


Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 





ve 


a. oe - 
ote? a tw 
eet 
. ‘ . 

* 
7 

‘ 

- 
LIBRARY 


HERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


» 
EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


ST. MATTHEW 


—_——<——. 


ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


ON THE 


__GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW 
S75 


Kex With the Tert Complete and Explanatory Motes 


By the Right Rev. 


JOHN CHARLES RYLE, D.D. 
S/S 


2 { . ‘th, ye? 
LORD BISHOP OF LIVERPOOL IIb 


POPULAR EDITION 


Hondon 
HODDER AND STOUGHTON 
27 PATERNOSTER ROW 


MDCCCXCVI 


rahe 


Hew shai stat Ay dels 


a. 





a ee 


PREFACE. 


THe plan I have adopted in drawing up the 
“Expository Thoughts” is as follows. I have 


divided the sacred text into sections or passages, 
averaging about twelve verses in each. I have then 
supplied a continuous series of short, plain ‘ Exposi- 
tions” of each of these passages. In each Exposition 
I have generally begun by stating as briefly as 
possible the main scope and purpose of the passage 
under consideration. I have then selected two, three, 
or four prominent points in the passage, singled 
them out from the rest, dwelt exclusively on them, 
and endeavoured to enforce them plainly and vigor- 
ously on the reader’s attention. The points selected 
will be found to be sometimes doctrinal, and some- 
times practical. The only rule in selection has been 
to seize on the really leading points of the passage. 
In style and composition I frankly avow that I 


have studied, as far as possible, to be plain and 


Iv PREFACE. 


pointed, and to choose what an old divine calls 
‘picked and packed”’ words. I have tried to place 
myself in the position of one who is reading aloud to 
others, and must arrest their attention if he can. 
I have said to myself in writing each Exposition, 
“T am addressing a mixed company, and I have but 
a short time.”—Keeping this in view, I have con- 
stantly left unsaid many things that might have been 
said, and have endeavoured to dwell chiefly on the 
things needful to salvation. I have deliberately 
passed over many subjects of secondary importance, 
in order to say something that might strike and stick 
in consciences. I have felt that a few points, well 
remembered and fastened down, are better than a 
quantity of truth lying loosely, and thinly scattered 
over the mind. 

A few foot notes, explaining difficult passages, 
have occasionally been added to the Exposition. 
I have thought it good to add these notes for the 
information of readers who may feel a wish to know 
what can be said about the “deep things” of 
Scripture, and may have no Commentary of their 
own. 

I cannot, of course, expect that the opinions 


expressed in these Expositions, whether about 


PREFACE. v 


doctrine, practice, or prophecy, will be satisfactory 
and acceptable to every one, I can only say, I have 
spoken out freely, and kept back nothing that seemed 
to me true. I have set down nothing but what I 
conscientiously believe to be the real meaning of the 
inspired writer, and the mind of the Spirit. I have 
always held that truth is most likely to be reached 
when men on all sides conceal nothing, but tell 
out all their minds. Right or wrong, I have en- 
deavoured to tell out my own mind. It is my 
firm conviction that I have said nothing in these 
Expositions which is not in perfect harmony with 
the Thirty-nine Articles of my own Church, and 
does not agree in the main with all the Protestant 
Confessions of Faith. The words of an old divine 
will explain the kind of theology to which I ever 
desire to adhere and conform: ‘I know no true 
religion but Christianity; no true Christianity but 
the Doctrine of Christ; of His divine person (Col. 
i. 15), of His divine office (1 Tim. ii. 5), of His divine 
righteousness (Jer. xxiii. 6), and of His divine Spirit, 
which all that are His receive (Rom. viii. 9). I know 
no true ministers of Christ but such as make it their 
business, in their calling, to commend Jesus Christ, 


in His saving fulness of grace and glory, to the faith 


vi PREFACE. 


and love of men. I know no true Christian but one 
united to Christ by faith, and abiding in Him by 
faith and love, to the glorifying of the name of Jesus 
Christ, in the beauties of Gospel holiness. Ministers 
and Christians of this spirit have for many years 
been my brethren and companions, and I hope ever 
shall ke. whithersoever the hand of the Lord may 
lead me.” * 

Commentaries and Expositions of Scripture are so 
numerous in the present day, that I feel it necessary 
ta say something about the class of readers whom I 
have specially had in view in putting forth these 
Expository THOUGHTS. 

In the first place, I indulge the hope that the work 
may be found switable for use at family prayers. 
The supply of works adapted for this purpose has 
never yet been equal to the demand. 

In the next place, I cannot help hoping that the 
work may prove an aid to those who visit the sick 
and the poor. The number of persons who visit 
hospitals, sick-rooms, and cottages, with an earnest 
desire to do spiritual good, is now very great. There 
is reason to believe that proper books for reading on 


such occasions are much wanted. 


* Traill’s Preface to *‘ Throne of Grace’. 


PREFACE. vii 


Last, but not least, I trust that the work may not 
be found unprofitable for private reading, as a 
companion to the Gospels. There are not a few 
whose callings and engagements make it impossible 
for them to read large commentaries and expositions 
of God’s Word. I have thought that such may find 
it helpful to their memories to have a few leading 
points set before their minds in connection with 
what they read. 

I send forth the work, with an earnest prayer that 
it may tend to the promotion of pure and undefiled 
religion, help to extend the knowledge of Christ, and 
be a humble instrument in aid of the glorious work 


of converting and edifying immortal souls. 


J. C. LIVERPOOL. 





TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


MatrHEw 
; I1—17. 
18—25. 
IL 123 
1S 9.8 
Tih, 1—12. 
13—17. 
IV. 1—11. 
12—25. 
Vv. j—12. 
13—20. 
21—37. 
388—48. 
VL 1—8. 
9—15. 
16—24. 
25—34. 
VIL 1-11, 
12—20. 
21—29. 
VIIL 1—I15. 
16- 27. 


The genealogy of Christ - . . 
The incarnation and name of Christ . 
The wise men from the East - . 
The flight into Egypt, and subsequent abode 

at Nazareth - - - ° 
The ministry of John the Baptist . 
The baptism of Christ - ° * 
The temptation - - : ° 
The beginning of Christ’s ministry, and the 

calling of the first disciples - - 
The beatitudes - - ~ : 


The character of true Christians, and the 
connection between the teaching of Christ 
and the Old Testament - - - 


Spirituality of the law proved by three 


examples - : - - 
The Christian law of love set forth - 
Ostentation in almsgiving and prayer for- 
bidden  - - - - - 
The Lord’s Prayer and the duty of forgiving 
one another - : - - 


The right manner of fasting,—treasure in 
heaven,—the single eye - “ 
Over-carefulness about this world forbidden 
Censoriousness forbidden,—prayer encou- 
raged. - - : : - 
The rule of duty towards others, —the two 
gates, warning against false prophets - 
Uselessness of profession without practice, 
—the two builders : : a 
Miraculous healing of a leprosy, a palsy, 
and a fever - - - - 
Christ’s wisdom in dealing with professors, 
—the storm on the lake calmed - 


PAGE 
1 


5 


13 
17 
21 
24 
27 
31 
35 


39 
43 


46 
49 


55 
58 


61 
65 


69 


76 


MattTHEW 


VIII. 


Ix, 


XIL 


XI 


XIV. 


XV. 


28—34. 
1—13. 
14—26, 
27—37. 
1—15. 


16—23. 
24-33. 
34—42, 


1—15. 
16—24. 


25—30. 
1—13. 


14—21. 


22—37. 


38—50. 


1—23. 
24—43, 


44—50, 


51—58. 


1—12. 


13—21. 
22—36. 


1—9. 


10—20. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
The devil cast out of a man in the country 
of the Gergesenes - : - 80 
A palsied man healed,—the calling of 
Matthew the publican - - - 83 
New wine and new bottles,—the Ruler’s 
daughter raised to life - - - 86 


Two blind men healed, —Christ’s compassion 
on the multitude,—the duty of disciples 
The sending forth of the first Christian 
preachers - : - - 
Instructions to the first Christian preachers 
Warnings to the first Christian preachers 
Cheering words to the first Christian 
preachers - - - - 
Christ’s testimony about John the Baptist 
Unreasonableness of unbelievers exposed, 
—danger of not using the light - - 
Greatness of Christ,—fulness of Gospel 
invitations - - . : 
The true doctrine of the Sabbath cleared 
from Jewish error - - - 
Wickedness of the Pharisees, —encouraging 
description of Christ’s character - 
Blasphemy of Christ’s enemies, — sins 
against knowledge,—idle words - 
Power of unbelief,—danger of imperfect 
and incomplete reformation,—Christ’s 


love to His disciples - : . 
Parable of the sower . ° . 
Parable of the wheat and tares_ - - 
Parables of the treasure, the pearl, and 

the net - - - : * 
Christ’s treatment in His own country,— 

danger of unbelief : - . 
Martyrdom of John the Baptist « ° 
Miracle of the loaves and fishes» ° 
Christ walking on the sea - . ° 
Hypocrisy of Scribes and Pharisees,— 

danger of traditions = - - - 


False teachers, —the heart the source of sin 


90 
94 
98 
101 


105 
108 


112 


115 


121 


124. 


128 


134 


140 
145 


150 


154 
158 
161 
166 


170 
175 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. xf 


MATTHEW PAGE 
XV. 21—28. The Canaanitish mother - e - 179 
29—39. Christ’s miracles of healing . - 183 

XVI. 1—12, Enmity of the Scribes and Pharisees,— 
Christ’s warning against them - - 187 
13—20. Peter's noble confession +  _ . - 192 

‘BI—93. Peterrebuked -  - ~~~ > 103--— 

24-98, Necessity of self-denial,—value of the soul 201 
XVII. 1—13. The transfiguration - - - 204 
14—21,. The young man possessed with a devil healed 210 
22—27. ‘The fish and the tribute money - - 214 

XVIII. 1—14, Necessity of conversion and humility,— 
reality of hell - > - - 218 


15—20. Rule for settling differences among Chris- 
tians,—nature of Church discipline - 22% 


21—35. Parable of the unforgiving servant - 2298 
XIX, 1—15. Christ’s judgment about divorces, —Christ’s 
tenderness to little children ° ce PRP. 
16—22, The rich young man : : - 237 
23—30. Danger of riches,—encouragement to for- 
sake all for Christ . - - 241 
XX, 1—16. Parable of the labourers in the vineyard - 245 


17—23. Christ’s announcement of His coming death 
—amixture of ignorance and faith in true 


disciples : - - - 250 

24—28. Truestandard of greatness among Christians 255 

29—34, Healing of two blind men - - 259 

XXL. 1—11. Christ’s public entry into Jerusalem - 262 
12—22, Christ casting the buyers and sellers out of 

the temple,—the barren fig tree - 267 
23—32. Christ’s reply to the Pharisees demanding 

His authority,—the two sons - - 271 

33—46. Parable of the wicked husbandmen 2 275 

XXIL 1—14, Parable of the great supper - - 279 


15—22, The Pharisees’ question about paying tribute 283 

23—33. The Sadducees’ question about the resur- 
rection - : : - - 288 

34—46, The Lawyer’s question about the great 
commandment,—Christ’s question to 
His enemies . . ° - 292 


xii 


MatTrHEew 
XXIII. 1—12. 


43—33. 


34—39. 
XXIV. 1—14. 


15—28. 


29—35. 


36—5l. 


XXV. 1—13. 
14—30. 
31—46. 
XXVI. 1—13. 
14—25. 


26—35. 


36— 46. 


47—56. 


57—68. 
69—75. 


XXVIII. 1—10. 


11—26. 
27—44. 


45—56. 
57— 66. 


XXVIII. 1—11. 
12—-20. 


4 
TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


Christ’s warning against the teaching of 
the Scribes and Pharisees ° - 
Hight charges against the Scribes and 
Pharisees - : : - 


Christ’s last public words to the Jews - 
Prophecy on the Mount of Olives,—about 
the destruction of Jerusalem, Christ’s 
second coming, and the end of the world 
Prophecy continued, about miseries to come 
at the first and s2cond sieges of Jerusalem 
Second advent of Christ described - 
Time just before second advent described, 


and watchfulness enjoined ° - 
Parable of the ten virgins * . 
Parable of the talents . . . 
Last judgment - * « : 


The woman who anointed our Lord’s head 
The false apostle, and his besetting sin - 
The Lord’s supper and the first commu- 


nicants - - - - - 
The agony in the garden - « - 
The false apostle’s kiss,—the voluntary 

submission of Christ - - - 
Christ before the Jewish Council « . 
Peter’s denial of his Master . ° 
The end of Judas Iscariot ° . 
Christ condemned before Pilate - : 
Christ’s sufferings in the hands of the 

soldiers, and crucifixion - . 


Christ’s death, and signs accompanying it 
Christ’s burial, and vain precautions of His 

enemies to prevent His resurrection + 
Christ’s resurrection - - ° 
Christ’s parting charge to His disciples - 


PAGE 


296 


300 
306 


311 


316 
321 


325 
330 
335 


345 
349 


354 
361 


366 
370 
374 
378 
384 


388 
393 


398 
403 
408 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


ON THE GOSPELS. 





MATTHEW I. 1—17. 


1 The book of the generation of 
Jesus Christ, the son of David, the 
son of Abraham. 

2 Abraham begat Isaac; and 
Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob be- 
gat Judas and his brethren ; 

3 And Judas begat Phares and 
Zara of Thamar ; and Phares begat 
Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram ; 

4 And Aram begat Aminadab ; 
and Aminadab begat Naasson ; 
and Naasson begat Salmon; 

5 And Salmon begat Booz of 
Rachab ; and Booz begat Obed of 
Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse ; 

6 And Jesse begat David the 
king: and David the king begat 
Solomon of her that had been the 
wife of Urias ; 

7 And Solomon begat Roboam ; 
and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia 
begat Asa; 

8 And Asa begat Josaphat; and 
Josaphat begat Joram ; and Joram 
begat Ozias ; 

9 And Ozias begat Joatham; and 
Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz 
begat Ezekias ; 

10 And Ezekias begat Manasses ; 


THESE verses begin the New Testament. 


and Manasses begat Amon; and 
Amon begat Josias ; 

11 And Josias begat Jechonias 
and his brethren, about the time 
they were carried away to Babylon: 

12 And after they were brought 
to Babylon, Jechonias begat Sala- 
thiel; and Salathiel begat Zoro- 
babel ; 

13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud ; 
and Abiud begat Eliakim; and 
Eliakim begat Azor ; 

14 And Azor begat Sadoc: and 
Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim 
begat Eliud ; 

15 And Eliud begat Hleazar; 
and Hleazar begat Matthan; and 
Matthan begat Jacob ; 

16 And Jacob begat Joseph the 
husband of Mary, of whom was 
born Jesus, who is called Christ. 

17 So all the generations, from 
Abraham to David are fourteen 
generations; and from David until 
the carrying away into Babylon 
are fourteen generations; and from 
the carrying away into Babylon 
unto Christ are fourteen genera- 
tions. 


Let us always 


read them with serious and solemn feelings—The book 
before us contains “ not the word of men, but of God.” 
Every verse in it was written by inspiration of the Holy 


Ghost. (1 Thess. ii. 13.) 


ws EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us thank God daily for giving us the Scriptures. 
The poorest Englishman who understands his Bible, 
knows more about religion than the wisest philosophers 
of Greece and Rome. 

Let us never forget the deep responsibility which 
possession of the Bible entails on us: We shall be judged 
at the last day according to our light. To whomsoever 
much is given, of them much will be required. 

Let us read the Bible reverently and diligently, with 
an honest determination to believe and practise all we 
find in it. It is no light matter how we use this book. 
Above all, let us never read the Bible without praying 
for the teaching of the Holy Spirit. He alone can apply 
truth to our hearts, and make us profit by what we read. 

The New Testament begins with the history of the 
life, death, and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
No part of the Bible is so important as this, and no part 
is so full and complete. Four distinct Gospels tell us 
the story of Christ’s doings and dying. Four times we 
read the precious accourt of His works and words. 
How thankful we ought to be for this! To know Christ 
is life eternal. To believe in Christ is to have peace 
with God. To follow Christ is to be a true Christian. 
To be with Christ will be heaven itself. We can never 
bear too much about the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The Gospel of St. Matthew begins with a long list of 
names. Sixteen verses are taken up with tracing a 
pedigree from Abraham to David, and from David to the 
family in which Jesus was born. Let no one think that 
these verses are useless. Nothing is useless in creation. 
The least mosses, and the smallest insects, serve some 


MATTHEW, CHAP. I. VER. 1—17. 3 


good end.—Nothing is useless in the Bible. Every word 
of it is inspired. The chapters and verses which seem 
at first sight unprofitable, are all given for some good 
purpose. He that looks carefully at these sixteen verses, 
will not fail to see in them useful and instructive lessons. 

We learn, for one thing, from this list of names, that 
God always keeps His word. He had promised, that “in 
Abraham’s seed all the nations of the earth should be 
blessed.” He had promised to raise up a Saviour of the 
family of David. (Gen. xii. 3; Is. xi. 1.) These sixteen 
verses prove that Jesus was the Son of David and the 
Son of Abraham, and that God’s promise was fulfilled.— 
Thoughtless and ungodly people should remember this 
lesson, and be afraid. Whatever they may think, God 
will keep His word. If they repent not, they will surely 
perish.—True Christians should remember this lesson, 
and take comfort. Their Father in heaven will be true 
to all His engagements. He has said that He will save 
all believers in Christ. If He has said it, He will cer. 
tainly do it. “He is not a man, that He should lie.”— 
“He abideth faithful: He cannot deny Himself.” (Num. 
xxiil. 19; 2 Tim. ii 13.) 

We learn, for another thing, from this list of names, 
the sinfulness and corruption of human nature. It is 
instructive to observe how many godly parents in this 
catalogue had wicked aud ungodly sons. The names of 
Roboam, and Joram, and Amon, and Jechonias, should 
teach us humbling lessons. They had all pious fathers. 
But they were all wicked men. Grace does not run in 
families. It needs something more than good examples 
and good advice to make us children of God. They that 


4 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


are born again are not born of blood, nor of the will of 
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. (Johni. 13.) 
Praying parents should pray night and day, that their 
children may be born of the Spirit. 

We learn, lastly, from this list of names, how great 1s 
the mercy and compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let 
us think how defiled and unclean human nature is, and 
then think what a condescension it was in Him to be 
born of a woman, and made in the “likeness of men.” 
(Phil. ii. 7.) Some of the names we read in this catalogue 
remind us of shameful and sad histories. Some of the 
names are those of persons never mentioned elsewhere in 
the Bible. But at the end of all comes the name of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Though He is the eternal God, He 
humbled Himself to become man, in order to provide 
salvation for sinners. “Though He was rich, yet for your 
sakes He became poor.” (2 Cor. viii. 9.) 

We should always read this catalogue with thankful 
feelings. We see here that no one who partakes of 
human nature can be beyond the reach of Christ’s 
sympathy and compassion. Our sins may have been as 
black and great as those of any whom St. Matthew 
names. But they cannot shut us out of heaven, if we 
repent and believe the Gospel. If the Lord Jesus was 
not ashamed to be born of a woman whose pedigree 
contained such names as those we have read to-day, we 
need not think that He will be ashamed to call us 
brethren, and to give us eternal life. 





MATTHEW, CHAP, 


‘I. VER. 18—2%5, 5 


MATTHEW I. 18—25. 


18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ 
was on this wise: When as his 
mother Mary was espoused to 
Joseph, before they came together, 
she was found with child of the 
Holy Ghost. 

19 Then Joseph her husband, 
being a just man, and not willing 
to make her a public example, was 
minded to put her away privily. 

20 But while he thought on these 
things, behold, the angel of the 
Lord appeared unto him in a 
dream, saying, Joseph, thou son 
of David, fear not to take unto 
thee Mary thy wife ; for that which 


is conceived in her is of the Holy | 


Ghost. 
21 And she shall bring forth a 


son, and thou shalt call his name 
JESUS: for he shall save his 
people from their sins. 

22 Now all this was done, that it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken 
of the Lord by the prophet, say- 


ing, 

23 Behold, a virgin shall be with 
child, and shall bring forth a son, 
and they shall call his name Em- 
manuel, which being interpreted 
is, God with us. 

24 Then Joseph being raised 
from sleep did as the angel of the 
Lord had bidden him, and took 
unto him his wife : 

25 And knew her not till she had 
brought forth her firstborn son: 
and he called his name JESUS. 


THESE verses begin by telling us two great truths. They 
tell us how the Lord Jesus Christ took our nature upon 
Him, and became man. They tell us also that His birth 
was miraculous. His mother Mary was a virgin. 

These are very mysterious subjects. They are depths, 
which we have no line to fathom. They are truths, which 
we have not mind enough to comprehend. Let us not 
attempt to explain things which are above our feeble 
reason. Let us be content to believe with reverence, and 
let us not speculate about matters which we cannot under- 
stand. Enough for us to know that with Him who made 
the world nothing is impossible. We may safely rest in 
the words of the Apostles’ Creed : “ Jesus Christ was con- 
ceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary.” 

Let us observe the conduct of Joseph described in these 
verses. It is a beautiful example of godly wisdom, and 
tender consideration for others. He saw the “appear- 
ance of evil” in her who was his espoused wife. But he 
did nothing rashly. He waited patiently to have the 
line of duty made clear. In all probability he laid the 


6 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


matter before God in prayer. “He that believeth shall 
not make haste.” (Isai. xxviii. 16.) 

The patience of Joseph was graciously rewarded. He 
received a direct message from God upon the subject of 
his auxiety, and was at once relieved from all his fears. 
How good it is to wait upon God! Who ever cast his 
cares npon God in hearty prayer, and found Him fail ? 
“Tn all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct 
thy paths.” (Prov. iii. 6.) 

Let us observe in these verses, the two names given to 
our Lord. One is “Jesus:” the other “Emmanuel.” 
One describes His office: the other His nature. Both 
are deeply interesting. 

Thename Jesusmeans “Saviour.” It is practically the 
same name as Joshua in the Old Testament. It is given 
to our Lord because “He saves His people from theirsins.” 
This is His special office. He saves them from the guilt 
of sin, by washing them in His own atoning blood. He 
saves them from the dominion of sin, by putting in their 
hearts the sanctifying Spirit. He saves them from the 
presence of sin, when He takes them out of this world to 
rest with Him. He will save them from all the conse- 
quences of sin, when He shall give them a glorious body 
at the last day. Blessed and holy are Christ’s people! 
From sorrow, cross, and conflict they are not saved; 
but they are “saved from sin” for evermore. They are 
cleansed from guilt by Christ’s blood. They are made 
meet for heaven by Christ’s Spirit. This is salvation ! 
He who cleaves to sin is not yet saved. 

“Jesus” is a very encouraging name to heavy-laden sin- 
ners. He who is King of kings and Lord of lords might 


MATTHEW, CHAP. I. VER. 18—25. 7 


lawfully have taken some more high-sounding title. But 
He did not do so. The rulers of this world have often 
called themselves Great, Conqueror, Bold, Magnificent, 
and the like. The Son of God was content to call Himself 
“Saviour.” The souls which desire salvation may draw 
nigh to the Father with boldness, and have access with 
confidence through Christ. It is His office and His de- 
light to show mercy. “God sent not His Son into the 
world to condemn the world, but that the world through 
Him might be saved.” (John iii. 17.) 

Jesus is a name which is peculiarly sweet and precious 
to believers. It has often done them good, when the 
favour of kings and princes would have been heard of 
with unconcern. It has given them what money cannot 
buy, even inward peace. It has eased their weary con- 
sciences, and given rest to their heavy hearts. The Song 
of Solomon speaks the experience of many, when it says, 
“Thy name is as ointment poured forth.” (Cant. i. 3.) 
Happy is that person who trusts not merely in vague 
notions of God’s mercy and goodness, but in “Jesus,” 

The name “ Emmanuel” is seldom found in the Bible. 
But it is scarcely less interesting than the name “Jesus. ’ 
It is the name which is given to our Lord from His 
nature as God-man, as ‘“‘God manifest in the flesh.” It 
signifies, “God with us.” 

Let us take care that we clearly understand that there 
was a union of two natures, the divine and human, ir 
the person of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a point of the 
deepest importance. We should settle it firmly in our 
minds, that our Saviour is perfect man as well as perfect 
God, and perfect God as well as perfect man. If we once 


8 ' EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


lose sight of this great foundation truth, we may run 
into fearful heresies. The name Emmanuel takes in the 
whole mystery. Jesus is “God with us.” He had a 
nature like our own in all things, sin only excepted. But 
though Jesus was “with us” in human flesh and blood, 
He was at the same time very God. 

We shall often find, as we read the Gospels, that our 
Saviour could be weary and hungry and thirsty,—could 
weep and groan and feel pain like one of ourselves. In all 
this we see “the man” Christ Jesus. We see the nature 
He took on Him, when He was born of the Virgin Mary. 

But we shall also find in the same Gospels that our 
Saviour knew men’s hearts and thoughts,—that He had 
power over devils, that He could work the mightiest 
miracles with a word,—that He was ministered to by 
angels,—that He allowed a disciple to call Him “my 
God,”—and that He said, ‘ Before Abraham was I am,” 
and “I and my Father are one.” In all this we see 
“ the eternal God.” We see Him “who is over all, God 
blessed for ever. Amen.” (Rom. ix. 5.) 

If we would have a strong foundation for our faith and 
hope, we must keep constantly in view our Saviour’s 
divinity. He in whose blood we are invited to trust is the 
Almighty God. All power is in heaven and earth. None 
can pluck us out of His hand. If we are true believers 
in Jesus, our heart need not be troubled or afraid. 

If we would have sweet comfort in suffering and trial, 
we aust keep constantly in view our Saviour’s humanity. 
He is the man Christ Jesus, who lay on the bosom of the 
Virgin Mary as a little infant, and knows the heart of a 
man. He can be touched with the feeling of our infirmi- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. Il. VER. [—1]2. 9 


ties. He has Himself experienced Satan’s temptations. 
He has endured hunger. He has shed tears. He has 
fell pain. We may trust Him unreservedly with our 
sorrows. He will not despise us. We may pour out our 
hearts before Him in prayer boldly, and keep nothing 
back. He can sympathize with His people. 

Let these thoughts sink down into our minds. Let us 
bless God for the encouraging truths which the first 
chapter of the New Testament contains. It tells us of 
One who “saves His people from their sins.” But this 
is not all. It tells us that this Saviour is “ Emmanuel,” 
God Himself, and yet God with us,—God manifest in 
human fiesh like our own. This is glad tidings. This 
is indeed good news. Let us feed on these truths in our 


hearts by faith with thanksgiving. 





MATTHEW II. 1—12. 


1 Now when Jesus was born in 
Bethlehem of Judeea in the days 
of Herod the king, behold, there 
came wise men from the east to 
Jerusalem, 

2 Saying, Where is he that is 
born King of the Jews? For we 
have seen his star in the east, and 
are come to worship him. 

38 When Herod the King had 
heard these things, he was troubled, 
and all Jerusalem with him. 

4 And when he had gathered 
all the chief priests and scribes of 
the people together, he demanded 
us them where Christ should be 


rn. 

5 And they said unto him, In 
Bethlehem of Judea; for thus it 
is written by the prophet, 

6 And thou Bethlehem, in the 
land of Juda, art not the least 
among the princes of Juda: for 
out of thee shall come a Governor, 
that shall rule my people Israel. 

7 Then Herod, when he had 
privily called the wise men, en- 


quired of them diligently what 
time the star appeared. 

8 And he sent them to Beth- 
lehem, and said, Go and search 
diligently for the young child ; and 
when ye have found him, bring me 
word again, that I may come and 
worship him also. 

9 When they had heard the king, 
they departed; and, lo, the star, 
which they saw in the east, went 
before them, till it came and stood 
over where the young child was. 

10 When they saw the star, they 
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. 

11 And when they were come 
into the house, they saw the young 
child with Mary his mother, and 
fell down, and worshipped him: 
and when they had opened their 


| treasures, they presented unto him 


gifts; gold, and frankincense, and 
myrrh, 

12 And being warned of God in a 
dream that they should not return 
to Herod, they departed into their 
own country another way. 


10 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Ir is not known who these wise men were. Their names 
and dwelling-place are alike kept back from us. We are 
only told that they came “from the East.” Whether they 
were Chaldeans or Arabians, we cannot say. Whether 
they learned to expect Christ from the ten tribes who 
went into captivity, or from the prophecies of Daniel, we 
do not know. It matters little who they were. The 
point which concerns us most is the rich instruction 
which their history conveys. 

These verses show us that there may be true servants 
of God im places where we should not expect to find them. 
The Lord Jesus has many “ hidden ones,” like these wise 
men. Their history on earth may be as little known as 
that of Melchizedek, and Jethro, and Job. But their 
names are in the book of life, and they will be found 
with Christ in the day of His appearing. It is well to 
remember this. We must not look round the earth and 
say hastily, “ All is barren.” The grace of God is not tied 
to places and families. The Holy Ghost can lead souls 
to Christ without the help of any outward means. Men 
may be born in dark places of the earth, like these wise 
men, and yet, like them, be made “ wise unto salvation.” 
There are some travelling to heaven at this moment, of 
whom the Church and the world know nothing. They 
flourish in secret places like the “lily among thorns,” and 
seem to “waste their sweetness on the desert air.” But 
Christ loves them, and they love Christ. 

These verses show us, secondly, that it is not always 
those who have most religious privileges, who give Christ 
most honowr. We might have thought that the scribes 
and Pharisees would have been the first to hasten to 


MATTHEW, CHAP. II. VER. 1—12. ll 


Bethlehem, on the slightest rumour that the Saviour was 
born. But it was not so. A few unknown strangers from 
a distant land were the first, except the shepherds men- 
tioned by St. Luke, to rejoice at His birth. “He came 
unto His own, and His own received Him not.” (John 
1.11.) What a mournful picture this is of human nature! 
How often the same kind of thing may be seen among our- 
selves! How often the very persons who live nearest to 
the means of grace are those who neglect them most! 
There is only too much truth in the old proverb, “The 
nearer the church the further from God.” Familiarity 
with sacred things has an awful tendency to make men 
despise them. There are many, who from residence and 
convenience ought to be first and foremost in the worship 
of God, and yet are always last. There are many, who 
might well be expected to be last, who are always first. 

These verses show us, thirdly, that there may be know- 
ledge of Scripture in the head, while there is no grace in the 
heart. We are told that king Herod sent to inquire of the 
priests and elders, “ where Christ should be born.” We 
are told that they returned a ready answer to him, and 
showed an accurate acquaintance with the letter of Scrip- 
ture. But they never went to Bethlehem to seek for the 
coming Saviour. They would not believe in Him, when 
He ministered among them. Their heads were better than 
their hearts—Let us beware of resting satisfied with 
head-knowledge. It is an excellent thing, when rightly 
used. Buta man may have much of it, and yet perish 
everlastingly. What is the state of our hearts? This 
is the great question. A little grace is better than many 


gifts. Gifts alone save no one ; but grace leads on to glory. 
c 


1Z EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


These verses show us, fourthly, a splendid example of 
spiritual diligence. What trouble it must have cost these 
wise men to travel from their homes to the house where 
Jesus was born! How many weary miles they must 
have journeyed! The fatigues of an Eastern traveller 
are far greater than we in England can at all understand. 
The time that such a journey would occupy must neces- 
sarily have been very great. The dangers to be encountered 
were neither few nor small—But none of these things 
moved them. They had set their hearts on seeing Him 
“that was born King of the Jews;” and they never 
rested till they saw Him. They prove to us the truth of 
the old saying, “Where there is a will there is a way.” 

It would be well for all professing Christians if they 
were more ready to follow the example of these good men. 
—Where is our self-denial ? What pains do we take about 
means of grace? What diligence do we show about 
following Christ ? What does our religion cost us?—These 
are serious questions. They deserve serious consideration. 
The truly “wise,” it may be feared, are very few. 

These verses show us, lastly, a striking example of faith. 
These wise men believed in Christ when they had never 
seen Him; but that was not all. They believed in Him 
when the scribes and Pharisees were unbelieving ;—but 
that again was not all. They believed in Him when they 
saw Him a little infant on Mary’s knees, and worshipped 
Him asa King. This was the crowning point of their 
faith—They saw no miracles to convince them. They 
heard no teaching to persuade them. They beheld no 
signs of divinity and greatness to overawe them. They 
saw nothing but a new-born infant, helpless and weak, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. II. VER. 183—23, 13 


and needing a mother’s care, like any one of ourselves. 
And yet when they saw that infant, they believed that 
they saw the divine Saviour of the world! « They fell 
down and worshipped Him.” 

We read of no greater faith than this in the whole 
volume of the Bible. It is a faith that deserves to be 
placed side by side with that of the penitent thief. The 
thief saw one dying the death of a malefactor, and yet 
prayed to Him, and “called Him Lord.” The wise men 
saw a new-born babe on the lap of a poor woman, and 
yet worshipped Him, and confessed that he was Christ. 
Blessed indeed are they that can believe in this fashion ! 

This is the kind of faith that God delights to honour. 
We see the proof of that at this very day. Wherever 
the Bible is read the conduct of these wise men is known, 
and told as a memorial of them. Let us walk in the steps 
of their faith. Let us not be ashamed to believe in Jesus 
and confess Him, though all around us remain careless and 
‘unbelieving. Have we not a thousand-fold more evidence 
than the wise men had, to make us believe that Jesus is the 
Christ? Beyond doubt we have. Yet where is our faith ? 


MATTHEW II. 13—23, 


13 And when they were departed, 
behold, the angel of the Lord ap- 

eareth to Joseph in a dream, say- 
ing, Arise, and take the young child 
and his mother, and flee into Egypt, 
and be thou there until I bring 
thee word: for Herod will seek the 
young child to destroy him. 

14 When he arose, he took the 
young child and his mother by 
night, and departed into Egypt: 

15 And was there until the death 
of Herod: that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken of the Lord by 





the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt 
have I called my son. 

16 Then Herod, when he saw 
that he was mocked of the wise 
men, was exceeding wrath, and 
sent forth, and slew all the children 
that were in Bethlehem, and in all 
the coasts thereof, from two years 
old and under, according to the 
time which he had diligently en- 
quired of the wise men. 

17 Then was fulfilled that which 
was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, 
saying, 


14 


18 In Rama was there a voice ; 


heard, lamentation, and weeping, 
and great mourning, Rachel weep- 
ing for her children, and would not 
be comforted, because they are 
not. 

19 But when Herod was dead, 
behold, an angel of the Lord ap- 
peareth in a dream to Joseph in 
Egypt, | 

20 Saying, Arise, and take the 
young child and his mother, and 
go into the land of Israel : for they 
are dead which sought the young 
child’s life. 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


21 And ke arose, and took the 
young child and his mother, and 
came into the land of Israel. 

22 But when he heard that Ar- 
chelaus, did reign in Judea in the 
room of his father Herod, he was 
afraid to go thither : notwithstand- 
ing, being warned of God in a 
dream, he turned aside into the 
parts of Galilee : 

23 And he came and dwelt ina 
city called Nazareth: that it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken by 
the prophets, He shall be called a 
Nazarene. 


LET us observe in this passage, how true it is that the 
rulers of this world are seldom friendly to the cause of 
God. The Lord Jesus comes down from heaven to save 
sinners, and at once we are told that Herod the king 
“seeks to destroy Him.” 

Greatness and riches are a perilous possession for the 
soul. Those who seek to have them know not what 
they seek. They lead men into many temptations. They 
are likely to fill the heart with pride, and to chain the 
uffections down to things below. “Not many mighty, 
not many noble are called.” “How hardly shall they 
that have riches enter into the kingdom of God.” 
(1 Cor. i. 26. Mark x. 23.) 

Do we envy the rich and great ? Does our heart some- 
times say, “Oh, that I had their place, and rank, and 
substance”? Let us beware of giving way to such feelings 
The very wealth which we admire may be gradually sink. 
ing its possessors down into hell. A little more money 
might be our ruin. Like Herod, we might run into every 
excess of wickedness and cruelty. “Take need, and be- 
ware of covetousness.” “Be content with such things 
as ye have.” (Luke xii. 15. Heb. xiii. 5.) 

Do we think that Christ’s cause depends on the power 


MATTHEW, CHAP. I. VER. 18—23. 15 


and patronage of princes? We are mistaken. They have 
seldom done much for the advancement of true religion : 
they have far more frequently been the enemies of the 
truth. “Put not your trust in princes.” (Psa. exlvi. 3.) 
They who are like Herod are many. They who are like 
Josiah and Edward the Sixth of England are few. 

Let us observe, for another thing, how the Lord Jesus 
was “a Man of Sorrows,” even from His infancy. Trouble 
awaits Him as soon as He enters into the world. His 
life is in danger from Herod’s hatred. His mother and 
Joseph are obliged to take Him away by night, and “ flee 
into Egypt.”—It was only a type and figure of all His 
experience upon earth. The waves of humiliation began 
to beat over Him, even when He was a sucking child. 

The Lord Jesus is just the Saviour that the suffering 
and sorrowful need. He knows well what we mean 
when we tell Him in prayer of our troubles. He can 
sympathize with us, when we cry to Him under cruel 
persecution. Let us keep nothing back from Him. Let 
us make Him our bosom friend. Let us pour out our 
hearts before Him. He has had great experience of 
affliction. 

Let us observe, for another thing, how death can 
remove the kings of this world like other men. The 
rulers of millions have no power to retain life, when 
the hour of their departure comes. The murderer of 
helpless infants must himself die. Joseph and Mary 
hear the tidings that “Herod is dead;” and at once 
they return in safety to their own land. 

True Christians should never be greatly moved by the 
persecution of man. Their enemies may be strong, and 


16 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


they may be weak; but still they ought not to be afraid. 
They should remember that “the triumphing of the wicked 
is but short.” (Job xx. 5.) What has become of the 
Pharaohs and Neros and Diocletians, who at one time 
fiercely persecuted the people of God? Where is the 
enmity of Charles IX. of France, and bloody Mary of 
England? They did their utmost to cast the truth down 
to the ground. But the truth rose again from the earth, 
and still lives; and they are dead, and mouldering in the 
grave. Let not the heart of any believer fail. Death is 
a mighty leveller, and can take any mountain out of the 
way of Christ’s Church. “The Lord liveth” for ever. His 
enemies are only men. The truth shall always prevail. 

Let us observe, in the last place, what a lesson of hu- 
mility is taught us by the dwelling place of the Son of God, 
when He was on earth. He dwelt with His mother and 
Joseph “in a city called Nazareth.” 

Nazareth was a small town in Galilee. It was an 
obscure, retired place, not so much as once mentioned in 
the Old Testament. Hebron, and Shiloh, and Gibeon, 
and Ramah, and Bethel, were far more important 
places. But the Lord Jesus passed by them all, and 
chose Nazareth. This was humility! 

In Nazareth the Lord Jesus lived thirty years. It was 
there He grew up from infancy to childhood, and from 
childhood to boyhood, and from boyhood to youth, and 
from youth to man’s estate. We know little of the manner 
in which those thirty years were spent. That He was 
“subject to Mary and Joseph,” we are expressly told, 
(Luke ii. 41.) That He worked in the carpenter’s shop 
with Joseph, is highly probable. We only know, that ~ 


MATTHEW, CHAP. III. VER. 1—192. 17 


almost five-sixths of the time that the Saviour of the 
world was on earth, was passed among the poor of this 
world, and passed in complete retirement. Truly this 
was humility ! 

Let us learn wisdom from our Saviour’s example. We 
are most of us far too ready to “seek great things” in 
this world: let us “seek them not.” (Jer. xlv. 5.) To have 
a place and a title and a position in society is not nearly 
so important as people think. It is a great sin to be covet- 
ous and worldly and proud: but it is no sin to be poor. 
It matters not so much what money we have, and where 
we live, as what we are in the sight of God. Where are 
we going when we die? Shall we live for ever in heaven? 
These are the main things to which we should attend. 

Above all, let us daily strive to copy our Saviour’s 
humility. Pride is the oldest and commonest of sins: 
humility is the rarest and most beautiful of graces. For 
humility let us labour; for humility let us pray. Our 
knowledge may be scanty, our faith may be weak, our 
strength may be small; but if we are disciples of Him 
who “dwelt at Nazareth,” let us at any rate be humble. 


MATTHEW III. 1—12. 


1 In those days came John the 
Baptist, preaching in the wilder- 
ness of Judea, 

2 And saying, Repent ye: for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

8 For this is he that was spoken 
of by the prophet Hsaias, saying, 
The voice of one crying in the wil- 
derness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make his paths straight. 

4 And the same John had his 
raiment of camel’s hair, and a 
leathern girdle about his loins; 
and his meat was locusts and wild 
honey. 





5 Then went out to him Jeru- 
salem, and all Judea, and all the 
region round about Jordan. 

6 And were baptized of him in 
Jordan, confessing their sins. 

7 But when he saw many of the 
Pharisees and Sadducees come to 
his baptism, he said unto them, 
O generation of vipers, who hath 
warned you to flee from the wrath 
to come? 

8 Bring forth therefore fruits 
meet for repentance: 

9 And think not to say within 
yourselves, We have Abraham to 


18 


ow father: for I say unto you, 

that God is able of these stones to 

raise up children unto Abraham. 
10 And now also the axe is laid 


unto the root of the trees: there- | fire 


fore eyery tree which bringeth not 
forth good fruit is hewn down, and 
cast into the fire. 

11 I indeed baptize you with 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


thet cometh after me is mightier 

han I, whose shoes I am not 
rote to bear: he shall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost, and with 


12 Whose fan ¢s in his hand, and 
he will thoroughly purge his floor, 
and gather his wheat into the gar- 
ner: but he will burn up the chaff 


water unto repentance: but he 
THESE verses describe the ministry of John the Baptist, 
the forerunner of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a ministry 
that deserves close attention. Few preachers ever pro- 
duced such effects as John the Baptist: “There went 
out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region 
round about Jordan.”——None ever received such praise 
from the great Head of the Church: Jesus called him “a 
burning and a shining light.” (John v.35.) The great 
Bishop of souls Himself declared, that “among them 
that are born of women there hath not risen a greater 
than John the Baptist.” Let us then study the leading 
features of his ministry. 

John the Baptist spoke plainly about sin. He taught 
the absolute necessity of “repentance,” before any one 
can be saved. He preached that repentance must be 
proved by its “fruits.” He warned men not to rest on 
outward privileges, or outward union with the Church. 

This is just the teaching that we all need. We are 
naturally dead, and blind, and asleep in spiritual things. 
We are ready to content ourselves with a mere formal 
religion, and to flatter ourselves that if we go to church 
we shall be saved. We need to be told, that except we 
“repent and are converted,” we shall all perish. 

John the Baptist spoke plainly about our Lord Jesus 
Christ. He taught people that One “mightier than him- 
self” was coming among them. He was nothing more 


with unquenchable fire. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. II. VER. 1—12. 19 


than a servant: the Coming One was the King. He 
himself could only baptize with water:” the Coming 
One could “baptize with the Holy Ghost,” take away 
sins, and would one day judge the world. 

This again is the very teaching that human nature 
requires. We need to be sent direct to Christ. Weare 
all ready to stop short of this; we want to rest in our 
union with the Church, our regular use of the sacraments, 
and our diligent attendance on an established ministry. 
We need to be told the absolute necessity of union with 
Christ Himself by faith. He is the appointed fountain 
of mercy, grace, life, and peace ; we must each have per- 
sonal dealings with Him about our souls. What do we 
know of the Lord Jesus? What have we got from Him” 
These are the questions on which our salvation hinges. 

John the Baptist spoke plainly about the Holy Ghost. 
He preached that there was such a thing as the baptism 
of the Holy Ghost. He taught that it was the special 
office of the Lord Jesus to give this baptism to men. 

This again is a teaching which we greatly require. 
We need to be told that forgiveness of sin is not the 
only thing necessary to salvation. There is another thing 
yet; and that is the baptizing of our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost. There must not only be the work of Christ for 
us, but the work of the Holy Ghostimus. There must 
not only be a title to heaven purchased for us by the blood 
of Christ, but a preparedness for heaven wrought in us 
by the Spirit of Christ. Let us never rest till we know 
something by experience of the baptism of the Spirit. 
The baptism of water is a great privilege: but let us see 
to it that we have also the baptism of the Holy Ghost. 


20 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


John the Baptist spoke plainly about the awful danger 
of the impenitent and unbelieving. He told his hearers 
that there was a “wrath to come:” he preached of an 
“unguenchable fire,” in which the “chaff” would one 
day be burned. 

This again is a teaching which is deeply important. 
We need to be straitly warned that it is no light matter 
whether we repent or not. We need to be reminded that 
there is a hell as well as a heaven, and an everlasting 
punishment for the wicked as well as everlasting life for 
the godly. Weare fearfully apt to forget this. We talk 
of the love and mercy of God, and we do not remember 
sufficiently His justice and holiness. Let us be very 
careful on this point. It is no real kindness to keep 
back the terrors of the Lord. It is good for us all to be 
taught that it is possible to be lost for ever, and that all 
unconverted people are hanging over the brink of the pit. 

In the last place, John the Baptist spoke plainly 
about the safety of true believers. He taught that there 
was “a garner” for all who are Christ’s “ wheat,’ and 
that they would be gathered together there in the day 
of His appearing. 

This again is a teaching which human nature greatly 
requires. The best of believers need much encourage- 
ment. They are yet in the body ; they live in a wicked 
world: they are often tempted by the devil. They 
ought to be often reminded that Jesus will never leave 
them nor forsake them. He will guide them safely 
through this life, and at length give them eternal glory. 
They shall be hid in the day of wrath; they shall be 
as safe as Noah was in the ark. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. III. VER. 13—17. 21 


Let these things sink down deeply into our hearts. 
We live in a day of much false teaching. Let us never 
forget the leading features of a faithful ministry. Happy 
would it have been for the Church of Christ, if all its 


ministers had been more like John the Baptist! 


MATTHEW III. 13—17. f 


18 Then cometh Jesus from 
Galilee to Jordan unto John, to 
be baptized of him. 

14 But John forbad him, saying, 
I have need to be baptized of thee, 
and comest thou to me? 

15 And Jesus answering said 
unto him, Suffer it to be so now: 
for thus it becometh us to fulfil all 
aie le Then he suffered 

im. 


WE have here the account 





16 And Jesus, when he was 
baptized, went up straightway out 
of the water: and lo, the heavens 
were opened unto him, and he 
saw the Spirit of God descending 
like a dove, and lighting upon 
him: 

17 And lo, a voice from heaven, 
saying, This is my beloved Son, in 
whom I am well pleased. 


of our Lord Jesus Christ’s 


baptism. This was His first step when He entered on 
His ministry. When the Jewish priests took up their 
pffice they were washed with water (Ex. xxix. 4): when 
our great High Priest begins the great work He came 
into the world to accomplish He is publicly baptized. 

We should notice, firstly, in these verses, the honour 
placed upon the sacrament of baptism. An ordinance of 
which the Lord Jesus Himself partook is not to be 
lightly esteemed. An ordinance to which the great Head 
of the Church submitted ought to be ever honourable 
in the eyes of professing Christians. 

There are few subjects in religion on which greater 
mistakes have arisen than baptism. There are few which . 
require so much fencing and guarding. Let us arm our 
minds with two general cautions. 

Let us beware, on the one hand, that we do not attach 
a superstitious importance to the water of baptism. We 


22, EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


must not expect that water to act asa charm. We must 
not suppose that all baptized persons, as a matter of 
course, receive the grace of God in the moment that 
they are baptized. To say that all who come to baptism 
obtain like and equal benefit, and that it matters not a 
jot whether they come with faith and prayer or in utter 
carelessness,—to say such things appears to contradict 
the plainest lessons of Scripture. 

Let us beware, on the other hand, that we do not dis- 
honour the sacrament of baptism. It is dishonoured 
when it is hastily slurred over as a mere form, or thrust 
out of sight, and never publicly noticed in the congrega- 
tion. A sacrament ordained by Christ Himself ought 
not to be treated in this way. The admission of every 
new member into the visible Church, whether young or 
grown up, is an event which ought to excite a lively 
interest in a Christian assembly. It is an event that 
ought to call forth the fervent prayers of all praying 
people. The more deeply we are convinced that baptism 
and grace are not inseparably tied together, the more we 
vaght to feel bound to join in prayer for a blessing, when 
ever any one is baptized. 

We should notice, secondly, in these verses, the pecu- 
larly solemn circumstances by which the baptism of our 
Lord Jesus Christ was attended. Such a baptism never 
will be again, so long as the world stands. 

We are told of the presence of all Three Persons of 
the blessed Trinity. God the Son, manifest in the flesh, 
is baptized ; God the Spirit descends like a dove, and 
lights upon Him; God the Father speaks from heaven 
with a voice. In a word, we have the manifested presence 


MATTHEW, CHAP. III, VER. 13—17. 23 


ot Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We may regard this 
as a public announcement that the work of Christ was 
the result of the eternal counsels of all the Three Persons 
of the blessed Trinity. It was the whole Trinity, which 
at the beginning of the creation said, “Let us make man;” 
it was the whole Trinity again, which at the beginning 
of the Gospel seemed to say, “ Let us save man.” 

We are told of “a voice from heaven” at our Lord’s 
baptism: the “heavens were opened,” and words were 
heard. This was a most significant miracle. We read 
of no voice from heaven before this, except at the giving 
of the law on Sinai. Both occasions were of peculiar 
importance. It therefore seemed good to our Father in 
heaven to mark both with peculiar honour. At the 
introduction both of the Law and Gospel He Himself 
spoke. “God spake these words.” (Exod. xx. 1.) 

How striking and deeply instructive are the Father's 
words: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased.” He declares, in these words, that Jesus is the 
Divine Saviour sealed and appointed from all eternity 
to carry out the work of redemption. He proclaims that 
He accepts Him as the Mediator between God and man. 
He publishes to the world that Heis satisfied with Him as 
the propitiation, the Substitute, the ransom-payer for the 
lost family of Adam, and the Head of a redeemed people. 
In Him He sees His holy “law magnified and made 
honourable.” Through Him He can “be just and yet the 
justifier of the ungodly.” (Isa. xlii. 21; Rom. iii. 26.) 

Let us carefully ponder these words. They are full 
of rich food for thought. They are full of peace, joy, com- 
fort, and consolation, for all who have fled for refuge ta 


24 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the Lord Jesus Christ, and committed their souls to Him 
for salvation. Such may rejoice in the thought, that 
though in themselves sinful, yet in God’s sight they are 
counted righteous. The Father regards them as members 
of His beloved Son: He sees in them no spot, and for 
His Son’s sake is “ well pleased.” (Eph. i. 6.) 


MATTHEW IV. 1—11. 


1 Then was Jesus led up of the 
spirit into the wilderness to be 
tempted of the devil. © 

2 And when he had fasted forty 
days and forty nights, he was after- 
ward an hungered. 

38 And when the tempter came to 
him, he said, If thou be the Son of 
God, command that these stones be 
made bread. 

4 But he answered and said, It is 
written, Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that pro- 
ceedeth out of the mouth of God. 

5 Then the devil taketh him up 
into the holy city, and setteth him 
on a pinnacle of the temple, 

6 And saith unto him, If thou be 
the Son of God, cast thyself down : 
for it is written, He shall give his 
angels charge concerning thee: and 





in their hands they shall bear thee 
up, lest at any time thou dash thy 
foot against a stone. 

7 Jesus said unto him, It is 
written again, Thou shalt not 
tempt the Lord thy God. 

8 Again, the devil taketh him up 
into an exceeding high mountain, 
and sheweth him all the kingdoms 
of the world, and the glory of them; 

9 And saith unto him, All these 
things will I give thee, if thou wilt 
fall down and worship me. 

10 Then saith Jesus unto him, 
Get thee hence Satan: for it is 
written, Thou shalt worship the 
Lord thy God, and him only shalt 
thou serve. 

11 Then the devil leaveth him, 
and, behold, angels came and min- 
istered unto him. 


TuE first event in our Lord’s ministry which St. Mat- 
thew records after His baptism, is His temptation. This 


is a deep and mysterious subject. 


There is much in the 


history of it which we cannot explain; but there lie on 
the face of the history plain practical lessons, to which 
we shall do well to take heed. 

Let us learn, in the first place, what a real and mighty 


enemy we have in the devil. 


He is not afraid to assault 


even the Lord Jesus Himself. Three times over he attacks 
God’s own Son: our Saviour was “tempted of the devil.” 

It was the devil who brought sin into the world at the 
beginning. This is he who vexed Job, deceived David, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IV. VER. 1—11. 25 


and gave Peter a heavy fall. This is he whom the Bible 
calls a “ murderer,” a “ liar,” and a “roaring lion.” (John 
vill. 44; 1 Pet. v. 8.) This is he whose enmity to our souls 
never slumbersand neversleeps. Thisis he who fornearly 
6000 years has been working at one work,—to ruin men 
and women, and to draw them to hell. This is he whose 
cunning and subtlety pass man’s understanding, and who 
often appears “an angel of light.” (1 Cor. xi. 14.) 

Let us watch and pray daily against the devil’s devices. 
There is no enemy worse than an enemy who is never seen 
and never dies, who is near us wherever we live, and goes 
with us wherever we go. Not least let us beware of that 
habit of foolish talking and jesting about the devil, which 
is so unhappily common. Let us remember that if we 
would be saved we must not only crucify the flesh and 
overcome the world, but also “resist the devil.” 

Let us learn, in the next place, that we must not count 
temptation a strange thing. “The disciple is not greater 
than his master, nor the servant than his lord.” If Satan 
came to Christ, he will also come to ‘Christians. 

It would be well for believers if they would remember 
this: they are too apt to forget it. They often find evil 
thoughts arising within their minds, which they can truly 
say they hate. Doubts, questions, and sinful imaginings 
are suggested to them, against which their whole inward 
man revolts: but let not these things destroy their peace, 
and rob them of their comforts. Let them remember 
there is a devil, and not be surprised to find him near 
them. ‘To be tempted is in itself no sin, It is the 
yielding to temptation, and the giving it a place in our 
hearts, which we must fear. 


26 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us learn, in the next place, that the chief weapon 
we ought to use in resisting Satan, is the Bible. Three 
times the great enemy offered temptations to our Lord. 
Three times his offer was refused, with a text of Scripture 
as the reason: “It is written.” 

Here is one among many reasons why we ought to be 
diligent readers of our Bibles. The Word isthe“sword of 
the Spirit:” we shall never fight a good fight if we do not 
use it as our principal weapon.—The Word is the “lamp” 
for our feet : we shall never keep the King’s highway to 
heaven if we do not journey by its light. (Eph. vi. 17: 
Psa. cxix. 105.)—It may well be feared that there is not 
enough Bible-reading amongst us. It is not sufficient to 
have the Book: we must actually read it, and pray over it 
ourselves. It will do us no good if it only lies still in our 
houses: we must be actually familiar with its contents, 
and have its texts stored in our memories and minds. 
Knowledge of the Bible never comes by intuition ; it can 
only be got by hard, regular, daily, attentive, wakeful read- 
ing. Do we grudge the time and trouble this will cost us? 
If we do we are not yet fit for the kingdom of God. 

Let us learn, in the last place, what a sympathizing 
Saviour the Lord Jesus Christ 1s. “In that He Himself 
hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succour them 
that are tempted.” (Heb. ii. 18.) 

The sympathy of Jesus is a truth which ought to be 
peculiarly dear to believers. They will find init a mine 
of strong consolation. They should never forget that 
they have a mighty Friend in heaven, who feels for them 
in all their temptations, and can enter into all their 
spiritual anxieties, Are they ever tempted by Satan to 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IV. VER. 12—¥5,. 27 


distrust God’s care and goodness? So was Jesus.—Are 
they ever tempted to presume on God’s mercy, and to run 
into danger without warrant? So also was Jesus.—Are 
they ever tempted to commit some private sin for the 
sake of some great public advantage? So also was 
Jesus.—Are they ever tempted to listen to some misap- 
plication of Scripture, as an excuse for doing wrong? So 
also was Jesus.—He is just the Saviour that a tempted 
people require. Let them flee to Him for help, and 
spread before Him all their troubles. They will find His 
ear ever ready to hear, and His heart ever ready to feel: 
He can understand their sorrows. 

May we all know the value of a sympathizing Saviour 
by experience! There is nothing to be compared to it in 
this cold and deceitful world. Those who seek theit 
happiness in this life only, and despise the religion of the 
Bible, have no idea what true comfort they are missing. 


MATTHEW IV. 12—25. 


12 Now when Jesus had heard 
that John was cast into prison, he 
departed into Galilee : 

13 And leaving Nazareth, he 
came and dwelt in Capernaum, 
which is upon the sea coast, in the 
borders of Zabulon and Nepthalim : 

14 That it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by Hsaias the 
prophet, saying, 

15 The land of Zabulon, and the 
land of Nepthalim, by the way of 
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of 
the Gentiles : 

16 The people which sat in dark- 
ness saw great light; and to them 
which sat in the region and shadow 
of death light is sprung up. 

17 From that time Jesus began 
to preach, and to say, Repent: for 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

18 And Jesus, walking by the 





sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, 
Simon called Peter, and Andrew 
his brother, casting a net into the 
sea: for they were fishers. 

19 And he saith unto them, 
Follow me, and I will make you 
fishers of men. 

20 And they straightway left 
their nets, and followed him. 

21 And going on from thence, he 
saw other two brethren, James the 
son of Zebedee, and John his bro- 
ther, in a ship with Zebedee their 
father, mending their nets; and he 
called them. 

22 And they immediately left the 
ship and their father, and followed 
him. 

23 And Jesus went about alt 
Galilee, teaching in their synago- 
gues, and preaching the Gospel of 
the kingdom, and healing all man- 


28 EXPOSITORY 


ner of sickness and all manner of 
disease among the people. 

24 And his fame went through- 
out all Syria: and they brought 
unto him all sick people that were 
taken with divers diseases and 
torments, and those which were 


THOUGHTS. 


which were lunatick, and those 
that had the palsy ; and he healed 
them. 

25 And there followed him great 
multitudes of people from Galilee, 
and from Decapolis, and from Je- 
rusalem, and from Judea, and from 


possessed with devils, and those ! beyond Jordan. 


WE have in these verses the beginning of our Lord’s 
ministry among men. He enters on His labours among 
a dark and ignorant people. He chooses men to be His 
companions and disciples. He confirms His ministry by © 
miracles, which rouse the attention of “all Syria,” and 
draw multitudes to hear Him. 

Let us notice the way in which our Lord commenced 
His mighty work. “He began to preach.” 

There is no office so honourable as that of the preacher: 
there is no work so important to the souls of men. It is 
an office which the Son of God was not ashamed to take 
up. It is an office to which He appointed His twelve 
apostles. It is an office to which St. Paul in his old age 
specially directs Timothy’s attention; he charges him 
with almost his last breath to “ preach the Word.” (2 Tim. 
iv. 2.) It is the principal means which God has always 
been pleased to use for the conversion and edification of 
souls. The brightest days of the Church have been those 
when preaching has been honoured ; the darkest days 
of the Church have been those when it has been lightly 
esteemed. Let us honour the Sacraments and public 
prayers of the Church, and reverently use them; but 
let us beware that we do not place them above preaching. 

Let us notice the first doctrine which the Lord Jesus 
proclaimed to the world. He “began to say, Repent.” 

The necessity of repentance is one of the great founda- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IV. VER. 12—25. 29 


tion stones which lie at the very bottom of Christianity : 
It is a truth which needs to be pressed on all mankind 
without exception. High or low, rich or poor, all have 
sinned, and are guilty before God; and all must repent 
and be converted, if they would be saved.—It is a truth 
which does not receive the attention it deserves. Truc 
repentance is no light matter. Itis a thorough change of 
heart about sin, a change showing itself in godly sorrow 
for sin,—in heart-felt confession of sin—in a complete 
breaking off from sinful habits, and an abiding hatred of 
all sin. Such repentance is the inseparable companion of 
saving faith in Christ.—Let us prize the doctrine highly. 
No Christian teaching can be called sound, which does not 
constantly bring forward “repentance toward God, and 
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.” (Acts xx. 21.) 

Let us notice the class of men whom the Lord Jesus 
chose to be His disciples. They were of the poorest and 
humblest rank in life. Peter, and Andrew, and James, 
and John, were all “fishermen.” 

The religion of our Lord Jesus Christ was not intended 
for the rich and learned alore. It was intended for all 
the world: and the majority of all the world will always 
be the poor. Poverty and ignorance of books, excluded 
thousands from the notice of the boastful philosophers 
of the heathen world. They exclude no one from the 
highest place in the service of Christ. Is a man humble ? 
Does he feel his sins? Is he willing to hear Christ’s 
voice and follow Him? If this be so, he may be the 
poorest of the poor, but he shall be found as high as 
any in the kingdom of heaven. Intellect, and money, 
and rank, are worth nothing without grace. 


30 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The religion of Christ must have been from heaven, 
or it never could have prospered and overspread the 
earth as it has done. It is vain for infidels to attempt 
to answer this argument: it cannot be answered. A 
religion which did not flatter the rich, the great, and 
the learned,—a religion which offered no license to the 
carnal inclinations of man’s heart,—a religion whose first 
teachers were poor fishermen, without wealth, rank, or 
power,—such a religion could never have “turned the 
world upside down,” if it had not been from God. Look 
at the Roman Emperors and the heathen priests with 
their splendid temples on the one side! Look at a few 
unlearned working men with the Gospel on the other ! 
Were there ever two parties so unequally matched ? 
Yet the weak proved strong, and the strong proved 
weak. Heathenism fell, and Christianity took its place. 
Christianity must have been from God. 

Let us notice, in the last place, the general character 
of the miracles by which our Lord confirmed His mission. 
Here we are told of them in the mass; hereafter we 
shall find many of them described particularly. And 
what is their character? They were miracles of mercy 
and kindness. Our Lord “ went about doing good.” 

These miracles are meant to teach us our Lord’s power 
He that could heal sick people with a touch, and cast out 
devils with a word, is “ able to save them to the uttermost 
that come unto God by Him.” (Heb.vii.25.) HeisAlmighty. 

These miracles are meant to be types and emblems of 
our Lord’s skill as a spiritual physician. He, before 
whom no bodily disease proved incurable, is mighty to 
cure every ailment of our souls. There is no broken 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 1—12. 31 


heart that He cannot heal; there is no wound of con- 
science that He cannot cure. Fallen, crushed, bruised, 
plague-stricken as we all are by sin, Jesus by His blood 
and Spirit can make us whole. Only let us apply to Him. 

These miracles, not least, are intended to show us 
Christ’s heart. Heis a most compassionate Saviour. He 
rejected no one who came to Him; He refused no one, 
however loathsome and diseased. He had an ear to hear 
all, and a hand to help all, and a heart to feel for all. 
There is no kindness like His. His compassions fail not. 

May we all remember that the Lord Jesus is “the 
same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.” (Heb. xiii. 
8.) High in heaven at God’s right hand, He is not in 
the least altered. He is just as able to save, just as 
willing to receive, just as ready to help, as He was 1800 
years ago. Should we have spread out our wants before 
Him then? Let usdothe same now. He can “heal all 
manner of sickness and all manner of disease.” 





MATTHEW V. 1—12. 


1 And seeing the multitudes, he 8 Blessed are the pure in heart: 
went up into a mountain: and | for they shall see God. 
when he was set, his disciples 9 Blessed are the peacemakers : 
zame unto him: for they shall be called the children 
2 And he opened his mouth, and | of God. : 
taught them, saying, 10 Blessed are they which are 
3 Blessed are the poor in spirit : | persecuted for righteousness’ sake: 
for their’s is the kingdom of heaven. | for their’s is the kingdom of hea: 
! 


4, Blessed are they that mourn: | ven. 
for they shall be comforted. 11 Blessedare ye, when menshall 


5 Blessed are the meek: for they | revile you, and persecute you, and 
shall inherit the earth. shall say all manner of evil against 
6 Blessed are they which do hun- ! you falsely, for my sake. F 
ger and thirst after righteousness : 12 Rejoice, and be exceeding 
for they shall be filled. glad: for great is your reward in 

7 Blessed are the merciful: for | heaven: for so persecuted they the 
they shall obtain mercy. prophets which were before you. 


TE three chapters which begin with these verses de- 
serve the special attention of all readers of the Bible. 








on EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


They contain what is commonly called the “Sermon on 
the Mount.” 

Every word of the Lord Jesus ought to be most pre- 
cious to professing Christians. It is the voice of the 
Chief Shepherd. It is the charge of the great Bishop 
and Head of the Church. It is the Master speaking. 
It is the word of Him who “spake as never man spake,” 
and by whom we shall all be judged at the last day. 

Would we know what kind of people Christians ought 
to be? Would we know the character at which Chris- 
tians ought to aim? Would we know the outward walk 
and inward habit of mind which become a follower of 
Christ? Then let us often study the Sermon on the Mount. 
Let us often ponder each sentence, and prove ourselves by 
it. Not least, let us often consider who they are that are 
called “blessed” at the beginning of the Sermon. Those 
whom the great High Priest blesses are blessed indeed! 

The Lord Jesus calls those “blessed” who are poor im 
spirit. He means the humble, and lowly-minded, and self- 
abased. Hemeansthose whoaredeeply convinced of their 
own sinfulnessin God’ssight. These are they who arenot 
“wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight.” 
They are not “rich and increased with goods:” they do 
not fancy they “need nothing ;” they regard themselves 
as “wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked.” Blessed are all such! Humility is the very first 
letter in the alphabet of Christianity. We must begin 
low, if we would build high. (Is. vi. 21; Rev. iii. 17.) 

The Lord Jesus calls those “blessed” who mourn. He 
means those who sorrow for sin, and grieve daily over their 
own short-comings. These are they who trouble them- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 1—12. 35 


selves more about sin than about anything on earth. 
The remembrance of it is grievous to them ; the burden 
of it is intolerable. Blessed are all such! “The sacri- 
fices of God are a broken spirit” and a contrite heart. 
(Ps. li. 17.) One day they shall weep no more: “they 
shall be comforted.” 

The Lord Jesus calls those “blessed” whoaremeck. He 
means those who are of a patient and contented spirit. 
They are willing to put up with little honour here below. 
They can bear injuries without resentment: they are not 
ready to take offence. Like Lazarus in the parable, they 
are content to wait for their good things. Blessed are all 
such! They are never losers in the long run. One day 
they shall “reign on the earth.” (Rev. v. 10.) 

The Lord Jesus calls those “blessed” who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness. He means those who desire 
above all things to be entirely conformed to the mind of 
Ged. They long not so much to be rich, or wealthy, or 
learned, as to be holy. Blessed are all such! They shall 
have enough one day. They shall “awake up after 
God’s likeness and be satisfied.” (Psalm xvii. 15.) 

The Lord Jesus calls those “ blessed” who are merciful 
He means those whoare full of compassion towards others. 
They pity all who are suffering either from sin or sorrow, 
and are tenderly desirous to make their sufferings less. 
They are “full of good works,” and endeavours to do good. 
(Acts ix. 36.) Blessed are all such! Both in this life and 
in that which is to come they shall reap a rich reward. 

The Lord Jesus calls those “ blessed” who are pure 
in heart. He means those who do not aim merely at out 
ward correctness, but at inward holiness. They are not 


ot EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


satisfied with a mere external show of religion. They 
strive to have always a conscience void of offence, and 
to serve God with the spirit and the inner man. Blessed 
areall such! The heart is the man. “Man looketh on 
the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the 
heart.” (1 Sam. xvi. 7.) He that is most spiritually- 
minded will have most communion with God. 

The Lord Jesus call those “blessed” who are peace- 
makers. He means those who use all their influence to 
promote peace and charity on earth, in private and in 
public, at home and abroad. He means those who strive 
to make all men love one another, by teaching that 
Gospel which says, “Love is the fulfilling of the law.” 
(Rom. xiii. 10.) Blessed are all such! They are doing 
the very work which the Son of God began when He 
came to earth the first time, and which He will finish 
when He returns the second time. 

Lastly, the Lord Jesus calls those “blessed” who are 
persecuted for righteousness’ sake. He means those who are 
laughed at, mocked, despised, and ill used, because they 
endeavour to live as true Christians. Blessed are all 
such! They drink of the same cup which their Master 
drank. They are now confessing Him before men, and 
He will confess them before His Father and the angels 
at the last day. “Great is their reward.” 

Such are the eight foundation-stones which the Lord 
lays down at the beginning of the Sermon on the Mount. 
Hight great testing truths are placed before us. May we 
mark well each one of them, and learn wisdom. 

Let us learn how entirely contrary are the principles 
of Christ to the principles of the world. it is vain to 


MATTHEW, CHAr. v. VER. 13—20. 35 


deny it: theyare almost diametrically opposed. The very 
characters which the Lord Jesus praisesthe world despises. 
Thevery pride, and thoughtlessness,and high tempers,and 
‘worldliness, and selfishness, and formality, and unloving- 
ness, which abound everywhere, the Lord Jesus condemns, 
Let us learn how unhappily different is the teaching 
of Christ from the practice of many professing Christians. 
Where shall we find men and women among those who 
go to churches and chapels, who are striving to live up to 
the pattern we have read of to-day? There is too much 
reason to fear that many baptized persons are utterly 
ignorant of what the New Testament commands. 
Above all, let us learn how holy and spiritually-minded 
all believers should be. They should never aim at any 
standard lower than that of the Sermon on the Mount. 
Christianity is eminently a practical religion. Sound 
doctrine is its root and foundation, but holy living 
should always be its fruit. If we would know what 
holy living is, let us often bethink ourselves who they 
are that Jesus calls “blessed.” 





MATTHEW V. 13—20. 
13 Ye are the salt of the earth: ; I am not come to destroy, but to 


but if the salt have lost his savour, 
wherewith shall it be salted P it is 
thenceforth good for nothing, but 
to be cast out, and to be trodden 
under foot of men. 

14 Ye are the light of the world. 
A city that is set on an hill cannot 
be hid. 

15 Neither do men light a candle, 
and put it under a bushel, but on 
wu candlestick; and it giveth light 
unto all that are in the house. 

16 Let your light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good 
works, and glorify your Father 
which is in heaven. 

17 Think not that I am come to 
destroy the law, or the prophets: 





fulfil. 

18 For verily I say unto you, Till 
heaven and earth pass, one jot or 
one tittle shall in no wise pass from 
the law, till all be fulfilled. 

19 Whosoever therefore shall 
break one of these least command- 
ments, and shall teach men s0, 
he shall be called the least in the 
kingdom of heaven : but whosoever 
shall do and teach them, the same 
shall be called great in the king- 
dom of heaven. 

20 For I say unto you, That ex- 
cept your righteousness shall ex- 
ceed the righteousness of the scribes 
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. 


36 EXPOSITORY THOUGATS. 


THESE verses teach us, in the first place, the character 
which true Christians must support and maintain tn the 
world. 

The Lord Jesus tells us that true Christians are to be 
in the world like “ salt.” “ Ye are the salt of the earth.” 
_ Now salt has a peculiar taste of its own, utterly unlike 
anything else. When mingled with other substances it 
preserves them from corruption. It imparts a portion of 
its taste to everything it is mixed with. It is useful so 
long as it preserves its savour, but no longer. Are we true 
Christians? Then let us see here our office and our duties! 

The Lord Jesus tells us that true Christians are to be 
in the world like light. “Ye are the light of the world.” 
Now it is the property of light to be utterly distinct from 
darkness. The least spark in a dark room can be seen at 
once. Of all things created, light is the most useful : it 
fertilizes ; it guides; it cheers. It was the first thing 
called into being. (Gen.i.3.) Without it the world would 
be a gloomy blank. Are we true Christians? Then 
behold again our position and its responsibility ! 

Surely, if words mean anything, we are meant to learn 
from these two figures that there must be something 
marked, distinct, and peculiar about our character, if we 
are true Christians. It will never do to idle through life, 
thinking and living like others, if we mean to be owned 
by Christ as His people. Have we grace? Then it must 
be seen.—Have we the Spirit? Then there must be 
fruit Have we any saving religion? Then there must 
be a difference of habits, tastes, and turn of mind, 
between us and those who think only of the world—It 
is perfectly clear that true Christianity is something more 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 13—20. 37 


than being baptized and going to church. “Salt” and 
“light” evidently imply peculiarity both of heart and 
life, of faith and practice. We must dare to be singular 
and unlike the world, if we mean to be saved. 

These verses teach us, in the second place, the relation 
between Chrisi’s teaching and that of the Old Testament. 

This is a point of great importance, and one about 
which great errors prevail. Our Lord clears up the 
point in one striking sentence: He says, “Think not 
that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: 
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.’ These are 
remarkable words. They were deeply important when 
spoken, as satisfying the natural anxiety of the Jews on 
the point. They will be deeply important as long as the 
world stands, as a testimony that the religion of the Old 
and New Testaments is one harmonious whole. 

The Lord Jesus came to fulfil the predictions of the 
prophets, who had long foretold that a Saviour would one 
day appear.—He came to fulfil the ceremonial law, by 
becoming the great Sacrifice for sin, to which all the 
Mosaic offerings had ever pointed.—He came to fulfil the 
moral law, by yielding to it a perfect obedience, which we 
could never have yielded,—and by paying the penalty for 
our breach of it with His atoning blood, which we could 
never have paid. In all these ways He exalted the law 
of God, and made its importance more evident even than 
it had been before. In a word, “He magnified the law 
and made it honourable.” (Isaiah xlii. 21.) 

There are deep lessons of wisdom to be learned from 
these words of our Lord about “ the law and the prophets.” 
Let us consider them well, and lay them up in our hearts. 


38 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


For one thing, let us beware of despising the Old Testa- 
ment, under any pretence whatever. Let us never listen to 
those who bid us throw it aside as an obsolete, antiquated, 
useless book. The religionof the Old Testament is the germ 
of Christianity. The Old Testament is the Gospel in the 
bud ; the New Testament is the Gospel in full flower.— 
The Old Testament is the Gospel in the blade; the New 
Testament is the Gospel in full ear—The saints in the 
Old Testament saw many things through a glass darkly ; 
but they all looked by faith to the same Saviour, and 
were led by the same Spirit as ourselves. ‘These are no 
light matters. Much infidelity begins with an ignorant 
contempt of the Old Testament. 

For another thing, let us beware of despising the law 
of the Ten Commandments. Let us not suppose fora 
moment that it is set aside by the Gospel, or that 
Christians have nothing to do with it. The coming of 
Christ did not alter the position of the Ten Command- 
ments one hair’s breadth. If anything, it exalted and 
raised their authority. (Rom. iii. 31.) The law of the Ten 
Commandments is God’s eternal measure of right and 
wrong. By it is the knowledge of sin. By it the Spirit 
shows men their need of Christ, and drives them to Him. 
To it Christ refers His people as their rule and guide for 
holy living. In its right place it is just as important as 
“the glorious Gospel.”—It cannot save us: we cannot be 
justified by it; but never, never let us despise it. It isa 
symptom of an ignorant ministry, and an unhealthy state 
of religion, when the law is lightly esteemed. The true 
Christian “delights in the law of God.” (Rom. vii. 22.) 

In the last place, let us beware of supposing that the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 21—37, 39 


Gospel has lowered the standard of personal holiness, and 
that the Christian is not intended to be as strict and 
particular about his daily life as the Jew. This is an im- 
mense mistake, but one that is unhappily very common. 
So far from this being the case, the sanctification of the 
New Testament saint ought to exceed that of him who has 
nothing but the Old Testament for his guide. The more 
light we have, the more we ought to love God. The more 
clearly we see our own complete and full forgiveness in 
Christ, the more heartily ought we to work for His glory. 
We know what it cost to redeem us far better than the 
Old Testament saints did. We have read what happened 
in Gethsemane and on Calvary, and they only saw it dimly 
and indistinctly as a thing yet tocome. May we never for- 
get our obligations! The Christian who is content with a 
low standard of personal holiness has got much to learn. 





MATTHEW V. 21—37. 


21 Ye have heard that it was said 
by them of old time, Thou shalt not 
kill ; and whosoever shall kill shall 
pe in danger of the judgment: 

22 But I say unto you, That who- 
soever is angry with his brother 
without a cause shall be in danger 
of the judgment: and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, Raca, shall 
be in danger of the council: but 
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, 
shall be in danger of hell fire. 

23 Therefore if thou bring thy 
gift to the altar, and there remem- 
berest that thy brother hath ought 
against thee ; 

24 Leave there thy gift before 
the altar, and go thy way; first be 
reconciled to thy brother, and then 
come and offer thy gift. 

25 Agree with thine adversary 
quickly, whiles thou art in the way 
with him; lest at any time the ad- 
versary deliver thee to the judge, 
and the judge deliver thee to the 





officer, and thou be cast into prison. 

26 Verily I say unto thee, Thou 
shalt by no means come out thence, 
till thou hast paid the uttermost 
farthing. 

27 Ye have heard that it was 
said by them of old time, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery : 

28 But I say unto you, That who- 
soever looketh on a woman to lust 
after her hath committed adultery 
with her already in his heart. 

29 And if thy right eye offend 
thee, pluck it out, and cast it from 
thee: for it is profitable for thee 
that one of thy members should 
perish, and not that thy whole 
body should be cast into hell. 

30 And if thy right hand offend 
thee, cut it off, and cast it from 
thee: for it is profitable for thee 
that one of thy members should 
perish, and not that thy whole 
body should be cast into hell. 

31 It hath been said, Whosoever 


40 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


shall put away his wife, let him | 34 But I say unto you, Swear 
give her a writing of divorcement: | not at all; neither by heaven; for 

82 But I say unto you, That | it is God’s throne: be aa 
whosoever shall put away his wife, 85 Nor by the earth ; for it is his 
saving for the cause of fornication, | footstool: neither by Jerusalem ; 
causeth her to commit adultery: | for it is the city of the great King. 
and whosoever shall marry her that 86 Neither shalt thou swear by 
is divorced committeth adultery. | thy head, because thou canst not 

83 Again, ye have heard that it ,) make one hair white or black. 
hath been said by them, of old 87 But let your communication 
time, Thou shalt not forswear thy- | be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for what- 
self, but shalt perform unto the | soever is more than these cometh 
Lord thine oaths: of evil. 


THESE verses deserve the closest attention of all readers 
of the Bible.’ A right understanding of the doctrines 
they contain lies at the very root of Christianity. The 
Lord Jesus here explains more fully the meaning of His 
words, “I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil.” 
He teaches us that His Gospel magnifies the Law, and 
exalts its authority. He shows us that the Law, as 
expounded by Him, was a far more spiritual and heart- 
searching rule than most of the Jews supposed ; and He 
proves this by selecting three commandments out of the 
ten as examples of what He means. 

He expounds the sixth commandment. Many thought 
that they kept this part of God’s law so long as they did 
not commit actual murder. The Lord Jesus shows that 
its requirements go much further than this. It condemns 
all angry and passionate language, and especially when 
used without a cause. Let us mark this well. We may 
be perfectly innocent of taking life away, and yet be 
guilty of breaking the sixth commandment! 

He expounds the seventh commandment, Many sup- 
posed that they kept this part of God’s law if they did 
not actually commit adultery. The Lord Jesus teaches 
that we may break it in our thoughts, hearts, and 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 21—37. 4] 


maginations, even when our outward conduct is moral 
and correct. The God with whom we have to do looks 
far beyond actions. With Him even a glance of the 
eye may be a sin! 

He expounds the third commandment. Many fancied 
that they kept this part of God’s law so long as they did 
not swear falsely, and performed their oaths. The Lord 
Jesus forbids all vain and light swearing altogether. All 
swearing by created things, even when God’s name is not 
brought forward,—all calling upon God to witness, ex- 
cepting on the most solemn occasions, is a great sin. 

Now all this is very instructive. It ought to raise very 
serious reflections in our minds. It calls us loudly to use 
great searchings of heart. And what does it teach ? 

It teaches us the exceeding holiness of God. He isa 
most pure and perfect Being, who sees faults and imper- 
fections where man’s eyes often see none. He reads our 
inward motives ; He notes our words and thoughts, as well 
as our actions: “ He desires truths in the inward parts.’ 
(Psa. li. 6.) It would be well if men would consider this 
part of God’s character more than they do! There would 
be no room for pride, and self-righteousness, and care- 
lessness, if men only saw God “as He is.” (1 John iii. 2.) 

It teaches us the exceeding ignorance of man in spiritual 
things. There are thousands and tens of thousands 
of professing Christians, it may be feared, who know no 
more of the requirements of God’s law than the most 
ignorant Jews. They know the letter of the Ten Com- 
mandments well enough. They fancy, like the young 
ruler, “ all these have I kept from my youth up.” (Matt. 
xix. 20.) They never dream that it is possible to break 


42 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the sixth and seventh commandments, if they do not 
break them by outward acts or deeds. And so they 
live on satisfied with themselves, and quite content 
with their little bit of religion. Happy indeed are 
they who really understand God’s law! 

It teaches us our exceeding need of the Lord Jesus 
Christ's atoning blood to save us. What man or woman 
upon earth can ever stand before such a God as this, and 
plead “not guilty”? Who is there that has ever grown 
to years of discretion, and not broken the commandments 
thousands of times? ‘There is none righteous, no, not 
one.” (Rom. iii. 10.) Without a mighty Mediator we should 
every one be condemned in the judgment day. Ignorance 
of the real meaning of the Law is one plain reason why 
somany do not value the Gospel, and content themselves 
with a little formal Christianity. They do not see the strict- 
ness and holiness of God’s ten Commandments : if they 
did, they would never rest till they were safe in Christ. 

Tn the last place, this passage teaches us the exceeding 
importance of avoiding all occasions of sin. If we really 
desire to be holy, we must “ take heed to our ways, that 
we sin not with our tongues.” (Psa, xxxix.1.) We must 
be ready to make up quarrels and disagreements, lest 
they gradually lead on to greater evils. “The beginning 
of strife is as when one letteth out water.” (Prov. xvii. 
14.) We must labour to crucify our flesh and mortify our 
members, to make any sacrifice and endure any bodily 
inconvenience rather than sin. We must keep our lips 
as it were with a bridle, and exercise an hourly strictness 
over our words. Let men call us precise, if they will, for 
so doing. Let them say, if they please, that we are “too 


MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 38—48. 


particular.” 


43 


We need not be moved. We are merely 


doing as our Lord Jesus Christ bids us, and, if this is 
the case, we have no cause to be ashamed. 





MATTHEW V. 38—48. 


38 Ye have heard that it hath 
been said, An eye for an eye, and 
a tooth for a tooth: 

39 But I say unto you, That ye 
resist not evil: but whosoever shall 
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn 
to him the other also. 

40 And if any man will sue thee 
at the law, and take away thy coat, 
let him have thy cloak also. 

41 And whosoever shall compel 
thee to go a mile, go with him 
twain. 

42 Give to him that asketh thee, 
and from him that would borrow 
of thee turn not thou away. 

43 Ye have heard that it hath 
been said, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 


44 But I say unto you, Love your 
enemies, bless them that curse you, 
do good to them that hate you, and 
pray for them which despitefully 
use you, and persecute you; 

45 That ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in heaven: 
for he maketh his sun to rise on the 
evil and on the good, and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the unjust. 

46 For if ye love them which love 
you, what reward have ye? do not 
even the publicans the same ? 

47 Andif yesalute your brethren 
only, what do ye more than others ? 
do not even the publicans so? 

48 Be ye therefore perfect even 
as your Father which is in heaven 
is perfect. 


WE have here our Lord Jesus Christ’s rules for our con- 
duct one towards another. He that would know how he 
ought to feel and act towards his fellow-men, should often 
study these verses. They deserve to be written in letters 
of gold. They haveextorted praise even trom the enemies 
of Christianity. Let us mark well what they contain. 
The Lord Jesus forbids everything like an unforgiving 
and revengeful spirit. “Isay unto you, That ye resist not 
evil.” A readiness to resent injuries, a quickness in tak- 
ing offence, a quarrelsome and contentious disposition, a 
keenness in asserting our rights,—all, all are contrary to 
the mind of Christ. The world may see no harm in these 
habits of mind; but they do not become the character 
of the Christian. Our Master says, ‘“ Resist not evil.” 
The Lord Jesus enjoins on us a spirit of universal love 
and charity. “I say unto you, Love your enemies.” 
E 


4.4. _EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We ought to put away all malice. We ought to return 
good for evil, and blessing for cursing. Moreover we are 
not to love in word only, but in deed. We are to deny 
ourselves, and take trouble, in order to be kind and 
courteous. If any man “compel thee to go a mile, go 
with him twain.” We are to put up with much and 
bear much, rather than hurt another, or give offence. 
In all things we are to be unselfish. Our thought must 
never be, “How do others behave to me?” but “ What 
would Christ have me to do?” 

A standard of conduct like this may seem, at first sight, 
extravagantly high. But we must never content ourselves 
with aiming at one lower. We must observe the two 
weighty arguments by which our Lord backs up this 
part of His instruction. They deserve serious attention. 

For one thing, if we do not aim at the spirit and tem- 
per which are here recommended, we are not yet children 
of God. What does our “Father which is in heaven” do? 
He is kind to all: He sends rain on good and on evil alike; 
He causes “His sun” to shine on all without distinction— 
A child should be like his father: but where is our likeness 
to our Father in heaven if we cannot show mercy and 
kindness to everybody? Where is the evidence that we 
are new creatures if we lack charity? It is altogether 
wanting. We must yet be “born again.” (John iii. 7.) 

For another thing, if we do not aim at the spirit and 
temper here recommended, we are manifestly yet of the 
world. “What do ye more than others?” is our Lord’s 
solemn question. Even those who have no religion can 
“love those who love them:” they can do good and show 
kindness when affection or interest moves them. But a 


-MATTHEW, CHAP. V. VER. 38—48. 45 


Christian ought to be influenced by higher principles 
than these.—Do we flinch from the test? Do we find it 
impossible to do good to our enemies? If that be the case 
we may be sure we have yet to be converted. As yet we 
have not “received the Spirit of God.” (1 Cor. ii. 12.) 

There is much in all this which calls loudly for solemn 
reflection. There are few passages of Scripture so calcu- 
lated to raise in our minds humbling thoughts. We have 
here a lovely picture of the Christian as he ought to be. 
We cannot look at it without painful feelings : we must 
all allow that it differs widely from the Christian as he 
is. Let us carry away from it two general lessons. 

In the first place, if the spirit of these ten verses 
were more continually remembered by true believers 
they would recommend Christianity to the world far more 
than they do. We must not allow ourselves to suppose 
that the least words in this passage are trifling and of 
small moment: they are not so. It is attention to the 
spirit of this passage which makes our religion beautiful. 
It is the neglect of the things which it contains by which 
our religion is deformed. Unfailing courtesy, kindness, 
tenderness, and consideration for others, are some of the 
greatest ornaments to the character of a child of God. 
The world can understand these things if it cannot 
understand doctrine. There is no religion in rudeness, 
roughness, bluntness, and incivility. The perfection of 
practical Christianity consists in attending to the little 
duties of holiness as well as to the great. 

In the second place, if the spirit of these ten verses 
had more dominion and power in the world, how much 
happier the world would be than i vs. Who does not 


46 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


know that quarrellings, strifes, selfishness, and unkind- 
ness, cause half the miseries by which mankind is visited ? 
Who can fail to see that nothing would so much tend to 
increase happiness as the spread of Christian love, such 
as is here recommended by our Lord? Let us remember 
this. _Those who fancy that true religion has any ten- 
dency to make men unhappy, are greatly mistaken: it is 
the absence of it that does this, and not the presence. 
True religion has the directly contrary effect: it tends 
to promote peace, and charity, and kindness, and good- 
will among men. The more men are brought under the 
teaching of the Holy Spirit, the more they will love one 


another, and the more happy they will be. 





MATTHEW VI. 1—8. 


1 Take heed that ye do not your 
alms before men, to be seen of 
them: otherwise ye have no re- 
ward of your Father which is in 
heaven. 

2 Therefore when thou doest thine 
alms, do not sound a trumpet be- 
fore thee, as the hypocrites do in 
the synagogues and in the streets, 
that they may have glory of men. 
Verily I say unto you, They have 
their reward. 

3 But when thou doest alms, let 
not thy left hand know what thy 
right hand doeth : 

4 That thine alms may be in 
secret: and thy Father which seeth 
in secret himself shall reward thee 
openly. 

5 And when thou prayest, thou 





shall not be as the hypocrites are. 
for they love to pray standing in 
the synagogues and in the corners 
of the streets, that they may be 
seen ofmen. Verily I say unto you, 
They have their reward. 

6 But thou, when thou prayest, 
enter into thy closet, and when 
thou hast shut thy door, pray to 
thy Father which is in secret: and 
thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall reward thee openly. 

7 But when ye pray, use not vain 
repetitions, as the heathen do: for 
they think that they shall be heard 
for their much speaking, 

8 Be not ye therefore like unto 
them: for your Father knoweth 
what things ye have need of, be- 
fore ye ask him. 


In this part of the Sermon on the Mount the Lord Jesus 
gives us instruction on two subjects: one is that of giving 
alms; the other is that of prayer. Both were subjects 
to which the Jews attached great importance: both in 
themselves deserve the serious attention of all professing 
Christians, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. I1—8. 47 


Let us observe that our Lord takes it for granted that 
all who call themselves His disciples will give alms. He 
assumes as a matter of course that they will think it a 
solemn duty to give, according to their means, to relieve 
the wants of others; the only point He handles is the 
manner in which the duty should be done. This is a 
searching lesson. It condemns the selfish stinginess of 
many in the matter of giving money. How many are 
“rich towards themselves,” but poor towards God! 
How many never give a farthing to do good to the 
bodies and souls of men! And have such persons any 
right to be called Christians in their present state of 
mind? It may well be doubted. A giving Saviour 
should have giving disciples. 

Let us observe, again, that our Lord takes it for granted 
that all who call themselves His disciples will pray. He 
assumes this also as a matter of course: He only gives 
directions as to the best way of praying. This is another 
lesson which deserves to be continually remembered. It 
teaches plainly that prayerless people are not genuine 
Christians. It is not enough to join in the prayers of 
the congregation on Sundays, or attend the prayers ofa 
family on week days. There must be private prayer also. 
Without this we may be outward members of Christ’s 
Church, but we are not living members of Christ. 

But what are the rules laid down for our guidance 
about almsgiving and praying? They are few and 
simple; but they contain much matter for thought. 

In giving, everything like ostentation is to be abhorred 
and avoided. “When thou doest thine alms, do not sound 
a trumpet before thee.” We are not to give as if we wished 


48 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


everybody to see how liberal and charitable we are, and 
desire the praise of our fellow-men. We are to shun 
everything like display. We are to give quietly, and 
make as little noise as possible about our charities. We 
are to aim at the spirit of the proverbial saying, “Let 
not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.” 

In praying, the principal object to be sought is to be alone 
with God. ‘When thou prayest, enter into thy closet.” 
We should endeavour to find some place where no mortal 
eye sees us, and where we can pour out our hearts with 
the feeling that no one is looking at us but God.—This 
is a rule which many find it very difficult to follow. The 
poor man and the servant often find it almost impossible 
to be really alone. But it is a rule which we must make 
great efforts to obey. Necessity, in such cases, is often 
the mother of invention. When a person has a real will 
to find some place where he can be in secret with his 
God, he will generally find a way. 

In all our duties, whether giving or praying, the great 
thing to be kept in mind is, that we have to do with a 
heart-searching and all-knowing God. “Our Father seeth 
in secret.” Everything like formality, affectation, or 
mere bodily service, is abominable and worthless in 
God’s sight. He takes no account of the quantity of 
money we give, or the quantity of words we use. The 
one thing at which His all-seeing eye looks is the 
nature of our motives and the state of our hearts. 

May we all remember these things. Here lies a rock, 
on which many are continually making spiritual ship- 
wreck. They flatter themselves that all must be right 
with their souls, if they only perform a certain amount 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 9—15, 49 


of “religious duties.” They forget that God does not 
regard the quantity, but the quality of our service, 
His favour is not to be bought, as many seem to suppose, 
by the formal repetition of a number of words, or by the 
self-righteous payment of a sum of money to a charitable 
institution. Where are our hearts ?—Are we doing all, 
whether we give or pray, “as to the Lord, and not to 
men ¢?”—Do we realize the eye of God ?—Do we simply 
and solely desire to please Him, who “seeth in secret,” 
and by whom “actions are weighed”? (1 Sam. ii. 3.)— 
Are we sincere ?—These are the sort of questions with 
which we should often ply our souls. 





MATTHEW VI. 9—15. 


9 After this manner therefore , tion, but deliver us from evil: For 
ray ye: Our Father which art in} thine is the kingdom, and the 
eaven, Hallowed be thy name. power, and the glory, for ever, 
10 Thy kingdom come. Thy will | Amen. 
be done in earth, as i¢ is in heaven. 14 For if ye forgive men their 
il Give us this day our daily | trespasses, your heavenly Father 
bread. will also forgive you: 
12 And forgive us our debts, as 15 But if ye forgive not men 
we forgive our debtors. their trespasses, neither will your 
13 And lead us not into tempta- | Father forgive your trespasses. 


THESE verses are few in number, and soon read, but 
they are of immense importance. They contain that 
wonderful pattern of prayer with which the Lord Jesus 
has supplied His people, commonly called “The Lord’s 
Prayer.” 

Perhaps no part of Scripture is so well known as 
this. Its words are familiar, wherever Christianity is 
found; thousands and tens of thousands, who never 
saw a Bible, or heard the pure Gospel, are acquainted 
with “Our Father,” or “ Paternoster.” Happy would 


50 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


it be for the world if this prayer was as well known 
in the spirit as it is in the letter. 

No part of Scripture is so full, and so simple at 
the same time as this. It is often the first prayer 
which we learn to offer up, when we are little children : 
here is its simplicity. It contains the germ of every- 
thing which the most advanced saint can desire: here is 
its fulness. The more we ponder every word it contains 
the more we shall feel “this prayer is of God.” 

The Lord’s Prayer consists of ten parts or sentences. 
There is one declaration of the Being to whom we 
pray. There are three prayers respecting His name, His 
kingdom,and Hiswill. There are four prayers respecting 
our daily wants, our sins, or weakness, and our dangers. 
There is one profession of our feeling towards others. 
There is one concluding ascription of praise——TIn all 
these parts we are taught to say “we,” and “our.” 
We are to remember others, as well as ourselves—On 
each of these parts a volume might be written. We 
must content ourselves at present with taking up sen- 
tence after sentence, and marking out the lessons which 
each sentence contains. 

The first sentence declares to whom we are to pray: 
“Qur Father which art in heaven.” We are not to pray 
to saints and angels, but to the everlasting Father, the 
Father of spirits, the Lord of heaven and earth. We call 
Him Father in the lowest sense, as our Creator: as St. 
Paul told the Athenians, ‘in Him we live, and move, and 
have our being,—we are also His offspring.” (Acts xvii. 
28.) We call Him Father in the highest sense, as the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, reconciling us to Him- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 9—15. 51 


self through the death of His Son. (Coloss. i. 20—22,) 
We profess that which the old Testament saints only 
saw dimly and afar off,—we profess to be His children 
by faith in Christ, and to have “the Spirit of adoption, 
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.” (Rom. viii. 15.) This, 
we must never forget, is the sonship that we must desire, 
if we would be saved. Without faith in Christ’s blood 
and union with Him, it is useless to talk of trusting in 
the “ Fatherhood” of God. 

The second sentence is a petition respecting God’s name: 
“Hallowed be Thy name.” By the “Name” of God we 
mean all those attributes under which He is revealed 
to us,—His power, wisdom, holiness, justice, mercy, and 
truth. By asking that they may be “hallowed,” we 
mean that they may be made known and glorified. The 
glory of God is the first thing that God’s children should 
desire. It is the object of one of our Lord’s own 
prayers: “Father, glorify Thy name.” (John xii. 28.) 
It is the purpose for which the world was created ; 
it is the end for which the saints are called and con- 
verted : it is the chief thing we should seek,—that ‘God 
in all things may be glorified.” (1 Peter iv. 11.) 

The third sentence is a petition concerning God’s king- 
dom: “Thy kingdom come.” By His kingdom we 

mean, first, the kingdom of grace which God sets up 
and maintains in the hearts of all living members of 
Christ, by His Spirit and Word. But we mean also, 
the kingdom of glory which shall one day be set up, 
when Jesus shall come the second time, and “all shall 
know Him from the least to the greatest.” (Heb. viii. 11.) 
This is the time when sin, and sorrow, and Satan shall 


52 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


be cast out of the world. It is the time when the Jews 
shall be converted, and the fulness of the Gentiles shall 
come in (Rom. xi. 25), and a time that is above all 
things to be desired. It therefore fills a foremost place 
in the Lord’s Prayer. We ask that which is expressed 
in the words of the Burial Service: “that it may please 
God to hasten His kingdom.” 

The fourth sentence is a petition concerniny God's 
will: “Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” 
We here pray that God’s laws may be obeyed by men 
as perfectly, readily, and unceasingly as they are by 
angels in heaven. We ask that those who now obey 
not His laws may be taught to obey them, and that 
those who do obey them may obey them better. Our 
truest happiness is perfect submission to God’s will, and 
it is the highest charity to pray that all mankind may 
know it, obey it, and submit to it. 

The fifth sentence is a petztion respecting our own daily 
wants: “Give us this day our daily bread.” We are 
here taught to acknowledge our entire dependence on 
God for the supply of our daily necessities. As Israel 
required daily manna, so we require daily “bread.” We 
confess that we are poor, weak, wanting creatures, and 
beseech Him who is our Maker to take care of us. We 
ask for “bread,” as the simplest of our wants, and in 
that word we include all that our bodies require. 

The sixth sentence is a petition respecting our sins: 
“Forgive us our debts.” We confess that we are sinners, 
aud need daily grants of pardon and forgiveness. This 
is a part of the Lord’s Prayer which deserves especially 
to be remembered. It condemns all self-righteousness 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 9—15. 53 


and self-justifying. We are instructed here to keep up 
a continual habit of confession at the throne of grace, 
and a continual habit of seeking mercy and remission, 
Let this never be forgotten. We need daily to “wash 
our feet.” (John xiii. 10.) 

The seventh sentence is a profession respecting our own 
feelings towards others: we ask our Father to “F orgive 
us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” This is the 
only profession in the whole prayer, and the only part 
on which our Lord comments and dwells, when He has 
concluded the prayer. The object of it is to remind 
us that we must not expect our prayers for forgiveness 
to be heard if we pray with malice and spite in our 
hearts towards others. To pray in such a frame of 
mind is mere formality and hypocrisy. It is even worse 
than hypocrisy; it is as much as saying, “Do not 
forgive me at all.” Our prayers are nothing without 
charity. We must not expect to be forgiven, if we 
cannot forgive. 

The eighth sentence is a petition respectiug our weak- 
ness: “Lead us not into temptation.” It teaches us 
that we are liable, at all times, to be led astray and to 
fall. It instructs us to confess our infirmity, and beseech 
God to hold us up, and not allow us to run into sin. 
Weask Him, who orders all things in heaven and earth, 
to restrain us from going into that which would injure 
our souls, and never to suffer us to be “tempted above 
that which we are able to bear.” (1 Cor. x. 13.) 

The ninth sentence is a petition respecting our dangers: 
“Deliver us from evil.” We are here taught to ask 
God to deliver us from the evil that is in the world, the 


54 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


evil that is within our own hearts, and not least from 
that evil one, the devil. We confess that, so long as 
we are in the body, we are constantly seeing, hearing, 
and feeling the presence of evil. It is about us, and 
within us, and around us on every side ; and we entreat 
Him, who alone can preserve us, to be continually 
delivering us from its power. (John xvii. 15.) 

The last sentence is an ascription of praise: “Thine 
is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory.” We 
declare in these words our belief that the kingdoms of 
this world are the rightful property of our Father; that 
to Him alone belongs all “power;” and that He alone 
deserves to receive all “glory.” And we conclude by 
offering to Him the profession of our hearts, that we 
give Him all honour and praise, and rejoice that He is 
King of kings, and Lord of lords. 

And now let us examine ourselves, and see whether 
we really desire to have the things which we are taught 
to ask for in the Lord’s Prayer. Thousands, it may be 
feared, repeat these words daily as a form, but never 
consider what they are saying. They care nothing for 
the “glory,” the “kingdom,” or the “will” of God. 
They have no sense of dependence, sinfulness, weakness, 
or danger. They have no love or charity towards their 
enemies. And yet theyrepeat the Lord’s Prayer! These 
things ought not to be so. May we resolve that, by 
God’s help, our hearts shall always go together with 
our lips! Happy is he who can really call God his 
“Father” through Jesus Christ his Saviour, and can 
therefore say a heartfelt “Amen ” to all that the Lord’s 
Prayer contains, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 16—24. 


55 


MATTHEW VI. 16—24. 


16 Moreover when ye fast, be 
not, as the hypocrites, of a sad 
countenance: for they disfigure 
their faces, that they may appear 
unto men to fast. Verily I say 
unto you, They have their reward. 

17 But thou, when thou fastest, 
anoint thine head, and wash thy 
face : 

18 That thou appear not unto 
men to fast, but unto thy Father 
which is in secret: and thy Father, 
which seeth in secret, shall reward 
thee openly. 

19 Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures upon earth, where moth 
and rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves break through and steal: 

20 But Jay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven, where nei- 





ther moth nor rust doth corrupt, 
and where thieves do not break 
through nor steal: 

21 For where your treasure is, 
there will your heart be also. 

22 The light of the body is the 
eye: if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be 
full of light, 

23 But if thine eye be evil, thy 
whole body shall be full of dark- 
ness. If therefore the light that 
is in thee be darkness, how great 
ds that darkness ! 

24 No man can serve two mas- 
ters: for either he will hate the 
one, and love the other, or else he 
will hold to the one, and despise 
the other. Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon. 


THERE are three subjects brought before us in this part 
of our Lord’s Sermon on the Mount. These three are 
fasting, worldliness, and singleness of purpose in religion. 

Fasting, or occasional abstinence from food, in order to 
bring the body into subjection to the spirit, is a practice 
frequently mentioned in the Bible, and generally in con- 
nection with prayer. David fasted when his child was 
sick. Daniel fasted when he sought special light from 
God. Paul and Barnabas fasted when they appointed 
elders. Esther fasted before going in to Ahasuerus.—It 
is a subject about which we find no direct command in 
the New Testament. It seems to be left to every one’s 
discretion, whether he will fast or not.—In this absence 
of direct command, we may see great wisdom. Many a 
poor man never has enough to eat, and it would be an 
insult to tell him to fast. Many a sickly person can 
hardly be kept well with the closest attention to diet, and 
could not fast without bringing on illness—It is a matter 
in which every one must be persuaded in his own mind, 


56 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and not rashly condemn others who do not agree with 
him.—One thing only must never be forgotten : those 
who fast should do it quietly, secretly, and without 
ostentation. Let them not “appear to men” to fast. 
Let them not fast to man, but to God. 

Worldliness is one of the greatest dangers that beset 
man’s soul. It is no wonder that we find our Lord 
speaking strongly about it. It is an insidious, specious, 
plausible enemy. It seems so innocent to pay close 
attention to our business! It seems so harmless to seek 
our happiness in this world, so long as we keep clear of 
open sins!—Yet here is a rock on which many make 
shipwreck to all eternity. They “lay up treasure on — 
earth,” and forget to “lay up treasure in heaven.” 
May we all remember this! Where are our hearts? 
What do we love best? Are our chiefest affections on 
things in earth, or things in heaven? Life or death de- 
pends on the answer we can give to these questions. If 
our treasure is earthly, our hearts will be earthly also. 
“Where your treasure is, there will your heart be.” 

Singleness of purpose is one great secret of spiritual 
prosperity. If our eyes do not see distinctly, we cannot 
walk without stumbling and falling. If we attempt to 
work for two different masters, we are sure to give satis- 
faction to neither. It is just the same with respect to 
our souls. We cannot serve Christ and the world at the 
same time: it is vain to attempt it. The thing cannot 
be done: the ark and Dagon will never stand together. 
God must be king over our hearts: His law, His will 
His precepts, must receive our first attention. Then, 
and uot till then, everything in our inward man will fal) 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 16—24. 57 


into its right place. Unless our hearts are so ordered, 
everything will be in confusion. “Thy whole pare shall 
be full of darkness.” 

Let us learn from our Lord’s instructions about fast- 
ing, the great importance of cheerfulness in our religion. 
Those words, “anoint thy head, and wash thy face,” are 
full of deep meaning. They should teach us to aim at 
letting men see that Christianity makes us happy. 
Never let us forget that there is no religion in looking 
melancholy and gloomy. Are we dissatisfied with 
Christ’s wages, and Christ’s service? Surely not! Then 
let us not look as if we were. 

Let us learn from our Lord’s caution about worldliness, 
what need we have to watch and pray against an earthly 
spirit. What are the vast majority of professing Chris- 
tians round us doing? “They are laying up treasure on 
earth.” There can be no mistake about it; their tastes, 
their ways, their habits, tell a fearful tale. They are 
not “laying up treasure in heaven.” Let us beware that 
we do not sink into hell by paying excessive attention 
to lawful things. Open transgression of God’s law slays 
its thousands, but worldliness its tens of thousands. 

Let us learn from our Lord’s words about the “single 
eye,” the true secret of the fatlwres which so many Chris- 
tians seem to make in their religion. There are failures, 
in all quarters. There are thousands in our churches 
uncomfortable, ill at ease, and dissatisfied with them- 
selves; and they hardly know why. The reason is re- 
vealed here. Theyare trying to keep in with both sides; 
they are endeavouring to please God and please man, 
to serve Christ and serve the world at the same time. 


58 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us not commit this mistake. Let us be decided, 
thorough-going, uncompromising followers of Christ. 
Let our motto be that of Paul: “One thing I do.” 
(Phil. iii. 13.) Then we shall be happy Christians. We 
shall feel the sun shining on our faces ; heart, head, and 
conscience will all be full of light. Decision is the 
secret of happiness in religion. Be decided for Christ, 


and “thy whole body shall be full of light.” 


MATTHEW VI. 25—34. 


25 Therefore I say unto you, 
Take no thought for your life, what 
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; 
nor yet for your body, what ye shall 
put on. Is not the life more than 
meat, and the body than raiment? 

26 Behold the fowls of the air: 
for they sow not, neither do they 
reap, nor gather into barns; yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth 
them. Are ye not much better 
than they? 

27 Which of you by taking 
thought can add one cubit unto 
his stature ? 

28 And why take ye thought for 
raiment? Consider the lilies of 
the field, how they grow; they toil 
not, neither do they spin: 

29 And yet I say unto you, That 
even Solomon in all his glory was 
not arrayed like one of these. ~ 


80 Wherefore, if God so clothe 
the grass of the field, which to-day 
is, and to-morrow is cast into the 
oven, shall he not much more 
clothe you, O ye of little faith? 

81 Therefore take no thought 
saying, What shall we eat? or 
What shall we drink? or Where- 
withal shall we be clothed ? 

82 (For after all these things 
do the Gentiles seek:) for your 
heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things. 

33 But seek ye first the kingdom 
of God, and his righteousness ; 
and all these things shall be added 
unto you. 

34 Take therefore no thought 
for the morrow: for the morrow 
shall take thought for the things 
of itself. Sufficient unto the day 
is the evil thereof. 


THESE verses are a striking example of the combined 
wisdom and compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ’s 
teaching. He kuows the heart of a man. He knows 
that we are always ready to turn off warnings against 
worldliness, by the argument that we cannot help being 
anxions about the things of this life. “Have we not 
our families to provide for? Must not our bodily wants 
be supplied? How can we possibly get through life if 
we think first of our souls?” The Lord Jesus foresaw 
such thoughts, and furnished an answer. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VI. VER. 25—34, 59 


He forbids us to keep up an anxious spirit about the 
things of this world. Four times over He says, “Take 
no thought.” About life—about food,—about clothing, 
—about the morrow, “take no thought.” Be not over- 
careful: be not over-anxious. Prudent provision for 
the future is right: wearing, corroding, self-tormenting 
anxiety is wrong. 

He reminds us of the providential care that God con- 
tinually takes of everything that He has created. Has He 
given us “life”? Then He will surely not let us want 
anything necessary for its maintenance.—Has He given 
us a “body”? Then He will surely not let us die for 
want of clothing. He that calls us into being will 
doubtless find meat to feed us. 

He points out the uselessness of over-anxiety. Our 
lives are entirelyin God’s hand. All the care inthe world 
will not make us continue a minute beyond the time 
which God has appointed. We cannot add one hour to 
our lives. We shall not die till our work is done. 

He sends us to the birds of the air for instruction. 
They make no provision for the future: they “sow not, 
neither do they reap.” They lay up no stores against 
time yet to come; they do not “gather into barns.” 
They literally live from day to day on what they can 
pick up, by using the instinct God has put in them. 
They ought to teach us that no man doing his duty 
in the station to which God has called him, shall ever 
be allowed to come to poverty. 

He bids us observe the flowers of the field. Year after 
year they are decked with the gayest colours, without 


the slightest labour or exertion on their part: “they toil 
F 


60 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


not, neither do they spin.” God, by His almighty power, 
clothes them with beauty every season. The same God 
is the Father of all believers. Why should they doubt 
that He is able to provide them with raiment, as well 
as the “lilies of the field”? He who takes thought for 
perishable flowers, will surely not neglect the bodies in 
which dwell immortal souls. 

He suggests to us that over-carefulness about the 
things of this world is most unworthy of a Christian. 
One great feature of heathenism is living for the 
present. Let the heathen, if he will, be anxious: 
he knows nothing of a Father in heaven. But let 
the Christian, who has clearer light and knowledge, 
give proof of it by his faith and contentment. When 
bereaved of those whom we love, we are not to “sorrow 
as others who have no hope.” (1 Thess. iv. 13.) When 
wried by anxieties about this life, we are not to be 
over-careful, as if we had no God, and no Christ. 

He offers us a gracious promise as a remedy against an 
anxious spirit. He assures us that if we “seek first ” and 
foremost to have a place in the kingdom of grace and 
glory, everything that we really want in this world shall 
be given to us. It shall be “added,” over and above our 
heavenly inheritance. ‘All things shall work together 
for good to them that love God.” ‘No good thing will 
He withhold from them that walk uprightly.” (Rom. 
vili, 28; Psalm lxxxiv. 11.) 

Last of all, He seals up all His instruction on this 
subject by laying down one of the wisest maxims. “The 
morrow shall take thought for the things of itself, 
Sufficient unte the day is the evil thereof.” Weare not 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 1—11. 61 


to carry cares before they come. We are to attend to 
to-day’s business, and leave to-morrow’s anxieties till 
to-morrow dawns. We may die before to-morrow. We 
know not what may happen on the morrow; this only 
we may be assured of,—that if to-morrow brings a cross, 
He who sends it can and will send grace to bear it. 
In all this passage there is a treasury of golden lessons. 
Let us seek to use them in our daily life. Let us not 
only read them, but turn them to practical account. Let 
us watch and pray against an anxious and over-careful 
spirit. It deeply concerns our happiness to doso. Half 
our miseries are caused by fancies about things that we 
think are coming upon us. Half the things that we 
expect to come upon us never come at all. Where is our 
faith? Where is our confidence in our Saviour’s words? 
We may well take shame to ourselves, when we read 
these verses, and then look into our hearts. We may be 
sure that David’s words are true: “I have been young, 
and now am old ; yet have I not seen the righteous for- 
saken, nor his seed begging bread.” (Psalm xxxvii. 25.) 


MATTHEW VII. 1—11 


1 Judge not, that ye be not 
judged. 

2 For with what judgment ye 
judge, ye shall be judged: and 
with what measure ye mete, it 
shall be measured to you again. 

8 And why beholdest thou the 
mote that is in thy brother’s eye, 
but considerest not the beam that 
is in thine own eye P 

4 Or how wilt thou say to thy 
brother, Let me pull out the mote 
out of thine eye: and, behold, a 
beam is in thine own eye P 


the beam out of thine own eye; and 
then shalt thou see clearly to cast 
out the mote outof thy brother’seye. 

6 Give not that which is holy 
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine, lest they tram- 
ple them under their feet, and turn 
again and rend you. 

7 Ask, and it shall be given you: 
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you: 

8 For every one that asketh re- 
ceiveth; and he that seeketh find- 
eth; and to him that knocketh it 


5 Thou hypocrite, first cast ont | shall be opened, 


62 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


9 Or what man is there of you, 11 If ye then, being evil, know 
whom if his son ask bread, will he | how to give good gifts unto your 


give him a stone? children, how much more shall your 
10 Or if he ask a fish, will he | Father which is in heaven give 
give him a serpent? good things to them that ask him? 


TuE first portion of these verses is one of those passages 
of Scripture which we must be careful not to strain 
beyond its proper meaning. It is frequently abused 
and misapplied by the enemies of true religion. It is 
possible to press the words of the Bible so far that they 
yield not food, but poison. 

When our Lord says, “Judge not,” He does not 
mean that it is wrong, under any circumstances, to pass 
an unfavourable judgment on the conduct and opinions 
of others. We ought to have decided opinions: we are 
to “prove all things;” we are to “try the spirits.” 
(1 Thess. v. 21; 1 John iv. 1.)—Nor yet does He mean 
that it is wrong to reprove the sins and faults of others 
antil we are perfect and faultless ourselves. Such an 
interpretation would contradict other parts of Scripture. 
It would make it impossible to condemn error and false 
doctrine ; it would debar any one from attempting the 
office of a minister or a judge. The earth would be 
“given into the hands of the wicked” (Job ix. 24): 
heresy would flourish: wrong-doing would abound. 

What our Lord means to condemn is a censorious and 
fault-jinding spirit. A readiness to blame others for 
trifling offences or matters of indifference, a habit of 
passing rash and hasty judgments, a disposition to 
magnify the errors and infirmities of our neighbours, 
and make the worst of them,—this is what our Lord 
forbids. It was common among the Pharisees: it has 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 1—11. 63 


always been common from their day down to the 
present time. We must watch against it. We should 
“believe all things,” and “hope all things” about others, 
and be very slow to find fault. This is Christian charity. 
(1 Cor. xiii. 7.) 

The second portion of these verses teaches us the im- 
portance of exercising discretion as to the persons with whom 
we speak on the subject of religion. Everything is beauti- 
ful in its place and season. Our zeal is to be tempered 
by a prudent consideration of times, places, and persons. 
“Reprove not a scorner,” says Solomon, “lest he hate 
thee.” (Prov. ix. 8.) It is not everybody to whom it is 
wise to open our minds on spiritual matters. There are 
many, who from violent tempers, or openly profligate 
habits, are utterly incapable of valuing the things of the 
Gospel. They will even fly into a passion, and run into 
greater excesses of sin, if we try to do good to their souls, 
To name the name of Christ to such people is truly to 
“cast pearls before swine.” It does them not good, 
but harm: it rouses all their corruption, and makes 
them angry. In short, they are like the Jews at Corinth 
(Acts xviii. 6), or like Nabal, of whom it is written, that 
he was “such a son of Belial, that a man could not 
speak unto him.” (1 Sam. xxv. 17.) 

The lesson before us is one which it is peculiarly diffi- 
cult to use in the proper way. The right application of 
it needs great wisdom. We are most of us far more 
likely to err on the side of over-caution than of over-zeal : 
we are generally far more disposed to remember the 
“time to be silent,” than the “time to speak.” It isa 
lesson, however, which ought to stir up a spirit of self- 


64 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


inquiry in all our hearts. Do we ourselves never check 
our friends from giving us good advice, by our morose- 
ness and irritability of temper? Have we never obliged 
others to hold their peace and say nothing, by our pride 
and impatient contempt of counsel? Have we never 
turned against our kind advisers, and silenced them by 
our violence and passion? We may well fear that we 
have often erred in this matter. 

The last portion of these verses teaches us the duty of 
prayer, and the rich encowragements there are to pray. 
There is a beautiful connection between this lesson and 
that which goes before it. Would we know when to be 
“silent,” and when to “speak,”—when to bring forward 
“holy things,” and produce our “pearls”? We must 
pray.—This is a subject to which the Lord Jesus evi- 
dently attaches great importance: the language that He 
uses is a plain proof of this. He employs three different 
words to express the idea of prayer: “Ask,”—“Seek,’— 
“Knock.” He holds out the broadest, fullest promise to 
those who pray: “Every one that asketh receiveth.” 
He illustrates God’s readiness to hear our prayers by an 
argument drawn from the well-known practice of parents 
on earth. “Evil” and selfish as they are by nature, they 
do not neglect the wants of their children according to 
the flesh. Much more will a God of love and mercy 
attend to the cries of those who are His children by 
grace ! 

Let us take special notice of these words of our Lord 
about prayer. Few of His sayings, perhaps, are so well 
known and so often repeated as this. The poorest and 
most unlearned can generally tell us, that “if we do 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 12—20. 65 


not seek we shall not find.” But what is the good of 
knowing it, if we do not use it? Knowledge, not 
improved and well employed, will only increase our 
condemnation at the last day. 

Do we know anything of this “asking, seeking, and 
knocking”? Why should we not? There is nothing 
so simple and plain as praying, if a man really has a 
will to pray. There is nothing unhappily, which men 
are so slow to do. They will use many of the forms of 
religion, attend many ordinances, do many things that 
are right, before they will do this, And yet without 
this, no soul can be saved! 

Do we ever really pray? If not, we shall at last be 
without excuse before God, except we repent. We shall 
not be condemned for not doing what we could not have 
done, or not knowing what we could not have known; 
but we shall find that one main reason why we are lost 
is this,—that we never “asked” that we might be saved. 

Do we indeed pray? Then let us pray on, and not 
faint. It is not lost labour; it is not useless: it will 
bear fruit after many days. Those words have never 
yet failed, “Every one that asketh receiveth.” 





MATTHEW VII. 12—20. 


12 Therefore all things whatso- 
ever ye would that men should do 
to you, do ye even so to them: for 
this is the law and the prophets. 

13 Enter ye in at the strait gate: 
for wide is the gate, and broad is 
the way, that leadeth to destruc- 
tion, and many there be which go 
in thereat: 

14 Because strait is the gate, and 


narrow is the way, which leadeth , 
unto life, and few there be that 
find it. 

15 Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep’s 
clothing, but inwardly they are 
ravening wolves. 

16 Ye shall know them by their 
fruits. Do men gather grapes of 
thorns, or figs of thistles ? 


66 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


17 Even so every good tree |rupt tree bring forth good fruit. 
bringeth forth good fruit; but a 19 Every tree that bringeth not 
corrupt tree bringeth forth evil | forth good fruit is hewn down, and 
fruit. cast into the fire. 

18 A good tree cannot bring | 20 Wherefore by their fruits ye 
forth evil fruit, neither can a cor- | shall know them. 

In this part of the Sermon on the Mount our Lord begins 
to draw His discourse to a conclusion. The lessons He 
here enforces on our notice, are broad, general, and full 
of the deepest wisdom. Let us mark them in succession. 

He lays down a general principle for owr guidance in 
all doubtful questions between man and man. We are 
“to do to others as we would have others do to us.” 
We are not to deal with others as others deal with us: 
this is mere selfishness and heathenism. We are to deal 
with others as we would like others to deal with us: 
this is real Christianity. 

This is a golden rule indeed! It does not merely 
forbid all petty malice and revenge, all cheating and 
overreaching: it does much more. It settles a hundred 
difficult, points, which in a world like this are continually 
arising between man and man. It prevents the necessity 
of laying down endless little rules for our conduct in 
specific cases. It sweeps the whole debateable ground 
with one mighty principle. It shows us a balance and 
measure, by which every one may see at once what is 
his duty.—Is there a thing we would not like our neigh- 
hour todo tous? Then let us always remember that 
this is the thing we ought not to do to him. Is there a 
thing we would like him to do to us? Then this is the 
very thing we ought to do to him—How many intricate 
questions would be decided at once if this rule were 
honestly used ! 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 12—20, 67 


In the second place, our Lord gives us a general 
caution against the way of the many in religion. It is not 
enough to think as others think, and do as others do. 
It must not satisfy us to follow the fashion, and swim 
with the stream of those among whom we live. He tells 
us that the way that leads to everlasting life is “ narrow,” 
and “few” travel in it. He tells us that the way that 
leads to everlasting destruction is “broad,” and full of 
travellers: “ Many there be that go in thereat.” 

These are fearful truths! They ought to raise great 
searchings of heart in the minds of all who hear them. 
—“‘Which way am I going? By what road am I 
travelling?”—In one or other of the two ways here 
described, every one of us may be found. May God 
give us an honest, self-inquiring spirit, and show us 
what we are! 

We may well tremble and be afraid, if our religion is 
that of the multitude. If we can say no more than this 
that “we go where others go, and worship where others 
worship, and hope we shall do as well as others at last,” 
we are literally pronouncing our own condemnation. 
What is this but being in the “broad way”? What is 
this but being in the road whose end is “destruction” 7 
Our religion at present is not saving religion. 

We have no reason to be discouraged and cast down 
if the religion we profess is not popular,and few agree 
with us. We must remember the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ in this passage: “The gate is strait.” 
Repentance, and faith in Christ, and holiness of life, 
have never been fashionable. The true flock of Christ 
has always been small. It must not move us to find 


68 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


that we are reckoned singular, and peculiar, and bigoted, 
and narrow minded. This is “the narrow way.” Surely 
it is better to enter into life eternal with a few, than to 
go to “destruction” with a great company. 

In the last place, the Lord Jesus gives us a general 
warning against false teachers in the Church. We are to 
“beware of false prophets.” The connection between 
this passage and the preceding one is striking. Would 
we keep clear of this “broad way ”? We must beware 
of false prophets. They will arise. They began in the 
days of the apostles ; even then the seeds of error were 
sown. They have appeared continually ever since. We 
must be prepared for them, and be on our guard. 

This is a warning which is much needed. There ara 
thousands who seem ready to believe anything in religion, 
if they hear it from an ordained minister. They forget 
that clergymen may err as much as laymen: they are 
not infallible. Their teaching must be weighed in the 
balance of Holy Scripture. They are to be followed and — 
believed, so long as their doctrine agrees with the Bible, 
but not a minute longer. We are to try them “by their 
fruits.” Sound doctrine and holy living are the marks of 
true prophets—Let us remember this. Our minister's 
mistakes will not excuse our own. “Ifthe blind lead 
the blind, both shall fall into the ditch." (Matt. xv. 14.) 

What is the best safe-guard against false teaching ? 
Beyond all doubt the regular study of the Word of God, 
with prayer for the teaching of the Holy Spirit. The 
Bible was given to be a lamp to our feet and a light to 
our path. (Psa. cxix. 105.) The man who reads it 
aright will never be allowed greatly to err. It is neglect 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 21—29. 69 


of the Bible which makes so many a prey to the first 
false teacher whom they hear. They would fain have 
us believe that “they are not learned, and do not pre- 
tend to have decided opinions.” The plain truth is that 
they are lazy and idle about reading the Bible, and do 
not like the trouble of thinking for themselves. No- 
thing supplies false prophets with followers so much as 
spiritual sloth under a cloak of humility. 

May we all bear in mind our Lord’s warning! The 
world, the devil, and the flesh, are not the only dangers in 
the way of the Christian. There remains another yet,and 
_ that is the “ false prophet,” the wolf in sheep’s clothing. 
Happy is he who prays over his Bible, and knows the 
difference between truth and error in religion! There is 
a difference, and we are meant to know it, and to use 


our knowledge. 


MATTHEW VII. 21—29. 


21 Not every one that saith unto 
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven; but he 
that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven. 

22 Many will say to me in that 
day, Lord, Lord, have we not pro- 
phesied in thy name? and in thy 
name have cast out devils? and in 
thy name done many wonderful 
works P 

23 And then will I profess unto 
them, I never knew you: depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity. 

24 Therefore whosoever heareth 
these sayings of mine, and doeth 
them, I will liken him unto a wise 
man, which built his house upon a 
rock: 

25 And the rain descended, and 


| the floods came, and the winda 
' blew, and beat upon that house ; 
| and it fell not: for it was founded 
upon a rock. 

26 And every one that heareth 
these sayings of mine, and doeth 
them not, shall be likened unto a 
| foolish man, which built his house 
upon the sand: 

27 And the rain descended, and 
the floods came, and the winds blew, 
and beat upon that house; and it 
fell: and great was the fall of it. 

28 And it came to pass, when 
| Jesus had ended these sayings, the 
people were astonished at his doc- 
| trine: 

29 For he taught them as one 
having authority, and not as the 
scribes. 





Tue Lord Jesus winds up the Sermon on the Mount by 


a passage of heart-piercing application. 


He turns from 


false prophets to false professors, from unsound teachers 


70 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to unsound hearers. Here is a word for all) May we 
have grace to apply it to our own hearts! 

The first lesson here is the uselessness of a mere outward 
professionof Christianity. “Notevery onethatsaith‘ Lord, 
Lord,’ shall enter the kingdom of heaven.” Not all that 
profess and call themselves Christians shall be saved. 

_ Let us take notice of this. It requires far more than 
most people seem to think necessary, to save asoul. We 
may be baptized in the name of Christ, and boast con- 
fidently of our ecclesiastical privileges. We may possess 
head knowledge, and be quite satisfied with our own 
state. We may even be preachers,and teachers of others, 
and do “many wonderful works” in connection with our 
Church. But all this time are we practically doing the 
will of our Father in heaven? Do we truly repent, truly 
believe on Christ, and live holy and humble lives? If 
not, in spite of all our privileges and profession, we 
shall miss heaven at last, and be for ever cast away. 
We shall hear those awful words, “I never knew you: 
depart from Me.” 

The day of judgment will reveal strange things. The 
hopes of many, who were thought great Christians while 
they lived, will be utterly confounded. The rottenness 
of their religion will be exposed and put to shame before 
the whole world. It will then be proved that to be saved 
means something more than “making a profession.” 
We must make a “practice” of our Christianity as well 
as a “profession.” Let us often think of that great day, 
Let us often “judge ourselves, that we be not judged,” 
and condemned by the Lord. Whatever else we are, let 
us aim at being real, true, and sincere. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VII. VER. 21—29. 71 


The second lesson here is a striking picture of two classes 
of Christian hearers. Those who hear and do nothing,— 
and those who hear and do as well as hear,—are both 
placed before us, and their histories traced to their 
respective ends. 

The man who hears Christian teaching, and practises 
what he hears, is like “a wise man who builds his house 
upon a rock.” He does not content himself with listening 
to exhortations to repent, believe in Christ, and live a 
holy life. He actually repents: he actually believes. 
He actually ceases to do evil, learns to do well, abhors 
that which is sinful, and cleaves to that which is good. 
He is a doer as well as a hearer. (James i. 22.) 

And what is the result? In the time of trial his 
religion doesnotfail him. The“floods” of sickness,sorrow, 
poverty, disappointments, bereavements, beat upon him 
in vain. His soul stands unmoved; his faith does not 
give way : his comforts do not utterly forsake him. His 
religion may have cost him trouble in time past. His 
foundation may have been obtained with much labour 
and many tears. To discover his own interest in Christ 
may have required many a day of earnest seeking, and 
many an hour of wrestling in prayer. But his labour 
has not been thrown away: he now reaps a rich reward. 
The religion that can stand trial is the true religion. 

The man who hears Christian teaching, and never gets 
beyond hearing, is like “a foolish man who builds his 
house upon the sand.” He satisfies himself with listening 
and approving, but he goes no further. He flatters 
himself, perhaps, that all is right with his soul, because 
he has feelings, and convictions, and desires, of a spiritual 


v2 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


kind. In these he rests. He never really breaks off from 
sin, and casts aside the spirit of the world. He never 
really lays hold on Christ, and takes up the cross. He 
is a hearer of truth, but nothing more. 

And what is the end of this man’s religion? It breaks 
down entirely under the first flood of tribulation. Itfails 
him completely, like a summer-dried fountain, when his 
need is the sorest. It leaves its possessor high and dry, 
like a wreck on a sand-bank, a scandal to the Church, a 
by-word to the infidel, and a misery to himself. Most 
true is it that what costs little is worth little! A religion 
which costs us nothing, and consists in nothing but 
hearing sermons, will always prove at last to be a useless 


thing. 


So ends the Sermon on the Mount. 


never was preached before. 


never been preached since. 
lasting influence on our own souls. 
us as well as to those who first heard it. 


Such a sermon 
Such a sermon perhaps has 

Let us see that it hasa 
It is addressed to 
We are they 


who shall have to give account of its heart-searching 


lessons. 


It is no light matter what we think of them. 


The word that Jesus has spoken, “the same shall judge 


us in the last day.” 


(John xii. 48.) 


MATTHEW VIII. 1—15, 


1 When he was come down from 
the mountain, great multitudes 
followed him. 

2 And, behold, there came a 
leper and worshipped him, saying, 
Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make 
me clean. 

8 And Jesus put forth his hand, 
and touched him, saying, I will; 
be thou clean. And immediately 


his leprosy was cleansed. 

4 And Jesus saith unto him, See 
thou tell no man; but go thy way, 
shew thyself to the priest, and offer 
the gift that Moses commanded, 
for a testimony unto them, 

5 And when Jesus was entered 
into Capernaum, there came unto 
him a centurion, beseeching him, 

6 And saying, Lord, my servant 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VIII. VER. 1—15. 


lieth at home sick of the palsy, 
grievously tormented. 

7 And Jesus saith unto him, I 
will come and heal him. 

8 The centurion answered and 
said, Lord, I am not worthy that 
thou shouldest come under my 
roof: but speak the word only, 
and my servant shall be healed. 

9 For I am a man under autho- 
rity, having soldiers under me: 
and I say to this man, Go, and he 
goeth; and to another, Come, and 
he cometh; and to my servant, Do 
this, and he doeth i. 

10 When Jesus heard it, he mar- 
velled, and said to them that fol- 
lowed, Verily I say unto you, I 
have not found so great faith, no, 
not in Israel. 


73 


11 And I say unto you, That 
many shall come from the east 
and west, and shall sit down with 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of heaven. 

12 But the children of the king- 
dom shall be cast out into outer 
darkness: there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth. 

18 And Jesus said unto the cen- 
turion, Go thy way; and as thou 
hast believed, so be it done unto 
thee. And his servant was healed 
in the selfsame hour. 

14 And when Jesus was come 
into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s 
mother laid, and sick of a fever. 

15 And he touched her hand, and 
the fever left her: and she arose, 
and ministered unto them. 


TuE eighth chapter of St. Matthew’s Gospel is full of our 
Lord’s miracles, of which no less than five are specially 
recorded. There is a beautiful fitness in this. 
fitting that the greatest sermon ever preached should be 
immediately followed by mighty proofs that the preacher | 
was the Son of God. Those who heard the Sermononthe 
Mount would be obliged to confess, that, as none “ spake 
such words as this man,” so also none did such works. 

The verses we have now read contain three great 
miracles, A leper is healed with a touch; a palsied per- 
son is made well by a word; a woman sick with a fever 
is restored in a moment to health and strength. On 
the face of these three miracles we may read three strik- 
ing lessons. Let us examine them, and lay them to heart. 

Let us learn, for one thing, how great is the power of owr 
Lord Jesus Christ. Leprosy is the most fearful disease by 
which man’s body can be afflicted. He that has it is like 
one dead while he lives. It is a complaint regarded by 
physicians,even at this day, as incurable. (2 Kings v. 7.) 


It was 


74. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


It is a disease known and recognized in the Sandwich 
Islands as irremediable. Yet Jesus says “Be thou clean: 
and immediately the leprosy was cleansed.”——To heal a 
person of the palsy without even seeing him, by only 
speaking a word, is to do that which our minds cannot 
even conceive. Yet Jesus commands, and at once it is 
done. To give a woman prostrate with a fever, not 
merely relief, but strength to do work in an instant, 
would baffle the skill of all the physicians on earth. Yet 
Jesus “touched” Peter’s wife’s mother, and “she arose, 
and ministered unto them.”—These are the doings of 
One thatis Almighty. There is no escape from the con- 
clusion. This was “the finger of God.” (Ex. viii. 19.) 

Behold here a broad foundation for the faith of a 
Christian! We are told in the Gospel to come to Jesus, 
to believe on Jesus, to live the life of faith in Jesus. 
We are encouraged to lean on Him, to cast all our care 
on Him, to repose all the weight of our souls on Him. 
We may do so without fear. He can bear all; He is 
a strong rock; He is Almighty. It was a fine saying 
of an old saint, “My faith can sleep sound on no other 
pillow than Christ’s omnipotence.” He can give life to 
the dead; He can give power to the weak; He can 
“increase strength to them that have no might.” Let 
us trust Him and not be afraid. The world is full of 
snares: our hearts are weak. But with Jesus nothing 
is impossible. 

Let us learn, for another thing, the mercifulness and 
compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ. The circumstances 
of the three cases we are now considering were all 


different, He heard the leper’s pitiful cry, “Lord, if 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VIII. VER. 1—15. 75 


Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” He was told of 
the centurion’s servant, but He never saw him. He saw 
_ Peter’s wife’s mother, “ laid, and sick of a fever,’ and we 
- are not told that He spokea word. ‘Yet in each case the 
heart of the Lord Jesus was one and the same. In each 
case He was quick to show mercy, and ready to heal. 
Each poor sufferer was tenderly pitied, and each effec- 
tually relieved. 

Behold here another strong foundation for our faith! 
Our great High Priest is very gracious: He can be 
“touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” He isnever 
tired of doing us good. He knows that we are a weak 
and feeble people, in the midst of a weary and troublous 
world. He is as ready to bear with us, and help us, as 
He was 1800 yearsago. It is as true of Him now as it 
was then, “He despiseth not any.” (Jobxxxvi. 5.) No 
heart can feel for us so much as the heart of Christ. 

Let us learn, in the last place, what a precious thing is 
the grace of faith. We know little about the centurion 
described in these verses. His name, his nation, his 
past history, are all hidden from us. But one thing we 
know, and that is, that he believed. “Lord,” he says, 
“T am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my 
roof. Speak the word only, and my servant shall be 
healed.” He believed, let us remember, when scribes 
and Pharisees were unbelievers. He believed, though 
a Gentile born, when Israel was blinded. And our Lord 
pronounced upon him the commendation, which has 
been read all over the world from that time to this, 
“T have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.” 


Let us lay firm hold on this lesson. It deserves to be 
G 


76 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


remembered. To believe Christ’s power and willingness 
to help, and to make a practical use of our belief, is a rare 
and precious gift: let us ever be thankful if we have it. 
To be willing to come to Jesus as helpless, lost sinners, 
and commit our souls into His hands is a mighty privi- 
lege: let us ever bless God if this willingness is our’s, 
for it is His gift. Such faith is better than all other gifts 
and knowledge in the world. Many a poor converted 
heathen, who knows nothing but that he is sick of sin, 
and trusts in Jesus, shall sit down in heaven, while 
many learned English scholars are rejected for evermore. 
Blessed indeed are they that believe! 

What do we each know of this faith? This is the 
great question. Our learning may be small: but do we 
believe ?—Our opportunities of giving and working for 
Christ’s cause may be few: but do we believe ?—We 
may neither be able to preach, nor write, nor argue for 
the Gospel: but do we believe ?—May we never rest til] 
we can answer this inquiry! Faith in Christ appears 
a small and simple thing to the children of this world. 
They see in it nothing great or grand. But faith in 
Christ is most precious in God’s sight, and, like most 
precious things, is rare. By it true Christians live; by 
it they stand; by it they overcome the world. With- 
out this faith no one can be saved. 


MATTHEW VIII. 16—27. 


16 When the even was come, 17 That it might be fulfilled 
they brought unto him many that | which was spoken by Esaias the 
were possessed with devils: and he | prophet, saying, Himself took our 
cast out the spirits with his word, | infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. 
and healed all that were sick : 18 Now when Jesus saw great 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VIII. VER. 16—27. 


multitudes about him, he gave 
commandment to depart unto the 
other side. 

19 Andacertain scribe came, and 
said unto him, Master, I will follow 
thee whithersoever thou goest. 

20 And Jesus saith unto him, The 
foxes have holes, and the birds of 
the air have nests; but the Son of 
man hath not where to lay his head. 

21 And another of his disciples 
said unto him, Lord, suffer me first 
to go and bury my father. 

22 But Jesus said unto him, Fol- 
low me: and let the dead bury 
their dead. 

23 And when he was entered into 


77? 


ship, his disciples followed him, 

24 And behold there arose a 

| great tempest in the sea, insomuch 
that the ship was covered with the 
waves: but he was asleep. 

25 And his disciples came to 
him, and awoke him, saying, Lord 
save us: we perish. 

26 And he saith unto them, Why 
are ye fearful, O ye of little faith ? 
Then he arose, and rebuked the 
winds and the sea; and there was 
a great calm, 

27 But the men marvelled, say- 
ing, What manner of man is this, 
that even the winds and the sea 

' obey him ! 


| a 


In the first part of these verses we see a striking example 
of owr Lord’s wisdom in dealing with those who professed 
a willingness to be His disciples. The passage throws so 
much light on a subject frequently misunderstood in 
these days, that it deserves more than ordinary attention. 

A certain Scribe offers to follow our Lord whithersoever 
He goes. It was a remarkable offer, when we consider 
the class to which the man belonged, and the time at 
which it was made. But the offer receives a remarkable 
answer. It is not directly accepted, nor yet flatly re- 
jected. Our Lord only makes the solemn reply, “The 
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests ; 
but the Son of man hath not where to lay His head.” 

Another follower of our Lord next comes forward, and 
asks to be allowed to “bury his father,” before going any 
further in the path of a disciple. The request seems, at 
first sight, a natural and lawful one. But it draws from 
our Lord’s lips a reply no less solemn than that already 
referred to: “Follow Me, and let the dead bury their 
dead.” 

There is something deeply impressive in both these 


78 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sayings. They ought to be well weighed by all profess- 
ing Christians. They teach us plainly, that people who 
show a desire to come forward and profess themselves 
true disciples of Christ, should be warned plainly to 
“ count the cost,” before they begin.—Are they prepared 
to endure hardship? Are they ready to carry the cross? 
If not, they are not yet fit to begin—They teach us 
plainly that there are times when a Christian must 
literally give up all for Christ’s sake, and when even 
such duties as attending to a parent’s funeral must be 
left to be performed by others. Such duties some will 
always be ready to attend to; and at no time can they 
be put in comparison with the greater duty of preaching 
the Gospel, and doing Christ’s work in the world. 

It would be well for the Churches of Christ if these 
sayings of our Lord were more remembered than they 
are. It may be feared that the lesson they contain is 
too often overlooked by the ministers of the Gospel, and 
that thousands are admitted to full communion who are 
never warned to “count the cost.” Nothing, in fact, 
has done more harm to Christianity than the practice 
of filling the ranks of Christ’s army with every volun- 
teer who is willing to make a little profession, and to 
talk fluently of his “experience.” It has been painfully 
forgotten that numbers alone do not make strength, 
and that there may be a great quantity of mere out- 
ward religion, while there is very little real grace. 
Let us remember this. Let us keep back nothing from 
young professors and inquirers after Christ: let us not 
enlist them on false pretences. Let us tell them 
plainly that there is a crown of glory at the end; but 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VIII. VER. 16—27. 79 


let us tell them no less plainly, that there is a daily 
cross in the way. 

In the latter part of these verses we learn that true 
saving faith is often mingled with much weakness and 
infirmity. It is a humbling lesson, but a very whole- 
some one. 

We are told cf our Lord and His disciples crossing 
the sea of Galilee in a boat. A storm arises,and the boat 
is in danger of being filled with water, by the waves 
that beat over it. Meanwhile our Lord is asleep. The 
frightened disciples awake Him, and cry to Him for 
help. He hears their cry and stills the waters with a 
word, so that there is “a great calm.” At the same 
time He gently reproves the anxiety of His disciples: 
“Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?” 

What a vivid and instructive picture we have here of 
the hearts of thousands of believers! How many have 
faith and love enough to forsake all for Christ’s sake, 
and to follow Him whithersoever He goes, and yet are 
full of fears in the hour of trial! How many have 
grace enough to turn to Jesus in every trouble, crying, 
“Lord save us,” and yet not grace enough to lie still, 
and believe in the darkest hour that all is well! 

Let the prayer, “ Lord, increase our faith,” always form 
part of our daily petitions. We never perhaps know the 
weakness of our faith, until we are placed in the furnace 
of trial and anxiety. Blessed and happy is that person 
who finds by experience that his faith can stand the fire, 
and that he can say with Job, “though He slay me, yet 
will I trust in Him.” (Job xiii 15.) 

We have great reason to thank God that Jesus, our 


80 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


great High-priest, is very compassionate and tender- 
He knows our frame: He considers our 
infirmities. He does not cast off His people because 
of defects: He pities even those whom He reproves. 
The prayer even of “little faith” is heard, and gets an 
answer. 


hearted. 


MATTHEW VIII. 28—34. 


28 And when he was come to the 
other side into the country of the 
Gergesenes, there met him two pos- 
sessed with devils, coming out of 
the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that 
no man might pass by that way. 

29 And, behold, they cried out, 
saying, What have we to do with 
thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art 
thou come hither to torment us 
before the time? 

80 And there was a good way off 
from them an herd of many swine 
feeding. 

81 So the devils besought him, 
saying, If thou cast us out, suffer 
us to go away into the herd of swine. 





82 And he said unto them, Go. 
And when they were come out, they 


| went into the herd of swine: and, 


behold, the whole herd of swine ran 
violently down a steep place into 
the sea, and perished in the waters. 

83 And they that kept them fied, 
and went their ways into the city, 
and told every thing, and what was 
befallen to the possessed of the 


: devils. 


84 And, behold, the whole city 
came out to meet Jesus: and when 
they saw him, they besought him 
that he would depart out of their 
coasts. 


' 


THE subject of these seven verses is deep and mysteri- 


ous. 
special fulness. 


The casting out of a devil is here described with 
It is one of those passages which throw 


strong light on a dark and difficult point. 
Let us settle it firmly in our minds that there is such a 


being as the devil. 


It is an awful truth, and one too much 


overlooked. There is an unseen spirit ever near us, of 
mighty power, and full of endless malice against our 
souls. From the beginning of creation he has laboured 
to injure man. Until the Lord comes the second time 
and binds him, he will never cease to tempt, and prac- 
tise mischief. In the days when our Lord was upon 


MATTHEW, CHAP. VIII. VER. 28—34. 81 


earth, it is clear that He had a peculiar power over the 
bodies of certain men and women, as well as over their 
souls. Even in our own times there may be more of 
this bodily possession than some suppose, though con- 
fessedly in a far less degree than when Christ came in 
the flesh. But that the devil is ever near us, and ever 
ready to ply our hearts with temptations, ought never 
to be forgotten. 

Let us, in the next place, settle it firmly in our minds 
that the power of the devil is limited. Mighty as he is, 
there is One mightier still. Keenly as his will is set on 
floing harm in the world, he can only work by per- 
mission. These verses show us that the evil spirits 
know they can only go to and fro, and ravage the earth 
until the time allowed them by the Lord of lords. “Art 
thou come to torment us,” they say, “before the time?” 
Their very petition shows us that they could not even 
hurt one of the swine of the Gergesenes, unless Jesus 
the Son of God suffered them. “Suffer us,” they say, 
“to go into the herd of swine.” 

Let us, in the next place, settle it in our minds that 
our Lord Jesus Christ is man’s great delwerer from the 
power of the devil. He can redeem us not only “from 
all iniquity,” and “this present evil world,” but from the 
devil. It was prophesied of old that He should bruise 
the serpent’s head. He began to bruise that head when 
He was born of the Virgin Mary. He triumphed over 
that head when He died upon the cross, He showed 
His complete dominion over Satan by “ healing all that 
were oppressed of the devil,” when He was upon earth 
(Acts x. 38.) Our best remedy, in all the assaults of 


82 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the devil is to cry to the Lord Jesus, and to seek His 
help. He can break the chains that Satan casts round 
us, and set us free. He can cast out every devil that 
plagues our hearts, as surely as in the days of old. It 
would be miserable indeed to know that thare is a devil 
ever near us, if we did not also know that Christ is 
“able to save to the uttermost, because He ever liveth 
to make intercession for us.” (Heb. vii. 25.) 

Let us not leave this passage without observing ¢he 
painful worldliness of the Gergesenes, among whom this 
miracle of casting out a devil was wrought. They 
besought the Lord Jesus to “ depart out of their coasts.” 
They had no heart to feel for anything but the loss of 
their swine. They cared not that two fellow-creatures, 
two immortal souls, were freed from Satan’s bondage. 
They cared not that there stood among them a greater 
than the devil, Jesus the Son of God. They cared for 
nothing but that their swine were drowned, and the 
“hope of their gains was gone.” (Acts xvi. 19.) They 
ignorantly regarded Jesus as one who stood between them 
and their profits, and they only wished to be rid of Him. 

There are only too many like these Gergesenes. There 
are thousands who care not one jot for Christ, or Satan, 
so long as they can make a little more money, and have 
a little more of the good things of this world. From 
this spirit may we be delivered! Against this spirit 
may we ever watch and pray! It is very common: it is 
awfully infectious. Let us recollect every morning that 
we have souls to be saved, and that we shall one day 
die, and after that be judged. Let us beware of loving 
the world more than Christ, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. 


IX. VER. 1—13. 83 


MATTHEW IX. 1—13. 


1 And he entered into a ship, 
and passed over, and came into his 
own city. 

2 And, behold, they brought to 
him a man sick of the palsy, lying 
on a bed: and Jesus seeing their 
faith said unto the sick of the 
palsy, Son, be of good cheer: thy 
sins be forgiven thee. 

8 And, behold, certain of the 
scribes said within themselves, 
This man blasphemeth. 

4 And Jesus knowing their 
thoughts said, Wherefore think 
ye evil in your hearts? 

5 For whether is easier, to say, 
Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to 
say, Arise, and walk? 

6 But that ye may Imow that 
the Son of man hath power on 
earth to forgive sins, (then saith 
he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, 
take up thy bed, and go unto thine 
house, 

7 And he arose, and departed to 
his house. 

8 But when the multitudes saw 





4t they marvelled, and glorified 
God, which had given such power 
unto men. 

9 And as Jesus passed forth 
from thence, he saw a man named 
Matthew, sitting at the receipt of 
custom: and he saith unto him, 
Follow me. And he arose, and 
followed him. 

10 And it came to pass, as Jesus 
sat at meat in the house, behold, 
many publicans and sinners came 
and sat down with him and his 
disciples. 

11 And when the Pharisees saw 
it, they said unto his disciples, 
Why eateth your Master with 
publicans and sinners ? 

12 But when Jesus heard that, 
he said unto them, They that be 
whole need not a physician, but 
they that are sick, 

13 But go ye and learn what 
that meaneth, I will have mercy, 
and not sacrifice; for I am not 
come to call the righteous, but 
sinners to repentance. 


LET us notice, in the first part of this passage, our 
Lord’s knowledge of men’s thoughts. 
There were certain of the scribes who found fault 


with the words which Jesus spoke to a man sick of the 
palsy: they said secretly among themselves, “This man 
blasphemeth.” They probably supposed that no one 
knew what was going on in their minds. They had yet 
to learn that the Son of God could read hearts, and 
discern spirits. Their malicious thought was publicly 
exposed. They were put to an open shame. Jesus 
“knew their thoughts.” , 
There is an important lesson for us here. “All 
things are naked and open unto the eyes of Him with 
whom we have to do.” (Heb. iv. 13.) Nothing can 
be concealed from Christ. What do we think of, in 


84 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


private, when no man sees us? What do we think of, 
in church, when we seem grave and serious? What 
are we thinking of at this moment, while these words 
pass under our eyes? Jesus knows. Jesus sees. 
Jesus records. Jesus will one day summon us to give 
account. It is written, that “God shall judge the 
secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gos- 
pel.” (Rom. ii 16.) Surely we ought to be very 
humble when we consider these things. We ought to 
thank God daily that the blood of Christ can cleanse 
from all sin. We ought often to cry, “ Let the words of 
my mouth, and the meditation of myheart, be acceptable 
in Thy sight.” (Psalm xix. 14.) 

Let us notice, in the second place, the wonderful call 
of the apostle Matthew to be Christ's disciple. 

We find the man, who afterwards was the first to 
write a Gospel, sitting at the receipt of custom. We see 
him absorbed in his worldly calling, and possibly think- 
ing of nothing but money and gain. But suddenly the 
Lord Jesus calls on him to follow Him, and become His 
disciple. At once Matthew obeys. He “ makes haste, 
and delays not” to keep Christ’s commandments. (Psal. 
cxix. 60.) He arises and follows Him. 

We should learn, from Matthew’s case, that with 
Christ nothing is impossible. He can take a tax- 
gatherer, and make him an apostle. He can change any 
heart, and make all things new. Let us never despair 
of any one’s salvation. Let us pray on, and speak on, 
and work on, in order to do good to souls, even to the 
souls of the worst. “The voice of the Lord is mighty 
in operation.” (Psalm xxix. 4.) When He says by the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IX. VER. 1—13. 85 


power of the Spirit, “follow Me.” He can make the 
hardest and most sinful obey. 

We should observe Matthew’s decision. He waited 
fornothing. He did not tarry for “ a convenient season ” 
(Acts xxiv. 25); and he reaped in consequence a great 
reward. He wrote a book which is known all over the 
earth. He became a blessing to others as well as blessed 
in his own soul. He left a name behind him which is 
better known than the names of princes and kings. 
The richest man of the world is soon forgotten when he 
dies ; but as long as the world stands millions will know 
the name of Matthew the publican. 

Let us notice, in the last place, our Lord’s precious 
declaration about His own mission. 

The Pharisees found fault with Him, because He 
allowed publicans and sinners to be in His company. 
In their proud blindness they fancied that a teacher 
sent from heaven ought to have no dealings with such 
people. They were wholly ignorant of the grand design 
for which the Messiah was to come into the world, to be 
a Saviour, a Physician, a healer of sin-sick souls. And 
they drew from our Lord’s lips a severe rebuke, accom- 
panied by the blessed words, “I am not come to call the 
righteous, but sinners to repentance.” 

Let us make sure that we thoroughly understand the 
doctrine that these words contain. The first thing need- 
ful, in order to have an interest in Christ, is to feel 
deeply our own corruption, and to be willing to come ta 
Him for deliverance. We are not to keep away from 
Christ, as many ignorantly do, because we feel bad, and 
wicked, and unworthy. We are to remember that sm- 


86 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


ners are those He came into the world to save, and that 
if we feel ourselves such, it is well. Happy is he who 
really comprehends that one principal qualification for 
coming to Christ is a deep sense of sin! 

Finally, if by the grace of God we really understand 
the glorious truth that sinners are those whom Christ 
came to call, let us take heed that we never forget it. 
Let us not dream that true Christians can ever attain 
such a state of perfection in this world, as not to need 
the mediation and intercession of Jesus. Sinners we are 
in the day we first come to Christ. Poor needy sinners 
we shall continue to be so long as we live, drawing all the 
grace we have every hour out of Christ’s fulness. Sin- 
ners we shall find ourselves in the hour of our death 
and shall die as much indebted to Christ’s blood, as in 
the day when we first believed. 


MATTHEW IX. 1426. 


14 Then came to him the dis- 
ciples of John, saying, Why do we 
and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy 
disciples fast not ? 

15 And Jesus said unto them, 
Can the children of the bride- 
chamber mourn, as long as the 
bridegroom is with them ? but the 
days will come, when the bride- 
groom shall be taken from them, 
and then shall they fast. 

16 No man putteth a piece of 
new cloth unto an old garment, 
for that which is put in to fill it 
up taketh from the garment, and 
the rent is made worse. 

17 Neither do men put new wine 
into old bottles: else the bottles 
break, and the wine runneth out, 
and the bottles perish ; but they 
put new wine into new bottles, 
and both are preserved. 

18 While he spake these things 
unto them, behold, there came a 


certain ruler, and worshipped him 
saying, My daughter is even now 
dead; but come and lay thy hand 
upon her, and she shall live. 

19 And Jesus arose, and followed 
him, and so did his disciples. 

20 And, behold, a woman, which 
was diseased with an issue of blood 
twelve years, came behind him, and 
touched the hem of his garment: 

21 For she said within herself, 
If I may but touch his garment, I 
shall be whole. 

22 But Jesus turned him about, 
and when he saw her, he said, 
Daughter, be of good comfort; 
thy faith hath made thee whole. 
And the woman was made whole 
from that hour. 

23 And when Jesus came into 
the ruler’s house, and saw the 
minstrels and the people making 
a noise, 

24 He said unto them, Give 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IX. VER. 14—26. 87 


place: for the maid is not dead, | forth, he went in, and took her by 

but sleepeth. And they laughed | the hand, and the maid arose. 

him to scorn. 26 And the fame hereof went 
25 But when the people were put | abroad into all that land. 

Lrt us mark, in this passage, the gracious name by 

which the Lord Jesus speaks of Himself. He calls 

Himself “the Bridegroom.” 

What the bridegroom is to the bride, the Lord Jesus 
is to the souls of all who believe in Him. He loves them 
with a deep and everlasting love. He takes them into 
union with Himself: they are “one with Christ and 
Christ in them.” He pays all their debts to God; He 
supplies all their daily need ; He sympathizes with them 
in all their troubles; He bears with all their infirmities, 
and does not reject them for a few weaknesses. He 
regards them as part of Himself: those that persecute 
and injure them are persecuting Him. The glory that 
He has received from His Father they will one day 
share with Him, and where He is, there shall they be. 
Such are the privileges of all true Christians. They are 
the Lamb’s wife. (Rev. xix. 7.) Such is the portion to 
which faith admits us. By it God joins our poor sinful 
souls to one precious Husband; and those whom God 
thus joins together shall never be put asunder. Blessed 
indeed are they that believe! 

Let us mark, in the next place, what a wise principle the 
Lord Jesus lays down for the treatment of young disciples. 

There were some who found fault with our Lord’s 
followers because they did not fast as John the Baptist’s 
disciples did. Our Lord defends His disciples with an 
argument full of deep wisdom. He shows that there 
would be want of fitness in their fasting, so long as He, 


88 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


their Bridegroom, was with them. But He does not stop 
there. He goes on to show, by two parables, that young 
beginners in the school of Christianity must be dealt 
with gently. They must be taught as they are able to 
bear: they must not be expected to receive everything 
at once. To neglect this rule would be as unwise as to 
“put new wine into old bottles,” or to put “a piece of 
new cloth to an old garment.” 

There is a mine of deep wisdom in this principle, which 
all would do well to remember in the spiritual teaching of 
those who are young in experience. We must be careful 
not to attach an excessive importance to the lesser things 
of religion. We must not be in a hurry to require a 
minute conformity to one rigid rule in things indifferent, 
until the first principles of repentance and faith have 
been thoroughly learned. To guide us in this matter, we 
have great need to pray for grace, and Christian common 
sense. Tact in dealing with young disciples is a rare gift, 
but a very useful one. To know what to insist upon as 
absolutely necessary from the first,—and what to reserve, 
as a lesson to be learned when the learner has come to 
more perfect knowledge,—is one of the highest attain- 
ments of a teacher of souls. 

Let us mark, in the next place, what encouragement our 
Lord gives to the humblest faith. 

We read in this passage, that a woman sorely afflicted 
with disease, came behind our Lord in the crowd, and 
“touched the hem” of His garment, in the hope that 
by so doing she should be healed. She said not a word 
to obtain help. She made no public confession of faith; 
but she had confidence that if she could only “touch His 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IX. VER. 14—26. 89 


garment” she would be made well. And so it was. There 
lay hid in that act of her’s a seed of precious faith, which 
obtained our Lord’s commendation. She was made whole 
at once, and returned home in peace. To use the words 
of a good old writer, “she came trembling, and went 
back triumphing.” 

Let us store up in our minds this history; it may 
perhaps help us mightily in some hour of need. Our 
faith may be feeble, our courage small, our grasp of 
the Gospel and its promises weak and trembling,— 
but, after all, the grand question is, Do we really trust 
only in Christ? Do we look to Jesus, and only to 
Jesus, for pardon and peace? If this be so, it is well. 
If wemay nottouch His garment, we can touch His heart. 
Such faith saves the soul. Weak faith receives less 
comfort than strong faith. Weak faith will carry us 
to heaven with far less joy than full assurance. But 
weak faith gives an interest in Christ as surely as strong 
faith. He that only touches the hem of Christ’s garment 
shall never perish. 

In the last place, let us mark in this passage, our 
Lord’s almighty power. He restores to life one that was 
dead. 

How wonderful that sight must have been! Who 
that has ever seen the dead can forget the stillness, the 
silence, the coldness, when the breath has left the body? 
Who can forget the awful feeling that a mighty change 
has taken place, and a mighty gulf been placed between 
ourselves and the departed? But behold! our Lord goes 
to the chamber where the dead lies, and calls the spirit 
- back to its earthly tabernacle. The pulse once more 


90 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


beats; the eyes once more see; the breath once more 
comes and goes. The ruler’s daughter is once more 
alive, and restored to her father and mother. This was 
omnipotence indeed! None could have done this but 
He who first created man, and has all power in heaven 
and earth. 

This is the kind of truth we never can know too well. 
The more clearly we see Christ’s power, the more likely 
we are to realize Gospel peace. Our position may be 
trying; our hearts may be weak; the world may be 
difficult to journey through; our faith may seem too 
small tocarryushome. But let us take courage, when we 
think on Jesus, and let us not be cast down. Greater is 
He that is for us, then all they that are against us. Our 
Saviour can raise the dead: our Saviour is almighty. 


(ee ee 


MATTHEW IX. 27—38. 


27 And when Jesus departed 
thence, two blind men followed 
him, crying, and saying, Thow 
Son of David, have mercy on us. 

28 And when he was come into 
the house, the blind men came to 
him: and Jesus saith unto them, 
Believe ye that I am able to do 
this? They said unto him, Yea, 
Lord. 

29 Then touched he their eyes, 
saying, According to your faith be 
it unto you. 

30 And their eyes were opened; 
and Jesus straitly charged them, 
saying, See that no man know it. 

31 But they, when they were 
departed, spread abroad his fame 
in all that country. 

32 As they went out, behold, 
they brought to him a dumb man 
possessed with a devil. 

33 And when the devil was cast 





out, the dumb spake: and the 
multitudes marvelled, saying, It 
was never so seen in Israel. 

34 But the Pharisees said, He 
casteth out devils through the 
prince of the devils. 

35 And Jesus went about all the 
cities and villages, teaching in 
their synagogues, and preaching 
the Gospel of the kingdom, and 
healing every sickness and every 
disease among the people. 

36 But when he saw the multi- 
tudes, he was moved with compas- 
sion on them, because they fainted, 
and were scattered abroad, as 
sheep having no shepherd. 

37 Then saith he unto his disci- 
ples, The harvest truly is plenteous, 
but the labourers are few ; 

38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of 
the harvest, that he will send forth 
labourers into his harvest, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IX. VER. 2'7—38. 91 


THERE are four lessons in this passage which deserve 
close attention. Let us mark them each in succession. 

Let us mark, in the first place, that strong faith in 
Christ may sometimes be found where it might least have 
been expected. Who would have thought that two blind 
men would have called our Lord the “Son of David”? 
They could not, of course, have seen the miracles that 
He did. They could only know Him by common report. 
But the eyes of their understanding were enlightened, if 
their bodily eyes were dark. They saw the truth which 
scribes and Pharisees could not see. They saw that 
Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah. They believed 
that He was able to heal them. 

An example like this shows us that we must never 
despair of any one’s salvation merely because he lives in 
a position unfavourable to his soul. Grace is stronger 
than circumstances. Thelife of religion does not depend 
merely upon outward advantages. The Holy Ghost can 
give faith, and keep faith in active exercise, without 
book-learning, without money, and with scanty means 
of grace. Without the Holy Ghost a man may know all 
mysteries, and live in the full blaze of the Gospel, and 
yet be lost. We shall see many strange sights at the 
last day. Poor cottagers will be found to have believed 
in the Son of David, while rich men, full of University 
learning, will prove to have lived and died, like the 
Pharisees, in hardened unbelief. Many that are last 
will be first, and the first last. (Matt. xx. 16.) 

Let us mark, in the next place, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ has had great experience of disease and sickness. He 


“went about all the cities and villages” doing good. He 
H 


92 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


was an eye-witness of all the ills that flesh is heir to. 
He saw ailments of every kind, sort, and description, 
and was brought in contact with every form of bodily 
suffering. None were too loathsome for Him to attend 
to: none were too frightful for Him to cure. He was 
a healer of “every sickness and every disease.” 

There is much comfort to be drawn from this fact. 
We are each dwelling in a poor frail body. We never 
know how much’suffering we may have to watch, as we 
sit by the bedsides of beloved relatives and friends. We 
never know what racking complaint we ourselves may 
have to submit to, before we lie down and die. But let 
us arm ourselves betimes with the precious thought 
that Jesus is specially fitted to be the sick man’s friend. 
The great High-priest to whom we must apply for par- 
don and peace with God, is eminently qualified to sym- 
pathise with an aching body, as well as to heal an ailing 
conscience. The eyes of Him who is King of kings 
used often to look with pity on the diseased. The world 
cares little for the sick, and often keeps aloof from them; 
but the Lord Jesus cares especially for the sick: He is 
the first to visit them, and say, “I stand at the door and 
knock.” Happy are they who hear His voice, and open 
the door! (Rev. iii. 20.) 

Let us mark, in the next place, our Lord's zender con- 
cern for neglected souls. “He saw multitudes” of people, 
when he was on earth, scattered about “like sheep having 
no shepherd,” and He was moved with compassion. He 
saw them neglected by those who for the time ought to 
have been teachers. He saw them ignorant, hopeless, 
helpless, dying, and unfit to die. The sight moved Him 


MATTHEW, CHAP. IX. VER. 27—38. 93 


to deep pity. That loving heart could not see such 
things, and not feel. 

Now what are our feelings, when we see such a 
sight? This is the question that should arise in our 
minds, There are many such to be seen on every 
side. There are millions of idolaters and heathen on 
earth,—millions of deluded Mahometans,—millions of 
superstitious Roman Catholics. There are thousands of 
ignorant and unconverted Protestants near our own 
doors. Do we feel tenderly concerned about their souls? 
Do we deeply pity their spiritual destitution? Do we 
long to see that destitution relieved? These are serious 
inquiries, and ought to be answered. It is easy to sneer 
at missions to the heathen, and those who work for 
them. But the man who does not feel for the souls of 
all unconverted persons can surely not have “the mind 
of Christ.” (1 Cor. ii. 16.) 

Let us mark, in the last place, that there 7s a solemn 
duty incumbent on all Christians who would do good to 
the unconverted part of the world. They are to pray 
for more men to be raised up to work for the conversion 
of souls. It seems as if it was to be a daily part of our 
prayers. “Pray ye the Lord of the harvest that He 
would send forth labourers into His harvest.” 

If we know anything of prayer, let us make it a 
point of conscience never to forget this solemn charge 
of our Lord’s. Let us settle it in our minds that it is 
one of the surest ways of doing good and stemming 
evil. Personal working for souls is good; giving money 
is good ; but praying is best of all. By prayer we reach 
Him, without whom work and money are alike in vain: 


94 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


we obtain the aid of the Holy Ghost.—Money can pay 
agents; Universities can give learning; bishops may 
ordain ; congregations may elect: but the Holy Ghost 
alone can make ministers of the Gospel, and raise up 
real workmen in the spiritual harvest, who need not be 
ashamed. Never, never may we forget that if we would 


do good to the world, our first duty is to pray! 





MATTHEW X. 1—15. 


1 And when he had called unto 
him his twelve disciples, he gave 
them power against unclean spirits, 
to cast them out, and to heal all 
manner of sickness and a}] manner 
of disease. 

2 Now the names of the twelve 
apostles are these; the first, Simon, 
who is called Peter, and Andrew his 
brother; James the son of Zebedee, 
and John his brother; 

3 Philip, and Bartholomew ; 
Thomas, and Matthew the publi- 
can; James the son of Alpheeus. 
and Lebbzeus, whose surname was 
Thaddeeus 5s 

4, Simon the Canaanite, andJudas 
Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 

5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, 
and commanded them, saying, Go 
not into the way of the Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not: 

6 But go rather to the lost sheep 
of the house of Israel. 

7 And as ye go, preach, saying, 
The kingdom of heaven is at hand. 

8 Heal the sick, cleanse the 


lepers, raise the dead, cast out 
devils: freely ye have received, 
freely give. 

9 Provide neither gold, nor sil- 
ver, nor brass in your purses, 

10 Nor scrip for your journey, 
neither two coats, neither shoes, 
nor yet staves: for the workman 
is worthy of his meat. 

11 And into whatsoever city or 
town ye shall enter, enquire who 
in it is worthy; and there abide 
till ye go thence. 

12 And when ye come into an 
house, salute it. 

13 And if the house be worthy, 
let your peace come upon it: but 
if it be not worthy, let your peace 
return to you. 

14 And whosoever shall not 
receive you, nor hear your words, 
when ye depart out of that house 
es city, shake off the dust of your 

eet. 

15 Verily, I say unto you, It shall 
be more tolerable for the land of 
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of 
judgment, than for that city. 


Tus chapter is one of peculiar solemnity. Here is the 
record of the first ordination which ever took place in 


the Church of Christ. 


The Lord Jesus chooses and 


sends forth the twelve apostles—Here is an account 
of the first charge ever delivered to newly ordained 


Christian ministers. 


The Lord Jesus Himself delivers 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 1—15. 95 


it. Never was there so important an ordination! Never 
was there so solemn a charge! 

There are three lessons which stand out prominently 
cn the face of the first fifteen verses of this chapter. 
Let us take them in order. 

We are taught, in the first place, that all ministers are 
not necessarily good men. We see our Lord choosing a 
Judas Iscariot to be one of His apostles. We cannot 
doubt that He who knew all hearts, knew well the 
characters of the men whom He chose. And here He 
includes in the list of His apostles one who was a traitor ! 

We shall do well to bear in mind this fact. Orders 
do not confer the saving grace of the Holy Ghost: 
ordained men are not necessarily converted. We are 
not to regard them as infallible, either in doctrine or in 
practice. We are not to make Popes or idols of them, 
and insensibly to put them in Christ’s place. Weare to 
regard them as “men of like passions” with ourselves, 
liable to the same infirmities, and daily requiring the 
same grace. Weare not to think it impossible for them 
to do very bad things, or to expect them to be above the 
reach of harm from flattery, covetousness, and the world. 
We are to prove their teaching by the Word of God, and 
to follow them so far as they follow Christ, but no further. 
Above all, we ought to pray for them, that they may be 
successors, not of Judas Iscariot, but of James and John. 
It is a serious responsibility to be a minister of the 
Gospel! Ministers need many prayers. 

We are taught, in the next place, that the great work 
of a minister of Christ is to do good. He is sent to seek 
“Jost sheep,’—to proclaim glad tidings,—to relieve those 


96 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


who are suffering,—to diminish sorrow,—and to increase 
joy. His life is meant to be one of “ giving,” rather than 
recelving. 

This is a high standard, and a very peculiar one. Let: 
it be well weighed, and carefully examined. It is plain, 
for one thing, that the life of a faithful minister of 
Christ cannot be one of ease. He must be ready to 
spend body and mind, time and strength, in the work 
of his calling. Laziness and frivolity are bad enough in 
any profession, but worst of all in that of a watchman for 
souls.—It is plain, for another thing, that the position of 
the ministers of Christ is not that which ignorant people 
sometimes assign to them, and which they unhappily 
sometimes claim for themselves. They are not so much 
ordained to rule as to serve. They are not so much 
intended to have dominion over the Church, as to supply 
its wants, and to wait upon its members, (2 Cor. i. 24.) 
Happy would it be for the cause of true religion if these 
things were better understood! Half the diseases of 
Christianity have arisen from mistaken notions about 
the minister’s office. 

We are taught, in the last place, that 7 is a most 
dangerous thing to neglect the offers of the Gospel. It 
shall prove “more tolerable for the land of Sodom and 
Gomorrha,” in the judgment day, than for those who 
have heard Christ’s truth, and not received it. 

This is a doctrine fearfully overlooked, and one that 
deserves serious consideration. Men are apt to forget 
that it does not require great open sins to be sinned in 
order to ruin a soul for ever. They have only to go on 
hearing without believing, listening without repenting, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 1—15. 97 


going to church without going to Christ, and by and by 
they will find themselves in hell! ‘We shall all be 
judged according to our light, and shall have to give 
account of our use of religious privileges. To hear of 
the “great salvation,” and yet neglect it, is one of the 
worst sins man can commit. (John xvi. 9; Heb. ii. 3.) 

What are we doing ourselves with the Gospel? This 
is the question which every one who reads this passage 
should put to his conscience. Let us assume that we 
are decent and respectable in our lives, correct and 
moral in all the relations of life, regular in our formal 
attendance on the means of grace. It is all well, so far 
ns it goes; but is this all that can be said ofus? Are 
we really receiving the love of the truth? Is Christ 
dwelling in our hearts by faith? If not, we are in 
fearful danger. We are far more guilty than the men 
of Sodom, who never heard the Gospel at all. We may 
awake to find that in spite of our regularity, and 
morality, and correctness, we have lost our souls to all 
eternity. It will not save us to have lived in the full 
sunshine of Christian privileges, and to have heard the 
Gospel faithfully preached every week. There must be 
experimental acquaintance with Christ. There must be 
personal reception of His truth. There must be vital 
union with Him. We must become His servants and 
disciples. Without this, the preaching of the Gospel 
only adds to our responsibility, increases our guilt, and 
will at length sink us more deeply into hell. These 
may seem hard sayings! But the words of Scripture, 
which we have read, are plain and unmistakable. 


They are all true, 


98 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW X. 16—28. 


16 Behold, I send you forth as 
sheep in the midst of wolves: be 
ye therefore wise as serpents, and 
harmless as doves. 

17 But beware of men: for they 
will deliver you up to the councils, 
and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues ; 

18 And ye shall be brought be- 
fore governors and kings for my 
sake, for a testimony against them 
and the Gentiles. 

19 But when they deliver you 
up, take no thought how or what 
ye shall speak: for it shall be 
given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. 


20 For it is not ye that speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father which 
speaketh in you. 

21 And ihe brother shall deliver 
up the brother to death, and the 
father the child: and the children 
shall rise up against their parents, 
and cause them to be put to death. 

22 And ye shall be hated of all 
men for my name’s sake; but he 
that endureth to the end shall be 
saved. 

23 But when they persecute you 
in this city, flee ye into another: 
for verily I say unto you, Ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of 
Israel, till the Son of man be come. 


THE truths contained in these verses should be pondered 
by all who try to do good in the world. To the selfish 
man who cares for nothing but his own ease or comfort, 
there may seem to be little in them. To the minister of 
the Gospel, and to every one who seeks to save souls, 
these verses ought to be full of interest. No doubt there 
is much in them which applies especially to the days of 
the apostles; but there is much also which applies to 
all times. 

We see, for one thing, that those who would do good 
to sowls, must be moderate in their expectations. They 
must not think that universal success will attend their 
labours, They must reckon on meeting with much 
opposition. They must make up their minds to be 
“hated,” persecuted, and ill-used, and that too by their 
nearest relations. They will often find themselves like 
“sheep in the midst of wolves.” 

Let us bear this in mind continually. Whether we 
preach, or teach, or visit from house to house,—whether 
we write or give counsel, or whatever we do, let it bea 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 16—23. 99 


settled principle with us not to expect more than Scrip- 
ture and experience warrant. Human nature is far more 
wicked and corrupt than we think. The power of evil 
is far greater than we suppose. Itis vainto imagine that 
everybody will see what is good for them, and believe 
what we tell them. It is expecting what we shall not 
find, and will only end in disappointment. Happy is 
that labourer for Christ who knows these things at his 
first starting, and has not to learn them by bitter ex- 
perience! Here lies the secret cause why many have 
turned back, who once seemed full of zeal to do good. 
They began with extravagant expectations ; they did not 
“count the cost.” They fell into the mistake of the great 
German Reformer, who confessed he forgot at one time 
that “old Adam was too strong for young Melancthon.” 

We see, for another thing, that those who would do 
good have need to pray for wisdom, good sense, and a 
sound mind. Our Lord tells His disciples to be “wise 
as serpents, and harmless as doves.” He tells them 
that when they are persecuted in one place, they may 
lawfully “flee to another.” 

There are few of our Lord’s instructions which it is 
so difficult to use rightly as this. There is a line marked 
out for us between two extremes, but a line that it re- 
quires great judgment to define. To avoid persecution, 
by holding our tongues and keeping our religion entirely 
to ourselves, is one extreme: we are not to err in that 
direction—To court persecution, and thrust our religion 
upon every one we meet, without regard to place, time, 
or circumstances, is another extreme: in this direction 
also we are warned not to err, any more than in the 


1t00 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


other—Truly we may say, ‘“‘ Who is sufficient for these 
things?” We have need to cry to “the only wise God” 
for wisdom. 

The extreme into which most men are liable to fall in 
the present day is that of silence, cowardice, and letting 
others alone. Our so-called prudence is apt to degene- 
rate into a compromising line of conduct, or downright 
unfaithfulness. We are only too ready to suppose that it 
is of no use trying to do good to certain people. We ex- 
cuse ourselves from efforts to benefit their souls by saying 
it would be indiscreet, or inexpedient, or would give need- 
legs offence, or would even do positive harm. Let us all 
watch and be on our guard against this spirit; laziness 
and the devil are often the true explanation of it. To 
give way to it is pleasant to flesh and blood, no doubt, 
and saves us much trouble; but those who give way to 
it often throw away great opportunities of usefulness. 

Qn the other hand, it is impossible to deny that there 
is such a thing as a righteous and holy zeal, which is “not 
according to knowledge.” It is quite possible to create 
much needless offence, commit great blunders, and stir 
up much opposition, which might have been avoided by 
a little prudence, wise management, and exercise of judg- 
ment. Let us all take heed that we are not guilty in 
this respect. We may be sure there is such a thing as 
Christian wisdom, which is quite distinct from Jesuitical 
subtlety, or carnal policy: this wisdom let us seek. 
Our Lord Jesus does not require us to throw aside our 
common sense, when we undertake to work for Him. 
There will be offence enough connected with our religion, 
do what we will; but let us not increase it without cause. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 24—33. 101 


Let us strive to “walk circumspectly, not as fools but as 
wise.” (Ephes. v. 15.) 

It is to be feared that believers in the Lord Jesus do 
no sufficiently pray for the Spirit of knowledge, judg- 
ment, and a sound mind. They are apt to fancy that if 
they have grace, they have all they need. They forget 
that a gracious heart should pray that it may be full of 
wisdom, as well as of the Holy Ghost. (Acts vi. 3.) 
Let us all remember this. Great grace and common 
sense are perhaps one of the rarest combinations. That 
they may go together, the life of David and the ministry 
of the Apostle Paul are striking proofs. In this however, 
as in every other respect, our Lord Jesus Christ Himself 
is our most perfect example. None were ever so faithful 
as He; but none were ever so truly wise. Let us make 
Him our pattern and walk in His steps. 





MATTHEW X. 24—33. 


24 The disciple is not above his | the soul: but rather fear him which 
master, nor the servant above his | is able to destroy both soul and 
lord. body in hell. 

25 It is enough for the disciple | 29 Are not two sparrows sold for 
that he be as his master, and the | a farthing? and one of them shall 
servant as his lord. If they have | not fall on the ground without your 
called the master of the house | Father. 

Beelzebub, how much more shall 30 But the very hairs of your 
they call them of his household? | head are all numbered. 

26 Fear them not therefore: for 81 Fear ye not therefore, ye are 
there is nothing covered, that shall | of more value than many sparrows. 
not be revealed; and hid, that shall | 32 Whosoever therefore shall 
not be known. confess me before men, him will 

27 What I tell you in darkness, | I confess also before my Father 
that speak ye in light; and what | which is in heaven. 
ye hear in the ear, that preach ye 33 But whosoever shall deny me 
upon the housetops. before men, him will I also deny 

28 And fear not them which kill | before my Father which is in 
the body, but are not able to kill heaven. 





To do good to souls in this world is very hard. All who 
try it find this out by experience. It needs a large stock 


102 EXPositoky THOUGHTS. 


of courage, faith, patience, and perseverance. Satan will 
fight vigorously to maintain his kingdom, and human 
nature is desperately wicked. To do harm is easy; to 
do good is hard. 

The Lord Jesus knew this well, when He sent forth 
His disciples to preach the Gospel for the first time. 
He knew what was before them, if they did not. He 
took care to supply them with a list of encouragements, 
in order to cheer them when they felt cast down. Weary 
missionaries abroad, or fainting ministers at home,—dis- 
heartened teachers of schools, and desponding visitors of 
districts——would do well to study often the nine verses 
we have just read. Let us mark what they contain. 

For one thing, those who try to do good to souls must 
not expect to fare better than their great Master. “The 
disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above 
his Lord.” The Lord Jesus was slandered and rejected 
by those whom He came to benefit. There was no error 
in His teaching, and no defect in His method of im- 
parting instruction. Yet many hated Him, and “called 
Him Beelzebub.” Few believed Him, and cared for 
what He said. Surely we have no right to be surprised 
if we, whose best efforts are mingled with much imper- 
fection, are treated in the same way as Christ. If we 
let the world alone, it will probably let us alone; but if 
we try to do it spiritual good, it will hate us as it did 
our Master. 

For another thing, those who try to do good must look 
forward with patience to the day of judgment. “There is 
nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid that 
shall not be known.” They must be content in this pre- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 24—33. 1038 


sent world to be misunderstood, misrepresented, vilified, 
slandered, and abused. They must not cease to work 
because their motives are mistaken, and their characters 
fiercely assailed. They must remember continually that 
all will be set right at the last day, when the secrets of all 
hearts shall be revealed. “He shall bring forth thy 
righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noon- 
day.” (Psal. xxxvii.6.) The purity of their intentions, 
the wisdom of their labours, and the rightfulness of their 
cause, shall at length be made manifest to all the world. 
Let us work on steadily and quietly. Men may not 
understand us, and may vehemently oppose us; but 
the day of judgment draws nigh: we shall be righted 
at last. The Lord, when He comes again, “will bring 
tu light the hidden things of darkness, and will make 
manifest the counsels of the heart: and then shall 
every man have praise of God.” (1 Cor. iv. 5.) 

For another thing, those who try to do good must fear 
God more than man. Man can hurt the body, but there 
his enmity must stop: he can go no further. God “is 
able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” We may be 
threatened with the loss of character, property, and all 
that makes life enjoyable, if we go on in the path of 
religious duty : we must not heed such threats, when 
our course is plain. Like Daniel and the three children, 
we must submit to anything rather than displease God, 
and wound our consciences. The anger of man may be 
hard to bear, but the anger of God is much harder. The 
fear of man does indeed bring a snare, but we must 
make it give way to the expulsive power of a stronger 
principle, even the fear of God. It was a fine saying 


10% EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of good Colonel Gardiner, “I fear God, and therefore 
there is none else that I need fear.” 

For another thing, those who try to do good must keep 
before their minds the providential care of God over them. 
Nothing can happen in this world without His per- 
mission: there is no such thing in reality as chance, 
accident, or luck. “The very hairs of their heads are 
all numbered.” The path of duty may sometimes lead 
them ito great danger. Health and life may seem to be 
perilled, if they go forward. Let them take comfort in the 
thought that all around them is in God’s hand. Their 
bodies, their souls, their charactersare all in His safe keep- 
ing. No disease can seize them,—nohand can hurtthem, 
unless He allows. They may say boldly to every fearful 
thing they meet with, “Thou couldest have no power at 
all against me, except it were given thee from above.” 

In the last place, those who try to do good should con- 
tinually remember the day when they will meet their Lord 
to receive their final portion. If they would have Him 
own them, and confess them before His Father’s throne, 
they must not be ashamed to own and “confess Him” 
before the men of this world. To do it may cost us 
much. It may bring on us laughter, mockery, perse- 
cution, and scorn. But let us not be laughed out of 
heaven. Let us recollect the great and dreadful day of 
account, and let us not be afraid to show men that we 
love Christ, and want them to know and love Him also. 

Let these encouragements be treasured up in the hearts 
of all who labour in Christ’s cause, whatever their posi- 
tion may be. The Lord knows their trials, and has 
spoken these things for their comfort. He cares for all 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 34—42, 105 


His believing people, but for none so much as those who 
work for His cause, and try to do good. May we seek to 
be of that number! Every believer may do something if 
he tries. There is always something for every one to do. 
May we each have an eye to see it, and a will to do it! 





MATTHEW X. 34—42, 


34 Think not that Iam come to. 389 He that findeth his life shall 
gend peace on earth: I came not | lose it: and he that loseth his life 


to send peace, but a sword. 
35 For I am come to set a man 


at variance against his father, and - 
the daughter against her mother, . 


and the daughter in law against 
her mother in law. 

36 And a man’s foes shall be 
they of his own household, 


for my sake shall find it. 

40 He that receiveth you receiv- 
eth me, and he that receiveth me 
receiveth him that sent me. 

41 He that receiveth a prophet 
in the name of a prophet shall re- 
ceive a prophet’s reward; and he 
that receiveth a righteous man in 


37 He that loveth father or mo-, the name of a righteous man shall 
ther more than me is not worthy! receive a righteous man’s reward. 


of me: and he that loveth son or } 


daughter more than me is not 
worthy of me. 

88 And he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth after me, is 
not worthy of me. 


42 And whosoever shall give to 
drink unto one of these little ones 
a cup of cold water only in the 
name of a disciple, verily I say 
unto you, he shall in no wise lose 
his reward. 


In these verses the great Head of the Church winds up 
His first charge to those whom He sends forth to make 
known His Gospel. He declares three great truths, 
which form a fitting conclusion to the whole discourse. 
In the first place, He bids us remember that His Gos- 
pel will not cause peace and agreement wherever it comes. 
“I came not to send peace, but a sword.” The object 
of His first coming on earth was not to set up a mil- 
lennial kingdom in which all would be of one mind, but 
to bring in the Gospel, which would lead to strifes and 
divisions. We have no right to be surprised if we see 
this continually fulfilled. We are not to think it strange 
if the Gospel rends asunder families, and causes estrange- 
ment between the nearest relations. It is sure to do so 


106 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


in many cases, because of the deep corruption of man’s 
heart. So long as one man believes, and another remains 
unbelieving, so long as one is resolved to keep his sins, 
and another is desirous to give them up, the result of 
the preaching of the Gospel must needs be division, For 
this the Gospel is not to blame, but the heart of man. 

There is deep truth in all this, which is constantly 
forgotten and overlooked. Many talk vaguely about 
“unity,” and “harmony,” and “peace” in the Church of 
Christ, as if they were things that we ought always to 
expect, and for the sake of which everything ought to 
be sacrificed! Such persons would do well to remember 
the words of our Lord. No doubt unity and peace are 
mighty blessings. We ought to seek them, pray for them, 
and give up everything in order to obtain them, excepting 
truth and a good conscience. Butit isan idle dream to 
suppose that the Churches of Christ will enjoy much of 
unity and peace before the millennium comes. 

In the second place, our Lord tells us that true Chris. 
tians must make wp their minds to trouble in this world. 
Whether we are ministers or hearers, whether we teach 
or are taught, it makes little difference: we must carry 
“a cross.” We must be content to lose even life itself 
for Christ’s sake. We must submit to the loss of man’s 
favour, we must endure hardships, we must deny our- 
selves in many things, or we shall never reach heaven 
at last. So long as the world, the devil, and our own 
hearts, are what they are, these things must be so. 

We shall find it most useful to remember this lesson 
ourselves, and to impress it upon others. Few things do 
so much harm in religion as exaggerated expectations. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. X. VER. 34—42. 107 


People look for a degree of worldly comfort in Christ’s 
service, which they have no right to expect, and not 
finding what they looked for, are tempted to give up 
religion in disgust. Happy is he who thoroughly under- 
stands, that though Christianity holds out a crown in 
the end, it brings also a cross in the way. 

In the last place, our Lord cheers us by saying, that 
the least service done to those who work in His cause is 
observed and rewarded of God. He that gives a believer 
so little as “a cup of cold water only in the name of a 
disciple shall in no wise lose his reward.” 

There is something very beautiful in this promise. It 
teaches us that the eyes of the great Master are ever 
upon those who labour for Him, and try to do good. 
They seem perhaps to work on unnoticed and unre- 
garded. The proceedings of preachers, and missionaries, 
and teachers and visitors of the poor, may appear very 
trifling and insignificant, compared to the movements of 
kings and of parliaments, of armies and of statesmen; 
but they are not insignificant in the eyes of God. He 
takes notice who opposes His servants, and who helps 
them; He observes who is kind to them, as Lydia was 
to Paul; and who throws difficulties in their way, as 
Diotrephes did in the way of John. (Acts xvi. 15; 3 
John 9.) All their daily experience is recorded, as they 
labour on in His harvest. All is written down in the 
great book of His remembrance, and will be brought to 
light at the last day. The chief butler forgot Joseph, 
when he was restored to his place; but the Lord Jesus 
never forgets any of His people. He will say to many 


who little expect it, in the resurrection morning, “I was 
I 


108 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


an hungered, and ye gave Me meat: I was thirsty, and 
ye gave Me drink.” (Matt. xxv. 35.) 

Let us ask ourselves, as we close the chapter, in what 
light we regard. Christ’s work and Christ’s cause in the 
world? Are we helpers of it or hinderers? Do we 
in any wise aid the Lord’s “‘ prophets,” and “righteous 
men”? Do we assist His “little ones”? Do we 
impede His labourers, or do we cheer them on ?—These 
are serious questions. They do well and wisely who 
give the “cup of cold water,” whenever they have oppor- 
tunity. They do better still who work actively in the 
Lord’s vineyard. May we all strive to leave the world, 
when wedie,a better world thanit was when we were born! 
This is to have the mind of Christ. This is to find out the 
value of the lessons this wonderful chapter contains. 


MATTHEW XI. 1—15. 


1 And it came to pass, when 
Jesus had made an end of com- 
manding his twelve disciples, he 
departed thence to teach and to 
preach in their cities. 

2 Now when John had heard in 
the prison the works of Christ, he 
sent two of his disciples, 

8 And said unto him, Art thou 
he that should come, or do we look 
for another ? 

4 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, Go and show John again 
those things which ye do hear and 
see: ’ 

5 The blind receive their sight, 
and the lame walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the 
dead are raised up, and the poor 
have the gospel preached to them. 

6 And blessed is he, whosoever 
shall not be offended in me. 

7 And as they departed, Jesus 
began to say unto the multitudes 
concerning John, What went ye 
out into the wilderness to see? A 
reed shaken with the wind? 





8 But what went ye out for to 
seeP A man clothed in soft rai- 
ment ? behold, they that wear soft 
clothing are in king’s houses. 

9 But what went ye out for to 
seeP A prophet? yea, I say unto 
you, and more than a prophet. 

10 For this is he, of whom it is 
written, Behold, I send my mes- 
senger before thy face, which shall 
prepare thy way before thee. 

11 Verily I say unto you, Among 
them that are born of women there 
hath not risen a greater than John 
the Baptist: notwithstanding he 
that is least in the kingdom of 
heaven is greater than he. 

12 And from the days of John the 
Baptist until now the kingdom of 
heaven suffereth violence, and the 
violent take it by force. 

13 For all the prophets and the 
law prophesied until John. 

14 And if ye will receive tt, this 
is Elias, which was for to come. 

15 He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XI. VER. 1—15. 109 


Tue first thing that demands our attention in this 
passage ts the message which John the Baptist sends to 
our Lord Jesus Christ. He “sent two of his disciples, 
and said unto Him, Art Thou He that should come, or 
do we look for another ?” 

It is most likely that this question did not arise from 
doubt or unbelief on the part of John. We probably 
do that holy man injustice if we interpret it in such 
away. It was asked for the benefit of his disciples. 
It was meant to give them an opportunity of hear- 
ing from Christ’s own lips the evidence of His divine 
mission. No doubt John the Baptist felt that his own 
ministry was ended. Something within him told him 
that he would never come forth from Herod’s prison- 
house, but wouldsurely die. Herememberedtheignorant 
jealousies that had already been shown by his disciples 
towards the disciples of Christ. He took the most likely 
course to dispel those jealousies for ever. He sent his 
followers to “hear and see” for themselves, 

The conduct of John the Baptist in this matter affords 
a striking example to ministers, teachers, and parents, 
when they draw near the end of their course. Their 
chief concern should be about the souls of those they 
are going to leave behind them. Their great desire 
should be to persuade them to cleave to Christ. The 
death of those who have guided and instructed us on 
earth ought always to have this effect. It should make 
us lay hold more firmly on Him who dieth no more, 
“continueth ever,” and “hath an unchangeable priest- 
hood.” (Heb. vii. 24.) 

The second thing that demands our notice in this 
passage, is the high testimony which our Lord bears to the 


110 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


character of John the Baptist. No mortal man ever 
received such commendation as Jesus here bestows on 
His imprisoned friend. “Among them that are born of 
women there hath not risen a greater than John the 
Baptist.” In time past John had boldly confessed Jesus 
before men, as the Lamb of God. Now Jesus openly 
declares John to be more than a prophet. 

There were some, no doubt, who weredisposedto think 
lightly of John the Baptist, partly from ignorance of the 
nature of his ministry, partly from misunderstanding the 
question he had sent to ask. Our Lord Jesus silences 
such cavillersby the declaration He here makes. He tells 
them not to suppose that John was a timid, vacillating, 
unstable man, “a reed shaken by the wind.” If they 
thought so, they were utterly mistaken: he was a bold, 
unflinching witness to the truth—He tells them not to 
suppose that John was at heart a worldly man, fond of 
Kings’ courts, and delicate living. If they thought so, 
they greatly erred: he was a self-denying preacher of 
repentance, who would risk the anger of a King, rather 
than not reprove his sins——JIn short, he would have 
them know that John was “more than a prophet.” 
He was one to whom God had given more honour than 
to all the Old Testament prophets. They indeed pro- 
phesied of Christ, but died without seeing Him; John 
not only prophesied of Him, but saw Him face to face. 
—tThey foretold that the days of the Son of man would 
certainly come, and the Messiah appear; John was an 
actual eye-witness of those days, and an honoured in- 
strument in preparing men for them.—To them it was 
given to predict that Messiah would be “brought as a 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XI. VER. 1—15. nit 


lamb to the slaughter,” and “cut off’ (Isai. liii. 7: 
Dan. x. 26). To John it was given to point to Him, 
and say, “ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world.” (John i. 29.) 

There is something very beautiful and comforting to 
true Christians in this testimony which our Lord bears 
to John the Baptist. It shows us the tender interest 
which our great Head feels in the lives and characters of 
all Hismembers. It shows us what honour He is ready 
-to put on the work and labour that they go through in 
His cause. It is a sweet foretaste of the confession 
which He will make of them before the assembled 
world, when He presents them faultless at the last 
day before His Father’s throne. 

Do we know what it is to work for Christ? Have we 
ever felt cast down and dispirited, as if we were doing 
no good, and no one cared for us? Are we ever tempted 
to feel, when laid aside by sickness, or withdrawn by 
providence, “I have laboured in vain, and spent my 
strength for naught” ?—Let us meet such thoughts by 
the recollection of this passage. Let us remember, there 
is One who daily records all we do for Him, and sees 
more beauty in His servants’ work than His servants do 
themselves. The same tongue which bore testimony to 
John in prison, will bear testimony to all His people 
at the last day. He will say, “Come, ye blessed of my 
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
- foundation of the world.” (Matt. xxv. 34.) And then 
shall His faithful witnesses discover, to their wonder and 
surprise, that there never was a word spoken on their 
Master’s behalf, which does not receive a reward. 


112 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XI. 16—24, 


16 But whereunto shall I liken 
this generation? It is like unto 
children sitting in the markets, 
and calling unto their fellows, 

17 And saying, We have piped 
unto you, and ye have not danced ; 
we have mourned unto you, and ye 
have not lamented. 

18 For John came neither eating 
nor drinking, and they say, He hath 
a devil. 

19 The Son of man came eating 
and drinking, and they say, Be- 
hold, a man gluttonous, and a 
winebibber, a friend of publicans 
and sinners. But wisdom is justi- 
fied of her children. 

20 Then began he to upbraid the 
cities wherein most of his mighty 
works were done, because they re- 
pented not: 


21 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if 
the mighty works, which were done 
in you, had been done in Tyre and 
Sidon, they would have repented 
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 

22 But I say unto you, It shall 
be more tolerable for Tyre and 
Sidon at the day of judgment, than 
for you. 

23 And thou, Capernaum, which 
art exalted unto heaven, shalt be 
brought down to hell: for if the 
mighty works, which have been 
done in thee, had been done in 
Sodom, it would have remained 
until this day. 

24 But I say unto you, That it 
shall be more tolerable for the land 
of Sodom in the day of judgment. 
than for thee, 


THESE sayings of the Lord Jesus were called forth by the 
state of the Jewish nation when He was upon earth. 
But they speak loudly to us also, as well as to the Jews. 
They throw great light on some parts of the natural 
man’s character. They teach us the perilous state of 
many immortal souls in the present day. 

The first part of these verses shows us the unreasonable: 
ness of many unconverted men in the things of religion. 
The Jews, in our Lord’s time, found fault with every 
teacher whom God sent among them. First came John 
the Baptist, preaching repentance, an austere man, a 
man who withdrew himself from society, and lived an 
ascetic life. Did this satisfy the Jews? No! They 
found fault and said, “He hath a devil.”—Then came 
Jesus the Son of God, preaching the Gospel, living 
as other men lived, and practising none of John the 
Baptist’s peculiar austerities. And did this satisfy the 
Jews? No! They found fault again, and said, “ Behold 


MATTHEW, OHAP. XI. YER. 16—2Z4. 113 


a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of pub- 
licans and sinners.” In short, they were as perverse 
and hard to please as wayward children. 

It is a mournful fact, that there are always thousands 
of professing Christians just as unreasonable as these 
Jews. They are equally perverse, and equally hard to 
please. Whatever we teach and preach, they find fault ; 
whatever be our manner of life, they are dissatisfied. 
Do we tell them of salvation by grace, and justification 
by faith? At once they cry out against our doctrine as 
licentious and Antinomian.—Do we tell them of the 
holiness which the Gospel requires? At once they ex- 
claim that we are too strict, and precise, and righteous 
overmuch.—Are we cheerful? They accuse us of levity. 
—Are we grave? They call us gloomy and sour.—Do 
we keep aloof from balls, and races, and plays? They 
denounce us as puritanical, exclusive, and narrow- 
minded—Do we eat, and drink, and dress like other 
people, and attend to our worldly callings, and go into 
society? They sneeringly insinuate that they see no 
difference between us and those who make no religious 
profession at all; and that we are not better than other 
iwnen.— What is all this but the conduct of the Jews 
over again? “We have piped unto you, and ye have not 
danced: we have mourned unto you, and ye have not 
lamented.” He who spake these words knew the hearte 
of men! 

The plain truth is, that true believers must not expect 
unconverted men to be satisfied, either with their faith 
or their practice. If they do, they expect what they 
will not find. They must make up their minds to heat 


114 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


objections, cavils, and excuses, however holy their own 
lives may be. Well says Quesnel, “ Whatever measures 
good men take, they will never escape the censures of the 
world. The best way is not to be concerned at them.” 
After all, what saith the Scripture? “The carnal mind 
isenmity against God.” —“The natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God.” (Rom. viii. 7; 1 Cor. 
ii. 14.) This is the explanation of the whole matter. 

The second part of these verses shows us the exceeding 
wickedness of wilful impenitence. Our Lord declares that 
it shall be “more tolerable for Tyre, Sidon, and Sodom, 
in the day of judgment,” than for those towns where 
people had heard His sermons, and seen His miracles, 
bus kad not repented. 

There is something very solemn in this saying. Let 
as look at it well. Let us think for a moment what 
dark idolatrous, immoral, profligate places Tyre and 
Sidon must have been. Let us call to mind the un- 
speakable wickedness of Sodom. Let us remember that 
the cities named by our Lord—Chorazin, Bethsaida, and 
Capernaum—were probably no worse than other Jewish 
towns, and, at all events, were far better and more 
moral than Tyre, Sidon, and Sodom. And then let us 
observe that the people of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and 
Capernaum, are to be in the lowest hell, because they 
heard the Gospel, and yet did not repent,—because they 
had great religious advantages, and did not use them. 
How awful this sounds! 

Surely these words ought to make the ears of every 
one tingle, who hears the Gospel regularly, and yet 
temains unconverted. How great is the guilt of such a 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XI. VER. 25—30. 115 


man before God! How great is the danger in which 
he daily stands! Moral, and decent, and respectable 
as his life may be, he is actually more guilty than an 
idolatrous Tyrian or Sidonian, or a miserable inhabitant 
of Sodom! They had no spiritual light: he has, and 
neglects it—They heard no Gospel: he hears, but does 
not obey it—Their hearts might have been softened, 
if they had enjoyed his privileges: Tyre and Sidon 
“would have repented :” Sodom “would have remained 
until thisday.” His heart under the full blaze of the 
Gospel remains hard and unmoved.—There is but one 
painful conclusion to be drawn: his guilt will be found 
greater than their’s at the last day. Most true is the 
remark of an English Bishop, “ Among all the aggrava- 
tions of our sins, there is none more heinous than the 
frequent hearing of our duty.” 

May we all think often about Chorazin, Bethsaida, 
and Capernaum! Let us settle it in our minds that 
it will never do to be content with merely hearing and 
liking the Gospel. We must go further than this: we 
must actually “ repent and be converted.” (Acts iii. 19.) 
We must actually lay hold on Christ, and become one 
with Him. Till then we are in awful danger. It will 
prove more tolerable to have lived in Tyre, Sidon, and 
Sodom, than to have heard the Gospel in England, and 
at last die unconverted. 





MATTHEW XI. 25—30. 


25 At that time Jesus answered 26 Even 80, Father: for so it 
and said, I thank thee, O Father, | seemed good in thy sight. 
Lord of heaven and earth, because} 27 All things are delivered unto 
thou hast hid these things from | me of my Father: and no man 
the wise and prudent, and hast | knoweth the Son, but the Father ; 
revealed them unto babes. neither knoweth any man the 


116 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Father, save the Son, and he to; 29 Take my yoke upon you, and 
whomsoever the Son will reveal | learn of me: for I am meek and 
him. lowly in heart; and ye shall find 
28 Come unto me, all ye that | rest unto your souls. 

labour and are heavy laden, and I 80 For my yoke is easy, and my 
will give you rest. burden is light. 

THERE are few passages in the four Gospels more im- 
portant than this—There are few which contain in so 
short a compass, so many precious truths. May God 
give us an eye to see, and a heart to feel their value! 

Let us learn, in the first place, the excellence of a child- 
like and teachable frame of mind. Our Lord says to His 
Father, “Thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and revealed them unto babes.” 

It is not for us to attempt to explain why some re- 
ceive and believe the Gospel, while others do not. The 
sovereignty of God in this matter is a deep mystery : 
we cannot fathom it. But one thing, at all events, 
stands out in Scripture, as a great practical truth to be 
had in everlasting remembrance. Those from whom 
the Gospel is hidden are generally “the wise in their 
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight;” those to 
whom the Gospel is revealed are generally humble, 
simple-minded, and willing to learn. The words of the 
Virgin Mary are continually being fulfilled: “He hath 
filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.” (Luke i. 53.) 

Let us watch against pride in every shape,—pride of 
intellect, pride of wealth, pride in our own goodness, 
pride in our own deserts. Nothing is so likely to keep 
a man out of heaven, and prevent him seeing Christ, as 
pride. Solongas we think we are something we shall 
never be saved. Let us pray for and cultivate humility. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XI. VER. 25—30. 117 


Let us seek to know ourselves aright, and to find out our 
place in the sight of a holy God. The beginning of the 
way to heaven, is to feel that we are in the way to hell, 
and to be willing to be taught of the Spirit. One of 
the first steps in saving Christianity, is to be able to 
say with Saul, “Lord what wilt Thou have me to do?” 
(Acts ix. 6.) There is hardly a sentence of our Lord’s 
so frequently repeated as this, “He that humbleth him- 
self shall be exalted.” (Luke xviii. 14.) 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses. 
the greatness and majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The language of our Lord on this subject is deep and 
wonderful. He says “ All things are delivered unto Me 
of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son save the 
Father, neither knoweth any man the Father save the 
Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal Him.” We 
may truly say, as we read these words, “Such knowledge 
is too wonderful for me; it is high: I cannot attain to it.” 
(Psalm cxxxix. 6.) We see something of the perfect 
union which exists between the first and second Persons 
of the Trinity. We see something of the immeasurable 
superiority of the Lord Jesus to all who are nothing 
more than men. But still, when we have said all this, 
we must confess that there are heights and depths in 
this verse, which are beyond our feeble comprehension. 
We can only admire them in the spirit of little children ; 
for the half of them, we must feel, remains untold. 

Let us, however, draw from these words the great 
practical truth, that all power over everything that con- 
cerns our soul’s interests is placed in our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s hands. “ All things are delivered unto Him.”— 


118 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


He bears the keys: to Him we must go for admission 
into heaven.—He is the door: through Him we must 
enter—He is the Shepherd: we must hear His voice, 
and follow Him, if we would nor perish in the wilder- 
ness.—He is the Physician: we must apply to Him, 
if we would be healed of the plague of sin—He is the 
bread of life: we must feed on Him, if we would have 
our souls satisfied—He is the light: we must walk 
after Him if we would not wander in darkness—He 
is the fountain: we must wash in His blood, if we 
would be cleansed, and made ready for the great day 
of account. Blessed and glorious are these truths! It 
we have Christ, we have all things. (1 Cor. iii. 22.) 

Let us learn, in the last place, from this passage, the 
breadth and fulness of the invitations of Christ's Gospel. 

The three last verses of the chapter, which contain 
this lesson, are indeed precious. They meet the trem- 
bling sinner who asks, “ Will Christ reveal His Father's 
love to such an one as me?” with the most gracious 
encouragement. They are verses which deserve to be 
read with special attention. For eighteen hundred years 
they have been a blessing to the world, and have done 
good to myriads of souls. There is not a sentence in 
them which does not contain a mine of thought. 

We should mark who they are that Jesus invites. He 
does not address those who feel themselves righteous and 
worthy: He addresses “all that labour and are heavy 
laden.”—It is a wide description: it comprises multi- 
tudes in this weary world. All who feel a load on their 
heart, of which they would fain get free, a load of sin or 
a load of sorrow, a load of anxiety or a load of remorse, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XI. VER. 25—30, 119 


—all, whosoever they may be, and whatsoever their past 
lives,—all such are invited to come to Christ. 

We should mark what a gracious offer Jesus makes: 
“T will give you rest.—Ye shall find rest to your souls.” 
How cheering and comfortable are these words! Unrest 
is one great characteristic of the world. Hurry, vexa- 
tion, failure, disappointment, stare us in the face on 
every side. Buthereishope! There isan ark of refuge 
for the weary, as truly as there was for Noah’s dove. 
There is rest in Christ, rest of conscience, and rest of 
heart, rest built on pardon of all sin, rest flowing from 
peace with God. 

We should mark what a simple request Jesus makes 
to the labouring and heavy-laden ones. “Come unto 
Me :—Take my yoke upon you, learn of Me.” He inter- 
poses no hard conditions. He speaks nothing of work to 
be done first, and deservingness of His gifts to be estab- 
lished. He only asks us to come to Him just as we are, 
with all our sins, and to submit ourselves like little 
children to His teaching. “Go not,” He seems to say, “to 
man for relief. Wait not for help to arise from any other 
quarter. Just as you are, this very day, come to Me.” 

We should mark what an encouraging account Jesus 
gives of Himself. He says, “I am meek and lowly of 
heart.” How true that is, the experience of all the 
saints of God has often proved. Mary and Martha at 
Bethany, Peter after his fall, the disciples after the 
resurrection, Thomas after his cold unbelief, all tasted 
the “meekness and gentleness of Christ.” It is the 
only place in Scripture where the “heart” of Christ ig 
actually named. It is a saying never to be forgotten. 


120 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We should mark, lastly, the encouraging account that 
Jesus gives of His service. He says, “ My yoke is easy, 
and my burden is light.” No doubt there is a cross to 
be carried, if we follow Christ. No doubt there are trials 
to be endured, and battles to be fought. But the com- 
forts of the Gospel far outweigh the cross. Compared to 
the service of the world and sin, compared to the yoke 
of, Jewish ceremonies, and the bondage of human super- 
stition, Christ’s service is in the highest sense easy and 
light. His yoke is no more a burden than the feathers 
are to a bird. His commandments are not grievous. His 
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all His paths are 
peace. (1 John v. 3; Prov. iii. 17.) 

And now comes the solemn inquiry, “Have we ac- 
cepted this invitation for ourselves? Have we no sins 
to be forgiven, no griefs to be removed, no wounds of 
conscience to be healed?” Let us hear Christ’s voice: 
He speaks to us as well as to the Jews. He says, “Come 
unto Me.”’—Here is the key to true happiness; here is 
the secret of having a light heart. All turns and hinges 
on an acceptance of this offer of Christ. 

May we never be satisfied till we know and feel that 
we have come to Christ by faith for rest, and do still 
come to Him for fresh supplies of grace every day! If 
we have come to Him already, let us learn to cleave to 
Him more closely. If we have never come to Him yet, 
let us begin to come to-day. His word shall never be 
broken: “Him that cometh unto Me, I will in no wise 
cast out.” (John vi. 37.) 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 1—13. 121 


MATTHEW XII. 1—13. 


1 At that time Jesus went on | meaneth, I will have merey, and 
the sabbath day through the corn; | not sacrifice, ye would not haye 
and his disciples were an hungred, | condemned the guiltless. 
and began to pluck the ears of corn, 8 For the Son of man is Lord 
and to eat. even of the sabbath day. 

_2 But when the Pharisees saw 9 And when he was departed 
it, they said unto him, Behold, thy | thence, he went into their syna- 
disciples do that which is not law- | gogue: 

ful to do upon the sabbath day. 10 And, behold, there was a man 

3 But he said unto them, Have | which had his hand withered. And 
ye not read what David did, when | they asked him, saying, Is it lawful 
he was an hungred, and they that | to heal on the sabbath days? that 
were with him ; they might accuse him. 

4 How he entered into the house 11 And he said unto them, What 
of God, and did eat the shewbread, | man shall there be among you, 
which was not lawful for him to | that shall have one sheep, and if 
eat, neither for them which were ! it fall into a pit on the sabbath 
with him, but only for the priests? day, will he not lay hold on it, and 

5 Or have ye not read in the law, lift ¢¢ out? 
how that on the sabbath days the 12 Howmuchthenisa man better 
priests in the temple profane the thanasheep? Wherefore itis law- 
sabbath, and are blameless ? ful to do well on the sabbath days. 

6 But I say unto you, That in 13 Then saith he to the man, 
this place is one greater than the Stretch forth thine hand. And he 
temple. | stretched it forth; and it was res- 

7 But if ye had known what this ' tored whole, like as the other. 





THE one great subject which stands out prominently in 
this passage of Scripture, is the Sabbath day. Itisa 
subject on which strange opinions prevailed among the 
Jews in our Lord’s time. The Pharisees had added to 
the teaching of Scripture about it, and overlaid the true 
character of the day with the traditions of men. Itisa 
subject on which divers opinions have often been held 
in the Churches of Christ, and wide differences exist 
among men at the present time. Let us see what we 
may learn about it from our Lord’s teaching in these 
yerses. 

Let us learn, in the first place, from this passage, that 
our Lord Jesus Christ does not do away with the observance 
of a weekly Sabbath day. He neither does so here nor 
elsewhere in the four Gospels. We often find His 
opinion expressed about Jewish errors on the subject of 


BOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOK 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


122 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the Sabbath. But we do not find a word to teach us 
that His disciples were not to keep a Sabbath at all. 

It is of much importance to observe this. The mis- 
takes that have arisen from a superficial consideration of 
our Lord’s sayings on the Sabbath question, are neither 
few nor small. Thousands have rushed to the hasty con- 
clusion that Christians have nothing to do with the 
fourth commandment, and that it is no more binding on 
us than the Mosaic law about sacrifices. There is nothing 
in the New Testament to justify any such conclusion. 

The plain truth is that our Lord did not abolish the law 
of the weekly Sabbath. He only freed it from incorrect 
interpretations, and purified it from man-made additions. 
He did not tear out of the decalogue the fourth command- 
ment. He only stripped off the miserable traditions with 
which the Pharisees had incrusted the day, and by which 
they had made it, not a blessing, but a burden. He left 
the fourth commandment where He found it,—a part of 
the eternal law of God, of which no jot or tittle was 
ever to pass away. May we never forget this! 

Let us learn, in the second place, from this passage, 
that our Lord Jesus Christ allows all works of real neces- 
sity and mercy to be done on the Sabbath day. 

This is a principle which is abundantly established in 
the passage of Scripture we are now considering. We 
find our Lord justifying His disciples for plucking the 
ears of corn on a Sabbath: it was an act permitted in 
Scripture. (Deut. xxiii. 25.) They “were an hungred,” 
and in need of food: therefore they were not to blame. 
—We find Him maintaining the lawfulness of healing 
a sick man on the Sabbath day. The man was suffering 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 1—18. 123 


from disease and pain: in such a case it was no breach 
of God’s commandment to afford relief. We ought 
never to rest from doing good. 

The arguments by which our Lord supports the lawful- 
ness of any work of necessity and mercy on the Sabbath, 
are striking and unanswerable. He reminds the Phari- 
sees, who charge Him and His disciples with breaking 
the law, how David and his men, for want of other 
food, had eaten the holy shew-bread out of the taber- 
nacle-—He reminds them how the priests in the temple 
are obliged to do work on the Sabbath, by slaying animals 
and offering sacrifices—He reminds them how even a 
sheep would be helped out of a pit on the Sabbath, 
rather than aJlowed to suffer and die, by any one of them- 
selves—Above all, He lays down the great principle 
that no ordinance of God is to be pressed so far as to 
make us neglect the plain duties of charity. “TI will 
have mercy, and not sacrifice.” The first table of the 
law is not to be so interpreted as to make us break the 
second. Thefourth commandment isnot to besoexplained 
as to make us unkind and unmerciful to our neighbour. 
There is deep wisdom in all this. We are reminded of 
the saying, “ Never man spake like this man.” 

In leaving the subject, let us beware that we are never 
tempted to take low views of the sanctity of the Chris- 
tian Sabbath. Let us take care that we do not make our 
gracious Lord’s teaching an excuse for Sabbath profa- 
nation. Let us not abuse the liberty which He has so 
clearly marked out for us, and pretend that we do things 
on the Sabbath from “necessity and mercy,” which in 


reality we do for our own selfish gratification. 
k 


124 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is great reason for warning people on this 
point. The mistakes of the Pharisee about the Sabbath 
were in one direction; the mistakes of the Christian 
are in another. The Pharisee pretended to add to the 
holiness of the day; the Christian is too often disposed 
to take away from that holiness, and to keep the day in 
an idle, profane, irreverent manner. May we all watch 
our own conduct on this subject! Saving Christianity 
is closely bound up with Sabbath observance. May we 
never forget that our great aim should be to “keep the 
Sabbath holy !”’ Works of necessity may be done: “ It is 
lawful to do well,” and showmercy. But to give the Sab- 
bath to idleness, pleasure-seeking, or the world, is utterly 
unlawful. It is contrary to the example of Christ, and 
a sin against a plain commandment of God. 


MATTHEW XII. 1421. 


14 Then the Pharisees went out, 
and held a council against him, 
how they might destroy him. 

15 But when Jesus knew it, he 
withdrew himself from thence: and 
great multitudes followed him, and 
he healed them all; 

16 And charged them that they 
should not make him known: 

17 That it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by Hsaias the 
prophet, saying, 

18 Behold my servant, whom I 


have chosen : my beloved, in whom 
my soul is well pleased : I will put 
my spirit upon him, and he shall 
shew judgment to the Gentiles. 

19 He shall not strive, nor cry; 
neither shall any man hear his 
voice in the streets. 

20 A bruised reed shall he not 
break, and smoking flax shall he 
not quench, till he send forth judg- 
ment unto victory. 

21 And in his name shall the 
Gentiles trust. 


TuE first thing which demands our notice in this passage, 
is the desperate wickedness of the human heart, which it 
exemplifies. Silenced and defeated by our Lord’s argu- 
ments, the Pharisees plunged deeper and deeper into sin. 
They “went out and held a council against Him how 
they might destroy Him.” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 14—2]. 125 


What evil had our Lord done, that He should be so 
treated? None, none at all: no charge could be brought 
against His life. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, and 
separate from sinners; His days were spent in doing 
good.—No charge could be brought against His teach- 
ing: He had proved it to be agreeable to Scripture and 
reason, and no reply had been made to His proofs, But 
it mattered little how perfectly He lived or taught. He 
was hated. 

This is human nature appearing in its true colours! 
The unconverted heart hates God, and will show its 
hatred whenever it dares, and has a favourable oppor- 
tunity. It will persecute God’s witnesses; it will 
dislike all who have anything of God’s mind, and are 
renewed after His image. Why were so many of the 
prophets killed? Why were the names of the apostles 
cast out as evil by the Jews? Why were the early 
martyrs slain? Why were John Huss, and Jerome of 
Prague, and Ridley, and Latimer burned at the stake ? 
Not for any sins that they had sinned,—not for any 
wickedness they had committed. They all suffered 
because they were godly men. And human nature, 
unconverted, hates godly men, because it hates God. 

It must never surprise true Christians if they meet 
with the same treatment that the Lord Jesus met with. 
“Marvel not if the world hates you.” (1 John iii. 13.) 
It is not the utmost consistency, or the closest walk with 
God, that will exempt them from the enmity of the 
natural man. They need not torture their consciences 
by fancying that if they were only more faultless and 
consistent, everybody would surely love them, This is a 


126 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


completemistake. They should remember, that there was 
never but one perfect man on earth, and that He was not 
loved, buthated. Itisnottheinfirmities of abeliever that 
the world dislikes, but his godliness. Itisnot the remains 
of the old nature that call forth the world’s enmity, 
but the exhibition of the new. Let us remember these 
things, and be patient. The world hated Christ, and the 
world will hate Christians. 

The second thing which demands our notice in this 
passage, is the encouraging description of our Lord Jesus 
Christ's character, which St. Matthew draws from the 
prophet Isaiah. “A bruised reed shall He not break, 
and smoking flax shall He not quench.” 

What are we to understand by the bruised reed, and 
smoking flax? The language of the prophet no doubt is 
figurative. What is it that these two expressions mean ? 
The simplest explanation seems to be, that the Holy 
Ghost is here describing persons whose grace is at present 
weak, whose repentence is feeble, and whose faith is 
small. Towards such persons the Lord Jesus Christ will 
be very tender and compassionate. Weak as the bruised 
reed is, it shall not be broken. Small as the spark of 
fire may be within the smoking flax, it shall not be 
quenched. It is a standing truth in the kingdom of 
grace, that weak grace, weak faith, and weak repentance, 
are all precious in our Lord’s sight. Mighty as He is, 
“He despiseth not any.” (Job xxxvi. 5.) 

The doctrine here laid down is full of comfort and con- 
solation. There are thousands in every Church of Christ 
to whom it ought to speak peace and hope. There 
are some in every congregation that hears the Gospel, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. Xit. VER. 14—21. 127 


who are ready to despair of their own salvation, because 
their strength seems sosmall. They are full of fears and 
despondency, because their knowledge, and faith, and 
hope, and love, appear so dwarfish and diminutive. Let 
them drink comfort out of this text. Let them know 
that weak faith gives a man as real and true an interest 
in Christ as strong faith, though it may not give him 
the same joy. There is life in an infant as truly as in 
a grown-up man; there is fire in aspark as truly as in 
a burning flame. The least degree of grace is an ever- 
lasting possession. It comes down from heaven. It is 
precious in our Lord’s eyes. It shall never be over- 
thrown. 

Does Satan make light of the beginnings of repentance 
towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ ? 
No: indeed, he does not! He has great wrath, because 
he sees his time is short.—Do the angels of God think 
lightly of the first signs of penitence and feeling after 
God in Christ? No: indeed, “there is joy” among 
them, when they behold the sight! Does the Lord Jesus 
regard no faith and repentance with interest, unless they 
are strong and mighty? “No: indeed! As soon as that 
“bruised reed,” Saul of Tarsus, begins to cry to Him, 
He sends Ananias to him, saying, “ Behold he prayeth.” 
(Acts ix. 11.) We err greatly if we do not encourage 
the very first movements of a soul towards Christ. Let 
the ignorant world scoff and mock, if it will; we may 
be sure that “bruised reeds” and “smoking flax” are 
very precious in our Lord’s eyes. 

May we all lay these things to heart, and use them in 
time of need, both for ourselves and others! It should 


128 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


be a standing maxim in our religion,—that a spark is 
better than utter darkness; and little faith better than 
no faith at all. ‘Who hath despised the day of small 
things?” (Zech. iv. 10.) It is not despised by Christ. 


It ought not to be despised by Christians. 





MATTHEW XII. 22—37. 


22 Then was brought unto him | 
one possessed with a devil, blind, 
and dumb: and he healed him, in- 
somuch that the blind and dumb ! 
both spake and saw. 

23 And all the people were ama- 
zed, and said, Is not this the Son 
of David ? | 

24 But when the Pharisees heard ; 
it, they said, This fellow doth not { 
cast out devils, but by Beelzebub {| 
the prince of the devils. 

25 And Jesus knew their 
thoughts, and said unto them, 
Every kingdom divided against 
itself is brought to desolation ; 
and every city or house divided 
against itself shall not stand: 

26 And if Satan cast out Satan, 
he is divided against himself; how 
shall then his kingdom stand ? | 

27 And if I by Beelzebub cast 
out devils, by whom do your chil- 





dren cast them out? therefore they 
shall be your judges. 

28 But if I cast out devils by the 

Spirit of God, then the kingdom of 
God is come unto you. 
_ 29 Or else how can one enter 
into a strong man’s house, and 
spoil his goods, except he first 
bind the strong man? and then 
he will spoil his house. 

30 He that is not with me is 


against me; and he that gather- 
eth not with me scattereth abroad. 

31 Wherefore I say unto you, All 
manner of sin and blasphemy shall 
be forgiven unto men: but the 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost 
shall not be forgiven unto men. 

82 And whosoever speaketh a 
word against the Son of man, it 
shall be forgiven him : but whoso- 
ever speaketh against the Holy 
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven 
him, neither in this world, neither 
in the world to come. 

33 Hither make the tree good, and 
his fruit good; or else make the 
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt - 
for the tree is known by his fruit, 

34 O generation of vipers, how 
can ye, being evil, speak good 
things? for out of the abundance 
of the heart the mouth speaketh. 

35 A good man out of the good 
treasure of the heart bringeth forth 
good things: and an evil man out 
of the evil treasure bringeth forth 
evil things. 

36 But I say unto you, That 
every idle word that men shall 
speak, they shall give account 
thereof in the day of Judgment. 

37 For by thy words thou shalt 
be justified, and by thy words thou 
shalt be condemned. 


THIS passage of Scripture contains “things hard to be 
understood.” The sin against the Holy Ghost in particu- 
lar has never been fully explained by the most learned 
divines. It is not difficult to show from Scripture what 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 22— 87. 129 


the sin is not: it is difficult to show clearly what it 
is. We must not be surprised. The Bible would not 
be the book of God, if it had not deep places here and 
there, which man has no line to fathom. Let us rather 
thank God that there are lessons of wisdom to be 
gathered, even out of these verses, which the unlearned 
may easily understand. 

Let us gather from them, in the first place, that there 
is nothing too blasphemous for hardened and prejudiced 
men to say against religion. Our Lord casts out a devil; 
and at once the Pharisees declare that He does it “by 
the prince of the devils.” 

This was an absurd charge. Our Lord shows that it 
was unreasonable to suppose that the devil would help 
to pull down his own kingdom, and “Satan cast out 
Satan.” But there is nothing too absurd and unreason- 
able for men to say, when they are thoroughly set against 
religion. The Pharisees are not the only people who 
have lost sight of logic, good sense, and temper, when 
they have attacked the Gospel of Christ. 

Strange as this charge may sound, it is one that has 
often been made against the servants of God. Their 
enemies have been obliged to confess that they are doing 
a work, and producing an effect on the world. The 
results of Christian labour stare them in the face: they 
cannot deny them. What then shall they say? They 
say the very thing that the Pharisees said of our Lord, 
“Tt is the devil.” The early heretics used language of 
this kindabout Athanasius. The Roman Catholicsspread 
reports of this sort about Martin Luther. Such things 
will be said as long as the world stands. 


130 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We must never be surprised to hear of dreadful 
charges being made against the best of men, without 
cause. “If they called the Master of the house Beelze- 
bub, how much more shall they call them of His house- 
hold ?”—It is an old device. When the Christian’s 
arguments cannot be answered, and the Christian’s works 
cannot be denied, the last resource of the wicked is to 
try to blacken the Christian’s character. If this be our 
lot, let us bear it patiently. Having Christ and a good 
conscience, we may be content. False charges will not 
keep us out of heaven. Our character will be cleared 
at the last day. 

In the second place, let us gather from these verses 
the impossibility of neutrality in religion. “He that is 
not with Christ is against Him, and he that gathereth 
not with Him, scattereth abroad.” 

There are many persons in every age of the Church, 
who need to have this lesson pressed upon them. They 
endeavour to steer a middle course in religion. They are 
not so bad as many sinners, but still they are not saints. 
They feel the truth of Christ’s Gospel, when it is brought 
before them; but they are afraid to confess what they 
feel. Because they have these feelings, they flatter 
themselves they are not so bad as others; and yet they 
shrink from the standard of faith and practice which the 
Lord Jesus sets up. They are not boldly fighting on 
Christ’s side, and yet they are not openly against Him. 
Our Lord warns all such that they are in a dangerous 
position. There are only two parties in religious mat- 
ters: there are only two camps: there are only two 
sides. Are we with Christ, and working in His cause? 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 22—37. 131 


If not, we are against Him. Are we doing good in the 
world? If not, we are doing harm. 

The principle here laid down is one which it concerns 
us all to remember. Let us settle it in our minds that 
we shall never have peace and do good to others unless 
we are thorough-going and decided in our Christianity. 
The way of Gamaliel never yet brought happiness and 
usefulness to any one, and never will. (Acts v. 34-39.) 

In the third place, let us gather from these verses the 
exceeding sinfulness of sins against knowledge. 

This is a practical conclusion which appears to flow 
naturally from our Lord’s words about the blasphemy 
against the Holy Ghost. Difficult as these words un- 
doubtedly are, they seem fairly to prove that there are 
degrees in sin. Offences arising from ignorance of the 
true mission of the Son of man, will not be punished so 
heavily as offences committed against the noontide light 
of the dispensation of the Holy Ghost. The brighter 
the light, the greater the guilt of him who rejects it. 
The clearer a man’s knowledge of the nature of the 
Gospel, the greater his sin, if he wilfully refuses to 
repent and believe. 

The doctrine here taught is one that does not stand 
alonein Scripture. St. Paul says to the Hebrews, “ It is 
impossible for those who were once enlightened, if they 
shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance ;”— 
“If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacri- 
fice for sins, but a fearfil looking for of judgment.” 
(Heb. vi. 4—6 ; x. 26, 27.) It is a doctrine of which we 
find mournful proofs in every quarter. The unconverted 


132 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


children of godly parents, the unconverted servants of 
godly families, and the unconverted members of evan- 
gelical congregations, are the hardest people on earth 
to impress. They seem past feeling. The same fire 
which melts the wax hardens the clay.—It is a doctrine, 
moreover, which receives awful confirmation from the 
histories of some whose last ends were eminently hope- 
less. Pharaoh, and Saul, and Ahab, and Judas Iscariot, 
and Julian, and Francis Spira, are fearful illustrations of 
our Lord’s meaning. In each of these cases there was a 
combination of clear knowledge and deliberate rejection 
of Christ. In each there was light in the head, but 
hatred of truth in the heart. And the end of each 
seems to have been “blackness of darkness for ever.” 

May God give usa will to use our knowledge, whether 
it be little or great! May we beware of neglecting our 
opportunities, and leaving our privileges unimproved! 
Have we light? Then let us live fully up to our light. 
Do we know the truth? Then let us walk in the truth. 
This is the best safeguard against the unpardonable 
sin. 

In the last place, let us gather from these verses the 
immense importance of carefulness about our daily words. 
Our Lord tells us, that “for every idle word that men 
shall speak, they shall give account in the day of judg- 
ment.” And He adds, “By thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” 

There are few of our Lord’s sayings which are so 
heart-searching as this. There is nothing, perhaps, to 
which most men pay less attention than their words, 
They go through their daily work, speaking and talking 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 2237, 133 


without thought or reflection, and seem to fancy that if 
they do what is right, it matters but little what they say. 
But is itso? Are our words so utterly trifling and 
unimportant? We dare not say so, with such a passage 
of Scripture as this before our eyes. Our words are the 
evidence of the state of our hearts, as surely as the taste 
of the water is an evidence of the state of the spring. 
“Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.” 
The lips only utter what the mind conceives. Our words 
will form one subject of inquiry at the day of judgment: 
we shall have to give account of our sayings, as well as 
of our doings. Truly these are very solemn conside- 
rations. If there were no other text in the Bible, this 
passage ought to convince us, that we are all “guilty 
before God,” and need a righteousness better than our 
own, even the righteousness of Christ. (Phil. iii. 9.) 
Let us be humble as we read this passage, in the 
recollection of time past. How many idle, foolish, vain, 
light, frivolous, sinful, and unprofitable things we have 
all said! How many words we have used which, like 
thistle-down, have flown far and wide, and sown mischief 
in the hearts of others, that will never die! How often, 
when we have met our friends, “our conversation,” to 
use an old saint’s expression, “has only made work for 
repentance.” There is deep truth in the remark of 
Burkitt, ‘A profane scoff or atheistical jest may stick in 
the minds of those who hear it, after the tongue that 
spake it is dead. A word spoken is physically transient, 
but morally permanent.” “Death and life,” says Solomon, 
“are in the power of the tongue.” (Prov. xviii. 21.) 
Let us be watchful as we read this passage about words, 


134 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


when we look forward to our days yet: tocome. Let us 
resolve, by God’s grace, to be more careful over our 
tongues,and more particular about our use of them. Let 
us pray daily that our “Speech may be always with 
grace.” (Coloss.iv. 6.) Let us say every morning with 
holy David, “I will take heed to my ways, that I sin 
not with my tongue.” Let us cry with him to the Strong 
One for strength, and say, “Set a watch before my mouth, 
and keep the door of my lips.” Well indeed might St. 
James say, “If any man offend not in word, the same is 
a perfect man.” (Psal. xxxix. 1; cxli. 3; James iii. 2.) 


MATTHEW XII. 38—50. 


38 Then certain of the scribes 
and of the Pharisees answered, 
saying, Master, we would see a 
sign from thee. 

39 But he answered and said 
unto them, An eyil and adulterous 
generation seeketh after a sign; 
and there shall no sign be given 
to it, but the sign of the prophet 
Jonas: 

40 For as Jonas was three days 
and three nights in the whale’s 
belly : so shall the son of man be 
three days and three nights in the 
heart of the earth. 

41 The men of Nineveh shall rise 
in judgment with this generation, 
and shall condemn it: because they 
repented at the preaching of Jonas: 
and, behold, a greater than Jonas 
is here. 

42 The queen of the south shall 
rise up in the judgment with this 
generation, and shall condemn it: 
for she came from the uttermost 
parts of the earth to hear the wis- 
dom of Solomon: and, behold, a 
greater than Solomon is here. 

43 When the unclean spirit is 
gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places, seeking rest, 





and findeth none. 

44 Then he saith, I will return 
into my house from whence I came 
out ; and when he is come, he find- 
eth it empty, swept, and garnished. 

45 Then goeth he, and taketh 
with himself seven other spirits 
more wicked than himself, and 
they enter in and dwell there: and 
the last state of that man is worse 
than the first. Even so shall it be 
also unto this wicked generation. 

46 While he yet talked to the 
people, behold, his mother and his 
brethren stood without, desiring to 
speak with him. 

47 Then one said unto him, Be- 
hold, thy mother and thy brethren 
stand without, desiring to speak 
with thee. 

48 But he answered and said 
unto him that told him, Who is my 
mother, and who are my brethren ? 

49 And he stretched forth his 
hand toward his disciples, and 
said, Behold my mother and my 
brethren ! 

50 For whosoever shall do the 
will of my Father which is in hea- 
ven, the same is my brother, and 
sister, and mother, 


THE beginning of this passage is one of those places 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 88—50. 135 


which strikingly illustrate the truth of Old Testament 
History. Our Lord speaks of the Queen of the South, 
as a real true person, who had lived and died. He refers 
to the story of Jonah, and his miraculous preservation in 
the whale’s belly, as undeniable matters of fact. Let us 
remember this if we hear men professing to believe the 
writers of the New Testament, and yet sncering at the 
things recorded in the Old Testament, as if they were 
fables. Such men forget that in so doing they pour 
contempt upon Christ Himself. The authority of the 
Old Testament and the authority of the New stand or 
fall together. The same spirit inspired men to write of 
Solomon and Jonah, who inspired the Evangelists to 
write of Christ. These are not unimportant points in 
this day: let them be well fixed in our minds. 

The first practical lesson which demands our attention 
in these verses, is the amazing power of unbelief. 

We should mark how the scribes and Pharisees call 
upon our Lord to show them more miracles. “Master, 
we would see a sign from Thee.” They pretended that 
they only wanted more evidence in order to be convinced 
and become disciples. They shut their eyes to the many 
wonderful works which Jesus had already done. It was 
not enough for them that he had healed the sick, and 
cleansed the lepers, raised the dead, and cast out devils, 
They were not yet persuaded ; they yet demanded more 
proof. They would not see what our Lord plainly 
pointed at in His reply,—that they had no real will to 
believe. There was evidence enough to convince them, 
but they had no wish to be convinced. 

There are many in the Church of Christ who are 


136 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


exactly in the state of these scribes and Pharisees. They 
flatter themselves that they only require a little more 
proof in order to become decided Christians. They fancy 
that if their reason and intellect could only be met with 
some additional arguments, they would at once give up 
all for Christ’s sake, take up the cross, and follow Him. 
But in the mean time they wait. Alas, for their 
blindness! They will not see that there is abundance of 
evidence on every side of them. The truth is that they 
do not want to be convinced. 

May we all be on our guard against the spirit of 
unbelief. It is a growing evil in these latter days. 
Want of simple childlike faith is an increasing feature 
of the times, in every rank of society. The true expla- 
nation of a hundred strange things that startle us in 
the conduct of leading men in Churches and States, is 
downright want of faith. Men who do not believe all 
that God says in the Bible, must necessarily take a 
vacillating and undecided line on moral and religious 
questions. “If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not 
be established.” (Isaiah vii. 9.) 

The second practical lesson which meets us in these 
verses is the ammense danger of a portial and imperfect 
religious reformation. 

We should mark what an awful picture our Lord 
draws of the man to whom the unclean spirit returns, 
after having once left him. How fearful are those words: 
“T will return into my house from whence I came out!” 
How vivid that description: “He findeth it empty, 
swept, and garnished!” How tremendous the conclusion ; 
“He taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 38 —50. 137 


than himself—and the last state of that man is worse 
than the first!” It is a picture most painfully full of 
meaning. Let us scan it closely, and learn wisdom. 

It is certain that we have in this picture the history 
of the Jewish church and nation at the time of our Lord’s 
coming. Called as they were at first out of Egypt to be 
God's peculiar people, they never seem to have wholly 
lost the tendency to worship idols. Redeemed as they 
afterwards were from the captivity of Babylon, they 
never seem to have rendered to God a due return for 
His goodness. Aroused as they had been by John the 
Baptist’s preaching, their repentance appears to have 
been only skin-deep. At the time when our Lord 
spoke they had become, as a nation, hardy and more 
perverse thanever. The grossness of idol-worship had 
given place to the deadness of mere formality. “Seven 
other spirits worse than the first” had taken possession 
of them. Their last state was rapidly becoming worse 
than the first. After forty years their iniquity came 
to the full. They madly plunged into a war with Rome; 
Judea became a very Babel of confusion ; Jerusalem 
was taken; the Temple was destroyed: the Jews were 
scattered over the face of the earth. 

Again it is highly probable that we have in this pic- 
ture the history of the whole body of Christian Churches. 
Delivered as they were from heathen darkness by the 
preaching of the Gospel, they have never really lived 
up to their light. Revived as many of them were at the 
time of the Protestant Reformation, they have none of 
them made a right use of their privileges, or “gone on 
to perfection.” They have all more or less stopped short 


138 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and settled on their lees. They have all been too ready 
to be satisfied with mere external amendments. And 
now there are painful symptoms in many quarters that 
the “evil spirit has returned to his house,” and is pre- 
paring an outbreak of infidelity and false doctrine, such 
as the Churches have never yet seen. Between unbelief 
in some quarters, and formal superstition in others, 
everything seems ripe for some fearful manifestation 
of anti-christ. It may well be feared that “the last 
state” of the professing Christian Churches will prove 
“worse than the first.” 

Saddest and worst of all, we have in this picture the 
history of many an individuals soul. There are men 
who seemed at one time of their lives to be under the 
influence of strong religious feelings. They reformed 
their ways. They laid aside many things that were 
bad; they took up many things that were good. But 
they stopped there, and went no further, and by and by 
gave up religion altogether. The evil spirit returned 
to their hearts, and found them “empty, swept, and 
garnished.” They are now worse than they ever were 
before. Their consciences seem seared ; their sense of 
religious things appears entirely destroyed; they are 
like men given over to a reprobate mind. One would 
say it was “impossible to renew them to repentance.” 
None prove so hopelessly wicked as those who after 
experiencing strong religious convictions have gone back 
again to sin and the world. 

If we love life, let us pray that these lessons may be 
deeply impressed on our minds. Let us never be content 
with a partial reformation of life, without thorough con- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 88—5U, 139 


version to God, and mortification of the whole body of 
sin. It is a good thing to strive to cast sin out of our 
hearts; but let us take care that we also receive the 
grace of God in its place. Let us make sure that we 
not only get rid of the old tenant, the devil, but have 
also got dwelling in us the Holy Ghost. 

The last practical lesson which meets us in these 
verses is the tender affection with which the Lord Jesus 
regards His true disciples. 

We should mark how He speaks of every one who does 
the will of His Father in heaven. He says, “the same 
is My brother, and sister, and mother.” What gracious 
words these are! Who can conceive the depth of our 
dear Lord’s love towards His relatives according to the 
flesh? It was a pure, unselfish love. It must have 
been a mighty love, a love that passes man’s under- 
standing. Yet here we see that all His believing people 
are counted as His relatives. He loves them, feels for 
them, cares for them, as members of His family, bone of 
His bone, and flesh of His flesh. 

There is a solemn warning here to all who mock and 
persecute true Christians on account of their religion. 
They consider not what they are doing. They are perse- 
cuting the near relatives of the King of kings. They 
will find at the last day that they have mocked those 
whom the Judge of all regards as “ His brother, and 
sister, and mother.” 

There is rich encouragement here for all believers. 
They are far more precious in their Lord’s eyes than 
they are in theirown. Their faith may be feeble, their 


repentance weak, their strength small. They may be 
i 


140 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


poor and needy in this world. But there is a glorious 
“ whosoever” in the last verse of this chapter which 
ought tocheer them. “ Whosoever” believes is a near 
relative of Christ. The Elder Brother will provide for 
him in time and eternity, and never let him be cast 
away. There is not one “little sister” in the family of 
the redeemed, whom Jesus does not remember. (Cant. 
viii. 8.) Joseph provided richly for all his relatives, and 
the Lord Jesus will provide for His. 


MATTHEW XIII. 1—23. 


1 Thesame day went Jesus outof 
the house, and sat by the sea side. 

2 And great multitudes were ga- 
thered together unto him,so that he 
went into a ship, and sat; and the 
whole multitude stood on the shore. 

8 And he spake many things 
unto them in parables, saying, Be- 
hold, a sower went forth to sow; 

4 And when he sowed, some seeds 
fell by the way side, and the fowls 
came and devoured them up: 

5 Some fell upon stony places, 
where they had not much earth: 
and forthwith they sprung up, be- 
cause they had no deepness of earth: 

6 And when the sun was up, they 
were scorched ; and because they 
had no root, they withered away. 

7 And some fell among thorns ; 
and the thorns sprung up, and 
choked them : 

8 But other fell into good 
ground, and brought forth fruit, 
some an hundredfold, some sixty- 
fold, some thirtyfold. 

9 Who hath ears to hear, let 
him hear. 

10 And the disciples came, and 
said unto him, Why speakest thou 
unto them in parables P 

11 He answered and said unto 
them, Because it is given unto you 
to know the mysteries of the king- 
dom of heaven, but to them it is 
not given. 

12 For whosoever hath, to him 





shall be given, and he shall have 
more abundance: but whosoever 
hath not, from him shall be taken 
away even that he hath. 

13 Therefore speak I to them in 
parables: because they seeing see 
not; and hearing they hear not, 
neither do they understand. 

14 And in them is fulfilled the 
prophecy of Hsaias, which saith, By 
hearing ye shall hear, and shall 
not understand; and seeing ye 
shall see, and shall not perceive: 

15 For this people’s heart is 
waxed gross, and their ears are dull 
of hearing, and their eyes they have 
closed; lest at any time they should 
see with their eyes, and hear with 
their ears, and should understand 
with their heart, and should be 
converted, and I should heal them. 

16 But blessed are your eyes, for 
they see; and your ears, for they 
hear. 

17 For verily I say unto you, 
That many prophets and righteous 
men have desired to see those things 
which ye see, and have not seen 
them; and to hear those things 
which ye hear, and have not heard 
them. 

18 Hear ye therefore the parable 
of the sower. 

19 When any one heareth the 
word of the kingdom, and under- 
standeth it not, then cometh the 
wicked one, and catcheth away that 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XII. VER. 1—23.° 


which was sown 1n his heart. This 
is he which received seed by the 
way side. 

20 But he that received the seed 
into stony places, the same is he 
that heareth the word, and anon 
with joy receiveth it; 

21 Yet hath he not root in him- 
self, but dureth for a while: for 
when tribulation or persecution 
ariseth because of the word, by and 
by he is offended. 





141 


22 He also that received seed 
among the thorns is he that hear- 
eth the word; and the care of this 
world, and the deceitfulness of 
riches, choke the word, and he 
becometh unfruitful. 

23 But be that received seed into 
the good ground is he that heareth 
the word, and understandeth it ; 
which also beareth fruit, and bring- 
eth forth, some an hundredfold, 
some sixty, some thirty. 


THE chapter which these verses begin is remarkable for 
the number of parables which it contains. Seven striking 
illustrations of spiritual truth are here drawn by the great 
Head of the Church from the book of nature. By so 
doing He shows us that religious teaching may draw helps 
from everything in creation. Those that would “ find out 
acceptable words,” should not forget this. (He. xii. 10.) 

The parable of the Sower, which begins this chapter, is 
one of those parables which admit of a very wide applica- 
tion. It is being continually verified under our own eyes. 
Wherever the Word of God is preached or expounded, 
and people are assembled to hear it, the sayings of our 
Lord in this parable are found to be true. It describes 
what goes on, as a general rule, in all congregations. 

Let us learn, in the first place, from this parable, that 
the work of the preacher resembles that of the sower. 

Like the sower, the preacher must sow good seed, if 
he wants to see fruit. He must sow the pure Word of 
God, and not the traditions of the Church, or the doc- 
trines of men. Without this, his labour will be vain. 
He may go to and fro, and seem to say much, and to 
work much in his weekly round of ministerial duty ; but 
there will be no harvest of souls for heaven, no living 
results, and no conversions. 


142 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Like the sower, the preacher must be diligent. He 
must spare no pains. He must use every possible means 
to make his work prosper. He must patiently “sow be- 
side all waters,” and “sow in hope.” He must be “instant 
in season and out of season.” He must not be deterred 
by difficulties and discouragements. “He that observeth 
the wind shall not sow.” No doubt his success does not 
entirely depend upon his labour and diligence; but with- 
out labour and diligence success will not be obtained. 
(Isa. xxxii. 20; 2 Tim. iv. 2; Eccles. xi. 4.) 

Like the sower, the preacher cannot give life. He can 
scatter the seed committed to his charge, but he cannot 
command it to grow. He may offer the word of truth to 
a people, but he cannot make them receive it and bear 
fruit. To give life is God’s solemn prerogative: “It 
is the Spirit that quickeneth.” God alone can “give 
the increase.” (John vi. 63; 1 Cor. iii. 7.) 

‘Let these things sink down into our hearts. It is no 
light thing to be areal minister of God’s Word. To 
be an idle, formal workman in the Church is an easy 
business: to be a faithful sower is very hard. Preachers 
ought to be specially remembered in our prayers. 

In the next place, let us learn from this passage that 
there are various ways of hearing the Word of God with- 
out benefit. 

We may listen to a sermon with a heart like the hard 
“way side,” careless, thoughtless, and unconcerned. 
Christ crucified may be affectionately set before us, and 
we may hear of His sufferings with utter indifference, 
as a subject in which we have no interest. Fast as the 
words fall on our ears, the devil may pluck them away, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 1—23. 143 


and we may go home as if we had not heard a sermon 
at all. Alas, there are many such hearers! It is as 
true of them as of the idols of old, “eyes have they, 
but they see not; they have ears, but they hear not.” 
(Psa. cxxxv. 16, 17.) Truth seems to have no more 
_ effect on their hearts than water on a stone. 

We may listen to a sermon with pleasure, while the 
impression produced on us is only temporary and short- 
lived. Our hearts, like the “stony ground,” may yield 
a plentiful crop of warm feelings and good resolutions, 
But all this time there may be no deeply-rooted work in 
our souls, and the first cold blast of opposition or temp- 
tation may cause our seeming religion to wither away. 
Alas, there are many such hearers! The mere love of 
sermons is no sign of grace. Thousands of baptized 
people are like the Jews of Ezekiel’s day: “Thou art 
unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a 
pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument ; for 
they hear thy words, but they do them not.” (Ezek. 
Xxxiii. 32.) 

We may listen to a sermon, and approve of every 
word it contains, and yet get no good from it, in conse- 
quence of the absorbing influence of this world. Our 
hearts, like the “thorny ground,” may be choked with a 
rank crop of cares, pleasures, and worldly plans. We 
may really like the Gospel, and wish to obey it, and 
yet insensibly give it no chance of bearing fruit, by 
allowing other things to fill a place in our affections, 
until they occupy our whole hearts. Alas, there are 
many such hearers! They know the truth well. They 
hope one day to be decided Christians, But they never 


144 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


come to the point of giving up all for Christ’s sake. 
They never make up their minds to “seek first the 
kingdom of God,’—and so die in their sins. 

These are points that we ought to weigh well. We 
should never forget that there are more ways than one 
of hearing the Word without profit. It is not enough 
that we come to hear: we may come, and be careless. 
It is not enough that we are not careless hearers: our 
impressions may be only temporary, and ready to perish. 
It is not enough that our impressions are not merely 
temporary; but they may be continually yielding no 
result, in consequence of our obstinate cleaving to the 
world.—Truly “the heart is deceitful above all things, 
and desperately wicked: who can know it?” (Jeremiah 
Xvii. 9.) 

In the last place, let us learn from this parable that 
there is only one evidence of hearing the Word rightly. 
That evidence is to bear “ fruit.” 

The fruit here spoken of is the fruit of the Spirit. 
Repentance towards God, faith towards the Lord Jesus 
Christ, holiness of life and character, prayerfulness, 
humility, charity, spiritual mindedness,—these are the 
only satisfactory proofs that the seed of God’s Word is 
doing its proper work in our souls. Without such proofs 
our religion is vain, however high our profession: it is 
no better than sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. 
Christ has said, “ I have chosen you, and ordained you, 
that ye should go and bring forth fruit.” (John xv. 16.) 

There is no part of the whole parable more important 
than this. We must never be content with a barren 
orthodoxy, and a cold maintenance of correct theological 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 24—43, 145 


views. We must not be satisfied with clear knowledge, 
warm feelings, and a decent profession. We must see to 
it that the Gospel we profess to love, produces positive 
“fruit” in our hearts and lives. This is real Chris- 
tianity. These words of St. James should often ring 
in our ears: “Be ye doers of the Word, and noi hearers 
only, deceiving your own selves.” (James i, 22.) 

Let us not leave these verses without putting to our- 
selves the important question, “How do we hear?” 
We live in a Christian country. We probably go toa 
place of worship Sunday after Sunday, and hear ser- 
In what spirit do we hear them ? What effect 
Can we point to 


mons. 
have they upon our characters ? 
anything that deserves the name of “ fruit ” ? 

We may rest assured, that to reach heaven at last it 
needs something more than to go to church regularly 
on Sundays and listen to preachers. The Word of God 
must be received into our hearts, and become the 
mainspring of our conduct. It must produce practical 
impressions on our inward man, that shall appear in 
our outward behaviour. If it does not do this, it will 
only add to our condemnation in the day of judgment. 





MATTHEW XIII. 24—43, 


24 Another parable put he forth 
unto them, saying, The kingdom 
of heaven is likened unto a man 
which sowed good seed in his field : 

25 Butwhilemenslept,hisenemy 
came and sowed tares among the 
wheat, and went his way. 

26 But when the blade was sprung 
up, and brought forth fruit, then 
appeared the tares also. 

27 So the servants of the house- 


holder came and said unto him, 
Sir, didst not thou sow good seed 
in thy field ? from whence then 
hath it tares P 

28 He said unto them, An enemy 
hath done this. The servants said 
unto him, Wilt thou then that we 
go and gather them up P 

29 But he said, Nay; lest while 
ye gather up the tares, ye root up 
also the wheat with them, 


146 EXPOSITORY 


80 Let both grow together until 
the harvest: and in the time of 
harvest I will say to the reapers, 
Gather ye together first the tares, 
and bind them in bundles to burn 
them: but gather the wheat into 
my barn. 

81 Another parable put he forth 
unto them, saying, The kingdom 
of heaven is like to a grain of 
mustard seed, which a man took, 
and sowed in his field : 

32 Which indeed is the least of 
all seeds: but when it is grown, it 
is the greatest among herbs, and 
becometh a tree, so that the birds 
of the air come and lodge in the 
branches thereof. 

33 Another parable spake he un- 
to them; The kingdom of heaven 
is hike unto leaven, which a woman 
took, and hid in three measures of 
meal, till the whole was leavened. 

34 All these things spake Jesus 
unto the multitude in parables ; 
and without a parable spake he 
not unto them: 

35 That it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the prophet, 
saying, I will open my mouth in 
parables ; I will utter things which 
have been kept secret from the 


THOUGHTS. 


foundation of the world. 

86 Then Jesus sent the multitude 
away, and went into the house: 
and his disciples came unto him, 
saying, Declare unto us the para- 
ble of the tares of the field. 

37 He answered and said unto 
them, He that soweth the good seed 
is the Son of man; 

88 The field is the world; the 
good seed are the children of the 
kingdom; but the tares are the 
children of the wicked one. 

39 The enemy that sowed them 
is the devil; the harvest is the end 
of the world; and the reapers are 
the angels. 

40 As therefore the tares ara 
gathered and burned in the fire ; sa 
shall it be in the end of this world. 

41 The Son of man shall send 
forth his angels, and they shall 
gather out of his kingdom all 
things that offend, and them which 
do iniquity ; 

42 And shall cast them into a 
furnace of fire: there shall be 
wailing and gnashing of teeth. 

43 Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. Who 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. 


THE parable of the “ wheat and tares,” which occupies the 
chief part of these verses, is one of peculiar importance 
in the present day.* It is eminently calculated to 
correct the extravagant expectations in which many 
Christians indulge, as to the effect of missions abroad, 
and of preaching the Gospel at home. May we give it 
the attention which it deserves ! 

In the first place, this parable teaches us that good 
and evil will always be found together in the professing 
Church, until the end of the world. 

The visible Church is set before us as a mixed body: 

* The consideration of the parables of the “mustard seed” 


and the “leaven” is purposely deferred to a future part of the 
“ ixpository 'Fhoughts on the Gospels.” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 24—43. 147 


it is a vast “field” in which “wheat and tares” grow 
side by side. We must expect to find believers and un- 
believers, converted and unconverted, “the children of the 
kingdom and the children of the wicked one,” all mingled 
together in every congregation of baptized people. 

The purest preaching of the Gospel will not prevent 
this. In every age of the Church the same state of 
things has existed. It was the experience of the early 
Fathers ; it was the experience of the Reformers ; it is 
the experience of the best ministers at the present hour. 
There has never been a visible Church or a religious 
assembly of which the members have been all “ wheat.” 
The devil, that great enemy of souls, has always taken 
care to sow “tares.” 

The most strict and prudent discipline will not prevent 
this. Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Independents, 
all, alike find it to be so. Do what we will to purify a 
Church, we shall never succeed in obtaining a perfectly 
purecommunion. Tares will be found among the wheat. 
Hypocrites and deceivers will creep in. And, worst of 
all, if we are extreme in our efforts to obtain purity, we 
do more harm than good. We run the risk of encourag- 
ing many a Judas Iscariot, and breaking many a bruised 
reed. In our zeal to “gather up the tares,” we are in 
danger of “rooting up the wheat with them.” Such zeal 
is not according to knowledge, and has often done much 
harm. Those who care not what happens to the wheat, 
provided they can root up the tares, show little of the 
mind of Christ. After all, there is deep truth in the 
charitable saying of Augustine, “ Those who are tares 
to-day, may be wheat to-morrow.” 


148 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Are we inclined to look for the conversion of the 
whole world by the labours of missionaries and minis- 
ters? Let us place this parable before us, and beware 
of such an idea. We shall never see all the inhabitants 
of earth “the wheat” of God, in the present order of 
things. The tares and wheat will “ grow together till 
the harvest.” The kingdoms of this world will never 
become the kingdom of Christ, and the millennium will 
never begin, until the King Himself returns. 

Are we ever tried by the scoffing argument of the in- 
fidel, that Christianity cannot be a true religion, because 
there are so many false Christians? Let us call to mind 
this parable,and remain unmoved. Let us tell the infidel 
that the state of things he scoffs at does not surprise us at 
all. OurMaster prepared us for iteighteenhundred years 
ago. He foresaw and foretold that His Church would 
be a field, containing not only “wheat,” but “ tares.” 

Are we ever tempted to leave one Protestant Church 
for another, because we see many of its members uncon- 
verted? Let us remember this parable, and take heed 
what we do. We shall never find a perfect Church. We 
may spend our lives in migrating from communion to 
communion, and pass our days in perpetual disappoint- 
ment. Go where we will, and worship where we may, 
we shall always find “ tares.” 

In the second place, the parable teaches us that there 
as to be a day of separation between the godly and the wn- 
godly members of the visible Church, at the end of the world. 

The present mixed state of things is not to be for ever: 
the wheat and the tares are to be divided at last. The 
Lord Jesus shall “send forth His angels” in the day of 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XIII. VER. 24—43. 149 


His second advent, and gather all professing Christians 
into two great companies. Those mighty reapers shall 
make no mistake. They shall discern with unerring 
judgment between the righteous and the wicked, and 
place every one in his own lot. The saints and faithful 
servants of Christ shall receive glory, honour, and eternal 
life, The worldly, the ungodly, the careless, and the un- 
converted, shall be “cast into a furnace of fire.” 

There is something peculiarly solemn in this part of 
the parable. The meaning of it admits of no mistake. 
Our Lord Himself explains it in words of singular clear- 
ness, as if He would impress it deeply on our minds. 
Well may He say at the conclusion, “ Who hath ears to 
hear, let him hear.” 

Let the ungodly man tremble when he reads this 
parable. Let him see in its fearful language his own 
certain doom, unless he repents and is converted. Let 
him know that he is sowing misery for himself, if he 
goes on still in his neglect of God. Let him reflect that 
his end will be to be gathered among the “ bundles of 
tares,” and be burned. Surely such a prospect ought to 
make a man think! As Baxter truly says, “ We must 
not misinterpret God’s patience with the ungodly.” 

Let the believer in Christ take comfort when he reads 
this parable. Let him see that there is happiness and 
safety prepared for him in the great and dreadful day 
of the Lord. The voice of the archangel and the trump 
of God will proclaim no terror for him. They will sum- 
mon him to join what he has long desired to see-—a 
perfect Church and a perfect communion of saints. How 
beautiful will the whole body of believers appear when 


150 EXPOSITORY TIIOUGHTS. 


finally separated from the wicked! How pure will the 
wheat look in the garner of God when the tares are at 
length taken away! How brightly will grace shine when 
no longer dimmed by incessant contact with the worldly 
and unconverted! The righteous are little known in the 
present day: the world sees no beauty in them, even as 
it saw none in their Master. “The world knoweth us 
not, because it knew Him not.” (1 Johniii.1.) But the 
righteous shall one day “shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father.” To use the words of Matthew 
Henry, “their sanctification will be perfected, and their 
justification will be published.” “When Christ who is 
our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him 
in glory.” (Col. iii. 4.) 


MATTHEW XIII. 44—50. 


44, Again, the kingdom of heaven | is like unto anet, that was cast into 
is like unto treasure hid in a field; | the sea, and gathered of every kind: 
the which when a man hath found, 48 Which, when it was full, they 
he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth | drew to shore, and sat down, and 
and selleth all that he hath, and |} gathered the good into vessels, but 
buyeth that field. | cast the bad away. 

45 Again,thekingdomofheaven ; 49 So shall it be at the end of 
is like unto a merchant man, seek- | the world: the angels shall come 
ing goodly pearls: forth, and sever the wicked from 

46 Who, when he had found one | among the just, 
pearl of great price, went and sold: 50 And shall cast them into tle 
all that he had, and bought it. furnace of fire: there shall be 

47 Again, the kngdom of heaven | wailing and gnashing of teeth. 


THE parables of the “treasure hid in a field,” and the 
“merchant man seeking goodly pearls,” appear intended 
to convey one and the same lesson. They vary, no 
doubt, in one striking particular. The “treasure” was 
found of one who does not seem to have sought it; the 





MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 44—50. 151 


“pearl” was found of one who was actually seeking 
pearls. But the conduct of the finders, in both cases, 
was precisely alike: both “sold all” to make the thing 
found their own property. It is exactly at this point 
that the instruction of both parables agrees. 

These two parables are meant to teach us that men 
really convinced of the importance of salvation will give 
up everything to win Christ and eternal life. 

What was the conduct of the two men our Lord 
describes? The one was persuaded that there was a 
“ treasure hid in a field,’ which would amply repay him, 
if he bought the field, however great the price that he 
might give-—The other was persuaded that the “ pearl” 
he had found was so immensely valuable, that it would 
answer to him to purchase it at any cost.—Both were 
convinced that they had found a thing of great value. 
Both were satisfied that it was worth a great present 
sacrifice to make this thing their own. Others might 
wonder at them, and think them foolish for paying 
such a sum of money for the “field” and “ pearl.” 
But they knew what they were about. They were sure 
that they were making a good bargain. 

We see, in this simple picture, the conduct of a true 
Christian explained. He is what he is, and does what 
he does in his religion, because he is thoroughly per- 
suaded that it is worth while. He comes out from the 
world; he puts off the old man; he forsakes the vain 
companions of his past life. Like Matthew, he gives 
up everything, and, like Paul, he “counts all things 
loss” for Christ’s sake. And why? Because he is con- 
vinced that Christ will make amends to him for all he 


152 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


gives up. He sees in Christ an endless “ treasure ;” he 
sees in Christ a precious “pearl:” and to win Christ 
he will make any sacrifice. This is true faith: this is 
the stamp of a genuine work of the Holy Ghost. 
We-see in these two parables the real clue to the con- 
duct of many unconverted people. They are what they 
are in religion, because they are not fully persuaded that 
it is worth while to be different. They flinch from de- 
cision. Theyshrink from taking up the cross. They halt 
betweentwo opinions. They will notcommitthemselves. 
They will not come forward boldly on the Lord’s side.— 
And why? Because they are not convinced that it will 
answer: theyhave not faith. Theyare not sure that “the 
treasure” is before them. Theyare not satisfied that “the 
pearl” is worth so great a price. They cannot yet make 
up their minds to “ sell all,” that they may win Christ, 
And so too often they perish everlastingly! Whena man 
will venture nothing for Christ’s sake, we must draw the 
sorrowful conclusion that he has not got the grace of God, 
The parable of the net let down into the sea, has 
some points in common with that of the wheat and the 
tares. It is intended to instruct us on a most important 
subject, the true nature of the visible Church of Christ. 
The preaching of the Gospel was the letting down of 
a large net into the midst of the sea of this world. 
The professing Church which it was to gather together, 
was to be a mixed body. Within the folds of the net 
there were to be fish of every kind, both good and 
bad. Within the pale of the Church there were to be 
Christians of various sorts, unconverted as well as con- 
verted, false as well as true. The separation of good 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 44-—50. 153 


and bad was sure to come at last, but not before the end 
of the world. Such was the account which the great 
Master gave to His disciples of the Churches which 
they were to found. 

It is of the utmost importance to have the lessons 
of this parable deeply graven on our minds. There 
is hardly any point in Christianity on which greater 
mistakes exist, than the nature of the visible Church. 
There is none, perhaps, on which mistakes are so perilous 
to the soul. 

Let us learn, from this parable, that all congregations 
of professed Christians ought to be regarded as mixed 
bodies. Theyare all assemblies containing “good fishand 
bad,” converted and unconverted, children of God and 
children of the world, and ought to be described and 
addressed as such. To tell all baptized people that they 
are born again, and have the Spirit, and are members of 
Christ, and are holy, in the face of such a parable as 
this, is utterly unwarrantable. Such a mode of address 
may flatter and please, but it is not likely to profit or save, 
It is painfully calculated to promote self-righteousness, 
and lull sinners to sleep. It overthrows the plain teach- 
ing of Christ, and is ruinous to souls. Do we ever hear 
such doctrine? If we do, let us remember the “ net.” 

Finally, let it be a settled principle with us never to 
be satisfied with mere outward Church-membership. We 
may be inside the net, and yet not be in Christ. The 
waters of baptism are poured on myriads who are never 
washed in the water of life. The bread and wine are 
eaten and drunk by thousands at the Lord’s table, who 
never feed on Christ by faith. Are weconverted? Are 


154 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


we among the “ good fish”? This is the grand question ! 
It is one which must be answered at last. The net will 
soon be “drawn to shore,” and the true character of every 
man’s religion will at length be exposed. There will be 
an eternal separation between the good fish and the bad, 
There will be a “furnace of fire” for the wicked. Surely, 
as Baxter says, “these plain words more need belief and 
consideration than exposition.” 





MATTHEW XIII. 51—58. 


51 Jesus saith unto them, Have 
ye understood all these things ? 
They say unto him, Yea, Lord. 

52 Then said he unto them, 
Therefore every Scribe which is 
instructed unto the kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a man that 
is an householder, which bringeth 
forth out of his treasure things 
new and old. 

58 And it came to pass, that 
when Jesus had finished these 
parables, he departed thence. 

54 And when he was come into 
his own country, he taught them 
in their synagogue, insomuch that 
they were astonished, and said, 


Whence hath this man this wis- 
dom, and these mighty works P 

55 Is not this the carpenter’s 
son? is not his mother called 
Mary? and his brethren, James, 
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas ? 

56 And his sisters, are they not 
all with us? Whence then hath this 
man all these things ? 

57 And they were offended in 
him. But Jesus said unto them, 
A prophet is not without honour, 
save in his own country, and in his 
own house. 

58 And he did not many mighty 
works there because of their un- 
belief. 


Tue first thing which we ought to notice in these verses 
is the striking question with which our Lord winds up 


the seven wonderful parables of this chapter. 


He said, 


“ Have ye understood all these things?” 
Personal application has been called the “soul” of 
preaching. A sermon without application is like a letter 


posted without a direction. 


It may be well written, 


rightly dated, and duly signed; but it is useless, because 


it never reaches its destination. 


Our Lord’s inquiry is 


an admirable example of real heart-searching appli- 
cation: “ Have ye understood ?” 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XII. VER. 51—58. 155 


The mere form of hearing a sermon can profit no 
man, unless he comprehends what it means. He might 
just as well listen to the blowing of a trumpet, or the 
beating of a drum. He might just as well attend a 
Roman Catholic service in Latin. His intellect must 
be set in motion, and his heart impressed. Ideas must 
be received into his mind. He must carry off the seeds 
of new thoughts. Without this he hears in vain. 

It is of great importance to see this point clearly, for 
there is a vast amount of ignorance about it. There are 
thousands who go regularly to places of worship, and 
think they have done their religious duty, but never 
carry away an idea, or receive an impression. Ask 
them, when they return home on a Sunday evening, 
what they have learned, and they cannot tell you a 
word. Examine them at the end of a year, as to the 
religious knowledge they have attained, and you will 
find them as ignorant as the heathen. 

Let us watch our souls in this matter. Let us take 
with us to church, not only our bodies, but our minds, 
our reason, our hearts, and our consciences. Let us 
often ask ourselves, “ What have I got from this ser- 
mon? what have I learned? what truths have been 
impressed on my mind?”—Intellect, no doubt, is not 
everything in religion ; but it does not therefore follow 
that it is nothing at all—The heart is unquestionably 
the main point; but we must never forget that the 
Holy Ghost generally reaches the heart through the 
mind. Sleepy, idle, inattentive hearers are never likely 
to be converted. 


The second thing which we ought to notice in these 
M 


156 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


verses is the strange treatment which our Lord received in 
His own country. 

He came to the town of Nazareth, where He had 
been brought up, and “taught in their synagogue.” His 
teaching, no doubt, was the same as it always was: 
“ Never man spake like this man.” But it had no effect 
on the people of Nazareth. They were “astonished,” 
but their hearts were unmoved. They said, “Is not this 
the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary?” 
They despised Him, because they were so familiar with 
Him. “They were offended in Him.” And they drew 
from our Lord the solemn remark, “A prophet is not 
without honour, save in his own country, and in his 
own house.” 

Let us see, in this history, a melancholy page of 
human nature unfolded to our view. We are all apt to 
despise mercies, if we are accustomed to them, and have 
them cheap. The Bibles and religious books, which are 
so plentiful in England, the means of grace, of which we 
have so abundant a supply, the preaching of the Gospel, 
which we hear every week,—all, all are liable to be 
undervalued. It is mournfully true, that in religion, 
more than anything else, “familiarity breeds contempt.” 
Men forget that truth is truth, however old and hack- 
neyed it may sound,—and despise it because it is old. 
Alas, by so doing, they provoke God to take it away! 

Do we wonder that the relatives, servants, and neigh- 
bours of godly people are not always converted? Do 
we wonder that the parishioners of eminent ministers 
of the Gospel are often their hardest and most impeni- 
tent hearers? Let us wonder no more. Let us mark 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 51—58. LST 


the experience of our Lord at Nazareth, and learn 
wisdom. 

Do we ever fancy that if we had only seen and heard 
Jesus Christ we should have been His faithful disciples ? 
Do we think that if we had only lived near Him, and 
been eye-witnesses of His ways, we should not have been 
undecided, wavering, and half-hearted about religion ? 
If we do, let us think so no longer. Let us observe the 
people of Nazareth, and learn wisdom. 

The last thing which we ought to notice in these 
verses is the ruinous nature of unbelief. The chapter 
ends with the fearful words, “He did not many works 
there because of their unbelief.” 

We see in this single word the secret of the ever- 
lasting ruin of multitudes of souls! They perish for 
ever, because they will not believe. There is nothing 
beside in earth or heaven that prevents their salvation, 
Their sins, however many, might all be forgiven. The 
Father’s love is ready to receive them. The blood of 
Christ is ready to cleanse them. The power of the Spirit 
is ready torenew them. But a great barrier interposes : 
they will not believe. “Ye will not come to Me,” says 
Jesus, “that ye might have life.” (John v. 40.) 

May we all be on our guard against this accursed sin ! 
It is the old root-sin which caused the fall of man. 
Cut down in the true child of God by the power of the 
Spirit, it is ever ready to bud and sprout again. There 
are three great enemies against which God’s children 
should daily pray ; pride, worldliness, and unbelief. Of 
these three none is greater than unbelief. 


158 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XIV. 1—12. 


1 At that time Herod the te- 
trarch heard of the fame of Jesus, 

2 And said unto his servants, 
This is John the Baptist; he is 
risen from the dead ; and therefore 
mighty works do shew forth them- 
selves in him. 

8 For Herod had laid hold on 
John, and bound him, and put him 
in prison for Herodias’ sake, his 
brother Philip’s wife. 

4 For John said unto him, It is 
not lawful for thee to have her. 

5 And when he would have put 
him to death, he feared the multi- 
tude, because they counted him as 
a prophet. 

6 But when Herod’s birthday 
was kept, the daughter of Hero- 
dias danced before them, and 


pleased Herod. 

7 Whereupon he promised with 
an oath to give her whatsoever she 
would ask. 

8 And she, being before in- 
structed of her mother, said, Give 
me here John Baptist’s head in a 
charger. 

9 And the king was sorry : never- 
theless for the oath’s sake, and 
them which sat with him at meat, 
he commanded it to be given her. 

10 And he sent, and beheaded 
John in the prison. 

11 And his head was brought in 
a charger, and given to the damsel : 
and she brought it to her mother. 

12 And his disciples came, and 
took up the body, and buried it, 
and went and told Jesus. 


WE have in this passage a page out of God’s book of 
martyrs, the history of the death of John the Baptist. 
The wickedness of King Herod, the bold reproof which 
John gave him, the consequent imprisonment of the 
faithful reprover, and the disgraceful circumstances of 
his death, are all written for our learning. “Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.” 
(Psalm cxvi. 15.) 

The story of John the Baptist’s death is told more 
fully by St. Mark than by St. Matthew. For the 
present it seems sufficient to draw two general lessons 
from St. Matthew’s narrative, and to fasten our attention 
exclusively upon them. 

Let us learn, in the first place, from these verses, the 
great power of conscience. ; 

King Herod hears of “the fame of Jesus,” and says 
to his servants, “This is John the Baptist: he is risen 
from the dead.” He remembered his own wicked 
dealings with that holy man, and his heart failed 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIV. VER. 1—12. 159 


within him. His heart told him that he had despised 
his godly counsel, and committed a foul and abominable 
murder; and his heart told him, that though he had 
killed John, there would yet be a reckoning day. He 
and John the Baptist would yet meet again. Well says 
Bishop Hall, “A wicked man needs no other tormentor, 
especially for sins of blood, than his own heart.” 

There is a conscience in all men by nature. Let this 
never be forgotten. Fallen, lost, desperately wicked as 
we are all born into the world, God has taken care to 
leave Himself a witness in our bosoms. It is a poor 
blind guide, without the Holy Ghost. It can save no 
one. It leads noone to Christ. It may be “ seared” and 
trampled under foot. But there is such a thing as con- 
science in every man, accusing or excusing him; and 
Scripture and experience alike declare it. (Rom. ii. 15.) 

Conscience can make even kings miserable, when they 
have wilfully rejected its advice. It can fill the princesof 
this world with fear and trembling, as it did Felix, when 
Paul preached. They find it easier to imprison and behead 
the preacher, than to bind his sermon, and silence the 
voice of his reproof in their own hearts. God’s witnesses 
may be put out of the way, but their testimony often 
lives and works on long after they are dead. God’s 
prophets live not for ever, but their words often survive 
them. (2 Tim. ii. 9; Zech. i. 5.) 

Let the thoughtless and ungodly remember this, and 
not sin against their consciences. Let them know that 
their sins will “surely find them out.” They may laugh, 
and jest, and mock at religion for a little time. They may 
cry, “ Who is afraid? Where is the mighty harm of 


160 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


our ways?” They may depend upon it they are sowing 
misery for themselves, and will reap a bitter crop sooner 
or later. Their wickedness will overtake them one day. 
They will find, like Herod, that it is “an evil thing 
and bitter to sin against God.” (Jerem. ii. 19.) 

Let ministers and teachers remember that there is a 
conscience inmen,and let them workonboldly. Instruc- 
tion is not always thrown away, because it seems to bear 
no fruit at the time it is given. Teaching is not always 
in vain, though we fancy that it is unheeded, wasted, 
and forgotten. There is a conscience in the hearers of 
sermons. There is a conscience in the children at our 
Sunday schools. Many a sermon and lesson will yet rise 
again, when he who preached or taught it is lying, like 
John the Baptist, in the grave. Thousands know that 
we are right, and, like Herod, dare not confess it. 

Let us learn, in the second place, that God’s children 
must not look for their reward in this world. 

If ever there was a case of godliness unrewarded in this 
life, it was that of John the Baptist. Let us think for a 
moment what a remarkable man he was during his short 
career, and then think to what end he came. Behold him 
that was the “ Prophet of the Highest,” and “ greater than 
any born of woman,” imprisoned like a malefactor !— 
Behold him cut off by a violent death, before the age of 
thirty-four; the “burning light” quenched, the faithful 
preacher murdered for doing his duty,—and this to gratify 
the hatred of an adulterous woman, and at the command 
of a capricious tyrant! Truly there was an event here, 
if there ever was one in the world, which might make an 
‘ ignorant man say, “ What profit is it to serve God ?” 


“MATTHEW, CHAP. XIV. VER. 18—21. 161 


But these are the sort of things which show us that 
there will one day be a judgment. The God of the 
spirits of all flesh shall at last set up an assize, and 
reward every one according to his works. The blood of 
John the Baptist, and James the Apostle, and Stephen, 
—the blood of Polycarp, and Huss, and Ridley, and 
Latimer, shall yet be required. It is all written in 
God’s Book. “The earth also shall disclose her blood, 
and shall no more cover her slain.” (Isaiah xxvi. 21.) 
The world shall yet know that there is a God that 
judgeth the earth. “If thou seest the oppression of the 
poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in 
a province, marvel not at the matter, for He that is 
higher than the highest regardeth: and there be higher 
than they.” (EKecl. v. 8.) 

Let all true Christians remember that their best things 
are yet to come. Let us count it no strange thing if we 
have sufferings in this present time. It is a season of 
probation: we are yet at school. We are learning pati- 
ence, longsuffering, gentleness, and meekness, which we 
could hardly learn if we had our good things now. But 
there is an eternal holiday yet to begin. For this let us 
wait quietly: it will make amends for all. “Our light 
affliction, which is but fora moment, worketh for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” (2 Cor.iv.17.) 





MATTHEW XIV. 13—21. 


13 When Jesus heard of it, he; moved with compassion toward 
departed thence by ship into a| them, and he healed their sick, — 
desert place apart: and when the | 15 And when it was evening,his 
people had heard thereof, they disciples came to him, saying, This 
followed him on foot out of the | isadesert place, and thetimeis now 
cities. past ; send the multitude away, that 

14 And Jesus went forth, and | they may go into the villages, and 
saw a great multitude, and was ! buy themselves victuals. 


162 EXPOSITORY 
16 But Jesus said unto them, 
They need not depart: give ye 
them to eat. 
17 And they say unto him, We 
have here but five loaves, and two 


fishes. 
18 He said, Bring them hither 
me. 
19 And he commanded the mul- 


titude to sit down on the grass, and 
took the five loaves, and the two 


THOUGHTS. 


fishes, and looking up to heaven, 
he blessed, and brake, and gave 
the loaves to his disciples, and the 
disciples to the multitude. 

20 And they did all eat, and were 
filled : and they took up of the frag- 
ments that remained twelve bas- 
kets full. 

21 And they that had eaten were 
about five thousand men, beside 
women and children. 


THESE verses contain one of our Lord Jesus Christ’s 
greatest miracles; the feeding of “five thousand men, 
beside women and children,” with five loaves and two 
fishes. Of all the miracles worked by our Lord, not 
one is so often mentioned in the New Testament as 
this. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, all dwell upon 
it. It is plain that this event in our Lord’s history is 
intended to receive special attention. Let us give it 
that attention, and see what we may learn. 

In the first place, this miracle is an wnanswerable proof 
of our Lord’s Divine power. 

To satisfy the hunger of more than five thousand 
people with so small a portion of food as five loaves 
and two fishes, would be manifestly impossible with- 
out a supernatural multiplication of the food. It was 
a thing that no pretended magician, impostor, or false 
prophet would ever have attempted. Such a person 
might possibly pretend to cure a single sick person, or to 
raise a single dead body, and by jugglery and trickery 
might persuade weak people that he succeeded. But 
such a person would never attempt such a mighty work 
as that which is here recorded. He would know well 
that he could not persuade ten thousand men, women, 
and children that they were full when they were hungry. 
He would be exposed as a cheat and impostor on the 
spot. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIV. VER. 13—21. 163 


Yet this is the mighty work which our Lord actually 
performed, and by performing it gave a conclusive proof 
that He was God. He called that into being which did 
not before exist. He provided visible, tangible, material 
food for more than five thousand people, out of a supply 
which in itself would not have satisfied fifty. Surely we 
must be blind if we do not see in this the hand of Him 
who “giveth food to all flesh” (Psalm cxxxvi. 25), and 
made the world and all that therein is. To create is the 
peculiar prerogative of God. 

We ought to lay firm hold on such passages as this. 
We should treasure up in our minds every evidence of 
our Lord’s divine power. The cold, orthodox, unconverted 
man may see little in the story: the true believer should 
store it in his memory. Let him think of the world, the 
devil, and his own heart, and learn to thank God that 
his Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, is almighty. 

In the second place, this miracle is a striking example 
of our Lord’s compassion toward men. 

Jesus “saw a great multitude” in a desert place, 
ready to faint for hunger. He knew that many in that 
multitude had no true faith and love towards Himself. 
They followed Him for fashion’s sake, or from curiosity, 
or some equally low motive. (John vi. 26.) But our 
Lord had pity upon all. All were relieved ; all partook 
of the food miraculously provided. All were “ filled,” 
and none went hungry away. 

Let us see in this the heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 
towards sinners. He is ever the same. He is now as 
He was of old, “the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and 
gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and 


164 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


truth.” (Exod. xxxiv. 6.) He does not deal with men 
according to their sins, or reward them according to 
their iniquities. He loads even His enemies with 
benefits. None will be so excuseless as those who are 
found impenitent at last. The Lord’s goodness leads 
them to repentance. (Rom. ii. 4.) In all His dealings with 
men on earth, He showed Himself one that “delighteth 
in mercy.” (Micah vii. 18.) Let us strive to be like 
Him. “We ought,” says an old writer, “to have abun- 
dance of pity and compassion on diseased souls.” 

In the last place, this miracle is a lively emblem of the 
sufficiency of the Gospel to meet the soul-wants of all man- 
kind, 

_ There can be little doubt that all our Lord’s miracles 
have a deep figurative meaning, and teach great spiritual 
truths. They must be handled reverently and discreetly. 
Care must be taken that we do not, like many of the 
Fathers, see allegories where the Holy Spirit meant none 
to be seen. But, perhaps, if there is any miracle worked 
by Christ which has a manifest figurative meaning, in 
addition to the plain lessons which may be drawn from 
its surface, it is that which is now before us. 

What does this hungry multitude in a desert place 
represent to us? It is an emblem of all mankind. The 
children of men are a huge assembly of perishing sinners, 
famishing in the midst of a wilderness world,—helpless, 
hopeless, and on the way to ruin. We have all gone 
astray like lost sheep (Isaiah liii. 6); we are by nature 
far away from God. Our eyes may not be opened to 
the full extent of our danger: but in reality we are 
“wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIV. VER. 13—21. 165 


naked.” (Rev. iii. 17.) There is but a step between 
us and everlasting death. 

What do these loaves and fishes represent, apparently 
so inadequate to meet the necessities of the case, but by 
miracle made sufficient to feed ten thousand people? 
They are an emblem of the doctrine of Christ crucified 
for sinners, as their vicarious Substitute, and naking 
atonement by His death for the sin of the world. That 
doctrine seems to the natural man weakness itself. Christ 
crucified was “to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the 
Greeks foolishness.” (1 Cor. 1. 23.) And yet Christ 
crucified has proved the “bread of God which cometh 
down from heaven, and giveth life to the world.” John 
vi. 33.) The story of the cross has amply met the spiri- 
tual wants of mankind wherever it has been preached. 
Thousands of evéry rank, age, and nation, are witnesses 
that it is “the wisdom of God, and the power of God.” 
They have eaten of it and been “filled:” they have 
found it “ meat indeed and drink indeed.” 

Let us ponder these things well. There are great 
depths in all our Lord Jesus Christ’s recorded dealings 
upon earth, which no one has ever fully fathomed. 
There are mines of rich instruction in all His words and 
ways, which no one has thoroughly explored. Many a 
passage of the Gospels is like the cloud which Elijah’s 
servant saw. (1 Kings xviii. 44.) The more we look at 
it the greater it will appear. There is an inexhaustible 
fulness in Scripture. Other writings seem comparatively 
poor and threadbare, when we become familiar with 
them; but the more we read the Bible the richer we 
shall find it. 


166 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XIV. 22—386. 


22 And straightway Jesus con- 
strained his disciples to get into 
a ship, and to go before him unto 
the other side, while he sent the 
multitudes away. 

23 And when he had sent the 
multitudes away, he went up into 
a mountain apart to pray: and 
when the evening was come, he 
was there alone. 

24 But the ship was now in the 
midst of the sea, tossed with waves: 
for the wind was contrary. 

25 And in the fourth watch of 
the night Jesus went unto them, 
walking on the sea. 

26 And when the disciples saw 
him walking on the sea, they were 
troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and 
they cried out for fear. 

27 But straightway Jesus spake 
unto them, saying, Be of good 
cheer ; itis I; be not afraid. 

28 And Peter answered him 
and said, Lord, if it be thou, 
bid me come unto thee on the 
water. 

29 And he said, Come. And 
when Peter was come down out of 


the ship, he walked on the water, 
to go to Jesus. : 

30 But when he saw the wind 
boisterous, he was afraid; and be- 
ginning to sink, he cried, saying 
Lord, save me. ; 

31 And immediately Jesus 
stretched forth his hand, and 
caught him, and said unto him, 
O thou of little faith, wherefore 
didst thou doubt ? 

82 And when they were come 
into the ship, the wind ceased. 

83 Then they that were in the 
ship came and worshipped him, 
saying, Of a truth thou art the 
Son of God. 

84 And when they were gone 
over, they came into the land of 
Gennesaret. 

85 And when the men of that 
place had knowledge of him, they 


‘| sent out into all that country 


round about, and brought unte 
him all that were diseased ; 

36 And besought him that they 
might only touch the hem of his 
garment: and as many as touched 
were made perfectly whole. 


Tue history contained in these verses is one of singular 
interest. The miracle here recorded brings out in strong 
light the character both of Christ and His people. The 
power and mercy of the Lord Jesus, and the mixture of 
faith and unbelief in His best disciples, are beautifully 
illustrated. 

We learn, in the first place, from this miracle, what 
absolute dominion our Saviour has over all created onungs. 
We see Him “walking on the sea” as if it was dry 
land. Those angry waves which tossed the ship of His 
disciples to and fro, obey the Son of God, and become a 
solid floor under His feet. That liquid surface, which 
was agitated by the least breath of wind, bears up the 
feet of our Redeemer, like a rock. To our poor, weak, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIV. VER, 22-36, 167 


minds, the whole event is utterly incomprehensible. 
The picture of two feet walking on the sea, is said by 
Doddridge to have been the Egyptian emblem of an 
impossible thing. The man of science will tell us, that 
for material flesh and blood to walk on water is a physical 
impossibility. Enough for us to know that it was done. 
Enough for us to remember, that to Him who created 
the seas at the beginning, it must have been perfectly 
easy to walk over their waves when He pleased. 

There is encouragement here for all true Christians. 
Let them know that there is nothing created which is 
notunder Christ’s control: “All things are thyservants.” 
(Psalm cxix. 91.) He may allow His people to be tried 
for a season, and to be tossed to and fro by storms of 
trouble. He may be later than they wish in coming 
to their aid, and not draw near till the “ fourth watch of 
the night.” But never let them forget that winds, and 
waves, and storms are all Christ’s servants. They cannot 
move without Christ’s permission. “The Lord on high is 
mightier than the voice of many waters, yea than the 
mighty waves of the sea.” (Psalm xciii. 4.) Are we ever 
tempted to cry with Jonah, “The floods compass me 
about: all Thy billows and Thy waves pass over me”? 
(Jonah ii. 3.) Let us remember they are “ His” billows. 
Let us wait patiently. We may yet see Jesus coming 
to us, and “walking on the sea.” 

We learn, in the second place, from this miracle, what 
power Jesus can bestow on them that believe on Him. Wo 
see Simon Peter coming down out of the ship and walk- 
ing on the water, like his Lord. What a wonderful 
proof was this of our Lord’s divinity! To walk on the 


168 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sea Himself was a mighty miracle; but to enable a 
poor weak disciple to do the same, was a mightier 
miracle still. 

There is a deep meaning in this part of the history. 
It shows us what great things our Lord can do for those 
that hear His voice, and follow Him. He can enable 
them to do things which at one time they would have 
thought impossible. He can carry them through diffi- 
culties and trials, which without Him they would never 
have dared to face. He can give them strength to walk 
through fire and water unharmed, and to get the better 
of every foe. Moses in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, the 
saints in Nero’s household, are all examples of His 
mighty power. Let us fear nothing, if we are in the 
path of duty. The waters may seem deep; but if 
Jesus says, “Come,” we have no cause to be afraid. 
“He that believeth on Me, the works that I do shall 
he do also, and greater works than these shall he do.” 
(John xiv. 12.) 

Let us learn, in the third place, from this miracle, how 
much trouble disciples bring upon themselves by unbelief. 
We see Peter walking boldly on the water for a little 
way; but by and by, when he sees “the wind boister- 
ous” he is afraid, and begins to sink. The weak “flesh” 
gets the better of the willing “spirit.” Heforgetsthe won- 
derful proofs of his Lord’s goodness and power, which 
he had just received. He considered not that the same 
Saviour who had enabled him to walk one step, must be 
able to hold him up for ever. He did not reflect that he 
was nearer to Christ when once on the water, than he 
was when he first left the ship. Fear took away his 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XIV. VER. 22—36. 169 


memory. Alarm confused his reason. He thought of 
nothing but the winds and waves, and his immediate 
danger, and his faith gave way. “Lord,” he cried, 
“save me.” 

What a lively picture we have here of the experience 
of many a believer! How many there are who have 
faith enough to take the first step in following Christ, 
but not faith enough to go on as they began. They 
take fright at the trials and dangers which seem to be 
in their way. They look at the enemies that surround 
them, and the difficulties that seem likely to beset their 
path. They look at them more than at Jesus, and at once 
their feet begin to sink. Their hearts faint within them. 
Their hope vanishes away. Their comforts disappear.— 
And why is all this? Christ is not altered. Their ene- 
mies are not greater than they were.—It is just because, 
like Peter, they have ceased to look to Jesus, and have 
given way to unbelief. They are taken up with thinking 
about their enemies, instead of thinking about Christ. 
May we lay this to heart, and learn wisdom! 

Let us learn, in the last place, from this miracle, how 
merciful our Lord Jesus Christ is to weak believers. We 
see Him stretching forth His hand immediately to save 
Peter, as soon as Peter cried to Him. He does not leave 
him to reap the fruit of his own unbelief, and to sink in 
the deep waters. He only seems to consider his trouble, 
and to think of nothing so much as delivering him from 
it. The only word He utters is the gentle reproof, “O 
thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt ?” 

We should mark, in this concluding part of the miracle, 
the exceeding “gentleness of Christ.” He can bear with 


170 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


much, and forgive much, when He sees true grace in a 
man’s heart. As a mother deals gently with her infant, 
and does not cast it away because of its waywardness 
and frowardness, so does the Lord Jesus deal gently with 
His people. He loved and pitied them before conversion, 
and after conversion He loves and pities them still more. 
He knows their feebleness, and bears long with them. 
He would have us know that doubting does not prove 
that a man has no faith, but only that his faith is small. 
And even when our faith is small, the Lord is ready to 
help us. “When I said, My foot slippeth; Thy mercy, 
O Lord, held me up.” (Psalm xciv. 18.) 

How much there is in all this to encourage men to 
serve Christ! Where is the man that ought to be afraid 
to begin running the Christian race, with such a Saviour 
as Jesus? If we fall, He will raise us again. If we err, 
He will bring us back. But His mercy shall never be 
altogether taken from us. He has said, “I will never 
leave thee, nor forsake thee,” and He will keep His word. 
(Heb. xiii. 5.) May we only remember that while we do 
not despise little faith we must not sit down content with 
it. Our prayer must ever be, “ Lord, increase our faith.” 


MATTHEW XV. 1—9. 


1 Then came to Jesus scribes 4 For God commanded, saying, 
and Pharisees, which were of | Honour thy father and mother: 
Jerusalem, saying, ‘and, He that curseth father or 

2 Why do thy disciples trans- | mother, let him die the death. 
gress the tradition of the elders ? 5 But ye say, Whosoever shall 
for they wash not their hands | say to is father or his mother, 
when they eat bread. Tt is a gift, by whatsoever thou 

3 But he answered and said unto | mightest be profited by me: 
them, Why do ye also transgress 6 And honour not his father or 
the commandment of God by your | his mother, he shall be free. Thus 
tradition P have ye made the commandment 








MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER, 1—9, 171 


of God of none effect by your tra- { eth me with their lips; but theix 
dition. ‘ : i heart is far from me. 
7 Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias 9 But in vain they do worship 
prophesy of you, saying, ; me, teaching for doctrines the 
8 This people draweth nigh unto | commandments of men. 
me with their mouth, and honour- 


WE have in these verses a conversation between our 
Lord Jesus Christ and certain scribes and Pharisees. 
The subject of it may seem, at first sight, of little 
interest in modern days. It is not so in reality: the 
principles of the Pharisees are principles that never 
die. There are truths laid down here, which are of 
deep importance. 

We learn, for one thing, that hypocrites generally attach 
great wmportance to mere outward things im religion. 

The complaint of the scribes and Pharisees in this 
place, is a striking case in point. They brought an 
accusation to our Lord against His disciples: but what 
was its nature? It was not that they were covetous or 
self-righteous. It was not that they were untruthful or 
uncharitable. It was not that they had broken any part 
of the law of God. But they “transgressed the traditions 
of the elders !—They did not wash their hands when 
they ate bread.” They did not observe a rule of merely 
human authority, which some old Jew had invented! 
This was the head and front of their offence! 

Do we see nothing of the spirit of the Pharisees in the 
present day? Unhappily we see only too much. There 
are thousands of professing Christians, who seem to care 
nothing about the religion of their neighbours, provided 
that it agrees in outward matters with their own. Does 
their neighbour worship according to their particular 


form? Can he repeat their shibboleth, and talk a little 
N 


172 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


about their favourite doctrines? If he can, they are 
' satisfied, though there is no evidence that he is con- 
verted. If he cannot, they are always finding fault, and 
cannot speak peaceably of him, though he may be serving 
Christ better than themselves. Let us beware of this 
spirit: it is the very essence of hypocrisy. Let our 
principle be, “The kingdom of God is not meat and 
drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy 
Ghost.” (Rom. xiv. 17.) 

We learn, for another thing, from these verses, the 
great danger of attempting to add anything to the Word 
of God. Whenever a man takes upon him to make 
additions to the Scriptures, he is likely to end with 
valuing his own additions above Scripture itself. 

We see this point brought out most strikingly in our 
Lord’s answer to the charge of the Pharisees against His 
disciples. He says, “Why do ye also transgress the 
commandment of God by your traditions?” He strikes 
boldly at the whole system of adding anything, as needful 
to salvation, to God’s perfect Word. He exposes the 
mischievous tendency of the system by an example: He 
shows how the vaunted traditions of the Pharisees were 
actually destroying the authority of the fifth command- 
ment. In short, He establishes the great truth, which 
ought never to be forgotten,—that there is an inherent 
tendency in all traditions to “make the Word of God of 
none effect.” The authors of these traditions may have 
meant no such thing, and their intentions may have been 
pure. But that there is a tendency in all religious insti- 
tutions of mere human authority to usurp the authority 
of God’s Word, is evidently the doctrine of Christ. It 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 1—29. 173 


is a solemn remark of Bucer’s, that “a man is rarely to 
be found who pays an excessive attention to human 
inventions in religion who does not put more trust in 
them than in the grace of God.” 

And have we not seen melancholy proof of this truth 
in the history of the Church of Christ? Unhappily we 
have seen only too much. As Baxter says, “ Men think 
God’s laws too many and too strict, and yet make more 
of their own, and are precise for keeping them.” Have 
we never read how some have exalted canons, rubrics, 
and ecclesiastical laws above the Word of God, and 
have punished disobedience to them with far greater 
severity than open sins, like drunkenness and swear- 
ing? Have we never heard of the extravagant impor- 
tance which the Church of Rome attaches to monastic 
vows, and vows of celibacy, and keeping feasts and 
fasts, insomuch that she seems to place them far above 
family duties, and the ten commandments ?—Have we 
never heard of men who make more ado about eating 
flesh in Lent, than about gross impurity of life, or 
murder ?—Have we never observed in our own land, 
how many seem to make adherence to Episcopacy the 
weightiest matter in Christianity, and to regard ‘“Church- 
manship,” as they call it, as far outweighing repentance, 
faith, holiness, and the graces of the Spirit? These 
are questions which can only receive one sorrowful 
answer. The spirit of the Pharisees still lives, after 
eighteen hundred years. The disposition to “ make the 
Word of God of none effect by traditions,” is to be found 
among Christians,as well as among Jews. ‘The tendency 
practically to exalt man’s inventions above God’s Word, 


174 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


is still fearfully prevalent. May we watch against it 
and be on our guard! May we never forget that no 
tradition or man-made institution in religion can ever 
excuse the neglect of relative duties, or justify disobe- 
dience to any plain commandment of God’s Word. 

We learn, in the last place, from these verses, that the 
religious worship which God desires, is the worship of the 
heart. We find our Lord establishing this by a quota- 
tion from Isaiah: “This people draweth near to Me with 
their lips, but their heart is far from Me.” 

The heart is the principal thing in the relation of 
husband and wife, of friend and friend, of parent and 
child. The heart must be the principal point to which 
we attend in all the relations between God and our souls. 
What is the first thing we need, in order to be Chris- 
tians? A new heart—What is the sacrifice God asks 
us to bring to Him? A broken and a contrite heart— 
What is the true circumcision? The circumcision of 
the heart.—What is genuine obedience? To obey from 
the heart.—What is saving faith? To believe with the 
heart— Where ought Christ to dwell? To dwell in our 
hearts by faith—What is the chief request that Wisdom 
makes to every one? “My son, give me thine heart.” — 

Let us leave the passage with honest self-inquiry as 
to the state of our own hearts. Let us settle it in our 
minds, that all formal worship of God, whether in public 
or private, is utterly in vain, so long as our “hearts are 
far from Him.” The bended knee, the bowed head, the 
loud Amen, the daily chapter, the regular attendance at 
the Lord’s table, are all useless and unprofitable, so long 
as our affections are nailed to sin, or pleasure, or money, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 10—2U. 175 


or the world. The question of our Lord must yet be 
answered satisfactorily, before we can be saved. He 
says to every one, “Lovest thou Me?” (John xxi. 17.) 


MATTHEW XY. 10—20. 


10 And he called the multitude, 
and said unto them, Hear, und un- 
derstand. 

11 Not that which goeth into the 
mouth defileth a man: but that 
which cometh out of the mouth, 
this defileth a man. 

12 Then came his disciples, and 
said unto him, Knowest thou that 
the Pharisees were offended, after 
they heard this saying? 

i3 But he answered and said, 
Every plant, which my heavenly 
Father hath not planted, shall be 
rooted up. 

14 Let them alone: they be blind 
leaders of the blind. And if the 
blind lead the blind, both shall fall 
into the ditch. 

15 Then answered Peter and said 





unto him, Declare unto us thie 
parable. 

16 And Jesus said, Are ye also 
yet without understanding P 

17 Do not ye yet understand, 
that whatsoever entereth in at the 
mouth goeth into the belly, and is 
east out into the draught ? 

18 But those things which pro- 
ceed out of the mouth come forth 
from the heart ; and they defile the 
man, 

19 For out of the heart proceed 
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, 
fornications, thefts, false witness, 
blasphemies, 

20 These are the things which 
defile a man: but to eat with un- 
washen hands defileth not a man. 


THERE are two striking sayings of the Lord Jesus in 


this passage. 
respects the human heart. 
closest attention. 


One respects false doctrine: the other 


Both of them deserve the 


Respecting false doctrine, our Lord declares that tt 1 


a duty to oppose it; that its final destruction is sure ; and 
that its teachers ought to be forsaken. He says, “ Every 
plant that my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall 
be rooted up. Let them alone.” 

It is clear, from examination of the passage, that the 
disciples were surprised at our Lord’s strong language 
about the Pharisees and their traditions. They had 
probably been accustomed from their youth to regard 
the Pharisees as the wisest and best of men. They 
were startled to hear their Master denouncing them ag 


176 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


hypocrites, and charging them with transgressing the 
commandment of God. “Knowest thou,” they said, 
“that the Pharisees were offended?” To this question 
we are indebted for our Lord’s explanatory declaration, 
—a declaration which perhaps has never received the 
notice it deserves. 

The plain meaning of our Lord’s words is, that false 
doctrine, like that of the Pharisees, was a plant to which 
no mercy should be shown. It was a “plant which His 
heavenly Father had not planted,” and a plant which it 
was a duty to “root up,” whatever offence it might cause. 
To spare it was no charity, because it was injurious to 
the souls of men.—It mattered nothing that those who 
planted it were high in office, or learned. If it contra- 
dicted the Word of God it ought to be opposed, refuted, 
andrejected. Hisdisciples musttherefore understand that 
it was right to refuse obedience to all teaching that was 
unscriptural,andto “let alone” and forsake all instructors 
who persisted in it—Sooner or later they would find 
that all false doctrine will be completely overthrown 
and put to shame, and that nothing shall stand but 
that which is built on the Word of God. 

There are lessons of deep wisdom in this saying of our 
Lord, which serve to throw light on the duty of many 
a professing Christian. Let us mark them well, and see 
what they are. It was practical obedience to this saying 
which produced the blessed Protestant Reformation. Its 
lessons deserve close attention. 

Do we not see here the duty of boldness in resisting 
false teaching? Beyond doubt we do. No fear of 
giving offence, no dread of ecclesiastical censure, should 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 10—20. 177 


make us hold our peace, when God’s truth is in peril. 
lf we are true followers of our Lord, we ought to be out- 
speaking, unflinching witnesses against error. “Truth,” 
says Musculus, “must not be suppressed because men 
are wicked and blind.” 

Do we not see again the duty of forsaking false 
teachers, if they will not give up their delusions? Be- 
yond doubt we do. No false delicacy, no mock humility 
should make us shrink from leaving the ministrations of 
any minister who contradicts God’s Word. It is at our 
peril if we submit to unscriptural teaching: our blood 
will be on our own heads. To use the words of Whitby, 
“ It never can be right to follow the blind into the ditch.” 

Do we not see, in the last place, the duty of patience, 
when we see false teaching abound? Beyond doubt we 
do. We may take comfort in the thought that it will 
not stand long. God Himself will defend the cause of 
His own truth. Sooner or later every heresy “shall be 
rooted up.” We are not to fight with carnal weapons, 
but wait, and preach, and protest, and pray. Sooner or 
later, as Wycliffe said, “the truth shall prevail.” 

Respecting the heart of man our Lord declares in 
these verses that it is the true source of all sin and defile- 
ment. The Pharisees taught that holiness depended on 
meats and drinks, on bodily washings and purifications. 
They held that all who observed their traditions on these 
matters were pure and cleanin God’s sight, and that all 
who neglected them were impure and unclean.—Our 
Lord overthrew this miserable doctrine, by showing his 
disciples that the real fountain of all defilement was not 
without a man, but within. “Out of the heart,” He 


178 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


says, “proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, forni- 
cations, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies : these are the 
things which defile a man.”—He that would serve God 
aright, needs something far more important than bodily 
washings. He must seek to have a “clean heart.” 

What an awful picture we have here of human nature, 
and drawn too by One who “knew what was in man!” 
What a fearful catalogue is this of the contents of our 
own bosoms! What a melancholy list of seeds of evil 
our Lord has exposed, lying deep down within every one 
of us, and ready at any time to start into active life! 
What can the proud and self-righteous say, when they 
read such a passage as this? This is no sketch of the 
heart of a robber or murderer: it is the true and faith- 
ful account of the hearts of all mankind. May God 
grant that we may ponder it well, and learn wisdom! 

Let it be a settled resolution with us that in all our 
religion the state of our hearts shall be the main thing. 
Let it not content us to go to church, and observe the 
forms of religion. Let us look far deeper than this, and 
desire to have a “heart right in the sight of God.” (Acts 
viii. 21.) The right heart is a heart sprinkled with the 
blood of Christ, and renewed by the Holy Ghost, and 
purified by faith. Never let us rest till we find within 
the witness of the Spirit, that God has created in us a 
clean heart, and made all things new. (Psalm li. 10; 
2 Cor. v. 17.) 

Finally, let it be a settled resolution with us to “keep 
our hearts with all diligence,” all the days of our lives, 
(Prov. iv. 23.) Even after renewal they are weak. Even 
after putting on the new man they are deceitful. Let us 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 21—28. 179 


never forget that our chief danger is from within. The 
world and the devil combined, cannot do us so much 
harm as our own hearts will, if we do not watch and 
pray. Happy is he who daily remembers the words of 
Solomon: “ He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool.” 


(Prov. xxviii. 26.) 


eer 


MATTHEW XV. 21—28. 


21 Then Jesus went thence, and 
departed into the coasts of Tyre 
and Sidon. 

22 And, behold, a woman of Ca- 
naan came out of the same coasts, 
and cried unto him, saying, Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, thow son of 
David; my daughter is grievously 
vexed with a devil. 

23 But he answered her not a 
word, And his disciples came and 
besought him, saying, Send her 
away ; for she crieth after us. 

24 But he answered and said, I 
am not sent but unto the lost 





sheep of the house of Israel. 

25 Then came she and worship- 
ped him, saying, Lord, help me. 

26 But he answered and said, It 
is not meet to take the children’s 
bread, and to cast it to dogs. 

27 And she said, Truth, Lord: 
yet the dogs eat of the crumbs 
which fall from their masters’ 
table. 

28 Then Jesus answered and said 
unto her, O woman, great is thy 
faith: be it unto thee even as thou 
wilt. And her daughter was made 
whole from that very hour. 


ANOTHER of our Lord’s miracles is recorded in these 
verses, the circumstances which attend it are peculiarly 


full of interest. 
what they are. 
in instruction. 


Let us take them up in order, and see 
Every word in these narratives is rich 


We see, in the first place, that true faith may some- 
times be found where it might have been least expected. 
A Canaanitish woman cries to our Lord for help, on 


behalf of her daughter. 


“Have mercy on me,” she 
says, “O Lord, thou son of David.” 


Such a prayer 


would have showed great faith had she lived in Bethany 
or Jerusalem. But when we find that she came from 
the “ coasts of Tyre and Sidon,” such a prayer may well 
fill us with surprise. It ought to teach us, that it is 


180 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


grace, not place, which makes people believers. We may 
live in a prophet’s family, like Gehazi, the servant of 
Elisha, and yet continue impenitent, unbelieving, and 
fond of the world. We may dwell in the midst of 
superstition and dark idolatry, like the little maid in 
Naaman’s house, and yet be faithfu.s witnesses for God 
and His Christ. Let us not despair of any one’s soul, 
merely because his lot is cast in an unfavourable 
position. It is possible to dwell in the coasts of Tyre 
and Sidon, and yet sit down in the kingdom of God. 

We see, in the second place, that affliction sometimes 
vroves a blessing to a person’s soul. 

The Canaanitish mother, no doubt, had been sorely 
tried. She had seen her darling child vexed with a 
devil, and been unable to relieve her. But yet that 
trouble brought her to Christ, and taught her to pray. 
Without it she might have lived and died in careless 
ignorance, and never seen Jesus at all. Surely it was 
good for her that she was afflicted. (Psalm cxix. 71.) 

Let us mark this well. There is nothing which shows 
our ignorance so much as our impatience under trouble. 
We forget that every cross is a messsage from God, and 
intended to do us good in the end. Trials are intended 
to make us think,—to wean us from the world,—to send 
us to the Bible,—to drive us to our knees. Health is a 
good thing; but sickness is far better, if it leads us to 
God. Prosperity is a great mercy; but adversity is a 
greater one, if it brings us to Christ. Anything, anything 
is better than living in carelessness, and dying in sin. 
Better a thousand times be afflicted, like the Canaanitish 
mother, and like her flee to Christ, than live at ease, like 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 21—28. 181 


the rich “ fool,” and die at last without Christ and with- 
out hope. (Luke xii. 20.) 

We see, in the third place, that Christ's people are 
often less gracious and compassionate than Christ Himself. 

The woman about whom we are reading found small 
favour with our Lord’s disciples. Perhaps they regarded 
an inhabitant of the coasts of Tyre and Sidon as un- 
worthy of their Master’s help. At any rate they said, 
“Send her away.” 

There is only too much of this spirit among many 
who profess and call themselves believers. They are apt 
to discourage inquirers after Christ, instead of helping 
them forward. They are too ready to doubt the reality 
of a beginner’s grace, because it is small, and to treat 
him as Saul was treated when he first came to Jerusalem 
after his conversion: They believed not that he was 
a disciple. (Actsix. 26.) Let us beware of giving way 
to this spirit. Let us seek to have more of the mind that 
was in Christ. Like Him, let us be gentle, and kind, and 
encouraging in all our treatment of those who are seeking 
to be saved. Above all, let us tell men continually that 
they must not judge of Christ by Christians. Let us 
assure them that there is far more in that gracious Master 
than there is in the best of His servants. Peter, and 
James, and John, may say to the afflicted soul, “Send her 
away :” but such a word never came from the lips of 
Christ. He may sometimes keep us long waiting, as He 
did this woman ; but He will never send us empty away. 

We see, in the last place, what encowragement there is 
to persevere in prayer, both for ourselves and others. 

It is hard to conceive a more striking illustration of 


182 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


this truth, than we have in this passage. The prayer of 
this afflicted mother at first seemed entirely unnoticed : 
Jesus “answered her not a word.” Yet she prayed on. 
—The saying which by and by fell from our Lord’s lips 
sounded discouraging : “IT am not sent but unto the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel.” Yet she prayed on: “ Lord, 
help me.”—The second saying of our Lord was even less 
encouraging than the first: “It is not meet to take 
the children’s bread, and cast it to dogs.” Yet “ hope 
deferred” did not make her heart sick.” (Prov. xiii 
12.) Even then she was not silenced. Even then she 
finds a plea for some “crumbs” of mercy to be granted 
to her. And her importunity obtained at length a 
gracious reward: “O woman, great is thy faith: be it 
unto thee even as thou wilt.” That promise never yet 
was broken: “Seek, and ye shall find.” (Matt. vii. 7.) 

Let us remember this history, when we pray for our- 
selves, Weare sometimes tempted to think that we get 
no good by our prayers, and that we may as well give 
them up altogether. Let us resist the temptation: it 
comes from the devil. Let us believe, and pray on. 
Against our besetting sins, against the spirit of the 
world, against the wiles of the devil, let us pray on, and 
not faint.—For strength to do duty, for grace to bear 
our trials, for comfort in every trouble, let us “ continue 
in prayer.” Let us be sure that no time is so well spent 
in every day as that which we spend upon our knees, 
Jesus hears us, and in His own good time will give an 
answer. 

Let us remember this history when we intercede for 
others. Have we children whose conversion we desire? 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XV. VER. 29—39. 183 


Have we relatives and friends about whose salvation 
Let us follow the example of this 
Canaanitish woman, and lay the state of their souls 
before Christ. Let us name their names before Him 
night and day, and never rest till we have an answer. 
We may have to wait many a long year. We may seem 
to pray in vain, and intercede without profit. But let 
us never give up, while life lasts. Let us believe that 
Jesus is not changed, and that He who heard the 
Canaanitish mother, and granted her request, will also 
hear us, and one day give us an answer of peace. 


we are anxious ? 


MATTHEW XV. 29—39. 


29 And Jesus departed from 
thence, and came nigh unto the 
sea of Galilee; and went up into a 
mountain, and sat down there. 

30 And great multitudes came 
unto him, having with them those 
that were lame, blind, dumb, 
maimed, and many others, and 
cast them down at Jesus’ feet ; and 
he healed them: 

81 Insomuch that the multitude 
wondered, when they saw the dumb 
to speak, the maimed to be whole, 
the lame to walk, and the blind to 
see: and they glorified the God of 
Israel. 

32 Then Jesus called his disciples 
unto him, and said, Ihave compas- 
sion on the multitude, because they 
continue with me now three days, 
and have nothing to eat : and I will 
not send them away fasting, lest 
they faint in the way. 

83 And his disciples say unto 


him, Whence should we have so 
much bread in the wilderness, as 
to fill so great a multitude P 

34 And Jesus saith unto them, 
How many loaves have ye? And 
they said, Seven, and a few little 
fishes. 

35 And he commanded the mul- 
titude to sit down on the ground. 

36 And he took the seven loaves 
and the fishes, and gave thanks, 
and break them, and gave to his 
disciples and the disciples to the 
multitude. 

387 And they did all eat, and were 
filled: and they took up of the 
broken meat that was left seven 
baskets full. 

88 And they that did eat were 
four thousand men, beside women 
and children. 

39 And he sent away the multi- 
tude, and took ship, and came into 
the coasts of Magdala. 


THE beginning of this passage contains three points 


which deserve our special attention. 


For the present 


let us dwell exclusively on them. 
In the first place, let us remark how much more pains 


people take about the relief of their bodily diseases than 


184 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


about their souls. We read, that “great multitudes came 
to Jesus, having with them those that were lame, blind, 
dumb, maimed, and many others.” Many of them, n 

doubt, had journeyed many miles, and gone through 
great fatigues. Nothing is so difficult and troublesome 
as to move sick people. But the hope of being healed 
was in sight. Such hope is everything to a sick man. 

We know little of human nature if we wonder at 
the conduct of these people. We need not wonder at 
all. They felt that health was the greatest of earthly 
blessings, and that pain was the hardest of all trials 
to bear. There is no arguing against sense. A man 
feels his strength failing. He sees his body wasting 
and his face becoming pale. He is sensible that his 
appetite is leaving him. He knows, in short, that he 
is ill, and needs a physician. Show him a physician 
within reach, who is said never to fail in working cures, 
and he will go to him without delay. 

Let us however not forget that our souls are far more 
diseased than our bodies, and let us learn a lesson from 
the conduct of these people. Our souls are afflicted with 
a malady far more deep-seated, far more complicated, far 
more hard to cure than any ailment that flesh is heir to. 
They are in fact plague-stricken by sin. They must be 
healed, and healed effectually, or perish everlastingly. 
Do we really know this? Do we feelit? Are we alive 
to our spiritual disease? Alas, there is but one answer 
to these questions! The bulk of mankind do not feel 
it at all. Their eyes are blinded. They are utterly 
insensible to their danger. For bodily health they crowd 
the waiting-rooms of doctors. For bodily health they 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XV. VER. 29—39. 185 


take long journeys to find purer air. But for their souls’ 
health they take no thought at all. Happy indeed is 
that man or woman who has found out his goul’s 
disease! Such an one will never rest till he has found 
Jesus. Troubles will seem nothing to him. Life, life, 
eternal life is at stake! He will “count all things loss 
that he may win Christ,” and be healed. (Phil. iii. 8.) 

In the second place, let us mark the marvellous ease 
and power with which our Lord healed all who were 
brought to Him. We read that “the multitude wondered 
when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be 
whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see; and 
they glorified the God of Israel.” 

Behold in these words a lively emblem of our Lord 
Jesus Christ’s power to heal sin-diseased souls. There 
is no ailment of heart that He cannot cure. There is 
no form of spiritual complaint that He cannot overcome. 
The fever of lust, the palsy of the love of the world, 
the slow consumption of indolence and sloth, the heart- 
disease of unbelief,—all, all, give way when He sends 
forth His Spirit on any one of the children of men. He 
can put a new song in a sinner’s mouth, and make him 
speak with love of that Gospel which he once ridiculed 
and blasphemed. He can open the eyes of a man’s 
understanding and make him see the kingdom of God. 
He can open the ears of a man, and make him willing 
to hear His voice, and to follow Him wheresoever He 
goeth. He can give power to a man who once walked 
in the broad way that leadeth unto destruction, to walk 
in the way of life. He can make hands that were once 
instruments of sin, serve Him and do His will. The 


186 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


time of miracles is not yet passed. Every conversion is 
a miracle. Have we ever seen a real instance of con- 
version? Let us know that we saw in it the hand of 
Christ. We should have seen nothing really greater 
if we had seen our Lord making the dumb to speak and 
the lame to walk, when He was on earth. 

Would we know what to do if we desire to be saved ? 
Do we feel soul-sick and want acure? We must just 
go to Christ by faith, and apply to Him for relief. He 
is not changed: eighteen hundred years have made no 
difference in Him. High at the right hand of God, He 
is still the great Physician. He still “ receiveth sinners.” 
(Luke xv. 2.) He is still mighty to heal. 

In the third place, let us remark the abundant com 
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. We read that “ He 
called His disciples and said, 1 have compassion on 
the multitude.” A great crowd of men and women is 
always a solemn sight. It should stir our hearts to feel 
that each is a dying sinner, and each has a soul to be 
saved. None ever seems to have felt so much when He 
saw a crowd, as Christ. 

It is a curious and striking fact, that of all the feel- 
ings experienced by our Lord when upon earth, there is 
none so often mentioned as “compassion.” His joy, His 
sorrow, His thankfulness, His anger, His wonder, His 
zeal, all are occasionally recorded. But none of these 
feelings are so frequently mentioned as “compassion.” 
The Holy Spirit seems to point out to us that this was 
the distinguishing feature of His character, and the 
predominant feeling of His mind when He was among 
men, Nine times over,—to say nothing of expressions 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XVI. VER, 1—12. 187 


in parables,—nine times over the Spirit has caused that 
word “compassion” to be written in the Gospels. 

There is something very touching and instructive in 
this circumstance. Nothing is written by chance in the 
Word of God. There is a special reason in the selection 
of every single expression, That word “ compassion,” no 
doubt, was specially chosen for our profit. 

It ought to encourage all who are hesitating about 
beginning to walk in God’s ways. Let them remember 
that their Saviour is full of “compassion.” He will 
receive them graciously. He will forgive them freely. 
He will remember their former iniquities no more. He 
will supply all their need abundantly. Let them not be 
afraid. Christ’s mercy is a deep well, of which no one 
ever found the bottom. 

It ought to comfort the saints and servants of the Lord 
when they feel weary. Let them call to mind that Jesus 
is “full of compassion.” He knows what a world it is in 
which they live. He knows the body of a man and all 
its frailties. He knows the devices of their enemy, the 
devil. And the Lord pities His people: let them not 
be cast down. They may feel that weakness, failure, and 
imperfection are stamped on all they do; but let them 
not forget that word which says, “ His compassions fail 
not.” (Lament, iii. 22.) 





MATTHEW XVI. 1—12. 


1 Tho Pharisees also with the | It ies be fair weather: for the sky 
Sadducecs came, and tempting jisred. | 4 , 
desired him that he would shew| 3 And in the morning, It will be 
+hein a sign from heaven. foul weather to-day: for the sky is 

2 He answered and said unto | red and lowring. O ye hypocrites, 
them, When it is evening, ye say, | ye can discern the face of the sky; 


0 


188 


but can ye not discern the signs of 
the times? 

4 A wicked and adulterous gen- 
eration seeketh after a sign; and 
there shall no sign be given unto it, 
but the sign of the prophet Jonas. 
And he left them, and departed. 

5 And when his disciples were 
come to the other side, they had 
forgotten to take bread. 

6 Then Jesus said unto them, 
Take heed and beware of the lea- 
ven of the Pharisees and of the 
Sadducees. 

7 And they reasoned among 
themselves, saying, It is because 
we have taken no bread. 

8 Which when Jesus perceived, 
he said unto them, O ye of little 
faith, why reason ye among your- 





EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


selves, because ye have brought 
no bread ? 

9 Doye not yet understand, nei- 
ther remember the five loaves of 
the five thousand, and how many 
baskets ye took up? 

10 Neither the seven loaves of 
the four thousand, and how many 
baskets ye took up? 

11 How is it that ye do not un- 
derstand that I spake it not to you 
concerning bread, that ye should 
beware of the leaven of the Phari- 
sees and of the Sadducees ? 

12 Then understood they how 
that he bade them not beware of 
the leaven of bread, but of the 
doctrine of the Pharisees and of 
the Sadducees. 


In these verses we find our Lord assailed by the untiring 
enmity of the Pharisees and Sadducees. As a general 
rule these two sects were at enmity between themselves : 
in persecuting Christ, however, they made common 
cause. Truly it was an unholy alliance! Yet how often’ 
we see the same thing in the present day. Men of the 
most opposite opinions and habits will agree in disliking 
the Gospel, and will work together to oppose its pro- 
gress. “There is no new thing under the sun.” (Eccles. 
i. 9.) | 

The first point in this passage which deserves special 
notice is the repetition which our Lord makes of words 
used by Him on a former occasion. He says, “a wicked 
and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and 
there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the 
prophet Jonas.” If we turn to the twelfth chapter of 
this Gospel and the 39th verse, we shall find that He 
had said the very same thing once before. 

This repetition may seem a trifling and unimportant 
matter in the eyes of some. But it is not so in reality. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 1—12, 189 


It throws light on a subject, which has perplexed the 
minds of many sincere lovers of the Bible, and ought 
therefore to be specially observed. 

This repetition shows us that our Lord was in the 
habit of saying the same things over again. He did not 
content Himself with saying a thing once, and after- 
wards never repeating it. It is evident that it was His 
custom to bring forward certain truths again and again, 
and thus to impress them more deeply on the minds of 
His disciples. He knew the weakness of our memories on 
spiritual things. He knew that what we hear twice, we 
remember better than what we hear once. He therefore 
brought out of His treasury old things as well as new. 

Now what does all this teach us? It teaches us that 
we need not be so anxious to harmonize the narratives 
we read in the four Gospels, as many are disposed to be. 
It does not follow that the sayings of our Lord, which 
we find the same in St. Matthew and St. Luke, were 
always used at the same time, or that the events with 
which they are connected must necessarily be the same. 
—St. Matthew may be describing one event in our Lord’s 
life; St. Luke may be describing another. And yet the 
words of our Lord, on both occasions, may have been pre- 
cisely alike.—To attempt to make out the two events to be 
one and the same, because of the sameness of the words 
used, has often led Bible students into great difficulties. 
It is far safer to hold the view here maintained,—that at 
different times our Lord often used the same words. 

The second point which deserves special notice in these 
verses is the solemn warning which our Lord takes occasion 
to give to His disciples. His mind was evidently pained 


190 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


with the false doctrines which He saw among the Jews, 
and the pernicious influence which they exercised. He 
seizes the opportunity to utter a caution. “Take heed, 
and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the 
Sadducees.” Let us mark well what those words contain. 

To whom was this warning addressed? To the twelve 
apostles,—to the first ministers of the Church of Christ, 
—to men who had forsaken all for the Gospel’s sake! 
Even they are warned! The best of men are only men, 
and at any time may fall into temptation. “Let Him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.” (1 Cor. 
x. 12.) If we love life, and would see good days, let us 
never think that we do not need that hint: “Take heed 
and beware.” 

Against what does our Lord warn His apostles ? Against 
the “doctrine” of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees, 
The Pharisees we are frequently told in the Gospels, were 
self-righteous formalists. The Sadducees were sceptics, 
freethinkers, and half infidels. Yet even Peter, James, 
and John must beware of their doctrines! Truly the best 
and holiest of believers may well be on his guard ! 

By what figure does our Lord describe the false 
doctrines against which He cautions His disciples? He 
calls them leaven, Like leaven, they might seem a 
small thing compared to the whole body of truth. Like 
leaven, once admitted, they would work secretly and 
noiselessly, Like leaven, they would gradually change 
the whole character of the religion with which they were 
mixed. How much is often contained in a single word ! 
It was not merely the open danger of heresy, but 
”Jeaven,” of which the apostles were to heware, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 1—12. 191 


There is much in all this that calls loudly for the close 
attention of all professing Christians. The caution of 
our Lord in this passage has been shamefully neglected 
It would have been well for the Church of Christ if the 
warnings of the Gospel had been as much studied as its 
promises. 

let us then remember that this saying of our Lord’s 
about the “leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees” was 
intended for all time. It was not meant only for the 
generation to which it was spoken, but for the per- 
petual benefit of the Church of Christ. He who spoke 
it saw with prophetical eye the future history of 
Christianity. The Great Physician knew well that 
Pharisee-doctrines and Sadducee-doctrines would prove 
the two great wasting diseases of His Church, until the 
end of the world. He would have us know that there 
will always be Pharisees and Sadducees in the ranks 
of Christians. Their succession, at any rate, shall never 
fail. Their generation shall never becomeextinct. Their 
name may change, but their spirit will always remain. 
Therefore He cries to us, “ Take heed, and beware.” 

Finally, let us make a personal use of this caution, by 
keeping up a holy jealousy over our own souls. Let us 
remember that we live in a world where Pharisaism and 
Sadduceeism are continually striving for the mastery in 
the Church of Christ. Some want to add to the Gospel, 
and some want to take away from it. Some would bury 
it, and some would pare it down to nothing. Some would 
stifle it by heaping on additions, and some would bleed 
- it to death by subtraction from its truths. Both parties 
agree only in one respect. Both would kill and destroy 


192 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


the life of Christianity, if they succeeded in having their 
own way. Against both errors let us watch and pray, 
and stand upon our guard. Let us not add to the 
Gospel, to please the Roman Catholic Pharisee. Let us 
not subtract from the Gospel, to please the Neologian 
Sadducee. Let our principle be “the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth,” nothing added to it, 
aud nothing taken away, 





MATTHEW XVI. 13—20. 


13 When Jesus came into the 
coasts of Czesarea Philippi, he 
asked his disciples, saying, Whom 
do re say that I the Son of man 
a 


m 

14 And they said, Some say that 
thou art John the’ Baptist: some 
Elias; and others, Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets. 

15 He saith unto them, But 
whom say ye that I am? 

16 And Simon Peter answered 
and said, Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God. 

17 And Jesus answered and said 
unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon 
Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath 





not revealed it unto thee, but my 
Father which is in heaven. 

18 And I say also unto thee, 
That thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build my church; and 
the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it. 

19 And I will give unto thee the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt loose 
on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

20 Then charged he his disciples 
that they should tell no man that 
he was Jesus the Christ. 


THERE are words in this passage which have led to 
painful differences and divisions among Christians. 
Men have striven and contended about their meaning 
till they have lost sight of all charity, and yet have 
failed to carry conviction to one another’s minds. Let 
it suffice us to glance briefly at the controverted words, 
and then pass on to more practical lessons. 

What then are we to understand, when we read that 
remarkable saying of our Lord’s, “Thou art Peter, and 
upon this rock I will build my church”? Does it mean 
that the Apostle Peter himself was to be the foundation 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 13—20. 193 


on which Christ’s Church was to be built? Such an 
interpretation, to say the least, appears exceedingly im- 
probable. To speak of an erring, fallible child of Adam 
as the foundation of the spiritual temple, is very unlike 
the ordinary language of Scripture. Above all, no reason 
can be given why our Lord should not have said, “I 
will build my Church upon thee,” if such had been His 
meaning, instead of saying, “I will build my Church 
upon this rock.” 

The true meaning of “the Rock,” in this passage, 
appears to be the truth of our Lord’s Messiahship and 
Divinity, which Peter had just confessed. It is as 
though our Lord had said, “Thou art rightly called by 
the name Peter, or stone, for thou hast confessed that 
mighty truth, on which, as on a rock, I will build my 
Church.” * 

But what are we to understand when we read the 
promise which our Lord makes to Peter: “I will give 
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven”? Do 
these words mean that the right of admitting souls to 
heaven was to be placed in Peter’s hands? The idea is 
preposterous. Such an office is the special prerogative 


* There is nothing modern, or peculiarly Protestant, in the 
view here maintained. It was held by Chrysostom long ago. 
It was taught by Ferus, a famous Roman Catholic preacher, of 
the Franciscan Order, at Mayence, in the sixteenth century, in 
his Homilies on St. Matthew. 


It may be well to remark, in this place, that it is a complete 
delusion to suppose that the Scriptures can be interpreted 
according to the “unanimous consent of the Fathers.” There 
ts no such unanimous consent! It is a mere high-sounding 
phrase, utterly destitute of any foundation in facts. The Fathers 
disagree as much in explaining Scripture, as Whitby and Gill, 
or Matthew Henry and D’Oyly and Mant, 


194 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of Christ Himself. (Rev.i. 18.) Do the words mean 
that Peter was to have any primacy or superiority over 
the rest of the Apostles? There is not the slightest proof 
that such a meaning was attached to the words in the 
New Testament times, or that Peter had any rank or 
dignity above the rest of the twelve. 

The true meaning of the promise to Peter appears 
to be, that he was to have the special privilege of 
first opening the door of salvation, both to the Jews 
and Gentiles. This was fulfilled to the letter, when he 
preached on the day of Pentecost to the Jews, and 
visited the Gentile Cornelius at his own house. On 
each occasion he used “the keys,” and threw open the 
door of faith. And of this he seems to have been sen- 
sible himself: “God,” he says, “made choice among ts, 
that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of 
the Gospel, and believe.” (Acts xv. 7.) 

Finally, what are we to understand when we read the 
words, ‘‘ Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be 
bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven”? Does this mean that 
the Apostle Peter was to have any power of forgiving sins, 
and absolving sinners? Such an idea is derogatory to 
Christ’s special office, as our Great High Priest. It isa 
power which we never find Peter, or any of the Apostles, 
once exercising. They always refer men to Christ. 

The true meaning of this promise appears to be, that 
Peter and his brethren, the apostles, were to be specially 
commissioned to teach with authority the way ot salva- 
tion. As the Old Testament priest declared authorita- 
tively whose leprosy was cleansed, so the apostles were 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 13—20. 195 


appointed to “declare and pronounce” authoritatively, 
whose sins were forgiven. Beside this, they were to 
be specially inspired to lay down rules and regulations 
for the guidance of the Church on disputed questions. 
Some things they were to “ bind” or forbid ; others they 
were to “loose” or allow. The decision of the Council 
at Jerusalem, that the Gentiles need not be circumcised, 
was one example of the exercise of this power (Acts 
xvi. 19). But it was a commission specially confined to 
the apostles. In discharging it they had no successors. 
With them it began, and with them it expired. 

Wewill leave these controverted words here. Enough 
perhaps has been said upon them for our personal edifi- 
cation. Let us only remember that, in whatever sense 
men take them, they have nothing to do with the Church 
of Rome. Let us now turn our attention to points which 
more immediately concern our own souls. 

In the first place, let us admire the noble confession 
which the apostle Peter makes in this passage. He says, 
in reply to our Lord’s question, “Whom say ye that 
I am ?”—*“ Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God.” 

At first sight, a careless reader may see nothing very 
remarkable in these words of the apostle. He may 
think it extraordinary that they should call forth such 
strong commendation from our Lord. But such thoughts 
arise from ignorance and inconsideration. Men forget 
that it is a widely different thing to believe in Christ’s 
divine mission when we dwell in the midst of professing 
Christians, and to believe in it when we dwell in the 
midst of hardened and unbelieving Jews. The glory of 


196 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Peter’s confession lies in this,—that he made it when 
few were with Christ and many against Him. He made 
it when the rulers of his own nation, the Scribes, and 
Priests, and Pharisees, were all opposed to his Master. 
He made it when our Lord was in the “ form of a ser- 
vant,” without wealth, without royal dignity, without 
any visible mark of a King. To make such a confession 
at such a time, required great faith and great decision of 
character. The confession itself, as Brentius says, “ was 
an epitome of all Christianity, and a compendium of 
true doctrine about religion.” Therefore it was that our 
Lord said, “ Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona.” 

We shall do well to copy that hearty zeal and affec- 
tion which Peter here displayed. We are perhaps too 
much disposed to underrate this holy man, because of 
his occasional instability, and his thrice-repeated denial 
of his Lord. This is a great mistake. With all his 
faults, Peter was a true-hearted, fervent, single-minded 
servant of Christ. With all his imperfections, he has 
given us a pattern that many Christians would do wisely 
to follow. Zeal like his may have its ebbs and flows, 
and sometimes lack steadiness of purpose. Zeal like his 
may be ill-directed, and sometimes make sad mistakes. 
But zeal like his is not to be despised. It awakens the 
sleeping; it stirs the sluggish; it provokes others to 
exertion. Anything is better than sluggishness, luke- 
warmness, and torpor, in the Church of Christ. Happy 
would it have been for Christendom had there been 
more Christians like Simon Peter and Martin Luther. 

In the next place, let us take care that we wnderstand 
what our Lord means when He speaks of His Church. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 13—20. 197 


The Church which Jesus promises to build upon a 
rock is the “ blessed company of all faithful people.” It 
is not the visible Church of any one nation, or country 
or place. It is the whole body of believers of every age, 
and tongue, and people. It is a Church composed of all 
who are washed in Chrisi’s blood, clothed in Christ’s 
righteousness, renewed by Christ’s Spirit, joined to Christ 
by faith, and epistles of Christ in life. It is a Church of 
which every member is baptized with the Holy Ghost, 
and is really and truly holy. It is a Church which is 
one body. All who belong to it are of one heart and one 
mind, hold the same truths, and believe the same doc- 
trines as necessary to salvation. It is a Church which 
has only one Head: that Head is Jesus Christ Himself. 
“He is the Head of the body.” (Col. i. 18.) 

Let us beware of mistakes on this subject. Few words 
are so much misunderstood as the word “ Church ;” few 
mistakes have so much injured the cause of pure reli- 
gion. Ignorance on this point has been a fertile source 
of bigotry, sectarianism, and persecution. Men have 
wrangled and contended about Episcopal, Presbyterian, 
and Independent Churches, as if it were needful to sal- 
vation to belong to some particular party, and as if, 
belonging to that party, we must of course belong to 
Christ. All this time they have lost sight of the one 
true Church, outside of which there is no salvation at 
all. It will matter nothing at the last day where we 
have worshipped, if we are not found members of the 
true Church of God’s elect. 

In the last place, let us mark the glorious promises 
which our Lord makes to His Church: He says, “The 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it.” 


198 EXPOSTYORY THOUGHTS, 


The meaning of this promise is,—that the power of 
Satan shall never destroy the people of Christ. He that 
brought sin and death into the first creation by tempting 
Eve, shall never bring ruin on the new creation by over- 
throwing believers. The mystical body of Christ shall 
never perish or decay. Though often persecuted, afflicted, 
distressed, and brought low, it shall never come to an 
end. It shall outlive the wrath of Pharaohs and Roman 
Emperors. Visible churches, like Ephesus, may come 
to nothing; but the true Church never dies. Like the 
bush that Moses saw, it may burn, but shall not be con- 
sumed. very member of it shall be brought safe to 
glory. In spite of falls, failures, and short-comings,—in 
spite of the world, the flesh, and the devil,—no member 
of the true Church shall ever be cast away. (John x. 28.) 


MATTHEW XVI. 21—23. 

21 From that time forth began ,; began to rebuke him, saying, Be it 
Jesus to show unto his disciples, | far from thee, Lord: this shall not 
how that he must go unto Jerusa- | be unto thee. 
lem, and suffer many things of the 23 But he turned, and said unto 
elders and chief priests and scribes, | Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan : 
and be killed, and be raised again | thou art an offence unto me: for 
the third day. thou savourest not the things that 

22 Then Peter took him, and | beof God, but those that be of men. 
IN the beginning of these verses we find our Lord 
revealing to His disciples a great and startling truth. 
That truth was His approaching death upon the cross. 
For the first time He places before their minds the as- 
tounding announcement that “He must go to Jerusalem, 
and suffer,—and be killed.” He had not come on earth 
to take a kingdom, but to die. He had not come to 
reign, and be ministered to; but to shed His blood as a 


sacrifice, and to give His life as a ransom for many. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 21—23. 199 


It is almost impossible for us to conceive how strange 
and incomprehensible these tidings must have seemed 
to His disciples. Like most of the Jews, they could 
form no idea of a suffering Messiah. They did not 
understand that the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah must be 
literally fulfilled. They did not see that the sacrifices of 
the law were all meant to point them to the death of the 
true Lamb of God. They thought of nothing but the 
second glorious coming of Messiah, which is yet to take 
place at the end of the world. They thought so much 
of Messiah’s crown, that they lost sight of His cross. 
We shall do well to remember this. A right understand- 
ing of this matter throws strong light on the lessons 
which this passage contains, 

We learn, in the first place, from these verses, that 
there may be much spiritual ignorance even in a true 
disciple of Christ. 

We cannot have a clearer proof of this than the con- 
duct of the apostle Peter in this passage. He tries to 
dissuade our Lord from suffering on the cross. “Be it 
far from Thee,” he says: “this shall not be unto Thee.” 
He did not see the full purpose of our Lord’s coming 
into the world. His eyes were blinded to the necessity 
of onr Lord’s death. He actually did what he could to 
prevent that death taking place at all! And yet we 
know that Peter was a converted man: he really be- 
lieved that Jesus was the Messiah. His heart was right 
in the sight of God. 

These things are meant to teach us that we must 
neither regard good men as infallible, because they are 
good men, nor yet suppose they have no grace, because 


200 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


their grace is weak and small. One brother may possess 
singular gifts, and be a bright and shining light in the 
Church of Christ. But let us not forget that he is a man, 
and as a man liable to commit great mistakes. Another 
brother’s knowledge may be scanty. He may fail to 
judge rightly on many points of doctrine; he may err 
both in word and deed. But has he faith and love 
towards Christ? Does he hold the Head? If so, let 
us deal patiently with him. What he sees not now, he 
may see hereafter. Like Peter, he may now be in the 
dark, and yet, like Peter, enjoy one day the full light of 
the Gospel. 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
that there is no doctrine of Scripture so deeply important 
as the doctrine of Christ’s atoning death. 

We cannot have clearer proof of this than the lan- 
guage used by our Lord in rebuking Peter. He addresses 
him by the awful name of “Satan,” as if he was an 
adversary, and doing the devil’s work, in trying to pre- 
vent His death. He says to him, whom He had so lately 
called “blessed,” “Get thee behind Me, thou art an offence 
unto Me.” He tells the man whose noble confession He 
had just commended so highly, “Thou savourest not 
the things that be of God, but those that be of men.” 
Stronger words than these never fell from our Lord’s 
lips. The error that drew from such a loving Saviour 
such a stern rebuke to such a true disciple, must have 
been a mighty error indeed. 

The truth is that our Lord would have us regard the 
crucifixion as the central truth of Christianity. Right 
views of His vicarious death. and the benefits resulting 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 24—28, 201 


from it, lie at the very foundation of Bible-religion. 
Never let us forget this. On matters of church-govern- 
ment, and the form of worship, men may differ from 
us, and yet reach heaven in safety. On the matter of 
Christ’s atoning death, as the way of peace, truth is only 
one. If we are wrong here, we are ruined for ever. 
Error on many points is only a skin disease; error 
about Christ’s death is a disease at the heart. Here let 
us take our stand : let nothing move us from this ground. 
The sum of all our hopes must be, that “ Christ has died 
for us.” (1 Thess. v. 10.) Give up that doctrine, and 
we have no solid hope at all. 





MATTHEW XVI. 24—28. 


24 Then said Jesus unto his dis- | lose his own soul? or what shall a 
ciples, If any man will come after | man give in exchange for his soul ? 
me, let him deny himself, and take 27 For the Son of man shall come 
up his cross, and follow me. in the glory of his Father with his 

25 For whosoever will save his | angels; and then he shall reward 
life shall lose it: and whosoever | every man according to his works. 
will lose his life for my sake shall 28 Verily I say unto you, There 
find it. be some standing here, which shall 

26 For what is a man profited, if | not taste of death, till they see the 
he shall gain the whole world, and | Son of man coming in his kingdom. 


In order to see the connection of these verses we must 
remember the mistaken impressions of our Lord’s disci- 
ples as to the purpose of His coming into the world. 
Like Peter they could not bear the idea of the cruci- 
fixion. They thought that Jesus had come to set up an 
earthly kingdom, and they did not see that He must needs 
suffer and die. They dreamed of worldly honours and 
temporal rewards in their Master’s service. They did 
not understand that true Christians, like Christ, must be 
“made perfect through sufferings.” Our Lord corrects 
these misapprehensions in words of peculiar solemnity, 
which we shall do well] to lay up in our hearts. 


202 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us learn, in the first place, from these verses, that 
men must make up their minds to trouble and self-denial, 
if they follow Christ. 

Our Lord dispels the fond dreams of His disciples, 
by telling them that His followers must “take up the 
cross.” The glorious kingdom they were expecting was 
not about to be set up immediately. They must make 
up their minds to persecution and affliction, if they in- 
tended to be His servants. They must be content to 
“lose their lives,” if they would have their souls saved. 

It is good for us all to see this point clearly. We 
must not conceal from ourselves that true Christianity 
brings with it a daily cross in this life, while it offers us 
a crown of glory in the life to come. The flesh must be 
daily crucified; the devil must be daily resisted; the 
world must be daily overcome. There is a warfare to 
be waged, and a battle to be fought. All this is the 
inseparable accompaniment of true religion: heaven is 
not to be won without it. Never was there a truer word 
than the old saying, “No cross, no crown!” If we 
have never found this out by experience, our souls are 
in a poor condition. 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
that there is nothing so precious as a man’s soul. 

Our Lord teaches this lesson by asking one of the 
most solemn questions that the New Testament contains. 
It is a question so well known, and so often repeated, 
that people often lose sight of its searching character. 
But it is a question that ought to sound in our ears 
like a trumpet, whenever we are tempted to neglect our 
eternal interests: “What shall it profit a man if he gain 
the whole world and lose his own soul ?” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVI. VER. 24—28. 203 


There can only be one answer to this question. There 
is nothing on earth, or under the earth, that can make 
amends to us for the loss of our souls. There is nothing 
that money can buy, or man can give, to be named in 
comparison with our souls. The world and all that it 
contains, is temporal: it is all fading, perishing, and 
passing away. The soul is efernal: that one single 
word is the key to the whole question. Let it sink 
down deeply into our hearts. Are we wavering in our 
religion? Do we fear the cross? Does the way seem 
too narrow? Let our Master’s words ring in our ears: 
“What shall it profit a man?” and let us doubt no more. 

Let us learn, in the last place, that the second coming 
of Christ is the time when His people shall receive their 
rewards. “The Son of Man shall come in the glory 
of His Father, and then shall He reward every man 
according to his works.” 

There is deep wisdom in this saying of our Lord’s, when 
viewed in connection with the preceding verses. He knows 
the heart of a man. He knows how soon we are ready to 
be cast down, and, like Israel of old, to be “discouraged 
because of the way.” (Num. xxi. 4.) He therefore holds 
out to us a gracious promise. He reminds us that He 
has yet to come a second time, as surely as He came the 
first time. He tells us that this is the time when His 
disciples shall receive their good things. There will be 
glory, honour, and reward in abundance one day for all 
who have served and loved Jesus. Butitis to be in the 
dispensation of the second advent, and not of the first. 
The bitter must come before the sweet, the cross before 


the crown. The first advent is the dispensation of the 
P 


204 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


crucifixion ; the second advent is the dispensation of the 

kingdom. We must submit to take part with our Lord 

in His humiliation, if we desire to share in His glory. 
And now let us not leave these verses without serious 


self-inquiry as to the matters which they contain. 


We 


have heard of the necessity of taking up the cross, and 


denying ourselves. 
carrying it daily ? 
soul. 
of Christ’s second advent. 


Have we taken it up, and are we 
We have heard of the value of the 
Do we live as if we believed it ? 


We have heard 
Do we look forward to it 


with hope and joy ?—Happy is that man who can give 
a, satisfactory answer to these questions ! 


MATTHEW XVII. 1—13. 


1 And after six days Jesus taketh 
Peter, James, and John his brother, 
and bringeth them up into an high 
mountain apart, 

2 And was transfigured before 
them: and his face did shine as the 
sun, and his raiment was white as 
the light. 

3 And, behold, there appeared 
unto them Moses and Elias talking 
with him. 

4 Then answered Peter, and said 
unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us 
to be here: if thou wilt, let us 
make here three tabernacles; one 
for thee, and one for Moses, and 
one for Elias. 

5 While he yet spake, behold, a 
bright cloud overshadowed them: 
and behold a voice out of the cloud, 
which said, This is my beloved Son, 
7 whom I am well pleased; hear ye 

im. ‘ 
_ 6 And when the disciples heard 
at, they fell on their face, and were 
sore afraid. 


7 And Jesus came and touched 
them, and said, Arise, and be not 
afraid. 

8 And when they had lifted up 
their eyes, they saw no man, save 
Jesus only. 

9 And as they came down from 
the mountain, Jesus charged them, 
saying, Tell the vision to no man, 
until the Son of man be risen again 
from the dead. 

10 And his disciples asked him, 
saying, Why then say the scribes 
that Elias must first come? 

11 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, Elias truly shall first 
come, and restore all things. 

12 But Isay unto you, That Elias 
is come already, and they knew him 
not, but have done unto him what- 
soever they listed. Likewise shall 
also the Son of man suffer of them. 

13 Then the disciples understood 
that he spake unto them of John 
the Baptist. 


THESE verses contain one of the most remarkable events 
in our Lord’s earthly ministry,—the event commonly 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 1—13. 205 


called the transfiguration. The order in which it is 
recorded is beautiful and instructive. The latter part 
of the last chapter showed us the cross: here we are 
graciously allowed to see something of the coming 
reward. The hearts which have just been saddened by 
a plain statement of Christ’s sufferings, are at once 
gladdened by a vision of Christ’s glory. Let us mark 
this. We often lose much by not tracing the connection 
between chapter and chapter in the Word of God. 

There are some mysterious things, no doubt, in the 
vision here described. It must needs be so. We are 
yet in the body. Our senses are conversant with gross 
and material things. Our ideas and perceptions about 
glorified bodies and dead saints must necessarily be 
vague and imperfect. Let us content ourselves with 
endeavouring to mark out the practical lessons which 
the transfiguration is meant to teach us. 

In the first place, we have in these verses a striking 
pattern of the glory in which Christ and His people will 
appear when He comes the second time. 

There can be little question that this was one main 
object of this wonderful vision. It was meant to en- 
courage the disciples, by giving them a glimpse of good 
things yet to come. That “face shining as the sun,” 
and that “raiment white as the light,” were intended 
to give the disciples some idea of the majesty in which 
Jesus will appear to the world, when He comes the 
second time, and all His saints with Him. The corner 
of the veil was lifted up, to show them their Master's 
true dignity. They were taught that if He did not yet 
appear to the world in the guise.of a King, it was 


206 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


only because the time for putting on His royal apparel 
was not yet come. It is impossible to draw any other 
conclusion from St. Peter's language, when writing on 
the subject. He says, with distinct reference to the 
transfiguration, “ We were eye witnesses of His majesty.’ 
(2 Peter i. 16.) 

It is good for us to have the coming glory of Christ 
and His people deeply impressed on our minds. We are 
sadly apt to forget it. There are few visible indications of 
it in the world : “We see not yet all things put under” our 
Lord’s feet. (Heb. ii. 8.) Sin, unbelief, and superstition 
abound. Thousands are practically saying, “ We will not 
have this man to reign over us.’—It doth not yet appear 
what His people shall be. Their crosses, their tribula- 
tions, their weaknesses, their conflicts, are all manifest 
enough ; but there are few signs of their future reward. 
Let us beware of giving way to doubts in this matter. 
Let us silence such doubts by reading over the history of 
the transfiguration. There is laid up for Jesus, and all 
that believe on Him, such glory as the heart of man 
never conceived. It is not only promised, but part of 
it has actually been seen by three competent witnesses. 
One of them says, “We beheld His glory, the glory as 
of the only begotten of the Father.” (John i.14) Surely 
that which has been seen may well be believed. 

In the second place, we have in these verses, an 
' unanswerable proof of the resurrection of the body, and 
the life after death We are told that Moses and Elijah 
appeared visibly in glory with Christ. They were seen 
in a bodily form. They were heard talking with our 
Lord. Fourteen hundred and eighty years had rolled 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 1—13, 207 


round, since Moses died and was buried. More than 
nine hundred years had passed away, since Elijah 
“went up by a whirlwind into heaven.” Yet here they 
are seen alive by Peter, James, and John! 

Let us lay firm hold on this part of the vision. It 
deserves close attention. We must all feel, if we ever 
think at all, that the state of the dead is a wonderful 
and mysterious subject. One after another we bury 
them out of our sight. We lay them in their narrow 
beds, and see them no more, and their bodies become 
dust. But will they really live again? Shall we really 
see them any more? Will the grave really give back 
the dead at the last day? These are questions that 
will occasionally come across the minds of some, in 
spite of all the plainest statements in the Word of God. 

Now we have in the transfiguration the clearest 
evidence that the dead will rise again. We find two 
men appearing on earth, in their bodies, who had long 
been separate from the land of the living,—and in them 
we have a pledge of the resurrection of all. All that 
have ever lived upon earth will again be called to life, 
and render up their account. Not one will be found 
missing. There is no such thing as annihilation. All 
that have ever fallen asleep in Christ will be found in 
safe keeping,—patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs,— 
down to the humblest servant of God in our own day. 
“Though unseen to us they all live to God.” “He is not 
a God of the dead, but of the living.” (Luke xx. 38.) 
Their spirits live as surely as we live ourselves, and will 
appear hereafter in glorified bodies, as surely as Moses 
and Elijah in the mount. These are indeed solemn 


208 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


thoughts! There is a resurrection, and men like Felix 
may well tremble. There is a resurrection, and men 
like Paul may well rejoice. 

In the last place, we have in these verses a remarkable 
testimony to Christ’s infinite superiority over all that are 
born of woman. 

This is a point which is brought out strongly by the 
voice from heaven, which the disciples heard. Peter, 
bewildered by the heavenly vision, and not knowing 
what to say, proposed to build three tabernacles, one for 
Christ, one for Moses, and one for Elijah. He seemed, in 
fact, to place the law-giver and the prophet side by side 
with his divine Master, as if all three were equal. At 
once, we are told, the proposal was rebuked in a marked 
manner.—A cloud covered Moses and Elijah, and they 
were no more seen. A voice at the same time came 
forth from the cloud, repeating the solemn words, made 
use of at our Lord’s baptism, “This is My beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased: hear ye Him.” That voice 
was meant to teach Peter that there was One there far 
greater than Moses or Elijah. Moses was a faithful 
servant of God; Elijah was a bold witness for the truth: 
but Christ was far above either one or the other. He 
was the Saviour to whom law and prophets were con- 
tinually pointing. He was the true Prophet, whom all 
were commanded to hear. (Deut. xviii. 15.) Moses and 
Elijah were great men in their day; but Peter and his 
companions were to remember that in nature, dignity, 
and office, they were far below Christ.—He was the true 
sun: they were the stars depending daily on His light. 
He was the root: they were the branches. He was the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 1—13. 209 


Master: they were the servants. Their goodness was 
all derived: His was original and His own.—Let them 
honour Moses and the prophets, as holy men. But if 
they would be saved they must take Christ alone for 
their Master, and glory only in Him. “Hear ye Him.” 

Let us see, in these words, a striking lesson to the 
whole Church of Christ. There is a constant tendency 
in human nature to “hear man.” Bishops, priests, dea- 
cons, popes, cardinals, councils, presbyterian preachers, 
and independent ministers, are continually exalted to a 
place which God never intended them to fill, and made 
practically to usurp the honour of Christ. Against this 
tendency let us all watch, and be on our guard. Let 
these solemn words of the vision ever ring in our ears : 
“Hear ye Christ.” 

The best of men are only men at their very best. 
Patriarchs, prophets, and apostles,—martyrs, fathers, 
reformers, puritans,—all, all are sinners, who, need a 
Saviour ; holy, useful, honourable in their place,—but 
sinners after all. They must never be allowed to stand 
between us and Christ. He alone is “the Son, in whom 
the Father is well pleased;” He alone is sealed and 
appointed to give the bread of life; He alone has the 
keys in His hands: “God over all, blessed for ever.” 
(Rom. ix. 5.) Let us take heed that we hear His voice, 
and followHim. Let us value all religious teaching just 
in proportion as it leads us to Jesus. The sum and sub- 
stance of saving religion is to “hear Christ.” 


210 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XVII. 1421. 


14 And when they were come to 
the multitude, there came to him 
a certain man, kneeling down to 
him, and saying, 

15 Lord have mercy on my son: 
for he is lunatic, and sore vexed: 
for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, 
and oft into the water. 

16 And I brought him to thy 
diodes, and they could not cure 


m. 

17 Then Jesus answered and 
said, O faithless and perverse gene- 
ration, how long shall I be with 
you ? how long shall I suffer you? 
bring him hither to me. 

18 And Jesus rebuked the devil ; 





and he departed out of him: and 
the child was cured from that very 
hour. 

19 Then came the disciples to 
Jesus apart, and said, Why could 
not we cast him out? 

20 And Jesus said unto them, 
Because of your unbelief: for verily 
I say unto you, If ye have faith as 
a grain of mustard seed, ye shall 
say unto this mountain, Remove 
hence to yonder place; and it shall 
remove; and nothing shall be im- 
possible unto you. 

21 Howbeit this kind goeth not 
out but by prayer and fasting. 


WE read in this passage another of our Lord’s great 


miracles. 
with a devil. 


He heals a young man lunatic and possessed 


The first thing we see in these verses is a lively emblem 


of the awful influence sometimes exercised by Satan over 
the young. We are told of a certain man’s son, who 
was “lunatic and sore vexed.” We are told of the evil 
spirit pressing him on to the destruction of body and 
soul: “Oft-times he falleth into the fire, and oft into 
the water.” It was one of those cases of Satanic pos- 
session, which, however common in our Lord’s times, in 
our own day is rarely seen. But we can easily imagine 
that, when they did occur, they must have been pecu- 
liarly distressing to the relations of the afflicted. It is 
painful enough to see the bodies of those we love racked 
by disease. How much more painful must it have been 
to see body and mind completely under the influence 
of the devil! “Out of hell,” says Bishop Hall, “ there 
could not be greater misery.” 

But we must not forget that there are many instances 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 14—21. 211 


of Satan’s spiritual dominion over young people, which 
are quite as painful, in their way, as the case described 
in this passage. There are thousands of young men who 
seem to have whollygiven themselves upto Satan’s temp- 
tations, and to be led “ captive at his will.” (2 Tim. ii. 
26.) They cast off all fear of God, and all respect for His 
commandments. They serve divers lusts and pleasures. 
They run wildly into every excess of riot. They refuse to 
listen to the advice of parents, teachers, or ministers. 
They fling aside all regard for health, character, or 
worldly respectability, They do all that lies in their 
power to ruin themselves, body and soul, for time and 
eternity. They are willing bond-slaves of Satan.—Who 
has not seen such young men? They are to be seen in 
town and in country ; they are to be found among rich 
and among poor. Surely such young men give mournful 
proof that although Satan now-a-days seldom has posses- 
sion of man’s body, he still exercises a fearful dominion 
over some men’s souls. 

Yet even about such young men as these, be it 
remembered, we must never despair. We must call 
to mind the almighty power of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Bad as this boy’s case was, of whom we read in these 
verses, he was “cured from the very hour” that he was 
brought to Christ! Parents, and teachers, and ministers 
should go on praying for young men, even at their worst. 
Hard as their hearts seem now, they may yet be softened : 
desperate as their wickedness now appears, they may 
yet be healed. They may yet repent, and be converted, 
like John Newton, and their last state prove better than 
their first. Whocantell? Let it bea settled principle 


212 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


with us, when we read our Lord’s miracles, never to 
despair of the conversion of any soul. 

In the second place, we see in these verses a striking 
example of the weakening effect of unbelief. The disciples 
anxiously inquired of our Lord, when they saw the devil 
yielding to His power, “Why could not we cast him 
out?” They received an answer full of the deepest 
instruction: “ Because of your unbelief.” Would they 
know the secret of their own sad failure in the hour of 
need? It was want of faith. 

Let us ponder this point well, and learn wisdom. 
Faith is the key to success in the Christian warfare 
unbelief is the sure road to defeat. Once let our faith 
languish and decay, and all our graces will languish with 
it. Courage, patience, long-suffering, and hope, will 
soon wither and dwindle away: faith is the root on 
which they all depend. The same Israelites who at one 
time went through the Red Sea in triumph, at another 
time shrunk from danger like cowards, when they reached 
the borders of the promised land. Their God was the 
same who had brought them out of the land of Egypt. 
Their leader was that same Moses who had wrought so 
many wonders before their eyes. But their faith was 
not the same. They gave way to shameful doubts of 
God’s love and power. “ They could not enter in because 
of unbelief.” (Heb. iii. 19.) 

In the last place, we see in these verses, that Satan’s 
kingdom is not to be pulled down without diligence and 
pains. This seems to be the lesson of the verse which 
concludes the passage we are now considering: “This 
kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.” A 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 14—2], 213 


gentle rebuke to the disciples appears to be implied in 
the words. Perhaps they had been too much lifted up 
by past successes; perhaps they had been less careful 
in the use of means in their Master’s absence, than they 
were under their Master’s eye. At any rate they receive a 
plain hint from our Lord, that the warfare against Satan 
must never be lightly carried on. They are warned that 
no victories are to be won easily over the prince of this 
world. Without fervent prayer,and diligent self-mortitfi- 
cation, they would often meet with failure and defeat. 

The lesson here laid down is one of deep importance. 
“T would,” says Bullinger, “that this part of the Gospel 
pleased us as much as those parts which concede liberty.” 
We are all apt to contract a habit of doing religious acts 
in a thoughtless, perfunctory way. Like Israel, puffed 
up with the fall of Jericho, we are ready to say to our- 
selves, “The men of Ai are but few” (Josh. vii. 3) ; 
“there is no need to put forth all our strength.” Like 
Israel, we often learn by bitter experience, that spiritual 
battles are not to be won without hard fighting. The 
ark of the Lord must never be handled irreverently. 
God’s work must never be carelessly done. 

May we all bear in mind our Lord’s words to His 
disciples, and make a practical use of them. In the pulpit 
and on the platform, in the Sunday school and in the 
district, in our use of family prayers and in reading 
our own Bibles, let us diligently watch our own spirit. 
Whatever we do, let us “do it with our might.” (Kccles. 
ix. 10.) Itis a fatal mistake to underrate our foes. Greater 
is He that is for us than he that is against us; but, for all 
that, he that is against us is not to be despised. He is 


214 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the “prince of this world.” He isa “strong man” armed, 
keeping his house, who will not “go out,” and part with 
his goods without a struggle. “We wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers.” 
(Ephes. vi. 12.) We have need to take the whole armour 
of God, and not only to take it, but to use it too. We 
may be very sure that those who win most victories over 
the world, the flesh, and the devil, are those who pray 
most in private, and “keep under their bodies, and bring 
them into subjection.” (1 Cor. ix. 27.) 


MATTHEW XVII. 22—27. 


22 And while they abode in Gali- 
lee, Jesus said unto them, The Son 
of man shall be betrayed into the 
hands of men: 

23 And they shall kill him, and 
the third day he shall be raised 
again. And they were exceeding 
sorry. 

24 And when they were come to 
Capernaum, they that received tri- 
bute money came to Peter, and said, 
Doth not your master pay tribute ? 

25 He saith, Yes. And when he 
was come into the house, Jesus 
prevented him, saying, What think- 





est thou, Simon? of whom do the 
kings of the earth take custom or 
tribute? of their own children, or 
of strangers P 

26 Peter saith unto him, Of 
strangers. Jesus saith unto him, 
Then are the children free. 

27 Notwithstanding, lest we 
should offend them, go thou to the 
sea, and cast an hook, and take up 
the fish that first cometh up; and 
when thou hast opened his mouth, 
thou shalt find a piece of money: 
that take, and give unto them for 
me and thee. 


THESE verses contain a circumstance in our Lord’s history 
which is not recorded by any of the Evangelists excepting 
St. Matthew. A remarkable miracle is worked in order 
to provide payment of the tribute-money required for the 
service of the temple. There are three striking points in 
the narrative, which deserve attentive observation. 

Let us observe, in the first place, our Lord’s perfect 
knowledge of everything that is said and done in this world. 
We are told that those who “received tribute-money 
came to Peter, and said. Doth not your Master pay 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 22—27, 915 


tribute? He saith, Yes.” It is evident that our Lord 
was not present, when the question was asked and the 
answer given; and yet no sooner did Peter come into 
the house than our Lord asked him, “ What thinkest 
thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take 
custom or tribute?” He showed that He was as well 
acquainted with the conversation as if he had been 
listening or standing by. 

There is something unspeakably solemn in the 
thought that the Lord Jesus knows all things. There 
is an eye that sees all our daily conduct. There is an 
ear that hears all our daily words. All things are naked 
and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom we have 
todo. Concealment is impossible: hypocrisy is useless. 
We may deceive ministers, and impose upon our 
relations and neighbours. But the Lord sees us through 
and through. We cannot deceive Christ. 

We ought to endeavour to make practical use of this 
truth. We should strive to live as in the Lord’s sight, 
and, like Abraham, to “walk before Him.” (Gen. xvii. 
1.) Let it be our daily aim to say nothing we would 
not like Christ to hear, and to do nothing we would not 
like Christ to see. Let us measure every difficult ques- 
tion as to right and wrong by one simple test, —“How 
would I behave if Jesus was standing by my side?” 
Such a standard is not extravagant and absurd. It isa 
standard that interferes with no duty or relation of life : 
it interferes with nothing but sin. Happy is he that 
tries to realize his Lord’s presence, and to do all and say 
all as unto Christ. 

Let us observe, in the next place, owr Lord’s almaghty 


216 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


power over all creation. He makes a fish his pay-master. 
He makes a dumb creature bring the tribute-money to 
meet the collector's demand. Well says Jerome, “I 
know not which to admire most here, our Lord’s fore- 
knowledge or His greatness.” 

We see here a literal fulfilment of the Psalmist’s 
words: “Thou madest Him to have dominion over the 
works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under 
His feet :—the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, 
and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.” 
(Psalm viii. 6—8.) 

Here is one among many proofs of the majesty and 
greatness of our Lord Jesus Christ. He only who first 
created could at His will command the obedience of all 
His creatures. “By Him were all things created—By 
Him all things consist.” (Col.i.16—18.) The believer 
who goes forth to do Christ’s work among the heathen 
may safely commit himself to his Master's keeping. He 
serves One who has all power, even over the beasts of 
the earth. How wonderful the thought, that such an 
Almighty Lord should condescend to be crucified for our 
salvation! How comfortable the thought, that when He 
comes again the second time He will gloriously manifest 
His power over all created things to the whole world. 
“The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion 
shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the 
serpent’s meat.” (Isaiah lxv. 25.) 

In the last place, let us observe in tnese verses, owr 
Lord’s willingness to make concessions, rather than give 
offence. He might justly have claimed exemption from 
the payment of this tribute-money. He, who was Son 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVII. VER. 22—277. 247 


of God, might fairly have been excused from paying for 
the maintenance of His Father's house. He who was 
“ greater than the temple,” might have shown good cause 
for declining to contribute to the support of the temple 
But our Lord does not do so. He claims no exemption. 
He desires Peter to pay the money demanded. At the 
same time He declares His reasons. It was to be done, 
“lest we should offend them.” “ A miracle is worked,” says 
Bishop Hall, “rather than offend even a tax-collector.” 

Our Lord’s example in this case deserves attention of 
all who profess and call themselves Christians. There is 
deep wisdom in those five words, “lest we should offend 
them.” They teach us plainly that there are matters in 
which Christ’s people ought to sink their own opinions, 
and submit to requirements which they may not tho- 
roughly approve, rather than give offence and “ hinder 
the Gospel of Christ.” God’s rights undoubtedly we 
ought never to give up; but we may sometimes safely 
give up ourown. It may sound very fine and seem very 
heroic to be always standing out tenaciously for our rights ! 
But it may well be doubted, with such a passage as this, 
whether such tenacity is always wise, and shows the 
mind of Christ. There are occasions when it shows 
more grace in a Christian to submit than to resist. 

Let us remember this passage as citizens and sulyects. 
We may not like all the political measures of our rulers, 
We may disapprove of some of the taxes they impose. 
But the grand question after all is, Will it do any good 
to the cause of religion to resist the powers that be ? Are 
their measures really injuring our souls? If not, let 
us hold our peace, “lest we should offend them.” “A 


218 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Christian,” says Bullinger, “never ought to disturb the 
public peace for things of mere temporary importance.” 

Let us remember this passage as members of a Church. 
We may not like every jot and tittle of the forms and 
ceremonies used in ourcommunion. We may not think 
that those who rule us in spiritual matters are always 
wise. But after all, are the points on which we are dis- 
satisfied really of vital importance ? Is any great truth 
of the Gospel at stake? If not, let us be quiet, “ lest we 
should offend them.” 

Let us remember this passage as members of Soctety. 
There may be usages and customs in the circle where our 
lot is cast, which to us,as Christians, are tiresome, use- 
less, and unprofitable. But are they matters of principle? 
Do they injure our souls? Will it do any good to the 
cause of religion, if we refuse to comply with them? If 
not, let us patiently submit, “lest we should offend them.” 

Well would it be for the Church and the world if 
these five words of our Lord had been more studied, 
pondered, and used! Who can tell the damage that has 
been done to the cause of the Gospel by morbid scru- 
pulosity, and conscientiousness, falsely so called! May 
we all remember the example of the great Apostle of the 
Gentiles: “We suffer all things, lest we should hinder 
the Gospel of Christ.” (1 Cor. ix. 12.) 





MATTHEW XVIII. 1—14. 


1 At the same time came the 3 And said, Verily I say unto 
disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who | you, Except ye be converted, and 
is the greatest in the kingdom of | become as little children, ye shall 
heaven P not enter into the kingdom of 

2 And Jesus called a little child | heaven. 
unto him, and set him in the midst 4 Whosoever therefore shall 
of them, humble himself as this little child, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 1—14. 


the same is greatest in the king- 
dom of heaven. 

5 And whoso shall receive one 
such little child in my name re- 
ceiveth me. 

6 But whoso shall offend one of 
these little ones which believe in 
me, it were better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his 
neck, and that he were drowned in 
the depth of the sea. 

7 Woe unto the world because of 
offences! for it must needs be that 
offences come; but woe to that man 
by whom the offence cometh! 

8 Wherefore if thy hand or thy 
foot offend thee, cut them off, and 
cast them from thee: it is better 
for thee to enter into life halt or 
maimed, rather than having two 
hands or two feet to be cast into 
everlasting fire. 

9 And if thine eye offend thee, 
pluck it out, and cast it from 
thee: it is better for thee to enter 


219 


into life with one eye, rather than 
having two eyes to be cast into 
hell fire, 

10 Take heed that ye despise not 
one of these little ones; for I say 
unto you, That in heaven their 
angels do always behold the face 
of my father which is in heaven, 

11 For the Son of man is come 
to save that which was lost. 

12 How think ye? if a man have 
an hundred sheep, and one of them 
be gone astray, doth he not leave 
the ninety and nine, and goeth into 
the mountains, and seeketh that 
which is gone astray. 

18 And if so be that he find it, 
verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth 
more of that sheep, than of the 
ninety and nine which went not 
astray. 

14 Even so it is not the will of 
your Father which is in heaven, 
that one of these little ones should 
perish, 


Tue first thing that we are taught in these verses is 
the necessity of conversion, and of conversion manifested by 
childlike humility. The disciples came to our Lord with 
the question, ‘Who is the greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven?” They spoke as men half-enlightened, and 
full of carnal expectations. They received an answer 
well calculated to awaken them from their day-dream, 
—an answer containing a truth which lies at the very 
foundation of Christianity ,—“Except ye be converted, 
and become as little children, ye shall not euter into the 
kingdom of heaven.” 

Let these words sink down deeply in our hearts. 
Without conversion there is no salvation. We all need 
an entire change of nature: of ourselves we have neither 
faith, nor fear, nor love towards God. We “must be born 
again.” (John iii. 8.) Of ourselves we are utterly unfit 
for dwelling in God’s presence. Heaven would be no 

Q 


220 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


heaven to us if we were not “converted.” It is true of 
all ranks, classes, and orders of mankind. All are born 
in sin and children of wrath, and all, without exception, 
need to be born again and made new creatures. A new 
heart must be given to us, and a new spirit put within 
us. Old things must pass away, and all things must 
become new. It is a good thing to be baptized into 
the Christian Church, and use Christian means of grace; 
but after all, “are we converted ?” 

Would we know whether we are really converted ? 
Would we know the test by which we must try ourselves ? 
The surest mark of true conversion is humility. If we 
have really received the Holy Ghost, we shall show it 
by a meek and childlike spirit. Like children, we shall 
think humbly of our own strength and wisdom, and be 
very dependent on our Father in heaven. Like children, 
we shall not seek great things in this world ; but having 
food and raiment and a Father’s love, we shall be con- 
tent. Truly this is a heart-searching test! It exposes 
the unsoundness of many a so-called conversion. It is 
easy to be a convert from one party to another party, 
from one sect to another sect, from one set of opinions to 
another set of opinions. Such conversions save no one’s 
soul. What we all want is a conversion from pride to 
humility,—from high thoughts of ourselves to lowly 
thoughts of ourselves—from self-conceit to self-abase- 
ment,—from the mind of the Pharisee to the mind of the 
Publican. A conversion of this kind we must experi- 
ence, if we hope to be saved. These are the conversions 
that are wrought by the Holy Ghost. 

The next thing that we are taught in these verses is 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 1—14. 221 


the great sin of putting stumbling-blocks in the way of 
believers. The words of the Lord Jesus on this subject 
are peculiarly solemn: “Woe unto the world because 
of offences !—Woe to that man by whom the offence 
cometh.” 

We put offences or stumbling-blocks in the way of 
men’s souls whenever we do anything to keep them 
back from Christ,—or to turn them out of the way of 
salvation,—or to disgust them with true religion. We 
may do it directly, by persecuting, ridiculing, opposing, 
or dissuading them from decided service of Christ. We 
may do it indirectly, by living a life inconsistent with 
our religious profession, and by making Christianity 
loathsome and distasteful by our own conduct. When- 
ever we do anything of the kind, it is clear, from our 
Lord’s words, that we commit a great sin, 

There is something very fearful in the doctrine here 
laiddown, It ought to stir up within us great searchings 
of heart. It is not enough that we wish to do good in 
this world. Are we quite sure that we are not doing 
harm ?—We may not openly persecute Christ’s servants ; 
but are there none that we are injuring by our ways and 
our example? It is awful to think of the amount of harm 
that can be done by one inconsistent professor of religion. 
He gives a handle to the infidel ; he supplies the worldly 
man with an excuse for remaining undecided ; he checks 
the inquirer after salvation; he discourages the saints, 
He is, in short, a living sermon on behalf of the devil. 
The last day alone will reveal the wholesale ruin of 
souls, that “offences” have occasioned in the Church 
of Christ. One of Nathan’s charges against David was, 


222 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


“Thou has given great occasion to the enemies of the 
Lord to blaspheme.” (2 Sam. xii. 14.) 

The next thing that we are taught in these verses is 
the reality of future punishment after death. Two strong 
expressions are used by our Lord on this point. He 
speaks of being “ cast into everlasting fire :” He speaks 
of being “cast into hell fire.” 

The meaning of these words is clear and unmistakable. 
There is a place of unspeakable misery in the world to 
come, to which all who die impenitent and unbelieving, 
must ultimately be consigned. There is revealed in 
Scripture a “fiery indignation,” which sooner or later 
will devour all God’s adversaries. (Heb. x. 27.) The 
same sure Word which holds out a heaven to all who 
repent and are converted, declares plainly that there 
will be a hell for all the ungodly. 

Let no man deceive us with vain words upon this 
awful subject. Men have arisen in these latter days 
who profess to deny the eternity of future punishment, 
and repeat the devil’s old argument, that we “shall not 
surely die.” (Gen. iii 4.) Let none of their reasonings 
move us, however plausible they may sound. Let us 
stand fast in the old paths. The God of love and mercy 
is also a God of justice: He will surely requite. The 
flood in Noah’s day, and the burning of Sodom, were 
meant to show us what He will one day do. No lips 
have ever spoken so clearly about hell as those of 
Christ Himself. Hardened sinners will find out, to 
their cost, that there is such a thing as the “ wrath of 
the Lamb.” (Rev. vi. 17.) 

The last thing we are taught in these verses, is the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 15—20. 223 


value that God sets on the least and lowest of believers. 
“Tt is not the will of your Father in heaven, that one of 
these little ones should perish.” 

These words are meant for the encouragement of all 
true Christians, and not for little children only. The 
connection in which they are found with the parable of 
the hundred sheep and one that went astray, seems to 
place this beyond doubt. They are meant to show us 
that our Lord Jesus is a Shepherd, who cares tenderly 
for every soul committed to His charge. The youngest, 
the weakest, the sickliest members of His flock are as dear 
to Him as the strongest. They shall never perish. None 
shall everpluck them out of His hand. Hewill lead them 
gently through the wilderness of this world. He will not 
overdrive them asingle day, lest any die. (Gen. xxxili. 
13.) He will carry them through every difficulty. He 
will defend them againsteveryenemy. The saying which 
He spoke shall be literally fulfilled: “Of them which 
Thou gavest me have I lost none.” (John xviii. 9.) 
With such a Saviour, who need fear beginning to be 
a thorough Christian? With such a Shepherd, who 
having once begun, need fear being cast away? 


MATTHEW XVIII. 15—20. 


15 Moreover if thy brother shall 
trespass against thee, go and tell 
him his fault between thee and 
him alone: if he shall hear thee, 
thou hast gained thy brother. 

16 But if he will not hear thee, 
then take with thee one or two 
more, that in the mouth of two or 
three witnesses every word may be 
established. 


17 And if he shall neglect to 
hear them, tell i¢ unto the church: 
but if he neglect to hear the 
church, let him be unto thee as a 
heathen man and a publican. 

18 Verily I say unto you, What- 
soever ye shall bind on earth shall 
be bound in heaven: and whatso- 
ever ye shall loose on earth shall] 
be loosed in heaven. 


224 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


19 Again I say unto you, That if ; my Father which is in heaven. 
two of you shall agree on earth as 20 For where two or three arr 
touching anything that they shall | gathered together in my name 
ask, it shall be done for them of} there am I in the midst of them 
THESE words of the Lord Jesus contain an expression 
which has often been misapplied. The command to 
“hear the Church,” has been so interpreted as to contra- 
dict other passages of God’s Word. It has been falsely 
applied to the authority of the whole visible Church in 
matters of doctrine, and so been made an excuse for the 
exercise of much ecclesiastical tyranny. But the abuse 
of Scripture truths must not tempt us to neglect the use 
of them. We must not turn away altogether from any 
text, because some have perverted it, and made it poison. 

Let us notice, in the first place, how admirable are the 
rules laid down by our Lord for the healing of differences 
among brethren. 

If we have unhappily received any injury from a 
fellow-member of Christ’s Church, the first step to be 
taken is to visit him “alone,” and tell him his fault. He 
may have injured us unintentionally, as Abimelech did 
Abraham (Gen. xxi. 26). His conduct may admit of 
explanation, like that of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and 
Manasseh, when they built an altar as they returned 
to their own land (Joshua xxii. 24). At any rate, this 
friendly, faithful, straightforward way of dealing is the 
most likely course to win a brother, if he is to be won. 
“A soft tongue breaketh the bone.” (Prov. xxv. 15.) 
Who can tell but he may say at once, “I was wrong,”— 
and make ample reparation ? 

If however this course of proceeding fails to produce 
any good effect, a second step is to be taken. We are to 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVUI. VER. 15—2u. 225 


“take with us one or two” companions, and tell our 
brother of his fault in their presence and hearing. Who 
can tell but his conscience may be stricken, when he finds 
his misconduct made known, and he may be ashamed and 
repent? If not, we shall at all events have the testimony 
of witnesses, that we did all we could to bring our brother 
to a right mind, and that he deliberately refused, when 
appealed to, to make amends. 

Finally, if this second course of proceeding prove 
useless, we are to refer the whole matter to the Christian 
congregation of which we are members: we are to “tell 
it to the Church.” Who can tell but the heart which 
has been unmoved by private remonstrances, may be 
moved by the fear of public exposure? If not, there 
remains but one view to take of our brother’s case. We 
must sorrowfully regard him as one who has shaken off 
all Christian principles, and will be guided by no higher 
motives than “a heathen man and a publican.” 

The passage is a beautiful instance of the mingled 
wisdom and tender consideration of our Lord’s teaching. 
What a knowledge it shows of human nature! Nothing 
does so much harm to the cause of religion as the quar- 
rels of Christians. No stone should be left unturned, no 
trouble spared, in order to prevent their being dragged 
before the public—What a delicate thoughtfulness it 
shows for the sensitiveness of poor human nature! 
Many a scandalous breach would be prevented, if we 
were more ready to practice the rule of “between thee 
and him alone.” Happy would it be for the Church and 
the world, if this portion of our Lord’s teaching was 
more carefully studied and obeyed! Differences and 


226 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


divisions there will be, so long as the world stands. But 
many of them would be extinguished at once, if the 
course recommended in these verses was tried. 

In the second place, let us observe what a clear argu- 
ment we have in these verses for the exercise of discipline 
in a Christian congregation. 

Our Lord commands disagreements between Chris- 
tians, which cannot be otherwise settled, to be referred 
to the decision of the Church, or Christian assembly to 
which they belong. “Tell it,” He says, “to the Church.” 
It is evident, from this, that He intends every congrega- 
tion of professing Christians to take cognizance of the 
moral conduct of its members, either by the action of the 
whole body collectively, or of heads and elders to whom 
its authority may be delegated. It is evident also that 
He intends every congregation to have the power of ex- 
cluding disobedient and refractory members from parti- 
cipation in its ordinances. “If he refuse,” He says, “to 
hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen man 
and a publican.” He says not a word about temporal 
punishment and civil disabilities. Spiritual penalties are 
the only penalty He permits the Church to inflict; and 
when rightly inflicted, they are not to be lightly regarded. 
“Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in 
heaven.” Such appears to be the substance of our Lord’s 
teaching about ecclesiastical discipline. 

It is vain to deny that the whole subject is surrounded 
with difficulties. On no point has the influence of the 
world weighed so heavily on the action of Churches 
On no point have Churches made so many mistakes,— 
sometimes on the side of sleepy remissness, sometimes on 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 15—20. 227 


the side of blind severity. No doubt the power of ex- 
communication has been fearfully abused and perverted, 
and, as Quesnel says, “we ought to be more afraid of our 
sins than of all the excommunications in the world.” 
Still it is impossible to deny, with such a passage as this 
before us, that Church discipline is according to the mind 
of Christ, and, when wisely exercised, is calculated to 
promote a Church’s health and well-being. It can never 
be right that all sorts of people, however wicked and un- 
godly, should be allowed to come to the table of the Lord 
no man letting or forbidding. It is the bounden duty of 
every Christian to use his influence to prevent such a 
state of things. A perfect communion can never be 
attained in this world;but purity should be the mark 
at which we aim. An increasingly high standard of 
qualification for full church-membership, will always be 
found one of the best evidences of a prosperous Church. 

Let us observe, in the last place, what gracious en- 
couragement Christ holds out to those who meet together 
in His name. He says, “Where two or three are 
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst 
of them.” That saying is a striking proof of our Lord’s 
divinity. God alone can be in more places than one at 
the same time. 

There is comfort in these words for all who love to 
meet together for religious purposes. At every assembly 
for public worship, at every gathering for prayer and 
praise, at every missionary meeting, at every Bible read- 
ing, the King of kings is present, Christ Himself attends. 
We may be often disheartened by the small number 
who are present on such occasions, compared with the 


228 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


number of those who meet for worldly ends. We may 
sometimes find it hard to bear the taunts and ridicule of 
an. illnatured world, which cries like the enemy of old, 
“What do these feeble people?” (Nehem. iv. 2.) But 
we have no reason for despondency. We may boldly fall 
back on these words of Jesus. At all such meetings we 
have the company of Christ Himself. 

There is solemn rebuke in these words for all who 
neglect the public worship of God, and never attend 
meetings for any religious purpose. They turn their 
backs on the society of the Lord of lords; they miss 
the opportunity of meeting Christ Himself. It avails 
nothing to say that the proceedings of religious meetings 
are marked by weakness and infirmity, or that as much 
good is got by staying at home as going to church. The 
words of our Lord should silence such arguments at once. 
Surely men are not wise when they speak contemptu- 
ously of any gathering where Christ is present. 

May we all ponder these things! If we have met 
together with God’s people for spiritual purposes in 
times past, let us persevere, and not be ashamed. If 
we have hitherto despised such meetings, let us consider 
our ways, and learn wisdom. 


MATTHEW XVIII. 21—35. 


21 Then came Peter to him, and 
said, Lord, how oft shall my bro- 
ther sin against me, and I forgive 
him P till seven times ? 

22 Jesus saith unto him, I say 
not unto thee, until seven times: 
but, Until seventy times seven. 

23 Therefore is the kingdom of 
heaven likened unto a certain 
king, which would take account of 
his servants. 


24 And when he had begun to 
reckon, one was brought unto him, 
which owed him ten thousand ta- 
lents. 

25 But forasmuch as he had not 
to pay, his lord commanded him to 
be sold, and his wife and children, 
and all that he had, and payment 
to be made. 

26 The servant therefore fell 
down, and worshipped him, saying, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 21]—35. 


Lord, have patience with me, and 
I will pay thee all. 

27 Then the Lord of that servant 
was moved with compassion, and 
loosed him, and forgave him the 
debt. 

28 But the same servant went 
out, and found one of his fellow- 
servants, which owed him an hun- 
dred pence: and he laid hands on 
him, and took him by the throat, 
saying, Pay me that thou owest. 

29 And his fellowservant fell 
down at his feet, and besought 
him, saying, Have patience with 
me, and I will pay thee all. 

30 And he would not: but went 
and cast him into prison, till he 
should pay the debt. 

81 So when his fellowservants 


229 


saw what was done, they were very 
sorry, and came and told unto their 
Lord all that was done. 

32 Then his lord, after that he 
had called him, said unto him, O 
thou wicked servant, I forgave 
thee all that debt, because thou 
desiredst me: 

33 Shouldst not thou also have 
had compassion on thy fellowser- 
vant, even as I had pity on thee ? 

34 And his lord was wroth, and 
delivered him to the tormentors, 
till he should pay all that was due 
unto him. 

35 So likewise shall my heavenly 
Father do also unto you, if ye from 
your hearts forgive not every one 

is brother their trespasses. 


In these verses the Lord Jesus deals with a deeply im- 
portant subject,—the forgiveness of injuries. We live 
in a wicked world, and it is vain to expect that we can 
escape ill-treatment, however carefully we may behave. 
To know how to conduct ourselves, when we are ill- 
treated, is of great moment to our souls. 

In the first place, the Lord Jesus lays it down as a 
general rule, that we ought to forgive others to the utter- 
most. Peter put the question, “How oft shall my 
brother sin against me and I forgive him? till seven 
times?” He received for answer, “I say not unto thee 
till seven times, but until seventy times seven.” 

The rule here laid down must of course be interpreted 
with sober-minded qualification. Our Lord does not 
mean that offences against the law of the land and the 
good order of society, are to be passed over in silence. 
He does not mean that we are to allow people to commit 
thefts and assaults with impunity. All that He means 
is, that we are to study a general spirit of mercy and 
forgivingness towards our brethren. We are to bear 


230 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


much, and to put up with much, rather than quarrel. 
We are to look over much, and submit to much, rather 
than have any strife. We are to lay aside everything 
like malice, revenge, and retaliation. Such feelings 
are only fit for heathens: they are utterly unworthy of 
a disciple of Christ. 

What a happy world it would be if this rule of our 
Lord’s was more known and better obeyed! How many 
of the miseries of mankind are occasioned by disputes, 
quarrels, lawsuits, and an obstinate tenacity about what 
men call “their rights!” How many of them might be 
altogether avoided, if men were more willing to forgive, 
and more desirous for peace! Let us never forget that 
a fire cannot go on burning without fuel: just in the 
same way it takes two to make a quarrel. Let us each 
resolve, by God’s grace, that of these two we will never 
be one. Let us resolve to return good for evil, and 
blessing for cursing, and so to melt down enmity, and 
change our foes into friends. (Rom. xii. 20.) It wasa 
fine feature in Archbishop Cranmer’s character, that if 
you did him an injury he was sure to be your friend. 

In the second place, our Lord supplies us with two 
powerful motives for exercising a forgiving spirit. He 
tells us a story of a man who owed an enormous sum to 
his master, and had “nothing to pay.” Nevertheless at 
the time of reckoning his master had compassion on him, 
and “forgave himall.” He tells us that this very man, 
after being forgiven himself, refused to forgive a fellow- 
servant a trifling debt of afew pence. He actually cast 
him into prison, and would not abate a jot of his demand! 
He tells us how punishment overtook this wicked and 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XVIII. VER. 21—35,. 231 


cruel man, who, after receiving mercy, ought surely to 
have shown mercy to others. And finally, he concludes 
the parable with the impressive words, “ So likewise 
shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your 
hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.” 

It is clear from this parable that one motive for forgiv- 
ing others ought to be the recollection that we all need 
forgiveness at God’s hands ourselves. Day after day we 
are coming short in many things, “ leaving undone what | 
we ought to do, and doing what we ought not to do.’ 
Day after day we require mercy and pardon. Our neigh- 
bours’ offences against us are mere trifles, compared with 
our offences against God. Surely it ill becomes poor 
erring creatures like us to be extreme in marking what 
is done amiss by our brethren, or slow to forgive it. 

Another motive for forgiving others ought to be the 
recollection of the day of judgment, and the standard by 
which we shall all be tried in that day. There will be 
no forgiveness in that day for unforgiving people. Such 
people would be unfit for heaven. They would not be 
able to value a dwelling-place to which “ mercy” is the 
only title, and in which “ mercy ” is the eternal subject 
of song. Surely if we mean to stand at the right hand, 
when Jesus sits on the throne of His glory, we must 
learn, while we are on earth, to forgive. 

Let these truths sink down deeply into our hearts, It 
is a melancholy fact that there are few Christian duties 
so little practised as that of forgiveness, It is sad to see 
- how much bitterness, unmercifulness, spite, hardness, 
and unkindness there isamong men. Yet there are few 
duties so strongly enforced in the New Testament Scrip- 


232 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


tures as this duty is, and few the neglect of which so 
clearly shuts a man out of the kingdom of God. 

Would we give proof that we are at peace with God, 
washed in Christ’s blood, born of the Spirit, and made 
God’s children by adoption and grace? Let us remem- 
ber this passage. Like our father in heaven, let us be 
forgiving. Has any man injured us? Let us this day 
forgive him. As Leighton says, “We ought to forgive 
ourselves little, and others much.” 

Would we do good to the world? Would we have 
any influence on others, and make them see the beauty 
of true religion? Let us remember this passage. Men 
who care not for doctrines can understand a forgiving 
temper. 

Would we grow in grace ourselves, and become more 
holy in all our ways, words, and works? Let us re- 
member this passage—Nothing so grieves the Holy 
Spirit, and brings spiritual darkness over the soul, as 
giving way to a quarrelsome and unforgiving temper. 
(Ephes. iv. 30—82.) 


MATTHEW XIX. 1—15. 


1 And it came to pass, that when 
Jesus had finished these sayings, 
he departed from Galilee, and came 
into the coasts of Judea beyond 
Jordan ; 

2 And great multitudes followed 
him; and he healed them there. 

_3 The Pharisees also came unto 
him, tempting him, and saying unto 
him, Is it lawful for a man to put 
away his wife for every cause? 

4 And he answered and said unto 
them, Have ye not read, that he 
which made them at the beginning 
made them male and female, 

5 And said, For this cause shall 


a man leave father and mother, 
and shall cleave to his wife: and 
they twain shall be one flesh ? 

6 Wherefore they are no more 
twain, but one flesh. What there- 
fore God hath joined together, let 
not man put asunder. 

7 They say unto him, Why did 
Moses then command to give a 
writing of divorcement, and to put 
her away? 

8 He saith unto them, Moses 
because of the hardness of your 
hearts suffered you to put away 
your wives: but from the begin- 
ning it was not so. 


MATTHEW, CHAP, 


9 And I say unto you, Whosoever 
shall put away his wife, except it 
be for fornication, and shall marry 
another, committeth adultery: and ! 
whoso marrieth her which is put | 
away doth commit adultery. 

10 His disciples say unto him, If | 


the case of the man be so with his | 


wife, it is not good to marry. 

11 But he said unto them, All 
men cannot receive this saying, 
save they to whom it is given. 

12 For there are some eunuchs, 
which were so born from their mo- 
ther’s womb: and there are some 


XIX. VER. 1—15. 233 


of men: and there be eunuchs, 
which have made themselves eun- 
uchs for the kingdom of heayen’s 
sake. He that is able to receive it, 
let him receive it. 

13 Then were there brought unto 
him little children, that He should 
put fis hands on them, and pray : 
; and the disciples rebuked them. 
| 14 But Jesus said, Suffer little 

children, and forbid them not, to 
come unto me: for of such is the 
kingdom of heaven. 

15 And he laid his hands on 
them, and departed thence. 


eunuchs which were made eunuchs | 


In these verses wé have the mind of Christ declared on 
two subjects of great moment. One is the relation of 
husband and wife: the other is the light in which we 
should regard little children, in the matter of their souls, 

It is difficult to overrate the importance of these two 
subjects. The well-being of nations, and the happiness 
of society, are closely connected with right views upon 
them. Nations are nothing but a collection of families. 
The good order of families depends entirely on keeping 
up the highest standard of respect for the marriage tie, 
and on the right training of children. We ought to be 
thankful, that on both these points, the great Head of 
the Church pronounced judgment so clearly. 

With respect to marriage, our Lord teaches that the 
union of husband and wife ought never to be broken off, 
except for the greatest of all causes, namely, actual un- 
Jaithfulness. 

In the days when our Lord was upon earth divorces 
were permitted among the Jews for the most trifling and 
frivolous causes. The practice, though tolerated by Moses, 
to prevent worse evils,—such as cruelty, or murder,— 


234 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


had gradually become an enormous abuse, and no doubt 
led to much immorality. (Malachi ii 14—16.) The re- 
mark made by our Lord’s disciples shows the deplorably 
low state of public feeling on the subject. They said, 
“Tf the case of the man be so, it is not good to marry.” 
They meant, of course, “if a man may not put away his 
wife for a slight cause at any time, he had better not 
marry at all.” Such language from the mouths of apos- | 
tles sounds strange indeed ! . 

Our Lord brings forward a widely different standard 
for the guidance of His disciples. He first founds His 
judgment on the original institution of marriage. He 
quotes the words used in the beginning of Genesis, where 
the creation of man and the union of Adam and Eve are 
described, as a proof that no relation should be so highly 
regarded as that of husband and wife. The relation of 
parent and child may seem very close, but there is one 
closer still: ‘“‘A man shall leave father and mother, and 
cleave to his wife.”"—He then backs up the quotation 
by His own solemn words, “What God hath joined to- 
gether, let not man put asunder.”—And finally He 
brings in the grave charge of breaking the seventh com- 
mandment, against marriage contracted after a divorce 
for light and frivolous causes :—“Whosoever shall put 
away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall 
marry another, committeth adultery.” 

It is clear, from the whole tenor of the passage, that 
the relation of marriage ought to be highly reverenced 
and honoured among Christians. Itisarelation which 
was instituted in paradise,in the time of man’s innocency, 
and is a chosen figure of the mystical union between 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIX. VER. 1—15. 235 


Christ and His Church. It is a relation which nothing 
but death ought to terminate. It is a relation which is 
sure to have the greatest influence on those whom it 
brings together, for happiness or for misery, for good or 
for evil. Such a relation ought never to be taken in 
hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly, but soberly, 
discreetly, and with due consideration. It is only too 
true, that inconsiderate marriages are one of the most 
fertile causes of unhappiness, and too often it may be 
feared, of sin. 

With respect to little children, we find our Lord in- 
structing us in these verses, both by word and deed, both 
by precept and example. “Little children were brought 
to Him, that He should put his hands on them and 
pray.” They were evidently tender infants, too young 
to receive instruction, but not too young to receive benefit 
by prayer. The disciples seem to have thought them 
beneath their Master’s notice, and rebuked those that 
brought them. But this drew forth a solemn declaration 
from the great Head of the Church:—‘“Jesus said, Suffer 
little children, and forbid them not, to come unto Me: 
for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” 

There is something deeply interesting both in the 
language and action of our Lord on this occasion, We 
know the weakness and feebleness, both in mind and 
body of a little infant. Of all creatures born into the 
world none is so helpless and dependent. We know 
who it was who here took such notice of infants, and 
found time, in His busy ministry among grown-up men 
and women, to “put His hands on them and pray.” It 


was the eternal Son of God, the great High Priest, the 
R 


236 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


King of kings, by whom all things consist, “the bright- 
ness of the Father’s glory, and the express image of His 
person.” (Heb. i. 3.) What an instructive picture the 
whole transaction places before our eyes! No wonder 
that the great majority of the Church of Christ have 
always seen in this passage a strong through indirect 
argument in favour of infant baptism. 

Let us learn, from these verses, that the Lord Jesus 
cares tenderly for the souls of little children. It is pro- 
bable that Satan specially hates them: it is certain that 
Jesus specially loves them. Young as they are, they are 
not beneath His thoughts and attention. That mighty 
heart of His has room for the babe in its cradle, as well 
as for the king on his throne. He regards each infant as 
possessing within its little body an undying principle, 
that will outlive the pyramids of Egypt, and see sun and 
moon quenched at the last day. With such a passage 
as this before us we may surely hope well about the 
salvation of all who die in infancy. “Of such is the 
kingdom of heaven.” 

Finally, let us draw from these verses encouragement 
to attempt great things in the religious instruction of 
children. Let us begin from their very earliest years to 
deal with them as having souls to be lost or saved, and 
let us strive to bring them to Christ. Let us make them 
acquainted with the Bible, as soon as they can under- 
stand anything. Let us pray with them, and pray for 
them, and teach them to pray for themselves. We may 
rest assured that Jesus looks with pleasure on such en- 
deavours, and isready to bless them. We may rest assured 
that such endeavours are not in vain. The seed sown in 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIX. VER. 16—22. 


237 


infancy, is often found after many days. Happy is that 
Church whose infant members are cared for as much as 


the oldest communicants! 


was crucified will surely be on that Church ! 


The blessing of Him that 
He “put 


His hands” on little children: He prayed for them. 


MATTHEW XIX. 16—22. 


16 And, behold, one came and 
said unto him, Good Master, what 
good thing shall I do, that I may 
have eternal life ? 

17 And he said unto him, Why 
callest thou me good? there is none 
good but one, that is, God: but if 
thou wilt enter into life, keep the 
commandments. 

18 He saith unto him, Which? 
Jesus said, Thou shalt do no mur- 
der, Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou 
shalt not bear false witness, 

19 Honour thy father and thy 


mother: and, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 

20 The young man saith unto 
him, All these things have I kept 
from my youth up: what lack I 
yet? 

21 Jesus said unto him, If thou 
wilt be perfect, go and sell that 
thou hast, and give to the poor, 
and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven: and come and follow me. 

22 But when the young man 
heard that saying, he went away 
sorrowful: for he had great pos- 
sessions. 


THESE verses contain a conversation between our Lord 
Jesus Christ and a young man, who came to Him to 
inquire about the way to eternal life. Like every con- 
versation recorded in the Gospels, between our Lord and 
an individual, it deserves special attention. Salvation 
is an individual business. Every one who wishes to be 
saved, must have private personal dealings with Christ 
about his own soul. 

We see, for one thing, from the case of this young 
man, that a person may have desires after salvation, and 
yet not be saved, Here is one who in a day of abounding 
unbelief comes of his own accord to Christ. He comes 
not to have a sickness healed; he comes not to plead 
about a child: he comes about his own soul. He opens 


238 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the conference with the frank question, “Good Master, 
what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal 
life?” Surely we might have thought, “This is a pro- 
mising case: this is no prejudiced ruler or Pharisee: 
this is a hopeful inquirer.” Yet by and by this very 
young man “goes away sorrowful.’—And we never 
read a word to show that he was converted ! 

We must never forget that good feelings alone in 
religion are not the grace of God. We may know the 
truth intellectually. We may often feel pricked in con- 
science. We may have religious affections awakened 
within us, have many anxieties about our souls, and 
shed many tears. But all this is not conversion. It 
is not the genuine saving work of the Holy Ghost. 

Unhappily this is not all that must be said on this 
point. Not only are good feelings alone not grace, but 
they are even positively dangerous, if we content our- 
selves with them, and do not act as well as feel. Itisa 
profound remark of that mighty master on moral ques- 
tions, Bishop Butler.—that passive impressions, often 
repeated, gradually lose alltheir power. Actions, often 
repeated,produce a habitin man’s mind. Feelings, often 
indulged in, without leading to corresponding actions, 
will finally exercise no influence at all. 

Let us apply this lesson to our own state. Perhaps we 
know what it is to feel religious fears, wishes, and desires. 
Let us beware that we do notrestin them. Let us never 
be satisfied till we have the witness of the Spirit in our 
hearts, that we are actually born again and new crea- 
tures. Let usnever rest till we know that we have really 
repented, and laid hold on the hope set before us in the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIX. VER. 16—22. 239 


Gospel. It is good to feel; but it is far better to be 
converted. 

We see, for another thing, from this young man’s case, 
that an unconverted person is often profoundly ignorant 
on spiritual subjects. Our Lord refers this inquirer to 
the eternal standard of right and wrong, the moral law. 
Seeing that he speaks so boldly about “doing,” He tries 
him by a command well calculated to draw out the real 
state of his heart: “If thou wilt enter into life, keep the 
commandments.” He even repeats to him the second 
table of the law; and at once the young man confidently 
replies, “All these have I kept from my youth up: what 
lack I yet?” So utterly ignorant is he of the spirituality 
of God’s statutes, that he never doubts that he has per- 
fectly fulfilled them. He seems thoroughly unaware that 
the commandments apply to the thoughts and words, as 
well as to the deeds, and that if God were to enter into 
judgment with him, he could “not answer Him one of a 
thousand.” (Job ix. 3.) How dark must his mind have 
been as to the nature of God’s law! How low must his 
ideas have been as to the holiness which God requires! 

It is a melancholy fact that ignorance like that of this 
young man is only too common in the Church of Christ. 
There are thousands of baptized people who know no 
more of the leading doctrines of Christianity than the 
veriest heathen. Tens of thousands fill churches and 
chapels weekly, who are utterly in the dark as to the 
full extent of man’s sinfulness. They cling obstinately 
to the old notion, that in some sort or other their own 
doings can save them. And when ministers visit them 
on their death-beds, they prove as blind as if they had 


240 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


never heard truth at all. So true is it, that the “ natural] 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for 
they are foolishness to him.” (1 Cor. ii. 14.) 

We see, in the last place, from this young man’s case, 
that one idol cherished in the heart may ruin a soul for 
ever, Our Lord, who knew what was in man, at last 
shows His inquirer his besetting sin, The same search- 
ing voice which said to the Samaritan woman, “ Go, call 
thy husband” (John iv. 16), says to the young man, 
“Go sell that thou hast, and give to the poor.” At once 
the weak point in his character is detected. It turns 
out that, with all his wishes and desires after eternal 
life, there was one thing he loved better than his soul, 
and that was his money. He cannot stand the test. 
He is weighed in the balance, and found wanting. And 
the history ends with the melancholy words, “ He went 
away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.” 

We have in this history one more proof of the truth, 
“The love of money is the root of all evil.” (1 Tim. vi. 10.) 
We must place this young man in our memories by 
the side of Judas, Ananias and Sapphira, and learn 
to beware of covetousness. Alas, it is a rock on which 
thousands are continually making shipwreck. There is 
hardly a minister of the Gospel who could not point to 
many in his congregation, who, humanly speaking, are 
“not far from the kingdom of God.” But they never 
seem to make progress. They wish; they feel; they 
mean; they hope: but there they stick fast! And 
why? Because they are fond of money. 

Let us prove our own selves, as we leave the passage. 
Let us see how it touches our own souls. Are we honest 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIX. VER. 23—30. 241 


and sincere in our professed desire to be true Christians ? 
Have we cast away all our idols? Is there no secret sin 
that we are silently clinging to, and refusing to give up? 
Is there no thing or person that we are privately loving 
more than Christ and our souls? These are questions 
that ought to be answered. The true explanation of the 
unsatisfactory state of many hearers of the Gospel is 
spiritual idolatry. We need not wonder that St. John 
says, “Keep yourselves from idols.” (1 John v. 21.) 





MATTHEW XIX. 23—30. 


23 Then said Jesus unto his dis- 
ciples, Verily I say unto you, That 
a rich man shall hardly enter into 
the kingdom of heaven. 

24 And again I say unto you, It 
is easier for a camel to go through 
the eye of a needle, than for a rich 
et to enter into the kingdom of 


God. 

25 When his disciples heard it, 
they were exceedingly amazed, 
saying, Who then can be saved ? 

26 But Jesus beheld them, and 
said unto them, With men this is 
impossible ; but with God all things 
are possible. 

27 Then answered Peter and 
said unto him, Behold, we have 





forsaken all, and followed thee; 
what shall we have therefore P 

28 And Jesus said unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, That ye 
which have followed me, in the re- 
generation when the Son of man 
shall sit in the throne of his glory, 
ye also shall sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel P 

29 And every one that hath forsa- 
ken houses, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or wife, or 
children, or lands, for my name’s 
sake, shall receive an hundred-fold, 
and shall inherit everlasting life. 

30 But many that are first shall 
be last; and the last shall be first. 


THE first thing that we learn in these verses is the im- 
mense danger which riches bring on the souls of those who 
possess them. The Lord Jesus declares, that “a rich man 
shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.” He goes 
even further. He uses a proverbial saying to strengthen 
His assertion: “It is easier for a camel to go through 
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the 


kingdom of God.” 
Few of our Lord’s sayings sound more startling than 


242 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


this. Fewrunmore counter to the opinions and prejudices 
of mankind. Few are so little believed. Yet this saying 
is true, and worthy of all acceptation. Riches, which all 
desire to obtain,—riches, for which men labour and toil, 
and become gray before their time,—riches are the most 
perilous possession. They often inflict great injury on 
the soul. They lead men into many temptations. They 
engross men’s thoughts and affections. They bind heavy 
burdens on the heart, and make the way to heaven even 
more difficult than it naturally is. 

Let us beware of the love of money. It is possible to 
use it well, and do good with it. But for one who makes 
a right use of money, there are thousands who make a 
wrong use of it, and do harm both to themselves and 
others. Let the worldly man, if he will, make an idol 
of money, and count him happiest who has most of it. 
But let the Christian, who professes to have “treasure 
in heaven,” set his face, like a flint, against the spirit of 
the world in this matter. Let him not worship gold. 
He is not the best man in God’s eyes who has most 
money, but he who has most grace. 

Let us pray daily for rich men’s souls. They are not 
to be envied: they are deeply to be pitied. They carry 
heavy weights in the Christian course: they are of all 
men the least likely “so to run as to obtain.” (1 Cor. 
ix. 24.) Their prosperity in this world is often their 
destruction in the world to come. Well may the Litany 
of the Church of England contain the words, “In all 
time of our wealth, good Lord, deliver us.” 

The second thing that we learn in this passage is the 
almighty power of God’s grace in the soul. The disciples 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIX. VER. 23—30. 243 


were amazed, when they heard our Lord’s language about 
rich men. It was language so entirely contrary to all 
their notions about the advantages of wealth, that they 
cried out with surprise, “Who then can be saved?” 
They drew from our Lord a gracious answer : “ With men 
this is impossible ; but with God all things are possible.” 
The Holy Ghost can incline even the richest of men to 
seek treasure in heaven. He can dispose even kings 
to cast their crowns at the feet of Jesus, and to count 
all things but loss for the sake of the kingdom of God. 
Proof upon proof of this is given to us in the Bible. 
Abraham was very rich, yet he was the Father of the 
faithful. Moses might have been a prince or king in 
Egypt, but he forsook all his brilliant prospects for the 
sake of Him who is invisible. Job was the wealthiest 
man in the East, yet he was a chosen servant of God ; 
David, Jehoshaphat, Josiah, Hezekiah, were all wealthy 
monarchs, but they loved God’s favour more than their 
earthly greatness. They all show us that “nothing is 
too hard for the Lord,” and that faith can grow even in 
the most unlikely soil. 

Let us hold fast this doctrine, and never let it go. 
No man’s place or circumstances shut him out from the 
kingdom of God. Let us never despair of any one’s sal- 
vation. No doubt rich people require special grace, and 
are exposed to special temptations. But the Lord God 
of Abraham, and Moses, and Job, and David, is not 
changed. He who saved them in spite of their riches, 
can save others also. When He works, who shall let 
it? (Isaiah xliii. 13.) 

The last thing that we learn in these verses is the 


24-4 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


immense encouragement the Gospel offers to those who give 
up everything for Christ's sake. We are told that Peter 
asked our Lord what he and the other apostles, who had 
forsaken their little all for His sake, should receive in 
return. He obtained a most gracious reply. <A full 
recompense shall be made to all who make sacrifices for 
Christ’s sake: they “shall receive an hundred fold, and 
shall inherit everlasting life.” 

There is something very cheering in this promise. 
Few in the present day, excepting converts among the 
heathen, are ever required to forsake homes, relatives, 
and lands, on account of their religion. Yet there are 
few true Christians who have not much to go through, 
in one way or another, if they are really faithful to their 
Lord. The offence of the cross is not yet ceased. 
Laughter, ridicule, mockery, and family persecution, are 
often the portion of an English believer. The favour 
of the world is often forfeited, places and situations 
are often perilled, by a conscientious adherence to the 
demands of the Gospel of Christ. All who are exposed 
to trials of this kind may take comfort in the promise of 
these verses. Jesus foresaw their need, and intended 
these words to be their consolation. 

We may rest assured that no man shall ever bea real 
loser by following Christ. The believermayseem tosuffer 
loss for a time, when he first begins the life of a decided 
Christian. He may be much cast down by the afflictions 
that are brought upon him on account of his religion. 
But let him rest assured that he will never find himself 
a loser in the long run, Christ can raise up friends for 
us who shall more than compensate for those we lose. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 1—16. 245 


Christ can open hearts and homes to us far more warm 
and hospitable than those that are closed against us. 
Above all, Christ can give us peace of conscience, inward 
joy, bright hopes, and happy feelings, which shall far 
outweigh every pleasant earthly thing that we have cast 


away for His sake. 
that it shall be so. 


He has pledged His royal word 
None ever found that word fail: 


let us trust it and not be afraid. 





MATTHEW XX. 1—16. 


1 For the kingdom of heaven is 
like unto a man that is an house- 
holder, which went out early in the 
morning to hire labourers into his 
vineyard. 

2 And when he had agreed with 
the labourers for a penny a day, he 
sent them into his vineyard. 

3 And he went out about the 
third hour, and saw others stand- 
ing idle in the market-place. 

4, And said unto them, Go ye also 
into the vineyard, and whatsoever 
is right I will give you. And they 
went their way. 

5 Again he went out about the 
sixth and ninth hour, and did like- 
wise. 

6 And about the eleventh hour 
he went out, and found others 
standing idle, and saith unto them, 
Why stand ye here all the day idle P 

7 They say unto him, Because no 
man hath hired us. He saith unto 
them, Go ye also into the vineyard ; 
and whatsoever is right, that shall 
ye receive, 

8 So when even was come, the 
lord of the yineyard saith unto his 


steward, Call the labourers, and | 





give them their hire, beginning 
from the last unto the first. 

9 And when they came that 
were hired about the eleventh hour, 
they received every man a penny. 

10 But when the first came, they 
supposed that they should have 
received more; and they likewise 
received every man a penny. 

11 And when they had received 
at, they murmured against the 
good man of the house, 

12 Saying, These last have 
wrought but one hour, and thou 
hast made them equal unto us, 
which have borne the burden and 
heat of the day. 

13 But he answered one of them, 
and said, Friend, I do thee no 
wrong: didst not thou agree with 
me for a penny ? 

14 Take that thine is, and go 
thy way: I will give unto this last, 
even as unto thee. 

15 Is it not lawful for me to do 
what I will with mine own? Is 
thine eye evil, because I am good ? 

16 So the last shall be first, and 
the first last: for many be called, 
but few chosen. 


THERE are undeniable difficulties in the parable con- 
tained in these verses. The key to the right explanation 
of them must be sought in the passage which concludes 
the last chapter. There we find the apostle Peter asking 
our Lord a remarkable question: “ We have forsaken 


. 
246 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


all, and followed Thee; what shall we have therefore ?” 
There we find Jesus giving a remarkable answer. He 
makes a special promise to Peter and his fellow-disciples : 
“They should one day sit on twelve thrones, judging 
the twelve tribes of Israel.” He makes a general promise 
to all who suffer loss for His sake: “They should re- 
ceive an hundred-fold, and inherit everlasting life.” 

Now we must bear in mind that Peter was a Jew. 
Like most Jews he had probably been brought up in 
much ignorance as to God’s purposes respecting the sal- 
vation of the Gentiles. In fact, we know from the Acts, 
that it required a vision from heaven to take that igno- 
rance away. (Acts x. 28.) Furthermore we must bear 
in mind that Peter and his fellow-disciples were weak 
in faith and knowledge. They were probably apt to 
attach a great importance to their own sacrifices for 
Christ’s sake, and inclined to self-righteousness and self- 
conceit.—Both these points our Lord knew well. He 
therefore speaks this parable for the special benefit of 
Peter and his companions. He read their hearts, He 
‘saw what spiritual medicine those hearts required, and 
supplied it without delay. In a word, He checked their 
rising pride, and taught them humility. 

In expounding this parable, we need not inquire 
closely into the meaning of the “penny,” the “market- 
place,” the “steward,” or the “hours:” such inquiries 
often darken counsel by words without knowledge. Well 
says a great divine, “the theology of parables is not argu- 
mentative.” The hint of Chrysostom deserves notice. 
He says, “It is not right to search curiously, and word 
by word, into all things in a parable; but when we have 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 1—16. 247 


learned the object for which it was composed, we are to 
reap this, and not to busy ourselves about anything fur- 
ther. Two main lessons appear to stand out on the 
face of the parable, and to embrace the general scope of 
its meaning. Let us content ourselves with these two. 

We learn, in the first place, that im the calling of 
nations to the professed knowledge of Himself, God exercises 
free, sovereign, and unconditional grace. He calls the 
families of the earth into the visible Church at His own 
time, and in His own way. 

We see this truth wonderfully brought out in the 
history of God’s dealings with the world. We see the 
children of Israel called and chosen to be God’s people 
in the very beginning of “ the day.” We see some of the 
Gentiles called at a later period, by the preaching of the 
Apostles. Wesee others being called in the present age, 
by the labours of missionaries. We see others, like the 
millions of Chinese and Hindoos, still “standing idle, 
because no man hath hired them.”—And why is all this? 
We cannot tell. We only know that God loves to hide 
pride from Churches, and to take away all occasion of 
boasting. He will never allow the older branches.of His 
Church to look contemptuously on the younger. His 
Gospel holds out pardon and peace with God through 
Christ to the heathen of our own times, as fully as it did 
toSt. Paul. The converted inhabitants of Tinnevelly and 
New Zealand shall be as fully admitted to heaven as the 
holiest patriarch who died 3500 years ago. The old wall 
between Jews and Gentiles is removed. There is nothing 
to prevent the believing heathen being a “ fellow-heir 
and partaker of the same hope” with the believing 


248 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Israelite. The Gentiles, converted at “the eleventh 
hour” of the world, shall be as really and truly heirs of 
glory asthe Jews. They shall sit down with Abraham, 
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, while 
many of the children of the kingdom are for ever cast 
out. “The last shall indeed be first.” 

We learn, in the second place, that in the saving of 
individuals, as well as in the calling of nations, God acts 
as a sovereign, and gives no account of His matters. “He 
has mercy on whom He will have mercy,” and that too 
at His own time. (Rom. ix. 15.) 

This is a truth which we see illustrated on every side 
in the Church of Christ, as a matter of experience. We 
see one man called to repentance and faith in the be- 
ginning of his days, like Timothy, and labouring in the 
Lord’s vineyard for forty or fifty years. We see another 
man called “at the eleventh hour,” like the thief on the 
cross, and plucked like a brand out of the fire,—one day 
a hardened impenitent sinner, and the next day in 
paradise. And yet the whole tenor of the Gospel leads 
us to believe that both these men are equally forgiven 
before God. Both are equally washed in Christ’s blood, 
and clothed in Christ’s righteousness. Both are equally 
justified, both accepted, and both will be found atChrist’s 
right hand at the last day. 

There can be no doubt that this doctrine sounds 
strange to the ignorant and inexperienced Christian. It 
confounds the pride of human nature. It leaves the self 
righteous no room to boast. It is a levelling, humbling 
doctrine, and gives occasion to many a murmur. But 
it is impossible to reject it, unless we reject the whole 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 1—16. 249 


Bible. True faith in Christ, though it be but a day old, 
justifies a man before God as completely as the faith 
of him who has followed Christ for fifty years. The 
righteousness in which Timothy will stand at the day 
of judgment, is the same as that of the penitent thief. 
Both will be saved by grace alone; both will owe all to 
Christ. We may not like this: but it is the doctrine 
of this parable, and not of this parable only, but of the 
whole New Testament. Happy is he who can receive 
the doctrine with humility! Well says Bishop Hall, 
“Tf some have cause to magnify God’s bounty, none 
have cause to complain.” 

Before we leave this parable let us arm our minds 
with some necessary cautions. It is a portion of Scrip- 
ture that is frequently perverted and misapplied. Men 
have often drawn from it, not milk, but poison. 

Let us beware of supposing, from anything in this 
parable, that salvation is in the slightest degree to be 
obtained by works. To suppose this is to overthrow 
the whole teaching of the Bible. Whatever a believer 
receives in the next world, is a matter of grace, and 
not of debt. God is never a debtor to us,in any sense 
whatever. When we have done all, we are unprofitable 
servants. (Luke xvii. 10.) 

Let us beware of supposing, from this parable, that the 
distinction between Jews and Gentiles is entirely done 
away by the Gospel. To suppose this is to contradict 
many plain prophecies, both of the Old Testament and 
New. In the matter of justification, there is no distinc- 
tion between the believing Jew and the Greek. But in 
the matter of national privileges, Israel is still a special 


250 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


people, and not “numbered among the nations.” God 
has many purposes concerning the Jews which are yet 
to be fulfilled. 

Let us beware of supposing, from this parable, that all 
saved souls will have the same degree of glory. To sup- 
pose this is to contradict many plain texts of Scripture. 
The title of all believers no doubt is the same,—the 
righteousness of Christ. But all will not have the same 
place in heaven. “Every man shall receive his own re- 
ward, according to his own labour.” (1 Cor. iii. 8.) 

Finally, let us beware of supposing, from this parable, 
that it is safe for any one to put off repentance till the 
end of his days. To suppose this is a most dangerous 
delusion. The longer men refuse to obey Christ’s voice, 
the less likely they are to be saved. “Now is the accepted 
time: now is the day of salvation.” (2 Cor. vi 2.) Few 
are ever saved on their death-beds. One thief on the cross 
was saved, that none should despair; but only one, that 
none should presume. A false confidence in those words, 
“the eleventh hour,” has ruined thousands of souls, 


MATTHEW XX. 17—23. 


17 And Jesus going up to Jerusa- { Grant that these my two sons may 
lem took the twelve disciples apart | sit, the one on thy right hand, and 
in the way, and said unto them, the otheron theleft, in thy kingdom. 

18 Behold, we go up to Jerusa- 22 But Jesus answered and said, 
lem; and the Son of man shall be | Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye 


betrayed unto the chief priests and 
unto the scribes, and they shall 
condemn him to death. 

19 And shall deliver him to the 
Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, 
and to crucify him: and the third 
day he shall rise again. 

20 Then came to him the mother 
of Zebedee’s children, with her 
sons, worshipping him, and desir- 
ing a certain thing of him. 

21 And he said unto her, What 
wilt thou? She saith unto him, 


able to drink of the cup that I shall 
drink of, and to be baptized with 
the baptism that I am baptized 
pon ? They say unto him, We are 
able. 

23 And he saith unto them, Ye 
shall drink indeed of my cup, and 
be baptized with the baptism that 
I am baptized with: but to sit on 
my right hand, and on my left, is 
not mine to give, but it shall be 
gwen to them for whom it is pre- 
pared of my Father, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 17—23. 251 


TuE first thing that we should notice in these verses is 
the clear announcement which the Lord Jesus Christ makes 
of His own approaching death. For the third time we 
find Him telling His disciples the astounding truth, that 
He, their wonder-working Master, must soon suffer and 
die. 

The Lord Jesus knew irom the beginning, all that 
was before Him. The treachery of Judas Iscariot, 
the fierce persecution of chief priests and scribes, the 
unjust judgment, the delivery to Pontius Pilate, the 
mocking, the scourging, the crown of thorns, the cross, 
the hanging between two malefactors, the nails, the 
spear,—all, all were spread before His mind like a 
picture. 

How great an aggravation of suffering fore-knowledge 
is, those know well who have lived in the prospect of 
some fearful surgical operation! Yet none of these 
things moved our Lord. He says, “I was not rebellious, 
neither turned away back. I gave my back to the 
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the 
hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.” 
(Isa. 1. 5, 6.) He saw Calvary in the distance all His 
life through, and yet walked calmly up to it, without 
turning to the right hand or to the left. Surely there 
never was sorrow like unto His sorrow, or love like 
His love. 

The Lord Jesus was a voluntary sufferer. When He 
died on the cross, it was not because He had not power 
to prevent it. He suffered intentionally, deliberately, and 
of His own free will. (John x. 18.) He knew that with- 


out shedding of His blood there could be no remission of 
8 


252 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


man’s sin. He knew that He was the Lamb of God, whe 
must die to take away the sin of the world. He knew 
that His death was the appointed sacrifice, which must 
be offered up to make reconciliation for iniquity. Know- 
ing all this, He went willingly to the cross. His heart 
was set on finishing the mighty work He came into the 
world todo. He was well aware that all hinged on His 
own death, and that, without that death, His miracles 
and preaching would have done comparatively nothing 
for the world. No wonder that He thrice pressed on the 
attention of His disciples that He “must needs” die. 
Blessed and happy are they who know the real meaning 
and importance of the sufferings of Christ! 

The next thing that we should notice in these verses 
is the mixture of ignorance and farth that may be found 
even in true hearted Christians. We see the mother of 
James and John coming to our Lord with her two sons, 
and preferring on their behalf a strange petition. She 
asks that they “may sit, one on His right hand, and the 
other on His left, in His kingdom.” She seems to have 
forgotten all He had just been saying about His suffer- 
ing. Her eagermind can think of nothing but His glory. 
His plain warnings about the crucifixion appear to have 
been thrown away on her sons. Their thoughts were 
full of nothing but His throne, and the day of His 
power. There was much of faith in their request, but 
there was much more of infirmity. There was some- 
thing to be commended, in that they could seein Jesus 
of Nazareth a coming king; but there was also much 
to blame, in that they did not remember that He was to 
be crucified before He could reign. Truly “the flesh 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 17— 23. 2538 


lusteth against the spirit” in all God’s children, and 
Luther well remarks, “the flesh ever seeks to be glo- 
rified before it is crucified.” 

There are many Christians who are very like this 
woman and her sons. They see in part, and know in 
part, the things of God. They have faith enough to 
follow Christ. They have knowledge enough to hate sin, 
and come out from the world. And yet there are many 
truths of Christianity of which they are deplorably 
ignorant. They talk ignorantly, they act ignorantly, 
and commit many sad mistakes. Their acquaintance 
with the Bible is very scanty : their insight into their 
own hearts is very small.— But we must learn from these 
verses to deal gently with such people, because the Lord 
has received them. We must not set them down as 
graceless and godless, because of their ignorance. We 
must remember that true faith may lie at the bottom of 
their hearts, though there is much rubbish at the top. 
We must reflect that the sons of Zebedee, whose know- 
ledge was at one time so imperfect, became at a later 
period pillars of the Church of Christ. Just so abeliever 
may begin his course in much darkness, and yet prove 
finally a man mighty in the Scriptures, and a worthy 
follower of James and John. 

The last thing that we should notice in these verses 
is the solemn reproof which our Lord gives to the ignorant 
request of the mother of Zebedee’s children and her two sons. 
He says to them, “Ye know not what ye ask.” They 
had asked to share in their Master’s reward, but they 
had not considered that they must first be partakers in 
their Master’s sufferings. (1 Pet. iv. 12.) They had for- 


254 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


gotten that those who would stand with Christ in glory, 
must drink of His cup, and be baptized with His bap- 
tism. They did not see that those who carry the cross, 
and those alone, shall receive the crown. Well might 
our Lord say, “Ye know not what ye ask.” 

But do we never commit the same mistake that the 
sons of Zebedee committed? Do we never fall into their 
error, and make thoughtless, inconsiderate requests? Do 
we not often say things in prayer without “counting the 
cost,” and ask for things to be granted to us, without 
reflecting how much our supplications involve? These 
are heart-searching questions. It may well be feared 
that many of us cannot give them a satisfactory answer. 

We ask that our souls may be saved and go to heaven. 
when we die. It is a good request indeed. But are we 
prepared to take up the cross, and follow Christ? Are 
we willing to give up the world for His sake? Are we 
ready to put off the old man and put on the new,—to 
fight, to labour, and to run so as to obtain? Are we 
ready to withstand a taunting world, and endure hard- 
ships for Christ’s sake?—-What shall we say? If we 
are not so ready, our Lord might say to us also, “Ye 
know not what ye ask.” 

We ask that God would make us holy and good. It 
is a good request indeed. But are we prepared to be 
sanctified by any process that God in His wisdom may 
call on us to pass through? Are we ready to be purified 
by affliction, weaned from the world by bereavements, 
drawn nearer to God by losses, sicknesses, and sorrow ? 
Alas, these are hard questions! But if we are not, our 
Lord might well say to us, “ Ye know not what ye ask,” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 24—28, 255 


Let us leave these verses with a solemn resolution to 
consider well what we are about, when we draw nigh to 
God in prayer. Let us beware of thoughtless, incon- 
siderate, and rash petitions. Well might Solomon say, 
“Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart 


be hasty to utter anything before God.” (Eccles. v. 2.) 





MATTHEW XX. 24—28. 


24 And when the ten heard itt, 
they were moved with indignation 
against the two brethren. 

25 But Jesus called them unto 
him, and said, Ye know that the 
princes of the Gentiles exercise 
dominion over them, and they that 
are great exercise authority upon 
them. 

26 But it shall not be so among 





you; but whosoever will be great 
among you, let him be your min- 
ister ; 

27 And whosoever will be chief 
among you, let him be your ser- 
vant: 

28 Even as the Son of man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give his life a ran- 
som for many. 


THESE verses are few in number, but they contain lessons 
of great importance to all professing Christians. Let us 
see what they are. 

In the first place, we learn that there may be pride, 
jealousy, and love of pre-eminence, even among true disciples 
of Christ. What saith the Scripture? ‘“ When the ten 
heard” what James and John had asked, “they were 
moved with indignation against the two brethren.” 

Pride is one of the oldest and most mischievous of 
sins. By it the angels fell; for “they kept not their first 
estate.” (Jude6.) Through pride Adam and Eve were 
seduced into eating the forbidden fruit. They were not 
content with their lot, and thought they would “ be as 
gods.” From pride the saints of Godreceive their great- 
est injuries after their conversion. Well says Hooker, 
“ Pride is a vice which cleaveth so fast unto the hearts 


256 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of men, that if we were to strip ourselves of all faults 
one by one, we should undoubtedly find it the very last 
and hardest to put off.’ It is a quaint but true saying 
of Bishop Hall, that “pride is the inmost coat, which we 
put off last, and which we put on first.” 

In the second place, we learn that a life of self-denying 
lindness to others is the true secret of greatness in the king- 
dom of Christ. What saith the Scripture? “ Whosoever 
will be great among you, let him be your minister :— 
Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your 
servant.” 

The standard of the world, and the standard of the 
Lord Jesus, are widely different. They are more than 
different: they are flatly contradictory one to the other. 
Among the children of this world he is thought the 
greatest man who has most land, most money, most ser- 
vants, most rank, and most earthly power. Among the 
children of God he is reckoned the greatest who does 
most to promote the spiritual and temporal happiness of 
his fellow-creatures. True greatness consists, not in re- 
ceiving, but in giving,—not in selfish absorption of good 
things, but in imparting good to others,—not in being 
served, but in serving,—not in sitting still, and being 
ministered to, but in going about and ministering to 
others. The angels of God see far more beauty in the 
work of the missionary than in the work of the Austra- 
lian digger for gold. They take far more interest in the 
labours of men like Howard and Judson than in the 
victories of Generals, the political speeches of Statesmen, 
or the council-chambers of Kings. Let us remembet 
these things. Let us beware of seeking false greatness: 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVER. 24-—28. 257 


let us aim at that greatness which alone is true. There 
is a mine of profound wisdom in that saying of our Lord’s, 
“Tt is more blessed to give than to receive.” (Acts xx. 35.) 

In the third place, we learn that the Lord Jesus Christ 
ts intended to be the example of all trwe Christians. What 
saith the Scripture? We ought to serve one another, 
“even as the Son of man came not to be ministered 
unto, but to minister.” 

The Lord God has mercifully provided His people 
with everything necessary to their sanctification. He 
has given those who follow after holiness the clearest of 
precepts, the best of motives, and the most encouraging 
of promises. But this is not all. He has furthermore 
supplied them with the most perfect pattern and ex- 
ample,—even the life of His own Son. By that life He 
bids us frame our own; in the steps of that life He 
bids us walk. (1 Peterii 21.) It is the model after 
which we must strive to mould our tempers, our words, 
and our works, in this evil world.—“ Would my Master 
have spoken in this manner? Would my Master have 
behaved in this way?” These are the questions by 
which we ought daily to try ourselves. 

How humbling this truth is! What searchings of 
heart it ought to raise within us! What a loud call it 
is to “lay aside every weight, and the sin which most 
easily besets us!” (Heb. xii. 1.) What manner of 
persons ought they to be who profess to copy Christ! 
What poor unprofitable religion is that which makes 
a man content with talk and empty profession, while 
his life is unholy and unclean! Alas, those who know 
nothing of Christ as an example, wui find at last that 


258 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


He knows nothing of them as His saved people. “He 
that saith he abideth in Him ought himself also so to 
walk even as He walked.” (1 John ii. 6.) 

Finally, let us learn from these verses that Christ's death 
was an atonement for sin. What saith the Scripture? “The 
Son of man came to give His life a ransom for many.” 

This is the mightiest truth in the Bible. Let us take 
care that we grasp it firmly, and never let it go. Our 
Lord Jesus Christ did not die merely as a martyr, or 
as a splendid example of self-sacrifice and self-denial. 
Those who can see no more than that in His death, fall 
infinitely short of the truth. They lose sight of the 
very foundation-stone of Christianity, and miss the 
whole comfort of the Gospel. Christ died as a sacrifice 
for man’s sin. He died to make reconciliation for man’s 
iniquity. He died to purge our sins by the offering of 
Himself. He died to redeem us from the curse which 
we all deserved, and to make satisfaction to the justice 
of God, which must otherwise have condemned us. 
Never let us forget this! 

We are all by nature debtors. We owe to our holy 
Maker ten thousand talents, and are not able to pay. 
We cannot atone for our own transgressions, for we are 
weak and frail, and only adding to our debts every day. 
But, blessed be God, what we could not do, Christ came 
into the world to do for us. What we could not pay, 
He undertook to pay for us, and to pay it He died 
for us upon the cross. “He offered Himself to God.” 
(Heb. ix. 14.) “He suffered for sin, the just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God.” (1 Peter 
iii, 18.) Once more, never let us forget this ! 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 29—34. 259 


Let us not leave these verses without asking ourselves, 
where is our humility ? what is our idea of true great- 
ness? what is our example? what is our hope ?—Life, 
eternal life, depends on the answer we give to these 
questions. Happy is that man who is truly humble, 
strives to do good in his day, walks in the steps of Jesus, 
and rests all his hopes on the ransom paid for him by 
Christ’s blood. Such a man is a true Christian ! 


MATTHEW XX. 29—34, 


29 And as they departed from 
Jericho, a great multitude followed 
hi 


m. 

80 And, behold, two blind men 
sitting by the way side, when they 
heard that Jesus passed by, cried 
out, saying, Have mercy on us, O 
Lord, thow Son of David. 

81 And the multitude rebuked 
them, because they should hold 
their peace: but they cried the 


more, saying, Have mercy on us, 
O Lord, thow Son of David. 

32 And Jesus stood still, and 
called them, and said, What will 
ye that I shall do unto you? 

33 They say unto him, Lord, 
that our eyes may be opened. 

34 So Jesus had compassion on 
them, and touched their eyes: and 
immediately their eyes received 
sight, and they followed him. 


In these verses we have a touching picture of an event 
in our Lord’s history. He heals two blind men sitting 
by the way-side, near Jericho. The circumstances of the 
event contain several deeply interesting lessons, which 
all professing Christians would do well to remember. 

For one thing, let us mark what strong faith may 
sometimes be found where it might least have been expected. 
Blind as these two men were, they believed that Jesus 
was able to help them. They never saw any of our 
Lord’s miracles. They knew Him only by hear-say, 
and not face to face. And yet, as soon as they heard 
that He was passing by, they “ cried out, saying, Have 
mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.” 


260 EXPOSITOKY LHOUGHTS. 


Such faith may well put us to shame. With all our 
books of evidence, and lives of saints, and libraries 
of divinity, how few know anything of simple, child- 
like confidence in Christ’s mercy and Christ’s power. 
Even among those who are believers, the degree of faith 
is often strangely disproportionate to the privileges en- 
joyed. Many an unlearned man, who can only read his 
New Testament with difficulty, possesses the spirit of 
unhesitating trust in Christ’s advocacy, while deeply- 
read divines are harassed by questionings and doubts. 
They who, humanly speaking, ought to be first, are often 
last, and the last first. 

For another thing, let us mark what wisdom there is in 
using every opportumty for getting good for our souls. 
These blind men “sat by the way-side:” had they not 
done so, they might never have been healed. Jesus 
never returned to Jericho, and they might never have 
met with Him again. 

Let us see, in this simple fact, the importance of dili- 
gence in the use of means of grace. Let us never neg- 
lect the house of God, never forsake the assembling of 
ourselves with God’s people, never omit the reading of 
our Bibles, never let drop the practice of private prayer. 
These things, no doubt, will not save us without the 
grace of the Holy Ghost. Thousands make use of 
them, and remain “ dead in trespasses and sins.” But 
it is just in the use of these things that souls are con- 
verted and saved. They are the ways in which Jesus 
walks. It is they who “sit by the way-side” who 
are likely to be healed. Do we know the diseases of 
our souls? Do we feel any desire to see the great 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER. 29-34, 261 


Physician? If we do we must not wait in idleness, 
saying, “If I am to be saved, I shall be saved.” We 
must arise and go to the road where Jesus walks. 
Who can tell but He will soon pass by for the last 
time? Let us sit daily “by the wayside.” 

For another thing, let us mark the value of pains and 
perseverance in seeking Christ. These blind men were 
“rebuked ” by the multitude that accompanied our Lord. 
Men told them to “hold their peace.” But they were 
not to be silenced in this way. They felt their need 
of help, and they cared nothing for the check which 
they received. “They cried the more, saying, Have 
mercy on us, O Lord, Thou son of David.” 

We have in this part of their conduct, a most import- 
ant example. We are not to be deterred by opposition 
or discouraged by difficulties, when we begin to seek the 
salvation of our souls. We must “pray always, and not 
faint.” (Luke xviii.1.) We must remember the parable 
of the importunate widow, and of the friend who came 
to borrow bread at midnight. Like them we must 
press our petitions at the throne of grace, and say, “I 
will not let Thee go, except Thou bless me.” (Gen. 
xxxii. 26.) Friends, relatives, and neighbours may say 
unkind things, and reprove our earnestness. We may 
meet with coldness and want of sympathy, where we 
might have looked for help. But let none of these 
things move us. If we feel our diseases, and want to find 
Jesus, the great Physician,—if we know our sins, and 
desire to have them pardoned,—let us press on. “The 
violent take the kingdom by force.” (Matt. xi. 12.) 

Finally, let us mark how gracious the Lord Jesus is to 


262 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


those who seek Him. “He stood still and called” the 
blind men. He kindly asked them what it was that 
they desired. He heard their petition, and did what they 
requested. He “had compassion on them, and touched 
their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight.” 

We see here an illustration of that old truth, which we 
can never know too well,—the mercifulness of Christ’s 
heart towards the sons of men. The Lord Jesus is not 
only a mighty Saviour, but merciful, kind, and gracious 
to a degree that our minds cannot conceive. Well might 
the Apostle Paul say, that “the love of Christ passeth 
knowledge.” (Eph. ili. 19.) Like him, let us pray that 
we may “know” more of that love. We need it when 
we first begin our Christian course, poor trembling 
penitents, and babes in grace. We need it afterwards, 
as we travel along the narrow way, often erring, often 
stumbling, and often cast down. We shall need it in the 
evening of our days, when we “ walk through the valley 
of the shadow of death.” Let us then grasp the love of 
Christ firmly, and keep it daily before our minds. We 
shall never know, till we wake up in the next world, 
how much we are indebted to it. 


MATTHEW XXI. 1—11. 


1 And when they drew nigh unto 
Jerusalem, and were come to Beth- 
phage, unto the mount of Olives, 
then sent Jesus two disciples, 

Saying unto them, Go into 
the village over against you, and 
straightway ye shall find an ass 
tied, and a colt with her: loose 
them, and bring them unto me. 

8 And if any man say ought unto 
you, ye shall say, The Lord hath 
need of them ; and straightway he 
will send them, 


4 All this was done, that it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken by 
the prophet, saying, 

5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion, 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, 
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and 
a colt the foal of an ass. 

6 And the disciples went, and 
did as Jesus commanded them, 

7 And brought the ass, and the 
colt, and put on them their clothes, 
and they set him thereon. 

8 And a very great multitude 


MATTHEW, CHAP. 


spread their garments in the way; 
others cut down branches from 
the trees, and strawed them in the 


way. 

9 And the multitudes that went 
before, and that followed, cried, 
saying, Hosanna to the ‘Son of 
David: Blessed is he that cometh 


XXI. VER. I—11]. 263 


in the name of the Lord; Hosanna 
in the highest. 

10 And when he was come into 
Jerusalem, all the city was moved, 
saying, Who is this? 

11 And the multitude said, This 
is Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth 
of Galilee 


THESE verses contain a very remarkable passage in our 
Lord Jesus Christ’s life. They describe His public entry 
into Jerusalem, when He came there for the last time, 
before He was crucified. 

There is something peculiarly striking in this incident 
in our Lord’s history. The narrative reads like the 
account of some royal conqueror’s return to his own city. 
“A very great multitude” accompanies Him in a kind 
of triumphal procession; loud cries and expressions of 
praise are heard around Him: “ All the city was moved.” 
The whole transaction is singularly at variance with the 
past tenor of our Lord’s life. It is curiously unlike the 
ways of Him who did not “cry, nor strive, nor let His 
voice be heard in the streets,”—-who withdrew Himself 
from the multitude on other occasions, and sometimes 
said to those He healed, “See thou say nothing to any 
man.” (Mark i 44.) And yet the whole transaction 
admits of explanation. The reasons of this public entry 
are not hard to find out—Let us see what they were. 

The plain truth is that our Lord knew well that 
the time of His earthly ministry was drawing to a 
close. He knew that the hour was approaching when 
He mast finish the mighty work He came to do, by 
dying for our sins upon the cross. He knew that 
His last journey had been accomplished, and that there 
remained nothing now in His earthly ministry, but to 


264 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


be offered as a sacrifice on Calvary. Knowing all this, 
He no longer, as in times past, sought secrecy. Knowing 
all this, He thought it good to enter the place where 
He was to be delivered to death, with peculiar solemnity 
and publicity. It was not fitting that the Lamb of 
God should come to be slain on Calvary privately and 
silently. Before the great sacrifice for the sin of the 
world was offered up, it was right that every eye should 
be fixed on the victim. It was suitable that the 
crowning act of our Lord’s life should be done with 
as much notoriety as possible. Therefore it was that 
He made this public entry; therefore it was that He 
attracted to Himself the eyes of the wondering multi- 
tude; therefore it was that “all Jerusalem was moved.” 
The atoning blood of the Lamb of God was about tc 
be shed: this deed was not to be “done in a corner.” 
(Acts xxvi. 26.) 

It is good to remember these things. The real mean- 
ing of our Lord’s conduct at this period of His history 
is not sufficiently considered by many readers of this 
passage. It remains for us to consider the practical 
lessons which these verses appear to point out. 

In the first place, let us notice in these verses an 
example of our Lord Jesus Christ's perfect knowledge. He 
sends His two disciples into a village. He tells them 
that they will there find the ass on which He was to 
ride. He provides them with an answer to the inquiry 
of those to whom the ass belonged. He tells them that 
on giving that answer the ass will be sent: and all 
happens exactly as He foretells. 

There is nothing hid from the Lord’s eyes. there are 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER. 1—11. 265 


no secrets with Him. Alone or in company, by night or 
by day, in private or in public, He is acquainted with all 
our ways. He that saw Nathanael under the fig-tree 
is unchanged. Go where we will, and retire from the 
world as we may, we are never out of sight of Christ. 
This is a thought that ought to exercise a restraining 
and sanctifying effect on our souls. We all know the 
influence which the presence of the rulers of this world 
has upon their subjects. Nature itself teaches us to put 
a check on our tongues, and demeanour, and behaviour, 
when we are under the eye of a King. The sense of our 
Lord Jesus Christ’s perfect knowledge of all our ways, 
ought to have the same effect upon our hearts. Let us 
do nothing we would not like Christ to see, and say 
nothing we would not like Christ to hear. Let us seek 
to live and move and have our being under a continual 
recollection of Christ’s presence. Let us behave as we 
would have done had we walked beside Him, in the 
company of James and John, by the Sea of Galilee. 
This is the way to be trained for heaven. In heaven, 
“we shall ever be with the Lord.” (1 Thess. iv. 17.) 
In the second place, let us notice in these verses an 
example of the manner in which prophecies concerning our 
Lord’s first coming were fulfilled. We are told that His 
public entry fulfilled the words of Zachariah: “Thy 
King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass.” 
It appears that this prediction was literally and ex- 
actly fulfilled. The words which the prophet spake by 
the Holy Ghost received no figurative accomplishment. 
As he said, so it came to pass; as he foretold, so it was 
done. Five hundred and fifty years had passed away 


266 EXPOSITORY TIIOUGHTS. 


since the prediction was made,—and then, when the 
appointed time arrived, the long-promised Messiah did 
literally ride into Zion “on an ass.” No doubt the vast 
majority of the inhabitants of Jerusalem saw nothing in 
the circumstance; the veil was upon their hearts. But 
we are not left in doubt as to the fulfilment ot the 
prophecy. We are told plainly, “All this was done 
that it might be fulfilled.” 

From the fulfilment of God’s word in time past, we 
are surely intended to gather something as to the manner 
of its fulfilment in time to come. We have a right to 
expect that prophecies respecting the second advent of 
Christ will be as literally fulfilled as those respecting His 
first advent. He came to this earth literally in person the 
first time ; He will come to this earth literally in person 
the second time. He came in humiliation once literally 
to suffer; He will come again in glory literally to reign. 
Every prediction respecting things accompanying His 
first advent was literally accomplished. It will be just 
the same when He returns. All that is foretold about 
the restoration of the Jews,—the judgments on the un- 
godly, the unbelief of the world, the gathering of the 
elect,—shall be made good to the letter. Let us not 
forget this. In the study of unfulfilled prophecy, a fixed 
principle of interpretation is of the first importance. 

Finally, let us notice in these verses a striking example 
of the worthlessness of man’s favour. Of all the admiring 
crowds who thronged round our Lord as He entered Je- 
rusalem, none stood by Him when He was delivered into 
the hands of wicked men. Many cried, “ Hosannah,” who 
four days after cried, “ Away with Him, crucify Him.” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER. 1222, 267 


But this is a faithful picture of human nature. This 
is a proof of the utter folly of thinking more of the praise 
of man than the praise of God. Nothing in truth is so 
fickle and uncertain as popularity. It is here to-day 
and gone to-morrow ; it is a sandy foundation, and sure 
to fail those who build upon it. Let us not care for it. 
Let us seek the favour of Him who is “the same 
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.” (Heb. xiii. 8.) 
Christ never changes. Those whom He loves, He 
loves to the end. His favour endureth for ever. 


MATTHEW XXI. 12—22. 


12 And Jesus went into the tem- 
ple of God, and cast out all them 
that sold and bought in the tem- 
ple, and overthrew the tables of 
the money-changers, and the seats 
of them that sold doves, 

13 And said unto them, It is 
written, My house shall be called 
the house of prayer; but ye have 
made it a den of thieves. 

14 And the blind and the lame 
came to him in the temple; and 
he healed them. 

15 And when the chief priests and 
scribes saw the wonderful things 
that he did, and the children crying 
in the temple, and saying, Hosanna 
to the Son of David; they were 
sore displeased, 

16 And said unto him, Hearest 
thou what these say? And Jesus 
saith unto them, Yea; have ye 
never read, Out of the mouth of 
babes and sucklings thou hast 
perfected praise? 


17 And he left them, and went 
out of the city into Bethany; and 
he lodged there. 

18 Now in the morning as he re- 
turned into the city, he hungered. 

19 And when he saw a fig tree in 
the way, he came to it, and found 
nothing thereon, but leaves only, 
and said unto it, Let no fruit grow 
on thee henceforward for ever. And 
presently the fig treewithered away. 

20 And when the disciples saw +t, 
they marvelled, saying, How soon 
is the fig tree withered away ! 

21 Jesus answered and said unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, If ye 
have faith, and doubt not, ye shall 
not only do this which is done to 
the fig tree, but also if ye shall 
say unto this mountain, Be thou 
removed, and be thou cast into the 
sea; it shall be done. 

22 And all things whatsoever ye 
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 
shall receive. 


WE have in these verses an account of two remarkable 
events in our Lord’s history. In both, there was some- 
thing eminently figurative and typical: each was an 
emblem of spiritual things. Beneath the surface of 


each lie lessons of solemn instruction. 
ui if 


268 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The first event that demands our attention is our 
Lord’s visit to the temple. He found His Father’s house 
in a state which too truly shadowed forth the general 
condition of the whole Jewish Church,—everything out 
of order, and out of course. He found the courts of that 
holy building disgracefully profaned by worldly transac- 
tions. Trading, and buying, and selling, were actually 
going on within its walls. There stood dealers ready to 
supply the Jew who came from distant countries, with 
any sacrifice he wanted. There sat the money-changer, 
ready to change foreign money for the current coin of 
the land. Bullocks, and sheep, and goats, and pigeons, 
were there exposed for sale, as if the place had been a 
market. The jingling of money might there be heard, 
as if those holy courts had been a bank or an exchange. 
Such were the scenes that met our Lord’s eyes. He saw 
it all with holy indignation. “He cast out all them 
that sold and bought ;” He “overthrew the tables of the 
money-changers.” Resistance there was none, for men 
knew that He was right. Objection there was none, for 
all felt that He was only reforming a notorious abuse, 
which had been basely permitted for the sake of gain. 
Well might He sound in the ears of the astonished 
traders, as they fled from the temple, those solemn words 
of Isaiah, “It is written, My house shall be called the 
house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.” 

Let us see in our Lord’s conduct on this occasion, a 
striking type of what He will do when He comes again 
the second time. He will purify His visible Church as 
He purified the temple. He will cleanse it from every 
thing that defiles and works iniquity, and cast every 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER. 12—22. 269 


worldly professor out of its pale. He will allow no wor- 
shipper of money, or lover of gain to have a place in that 
glorious temple, which He will finally exhibit before the 
world. May we all strive to live in the daily expectation 
of that coming! May we judge ourselves that we be not 
condemned, and cast out in that searching and sifting 
day! We should often study those words of Malachi: 
“Who may abide the day of His coming? and who shall 
stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner’s fire, 
and like fuller’s soap.” (Mal. iii. 2.) 

The second event that demands our attention in these 
verses is owr Lord’s curse upon the fruitless fig-tree. We 
are told that being hungry, He came to a fig-tree in 
the way, and “found nothing thereon but leaves only, 
and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward 
for ever. And presently the fig-tree withered away.” 
This is an instance almost without parallel in all our 
Lord’s ministry. It is almost the only occasion on which 
we find Him making one of His creatures suffer, in 
order to teach a spiritual truth. There was a heart- 
searching lesson in that withered fig-tree. It preaches 
a sermon we shall do well to hear. 

That fig-tree, full of leaves, but barren of fruit, was 
a striking emblem of the Jewish Church, when our Lord 
was upon earth. The Jewish Church had everything to 
make an outward show. It had the temple, the priest- 
hood, the daily service, the yearly feasts, the Old Testa- 
ment Scriptures, the courses of the Levites, the morning 
and evening sacrifice. But beneath these goodly leaves, 
the Jewish Church was utterly destitute of fruit. It had 
no grace, no faith, no love, no humility, no spirituality, 


270 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


no real holiness, no willingness to receive its Messiah 
(John i. 11.) And hence, like the fig-tree, the Jewish 
Church was soon to wither away. It was to be stripped 
of all its outward ornaments, and its members scattered 
over the face of the earth. Jerusalem was to be de- 
stroyed ; the temple was to be burned ; the daily sacrifice 
was to be taken away; the tree was to wither down te 
the very ground. And so it came to pass. Never was 
there a type so literally fulfilled. In every wandering 
Jew we see a branch of the fig-tree that was cursed. 

But we may not stop here. We may find even more 
instruction in the event we are now considering. These 
things were written for our sakes, as well as for the 
Jews. 

Ts not every fruitless branch of Christ’s visible Church 
in awful danger of becoming a withered fig-tree? Beyond 
doubt it is. High ecclesiastical profession, without holi- 
ness among a people,—overweening confidence in coun- 
cils, bishops, liturgies, and ceremonies, while repentance 
and faith have been neglected—have ruined many a 
visible Church in time past, and may yet ruin many 
more. Where are the once famous Churches of Ephesus, 
and Sardis, and Carthage, and Hippo? They are all gone. 
They had leaves, but no fruit. Our Lord’s curse came 
upon them: they became withered fig-trees. The decree 
went forth, ‘“‘ Hew them down.” (Dan. iv. 23.) Let us 
remember this. Let us beware of church-pride. Let us 
not be high-minded, but fear. (Rom. xi. 20.) 

Finally, is not every fruitless professor of Christianity 
in awful danger of becoming a withered fig-tree? There 
can be no doubt of it. So long as a man is content with 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER, 23—32. 271 


the mere leaves of religion with a name to live while 
he is dead, and a form of godliness without the power, 
—so long his soul is in great peril. So long as he is 
satisfied with going to church or chapel, or receiving the 
Lord’s Supper, and being called a Christian, while his 
heart is not changed, and his sins are not forsaken,—so 
long he is daily provoking God to cut him off without 
remedy. Fruit, fruit,—the fruit of the Spirit is the only 
sure proof that we are savingly united to Christ, and in 
the way to heaven. May this sink down into our hearts, 
and never be forgotten ! 


MATTHEW XXI. 23—32. 


23 And when he was come into 
the temple, the chief priests and 
the elders of the people came unto 
him as he was teaching, and said, 
By what authority doest thou these 
things, and who gave thee this 
authority ? 

24 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, I also will ask you one 
thing, which if ye tell me, I in like 
wise will tell you by what author- 
ity I do these things. 

25 The baptism of John, whence 
was it? from heaven, or of men? 
And they reasoned with themselves, 
saying, If we shall say, From hea- 
ven; he will say unto us, Why did 
ye not then believe him? 

26 But if we shall say, Of men; 
we fear the people; for all hold 
John as a prophet. 

27 And they answered Jesus, and 
said, We cannot tell. And he said 
unto them, Neither tell I you by 
what authority I do these things. 





28 But what think ye? A certain 
man had two sons; and he came 
to the first, and said, Son, go work 
to-day in my vineyard. 

29 He answered and said, I will 
not: but afterward he repented, 
and went. 

30 And he came to the second, 
and said likewise. And he an- 
swered and said, I go, sir: and 
went not. 

31 Whether of them twain did 
the will of is father? They say 
unto him, The first. Jesus saith 
unto them, Verily I say unto you, 
That the publicans and the harlots 
go into the kingdom of God before 

ou. 

32 For John came unto you in 
the way of righteousness, and ye 
believed him not: but the publicans 
and the harlots believed him: and 
ye, when ye had seen it, repented 
not afterward, that ye might be- 
lieve him. 


THESE verses contain a conversation between our Lord 
Jesus Christ and the chief priests and elders of the 


people. 


Those bitter enemies of all righteousness saw 


272: EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the sensation which the public entry into Jerusalem, and 
the cleansing of the temple, had produced. At once they 
came about our Lord, like bees, and endeavoured to find 
occasion for an accusation against Him. 

Let us observe, in the first place, how ready the enemies 
of truth are to question the authority of all who do more 
good than themselves. The chief priests have not a word 
to say about our Lord’s teaching. They make no charge 
against the lives or conduct of Himself or His followers. 
The point on which they fasten is His commission : “ By 
what authority doest Thou these things? And who gave 
Thee this authority ?” 

The same charge has often been made against the 
servants of God, when they have striven to check the 
progress of ecclesiastical corruption. It is the old engine 
by which the children of this world have often laboured 
to stop the progress of revivals and reformations. It is 
the weapon which was often brandished in the face of the 
Reformers, the Puritans, and the Methodists of the last 
century. It is the poisoned arrow which is often shot at 
city-missionaries and lay-agents in the present day. Too 
many care nothing for the manifest blessing of God on a 
man’s work, so long as he is not sent forth by their own 
sect or party. It matters nothing to them, that some 
humble labourer in God’s harvest can point to numerous 
conversions of souls through his instrumentality. They 
still cry, “ By what authority doest Thou these things ?” 
His success is nothing: they demand his commission. 
His cures are nothing: they want his diploma. Let us 
neither be surprised nor moved, when we hear such 
things. It is old charge which was brought against 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER. 23—82. - 273 


Christ Himself. “There is no new thing under the 
sun.” (Kccles. i. 9.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, he consummate 
wisdom with which our Lord replied to the question put to 
Him. His enemies asked Him for His authority for 
doing what He did. They doubtless intended to make 
His answer a handle for accusing Him. He knew the 
drift of their inquiry, and said, “I also will ask you one 
thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you 
by what authority I do these things. The baptism of 
John, whence was it? from heaven or of men ?” 

We must distinctly understand that in this answer of 
our Lord’s there was no evasion. To suppose this is a 
great mistake. The counter-question which He asked 
was in reality an answer to His enemies’ inquiry. He 
knew they dared not deny that John the Baptist was “a 
man sent from God.” He knew that, this being granted, 
He needed only to remind them of John’s testimony to 
Himself,—Had not John declared Him to be “the Lamb 
of God that taketh away the sin of the world”? Had 
not John pronounced Him to be the Mighty One, who 
was to “baptize with the Holy Ghost ” ?—In short, our 
Lord’s question was a home-thrust to the conscience of 
His enemies. If they once conceded the divine authority 
of John the Baptist’s mission, they must also concede the 
divinity of His own. If they acknowledged that John 
came from heaven, they must acknowledge that He 
Himself was the Christ. 

Let us pray that in this difficult world, we may be 
supplied with the same kind of wisdom which was here 
displayed by our Lord. No doubt we ought to act on the 


274 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


injunction of St. Peter, “and be always ready to give a 
reason of the hope that is in us, with meekness and with 
fear.” (1 Peter iii. 15.) We ought to shrink from no 
inquiry into the principles of our holy religion, and to be 
ready at any time to defend and explain our practice. 
But for all this we must never forget that “wisdom is 
profitable to direct,” and that we should strive to speak 
wisely in defence of a good cause. The words of Solomon 
deserve consideration: “Answer not a fool according to 
his folly, lest thou be like unto him.” (Prov. xxvi. 4.) 

In the last place, let us observe in these verses what 
immense encouragement owr Lord holds out to those who 
repent. We see this strikingly brought out in the parable 
of the “two sons.” Both were told to go and work in 
their father’s vineyard. One son, like the profligate 
publicans, for some time flatly refused obedience, but 
“afterwards” repented and went. The other, like the 
formal Pharisees, pretended willingness to go, but after 
all went not. “Whether of them twain,” says our 
Lord, “did the will of his father?” Even His enemies 
were obliged to reply, “The first.” 

Let it bea settled principle in our Christianity that 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely 
willing to receive penitent sinners—It matters nothing 
what a man has been in time past. Does he repent, and 
come to Christ? Then old things are passed away, and 
all things are become new.—It matters nothing how 
high and self-confident a man’s profession of religion 
may be. Does he really give up his sins? If not, his 
profession is abominable in God’s sight, and he himself 
is still under the curse—Let us take courage ourselves, 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXI. VER. 33—46, 275 


if we have been great sinners hitherto. Only let us 
repent and believe in Christ, and there is hope. Let 
us encourage others to repent. Let us hold the door 
wide open to the very chief of sinners. Never will 
that word fail, “If we confess our sins, He is faithful 
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness.” (1 John i. 9.) 





MATTHEW XXTI. 33—46. 


33 Hear another parable: There { the vineyard cometh, what will he 
was a certain householder, which | do unto those husbandmen ? 
planted a vineyard, and hedged it 41 They say unto him, He will 
round about, and digged a wine-| miserably destroy those wicked 
press in it, and built a tower, and} men, and will let out his vineyard 
let it out to husbandmen, and went | unto other husbandmen, which 
into a far country: shall render him the fruits in their 
34 And when the time of the |} seasons. 
fruit drew near, he sent his ser- 42 Jesus saith unto them, Did ye 
vants to the husbandmen, that | never read in the scriptures, The 
they might receive the fruits of ; stone which the builders rejected, 
it. the same is become the head of the 
35 And the husbandmen took | corner: this is the Lord’s doing, 
his servants, and beat one, and | and it is marvellous in our eyes? 
killed another, and stoned another. 43 Therefore say I unto you, 
36 Again, he sent other servants | The kingdom of God shall be taken 
more than the first: and they did | from you, and given to a nation 
unto them likewise. bringing forth the fruits thereof. 
37 But last of all he sent unto 44 And whosoever shall fall on 
them his son, saying, They will } this stone shall be broken: but on 
reverence my son. whomsoever it shall fall, it will 
88 But when the husbandmen | grind him to powder. _ 
saw the son, they said among them- 45 And when the chief priests 
selves, This is the heir; come, let | and Pharisees had heard his para- 
us kill him, and let us seize on his | bles, they perceived that he spake 
inheritance. of them. 
89 And they caught him, and 46 But when they sought to lay 
cast him out of the vineyard, and | hands on him, they feared the 
slew him. multitude, because they took him 


40 When the lord therefore of | for a prophet. 


THE parable contained in these verses was spoken with 
special reference to the Jews. They are the husbandmen 
here described. Their sins are set before us here as 
in a picture. Of this there can be no doubt. It is 
written, that “He spake of them.” 

But we must not flatter ourselves that this parable 


276 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


contains nothing for the Gentiles. There are lessons 
laid down for us, as well as for the Jew. Let us see 
what they are. 

We see, in the first place, what distinguishing privileges 
God 1s pleased to bestow on some nations. 

He chose Israel to be a peculiar people to Himself. 
He separated them from the other nations of the earth, 
and bestowed on them countless blessings. He gave 
them revelations of Himself, while all the rest of the 
earth was in darkness. He gave them the law, and the 
covenants, and the oracles of God, while all the world 
beside was let alone. In short, God dealt with the Jews 
as a man deals with a piece of land which he fences 
out and cultivates, while all the country around is left 
untilled and waste. The vineyard of the Lord was the 
house of Israel. (Isai. v. 7.) 

And have we no privileges? Beyond doubt we have 
many. We have the Bible, and liberty for every one to 
read it. We have the Gospel, and permission to every 
one to hear it. We have spiritual mercies in abundance, 
of which five hundred millions of our fellow-men know 
nothing at all. How thankful we ought to be! The 
poorest man in England may say every morning, “ There 
are five hundred millions of immortal souls worse off 
than Iam. Who am I, that I should differ? Bless the 
Lord, O my soul.” 

We see, in the next place, what a bad use nations 
sometimes make of their privileges. 

When the Lord separated the Jews from other people, 
He had a right to expect that they would serve Him, 
and obey His laws. When a man has taken pains with 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXI. VER. 33—46, 207 


a vineyard, he has a right to expect fruit. But Israel 
rendered not a due return for all God’s mercies. They 
“mingled with the heathen, and learned their works.” 
(Psalm cvi. 35.) They hardened themselves in sin and 
unbelief. They turned aside after idols. They kept not 
God’s ordinances. They despised God’s temple. They 
refused to listen to His prophets. They ill-used those 
whom He sent to call them to repentance. And finally, 
they brought their wickedness to a height, by killing the 
Son of God Himself, even Christ the Lord. 

And what are we doing ourselves with our privileges ? 
Truly this is a serious question, and one that ought to 
make us think. It may well be feared, that we are not, 
as a nation, living up to our light, or walking worthy of 
our many mercies. Must we not confess with shame, 
that millions amongst us seem utterly without God in 
the world? Must we not acknowledge, that in many a 
town, and in many a village, Christ seems hardly to 
have any disciple, and the Bible seems hardly to be 
believed 2? It is vain to shut our eyes to these facts. 
The fruit that the Lord receives from His vineyard in 
Great Britain, compared with what it ought to be, is 
disgracefully small. It may well be doubted whether 
we are not as provoking to Him as the Jews. 

We see, in the next place, what an awful reckoning 
God sometimes has with Nations and Churches which make 
a bad use of their privileges. 

A time came when the longsuffering of God towards 
the Jews had an end. Forty years after our Lord’s death, 
the cup of their iniquity was at length full, and they 
received a heavy chastisement for their many sins. Their 


278 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


holy city, Jerusalem, was destroyed, and their temple was 
burned. They themselves were scattered over the face of 
the earth. “The kingdom of God was taken from them, 
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” 

And will the same thing ever happen tous? Will 
the judgments of God ever come down on this nation of 
England because of her unfruitfulness under so many 
mercies? Who can tell? We may well cry with the 
prophet, “Lord God, Thou knowest.” We only know 
that judgments have come on many a Church and Nation 
in the last eighteen hundred years. The kingdom of God 
has been taken from the AfricanChurches. The Mahom- 
etan power has overwhelmed most of the Churches of the 
East. At all events it becomes all English believers to 
intercede much on behalf of their country. Nothing 
offends God so much as neglect of privileges. Much 
has been given to us, and much will be required. 

We see, in the last place, the power of conscience even 
in wicked men. 

The chief priests and elders at last discovered that our 
Lord’s parable was specially meant for themselves. 
The point of its closing words was too sharp to be 
escaped. “They perceived that He spake of them.” 

There are many hearers of the Gospel in every con- 
gregation who are exactly in the condition of these 
unhappy men. They know that what they hear Sunday 
after Sunday is all true. They know that they are 
wrong themselves, and that every sermon condemns 
them; but they have neither will nor courage to ac- 
knowledge this. They are too proud or too fond of the 
world to confess their past mistakes, and to take up the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 1—14, 


cross and follow Christ. 


279 


Let us all beware of this 


awful state of mind. The last day will prove that 
there was more going on in the consciences of hearers 


than was at all known to preachers. 


Thousands and 


ten thousands will be found, like the chief priests, to 
have been convicted by their own consciences, and yet 


to have died unconverted. 





MATTHEW XXII. 1—14. 


1 And Jesus answered and spake 
unto them again by parables, and 
said, 

2 The kingdom of heaven is like 
unto a certain king, which made a 
marriage for his son, 

3 And sent forth his servants to 
call them that were bidden to the 
wedding: and they would not come. 

4, Again, he sent forth other ser- 
vants, saying, Tell them which are 
bidden, Behold, I have prepared my 
dinner: my oxen and my fatlings 
are killed, and all things are ready : 
come unto the marriage. 

5 But they made light of it, and 
went their ways, one to his farm, 
another to his merchandise : 

6 And the remnant took his ser- 
vants, and entreated them spite- 
fully, and slew them. 

7 But when the king heard there- 
of, he was wroth : and he sent forth 
his armies, and destroyed those 
murderers, and burned up their 
city. 





8 Then saith he to his servants, 
The wedding is ready, but they 
which were bidden were not worthy. 

9 Go ye therefore into the high- 
ways, and as many as ye shall find, 
bid to the marriage. 

10 So those servants went out 
into the highways, and gathered to- 
gether all as many as they found, 
both bad and good: and the wed- 
ding was furnished with guests. 

11 And when the king came in 
to see the guests, he saw there a 
man which had not on a wedding 
garment: 

12 And he saith unto him, 
Friend, how camest thou in hither 
not having a wedding garment ? 
And he was speechless. 

13 Then said the king to the ser- 
vants, Bind him hand and foot, 
and take him away, and cast him 
into outer darkness ; there shall be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

14 For many are called, but few 
are chosen, 


THE parable related in these verses is one of very wide 


signification. 


In its first application it unquestionably 


points to the Jews.—But we may not confine it to them. 
It contains heart-searching lessons for all among whom 
the Gospel is preached. Itis a spiritual picture which 
speaks to us this day, if we have an ear to hear. The 
remark of a learned divine is wise and true: “ Parables 


280 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


are like many-sided precious stones, cut so as to cast 
lustre in more than one direction.” 

Let us observe, in the first place, that the salvation of 
the Gospel is compared to a marriage feast. The Lord 
Jesus tells us that a “certain King made a marriage for 
his son.” 

There is in the Gospel a complete provision for all 
the wants of man’s soul. Thereisa supply of every- 
thing that can be required to relieve spiritual hunger and 
spiritual thirst. Pardon, peace with God, lively hope in 
this world, glory in the world to come,—are set before 
us in rich abundance. It is “‘a feast of fat things.” All 
this provision is owing to the love of the Son of God, 
Jesus Christ our Lord. He offers to take us into union 
with Himself, to restore us to the family of God as dear 
children, to clothe us with His own righteousness, to give 
us a place in His kingdom, and to present us faultless 
before His Father’s throne at the last day. The Gospel, 
in short, is an offer of food to the hungry, of joy to the 
mourner, of a home to the outcast, of a loving friend 
to the lost. It is glad tidings. God offers, through His 
dear Son, to be at one with sinful man. Let us not forget 
this. “Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that 
He loved us, and sent His Son to be the propitiation for 
our sins.” (1 John iv. 10.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, that the invitations 
of the Gospel are wide, full, broad and unlimited. The 
Lord Jesus tells us in the parable, that the King’s ser- 
vants said to those who were bidden, “All things are 
ready : come unto the marriage.” 

There is nothing wanting on God’s part for the 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXII. VER. 1—14. 281 


salvation of sinners’ souls. No one will ever be able to 
say at last that it was God’s fault, if he is not saved. 
The Father is ready to love and receive; the Son is 
ready to pardon and cleanse guilt away; the Spirit is 
ready to sanctify and renew; angels are ready to rejoice 
over the returning sinner; grace is ready to assist him ; 
the Bible is ready to instruct him; heaven is ready to 
be his everlasting home. One thing only is needful, and 
that is,—the sinner must be ready and willing himself. 
Let this also never be forgotten. Let us not quibble 
and split hairs upon the point. God will be found 
clear of the blood of all lost souls. The Gospel always 
speaks of sinners as responsible and accountable beings. 
The Gospel places an open door before all mankind. 
No one is excluded from the range of its offers. Though 
efficient only to believers, those offers are sufficient for 
all the world. Though few enter the strait gate, all 
are invited to come in. 

Let us observe, in the third place, that the salvation of 
the Gospel is rejected by many to whom it is offered. The 
Lord Jesus tells us that those whom the King’s servants 
bade to the wedding “made light of it, and went their 
way.” | 

There are thousands of hearers of the Gospel who 
derive from it no benefit whatever. They listen to it 
Sunday after Sunday, and year after year, and do not 
believe to the saving of the soul. They feel no special 
need of the Gospel; they see no special beauty in it. 
They do not perhaps hate it, or oppose it, or scoff at it, 
but they do not receive it into their hearts, They like 
other things far better. Their money, their land, their 


282 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. af 


business, or their pleasures, are all far more interesting 
subjects to them than their souls.—It is an awful state 
of mind to be in, but awfully common. Let us search 
our own hearts, and take heed that it is not our own. 
Open sin may kill its thousands; but indifference and 
neglect of the Gospel kill their tens of thousands. Mul- 
titudes will find themselves in hell, not so much because 
they openly broke the ten commandments, as because 
they made light of the truth. Christ died for them on 
the cross, but they neglected Him. 

Let us observe, in the last place, that all false professors 
of religion will be detected, exposed, and eternally condemned 
at the last day. The Lord Jesus tells us that when the 
wedding was at last furnished with guests, the King 
came in to see them, and “saw a man which had not 
on a wedding garment.” He asked him how he came 
in there without one, and he received no reply. And 
he then commanded the servants to “bind him hand 
and foot, and take him away.” 

There will always be some false professors in the 
Church of Christ, as long as the world stands. “In 
this parable,” it has been truly remarked, “one single 
castaway represents all the rest.” It is impossible to 
read the hearts of men. Deceivers and hypocrites will 
never be entirely excluded from the ranks of those who 
call themselves Christians. So long as a man professes 
subjection to the Gospel, and lives an outwardly correct 
life, we dare not say positively that he is not clothed 
in the righteousness of Christ. But there will be no 
deception at the last day. The unerring eye of God 
will discern who are His own people, and who are not, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 15—22. 283 


Nothing but true faith shall abide the fire of His judg- 
ment. All spurious Christianity shall be weighed in the 
balance and found wanting. None but true believers 
shall sit down at the marriage supper of the Lamb. It 
shall avail the hypocrite nothing that he has been a 
loud talker about religion, and had the reputation of 
being an eminent Christian among men. His triumph- 
ing shall be but fora moment. He shall be stripped of 
his borrowed plumage, and stand naked and shivering 
before the bar of God, speechless, self-condemned, hope- 
less, and helpless. He shall be cast into outer darkness 
with shame, and reap according as he has sown. Well 
may our Lord say, “There shall be weeping and gnash- 
ing of teeth.” 

Let us learn wisdom from the solemn pictures of this 
parable, and give diligence to make our calling and elec- 
tion sure. We ourselves are among those to whom the 
word is spoken: “All things are ready, come to the 
marriage.” Let us see that we refuse not Him that 
speaketh. Let us not sleep as others do, but watch and 
be sober. Time hastens on. The King will soon come 
in to see the guests. Have we or have we not got on the 
wedding garment? Have we put on Christ? That is 
the grand question that arises out of this parable. May 
we never rest till we can give a satisfactory answer ! 
May those heart-searching words daily ring in our ears, 
“Many are called, but few are chosen!” 


MATTHEW XXII. 15—22. 


15 Then went the Pharisees, and | their disciples with the Herodians, 
took counsel how they might en- | saying, Master, we know that thou 
tangle him in hie talk. art true, and teachest the way of 

16 And they sent out unto him! God in truth, neither carest thou 


U 


284 


for any man: for thou regardest 
not the person of men. 

17 Tellus therefore, What think- 
est thou? Is it lawful to give tri- 
bute unto Cesar, or not ? 

18 But Jesus perceived their 
wickedness, and said, Why tempt 
ye me, ye hypocrites P 

19 Shew me the tribute money. 
And they brought unto him a 


penny. 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


20 And he saith unto them, 
Whose is this image and super- 
scription P 

21 They say unto him, Casar’s. 
Then saith he unto them, Render 
therefore unto Casar the things 
which are Czsar’s; and unto God 
the things that are God’s. 

22 When they had heard these 
words, they marvelled, and 1 
him, and went their way. 


We see, in this passage, the first of a series of subtle 
attacks which were made on our Lord during the last 
days of His earthly ministry. His deadly foes, the 
Pharisees, saw the influence which He was obtaining, 
both by His miracles and by His preaching. They were 
determined by some means to silence Him, or put Him 
to death. They therefore endeavoured to “entangle Him 
in His talk.” They sent forth “their disciples with the 
Herodians,” to try Him with a hard question, They 
wished to entice Him into saying something which 
might serve as a handle for an accusation against Him. 
Their scheme, we are told in these verses, entirely 
failed. They took nothing by their aggressive move- 
ment, and retreated in confusion, 

The first thing which demands our attention in these 
verses is the flattering language with which our Lord was 
accosted by His enemies. “Master,” they said, “we know 
that Thou are true, and teachest the way of God in truth, 
neither carest Thou for any man; for Thou regardest not 
the person of men.”—-How well these Pharisees and 
Herodians talked! What smooth and honeyed words were 
these! They thought no doubt, that by good words and 
fair speeches they would throw our Lord off His guard. 
It might truly be said of them, “The words of his mouth 
were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart : his 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 15—22, 285 


words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn 
swords.” (Psalm ly. 21.) 

It becomes all professing Christians to be much on 
their guard against flattery. We mistake greatly if we 
suppose that persecution and hard usage are the only 
weapons in Satan’s armoury. That crafty foe has other 
engines for doing us mischief, which he knows well how 
to work. He knows how to poison souls by the world’s 
seductive kindness, when he cannot frighten them by 
the “fiery dart” or the sword. Let us not be ignorant 
of his devices. “By peace he destroys many.” 

Weare only too apt to forget this truth. We overlook 
the many examples which God has given us in Scripture 
for our learning. What brought about the ruin of Sam- 
son ? Not the armies of the Philistines, but the pretended 
love of a Philistine woman.—What led to Solomon’s 
backsliding? Not the strength of outward enemies, but 
the blandishments of his numerous wives.— What wasthe 
cause of King Hezekiah’sgreatestmistake? Not thesword 
of Sennacherib, or the threats of Rab-shakeh, but the flat- 
tery of the Babylonian ambassadors.—Let us remember 
these things, and be on our guard. Peace often ruins 
nations more than war. Sweet things occasion far more 
sickness than bitter. The sun makes the traveller cast off 
his protective garments far sooner than the north wind. 
Let us beware of the flatterer. Satan is never so danger- 
ous as when he appears as an angel of light. The world 
is never so dangerous to the Christian as when it smiles. 
When Judas betrayed his Lord, it was with a kiss. The 
believer that is proof against the world’s frown does well; 
but he that is proof against its flattery does better, 


286 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The second thing that demands our attention in these 
verses is the marvellous wisdom of the reply which our 
Lord made to His enemies. The Pharisees and Herodians 
asked whether it was lawful to give tribute to Cesar or 
not. They doubtless thought that they had put a ques- 
tion which our Lord could not answer without giving 
them an advantage.—Had He simply replied that it was 
lawful to pay tribute, they would have denounced Him 
to the people as one who dishonoured the privileges of 
Israel, and considered the children of Abraham no longer ~ 
free, but subjects to a foreign power—Had He, on the 
other hand, replied that it was not lawful to pay tribute, 
they would have denounced Him to the Romans as a 
mover of sedition, and a rebel against Czesar, who refused 
to pay his taxes-~But our Lord’s conduct completely 
baffled them. He demanded to see the “ tribute-money :” 
He asks them whose head is on that coin. They reply, 
“ Ceesar’s.” They acknowledge that the Roman Emperor 
Cesar has some authority over them, by using money 
bearing his image and superscription, since he that coins 
the current money is ruler of the land where that money 
is current. And at once they receive an irresistibly con- 
Clusive answer to their question: “Render to Cxsar the 
things which are Ceesar’s, and unto God the things that 
are God’s.” 

The principle laid down in these well-known words is 
one of deep importance. There is one obedience owing by 
every Christian to the civil government under which he 
lives, in all matters which are temporal, and not purely 
spiritual. He may not approve of every requirement 
of that civil government; but he must submit to the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 15—22, 287 


laws of the commonwealth, so long as those laws are unre- 
pealed. He must “render unto Cesar the things that are 
Cesar’s.”—There is another obedience which the Christian 
owes to the God of the Bible in all matters which are 
purely spiritual. No temporal loss, no civil disability, 
no displeasure of the powers that be, must ever tempt 
him to do things which the Scripture plainly forbids. 
His position may be very trying. He may have to suffer 
much for his conscience’ sake. But he must never fly in 
the face of unmistakable requirements of Scripture. If 
Cesar coins a new Gospel, he is not to be obeyed. We 
must “render to God the things that are God’s,” 

The subject unquestionably is one of great difficulty 
and delicacy. It is certain that the Church must not 
swallow up the State. Itis no less certain that the State 
must not swallow up the Church. On no point, perhaps, 
have conscientious men been so much tried. On no point 
have good men disagreed so much as in solving the 
problem, “where the things of Cesar end, and where the 
things of God begin.”——The civil power, on theoneside, has 
often encroached terribly on the rights of conscience,—as 
the English Puritans found to their cost in the unhappy 
times of the Stuarts. The spiritual power, on the other 
side, has often pushed its claims to an extravagant ex- 
tent, so as to take Cesar’s sceptre out of his hands,—as 
it did when the Church of Rome trampled on our own 
English King John. In order to have a right judgment 
in all questions of this kind, every true Christian should 
constantly pray for“ wisdom from above.” The man whose 
eye is single, and who daily seeks for grace and practical 
common sense, will never be allowed greatly to err. 


288 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XXII. 23—383. 


23 The same day came to him 
the Sadducees, which say that there 
is no resurrection, and asked him, 

Saying, Master, Moses said, 
If a man die, having no children, 
his brother shall marry his wife, 
and raise up seed unto his brother. 

25 Now there were with us seven 
brethren: and the first, when he 
had married a wife, deceased, and, 
having no issue, left his wife unto 
his brother : 

26 Likewise the second also, and 
the third, unto the seventh. 

27 And last of all the woman 
died also. 

28 Therefore in the resurrection 
whose wife shall she be of the 
seven? for they all had her. 


29 Jesus answered anJ said unte 
them, Ye do err, not knowing the 
scriptures, nor the power of God. 

30 For in the resurrection they 
neither marry, nor are given in 
marriage, but are as the angels of 
God in heaven. 

31 But as touching the resurrec- 
tion of the dead, have ye not read 
that which was spoken unto you 
by God, saying, 

82 I am the God of Abraham, 
and the God of Isaac, and the God 
of Jacob? God is not the God of 
the dead, but of the living. 

83 And when the multitude 
heard this, they were astonished 
at his doctrine. 


THIS passage describes a conversation between our Lord 


Jesus Christ and the Sadducees. 


These unhappy men, 


who said that there was “no resurrection,” attempted, 
like the Pharisees and Herodians, to perplex our Lord 
with hard questions. Like them, they hoped “to entangle 
Him in His talk,” and to injure His reputation among 
the people. Like them, they were completely baffled. 
Let us observe, in the first place, that absurd sceptical 
objections to Bible truths are ancient things. The Sad- 
ducees wished to show the absurdity of the doctrine of 
the resurrection and the life to come. They therefore 
came to our Lord with a story which was probably in- 
vented for the occasion. They told Him that a certain 
woman had married seven brothers in succession, who 
had all died and left no children. They then asked, 
“whose wife” this woman would be in the next world, 
when all rose again ?—The object of the question was 
plain and transparent. They meant, in reality, to bring 
the whole doctrine of a resurrection into contempt 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 23—33. 289 


They meant to insinuate that there must needs be 
confusion and strife and unseemly disorder, if after 
death men and women were to live again. 

It must never surprise us, if we meet with like objec- 
tions against the doctrines of Scripture, and especially 
against those doctrines which concern another world. 
There never probably will be wanting “ unreasonable 
men,” who will “intrude” into things unseen, and make 
imaginary difficulties their excuse for unbelief. Swpposed 
cases are one of the favourite strongholds in which an 
unbelieving mind loves to entrench itself. Such a mind 
will often set up a shadow of its own imagining, and 
fight with it, as if it was a truth. Such a mind will 
often refuse to look at the overwhelming mass of plain 
evidence by which Christianity is supported, and will 
fasten down on some one single difficulty, which it 
fancies is unanswerable. The talk and arguments of 
people of this character should never shake our faith 
for a moment. For one thing, we should remember 
that there must needs be deep and dark things in a 
religion which comes from God, and that a child may 
put questions which the greatest philosopher cannot 
answer. For another thing, we should remember that 
there are countless truths in the Bible which are clear 
and unmistakable. Let us first attend to them, believe 
them, and obey them. So doing, we need not doubt 
that many a thing now unintelligible to us will yet be 
made plain. So doing, we may be sure that “ what we 
know not now we shall know hereafter.” 

Let us observe, in the second place, what a remarkable 
text our Lord brings forward in proof of the reality of a 


290 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


life to come. He places before the Sadducees the words 
which God spake to Moses in the bush : “I am the God 
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob.” (Exod. iii. 6.) He adds the comment, “God is 
not the God of the dead, but of the living.” At the time 
when Moses heard these words, Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob had been dead and buried many years. Two cen- 
turies had passed away since Jacob, the last of the three, 
was carried to his tomb. Yet God spoke of them as 
being still His people, and of Himself as being still their 
God. He said not, “I was their God,” but “I am.” 
Perhaps we are not often tempted to doubt the truth 
of a resurrection, and a life to come. But unhappily, it 
is easy to hold truths theoretically, and yet not realize 
them practically. There are few of us who would not 
find it good to meditate on the mighty verity which our 
Lord here unfolds, and to give it a prominent place in our 
thoughts. Let us settle it in our minds that the dead 
are in one sense still alive. From our eyes they have 
passed away, and their place knows them no more. But 
in the eyes of God they live, and will one day come forth 
from their graves to receive an everlasting sentence, 
There is no such thing as annihilation: the idea is a 
miserable delusion. The sun, moon, and stars,—the 
solid mountains, and deep sea, will one day come to 
nothing. But the weakest babe of the poorest man shall 
live for evermore in another world. May we never 
forget this! Happy is he who can say from his heart 
the words of the Nicene Creed: “I look for the resurrec- 
tion of the dead, and the life of the world to come.” 
Let us observe, in the last place, the account which our 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 23—33. 291 


Lord gives of the state of men and women after the resurrec- 
tion. He silences the fancied objections of the Sadducees, 
by showing that they entirely mistook the true character 
of the resurrection state. They took it for granted that 
it must needs be a gross, carnal existence, like that of 
mankind upon earth. Our Lord tells them that in the 
next world we may have a real material body, and yet a 
body of very different constitution, and different necessi- 
ties, from that which we have now. He speaks only of 
the saved, be it remembered: He omits all mention of 
the lost. He says, “In the resurrection they neither 
marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels 
of God in heaven.” 

We know but little of the life to come in heaven, 
Perhaps our clearest ideas of it are drawn from consider- 
ing what it will not be, rather than what it will be. It 
is a state in which we shall hunger no more, nor thirst 
any more. Sickness, pain,and disease, will not be known. 
Wasting old age, and death will have no place. Mar- 
riages, births, and a constant succession of inhabitants, 
will no more be needed. They who are once admitted 
into heaven shall dwell there for evermore.—And, to 
pass from negatives to positives, one thing we are told 
plainly: we shall be “as the angels of God.” Like 
them, we shall serve God perfectly, unhesitatingly, and 
unweariedly. Like them, we shall ever be in God’s 
presence. J.ike them, we shall ever delight to do His 
will. Like them, we shall give all glory to the Lamb. 
These are deep things: but they are all true. 

Are we ready for this life? Should we enjoy it, if 
admitted to take part in it? Is the company of God, 


292 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and the service of God pleasant to us now? Is the 
occupation of angels one in which we should delight? 
These are solemn questions. Our hearts must be heavenly 
on earth, while we live, if we hope to go to heaven when 


we rise again in another world. (Coloss. iii. 1—4.) 





MATTHEW XXII. 34—46. 


84 But when the Pharisees had 
heard that he had put the Saddu- 
cees to silence, they were gathered 
together. 

85 Then one of them, which was 
a lawyer, asked him a question, 
tempting him, and saying, 

386 Master, which is the great 
commandment in the law ? 

37 Jesus said unto him, Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy mind. 

88 This is the first and great 
commandment. 

39 And the second is like unto 
it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself. 

40 On these two commandments 


In the beginning of this 


hang all the law and the prophets. 

41 While the Pharisees were 
gathered together, Jesus asked 
them, 

42 Saying, What think ye of 
Christ? Whose sonis he? They 
say unto him, The Son of David. 

43 He saith unto them, How 
then doth David in spirit call him 
Lord, saying, 

44 The LogD said unto my Lord, 
Sit thou on my right hand, till I 
make thine enemies thy footstool ? 

45 If David then call him Lord, 
how is he his son? 

46 And no man was able to 
answer him a word, neither durst 
any man from that day forth ask 
him any more questions. 


passage we find our Lord 


replying to the question of a certain lawyer, who asked 
Him which was “the great commandment of the law ?” 
That. question was asked in no friendly spirit. But we 
have reason to be thankful that it was asked at all. It 
drew from our Lord an answer full of precious instruction. 
Thus we see how good may come out of evil 

Let us mark what an admirable swmmary these verses 
contain of our duty towards God and our neighbour. Jesus 
says, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind:” 
He says again, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XX. VER, 34—46,. 293 


thyself ;” and He adds, “ On these two commandments 
hang all the law and the prophets.” 

How simple are these two rules, and yet how com- 
prehensive! How soon the words are repeated, and 
yet how much they contain! How humbling and con- 
demning they are! How much they prove our daily 
need of mercy, and of the precious blood of atonement ! 
Happy would it be for the world if these rules were 
more known and more practised. 

Love is the grand secret of true obedience to God. 
When we feel towards Him as children feel towards a 
dear father, we shall delight to do His will. We shall 
not find His commandments grievous, or work for Him 
like slaves under fear of the lash. We shall take 
pleasure in trying to keep His laws, and mourn when 
we transgress them. None work so well as they who 
work for love. The fear of punishment, or the desire of 
reward, are principles of far less power. They do the 
will of God best who do it from the heart. Would we 
train children right? Let us teach them to love God. 

Love is the grand secret of right behaviour towards 
our fellow-men. He who loves his neighbour will scorn 
to do him any wilful injury, either in person, property, 
or character——But he will not rest there. He will 
desire in every way to do him good; he will strive 
to promote his comfort and happiness; he will en- 
deavour to lighten his sorrows, and increase his joys. 
When a man loves us, we feel confidence in him. 
We know that he will never intentionally do us harm, 
and that in every time of need he will be our friend. 
Would we teach children to behave aright towards 


994. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


others? Let us teach them to “love everybody as 
themselves, and do to others as they would have others 
do to them.” ; 

But how shall we obtain this love towards God? It 
is no natural feeling. We are “born in sin,” and as 
sinners, are afraid of Him. how then can we love Him? 
We can never really love Him till we are at peace with 
Him through Christ. When we feel our sins forgiven, 
and ourselves reconciled to our holy Maker, then, and 
not till then, we shall love Him and have the Spirit of 
adoption. Faith in Christ is the true spring of love to 
God. They love most who feel most forgiven. “We 
love Him because He first loved us.” (1 John iv. 19.) 

And how shall we obtain this love towards our neigh- 
bour? This also is no natural feeling. We are born 
selfish, hateful, and hating one another. (Titus iii. 3.) 
We shall never love our fellow-men aright till our 
hearts are changed by the Holy Ghost. We must be 
born again. We must put off the old man, and put on 
the new, and receive the mind that was in Christ Jesus. 
Then, and not till then, our cold hearts will know true 
God-like love towards all. “The fruit of the Spirit is 
love.” (Gal. v. 22.) 

Let these things sink down into our hearts. There is 
much vague talk in these latter days about “love” and 
“charity.” Men profess to admire them and desire to 
see them increased, and yet hate the principles which 
alone can produce them. Let us stand fast in the old 
paths. We cannot have fruits and flowers without roots. 
We cannot have love to God and man without faith in 
Christ, and without regeneration. The way to spread 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII VER. 34—46, 295 


true love in the world, is to teach the atonement of 
Christ, and the work of the Holy Ghost. 

The concluding portion of the passage contains a@ ques- 
tion put to the Pharisees by our Lord. After answering 
with perfect wisdom the inquiries of His adversaries, He 
at last asks them, “What think ye of Christ? Whose 
Son is He?” They reply at once, “The Son of David.” 
He then asks them to explain why David in the Book 
of Psalms calls Him Lord. (Psalm cx.1.) “If David 
then call Him Lord, how is He his Son?” At once 
His enemies were put to silence: “No man was able 
to answer Him a word.” The scribes and Pharisees 
no doubt were familiar with the Psalm He quoted, but 
they could not explain its application. It could only be 
explained by conceding the pre-existence and divinity 
of the Messiah. This the Pharisees would not concede. 
Their only idea of Messiah was that He was to bea 
man like one of themselves. Their ignorance of the 
Scriptures, of which they pretended to know more than 
others, and their low, carnal view of the true nature 
of Christ, were thus exposed at one and the same 
time. Well may Matthew say, by the Holy Ghost, 
“From that day forth durst no man ask Him any more 
questions.” 

Let us not leave these verses without making a prac- 
tical use of our Lord’s solemn question, “What think 
ye of Christ?” What do we think of His person, and 
His offices? What do we think of His life, and what 
of His death for us on the cross? What do we think of 
His resurrection, ascension, and intercession at the right 
hand of God? Have we tasted that He is gracious? 


296 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Have we laid hold on Him by faith? Have we found 
by experience that He is precious to our souls? Can 
we truly say, “He is my Redeemer and my Saviour, my 
Shepherd and my Friend ” ? 

These are serious inquiries. May we never rest till 
we can give a satisfactory answer to them! It will not 
profit us to read about Christ, if we are not joined to 
Him by living faith, Once more then let us test our 
religion by this question: “ What think we of Christ ?” 


MATTHEW XXIII. 1—12. 


1 Then spake Jesus to the multi- 
tude, and to his disciples, 

2 Saying, The scribes and the 
Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat : 

3 All therefore whatsoever they 
bid you observe, that observe and 
do; but do not ye after their works: 
for they say, and do not. 

4 For they bind heavy burdens 
and grievous to be borne, and lay 
them on men’s shoulders; but they 
themselves will not move them with 
one of their fingers. 

5 But all their works they do 
for to be seen of men; they make 
broad their phylacteries, and en- 
large the borders of their gar- 
ments, 


at feasts, and the chief seats in 
the synagogues, 

7 And greetings in the markets, 
and to be called of men, Rabbi, 
Rabbi. 

8 But be ye not called Rabbi: for 
one is your Master, even Christ; 
and all ye are brethren. 

9 And call no man your father 
upon the earth: for one is your 
Father, which is in heaven, 

10 Neither be ye called masters : 
for one is your master, even Christ. 

11 But he that is greatest among 
you shall be your servant. 

12 And whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased: and he 
that shall humble himself shall be 


6 And love the uppermost rooms | exalted. 


WE are now beginning a chapter which in one respect 
is the most remarkable in the four Gospels, It contains 
the last words which the Lord Jesus ever spoke within 
the walls of the temple. Those last words consist of a 
withering exposure of the scribes and Pharisees, and a 
sharp rebuke of their doctrines and practices. Knowing 
full well that His time on earth was drawing to a close, 
our Lord no longer keeps back His opinion of the leading 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIII. VER. 1—12. 297 


teachers of the Jews. Knowing that He would soon 
leave His followers alone, like sheep among wolves, 
He warns them plainly against the false shepherds by 
whom they were surrounded. 

The whole chapter is a signal example of boldness 
and faithfulness in denouncing error. It is a striking 
proof that it is possible for the most loving heart to use 
the language of stern reproof. Above all, it is an awful 
evidence of the guilt of unfaithful teachers. So long 
as the world stands, this chapter ought to be a warning 
and a beacon to all ministers of religion. No sins are 
so sinful as theirs in the sight of Christ. 

In the twelve verses which begin the chapter, we see 
firstly, the duty of distinguishing between the office of a 
false teacher and his example. “The scribes and Pharisees 
sat in Moses’ seat.” Rightly or wrongly, they occupied 
the position of the chief public teachers of religion among 
the Jews. However unworthily they filled the place of 
authority, their office entitled them to respect. But while 
their office was respected, their bad lives were not to be 
copied. Although their teaching was to be adhered to, 
so long as it was Scriptural, it was not to be observed 
when it contradicted the Word of God. To use the 
words of a great divine, “ They were to be heard when 
they taught what Moses taught,” but no longer. That 
such was our Lord’s meaning is evident from the whole 
tenor of the chapter we are reading. False doctrine is 
there denounced as well as false practice. 

The duty here placed before us is one of great im- 
portance. There is a constant tendency in the human 
mind to run into extremes. If we do not regard the 


298 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


office of the minister with idolatrous veneration, we are 
apt to treat it with indecent contempt. Against both 
these extremes we have need to be on our guard. How- 
ever much we may disapprove of a minister’s practice, 
or dissent from his teaching, we must never forget to 
respect his office. We must show that we can honour 
the commission, whatever we may think of the officer 
that holds it. The example of St. Paul on a certain 
occasion is worthy of notice : “I wist not, brethren, that 
he was the high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt 
not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.” (Acts 
xxiii, 5.) | 

We see, secondly, in these verses, that inconsistency, 
ostentation, and love of pre-eminence, among professors of 
religion, are specially displeasing to Christ. As to incon- 
sistency, it is remarkable that the very first thing our 
Lord says of the Pharisees is, that “they say, and do 
not.” They required from others what they did not 
practise themselves.—As to ostentation,our Lord declares, 
that they did all their works “to be seen of men.” They 
had their phylacteries, or strips of parchment with texts 
written on them, which many Jews wore on their clothes, 
made of an excessive size. They had the “ borders,” or 
fringes of their garments, which Moses bade Israelites to 
wear as a remembrance of God, made of an extravagant 
width. (Num. xv. 38.) And all this was done to attract 
notice, and to make people think how holy they were. 
—As to love of pre-eminence, our Lord tells us that the 
Pharisees loved to have “the chief seats” given them 
in public places, and to have flattering titles addressed to 
them. All these things our Lord holds up to reprobation, 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXIII. VER. 1—12. 299 


and against all He would have us watch and pray. They 
are soul-ruining sins. “How can ye believe which receive 
honour one of another?” (John v. 44.) Happy would 
it have been for the Church of Christ if this passage 
had been more deeply pondered, and the spirit of it 
more implicitly obeyed. The Pharisees are not the 
only people who have imposed austerities on others, and 
affected a sanctity of apparel, and loved the praise of 
man. The annals of Church history show that only 
too many Christians have walked closely in their steps. 
May we remember this and be wise! It is perfectly 
possible for a baptized Englishman to be in spirit a 
thorough Pharisee. 

We see, in the third place, from these verses, that 
Christians must never give to any man the titles and hon- 
ours which are due to God alone and to His Christ. We 
are to “call no man Father on earth.” 

The rule here laid down must be interpreted with 
proper Scriptural qualification. We are not forbidden 
to esteem ministers very highly in love for their work's 
sake. (1 Thess. v.13.) Even St. Paul, one of the hum- 
blest saints, called Titus “his own son in the faith,” and 
says to the Corinthians, “I have begotten you through 
the Gospel.” (1 Cor. iv. 15.) But still we must be 
very careful that we do not insensibly give to ministers 
a place and an honour which do not belong to them. 
We must never allow them to come between ourselves 
and Christ. The very best are not infallible. They are 
not priests who can atone for us. They are not mediators 
who can undertake to manage our soul’s affairs with God. 


They are men of like passions with ourselves, needing 
4 


300 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the same cleansing blood, and the same renewing Spirit, 
set apart to a high and holy calling, but still after all 
only men. Let us never forget these things. Such 
cautions are always useful. Human nature would always 
rather lean on a visible minister, than an invisible Christ. 

We see, in the last place, that there is no grace which 
should distinguish the Christian so much as humility. He 
that would be great in the eyes of Christ, must aim at a 
totally different mark from that of the Pharisees. His 
aim must be, not so much to rule as to serve the Church. 
Well says Baxter, “ Church greatness consisteth in being 
greatly serviceable.” The desire of the Pharisee was to 
receive honour, and to be called “master.” The desire of 
the Christian must be to do good, and to give himself, 
and all that he has, to the service of others. Truly this 
is a high standard, but a lower one must never content 
us. The example of our blessed Lord, the direct com- 
mand of the apostolic Epistles, both alike require us to 
be “clothed with humility.” (1 Peter v. 5.) Let us 
seek that blessed grace day by day. None is so beautiful, 
however much despised by the world. None is such an 
evidence of saving faith and true conversion to God. 
None is so often commended by our Lord. Of all His 
sayings, hardly any is so often repeated as that which 
concludes the passage we have now read: “He that 
shall humble hiraself shall be exalted.” 


MATTHEW XXIII. 13—33, 


13 But woe unto you, scribes'; 14 Woe unto you, scribes and 
and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye | Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye de- 
shut up the kingdom of heaven’| vour widows’ houses, and for a 
against men: for ye neither goin pretence make long prayer : there- 
yourselves, neither suffer ye them | fore ye shall receive the greater 
that are entering to go in, | damnation. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIII. VER. 13—33. 


15 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye com- 
pass sea and land to make one 
proselyte, and when he is made, 
ye make him twofold more the 
child of hell than yoursetves. 

16 Woe unto you, ye blind guides, 
which say, Whosoever shall swear 
by the temple, it is nothing: but 
whosoever shall swear by the gold 
of the temple, he is a debtor ! 

17 Ye fools and blind: for 
whether is greater, the gold, or the 
temple that sanctifieth the gold? 

18 And Whosoever shall swear 
by the altar, it is nothing; but 
whosoever sweareth by the gift 
that is upon it, he is guilty. 

19 Ye fools and blind: for 
whether is greater, the gift, or the 
altar that sanctifieth the gift P 

20 Whoso therefore shall swear 
by the altar, sweareth by it, and 
by all things thereon. 

21 And whoso shall swear by the 
temple, sweareth by it, and by him 
that dwelleth therein. 

22 And he that shall swear by 
heaven, sweareth by the throne 
of God, and by him that sitteth 
thereon. 

23 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay 
tithe of mint and anise and cum- 
min, and have omitted the weigh- 
tier matters of the law, judgment, 
merey, and faith: these ought ye 
to have done, and not to leave the 
other undone. 


30] 


24 Ye blind guides, which strain 
at a gnat, and swallow a camel. 

25 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye make 
clean the outside of the cup and 
of the platter, but within they are 
full of extortion and excess. 

26 Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse 
first that which is within the cup 
and platter, that the outside of 
them may be clean also. 

27 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are 
like unto whited sepulchres, which 
indeed appear beautiful outward, 
but are within full of dead men’s 
bones, and of all uncleanness. 

28 Even so ye also outwardly 
appear righteous unto men, but 
within ye are full of hypocrisy and 
iniquity. 

29 Woe unto you, scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye 
build the tombs of the prophets, 
and garnish the sepulchres of the 
righteous, 

80 And say, If we had been in 
the days of our fathers, we would 
not have been partakers with them 
in the blood of the prophets. 

81 Wherefore be ye witnesses 
unto yourselves, that ye are the 
children of them which killed the 
prophets. 

82 Fill ye up then the measure 
of your fathers. 

83 Ye serpents, ye generation of 
vipers, how can ye escape the dam- 
nation of hell ? 


WE have in these verses the charges of our Lord against 
the Jewish teachers, ranged under eight heads. Standing 
in the midst of the temple, with a listening crowd around 
Him, He publicly denounces the main errors of the scribes 
and Pharisees, in unsparing terms. Eight times He uses 
the solemn expression, “Woe unto you.” Seven times 
He calls them “ hypocrites.” Twice He speaks of them 
as blind guides,—twice as “fools and blind,’—once as 
“serpents and a generation of vipers.” Let us mark 


302 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


that language well. It teaches a solemn lesson. It 
shows how utterly abominable the spirit of the scribes 
and Pharisees is in God’s sight, in whatever form it may 
be found. 

Let us glance shortly at the eight charges which our 
Lord brings forward, and then seek to draw from the 
whole passage some general instruction. 

The first “woe” in the list is directed against the 
systematic opposition of the scribes and Pharisees to the 
progress of the Gospel. They “shut up the kingdom of 
heaven,” for they would neithergoin themselves, norsuffer 
others to goin. They rejected the warning voice of John 
the Baptist. They refused to acknowledge Jesus, when 
He appeared among them as the Messiah. They tried 
to keep back Jewish inquirers. They would not believe 
the Gospel themselves, and they did all in their power 
to prevent others believing it. This was a great sin. 

The second “ woe” in the list is directed against the 
covetousness and self-aggrandizing spirit of the scribes 
and Pharisees. They “devoured widows’ houses, and 
for a pretence made long prayer.” They imposed on the 
credulity of weak and unprotected women, by an affecta- 
tion of great devoutness, until they were regarded as 
their spiritual directors. They scrupled not to abuse 
the influence, thus unrighteously obtained, to their own 
temporal advantage, and, in a word, to make money by 
their religion. This again was a great sin. 

The third “woe” in the list is directed against the 
zeal of the scribes and Pharisees for making partizans. 
They “compassed sea and land to make one proselyte.” 
They laboured incessantly to make men join their party 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXIII. VER, 13—33, 303 


and adopt their opinions. They did this from no desire 
to benefit men’s souls in the least, or to bring them to 
God. They only did it to swell the ranks of their 
sect, and to increase the number of their adherents, and 
their own importance. Their religious zeal arose from 
sectarianism, and not from the love of God. This also 
was a great sin. 

The fourth “ woe” in the list is directed against the 
doctrines of the scribes and Pharisees about oaths. They 
drew subtle distinctions between one kind of oath and 
another. They taught the Jesuitical tenet, that some 
oaths were binding on men, while others were not. They 
attached greater importance to oaths sworn “ by the 
gold” offered to the temple, than to oaths sworn “by the 
temple” itself. By so doing they brought the third 
commandment into contempt,—and by making men 
overrate the value of alms and oblations, advanced their 
own interests. This again was a great sin.* 

The fifth “woe” in the list is directed against the 
practice of the scribes and Pharisees to exalt trifles in 
religion above serious things, to put the last things first, 
and the first last. They made great ado about tithing 
“ mint,” and other garden herbs, as if they could not be 
too strict in their obedience to God’s law, while at 
the same time they neglected great plain duties, such as 
justice, charity, and honesty. This again was a great sin. 

* This practice of tampering with oaths was well known 
among the heathen as a feature in the Jewish character. . It 


is a striklng fact that Martial, the Roman poet, specially refers 
to it. 


“ Ecce negas, jurasque mihi per templa Tonantis : 
Non credo: Jura, verpe, per Anchialum.”—Manrriat ix. 94, 


304 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The sixth and seventh “ woes” in the list possess too 
much in common to be divided. They are directed 
against a general characteristic of the religion of the 
scribes. They set outward purity and decency above 
inward sanctification and purity of heart. They made it 
a religious duty to cleanse the “outside” of their cups 
and platters, while they neglected their own inward man. 
They were like whitened sepulchres, clean and beautiful 
externally, but within full of all corruption. ‘Even so 
they outwardly appeared righteous, but within were full 
of hypocrisy and iniquity.” This also was a great sin. 

The last “woe” in the list is directed against the 
affected veneration of the scribes and Pharisees for the 
memory of dead saints. They built the “tombs of the 
prophets,” and garnished “the sepulchres of the right- 
eous,’ while their own lives proved that they were 
of one mind with those who “killed the prophets.” 
There own conduct was a daily evidence that they liked 
dead saints better than living ones. The very men that 
pretended to honour dead prophets, could see no beauty 
in a living Christ. This also was a great sin.* 

Such is the melancholy picture which our Lord gives 
of Jewish teachers. Let us turn from the contemplation 


* A passage from the Berlenberger Bible on this subject is 
sufficiently striking to deserve insertion. . 


“ Ask in Moses’s times who were the good people: they will — 
be Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but not Moses,—he should be 
stoned. Ask in Samuel’s times who were the good people: 
they will be Moses and Joshua, but not Samuel. Ask in the 
times of Christ who were such: they will be all the former 
prophets, with Samuel, but not Christ and His apostles.” 


The Latin proverbs “mortui non mordent,” and “ sit divus, 
dummodo non vivus,” are hoth illustrative of the same truth. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XIII. VER. 18—33. 305 


of it with sorrow and humiliation. It is a fearful exhi- 
bition of the morbid anatomy of human nature. It is 
a picture which unhappily has been reproduced over 
and over again in the history of the Church of Christ. 
There is not a point in the character of the scribes and 
Pharisees in which it might not be easily shown that 
persons calling themselves Christians have often walked 
in their steps. * 

Let us learn, from the whole passage, how deplorable 
was the condition of the Jewish nation when our Lord 
was upon earth. When such were the teachers, what 
must have been the miserable darkness of the taught! 
Truly the iniquity of Israel had come to the full. It 
was high time, indeed, for the Sun of Righteousness to 
arise, and for the Gospel to be preached. 

Let us learn, from the whole passage, how abominable 
is hypocrisy in the sight of God. These scribes and 
Pharisees are not charged with being thieves or mur- 
derers, but with being hypocrites to the very core. 
Whatever we are in our religion, let us resolve never 
to wear a cloak. Let us by all means be honest and real, 

Let us learn, from the whole passage, how awfully 
dangerous is the position of an unfaithful minister. It 
is bad enough to be blind ourselves. It is a thousand 
times worse to be a blind guide. Of all men none is so 


* T cannot resist the opportunity of here expressing my firm 
conviction that our Lord’s sayings in this chapter were meant 
to bear a prophetical signification, and to apply to corruptions 
which He foresaw would spring up in His professing Church. 
Beyond doubt there is a most unhappy similarity between the 
doctrines and practices of the scribes and Pharisees, and many 
of the leading corruptions of the Church of Rome. 


wo 


306 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


culpably wicked as an unconverted minister, and none 
will be judged so severely. It is a solemn saying about 
such an one, “ He resembles an unskilful pilot: he does 
not perish alone.” 

Finally, let us beware of supposing from this passage 
that the safest course in religion is to make no profes- 
sion at all. This is to run into a dangerous extreme. 
It does not follow that there is no such thing as true 
profession, because some men are hypocrites. ‘It does 
not follow that all money is bad because there is much 
counterfeit coin. Let not hypocrisy prevent our con- 
fessing Christ, or move us from our steadfastness, if we 
have confessed Him. Let us press on, looking unto 
Jesus, and resting on Him, praying daily to be kept 
from error, and saying with David, “ Let my heart be 
sound in Thy statutes.” (Psalm cxix. 80.) 


MATTHEW XXIII. 34—39, 


84 Wherefore, behold I send unto 
you prophets, and wise men and 
scribes : and some of them ye shall 
kill and crucify : and some of them 
shall ye scourge in your synago- 
gues, and persecute them from city 
to city. 

35 That upon you may come 
all the righteous blood shed upon 
the earth, from the blood of righ- 
teous Abel unto the blood of Za- 
charias son of Barachias, whom 
ye slew between the temple and 
the altar. 

36 Verily I say unto you, All these 


things shall come upon this genera- 
tion. 

37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou 
that killest the prophets, and ston- 
est them which are sent unto thee, 
how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a 
hen gathereth her chickens under 
her wings, and ye would not! 

38 Behold your house is left unto 
you desolate. 

39 For I say unto you, Ye shall 
not see me henceforth, till ye shall 
say, Blessed is he that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. 


THESE verses form the conclusion of our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s address on the subject of the scribes and Phari- 


sees. 


They are the last words which He ever spoke, as 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIII. VER. 34—39. 307 


a public teacher, in the hearing of the people. The 
characteristic tenderness and compassion of our Lord, 
shine forth in a striking manner at the close of His 
ministry. Though He left His enemies in unbelief, He 
shows that He loved and pitied them to the last. 

We learn, in the first place, from these verses, that 
God often takes great pains with ungodly men. He sent 
the Jews “prophets, and wise men, and scribes.” He 
gave them repeated warnings. He sent them message 
after message. He did not allow them to go on sinning 
without rebuke. They could never say they were not 
told when they did wrong. 

This is the way in which God generally deals with 
unconverted Christians. He does not cut them off in 
their sins without a call to repentance. He knocks at 
the door of their hearts by sicknesses and afflictions ; 
_ He assails their consciences by sermons, or by the advice 
of friends ; He summons them to consider their ways by 
opening the grave under their eyes, and taking away 
from them their idols. They often know not what it all 
means, and are blind and deaf to all His gracious 
messages. But they will see His hand at last, though 
perhaps too late. They will find that “ God spake once, 
yea, twice, but they perceived it not.” (Job xxxiii. 14.) 
They will discover that they too, like the Jews, had 
prophets, and wise men, and scribes, sent to them. 
There was a voice in every providence, “Turn ye, turn 
ye, why will ye die?” (Ezek. xxxiii. 11.) 

We learn, in the second place, from these verses, that 
God takes notice of the treatment which His messengers 
and ministers receive, and will one day reckon for it. The 


308 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Jews, as a nation, had often given the servants of God 
most shameful usage, and had dealt with them as 
enemies, because they told them the truth. Some they 
had persecuted, and some they had scourged, and some 
they had even killed. They thought, perhaps, that 
no account would be required of their conduct. But 
our Lord tells them they were mistaken. There was 
an eye that saw all their doings. There was a hand that 
registered all the innocent blood they shed, in books 
of everlasting remembrance. The dying words of Zach-— 
arias, who was “slain between the temple and the altar,” 
would be found, after eight hundred and fifty years, 
not to have fallen to the ground—He said, as he died, 
*The Lord look upon it and require it.” (2 Chron. 
xxiv. 22.)* Yet a few years, and there would be such 
an inquisition for blood at Jerusalem as the world had 
never seen. The holy city would be destroyed. The 
nation which had murdered so many prophets would 
itself be wasted by famine, pestilence, and the sword, 
while even those that escaped would be scattered to 
the four winds, and become, like Cain the murderer, 
“fugitives and vagabonds upon earth.” We all know 
now literally these sayings were fulfilled. Well might 


*Tt is remarkable that the Zacharias here spoken of, is de- 
scribed in Chronicles as the son of Jehoiada. Our Lord speaks 
of him as the son of Barachias. This discrepancy has led some 
to suppose that the Zacharias here spoken of could not be the 
one who was murdered in the days of Joash, but an entirely 
different person. But there seems no sufficient reason for this 
supposition. By far the most satisfactory explanation appears 
to be, that the father of Zacharias had two names, Jehoiada and 
Barachias. It was not at all uncommon among the Jews to have 
two names. Matthew was called Levi; aud Jude, Thaddeus. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXII. VER. 34-—39. 309 


our Lord say, “Verily all these things shall come upon 
this generation.” 

It is good for us all to mark this lesson well. We 
are too apt to think that “bygones are bygones,” and 
that things which to us are past, and done, and old, will 
never be raked up again. But we forget that with God 
“one day is as a thousand years,” and that the events 
of a thousand years ago are as fresh in His sight as the 
events of this very hour. God “requireth that which 
is past” (Eccles. iii. 15), and above all, God will require 
an account of the treatment of His saints. The blood of 
the primitive Christians shed by the Roman Emperors, 
—the blood of the Vallenses and Albigenses,and the suf- 
ferers at the massacre of St. Bartholomew,—the blood of 
the martyrs who were burned at the time of the Refor. 
mation, and of those who have been put to death by the 
Inquisition,—all, all will yet be accounted for. Itis an old 
saying, that “the mill-stones of God’s justice grind slowly, 
but they grind very fine.” The world will yet see that 
“there is a God that judgeth in the earth.” (Ps. lviii. 11.) 

Let those who persecute God’s people in the present 
day, take heed what they are doing. Let them know 
that all who injure, or ridicule, or mock, or slander 
others on account of their religion, commit a great sin. 
Let them know that Christ takes notice of every one 
who persecutes his neighbour because he is better than 
himself, or because he prays, reads his Bible, and thinks 
about his soul. He lives who said, ‘‘ He that toucheth 
you, toucheth the apple of mine eye.” (Zech. ii. 8.) The 
judgment-day will prove that the King of kings will 
reckon with all who insult His servants. 


310 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We learn, in the last place, from these verses, that those 
who are lost for ever, are lost through ther own fault. 

The words of our Lord Jesus Christ are very remark- 
able. He says, “I would have gathered thy children 
together,—and ye would not.” 

There is something peculiarly deserving of notice in 
this expression. It throws light on a mysterious subject, 
and one which is often darkened by human explanations. 
It shows that Christ has feelings of pity and mercy for 
many who are not saved, and that the grand secret of 
man’s ruin is his want of will. Impotent as man is by 
nature,—unable to think a good thought of himself,— 
without power to turn himself to faith and calling upon 
God,—he still appears to have a mighty ability to ruin 
his own soul. Powerless as he is to good, he is still 
powerful to evil. We say rightly that a man can do 
nothing of himself, but we must always remember that 
the seat of impotence is his will. A will to repent and 
believe no man can give himself, but a will to reject 
Christ and have his own way, every man possesses by 
nature, and if he is not saved at last, that will shall prove 
to have been his destruction. “ Ye will not come to Me,” 
says Christ, “that ye might have life.” (John v. 40.) 

Letus leave the subject with the comfortable reflection 
that with Christ nothing is impossible. The hardest 
heart can be made willing in the day of His power. 
Grace beyond doubt is irresistible. But never let us for- 
get that the Bible speaks of man as a responsible being, 
and that it says of some, “ Ye do always resist the Holy 
Ghost.” (Acts vii. 51.) Let us understand that the ruin of 
those who are lost, is not because Christ was not willing 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 1—14. 311 


to save them,—nor yet because they wanted to be saved, 
but could not,—but because they would not come to 
Christ. Let the ground we take up be always that of 
the passage we are now considering. Christ would gather 
men, but they will not to be gathered; Christ would save 
men, but they will not to be saved. Let it be a settled 
principle in our religion, that man’s salvation, if saved, 
is wholly of God; and that man’s ruin, if lost, is wholly 
of himself. The evil that is in us is all our own: the 
good, if we have any, is all of God. The saved in the 
next world will give God all the glory: the lost in the 
next world will find that they have destroyed them- 


selves, (Hosea xiii. 9.) 


MATTHEW 


1 And Jesus went out, and de- 
parted from the temple: and his 
disciples came to him for to shew 
him the buildings of the temple. 

2 And Jesus said unto them, See 
ye not all these things? verily I say 
unto you, There shall not be left 
here one stone upcn another, that 
shall not be thrown down. 

8 And as he sat upon the mount 
of Olives, the disciples came unto 
him privately, saying, Tell us, when 
shall these things be? and what 
shall be the sign of thy coming, 
and of the end of the world? 

4, And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, Take heed that no man 
deceive you. : 

5 For many shall come in my 
name saying, I am Christ; and 
shall deceive many. 

6 And ye shall hear of wars and 
rumours of wars: see that ye be not 
troubled: for all these things must 
come to pass, but the end is not yet. 


XXIV. 1—M. 


7 For nation shall rise against 
nation, and kingdom against king- 
dom: and there shall be famines 
and pestilences, and earthquakes, 
in divers places. 

8 All these are the beginning of 
SOrrows. 

9 Then shall they deliver you up 
to be afflicted, and shall kill you: 
and ye shall be hated of all nations 
for my name’s sake. 

10 And then shall many be offen- 
ded, and shall betray one another, 
and shall hate one another. 

11 And many false prophets 
shall rise, and shall deceive many. 

12 And because iniquity shall 
abound, the love of many shall 
wax cold. 

13 But he that shail endure unto 
the end, the same shall be saved. 

14 And this Gospel of the king- 
dom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness unto all na- 
tions ; and then shall the end come. 


THESE verses begin a chapter full of prophecy, prophecy 


312 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of which a large portion is unfulfilled, prophecy which 
ought to be deeply interesting to all true Christians. It 
is a subject to which, the Holy Ghost says, we “do well 
to take heed.” (2 Peter i. 19.) 

All portions of Scripture like this ought to be ap- 
proached with deep humility, and earnest prayer for the 
teaching of the Spirit. On no point have good men so 
entirely disagreed as on the interpretation of prophecy. 
On no point have the prejudices of one class, the dog- 
matism of a second, and the extravagance of a third, 
done so much to rob the Church of truths, which God 
intended to be a blessing. Well says a certain divine, 
“What does not man see, or fail to see, when it serves 
to establish his own favourite opinions ?” 

To understand the drift of the whole chapter we must 
carefully keep in view the question which gave rise to 
our Lord’s discourse. On leaving the temple for the last 
time, the disciples, with the natural feeling of Jews, 
had called their Master’s attention to the splendid build- 
ings of which it was composed. To their surprise and 
amazement, He tells them that the whole was about to 
be destroyed! These words appear to have sunk deeply 
into the minds of the disciples. They came to Him, as 
He sat upon the Mount of Olives, and asked Him with 
evident anxiety, “Tell us when shall these things be? 
and what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the 
end of the world?”—In these words we see the clue 
to the subject of the prophecy now before us. It em- 
braces three points,—one, the destruction of Jerusalem, 
—another, the second personal advent of Christ,—and a 
third, the end of the world. These three points are iti 


MATIHEW, CHAP, XXIV. VER, 1—14. 313 


some parts of the chapter so entwined together that it is 
difficult to separate and disentangle them. Butall these 
points are to be found in the chapter, and without a con- 
tinual recollection of them it cannot be fairly explained. 

The first fourteen verses of the prophecy are taken 
up with general lessons of wide range and application. 
They seem to apply with equal force to the close of 
both Jewish and Christian dispensations, the one event 
being strikingly typical of the other. They certainly 
demand special notice from us, “on whom the ends of 
the world are come.” (1 Cor. x. 11.) Let us now see 
what those lessons are. 

The first general lesson before us is a warning against 
deception. The very first words of the discourse are, 
“Take heed that no man deceive you.” 

A more needful warning than this cannot be conceived. 
Satan knows well the value of prophecy, and has ever 
laboured to bring the subject into contempt. How many 
false Christs and false prophets arose before the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, the works of Josephus abundantly 
prove. In how many ways the eyes of man are con- 
tinually blinded in the present day, as to things to come, 
it might easily be shown. Irvingism and Mormonism 
have been only too successfully used as arguments for 
rejecting the whole doctrine of the second advent of 
Christ. Let us watch, and be on our guard. 

Let no man deceive us as to the leading facts of unful- 
filled prophecy, by telling us they are impossible,—or as 
to the manner in which they will be brought to pass, by 
telling us it is improbable, and contrary to past experi- 
ence. Let no man deceive us as to the time when 


314 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


unfulfilled prophecies will be accomplished, either by 
fixing dates on the one hand, or bidding us wait for the 
conversion of the world on the other—On all these 
points let the plain meaning of Scripture be our only 
guide, and not the traditional interpretations of men. 
Let us not be ashamed to say that we expect a literal 
fulfilment of unfulfilled prophecy. Let us frankly allow 
that there are many things we do not understand, but 
still hold our ground tenaciously,—believe much, wait 
long,—and not doubt that all will one day be made clear. 
Above all, let us remember that the first coming of 
Messiah to suffer was the most improbable event that 
could have been conceived, and let us not doubt that 
as He literally came in person to suffer, so He will 
literally come again in person to reign. 

The second grand lesson before us is a warning against 
over-sanguine and extravagant expectations as to things 
which are to happen before the end comes. It is a warning 
as deeply important as the preceding one. Happy would 
it have been for the Church if it had not been so much 
neglected. 

We are not to expect a reign of universal peace, 
happiness, and prosperity, before the end comes. If we 
do, we shall be greatly deceived. Our Lord bids us look 
for “wars, famines, pestilence,” and persecution. It is 
vain to expect peace until the Prince of peace returns. 
Then, and not till then, the swords shall be beaten into 
ploughshares, and nations learn war no more. Then, 
and not till then, the earth shall bring forth her 
increase. (Isa. ii. 4; Ps. Ixvii. 6.) 

We are not to expect a time of universal purity of 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 1—14. 315 


doctrine and practice in the Church of Christ, before the 
end comes. If we do, we shall be greatly mistaken. 
Our Lord bids us look for the rising of “ false prophets,” 
the “ abounding of iniquity,” and the “ waxing cold of 
theloveof many.” The truth will never be received by all 
professing Christians, and holiness will never be the rule 
among men, until the great Head of the Church returns, 
and Satan is bound. Then, and not till then, there will be 
a glorious Church, without spotor blemish. (Ephes, v. 27.) 

We are not to expect that all the world will be con- 
verted before the end comes. If we do, we shall be 
greatly mistaken. “The Gospel is to be preached in all 
the world for a witness unto all nations,’ but we must 
not think that we shall see it universally believed. It 
will “take out a people,” wherever it is faithfully 
preached, as witnesses to Christ, but the full gathering 
of the nations shall never take place until Christ comes. 
Then, and not till then, shall the earth be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. 
(Acts xv. 14; Habak. ii. 14.) 

Let us lay these things to heart, and remember them 
well, They are eminently truths for the present times. 
Let us learn to be moderate in our expectations from any 
existing machinery in the Church of Christ, and we shall 
be spared much disappointment. Let us make haste to 
spread the Gospel in the world, for the time is short, not 
long.—The night cometh when no man can work, Trou- 
blous times are a-head. Heresies and persecutions may 
soon weaken and distract the Churches. A fierce war of 
principles may soon convulse the nations. The doors 
now open to do good may soon be shut for ever. Our 

¥ 


316 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


eyes may yet see the sun of Christianity go down like 
the sun of Judaism, in clouds and storm. Above all, let 


us long for our Lord’s return. 


May we all have a heart 


to pray daily, “Come, Lord Jesus!” (Rev. xxii. 20.) 








MATTHEW XXIV. 15—28. 


15 When ye therefore shall see 
the abomination of desolation, 
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, 
stand in the holy place, (whoso 
readeth, let him understand :) 

16 Then let them which be in 
Judea flee into the mountains: 

17 Let him which is on the house- 
top not come down to take any 
thing out of his house: 

18 Neither let him which is in the 
field return back to take his clothes. 

19 And woe unto them that are 
with child, and to them that give 
suck in those days! 

20 But pray ye that your flight 
be not in the winter, neither on 
the sabbath day ; 

21 For then shall be great tribu- 
lation, such as was not since the 
beginning of the world to this time, 
ao, nor ever shall be. 

22 And except those days should 


be shortened, there should no flesh 
be saved: but for the elect’s sake 
those days shall be shortened. 

23 Then if any man shall say 
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or 
there : believe i¢ not. 

24 For there shall arise false 
Christs, and false prophets, and 
shall shew great signs and wonders; 
insomuch that, if i¢ were possible, 
they shall deceive the very elect. 

25 Behold I have told you before. 

26 Wherefore if they shall say 
unto you, Behold heis inthe desert ; 
go not forth: behold he is in the 
secret chambers; believe 7¢ not. 

27 For as the lightning cometh 
out of the east, and shineth even 
unto the west; so shall also the 
coming of the Son of man be. 

28 For wheresoever the carcase 
is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together. 


ONE main subject of this part of our Lord’s prophecy is 
the taking of Jerusalem by the Romans. That great 
event took place about forty years after the words we 
have now read were spoken. A full account of it is to 
be foundin the writings of the historianJosephus. Those 
writings are the best comment on our Lord’s words; 
for they are a striking proof of the accuracy of every tittle 
of His predictions.* The sorrows and miseries which 


* These are the words of Josephus. They are the more re- 
markable when we remember that he was not a Christian. “No 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 15—28. 317 


the Jews endured throughout the siege of their city ex- 
ceed anything on record: it was truly a time of tribula- 
tion, such as was not since the beginning of the world.” 

It surprises some to find so much importance attached 
to the taking of Jerusalem: they would rather regard 
the whole chapter as unfulfilled. Such persons forget 
that Jerusalem and the temple were the heart of the old 
Jewish dispensation : when they were destroyed, the old 
Mosaic system came to an end. The daily sacrifice, the 
yearly feasts, the altar, the holy of holies, the priest- 
hood, were all essential parts of revealed religion, till 
Christ came,—but no longer. When He died upon the 
cross, their work was done: they were dead, and it only 
remained that they should be buried.—But it was not 
fitting that this thing should be done quietly. The 
ending of a dispensation given with so much solemnity 
at mount Sinai, might well be expected to be marked 
with peculiar solemnity. The destruction of the holy 
temple, where so many old saints had seen “ shadows of 
good things to come,” might well be expected to form a 
subject of prophecy: and so it was. The Lord Jesus 
specially predicts the desolation of “the holy place.” 
The great High Priest describes the end of the dispen- 
sation which had been “ a schoolmaster ” to bring men to 
Himself. (Gal. iii, 24.) 

But we must not suppose that this part of our Lord’s 
prophecy is exhausted by the first taking of Jerusalem. 
It is highly probable that our Lord’s words have a 


other city ever suffered such things. All the calamities which 
have ever happened to any from the beginning, seem not com- 
parable to those which befel the Jews.” 


318 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


further and deeper application still. It is highly 
probable that they apply to a second siege of Jerusalem, 
which is yet to take place, when Israel has returned to 
their own land ; and to a second tribulation on the inhabi- 
tants thereof, which shall only be stopped by the advent 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Such a view of this passage 
may sound startling to some.* But those who doubt its 
correctness would do well to study the last chapter of the 
prophet Zechariah, and the last chapter of Daniel. These 
two chapters contain solemn things. They throw great 
light on these verses we are now reading, and their con- 
nection with the verses which immediately follow. 

It now remains for us to consider the lessons which 
this passage contains for our own personal edification. 
These lessons are plain and unmistakable: in them at 
least there is no darkness at all. 

For one thing, we see that flight from danger may 
sometimes be the positive duty of a Christian. Our Lord 
Himself commanded His people under certain circum- 
stances “to flee.” 

The servant of Christ undoubtedly is not to be a 
coward. He is to confess his Master before men; he is 
to be willing to die, if needful, for the truth. But the 
servant of Christ is not required to run into danger, 

unless it comes in the line of duty. He is not to be 


* I think it well to say that Irenceeus and Hilary among the 
Fathers, and Ferus in the sixteenth century, all refer the fulfil- 
ment of this part of our Lord’s prophecy to the end of the world, 
when a personal Antichrist shall appear. Hilary considers that 
the verse which speaks of “ the abomination of desolation stand- 
ing in the holy place,” will be fulfilled by the rise of a mighty 
personal Antichrist who shall be worshipped by infidels. In con- 
nection with this verse, 2 Thess. ii. 4, deserves attentive study. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 15—28. 319 


ashamed to use reasonable means to provide for his 
personal safety, when no good is to be done by dying 
at his post. There is deep wisdom in this lesson. The 
true martyrs are not always those who court death, 
and are ina hurry to be beheaded or burned. There 
are times when it shows more grace to be quiet, and 
wait, and pray, and watch for opportunities, than to 
defy our adversaries, and rush into the battle. May we 
have wisdom to know how to act in time of persecution ! 
It is possible to be rash as well as to be a coward; and 
to stop our own usefulness by being over hot as well as 
by being over cold. 

We see, for another thing, that im delivering this 
prophecy our Lord makes special mention of the Sabbath. 
“Pray ye,” He says, “that your flight be not on the 
Sabbath day.” 

This is a fact that deserves special notice. We live 
in times when the obligation of the Sabbath upon 
Christians is frequently denied by good men. They 
tell us that it is no more binding on us than the cere- 
monial law. It is difficult to see how such a view can 
be reconciled with our Lord’s words on this solemn occa- 
sion. He seems intentionally to mention the Sabbath, 
when He is foretelling the final destruction of the 
temple and the Mosaic ceremonies, as if to mark the 
day with honour. He seems to hint that although His 
people would be absolved from the yoke of sacrifices 
and ordinances, there would yet remain the keeping of 
a Sabbath for them. (Heb. iv. 9.) The friends of a 
holy Sunday ought carefully to remember this text. 
It is one which will bear much weight. 


320 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We see, for another thing, that Gtod’s elect are always 
special objects of God's care. Twice in this passage our 
Lord mentions them. “For the elect’s sake the days of 
tribulation are to be shortened.” It will not be possible 
to deceive the “ elect.” 

Those whom God has chosen to salvation by Christ 
are those whom God specially loves in this world: they 
are the jewels among mankind. He cares more for them 
than for kings on their thrones, if kings are not con- 
verted. He hears their prayers. He orders all the 
events of nations, and the issues of wars, for their good 
and their sanctification. He keeps them by His Spirit. 
He allows neither man nor devil to pluck them out of 
His hand. Whatever tribulation comes on the world, 
God’s elect are safe. May we never rest till we know 
that we are of this blessed number! There breathes not 
the man or woman who can prove that he is not one. 
The promises of the Gospel are open to all. May we 
give diligence to make our calling and election sure! 
God s elect are a people who cry unto Him night and 
day. When Paul saw the faith, and hope, and love of 
the Thessalonians, then he knew “their election of 
God.” (1 Thess. i. 4; Luke xviii. 7.) 

Finally, we see from these verses, that whenever the 
second advent of Christ takes place it will be a very sudden 
event, It will be “as the lightning coming out of the 
east, and shining even to the west.” 

This is a practical truth that we should ever keep be- 
fore our minds. That our Lord Jesus will come again in 
person to this world, we know from Scripture. That he 
will come in a time of great tribulation, we also know, 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXIV. VER. 29-—35. 321 


But the precise period, the year, the month, the day, the 
hour, are all hidden things. We only know that it will 
be a very sudden event. Our plain duty then is to live 
always prepared for His return. Let us walk by faith, 
and not by sight. Let us believe on Christ, serve Christ, 
follow Christ,and love Christ. Soliving, whenever Christ 
may return, we shall be ready to meet Him. 





MATTHEW XXIV. 29—35. 


29 Immediately after the tribu- 
lation of those days shall the sun 
be darkened,and the moon shall not 
give her light, and the stars shall 
fall from heaven, and the powers 
of the heavens shall be shaken: 

80 And then shall appear the 
sign of the Son of man in heaven: 
and then shall all the tribes of the 
earth mourn, and they shall see the 
Son of man coming in the clouds of 
heaven with power and great glory. 

31 And he shall send his angels 
with a great sound of a trumpet, 
and they shall gather together his 


In this part of our Lord’s 








elect from the four winds, from one 
end of heaven to the other. 

32 Now learn a parable of the fig 
tree; When his branch is yet ten- 
der, and putteth forth leaves, ye 
know that summer ts nigh: 

33 So likewise ye, when ye shall 
see all these things, know that it 
is near, even at the doors. 

34 Verily I say unto you, This 
generation shall not pass, till all 
these things be fulfilled. 

35 Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass 
away. 


prophecy He describes His 


own second coming to judge the world. This, at all 
events, seems the natural meaning of the passage: to 
take any lower view appears to be a violent straining of 
Scripture language. If the solemn words here used 
mean nothing more than the coming of the Roman 
armies to Jerusalem, we may explain away anything in 
the Bible. The event here described is one of far greater 
moment than the march of an earthly army. It is 
nothing less than the closing act of the present dispen- 
sation,—the second personal advent of Jesus Christ. 

- These verses teach us, in the first place, that when the 


322 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Lord Jesus returns to this world He shall come with pecu- 
liar glory and majesty. He shall come “in the clouds 
of heaven with power and great glory.” Before His 
presence the very sun, moon, and stars shall be darkened, 
and “the powers of heaven shall be shaken.” 

The second personal coming of Christ shall be as 
different as possible from the first. He came the first 
time as “a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief :” 
He was born in the manger of Bethlehem, in lowliness 
and humiliation. He took on Him the form of a servant, 
and was despised and rejected of men. He was betrayed 
into the hands of wicked men, condemned by an unjust 
judgment, mocked, scourged, crowned with thorns, and 
at last crucified between two thieves.——He shall come 
the second time as the King of all the earth, with 
royal majesty. The princes and great men of this world 
shall themselves stand before His throne to receive an 
eternal sentence. Before Him every mouth shall be 
stopped, and every knee bow, and every tongue shall 
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. May we all remember 
this! Whatever ungodly men may do now, there will be 
no scoffing, no jesting at Christ, no infidelity at the last 
day. The servants of Jesus may well wait patiently: 
their Master shall one day be acknowledged King of 
kings by all the world. 

These verses teach us, in the second place, that when 
Christ returns to this world He will first take care of His 
believing people. He shall “send His angels,” and 
“ gather together His eluct.” 

When Christ returns in glory and the judgment 
begins, true Christians shall be perfectly safe. Not 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 29—35, 323 


a hair of their heads shall fall to the ground: not one 
bone of Christ’s mystical body shall be broken. There 
was an ark for Noah, in the day of the flood—there was a 
Zoar for Lot, when Sodom was destroyed,—and there shall 
be a hiding-place for all believers in Jesus, when the 
wrath of God at last bursts on this wicked world. Those 

mighty angels who rejoiced in heaven when each sinner 
repented, shall gladly catch up the people of Christ to 
meet their Lord in the air. The day of Christ’s second 
advent no doubt will be an awful day, but believers may 
look forward to it without fear. 

When Christ returns in glory, true Christians shall at 
length be gathered together. The saints of every age 
and every tongue shall be assembled out of every land. 
All shall be there, from righteous Abel down to the last 
soul that is converted to God,—from the oldest patriarch 
down to the little infant that just breathed and died. Let 
us think what a happy gathering that will be, when all 
the family of God are at length together. If it has been 
pleasant to meet one or two saints occasionally on earth, 
how much more pleasant will it be to meet a “ multitude 
that no man can number!” Surely we may be content 
to carry the cross, and to put up with partings for a few 
years. We travel on towards a day, when we shall meet 
to part no more. 

These verses teach us, in the third place, that until 
Christ returns to this earth the Jews will always remain a 
separate people. Our Lord tells us, “This generation 
shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled.” * 


*T see no other interpretation of these much controverted 
words, “this generation,” which is in the least satisfactory, 


324 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The continued existence of the Jews as a distinct 
nation is undeniably a great miracle. Jt is one of those 
evidences of the truth of the Bible which the Infidel 
can never overthrow. Without a land, without a king, 
without a government, scattered and dispersed over the 
world for eighteen hundred years, the Jews are never 
absorbed among the people of the countries where they 
live, like Frenchmen, Englishmen, and Germans,—but 
“dwell alone.” (Numb, xxiii. 9.) Nothing can account 
for this but the finger of God. The Jewish nation 
stands before the world a crushing answer to infidelity, 
and a living book of evidence that the Bible is true. 
But we ought not to regard the Jews only as witnesses 
of the truth of Scripture; we should see in them a 
continual pledge, that the Lord Jesus is coming again 
one day. Like the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, they 
witness to the reality of the second advent, as well as of 
the first. Let us remember this. Let us see in every 
wandering Jew a proof that the Bible is true, and that 
Christ will one day return. 

Finally, there verses teach us that our Lord's pre- 
dictions will certainly be fulfilled. He says, “Heaven 
and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not 
pass away.” 


and is not open to very serious objections. The word “ gene- 
ration” admits of the sense in which I have taken it, and seems 
to me to be used in that sense in Matt. xii. 45, xvii. 17, and 
xxiii. 36; Luke xvi. 8, and xvii. 25: and Philip. ii. 15. The 
view that I have propounded is not new. It is adopted b 
Mede, Parceus, Flacius, Illyricus, Calovius, Jansenius, Du Veil, 
Adam Clarke, and Stier. 


Chrysostom, Origen, and Theophylact consider “this gene- 
tation” to mean “ true believers.” 


MATTHEW CHAP. XXIV. VER. 36—51. 325 


Our Lord knew well the natural unbelief of human 
nature. He knew that “scoffers would arise in the last 
days, saying, Where is the promise of His coming?” (2 
Pet. iii. 4.) He knew that when He came, faith would be 
rare on the earth. He foresaw how many would con- 
temptuously reject the sclemn predictions He had just 
been delivering, as improbable, unlikely, and absurd. 
He warns us against such sceptical thoughts, with a 
caution of peculiar solemnity: He tells us that, whatever 
man may say or think, His words shall be fulfilled in 
their season, and shall not “pass away” unaccomplished. 
May we all lay to heart His warning! We live in an 
unbelieving age. Few believed the report of our Lord’s 
first coming, and few believe the report of His second. 
(Isaiah lili. 1.) Let us beware of this infection, and 
believe to the saving of our souls. We are not reading 
“cunningly devised fables,” but deep and momentous 


truths. May God give us a heart to believe them! 





MATTHEW XXIV. 36—51. 


386 But of that day and hour 
knoweth no man, no, not the 
angels of heaven, but my Father 
only. 

87 But as the days of Noe were, 
so shall also the coming of the Son 
of man be. 

38 For as in the days that were 
before the flood they were eating 
and drinking, marrying and giving 
in marriage, until the day that 
Noe entered into the ark, 

39 And knew not until the flood 
came, and took them all away; so 
shall also the coming of the Son of 
man be. 

40 Then shall two be in the 
field; the one shall be taken, and 
the other left. atti 

41 Two women shall be grinding 


at the mill; the one shall be taken, 
and the other left. 

42, Watch therefore: for ye know 
not what hour your Lord doth come. 

43 But know this, that if the 

oodman of the house had known 
in what watch the thief would 
come, he would have watched, and 
would not have suffered his house 
to be broken up. 

44, Therefore be ye also ready: 
for in such an hour as ye think 
not the Son of man cometh. 

45 Who then is a faithful and 
wise servant, whom his lord hath 
made ruler over his household, to 
give them meat in due season P 

46 Blessed is that servant, whom 
his lord when he cometh shall find 
so doing. 


326 


47 Verily I say unto you, That 
he shall make him ruler over all 
his goods. 

48 But and if that evil servant 
shall say in his heart, My Lord de- 
layeth his coming ; 

49 And shall begin to smite his 
fellow-servants, and to eat and 


EXPOSITORY TIOUGHTS. 


50 The Lord of that servant 
shall come in a day when he look- 
eth not for him, and in an hour 
that he is not aware of. 

51 And shall cut him asunder, 
and appoint him his portion with 
the hypocrites : there shall be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth. 


drink with the drunken; 


THERE are verses in this passage which are often much 
misapplied. ‘The coming of the Son of man” is fre- 
quently spoken of as being the same thing as death. The 
texts which describe the uncertainty of His coming are 
used in epitaphs, and thought suitable to the tomb. But 
there is no solid ground for such an application of this 
passage. Death is one thing, and the coming of the Son 
of man is quite another. The subject of these verses is 
not death, but the second advent of Jesus Christ. Let 
us remember this. It is a serious thing to wrest Scrip- 
ture and use it in any but its true meaning. 

The first thing that demands our attention in these 
verses, is the awful account that they give of the state of 
the world when the Lord Jesus comes again. 

The world will not be converted when Christ returns : 
it will be found in the same condition that it was in the 
day of the flood. When the flood came, men were found 
“eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,” 
absorbed in their worldly pursuits, and utterly regardless 
of Noah’s repeated warnings. They saw no likelihood 
of a flood; they would not believe there was any dan- 
ger. But at last the flood came suddenly and took 
them all away. All that were not with Noah in the 
ark were drowned. They were all swept away to their 
last account, unpardoned, unconverted, and unprepared 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 3b—51. 327 


to meet God. And our Lord says, “So shall also the 
coming of the Son of man be.” 

Let us mark this text, and store it up in our minds. 
There are many strange opinions current on this subject, 
even among good men. Let us not flatter ourselves that 
the heathen will all be converted, and the earth filled 
with the knowledge of God, before the Lord comes. Let 
us not dream that the end of all things cannot be at 
hand, because there is yet much wickedness both in the 
Church and in the world. Such views receive a flat 
contradiction in the passage now before us, The days 
of Noah are the true type of the days when Christ shall 
return. Millions of professing Christians will be found 
thoughtless, unbelieving, Godless, Christless, worldly, 
and unfit to meet their Judge. Let us take heed that 
we are not found amongst them. 

The second thing that demands our attention is the 
awful separation that will take place when the Lord Jesus 
comes again. We read twice over, that ‘‘One shall be 
taken and the other left.” 

The godly and the ungodly at present are mingled 
together. In the congregation, and in the place of wor- 
ship, in the city and in the field, the children of God 
and the children of the world are all side by side. But 
it shall not be so always. In the day of our Lord’s 
return, there shall at length be a complete division. 
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last 
trumpet, each party shall be separated from the other 
for evermore. Wives shall be separated from husbands, 
parents from children, brothers from sisters, masters 
from servants, preachers from hearers. There shall be 


328 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


no time for repentance, or a change of mind, when the 
Lord appears. All shall be taken as they are, and reap 
according as they have sown. Believers shall be caught 
up to glory, honour, and eternal life ; unbelievers shall be 
left behind to shame and everlasting contempt. Blessed 
and happy are they who are of one heart in following 
Christ! Their union alone shall neyer be broken: it 
shall last for evermore.—Who can describe the happi- 
ness of those who are taken, when the Lord returns? 
Who can imagine the misery of those who are left 
behind? May we think on these things, and consider 
our ways ! 

The last thing that demands our attention in these 
verses, is the practical duty of watchfulness in the prospect 
of Christ’s second coming. “ Watch,” says our Lord,“ for 
ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.”—“ Be ye 
ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of 
man cometh.” 

This is a point which our blessed Master frequently 
presses upon our notice. We hardly ever find Him 
dwelling on the second advent without adding an in- 
junction to “watch.” He knows the sleepiness of our 
nature. He knows how soon we forget the most solemn 
subjects in religion. He knows how unceasingly Satan 
labours to obscure the glorious doctrine of His coming 
again. He arms us with heart-searching exhortations 
to keep awake, if we would not be ruined for evermore. 
May we all have an ear to hear them! 

True Christians ought to live like watchmen. The 
day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. They 
should strive to be always on their guard. They should 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXIV. VER. 36—51. 329 


behave like the sentinel of an army in an emeny’s land. 
They should resolve by God’s grace not to sleep at their 
post. That text of St. Paul’s deserves many a thought : 
“Tet us not sleep as do others ; but let us watch and be 
sober.” (1 Thess. v. 6.) 

True Christians ought to live like good servants,whose 
master is not at home, They should strive to be always 
ready for their Master’s return, They should never give 
way to the feeling, “My Lord delayeth His coming.” 
They should seek to keep their hearts in such a frame, 
that whenever Christ appears they may at once give 
Him a warm and loving reception. There is a vast 
depth in the saying, “ Blessed is that servant, whom his 
Lord when He cometh shall find so doing.” We may 
well doubt whether we are true believers in Jesus if 
we are not ready at any time to have our faith changed 
into sight. 

Let us close the chapter with solemn feelings. The 
things we have just been reading call loudly for great 
searchings of heart. Let us seek to make sure that we 
are in Christ, and that we shall have an ark of safety 

when the day of wrath breaks onthe world. Let us 
strive so to live that we may be pronounced “blessed ” 
at the last, and not cast off for evermore. Not least, 
let us dismiss from our minds the common idea that 
unfulfilled prophecy is a speculative and not a practical 
thing. Ifthe things we have been considering are not 
practical, there is no such thing as practical religion at 
all. Well might St. John say, “Every man that hath 
this hope in him purifieth himself, even as He is pure.” 
(1 John iii. 3.) 


330 EXPOSITORY 


THOUGHTS. 


MATTHEW XXV. 1—13. 


1 Then shall the kingdom of 
heaven be likened unto ten vir- 
gins, which took their lamps, and 
went forth to meet the bride- 
groom. F 

2 And five of them were wise, 
and five were foolish. 

3 They that were foolish took 
their lamps, and took no oil with 
them: 

4 But the wise took oil in their 
vessels with their lamps. 

5 While the bridegroom tarried, 
they all slumbered and slept. 

6 And at midnight there was a 
cry made, Behold, the bridegroom 
cometh; go ye out to meet him. 

7 Then all those virgins arose, 
and trimmed their lamps. 

8 And the foolish said unto the 


wise, Give us of your oil; for our 
lamps are gone out. 

9 But the wise answered, saying, 
Not so; least there be not enough 
for us and you: but go ye rather 
to them that sell, and buy for 
yourselves. 

10 And while they went to buy, 
the bridegroom came ; and they that 
were ready went in with him to the 
marriage : and the door was shut. 

11 Afterward came also the 
other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, 
open to us. 

12 But he answered and said, 
Verily I say unto you, I know you 
not. 

13 Watch therefore, for ye know 
neither the day nor the hour 
wherein the Son of man cometh. 


Tue chapter we have now begun is a continuation of our 
Lord’s prophetical discourse on the Mount of Olives. 
The time to which it refers is plain and unmistak- 
able. From first to last, there is a continual reference to 
the second advent of Christ, and the end of the world. 
The whole chapter contains three great divisions. In 
the first, our Lord uses His own second coming as an 
argument for watchfulness and heart-religion: this He 
does by the parable of the ten virgins. In the second, 
He uses His own second coming as an argument for 
diligence and faithfulness: this He does by the parable 
of the talents. In the third, He winds up all by a de- 
scription of the great day of judgment: a passage which 
for majesty and beauty stands unequalled in the New 
Testament. : 

The parable of the ten virgins, which we have now 
read, contains lessons peculiarly solemn and awakening, 

Let us see what they are. 

We see, for one thing, that the second coming of Christ 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER, 1—13. gol 


will find His Church a mixed body, containing evil as 
well as good. 

The professing Churchis compared to“ten virgins, who 
took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom.” 
All of them had lamps, but only five had oil in their 
vessels to feed the flame. All of them professed to have 
one object in view, but five only were truly “ wise,” and 
the rest were foolish. Thevisible Church of Christ is just 
in the same condition. All its members are baptized in 
the name of Christ, but not all really hear His voice and 
follow Him. All are called Christians, and profess to be 
of the Christian religion, but not all have the grace of the 
Spirit in their hearts, and really are what they profess to 
be. Our own eyes tell us that it is so now. The Lord 
Jesus tells us that it will be so when He comes again.” * 
Let us mark well this description. It is a humbling 
picture. After all our preaching and praying,—after 


* T think it is fair to say that a different view of this parable 
is held by some interpreters. They consider that all the ten vir- 
ins represent true believers, and that the five foolish ones are 
Daievenk that fall away,—or believers thai are only shut out from 
certain privileges at the Lord’s return, and are finally saved. 

I cannot admit the correctness of this view. It appears to 
me to do great violence to the plain meaning of the conclusion 
of the parable, to be out of keeping with the general tenor of 
our Lord’s discourse in this place, and to contradict many texts 
of Scripture. 

I believe that the ten virgins represent the two great classes 
which compose the visible Church of Christ,—the converted 
and the unconverted,—the false professorsand thereal Christians 
—the hypocrites and the true believers,—the foolish builders 
and the wise builders,—the good fish and the bad,—the living 
and the dead,—the wheat and the tares. 

This view is neither new nor uncommon. It is held in the 
main, by the following commentators :—Bullinger, Brentius, 
Gualter, Pellican, Beza, Ferus, Paroous, Piscator, Musculus, 
tee Baxter, Quesnel, Poole, Manton, Henry, Burkitt, Dod- 

idge, Scott. 

Z 


Jou EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


all our visiting and teaching,—after all our missionary 
exertions abroad, and means of grace at home, many 
will be found at last dead in trespasses and sins!” The 
wickedness and unbelief of human nature is a subject 
about which we all have much to learn. 

We see, for another thing, that Christ’s second coming, 
whenever it may be, will take men by surprise. 

This is a truth which is set before us in the parable, in 
avery striking manner. “At midnight,” when the virgins 
were slumbering and sleeping, there was a cry, “The 
bridegroom cometh; go ye forth to meet him.” It will 
be just the same when Jesus returns to the world. He 
will find the vast majority of mankind utterly unbelieving 
and unprepared. He will find the bulk of His believing 
people in a sleepy and indolent state of soul. Business 
will be going on in town and country just as it does 
now. Politics, trades, farming, buying, selling, pleasure- 
seeking, will be taking up men’s attention, just as they 
do now. Rich men will still be faring sumptuously, and 
poor men murmuring and complaining. Churches will 
still be full of divisions, or wrangling about trifles. Theo- 
logical controversies will be still raging. Ministers will 
still be calling men to repent, and the vast majority in all 
congregations will be still putting off the day of decision. 
—In the midst of all this, the Lord Jesus Himself shall 
suddenly appear. In an hour when no man thinketh, 
the startled world shall be summoned to break off all its 
employments, and to stand before its lawful King. ' There 
is something unspeakably awful in the idea: but thus it 
is written, and thus it shall be. Well might a dying min- 
ister say, “We are none of us more than hali-awake,” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER. 1—1]3. 333 


We see, in the next place, that when the Lord comes 
again many will find out the value of saving religion 
too late. 

The parable tells us that when the bridegroom came, 
the foolish virgins said unto the wise, “Give us of your 
oil; for our lamps are gone out.” It tells us further, 
that as the wise had no oil to spare, the foolish went to 
“buy for themselves.” It tells us finally, that they came 
when the door was shut, and asked in vain for admission: 
“Lord, Lord,” they cried, “open unto us.” All these 
expressions are striking emblems of things to come. 
Let us take heed that we do not find them true by 
experience, to our own eternal ruin. 

We may settle it in our minds that there will be an 
entire change of opinion one day as to the necessity of 
decided Christianity. At present, we must all be aware, 
the vast majority of professing Christians care nothing 
at all about it. They have no sense of sin; they have 
no love towards Christ; they know nothing of being 
born again. Repentance, and faith, and grace, and 
holiness, are mere “ words and names” to them, They 
are subjects which they either dislike, or about which 
they feel no concern. But this state of things shall one 
day come to anend. Knowledge, conviction, the value 
of the soul, the need of a Saviour, shall all burst on 
men’s minds one day like a flash of lightning. But it 
will be too late! It will be too late to be buying oil 
when the Lord returns. The mistakes that are not 
found out till that day are irretrievable. 

Are we ever mocked, and persecuted, and thought 
foolish because of our religion? Let us bear it patiently 


334 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and pray for those who persecute us. They know not 
what they are doing; they will certainly alter their 
minds one day. We may yet hear them confessing 
that we were “wise” and they were “foolish.” The 
whole world shall one day acknowledge that the saints 
of God made a wise choice. 

We see, lastly, in this parable, that when Christ returns 
true Christians shall receive a rich reward for all they have 
suffered for their Master's sake. We are told that when 
the bridegroom came, “they that were ready went in 
with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.” 

True Christians shall alone be found ready at the 
second advent. Washed in the blood of atonement, 
clothed in Christ’s righteousness, renewed by the Spirit, 
they shall meet their Lord with boldness, and sit down 
at the marriage supper of the Lamb, to go out no more. 
Surely this is a blessed prospect. 

They shall be with their Lord,— with Him who loved 
them and gave Himself for them,—with Him who bore 
with them, and carried them through their earthly 
pilgrimage ——with Him whom they loved truly and fol- 
lowed faithfully on earth, though with much weakness, 
and many atear. Surely this is also a blessed prospect. 

The door shall be shut at last,—shut on all pain and 
sorrow,—shut on an illnatured and wicked world,—shut 
on a tempting devil,—shuton alldoubts and fears—shut 
to be opened again no more. Surely we may again say, 
this is a blessed prospect. 

Let us remember these things. They will bear medi- 
tation; they are all true. The believer may have 
much tribulation, but he has before him abounding 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER. 14—30 335 


consolations. “Weeping may endure for a night, but 
joy cometh in the morning.” (Psalm xxx. 5.) The day 
of Christ’s return shall surely make amends for all. 

Let us leave this parable with a settled determination 
never to be content with anything short of indwelling 
grace in our hearts. The lamp and the name of Chris- 
tian, the profession and the ordinances of Christianity, 
are all well in their way, but they are not the “one 


thing needful.” 


Let us never rest till we know that we 


have the oil of the Spirit in our hearts. 





MATTHEW XXYV. 14—80. 


14 For the kingdom of heaven is 
as a man travelling into a far coun- 
try, who called his own servants, 
and delivered unto them his goods. 

15 And unto one he gave five 
talents, to another two, and to 
another one; to every man accor- 
ding to his several ability; and 
straightway took his journey. 

16 Then he that had received the 
five talents went and traded with 
the same, and made them other 
five talents. 

17 And likewise he that had re- 
ceived two, healso gained other two. 

18 But he that had received one 
went and digged in the earth, and 
hid his lord’s money. 

19 After a long time the lord of 
those servants cometh, and reckon- 
eth with them. 

20 And so he that had received 
fivetalents came and brought other 
five talents, saying, Lord, thou de- 
liveredst unto me five talents: be- 
hold, I have gained beside them 
five talents more. 

21 His lord said unto him, Well 
done, thou good and faithful ser- 
vant: thou hast been faithful over 
a few things, I will make thee ruler 
over many things: enter thou into 
the joy of thy lord, 


22 He also that had received two 
talents came and said, Lord, thou 
deliveredst unto me two talents: 
behold, I have gained two other 
talents beside them, 

23 His lord said unto him, Well 
done, good and faithful servant ; 
thou hast been faithful over a few 
things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things: enter thou into the 
joy of thy lord. 

24 Then he which had received 
the one talent came and said, Lord, 
I knew thee that thou art an hard 
man, reaping where thou hast not 
sown, and gathering where thou 
hast not strawed: 

25 And I was afraid, and went 
and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, 
there thou hast that is thine. 

26 His lord answered and gaid 
unto him, Thou wicked and sloth- 
ful servant, thou knewest that I 
reap where T sowed not, and gather 
where I have not strawed: 

27 Thou oughtest therefore to 
haye put my money to the ex- 
changers, and then at my coming 
I should have received mine own 
with usury. 

28 Take therefore the talent 
from him, and give it unto him 
which hath ten talents. 


836 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


29 For unto every one that hath 30 And cast ye the unprofitable 
shall be given, and he shall have | servant into outer darkness: there 
abundance: but from him that | shall be weeping and gnashing of 
hath not shall be taken away even | teeth. 
that which he hath. 


THE parable of the talents, which we have now read, 
is near akin to that of the ten virgins. Both direct 
our minds to the same important event, the second 
advent of Jesus Christ. Both bring before us the same 
persons, the members of the professing Church of Christ. 
The virgins and the servants are one and the same 
people,—but the same people regarded from a different 
point, and viewed on different sides. The practical 
lesson of each parable is the main point of difference. 
Vigilance is the key-note of the first parable, diligence 
that of the second. The story of the virgins calls on 
the Church to watch ; the story of the talents calls on 
the Church to work. 

We learn, in the first place, from this parable, that all 
professing Christians have received something from God. 
We are all God’s “servants:” we have all “talents” 
entrusted to our charge. 

The word “talents” is an expression that has been 
curiously turned aside from its original meaning. It 
is generally applied to none but people of remarkable 
ability or gifts: they are called “talented” people. Such 
an use of the expression is a mere modern invention. 
In the sense in which our Lord used the word in 
this parable, it applies to all baptized persons without 
distinction. We have all “talents” in God’s sight: we 
are all talented people. 

Anything whereby we may glorify God is “a talent.” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER. 14—30. 3o7 . 


Our gifts, our influence, our money, our knowledge, our 
health, our strength, our time, our senses, our reason, our 
intellect, our memory, our affections, our privileges as 
members of Christ’s Church, our advantages as possessors 
of the Bible,—all, all are talents. Whence came these 
things? What hand bestowed them? Why are we what 
we are? Why are we not the worms that crawl on the 
earth? There is only one answer to these questions: 
all that we have is a loan from God. We are God’s 
stewards ; we are God’s debtors. Let this thought sink 
deeply into our hearts, 

We learn, in the second place, that many make a baa 
use of the privileges and mercies they receive from God. 
We are told in the parable of one who “digged in the 
earth and hid his Lord’s money.” That man represents 
a large class of mankind. 

To hide our talent is to neglect opportunities of glori- 
fying God, when we have them. The baptized Bible- 
despiser, the prayer-neglecter, and the Sabbath-breaker , 
the unbelieving, the sensual, and the earthly-minded ; 
the trifler, the thoughtless and the pleasure-seeker; the 
money-lover, the covetous, and the self-indulgent,—all, 
all are alike burying their Lord’s money in the ground. 
They have all light that they do not use: they might all 
be better than they are. But they are all daily robbing 
God: He has lent them much, and they make Him no 
return. The words of Daniel to Belshazzar are strictly 
applicable to every unconverted person: “The God in 
whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, 
hast thou not glorified.” (Dan. v. 23.) 

We learn, in the third place, that all professing 


338 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Christians must one day have a reckoning with God. The 
parable tells us that “after along time the Lord of those 
servants came, and reckoned with them.” 

There is a judgment before us all. Words have no 
meaning in the Bible, if there is none: it is mere 
trifling with Scripture to deny it. There is a judgment 
before us according to our works,—certain, strict, and 
unavoidable. High or low, rich or poor, learned or 
unlearned, we shall all have to stand at the bar of God 
and receive our eternal sentence. There will be no 
escape: concealment will be impossible. We and God 
must at last meet face to face. We shall have to render 
an account of every privilege that was granted to us, 
and of every ray of light that we enjoyed. We shall find 
that we are dealt with as accountable and responsible 
creatures, and that to whomsoever much is given, of 
them much will be required. Let us remember this 
every day we live. Let us “judge ourselves that we be 
not condemned of the Lord.” (1 Cor. ii. 31.) 

We learn, in the fourth place, that true Christians will 
receive an abundant reward in the great day of reckoning 
The parable tells us that the servants who had used their 
Lord’s money well, were commended as “good and faith- 
ful,” and told to “enter into the joy of their Lord.” 

These words are full of comfort to all believers, and 
may well fill us with wonder and surprise. The best of 
Christians is a poor frail creature, and needs the blood 
of atonement every day that he lives. But the least and 
lowest of believers will find that he is counted among 
Christ’s servants, and that his labour has not been in vain 
in the Lord. He will discover to his amazement, that 


MATTHEW CHAP. XXV. VER. 14—30. 339 


his Master's eye saw more beauty in his efforts to please 
Him, than he ever saw himself. He will find that every 
hour spent in Christ’s service, and every word spoken on 
Christ’s behalf, has been written in a book of remem- 
brance. Let believers remember these things and take 
courage.—The cross may be heavy now, but the glorious 
reward shall make amends for all. Well says Leighton, 
“Here some drops of joy enter into us, but there we 
shall enter into joy.” 

We learn, in the last place, that all wnfruitful members 
of Christ's Church will be condemned and cast away in the 
day of judgment. The parable tells us that the servant 
who buried his master’s money, was reminded that he 
“knew” his master’s character and requirements, and was 
therefore without excuse. It tells us that he was con- 
demned as “wicked,” “slothful,” and “unprofitable,” and 
castinto“outerdarkness.” And our Lordaddsthesolemn 
words, “ There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 

There will beno excuse for an unconverted Christian at 
the last day. The reasons with which he now pretends 
to satisfy himself will prove useless and vain. TheJudge 
of all the earth will be found to have done right. The 
ruin of the lost soul will be found to be his own fault. 
Those words of our Lord, “thou knewest,” are words 
that ought to ring loudly in many a man’s ears, and 
prick him to the heart. Thousands are living at this 
day “without Christ” and without conversion, and yet 
pretending that they cannot help it! And all this time 
they “know,” in their own conscience, that they are 
guilty. They are burying their talent: they are not 
doing what they can. Happy are they who find this 
out betimes! It will all come out at the last day. 


S40", EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us leave this parable with a solemn determination, 
by God’s grace, never to be content with a profession of 
Christianity without practice. Let us not only talk about 
religion, but act; let us not only feel the importance of 
religion, but do something too. We are not told that 
the unprofitable servant was a murderer, or a thief, or 
even a waster of his Lord’s money: but he did nothing, 
—and this was his ruin! Let us beware of a do-nothing 
Christianity: such Christianity does not come from the 
Spirit of God. “To do no harm,” says Baxter, “is the 
praise of a stone, not of a man.” 


MATTHEW XXV. 31—46. 


81 When the Son of man shall 39 Or when saw we thee sick, or 
come in his glory, and all the holy | in prison, and came.unto thee? 
angels with him, then shall he sit 40 And the King shall answer 
upon the throne of his glory: and say unto them, Verily I say un- 

32 And before him shall be | to you, Inasmuch as ye have done 
gathered all nations: and he shall | <¢ unto one of the least of these my 
separate them one from another, | brethren, ye have done it unto me. 
as a shepherd divideth his sheep 41 Then shall he say also unto 
from the goats: them on the left hand, Depart 

383 And he shall set the sheep on | from me, ye cursed, into everlast- 
his right hand, but the goats on | ing fire, prepared for the devil and 
the left. his angels: 

34 Then shall the king say unto 42 For I was an hungred, and 
them on his right hand, Come, ye | ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, 
blessed of my Father, inherit the | and ye gave me no drink: 
kingdom prepared for you from| 43 I was a stranger, and ye took 
the foundation of the world: me not in: naked, and ye clothed 

35 For I was an hungred, and | me not: sick, and in prison, and 
ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, | ye visited me not. 
and ye gave me drink: I was a| 44 Then shall they also answer 
stranger, and ye took me in: ; him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee 

36 Naked and ye clothed me: I | anhungred, orathirst,orastranger, 
was sick, and ye visited me: I was | or naked, or sick, or in prison, and 
in prison, and ye came unto me. did not minister unto thee ? 
} 





37 Then shall the righteous an- 45 Then shall he answer them, 
swer him, saying, Lord, when saw | saying, Verily, I say unto you, Inas- 
we thee an hungred, and fed thee? | much as ye did 4¢ not to one of the 
or thirsty, and gave thee drink? least of these, ye did it not to me. 

38 When saw we thee a stran- 46 And these shall go away into 
ger, and took thee in? or naked, | everlasting punishment: but the 
and clothed thee? righteous into life eternal. 


In these verses our Lord Jesus Christ describes the 
judgment-day, and some of its leading circumstances. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER. 31—46. 34] 


There are few passages in the whole Bible more solemn 
and heart-searching than this. May we read it with 
the deep and serious attention which it deserves. 

Let us mark, in the first place, who will be the Judge 
in the last day. We read that it will “be the Son of 
man,’—Jesus Christ Himself. 

That same Jesus who was born in the manger of 
Bethlehem, and took upon Him the form of a servant, 
who was despised and rejected of men, and often had 
not where to lay His head, who was condemned by the | 
princes of this world, beaten, scourged, and nailed to the 
cross,—that same Jesus shall Himself judge the world, 
when he comes in His glory. To Him the Father hath 
committed all judgment. (John v.22.) To Him at last 
every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess that He 
is Lord. (Philip. ii. 10, 11.) 

Let believers think of this, and take comfort. He 
that sits upon the throne in that great and dreadful day 
will be their Saviour, their Shepherd, their High Priest, 
their elder Brother, their Friend. When they see Him, 
they will have no cause to be alarmed. 

Let unconverted people think of this, and be afraid. 
Their Judge will be that very Christ, whose Gospel they 
now despise, and whose gracious invitations they refuse 
to hear. How great will be their confusion at last, if 
they go on in unbelief and die in their sins! To be con- 
demned in the day of judgment by any one would be 
awful. But to be condemned by Him who would have 
saved them will be awful indeed. Well may the psalmist 
say, “ Kiss the Son lest He be angry.” (Psalm ii. 12.) 

Let us mark, in the second place, who will be judged 


342 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


in the last day. We read that before Christ “shall be 
vathered all nations.” 

All that have ever lived shall one day give account 
of themselves at the bar of Christ. All must obey the 
summons of the great King, and come forward to receive 
their sentence. Those who would not come to worship 
Christ on earth, will find they must come to His great 
assize, when He returns to judge the world. 

All that are judged will be divided into two great 
classes. There will no longer be any distinction between 
kings and subjects, or masters and servants, or dissenters 
and churchmen. There will be no mention of ranks and 
denominations, for the former things will have passed 
away. Grace or no grace, conversion or unconversion, 
faith or no faith, will be the only distinction at the last 
day. All that are found in Christ will be placed among 
the sheep “on His right hand ;” all that are not found 
in Christ will be placed among the goats “on the left.” 
Well says Sherlock: “Our separations will avail us 
nothing, unless we take care to be found in the number 
of Christ’s sheep, when He comes to judgment.” 

Let us mark, in the third place, in what manner the 
judgment will be conducted in the last day. We read of 
several striking particulars on this point. Let us see 
what they are. 

The last judgment will be a judgment according to 
evidence. The works of men are the witnesses which 
will be brought forward, and above all their works of 
charity. The question to be ascertained will not merely 
be what we said, but what we did: not merely what we 
professed, but what we practised. Our works unques- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXV. VER. 31—46. 343 


tionably will not justify us: we are justified by faith 
without the deeds of the law; but the truth of our faith 
will be tested by our lives. Faith which hath not works 
is dead, being alone. (James ii. 11.) 

The last judgment will be a judgment that will bring 
joy to all true believers. They will hear those precious 
words, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the 
kingdom.” They will be owned and confessed by their 
Master before His Father and the holy angels. They will 
find that the wages He gives to His faithful servants are 
nothing less than “a kingdom.” The least, and lowest, 
and poorest of the family of God, shall have a crown of 
glory, and be a king! 

The last judgment will be a judgment that will bring 
confusion on all unconverted people. They will hear 
those awful words, “ Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting 
fire.” They will be disowned by the great Head of the 
Church before the assembled world. They will find that 
as they would “sow to the flesh,” so of the flesh they 
must “ reap corruption.” (Gal. vi. 8.) They would not 
hear Christ, when He said, “Come unto Me, and I will 
give you rest,” and now they must hear Himsay, “Depart 
into everlasting fire.” They would not carry His cross, 
and so they can have no place in His kingdom. 

The last judgment will be a judgment that will strik- 
ingly bring out the characters both of the lost and saved. 
They on the right hand, who are Christ’s sheep, will 
still be “clothed with humility.” (1 Pet.v. 5.) They will 
marvel to hear any work of theirs brought forward and 
commended.—They on the left hand, who are not Christ’s, 

‘will still be blind and self-righteous. They will not be 


344 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sensible of any neglect of Christ: “Lord,” they say, 
“when saw we Thee,—and did not minister unto Thee?” 
Let this thought sink down into our hearts. Characters 
on earth will prove an everlasting possession in the world 
tocome. With the same heart that men die, with that 
heart they will rise again. 

Let us mark, in the last place, what will be the finai 
results of the judgment day. We are told this in words 
that ought never to be forgotten: “The wicked shall go 
away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous 
into life eternal.” 

The state of things after the judgment is changeless 
and without end. The misery of the lost, and the 
blessedness of the saved, are both alike for ever. Let no 
man deceive us on this point. It is clearly revealed in 
Scripture. The eternity of God, and heaven, and hell, 
all stand on the same foundation. As surely as God is 
eternal, so surely is heaven an endless day without night, 
and hell an endless night without day. 

Who shall describe the blessedness of eternal life? 
It passes the power of man to conceive: it can only be 
measured by contrast and comparison. An eternal rest, 
after warfare and conflict ; the eternal company of saints, 
after buffeting with an evil world; an eternally glorious 
and painless body, after struggling with weakness and 
infirmity ; an eternal sight of Jesus face to face, after 
only hearing and believing,—all this is blessedness in- 
deed. And yet the half of it remains untold. 

Who shall describe the misery of eternal punishment 4 
It is something utterly indescribable and inconceivable. 
The eternal pain of body; the eternal sting of an ac- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 1—13. o4b 


cusing conscience; the eternal society of none but the 
wicked, the devil and his angels; the eternal remem- 
brance of opportunities neglected and Christ despised ; 
the eternal prospect of a weary, hopeless future,—all 
this is misery indeed: it is enough to make our ears 
tingle, and our blood run cold. And yet this picture is 
nothing compared to the reality. 

Let us close these verses with serious self-inquiry. Let 
us ask ourselves on which side of Christ we are likely to 
be at the last day. Shall we be on the right hand, or 
shall we be on the left? Happy is he who never rests 
till he can give a satisfactory answer to this question. 


MATTHEW XXVI. 1—13. 


1 And it came to pass, when 
Jesus had finished all these say- 
ings, he said unto his disciples, 

2 Ye know that after two days 
is the feast of the passover, and 
the Son of man is betrayed to be 
crucified. 

8 Then assembled together the 
chief priests, and the scribes, and 
the elders of the people, unto the 
palace of the high priest, who was 
called Caiaphas, 

4 And consulted that they might 
cn Jesus by subtilty, and kill 


5 But they said, Not on the feast 
day, lest there be an uproar among 
the people. 


6 Now when Jesus was in Beth- | 


any, in the house of Simon the 
leper, 

7 There came unto him a woman 
having an alabaster box of very 


precious ointment, and poured it 
on his head, as he sat at meat. 

8 But when his disciples saw ‘it, 
they had indignation, saying, To 
what purpose 7s this waste P 

9 For this ointment might have 
been sold for much, and given to 
the poor. 

10 When Jesus understood %¢, he 
said unto them, Why trouble ye 
the woman? for she hath wrought 
@ good work upon me. 

11 For ye have the poor always 
with you; but me ye have not 
always. 

12 For in that she hath poured 
this ointment on my body, she did 
it for my burial. 

13 Verily I say unto you, Where- 
soever this Gospel shall be preach- 
ed in the whole world, there shall 
also this, that this woman hath 
done, be told for a memorial of her. 


WE now approach the closing scene of our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s earthly ministry. Hitherto we have read of His 
sayings and doings: we are now about to read of His 
sufferings and death. Hitherto we have seen Him as 


346 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the great Prophet: we are now about to see Him as 
the great High Priest. 

It is a portion of Scripture which ought to be read 
with peculiar reverence and attention. The place where- 
on we stand is holy ground. Here we see how the Seed 
of the woman bruised the Serpent’s head. Here we see 
the Great Sacrifice to which all the sacrifices of the Old 
Testament had long pointed. Here we see how the 
blood was shed which “ cleanseth from all sin,” and the 
Lamb slain who “taketh away the sins of the world.” 
(1 John i. 8; John i. 29.) We see, in the death of 
Christ, the great mystery revealed, how God can be just, 
and yet justify the ungodly. No wonder that all the 
four Gospels contain a full account of this wonderful 
event. On other points in our Lord’s history, we often 
find that when one Evangelist speaks the other three 
are silent. But when we come to the crucifixion, we 
find it minutely described by all four. 

In the verses we have now read, let us first observe 
how careful our Lord is to call the attention of His disci- 
ples to His own death. He said to them, “ Ye know that 
after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son 
of man is betrayed to be crucified.” 

The connection of these words with the preceding 
chapter is exceedingly striking. Our Lord had just 
been dwelling on His own second coming in power and 
glory, at the end of the world. He had been describing 
the last judgment, and all its awful accompaniments, 
He had been speaking of Himself as the Judge, before 
whose throne all nations would be gathered. And then 
at once, without pause or interval, He goes on to speak 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 1—13. 347 


of His crucifixion. While the marvellous predictions of 
His final glory were yet ringing in the ears of His dis- 
ciples, He tells them once and again of His coming 
sufferings. He reminds them that He must die as a 
sin-offering before he reigned as a King, that He must 
make atonement on the cross, before He took the crown. 

We can never attach too much importance to the 
atoning death of Christ. It is the leading fact in the 
Word of God, on which the eyes of our soul ought to be 
ever fixed. Without the shedding of His blood, there 
is no remission of sin. It is the cardinal truth on which 
the whole system of Christianity hinges. Without it 
the Gospel is an arch without a keystone, a fair building 
without a foundation, a solar system withouta sun. Let 
us make much of our Lord’s incarnation, and example, 
His miracles and His parables, His works and His 
words; but above all let us make much of His death. 
Let us delight in the hope of His second personal coming 
and millennial reign; but let us not think more even of 
these blessed truths, than of the atonement on the cross. 
This after all is the master-truth of Scripture,—that 
“ Christ died for our sins.” To this let us daily return: 
on this let us daily feed our souls. Some, like the 
Greeks of old, may sneer at the doctrine, and call it 
“foolishness.” But let us never be ashamed to say with 
Paul, “God forbid that I should glory save in the cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (Gal. vi. 14.) 

Let us, observe, in the second place, in these verses, 
what honour Christ loves to put on those that honour Him. 

We are told that when He “was in the house of 


Simon the leper,” a certain woman came while He sat 
2A 


348 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


at meat, and poured a box of precious ointment on His 
head. She did it, no doubt, out of reverence and affec- 
tion. She had received soul-benefit from Him, and she 
thought no mark of honour too costly to be bestowed on 
Him in return, But this deed of hers called forth dis- 
approbation from some who saw it. They called it 
“waste.” They said it might have been better to sell the 
ointment, and give the money to the poor. At once our 
Lord rebuked these cold-hearted fault-finders. He tells 
them that the woman “has wrought a good work,” and 
one that He accepts and approves. He goes on to 
make a striking prediction : “ Wheresoever this Gospel is 
preached in the whole world, there shall also this that 
this woman hath done be told for a memorial of her.” 

We see, in this little incident, how perfectly our Lord 
knew things to come, and how easy it is for Him to con- 
fer honour, This prophecy of His about this woman is 
receiving a fulfilment every day before our eyes. Wher- 
ever the Gospel of St. Matthew is read, the deed that 
she did is known. The deeds and titles of many a King, 
and Emperor, and General, are as completely forgotten 
as if written in the sand. But the grateful act of one 
humble Christian woman is recorded in two hun- 
dred different languages, and is known all over the 
globe. The praise of man is but for a few days: the 
praise of Christ endureth for ever. The pathway to 
lasting honour is to honour Christ. 

Last, but not least, we see in this incident a blessed 
foretaste of things that will yet take place in the day 
of judgment. In that great day no honour done to 
Christ on earth shall be found to have been forgotten. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER, 14—25, 349 


The speeches of parliamentary orators, the exploits of 
warriors, the works of poets and painters, shall not be 
mentioned in that day. But the least work that the 
weakest Christian woman has done for Christ, or His 
members, shall be found written in a book of everlasting 
remembrance. Not a single kind word or deed, not a 
cup of cold water, or a box of ointment, shall be omitted 
from the record. Silver and gold she may have had 
none. Rank, power, and influence she may not have 
possessed, But if she loved Christ, and confessed Christ, 
and worked for Christ, her memorial shall be found on 
high: she shall be commended before assembled worlds. 

Do we know what it is to work for Christ? Ih we 
do, let us take courage, and work on. What greater 
encouragement can we desire than we see here? We 
may be laughed at and ridiculed by the world. Our 
motives may be misunderstood; our conduct may be 
misrepresented ; our sacrifices for Christ’s sake may be 
called “ waste,”—waste of time, waste of money, waste 
of strength. Let none of these things move us. The 
eye of Him who sat in Simon’s house at Bethany is upon 
us. He notes all we do, and is well pleased. Let us be 
“ steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work 
of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labour is 
not in vain in the Lord.” (1 Cor. xv. 58.) 





MATTHEW XXVI. 14—25. 


14 Then one of the twelve, called | him unto youP And they cove- 
Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief | nanted with him for thirty pieces 
priests, of silver. ” 

15 And said unto them, What| 16 And from that time he sought 
will ye give me, and I will deliver opportunity to betray him. 


350 EXPOSITORY 


17 Now the first day of the feast 
of unleavened bread the disciples 
came to Jesus, saying unto him, 
Where wilt thou that we prepare 
for thee to eat the passover ? 

18 And he said, Go into the city 
to such a man, and say unto him, 
The Master saith, My time is at 
hand; I will keep the passover at 
thy house with my disciples. 

19 And the disciples did as Jesus 
had appointed them; and they 
made ready the passover. 

20 Now when the even was come, 
he sat down with the twelve. 

21 And as they did eat, he said, 
Verily I say unto you, that one 


THOUGHTS. 


of you shall betray me. 

22 And they were exceeding sor 
rowful, and began every one of 
them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? 

23 And he answered and said, 
He that dippeth his hand with me 
in the dish, the same shall betray 


me. 

24, The Son of man goeth as it is 
written of him: but woe unto that 
man by whom the Son of man is 
betrayed! it had been good for 
that man if he had not been born. 

25 Then Judas, which betrayed 
him, answered and said, Master, is 
it if He said unto him, Thou hast 
said. 


WE read, in the beginning of this passage, how our Lord 
Jesus Christ was betrayed into the hands of His deadly 
enemies. The priests and scribes, however anxious to 
put Him to death, were at a loss how to effect their 
purpose, for fear of an uproar among the people. At 
this juncture a fitting instrument for carrying out their 
designs, offered himself to them in the person of Judas 
Iscariot. That false Apostle undertook to deliver His 
Master into their hands for thirty pieces of silver. 

There are few blacker pages in all history than the 
character and conduct of Judas Iscariot. There is no 
more awful evidence of the wickedness of man. A 
poet of our own has said, that “sharper than a serpent’s 
tooth is a thankless child.” But what shall we say of a 
disciple who would betray his own Master,—an apostle 
who could sell Christ? Surely this was not the least 
bitter part of the cup of suffering which our Lord drank. 

Let us learn, in the first place, from these verses, 
that aman may enjoy great privileges, and make a great 
religious profession, and yet his heart all the time may 
not be right before God, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXvVI. VER. 14—25. 351 


Judas Iscariot had the highest possible religious 
privileges. He was a chosen apostle, and companion of 
Christ. He was an eye-witness of our Lord’s miracles, 
and a hearer of His sermons. He saw what Abraham 
and Moses never saw, and heard what David and Isaiah 
never heard. He lived in the society of the eleven 
Apostles. He was a fellow-labourer with Peter, James. 
and John. But forall this his heart was never changed. 
He clung to one darling sin. 

Judas Iscariot made a reputable profession of religion : 
there was nothing but what was right, and proper, and 
becoming in his outward conduct. Like the other 
Apostles, he appeared to believe and to give up all for 
Christ’s sake. Like them, he was sent forth to preach and 
work miracles. No one of the eleven seems to have 
suspected him of hypocrisy. When our Lord said, “One 
of you shall betray Me,” no one said, “Is it Judas?” 
Yet all this time his heart was never changed. 

We ought to observe these things: they are deeply 
humbling and instructive. Like Lot’s wife, Judas is 
intended to be a beacon to the whole Church. Let us 
often think about him, and say, as we think, “Search 
me, O Lord, and try my heart, and see if there be any 
wicked way in me.” Let us resolve, by God's grace, 
that we will never be content with anything short of 
sound and thorough heart conversion. 

Let us learn, in the second place from these verses, 
that the love of money ts one of the greatest snares to a 
man’s soul. We cannot conceive a clearer proof of this, 
than the case of Judas. That wretched question, “ What 
will ye give me?” reveals the secret sin which was his 


352 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


ruin. He had given up much for Christ’s sake, but he 
had not given up his covetousness. 

The words of the apostle Paul should often ring in 
our ears: “the love of money is the root of all evil.” (2 
Tim. vi. 10.) The history of the Church abounds in illus- 
trations of this truth. For money Joseph was sold by his 
brethren ; for money Samson was betrayed to the Phil- 
istines; for money Gehazi deceived Naaman, and lied to 
Elisha ; for money Ananias and Sapphira tried to deceive 
Peter; for money the Son of God was delivered into the 
hands of wicked men. Wonderful indeed does it seem 
that the cause of so much evil should be loved so well. 

Let us all be on our guard against the love of money. 
The world is full of it in our days: the plague is 
abroad. Thousands who would abhor the idea of wor- 
shipping Juggernaut, are not ashamed to make an idol 
of gold. We are all liable to the infection, from the 
least to the greatest. We may love money without 
having it, just as we may have money without loving 
it. It is an evil that works very deceitfully: it carries 
us captives before we are aware of our chains. Once let 
it get the mastery, and it will harden, palsy, sear, freeze, 
blight, and wither our souls. It overthrew an apostle of 
Christ: let us take heed that it does not overthrow us. 
One leak may sink a ship: one unmortified sin may 
ruin a soul. 

We ought frequently to call to mind the solemn words, 
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, 
and lose his own soul?” ‘We brought nothing into 
this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.” 
Our daily prayer should be, “Give me neither poverty 


-MATIHEW, CHAP. XXVL. VER. 14—25. 353 


nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me.” (Prov. 
xxx. 8.) Our constant aim should be to be rich in grace. 
They that “wl/ be rich” in worldly possessions often find 
at last that they have made the worst of bargains. (1 Tim. 
vi. 9.) Like Esau, they have bartered an eternal portion 
for a little temporary gratification. Like Judas Iscariot, 
they have sold themselves to everlasting perdition. 

Let us learn, in the last place, from these verses, the 
hopeless. condition of all who die unconverted. The words 
of our Lord on this subject are peculiarly solemn: He 
says of Judas, “It had been good for that man if he 
had not been born.” 

This saying admits of only one interpretation. It 
teaches plainly that it is better never to live at all, 
than to live without faith, and to die without grace. To 
die in this state is to be ruined forevermore. Itisa fall 
from which there is no rising. It is a loss which is 
utterly irretrievable. There is no change in hell: the 
gulf between hell and heaven is one that no man can pass. 

This saying could never have been used if there was 
any truth in the doctrine of universal salvation. If it 
really was true that all would sooner or later reach 
heaven, and hell sooner or later be emptied of inhabi- 
tants, it never could be said that it would have been 
“good for a man not to have been born.” Hell itself 
would lose its terrors, ifit had anend. Hell itself would 
be endurable, if after millions of ages there was a hope 
of freedom and of heaven. But universal salvation will 
find no foot-hold in Scripture. The teaching of the Word 
of God is plain and express on the subject. There isa 
worm that never dies, and a fire that is not quenched. 


354 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


(Mark ix. 44.) “Except a man be porn again,” he will 
wish one day he had never been born at all. “ Better,” 
says Burkitt, “have no being, than not have a being in 
Christ.” 

Let us grasp this truth firmly, and not let it go. There 
are always persons who deny the reality and eternity of 
hell. We live in a day when a morbid charity induces 
many to exaggerate God’s mercy, at the expense of His 
justice, and when false teachers are daring to talk of a 
“love of God lower even than hell.” Let us resist such 
teaching with a holy jealousy, and abide by the doctrine 
of HolyScripture. Let us not be ashamed to walk in the 
old paths, and to believe that there is an eternal God, an 
eternal heaven, and an eternal hell. Once depart from 
this belief, and we admit the thin edge of the wedge of 
scepticism, and may at last deny any doctrine of the 
Gospel. We may rest assured that there is no firm 
standing ground between a belief in the eternity of hell, 
and downright infidelity. 





MATTHEW XXVI. 26—35. 


26 And as they were eating, Jesus 
took bread,and blessed it,and brake 
it, and gave it to the disciples, and 
said, Take, eat; this is my body. 

27 And he took the cup, and 
gave thanks, and gave tt to them, 
saying, Drink ye all of it; 

28 For this is my blood of the 
new testament, which is shed for 
many for the remission of sins. 

29 But I say unto you, I will 
not drink henceforth of this fruit 
of the yine, until that day when 
I drink it new with you in my 
Father’s kingdom, 

30 And when they had sung an 
hymn, they went out into the 
mount of Olives. 

31 Then saith Jesus unto them, 


All ye shall be offended because of 
me this night: for it is written, I 
will smite the shepherd, and the 
sheep of the flock shall be scattered 
abroad. 

32 But after I am risen again, I 
will go before you into Galilee. 

33 Peter answered and said unto 
him, Though all men shall be of- 
fended because of thee, yet will I 
never be offended. 

34 Jesus said unto him, Verily 
I say unto thee, That this night, 
before the cock crow, thou shalt 
deny me thrice. 

3) Peter said unto him, Though 
I should die with thee, yet will I 
not deny thee. Likewise also soid 
all the disciples. 


MATTHEW, OHAP. XXVI. VER. 26—35. 305 


THESE verses describe the appointment of the sacrament 
of the Lord’s Supper. Our Lord knew well the things 
that were before Him, and graciously chose the last quiet 
evening that He could have before His crucifixion, as an 
occasion for bestowing a parting gift on His Church. 
How precious must this crdinance have afterwards ap- 
peared to His disciples, when they remembered the 
events of that night! How mournful is the thought 
that no ordinance has led to such fierce controversy, and 
been so grievously misunderstood, as the ordinance of 
the Lord’s Supper! It ought to have united the Church, 
but our sins have made it a cause of division. The 
thing which should have been for our welfare, has beep 
too often made an occasion of falling. 

The first thing that demands our notice in these 
verses, 7s the right meaning of our Lord’s words, “ This 
is my body, this is my blood.” 

It is needless to say that this question has divided 
the visible Church of Christ. It has caused volumes of 
controversial theology to be written. But we must not 
shrink from having decided opinions upon it, because 
theologians have disputed and differed. Unsoundness on 
this point has given rise to many deplorable superstitions, 

The plain meaning of our Lord’s words appears to be 
this: “This bread represents my body. This wine re- 
presents my blood.” He did not mean that the bread 
He gave to His disciples was really and literally His 
body. He did not mean that the wine He gave to His 
disciples was really and literally His blood. Let us lay 
firm hold on this interpretation: it may be supported 
by several grave reasons.* 

* Bishop Law has remarked that there is no term in the 


356 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The conduct of the disciples at the Lord’s Supper 
forbids us to believe that the bread they received was 
Christ’s body, and the wine they received was Christ’s 
blood. They were all Jews, taught from their infancy 
to believe that it was sinful to eat flesh with the blood 
(Deut. xii. 23-25). Yet there is nothing in the narrative 
to show that they were startled by our Lord’s words. 
They evidently perceived no change in the bread and 
wine. 

Our own senses at the present day forbid us to believe 
that there is any change in the bread and wine in the 
Lord’s Supper. Our own taste tellsus that they are really 
and literally what they appear to be. Things above our 
reason the Bible requires us to believe ; but we are never 
bid to believe that which contradicts our senses. 

The true doctrine about our Lord’s human nature 
forbids us to believe that the bread in the Lord’s Supper 
can be His body, or the wine His blood. The natural 
body of Christ cannot be at one time in more places 
than one. If our Lord’s body could sit at table, and at 
the same time be eaten by the disciples, it is perfectly 
clear that it was not a human body like our own. But 
this we must never allow for one moment. It is the 
glory of Christianity that our Redeemer is perfect man 
as well as perfect God. 

Hebrew language, which expresses to signify or denote; and 
that the Greek here naturally takes the impress of the Hebrew 
or Syriac idiom, if is being used for it signifies. Hence the 
similar use of the verb in various passages. ‘The three branches 
are three days (Gen. xl. 12); ‘the seven kine are seven years’ 
(Gen. xli. 26); ‘the ten horns are ten kings’ (Dan. vii. 24); 
‘the field ts the world’ (Matt. xiii. 38); ‘the seven stars are the 
angels of the seven Churches, and the seven candlesticks which 


thou sawest are the seven Churches.’ (Rev. i, 20.)”— Watson 
on Matthew, v. 386. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 26—35. 357 


Finally, the genius of the language in which our Lord 
spoke at the Lord’s Supper, makes it entirely unneces- 
sary to interpret His word’s literally. The Bible is full 
of expressions of a similar kind, to which no one thinks 
of giving any but a figurative meaning. Our Lord speaks 
of Himself as the “door” and the “vine,” and we know 
that He is using emblems and figures when He so 
speaks. There is therefore no inconsistency in supposing 
that He used figurative language when He appointed 
the Lord’s Supper ; and we have the more right to say 
so when we remember the grave objections which stand 
in the way of a literal view of His words. 

Let us lay up these things in our minds, and not 
forget them. In a day of abounding heresy, it is good 
to be well armed. Ignorant and confused views of the 
meaning of Scripture language are one great cause of 
religious error. 

The second thing which demands our notice in these 
verses is the purpose and object for which the Lord’s 
Supper was appointed. 

This is a subject again on which great darkness pre- 
vails. The ordinance of the Lord’s Supper has been 
regarded as something mysterious and past understand- 
ing. Immense harm has been done to Christianity by 
the vague and highflown language in which many 
writers have indulged in treating of the sacrament. 
There is certainly nothing to warrant such language in 
the account of its original institution. The more simple 
our views of its purpose, the more Scriptural they are 
likely to be. 

The Lord’s Supper is not a sacrifice. There is no 


358 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


oblation in it,—no offering up of anything but our 
prayers, praises, and thanksgivings. From the day that 
Jesus died there needed no more offering for sin: by one 
offering He perfected for ever them that are sanctified. 
(Heb. x. 14.) Priests, altars, and sacrifices, all ceased to 
be necessary, when the Lamb of God offered up Himself. 
Their office came to an end: their work was done. 

The Lord’s Supper has no power to confer benefit on 
those who come to it, if they do not come to it with 
faith. The mere formal act of eating the bread and 
drinking the wine is utterly unprofitable, unless it is 
done with a right heart. It is eminently an ordinance 
for the living soul, not for the dead ; for the converted, 
not for the unconverted. 

The Lord’s Supper was ordained for a continual re- 
membrance of the sacrifice of Christ’s death, until He 
comes again. The benefits it confers are spiritual, not 
physical: its effects must be looked for in our inward 
man. It was intended to remind us, by the visible, 
tangible emblems of bread and wine, that the offering of 
Christ’s body and blood for us on the cross is the only 
atonement for sin, and the life of a believer’s soul. Itwas 
meant to help our poor weak faith to closer fellowship 
with our crucified Saviour, and to assist us in spiritually 
feeding on Christ’s body and blood. It is an ordinance 
for redeemed sinners, and not for unfallen angels. By 
receiving it we publicly declare our sense of guilt, and 
our need of a Saviour,—our trust in Jesus, and our love 
to Him,—our desire to live upon Him, and our hope to 
live with Him. Using it in this spirit, we shall find 
our repentance deepened, our faith increased, our hope 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 26—35. 359 


brightened, and our love enlarged,—our besetting sins 
weakened, and our graces strengthened. It will draw 
us nearer to Christ. 

Let us bear these things in mind: they need to be 
remembered in these latter days. There is nothing in 
our religion which we are so ready to pervert and mis- 
understand as those parts which approach our senses. 
Whatever we can touch with our hand, and see with our 
eyes, we are apt to exalt into an idol, or to expect good 
from it as a mere charm. Let us specially beware of 
this tendency in the matter of the Lord’s Supper. 
Above all, “let us take heed,” in the words of the 
Church of England Homily, “lest of the memory it be 
made a sacrifice.” 

The last thing which deserves a brief notice in -this 
passage, is the character of the first communicants. It is 
a point full of comfort and instruction. 

The little company to which the bread and wine were 
first administered by our Lord was composed of the 
Apostles whom He had chosen to accompany Him during 
His earthly ministry. They were poor and unlearned 
men, who loved Christ, but were weak alike in faith and 
knowledge. They knew but little of the full meaning of 
their Master’s sayings and doings; they knew but little of 
the frailty of their own hearts. They thought they were 
ready to die with Jesus, and yet that very night they all 
forsook Him and fled. All this our Lord knew perfectly 
well. The state of their hearts was not hid from Him; and 
yet He did not keep back from them the Lord’s Supper ! 

There is something very teaching in this circumstance. 
It shows us plainly that we must not make great know- 


360 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


ledge, and great strength of grace, an indispensable 
qualification for communicants. A man may know but 
little, and be no better than a child in spiritual strength, 
but he is not on that account to be excluded from the 
Lord’s table-—Does he really feel his sins? Does he really 
love Christ? Does he really desire to serve Him ? If this 
be so, we ought to encourage and receive Him. Doubtless 
we must do all we can to exclude unworthy communi- 
cants. No graceless person ought to come to the Lord’s 
Supper. But we must take heed that we do not reject 
those whom Christ has not rejected. There is no wisdom 
in being more strict than our Lord and His disciples. 

Let us leave the passage with serious self-inquiry as te 
our own conduct with respect to the Lord’s Supper. Do 
we turn away from it, when it is administered? If so, 
how can we justify our conduct ?—It will not do to say 
it is not a necessary ordinance. To say so is to pour 
contempt on Christ Himself and declare that we do not 
obey Him. It will not do to say that we feel unworthy 
to come to the Lord’s table. To say so is to declare 
that we are unfit to die, and unprepared to meet God. 
These are solemn considerations: all non-communicants 
should ponder them well. 

Are we in the habit of coming to the Lord’s table? 
If so, in what frame of mind do we come? Do we draw 
near intelligently, humbly, and with faith? Do we 
understand what we are about? Do we really feel our 
sinfulness, and need of Christ? Do we really desire to 
live a Christian life, as well as profess the Christian faith 7 
Happy is that soul who can give a satisfactory answer tc 
these questions? Let him go forward, and persevere. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 36—46. 


361 


MATTHEW XXVI. 36—46. 


36 Then cometh Jesus with them 
unto a place called Gethsemane, 
and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye 
here, while I go and pray yonder. 

37 And he took with him Peter 
and thetwo sons of Zebedee, and be- 
gan to be sorrowful and very heavy. 

38 Then saith he unto them, My 
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even 
unto death: tarry ye here and 
watch with me. 

39 And he went a little further, 
and fell on his face and prayed, 
saying, O my Father, if it be pos- 
sible, let this cup pass from me: 
nevertheless not as I will, but as 
thou wilt. 

40 And he cometh unto the disci- 
ples, and findeth them asleep, and 
saith unto Peter, What, could ye 
not watch with me one hour? 

41 Watch and pray, that ye enter 





not into temptation: the spirit 
indeed 1s willing, but the flesh is 
weak, 

42 He went away again the 
second time, and prayed, saying, 
O my Father, if this cup may not 
pass away from me, except I drink 
it, thy will be done. 

43 And he came and found them 
asleep again: for their eyes were 
heavy. 

44 And he left them, and went 
away again, and prayed the third 
time, saying the same words. 

45 Then cometh he to his disci- 
ples, and saith unto them, Sleep on 
now, and take your rest: behold, 
the hour is at hand, and the Son 
of man is betrayed into the hands 
of sinners. 

46 Rise, let us be going: behold 
he is at hand that doth betray me. 


THE verses we have now read describe what is commonly 
called Christ’s agony at Gethsemane. It is a passage 
which undoubtedly contains deep and mysterious things. 
We ought to read it with reverence and wonder, for 
there is much in it which we cannot fully comprehend. 

Why do we find our Lord so “sorrowful, and very 
heavy,” as He is here described? What are we to make 
of His words, “ My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto 
death”? Why do we see Him going apart from His 
disciples, and falling on His face, and crying to His 
Father with strong cries, and thrice-repeated prayer ? 
Why is the Almighty Son of God, who had worked so 
many miracles, so heavy and disquieted? Why is Jesus, 
who came into the world to die, so like one ready to faint © 
at the approach of death? Why is all this? 

There is but one reasonable answer to these questions. 
The weight that pressed down our Lord’s soul, was notthe 
fear of death, and its pains Thousands have endured 


362 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the most agonizing sufferings of body, and died without a 
groan, and so, no doubt, might our Lord have died. But 
the real weight that bowed down the heart of Jesus was 
the weight of the sin of the world, which seems to have 
now pressed down upon Him with peculiar force. Itwas 
the burden of our guilt imputed to Him, which was now 
laid on Him, as on the head of the scape-goat. How 
great that burden must have been, no heart of man can 
conceive! it is known only to God. Well may the Greek 
Litany speak of the “unknown sufferings of Christ.” 
The words of Scott on this subject are probably correct: 
“Christ at this time endured as much misery of the same 
kind with that of condemned spirits, as could possibly 
consist with a pure conscience, perfect love of God and 
man, and an assured confidence of a glorious event.” * 


* T believe that the view maintained in this exposition is the 
only reasonable solution that can be given of our Lord’s agony. 
How any Socinian, or any divine who denies the imputation of 
man’s sin to Christ, and the vicarious nature of Christ’s suffer- 
ings, can account satisfactorily for the agony in the garden, 
I am totally at a loss to conceive——Upon the principle of the 
Socinian, who utterly denies the doctrine of atonement, and says 
that our Lord was only a man, and not God, He was one who 
showed less firmness in suffering than many men have shown! 
—Upon the principle of some modern divines, who say that our 
Lord’s death was not a propitiation and expiation for sin, but 
only a great example of self-sacrifice, the intense agony of body 
and mind here described is equally unaccountable.—Both views 
appear to me alike dishonouring to our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
utterly unscriptural and unsatisfactory. I believe the agony 
in the garden to be a knot that nothing can untie but the old 
doctrine of our sin being really imputed to Christ, and Christ 
being made sin and a curse for us. 

There are deep things in this passage of Scripture, containing 
the account of the agony, which I purposely leave untouched. 
They are too deep for man’s line to fathom. The extent to which 
Satan was allowed to tempt our Lord in this hour,—the degree 
of suffering, both mental and bodily, which an entirely sinless 
person, like our Lord, would endure in bearing the sin of all 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 36—46. 363 


But however mysterious this part of our Lord’s history 
may seem to us, we must not fail to observe the precious 
lessons of practical instruction which it contains. Let 
us now see what those lessons are. 

Let us learn, in the first place, that prayer is the best 
practwal remedy that we can use in time of trouble. 
We see that Christ Himself prayed, when His soul was 
sorrowful. All true Christians ought to do the same. 

Trouble is a cup that all must drink in this world of 
sin. Weare “born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward ” 
(Job v. 7); we cannot avoidit. Of all creatures, none is 
sovulnerable as man. Our bodies, our minds, our families, 
our business, our friends, are all so many doors through 
which trial will come in. The holiest saints can claim 
no exemption from it: like their Master, they are often 
“men of sorrow.” 

" But what is the first thing to be done in time of 
trouble?) We must pray.—Like Job, we must fall down 
and worship (Job i. 20); like Hezekiah, we must spread 
our matters before the Lord. (2 Kings xix. 14) The first 
person we must turn to for help must be our God. We 
must tell our Father in heaven all our sorrow. We must 
believe confidently that nothing is too trivial or minute 
to be laid before Him,so long as we do it with entire sub- 
mission to Hiswill. It is the mark of faith to keep nothing 
back from our best Friend. So doing, we may be sure we 
shall have an answer. “If it be possible,” and the thing 
mankind,—the manner in which the human and divine wills 
both operated in our Lord’s experience, since He was at all 
times as really man as God,—all these are points which I prefer 
to leave alone. It is easy on such questions to “darken counsel 


by words without knowledge.” 
28B 


364 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


we ask is for God’s glory, it shall be done. The thorn in 
the flesh will either be removed, or grace to endure it 
will be given to us, as it was to St. Paul. (2 Cor. xii. 9.) 
May we all store up this lesson against the day of need. It 
is a true saying, that “ prayers are the leeches of care.” 

Let us learn, in the second place, that entire submission 
of will to the will of God should be one of our chief aims 
in this world. The words of our Lord are a beautiful 
example of the spirit that we should follow after in this 
matter. He says, “Not as I will, but as Thou wilt.” 
He says again, “Thy will be done.” 

A will unsanctified and uncontrolled, is one great 
cause of unhappiness in life. It may be seen in little 
infants; it is born with us: we all like our own way. 
We wish and want many things, and forget that we are 
entirely ignorant what is for our good, and unfit to 
choose for ourselves. Happy is he who has learned to 
have no “wishes,” and in every state to be content! It 
is a lesson which we are slow to learn, and, like St. Paul, 
we must learn it not in the school of mortal man, but of 
Christ. (Philip. iv. 11.) 

Would we know whether we are born again, and 
growing in grace? Let us see how it is with us in 
the matter of our wills. Can we bear disappointment ? 
Can we put up patiently with unexpected trials and 
vexations ? Can we see our favourite plans, and darling 
schemes crossed, without murmuring and complaint ? 
Can we sit still, and suffer calmly, as well as go up and 
down and work actively? These are the things that 
prove whether we have the mind of Christ. It ought 
uever to be forgotten, that warm feelings and joyful 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 36—46. 365 


frames are not the truest evidences of grace. A mortified 
will is a far more valuable possession. Even our Lord 
Himself did not always rejoice. But He could always 
say, “Thy will be done.” 

Let us learn, in the last place, that there is great 
weakness, even in true disciples of Christ, and that they 
have need to watch and pray against it. We see Peter, 
James, and John, those three chosen apostles, sleeping 
when they ought to have been watching and praying; 
and we find our Lord addressing them in these solemn 
words, “ Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tempta- 
tion: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.” 

There is a double nature in all believers. Converted, 
renewed, sanctified as they are, they still carry about 
with them a mass of indwelling corruption, a body of sin. 
St. Paul speaks of this, when he says, “I find a law, 
that, when I would do good, evil is present with me. 
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: 
but I see another law in my members, warring against 
the law of my mind.” (Rom. vii. 21--23.) The experi- 
ence of all true Christians in every age confirms this. 
They find within themselves two contrary principles,and a 
continual strife between the two, To these two principles 
our Lord alludes when He addresses His half-awakened 
disciples: He calls the one “flesh,” and the other “spirit.” 
He says “the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.” 

But does our Lord excuse this weakness of His 
disciples? Be it far from us to think so: those whc 
draw this conclusion mistake His meaning. He uses 
that very weakness as an argument for watchfulness 
and prayer. He teaches us that the very fact that we 


366 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


are encompassed with infirmity, should stir us up con- 
tinually to “watch and pray.” 

If we know anything of true religion, let us never 
forget this lesson. If we desire to walk with God com- 
fortably, and not to fall, like David or Peter, let us 
never forget to watch and pray. Let us live like men 
on enemy’s ground, and be always on our guard. We 
cannot walk too carefully ; we cannot be too jealous 
over our souls. The world is very ensnaring ; the devil 
is very busy. Let our Lord’s words ring in our ears 


daily, like a trumpet. 


Our spirits may sometimes be 


very willing; but our flesh is also very weak. Then 
let us always watch and always pray. 


MATTHEW XXVI. 47—56. 


47 And while he yet spake, lo, 
Judas, one of the twelve, came, and 
with him a great multitude with 
swords and staves, from the chief 
priests and elders of the people. 

48 Now he that betrayed him 
gave them a sign, saying, Whom- 
soever I shall kiss, that same is 
he: hold him fast. 

49 And forthwith he came to 
Jesus, and said, Hail, Master; and 
kissed him, 

50 And Jesus said unto him, 
Friend, wherefore art thou come? 
Then came they, and laid hands on 
Jesus, and took him. 

51 And, behold, one of them 
which were with Jesus stretched 
out his hand, and drew his sword, 
and struck a servant of the high 
priest's, and smote off his ear. 


52 Then said Jesus unto him, 
Put up again thy sword into his 
place: for all they that take the 
sword shall perish with the sword. 

53 Thinkest thou that I cannot 
now pray to my Father, and he 
shall presently give me more than 
twelve legions of angels? 

54 But how then shall the scrip- 
fe be fulfilled, that thus it must 

8 

55 In that same hour said Jesus 
to the multitudes, Are ye come out 
as against a thief with swords and 
staves for to take me? I sat daily 
with you teaching in the temple, 
and ye laid no hold on me. 

56 But all this was done, that 
the scriptures of the prophets 
might be fulfilled. Then all the 
disciples forsook him, and fled. 


WE see in these verses, the cup of our Lord Jesus 
Christ's sufferings beginning to be filled. We see Him 
betrayed by one of His disciples, forsaken by the rest, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 47—56. 367 


and taken prisoner by His deadly cnemies. Never 
surely was there sorrow like His sorrow. Never may 
we forget, as we read this part of the Bible, that our 
sins were the cause of these sorrows! Jesus was 
“delivered for our offences.” (Rom. iv. 25.) 

Let us notice, for one thing, in these verses, what 
gracious condescension marked our Lord’s intercourse with 
His disciples, 

We have this point proved by a deeply touching cir- 
cumstance at the moment of our Lord’s betrayal. When 
Judas Iscariot undertook to guide the multitude to the 
place where his Master was, he gave them a sign by which 
they might distinguish Jesus in the dim moonlight 
from His disciples. He said, “ Whomsoever I shall kiss, 
that same is He.” And so, when he came to Jesus, he 
said, “Hail, Master; and kissed Him.” That simple 
fact reveals the affectionate terms on which the disciples 
associated with our Lord. It is an universal custom, in 
Eastern countries, when friend meets friend, to salute one 
another with a kiss (Exod. xviii. 7.; 1 Sam. xx. 41). It 
would seem therefore, that when Judas kissed our Lord, 
he only did that which all the apostles were accustomed 
to do, when they met their Master after an absence. 

Let us draw comfort from this little circumstance for 
ourown souls. Our Lord Jesus Christ is a most gracious 
and condescending Saviour. He is not an “austere man,” 
repelling sinners, and keeping them at a distance. He 
is not a being so different from us in nature, that we 
must regard Him with awe rather than affection. He 
would have us rather regard Him as an elder Brother, 
and a beloved Friend. His heart in heaven is still the 


368 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


same that it was upon earth. He never changes. He 
is ever meek, merciful, and condescending to men of 
low estate. Let us trust Him, and not be afraid. 

Let us notice, for another thing, how our Lord con- 
demns those who think to use carnal weapons in defence of 
Him and His cause. He reproves one of His disciples 
for striking a servant of the high priest. He bids him 
“put up his sword into its place ;” and adds a solemn 
declaration of perpetual significance —* All they that 
take the sword shall perish by the sword.” 

The sword has a lawful office of its own. It may 
be used righteously, in the defence of nations against 
oppression. It may become positively necessary to use 
it, to prevent confusion, plunder, and rapine upon earth. 
But the sword is not to be used in the propagation and 
maintenance of the Gospel. Christianity is not to be 
enforced by bloodshed, and belief in it extorted by 
force. Happy would it have been for the Church if 
this sentence had been more frequently remembered ! 
There are few countries in Christendom where the 
mistake has not been made of attempting to change 
men’s religious opinions by compulsion, penalties, 
imprisonment, and death. And with what effect? The 
pages of history supply an answer. No wars have 
been so bloody as those which have arisen out of the 
collision of religious opinions. Often, mournfully often 
the very men who have been most forward to promote 
those wars have themselves been slain. May we never 
forget this! The weapons of the Christian warfare are 
not carnal, but spiritual. (2 Cor. x. 4.) 

Let us notice, for another thing, how our Lord submitted 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXVI, VER. 46—56. 369 


to be made a prisoner of His own free will. He was not 
taken captive because He could not escape. It would 
have been easy for Him to scatter His enemies to the 
winds, if He had thought fit. “Thinkest thou,” He says 
to a disciple, “that I cannot pray to my Father, and He 
shall presently give Me more than twelve legions of 
angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, 
that thus it must be?” 

We see in those words the secret of His voluntary 
submission to His foes, He came on purpose to fulfil 
the types and promises of Old Testament Scriptures, 
and by fulfilling them to provide salvation for the 
world. He came intentionally to be the true Lamb of 
God, the Passover Lamb, to suffer for us, and shed His 
blood to atone for our sins. He came voluntarily to be - 
the Scapegoat on whom the iniquities of the people were 
to be laid. His heart was set on accomplishing this great 
work. It could not be done without the “ hiding of His 
power,” for a time. To do it He became a willing 
sufferer. He was taken, tried, condemned, and crucified 
entirely of His own free will. 

Letusobserve this carefully, for thereismuchencourage- 
ment in it. The willing sufferer will surely be a willing 
Saviour. The Almighty Son of God, who allowed men to 
bind Him and lead Him away captive, when He might 
have prevented them with a word, must surely be full of 
readiness to save the souls that flee to Him. Once more 
then let us learn to trust Him, and not be afraid. 

Let us notice, in the last place, how little Christians _ 
know the weakness of their own hearts, until they are tried.” 
We have a mournful illustration of this in the conduct 


370 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of our Lord’s Apostles. The verses we have read con- 
clude with the words, “Then all the disciples forsook 
Him, and fled.” They forgot their confident assertions, 
made a few hours before. They forgot that they had 
declared their willingness to die with their Master. 
They forgot everything but the danger that stared them 
in the face. The fear of death overcame them: they 
“forsook Him, and fled.” 

How many professing Christians have done the same! 
How many, under the influence of excited feelings, have 
promised that they would never be ashamed of Christ! 
They have come away from the communion table, or the 
striking sermon, or the Christian meeting, full of zeal and 
love, and ready to say to all who caution them against 
backsliding, “Is thy servant a dog, that he should do 
this thing?” And yet in a few days these feelings have 
cooled down and passed away. A trial has come and 
they have fallen before it. They have forsaken Christ! 

Let us learn, from this passage, lessons of humiliation 
and self-abasement. Let us resolve, by God’s grace, to 
cultivate a spirit of lowliness, and self-distrust. Let us 
settle it in our minds, that there is nothing too bad for 
the very best of us to do, unless he watches, prays, and 
is held up by the grace of God. And let it be one of 
our daily prayers, “Hold Thou me up, and I shall be 
safe.” (Psalm cxix. 117.) 


MATTHEW XXVI. 57—68. 


57 And they that had laid hold and went in, and sat with the ser- 
on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas | vants, to see the end. 
the high priest, where the scribes 59 Now the chief priests, and 
and the elders were assembled. elders, and all the council, sought 
58 But Peter followed him afar | false witness against Jesus, to put 
off unto the high priest’s palace, ' him to death: 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 57—68. 


60 But found none: yea, though 
many false witnesses came, yet 
found theynone. At the last came 
two false witnesses, 

61 And said, This fellow said, I 
am able to destroy the temple of 
God, and to build it in three days. 

62 And the high priest arose, 
and said unto him, Answerest thou 
nothing? what is it which these 
witness against thee P 

63 But Jesus held his peace. And 
the high priest answered and said 
unto him, I adjure thee by the liv- 
ing God, that thou tell us whether 
thou be the Christ, the Son of God. 

64 Jesus saith unto him, Thou 
hast said: nevertheless I say unto 


37] 


you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son 
of man sitting on the right hand of 
power, and coming in the clouds of 
heaven. 

65 Then the high priest rent his 
clothes, saying, He hath spoken 
blasphemy; what further need 
have we of witnesses ? behold, now 
ye have heard his blasphemy. 

66 What think ye? They an- 
swered and said, He is guilty of 
death. 

67 Then did they spit in his face, 
and buffeted him ; and others smote 
him with the palms of their hands, 

68 Saying, Prophecy unto us, 
aise Christ, Who is he that smote 
thee ? 


WE read, in these verses, how our Lord Jesus Christ was 
brought before Caiaphas the high priest, and solemnly 
pronounced guilty. It was fitting that it should be so. 
The great day of atonement was come, and the wondrous 
type of the scape-goat was about to be completely ful- 
filled. It was only suitable that the Jewish high priest 
should do his part, and declare sin to be upon the head 
of the victim, before He was led forth to be crucified. 
(Levit. xvi. 21.) May we ponder these things and under- 
stand them. There was a deep meaning in every step 
of our Lord’s passion. 

Let us observe, in these verses, that the chief’ priests 
were the principal agents in bringing about owr Lord's 
death. It was not so much the Jewish people, we must 
remember, who pushed forward this wicked deed, as 
Caiaphas and his companions, the chief priests. 

This is an instructive fact, and deserves notice. It is 
a clear proof that high ecclesiastical office exempts no 
man from gross errors in doctrine, and tremendous sins 
in practice. The Jewish priests could trace up their 
pedigree to Aaron, and were his lineal successors. Their 


372 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


office was one of peculiar sanctity, and entailed peculiar 
responsibilities. And yet these very men were the 
murderers of Christ ! 

Let us beware of regarding any minister of religion 
as infallible. His orders, however regularly conferred, 
are no guarantee that he may not lead us astray, and 
even ruin our souls. The teaching and conduct of all 
ministers must be tried by the Word of God. They are 
to be followed so long as they follow the Bible, but 
no longer. The maxim laid down in Isaiah must be our 
euide: ‘To the law and to the testimony: if they speak 
not according to this word, it is because there is no light 
in them.” (Isaiah viii. 20.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, how fully our Lord 
declared to the Jewish council His own Messiahship, and 
His future coming in glory. 

The unconverted Jew can never tell us at the present 
day that his forefathers were left in ignorance that Jesus 
was the Messiah. Our Lord’s answer to the solemn 
adjuration of the high priest is a sufficient reply. He 
tells the council plainly that He is “the Christ, the Son 
of God.” He goes on to warn them that though He had 
not yet appeared in glory, as they expected Messias 
would have done, a day would come when He would do 
so. “Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on 
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of 
heaven.” They would yet see that very Jesus of Naza- 
reth, whom they had arraigned at their bar, appear in all 
majesty as King of kings. (Rev. i. 7.) 

It is a striking fact which we should not fail to notice, 
that almost the last word spoken by our Lord to the 


MATTHEW, (HAP, XXVI. VER, 57—68. 373 


Jews, was a warning prediction about His own second 
advent. He tells them plainly that. they would yet see 
Him in glory. No doubt He referred to the seventh 
chapter of Daniel, in the language that He used. (Dan. 
vil. 13.) But He spoke to deaf ears. Unbelief, pre- 
judice, self-righteousness, covered them like a thick 
cloud. Never was there such an instance of spiritual 
blindness. Well may the Church of England litany 
contain the prayer, “From all blindness——and from 
hardness of heart, Good Lord deliver us.” 

Let us observe, in the last place, how much our Lord 
endured before the council, from false witness and mockery. 

Falsehood and ridicule are old and favourite weapons 
of the devil. “ He is a liar, and the father of it.” (John 
viii. 44.) All through our Lord’s earthly ministry we see 
these weapons continually employed against Him. He 
was called “a glutton, a winebibber,” and “a friend of 
publicans and sinners.” He was held up to contempt as 
“a Samaritan.” The closing scene of His life was only 
in keeping with all the past tenor of it. Satan stirred up 
His enemies to add insult to injury. No sooner was He 
pronounced guilty, than every sort of mean indignity 
was heaped upon Him. “They spit in His face, and 
buffeted Him;” “they smote Him with the palms of 
their hands;” they said mockingly, “ Prophecy unto us, 
Thou Christ, who is he that smote Thee ?” 

How wonderful and strange it all sounds! How won- 
derful that the Holy Son of God should have voluntarily 
submitted to such indignities, to redeem such miserable 
sinners as we are! How wonderful, not least, that every 
tittle of these insults was foretold seven hundred years 


374 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


before they were inflicted! Seven hundred years before 
Isaiah had written down the words, “I hid not my face 
from shame and spitting.” (Isai. 1. 6.) 

Let us draw from this passage one practical conclusion. 
Let it never surprise us if we have to endure mockery, 
and ridicule, and false charges, because we belong to 
Christ. “The disciple is not above his Master, nor the 
servant above his lord.” (Matt. x. 24.) If lies and in- 
sults were heaped upon our Saviour, we need not wonder 
if the same weapons are constantly used against His 
people. It is one of Satan’s great devices to blacken the 
characters of godly men, and bring them into contempt. 
The lives of Luther, Cranmer, Calvin, and Wesley supply 
abundant examples of this. If we are ever called upon 
to suffer in this way, let us bear it patiently. We drink 
the same cup that was drunk by our beloved Lord. But 
there is one great difference. At the worst, we only drink 
a fewbitter drops; but He drank the cup to the very dregs, 


MATTHEW XXVI. 69—75. 


69 Now Peter sat without in the, 73 And after a while came unto 
palace: and a damsel came unto | him they that stood by, and said to 
him, saying, Thou also wast with | Peter, Surely thou also art one of 
Jesus of Galilee. | them; for thy speech bewrayeth 

70 But he denied before them | thee. 
all, saying, I know not what thou 74 Then began he to curse and to 
sayest. swear, saying, I know not the man. 
_ 71 And when he was gone out | And immediately the cock crew. 
into the porch, another maid saw! 75 And Peter remembered the 
him, and said unto them that were | word of Jesus, which said unto him, 
there, This fellow was also with | Before the cock crow, thou shalt 
Jesus of Nazareth. deny me thrice. And he went out, 

72 And again he denied with an | and wept bitterly. 
oath, I do not know the man. 





THESE verses relate a remarkable and deeply instructive 
event: the apostle Peter’s denial of Christ. It is one of 
those events, which indirectly prove the truth of the Bible. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 69—75. - 375 


If the Gospel had been a mere invention of man, we 
should never have been told that one of its principal — 
preachers was once so weak and erring, as to deny his 
Master. 

The first thing that demands our notice is the full 
nature of the sin of which Peter was guilty. 

It was a great sin. We see a man who had followed 
Christ for three years, and been forward in professing 
faith and love towards Him,—a man who had received 
boundless mercies, and loving-kindness, and been treated 
by Christ as a familiar friend,—we see this man denying 
three times that he knows Jesus! This was bad.—It 
was asin committed under circumstances of great aggra- 
vation. Peter had been warned plainly of his danger, 
and had heard the warning. He had just been receiving 
the bread and wine at our Lord’s hands, and declaring 
loudly that though he died with Him, he would not 
deny Him! This also was bad.—It was a sin committed 
under apparently small provocation. Two weak women 
made the remark that he was with Jesus; and they that 
stood by say, “ Surely thou art one of them.” No threat 
seems to have been used. No violence seems to have 
been done. But it was enough to overthrow Peter’s 
faith. He denies before all! He denies with an oath: 
he curses and swears.—Truly it is a humbling picture! 

Let us mark this history, and store it up in our minds, 
It teaches us plainly that the best of saints are only men, 
and men encompassed with many infirmities. A man 
may be converted to God, have faith and hope, and love 
towards Christ, and yet be overtaken in a fault, and 
have awful falls. It shows us the necessity of humility : 


376 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


so long as we are in the body, we are in danger. The 
flesh is weak, and the devil is active: we must never 
think, “I cannot fall.” It points out to us the duty of 
charity towards erring saints. We must not set down 
men as graceless reprobates, because they occasionally 
stumble and err. We must remember Peter, and “restore 
them in the spirit of meekness.” (Gal. vi. 1.) 

The second thing that demands our notice is the series 
of steps by which Peter was led to deny his Lord. 

These steps are mercifully recorded for our learning. 
The Spirit of God has taken care to have them written 
down for the perpetual benefit of the Church of Christ. 
Let us trace them out one by one. 

The first step to Peter’s fall was self-confidence: he 
said, ‘Though all men should be offended, yet will I 
never be offended.” The second step was indolence: his 
Master told him to watch and pray ; instead of doing so 
he slept. The third step was cowardly compromising: 
instead of keeping close to his Master, he first forsook 
Him, and then “followed Him afar off.” The last step 
was needless venturing into evil company: he went into 
the priest’s palace, and “sat with the servants,” like one 
of themselves. And then came the final fall: the cursing, 
the swearing, and the three-fold denial. Startling as it 
appears, his heart had been preparing it. It was the 
fruit of seeds which he himself had sown. “He ate 
the fruit of his own ways.” 

Let us remember this part of Peter’s history. It is 
deeply instructive to all who profess and call themselves 
Christians. Great illnesses seldom attack the body, with- 
out aprevioustrain of premonitorysymptoms. Great falls 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVI. VER. 69—75. 377 


seldom happen to a saint, without a previous course of 
secret backsliding. The Church and the world are some- 
times shocked by the sudden misconduct of some great 
professor of religion. Believersare discouraged andstum- 
bled by it. The enemies of God rejoice and blaspheme. 
But if the truth could be known, the explanation of such 
cases would generally be found to have been private 
departure from God. Men fall in private, long before 
they fall in public. The tree falls with a great crash ; 
but the secret decay which accounts for it, is often not 
discovered till it is down on the ground. 

The last thing which demands our notice is the sorrow 
which Peter's sin brought upon him. We read at the end 
of the chapter, “He went out, and wept bitterly.” 

These words deserve more attention than they gene- 
rally receive. Thousands have read the history of Peter's 
sin, who have thought little of Peter’s tears, and Peter’s 
repentance. May we have an eye to see, and a heart to 
understand ! 

We see in Peter’s tears, the close connection between 
unhappiness and departure from God. It is a mervitul 
arrangement of God, that in one sense holiness shall 
always bring its own reward. A heavy heart and an 
uneasy conscience, a clouded hope, and an abundant crop 
of doubts, will always be the consequence of backsliding 
and inconsistency. The words of Solomon describe the 
experience of many an inconsistent child of God: “The 
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways.” 
(Prov. xiv. 14.) Let it be a settled principle in our re- 
ligion that if we love inward peace we must walk closely 
with God. 


378 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We see in Peter’s bitter tears the grand mark of 
difference between the hypocrite and the true believer. 
When the hypocrite is overtaken by sin, he generally 
falls to rise no more: he has no principle of life with- 
in him to raise him up.—When the child of God is 
overtaken, he rises again by true repentance, and by 
the grace of God amends his life. Let no man flatter 
himself that he may sin with impunity, because David 
committed adultery, and because Peter denied his Lord. 
No doubt these holy men sinned greatly: but they did 
not continue in their sins. They repented greatly ; they 
mourned over their falls; they loathed and abhorred 
their own wickedness. Well would it be for many, if 
they would imitate them in their repentance, as well as 
in their sins! Too many are acquainted with their fall, 
but not with their recovery. Like David and Peter, 
they have sinned, but they have not, like David and 
Peter, repented. 

The whole passage is full of lessons that ought never 
to be forgotten. Do we profess to have a hope in Christ? 
Let us mark the weakness of a believer, and the steps 
that lead to a fall—_Have we unhappily backslidden, and 
left our first love? Let us remember that the Saviour 
of Peter still lives. There is mercy for us as well as for 
him: but we must repent, and seek that mercy, if we 
would find it. Let us turn unto God, and He will turn 
to us: His compassions fail 1.06. (Lam. iii. 22.) 


MATTHEW XXVII. 1—10. 


1 When the morning was come, | the people took counsel against 
all the chief priests and elders of | Jesus to put him to death- 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 1—10. 


2 And when they had bound him, 
they led him away, and delivered 
him to Pontius Pilate the governor. 

3 Then Judas, which had be- 
trayed him, when he saw that he 
was condemned, repented himself, 
and brought again the thirty pieces 
of silver to the chief priests and 
elders, 

4 Saying, I have sinned in that I 
have betrayed the innocent blood. 
And they said, What is that to us? 
see thou fo that. 

5 And he cast down the pieces of 
silver in the temple, and departed, 
and went and hanged himself. 

6 And the chief priests took the 


379 


silver pieces, and said, It is not 
lawful for to put them into the 
treasury, because it is the price of 
blood. 

7 And they took counsel, and 
bought with them the potter’s 
field, to bury strangers in. 

8 Wherefore that field was cailed, 
The field of blood, unto this day. 

9 Then was fulfilled that which 
was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, 
saying, And they took the thirty 
pieces of silver, the price of him 
that was valued, whom they of the 
children of Israel did value ; 

10 And gave them forthe potter’s 
field, as the Lord appointed me. 


THE opening of this chapter describes the delivery of our 
Lord Jesus Christ into the hands of the Gentiles. The 
chief priests and elders of the Jews led Him away to 
Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor. We may see in 
this incident the finger of God. It was ordered by His 
providence, that Gentiles as well as Jews should be con- 
serned in the murder of Christ. It was ordered by His 
providence, that the priests should publicly confess that 
the “sceptre had departed from Judah.” They were 
unable to put any one to death, without going to the 
Romans. Thewordsof Jacob were therefore fulfilled. The 
Messiah, “Shiloh,” had indeed “come.” (Gen. xlix. 10.) 

The subject that principally occupies the verses we 
have read, is the melancholy end of the false apostle, 
Judas Iscariot. It is a subject full of instruction: let 
us mark well what it contains. 

We see, in the end of Judas, a plain proof of our 
Lord’s innocence of every charge laid against Him. 

If there was any living witness who could give evidence 
against our Lord Jesus Christ, Judas Iscariot was tha 


A chosen apostle of Jesus, a constant companion 
2¢ 


man, 


380 "-«- EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


in all His journeyings, a hearer of all His teaching 
both in public and private——he must have known well 
if our Lord had done any wrong, either in word or deed. 
A deserter from our Lord’s company, a betrayer of Him 
into the hands of His enemies, it was his interest for his 
own character's sake, to prove Jesus guilty. It would 
extenuate and excuse his own conduct, if he could make 
out that his former Master was an offender, and an 
impostor. 

Why then did not Judas Iscariot come forward? Why 
did he not stand forth before the Jewish council, and 
specify his charges, if he had any to make? Why did 
he not venture to accompany the chief priests to Pilate, 
and prove to the Romans that Jesus was a malefactor ?— 
There is but one answer to these questions. Judas did 
not come forward as a witness, because his conscience 
would not let him. Bad as he was, he knew he could 
prove nothing against Christ. Wicked as he was, he 
knew well that his Master was holy, harmless, innocent, 
blameless, and true. Let this never be forgotten. The 
absence of Judas Iscariot at our Lord’s trial is one 
among many proofs that the Lamb of God was without 
blemish,—a sinless man. 

We see, for another thing, in the end of Judas, that 
there ts such a thing as repentance which ts too late. We 
are told plainly that “Judas repented himself ;” we are 
even told that he went to the priests, and said, “I have 
sinned.” And yet it is clear that he did not repent unto © 
salvation ! 

This is a point which deserves special attention, It is 
a common saying, “that it is never too late to repent.” 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 1—10. 381 


The saying, no doubt, is true, if repentance be true. But 
unhappily, late repentance is often not genuine. It is 
possible for a man to feel his sins, and be sorry for them, 
—to be under strong convictions of guilt, and express 
deep remorse,—to be pricked in conscience, and exhibit 
much distress of mind,—and yet, for all this, not repent 
with his heart. Present danger, or the fear of death, 
may account for all his feelings, and the Holy Ghost 
may have done no work whatever on his soul. 

Let us beware of trusting to a late repentance. “Now 
is the accepted time: to-day is the day of salvation.” 
One penitent thief was saved in the hour of death, that 
no man might despair ; but only one, that no man might 
presume. Let us put off nothing that concerns our 
souls, and above all not put off repentance, under the 
vain idea that it is a thing in our own power. The 
words of Solomon on this subject are very fearful. He 
speaks of men who “shall call upon God but He will 
not answer; who shall seek Him early, and not find 
Him.” (Prov. i. 28.) 

Let us see, for another thing, in the end of Judas, how 
little comfort ungodliness brings a man at the last. We 
are told that he cast down the thirty pieces of silver, 
for which he had sold his Master, in the temple, and went 
away in bitterness of soul. That money was dearly earned. 
It brought him no pleasure,even when he had it:* for the 
“treasures of wickedness profit nothing.” (Prov. x. 2.) 


* Tt is a great and undeniable difficulty, that the words quoted 
as having been used by “ Jeremy the prophet,” are not to be 
found in any writings of Jeremiah that we possess, and that 
they are found in the prophet Zechariah. The following solu- 
tions of the difficulty have been suggested, 


382 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Sin is, ‘in truth, the hardest of all masters. In its 
service there is plenty of fair promises, but an utter 
dearth of performance. Its pleasures are but for a 
season: its wages are sorrow, remorse, self-accusation, 
and too often death. They that sow to the flesh, do 
indeed reap corruption. 

Are we tempted to commit sin? Let us remember the 


1. Some think that the prophecy quoted by Matthew was 
really delivered by Jeremiah, though not written, and only 
handed down and recorded by Zechariah. In favour of this 
view, we must remember that we have a saying of our Lord’s 
at Acts xx. 35, which is not recorded in the Gospel, and a 
prophecy of Enoch’s in Jude. (Jude 14.) 


2. Some think that the name of Jeremiah was applied by the 
Jews to all that portion of the Old Testament Scripture containing 

rophecies, and that Matthew did not really mean that Jeremy 
fad delivered the prophecy. This is the view of Lightfoot. 


3. Some think that Matthew originally wrote the words ‘“‘ The 
prophet,” without quoting the name of any one in particular, and 
that the word ‘‘ Jeremy’ was inserted by an ignorant transcriber, 
Tn favour of this view, it is fair to say that the Syriac version, one 
of the oldest extant, simply says ‘“‘the prophet,” and omits 
Jeremy’s name. The Persian version of the Gospels also omits it. 


4. Some think that Matthew originally wrote the words 
‘Zechariah the prophet,” and that some ignorant transcriber 
changed the word into Jeremiah. In favour of this view it must 
be fairly remembered that in manuscripts, names were often 
written short, and that IOU, and ZOU, as the name would probably 
be written in this case, are not very unlike. 


I offer no opinion on these solutions of the difficulty. A 
question of this sort, which has puzzled so many interpreters, 
is not likely to be settled at this period of the world. 


One solution of the difficulty I only mention in order to enter 
my protest againstit. That solution is adopted by many modern 
divines. It is simply this, that “ Matthew forgot what he was 
doing, and made a blunder. He quoted from memory, and in- 
accurately. He meant Zechariah, and not Jeremiah.” I can only 
say that at this rate we must give up the inspiration of Scripture 
altogether! If writers ofthe Bible could make blunders like this, 
we never know where we are in quoting a text. To use such an 
argument is putting a sword into the hands of Arians and Socin- 
ians, which they well know how to use. Once give up the verbal 
inspiration of Scripture, and we stand on a quicksand. 


) MATTHEW, CHAP. XXvil. VER. 1—10. 383 


words of Scripture, “Your sin will find you out,” and 
resist the temptation. (Numbers xxxii. 23.) Let us be 
sure that sooner or later, in this life or in the life to come, 
in this world or in the judgment day, sin and the sinner 
will meet face to face, and have a bitter reckoning. Let 
us be sure that of all trades sin is the most unprofitable. 
Judas, Achan, Gehazi, Ananias and Sapphira, all found 
it so to their cost. Well might St. Paul say, “ What fruit 
had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed ?” 
(Rom. vi. 21.) 

Finally, let us see in the case of Judas, to what a 
miserable end a man may come, if he has great privileges, 
and does not use them rightly. We are told that this 
unhappy man “departed and went and hanged himself.” 
What an awful death to die. An apostle of Christ, a 
former preacher of the Gospel, a companion of Peter and 
John, commits suicide, and rushes into God’s presence 
unprepared and unforgiven. 

Let us never forget that no sinners are so sinful as 
sinners against light and knowledge. None are so pro- 
voking to God. None, if we look at Scripture, have 
been so often removed from this world by sudden and 
fearful visitations. Let us remember Lot’s wife, 
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and Saul, King of Israel : 
they are all cases in point. It is a solemn saying of 
Bunyan, “that none fall so deep into the pit, as those 
who fall backward.” It is written in Proverbs, “ He that 
being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly 
be destroyed, and that without remedy.” (Prov. xxix. 1.) 
May we all strive to live up to our light. There is such 
a thing as sin against the Holy Ghost. Clear knowledge 


384 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


‘of truth in the head, combined with deliberate love of 
sin in the heart, go a long way towards it. 

And now what is the state of our hearts? Are we 
ever tempted to rest on our knowledge and profession of 
religion? Let us remember Judas, and beware.—Are we 
disposed to cling to the world, and to give money a pro- 
minent place in our minds? Again, let us remember 
Judas, and beware—Are we trifling with any one sin, 
and flattering ourselves we may repent by and by ? 
Once more, led us remember Judas, and beware.—He is 
set up before us as a beacon. Let us look well at him, 


and not make shipwreck. 





MATTHEW XXVII. 11—26, 


11 And Jesus stood before the 
governor: and the governor asked 
him, saying, Art thou the King of 
the Jews? And Jesus said unto 
him, Thou sayest. 

12 And when he was accused of 
the chief priests and elders, he 
answered nothing. 

13 Then said Pilate unto him, 
Hearest thou not how many things 
they witness against thee? 

14 And he answered him to never 
a word: insomuch that the gov- 
ernor marvelled greatly. 

15 Nowat that feast the governor 
was wont to release unto the people 
a prisoner, whom they froutd. 

16 And they had then a notable 
prisoner, called Barabbas. 

17 Therefore when they were 
gathered together, Pilate said unto 
them, Whom will ye that I release 
unto youP Barabbas, or Jesus 
which is called Christ ? 

18 For he knew that for envy 
they had delivered him. 

_ 19 When he was set down on the 
judgment-seat, his wife sent unto 
him, saying, Have thou nothing to 
do with that just man: for I have 
suffered many things this day in a 


dream because of him. 

20 But the chief prmests and 
elders persuaded the multitude 
that they should ask Barabbas, 
and destroy Jesus. 

21 The governor answered and 
said unto them, Whether of the 
twain will ye that I release unto 
you? They said, Barabbas. 

22 Pilate saith unto them, What 
shall I do then with Jesus which is 
called Christ? They all say unto 
him, Let him be crucified. 

23 And the governor said, Why 
what evil hath he done? But they 
cried out the more, saying, Let him 
be crucified. 

24 When Pilate saw that he 
could prevail nothing, but that 
rather a tumult was made, he 
took water, and washed his hands 
before the multitude, saying, I am 
innocent of the blood-of this just 
person: see ye fo it. 

25 Then answered all the people, 
and said, His blood be on us, and 
on our children. 

26 Then released he Barabbas 
unto them- and when he had 
scourged Jesus, he delivered him 
to be crucified. 


MAITHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 11—26. 385 


THESE verses describe our Lord’s appearance before 
Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor. That sight must 
have been wonderful to the angels of God. He who 
will one day judge the world allowed Himself to be jud- 
ged and condemned, though “ He had done no violence, 
neither was any deceit in His mouth.” (Isa. liii. 9.) He 
from whose lips Pilate and Caiaphas will one day re- 
ceive their eternal sentence, suffered silently an unjust 
sentence to be passed upon Him. Those silent sufferings 
fulfilled the words of Isaiah: “As a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth.” (Isa. 
hii. 7.) To those silent sufferings believers owe all their 
peace and hope.—Through them they will have boldness 
in the day of judgment, who in themselves would have 
nothing to say. 

Let us learn, from the conduct of Pilate, how pitiful 
ts the condition of an unprincipled great man. 

Pilate appears to have been inwardly satisfied that 
our Lord had done nothing worthy of death. We are 
told distinctly, that “he knew that for envy they had 
delivered Him.” Left to the exercise of his own un- 
biassed judgment, he would probably have dismissed the 
charges against our Lord, and let Him go free. 

But Pilate was the governor of a jealous and turbulent 
people. His great desire was to procure favour with them 
and please them. He cared little how much he sinned 
against God and conscience, so long as he had the praise 
of man. Though willing to save our Lord’s life, he was 
afraid to do it if it offended the Jews; and so, after a 
feeble attempt to divert the fury of the people from 
Jesus to Barabbas,—and a feebler attempt to satisfy his 


386 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


own conscience, by washing his hands publicly before 
the people,—he at last condemned One whom he himself 
called a “just person!” He rejected the strange and 
mysterious warning which his wife sent to him after her 
dream. He stifled the remonstrances of his own consci- 
ence. He “delivered Jesus to be crucified.” 

We see in this miserable man a lively emblem of 
many a ruler of this world! How many there are who 
know well that their public acts are wrong, and yet have 
not the courage to act up to their knowledge. They fear 
the people; they dread being laughed at: they cannot 
bear being unpopular! Like dead fish, they float with 
the tide. The praise of man is the idol before which 
they bow down, and to that idol they sacrifice consci- 
ence, inward peace, and an immortal soul. 

Whatever our position in life may be, let us seek to be 
guided by principle, and not by expediency. The praise 
of man is a poor, feeble, uncertain thing: it is here to- 
day and gone to-morrow. Let us strive to please God, 
and then we may care little who else is pleased. Let 
us fear God, and then there is none else of whom we 
need be afraid. 

Let us learn from the conduct of the Jews, described 
in these verses, the desperate wickedness of human nature. 

The behaviour of Pilate afforded the chief priests and 
elders an occasion of reconsidering what they were about. 
The difficulties he raised about condemning our Lord 
gave time for second thoughts. But there were no 
second thoughts in the minds of our Lord’s enemies, 
They pressed on their wicked deed. They rejected the 
compromise that Pilate offered. They actually preferred “ 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 11—26. 387 


having a wretched felon, named Barabbas, set at liberty 
rather than Jesus. They clamoured loudly for our 
Lord’s crucifixion ; and they wound up all by recklessly 
taking on themselves all the guilt of our Lord’s death, 
in words of portentous meaning: “His blood be on us 
and on our children.” 

And what had our Lord done that the Jews should 
hate Him so? He was no robber, or murderer. He was 
no blasphemer of their God, or reviler of their prophets. 
He was one whose life was love. He was one who “ went 
about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of 
the devil.” (Acts x. 38.) He was innocent of any trans- 
gression against the law of God or man; and yet the 
Jews hated Him, and never rested till He was slain! 
They hated Him, because He told them the truth. They 
hated Him, because He testified of their works that they 
were evil. They hated the light, because it made their 
own darkness visible. In a word, they hated Christ, 
because He was righteous and they were wicked,— 
because He was holy and they were unholy,—because 
He testified against sin, and they were determined to 
keep their sins and not let them go. 

Let us observe this. There are few things so little 
believed and realized as the corruption of human nature. — 
Men fancy that if they saw a perfect person they would 
love and admire him. They flatter themselves that it is 
the inconsistency of professing Christians which they 
dislike and not their religion. They forget that when a 
really perfect man was on earth, in the person of the 
Son of God, He was hated and put to death. That single 
fact goes far to prove the truth of an old saying, that 


388 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 
“unconverted men would kill God, if they couta get at 
Him.” 

Let us never be surprised at the wickedness there is 
in the world. Let us mourn over it, and labour to make 
it less, but let us never be surprised at its extent. There 
is nothing which the heart of man is not capable of con- 
seiving, or the hand of man of doing. As long as we 
live, let us mistrust our own hearts. Kvenwhen renewed 
by the Spirit, they are still “deceitful above all things, 
and desperately wicked.” (Jer. xvii. 9.) 


MATTHEW XXVII. 27—44. 


27 Then the soldiers of the 
governor took Jesus into the com- 
mon hall, and gathered unto him 
the whole band of solders. 

28 And they stripped him, and 
put on him a scarlet robe. 

29 And when they had platted a 
crown of thorns, they put 7¢ upon 
his head, and a reed in his right 
hand: and they bowed the knee 
before him, and mocked him say- 
ing, Hail, King of the Jews! 

30 And they spit upon him, and 
took the reed, and smote him on 
the head. 

31 And after that they had 
mocked him, they took the robe 
off from him, and put his own rai- 
ment on him, and led him away to 
crucify him. 

32 And as they came out, they 
found a man of Cyrene, Simon by 
name: him they compelled to bear 
his cross. 

33 And when they were come 
unto a place called Golgotha, that 
is to say, a place of a skull, 

34 They gave him vinegar to 
drink, mingled with gall: and 
when he had tasted thereof, he 
would not drink, 

35 And they crucified him, and 
parted his garments, casting lots: 
that it might be fulfilled which was 





spoken by the prophet, They par- 
ted my garments among them, and 
upon my vesture did they cast lots. 

36 Andsitting down they watched 
him there ; 

37 And set up over his head 
his accusation written, THIS IS 
JESUS THE KING OF THE 
JEWS. 

38 Then were there two thieves 
crucified with him, one on the right 
hand, and another on the left, 

39 And they that passed by re- 
viled him, wagging their heads, 

40 And saying, Thou that des- 
troyest the temple, and buildest 
it in three days, save thyself. If 
thou be the Son of God, come down 
from the cross. 

41 Likewise also the chief priests 
mocking him, with the scribes and 
elders, said, 

42 He saved others: himself he 
cannot save. If he be the King of 
Israel, let him now come down 
from the cross, and we will believe 

im. 

43 He trusted in God; let him 
deliver him now, if he will have 
him: for he said, Iam the Son of 
God. 

44, The thieves also, which were 
crucified with him, cast the same 
in his teeth. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 27—44. 389 


THESE verses describe the sufferings of our Lord J esus 
Christ after His condemnation by Pilate,—His sufferings 
in the hands of the brutal Roman soldiers, and His final 
sufferings on the cross. They form a marvellous record. 
They are marvellous when we remember the Sufferer,— 
the eternal Son of God? They are marvellous when we 
remember the persons for whom these sufferings were 
endured. We and our sins were the cause of all this 
sorrow! He “died for our sins.” (1 Cor. xv. 3.) 

Let us observe, in the first place, the eatent and reality 
of our Lord’s sufferings. 

The catalogue of all the pains endured by our Lord's 
body is indeed a fearful one. Seldom has such suffering 
been inflicted on one body in the last few hours of a life. 
The most savage Indian tribes, in their refinement of 
cruelty, could hardly have heaped more agonizing tortures 
on an enemy than were accumulated on the flesh and 
bones of our beloved Master. Never let it be forgotten 
that He had a real human body, a body exactly like 
our own, just as sensitive, just as vulnerable, just as 
capable of feeling intense pain, And then let us see 
what that body endured. 

Our Lord, we must remember, had already passed a 
night without sleep, and endured excessive fatigue. He 
had been taken from Gethsemane to the Jewish council, 
and from the council to Pilate’s judgment hall. He had 
been twice placed on His trial, and twice unjustly con- 
demned. He had been already scourged and beaten 
cruelly with rods. And now, after all this suffering, He 
was delivered up to the Roman soldiers, a body of men 
no doubt expert in cruelty, and, of all people, least likely 


390 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to behave with delicacy of compassion.—These hard men 
at once proceeded to work their will. They “gathered 
together the whole band.” They stripped our Lord of 
His raiment, and put on Him, in mockery, a scarlet 
robe. They “plaited a crown of sharp thorns,” and in 
derision placed it on His head. They then bowed the 
knee before Him in mockery, as nothing better than a 
pretended king. They “spit upon Him.” They “smote 
Him on the head:” and finally, having put His own 
robe on Him, they led Him out of the city to a place 
called Golgotha, and there crucified Him between two 
thieves. 

But what was a crucifixion? Let us try to realize it, 
and understand its misery. The person crucified was 
laid on his back on a piece of timber, with a cross-piece 
nailed to it near one end,—or on the trunk of a tree with 
branching arms, which answered the same purpose. His 
hands were spread out on the cross-piece, and nails driven 
through each of them, fastening them to the wood. His 
feet in like manner were nailed to the upright part of the 
cross. And then,the body having been securely fastened, 
the cross was raised up, and fixed firmly in the ground. 
And there hung the unhappy sufferer, till pain and ex- 
haustion brought him to his end,—not dying suddenly, 
for no vital part of him was injured; but enduring the 
most excruciating agony from his hands and feet, and 
unable to move. Such was the death of the cross. Such 
was the death that Jesus died for us! For six long 
hours He hung there before a gazing crowd, naked, and 
bleeding from head to foot,—His head pierced with 
thorns, His back lacerated with scourging—His hands 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER, 27—44. 391 


and feet torn with nails——and mocked and revited by 
His cruel enemies to the very last. 

Let us meditate frequently on these things: let us often 
read over the story of Christ’s cross and passion. Let us 
remember, not least, that all these horrible sufferings 
were borne without a murmur. No word of impatience 
crossed our Lord’s lips. In His death, no less than in 
His life, He was perfect. To the very last Satan found 
nothing in Him. (John xiv. 30.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, that all our Lord 
Jesus Christ's sufferings were vicarious. He suffered not 
for His own sins, but for our’s. He was eminently our 
substitute in all His passion. 

This is a truth of the deepest importance. Without 
it the story of our Lord’s sufferings, with all its minute 
details, must always seem mysterious snd inexplicable. 
It is a truth, however, of which the Scriptures speak 
frequently, and that too with no uncertain sound. We 
are told that Christ “bare our sins in His own body on 
the tree,’ —that He “suffered for sins, the just for the un- 
just,’”—that “He was made sin for us, who knew no 
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in 
Him,”—that “He was made a curse for us,”—that “He 
was offered to bear the sins of many,’—that “He was 
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our 
iniquities.”—and that “the Lord hath laid on Him the 
iniquity of us all.” (1 Peter ii. 22, and iii, 18; 2 Cor. 
v. 21; Gal. iii. 13; Heb. ix. 28; Isaiah liii 5,6.) May 
we all remember these texts. They are among the 
foundation stones of the Gospel. 

But we must not be content with a vague general belief 


392 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


that Christ’s sufferings on the cross were vicarious. We 
are intended to see this truth in every part of His passion. 
We may follow him all through, from the bar of Pilate, 
to the minute of His death, and see Him at every step as - 
our mighty Substitute, our Representative, our Head, our 
Surety, our Proxy,—the Divine Friend who undertook 
to stand in our stead, and by the priceless merit of 
His sufferings, to purchase our redemption. Was He 
scourged? It was that “through His stripes we might 
be healed.”—-Was He condemned, though innocent? It 
was that we might be acquitted, though guilty—Did He 
wear a crown of thorns? It was that we might wear the 
crown of glory—Was He stripped of His raiment? It 
was that we might be clothed in everlasting righteous- 
ness—Was He mocked and reviled? It was that we 
might be honoured and blessed—Was He reckoned a 
malefactor, and numbered among transgressors? It was 
that we might be reckoned innocent, and justified from 
all sin—Was He declared unable to save Himself? It 
was that He might be able to save others to the utter- 
most.—Did He die at last, and that the most painful and 
disgraceful of deaths? It was that we might live for 
evermore, and be exalted to the highest glory.—Let us 
ponder these things well: they are worth remembering. 
The very key to peace is a right apprehension of the 
vicarious sufferings of Christ. 

Let us leave the story of our Lord’s passion with 
feelings of deep thankfulness. Our sins are many and 
great: but a great atonement has been made for them. 
There was an infinite merit in all Christ’s sufferings : 
they were the sufferings of One who was God as well as 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIL. VER. 45—56. 393 


man. Surely it is meet, right, and our bounden duty, to 
praise God daily because Christ has died. 

Last, but not least, let us ever learn from the story of 
the passion, to hate sin with a great hatred. Sin was 
the cause of all our Saviour’s suffering. Our sins plaited 
the crown of thorns. Our sins drove the nails into His 
hands and feet. On account of our sins His blood was 
shed. Surely the thought of Christ crucified should 
make us loathe all sin. Well says the Church of Eng- 
land Homily of the Passion: “Let this image of Christ 
crucified be always printed in our hearts. Let it stir us 
up to the hatred of sin, and provoke our minds to the 
earnest love of Almighty God.” 


MATTHEW XXVII. 45—56, 


45 Now from the sixth hour 
there was darkness over all the 
land unto the ninth hour. 

4€ And about the ninth hour 
Jeeus cried with a loud voice, say- 
ing, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?P 
that is to say, My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me? 

47 Some of them that stood 
there, when they heard that, said, 
This man calleth for Elias. 

48 And straightway one of them 
ran, and took a sponge, and filled 
it with vinegar, and put it on a 
reed, and gave him to drink. 

49 The rest said, Let be, let us 
see whether Elias will come to save 
him, 

50 Jesus, when he had cried 
again with a loud voice, yielded 
up the ghost. 

51 And, behold, the veil of the 
temple was rent in twain from the 





top to the bottom; and the earth 
did quake, and the rocks rent; 

52 And the graves were opened; 
and many bodies of the saints 
which slept arose, 

53 And came out of the graves 
after his resurrection, and went 
into the holy city, and appeared 
unto many. 

54 Now when the centurion, and 
they that were with him, watching 
Jesus, saw the earthquake, and 
those things that were done, they 
feared greatly, saying, Truly this 
was the Son of God. 

55 And many women were there 
beholding afar off, which followed 
Jesus from Galilee, ministering 
unto him, 

56 Among which was Mary Mag- 
dalene, and Mary the mother of 
James and Joses, and the mother 
of Zebedee’s children. 


In these verses we read the conclusion of our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s passion. After six hours of agonizing suffering, 
He became obedient even unto death, and “yielded 


4 


394 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


up the ghost.” Three points in the narrative demand a 
special notice: to them let us confine our attention. - 

Let us observe, in the first place, the remarkable words 
which Jesus uttered shortly before His death: “My God, 
my God, why has Thou forsaken Me!” 

There is a deep mystery in these words, which no 
mortal man can fathom. No doubt they were not 
wrung from our Lord by mere bodily pain: such an 
explanation is utterly unsatisfactory, and dishonourable 
to our blessed Saviour. They were meant to express the 
real pressure on His soul of the enormous burden of a 
world’s sins. They were meant to show how truly and 
literally He was our substitute-—was made sin, and a 
curse for us, and endured God’s righteous anger against. 
a world’s sin in his own person. At that awful moment 
the iniquity of us all was laid upon Him to the utter- 
most. It pleased the Lord to bruise Him, and put Him 
to grief. (Isaiah lili. 10.) He bore our sins: He carried 
our transgressions. Heavy must have been that burden, 
real and literal must have been our Lord’s substitution 
for us, when He, the eternal Son of God, could speak of 
Himself as for a time “ forsaken.” 

Let the expression sink down into our hearts, and not 
be forgotten. We can have no stronger proof of the 
sinfulness of sin, or of the vicarious nature of Christ’s 
sufferings, than His ery, “My God, my God, why hast 
Thou forsaken Me!” It is a cry that should stir us up 
to hate sin, and encourage us to trust in Christ.* 


* The following quotations deserve notice, and throw light 
on this peculiarly solemn portion of Scripture. 


“Our Lord said this under a deep sense of His Father’s 


MATTHEW, CHAP, XXVII. VER. 45—56. 395 


Let us observe, in the second place, how much is con- 
tained in the words which describe our Lord’s end. We 
are simply told “He yielded up the Ghost.” 

There never was a last breath drawn of such deep 
import as this. There never was an event on which so 
much depended. The Roman soldiers, and the gaping 
crowd around the cross, saw nothing remarkable. They 
only saw a person dying as others die, with all the usual 
agony and suffering which attended a crucifixion. But 
they knew nothing of the eternal interests which were 
involved in the whole transaction. 

That death discharged in full the mighty debt which 
sinners owe to God, and threw open the door of life to 
every believer. That death satisfied the righteous claims 
of God’s holy law, and enabled God to be “just, and yet 
the Justifier” of the ungodly. (Rom. iii. 26.) That death 
was no mere example of self-sacrifice, but a complete 
atonement and propitiation for man’s sin, affecting the 
condition and prospects of all mankind. That death 
solved the hard problem, how God could be perfectly 
holy, and yet perfectly merciful. It opened to the world 
a fountain for all sin and uncleanness. It was a complete 
victory over Satan, and spoiled him openly. “It finished 
wrath unto mankind, in whose stead he now underwent that 
which was due for the sins of the whole world. When He said 
‘Why hast Thou forsaken Me?’ He implied that God had for 
the time withdrawn from Him the sense and vision of His com- 
fortable presence. When He said ‘My God,’ He implied the 


strength of His faith whereby He did firmly apprehend the sure 
and gracious aid of His eternal Father.”—Burshop Hall. 


“ All the wailings and howlings of the damned to all eternity, 
will fall infinitely short of expressing the evil and bitterness of 
sin with such emphasis as these few words, ‘ My God, my God, 
why hast Thou forsaken me.’”—Jamieson. 

2D 


396 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the transgression, made an end of sins, made reconcilia- 
tion for iniquity, and brought in everlasting righteous- 
ness.” (Dan. ix. 24.) It proved the sinfulness of sin, 
when it needed such a sacrifice to atone forit. It proved 
the love of God to sinners, when He sent His own Son 
to make the atonement. Never, in fact, was there, or 
could there be again, such a death. No wonder that 
the earth quaked, when Jesus died in our stead on the 
accursed tree. The solid frame of the world might well 
tremble and be amazed, when the soul of Christ was 
made “an offering for sin.” (Isaiah liii. 10.) 

Let us observe, in the last place, what a remarkable 
miracle occurred at the hour of our Lord’s death, in the 
very midst of the Jewish temple. We are told that “the 
veil of the temple was rent in twain.” The curtain 
which separated the holy of holies from the rest of the 
temple, and through which the high priest alone might 
pass, was suddenly “split from top to bottom.” 

Of all the wonderful signs which accompanied our 
Lord’s death, none was more significant than this. The 
mid-day darkness, for three hours, must needs have been 
a startling event. The earthquake, which rent the rocks, 
must have been a tremendous shock. But there was a 
meaning in the sudden “ rending of the veil from top to 
bottom,” which must have pricked the heart of any in- 
telligent Jew. The conscience of Caiaphas, the high 
priest, must have been hard indeed, if the tidings of 
that rent veil did not fill him with dismay. 

That rending of the veil proclaimed the termination 
and passing away of the ceremonial law. It was a sign 
that the old dispensation of sacrifices and ordinances 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER, 45—956. 397 


was no longer needed. Its work was done; its occu- 
pation was gone, from the moment that Christ died. 
There was no more need of an earthly high priest, and 
a mercy-seat, and a sprinking of blood, and an offering 
up of incense, and a day of atonement. The true High 
Priest had at length appeared. The true Lamb of God 
had been slain. The true mercy-seat was at length 
revealed. The figures and shadows were no longer 
wanted. May we all remember this! To set up an 
altar, and a sacrifice, and a priesthood now, is to light 
a candle at noon-day. 

That rending of the veil proclaimed the opening of 
the way of salvation to all mankind. The way into the 
presence of God was unknown to the Gentile, and only 
seen dimly by the Jew, until Christ died. But Christ 
having now offered up a perfect sacrifice, and obtained 
eternal redemption, the darkness and mystery were to 
pass away. All were to be invited now to draw near to 
God with boldness, and approach Him with confidence, 
by faith in Jesus. A door was thrown open, and a way 
of life set before the whole world. May we all remem- 
ber this! From the time that Jesus died, the way of 
peace was never meant to be shrouded in mystery: 
there was to be no reserve. The Gospel was the reve- 
lation of a mystery, which had been hid from ages and 
generations. Toclothe religion now with mystery, is to 
mistake the grand characteristic of Christianity. 

Let us turn trom the story of the crucifixion, every 
time we read it with hearts full of praise. Let us praise 
God for the confidence it gives us, as to the ground of 
our hope of pardon. Our sins may be many and great, 


398 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


but the payment made by our Great Substitute far out- 
weighs them all—Let us praise God for the view it 
gives us of the love of our Father in heaven. He that 
spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us 
all, will surely with Him give us all things. (Rom. viii. 
32.) Not least, let us praise God for the view it gives 
us of the sympathy of Jesus with all His believing 
people. He can be touched with the feeling of our in 
firmities. He knows what suffering is. He is just the 
Saviour that an infirm body, with a weak heart, in an 


evil world, requires. 


MATTHEW XXVII. 57—66, 


57 When the even was come, 
there came a rich man of Arima- 
thea, named Joseph, who also 
himself was Jesus’ disciple: 

58 He went to Pilate, and beg- 
ged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate 
commanded the body to be deli- 
vered. 

59 And when Joseph had taken 
the body, he wrapped it in a clean 
linen cloth, 

60 And laid it in his own new 
tomb, which he had hewn out in 
the rock: and he rolled a great 
stone to the door of the sepulchre, 
and departed. 

61 And there was Mary Magda- 
lene, and the other Mary, sitting 
over against the sepulchre. 

62 Now the next day, that fol- 


lowed the day of the preparation, 
the chief priests and Pharisees 
came together unto Pilate, 

63 Saying, Sir, we remember 
that that deceiver said, while he 
was yet alive, After three days I 
will rise again. 

64 Command therefore that the 
sepulchre be made sure until the 
third day, lest his disciples come 
by night, and steal him away, and 
say unto the people, He is risen 
from the dead: so the last error 
shall be worse than the first. 

65 Pilate said unto them, Ye 
have a watch: go your way, make 
it as sure as ye can. 

66 So they went, and made the 
sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, 
and setting a watch. 


THESE verses contain the history of our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s burial. There was yet one thing needful, in 
order to make it certain that our Redeemer accom- 
plished that great work of redemption which He under- 
took. That holy body, in which He bore our sins on 
the cross, must actually be laid in the grave, and rise 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 57—66. 399 


again. His resurrection was to be the seal and head- 
stone of all the work. 

The infinite wisdom of God foresaw the objections of 
unbelievers and infidels, and provided against them.— 
Did the Son of God really die? Did He really rise 
again? Might there not have been some delusion as 
to the reality of His death? Might there not have been 
imposition or deception, as to the reality of His resur- 
rection ?—All these, and many more objections, would 
‘doubtless have been raised, if opportunity had been 
given. But He who knows the end from the beginning, 
prevented the possibility of such objections being made. 
By His over-ruling providence He ordered things so 
that the death and burial of Jesus were placed beyond 
a doubt.—Pilate gives consent to His burial. A loving 
disciple wraps the body in linen, and lays it in a new 
tomb hewn out of a rock, “ wherein was never man yet 
laid.” The chief priests themselves set a guard over the 
place where His body was deposited. Jews and Gen- 
tiles, friends and enemies, all alike testify to the great 
fact, that Christ did really and actually die, and was laid 
ina grave. It is a fact that can never be questioned.— 
He was really “bruised;” He really suffered;” He 
really “died ;” He was really “buried.” Let us mark 
this well: it deserves recollection. 

Let us learn, for one thing, from these verses, that our 
Lord Jesus Christ has friends of whom little is known. 

We cannot have a more striking example of this truth 
than we see in the passage now before us. A man named 
Joseph, of Arimathza, comes forward, when our Lord 
was dead, and asks permission to bury Him. We have 


400 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


never heard of this man at any former period of our 
Lord’s earthly ministry. We never hear of him again. 
We know nothing, but that he was a disciple who loved 
Christ, and did Him honour. At a time when the Apos- 
tles had forsaken our Lord,—at a time when it was a 
dangerous thing to profess regard for Him,—at a time 
when there seemed to be no earthly advantage to be 
gained by confessing his discipleship,—at such a time 
as this, Joseph comes forward boldly, and begs the body 
of Jesus, and lays it in his own new tomb. 

This fact is full of comfort and encouragement. It 
shows us that there are some quiet, retiring souls on 
earth, who know the Lord, and the Lord knows them, 
and yet they are little known by the Church. It shows 
us that there are “diversities of gifts” among Christ’s 
people. There are some who glorify Christ passively, 
and some who glorify Him actively. There are some 
whose vocation it is to build the Church, and fill a 
public place, and there are some who only come for- 
ward, like Joseph, in times of special need. But each 
and all are led by one Spirit, and each and all glorify 
God in their several ways. 

Let these things teach us to be more hopeful. Let 
us believe that “many shall yet come from the east and 
west, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. viii. 11.) There may 
be in some dark corners of Christendom many, who, 
like Simeon, and Anna, and Joseph of Arimathea, are 
at present little known, who shall shine brightly among 
the Lord’s jewels in the day of His appearing. 

Let us learn, for another thing, from these verses, that 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVII. VER. 57—66. 401 


God can make the devices of wicked men work round to 
His own glory. 

We are taught that lesson in a striking manner, by 
the conduct of the priests and Pharisees, after our Lord 
was buried. The restless enmity of these unhappy men 
could not sleep, even when the body of Jesus was in the 
grave. They called to mind the words, which they 
remembered He had spoken, about “rising again :” they 
resolved, as they thought, to make His rising again 
impossible. They went to Pilate: they obtained from 
him a guard of Roman soldiers; they set a watch over 
the tomb of our Lord; they placed a seal upon the 
stone. In short they did all they could to “make the 
sepulchre sure.” 

They little thought what they were doing. They little 
thought that unwittingly they were providing the most 
complete evidence of the truth of Christ’s coming re- 
surrection. They were actually making it impossible 
to prove that there was any deception or imposition, 
Their seal, their guard, their precautions, were all to 
become witnesses, in a few hours, that Christ had risen, 
They might as well have tried to stop the tides of the 
sea, or to prevent the sun rising, as to prevent Jesus 
coming forth from the tomb. They were taken in their 
own craftiness. (1 Cor. iii, 19.) Their own devices 
became instruments to show forth God’s glory. 

The history of the Church of Christ is full of ex. 
amples of a similar kind. The very things that have 
seemed most unfavourable to God’s people, have often 
turned out to be for their good. What harm did the 
“persecution which arose about Stephen” do to the 


’ 


402 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Church of Christ? They that were scattered “went 
everywhere, preaching the Word.” (Acts vii. 4.)—What 
harm did imprisonment do St. Paul? It gave him time 
to write many of those Epistles which are now read all 
over the world.— What real harm did the persecution of 
bloody Mary do to the cause of the English Reforma- 
tion? The blood of the Martyrs became the seed of the 
Church real—-What harm does persecution do the 
people of God at this very day? It only drives them 
nearer to Christ. It only makes them cling more closely 
to the throne of grace, the Bible, and prayer. 

Let all true Christians lay these things to heart, and 
take courage. We live in a world where all things are 
ordered by a hand of perfect wisdom, and where all 
things are working together continually for the good of 
the body of Christ. The powers of this world are only 
tools in the hand of God. He is ever using them for 
His own purposes, however little they may be aware of 
it. They are the instruments by which He is ever 
squaring and polishing the living stones of His spiritual 
temple, and all their schemes and plans will only turn 
to His praise. Let us be patient in days of trouble aud 
darkness, and look forward. The very things which 
now seem against us are all working together for God's 
glory. We see but half now. Yet a little, we shall 
see all, and we shall then discover that all the perse- 
cution we now endure was, like “the seal” and “the 
guard,” tending to God’s glory. God can make the 
“wrath of man praise Him.” (Psalm Ixxvii. 10.) 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER. 1—10. 


403 


MATTHEW XXVIII. 1—10. 


1 Tn the end of the sabbath, as 
it began to dawn toward the first 
day of the week, came Mary Mag- 
dalene and the other Mary to see 
the sepulchre. 

2 And, behold, there was a great 
earthquake: for the angel of the 
Lord descended from heaven, and 
came and rolled back the stone 
from the door, and sat upon it. 

3 His countenance was like 
lightning, and his raiment white 
as snow: 

4 And for fear of him the keepers 
did shake, and became as dead men. 

5 And the angel answered and 
said unto the women, Fear not 
ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, 
which was crucified, 

6 He is not here: for he is risen, 


as he said. Come, see the place 
where the Lord lay. 

7 And go quickly, and tell his 
disciples that he is risen from the 
dead: and behold, he goeth before 
you into Galilee; there shall ye 
see him: lo, I have told you. 

8 And they departed quickly 
from the sepulchre with fear and 
great joy; and did run to bring 
his disciples word. 

9 And as they went to tell his 


: disciples, behold, Jesus met them, 
‘saying, All hail. 


And they came 
and held him by the feet, and wor. 
shipped him. 

10 Then said Jesus unto them, 
Be not afraid: go tell my brethren 
that they go into Galilee, and 
there shall they see me. 


THE principal subject of these verses is the resurrection 
of our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. It is one of 
those truths which lie at the very foundation of Christi- 
anity, and has therefore received special attention in the 
four Gospels. All four Evangelists describe minutely 
how our Lord was crucified: all four relate, with no 
less clearness, that He rose again. 

We need not wonder that so much importance is 
attached to our Lord’s resurrection. It is the seal and 
headstone of the great work of redemption, which He 
came todo, Itis the crowning proof that He has paid 
the debt which He undertook to pay on our behalf, won 
the battle which He fought to deliver us from hell, and is 
accepted as our Surety and our Substitute by our Father 
in heaven. Had He never come forth from the prison 
of the grave, how could we ever have been sure that our 
ransom had been fully paid? (1 Cor. xv. 17.) Had He 
never risen from His conflict with the last enemy, how 


404 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


could we have felt confident that He has overcome 
death, and him that had the power of death, that is the 
devil? (Heb. ii. 14.) But thanks be unto God, we are 
not left in doubt: the Lord Jesus really “rose again for 
our justification.” True Christians are “begotten again 
unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ 
from the dead.” They may boldly say with Paul, “ Who 
is he that condemneth : it is Christ that died, yea rather 
that is risen again.” (Rom. vill. 34; Rom. iv. 25; 1 
Peter 1. 3.) 

We have reason to be very thankful that this wonder- 
ful truth of our religion is so clearly and fully proved. 
It is a striking circumstance, that of all the facts of our 
Lord’s earthly ministry, none are so incontrovertibly 
established as the fact that He rose again. The wisdom 
of God, who knows the unbelief of human nature, has 
provided a great cloud of witnesses on the subject. 
Never was there a fact which the friends of God were 
so slow to believe, as the resurrection of Christ. Never 
was there a fact which the enemies of God were so 
anxious to disprove. And yet, in spite of the unbelief of 
friends, and the enmity of foes, the fact was thoroughly 
established. Its evidences will always appear to a fair 
and impartial mind unanswerable. It would be impos- 
sible to prove anything in the world, if we refuse to 
believe that Jesus rose again. 

Let us notice in these verses, the glory and majesty 
with which Christ rose from the dead. We are told that 
“there was a great earthquake.” Weare told that “the 
angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and 
rolled back the stone from the door of the sepulchre, 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER. 1—10. 405 


and sat upon it.” We need not suppose that our 
blessed Lord needed the help of any angel, when He 
came forth from the grave. We need not for a moment 
doubt that He rose again by His own power. But it 
pleased God, that His resurrection should be accom- 
panied and followed by signs and wonders. It seemed 
good that ‘the earth should shake, and a glorious angel 
appear, when the Son of God arose from the dead as a 
conqueror. 

Let us not fail to see in the manner of our Lord’s 
resurrection, a type and pledge of the resurrection of 
His believing people. The grave could not hold Him 
beyond the appointed time, and it shall not be able to 
hold them. A glorious angel was a witness of His rising, 
and glorious angels shall be the messengers who shall 
gather believers when they rise again. He rose with a 
renewed body, and yet a body, real, true, and material, 
and so also shall His people have a glorious body, and 
be like their Head. “When we see Him we shall be 
like Him.” (1 John iii. 2.) 

Let us take comfort in this thought. Trial, sorrow, 
and persecution are often the portion of God’s people. 
Sickness, weakness, and pain often hurt and wear their 
poor earthly tabernacle. But their good time is yet to 
come. Let them wait patiently, and they shall have a 
glorious resurrection. When we die, and where we are 
buried, and what kind of a funeral we have, matters 
little. The great question to be asked is this, “How 
shall we rise again ? ” 

Let us notice, in the next place, the terror which 


Christ's enemies felt at the period of His resurrection. 


406 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We are told that, at the sight of the angel, “the keepers 
did shake, and became as dead men.” Those hardy 
Roman soldiers, though not unused to dreadful sights, 
saw a sight which made them quail. Their courage 
melted at once at the appearance of one angel of God. 

Let us again see in this fact, a type and emblem of 
things yet to come. What will the ungodly and the 
wicked do at the last day, when the trumpet shall 
sound, and Christ shall come in glory to judge the 
world? What will they do, when they see al/ the dead, 
both small and great, coming forth from their graves, 
and all the angels of God assembled round the great 
white throne? What fears and terrors will possess their 
souls, when they find they can no longer avoid God’s 
presence, and must at length meet Him face to face? 
Oh, that men were wise, and would consider their latter 
end! Oh, that they would remember that there is a 
resurrection and a judgment, and that there is such a 
thing as “the wrath of the Lamb!” (Rev. vi. 16.) 

Let us notice, in the next place, the words of comfort 
which the angel addressed to the friends of Christ. We 
read that he said, “Fear not ye: for I know that ye 
seek Jesus, which was crucified.” 

These words were spoken with a deep meaning. They 
were meant to cheer the hearts of believers in every age, 
in the prospect of the resurrection. They were intended 
to remind us, that true Christians have no cause for 
alarm in the last day, whatever may come on the world. 
The Lord shall appear in the clouds of heaven and the 
earth shall be burned up. The graves shall give up the 
dead that are in them, and the sea shall give up the 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER. 1—10. 407 


dead that are in it. The judgment shall be set, and 
the books shall be opened. The angels shall sift the 
wheat from the chaff, and divide between the good fish 
and the bad. But in all this there is nothing that need 
' make believers afraid. Clothed in the righteousness of 
Christ, they shall be found without spot and blameless. 
Safe in the one true ark, they shall not be hurt when the 
flood of God’s wrath breaks on the earth. Then shall the 
words of the Lord receive their complete fulfilment : 
“ When these things begin to come to pass, lift up your 
heads, for your redemption draweth nigh.” (Luke 
xxi, 28.) Then shall the wicked and unbelieving see 
how true was that word : “ Blessed are the people whose 
God is the Lord.” (Psalm xxxiii. 12.) 

Let us notice, finally, the gracious message which the 
Lord sent to the disciples after His resurrection. He 
appeared in person to the women who had come to do 
honour to His body. Last at the cross and first at the 
tomb, they were the first who were privileged to see Him 
after He rose. To them He gives commission to carry 
tidings to His disciples. His first thought is for His 
little scattered flock: “Go, tell my brethren.” 

There is something deeply touching in those simple 
words, “My brethren:” they deserve a thousand thoughts. 
Weak, frail, erring as the disciples were, Jesus still calls 
them His “brethren.” He comforts them, as Joseph 
did his brethren who had sold him, saying, “T am your 
brother Joseph.” Much as they had come short of 
their profession, sadly as they had yielded to the fear of 
man, they are still His “brethren.” Glorious as He 
was in Himself,—a conqueror over death and hell, and 


408 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the grave, the Son of God is still “meek and lowly of 
heart.” He calls His disciples “ brethren.” 

Let us turn from the passage with comfortable thoughts, 
if we know anything of true religion. Let us see in these 
words of Christ an encouragement to trust and not be 
afraid. Our Saviour is one who never forgets His people. 
He pities their infirmities: He does not despise them. 
He knows their weakness, and yet does not cast them 
away. Our great High Priest is also our elder brother. 


MATTHEW XXVIII. 11—20. 


11 Now when they were going, 
behold, some of the watch came 
into the city, and shewed unto the 
chief priests all the things that 
were done. 

12 And when they were assem- 
bled with the elders, and had taken 
counsel, they gave large money 
unto the soldiers. 

13 Saying, Say ye, His disciples 
came by night and stole him away 
while we slept. 

14 And if this come to the gover- 
nor’s ears, we will persuade him, 
and secure you. 

15 So they took the money, and 
did as they were taught: and this 
saying is commonly reported among 
the Jews until this day. 





16 Then the eleven disciples 
went away into Galilee, into a 
mountain where Jesus had ap- 
pointed them. 

17 And when they saw him, they 
worshipped him: but some doubted. 

18 And Jesus came and spake 
unto them, saying, All power is 
given unto me in heaven and in 
earth, 

19 Go ye therefore, and teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: 

20 Teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have com- 
manded you: and, Jo, I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of 
the world. Amen. 


THESE verses form the conclusion of the Gospel of St. 
Matthew. They begin by showing us what absurdities 
blind prejudice will believe, rather than believe the 
truth. They go on to show us what weakness there is 
in the hearts of some disciples, and how slow they are 
to believe. They finish by telling us some of the 
last words spoken by our Lord upon earth—words so 
remarkable that they demand and deserve all our 
attention. 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER. 11—20. 409 


Let us observe, in the first place, the honowr which 
God has put on our Lord Jesus Christ. Our Lord says, 
“ All power is given unto Me in heaven and earth.” 

This is a truth which is declared by St. Paul to the 
Philippians: “God hath highly exalted Him and given 
Him a name, which is above every name.” (Phil. ii. 9.) 
It is a truth which in nowise takes away from the true 
notion of Christ’s divinity, as some have ignorantly 
supposed. It is simply a declaration, that, in the 
counsels of the eternal Trinity, Jesus, as Son of man, 
is appointed heir of all things,—that He is the Mediator 
between God and man,—that the salvation of all who 
are saved is laid upon Him, and He is the great 
Fountain of mercy, grace, life, and peace. It was for 
this “joy set before Him that He endured the cross.” 
(Heb. xii. 2.) 

Let us embrace this truth reverently, and cling to it 
firmly. Christ is He who has the keys of death and 
hell. Christ is the anointed Priest, who alone can ab- 
solve sinners. Christ is the Fountain of living waters, in 
whom alone we can be cleansed. Christ is the Prince 
and Saviour, who alone can give repentance and remis- 
sion of sins. In Him all fulness dwells. He is the Way, 
the Door, the Light, the Life, the Shepherd, the Altar of 
Refuge. “He that hath the Son hath life; and he that 
hath not the Son of God hath not life.” (1 John v. 12.) 
May we all strive to understand this! Perhaps men may 
sometimes think too little of God the Father, and God 
the Spirit ; but no man ever thought too much of Christ. 

Let us observe, in the second place, the duty which Jesus 
lays on His disciples, He bids them “go and teach all 


410 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


nations.” They were not to confine their knowledge to 
themselves, but communicate it to others. They were 
not to suppose that salvation was revealed only to the 
Jews, but to make it known to all the world. They were 
to strive to make disciples of all nations, and to tell the 
whole earth that Christ had died for sinners. 

Let us never forget that this solemn injunction is still 
in full force. It is still the bounden duty of every dis- 
ciple of Christ to do all he can in person, and by prayer, 
to make others acquainted with Jesus. Where is our 
faith, if we neglect this duty? Where is our charity ? 
It may well be questioned whether a man knows the 
value of the Gospel himself, if he does not desire to 
make it known to all the world. 

Let us observe, in the third place, the public profession 
which Jesus requires of those who believe His Gospel. 
He tells His apostles to “baptize” those whom they re- 
ceived as disciples. 

It is very difficult to conceive, when we read this 
last command of our Lord’s, how men can avoid the 
conclusion that baptism is necessary, when it may be 
had. It seems impossible to explain the word that we 
have here of any but an outward ordinance, to be ad- 
ministered to all who join His Church.—That outward 
baptism is not absolutely necessary to salvation, the 
case of the penitent thief plainly shows: he went to 
paradise unbaptized. That outward baptism alone often 
confers no benefit, the case of Simon Magus plainly 
shows: although baptized he remained “in the gall of 
bitterness and bond of iniquity.” (Acts iii. 23.) But 
that baptism is a matter of entire indifference, and need 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER, 11—20. 411 


not be used ai all, is an assertion which seems at vari- 
ance with our Lord’s words in this place.* 

The plain practical lesson of the words is the necessity 
of a public confession of faith in Christ. It is not 
enough to be a secret disciple. We must not be ashamed 
to let men see whose we are, and whom we serve. We 
must not behave as if we did not like to be thought 
Christians. We must take up our cross, and confess 
our Master before the world. His words are very 
solemn: “ Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me,. .. of him 
also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when He cometh 
in the glory of His Father with the holy angels.” 
(Mark viii. 38.) 

Let us observe, in the fourth place, the obedience which 
Jesus requires of all who profess themselves His disciples. 
He bids the Apostles to teach them to “observe all 
things, whatsoever He has commanded them.” 

This is a searching expression. It shows the useless- 
ness of a mere name and form of Christianity. It shows 
that they only are to be counted true Christians who 
live in a practical obedience to His word, and strive to 
do the things that He has commanded. The water of 
baptism, and the bread and wine of the Lord’s Supper 


* I purposely abstain from saying anything on the subject of 
infant baptism. 

There is nothing in this text which can be fairly used either 
way in settling this much-vexed controversy. 

Ti is certain that the missionaries of the Church of England 
carry out the meaning of this text as fully and thoroughly as 
the missionaries of Baptist Churches. 

The point settled by the text is not so much what ouglit to be 
done with the children of Christians, as what ought to be done 
with heathens when converted. 

2E 


4% EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


alone will save no man’s soul. It profits nothing that 
we go to a place of worship and hear Christ’s ministers, 
and approve of the Gospel, if our religion goes no 
further than this——What are our lives? What is our 
daily conduct at home and abroad? Is the Sermon on 
the Mount our rule and standard? Do we strive to 
copy Christ’s example? Do we seek to do the things 
that He “commanded?”—These are questions that must 
be answered in the affirmative, if we would prove 
ourselves born again, and children of God. Obedience 
is the only proof of reality. “Faith without works is 
dead,” being alone. (James ii. 17, 20, 26.) “Ye are my 
friends,” says Jesus, “if ye do whatsoever I command 
you.” (John xv. 14.) 

Let us observe, in the fifth place, the solemn mention 
of the blessed Trinity which our Lord makes in these 
verses. He bids the Apostles to baptize “in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” 

This is one of those great plain texts which directly 
teach the mighty doctrine of the Trinity. It speaks of 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as Three distinct persons, 
and speaks of all Three as co-equal. Such as the 
Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. 
And yet these Three are One. 

This truth is a great mystery. Let it be enough to 
receive and believe it, and let us abstain from all useless, 
attempts at explanation. It is childish folly to refuse 
assent to things that we do not understand. We are 
poor crawling worms of a day, and know little at our 
best about God and eternity. Suffice it for us to receive 
the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, with humility and 


MATTHEW, CHAP. XXVIII. VER, 11—20. 413 


"reverence, and to ask no vain questions. Let us believe 
that no sinful soul can be saved without the work of all 
Three Persons in the blessed Trinity, and let us rejoice 
that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who co-operated to 
make man, do also co-operate to save him. Here let 
us pause: we may receive pratically what we cannot 
explain theoretically. 

Finally, let us observe in these verses, the gracious 
promise with which Jesus closes His words. He says to 
His disciples, “I am with you alway, even unto the end 
of the world.” “Certainly I will be with thee,” was 
the word which God spoke to Moses, when He sent 
him to Pharaoh. “I am with you always,” was one of 

our Lord’s last words to His disciples. (Exod. iii. 12.) 
It is impossible to conceive words more comforting 
strengthening, cheering, and sanctifying than these. 
Though left alone, like orphan children in a cold 
unkind world, the disciples were not to think they 
were deserted. Their Master would be ever “with 
them.” Though commissioned to do a work as hard 
as that of Moses when sent to Pharaoh, they were not 
to be discouraged. Their Master would certainly be 
“with them.” No words could be more suited to the 
position of those to whom they were first spoken. No 
words could be imagined more consolatory to believers 
in every age of the world. 

Let all true Christians lay hold on these words and 
keep them in mind. Christ is “with us” always: 
Christ is “ with us” wherever we go. He came to be 
“Emmanuel, God with us,’ when He first came into 
the world. He declares that He is ever Emmanuel, 


414 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


“with us,” when He comes to the end of His earthly 
ministry, and is about to leave the world. He is “ with 
us” daily to pardon and forgive, “with us” daily to 
sanctify and strengthen, “ with us” daily to defend and 
keep, “ with us” daily to lead and to guide,“ with us” 
in sorrow and “ with us” in joy, “ with us” in sickness 
and “with us” in health, “ with us” in life and “ with 
us” in death, “with us” in time and “with us” in 
eternity. 

What stronger consolation could believers desire than 
this? Whatever happens, they at least are never com- 
pletely friendless and alone. Christ is ever with them. 
They may look into the grave, and say with David, 
“Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death, I will fear no evil ; for Thou art with me.” They 
may look forward beyond the grave, and say with Paul, 
“We shall ever be with the Lord.” (Psalm xxii. 4; 
1 Thess. iv. 17.) He has said it, and He will stand to 
it: “I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
world.” “I will never leave you and never forsake 
you.”—We could ask nothing more. Let us go on 
believing, and not be afraid. It is everything to be a 
real Christian. None have such a King, such a Priest, 
such a constant Companion, and such an unfailing 
Friend, as the true servants of Christ. 


The Expositor’s Bible. 


EDITED BY 
Rrv. W. ROBERTSON NICOLL, M.A., LL.D. 


Separate Volumes, 7s. 6d. Price to Subscribers for any single series, 24s. net, 
eacept the Highth (7 volumes) the subscription price of which is 288. net. 


FIRST SERIES. 


Colossians and Philemon, By ALEXANDER MacLaREN, D.D. 
The Gospel according to St. Mark, 


od oe Right Rev. G. A. CHapwicx, D.D., Lord Bishop of Derry and 
aphoe, 
The Book of Genesis. By the Rev. Professor Marcus Dons, D.D. 


The First Book of Samuel. By Professor W. G. Buarkig, D.D., LL.D. 
The Second Book of Samuel. By the same Author. 
The Epistle tothe Hebrews. By Principal T. C. Epwarps, D.D. 


SECOND SERIES. 


The Epistle to the Galatians. By Professor G. G. FINDLAY, B.A. 
The Pastoral Epistles. By the Rev. A. PLummeEr, D.D. ‘ 
The Book of Isaiah. i.—xxxix. Vol.I. By Prof. Gzorer ADam SmiTH, D.D. 
The Eook of Revelation. By Professor W. Mittican, D.D. 
The First Epistle to the Corinthians. By Professor Marcus Dons, D.D. ° 
The Epistles of St. John. 
By the Most Rev. W. ALEXANDER, D.D., D.C.L., Archbishop of Armagh. 


THIRD SERIES. 


sudges and Ruth. By the Rev. R. A. Watson, D.D. 

fhe Prophecies of Jeremiah. By the Rev. C. J. Baut, M.A. 

The Book of Isaiah. Chaps. xl, to Ixvi, Vol. II. By Professor Groncz ADAM 
SmitH, D.D. 

The Gospel of St. Matthew. By J. Monro Gisson, D.D. 


The Book of Exodus, 
By the Right Rev. G. A. CHapwick, D.D., Lord Bishop of Derry and Raphoe.. 


The Gospel of St. Luke. By the Rev. H. Burton, M.A. 


FOURTH SERIES. 


Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. By SAMUEL Cox, D.D. 

The Epistles of St. James and St, Jude. By the Rev. ALFRED PLUMMER, D.D, 
The Book of Leviticus. By the Rev. 8. H. Ketroae, D.D, 

The Book of Proverbs. By the Rev. R. F. Horton, D.D. 

The Acts of the Apostles. Vol, I, By the Rev. Professor G. T, Stoxss, D.D. 
The Gospel of St.John. Vol. J. By the Rev. Professor Marcus Dons, D.D. 


“LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 





The Expositor’s Bible—(contnued). 


Separate Volumes, 1s. 6a. Price to subscribers for any single series 24s. net, 
except the Highth (7 volumes), the subscription price of which is 28s. net. 
% 


FIFTH SERIES. 


The Epistles to the Thessalonians. By the Rev. James Denney, D.D. 

The Gospel of St. John. Vol. II. By the Rev. Professor Marcus Dops, D.D. 
The Book of Psalms. Vol. I. By the Rev. ALEXANDER Maciaren, D.D. 

The Acts of the Aposties. Vol. II. By the Rev. Professor G. T. StoxEs, D.D. 
The Book of Job, By the Rev. R. A. Watson, D.D, 

The Epistle to the Ephesians. By the Rev. Professor G. G. FinDLAY, B.A. 


SIXTH SERIES. 


The Epistle to the Philippians. By the Rev. Principal Rarny, D.D. 
The First Book of Kings. 

By the Very Rev. F. W. Farrar, F.R.S., Dean of Canterbury. 
The Book of Joshua, By the Rev. Professor W. G. Buarkig, D.D., LL.D. 
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther. By the Rev. Professor W. F. ADENBy, M.A. 
The Book of Psalms, Vol. II. By the Rev. ALEXANDER MacuareEN, D.D. 
The Epistles of St. Peter. By the Rev. Professor J. Rawson Lumsy, D.D. 


SEVENTH SERIES, 


The Epistle to the Romans. By Hanpiey C. G. Moutz, M.A., D.D. 

The Second Book of Kings. By the Very Rev. F. W. Farrar, F.R.S., Dean of 
; Canterbury. 
. The Second Epistle to the Corinthians, By the Rev. James Denney, D.D, 

The Book of Chronicles. By the Rev. Professor W. H. BENNETT, M.A, 

The Book of Numbers. By the Rev. R. A. Watson, D.D. 

The Book of Psalms. Vol. II]. By ALEXANDER MacLaren, D.D. 


EIGHTH AND FINAL SERIES. 


The Book of Daniel, By the Very Rev. F. W. Farrar, F.R.S., Dean of Canter- 
bury. 

The Book of Jeremiah. Chaps. xxi-lii. By the Rev. W. H. Bennett, M.A. 

The Book of Deuteronomy. By the Rev. Professor ANDREW HARPER, B.D. 

The Song of Solomon and the Lamentations of Jeremiah. 
By the Rev. W. F. ADENEY, M.A. 

The Book of Ezekiel. By the Rev. JOHN SKINNER, M.A. 

The Book of the Twelve Prophets. 
By the Rev. Professor GEoRGE ADAM SmitH, D.D. In two vols. 


LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 


THE MUSICAL EDITION contains nearly one thousand different tunes, 


many of them composed expressly jor 


_ THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND HYMNAL, 


Edited by the Rev. CHarxes D. Bett, D.D., Hon, Canon of Carlisle ; and the 
Rev. H. E. Fox, M.A. » Hon, See. of the Church Missionary Society. 


And the Music by A. H. Mann, Mus.D. Oxon, Organist of King’s College, 
Cambridge. . 


hist of Prices. Soueee ee 
NONPAREIL, 32mo— 8. d. 8. d. 
CLOGH Pe tah Se Fe gPG)  ecn tk P58 65a) Cols 08 Sy ae, LEO 
ROG, Ted Clgesg ce ne GA a ee ts! ce it 4 = 20 
Persian, limp, gilt edges Seeds sh = | Dini - 3 6 
Morocco; gilt edgs.: Man PP" Oa al ise S 4 0 


MINION, 16mo— 


Cloth,rededges - « « ars rae - 5 eye) = 20 
Roan,rededges - - « 2) Geter eae a tae NS eg is 3 6 
Persian, limp, gilt edges - wwe! Mae OS - Ss 8.@ A 46 
Morocco, gilt edges = Js a Sey at : 3 6 : 5 0 
LARGE TYPE EDITION-- 
Cloth,rededges - - - aap a bie) ate OG - 40 
Roan, red edges - : : : - - - 40 - 6 6 
Persian, limp, gilt edyzes : * - - - - 5 0 - 7 6 
Morocco, gilt edges - st - - : = «5 6 - 9 0 


CROWN 8vo, with TUNES.-- 
Cloth, red edges - iia eee te - 
Persian, limp, gilt edges er a. Se 
Morocco, gilt edges - - - - - 
Choir Edition, extra strongly bound in cloth 
*,* Copies may also be had extra bound in morocco, russia, german calf, 
and seal, with or without the Prayer Book. 

A Gratis Specimen Copy of Tur Hymna. will be sent post free to any Clergyman 
applying for the same, and the Publishers will be happy to send this Prospectus to any 
addresses supplied to them. To facilitate its introductiun into Churches, the Publishers 
are willing to supply FIRST ORDERS on SPECIAL TERMS. ed 


+ Aas: fe 


CONT OT 
CaAaom 


THE MUSIC OF THE NEW HYMNAL. 


The music of the Church of England Hymnal places it at once in the very front rank 
vf such works, and promises it a career of the widest usefulness. For it offers to the 
user nearly 1000 tunes, a considerable proportion of which are new, whilst none are such 
as a refined musical taste, guided by a devotional spirit would wish to reject. Some 
characteristics of the 2a f8 Soars it off at once from its competitors. No tune, for 
example, is used for two hymns, however familiar it may be. There are many new 
tunes, characterised, not only by remarkable beauty, but also by a devotional spirit. 
Many of these are by Dr. Mann himself, who shows great skill in writing simple Church- 
like tunes as well as those of a more ambitious character. But the whole range of 
English composers is fairly covered, with an equal regard for the old and the new. 
The harmonies are everywhere satisfactory. Organists and choir-masters, even while 
the Hymnal is not in use, will find the book worth their attention.—7he Record. 

‘A very important and valuable addition to the Hymns we already possess.”—The 
News. 

“« The collection seems to us to be singularly complete, and both in character and 
comprehensiveness the contents are all that can be desired. For every occasion there 
are especially appropriate compositions, and not a few of the most beautiful are from the 
pen of the accomplished chief editor of the volume. Most, if not all, of the people’s 
favourite hymns are to be found amongst the contents, and a careful examination of 
these generally shows that they are absolutely free from any false teaching.” —Rock, 


LONDON: HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW, EC. 





4 SPECIAL NOTICE.— CHEAP ISSUE “4 
>. 7 ‘ : - 


THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE 


TO THE BIBLE. bey, 


Tracing every Word of the rest of the >. a English Version of the Canonical - 
Books, and every Occurrence of Hach Word in Regular Order, together with the ‘ 


: ~ \ ry . - 
Comparative Concordance of the. Authorised and Revised 
Versione: : : 


-ALSO BRIEF DICTIONARIES OF THE HEBREW AND GREEK WORDS OF vr 
ORGWAL WITH REFERENCES TO THE ENGLISH WORDS. 


By JAMES STRONG, LL.D. 
ow ——_—-— . * 


For the convenience of Purchasers, this Important Work is now being issued in 


* 
THREE SECTIONS at 6s.Gd. EACH NET. 
. IN STIFF BOARDS, CLOTH BACK. 


The First Section will be ready in April, the Second in May, and the Third in June. 


Cloth Covers, price Is. 6d., will be supplied for binding in One 
: _ Volume, but the Sections will serve for permanent use. 
ae 


»“*T can hardly speak too strongly of it. It is a monument of conscientious labour, 
sand, so far as I have tested it, of remarkable accuracy. I shall very gladly recommend 
the book to young clergymen and others, as the price of this large and most useful 


volume is extremely moderate."—Right Rev. C. J. ELLICOTT, D.D., Lord Bishop of 
*Gletcester and Bristol. 


‘Phe Concordance, which I have now been able to examine in some representative 
parts, appears to me to approach very near the ideal for accuracy, range of treatment 
wand fulness. The novel features (such, I believe they are), of a comparative table of 

variations between ‘A.V.” and ‘“R.V.,” and the appended Hebrew and Greek Dic- 
itionaries are very valuable heips to thoughtful and accurate readers of the Divine Book. 
Yet they are only accessories in this remarkable volume.”—Rev. HANDLEY C. G. 
uMOULE, D.D., Principal of Ridley Hall, Cambridge. 


‘*T have had Dr. Strong’s Concordance in use for some weeks. Apart from the 
special features of the work, which are described in the prospectus, and which greatly 
.and to its value, I have found it extremely useful for the ordinary purposes of a Con- 
«cordance. After vainly endeavouring to find a text in my Cruden, which, however, 


has been of great service to me for forty years, I yey found it at once in Strong.” —Dr. 
R. W. DALE. 


~ LONDON : HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27 PATERNOSTER ROW, KO” 











BS2575 .R85 


Ryle, J.C. (John Charles), 1816-1900. _| 2 
Expository thoughts on the Gospel of Sa 1 1 3 2 c 1 





oe 


Expository...on St. Matthew 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


(hey PRINTED IN U).S.A, 








