A    " 


-- 


3SZ555 
.TW4- 
v.  6> 


per"fccf 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


ST.  JOHN.     VOL.  II. 


KYLE'S    COMMENTARIES. 


Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gospels.    By  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle. 

Matthew $1.50 

Mark 1.50 

Luke.    2  vols 3.00 

John.     Vols.  1  and  II.    Each     .        .  1.50 

"  Mr.  Ryle  is  one  of  the  most  plain,  positive,  and  practical  writers  of  toe 
day.  He  goes  directly  to  his  subject,  and  finds  a  straight  path  to  the  hoart 
of  his  reader.  The  excellences  of  his  stylo  are  brought  out  with  great  force 
and  impressiveness  in  this  expository  volume  on  Matthew.  It  is  not  critical, 
but  practical,  seeking  to  bring  the  idea  of  Christ's  words  home  to  the  conscience 
for  reflection  and  improvement." — Rich.  Christian  Advocate. 

"  In  these  brief  and  familiar  comments  we  find,  combined  with  the  fruits  of 
the  author's  critical  study  of  the  Scriptures,  that  fervent  piety,  earnest  love 
fox  souls,  and  directness  of  address  to  the  heart  and  conscience,  which  have 
rendered  his  writings  so  deservedly  popular  amongst  evangelical  Christians 
of  every  name.  These  notes  will  be  found  a  pleasant  and  profitable  companion 
for  the  closet,  as  well  as  useful  for  family  instruction." — Presbyterian. 

"  The  general  complaint  against  expositors  cannot  be  preferred  against  Mr. 
Ryle,  namely,  that  they  pass  over  the  really  difficult  passages.  To  these  he 
has  devoted  great  and  successful  attention ;  nor  do  we  know  any  work  in  which 
a  person  ignorant  of  the  Greek  tongue  can  obtain  so  much  satisfaction  as  to 
the  meaning  of  the  original  words  without  being  troubled  with  a  provoking 
parade  of  learning,  worthless  to  the  ordinary  reader." — Colonial  Presbyterian. 


Expository  Thoughts 


on 


THE    GOSPELS. 


FOR    FAMILY  AND    PRIVATE    USE. 


S2Sitfj  ifje  Etxt  Complete. 


THE  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE.  M.A., 

VICAR    OF    8TRADBROKE, 

HONORARY    CANON    OF    NORWICH,    AND    RURAL    DEAN    OH 
HORNF,,    SUFFOLK. 


ST.     JOHN. 
Vol.  n. 


NEW    YORK: 

ROBERT    CARTER  AND   BROTHERS, 

530  Broadway. 

1878. 


PREFACE  TO  SECOND  VOLUME. 


In  sending  forth  the  second  volume  of  my  * '  Exposi- 
tory Thoughts  on  St.  John,"  I  have  little  or  nothing 
to  add  to  the  introduction  with  which  I  prefaced  the 
first  volume. 

In  the  general  plan  of  the  work, —  in  the  style  of 
expositions,  notes,  and  critical  remarks, —  in  the  list 
of  Commentators  employed  and  consulted  in  preparing 
the  whole,  the  reader  will  find  little  difference  be- 
tween this  volume  and  the  one  which  preceded  it.  I 
have  rigidly  adhered  to  the  line  which  I  marked  out 
to  myself  at  first.  In  the  notes  I  have  gone  steadily 
forward  through  every  verse,  endeavouring  to  throw 
light  on  the  meaning  of  every  word,  evading  no  diffi- 
culty, examining  every  disputable  point,  trying  to  un- 
tie every  knot,  and  carefully  availing  myself  of  help 
from  every  quarter. 

The  doctrinal  views  of  religion  to  which  I  gave  ex- 
pression in  the  first  volume,  will  be  found  unchanged 
in    the    second.      The    fourteen    years   which    have 


VI  PREFACE  TO  SECOND  VOLUME. 

"  passed  over  "  me  since  I  first  began  writing  on  the 
Gospels,  I  humbly  hope  have  not  been  thrown  away. 
They  have  been  to  me  years  of  many  trials,  and  I 
may  add  of  much  work,  much  reading,  much  reflec- 
tion, and  not  a  little  prayer.  At  the  end  of  these 
fourteen  years,  I  feel  more  than  ever  convinced  that 
what  are  called  "Evangelical"  views  of  Christian 
truth  are  thoroughly  Scriptural  views,  and  will  bear 
the  test  of  any  fair  investigation.  The  longer  I  live 
the  more  firmly  am  I  persuaded  that  no  system  of  di- 
vinity is  so  entirely  in  harmony  with  the  Bible,  as  the 
system  which  rightly  or  wrongly  is  called  *  *  Evan- 
gelical." 

In  short,  I  am  not  ashamed  of  saying  once  more 
that  in  matters  of  doctrine  I  am  an  "  Evangelical 
Churchman,"  and  that  I  am  so  because  I  can  find  no 
other  doctrinal  system  in  the  New  Testament,  when 
fairly  and  reasonably  interpreted.  Let  me  add,  once 
for  all,  that  nothing  so  much  confirms  me  in  my  opin- 
ions, as  the  broad  fact  that  "  Evangelical"  views  are 
those  to  which  I  see  men  of  all  schools  of  opinion 
turn  for  comfort  when  they  leave  the  world.  I 
observe  continually  that  learned  and  zealous  High 
Churchmen,  after  denouncing  "Evangelicalism"  as  a 
defective  system  for  many  years,  are  only  too  happy 
to  take  refuge  in  simple  Evangelical  doctrines  when 
they  lie  on  their  death-beds.     That  fact  alone  speaks 


PREFACE    TO  SECOND   VOLUME.  VU 

volumes.     Give  me  the  doctrines  that  men  cling  to, 
and  find  soul-comforting  in  the  hour  of  death  ! 

I  now  send  forth  this  volume  with  an  earnest  prayer 
that  God  may  bless  it  and  make  it  useful.  Ignorance 
of  Scripture,  I  feel  more  than  ever,  is  the  curse  of 
these  latter  days.  Men  read  many  books,  and  yet 
neglect  "  the  one  Book."  If  I  can  help  to  make  the 
Bible  more  plain  and  interesting  to  any  man's  soul,  I 
6hall  be  abundantly  content. 

J.  C.  KYLE. 

Stradbroke  Vicarage , 
22d  October,  1869. 

P.  S.  I  hope,  if  it  please  God  to  prolong  liie, 
health,  and  a  moderate  degree  of  leisure,  to  carry  on 
my  work  on  St.  John  without  delay.  A  third  vol- 
ume will  complete  it.  If  any  one  will  take  the 
trouble  to  count  all  the  verses  in  St.  John's  Gospel, 
he  will  find  that  the  last  nine  chapters  contain  about 
the  same  quantity  of  matter  as  the  first  six,  and  the 
second  six  chapters.  I  have  therefore  good  ground 
for  thinking  that  the  third  volume  will  not  exceed  in 
length  either  of  the  two  which  have  preceded  it. 

After  finishing  "  Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gos- 
pels," I  hope  to  attempt  "  Expository  Thoughts  on 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 


TABLE   OF  CONTENTS. 


VII. 


John.  Pagb 

1—13.  Hardness  and  unbelief  of  man, — reason 
why  many  hate  Christ, — various  opin- 
ions about  Christ        .        .        -  1—5 

14 — 24.  Honest  obedience  the  way  to  spiritual 
knowledge, — a  self-exalting  spirit  in 
ministers  deprecated,— the  danger  of 
hasty  judgments.         .        .        .  13 — 17 

25 — 36.  Blindness  of  unbelieving  Jews,— God's 
overruling  hand  over  His  enemies, — 


miserable  end  of  unbelievers 


27—30 


37 — 39.    A  case  supposed,— a  remedy  proposed, — 

a  promise  held  out      .         .        .  39 — 43 


40—53. 


Uselessness  of  mere  head-knowledge, — 
singular  greatness  of  our  Lord's  gifts 
as  a  teacher, — the  work  of  grace  in  the 
heart  sometimes  gradual    . 


50—54 


VIII.       1—11. 


The  power  of  conscience, 
true  repentance   . 


-the  nature  of 


61—64 


12—20. 


Christ  the  light  of  the  world, — promise 
to  those  who  follow  Christ, — Christ's 
exposure  of  His  enemies'  ignorance.         74- 


-77 


21—30. 


Christ  may  be  sought  in  vain, — differ- 
ence between  Christ  and  the  wicked, — 
the  awful  end  of  unbelief    . 


87-91 


IX 


X  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 

John.  Pagb 

VIII.  31 — 36.  Importance  of  steady  perseverance  in 
religion, — nature  of  true  slavery, — na- 
ture of  true  liberty      .        .        .  100—104 


37 — 47.  Ignorant  self-righteousness  of  natural 
man,— true  marks  of  spiritual  sonship, 
— reality  and  character  of  the  devil       109- 


-112 


48—59.  Blasphemous  language  addressed  to  our 
Lord, — encouragement  to  believers, — 
Abraham's  knowledge  of  Christ, — 
Christ's  pre-existence  .        .  122—126 


IX.  1—12.  Sin  the  cause  of  sorrow  in  this  world, — 
the  importance  of  using  opportunities, 
— different  means  used  by  Christ  in 
working  miracles, — Christ's  almighty 
power 134- 


-138 


13 — 25.  Jewish  ignorance  of  right  use  of  Sab- 
bath,— desperate  lengths  to  which 
prejudice  leads  men, — seeing  and  feel- 
ing an  irresistible  evidence         .  149—151 


26—41.  Poor  men  sometimes  wiser  than  the 
rich, — cruelty  of  unconverted  men, — 
danger   of  knowledge   if  not  rightly 


used 


159—163 


X.  1 — 9.  Picture  of  a  false  minister, — picture  of 
true  Christians, — picture  of  Christ 
Himself 175—178 

10 — 18.  Object  for  which  Christ  came  into  the 
world, — Christ's  office  as  a  Shepherd, 
— Christ's  death  a  voluntary  act.  188—191 


19 — 30.  Christ  the  innocent  cause  of  strifes  and 
controversies,— name  given  by  Christ 
to  true  Christians, — the  vast  privileges 
of  true  Christians        .        .        .  202- 


-205 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


XI 


X. 


John. 
31—42. 


Page 


Wickedness  of  human  nature, — honour 
put  on  Scripture  by  Christ,— impor- 
tance attached  by  Christ  to  His  mira- 
cles        215- 


-219 


XI. 


XII. 


1 — 6.  True  Christians  may  be  ill  as  well  as 
others, — Christ  is  the  best  Friend  in 
time  of  need, — Christ  loves  all  true 
Christians,  however  varying  in  tem- 
perament,— Christ  knows  best  the 
time  to  help         ....  228—331 

7 — 16.  Christ's  ways  with  His  people  some- 
times mysterious, — Christ's  tender  lan- 
guage about  His  people,— natural  tem- 
perament shows  itself  in  all  believers  242 — 246 

17 — 29.  Mixture  of  grace  and  weakness  in  be- 
lievers,— need  of  having  clear  views  of 
Christ's  person,  office,  and  power  254—257 

30 — 37.  Blessing  bestowed  on  sympathy,— 
depth  of  sympathy  in  Christ  for  His 
people 267—270 

38 — 46.  Christ's  words  about  the  stone  over  the 
grave  of  Lazarus, — Christ's  words  ad- 
dressed to  Martha  when  she  doubted, 
— Christ's  words  to  God  the  Father, — 
Christ's  words  addressed  to  Lazarus 
in  his  grave         ....  277 — 281 

47—67.  Wickedness  of  man's  natural  heart, — 
blind  ignorance  of  God's  enemies, — im- 
portance often  attached  by  bad  men  to 
ceremonial 291— 2£"» 

1 — 11.  Abounding  proofs  of  the  truth  of  Christ's 
miracles, — discouragement  Christ's 
friends  meet  with  from  man, — man's 
hardness  and  unbelief         .        .  306 — 810 


XII 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 


John. 
XII.  12—19. 


Pagf 


Christ's  sufferings  entirely  voluntary, — 
prophecies  about  Christ's  first  advent 
minutely  fulfilled         .        .        .  321- 


-325 


20—26.     Death  the  way  to  spiritual  life,— Christ's 

servants  must  follow  Him  .        .  331—335 

27 — 33.  Man's  sin  imputed  to  Christ, — Christ's 
internal  conflict,— God's  voice  heard 
from  heaven,— Christ's  prophecy  about 


His  being  lifted  up 


341—3-15 


84 — 43.  Duty  of  using  present  opportunities,— 
hardness  of  man's  heart, — power  of 
the  love  of  this  world         .        .  357- 


-3G0 


44 — 50.    Dignity  of  Christ,— certainty  of  a  judg- 
ment to  come       ....  371 — 374 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS 


ON  THE  GOSPELS. 


JOHN  VII.     1—13. 


1  After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in 
Galilee:  for  he  would  not  walk  in  Jew- 
ry, because  the  Jews  sought  to  kill 
him. 

2  Now  the  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles 
was  at  hand. 

3  His  brethren  therefore  said  unto 
him,  Depart  hence,  and  go  into  Judsea, 
that  thy  disciples  also  may  see  the 
works  that  thou  doest. 

4  For  there  is  no  man  that  doeth  any- 
thing in  secret,  and  he  himself  seeketh 
to  be  known  openly.  If  thou  do  these 
things,  shew  thyself  to  the  world. 

5  For  neither  did  his  brethren  be- 
lieve in  him. 

6  Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  My 
time  is  not  yet  come:  but  your  time 
is  alway  ready. 

7  The  world  cannot  hate  you;   but 


me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it, 
that  the  works  thereof  are  evil. 

8  Go  ye  up  unto  this  feast:  I  go  not 
up  yet  unto  this  feast;  for  my  time  is 
not  yet  full  come. 

9  When  he  had  said  these  words  un- 
to them,  he  abode  still  in  Galilee. 

10  IT  But  when  his  brethren  were 
gone  up,  then  went  he  also  up  unto  the 
feast,  not  openly,  but  as  it  were  in  se- 
cret. 

11  Then  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the 
feast,  and  said,  Where  is  he  ? 

12  And  there  was  much  murmuring 
among  the  people  concerning  him:  for 
some  said,  He  is  a  good  man :  others 
said,  Nay;  but  he  deceiveth  the  peo- 
ple. 

13  Howbeit  no  man  spake  openly  of 
him  for  fear  of  the  Jews. 


The  chapter  we  now  begin  is  divided  from  the  preceding 
one  b}'  a  wide  interval  of  time.  The  many  miracles  which 
our  Lord  wrought,  while  He  "  walked  in  Galilee,"  are 
passed  over  by  St.  John  in  comparative  silence.  The 
events  which  he  was  specially  inspired  to  record  are  those 
which  took  place  in  or  near  Jerusalem. 

We  should  observe  in  this  passage  the  desperate  hard- 
ness and  unbelief  of  human  nature.  We  are  told  that  even 
our  Lord's  "  brethren  did  not  bel'veve  in  Him."     Holy  and 

1 


2  EXPOSITOEY   THOUGHTS. 

harmless  and  blameless  as  He  was  in  life,  some  of  bis 
nearest  relatives,  according  to  the  flesh,  did  not  receive 
Him  as  the  Messiah.  It  was  bad  enough  that  His  own 
people,  "  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  Him."  But  it  was  even 
worse  that  "  His  brethren  did  not  believe." 

That  great  Scriptural  doctrine,  man's  need  of  preventing 
and  converting  grace,  stands  out  here,  as  if  written  with  a 
sunbeam.  It  becomes  all  who  question  that  doctrine  to 
look  at  this  passage  and  consider.  Let  them  observe  that 
seeing  Christ's  miracles,  hearing  Christ's  teaching,  living 
in  Christ's  own  company,  were  not  enough  to  make  men 
believers.  The  mere  possession  of  spiritual  privileges  never 
yet  made  any  one  a  Christian.  All  is  useless  without  the 
effectual  and  applying  work  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  No 
wonder  that  our  Lord  said  in  another  place,  "  No  man  can 
come  to  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
him."     (John  vi.  44.) 

The  true  servants  of  Christ  in  every  age  will  do  well  to 
remember  this.  They  are  often  surprised  and  troubled  to 
find  that  in  religion  they  stand  alone.  They  are  apt  to 
fancy  that  it  must  be  their  own  fault  that  all  around  them 
are  not  converted  like  themselves.  They  are  ready  to 
blame  themselves  because  their  families  remain  worldly 
and  unbelieving.  But  let  them  look  at  the  verse  before  us. 
In  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  was  no  fault  either  in  tem- 
per, word,  or  deed.  Yet  even  Christ's  own  "  brethren  did 
not  believe  in  Him." 

Our  blessed  Master  has  truly  learned  by  experience  how 
to  sympathize  with  all  his  people  who  stand  alone.  This 
is  a  thought  "  full  of  sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable 
comfort."  He  knows  the  heart  of  every  isolated  believer, 
and  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  his  trials.  He  has 
drunk  this  bitter  cup.  He  has  passed  through  this  fire. 
Let  all  who  are  fainting  and  cast  down,  because  brothers 
and  sisters  despise  their  religion,  turn  to  Christ  for  com- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VH.  3 

fort,  and  pour  out  their  hearts  before  Him.  He  "  has 
suffered  Himself  being  tempted"  in  this  way,  and  He 
can  help  as  well  as  feel.     (Heb.  ii.  18.) 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  in  this  passage, 
one  principal  reason  why  many  hate  Christ.  We  are  told 
that  our  Lord  said  to  His  unbelieving  brethren  "  The  world 
cannot  hate  you  ;  but  me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it, 
that  the  works  thereof  are  evil." 

These  words  reveal  one  of  those  secret  principles  which 
influence  men  in  their  treatment  of  religion.  They  help  to 
explain  that  deadly  enmity  with  which  many  during  our 
Lord's  earthly  ministry  regarded  Him  and  His  Gospel. 
It  was  not  so  much  the-high  doctrines  which  He  preached, 
as  the  high  standard  of  practice  which  He  proclaimed, 
which  gave  offence.  It  was  not  even  His  claim  to  be 
received  the  Messiah  which  men  disliked  so  much,  as  His 
witness  against  the  wickedness  of  their  lives.  In  short, 
they  could  have  tolerated  His  opinions  if  He  would  only 
have  spared  their  sins. 

The  principle,  we  may  be  sure,  is  one  of  universal  ap- 
plication. It  is  at  work  now  just  as  much  as  it  was 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  The  real  cause  of  many 
people's  dislike  to  the  Gospel  is  the  holiness  of  living 
which  it  demands.  Teach  abstract  doctrines  only,  and 
few  will  find  any  fault.  Denounce  the  fashionable  sins  of 
the  day,  and  call  on  men  to  repent  and  walk  consistently 
with  God,  and  thousands  at  once  will  be  offended.  The 
true  reason  why  many  profess  to  be  infidels,  and  abuse 
Christianity,  is  the  witness  that  Christianity  bears  against 
their  own  bad  lives. — Like  Ahab,  they  hate  it,  "  because 
it  does  not  prophesy  good  concerning  them,  but  evil."  (1 
Kings  xxxii.  8.) 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  the  strange  va- 
riety of  opinions  about  Christ,  which  were  current  from  the 
beginning.      We  are  told  that  "  there  was  much  murmuring 


4  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

among  the  people  concerning  him :  for  some  said,  He  is  a 
good  man  :  others  said,  Nay,  but  he  deceiveth  the  people  " 
The  words  which  old  Simeon  had  spoken  thirty  years  be- 
fore were  here  accomplished  in  a  striking  manner.  He 
had  said  to  our  Lord's  mother,  "  This  child  is  set  for  the 
fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel :  and  for  a  sign 
which  shall  be  spoken  against ;  —  that  the  thoughts  of 
many  hearts  may  be  revealed."  (Luke  ii.  34,  35.)  In  the 
diversities  of  opinion  about  our  Lord  which  arose  among 
the  Jews,   we  see  the  good  old  man's  saying  fulfilled. 

In  the  face  of  such  a  passage  as  this,  the  endless 
differences  and  divisions  about  religion,  which  we  see  on 
all  sides,  in  the  present  day,  ought  never  to  surprise  us. 
The  open  hatred  of  some  toward  Christ, — the  carping,  fault- 
finding, prejudiced  spirit  of  others, — the  bold  confession 
of  the  few  faithful  ones, — the  timid,  man-fearing  temper  of 
the  many  faithless  ones, — the  unceasing  war  of  words  and 
strife  of  tongues  with  which  the  Churches  of  Christ  are  so 
sadly  familiar, — are  only  modern  symptoms  of  an  old  dis- 
ease. Such  is  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  that  Christ 
is  the  cause  of  division  among  men,  wherever  He  is 
preached.  So  long  as  the  world  stands,  some,  when  they 
hear  of  Him,  will  love,  and  some  will  hate, — some  will 
believe,  and  some  will  believe  not.  That  deep,  prophetical 
saying  of  His  will  be  continually  verified :  "  Think  not 
that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth ;  I  came  not  to 
send  peace,  but  a  sword."     (Matt.  x.  34.) 

What  think  we  of  Christ  ourselves?  This  is  the  one 
question  with  which  we  have  to  do.  Let  us  never  be 
ashamed  to  be  of  that  little  number  who  believe  on  Him, 
hear  His  voice,  follow  Him,  and  confess  Him  before  men. 
While  others  waste  their  time  in  vain  jangling  and  un- 
profitable controversy,  let  us  take  up  the  cross  and  give 
all  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure.  The 
children  of  this  world  may  hate  us,  as  it  hated  our  Master, 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  5 

because  our  religion  is  a  standing  witness   against  them. 

But    the   last   clay  will  show  that   we    chose  wisely,  lost 

nothing,   and   gained   a   crown  of  glory  that  facleth  not 

away. 

Notes.    John  VII.  1—13. 

1. — [After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in  Galilee.']  These  words 
cover  a  space  of  about  six  months.  The  events  of  the  last 
chapter  took  place  about  the  time  of  the  Passover,  in  spring. 
The  events  of  the  chapter  we  now  begin  took  place  in  autumn, 
at  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  What  our  Lord  did  in  Galilee  during 
these  six  months  St.  John  passes  over  in  silence.  His  Gospel, 
with  the  exception  of  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  and  6th  chapters,  is 
almost  entirely  taken  up  with  our  Lord's  doings  in  or  near 
Jerusalem.  He  was,  at  this  period  of  His  ministry,  entirely 
absent  from  Jerusalem,  it  would  seem,  for  about  eighteen 
months. 

The  expression  "walked"  must  be  taken  figuratively.  It 
simply  means,  that  our  Lord  "  lived,  dwelt,  sojourned,  was 
going  to  and  fro,  and  passing  his  time."  The  Greek  word  is  in 
the  imperfect  tense,  and  denotes  a  continuous  action  or  habit. 

[He  would  not  walk  in  Jewry.]  This  would  be  more  literally 
rendered,  "  He  did  not  will,  or  desire,  or  choose  to  walk."  The 
use  of  the  word  "Jewry  "  by  our  translators  is  to  be  regretted, 
and  seems  uncalled  for.  The  Greek  word  so  rendered  is  the 
same  that  is  rendered  "Judaea  "  in  the  third  verse. 

[Because  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  him.]  By  "the  Jews"  we 
must  understand  the  leaders  and  rulers  of  the  Jewish  nation. 
There  is  no  proof  that  the  lower  orders  felt  the  same  enmity 
that  the  upper  classes  did  against  our  Lord.  "The  common 
people  heard  Him  gladly."  (Mark  xii.  37.)  The  depth  and 
bitterness  of  this  hatred  against  Christ  may  be  seen  in  their 
wish  to  kill  Him.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  settled  plan  with  the 
Jews  from  the  time  when  the  miracle  was  wrought  at  the  pool 
of  Bethesda.  (John  v.  16,  18..)  They  could  neither  answer 
Him,  nor  silence  Him,  nor  prevent  the  common  people  listening 
to  Him.  They  resolved  therefore  to  kill  Him. 

Our  Lord's  example  recorded  in  this  verse  shows  clearly  that 
Christians  are  not  meant  to  court  martyrdom,  or  wilfully  expose 
themselves  to  certain  death,  under  the  idea  that  it  is  their  duty. 
Many  primitive  martyrs  seem  not  to  have  understood  this. 

2.— [Jeics' feast  of  tabernacles.]  This  expression,  like  many  others 
in  St.  John's  Gospel,  shows  that  he  wrote  for  the  Gentiles,  who 
knew  little  of  Jewish  customs  and  feasts.  Hence  "the  Jews' 
feast." 

The  feast  of  tabernacles  was  one  of  the  three  great  feasts  in 
the  Jewish  year,  wheu,  by  God's  command,  all  pious  Jews  went 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


up  to  Jerusalem.  (Deut.  xvi.  16.)  It  was  held  in  autumn,  aftei 
the  completion  of  the  harvest,  in  the  seventh  month.  The  time 
of  the  Jewish  "  Passover  "  answered  to  our  Easter,  "  Pentecost  " 
to  our  Whitsuntide,  and  "Tabernacles"  to  our  Michaelmas. 
The  seventh  month  was  remarkable  for  the  number  of  ordi- 
nances which  the  law  of  Moses  required  the  Jews  to  observe. 
On  the  first  day  was  the  feast  of  trumpets,  on  the  tenth  day  was 
the  day  of  atonement,  and  on  the  fifteenth  began  the  feast  of 
tabernacles. 

There  are  several  things  peculiar  to  the  feast  of  tabernacles, 
which  ought  to  be  remembered  in  reading  this  chapter,  because 
some  of  them  throw  light  on  it.  (1)  It  was  an  occasion  of 
special  mirth  and  rejoicing  with  the  Jews.  They  were  ordered 
to  dwell  in  booths,  or  tabernacles  made  of  brauches,  for  seven 
days,  in  remembrance  of  their  dwelling  in  temporary  booths 
when  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  and  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord." 
(Lev.  xxiii.  39 — 43.)  (2)  it  was  a  feast  at  which  more  sacrifices 
were  offered  up  than  at  any  of  the  Jewish  feasts.  (Num.  xxix. 
12 — 34.)  (3)  It  was  a  feast  at  which,  once  every  seven  years, 
the  law  was  publicly  read  to  the  whole  people.  (4)  It  was  a 
feast  at  which  water  was  drawn  from  the  pool  of  Siloam  every 
day  with  great  solemnity,  and  poured  upon  the  altar,  while  the 
people  sung  the  12th  chapter  of  Isaiah.  (5)  It  was  a  feast  which 
followed  close  on  the  great  day  of  atonement,  when  the  pecu- 
liarly typical  ordinances  of  the  scapegoat,  and  the  High  Priest 
going  once  in  the  year  into  the  holy  of  holies,  were  fresh  in  the 
minds  of  the  people.  These  things  should  be  carefully  noted, 
and  remembered,  as  we  read  through  the  .chapter. 

Josephus  calls  the  feast  of  tabernacles  "the  holiest  and 
greatest  feast  of  the  Jews."  It  was  a  Rabbinical  saying,  "  The 
man  who  has  not  seen  these  festivities  does  not  know  what  a 
jubilee  is." 

Whether  this  very  year,  when  our  Lord  went  to  the  feast  of 
tabernacles,  was  the  precise  seventh  year  in  which  the  public 
reading  of  the  law  took  place,  we  cannot  now  know  for  certainty. 
Whether  the  custom  of  dwelling  in  booths  was  literally  kept  up 
when  our  Lord  was  on  earth  may  also  be  matter  of  question.  It 
certainly  had  not  been  observed  for  many  years  in  the  clays  of 
Nehemiah.  (Neh.  viii.  17.)  But  that  this  feast  was  kept  up  with 
extraordinary  festivity  and  rejoicing  in  the  latter  days  of  tlie 
Jewish  dispensation  is  testified  by  all  Jewish  writers. 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  this  public  rejoicing,  and  the  con- 
course of  Jews  from  every  part  of  the  world,  that  the  things 
recorded  in  this  chapter  took  place.  It  stauds  to  reason  that  all 
that  our  Lord  said  and  did  this  week  must  have  been  more 
than  usually  public,  and  would  necessarily  attract  great  atten- 
tion. 

Wordsworth,  Bu-gon,  and  others,  consider  the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles to  have  been  a  very  siguilicaut  type  of  our  Lord's  incar- 


JOHlN^,    CIIAP.    VII.  7 

nation.  I  confess  that  I  am  unable  to  see  it.  If  the  feast  was 
typical  at  all,  which  is  not  certain,  I  venture  the  conjecture, 
that  it  was  meant  to  be  a  type  of  our  Lord's  second  advent.  My 
reasons  are  these  : — 

(a.)  It  was  the  last  in  order  of  the  Jewish  feasts  every  year, 
and  formed  the  completion  of  the  annual  routine  of  Mosaic 
ordinances.     It  wound  up  all. 

(b.)  It  was  kept  at  the  end  of  harvest,  when  the  year's  work 
was  done,  and  the  fruits  were  all  gathered  in. 

(c.)  It  was  an  occasion  of  special  rejoicing  and  festivity  more 
than  any  of  the  feasts.  The  dwelling  in  booths  seems  to  have 
been  a  circumstance  of  the  feast  less  essential  than  the  rejoicing. 

(d.)  It  followed  immediately  after  the  feast  of  trumpets,  and 
the  day  of  atonement.  On  that  clay  the  High  Priest  went  into 
the  holy  of  holies  and  then  came  out  to  bless  the  people.  (See 
Isa.  xxvii.  13 ;  1  Thes.  iv.  16.) 

(e.)  It  followed  immediately  after  the  jubilee  every  fiftieth 
year.  That  jubilee,  and  proclamation  of  liberty  to  all,  was  in 
the  seventh  month. 

(/.)  It  is  that  special  feast  which,  after  the  Jews  are  restored 
and  Jerusalem  rebuilt,  the  nation  are  yet  to  keep  in  the  future 
kingdom  of  Christ.     (Zech.  xiv.  16.) 

I  venture  this  conjecture  with  much  diffidence ;  but  I  think  it 
deserves  consideration.  In  the  six  points  I  have  mentioned, 
I  see  much  more  of  the  second  advent  than  of  the  first.  To  my 
eyes  the  feast  of  passover  was  a  type  of  Christ  crucified ;— the 
feast  of  pentecost,  of  Christ  sending  forth  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
this  dispensation;— the  feast  of  tabernacles,  of  Christ  coming 
again  to  gather  His  people  in  one  joyous  company,  to  reap  the 
harvest  of  the  earth,  to  wiud  up  this  dispensation,  to  come  forth 
and  bless  His  people,  and  to  proclaim  a  jubilee  to  all  the  earth. 

3.— [His  brethren.]  Who  these  "  brethren  "  were  is  a  matter  of 
dispute.  Some  think,  as  Alford,  Stier,  and  others,  that  they 
were  literally  our  Lord's  own  brethren,  and  the  children  of 
Mary  by  Joseph,  born  after  our  Lord's  birth.  (See  Psalm  lxix. 
8.) — Some  think,  as  Theophylact  and  others,  that  they  were 
the  children  of  Joseph  by  a  former  marriage,  and  brought  up 
by  Mary  under  the  same  roof  with  our  Lord. — Others  think,  as 
Augustine,  Zwingle,  Musculus,  and  Bengel,  that  the  word 
"brethren"  does  not  neccssarDy  mean  more  than  cousins  or 
kinsmen.  (See  1  Chron.  xxiii.  22.)  Tiiis  is  the  most  probable 
opinion.  I  take  these  "brethren"  to  have  been  relatives  and 
kinsmen  of  Joseph  and  Mary,  living  at  Nazareth,  or  Capernaum, 
or  elsewhere  in  Galilee, — who  naturally  observed  all  our  Lord's 
doings  w'.th  interest  and  curiosity,  but  at  present  did  not  believe 
on  Him.  To  suppose,  as  some  do,  that  these  brethren  were 
some  of  our  Lord's  Apostles,  is  to  my  mind  a  most  improbable 
theory,  and  flatly  contrary  to  the  5th  verse  of  this  chapter. 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


If  Mary  really  had  sons  after  the  birth  of  our  Lord,  it  cer- 
tainly seems  strange  that  our  Lord  should  commend  her  to  the 
care  of  John,  on  the  cross,  and  not  to  her  own  sons,  His  half- 
brethren.  That  at  the  latter  part  of  His  ministry  He  had  some 
"  brethren"  who  were  not  Apostles,  but  believed,  is  clear  from 
Acts  i.  14.  But  whether  they  were  the  "  brethren  "  of  the  text 
before  us,  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining. 

[Depart... go  into  Judcea,  that  thy  disciples,  etc.~\  This  recom- 
mendation, as  well  as  the  next  verse,  looks  like  the  advice  of 
men  who  as  yet  were  not  convinced  of  our  Lord's  Messiahship. 
The  expression  "that  Thy  disciples  may  see,"  seems  also  to 
indicate  that  the  speakers  were  not  yet  of  the  number  of  our 
Lord's  disciples.  The  language  is  that  of  bystanders  looking  on, 
waiting  to  see  how  the  question  is  to  be  settled,  before  they  make 
up  their  own  minds.  It  is  as  though  they  said, — "  Make  haste, 
rally  a  party  round  Thee,  show  some  public  proof  that  Thou  art 
the  Christ,  and  gather  adherents."  The  "  works  "  here  mentioned 
must  evidently  mean  miracles.  This  speech  seems  to  imply  that 
our  Lord  had  a  party  of  disciples  in  Judaea  and  at  Jerusalem. 
Many,  it  should  be  remembered,  "  believed  on  Him"  at  the  first 
passover  he  attended.     (John  ii.  23.) 

4. — [For  there  is  no  man,  etc.]  This  sentence  is  a  kind  of  prover- 
bial saying.  Every  one  knows  that  if  a  man  seeks  to  be  known 
openly,  it  is  no  use  to  do  his  work  secretly. 

[If  thou  do  these  things,  show  thyself  to  the  icorld.~\  There 
seems  to  be  a  latent  .sneer  about  this  sentence.  "  If  Thou  really 
art  doing  miracles  to  prove  Thyself  the  Messiah,  do  not  con- 
tinue to  hide  Thyself  here  in  Galilee.  Go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and 
do  miracles  there,"  That  the  speakers  said  this  from  an  honest 
zeal  for  God's  glory,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  have  our  Lord 
known  by  others  as  well  as  themselves,  is  a  view  that  I  cannot 
think  probable. 

Some  think  that  the  words  "If  Thou  doest,"  mean  "since 
Thou  doest,"  and  see  a  parallel  in  Coloss.  iii.  1, — where  "  if" 
does  not  imply  any  doubt  whether  the  Colossians  were  "  risen 
with  Christ."  Lampe  thinks  it  means,  "if  Thou  really  and 
truly,  not  illusively,  doest  miracles." 

The  false  standard  of  an  unconverted  man  is  very  manifest  in 
this  and  the  preceding  verse.  Such  an  one  has  no  idea  of 
waiting  for  man's  praise  and  favour,  and  being  content  without 
it  if  it  does  not  come.  He  thinks  that  a  religion  should  have 
the  praise  of  the  world,  and  labour  to  get  it.  The  man  of  God 
remembers  that  true  religion  does  not  "  cry,  nor  strive,"  nor 
court  publicity. 

5. — [For  neither... brethren  believe.']  These  words  appear  to  me  to 
admit  of  only  one  meaning.  They  mean,  that  these  brethren 
of  our  Lord  had  at  present  no  faith  at  all.  They  did  not  yet 
believe  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.    They  had  no  grace.    They 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  9 

were  not  converted.  The  idea  of  some  that  the  words  mean, 
"  His  brethren  did  not  fully  and  entirely  believe  in  Him,"  seems 
to  me  utterly  without  foundation.  It  cannot,  moreover,  be 
reconciled  with  the  language  that  soon  follows, — "The  world 
cannot  hate  you,"  etc.  Such  language  cannot  be  applied  to 
disciples.  The  whole  teaching  of  the  Bible  shows  clearly  that  it 
was  quite  possible  to  be  a  relative  of  Christ  according  to 
the  flesh  and  yet  not  be  converted.  He  that  does  God's  will  is 
as  clear  to  Christ  as  "brother,  or  sister,  or  mother."  (Mark 
iii.  35.) 

How  frequently  even  the  natural  brethren  of  God's  most  emi- 
nent saints  have  been  graceless  and  ungodly,  every  Bible  reader 
must  often  have  observed.  The  cases  of  the  brothers  of  Abel, 
Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  and  David  will  occur  to  our  minds. 

We  should  learn  from  a  verse  like  this  the  desperate  hardness 
of  man's  heart,  the  absolute  necessity  of  grace  to  make  any  one 
a  disciple,  and  the  extreme  danger  of  familiarity  with  high 
spiritual  privileges.  We  should  remember  too,  that  a  man  may 
be  a  truly  good  and  holy  man,  and  yet  not  have  converted  rela- 
tives. No  one  can  give  grace  to  his  own  family.  "  A  prophet 
is  not  without  honour  but  in  his  own  country."  (Mark  vi.  4.) 
Even  our  Lord  was  not  believed  by  all  around  Him.  He  can  truly 
sympathize  with  all  His  people  who  are  in  a  similar  position. 

6.— [My  time  is  not  yet  come.']  These  words  must  mean,  that  our 
Lord  did  everything  during  His  earthly  ministry  according  to  a 
preordained  plan,  and  that  he  could  take  no  step  except  in  har- 
mony with  that  plan.  He  doubtless  spoke  with  a  Divine  depth 
of  meaning  that  none  but  Himself  could  comprehend,  and  that 
must  have  been  unintelligible  at  the  time  to  His  "  brethren." 
To  them  His  words  would  probably  convey  nothing  more  than 
the  idea  that  for  some  reason  or  other  He  did  not  think  the 
present  a  favourable  opportunity  for  going  to  Jerusalem. 

[Your  time  is  alway  ready.]  This  sentence  must  mean,  that 
to  unconverted  people,  like  our  Lord's  brethren,  it  could  make 
no  matter  what  time  they  went  up.  All  times  were  alike.  They 
would  excite  no  enmity,  and  run  no  risk. 

A  Christian  not  possessing  foreknowledge  can  only  pray  for 
guidance  and  direction  as  to  the  steps  of  his  life,  and  the  ways 
and  times  of  his  actions ;  and,  having  prayed,  then  make  the 
best  use  of  his  judgment,  trusting  that  a  faithful  God  will  not  let 
him  make  mistakes. 

7. — [The  world  cannot  hate  you.]  These  words  surely  settle  the 
question  as  to  the  present  state  of  our  Lord's  brethren.  They 
were  yet  unconverted.  Our  Lord  says,  in  another  place, — "If 
ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own."  (John 
xv.  19.) 

[  Me  it  Jiateth  because  I  testify. ..works.  ..evil.]  The  true  reason  of 
this  enmity  of  many  of  the  Jews  against  Christ  is  here  distinctly 


10  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


indicated.  It  was  not  merely  His  claims  to  be  received  as  the 
Messiah.  It  was  not  merely  the  high  and  spiritual  doctrine  He 
preached.  It  was  rather  His  constant  testimony  against  the 
sinful  lives  and  wicked  practices  of  the  many  in  His  day.  That 
adultery,  covetousness,  and  hypocrisy  were  rife  and  common 
among  the  leading  Pharisees,  is  evident  from  many  expressions 
in  the  Gospels.  It  was  our  Lord's  witness  against  these  darling 
sins  that  enraged  His  enemies. 

The  wickedness  of  human  nature  is  painfully  shown  in  this 
sentence.  Christ  was  "  hated."  It  is  an  utter  delusion  to  sup- 
pose that  there  is  any  innate  response  to  perfect  moral  purity, 
or  any  innate  admiration  of  "the  true,  the  pure,  the  just,  the 
kind,  the  good,  and  the  beautiful,"  in  the  heart  of  man.  God 
gave  man,  1800  years  ago,  a  perfect  pattern  of  purity,  truth,  and 
love,  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  while  He  was  upon  earth.  And 
yet  we  are  told  He  was  "  hated." 

True  Christians  must  never  be  surprised  if  they  are  "  hated" 
like  their  Lord.  "The  disciple  is  not  above  his  Master." — 
"  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you."  (Matt.  x. 
24;  1  John  iii.  13.)  In  fact  the  more  like  Christ  they  are,  the 
more  likely  to  be  "  hated."  Moreover,  they  must  not  be  cast 
down  and  make  themselves  miserable,  under  the  idea  that  it  is 
their  inconsistencies  the  world  hates,  and  that  if  they  were  more 
consistent  and  lovely  in  life  the  world  would  like  them  better. 
This  is  a  complete  mistake,  and  a  common  delusion  of  the  devil. 
What  the  world  hates  about  Christians  is  neither  their  doctrines, 
nor  their  faults,  but  their  holy  lives.  Their  lives  are  a  constant 
testimony  against  the  world,  which  makes  the  men  of  the  world 
feel  uncomfortable,  and  therefore  the  world  hates  them. 

Let  us  note,  that  unpopularity  among  men  is  no  proof  that  a 
Christian  is  wrong,  either  in  faith  or  practice.  The  common 
notion  of  many,  that  it  is  a  good  sign  of  a  person's  character  to 
be  well-spoken  of  by  everybody,  is  a  great  error.  When  we  see 
how  our  Lord  was  regarded  by  the  wicked  and  worldly  of  His 
day,  we  may  well  conclude  that  it  is  a  very  poor  compliment  to 
be  told  that  we  are  liked  by  everybody.  There  can  surely  be 
very  little  "  witness  "  about  our  lives  if  even  the  wicked  like  us. 
"  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you."  (Luke 
vi.  2G.)     That  sentence  is  too  much  forgotten. 

Erasmus  used  to  say,  that  Luther  might  have  had  an  easy  life, 
if  he  had  not  touched  the  Pope's  crown,  and  the  monks'  bel- 
lies. 

Bengel  observes,  "  Those  who  please  all  men,  at  all  times, 
ought  deservedly  to  look  on  themselves  with  suspicion." 

8. — [Go  ye  up. ..this  feast."]  These  words  can  hardly  be  called  a 
command.  They  rather  mean,  "  If  you  wish  to  go  at  once,  go, 
and  do  not  tarry  for  Me." 

II go  not  up  yet... my  time  is  not  yet  full  come.]     Here  the  rea- 


JOHN,    CIIAr.    VII.  11 

son  already  given  and  commented  on  is  repeated.  Our  Lord 
did  not  say  He  would  not  go  to  the  feast,  but  not  yet.  There 
was  "  a  time  "  for  all  His  actions,  and  every  step  of  His  ministry, 
and  that  time  had  not  yet  fully  arrived ;  or,  as  the  Greek  literally 
means,  was  not  "fulfilled."  True  Christians  should  remember 
that,  like  their  Master  on  this  occasion,  they  and  worldly  men 
cannot  well  work  and  act  and  move  together.  They  will  often 
find  it  so.  Their  principles  are  different.  Their  reasons  and 
motives  of  action  are  different.  They  will  often  find  that  "  two 
canuot  walk  together  except  they  are  agreed." 

It  seems  strange  that  any  reasonable  person  should  see  dif- 
ficulty in  this  passage,  as  if  it  threw  a  colour  of  doubt  on  our 
Lord's  veracity.  Yet  Augustine  has  a  Homily  on  the  subject  in 
defence  of  our  Lord.  Surely  the  simplest  and  most  natural 
view  is,  that  our  Lord  meant,  "  I  am  not  going  up  yet;  "  and 
"  am  not  going,  at  any  rate,  in  the  public  caravan  with  your- 
selves." This  is  Chrysostom's  view  and  Theophylact  s.  At  an 
early  period  Porphyry  tried  to  fasten  on  our  Lord  the  charge  of 
inconstancy  of  purpose,  out  of  this  passage.  An  enemy  of 
Christianity  must  be  sadly  at  a  loss  for  objections,  if  he  can 
find  no  better  than  one  founded  on  this  place. 

9. — [When... said  these  words... abode... Galilee.]  This  means,  that 
He  staid  at  the  place  where  this  conversation  took  place,  while 
His  brethren  started  on  their  journey  to  Jerusalem.  What  the 
place  in  Galilee  was  we  are  not  told. 

10. — [But  when... brethren... gone  up,  then  went  he.~\  We  are  not 
told  what  interval  there  was  between  our  Lord's  setting  off  for 
Jerusalem,  and  His  brethren's  departure.  The  words  before  us 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  He  set  off  very  soon  after  them. 
One  reason  perhaps  for  our  Lord  not  going  with  them  was  His 
desire  to  avoid  being  made  a  public  show  by  His  relatives. 
They  had  very  likely  a  carnal  desire  to  call  attention  to  Him 
and  to  rally  a  party  of  adherents  round  Him,  for  their  owu 
worldly  ends.  To  avoid  affording  any  opportunity  for  this,  our 
Lord  would  not  go  in  their  company.  He  had  not  forgotten,  no 
doubt,  that  in  Galilee  there  was  a  party  who  once  would  fain 
have  "  taken  Him  by  force  to  make  Him  a  king."  (John  vi.  15.) 
He  wished  to  keep  clear  of  that  party. 

[Not  openly,  but. ..in  secret.]  This  probably  only  means  that 
our  Lord  did  not  go  in  the  caravan,  or  large  company  of  His 
kinsmen,  who  according  to  custom  went  up  together  from  Gali- 
lee, but  in  a  more  private  manner. — How  large  the  caravans  or 
gatherings  of  fellow-travellers  going  up  to  the  three  great  feasts 
must  have  been,  we  may  easily  see  from  the  account  of  our 
Lord  being  not  missed  by  Mary  and  Joseph  at  first,  when  He 
went  up  to  Jerusalem  with  them  at  the  age  of  twelve.  "  Sup- 
posing Him  to  have  been  in  their  company,  they  went  a  day's 
journey,  and  sought  Him  among  their  kinsfolk  and  acquaint- 
ance."   (Luke  ii.  44.)— Our  Lord  never  sought  publicity  but 


12  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


once,  and  that  was  when  He  entered  Jerusalem,  at  the  last  pass« 
over,  just  before  His  crucifixion.  Then  He  wanted  to  draw  at- 
tention to  the  great  sacrifice  He  was  about  to  offer  up  on  the  cross. 
The  contrast  between  His  conduct  on  that  occasion  and  the 
present  one  is  very  remarkable. 

When  it  says  that  "  He  went  in  secret,"  it  does  not  neces- 
sarily mean  that  He  went  alone.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  His  own  chosen  Apostles  had  gone  without  Him.  It  only 
means  that  He  did  not  go  up  publicly  in  the  company  of  all 
"  His  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance  "  from  Galilee. 

11  — [Then  the  Jews  sought  Him.']  If,  as  usually  is  the  case  in  St. 
John,  the  "  Jews  "  here  mean  the  rulers  and  Pharisees,  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  they  sought  Jesus  in  order  to  kill  Him, 
as  the  first  verse  tells  us  they  wished  to  do.  They  naturally 
concluded  that,  like  all  devout  Jews,  He  would  come  up  to  Jeru- 
salem to  the  feast. 

[Where  is  He?~\  Here,  as  in  many  other  places,  the  Greek 
word  rendered  "he"  implies  dislike  and  contempt.  It  is  as  if 
they  said,  "that  fellow,"  (See  Matt,  xxvii.  63,)  "that  de- 
ceiver." 

\2.— [There  was  much  murmuring.']  As  a  general  rule  the  Greek 
word  rendered  "murmuring"  means  an  undercurrent  of  dis- 
content or  dislike,  not  openly  expressed.  (Thus,  Acts  vi.  1.) 
But  here,  and  at  ver.  32,  it  does  not  seem  to  mean  more  than 
muttering,  and  private  conversation,  implying  only  that  people 
were  not  satisfied  "about  our  Lord,  and  privately  talked  much  to 
one  another  about  Him. 

[The  people.]  This  word  in  the  Greek  is  in  the  plural,  and 
evidently  means  the  multitude,  or  crowd  of  persons  who  were 
gathered  at  Jerusalem  on  account  of  the  feast,  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  the  rulers  who  are  called  "  the  Jews." 

[Some.. . good  man :  others. ..deceiveth... people.]  These  expres- 
sions show  the  feeling  of  the  common  people  towards  our  Lord, 
and  are  doubtless  indicative  of  the  classes  from  which  the  two 
opinions  came.  The  class  of  simple-minded,  true-hearted  Is- 
raelites, who  had  sufficient  independence  to  think  for  them- 
selves, would  say  of  our  Lord,  "  He  is  a  good  man."  So  also 
would  the  Galileans,  probably,  who  had  seen  and  heard  most 
of  our  Lord's  ministry.  On  the  other  hand,  the  class  of  carnal 
Jews  who  thought  nothing  of  true  religion,  and  were  led  like  a 
mob  at  the  beck  of  the  priests  and  Pharisees,  would  probably 
take  their  cue  from  the  Rulers,  and  say,  "He  deceiveth  the 
people,"  simply  because  they  were  told  so.  Such,  probably, 
was  the  feeling  jf  the  lower  orders  at  Jerusalem. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  Christ  is,  and  always  has  been,  the  cause 
of  division  of  opinion,  whenever  He  has  come  or  has  been 
preached.  To  some  He  is  a  savour  of  "  life,"  and  to  others  of 
"death."     (2  Cor.  ii.  16.)    He  draws  out  the  true  character  of 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII. 


13 


mankind.  They  either  like  Him  or  dislike  Him.  Strife  and 
conllict  of  opinion  are  the  certain  consequences  of  the  Gospel 
really  coming  among  men  with  power.  The  fault  is  not  in  the 
Gospel  but  in  human  nature.  Stillness  and  quiet  are  signs  not 
of  Fife  but  of  death.  The  sun  calls  forth  miasma  and  malaria 
from  the  swamps  it  shines  upon ;  but  the  fault  is  not  in  the  sun, 
but  in  the  laud.  The  very  same  rays  call  forth  fertility  and 
abundance  from  the  cornfield. 

13. — [HoicbeU  no  man.. .openly. ..fear. ..Jews.]  This  expression  of 
course  applies  specially  to  those  who  favoured  our  Lord. 
Those  who  hated  Him  would  not  fear  to  say  so  openly.  This 
verse  shows  the  length  to  which  the  enmity  of  the  Jewish  ru- 
lers against  our  Lord  had  already  gone.  It  was  a  notorious  fact 
among  the  lower  orders  that  the  heads  of  the  nation  hated 
Jesus,  and  that  it  was  a  dangerous  thing  to  talk  favourably  of 
Him,  or  to  manifest  any  interest  in  Him.  The  fear  of  man  is  a 
powerful  principle  among  most  people.  Rulers  have  little  idea 
how  many  things  are  secretly  talked  of  sometimes  among  sub- 
jects, and  kept  back  from  them.  Two  hundred  years  ago,  the 
Stuarts  could  persecute  all  open  and  out-spoken  favourers  of 
the  English  Puritans;  but  they  could  not  prevent  the  lower 
orders  secretly  talking  of  them,  and  imbibing  prejudices  in  their 
favour. 


JOHN  VII.   14-24. 


14  IT  Now  about  the  midst  of  the 
feast  Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple, 
and  taught. 

15  And  the  Jews  marvelled,  say- 
ing, How  knoweth  this  man  letters, 
having  never  learned  ? 

16  Jesus  answered  them,  and  said, 
My  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  his  that 
sent  me. 

17  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he 
shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it 
be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  myself. 

18  He  that  speaketh  of  himself 
seeketh  his  own  glory:  but  he  that 
seeketh  his  glory  that  sent  him,  the 
same  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness  is 
in  him. 

19  Did  not  Moses  give  you  the  law, 
and  yet  none  of  you  keepeth  the  law  ? 
Why  go  ye  about  to  kill  me  ? 


20  The  people  answered  and  said, 
Thou  hast  a  devil:  who  goeth  about  to 
kill  thee  ? 

21  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  I  have  done  one  work,  and  ye 
all  marvel. 

22  Moses  therefore  gave  unto  you 
circumcision  (not  because  it  is  of  Mo- 
ses, but  of  the  fathers) ;  and  ye  on  the 
Sabbath  day  circumcise  a  man. 

23  If  a  man  on  the  Sabbath  day  re- 
ceive circumcision,  that  the  law  of 
Moses  should  not  be  broken;  are  ye 
angry  at  me,  because  I  have  made  a 
man  every  whit  whole  on  the  Sabbath 
day? 

24  Judge  not  according  to  the  ap- 
pearance, but  judge  righteous  judg- 
ment. 


We  learn  first  in  this  passage,  that  honest  obedience  to  God's 
will  is  one  ivay  to  obtain  clear  spiritual  knowledge.     Our 


14  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Lord  says,  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of 
the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of 
myself." 

The  difficulty  of  finding  out  "  what  is  truth  "  in  religion 
is  a  common  subject  of  complaint  among  men.  They  point 
to  the  many  differences  which  prevail  among  Christians  on 
matters  of  doctrine,  and  profess  to  be  unable  to  decide  who 
is  right.  In  thousands  of  cases  this  professed  inability  to 
find  out  truth  becomes  an  excuse  for  living  without  any 
religion  at  all. 

The  saying  of  our  Lord  before  us  is  one  that  demands 
the  serious  attention  of  persons  in  this  state  of  mind.  It 
supplies  an  argument  whose  edge  and  point  they  will  find 
it  hard  to  evade.  It  teaches  that  one  secret  of  getting  the 
key  of  knowledge  is  to  practise  honestly  what  we  know, 
and  that  if  we  conscientiously  use  the  light  that  we  now 
have,  we  shall  soon  find  more  light  coming  down  into  our 
minds. — In  short,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  true,  that 
by  doing  we  shall  come  to  knowing. 

There  is  a  mine  of  truth  in  this  principle.  Well  would 
it  be  for  men  if  they  would  act  upon  it.  Instead  of  saying, 
as  some  do, — "  I  must  first  know  everything  clearly,  and 
then  I  will  act," — we  should  say, — "  I  will  diligently  use 
such  knowledge  as  I  possess,  and  believe  that  in  the  using 
fresh  knowledge  will  be  given  to  me."  How  many  mys- 
teries this  simple  plan  would  solve !  How  many  hard 
thing  would  soon  become  plain  if  men  would  honestly  live 
up  to  their  light,  and  "follow  on  to  know  the  Lord!" 
(Hosea  vi.  3.) 

It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  God  deals  with  us  as 
moral  beings,  and  not  as  beasts  or  stones.  He  loves  to 
encourage  us  to  self-exertion  and  diligent  use  of  such  means 
as  we  have  in  our  hands.  The  plain  things  in  religion  are 
undeniably  very  many.  Let  a  man  honestly  attend  to 
them,  and  he  shall  be   taught  the  deep  things   of  God. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  15 

Whatever  some  may  say  about  their  inability  to  find  out 
truth,  you  will  rarely  find  one  of  them  who  does  not  know 
better  than  he  practises.  Then  if  he  is  sincere,  let  him 
begin  here  at  once.  Let  him  humbly  use  what  little  knowl- 
edge he  has  got,  and  God  will  soon  give  him  more. — "  If 
thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light." 
(Matt.  vi.  22.) 

We  learn,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  that  a  self-exalting 
spirit  in  ministers  of  religion  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  mind 
of  Christ.  Our  Lord  says,  u  He  that  speaketh  of  himself 
seeketh  his  own  glory  ;  but  he  that  seeketh  His  glory  that 
sent  him,  the  same  is  true,  and  no  unrighteousness  is  in 
him." 

The  wisdom  and  truth  of  this  sentence  will  be  evident  at 
once  to  any  reflecting  mind.  The  minister  truly  called  of 
God  will  be  deeply  sensible  of  his  Master's  majest}^  and 
his  own  infirmity,  and  will  see  in  himself  nothing  but  un- 
worthiness.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  who  knows  that  he  is 
not  "  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  will  try  to  cover 
over  his  defects  by  magnifjdng  himself  and  his  office.  The 
very  desire  to  exalt  ourselves  is  a  had  S3nnptom.  It  is  a 
sure  sign  of  something  wrong  within. 

Does  any  one  ask  illustrations  of  the  truth  before  us? 
He  will  find  them,  on  the  one  side,  in  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  of  our  Lord's  times.  If  one  thing  more  than 
another  distinguished  these  unhappy  men,  it  was  their 
desire  to  get  praise  for  themselves. — He  will  find  them,  on 
the  other  side,  in  the  character  of  the  Apostle  St.  Paul. 
The  keynote  that  runs  through  all  his  Epistles  is  personal 
humility  and  zeal  for  Christ's  glory  : — "  I  am  less  than  the 
least  of  all  saints — I  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  Apostle — 
I  am  chief  of  sinners — we  preach  not  ourselves  but  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord,  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus' 
sake."  ;Ephes.  iii.  8  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9  ;  1  Tim.  i.  15  ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  5.) 


16  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Does  any  one  ask  for  a  test  by  which  he  may  discern  the 
real  man  of  God  from  the  false  shepherd  in  the  present 
day?  Let  him  remember  our  Lord's  weighty  words,  and 
notice  carefully  what  is  the  main  object  that  a  minister 
loves  to  exalt.  Not  he  who  is  ever  crying, — "  Behold  the 
Church  !  behold  the  Sacraments  !  behold  the  ministry  !  " 
but  he  who  says, — "  Behold  the  Lamb!" — is  the  pastor 
after  God's  own  heart.  Happy  indeed  is  that  minister 
who  forgets  self  in  his  pulpit,  and  desires  to  be  hid  behind 
the  cross.  This  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  work,  and  be 
a  blessing. 

We  learn,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  the  danger  of  forming  a 
hasty  judgment.  The  Jews  at  Jerusalem  were  ready  to 
condemn  our  Lord  as  a  sinner  against  the  law  of  Moses, 
because  He  had  done  a  miracle  of  healing  on  the  Sabbath- 
day.  They  forgot  in  their  blind  enmity  that  the  fourth 
commandment  was  not  meant  to  prevent  works  of  necessity 
or  works  of  mercy.  A  work  on  the  Sabbath  our  Lord  had 
done,  no  doubt,  but  not  a  work  forbidden  by  the  law. 
And  hence  they  drew  down  on  themselves  the  rebuke, 
"Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge  right- 
eous judgment." 

The  practical  value  of  the  lesson  before  us  is  very  great. 
We  shall  do  well  to  remember  it  as  we  travel  through  life, 
and  to  correct  our  estimate  of  people  and  things  by  the 
light  which  it  supplies. 

We  are  often  too  ready  to  be  deceived  by  an  appearance 
of  good.  We  are  in  danger  of  rating  some  men  as  very 
good  Christians,  because  of  a  little  outward  profession  of 
religion,  and  a  decent  Sunday  formality, — because,  in 
short,  they  talk  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  wear  the  garb 
of  pilgrims.  We  forget  that  all  is  not  good  that  appears 
good,  even  as  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters,  and  that  daily 
practice,  choice,  tastes,  habits,  conduct,  private  character, 


JOHN,    CHAT.   VII.  17 

are  the  true  evidence  of  what  a  man  is. — In  a  word,  we 
forget  our  Lord's  saying, — "Judge  not  according  to  the 
appearance." 

We  are  too  ready,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  deceived  by 
the  appearance  of  evil.  We  are  in  danger  of  setting  down 
some  men  as  no  true  Christians,  because  of  a  few  faults  or 
inconsistencies,  and  "  making  them  offenders  because  of  a 
word."  (Isa.  xxix.  21.)  We  must  remember  that  the  best 
of  men  are  but  men  at  their  very  best,  and  that  the  most 
eminent  saints  may  be  overtaken  by  temptation,  and  yet  be 
saints  at  heart  after  all.  We  must  not  hastily  suppose  that 
all  is  evil,  where  there  is  an  occasional  appearance  of  evil. 
The  holiest  man  may  fall  sadly  for  a  time,  and  yet  the 
grace  within  him  may  finally  get  a  victory.  Is  a  man's 
general  character  godly? — Then  let  us  suspend  our  judg- 
ment when  he  falls,  and  hope  on.  Let  us  "  judge  righteous 
judgment." 

In  any  case  let  us  take  care  that  we  pass  fair  judgment 
on  ourselves.  Whatever  we  think  of  others,  let  us  beware 
of  making  mistakes  about  our  own  character.  There,  at 
any  rate,  let  us  be  just,  honest,  and  fair.  Let  us  not  flatter 
ourselves  that  all  is  right,  because  all  is  apparently  right 
before  men.  "  The  Lord,"  we  must  remember,  "  looketh 
on  the  heart."  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7.)  Then  let  us  judge  our- 
selves with  righteous  judgment,  and  condemn  ourselves 
while  we  live,  lest  we  be  judged  of  the  Lord  and  con- 
demned for  ever  at  the  last  day.     (1  Cor.  xi.  31.) 

Notes.    John  VII.  14—24. 

14.— [About... midst  of...feast.~]  This  would  be  about  the  fourth 
day  of  the  week,  as  the  feast  lasted  seven  days.  Some  who 
consider  the  feast  of  tabernacles  a  type  of  Christ's  incarnation, 
think  this  circumstance  is  typical  of  our  Lord's  earthly  ministry 
lasting  three  years  and  a  half,  answering  to  the  three  days  and 
a  half  during  which  our  Lord  taught  publicly  here  in  Jerusalem. 
I  doubt  myself  whether  the  circ  lmstance  is  typical  at  all.    If  the 


18  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


feast  of  tabernacles  is  typical,  I  believe  it  points  to  the  second 
advent  of  Christ  much  more  than  to  the  first. 

[Jesus  went  up. ..temple.']  This  means  the  outer  court  of  the 
temple,  where  pious  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of  assembling  in 
order  to  hear  the  doctors  of  the  law  and  others,  and  to  discuss 
religious  subjects.  This  is  the  place  where  our  Lord  was,  when 
Joseph  and  Mary  found  Him,  at  twelve  years  of  age,  "in  the 
temple."  (Luke  ii.  46.)  It  was  probably  a  large  open  court 
yard,  with  piazzas  or  verandas  around  it,  for  shelter  against  heat 
and  cold. 

[Taught."]  What  our  Lord  taught  we  are  not  told.  Exposi- 
tions of  Scripture,  as  Luke  iv.  17 — 21,  and  such  lessons  as  those 
contained  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  the  parables,  were 
most  likely  the  kind  of  things  that  He  "taught"  first,  on  such 
occasions  as  this.  It  admits  of  doubt  whether  He  taught  such 
deep  things  as  those  contained  in  the  5th  and  6th  chapters  of  St. 
John,  unless  publicly  attacked,  or  put  on  His  defence. 

Alford  thinks  this  was  "  the  first  time "  that  our  Lord 
"taught  publicly  at  Jerusalem."  Yet  this  seems  at  least  ques- 
tionable when  we  consider  the  2nd  and  5th  chapters  of  John. 

15. — [The  Jews  marvelled.]  The  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  Scrip- 
ture which  our  Lord  showed  must  have  been  the  principal  cause 
of  wonder.  Yet,  we  may  well  believe,  there  was  something 
wonderful  in  His  manner  and  style  of  speaking. 

[How  knoweth  this  man  letters?]  The  word  rendered 
"  letters  "  here,  must  probably  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  "  learn- 
ing." It  is  so  used  in  Acts  xxvi.  24.  In  John  v.  47  it  is  ren- 
dered "writings."  In  2  Tim.  iii.  11  it  is  "Scriptures."  The 
original  idea  is  a  "  written  character,"  a  letter  of  an  alphabet. 
It  is  thus  used  in  Luke  xxiii.  38  of  the  inscription  on  the  cross, 
written  "  in  letters  of  Greek,"  etc. 

[Having  never  learned.]  The  Jews  must  have  meant  by  this, 
that  our  Lord  had  never  attended  any  of  the  great  theological 
schools  which  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  kept  up  in  Jerusalem, — 
to  which  St.  Paul  refers,  when  he  says,  he  was  "  brought  up 
in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel."  (Acts  xxii.  3.)  They  did 
not  of  course  mean  that  any  one  brought  up  at  Nazareth  must 
necessarily  have  been  totally  ignorant.  That  our  Lord  could  read 
and  write  is  clear  from  Luke  iv.  16,  and  John  viii.  6.  But  the  Jeru- 
salem Jews,  in  their  pride  aud  self-conceit,  set  down  any  one  as 
comparatively  ignorant  who  had  uot  been  trained  in  their  great 
metropolitan  schools.  People  are  very  apt  to  condemn  any  one 
as  "  ignorant  "  who  disagrees  with  them  in  religion. 

According  to  Tholuck,  it  was  a  nils  of  the  Talmud,  "  that  no 

man  could  appear  as  a  teacher,  who  had  not  for  some  years  been 

a  colleague  of  a  Eabbi." 

\G.—[M(j  doctrine   is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me.]     Our  Lord 

meant  by  these  words,    "  My  doctrine  is  not  mine  only.    The 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  19 


teaching  that  I  am  proclaiming  is  not  a  thing  of  my  own  private 
invention,  and  the  product  of  my  own  isolated  mind.  It  is  the 
doctrine  of  my  Father  who  sent  me.  It  deserves  attention 
because  it  is  His  message.  He  that  despiseth  it,  despiseth  not 
only  me,  but  Him  whose  messenger  I  am." — The  great  truth  of 
His  own  inseparable  and  mysterious  union  with  God  the  Father, 
is  here  once  more  pointed  at.  It  is  like,  "  I  can  of  my  own  self 
do  nothing,"  (John  v.  30,)  and  "as  my  Father  hath  taught  me  I 
speak  these  things,"  (John  viii.  28,)  and  "  I  have  not  spoken 
of  myself;  but  the  Father  which  sent  me  He  gave  me  com- 
mandment what  I  should  say  and  what  I  should  speak."  (John 
xii.  49.) 

Some  think  that  our  Lord  only  meant,  "  The  sense  of  Scrip- 
ture which  I  give  is  not  my  own,  but  the  sense  in  which  God  at 
first  gave  it."  But  this  is  a  very  meagre  view  of  the  sentence, 
though  an  Arian  or  Socinian  may  like  it. 

Cyril  remarks:  "In  saying  that  He  was  sent  by  the  Father, 
He  does  not  show  Himself  inferior  to  the  Father.  For  this  mis- 
sion is  not  that  of  a  servant,  though  it  might  be  called  so,  as  He 
1  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a  servant.'  But  He  is  <  sent,'  as  a 
word  is  out  of  the  mind,  or  a  sunbeam  out  of  the  sun." 

Augustine  remarks :  "  This  sentence  undoeth  the  Sabellian 
heresy.  The  Sabellians  have  dared  to  say  that  the  Son  is  the 
same  as  the  Father :  the  names  two,  the  reality  one.  If  the 
names  were  two,  and  the  reality  one,  it  would  not  be  said,  '  My 
doctrine  is  not  mine.'  If  Thy  doctrine  be  not  Thine,  Lord, 
whose  is  it,  unless  there  be  another  whose  it  may  be?" 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  our  Lord  had  in  view  the  famous 
prophecy  of  Moses  in  which  God  says  of  Messiah,—"  I  will  put 
my  words  in  his  mouth."     (Deut.  xviii.  18.) 

Let  us  carefully  note  with  what  peculiar  reverence  we  should 
receive  and  study  every  word  that  fell  from  our  Lord's  lips. 
When  He  spoke,  He  did  not  speak  His  own  mind  only,  as  one  of 
His  Apostles  or  prophets  did.  It  was  God  the  Father  speaking 
with  and  through  Him.  No  wonder  when  we  read  such  expres- 
sions as  this  that  St.  John  calls  our  Lord  "  the  Word." 

17.— [If  any  man  will  do  his  will.~\  The  English  language  here 
fails  to  give  the  full  force  of  the  Greek.  It  is  literally,  "  If  any 
man  is  willing  to  do, — has  a  mind  and  desire  and  inclination  to 
do  God's  will."  It  is  not  the  simple  future  of  the  verb  "  do." 
There  are  two  distinct  verbs.  The  stress,  therefore,  in  reading 
the  sentence,  must  not  be  laid  entirely  on  "  doing"  God's  will. 
It  is  "if  any  man  is  willing  to  do." 

[He  shall  know  of  the  doctrine.]  This  means  he  shall  know 
"  concerning  and  about"  the  doctrine  I  am  proclaiming. 

[Whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  myself]  This 
means  "  whether  the  doctrine  is  from  God,  as  I  say  it  is, — the 


20  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


doctrine  of  God  the  Father,  which  he  has  commissioned  arid 
sent  me  to  proclaim  to  man, — or  whether  I  speak  from  myself, 
on  my  own  isolated  responsibility,  without  any  license  or  com- 
mission." The  translation  "speak  of  myself,"  is  unfortunately 
equivocal.  The  expression  does  not  mean  "  about  and  concern- 
ing "  myself,  but  " from"  myself. 

By  "doing  the  will  of  God,"  our  Lord  must  mean,  "obeying 
and  performing,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  that  will  of  God  which  we 
have  expressly  declared  to  us  in  the  word  of  God."  (17th  Arti- 
cle.) Such  "  doing  "  He  declares  is  the  way  to  knowledge.  It 
is  the  same  idea  as  the  "doing  truth"  of  John  iii.  21. 

The  principle  here  laid  down  is  one  of  immense  importance. 
We  are  taught  that  clear  knowledge  depends  greatly  on  honest 
obedience,  and  that  distinct  views  of  Divine  truth  cannot  be 
expected,  unless  we  try  to  practise  such  things  as  we  know. 
Living  up  to  our  light  we  shall  have  more  light.  Striving  to  do 
the  few  things  we  know,  we  shall  find  the  eyes  of  our  under- 
standing enlightened,  and  shall  know  more.  Did  the  Jews  pro- 
fess to  feel  perplexed,  and  not  to  know  whether  our  Lord  was 
sent  from  God  ?  Let  them  honestly  do  God's  will,  and  seek 
knowledge  in  the  path  of  sincere  obedience  in  such  matters  as 
were  clear  and  plain. — So  doing  they  would  be  guided  into  all 
truth,  and  find  their  doubts  removed. 

We  learn  from  these  words  how  greatly  they  err  who  profess 
to  be  waiting  till  their  mental  difficulties  are  removed  before 
they  become  decided  Christians.  They  must  change  their  plan. 
They  must  understand  that  knowledge  comes  through  humble 
obedience  as  well  as  through  the  intellect.  Let  them  begin  by 
honestly  doing  God's  will  as  far  as  they  know  that  will,  and  in 
so  doing  they  will  find  their  minds  enlightened. 

We  learn,  furthermore,  that  God  tests  men's  sincerity  by 
making  obedience  part  of  the  process  by  which  religious 
knowledge  is  obtained.  Are  we  really  willing  to  do  God's  will 
so  far  as  we  know  it  ?  If  we  are,  God  will  take  care  that  our 
knowledge  is  increased.  If  we  are  not  willing  to  do  His  will, 
we  show  clearly  that  we  do  not  want  to  be  God's  servants. 
Our  hearts  and  not  our  heads  are  in  fault. 

We  learn,  finally,  the  great  principle  on  which  many  will  be 
condemned  at  the  last  day.  They  did  not  live  up  to  their  light. 
They  did  not  use  such  knowledge  as  they  possessed,  and  so 
were  left  dark  and  dead  in  sins.  There  is  probably  not  one  in 
a  thousand  among  unconverted  people,  who  does  not  know  far 
better  than  he  practises.  Such  men  surely,  if  lost,  will  have 
none  to  blame  but  themselves  ! 

In  interpreting  this  verse,  I  believe  we  must  be  careful  not  to 
lay  more  meaning  on  the  expression  "do  His  will,"  than  our 
Lord  meant  it  to  bear.  I  say  this  because  I  observe  many  re- 
spectable commentators  place  such  f.  very  wide  and  comprehen- 


john,  chap.  vn.  21 


give  sense  upon  "doing  God's  will,"  that  they  miss  entirely  our 
Lord's  purpose  in  speaking  the  words.  They  start  with  saying, 
that  to  "  do  God's  will,"  we  must  have  faith  in  Christ,  new 
hearts,  grace  reigning  within  us,  and  the  like,  and  thus  repre- 
sent our  Lord  as  saying  in  effect,  "  If  any  man  will  become  a 
true  believer,  and  a  converted  man,  he  shall  '  know  of  the 
doctrine,' "  etc.  I  venture  to  think  that  such  interpretation 
completely  misses  the  mark,  and  is  going  round  in  a  circle.  Of 
course  any  true  believer  knows  true  doctrine.  I  believe  that 
our  Lord's  object  was  simply  to  encourage  the  honest-minded, 
sincere,  single-eyed  inquirer  after  truth.  To  such  a  man, 
though  at  present  very  ignorant,  He  says,  "  If  you  really  have 
a  desire  to  do  God's  will,  to  please  Him,  and  to  follow  any  light 
He  gives  you,  you  will  be  taught  of  Him,  you  will  find  out  the 
truth.  My  doctrine  may  be  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but 
it  is  revealed  to  babes."  (Matt.  xi.  25.)  I  hold,  in  short,  that 
we  should  take  as  simple  a  view  as  possible  of  the  sentence, 
"If  any  man  will  do  His  will,"  and  be  very  careful  that  we  do 
not  mar  its  usefulness  by  putting  more  meaning  on  it  than  our 
Lord  intended. 

Bishop  Hall  thus  paraphrases  the  text:  "If  any  man  shall, 
with  a  simple  and  houest  heart,  yield  himself  over  to  do  the 
will  of  my  Father,  according  to  the  measure  of  that  he  knows, 
God  shall  encourage  and  bless  that  man  with  further  light;  so 
as  he  shall  fully  know  whether  my  doctrine  be  of  God,  or  of 
myself." 

Burgon  remarks :  "  The  perception  of  truth  depends  on  the 
practice  of  virtue.  It  is  a  favourite  maxim  of  the  present  day, 
that  increased  knowledge  will  bring  with  it  growth  in  godli- 
ness. Scripture  at  all  events  entirely  reverses  the  process. 
The  way  to  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God,  is  to  do 
His  will."    (See  John  v.  44;  viii.  12.) 

Hengstenberg  remarks :  "  Whosoever  would  lead  souls  to 
Christ  should  not  tarry  long  about  the  specious  arguments 
with  which  the  natural  man  seeks  to  disguise  the  hateful  per- 
version of  his  state  of  will,  but  should  above  all  things  try  to 
excite  willingness  to  do  the  will  of  God." 

18. — [He  that  speaketh  of  himself,  etc.']  In  this  verse,  as  in  the 
preceding  verses,  "  He  that  speaketh  of  himself"  would  be  more 
literally  rendered  "speaketh  from  himself."  The  verse  con- 
tains a  general  principle,  applicable  not  only  to  our  Lord's  ow'.i 
case,  but  to  teachers  of  religion  in  every  age.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  as  follows : — "  He  that  undertakes  on  his  own  re- 
sponsibility, and  without  being  sent  by  God,  to  speak  to  men 
about  religion,  will  naturally  seek  to  advance  his  own  im- 
portance, and  get  honour  for  himself.  Speaking  from  himself, 
he  will  speak  for  himself,  and  try  to  exalt  himself.  He,  on  the 
contrary,  who  is  a  true  messenger  of  God,  and  in  whom  there 
is  no  dishonesty  or  unrighteousness,  will  always  seek  first  the 


22  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


glory  of  the  God  who  sent  him."    In  Fhort,  it  is  one  mark  of  a 
man  being  a  true  servant  of  God,  and  really  commissioned  by 

our  Father  in  heaven,  that  he  ever  seeks  his  Master's  glory 
more  than  his  own. 

The  principle  here  laid  down  is  a  very  valuable  one.  By  it 
we  may  test  the  pretensious  of  many  false  teachers  of  religion, 
and  prove  them  to  be  unsound  guides.  There  is  a  curious  ten- 
dency in  every  system  of  heresy,  or  unsound  religion,  to  make 
its  ministers  magnify  themselves,  their  authority,  their  im- 
portance, and  their  office.  It  may  be  seen  in  Eomanism  and 
Brahminism  to  a  remarkable  extent. 

Alford's  remark,  however,  is  very  true,  that  in  the  highest 
and  strictest  sense,  "  the  latter  part  of  the  sentence  is  only  true 
of  the  Holy  One  Himself,  and  that  owing  to  human  infirmity, 
purity  of  motive  is  no  sure  guarantee  for  correctness  of  doc- 
trine ;  "  and  therefore  in  the  end  of  the  verse  it  is  not  said,  "  he 
who  seeketh  God's  glory,"  but  "he  who  seeketh  His  glory  that 
sent  Him  " — specially  indicating  Christ  Himself. 

Burgon  thinks  that  "  true  "  is  a  word  used  intentionally,  in 
contrast  with  the  expression,  "  He  deceiveth  the  people." 

19.— [Did  not  Moses  give  you  the  law?]  Our  Lord  here  appeals 
to  the  well-known  reverence  with  which  all  Jews  regarded 
Moses  and  the  law.  But  it  is  highly  probable  that  He  had  in 
view  the  practice  of  publicly  reading  the  law  of  Moses  to  the 
people  during  the  seven  days  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which 
was  observed  once  in  every  seven  years  at  that  feast,  (l)eut. 
xxxi.  10.)  If,  as  is  possible,  this  was  one  of  the  seventh  years 
in  which  the  law  was  so  read,  there  would  be  a  singular 
significance  and  aptuess  in  His  appeal.  "This  very  day  you 
have  been  hearing  that  law,  which  you  profess  to  honour  so 
much.    But  do  you  honour  it  in  your  lives  ?  " 

[None  of  you  keepeth  the  laiv,  etc.]  This  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "  none  of  you  doeth  the  law."  It  is  the  same 
word  that  is  used  in  the  expression,  "  if  any  man  will  do  His 
will,"  (v.  17.)  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  "  You  reject  me  and 
my  doctrine,  and  profess  to  be  zealous  for  the  honour  of  Moses 
and  the  law.  And  yet  none  of  you  really  obey  the  law  in  heart 
and  in  spirit.  For  instance  :  why  do  you  seek  to  kill  me?  You 
are  full  of  hatred  of  me,  and  want  to  put  me  to  death  unjustly, 
in  the  face  of  the  sixth  commandment.  This  is  not  keeping  the 
law." 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  go  about,"  is  the  same  that  is 
rendered  "  seek"  in  v.  1  of  this  chapter,  and  ch.  v.  16,  18. 

20.— [The  people  answered  and  said,  etc.]  It  seems  probable  that 
those  who  said  this  were  the  common  people,  the  multitude  of 
Jews  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  to  many  of  whom 
our  Lord  was  a  stranger.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  the 
rulers  and  kf.ders  of  Jerusalem  would  have  spoken  in  this  way. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  23 

The  expression  "  Thou  hast  a  devil,"  may  possibly  be  a 
repetition  of  the  old  charge,  that  our  Lord  wrought  His  miracles 
by  Beelzebub,  and  was  in  league  with  the  devil,  as  John  viii.  48. 
In  that  sense  it  would  be  the  strongest  form  of  reproach, 
blasphemy,  and  contempt.  But  considering  who  the  speakers 
were,  it  is  more  likely  that  it  simply  means,  "  Thou  art  beside 
Thyself,  and  mad."    (So  John  x.  20.) 

The  expression,  "  who  goeth  about  to  kill  Thee,"  can  easily 
be  understood,  if  we  suppose  the  speakers  to  be  the  common 
people,  and  not  the  rulers.  The  common  people  probably  knew 
nothing  about  the  intention  of  the  rulers  to  put  Jesus  to  death, 
and  would  think  Him  beside  himself  to  say  that  any  one  wanted 
to  kill  Him. 

21. — [Jesus  answered...!  have  done  one  work.']  Our  Lord  can  only 
refer  here  to  the  miracle  He  had  wrought  on  a  former  occasion 
at  the  pool  of  Bethesda.  (Ch.  v.  1,  etc.)  This  was  at  present 
the  only  great  miracle  that  had  been  publicly  performed  in 
Jerusalem  :  and  from  its  having  led  to  our  Lord  being  brought 
before  the  Sanhedrim,  or  great  council  of  the  Jews,  and  to  His 
defence  made  before  them,  it  would  be  a  miracle  that  all  would 
know. 

[Ye  all  marvel.]  This  strong  present  tense  seems  to  mean, 
"ye  are  all  still  wondering,"  not  only  at  the  greatness  of  the 
miracle,  but  also  at  my  working  it  on  the  Sabbath  day. 
Schleusner  maintains  that  the  Greek  word  rendered  "marvel" 
means  here,  "ye  are  indignant,  ye  take  amiss."  He  thinks  the 
word  is  used  in  this  sense  in  Mark  vi.  6 ;  John  v.  28 ;  and  Galat. 
i.  6. 

22. — [Moses  therefore  gave  unto  you  circumcision.]  There  is  a 
difficulty  in  this  verse  in  the  expression  we  translate  "  therefore." 
It  is  literally,  "on  this  account, — for  this  reason,— on  account 
of  this."  It  is  not  easy  to  say  how  the  expression  conies  in,  and 
with  what  it  is  connected.  (1)  Some,  as  Theophylact,  Beza, 
Poole,  Whitby,  Hammond,  Maldonatus,  Pearce,  Doddridge, 
Bloomfield,  Olshausen,  Tholuck,  Hengstenberg,  and  Stier, 
propose  to  alter  the  stopping,  and  to  connect  it  with  the  end  of 
the  preceding  verse, — "ye  all  marvel  because  of  this  one  work." 
(Compare  Mark  vi.  6.)  But  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Greek 
language  will  fairly  admit  this. — (2)  Some  would  connect 
"therefore"  with  "are  ye  angry,"  in  the  following  verse: — 
"  Are  you  really  angry  with  me  on  account  of  this  one  work, 
when  you  yourselves  break  the  Sabbath,  in  a  sense,  by  circum- 
cising on  the  Sabbath  day?" — But  this  connection  seems  very 
distant  indeed. — (3)  Some,  as  Grotius,  Calovius,  Jansenius, 
and  Webster,  think  the  expression  altogether  elliptical,  and 
would  fill  up  the  sense  after  "  therefore,"  by  supposing  some 
such  connection  as  this  :— "  On  account  of  this  work  and  your 
anger  at  it,  let  me  remind  you  of  your  own  practice  about 
circumcision."     (See  Matt,  xviii.  22;  xii.  30;  Luke  xii.  22.)— 


24  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 


(4)  Some,  fis  Chemnitius,  Musculus,  and  De  Dieu,  interpret 
"therefore"  as  "because,"  and  make  the  sentence  mean, 
"  Because  Moses  gave  you  circumcision,  you  circumcise  a  man 
on  the  Sabbath  day,"  etc.  But  it  seems  a  violent  strain  to  make 
the  Greek  word  we  render  "therefore"  mean  "because."— (5) 
Some,  finally,  as  Alford,  Burgon,  Barradius,  Toletus,  and 
Lyranus,  would  connect  "therefore"  with  the  middle  of  this 
verse,  and  would  have  it  mean,  "  For  this  reason  Moses  gave 
you  circumcision,  viz.,  not  because  it  was  an  ordinance  ap- 
pointed first  by  him,  but  because  it  was  given  to  the  fathers," 
— i.  c,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  This  last  is  perhaps  as 
tenable  a  view  as  any.  But  it  is  undeniably  a  difficulty,  and 
must  remain  so.  Adopting  this  view,  the  whole  verse  may  be 
paraphrased  as  follows : — "  Moses,  whose  name  and  law  you 
highly  reverence,  gave  you  among  other  things  the  ordinance 
of  circumcision.  He  gave  it,  remember,  for  this  reason  :  because 
it  was  an  old  ordinance,  handed  down  to  him  by  your  fathers, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  not  an  ordinance  first  com- 
municated to  him  like  the  Levitical  law.  Now  you,  in  obedience 
to  the  ordinance  of  circumcision,  which  ought  to  be  administered 
on  the  eighth  day  after  a  child's  birth,  think  it  no  breach  of  the 
fourth  commandment  to  circumcise  a  child  on  the  Sabbath  day. 
In  fact,  you  postpone  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  to  the  law  of 
circumcision.  You  admit  that  a  work  of  piety  and  necessity 
may  be  clone  on  the  Sabbath  day.  You  admit  that  the  fourth 
commandment  which  was  given  on  Mount  Sinai  was  not  so 
important  as  the  older  law  of  circumcision." 

Burgon  shows  that  "  therefore  "  is  used  just  in  the  same  way 
as  here,  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  and  pointing  forward, 
in  John  v.  16,  18 ;  viii.  47 ;  x.  17 ;  xii.  18,  39. 

We  should  note  how  here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord  refers  to 
Moses  as  a  real  person,  and  to  the  Old  Testament  history  as 
real  true  history. 

23. — [If  a  man,  etc.']  The  argument  in  this  verse  is  as  follows : — 
"  Even  among  yourselves  you  circumcise  a  child  on  the  Sabbath 
day,  when  it  happens  to  be  the  eighth  day  after  his  birth,  in 
order  that  the  law  of  circumcision,  which  your  great  lawgiver, 
Moses,  sanctioned  and  re-ordained,  should  not  be  broken.  You 
thus  admit  the  whole  principle  that  there  is  some  work  which 
may  be  done  on  the  Sabbath  day.  Is  it  then  just  and  fair  to  be 
angry  with  me,  because  I  have  done  a  far  greater  work  to  a  mau 
on  the  Sabbath,  than  the  work  of  circumcision?  I  have  not 
wounded  his  body  by  circumcision,  but  made  him  perfectly 
whole.  I  have  not  done  a  purifying  work  to  one  particular 
part  of  him,  but  have  restored  his  whole  body  to  health  and 
strength.  I  have  not  done  a  work  of  necessity  to  one  single 
member  only,  but  a  work  of  necessity  and  benefit  to  the  whole 
man." 

I  cannot  see  any  ground  for  the  idea  suggested  by  Alford, 
that  our  Lord  implies  in  this  verse,  that  the  law  of  the  Sabbath 


25 


is  a  mere  Judaical  practice  and  comparatively  a  modern 
crdinance,  and  that  as  such  it  properly  gave  way  to  the  older 
and  higher  law  of  circumcision,  which  was  "of  the  fathers." — 
It  might  be  replied,  firstly,  that  the  Sabbath  is  so  far  from  being 
a  Jndaical  institution,  that  it  is  actually  olclerthan  circumcision, 
and  was  appointed  in  Paradise. — It  might  be  replied,  secondly, 
that  our  Lord  seems  purposely  to  guard  against  the  idea  by 
speaking  of  circumcision  as  "  given  by  Moses,"  and  as  a  part  of 
"the  law  of  Moses."  In  fact,  He  does  this  twice  with  such 
curious  particularity,  that  one  might  think  He  meant  to  guard 
against  any  one  wresting  this  passage  into  an  argument  against 
the  perpetual  obligation  of  the  Sabbath  day.  He  is  pleased  for 
the  occasion  to  speak  both  of  circumcision  and  the  SabT)ath  as 
part  of  "  the  law  of  Moses."  He  did  this  purposely,  because 
the  minds  of  His  hearers  were  full  of  Moses  and  the  law  at  this 
particular  period.  And  His  argument  amounts  to  this,  that  if 
they  themselves  allowed  the  Mosaic  law  of  the  Sabbath  must 
give  way  in  a  case  of  necessity  to  the  Mosaic  law  of  circumci- 
sion, they  admitted  that  some  works  might  be  done  on  the 
Sabbath  day;  and  therefore  His  work  of  healing  an  entire  man 
on  the  Sabbath  day  could  not  be  condemned  as  sinful. 

The  marginal  reading,  "  without  breaking  the  law  of  Moses," 
instead  of  "that  the  law  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken," 
appears  to  me  inadmissible  and  unnecessary.  It  is  inadmissible, 
because  it  is  a  forced  and  unnatural  interpretation  of  the  Greek 
words.  It  is  unnecessary,  because  our  Lord  is  evidently 
speaking  of  circumcision  as  part  of  "  the  law  of  Moses." 

The  idea  of  some  commentators,  as  Trapp,  Rollock, 
Plutcheson,  Beza,  and  Stier,  that  "  every  whit  whole  "  means 
11  wholeness"  of  soul  as  well  as  body,  and  implies  conversion  of 
heart  as  well  as  restoration  to  entire  health  and  strength  of  the 
physical  man,  appears  to  me  unlikely  and  far-fetched.  It  is  a 
pious  thought,  but  not  apparently  in  our  Lord's  mind.  More- 
over, it  is  not  quite  certain  that  the  man  healed  at  Bethesdawas 
healed  in  soul  as  well  as  body.     There  is  no  clear  proof  of  it. 

2\.— [Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  etc.']  The  sense  of 
this  verse  mu»t.  be  sought  in  connection  with  the  subject  of 
which  our  lord  has  just  been  speaking.  The  Jews  had 
condemned  our  Lord  and  denounced  Him  as  a  sinner  against  the 
fourth  commandment,  because  He  had  done  a  work  on  the 
Sabbath  day.  Our  Lord  refers  to  this  and  says,—"  Judge  not 
the  deed  I  did  according  to  the  appearance.  I  did  a  work  on 
the  Sabbath  unquestionably.  But  what  kind  of  a  work  was  it? 
It  was  an  act  of  necessity  and  mercy,  and  therefore  an  act  as 
lawful  to  be  clone  as  circumcision,  which  you  yourselves 
perform  on  the  Sabbath  clay.  In  appearance  the  Sabbath  was 
broken.  In  reality  it  was  not  broken  at  all.  Judge  fair  and 
just  and  righteous  judgment.  Do  not  hastily  condemn  an 
action,  such  as  this,  without  looking  below  the  surface." 


26 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


There  is  perhaps  a  reference  here  to  Isaiah's  prophecy  about 
Messiah,  "lie  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  His  eyesl"  (Isa. 
xi.  3.) 

The  principle  here  laid  down  is  one  of  vast  importance. 
Nothing  is  so  common  as  to  judge  too  favourably  or  too  un- 
favourably of  characters  and  actions,  from  merely  looking  at  the 
outward  appearance  of  things.  We  are  apt  to  form  hasty 
opinions  of  others,  either  for  good  or  evil,  on  very  insufficient 
grounds.  We  pronounce  some  men  to  be  good  and  others  to  be 
bad, — some  to  be  godly  and  others  to  be  ungodly,  without 
anything  but  appearance  to  aid  our  decision.  We  should  do 
well  to  remember  our  blindness,  and  to  keep  in  mind  this  text. 
The  bad  are  not  always  so  bad,  nor  the  good  so  good  as.  they 
appear.  A  potsherd  may  be  covered  over  with  gilding,  and 
look  bright  outside.  A  nugget  of  gold  may  be  covered  with 
dirt,  and  look  worthless  rubbish.  One  man's  work  may  look 
good  at  first,  and  yet  turn  out,  by  and  by,  to  have  been  done 
from  the  basest  motives.  Another  man's  work  may  look  very 
questionable  at  first,  and  yet  at  last  may  prove  Christ-like  and 
truly  godly.  From  rashly  "judging  by  appearances"  may  the 
Lord  deliver  us ! 

Whether  our  Lord  meant  "judge  not  persons,"  or  "judge  not 
actions,"  according  to  appearance,  is  a  point  on  which  com- 
mentators do  not  agree.  If  we  take  the  application  to  be  to 
"persons,"  the  sentence  means,  "  Do  not  hastily  suppose  that 
Moses  and  I  are  at  variance,  and  that,  therefore,  I  must  be 
wrong,  because  Moses,  the  great  lawgiver,  must  be  right." 
But  it  seems  far  simpler  and  more  natural  to  apply  the 
expression  to  "actions," — "Judge  not  the  thing  done  by  the 
appearance  only.    Look  below  the  surface  and  weigh  it  justly.'* 


JOHN  VII.   25-36. 


25  Then  said  some  of  them  of  Jeru- 
salem, Is  not  this  he  whom  they 
seok  to  kill  ? 

2G  But,  lo,  he  speaketh  boldly,  and 
they  say  nothing  unto  him.  Do  tho 
rulers  know  indeed  that  this  is  the 
very  Christ  ? 

27  Ilowbcit  we  know  this  man 
whence  he  is:  but  when  Christ  cometh, 
no  man  knoweth  whence  ho  is. 

28  Then  cried  Jesus  in  the  temple 
as  he  taught,  saying,  Ye  both  know 
me,  and  ye  know  whence  I  am:  and 
I  am  not  come  of  myself,  but  ho  that 
sent  me  is  true,  whom  yo  know  not. 


29  But  I  know  him:  for  I  am  from 
him,  and  he  hath  sent  mo. 

30  Thon  they  sought  to  tako  him: 
but  no  man  laid  hands  on  him,  because 
his  hour  was   not  yet  come. 

31  And  many  of  the  people  be- 
lieved on  him,  and  said,  When 
Christ  cometh,  will  ho  do  more  mira- 
cles than  these  which  this  man  hath 
done  ? 

32  IT  The  Pharisees  heard  that  the 
people  murmured  such  things  concern- 
ing him;  and  the  Pharisees  and  the 
chief  priests  sent  officers  to  tako  him 

33  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them,  Yet 


JOHN-,    CHAP.    VII. 


27 


A  little  while  am  I  with  you,  and  then 
I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me. 

34  Yo  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not 
find  me:  and  where  I  am,  thither  yo 
cannot  come. 

35  Then  said  the  Jews  among  them- 
selves, Whither  will  he  go,  that  we 


shall  not  find  him?  will  he  go  unto 
tho  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles,  and 
teach  the  Gentiles  ? 

36  What  maimer  of  saying  is  this 
that  he  said,  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and 
shall  not  find  me:  and  where  I  am 
thither  ye  cannot  come  ? 


We  see  in  these  verses,  the  obstinate  blindness  of  the  un- 
believing Jews.  We  find  them  defending  their  denial  of 
onr  Lord's  Messiahship,  by  saying, "  We  know  this  man 
whence  He  is :  but  when  Christ  cometh  no  man  knoweth 
whence  He  is."  And  yet  in  both  these  assertions  they 
were  wrong ! 

They  were  wrong  in  saying  that  they  "knew  whence 
our  Lord  came."  They  meant  no  doubt  to  say  that  He 
was  born  at  Nazareth,  and  belonged  to  Nazareth,  and  was 
therefore  a  Galilean.  Yet  the  fact  was,  that  our  Lord  was 
born  at  Bethlehem,  that  He  belonged  legally  to  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  and  that  His  mother  and  Joseph  were  of  the 
house  and  lineage  of  David.  It  is  incredible  to  suppose 
that  the  Jews  could  not  have  found  this  out,  if  they  had 
honestly  searched  and  inquired.  It  is  notorious  that 
pedigrees,  genealogies,  and  family  histories  were  most 
carefully  kept  by  the  Jewish  nation.  Their  ignorance  was 
without  excuse. 

They  were  wrong  again  in  saying  "  that  no  man  was  to 
know  whence  Christ  came."  There  was  a  well-known 
prophecy,  with  which  their  whole  nation  was  familiar,  that 
Christ  was  to  come  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem.  (Micah 
v.  2  ;  Matt.  ii.  5  ;  John  vii.  42.)  It  is  absurd  to  suppose 
that  they  had  forgotten  this  prophecy.  But  apparently 
they  found  it  inconvenient  to  remember  it  on  this  oc- 
casion. Men's  memories  are  often  sadly  dependent  on 
their  wills. 

The  Apostle  Peter,  in  a  certain  place,  speaks  of  some 
as  "  willingly  ignorant."     (2  Pet.  iii.    5.)     He  had   good 


28  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

reason  to  use  the  expression.  It  is  a  sore  spiritual  disease, 
and  one  most  painfully  common  among  men.  There  are 
thousands  in  the  present  day  just  as  blind  in  their  way  as 
the  Jews.  They  shut  their  eyes  against  the  plainest  facts 
and  doctrines  of  Christianity.  They  pretend  to  say  that 
they  do  not  understand,  and  cannot  therefore  believe  the 
things  that  we  press  on  their  attention,  as  needful  to  sal- 
vation. But,  alas !  in  nineteen  cases  out  of  twent}T  it  is 
a  wilful  ignorance.  They  do  not  believe  what  they  do 
not  like  to  believe.  They  will  neither  read,  nor  listen,  nor 
search,  nor  think,  nor  inquire,  honestly  after  truth.  Can 
any  one  wonder  if  such  persons  are  ignorant?  Faithful 
and  true  is  that  old  proverb, — "  There  are  none  so  blind  as 
those  who  will  not  see." 

We  see,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses,  the  overruling 
hand  of  God  over  all  His  enemies.  We  find  that  the  un- 
believing Jews  "  Sought  to  take  our  Lord :  but  no  man 
laid  hands  on  Him,  because  his  hour  was  not  yet  come." 
They  had  the  will  to  hurt  him,  but  b}r  an  invisible  restraint 
from  above,  they  had  not  the  power. 

There  is  a  mine  of  deep  truth  in  the  woids  before  us, 
which  deserves  close  attention.  They  show  us  plainly  that 
all  our  Lord's  sufferings  were  undergone  voluntarily,  and 
of  His  own  free  will.  He  did  not  go  to  the  cross  because 
He  could  not  help  it.  He  did  not  die  because  He  could 
not  prevent  His  death.  Neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  Pharisee 
nor  Sadducee,  Annas  nor  Caiaphas,  Herod  nor  Pontius 
Pilate,  could  have  injured  our  Lord,  except  power  had  been 
given  them  from  above.  All  that  they  did  was  done  under 
control,  and  by  permission.  The  crucifixion  was  part  of 
the  eternal  counsels  of  the  Trinit}^.  The  passion  of  our 
Lord  could  not  begin  until  the  very  hour  which  God  had 
appointed.     This   is  a   grea*;  mystery.     But  it  is  a  truth. 

The  servants  of  Christ  in  Q\ery  age  should  treasure  up 
the  doctrine  before  us,  and  remember  it  in  time  of  need. 


JOTIN,    CHAP.    VII.  29 

It  is  "  full  of  sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable  comfort  to 
goclly  persons."  Let  such  never  forget  that  they  live  in  a 
world  where  God  overrules  all  times  and  events,  and  where 
nothing  can  happen  but  by  God's  permission.  The  very 
hairs  of  their  heads  are  all  numbered.  Sorrow  and  sick- 
ness, and  poverty,  and  persecution,  can  never  touch  them, 
unless  God  sees  fit.  They  may  boldly  say  to  every  cross, 
— "  Thou  couldst  have  no  power  against  me,  except  it  were 
given  thee  from  above."  Then  let  them  work  on  confi- 
dently. They  are  immortal,  till  their  work  is  done.  Let 
them  suffer  patiently,  if  needs  be  that  they  suffer.  Their 
"times  are  in  God's  hand."  (Psl.  xxxi.  15.)  That  hand 
guides  and  governs  all  things  here  below,  and  makes  no 
mistakes. 

We  see  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  miserable  end  to  which 
unbelievers  may  one  day  come.  We  find  our  Lord  saying 
to  His  enemies, — "Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not  find 
me ;  and  where  I  am  thither  ye  cannot  come." 

We  can  hardty  doubt  that  these  words  were  meant  to 
have  a  prophetical  sense.  Whether  our  Lord  had  in  view 
individual  cases  of  unbelief  among  His  hearers,  or  whether 
He  looked  forward  to  the  national  remorse  which  many 
would  feel  too  late  in  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem,  are 
points  which  we  cannot  perhaps  decide.  But  that  many 
Jews  did  remember  Christ's  sayings  long  after  He  had  as- 
cended into  heaven,  and  did  in  a  way  seek  Him  and  wish 
for  Him  when  it  was  too  late,  we  may  be  very  sure. 

It  is  far  too  much  forgotten  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
finding  out  truth  too  late.  There  may  be  convictions  of 
sin,  discoveries  of  our  own  foil}7,  desires  after  peace,  anx- 
ieties about  heaven,  fears  of  hell, — but  all  too  late.  The 
teaching  of  Scripture  on  this  point  is  clear  and  express. 
It  is  written  in  Proverbs, — "  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me, 
but  I  will  not  answer  ;  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they 
shall  not  find  me."  (Prov.  ii.  28.)  It  is  written  of  the  foolish 


30  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

virgins  in  the  parable,  that  when  they  found  the  door  shut, 
they  knocked  in  vain,  saying,  "Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us." 
(Matt.  xxxv.  11.)  Awful  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  possible, 
by  continually  resisting  light  and  warnings,  to  sin  away 
our  own  souls.     It  sounds  terrible,  but  it  is  true. 

Let  us  take  heed  to  ourselves  lest  we  sin  after  the  ex- 
ample of  the  unbelieving  Jew's,  and  never  seek  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  a  Saviour  till  it  is  too  late.  The  door  of  mercy 
is  still  open.  The  throne  of  grace  is  still  waiting  for  us. 
Let  us  give  diligence  to  make  sure  our  interest  in  Christ, 
while  it  is  called  to-day.  Better  never  have  been  born 
than  hear  the  Son  of  God  say  at  last,  "  Where  I  am  thither 
ye  cannot  come." 

Notes.    John  VII.  25—36. 

25. — {Then  said  some  of... Jerusalem,  etc.'}  It  is  likely  that  these 
speakers  were  some  of  the  lower  orders  who  lived  at  Jerusalem, 
and  knew  what  the  rulers  wauted  to  do  to  our  Lord.  They  can 
hardly  be  the  same  as  "  the  people  "  at  20th  verse.  They,  being 
probably  strangers  to  the  plans  of  the  priests  and  Pharisees, 
said,  "who  goeth  about  to  kill  Thee?"  These,  on  the  other 
hand,  say,  "  is  not  this  He  whom  they  seek  to  kill?  " 

Tittman  remarks  that  the  argument  of  the  preceding  verses 
"  appears  to  have  had  great  weight  in  the  miuds  of  our  Lord's 
hearers." 

26.— [But,  lo,  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  nothing,  etc.']  There 
appears  to  have  been  a  restraining  power  put  on  our  Lord's 
enemies  at  this  juncture.  (S<-e  verse  30.)  It  certainly  seems 
to  have  struck  the  people  before  us  as  a  remarkable  thing,  that 
our  Lord  should  speak  out  so  boldly,  openly,  and  publicly,  and 
yet  no  effort  be  made  by  the  rulers  to  apprehend  Him  and  stop 
His  teaching.  No  wonder  that  they  asked  the  question  which 
immediately  follows.  "Have  our  rulers  changed  their  mind? 
Are  they  convinced  at  last?  Have  they  really  found  out  that 
this  is  truly  the  Messiah,  the  Christ  of  God  ?  " 

The  Greek  words  would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  Have 
the  rulers  truly  learned  that  this  man  is  truly  the  Christ?  " 

27. — [Howbeit  ice  know  this  man  whence  he  is.~]  This  means  that 
they  knew  that  our  Lord  was  from  Nazareth  of  Galilee.  This, 
we  must  remember,  was  the  universal  belief  of  all  the  Jews. 
When  our  Lord  rode  iuto  Jerusalem,  just  before  his  crucifixion, 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  31 


the  multitude  said,  "This  is  Jesus,  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  of 
Galilee."  (Matt.  xxi.  11.)  When  an  inscription  was  put  over 
His  head  on  the  cross,  in  the  letters  of  the  three  languages,  it 
was,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  king  of  the  Jews."  ( John  xix. 
19.  See  also  Matt.  xiii.  55 ;  Mark  vi.  3  ;  Luke  iv.  22.)  Yet  we 
know  all  this  time  that  the  Jews  were  mistaken,  and  that  our 
Lord  was  in  reality  born  at  Bethlehem,  according  to  prophecy. 
(Micah  v.  2.)  We  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  Jews  might  have 
found  out  this,  if  they  had  taken  the  pains  to  inquire  narrowly 
into  the  early  history  of  our  Lord's  life.  In  a  nation  so  strict 
about  pedigrees  and  birthplaces,  such  a  thing  could  not  be  hid. 
But  it  seems  as  if  they  would  not  take  the  pains  to  inquire,  and 
satisfied  themselves  with  the  common  story  of  His  origin,  as  it 
gave  them  an  additional  excuse  for  not  receiving  Him  as  the 
Messiah. 

The  entire  ignorance  which  appears  to  have  prevailed  among 
the  Jews,  about  all  the  circumstances  of  our  Lord's  miraculous 
conception,  and  His  birth  at  Bethlehem,  is  certainly  rather  re- 
markable. Yet  it  should  be  remembered  that  thirty  years  had 
passed  away  between  our  Lord's  birth  and  His  public  ministry, 
—  that  His  mother  and  Joseph  were  evidently  in  a  very  humble 
position  and  might  easily  be  overlooked,  as  well  as  all  that  hap- 
pened to  them, — and  that  living  quietly  at  Nazareth,  their  jour- 
ney to  Bethlehem  at  the  time  of  "  the  taxing"  would  soon  be 
forgotten  by  others. 

After  all  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  part  of  God's  dealings 
with  man,  not  to  force  conviction  and  belief  on  any  one.  The 
obscurity  purposely  left  over  our  Lord's  birthplace  was  a  part 
of  the  moral  probation  of  the  Jewish  nation.  If,  in  their  pride 
and  indolence  and  self-righteousness,  they  would  not  receive 
the  abundant  evidence  which  our  Lord  gave  of  His  Messiah- 
ship,  it  could  not  be  expected  that  God  would  make  unbelief 
impossible,  by  placing  His  birth  of  a  virgin  at  Bethlehem  be- 
yond the  reach  of  doubt.  In  this,  as  in  everything  else,  if  the 
Jews  had  honestly  desired  to  find  out  the  truth,  they  might  have 
found  it. 

[WJien  Christ  cometh,  no  man  knoiceth,  etc.~]  It  is  rather  diffi- 
cult to  see  what  the  Jews  meant  by  these  words.  Most  writers 
think  that  they  referred  to  the  mysterious  language  of  Isaiah 
about  Messiah, — "Who  shall  declare  his  generation;  "  (Isa.  liii. 
8;)  or  to  Micah's  words, — "  Whose  goings  forth  have  been  from 
of  old,  from  everlasting;  "  (Micah  v.  2;)  and  that  they  had  in 
view  the  Divine  and  heavenly  origin  of  Messiah,  which  all  Jews 
allowed  would  be  a  mystery.  Yet  it  is  hard  to  understand  why 
they  did  not  say,  "when  Christ  cometh,  He  shall  be  born  in 
Bethlehem,"  and  why  they  should  be  supposed  to  speak  of  our 
Lord's  earthly  origin  in  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  and  of 
Messiah's  Divine  origin  in  the  end.  There  seems  no  explana- 
tion except  to  suppose  that  these  speakers  were  singularly 
ignorant  Jews,  who  did  not  know  that  Messiah  was  to  be  born 


32  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


at  Bethlehem,  and  only  knew  that  His  birth  was  to  be  a  mys- 
terious thing.  This  is  a  possible  view,  if  not  a  very  probable 
one. — The  argument  of  the  speakers  before  us  would  then  be  as 
follows  : — "  When  Messiah  comes,  He  is  to  come  suddenly,  as 
Malachi  foretold,  saying,  '  the  Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to  His 
temple,'  (Mai.  iii.  1,)  unexpectedly,  mysteriously,  and  taking 
people  by  surprise.  This  man  therefore,  who  is  sitting  in  the 
temple  among  us,  cannot  be  the  Messiah,  because  we  know  that 
He  came  from  Nazareth  in  Galilee,  and  has  been  living  there  for 
more  than  thirty  years." — The  prophecy  about  Messiah  being 
born  at  Bethlehem,  they  conveniently  dropped  out  of  sight,  and 
in  fact  never  dreamed  that  it  was  fulfilled  by  our  Lord.  The 
only  prophecy  they  chose  to  look  at  was  the  one  in  Malachi, 
(Mai.  iii.  1,)  and  as  the  Lord  did  not  appear  to  fulfil  that,  they 
concluded  that  He  could  not  be  the  Christ.  In  religious  matters 
people  are  easily  satisfied  with  very  imperfect  and  superficial 
reasoning,  when  they  want  to  be  satisfied  and  to  be  spared 
further  trouble.  Men  never  want  reasons  to  confirm  their  will. 
This  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  Jews. 

Rupertus  mentions  a  common  tradition  of  the  Jews, — that 
when  Christ  came,  He  would  come  at  midnight,  as  the  angel 
came  at  midnight,  when  the  first-born  were  destroyed  in  Egypt, 
and  he  thinks  it  may  have  been  in  their  minds  here. 

Hutcheson  observes  that  "  not  comparing  of  Scripture  with 
Scripture,  but  taking  any  single  sentence  that  seems  to  plead 
for  that  we  would  be  at,  is  a  very  great  nursery  and  cause  of 
error.  Such  is  the  Jews'  reasoning  here.  They  catch  at  one 
thing,  speaking  of  Messiah's  Divinity,  and  take  no  notice  of 
other  places." 

Besser  quotes  a  saying  of  Luther's:  "The  Jews  are  poor 
scholars.  They  have  caught  the  sound  of  the  prophet's  clock, 
(Micah.  v.  2,)  but  they  have  not  noted  the  stroke  aright.  He 
who  does  not  hear  well,  imagines  well.  They  heard  that  Christ 
was  so  to  come,  that  none  should  know  whence  He  came.  But 
they  understood  not  right,  that  coming  from  God  He  was  to  be 
born  of  a  virgin,  and  come  secretly  into  the  world." 

28. — \_Tlien  cried  Jesus. ..temple. ..taught.]  This  is  a  remarkable 
expression.  We  find  our  Lord  departing  from  His  usual  prac- 
tice, when  we  read  that  He  "  cried,"  or  raised  His  voice  to  a 
high  pitch.  Generally  speaking,  the  words  in  St.  Matthew 
apply  strictly,  quoted  fromlsa.  xlvii.  1, — "He  shall  not  strive 
nor  cry.  neither  shall  any  man  hear  His  voice  in  the  street." 
(Matt.  xii.  19.)  Yet  we  see  there  were  occasions  when-He  did 
see  it  right  to  cry  aloud  and  lift  up  His  voice,  and  this  is  one. 
The  perverse  ignorance  of  the  Jews,  their  persistence  in  blind- 
ness to  all  evidence,  and  the  great  opportunity  afforded  by  the 
crowds  around  Him  in  the  temple  courts,  were  probably  rea- 
sons why  He  "  cried." 

Our  Lord  is  only  said  to  have  "  cried  "  or  lifted  up  His  voice 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  33 

in  four  other  passages  in  the  Gospels,— viz.,  Matt,  xxvii.  50; 
Mirk  xv.  39 ;  John  vii.  37,  and  xii.  44.  The  Greek  for  "cried  " 
in  Matt,  xxvii.  46  is  even  a  stronger  word  than  that  before 
us. 

[Ye  both  know  me  and. ..whence  lam.']  This  is  an  undeniably 
difficult  expression;  partly  because  it  is  hard  to  reconcile  with 
John  viii.  14,  and  partly  because  it  is  not  clear  how  the  Jews 
could  be  said  to  "know  our  Lord"  and  "whence  He  was." 
The  explanations  suggested  are  various. 

(1)  Some,  as  Grotius,  Lampe,  Doddridge,  Bloorafield,  Titt- 
man,  and  A.  Clarke,  would  have  the  sentence  read  as  a 
question  : — "  Do  you  both  know  me,  and  do  ye  know  whence  I 
am?  Are  you  quite  sure  that  you  are  correct  in  saying  this?  " 
— In  this  view  it  would  be  rather  like  the  mode  of  expression 
used  by  our  Lord  in  John  xvi.  31, — "Do  ye  now  believe?" 
where  the  interrogative  forms  the  beginning  of  the  sentence. 

(2)  Some,  as  Calvin,  Ecolampadius,  Beza,  Flacius,  Gualter, 
Rolluck,  Toletus,  Glassius,  Olshausen,  Tholuck,  Stier,  and 
Webster,  think  that  the  sentence  is  spoken  ironically: — "Truly 
you  do  know  me  and  whence  I  am,  aud  poor  miserable  knowl- 
edge it  is,  worth  nothing  at  all." — Bengel  and  others  object  to 
this  view,  that  our  Lord  never  spoke  ironically.  Yet  it  would 
be  hard  to  show  that  there  is  no  irony  in  John  x.  32,  if  not  in 
Matt.  xxvi.  45,  and  Mark  vii.  9. 

(3)  Some  think,  as  Chrysostom,  Cocceius,  Jansenius,  Di- 
odati,  Bengel,  Henry,  Burkitt,  Hengstenberg,  Alforcl,  Words- 
worth, and  Burgon,  that  the  sentence  is  is  a  simple  affirmation  : 
— "  It  is  true  that  you  know  me  and  whence  I  am.  I  grant  that 
in  a  certain  sense  you  are  right.  You  know  where  I  have  been 
brought  up,  and  who  my  relatives  according  to  the  flesh  are. 
And  yet  in  reality  you  know  very  little  of  me.  Of  my  Divine 
nature  and  my  unity  with  my  Father  ye  know  nothing  at  all." 
—On  the  whole  I  prefer  this  last  view  to  either  of  the  other 
twTo. 

[And  I  am  not  come  of  myself,  etc.']  This  sentence  and  the 
rest  of  the  verse  are  evidently  elliptical,  and  must  be  para- 
phrased to  give  a  full  idea  of  the  sense  : — "  Aud  yet  ye  do  not 
really  and  thoroughly  know  me;  for  I  am  not  come  of  myself, 
independent  of  God  the  Father,  and  without  commission,  but 
sent  by  the  Father  into  the  world.  And  He  that  seut  me  has 
proved  Himself  true  to  His  promises  by  sending  me,  and  is 
indeed  a  real  true  Person,  the  true  and  faithful  God  of  Israel, 
whom  ye,  with  all  your  profession,  do  not  know." 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord's  expression,  "not  come  of 
myself,"  points  directly  to  that  intimate  union  between  Himself 
and  God  the  Father,  which  is  so  constantly  referred  to  in  the 
Gospel  of  John. 

Here  too,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord  charges  on  the  unbelieving 


34  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Jews  ignorance  of  the  God  whom  they  professed  to  serve,  and 
for  whose  honour  they  professed  to  be  jealous.  With  all  their 
boasted  zeal  for  true  religion  and  the  true  God,  they  did  not 
really  know  God. 

The  word  "true,"  here,  is  of  doubtful  interpretation.  It 
means  "  truthful,"  according  to  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Theophy- 
lact,  Lampe,  Tholuck.  But  it  is  not  clear  that  this  is  so. 
Alford  maintains  that  it  must  mean  "  really  existent."  Trench 
takes  the  same  view  in  his  "  New  Testament  Synonyms." 

29. — [But  I  know  him,  etc.~\  The  knowledge  of  which  our  Lord 
here  speaks,  is  that  peculiar  and  intimate  knowledge  which  is 
necessarily  implied  in  the  unity  of  the  three  Persons  of  the 
Trinity,  in  the  Godhead.  There  is  a  high  and  deep  sense  in 
which  the  Son  knows  the  Father,  and  the  Father  knows  the 
Son,  which  we  cannot  pretend  to  explain,  because  it  is  far 
above  our  capacities.  (John  x.  15.)  The  Jews  knew  nothing 
rightly  of  God  the  Father.  Jesus  on  the  contrary  could  say, 
"I  know  him,"  as  no  one  else  could.  ''Neither  knoweth  any 
man  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son 
will  reveal  Him."     (Matt.  xi.  27.) 

The  expression  "  I  am  from  Him,"  must  not  be  confined  and 
cramped  down  to  mean  only  that  our  Lord  had  come  like  any 
prophet  of  old,  with  a  message  aucl  commission  from  God.  It 
declares  the  relationship  between  God  the  Father  and  God  the 
Son.  "  I  am  from  Him  by  eternal  generations, — always  one 
with  Him, — always  equal  with  Him,— but  always  a  distinct 
person;— always  the  only  begotten  Son, — always  from  Him." 

The  expression  "  He  hath  sent  me,"  is,  like  the  preceding 
one,  something  far  more  than  the  mere  assertion  of  a  prophet's 
commission.  It  is  a  declaration  that  He  was  the  Sent  One, — 
the  Messiah,  the  Prophet  greater  than  Moses,  whom  the  Father 
had  always  promised  to  send :— "  I  am  the  Seed  of  the  woman 
sent  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  I  am  He  whom  the  Father 
covenanted  and  engaged  to  send  for  the  redemption  of  a  lost 
world.  I  am  He  whom  the  Father  hath  sent  to  be  the  Saviour 
of  lost  man.  I  proclaim  myself  the  Sent  One,— the  Christ  of 
God." 

Bishop  Hall  paraphrases  the  two  verses  thus :  "  Ye  mutter 
secretly  that  ye  know  me,  and  the  place  of  my  birth  and  parent- 
age; but  ye  are  utterly  mistaken,  for  I  have  a  Father  in  heaven 
whom  ye  know  not.  I  came  not  of  myself,  but  my  Father  is  He 
that  sent  me,  who  is  the  God  of  truth ;  of  whom  ye,  after  all 
your  pretences  of  knowledge,  are  utterly  ignorant.  But  I  do 
perfectly  know  Him,  as  I  have  good  reason;  for  both  I  am 
from  Him  by  eternal  generation,  and  am  by  Him  sent  into  the' 
world  to  do  the  great  work  of  redemption." 

SO. — [  Then  they  sought  to  take  him.']  This  last  declaration  seems  to 
have  raised  the  anger  of  the  Jerusalem  multitude,  who  were  lis- 


JOHN,    CHAP.   VII.  35 

tening  to  our  Lord.  With  the  characteristic  keenness  of  all 
Jews  they  at  once  detected  in  our  Lord's  language  a  claim  to  be 
received  as  the  Messiah.  Just  as  on  a  former  occasion,  they 
saw,  in  His  "  calling  God  His  Father,"  that  He  "  made  Himself 
equal  with  God,  "  (John  v.  18,)  so  here  in  His  saying  "I  am 
from  Him  :  He  hath  sent  me,"  they  saw  an  assertion  of  His  right 
to  be  received  as  Messiah. 

[But  no  man. ..hour  not  ijet  come.']  This  restraint  on  our  Lord's 
enemies  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  direct  Divine  interposi- 
tion. It  is  like  John  viii.  20,  aud  xviii.  6.  It  is  clear  that  they  could 
do  nothing  against  Him  except  by  God's  permission,,  and  when 
God,  in  His  wisdom,  was  pleased  to  let  it  be  done.  Our  Lord 
did  not  fall  into  His  enemies'  hands  through  inability  to  escape, 
but  because  the  "hour  had  come,"  when  He  voluntarily  under- 
took to  die  as  a  substitute. 

The  doctrine  before  us,  let  us  note,  is  full  of  comfort  to  God's 
people.  Nothing  can  hurt  them  except  and  until  God  permits. 
We  are  all  immortal  till  our  work  is  done.  To  realize  that  noth- 
ing happens  in  this  world  except  by  the  eternal  counsels  of  our 
Father,  and  according  to  His  eternal  plans,  is  one  grand  secret 
of  living  a  calm,  peaceful,  and  contented  life. 

Besser  quotes  a  saying  of  Luther's:  "God  has  appointed  a 
nice,  easy  hour,  for  everything;  and  that  hour  has  the  whole 
world  for  its  enemy :  it  must  attack  it.  The  devil  shoots  and 
throws  at  the  poor  clock-hand,  but  in  vain :  for  all  depends 
on  the  hour.  Till  the  hour  comes,  and  the  hand  has  run  its 
course,  the  devil  and  the  world  shall  accomplish  nothing." 

SI.— [Many  of  the  people.']  This  means  the  common  people — the 
lower  orders,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Pharisees  and  chief 
priests. 

[Believed  on  Him.]  There  seems  no  reason  to  think  that  this 
was  not  a  true  faith,  so  far  as  it  went.  But  it  would  not  be  safe 
perhaps  to  conclude  that  it  was  more  than  a  general  belief  that 
our  Lord  must  be  the  Messiah,  the  Christ,  and  that  He  deserved 
to  be  received  as  such. 

[Wlien  Christ  cometh  ...  more  miracles... done.]  This  language 
must  clearly  have  been  used  by  people  who  were  familiar  with 
many  of  our  Lord's  miracles  wrought  in  Galilee,  and  knew  a 
good  deal  about  His  ministry.  So  few  miracles  probably  had 
been  wrought  as  yet  in  and  round  Jerusalem,  that  the  language 
would  hardly  be  used  by  Jerusalem  people.  The  word  "  more  " 
probably  means  not  only  more  in  number,  but  "  greater "  in 
character. 

The  question  raised  by  these  people  was  a  fair  and  reasonable 
one, — "  What  greater  evidence  could  any  one  give  that  He  is 
the  Christ,  than  this  man  has  given?  He  could  not  work  great- 
er miracles,  even  if  He  worked  more  numerous  ones.   What  then 


36  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


are  we  waiting  for?    Why  should  we  not  acknowledge  this  man 
as  the  Christ?"" 

32. — [The  Pharisees  heard  that  the  people  murmured...  him.']  This 
would  be  more  literally  translated,  "  The  Pharisees  heard  the 
people  murmuring ; "  they  actually  heard  with  their  own  ears 
the  common  people,  as  they  walked  about  the  temple  courts, 
and  gathered  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  crowded  time  of 
the  feast,  keeping  up  their  under  conversation  about  our  Lord. 
Here,  as  at  the  12th  verse,  the  word  we  render  "murmuring" 
does  not  necessarily  imply  any  finding  fault,  but  only  a  dissatis- 
fied and  restless  state  of  mind,  which  found  vent  in  much  con- 
versation and  whispering  among  the  people. 

[And  the  Pharisees. ..sent  officers  to  take  Him.']  It  would  seem 
that  the  talk  and  stir  of  men's  minds  about  our  Lord  so  alarmed 
and  irritated  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  that  they  resolved  even 
now  in  the  midst  of  the  feast  to  arrest  Him,  aud  so  stop  His 
preaching.  What  day  of  the  feast  this  was,  and  what  interval 
elapsed  between  this  verse  and  the  37th,  where  we  are  told  of 
"  the  last  day  "  of  the  feast,  we  are  not  told.  It  seems  probable 
that  the  officers  sought  an  opportunity  for  taking  our  Lord,  but 
could  find  none, — partly  because  of  the  crowds  that  surrounded 
Him,  and  partly  because  of  a  divine  restraint  laid  upon  them ; 
and  that  this  was  the  state  of  things  for  three  days  at  least. 

Full  well  did  these  Pharisees  justify  our  Lord's  character  of 
them  in  another  place:  "Ye  neither  go  in  yourselves  into  the 
kingdom :  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering  to  go  in." 
(Matt,  xxiii.  13.) 

33. — [Then  said  Jesus  unto  them.  ]  The  officers  of  the  Pharisees 
and  their  supporters  seem  clearly  to  be  the  persons  whom  our 
Lord  here  addresses.  Not  only  were  they,  through  Divine  re- 
straint, unable  to  lay  hands  on  Him,  but  they  were  obliged  to 
stand  by  and  listen  to  Him.  They  dared  not  seize  Him  for  fear 
of  the  people,  and  yet  dared  not  go  away  to  report  their  iuability 
to  carry  out  their  orders. 

[  Yet  a  little  while,  etc.  ]  There  is  probably  an  uuder-tone  of 
sadness  and  tenderness  about  this  and  the  following  sentences. 
It  is  as  though  our  Lord  said,  "  Ye  have  come  to  lay  hands  on 
me,  and  yet  ye  might  well  bear  with  me.  I  am  only  a  little  time 
longer  with  you,  and  then  when  my  time  is  come  for  leaving  the 
world,  I  shall  go  back  to  my  Father  who  sent  me."  Or  else  it 
must  mean,  "  Ye  are  sent  to  lay  hands  on  me,  but  it  is  useless  at 
present:  ye  cannot  do  it,  because  my  hour  is  not  yet  come.  I 
have  yet  a  little  longer  time  to  minister  on  earth,  and  then,  and 
not  till  then,  I  go  to  Him  that  sent  me."  Alford  takes  this  view. 

The  Jews  of  course  could  not  understand  whom  our  Lord 
meant  by  "Him  that  sent  me,"  and  this  saying  must  necessa- 
rily have  seemed  dark  aud  mysterious  to  them. 

34. — [Ye  shall  seek  me. ..shall,  not  find  me.]  These  words  seem 
addressed  both  to  the  officers  and  to  those  who  sent  them,— to 


JOHN,   CHAP.    VII.  37 

the  whole  body,  in  fact,  of  our  Lord's  unbelieving  enemies: — 
■*  A  day  will  come  too  late,  when  you  will  anxiously  seek  me, 
and  bitterly  lament  your  rejection  of  me,  but  too  late.  The  day 
of  your  visitation  will  be  past  and  gone,  and  you  will  not  find 
me." 

There  is  a  great  Bible  truth  taught  here,  as  elsewhere,  which 
is  far  too  much  overlooked  by  many,— I  mean  the  possibility  of 
men  seeking  salvation  when  it  is  too  late,  and  crying  for  pardon 
and  heaven  when  the  door  is  shut  forever.  Men  may  find  out 
their  folly  and  be  filled  with  remorse  for  their  sins,  and  yet  feel 
that  they  cannot  repent.  No  doubt  true  repentance  is  never 
too  late;  but  late  repentance  is  seldom  true.  Pharaoh,  King 
Saul,  and  Judas  Iscariot,  could  all  say,  "I  have  sinned."  Hell 
itself  is  truth  known  too  late.  God  is  unspeakably  merciful,  no 
doubt.  But  there  is  a  limit  even  to  God's  mercy.  He  can  be 
angry,  and  may  be  provoked  to  leave  men  alone.  People  should 
often  study  Prov.  i.  24 — 31;  Job  xxvii.  9;  Isai.  i.  15;  Jer.  xi. 
11;  xiv.  12;  Ezek.  viii.  18;  Hosea  v.  6;  Micahiii.  4;  Zech.  vii. 
13;  Matt.  xxv.  11,  12. 

These  words  very  possibly  received  a  most  awful  fulfilment 
during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  forty  years  after  they  were  spoken. 
So  think  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius. 

But  they  were  probably  found  true  by  many  of  our  Lord's 
hearers  long  before  that  time.  Their  eyes  were  opened  to  see 
their  folly  and  sin,  after  our  Lord  had  left  the  world. 

Burgon  remarks,  that  to  this  very  day  the  Jews  are  in  a  sense 
seeking  the  Messiah,  and  yet  not  finding  Him. 

{Wliere  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  come.']  The  place  our  Lord 
speaks  of  here  is  evidently  heaven.  Some  have  thought,  as 
Bengel,  that  the  words,  "where  I  am,"  should  be  translated, 
"where  I  go."  But  it  is  neither  a  natural  nor  usual  sense  to 
put  on  the  words.  Nor  is  it  necessary.  There  was  a  sense 
in  which  the  Son  of  God  could  say  with  perfect  truth — "  Where 
I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  come."  As  God,  he  never  ceased  to  be  in 
heaven,  even  when  He  was  fulfilling  His  ministry  on  earth  during 
his  incarnation.  As  God,  He  could  truly  say,  "where  I  am," 
and  not  merely  where  "  I  was,"  or  where  "  I  shall  be."  It  is 
like  John  iii.  13,  where  our  Lord  speaking  to  Nicodemus,  calls 
Himself  the  Son  of  man  which  IS  in  heaven."  The  expression 
is  one  of  the  many  texts  proving  our  Lord's  divinity.  No  mere 
man  speaking  on  earth  could  speak  of  heaven  as  a  place  "  where 
I  am."    Augustine  strongly  maintains  this  view. 

\Ye  cannot  come.']  This  is  one  of  those  expressions  which 
show  the  impossibility  of  unconverted  and  unbelieving  men 
going  to  heaven.  It  is  a  place  where  they  "  cannot  come." 
Their  own  nature  unfits  them  for  it.  They  would  not  be  happy 
if  they  were  there.  Without  new  hearts,  without  the  Holy 
Ghost,  without  the  blood  of  Christ  they  could  not  enjoy  heaven. 
The  favourite  notion  of  some  modern  theologians,  that  all  man- 


38  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

kind  are  finally  to  go  to  heaven,  cannot  possibly  be  reconciled 
with  this  expression.  Men  may  please  themselves  with  thinking 
it  is  kind  and  loving  and  liberal  and  large-hearted  to  teach  and 
believe  that  all  men  and  women  of  all  sorts  will  finally  be  found 
in  heaven.  One  word  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  overturns  the 
whole  theory. — Heaven  is  a  place,  He  says  to  the  wicked,  where 
"  ye  cannot  come." 

The  word  "ye"  is  emphatical,  and  in  the  Greek  stands  out 
in  strong  contrast  to  the  "  I  "  of  the  sentence. 

35.— [Then  said  the  Jews.. .themselves.']  The  expression  "Jews" 
here  can  hardly  be  confined  to  the  Pharisees  and  rulers.  It 
must  mean  at  any  rate  those  among  them  who  heard  our  Lord 
say  the  words  in  the  preceding  verse.  Whoever  they  were, 
they  were  probably  not  friendly  to  Him. 

[Wliither  will  He  go... not  find  Him.']  This  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "Whither  is  this  man  about  to  go."  They 
could  put  no  meaning  of  a  spiritual  kind  on  our  Lord's  words. 

[Will  He  go. ..dispersed. ..Gentiles,  etc.]  This  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "Is  He  about  to  go  to  the  dispersion  among 
the  Greeks,  and  to  teach  the  Greeks."  The  Greek  language, 
and  Greek  literature,  and  Greek  philosophy,  had  so  thoroughly 
leavened  Asia  Minor  and  Syria  and  Palestine,  that  the  expression 
"  Greeks  "  in  the  New  Testament  is  often  equivalent  to  Gentiles, 
and  stands  for  any  people  who  are  not  Jews.  Thus  Rom.  ii.  9 ; 
x.  3—9 ;  1  Cor.  x.  32 ;  xii.  13.  Yet  it  is  a  singular  fact  that  this 
is  the  only  passage  in  the  New  Testament  where  the  word 
"  Greek,"  standing  alone  and  not  in  contradistinction  to  Jews, 
is  rendered  "  Gentile." 

The  verse  teaches  two  interesting  things.  One  is  the  fact  that 
the  existence  of  a  large  number  of  Jews  scattered  all  over  the 
Gentile  world  was  acknowledged  as  notorious  in  our  Lord's  time. 
The  other  is  the  impression  that  it  proves  to  have  prevailed 
among  the  Jews  that  a  new  teacher  of  religion  might  be  expected 
to  go  to  the  Jews  scattered  among  the  Gentiles,  and,  beginning 
with  them,  proceed  to  teach  the  Gentiles.  This  is  in  fact  precisely 
what  the  Apostle  Paul  and  his  companions  afterwards  did.  They 
did  "go  to  the  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles,  and  teach  the 
Gentiics."  The  idea  started  here  of  "  teaching  the  Gentiles  "  was 
probably  the  suggestion  of  those  who  hated  our  Lord.  How 
much  the  Jews  detested  the  opening  of  the  door  of  salvation  to 
the  Gentiles,  we  know  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  Hengstenberg,  and  many 
others,  think  that  the  words  "dispersed  among  tiie  Gentiles" 
mean  the  Gentiles  themselves  dispersed  and  scattered  all  over 
the  world,  and  not  the  Jews.  But  our  own  version  seems  far 
more  likely.  There  is  an  awkwardness  in  calling  the  Gentiles 
"the  dispersion,"  and  it  is  an  expression  nowhere  else  used. 
James  calls  the  Jews  "the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad." 
(James  i.  1.) 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  39 

86.— [WJiat  manner  of  saying,  etc.~\  This  question  of  the  Jews  is 
the  language  of  people  who  saw  that  there  was  probably  some 
deep  meaning  in  our  Lord's  words,  and  yet  were  unable  to  make 
out  which  He  meant.  Hating  our  Lord  bitterly,  as  many  of 
them  did, — determined  to  kill  Him  the  first  opportunity, — vexed 
and  annoyed  at  their  own  inability  to  answer  Him,  or  to  stop 
His  influence  with  the  people, — they  suspected  everything  that 
fell  from  His  lips.  "  Do  not  these  words  of  his  imply  some 
mischief?  Is  there  not  some  evil  at  the  bottom  of  them?  Do 
they  not  indicate  that  he  is  going  to  dishonour  the  law  of 
Moses  by  pulling  down  the  wall  of  partition  between  Jew  and 
Gentile?" 


JOHN  VII.   37—39. 


37  In  the  last  day,  that  great  day 
of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried, 
Baying,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him 
come  unto  me,  and  drink. 

38  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the 
scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly 
ehall  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 


39  (But  this  spake  he  of  tho  Spirit, 
which  they  that  believe  on  him  should 
receive:  for  tho  Holy  Ghost  was  not 
yet  given;  because  that  Jesus  was  not 
yet  glorified.) 


It  has  been  said  that  there  are  some  passages  in  Scripture 
which  deserve  to  be  printed  in  letters  of  gold.  Of  such 
passages  the  verses  before  us  form  one.  They  contain  one 
of  those  wide,  full,  free  invitations  to  mankind,  which  make 
the  Gospel  of  Christ  so  eminently  the  "  good  news  of  God." 
Let  us  see  of  what  it  consists. 

We  have,  first,  in  these  verses,  a  case  supposed.  The 
Lord  Jesus  says,  "  If  any  man  thirst."  These  words  no 
doubt  were  meant  to  have  a  spiritual  meaning.  The  thirst 
before  us  is  of  a  purely  spiritual  kind.  It  means  anxiety  of 
soul, — conviction  of  sin, — desire  of  pardon, — longing  after 
peace  of  conscience.  When  a  man  feels  his  sins,  and  wants 
forgiveness — is  deeply  sensible  of  his  soul's  need,  and  ear- 
nestly desires  help  and  relief — then  he  is  in  that  state  of  mind 
which  our  Lord  had  in  view,  when  he  said,  "  If  any  man 
thirst."  The  Jews  who  heard  Peter  preach  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  and  were  "  pricked  in  their  hearts," — the  Phi- 
lippian  jailer  who  cried  to  Paul  and  Silas,  "  What  must  I 


40  EXPOSITORY   TnOUGIITS. 

do  to  be  saved?"  are  both  examples  of  what  the  expression 
means.     In  both  cases  there  was  "  thirst." 

Such  thirst  as  this,  unhappily,  is  known  by  few.  All 
ought  to  feel  it,  and  all  would  feel  it  if  they  were  wise. 
Sinful,  mortal,  dying  creatures  as  we  all  are,  with  souls 
that  will  one  day  be  judged  and  spend  eternity  in  heaven  or 
hell,  there  lives  not  the  man  or  woman  on  earth  who  ought 
not  to  "thirst"  after  salvation.  And  yet  the  many  thirst 
after  everything  almost  except  salvation.  Money,  pleas- 
ure, honour,  rank,  self-indulgence, — these  are  the  things 
which  they  desire.  There  is  no  clearer  proof  of  the  fall  of 
man,  and  the  utter  corruption  of  human  nature,  than  the 
careless  indifference  of  most  people  about  their  souls.  No 
wonder  the  Bible  calls  the  natural  man  "  blind,"  and 
"  asleep,"  and  "  dead,"  when  so  few  can  be  found  who  are 
awake,  alive,  and  athirst  about  salvation. 

Happy  are  those  who  know  something  by  experience  of 
spiritual  "  thirst."  The  beginning  of  all  true  Christianity 
is  to  discover  that  we  are  guilty,  empty,  needy  sinners. 
Till  we  know  that  we  are  lost,  we  are  not  in  the  way  to  be 
saved.  The  very  first  step  toward  heaven  is  to  be  thor- 
oughly convinced  that  we  deserve  hell.  That  sense  of  sin 
which  sometimes  alarms  a  man  and  makes  him  think  his 
own  case  desperate,  is  a  good  sign.  It  is  in  fact  a  symp- 
tom of  spiritual  life :  "  Blessed  indeed  are  they  which  do 
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for  the}'  shall  be 
filled."     (Matt.  v.  6.) 

We  have,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  a  remedy  proposed. 
The  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come 
unto  me  and  drink."  He  declares  that  He  is  the  true  foun- 
tain of  life,  the  supplier  of  all  spiritual  necessities,  the  re- 
liever of  all  spiritual  wants.  He  invites  all  who  feel  the 
burden  of  sin  heavy,  to  apply  to  Him,  and  proclaims  Him- 
self their  helper. 

Those  words  "  let  him  come  unto  me,"  are  few  and  very 


jonx,   CHAP.   VII.  41 

simple.  But  they  settle  a  mighty  question  which  all  the 
■wisdom  of  Greek  and  Roman  philosophers  could  never 
settle ;  they  show  how  man  can  have  peace  with  God. 
They  show  that  peace  is  to  be  had  in  Christ. by  trusting  in 
Him  as  our  mediator  and  substitute, — in  one  word,  by  be- 
lieving. To  "  come"  to  Christ  is  to  believe  on  Him,  and 
to  "  believe  "  on  Him  is  to  come.  The  remedy  may  seem 
a  ver}'  simple  one,  too  simple  to  be  true.  But  there  is  no 
other  remedy  than  this  ;  and  all  the  wisdoin  of  the  world 
can  never  find  a  flaw  in  it,  or  devise  a  better. 

To  use  this  grand  prescription  of  Christ  is  the  secret  of 
all  saving  Christianit}'.  The  saints  of  God  in  every  age 
have  been  men  and  women  who  drank  of  this  fountain  by 
faith,  and  were  relieved.  They  felt  their  guilt  and  empti- 
ness, and  thirsted  for  deliverance.  They  heard  of  a  full 
suppl}7  of  pardon,  mercy,  and  grace  in  Christ  crucified  for 
all  penitent  believers.  They  believed  the  good  news  and 
acted  upon  it.  They  cast  aside  all  confidence  in  their  own 
goodness  and  worthiness,  and  came  to  Christ  by  faith  as 
sinners.  So  coming  they  found  relief.  So  coming  daily 
the}7  lived.  So  coming  they  died.  Really  to  feel  the  sin- 
fulness of  sin  and  to  thirst,  and  really  to  come  to  Christ 
and  believe,  are  the  twro  steps  which  lead  to  heaven.  But 
they  are  mighty  steps.  Thousands  are  too  proud  and 
careless  to  take  them.  Few,  alas !  think,  and  still  fewer 
believe. 

We  have,  lastty,  in  these  verses,  a  promise  held  out. 
The  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  He  that  believeth  on  me,  out  of  his 
belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  These  words  of 
course  were  meant  to  have  a  figurative  sense.  They  have 
a  double  application.  They  teach,  for  one  thing,  that  all 
who  come  to  Christ  by  faith  shall  find  in  Him  abundant 
satisfaction.  They  teach,  for  another  thing,  that  believers 
shall  not  only  have  enough  for  the  wants  of  their  own  souls, 
but  shall  also  become  fountains  of  blessings  to  others. 


42  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

The  fulfilment  of  the  first  part  of  the  promise  could  be 
testified  lry  thousands  of  living  Christians  in  the  present 
day.  They  would  say,  if  their  evidence  could  be  collected, 
that  when  they  came  to  Christ  by  faith,  they  found  in  Ilim 
more  than  they  expected.  They  have  tasted  peace,  and 
hope,  and  comfort,  since  they  first  believed,  which,  with 
all  their  doubts  and  fears,  they  would  not  exchange  for 
anything  in  this  world.  They  have  found  grace  according 
to  their  need,  and  strength  according  to  their  days.  In 
themselves  and  their  own  hearts  they  have  often  been  dis- 
appointed ;  but  they  have  never  been  disappointed  in 
Christ. 

The  fulfilment  of  the  other  half  of  the  promise  will  never 
be  fully  known  until  the  judgment-day.  That  day  alone 
shall  reveal  the  amount  of  good  that  every  believer  is  made 
the  instrument  of  doing  to  others,  from  the  very  day  of  his 
conversion.  Some  do  good  while  they  live,  by  their 
tongues  ;  like  the  Apostles  and  first  preachers  of  the  Gos- 
pel. Some  do  good  when  they  are  dying  ;  like  Stephen  and 
the  penitent  thief,  and  our  own  mai  tyred  Reformers  at  the 
stake.  Some  do  good  long  after  they  are  dead,  by  their 
writings  ;  like  Baxter  and  Bunyan  and  M'Cheyne.  But  in 
one  way  or  another,  probably,  almost  all  believers  will  be 
found  to  have  been  fountains  of  blessings.  By  word  or  by 
deed,  by  precept  or  by  example,  directly  or  indirectly,  they 
are  always  leaving  their  marks  on  others.  They  know  it 
not  now ;  but  they  will  find  at  last  that  it  is  true.  Christ's 
saying  shall  be  fulfilled. 

Do  we  ourselves  know  anything  of  "  coming  to  Christ?  " 
This  is  the  question  that  should  arise  in  our  hearts  as  we 
leave  this  passage.  The  worst  of  all  states  of  soul  is  to  be 
without  feeling  or  concern  about  eternity, — to  be  without 
"  thirst."  The  greatest  of  all  mistakes  is  to  try  to  find  re- 
lief in  any  other  way  than  the  one  before  us, — the  way  of 
Rimply  "  coming  to  Christ."    It  is  one  thing  to  come  to 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  43 

Christ's  Church,  Christ's  ministers,  and  Christ's  ordinan- 
ces. It  is  quite  another  thing  to  come  to  Christ  Himself. 
Happy  is  he  who  not  only  knows  these  things,  but  acts 
upon  them ! 

Notes.    John  VII.  37—39. 

87. — [In. ..last  day... great  day... feast. ]  There  seems  to  be  an  in- 
terval of  three  days  between  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one. 
At  any  rate  it  is  certain  that  our  Lord  went  to  the  temple  and 
taught  "about  the  midst  of  the  feast."  (v.  14.)  There  seems 
no  break  from  that  point,  but  a  continuous  narrative  of  teach- 
ing and  argument  up  to  this  verse.  There  is  therefore  no  ac- 
count of  what  our  Lord  did  duriug  the  three  latter  days  of  the 
feast.  We  can  only  conjecture  that  He  taught  on  uninter- 
rupted, and  that  a  restraint  was  put  by  divine  interposition 
on  His  enemies,  so  that  they  dared  not  interfere  with  Him. 

Whether  this  "  last  day  of  the  feast"  means  the  eighth  day  or 
the  seventh,  is  a  question  not  decided. 

(1)  Some,  as  Bengel,  and  others,  think  it  must  be  the  seventh 
day,  because  in  the  account  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles  given  by 
Moses,  there  is  no  special  mention  of  anything  to  be  done  on 
the  eighth  day ;  (Levit.  xxiv.  33 — 43 ;)  while  on  each  of  the  seven 
days  of  the  feast  there  were  special  sacrifices  appointed,  a  spe- 
cial reading  of  the  law  once  every  seven  years,  and  also,  accord- 
ing to  the  Jewish  writers,  a  solemn  drawing  of  water  from  the 
pool  of  Siloam,  to  be  poured  on  the  altar  in  the  temple. 

(2)  Others,  as  Lightfoot,  Gill,  Alford,  Stier,  Wordsworth,  and 
Burgon,  think  it  must  be  the  eighth  day,  because  in  reality  the 
feast  could  hardly  be  said  to  be  finished  till  the  end  of  the  eighth 
day;  and  even  in  the  account  of  the  feast  in  Leviticus,  it  is  said 
that  the  eighth  day  is  to  be  "a holy  convocation " and  a  "  sab- 
bath."    (Lev.  xxiii.  36  and  39.) 

The  point  is  of  no  practical  importance ;  but  of  the  two  opin- 
ions I  incline  to  prefer  the  second  one.  The  words  seem  to  me 
to  indicate  that  all  the  ceremonial  of  the  feast  was  over,  the  last 
offerings  had  been  made,  and  the  people  were  on  the  point  of 
dispersing  to  their  respective  homes,  when  our  Lord  seized  the 
opportunity,  and  made  the  grand  proclamation  which  immedi- 
ately follows. — It  was  a  peculiarly  typical  occasion.  The  last 
feast  of  the  year  was  concluding,  and  before  it  concluded  our 
Lord  proclaimed  publicly  the  great  truth  which  was  the  com- 
mencement of  a  new  dispensation,  and  Himself  as  the  end  of 
all  sacrifices  and  ceremonies. 

The  objection  that  no  drawing  and  pouring  of  water  took 
place  on  the  eighth  day,  appears  to  me  of  no  weight.  That  our 
Lord  referred  to  it,  is  highly  probable.  But  I  think  He  re- 
ferred to  it  as  a  thing  which  the  Jews  had  seen  seven  days  run« 


44  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


ning,  and  remembered  well.  Now  on  the  eighth  day,  when 
there  was  no  water  drawn,  there  seems  a  peculiar  fitness  in  His 
crying, — "  Come  unto  me  and  drink.  The  water  of  life  that  I 
give  may  be  drawn,  though  the  feast  is  over." 

[Jesus  stood  and  cried.]  These  words  must  mean  that  our 
Lord  chose  some  high  and  prominent  position,  where  He  could 
"  stand  "  and  be  seen  and  heard  by  many  persons  at  once.  If, 
as  we  may  suppose,  the  worshippers  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
were  just  turning  away  from  the  last  of  its  ceremonies,  one  can 
easily  imagine  that  our  Lord  "stood"  in  some  commanding 
position  close  by  the  entrance  of  the  temple.  When  it  is  said 
that  "He  cried,"  it  means  that  He  lifted  up  His  voice  in  a  load, 
and  to  Him  unusual  manner,  in  order  to  arrest  attention, — like 
a  herald  making  a  public  proclamation. 

\lf  any  man  thirst.. .come  unto  me  and  drink."]  These  words 
can  have  but  one  meaning. — They  are  a  general  invitation  to  all 
who  are  athirst  about  their  souls,  to  come  unto  Christ  in  order 
to  obtain  relief.  He  declares  Himself  to  be  the  fountain  of  life, 
— the  reliever  of  man's  spiritual  wants, — the  giver  of  satisfac- 
tion to  weary  consciences, — the  remover  and  pardoner  of  sins. 
He  recommends  all  who  feel  their  sins  and  want  pardon,  to 
come  unto  Him,  and  promises  that  they  shall  at  once  get  what 
they  want.  The  idea  is  precisely  the  same  as  that  in  Matt.  xi. 
28,  though  the  image  employed  is  different. 

It  is  probable,  as  almost  all  commentators  remark,  that  our 
Lord  chose  this  figure  and  imagery,  because  of  the  Jewish  cus- 
tom of  drawing  water  from  the  pool  of  Siloam  during  the  feast 
of  tabernacles,  and  carrying  it  in  solemn  procession  to  the  tem- 
ple. And  it  is  thought  that  our  Lord  purposely  refers  to  this 
ceremony,  of  which  the  minds  of  many  would  doubtless  be 
full: — "Does  any  one  want  true  water  of  life,  better  than  any 
water  of  Siloam? — Let  him  come  to  Me  and  by  faith  draw  out 
of  Me  living  waters, — even  peace  of  conscience,  and  pardon  of 
sins." — But  it  is  fair  to  remember  that  this  is  only  conjecture. 
This  custom  of  drawing  water  from  Siloam  at  the  feast  was  a 
human  invention,  nowhere  commanded  in  the  law  of  Moses,  or 
even  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament ;  and  it  admits  of  doubt 
whether  our  Lord  would  have  sanctioned  it.  Moreover,  it  is 
evident  from  John  iv.  10,  and  vi.  35,  that  the  figures  of  "  water  " 
and  "thirst "were  not  unfrequently  used  by  our  Lord. — The 
figures  at  any  rate  were  familiar  to  all  Jews,  from  Isaiah  lv. 
1. 

Some  have  thought,  because  the  feast  of  tabernacles  was 
specially  intended  to  remind  the  Jews  of  their  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness,  that  our  Lord  had  in  view  the  miraculous  supply  of 
water  from  the  rock,  which  followed  Israel  everywhere,  and 
that  He  wished  the  Jews  to  see  in  Him  the  fulfilment  of  that 
type,  the  true  Rock.  (1  Cor.  x.  4.)  The  idea  is  deserving  of 
attention. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  45 

The  whole  sentence  is  one  of  those  golden  sayings  which 
ought  to  be  dear  to  every  true  Christian,  and  is  full  of  wide  en- 
couragement to  all  sinuers  who  hear  it. — Its  words  deserve 
special  attentiou. 

We  should  note  the  breadth  of  the  invitation.  It  is  for  "  any 
man."  No  matter  who  and  what  he  may  have  been, — no  matter 
how  bad  and  wicked  his  former  life, — the  hand  is  held  out,  and 
the  offer  made  to  Him: — "If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come." 
Let  no  man  say  that  the  Gospel  is  narrow  in  its  offers. 

We  should  note  the  persons  invited.  They  are  those  who 
"thirst."  That  expression  is  a  figurative  one,  denoting  the 
spiritual  distress  and  anxiety  which  any  one  feels  when  he  dis- 
covers the  value  of  his  soul,  and  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  his 
own  guilt.  Such  an  one  feels  a  burning  desire  for  relief,  of 
which  the  distressing  sensation  of  "  thirst  " — a  sensation  famil- 
iar to  all  Eastern  nations— is  a  most  fitting  emblem.  No  further 
qualification  is  named.  There  is  no  mention  of  repentance, 
amendment,  preparation,  conditions  to  fulfil,  new  heart  to  be 
got.  One  thing  alone  is  named.  Does  a  man  "  thirst?  "  Does 
he  feel  his  sins  and  want  pardon? — Then  the  Lord  invites 
him. 

We  should  note  the  simplicity  of  the  course  prescribed  to  a 
thirsting  sinner. — It  is  simply,  "  Let  him  come  unto  Me."  He 
has  only  to  cast  his  soul  on  Christ,  trust  Him,  lean  on  Him, 
believe  on  Him,  commit  his  soul  with  all  its  burdens  to  Him,  audi 
that  is  enough.  To  trust  Christ  is  to  "come"  to  Christ. — So 
"  coming,"  Christ  will  supply  all  his  need.  So  believing,  he  is 
at  once  forgiven,  justified,  and  received  into  the  number  of  God's 
children.     (See  John  vi.  35,  87.) 

The  expression  "drink,"  is  of  course  figurative,  answering  to 
the  word  "  thirst."  It  means,  "  Let  him  freely  take  from  me 
everything  that  his  soul  wants, — mercy,  grace,  pardon,  peace, 
strength.  I  am  the  fountain  of  life.  Let  him  use  me  as  such, 
and  I  shall  be  well  pleased." 

We  do  not  read  of  any  prophet  or  Apostle  in  the  Bible  who 
ever  used  such  language  as  this,  and  said  to  men,  "  Come  uuto 
me  and  drink."  None  surely  could  use  it  but  one  who  knew 
that  He  was  very  God. 

88. — [He  that  believeth  on  me,  etc.']  This  verse  is  undoubtedly  full 
of  difficulties,  and  has  received  very  various  interpretations.  Not 
the  least  difficulty  is  about  the  connection  in  which  the  several 
expressions  of  the  verse  ought  to  be  taken. 

(1)  Some,  as  Stier,  would  connect  "  He  that  believeth  on 
me  "  with  the  verb  "drink"  in  the  preceding  verse.  It  would 
then  run  thus,  —  "  If  any  man  thirst  let  him  come  unto  me,  and 
let  him  drink  that  believeth  on  me." — I  cannot  think  this  is  a 
right  view.  For  one  thing,  it  would  be  a  violent  strain  of  all 
grammatical  usage  of  the  Greeklanguage,  to  interpret  the  words 


46  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS'. 

thus.  For  another  thing,  it  would  introduce  doctrinal  con- 
fusion. Our  Lord's  invitation  was  not  made  to  him  "  that  be- 
lieveth,"  but  to  him  that  is  "  athirst." 

(2)  Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  Pellican,  Heinsius, 
Gualter,  De  Dieu,  Lightfoot,  Trapp,  and  Henry,  would  connect 
"  lie  that  believeth  on  me"  with  the  following  words, — "  As  the 
Scripture  hath  said."  It  would  then  mean,  "  He  that  believeth 
on  me  after  the  manner  that  the  Scripture  bids  him  believe." 
I  cannot  think  that  this  interpretation  is  correct.  The  expres- 
sion, "  Believeth  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,"  is  a  very  strange 
and  vague  one,  and  unlike  anything  else  in  the  Bible. 

(3)  Most  commentators  think  that  the  words,  "As  the  Scrip- 
ture hath  said,"  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  those  that 
follow,  "out  of  his  belly,"  etc.  They  think  that  our  Lord  did 
not  mean  to  quote  precisely  any  one  text  of  Scripture,  but  only 
to  give  in  His  own  words  the  general  sense  of  several  wrell- 
kuown  texts.  This,  in  spite  of  difficulties,  I  believe  is  the  only 
satisfactory  view. 

One  difficulty,  of  a  grammatical  kind,  arises  from  the  expres- 
sion, "  He  that  believeth  on  me,"  having  no  verb  with  which  it 
is  connected  in  the  verse.  This  cannot  be  got  over.  It  must 
be  taken  as  a  nominative  absolute,  and  the  sentence  must  bd 
regarded  as  an  elliptical  sentence,  which  we  must  fill  up. 

Another  difficulty  arises  from  the  fact,  that  there  is  no  text 
in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  which  at  all  answers  to  the 
quotation  apparently  given  here.  This  difficulty  is  undeuiable, 
but  not  insuperable.  As  I  have  already  said,  our  Lord  did  not 
intend  to  give  an  exact  quotation,  but  only  the  general  sub- 
stance of  several  Old  Testament  promises.  Wordsworth  thinks 
Matt.  ii.  23  a  similar  case.  Jerome  also  maintains  that  fre- 
quently the  inspired  writers  contented  themselves  with  giving 
the  sense  and  not  the  precise  words  of  a  quotation.  (See  also 
Ephes.  v.  14.) 

Another  difficulty  arises  as  to  the  application  of  the  words, 
"  Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  Some,  as 
Rupertus,  Bengel,  and  Stier,  would  apply  this  to  our  Lord  Him- 
self, and  say  that  it  meaus,  "  Out  of  Christ's  belly  shall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water."  But  it  is  a  grave  objection  to  this  view 
that  it  totally  disconnects  the  beginning  of  the  verse  from  the 
end, — makes  the  expression  "  He  that  believeth  on  me  "even 
more  elliptical  than  it  needs  be,— and  throws  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse  into  the  form  of  a  precise  quotation  of  Scripture. 

I  venture  to  think  that  the  true  interpretation  of  the  verse  is 
as  follows  : — "  He  that  believeth  on  me,  or  comes  to  me  by  faith 
as  his  Saviour,  is  the  man  out  of  whose  belly  shall  flow  rivers 
of  living  water,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said  it  should  be."  It  is 
a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  this  view  that  our  Lord  said  to 
the  Samaritan  woman,  that  the  water  He  could  give  would  be 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  47 


In  him  that  drank  it  "a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  ever- 
lasting life."  (John  iv.  14.)  The  full  meaning  of  the  promise 
is  that  every  believer  in  Christ  shall  receive  abundant  satisfac- 
tion of  his  own  spiritual  wants ;  and  not  only  that,  but  shall 
also  become  a  source  of  blessing  to  others.  From  him  instru- 
mentally,  by  his  word,  work,  and  example,  waters  of  life  shall 
flow  forth  to  the  everlasting  benefit  of  his  fellow-men.  He 
shall  have  enough  for  himself,  and  shall  be  a  blessing  to  others. 
The  imagery  of  the  figure  used  is  still  kept  up,  and  "  his  belly  " 
must  stand  for  "  his  inner  man."  His  heart  being  filled  with 
Christ's  gifts  shall  overflow  to  others,  and  having  received 
much,  shall  give  and  impart  much. 

The  passages  to  which  our  Lord  referred,  and  the  substance 
of  which  He  gives,  are  probably  Isai.  xii.  3;  xxxv.  G,  7;  xli.  18; 
xliv.  3;  lv.  1;  lviii.  11;  Zech.  xiv.  8,  16.  Of  these  passages  our 
Lord  gives  the  general  sense,  but  not  the  precise  words.  This 
is  the  view  of  Calvin,  Beza,  Grotius,  Cocceius,  Diodati,Lampe, 
and  Scott.  It  is  a  curious,  confirmatory  fact,  that  the  Arabic 
and  Syriac  versions  of  the  text  both  have  the  expression 
"  Scripture"  in  the  plural,  "As  the  Scriptures  have  said." 

It  is  a  curious  fact  which  Bengel  mentions,  that  the  14th 
chapter  of  Zechariah  was  read  in  public  in  the  temple,  on  the 
first  day  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  If  this  is  correct  we 
can  hardly  doubt  that  our  Lord  must  have  had  this  in  mind 
when  He  used  the  expression,  '*  As  the  Scripture  hath  said." 
It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  As  you  have  heard,  for  instance, 
during  this  very  feast,  from  the  book  of  your  prophet  Zecha- 
riah." 

That  almost  every  believer,  whose  life  is  spared  after  he 
believes,  becomes  a  fountain  of  blessing  and  good  to  others,  is 
a  simple  matter  of  fact,  which  needs  no  illustration.  A  truly 
converted  man  always  desires  the  conversion  of  others,  and 
labours  to  promote  it.  Even  the  thief  on  the  cross,  short  as 
his  life  was  after  he  repented,  cared  for  his  brother  thief;  and 
from  the  words  he  spoke  have  flowed  "  rivers  of  living  water" 
over  this  sinful  world  for  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years. 
He  alone  has  been  a  fountain  of  blessing. 

Bloomfield  quotes  a  Rabbinical  sentence, — "When  a  man 
turns  to  the  Lord,  he  is  like  a  fountain  filled  with  living  water, 
and  rivers  flow  from  him  to  men  of  all  nations  and  tribes." 

The  favourite  notion  of  some,  that  our  Lord  in  this  place  only 
referred  to  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  given 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  is  an  idea  that  does  not  commend 
itself  to  me  at  all.  The  thing  before  us  is  a  thing  promised  to 
every  believer. — But  the  miraculous  gifts  were  certaiuly  not 
bestowed  on  every  believer.  Thousands  were  evideutly  con- 
rerted  through  the  Apostles'  preaching  who  did  not  receive 
these  gifts.    Yet  all  received  the  Holy  Ghost. 


48  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Luther  paraphrases  this  verse  thus  :  "  He  that  cometh  to  me 
shall  be  so  furnished  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  shall  not 
only  be  quickened  and  refreshed  himself  and  delivered  from 
thirst,  but  he  shall  also  be  a  strong  stone  vessel,  from  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  all  His  gifts  shall  flow  to  others,  refreshing, 
comforting,  and  strengthening  them,  even  as  he  was  refreshed 
by  me.  So  St.  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  by  one  sermon, 
as  by  a  rush  of  water,  delivered  three  thousand  men  from  the 
devil's  kingdom,  washing  them  in  an  hour  from  sin,  death,  and 
Satan."  Hengstenberg,  after  quoting  this,  adds,  "  That  was 
only  the  first  exhibition  of  a  glorious  peculiarity  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  Church  of  the  New  Testament  from  the  Church 
of  Hie  Old.  She  has  a  living  impulse  which  will  diffuse  the  life 
within  her,  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

89. — [But  this  spake. ..of  the  Spirit.']  This  verse  is  one  of  those 
explanatory  comments  which  are  so  common  in  St.  John's 
Gospel.  The  opening  words  would  be  more  literally  rendered, 
"He  spake  this  concerning  the  Spirit." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  here,  at  any  rate,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  "  water"  does  not  mean  "baptism,"  but  the  Holy  Spirit. — 
St.  John  himself  says  so  in  unmistakable  language. 

[Which  they. ..believe. ..should  receive.']  This  means,  "Which 
believers  in  Him  were  about  to  receive."  There  is  an  insepa- 
rable connection  between  faith  in  Christ  aud  receiving  the 
Holy  Ghost.  If  anv  man  has  faith  he  has  the  Spirit.  If  any 
man  has  not  the  Spirit  he  has  no  saving  faith  in  Christ.  The 
effectual  work  of  the  second  and  third  Persons  in  the  Trinity  is 
never  divided. 

Rupertus  think  that  our  Lord  had  specially  in  view  that 
mighty  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Gentile  world,  which 
was  to  take  place  after  His  own  ascension  into  heaven,  and  the 
going  forth  of  the  Apostles  into  the  world  to  preach  the 
Gospel. 

[For  the  Holy  Ghost. ..not  yet  given,  etc.]  This  sentence  means 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  poured  on  believers  in  all  His 
fulness,  because  our  Lord  had  not  yet  finished  His  work  by 
dying,  rising  again,  and  ascending  into  heaven  for  us.  It  was 
not  till  He  was  "glorified  "  by  going  up  into  heaven  and  taking 
His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
sent  down  in  full  influence  on  the  Church.  Then  was  fulfilled 
Psalm  lxviii.  18, — "Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led 
captivity  captive :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  man :  yea,  for 
the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among 
them." — Before  our  Lord  died  and  rose  again  and  ascended,  the 
Holy  Ghost  was,  and  had  been  from  all  eternity,  one  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  a  distinct  Person,  of  equal  power  and 
authority,  very  and  eternal  God.  But  He  had  not  revealed 
Himself  so  fully  to  those  whose  hearts  He  dwelt  in  as  He  did 
after  the  ascension;  and  He  had  not  come  down  in  person  on 


john,  chap.  vn.  49 

the  Gentile  world,  or  sent  forth  the  Gospel  to  all  mankind  with 
rivers  of  blessing,  as  He  did  when  Paul  and  Barnabas  were 
"  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Acts  xiii.  4.)  In  a  word, 
the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  had  not  yet  begun. 

The  expression  "  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,"  would 
be  more  literally  rendered,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not."  This 
cannot  of  course  mean  that  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  exist,  and 
was  in  no  sense  present  with  believers  in  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  On  the  contrary,  the  Spirit  strove  with  the  men 
of  Noah's  day, — David  spake  by  the  Holy  Ghost,— Isaiah  spake 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,— and  John  the  Baptist,  now  dead,  was  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb.  (Gen.  vi.  3 ; 
Mark  xii.  36;  Isa.  lxiii.  10,  11 ;  Luke  i.  15.) 

What  the  expression  does  mean  is  this.  The  Holy  Ghost  was 
not  yet  with  men  in  such  fulness  of  influence  on  their  minds, 
hearts,  and  understandings,  as  the  Spirit  of  adoption  and  reve- 
lation, as  He  was  after  our  Lord  ascended  up  into  heaven.  It 
is  clear  as  daylight,  from  our  Lord's  language  about  the  Spirit, 
in  John  xiv.  16,  17,  26;  xv.  26;  xvi.  7—15,  that  believers  were 
meant  to  receive  a  far  more  full  and  complete  outpouring  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  after  His  ascension  than  they  had  received  before. 
It  is  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  indeed,  that  after  the  ascension 
the  Apostles  were  quite  different  men  from  what  they  had  been 
before.  They  both  saw,  and  spoke,  and  acted  like  men  grown 
up;  while  before  the  ascension  they  had  been  like  children.  It 
was  this  increased  light  and  knowledge  and  decision  that  made 
them  such  a  blessing  to  the  world,  far  more  than  any  miraculous 
gifts.  The  possession  of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  it  is  evident,  in 
the  early  Church  was  quite  compatible  with  an  ungodly  heart. 
A  man  might  speak  with  tongues,  and  yet  be  like  salt  that  had 
lost  its  savour.  The  possession  of  the  fulness  of  the  graces  of 
the  Spirit,  on  the  contrary,  was  that  which  made  any  man  a 
blessing  to  the  world. 

Alford  says  :  "St.  John  does  not  say  that  the  words  were  a 
prophecy  of  what  happened  on  the  day  of  Pentecost;  but  of  the 
Spirit  which  the  believers  were  about  to  receive.  Their  first 
reception  of  Him  must  not  be  illogically  put  in  the  place  of  all 
His  indwelling  and  working,  which  are  here  intended." 

I  am  quite  aware  that  most  commentators  hold,  that  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  was  specially  meant  by  St. 
John  in  this  passage.  But  after  carefully  considering  the 
matter,  I  cannot  subscribe  to  this  opinion.  To  confine  this 
verse  to  the  day  of  Pentecost  appears  to  me  to  cramp  and  nar- 
row its  meaning, — to  deprive  many  believers  of  their  interest 
in  a  most  precious  promise, — and  to  overlook  all  the  special 
language  about  the  inward  teaching  of  the  Comforter  as  a  thing 
to  come  on  believers,  which  our  Lord  used  the  night  before  His 
crucifixion. 

Bengel  remarks  that  the  use  of  "  to  be  "  instead  of  "to  be 
3 


50 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


present  "is  not  uncommon  in  the  Bible.  (Thus  2  Chron.  xv. 
3.)  When  therefore  we  read  "  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not,"  we 
need  not  be  stumbled  by  the  expression.  It  simply  means  "  He 
was  not  fully  manifested  and  poured  out  on  the  Church." 
Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  no  doubt,  had  the  Spirit  now, 
when  our  Lord  was  speaking.  But  they  had  Him  much  more 
fully,  after  pur  Lord  was  glorified.  This  explains  the  meaning 
of  the  passage  before  us. 

We  should  note,  in  leaving  these  three  verses,  what  a  striking 
example  they  supply  to  preachers,  ministers,  and  teachers  of 
religion.  Let  such  learn  from  their  Master  to  offer  Christ 
boldly,  freely,  fully,  broadly,  unconditionally,  to  all  thirsting 
souls.  The  Gospel  is  too  often  spoiled  in  the  presentation  of 
it.  Some  fence  it  round  with  conditions,  and  keep  sinners  at  a 
distance.  Others  direct  sinners  wrongly,  and  send  them  to 
something  else  beside  or  instead  of  Christ.  He  only  copies  his 
Lord  who  says,  "  If  any  one  feels  his  sins,  let  him  come  at  once, 
straight,  direct,  not  merely  to  church,  or  to  the  sacrament,  or 
to  repentance,  or  to  prayer,  but  to  Christ  Himself." 


JOHN  VII.  40—53. 


40  Many  of  the  people  therefore, 
when  they  heard  this  saying,  said,  Of 
a  truth  this  is  the  Prophet. 

41  Others  said,  This  is  the  Christ. 
But  some  said,  Shall  Christ  come  out 
of  Galilee? 

42  Hath  not  the  scripture  said, 
That  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  Da- 
vid, and  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem, 
where  David  was  ? 

43  So  there  was  a  division  among 
the  people  because  of  him. 

44  And  some  of  them  would  have 
taken  him;  but  no  man  laid  hands  on 
him. 

45  Then  came  the  officers  to  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees;  and  they 
said  unto  them,  Why  have  ye  not 
brought  him  ? 


46  The  officers  answered,  Never 
man  spake  like  this  man. 

47  Then  answered  them  the  Phar- 
isees, Are  ye  also  deceived  ? 

48  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the 
Pharisees  believed  on  him  ? 

49  But  this  people  who  knoweth 
not  the  law  are  cursed. 

50  Nicodemus  saith  unto  them,  (he 
that  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being 
one  of  them.) 

51  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man, 
before  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he 
doeth? 

52  They  answered  and  said  unto 
him,  Art  thou  also  of  Galilee  ?  Search, 
and  look:  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no 
prophet. 

53  And  every  man  went  unto  his 
own  house. 


These  verses  show  us,  for  one  thing,  hoiv  useless  is  knowl- 
edge in  religion,  if  it  is  not  accompanied  by  grace  in  the  heart. 
We  are  told  that  some  of  our  Lord's  hearers  knew  clearly 
where  Christ  was  to  be  born.     They  referred  to  Scripture, 


john,  chap.  vn.  51 

like  men  familiar  with  its  contents.  "  Hath  not  the  Scrip- 
ture said  that  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  out 
of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  David  was?"  And  yet 
the  eyes  of  their  understanding  were  not  enlightened. 
Their  own  Messiah  stood  before  them,  and  they  neither 
received,  nor  believed,  nor  obeyed  Him. 

A  certain  degree  of  religious  knowledge,  beyond  doubt, 
is  of  vast  importance.  Ignorance  is  certainly  not  the 
mother  of  true  devotion,  and  helps  nobody  toward  heaven. 
An  "  unknown  God  "  can  never  be  the  object  of  a  reasona- 
ble worship.  Happy  indeed  would  it  be  for  Christians  if 
they  all  knew  the  Scriptures  as  well  as  the  Jews  seem  to 
have  done,  when  our  Lord  was  on  earth  ! 

But  while  we  value  religious  knowledge,  we  must  take 
care  that  we  do  not  overvalue  it.  We  must  not  think  it 
enough  to  know  the  facts  and  doctrines  of  our  faith,  unless 
our  hearts  and  lives  are  thoroughly  influenced  by  what  we 
know.  The  very  devils  know  the  creed  intellectually,  and 
"  believe  and  tremble,"  but  remain  devils  still.  (James  ii. 
19.)  It  is  quite  possible  to  be  familiar  with  the  letter  of 
Scripture,  and  to  be  able  to  quote  texts  appropriately,  and 
reason  about  the  theory  of  Christianity,  and  yet  to  remain 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Like  many  of  the  generation 
to  which  our  Lord  preached,  we  may  know  the  Bible  well, 
and  yet  remain  faithless  and  unconverted. 

Heart-knowledge,  we  must  always  remember,  is  the  one 
thing  needful.  It  is  something  which  schools  and  univer- 
sities cannot  confer.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  To  find  out 
the  plague  of  our  own  hearts  and  hate  sin, — to  become 
familiar  with  the  throne  of  grace  and  the  fountain  of 
Christ's  blood, — to  sit  daily  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and 
humbly  learn  of  Him, — this  is  the  highest  degree  of 
knowledge  to  which  mortal  man  can  attain.  Let  any 
one  thank  God  who  knows  anything  of  these  things.     He 


52  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

may  be  ignorant  of  Greek,  Latin,  Hebrew,  and  mathe- 
matics, but  he  shall  be  saved. 

These  verses  show  us,  for  another  thing,  how  eminent 
must  have  been  our  Lord's  gifts,  as  a  public  Teacher  of 
religion.  We  are  told  that  even  the  officers  of  the  chief 
priests,  who  were  sent  to  take  Him,  were  struck  and 
amazed.  They  were,  of  course,  not  likely  to  be  prejudiced 
in  His  favour.  Yet  even  they  reported, — "Never  man 
spake  like  this  Man." 

Of  the  manner  of  our  Lord's  public  speaking,  we  can 
of  necessity  form  little  idea.  Action,  and  voice,  and  de- 
livery are  things  that  must  be  seen  and  heard  to  be  appre- 
ciated. That  our  Lord's  manner  was  peculiarly  solemn, 
arresting,  and  impressive,  we  need  not  doubt.  It  was 
probably  something  very  unlike  what  the  Jewish  officers 
were  accustomed  to  hear.  There  is  much  in  what  is  said 
in  another  place :  "  He  taught  them  as  One  having  au- 
thority, and  not  as  the  Scribes."     (Matt.  vii.  29.) 

Of  the  matter  of  our  Lord's  public  speaking,  we  may 
form  some  conception  from  the  discourses  which  are 
recorded  in  the  four  Gospels.  The  leading  features  of 
these  discourses  are  plain  and  unmistakable.  The  world 
has  never  seen  anything  like  them,  since  the  gift  of  speech 
was  given  to  man.  They  often  contain  deep  truths,  which 
we  have  no  line  to  fathom.  But  they  often  contain  simple 
things,  which  even  a  child  can  understand.  They  are  bold 
and  outspoken  in  denouncing  national  and  ecclesiastical 
sins,  and  3-et  they  are  wise  and  discreet  in  never  giving 
needless  offence.  They  are  faithful  and  direct  in  their 
warnings,  and  jTet  loving  and  tender,  in  their  invitations. 
For  a  combination  of  power  and  simplicity,  of  courage  and 
prudence,  of  faithfulness  and  tenderness,  we  may  well  say, 
"  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man  !  " 

It  would  be  well  for  the  Church  of  Christ  if  ministers 
and  teachers  of  religion  would  strive  more  to  speak  after 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  53 

their  Lord's  pattern.  Let  them  remember  that  fine  bom- 
bastic language,  and  a  sensational,  theatrical  style  of 
address,  are  utterly  unlike  their  Master.  Let  them  realize, 
that  an  eloquent  simplicity  is  the  highest  attainment  of 
public  speaking.  Of  this  their  Master  left  them  a  glorious 
example.  Surely  they  need  never  be  ashamed  of  walking 
in  His  steps. 

These  verses  show  us,  lastly,  how  sloivly  and  gradually 
the  ivork  of  grace  goes  on  in  some  hearts.  We  are  told  that 
Nicodemus  stood  up  in  the  council  of  our  Lord's  enemies, 
and  mildly  pleaded  that  He  deserved  fair  dealing.  "  Doth 
our  law  judge  any  man,"  he  asked,  "  before  it  hear  him, 
and  know  what  he  doeth  ?  " 

This  very  Nicodemus,  we  must  remember,  is  the  man 
who,  eighteen  months  before,  had  come  to  our  Lord  by 
night  as  an  ignorant  inquirer.  He  evidently  knew  little 
then,  and  dared  not  come  to  Christ  in  open  day.  But  now, 
after  eighteen  months,  he  has  got  on  so  far  that  he  dares 
to  say  something  on  our  Lord's  side.  It  was  but  little  that 
he  said,  no  doubt,  but  it  was  better  than  nothing  at  all. 
And  a  day  was  yet  to  come,  when  he  would  go  further  still. 
He  was  to  help  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  in  doing  honour  to 
our  Lord's  dead  bod}^,  when  even  His  chosen  Apostles  had 
forsaken  Him  and  fled. 

The  case  of  Nicodemus  is  full  of  useful  instruction.  It 
teaches  us,  that  there  are  diversities  in  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  All  are  undoubtedly  led  to  the  same 
Saviour,  but  all  are  not  led  precisely  in  the  same  way.  It 
teaches  us,  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  does  not  always  go 
forward  with  the  same  speed  in  the  hearts  of  men.  In 
some  cases  it  may  go  forward  very  slowly  indeed,  and  yet 
may  be  real  and  true. 

We  shall  do  well  to  remember  these  things,  in  forming 
our  opinion  of  other  Christians.  We  are  often  ready  to 
condemn  some  as  graceless,  because  their  experience  does 


54  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

not  exactly  tally  with  our  own,  or  to  set  them  down  as  not 
in  the  narrow  way  at  all,  because  they  cannot  run  as  fast 
as  ourselves.  "We  must  beware  of  hasty  judgments.  It 
is  not  always  the  fastest  runner  that  wins  the  race.  It 
is  not  always  those  who  begin  suddenly  in  religion,  and 
profess  themselves  rejoicing  Christians,  who  continue  stead- 
fast to  the  end.  Slow  work  is  sometimes  the  surest  and 
most  enduring.  Nicodemus  stood  firm,  when  Judas  Iscar- 
iot  fell  away  and  went  to  his  own  place.  No  doubt  it 
would  be  a  pleasant  thing,  if  everybody  who  was  con- 
verted came  out  boldly,  took  up  the  cross,  and  confessed 
Christ  in  the  clay  of  his  conversion.  But  it  is  not  always 
given  to  God's  children  to  do  so. 

Have  we  any  grace  in  our  hearts  at  all?  This,  after  all, 
is  the  grand  question  that  concerns  us.  It  may  be  small, 
— but  have  we  any?  It  may  grow  slowly,  as  in  the  case 
of  Nicodemus, — but  does  it  grow  at  all?  Better  a  little 
grace  than  none  !  Better  move  slowly  than  stand  still  in 
sin  and  the  world  ! 

Notes.    John  VII.  40—53. 

40. — [Many ...  people... this  saying,  said.]  The  "  people  "  here  evi- 
dently mean  the  general  multitude  of  common  people,  who  had 
come  together  to  attend  the  feast,  and  not  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees.  The  "  saying"  which  called  forth  their  remarks  ap- 
pears to  be  the  public  proclamation  that  our  Lord  had  just  made, 
inviting  all  thirsty  souls  to  come  to  Him  as  the  fountain  of  life. 
That  any  one  person  should  so  boldly  announce  himself  as  the 
reliever  of  spiritual  thirst  seems  to  have  arrested  attention, 
and,  taken  in  connection  with  the  fact  of  our  Lord's  public 
teaching  during  the  latter  half  of  the  feast,  which  many  of  the 
people  must  have  heard,  it  induced  them  to  say  what  immedi- 
ately follows. 

Brentius,  Museums,  and  others,  hold  strongly  that  our  Lord's 
words  in  the  preceding  three  verses  must  have  been  greatly 
amplified,  at  the  time  He  spoke,  and  are  in  fact  a  sort  of  text  or 
keynote  to  His  discourse;  and  that  this  is  referred  to  in  the 
expression,  "  this  saying.  "  Yet  the  supposition  seems  hardly 
necessary.  The  words  were  a  conclusion  to  three  days'  teach- 
ing and  preaching. 

[0/  a  truth  this  man.. .Prophet.]  This  would  be  more  literally 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VII.  55 

rendered,  "  This  man  is  truly  and  really  the  Prophet.  "  These 
speakers  meant  that  He  must  be  "  the  Prophet "  like  unto  Moses, 
foretold  in  Deuteronomy.  (Dent,  xviii.  15,  18.) 
41. — [Others  said,  TJiis  is  the  Christ.']  These  speakers  saw  in  our 
Lord  the  Messiah,  or  Anointed  Saviour,  whom  all  pious  Jews 
were  eagerly  expecting  at  this  period,  and  whose  appearing  the 
whole  nation  were  looking  for  in  one  way  or  another,  though 
the  most  part  expected  nothing  more  than  a  temporal  Redeemer. 
(Psalm  xlv.  7 ;  Isaiah  lxi.  1 ;  Dan.  ix.  25,  26.)  Even  the  Samari- 
tan woman  could  say,  "  I  know  that  Messiah  cometh."  (John  iv. 
25.) 

[But  some  said,  Shall  Christ... Galilee?']  This  ought  to  have 
been  rendered,  "  But  others  said."  It  was  not  a  few  exception- 
al speakers  only,  but  a  party  probably  as  large  as  any.  They 
raised  the  objection,  which  was  not  unnatural,  that  this  new 
teacher  and  preacher,  however  wonderful  He  might  be,  was 
notoriously  a  Galilean,  of  Nazareth,  and  therefore  could  not  be 
the  promised  Messiah.  How  utterly  ignorant  most  persons 
were  of  our  Lord's  birthplace,  we  see  here,  as  elsewhere. 

42. — [Hath  not  the  Scripture  said,  etc.  ]  We  should  note  in  this 
verse  the  clear  knowledge  which  most  Jews  in  our  Lord's  time 
had  of  Scripture  prophecies  and  promises.  Even  the  common 
people  knew  that  Messiah  was  to  be  of  the  family  of  David,  and 
to  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  the  well  known  birthplace  of  David. 
It  may  indeed  be  feared  that  myriads  of  Christians  know  far  less 
of  the  Bible  than  the  Jews  did  eighteen  hundred  years  ago. 

43. — [So... division  among... people  because  of  Him.]  Here  we  see 
our  Lord's  words  literally  fulfilled. — He  did  not  bring  "  peace, 
but  division."  (Luke  xii.  51.)  It  will  always  be  so  as  long  as  the 
world  stands.  So  long  as  human  nature  is  corrupt,  Christ  will 
be  a  cause  of  division  and  difference  among  men.  To  some  He 
is  a  savour  of  life,  and  to  others  of  death.  Grace  and  nature 
never  will  agree  any  more  than  oil  and  water,  acid  and  alkali. 
A  state  of  entire  quiet,  and  the  absence  of  any  religious  divis- 
ion, is  often  no  good  sign  of  the  condition  of  a  Church  or  a 
parish.  It  may  even  be  a  symptom  of  spiritual  disease  and 
death.  The  question  may  possibly  be  needful  in  such  cases, 
"Is  Christ  there?" 

44.— [And  some... would... taken  Him.]  This  would  be  more  satis- 
factorily rendered,  "Some  out  of  those "  who  made  up  the 
crowd  "  were  desirous  and  wished  to  take  our  Lord  prison- 
er."— These  were  no  doubt  the  friends  and  adherents  of  the 
Pharisees,  and  very  likely  were  the  common  people  who  dwelt 
•  at  Jerusalem,  and  knew  well  what  their  leaders  wanted  to  do. 
[No  man  laid  hands  on  Him.]  This  must  be  accounted  for 
primarily  by  divine  restraint  which  was  at  present  laid  on  our 
Lord's  enemies,  because  His  hour  was  not  yet  come;— and  sec- 
ondarily by  the  fear  in  which  the  Pharisees'  party  evidently 
stood  of  a  rising  in  our  Lord's  defence  on  the  part  of  the  Gali- 
leans, and  others  who  had  come  up  to  the  feast.  Thus  we  read 
that  at  the  last  Passover  "the  priests  and  Scribes  sought  how 


56  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


they  might  kill  Him,  for  they  feared  the  people."  (Luke  xxil. 
2.)  Again :  "They  said,  Not  on  the  feast  day,  lest  there  be  an 
uproar  of  the  people."     (Mark  xiv.  2,  and  Matt.  xxvi.  5.) 

45. — [Then  came  the  officers,  etc.~\  It  is  not  clear  what  interval  of 
time  elapsed  between  verse  32nd,  where  we  read  that  the  offi- 
cers were  sent  by  the  priests  to  take  our  Lord,  and  the  present 
verse,  where  we  are  told  of  their  coming  back  to  their  mas- 
ters.— At  first  sight  of  course  it  all  happened  in  one  day.  Yet 
if  we  observe  that  between  the  sending  them  to  take  our  Lord, 
and  the  present  verse,  there  comes  in  the  remarkable  verse, 
"In  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast,"  it  seems  impos- 
sible to  avoid  the  conclusion,  that  an  interval  of  two  or  three 
days  must  have  elapsed. — It  seems  highly  probable  that  the  offi- 
cers had  a  general  commission  and  warrant  to  take  our  Lord 
prisoner,  whenever  they  saw  a  fitting  opportunity,  about  the 
fourth  day  of  the  feast.  They  found  however  no  opportunity, 
on  account  of  the  temper  and  spirit  of  the  crowd,  and  dared 
not  make  the  attempt.  And  at  last,  at  the  end  of  the  feast, 
when  the  multitude  was  even  more  aroused  than  at  first,  by  our 
Lord's  open  testimony,  they  were  obliged  to  return  to  those 
who  sent  them,  and  confess  their  inability  to  carry  out  their 
orders. 

46. — [The  officers  answered,  etc.']  The  answer  of  the  officers  has 
probably  a  double  application.  They  themselves  felt  the  power 
of  our  Lord's  speaking.  They  had  never  heard  any  man  speak 
like  this  man.  It  tied  their  hands,  and  made  them  feel  incapa- 
ble of  doing  anything  against  Him. — They  had  besides  marked 
the  power  of  His  speaking  over  the  minds  of  the  multitude 
which  gathered  round  Him.  They  had  never  seen  any  one  ex- 
ercise such  an  influence  over  His  hearers.  They  felt  it  useless 
to  attempt  arresting  one  who  had  such  complete  command 
over  His  audience.  We  cannot  doubt  that  they  bad  heard  much 
more  "  speaking"  than  the  few  things  recorded  between  verses 
32nd  and  46th.  These  are  only  specimens  of  what  our  Lord 
said,  and  furnish  a  keynote  to  us  indicating  the  general  tenor 
of  His  teaching. 

What  it  was  precisely  that  the  officers  meant  when  they  said 
"Never  man  spake  like  this  man,"  we  are  left  to  conjecture. 
They  probably  meant  that  they  had  never  heard  any  one  speak 
such  deep  and  important  truths— in  such  simple  and  yet  striking 
language — and  in  so  solemn,  impressive,  and  yet  affectionate 
style.  Above  all,  they  probably  meant  that  He  spake  with  a 
dignified  tone  of  authority,  as  a  messenger  from  heaven,  to 
which  they  were  entirely  unaccustomed. 

47. — [Then  answered  them.. .Pharisees... ye.. .deceived?]  The  word 
rendered  "  deceived  "  means,  literally,  "  led  astray,  or  caused  to 
err."  Have  you  too  been  carried  off  by  this  new  teaching? 
The  question  implies  anger,  sarcasm,  ridicule,  and  displeasure. 

48. — [Have  any... rulers... Pharisees  believed  on  him?]    This  arro- 


JOHN,    CHAP.   VII.  57 

gant  question  was  doubtless  meant  to  be  an  unanswerable 
proof  that  our  Lord  could  not  possibly  be  the  Messiah  :—"  Can 
a  person  be  deserving  of  the  least  credit,  as  a  teacher  of  a  new 
religion,  if  those  who  are  the  most  learned  and  highest  in  posi- 
tion do  not  believe  Him?" — This  is  precisely  the  common  argu- 
ment of  human  nature  iu  every  age.  The  doctrine  which  the 
great  and  learned  do  not  receive  is  always  assumed  to  be 
wrong.  And  yet  St.  Paul  says,  "  Not  many  wise,  not  many  no- 
ble are  called."  (1  Cor.  i.  26.)  The  very  possession  of  rank 
and  learning  is  often  a  positive  hindrance  to  a  man's  soul. 
The  great  and  the  learned  are  often  the  last  and  most  unwilling 
to  receive  Christ's  truth. — "  How  hardly  shall  a  rich  man  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God."     (Matt.  xix.  23.) 

It  seems  clear  from  this  that  at  present  the  Pharisees  did  not 
know  that  one  of  their  own  number,  Nicodemus,  was  favourably 
disposed  to  our  Lord. 

49. — [But  this  people... knoweth  not  law...cursed.~\  This  sentence  is 
full  of  contempt  and  scorn  throughout.  "This  people,"— a 
mob, — a  common  herd, — "  which  knoweth  not  the  law,"  is  not 
deeply  read  in  the  Scriptures,  and  have  no  deep  Rabbinical 
learning, — "  are  cursed,"  are  under  God's  curse  and  given  over 
to  a  strong  delusion.  Their  opinion  is  worthless,  and'  what 
they  think  of  the  new  Galilean  teacher  is  of  no  moment  or  value. 
— Charges  like  these  have  been  made  in  every  age,  against  the 
adherents  of  all  reformers  and  revivers  of  true  religion.  The 
multitude  who  followed  Luther  in  Germany,  our  own  Reform- 
ers in  England,  and  the  leaders  of  revived  religion  in  the  last 
century,  were  always  attacked  as  ignorant  enthusiasts  whose 
opinion  was  worth  nothing.  When  the  enemies  of  vital  relig- 
ion cannot  prevent  people  flocking  after  the  Gospel,  and  cannot 
answer  the  teaching  of  its  advocates,  they  often  fight  with  the 
weapons  of  the  Pharisees  in  this  verse.  They  content  them- 
selves with  the  cheap  and  easy  assertion  that  those  who  do  not 
agree  with  themselves  are  ignorant  and  kuow  nothing,  and 
that  therefore  it  matters  nothing  what  they  think.  Yet  St.  Paul 
says,  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  con- 
found the  wise;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty."  (1  Cor.  i.  27.) 
The  poorer  and  humbler  classes  are  often  much  better  judges 
of  "  what  is  truth"  in  religion  than  the  great  and  learned. 

The  disposition  of  the  Jews  to  pronounce  those  "  accursed  " 
who  differ  from  themselves  in  religious  controversy  is  exhib- 
ited in  this  verse.  Jewish  converts  to  Christianity  in  modern 
times  are  often  sadly  familiar  with  cursing  from  their  own 
relatives. 

50. — [Nicodemus... he... came  to  Jesus  by  night.']  This  would  be 
more  literally  rendered,  "He  that  came  to  Him  by  night." 
The  omission  of  our  Lord's  name  here  is  very  peculiar. — The 
fact  of  Nicodemus  having  come  to  see  Jesus  "by  night"  is 
always  mentioned  by  St.  John,  where  His  name  occurs.     (See 


58  EXPOSITOltY   THOUGHTS. 


John  xix.  39.)  It  is  to  ray  mind  a  strong  proof  that  he  was  a 
coward  when  he  first  came  to  our  Lord,  and  dared  not  come 
openly  by  day. 

[Being  one  of  them.']  This  means  that  he  was  a  chief  man,  or 
ruler  among  the  Pharisees,  and  as  such  was  present  at  all  their 
deliberations  and  counsels.  His  case  shows  that  the  grace  oi 
God  can  reach  men  in  any  position,  however  unfavourable  it  may 
be  to  true  religion.  Even  a  chief  Pharisee,  one  of  that  com- 
pany of  men  who,  as  a  body,  hated  our  Lord  and  longed  to  kill 
Him,  could  believe  and  speak  up  for  Him.  We  must  never  con- 
clude hastily  that  there  can  be  no  Christians  among  a  body  of 
men,  because  the  great  majority  of  them  hate  Christ,  and  are 
hardened  in  wickedness.  There  was  a  Lot  in  Sodom,  an  Oba- 
diah  in  Ahab's  house,  a  Daniel  in  Babylon,  saints  in  Nero's 
palace,  and  a  Nicodemus  among  the  Pharisees.  He  was  "one 
out  of  their  number,"  but  not  one  of  them  in  spirit. 

51. — [Doth  our  law  judge  any  man,  etc.]  This  was  undoubtedly 
speaking  up  for  our  Lord,  and  pleading  for  His  being  treated 
justly  and  fairly,  and  according  to  law.  At  first  sight  it  seems 
a  very  tame  and  cautious  mode  of  showing  his  faith,  if  he  had 
any.  But  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  more  could  have  been  said 
in  the  present  temper  of  the  Pharisees.  Nicodemus  wisely  ap- 
pealed to  law.  "Is  it  not  a  great  principle  of  that  law  of 
Moses,  which  we  all  profess  to  honour,  that  no  man  should  be 
condemned  without  first  hearing  from  him  what  defence  he  can 
make,  and  without  clear  knowledge  and  evidence  as  to  what  he 
has  really  done?— Is  it  fair  and  legal  to  condemn  this  person 
before  you  have  heard  from  His  own  lips  what  He  can  say  in 
His  defence,  and  before  you  know  from  the  testimony  of  com- 
petent witnesses  what  He  has  really  done? — Are  you  not  flying 
in  the  face  of  our  law  by  hastily  judging  His  case,  and  setting 
Him  down  as  a  malefactor  before  you  have  given  Him  a  chance 
of  clearing  Himself?  (See  Deut.  i.  17,  and  xvii.  8,  etc.,  and  xix. 
15,  etc.)  Nicodemus,  it  will  be  observed,  cautiously  takes  up 
his  ground  on  broad  general  principles  of  universal  application, 
and  does  not  say  a  word  about  our  Lord's  particular  case. 

The  Greek  words  would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "Doth 
our  law  condemn  the  man  unless  it  hears  from  him  first." 

I  think  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  these  words 
show  Nicodemus  to  have  become  a  real,  though  a  slow-growing 
disciple  of  Christ,  and  a  true  believer.  It  required  great  cour- 
age to  do  even  the  little  that  he  did  here,  and  to  say  what  he 
said. 

Let  us  carefully  note,  that  a  man  may  begin  very  feebly  and 
grow  very  slowly,  and  seem  to  make  very  little  progress,  and 
yet  have  the  true  grace  of  God  in  his  heart.  We  must  be  care- 
ful that  we  do  not  hastily  set  down  men  as  unconverted,  be- 
cause they  get  on  slowly  in  the  Christian  life.  All  do  not  grow 
equally  quick. 


JOHN,    CIUP.    Til.  59 


Let  us  learn  to  believe  that  even  in  high  places,  and  most  un- 
likely positions,  Christ  may  have  friends  of  whom  we  know 
nothing.  Who  would  have  expected  a  chief  ruler  among  the 
Pharisees  to  rise  at  this  juncture  and  plead  for  justice  and  fair 
dealing  in  the  case  of  our  Lord  ? 

62. — {They  answer ed...thou  also  of  Galilee?]  This  was  the  lan- 
guage of  rage,  scorn,  and  bitter  contempt.  "  Art  thou  too,  a 
ruler,  a  learned  man,  a  Pharisee,  one  of  ourselves,  become  one 
of  this  Galilean  party?  Hast  thou  joined  the  cause  of  this  new 
Galilean  prophet?" 

The  tone  of  this  bitter  question  seems  to  me  to  prove  that 
Nicodemus  had  said  as  much  as  was  possible  to  be  said,  on  this 
occasion.  The  temper  and  spirit  of  the  Pharisees,  from  disap- 
pointment and  vexation  at  our  Lord's  increasing  popularity, 
and  their  own  utter  inability  to  stop  His  course,  made  them 
furious  at  a  single  word  being  spoken  favourably  or  kindly  about 
Him.  They  must  indeed  have  been  in  a  violent  frame  of  mind, 
when  the  mere  hint  at  the  desirableness  of  acting  justly,  fairly, 
and  legally,  made  them  ask  a  brother  Pharisee  whether  he  was 
a  Galilean ! 

Musculus  remarks  that  Nicodemus  got  little  favour  from  the 
Pharisees,  though  his  favourable  feeling  towards  our  Lord  was 
so  cautiously  expressed.  He  observes  that  this  is  generally  the 
case  with  those  who  act  timidly  as  he  did.  People  may  just  as 
well  be  outspoken  and  bold. 

[Search  and  look,']  This  seems  to  be  meant  sarcastically.  "Go 
and  search  the  Scriptures  again,  and  look  at  what  they  say  about 
the  Messiah,  before  thou  sayest  one  word  about  this  new  Gal- 
ilean prophet.  Examine  the  prophets,  and  see  if  thou  canst 
find  a  tittle  of  evidence  in  favour  of  this  Galilean,  whose  cause 
thou  art  patronizing." 

[Out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet.]  This  would  be  rendered 
more  literally,  "  a  prophet  out  of  Galilee  has  not  been  raised." 
About  the  meaning  of  the  words  there  are  three  very  different 
opinions. 

(1)  Some  think  that  the  words  only  mean,  no  "prophet  of 
great  note  or  eminence  has  ever  been  raised  up  in  Galilee." 
This,  however,  is  a  tame  and  unsatisfactory  view. 

(2)  Some,  as  Bishop  Pearce,  Burgon,  and  Sir  N.  Knatchbull, 
think  that  the  Pharisees  only  meant  that  "  THE  Prophet  like 
unto  Moses,  the  Messiah,  has  nowhere  in  the  Scripture  been 
foretold  as  coming  out  of  Galilee."  According  to  this  view  the 
Pharisees  said  what  was  quite  correct. 

(3)  Others,  as  Alford,  Wordsworth,  Tholuck,  and  most  other 
commentators,  think  that  the  Pharisees,  in  their  rage  and  fury, 
either  forgot,  or  found  it  convenient  to  forget    that  prophets 


60  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


had  arisen  from  Galilee.     According  to  this  view  they  made  an 
ignorant  assertion,  and  said  what  was  not  true. 

I  find  it  very  difficult  to  receive  this  third  opinion.  To  me  it 
seems  quite  preposterous  to  suppose  that  men  so  thoroughly 
familiar  with  the  letter  of  Scripture,  as  the  Pharisees  were, 
would  venture  on  such  a  monstrous  and  ignorant  assertion,  as 
to  say  that  "no  prophet  had  ever  arisen  out  of  Galilee!" 
Elijah,  Elisha,  Amos,  Jonah,  and  perhaps  Nahum,  are  all  thought 
by  some  to  have  been  Galilean  prophets.  Moreover  Isaiah 
distinctly  prophesied  that  in  Messiah's  times,  Zebulon  and 
Nepthali  and  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles  should  be  a  region  where 
"light  should  spring  up."     (Matt.  iv.  14 — 16.) 

On  the  other  hand,  I  must  frankly  admit  that  the  Greek  of 
the  sentence  must  be  much  strained  to  make  it  mean  "the  true 
prophet  is  not  to  arise  out  of  Galilee.  I  do  not  forget,  more- 
over, that  when  men  lose  their  tempers  and  fly  into  a  passion, 
there  is  nothing  too  foolish  and  ignorant  for  them  to  say.  Like 
a  drunken  man  they  may  talk  nonsense,  and  say  things  of  which 
in  calm  moments  they  may  be  ashamed.  It  may  have  been  so 
with  the  Pharisees  here.  They  were  no  doubt  violently  enraged, 
and  in  this  state  of  mind  might  say  anything  absurd. 

The  point,  happily,  is  not  one  of  first-rate  importance,  and 
men  may  afford  to  differ  about  it.  Nevertheless  if  I  must  give 
an  opinion,  I  prefer  the  second  of  the  three  views  I  have  given. 
The  improbability  of  the  Pharisees  asserting  anything  flatly 
contrary  to  the  letter  and  facts  of  Scripture,  is,  to  my  mind,  an 
insuperable  objection  to  the  other  views. 

63. — [And  every  man. ..his  own  house.']  These  words  seem  to  indi- 
cate that  the  assembly  of  Pharisees,  before  whom  the  officers 
had  appeared,  reporting  their  inability  to  take  our  Lord  pris- 
oner, broke  up  at  once  without  taking  any  further  action.  They 
saw  they  could  do  nothing.  Their  design  to  put  our  Lord  to 
death  at  once  could  not  be  carried  out,  and  must  be  deferred. 
They  therefore  separated  and  went  to  their  own  houses.  We 
may  well  believe  that  they  parted  in  a  most  bitter  and  angry 
frame  of  mind,  boiling  over  with  mortified  pride  and  baulked 
malice.  They  had  tried  hard  to  stop  our  Lord's  course,  and  had 
completely  failed.  The  "Galilean"  had  proved  for  the  time 
stronger  than  the  Sanhedrim.  Once  more,  as  after  the  miracle 
of  Bethesda,  they  had  been  ignominiously  foiled. and  publicly 
defeated. 

Hutcheson  remarks  :  "  There  is  no  council  nor  understanding 
against  Christ,  but  when  He  pleaseth  He  can  dissipate  all  of  it. 
Here  every  man  went  unto  his  own  house,  without  doing  any- 
thing." 

Maldonatus  thinks  the  verse  proves  that  though  the  Pharisees 
sneered  at  Nicodemus,  and  reviled  him,  they  could  not  deny  the 
fairness  and  justice  of  what  he  said.     He  thinks,  therefore,  that 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII. 


61 


they  dispersed  in  consequence  of  Nicodemus'  interference. 
Even  one  man  may  do  something  against  many,  when  God  is  on 
his  side. 

Besser  quotes  a  saying  of  Luther's  :  "  Much  as  the  Pharisees 
before  had  blustered,  they  dared  do  nothing  to  Jesus  :  they  be- 
came still  and  silent.  He  goes  up  to  the  feast  meek  and  silent, 
and  returns  home  with  glory. — They  go  up  with  triumph,  and 
come  down  weak." 

Trapp  remarks :  "  See  what  one  man  may  do  against  a  mis- 
chievous multitude.  It  is  good  to  be  doing,  though  there  be 
few  or  none  to  second  us." 


Baxter  remarks: 
a  persecution." 


One  man's  words  may  sometimes  divert 


JOHN  VIII.     1—11. 


1  Josus  went  unto  the  Mount  of 
Olives. 

2  And  early  in  the  morning  he 
came  again  to  the  temple,  and  all  the 
people  came  unto  him;  and  he  sat 
down,  and  taught  them. 

3  And  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
brought  unto  him  a  woman  taken  in 
adultery;  and  when  they  had  set  her 
in  the  midst, 

4  They  say  unto  him,  Master,  this 
woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  the 
very  act. 

5  Now  Moses  in  the  law  command- 
ed us,  that  such  should  be  stoned:  but 
what  sayest  thou  ? 

6  This  they  said,  tempting  him, 
that  they  might  have  to  accuse  him. 
But  Jesus  stooped  down,  and  with  his 
finger  wrote  on  the  ground,  as  though 
he  heard  them  not. 


7  So  when  they  continued  asking 
him,  he  lifted  up  himself,  and  said 
unto  them,  He  that  is  without  sin 
among  you,  let  him  first  cast  a  stone 
at  her. 

8  And  again  he  stooped  down,  and 
wrote  on  the  ground. 

9  And  they  which  heard  it,  being 
convicted  by  their  own  conscience,  went 
out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  the  eld- 
est, even  unto  the  last:  and  Jesus  was 
left  alono,  and  the  woman  standing  in 
the  midst. 

10  When  Jesus  had  lifted  up  him- 
self, and  saw  none  but  the  woman,  he 
said  unto  her,  Woman,  where  are  those 
thine  accusers?  hath  no  man  con- 
demned thee  ? 

11  She  said,  No  man,  Lord.  And 
Jesus  said  unto  her,  Neither  do  I  con- 
demn thee:  go,  and  sin  no  more. 


The  narrative  which  begins  the  eighth  chapter  of  St.  John's 
Gospel  is  of  a  rather  peculiar  character.  In  some  respects 
it  stands  alone.  There  is  nothing  quite  like  it  in  the  whole 
range  of  the  four  Gospels.  In  every  age  some  scrupulous 
minds  have  stumbled  at  the  passage,  and  have  doubted 
whether  it  was  ever  written  by  St.  John  at  all.  But  the 
justice  of  such  scruples  is  a  point  that  cannot  easily  be 
proved. 


b2  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 

To  suppose,  as  some  have  thought,  that  the  narrative 
before  us  palliates  the  sin  of  adultery,  and  exhibits  our 
Lord  as  making  light  of  the  seventh  commandment,  is 
surely  a  great  mistake.  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to 
justify  such  an  assertion.  There  is  not  a  sentence  in  it  to 
warrant  our  saying  anything  of  the  kind.  Let  us  calmly 
weigh  the  matter,  and  examine  the  contents  of  the  passage. 

Our  Lord's  enemies  brought  before  Him  a  woman  guilty 
of  adultery,  and  asked  him  to  say  what  punishment  she 
deserved.  We  are  distinctly  told  that  they  asked  the  ques- 
tion, "  tempting  Him."  They  hoped  to  entrap  Him  into 
sajnng  something  for  which  they  might  accuse  Him.  They 
fancied  perhaps  that  He  who  preached  pardon  and  salvation 
to  "  publicans  and  harlots"  might  be  induced  to  say  some- 
thing which  would  either  contradict  the  law  of  Moses,  or 
His  own  words. 

Our  Lord  knew  the  hearts  of  the  malicious  questioners 
before  Him,  and  dealt  with  them  with  perfect  wisdom,  as 
He  had  done  in  the  case  of  the  "  tribute-money."  (Matt, 
xxii.  17.)  He  refused  to  be  a  "judge"  and  lawgiver 
among  them,  and  specially  in  a  case  which  their  own  law 
had  already  decided.  He  gave  them  at  first  no  answer  at 
all. 

But  "  when  they  continued  asking,"  our  Lord  silenced 
them  with  a  withering  and  heart-searching  reply. — "  Pie 
that  is  without  sin  among  you,"  he  said,  "  let  him  first  cast 
a  stone  at  her." — He  did  not  say  that  the  woman  had  not 
sinned,  or  that  her  sin  was  a  trifling  and  venial  one.  But 
He  reminded  her  accusers  that  they  at  any  rate  were  not 
the  persons  to  bring  a  charge  against  her.  Their  own  mo- 
tives and  lives  were  far  from  pure.  They  themselves  did 
not  come  into  the  case  with  clean  hands.  What  they  really 
desired  was  not  to  vindicate  the  purity  of  God's  law,  and 
punish  a  sinner,  but  to  wreak  their  malice  on  Himself. 

Last  of  all,  when  those  who  had  brought  the  unhappy 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  63 

woman  to  our  Lord  had  gone  out  from  His  presence ,  "  con 
victed  by  their  own  conscience,"  He  dismissed  the  guilty 
sinner  with  the  solemn  words,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee :  go  and  sin  no  more." — That  she  did  not  deserve  pun- 
ishment He  did  not  say.  But  He  had  not  come  to  be  a 
judge.  Moreover,  in  the  absence  of  all  witnesses  or  accus- 
ers, there  was  no  case  before  Him. .  Let  her  then  depart  as 
one  whose  guilt  was  "  not  proven,"  even  though  she  was 
really  guilty,  and  let  her  "  sin  no  more." 

To  say  in  the  face  of  these  simple  facts  that  our  Lord 
made  light  of  the  sin  of  adultery  is  not  fair.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  passage  before  us  to  prove  it.  Of  all  whose 
words  are  recorded  in  the  Bible  there  is  none  who  has 
spoken  so  strongly  about  the  breach  of  the  seventh  com- 
mandment as  our  divine  Master.  It  is  He  who  has  taught 
that  it  may  be  broken  by  a  look  or  a  thought,  as  well  as  by 
an  open  act.  (Matt.  v.  28.)  It  is  He  who  has  spoken 
more  strongly  than  any  about  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage 
relation.  (Matt.  xix.  5.)  In  all  that  is  recorded  here,  we 
see  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  rest  of  His  teaching.  He 
simply  refused  to  usurp  the  office  of  the  judge  and  to  pro- 
nounce condemnation  on  a  guilty  woman,  for  the  gratifica- 
tion of  His  deadly  enemies. 

In  leaving  this  passage,  we  must  not  forget  that  it  con- 
tains two  lessons  of  great  importance.  Whatever  difficul- 
ties the  verses  before  us  may  present,  these  two  lessons  at 
any  rate  are  clear,  plain,  and  unmistakable. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  the  power  of  conscience.  We 
read  of  the  woman's  accusers,  that  when  they  heard  our 
Lord's  appeal,  "  being  convicted  by  their  own  conscience, 
they  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  the  eldest,  even 
unto  the  last."  Wicked*  and  hardened  as  they  were,  they 
felt  something  within  which  made  them  cowards.  Fallen 
as  human  nature  is,  God  has  taken  care  to  leave  within 
every  man  a  witness  that  will  be  heard. 


64  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Conscience  is  a  most  important  part  of  our  inward  man, 
and  pla}Ts  a  most  prominent  part  in  our  spiritual  history. 
It  cannot  save  us.  It  never  yet  led  any  one  to  Christ.  It 
is  blind,  and  liable  to  be  misled.  It  is  lame  and  powerless, 
and  cannot  guide  us  to  heaven.  Yet  conscience  is  not  to 
be  despised.  It  is  'the  minister's  best  friend,  when  he 
stands  up  to  rebuke  sin  from  the  pulpit.  It  is  the  mother's 
best  friend,  when  she  tries  to  restrain  her  children  from 
evil  and  quicken  them  to  good.  It  is  the  teacher's  best 
friend,  when  he  presses  home  on  bo}rs  and  girls  their  moral 
duties.  Happy  is  he  who  never  stifles  his  conscience,  but 
strives  to  keep  it  tender  !  Still  happier  is  he  who  prays  to 
have  it  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sprinkled  with 
Christ's  blood. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  the  nature  of  true  repentance. 
When  our  Lord  had  said  to  the  sinful  woman,  "Neither  do 
I  condemn  thee,"  He  dismissed  her  with  the  solemn  words, 
"  go  and  sin  no  more."  He  did  not  merely  say,  "  go  home 
and  repent."  He  pointed  out  the  chief  thing  which  her 
case  required, — the  necessity  of  immediate  breaking  off 
from  her  sin. 

Let  us  never  forget  this  lesson.  It  is  the  very  essence 
of  genuine  repentance,  as  the  Church  catechism  well  teaches, 
to  "  forsake  sin."  That  repentance  which  consists  in 
nothing  more  than  feeling,  talking^  professing,  wishing, 
meaning,  hoping,  and  resolving,  is  worthless  in  God's 
sight.  Action  is  the  very  life  of  "repentance  unto  salva- 
tion not  to  be  repented  of."  Till  a  man  ceases  to  do  evil 
and  turns  from  his  sins,  he  does  not  really  repent. — Would 
we  know  whether  we  are  truly  converted  to  God,  and  know 
anything  of  godly  sorrow  for  sin,  and  repentance  such  as 
causes  "  joy  in  heaven"?  Let  us  search  and  see  whether 
we  forsake  sin.  Let  us  not  rest  till  ive  can  say  as  in  God's 
sight,  "  I  hate  all  sin,  and  desire  to  sin  no  more." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  05 


Notes.    John  VIII.  1— II. 

These  eleven  verses,  together  with  the  last  verse  of  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  form  perhaps  the  gravest  critical  difficulty  in  the 
New  Testament.  Their  genuineness  is  disputed. — It  is  held 
by  many  learned  Christian  writers,  who  have  an  undoubted 
right  to  be  heard  on  such  matters,  that  the  passage  was  not 
written  by  St.  John,  that  it  was  written  by  an  uninspired  hand, 
and  probably  at  a  later  date,  and  that  it  has  no  lawful  claim  to 
be  regarded  as  a  part  of  canonical  Scripture. — It  is  held  by 
others,  whose  opinion,  to  say  the  least,  is  equally  entitled  to  re- 
spect, that  the  passage  is  a  genuine  part  of  St.  John's  Gospel, 
and  that  the  arguments  against  it,  however  weighty  they  may 
appear,  are  insufficient,  and  admit  of  an  answer.  A  summary  of 
the  whole  case  is  all  that  I  shall  attempt  to  give. 

In  the  list  of  those  who  think  the  passage  either  not  genuine, 
or  at  least  doubtful,  are  the  following  names  :— Beza,  Grotius, 
Baxter,  Hammond,  A.  Clark,  Tittman,  Tholuck,  Olshauseu, 
Hengstenberg,  Tregelles,  Alford,  Wordsworth,  Scrivener. 

In  the  list  of  those  who  think  the  passage  genuine  are  the  fol- 
lowing names  : — Augustine,  Ambrose,  Euthymius,  Rupertus, 
%winglg,  Ca1v'm)  Melapcthon,  Ecolampaclius,  Brentius,  Bucer, 
Gualter,  Musculus,  Bullinger,  Pellican,  Flacius,  Diodati,  Chem- 
nitius,  Aretius,  Piscator,  Calovius,  Cocceius,  Toletus,  Malclona- 
tus,  a  Lapide,  Ferus,Nifanius,  Cartwright,  Mayer,  Trapp,  Poole, 
Lampe,  Whitby,  Leigh,  Doddridge,  Beugel,  Stier,  Webster,  Bur- 
gon. 

Calvin  is  sometimes  named  as  one  of  those  who  think  the  pas- 
sage before  us  not  genuine.  But  his  language  about  it  in  his 
Commentary  is  certainly  not  enough  to  bear  out  the  assertion. 
He  says,  "  It  is  plain  that  this  passage  was  unknown  anciently 
to  the  Greek  Churches ;  and  some  conjecture  that  it  has  been 
brought  from  some  other  place,  and  inserted  here.  But  as  it 
has  always  been  received  by  the  Latin  Churches,  and  is  found 
in  many  old  Greek  manuscripts,  and  contains  nothing  unworthy 
of  an  Apostle,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  refuse  to  apply 
it  to  our  advantage." 

A.]  The  arguments  against  the  passage  are  as  follows  :— 

(1)  That  it  is  not  found  in  some  of  the  oldest  and  best  manu- 
scripts, now  existing,  of  the  Greek  Testament. 

(2)  That  it  is  not  found  in  some  of  the  earlier  versions  or 
trai.slations  of  the  Scriptures. 

(3)  That  it  is  not  commented  on  by  the  Greek  Fathers,  Ori- 
gen,  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  and  Theoplrylact,  in  their  exposition  of 
St.  John;  nor  quoted  or  referred  to  by  Tertullian  and  Cyprian. 

(4)  That  it  differs  in  style  from  the  rest  of  St.  John's  Gospel, 
and  contains  several  words  and  forms  of  expression  which  are 
nowhere  else  used  in  his  writings. 


66  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


(5)  That  the  moral  tendency  of  the  passage  is  somewhat 
doubtful,  and  that  it  seems  to  represent  our  Lord  as  palliating  a 
heinous  sin. 

B  ]  The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  passage  are  as  follows  : — 

(1)  That  it  is  found  in  many  old  manuscripts,  if  not  in  the 
very  oldest  and  best. 

(2)  That  it  is  found  in  the  Vulgate  Latin,  and  in  the  Arabic, 
Coptic,  Persian,  and  Ethiopian  versions. 

(3)  That  it  is  commented  on  by  Augustine  in  his  exposition  of 
this  Gospel;  while  in  another  of  his  writings,  he  expressly  re- 
fers to,  and  explains,  its  omission  from  some  manuscripts:  — 
that  it  is  quoted  and  defended  by  Ambrose,  referred  to  by  Je- 
rome, and  treated  as  genuine  in  the  Apostolical  constitutions. 

(4)  That  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  there  is  any  im- 
moral tendency  in  the  passage.  Our  Lord  pronounced  no  opin- 
ion on  the  sin  of  adultery,  but  simply  declined  the  office  of  a 
judge. 

It  may  seem  almost  presumptuous  to  offer  any  opinion  on  this 
very  difficult  subject.  But  I  venture  to  make  the  following  re- 
marks, and  to  invite  the  reader's  candid  attention  to  them.  I 
lean  decidely  to  the  side  of  those  who  think  the  passage  is  gen- 
uine, for  the  following  reasons  : — 

1.  The  argument  from  manuscripts  appears  to  me  inconclusive. 
We  possess  comparatively  few  very  ancient  ones.  Even  of  them, 
some  favour  the  genuineness  of  the  passage. — The  same  remark 
applies  to  the  ancient  versions.  Testimony  of  this  kind,  to  be 
conclusive,  should  be  unanimous. 

2.  The  argument  from  the  Fathers  seems  to  me  more  in  favour 
of  the  passage  than  against  it. — On  the  one  side  the  reasons 

•  are  simply  negative.  Certain  Fathers  say  nothing  about  the 
passage,  but  at  the  same  time  say  nothing  against  it. — On  the 
other  side  the  reasons  are  positive.  Men  of  such  high  authority 
as  Augustine  and  Ambrose  not  only  comment  on  the  passage, 
but  defend  its  genuineness,  and  assign  reasons  for  its  omission 
by  some  mistaken  transcribers. 

Let  me  add  to  this  that  the  negative  evidence  of  the  Fathers 
who  are  against  the  passage  is  not  nearly  so  weigh  y  9  it  ap- 
pears at  first  sight.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  is  one.  But  his  com- 
mentary on  the  eight  chapter  of  John  is  lost,  and  what  we  .have 
was  supplied  by  the  modern  hand  of  Jodocus  Clichtovoeus,  a 
Parisiau  doctor,  who  lived  in  the  year  1510  a.  d.  (See  Dup.n's 
Eccles.  Hist.  ) — Chrysostom's  commentary  on  John  consists  of 
popular  public  homilies,  in  which  we  can  easily  imagine  such  a 
passage  as  this  might  possibly  be  omitted. — Theophylact  was 
notoriously  a  copycr  and  imitator  of  Chrysostom. — Origen, 
the  only  remaining  commentator,  is  one  whose  testimony  is  not 
of  first-rate  value,  aud  he  has  omitted  many  things  in  his  ex- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  ti7 


position  of  St.  John. — The  silence  of  Tertullian  and  Cyprian 
is  perhaps  accountable,  on  the  same  principles  by  which  Augus- 
tine explains  the  omission  of  the  passage  in  some  copies  of  this 
Gospel  in  his  own  time. 

Some,  as  Calovius,  Maldonatus,  Flacius,  Aretius,  and  Pisca- 
tor,  think  that  Chrysostom  distinctly  refers  to  this  passage,  in 
his  Sixtieth  Homily  on  John,  though  he  passes  it  over  in  expo- 
sition. 

3.  The  argument  from  alleged  discrepancies  between  the 
style  and  language  of  this  passage,  and  the  usual  style  of  St. 
John's  writing,  is  one  which  should  be  received  with  much 
caution.  We  are  not  dealing  with  an  uninspired  but  with  an 
inspired  writer.  Surely.it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  an  in- 
spired writer  may  occasionally  use  words  and  constructions  and 
modes  of  expression  which  he  generally  does  not  use,  and  that 
it  is  no  proof  that  he  did  not  write  a  passage  because  he  wrote 
it  in  a  peculiar  way. 

I  leave  the  subject  here.  In  cases  of  doubt  like  this,  it  is 
wise  to  be  on  the  safe  side.  On  the  whole  I  think  it  safest  to 
regard  this  disputed  passage  as  genuine.  At  any  rate  I  prefer 
the  difficulties  on  this  side  to  those  on  the  other. 

The  whole  discussion  may  leave  in  our  minds,  at  any  rate, 
one  comfortable  thought.  If  even  in  the  case  of  this  notori- 
ously disputed  passage— more  controverted  and  doubted  than 
any  in  the  New  Testament— so  much  can  be  said  in  its  favour, 
how  immensely  strong  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole 
volume  of  Scripture  rests !  If  even  against  this  passage  the 
arguments  of  opponents  are  not  conclusive,  we  have  no  reason 
to  fear  for  the  rest  of  the  Bible. 

After  all  there  is  much  ground  for  thinking  that  some  critical 
difficulties  have  been  purposely  left  by  God's  providence  in  the 
text  of  the  New  Testament,  in  order  to  prove  the  faith  and 
patience  of  Christian  people.  They  serve  to  test  the  humility 
of  those  to  whom  intellectual  difficulties  are  a  far  greater  cross 
than  either  doctrinal  or  practical  ones.  To  such  minds  it  is 
trying  but  useful  discipline  to  find  occasional  passages  involv- 
ing knots  which  they  cannot  quite  untie,  and  problems  which 
they  cannot  quite  solve.  Of  such  passages  the  verses  before 
us  are  a  striking  instance.  That  the  text  of  them  is  "  a  hard 
thing "  it  would  be  wrong  to  deny.  But  I  believe  our  duty  is 
not  to  reject  it  hastily,  but  to  sit  still  and  wait.  In  these 
matters  "  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste." 

The  following  passage  from  Augustine  (De  conjug.  Adult.) 
is  worth  notice.  Having  argued  that  it  well  becomes  a  Chris- 
tian husband  to  be  reconciled  to  his  wife,  upon  her  repentance 
after  adultery,  because  our  Lord  said,  "Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee :  go  and  sin  no  more," — he  says,  "  This,  however,  rather 
shocks  the  minds  of  some  weak  believers,  or  rather  unbelievers 


68  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


and  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith,  insomuch  that,  afraid  of  its 
giving  their  wives  impunitj^  of  sinning,  they  struck  out  of  their 
copies  of  the  Gospel  this  that  our  Lord  did  in  pardoning  the 
woman  taken  in  adultery;  as  if  He  granted  leave  of  sinning, 
when  he  said,  "  Go  and  sin  no  more."  Augustine,  be  it  re- 
membered, lived  about  400  a.d. 

Those  who  wish  to  look  further  into  the  subject  of  this  dis- 
puted passage  will  find  it  fully  discussed  by  Gomarus,  Bloom- 
field,  and  Wordsworth. 

1. — [Jesus  went... mount... Olives.]    The  division  of  the  chapter  in 

{this  place  is  to  be  regretted.  The  last  verse  of  the  preceding 
chapter  and  the  verse  before  us  are  evidently  intended  to  be 
taken  together.  While  the  Pharisees  and  members  of  the 
council  "  went  every  man  to  his  own  house,"  our  Lord,  having 
no  home  of  His  own,  retired  "to  the  Mount  of  Olives,"  and 
there  spent  the  night  in  the  open  air.  In  such  a  climate  as  that 
of  Judea  there  was  nothing  remarkable  in  His  doing  this.  The 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  at  the  foot  of  the  mount,  would  supply 
sufficient  shelter.  That  this  was  our  Lord's  habitual  practice, 
we  are  distinctly  told  in  Luke  xxi.  37. 

Lampe  remarks  that  we  never  read  of  our  Lord  lodging, 
sleeping,  or  tarrying  a  night  in  Jerusalem. 

2. — [And  early  in  the  morning.']  This  expression  is  worth  notic- 
ing, because,  according  to  some,  it  explains  our  Lord's  subse- 
quent use  of  the  figure — "  I  am  the  light  of  the  world."  They 
think  that  it  refers  to  the  break  of  day,  or  rising  of  the  sun. 

[He  came  again. ..temple.]  This  means  the  outer  courts  of  the 
temple,  where  it  was  customary  for  the  Jews  to  assemble  and 
listen  to  teachers  of  religion.  In  eastern  countries  and  in  the 
times  when  there  was  no  printing,  it  must  be  remembered, 
much  instruction  was  given  in  this  way,  by  open-air  addresses 
or  conversations.     Thus  Socrates  taught  at  Athens. 

[All  the  people  came  unto  Him.]  "  All "  here  must  mean  great 
multitudes  of  the  people.  After  all  that  had  happened  in  the 
last  three  or  four  days,  we  may  easily  understand  that  our  Lord's 
appearance  would  at  once  attract  a  crowd.  His  fame  as  a  teacher 
and  speaker  was  established. 

[He  sat  down,  and  taught.]  That  it  was  common  for  the 
teachers  to  sit,  and  the  hearers  to  stand,  is  evident  from  other 
texts.  "I  sat  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple."  (Matt. 
xxvi.  55.)  In  the  synagogues  of  Nazareth,  when  our  Lord  began 
to  preach,  He  first  "  gave  the  book  to  the  minister,  and  sat  down." 
(Luke  iv.  20.)  "  He  sat  down  and  taught  the  people  out  of  the 
ship."  (Luke  v.  3.)  "  We  sat  down  and  spake  to  the  women." 
(Acts  xvi.  13.) 

3. — [The  Scribes  and  Pharisees.]  This  is  the  only  place  in  St. 
John's  Gospel  where  he  mentions  the  "  Scribes  "  at  all.  He  names 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  69 


the  Pharisees  twenty  times — sixteen  times  alone,  and  four  timea 
In  conjunction  with  the  chief-priests. 

This  fact  is  thought  by  some  to  be  an  argument  against  the 
genuineness  of  the  passage,  but  without  just  cause.  St.  Mark, 
in  his  Gospel,  speaks  twelve  times  of  the  Pharisees,  and  only 
twice  mentions  the  Scribes  in  conjunction  with  them.  More* 
over,  this  is  the  only  occasion  recorded  in  St.  John,  when  a 
formal  attempt  was  made  to  entrap  our  Lord  by  a  subtle  ques- 
tion. That  being  so,  there  may  be  a  good  reason  why  the 
Scribes  should  be  mentioned  as  well  as  the  Pharisees,  as  prin- 
cipal agents  in  the  attempt. 

[Brought  unto  Him  a  woman,  etc.'}  It  seems  not  improbable 
that  this  attempt  to  ensnare  our  Lord  was  one  result  of  His  ene- 
mies' failure  to  apprehend  Him  during  the  feast.  Defeated  in 
their  effort  to  meet  Him  in  argument,  or  to  apprehend  Him  in 
the  absence  of  any  legal  charge,  they  tried  next  to  entrap  Him 
into  committing  Himself  in  some  way,  and  so  giving  them  a 
handle  against  Him.  No  time  was  to  be  lost.  They  had  failed 
yesterday,  and  found  their  own  officers  unwilling  to  apprehend 
our  Lord.  They  resolved  to  try  another  plan  to-day.  They 
would  ensnare  our  Lord  into  cloim;  something  illegal  or  indis- 


[Set  her  in  the  midst.]  This  means  in  the  middle  of  a  ring  or 
circle,  composed  of  themselves  and  their  followers,  our  Lord 
and  His  disciples,  and  the  crowd  listening  to  His  teaching. 

4. — [They  say. ..this  woman... taken... etc.~]  It  throws  some  light  on 
this  charge  to  remember  what  immense  crowds  came  up  to  Jeru- 
salem at  the  great  public  feasts,  and  especially  at  the  feast  of 
tabernacles.  At  such  a  season,  when  every  house  was  crowded, 
as  at  a  fair  time,  when  many  consequently  slept  in  the  open  air, 
and  no  small  disorder  probably  ensued,  we  can  well  understand 
that  such  a  sin  as  a  breach  of  the  seventh  commandment  would 
be  very  likely  to  be  committed. 

5. — [Now Moses.. .law  commanded... stoned.]  This  is  the  legitimate 
conclusion  of  the  two  texts,  Lev.  xx.  10  and  Deut.  xxii.  22, 
when  compared.  There  seems  no  ground  for  the  comment  of 
some  writers,  that  Moses  did  not  command  an  adulteress  to  be 
put  to  death  by  stoning. 

It  is  worth  notice,  that  the  expression,  "Moses  in  the  law," 
is  not  used  either  by  Matthew,  Mark,  or  Luke.  But  it  is  used 
by  St.  John  both  here  and  at  chap.  i.  45. 

[But  what  sayest  thou  ?]  This  would  be  more  literally  ren- 
dered, "What  therefore  sayest  thou?"  The  Greek  word  ren- 
dered "  but "  by  our  translators  is  hardly  ever  so  rendered  in 
the  New  Testament;  and  in  most  places  is  either  "therefore," 
"then,"  "so,"  "now,"  or  "and."  John  ix.  18,  and  Acts  xxv. 
4,  are  the  only  parallel  cases. 


70  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Ecolampadius  thinks  the  Pharisees  were  especially  sore  and 
irritated  because  our  Lord  had  said  that  "  publicans  and  harlots  '* 
would  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  before  Pharisees.  (Matt. 
xxi.  31.) 

6. — [  This  they  said,  tempting... accuse  Mm.~\  la  what  did  this  temp- 
tation cousist  ?  How  did  the  Jews  hope  to  find  ground  for  an 
accusation?  The  answer  seems  easy. — If  our  Lord  replied  that 
the  woman  ought  not  to  be  stoned,  they  would  have  denounced 
Him  to  the  people  as  one  that  poured  contempt  on  the  law. — If 
our  Lord,  on  the  contrary,  replied  that  the  woman  ought  to  be 
stoned,  they  would  have  accused  Him  to  the  Romans  as  one  who 
usurped  the  prerogative  of  putting  criminals  to  death.  See  John 
xviii.  31 :  "It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death." 
Moreover,  they  would  have  published  everywhere  our  Lord's  in- 
consistency in  offering  salvation  to  publicans  and  harlots,  and 
yet  condemning  to  death  an  adulteress  for  one  transgression. 

Let  it  be  noticed  that  subtle  ensnaring  questions  like  these, 
putting  the  person  questioned  into  an  apparent  dilemma  or  diffi- 
culty, whatever  answer  he  might  give,  seem  to  have  been 
favourite  weapons  of  the  Jews.  The  Pharisees'  question  about 
"  tribute-money,"  the  lawyer's  question  about  "  the  great  com- 
mandment of  the  law,"  and  the  Sadducees'  question  about  "the 
resurrection,"  are  parallel  cases.  The  question  before  us  is 
therefore  quite  in  keeping  with  other  places  in  the  Gospels. 

Augustine  remarks,  "Tjhey  said  in  themselves,  'Let  us  put 
before  Him  a  woman  caught  in  adultery ;  let  us  ask  what  is 
ordered  in  the  law  concerning  her;  if  He  shall  bid  stone  her, 
He  will  not  have  the  repute  of  gentleness  :  if  He  give  sentence 
to  let  her  go,  He  will  not  keep  righteousness.' "  Euthymius  says 
the  same. 

[But  Jesus  stooped  down,  etc.,  etc.'}  Our  Lord's  intention  in 
this  remarkable  sentence  can  hardly  admit  of  doubt.  He 
declined  to  answer  the  subtle  question  put  to  Hira,  partly  be- 
cause he  knew  the  malicious  motive  of  the  questioners,  partly 
because  He  had  always  announced  that  He  did  not  come  to  be  "  a 
judge  and  divider"  among  men,  or  to  interfere  in  the  slightest 
degree  with  the  administration  of  the  law.  His  silence  was 
equivalent  to  a  refusal  to  answer. 

But  the  peculiar  action  that  our  Lord  employed,  in  "  writing 
with  his  finger  on  the  ground,"  is  undeniably  a  difficulty.  St. 
John  gives  no  explanation  of  the  action,  and  we  are  left  to  con- 
jecture both  why  our  Lord  wrote  and  what  He  wrote. 

(1)  Some  think,  asBede,  Rupertus,  and  Lampe,  that  our  Lord 
wrote  on  the  ground  the  texts  of  Scripture  which  settled  the 
question  brought  before  Him,  as  the  seventh  commandment,  and 
Lev.  xx.  10,  and  Deut.  xxii.  22.  The  action  would  then  imply, 
"Why  do  you  ask  me?  What  is  written  in  the  law,  that  law 
which  God  wrote  with  His  own  finger  as  I  am  writing  now?  " 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  71 

(2)  Some  think,  as  Lightfoot  and  Burgon,  that  onr  Lord  meant 
to  refer  to  the  law  of  Moses  for  the  trial  of  jealousy,  in  which 
an  accused  woman  was  obliged  to  drink  water  into  which  dust 
from  the  floor  of  the  tabernacle  or  temple  had  been  put  by  the 
priest.  (Num.  v.  17.)  The  action  would  then  imply,  "  Has 
the  law  for  trying  such  an  one  as  this  been  tried?  Look  at  the 
dust  on  which  I  am  writing.  Has  the  woman  been  placed  before 
the  priest,  and  drank  of  the  dust  and  water?  " 

(3)  Some  think,  as  Augustine,  Melancthon,  Brentius,  Toletus, 
and  a  Lapide,  that  our  Lord's  action  was  a  silent  reference  to 
the  text,  Jer.  xvii.  13:  "They  that  depart  from  me  shall  be 
written  in  the  earth." 

(4)  One  rationalist  writer  suggests  that  our  Lord  "  stooped 
down"  from  feelings  of  modesty,  as  if  ashamed  of  the  sight 
before  Him,  and  of  the  story  told  to  Him.  The  idea  is  prepos- 
terous, and  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  our  Lord's  public 
demeanour. 

(5)  Some  think,  as  Euthymius,  Calvin,  Rollock,  Chemnitius, 
Diodati,  Flavius,  Piscator,  Grotius,  Poole,  and  Hutcheson,  that 
our  Lord  did  not  mean  anything  at  all  by  this  writing  on  the 
ground,  and  that  He  only  signified  that  He  would  give  no  answer, 
and  would  neither  listen  to  nor  interfere  in  such  matters  as  the 
one  brought  before  Him. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  Christ  intended,  by  doing  nothing,  to  show 
how  unworthy  they  were  of  being  heard;  just  as  if  any  one, 
while  another  was  speaking  to  him,  were  to  draw  lines  on  the 
wall,  or  to  turn  his  back,  or  to  show  by  any  other  sign,  that  he 
was  not  attending  to  what  was  said." 

I  must  leave  the  reader  to  choose  which  solution  he  prefers. 
To  my  eyes,  I  confess,  there  are  difficulties  in  each  view.  If  I 
must  select  one,  I  prefer  the  last  of  the  five,  as  the  simplest. 

Quesnel  remarks  :  "  We  never  read  that  Jesus  Christ  wrote  but 
once  in  His  life.  Let  men  learn  from  hence  never  to  write  but 
when  it  is  necessary  or  useful,  and  to  do  it  with  humility  and 
modesty,  on  a  principle  of  charity,  and  not  of  malice." 

7.—  \_So  when  they  continued... lifted... said  unto  them.]  The  Scribes 
and  Pharisees  seem  to  have  been  determined  to  have  an  answer, 
and  to  have  made  it  necessary  for  our  Lord  to  speak  at  last.  But 
His  first  silence  and  significant  refusal  to  attend  were  a  plain 
proof  to  all  around  that  He  did  not  wish  to  interfere  with  the 
office  of  the  magistrate,  and  had  not  come  to  be  a  judge  of  offen- 
ces against  the  law.  If  they  got  an  opinion  from  Him  about 
this  case,  they  could  not  say  that  He  gave  it  willingly,  but  that 
it  was  extorted  from  Him  by  much  importunity. 

[He  that  is  without  sin. ..first  cast  a  stone  at  her.']  This  solemn 
and  weighty  sentence  is  a  striking  example  of  our  Lord's  perfect 
wisdom.     He  referred  His  questioners  to  Scripture.     Deut.  xvii. 


72  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


7:  "  The  hands  of  the  witnesses  shall  be  first  upon  him  to  put 
him  to  death." — It  sent  their  minds  home  to  their  own  private 
lives.  "  Whatever  the  woman  may  deserve,  are  you  the  people 
to  find  fault  with  her?  " — It  neither  condemned  nor  justified  the 
adulteress,  and  yet  showed  our  Lord's  reverence  for  the  law  of 
Moses.  "I  decline  to  pronounce  sentence  on  this  woman, 
because  I  am  not  the  judge.  You  know  yourselves  what  the 
law  is  in  such  cases  as  well  as  I  do.  You  have  no  right  to 
assume  that  I  do  not  reverence  the  law  as  much  as  yourselves. 
But  since  you  profess  to  honour  the  law  of  Moses  so  much,  I 
remind  you  that  this  same  law  requires  the  witnesses  to  be  the 
executioners.  Now  are  you  the  persons  who  ought  to  punish 
this  woman,  however  guilty  she  may  be?  Do  you  yourselves 
come  before  me  with  clear  consciences  about  the  seventh  com- 
mandment?" 

Many  think  that  when  our  Lord  said  "  he  that  is  without  sin," 
He  meant  the  expression  to  be  taken  in  a  general  sense.  I  can- 
not hold  this  view.  It  would  involve  the  awkward  conclusion 
that  no  one  could  be  a  judge  at  all,  or  punish  a  criminal,  be- 
cause no  one  is  altogether  and  absolutely  "  without  sin."  I  am 
decidedly  of  opinion  that  our  Lord  referred  to  sin  against  the 
seventh  commandment.  There  is  too  much  reason  to  think 
that  such  sin  was  very  common  among  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's 
time.  The  expression  "  an  adulterous  generation  "  (Matt.  xii. 
39;  xvi.  4;  and  Mark  viii.  38)  is  full  of  meaning.  (See  also 
Rom.  ii.  22;  Luke  xviii.  11;  and  James  iv.  4.) 

8. — [And  again  he  stooped  down,  etc.']  This  repeated  act  would 
greatly  add  to  the  weighty  solemnity  of  the  sentence  which 
had  just  fallen  from  our  Lord's  lips.  "  I  have  given  my  opinion ; 
— now  what  are  you  going  to  do?    I  wait  for  your  reply." 

9. — [And  they  which  heard... conscience.']  This  sentence  seems  to 
me  to  confirm  the  opinion,  that  when  our  Lord  said  "  he  that  is 
without  sin,"  He  referred  to  sin  against  the  seventh  command- 
ment. A  general  charge  would  hardly  have  produced  the  effect 
here  described.  A  charge  of  breaking  the  seventh  command- 
ment would  be  just  such  an  one  as  a  man  would  shrink  from, 
if  made  publicly.  The  sin  is  peculiarly  one  which  brings  with 
it  afterwards  a  certain  sense  of  shame.  It  is  commonly  a  deed 
of  darkness  and  done  in  secret,  and  the  doer  of  it  dreads  the 
light. 

The  power  of  conscience  stands  out  here  in  a  very  striking 
manner.  It  is  a  part  of  man's  inward  nature  which  is  far  too 
little  remembered  by  ministers  and  teachers.  Fallen  and  cor- 
rupt as  man  is,  we  must  never  forget  that  God  has  left  him  a 
certain  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  called  conscience.  It  has  uo 
power  to  save,  or  convert,  or  lead  to  Christ.  But  it  has  a 
power  to  accuse,  and  prick,  and  witness.  Such  texts  as  Rom. 
ii.  15  and  2  Cor.  iv.  2  should  be  carefully  considered. 

[Went out.. .beginning. ..eldest.. .last.]    The  words  "eldest "and 


JOHN,  chap.  vin.  73 

"  last "  in  this  sentence  are  in  the  plural  number,  which  does 
not  appear  in  the  English  version.  The  oldest  would  probably 
have  the  greatest  number  of  sins  on  their  minds. 

[Jesus  was  left  alone,  and  the  woman... midst.']  This  must  of 
course  mean  that  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  who  accused  the 
women  were  all  gone  away.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow 
that  the  crowd  of  hearers  who  were  about  our  Lord  when  the 
case  was  brought  to  Him  had  gone  away.  They  must  have 
stood  by,  and  seen  and  heard  all  that  passed. 

10. — [When  Jesus  had  lifted  up  himself,  etc.~\  How  long  the  pause 
must  have  been  during  which  our  Lord  stooped  down  and  wrote 
on  the  ground  a  second  time,  we  are  not  told.  But  it  must 
probably  have  been  several  minutes.  When  it  says  that  our 
Lord  "  saw  none  but  the  woman,"  it  must  mean  "  none  of  the 
party  which  came  and  interrupted  His  teaching,  except  the 
woman."  The  accusers  had  disappeared,  and  the  accused 
alone  remained. 

The  question  that  our  Lord  put  to  the  woman  must  have  been 
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  crowd  around.  Let  them  mark  from 
the  question  and  answer  that  the  case  had  fallen  to  the  ground. 
No  evidence  was  offered.  No  accuser  appeared.  No  sentence 
therefore  could  be  pronounced,  and  none  was  needed. 

11.—  [She  said,  No  man,  Lord.]  We  may  observe  here  that  our 
Lord,  with  merciful  consideration,  did  not  ask  the  woman 
whether  she  was  guilty  or  not.  Thus  she  could  with  truth  re- 
ply to  His  question,  and  yet  not  criminate  herself. 

[Jesus  said... neither  do  I  condemn... sin  no  more.]  The  mingled 
kindness  and  perfect  wisdom  of  this  sentence  deserve  special 
notice.  Our  Lord  says  nothing  of  the  question  whether  the 
woman  deserved  punishment,  and  what  kind  of  punishment. 
He  simply  says  "  I  do  not  condemn  thee.  It  is  not  my  province 
or  offence  to  judge  or  pronounce  any  sentence." — Nor  yet  does 
He  tell  the  woman  that  she  may  go  away  without  stain  or  blem- 
ish on  her  character.  On  the  contrary  He  implies  that  she  had 
sinned  and  was  guilty.  But  in  the  absence  of  witnesses  she 
might  go  away  clear  of  punishment. — Nor  yet  does  He  say 
"  Go  in  peace,"  as  in  Luke  vii.  50,  and  viii.  48. 

"Go,"  He  says,  "and  sin  no  more."  How  anyone,  in  the 
face  of  this  text,  can  say  that  our  Lord  palliates  and  condones 
the  woman's  sin,  it  is  rather  hard  to  understand.  That  He  re- 
fused to  condemn  her  is  clear  and  plain,  because  it  was  not  His 
office.  That  He  ignored  or  connived  at  her  sin,  as  Hengsteu- 
berg  says,  (in  his  argument  against  the  genuineness  of  the 
whole  passage,)  can  never  be  proved.  The  very  last  words 
show  what  he  thought  of  her  case : — "  Sin  no  more."  She 
had  sinned,  and  had  only  escaped  from  lack  of  evidence.  Let 
her  remember  that,  and' "sin  no  more." 

Augustine   remarks,  "How,  Lord?    Dost  thou  then  favour 
4 


74 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


sin?  Not  so,  assuredly.  Mark  what  He  says :  Go,  henceforth 
sin  no  more.  You  see  then  that  the  Lord  condemned,  but  He 
condemned  siu,  not  man.  For  were  He  a  favourer  of  sin,  He 
would  say,  neither  will  I  condemn  thee,  go,  live  as  thou  wilt." 

The  remark  of  Euthymius  that  our  Lord  considered  the  pub- 
lic shame  and  exposure  sufficient  punishment  for  the  woman's 
sin,  is  thoroughly  unsatisfactory,  and  not  warranted  by  any- 
thing in  the  context. — The  view  of  Bullinger  and  some  others, 
that  one  principal  object  of  the  passage  is  to  teach  our  Lord's 
mercy  and  readiness  to  pardon  great  sinners,  appears  to  me 
quite  destitute  of  foundation.  Christ's  abounding  mercy  is  a 
great  truth,  but  not  the  truth  of  this  passage. — There  seems  no 
parallel  between  this  woman  and  the  Samaritan  woman  in 
John  iv. 

Poole  observes  that  our  Lord  does  not  merely  say  "  Commit 
adultery  no  more.  No  partial  repentance  or  sorrow  for  any  par- 
ticular sin  will  suffice  a  penitent  that  hopes  for  mercy  from 
God;  but  a  leaving  off  all  sin,  of  what  kind  soever  it  is." 


JOHN  VIII.   12-20. 


12  Then  spake  Jesus  again  unto 
them,  saying,  I  am  the  light  of  the 
world:  he  that  followeth  me  shall  not 
walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the 
light  of  life. 

13  The  Pharisees  therefore  said  unto 
him,  Thou  bearest  record  of  thyself; 
thy  record  is  not  true. 

14  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  Though  I  bear  record  of  myself, 
yet  my  record  is  true:  for  I  know 
whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go;  but 
ye  cannot  tell  whenco  I  come,  and 
whither  I  go. 

15  Ye  judge  after  the  flesh ;  I  judge 
no  man. 

16  And  yet    if  I  judgo,  my  judg- 


ment is  true:  for  I  am  not  alone,  but 
I  and  the  Father  that  sent  me. 

17  It  is  also  written  in  your  law, 
that  the  testimony  of  two  men  is 
true. 

18  I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of 
myself,  and  the  Father  that  sent  me 
beareth  witness  of  me. 

19  Then  said  they  unto  him,  Where 
is  thy  Father  ?  Jesus  answered,  Ye 
neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father :  if  ye 
had  known  me,  ye  should  have  known 
my  Father  also. 

20  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the 
treasury,  as  ho  taught  in  the  temple; 
and  no  man  laid  hands  on  him;  for 
his  hour  was  not  yet  come. 


The  conversation  between  our  Lord  and  the  Jews5  which 
begins  with  these  verses,  is  full  of  difficulties.  The  con- 
nection between  one  part  and  another,  and  the  precise 
meaning  of  some  of  the  expressions  which  fell  from  our 
Lord's  lips,  are  "  things  hard  to  be  understood."  In  pas- 
sages like  this  it  is  true  wisdom  to  acknowledge  the  great 


JOHN,  chap.  vin.  75 

imperfection  of  our  spiritual  vision,  and  to  be  thankful  if 
we  can  glean  a  few  handfuls  of  truth. 

Let  us  notice,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  says  of  Himself.  He  proclaims,  "  I  am  the  light  of 
the  world." 

These  words  imply  that  the  world  needs  light,  and  is 
naturally  in  a  dark  condition.  It  is  so  in  a  moral  and 
spiritual  point  of  view :  and  it  has  been  so  for  nearly  6,000 
years.  In  ancient  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  in  modern 
England,  France,  and  German}',  the  same  report  is  true. 
The  vast  majority  of  men  neither  see  nor  understand  the 
value  of  their  souls,  the  true  nature  of  God,  nor  the  reality 
of  a  world  to  come  !  Notwithstanding  all  the  discoveries 
of  art  and  science,  "  darkness  still  covers  the  earth,  and 
gross  darkness  the  people."     (Isai.  lx.  2.) 

For  this  state  of  things,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  declares 
Himself  to  be  the  only  remedy.  He  has  risen,  like  the  sun, 
to  diffuse  light,  and  life,  and  peace,  and  salvation,  in  the 
midst  of  a  dark  world.  He  invites  all  who  want  spiritual 
help  and  guidance  to  turn  to  Him,  and  take  Him  for  their 
leader.  What  the  sun  is  to  the  whole  solar  system — the 
centre  of  light,  and  heat,  and  life,  and  fertility — that  He 
has  come  into  the  world  to  be  to  sinners. 

Let  this  sa}dng  sink  down  into  our  hearts.  It  is  weighty 
and  full  of  meaning.  False  lights  on  every  side  invite 
man's  attention  in  the  present  day.  Reason,  philosophy, 
earnestness,  liberalism,  conscience,  and  the  voice  of  the 
Church,  are  all,  in  their  various  ways,  crying  loudly  that 
they  have  got  "  the  light "  to  show  us.  Their  advocates 
know  not  what  they  say.  Wretched  are  those  who  believe 
their  high  professions  !  He  only  is  the  true  light  who  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  who  died  as  our  substitute 
on  the  cross,  and  sits  at  God's  right  hand  to  be  our 
Friend.  "  In  His  light  we  shall  see  light."  (Psalm  xxxvi. 
9.) 


76  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Let  us  notice,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  says  of  those  that  folloio  Him.  He  promises,  "He 
that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall 
have  the  light  of  life." 

To  follow  Christ  is  to  commit  ourselves  wholly  and 
entirely  to  Him  as  our  only  leader  and  Saviour,  and  to 
submit  ourselves  to  Him  in  every  matter,  both  of  doctrine 
and  practice.  "  Following"  is  only  another  word  for  "  be- 
lieving." It  is  the  same  act  of  soul,  only  seen  from  a  differ- 
ent point  of  view.  As  Israel  followed  the  pillar  of  cloud 
and  fire  in  all  their  journeyings — moving  whenever  it 
moved,  stopping  whenever  it  tarried,  asking  no  questions, 
marching  on  in  faith — so  must  a  man  deal  with  Christ.  He 
must  u  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth."  (Rev. 
xiv.  4.) 

He  that  so  follows  Christ  shall  "  not  walk  in  darkness." 
He  shall  not  be  left  in  ignorance,  like  the  many  around 
him.  He  shall  not  grope  in  doubt  and  uncertainty,  but 
shall  see  the  way  to  heaven,  and  know  where  he  is  going. — 
He  "  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  He  shall  feel  within  him 
the  light  of  God's  countenance  shining  on  him.  He  shall 
find  in  his  conscience  and  understanding  a  living  light, 
which  nothing  can  altogether  quench.  The  lights  with 
which  many  please  themselves  shall  go  out  in  the  valley  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  and  prove  worse  than  useless.  But 
the  light  that  Christ  gives  to  every  one  that  follows  Him 
shall  never  fail. 

Let  us  notice,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  what  the  Lord  Jesus 
says  of  His  enemies.  He  tells  the  Pharisees  that,  with  all 
their  pretended  wisdom,  they  were  ignorant  of  God.  "Ye 
neither  know  Me  nor  my  Father :  if  ye  had  known  Me,  ye 
should  have  known  my  Father  also." 

Ignorance  like  this .  is  only  too  common.  There  are 
thousands  who  are  conversant  with  many  branches  of  human 
learning,  and  can  even  argue  and  reason  about  religion,  and 


joiin,  ciiAr.  vnr.  77 

yet  know  nothing  really  about  God.  That  there  is  such  a 
Being  as  God  they  fully  admit.  But  His  character  and 
attributes  revealed  in  Scripture,  His  holiness,  His  purity, 
His  justice,  His  perfect  knowledge,  His  unchangeableness, 
are  things  with  which  they  are  little  acquainted.  In  fact, 
the  subject  of  God's  nature  and  character  makes  them  un- 
comfortable, and  they  do  not  like  to  dwell  upon  it. 

The  grand  secret  of  knowing  God  is  to  draw  near  to  Him 
through  Jesus  Christ.  Approached  from  this  side,  there  is 
nothing  that  need  make  us  afraid.  Viewed  from  this  stand- 
point, God  is  the  sinner's  friend.  God,  out  of  Christ,  may 
well  fill  us  with  alarm.  How  shall  we  dare  to  look  at  so 
high  and  holy  a  Being? — God  in  Christ  is  full  of  mercy, 
grace,  and  peace.  His  law's  demands  are  satisfied.  His 
holiness  need  not  make  us  afraid.  Christ  in  one  word  is 
the  way  and  door,  by  which  we  must  ever  draw  nigh  to  the 
Father.  If  we  know  Christ,  we  shall  know  the  Father.  It 
is  His  own  word, — "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but 
by  Me."  (John  xiv.  6.)  Ignorance  of  Christ  is  the  root 
of  ignorance  of  God.  "Wrong  at  the  starting-point,  the 
whole  sum  of  a  man's  religion  is  full  of  error. 

And  now,  where  are  we  ourselves?  Do  we  know? 
Many  are  living  and  dying  in  a  kind  of  fog. — Where  are 
we  going?  Can  we  give  a  satisfactory  answer?  Hundreds 
go  out  of  existence  in  utter  uncertainty. — Let  us  leave 
nothing  uncertain  that  concerns  our  everlasting  salvation. 
Christ,  the  light  of  the  world,  is  for  us  as  well  as  for  others, 
if  we  humbly  follow  Him,  cast  our  souls  on  Him,  and  be- 
come His  disciples. — Let  us  not,  like  thousands,  waste  our 
lives  in  doubting,  and  arguing,  and  reasoning,  but  simply 
follow.  The  child  that  says — "I  will  not  learn  anything 
till  I  know  something,"  will  never  learn  at  all.  The  man 
that  says — "  I  must  first  understand  everything  before  I 
become  a  Christian,"  will  die  in  his  sins.  Let  us  begin  by 
"  following,"  and  then  we  shall  find  light. 


78  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


Notes.    John  VIII.    12—20. 

Before  beginning  the  notes  on  this  section,  I  will  ask  any  one 
who  doubts  the  genuineness  of  the  first  eleven  verses  of  the 
chapter,  to  consider  how  very  awkwardly  the  twelfth  verse 
would  come  in  if  it  immediately  followed  the  52nd  verse  of  the 
seventh  chapter. — The  omission  of  the  disputed  passage  about 
the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  however  necessary  some  may 
think  it,  undoubtedly  makes  a  breach  in  the  connection  which 
cannot  be  reasonably  explained.— Omit  the  passage,  and  our 
Lord  appears  to  break  in  upon  the  angry  council  of  tiie  Phari- 
sees, foiled  in  their  attempt  to  take  Him,  and  vexed  with  Nico- 
demus  for  pleading  for  Him.  This  is  surely  very  improbable, 
to  say  the  least. — Retain  the  disputed  passage,  on  the  other 
hand,  and  the  whole  connection  seems  plain.  A  night  has  passed 
away.  A  sunrise  is  over  the  whole  party  assembled  in  the  tem- 
ple court.  And  our  Lord  begins  again  to  teach  by  proclaiming 
a  beautiful  truth,  appropriate  to  the  occasion, — "I  am  the  light 
of  the  world." 

12. — {Then  spake  Jesus  again... them.']  The  expression  "  spake 
again  "  exactly  fits  in  with  the  preceding  narrative.  It  carries 
us  back  to  the  2nd  verse,  where  we  read  that  our  Lord  was  sit- 
ting in  the  temple  and  teaching  the  people,  when  the  woman 
taken  in  adultery  was  brought  before  Him.  This  naturally  in- 
terrupted and  broke  off  His  teaching  for  a  time.  But  when  the 
case  was  settled,  and  both  accuser  and  accused  had  gone  away, 
He  resumed  His  teaching.  Then  the  expression  comes  in  most 
naturally,  "  He  spake  again."  Once  admit  that  the  narrative  of 
the  woman  is  not  genuine  and  must  be  left  out,  and  there  is 
really  nothing  with  which  to  connect  the  words  before  us.  We 
are  obliged  to  look  back  as  far  as  the  37th  verse  of  the  last 
chapter. 

The  same  remark  applies  to  the  word  "them."  The  natural 
application  of  it  is  to  "  the  people  "  whom  our  Lord  was  teach- 
ing, in  the  2nd  verse,  when  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  interrup- 
ted him.  Leave  out  the  narrative  of  the  woman,  and  there  is 
nothing  to  which  the  word  "them  "  can  be  referred,  except  the 
angry  council  of  the  Pharisees  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  chapter. 

[I  am... light... world .]  In  this  glorious  expression,  our  Lord, 
we  cannot  doubt,  declares  Himself  to  be  the  promised  Messiah 
or  Saviour,  of  whom  the  prophets  had  spoken.  The  Jews  would 
remember  the  words, — "  I  will  give  thee  for  a  light  of  the  Gen- 
tiles." (Isai.  xlii.  6 ;  xlix.  6.)  So  also  Simeon  had  said,  he  would 
be  a  "  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles."  (Luke  ii.  32.)  Why  He  used 
this  figure,  and  what  He  had  in  His  mind  in  choosing  it,  is  a 
point  on  which  commentators  do  not  agree.  That  he  referred 
to  something  before  His  eyes  is  highly  probable,  and  in  keep- 
ing with  His  usual  mode  of  teaching. 

(1)  Some  think,  as  Aretius,  Musculus,  Ecolampadius,  Bull- 
inger,and  Bp.  Andrews,  that  He  referred  to  the  sun,  then  rising 


JOHN,   CHAP.  vni.  79 


while  He  spoke.    What  the  sun  was  to  the  eaith,  that  He  came 
to  be  to  mankind. 

(2)  Some  think,  as  Stier,  Olshausen,  Besser,  D.  Brown,  and 
Alford,  that  He  referred  to  the  great  golden  lamps  which  used 
to  be  kept  burning  in  the  temple  courts.  He  was  the  true  light, 
able  to  enlighten  men's  hearts  and  minds.  They  were  nothing 
but  ornaments,  or  at  most,  emblems. 

(3)  Some  think,  as  Cyril  and  Lampe,  that  He  referred  to  the 
pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  which  gave  light  to  the  Israelites,  and 
guided  them  through  the  wilderness.  He  was  the  true  guide  to 
heaven,  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world. 

The  first  of  these  three  views  seems  to  me  most  probable,  and 
most  in  harmony  with  the  context. 

Rupertus  remarks,  that  two  grand  declarations  of  Christ  fol- 
lowed each  other  on  two  successive  days  at  Jerusalem.  On  the 
last  day  of  the  feast  He  said, — "If  any  man  thirst  let  him  come 
unto  Me  and  drink."  (John  vii.  37.)  The  very  next  day  He 
said,—"  I  am  the  light  of  the  world." 

[He  that  followeth  me."]  This  means  "  following  "  as  a  disci- 
ple, servant,  traveller,  soldier,  or  sheep.  What  the  teacher  is 
to  the  scholar,  the  master  to  the  servant,  the  guide  to  the  trav- 
eller, the  general  to  the  soldier,  the  shepherd  to  the  sheep,  that 
is  Christ  to  true  Christians.  "  Following"  is  the  same  as  "  be- 
lieving." See  Matt.  xvi.  24;  xix.  21;  John  x.  27;  xii.  26.  Fol- 
lowing here,  we  must  always  remember,  does  not  mean  copying 
and  imitating,  but  trusting,  putting  faith  in  another. 

Musculus  and  Henry  observe,  that  it  is  of  no  use  that  Christ 
is  the  light  of  the  world  if  we  do  but  follow  Him.  "  Following  " 
is  the  point  on  which  all  turns.  It  is  not  enough  to  gaze  upon 
and  admire  the  light.    We  must  "  follow"  it. 

[Shall  not  walk  in  darkness.]  The  expression  "darkness"  in 
the  New  Testament  sometimes  denotes  sin,  as  1  John  i.  6,  and 
sometimes  ignorance  and  unbelief,  as  1  Thess.  v.  4.  Some  have 
thought  that  our  Lord  referred  to  the  woman  taken  in  adultery, 
and  to  such  deeds  of  moral  darkness  as  she  had  been  guilty  of. 
The  meaning  would  then  be, — "He  that  follows  Me  and  be- 
comes my  disciple,  shall  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  dark- 
ness, and  shall  no  longer  commit  such  sins  as  you  have  just 
heard  of." — Others,  on  the  contrary,  think  that  ouir  Lord  only 
referred  to  the  intellectual  darkness  and  ignorance  of  man's 
mind,  which  He  had  come  to  illuminate.  The  meaning  wrould 
then  be, — "  He  that  follows  Me  as  my  disciple  shall  no  longer 
live  in  ignorance  and  darkness  about  his  soul."  I  decidedly  pre- 
fer this  second  view.  The  promise  seems  to  me  to  have  a 
special  reference  to  the  ignorance  in  which  the  Jews  were, 
about  everything  concerning  Christ,  as  shown  in  the  preceding 
chapter. 

[Shall  have.. .light  of  life.]     This  expression  means, — "  He 


80  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


shall  possess  living  light.  He  shall  have  spiritual  light,  as  much 
superior  to  the  light  of  any  lamp  or  even  of  the  sun,  as  the  living 
water  offered  to  the  Samaritan  woman  was  superior  to  the  water 
of  Jacob's  well."  The  spiritual  light  that  Christ  gives  is  indepen- 
dent of  time  or  place, — is  not  affected  by  sickness  or  death, — 
burns  on  forever,  and  cannot  be  quenched.  He  that  has  it  shall 
feel  light  within  his  mind,  heart,  and  conscience,— shall  see 
light  before  him  on  the  grave,  death,  and  the  world  to  come, — 
shall  have  light  shining  round  him,  guiding  him  in  his  journey 
through  life,  and  shall  reflect  light  by  his  conduct,  ways  and 
conversation. 

Chrysostom  thinks  that  one  purpose  of  this  promise  was  to 
draw  on  and  encourage  Nicodemus,  and  to  remind  him  of  the 
former  saying  Jesus  had  used  about  light  and  darkness,  John 
iii.  20.  J 

Augustine  remarks  on  this  verse,  "  What  is  our  duty  to  do, 
Christ  puts  in  the  present  tense :  what  He  promiseth  to  them 
that  do  it,  He  bath  denoted  by  a  future  time.  He  that  followeth 
now,  shall  have  hereafter, — followeth  now  by  faith,  shall  have 
hereafter  by  sight.  When  by  sight?  When  we  shall  have  come 
to  the  vision  yonder,  when  this  night  of  ours  shall  have  passed 
away."  I  should  be  sorry,  however,  to  confine  the  promise  to  so 
limited  an  interpretation  as  this,  and  though  I  have  no  doubt  it 
will  only  be  completely  fulfilled  at  the  second  advent,  I  still 
think  that  it  is  partially  and  spiritually  fulfilled  now  to  every 
believer. 

Calvin  remarks,  that  in  this  verse  "Benefit  is  offered  not 
only  to  one  person  or  another,  but  to  the  whole  world.  By  this 
universal  statement  Christ  intended  to  remove  the  distinction, 
not  only  between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  but  between  learned  and 
ignorant,  between  persons  of  distinction  and  common  people." 
He  also  says, — "  In  the  latter  clause  of  the  verse,  the  perpetuity 
of  light  is  stated  in  express  terms.  We  ought  not  to  fear  there- 
fore lest  it  leave  us  in  the  middle  of  our  journey." 

Brentius  remarks,  that  if  a  man  could  continually  "  follow  'J 
the  sun,  he  would  always  be  in  broad  daylight  in  every  part  of 
the  globe.  So  it  is  with  Christ  and  believers.  Always  follow- 
ing Him,  they  will  always  have  light. 

In  this  most  precious  and  interesting  verse  there  are  several 
things  which  deserve  our  special  attention. 

(a)  We  should  note  the  great  assumed  truth  which  lies 
underneath  the  whole  verse.  That  truth  is  the  fall  of  man. 
The  world  is  in  a  state  of  moral  and  spiritual  darkness.  Natu- 
rally men  know  nothing  rightly  of  themselves,  God,  holiness, 
or  heaven.    They  need  light. 

(ft)  We  should  note  the  full  and  bold  manner  of  our  Lord's 
declaration.    He  proclaims  Himself  to  be  "  the  light  of  the 


JOHN,   CHAP.    VIH.  81 

world."    None  could  truly  say  this  but  One,  who  knew  that  He 
was  very  God.    No  Prophet  or  Apostle  ever  said  it. 

(c)  We  should  note  how  our  Lord  says  that  He  is  "  the  light 
of  the  world."  He  is  not  for  a  few  only,  but  for  all  mankind. 
Like  the  sun  He  shines  for  the  benefit  of  all,  though  all  may  not 
value  or  use  His  light. 

(d)  We  should  note  the  man  to  whom  the  promise  is  made. 
It  is  to  him  "  that  followeth  Me."  To  follow  a  leader  if  we  are 
blind,  or  ignorant,  or  in  the  dark,  or  out  of  the  way,  requires 
trust  and  confidence.  This  is  just  what  the  Lord  Jesus  requires 
of  sinners  who  feel  their  sins  and  want  to  be  saved.  Let  them 
commit  themselves  to  Christ,  and  He  will  lead  them  safe  to 
heaven.  If  a  man  can  do  nothing  for  himself,  he  cannot  do 
better  than  trust  another  and  follow  him. 

(e)  We  should  note  the  thing  promised  to  him  who  follows 
Jesus, — viz.,  deliverance  from  darkness  and  possession  of  light. 
This  is  precisely  what  Christianity  brings  to  a  believer.  He 
feels,  and  sees,  and  has  a  sense  of  possessing  something  he  had 
not  before.  God  "  shines  into  his  heart  and  givesl  ight."  He 
is  "  called  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light."  (2  Cor.  iv. 
4—6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9.) 

Melancthon  thinks  that  this  verse  is  only  a  brief  summary  of 
what  our  Lord  said,  and  must  be  regarded  as  the  text  or  key- 
note of  a  long  discourse. 

Bullinger  remarks  how  useful  it  is  to  commit  to  memory  and 
store  up  great  sentences  and  maxims  of  Christ,  like  this  verse. 

13.— [Tlie  Pharisees... said  unto  him.]  These  "Pharisees  were 
probably  some  of  the  multitude  who  had  come  together  to  hear 
our  Lord's  teaching,  and  not  those  who  brought  the  woman 
taken  in  adultery  to  Hiin.  The  Pharisees  were  a  powerful  and 
widely  spread  sect,  and  members  of  their  body  would  be  found 
in  every  crowd  of  hearers,  ready  to  raise  objections  and  find 
fault  with  anything  our  Lord  said,  wherever  they  thought  there 
was  an  opportunity. 

{Thou  barest  record  of  thyself.]  This  would  be  more  literally 
rendered,  "  thou  dost  witness  about  thyself." 

[Thy  record  is  not  true.]  This  means, — "  thy  testimony  is  not 
trustworthy,  and  deserving  of  attention."  The  Pharisees  evi- 
dently could  not  mean  "thy  testimony  is  false."  They  only 
meant  that  it  was  an  acknowledged  principle  among  men  that  a 
man's  testimony  to  his  own  character  is  comparatively  worth- 
less. Our  Lord  Himself  had  admitted  this  on  a  former  occa- 
sion, when  he  said  before  the  council, — "  If  I  bear  witness  of 
myself  my  witness  is  not  true."  (John  v.  31.)  Solomon  had 
said, — "Let  another  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  mouth;  a 
stranger,  and  not  thine  own  lips."     (Prov.  xxvii.  2.) 

14. — [Jesus    answered... though    I  bear    record... true.]     Our    Lord 


82  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


meant  by  these  words  that  even  if  He  did  testify  of  Himself, 
and  make  assertions  about  His  own  office  and  mission,  His 
testimony  ought  not  to  be  despised  and  disregarded  as  not 
trustworthy.  Whether  His  enemies  would  hear  it  or  not,  what 
He  said  deserved  credit,  and  was  worthy  of  all  acceptation. — 
"  The  testimony  that  I  bear  is  not  the  testimony  of  a  common 
witness,  but  of  one  who  is  thoroughly  to  be  depended  on." 

[For  I  know  whence  I  came,  etc.']  Our  Lord  here  gives  a 
solemn  and  weighty  reason  why  His  testimony  to  Himself  ought 
to  be  reverently  received  by  the  Jews,  and  not  refused.  That 
reason  was  His  divine  nature  and  mission.  He  came  to  them 
and  stood  before  them  not  as  a  common  prophet  and  an  every- 
day witness,  but  as  one  who  knew  the  mysterious  truth  that  He 
was  the  Divine  Messiah,  that  should  come  into  the  world. — "  I 
know  whence  I  came : — I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  to  be  His 
Messenger  to  a  lost  world.  I  know  whither  I  go : — I  am  about 
to  return  to  my  Father  when  I  have  finished  His  work,  and  to 
sit  down  at  His  right  hand  after  my  ascension.  Knowing  all 
this,  I  have  a  right  to  say  that  my  testimony  is  trustworthy. 
You,  on  the  other  hand,  are  utteriy  ignorant  about  me.  You 
neither  know  nor  believe  my  Divine  origin  nor  mission. 
Justly,  therefore,  I  may  say  that  it  matters  little  whether  you 
think  my  testimony  deserving  of  credit  or  not.  Your  eyes  are 
blinded,  and  your  opinion  is  worthless." 

Chrysostom  observes  that  our  Lord  "  might  have  said,  I  am 
God.  But  He  ever  mingleth  lowly  words  with  sublime,  and 
even  these  He  veileth." 

Bucer,  Chcmnitius,  and  Quesnel  observe  that  our  Lord's 
argument  is  like  that  of  an  ambassador  from  a  king,  who  says, 
— "I  know  my  commission  and  Who  sent  Me,  and  therefore  I 
claim  attention  to  my  message." 

Webster  paraphrases  the  sentence :  "  I  speak  in  the  full 
consciousness  of  my  previous  and  future  existence  in  the  glory 
of  the  Father;  and  I  therefore  feel  and  assert  my  right  to  be 
believed  on  my  own  testimony.  If  you  knew  whence  I  came 
and  whither  I  go,  you  would  not  want  any  other  witness  than 
myself.  And  this  you  might  know  if  you  were  spiritual;  but 
you  are  carnal,  and  judge  after  the  flesh." 

15. — [Ye  judge  after  the  ftesh.~]  The  meaning  of  this  sentence 
seems  to  be, — '•  You  judge  and  decide  everything  on  fleshly  and 
worldly  principles,  according  to  the  outward  appearance.  You 
estimate  Me  and  my  mission  according  to  what  you  see  with 
the  eye.  You  presume  to  despise  Me  and  set  light  by  Me, 
because  there  is  no  outward  grandeur  and  dignity  about  Me. 
Judging  everything  by  such  a  false  standard,  you  see  no  beauty 
in  Me  and  my  ministry.  You  have  already  set  Me  down  in  your 
own  minds  as  an  impostor,  and  worthy  to  die.  Your  minds  are 
full  of  carnal  prejudices,  and  hence  my  testimony  seems  worth- 
less to  you." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  83 

Calvin  thinks  that  "flesh"  is  here  used  in  opposition  to< 
"  spirit,"  and  that  the  meaning  is,  "  You  judge  on  carnal  wicked 
principles,"  and  not  "You  judge  after  the  outward  appearance." 
Most  commentators  think  that  the  expression  refers  to  our 
Lord's  humble  appearance. 

[J  judge  no  man.']  In  these  words  onr  Lord  puts  in  strong 
contrast  the  difference  between  Himself  and  His  enemies. 
"Unlike  you,  I  condemn  and  pass  judgment  on  no  man,  even 
on  the  worst  of  sinners.  It  is  not  my  present  business  and 
office,  though  it  will  be  one  day.  I  did  not  come  into  the  world 
to  condemn,  but  to  save."  (John  iii.  17.)  It  is  useless,  how- 
ever, to  deny  that  the  connection  between  the  beginning  and 
end  of  the  verse  is  not  clear.  It  seems  to  turn  entirely  on  the 
twice- repeated  word  "judge,"  and  the  word  appears  to  be 
used  in  two  different  senses. 

Some  have  thought  that  our  Lord  refers  to  the  case  of  the 
woman  taken  in  adultery,  and  contrasts  His  own  refusal  to  be 
a  judge  in  her  case,  with  the  malicious  readiness  of  the  Phari- 
sees to  judge  Him  and  condemn  Him  even  when  innocent.  "I 
refuse  to  condemn  even  a  guilty  sinner.  You  on  the  contrary 
are  ready  to  condemn  Me,  in  whom  you  can  find  no  fault,  on 
carnal  and  worldly  principles." 

Some,  as  Bulliuger,  Jansenius,  Trapp,  Stier,  Gill,  Pearce,  and 
Barnes  have  thought  that  the  sentence  before  us  means, — "  I 
judge  no  man  according  to  the  flesh,  as  you  do."  But  this  view 
does  not  seem  to  harmonize  with  the  following  verse. 

Bishop  Hall  paraphrases  the  verse  thus:  "Ye  presume  to 
judge  according  to  your  own  carnal  affections,  and  follow  your 
outward  senses  in  the  judgment  ye  pass  on  Me.  In  the  mean 
time  ye  will  not  endure  Me,  who  do  not  challenge  or  reconcile 
that  power  which  I  might  in  judging  you." 

16. — [And  yet  if  I  judge,  my  judgment,  etc.]  This  verse  seems  to 
come  in  parenthetically.  It  appears  intended  to  remind  the 
Jews,  that  if  our  Lord  did  not  assume  the  office  of  a  judge  now, 
it  was  not  because  He  was  not  qualified.  The  sense  is  as 
follows  :  "Do  not  however  suppose,  because  I  say  that  I  judge 
no  man,  that  I  am  not  qualified  to  judge.  On  the  contrary,  if  I 
do  pass  judgment  on  any  person's  actions  or  opinions,  my  judg- 
ment is  perfectly  correct  and  trustworth}\  For  I  am  not  alone. 
There  is  an  inseparable  union  between  Me,  and  the  Father  that 
sent  Me.  When  I  judge,  it  is  not  I  alone,  but  the  Father  with 
Me  that  judges.  Hence,  therefore,  my  judgment  is  and  must  be 
trustworth}\"  The  reader  should  compare  John  v.  19,  and  30. 
The  doctrine  is  the  same.  That  mighty  truth, — the  insepa- 
rable union  of  the  Father  and  the  Son, — is  the  only  key  that 
unlocks  the  deep  expression  before  us.  Our  Lord's  frequent 
reference  to  that  truth,  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  should  be  carefully 
noted. 


84  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


17.— [It  is  also  written,  etc.~\  Our  Lord,  in  this  verse,  reminds  cne 
Jews  of  an  admitted  principle  of  the  law  of  Moses,— that  the 
testimony  of  two  witnesses  deserved  credit.  (Deut.  xvii.  6; 
xix.  15.)  "  You  will  admit  that  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses 
deserves  credit  at  any  rate,  although  one  witness  alone  may 
prove  nothing.  Now,  admitting  this,  hear  what  testimony  I 
can  adduce  to  the  divine  character  of  my  mission." 

Let  it  be  noted,  that  where  our  Lord  says  "  in  your  law," 
He  did  not  mean  that  He  was  above  the  law  and  did  not  recog- 
nize its  authority.  He  only  intended,  by  laying  stress  on  the 
word  "your,"  to  remind  the  Jews  that  it  was  their  own 
honoured  law  of  Moses,  to  which  they  were  continually  pro- 
fessing to  refer,  that  laid  down  the  great  principle  to  which  He 
was  about  to  direct  their  attention.  "It  is  written  in  the  law 
that  you  speak  of  so  much,  and  that  you  so  often  quote." 

It  admits  of  consideration  whether  our  Lord  did  not  mean  to 
use  the  expression  "  of  two  men  "  emphatically.  It  may  be  that 
He  would  put  in  strong  contrast  the  testimony  of  two  mere 
men,  with  the  testimony  of  Himself  and  his  Father  in  heaven. 
It  is  like  the  expression,  "  If  we  receive  the  wituess  of  men, 
the  witness  of  God  is  greater."  (1  John  v.  9.)  At  any  rate  the 
word  rendered  "  men  "  is  emphatic  in  the  Greek. 

18. — [7«m  one,  etc.~\  The  connection  and  sense  of  this  verse  are 
as  follows :  "  Admitting  that  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses  is 
trustworthy,  I  bid  you  observe  that  there  are  two  witnesses  to 
My  divine  nature  and  mission.  I  myself,  the  Eternal  Son,  am 
one  of  these  witnesses :  I  am  ever  testifying  concerning  my- 
self. The  Father  that  sent  Me  into  the  world  is  the  other 
witness  :  He  is  ever  testifying  concerning  Me.  He  has  testilied 
by  the  mouth  of  the  Prophets  in  the  Old  Testament.  He  is 
testifying  now  by  the  miraculous  works  which  He  is  continually 
doing  by  My  hands."  The  reader  should  compare  John  v.  31 — 
39. 

There  is  undeniably  something  very  remarkable  about  this 
verse.  It  seems  a  singular  condescension  on  our  Lord's  part  to 
use  the  train  of  argument  that  it  contains.  The  true  solution 
probably  lies  in  the  very  high  dignity  of  the  two  witnesses, 
whom  He  places  together  before  the  Jews.  The  Greek  words 
beginning  the  verse  are  peculiar,  and  cau  hardly  be  rendered 
in  English.  They  will  almost  bear  to  be  translated, — "  I,  the 
great  I  am,  am  the  person  witnessing  about  myself;  and  the 
Father,"  etc. 

Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  both  remark  that  our  Lord  here 
claims  equality  of  honour  with  the  Father,  by  putting  His  testi- 
mony and  the  Father's  side  by  side. 

Poole  remarks  :  "  Our  Saviour  must  not  be  understood  here 
to  distinguish  Himself  from  His  Father  in  respect  of  His  divine 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  85 


being,  for  so  He  and  His  Father  are  one;  but  in  respect  of  His 
office,  as  He  was  sent,  and  His  Father  was  He  who  sent  Him." 

19. — [Then  said  tliey...Wliere  is  thy  Father?]  This  question  of  the 
Jews  was  probably  not  asked  in  a  tone  of  serious  inquiry,  or 
from  real  desire  to  know.  It  was  more  likely  sneering  and 
sarcastic. 

Calvin  observes,  "By  these  words  they  meant  that  they  did 
not  so  highly  value  Christ's  Father  as  to  ascribe  anything  to  the 
Son  on  His  account." 

Hengstenberg  bids  us  observe  that  they  did  not  ask,  "Who 
is  thy  Father?  "  but  "  Where  is  thy  Father?  "  It  sounds  as  if 
they  looked  round  in  contempt,  as  if  scornfully  expecting  an 
earthly  father  to  stand  forth  and  testify  to  Christ. 

[Jesus  answered.  Ye  neither  know  me... Father.]  Our  Lord 
here  tells  His  enemies  that  they  were  ignorant  both  of  Himself 
and  of  His  Father  in  heaven.  With  all  their  pride  of  knowledge 
and  fancied  high  attainments  they  knew  nothing  rightly  either 
of  the  Father  or  the  Son.  The  expression  certainly  favours  the 
idea  that  the  expression  "  Ye  know  me,"  (John  vii.  28,)  must  be 
taken  as  a  slight  sarcasm. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  great  familiarity  with  the  letter  of  Scrip- 
ture is  perfectly  compatible  with  gross  spiritual  darkness. 
The  Pharisees  knew  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  well;  but 
they  neither  knew  God  nor  Christ. 

[If  ye  had  known  me. ..my  Father  also.]  These  words  teach 
plainly  that  ignorance  of  Christ  and  ignorance  of  God  are  in- 
separably connected.  The  man  who  thinks  he  knows  anything 
rightly  of  God  while  he  is  ignorant  of  Christ  is  completely  de- 
ceived. The  God  whom  he  thinks  he  knows  is  not  the  God  of 
the  Bible,  but  a  God  of  his  own  fancy's  invention.  At  any  rate 
he  can  have  a  most  imperfect  conception  of  God,  and  can  have 
but  little  idea  of  His  perfect  holiness,  justice,  and  purity.  The 
words  teach  also  that  Christ  is  the  way  by  which  we  must  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  God.  In  Ilim,  through  Him,  and  by  Him, 
we  may  come  boldly  into  the  Father's  presence,  and  behold  His 
high  attributes  without  fear. 

He  that  would  have  saving,  soul-satisfying  religion,  and  be- 
come a  friend  and  servant  of  God,  must  begin  with  Christ. 
Knowing  Him  as  his  Saviour  and  Advocate,  he  will  find  it  easy 
and  pleasant  to  know  God  the  Father.  Those  that  reject  Christ, 
like  the  Jews,  will  live  and  die  in  ignorance  of  Gocl,  however 
learned  and  clever  they  may  be.  But  the  poorest,  humblest 
man,  that  lays  hold  on  Christ  and  begins  with  Him,  shall  find 
out  enough  about  God  to  make  him  happy  forever.  In  the 
matter  of  becoming  acquainted  with  God  it  is  the  first  step  to 
know  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator,  and  to  believe  on  Him. 

rht  here  is  the  same 


86  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


as  that  in  the  words  spoken  to  Philip,  when  in  reply  to  Philip's 
question,  "Lord,  show  us  the  Father,"  Jesus  said,  "He  that 
hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  (John  xiv.  8,  9.)  I  think 
this  is  at  least  doubtful.  The  thing  that  Philip  needed  to  know 
was  the  precise  relation  between  the  Father  and  Son.  The 
thiug  that  the  Jews  needed  was  a  right  knowledge  of  God  alto- 
gether. 

20.— [TJiese  words  spake  Jesus. ..treasury. ..temple.']  This  sentence 
seems  meant  to  mark  a  pause  or  break  in  the  discourse,  and  to 
show  also  how  publicly  and  openly  our  Lord  proclaimed  His 
Messiahship.  It  was  in  a  well-known  part  of  the  temple  called 
the  treasury  that  He  declared  Himself  to  be  "  the  light  of  the 
world,"  and  defended  His  testimony. 

Calvin  thinks  that  "  the  treasury  was  a  part  of  the  temple 
where  the  sacred  offerings  were  laid  up,  and  therefore  a  much 
frequented  place." 

[No  mari  laid  hands  on  him.']  The  remark  made  on  a  former 
occasion  applies  here.  (John  vii.  30.)  A  divine  restraint  was 
laid  on  our  Lord's  enemies.  They  felt  unable  to  lift  a  finger 
against  Him.    They  had  the  will  to  hurt,  but  not  the  power. 

[His  hour  was  not  yet  come.]  The  same  deep  thought  that  we 
remarked  in  ch.  vii.  30,  comes  up  here  again.  There  was  a  cer- 
tain fixed  time  during  which  our  Lord's  ministry  was  to  last, 
and  till  that  time  was  expired  His  enemies  could  not  touch 
Him.  When  the  time  had  expired,  our  Lord  said,  "This  is 
your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness."     (Luke  xxii.  53.) 

The  expression  should  be  carefully  noticed,  and  remembered 
by  all  true  Christians.  It  teaches  that  the  wicked  can  do  no 
harm  to  Christ  and  His  members  until  God  gives  them  permis- 
sion. Not  a  hair  of  a  believer's  head  can  be  touched  until  God 
in  His  sovereign  wisdom  allows  it. — It  teaches  that  all  times 
are  in  God's  hand.  There  is  an  allotted  "  hour  "  both  for  doing 
aud  for  suffering.  Till  the  hour  comes  for  dying  no  Christian 
will  die.  When  the  hour  comes  nothing  can  prevent  his  death. 
These  are  comfortable  truths,  and  deserve  attention.  Christ's 
members  are  safe  and  immortal  till  their  work  is  done.  When 
they  suffer  it  is  because  God  wills  it  and  sees  it  good. 

Quesnel  remarks  :  "  A  man  enjoys  the  greatest  peace  of  mind 
when  he  has  once  settled  himself  in  a  firm  and  steadfast  belief 
of  God's  providence,  and  an  absolute  dependence  upon  His  de- 
sign and  will." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII. 


87 


JOHN  VIII.  21—30. 


21  Then  said  Jesus  again  unto  them, 
I  go  my  way,  and  ye  shall  seek  me 
and  shall  die  in  your  sins:  whither  I 
go,  ye  cannot  come. 

22  Then  said  tho  Jews,  Will  he  kill 
himself?  because  he  saith,  Whither  I 
go,  ye  cannot  come. 

23  And  he  said  unto  them,  Ye  are 
from  beneath;  I  am  from  above:  ye 
are  of  this  world;  I  am  not  of  this 
world. 

24  I  said  therefore  unto  you,  that 
ye  shall  die  in  your  sins:  for  if  ye 
believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die 
in  your  sins. 

25  Then  said  they  unto  him,  Who 
art  thou  ?  And  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
Even  the  same  that  I  said  unto  you 
from  the  beginning. 


26  I  have  many  things  to  say  a:ad 
to  judge  of  you:  but  he  that  sent  me 
is  true;  and  I  speak  to  the  world 
those  things  which  I  have  heard  of 
him. 

27  They  understood  not  that  he 
spake  to  them  of  the  Father. 

28  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them, 
When  ye  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of 
man,  then  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  he, 
and  that  I  do  nothing  of  myself;  but 
as  my  Father  hath  taught  me,  I  speak 
these  things. 

29  And  he  that  sent  me  is  with  me: 
tho  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone;  for 
I  do  always  those  things  that  please 
him. 

30  As  he  spake  theso  words,  many 
believed  on  him. 


This  passage  contains  deep  things,  so  deep  that  we  have 
no  line  to  fathom  them.  As  we  read  it  we  should  call  to 
mind  the  Psalmist's  words, — "  Thy  thoughts  are  very 
deep."  (Psalm  xeii.  5.)  But  it  also  contains,  in  the 
opening  verses,  some  things  which  are  clear,  plain,  and 
unmistakable.  To  these  let  us  give  our  attention  and 
root  them  firmly  in  our  hearts. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  that  it  is  possible  to  seek  Christ  in 
vain.  Our  Lord  says  to  the  unbelieving  Jews,  "  Ye  shall 
seek  Me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sins."  He  meant,  by  these 
words,  that  the  Jews  would  one  day  seek  Him  in  vain. 

The  lesson  before  us  is  a  very  painful  one.  That  such 
a  Saviour  as  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  full  of  love,  so  willing 
to  save,  should  ever  be  sought  "  in  vain,"  is  a  sor- 
rowful thought.  Yet  so  it  is !  A  man  may  have  many 
religious  feelings  about  Christ,  without  any  saving  religion 
Sickness,  sudden  affliction,  the  fear  of  death,  the  failure  of 
usual  sources  of  comfort — all  these  causes  may  draw  out 
of  a  man  a  good  deal  of  "  religiousness."  Under  the 
immediate  pressure  of  these  he  may  say  his  prayers  fer 


88  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

vently,  exhibit  a  strong  spiritual  feelings,  and  profess  for  a 
season  to  "  seek  Christ,"  and  be  a  different  man.  And  yei 
all  this  time  his  heart  may  never  be  touched  at  all !  Take 
away  the  peculiar  circumstances  that  affected  him,  and  he 
may  possibly  return  at  once  to  his  old  ways.  He  sought 
Christ  "  in  vain,"  because  he  sought  Him  from  false 
motives,  and  not  with  his  whole  heart. 

Unhappily  this  is  not  all.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
settled  habit  of  resisting  light  and  knowledge,  until  we 
seek  Christ  u  in  vain."  Scripture  and  experience  alike 
prove  that  men  may  reject  God  until  God  rejects  them,  and 
will  not  hear  their  prayer.  They  may  go  on  stifling  their 
convictions,  quenching  the  light  of  conscience,  fighting 
against  their  own  better  knowledge,  until  God  is  provoked  to 
give  them  over  and  let  them  alone.  It  is  not  for  nothing 
that  these  words  are  written, — u  Then  shall  they  call  upon 
Me,  but  I  will  not  answer ;  they  shall  seek  Me  early,  but 
they  shall  not  find  Me  :  for  that  they  hated  knowledge,  and 
did  not  choose  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  (Prov.  i.  28,  29.) 
Such  cases  may  not  be  common  ;  but  they  are  possible,  and 
they  are  sometimes  seen.  Some  ministers  can  testifj''  that 
they  have  visited"  people  on  their  deathbeds  who  seem  to 
seek  Christ,  and  yet  to  seek  in  vain. 

There  is  no  safety  but  in  seeking  Christ  while  He  may  be 
found,  and  calling  on  Him  while  He  is  near,— seeking  Him 
with  a  true  heart,  and  calling  on  Him  with  an  honest  spirit. 
Such  seeking,  we  may  be  very  sure,  is  never  in  vain.  It 
will  never  be  recorded  of  such  seekers,  that  they  "  died  in 
their  sins."  He  that  really  comes  to  Christ  shall  never 
be  "  cast  out."  The  Lord  has  solemnly  declared  that  "  He 
hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth," — and  that 
»'  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  (Ezekiel  xviii.  32  ;  Micah  vii. 
18.) 

We  learn  for  another  thing,  hew  ivide  is  the  difference 
between   Christ  and  the  ungodly.     Our  Lord   says  to  the 


JOIIN,    CHAP.    VIII.  89 

unbelieving  Jews, — "  Ye  are  from  beneath,  I  am  from 
above :  ye  are  of  this  world,  I  am  not  of  this  world." 

These  words,  no  doubt,  have  a  special  application  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  In  the  highest  and  most 
literal  sense,  there  never  was  but  One  who  could  truly  say, 
"  I  am  from  above, — I  am  not  of  this  world."  That  One 
is  He  who  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  was  before  the 
world, — even  the  Son  of  God. 

But  there  is  a  lower  sense,  in  which  these  words  are  ap- 
plicable to  all  Christ's  living  members.  Compared  to  tho 
thoughtless  multitude  around  them,  they  are  "  from  above," 
and  "  not  of  this  world,"  like  their  Master.  The  thoughts 
of  the  ungodly  are  about  things  beneath ;  the  true  Chris- 
tian's affections  are  set  on  things  above.  The  ungodly 
man  is  full  of  this  world ;  its  cares,  and  pleasures,  and 
profits,  absorb  his  whole  attention.  The  true  Christian, 
though  in  the  world,  is  not  of  it ;  his  citizenship  is  in 
heaven,  and  his  best  things  are  yet  to  come. 

The  true  Christian  will  do  well  never  to  forget  this  line 
of  demarcation.  If  he  loves  his  soul,  and  desires  to  serve 
God,  he  must  be  content  to  find  himself  separated  from 
many  around  him  by  a  gulf  that  cannot  be  passed.  He 
may  not  like  to  seem  peculiar  and  unlike  others ;  but  it  is 
the  certain  consequence  of  grace  reigning  within  him.  He 
may  find  it  brings  on  him  hatred,  ridicule,  and  hard 
speeches ;  but  it  is  the  cup  which  his  Master  drank,  and 
of  which  his  Master  forewarned  all  His  disciples. — "  If  ye 
were  of  the  world  the  world  would  love  His  own,  but 
because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you 
out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."  (John 
xv.  19.) — Then  let  the  Christian  never  be  ashamed  to  stand 
Alone  and  show  his  colors.  He  must  carry  the  cross  if  he 
would  wear  the  crown.  If  he  has  within  him  a  new  prin- 
ciple "  from  above,"  it  must  be  seen. 

We  learn,  lastly,  how  awful  is  the  end  to  which  unbelief 


90  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

can  bring  man.  Our  Lord  sa}'s  to  his  enemies,  "  If  ye 
believe  not  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins." 

These  solemn  words  are  invested  with  peculiar  solemnity 
when  we  consider  from  whose  lips  they  came.  Who  is  this 
that  speaks  of  men  d}Ting  "  in  their  sins,"  unpardoned, 
unforgiven,  unfit  to  meet  God, — of  men  going  into  another 
world  with  all  their  sins  upon  them?  He  that  says  this  is 
no  other  than  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  who  laid  down  His 
life  for  his  sheep, — the  loving,  gracious,  merciful,  compas- 
sionate Friend  of  sinners.  It  is  Christ  Himself!  Let  this 
simple  fact  not  be  overlooked. 

They  are  greatly  mistaken  who  suppose  that  it  is  harsh 
and  unkind  to  speak  of  hell  and  future  punishment.  How 
can  such  persons  get  over  such  language  as  that  which  is 
before  us?  How  can  they  account  for  many  a  like  ex- 
pression which  our  Lord  used,  and  specially  for  such 
passages  as  those  in  which  He  speaks  of  the  "  worm  that 
dieth  not  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  "  ?  (Mark  x. 
46.)  They  cannot  answer  these  questions.  Misled  by  a 
false  charity  and  a  morbid  amiability,  they  are  condemning 
the  plain  teaching  of  the  Scripture,  and  are  wise  above 
that  which  is  written. 

Let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds,  as  one  of  the  great  foun- 
dation truths  of  our  faith,  that  there  is  a  hell.  Just  as  we 
believe  firmly  that  there  is  an  eternal  heaven  for  the 
godly,  so  let  us  believe  firmly  that  there  is  an  eternal  hell 
for  the  wicked.  Let  us  never  suppose  that  there  is  any 
want  of  charity  in  speaking  of  hell.  Let  us  rather  main- 
tain that  it  is  the  highest  love  to  warn  men  plainly  of 
danger,  and  to  beseech  them  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come."  It  was  Satan,  the  deceiver,  murderer,  and  liar, 
who  said  to  Eve  in  the  beginning,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die." 
(Gen.  iii.  4.)  To  shrink  from  telling  men,  that  except 
they  believe  they  will  "  die  in  their  sins,"  may  please  the 
devil,  but  surely  it  cannot  please  God. 


JOHN,   CHAP.    VIII.  91 

Finally,  let  us  never  forget  that  unbelief  is  the  special 
sin  that  ruins  men's  souls.  Had  the  Jews  believed  on  our 
Lord,  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  might  have  been 
forgiven  them.  But  unbelief  bars  the  door  in  mercy's  face, 
and  cuts  off  hope.  Let  us  watch  and  pray  hard  against  it. 
Immortality  slays  its  thousands,  but  unbelief  its  tens  of 
thousands.  One  of  the  strongest  sayings  ever  used  by 
our  Lord  was  this, — "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned."     (Mark  xvi.  16.) 

Notes.    John  VIII.  21—30. 

21. — [Then  said  Jesus  again  unto  them.']  There  seems  a  break  or 
pause  between  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one.  It  is  as  if  our 
Lord  resumed  discourse  with  a  new  leading  thought  or  key-note. 
The  other  idea,  viz.,  that  "  again  *'  refers  to  chap.  vii.  34,  and 
means  that  our  Lord  impressed  on  His  hearers  a  second  time  that 
He  would  soon  leave  them,  does  not  seem  probable. — It  seems 
not  unlikely  that  in  the  first  instance  our  Lord  spoke  of  "  going" 
to  the  officers  of  the  priests  and  Pharisees,  and  that  here  He 
speaks  to  their  masters,  or  at  least  to  a  different  set  of  hearers. 

[Igo  my  way.]  This*  must  mean,  "  I  am  soon  about  to  leave 
this  world.  'My  mission  is  drawing  to  a  close.  The  time  of 
My  decease  and  sacrifice  approaches,  and  I  must  depart,  and  go 
back  to  My  Father  in  heaven*  from  whence  I  came.  " — The 
leading  object  of  the  sentence  appears  to  be  to  excite  in  the 
minds  of  the  Jews  thought  and  inquiry  about  His  divine  nature. 
"  I  am  one  who  came  from  heaven,  and  am  going  back  to  heaven. 
Ought  you  not  to  inquire  seriously  who  I  am?" 

Chrysostom  thinks  our  Lord  said  this,  partly  to  shame  and 
terrify  the  Jews,  and  partly  to  show  them  that  His  death  would 
not  be  affected  by  their  violence,  but  by  His  own  voluntary  sub- 
mission. 

[Fe  shall  seek  me. ..die  in. ..sins.]  This  means  that  His  hearers 
would  seek  Him  too  late,  having  discovered  too  late  that  He 
was  the  Messiah  whom  they  ought  to  have  received.  But  the 
door  of  mercy  would  then  be  shut.  They  would  seek  in  vain, 
because  they  had  not  known  the  day  of  their  visitation.  And 
the  result  would  be  that  many  of  them  would  die  miserably  "  in 
their  sins," — with  their  sins  upon  them  unpardoned  and  un- 
forgiven. 

[Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come.]  This  must  mean  heaven,  the 
everlasting  abode  of  glory  which  the  Son  had  with  the  Father 
before  He  came  into  the  world,  which  He  left  for  a  season  when 
He  became  incarnate,  and  to  which  He  returned  when  He  had 


92  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


finished  the  work  of  man's  redemption.  To  this  a  wicked  maw 
cannot  come.  Unbelief  shuts  him  out.  It  is  impossible  in  the 
nature  of  things  that  an  unforgiven,  unconverted,  unbelieving 
man  can  go  to  heaven.  The  words  in  Greek  are  emphatic,  — 
"  Ye  cannot  come." 

The  notion  of  Augustine  and  others  that  "  ye  shall  seek  Me" 
only  means  "  ye  shall  seek  Me  in  order  to  kill  Me,  as  ye  are 
wishing  to  do  now,  but  at  last  I  shall  be  withdrawn  from  your 
reach," — seems  to  me  quite  untenable.  The  "seeking,"  to  my 
mind,  can  only  be  the  too  late  seeking  of  remorse.  —  The  theory 
of  some,  that  it  refers  exclusively  to  the  time  of  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Romans,  seems  to  me  equally  untenable.  My 
belief  is  that  from  the  time  that  our  Lord  left  the  world  down 
to  this  day,  the  expression  has  been  peculiarly  true  of  the  Jew- 
ish nation.  They  have  been  perpetually,  in  a  sense,  "  seeking" 
and  hungering  after  a  Messiah,  and  yet  unable  to  find  Him,  be- 
cause they  have  not  sought  aright. — In  saying  this  we  must 
carefully  remember  that  our  Lord  did  not  mean  to  say  that  any 
of  His  hearers  were  too  sinful  and  bad  to  be  forgiven.  On  the 
contrary,  not  a  few  of  them  that  crucified  Him  found  mercy  on 
the  clay  of  Pentecost,  when  Peter  preached.  (Acts  ii.  22 — 40.) 
But  our  Lord  did  mean  to  say  prophetically  that  the  Jewish,  na- 
tion, as  a  nation,  would  be  specially  hardened  and  unbelieving, 
and  that  many  of  them,  though  an  elect  remnant  might  be  saved, 
would  "die  in  their  sins."  In  proof  of  this  peculiar  blindness 
and  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  nation  we  should  study  Acts  xxviii. 
25 — 27 ;  Romans  xi.  7,  and  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  16.  The  Greek  expres- 
sion for  "  sins"  in  this  verse  confirms  the  view.  It  is  not,  liter- 
ally rendered,  "sins,"  but  "sin," — your  special  sin  of  unbelief. 

Let  us  note  that  it  is  possible  to  seek  Christ  too  late,  or  from 
a  wrong  motive,  and  so  to  seek  Him  in  vain.  This  is  a  very  im- 
portant principle  of  Scripture.  True  repentance,  doubtless,  is 
never  too  late,  but  late  repentance  is  seldom  true.  There  is 
mercy  to  the  uttermost  in  Christ ;  but  if  men  wilfully  reject  Him, 
turn  away  from  Him,  and  put  off  seeking  Him  in  earnest,  there 
is  such  a  thing  as  "  seeking  Christ "  in  vain.  Such  passages  as 
Proverbs  i.  24—32;  Matt.  xxv.  11—12;  Luke  xiii.  24;  Heb.  vi. 
4 — 8,  and  x.  26 — 31,  ought  to  be  carefully  studied. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  teaches  plainly  that  it  is  possible 
for  men  to  "die  in  their  sins,"  and  never  come  to  the  heaven 
where  He  has  gone.  This  is  flatly  contrary  to  the  doctrine 
taught  by  some  in  the  present  day,  that  there  is  no  hell  and  no 
future  punishment,  and  that  all  will  finally  go  to  heaven. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  our  Lord's  words,  "  Ye  shall  seefc 
Me,"  and  "  Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come,"  are  used  three  times 
in  this  Gospel : — twice  to  the  unbelieving  Jews,  here  and  vii.  34, 
and  once  to  the  disciples,  xiii.  33.  But  the  careful  reader  will 
observe  that  in  the  two  first  instances  the  expression  is  coupled 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  93 

with,  "Ye  shall  not  find  Me,"  and  "Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins." 
In  the  last,  it  evidently  means  the  temporary  separation  be- 
tween Christ  and  His  disciples  which  would  be  caused  by  His 
ascension. 

Melancthon  observes  that  nothing  seems  to  bring  on  men 
such  dreadful  guilt  and  punishment  as  neglect  of  the  Gospel. 
The  Jews  had  Christ  among  them  and  would  not  believe,  and  so 
when  afterward  they  sought  they  could  not  find. 

Rollock  observes  that  the  "  seeking  "  which  our  Lord  here  fore- 
tells was  like  that  of  Esau,  when  he  sought  too  late  for  the  lost 
birthright. 

Burkitt  observes,  "Better  a  thousand  times  to  die  in  a  clitch 
than  to  die  in  our  sins  1  They  that  die  in  their  sins  shall  rise  in 
their  sins,  and  stand  before  Christ  in  their  sins.  Such  as  lie 
down  in  sin  in  the  grave  shall  have  sin  lie  down  with  them  in 
hell  to  all  eternity.  The  sins  of  believers  go  to  the  grave  be- 
fore them;  sin  dieth  while  they  live.  The  sins  of  unbelievers 
go  to  the  grave  with  them." 

22. — [Then  said  the  Jews,  etc.~\  It  is  plain  that  this  last  saying  of 
our  Lord  perplexed  His  enemies.  It  evidently  implied  some- 
thing which  they  did  not  understand.  In  the  preceding  chapter 
(vii.  34)  they  began  speculating  whether  it  meant  that  our  Lord 
was  going  forth  into  the  world  to  teach  the  Gentiles.  Here 
they  start  another  conjecture,  and  begin  to  suspect  that  our 
Lord  must  mean  His  going  into  another  world  by  death.  But 
by  what  death  did  He  think  of  going?  Did  He  mean  to  "kill 
Himself?"  It  seems  strange  that  they  should  start  such  an  idea. 
But  may  it  not  be  that  their  minds  were  occupied  with  their 
own  plan  of  putting  Him  to  death?  "  Will  He  really  anticipate 
our  plan,  by   committing  suicide,  and  thus  escape  our  hands?" 

Origen  suggests  that  the  Jews  had  a  tradition  about  the  man- 
ner in  which  Messiah  would  die:  viz.,  "that  He  would  have 
power  to  depart  at  His  own  time,  and  in  a  way  of  His  own 
choosing." 

Rupertus  observes  that  afterwards,  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem 
by  Titus,  many  of  the  desperate  Jews  did  the  very  thing  they 
here  said  of  our  Lord — they  killed  themselves  in  madness  of 
despair. 

Melancthon  remarks  that  nothing  seems  to  anger  wicked  men 
so  much  as  to  be  told  they  cannot  come  where  Christ  is. 

23. — [And  he  said,  Ye  are  from  beneath,  etc.~\  Our  Lord's  argument 
in  this  case  appears  to  be  as  follows :  ""There  is  no  union,  har- 
mony, or  fellowship  between  you  and  Me.  Your  minds  are  en- 
tirely absorbed  find  buried  in  earth  and  objects  of  a  mere  earthly 
kind.  You  are  from  beneath,  and  of  this  world ;  while  I  came 
from  heaven,  and  My  heart  is  full  of  the  things  of  heaven  and 
My  Father's  business.     No  wonder,  therefore,  that  I  said  you 


94  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


cannot  come  whore  I  go,  and  will  die  in  your  sins.  Unless  your 
hearts  are  changed,  and  you  learn  to  be  of  one  mind  with  Me, 
you  are  totally  unmeet  for  heaven,  and  must  at  last  die  in  your 
sins." 

The  expressions  "from  beneath"  and  "from  above"  nrc 
strong  figurative  phrases,  intended  to  put  in  contrast  earth  and 
heaven.  (See  Col.  iii.  1,  2.)  The  Greek  phrases  literally  ren- 
dered would  be, — "  Ye  are  from  the  things  beneath :  I  am  from 
the  things  above. 

The  expression  "  of  this  world  "  means  bound  up  with,  and 
inseparably  connected  by,  tastes,  aims,  and  affections,  with  this 
world,  and  nothing  else  but  this  world.  It  is  the  character  of 
one  utterly  dead  and  graceless,  who  looks  at  nothing  but  the 
world,  and  lives  for  it.  It  is  a  character  utterly  at  variance 
with  that  of  our  Lord,  who  was  eminently  "  not  of  this  world;" 
and  therefore  those  who  were  of  this  character  were  incapable 
of  union  and  friendship  with  Him. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  what  our  Lord  says  of  Himself  here  is 
the  very  same  thing  that  is  said  of  His  true  disciples  elsewhere. 
If  a  man  has  grace  he  is  "  not  of  this  world."  (See  John  xv. 
19;  xvii.  16;  and  1  John  iv  5.)  Christ's  living  members  always 
have  more  or  less  of  their  Master's  likeness  in  this  respect. 
They  are  always  more  or  less  separated  from  and  distinct  from 
this  world.  He  that  is  thoroughly  worldly  has  the  plainest  mark 
of  not  being  a  member  of  Christ  and  a  true  Christian. 

Theophylact  observes  that  the  strange  notion  of  the  Apollina- 
rian  heretics,  that  our  Lord's  body  was  not  a  real  human  body, 
but  came  down  from  heaven,  was  built  on  this  verse  for  one  of 
its  reasons.  But,  as  he  remarks,  they  might  as  well  saj^  the 
Apostles  had  not  common  human  bodies,  since  the  same  thing 
is  said  of  them — "  not  of  this  world." 

24.—  [I  said  therefore,  etc.'}  This  verse  seems  elliptical,  and  must 
be  filled  up  in  some  such  manner  as  this:  "  It  is  because  you 
are  thoroughly  earthly  and  of  this  world,  that  I  said,  Ye  cannot 
come  where  I  go.  You  are  not  heavenly  minded,  and  cannot  go 
to  heaven,  but  must  go  to  your  own  place.  The  end  will  be 
that  you  will  die  in  your  sins.  Not  believing  in  Me  as  the  Mes- 
siah, you  cut  yourselves  off  from  all  hope,  and  must  die  in  your 
sins.  This,  in  short,  is  the  root  of  all  your  misery — your  un- 
belief." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  unbelief  is  the  thing  that  specially  ruins 
men.  All  manner  of  sin  may  be  forgiven.  But  unbelief  bars 
the  door  against  mercy.     (Mark  xvi.  26,  and  John  iii.  36.) 

Let  it  be  noted  that  unbelief  was  the  secret  of  the  Jews  being 
so  thoroughly  "  of  the  world."  If  they  would  only  have  be- 
lieved in  Christ,  they  would  have  been  "  delivered  from  this 
present  evil  world."    The  victory  that  overcomes  the  world  is 


JOHN,  chap.  vnr.  95 

faith.     Once  believing  on  a  heavenly  Saviour  a  man  has  a  por- 
tion and  a  heart  in  heaven.     (Gal.  i.  4 ;  1  John  v.  4,  5.) 

Let  it  be  noted  that  there  is  nothing  hard  or  uncharitable  in 
warning  men  plainly  of  the  consequences  of  unbelief.  Never  to 
speak  of  hell  is  not  acting  as  Christ  did. 

The  expression  "believe  not  that  I  am  He"  would  be  more 
literally  rendered  "  believe  not  that  I  am."  Hence  some  think 
that  our  Lord  refers  to  the  great  name,  well  known  to  the  Jews, 
under  which  God  revealed  Himself  to  Israel  in  Egypt,  —  "  Say 
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  you."   ^Ex.  iii.  14.) 

Augustine  remarks  that  "the  whole  unhappiness  of  the  Jews 
was  not  that  they  had  sin,  but  to  die  in  sins."  He  also  observes : 
"In  these  words,  Except  ye  believe  that  I  am,  Jesus  meant 
nothing  short  of  this,  Except  ye  believe  that  I  am  God,  ye  shall 
die  in  your  sins.  It  is  well  for  us,  thank  God,  that  He  said  ex- 
cept ye  believe,  and  not  except  ye  understand." 

Quesnel  remarks:  "It  is  a  mistaken  prudence  to  hide  these 
dreadful  truths  from  sinners,  for  fear  of  casting  them  into  de- 
spair by  the  force  of  God's  judgments.  We  ought,  on  the  con- 
trary, to  force  them,  by  the  sight  of  clanger,  to  throw  themselves 
into  the  arms  of  Christ,  the  only  refuge  for  sinners." 

25. — [Then  said  they,.  .  Who  art  thou?']  This  question  cannot  have 
been  an  honest  inquiry  about  our  Lord's  nature  and  origin. 
Our  Lord  had  spoken  so  often  of  His  Father,— for  instance,  in 
the  fifth  chapter,  when  before  the  council, — that  the  Jews  of 
Jerusalem  must  have  kuown  well  enough  who  and  what  He 
claimed  to  be.  It  is  far  more  likely  that  they  hoped  to  elicit 
from  Him  some  fresh  declaration  which  they  could  lay  hold  on, 
and  make  the  ground  of  an  accusation.  Anger  and  malice  seem 
at  the  bottom  of  the  question — "  Who  art  thou  that  sayest  such 
things  of  us?  Who  art  thou  that  undertakest  to  pronounce 
such  condemnation  on  us? " 

Ecolampadius  thinks  the  question  was  asked  sarcastically.— 
"  Who  art  thou,  indeed,  to  talk  in  this  way  ?  " 

[And  Jesus  saith...even  the  same... beginning.'] — Our  Lord's 
reply  here  seems  so  guarded  and  cautious,  that  it  increases  the 
probability  of  the  Jews'  question  being  put  with  a  malicious 
intention.  He  knew  their  thoughts  and  designs,  and  answered 
them  by  reminding  them  what  He  had  always  said  of  Himself: 
"  Why  ask  Me  who  I  am?  You  know  well  what  I  have  always 
said  of  Myself.  I  am  the  same  that  I  said  to  you  from  the 
beginning.     I  have  nothing  new  to  say." 

Scott  thinks  it  simply  means,  "  I  am  the  same  that  I  told  you 
at  the  beginning  of  this  discourse, — the  Light  of  the  World." 

There  is  an  undeniable  difficulty  and  obscurity  about  the  sen- 
tence before  us,  and  it  has  consequently  received  three  different 


06  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


interpretations.      The  difficulty  arises  chiefly  from  the  word 
"  beginning." 

(a)  Some  think,  as  our  own  English  version,  Chrysostom, 
Calvin,  Bucer,  Glial ter,  Cartwright,  Rollock,  and Lightfoot,  that 
"beginning"  means  the  beginning  of  our  Lord's  ministry.  "  I 
am  the  same  person  that  I  told  you  I  was  from  the  very  first 
beginning  of  My  ministry  among  you."  This  view  is  confirmed 
by  the  Septnagint  rendering  of  Gen.  xliii.  18,  20. 

(b)  Some  think,  as  Theophylact,  Melancthon,  Aretius,  and 
Musculus,  that  "beginning"  is  an  adverb,  and  means  simply, 
"  as  an  opening  or  beginning  statement."  "  First  of  all,  as  a 
commencement  of  My  reply,  I  tell  you  that  I  am  what  I  always 
said  I  was." 

(c)  Some  think,  as  Augustine,  Rupertus,  Toletus,  Ferus, 
Jansenius,  Lampe,  and  Wordsworth,  that  "  beginning  "  is  a  sub- 
stantive, and  means  the  Beginning  of  all  things,  the  personal 
Beginning,  like  "  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  Beginning 
and  the  End."  (Rev.  i.  8;  xxi.  6;  xxii.  13.)  It  would  then 
mean,  "  I  am  the  great  beginning  of  all  things,  the  eternal  God, 
as  I  always  said." 

The  reader  must  exercise  his  own  judgment  on  these  three 
views.  The  extreme  brevity  and  conciseness  of  the  Greek 
words  make  it  very  hard  to  give  a  decided  opinion  upon  them. 
On  the  whole,  I  prefer  the  view  taken  by  our  translators.  In 
three  other  places  in  St.  John's  Gospel  our  Lord  speaks  of  His 
early  ministry  as  "the  beginning."  (John  vi.  64;  xv.  27;  xvi. 
4.)  In  no  place  in  St.  John's  Gospel  does  He  ever  call  Himself 
"the  beginning."  As  to  the  second  view,  that  it  only  means, 
"First  of  all,  as  an  opening  statement,"  it  seems  to  me  so 
meagre,  flat  and  bald,  that  I  cannot  think  it  is  correct. 

Rollock,  who  takes  the  view  of  our  English  version,  observes 
what  a  bright  example  onr  Lord  here  sets  to  all  Christians,  and 
especially  to  ministers,  of  always  telling  the  same  story,  and 
witnessing  one  and  the  same  confession  without  variation. 

26. — [Uiave  many  things,  etc.~\  This  verse  again  is  very  elliptical. 
This  meaning  seems  to  be  as  follows:  "You  marvel  and  are 
angry  at  My  saying  that  you  are  from  beneath,  and  will  die  in 
your  sin,  and  cannot  come  where  I  go.  You  ask  who  I  am  that 
speak  and  judge  in  this  manner.  But  I  tell  you  that  I  have 
many  other  things  that  I  might  say,  and  other  judgments  that 
I  might  pronounce  about  you.  But  I  forbear  now.  Yet  I  tell 
you  that  He  who  sent  Me  is  the  one  true  God ;  and  I  only  speak 
to  the  world  things  which  I  have  heard  of  Him,  and  am  com- 
missioned by  Him  to  proclaim.  He  that  sent  Me  will  prove 
them  to  be  true  one  day." 

The  general  idea  seems  to  be  that  our  Lord  defends  His  right 
to  speak  decidedly  and  pronounce  judgment  on  His  enemies* 
conduct  on  the  ground  of  His  divine  mission.     "  I  have  a  right 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  97 

to  say  what  I  have  said ;  and  I  might  say  much  more,  because 
I  am  not  a  common  prophet,  but  am  commissioned  and  sent 
as  the  Word  of  the  Father." 

The  frequency  with  which  our  Lord  speaks  of  Himself  as 
"  sent  by  the  Father,"  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  should  be  carefully 
noticed. 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  Himself  as  "  hearing"  things  from 
the  Father,  we  must  remember  that  His  language  is  accom- 
modated to  our  understanding.  The  relation  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son  in  the  Trinity  is  something  too  mysterious 
for  us  fully  to  comprehend.  The  Son  does  not  really  and  liter- 
ally need  the  Father  to  "  speak  "  to  Him,  and  does  not  himself 
need  to  "hear"  Him.  The  first  and  second  Persons  in  the 
Trinity  are  ineffably  united,  though  two  distinct  Persons. 

Lightfoot  thinks  the  latter  part  of  this  verse  means:  "He 
that  sent  Me  hath  of  old  said  and  judged  of  you,  and  He  is  true, 
and  they  are  true  things  that  He  said.  Of  this  kind  are  the 
passages  Isaiah  xi.  10,  and  xxix.  10,  and  from  such  predictions 
Christ  concludes  thus — « ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."' 

27.— [They  understood  not,  etc.']  Why  the  Jews  who  heard  these 
words  did  not  comprehend  that  our  Lord  spoke  of  the  "  Father" 
is  not  clear.  They  must  have  thought  that  "  He  that  sent  Me  " 
meant  some  earthly  sender.  The  extent  to  which  our  Lord's 
hearers  sometimes  understood  Him,  as  in  John  v.  18,  and  some- 
times did  not  understand  Him,  as  here,  is  a  curious  subject. 

Alford  observes  :  "  There  is  no  accounting  for  the  ignorance 
of  unbelief;  as  any  minister  of  Christ  knows  by  painful  expe- 
rience." 

28.— [Then  said  Jesus,  etc.]  This  verse  is  phrophetical.  Our 
Lord  predicts  that  after  His  crucifixion  the  Jews  would  know 
that  He  was  the  Messiah,  that  He  had  done  all  he  had  done 
not  of  His  own  private  authority,  but  by  God's  commission,  and 
that  He  had  spoken  to  the  world  only  such  things  as  the  Father 
had  taught  aud  appointed  Him  to  speak.  But  whether  our 
Lord  meant  that  His  hearers  would  really  believe  with  the 
heart  and  really  confess  His  Messiahship,  or  that  they  would 
know  it  too  late  and  be  convinced  when  the  day  of  grace  was 
past  and  gone,  is  a  nice  and  difficult  question. 

My  own  opinion,  judging  from  the  context  and  the  analogy 
of  other  places,  is  in  favour  of  the  latter  view:  viz.,  that  our 
Lord  predicted  the  Jewish  nation  would  know  the  truth  and 
discover  their  own  mistake  too  late.  I  think  so  because  our 
Lord  seems  so  frequently  to  allude  to  the  light  which  would 
come  on  the  minds  of  the  Jewish  nation  at  large  after  His 
death.     They  would  be  convinced,  though  not  converted. 

Chrysostom  thinks  that  our  Lord  meant,  "  Do  you  expect 
that  you  shall  certainly  rid  yourselves  of  Me,  and  slay  Me  ?    I 
5 


98  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


toll  you  that  then  ye  shall  most  surely  know  that  I  am,  by  reason 
of  the  miracle  of  my  resurrection,  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem. When  ye  have  been  driven  away  from  your  place  of  wor- 
ship, and  it  is  not  even  allowed  you  to  serve  God  as  hitherto, 
then  ye  shall  know  that  He  doth  this  to  avenge  Me,  and  because 
He  is  wroth  with  those  who  would  not  hear  Me." 

Augustine  takes  the  other  side,  and  says:  "Without  doubt 
Jesus  saw  there  some  whom  He  knew,  whom  in  His  foreknowl- 
edge lie  had  elected  together  with  His  other  saints  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  that  after  His  passion  they  should 
believe." 

Euthymius,  agreeing  with  Chrysostom,  remarks  how  the 
crowds  that  saw  our  Lord  crucified,  and  returned  home  smiting 
their  breasts, — the  centurion  who  superintended  His  crucifix- 
ion,— the  chief  priests  who  tried  in  vain  to  stifle  the  report  of 
His  resurrection, — and  Josephus  the  historian,  who  attributed 
the  misfortunes  of  the  nation  to  their  murder  of  Christ, — were 
all  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  this  verse.  When  too  late  they 
knew  who  our  Lord  was. 

Alford  thinks  that  the  words  admit  of  a  double  fulfilment,  and 
that  the  Jews  were  to  "  know  "  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ, 
in  two  different  ways.  Some  would  know  by  being  converted, 
some  by  being  punished  and  judged. 

The  expression  "  lifted  up,"  both  here  and  elsewhere  in  St. 
John's  Gospel,  can  mean  nothing  but  our  Lord's  crucifixion  and 
lifting  up  on  the  cross.  (John  iii.  14,  and  xii.  32.)  It  is  never 
used  in  any  other  sense,  and  the  modern  habit  of  talking  of 
Christ  as  "  lifted  up,"  when  magnified  and  exalted  in  the  pulpit, 
is  a  total  misapprehension,  and  a  play  upon  words. 

Bollock  and  others  think  that  the  phrase  "lifted  up"  may 
fairly  include  all  the  consequences  and  effects  of  our  Lord's 
crucifixion,  such  as  His  second  advent  to  judge  the  world,  and 
that  this  will  be  the  time  when  the  unbelieving  will  at  last  know 
and  be  convinced  that  Christ  is  Lord  of  all.  But  the  idea  seems 
far-fetched. 

The  expression  "  then  ye  shall  know"  may  possibly  refer  both 
to  our  Lord's  resurrection  as  well  as  his  crucifixion.  Certainly 
the  rising  again  from  the  dead  silenced  our  Lord's  enemies  in  a 
way  that  nothing  else  ever  did. 

The  expression  "that  I  am  he,"  here  as  elsewhere,  might  be 
equally  well  rendered  "  that  I  am ;  "  that  I  am  the  great  "  I  AM," 
the  Messiah. 

The  phrase  "  that  I  do  nothing  of  myself"  is  the  same  that 
we  have  had  frequently  before,  as  in  John  v.  19,  30.  It  means 
"that  I  do  nothing  of  My  own  independent  authority."  The 
reference  is  to  the  perfect  union  between  the  Son  and  the 
Father. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  99 


The  expression,  "  as  my  Father  hath  taught  Me  I  speak  these 
things,"  again  bears  special  reference  to  the  divine  commission 
of  our  Lord  and  the  perfect  union  between  Himself  and  His 
Father.  "  I  do  not  speak  the  things  I  speak  of  Myself  and  by 
My  own  authority  only.  I  speak  nothing  but  what  My  Father 
has  taught,  commissioned,  and  appointed  Me  to  speak."  Com- 
pare 7th,  16th,  and  26th  verses  of  this  chapter. 

Augustine  says  here  :  "  Do  not  as  it  were  represent  to  your- 
selves two  men,  the  one  father,  the  other  son,  and  the  father 
speaking  to  the  son,  as  thou  doest  when  thou  sayest  certain 
words  to  thy  son  advising  and  instructing  him  how  to  speak, 
that  whatever  he  has  heard  from  thee  he  may  commit  to  mem- 
ory, and  having  committed  to  memory  utter  also  with  the 
tongue.  Do  not  so  conceive.  Stature  and  motion  of  the  body, 
the  office  of  the  tongue,  distinction  of  sounds,  do  not  go  about 
to  conceive  them  in  the  Trinity."  Again  :  "  incorporeally  the 
Father  spake  to  the  Son,  because  incorporeally  the  Father  begat 
the  Son.  And  He  taught  Him  not,  as  if  He  had  begotten  Him 
ignorant  and  in  need  of  teaching;  but  this  '  taught'  is  the  same 
as  begat  Him  knowing." 

29. — [And  he  that  sent  me,  etc.']  This  verse  contains  once  more  that 
deep  and  oft-repeated  truth,  the  entire  unity  between  God  the 
Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  consequent  entire 
and  complete  harmony  between  the  mind  of  the  Father  and  the 
mind  of  the  Son.  It  contains  moreover  that  entire  and  com- 
plete performance  of  the  Father's  will  by  the  Son,  and  that  per- 
fect righteousness,  obedience,  and  holiness,  wherewith  the 
Father  is  well-pleased. 

When  we  read  such  words  as  "he  that  sent  Me  is  with  Me," 
and  "  hath  not  left  Me  alone,"  we  must  remember  that  there  is 
much  in  them  which  we  cannot  fully  explain.  We  must  be  con- 
tent to  believe  that  the  Father  was  "  with  "  the  Son,  and  never 
"left"  Him  during  the  whole  period  of  His  incarnation,  in  an 
ineffable  and  inscrutable  manner.  Perhaps  also  there  is  a  ref- 
erence to  Isai.  1.  7,  8,  9. 

Augustine  remarks:  "Albeit  both  are  together,  yet  one  was 
sent,  and  the  other  did  send.  The  Father  seut  the  Son,  yet 
quitted  not  the  Son." 

When  we  read  such  words  as  "  I  do  always  those  things  that 
please  Him,"  we  must  see  in  the  expression  a  description  of 
that  spotless  perfection  with  which  the  Son  during  His  incarna- 
tion constantly  pleased  the  eternal  Father. 

Let  Christians  never  forget  the  practical  lesson  that  in  this 
verse,  as  in  many  other  places,  Christ  is  their  example  and  their 
encouragement.  Like  Him,  however  short  they  may  come,  let 
them  aim  at  "  always  doing  what  pleases  God."  Like  Him,  let 
them  be  sure  that  so  doing  they  will  find  the  Father  "  with 
them,"  and  will  never  be  left  quite  "  alone." 


tOO  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Calvin  remarks  :  "  This  is  the  courage  with  which  we  ought 
to  be  animated  in  the  present  clay,  that  we  may  not  give  way  <>n 
account  of  the  small  number  of  believers:  for  though  the  whole 
world  be  opposed  to  His  doctrine,  still  we  are  not  alone.  Hence  it 
is  evident  how  foolish  is  the  boasting  of  the  Papists,  who,  while 
they  neglect  God,  proudly  boast  of  their  vast  numbers." 

}.  --[As  he  spake  these  words,  many  believed  on  him."]  There  can  be 
little  doubt  that  "  these  words  "  in  this  place,  refer  to  the  whole 
discourse  which  was  delivered  at  this  time,  and  not  to  the  [sin- 
gle verse  which  immediately  precedes  this  one.  It  is  possible 
that  the  reference  to  Isai.  1-.  7,  8,  9,  may  have  brought  light  to 
the  Jews'  minds,  and  explained  our  Lord's  relation  to  the 
Father,  and  His  claim  to  be  received  as  the  Messiah.— Other- 
wise it  is  not  very  clear  what  it  was  that  made  "  many  believo" 
on  Him  at  this  juncture.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  think 
that  the  "  belief "  here  was  anything  more  than  a  head  belief 
that  our  Lord  was  the  Messiah.  That  many  did  so  believe 
whose  hearts  remained  unchanged,  there  can  be  little  doubt. 
The  same  expression  occurs  at  x.  42,  and  xi.  45,  and  xii.  42. 
The  extent  to  which  men  may  be  intellectually  convinced  of  the 
truth  of  religion,  and  know  their  duty,  while  their  hearts  are 
unrenewed,  and  they  continue  in  sin,  is  one  of  the  most  pain- 
ful phenomena  in  the  history  of  human  nature.  Let  us  never 
be  content  with  believing  things  to  be  true,  without  a  personal 
laying  hold  on  the  living  Person,  Christ  Jesus,  and  actually  fol- 
lowing Him. 

Chrysostom  observes  :  "  They  believed,  yet  not  as  they  ought, 
but  carelessly  and  by  chance,  being  pleased  and  refreshed  by 
the  humility  of  the  words.  For  that  they  had  not  perfect  faith, 
the  Evangelist  shows  by  their  speeches  after  this,  in  which 
they  insult  him  again."  Theophylact,  Zwingle,  and  Calvin  take 
the  same  view. 


JOHN  VIII.   31-36. 


31  Then  said  Jesus  to  those  Jews 
which  believed  on  him,  If  ye  continue 
in  my  word,  then  are  ye  my  disciples 
indeed; 

32  And  yo  shall  know  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free. 

33  They  answered  him,  We  be 
Abraham's  seed,  and  were  never  in 
bondage  to  any  man:  how  sayest 
thou,  Ye  shall  be  made  free  ? 


34  Jesus  answered  them,  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Whosoever 
committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin. 

35  And  the  servant  abideth  not  in 
the  house  forever:  but  the  Son  abid- 
eth ever. 

36  If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make 
you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed. 


These  verses  show  us,  for  one  thing,  the  importance  of 
steady  per severance  in  Christ's  service.     There  were  many, 


JOIIX,    CHAP.    VIII.  101 

it  seems,  at  this  particular  period,  who  professed  to  believe 
on  our  Lord,  and  expressed  a  desire  to  become  His  disci- 
ples. There  is  nothing  to  show  that  they  had  true  faith. 
They  appear  to  have  acted  under  the  influence  of  temporary 
excitement,  without  considering  what  they  were  doing. 
And  to  them  our  Lord  addresses  this  instructive  warning, 
— Ci  If  ye  continue  in  My  word,  then  are  ye  My  disciples 
indeed." 

This  sentence  contains  a  mine  of  wisdom.  To  make  a 
beginning  in  religious  life  is  comparatively  easy.  Not  a 
few  mixed  motives  assist  us.  The  love  of  novelty,  the 
praise  of  well-meaning  but  indiscreet  professors,  the  secret 
self-satisfaction  of  feeling  "  how  good  I  am/'  the  universal 
excitement  attending  a  new  position, — all  these  things  com- 
bine to  aid  the  young  beginner.  Aided  by  them  he  begins 
to  run  the  race  that  leads  to  heaven,  la}^s  aside  many  bad 
habits,  takes  up  many  good  ones,  has  many  comfortable 
frames  and  feelings,  and  gets  on  swimmingly  for  a  time. 
But.  when  the  newness  of  his  position  is  past  and  gone, 
when  the  freshness  of  his  feelings  is  rubbed  off  and  lost, 
when  the  world  and  the  devil  begin  to  pull  hard  at  him, 
when  the  weakness  of  his  own  heart  begins  to  appear, — ■ 
then  it  is  that  he  finds  out  the  real  difficulties  of  vital  Chris- 
tianity. Then  it  is  that  he  discovers  the  deep  wisdom  of 
our  Lord's  saying  now  before  us.  It  is  not  beginning,  but 
"  continuing  "  a  religious  profession,  that  is  the  test  of  true 
grace. 

We  should  remember  these  things  in  forming  our  estimate 
of  other  people's  religion.  No  doubt  we  ought  to  be  thank- 
ful when  we  see  any  one  ceasing  to  do  evil  and  learning  to 
do  well.  We  must  not  "  despise  the  day  of  small  things." 
(Zech.  iv.  10.)  But  we  must  not  forget  that  to  begin  is  one 
thing,  and  to  go  on  is  quite  another.  Patient  continuance 
in  well-doing  is  the  only  sure  evidence  of  grace.  Not  he 
that  runs  fast  and  furiously  at  first,  but  he  that  keeps  up 


102  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

his  speed,  is  he  that  "  runs  so  as  to  obtain."  By  all  means 
let  us  be  hopeful  when  we  see  anything  like  conversion. 
But  let  us  not  make  too  sure  that  it  is  real  conversion, 
until  time  has  set  its  seal  upon  it.  Time  and  wear  test 
metals,  and  prove  whether  they  are  solid  or  plated.  Time 
and  wear,  in  like  manner,  are  the  surest  tests  of  a  man's 
religion.  Where  there  is  spiritual  life  there  will  be  con- 
tinuance and  steady  perseverance.  It  is  the  man  who  goes 
on  as  well  as  begins,  that  is  "  the  disciple  indeed." 

These  verses  show  us,  for  another  thing,  the  nature  of  true 
slavery.  The  Jews  were  fond  of  boasting,  though  without 
an}'  just  cause,  that  they  were  politically  free,  and  were  not  in 
bondage  to  any  foreign  power.  Our  Lord  reminds  them 
that  there  was  another  bondage  to  which  they  were  giving 
no  heed,  although  enslaved  by  it. — "  He  that  committeth 
sin  is  the  servant  of  sin." 

How  true  that  is  !  How  many  on  every  side  are  thorough 
slaves,  although  they  do  not  acknowledge  it !  They  are  led 
captive  by  their  besetting  corruptions  and  infirmities,  .and 
seem  to  have  no  power  to  get  free.  Ambition,  the  love  of 
money,  the  passion  for  drink,  the  craving  for  pleasure  and 
excitement,  gambling,  gluttony,  illicit  connections, — all 
these  are  so  many  tyrants  among  men.  Each  and  all  have 
crowds  of  unhappy  prisoners  bound  hand  and  foot  in  their 
chains.  The  wretched  prisoners  will  not  allow  their  bond- 
age. They  will  even  boast  sometimes  that  they  are 
eminently  free.  But  many  of  them  know  better.  There 
are  times  when  the  iron  enters  into  their  souls,  and  they 
feel  bitterly  that  they  are  slaves. 

There  is  no  slavery  like  this.  Sin  is  indeed  the  hardest 
of  all  task-masters.  Misery  and  disappointment  by  the 
way,  despair  and  hell  in  the  end, — these  are  the  onl}-  wages 
that  sin  pays  to  its  servants.  To  deliver  men  from  this 
bondage,  is  the  grand  object  of  the  Gospel.  To  awaken 
people  to  a  sense  of  their  degradation,  to  show  them  their 


John,  chap.  vin.  103 

chains,  to  make  them  arise  and  struggle  to  be  free, — this  is 
the  great  end  for  which  Christ  sent  forth  His  ministers. 
Happy  is  he  who  has  opened  his  eyes  and  found  out  his 
danger.  To  know  that  we  are  being  led  captive,  is  the 
very  first  step  toward  deliverance. 

These  verses,  show  us,  lastly,  the  nature  of  true  liberty. 
Our  Lord  declares  this  to  the  Jews  in  one  comprehensive 
sentence.  He  sa}*s,  "  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  indeed." 

Liberty,  most  Englishmen  know,  is  rightly  esteemed  one 
of  the  highest  temporal  blessings.  Freedom  from  foreign 
dominion,  a  free  constitution,  free  trade,  a  free  press,  civil 
and  religions  liberty, — what  a  world  of  meaning  lies  beneath 
these  phrases  !  How  many  would  sacrifice  life  and  fortune 
to  maintain  the  things  which  they  represent !  Yet,  after 
all  our  boasting,  there  are  many  so-called  freemen  who  are 
nothing  better  than  slaves.  There  are  many  who  are 
totally  ignorant  of  the  highest,  purest  form  of  liberty.  The 
noblest  liberty  is  that  which  is  the  property  of  the  true 
Christian.  Those  only  are  perfectly  free  people  whom  the 
Son  of  God  "  makes  free."  All  else  will  sooner  or  later  be 
found  slaves. 

Wherein  does  the  liberty  of  true  Christians  consist?  Of 
what  is  their  freedom  made  up  ? — They  are  freed  from  the 
guilt  and  consequences  of  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  Justi 
fied,  pardoned,  forgiven,  they  can  look  forward  boldty  to 
the  day  of  judgment,  and  cry  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
our  charge?  Who  is  he  that  condemneth?" — They  are 
freed  from  the  power  of  sin  by  the  grace  of  Christ's  Spirit. 
Sin  has  no  longer  dominion  over  them.  Renewed,  con- 
verted, sanctified,  they  mortify  and  tread  down  sin,  and 
are  no  longer  led  captive  by  it. — Liberty,  like  this,  is  the 
portion  of  all  true  Christians  in  the  day  that  they  flee  to 
Christ  by  faith,  and  commit  their  souls  to  Him.  That  day 
they  become  free  men.     Liberty,  like  this,  is  their  portion 


104  EXPOSITOHY   THOUGHTS. 

for  evermore.  Death  cannot  stop  it.  The  grave  cannot 
even  hold  their  bodies  for  more  than  a  little  season.  Those 
whom  Christ  makes  free  are  free  to  all  eternity. 

Let  us  never  rest  till  we  have  some  personal  experience 
of  this  freedom  ourselves.  Without  it  all  other  freedom  is 
a  worthless  privilege.  Free  speech,  free  laws,  political 
freedom,  commercial  freedom,  national  freedom,  —  all  these 
cannot  smooth  down  a  dying  pillow,  or  disarm  death  of  his 
sting,  or  fill  our  consciences  with  peace.  Nothing  can  do 
that  but  the  freedom  which  Christ  alone  bestows.  He  gives 
it  freely  to  all  who  seek  it  humbly.  Then  let  us  never  rest 
till  it  is  our  own. 

Notes.    John  VIII.  31—36. 

81.— [Then  Jesus  said.. .Jews. ..believed.. .him.']  It  is  clear,  I  think, 
from  the  tone  of  the  conversation  that  runs  from  this  verse 
uninterruptedly  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  that  this  "believ- 
ing "  was  not  faith  of  the  heart.  These  Jews  only  "  believed  " 
that  our  Lord  was  One  sent  from  heaven,  and  deserved  atten- 
tion. But  they  were  the  same  Jews  to  whom  He  says  by  and 
by,  "Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil." 

[If  ye  continue... my  word. ..disciples  indeed.]  This  sentence 
does  not  mean  that  these  Jews  had  really  begun  to  receive 
Christ's  word  into  their  hearts.  Such  a  sense  would  be  contra- 
dictory to  the  context.  It  must  mean  :  "  If  you  take  up  a  firm 
stand  on  that  Gospel  and  Word  of  Truth  which  I  have  come  to 
proclaim,  and  go  on  sticking  firmly  to  it  in  your  hearts  and 
lives,  not  merely  convinced  and  wishing,  but  actually  following 
Me,  then  you  are  truly  My  disciples."— The  word  rendered  "  in- 
deed "  is  more  literally,  "truly."  The  converse  throws  light 
on  our  Lord's  meaning:  "You  are  not  truly  disciples,  unless 
you  continue  steadfast  in  My  doctrine." 

Our  Lord  teaches  the  great  principle,  that  steady  continuance 
is  the  only  real  and  safe  proof  of  discipleship.  No  persever- 
ance, no  grace !  No  continuance  in  the  word,  no  real  faith  and 
conversion !  This  is  one  of  the  meeting-points  between  Calvin- 
ist  and  Arminian.  He  that  has  true  grace  will  not  fall  away. 
He  that  falls  away  has  no  true  grace,  and  must  not  flatter  him- 
self he  is  a  disciple. 

Let  us  note,  that  it  is  not  the  "word  continuing  in  us,"  but 
"  our  continuing  in  the  word,"  which  makes  us  true  disciples. 
The  distinction  is  very  important.  The  word  "  might  continue 
in  us,"  and  not  be  seen.    If  we  "  continue  in  the  word,"  our 


john,  chap.  vm.  105 

lives  will  show  it.     In  John  xv.  7,  we  have  both  expressions 
together:  "  If  ye  abide  in  Me,  and  My  words  abide  in  you." 

$2. — [And  ye  shall  know  the  truth.']  The  expression,  "  the  truth." 
here  cannot,  I  think,  mean  the  Personal  Truth,  the  Messiah. 
It  must  be  the  whole  doctrinal  truth  concerning  Myself,  My 
nature,  My  mission,  and  My  Gospel.  Steady  continuance  in  My 
service  shall  lead  to  clear  knowledge.  It  is  a  parallel  saying  to 
the  sentence,  "If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of 
the  doctrine."  (vii.  17.)  Honest  obedience  and  steady  perse- 
verance in  acting  up  to  our  light,  and  doing  what  we  learn, 
are  one  grand  secret  of  obtaining  more  knowledge. 

Chrysostom  however  thinks  that  our  Lord  means  by  "  truth," 
Himself.  "  Ye  shall  know  Me,  for  I  am  the  truth."  So  also 
Augustine,  Theophylact,  Euthymius,  and  Lampe. 

[The  truth  shall  make  you  free.]  This  freedom  can  only  mean 
spiritual  freedom, — freedom  from  the  guilt,  burden,  and  domin- 
ion of  sin, — freedom  from  the  heavy  yoke  of  Pharisaism,  under 
which  many  Jews  were  labouring  and  heavy  laden.  (Matt.  xi. 
28.)  "  The  Gospel  I  preach,  and  its  good  news,  shall  deliver 
you  from  spiritual  bondage,  and  make  you  feel  like  men  set  at 
liberty." 

I  think  these  words  must  have  been  spoken  with  special  ref- 
erence to  the  bondage  and  spiritual  slavery  in  which  the  Jewr 
were  kept  by  their  principal  teachers,  when  our  Lord  came 
among  them.'  In  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth  He  had  said,  that 
He  came  "  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives."  (Luke  iv. 
18.)  This,  however,  is  the  first  place  in  the  Gospels  where  He 
openly  declares  that  His  Gospel  will  give  men  freedom. 

Until  truth  comes  into  a  man's  heart,  he  never  really  knows 
what  it  is  to  feel  true  spiritual  liberty. 

Augustine  says,  "  To  Christ  let  us  all  flee.  Against  sin  let  us 
call  on  God  to  interpose  as  our  Liberator.  Let  us  ask  to  be 
taken  on  sale,  that  we  may  be  redeemed  by  His  blood." 

53. — [They  answered,  We  be  Abraham's  seed.]  Here  we  see  the 
usual  pride  of  carnal  descent  coming  out  in  the  Jewish  mind. 
It  is  just  what  John  the  Baptist  told  them  when  he  preached, 
"Think  not  to  say  that  we  have  Abraham  to  our  father." 
(Matt.  iii.  19.) 

[And  to  ere  never  in  bondage  to  any  man.]  This  is  the  blind- 
ness of  pride  in  its  strongest  form.  The  seed  of  Abraham  were 
in  bondage  to  the  Egyptians  and  Babylonians  for  many  years, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  frequent  bondages  to  Philistines,  and 
other  nations,  as  recorded  in  the  book  of  Judges.  Even  now, 
while  they  spoke,  they  were  in  subjection  to  the  Romans.  The 
power  of  self-deception  in  unconverted  man  is  infinite.  These 
Jews  were  not  more  unreasonable  than  many  now-a-days,  who 
say,  "  We  are  not  dead  in  sin, — we  have  grace,  we  have  faith, 


106  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

we  are  regenerate,  we  have  the  Spirit,"  while  their  lives  show 
plainly  that  they  are  totally  mistaken. 

[How  sayest  thou... made  free?']  This  question  was  partly  asked 
in  anger  and  resentment,  and  partly  in  curiosity.  Angry  as  the 
Jews  were  at  the  idea  of  being  subject  to  any  one,  they  yet 
caught  at  the  expression  "be  made  free."  It  made  them  think 
of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  Messiah  foretold  in  the  Prophets. — ■ 
"  Art  Thou  going  to  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel?  Art  Thou 
going  to  set  us  free  from  the  Romans?  " 

We  should  observe  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  readiness  of  our 
Lord's  hearers  to  put  a  carnal  sense  on  spiritual  language.  Nic- 
odemus  misunderstanding  the  new  birth,  the  Samaritan  woman 
and  the  living  waters,  the  Capernaites  and  the  bread  from  hea- 
ven, are  all  illustrations  of  what  I  mean.  (See  John  iii.  4;  iv. 
11;  vi.  34.) 

Pearce  thinks  the  Jews  here  spoke  of  themselves  individually, 
and  not  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Yet  surely,  even  when  they 
spoke,  they  were  subject  to  the  Romans. 

Henry  observes :  "  Carnal  hearts  are  sensible  of  no  other 
grievances  than  those  that  molest  the  body  and  injure  their  sec- 
ular affairs.  Talk  to  them  of  encroachments  on  their  civil  lib- 
erty and  property, — tell  of  waste  committed  on  their  lands,  or 
damage  done -to  their  houses,  and  they  understand  you  very 
well,  and  can  give  you  a  sensible  answer :  the  thing  touches 
and  affects  them.  But  discourse  to  them  of  the  bondage  of  sin, 
or  captivity  to  Satan,  and  a  liberty  by  Christ, — tell  them  of 
wrong  done  to  their  souls,  and  you  bring  strange  things  to 
them." 

34. — [Jesus  answered,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  shows  His 
hearers  what  kind  of  freedom  He  had  meant,  by  showing  the 
kind  of  slavery  from  which  He  wished  them  to  be  delivered. 
Did  they  ask  in  what  sense  He  meant  they  should  be  made  free? 
Let  them  know,  first  of  all,  that  in  their  present  state  of  mind, 
wicked,  worldly,  and  unbelieving,  they  were  in  a  state  of  bon- 
dage. Living  in  habitual  sin  they  were  the  "servants  of  sin." 
This  was  a  general  proposition  which  they  themselves  must  ad- 
mit. The  man  that  lived  wilfully  in  habits  of  sin  was  acknowl- 
edged by  all  to  be  the  slave  of  sin.  Sin  ruled  over  him,  and  he 
was  its  servant.  This  was  an  axiom  in  religion  which  they 
could  not  dispute,  for  even  heathen  philosophers  admitted  it. 
(See  Rom  vi.  16—20;  2  Pet.  ii.  19.) 

"  Committeth,"  we  must  remember  here,  does  not  mean 
"  commits  an  act  of  sin,"  but  habitually  lives  in  the  commission 
of  sin.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  St.  John  says,  "  He  that  commit- 
teth sin  is  of  the  devil,"  and  "  He  that  is  born  of  God  doth  not 
commit  sin."   (1  John  iii.  8,  9.) 

35. — [And  the  servant  abidethnot,  etc.']  This  is  a  difficult,  because 
a  very  elliptical  verse.     The  leading  object  in  our  Lord's  mind 


john,  chap.  vnr.  107 


seems  to  be  to  show  the  Jews  the  servile  and  slavish  condition 
in  which  they  were,  so  long  as  they  rejected  Him,  the  true  Mes- 
siah, and  the  free  and  elevated  position  which  they  would  oc- 
cupy if  they  would  believe  in  Him  and  become  His  disciples. — 
"  Atpiesent,  living  under  the  bondage  of  the  ceremonial  law, 
and  content  with  it  and  Pharisaic  traditions,  you  are  no  better 
than  slaves  and  servants,  liable,  like  Hagar  and  Ishmael,  to  be 
cast  out  of  God's  favour  and  presence  at  any  moment. — Receiv- 
ing Me  and  believing  on  Me  as  the  Messiah,  you  would  at  once 
be  lifted  to  the  position  of  sons,  and  would  abide  forever  in 
God's  favour,  as  adopted  children  and  dear  sons  and  daughters. 
— You  know  yourselves  that  the  servant  has  no  certain  tenure 
in  the  house,  and  may  be  cast  out  at  any  time;  while  the  Son 
is  heir  to  the  Father,  and  has  a  certain  tenure  in  the  house  for- 
ever.—Know  that  I  wish  you  to  be  raised  from  the  relation  of 
servants  to  that  of  sons.  Now,  under  the  bondage  you  are  in, 
you  are  like  slaves.  Receiving  Me  and  My  Gospel  you  would 
become  children  and  free." 

Something  like  this  seems  the  leading  idea  in  our  Lord's  mind. 
But  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  it  is  a  dark  and  difficult  sentence, 
and  requires  much  filling  up  and  paraphrasing  to  complete  its 
meaning.  The  simplest  plan  is  to  take  it  as  a  parenthesis.  It 
then  becomes  a  comment  on  the  word  "  servant,"  which  to  a  Jew, 
familiar  with  the  story  of  Hagar  and  Ishmael,  would  be  very 
instructive,  and  would  convey  the  latent  thought  that  our  Lord 
wished  them  to  be  not  servauts  but  sons.  I  cannot  for  a  mo- 
ment think  that  "  the  Son"  in  the  last  clause  means  the  Son  of 
God,  or  that  the  whole  clause  was  meant  to  teach  His  eternity. 

It  is  certainly  possible  that  a  deep  mystical  sense  may  lie 
under  the  words  "  servant "  and  "  son  "  in  this  verse.  "  Ser- 
vant" may  mean  the  Jew,  content  with  the  inferior  and  servile 
religion  of  Moses.  "  Son  "  may  mean  the  believer  in  Christ, 
who  receives  the  adoption  and  enjoys  Gospel  liberty.  He  that 
is  content  with  Judaism  will  find  his  system  and  religion  soon 
pass  away.  He  that  enters  into  Christ's  service  will  find  him- 
self a  son  forever.  But  this  is  at  best  only  conjectural,  and  a 
somewhat  questionable  interpretation. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  clear  to  my  mind.  The  latent 
thought  in  our  Lord's  mind  is  a  reference  to  the  story  of  Hagar 
and  her  son  Ishmael  being  cast  out  as  bond-servants,  while 
Isaac  the  son  and  heir  abode  in  the  house.  He  wished  to  im- 
press on  His  hearer's  minds,  that  he  desired  them,  like  Isaac, 
to  have  the  privilege  of  sons  forever,  and  to  be  free  to  all  eter- 
nity. Keeping  this  thought  in  view,  and  regarding  the  verse  as 
a  parenthesis,  its  difficulties  are  not  insuperable. 

Chrysostom  says  :  "  '  Abideth  not'  means  '  hath  not  power  to 
grant  favours,  as  not  being  master  of  the  house;  '  but  the  Son 
is  master  of  the  house."  The  Jewish  priests  were  the  servants, 
and  Christ  was  the  Son.     The  priests  had  no  power  to  set  free; 


108  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


the  Son  of  God  had.   Theophylact  and  Euthymius  take  the  same 
view. 

Maldonatus  calls  attention  to  the  expression  in  Hebrews, 
where  Moses  and  Christ  are  put  in  contrast,  and  each  in  con- 
nection with  the  word  "  house,"  Moses  as  a  servant,  Christ 
as  a  Son.  St.  Paul  certainly  seems  there  to  refer  to  this  pas- 
sage.    (Heb.  iii.  2,  5,  6.) 

36. — [If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  etc.~\  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
explains  what  He  had  meant  by  freedom.  It  was  a  freedom 
from  sin,  its  guilt,  and  power,  and  consequences,  which  believ- 
ers in  Him  were  to  receive.  "  If  I,  the  Son  of  man,  make  you 
free,  in  the  sense  of  delivering  you  from  the  burden  of  sin,  then 
you  will  be  free  indeed !  "  This  was  the  freedom  that  He  wished 
them  to  obtain.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord  carefully  avoids 
sayiug  anything  to  bring  on  Himself  the  charge  of  rebelling 
against  constituted  authorities,  and  of  heading  a  popular  rise 
for  liberty. 

The  word  rendered  "  indeed  "  here  is  not  the  word  so  ren- 
dered at  the  31st  verse.  Here  it  means  "  really,  in  reality," 
from  the  participle  of  the  verb  "to  be."  There  it  means 
"  truly." 

Let  us  not  forget  in  these  days  that  the  only  liberty  which  is 
truly  valuable  in  God's  sight  is  that  which  Christ  gives.  All 
political  liberty,  however  useful  for  many  purposes,  is  worth- 
less, unless  we  are  children  of  God,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom, 
by  faith  in  Jesus.  He  only  is  perfectly  free  who  is  free  from 
sin.  All  beside  are  slaves.  He  that  would  be  free  in  this  fash- 
ion has  only  to  apply  to  Christ  for  freedom.  It  is  the  peculiar 
office  and  privilege  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  enfranchise  forever 
all  who  come  to  Him. 

Augustine  carries  the  freedom  here  promised  far  into  the 
future.  He  remarks,  "  When  shall  there  be  full  and  perfect 
liberty?  When  there  shall  be  no  enemies,  when  the  last  ene- 
my shall  be  destroyed,  even  death." 


JOHN  VIII.   37—47. 


37  I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's 
seed;  but  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  because 
my  word  hath  no  place  in  you. 

38  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen 
with  my  Father:  and  ye  do  that  which 
ye  have  seen  with  your  father. 

39  They  answered  aud  said  unto 
him,   Abraham  is  our  father.     Jesus 


saith  unto  them,  If  ye  were  Abraham's 
children,  ye  would  do  the  works  of 
Abraham. 

40  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a 
man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth, 
which  I  have  heard  of  God:  this  did 
not  Abraham. 

41  Yo  do  the  deeds  of  your  father. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII. 


109 


Then  said  they  to  him,  We  he  not 
born  of  fornication ;  we  have  one  Fa- 
ther, even  God. 

42  Jesus  said  unto  them,  If  God 
were  your  Father,  yo  would  love  me: 
for  I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from 
God;  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but 
he  sent  me. 

43  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my 
speech  ?  even  because  ye  cannot  hear 
my  word. 

44  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil, 
and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do. 
He  was  a  murderer  from  the  begin- 


ning, and  abode  not  in  the  truth,  be- 
cause there  is  no  truth  in  him.  When 
he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  hia 
own :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father 
of  it. 

45  And  because  I  tell  you  the  truth, 
ye  believe  me  not. 

46  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of 
sin  ?  And  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do 
ye  not  believe  me? 

47  He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God'a 
words :  ye  therefore  hear  them  not,  be- 
cause ye  are  not  of  God. 


There  are  things  taught  in  this  passage  of  Scripture  which 
are  peculiarly  truth  for  the  times.  Well  would  it  be  for 
the  Churches  if  all  Christians  would  ponder  carefully  the 
matter  which  it  contains. 

We  are  taught  for  one  thing  the  ignorant  self-righteous- 
ness of  the  natural  man.  We  find  the  Jews  pluming  them- 
selves on  their  natural  descent  from  Abraham,  as  if  that 
must  needs  cover  all  deficiencies :  "  Abraham  is  our 
father."  We  find  them  going  even  further  than  this,  and 
claiming  to  be  God's  special  favourites  and  God's  own 
family :  "  We  have  one  Father,  even  God."  They  forgot 
that  fleshly  relationship  to  Abraham  was  useless,  unless 
they  shared  Abraham's  grace.  They  forgot  that  God's 
choice  of  their  father  to  be  head  of  a  favoured  nation  was 
never  meant  to  carry  salvation  to  the  children,  unless  they 
walked  in  their  father's  footsteps.  All  this  in  their  blind 
self-conceit  they  refused  to  see.  "  We  are  Jews.  We 
are  God's  children.  We  are  the  true  Church.  We  are  in 
the  covenant.  We  must  be  all  right."  This  was  their 
whole  argument ! 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  there  are  multitudes  of  so-called 
Christians  who  are  exactly  like  these  Jews.  Their  whole 
religion  consist  of  a  few  notions  neither  wiser  nor  better 
than  those  propounded  by  the  enemies  of  our  Lord.  They 
will  tell  you  "  that  they  are  regular  Church  people ;  they 


110  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

have  been  baptized  ;  they  go  to  the  Lord's  table  ;" — but  they 
can  tell  jrou  no  more.  Of  all  the  essential  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel  the}'  are  totally  ignorant.  Of  faith,  and  grace,  and 
repentance,  and  holiness,  and  spiritual  mindedness  they 
know  nothing  at  all.  But,  forsooth !  they  are  Churchmen, 
and  so  the}'  hope  to  go  to  heaven  !  There  are  myriads  in 
this  condition.  It  sounds  sad,  but  unhappily  it  is  only 
too  true. 

Let  us  settle  firmly  in  our  minds  that  connection  with 
a  good  Church  and  good  ancestors  is  no  proof  whatever 
that  we  ourselves  are  in  a  way  to  be  saved.  We  need 
something  more  than  this.  We  must  be  joined  to  Christ 
himself  b}'  a  living  faith.  We  must  know  something  ex- 
perimentally of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts. 
"  Church  principles,"  and  "  sound  Churchmanship,"  are  fine 
words  and  excellent  party  cries.  But  they  will  not  deliver 
our  souls  from  the  wrath  to  come,  or  give  us  boldness  in 
the  day  of  judgment. 

We  are  taught  for  another  thing  the  true  marks  of 
spiritual  sonship.  Our  Lord  makes  this  point  most  plain 
by  two  migh^  sayings.  Did  the  Jews  say,  "  We  have 
Abraham  to  our  father"?  He  replies,  "If  ye  were  Abra- 
ham's children  ye  would  do  the  work  of  Abraham." — Did 
the  Jews  say,  "We  have  one  Father,  even  God"?  He 
replies,  "  If  God  were  your  Father  ye  would  love  Me." 

Let  these  two  sayings  of  Christ  sink  down  into  our 
hearts.  They  supply  an  answer  to  two  of  the  most  mis- 
chievous, yet  most  common,  errors  of  the  present  day. 
What  more  common,  on  one  side,  than  vague  talk  about 
the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God?  "All  men,"  we  are 
told,  "  are  God's  children,  whatever  be  their  creed  or  re- 
ligion ;  all  are  finally  to  have  a  place  in  the  Father's  house, 
"  where  there  are  many  mansions." — What  more  common, 
on  another  side,  than  high-sounding  statements  about  the 
effect  of  baptism  and  the  privileges  of  Church-membership  ? 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  Ill 

"  By  baptism,"  we  are  confidently  told,  "  all  baptized 
people  are  made  children  of  God ;  all  members  of  the 
Church,  without  distinction,  have  a  right  to  be  addressed 
as  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty." 

Statements  like  these  can  never  be  reconciled  with  the 
plain  language  of  our  Lord  in  the  passage  before  us.  If 
words  mean  anything,  no  man  is  really  a  child  of  God, 
who  does  not  love  Jesus  Christ.  The  charitable  judgment 
of  a  baptismal  service,  or  the  hopeful  estimate  of  a  cate- 
chism, may  call  him  by  the  name  of  a  son,  and  reckon  him 
among  God's  children.  But  the  reality  of  sonship  to  God, 
and  all  its  blessings,  no  one  possesses  who  does  not  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  (Ephes.  vi.  24.)  In 
matters  like  these  we  need  not  be  shaken  by  mere  asser- 
tions. We  may  well  afford  to  despise  the  charge  of  un- 
dervaluing the  sacraments.  We  have  only  to  ask  one 
question:  "What  is  written?  What  saith  the  Lord?" 
And  with  this  saying  before  us,  we  can  only  come  to  one 
conclusion  :  "  Where  there  is  no  love  to  Christ,  there  is  no 
sonship  to  God." 

We  are  taught,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  reality  and 
character  of  the  devil.  Our  Lord  speaks  of  him  as  one 
whose  personality  and  existence  are  be37ond  dispute.  In 
solemn  words  of  stern  rebuke  He  says  to  His  unbelieving 
enemies,  "Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil," — led  by  him, 
doing  his  will,  and  showing  unhappily  that  you  are 
like  him.  And  then  He  paints  his  picture  in  dark  colors, 
describing  him  as  a  "murderer"  from  the  beginning,  as  a 
"  liar  "  and  the  father  of  lies. 

There  is  a  devil !  We  have  a  mighty  invisible  enemy 
alwa}rs  near  us, — one  who  never  slumbers  and  never  sleeps, 
— one  who  is  about  our  path  and  about  our  bed,  and  spies 
out  all  our  ways,  and  will  never  leave  us  till  we  die. — He 
is  a  murderer !  His  great  aim  and  object  is,  to  ruin  us  for- 
ever and  kill  our  souls.      To  destroy,  to  rob  us  of  eternal 


112  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

life,  to  bring  us  down  to  the  second  death  in  hell,  ai'e  the 
things  for  which  he  is  unceasingly  working.  He  is  ever 
going  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour. —  He  is  a  liar! 
He  is  continually  trying  to  deceive  us  by  false  represen- 
tations, just  as  he  deceived  Eve  at  the  beginning.  He  is 
always  telling  us  that  good  is  evil  and  evil  good, — truth  is 
falsehood  and  falsehood  truth, — the  broad  way  good  and 
the  narrow  way  bad.  Millions  are  led  captive  by  his 
deceit,  and  follow  him,  both  rich  and  poor,  both  high  and 
low,  both  learned  and  unlearned.  Lies  are  his  chosen 
weapons.     By  lies  he  slays  many. 

These  are  awful  things  ;  but  they  are  true.  Let  us  live 
as  if  we  believed  them.  Let  us  not  be  like  many  who 
mock,  and  sneer,  and  scoff,  and  deny  the  existence  of  the 
very  being  who  is  invisibly  leading  them  to  hell.  Let  us 
believe  there  is  a  devil,  and  watch,  and  pray,  and  fight 
hard  against  his  temptations.  Strong  as  he  is,  there  is  One 
stronger  than  him,  who  said  to  Peter,  "  I  have  prayed  for 
thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not,"  and  who  still  intercedes  at 
God's  right  hand.  Let  us  commit  our  souls  to  Him.  (Luke 
xxii.  32.)  With  such  a  being  as  the  devil  going  to  and 
fro  in  the  world,  we  never  need  wonder  to  see  evil  abound- 
ing. But  with  Christ  on  our  side,  we  need  not  be  afraid. 
Greater  is  He  that  is  for  us  than  he  that  is  against  us.  It 
is  written,  "Resist  the  devil,  and  he  shall  flee  from  3Tou." 
— "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet 
shortly."     (James  iv.  7  ;  Rom.  xvi.  20.) 

Notes.    John  VIII.  37—47. 

87. — [I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed.'}  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
takes  up  the  arrogant  boast  of  the  Jews,  that  they  were  Abra- 
ham's seed.  He  had  replied  to  their  assertion,  "  We  were  never 
in  bondage  to  any  man,"  by  showing  the  nature  of  true  bondage 
and  true  liberty.  He  now  returns  to  their  opening  saying, 
"  We  be  Abraham's  seed,'  and  begins  by  telling  them  that  He 
knew,  and  fully  admitted,  their  carnal  descent  from  Abraham. 

[But  ye  seek  to  kill  me.}    This  must  mean,  "Your  relation  to 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  113 


Abraham  does  you  no  good,  for  ye  are  seeking  to  murder  Me 
at  this  very  moment,  though  I  have  come  to  fulfil  the  promises 
made  to  Abraham." 

Here,  as  well  as  at  the  40th  verse,  and  chapter  vii.  19,  our 
Lord  shows  His  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  designs  of  His 
enemies.  He  gives  us  an  example  of  steady  perseverance  in 
God's  work,  even  though  we  know  our  lives  are  in  peril. 

[Because  my  word  hath  no  place  in  you.~\  This  means, 
"Because  the  Gospel  I  preach,  the  message  I  brought  from  my 
Father,  makes  no  way  or  progress  in  your  hearts,  or  among 
you." — The  Greek  word,  which  our  translators  have  rendered 
"hath  place,"  is  never  so  rendered  elsewhere.  The  idea  here 
seems  to  be  that  of  "  going  forward,  spreading,  and  marching 
on." 

This  describes  literally  the  condition  of  many  who  hear 
Christ's  word  in  every  age.  It  seems  to  come  to  a  dead  stand- 
still or  halt  in  their  hearts,  and  to  make  no  way  with  them. 

88. — [I  speak  that,  etc.~\  The  sense  of  this  verse  appears  to  be 
filled  up  thus:  "The  truth  is,  that  there  is  an  entire  gulf  and 
breach  between  you  and  Me.  I  speak,  and  am  ever  speaking, 
the  doctrine  which  I  have  seen  with  My  Father,  in  our  eternal 
councils  about  mankind,  and  which  I  am  sent  by  Him  to  pro- 
claim to  the  world.  You,  on  the  other  hand,  clo  and  are  always 
doing  the  things  which  your  father  the  devil  presents  to  your 
minds,  and  which  you  have  seen  and  imbibed  into  your  charac- 
ters, under  his  influence." 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  what  He  has  "seen"  with  His 
Father,  we  must  remember,  as  elsewhere,  that  He  uses 
language  accommodated  to  our  weak  capacities,  to  describe  the 
relation  between  Himself  and  the  first  Person  in  the  Trinity. 
Compare  John  iii.  32  and  v.  19. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "father"  of  the  Jews,  to 
whom  our  Lord  here  refers,  is  "  the  devil,"  when  we  read  the 
verses  following.  It  conveys  an  awful  idea  of  the  state  of 
unbelieving  and  wicked  men,  that  they  are  doing  what  they 
have  seen  and  learned  from  the  devil.  There  may,  however, 
be  special  reference  to  the  design  of  the  Jews  to  kill  Christ. 
Our  Lord's  meaning  may  be,  "Ye  are  doing  what  ye  have  seen 
with  the  devil  your  father.  He  has  suggested  to  you  to  kill 
Me,  and  you  are  listening  to  his  suggestion." 

39. _ [They  ansicered... Abraham  is  our  father.']  This  is  a  repeti- 
tion of  what  the  Jews  had  already  said.  Startled  at  what  our 
Lord  said  about  their  "  father,"  they  reassert  emphatically  their 
relationship  to  Abraham.— "What  do  you  mean  by  thus  speak- 
ing of  our  father  ?    Abraham  is  our  father." 

[Jesus  saith...if  Abraham's  children... works  of  Abraham.]  Our 
Lord  here  tells  them  that  it  is  possible  to  be  Abraham's  chil- 


114  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


dren  according  to  the  flesh,  and  yet  not  Abraham's  children 
according  to  the  Spirit.  — "If  ye  were  true  spiritual  descendants 
of  Abraham,  you  would  show  it  by  doing  such  things  as  Abra- 
ham did.  Your  works  would  be  like  his,  because  springing 
from  a  like  faith." 

The  distinction  here  drawn  by  our  Lord  is  a  very  important 
one  for  Christians  to  notice.  The  utter  uselessness  of  carnal 
relationship,  or  formal  outward  succession,  is  a  truth  which 
man  does  not  like  to  admit,  but  one  that  needs  to  be  constantly 
taught  in  the  Churches.  How  common  to  hear  men  say,  "  we 
belong  to  the  one  true  Church;  we  are  in  the  direct  succession 
from  the  Apostles."  Such  claims  are  utterly  useless,  if  not 
accompanied  by  "  works." 

We  must  never  forget  the  importance  of  "  works,"  if  put  in 
their  right  place.  They  cannot  justify  us.  They  are  at  best 
full  of  imperfection.  But  they  are  useful  evidences,  and  serve 
to  show  whose  we  are,  and  what  our  religion  is  worth. 

40. — [But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  etc.~\  Our  Lord  in  this  verse  con- 
firms the  charge  made  in  the  preceding  one, — that  His  enemies 
were  not  Abraham's  spiritual  children,  although  carnally  de- 
scended from  Abraham. — "  At  this  very  moment  you  are 
wishing  and  endeavouring  to  put  Me  to  death,  not  for  any 
crime,  but  simply  because  I  have  spoken  to  you  that  mighty 
message  of  truth  which  I  heard  from  My  Father,  and  am  sent 
to  proclaim  to  the  world  as  the  Messiah.  This  is  the  very 
opposite  of  what  your  great  forefather  Abraham  would  have 
done.  He  longed  to  see  My  day.  He  rejoiced  in  the  prospect 
of  it.  He  would  have  hailed  My  appearance  and  message  with 
delight.  Your  conduct,  therefore,  is  an  unanswerable  proof 
that  you  are  not  Abraham's  spiritual  children." 

Our  Lord's  argument  is  the  same  that  St.  Paul  uses  to  the 
Romans.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  outwardly." — "  They 
which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh  are  not  the  children  of  God." 
(Rom.  ii.  28,  29 ;  ix.  8.)  The  importance  of  it  cannot  be  over- 
rated. It  establishes  the  great  principle  that  fleshly  relation- 
ship, or  ecclesiastical  connection,  is  nothing  without  grace  in 
the  heart,  and  indeed  only  adds  to  a  man's  condemnation. 

The  expression  "  this  did  not  Abraham  "  is  a  Hebraism.  Of 
course  literally  Abraham  could  not  "  seek  to  kill "  Christ, 
because  he  never  lived  with  Him  on  earth.  The  meaning  must 
be  "  your  conduct  is  the  very  opposite  of  what  Abraham  would 
have  done,  and  utterly  contrary  to  the  general  tenor  of  what 
he  did  while  he  lived."  Compare  Deut.  xvii.  3;  Jer.  vii.  22 — 
31 :  xix.  5 ;  xxxii.  35,  where  the  same  form  of  speech  is  used. 

When  our  Lord  calls  Himself  here  simply  "  a  man,"  He  uses 
an  expression  which  He  nowhere  else  employs  in  the  Gospels. 
As  a  rule,  He  calls  Himself"  the  Son  of  man,"  when  speaking 
of  His  human  nature.     Here,  however,  He  seems  to  speak  of 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  115 

Himself  in  the  point  cf  view  iu  which  His  unbelieving  enemies 
ought  to  have  regarded  Him,  if  they  could  not  yet  acknowledge 
His  divinity.  "  I  am  among  you  a  man  speaking  the  truth  :  and 
yet  ye  seek  to  kill  Me." — The  attempt  of  Jews  and  Socinians  to 
show  that  our  Lord  was  not  really  God,  founded  on  this  text, 
is  futile.  Our  Lord's  real  and  true  humanity  no  sound  Trini- 
tarian thinks  of  denying. 

41. — [Ye  do  the  deeds  of  your  father.]  This  means  "You  are 
doing  the  things  that  your'  father  the  devil  approves  and 
suggests  to  you.  You  are  showing  yourselves  genuine  children 
of  the  devil,  by  doing  his  works."  The  word  "ye"  in  the 
Greek  is  emphatic,  and  may  possibly  be  intended  to  contrast 
with  "  I,"  at  the  beginning  of  the  35th  verse. 

[Then  said  they... not  born  of  fornication.']  These  words  can 
hardly  be  taken  literally.  Our  Lord  was  speaking  to  the  Jews 
not  as  individuals,  but  as  a  nation  and  a  class,  and  was  speak- 
ing of  their  descent  in  a  religious  point  of  view.  The  question 
was,  "  Who  was  their  father"?  From  whom  did  they  get  their 
spiritual  character?  To  whom  were  their  proclivities  and  ten- 
dencies to  be  traced?"  This  our  Lord's  hearers  understood, 
and  said,  "  We  be  not  born  of  fornication ;  we  are  not  heathens 
and  idolaters  at  any  rate,  even  if  we  are  not  as  good  as  Abra- 
ham."— That  idolatry  was  called  fornication,  because  it  was 
unfaithfulness  to  the  covenant  God,  a  forsaking  Him  for  false 
gods,  is,  I  think,  clear  from  many  places  in  the  Old  Testament. 
See  for  instance  Jeremiah  ii.  1—20,  and  iii.  1 — 3.  I  think  this 
was  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews,  when  they  spoke  to  our  Lord 
here.     This  is  Augustine's  view. 

The  notion  of  Euthymius,  Rupertus,  and  others,  that  the 
Jews  refer  to  other  children  of  Abraham,  by  Hagar  and  Ketu- 
rah,  and  boast  themselves  his  true  children  by  Sarah,  is  not 
satisfactory.  It  is  surely  too  much  to  charge  Abraham  with 
the  sin  of  fornication,  because  he  took  Hagar  to  be  his  wife, 
at  the  instance  of  Sarah,  and  married  Keturah  after  Sarah's 
death ! 

The  notion  of  some,  that  the  Jews  refer  here  to  the  many  mar- 
riages between  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  the  Old  Testament  times, 
(as  seen  in  Ezra  x.  1,  etc.,)  and  repudiate  them,  is  not  proba- 
ble. 

Some  have  thought  that  the  Jews  insinuated  wicked  doubts 
of  our  Lord's  legitimate  birth  in  this  phrase.  But  it  seems 
unlikely. 

[We  have  one  Father,  even  God.]  The  Jews  here  lay  claim  to 
be  regarded  as  God's  children.  That  God  is  called  "the 
Father "  of  Israel  in  several  places  in  the  Old  Testament,  is 
undeniable.  See  Deut.  xxxii.  6;  1  Chron.  xxix.  10;  Isai.  lxiii. 
16  and  lxiv.  8 ;  Mai.  i.  6.  But  it  is  very  clear  that  these  texts 
specially  refer  to  God's  relation  to  Israel  as  a  nation,  and  not  to 
Israelites  as  individuals.    The  Jews,  however,  in  their  pride 


116  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


and  self-righteousness,  made  no  such  nice  distinction.  They 
did  not  see  that  national  sonship  and  covenant  sonship  with- 
out spiritual  sonship,  are  nothiug  worth.  Hence  they  brought 
on  themselves  the  stern  rebuke  of  the  next  verse. 

42. — [Jesus  said... if  God. ..your  Father.. .love  me.']  Our  Lord  here 
tells  the  Jews,  that  although  they  might  be  children  of  God  by 
covenant  and  nationality,  they  were  evidently  not  God's  chil- 
dren by  grace  and  spiritual  birth.  If  God  was  really  their 
Father,  they  would  show  it  by  loving  the  Son  of  God,  even 
Himself. 

Let  us  note  carefully  the  great  principle  contained  in  this 
sentence.  Love  to  Christ  is  the  infallible  mark  of  all  true  chil- 
dren of  God.  Would  we  know  whether  we  are  born  again, 
whether  we  are  children  of  God?  There  is  one  simple  way  of 
finding  it  out.  Do  we  love  Christ?  If  not,  it  is  vain  and  idle 
to  talk  of  God  as  our  Father,  and  ourselves  as  God's  children. 
No  love  to  Christ,  no  sonship  to  God ! 

The  favourite  notion  of  many,  that  baptism  makes  us  sons 
and  daughters  of  God,  and  that  all  baptized  people  should  be 
addressed  as  God's  children,  is  utterly  irreconcilable  with  this 
sentence.  Unless  a  baptized  person  loves  Christ,  he  has  no 
right  to  call  God  Father,  and  is  not  God's  child.  He  has  yet  to 
be  born  again,  and  brought  into  God's  family.  Before  the 
point  and  edge  of  these  words,  the  doctrine  that  spiritual  re 
generation  always  accompanies  baptism  cannot  stand. 

The  modern  notion  about  God's  universal  Fatherhood,  which 
finds  such  favour  with  many,  is  no  less  irreconcilable  with 
this  sentence  than  baptismal  regeneration.  That  God  the 
Father  is  full  of  love,  mercy,  and  compassion  to  all  is  no  doubt 
true.  But  that  God  is  really  and  truly  the  spiritual  Father  of 
any  one  who  does  not  love  Christ  can  never  be  maintained 
without  contradicting  our  Lord's  words  in  this  place. 

The  sentence  is  full  of  condemnation  to  all  who  know  nothing 
experimentally  of  Christ,  and  neither  think,  nor  feel,  nor  care 
anything  about  Him.  Crowds  of  so-called  Christians  are  in 
this  unhappy  state,  and  are  plainly  not  God's  children,  whatever 
they  may  think. — The  sentence  is  equally  full  of  comfort  for  all 
true  believers,  however  weak  and  feeble.  If  they  feel  drawn 
towards  Christ  in  heart  and  affection,  and  can  truly  say  "I  do 
love  Him,"  they  have  the  plainest  mark  of  being  God's  children, 
and  "if  children  then  heirs."     (Rom.  viii.  17.) 

[For  I  proceeded  forth,  etc.]  Our  Lord  here  shows  the  Jews 
His  own  divine  nature  and  mission.  He  had  proceeded  forth, 
and  come  from  God — the  eternal  Son  from  the  eternal  Father. 
He  had  not  come  of  His  own  independent  will  and  without 
commission,  but  specially  sent  and  appointed  by  the  Father,  as 
His  last  and  dearest  Messenger  to  a  lost  world.  Such  was  His 
nature.     Such  was  His  position  and  relation  to  the  Father.— If 


JOHN,   CHAP.   vnr.  117 


therefore  they  really  were  children  of  God  the  Father,  they 
would  love  Him  as  the  Father's  Sod,  the  Father's  Messenger,  the 
Father's  promised  Messiah.  Not  loving  Him,  they  gave  the  plain- 
est proof  that  they  were  not  God's  children. — A  true  child  of  God 
will  love  everything  belonging  to  God,  and  specially  he  will  love 
God's  only  begotten  and  beloved  Son.  He  can  see  and  rind 
nothing  nearer  to  the  Father  than  the  Son,  who  is  the  •'  bright- 
ness of  His  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person."  (Heb. 
i.  3.)  If,  therefore,  he  does  not  love  the  Son,  it  is  clear  that  he 
is  no  true  child  of  the  Father. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  Christ's  argument  is  this :  whoever  is  a 
child  of  God  will  acknowledge  His  first-born  Son;  but  you  hate 
Me,  and  therefore  you  have  no  reason  to  boast  that  you  are 
God's  children.  We  ought  carefully  to  observe  in  this  passage, 
that  there  is  no  piety  and  no  fear  of  God  where  Christ  is  re- 
jected. Hypocritical  religion  presumptuously  shelters  itself  un- 
der the  name  of  God;  but  how  can  they  agree  with  the  Father, 
who  disagree  with  His  only  Son  ?  " 

43. — [  Why  do  ye  not  understand?  etc.']  In  this  verse,  our  Lord  seems 
to  me  to  draw  a  distinction  between  "speech"  and  "word." 
The  expression  "  word  "  is  deeper  than  "  speech."  By  "  speech," 
He  means  "  My  manner  of  speaking  and  expressing  Myself." 
By  "word,"  He  means  generally  "  My  doctrine.  " — The  sense  is, 
"  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  My  manner  of  express- 
ing Myself  to  you,  when  I  speak  of  such  things  as  freedom  and 
of  'your  father'  ?  It  is  because  ye  will  not  receive  and  attend 
to  My  whole  message, — the  word  that  I  bring  to  you  from  My 
Father." — Lightfoot  takes  this  view. 

This  explanation  seems  to  me  to  describe  most  accurately  the 
state  of  things  between  our  Lord  and  His  hearers.  They  were 
continually  misunderstanding,  misinterpreting,  and  stumbling 
at,  the  expressions  and  language  that  He  used  in  teaching  them. 
Did  He  speak  of  " bread"  ?  They  thought  He  meant  literal 
bread. — Did  He  speak  of  "  freedom  "  ?  They  thought  He  meaut 
temporal  and  political  freedom. — Did  He  speak  of  "  their 
Father"?  They  thought  He  meant  Abraham. — How  was  it  that 
they  so  misunderstood  His  language  aud  dialect?  It  was  simply 
because  their  hearts  were  utterly  hardened  and  closed  against 
the  whole  "  word  of  salvation"  which  He  came  to  proclaim. 
Having  no  will  to  listen  to  and  receive  His  doctrine,  they  were 
ready  at  every  step  to  misconstrue  the  words  and  figures  under 
which  it  was  conveyed  and  placed  before  them. 

Any  one  who  preaches  the  Gospel  now  must  ofteu  observe 
that  precisely  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  present  day.  Hear- 
ers, who  are  strongly  prejudiced  against  the  Gospel,  are  con- 
stantly perverting,  wresting,  and  misinterpreting  the  language 
of  the  preacher.  None  are  so  blind  as  those  who  will  not  see, 
and  none  so  stupid  as  those  who  do  not  want  to  understand. 

The  "cannot"  here  is  a  moral  inability.  It  is  like  "no  man 


118  EXPOSITORY   TIIOUGHTS. 

can  come  unto  Me,"  and  "  His  brethren  could  not  speak  peacea- 
bly unto  him."  (John  vi.  44;  Gen.  xxxvii.  4.)  It  means,  "Ye 
have  no  will  to  hear  with  your  hearts." 

Chrysostom  remarks  :  "  Not  to  be  able  here  means  not  to  be 
willing." 

44. — [Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  etc."]  This  verse  deserves 
special  attention,  both  for  the  sternness  of  the  rebuke  it  con- 
taius,  and  the  deep  subject  which  it  handles.  The  general 
sense  is  as  follows:  "Ye  are  so  far  from  being  spiritual  chil- 
dren of  Abraham,  or  true  children  of  God,  that,  on  the  contrary, 
ye  may  be  rightly  called  the  children  of  the  devil;  and  ye  show 
it,  by  having  a  will  set  on  doing  the  evil  things  which  your 
father  suggests  to  you.  He,  from  the  beginning  of  creation, 
was  a  being  set  on  the  destruction  of  man,  and  abode  not  in  the 
original  truth  and  righteousness  in  which  he  was  created ;  for 
now  truth  is  not  in  his  nature.  When  he  now  speaks  and  sug- 
gests a  lie,  he  speaks  out  of  his  own  peculiar  inward  nature, 
for  he  is  emiently  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  a  lie." 

When  our  Lord  says  to  the  wicked  Jews,  "  Ye  are  of  your 
father  the  devil,"  He  does  not  mean  that  the  wicked  are  made 
wicked  by  the  devil  in  the  same  sense  that  the  godly  are  made 
godly  by  God,  created  anew  and  begotten  of  God  ;  but  He  uses 
a  common  Hebraism,  by  which  persons  who  are  closely  con- 
nected with,  or  entirely  under  the  influence  of,  another,  are 
called  "his  children."  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  wicked  and 
unbelieving  are  truly  the  children  of  the  devil.  This  must  be 
carefully  remembered.  The  devil  has  no  power  to  "  create"  the 
wicked.  He  only  finds  them  born  in  sin,  and,  working  upon 
their  sinful  nature,  obtains  such  an  influence,  that  he  becomes 
practically  the  "  father  of  the  wicked."  (See  Matt.  xiii.  38  and  1 
John  iii.  8;  Matt.  xiii.  19 ;  Luke  xvi.  8;  xx.  34;  Isai.  lvii.  4; 
Numb.  xvii.  10.) 

Augustine  says  :  "  Whence  are  those  Jews  sons  of  the  dev- 
il?— By  imitation,  not  by  birth."  He  also  refers  to  Ezek.  xvi. 
3,  as  a  parallel  case. 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  Ye  will  do  the  lusts  of  your  father," 
we  must  remember  that  "ye  will "  is  emphatic  in  the  Greek. 
"  Ye  have  a  will,  and  mind,  and  purpose,  and  disposition." — By 
"  doing  the  lusts,"  lie  means  "ye  follow  those  evil  inclinations 
and  desires  "  which  are  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  devil, 
and  according  to  his  mind, — such  as  to  commit  murder,  and  to 
love  and  tell  a  lie.  The  desire  of  the  devil  can  only  be  for  that 
which  is  evil. 

When  our  Lord  says  the  devil  was  a  "murderer  from  the 
beginning,"  I  do  not  think  He  refers  exclusively  to  Cain's  mur- 
der of  Abel, -though  I  think  it  was  in  His  mind.  (See  1  John  iii. 
12.)  I  rather  think  He  means  that  the  devil,  from  the  beginning 
of  creation,  was  set  on  bringing  death  into  the  world,  and  mur- 
dering man  both  body  and  soul. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  119 


Origen  remarks :  "  It  was  not  one  man  only  that  the  devil 
killed,  but  the  whole  human  race,  inasmuch  as  in  Adam  all  die. 
So  that  he  is  truly  called  a  murderer." 

When  our  Lord  says  that  the  "  devil  abode  not  in  the  truth," 
I  think  He  teaches  that  the  devil  is  a  fallen  spirit,  and  that  he 
was  originally  made  very  good  and  "  perfect,"  like  all  other 
works  of  God's  hands.  But  he  did  not  continue  in  that  state  of 
truth  and  righteousness  in  which  he  was  originally  created.  He 
kept  not  his  first  estate,  but  fell  away.  "  Truth "  seems  to 
stand  for  all  righteousness,  and  holiness,  and  conformity  to  the 
miud  of  God,  who  is  "Truth  itself."  This  verse,  and  Jude  6, 
are  the  two  clearest  proofs  in  the  Bible  that  the  devil  fell,  and 
was  not  created  evil  at  the  beginning. 

The  word  "abode"  would  be  more  literally  rendered, 
"stood." 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  Because  there  is  no  truth  in  him,"  Pie 
does  not  mean  that  this  was  the  reason  why  the  devil  "  abode 
not  in  the  truth."  If  this  had  been  His  meaning,  He  would 
have  said,  " Truth  was  not  in  him."  But  He  says,  "is." — His 
words  are  meant  to  describe  the  present  nature  of  the  devil. 
"He  is  now  a  being  in  whom  truth  is  not." — It  seems  to  me  a 
somewhat  similar  expression  to  that  of  St.  Paul,  when  he  says, 
"  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly ; "  where 
"  because  "  does  not  mean  the  reason  why  he  obtained  mercy. 
(1  Tim.  i.  12.)  The  Greek  word  for  "  because  "  in  both  cases 
is  the  same. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  As  we  are  called  the  children  of  God,  not 
only  because  we  resemble  Him,  but  because  He  governs  us 
by  His  Spirit, — because  Christ  lives  and  is  vigorous  in  us,  so  as 
to  conform  us  to  His  Father's  image ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
devil  is  said  to  be  the  father  of  those  whose  understandings  he 
blinds,  whose  hearts  he  moves  to  commit  all  unrighteousness, 
and  on  whom,  in  short,  he  acts  powerfully,  and  exercises  his 
tyranny." 

When  our  Lord  says  that  "  the  devil  speaketh  of  his  own,"  He 
does  not  mean  that  he  "  speaks  about  his  own,"  but  that  he 
speaks  "out  of  his  own  things."  It  is  like,  "  Out  of  the  abun- 
dance of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  (Matt.  xii.  34.)  He 
speaks  out  of  those  things  of  which  he  is  full. 

When  our  Lord  says  that  the  devil  "  is  a  liar,"  I  think  He 
refers  to  the  great  original  lie  by  which  he  deceived  Eve  at  the 
beginning,  "Ye  shall  not  surely  die."     (Gen.  iii.  4.) 

When  our  Lord  says  here  of  the  devil,  that  "he  is  a  liar  and 
the  father  of  it,"  I  think  the  most  likely  and  natural  meaning  is, 
that  "  he  is  the  father  of  every  lie."  A  lie  is  specially  the  result 
and  work  of  the  devil.  The  expression  "  of  it  "  is  undeniably 
difficult,  and  is  variously  interpreted. 

(a)  Some  think  that  it  means  "  he  is  the  father  of  him,"— 


120  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


viz.,  of  the  liar,  of  every  one  that  tells  a  lie.     This  is  the  view 
of  Brentius,  Bengel,  Stier,  Hengstenberg,  and  Alford. 

(b)  Some  think  that  it  means  "  he  is  a  liar,  and  his  father." 
This  was  an  error  of  the  Manicheans,  and  justly  reproved  by 
Augustine.  Yet  Grotius  seems  to  hold  this  view,  and  maintains 
that  he  who  deceived  Adam  and  Eve  was  not  the  prince  of  the 
devils,  but  one  of  his  messengers  I  (See  2  Cor.  xii.  7.)  This 
seems  an  untenable  idea. 

Neither  of  these  views  is  at  all  natural  and  satisfactory, — and 
the  one  I  have  given— "  father  of  a  lie"— seems  tome  much 
more  probable.  It  is  the  view  of  Augustine,  Theophylact, 
Rupertus,  Calvin,  Bucer,  Beza,  Bullinger,  Rollock,  Burgon, 
Wordsworth,  and  the  great  majority  of  all  commentators. 

Let  us  note,  in  this  verse,  how  strongly  and  directly  our  Lord 
rebukes  His  enemies.  There  are  times  when  strong  condemna- 
tion becomes  a  positive  duty,  and  we  must  not  refrain  from  it 
through  fear  of  being  charged  with  severity,  personality,  and 
harshness. 

Let  us  note  how  clearly  this  verse  establishes  the  personality 
of  the  devil.  The  expression  before  us  can  never  be  explained 
by  those  who  think  he  is  only  a  vague  evil  influence. 

Let  us  note  how  the  fall  of  angels  is  recognized  and  taught 
by  our  Lord,  as  one  of  the  great  truths  that  we  must  believe. 

Let  us  note  how  murder  and  lying  are  specially  mentioned  as 
characteristics  of  the  devil.  They  are  sins  most  opposite  to  the 
mind  of  God,  however  lightly  regarded — and  lying  especially — 
by  man.  An  indifference  to  the  sin  of  lying,  whether  among 
old  or  young,  rich  or  poor,  is  one  of  the  most  unmistakable 
symptoms  of  an  ungodly  condition. 

Luther  says  :  "  The  world  is  a  den  of  murderers,  subject  to 
the  devil.  If  we  desire  to  live  on  earth,  we  must  be  content  to 
be  guests  in  it,  and  to  lie  in  an  inn  where  the  host  is  a  rascal, 
whose  house  has  over  the  door  this  sign  or  shield,  '  For  murder 
and  lies.'  For  this  sign  and  escutcheon  Christ  Himself  hung 
over  the  door  of  his  house,  when  He  said,  He  is  a  murderer  and 
a  liar." 

45. — [And  because  I  tell,  etc.~\  Our  Lord  in  this  verse  puts  in 
strong  coutrast  His  own  teaching  and  the  lying  suggestions  of 
the  devil,  and  the  readiness  of  the  wicked  Jews  to  disbelieve 
Him  and  believe  the  devil. — "The  reason  why  you  do  not  be- 
lieve Me  is,  your  thorough  dislike  to  the  truth  of  God.  You  are 
genuine  children  of  your  father  the  devil.  If  I  told  you  things 
that  are  false,  ye  would  believe  Me.  But  because  I  tell  you 
things  that  are  true,  you  believe  me  not." 

We  see  here  how  little  cause  faithful  ministers  of  Christ  have 
to  feel  surprise  at  the  unbelief  of  many  of  their  hearers.  If 
they  preach  the  truth,  they  must  make  up  their  minds  not  to 


john,  chap.  vm.  121 

be  believed  by  many.  It  is  only  what  happened  to  their  Mas- 
ter. "  If  they  have  kept  My  saying,  they  will  keep  yours  also." 
(John  xv.  20.) 

46.— [Which  of  you  convinceth  me?  etc.']  Our  Lord  in  this  verse 
asks  two  questions,  to  which  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  give 
an  answer :  "  Which  of  you  can  reprove  or  convince  Me  as  an 
offender  concerning  sin  of  any  kind?  You  know  that  you  can- 
not lay  any  offence  to  My  charge.  Yet  if  I  am  free  from  any 
charge,  and  at  the  same  time  speak  to  you  nothing  but  what  is 
right  and  true,  what  is  the  reason  that  ye  do  not  believe  Me  ?  " 

Let  us  note  here  the  perfect  spotlessness  and  innocence  of 
our  Lord's  character.  None  but  He  could  ever  say,  "I  have  no 
sin.  I  challenge  any  one  to  find  out  any  imperfection  or  fault 
in  Me."  Such  a  complete  and  perfect  Sacrifice  and  Mediator  is 
just  what  sinful  man  needs. 

47.— [He  that  is  of  God,  etc.~\  Our  Lord  in  this  verse  supplies 
an  answer  to  His  own  questions,  and  conclusively  proves  the 
wickedness  and  ungodliness  of  His  hearers. — "He  that  is  a  true 
child  of  God  hears  with  pleasure,  believes,  and  obeys  God's 
words,  such  as  I  bring  to  you  from  My  Father.  You,  by  not 
hearing,  believing,  and  obeying  them,  prove  plainly  that  you 
are  not  God's  children.  If  you  were,  you  would  hear  gladly, 
believe,  and  obey.  Your  not  hearing  proves  conclusively  that 
you  are  what  I  said,  children,  not  of  God,  but  of  the  devil." 

Let  us  note  here  that  the  disposition  to  hear  and  listen  to 
truth  is  always  a  good  sign,  though  not  an  infallible  one,  about 
a  person's  soul.  It  is  said,  in  another  place,  "My  sheep  hear 
my  voice."  (John  x.  26,  27.)  When  we  see  people  obstinately 
refusing  to  listen  to  counsel,  and  to  attend  to  the  Gospel,  we 
are  justified  in  regarding  them  as  not  God's  children,  not  born 
again,  without  grace,  and  needing  yet  to  be  converted. 

Let  us  note  here,  as  elsewhere,  how  carefully  our  Lord  speaks 
of  His  teaching  as  "  God's  words."  It  consisted  of  words  and 
truths  which  God  the  Father  had  commissioned  Him  to  preach 
and  proclaim  to  man.  It  was  not  "  His  own  words  "  only,  but 
His  Father's  as  well  as  His  own. 

Bollock  observes,  that  there  is  no  surer  mark  of  an  unsancti- 
fied  nature  than  dislike  to  God's  Word. 

Musculus,  Bucer,  and  others  maintain  here  that  the  phrase, 
"  He  that  is  of  God,  heareth  God's  Words,"  must  be  confined  to 
God's  election;  and  means,  "  He  that  was  chosen  of  God  from 
all  eternity."  I  cannot,  however,  see  reason  for  confining  the 
sense  so  closely.  I  prefer  to  consider  "  of  God  "  as  including, 
not  only  election,  but  calling,  regeneration,  adoption,  conver- 
sion, and  sanctification.  This  is  Rollock's  view. 
6 


122 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


JOHN  VIII.  4S— 59. 


48  Then  answered  the  Jews,  and 
said  unto  him,  Say  we  not  well  that 
thou  art  a  Samaritan  and  hast  a 
devil  ? 

49  Jesus  answered,  I  have  not  a 
devil ;  but  I  honour  my  father,  and  ye 
do  dishonour  me. 

50  And  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory: 
there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judgeth. 

51  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall 
never  see  death. 

52  Then  said  the  Jews  unto  him, 
Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  devil. 
Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets; 
and  thou  sayest,  If  a  man  keep  my 
saying,  he  shall  never  taste  of  death. 

53  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father 
Abraham,  which  is  dead  ?  and  the 
prophets  are  dead:  whom  makest  thou 
thyself? 

54  Jesus  answered,  If  I  honour  my- 


self, my  honour  is  nothing:  it  is  my 
Father  that  honoureth  me;  of  whom  ye 
say,  that  he  is  your  God: 

55  Yet  ye  have  not  known  him; 
but  I  know  him:  and  if  I  should  say, 
I  know  him  not,  I  shall  be  a  liar  like 
unto  you :  but  I  know  him,  and  keep 
his  saying. 

56  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced 
to  see  my  day:  and  he  saw  it,  and  was 
glad. 

57  Then  said  the  Jews  unto  him, 
Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and 
hast  thou  seen  Abraham  ? 

58  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  before  Abra- 
ham was,  I  am. 

59  Then  took  they  up  stones  to 
cast  at  him:  but  Jesus  hid  himself, 
and  went  out  of  the  temple,  going 
through  the  midst  of  them,  and  so 
passed  by. 


We  should  observe,  first,  in  this  passage,  what  blasphemous 
and  slanderous  language  was  addressed  to  our  Lord  by  His 
enemies.  We  read  that  the  Jews  "  said  unto  Him,  Say 
we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  a  devil  ?  " 
Silenced  in  argument,  these  wicked  men  resorted  to  per- 
sonal abuse.  To  lose  temper,  and  call  names,  is  a  common 
sign  of  a  defeated  cause. 

Nicknames,  insulting  epithets,  and  violent  language,  are 
favourite  weapons  with  the  devil.  When  other  means  of 
carrying  on  his  warfare  fail,  he  stirs  up  his  servants  to 
smite  with  the  tongue.  Grievous  indeed  are  the  sufferings 
which  the  saints  of  God  have  had  to  endure  from  the 
tongue  in  every  age.  Their  characters  have  been  slan- 
dered. Evil  reports  have  been  circulated  about  them. 
Lying  stories  have  been  diligently  invented,  and  greedily 
swallowed,  about  their  conduct.  No  wonder  that  David 
said,  "Deliver  nry  soul,  O  Lord,  from  lying  lips,  and  from 
a  deceitful  tongue."     (Psalm  cxx.  2.) 


JOHN,   CHAP.   Tin.  123 

The  true  Christian  in  the  present  day  must  never  be 
surprised  to  find  that  he  has  constant  trials  to  endure  from 
this  quarter.  Human  nature  never  changes.  So  long  as 
he  serves  the  world,  and  walks  in  the  broad  way,  little 
perhaps  will  be  said  against  him.  Once  let  him  take  up 
the  cross  and  follow  Christ,  and  there  is  no  lie  too  mon- 
strous, and  no  story  too  absurd,  for  some  to  tell  against 
him,  and  for  others  to  believe.  But  let  him  take  comfort 
in  the  thought  that  he  is  only  drinking  the  cup  which  his 
blessed  Master  drank  before  him.  The  lies  of  his  enemies  do 
him  no  injury  in  heaven,  whatever  they  may  on  earth.  Let 
him  bear  them  patiently,  and  not  fret,  or  lose  his  temper. 
When  Christ  was  reviled,  "  He  reviled  not  again."  (1 
Peter  ii.  23.)     Let  the  Christian  do  likewise. 

We  should  observe,  secondly,  what  glorious  encourage" 
ment  our  Lord  holds  out  to  His  believing  people.  We  read 
that  He  said,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  if  a  man 
keep  My  saying,  he  shall  never  see  death." 

Of  course  these  words  do  not  mean  that  true  Christians 
shall  never  die.  On  the  contrary,  we  all  know  that  they 
must  go  down  to  the  grave,  and  cross  the  river  just  like 
others.  But  the  words  do  mean,  that  they  shall  not  be 
hurt  by  the  second  death, — that  final  ruin  of  the  whole 
man  in  hell,  of  which  the  first  death  is  only  a  faint  type  or 
figure.  (Rev.  xxi.  8.)  And  they  do  mean  that  the  sting 
of  the  first  death  shall  be  removed  from  the  true  Christian. 
His  flesh  may  fail,  and  his  bones  maybe  racked  with  strong 
pain ;  but  the  bitter  sense  of  unpardoned  sins  shall  not 
crush  him  down.  This  is  the  worst  part  of  death, — and  in 
this  he  shall  have  the  "  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."     (1  Cor.  xv.  57.) 

This  blessed  promise,  we  must  not  forget  to  notice,  is 
the  peculiar  property  of  the  man  who  "  keeps  Christ's 
sa}Tings."  That  expression,  it  is  clear,  can  never  be  appli- 
cable to  the  mere  outward  professing  Christian,  who  neither 

- 


124  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

knows  nor  cares  anything  about  the  Gospel.  It  belongs  to 
him  who  receives  into  his  heart,  and  obej^s  in  his  life,  the 
message  which  the  Lord  Jesus  brought  from  heaven.  It 
belongs,  in  short,  to  those  who  are  Christians,  not  in  name 
and  form  only,  biit  in  deed  and  in  truth.  It  is  written, — 
"  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second 
death."     (Rev.  ii.  11.) 

We  should  observe,  thirdly,  in  this  passage,  what  clear 
knowledge  of  Christ  Abraham  possessed.  We  read  that  our 
Lord  said  to  the  Jews,  "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to 
see  My  day :  and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad." 

When  our  Lord  used  these  remarkable  words,  Abraham 
had  been  dead  and  buried  at  least  1850  years !  And  yet 
he  is  said  to  have  seen  our  Lord's  day  !  How  wonderful 
that  sounds  !  Yet  it  was  quite  true.  Not  only  did  Abra- 
ham "  see  "  our  Lord  and  talk  to  Him  when  He  "  appeared 
unto  him  in  the  plains  of  Mamre,"  the  night  before  Sodom 
was  destroyed,  (Gen.  xviii.  1,)  but  by  faith  he  looked 
forward  to  the  day  of  our  Lord's  incarnation  yet  to  come, 
and  as  he  looked  he  "  was  glad."  That  he  saw  many 
things,  through  a  glass  darkly,  we  need  not  doubt.  That 
he  could  have  explained  fully  the  whole  manner  and  cir- 
cumstances of  our  Lord's  sacrifice  on  Calvary,  we  are 
not  obliged  to  suppose.  But  we  need  not  shrink  from 
believing  that  he  saw  in  the  far  distance  a  Redeemer,  whose 
advent  would  finally  make  all  the  earth  rejoice.  And  as 
he  saw  it,  he  "  was  glad." 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  we  are  too  apt  to  forget  that 
there  never  was  but  one  way  of  salvation,  one  Saviour,  and 
one  hope  for  sinners,  and  that  Abraham  and  all  the  Old 
Testaments  saints  looked  to  the  same  Christ  that  we  look 
to  ourselves.  We  shall  do  well  to  call  to  mind  the  Seventh 
Article  of  the  Church  of  England  :  "  The  Old  Testament 
is  not  contrary  to  the  New :  for  both  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  everlasting  life  is  offered  through  Christ,  who  is 


125 


the  only  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  being  both  God 
and  man.  Wherefore  they  are  not  to  be  heard,  which  feign 
that  the  old  Fathers  did  look  only  for  transitory  promises." 
This  is  truth  that  we  must  never  forget  in  reading  the  Old 
Testament.  This  is  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  con- 
demned. 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  this  prophecy,  Jiow  distinct- 
ly our  Lord  declares  His  own  pre-existence.  We  read 
that   He   said  to  the  Jews,  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am." 

Without  a  controversjr,  these  remarkable  words  are  a 
great  deep.  They  contain  things  which  we  have  no  eyes 
to  see  through,  or  mind  to  fathom.  But  if  language  means 
anything,  they  teach  us  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
existed  long  before  He  came  into  the  world.  Before  the 
days  of  Abraham  He  was.  Before  man  was  created  He 
was.  In  short,  they  teach  us  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  no 
mere  man  like  Moses  or  David.  He  was  One  whose  goings 
forth  were  from  everlasting, — the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  forever, — very  and  eternal  God. 

Deep  as  these  words  are,  they  are  full  of  practical  com- 
fort. They  show  us  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth, 
and  height  of  that  great  foundation,  on  which  sinners  are 
invited  to  rest  their  souls.  He  to  whom  the  Gospel  bids 
us  come  with  our  sins,  and  believe  for  pardon  and  peace, 
is  no  mere  man.  He  is  nothing  less  than  very  God,  and 
therefore  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost"  all  who  come  to 
Him.  Then  let  us  begin  coming  to  Him  with  confidence. 
Let  us  continue  leaning  on  Him  without  fear.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  God,  and  our  eternal  life  is  secure. 

Notes.    John  VIII.  48—59. 

48. — \Then  answered  the  Jeivs...  Samaritan. ..devil.']  This  verse 
seems  to  contain  nothing  but  personal  abuse  and  blasphemous 
slander.  Unable  to  answer  our  Lord's  arguments,  the  unbeliev- 
ing Jews  lost  their  temper,  and  resorted  to  the  last  weapon  of 
a  disputant, — senseless  invective  and  calling  of  names.    The 


126  EXIOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


extent  to  which  calling  names  is  carried  by  Oriental  people,  even 
in  the  present  day,  is  something  far  greater  than  in  this  coun- 
try we  can  imagine. 

"When  the  Jews  called  our  Lord  "  a  Samaritan,"  they  meant 
much  the  same  as  saying  that  He  was  no  true  Jew,  and  little 
better  than  a  heathen.  "The  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the 
Samaritans."  (John  iv.  9.)  When  they  said,  "Thou  hast  a 
devil,"  I  think  it  meant  rather  more  than  "thou  art  mad,"  as  in 
John  vii.  20,  if  we  observe  the  following  verse.  It  probably 
implied,  "  Thou  actest  and  speakest  under  the  influence  of  the 
devil.     The  power  Thou  hast  is  from  Satan,  and  not  from  God." 

Let  us  learn  here  how  little  cause  Christians  have  to  be  sur- 
prised, if  hard  names  and  insulting  epithets  are  applied  to  them. 
It  is  only  what  was  done  to  their  Master,  and  is  no  ground  for 
discouragement  in  doing  God's  work. 

49. — [Jesus  answered,  I  have  not  a  devil,  etc."]  Our  Lord's  answer 
to  the  coarse  invective  of  His  enemies  amounts  to  this :  "  In 
saying  that  I  have  a  devil  you  say  that  which  is  not  true.  I  am 
simply  honouring  My  Father  in  heaven  by  delivering  His  mes- 
sage to  man,  and  you  by  your  violent  language  are  dishonouring 
Me,  and  in  effect  dishonouring  and  insulting  my  Father.  Your 
insults  do  not  strike  Me  only,  but  my  Father  also." 

Let  us  note  our  Lord's  calmness  and  equanimity  under  insult. 
A  solemn  denial  of  the  blasphemous  charge  laid  against  Him, 
and  an  equally  solemn  reminder  that  He  was  honouring  the  God 
whom  they  themselves  professed  to  worship,  are  the  only  reply 
He  condescends  to  make. 
£0. — [And  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory.']  This  sentence  seems  to 
arise  out  of  the  last  verse.—"  Ye  dishonour  Me;  but  you  do  not 
move  or  hurt  Me,  for  I  did  not  come  to  seek  my  own  glory,  but 
the  glory  of  Him  that  sent  Me.  I  receive  not  honour  from  men." 
(See  John  vii.  18  and  v.  41.)  Here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord 
points  to  the  great  principle,  "  that  a  true  messenger  from 
heaven  will  never  seek  his  own  glory,  but  his  Master's." 

[  There  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judgeth.]  There  is  a  very  solemn 
warning  in  these  words.  They  mean,  "There  is  One,  however, 
even  my  Father  in  heaven,  who  does  seek  and  desire  my  glory; 
and  not  only  seeks,  but  judges  the  conduct  of  all  who  dishonour 
Me,  with  deep  displeasure,  and  will  punish  it  at  the  last  day." 

There  is  comfort  here  for  all  Christ's  members  as  wrell  as  for 
their  Head.  Though  they  may  not  think  of  it,  there  is  One  in 
heaven  who  cares  deeply  for  them,  sees  all  they  go  through,  and 
will  one  day  plead  their  cause.  The  latent  thought  seems  the 
same  as  in  Eccles.  v.  8 — "He  that  is  higher  than  the  highest 
regardeth."  A  believer  may  cheer  himself  with  the  thought, 
"  There  is  One  that  judgeth.  There  is  One  that  sees  all,  that 
cares  for  me,  and  will  set  all  right  at  the  last  day." 


127 


Euthymius  remarks  on  this  verse  that  we  should  not  heed 
things  said  against  ourselves,  but  should  vindicate  the  honour 
of  God  if  things  are  said  against  God. 

61. — [Verily.. .if  a  man  keep  my  saying... never  see  death.]  The 
mighty  promise  contained  in  this  verse  seems  intended  to  wind 
up  the  whole  conversation.  All  that  our  Lord  had  said  had  pro- 
duced no  effect.  He  therefore  closes  His  teaching  for  the  pres- 
ent by  one  of  those  mighty  sayings  which  tower  above  every- 
thing near  them,  and  of  which  St.  John's  Gospel  coutains  so 
many. — "  Whether  you  will  hear  or  not,  whether  you  choose  to 
know  Me  or  not,  I  solemnly  tell  you  that  if  any  man  receives, 
believes,  and  keeps  My  doctrine,  he  shall  never  see  death. 
Despised  and  rejected  as  I  am  by  you,  life  or  death,  heaven  or 
hell,  blessing  or  cursing,  depend  and  hinge  on  accepting  the 
message  I  proclaim  to  you.  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life." — It  is  like  Moses  taking  leave  of  Israel  and  saying,  "  I  call 
heaven  and  earth  to  record  against  you,  that  I  have  set  before 
you  life  and  death."  (Deut.  xxx.  15,  19.)  Just  so  our  Lord 
seems  to  say,  "  I  tell  you  once  more,  for  the  last  time,  that  to 
keep  My  saying  is  the  way  to  escape  death." 

The  expression  is  parallel  to  the  one  our  Lord  uses  in  the 
synagogue  of  Capernaum.  There  He  says,  "  He  that  believeth 
in  Me,  hath  everlasting  life."  Here  it  is  "  shall  never  see 
death."    (John  vi.  47.) 

We  should  notice  here,  as  elsewhere,  that  when  our  Lord  uses 
the  expression,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,"  which  is 
familiar  to  all  careful  readers  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  He  is  always 
about  to  say  something  of  peculiar  gravity  and  solemnity.  See 
John  i.  51;  iii.  3,  5,  11;  v.  19,  24,  25;  vi.  26,  32,  47,  53;  viii.  34, 
61,  58;  x.  1,  7;  xii.  24;  xiii.  16,  20,  21,  38;  xiv.  12;  xvi.  20,  23; 
xxi.  18. 

The  expression  "  keep  my  saying,"  means  "  receive  into  his 
heart,  believe,  embrace,  obey,  and  hold  fast  the  doctrine  or 
message  which  I  am  commissioned  to  teach." — The  phrase  "  my 
saying,"  means  much  more  than  the  "  words  I  am  speaking  at 
this  moment."    It  is  rather  the  whole  doctrine  of  My  Gospel. 

The  expression  "  never  see  death  "  cannot  be  taken  literally. 
Our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  His  disciples  would  not  die  and  be 
buried  like  other  children  of  Adam.  We  know  that  they  did 
die.  The  meaning  is  probably  threefold:  (1)  "He  shall  be 
completely  delivered  from  that  spiritual  death  Of  condemnation 
under  which  all  mankind  are  born ;  his  soul  is  alive  and  can 
die  no  more :  (2)  He  shall  be  delivered  from  the  sting  of 
bodily  death;  his  flesh  and  bones  may  sink  under  disease  and 
be  laid  in  the  grave,  but  the  worst  part  of  death  shall  not  be 
able  to  touch  him,  and  the  grave  itself  shaL  give  him  up  one 
day :  (3)  He  shall  be  delivered  entirely  from  the  second  death, 
even  eternal  punishment  in  hell;  over  him  the  second  death 
ehall  have  no  power." 


128  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


The  width  and  greatness  of  this  promise  are  very  remarkable. 
Ever  since  the  day  of  Adam's  fall  death  has  been  man's  peculiar 
enemy.  Man  has  found  the  truth  of  the  sentence,  "  In  the  day 
thou  eatest  thou  shalt  surely  die."  (Gen.  ii.  27.)  But  our 
Lord  boldly  and  opeuly  proclaims  that  in  keeping  His  saying 
there  is  complete  deliverance  from  death.  In  fact,  He  pro- 
claims Himself  the  One  greater  than  death.  None  could  say 
this  but  a  Redeemer  who  was  very  God. 

Augustine  says :  "  The  death  from  which  our  Lord  came  to 
deliver  us  was  the  second  death,  eternal  death,  the  death  of 
hell,  the  death  of  damnation  with  the  devil  and  his  angels. 
That  is  indeed  death;  for  this  death  of  ours  is  only  a  migration. 
What  is  it  but  a  putting  off  a  heavy  load,  provided  there  be  not 
another  load  carried,  by  which  the  man  shall  be  cast  headlong 
into  hell.  This  is  the  death  of  which  the  Lord  says,  *  He  shall 
not  see  death.' " 

Let  us  note  the  breadth  and  fulness  of  this  promise.  It  is  for 
any  one  who  keeps  Christ's  sayings.  "  If  a  man,"  or  rather  it 
should  be  rendered,  "  If  any  man,"  etc. 

Let  us  beware  of  putting  a  meaning  on  this  promise  which  it 
was  not  intended  to  convey.  The  idea  of  some  that  it  means 
"  believers  shall  be  so  completely  delivered  from  death  that 
they  shall  neither  feel  bodily  pain  nor  mental  conflict,"  is  one 
that  cannot  be  supported.  It  is  not  borne  out  by  other  pas- 
sages of  Scripture,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  contradicted  by 
experience.  The  Gospel  delivers  believers  from  that  "  fear  of 
death  "  which  unbelievers  feel,  no  doubt.  (Heb.  ii.  15.)  But 
we  have  no  right  to  expect  believers  to  have  no  bodily  conflict, 
no  convulsion,  no  struggle,  and  no  suffering.  Flesh  and  blood 
must  and  will  feel.  "  I  groan,"  said  holy  Baxter  on  his  death- 
bed, "but  I  do  not  grumble."  Death  is  a  serious  thing,  even 
though  the  sting  is  taken  away. 

Parkhurst  thinks  the  expression  here  is  like  Luke  ii.  26, 
where  it  was  said  of  Simeon  that  he  should  not  "  see  death." 
But  the  Greek  for  "see"  is  there  a  different  word,  and  the 
phrase  there  seems  to  mean  nothing  more  than  "  die,"  which 
does  not  come  up  to  the  full  promise  here.  He  also  quotes 
Psalms  xlix.  9;  lxxxix.  49.  But  neither  of  these  places  seem 
parallel. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "see"  is  so  peculiar  that  one 
might  almost  think  the  phrase  meant,  "  he  shall  not  gaze  upon 
and  behold  death  forever  to  all  eternity,  as  the  wicked  shall." 
But  I  prefer  the  threefold  sense  already  given. 

52.— [The?i  said  the  Jews,  etc.]  The  argument  of  the  Jews  in  this 
verse  seems  to  be  as  follows :  "  We  know  now  by  Thy  own 
words  that  Thou  art  mad  and  hast  a  devil.  Our  great  father 
Abraham  and  the  prophets,  holy  and  good  as  they  all  were,  are 
all  dead,  and  yet  Thou  presumest  to  say  that  if  a  man  keep  Thy 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  129 

saying  he  will  never  die.  In  short,  Thou  makest  Thyself 
greater  than  Abraham,  for  Abraham  could  not  escape  death, 
while  keeping  Thy  saying  enables  a  man  to  escape  death.  To 
talk  in  this  way  is  a  plain" proof  that  thou  art  mad." 

The  phrase  "  to  have  a  devil,"  in  this  place  can  hardly  mean 
anything  but  "to  be  mad  or  crazy." 

The  Jews,  it  will  be  observed,  do  not  quote  our  Lord's 
words  correctly.  He  had  said,  "  shall  never  see  death."  They 
report  Him  as  saying,  "  shall  never  taste  of  death.*'  Whether 
this  was  a  wilful  perversion  of  His  words  is  rather  difficult  to 
decide.  Some  think  that  the  Jews  intentionally  exaggerated 
the  promise,  and  put  "taste"  for  "  see,"  in  order  to  magnify 
the  offence  our  Lord  had  committed.  Others  think  that  the 
difference  means  nothing,  and  that  it  only  shows  how  thoroughly 
the  Jews  misunderstood  our  Lord,  and  thought  that  He  referred 
to  nothing  but  bodily  death. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  we  may  remark  how  ready  the  Jews  were 
to  pervert  and  warp  our  Lord's  meaning,  and  to  put  a  carnal 
and  gross  sense  on  spiritual  language. 

53.—  [Art  thou  greater,  etc.?~\  The  question  in  this  verse  shows 
that  our  Lord  had  again  succeeded  in  arousing  the  curiosity  of 
the  Jews,  and  stirring  them  to  inquire  about  His  nature  and 
person. — "Who  art  Thou  that  talkest  in  this  way?  Whom 
dost  Thou  make  Thyself?  To  say  that  those  who  keep  Thy 
saying  shall  never  die  is  to  make  Thyself  superior  to  Abraham 
and  the  prophets,  who  are  all  dead.  Who  and  what  art  Thou? 
Art  thou  really  some  one  greater  than  Abraham?  " 

Chrysostom  observes  that  the  question  of  the  Jews  reminds 
us  of  the  Samaritan  woman's  question:  "Art  thou  greater 
than  our  father  Jacob?  "     (John  iv.  12.) 

64.— [If  I  honour  my  self... nothing,  etc.']  Our  Lord's  meaning  in 
this  verse  seems  to  be  as  follows :  "  If  at  auy  time  I  take  to 
myself  and  claim  honour,  such  honour  would  be  worthless.  He 
who  puts  honour  on  Me,  and  commissions  Me  to  say  that  keep- 
ing My  saying  shall  deliver  a  man  from  death,  is  My  Father  in 
heaven, — that  very  Being  whom  you  profess  to  call  your  God. 
It  is  your  own  God,  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who 
has  put  such  honour  on  Me,  that  life  or  death  turn  on  keeping 
My  sayings,  and  believing  on  Me." 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  we  should  mark  the  carefulness  with 
which  our  Lord  disclaims  all  self-exaltation,  and  desire  for 
glory  and  honour  from  man.  If,  in  claiming  for  Himself  to  hold 
the  keys  of  life  and  death,  He  seemed  to  claim  honour,  He  care- 
fully reminds  the  Jews  that  it  is  an  honour  put  on  Him  by  the 
Father  in  heaven,  even  by  their  own  God.  He  desired  no 
honour  independent  of  Him,  or  in  rivalry  to  Him. 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  My  Father  honoureth  Me,"  the  ex- 


130  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS, 


presslon  must  include  all  the  works,  and  signs,  and  miracles, 
which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  do ;  as  well  as  the  words  which 
He  gave  Him  to  speak.     (John  v.  26;  xiv.  10,  11.) 

55. — [Yet  ye  have  not  known  him,  etc.~  The  meaning  of  this  verse 
seems  to  be  as  follows :  "  Although  you  say  of  My  Father  in 
heaven  that  He  is  your  God,  you  do  not  really  know  Him,  and 
are  plainly  ignorant  of  His  character,  His  will,  and  His  pur- 
poses. Professing  to  know  Him,  in  works  you  deny  Him.  But 
I,  on  the  contrary,  know  Him  perfectly :  for  I  am  indeed  one 
with  Him  from  all  eternity,  and  cariTe  forth  from  Him.  So  per- 
fectly do  I  know  Him,  that  I  should  be  a  liar,  and  a  child  of  the 
devil,  like  yourselves,  if  I  said  I  did  not  know  Him.  Bm  I  re- 
peat that  I  know  Him  perfectly,  and  in  all  My  words  anc  works 
here  on  earth  I  carefully  keep  His  sayings,  and  observe  the 
commission  he  gave  me." 

There  is  undeniably  a  great  peculiarity  in  the  language  of 
this  verse.  But-  it  is  probably  a  Hebrew  mode  of  putting  in 
strong  contrast  the  Jews'  thorough  ignorance  of  God,  notwith- 
standing their  high  profession  of  being  His  chosen  people, — 
and  our  Lord's  perfect  knowledge  of  God,  notwithstanding  the 
repeated  assertions  that  He  had  a  devil,  was  a  Samaritan,  and 
was  consequently  an  enemy  to  the  God  of  Israel. — The  phrase, 
"  I  should  be  a  liar,  like  yourselves,  if  I  said  I  did  not  know  the 
Father,"  was  just  the  phrase  to  convey  the  strongest  idea  to 
the  Jews'  minds  of  our  Lord's  knowledge. — In  arguing  with 
some  men,  nothing  but  the  strongest  language,  and  the  most 
paradoxical  expressions,  have  any  effect.— Even  God  himself 
thinks  it  good  to  make  such  an  asseveration  as  "I  swear  by 
myself,"  and  "  as  I  live,"  in  order  to  command  attention.  (Jer. 
xxii.  5;  Heb.  vi.  13;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.)  Those  who  blame 
ministers  and  preachers  for  using  strong  language,  and  say  that 
they  should  never  use  any  but  gentle,  tame,  and  mild  phrases, 
can  hardly  have  studied  human  nature  or  the  style  of  Scripture 
with  thorough  attention. 

56.—  [Your  father  Abraham,  etc.']  Our  Lord,  in  this  verse,  takes 
up  the  question  of  the  Jews,  as  to  His  being  greater  than  Abra- 
ham, and  boldly  gives  an  answer.  "  You  ask  Me  whether  I  am 
greater  than  Abraham.  I  tell  you  in  reply  that  I  am  He  whose 
coming  and  whose  day  of  glory  Abraham  rejoiced  to  think  he 
should  see.  Moreover  by  faith  he  even  saw  it,  and  when  he 
saw  it  he  was  glad." 

The  precise  meaning  of  the  words  of  this  verse  is  rather  dif- 
ficult to  discover,  though  the  general  idea  of  it  is  plain  and  un- 
mistakable. It  is  clear  that  our  Lord  implies  that  He  is  the 
promised  Messiah,  the  Seed  of  Abraham,  in  whom  all  the 
generations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed, — and  of  whom  when 
Abraham  first  heard,  "  he  laughed  "  for  joy.     (Gen.  xvii.  17.) 

(a)  Some  think,  as  most  of  the  Fathers  and  Reformers, 
that  it  means,  "  Abraham  rejoiced  in  the  prospect  of  seeing,  at 


JOHN,    CHAP.    VIII.  131 


some  future  time,  My  day,  the  clay  of  Messiah ;  and  by  faith  he 
did  see  it  afar  off." 

(b)  Some  think,  as  Maldonatus,  Lampe,  Stier,  and  Bloom- 
field,  that  it  means,  "  Abraham  rejoiced  when  he  was  told  that 
he  should  see  My  clay ;  and  he  actually  has  seen  it  in  Paradise, 
and  has  been  gladdened  there  in  the  separate  state  by  the 
sight." 

(c)  Some  think,  as  Brown,  Olshausen,  Alford,  Webster,  and 
Hengstenberg,  that  it  means,  "  Abraham's  great  desire  and  joyful 
expectation  was  to  see  My  clay,  and  he  actually  saw  Me  when  I 
appeared  to  him  and  talked  with  him  on  earth." 

Of  these  three  views  the  first  appears  to  me  the  most  proba- 
ble, and  most  in  keeping  with  the  history  of  Abraham,  in 
Genesis.  It  should  be  carefully  observed  that  our  Lord  does 
not  say  that  "Abraham  saw  Me,"  but  that  "he  saw  My  day." 
The  cause  of  Abraham's  joy  seems  to  have  been,  that  there  was 
to  be  of  his  seed  a  Messiah,  a  Saviour;  and  that  he  should  see 
His  clay, — the  day  of  the  Lord,  the  triumphant  day  of  Messiah's 
complete  victory  and  restitution  of  all  things.  This  day  he 
even  saw  by  faith  afar  off,  and  was  glad  at  the  sight.— Our 
Lord's  object  does  not  seem  to  be  to  tell  the  Jews  that  Abraham 
had  seen  Him,  but  that  He  was  "  the  Seed,"  the  Messiah,  who 
was  promised  to  their  father  Abraham.  The  Jews  had  asked 
whether  he  was  greater  than  Abraham?  "Yes,"  he  replies, 
"  I  am.  I  am  that  very  Messiah  whose  day  Abraham  rejoiced 
to  hear  of,  and  saw  afar  off  by  faith.  If  you  were  like  Abraham 
you  would  rejoice  to  see  Me." 

Chrysostom  and  Euthymius  think  that  "  My  day,"  in  this 
verse,  means  "the  day  of  the  crucifixion,  which  Abraham  fore- 
showed typically  by  offering  the  ram  in  Isaac's  place."  This 
however  seems  a  very  cramped  and  limited  view. 

Rupertus  thinks  that  Abraham  "  saw  the  day  of  Christ "  when 
he  entertained  the  three  angels  who  came  to  him. 

Augustine  thinks  it  may  refer  to  both  the  advents  of  Christ : 
first  in  humiliation,  and  second  in  glory. 

67. — [Then  said  the  Jews,  etc.']  It  is  plain  that  the  Jews  here  put 
a  wrong  meaning  on  our  Lord's  words,  and  suppose  Him  to  say 
that  Abraham  had  seen  Him,  and  He  had  seen  Abraham.  Yet 
our  Lord  had  only  said,  "  Abraham  saw  My  day."  It  is  another 
instance  of  their  readiness  to  pervert  His  words. 

When  the  Jews  said,  "  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,"  I 
believe  they  only  meant,  "  Thou  art  not  yet  a  middle-aged  man." 
Fifty  years  old  was  the  turning  point  in  life,  at  which  the 
Levites  and  priests  were  excused  from  further  active  service  in 
the  tabernacle.  (Numbers  iv.  3.)  I  fancy  the  reference  is  to 
this.— Our  Lord  was  at  this  time  about  thirty- three  years  old,  or 
at  most  thirty -four.    The  notion  of  Irenaeus  and  Papias  that  He 


132  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

really  was  fifty  before  He  was  crucified,  is  utterly  without  war- 
rant, and  absurd. 

Some  think  that  our  Lord's  countenance  was  so  marred  and 
aged  by  sorrow  and  care,  that  He  looked  much  older  than  lie 
really  was,  and  that  hence  the  Jews  supposed  Him  to  be  nearly 
fifty.    But  I  prefer  the  former  view. 

Euthymius  thinks  that  the  Jews  thought  our  Lord  was  fifty 
years  old,  on  account  of  His  great  wisdom  and  experience.  This, 
however,  seems  a  weak  and  untenable  view. 

68.— [Jesus  said. ..before  Abraham  was,  lam.'}  This  famous  verse, 
I  believe,  can  only  receive  one  honest  interpretation.  It  is  a 
distinct  assertion  of  our  Lord's  eternity, — His  existence  before 
all  creation.  '•  I  solemnly  declare  unto  you  that  before  Abraham 
was  and  existed  I  was,  the  great  I  AM,  the  same  yesterday, 
to-clay,  and  forever, — the  eternal  God."  All  attempts  to  evade 
this  explanation  appear  to  me  so  preposterous  that  it  is  waste 
of  time  to  notico  them.  The  man  who  can  think  the  words  only 
mean,  "  I  am  He  who  was  promised  to  Adam  before  Abraham 
was  born,"  seems  past  the  reach  of  reasoning. — The  name  "  I 
AM,"  we  must  remember,  is  the  very  name  by  which  God 
revealed  Himself  to  the  Jews,  when  He  sent  Moses  to  them : 
"  Say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me."  (Exod. 
iii.  14.) 

Let  us  carefully  note  what  a  strong  proof  we  have  here  of  the 
pre-existence  and  divinity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  applies 
to  Himself  the  very  name  by  which  God  made  Himself  known 
when  He  undertook  to  redeem  Israel.  It  was  "  I  AM  "  who 
brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  It  was  "I  AM"  who 
died  for  us  upon  the  cross.  The  amazing  strength  of  the  foun- 
dation of  a  sinner's  hope  appears  here.  Believing  on  Jesus  we 
rest  on  divinity,  on  One  who  is  God  as  well  as  man. 

There  is  a  difference  in  the  Greek  verbs  here  employed,  which 
we  should  carefully  notice.  The  Greek  for  "was"  is  quite  dif- 
ferent from  the  Greek  for  "  am."  It  is  as  if  our  Lord  said, 
"  before  Abraham  was  bom,  I  have  an  existence  individual  and 
eternal." 

Chrysostom  observes:  "He  said  not  before  Abraham  was,  I 
was,  but,  I  AM.  As  the  Father  useth  this  expression  I  AM,  so 
also  doth  Christ,  for  it  signifieth  continuous  being,  irrespective 
of  all  time.  On  which  account  the  expression  seemed  to  the 
Jews  blasphemous." 

Augustine  says:  "In  these  words  acknowledge  the  Creator 
and  discern  the  creature.  He  that  spake  was  made  the  Seed  of 
Abraham ;  and  that  Abraham  might  be,  He  was  before  Abra- 
ham." 

Gregory  remarks  :  "  Divinity  has  no  past  or  future,  but  always 
the  present ;  and  therefore  Jesus  does  not  say  before  Abraham 
was  I  was,  but  I  am." 


133 


59.— [Then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  him.~\  It  is  clear  that  the 
Jews  at  any  rate  had  no  doubt  what  our  Lord  meant  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  whatever  modern  Socinians  may  think.  They  saw 
and  knew  at  once  that  He  who  spake  to  them  boldly  claimed  to 
be  Jehovah,  and  One  far  greater  than  Abraham,  being  very  God. 
This  they  did  not  believe,  and  therefore  regarded  Him  as  a  blas- 
phemer who  ought  at  once  to  be  stoned.  In  their  rage  and  fury 
they  immediately  took  up  stones,  which  were  probably  lying 
about  on  account  of  repairs  of  the  temple,  in  order  to  stone  Him. 
The  whole  proceeding  appears  to  have  been  a  tumultuous  and 
disorderly  one,  not  regularly  conducted,  but  sudden  and  un- 
authorized, like  the  stoning  of  Stephen  afterwards.  (Acts  vii. 
58.) 

[But  Jesus  hid  himself,  etc.']  I  think  this  withdrawal  can  only 
be  regarded  as  miraculous.  The  Greek  word  rendered  "hid 
Himself"  is  literally  "was  hid."  It  seems  most  improbable 
that  our  Lord  could  "  pass  by  "  and  "  go  through  the  midst "  of 
an  angry  crowd,  whose  eyes  had  for  a  long  time  been  fixed  and 
concentrated  on  Him,  without  being  seen  and  stopped,  unless 
there  was  a  miraculous  interposition.  I  believe  that  the  eyes  of 
His  enemies  were  holden,  and  that  they  did  not  know  Him  for  a 
season,  or  that  by  His  own  almighty  power  He  rendered  Him- 
self temporarily  invisible.  It  is  only  what  He  did  at  Nazareth 
on  a  similar  occasion ;  (Luke  iv.  30 ;)  and  if  we  once  concede 
that  our  Lord  could  work  miracles  at  His  will,  there  seems  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  He  would  not  work  one  on  this  occasion. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord's  enemies  could  do  nothing  to  Him 
until  His  hour  was  come  for  suffering.  When  He  was  at  last 
taken  prisoner,  brought  before  Pilate,  and  crucified,  it  was  not 
because  He  could  not  escape,  but  because  He  would  not.  What 
He  did  here  He  might  have  done  there. 

Let  us  note  that  it  is  not  always  the  path  of  duty  and  of  real 
obedience  to  God's  will  to  sit  still  and  submit  to  sufferings  and 
death.  It  may  be  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  "  flee  to  some 
other  city  "  and  avoid  death.  (Matthew  x.  23.)  To  court  martyr- 
dom and  throw  away  life,  when  it  might  be  saved,  is  not  always 
the  duty  of  a  servant  of  Christ.  Some  of  the  martyrs  of  the 
primitive  Church  appear  to  have  forgotten  this. 

Augustine  says  :  "Jesus  did  not  hide  Himself  in  a  corner  of 
the  temple  as  if  He  were  afraid,  or  take  refuge  in  a  house,  or 
run  behind  a  wall  or  a  pillar;  but  by  His  heavenly  power  He 
made  Himself  invisible  to  His  enemies,  and  went  through  the 
midst  of  them." 

The  argument  of  Maldonatus,  that  this  verse  proves  the  pos- 
sibility of  Christ  being  corporally  present  in  the  Lord's  Supper 
in  the  bread,  is  so  preposterous  that  it  requires  no  refutation. 
There  is  no  positive  proof  that  our  Lord  was  actually  invisible 
here.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  eyes  of  His  enemies  were 
"  holden  that  they  could  not  know  Him."  (Luke  xxiv.  16.)  Jf  He 


134 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


was  invisible,  Maldonatus  proves  too  much.  The  bread  in  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  seen,  and  after  consecration  the  Roman  Cath- 
olic says  its  substance  is  changed.    But  it  is  not  invisible. 

In  leaving  this  remarkable  chapter,  we  should  not  fail  to  no- 
tice the  difficulties  under  which  our  Lord's  public  ministry  was 
carried  on.  Ten  times,  between  the  12th  verse  and  the  59th, 
we  find  His  enemies  interrupting,  contradicting,  or  reviling 
Him.  Our  Master's  calm  diguity  and  perfect  meekness  under 
all  this  "  contradiction  of  sinners  "  ought  to  be  a  never  forgot- 
ten example  to  His  disciples. 

It  is  a  wise  remark  of  Pascal,  that  our  Lord's  enemies,  by 
their  incessant  cavilling  and  interruption,  both  here  and  else- 
where, have  supplied  us  unintentionally  with  a  strong  proof  of 
the  truth  of  His  teaching.  If  our  Lord's  doctrines  had  only 
been  delivered  privately  to  a  prejudiced  audience  of  kind  and 
loving  disciples,  they  would  not  come  down  to  us  with  the  same 
weight  that  they  do  now.  But  they  were  often  proclaimed  in 
the  midst  of  bitter  enemies,  learned  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
were  ready  to  detect  any  flaw  or  defect  in  His  reasoning.  That 
the  enemies  of  Christ  could  never  answer  or  silence  Him  is  a 
strong  evidence  that  His  doctrine  was  God's  own  truth.  It  was 
from  heaven  and  not  from  men. 


JOHN  IX.     1—12. 


1  And  as  Jesus  passed  by,  he  saw  a 
man  which  was  blind  from  his  birth. 

2  And  his  disciples  asked  him,  say- 
ing, Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man,  or 
his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ? 

3  Jesus  answered,  Neither  hath 
this  man  sinned,  nor  his  parents:  but 
that  the  works  of  God  should  be  made 
manifest  in  him. 

4  I  must  work  the  works  of  him 
that  sent  mo,  while  it  is  day:  the 
night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work. 

5  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I 
am  the  light  of  the  world. 

6  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  spat 
on  the  ground,  and  made  clay  of  the 
spittle,  and  he  anointed  the  eyes  of 
the  blind  man  with  the  clay. 

7  And  said  unto  him,  Go  wash  in 
the  pool  of  SUoam,  (which  is  by  inter- 


pretation, Sent.)  He  wont  his  way 
therefore,  and  washed,  and  came  see- 
ing. 

8  The  neighbours,  therefore,  and 
they  which  before  had  seen  him  that 
bo  was  blind,  said,  Is  not  this  he  that 
sat  and  begged  ? 

9  Some  said,  This  is  he;  others  said, 
He  is  like  him:  but  he  said,  I  am  he. 

10  Therefore  said  they  unto  him, 
How  were  thine  eyes  opened  ? 

11  He  answered  and  said,  A  man 
that  is  called  Jesus  made  clay,  and 
anointed  mine  eyes,  and  said  unto 
me,  Go  to  the  pool  of  Siloam,  and 
wash :  and  I  went  and  washed,  and  I 
received  sight. 

12  Then  said  they  unto  him,  Where 
is  he  ?     He  said,  I  know  not. 


The  chapter  we  now  begin  records  one  of  the  few  great  works 
of  Christ  which  St.  John  has  reported.      It  tell  us  how  our 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  135 

Lord  gave  sight  to  a  man  who  had  been  "  blind  from  his 
birth."  Here,  as  elsewhere  in  this  Gospel,  we  find  the 
circumstances  of  the  miracle  narrated  with  peculiar  fulness, 
minuteness,  and  particularity.  Here  too,  as  elsewhere, 
we  find  the  narrative  rich  in  spiritual  lessons. 

We  should  observe,  first,  in  this  passage,  how  much 
sorrow  sin  has  brought  into  the  world.  A  sorrowful  case  is 
brought  before  us.  We  are  told  of  a  man  "  who  was  blind 
from  his  birth."  A  more  serious  affliction  can  hardly  be 
conceived.  Of  all  the  bodily  crosses  that  can  be  laid  on 
man,  without  taking  away  life,  none  perhaps  is  greater 
than  the  loss  of  sight.  It  cuts  us  off  from  some  of  the 
greatest  enjoyments  of  life.  It  shuts  us  up  within  a 
narrow  world  of  our  own.  It  makes  us  painfully  helpless 
and  dependent  on  others.  In  fact,  until  men  lose  their 
eyesight,  they  never  fully  realize  its  value. 

Now  blindness,  like  every  other  bodily  infirmity,  is  one 
of  the  fruits  of  sin.  If  Adam  had  never  fallen,  we  cannot 
doubt  that  people  would  never  have  been  blind,  or  deaf,  or 
dumb.  The  many  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  the  countless 
pains,  and  diseases,  and  physical  defects  to  which  we  are 
all  liable,  came  in  when  the  curse  came  upon  the  earth. 
"  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by 
sin."     (Rom.  v.  12.) 

Let  us  learn  to  hate  sin  with  a  godly  hatred,  as  the  root 
of  more  than  half  of  our  cares  and  sorrows.  Let  us 
fight  against  it,  mortify  it,  crucify  it,  and  abhor  it  both  in 
ourselves  and  others.  There  cannot  be  a  clearer  proof  that 
man  is  a  fallen  creature  than  the  fact  that  he  can  love  sin 
and  take  pleasure  in  it. 

We  should  observe,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  what  a 
solemn  lesson  Christ  gives  us  about  the  use  of  opportunities. 
He  says  to  the  disciples  who  asked  Him  about  the  blind 
man,  "  I  must  work  while  it  is  called  to-day :  the  night 
cometh,  when  no  man  can  work." 


136  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

That  saying  was  eminently  true  when  applied  to  our  Lord 
Himself.  He  knew  well  that  his  own  earthly  ministry 
would  only  last  three  years  altogether,  and  knowing  this 
He  diligently  redeemed  the  time.  He  let  slip  no  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  works  of  mercy,  and  attending  to  His 
Father's  business.  Morning,  noon,  and  night  He  was 
always  carrying  on  the  work  which  the  Father  gave  Him 
to  do.  It  was  His  meat  and  drink  to  do  His  Father's 
will,  and  to  finish  His  work.  His  whole  life  breathed 
one  sentiment, — "I  must  work :  the  night  cometh,  when 
no  man  can  work." 

The  saying  is  one  which  should  be  remembered  by  all 
professing  Christians.  The  life  that  we  now  live  in  the 
flesh  is  our  day.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  use  it  well,  for 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  our  souls.  Let  us  work 
out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  while  it  is 
called  to-day.  There  is  no  work  nor  labour  in  the  grave, 
toward  which  we  are  all  fast  hastening.  Let  us  pray,  and 
read,  and  keep  our  Sabbaths  holy,  and  hear  God's  Word, 
and  do  good  in  our  generation,  like  men  who  never  forget 
that  "  the  night  is  at  hand."  Our  time  is  very  short. 
Our  daylight  will  soon  be  gone.  Opportunities  once  lost 
can  never  be  retrieved.  A  second  lease  of  life  is  granted 
to  no  man.  Then  let  us  resist  procrastination  as  we  would 
resist  the  devil.  Whatever  our  hand  findeth  to  do,  let  us  do 
it  with  our  might.  "The  night  cometh,  when  no  man 
can  work." 

We  should  observe,  thirdly,  in  this  passage,  what  differ- 
ent means  Christ  used  in  working  miracles  on  different  oc- 
casions. In  healing  the  blind  man  He  might,  if  He  had 
thought  fit,  have  merely  touched  Him  with  his  finger,  or 
given  command  with  His  tongue.  But  He  did  not  rest 
content  with  doing  so.  We  are  told  that  "  He  spat  on  the 
ground,  and  made  clay  of  the  spittle,  and  He  anointed  the 
eyes  of  the  blind  man  with  the  claj^."     In  all  these  means 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  137 

of  course  there  was  no  inherent  healing  virtue.     But  for 
wise  reasons  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  use  them. 

We  need  not  doubt  that  in  this,  as  in  every  other  action 
of  our  Lord,  there  is  an  instructive  lesson.  It  teaches  us, 
we  may  well  believe,  that  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  will 
not  be  tied  down  to  the  use  of  any  one  means  or  instrumen- 
tality. In  conferring  blessings  on  man,  He  will  work  in  His 
own  way,  and  will  allow  no  one  to  prescribe  to  Him.  Above 
all,  it  should  teach  those  who  have  received  anything  at 
Christ's  hands,  to  be  careful  how  they  measure  other  men's 
experience  by  their  own.  Have  we  been  healed  by  Christ, 
and  made  to  see  and  live?  Let  us  thank  God  for  it,  and 
be  humbled.  But  let  us  beware  of  saying  that  no  other 
man  has  been  healed,  except  he  has  been  brought  to  spir- 
itual life  in  precisely  the  same  manner.  The  great  ques- 
tion is, — "Are  the  eyes  of  our  understanding  opened? 
Do  we  see  ?  Have  we  spiritual  life  ?  " — Enough  for  us  if 
the  cure  is  effected  and  health  restored.  If  it  is,  we  must 
leave  it  to  the  great  Physician  to  choose  the  instrument, 
the  means,  and  the  manner, — the  clay,  the  touch,  or  the 
command. 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  the  almighty 
power  that  Christ  holds  in  His  hands.  We  see  Him  doing 
that  which  in  itself  was  impossible.  Without  medicines 
He  cures  an  incurable  case.  He  actually  gives  eyesight  to 
one  that  was  born  blind. 

Such  a  miracle  as  this  is  meant  to  teach  an  old  truth, 
which  we  can  never  know  too  well.  It  shows  us  that 
Jesus  the  Saviour  of  sinners  "  has  all  power  in  heaven  and 
earth."  Such  mighty  works  could  never  have  been  done 
by  one  that  was  merely  man.  In  the  cure  of  this  blind 
man  we  see  nothing  less  than  the  finger  of  God. 

Such  a  miracle,  above  all,  is  meant  to  make  us  hopeful 
about  our  own  souls  and  the  souls  of  others.  Why  should 
we  despair  of  salvation  while  we  have  such  a  Saviour? 


138  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Where  is  the  spiritual  disease  that  He  cannot  take  away? 
He  can  open  the  eyes  of  the  most  sinful  and  ignorant,  and 
make  them  see  things  they  never  saw  before.  He  can  send 
light  into  the  darkest  heart,  and  cause  blindness  and  preju- 
dice to  pass  away. 

Surely,  if  we  are  not  saved,  the  fault  will  be  all  our  own. 
There  lives  at  God's  right  hand  One  who  can  heal  us  if  we 
apply  to  Him.  Let  us  take  heed  lest  those  solemn  words 
are  found  true  of  us, — "  Light  is  come  into  the  world : 
but  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their 
deeds  were  evil."  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me  that  ye  might 
have  life."     (John  iii.  19  ;  v.  40.) 

Notes.    John  IX.  1—12. 

1. — [And  as  Jesus  passed  by.']  The  Greek  word  rendered  "  passed 
by,"  is  the  same  as  the  word  so  rendered  in  the  preceding 
verse,  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter. — Some  think,  from  this 
repetition,  that  the  miracle  recorded  here  took  place  immedi- 
ately after  the  events  of  the  last  chapter,  without  the  least 
break  or  interruption ;  and  that  it  was  as  our  Lord  was  retiring 
from  the  temple,  after  the  attempt  of  the  Jews  to  stone  Him, 
that  He  saw  the  blind  man. — Others,  however,  think  that  an  in- 
terval of  time  must  have  elapsed,  partly  because  it  seems 
improbable  that  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  would  all  be  able  to 
withdraw  themselves  quietly  from  an  angry  mob,  and  calmly 
stand  still  near  the  scene  of  attempted  violence  to  attend  to  a 
blind  man,  and  partly  because  it  is  the  manner  of  St.  John's 
Gospel  to  pass  from  one  event  to  another,  sometimes  without 
intimating  that  there  is  any  change  of  time  or  place.  Thus, 
John  v.  19;  yi.  25,  43,59;  vii.  28—33.  The  point,  however,  is 
not  one  of  any  practical  importance. 

Chemnitius  holds  strongly  that  an  interval  of  two  months 
comes  iu  here,  and  that  our  Lord  spent  that  time  in  a  visitation 
of  the  towns  and  villages  of  Judaea,  as  related  in  Luke  xiii.  22. 
He  thinks  that  He  thus  occupied  the  two  months  after  the  feast 
of  tabernacles,  and  that  He  returned  to  Jerusalem  shortly  be- 
fore the  feast  of  dedication,  in  winter.  The  main  objection  to 
this  theory  seems  to  be,  that  it  is  not  the  natural  conclusion 
we  should  draw  from  the  text. 

Gualter,  Ferus,  Ecolampadius,  and  Musculus  maintain,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  there  is  a  close  and  intentional  connection  be- 
tween this  chapter  and  the  preceding  one.  They  think  that 
oar  Lord  desired  to  show,  by  deed  as  well  as  word,  that  He  was 


JOHN,    CHAP.   IX.  139 


"  the  Light  of  the  world."  (John  viii.  14.)  Bucer  says,  u  This 
chapter  is  a  sermon  in  act  and  deed,  on  the  words,  '  I  am  the 
Light  of  the  world.'  " 

In  the  miracle  which  occupies  the  whole  of  this  chapter,  the 
following  special  circumstances  deserve  notice  :  (1)  It  is  only- 
related  by  St.  John.  (2)  Like  each  of  the  few  miracles  in  St. 
John,  it  is  described  with  great  minuteness  and  particularity. 
(3)  It  is  one  of  the  four  miracles  wrought  in  Judasa,  or  near 
Jerusalem,  mentioned  in  St.  John.  He  records  eight  great 
miracles  altogether:  four  in  Galilee,— turning  the  water  into 
wine,  healing  the  nobleman's  son,  feeding  the  multitude,  and 
walking  on  the  water,  (chap,  ii.,  iv.,  and  vi. ;)  and  four  in 
Judaea, — purifying  the  temple,  healing  the  impotent  man,  re- 
storing sight  to  the  blind,  and  raising  Lazarus.  (Chap,  ii.,  v., 
vi.,  and  ix.)  (4)  It  is  one  of  those  miracles  which  the  Jews 
were  especially  taught  to  expect  in  Messiah's  time  :  "  In  that 
day  shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind  see  out  of  obscurity."  ( Isai. 
xxix.  18.)  (5)  It  is  one  of  those  signs  of  Messiah  having 
come,  to  which  Jesus  particularly  directed  John  the  Baptist's 
attention:  "The  blind  receive  their  sight."  (Matt.  xi.  5.) 
(6)  It  was  a  miracle  worked  in  so  public  a  place,  and  on  a  man 
so  well  known,  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  Jerusalem  Jews 
to  deny  it. 

It  is  hardly  necessary,  perhaps,  to  bid  any  well-instructed 
Christian  observe  the  singularly  instructive  and  typical  char- 
acter of  each  of  the  eight  miracles  which  John  was  inspired  to 
record.    Each  was  a  vivid  picture  of  spiritual  things. 

Hengstenberg  observes  that  three  of  the  four  great  miracles 
wrought  by  Christ  in  Judcea  exactly  represent  the  three  classes 
of  works  referred  to  in  Matt.  xi.  5,  "  The  lame  walk,  the  blind 
see,  the  dead  are  raised  up."     (John  v. ;  ix. ;  xi.) 

\_He  saw  a  man... blind  from  7iis  birth.']  The  man  was  probably 
sitting  near  the  temple  gateway,  to  attract  the  notice  of  wor- 
shippers going  to  and  fro,  like  the  man  described  in  Acts.  (Acts 
iii.  2.)  From  blindness  he  would  naturally  be  dependent  on 
charity.  The  Jewish  law  specifies  the  blind  as  peculiarly  de- 
serving of  attention.  (Levit.  xix.  14;  Deut.  xxvii.  18.)  To 
give  sight  to  one  who  had  not  lost  the  use  of  his  eyes  by  dis- 
ease or  accident,  but  had  never  seen  at  all,  was  of  course  a 
mighty  miracle. 

Let  it  be  noted,  that  our  Lord  "saw"  the  blind  man,  and 
healed  him  of  His  own  free  will,  unasked,  and  unexpectedly. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  impotent  man,  (John  v.  6,)  He  did  not 
wait  to  be  entreated,  but  was  Himself  the  first  to  move.  Let 
it  however  be  noted  at  the  same  time,  that  if  the  man  had  not 
been  by  the  wayside,  our  Lord  would  not  have  seen  him. 

Chrysostom  observes,  that  when  the  Jews  "  would  not  re- 
ceive our  Lord's  sayings,  and  tried  to  kill  Him,  He  went  out 
of  the  temple,  and  healed  the  blind,  mitigating  their  rage  by  His 


140  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


absence;  and  by  working  a  miracle,  both  softening  their  hard* 
ness,  and  proving  His  affections.  And  it  is  clear  that  He  pro- 
ceeded intentionally  to  this  work  on  leaving  the  temple,  for  it 
was  He  who  saw  the  blind  man,  and  not  the  blind  man  who 
came  to  Him." 

Gualter  observes,  that  this  passage  shows  how  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  and  how  He  sees  His  own  people, 
even  when  they  think  not  of  Him. 

Alford  thinks  it  possible  that  the  blind  man  was  constantly 
proclaiming  that  he  had  been  born  blind,  to  excite  pity. 

Burgon  observes :  "  More  of  our  Saviour's  miracles  are  re- 
corded as  having  been  wrought  on  blindness  than  on  any  other 
form  of  human  infirmity.  One  deaf  and  dumb  man  is  related 
to  have  had  speech  and  hearing  restored  to  him ;  one  case  of 
palsy,  and  one  of  dropsy,  find  special  record ;  twice  was  leprosy, 
and  twice  was  fever  expelled  by  the  Saviour's  word;  three 
times  were  dead  persons  raised  to  life ;  but  the  records  of  His 
cures  wrought  on  blindness  are  four  in  number,  at  least,  if  not 
five."  (See  Matt.  xii.  22.)  Isaiah  seems  to  foretell  the  re- 
covery of  sight  by  the  blind,  as  "  an  act  of  mercy  specially 
symbolical  of  Messiah's  day."  (Isai.  xxix.  18 ;  xxxii.  3 ;  xxxv. 
5 ;  xlii.  7.) 

I. — [And  his  disciples  asked  him.']  This  expression  seems  to  show 
that  our  Lord  was  surrounded  and  accompanied  by  His  usual 
followers,  and  favours  the  idea  that  there  was  some  break  or 
interval  between  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  and  the  end  of 
the  last.  Though  He  by  Divine  power  could  hide  Himself  and 
go  through  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  it  is  hardly  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  within  a  few  minutes  He  would  be  surrounded 
again  by  His  disciples.    Yet  it  is  of  course  possible. 

[Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man... parents... blind?']  This  curious 
question  has  given  rise  to  much  unprofitable  discussion.  It  is 
repeatedly  asked, — Why  did  the  disciple  say  this?  What  put 
it  into  their  minds  to  start  the  inquiry? 

(a)  Some  think  that  the  Jews  had  imbibed  the  common 
Oriental  notion  of  the  pre-existence  and  transmigration  of  souls 
from  one  body  to  another,  and  that  the  disciples  supposed  that 
in  some  previous  state  of  existence  this  blind  man  must  have 
committed  some  great  sin,  for  which  he  was  now  punished. 

(6)  Some  think  that  the  question  refers  to  a  strange  notion 
current  among  some  Jews,  that  infants  might  sin  before  they 
were  born.  In  support  of  this  view,  they  quote  Gen.  xxv.  22, 
and  Gen.  xxxviii.  28,  29. 

(c)  The  most  probable  view  is,  that  the  question  arose  from 
a  misapplication  of  such  passages  of  Scripture  as  the  Second 
Commandment,  where  God  speaks  of  "visiting  the  iniquity  of 
the  fathers  upon  the  children,  "  (Exod.  xx.  5,)  and  from  a  for- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  141 


getfulness  of  Eze.  xviii.  20,  etc.  There  are  few  notions  that 
men  seem  to  cling  to  so  naturally,  as  the  notion  that  bodily  suf- 
ferings, and  all  afflictions,  are  the  direct  consequences  of  sin, 
and  that  a  diseased  or  afflicted  person  must  necessarily  be  a  very 
wicked  man.  This  was  precisely  the  short-sighted  view  that 
Job's  three  friends  took  up  when  they  came  to  visit  him,  and 
against  which  Job  contended.  This  was  the  idea  of  the  people 
at  Melita,  when  Paul  was  bitten  by  a  viper,  after  the  ship- 
wreck: "This  man  is  a  murderer."  (Acts  xxviii.  4.)  This 
appears  to  have  been  at  the  bottom  of  the  question  of  the  dis- 
ciples:  "There  is  suffering;  then  there  must  have  been  sin. 
Whose  sin  was  it?" 

Chrysostom  thinks  that  the  disciples  remembered  our  Lord's 
words  to  the  paralytic  whom  He  healed  (chap.  v.  14)  :  "  Thou 
art  made  whole ;  sin  no  more ;  "  and  asked  now  to  what  sin  this 
man's  blindness  might  be  traced.  This,  however,  seems  very 
improbable,  considering  the  length  of  time  between  the  two 
miracles. 

Hengstenberg  observes  that  the  fallacy  of  supposing  that 
special  afflictions  are  the  result  of  some  special  sins,  "com- 
mends itself  to  low  and  common  spirits  by  its  simplicity  and 
palpableness.  It  has  the  advantage  of  rendering  it  needless  to 
weep  with  them  that  weep.  It  saves  a  man  from  the  obliga- 
tion, when  he  sees  heavy  affliction,  of  smiting  on  his  breast, 
and  saying  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.'  It  gives  the 
natural  man  the  comfortable  feeling  that  he  is  so  much  the 
better  than  the  sufferer,  as  he  is  more  fortunate." 

Those  who  wish  to  go  more  deeply  into  the  subject  will  find 
it  fully  discussed  by  the  great  Dutch  diviue,  Gomarus. 

It  is  worth  notice  that  the  word  here  rendered  "  Master  "  is 
the  same  that  is  rendered  "Rabbi"  in  five  other  places  in  St. 
John.  (i.  38 ;  i.  49  ;  iii.  2 ;  iii.  26 ;  vi.  25.)  Why  our  translators  did 
not  observe  uniformity  in  their  translation  of  the  word 
throughout  this  Gospel  is  not  very  clear. 

3. — [Jesus  answered,  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned. ..parents.']  This 
first  part  of  our  Lord's  answer  is  elliptical.  The  sense  of 
course  must  be  supplied  from  the  context.  Our  Lord  did  not 
mean  that  neither  this  blind  man  nor  his  parents  had  committed 
any  sin  at  all,  but  that  it  was  not  any  special  sin  of  his  or 
theirs  which  had  caused  his  blindness.  Nor  yet  did  our  Lord 
mean  that  the  sins  of  parents  could  never  entail  disease  on 
children;  but  that  the  case  before  Him,  at  any  rate,  was  not 
such  a  case.  Of  course  he  did  not  mean  us  to  forget  that  sin  is 
the  great  primeval  cause  of  all  the  evils  that  are  in  the  world. 

[But  that  the  icorlcs  of  G<<d... manifest  in  him.']  The  meaning 
of  this  must  be,  that  the  man's  blindness  was  permitted  and 
overruled  by  God,  in  order  that  His  works  of  mercy  in  healing 
him  might  be  shown  to  men.  This  blindness  was  allowed  and 
ordained  by  God,  not  because  he  was  specially  wicked,  but  in 


142  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

order  to  furnish  a  platform  for  the  exhibition  of  a  work  of  Di- 
vine mercy  and  power. 

A  deep  and  instructive  principle  lies  in  these  words.  They 
6urely  throw  some  Light  on  that  great  question, — the  origin  of 
evil.  God  has  thought  fit  to  allow  evil  to  exist,  in  order  that 
He  may  have  a  platform  for  showing  His  mercy,  grace,  and 
compassion.  If  man  had  never  fallen,  there  would  have  been 
no  opportunity  of  showing  Divine  mercy.  But  by  permitting 
evil,  mysterious  as  it  seems,  God's  works  of  grace,  mercy,  and 
wisdom  in  saving  sinners,  have  been  wonderfully  manifested  to 
all  His  creatures.  The  redeeming  of  the  Church  of  elect  sin- 
ners is  the  means  of  "  showing  to  principalities  and  powers  the 
manifold  wisdom  of  God."  (Ephes.  iii.  10.)  Without  the  fall 
we  should  have  known  nothing  of  the  cross  and  the  Gospel. 

Melancthon,  on  this  verse,  suggests  no  less  than  ten  reasons 
why  God  permits  evil  to  come  on  the  Church,  which  contain 
much  food  for  thought.  Brentius  and  Chemnitius  also  say  many 
excellent  things  on  the  same  theme. 

Bucer  remarks  that  this  verse  should  teach  us  to  bear  ills  pa- 
tiently and  cheerfully,  since  all  that  happens  to  us  tends,  in 
some  way,  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Gualter  remarks,  that  even  wicked  men  like  Pharaoh  subserve 
the  glory  of  God,  (Rom.  ix.  17 ;)  much  more  may  men's  afflictions 
and  diseases. 

Ecolampadius  remarks,  that  God  allows  nothing  whatever  to 
happen  without  some  good  reason  and  cause. 

Henry  observes  :  "  The  intention  of  Providence  often  does 
not  appear  till  a  great  while  after  the  event,  perhaps  many  years 
after.  The  sentences  in  the  book  of  Providence  are  sometimes 
long,  and  you  must  read  a  great  way  before  you  understand  the 
meaning." 

Jones,  of  Nayland,  on  this  text  remarks  :  "  The  best  way  to 
answer  the  great  question  of  the  origin  of  evil,  is  to  consider 
the  end  of  it,  '  what  good  comes  out  of  it?'  this  makes  the  sub- 
ject plain  and  useful.  Why  was  this  man  born  blind?  That  the 
works  of  God  might  appear,  and  Christ  might  cure  him. — Why 
did  man  fall?  That  God  might  save  him. — Why  is  evil  permit- 
ted in  the  world?  That  God  may  be  glorified  in  removing  it. — 
Why  does  the  body  of  man  die?  That  God  may  raise  it  up 
again. — When  we  philosophize  in  this  manner  we  find  light, 
certainty,  and  comfort.  We  have  a  memorable  example  of  it 
in  the  case  before  us." 

Barnes  remarks  that  "those  who  are  afflicted  with  blindness, 
deafness,  or  any  deformity,  should  be  submissive  to  God.  It  is 
His  appointment,  and  is  right  and  best.  God  does  no  wrong; 
and  when  all  His  works  are  seen,  the  universe  will  see  and 
know  that  He  is  just." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  143 

4.— [I must  work  the  works,  etc.']  The  connection  between  this 
verse  and  the  preceding  one  seems  to  be  in  the  word  "works." 
It  it  as  though  our  Lord  said,— "Healing  the  blind  man  is  one 
of  the  great  «  works '  which  God  has  appointed  for  Me  to  do, 
and  I  must  do  it  during  the  '  day,'  or  short  period  of  My  minis- 
try. This  blindness  was  ordained  by  My  Father  to  be  a  means 
of  showing  forth  My  divine  power." 

The  expression  "  while  it  is  day,"  and  "the  night  cometh," 
must  probably  be  interpreted  with  special  reference  to  our 
Lord's  ministry  upon  earth.  While  He  was  with  His  disciples 
speaking,  teaching,  and  working  miracles,  it  was  comparatively 
"  day."  His  little  Church  basked  in  the  full  sunlight  of  His 
Divine  presence,  and  saw  and  learned  countless  wonderful 
things.  When  He  ascended  up  on  high  it  became  comparatively 
"night."  Just  as  in  night  "  no  man  can  work,"  so  when  Christ 
left  the  world  the  visible  proof  of  His  Divine  mission,  which 
the  disciples  had  so  long  enjoyed  and  seen,  could  no  longer  be 
given.  The  proverbial  saying,  "No  man  can  work  in  the  night," 
would  be  verified. 

These  limits  to  the  application  of  the  figure  must  be  carefully 
remembered.  Of  course  our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  the  Church, 
after  His  ascension,  would  not  enjoy  far  more  spiritual  light 
than  it  did  before  He  came ;  nor  yet  that  the  disciples,  after  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  would  not  see  many  truths  far  more  clearly 
even  than  when  Christ  was  with  them.  But  the  words  "clay 
and  night "  here  have  a  special  reference  to  our  Lord's  bodily 
presence  with  His  Church.  As  long  as  He  was  visibly'with 
them  it  was  "  day."  When  He  left  them  it  was  "night."  It  is 
well  to  remark  that  St.  Paul  uses  the  same  figures  when  com- 
paring time  present  with  time  to  come,  at  the  second  advent. 
He  says,  "  The  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is  at  hand."  (Rom, 
xiii.  12.)  There  the  night  is  Christ's  bodily  absence,  and  the 
day  Christ's  bodily  presence. 

Melancthon  points  out  what  an  example  Christ  supplies  to 
Christians  in  this  place.  The  hatred,  opposition,  and  persecu- 
tion of  the  world,  and  the  failures  and  infirmities  of  professing 
Christians,  must  not  make  us  give  way  to  despondency.  Like 
our  Master,  we  must  work  on. 

Calvin  observes :  "  From  these  words  we  may  deduce  the 
universal  rule,  that  to  every  man  the  course  of  his  life  may  be 
called  his  day." 

Beza  and  others  think  that  there  is  a  primary  prophecy  here 
of  the  withdrawal  of  light  and  privilege  from  the  Jews,  which 
was  in  the  mind  of  our  Lord,  as  well  as  the  general  principle 
that  to  all  men  day  is  the  time  for  work  and  not  night. 

5. — [As  long  as  lam  in  the  world,  etc']  This  verse  seems  to  be  a 
general  broad  assertion  of  our  Lord's  purpose  in  coming  into 
the  world,  and  His  position  while  in  it.  "I  came  into  the  world 
to  be  its  S  in  and  spiritual  Guide,  and  to  deliver  men  from  the 


144  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


natural  darkness  iu  which  they  are;  and  so  long  as  I  am  in  the 
world  I  wish  to  be  its  Light  in  the  fullest  sense,  the  Deliverer 
of  men's  souls  and  the  Healer  of  men's  bodies." 

Coccems  suggests,  that  in  these  words  our  Lord  had  respect 
to  the  fact  that  He  was  going  to  work  a  work  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  that  it  would  be  disapproved  by  the  Jews,  as  a  breach  of 
the  Sabbath.  Foreseeing  this,  He  defends  what  He  is  about  to 
do,  by  reminding  His  disciples  that  during  the  short  time  of 
His  earthly  ministry  He  must  seize  every  opportunity  of  doing 
good. 

Alford  observes,  that  just  as  Jesus  said  before  He  raised 
Lazarus,  "I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life,"  so  here,  before 
giving  sight  to  the  blind,  he  said,  "  I  am  the  Light." 

, — [Wlien... thus  spoken... spat... anointed... clay. ~]  The  action  here 
used  by  our  Lord  is  the  same  that  we  find  used  on  two  other 
occasions, — once  when  He  healed  one  deaf  and  dumb,  (Mark 
vii.  33;)  once  when  He  healed  a  blind  man.  (Mark  viii.  23.) 
The  making  of  the  "  clay,"  however,  is  quite  peculiar  to  this 
miracle.  The  reason  why  our  Lord  used  the  action  we  cannot 
tell.  There  is,  of  course,  no  special  virtue  either  in  spittle,  or 
in  clay  made  from  spittle,  which  could  cure  a  man  born  blind. 
Why,  then,  did  Jesus  use  this  means?  Why  did  He  not  heal  the 
man  with  a  word  or  a  touch? 

The  only  answer  to  such  inquiries  is,  that  our  Lord  would 
teach  us,  by  His  peculiar  mode  of  proceeding  here,  that  He  is 
not  tied  to  any  one  means  of  doing  good,  and  that  we  may 
expect  to  find  variety  in  His  methods  of  dealing  with  souls,  as 
well  as  with  bodies.  May  He  not  also  wish  to  teach  us  that 
He  can,  when  He  thinks  fit,  invest  material  things  with  an 
efficacy  which  is  not  inherent  in  them?  We  are  not  to  despise 
Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  because  water,  bread,  and  wine 
are  mere  material  elements.  To  many  who  use  them,  no  doubt 
they  are  nothing  more  than  mere  material  things,  and  never  do 
them  the  slightest  good.  But  to  those  who  use  the  sacraments 
rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith,  Christ  can  make  water,  bread, 
and  wine,  instruments  of  doing  real  good.  He  that  was  p'eased 
to  use  clay  in  healing  a  blind  man,  may  surely  use  material 
things,  if  He  thinks  fit,  in  His  own  ordinances.  The  water  in 
Baptism,  and  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  while 
they  are  not  to  be  treated  as  idols,  ought  not  to  be  treated  with 
irreverence  and  contempt.  It  was,  of  course,  not  the  clay  that 
healed  the  blind  man,  but  Christ's  word  and  power.  Neverthe- 
less the  clay  was  used.  So  the  brazen  serpent  in  itself  had  no 
medicinal  power  to  cure  the  bitten  Israelites.  But  without  it 
they  were  not  cured. 

The  selection  of  clay  for  anointing  the  blind  man's  eyes  is 
thought  by  some  to  be  significant,  and  to  contain  a  possible 
reference  to  the  original  formation  of  man  out  of  the  dust.  He 
that  formed  man  with  all  his  bodily  faculties  out  of  the  dust 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  145 

could  easily  restore  one  of  those  faculties,  even  sight,  when  He 
thought  fit.  He  that  healed  these  blind  eyes  with  clay  was  the 
same  Being  who  originally  formed  man  out  of  the  clay. 

Ecolampadius  thinks  that  the  spittle  was  the  emblem  of 
Christ's  Divinity,  and  the  clay  of  His  humanity,  and  that  the 
union  of  the  two  represented  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in 
Christ's  person,  whereby  healing  came  to  a  sin-sick  world.  To 
say  the  least,  this  seems  fanciful. 

Barradius  suggests  that  our  Lord  actually  formed  new  eyes 
for  the  man,  as  He  at  first  formed  man's  body  out  of  the  dust. 
This,  however,  seems  needlessly  improbable. 

Poole  thinks  that  our  Lord  used  spittle  to  make  clay,  simply 
because  there  was  no  water  nigh  at  hand  to  make  it  with. 

Wordsworth  observes  that  Christ's  manner  of  working  the 
miracle  was  "  tenderness  to  the  Jews.  They  would  see  the 
clay  on  the  man's  eyes,  and  see  him  going  to  Siloam." 

He  also  observes,  "  Cod  loves  to  effect  His  greatest  works  by 
means  tending  under  ordinary  circumstances  to  produce  the 
very  opposite  of  what  is  to  be  done.  God  walls  the  sea  with 
sand.  God  clears  the  air  with  storms.  God  warms  the  earth 
with  snow.  So  in  the  world  of  grace.  He  brings  water  in  the 
desert,  not  from  the  soft  earth,  but  the  flinty  rock.  He  heals 
the  sting  of  the  serpent  of  fire  by  the  serpent  of  brass.  He 
overthrows  the  wall  of  Jericho  by  ram's  horns.  He  slays  a 
thousand  men  with  the  jawbone  of  an  ass.  He  cures  salt  water 
with  salt.  He  fells  the  giant  with  a  sling  and  stone.  And  thus 
does  the  Son  of  God  work  in  the  Gospel.  He  cures  the  blind 
man  by  that  which  seemed  likely  to  increase  his  blindness,  by 
anointing  his  eyes  with  clay.  He  exalts  us  to  heaven  by  the 
stumbling-block  of  the  cross." 

7. — And  said. ..Go,  to  ash...  Siloam.']  The  direction  here  given  to 
the  blind  man  would  remind  any  pious  Jew  of  Elisha's  directions 
to  Naaman,  "  Go,  wash  in  Jordan."  (2  Kings  v.  10.)  The  water 
of  this  pool  had  no  inherent  healing  efficacy  any  more  than  other 
water.  But  the  command  was  a  test  of  faith,  and  in  obeying, 
the  blind  man  found  what  he  wanted.  It  is  the  great  principle 
which  runs  through  Scripture,— "  Believe  and  obey,  and  all  will 
be  right." 

The  pool  of  Siloam  was  a  well-known  reservoir,  or  artificial 
pond,  in  a  valley  close  to  Jerusalem,  remarkable  for  a  supply  of 
water  from  an  intermittent  spring.  It  is  pointed  out  in  the 
present  day,  and  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  it  is  the 
same  pool  that  was  so  called  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  It  is 
first  mentioned  in  Nehemiah  iii.  15,  and  afterwards  in  Isaiah 
viii.  6. 

Lightfoot  asserts  that  the  pool  of  Bethesda  and  the  pool  of 
Siloam  were  both  supplied  from  one  spring. 
7 


146  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


[Which  is  by  interpretation,  Sent.~]  There  is  undeniable  diffi- 
culty about  this  seutence.  It  is  naturally  asked, — Whv  is  this 
parenthetical  explanation  inserted  by  St.  John?  Why  are  we 
specially  told  that  the  word  Siloara  means  Sent,  or  He  that  was 
sent? — The  most  probable  answer  seems  to  be,  that  the  name 
of  the  fountain  was  meant  to  refer  the  blind  man's  mind  to  the 
Messiah,  whom  God  had  "  sent."  All  pious  Jews  would  under- 
stand the  expression  which  so  frequently  occurs  in  John's  Gos- 
pel, "  He  whom  God  hath  sent,"  to  point  to  Messiah.  When 
therefore  Jesus  said,  "  Go,  wash  in  Siloam,''  the  naming  of  that 
particular  fountain  would  be  a  silent  hint  that  He  who  gave  the 
command  was  the  Sent  One  of  God,  the  great  Healer  of  all  dis- 
eases. St.  John's  parenthesis  would  then  mean,  when  ex- 
pounded :  "  This  was  a  most  suitable  and  proper  pool  for  Jesus 
to  name.  It  was  fitting  that  He  who  was  '  Sent  of  God '  should 
work  a  miracle  in  the  pool  called  '  Sent."' — This  is  the  view  of 
Chrysostom  and  Augustine. 

It  is  impossible  to  help  feeling  that  the  clause  looks  very  much 
like  the  insertion  of  some  ignorant  early  copyist,  who  wished  to 
show  his  own  knowledge  of  etymology,  and  perhaps  found  it  in 
an  old  copy  as  a  marginal  gloss.  The  Syriac  and  Persian  ver- 
sions do  not  contain  the  clause.  Yet  it  certainly  is  found  in 
most  manuscripts  and  versions. 

Hutcheson  thinks  that  John  inserted  this  clause  for  no  other 
end  than  to  remind  readers  that  this  fountain  was  a  special  gift 
"  sent"  by  God,  among  the  hills  near  Jerusalem,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  Jews. 

Hengstenberg  says:  "As  Jesus  represents  Himself  and  His 
Church  as  the  real  Pool  of  Bethesda,  in  chap,  v.,  so  here  He 
declares  Himself  the  real  Sent  One,  or  Siloam,  the  Fountain  of 
blessings." 

[He  went.. .washed.. .came  seeing.']  The  blind  man,  as  is  often 
the  case  with  people  born  blind,  was  probably  able  to  find  his 
way  about  Jerusalem  without  trouble,  and  the  road  from  the 
temple-gate  to  the  pool  of  Siloam  was  likely  to  be  much  fre- 
quented. His  implicit  faith  and  obedience  contrast  favourably 
with  the  conduct  of  Naaman,  when  told  to  go  and  wash  in  Jor- 
dan. (2  Kings  v.  14.)  The  word  "came"  must  either  mean 
"  to  his  own  home,"  or  simply  "came  back  to  the  tempie-gate." 
The  miracle  of  healing  seems  to  have  taken  place  in  the  act  of 
washing  in  Siloam. 

Let  us  remember  that  the  blind  man's  conduct  is  meant  to  be 
a  pattern  to  us.  He  did  not  stumble  at  Christ's  command,  but 
simply  obeyed;  and  in  obeying  he  was  healed.  We  must  do 
likewise. 

Melancthon  thinks  it  likely  that  a  crowd  of  curious  and  jeer- 
ing spectators  accompanied  the  man  to  Siloam  to  see  the  result 
of  our  Lord's  prescription. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  167 

one  which  the  Pharisees  felt  to  be  unanswerable.  Silenced 
before  the  whole  council  they  turn  on  the  speaker  with  auger 
and  abuse.  "  Thou  art  a  miserable,  wicked  creature,  entirely- 
born  in  sin,  and  dost  thou  pretend  to  know  better  than  us,  and 
to  teach  us?"  They  then  proceeded  at  once  to  excommunicate 
him.  The  expression,  "  they  cast  him  out,"  must  surely  mean 
much  more  than  merely  turning  him  out  of  the  room  or  place 
where  they  were  assembled.  To  my  mind  it  means  nothing 
less  than  a  formal  expulsion  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
and  the  consequent  degradation  of  the  man.  It  must  be  ad- 
mitted that  Maldonatus  and  some  others  tlynk  it  only  means 
that  "  they  turned  him  out  of  the  room  "  where  they  were.  But 
this  does  not  agree  with  the  context,  and  almost  all  commenta- 
tors think  "excommunication"  is  meant. 

It  is  held  by  many  that  the  expression,  "  born  in  sin,"  was 
used  with  special  reference  to  the  healed  man's  old  infirmity  of 
blindness.  "  Thy  very  blindness  shows  thee  to  have  been  a 
very  wicked  man.  It  is  God's  stamp  on  thy  wickedness.  Body 
and  soul  are  both  polluted  by  sin."  There  may  be  a  latent  ref- 
erence to  the  vulgar  error  referred  to  at  verse  2,  that  blindness 
was  an  evidence  of  God's  special  displeasure. 

The  expression,  "  Dost  thou  teach  us?"  is  precisely  one  of 
those  which  wicked  people  in  possession  of  place,  rank,  dignity, 
and  income,  are  fond  of  using  about  Reformers  of  the  Church 
and  independent  thinkers. — "  How  can  such  an  ignorant  person 
as  you  pretend  to  know  better  than  us,  and  teach  us?  We  are 
high  in  office,  and  must  know  better  than  you." 

Let  us  note  that  this  resort  to  personal  abuse  and  violent  lan- 
guage is  often  a  sure  mark  of  a  failing  cause  in  religion.     Ina- 
bility to  reply  to  argument  is  often  the  true  cause  of  ill-temper      ry 
and  personalities.    Truth  can  afford  to  be  patient;  error  can- 
not. 

Let  us  note  that  persecution  and  excommunication  are  com- 
mon weapons  with  the  enemies  of  spiritual  religion.  When 
men  cannot  answer  arguments,  they  often  try  to  silence  and  in- 
timidate those  who  use  them. 

The  dread  of  excommunication  with  a  Jew  was  second  only 
to  the  dread  of  death. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  It  is  certain  that  those  who  are  not  subject 
to  Christ  are  deprived  of  the  lawful  power  of  excommunicating. 
Nor  ought  we  to  dread  being  excluded  from  their  assemblies, 
since  Christ,  our  Life  and  Salvation,  was  banished  from  them." 

Musculus  observes  that  this  excommunication  could  not  have 
been  without  the  vote  of  the  majority  of  the  council.  Truth  is 
too  often  with  minorities. 

Pellican  remarks  that  "  to  be  shut  out  from  the  communion 
of  the  wicked  is  no  dishonour  or  loss." 


168  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS 


Ferus,  a  Romanist,  says  that  this  verse  should  teach  the  lead- 
ers of  Churches  not  to  be  hasty  in  excommunicating  people,  lest 
they  commit  as  great  mistake  as  the  Pharisees. 

Barradius,  a  Portuguese  Romanist,  makes  strong  remarks 
here  on  the  great  sin  of  unjust  excommunication.  He  quotes 
the  text  in  Samuel  which  says  that  the  sons  of  Eli  made  men 
"  abhor  the  offering  of  the  Lord;  "  and  applies  to  the  same  point 
the  text  in  Cauticles  where  the  bride  complains  that  the  keeper 
and  watchmen,  who  ought  to  have  helped,  "  smote  and  wounded 

her." 

• 

Quesnel  remarks  that  wicked  pastors  are  always  impatient 
that  any  one  should  remind  them  of  their  duty. 

Lightfoot  observes  that  this  man  was  the  first  confessor  who 
/     suffered  for  Christ's  sake,  as  John  the  Baptist  was  the  first 
martyr. 

Trench  observes  that  the  Pharisees  in  their  rage  forgot  "  that 
the  two  charges, — one,  that  the  man  had  not  been  born  blind 
and  was  an  impostor ;  the  other,  that  he  bore  the  mark  of  God's 
anger  in  blindness  reaching  back  to  his  birth, — will  not  agree 
together." 

35.— [Jesus  heard... cast  him  out.~\  An  interval  of  time  most  prob- 
ably elapsed  between  the  last  verse  and  the  present  one.  Where 
our  Lord  was,  at  Jerusalem  or  elsewhere,  and  what  He  was 
doing  during  the  interval,  we  are  not  told.  We  can  hardly 
suppose  that  the  events  related  in  the  present  and  following 
verses,  and  the  former  part  of  the  tenth  chapter,  took  place  on 
the  same  day  that  the  blind  man  was  cured.  There  must  have 
been  a  break.  Moreover  the  very  expression  before  us  shows 
that  the  excommunication  had  had  time  to  be  reported  and 
known  in  Jerusalem.  Making  every  allowance  for  the  public 
notoriety  of  everything  done  by  the  Sanhedrim,  we  can  hardly 
suppose  that  in  a  day  when  there  was  no  newspaper,  the  treat- 
ment of  the  blind  man  would  be  public  news  and  reported  with- 
out some  interval  of  time. 

As  God,  our  Lord  doubtless  knew  all  that  happened  to  the 
sufferer,  but  He  did  nothing  till  his  excommunication  was  pub- 
licly reported. 

Burkitt  observes :"  O  happy  man!  Having  lost  the  syna- 
gogue, he  finds  heaven." 

Wordsworth  observes :  "  If  those  who  sit  in  Moses'  seat  teach 
things  contrary  to  the  law  of  Moses,  and  proceed  to  impose 
their  false  doctrines  as  terms  of  communion ;  if  they  will  not 
receive  Him  of  whom  Moses  wrote,  and  threaten  with  excom- 
munication those  who  confess  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  then  no 
desire  of  unity,  no  love  of  enemies,  no  fear  of  separation  from 
parents,  and  spiritual  superiors,  no  dread  of  spiritual  censures 
and  penalties,  must  deter  the  disciples  of  Christ  from  confess- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  169 

Ing  Him.     Our  Lord  Himself  has  set  the  seal  of  His  Divine 
sanction  on  these  principles." 

[And  lohen  he  had  found,  etc.']  We  should  note  in  this  sen- 
tence our  Lord's  kindness  and  compassion.  As  soon  as  His 
people  suffer  for  His  name's  sake  He  is  ready  to  visit  them  and 
speak  words  of  comfort  and  give  special  consolation.  We  see 
too  an  example  of  His  zeal  to  turn  temporal  trials  to  spiritual 
gain.  Like  Him,  we  should  be  ready  to  say  to  sufferers,  "  Dost 
thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God?  The  world  fails  thee.  Turn 
to  Christ,  and  seek  rest." 

Chrysostom  remarks :  "  They  who  for  the  sake  of  the  truth 
and  confession  of  Christ  suffer  anything  and  are  insulted,  these 
are  especially  honoured.  So  it  was  here  with  the  blind  man. 
The  Jews  cast  him  out  of  the  temple,  and  the  Lord  of  the  tem- 
ple found  him.  He  was  dishonoured  by  those  who  dishonoured 
Christ,  and  was  honoured  by  the  Lord  of  angels." 

We  should  note  that  this  is  one  of  the  very  few  occasions  on 
which  our  Lord  called  Himself  directly  "  the  Son  of  God." 
(See  John  iii.  18;  v.  25;  x.  36;  xi.  4.) 

The  word  "thou "here  is  emphatic.  "Others  are  unbeliev- 
ing.    Dost  thou  believe?  " 

86. — [He  answered  and  said,  etc.]  This  is  the  language  of  a  mind 
ignorant  of  many  things,  yet  willing  to  be  instructed.  It  is 
like  Saul  crying,  "  Who  art  Thou,  Lord?  "  and  the  jailer  saying, 
"What  must  I  do?"  When  a  man  begins  to  inquire  about 
Christ,  and  ask  who  He  is,  it  is  always  a  hopeful  symptom  of 
his  stnte  of  soul. 

It  inay  be  doubted  whether  "Lord"  here  would  not  have 
been  setter  rendered  "  Sir." 

Cb.'ysostom  says:  "The  expression  is  that  of  a  longing,  in- 
quiring soul." 

37. — [And  Jesus  said,  etc.]  We  should  carefully  notice  the  extraor- 
dinary fulness  of  the  revelation  which  our  Lord  here  made  of 
Himself.  In  no  case  but  this,  and  that  of  the  Samaritan 
woman,  clo  we  find  Him  so  unreservedly  declaring  His  own 
Divinity  and  Messiahship.  So  true  is  it  that  "the  meek  He 
will  guide  in  judgment,'1  and  that  things  "hid  to  the  wise  and 
prudent  are  revealed  to  babes."  The  poor  and  despised  and 
friendless  among  mankind  are  often  those  whom  He  favours 
with  special  revelations  of  His  kindness  and  mercy.  (John  iv. 
26]  Matt.  v.  10—12.) 

38. — [And  he  said,  Lord,  I  believe.]  This  immediate  profession  of 
faith  seems  to  indicate  that  the  man's  mind  had  been  prepared 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  during  the  interval  of  time  since  His  cure. 
The  more  he  thought  over  his  miraculous  healing,  and  the  Per- 
son who  had  wrought  it,  the  more  ready  he  was  to  believe  in 
Him  as  the  Messiah. 


170  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

"We  must  not  perhaps  estimate  too  highly  the  extent  of  this 
man's  faith.  At  any  rate,  it  had  the  germ  and  nucleus  of  all 
justifying  faith  about  it,  a  belief  in  oar  Lord  as  the  Messiah. 

[And  he  worshipped  Him.']  This  seems  to  have  been  some- 
thing more  than  an  action  of  respect  and  reverence  to  a  man. 
It  looks  like  the  worship  given  to  One  who  was  felt  to  be  very 
God.  Our  Lord  accepts  it,  and  says  not  one  word  to  check  it. 
We  cannot  suppose  that  Paul  or  Peter  or  John  would  have 
allowed  a  fellow-man  to  give  them  "worship."  (See  Acts  x. 
25,  26,  and  xiv.  14,  15;  Rev.  xix.  10,  and  xxii.  9.) 

Chrysostom  remarks  how  few  of  those  whom  our  Lord  mi- 
raculously healed,  worshipped  Him  as  this  man  did. 

Cocceius  remarks  that  when  we  consider  that  this  act  of 
worship  follows  immediately  on  a  full  profession  of  faith  in 
Jesus  as  the  "  Son  of  God,"  it  cannot  be  lightly  passed  over  as 
a  mere  mark  of  respect. 

Ferus  observes  that  there  is  a  thing  said  of  this  worshipper 
which  is  said  of  no  one  else  who  "worshipped"  Christ.  He 
said,  "  I  believe,"  before  he  did  it,  and  I  believe  in  the  "  Son  of 
God." 

Poole  observes  that  "  although  the  word  '  worshipped '  in  the 
Greek  be  a  word  used  sometimes  to  signify  that  civil  respect 
which  men  show  to  their  superiors,  yet  it  cannot  be  so  inter- 
preted in  this  place,  considering  what  went  before." 
39.— {And  Jesus  said,  For  judgment,  etc.]  We  must  not  suppose 
that  there  is  any  contradiction  between  these  words  and  those 
in  John  iii.  17,  and  xii.  47.*  It  was  quite  true  that  our  Lord 
had  not  come  into  the  world  to  be  a  Judge,  but  a  Saviour.  Yet 
He  had  come  to  produce  a  judgment,  or  distinction,  or  division 
between  class  and  class  of  characters,  and  to  be  the  cause  of 
light  breaking  in  on  some  minds  which  before  His  coming  could 
not  see,  and  of  blindness  covering  other  minds  which  before 
His  coming  flattered  themselves  that  they  were  full  of  light. 
In  that  the  expression  is  very  parallel  to  that  of  Simeon,  (Luke 
ii.  35.)  "  The  thoughts  of  many  hearts  were  revealed  by  his  com- 
ing." Humble-minded,  ignorant  people  had  light  revealed  to 
them.  Proud,  self-righteous  people  were  given  over  to  judicial 
blindness.     (See  Matt.  xi.  25.) 

And  is  not  this  judgment  a  common  consequence  of  Christ's 
Gospel  coming  to  a  place  or  a  people  for  the  first  time?  Minds 
previously  quite  dead  receive  sight.  Minds  previously  self-sat- 
isfied and  proud  of  their  own  light  are  given  over  to  utter  dark- 
ness and  left  behind.  Those  who  once  saw  not  see.  Those 
who  fancied  themselves  clear-sighted  are  found  blind.  The 
same  fire  which  melts  wax  hardens  the  clay. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Greek  word  rendered  "  might  be 
made  "  would  be  more  literally  translated  "might  become."  I 
do  not  mean  to  say  that  in  no  case  does  God  ever  give  over 


171 


people  to  blindness,  by  a  kind  of  judgment,  on  account  of  tbeif 
hardness  and  impenitence.  But  we  should  carefully  observe 
how  rarely  Scripture  speaks  of  it  as  God's  act.  Thus  here  it  is 
not  literally  true  that  He  "makes"  them  blind,  but  that  they 
"6ec«?»e"  blind. 

Augustine  remarks :  "  Who  are  those  that  see?  Those  who 
think  they  see,  who  believe  they  see."  He  also  says :"  The 
judgment  which  Christ  hath  brought  into  the  world  is  not  that 
wherewith  He  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  in  the  end  of 
the  world.  It  is  a  work  of  diserimkvition  rather,  by  which  He 
discerneth  the  cause  of  them  whicn  believe  from  that  of  the 
proud  who  think  they  see,  and  therefore  are  worse  blinded." 

Zwingle  remarks :  "  Judgment  is  here  taken  for  discrimina- 
tion, or  separation  into  classes."    Ferus  says  much  the  same. 

Cheranitius  thinks  that  our  Lord  spoke  these  words  with  spe- 
cial reference  to  the  false  and  unjust  judgment  of  excommunica- 
tion which  the  Pharisees  had  just  passed.  It  is  as  though  He 
would  say,  "  True  judgment,  a  right  discrimination  into  classes, 
is  My  prerogative.  The  excommunication  of  a  Pharisee  is 
worthless." 

Musculus  and  Gualter,  think  that  "judgment"  here  means, 
the  eternal  decree  of  God.  "  I  came  into  the  world  to  carry  out 
God's  eternal  purposes,  which  are  that  the  wise  and  prudent 
should  remain  in  darkness,  truth  should  be  revealed  to  babes;" 
but  this  seems  far-fetched. 

Poole  says:  "The  best  notion  of  'judgment'  here  is  theirs 
who  interpret  it  of  the  spiritual  government  of  the  world,  com- 
mitted to  Christ,  and  managed  by  Him  with  perfect  rectitude 
and  equity.  One  eminent  part  of  this  was  His  publishing  the 
Gospels,  the  law  of  faith.  The  result  of  which  is,  that  many 
spiritually  blind,  and  wholly  unable  to  see  the  way  to  eternal 
life,  might  be  enlightened  with  saving  knowledge,  and  that 
many  who  think  they  see,  should  by  their  obstinate  infidelity 
become  more  blind  than  they  were  from  their  birth.  Not  that 
I  cast  any  such  evil  influence  on  them,  but  this  happeneth 
through  their  own  sore  eyes." 

Whitby  remarks  that  the  Greek  conjunction  here  rendered 
"  that "  is  not  causal,  but  only  consequential;  as  when  Christ 
said,  "  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword,"  meaning,  the 
consequence  and  result  of  My  coming  will  be  to  send  a  sword, 
and  not  the  object  of  My  coming.  He  also  thinks  that  the  verse 
has  a  wide  application  to  the  Gentiles  sitting  in  darkness,  being 
enlightened  by  Christ's  coming,  while  the  Jews  were  blinded. 

Hengstenberg  says  :  "  Those  that  see  are  the  Jews,  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  Gentiles." 

Burgon  remarks :  "  Judgment  is  not  used  here  in  an  active 
sense      It  is  the  condemnation  implied  bj   severing  men  into 


172  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


good  and  bad,  which  was  one  consequence  (not  the  purpose)  of 
Christ's  coming  into  the  world. — When  Christ  came  into  the 
world,  men  promptly  showed  themselves  to  belong  to  the  state 
of  darkness  or  of  light,  and  by  their  arranging  themselves  in 
two  great  classes,  anticipated  their  own  final  sentence." — "  The 
blind  (that  is,  simple  and  ignorant,  yet  meek  and  faithful  men) 
saw;  while  the  seeing  (that  is,  vain  pretenders  to  discernment, 
proud,  presumptuous  persons)  were  made  blind." 

40. — [And  some. ..Pharisees. ..heard  words.']  This  sentence  literally 
rendered  would  be,  "Those  of  the  Pharisees  who  were  with 
Him  heard."  It  seems  to  show  that  here,  as  on  all  other  occa- 
sions, some  of  the  party  of  the  Pharisees  were  in  the  crowd 
which  hung  round  our  Lord,  narrowly  watching  all  he  said  and 
did,  and  eagerly  catching  at  anything  which  might  give  them 
an  advantage  against  Him.  It  ought  to  make  us  feel  the  im- 
mense difficulty  of  our  Lord's  position.  He  was  always  at- 
tended by  enemies,  and  spoke  and  acted  under  the  eyes  of  peo- 
ple desiring  to  do  Him  harm.  It  also  teaches  us  that  we  must 
not  cease  from  efforts  to  do  good,  because  many  of  our  hearers 
are  unbelieving. 

[And  said.. .Are  ice  blind  also?']  This  question  cannot  possibly 
be  taken  as  a  humble,  anxious  inquiry.  It  is  rather  the  sarcas- 
tic, sneering  inquiry  of  men  whose  consciences  were  pricked 
by  our  Lord's  words,  and  who  felt  that  He  was  condemning 
them:  "And  in  what  class  do  you  place  us?  Are  we  among 
those  whom  you  call  blind?  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  we  who 
are  doctors  of  the  law,  see  and  understand  nothing  ?  " — St. 
Paul's  words  to  the  unbelieving  Jew  should  be  remembered 
here  :  "  Thou  art  confident  that  thou  art  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a 
light  of  them  which  are  in  darkness."  (Rom.  ii.  17.)  Blind- 
ness was  probably  the  last  thing  which  the  Pharisees  would 
allow  could  be  predicated  of  them. 

Augustine  remarks :  "There  are  many,  who  according  to 
common  usage,  are  called  good  people,  good  men,  good  women, 
harmless,  honouring  their  parents,  not  committing  adultery, 
doing  no  murder,  not  stealing,  not  bearing  false  witness,  and 
in  a  sort  observing  the  other  duties  commanded  in  the  law,  and 
yet  are  not  Christians.  And  these  commonly  give  themselves 
airs  like  the  Pharisees  here,  saying,  '  Are  we  blind  also  ?  ' " 

Ferus  observes :  "  This  is  just  the  ancient  arrogance  of  the 
Jews." 

Jones,  of  Nayland,  makes  the  pious  remark :  "  Give  us,  O 
Lord,  the  sight  of  this  man  who  had  been  blind  from  birth, 
and  deliver  us  from  the  blindness  of  his  judges,  who  had  been 
learning  all  their  lives,  and  yet  knew  nothing.  And  if  the 
world  should  cast  us  out,  let  us  be  found  of  Thee,  whom  the 
world  crucified." 

41. — [Jesus  said  unto  them,  etc.]     Our  Lord's  answer  to  the  Phari- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    IX.  173 


sees  is  a  very  remarkable  and  elliptical  one.  It  may  be  thus 
paraphrased :  '{  Well  would  it  be  for  you.  if  you  were  really 
blind  and  ignorant.  If  you  were  really  ignorant,  you  would  be 
far  less  blameworthy  than  you  are  now.  If  you  were  really 
blind,  you  would  not  be  guilty  of  the  sin  of  wilful  unbelief  as 
you  are  now.  But,  unhappily,  you  say  that  you  know  the  truth, 
and  see  the  light,  and  are  not  ignorant,  even  while  you  are 
rejecting  Me.  This  self-satisfied  state  of  mind  is  the  very 
thing  which  is  ruining  you.  It  makes  your  sin  abide  heavily 
on  you." 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  igno- 
rance makes  a  man  entirely  free  from  guilt.  He  only  meant 
that  a  really  ignorant  man  is  much  less  guilty  than  one  who 
has  light  and  knowledge,  but  does  not  improve  and  use  them. 
No  man's  case  is  so  hopeless  as  that  of  the  self-confident  man, 
who  says  that  he  knows  everything,  and  wants  no  light.  Such 
a  man's  sin  abides  on  him,  and,  unless  repented  of,  will  sink 
him  into  the  pit. 

Let  us  note  what  a  heavy  condemnation  this  text  contains 
for  those  professing  Christians  who  are  constantly  comforting 
themselves  by  saying,  "  We  know,"  "  We  are  not  ignorant," 
"We  see  the  truth,"  while  yet  they  lazily  sit  still  in  irreiigion 
and  make  no  attempt  to  obey.  Such  persons,  however  little 
they  think  it,  are  far  more  guilty  before  God  than  the  poor 
heathen  who  never  hear  truth  at  all.  The  more  light  a  man 
has,  the  more  sin,  if  he  does  not  believe. 

To  infer  the  salvation  of  all  the  unconverted  heathen  from 
this  text  would  be  unwarrantable,  and  going  much  too  far. 
The  worst  heathen  man  has  sufficient  light  to  judge  and  con- 
demn him  at  last,  and  far  more  than  he  lives  up  to.  But  it  is 
not  too  much  to  say  that  an  ignorant  heathen  is  in  a  far  more 
hopeful  condition  than  a  proud,  self-satisfied,  self-righteous, 
unconverted  Christian. 

Brentius  thinks  that  the  expression,  "  if  ye  were  blind," 
means  "  if  ye  would  confess  your  blindness;"  and  that  "  to  say 
we  see,"  is  equivalent  to  a  "refusal  to  acknowledge  ignorance 
and  need." 

Chemnitius  observes,  that  the  expression  of  this  verse  teaches 
that  there  are  two  sorts  of  sinneis  in  this  world, — those  who 
sin  from  ignorance  and  infirmity,  and  those  who  sin  against 
light  and  knowledge,  and  that  they  must  be  regarded  and  dealt 
with  accordingly. 

Musculus  remarks,  that  nothing  seems  to  gall  men  so  much 
as  the  imputation  of  ignorance  and  want  of  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  The  very  men  who  are  unmoved  if  charged  with  im- 
moral actions,  such  as  simony,  adultery,  gluttony,  or  misuse  of 
ecclesiastical  property,  are  furious  if  told  that  they  are  dark 
and  blind  about  doctrine. 


174:  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

The  expression,  "  your  sin  remaineth,"  is  very  worthy  of 
notice.  It  teaches  the  solemn  truth  that  the  sins  of  impenitent 
and  unconverted  people  are  upon  them,  uuforgiven,  and  not 
taken  away.  It  condemns  the  modern  idea  that  all  sins  are 
already  forgiven  and  pardoned  on  account  of  Christ's  death, 
and  all  men  justilied,  and  that  the  only  thing  required  is  to 
believe  it  and  know  it.  On  the  contrary  our  sins  are  upou  us, 
and  remain  upon  us  until  we  believe.  Ferus  calls  it  "  a  terriole 
saying." 

Tholuck  remarks  on  the  whole  chapter :  "  The  narrative  of 
this  miracle  has  a  special  value  in  apologetics.  How  often  do 
we  hear  the  wish  expressed,  that  Christ's  miracles  had  been 
put  on  documentary  record,  and  had  been  subjected  to  a 
thorough  judicial  investigation.  Here  we  have  the  very  thing 
that  is  desired ;  judicial  personages,  and  these,  too,  the  avowed 
enemies  of  Christ,  investigate  a  miracle  in  repeated  hearings, 
and  yet  it  holds  its  ground.  A  man  blind  from  his  birth  was  ! 
made  to  see ! " — No  wonder  that  German  sceptics,  like  Strauss 
and  Bauer,  are  driven  to  assert  that  the  whole  narrative  is  a 
fabrication. 

In  leaving  this  chapter,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  this  is 
that  one  of  our  Lord's  miracles  about  which  nearly  all  commen- 
tators have  agreed  that  it  has  a  spiritual  signification,  and  is 
emblematic  of  spiritual  truth.  Lampe  remarks,  that  even 
those  writers  who  are  ordinarily  most  averse  to  spiritualizing  | 
And  accommodating,  admit  that  the  healing  of  this  blind  man 
is  a  picture  of  the  illumination  of  a  sinner's  soul.  His  healing 
is  a  lively  figure  of  conversion. 

It  is  curious  that  we  hear  no  more  of  this  man  who  was 
healed.  It  is  pleasant;  however,  to  bear  in  mii^the  thought 
that  there  were  many  who  believed  in  Christ  and  were  true 
disciples,  whose  names  and  lives  have  never  come  down  to 
us.  We  must  not  suppose  that  there  were  none  saved  but 
those  whose  histories  are  recorded  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  last  day,  we  may  well  believe,  will  show  that  this  man  was 
only  a  type  of  a  large  class,  whose  names  were  written  in  the  , 
Book  of  life,  though  not  recorded  for  our  learning  by  the  in- 
Bpired  writers. 


JOHN  X.     1—9. 


1  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into 
the  sheepfold,  but  climbeth  up  some 
other  way,  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a 
robber. 

2  But  he  that  entereth  in  by  tho 
door  is  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep. 


3  To  him  the  porter  openeth;  and 
the  sheep  hear  his  voice:  and  he  call- 
oth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  lead- 
eth  them  out. 

4  And  when  ho  putteth  forth  his 
own  sheep,  he  goeth  before  them,  and 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X. 


175 


the  sheep  follow  him:  for  they  know 
his  voice. 

5  And  a  stranger  will  they  not  fol- 
low, but  will  flee  from  him:  for  they 
know  not  the  voice  of  strangers. 

6  This  parable  spake  Jesus  unto 
them:  but  they  understood  not  what 
things  they  were  which  he  spake  unto 
them. 


7  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  again, 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  I  am 
the  door  of  the  sheep. 

8  All  that  ever  came  before  me  are 
thieves  and  robbers:  but  the  sheep  did 
not  hear  them. 

9  I  am  the  door:  by  me  if  any  man 
enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and  shall 
go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture. 


The  chapter  we  have  now  begun  is  closely  connected  with 
the  preceding  one.  The  parable  before  us  was  spoken 
with  direct  reference  to  the  blind  teachers  of  the  Jewish 
Church.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  the  persons  our 
Lord  had  in  view,  when  He  described  the  false  shepherd. 
The  very  men  who  had  just  said  "  We  see,"  were  denounced 
with  holy  boldness,  as  "  thieves  and  robbers." 

We  have,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  a  vivid  picture 
of  a  false  teacher  of  religion.  Our  Lord  says  that  he  is  one 
who"  enters  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheep  fold,  but  climbs 
up  some  other  way." 

The  "  door,"  in  this  sentence,  must  evidently  mean 
something  far  more  than  outward  calling  and  com- 
mission. The  Jewish  teachers,  at  any  rate,  were  not 
deficient  i#fchis  point :  they  could  probably  trace  up  their 
orders  in  direct  succession  to  Aaron  himself.  Ordination 
is  no  proof  whatever  that  a  man  is  fit  to  show  others  the 
way  to  heaven.  He  may  have  been  regularly  set  apart  by 
those  who  have  authority  to  call  ministers,  and  yet  all  his 
life  may  never  come  near  the  door,  and  at  last  may  die 
nothing  better  than  "  a  thief  and  a  robber." 

The  true  sense  of  the  "door"  must  be  sought  in  our 
Lord's  own  interpretation.  It  is  Christ  Himself  who  is 
"  the  door."  The  true  shepherd  of  souls  is  he  who  enters 
the  ministry  with  a  single  eye  to  Christ,  desiring  to  glorify 
Christ,  doing  all  in  the  strength  of  Christ,  preaching 
Christ's  doctrine,  walking  in  Christ's  steps,  and  labouring 
to  bring  men  and  women  to  Christ.     The  false  shepherd  of 


176  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

souls  is  he  who  enters  the  ministerial  office  with  little  or  no 
thought  about  Christ,  from  worldly  and  self-exalting 
motives,  but  from  no  desire  to  exalt  Jesus,  and  the  great 
salvation  that  is  in  Him.  Christ,  in  one  word,  is  the 
grand  touchstone  of  the  minister  of  religion.  The  man 
who  makes  much  of  Christ  is  a  pastor  after  God's  own 
heart,  whom  God  delights  to  honour.  The  minister  who 
makes  little  of  Christ  is  one  whom  God  regards  as  an 
impostor, — as  one  who  has  climbed  up  to  his  holy  office  not 
by  the  door,  but  by  "  some  other  way." 

The  sentence  before  us  is  a  sorrowful  and  humbling  one. 
That  it  condemns  the  Jewish  teachers  of  our  Lord's  time 
all  men  can  see.  There  was  no  "  door"  in  their  ministry. 
They  taught  nothing  rightly  about  Messiah.  They  rejected 
Christ  Himself  when  He  appeared, — but  all  men  do  not 
see  that  the  sentence  condemns  thousands  of  so-called 
Christian  teachers,  quite  as  much  as  the  leaders  and 
teachers  of  the  Jews.  Thousands  of  ordained  men  in 
the  present  day  know  nothing  whatever  about  Christ, 
except  His  name.  They  have  not  entered  u  the  door" 
themselves,  and  they  are  unable  to  show  it  to  others.  Well 
would  it  be  for  Christendom  if  this  were  more  widely 
known,  and  more  seriously  considered !  Unconverted  min- 
isters are  the  dry-rot  of  the  Church.  "  When  the  blind 
lead  the  blind  "  both  must  fall  into  the  ditch.  If  we  Mould 
know  the  value  of  a  man's  ministry,  we  must  never  fail  to 
ask,  Where  is  the  Lamb  ?  Where  is  the  Door  ?  Does  he 
bring  forward  Christ,  and  gives  Him  his  rightful  place  ? 

We  have,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses,  a  peculiar 
•picture  of  true  Christians.  Our  Lord  describes  them  as  sheep 
who  "  hear  the  voice  of  a  true  Shepherd,  and  know  His 
voice  ;  "  and  as  "  sheep  who  will  not  follow  a  stranger,  but 
will  flee  from  him,  for  the}'  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers." 

The  thing  taught  in  these  words  is  a  very  curious  one, 
and   may  seem  "  foolishness "  to  the   world.     There   is   a 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  17  7 

spiritual  instinct  in  most  true  believers,  which  generally 
enables  them  to  distinguish  between  true  and  false  teaching. 
When  they  hear  unsound  religious  instruction,  there  is 
something  within  them  which  says,  "  This  is  wrong." 
When  they  hear  the  real  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  there 
is  something  in  their  hearts  which  responds,  "  This  is 
right."  The  careless  man  of  the  world  may  see  no  differ- 
ence whatever  between  minister  and  minister,  sermon 
and  sermon.  The  poorest  sheep  of  Christ,  as  a  general 
rule,  will  "  distinguish  things  that  differ,"  though  he  may 
sometimes  be  unable  to  explain  why. 

Let  us  beware  of  despising  this  spiritual  instinct.  What- 
ever a  sneering  world  may  please  to  say,  it  is  one  of  the 
peculiar  marks  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As 
such,  it  is  specially  mentioned  by  St.  John,  when  he  says, 
"  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know 
all  things."  (1  John  ii.  20.)  Let  us  rather  pray  for  it 
daily,  in  order  that  we  may  be  kept  from  the  influence  of 
false  shepherds.  To  lose  all  power  of  distinguishing 
between  bitter  and  sweet  is  one  of  the  worst  S3Tmptoms  of 
bodily  disease.  To  be  unable  to  see  any  difference  be- 
tween law  and  gospel,  truth  and  error,  Protestantism  and 
Popery,  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  the  doctrine  of  man,  is 
a  sure  proof  that  we  are  yet  dead  in  heart,  and  need 
conversion. 

We  have,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  a  most  instructive 
picture  of  Christ  Himself.  He  utters  one  of  those  golden 
sayings  which  ought  to  be  dear  to  all  true  Christians. 
They  apply  to  people  as  well  as  to  ministers.  "I  am 
the  door :  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved, 
and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture." 

We  are  all  by  nature  separate  and  far  off  from  God. 
Sin,  like  a  great  barrier-wall,  rises  between  us  and  our 
Maker.  The  sense  of  guilt  makes  us  afraid  of  Him. 
The  sense  of  His  holiness  keeps  us  at  a  distance  from  Him, 


178  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Born  with  a  heart  at  enmity  with  God,  we  become  more 
and  more  alienated  from  Him,  by  practice,  the  longer  we 
live.  The  very  first  questions  iu  religion  that  must  be 
answered,  are  these:  "How  can  I  draw  near  to  God? 
How  can  I  be  justified  ?  How  can  a  sinner  like  me  be 
reconciled  to  my  Maker  ?  " 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  provided  an  answer  to  these 
mighty  questions.  By  His  sacrifice  for  us  on  the  cross, 
He  has  opened  a  way  through  the  great  barrier,  and  pro- 
vided pardon  and  peace  for  sinners.  He  has  "  suffered 
for  sin,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God."  He 
has  opened  a  way  into  the  holiest,  through  His  blood,  by 
which  we  may  draw  near  to  God  with  boldness,  and  ap- 
proach God  without  fear.  And  now  He  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him.  In  the 
highest  sense  He  is  "  the  door."  No  one  "  can  come  to 
the  Father  "  but  by  Him. 

Let  us  take  heed  that  we  use  this  door,  and  do  not 
merely  stand  outside  looking  at  it.  It  is  a  door  free  and 
open  to  the  chief  of  sinners  :  "  If  any  man  enter  in  b}^  it, 
he  shall  be  saved."  It  is  a  door  within  which  we  shall 
find  a  full  and  constant  supply  for  every  want  of  our  souls. 
We  shall  find  that  we  can  "go  in  and  out,"  and  enjoy 
liberty  and  peace.  The  day  comes  when  this  door  will  be 
shut  forever,  and  men  shall  strive  to  enter  in,  but  not  be 
able.  Then  let  us  make  sure  work  of  our  own  salvation. 
Let  us  not  stand  tarrying  without,  and  halting  between 
two  opinions.     Let  us  enter  in  and  be  saved. 

Notes.    John  X.  1—9. 

1. — [  Verily...  I  say...  you.]  Tlree  things  must  be  carefully  remem- 
bered, if  we  would  rightly  understand  the  first  nine  verses  of 
this  chapter.  Inattention  to  them  has  caused  much  confused 
and  inconsistent  interpretation. 

(«)  For  one  thing,  the  passage  is  closely  connected  with  the 
last  chapter.  The  opening  sentence  should  be  read  on,  without 
break  or  separation  between,  together  with  the  forty-first  verse 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  179 


of  the  ninth  chapter.  Our  Lord  is  still  speaking  to  the  hostile 
Pharisees  who  asked,  "  Are  we  blind  also?  "  and  got  the  answer, 
"  Ye  say,  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  reraaineth." — It  is  to  them 
that  He  goes  on  to  say,  "  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  entereth  not  in 
by  the  door  is  a  thief  and  a  robber."  He  is  not  so  much  com- 
forting His  disciples  now,  as  rebuking  and  exposing  His  enemies. 

(b)  For  another  thing,  the  passage  is  entirely  a  parable,  or  alle- 
gory. (See  sixth  verse.)  In  interpreting  it,  like  almost  all  our 
Lord's  parables,  the  one  great  lesson  should  be  kept  in  view, 
which  is  the  key-note  to  the  whole.  We  must  not  press  every 
detail  and  little  point  too  far,  and  try  to  attach  a  spiritual  mean- 
ing to  the  lesser  parts  of  the  picture.  Those  who  do  so  always 
run  aground  in  their  exposition,  and  get  into  difficulties.  To 
this  parable,  if  any,  the  old  quaint  sayings  are  applicable  :  "  No 
parable  stands  on  four  legs." — "Squeeze  parables  too  far,  and  you 
will  draw  blood  from  them,  and  not  milk." 

Calvin  remarks  wisely  :  "  It  is  useless  to  scrutinize  too  closely 
every  part  of  this  parable.  Let  us  rest  satisfied  with  this  gen- 
eral view,  that  as  Christ  states  a  resemblance  between  the  Church 
and  a  fold,  (a  sheepfold,  in  which  God  assembles  all  His  people,) 
so  He  compares  Himself  to  a  door,  because  there  is  no  other  en- 
trance into  the  Church  but  by  Himself.  Then  it  follows  that 
they  are  good  shepherds,  who  lead  men  straight  to  Christ;  and 
that  they  are  truly  gathered  into  Christ's  fold,  so  as  to  belong  to 
His  flock,  who  devote  themselves  to  Christ  alone." 

(c)  For  another  thing,  the  object  that  our  Lord  had  in  view, 
in  speaking  this  parable,  must  be  kept  steadily  before  our  eyes. 
That  object  was  to  show  the  entire  unfitness  of  the  Pharisees  to 
be  pastors  and  teachers  of  the  Jews,  because  they  had  not  ta- 
ken up  their  office  in  the  right  spirit,  and  with  a  right  under- 
standing of  the  work  they  had  to  do.  He  is  not  iu  this  part 
speaking  of  Himself  as  "the  Shepherd,"  but  as  "the  Door:" 
only  as  the  Door.  What  Christ  is  as  a  "  Shepherd  "  comes  after- 
ward ;  what  Christ  is  as  "the  Door  "  is  the  one  point  of  the  first 
nine  verses. 

The  "progressive"  character  of  our  Lord's  discourses  record- 
ed in  St.  John,  is  strikingly  illustrated  in  this  chapter.  Start- 
ing from  a  very  simple  statement,  our  Lord  goes  on  to  speak  of 
the  highest  truths.  We  see  the  same  in  the  fourth,  fifth,  and 
sixth  chapters. 

This  is  one  of  the  twenty-four  places  in  St.  John's  Gospel, 
where  the  double  "  verily"  comes  in.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  al- 
ways prefaces  some  statement  of  more  than  ordinary  importance 
and  solemnity. 

[Ife  that  entereth  not,  etc.']  Our  Lord  here  appeals  to  the  com- 
mon experience  of  His  hearers.  They  all  knew  well  that  any 
one  who  was  seen  entering  a  sheepfold  by  climbing  over  the 
wall  or  fence  of  euclosure,  and  not  by  going  through  the  door, 


180  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


would  be  justly  suspected  of  being  a  thief.    Every  true  shep- 
herd, as  a  matter  of  course,  makes  use  of  the  door. 

The  "  door"  He  afterwards  interprets  to  mean  Himself.  The 
latent  thought  evidently  is,  that  any  teacher  of  religion  who  does 
not  take  up  and  discharge  his  office  with  faith  in  Christ  and  His 
atonement,  and  with  an  aim  to  glorify  Christ,  is  unfit  for  his 
business,  and  unable  to  do  any  good.  Instead  of  being  a  shep- 
herd who  helps  and  feeds,  he  is  no  better  than  a  "  robber,"  who 
does  harm.  Instead  of  saving  souls,  he  kills  them.  Instead  of 
bringing  life,  he  brings  death  to  his  hearers. 

Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Euthymius,  Theophylact,  Maldonatus, 
think  the  "door"  means  the  Scriptures.  Others,  as  Tholuck 
and  Hengstenberg,  think  the  "door"  means  a  proper  divine  call 
to  office.    Both  views  seem  to  me  unnatural  and  incorrect. 

Augustine  observes:  "Christ's  fold  is  the  Catholic  Church. 
Whoso  would  enter  the  fold,  let  him  enter  in  by  the  door :  let 
him  preach  very  Christ.  Let  him  not  only  preach  very  Christ. 
but  seek  Christ's  glory,  not  his  own." — He  says  again,  "  I,  seek- 
ing to  enter  into  your  hearts,  preach  Christ :  if  I  preach  other 
than  that,  I  shall  be  striving  to  climb  in  some  other  way.  Christ 
is  my  Door :  through  Christ  I  win  your  hearts." 

Language  borrowed  from  the  care  of  sheep  and  sheepfolds 
would  be  much  more  intelligible  in  Palestine  than  it  is  here  in 
England.  Keeping  sheep  was  much  more  common  there  than  in 
our  climate.  Folds,  doors,  shepherds,  thieves  climbing  over  some 
other  way,  would  be  points  familiar  to  most  Jews.  Moreover, 
the  use  of  such  language  in  speaking  of  spiritual  things  would 
be  peculiarly  intelligible  to  all  who  had  read  Jer.  xxiii.,  Ezek. 
xxxiv.,  and  Zech.  xi. 

Brentius  remarks  on  the  condescension  of  our  Lord  in  bor- 
rowing spiritual  lessons  from  such  humble  sources :  "  What  is 
more  low  than  a  shepherd's  condition?  Every  shepherd  is  an 
abomination  to  the  Egyptians.  What  more  dull  and  stupid  than 
a  sheep  ?  Yet  here  is  a  picture  of  Christ  and  believers !  " 

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  in  his  book  on  Daniel,  supposes  that  our 
Lord,  in  choosing  the  subject  of  this  parable,  had  before  His 
eyes  the  many  sheepfolds  near  the  temple  and  about  Jerusalem, 
where  sheep  were  kept  ready  to  be  sold  for  sacrifice. 

The  expression,  "  some  other  way,"  seems  tome  purposely 
very  wide.  Men  may  become  teachers  of  the  Church  from  many 
different  motives,  and  in  many  different  frames  of  mind.  Some 
may  be  sceptical,  some  formalists,  some  worldly;  but  all  alike 
are  wrong,  if  they  do  not  enter  office  "  through  the  Door : "  viz., 
by  Christ. 

The  word  rendered  "the  same  "  would  be  more  literally  trans- 
lated, "that  man." 

The  expression,  "  thief  and  rob1  <>r,  "  is  very  strong,  aud  sup- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  181 


plies  a  striking  instance  of  the  use  of  a  parable  to  convey  indi- 
rectly a  sharp  and  severe  rebuke.  Of  course  our  Lord  could 
hardly  have  said  to  the  Pharisees,  "You  are  thieves  and  rob- 
bers." Yet  by  use  of  a  parable,  He  says  what  is  tantamount  to 
it. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  these  strong  epithets  show  plainly  that 
there  are  times  when  it  is  right  to  rebuke  sharply.  Flattering 
everybody,  and  complimenting  all  teachers  who  are  zealous  and 
earnest,  without  reference  to  their  soundness  in  the  faith,  is  not 
according  to  Scripture.  Nothing  seems  so  offensive  to  Christ 
as  a  false  teacher  of  religion,  a  false  prophet,  or  a  false  shep- 
herd. Nothing  ought  to  be  so  much  dreaded  in  the  Church,  and 
if  needful,  to  be  so  plainly  rebuked,  opposed,  and  exposed. 
The  strong  language  of  our  Keformers,  when  writing  against 
Komish  teachers,  is  often  blamed  more  than  it  ought  to  be. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "thief"  implies  secret  fraud  and 
dishonesty.  The  word  rendered  "  robber"  implies  more  open 
violence.  There  are  false  teachers  of  both  sorts ;  open  Papists 
and  open  Sceptics,  semi-Papists  and  semi- Sceptics.  All  are 
alike  dangerous. 

Augustine  observes :  "Let  the  Pagans,  the  Jews,  the  heretics 
say,  '  We  lead  a  good  life.'  If  they  enter  not  by  the  door,  what 
availeth  it?  A  good  life  only  profiteth  if  it  lead  to  life  eternal. 
Indeed,  those  cannot  be  said  to  lead  a  good  life,  who  are  either 
blindly  ignorant  of,  or  wilfully  despise,  the  end  of  good  living. 
No  one  can  hope  for  eternal  life  who  knows  not  Christ,  who  is 
the  life,  and  by  that  door  enters  the  fold." 

Hammond  alone  anions  commentators  applies  this  verse  and 
the  four  following  entirely  to  Christ  Himself,  and  considers 
"  the  door"  to  mean  the  proper  evidence  of  miracles  aud  doc- 
trine.    I  cannot  see  this  at  all. 

Bishop  Burnet  remarks  that  this  parable  is  the  passage  above 
all  others  which  both  Fathers  and  modern  writers  have  chiefly 
used,  in  order  to  show  the  difference  between  good  and  bad 
ministers.  Wordsworth  calls  the  whole  chapter  "  a  divine  pas- 
toral to  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons." 

2. — \He  that  entereth  in  by  the  door,  etc.']  This  verse  contains  the 
converse  of  the  preceding  verse.  He  that  is  seen  entering  the 
sheepfold  by  the  one  proper  entrance,  the  door,  may  be  set  down 
as  a  true  shepherd.  Such  a  man,  being  duly  commissioned  by 
the  owner  of  the  flock,  and  recognized  by  the  sheep  as  their  pas- 
tor and  friend,,  has  no  need  to  enter  clandestinely,  like  a  thief, 
or  by  violence,  as  a  robber. 

The  word  "the"  before  shepherd  is  not  in  the  Greek.  It 
should  be  simply,  "a  shepherd."  The  omission  of  the  article 
seems  intentional,  to  show  that  our  Lord  is  describing  true 
"  shepherds  of  sheep  "  generally,  and  not  Himself. 

3. — [To  him... porter  openeth,  etc.]    The  whole  of  this  verse  is  meaDt 


182  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


to  show  the  character  of  a  true  shepherd  of  sheep,  in  four 
respects,  (a)  The  porter  opens  the  gate  to  him,  knowing  by 
his  step  and  manner  of  approach,  that  he  is  a  friend,  and  not  an 
enemy.  (6)  The  sheep  recognize  his  voice,  and  attend  to  what 
he  says,  (c)  He,  knowing  all  his  flock  individually,  calls  each 
sheep  by  his  own  peculiar  name,  (d)  He  leads  them  out  to 
feed,  desiring  daily  to  promote  their  health  and  well-being.  In 
all  these  four  points,  he  is  unlike  the  thief  and  robber. 

The  different  customs  of  Eastern  countries,  as  compared  to  our 
own,  must  be  carefully  kept  in  mind,  to  understand  the  expres- 
sions of  this  verse.  A  fold  in  Palestine  was  a  space  enclosed 
by  high  walls,  not  by  low  hurdles.  It  had  agate  guarded  by  a 
porter  at  night,  as  the  sheep  could  not  be  safely  left  alone.  An 
Eastern  shepherd  kuows  each  sheep  in  his  flock,  and  often  has 
a  name  for  each  one.    The  sheep  are  led,  and  not  driven. 

About  "  the  porter  who  opens,"  in  this  verse,  opinions  differ. 
Most  commentators  hold  that  the  "porter"  means  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  calls  true  ministers  into  the  Church,  and  "  opens 
hearts;  "  and  that  the  sense  is,  "  to  a  true  pastor  the  Holy  Ghost 
gives  a  call  to  his  office,  and  makes  a  wray  into  the  hearts  of 
hearers."  This,  no  doubt,  is  excellent  divinity,  but  I  cannot 
think  our  Lord  meant  anything  of  the  kind.  The  "  porter  "  here 
is  not  said  to  call  the  pastor,  but  to  open  when  the  pastor 
comes ;  nor  yet  to  open  hearts,  but  the  door  of  the  fold,  through 
which  the  true  pastor  enters.— The  view  of  Wordsworth,  also 
held  by  Augustine,  Rupertus,  Builinger,  and  Flacius, — that  the 
"  porter"  is  Christ  Himself,  who  is  not  only  "  Door,"  but  "Por- 
ter," also, — does  not  appear  to  me  necessary.  I  prefer,  with 
Glassius,  Grotius,  Hutcheson,  and  Bloomfleld,  regarding  the 
whole  sentence  as  a  subordinate  feature  in  the  parable,  signify- 
ing that  a  true  shepherd  of  sheep  not  only  enters  by  the  lawful 
door,  but  that  every  facility  is  made  for  his  entrance. 

Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Euthymius,  aud  Theophylact,  think  the 
"porter"  may  mean  "Moses." 

Others,  as  Ecolampadius,  Lampe,  Webster,  think  the  "por- 
ter" means  the  ministers  and  teachers  of  the  Church,  who  have 
the  power  of  the  keys,  and  the  right  to  admit  pastors. 

Others,  as  Gomarus,  Brentius,  Maldonatus,  Hall,  Whitby, 
Bengel,  and  Hengstenburg,  think  the  "porter"  is  God  the 
Father. 

The  expression,  "his  own  sheep,"  must  not  be  pressed  too  far. 
It  simply  means  that  a  real  shepherd,  according  to  Eastern  cus- 
tom, knowing  his  own  flock  individually  byname,  calls  them  at 
once  by  their  names,  and  proves  his  relation  to  them  by  so  doing. 
If  not  his  owi],  he  could  not  do  so. 

4.— [And  when  he  putteth  forth,  etc.']  This  verse  is  simply  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  description  of  a  true  and  faithful  shepherd  of 
sheep.     Whenever  such  an  one  takes  his  flock  out  to  pasture,  he 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  183 


walks  before  them,  as  an  Eastern  shepherd  always  does,  never 
requiring  them  to  go  where  he  does  not  first  go  himself.  Such 
a  shepherd  the  sheep  follow  with  implicit  confidence,  and,  know- 
ing his  voice,  go  wherever  he  calls  them. 

The  words  of  Moses  should  be  read :  "  Let  the  Lord  set  a  man 
over  the  congregation,  which  may  go  out  before  them,  and  which 
may  go  in  before  them,  and  which  may  lead  them  out,  and  which 
may  bring  them  in  :  that  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  be  not  as 
sheep  which  have  no  shepherd.  "     (Num.  xxvii.  16,  17.) 

That  Eastern  shepherds  "  lead  "  their  sheep,  is  clear  from  Exod. 
iii.  1:  "  He  led  the  fiock ;  "  andPsalmxxiii.2  :  "  He  leadeth  me." 

ft. — [And  a  stranger  icill  they  not  follow,  etc.']  This  verse  concludes 
the  picture  of  a  true  shepherd  and  his  flock.  It  was  a  fact  well 
known  to  all  our  Lord's  hearers,  that  sheep  accustomed  to  one 
shepherd's  voice  would  not  obey  a  stranger's  voice,  but  would 
rather  be  frightened  at  it.  Just  so  true  Christians  have  a  spir- 
itual taste  and  discernment  by  which  they  distinguish  a  false 
teacher,  and  will  not  hear  him.  "Ye  have  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,  and  know  all  things."  (1  John  ii.  20.)  The  poor 
and  illiterate  believers  often  illustrate  this  in  a  very  extraordi- 
nary way. 

Brentius  observes  here  the  singular  faculty  which  sheep 
possess  of  always  knowing  and  recognizing  the  voice  of  their 
own  shepherd.  He  also  notices  the  extraordinary  knowledge 
that  the  lamb  has  of  its  own  mother's  bleat  among  a  thousand 
others,  as  a  curious  characteristic  of  an  animal  in  many  respects 
dull  and  stupid. 

Scott  observes  that  this  verse  justifies  true  Christians  in  not 
listening  to  false  teachers.  For  leaving  their  parish  church  per- 
haps, under  these  circumstances,  many  reproach  them.  Yet  the 
very  men  who  reproach  them  would  not  trust  their  worldly  affairs 
to  an  ignorant  and  dishonest  lawyer,  or  their  bodies  to  an  incom- 
petent doctor!  Can  it  be  wrong  to  acton  the  same  principles 
for  our  souls? 

Besser  observes :  "  Sheep  flee  from  a  false  shepherd.  They 
will  not  say,  it  is  enough  if  we  do  not  follow  this  strange 
preacher  in  those  points  in  which  he  holds  forth  unsound  teach- 
ing. They  will  have  nothing  at  ail  to  do  with  him.  They  will 
flee  from  him  as  from  a  contagious  disease."     (2  Tim.  ii.  17.) 

Bickersteth  observes  that  this  verse,  and  the  third,  throw  light 
on  the  pastoral  office  of  ministers.  "  How  much  of  ministerial 
influence  depends  on  personal  knowledge !  Great  is  the  hindrance 
to  the  influence  when  an  overgrown  population  renders  it  impos- 
sible." 

6. — [This parable. ..Jesus.. .them.']  The  word  rendered  "parable" 
here  hardly  bears  the  sense  of  the  expression.  It  is  rather 
"  allegory,  "  or  figurative  picture.  However,  it  clearly  settles 
that  the  whole  passage  must  be  taken  as  a  picture  of  spiritual 


184  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


things,  and  must  be  carefully  handled,  and  not  interpreted  too 
literally.  The  Greek  word  used  by  John  for  "parable"  is  not 
used  in  any  other  Gospel. 

\_B\it  they  understood  not... unto  them.]  The  Pharisees  appear 
to  have  failed  in  seeing  the  application  of  the  parable.  This  is 
curious,  when  we  remember  how  quickly  they  saw  the  applica- 
tion to  themselves  of  the  parable  of  the  husbandmen  who  killed 
the  heir  of  the  vineyard.  But  nothing  seems  to  blind  men's  eyes 
so  much  as  pride  of  office.  Wrapped  up  in  their  conceit  of  their 
own  knowledge  and  dignity,  they  did  not  see  that  they  them- 
selves who  pretended  to  be  leaders  and  teachers  of  the  Jewish 
flocks  were  not  shepherds,  but  "  thieves  aud  robbers,"  doing 
more  harm  than  good.  They  did  not  see  that  the  fatal  defect  in 
their  own  qualification  for  office  was  ignorance  of  Christ  and 
want  of  faith  in  Him.  They  did  not  see  that  no  true  sheep  of 
Christ  could  be  expected  to  hear,  follow,  or  obey  their  teaching. 
Above  all,  they  did  not  see  that  in  excommunicating  the  poor 
blind  man  whom  our  Lord  had  healed,  they  were  just  proving 
themselves  to  be  "thieves  and  robbers,"  and  injuring  one  whom 
they  ought  to  have  helped. 

If  even  One  who  "  spake  as  never  man  spake  "  was  not  always 
understood,  ministers  cannot  be  surprised  if  they  find  they  are 
often  not  understood  now.  How  little  of  a  sermon  is  under- 
stood, few  preachers  have  the  least  idea! 

Ferus  remarks  that  our  Lord's  hearers  must  have  been  blind 
not  to  see  that  their  own  prophet  Ezekiel  had  already  shown  the 
application  of  the  parable.     (Chap,  xxxiv.) 

Lampe  thinks  they  knew  that  our  Lord  was  speaking  of  them, 
but  could  not  fully  comprehend  the  application  of  the  parable. 

7. — [Then  said  Jesus... again."]  Here  we  see  the  condescension  and 
patience  of  our  Lord.  Seeing  His  hearers  not  able  to  understand 
Him,  He  proceeds  to  explain  His  meaning  more  fully.  This  is 
an  example  for  all  teachers  of  religion.  Without  frequent  repe- 
tition and  simplification  spiritual  lessons  can  never  be  taught. 

[Verily,  verily... you.]  Once  more  this  solemn  expression  is 
used,  and  again  to  the  same  hearers,  the  Pharisees. 

[I  am  the  door  of  the  sheep.]  Here  is  plain  exposition.  Jesus 
here  declares  that  He  Himself  is  the  Door  through  whom,  and 
by  faith  in  whom,  both  shepherd  and  sheep  must  pass,  if  they 
would  go  inside  God's  fold.  "Every  single  sheep  must  enter 
through  Me,  if  he  would  join  God's  flock.  Every  teacher  who 
wishes  to  be  a  shepherd  over  God's  flock,  must  enter  his  office 
looking  to  Me." 

This  high  claim  of  dignity  must  have  sounded  startling  to  the 
Pharisees  !  A  higher  claim  we  can  hardly  conceive.  None  but 
One,  even  the  Divine  Messiah,  could  have  used  such  an  expres- 
sion.   No  prophet  or  apostle  ever  did. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  185 


At  first  sight  it  seems  strange  that  our  Lord  says,  "  I  am  the 
Door  of  the  sheep,"  and  not  simply  "  the  Door."  But  I  think  it 
is  meant  to  teach  that  the  Door  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  sheep 
more  than  the  shepherd,  and  that  He  Himself  is  given  more 
particularly  for  all  His  people  than  for  His  ministers.  Minis- 
ters are  only  servants.  The  flock  might  possibly  do  without 
them,  but  they  could  not  do  without  the  flock. 

Bullinger  calls  attention  to  the  many  beautiful  figures  under 
which  our  Lord  represented  Himself  and  His  office  to  the  Jews, 
in  St.  John's  writings.  The  Bread,  the  Living  Water,  the  Light 
of  the  World,  the  Door,  the  Shepherd,  are  all  in  five  chapters 
of  this  Gospel. 

Musculus  observes  that  the  simple  view  of  Christ  being  "  the 
Door,"  is  that  He  is  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 

Webster  observes :  "  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  in  the  Ser- 
mon on  the  Mount,  (Matt.  vii.  13 — 17,)  the  description  of  the 
strait  gait  and  narrow  way  immediately  precedes  the  warning 
against  false  prophets  and  ravening  wolves."  The  same  also 
may  be  seen  here. 

8.— [All  that  ever  came  before  me,  etc.']  These  words,  "  All,  before 
Me,"  must  evidently  be  limited  or  qualified.  They  cannot  be 
taken  in  their  fullest  sense.  The  prophets  and  John  the  Bap- 
tist were  not  thieves  and  robbers.  It  cannot  well  be  taken  to 
mean,  "  All  who  have  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah."  There  is  no 
evidence  that  many  claimants  did  appear  before  our  Lord,  if 
any.  Besides,  the  word  "are,"  in  the  present  tense,  seems  to 
exclude  those  who  lived  before  our  Lord's  time. 

The  great  knot  of  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  words,  "  came 
before  Me."  The  Greek  word  rendered  "before  "  has  only  four 
meanings :  (1)  before  in  point  of  time ;  (2)  before  in  point  of 
place ;  (3)  before  in  point  of  dignity  and  honour ;  (4)  before  in 
the  way  of  substitution.  Of  these,  the  two  first  seem  out  of 
the  question,  and  we  are  shut  up  to  the  two  last.  I  can  only 
conjecture  that  the  sentence  must  be  paraphrased  in  this  way  : 
"  All  who  have  come  into  the  Church  professing  to  be  teachers, 
claiming  honour  for  themselves  instead  of  Me,  or  honouring 
anything  in  preference  to  Me,  such  as  you  Pharisees, — all  such 
are  not  true  shepherds,  but  thieves  and  robbers."  I  can  see  no 
better  solution,  and  I  admit  that  the  sentence  is  a  difficulty. 

Some,  as  Chrysostom  and  Theophylact,  think  "  thieves  and 
robbers  "  mean  Theudas,  Judas  of  Galilee,  (Acts  v.  36,  37,)  and 
others  like  them. 

Euthymius  remarks  that  "  all"  here  must  not  be  taken  liter- 
ally, but  is  a  Hebraism  meaning,  "  Any  one  who  does  not  come 
by  Me  is  a  thief,"  etc. 

Theophylact  observes  that  the  Manichean  heretics  wrested  this 
text  into  a  proof  of  their  fanatical  view,  that  the  Old  Testament 
prophets  were  not  sent  by  God! 


186  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Luther  says :  *'  These  thieves  and  robbers  form  at  all  times 
the  great  majority  in  the  world,  and  nothing  better  can  they  be 
as  long  as  they  are  not  in  Christ.  In  fact,  the  world  will  have 
such  wolf's  preaching,  and  indeed  desires  no  better,  because  it 
hears  not  Christ  nor  regards  Christ.  It  is  no  wonder  that  true 
Christians  and  their  pastors  are  so  few." 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  That  no  man  may  be  moved  by  the  consid- 
eration, that  there  have  been  teachers  in  all  ages  who  gave 
themselves  no  concern  whatever  about  directing  men  to  Christ, 
Christ  expressly  states  that  it  is  no  matter  how  many  there 
may  have  been  of  this  description,  or  how  early  they  began  to 
appear.  There  is  but  one  Door,  and  all  who  leave  it,  and  make 
openings  or  breaches  in  the  walls,  are  thieves. 

Lightfoot  thinks  that  our  Lord  refers  to  the  Pharisees,  Saddu- 
cees,  and  Essenes,  who  had  long  misled  the  Jews  before  Christ 
came,  and  that  they  were  the  three  false  shepherds  whose  final 
casting  off  is  foretold  in  Zechariah  xi.  8. 

The  expression,  "  The  sheep  did  not  hear  them,"  must  mean 
that  true  believers,  when  our  Lord  came  on  earth,  such  as 
Simeon,  Anna,  and  others,  had  ceased  to  put  any  confidence  in 
the  commissioned  teachers  of  the  Jews,  and  were  like  sheep 
without  a  shepherd. 

The  word  "  sheep,"  in  this  explanatory  verse,  must  evidently 
be  taken  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  can  ouly  mean  true  believers. 
Mere  outward  members  of  the  Church,  without  faith  and  grace, 
are  not  "  sheep." 

"  Sheep,"  says  Hengstenberg,  M  in  the  discourses  of  Christ, 
are  always  the  faithful  members  of  God's  kingdom,  the  company 
of  believers." 

Alford  says:  "The  sheep  throughout  this  parable  are  not  the 
mixed  multitude  of  good  and  bad ;  but  the  real  sheep,  the  faith- 
ful, who  are  what  all  in  the  fold  should  be.  The  false  sheep,  the 
goats,  do  not  appear." 

Brentius  remarks  that  we  must  not  hastily  assume,  from  our 
Lord's  saying  "  the  sheep  did  not  hear  them,"  that  godly  peo- 
ple will  never  be  led  away  temporarily  by  false  teachers.  They 
may  be  deceived  and  seduced,  but  will  return  to  the  truth  at 
last. 
9. — [7am  the  door,  etc.~\  This  verse  is  one  of  those  wide,  broad, 
grand  statements  which  our  Lord  sometimes  makes,  stretching 
far  beyond  the  subject  of  which  He  is  immediately  speaking.  It 
is  like,  "  I  am  the  Bread, — I  am  the  Light, — I  am  the  Way." — 
The  primary  meaning  is,  "  I  am  He  through  whom  anil  by 
whom  alone  true  pastors  must  enter  the  Church.  All  such  pas- 
tors, entering  by  Me,  shall  find  themselves  at  home  in  the  fold, 
and  enjoy  the  confidence  of  my  flock,  and  find  food  for  the  souls 
of  my  sheep,  their  hearers." — The  secondary  or  fuller  meaning 
is,  "I  am  the  Way  of  access  to  God.    All  who  come  to  the 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  187 

Father  by  Me,  whether  pastors  or  hearers,  sha/1  find  through 
Me  safety  and  liberty,  and  possess  continua'  food  for  their 
souls."  Strictly  speaking  the  sentence  appears  to  belong  spe- 
cially to  the  true  ministers  of  the  flock  of  Christ.  But  I  dare  not 
confine  it  to  them  alone.  It  is  a  grand,  wide  promise  to  all  who 
enter  in. 

Melancthon  sees  in  this  verse  a  most  excellent  picture  of  a 
true  pastor,  in  four  respects.     (1)  He  shall  be  saved  personally. 

(2)  He  shall  go  into  close  and  intimate  communion  with  God. 

(3)  He  shall  go  forth  furnished  with  gifts,  and  be  useful  to  the 
Church.  (4)  He  shall  find  food  and  refreshment  for  his  own 
soul. 

Musculus  observes  that  our  Lord  does  not  say,  "If  any 
learned,  or  righteous,  or  noble,  or  rich,  or  Jewish  man  enters 
by  Me ;  "  but  any  man,  "  no  matter  who,  great  or  small,  how- 
ever wicked  in  times  past," — any  man  that  enters  by  Me  shall 
be  saved. 

The  expression,  "  go  in  and  out,"  implies  a  habit  of  using 
familiarly  a  dwelling,  and  treating  it  as  a  home.  It  is  a  Hebra- 
ism. It  expresses  beautifully  the  habitual  communion  and 
happy  intercourse  with  Christ  which  a  true  believer  enjoys.  (See 
Acts  i.  21,  ix.  28 ;  John  xiv.  23;  Rev.  iii.  20.) 

Augustine  suggests  that  "  go  in  "  means  entering  by  faith, 
and  "  going  out/'  dying  in  faith,  and  the  result  of  it  having  life 
in  glory.  He  says,  "  We  come  in  by  believing:  we  go  out  by 
dying."    But  this  seems  far-fetched. 

Euthymius  thinks  that  "going  out"  refers  to  the  Apostles 
going  out  into  the  world  to  preach  the  Gospel. 

The  '*  finding  pasture  "  implies  the  .satisfaction,  comfort,  and 
refcgshgifint  of  soul  which  every  one  who  uses  Christ  as  his 
Door  into  heaven  shall  experience.  The  latent  thought  is  evi- 
dently Psalm  xxiii.  1,  2,  etc. 

Burgon  remarks  :  "  The  concluding  words  describe  the  secur- 
ity and  enjoyment  which  are  the  privilege  of  God's  people.  To 
go  in  and  out  is  to  transact  the  business  of  each  day's  life :  its 
rest  and  labour,  the  beginning  and  end  of  every  work.  The 
Hebrew  phrase  denotes  a  man's  whole  life  and  conversation. 
The  promises  connected  therewith  seem  to  imply  that  in  their 
daily  walk,  it  may  be  in  the  world's  dusky  lane  and  crowded 
mart,  the  people  of  God  will  find  spiritual  support  and  conso- 
lation, even  meat  for  their  souls,  which  the  world  knows  not 
of.  Elsewhere  the  phrase  is  often,  '  go  out  and  come  in.'  Here, 
not  without  meaning,  the  expressions  are  transposed.  The  for- 
mer is  the  order  of  nature,  the  latter  the  order  of  grace." 

In  leaving  this  difficult  passage,  it  is  well  to  remember  that 
though  our  Lord  is  not  speaking  of  Himself  as  a  Shepherd  here, 
and  is  only  giving  a  descriptive  picture  of  a  good  shepherd, 
there  is  a  latent  application  to  Himself.    There  is  no  one  to 


188 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


whom  the  various  features  of  the  picture  apply  so  literally, 
clearly,  and  exactly,  as  they  do  to  the  great  Shepherd  of  believ- 
ers. "Every  expression,"  says  Burgon,  "has  a  marked  refer- 
ence to  Christ;  yet  it  is  plain  that  it  is  not  of  Himself  that  He 
is  primarily  speaking." 

Throughout  the  passage  it  is  noteworthy  how  much  stress 
is  laid  on  the  "voice"  of  the  shepherd,  and  on  hearing  his 
voice.  I  cannot  but  regard  that  as  intentional.  It  is  the  "  voice 
in  teaching "  which  makes  the  great  difference  between  one 
earthly  pastor  and  another.  "The  shepherd,"  says  Burgon, 
"  must  not  be  silent  while  among  his  sheep."  It  is  hearing  the 
voice  of  the  Chief  Shepherd  which  is  one  great  mark  of  all  true 
believers. 


JOHN  X.   10—18. 


10  Tho  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to 
steal,  and  to  kill,  and  to  destroy:  I  am 
come  that  they  might  have  life,  and 
that  they  might  have  it  more  abundant- 
ly- 

11  I  am  tho  good  shepherd:  the 
good  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the 


12  But  he  that  is  an  hireling,  and 
not  the  shepherd,  whose  own  the  sheep 
are  not,  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  and 
leaveth  tho  sheep,  and  fleeth:  and  the 
wolf  catcheth  them,  and  scattereth  the 
sheep. 

13  The  hireling  fleeth,  because  he  is 
an  hireling,  and  careth  not  for  the 
sheep. 

14  I  am  the  good  shepherd,  and 


know    my   sheep,  and   am  known  of 
mine, 

15  As  the  Father  knoweth  me,  even 
so  know  I  tho  Father:  and  I  lay  down 
my  life  for  tho  sheep. 

16  And  other  sheep  I  have,  which 
are  not  of  this  fold:  thorn  also  I  must 
bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice; 
and  there  shall  be  one  fold,  and  ono 
shepherd. 

17  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love 
me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I 
might  take  it  again. 

18  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I 
lay  it  down  of  myself.  I  have  power 
to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  tako 
it  again.  This  commandment  have  I 
received  of  my  Father. 


These  verses  show  us,  for  one  thing,  the  great  object  for 
tvhicJi  Christ  came  into  the  world.  He  says,  I  am  come 
that  men  "  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it 
more  abundantly." 

The  truth  contained  in  these  words  is  of  vast  importance. 
They  supply  an  antidote  to  many  crude  and  unsound  no- 
tions which  are  abroad  in  the  world.  Christ  did  not  come 
to  be  only  a  teacher  of  new  morality,  or  an  example  of 
holiness  and  self-denial,  or  a  founder  of  new  ceremonies, 
as  some  have  vainly  asserted.     He  left  heaven,  and  dwelt 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  189 

for  thirty-three  years  on  earth  for  far  higher  ends  than 
these.  He  came  to  procure  eternal  life  for  man,  by  the 
price  of  His  own  vicarious  death.  He  came  to  be  a  mighty 
fountain  of  spiritual  life  for  all  mankind,  to  which  sinners 
coming  by  faith  might  drink  ;  and,  drinking,  might  live  for 
evermore.  By  Moses  came  laws,  rules,  ordinances,  cere- 
monies.    By  Christ  came  grace,  truth,  and  eternal  life. 

Important  as  this  doctrine  is,  it  requires  to  be  fenced 
with  one  word  of  caution.  We  must  not  overstrain  the 
meaning  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  words.  We  must  not 
suppose  that  eternal  life  was  a  thing  entirely  unknown  until 
Christ  came,  or  that  the  Old  Testament  saints  were  in  utter 
darkness  about  the  world  to  come.  The  way  of  life  by 
faith  in  a  Saviour  was  a  way  well  known  to  Abraham  and 
Moses  and  David.  A  Redeemer  and  a  Sacrifice  was  the 
hope  of  all  God's  children  from  Abel  down  to  John  the 
Baptist ;  but  their  vision  of  these  things  was  necessarily 
imperfect.  They  saw  them  afar  off,  and  not  distinctly. 
They  saw  them  in  outline  only,  and  not  completely.  It 
was  the  coming  of  Christ  which  made  all  things  plain,  and 
caused  the  shadows  to  pass  away.  Life  and  immortality 
were  brought  into  full  light  by  the  Gospel.  In  short,  to 
use  our  Lord's  own  words,  even  those  who  had  life  had  it 
"  more  abundantly,"  when  Christ  came  into  the  world. 

These  verses  show  us,  for  another  thing,  one  of  the  prin- 
cipal offices  which  Jesus  Christ  fills  for  true  Christians. 
Twice  over  our  Lord  uses  an  expression  which,  to  an  East- 
ern hearer,  would  be  singularly  full  of  meaning.  Twice 
over  he  says  emphatically,  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd."  It 
is  a  saying  rich  in  consolation  and  instruction. 

Like  a  good  shepherd,  Christ  knows  all  His  believing 
people.  Their  names,  their  families,  their  dwelling-places, 
their  circumstances,  their  private  history,  their  experience, 
their  trials,  —  with  all  these  things  Jesus  is  perfectly 
acquainted.     There  is  not  a  thing  about  the  least  and  low- 


190  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

est  of  them  with  which  He  is  not  familiar.  The  children  of 
this  world  may  not  know  Christians,  and  may  count  theiT 
lives  folly  ;  but  the  Good  Shepherd  knows  them  thoroughly, 
and,  wonderful  to  say,  though  He  knows  them,  does  not 
despise  them. 

Like  a  Good  Shepherd,  Christ  cares  tenderly  for  all  His 
believing  people.  He  provides  for  all  their  wants  in  the 
wilderness  of  this  world,  and  leads  them  by  the  right  way 
to  a  city  of  habitation.  He  bears  patiently  with  their  many 
weaknesses  and  infirmities,  and  does  not  cast  them  off  be- 
cause they  are  wayward,  erring,  sick,  footsore,  or  lame. 
He  guards  and  protects  them  against  all  their  enemies,  as 
Jacob  did  the  flock  of  Laban  ;  and  of  those  that  the  Father 
has  given  Him  He  will  be  found  at  last  to  have  lost  none. 

Like  a  Good  Shepherd,  Christ  lays  down  His  life  for  the 
sheep.  He  did  it  once  for  all,  when  He  was  crucified  for 
them.  When  He  saw  that  nothing  could  deliver  them  from 
hell  and  the  devil,  but  His  blood,  He  willingly  made  His 
soul  an  offering  for  their  sins.  The  merit  of  that  death 
He  is  now  presenting  before  the  Father's  throne.  The 
sheep  are  saved  for  evermore,  because  the  Good  Shepherd 
died  for  them.  This  is  indeed  a  love  that  passeth  knowl- 
edge !  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."     (John  xv.  13.) 

Let  us  only  take  heed  that  this  office  of  Christ  is  not  set 
before  us  in  vain.  It  will  profit  us  nothing  at  the  last  day 
that  Jesus  was  a  Shepherd,  if  during  our  lifetime,  we  never 
heard  His  voice  and  followed  Him.  If  we  love  life,  let  us 
join  His  flock  without  delay.  Except  we  do  this,  we  shall 
be  found  at  the  left  hand  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  lost 
for  evermore. 

These  verses  show  us,  lastly,  that  when  Christ  died,  He 
died  of  His  own  voluntary  free  ivill.  He  uses  a  remarkable 
expression  to  teach  this :  "  I  lay  down  my  life  that  I  might 
take  it  again.     No  man  taketh  it  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  191 

down  of  myself.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  clown,  and  I  have 
power  to  take  it  again." 

The  point  before  us  is  of  no  mean  importance.  We  must 
never  suppose  for  a  moment  that  our  Lord  had  no  power  to 
prevent  His  sufferings,  and  that  He  was  delivered  up  to  His 
enemies  and  crucified  because  He  could  not  belp  it.  Noth- 
ing could  be  further  from  the  truth  than  such  an  idea.  The 
treachery  of  Judas,  the  armed  band  of  priests'  servants,  the 
enmity  of  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  injustice  of  Pontius 
Pilate,  the  rude  hands  of  Roman  soldiers,  the  scourge,  the 
nails,  and  the  spear, — all  these  could  not  have  harmed  a 
hair  of  our  Lord's  head,  unless  He  had  allowed  them.  Well 
might  He  say  those  remarkable  words,  "  Thinkest  thou  that 
I  cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and  He  shall  presently 
give  Me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels.  But  how, 
then,  shall  the  Scripture  be  fulfilled?"     (Matt.  xxvi.  53.) 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  our  Lord  submitted  to  death  of 
His  own  free  will,  because  He  knew  that  His  death  was  the 
only  way  of  making  atonement  for  man's  sins.  He  poured 
out  His  soul  unto  death  with  all  the  desire  of  His  heart, 
because  He  had  determined  to  pay  our  debt  to  God,  and 
redeem  us  from  hell.  For  the  j'03^  set  before  Him  He  will- 
ingly endured  the  cross,  and  laid  down  His  life,  in  order 
that  we,  through  His  death,  might  have  eternal  life.  His 
death  was  not  the  death  of  a  martyr,  who  sinks  at  last  over- 
whelmed by  enemies,  but  the  death  of  a  triumphant  con- 
queror, who  knows  that  even  in  dying  he  wins  for  himself 
and  his  people  a  kingdom  and  a  crown  of  glory. 

Let  us  lean  back  our  souls  on  these  mighty  truths,  and  be 
thankful.  A  willing  Saviour,  a  loving  Saviour,  a  Saviour 
who  came  specially  into  the  world  to  bring  life  to  man,  is 
just  the  Saviour  that  we  need.  If  we  hear  His  voice,  re- 
pent and  believe,  He  is  our  own. 


192  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Notes.    John  X.  10—18. 

10.— [The  thief... destroy.']  In  this  passage  our  Lord  entirely  drops 
the  figure  of  "  the  door,"  and  presents  Himself  under  a  new  as- 
pect, as  "  the  Shepherd."  And  the  first  thing  He  does  is  to 
show  the  amazing  difference  between  Himself  and  the  false 
teachers  who  bore  rule  among  the  Jews.  He  had  already  told 
the  Pharisees  that  they  were  no  better  than  "  thieves  and  rob- 
bers." He  now  contrasts  their  objects  with  His  own.  A  thief 
does  not  come  to  the  fold  to  do  good  to  the  flock,  but  harm ;  for 
his  own  selfish  advantage,  and  for  the  injury  of  the  sheep.  Just 
so  the  Pharisees  only  became  teachers  of  the  Jewish  Church  for 
their  own  advantage  and  interest,  and  taught  doctrine  which 
was  only  calculated  to  ruin  and  destroy  souls. 

A.  Clarke  observes  :  "  How  can  worldly  minded  hirelings, 
fox-hunting,  card-playing  priests,  read  these  words  without 
trembling  to  the  centre  of  their  souls  ?" 

Bickersteth  suggests  that  "  the  thief  in  the  singular  number 
may  remind  us  of  the  prince  of  darkness,  the  great  chief  robber 
and  thief  of  souls." 

[I  am  come. ..life.. .abundantly.]  Our  Lord  here  puts  in  strong 
contrast  with  the  false  teachers  of  the  Jews,  His  own  purpose 
and  object  in  coming  into  the  world.  He  drops  the  figure  of 
"  the  door,"  and  says  plainly  and  distinctly,  stating  it  in  the 
widest,  broadest  way,  that,  as  a  personal  Saviour,  He  came  that 
men  might  have  life.  The  thief  came  to  take  life  :  He  came  to 
give  it.  He  came  that  the  way  to  eternal  life  might  be  laid 
open,  the  life  of  justification  purchased  by  His  blood,  the  life  of 
sanctification  provided  by  the  grace  of  His  Spirit.  He  came  to 
buy  this  life  by  His  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  He  came  to  proclaim 
this  life  and  offer  it  to  a  lost  world.  To  bring  life  and  hope  to 
a  lost,  dead,  perishing  world  was  the  grand  object  of  his  incar- 
nation. The  ministry  of  the  Pharisees  was  death,  but  that  of 
Christ  was  life.  The  word  "  they  "  before  "  might  have,"  must 
be  taken  generally  here  for  "  men."  There  is  nothing  else  to 
which  it  can  apply. 

But  this  was  not  all.  Our  Lord  came  that  men  who  had  life 
already  "  might  have  it  more  abundantly :  "  that  is,  that  they 
might  see  the  way  of  life  more  clearly,  and  have  no  uncertainty 
about  the  way  of  justification  before  God ;  and  that  they  might 
feel  the  possession  of  life  more  sensibly,  and  have  more  con- 
scious enjoyment  of  pardon,  peace,  and  acceptance.  This  seems 
to  me  by  far  the  simplest  view  of  the  text.  Of  course  there 
were  millions  in  the  world  who  before  Christ  came  knew  noth- 
ing of  life  for  their  souls :  to  them  Christ's  coming  brought 
"  life." — But  there  were  also  many  believing  Jews  who  had  life 
already  when  Christ  came,  and  were  walking  in  the  steps  of 
Abraham :  to  them  Christ's  coming  brought  "  life  more  abun- 
dantly."   It  enlarged  their  vision  and  increased  their  comfort. 


JOHN,   CHAP.    X.  193 

So  Paul  tolls  Titus  that  "  Christ's  appearing  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light."     (2  Tim.  i.  10.) 

Most  commentators  do  not  admit  the  comparative  idea  in 
"  more  abundantly,"  but  interpret  it  as  simply  meaning  the 
abundance  of  grace  aud  mercy  which  Christ  brings  into  the 
world  :  as  Rom7  v.  20,  21.  This  is  true,  but  I  venture  to  think 
it  is  not  all  the  truth. 

Chemnitius,  following  Augustine,  thinks  that  "  more  abun- 
dantly "  may  refer  to  the  life  of  glory  hereafter,  which  saints 
will  have  after  the  life  of  faith  here.     But  I  cannot  see  this. 

11. — [lam  the  good  shepherd.']  Here  our  Lord  declares  that  He 
Himself  is  the  great  Head  Shepherd  of  God's  people,  of  whom 
all  ministers,  even  the  best,  are  only  faint  imitators.  It  is  as  if 
He  said,  "  I  am  towards  all  who  believe  in  Me,  what  a  good 
shepherd  is  to  his  sheep,  careful,  watchful,  and  loving."  The 
article  in  the  Greek  is  twice  used  to  increase  the  emphasis  :  "I 
am  the  Shepherd,  the  good  or  excellent  One."  In  the  second 
verse  of  the  chapter,  before  the  word  "  Shepherd,"  in  the  Greek, 
we  may  remember,  there  is  no  article  at  all. 

It  is  probable  that  the  name  "  shepherd,"  in  Jewish  ears, 
would  convey,  much  more  clearly  than  it  does  in  ours,  a  claim 
to  be  regarded  as  the  Messiah  or  Shepherd  of  souls.  (See  Gen. 
xlix.  24 ;  Psalm  xxiii. ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.) 

[The  good  shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep.]  Our  Lord 
here  shows  the  distinguishing  mark  of  a  good  shepherd.  Such 
an  one  will  lay  down  his  life  for  his  sheep,  to  save,  protect, 
and  defend  them.  He  will  die  rather  than  lose  one.  He  will 
peril  his  life,  like  David,  attacking  the  lion  and  the  bear,  rather 
than  let  one  be  taken  from  him.  "  All  this,"  our  Lord  implies, 
"  I  have  come  to  do  for  my  spiritual  sheep.  I  have  come  to 
shed  my  life-blood  to  save  their  souls,  to  die  that  they  may 
live."  The  word  "  giveth  "  here,  should  have  been  translated 
"layeth  down."    It  is  so  rendered  in  the  loth  verse. 

Flacius  observes  how  our  Lord  here,  as  elsewhere,  always 
brings  round  His  discourse  to  His  own  atoning  death. 

Hengstenberg  observes :  "  The  expression,  '  laying  clown  the 
soul  or  life  '  for  any  one,  does  not  occur  anywhere  else  inde- 
pendently in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  never  found  in  profane 
writers.  It  must  be  referred  back  to  the  Old  Testament,  and 
specially  to  Isai.  liii.  10,  where  it  is  said  of  Messiah,  '  He 
shall  make,  or  place,  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin.'" 

Tittman  says  :  "  Those  who  maintain  that  Christ  died  only  to 
confirm  the  truth  of  His  doctrine,  or  to  confirm  the  certainty  of 
the  promises  of  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God,  are  under  a 
mistake.  The  death  of  Christ  was  not  necessary  for  either  of 
those  purposes.  The  truth  of  His  doctrine  and  the  certainty 
of  His  promises  must  be  established  by  other  evidence.    Neither 

y 


194  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

does  our  Lord  say,  that  He  laid  down  life  for  His  doctrines,  but 
for  His  sheep." 

12,  13. — [But  he  that  is  an  hireling,  etc.']  Our  Lord  in  these  two 
verses  illustrates  the  subject  He  has  taken  up,  by  showing  the 
wide  difference  between  a  mere  hired  shepherd,  and  one  who 
feels  a  special  interest  in  his  sheep  because  they  are  his  own. 
A  mere  hired  servant,  who  has  not  spent  his  money  in  buying 
the  sheep,  but  only  takes  charge  of  a  flock  for  pay,  and  cares 
little  so  long  as  he  gets  his  money,  such  an  one,  as  a  general 
rule,  will  make  no  sacrifice  and  run  no  risk  for  the  sheep.  If 
he  sees  a  wolf  coming  he  will  not  meet  him  and  fight,  but  will 
run  away,  and  leave  the  flock  to  be  scattered  and  devoured. 
He  acts  in  this  way  because  his  whole  heart  is  not  in  his  work. 
He  feeds  the  flock  for  money  and  not  for  love ;  for  what  he  can 
get  by  it,  and  not  because  he  really  cares  for  the  sheep.  Of 
course  the  picture  must  be  taken  as  generally  true  :  we  cannot 
suppose  our  Lord  meant  that  no  paid  servant  was  trustworthy. 
Jacob  was  a  hired  shepherd,  yet  trustworthy.  But  doubtless 
His  Jewish  hearers  knew  many  such  "  hirelings  "  as  he  here 
describes.  The  picture  of  a  faithless  shepherd  in  Ezekiel 
xxxiv.  would  also  occur  to  those  who  were  familiar  with  Old 
Testament  Scripture. 

It  is  worth  remembering  that  St.  Paul  specially  warns  the 
Ephesian  elders,  in  Acts  xx.,  that  "  grievous  wolves  "  would 
enter  in  among  them,  not  sparing  the  flock.  Our  Lord  also  in 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  compares  false  prophets  to  "  ravening 
wolves."     (Matt.  vii.  15.) 

Musculus  observes  how  great  a  misfortune  it  is  to  Christ's 
sheep  when  they  are  deserted  by  ministers,  and  left  without 
regular  means  of  grace.  It  has  a  scattering,  weakening  effect. 
The  best  of  ministers  are  poor,  weak  creatures.  But  Churches 
cannot  keep  together,  as  a  rule,  without  pastors;  the  wolf 
scatters  them.  The  ministry  no  doubt  may  be  overvalued,  but 
it  may  also  be  undervalued. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  the  latent  thought  of  our  Lord's 
language  here  was  as  follows.  The  Pharisees  and  other  false 
teachers  were  no  better  than  hireling  shepherds.  They  cared 
for  nothing  but  themselves,  and  their  own  honour  or  profit. 
They  cared  nothing  for  souls.  They  were  willing  to  have  the 
name  and  profession  of  shepherds,  but  they  had  no  heart  in 
their  work.  They  had  neither  will  nor  power  to  protect  their 
hearers  against  any  assault  which  that  wolf,  the  devil,  might 
make  against  them.  Hence  the  Jews,  when  our  Lord  came  on 
earth,  were  without  help  for  their  souls,  fainting  and  scattered 
like  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  a  prey  to  every  device  of  the 
devil. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  great  secret  of  a  useful  xnd  Christ- 
like ministry  is  to  love  men's  souls.  He  that  is  a  minister 
merely  to  get  a  living,  or  to  have  an  honourable  position,  i3 


195 


"  the  hireling  "  of  these  verses.    The  true  pastor's  first  care  is 
for  his  sheep.     The  false  pastor's  first  thought  is  for  himself. 

Our  Lord's  strong  language  about  the  false  teachers  of  the 
Jews  ends  here.  Those  who  think  that  unsound  ministers 
ought  never  to  be  exposed  and  held  up  to  notice,  and  men 
ought  never  to  be  warned  against  them,  would  do  well  to  study 
this  passage.  No  class  of  character  throughout  our  Lord's 
ministry  seems  to  call  forth  such  severe  denunciation  as  that 
of  false  pastors.  The  reason  is  obvious.  Other  men  ruin 
themselves  alone:  false  pastors  ruin  their  flocks  as  well  as 
themselves.  To  flatter  all  ordained  men,  and  say  they  never 
should  be  called  unsound  and  dangerous  guides,  is  the  surest 
way  to  injure  the  Church  and  offend  Christ. 

Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  most  commentators  think 
that  the  "  wolf"  here  means  the  devil,  even  as  he  is  called  else- 
where a  roaring  lion,  a  serpent,  and  a  dragon. 

Lampe,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  the  wolf  signifies  the 
same  as  the  thief  and  robber,  and  that  it  must  mean  the  false 
prophet,  the  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing.  (See  Zeph.  iii.  3 ;  Matt. 
vii.  15.) 

In  interpreting  this  whole  passage  we  must  be  careful  not  to 
strain  it  too  far.  Our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  in  no  case  is 
flight  from  clanger  lawful  iu  a  pastor.  He  Himself  says  else- 
where, "  When  they  persecute  you  in  one  city,  flee  ye  to  an- 
other." (Matt.  x.  23.)  So  Paul  left  Damascus  by  stealth  to 
escape  the  Jews.     (Acts  ix.  25.) 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  Ought  we  to  reckon  that  man  an  hireling, 
who,  for  any  reasons  whatever,  shrinks  from  encountering  the 
wolves?  This  was  anciently  debated  as  a  practical  question, 
when  tyrants  raged  cruelly  against  the  Church.  Tertullian  and 
others  were,  in  my  opinion,  too  rigid  on  this  point.  I  prefer 
greatly  the  moderation  of  Augustine,  who  allowed  pastors  to 
flee  on  certain  conditions." 

No  unbending  rule  can  be  laid  clown.  Each  case  muse  be 
decided  by  circumstances.  There  are  times  when,  like  St.  Paul 
or  Jewell,  a  man  may  see  it  a  duty  to  flee,  and  await  better 
days;  and  times  when,  like  Hooper,  he  may  feel  called  to 
decline  flight  and  to  die  with  his  sheep.  Barnabas  and  Paul 
were  specially  commended  to  the  Church  at  Antioch,  (Acts  xv. 
25,)  as  those  who  had  "  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus."  St.  Paul  tells  the  Ephesian  elders,  "  I  count 
not  my  life  clear  unto  myself  so  that  I  may  finish  my  course 
with  joy."  (Acts  xx.  24.)  Again  he  says,  "  I  am  ready  to  die 
at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."     (Acts  xxi.  13.) 

14. — [lam  the  good  shepherd.']  These  words  are  repeated  to  show 
the  importance  of  the  office  our  Lord  fills  as  the  Good  Shep- 
herd, and  to  bring  into  stronger  light  the  wide  difference  be- 
tween Ilim  and  the  Pharisees. 


196  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


[And  "know  my  sheep,  and  am  known  of  mine.']  These  words 
express  the  close  and  intimate  union  there  is  between  Christ 
and  all  His  believing  people,  a  union  understood  fully  by  those 
alone  who  feel  it,  but  to  the  world  foolishness.  Our  Lord,  like 
a  good  earthly  shepherd,  knows  every  one  of  his  people, — 
knows  them  with  a  special  knowledge  of  love  and  approval; 
knows  where  they  dwell  and  all  about  them,  their  weaknesses, 
trials,  and  temptations,  and  knows  exactly  what  each  one  needs 
from  clay  to  day.  His  people,  on  the  other  hand,  know  Him 
with  the  knowledge  of  faith  and  confidence,  and  feel  in  Him  a 
loving  trust  of  which  an  unbeliever  can  form  no  idea.  They 
know  Him  as  their  own  sure  Friend  and  Saviour,  and  rest  on 
the  knowledge.  The  devils  know  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour. 
The  sheep  know  and  feel  that  He  is  their  Saviour. 

I  fancy  the  fulness  of  this  verse  would  be  far  more  plain  to 
Jews  accustomed  to  Oriental  shepherds  and  their  flocks,  to  the 
care  of  a  good  shepherd  and  the  confidence  of  a  flock,  than  it  is 
to  us  in  this  Northern  climate.  At  any  rate  it  teaches  indirectly 
the  duty  of  every  Christ-like  pastor  to  be  personally  acquainted 
with  all  his  people,  just  as  a  good  shepherd  knows  each  one  of 
his  sheep. 

Musculus  points  out  the  strong  contrast  between  "I  know  ray 
sheep,"  and  the  solemn  saying  to  the  virgins,  "  I  know  you 
not,"  and  to  the  false  professors,  "  I  never  knew  you,"  in  Matt. 
xxv.  7 ;  vii.  23. 

Besser  remarks  that  " '  I  am  known  of  mine '  is  a  sharp  re- 
buke to  those  doubters  who  in  voluntary  humility  refuse  to  be 
sure  of  their  salvation." 

15. — [As  the  Father... me... I  the  Father.]  I  believe  this  sentence 
ought  to  be  read  in  close  connection  with  the  last  verse,  and 
without  any  full  stop  between.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Greek 
against  this  view.  The  sense  would  then  be,  "I  know  my 
sheep  and  am  known  of  mine,  even  as  the  Father  knoweth  Me 
and  I  know  the  Father."  The  meaning  will  then  be  that  the 
mutual  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His  sheep  is  like  the  mutual 
knowledge  of  the  Father  and  the  Son, — a  knowledge  so  high, 
so  deep,  so  intimate,  so  ineffable,  that  no  words  can  fully  con- 
vey it.  The  full  nature  of  that  knowledge  which  the  first 
Person  of  the  Trinity  has  of  the  Second,  and  the  Second  has  of 
the  First,  is  something  far  beyond  finite  man's  understanding.  It 
is  in  short  a  deep  mystery.  Yet  the  mutual  knowledge  and  com- 
munion of  Christ  and  believers  is  something  so  deep  and  won- 
derful that  it  can  only  be  compared,  though  at  a  vast  distance, 
to  that  which  exists  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

To  understand  this  knowledge  a  little,  we  should  read  care- 
fully the  language  used  in  Proverbs  viii.  22 — 30. 

[And  I  lay  doivn  my  life  for  the  sheep.]  Our  Lord,  to  show 
how  truly  He  is  the  Good  Shepherd,  declares  that  like  a  good 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  197 

shepherd  He  not  only  knows  all  His  sheep,  but  lays  down  His 
life  for  them.  By  using  the  present  tense,  He  seems  to  say,  "  I 
am  doing  it.  I  am  just  about  to  do  it.  I  came  iuto  the  world 
to  do  it."  This  can  only  refer  to  His  own  atoning  death  on  the 
cross  :  the  great  propitiation  He  was  about  to  make  by  shedding 
His  life-blood.  It  was  the  highest  proof  of  love.  "Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his 
friends."     (John  xv.  13.) 

Taken  alone  and  by  itself  this  sentence  undoubtedly  contains 
the  doctrine  of  particular  redemption.  It  declares  that  Christ 
"lays  down  His  life  for  the  sheep."  That  He  does  so  in  a 
special  sense  I  think  none  can  deny.  The  "sheep"  alone, 
or  true  believers,  obtain  any  saving  benefit  from  His  death. 
But  to  argue  from  this  text,  that  in  no  sense  and  in  no  way  did 
Christ  die  for  any  beside  His  "  sheep,"  is  to  say  what  seems 
to  me  to  contradict  Scripture.  The  plain  truth  is  that  the  ex- 
tent of  redemption  is  not  the  leading  subject  of  this  verse. 
Our  Lord  is  saying  what  He  does  for  His  sheep  :  He  loves  them 
so  that  He  dies  for  them.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  we  are 
to  conclude  that  His  death  was  not  meant  to  influence  and 
effect  the  position  of  all  mankind.  I  venture  to  refer  the  reader 
to  my  own  notes,  in  this  commentary,  on  John  i.  28;  iii.  16 
and  vi.  32,  for  a  full  discussion  of  the  subject. 

Both  here  and  in  the  11th  verse,  I  do  not  think  the  Greek 
word  translated  "  for  "  should  be  pressed  too  far,  as  if  it  neces- 
sarily implied  the  doctrine  of  substitution,  or  the  vicariousness 
of  Christ's  death.  That  doctrine  is  a  blessed  and  glorious 
truth,  and  is  taught  plainly  and  unmistakably  elsewhere.  Here, 
however,  we  are  reading  parabolic  figurative  language,  and  I 
doubt  whether  it  is  quite  fair  to  explain  it  as  meaning  more 
than  "  on  account  of,"  or  "  in  behalf  of,"  the  sheep.  Of  course 
it  comes  to  the  same  thing  at  last :  if  the  Shepherd  did  not 
die,  the  sheep  would  die.  But  I  do  not  quite  think  "  vicarious- 
ness," at  any  rate,  is  the  primary  idea  of  the  sentence. 

I  fully  agree  with  Parkhurst,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  Greek 
expression  for  "  dying  for  any  one,"  in  Rom.  v.  6 — 8,  never  has 
any  signification  other  than  that  of"  rescuing  the  life  of  another 
at  the  expense  of  our  own." 

16.— [And  other  sheep  I  have... fold.']  In  this  sentence,  our  Lord 
declares  plainly  the  approaching  conversion  of  the  Gentile*,. 
The  sheep  He  specially  died  for  were  not  merely  the  few 
believing  Jews,  but  the  elect  Gentiles  also.  They  are  the 
"other  sheep:"  "this  fold"  means  the  Jewish  Church.  It 
reads  as  though  He  would  show  the  real  measure  and  size  of 
His  flock.  It  was  one  much  larger  than  the  Jewish  nation,  of 
which  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  so  proud. 

Let  it  be  noted  here  that  our  Lord  uses  the  present  tense. 
The  heathen  sheep  were  as  yet  heathen,  and  not  brought  in: 
yet  He  says,  "  I  have  them."    They  were  already  given  to  Him 


198  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

In  the  eternal  councils,  and  foreknown  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world.  So  it  was  with  the  Corinthians  before  their  conver- 
sion :  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city."     (Acts  xviii.  10.) 

Augustine  remarks:  "They  were  yet  without,  among  the 
Gentiles,  predestinated,  not  yet  gathered  in.  These  He  knew 
who  had  predestinated  them :  He  knew  who  had  come  to  re- 
deem them  with  the  shedding  of  His  own  blood.  He  saw  them 
who  did  not  yet  see  Him :  He  knew  them  who  yet  believed  not 
in  Him." 

[Them  also... bring.'}  Our  Lord  here  declares  that  it  is  neces- 
sary for  Him,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, and  to  carry  out  the  great  purpose  of  His  coming,  to 
bring  in  and  add  to  His  flock  other  believers  beside  the  Jewish 
sheep :  "  It  is  part  of  my  work,  office,  and  mission,  to  gather 
them  out  from  the  heathen  by  the  preaching  of  my  apostles." 

The  prediction  here  made  was  contrary  to  Jewish  prejudices. 
The  Jews  thought  they  aloue  were  God's  flock  aud  favoured 
people.  Even  the  apostles  afterwards  were  slow  to  remember 
these  words. 

Hutcheson  observes  :  "  Christ  Himself  is  chief  in  bringing  in 
His  elect,  whatever  instruments  He  employs :  and  He  is  at 
pains  to  seek  them,  and  gain  their  consent,  as  being  bound  in 
the  covenant  of  redemption  to  present  all  that  are  given  Him 
blameless  before  the  Father."  Saints  are  "  the  called  of  Jesus 
Christ."     (Rom.  i.  6.) 

[They  shall  hear  my  voice.'}  This  is  a  prophecy  and  a  promise 
combined.  It  was  a  prophecy  that  the  elect  among  the  heathen, 
however  unlikely  it  might  appear,  would  hear  Christ's  voice 
speaking  to  them  in  the  Gospel  preached;  and,  hearing,  would 
believe  and  obey. — It  was  a  promise  that  would  encourage  His 
Apostles  to  preach  to  the  heathen:  "They  will  listen,  aud  be 
converted,  and  follow  Me." — It  is  a  saying  that  was  wonderfully 
forgotten  by  the  Apostles  afterwards.  They  were  backward  to 
bring  in  the  other  sheep,  after  their  Master  left  the  world.— It 
is  a  sentence  that  should  nerve  and  cheer  the  missionary. 
Christ  has  said  it:  "The  sheep  who  are  scattered  among  the 
heathen  will  hear." 

The  text,  "He  that  heareth  you  heareth  Me,"  (Luke  x.  1G,)  is 
the  Divine  explanation  of  the  expression,  "  hear  my  voice." 

[And  there  shall  be  one  fold... shepherd.]  This  sentence  con- 
tains one  word  which  ought  to  have  been  differently  translated. 
It  ought  to  be,  as  Tyndale  renders  it,  "  one  flock  and  one  shep- 
herd." There  is  an  evident  difference.  Christ's  universal 
Church  is  a  mighty  company  of  which  the  members  may  be 
found  in  many  different  visible  Churches,  or  ecclesiastical 
"folds:"  but  it  composes  only  one  "flock."  There  is  only 
"  one  Holy  Catholic  Church,"  which  is  the  blessed  company  of 
all  faithful  people;  but  there  are  many  various  visible 
Churches. 


john,  chap.  x.  199 


The  sentence  is  true  of  all  believers  now.  Though  differing 
in  various  points,  such  as  government  or  ceremonies,  true 
believers  are  all  sheep  of  one  flock,  and  all  look  up  to  one  Sa- 
viour and  Shepherd.  It  will  be  more  completely  fulfilled  at 
Christ's  second  cominy:  then  shall  be  exhibited  to  the  world 
one  glorious  Church  under  one  glorious  Head.  In  the  view  of 
this  promise  unity  with  all  true  Christians  should  be  sought  and 
striven  for  by  every  true  sheep. 

Gualter  remarks  that  there  never  has  been,  or  can  be,  more 
than  one  Holy  Catholic  Church,  and  unless  we  belong  to  it  we 
cannot  be  saved,  and  he  warns  us  against  the  pernicious  error 
that  all  men  shall  get  to  heaven  if  sincere,  whether  they  belong 
to  the  Holy  Catholic  Church  or  not. 

Chemnitius  observes  that  we  must  be  careful  not  to  make  this 
one  Church  either  too  narrow  or  too  broad.  We  make  it  too 
narrow  when,  like  the  Jews  and  the  Papists,  we  exclude  any 
believer  who  does  not  belong  to  our  particular  fold.  We  make  it 
too  broad  when  we  include  every  professing  Christian,  whether 
he  hears  Christ's  voice  or  not.    It  is  a  flock  of  "  sheep." 

In  every  other  place  in  the  New  Testament  the  word  here 
wrongly  translated  "fold,"  is  rendered  "flock."  (Matt.  xxvi. 
81;  Luke  ii.  8 ;  1  Cor.  ix  7.)  The  word  "fold,"  before  us,  is 
evidently  an  oversight  of  our  translators. 

17. — [Therefore... my  Father  love  me  because,  etc.]  This  is  a  deep 
and  mysterious  verse,  like  all  verses  which  speak  of  the  relation 
between  the  First  and  Second  Persons  of  the  Trinity.  We  must 
be  content  to  admire  and  believe  what  we  cannot  fully  under- 
stand. When,  as  in  John  v.  20,  and  here,  our  Lord  speaks  of 
"  the  Father  loving  the  Sou,"  we  must  remember  that  He  is  using 
language  borrowed  from  earthly  affection  to  express  the  mind 
of  one  Person  of  the  Trinity  towards  another,  and  accordingly 
we  must  interpret  it  reverently. — Yet  we  may  surely  gather 
from  this  verse  that  our  Lord's  coming  into  this  world  to  lay 
down  His  life  for  the  sheep,  by  dying  on  the  cross,  and  to  take 
it  again  for  their  justification,  by  rising  again  from  the  dead,  was 
a  transaction  viewed  with  infinite  complacency  and  approbation 
by  God  the  Father. — "  I  am  about  to  die,  and  after  death  to 
rise  again.  My  so  doing,  however  strange  it  may  seem  to  you 
Pharisees,  is  the  very  thing  which  my  Father  in  heaven  approves, 
and  for  which  He  specially  loves  Me." — It  is  like  the  Father's 
words,  "  In  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  "  and  St.  Paul's,  "  Where- 
fore God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,"  (Matt.  iii.  17;  Phil.  ii.  9;) 
and  Isaiah's,  "I  will  divide  Him  a  portion  with  the  great, 
because  He  hath  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death."  (Isai.  liii. 
12.) 

Our  Lord,  by  mentioning  His  resurrection,  seems  to  remind 
His  hearers  that  in  one  respect  He  was  different  from  the  best 
of  shepherds.  They  might  lay  down  their  lives ;  but  then  there 
would  be  an  end  of  them.    He  meant  to  lay  down  His  life,  but 


200  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


after  that  to  take  it  again.    He  would  not  only  die  for  His  peo« 
pie,  but  also  rise  again. 

Guyse  thinks  the  true  meaning  is,  "  I  cheerfully  lay  down  ray 
life  for  the  expiation  of  my  sheep's  offences,  in  order  that  I  may 
rise  again  for  their  justification." 

Let  it  be  noted  here,  that  there  is  no  part  of  Christ's  work  for 
His  people  that  God  the  Father  is  said  to  regard  with  such 
special  complacency  as  His  dying  for  them.  No  wonder  that 
ministers  ought  to  make  Christ  crucified  the  principal  subject 
of  their  teaching. 

Gualter  thinks  these  words  were  specially  meant  to  prevent 
the  offence  of  the  ignominious  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross. 
That  death,  whatever  the  Jews  might  think,  was  part  of  Christ's 
plan  and  commission,  and  one  reason  why  the  Father  loved 
Him. 

Brentius  thinks  that  there  is  here  a  reference  to  the  story  of 
Abraham  offering  Isaac,  when  the  words  were  used,  "Because 
thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  not  withheld  thy  son,  therefore, 
blessing,  I  will  bless  thee."    (Gen.  xix.) 

Hengstenberg  remarks  that  the  Father's  love  "  was  the  very 
opposite  of  that  wrath  of  God,  of  which  the  Jews  regarded 
Christ's  death  as  a  proof  and  sign."  They  thought  that  God  had 
forsaken  Him,  and  given  Him  up  to  be  crucified  in  displeasure, 
when  in  reality  God  was  well  pleased. 

18. — [No  man  takcth...of  myself.]  In  this  sentence  our  Lord 
teaches  that  His  own  death  was  entirely  voluntary.  An  earthly 
shepherd  may  die  for  his  flock,  but  against  his  own  will.  The 
Great  Shepherd  of  believers  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin 
of  His  own  free  will.  He  was  not  obliged  or  compelled  to  do  it 
by  superior  force.  No  one  could  have  taken  away  His  life  had 
He  not  been  willing  to  lay  it  down;  but  He  laid  it  clown  "of 
Himself,"  because  He  had  covenanted  to  offer  Himself  as  a  pro- 
pitiation for  our  sins.  His  own  love  to  sinners,  and  not  the 
power  of  the  Jews  or  Pontius  Pilate's  soldiers,  was  the  cause  of 
His  death. 

The  word  "I"  is  inserted  emphatically  in  the  Greek.  "I 
myself"  lay  down  my  life  "  of  myself." 

Henry  observes :  "  Christ  could,  when  He  pleased,  slip  the 
knot  of  union  between  body  and  soul,  and  without  any  act  of 
violence  done  to  Himself,  could  disengage  them  from  each  oth- 
er. Having  voluntarily  taken  up  a  body,  he  could  voluntarily 
lay  it  down  again.  This  appeared  when  He  cried  with  a  loud 
voice,  and  '  gave  up  '  the  ghost." 

[7  have  power... down... take  it  up.'}  Our  Lord  here  amplifies 
His  last  statemeut,  and  magnifies  His  own  Divine  nature,  by 
declaring  that  He  has  full  power  to  lay  down  His  life  when  He 
pleases,  and  take  it  again  when  He  pleases.    This  last  point  de« 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  201 


serves  special  notice.  Our  Lord  teaches  that  His  resurrection, 
as  well  as  His  death,  was  in  His  own  power.  When  our  Lord 
rose  again  He  was  not  passive,  and  raised  by  the  power  of 
another  only,  but  rose  by  His  own  Divine  power.  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  in  some  places  is  at- 
tributed to  His  Father's  act,  as  Acts  ii.  24,  32 ;  once,  at  least,  to 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  1  Pet.  iii.  18;  and  here,  and  in  John  ii.  19, 
to  Christ  Himself.  All  leads  to  the  same  great  conclusion, — 
that  the  resurrection  of  Our  Lord,  as  well  as  every  part  of  His 
mediatorial  work,  was  an  act  in  which  all  three  Persons  of  the 
Trinity  concurred  and  co-operated. 

Hutcheson  observes  that  if  Christ  had  power  to  take  life 
again,  when  He  pleased,  "  so  He  can  put  a  period  to  the  suffer- 
ings of  His  own  when  He  pleaseth,  without  any  help  of  their 
crooked  ways." 

[This commandment. ..received.. .Father."]  Chrysostom,  and  most 
other  commentators,  apply  these  words  strictly  to  the  great 
work  which  our  Lord  has  just  declared  He  had  power  to  do : 
viz.,  to  lay  down  His  life  and  to  take  it  again.  "  This  is  part 
of  the  commission  I  received  from  my  Father  on  coming  into 
the  world,  and  one  of  the  works  He  gave  Me  to  do." 

No  doubt  this  is  good  exposition  and  good  divinity.  Yet  I 
am  rather  inclined  to  think  that  our  Lord's  words  refer  to  the 
whole  doctrine  which  He  had  just  been  declaring  to  the  Jews  : 
viz.,  His  office  as  a  Shepherd,  His  being  the  true  Shepherd,  His 
laying  down  His  life  for  the  sheep,  and  taking  it  again,  His  hav- 
ing other  sheep  who  were  to  be  brought  into  the  fold,  His  final 
purpose  to  exhibit  to  the  world  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd. 
Of  all  this  truth,  He  says,  "  I  received  this  doctrine  in  charge 
from  my  Father,  to  proclaim  to  the  world,  and  I  now  declare  it 
to  you  Pharisees." — I  suspect  that  both  here  and  elsewhere,  the 
word  "  commandment "  has  a  wide,  deep  meaning,  and  points 
to  that  solemn  and  mysterious  truth,  the  entire  unity  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  in  the  work  of  redemption,  to  which  John 
frequently  refers :  "  I  am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  Me. 
The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  I  speak  not  of  myself,  but  the 
Father  that  dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth  the  works."  (John  xiv. 
10.)  "  The  Father  gave  Me  a  commandment  what  I  should 
speak."  (John  xii.  49.)  Our  Lord's  object  in  these  often  re- 
peated expressions  seems  to  be  to  keep  the  Jews  in  mind  that 
He  was  not  a  mere  human  Prophet,  but  one  who  was  God  as 
well  as  man,  and  in  whom,  both  speaking  and  working,  the 
Father  always  dwelt. 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  receiving  a  commandment,"  we 
must  take  care  that  we  do  not  suppose  the  expression  implies 
any  inferiority  of  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity  to  the  First. 
We  must  reverently  remember  the  everlasting  covenant  between 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  salvation  of  man,  and  in- 
terpret "commandment"  as  meaning  a  part  of  the  charge  or 
commission  with  which  the  Second  Person,  Christ,  was  sent 
into  the  world,  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  the  Eternal  Trinity. 


2C,2  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

JOHN  X.  19—39. 

19  Thero   was   a  division  therefore  I      25  Jesus  answered  them,  I  told  von, 
again  among  the  Jews  for  these  sayings,    and  yon  believed  not:  thewn       t.ffi 


20  And  many  of  them  said,  He  bath 
a  devil,  and  is  mad;  why  hear  ye 
him  ? 

21  Others  said,  These  are  not  the 
words  of  him  that  hath  a  devil.  Can 
a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ? 

22  And  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast 
of  the  dedication,  and  it  was  winter. 

23  And  Jesus  walked  in  the  temple 
in  Solomon's  porch. 

m  24  Then  came  the  Jews  round  about 
him,  and  said  unto  him,  How  long  dost 
thou  make  us  to  doubt  ?  If  thou  be  the 
Christ,  tell  us  plainly. 


and  you  believed  not:  the  works  that  I 
do  in  my  Father's  name,  they  bear  wit- 
ness of  me. 

26  But  ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are 
not  of  my  sheep,  as  I  said  unto  you. 

27  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I 
know  them,  and  they  follow  me: 

_  28  And  I  give  unto  them  eternal 
life ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neith- 
er shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand. 

m    29  My  Father  which  gave  them  me, 
is  greater  than  all;  and  no  man  is  able 
to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand. 
30  I  and  my  Father  are  one. 


We  should  notice,  first,  in  this  passage,  what  strifes  and  con- 
troversies our  Lord  occasioned  when  He  was  on  earth.  We 
read  that  "  there  was  a  division  among  the  Jews  for  His 
sayings,"— and  that  "  many  of  them  said  He  hath  a  devil, 
and  is  mad,"  while  others  took  an  opposite  view.  It  may 
seem  strange,  at  first  sight,  that  He  who  came  to  preach 
peace  between  God  and  man  should  be  the  cause  of  conten- 
tion. But  herein  were  His  own  words  literally  fulfilled,— 
«'  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword."  (Matt.  x.  34.) 
The  fault  was  not  in  Christ  or  His  doctrine,  but  in  the  carnal 
mind  of  His  Jewish  hearers. 

Let  us  never  be  surprised  if  we  see  the  same  thing  in  our 
own  day.  Human  nature  never  changes.  So  long  as  the 
heart  of  man  is  without  grace,  so  long  we  must  expect  to  see 
it  dislike  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Just  as  oil  and  water,  acids 
and  alkalies,  cannot  combine,  so  in  the  same  way  uncon- 
verted people  cannot  really  like  the  people  of  God.—"  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."—"  The  natural  man 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  (Rom.  viii 
7;  1  Cor.  ii.  14.) 

The  servant  of  Christ  must  think  it  no  strange  thing  if 
he  goes  through  the  same  experience  as  his  Master  °He 
will  often  find  his  ways  and  opinions  in  religion  the  cause 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  203 

of  strife  in  his  own  family.  He  will  have  to  endure  ridi- 
cule, hard  words,  and  petty  persecution,  from  the  children 
of  this  world.  He  may  even  discover  that  he  is  thought  a 
fool  or  a  madman  on  account  of  his  Christianity.  Let  none 
of  these  things  move  him.  The  thought  that  he  is  a  par- 
taker of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  ought  to  steel  him  against 
every  trial.  "  If  they  have  called  the  Master  of  the  house 
Beelzebub,  how  much  more  shall  they  call  them  of  his 
household."     (Matt.  x.  25.) 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  should  never  be  forgotten.  We 
must  not  allow  ourselves  to  think  the  worse  of  religion  be- 
cause of  the  strifes  and  dissensions  to  which  it  gives  rise. 
Whatever  men  may  please  to  say,  it  is  human  nature,  and 
not  religion,  which  is  to  blame.  We  do  not  blame  the  glo- 
rious sun  because  its  rays  draw  forth  noxious  vapors  from 
the  marsh.  We  must  not  find  fault  with  the  glorious  Gospel, 
if  it  stirs  up  men's  corruptions,  and  causes  the  "  thoughts 
of  many  hearts  to  be  revealed.,,     (Luke  ii.  35.) 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  the  name  which  Christ  gives 
to  true  Christians.  He  uses  a  figurative  expression  which, 
like  all  His  language,  is  full  of  deep  meaning.  He  calls 
them,  u  My  sheep." 

The  word  "  sheep,"  no  doubt,  points  to  something  in  the 
character  and  ways  of  true  Christians.  It  would  be  easy 
to  show  that  weakness,  helplessness,  harmlessness,  useful- 
ness, are  all  points  of  resemblance  between  the  sheep  and 
the  believer.  But  the  leading  idea  in  our  Lord's  mind  was 
the  entire  dependence  of  the  sheep  upon  its  Shepherd. 
Just  as  sheep  hear  the  voice  of  their  own  shepherd,  and 
follow  him,  so  do  believers  follow  Christ.  By  faith  they 
listen  to  His  call.  By  faith  they  submit  themselves  to  His 
guidance.  By  faith  they  lean  on  Him,  and  commit  their 
souls  implicitly  to  His  direction.  The  ways  of  a  shepherd 
and  his  sheep  are  a  most  useful  illustration  of  the  relation 
between  Christ  and  the  true  Christian. 


204  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

The  expression,  "  My  sheep,"  points  to  the  close  connec- 
tion that  exists  between  Christ  and  believers.  They  are 
His  by  gift  from  the  Father,  His  by  purchase,  His  by  call- 
ing and  choice,  and  His  by  their  own  consent  and  heart- 
submission.  In  the  highest  sense  they  are  Christ's  prop- 
erty ;  and  just  as  a  man  feels  a  special  interest  in  that 
which  he  has  bought  at  a  great  price  and  made  his  own,  so 
does  the  Lord  Jesus  feel  a  peculiar  interest  in  His  people. 

Expressions  like  these  should  be  carefully  treasured  up 
in  the  memories  of  true  Christians.  They  will  be  found 
cheering  and  heart-strengthening  in  days  of  trial.  The 
world  may  see  no  beauty  in  the  ways  of  a  godly  man,  and 
may  often  pour  contempt  on  him.  But  he  who  knows  that 
he  is  one  of  Christ's  sheep  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed. 
He  has  within  him  a  "  well  of  water  springing  up  into  ever- 
lasting life."     (John  iv.  14.) 

We  should  notice,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  the  vast  privi* 
leges  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  bestoivs  on  true  Christians. 
He  uses  words  about  them  of  singular  richness  and  strength, 
"  I  know  them. — I  give  unto  them  eternal  life. — They  shall 
never  perish, — neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  This  sentence  is  like  the  cluster  of  grapes  which 
came  from  Eshcol.  A  stronger  form  of  speech  perhaps  can 
hardty  be  found  in  the  whole  range  of  the  Bible. 

Christ  "  knows"  his  people  with  a  special  knowledge  of 
approbation,  interest,  and  affection.  By  the  world  around 
them  they  are  comparatively  unknown,  uncared  for,  or  de- 
spised. But  they  are  never  forgotten  or  overlooked  by 
Christ. 

Christ  "gives"  his  people  "  eternal  life."  He  bestows 
on  them  freely  a  right  and  title  to  heaven,  pardoning  their 
many  sins,  and  clothing  them  with  a  perfect  righteousness. 
Money,  and  health,  and  worldly  prosperity  He  often  wisely 
withholds  from  them.  But  He  never  fails  to  give  them 
grace,  peace,  and  glory. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  205 

Christ  declares  that  His  people  "  shall  never  perish." 
Weak  as  they  are  they  shall  all  be  saved.  Not  one  of  them 
shall  be  lost  and  cast  away :  not  one  of  them  shall  miss 
heaven.  If  they  err,  they  shall  be  brought  back ;  if  they 
fall,  they  shall  be  raised.  The  enemies  of  their  souls  may 
be  strong  and  mighty,  but  their  Saviour  is  mightier ;  and 
none  shall  pluck  them  out  of  their  Saviour's  hands. 

A  promise  like  this  deserves  the  closest  attention.  If 
words  mean  anything,  it  contains  that  great  doctrine,  the 
perseverance,  or  continuance  in  grace,  of  true  believers. 
That  doctrine  is  literally  hated  by  worldly  people.  No 
doubt,  like  every  other  truth  of  Scripture,  it  is  liable  to  be 
abused.  But  the  words  of  Christ  are  too  plain  to  be  eva- 
ded. He  has  said  it,  and  He  will  make  it  good, — "  My 
sheep  shall  never  perish." 

Whatever  men  may  please  to  say  against  this  doctrine, 
it  is  one  which  God's  children  ought  to  hold  fast,  and  de- 
fend with  all  their  might.  To  all  who  feel  within  them  the 
workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  a  doctrine  full  of  encour- 
agement and  consolation.  Once  inside  the  ark,  they  shall 
never  be  cast  out.  Once  converted  and  joined  to  Christ, 
they  shall  never  be  cut  off  from  His  mystical  body.  Hypo- 
crites and  false  professors  shall  doubtless  make  shipwreck 
forever,  unless  they  repent.  But  true  "  sheep  "  shall  never 
be  confounded.  Christ  has  said  it,  and  Christ  cannot  lie  : 
"  they  shall  never  perish." 

Would  we  get  the  benefit  of  this  glorious  promise  ?  Let 
us  take  care  that  we  belong  to  Christ's  flock.  Let  us  hear 
His  voice  and  follow  Him.  The  man  who,  under  a  real 
sense  of  sin,  flees  to  Christ  and  trusts  in  Him,  is  one  of 
those  who  shall  never  be  plucked  out  of  Christ's  hand. 

Notes.    John  X.  19—30. 

19.— [There  was  a  division,  etc.']  This  is  the  third  time  that  we  find 
our  Lord's  words  causing  a  division,  or  schism,  among  His 
hearers.    Each  time  it  occurred  at  Jerusalem.    At  chap.  vii.  43, 


206  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


it  was  among  "  the  people ;  "  at  ix.  16,  among  the  "  Pharisees." 
Here  it  was  among  the  "  Jews,"  an  expression  in  St.  John's 
Gospel  generally  applied  to  our  Lord's  enemies  among  the 
Pharisees. 

The  special  "  sayings  "  which  caused  the  division  were  proba- 
bly our  Lord's  words  about  His  Father,  His  claim  to  have  power 
to  lay  down  His  life  and  take  it  again,  and  His  proclamation  of 
Himself  as  "the  Good  Shepherd/'  Words  like  these  from  a 
Galilean  teacher  of  humble  appearance  were  likely  to  offend  the 
proud  Pharisees  of  Jerusalem. 

That  our  Lord  would  be  a  cause  of  division — a  stone  of  stum- 
bling to  some,  and  set  for  the  rise  and  fall  of  many  in  Israel — had 
been  foretold  by  Isaiah,  viii.  14,  and  by  Simeon,  Luke  ii.  34. 
Divisions  among  His  hearers  are  therefore  no  proof  that  He  was 
not  the  Messiah,  and  divisions  among  hearers  of  the  Gospel  in 
the  present  day  are  no  argument  against  the  truth  of  the  Gospel. 
Even  now  the  same  Gospel  is  a  savour  of  death  to  some,  and  of 
life  to  others,  calls  forth  love  in  some,  and  hatred  in  others. 
The  same  fire  which  melts  wax  hardens  clay. 

20. — [And  many  of  them  said,  etc.']  This  is  the  sort  of  profane 
remark  which  we  can  well  imagine  many  unconverted  hearers 
of  our  Lord  making:  "What!  a  humble  Galilean  like  this  Man 
call  Himself  the  only  good  Shepherd,  and  talk  of  having  power 
to  lay  down  His  life  and  take  it  again,  and  of  having  a  special 
commission  from  His  Father  in  heaven.  He  must  surely  have  a 
devil,  or  be  out  of  His  senses.  He  must  be  mad.  Why  do  you 
waste  your  time  in  listening  to  Him?  "—Thousands  talk  in  this 
way  now  against  Christ's  servants.  They  would  probably  have 
talked  in  the  same  way  against  their  Master! 

Let  us  note  what  blasphemous  and  slanderous  things  were  said 
against  our  Lord.  True  Christians,  and  specially  ministers, 
must  never  wonder  if  they  are  treated  in  the  same  manner. 

21. — [Others  said,  These  are  not,  etc.']  Here  we  see  that  there  were 
some  among  the  Pharisees  who  took  our  Lord's  part,  and  were 
disposed  to  believe  op  Him.  Such  probably  were  Gamaliel, 
Nicodemus,  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  They  defend  him  on  the 
score  both  of  His  words  and  works. — As  to  His  words,  they  argue 
that  no  one  of  common  sense  could  call  such  words  as  our  Lord 
had  just  spoken  the  words  of  a  man  possessed  with  a  devil.  The 
devil  and  his  agents  do  not  desire  to  do  good  to  man,  or  to 
glorify  God.  The  calm,  solemn,  loving,  God-glorifying  language 
just  used,  was  the  very  opposite  to  that  which  might  be  expected 
from  a  demoniac— As  to  his  works,  they  argue  that  no  devil,  how- 
ever powerful,  could  work  such  a  miracle  as  to  open  the  eyes  of 
the  blind.  Some  wonderful  works  the  devil  might  do,  but  no 
such  work  as  that  of  giving  sight.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  the 
Jews  held  that  to  give  sight  to  the  blind  was  one  of  the  special 
miracles  which  Messiah  would  work  "Then  the  eyes  of  the 
blind  shall  be  opened."    (Isaiah  xxxv.  5.) 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  207 

The  Greek  word  here  rendered  "  words,"  is  not  the  same  as 
that  rendered  "sayings,"  in  verse  19.  Webster  says  it  is  a 
stronger  expression,  and  means  "the  whole  transaction,"  as 
well  as  the  things  said.  The  word  "  blind  "  here  in  the  Greek  is 
plural,  and  would  be  more  accurately  translated,  "  of  blind 
persons." 

22. — [And  it  was  o,t  Jerusalem.']  Many  think  that  an  interval  of 
time  comes  in  between  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one.  I 
doubt  it.  From  chap.  vii.  2,  where  we  are  told  it  was  the  feast 
of  tabernacles,  the  narrative  runs  on  at  first  sight  continuously ; 
yet  if  we  look  at  John  ix.  35,  there  must  have  been  one  break  of 
time. — If  there  was  any  interval  before  the  verse  we  are  now 
considering,  I  think  it  must  have  been  very  short.  The  follow- 
ing verses  show  that  the  discourse  about  "  the  sheep  "  must  have 
been  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews,  as  our  Lord  refers  to  it  as 
a  thing  they  could  remember:  He  would  hardly  have  done  so  if 
the  interval  had  been  very  long.  At  any  rate,  I  can  see  no  proof 
that  our  Lord  left  Jerusalem  between  the  discourse  about  the 
"  sheep  "  and  the  verse  before  us. 

[  The  feast  of  the  dedication.']  This  Jewish  festival  is  one  which 
is  nowhere  else  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  It  is,  however,  a  matter 
ofhistory,  according  to  most  commentators,  that  it  was  first 
appointed  by  Judas  Maccabeus  to  commemorate  the  purging  of 
the  temple,  and  the  rebuilding  of  the  altar,  after  the  Syrians 
were  driven  out.  Its  appointment  is  recorded  in  the  Apocry- 
pha in  1  Maccabees  iv.  52 — 59.  The  Apocryphal  books  are,  no 
doubt,  uninspired.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  question  the 
accuracy  of  their  historical  statements.  The  passage  before  us 
is  often  referred  to,  as  proving  that  our  Lord  recognized,  and 
tacitly  sanctioned,  a  man-made  and  man-appointed  festival. 
"  The  Church  has  power  to  decree  rites  and  ceremonies,"  aud 
so  long  as  it  ordains  nothing  against  God's  Word,  its  appoint- 
ments deserve  respect.  At  any  rate  our  Lord  did  not  denounce 
the  feast  of  dedication,  or  refuse  to  be  present  at  it. 

Chrysostom  and  others  think  that  the  feast  of  dedication  was 
appointed  to  commemorate  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  after 
the  Babylonian  captivity,  in  Ezra's  time.     (Ezra  vi.  16.) 

Some  think  that  it  was  to  commemorate  the  dedication  of  Solo- 
mon's temple.  (2  Chron.  vii.  9.)  There  is,  however,  no  war- 
rant for  this  view. 

Pearce  remarks,  that  John  alone,  of  all  the  evangelists,  records 
our  Lord's  attendance  at  four  of  the  great  feasts  of  the  Jews  :  viz., 
passover,  (John  ii.  13,)  pentecost,(v.  1,)  tabernacles,  (vii.  2,)  and 
dedication  here. 

[It  was  winter.]  This  shows  that  three  months  had  passed 
since  the  miracle  of  healing  the  blind  man,  which  was  worked 
at  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  That  was  about  Michaelmas,  by 
our  reckoning.  The  season  of  winter  is  here  mentioned  to  ex- 
plain why  our  Lord  walked  under  cover,  "  iu  a  porch." 


208  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 


The  mention  of  winter  goes  far  to  prove  that  the  feast  of  dedi- 
cation must  have  been  appointed  in  commemoration  of  the 
work  of  Judas  Maccabeus.  (Solomon's  dedication  was  at  Michael- 
mas, in  the  seventh  month ;  Ezra's  about  Easter,  in  the  first 
month. 

13. — [And  Jesus  walked.']  This  must  either  mean  that  "it  was  the 
habit"  of  our  Lord  to  walk,  or  else  that  "one  day  Jesus  was 
walking."    The  latter  seems  the  more  likely  sense. 

[In  the  temple."}  This  means  in  the  outer  court,  or  area  around 
the  temple,  which  was  a  common  place  of  resort  for  the  Jews, 
and  specially  upon  festivals.  Here  teachers  expounded,  and 
discussions  on  religious  questions  seem  to  have  taken  place. 
Here  probably  our  Lord  was  found  "  among  the  doctors,"  hearing 
and  asking  questions,  when  he  was  twelve  years  old.  (Luke  ii. 
4-6.) 

[In  Solomon's  porch. .]  The  word  "  porch  "  rather  means  what 
we  should  call  a  verauda,  or  colonnade.  It  was  one  of  those  long 
covered  walks  under  a  roof  supported  by  columns,  on  one  side  at 
least,  which  the  inhabitants  of  hot  countries  appear  to  find  abso- 
lutely needful.  Singularly  enough,  one  sect  of  heathen  philoso- 
phers at  Athens  was  called  "  Stoics,"  from  its  meeting  in  a  place 
called  "  Stoa,"  here  rendered  a  porch;  while  another  was  called 
"  Peripatetics,"  from  its  habit  of  "  walking  about "  during  its 
discussions,  just  as  our  Lord  did  in  this  verse.  The  cloisters  of 
a  cathedral  or  abbey,  perhaps,  are  most  like  the  building  calied 
a  "porch  "  here. 

Josephus  says  this  porch  was  one  of  the  buildings  which  re- 
mained partly  undestroyed  from  Solomon's  temple. 

Tacitus  expressly  mentions  it  as  one  of  the  defences  of  the 
temple  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem. 

24. — [Then  came. ..Jews  round.. .said.. .him.']  This  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "encircled  Him,"  or  surrounded  Him  in  a 
circle. 

[How  long...  make... doubt. ~\  This  would  be  more  literally  ren- 
dered, "  Until  what  time  dost  Thou  lift  up  our  souls  ?  How  long 
dost  Thou  keep  us  in  a  state  of  suspense  and  excitement?  " 

Eisner  thinks  it  means,  "  How  long  dost  Thou  take  away  our 
life,  (as  at  verse  eighteen,)  or  kill  us  with  doubt  and  perplexity  ?" 
Suicer,  Schleusuer,  and  Parkhurst,  however, prefer,  "hold  us  in 
suspense."     (See  marginal  reading  in  Luke  xii.  29.) 

[If. ..Christ,  tell  us  plainly.']  The  Jews  had  no  right  to  say  they 
had  not  sufficient  evidence  that  our  Lord  was  the  Christ.  But 
nothing  is  more  common  with  hardened  and  wicked  men  than  to 
allege  a  want  of  evidence,  and  to  pretend  willingness  to  believe, 
if  only  more  evidence  was  supplied. 

"  Plainly  "  here  does  not  mean  in  plain  language,  and  easily 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  209 

understood,  but  openly,  boldly,  unreservedly,  and  without  mys- 
tery. 

S5.— [Jesus  answered.. .1  told.. .ye  believed  not.']  To  what  does  our 
Lord  refer  here  ?  I  believe  He  refers  to  what  he  had  said  in  the 
fifth  chapter  before  the  Sanhedrim,  and  in  the  eighth  chapter  in 
the  discourse  beginning,  "  I  am  the  Light,"  etc.  The  words 
would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  I  ha>e  told  you,  and  ye  do 
not  believe." 

Henry  observes,  "The  Jews  pretended  that  they  only  doubted, 
but  Christ  tells  them  that  they  did  not  believe.  Scepticism  in 
religion  is  no  better  than  downright  infidelity." 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  "I  have  told  you  "  specially  refers 
to  our  Lord's  recent  proclamation  of  Himself  as  "  the  Good 
Shepherd."  To  a  Jewish  ear  it  would  sound  like  a  claim  to  be 
the  Messiah. 

\_Tlie  icorks... Father's  name, ...witness  of  me.]  Here,  as  in  other 
places,  our  Lord  appeals  to  His  miracles  as  the  grand  proof  that 
He  was  the  Christ.  (Compare  iii.  2,  and  v.  36,  and  vii.  31,  and 
ix.  33,  34,  and  Acts  ii.  22.)  It  is  as  though  our  Lord  said,  "The 
miracles  I  have  done  are  more  than  sufficient  proof  that  I  am  the 
Messiah.  Nothing  can  account  for  them  but  the  fact  that  I  au 
the  promised  Messiah." 

We  should  observe  that  our  Lord  says,  "  The  works  which  I  do 
in  my  Father's  name ;"  that  is,  by  my  Father's  commission  and 
appointment,  and  as  His  Messenger.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  He 
carefully  reminds  the  Jews  that  He  does  not  act  independently 
of  His  Father,  but  in  entire  harmony  and  unity  with  Him.  His 
works  were  works  which  "  the  Father  gave  Him  to  finish." 

We  should  observe  how  our  Lord  always  and  confidently  ap- 
peals to  the  evidence  of  His  miracles.  Those  who  try  to  depre- 
ciate and  sneer  at  miracles,  seem  to  forget  how  often  they  are 
brought  forward  as  good  witnesses  in  the  Bible.  This,  in  fact, 
is  their  great  object  and  purpose.  They  were  not  so  much 
meant  to  convert,  as  to  prove  that  He  who  did  them  was  from 
God,  and  deserved  attention. 

"  Of  me,"  would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  concerning  or 
about  me." 

26. — [But  ye  believe  not,  because. ..not.. .sheep.']  I  doubt  whether 
the  word  "  because"  does  not  put  a  meaning  on  this  verse  which 
it  hardly  bears  in  the  Greek.  It  should  rather  be,  "  Ye  neither 
believe  my  words  nor  my  works,  for  ye  are  not  in  the  number 
of  my  sheep.  If  ye  were  my  sheep  ye  would  believe :  faith  is 
one  of  their  marks."  Not  being  Christ's  sheep  was  not  the 
cause  of  the  unblief  of  the  Jews ;  but  their  unblief  was  the  ev- 
idence that  they  were  not  Christ's  sheep. 

Tyndale  and  others  think  that  the  full  stop  should  be  after  the 


210  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 


word  "  sheep,"  and  that  "  as  I  said  unto  yon,"  should  be  taken 
with  the  following  verse ;  but  I  see  no  necessity  for  this. 

[As  1  said  unto  you.']  I  think  these  words  refer  to  two  sayings 
of  our  Lord,  which  He  had  used  in  speaking  to  the  Jews,  one  in 
chap.  viii.  47:  "He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's  words :  ye 
therefore  hear  them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  God;  "  and  the 
other  at  the  third  and  fourth  verses  of  tins  chapter :  "  The  sheep 
hear  His  voice  " — "  the  sheep  follow  Him,  for  they  know  His 
voice." 

27. — [My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  etc.]  Having  told  the  Pharisees  that 
they  were  not  His  sheep,  our  Lord  goes  on  to  describe  the  char- 
acter of  those  who  were  His  sheep;  that  is,  of  H:s  own  true 
people  and  servants.  This  He  does  in  a  verse  of  singular  rich- 
ness and  fulness.    Every  word  is  instructive. 

Christ  calls  His  people  "  sheep."  He  does  so  because  they  are 
in  themselves  singularly  helpless  and  dependeut  on  their  Shep- 
herd; because  comparatively  they  are  the  most  harmless  and 
helpless  of  animals;  because  even  at  their  best  they  are  weak, 
foolish,  and  liable  to  go  astray. 

Chemnitius  gives  thirteen  distinct  reasons  why  believers  are 
called  sheep.  They  are  too  long  to  quote  here,  but  will  repay  the 
examination  of  any  one  who  has  access  to  his  commentary. 

He  calls  them,  "  My  sheep."  They  are  His  by  God  the  Father's 
gift, — His  by  redemption  and  purchase, — His  by  calling  and 
choosing, — His  by  feeding,  keeping,  and  preserving,— and  His 
by  their  own  consent  and  will.     They  are  His  peculiar  property. 

He  says,  "  They  hear  my  voice."  By  this  He  means  that  they 
listen  to  His  invitation,  when  He  calls  them  to  repent,  believe, 
and  come  to  Him.  This  supposes  that  Christ  first  speaks,  and 
then  they  hear.  Grace  begins  the  work :  they,  through  grace, 
obey  His  calling,  and  willingly  do  as  He  bids  them.  The  ears  of 
unconverted  people  are  deaf  to  Christ's  call,  but  true  Christians 
hear  and  obey. 

He  says,  "  I  know  them."  This  means  that  He  kuows  them 
with  a  special  knowledge  of  approbation,  complacency,  love, 
and  interest.  (See  the  word  "know "in  Psalms  i.  G,  xxxi.  8, 
Amos  iii.  2.)  Of  course  He  knows  the  secrets  of  all  men's  hearts, 
and  all  about  all  wicked  people.  But  He  kuows  with  a  peculiar 
knowledge  those  who  are  His  people.  The  world  knows  them 
not,  but  Christ  knows  and  cares  for  them.     (1  John  iii.  1.) 

He  says,  "  They  follow  Me."  This  means  that  His  people, 
like  sheep,  obey,  trust,  and  walk  in  the  steps  of  their  Divine 
Master.  They  follow  Him  in  holy  obedience  to  His  command- 
ments; they  follow  Him  in  striving  to  copy  His  example;  and 
they  follow  Him  in  trusting  implicitly  His  providential  leadings, 
— going  where  He  would  have  them  go,  and  taking  cheerfully 
all  He  appoints  for  them. 


JOHLT,    CHAP.    X.  211 

It  is  almost  needless  to  remark  that  this  description  belongs 
to  none  but  true  Christians.  It  did  not  belong  to  the  Pharisees 
to  whom  our  Lord  spoke.  It  does  not  belong  to  multitudes  of 
baptized  people  in  our  own  day. 

Luther  says  :  "  The  sheep,  though  the  most  simple  creature, 
is  superior  to  all  animals  in  this,  that  he  soon  hears  his  shep- 
herd's voice,  and  will  follow  no  other.  Also  he  is  clever  enough 
to  hang  entirely  on  his  shepherd,  and  to  seek  help  from  him  alone. 
He  cannot  help  himself,  nor  find  pasture  for  himself,  nor  heal 
himself,  nor  guard  against  wolves,  but  depends  wholly  and 
solely  on  the  help  of  another." 

In  the  Greek  of  this  verse,  there  is  a  nice  distinction  between 
the  number  of  the  verb  "hear"  and  the  verb  "follow,"  which 
the  English  language  caunot  convey.  It  is  as  though  our  Lord 
had  said,  My  sheep  are  a  body,  which  "  hears  "  my  voice,  in 
the  singular;  and  of  which  the  individual  members  "follow" 
Me,  in  the  plural. 

28.— [And  I  give,  etc.']  From  the  character  of  Christ's  sheep,  the 
Good  Shepherd  goes  on  to  describe  their  privileges.  He  gives 
to  them  eternal  life,  the  precious  gift  of  pardon  and  grace  in 
this  world,  and  a  life  of  glory  in  the  world  to  come. — He  says, 
"  I  give,"  in  the  present  tense.  Eternal  life  is  the  present  pos- 
session of  every  believer.  He  declares  that  they  shall  never 
perish  or  be  lost,  unto  all  eternity;  and  that  no  one  shall  ever 
pluck  them  out  of  His  hand. 

We  have  here  the  divinity  and  dignity  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  None  but  one  who  was  very  God  could  say,  "I  give 
eternal  life."    No  Apostle  ever  said  so. 

We  have  here  the  perpetuity  of  grace  in  believers,  and  the 
certainty  that  they  shall  never  be  cast  away.  How  any  one  can 
deny  this  doctrine,  as  the  Arminians  do,  aud  say  that  a  true 
believer  may  fall  away  and  be  lost,  in  the  face  of  this  text,  it  is 
hard  to  understand.  It  is  my  own  deliberate  opinion  that  it 
would  be  almost  impossible  to  imagiue  words  in  which  a  saiut's 
"  perseverance  "  could  be  more  strongly  asserted. 

We  have  here  a  distinct  promise,  that  "no  one,"  man,  angel, 
devil,  or  spirit,  shall  be  able  to  tear  from  Christ  His  sheep.  The 
Greek  literally  is  not  "  any  man,"  but  "  any  person,  or  any  one." 

The  doctrine  plainly  taught  in  this  text  may  be  called  "  Cal- 
vinism "  by  some,  and  of  "  dangerous  tendency  "  by  others.  The 
only  question  we  ought  to  ask  is,  whether  it  is  scriptural.  The 
simplest  answer  to  that  question  is,  that  the  words  of  the  text, 
in  their  plain  and  obvious  meaning,  cannot  be  honestly  inter- 
preted in  aiy  other  way.  To  thrust  in,  as  some  enemies  of  perse- 
verance do,  the  qualifying  clause,  "  they  shall  never  perish  so  long 
as  they  continue  my  sheej),"  is  adding  to  Scripture,  and  taking  un* 
warrantable  liberties  with  Christ's  words. 


212  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


So,  again,  Whitby's  interpretation,  "  They  shall  never  perish 
through  any  defect  on  ray  part,"  though  they  may  fall  away  by 
their  own  fault,  is  a  sad  instance  of  unfair  handling  of  Scrip- 
ture. 

Let  it  only  be  remembered  that  the  character  of  those  who 
shall  never  perish  is  most  distinctly  and  carefully  laid  down  in 
this  place.  It  is  those  who  hear  Christ's  voice  and  follow  Him, 
who  alone  are  "  sheep : "  it  is  "  His  sheep,"  and  His  sheep  alone, 
who  shall  never  perish.  The  man  who  boasts  that  he  shall  never 
be  cast  away  and  never  perish,  while  he  is  living  in  sin,  is  a  mis- 
erable self-deceiver.  It  is  the  perseverance  of  saints,  and  not  of 
sinners  and  wicked  people,  that  is  promised  here.  Doubtless  the 
doctrine  of  the  text  may  be  misused  and  abused,  like  every  other 
good  thing.  But  to  the  humble  penitent  believer,  who  puts  his 
trust  in  Christ,  it  is  one  of  the  most  glorious  and  comfortable 
truths  of  the  Gospel.  Those  who  dislike  it  would  do  well  to  study 
the  17th  Article  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  Hooker's  sermon 
on  the  "Perpetuity  of  Faith  in  the  Elect." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  last  clause  of  the  text  plainly  implies 
that  many  will  try  to  pluck  away  Christians  from  Christ,  and 
draw  them  back  to  sin.  To  feel  that  something  is  always 
"  plucking  "  and  "  pulling"  at  us  must  never  surprise  believers. 
There  is  a  devil,  and  saints  will  always  feel  and  find  his  pres- 
ence. 

Let  it  be  noted,  that  to  be  safe  in  Christ's  hand,  and  so  never 
to  perish,  is  one  thing;  but  to  feel  that  we  are  safe  is  quite 
another.  Many  true  believers  are  safe,  who  do  not  realize  and 
feel  it. 

Musculus  observes  that  our  Lord  does  not  say  in  this  verse 
that  His  sheep  shall  lose  nothing  in  this  world.  They  may  lose 
property,  liberty,  and  life,  for  Christ's  sake.  But  their  souls 
cannot  be  lost.  He  also  observes  that  all  Christ's  sheep  are  in 
Christ's  hand.  His  hand  holdiug  them,  and  not  their  hand  hold- 
ing Him,  is  the  true  secret  of  their  safety  and  perseverance. 

The  importance  of  the  doctrine  contained  in  this  text  cannot, 
in  my  judgment,  be  overrated.  The  Christian  who  does  not 
hold  it  is  a  great  loser.  It  is  one  of  the  grand  elements  of  the 
good  news  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  a  safeguard  against  much 
unsound  doctrine.  Perseverance  can  never  be  reconciled  with 
baptismal  regeneration.  The  advocates  of  an  extravagant 
view  of  baptismal  grace,  it  may  be  observed,  always  have  a 
special  dislike  to  the  doctrine  of  this  text. 

Hengstenberg  wisely  remarks  :  "  It  is  cold  consolation  to  say, 
if  and  so  long  as  they  remain  my  sheep  they  are  secure,  and 
shall  never  perish.  The  whole  strength  of  our  soul's  desire  is 
for  a  guarantee  against  ourselves.  That  there  is  such  a  guar- 
antee is  here  assured  to  us." 

9.— [My  Father  who  gare,  etc.,  etc."]    Our  Lord  here  strengthens 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  213 

the  mighty  promise  just  made,  by  declaring  that  His  sheep  are 
not  His  only,  but  His  Father's :  His  Father  gave  them  to  Him. 
"  My  Father,  He  declares,  is  '  almighty,'  or  greater  than  all ;  the 
Possessor  of  all  power.  No  one  is  able  to  pluck  anything  out 
of  my  Father's  hand,  so  that  my  sheep's  safety  is  donbly 
secured."  Let  it  be  noted  that-  the  word  "  them,"  in  the  last 
clause  of  our  English  version,  is  not  in  the  Greek. 

It  is  probable  that  both  in  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one, 
there  is  a  latent  reference  to  the  case  of  the  man  whom  the 
Pharisees  had  lately  "  cast  out  "of  the  Church,  or  excommuni- 
cated. Our  Lord  seems  to  say,  "You  may  cut  off  and  tear 
away  from  your  outward  church-membership  whom  you  will: 
but  you  can  never  pluck  away  any  of  my  people  from  Me." 

Let  it  be  noted  here  that  the  Father  is  just  as  much  interested 
in  the  safety  of  believers  as  the  Son.  To  leave  out  of  sight  the 
Father's  love,  in  our  zeal  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  is  very  poor 
theology. 

Melancthon  dwells  on  this  promise  in  a  passage  of  singular 
beauty.  He  specially  dwells  on  it  as  a  ground  of  comfort 
against  the  invasion  of  Europe  by  the  Turks,  the  persecution 
of  truth  by  so-called  Christian  princes,  and  the  furious  strifes 
and  controversies  of  teachers  of  the  Church.  There  is  a  Church 
which  nothing  can  harm. 

Calvin  remarks :  "  Our  salvation  is  certain,  because  it  is  in 
the  hand  of  God.  Our  faith  is  weak,  and  we  are  prone  to 
waver :  but  God,  who  hath  taken  us  under  His  protection  is 
sufficiently  powerful  to  scatter  with  a  breath  all  the  power  of 
our  adversaries.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  turn  our  eyes  to 
this." 

Musculus  observes  that  it  is  said  the  Father  "gave"  the 
sheep  to  Me,  in  the  past  tense.  Believers  were  given  to  Christ 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

30. — [7  and  the  father  are  one.~\  In  order  to  explain  how  it  is  that 
the  Father  should  take  as  much  interest  in  the  sheep  as  the 
Son,  our  Lord  here  declares,  in  the  plainest  and  most  explicit 
terms,  the  deep  truth  of  the  essential  unity  between  Himself 
and  His  Father.  Literally  translated,  the  sentence  is,  "I  aud 
my  Father  are  one  thing."  By  this,  of  course,  He  did  not  mean 
that  His  Father  and  He  were  one  Person.  This  would  over- 
throw the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  But  He  did  mean,  "  I  and 
my  eternal  Father,  though  two  distinct  Persons,  and  not  to  be 
confounded,  are  yet  one  in  essence,  nature,  dignity,  power, 
will,  and  operation.  Hence,  in  the  matter  of  securing  the 
safety  of  ray  sheep,  what  I  do,  my  Father  does  likewise.  I  do 
not  act  independently  of  Him." 

This  is  one  of  those  deep  and  mysterious  texts  which  we 
must  be  content  to  receive  and  believe,  without  attempting  to 
pry  too  curiously  into  its  contents.    The  cautious  aud  exact 


214  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

■words  of  the  Athanasian  Creed  should  be  often  remembered : 
"Neither  confounding  the  Persons,  nor  dividing  the  substance. 
—  There  is  one  Person  of  the  Father,  another  of  the  Son,  and 
another  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  but  the  Godhead  of  the  Father,  of 
the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  all  one,  the  glory  equal,  the 
majesty  coeternal." 

Augustine  remarks  that  this  text  alone  overthrows  both  the 
doctrine  of  the  Sabellians  and  the  Arians.  It  silences  the 
Sabelliaus,  who  say  there  is  only  one  Person  in  the  Godhead, 
by  speaking  of  two  distinct  Persons.  It  silences  the  Arians, 
who  say  the  Son  is  inferior  to  the  Father,  by  saying  that  Father 
and  Son  are  "  one." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  doctrine  of  this  verse  is  precisely  the 
same  that  our  Lord  had  maintained  on  a  former  occasion  (in 
the  fifth  chapter)  before  the  Sanhedrim.  There  it  was  ex- 
pounded fully :  here  it  is  briefly  asserted.  And  the  interpreta- 
tion put  on  His  meaning,  in  both  cases,  by  the  Jews,  was  ex- 
actly the  same.  They  regarded  it  as  a  claim  to  be  regarded  as 
"  God." 

The  practical  use  of  the  text  to  a  believer  in  Christ  is  far  too 
much  overlooked.  It  shows  the  entire  childlike  confidence 
with  which  such  an  one  may  look  at  the  Father.  "He  who 
hath  the  Son  hath  the  Father."  The  remark  is  only  too  true 
that  while  some  ignorantly  talk  of  the  Father,  as  if  there  was 
no  Christ  crucified,  others,  with  no  less  ignorance,  talk  of  Christ 
crucified  as  if  there  was  no  God  and  Father  of  Christ,  who 
loved  the  world ! 

Chrysostom  observes  :  "  That  thou  may  est  not  suppose  that 
Christ  is  weak,  and  the  sheep  are  in  safety  through  the  Father's 
power,  He  adcleth,  '  I  and  the  Father  are  one.'  As  though  He 
had  said,  I  did  not  assert  that  on  account  of  the  Father  no  man 
plucketh  them  away,  as  though  I  were  too  weak  to  keep  the 
sheep.  For  I  and  the  Father  are  one.  He  speaks  here  with 
reference  to  power,  for  concerning  this  was  all  His  discourse; 
and  if  the  power  be  the  same,  it  is  clear  that  the  essence  is 
also." 

Ecolampadius  remarks:  "He  does  not  say  we  are  one  in  the 
masculine  gender, — that  is,  one  person ;  but  one  in  the  neuter 
gender, — that  is,  one  in  nature,  power,  and  majesty.  If  you 
were  to  say  one  Person,  you  would  take  away  both,  and  leave 
neither  Father  nor  Son." 

Maldonatus  quotes  a  saying  of  Augustine's, — "  that  it  is  inva- 
riably found  in  Scripture  that  things  called  ■  one  '  are  things  of 
the  same  nature." 

It  is  fair  to  admit  that  Erasmus,  Calvin,  and  a  few  others 
think  the  "oneness"  here  only  means  unity  of  consent  and 
will.  But  the  vast  majority  of  commentators  think  otherwise, 
and  the  Jews  evidently  thought  so  also. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X. 


215 


JOHN  X.   31-42. 


31  Then  the  Jews  took  up  stones 
again  to  stone  hiin. 

32  Jesus  answered  them,  Many  good 
works  have  I  shewed  you  from  my  Fa- 
ther; for  which  of  those  works  do  ye 
stone  me  ? 

33  The  Jews  answered  him,  saying, 
For  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not; 
but  for  blasphemy ;  and  because  that 
thou,  being  a  man,  makest  thyself 
God. 

34  Jesus  answered  them,  Is  it  not 
written  in  your  law,  I  said  Ye  are 
gods? 

35  If  he  called  them  gods,  unto 
whom  the  word  of  God  came,  and  the 
scripture  cannot  be  broken; 

36  Say  ye  of  him,  whom  the  Father 
hath  sanctified,  and  sent  into  the  world, 


Thou  blasphemest;  because  I  said,  I 
am  the  Son  of  God  ? 

37  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Fa- 
ther, believe  me  not. 

38  But  if  I  do,  though  ye  believe 
not  me,  believe  the  works :  that  ye  may 
know,  and  believe,  that  the  Father  is 
in  me,  and  I  in  him. 

39  Therefore  they  sought  again  to 
take  him:  but  he  escaped  out  of  their 
hand. 

40  And  went  away  again  beyond 
Jordan  into  the  place  where  John  at 
first  baptized;    and  there  he  abode. 

41  And  many  resorted  unto  him, 
and  said,  John  did  no  miracle:  but  all 
things  that  John  spake  of  this  man 
were  true. 

42  And  many  believed  od  him  there. 


We  should  observe,  in  these  verses,  the  extreme  wicked- 
ness of  human  nature.  The  unbelieving  Jews  at  Jerusalem 
was  neither  moved  by  our  Lord's  miracles,  nor  by  His 
preaching.  They  were  determined  not  to  receive  Him  as 
their  Messiah.  Once  more  it  is  written  that "  they  took 
up  stones  to  stone  Him." 

Our  Lord  had  done  the  Jews  no  injury.  He  was  no 
robber,  murderer,  or  rebel  against  the  law  of  the  land.  He 
was  one  whose  whole  life  was  love,  and  who  "  went  about  do- 
iug  good."  (Acts  x.  38.)  There  was  no  fault  or  inconsistency 
in  His  character.  There  was  no  crime  that  could  be  laid  to 
His  charge.  So  perfect  and  spotless  a  man  had  never 
walked  on  the  face  of  this  earth.  But  yet  the  Jews  hated 
Him,  and  thirsted  for  His  blood.  How  true  are  the  words 
of  Scripture  :  "  They  hated  Him  without  a  cause."  (John 
xv.  25.)  How  just  the  remark  of  an  old  divine  :  "  Uncon. 
verted  men  would  kill  God  Himself  if  they  could  only  ge\ 
at  Him." 

The  true  Christian  has  surely  no  right  to  wonder  if  he 
meets  with  the  same  kind  of  treatment  as  our  blessed  Lord. 
In  fact,  the  more  like  he  is  to  his  Master,  and  the  more 


216  EXPOSITDRY  THOUGHTS. 

holy  and  spiritual  his  life,  the  more  probable  is  it  that  he 
will  have  to  endure  hatred  and  persecution.  Let  him  not 
suppose  that  any  degree  of  consistency  will  deliver  him 
from  this  cross.  It  is  not  his  faults,  but  his  graces,  which 
call  forth  the  enmity  of  men.  The  world  hates  to  see  any- 
thing of  God's  image.  The  children  of  the  world  are  vexed 
and  pricked  in  conscience  when  they  see  others  better  than 
themselves.  Why  did  Cain  hate  his  brother  Abel,  and 
slay  him?  "Because,"  says  St.  John,  "  his  own  works 
were  evil,  and  his  brother's  righteous."  (1  John  iii.  12.) 
"Why  did  the  Jews  hate  Christ?  Because  He  exposed  their 
sins  and  false  doctrines  ;  and  they  knew  in  their  own  hearts 
that  he  was  right  and  they  were  wrong.  "  The  world," 
said  our  Lord,  "  hateth  Me,  because  I  testify  of  it,  that  the 
works  thereof  are  evil."  (John  vii.  7.)  Let  Christiana 
make  up  their  minds  to  drink  the  same  cup,  and  let  them 
drink  it  patiently  and  without  surprise.  There  is  One  in 
heaven  who  said,  "  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it 
hated  Me  before  it  hated  you."  (John  xv.  18.)  Let  them 
remember  this  and  take  courage.  The  time  is  short.  We 
are  travelling  on  towards  a  day  when  all  shall  be  set  right, 
and  every  man  shall  receive  according  to  his  works.  "  There 
is  an  end  :  and  our  expectation  shall  not  be  cutoff."  (Prov. 
xxiii.  18.) 

We  should  observe,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  the  high 
honour  that  Jesus  Christ  x>uts  on  the  Holy  Scriptures.  We 
find  Him  using  a  text  out  of  the  Psalms  as  an  argument 
against  His  enemies,  in  which  the  whole  point  lies  in  the 
single  word  "  gods."  And  then  having  quoted  the  text, 
He  la3rs  down  the  great  principle,  u  the  Scripture  cannot  be 
broken."  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  Wherever  the  Scrip- 
ture speaks  plainly  on  any  subject,  there  can  be  no  more 
question  about  it.  The  cause  is  settled  and  decided.  Every 
jot  and  tittle  of  Scripture  is  true,  and  must  be  received  as 
conclusive." 


JOHN,   CHAP.    X.  217 

The  principle  here  laid  down  by  our  Lord  is  one  of  vast 
importance.  Let  us  grasp  it  firmly,  and  never  let  it  go. 
Let  us  maintain  boldly  the  complete  inspiration  of  every 
word  of  the  original  Hebrew  and  Greek  Scriptures.  Let  us 
believe  that  not  only  every  book  of  the  Bible,  but  every 
chapter, — aud  not  only  every  chapter,  but  every  verse, — 
and  not  only  every  verse,  but  every  word,  was  originally 
given  by  inspiration  of  God.  Inspiration,  we  must  never 
shrink  from  asserting,  extends  not  only  to  the  thoughts  and 
ideas  of  Scripture,  but  to  the  least  words. 

The  principle  before  us,  no  doubt,  is  rudely  assaulted  in 
the  present  day.  Let  no  Christian's  heart  fail  because  of 
these  assaults.  Let  us  stand  our  ground  manfully,  and 
defend  the  principle  of  plenary  inspiration  as  we  would  the 
apple  of  our  eye.  There  are  difficulties  in  Scripture,  we 
need  not  shrink  from  conceding,  things  hard  to  explain, 
hard  to  reconcile,  and  hard  to  understand.  But  in  almost 
all  these  difficulties,  the  fault,  we  may  justly  suspect,  is  not 
so  much  in  Scripture  as  in  our  own  weak  minds.  In  all 
cases  we  may  well  be  content  to  wait  for  more  light,  and  to 
believe  that  all  shall  be  made  clear  at  last.  One  thing  we 
may  rest  assured  is  very  certain, — if  the  difficulties  of 
plenary  inspiration  are  to  be  numbered  by  thousands,  the 
difficulties  of  any  other  view  of  inspiration  are  to  be  num- 
bered by  tens  of  thousands.  The  wisest  course  is  to  walk 
in  the  old  path, — the  path  of  faith  and  humility  ;  and  say, 
"  I  cannot  give  up  a  single  word  of  my  Bible.  All  Scrip- 
ture is  given  by  inspiration  of  God.  The  Scripture  cannot 
be  broken." 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  importance 
which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  attaches  to  His  miracles.  He 
appeals  to  them  as  the  best  evidence  of  His  own  Divine 
mission.  He  bids  the  Jews  look  at  them,  and  deny  them 
if  they  can.  "  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  believe 
10 


218  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

me  not.  But  if  I  do,  though  ye  believe  not  Me,  believe  the 
works." 

The  mighty  miracles  which  our  Lord  performed  during 
the  three  years  of  His  earthly  ministry  are  probably  not 
considered  as  much  as  they  ought  to  be  in  the  present  day. 
These  miracles  were  not  few  in  number.  Forty  times  and 
more  we  read  in  the  Gospels  of  His  doing  things  entirely 
out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  nature, — healing  sick  people 
in  a  moment,  raising  the  dead  with  a  word,  casting  out 
devils,  calming  winds  and  waves  in  an  instant,  walking  on 
the  water  as  on  solid  ground.  These  miracles  were  not  all 
done  in  private  among  friends.  Many  of  them  were  wrought 
in  the  most  public  manner,  under  the  eyes  of  unfriendly 
witnesses.  We  are  so  familiar  with  these  things  that  we 
are  apt  to  forget  the  mighty  lesson  they  teach.  They  teach 
that  He  who  worked  these  miracles  must  be  nothing  less 
than  very  God.  They  stamp  His  doctrines  and  precepts 
with  the  mark  of  Divine  authority.  He  onty  who  created 
all  things  at  the  beginning  could  suspend  the  laws  of  crea- 
tion at  His  will.  He  who  could  suspend  the  laws  of  crea- 
tion must  be  One  who  ought  to  be  thoroughly  believed  and 
implicitly  obeyed.  To  reject  One  who  confirmed  His  mis- 
sion by  such  mighty  works  is  the  height  of  madness  and 
folly. 

Hundreds  of  unbelieving  men,  no  doubt,  in  every  age, 
have  tried  to  pour  contempt  on  Christ's  miracles,  and  to 
deny  that  they  were  ever  worked  at  all.  But  they  labour 
in  vain.  Proofs  upon  proofs  exist  that  our  Lord's  ministry 
was  accompanied  by  miracles ;  and  that  this  was  acknowl- 
edged by  those  who  lived  in  our  Lord's  time.  Objectors 
of  this  sort  would  do  well  to  take  up  the  one  single  miracle 
of  our  Lord's  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  disprove  it 
if  they  can.  If  they  cannot  disprove  that,  they  ought,  as 
honest  men,  to  confess  that  miracles  are  possible.  And 
then,  if  their  hearts  are  truly  humble,  they  ought  to  admit 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  219 

that  He  whose  mission  was  confirmed  by  such  evidence 
must  have  been  the  Son  of  God. 

Let  us  thank  God,  as  we  turn  from  this  passage,  that 
Christianity  has  such  abundant  evidence  that  it  is  a  religion 
from  God.  Whether  we  appeal  to  the  internal  evidence  of 
the  Bible,  or  to  the  lives  of  the  first  Christians,  or  to  prophe- 
cy, or  to  miracles,  or  to  histor}^,  we  get  one  and  the  same 
answer.  All  say  with  one  voice,  "  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God,  and  believers  have  life  through  His  name" 

Notes.    John  X.  31—42. 

81. — \Then  the  Jews  took  tip  stones,  etc.~]  The  conduct  of  the  Jews 
is  just  the  same  as  it  was  when  our  Lord  said,  "  Before  Abra- 
has  was  I  am."  (John  viii.  59.)  They  regarded  His  words  as 
blasphemy,  and  proceeded  to  take  the  law  in  their  own  hands, 
as  they  did  in  Stephen's  case,  and  to  inflict  the  punishment  due 
to  blasphemy.  (See  Lev.  xxiv.  14—16.)  "  He  that  blasphem- 
eth  the  name  of  the  Lord,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  and 
all  the  congregation  shall  certainly  stone  him."  (So  Num.  xv. 
36;  1  Kings  xxi.  13.)  The  Jews  of  course  had  no  power  to  put 
any  man  to  death,  being  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans, 
and  if  they  did  stone  any  one  it  would  have  been  a  sudden 
tumultuary  proceeding,  or  act  of  Lyneh-law. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Greek  word  for  "  took  up  "  here,  is 
not  the  same  that  is  used  at  viii.  59.  Here  it  rather  means  "  they 
carried."  Parkhurst  thinks  this  implies  the  great  size  of  the 
s.tones  they  brought.  No  doubt  the  stones  used  in  stoning  to 
death,  were  not  pebbles,  but  large  stones.  Yet  1  rather  incline 
to  think  that  it  shows  that  they  had  to  carry  stones  from  some 
little  distance  for  their  murderous  purpose.  We  can  hardly 
suppose  there  were  suitable  stones  lying  about  within  an  old 
finished  building  like  Solomon's  porch,  though  there  might  be 
stones  at  a  little  distance  on  account  of  the  repairs  of  the 
temple. 

Augustine  remarks:  "Behold  the  Jews  understood  what 
Arians  do  not  understand." 

Maldonatus  observes  that  "  these  stones  cry  out  against  the 
Arians." 

82.— lJesus...ma7iy  good  works. ..shewed. ..Father,  etc.~\  Our  Lord 
here  appeals  to  the  many  miracles  He  had  publicly  wrought 
before  the  Jews,  in  discharging  His  commission  as  sent  by  the 
Father  to  be  the  Messiah,  all  good  and  excellent  works,  in 
which  none  could  find  any  fault,  and  lie  asks  whether  they 
proposed  to  stone  Him  for  any  of  them.     They  had  often  asked 


220  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


for  signs  and  proofs  of  His  being  the  Messiah.  Well,  He  had 
wrought  many  such  signs.  Did  they  really  mean  to  kill  Him 
for  His  works?  He  had  gone  about  only  doing  good.  Did 
they  intend  to  stone  him  for  this? 

The  expression,  "  I  have  shewed,"  is  curious,  and  we  should 
have  expected  rather,  "I  have  worked."  It  probably  means, 
"  I  have  publicly  exhibited  before  your  eyes,  and  not  in  a  cor- 
ner, but  in  such  a  manner  as  to  court  the  fullest  public  obser- 
vation, many  wonderful  proofs  of  my  Messiahship."  (Compare 
John  ii.  18:  "  What  sign  shewest  Thou?")  So  St.  Paul  says 
that  "  God  shall  in  His  own  time  shew  the  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ."  (1  Tim.  vi.  15.)  The  expression  is  probably  a  Hebra- 
ism.    (Compare  Psalm  iv.  6;  lx.  3;  lxxi.  20;  Exod.  vii.  9.) 

The  expression,  "from  my  Father,"  points  to  the  great  truth 
continually  brought  forward  by  our  Lord  in  this  Gospel:  viz., 
that  all  His  works  as  well  as  words  were  given  to  Him  by  the 
Father,  to  be  worked  and  spoken  in  the  world,  and  ought 
therefore  to  be  held  in  special  reverence. 

Hengstenberg  observes,  that  the  expression,  "  many  good 
works,"  evidently  supposes  that  John  knew  of  many  other 
miracles  which  he  does  not  record,  and  that  many  had  been 
done  at  Jerusalem  beside  the  few  that  are  recorded. 

[For  which. ..works. ..stone  me.']  This  could  be  literally  ren- 
dered, "  On  account  of  which  work  of  all  these  are  you  stoning 
Me?  "  Some,  as  Gualter  and  Tholuck,  have  thought  that  there 
is  a  slight  tinge  of  sarcasm  about  the  question.  "Is  it  so  that 
you  are  actually  going  to  stone  Me  for  good  actions  ?  Are  not 
men  generally  stoned  for  evil  doings  ?  "  Yet  this  seems  an  un- 
likely idea,  and  is  needless.  Is  not  the  meaning  made  clear  by 
simply  inverting  the  order  of  words?  "For  what  work  or 
action  are  you  going  to  stone  Me?  Justice  requires  that  crimi- 
nals should  be  punished  for  doing  evil  works ;  but  all  the  many 
wonderful  works  I  have  done  among  you  have  been  good,  and 
not  evil.  You  surely  will  not  stone  me  for  any  of  these ;  reason 
and  your  laws  teach  that  this  would  be  wrong.  It  is  not  there- 
fore for  my  works  and  life  that  you  are  going  to  stone  Me.  I 
challenge  you  to  prove  that  I  have  done  evil.  Which  of  you 
convicteth'Me  of  sin?  " 

Taken  in  this  view,  the  verse  is  simply  a  strong  assertion, 
made  by  our  Lord,  of  His  own  entire  innocence  of  any  crime 
for  which  He  could  be  stoned. 

Hutchesou  thinks  that  "  some  stones  were  already  cast  at 
Christ,  and  therefore  He  says,  Do  you  stone  Me?"  Yet  this 
seems  needless.  The  present  tense  here  implies  only,  Are  ye 
on  the  point  of  stoning  Me? 

33. — [The  Jews  answered,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  confident  challenge,  as 
in  chap.  viii.  46,  seems  to  have  been  found  unanswerable  by  the 
Jews.    They  could  not  prove  any  evil  work  against  Him.    They 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  221 


therefore  reply  that  they  do  not  propose  to  stone  Him  for  His 
works,  but  for  having  spoken  blasphemous  icords.  The  precise 
nature  of  the  blasphemy  they  say  is,  that  "  being  nothing  but  a 
mere  man,  He  made  Himself  God,  or  spoke  of  Himself  in  such 
a  way  as  showed  that  He  claimed  to  be  God." 

This  is  a  very  remarkable  verse.  It  is  like  chap.  v.  18  :  "  The 
Jews  sought  to  kill  Him,  because  He  said  that  God  was  His 
Father,  making  Himself  equal  with  God."  It  shows  clearly 
that  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's  time  attached  a  much  higher  and 
deeper  sense  to  our  Lord's  frequently  used  language  about  God 
being  His  Father  than  modern  readers  are  apt  to  do.  In  fact 
they  regarded  it  as  nothing  less  than  a  claim  to  equality  with 
God.  Modern  Arians  and  Socinians,  who  profess  to  see  noth- 
ing in  our  Lord's  Sonship  but  a  higher  degree  of  that  relation- 
ship which  exists*  between  all  believers  and  God,  would  do 
well  to  mark  this  verse.  What  they  say  they  cannot  see, 
the  Jews  who  hated  Christ  could  see.  This  "  cotemporaneous 
exposition,"  to  use  a  legal  phrase,  of  our  Lord's  words,  de- 
serves great  respect,  and  carries  with  it  great  weight  and 
authority.  As  a  man,  our  Lord  was  a  Jew,  educated  and 
trained  among  Jews.  Common  sense  points  out  that  the  Jews 
who  lived  in  His  time  were  more  likely  to  put  correct  sense  on 
His  words  than  modern  Socinians. 

Gualter  observes,  how  frequently  wicked  men  and  persecutors 
of  Christ's  people  have  affected  a  zeal  for  God's  glory  and  pre- 
tended a  horror  of  blasphemy.  The  accusers  of  Naboth  and 
Stephen  are  examples  :  so  also  the  Spanish  Inquisition. 

A.  Clarke  observes :  "  That  had  the  Jews,  as  many  called 
Christians  do,  understood  our  Lord  only  to  mean,  by  being 
*  one  with  the  Father,' that  He  had  unity  of  sentiment  with  the 
Father,  they  would  not  have  attempted  to  treat  Him  as  a  blas- 
phemer. In  this  sense  Abraham,  Isaac,  Moses,  David,  and  all 
the  prophets  were  one  with  God.  But  what  irritated  them  was 
that  they  understood  him  to  speak  of  unity  of  nature.  There- 
fore they  say,  '  Thou  makest  Thyself  God.'  " 

S4, — [Jesus  answered  them,  etc.']  Our  Lord's  defence  of  his  own 
language  against  the  charge  of  blasphemy  is  very  remarkable. 
It  is  an  argument  from  a  lesser  to  a  greater.  If  princes,  who  are 
merely  men,  are  called  gods,  He  who  was  the  eternal  Son  of 
the  Father  could  surely  not  be  justly  chargeable  with  blasphemy 
for  calling  Himself  the  "  Son  of  God." 

The  expression,  "  your  law,"  means  the  Scriptures.  Some- 
times our  Lord  speaks  of  two  great  divisions  into  which  the 
Jews  divided  the  Old  Testament:  viz.,  the  law  and  the  proph- 
ets. (As  Matt.  xxii.  40.)  The  ';law"  then  included  not  the 
books  of  Moses  only,  but  everything  clown  to  the  end  of  the 
Song  of  Solomon.  Sometimes  He  distributes  the  Scriptures 
into  three  parts :  the  law,  the  psalms,  and  the  prophets.  (As 
in  Luke  xxii.  44.)    Here  He  uses  one  word  for  all  the  Old  Tes- 


222  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


tament,  and  calls  it  "the  law."  By  saying  "your  law,"  ouf 
Lord  reminds  His  hearers  that  He  appeals  to  their  own  honoured 
sacred  writings. 

The  expression,  "  I  said  ye  are  gods,"  is  drawn  from  the 
82d  Psalm,  in  which  Asaph  is  speaking  of  princes  and  rulers, 
and  their  position  and  duties.  Their  elevation  above  other  men 
was  so  great,  and  their  consequent  responsibility  for  the  state 
of  nations  so  great,  that  compared  to  other  men,  it  might 
be  said,  "  You  are  as  gods."  A  king  is  called  "  the  Lord's 
anointed.  "  (2  Sam.  i.  14.)  So  "  Ye  judge  not  for  man,  but  for 
the  Lord."  (2  Chron.  xix.  G.)  Princes  and  magistrates  are 
ordained  of  God,  derive  their  power  from  God,  act  for  God,  and 
stand  between  the  people  and  God.  Hence,  in  a  sense,  they  are 
called  "  gods."  Those  who  wish  to  see  this  subject  fully  worked 
out,  will  see  it  in  Hall  and  Swinuock's  Exposition  of  the  82d 
Psalm. 

We  should  observe  how  our  Lord  appeals  to  Scripture  as  the 
judge  of  controversy :  "  Is  it  not  written?  "  A  plaiu  text  ought 
to  settle  every  disputed  point.  He  might  have  argued  :  He  sim- 
ply quotes  a  text.  By  so  doing  He  puts  peculiar  honour  on 
Scripture. 

It  is  worth  noticing  that  the  Hebrew  word  rendered  "judges" 
in  our  version  of  Exodus  xxii.  8,  9,  might  have  been  rendered 
"  gods."  (Compare  Exodus  xxii.  28  ;  xxi.  6.) 

35. — [If  he  called  them  gods.~]  Here  our  Lord  proceeds  to  show 
what  was  the  edge  and  point  of  His  argument.  All  turned  on 
the  use  of  the  single  word  "gods"  in  one  single  verse  of  a 
Psalm. 

It  is  not  very  clear  what  governs  the  word  we  render  "  called,' 
in  this  sentence.  Our  translators  evidently  thought  it  meant 
"  God."  But  why  should  it  not  refer  direct  to  "your  law  "  in 
the  last  verse  :  "  If  your  own  book  of  the  law  in  the  Psalm  has 
called  certain  persons  gods." 

Chrysostom  observes:  "  What  He  saith  is  of  this  kind:  '  If 
those  who  have  received  this  honour  by  grace  are  not  found 
fault  with  for  calling  themselves  gods,  how  can  He  deserve  to 
be  rebuked  who  hath  this  by  nature.'  "  Theophylact  says  the 
same. 

\To  whom  the  word  of  God  came. ,]  This  is  a  rather  difficult 
expression.  Some,  as  Bullinger  and  B'irgon,  think  that  it  re- 
fers to  the  commission  from  God,  which  rulers  receive:  "they 
are  persons  to  whom  God  has  spoken,  and  commanded  them  to 
rule  for  Him." — Some,  as  Alford,  think  it  simply  means,  "if  He 
called  them  gods,  to  whom  God  spake  in  these  passages."  But 
it  may  justly  be  replied  that  it  does  not  say  "  God  spake ;  "  but, 
"  There  was  the  word  of  God."  Of  the  two  views  the  former 
seems  best.  The  Greek  is  almost  the  same  as  that  of  Luke  iii. 
2  :  "  The  word  of  God  came  to  John," — meaning  a  special  com- 
mission. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  223 


Heinsius  suggests  that  the  sentence  means  t(  against  whom 
the  word  of  God  was  "  spoken  in  the  82d  Psalm :  that  Psalm 
containing  a  rebuke  of  princes.    But  this  seems  doubtful. 

Pearce  thinks  that  it  means  "with  whom  was  the  word  of 
judgment,"  and  refers  to  the  Septuagint  version  of  2  Chron. 
xix.  6. 

It  deserves  notice  that  it  is  never  said  of  Christ  Himself,  that 
the  "  Word  of  God  came  to  Him."  He  was  above  all  other  com- 
missioned judges. 

[And  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken.]  In  this  remarkable  pa- 
renthesis our  Lord  reminds  His  Jewish  hearers  of  their  own  ac- 
knowledged principle,  that  the  "  Scripture  cannot  be  annulled  or 
broken : "  that  is,  that  everything  which  it  says  must  be  re- 
ceived reverently  and  unhesitatingly,  and  that  not  one  jot.  or 
tittle  of  it  ought  to  be  disregarded.  Every  word  of  Scripture 
must  be  allowed  its  full  weight,  and  must  neither  be  clipped, 
passed  over,  nor  evaded.  If  the  82d  Psalm  calls  princes  who 
are  mere  men  "gods,"  there  cannot  be  any  impropriety  in  ap- 
plying the  expression  to  persons  commissioned  by  God.  The 
expression  may  seem  strange  at  first.  Never  mind,  it  is  in  the 
Scripture  and  it  must  be  right. 

Few  passages  appear  to  me  to  prove  so  incontrovertibly  the 
plenary  inspiration  and  divine  authority  of  every  word  in  the 
original  text  of  the  Bible.  The  whole  point  of  our  Lord's  argu- 
ment hinges  on  the  divine  authority  of  a  single  word.  Was 
that  word  in  the  Psalms?  Then  it  justified  the  application  of 
the  expression  "  gods  "  to  men.  Scripture  cannot  be  broken. 
The  theories  of  those  who  say  that  the  writers  of  the  Bible  were 
inspired,  but  not  all  their  writings, — or  the  ideas  of  the  Bible 
inspired,  but  not  all  the  language  in  which  these  ideas  are  con- 
veyed,— appear  to  be  totally  irreconcilable  with  our  Lord's  use 
of  the  sentence  before  us.  There  is  no  other  standing  ground, 
I  believe  about  inspiration,  excepting  the  principle  that  it  is 
plenary,  and  reaches  to  every  syllable.  Once  leaving  that 
ground,  we  are  plunged  in  a  sea  of  uncertainties.  Like  the  care- 
fully composed  language  of  wills,  settlements,  and  conveyances, 
every  word  of  the  Bible  must  be  held  sacred,  and  not  a  single 
flaw  or  slip  of  the  pen  admitted. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word  rendered 
"  broken  "  is  loosed  or  untied. 

Gill  observes :  "  This  is  a  Jewish  way  of  speaking,  much 
used  in  the  Talmud.  When  one  doctor  has  produced  an  argu- 
ment, another  says,  *  It  may  be  broken,'  or  objected  to,  or  re- 
futed.   But  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken." 

Hengstenberg  says :  "  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  Scrip- 
ture is  broken  by  those  Who  assert  that  the  Psalms  breathe  a 
spirit  of  revenge— that  Solomon's  song  is  a  common  Oriental 
love  song— that  there  are  in  the  Prophets  predictions  never  to 


224  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


be  fulfilled— or  by  those  who  deny  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the 
Pentateuch." 

86.—  [Say  ye  of  him,  etc.']  Our  Lord  in  this  verse  presses  home  on 
the  Jews  the  force  of  the  expression  in  the  82d  Psalm.  "If 
princes  are  called  gods,  do  ye  mean  to  call  Me  whom  the  Father 
sanctified  from  eternity  to  be  Messiah,  and  sent  into  the  world 
in  due  time,  a  blasphemer,  because  I  have  said,  I  am  the  Son  of 
God?" 

"  Say  ye  of  him  "  would  have  been  better  rendered,  "  Say  ye 
of  Me."    The  Greek  leaves  it  open. 

The  expression,  "  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified,"  must 
mean,  "whom  the  Father  hath  set  apart,  and  appointed  from 
all  eternity  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  as  a  priest  is  sanctified  and 
set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  temple."  It  cannot  mean  liter- 
ally "  made  holy."  It  implies  eternal  dedication  and  appoint- 
ment to  a  certain  office.  This  is  one  of  the  places  which  teach 
the  eternal  generation  of  Christ.  Long  before  He  came  into 
the  world,  "  the  Father"  (not  God,  observe)  had  sanctified  and 
appointed  the  Son.  He  did  not  become  the  Son  when  He  en- 
tered the  world :  He  was  the  Son  from  all  eternity. 

The  expression,  "  sent  into  the  world,"  means  that  mission 
of  Christ's  to  be  the  Saviour,  which  took  place  when  he  became 
incarnate,  and  came  among  us  in  the  form  of  a  man.  He  was 
the  Father's  "  sent  One,"  the  "  Apostle  "  of  our  profession.  (See 
Heb.  iii.  1;  John  iii.  17;  and  1  John  iv.  14.)  He  that  was  so 
"  sanctified  "  and  "  sent,"  might  well  speak  of  Himself  as  the  Son 
of  God,  and  equal  with  God. 

Calvin  remarks :  "  There  is  a  sauctification  that  is  common 
to  all  believers.  But  here  Christ  claims  for  Himself  something 
far  more  excellent :  namely,  that  He  alone  was  separated  from 
all  others,  that  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  and  majesty  of  God  might 
be  displayed  in  Him;  as  He  said  formerly,  'Him  hath  God  the 
Father  sealed.' "     (John  vi.  27.) 

87. — [If  I  do  not  the  works,  etc.]  Here  our  Lord  once  more  appeals 
to  the  evidence  of  His  miracles,  and  challenges  attention  to 
them.  "  I  do  not  ask  you  to  believe  that  I  am  the  Son  of  God 
and  the  Messiah,  if  I  do  not  prove  it  by  my  works.  If  I  did  no 
miracles,  you  might  be  justified  in  not  believing  Me  to  be  the 
Messiah,  and  in  calling  Me  a  blasphemer." 

Here,  again,  we  should  observe  how  our  Lord  calls  His  mira- 
cles the  "  works  of  His  Father."  They  were  works  given  to  Him 
by  His  Father  to  do.  They  were  such  works  as  none  but  God 
the  Father  could  possibly  perform. 

Gualter  observes,  what  a  proof  this  verse  indirectly  supplies 
of  the  nullity  of  the  Pope's  claim  to  be  God's  vicegerent  and 
head  of  the  Church !  What  are  r  is  works  ?  What  evidence  of  « 
divine  mission  does  he  give  ? 


JOHN,    CHAP.    X.  225 


Musculus  also  remarks  that  the  Pope's  high  claims  and  great 
sounding  titles  are  useless,  so  long  as  his  works  contradict  his 
words. 

38.— [But  if  I  do  though,  etc.']  Our  Lord  here  concludes  His 
reply  to  the  Jews :  "  If  I  do  the  works  of  my  Father,  then, 
though  ye  may  not  be  convinced  by  what  I  say,  be  convinced  by 
what  I  do.  Though  ye  resist  the  evidence  of  my  words,  yield  to 
the  evidence  of  my  works.  In  this  way  learn  to  know  and 
believe  that  I  and  my  Father  are  indeed  one,  He  in  Me,  and  I  in 
Him,  and  that  in  claiming  to  be  His  $on  I  speak  no  blas- 
phemy." 

We  should  note  here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord's  strong  and 
repeated  appeals  to  the  evidence  of  His  miracles.  He  sent  to 
John  the  Baptist,  and  desired  him  to  mark  His  works,  if  He 
would  know  whether  He  was  "  the  coming  One," — "  Go  and  tell 
John  what  ye  have  seen  and  heard,  the  blind  receive  their  sight," 
etc.    Just  so  He  argues  here.     (Matt.  xi.  4.) 

Let  us  note  the  close  and  intimate  union  that  exists  between 
the  First  and  Second  Persons  of  the  Trinity  :  "  The  Father  is  in 
Me,  and  I  in  Him."  Such  language  can  never  be  reconciled  with 
the  views  of  Socinians. 

" By  these  words,"  says  Bloomfield,  "our  Lord  meant  com- 
munion of  mind  and  equality  of  power.  It  is  plain  that  the  Jews 
clearly  understood  that  He  claimed  and  ascribed  to  Himself  the 
attributes  of  Godhead,  and  made  Himself  equal  with  the 
Father." 

Chrysostom  remarks,  that  our  Lord  seems  to  say,  "  I  am 
nothing  different  from  what  the  Father  is,  so  however  as  that  I 
remain  Son ;  and  the  Father  is  nothing  different  from  what  I 
am,  so  however  as  that  He  remains  Father.  He  that  knows  Me 
has  known  the  Father,  and  learned  the  Son." 

89 .—[Therefore. ..sought. ..take  him.']  Here  we  see  the  utter  insen- 
sibility of  our  Lord's  hardened  enemies  to  any  argument  or 
appeal  to  their  reason.  In  spite  of  what  He  had  now  said,  they 
showed  a  determination  to  go  on  with  their  wicked  designs,  and 
tried  again  to  lay  violent  hands  on  Him.  Nothing  seems  to 
harden  the  heart,  and  take  away  the  reasoning  faculty,  so  com- 
pletely as  obstinate  resistance  to  plain  evidence. 

!  [But  he  escaped.. .hand.]  This  would  be  literally  rendered, 
"And  He  came  forth  out  of  their  hand,"  as  in  Luke  iv.  30;  and 
at  viii.  59  of  this  Gospel.  The  escape  seems  to  have  been  effected 
by  miracle.  A  restraint  was  put  on  the  hands  of  His  enemies, 
and  their  eyes  were  temporarily  blinded. 

40. — [And went... again.. .Jordan. ..John. ..baptized.]  I  know  not  to 
what  the  expression  "  again  "  can  refer  here,  except  to  the  time 
when  our  Lord  began  His  ministry  by  coming  to  be  baptized  by 
John  at  Bethabara,  beyond  Jordan.  (See  John  i.  28.)  I  do  not 
find  that  He  had  been  there  again  during  the  three  years  oi  Bis» 


226  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


ministry.  There  is  something  touching  and  instructive  in  the 
choice  of  this  place.  Where  our  Lord  began  His  ministry, 
there  He  resolved  to  enter  it.  It  would  remind  His  Jewish 
hearers  that  John  the  Baptist  had  repeatedly  proclaimed  Him  as 
"  the  Lamb  of  God,"  and  they  could  not  deny  John's  Divine  mis- 
sion. It  would  remind  His  own  disciples  of  the  iirst  lessons 
which  they  learned  under  their  Master's  teaching,  and  recall  old 
things  to  their  minds.  It  is  good  to  revisit  old  scenes  sometimes. 
The  flesh  needs  many  helps  to  memory. 

Henry  makes  the  quaint  remark,  "  The  Bishop  of  our  souls 
came  not  to  be  fixed  in  one  See,  but  to  go  about  from  place  to 
\>lace  doing  good." 

[And  there  he  abode.']  Our  Lord  must  evidently  have  remained 
here  between  three  and  four  months, — from  the  feast  of  dedica- 
tion to  the  last  passover  when  he  was  crucified ;  that  is  from 
winter  to  Easter.  Where  precisely,  and  with  whom  he  stayed, 
we  do  not  know.  It  must  have  been  a  solemn  and  quiet  season 
to  Himself  and  His  disciples. 

Musculus  observes  that  this  verse  teaches  us  that  it  is  lawful 
to  regard  localities  in  which  great  spiritual  works  have  been 
done  with  more  than  ordinary  reverence  and  affection. 

II. — [And  many  resorted,  etc.']  Our  Lord's  choice  of  an  abode 
seems  to  have  had  an  excellent  effect.  It  was  not  so  far  from 
Jerusalem  but  that  "many"  could  come  to  hear  Him.  as  they 
did  to  hear  John  the  Baptist.  There  on  the  very  spot  where 
John,  now  no  longer  living,  used  to  preach  to  enormous  crowds, 
and  baptize,  they  could  not  help  being  reminded  of  John's 
repeated  testimony  to  Christ.  And  the  consequence  was,  that 
they  said,  "  John,  whom  we  believe  to  have  been  a  prophet, 
certainly  did  no  miracles,  but  everything  that  he  said  of  this 
Jesus  as  the  coming  One,  whose  shoes  he  was  not  worthy  to 
wear,  was  true.  We  believed  John  to  be  a  prophet  sent  of  God. 
Much  more  ought  this  man  to  be  believed." 

Let  us  observe  that  John's  preaching  was  not  forgotten  after 
his  death,  though  it  seemed  to  produce  little  effect  during  his 
life.  Herod  could  cut  short  his  ministry,  put  him  in  prison,  and 
have  him  beheaded ;  but  he  could  not  prevent  his  words  being 
remembered.  Sermons  never  die.  The  Word  of  God  is  not 
bound.     (2  Tim.  ii.  9.) 

We  never  read  of  any  miracle  or  mighty  work  being  performed 
by  John.  He  was  only  "  a  voice."  Like  all  other  ministers,  he 
had  one  great  work, — to  preach,  and  prepare  the  way  for  Christ. 
To  do  this  is  more  lasting  work  than  to  perform  miracles, 
though  it  does  not  make  so  much  outward  show. 

Besser  remarks  :  "  John  is  a  type  of  every  servant  of  Christ. 
The  gift  of  working  miracles,  imparted  but  to  few,  we  can  do 
without,  if  only  one  hearer  testify  of  us,  'All  things  that  they 
spake  of  Christ  are  true.'    If  only  our  preaching,  though  it  may 


JOHN,    CHAP.   XI.  227 

last  longer  than  three  years,  is  sealed  ts  the  tifie  witness  of 
Christ,  through  the  experience  of  those  who  believe  and  are 
saved,  then  we  shall  have  done  miracles  enough." 

42. — [And  many  believed... there.']  Whether  this  was;  head  belief, 
the  faith  of  intellectual  conviction,— or  heart  belief,  the  faith  of 
reception  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour, — we  are  left  in  doubt.  We  have 
the  same  expression  viii.  30  and  xi.  45.  Yet  we  need  not  doubt 
that  very  many  Jews,  both  here  and  elsewhere,  were  secretly 
couvinced  of  our  Lord's  Messiahship,  and  after  His  resurrection 
came  forward  and  confessed  their  faith,  and  were  baptized.  It 
seems  highly  probable  that  this  accounts  for  the  great  number 
converted  at  once  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  at  other  times. 
(See  Acts  iv.  4 ;  vi.  7 ;  and  xxi.  20.)  The  way  had  been  pre- 
pared in  their  hearts  long  before,  by  our  Lord's  own  preaching, 
though  at  the  time  they  had  not  courage  to  avow  it.  The  good 
that  is  done  by  preaching  is  not  always  seen  immediately.  Our 
Lord  sowed,  and  His  Apostles  reaped  all  over  Palestine. 

Chrysostom  has  a  long  and  curious  comment  on  this  verse. 
He  draws  from  it  the  great  advantage  of  privacy  and  quiet  to 
the  soul,  and  the  benefit  that  women  especially  derive  from 
living  a  retired  life  at  home,  compared  to  men.  His  exhortation 
to  wives  to  use  their  advantages  in  this  respect,  and  to  help 
their  husbands'  souls,  is  very  singular,  when  we  consider  the 
times  he  wrote  in,  and  the  state  of  society  at  Constantinople. 
"Nothing,"  he  says,  "  is  more  powerful  than  a  pious  and  sensi- 
ble woman,  to  bring  a  man  into  proper  order,  and  to  mould  his 
soul  as  she  will." 

Henry  observes :  "  Where  the  preaching  of  repentance  has 
had  success,  there  the  preaching  of  reconciliation  and  Gospel 
grace  is  most  likely  to  be  prosperous.  Where  John  has  been 
acceptable,  Jesus  will  not  be  unacceptable.  The  jubilee  trumpet 
sounds  sweetest  in  the  ears  of  those  who,  in  the  day  of  atone- 
ment, have  afflicted  their  souls  for  sin." 


JOHN  XI.   1—6. 


1  Now  a  certain  man  was  sick,  named 
Lazarus,  of  Bethany,  the  town  of  Ma- 
ry and  her  sister  Martha. 

2  (It  was  that  Mary  which  anointed 
the  Lord  with  ointment,  and  wiped  his 
feet  with  her  hair,  whose  brother  Laza- 
rus was  sick.) 

3  Therefore  his  sisters  sent  unto  him, 
6aying,  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou 
lovest  is  sick. 


4  When  Jesus  heard  that,  he  said, 
This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  for 
the  glory  of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God 
might  be  glorified  thereby. 

5  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her 
sister,  and  Lazarus. 

6  When  he  had  heard  therefore  that 
he  was  sick,  he  abode  two  days  still  in 
the  same  place  where  he  was. 


228  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

The  chapter  we  have  now  begun  is  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable in  the  New  Testament.  For  grandeur  and  sim- 
plicity, for  pathos  and  solemnity,  nothing  was  ever  written 
like  it.  It  describes  a  miracle  which  is  not  recorded  in 
the  other  Gospels, — the  raising  of  Lazarus  from  the  dead. 
Nowhere  shall  we  find  such  convincing  proofs  of  our  Lord's 
Divine  power.  As  God,  He  makes  the  grave  itself  yield  up 
its  tenants* — Nowhere  shall  we  find  such  striking  illustra- 
tions of  our  Lord's  ability  to  sympathize  with  His  people. 
As  man,  He  can  be  touched  with  the  feelings  of  our  infirmi- 
ties.— Such  a  miracle  well  became  the  end  of  such  a  min- 
istry. It  was  meet  and  right  that  the  victory  of  Bethany 
should  closely  precede  the  crucifixion  at  Calvary. 

These  verses  teach  us  that  true  Christians  may  be  sick 
and  ill  as  well  as  others.  We  read  that  Lazarus  of  Bethany 
was  one  "  whom  Jesus  loved,"  and  a  brother  of  two  well- 
known  holy  women.  Yet  Lazarus  was  sick,  even  unto 
death !  The  Lord  Jesus,  who  had  power  over  all  diseases, 
could  no  doubt  have  prevented  this  illness,  if  He  had 
thought  fit.  But  He  did  not  do  so.  He  allowed  Lazarus 
to  be  sick,  and  in  pain,  and  weary,  and  to  languish  and 
suffer  like  any  other  man. 

The  lesson  is  one  which  ought  to  be  deeply  graven  in 
our  memories.  Living  in  a  world  full  of  disease  and 
death,  we  are  sure  to  need  it  some  day.  Sickness,  in  the 
veiy  nature  of  things,  can  never  be  anything  but  trying 
to  flesh  and  blood.  Our  bodies  and  souls  are  strangely 
linked  together,  and  that  which  vexes  and  weakens  the 
body  can  hardly  fail  to  vex  the  mind  and  soul.  But  sick- 
ness, we  must  always  remember,  is  no  sign  that  God  is 
displeased  with  us  ;  nay,  more,  it  is  generally  sent  for  the 
good  of  our  souls.  It  tends  to  draw  our  affections  away 
from  this  world,  and  to  direct  them  to  things  above.  It 
sends  us  to  our  Bibles,  and  teaches  us  to  pray  better.  It 
helps   to   prove  our  faith  and  patience,  and   shows  us  the 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  229 

real  value  of  our  hope  in  Christ.  It  reminds  us  betimes 
that  we  are  not  to  live  always,  and  tunes  and  trains  our 
hearts  for  our  great  change.  Then  let  us  be  patient  and 
cheerful  when  we  are  laid  aside  by  illness.  Let  us  believe 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  loves  us  when  we  are  sick  no  less  than 
when  we  are  well. 

These  verses  teach  us,  secondly,  that  Jesus  Clirist  is  the 
Christian's  best  Friend  in  the  time  of  need.  We  read  that 
when  Lazarus  was  sick,  his  sisters  at  once  sent  to  Jesus, 
and  laid  the  matter  before  Him.  Beautiful,  touching,  and 
simple  was  the  message  they  sent.  They  did  not  ask  Him 
to  come  at  once,  or  to  work  a  miracle,  and  command  the 
disease  to  depart.  They  only  said,  "  Lord,  he  whom  Thou 
lovest  is  sick,"  and  left  the  matter  there,  in  the  full  belief 
that  He  would  do  what  was  best.  Here  was  the  true  faith 
and  humility  of  saints !  Here  was  gracious  submission 
of  will ! 

The  servants  of  Christ,  in  every  age  and  climate,  will 
do  well  to  follow  this  excellent  example.  No  doubt  when 
those  whom  we  love  are  sick,  we  are  to  use  diligently  every 
reasonable  means  for  their  recovery.  We  must  spare  no  pains 
to  obtain  the  best  medical  advice.  We  must  assist  nature  in 
every  possible  manner  to  fight  a  good  fight  against  its 
enemy.  But  in  all  our  doing,  we  must  never  forget  that 
the  best  and  ablest  and  wisest  Helper  is  in  heaven,  at 
God's  right  hand.  Like  afflicted  Job  our  first  action  must 
be  to  fall  on  our  knees  and  worship.  Like  Hezekiah,  we 
must  spread  our  matters  before  the  Lord.  Like  the  holy 
sisters  at  Bethany,  we  must  send  up  a  prayer  to  Christ. 
Let  us  not  forget,  in  the  hurry  and  excitement  of  our  feel- 
ings, that  none  can  help  like  Him,  and  that  He  is  merciful, 
loving,  and  gracious. 

These  verses  teach  us,  thirdly,  that  Christ  loves  all  who 
are  true  Christians.  We  read  that  "  Jesus  loved  Martha, 
and    her  sister,  and   Lazarus."     The   characters   of  these 


230  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

three  good  people  seem  to  have  been  somewhat  difFerent. 
Of  Martha,  we  are  told  in  a  certain  place,  that  she  was 
"  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things/'  while  Mary 
"  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  His  word."  Of  Lazarus  we 
are  told  nothing  distinctive  at  all.  Yet  all  these  were 
loved  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  all  belonged  to  His  family, 
and  He  loved  them  all. 

We  must  carefully  bear  this  in  mind  in  forming  our 
estimate  of  Christians.  '  We  must  never  forget  that  there 
are  varieties  in  character,  and  that  the  grace  of  God  does  not 
cast  all  believers  into  one  and  the  same  mould.  Admitting 
fully  that  the  foundations  of  Christian  character  are  always 
the  same,  and  that  all  God's  children  repent,  believe,  are 
hoty,  prayerful,  and  Scripture-loving,  we  must  make  al- 
lowances for  wide  varieties  in  their  temperaments  and  habits 
of  mind.  We  must  not  undervalue  others  because  they  are 
not  exactly  like  ourselves.  The  flowers  in  a  garden  may 
differ  widely,  and  yet  the  gardener  feels  interest  in  all. 
The  children  of  a  family  may  be  curiously  unlike  one 
another,  and  yet  the  parents  care  for  all.  It  is  just  so 
with  the  Church  of  Christ.)  There  are  degrees  of  grace, 
and  varieties  of  grace ;  but  the  least,  the  weakest,  the 
feeblest  disciples  are  all  loved  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  Then 
let  no  believer's  heart  fail  because  of  his  infirmities ;  and, 
above  all,  let  no  believer  dare  to  despise  and  undervalue  a 
brother. 

These  verses  teach  us,  lastly,  that  Christ  knows  best  at 
what  time  to  do  anything  for  His  people.  We  read  that 
"  when  He  had  heard  that  Lazarus  was  sick,  He  abode  twTo 
days  still  in  the  same  place  where  He  was."  In  fact,  He 
purposely  delayed  His  journey,  and  did  not  come  to  Beth- 
any till  Lazarus  had  been  four  days  in  the  grave.  No 
doubt  He  knew  well  what  was  going  on ;  but  He  never 
moved  till  the  time  came  which  He  saw  was  best.      For 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  231 

the  sake  of  the  Church  and  the  world,  for  the  good  of 
friends  and  enemies,  He  kept  away. 

The  chilrden  of  God  must  constantly  school  their  minds 
to  learn  the  great  lesson  now  before  us.  Nothing  so  helps 
us  to  bear  patiently  the  trials  of  life  as  an  abiding  convic- 
tion of  the  perfect  wisdom  by  which  everything  around  us 
is  managed.  Let  us  try  to  believe  not  only  that  all  that 
happens  to  us  is  well  done,  but  that  it  is  done  in  the  best 
manner,  by  the  right  instrument,  and  at  the  right  time. 
We  are  all  naturally  impatient  in  the  day  of  trial.  Wa 
are  apt  to  say,  like  Moses,  when  beloved  ones  are  sick, 
"  Heal  her  now,  Lord,  we  beseech  thee."  (Num.  xii.  13.) 
We  forget  that  Christ  is  too  wise  a  Physician  to  make  any 
mistakes.  It  is  the  duty  of  faith  to  say,  "My  times  are 
in  Thy  hand.  Do  with  me  as  Thou  wilt,  how  Thou  wilt, 
what  Thou  wilt,  and  when  Thou  wilt.  Not  my  will,  but 
Thine  be  done."  The  highest  degree  of  faith  is  to  be  able 
to  wait,  sit  still,  and  not  complain. 

Let  us  turn  from  the  passage  with  a  settled  determina- 
tion to  trust  Christ  entirely  with  all  the  concerns  of  this 
world,  both  public  and  private.  Let  us  believe  that  He  by 
whom  all  things  were  made  at  first  is  He  who  is  managing 
all  with  perfect  wisdom.  The  affairs  of  kingdoms,  families, 
and  private  individuals  are  all  alike  overruled  by  Him. 
He  chooses  all  the  portions  of  His  people.  When  we  are 
sick,  it  is  because  He  knows  it  to  be  for  our  good  ;  when 
He  delays  coming  to  help  us,  it  is  for  some  wise  reason. 
The  hand  that  was  nailed  to  the  cross  is  too  wise  and 
loving  to  smite  without  a  needs-be,  or  to  keep  us  waiting 
for  relief  without  a  cause. 

Notes.    John  XI.  1—6. 

The  raising  of  Lazarus,  described  in  this  chapter,  is  one  of 
the  most  wonderful  events  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  and  de- 
mands more  than  ordirary  attention.  In  no  part  of  our  Lord's 
history  do  we  see  Ilim  so  distinctly  both  man  and  God  at  the 


232  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

same  time,  man  in  sympathy,  and  God  in  power.  Like  each 
of  the  few  incidents  in  our  Lord's  ministry  related  by  St.  John, 
it  is  placed  before  us  with  peculiar  minuteness  and  particu- 
larity. The  story  is  singularly  rich  in  delicate,  tender,  and 
beautiful  expressions.  Before  entering  upon  it,  I  venture  to 
offer  the  following  preliminary  remarks. 

(a)  The  raising  of  Lazarus  was  manifestly  intended  to 
supply  the  Jews  with  one  more  incontrovertible  proof  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ  of  God,  the  promised  Messiah.  In  the 
tenth  chapter,  at  the  feast  of  dedication,  Our  Lord  had  been 
asked,  "If  Thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly."  (John  x.  24.) 
In  reply  He  had  distinctly  appealed  to  His  "  works,"  as  the  best 
evidence  of  His  Messiahship.  He  had  deliberately  challenged 
attention  to  those  works  as  witnesses  to  His  commission. 
And  now,  after  a  short  interval,  we  find  Him  for  the  last  time, 
within  two  miles  of  Jerusalem  before  many  eye-witnesses, 
doing  such  a  stupendous  work  of  Divine  power  that  a  man  might 
have  thought  any  sceptic  would  have  been  silenced  forever. 
After  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  at  any  rate 
could  never  say  that  they  were  left  destitute  of  proofs  of 
Christ's  Messiahship. 

(b)  The  raising  of  Lazarus  was  meant  to  prepare  the  minds 
of  the  Jews  for  our  Lord's  own  resurrection.  It  took  place 
between  Christmas  and  Easter,  and  probably  within  two 
months  of  His  own  crucifixion.  It  proved  incontrovertibly  that 
a  person  dead  four  days  could  be  raised  again  by  Divine  power, 
and  that  the  restoration  to  life  of  a  corpse  was  not  an  impossi- 
bility with  God.  I  think  it  impossible  not  to  see  in  this  a 
latent  design  to  prepare  the  minds  of  the  Jews  for  our  Lord's 
own  resurrection.  At  any  rate  it  paved  the  way  for  men  believ- 
ing the  event  to  be  not  incredible.  No  one  could  say  on  Easter 
Sunday,  when  the  grave  of  Jesus  was  found  empty,  and  the 
body  of  Jesus  was  gone,  that  His  resurrection  was  an  impossi- 
bility. The  mere  fact  that  between  winter  and  Easter  in  that 
very  year  a  man  dead  four  days  had  been  restored  to  life  within 
two  miles  of  Jerusalem  would  silence  such  remarks.  Though 
improbable,  it  could  not  be  called  impossible. 

(c)  The  raising  of  Lazarus  is  of  all  our  Lord's  miracles  the 
one  which  is  most  thoroughly  credible,  and  supported  by  most 
incontrovertible  evidence.  The  man  who  disbelieves  it  may  as 
well  say  plainly  that  he  does  not  believe  anything  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  does  not  allow  that  a  miracle  is  possible.  Of 
course  there  is  no  standing-ground  between  denying  the  possi- 
bility of  miracles,  and  denying  the  existence  of  a  creating  God. 
If  God  made  the  world,  surely  He  can  change  the  course  of 
nature  at  any  time,  if  He  thinks  fit. 

The  famous  sceptic,  Spiuosa,  declared  that  if  he  could  be 
persuaded  of  the  truth  of  the  miracle  before  us,  he  would  for- 
sake his  own  system,  and  embrace  Christianity.  Yet  it  is  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  see  what  evidence  of  a  fact  a  man  can  desire. 


joiin,  chap.  xi.  233 


If  he  is  not  satislied  with  the  evidence  that  Lazarus  really  was 
raised  from  the  dead.  But,  unhappily,  none  are  so  blind  as 
those  who  will  not  see. 

The  following  passage  from  Tittman,  the  German  Commenta- 
tor, is  so  sensible  that  I  make  no  apology  for  giving  it  at 
length,  though  somewhat  condensed:  "The  whole  story,"  he 
says,  "is  of  a  nature  calculated  to  exclude  all  suspicion  of 
imposture,  and  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  miracle.  A  well- 
known  person  of  Bethany,  named  Lazarus,  falls  sick  in  the 
absence  of  Jesus.  His  sisters  send  a  message  to  Jesus,  an- 
nouncing it;  but  while  He  is  yet  absent  Lazarus  dies,  is  buried, 
and  kept  in  the  tomb  for  four  days,  during  which  Jesus  is  still 
absent.  Martha,  Mary,  and  all  his  friends  are  convinced  of  his 
death.  Our  Lord,  while  yet  remaining  in  the  place  where  He 
had  been  staying,  tells  His  disciples  in  plain  terms  that  He 
means  to  go  to  Bethany,  to  raise  Lazarus  from  the  dead,  that 
the  glory  of  God  may  be  illustrated,  and  their  faith  confirmed. 
At  our  Lord's  approach,  Martha  goes  to  meet  Him,  and  an- 
nounces her  brother's  death,  laments  the  absence  of  Jesus 
before  the  event  took  place,  and  yet  expresses  a  faint  hope  that 
by  some  means  Jesus  might  yet  render  help.  Our  Lord  declares 
that  her  brother  shall  be  raised  again,  and  assures  her  that  He 
has  the  power  of  granting  life  to  the  dead.  Mary  approaches, 
accompanied  by  weeping  friends  from  Jerusalem.  Our  Lord 
Himself  is  moved,  and  weeps,  and  goes  to  the  sepulchre, 
attended  by  a  crowd.  The  stone  is  removed.  The  stench  of 
the  corpse  is  perceived.  Our  Lord,  after  pouring  forth  audible 
prayer  to  His  Father,  calls  forth  Lazarus  from  the  grave,  in  the 
hearing  of  all.  The  dead  man  obeys  the  call,  comes  forth  to 
public  view  in  the  same  dress  that  he  was  buried  in,  alive  and 
well,  and  returns  home  without  assistance.  All  persons 
present  agree  that  Lazarus  is  raised  to  life,  and  that  a  great 
miracle  has  been  worked,  though  not  all  believe  the  person  who 
worked  it  to  be  the  Messiah.  Some  go  away  and  tell  the  rulers 
at  Jerusalem  what  Jesus  has  done.  Even  these  do  not  doubt 
the  truth  of  the  fact;  on  the  contrary,  they  confess  that  our 
Lord  by  His  works  is  becoming  every  day  more  famous,  and 
that  He  would  probably  be  soon  received  as  Messiah  by  the 
whole  nation.  And  therefore  the  rulers  at  once  take  counsel 
how  they  may  put  to  death  both  Jesus  and  Lazarus.  The 
people,  in  the  mean  time  hearing  of  this  prodigious  transaction, 
flock  in  multitudes  to  Bethany,  partly  to  see  Jesus,  and  partly 
to  view  Lazarus.  And  the  consequence  is  that  by  and  by,  when 
our  Lord  comes  to  Jerusalem,  the  population  goes  forth  in 
crowds  to  meet  Him  and  show  Him  honour,  and  chiefly  because 
of  His  work  at  Bethany.  Now,  if  all  these  circumstances  do 
not  establish  the  truth  of  the  miracle,  there  is  no  truth  in  his- 
tory."— I  only  add  the  remark,  that  when  we  consider  the  place, 
the  time,  the  circumstances,  and  the  singular  publicity,  of  the 
raising  of  Lazarus,  it  really  seems  to  require  more  credulity  to 
deny  it  than  to  believe  it.     It  is  the  unbeliever,  and  not  the  be- 


234  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


liever  of  this  miracle,  who  seems  to  me  the  credulous  man. 
The  difficulties  of  disbelieving  it  are  far  greater  than  those  of 
believing  it. 

(d)  The  raising  of  Lazarus  is  not  mentioned  by  Matthew, 
Mark,  and  Luke.  This  has  stumbled  many  persons.  Yet  the 
omission  of  the  story  is  not  hard  to  explain.  Some  have  said 
that  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Ltke  purposely  confine  themselves  to 
miracles  done  in  Galilee. — Some  have  said  that  when  they  wrote 
their  Gospels  Lazarus  was  yet  alive,  and  the  mention  of  his 
name  would  have  endangered  his  safety. — Some  have  said  that 
it  was  thought  better  for  the  soul  of  Lazarus  not  to  draw  at- 
tention to  him  and  surround  him  with  an  unhealthy  celebrity  till 
after  he  left  the  world. — In  each  and  all  of  these  reasons  there  is 
some  weight.  But  the  best  and  simplest  explanation  probably 
is,  that  each  Evangelist  was  inspired  to  record  what  God  saw  to 
be  best  and  most  suitable.  No  one,  I  suppose,  imagines  that 
the  Evangelists  record  a  tenth  part  of  our  Lord's  miracles,  or 
that  there  were  not  other  dead  persons  raised  to  life,  of  whom 
we  know  nothing  at  all.  "  The  dead  are  raised  up,"  was  our 
Lord's  own  message,  at  an  early  period  of  His  ministry,  to  John 
the  Baptist.  (Matt.  xi.  5.)  "  If  the  works  that  Jesus  did  should 
be  written  every  one,"  says  John,  "  the  world  itself  could  not 
contain  the  books  that  should  be  written."  (Johnxxi.  25.)  Let 
it  suffice  us  to  believe  that  each  Evangelist  was  inspired  to  re- 
cord exactly  those  events  which  were  most  likely  to  be  profita- 
ble for  the  Church  in  studying  his  Gospel.  Our  Lord's  ministry 
and  say  ings  at  Jerusalem  were  specially  assigned  to  John.  What 
wonder,  then,  that  he  was  appointed  to  record  the  mighty  mira- 
cle which  took  place  within  two  miles  of  Jerusalem,  and  proved 
incontrovertibly  the  guilt  of  the  Jerusalem  Jews  in  not  receiving 
Jesus  as  the  Messiah? 

Bucer  remarks  that  there  is  a  continually  ascending  greatness 
and  splendour  in  those  miracles  which  John  was  inspired  to  re- 
cord in  his  Gospel,  and  that  the  raising  of  Lazarus  was  the  most 
illustrious  of  all.  He  also  observes  that  our  Lord  specially  chose 
the  great  feasts  at  Jerusalem  as  occasions  of  working  miracles. 

Chemnitius  remarks  :  "  There  is  not  in  the  whole  Evangelical 
narrative  a  more  delightful  history,  and  one  more  abundant  both 
in  doctrine  and  consolation,  than  this  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus. 
It  therefore  ought  to  be  studied  most  closely  and  minutely  by  all 
pious  minds." 

1. — [JVbio  a  certainman...sick...Lazarus.~\  These  simple  words  are 
the  key-note  to  the  whole  chapter.  All  turns  on  the  bodily  illness 
of  an  obscure  disciple  of  Christ.  How  much  in  the  history  of 
our  lives  hinges  on  little  events,  and  specially  on  illnesses  I 
Sickness  is  a  sacred  thing,  and  one  of  God's  great  ordinances. 

This  illness  took  place  between  winter  and  Easter,  during  the 
time  that  our  Lord  was  at  Bethabara,  beyond  Jordan.  The  na- 
ture of  the  disease  we  are  not  told ;  but  irom  its  rapid  course,  it 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  235 


is  not  unlikely  it  was  a  fever,  such  as  is  common  even  now  in 
Palestine. 

This  is  the  first  time  that  Lazarus  is  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  we  know  nothing  certain  of  his  history.  Some 
have  conjectured  that  he  was  the  young  ruler  who  came  to  our 
Lord,  asking  what  he  must  do  to  obtain  eternal  life, — and 
went  away  sorrowful  at  the  time,  but  was  afterwards  converted. 
— Some  have  conjectured  that  he  is  the  young  man  who  followed 
our  Lord  when  he  was  taken  prisoner,  mentioned  by  St.  Mark, 
and  fled  away  naked.— But  these  are  mere  guesses',  and  there  is 
really  no  solid  foundation  for  them.  That  he  was  not  a  poor 
man,  but  comparatively  rich,  seems  highly  probable  from  the 
"  feast "  in  John  xii.,  the  number  of  friends  who  came  to  mourn 
him,  the  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment  used  by  his  sister, 
and  the  sepulchre  hewn  out  of  rock.  But  even  this  is  only  a 
conjecture. 

The  name  "Lazarus  "no  doubt  is  a  Greek  form  of  the  He- 
brew name  "  Eleazer."  It  is  worth  noticing,  that  it  survives  to 
this  day  in  the  modern  name  of  Bethany,  "  El-Azarizeh."  {See 
Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary.) 

[Of  Bethany. ..town. ..Mary. ..Martha."]  The  word  "town"  in 
this  sentence  would  have  been  better  translated  "  village,"  as  it 
is  in  sixteen  other  texts  in  the  New  Testament.  Bethany,  in 
truth,  was  only  a  small  village,  a  short  two  miles  from  Jerusa- 
lem, on  the  east  side ;  and  its  situation  is  perfectly  known  now. 
It  lies  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  on  the  road 
to  Jericho.  It  is  not  once  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
owes  its  fame  to  its  being  the  place  where  Lazarus  was  raised, 
— the  place  where  our  Lord  rested  at  night  just  before  the  pas- 
sion,— the  place  from  which  He  commenced  His  triumphant 
entry  into  Jerusalem, — the  place  from  which  He  finally  ascended 
into  heaven,  (Luke  xxiv.  10,)  and  the  dwelling-place  of  Mary 
and  Martha. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  presence  of  God's  elect  children  is  the 
one  thing  which  makes  towns  and  countries  famous  in  God's 
sight.  The  village  of  Martha  and  Mary  is  noticed,  while  Mem- 
phis and  Thebes  are  not  named  in  the  New  Testament.  A  cot- 
tage where  there  is  grace,  is  more  pleasant  in  God's  sight  than  a 
cathedral  town  where  there  is  none. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  this"  verse  supplies  internal  evidence  that 
St.  John's  Gospel  was  written  long  after  the  other  historical 
parts  of  the  New  Testament.  He  speaks  of  Martha  and  Mary 
as  persons  whose  names  and  history  would  be  familiar  to  all 
Christian  readers. 

There  is  a  peculiarity  in  the  Greek  of  this  verse,  which  is 
hardly  conveyed  in  our  English  translation.  Literally  it  would 
be  rendered,  "  Lazarus  from  Bethany,  out  of  the  town  of  Mary," 
etc.    That  "  from  "  Bethany  means  exactly  what  we  render  it,  is 


236  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


clear  from  Acts  xvii.  13 ;  Heb.  xiii.  24.  But  why  "  out  of  the 
village,  or  town  of  Mary,"  is  said,  is  not  quite  so  clear.  It  is 
open  to  the  conjecture  that  it  means  "  Lazarus  was  now  a  man 
of  Bethany,  but  "was  originally  out  of  the  town  of  Mary  and 
Martha ;"  viz.,  some  other  place.  But  this  seems  unlikely. — Web- 
ster suggests  that  "out  of"  is  added  by  way  of  emphasis,  to 
show  that  Lazarus  not  only  lived  there,  but  that  it  was  also  the 
place  of  his  nativity.  Greswell  says  much  the  same.  It  is  note- 
worthy that  John  i.  44  contains  exactly  the  same  form  of  expres- 
sion about  Philip  and  Bethsaida. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Mary  is  named  before  Martha,  though 
Martha  was  evidently  the  older  sister,  and  head  of  the  house. 
The  reason,  I  suppose,  is  that  Mary's  name  and  character  were 
better  known  of  the  two. 

Chemnitius  thinks  it  possible  that  all  Bethany  belonged  to 
Martha  and  Mary,  and  that  this  accounts  for  the  consideration 
in  which  they  were  held,  and  the  number  of  mourners,  etc.  It 
is  worth  remembering  that  Bethany  was  a  very  small  place. 
Yet  Bethsaida  was  called  the  "  town  of  Andrew  and  Peter," 
(John  i.  44,)  and  clearly  did  not  belong  to  two  poor  fishermen. 

2. — [It  was  that  Mary,  etc.~]  This  verse  is  a  parenthetical  explana- 
tion inserted  by  St.  John  after  his  manner,  to  make  it  certain 
what  Mary  he  refers  to,  as  the  sister  of  Lazarus.  Christians 
knew  there  were  in  our  Lord's  time  no  less  than  four  Maries : 
(1)  The  virgin  mother  of  our  Lord,  (2)  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  (3) 
Mary  Magdalene,  (4)  Mary  the  sister  of  Martha.  To  prevent, 
therefore,  any  mistake,  John  says,"  It  was  that  Mary  who  anoint- 
ed our  Lord,  whose  brother  Lazarus  was  dead." 

Simple  as  these  words  seem,  there  is  a  singular  diversity  of 
opinion  as  to  the  question  who  Mary  the  sister  of  Martha  and 
Lazarus  was,  and  how  many  times  our  Lord  was  anointed. 

(a)  Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Origen,  and  Chemnitius,  maiutain 
that  the  anointing  took  place  three  times :  once,  in  Luke  vii.,  at 
the  house  of  Simon  the  Pharisee ;  once  in  Bethany,  at  the  house 
of  Simon  the  leper;  and  once  in  Bethany,  at  the  house  of  Mar- 
tha and  Mary.  Others,  as  Ferus,  while  agreeing  with  Chrysos- 
tom  that  our  Lord  was  anointed  three  times,  think  Mary  was  the 
woman  who  twice  did  it. 

(6)  Some  maintain  that  our  Lord  was  anointed  twice  :  once  at 
the  Pharisee's  house,  (in  Luke  vii.,)  and  once  at  Bethany,  at  the 
house  of  Simon  the  leper,  where  Martha  and  Mary  and  Lazarus 
lived,  for  some  cause  which  we  do  not  know. 

(c)  Some,  as  Augustine,  Bede,  Toletus,  Right  foot,  Maldonatus, 
Cornelius  a  Lapide,  and  Hengsteuberg,  maintain  that  our  Lord 
was  only  once  anointed, — that  the  narrative  in  Luke  vii.  was  in- 
serted out  of  chronological  order, — that  Simon  the  Pharisee  and 
Simon  the  leper  were  the  same  person,  and  that  the  one  anoint- 
ing took  place  at  Bethany.     Hengsteuberg   supports  his  theory 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  237 


very  ingenious!}7,  and  boldly  suggests  that  Simon  the  Pharisee 
was  also  called  Simon  the  leper,  was  the  husband  of  Martha, 
and  not  friendly  to  Clirist : — that  this  accounts  for  Martha  being 
more  "  careful  and  troubled,"  in  Luke  x.  41,  than  Mary,  and  for 
unfriendly  Pharisees  being  present  at  the  raising  of  Lazarus; — 
that  Mary  Magdalene  was  the  same  as  Mary  of  Bethany,  and 
that  Mary  of  Bethany  was  the  "  sinner,"  in  Luke  vii. 

Toletus  frankly  admits  that  the  Romish  Church  holds  that 
there  was  only  one  anointing  by  one  person,  as  it  is  plainly  de- 
clared in  one  of  her  formularies  :  viz.,  the  Breviary. 

My  own  opinion  is  decidedlyagainst  the  last  of  these  views. 
I  hold  that  there  were  at  least  two  anointings, — one  at  a  com- 
paratively early  period  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  and  another  at  the 
close  of  it, — one  in  the  house  of  an  unfriendly  Pharisee  named 
Simon,  and  another  at  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  in  Bethany, 
— one  by  a  woman  who  had  been  pre-eminently  a  sinner,  another 
by  Mary  the  sister  of  Martha,  against  whose  moral  character  we 
know  nothing. — Why  the  house  of  Martha  and  Mary  at  Bethany 
is  called  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  I  admit  I  cannot  explain. 
I  can  only  surmise  that  there  was  some  relationship  of  which 
we  know  nothing.  But  this  difficulty  is  nothing  in  my  eyes  com- 
pared to  that  of  supposing,  with  Augustine  and  his  followers, 
that  the  event  described  in  Luke  vii.  took  place  just  at  the  end 
of  our  Lord's  ministry.  There  is  strong  internal  evidence  that 
it  did  not,  to  my  mind.  Surely  at  the  end  of  our  Lord's  ministry, 
people  wOuld  not  have  said  with  wonder,  "  Who  is  this  that  for- 
giveth  sins?  "  Surely  Mary  would  not  be  spoken  of  as  a  noto- 
rious "  sinner." 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  hold  the  view  that  our  Lord  was  only 
anointed  twice,  once  at  the  house  of  Simon  the  Pharisee,  and 
once  at  Bethany,  it  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  there  is  a  very 
grave  difficulty  to  be  got  over.  That  difficulty  is  that  St.  Mark 
says  that  a  woman  anointed  our  Lord  "  two  days  "  before  the 
Passover,  and  poured  the  ointment  on  His  "head"  while  John 
says  He  was  anointed  "  six  days  before  the  passover,"  and  the 
ointment  poured  on  His  "  feet." — I  do  not  see  how  this  difficulty 
can  be  got  over.  If,  however,  we  hold  that  our  Lord  was  anoint- 
ed twice  in  the  last  week  before  He  was  crucified,  once  "  six 
days  "  before,  and  once  "  two  days  "  before,  and  on  each  occa- 
sion by  a  woman,  the  whole  thing  is  clear.  That  such  a  thing 
should  be  done  more  than  once,  in  those  days,  does  not  strike 
me  as  any  objection,  considering  the  customs  of  the  age.  That 
our  Lord's  language  in  defence  of  the  woman  should  on  each 
occasion  be  the  same  is  somewhat  remarkable.  But  it  is  only  a 
minor  difficulty.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  if  I  must  give  an 
opinion,  I  incline  to  agree  with  Chrysostom,  that  there  were 
three  anointings.  I  also  think  there  is  something  in  the  view, 
of  Ferus,  that  Mary,  sister  of  Lazarus,  anointed  our  Lord  twice, 
once  six  days  before  the  passover,  and  once  again  two  days 
before. 


238  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


The  use  of  the  past  participle  in  the  verse  before  us  seems  to 
me  no  difficulty  at  all.  It  is  of  course  true  that  at  this  time  Mary 
had  not  anointed  our  Lord.  But  it  is  no  less  true  that  John  evi- 
dently mentions  it  by  anticipation,  as  an  historical  fact  long  past 
and  well  known  in  the  Church  when  he  wrote  his  Gospel,  which 
his  readers  would  understand.  "  It  was  that  Mary  which  after- 
wards anointed  Christ's  feet." 

Let  us  note  in  this  verse,  that  the  good  deeds  of  all  Christ's 
saints  are  carefully  recorded  in  God's  book  of  remembrance. 
Men  are  forgetful  and  ungrateful.  Nothing  done  for  Christ  is 
ever  forgotten. 

Let  us  note  that  sickness  comes  to  Christ's  people  as  well  as 
to  the  wicked  and  worldly.  Grace  does  not  exempt  us  from 
trial.  Sickuess,  on  the  contrary,  is  one  of  God's  most  useful 
instruments  for  sanctifying  His  saints,  and  making  them  bear 
fruit  of  patience,  and  for  showing  the  world  that  His  people  do 
not  serve  Him  merely  for  what  they  get  of  bodily  ease  and  com- 
fort iu  this  life.  "Job  does  not  serve  God  for  nought,"  was  the 
devil's  sneer,  in  the  days  when  Job  prospered.  "Lazarus  and 
his  sisters  make  a  good  thing  of  their  religion," — might  have 
been  said  if  they  had  had  no  trials. 

Brentius  remarks  :  "  God  does  not  go  away  when  bodily  health 
goes  away.     Christ  does  not  depart  when  life  departs." 

S.— [Therefore  his  sisters  sent... saying.]  This  is  an  example  of  what 
all  Christians  should  do  in  trouble.  Like  Mary  aud  Martha,  we 
should  first  send  a  message  to  Christ.  By  prayer  we  can  do  it 
as  really  as  they  did.  This  is  what  Job  did  in  his  trouble  :  he 
first  of  all  "worshipped,"  and  said,  "  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  This  is  what  Asa  did  not  do  :  "  He  sought  not  to  the 
Lord,  but  to  the  physicians."     (Job  i.  20;  2  Chron.  xv.  12.) 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Greek  would  be  more  literally  ren- 
dered "  the  sisters,"  and  not  "  his."  This  message,  from  the 
expression  in  next  verse,  "  heard,"  would  seem  to  have  been  a 
verbal  and  not  a  written  one. 

[Lord.. .he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick.]  This  is  a  very  touching 
and  beautiful  little  message. — Its  humble  and  respectful  confi- 
dence is  noteworthy,  "  He  whom  Thou  lovest  is  sick."  They 
do  not  say,  "  do  something,"  or-"  heal  him,"  or  "  come  at  once." 
They  simply  spread  the  case  before  the  Lord,  and  leave  Him  to 
do  what  He  thinks  wisest  and  best.  It  is  like  Hezekiah  spread- 
ing Sennacherib's  letter  before  God.  (2  Kings  xix.  14.)—  The 
name  given  to  Lazarus  is  noteworthy :  they  do  not  say  "our 
brother,"  or  "thy  disciple,"  or  even  "one  who  loves  Thee,"  but 
simply  "  he  whom  Thou  lovest,"  one  whom  Thou  hast  been 
pleased  to  treat  graciously  and  kindly  as  a  beloved  friend. 
Christ's  love  to  us,  and  not  our  love  to  Christ,  is  the  blessed 
truth  which  we  ought  continually  to  keep  before  our  minds. 
His  love  never  chances  :  ours  is  wavering  and  uncertain. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  239 

The  idea  of  some,  that  sending  a  message  to  Christ  was  a 
mark  of  weak  faith  in  the  two  sisters,  as  if  it  showed  doubt  of 
Christ's  omniscience,  is  absurd.  At  this  rate  we  might  never 
pray,  and  might  say  there  is  no  need,  because  God  knows  all ! 

The  word  "  behold  "  seems  either  to  indicate  something  "  sud- 
den "  in  the  illness  of  Lazarus,  like  Mark  ii.  21,  and  to  be  used 
adverbially;  or  else  we  must  take  it  as  an  imperative  verb. 
"  Behold  a  case  of  great  affliction :  look  upon  it  and  see :  he 
whom  Thou  lovest  is  sick."  This  would  be  like  Hezekiah's 
prayer:  "  Open  Thine  eyes  and  see."  (2  Kings  xix.  16.)  We 
can  hardly  suppose  that  such  disciples  as  Martha  and  Mary 
would  think  it  a  strange  or  surprising  thing  that  a  disciple  of 
Christ  should  be  ill;  yet  it  is  possible  they  did.  However, 
Theophylact  and  Ferus  suppose  that  "Behold"  implies  a  degree 
of  wonder  and  surprise. 

Rupertus  remarks,  on  the  message  containing  no  request: 
"  To  a  loving  Mend  it  was  quite  enough  to  announce  the  fact 
that  Lazarus  was  sick."  Affectionate  friends  are  not  verbose 
or  lengthy  in  descriptions. 

Brentius  remarks  that  the  message  is  like  all  true  prayer :  it 
does  not  consist  in  much  speaking,  and  fine  long  sentences. 

Musculus  and  Chemnitius  both  remark,  that  when  a  man's 
child  falls  into  a  well  or  pit,  it  is  enough  to  tell  a  loving  father 
the  simple  fact,  in  the  shortest  manner  possible,  without  dwell' 
ing  on  it  verbosely  and  rhetorically. 

Bollock  observes  how  useful  it  is  to  have  praying  sisters. 

Let  us  note  that  Christ's  friends  may  be  sick  and  ill,  just  like 
other  people.  It  is  no  proof  that  they  are  not  beloved,  and 
specially  preserved  and  cared  for  by  God.  "  Whom  the  Lord 
loveth  He  chasteneth."  The  purest  gold  is  most  in  the  fire ;  the 
most  useful  tools  are  oftenest  ground.  Epaphroditus  and  Tim- 
othy were  both  of  weak  health,  and  Paul  could  not  prevent  it. 

4. — [When  Jesus  heard  that,  he  said.']  This  verse  seems  to  contain 
the  reply  which  our  Lord  gave  to  the  messenger.  It  was  to 
him  probably,  though  in  the  hearing  of  all  His  disciples,  that 
He  addressed  the  words  which  follow.  It  is  as  though  He  said, 
"  Go,  return  to  thy  mistress  and  say  as  follows." 

[This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  etc.']  The  meaning  of  this 
sentence  must  evidently  be  taken  with  qualification.  Our  Lord 
did  not  mean  that  Lazarus  would  not  in  any  sense  die.  It  is  as 
though  He  said,  "  The  end  of  this  sickness  is  not  Lazarus' 
death  and  entire  removal  from  this  world,  but  generally  the 
glory  of  God,  and  specially  the  glorifying  of  Me,  His  Son,  which 
will  be  effected  by  my  raising  him  again."  Death's  temporary 
victory  over  us  is  not  complete  till  our  bodies  perish  and  re- 
turn to  dust.  This  was  not  allowed  in  the  case  of  Lazarus,  and 
hence  death  had  not  full  dominion  over  him,  though  he  ceased 
to  breathe  and  became  unconscious. 


240  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


It  is  undeniable  that  there  was  something  dark  and  mysterious 
about  our  Lord's  message.  He  might  of  course  have  said  plainly, 
"Lazarus  will  die,  and  then  I  will  raise  him  again."  Yet  there 
is  a  wonderful  likeness  between  the  style  of  his  message  and 
many  an  unfulfilled  prophecy.  He  said  enough  to  excite  hope, 
and  encourage  faith  and  patience  and  prayer,  but  not  enough  to 
make  Mary  and  Martha  leave  off  praying  and  seeking  God.  And 
is  not  this  exactly  what  we  should  feel  about  many  an  unful- 
filled prediction  of  things  to  come?  Men  complain  that  proph- 
ecies are  not  so  literally  fulfilled  as  to  exclude  doubt  and  un- 
certainty. But  they  forget  that  God  wisely  permits  a  degree 
of  uncertainty  in  order  to  keep  us  watching  and  praying.  It  is 
just  what  He  did  with  Martha  and  Mary  here. 

Let  us  remember  that  the  final  result  of  Lazarus'  sickness  is 
what  we  should  desire  as  the  result  of  any  sickness  that  comes 
on  us  and  our  families  :  viz.,  that  God  and  Christ  may  be  glori- 
fied in  us.  We  cannot  say,  "  It  shall  not  end  in  death :  "  but 
we  can  say,  "By  God's  help,  it  shall  be  for  God's  glory." 

Chrysostom  observes  :  "  The  expression  that  in  this  passage 
denotes  not  cause,  but  consequence.  The  sickness  happened 
from  other  causes.     Christ  used  it  for  the  glory  of  God." 

Calvin  remarks,  that  God  wishes  to  be  honoured  by  Christ 
being  glorified.  "  He  who  does  not  honour  the  Son  does  not 
honour  the  Father."     (John  v.  23.) 

, — [Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  etc.~\  This  verse  is  meant  to  show 
that  all  the  members  of  the  family  at  Bethany  were  disciples  of 
Jesus  and  beloved  by  Him,  the  brother  as  well  as  the  sisters, 
and  one  sister  as  well  as  the  other.  A  happy  family,  Lampe 
remarks,  in  which  all  the  members  were  objects  of  Christ's 
special  love. 

We  know  not  where  Lazarus  was  at  the  time  when  Jesus 
stopped  at  Martha's  house,  in  Luke  x. :  perhaps  he  was  not  con- 
verted at  that  time.    But  this  is  only  conjecture. 

We  are  generally  apt  to  undervalue  the  grace  of  Martha  and 
overvalue  that  of  Mary,  because  of  what  happened  when  Jesus 
was  at  Martha's  house  before.  Many  foolish  things  are  some- 
times lightly  said  against  mothers  and  mistresses  as  being  Mar- 
thas, "careful  and  troubled  about  many  things."  Yet  people 
should  remember  that  different  positions  call  out  different  phases 
of  character.  Mary  certainly  shines  more  brightly  than  Mar- 
tha in  the  10th  of  Luke ;  but  it  is  a  grave  question  whether  Mar- 
tha did  not  outshine  her  in  the  11th  of  John.  Active-minded 
Christians  come  out  better  under  some  circumstances ;  quiet- 
minded  Christians,  in  others.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  here  that 
He  loves  all  who  have  grace,  though  their  temperaments  differ/ 
Let  us  learn  not  to  judge  others  rashly,  and  not  to  form  hasty 
estimates  of  Christians,  until  we  have  seen  them  under  every 
sort  of  circumstances,  in  winter  as  well  as  summer,  in  dark  days 
as  well  as  bright. 


JOHN,    CHAP.   XI.  241 


Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Greek  word  here  rendered  "  loved,'* 
is  not  the  same  that  is  rendered  "  lovest,"  in  the  3d  verse. 
The  word  describing  the  love  of  Jesus  to  the  three  in  this  verse 
is  a  word  expressing  a  high,  deep,  excellent,  and  noble  affec- 
tion. It  is  the  same  as  Mark  x.  21,  and  John  iii.  16. — The  word 
used  in  the  message  of  the  sisters  is  a  lower  word,  such  as  is 
used  to  describe  the  affection  between  a  parent  and  child,  or 
husband  and  wife.  It  is  the  word  used  for  "kiss"  in  Matt. 
xxvi.  48;  Markxiv.  44;  and  Luke  xxii.  47.  It  is  very  noticeable 
that  this  word  is  carefully  avoided  here,  when  the  two  sisters 
are  mentioned.  The  Holy  Ghost  inspired  John  to  abstain  even 
from  the  appearance  of  evil.  What  a  lesson  this  ought  to  be 
to  us! 

Let  it  be  noted  that  we  see  here  an  example  of  the  broad  dis- 
tinction that  ought  to  be  drawn  between  Christ's  general  love 
of  compassion  which  He  feels  towards  all  mankind,  and  His 
special  love  of  election  which  He  feels  towards  His  own  mem- 
bers. He  loved  all  sinners  to  whom  He  came  to  preach  the  Gos- 
pel, and  He  wept  over  unbelieving  Jerusalem.  But  He  specially 
loved  those  who  believed  on  Him. 

,— [When  he  had  heard  therefore,  etc.~]  It  is  impossible  not  to  re- 
mark an  intentional  and  most  instructive  connection  between 
this  verse  and  the  preceding  one.  Our  Lord  loved  the  family  of 
Bethany,  all  three  of  them ;  and  yet  when  He  heard  Lazarus  was 
sick,  instead  of  hastening  at  once  to  Bethany  to  heal  him,  He 
quietly  remained  at  Bethabara  for  two  days,  without  moving. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  this  delay  was  intentional  and  of  pur 
pose,  and  it  throws  immense  light  on  many  of  God's  providen- 
tial dealings  with  His  people.  We  know  that  the  delay  caused 
immense  mental  pain  and  suffering  to  Martha  and  Mary,  and 
obliged  Lazarus  to  go  through  all  the  agony  of  death,  and  the 
sorrow  of  parting.  We  can  easily  imagine  the  grief  and  sus- 
pense and  perplexity  in  which  the  household  at  Bethany  must 
have  been  kept  for  four  days,  when  their  loving  Master  did  not 
appear;  and  we  know  that  our  Lord  could  have  prevented  it  all, 
but  did  not.  But  we  know  also  that  if  He  had  at  once  hurried 
to  Bethany  and  healed  Lazarus,  or  spoken  a  word  from  a  dis- 
tance at  Bethabara  and  commanded  his  healing,  as  in  John  iv. 
50,  the  mighty  miracle  of  raising  him  would  never  have  been 
wrought,  and  the  wonderful  sayings  of  Bethany  would  never 
have  been  spoken.  In  short  the  pain  of  a  few  was  permitted 
for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  Church  of  Christ. 

We  have  here  the  simplest  and  best  account  of  the  permission 
of  evil  and  suffering.  God  could  prevent  it.  God  does  not  love 
to  make  his  creatures  suffer.  But  God  sees  there  are  lessons 
which  mankind  could  not  learn  unless  evil  was  permitted; 
therefore  God  permits  it.  The  suffering  of  some  tends  to  the 
good  of  many.  "He  that  believech  shall  not  make  haste." 
We  shall  see  at  the  last  day  that  all  was  well  done.  Even  the 
delays  and  long  intervals  which  puzzle  us  in  God's  dealings,  are 
11 


242 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


wisely  ordered,  and  are  working  for  good.    Like  children,  we 
are  poor  judges  of  half-fiuished  work. 

Chrysostom  says:  "Christ  tarried  that  none  might  be  able 
to  assert  that  He  restored  Lazarus  when  not  yet  dead,  saying  it 
was  a  lethargy,  a  fainting,  a  fit,  but  not  death.  He  therefore 
tarried  so  long  that  corruption  began." 

Calvin  observes  :  "  Let  believers  learn  to  suspend  their  desires, 
if  God  does  not  stretch  out  His  hand  to  help  as  soon  as  they 
think  necessity  requires.  Whatever  may  be  His  delays,  he  never 
sleeps  and  never  forgets  His  people/' 

Quesnel  remarks :  "God  permits  evil,  that  He  may  make  the 
power  of  His  grace  and  the  might  of  His  love  more  conspicuous 
in  the  conversion  of  a  sinner." 

Poole  remarks :  "  We  must  not  judge  of  Christ's  love  to  us 
by  His  mere  external  dispensations  of  providence,  nor  judge 
that  He  doth  not  love  us,  because  He  doth  not  presently  come  in 
to  our  help  at  our  time,  and  in  such  ways  and  methods  as  we 
think  reasonable." 


JOHN  XI.     7—16. 


7  Then  after  that  saith  he  to  his  dis- 
ciples, Let  us  go  into  Judaea  again. 

8  His  disciples  say  unto  him,  Mas- 
ter, the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone 
thee;  and  goest  thou  thither  again  ? 

9  Jesus  answered,  Are  there  not 
twelve  hours  in  the  day  ?  If  any  man 
walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth  not,  be- 
cause he  seeth  the  light  of  this  world. 

10  But  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night, 
he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  light 
in  him. 

11  These  things  said  he:  and  after 
that  he  saith  unto  them,  Our  friend 
Lazarus  sleepeth ;  but  I  go,  that  I  may 
awake  him  out  of  sleep. 


12  Then  said  his  disciples,  Lord,  if 
he  sleep,  he  shall  do  well. 

13  llowbeit  Jesus  spake  of  his  death: 
but  they  thought  that  ho  had  spoken  of 
taking  of  rest  in  sleep. 

14  Then  said  Jesus  unto  them  plain- 
ly, Lazarus  is  dead. 

15  And  I  am  glad  for  your  sakcs  that 
I  was  not  there,  to  the  intent  ye  may 
believe;  nevertheless  let  us  go  unto 
him. 

16  Then  said  Thomas,  which  is 
called  Didymus,  unto  his  fellow-dis- 
ciples, Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die 
with  him. 


We  should  notice,  in  this  passage,  how  mysterious  are  the 
ways  in  which  Christ  sometimes  leads  His  people.  We  are 
told  that  when  He  talked  of  going  back  to  Judaea,  His  dis- 
ciples were  perplexed.  It  was  the  very  place  where  the 
Jews  had  lately  tried  to  stone  their  Master:  to  return 
thither  was  to  plunge  into  the  midst  of  danger.     These 


243 


timid  Galileans  could  not  see  the  necessity  or  prudence  of 
such  a  step.     "  Goest  Thou  thither  again?  "  they  cried. 

Things  such  as  these  are  often  going  on  around  us.  The 
servants  of  Christ  are  often  placed  in  circumstances  just  as 
puzzling  and  perplexing  as  those  of  the  disciples.  They 
are  led  in  ways  of  which  they  cannot  see  the  purpose  and 
object;  they  are  called  to  fill  positions  from  which  they 
naturally  shrink,  and  which  they  would  never  have  chosen 
for  themselves.  Thousands  in  every  age  are  continually 
learning  this  by  their  own  experience.  The  path  they  are 
obliged  to  walk  in  is  not  the  path  of  their  own  choice.  At 
present  they  cannot  see  its  usefulness  or  wisdom. 

At  times  like  these  a  Christian  must  call  into  exercise 
his  faith  and  patience.  He  must  believe  that  his  Master 
knows  best  by  what  road  His  servant  ought  to  travel,  and 
that  He  is  leading  him,  by  the  right  wajr,  to  a  city  of  habita- 
tion. He  may  rest  assured  that  the  circumstances  in  which 
he  is  placed  are  precisely  those  which  are  most  likely  to 
promote  his  graces  and  to  check  his  besetting  sins.  He 
need  not  doubt  that  what  he  cannot  see  now  he  will  under- 
stand hereafter.  He  will  find  one  day  that  there  was  wis- 
dom in  every  step  of  his  journey,  though  flesh  and  blood 
could  not  see  it  at  the  time.  If  the  twelve  disciples  had 
not  been  taken  back  into  Judaea,  they  would  not  have  seen 
the  glorious  miracle  of  Bethany.  If  Christians  were  allowed 
to  choose  their  own  course  through  life,  they  would  never 
learn  hundreds  of  lessons  about  Christ  and  His  grace, 
which  they  are  now  taught  in  God's  ways.  Let  us  remem- 
ber these  things.  The  time  may  come  when  we  shall  be 
called  to  take  some  journey  in  life  which  we  greatly  dis- 
like. When  that  time  comes,  let  us  set  out  cheerfully,  and 
believe  that  all  is  right. 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  how  tenderly 
Christ  speaks  of  the  death  of  believers.     He  announces  the 


244  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

fact  of  Lazarus  being  dead  in  language  of  singular  beauty 
and  gentleness  :  "  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth." 

Every  true  Christian  has  a  Friend  in  heaven,  of  almighty 
power  and  boundless  love.  He  is  thought  of,  cared  for, 
provided  for,  defended  by  God's  eternal  Son.  He  has  an 
unfailing  Protector,  who  never  slumbers  or  sleeps,  and 
watches  continually  over  his  interests.  The  world  may 
despise  him,  but  he  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed.  Father 
and  mother  even  may  cast  him  out,  but  Christ  having  once 
taken  him  up  will  never  let  him  go.  He  is  the  "friend  of 
Christ "  even  after  he  is  dead !  The  friendships  of  this 
world  are  often  fair-weather  friendships,  and  fail  us  like 
summer-dried  fountains,  when  our  need  is  the  sorest ;  but 
the  friendship  of  the  Son  of  God  is  stronger  than  death,  and 
goes  beyond  the  grave.  The  Friend  of  sinners  is  a  Friend 
that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother. 

The  death  of  true  Christians  is  "  sleep,"  and  not  annihi- 
lation. It  is  a  solemn  and  miraculous  change,  no  doubt, 
but  not  a  change  to  be  regarded  with  alarm.  They  have 
nothing  to  fear  for  their  souls  in  the  change,  for  their  sins 
are  washed  away  in  Christ's  blood.  The  sharpest  sting  of 
death  is  the  sense  of  unpardoned  sin.  Christians  have 
nothing  to  fear  for  their  bodies  in  the  change  ;  they  will  rise 
again  by  and  b}7,  refreshed  and  renewed,  after  the  image  of 
the  Lord.  The  grave  itself  is  a  conquered  enenry.  It  must 
render  back  its  tenants  safe  and  sound,  the  very  moment 
that  Christ  calls  for  them  at  the  last  clay. 

Let  us  remember  these  things  when  those  whom  we  love 
fall  asleep  in  Christ,  or  when  we  ourselves  receive  our  no- 
tice to  quit  this  world.  Let  us  call  to  mind,  in  such  an 
hour,  that  our  great  Friend  takes  thought  for  our  bodies  as 
well  as  for  our  souls,  and  that  He  will  not  allow  one  hair 
of  our  heads  to  perish.  Let  us  never  forget  that  the  grave 
is  the  place  where  the  Lord  Himself  lay,  and  that  as  He 
rose  again  triumphant  from  that  cold  bed,  so  also  shall  all 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  245 

His  people.  To  a  mere  worldly  man  death  must  needs  be  a 
terrible  thing ;  but  he  that  has  Christian  faith  may  boldly 
say,  as  he  lays  down  life,  "  I  will  lay  me  down  in  peace, 
and  take  my  rest :  for  it  is  Thou,  Lord,  that  makest  me 
dwell  in  safety." 

We  should  notice,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  lioiv  much  of 
natural  temperament  clings  to  a  believer  even  after  conversion. 
We  read  that  when  Thomas  saw  that  Lazarus  was  dead, 
and  that  Jesus  was  determined,  in  spite  of  all  danger,  to 
return  into  Judaea,  he  said,  "  Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may 
die  with  Him."  There  can  only  be  one  meaning  in  that 
expression :  it  was  the  language  of  a  despairing  and  de- 
sponding mind,  which  could  see  nothing  but  dark  clouds  in 
the  picture.  The  very  man  who  afterwards  could  not  be- 
lieve that  his  Master  had  risen  again,  and  thought  the  news 
too  good  to  be  true,  is  just  the  one  of  the  twelve  who  thinks 
that  if  they  go  back  to  Judaea  they  must  all  die  ! 

Things  such  as  these  are  deeply  instructive,  and  are 
doubtless  recorded  for  our  learning.  They  show  us  that 
the  grace  of  God  in  conversion  does  not  so  re-mould  a  man 
as  to  leave  no  trace  of  his  natural  bent  of  character.  The 
sanguine  do  not  altogether  cease  to  be  sanguine,  nor  the 
desponding  to  be  desponding,  when  they  pass  from  death 
to  life,  and  become  true  Christians.  They  show  us  that  we 
must  make  large  allowances  for  natural  temperament,  in 
forming  our  estimate  of  individual  Christians.  We  must 
not  expect  all  God's  children  to  be  exactly  one  and  the 
same.  Each  tree  in  a  forest  has  its  own  peculiarities  of 
shape  and  growth,  and  yet  all  at  a  distance  look  one  mass 
of  leaf  and  verdure.  Each  member  of  Christ's  body  has 
his  own  distinctive  bias,  and  yet  all  in  the  main  are  led  by 
one  Spirit,  and  love  one  Lord.  The  two  sisters  Martha 
and  Mary,  the  apostles  Peter  and  John  and  Thomas,  were 
certainly  very  unlike  one  another  in  many  respects.     But 


246  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

they  bad  all  one  point  in  common  :  they  loved  Christ,  and 
were  His  friends. 

Let  ns  take  heed  that  we  really  belong  to  Christ.  This 
is  the  one  thing  needful.  If  this  is  made  sure,  we  shall  be 
led  by  the  right  wa}T,  and  end  well  at  last.  We  may  not 
have  the  cheerfulness  of  one  brother,  or  the  fiery  zeal  of 
another,  or  the  gentleness  of  another.  But  if  grace  reigns 
within  us,  and  we  know  what  repentance  and  faith  are  by 
experience,  we  shall  stand  on  the  right  hand  in  the  great 
day.  Happy  is  the  man  of  whom,  with  all  his  defects, 
Christ  says  to  saints  and  angels,  "  This  is  our  friend." 

Notes.     John  XI.  7—16. 

7. — [Then  after  that  saith... disciples.]  The  Greek  words  which  be- 
gin this  sentence  mark  an  interval  of  time  even  more  emphati- 
cally than  our  English  version  does.  They  would  be  literally 
rendered,  "  Afterwards,  after  this."  The  word  translated  "  then  " 
is  the  same  that  is  translated  "  after  that"  in  1  Cor.  xv.  6—7. 

[Let  lis  go...Judcea  again.']  This  is  the  language  of  the  kind 
and  loving  head  of  a  family,  and  the  chief  in  a  party  of  friends. 
Our  Lord  does  not  say.  "  I  shall  go  to,"  or,  "  Follow  Me  to  Ju- 
daea, but,  "Let  us  go."  It  is  the  voice  of  a  kind  Master  and 
Shepherd  proposing  a  thing  to  His  pupils  and  followers,  as  though 
He  would  allow  them  to  express  their  opinions  about  it.  How 
much  depends  on  the  manner  and  language  of  a  leader ! 

The  familiar,  easy  manner  in  which  our  Lord  is  said  here  to  tell 
His  disciples  what  He  proposes  to  do,  gives  a  pleasant  idea  of 
the  terms  on  which  they  lived  with  Him. 

8. — [His  disciples  say... Master.]  The  answer  of  the  disciples  is  an 
interesting  illustration  of  the  easy  terms  on  which  they  were 
with  their  Master.  They  tell  him  frankly  and  unreservedly  their 
feelings  and  fears. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  word  rendered  "  Master"  here  is  the 
well-known  word  "Rabbi."  The  use  of  it  shows  that  there  is 
nothing  necessarily  insulting,  sneering,  or  discourteous  about 
the  term.  It  was  the  title  of  honour  and  respect  given  by  all 
Jews  to  their  teachers.  Thus  John  the  Baptist's  disciples  said 
to  him,  when  jealous  for  his  honour,  "llabbi,  he  that  was  with 
thee,"  etc.  (John  iii.  26.) 

[The  Jews  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee.]  The  "Jews"  here 
mean  especially  the  leaders  or  principal  persons  among  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  at  Jerusalem,  as  it  generally  does  in  St. 
John's  Gospel.    The  word  rendered  "  of  late  "  is  generally  trans- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  247 


latecl  "  now,"  or  "  at  this  time."  There  is  not  another  instance 
of  its  being  translated  "  of  late  "  in  the  New  Testament.  Hence 
the  sentence  would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  The  Jews  even 
now  were  seeking  to  stone  Thee."  They  allude  to  the  attempt 
made  at  the  feast  of  dedication  a  few  weeks  before.  The  at- 
tempt was  so  recent  that  it  seemed  "even  now." 

[And  goest  thou  thither  again?']  This  question  indicates  sur- 
prise and  fear, — "  Do  we  hear  aright  ?  Dost  Thou  really  talk  of 
going  back  again  to  Judaea?  Dost  Thou  not  fear  another  as- 
sault on  Thy'life?"  We  can  easily  detect  fear  for  their  own 
safety,  as  well  as  their  Master's,  in  the  question  of  the  disciples  : 
yet  they  put  it  on  ';  thee,"  and  not  on  "us." 

Let  us  note  how  strange  and  unwise  our  Lord's  plans  some- 
times appear  to  His  short-sighted  people.  How  little  the  best 
can  understand  His  ways  ! 

>,  10. — [Jesus  answered,  Are  there  not  twelve  hours,  etc.]  The  an- 
swer which  our  Lord  makes  to  the  remonstrance  of  His  timid 
disciples  is  somewhat  remarkable.  Instead  of  giving  them  a  di- 
rect reply,  bidding  them  not  to  be  afraid,  He  first  quotes  a  pro- 
verbial saying,  and  then  draws  from  that  saying  general  lessons 
about  the  time  which  any  one  who  is  on  a  j  ourney  will  choose  for 
journeying.  He  draws  no  conclusion,  and  leaves  the  applica- 
tion to  be  made  by  the  disciples  themselves.  To  an  English  ear 
the  answer  seems  far  more  strange  than  it  would  to  an  Eastern 
one.  To  quote  a  proverb  is,  even  now,  a  common  reply  among 
Orientals.  To  fill  up  the  sense  of  our  Lord's  elliptical  reply,  and 
draw  the  conclusions  He  meant  to  be  drawn,  but  did  not  express, 
is,  however,  not  very  easy.  The  following  may  be  taken  as  a 
paraphrase  of  it : — 

"  Are  not  the  working  hours  of  the  day  twelve?  You  know 
they  are,  speaking  generally.  If  a  man  on  a  journey  walks  dur- 
ing these  twelve  daylight  hours,  he  sees  his  road,  and  does  not 
stumble  or  fall,  because  the  sun,  which  is  the  light  of  the  world, 
shines  on  his  path.  If,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  on  a  journey 
chooses  to  walk  in  the  unreasonable  hour  of  night,  he  is  likely 
to  stumble  or  fall,  for  want  of  light  to  guide  his  feet.  It  is  even 
so  with  Me.  My  twelve  hours  of  ministry,  my  day  of  work,  is 
not  yet  over.  There  is  no  fear  of  my  life  being  cut  off  before 
the  time :  I  shall  not  be  slain  till  my  work  is  done.  Till  mine 
hour  is  come  I  am  safe,  and  not  a  hair  of  my  head  can  be  touched. 
I  am  like  one  walking  in  the  full  light  of  the  sun,  and  cannot  fall. 
The  night  will  soon  be  here  when  I  shall  walk  on  earth  no  long- 
er :  but  the  night  has  not  yet  come.  There  are  twelve  hours  in 
my  day  of  earthly  ministry,  and  the  twelfth  with  Me  has  not 
arrived." 

This  seems  to  me  substantially  the  correct  explanation  of  our 
Lord's  meaning.  The  idea  of  ancient  writers,  as  Hugo  and  Ly- 
ranus,  that  our  Lord  meant,  by  mentioning  the  twelve  hours  of 
the  day,  that  men  often  change  their  minds  as  the  day  goes  on, 


248  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


and  that  the  Jews,  perhaps,  no  longer  wished  to  kill  Him,  is  very 
improbable  and  unsatisfactory. 

I  grant  that  the  conclusion  of  the  tenth  verse,  "there  is  no 
light  in  him,"  presents  some  difficulty.  The  simplest  explana- 
tion is,  that  it  only  means,  "  because  he  has  no  light." 

Pearce  conjectures  that  the  clause  should  be  rendered,  "Be- 
cause there  is  no  light  in  it;  viz.,  the  world."  The  Greek  will 
perhaps  bear  this  interpretation. 

Let  us  note  that  the  great  principle  underlying  the  two  verses 
is  the  old  saying  in  another  form,  "  Every  man  is  immortal  till 
his  work  is  done."  A  recollection  of  that  saying  is  an  excellent 
antidote  against  fears  of  danger.  The  missionary  in  heathen 
lands,  and  the  minister  at  home,  pressed  down  by  unhealthy  cli- 
mate, or  over-abundant  work,  may  take  comfort  in  it,  after  their 
Lord's  example.  Let  us  only,  by  way  of  caution,  make  sure  that 
our  dangers  meet  us  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  that  we  do  not  go 
out  of  the  way  to  seek  them. 

Rupertus  suggests  that  our  Lord  had  in  His  mind  His  own 
doctrine,  that  He  was  the  Light  and  Sun  of  the  world.  Now 
as  the  sun  continues  shining  all  the  twelve  hours  of  the  day,  and 
no  mortal  power  can  stop  it,  so  He  would  have  the  disciples 
know  that  until  the  evening  of  His  own  course  arrived,  no 
power  of  the  Jews  could  possibly  check,  arrest,  or  do  Him  harm. 
As  to  the  disciples,  He  seems  to  add,  "  So  long  as  I  am  shining 
on  you  with  my  bodily  presence,  you  have  nothing  to  fear,  you 
will  not  fall  into  trouble.  When  I  am  taken  from  you,  and  not 
till  then,  you  will  be  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  per- 
secutors, and  even  of  being  put  to  death."  Ecolampadius  takes 
the  same  view. 

Melancthon  thinks  that  our  Lord  uses  a  proverbial  mode  of 
speech,  in  order  to  teach  us  the  great  broad  lesson  that  we 
must  attend  to  the  duties  of  our  day,  station,  and  calling,  and 
then  leave  the  event  to  God.  In  the  path  of  duty  all  will  turn 
out  right.  Calvin,  Bullinger,  Gualter,  and  Brentius,  take  much 
the  same  view. 

Leigh  remarks  :  "  Christ  comforts  from  God's  providence.  God 
made  the  day  twelve  hours.  Who  can  make  it  shorter?  Who 
can  shorten  man's  life  ?  " 

Does  it  not  come  to  this,  that  our  Lord  would  have  the  disci- 
ples know  that  He  Himself  could  not  take  harm  till  His  day  of 
work  was  over,  and  that  they  could  take  no  harm  while  He  was 
with  them  ?  (Compare  Luke  xiii.  32,  33.)  Bishop  Ellicott  sug- 
gests that  this  was  the  very  time  in  our  Lord's  ministry  when 
He  said  to  the  Pharisee,  "  I  do  cures  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and 
the  third  day  I  shall  be  perfected.  Nevertheles  s  I  must  walk  to- 
day and  to-morrow  and  the  day  following."    But  I  doubt  this. 

It  is  certain  that  there  came  a  time  when  our  Lord  said,  "This 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  249 

is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness,"  to  His  enemies.    Then 
He  was  taken,  and  His  disciples  fled. 

11.— [These  things... our  friend  Lazarus. ..sleepeth.~\  In  this  verse 
our  Lord  breaks  the  fact,  that  Lazarus  is  dead,  to  His  disciples. 
He  does  it  in  words  of  matchless  beauty  and  tenderness.  After 
saying  "these  things"  about  the  twelve  hours  of  the  day,  which 
we  have  considered  in  the  last  verse,  He  seems  to  make  a  slight 
pause.  Then,  "after  that,"  comes  the  announcement,  which 
would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  Lazarus,  the  friend  of  us, 
has  been  laid  asleep." 

The  word  "sleepeth"  means,  "is  dead."  It  is  a  gentle  and 
pathetic  way  of  expressing  the  most  painful  of  events  that  can 
befall  man,  and  a  most  suitable  one,  when  we  remember  that 
after  death  comes  resurrection.  In  dying  we  are  not  annihilated. 
Like  sleepers,  we  lie  down,  to  rise  again.  Estius  well  remarks, 
"Sleeping,  in  the  sense  of  dying,  is  only  applied  to  men,  because 
of  the  hope  of  the  resurrection.  We  read  no  such  thing  of 
brutes." 

The  use  of  the  figure  is  so  common  in  Scripture,  that  it  Is 
almost  needless  to  give  references.  (See  Deut.  xxxi.  16;  Dan- 
iel xii.  2;  Matt,  xxvii.  52;  Acts  vii.  60;  xiii.  36;  1  Cor.  vii.  39; 
xi.  30 ;  xv.  6—18 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  H.)  But  it  is  a  striking  fact 
that  the  figure  is  frequently  used  by  great  heathen  writers,  show- 
ing clearly  that  the  tradition  of  a  life  after  death  existed  even 
among  the  heathen.  Homer,  Sophocles,  Virgil,  Catullus,  supply 
instances.  However,  the  Christian  believer  is  the  only  one  who 
can  truly  regard  death  as  sleep, — that  is,  as  a  healthy,  refreshing 
thing,  which  can  do  hiui  no  harm.  Many  among  ourselves,  per- 
haps, are  not  aware  that  the  figure  of  speech  exists  among  us  in 
full  force  in  the  word  "  cemetery,"  applied  to  burial-ground. 
That  word  is  drawn  from  the  very  Greek  verb  which  our  Lord 
uses  here.    It  is  literally  a  "  sleeping-place." 

The  word  "friend,"  applied  to  Lazarus,  gives  a  beautiful  idea 
of  the  relation  between  the  Lord  Jesus  and  all  His  believing  peo 
pie.  Each  one  is  His  "  friend," — not  servant,  or  subject  only, 
but  "  friend."  A  poor  believer  has  no  cause  to  be  ashamed.  He 
has  a  Friend  greater  than  kings  and  nobles,  who  will  show  Him- 
self friendly  to  all  eternity.  A  dead  saint  lying  in  the  grave  is 
not  cut  off  from  Christ's  love  :  even  in  his  grave,  he  is  still  the 
friend  of  Christ. 

The  expression  "  our,"  attached  to  friend,  teaches  the  beauti- 
ful lesson  that  every  friend  of  Christ  is  or  should  be  the  friend 
of  all  Christians.  Believers  are  all  one  family  of  brothers  and 
sisters,  and  members  of  one  body.  Lazarus  was  not "  my  "  friend, 
but  "our"  friend.  If  any  one  is  a  friend  of  Christ,  every  other 
believer  should  be  ready  and  willing  to  hold  out  his  hand  to  him, 
a'ud  say,  "  You  are  my  friend." 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  I  go  that  I  may  awaken  him  out  of 


250  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

sleep,"  He  proclaims  His  deliberate  intention  and  purpose  to  raise 
Lazarus  from  the  dead.  He  boldly  challenges  the  attention  of 
the  disciples,  and  declares  that  He  is  going  to  Bethany,  to  restore 
a  dead  man  to  life.  Never  was  bolder  declaration  made.  None 
surely  would  make  it  but  One  who  knew  that  He  was  very  God. 

"  I  go,"  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "  I  am  at  once  setting  forth  on 
a  journey  to  Bethany."  The  expression,  that  "  I  may  awake  him 
out  of  sleep,"  is  one  word  in  Greek,  and  is  equivalent  to  "  that 
I  may  unsleep  him."  What  our  Lord  went  to  do  at  Bethany,  He 
is  soon  coining  to  do  for  all  our  friends  who  are  asleep  in  Christ. 
He  is  coming  to  awaken  them. 

Some  commentators  have  thought  that  Lazarus  died  in  the 
very  moment  that  our  Lord  said,  "  Our  friend  sleepeth,"  and  that 
it  means,  "Lazarus  has  just  fallen  asleep  and  died."  But  this  is 
only  conjecture,  though  doubtless  our  Lord  knew  the  moment 
of  his  decease. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  our  Lord  says,  "I  go,"  in  the  singular 
number,  and  not  "  Let  us  go."  Does  it  not  look  as  if  He  meant, 
"Whether  you  like  to  go  or  not,  I  intend  to  go?" 

Hall  remarks  :  "  None  can  awaken  Lazarus  out  of  this  sleep, 
but  He  that  made  Lazarus.  Every  mouse  or  gnat  can  raise  us 
up  from  that  other  sleep ;  none  but  an  omnipotent  power  from 
this." 

12. — {Then said.. .disciples... sleep. ..well.']  It  seems  strange  that  the 
disciples  should  misunderstand  our  Lord's  words,  considering 
how  commonly  death  was  called  sleep.  But  their  unwillingness 
to  go  into  Judaea  probably  made  them  shut  their  eyes  to  our 
Lord's  real  meaning. 

Most  writers  think  that  the  disciples  referred  to  the  general 
opinion,  that  sleep  in  a  sickness  is  a  sign  of  amendment.  Some, 
however,  suggest  that  they  had  gathered  from  the  messenger 
sent  by  Martha  and  Mary  what  was  the  precise  nature  of  Laza- 
rus' illness,  and  therefore  knew  that  it  was  one  in  which  sleep 
was  a  favourable  symptom. 

The  Greek  word  for  "  he  shall  do  well,"  is  curious.  It  is  the 
same  that  is  often  rendered  "  shall  be  made  whole."  Some- 
times it  is  "  healed,"  and  generally  "saved." 

The  latent  thought  is  manifest :  "  If  Lazarus  sleeps,  he  is  get- 
ting better,  and  there  is  no  need  of  our  going  to  Judaea." 

13. — [Hoiobeit  Jesus  spake,  etc.]  This  verse  is  one  of  those  ex- 
planatory glosses  which  St.  John  frequently  puts  into  his  nar- 
rative parenthetically.  The  three  first  words  of  the  verse  would 
be  more  literally  rendered,  "But  Jesus  had  spoken." 

How  the  disciples  could  have  "  thought "  or  "  supposed  "  that 
our  Lord  meant  literal  sleep,  and  not  death,  seems  strange, 
when  we  remember  that  Peter,  James,  and  John,  had  heard  Him 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  251 

use  the  same  expression  after  the  death  of  the  ruler's  daughter: 
"  The  maid  sleepeth."  (Matt.  ix.  24.)  Two  probable  reasons 
may  be  assigned :  one  is  that  they  had  heard  from  the  messen- 
ger that  Lazarus'  recovery  turned  on  his  getting  sleep,  and  that 
if  he  only  got  some  sleep  he  might  do  well ;  the  other  is  that 
they  were  so  afraid  of  returning  to  Judsea,  that  they  determined 
to  believe  Lazarus  was  getting  better,  and  to  construe  our 
Lord's  words  in  the  way  most  agreeable  to  their  fears.  It  i3 
common  to  observe  that  men  will  not  understand  what  they  do 
not  want  to  understand. 

Quesnel  remarks  here  :  "  The  misunderstanding  of  the  Apos- 
tles was  a  great  instance  of  stupidity,  and  shows  plainly  how 
sensual  and  carnal  their  minds  still  were.  The  knowledge  of 
this  is  useful  in  order  to  convince  incredulous  persons  that  the 
Apostles  were  not  of  themselves  capable  either  of  converting 
the  world,  or  of  inventing  the  wonderful  things  and  sublime 
discourses  which  they  relate." 

The  readiness  of  the  disciples  to  misunderstand  figurative 
language  is  curiously  shown  in  two  other  places,  where  our 
Lord  spoke  of  "leaven"  and  "meat."  (Matt.  xvi.  6;  John 
iv.  32.) 

14. — [Then  said... plainly... Lazarus... dead."]  Here  at  last  our 
Lord  breaks  the  fact  of  Lazarus'  death  to  His  disciples  openly, 
and  without  any  farther  reserve.  He  had  approached  the  sub- 
ject gently  and  delicately,  and  thus  prepared  their  minds  for 
something  painful,  by  steps.  First  He  said  simply,  "  Let  us  go 
into  Judaea,"  without  assigning  a  reason.  Secondly  He  said, 
"Lazarus sleepeth."  Lastly  He  says,  "  Lazarus  is  dead."  There 
is  a  beautiful  consideration  for  feelings  in  these  three  steps.  It 
is  a  comfortable  thought  that  our  mighty  Saviour  is  so  tender- 
hearted and  gentle.  It  is  an  instructive  lesson  to  us  on  the  duty 
of  dealing  gently  with  others,  and  specialty  in  announcing 
afflictions. 

The  word  rendered  "plainly  "is  the  same  as  in  John  x.  24. 
Here,  as  there,  it  does  not  mean  "  in  plain,  intelligible  language  " 
so  much  as  "  openly,  unreservedly,  and  without  mystery." 

15. — [And  lam  glad. ..not  there... believe. ~]  This  sentence  would  be 
more  literally  rendered,  "  And  I  rejoice  on  account  of  you,  in 
order  that  ye  may  believe,  that  I  was  not  there."  Our  Lord 
evidently  means  that  He  was  glad  that  He  was  not  at  Bethany 
when  Lazarus  became  ill,  and  had  not  healed  him  before  his 
death,  as  in  all  probability  He  would  have  done.  The  result 
now  would  be  most  advantageous  to  the  disciples.  Their  faith 
would  receive  an  immense  confirmation,  by  witnessing  the  stu- 
pendous miracle  of  Lazarus  being  raised  from  the  dead.  Thus, 
great  good,  in  one  respect,  would  come  out  of  great  evil.  The 
announcement  they  had  just  heard  might  be  very  painful  and 
distressing,  but  He  as  their  Master  could  not  but  be  glad  to 
think  how  mightily  their  faith  would  be  strengthened  in  the  end. 


252  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 


Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  does  not  say,  "lam  glad  Lazarus 
is  dead,  but  I  am  glad  I  was  not  there."  Had  He  been  there, 
He  seems  to  say,  He  could  not  have  refused  the  prayer  of 
Martha  aud  Mary  to  heal  His  friend.  We  are  not  intended  to 
be  so  unfeeling  as  to  rejoice  in  the  death  of  Christian  friends ; 
but  we  may  rejoice  in  the  circumstances  attending  their  deaths, 
and  the  glory  redounding  to  Christ,  and  the  benefit  accruing  to 
saints  from  them. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  does  not  say,  "I  am  glad  for  the 
sake  of  Martha  and  Mary  and  Lazarus  that  I  am  not  there,  but 
for  your  sakes."  It  is  no  pleasure  to  Him  to  see  His  individual 
members  suffering,  weeping,  and  dying;  but  He  does  rejoice 
to  see  the  good  of  many  spring  out  of  the  suffering  of  a  few. 
Hence  He  permits  some  to  be  afflicted,  in  order  thalf  many  may 
be  instructed  through  their  afflictions.  This  is  the  key  to  the 
permission  of  evil  in  the  world ;  it  is  for  the  good  of  the  many. 
When  we  ourselves  are  allowed  of  God  to  suffer,  we  must  re- 
member this.  We  must  believe  there  are  wise  reasons  why 
God  does  not  come  to  our  help  at  once  and  take  the  suffering 
away. 

Let  us  note  our  Lord's  desire  that  His  disciples  "  may  be- 
lieve." He  did  not  mean  that  they  might  believe  now  for  the 
first  time,  but  that  they  might  believe  more  firmly,  heartily,  and 
unhesitatingly ;  that  their  faith,  in  short,  might  receive  a  great 
increase  by  seeing  Lazarus  raised.  We  see  here  the  immense 
importance  of  faith.  To  believe  on  Christ,  aud  trust  God's 
word,  is  the  first  step  towards  heaven.  To  believe  more  and 
trust  more,  is  the  real  secret  of  Christian  growth,  progress, 
and  prosperity.  To  make  us  believe  more  is  the  end  of  all 
Christ's  dealings  with  us.     (See  John  xiv.  1.) 

[Nevertheless  let  us  go  unto  Mm.']  The  first  word  here  would 
be  more  literally  rendered  "But."  It  is  as  though  our  Lord 
said,  "But  let  us  delay  no  longer ;  let  us  cast  aside  all  fears  of 
danger ;  let  us  go  to  our  friend." 

It  is  noteworthy  that  our  Lord  says,  "let  us  go  to  Lazarus," 
though  he  was  dead,  and  would  be  buried  by  the  time  they 
reached  Bethany.  Can  it  be  that  the  disciples  thought  He  had 
David's  words  about  his  dead  child  in  His  mind,  "  I  shall  go  to 
him  "  ?  The  words  of  Thomas,  in  the  next  verse,  seem  to  make 
it  possible. 

We  may  notice  three  gradations  in  our  Lord's  language  about 
going  to  Bethany.  The  first,  in  the  7th  verse :  there  He  says 
in  the  plural,  "Let  us  all  go  into  Judaea." — The  second,  in  verse 
11:  there  He  says  in  the  singular,  "I  go  to  awake  him;  "as 
though  He  was  ready  to  go  alone. — The  third  is  here  in  the 
plural,  "  Let  us  al1  go." 

Toletus  thinks  that  by  these  words  our  Lord  meant  to  hint 
His  intention  of  raising  Lazarus. 


253 


Burkitt  remarks  :  "  O  love,  stronger  than  death !  The  grave 
cannot  separate  Christ  and  his  friends.  Other  friends  ac- 
company us  to  the  brink  of  the  grave,  and  then  they  leave  us. 
— Neither  life  nor  death  can  separate  from  the  love  of  Christ. 

Bengel  remarks:  "It  is  beautifully  consonant  with  Divine 
propriety,  that  no  one  is  ever  read  of,  as  having  died  while  the 
Prince  of  Life  was  present." 

16.— [Then  said  71wmas...go...die  with  him.]  The  disciple  here 
named  is  also  mentioned  in  John  xiv.  5,  and  John  xx.  24,  26,  27. 
On  each  occasion  he  appears  in  the  same  state  of  mind,— ready 
to  look  at  the  black  side  of  everything,— taking  the  worst  view 
of  the  position,  and  raising  doubts  and  fears.  In  John  xiv.  5, 
he  does  not  know  where  our  Lord  is  going.  In  John  xx.  25,  he 
cannot  believe  our  Lord  has  risen.  Here  he  sees  nothing  but 
danger  and  death,  if  his  Master  returns  to  Judaea.  Yet  he  is 
true  and  faithful  nevertheless.  He  will  not  forsake  Christ, 
even  if  death  is  in  the  way.  "Let  us  go,"  he  says  to  his  fellow- 
disciples,  "  and  die  with  our  Master.  He  is  sure  to  be  kilied 
if  He  does  go;  but  we  cannot  do  better  than  be  killed  with 
him." 

Some,  as  Brentius,  Grotius,  Leigh,  Poole,  and  Hammond, 
think  that  "  with  him,"  refers  to  Lazarus.  But  most  commenta- 
tors think  that  Thomas  refers  to  our  Lord ;  with  them  I  entirely 
agree. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  a  man  may  have  notable  weaknesses  and 
infirmities  of  Christian  character,  and  yet  be  a  disciple  of 
Christ.  There  is  no  more  common  fault  among  believers, 
perhaps,  than  despondency  and  unbelief.  A  reckless  readiness 
to  die  and  make  an  end  of  our  troubles  is  not  grace  but  impa- 
tience. 

Let  us  observe  how  extremely  unlike  one  another  Christ's 
disciples  were.  Peter,  for  instance,  overrunning  with  zeal  and 
confidence,  was  the  very  opposite  of  desponding  Thomas.  Yet 
both  had  grace,  and  both  loved  Christ.  We  must  not  foolishly 
assume  that  all  Christians  are  exactly  like  one  another  in  de- 
tails of  character.  We  must  make  large  allowances,  when  the 
main  features  are  right. 

Let  us  remember  that  this  same  Thomas,  so  desponding  in 
our  Lord's  life-time,  was  afterwards  the  very  Apostle  who  first 
preached  the  Gospel  in  India,  according  to  ecclesiastical  his- 
tory, and  penetrated  further  East  than  any  whose  name  is  re- 
corded. Chrysostom  says,  "  The  very  man  who  dared  not  go 
to  Bethany  in  Christ's  company,  afterwards  ran  alone  through 
the  world,  and  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  nations  full  of  murder  and 
ready  to  kill  him." 

Some  have  thought  that  his  Greek  name  "  Didymus,"  signify- 
ing "  two  "  or  "  double,"  was  given  him  because  of  his  character 
being  double,  viz.,  part  faith  and  part  weakness.    But  this  is 


254 


EXPOSITORY   THOLGHTS. 


very  doubtful.  In  the  first  three  Gospels,  in  the  catalogue  of 
the  twelve,  he  is  always  named  together  with  Matthew  the 
publican.     But  why  we  do  not  know. 

The  Greek  word  for  "fellow-disciple"  is  never  used  in  the 
New  Testament  excepting  here. 


JOHN  XI.    17-29. 


17  Then  when  Jesus  came,  he  found 
that  he  had  lain  in  the  grave  four  days 
already. 

18  Now  Bethany  was  nigh  unto  Je- 
rusalem, about  fifteen  furlongs  off: 

19  And  many  of  the  Jews  came  to 
Martha  and  Mary,  to  comfort  them  con- 
cerning their  brother. 

20  Then  Martha,  as  soon  as  she  heard 
that  Jesus  was  coming,  went  and  met 
him:  but  Mary  sa.t  still  in  the  house. 

21  Then  said  Martha  unto  Jesus, 
Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my 
brother  had  not  died. 

22  But  I  know,  that  even  now,  what- 
soever thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will 
give  it  thee. 

23  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Thy  brother 
shall  rise  again. 

24  Martha  saith  unto  him,  I  know 


that  he  shall  rise  again  in  the  rosur 
rection  at  the  last  day. 

25  Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am  the 
resurrection  and  the  life:  he  that  be- 
lieveth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead, 
yet  shall  he  live: 

26  Aud  whosoever  liveth,  and  be- 
lieveth  in  mo  shall  never  die.  Be- 
lievest  thou  this? 

27  She  saith  unto  him,  Yea,  Lord:  I 
believe  that  thou  art  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  which  should  come  into 
the  world. 

28  And  when  she  had  so  said,  she 
went  her  way,  and  called  Mary  her 
sister  secretly,  saying,  The  Master  ia 
come,  and  calleth  for  thee, 

29  As  soon  as  she  heard  that,  she 
arose  quickly,  and  came  unto  him. 


There  is  a  grand  simplicity  about  tbis  passage,  which  is 
almost  spoilt  by  any  human  exposition.  To  comment  on  it 
seems  like  gilding  gold  or  painting  lilies.  Yet  it  throws 
much  light  on  a  subject  which  we  can  never  understand  too 
well ;  that  is,  the  true  character  of  Christ's  people.  The 
portraits  of  Christians  in  the  Bible  are  faithful  likenesses. 
They  show  us  saints  just  as  they  are. 

We  learn,  firstly,  toJiat  a  strange  mixture  of  grace  and 
weakness  is  to  be  found  even  in  the  hearts  of  true  believers. 

We  see  this  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  language  used 
b}r  Martha  and  Mary.  Both  these  holy  women  had  faith 
enough  to  say,  "  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother 
had   not   died."     Yet   neither  of  them  seems  to  have  re- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  255 

membered  that  the  death  of  Lazarus  did  not  depend  on 
Christ's  absence,  and  that  our  Lord,  had  He  thought  fit, 
could  have  prevented  his  death  with  a  word,  without  com- 
ing to  Bethan}r. — Martha  had  knowledge  enough  to  say, 
"  I  know,  that  even  now,  whatsoever  Thou  wilt  ask  of  God, 
God  wilt  give  it  Thee, — I  know  that  my  brother  shall  rise 
again  at  the  last  day, — I  believe  that  Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God." — But  even  she  could  get  no  further.  Her 
dim  eyes  and  trembling  hands  could  not  grasp  the  grand 
truth  that  He  who  stood  before  her  had  the  keys  of  life  and 
death,  and  that  in  her  Master  dwelt  "  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodity."  (Colos.  ii.  9.)  She  saw  indeed,  but 
through  a  glass  darkly.  She  knew,  but  only  in  part.  She 
believed,  but  her  faith  was  mingled  with  much  unbelief. 
Yet  both  Martha  and  Mary  were  genuine  children  of  God, 
and  true  Christians. 

These  things  are  graciously  written  for  our  learning.  It 
is  good  to  remember  what  true  Christians  really  are.  Many 
and  great  are  the  mistakes  into  which  people  fall,  by  form- 
ing a  false  estimate  of  the  Christian's  character.  Many 
are  the  bitter  things  which  people  write  against  themselves, 
by  expecting  to  find  in  their  hearts  what  cannot  be  found 
on  this  side  of  heaven.  Let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds  that 
saints  on  earth  are  not  perfect  angels,  but  only  converted 
sinners.  They  are  sinners  renewed,  changed,  sanctified, 
no  doubt ;  but  they  are  yet  sinners,  and  will  be  till  they 
die.  Like  Martha  and  Maiy,  their  faith  is  often  entangled 
with  much  unbelief,  and  their  grace  compassed  round 
with  much  infirmity.  Happy  is  that  child  of  God  who 
understands  these  things,  and  has  learned  to  judge  rightly 
both  of  himself  and  others.  Rarely  indeed  shall  we  find 
the  saint  who  does  not  often  need  that  praj'er,  "  Lord,  I 
Jielieve  :  help  Thou  mine  unbelief." 

We  learn,  seconcll}7,  what  need  many  believers  have 
of  clear  views  of  Christ's  person,  office,  and  poiver.    This 


256  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

is  a  point  which  is  forcibly  brought  out  in  the  well-known 
sentence  which  our  Lord  addressed  to  Martha.  In  reply 
to  her  vague  and  faltering  expression  of  belief  in  the 
resurrection  at  the  last  day,  He  proclaims  the  glorious 
truth,  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  ;  " — "  I,  even  T, 
thy  Master,  am  He  that  has  the  keys  of  life  and  death  in 
IIi«  hands."  And  then  He  presses  on  her  once  more  that 
Gid  lesson,  which  she  had  doubtless  often  heard,  but  never 
fully  realized  :  "He  that  believeth  in  Me,  though  he  were 
dead,  yet  shall  he  live ;  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth 
in  Me  shall  never  die." 

There  is  matter  here  which  deserves  the  close  consider- 
ation of  all  true  Christians.  Many  of  them  complain  of 
want  of  sensible  comfort  in  their  religion.  They  do  not 
feel  the  inward  peace  which  they  desire.  Let  them  know 
that  vague  and  indefinite  views  of  Christ  are  too  often  the 
cause  of  all  their  perplexities.  They  must  try  to  see  more 
clearly  the  great  object  on  which  their  faith  rests.  They 
must  grasp  more  firmly  His  love  and  power  toward  them 
that  believe,  and  the  riches  He  has  laid  up  for  them  even 
now  in  this  world.  We  are  many  of  us  sadly  like  Martha. 
A  little  general  knowledge  of  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour 
is  often  all  that  we  possess.  But  of  the  fulness  that  dwells 
in  Him,  of  His  resurrection,  His  priesthood,  His  interces- 
sion, His  unfailing  compassion,  we  have  tasted  little 
or  nothing  at  all.  They  are  things  of  which  our  Lord 
might  well  say  to  many,  as  he  did  to  Martha,  "  Believest 
thou  this  ?  " 

Let  us  take  shame  to  ourselves  that  we  have  named 
the  name  of  Christ  so  long,  and  yet  know  so  little  about 
Him.  What  right  have  we  to  wonder  that  we  feel  so  little 
sensible  comfort  in  our  Christianity?  Our  slight  and 
imperfect  knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  true  reason  of  our 
discomfort.  Let  the  time  past  suffice  us  to  have  been 
lazy  students  in  Christ's  school ;  let  the  time  to   come  find 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  257 

us  more  diligent  in  trying  to  "  know  Him  and  the  power 
of  His  resurrection."  (Philip,  iii.  10.)  If  true  Christians 
would  only  strivTe,  as  St.  Paul  says,  to  J*  comprehend  what 
is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to 
know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,"  they 
would  be  amazed  at  the  discoveries  they  would  make. 
They  would  soon  find,  like  Hagar,  that  there  are  wells  of 
water  near  them  of  which  the}7  had  no  knowledge.  They 
would  soon  discover  that  there  is  more  heaven  to  be  enjoyed 
on  earth  than  they  had  ever  thought  possible.  The  root 
of  a  happy  religion  is  clear,  distinct,  well-defined  knowl- 
edge of  Jesus  Christ.  More  knowledge  would  have  saved 
Martha  many  sighs  and  tears.  Knowledge  alone  no  doubt, 
if  unsanctified,  only  "  puffeth  up."  (1  Cor.  viii.  1.)  Yet 
without  clear  knowledge  of  Christ  in  all  His  offices  we 
cannot  expect  to  be  established  in  the  faith,  and  steady  in 
the  time  of  need. 

Notes.    John  XI.  17—29. 

17. — {Then  when  Jesus  came."]  We  are  left  entirely  to  conjecture 
as  to  the  time  spent  by  our  Lord  in  His  journey  from  Bethabara 
to  Bethany.  We  do  not  know  anything  certain  of  the  place  where 
He  was  abiding,  except  that  it  was  beyond  Jordan.  Probably  it 
was  between  twenty  and  thirty  miles  from  Bethany,  and  this 
distance,  to  those  who  travel  on  foot,  would  be  at  least  a  day's 
journey. 

[He  found... lain... grave... four  days  already.']  The  Greek  form 
of  language  here  is  peculiar,  and  a  literal  translation  would  be 
impossible.  It  would  be,  "  He  found  him  being  already  four 
days  in  the  grave."  It  is  highly  probable  that  Lazarus  was 
buried  the  same  clay  that  he  died.  In  a  country  like  Palestine, 
with  a  hot  climate,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  keep  corpses  long 
unburied,  without  danger  and  discomfort  to  the  living.  A  man 
may  talk  to  his  friend  one  day,  and  find  him  buried  the  next 
day. 

One  thing  is  abundantly  proved  by  this  verse.  Lazarus  must 
certainly  have  been  dead,  and  not  in  a  trance  or  swoon.  A  per- 
son lying  in  a  grave  for  four  days,  all  reasonable  people  would 
admit,  must  have  been  a  dead  man. 

The  various  fo:*ms  of  death  which  our  Lord  is  recorded  to 
have  triumphed  c  rer  should  not  be  forgotten.    Jairus'  daughter 


258  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


was  just  dead ;  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nain  was  being  carried 
to  the  grave ;  Lazarus,  the  most  extraordinary  case  of  all,  had 
been  four  days  in  the  tomb. 

The  expression,  "  He  found,"  in  this  .  verse,  must  not  be 
thought  to  imply  any  surprise.  We  know  that  our  Lord  begun 
His  journey  from  Bethabara  with  a  full  knowledge  that  Lazarus 
was  dead.  What  "  He  found  "  applies  to  Lazarus  therefore,  and 
to  the  precise  length  of  time  that  he  had  been  in  the  grave.  He 
v.as  not  only  dead,  but  buried. 

We  can  well  imagine  what  a  sorrowful  time  those  four  days 
must  have  been  to  Martha  and  Mary,  and  how  many  thoughts 
must  have  crossed  their  minds  as  to  the  reason  of  our  Lord's 
delay,  as  to  the  day  He  would  come,  and  the  like.  Nothing  so 
wears  us  down  as  suspense  and  uncertainty.  Yet  of  all  graces 
there  is  none  so  glorifying  to  God  and  sanctifying  to  the  heart 
as  that  of  patience  or  quietly  waiting.  How  long  Abraham, 
Jacob,  Joseph,  Moses,  and  David  were  kept  waiting!  Jesus 
loves  to  show  the  world  that  His  people  can  wait.  Martha  and 
Mary  had  to  exemplify  this.     Well  if  we  can  do  likewise ! 

Gomarus  discusses  at  length  the  curious  question,  where  the 
soul  of  Lazarus  was  during  those  four  days.  He  dismisses  as 
unscriptural  the  idea  that  it  was  yet  in  the  body,  and  seems  to 
hold  that  it  was  in  Paradise. 

The  "  four  days  "  are  easily  accounted  for,  if  we  remember 
the  time  occupied  by  the  messenger  from  Bethany,  the  two  days' 
delay  at  Bethabara,  and  the  journey  to  Bethany. 

18. — [Now  Bethany. ..nigh. ..Jerusalem,  about  fifteen  furlongs  off."] 
This  verse  shows  that  John  wrote  for  readers  who  were  not  ac- 
quainted with  Palestine.  According  to  his  manner  he  gives  a 
parenthetical  description  of  the  situation  of  Bethany,  partly  to 
show  how  very  near  to  Jerusalem  the  wonderful  miracle  he  re- 
lates was  worked, — within  a  walk  of  the  temple,  and  almost 
within  view  ;  and  partly  to  account  for  the  number  of  the  Jews 
who  came  from  Jerusalem  to  comfort  Martha  and  Mary. 

The  distance,  fifteen  furlongs,  is  rather  less  than  two  miles. 
The  use  of  the  expression,  "about,"  shows  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
condescends  to  use  man's  common  form  of  language  in  describ- 
ing things,  and  that  such  expressions  are  not  inconsistent  with 
inspiration.     (See  John  ii.  6,  and  vi.  19.) 

19. — [And  many  Jews... came... Mary. ,]  This  sentence  would  be 
more  literally  rendered,  u  Many  from  among  the  Jews  had  come 
to  those  around  Martha  and  Mary."  Who  these  Jews  were  it  19 
impossible  to  say,  except  that  they  evidently  came  from  Jerusa- 
lem. One  can  hardly  suppose  that  they  were  the  leaders  and 
rulers  of  the  Pharisees.  Such  men  would  not  be  likely  to  care 
for  friends  of  Jesus,  and  would  hardly  have  condescended  to 
visit  Martha  and  Mary,  who  were  doubtless  known  to  be  His 

°  disciples.    Of  course  it  is  possible  that  Simon  the  leper,  in 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  259 


whose  house  Lazarus  died,  may  have  been  a  man  of  considera* 
tion,  and  that  the  Jews  may  have  come  out  of  respect  to  him. 
At  any  rate  it  is  clear  that  those  who  saw  the  stupendous  mira- 
cle of  this  chapter  were  Jerusalem  Jews,  and  were  "  many,"  and 
not  few. — The  expression,  "  Those  around  Martha  and  Mary," 
is  a  form  of  language  not  uncommon  in  Greek,  and  is  probably 
rightly  translated  in  our  version.  It  can  hardly  mean,  "  the 
women  who  had  come  to  mourn  with  Martha  and  Mary,"  though 
it  is  well  known  that  women  were  the  chief  mourners  at  funer- 
als. It  is,  however,  only  fair  to  say  that  Beza  decidedly  holds 
that  the  women  and  female  friends  who  had  come  to  mourn  with 
Mary  and  Martha  are  meant  in  this  verse. 

\_To  comfort  them  concerning  their  brother.']  This  appears  to 
have  been  a  common  practice  among  the  Jews.  When  any  one 
died,  friends  and  neighbours  assembled  for  several  days  at  the 
house  of  the  deceased,  to  mourn  with  and  comfort  the  relatives. 
Lightfoot  specially  mentions  it.  The  same  custom  prevails  in 
many  parts  of  the  world  at  the  present  day :  Hindostan  and 
Ireland  are  instances. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  many  of  these  Jews  came  to  Martha 
and  Mary  from  form  and  custom,  and  not  from  any  genuine 
sympathy  or  kind  feeliug,  much  less  from  any  unity  of  spiritual 
taste.  Yet  it  is  striking  to  observe  how  God  blesses  even  the 
semblance  of  sympathy.  By  coming  they  saw  Christ's  greatest 
miracle.  If  unbelief  can  sympathize,  how  much  more  should 
grace. 

One  thing  at  any  rate  seems  very  clearly  proved  by  this 
verse.  Whatever  was  the  rank  or  position  of  Martha,  Marj^, 
and  Lazarus,  they  were  well-known  people,  and  anything  that 
happened  in  their  house  at  Bethany  was  soon  public  news  in 
Jerusalem.  Had  they  been  strangers  from  Galilee,  the  thing 
named  in  this  verse  would  not  have  been  written. 

Chrysostom  thinks  the  Evangelist  mentioned  the  Jews 
coming  to  comfort  Martha  and  Mary,  as  one  of  the  many  cir- 
cumstances proving  that  Lazarus  was  really  dead.  They  evi- 
dently thought  him  dead,  or  they  would  not  have  come. 

Lightfoot  gives  a  long  and  curious  account  of  the  customs  of 
the  Jews  about  comforting  mourners.  He  says  that  "thirty 
days  were  allotted  for  the  time  of  mourning.  The  three  first 
days  were  for  weeping;  seven  clays  for  lamentation;  and  thirty 
days  for  intermission  from  washing  or  shaving.  The  beds  in 
the  house  of  mourning  were  all  taken  down  and  laid  on  the 
ground,  as  soon  as  the  coffin  left  the  house.  The  comforter  sat 
on  the  floor ;  the  bereaved  sat  chief.  The  comforter  might  not 
say  a  word  till  the  chief  mourner  broke  silence." 

Poole  observes  that  the  mourning  for  Jacob  was  forty  days, 
for  Aaron  and  Moses,  thirty  days.  (Gen.  1.  3;  Num.  xx.  29; 
Deut.  xxxiv.  8.) 


260  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


20. — [Then  Martha. ..heard.. .Jesus.. .coming. ..met  him.']  The  Greek 
word  for  "  was  coming,"  would  have  been  more  literally  trans- 
lated, "  is  coming,"  or,  "comes,"  in  the  present  tense.  It  then 
gives  the  idea  that  Martha  received  from  some  friend,  servant, 
or  watchman,  who  was  on  the  lookout  on  the  road  from  Jor- 
dan, the  message  long  looked  for,  "Jesus  is  in  sight:"  "  He  is 
coming."  She  then  hurried  out,  and  met  our  Lord  outside  the 
village.  The  Greek  is  simply,  "met  Him;"  and  "went"  is 
needless. 

Bullinger  thinks  that  Martha,  with  characteristic  activity, 
was  bustling  after  domestic  duties,  and  heard  from  some  one 
that  Jesus  was  coming,  and  ran  to  meet  Him,  without  going  to 
tell  Mary. 

[But  Mary  sat  still... house.']  While  Martha  hurried  out  to 
meet  Jesus,  Mary  continued  sitting  in  the  house.  Martha's 
"  met"  is  a  perfect  tense ;  Mary's  "  sat"  is  an  imperfect.  It  is 
impossible  not  to  see  the  characteristic  temperament  of  each 
sister  coming  out  here,  and  doubtless  it  is  written  for  our  learn- 
ing. Martha — active,  stirring,  busy,  demonstrative — cannot 
wait,  but  runs  impulsively  to  meet  Jesus.  Mary — quiet,  gentle, 
pensive,  meditative,  contemplative,  meek — sits  passively  at 
home.  Yet  I  venture  to  think  that  of  the  two  sisters,  Martha 
here  appears  to  most  advantage.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
being  so  crushed  and  stunned  by  our  affliction  that  we  do  not 
adorn  our  profession  under  it.  Is  there  not  something  of  this 
in  Mary's  conduct  throughout  this  chapter?  There  is  a  time  to 
stir,  as  well  as  to  sit  still ;  and  here,  by  not  stirring,  Mary  cer- 
tainly missed  hearing  our  Lord's  glorious  declaration  about 
Himself.  I  would  not  be  mistaken  in  saying  this.  Both  these 
holy  women  were  true  disciples;  yet  if  Mary  showed  more 
grace  on  a  former  occasion  than  Martha,  I  think  Martha  here 
showed  more  than  Mary. 

Let  us  never  forget  that  there  are  differences  of  temperament 
among  believers,  and  let  us  make,  due  allowance  for  others  if 
they  are  not  quite  like  ourselves.  There  are  believers  who  are 
quiet,  passive,  silent,  and  meditative;  and  believers  who  are 
active,  stirring,  and  demonstrative.  The  well-ordered  Church 
must  find  room,  place,  and  work  for  all.  We  need  Marys  as  well 
as  Marthas,  and  Marthas  as  well  as  Marys. 

Nothing  brings  out  character  so  much  as  sickness  and 
affliction.  If  we  would  know  how  much  grace  believers  have, 
we  should  see  them  in  trouble. 

Let  us  remember  that  "sitting"  was  the  attitude  of  a 
mourner,  among  the  Jews.  Thus  Job's  friends  "  sat  down  with 
him  on  the  ground."     (Job  ii.  13.) 

Henry  remarks:  "In  the  day  of  affliction  Mary's  contem- 
plative and  reserved  temper  proved  a  snare  to  her,  made  her 
less  able  to  grapple  wi*h  grief,  and  disposed  her  to  melancholy. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  261 

It  will  be  our  wisdom  to  watch  against  the  temptations,  and 
improve  the  advantages  of  our  natural  temper." 

21. — [Then  said  Martha... if  thou... not  died.]  This  is  the  first  ac- 
count of  Martha's  feelings.  It  was  the  uppermost  thought  in 
her  mind,  and  with  honest  impulsiveness  she  brings  it  out  at 
once.     It  is  easy  to  detect  in  it  a  strange  mixture  of  emotions. 

Here  is  a  passion,  not  unmixed  with  a  tinge  of  reproach.  "  I 
wish  you  had  been  here  :  why  did  you  not  come  sooner?  You 
might  have  prevented  my  brother's  death." 

Here  is  love,  confidence,  and  devotion  creeping  out.  "  I  wish 
you  had  been  here.  We  loved  you  so  much.  We  depended  so 
entirely  on  your  love.  We  felt  if  you  had  been  here  all  would 
be  ordered  well." 

Here  is  faith.  "  I  wish  you  had  been  here.  I  believe  you 
could  have  healed  my  brother,  and  kept  death  from  him." 

Nevertheless  there  is  something  of  unbelief  at  bottom.  Martha 
forgets  that  the  bodily  presence  of  Jesus  was  not  necessary  in 
order  to  cure  her  brother,  or  to  prevent  his  death.  She  must 
have  known  what  our  Lord  did  for  the  centurion's  servant,  and 
the  ruler  of  Capernaum.  He  had  but  to  speak  the  word  any- 
where and  Lazarus  would  have  recovered.  But  memories  often 
fail  in  time  of  trouble. 

Ferus  remarks  how  apt  we  all  are  to  say,  as  Martha,  "If  God 
had  been  here,  if  Christ  had  been  present,  this  would  not  have 
happened;  as  if  Christ  was  not  always  present,  and  everywhere 
near  His  people !  " 

Henry  remarks  that  in  cases  like  Martha's,  "  we  are  apt  to  add 
to  our  trouble  by  fancying  what  might  have  been.  If  such  a 
method  had  been  taken,  such  a  physician  employed,  my  friend 
had  not  died !  which  is  more  than  we  know.  And  what  good 
does  it  do  ?    When  God's  will  is  done,  our  business  is  to  submit." 

22. — [But  I  know... even  now... ask... give  it  thee.']  In  these  words  poor 
Martha's  faith  and  hope  shine  clearly  and  unmistakably,  though 
not  without  serious  blemishes.  "  Even  now,"  she  says,  "  though 
my  brother  is  dead  and  lying  in  the  grave,  I  know,  and  feel  con- 
fident, from  the  many  proofs  I  have  seen  of  Thy  power,  that 
whatsoever  things  Thou  mayest  ask  of  God,  God  will  give  them 
to  Thee.  I  must  therefore  even  now  cling  to  the  hope  that  in 
some  way  or  other  Thou  wilt  help  us." 

The  faith  of  these  words  is  plain  and  unmistakable.  Martha 
hopes,  desperately  against  hope,  that  somehow  all  will  be  right, 
though  she  knows  not  how.  She  has  strong  confidence  in  the 
efficacy  of  our  Lord's  prayers. 

The  presence  of  dim  views  and  indistinct  apprehensions  of 
Christ  in  Martha's  mind  is  as  evident  as  her  faith.  She  speaks 
as  if  our  Lord  was  a  human  prophet  only,  and  had  no  independent 


262  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

power  of  His  own,  as  God,  to  work  a  miracle,  and  as  if  lie  could 
not  command  a  cure,  but  must  ask  God  for  it,  as  Elisha  did.  She 
must  have  strangely  forgotten  the  manner  in  which  our  Lord 
had  often  worked  His  miracles.  Chrysostom  remarks,  that  she 
speaks  as  if  Christ  was  only  "  some  virtuous  and  approved  mor- 
tal." 

Let  us  note  here  that  there  may  be  true  faith  and  love  toward 
Christ  in  a  person,  and  yet  much  dimness  and  ignorance  mixed 
up  with  it.  Love  to  Christ,  in  Christian  women  especially,  is 
often  much  clearer  than  faith  and  knowledge.  Hence  women 
are  more  easily  led  astray  by  false  doctrine  than  men.  It  is  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  remember  that  there  are  degrees  of 
faith  and  knowledge.  How  small  a  degree  of  faith  may  save, 
and  how  much  of  ignorance  may  be  found  even  in  one  who  is  on 
the  way  to  heaven,  are  deep  points  which  probably  the  last  day 
alone  will  fully  disclose. 

Let  us  do  Martha  the  justice  to  observe  that  she  shows  great 
confidence  in  the  value  and  efficacy  of  prayer. 

23. — [Jesus  saith... brother... rise  again.~\  These  words,  the  first 
spoken  by  our  Lord  after  arriving  at  Bethany,  are  very  remark- 
able. They  sound  as  if  He  saw  the  vague  nature  of  Martha's 
faith,  and  would  gradually  lead  her  on  to  clearer  and  more  dis- 
tinct views  of  Himself,  His  office,  and  Person.  He  therefore 
begins  by  the  broad,  general  promise,  "  Thy  brother  shall  be 
raised  up."  He  does  not  say  when  or  how.  If  his  disciples 
heard  him  say  this,  they  might  have  some  clue  to  his  meaning, 
as  He  had  said,  "  I  go  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of  sleep."  But 
Martha  had  not  heard  that. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  loves  to  draw  out  the  faith  and  knowl- 
edge of  His  people  by  degrees.  If  He  told  us  everything  at 
once,  plainly,  and  without  any  room  for  misunderstanding,  it 
would  not  be  good  for  us.    Exercise  is  useful  for  all  our  graces. 

Bollock  sees  in  this  verse  a  signal  example  of  our  Lord's 
unwillingness  to  "  break  the  bruised  reed,  or  quench  the  smoking 
flax."  He  nourishes  and  encourages  the  little  spark  of  faith 
which  Martha  had. 

24.— -[Martha. ..Iknow... resurrection. ..last  day.']  Martha  here  reveals 
the  extent  of  her  faith  and  knowledge.  She  knows  and  feels 
sure  that  her  brother  will  be  raised  again  from  the  dead  in  the 
last  day,  when  the  resurrection  takes  place.  This,  as  a  pious 
Jewess,  she  had  learned  from  the  old  Testament  Scriptures,  and 
as  a  Christian  believer,  she  had  gathered  even  more  distinctly 
from  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  But  she  does  not  say,  "  I  know 
and  feel  confident"  of  anything  more.  She  may  perhaps  have 
had  some  glimmering  of  hope  that  Jesus  would  do  something, 
but  she  does  not  say,  "I  know."  General  faith  is  easier  than 
particular. 

We  see  from  this  verse  that  the  resurrection  of  the  body 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  2(53 

formed  part  of  the  creed  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and  of  the  faith  of 
our  Lord's  disciples.  Martha's  "  i"  know"  sounds  as  if  she  re- 
membered the  words  of  Job,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 
What  she  did  not  understand,  or  had  failed  to  remember,  was  our 
Lord's  peculiar  office  as  Lord  of  the  resurrection.  We  cannot 
now  understand  how  she  can  have  failed  to  hear  what  our  Lord 
had  said  before  the  Sanhedrim.  (John  v.  25 — 29.)  If  she  had,  she 
evidently  had  not  comprehended  it.  Even  our  Lord's  teaching 
was  often  not  taken  in  by  His  people !  How  much  less  must 
His  ministers  expect  all  their  sermons  to  be  understood  ! 

To  my  eyes  there  is  an  evident  tone  of  disappointment  about 
Martha's  speech.  It  is  as  though  she  said,  "  I  know,  of  course, 
that  he  will  rise  again  at  last ;  but  that  is  cold  comfort.  It  is  a 
far-distant  event.    I  want  nearer  and  better  consolation." 

Hutcheson  remarks  :  "  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  men  be- 
lieving great  things  that  are  far  off,  and  about  which  they  have 
no  present  exercise,  when  yet  their  faith  proves  weak  in  the  mat- 
ter of  a  present  trial,  though  less  difficult  than  that  which  they 
profess  to  believe." 
25. — [Jesus  said.. .lam.. .resurrection.. .life.']  In  this  and  the  follow- 
ing verses,  our  Lord  corrects  Martha's  feeble  and  inadequate 
notions,  and  sets  before  her  more  exalted  views  of  Himself. 
As  Chrysostom  says,  "  He  shows  her  that  He  needed  none  to 
help  Him."  He  tells  her  that  He  is  not  merely  a  human  teacher 
of  the  resurrection,  but  the  Divine  Author  of  all  resurrection, 
whether  spiritual  or  physical,  and  the  Root  and  Fountain  of  all 
life.  "  I  am  that  high  and  holy  One  who,  by  taking  man's  nature 
upon  Me,  have  ennobled  his  body,  and  made  its  resurrection 
possible.  I  am  the  great  First  Cause  and  Procurer  of  man's 
resurrection,  the  Conqueror  of  death,  and  the  Saviour  of  the 
body.  I  am  the  great  Spring  and  Source  of  all  life,  and  what- 
ever life  any  one  has,  eternal,  spiritual,  physical,  is  all  owing  to 
Me.  All  that  are  raised  from  the  grave  will  be  raised  by  Me. 
All  that  are  spiritually  quickened  are  quickened  by  Me.  Sep- 
arate from  Me  there  is  no  life  at  all.  Death  came  by  Adam  :  Ufa 
comes  by  Me." 

All  must  feel  that  this  is  a  deep  saying,  so  deep  that  we  se< 
but  a  little  of  it.  One  thing  only  is  very  clear  and  plain  :  none 
could  use  this  language  but  one  who  knew  and  felt  that  He  waa 
very  God.     No  prophet  or  Apostle  ever  spoke  in  this  way. 

I  do  not  feel  sure  that  the  two  first  words  of  this  verse  do  not; 
contain  a  latent  reference  to  the  great  title  of  Jehovah,  "I  am." 
The  Greek  quite  permits  it. 

[He  that  believeth... me. ..dead. ..live.]  This  seutence  receives 
two  interpretations.  Some,  as  Calvin  and  Hutcheson,  hold  that 
"  dead  "  here  means  spiritually  dead.  Others,  as  Bollinger,  Gual- 
ter,  Brentitus,  Museums,  hold  that  "  dead  "  means  bodily  dead. — 
With  these  last  I  entirely  agree,  partly  because  of  the  point  that 
our  Lord  is  pressing  on  Martha,  partly  because  of  the  awkward- 
ness of  speaking  of  a  believer  as  "dead."    Moreover,  the  ex- 


264  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


pression  is  a  verb, — "  though  he  has  died,"  and  not  an  adjec- 
tive,— "  is  a  dead  person."  The  sense  I  believe  to  be  this  :  "  He 
that  believes  in  Me,  even  if  he  has  died,  and  been  laid  in  the 
grave,  like  thy  brother,  shall  yet  live,  and  be  raised  again  through 
my  power.  Faith  in  Me  unites  such  an  one  to  the  Fountain  of 
all  life,  and  death  can  only  hold  him  for  a  short  time.  As  sure- 
ly as  I,  the  Head,  have  life,  and  cannot  be  kept  a  prisoner  by  the 
grave,  so  surely  all  my  members,  believing  in  Me,  shall  live 
also." 

26. — [And  whosoever  liveth...believeth... never  die.']  In  this  verse  our 
Lord  seems  to  me  to  speak  of  living  believers,  as  in  the  last 
verse  He  had  spoken  of  dead  ones.  Here,  then,  He  makes  the 
sweeping  declaration,  that  "  every  one  who  believes  in  Him 
shall  never  die :"  that  is,  he  "shall  not  die  eternally,"  as  the 
Burial  Service  of  the  Church  of  England  has  it.  The  second 
death  shall  have  no  power  over  him.  The  sting  of  bodily  death 
shall  be  taken  away.  He  partakes  of  a  life  that  never  ends, 
from  the  moment  that  he  believes  in  Christ.  His  body  may  be 
laid  in  the  grave  for  a  little  season,  but  only  to  be  raised  after  a 
while  to  glory;  and  his  soul  lives  on  uninterruptedly  for  ever- 
more,  and,  like  the  great  risen  Head,  dieth  no  more. 

That  there  are  great  depths  in  this  and  the  preceding  sen- 
tence, every  reverent  believer  will  always  admit.  We  feel  that 
we  do  not  see  the  bottom.  The  difficulty  probably  arises  from 
the  utter  inability  of  our  gross,  carnal  natures  to  comprehend 
the  mysteries  of  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  any  kind.  One 
thing  is  abundantly  clear,  and  that  is  the  importance  of  faith  in 
Christ.  "  He  that  believeth"  is  the  man  who  though  dead  shall 
live,  and  shall  never  die.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  believe,  and 
then  all  shall  one  day  be  plain.  The  simple  questions,  "  What  is 
life,  and  what  is  death?"  contain  enough  to  silence  the  wisest 
philosopher. 

[Believest  thou  this?]  This  searching  question  is  the  applica- 
tion to  Martha  of  the  great  doctrines  just  laid  down.  "  Thou 
believest  that  the  dead  will  rise.  It  is  well.  But  dost  thou  be- 
lieve that  I  am  the  Author  of  resurrection,  and  the  source  of 
life?  Dost  thou  realize  that  I,  thy  Teacher  and  Friend,  am  very 
God,  and  have  the  keys  of  death  and  the  grave  in  my  hands? 
Hast  thou  yet  got  hold  of  this?  If  thou  hast  not,  and  only 
knowest  me  as  a  prophet  sent  to  teach  good  and  comfortable 
things,  thou  hast  only  received  half  the  truth." 

Home  questions  like  these  are  very  useful.  How  little  we 
most  of  us  know  what  we  really  believe,  and  what  we  do  not; 
what  we  have  grasped  and  made  our  own,  and  what  we  hold 
loosely !  Above  all,  how  little  we  know  what  we  really  believe 
about  Christ ! 

Melancthon  points  out  how  immensely  important  it  is  to 
know  whether  we  really  have  faith,  and  believe  what  wre  hold. 

27.  —  [She  saith...Tea,  Lord;  I  believe]    Poor  Martha,  pressed 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  265 


home  with  the  mighty  question  of  the  last  verse,  seems  hardly- 
able  to  give  any  but  a  vague  answer.  In  truth,  we  cannot  ex- 
pect that  she  would  speak  distinctly  about  that  which  she  only 
understood  imperfectly.  She  therefore  falls  back  on  a  general 
answer,  in  which  she  states  simply,  yet  decidedly,  what  was  the 
extent  of  her  creed. 

Our  English  word,  "  I  believe,"  hardly  gives  the  full  sense 
of  the  Greek.  It  would  be  literally,  "  I  have  believed,  and  do 
believe."    This  is  my  faith,  and  has  been  for  a  long  time. 

Augustine,  Bede,  Bullinger,  Chemnitius,  Gualter,  Maldonatus, 
Quesnel,  and  Henry,  think  that  the  first  word  of  Martha's  reply 
is  a  full  and  explicit  declaration  of  faith  in  everything  our 
Lord  had  just  said.  "Yes,  Lord,  I  do  believe  Thou  art  the 
resurrection  and  the  life,"  etc.  I  cannot  see  this  myself.  The 
idea  seems  contradicted  by  Martha's  subsequent  conduct  at  the 
grave. 

Musculus  strongly  maintains  that  Martha's  confession,  good 
as  it  was,  was  vague  and  imperfect.  Lampe  takes  much  the 
same  view. 

\Thou  art  the  Christ... Son  of  God.. .came.. .world.']  Here  is 
Martha's  statement  of  her  belief.  It  contains  three  great 
points :  (1)  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  anointed  One,  the 
Messiah ;  (2)  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God ;  (3)  that  He  was 
the  promised  Redeemer,  who  was  to  come  into  the  world.  She 
goes  no  further,  and  probably  she  could  not.  Yet  considering 
the  time  she  lived  in,  the  universal  unbelief  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  and  the  wonderful  difference  in  the  views  of  believers 
before  the  crucifixion  and  after,  I  regard  it  as  a  noble  and 
glorious  confession,  and  even  fuller  than  Peter's,  in  Matthew 
xvi.  16.  Melancthon  points  out  the  great  superiority  of 
Martha's  faith  to  that  of  the  most  intellectual  heathen,  in  a  long 
and  interesting  passage. 

It  is  easy  to  say  that  Martha's  faith  was  rather  vague,  and 
that  she  ought  to  have  seen  everything  more  clearly.  But  we 
at  this  period  of  tinie,  and  with  all  our  advantages,  are  very 
poor  judges  of  such  a  matter.  Dark  and  dim  as  her  views 
were/ it  was  a  great  thing  for  a  solitary  Jewish  woman  to  have 
got  hold  of  so  much  truth,  when  within  two  miles,  in  Jerusalem, 
all  who  held  such  a  creed  as  hers  were  excommunicated  and 
persecuted. 

Let  us  note  that  people's  views  of  truth  may  be  very  defec- 
tive on  some  points,  and  yet  they  may  have  the  root  of  the 
matter  in  them.  Martha  evidently  did  not  yet  fully  realize  that 
Christ  was  the  resurrection  and  the  life :  but  she  had  learned 
the  alphabet  of  Christianity,— Christ's  Messiahship  and  Divin- 
ity, and  doubtless  learned  more  in  time.  We  must  not  con- 
demn people  hastily  or  harshly,  because  they  do  not  see  all  at 
once. 

12 


266  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Chrysostom  says:  "Martha  seems  to  me  not  to  understand 
Christ's  saying.  She  was  conscious  it  was  some  great  thing, 
but  did  not  perceive  the  whole  meaning,  so  that  when  asked 
one  thing  she  answered  another." 

Toletus  remarks:  "Martha  thought  she  believed  everything 
Christ  said,  while  she  believed  Him  to  be  the  true  promised 
Messiah.  And  she  did  truly  believe,  but  her  faith  was  implicit 
and  general.  It  is  just  as  if  some  rustic,  being  questioned 
about  some  proposition  of  faith  which  he  does  not  quite  com- 
prehend, replies,  '  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Church.'  So  here 
Martha  said,  '  I  believe,  Lord,  that  Thou  art  the  true  Christ, 
and  that  all  things  Thou  sayest  are  true ; '  and  yet  she  did  not 
distinctly  perceive  them."  This  is  a  remarkable  testimony  from 
a  Romanist. 

Ought  we  not,  perhaps,  to  make  some  allowance  for  the  distress 
and  affliction  in  which  Martha  was  when  she  made  her  confession  ? 
Is  it  fair  to  expect  a  person  in  her  position  to  speak  as  distinctly 
and  precisely  as  one  not  in  trouble  ? 

3. — [And  when  she  had  said  tJiis,  etc.]  The  affection  of  Martha  for 
her  sister  appears  here.  Once  assured  that  her  Master  was 
come,  and  perhaps  somewhat  cheered  by  the  few  words  He  spoke, 
she  hastens  home  to  tell  Mary  that  Jesus  was  come,  and  had 
called  for  her.  We  are  not  told  expressly  that  Jesus  had  men- 
tioned Mary,  but  we  may  suppose  that  He  did,  and  had  asked 
where  she  was. 

The  word  "  secretly"  may  be  applied  to  the  word  which  fol- 
lows, if  we  like,  and  it  would  then  mean  that  "  Martha  called 
Mary,  saying  secretly."    This  is  probably  the  correct  rendering. 

The  word  rendered  "  is  come"  would  be  more  literally  trans- 
lated, "is  present:  is  actually  here." 

The  expression,  "the  Master,"  is  probably  the  name  by  which 
our  Lord  was  familiarly  known  by  the  family  at  Bethany.  It  is 
literally,  "the  Teacher." 

Bullinger  remarks  that  the  word  "  secretly  "  is  purposely  in- 
serted, to  show  that  the  Jews  who  followed  Mary  had  no  idea 
that  Jesus  was  come.  Had  they  known  it,  he  thinks,  they  would 
not  have  followed  her,  and  so  would  not  have  seen  the  miracle. 

Hall  evidently  thinks  that  Martha  told  Mary  "  secretly,"  for 
fear  of  the  unbelieving  Jews  who  were  among  the  comforters 
He  remarks :  "  Christianity  doth  not  bid  us  abate  anything  of 
our  wariness  and  honest  policy  :  yea,  it  requires  us  to  have  no 
less  of  the  serpent  than  of  the  dove." 

E). — [As  soon  as  she  heard,  etc.]  The  two  last  words  in  this  sen- 
tence are  both  in  the  present  tense.  It  would  be  more  literally 
rendered,  "  She,  when  she  heard,  arises  quickly  and  comes  to 
Him."    It  is  evident,  I  think,  that  the  sudden  movement  of  Mary 


JOnN,    CHAP.    XI. 


267 


was  not  caused  by  hearing  that  Jesus  was  come,  but  that  Jesus 
called  for  her. 

It  is  not  unlikely,  from  the  word  "  arose,"  that  Mary  was 
lying  or  sitting  prostrate  on  the  ground,  under  the  pressure  of 
grief.  We  may  also  well  suppose  that  our  Lord,  who  doubtless 
knew  her  state,  asked  for  her,  in  order  to  rouse  her  to  exertion. 
When  David  heard  that  his  child  was  dead,  and  nothing  left  for 
him  to  do  but  to  be  resigned,  he  "  arose  from  off  the  earth."  (2 
Sam.  xii.  20.) 


JOHN  XI.    30—37. 


30  Now  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into 
the  town,  but  was  in  that  place  where 
Martha  met  him. 

31  The  Jews  then  which  were  with 
her  in  the  house,  and  comforted  her, 
when  they  saw  Mary,  that  she  rose  up 
hastily  and  went  out,  followed  her,  say- 
ing, She  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  weep 
there. 

32  Then  when  Mary  was  come  where 
Jesus  was,  and  saw  him,  she  fell  down 
at  his  feet,  saying  unto  him,  Lord,  if 
thou  hadst  boon  here,  my  brother  had 
not  died. 


33  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  her 
weeping,  and  the  Jews  also  weeping, 
which  came  with  her,  he  groaned  in  the 
spirit,  and  was  troubled. 

34  And  said,  Where  have  ye  laid 
him  ?  They  said  unto  him,  Lord,  come 
and  see. 

35  Jesus  wept. 

36  Then  said  the  Jews,  Behold  how 
he  loved  him  ! 

37  And  some  of  them  said,  Could  not 
this  man,  which  opened  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  have  caused  that  even  this  man 
should  not  have  died  ? 


Not  many  passages  in  the  New  Testament  are  more  won- 
derful than  the  simple  narrative  contained  in  these  eight 
verses.  It  brings  out,  in  a  most  beautiful  light,  the 
sympathizing  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It 
shows  us  Him  who  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all 
who  come  to  God  by  Him,"  as  able  to  feel  as  He  is  to 
save.  It  shows  us  Him  who  is  One  with  the  Father,  and 
the  Maker  of  all  things,  entering  into  human  sorrows,  and 
shedding  human  tears. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  how  great  a 
blessing  God  sometimes  bestows  on  actions  of  kindness  and 
sympathy. 

It  seems  that  the  house  of  Martha  and  Mary  at  Bethany 
was  filled  with  mourners  when  Jesus  arrived.  Many 
of  these  mourners,  no  doubt,  knew  nothing  of  the  inner 


268  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

life  of  these  holy  women.  Their  faith,  their  hope,  their 
love  to  Christ,  their  discipleship,  were  things  of  which 
they  were  wholly  ignorant.  But  they  felt  for  them  in  their 
heavy  bereavement,  and  kindly  came  to  offer  what  comfort 
they  could.  B}r  so  doing  they  reaped  a  rich  and  unexpected 
reward.  They  beheld  the  greatest  miracle  that  Jesus  ever 
wrought.  They  were  eye-witnesses  when  Lazarus  came 
forth  from  the  tomb.  To  many  of  them,  we  may  well  be- 
lieve, that  day  was  a  spiritual  birth.  The  raising  of  Laza- 
rus led  to  a  resurrection  in  their  souls.  How  small  some- 
times are  the  hinges  on  which  eternal  life  appears  to  depend  ! 
If  these  people  had  not  sympathized  they  might  never 
have  been  saved. 

•We  need  not  doubt  that  these  things  were  written  for 
our  learning.  To  show  sympathy  and  kindness  to  the 
sorrowful  is  good  for  our  own  souls,  whether  we  know  it  or 
not.  To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction, 
to  weep  with  them  that  weep,  to  try  to  bear  one  another's 
burdens,  and  lighten  one  another's  cares, — all  this  will 
make  no  atonement  for  sin,  and  will  not  take  us  to  heaven. 
Yet  it  is  healthy  employment  for  our  hearts,  and  emplo}rment 
which  none  ought  to  despise.  Few  perhaps  are  aware  that 
one  secret  of  being  miserable  is  to  live  only  for  ourselves, 
and  one  secret  of  being  happy  is  to  try  to  make  others 
happy,  and  to  do  a  little  good  in  the  world.  It  is  not 
for  nothing  that  these  words  were  written  by  Solomon, 
"It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than  to  the 
house  of  feasting." — "The  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the 
house  of  mourning,  but  the  heart  of  fools  is  in  the  house 
of  mirth."  (Eccl.  vii.  2,  4.)  The  saying  of  our  Lord  is 
too  much  overlooked  :  "  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  to 
one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold  water  only  in  the  name 
of  a  disciple,  verily  I  say  unto  you  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose 
his  reward."  (Matt.  x.  42.)  The  friends  of  Martha  and 
Mary  found   that   promise  wonderfully   verified.       In  au 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  269 

age  of  peculiar  selfishness  and  self-inclulgence,  it  would 
be  well  if  they  had  more  imitators. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  what  a  depth  of  tender  sym- 
pathy there  is  in  Christ's  heart  towards  His  people.  We 
read  that  when  our  Lord  saw  Mary  weeping,  and  the  Jews 
also  weeping  with  her,  "  He  groaned  in  the  spirit  and 
was  troubled."  We  read  even  more  than  this.  He  gave 
outward  expression  to  His  feelings :  He  "  wept."  He 
knew  perfectly  well  that  the  sorrow  of  the  family  of 
Bethany  would  soon  be  turned  into  joy,  and  that  Lazarus 
in  a  few  minutes  would  be  restored  to  his  sisters.  But 
though  he  knew  all  this,  he  "  wept." 

This  weeping  of  Christ  is  deeply  instructive.  It  shows 
us  that  it  is  not  sinful  to  sorrow.  Weeping  and  mourning 
are  sadly  trying  to  flesh  and  blood,  and  make  us  feel  the 
weakness  of  our  mortal  nature.  But  they  are  not  in 
themselves  wrong.  Even  the  Son  of  God  wept. — It  shows 
us  that  deep  feeling  is  not  a  thing  of  which  we  need  be 
ashamed.  To  be  cold  and  stoical  and  unmoved  in  the 
sight  of  sorrow  is  no  sign  of  grace.  There  is  nothing 
unworthy  of  a  child  of  God  in  tears.  Even  the  Son  of 
God  could  weep. — It  shows  us,  above  all,  that  the  Saviour 
in  whom  believers  trust  is  a  most  tender  and  feeling 
Saviour.  He  is  one  who  can  be  touched  with  sympathy 
for  our  infirmities.  When  we  turn  to  Him  in  the  hour  of 
trouble,  and  pour  out  our  hearts  before  Him,  He  knows 
what  we  go  through  and  can  pity.  And  He  is  One  who 
never  changes.  Though  He  now  sits  at  God's  right  hand 
in  heaven,  His  heart  is  still  the  same  that  it  was  upon 
earth.  We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  who,  when 
He  was  upon  earth,  could  weep. 

Let  us  remember  these  things  in  daily  life,  and  never 
be  ashamed  of  walking  in  our  Master's  footsteps.  Let  us 
strive  to  be  men  and  women  of  a  tender  heart  and  a  sym- 
pathizing spirit.     Let  us  never  be  ashamed  to  weep  with 


270  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

them  that  weep,  and  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice.  Well 
would  it  be  for  the  Church  and  the  world  if  there  were 
more  Christians  of  this  stamp  and  character  !  The  Church 
would  be  far  more  beautiful,  and  the  world  be  far  more 
happy. 

Notes.    John  XI.  30—37. 

30. — [Nbio  Jesus  ivas  not  yet  come,  etc.'}  The  Greek  word  for 
"  come  "  is  in  the  preterperfect  tense.  The  sentence,  translated 
literally,  would  be,  "  Jesus  had  not  yet  come  into  the  town," 
when  Martha  left  Him  to  tell  Mary,  but  was  still  waiting  or  re- 
maining in  the  place  outside  Bethany,  where  Martha  at  first  met 
Him.  The  word  "  town "  would  be  more  correctly  rendered 
"  village,"  according  to  our  present  acceptation  of  the  word. 
Yet  it  is  fair  to  remember  that  words  change  their  meaning  with 
lapse  of  time.  Even  at  this  day  a  little  Suffolk  village  of  1,400 
people,  is  called  a  "  town"  by  many  of  its  inhabitants. 

Calvin  thinks  that  Jesus  remained  outside  Bethany  by  Mar- 
tha's request,  that  His  life  might  not  be  endangered. 

81. — {The  Jews  then... comforted  her... saw  Mary... followed  her. ,]  It 
is  probable  that  the  persons  here  mentioned  formed  a  consider- 
able number, — as  many  as  could  crowd  into  the  house.  "  Com- 
forted" in  the  Greek  is  the  present  participle,  and  implies  that 
they  were  actually  employed  in  comforting  Mary.  Concerning 
the  manner  of  comforting  on  such  occasions,  we  know  nothing 
certain.  People  who  only  talk  common  places  are  miserable 
comforters,  and  far  worse  than  Job's  friends,  who  sat  for  seven 
days  saying  nothing  at  all.  It  may  be  that  among  the  Jews  the 
mere  presence  of  courteous  and  sympathizing  people  was 
thought  a  kind  attention,  and  soothed  the  feelings  of  the  be- 
reaved.   The  customs  of  nations  differ  widely  in  such  matters. 

It  is  evident  these  Jews  did  not  hear  Martha's  message,  and 
knew  nothing  of  Jesus  being  near.  Some  of  them,  perhaps, 
had  they  known  it,  would  not  have  followed  Mary;  not  know- 
ing, they  all  followed  without  exception,  aud  unexpectedly 
became  eye-witnesses  of  a  stupendous  miracle.  All  they  knew 
was  that  Mary  went  out  hastily.  They  followed  in  a  spirit  of 
kind  sympathy,  and  by  so  doing  reaped  a  great  blessing. 

Bupertus  shrewdly  remarks  that  the  Jews  did  not  follow 
Martha,  when  she  ran  to  meet  Jesus,  but  did  follow  Mary.  He 
conjectures  that  Mary's  affliction  was  deeper  and  more  over- 
whelming than  Martha's,  and  her  friends  devoted  themselves 
more  to  comfort  her,  as  needing  most  consolation.  Yet  the 
simpler  reason  seems  to  be  that  when  both  sisters  had  left  the 
house,  the  friends  could  hardly  do  anything  else  but  go  out  and 
follow. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  271 

[SJie  goeth.  .grave. ..weep  there.']  We  must  suppose  from  this 
sentence,  tha ;  weeping  at  the  grave  of  dead  friends  was  a 
custom  amoi  g  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's  time.  In  estimating 
such  a  custom,  which  to  most  thinking  persons  may  seem  as 
useless  as  rubbing  a  wound,  and  very  likely  to  keep  up  pain 
without  healing,  it  is  only  fair  to  remember  that  Old  Testament 
views  of  the  state  after  death  were  not  nearly  so  well  lighted 
and  comfortable  as  ours.  The  removal  of  death's  sting,  the 
resurrection  and  paradise,  were  things  not  nearly  so  well 
understood  even  by  the  best  saints  before  Christ,  as  they  were 
after  Christ  rose  again.  To  most  of  the  Jews,  in  our  Lord's 
time,  we  can  well  believe  that  death  was  regarded  as  the  end 
of  all  happiness  and  comfort,  and  the  state  after  death  as  a 
dreary  blank.  When  Sadducees,  who  said  there  was  "no 
resurrection,"  were  chief  rulers  and  high  priests,  we  may  well 
suppose  that  the  sorrow  of  many  Jews  over  the  death  of  friends 
was  a  "  sorrow  without  hope."  Even  at  this  day,  "the  place 
of  wailing"  at  Jerusalem,  where  the  Jews  assemble  to  weep 
over  the  foundation-stones  of  the  old  temple,  is  a  proof  that 
their  habit  of  weeping  over  crushed  hopes  is  not  yet  extinct. 

32.—  [That  when  Mary,  etc.]  We  see  in  this  verse  that  as  soon  as 
Mary  met  our  Lord,  the  first  thing  she  said  was  almost  exactly 
what  Martha  had  said  in  the  twenty-first  verse,  and  the  remarks 
made  there  need  not  be  repeated.  The  similarity  shows,  at 
any  rate,  that  throughout  the  illness  of  Lazarus,  the  thoughts 
of  the  two  sisters  had  been  running  in  one  and  the  same 
direction.  Both  had  built  all  their  hopes  on  Jesus  coming. 
Both  had  felt  confidence  that  His  coming  would  have  saved 
their  brother's  life.  Both  were  bitterly  disappointed  that  He 
did  not  come.  Both  had  probably  kept  saying  the  same  words 
repeatedly,  "  If  our  Master  would  only  come,  Lazarus  would 
not  die."  There  are,  however,  one  or  two  touches  of  differ- 
ence between  the  two  sisters,  here  as  elsewhere.  Let  us  note 
them. 

Mary  "  fell  down "  at  our  Lord's  feet,  and  Martha  did  not. 
She  was  made  of  softer,  feebler  character  than  Martha,  and  was 
more  completely  crushed  and  overcome  than  her  sister. 

Mary  fell  down  at  our  Lord's  feet  when  she  " saw"  Him.  Up 
to  that  moment  probably  she  had  borne  up,  and  had  run  to  the 
place  where  Martha  told  her  Jesus  was  waiting.  But  when  she 
actually  saw  her  Master,  and  remembered  how  she  had  longed 
for  a  sight  of  Him  for  some  days,  her  feelings  overcame  her, 
and  she  broke  down.  The  eyes  have  a  great  effect  on  the  feel- 
ings of  the  heart.  People  often  bear  up  pretty  well,  till  they 
see  something  that  calls  up  thoughts. 

I  do  not  perceive  any  ground  for  thinking,  as  Calvin  does, 
that  this  "fa.ling  at  our  Lord's  feet"  was  an  act  of  worship,  a 
recognition  o  f  our  Lord's  divinity.  It  is  much  more  uatural  and 
reasonable  to  regard  it  as  the  mere  expression  of  Mary's  state 
of  feelings. 


272  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Trapp  remarks  that  the  words  of  Mary  in  this  verse  and  of 
Martha  in  the  former  one  show  that  we  are  all  naturally  dis- 
posed to  make  too  much  of  Christ's  bodily  presence. 

83. — [When  Jesus  therefore  saw  hery  etc.~\  This  is  one  of  those 
verses  which  bring  out  very  strongly  the  real  humanity  of  our 
Lord,  and  His  power  to  sympathize  with  His  people.  As  a  real 
man,  He  was  specially  moved  when  He  saw  Mary  and  the  Jews 
weeping.  As  God,  He  had  no  need  to  hear  their  plaintive 
language,  and  to  see  their  tears,  in  order  to  learn  that  they 
were  afflicted.  He  knew  perfectly  all  their  feelings.  Yet  as 
man  He  was  like  ourselves,  peculiarly  stirred  by  the  sight  of 
sorrow;  for  human  nature  is  so  constituted  that  grief  is 
eminently  contagious.  If  one  in  a  company  is  deeply  touched, 
and  begins  to  weep,  it  is  extremely  likely  that  others  will  weep 
also.  This  power  of  sympathy  our  Lord  evidently  had  in  full 
possession.     He  saio  weeping  and  He  wept. 

Let  us  carefully  remark  that  our  Lord  never  changes.  He  did 
not  leave  behind  Him  His  human  nature  when  He  ascended  up 
into  heaven.  At  this  moment,  at  God's  right  hand,  He  can  be 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  can  understand 
tears  as  well  as  ever.  Our  great  High  Priest  is  the  very  Friend 
that  our  souls  need,  able  to  save  as  God,  able  to  feel  as  man. 
To  talk  of  the  Virgin  Mary  feeling  for  sinners  more  than  Jesus 
is  to  say  that  which  is  ignorant  and  blasphemous.  To  teach 
that  we  can  need  any  other  priest,  when  Jesus  is  such  a  feeling 
Saviour,  is  to  teach  what  is  senseless  and  absurd. 

[He  groaned  in  spirit.]  There  is  considerable  difficulty  about 
this  expression.  The  word  rendered  "  groaned,"  is  only  used 
five  times  in  the  New  Testament.  In  Matt.  ix.  30,  and  Mark  i. 
43, it  is " straitly charged."  In  Mark  xiv.  5, it  is  "murmured." 
Here,  and  at  the  thirty-eighth  verse  above,  it  is  "groaned." 
Now  what  is  precisely  meant  by  the  phrase? 

(a)  Some,  as  Ecolampadius,  Brentius,  Chemnitius,  Flacius, 
and  Ferus,  maintain  firmly  that  the  notion  of  anger,  indignation, 
and  stern  rebuke,  is  inseparable  from  the  word  "  groaned." 
They  think  that  the  latent  idea  is  the  deep  and  holy  indignation 
with  which  our  Lord  was  moved  at  the  sight  of  the  ravages 
which  death  had  made,  and  the  misery  sin  and  the  devil  had 
brought  into  the  world.  They  say  it  implies  the  stern  and 
righteous  wrath  with  which  the  deliverer  of  a  country  tyran- 
nized over  and  trampled  down  by  a  rebel  regards  the  desolation 
and  destruction  which  the  rebel  has  caused. 

(&)  Some  add  to  this  view  the  idea  that  "  in  spirit"  means 
that  our  Lord  groaned  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  by  the 
Divine  Spirit  which  dwelt  in  Him  without  measure,  or  by  the 
power  of  His  Godhead. 

(c)  Some,  as  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  and  Euthymius, 
think  "  groaned  in  spirit "  means  that  Christ  rebuked  His  own 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  273 


natural  feelings  by  His  Divine  nature,  or  restrained  His  trouble, 
and  in  so  doing  was  greatly  disturbed. 

(d)  Some,  as  Gomarus  and  Lampe,  consider  that  our  Lord 
was  moved  to  holy  sorrow  and  indignation  at  the  sight  of  the 
unbelief  even  of  Martha  and  Mary,  (expressed  by  their  immod- 
erate grief,  as  if  the  case  of  Lazarus  was  hopeless,)  as  well  as 
at  the  sight  of  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews. 

(e)  Some,  as  Bullinger,  Gualter,  Diodati,  Grotius,  Maldona- 
tus,  Jansenius,  Bollock,  and  Hutcheson,  consider  that  the 
phrase  simply  expresses  the  highest  and  deepest  kind  of  inward 
agitation  of  mind,  an  agitation  in  which  grief,  compassion,  and 
holy  detestation  of  sin's  work  in  the  world  were  all  mingled 
and  combined.  This  agitation,  however,  was  entirely  inward 
at  present :  it  was  not  bodily,  but  spiritual ;  not  in  the  flesh,  but 
in  the  spirit.  As  Burgon  says,  the  "  spirit "  here  means  Christ's 
inward  soul.  I  prefer  this  opinion  to  the  former  one,  though  I 
fully  admit  it  has  difficulties.  But  it  is  allowed  by  Schleusner 
and  Parkhurst,  and  seems  the  view  of  Tyndall,  Cranmer,  and 
.lie  Geneva  version,  as  well  as  of  our  own. 

[ And  icas  troubled.]  This  expression  is  to  my  mind  even 
more  difficult  than  the  one  which  immediately  precedes  it.  It 
would  be  literally  translated,  as  our  marginal  reading  has  it, 
"  He  troubled  himself."  In  fact,  Wycliffe  translates  it  so.  Now 
what  can  this  mean  ? 

Some  maintain  that  in  our  Lord's  mysterious  Person  the  human 
nature  was  so  entirely  subordinated  to  the  Divine,  that  the 
human  passions  and  affections  never  moved  unless  influenced 
and  actuated  by  the  Divine  nature,  and  that  here,  to  show  His 
sympathy,  He  "troubled  Himself."  Thus  Rupertus  remarks 
that  "  if  He  had  not  troubled  Himself,  no  one  else  could  have 
troubled  Him."  I  confess  that  I  regard  this  view  with  a  little 
suspicion.  It  seems  to  me  to  imply  that  our  Lord's  human 
nature  was  not  like  ours,  and  that  His  humanity  was  like  an 
instrument  played  upon  by  His  divinity,  but  in  itself  dead  and 
passive  until  its  music  was  called  out.  To  my  mind  there  is 
something  dangerous  in  this. 

I  prefer  to  think  that  our  Lord  as  man  had  all  the  feelings, 
passions,  and  affections  of  a  man,  but  all  under  such  perfect  con- 
trol that  they  never  exceeded  as  ours  do,  and  were  never  even 
very  demonstrative,  excepting  on  great  occasions.  As  Beza 
says,  there  was  no  "disorder"  in  His  emotions.  Here  I  think 
He  saw  an  occasion  for  exhibiting  a  very  deep  degree  of  sorrow 
and  sympathy,  partly  from  the  sorrowful  sight  He  beheld,  and 
partly  from  His  love  to  Mary,  Martha,  and  Lazarus.  Therefore 
He  greatly  disturbed  and  "troubled  Himself." 

It  still  admits  of  a  question  whether  the  phrase  may  not  be 
simply  a  Hebraism  for  "  He  was  troubled."  (Compare  1  Sam. 
xxx.  6,  and  2  Sam.  xii.  18.)  Hammond  says  it  is  a  Hebrew 
idiom. 


274  EXPOSITOBY   THOUGHTS. 

When  all  has  been  said,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  phrase 
touches  a  very  delicate  and  mysterious  subject :  that  subject  is 
the  precise  nature  of  the  union  of  two  natures  in  our  Lord's 
Person.  That  He  was  at  the  same  time  perfect  God  and  perfect 
Man  is  an  article  of  the  Christian  faith  ;  but  how  far  the  Divine 
nature  acted  on  the  human,  and  to  what  extent  it  checked  and 
influenced  the  action  of  human  passions  and  feelings,  are  very 
deep  points,  which  we  have  no  line  completely  to  fathom. 
After  all,  not  the  least  part  of  our  difficulty  is  that  we  can  form, 
no  clear  and  adequate  conception  of  a  human  nature  entirely 
without  sin. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  abundantly  clear  from  this  passage: 
there  is  nothing  wrong  or  wicked  in  being  greatly  moved  by  the 
sight  of  sorrow,  so  long  as  we  keep  our  feelings  under  control. 
To  be  always  cold,  unfeeling,  and  unsympathizing  may  appear 
to  some  very  dignified  and  philosophical.  But  though  it  may 
suit  a  Stoic,  it  is  not  consistent  with  the  character  of  a  Chris- 
tian.    Sympathy  is  not  sinful,  but  Christ-like. 

Theophylact  observes  that  Christ  "teaches  us  by  His  own 
example  the  due  measure  of  joy  and  grief.  The  absence  alto- 
gether of  sympathy  and  sorrow  is  brutal :  the  excess  of  them  is 
womanly." 

Melancthon  observes  that  none  of  Christ's  miracles  seem  to 
have  been  done  without  some  great  mental  emotion.  (Luke  viii. 
46.)  He  supposes  that  here  at  this  verse,  there  was  a  great 
conflict  with  Satan  in  our  Lord's  mind,  and  that  He  wrestled 
in  prayer  for  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  and  then  thanked  God 
afterwards  that  the  prayer  was  heard.  Calvin  takes  much  the 
same  view. 

Ecolampadius  observes  that  we  must  not  think  Christ  had  a 
.  human  body  only,  and  not  a  human  soul.     He  had  a  soul  like  our 
own  in  all  things,  sin  only  excepted,  and  capable  of  all  our  feel- 
ings and  emotions. 

Piscator  and  Trapp  compare  the  trouble  of  spirit  which  our 
Lord  went  through,  to  the  disturbance  and  agitation  of  perfectly 
clear  water  in  a  perfectly  clear  glass  vessel.  However  great  the 
agitation,  the  water  remains  clear. 

Musculus  reverently  remarks  that  after  all  there  is  something 
about  this  "groaning  in  spirit  and  troubling  Himself,"  which 
cannot  be  fully  explained. 

34. — [And  said,  Where  have  ye  laid  him?']  We  cannot  suppose 
that  our  Lord,  who  knew  all  things,  even  to  the  moment  of 
Lazarus'  death  could  really  need  to  be  informed  where  Lazarus 
was  buried.  He  asks  what  He  does  here  partly  as  a  kind  friend 
to  show  His  deep  sympathy  and  interest  in  the  grave  of  His 
friend,  and  partly  to  give  further  proof  that  there  was  no  collu- 
sion in  the  matter  of  Lazarus'  burial,  and  that  He  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  choice  of  his  tomb,  in  order  to  concert  an  impos- 


JOHN,   CHAP.  XI.  275 


ture  about  raising  him.  In  short,  those  who  heard  Him  pub- 
licly ask  this  question  would  see  that  this  was  no  prearranged 
and  precontrived  miracle. 

Quesnel  remarks  :  "  Christ  does  n  *t  ask  out  of  ignorance, 
any  more  than  God  did  when  he  said,  'Adam,  where  art 
thou  ? ' " 

[They  said.. .Lord,  come  and  see.]  Who  they  were  that  said 
this,  we  do  not  exactly  know.  It  was  probably  the  common 
saying  of  all  the  party  of  mourners  who  stood  around  while 
Jesus  talked  with  Mary.  They  did  not  know  why  our  Lord 
wished  to  see  the  grave.  They  may  possibly  have  supposed 
that  He  wished  to  accompany  Mary  and  Martha,  and  to  weep  at 
the  grave.  At  any  rate  the  question  and  answer  secured  a  large 
attendance  of  companions,  as  the  disciples  and  our  Lord  went 
to  the  place  where  Lazarus  was  buried. 

3*. — [Jesus  ioept.~\  This  wonderful  little  verse  has  given  rise  to  an 
enormous  amount  of  comment.  The  difficulty  is  to  select 
thoughts,  and  not  to  overload  the  subject. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  wept "  is  not  the  same  as  that 
used  for  "  weeping"  in  the  thirty-third  verse,  but  totally  differ- 
ent. There  the  weeping  is  a  weeping  accompanied  by  demon- 
strative lamentation.  Here  the  word  would  be  more  literally 
and  accurately  rendered  "  shed  tears."  In  fact  it  is  the  only 
place  in  the  New  Testament  where  this  word  for  "weep"  is 
used. 

There  are  three  occasions  where  our  Lord  is  recorded  to  have 
wept,  in  the  Gospels  :  once  when  he  beheld  the  city,  (Luke  xix. 
41,)  once  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  (Matt.  xxvi.  39,  and 
Heb.  vi.  7,)  and  here.  We  never  read  of  His  laughing,  and 
only  once  of  His  rejoicing.     (Luke  x.  21.) 

The  reasons  assigned  by  commentators  why  our  Lord  wept 
here,  before  He  raised  Lazarus,  are  various  and  curious. 

(a)  Some  think  that  he  wept  to  see  the  ravages  made  by 
death  and  sin. 

(b)  Some,  as  Hilary,  think  that  He  wept  to  think  of  the 
unbelief  of  the  Jews. 

(c)  Some  think  that  He  wept  to  see  how  weak  and  feeble 
was  the  faith  of  Mary  and  Martha. 

(d)  Some,  as  Jerome  and  Ferus,  think  that  He  wept  at  the 
thought  of  the  sorrow  Lazarus  would  go  through  by  returning 
to  a  sinful  world. 

(e)  Some  think  that  He  wept  out  of  sympathy  with  the 
affliction  of  His  friends  at  Bethany,  in  order  to  give  an  eternal 
proof  to  His  Church  that  He  can  feel  with  us  and  for  us. 

I  believe  this  last  opinion  is  the  true  one. 


276  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


We  learn  the  great  practical  lesson,  from  this  verse,  that 
there  is  nothing  unworthy  of  a  Christian  in  tears.  There  is 
nothing  unmanly,  dishonourable,  unwise,  or  feeble,  in  being  full 
of  sympathy  with  the  afflicted,  and  ready  to  weep  with  them 
that  weep.  Indeed,  it  is  curious  to  gather  up  the  many  instan- 
ces we  have  in  Scripture  of  great  men  weeping. 

We  may  draw  great  comfort  from  the  thought  that  the 
Saviour  in  whom  we  are  bid  to  trust  is  one  who  can  weep, 
and  is  as  able  to  feel  as  He  is  able  to  save. 

We  may  learn  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  humanity  very 
strongly  from  this  little  verse.  He  was  one  who  could  hunger, 
thirst,  sleep,  eat,  drink,  speak,  walk,  groan,  be  wearied,  wonder, 
feel  indignant,  rejoice,  like  any  of  ourselves,  and  yet  without 
sin;  and,  above  all,  He  could  weep.  I  read  that  there  is  "joy 
in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God,"  (Luke  xv.,)  but  I  never 
read  of  angels  weeping.  Tears  are  peculiar  to  flesh  and 
blood. 

Chrysostom  remarks  that  "  John,  who  enters  into  higher 
statements  about  our  Lord's  nature  than  any  of  the  evangelists, 
also  descends  lower  than  any  in  describing  his  bodily  affec- 
tions." 

36. — [Then  said. ..Jews. ..Behold. ..loved  7iim.~]  This  sentence  is  the 
expression  partly  of  surprise,  which  comes  out  in  the  word 
"  behold  ;  "  and  partly  of  admiration, — what  a  loving  and  tender- 
hearted Teacher  this  is !  It  gives  the  idea  that  those  who  said 
this  were  the  few  unprejudiced  Jews  who  had  come  to  Bethany 
to  comfort  Mary  and  Martha,  and  afterward  believed  when  they 
saw  Lazarus  raised. 

Let  us  observe  that  of  all  graces,  love  is  the  one  which  most 
arrests  the  attention  and  influences  the  opinion  of  the  world. 

37. — [And  some  of  them  said,  etc.~\  This  sentence  sounds  to  me 
like  the  language  of  enemies  determined  to  believe  nothing 
good  of  our  Lord,  and  prepared  to  pick  a  hole  or  find  a  fault  if 
possible,  in  anything  that  He  did.  Does  not  a  sarcastic  sneer 
ring  throughout  it?  "Could  not  this  Man,  if  He  really  did 
open  the  eyes  of  that  blind  person  at  Jerusalem  last  autumn, 
have  prevented  this  friend  of  His  from  dying?  If  He  really  is 
the  Messiah  and  the  Christ,  and  really  does  work  such  wonder- 
ful works,  why  has  He  not  prevented  all  this  sorrow?  If  He 
really  loved  Lazarus  and  his  sisters,  why  did  He  not  prove  His 
love  by  keeping  him  back  from  the  grave?  Is  it  not  plain  that 
He  is  not  Almighty?  He  cannot  do  everything.  He  could  open 
the  eyes  of  a  blind  man,  but  He  could  not  prevent  death  carry- 
ing off  His  friend.  If  He  was  able  to  prevent  Lazarus  dying, 
why  did  He  not  do  it?  If  He  was  not  able,  it  is  clear  there  are 
some  things  He  cannot  do." 

We  should  note  that  "the  blind"  is  a  word  in  the  singular 
number.  It  is  evidently  the  blind  man  at  Jerusalem  whose  case 
is  referred  to. 


JOHN,    CIIAP.    XI. 


277 


Let  us  note  that  nothing  will  convince,  or  satisfy,  or  silence 
some  wicked  men.  Even  when  Christ  is  before  them,  they  are 
cavilling,  and  doubting,  and  finding  fault.  What  right  have 
Christ's  ministers  to  be  surprised  if  they  meet  with  the  same 
treatment  ? 

Musculus  remarks  on  the  Satanic  malice  which  this  sentence 
displays.  It  is  the  old  sceptical  spirit  of  cavilling  and  ques- 
tioning. Unbelief  is  always  saying  why?  and  why?  and  why? 
"  If  this  Man  was  such  a  friend  of  Lazarus,  and  loved  him  so 
much,  why  did  He  let  him  die  ?  " 


JOHN  XL   38-46. 


38  Jesus  therefore  again  groaning  in 
himself  cometh  to  the  grave.  It  was  a 
cave,  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it. 

39  Jesus   said,   Take   ye   away  the 
— THione.     Martha,  the  sister  of  him  that 

was  dead,  saith  unto  him,  Lord,  by  this 
time  he  stinketh :  for  he  hath  been  dead 
four  days. 

40  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Said  I  not 
unto  thee,  that,  if  thou  wouldest  be- 
lieve, thou  shouldest  see  the  glory  of 
God? 

41  Then  they  took  away  the  stone 
from  the  place  where  the  dead  was  laid. 
And  Jesus  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  said, 
Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast 
heard  me. 

42  And  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me 


always :  but  because  of  the  people  which 
stand  by  I  said  it,  that  they  may  be- 
lieve that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

43  And  when  he  thus  had  spoken, 
he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus, 
come  forth. 

44  And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth, 
bound  hand  and  foot  with  graveclothes : 
and  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a 
napkin.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Loose 
him,  and  let  him  go. 

45  Then  many  of  the  Jews  which 
came  to  Mary,  and  had  seen  the  things 
which  Jesus  did,  believed  on  him. 

46  But  some  of  them  went  their 
ways  to  the  Pharisees,  and  told  them 
what  things  Jesus  had  done. 


These  verses  record  one  of  the  greatest  miracles  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ever  worked,  and  supply  an  unanswerable 
proof  of  His  divinity.  He  whose  voice  could  bring  back 
from  the  grave  one  that  had  been  four  days  dead,  must 
indeed  have  been  very  God  !  The  miracle  itself  is  described 
in  such  simple  language  that  no  human  comment  can 
throw  light  upon  it.  But  the  sayings  of  our  Lord  on  this 
occasion  are  peculiarly  interesting,  and  demand  special 
notice. 

We  should  mark,  first,  our  Lord's  words  about  the   stone 
wJiich  lay  upon  the  grave  of  Lazarus.      We  read  that  He 


278  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 

said  to  those  aiound  Him,  when  he  came  to  the  place  of 
burial,  "  Take  ye  away  the  stone." 

Now  why  did  our  Lord  say  this?  It  was  doubtless 
as  easy  for  Him  to  command  the  stone  to  roll  away  un- 
touched as  to  call  a  dead  body  from  the  tomb.  But  such 
was  not  His  mode  of  proceeding.  Here,  as  in  other  cases, 
He  chose  to  give  man  something  to  do.  Here,  as  elsewhere, 
He  taught  the  great  lesson  that  His  almighty  power  was 
not  meant  to  destroy  man's  respojisjbility.  Even  when  He 
was  ready  and  willing  to  raise  the  dead,  He  would  not 
have  man  stand  by  altogether  idle. 

Let  us  treasure  up  this  in  our  memories.  It  involves  a 
point  of  great  importance.  In  doing  spiritual  good  to 
others, — in  training  up  our  children  for  heaven, — in  follow- 
ing after  holiness  in  our  own  daity  walk, — in  all  these 
things  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  we  are  weak  and  help- 
less. "  Without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing."  But  still  we 
must  remember  that  Christ  expects  us  to  do  what  we  can. 
"  Take  ye  away  the  stone  "  is  the  daily  command  which 
He  gives  us.  Let  us  beware  that  we  do  not  stand  still  in 
idleness,  under  the  pretence  of  humility.  Let  us  daily  try 
to  do  what  we  can,  and  in  the  trying  Christ  will  meet  us 
and  grant  His  blessing. 

We  should  mark,  secondly,  the  words  which  our  Lord 
addressed  to  Martha,  ivhen  she  objected  to  the  stone  being 
removed  from  the  grave.  The  faith  of  this  holy  woman 
completely  broke  down,  when  the  cave  where  her  beloved 
brother  lay  was  about  to  be  thrown  open.  She  could 
not  believe  that  it  was  of  any  use.  "  Lord,"  she  cries, 
"  by  this  time  he  stinketh."  And  then  comes  in  the  solemn 
reproof  of  our  Lord :  "  Said  I  not  unto  thee  that  if  thou 
wouldest  believe  thou  shouldest  see  the  glory  of  God  ?  " 

That  sentence  is  rich  in  meaning.  It  is  far  from  un- 
likely that  it  contains  a  reference  to  the  message  which 
had   been  sent  to  Martha  and  Mary,  when  their   brother 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  279 

first  fell  sick.  It  may  be  meant  to  remind  Martha  that  her 
Master  had  sent  her  word,  "  This  sickness  is  not  unto 
death,  but  for  the  gloiy  of  God."  But  it  is  perhaps  more 
likely  that  our  Lord  desired  to  recall  to  Martha's  mind  the 
old  lesson  He  had  taught  her  all  through  His  ministry,  the 
duty  of  always  believing.  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  Mar- 
tha, Martha,  thou  art  forgetting  the  great  doctrine  of 
faith,  which  I  have  ever  taught  thee.  Believe,  and  all 
will  be  well.     Fear  not :  only  believe." 

The  lesson  is  one  which  we  can  never  know  too  well. 
How  apt  our  faith  is  to  break  down  in  time  of  trial !  How 
easy  it  is  to  talk  of  faith  in  the  days  of  health  and  pros- 
perity, and  how  hard  to  practise  it  in  the  days  of  dark- 
ness, when  neither  sun,  moon,  nor  stars  appear !  Let  us 
lay  to  heart  what  our  Lord  says  in  this  place.  Let  us 
pray  for  such  stores  of  inward  faith,  that  when  our  turn 
comes  to  suffer,  we  may  suffer  patiently  and  believe  all  is 
well.  The  Christian  who  has  ceased  to  sa}',  "  I  must  see, 
and  then  I  will  believe,"  and  has  learned  to  say,  "  I  believe, 
and  by  and  by  I  shall  see,"  has  reached  a  high  degree  in 
the  school  of  Christ. 

We  should  mark,  thirdly,  the  words  which  our  Lord 
addressed  to  God  the  Father,  when  the  stone  was  taken  from 
the  grave.  We  read  that  He  said,  "  Father,  I  thank  Thee 
that  Thou  hast  heard  Me.  And  I  knew  that  Thou  nearest 
Me  always :  but  because  of  the  people  which  stand  by  I 
said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me." 

This  wonderful  language  is  totally  unlike  anything  said 
by  Prophets  or  Apostles,  when  they  worked  miracles.  In 
fact,  it  is  not  prayer,  but  praise.  It  evidently  implies  a 
constant  mysterious  communion  going  on  between  Jesus 
and  His  Father  in  heaven,  which  it  is  past  the  power  of 
man  either  to  explain  or  conceive.  We  need  not  doubt 
that  here,  as  elsewhere  in  St.  John,  our  Lord  meant  to 
teach  the  Jews  the   entire  and  complete  unity  there  waa 


280  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

between  Him  and  His  Father,  in  all  that  He  did,  as  well  as 
in  all  that  He  taught.  Once  more  He  would  remind  them 
that  he  did  not  come  among  them  as  a  mere  Prophet, 
but  as  the  Messiah  who  was  sent  by  the  Father,  and  who 
was  one  with  the  Father.  Once  more  He  would  have  them 
know  that  as  the  words  which  He  spake  were  the  very  words 
which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  speak,  so  the  works  which  He 
wrought  were  the  very  works  which  the  Father  gave  Him 
to  do.  In  short,  He  was  the  promised  Messiah,  whom  the 
Father  always  hears,  because  He  and  the  Father  are  One. 

Deep  and  high  as  this  truth  is,  it  is  for  the  peace  of  our 
souls  to  believe  it  thoroughly,  and  to  grasp  it  tigntly.  Let 
it  be  a  settled  principle  of  our  religion,  that  the  Saviour  in 
whom  we  trust  is  nothing  less  than  eternal  God,  One  whom 
the  Father  hears  always,  One  who  in  very  deed  is  God's 
Fellow.  A  clear  view  of  the  dignity  of  our  Mediator's 
Person  is  one  secret  of  inward  comfort.  Happy  is  he  who 
can  say,  "  1  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  that  He  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him."  (2 
Tim.  i.  12.) 

We  should  mark,  lastly,  the  words  wliich  our  Lord 
addressed  to  Lazarus  when  he  raised  him  from  the  grave. 
We  read  that  "  He  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come 
forth  !  "  At  the  sound  of  that  voice,  the  king  of  terrors  at 
once  3rielded  up  his  lawful  captive,  and  the  insatiable  grave 
gave  up  its  prey.  At  once  "  He  that  was  dead  came  forth, 
bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave-clothes." 

The  greatness  of  this  miracle  cannot  possibly  be  ex- 
aggerated. The  mind  of  man  can  scarcely  take  in  the 
vastness  of  the  work  that  was  done.  Here,  in  open  day, 
and  before  many  hostile  witnesses,  a  man,  four  da3Ts  dead, 
was  restored  to  life  in  a  moment.  Here  was  public  proof 
that  our  Lord  had  absolute  power  over  the  material  world  ! 
A  corpse,  already  corrupt,  was  made  alive ! — Here  was 
public  proof  that  our  Lord  had  absolute  power  over  the 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  281 

world  of  spirits !  A  soul  that  had  left  its  earthly  tene- 
ment was  called  back  from  Paradise,  and  joined  once  more 
to  its  owner's  body. — Well  may  the  Church  of  Christ  main- 
tain that  He  who  could  work  such  works  was  "  God  over 
all  blessed  forever."     (Rom.  ix.  5.) 

Let  us  turn  from  the  whole  passage  with  thoughts  of 
comfort  and  consolation.  Comfortable  is  the  thought 
that  the  loving  Saviour  of  sinners,  on  whose  mercy  our 
souls  entirely  depend,  is  one  who  has  all  power  in  heaven, 
and  earth,  and  is  mighty  to  savre. — Comfortable  is  the 
thought  that  there  is  no  sinner  too  far  gone  in  sin  for 
Christ  to  raise  and  convert.  He  that  stood  by  the  grave 
of  Lazarus  can  say  to  the  vilest  of  men,  "  Come  forth : 
loose  him,  and  let  him  go." — Comfortable,  not  least,  is  the 
thought  that  when  we  ourselves  lie  down  in  the  grave,  we 
may  lie  down  in  the  full  assurance  that  we  shall  rise  again. 
The  voice  that  called  Lazarus  forth  will  one  day  pierce  our 
tombs,  and  bid  soul  and  body  come  together.  "The 
trumpets  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incor- 
ruptible, and  we  shall  be  changed."     (1  Cor.  xv.  52.) 

Notes.    John  XI.  38—46. 

38. — [Jesus.. .groaning... cometh. ..grave.']  The  word  here  rendered 
"groaning"  is  the  same  that  was  used  at  32d  verse,  and  the 
same  remarks  apply  to  it.  The  only  difference  is  that  here  it  is 
"groaning  in  Himself,"  and  there  "groaning  in  the  spirit." 
This,  however,  confirms  my  impression  that  in  the  former  verse 
"  in  the  spirit"  simply  means  "  inwardly  and  spiritually,"  and 
that  the  general  idea  is  "  under  the  influence  of  very  strong 
inward  emotion." 

The  situation  of  the  grave,  we  need  not  doubt,  was  outside 
the  village  of  Bethany.  There  was  no  such  thing  as  interment 
within  a  town  allowed  among  the  Jews,  or  indeed  among  ancient 
nations  generally.  The  practice  of  burying  the  dead  among  the 
living  is  a  barbarous  modern  innovation,  reflecting  little  credit 
on  Christians. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  Christ  approaches  the  sepulchre  a^  a  cham- 
pion preparing  for  a  contest ;  and  we  need  not  wonder  that  He 
groans,  as  the  violent  tyranny  of  death,  which  He  had  to  con- 
quer, is  placed  before  His  eyes." 


282  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Ecolampadius  and  Musculus  think  that  the  unbelieving, 
sneering  remark  of  the  Jews  in  the  preceding  Terse  is  the  reason 
why  our  Lord  "  again  groaned."  Bullinger  thinks  that  the 
renewed  emotion  of  our  Lord  was  simply  occasioned  by  the  sight 
of  the  grave. 

{It  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  lay  upon  it.']  Graves  among  the 
Jews  seem  to  have  been  of  three  kinds.  (1)  Sometimes,  but 
rarely,  they  were  holes  dug  down  into  the  ground,  like  our  own. 
(See  Luke  xi.  44.)  (2)  Most  frequently  they  were  caves  hewn 
horizontally  into  the  side  of  a  rock,  with  a  stone  placed  against 
the  mouth.  This  was  most  probably  the  kind  of  new  tomb  in 
which  our  Lord  was  laid.  (3)  Sometimes  they  were  caves  in 
which  there  was  a  sloping,  downward  descent.  This  appears 
to  have  been  the  description  of  grave  in  which  Lazarus  was 
buried.    It  says  distinctly  that  "  a  stone  lay  upon  it." 

No  doubt  these  particulars  are  specified  to  supply  incidental 
proof  of  the  reality  of  Lazarus'  death  and  burial. 

89. — {Jesus  said,  Take  ye  away  the  stone.]  The  expression  here 
conveys  the  idea  of  "  lifting  up  "  to  take  away.  It  is  the  same 
word  that  is  rendered  "  lifted  up  "  in  41st  verse. 

The  use  of  this  word  greatly  strengthens  the  idea  that  the 
grave  was  a  descending  cave,  and  not  a  horizontal  one.  When 
our  Lord  rose  again,  the  stone  was  "  rolled  away  from  the  door," 
and  not  lifted  up.     (Matt,  xxviii.  2.) 

By  calling  on  the  crowd  of  attendants  to  take  away  the  stone, 
our  Lord  effected  two  things.  Firstly,  He  impressed  on  the 
mind  of  all  engaged  the  reality  and  truth  of  the  miracle  He  was 
about  to  perform.  Every  one  who  lent  a  hand  to  lift  the  huge 
stone  and  remove  it  would  remember  it,  and  become  a  witness. 
He  would  be  able  to  say,  "  I  myself  helped  to  lift  up  the  stone. 
I  myself  am  sure  there  was  no  imposture.  There  was  a  dead 
body  inside  the  grave."  In  fact,  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  smell 
rising  from  the  bottom  of  the  cave  would  tell  any  one  who 
helped  to  lift  the  stone  what  there  was  there. — Secondly,  our 
Lord  teaches  us  the  simple  lesson  that  He  would  have  man  do 
what  he  can.  Man  cannot  raise  the  soul,  and  give  life,  but  he 
can  often  remove  the  stone. 

Flacius  points  out  the  likeness  between  this  command  and 
the  command  at  Cana  to  fill  the  water-pots  with  water.  (John 
ii.  7.) 

That  the  stones  placed  at  the  mouth  of  graves  in  Palestine 
were  very  large,  and  not  easily  moved,  we  may  see  from  Mark 
xvi.  3. 

{Martha,  the  sister  of  him,  etc.,  etc.]  This  is  a  remarkable 
sentence,  and  teaches  several  important  tk'ngs. 

(a)  It  certifies,  for  the  last  time,  the  reality  of  Lazarus' 
death.  He  was  not  in  a  swoon  or  a  trance.  His  own  sister,  who 
had  doubtless  seen  him  die,  and  closed  his  eyes,  declares  before 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  283 

the  crowd  of  lookers-on,  that  Lazarus  had  been  dead  four  days, 
and  was  fast  going  to  corruption.  This  we  may  well  believe  in 
such  a  climate  as  that  of  Palestine. 

(&)  It  proves,  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt,  that  there  was  no 
imposture,  no  collusion,  no  concerted  deception,  arranged  be- 
tween the  family  of  Bethany  and  our  Lord.  Here  is  the  sister 
of  Lazarus  actually  questioning  the  propriety  of  our  Lord's  order, 
and  publicly  saying  in  effect  that  it  is  no  use  to  move  the  stone, 
that  nothing  can  now  be  done  to  deliver  her  brother  from  the 
power  of  death.  Like  the  eleven  Apostles,  after  Jesus  Himself 
rose,  Martha  was  not  a  willing  and  prepared  witness,  but  a 
resisting  and  unwilling  one. 

(c)  It  teaches,  not  least,  how  much  unbelief  there  is  in  a 
believer's  heart  at  the  bottom.  Here  is  holy  Martha,  with  all 
her  faith  in  our  Lord's  Messiahship,  shrinking  and  breaking 
down  at  this  most  critical  point.  She  cannot  believe  that  there 
is  any  use  in  removing  the  stone.  She  suggests,  impulsively 
and  anxiously,  her  doubt  whether  our  Lord  remembers  how  long 
her  brother  has  been  dead. 

It  is  not  for  nothing  that  we  are  specially  told  it  was  "  Mar- 
tha, the  sister  of  him  that  was  dead,"  who  said  this.  If  even 
she  could  say  this,  and  raise  objections,  the  idea  of  imposture 
and  deception  becomes  absurd. 

Some  writers  object  to  putting  the  full  literal  meaning  on  the 
Greek  word  rendered  "  stinketh;  "  but  I  can  see  nothing  in  the 
objection.  We  need  not  suppose  that  the  body  of  Lazarus  was 
different  toother  bodies.  Moreover,  it  was  just  as  easy  to  our 
Lord  to  raise  a  corpse  four  days  dead,  as  one  only  four  hours 
dead.  In  either  case,  the  grand  difficulty  to  be  overcome  would 
be  the  same  :  viz.,  to  change  death  into  life.  Indeed,  it  is  worth 
considering,  whether  this  fact  about  Lazarus  is  not  specially 
mentioned  in  order  to  show  our  Lord's  power  to  restore  man's 
corrupt  and  decayed  body  at  the  last  day,  and  to  make  it  a  glori- 
ous body. 

Let  us  note  here  what  a  humbling  lesson  death  teaches.  So 
terrible  and  painful  is  the  corruption  of  a  body,  when  the  breath 
leaves  it,  that  even  those  who  love  us  most  are  glad  to  bury  us 
out  of  sight.     (Gen.  xxiii.  4.) 

Musculus  suggests  that  Martha  had  so  little  idea  what  our 
Lord  was  going  to  do,  that  she  supposed  He  only  wanted  to  see 
Lazarus'  face  once  more.     This  is  perhaps  going  too  far. 

The  Greek  for  "  dead  four  days,"  is  a  singular  expression,  and 
one  that  cannot  be  literally  rendered  in  English.  It  would  be 
"He  is  a  person  of  four  days,"  and  it  may  possibly  mean,  "  He 
has  been  buried  four  days."  Raphelius  gives  examples  from 
Herodotus  and  Xenophon,  which  make  it  possible  that  it  means 
either  dead  or  buried. 

a  very  curious  tradition  of  the  Jewsi 


284  EXPOSITORY   THOUGH  rs. 


"  They  say  after  death  the  spirit  hovers  about  the  sepulchre, 
waiting  to  see  if  it  may  return  to  the  body.  But  when  it  sees 
the  look  of  the  face  of  the  corpse  changed,  then  it  hovers  no 
more,  but  leaves  the  body  to  itself."  He  also  adds,  "  They  do 
not  certify  of  the  dead,  except  within  three  days  after  decease ; 
for  after  three  days  the  countenance  changes." 

40. — [Jesus  saith,said  I  not,  etc.~\  This  gentle  but  firm  reproof 
is  remarkable.  It  is  not  clear  to  what  our  Lord  refers  in  the 
words,  "  Said  I  not." 

(a)  Some  think,  as  Rupertus,  that  He  refers  to  the  message 
He  sent  at  the  beginning:  ''This  sickness  is  not  unto  death, 
but  for  the  glory  of  God." 

(b)  Some  think  that  He  refers  to  the  conversation  He  had 
with  Martha  when  she  first  met  Him  outside  Bethany. 

(c)  Some  think  that  He  refers  to  words  He  had  often  used  in 
discoursing  with  Martha  and  Mary,  on  former  occasions. 

The  point  is  one  which  must  be  left  open,  as  we  have  no  means 
of  settling  it.  My  own  impression  is  that  there  is  probably  a 
reference  to  the  message  which  our  Lord  sent  back  to  the  sis- 
ters at  first,  when  Lazarus  was  sick.  I  fancy  there  must  have 
been  something  more  said  at  that  time  which  is  not  recorded, 
and  that  our  Lord  reminded  Martha  of  this.  At  the  same  time 
I  cannot  doubt  that  our  Lord  constantly  taught  the  family  of 
Bethany  and  all  His  disciples,  that  believing  is  the  grand  secret 
of  seeing  God's  glorious  works. — "  If  thou  canst  believe,  all 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." — "  He  did  not  many 
mighty  works,  because  of  their  unbelief."  (Mark  ix.  23;  Matt. 
xiii.  58.)  Unbelief,  in  a  certain  sense,  seems  to  tie  the  hands  and 
limit  the  power  of  omnipotence. 

Let  us  note  that  if  we  would  see  much  we  must  first  believe. 
Man's  natural  idea  is  just  the  reverse :  he  would  first  see,  and 
then  believe. 

Let  us  note  that  even  the  best  believers  need  reminding  of 
Christ's  sayings,  and  are  apt  to  forget  them.  "  Said  I  not  unto 
thee."    It  is  a  little  sentence  we  should  often  call  to  mind. 

41. — [Then  they  took  away... stone... laid. ~\  Martha's  interruption 
seems  to  me  to  have  caused  a  little  pause  in  the  proceedings. 
She  being  the  nearest  relative  of  Lazarus,  and  having  probably 
arranged  everything  concerning  his  burial,  and  provided  his 
tomb,  we  may  well  believe  that  her  speech  made  the  bystanders 
hesitate  to  move  the  stone.  When,  however,  they  heard  our 
Lord's  solemn  reply,  and  observed  that  she  was  silenced,  and 
made  no  further  objection,  "  then"  they  proceeded  to  do  what 
our  Lord  desired. 

Hall  remarks  :  "  They  <hat  laid  their  hands  to  the  stone  doubt- 
less held  still  awhile,  when  Martha  spoke,  and  looked  one  while 
on  Christ,  another  while  on  Martha,  to  hear  what  issue  of  reso- 
lution would  follow  so  important  an  objection." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  285 

[And  Jesus  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  said.]  We  now  reach  a  point 
of  thrilling  and  breathless  interest.  The  stone  had  been  re- 
moved from  the  mouth  of  the  cave.  Our  Lord  stands  before  the 
open  grave,  and  the  crowd  stands  around,  awaiting  anxiously  to 
see  what  would  happen  next.  Nothing  appears  from  the  tomb. 
There  is  no  sign  of  life  at  present ;  but  while  all  are  eagerly 
looking  and  listening,  our  Lord  addressed  His  Father  in  heaven 
in  a  most  solemn  manner,  lifting  up  His  eyes,  and  speaking  au- 
dibly to  Him  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  crowd.  The  reason  He 
explains  in  the  next  verse.  Now,  for  the  last  time,  about  to 
work  His  mightiest  miracle,  He  once  more  makes  a  public  dec- 
laration that  He  did  nothing  separate  from  His  Father  in  heaven, 
and  that  in  this  and  all  His  works  there  is  a  mysterious  and  in- 
timate union  between  Himself  and  the  Father. 

We  should  note  how  He  suits  the  action  to  the  word.  "  He 
lifted  up  His  eyes."  (Compare  John  xvii.  1.)  He  showed  that 
He  was  addressing  an  unseen  Father  in  heaven. 

[Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me.]  This  is  a  re- 
markable expression.  Our  Lord  begins  with  "  thanks,"  when 
man  would  have  expected  Him  to  offer  prayer.  How  shall  we 
explain  it? 

(a)  Some  think  that  our  Lord  refers  to  prayer  He  had  put 
up  to  the  Father  concerning  the  death  of  Lazarus,  from  the 
moment  that  He  heard  of  his  illness,  and  to  His  present  firm 
conviction  that  those  prayers  had  been  heard,  and  were  going 
to  receive  a  public  answer. 

(6)  Others  think  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  our 
Lord  refers  to  any  former  and  remote  prayer, — that  there  was  a 
constant,  hourly,  minutely  communication  between  Himself 
and  His  heavenly  Father, — and  that  to  pray,  and  return  thanks 
for  the  answer  to  prayer,  were  actions  which  in  His  experience 
were  very  closely  connected. 

The  subject  is  a  deep  and  mysterious  one,  and  I  shrink  from 
giving  a  very  positive  opinion  about  it.  That  our  Lord  con- 
stantly prayed,  on  all  occasions,  we  know  from  the  Gospels. 
That  He  prayed  sometimes  with  great  agony  of  mind  and  with 
tears,  we  also  know.  (Heb.  v.  7.)  But  how  far  He  could  know 
anything  of  that  peculiar  struggle  which  we  poor  sinners  have 
to  carry  on  with  doubt,  fear,  and  anxiety,  in  our  prayers  is 
another  question  altogether,  and  very  hard  to  answer.  One 
might  suppose  that  One  who  was  as  man,  entirely  holy,  humble, 
and  without  sin,  might  be  able  to  thank  for  prayer  heard, 
almost  as  soon  as  prayer  was  offered.  Upon  this  theory  the 
sentence  before  us  would  be  plain:  "I  pray  that  Lazarus  may 
be  raised ;  and  I  thank  Thee  at  the  same  time  for  hearing  my 
prayer,  as  I  know  Thou  dost." 

And  yet  we  must  not  forget  two  of  our  Lord's  prayers  not 
granted,  apparently:    "  Father,  #save  Me  from  this  hour;"— 


286  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


"Father,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me."  (Jolm.  xii.  47,  and  Mark 
xxvi.  29.)  It  is,  however,  only  fair  to  say  that  the  first  of 
these  prayers  is  greatly  qualified  by  the  context,  and  the  second 
by  the  words,  "  if  it  be  possible." 

We  may  note  here,  as  elsewhere,  what  an  example  of  thank- 
fulness, as  well  as  prayerfuluess,  our  Lord  always  supplies. 
Well  if  it  was  followed  !  His  people  are  always  more  ready  to 
ask  than  to  thank.  The  more  grace  in  a  heart  the  more  humil- 
ity, and  the  more  humility  the  more  praise. 

Chrysostom  remarks  :  "  Who  now  ever  prayed  in  this  man- 
ner? Before  uttering  any  prayer,  He  saith,  'I  thank  Thee,' 
showing  that  He  needed  not  prayer."  He  also  says  that  the 
real  cause  of  our  Lord  saying  this  was  to  show  the  Jews  He 
was  no  enemy  of  God,  but  did  all  His  works  according  to  His 
will. 

Origen  observes  :  "  If  to  those  who  pray  worthily  is  given  the 
promise  in  Isaiah,  '  Thou  shalt  cry,  and  He  shall  say,  Here  I 
am,'  what  answer,  think  we,  could  our  Lord  receive?  He  was 
about  to  pray  for  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus.  He  was  heard  by 
the  Father  before  He  prayed;  His  request  was  granted  before 
it  was  made ;  and,  therefore,  He  begins  with  thanks." 

Musculus,  Flacius,  and  Glassius,  think  that  our  Lord  refers  to 
prayer  He  had  been  putting  up  secretly  when  He  was  "groan- 
ing in  spirit  and  troubled,"  and  that  He  was  then  wrestling  and 
agonizing  in  prayer,  though  those  around  Him  knew  it  not.  We 
may  remember  that  at  the  Red  Sea  we  are  not  told  of  any  audi- 
ble prayer  Moses  offered,  and  yet  the  Lord  says,  "  Wherefore 
criest  thou  unto  Me? "     (Exodus  xiv.  15.) 

Quesnel  observes  :  "  Christ  being  about  to  conclude  His  pub- 
lic life  and  preaching  by  the  last  and  most  illustrious  of  His 
miracles,  returns  solemn  thanks  to  His  Father  for  the  power 
given  to  His  human  nature  to  prove  the  authority  of  His  mis- 
sion by  miracles." 

Hall  observes  :  "Words  express  our  hearts  to  men,  thoughts 
to  God.  Well  didst  Thou  know,  Lord,  out  of  the  self-sameness 
of  Thy  will  with  the  Father's,  that  if  Thou  didst  but  think  in 
Thy  heart  that  Lazarus  should  rise,  he  was  now  raised.  It  was 
not  for  Thee  to  pray  vocally  and  audibly,  lest  those  captious 
hearers  should  say,  Thou  didst  all  by  entreaty,  and  nothing  by 
power." 

42.— [And  I  knew  that  Thou  hearest,  etc.']  This  verse  is  so  ellipti- 
cal that  the  meaning  can  hardly  be  seen  without  a  paraphrase. 
"  I  do  not  give  Thee  these  thanks  as  if  I  had  ever  doubted  Thy 
willingness  to  hear  Me ;  on  the  contrary,  I  know  well  that  Thou 
always  hearest  Me. — Thou  dost  not  only  hear  all  my  prayers  as 
Man,  both  for  myself  and  my  people;  Thou  dost  also  ever 
hear  Me,  even  as  I  hear  Thee,  from  the  mystical  union  there  is 
between  the  Father  and  th,e  Son.    But  I  have  now  said  this 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  287 

publicly,  for  the  benefit  of  this  crowd  of  people  standing  by  the 
grave,  in  order  that  they  may  see  and  believe  for  the  last  time 
that  I  do  no  miracle  without  Thee,  and  that  I  am  the  Messiah 
whom  Thou  hast  sent  into  the  world.  I  would  have  them  pub- 
licly hear  Me  declare  that  I  work  this  last  great  work  as  Thy 
Sent  One,  and  as  a  last  evidence  that  I  am  the  Christ." 

I  cannot  but  think  there  is  a  deep  meaning  about  the  expression, 
"  Thou  hearest  Me  alway."  (Compare  John  v.  30.)  But  I 
admit  the  difficulty  of  the  phrase  and  would  speak  with  diffidence. 

It  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  more  thorough  open  challenge  to 
the  attention  of  the  Jews,  than  the  language  which  preceded  the 
raising  of  Lazarus.  Before  doing  this  stupendous  work,  our 
Lord  proclaims  that  He  is  doing  and  speaking  as  He  does  to  sup- 
ply a  proof  that  the  Father  sent  and  commissioned  Him  as  the 
Christ.  Was  He  the  "  Sent  One,"  or  not?  This,  we  must  always 
remember,  was  the  great  question,  of  which  He  undertook  to 
give  proof.  The  Jews,  moreover,  said  that  He  did  His  miracles 
by  Beelzebub  :  let  them  hear  that  He  did  all  by  the  power  of  God. 

Bullinger  remarks  that  our  Lord  seems  to  say,  "The  Jews  do 
not  all  understand  that  union  and  communion  between  Me  and 
Thee,  by  which  we  are  of  the  same  will,  power,  and  substance. 
Some  of  them  even  think  that  I  work  by  the  power  of  the  devil. 
Therefore  that  all  may  believe  that  I  come  from  Thee,  am  sent 
by  Thee,  am  Thy  Son,  equal  to  Thee,  light  of  light,  very  God  of 
very  God,  I  use  expressions  of  this  sort." 

Poole  remarks:  "There  is  a  great  difference  between  God's 
hearing  of  Christ  and  hearing  us.  Christ  a*id  His  Father  have 
one  essence,  one  nature,  and  one  will." 

The  following  miracles  were  wrought  by  Christ  without  audi- 
ble prayer,  and  with  only  an  authoritative  word,  Matt.  viii.  3 ; 
ix.  6 ;  Mark  v.  41 ;  ix.  25 ;  Luke  vii.  14. 

Wordsworth  observes  :  "  Christ  prayed  to  show  that  He  was 
not  against  God,  nor  God  against  Him,  and  that  what  He  did  was 
done  with  God's  approval." 

43.— [And  ivhen... cried.. .come  forth.']  In  this  verse  we  have  the  last 
and  crowning  stage  of  the  miracle.  Attention  was  concentrated 
on  the  grave  and  our  Lord.  The  crowd  looked  on  with  breath- 
less expectation ;  and  then,  while  they  looked,  having  secured 
their  attention,  our  Lord  bids  Lazarus  come  forth  out  of  the  grave. 
The  Greek  word  for  "  He  cried,"  is  only  in  this  place  applied  to 
any  voice  or  utterance  of  our  Lord.  In  Matt.  xii.  19,  it  is  used, 
where  it  is  said  of  our  Lord,  "  He  shall  no\  cry."  Here  it  is  evi- 
dent that  He  purposely  used  a  very  loud,  piercing  cry,  that  all 
around  might  hear  and  take  notice. 

Theophylact  thinks  that  Jesus  "cried  aloud  to  contradict  the 
Gentile  fable  that  the  soul  remained  in  the  tomb  with  the  body. 
Therefore  the  soul  of  Lazarus  is  called  to  as  if  it  were  absent, 


288  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


and  a  loud  voice  were  necessary  to  summon  it  back."   Euthymius 
suggests  the  same  reason.    This,  however,  seems  an  odd  idea. 

On  the  other  hand,  Brentius,  Grotius,  and  Lampe  suggest 
that  Jesus  "cried  with  a  loud  voice,"  to  prevent  the  Jews  from 
saying  that  He  muttered  or  whispered  some  magical  form,  or 
words  of  enchantment,  as  witches  did. 

Ferus  observes  that  our  Lord  did  not  say,  "  In  the  name  of  my 
Father  come  forth,"  or  "Raise  Him,  O  my  Father,"  but  acts  by 
His  own  authority. 

11.— [And  He  that  was  dead  came  forth.']  The  effect  of  our  Lord's 
words  was  seen  at  once.  As  soon  as  He  "  cried,"  Lazarus  was 
seen  coming  up  out  of  the  cave,  before  the  eyes  of  the  crowd.  A 
more  plain,  distinct,  and  unmistakable  miracle  it  would  be  im- 
possible for  man  to  imagine.  That  a  dead  man  should  hear  a 
voice,  obey  it,  rise  up,  and  move  forth  from  his  grave  alive  is 
utterly  contrary  to  nature.  God  alone  could  cause  such  a  thing. 
What  first  began  life  in  him,  how  lungs  and  heart  began  to  act 
again,  suddenly  and  instantaneously,  it  would  be  waste  of  time 
to  speculate.     It  was  a  miracle,  and  there  we  must  leave  it. 

The  idea  of  some,  that  Lazarus  moved  out  of  the  grave  with- 
out the  use  of  his  legs,  passing  through  air  like  a  spirit  or  ghost, 
seems  to  me  needless  and  unreasonable.  I  agree  with  Hutche- 
son,  Hall,  and  Pearce,  that  though  "  bound  hand  and  foot,"  there 
is  no  certain  proof  that  his  legs  were  tied  together  so  tightly 
that  he  could  not  move  out  of  the  grave,  though  slowly  and  with 
difficulty,  like  one  encumbered,  on  his  own  feet.  The  tardy, 
shuffling  action  of  such  a  figure  would  strike  all.  Pearce  re- 
marks, "  He  must  have  come  forth  crawling  on  his  knees."  We 
are  surely  not  required  to  multiply  miracles. — Yet  the  idea  that 
Lazarus  came  out  with  a  supernatural  motion  seems  to  be  held 
by  Augustine,  Zwingle,  Ecolampadius,  Bueer,  Gualter,  Toletus, 
Jansenius,  Lampe,  Lightfoot,  and  Alford,  who  think  it  part  of 
the  miracle.  I  would  not  press  my  opinion  positively  on  others, 
though  I  firmly  mantaiu  it.  My  own  private  feeling  is  that  the 
slow,  gradual,  tottering  movements  of  a  figure  encumbered  by 
grave-clothes  would  impress  a  crowd  far  more  than  the  rapid, 
ghost-like  gliding  out  in  air  of  a  body,  of  which  the  feet  did  not 
move. 

[His  face  bound  about... napkin.']  This  is  mentioned  to  show 
that  he  had  been  really  dead,  and  his  corpse  treated  like  all 
other  corpses.  If  not  dead,  he  would  have  been  unable  to 
breathe  through  the  napkin  for  four  days. 

[Jesus  saith... Loose  him... let  him  go."]  This  command  was 
given  for  two  reasons :  partly  that  many  around  might  touch 
Lazarus  and  see  for  themselves  that  it  was  not  a  ghost,  but  a 
real  body  that  was  raised ;  partly  that  he  might  be  able  to 
walk  to  his  own  house  before  the  eyes  of  the  multitude  as  a 
living  man.  This,  until  he  was  freed  from  grave-clothes  and  his 
eyes  were  unbandaged,  would  have  been  impossible. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  289 

Very  striking  is  it  to  remark  how  in  the  least  minute  particu- 
lars the  objections  of  infidels  and  sceptics  are  quietly  fore- 
stalled and  met  in  Gospel  narrative !  Thus  Chrysostom  remarks 
that  the  command  to  "  loose  him  "  would  enable  the  friends  who 
bore  Lazarus  to  the  grave,  to  know  from  the  grave-clothes  that 
it  was  the  very  person  they  had  buried  four  days  before.  They 
would  recognize  the  clothes ;  they  could  not  say,  as  some  had 
said  in  the  case  of  the  blind  man,  "  This  is  not  he."  He  also 
remarks  that  both  hands,  eyes,  ears,  and  nostrils  would  all  con- 
vince the  witnesses  of  the  truth  of  the  miracle. 

45. — [Then  many  of  the  Jews... believed  on  him.']  This  verse 
describes  the  good  effect  which  the  raising  of  Lazarus  had  on 
many  of  the  Jews  who  had  come  from  Jerusalem  to  comfort 
Mary  and  Martha.  Their  remaining  prejudices  gave  way.  They 
were  unable  to  resist  the  extraordinary  evidence  of  the  miracle 
they  had  just  seen.  From  that  day  they  no  longer  denied  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ.  Whether  their  belief  was  faith  unto 
salvation  may  well  be  doubted;  but  at  any  rate  they  ceased  to 
oppose  and  blaspheme.  And  it  is  more  than  probable  that  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost  many  of  those  very  Jews  whose  hearts  had 
been  prepared  by  the  miracle  of  Bethany  came  boldly  forward 
and  were  baptized. 

"We  should  observe  in  this  verse  what  a  signal  blessing  God 
was  pleased  to  bestow  on  sympathy  and  kindness.  If  the  Jews 
had  not  come  to  comfort  Mary  under  her  affliction,  they  would 
not  have  seen  the  mighty  miracle  of  raising  Lazarus,  and  per- 
haps would  not  have  been  saved. 

Lampe  remarks  on  these  Jews  :  "  They  had  come  as  the  mer- 
ciful, and  they  obtained  mercy." 

Besner  observes  the  beautiful  delicacy  with  which  St.  John 
draws  a  veil  over  the  effect  on  Martha  and  Mary  of  this  miracle, 
while  he  dwells  on  the  effect  it  had  on  strangers. 

46. — [But  some  of  them  icent... Pharisees,  etc.']  We  see  in  this  verse 
the  bad  effect  which  the  raising  of  Lazarus  had  on  some  who 
saw  it.  Instead  of  being  softened  and  convinced,  they  were 
hardened  and  enraged.  They  were  vexed  to  see  even  more  un- 
answerable proofs  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  and  irritated  to  feel 
that  their  own  unbelief  was  more  than  ever  inexcusable.  They 
therefore  hurried  off  to  the  Pharisees  to  report  what  they  had 
seen,  and  to  point  out  the  progress  that  our  Lord  was  making 
in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  Jerusalem. 

The  amazing  wickedness  of  human  nature  is  strikingly  illus- 
trated in  this  verse.  There  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  sup- 
pose that  seeing  miracles  will  necessarily  convert  souls.  Here 
is  a  plain  proof  that  it  does  not.  Never  was  there  a  more  re- 
markable confirmation  of  our  Lord's  words  in  the  parable  of  the 
Rich  Man  and  Lazarus,  "  If  they  believe  not  Moses  and  the 
Prophets,  neither  will  they  be  pe:  suaded,  though  one  rose  from 
the  dead." 

13 


290  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Musculns  observes  what  a  wonderful  example  we  have  here 
of  the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  choosing  some,  and  leading  them 
to  repentance  and  faith,  and  not  choosing  others.  Here  is  the 
same  miracle,  seen  under  the  same  circumstances,  and  with  the 
same  evidence,  by  a  large  crowd  of  persons ;  yet  while  some 
believe,  others  believe  not !  It  is  like  the  case  of  the  two  thieves 
on  the  cross,  both  seeing  the  same  sight,  one  repenting  and  the 
other  impenitent.  The  same  fire  which  melts  wax  hardens 
clay. 

In  leaving  this  wonderful  miracle,  there  are  three  things 
which  demand  special  notice. 

(a)  We  should  observe  that  we  are  not  told  of  anything  that 
Lazarus  said  about  his  state  while  in  the  grave,  and  nothing  of 
his  after  history.  Tradition  says  that  he  lived  for  thirty  years 
after,  and  was  never  known  to  smile ;  but  this  is  probably  a 
mere  apocryphal  invention.  As  to  his  silence,  we  can  easily 
see  there  is  a  Divine  wisdom  about  it.  If  St.  Paul  "  could  not 
utter "  the  things  that  he  saw  in  the  third  heaven,  and  called 
them  "unspeakable  things;"  it  is  not  strange  that  Lazarus 
should  say  nothing  of  what  he  saw  in  Paradise.  (2  Cor.  xii.4.) 
Put  there  may  be  always  seen  in  Scripture  a  striking  silence 
about  the  feelings  about  men  and  women  who  have  been  the 
subjects  of  remarkable  Divine  interposition.  God's  ways  are 
not  man's  ways.  Man  loves  sensation  and  excitement,  and 
likes  to  make  God's  work  on  his  fellow-creatures  a  gazing-stock 
and  a  show,  to  their  great  damage.  God  almost  always  seems 
to  withdraw  them  from  the  public,  both  for  their  own  good  and 
His  glory. 

(b)  We  should  observe  that  we  are  told  nothing  of  the  feel- 
ings of  Martha  and  Mary,  after  they  saw  their  brother  raised  to 
life.  The  veil  is  drawn  over  their  joy,  though  it  was  not  over 
their  sorrow.  Affliction  is  a  more  profitable  study  than  re- 
joicing. 

(c)  We  should  observe,  lastly,  that  the  raising  of  Lazarus  is 
one  of  the  most  signal  instances  in  the  Gospels  of  Christ's 
Divine  power.  To  Him  who  could  work  such  a  miracle  nothing 
is  impossible.  He  can  raise  from  the  death  of  sin  any  dead 
soul,  however  far  gone  and  corrupt.  He  will  raise  us  from  the 
grave  at  His  own  second  appearing.  The  voice  which  called 
Lazarus  from  the  tomb  is  almighty.  "  The  dead  shall  hear  the 
voice  of  the  Son  of  Mar.,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."  (John 
F.26.) 


JOHN,    CIIAP.    XI. 


291 


JOHN  XI.     47—57. 


47  Then  gathered  the  chief  priests 
and  the  Pharisees  a  council,  and  said, 
What  do  wo  ?  for  this  man  doeth  many- 
miracles. 

48  If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  all  men 
will  believe  on  him  :  and  the  Romans 
shall  come  and  take  away  both  our 
placo  and  nation. 

49  And  one  of  them  named  Caiaphas, 
being  the  high  priest  that  same  year, 
gaid  unto  them,  Ye  know  nothing  at  all, 

50  Nor  consider  that  it  is  expedient 
for  us,  that  one  man  should  die  for  the 
people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish 
not. 

5 1  And  this  spake  he  not  of  himself  : 
but  being  high  priest  that  year,  he 
prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for 
that  nation  : 

62  And  not  for  that  nation  only,  but 
that  also  he  should  gather  together  in 
one  the  children  of  God  that  were  scat- 
tered abroad. 


53  Then  from  that  day  forth  they 
took  counsel  together  for  to  put  him  to 
death. 

54  Jesus  therefore  walked  no  more 
openly  among  the  Jews;  but  went 
thence  unto  a  country  near  to  the  wil- 
derness, into  a  city  called  Ephraim,  and 
there  continued  with  his  disciples. 

55  And  the  Jews'  passover  was  nigh 
at  hand  :  and  many  went  out  of  the 
country  up  to  Jerusalem  before  the 
passover,  to  purify  themselves. 

56  Then  sought  they  for  Jesus,  and 
spake  among  themselves,  as  they  stood 
in  the  temple,  What  think  ye,  that  he 
will  not  come  to  the  feast  ? 

57  Now  both  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Pharisees  had  given  a  command- 
ment, that,  if  any  man  knew  where  ho 
were,  he  should  shew  it,  that  they 
might  take  him. 


These  concluding  verses  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  St. 
John  contain  a  melancholy  picture  of  human  nature.  As 
we  turn  away  from  Jesus  Christ  and  the  grave  at  Bethany, 
and  look  at  Jerusalem  and  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  we  may 
well  say,  "Lord,  what  is  man?" 

"We,  should  observe,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  the 
desperate  wickedness  of  man's  natural  heart.  A  mighty 
miracle  was  wrought  within  an  easy  walk  of  Jerusalem. 
A  man  four  days  dead  was  raised  to  life,  in  the  sight  of 
many  witnesses.  The  fact  was  unmistakable,  and  could 
not  be  denied ;  and  yet  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees 
would  not  believe  that  He  who  did  this  miracle  ought  to 
be  received  as  the  Messiah.  In  the  face  of  overwhelming 
evidence  they  shut  their  eyes,  and  refused  to  be  convinced. 
"  This  man,"  they  admitted,  "  does  many  miracles."  But 
so  far  from  yielding  to  this  testimony,  they  only  plunged 
into  further  wickedness,  and  "  took  counsel  to  put  Him  to 
death."     Great,  indeed,  is  the  power  of  unbelief! 


292  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

Let  us  beware  of  supposing  that  miracles  alone  have 
any  power  to  convert  men's  souls,  and  to  make  them 
Christians.  The  idea  is  a  complete  delusion.  To  fancy, 
as  some  do,  that  if  they  saw  something  wonderful  done 
before  their  ej-es  in  confirmation  of  the  Gospel,  they 
would  at  once  cast  off  all  indecision  and  serve  Christ, 
is  a  mere  idle  dream.  It  is  the  grace  of  the  spirit  in 
our  hearts,  and  not  miracles,  that  our  souls  require.  The 
Jews  of  our  Lord's  day  are  a  standing  proof  to  mankind 
that  men  may  see  signs  and  wonders,  and  yet  remain 
hard  as  stone.  It  is  a  deep  and  true  saying,  "  If  men 
believe  not  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  neither  would  they 
be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  (Luke 
xvi.  31.) 

We  must  never  wonder  if  we  see  abounding  unbelief 
in  our  own  times,  and  around  our  own  homes.  It  may 
seem  at  first  inexplicable  to  us,  how  men  cannot  see  the 
truth  which  seems  so  clear  to  ourselves,  and  do  not  re- 
ceive the  Gospel  which  appears  so  worthy  of  acceptation. 
But  the  plain  truth  is,  that  man's  unbelief  is  a  far  more 
deeply  seated  disease  than  it  is  generally  reckoned.  It 
is  proof  against  the  logic  of  facts,  against  reasoning, 
against  argument,  against  moral  suasion.  Nothing  can 
melt  it  down  but  the  grace  of  God.  If  we  ourselves 
believe,  we  can  never  be  too  thankful.  But  we  must 
never  count  it  a  strange  thing,  if  we  see  many  of  our 
fellow-Christians  just  as  hardened  and  unbelieving  as 
the  Jews. 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  the  blind  igno- 
rance with  which  God's  enemies  often  act  and  reason.  These 
rulers  of  the  Jews  said  to  one  another,  "If  we  let  this 
Christ  alone  we  shall  be  ruined.  If  we  do  not  stop 
His  course,  and  make  an  end  of  His  miracles,  the 
Romans  will  interfere,  and  make  an  end  of  our  nation." 
Never,  the  event   afterward    proved,  was   there   a   more 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  293 

short-sighted  and  erring  judgment  than  this.  They 
rushed  madly  on  the  path  they  had  chosen,  and  the  very 
thing  they  feared  came  to  pass.  They  did  not  leave 
our  Lord  alone,  but  crucified  and  slew  Him.  And  what 
happened  then?  After  a  few  years,  the  very  calamity 
they  had  dreaded  took  place :  the  Roman  armies  did 
come,  destroyed  Jerusalem,  burned  the  temple,  and  car- 
ried away  the  whole  nation  into  captivity. 

The  well-read  Christian  need  hardly  be  reminded  of 
many  such  like  things  in  the  history  of  Christ's  Church. 
The  Roman  emperors  persecuted  the  Christians  in  the 
first  three  centuries,  and  thought  it  a  positive  duty  not 
to  let  them  alone.  But  the  more  they  persecuted  them, 
the  more  they  increased.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs 
became  the  seed  of  the  Church. — The  English  Papists, 
in  the  daj^s  of  Queen  Mary,  persecuted  the  Protestants, 
and  thought  that  truth  was  in  danger  if  they  were  let 
alone.  But  the  more  they  burned  our  forefathers,  the 
more  they  confirmed  men's  minds  in  steadfast  attachment 
to  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation. — In  short,  the  words 
of  the  second  Psalm  are  continually  verified  in  this 
world  :  "  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the 
rulers  take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord."  But 
"  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh ;  the  Lord 
shall  have  them  in  derision."  God  can  make  the 
designs  of  His  enemies  work  together  for  the  good  of 
His  people,  and  cause  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 
In  days  of  trouble,  and  rebuke,  and  blasphemy,  believers 
may  rest  patiently  in  the  Lord.  The  very  things  that  at 
one  time  seem  likely  to  hurt  them,  shall  prove  in  the  end 
to  be  for  their  gain. 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  what  importance  bad  men 
sometimes  attach  to  outward  ceremonial,  while  their  hearts 
are  full  of  sin.  We  are  told  that  many  Jews  "  went  up 
out  of  the  country  to  Jerusalem,  before  the  Passover,  to 


294  EXrOSITOKY    THOUGHTS. 

purify  themselves. "  The  most  of  them,  it  may  be  feared, 
neither  knew  nor  cared  anything  about  inward  purity 
of  heart.  They  made  much  ado  about  the  washings, 
and  fastings,  and  ascetic  observances,  which  formed  the 
essence  of  popular  Jewish  religion  in  our  Lord's  time ; 
and  yet  they  were  willing  in  a  very  few  days  to  shed 
innocent  blood.  Strange  as  it  may  appear,  these  very 
sticklers  for  outward  sanctification  were  found  ready  to 
do  the  will  of  the  Pharisees,  and  to  put  their  own  Mes- 
siah to  a  violent  death. 

Extremes  like  this  meeting  together  in  the  same  per- 
son are,  unhappily,  far  from  uncommon.  Experience 
shows  that  a  bad  conscience  will  often  try  to  satisfy  itself 
by  a  show  of  zeal  for  the  cause  of  religion,  while  the 
"  weightier  matters  "  of  the  faith  are  entirely  neglected. 
The  very  same  man  who  is  ready  to  compass  sea 
and  land  to  attain  ceremonial  purity  is  often  the  very 
man,  who,  if  he  had  fit  opportunity,  would  not  shrink 
from  helping  to  crucify  Christ.  Startling  as  these  asser- 
tions may  seem,  they  are  abundantly  borne  out  by  plain 
facts.  The  cities  where  Lent  is  kept  at  this  day  with 
the  most  extravagant  strictness  are  the  very  cities  where 
the  carnival  after  Lent  is  a  season  of  glaring  excess 
and  immorality.  The  people  in  some  parts  of  Chris- 
tendom, who  make  much  ado  one  week  about  fasting 
and  priestly  absolution,  are  the  very  people  who  another 
week  will  think  nothing  of  murder !  These  things  are 
simple  realities.  The  hideous  inconsistency  of  the  Jewish 
formalists  in  our  Lord's  time  has  never  been  without 
a  long  succession  of  followers. 

Let  us  settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds  that  a  religion 
which  expends  itself  in  zeal  for  outward  formalities  is 
utteiiess  worthless  in  God's  sight.  The  purity  that  God 
desires  to  see  is  not  the  purity  of  bodily  washing  and 
fasting,   of  holy  water  and  self-imposed   asceticism,  but 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  295 

purity  of  heart.  Will-worship  and  ceremonialism  may 
"  satisfy  the  flesh,"  but  the}*-  do  not  tend  to  promote  real 
godliness.  The  standard  of  Christ's  kingdom  must  be 
sought  in  the  sermon  on  the  Mount :  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  (Matt.  v.  8 ; 
Col.  ii.  23.) 

Notes.    John  XI.  47—57. 

47. — [Then  gathered.. .priests. ..Pharisees. ..council.]  This  council 
was  probably  the  great  sanhedrim,  or  consultative  assembly  of 
the  Jewish  Church.  It  was  for  purely  ecclesiastical,  and  not 
for  civil  or  political  purposes.  It  is  the  same  assembly  before 
which,  it  is  conjectured  with  much  show  of  reason,  our  Lord 
made  His  defence,  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  this  gospel.  On  re- 
ceiving the  tidings  of  the  astounding  miracle  which  had  been 
wrought  at  Bethany,  our  Lord's  bitterest  enemies,  the  chief 
priests  and  Pharisees,  seem  to  have  been  alarmed  and  enraged, 
and  to  have  felt  the  absolute  necessity  of  taking  decided  meas- 
ures to  check  our  Lord's  progress.  Ecclesiastical  rulers,  un- 
happily, are  often  the  foremost  enemies  of  the  Gospel. 

[And  said,  Wliat  do  we?~\  This  question  indicates  perplexity 
and  irritation.  "What  are  we  about?  Are  we  going  to  sit 
still,  and  let  this  new  Teacher  carry  all  before  Him  ?  What  is 
the  use  of  trifling  with  this  new  heresy?  We  are  doing  noth- 
ing effectual  to  check  it.     It  grows ;  and  we  let  it  alone." 

[For  this  man  doeth  many  miracles.]  This  is  a  marvellous 
admission.  Even  our  Lord's  worst  enemies  confess  that  our 
Lord  did  miracles,  and  many  miracles.  Can  we  doubt  that  they 
would  have  denied  the  truth  of  His  miracles,  if  they  could? 
But  they  do  not  seem  to  have  attempted  it.  They  were  too 
many,  too  public,  and  too  thoroughly  witnessed,  for  them  to 
dare  to  deny  them.  How.  in  the  face  of  this  fact,  modern  infi- 
dels and  sceptics  can  talk  of  our  Lord's  miracles  as  being  im- 
postures and  delusions,  they  would  do  well  to  explain !  If  the 
Pharisees  who  lived  in  our  Lord's  time,  and  who  moved  heaven 
and  earth  to  oppose  His  progress,  never  dared  to  dispute  the 
fact  that  He  worked  miracles,  it  is  absurd  to  begin  denying  His 
miracles  now,  after  eighteen  centuries  have  passed  away. 

Let  us  note  the  desperate  hardness  and  wickedness  of  man's 
heart.  Even  the  sight  of  miracles  will  not  convert  any  one, 
without  the  renewing  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Brentius  remarks  that  the  simple  answer  to  the  question  of 
this  verse  ought  to  have  been,  "  Our  duty  is  to  believe  at  once 
that  this  worker  of  many  miracles  is  the  Christ  of  God." 

48.— [If  we  let  him  thus  alone.]  This  means,  "  If  we  continue  to 
treat  Him  as  we  do  now,  and  take  no  more  active  measures  to 


296  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 

put  Him  clown, — if  we  only  dispute  and  reason  and  argue  and 
cavil  and  denounce  Hiin,  but  let  Him  have  His  liberty,  let  Him 
go  where  He  pleases,  let  Hira  do  what  He  pleases,  and  preach 
what  He  pleases." 

"  Thus  "  can  only  mean  "  as  at  present,  and  hitherto." 

[All  men  will  believe  on  him.']  This  means  the  bulk  of  the 
population  will  believe  that  He  is  what  He  professes  to  be, — the 
promised  Messiah.  The  number  of  His  adhereuts  will  increase, 
and  faith  in  His  Messiahship  will  become  contagious,  and 
spread  all  over  Palestine. 

The  word  "  all,"  in  this  sentence,  must  evidently  not  be 
taken  literally.  It  only  means  "  the  great  mass  of  the  people." 
It  is  like  "  all  men  come  unto  Him,"  said  by  the  angry  disciples 
of  John  the  Baptist  about  Christ.  (John  iii.  36.)  When  men 
lose  their  tempers,  and  talk  in  passion,  they  are  very  apt  to  use 
exaggerated  expressions. 

[The  Bomans  come. ..take  away... place... nation.']  The  process 
of  reasoning  by  which  the  Pharisees  arrived  at  this  conclusion 
was  probably  something  of  this  kind.  "  This  man,  if  let  alone, 
will  gather  round  Him  a  crowd  of  adherents,  who  will  proclaim 
Him  a  Leader  and  King.  This  our  governors,  the  Romans,  will 
hear,  and  consider  it  a  rebellion  against  their  authority.  Then 
they  will  send  an  army,  deal  with  us  as  rebels,  destroy  Jerusa- 
lem and  the  temple,  and  carry  away  the  whole  Jewish  nation, 
as  the  Babylonians  did,  into  captivity." 

In  this  wretched  argument  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  appears 
most  prominent,  ignorance  or  unbelief. 

It  was  an  ignorant  argument.  The  Pharisees  ought  to  have 
known  well  that  nothing  was  further  from  our  Lord's  teaching 
than  the  idea  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  supported  by  an  armed 
force.  He  always  proclaimed  that  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this 
world,  and  not  temporal,  like  Solomon's  or  David's.  He  had 
never  hinted  at  any  deliverance  from  Roman  authority.  He 
distinctly  taught  men  to  render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  were 
Caesar's,  and  had  distinctly  refused,  when  appealed  to,  to  be  "a 
Judge  or  divider  "  among  the  Jews.  Such  a  person,  therefore, 
was  not  the  least  likely  to  excite  the  jealousy  of  the  Ro- 
mans. 

It  was  an  unbelieving  argument.  The  Pharisees  ought  to  have 
believed  that  the  Romans  could  never  have  conquered  and  put 
down  our  Lord  and  His  adherents,  if  He  really  was  the  Messiah, 
and  could  work  miracles  at  His  will.  The  Philistines  could  not 
overcome  David,  and  the  Romans  could  not  have  overcome 
David's  greater  Son.  By  their  own  showing,  the  Jewish  nation 
would  have  had  protection  enough  in  the  miracle-working 
power  of  our  Lord. 

That  there  was  an  expectation  1 1  iroughout  the  East,  at  the  time 
of  our  Lord's   ministry,  that  some    remarkable    person  was 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  297 


about  to  arise,  and  become  a  great  leader,  is  mentioned  by 
Roman  historians.  Bat  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Roman 
government  ever  showed  jealousy  of  any  one  who  was  merely 
a  religious  teacher,  like  our  Lord,  and  did  not  interfere  with  the 
civil  power. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  this  saying  of  the  Pharisees  looks 
like  an  excuse,  caught  up  as  a  weapon  against  our  Lord,  and  a 
pretext  for  stirring  up  enmity  against  Him.  What  they  really 
hated  was  our  Lord's  doctrine,  which  exposed  their  own  sys- 
tem, and  weakened  their  authority.  They  felt  that  their  craft 
was  in  danger;  but  not  daring  to  say  this  publicly,  they  pre- 
tended a  fear  that  He  would  excite  the  jealousy  of  the  Romans, 
and  endanger  the  whole  nation.  They  did  just  the  same  when 
they  finally  accused  Him  to  Pilate,  as  One  that  stirred  up  sedi- 
tion, and  made  Himself  a  King.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
wicked  people  to  assign  very  untrue  reasons  for  their  conduct, 
and  to  keep  back  and  conceal  their  true  motives.  Demetrius, 
and  his  friends  at  Ephesus,  said  that  the  temple  of  the  great 
goddess  Diana  was  in  danger,  when  in  reality  it  was  their  own 
craft  and  their  own  wealth.  The  Jews  at  Thessalonica  who 
persecuted  Paul,  pretended  great  zeal  for  "the  decrees  of 
Caesar,"  when  their  real  motive  was  hatred  of  Christ's  Gospel. 
The  Pharisees  here  pretended  fear  of  the  Romans,  when  in 
reality  they  found  the  growing  influence  of  Jesus  pulling  down 
their  own  power  over  the  people. 

Calvin  observes  :  "  They  double  their  wickedness  by  a  plausi- 
ble disguise,— their  zeal  for  the  public  good.  The  fear  that 
chiefly  distressed  them  was  that  their  own  tyranny  should  be 
destroyed ;  but  they  pretend  to  be  anxious  about  the  temple 
and  worship  of  God." 

Bucer  compares  the  Pharisees'  pretended  fear  of  the  Romans 
to  the  absurd  fears  of  the  consequence  of  printing  and  literature, 
which  the  Papists  used  to  express  at  the  period  of  the  Reforma- 
tion. 

Flacius  remarks  that  "  through  fear  of  Caesar,  God  is  de- 
spised and  His  Son  crucified,  and  this  under  pretext  of  preserv- 
ing religion,  the  temple,  and  the  nation.  Human  wisdom 
preserves  itself  by  appeasing  man  and  offending  God !  " 

Ferus  remarks  that  the  council  entirely  forgot  that  "  rulers, 
whether  the  Romans  or  any  others,  are  not  a  terror  to  good 
works,  but  to  evil.  If  the  Jews  had  believed  and  obeyed  God, 
they  had  nothing  to  fear." 

That  the  leading  Jews  at  Jerusalem  had  a  strong  suspicion 
that  Jesus  really  was  the  Messiah,  in  spite  of  all  their  out- 
rageous enmity  and  unbelief,  is  evident  not  only  from  compari- 
son of  other  places,  but  from  their  nervous  anxiety  to  get  rid 
of  Him.  They  knew  that  Daniel's  seventy  weeks  were  run  out. 
They  could  not  deny  the  miracles  that  Jesus  did.  But  they 
dared  not  follow  out  their  convictions,  and  draw  the  conclusion 


298  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


they  ought  to  have  drawn.     They  willingly  shut  their  eyes 
agaiust  light. 

How  miserably  mistaken  the  policy  of  the  Pharisees  proved 
to  be,  it  is  needless  to  say.  If  they  had  let  Jesus  aloue,  and 
allowed  His  Gospel  to  be  received  and  believed,  Jerusalem, 
humanly  speaking,  might  have  stood  to  this  day,  and  the  Jews 
might  have  been  more  mighty  and  prosperous  than  in  the  days 
of  Solomon.  By  not  letting  Jesus  alone,  and  by  killing  Him, 
they  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  nation's  sin,  and  brought 
destruction  on  the  temple,  and  scattering  on  the  whole  people. 

"  Take  away,"  applied  to  place  here,  must  mean  "  destroy." 
•xhus  MawU  xxiv.  39  :  "  The  flood  took  them  all  away." 

Some,  as  Heinsius  and  Bloomfield,  think  that  "  our  place  " 
means  the  chy ,  Jerusalem. 

Some,  as  Ol&hausen  and  Alford,  think  that  "  our  place  "means 
"our  country.''* 

Others,  as  Maldonatus,  Hutcheson,  Poole,  and  Hammond, 
with  whom  I  entirely  agree,  think  "our  place"  means  the 
temple.  (Compare  Acts  vi.  13,  14.)  Lainpe  thinks  this  view 
is  proved  by  Micah  i.  3. 

Calvin  observes,  how  many  people  in  his  day  were  always 
banging  back  from  helping  the  Protestant  Reformation,  from 
•  he  very  same  motives  as  these  Jews, — the  fear  of  consequences. 
•«  We  must  consult  public  tranquillity.  There  are  dangers  in  the 
way." 

*d.—[And  one  of  them,  named  Vaiaphas.']  This  man,  by  comparing 
Acts  v.  17,  would  seem  to  have  been  of  the  sect  of  the  Saddu- 
cees.  We  also  know  that  he  was  son-in-law  to  Annas,  of  whom 
Josephus  specially  mentions  that  he  was  a  Sadducee.  If  this 
view  be  correct  (and  Guyse,  Gill,  Scott,  and  Lampe  agree  with 
me  in  it),  it  rather  accounts  for  the  contemptuous  way  in  which 
he  seema  to  speak  in  replying  here,  to  the  saying  of  the  Pharisees. 
It  is  remarkable,  however,  to  observe  how  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees,  who  disagreed  on  so  many  points,  were  agreed  in 
hating  and  opposing  Christ.  Formalists  and  sceptics,  in  all 
ages,  make  common  cause  against  the  fiospel. 

[Being. ..high  priest.. .same  year.~]  This  expression  shows  the 
disorder  and  irregularity  which  prevailed  iu  the  Jewish  Church 
in  our  Lord's  time.  According  to  the  l*.w  of  Moses,  the  office 
of  high  priest  was  tenable  for  life.  In  the  last  days  of  the 
Jews  the  office  seems  to  have  been  obtainable  by  election,  and 
to  have  been  held  with  great  variety  of  ternj.  Caiaphas  was  high 
priest  when  John  the  Baptist  began  his  .ministry,  and  Annas 
with  him.  (Luke  iii.  2.)  He  was  also  high  priest  after  the  Day 
of  Pentecost,  and  before  the  persecution  of  Stephen.  No 
wonder  St.  Paul  says,  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  of  Ananias,  "  I 
wist  not  that  he  was  the  high  priest."    (Acts  xxiii.  2.) 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  299 

Poole  remarks  :  "  After  Herod's  time  tb^re  was  no  regard  to 
the  family  of  Aaron,  but  the  Romans  made  what  high  priests 
they  pleased.  Josephus  tells  us  that  the  Jews  had  thirteen 
high  priests  from  Aaron  to  Solomon,  which  was  612  years; 
eighteen  from  Solomon  to  the  Babylonian  captivity,  which  was 
460  years;  fifteen  from  the  captivity  to  Antiochus,  which  was 
414  years  :  but  they  had  no  less  than  twenty-eight  between  the 
time  that  Herod  began  to  reign  and  Jerusalem  was  destroyed, 
which  was  less  than  a  century." 

[Said...  Ye  know  nothing  at  all.']  The  word  rendered  "ye"  is 
here  emphatic  in  the  Greek.  It  seems  not  unlikely  that  it  ex- 
presses Caiaphas'  contempt  for  the  ignorance  and  helplessness 
of  the  Pharisees' question.  "You  and  all  your  party  do  not 
uuderstand  what  the  situation  of  things  requires.  You  are 
wasting  time  in  complaints  and  expressions  of  vexation,  when 
a  sterner,  severer  policy  is  imperatively  demanded." 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  What  others  made  matter  of  doubt, 
and  put  forth  in  the  way  of  deliberation,  this  man  cried  aloud 
shamelessly,  openly,  and  audaciously.     One  must  die." 

Pearce  thinks  that  some  of  the  Jews  in  council  must  have 
talked  of  only  putting  a  stop  to  Christ's  preaching,  as  they  after- 
wards tried  to  stop  the  Apostles,  (Acts  iv.  18,)  but  that  Caiaphas 
ridiculed  such  weak  counsel,  and  advised  more  violent  measures. 
May  we  not  suppose  that  Nicodemus  and  others  spoke  in  favour 
of  our  Lord  ? 

60.— [Nor  consider.]  The  word  thus  rendered  is  almost  always 
translated  "  reason,"  and  is  nowhere  "  consider,'*  except  here. 
It  seems  to  imply  that  Caiaphas  wished  the  Pharisees  to  know 
that  they  had  not  reasoned  out  and  properly  weighed  the  right 
thing  to  be  done.  Hence  this  perplexity.  He  would  not  show 
them  the  conclusion  they  ought  to  have  come  to. 

[It  is  expedient... one... die... whole... perish  not.]  Caiaphas*  con- 
clusion is  short  and  decisive.  He  gives  it  elliptically.  "  This 
Man  must  die.  It  is  far  better  that  one  should  die,  whether  in- 
nocent or  not,  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  uation.  than  that  the 
whole  nation  should  be  brought  into  trouble  and  perish.  You 
are  thinking  that  if  we  do  not"  let  this  Man  alone,  and  interfere, 
we  are  injuring  an  innocent  person.  Away  with  such  childish 
scruples.  Let  Him  be  put  out  of  the  way.  It  is  expedient  to 
kill  Him.  Better  He  should  die  to  save  the  nation  from  further 
trouble,  than  live,  and  the  nation  be  brought  into  trouble  by 
Him." 

I  cannot  suppose  that  Caiaphas  meant  anything  more  than  this. 
He  simply  argues  that  Christ's  death  would  be  a  public  benefit, 
and  that  to  spare  Him  might  bring  destruction  on  the  nation. 
Of  the  full  meaning  that  His  words  were  capable  of  bearing  t 
do  not  believe  he  had  the  least  idea. 

Let  us  carefully  note  here  what  crimes  and  sins  may  be  com 


100  EXPOSITOKY   THOUGHTS. 


mitted  on  the  ground  of  expediency.  None  are  so  likely  to  be 
tempted  to  commit  such  sins  as  rulers  and  governors.  None 
are  so  likely  to  do  things  unjust,  dishonest,  aud  oppressive,  as  a 
Government  under  the  pressure  of  the  spurious  argument  that 
it  is  expedient  that  the  few  should  suffer,  rather  than  the  many 
should  take  harm.  For  political  expediency  Christ  was  crucified. 
What  a  fact  that  is !  Ought  we  not  rather  to  ask  always  what  is 
just,  what  is  right,  what  is  honourable  in  the  sight  of  God? 
That  which  is  morally  wrong  can  never  be  politically  right.  To 
govern  only  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  and  benefiting  the  majority, 
without  any  reference  to  the  eternal  principles  of  justice,  right, 
and  mercy,  may  be  expedient,  and  please  man;  but  it  does  not 
please  God. 

Calvin  observes  :  "  Let  us  learn  never  to  separate  what  is  use- 
ful and  expedient  from  what  is  lawful,  since  we  ought  not  to 
expect  any  prosperity  and  success  but  from  the  blessing  of  God." 

Ecolampadius  remarks  that  we  must  never  do  evil  that  good 
may  come.  "  If  you  could,  by  the  slaying  of  one  good  man, 
work  the  saving  of  many,  it  would  be  unlawful." 

Poole  observes :  "  Never  was  anything  spoken  more  diaboli- 
cally. Like  a  wretched  politician,  concerned  for  nothing  but  the 
people's  safety,  Caiaphas  saith  not  it  is  lawful,  but  it  is"  expedi- 
ent for  us  that  one  Man,  be  He  never  so  good,  never  so  innocent 
and  just,  should  die." 

Doddridge  remarks  :  "  When  will  the  politicians  of  this  world 
learn  to  trust  God  in  His  own  ways,  rather  than  to  trust  them- 
selves and  their  own  wisdom,  in  violation  of  all  rules  of  truth, 
honour,  aud  conscience  ?  " 

51,  52. — [And  this  spake  he  not  of  himself,  etc.']  These  two  verses 
contain  a  parenthetical  comment  by  St.  John,  on  the  address  of 
Caiaphas  to  the  Pharisees.  It  is  a  peculiar  passage,  and  not 
without  difficulty.  That  a  man  like  Caiaphas  should  be  said  to 
prophesy,  and  that  his  prophecy  should  be  of  so  wide  and  exten- 
sive a  character,  is  undoubtedly  strange.  I  offer  a  few  remarks 
that  may  help  to  throw  light  on  the  passage. 

That  God  can  employ  a  wicked  man  to  declare  prophetical 
truth  is  clearly  proved  by  the  case  of  Balaam.  But  the  po- 
sitions of  Balaam  and  Caiaphas  were  very  different. 

That  the  Jewish  high  priest  at  any  time  possessed,  by  virtue 
of  his  office,  the  power  of  predicting  things  to  come,  I  can  no- 
where find.  David  certainly  speaks  of  Zadok  as  "  a  seer." 
(2  Sam.  xv.  27.)  The  high  priest's  ephod  conveyed  a  certain 
mysterious  power  to  the  wearer,  of  forseeing  things  immediate- 
ly near.  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  9.)  The  "  urim  and  thummin,"  whatever 
they  were,  which  dwelt  in  the  breast -plate  of  the  high  priest, 
appear  to  have  given  the  wearer  peculiar  powers  of  discern- 
ment. But  even  they  were  withdrawn  at  the  destruction  of  the 
first  temple.    In  short,  there  is  an  utter  absence  of  proof  that  a 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  301 


Jewish  high  priest,  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  had  any  power  of 
prophesying. 

I  believe  that  the  verses  before  us  are  very  elliptical,  and  re- 
quire much  to  be  supplied  in  order  to  convey  the  meaning  of  St. 
John.  The  only  satisfactory  sense  I  can  put  upon  the  passage 
will  be  found  in  the  following  free  paraphrase. 

[This  spake  he  not  of  himself '.]  He  spoke  these  words,  though 
he  was  not  aware  of  it,  under  the  influence  of  an  overruling 
power,  making  him  say  things  of  far  deeper  meaning  than  he  was 
conscious  of  himself.  As  Ecolampadius  says,  "  God  used  him 
as  an  instrument."     (See  Isa.  x.  15.) 

[But  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophesied.}  He  spoke 
words  which,  as  the  event  showed  afterwards,  were  eminently 
prophetical ;  and  the  fact  that  they  fell  from  his  lips  when  he  was 
high  priest  made  them  more  remarkable,  when  afterwards 
remembered  and  noted. 

[That  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation.']  He  actually  foretold, 
though  the  fulfilment  was  in  a  manner  very  different  from  his 
intentions,  that  Jesus  would  die  for  the  benefit  of  the  Jewish 
nation. 

[And  not  for  that  nation  only,  etc.']  And  He  also  foretold  what 
was  practically  fulfilled  afterwards,  though  in  a  way  marvellous- 
ly unlike  what  he  thought, — that  Jesus  would  not  only  die  for  the 
Jewish  nation,  but  for  the  benefit  of  all  God's  children  at  pres- 
ent scattered  all  over  the  world. 

The  utmost,  in  fact,  that  I  can  make  of  John's  explanatory 
comment,  is  that  he  remarks  on  the  extraordinary  manner  in 
which  Caiaphas'  words  proved  true,  though  in  a  way  that  he 
never  intended,  wished,  or  expected.  He  lets  fall  a  saying  on  a 
great  public  occasion,  which  comes  from  his  lips  with  great 
authority,  on  account  of  his  office  as  high  priest.  That  saying 
was  afterwards  fulfilled  in  the  most  marvellous  manner  by  the 
overruling  providence  of  God,  but  in  a  way  that  the  speaker 
never  dreamed  of.  The  thing  was  afterwards  remembered  and 
remarked  on;  and  it  seemed,  says  St.  John,  as  if  being  high 
priest  that  year,  he  was  miraculously  compelled  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  prophesy  the  redemption  of  mankind,  at  the  very  time 
that  he  thought  he  was  only  speaking  of  putting  Christ  to  death. 
Caiaphas,  in  short,  meant  nothing  but  to  advise  the  murder  of 
Christ.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  obliged  him  unconsciously  to  use 
words  which  were  a  most  remarkable  prediction  of  Christ's 
death  bringing  life  to  a  lost  world. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "should  die,"  would  be  more 
literally,  "  was  about  to  die."  It  simply  expresses  a  future 
coming  event. 

The  "children  of  God  scattered  abroad,"  I  believe,  mean 
the  elect  of  God  among  the  Gentiles.    They  are  put  in  contrast 


302  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

with  "  that  nation,"  or  "  the  nation,"  as  it  would  be  more  liter- 
ally rendered. 

The  "  gathering  together  in  one,"  I  believe  to  be  that  final 
gathering  of  all  Christ's  members  which  is  yet  to  come  at  His 
second  advent.     (See  Eph.  i.  10;  John  xii.  32;  Gen.  xlix.  10.) 

Lightfoot  says,  the  Jews  thought  the  greatest  work  of  Mes- 
siah was  to  be  the  "  reduction,  or  gathering  together  of  the  cap- 
tivities." 

I  leave  the  passage  with  a  very  deep  sense  of  its  difficulty, 
and  desire  not  to  press  my  views  on  others  dogmatically,  if  they 
are  not  satisfied  with  them. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  Caiaphas  prophesied,  not  knowing 
what  he  said;  and  the  grace  of  God  merely  made  use  of  his 
mouth,  but  touched  not  his  accursed  heart." 

Musculus  and  Ferus  remark  how  striking  the  resemblance  is 
between  Caiaphas  unintentionally  using  language  fulfilled  in  a 
sense  totally  unlike  what  he  meant,  and  the  Jews  saying  of 
Christ  to  Pilate,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children." 
They  little  knew  the  awful  and  tremendous  extent  of  the 
saying. 

The  absurdity  of  the  Roman  Catholic  claim,  that  the  Pope's 
words  and  decrees  are  to  be  received  as  partially  inspired  be- 
cause of  his  office,  on  the  ground  of  this  passage,  is  noted  and 
exposed  by  all  the  Protestant  commentators  of  the  seventeenth 
century. 

Lightfoot  thinks  we  should  lay  great  emphasis  on  the  expres- 
sion, "  that  same  year,"  and  justly  so. — He  observes  that  it  was 
the  very  year  when  the  high  priest's  office  ended,  and  the  veil 
was  rent,  and  the  Jewish  dispensation  wound  up,  and  the  Mosaic 
priesthood  abrogated  by  Christ's  becoming  manifestly  our 
Priest.— He  thinks  St.  Paul,  in  Acts  xxiii.  5,  "I  wist  not  that 
he  was  the  high  priest,"  may  have  meant  "  that  he  did  not  know 
there  was  any  high  priest  at  all."  He  also  observes  that  this 
very  year  at  Pentecost,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  poured  out  as  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  and  revelation  in  an  extraordinary  measure. 
What  wonder  if  "  that  year  "  the  last  high  priest,  like  Balaam, 
should  prophesy. 

53. — [Then  from  that  daij... counsel... death. ]  We  see  here  the  re- 
sult of  Caiaphas'  counsel.  His  stern,  bold,  outspoken  proposal 
carried  all  the  council  with  him,  and  even  if  Gamaliel,  Nicode- 
mus,  and  Joseph  were  there,  their  voices  were  silenced.  From 
that  very  day  it  became  a  settled  thing  with  the  Jewish  leaders 
at  Jerusalem,  that  Jesus  was  to  be  put  to  death.  The  only 
difficulty  was  to  find  the  way,  the  time,  and  the  means  of  doing 
it  without  creating  a  tumult.  The  great  miracle  just  wrought 
at  Bethany  would  doubtless  increase  the  number  of  our  Lord's 
adherents,  and  make  it  necessary  to  use  caution  in  carrying  out 
the  murderous  plan. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XI.  303 

The  conclusions  of  great  ecclesiastical  councils  are  seldom 
wise  and  good,  and  sometimes  are  wicked  and  cruel.  Bold, 
forward,  unscrupulous  men,  like  Caiaphas,  generally  silence  the 
quieter  members,  and  carry  all  before  them. 

54. — [Jesus  therefore  walked. ..Jews.']  From  this  time  our  Lord 
found  it  necessary  to  give  up  appearing  openly  at  Jerusalem, 
and  came  there  no  more  till  the  week  of  his  crucifixion.  He 
knew  the  result  of  the  council  just  held,  either  from  His  own 
Divine  knowledge,  or  from  the  information  of  friends  like 
Nicodemus;  aud  as  His  time  was  not  fully  come,  he  retired 
from  Judaea  for  a  season. 

The  expression,  "  no  more,"  is  literally  "  not  yet."  It  must 
mean  "  no  more  at  present." 

May  we  not  learn  from  our  Lord's  conduct,  that  it  may  be  a 
duty  sometimes  not  to  court  danger  or  death?  There  are  sea- 
sons when  it  is  a  duty  to  retire,  as  well  as  seasons  for  going  for- 
ward.    There  are  times  to  be  silent,  as  well  as  times  to  speak. 

Hutchesou  remarks :  "  It  is  lawful  for  Christ's  servants  to 
flee  when  their  death  is  decreed  by  enemies,  and  the  persecution 
is  personal." 

[  Went  thence... wilderness. ..Ephraim... disciples.']  Nothing  what- 
ever is  known  for  certain  of  the  distinct  locality  to  which  our 
Lord  retired,  or  of  the  city  here  named.  It  seems,  purposely, 
to  have  been  a  quiet,  isolated,  and  little  frequented  place.  The 
probability  is  that  it  was  beyond  Jordan,  in  Perea,  because 
when  our  Lord  came  to  Jerusalem  the  last  time  He  passed 
through  Jericho. 

Ellicott  suggests  that  Ephraim  was  a  town  called  also  Ophrah, 
About  twenty  miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  borders  of  Sama- 
ria. He  also  thinks  that  on  leaving  Ephraim  those  words  of 
St.  Luke  (chapter  xvii.  11)  come  in,  which  say,  that  our  Lord 
"passed  through  the  midst  of  Samaria  and  Galilee."  After 
that  he  thinks  He  went  through  Perea,  to  Jericho.  But  I  am  not 
satisfied  that  he  proves  these  points. 

It  is  worth  noticing  that  our  Lord  chose  a  scene  of  entire 
quiet  and  seclusion  as  His  last  abode,  before  going  up  to  His 
last  great  season  of  suffering  at  the  crucifixion.  It  is  well  to 
get  alone  and  be  still,  before  we  take  in  hand  any  great  work 
for  God.  Our  Saviour  was  not  above  this.  How  much  more 
should  His  disciples  remember  it!  In  saying  this,  I  would  not 
be  thought  to  commend  the  ostentatious  "retreats"  of  the 
Romish  Church  and  its  followers.  It  is  of  the  very  essence  of 
Christian  retirement,  if  it  is  to  be  profitable,  that  it  should  be 
without  parade,  and  should  not  attract  the  notice  of  men.  The 
life  of  the  Eremite  has  no  warrant  in  Scriptnre. 

When  it  says  that  our  Lord  continued  or  tarried  at  Ephraim 
"  with  His  disciples,"  it  is  worth  noticing  that  we  do  not  hear  a 
word  of  any  public  wrorks  that  he  did  there.     It  looks  as  if  He 


304  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


devoted  the  last  few  quiet  days  that  remained  before  His  cruci- 
fixion, to  uninterrupted  communion  with  the  Father,  and  pri- 
vate instruction  of  His  disciples, 

55. — [And... Jews'  passover...nigh  at  hand.']  This  expression,  like 
many  others  in  John's  Gospel,  shows  that  he  wrote  for  the 
Church  generally,  and  for  many  readers  who  were  not  familiar 
with  Jewish  feasts  and  customs. 

[And  many  ivent... country. ..before. ..passover.]  This  seems 
mentioned  as  a  simple  matter  of  custom  among  the  Jews,  and 
not  as  a  thing  done  this  year  more  than  any  other.  They  always 
did  so;  and  thus  drew  together,  for  seven  days  before  the  pass- 
over,  a  larger  collection  of  people  at  Jerusalem  than  at  any 
other  time  of  the  year.  Hence  the  crowds  and  expectation 
when  our  Lord  appeared.  He  had  been  talked  of  by  people 
from  all  parts  of  Palestine. 

[To  purify  themselves.]  This  refers  to  the  ceremonial  wash- 
ings, purifications,  and  atonements  for  ceremonial  uncleanness, 
which  all  strict  Jews  were  careful  to  go  through  before  eating 
the  passover.  (See  2  Chron.  xxx.  18,  19.)  It  is  impossible  to 
read  the  book  of  Leviticus  carefully,  and  not  to  be  struck  with  the 
almost  endless  number  of  ways  in  which  an  Israelite  could  be- 
come ceremonially  unclean,  and  need  going  to  the  priest  to 
have  an  atonement  made.  (See  Numbers  ix.  6 — 11.)  That  the 
Pharisees,  in  such  matters,  added  to  legal  strictness  by  their 
absurd  scrupulosity,  such  as  "  straining  at  a  gnat,"  we  cannot 
doubt;  but  the  simple  law  as  it  stood  was  a  yoke  that  was  very 
hard  to  bear.  No  wonder  that  thousands  of  devout  Jews  came 
anxiously  before  the  passover,  to  Jerusalem,  to  be  made  ceremo- 
nially clean  and  fit  for  the  feast. 

It  is  worth  noting  how  singular  particular  men  are  some- 
times about  forms  and  ceremonies,  and  outward  correctness, 
while  they  coolly  plan  and  execute  enormous  crimes.  The  Jews, 
zealous  about  "  purifying"  themselves  while  they  were  planning 
the  murder  of  Christ,  have  had  imitators  and  followers  in 
every  age  of  the  Church.  Strictness  about  forms  and  ceremo- 
nies, and  utter  recklessness  about  gross  sin,  are  found  quite 
compatible  in  many  hearts. 

66.— [Then  sought  they. ..Jesus,  and  spake,  etc.,  etc.]  The  persons 
here  mentioned  seem  to  me  to  have  been  the  Jews  from  all 
parts  of  Palestine,  mentioned  in  the  last  verse,  who  had  come 
up  to  prepare  for  the  passover.  The  fame  and  history  of  our 
Lord  were  probably  so  great  throughout  Palestine,  tbat  one  of 
the  first  inquiries  the  comers  would  make  of  one  another  would 
be  about  Him.  And  as  they  stood  in  the  temple  court,  waiting 
for  their  turn  to  go  through  ceremonial  purification,  or  talking 
with  old  friends  and  acquaintances  who  had  come  up,  like  them- 
selves, from  the  country,  Jesus  would  probably  be  a  principal 
topic  of  conversation. 

[What  think  ye... that... not  come... feast.]    This  is  mentioned  as 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  305 

one  of  the  principal  inquiries  made  by  the  Jews  of  one  another. 
Our  Lord,  on  a  former  occasion,  had  not  come  up  to  the  pass- 
over.  (See  John  vi.)  They  might,  therefore,  naturally  feel 
doubtful  whether  He  would  come  now. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  question  admits  of  being  taken  as 
one,  or  divided  into  two  distinct  ones. 

Some  think  that  it  means,  "  What  think  ye  of  the  question, 
whether  He  will  come  to  the  feast  or  not?" 

Others  hold  that  it  means,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ,  and 
especially  of  His  position  at  this  time?  Do  you  think  that  He 
will  not  come  to  the  feast?  "    I  myself  prefer  this  view. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  very  question  with  which  our  Lord 
confounded  the  Pharisees  a  few  days  after,  as  recorded  in  St. 
Matthew  xxii.  42,  begins  with  precisely  the  same  Greek  words 
as  those  here  used,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ?  " 

57. — [Nbio  both. ..priests. ..Pharisees,  etc.,  etc.]  This  verse  shows 
the  first  steps  which  had  been  taken  after  the  session  of  the 
council  which  adopted  the  advice  of  Caiaphas  to  kill  Jesus.  A 
general  order  had  been  given  that  if  any  man  knew  where 
Jesus  lodged  in  Jerusalem,  he  was  to  give  information,  in  order 
that  He  might  be  apprehended. 

I  cannot  help  thinking  myself  that  this  order  must  only  have 
referred  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  house  where  our  Lord  might 
lodge  when  He  came  to  the  passover,  if  He  did  come.  I  cannot 
suppose  that  our  Lord's  enemies  could  be  ignorant  where  He 
was  between  the  miracle  of  Bethany  and  the  passover.  But  I 
fancy  they  dared  not  run  the  risk  of  a  tumult  or  rebellion,  which 
might  be  caused  if  they  sent  into  the  rural  districts  to  appre- 
hend Him.  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  priests  and  Pharisees  extended  beyond  the  walls  of  Jerusa- 
lem, and  whether  they  could  lay  hands  upon  our  Lord  anywhere 
outside  the  city.  This  might  have  been  the  reason  why  He 
often  lodged  at  Bethany. 

Musculus  here  discusses  the  question,  whether  obedience 
to  the  powers  that  be  obliges  us  to  give  up  a  man  to  those  who 
are  seeking  to  apprehend  him.  He  answers,  "Decidedly  not; 
if  we  believe  him  to  be  an  innocent  man." 


JOHN  XII.    1—11. 


1  Then  Jesus  six  days  before  the 
passover  came  to  Bethany,  where  Laz- 
arus was  which  had  been  dead,  whom 
he  raised  from  the  dead. 

2  There  they  made  him  a  supper ; 


and  Martha  served:  but  Lazarus  was 
one  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table  with 
him. 

3  Then  took  Mary  a  pound  of  oint- 
ment of  spikenard,   very  costly,  and 


306 


EXrOSITORY   THOUGHTS, 


anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  wiped 
his  feet  with  her  hair:  and  the  house 
was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  oint- 
ment. 

4  Then  saith  one  of  his  disciples,  Ju- 
das Is  *,riot,  Simon's  son,  which  should 
betray  him, 

5  Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold 
for  three  hundred  pence,  and  given  to 
the  poor  ? 

6  This  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for 
the  poor;  but  because  he  was  a  thief, 
and  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was 
put  therein. 

7  Then  said  Jesus,  Let  her  alone: 


against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath 
she  kept  this. 

8  For  the  poor  always  ye  have  with 
you:  but  me  ye  have  not  always. 

9  Much  people  of  the  Jews  therefore 
knew  that,  he  was  there :  and  they  camo 
not  for  Jesus'  sake  only,  but  that  they 
might  see  Lazarus  also,  whom  he  had 
raised  from  the  dead. 

10  But  the  chief  priests  consulted 
that  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to 
death ; 

11  Because  that  by  reason  of  him, 
many  of  the  Jews  went  away,  aod 
believed  on  Jesus. 


The  chapter  we  have  now  begun  finishes  a  most  im- 
portant division  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  Our  Lord's  public 
addresses  to  the  unbelieving  Jews  of  Jerusalem  are  here 
brought  to  an  end.  After  this  chapter,  St.  John  records 
nothing  but  what  was  said  in  private  to  the  disciples. 

We  see,  for  one  thing,  in  this  passage,  what  abounding 
proofs  exist  of  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  greatest  miracles. 

We  read  of  a  supper  at  Bethany,  where  Lazarus  "  sat 
at  the  table  "  among  the  guests, — Lazarus,  who  had  been 
publicly  raised  from  the  dead,  after  lying  four  days  in 
the  grave.  No  one  could  pretend  to  say  that  his  resur- 
rection was  a  mere  optical  delusion,  and  that  the  eyes  of 
the  bystanders  must  have  been  deceived  by  a  ghost  or 
vision.  Here  was  the  very  same  Lazarus,  after  several 
weeks,  sitting  among  his  fellow-men  with  a  real  material 
body,  and  eating  and  drinking  real  material  food.  It 
is  hard  to  understand  what  stronger  evidence  of  a  fact 
could  be  supplied.  He  that  is  not  convinced  by  such 
evidence  as  this  may  as  well  say  that  he  is  determined  to 
believe  nothing  at  all. 

It  is  a  comfortable  thought,  that  the  very  same  proofs 
which  exist  about  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  are  the 
proofs  which  surround  that  still  mightier  fact,  the  resur- 
rection of  Christ  from  the  dead.  Was  Lazarus  seen  for 
6everal   weeks   by  the   people  of  Bethany,  going  in  and 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  307 

coming  out  amoDg  thern?  So  was  the  Lord  Jesus  seen 
by  His  disciples. — Did  Lazarus  take  material  food  before 
the  eyes  of  his  friends?  So  did  the  Lord  Jesus  eat  and 
drink  before  His  ascension. — No  one,  in  his  sober  senses, 
who  saw  Jesus  take  "  broiled  fish  and  a  honeycomb," 
and  eat  it  before  several  witnesses,  would  doubt  that 
He  had  a  real  body.     (Luke  xxiv.  42.) 

We  shall  do  well  to  remember  this.  In  an  age  of 
abounding  unbelief  and  scepticism,  we  shall  find  that 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  will  bear  any  weight  that  we 
can  lay  upon  it.  Just  as  He  placed  beyond  reasonable 
doubt  the  rising  again  of  a  beloved  disciple  within  two 
miles  of  Jerusalem,  so  in  a  very  few  weeks  He  placed 
beyond  doubt  His  own  victory  over  the  grave.  If  we 
believe  that  Lazarus  rose  again,  we  need  not  doubt  that 
Jesus  rose  again  also.  If  we  believe  that  Jesus  rose 
again,  we  need  not  doubt  the  truth  of  His  Messiahship, 
the  reality  of  His  acceptance  as  our  Mediator,  and  the 
certainty  of  our  own  resurrection.  Christ  has  risen 
indeed,  and  wicked  men  may  well  tremble.  Christ  has 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  believers  may  well  rejoice. 

We  see,  for  another  thing,  in  this  passage,  what  urikind- 
ness  and  discouragement  Christ's  friends  sometimes  meet 
with  from  man. 

We  read  that,  at  the  supper  in  Bethany,  Mary,  the 
sister  of  Lazarus,  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus  with  pre- 
cious ointment,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head. 
Kor  was  this  ointment  poured  on  with  a  niggardly  hand. 
She  did  it  so  liberally  and  profusely  that  "  the  house 
was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment. "  She  did 
it  under  the  influence  of  a  heart  full  of  love  and 
gratitude.  She  thought  nothing  too  great  and  good  to 
bestow  on  such  a  Saviour.  Sitting  at  His  feet  in  days 
gone  by,  and  hearing  His  words,  she  had  found  peace 
for   her   conscience,   and   pardon   for   her   sins.     At  this 


308  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

very  moment  she  saw  Lazarus,  alive  and  well,  sitting  by 
her  Master's  side, — her  own  brother  Lazarus,  whom  He 
had  brought  back  to  her  from  the  grave.  Greatly  loved, 
she  thought  she  could  not  show  too  much  love  in  return. 
Having  freely  received,  she  freely  gave. 

But  there  were  some  present  who  found  fault  with 
Mary's  conduct,  and  blamed  her  as  guilty  of  wasteful 
extravagance.  One  especially,  an  apostle,  a  man  of 
whom  better  things  might  have  been  expected,  declared 
openly  that  the  ointment  would  have  been  better  em- 
ployed if  it  had  been  sold,  and  the  price  "  given  to  the 
poor."  The  heart  which  could  conceive  such  thoughts 
must  have  had  low  views  of  the  dignity  of  Christ's 
person,  and  still  lower  views  of  our  obligations  to  Him.  A 
cold  heart  and   a   stingy  hand  will  generally  go  together. 

There  are  only  too  many  professing  Christians  of  a 
like  spirit  in  the  present  day.  Myriads  of  baptized 
people  cannot  understand  zeal  of  any  sort  for  the 
honour  of  Christ.  Tell  them  of  any  vast  outlay  of 
money  to  push  trade  or  to  advance  the  cause  of  science, 
and  they  approve  of  it  as  right  and  wise.  Tell  them  of 
any  expense  incurred  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
at  home  or  abroad,  for  spreading  God's  Word,  for  extend- 
ing the  knowledge  of  Christ  on  earth,  and  they  tell 
you  plainly  that  they  think  it  waste.  They  never  give 
a  farthing  to  such  objects  as  these,  and  count  those 
people  fools  who  do.  Worst  of  all,  they  often  cover 
over  their  own  backwardness  to  help  purely  Christian 
objects,  by  a  pretended  concern  for  the  poor  at  home. 
Yet  they  find  it  convenient  to  forget  the  notorious  fact 
that  those  who  do  most  for  the  cause  of  Christ  are  pre- 
cisely those  who  do  most  for  the  poor. 

We  must  never  allow  ourselves  to  be  moved  from 
"  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,"  by  the  unkind  re- 
marks of  such  persons      It  is  vain  to  expect  a  man  to  do 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  309 

much  for  Christ,  when  he  has  no  sense  of  debt  to  Christ. 
We  must  pity  the  blindness  of  our  unkind  critics,  and 
work  on.  He  who  pleaded  the  cause  of  loving  Mary, 
and  said,  "  Let  her  alone/'  is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  keeps  a  book  of  remembrance.  A  day  is  soon 
coming  when  a  wondering  world  will  see  that  every  cup 
of  cold  water  given  for  Christ's  sake,  as  well  as  every 
box  of  precious  ointment,  was  recorded  in  heaven,  and 
has  its  rewards.  In  that  great  day  those  who  thought 
that  any  one  could  give  too  much  to  Christ  will  find 
they  had  better  never  have  been  born. 

We  see,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  what  desperate  hardness 
and  unbelief  there  is  in  the  heart  of  man. 

Unbelief  appears  in  the  chief  priests,  who  "  consulted 
that  they  might  put  Lazarus  to  death."  They  could  not 
deny  the  fact  of  his  having  been  raised  again.  Living, 
and  moving,  and  eating,  and  drinking  within  two  miles 
of  Jerusalem,  after  lying  four  days  in  the  grave,  Laza- 
rus was  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  Christ's  Messiahship, 
whom  they  could  not  possibly  answer  or  put  to  silence. 
Yet  these  proud  men  would  not  give  way.  They  would 
rather  commit  a  murder  than  throw  clown  the  arms  of 
rebellion,  and  confess  themselves  in  the  wrong.  No  won- 
der that  the  Lord  Jesus  in  a  certain  place  "  marvelled" 
at  unbelief.  Well  might  He  say,  in  a  well-known  parable, 
"If  they  believe  not  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead." 
(Mark  vi.  6  ;  Luke  xvi.  31.) 

Hardness  appears  in  Judas  Iscariot,  who,  after  being 
a  chosen  Apostle,  and  a  preacher  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  turns  out  at  last  a  thief  and  a  traitor.  So  long 
as  the  world  stands  this  unhappy  man  will  be  a  lasting 
proof  of  the  depth  of  human  corruption.  That  any 
one  could  follow  Christ  as  a  disciple  for  three  years,  see 
all  His  miracles,  hear   all   His   teaching,  receive  at  Hia 


310  EXPOSITORY   TIIOUGHTS. 

hand  repeated  kindnesses,  be  counted  an  Apostle,  and 
yet  prove  rotten  at  heart  in  the  end,  all  this  at  first 
sight  appears  incredible  and  impossible !  Yet  the  case  of 
Judas  shows  plainly  that  the  thing  can  be.  Few  things, 
perhaps,  are  so  little  realized  as  the  extent  of  the  fall 
of  man. 

Let  us  thank  God  if  we  know  an}7thing  of  faith,  and 
can  say,  with  all  our  sense  of  weakness  and  infirmity, 
"I  believe."  Let  us  pray  that  our  faith  may  be  real, 
true,  genuine,  and  sincere,  and  not  a  mere  temporary 
impression,  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew. 
Not  least,  let  us  watch  and  pray  against  the  love  of  the 
world.  It  ruined  one  who  basked  in  the  full  sunshine 
of  privileges,  and  heard  Christ  Himself  teaching  every 
day.  Then  "  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed 
lest  he  fall."     (1  Cor.  x.  12.) 

Notes.    John  XII.  1—11. 

1. — [Then  Jesus  six  days.. .passover... Bethany.']  Every  intelligent 
reader  of  the  Gospel  will  see  that  John  purposely  omits  at  this 
point  certain  events  which  are  recorded  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and 
Luke.  He  passes  at  once  from  our  Lord's  retirement  to  the  city 
called  Ephraim  to  His  return  to  Bethany  for  the  last  time.  In 
this  interval  will  be  found  the  things  related  in  Matthew  x.  17 
— 34;  Mark  x.  32 — 52;  Lukexviii.  31,  toxix.  1— 28.  In  whatever 
part  of  Palestine  this  city  Ephraim  was,  it  is  almost  certain  that 
between  it  and  Bethany  Jesus  passed  through  Jericho,  healed 
two  blind  men  there,  converted  the  publican  Zaccheus,  and 
spoke  the  parable  of  the  nobleman  who  went  into  a  far  country, 
after  giving  to  his  ten  servants  ten  pounds. 

Why  St.  John  did  not  record  these  facts  we  do  not  know,  and 
it  is  mere  waste  of  time  to  inquire.  A  reverent  mind  will  be  con- 
tent to  remember  that  John  wrote  by  inspiration  of  God,  and 
was  guided  by  infallible  direction,  both  as  to  what  he  recorded 
and  what  he  did  not  record.  Reason  and  common  sense,  more- 
over, tell  us  that  if  the  four  Evangelists  had  all  narrated  exactly 
the  same  things,  their  value  as  independent  witnesses  would 
have  been  greatly  damaged.  Their  variations  and  diversities  are 
a  strong  indirect  proof  of  their  credibility.  Too  close  an  agree- 
ment would  raise  a  suspicion  of  collusion,  and  look  like  an  at- 
tempt to  deceive. 

The  expression,  "  six  days  before  the  passover,"  is  remarkable, 


john,  chap.  xn.  311 


because  at  first  sight  it  seems  to  contradict  Mark's  narrative  of 
the  anointing,  which  Mark  expressly  says  was  "  two  clays  before 
the  passover."  (Mark  xiv.  1.)  Hence  some  maintain  that  the 
Greek  words  should  be  translated,  u  Before  the  six  days  of  the 
passover  feast,"  leaving  the  precise  day  indefinite  and  uncertain. 
To  this,  however,  it  is  reasonably  objected  that  the  passover 
feast  was  more  than  six  days,  and  that  the  proposed  translation 
is  not  a  probable  rendering  of  the  Greek  words. — To  this  I  must 
add,  that  in  my  opinion  there  seems  no  necessity  for  departing 
from  the  English  version.  It  is  not  only  possible,  but  probable, 
as  Lightfoot  maintains,  that  there  were  two  distinct  anointings 
of  our  Lord,  one  six  days  before  the  passover,  and  the  other  two 
days  before.  [The  reader  is  requested  to  refer  back  to  the  notes 
on  John  ii.  2,  where  he  will  find  this  point  fully  discussed.] 

The  passover  was  slain  on  the  Thursday  evening.  At  this  rate 
our  Lord  must  have  arrived  at  Bethany  on  Friday,  the  afternoon 
or  evening  before  the  Sabbath.  Thus  he  must  have  spent  His 
last  earthly  Sabbath  with  Mary,  Martha,  and  Lazarus,  at  Beth- 
any. 

That  the  disciples  must  have  journeyed  to  Bethany  with  a  full 
impression  that  a  great  crisis  was  at  hand,  and  the  end  of  their 
Master's  ministry  approaching,  one  can  hardly  doubt,  after  read- 
ing the  plain  warnings  recorded  in  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke. 
But  whether  they  really  thought  their  Master  would  be  put  to 
death,  or  whether  they  did  not  secretly  expect  He  would  soon 
manifest  His  Divine  power,  take  His  kingdom  and  reign,  is  more 
than  questionable. 

A  more  deliberate,  voluntary,  calm  walking  up  to  death  than 
our  Lord's  last  journey  into  Judaea,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive. 

[WJiere  Lazarus. ..been  dead. ..raised  from  the  dead.']  These 
words  seem  to  show  that  Lazarus  lived  at  Bethany,  and  was  not 
merely  a  visitor  or  lodger  there.  They  also  show  the  immense 
importance  of  the  miracle  wrought  on  him.  Within  two  miles 
of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple,  there  lived  for  weeks,  if  not  for 
months,  a  man  well  known  to  many  Jews,  who  had  been  actually 
raised  from  his  grave  after  being  four  days  buried.  He  had  not 
been  raised  only,  and  then  disappeared  from  public  notice,  but 
he  lived  where  He  was  raised. 

Lightfoot  draws  out  the  following  interesting  scheme  of  our 
Lord's  disposal  of  time  during  the  last  six  days  before  His  cruci- 
fixion :  (1)  On  Saturday  He  supped  with  Lazarus.  (2)  On  Sun- 
day He  rode  into  Jerusalem  publicly  on  an  ass.  This  was  the 
day  when  the  Jews  used  to  take  out  a  lamb  from  the  flock,  for 
each  family,  and  to  keep  it  separate  for  the  passover.  On  this 
day  the  Lamb  of  God  publicly  presented  Himself  in  Zion.  (3) 
On  Mouday  He  went  to  Jerusalem  again,  and  cursed  the  barren 
fig-tree  on  the  way.  (4)  On  Tuesday  He  went  again  to  Jerusa- 
lem, and  spoke  for  the  last  time  to  the  people.  Returning,  He 
sat  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  and  delivered  the  famous  prophecy 


312  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


of  Matthew  xxiv.  and  xxv.,  and  supped  that  night  with  Simon 
the  leper.  (5)  On  Wednesday  He  tarried  in  Bethany.  (6)  On 
Thursday  He  went  to  Jerusalem,  ate  the  passover,  appointed  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  the  same  night  was  taken  before  the  priests 
as  a  prisoner.     (7)  On  Friday  He  was  crucified. 

2. — [There  they  made  him  a  supper.']  These  words  show  the  joyful 
hospitality  with  which  the  Master  was  received  by  the  disciples. 
The  expression,  "  they,"  may  perhaps  be  used  indefinitely,  ac- 
cording to  a  common  Hebraism.  (Compare  Matthew  v.  15;  x. 
10;  xiii.  48,  and  John  xv.  6.)  It  then  simply  means,  "  a  supper 
was  made."  If  not  so  used,  it  evidently  can  apply  to  none  but 
Mary,  Martha,  and  Lazarus. — Whether  the  supper  was  on  Friday 
evening,  when  our  Lord  arrived,  after  the  Sabbath  began,  or  on 
the  Saturday,  or  the  Sabbath  Day,  is  immaterial.  It  is  evident 
that  hospitality  was  thought  no  breach  of  the  Sabbath  among 
the  Jews. 

Lightfoot  says  the  feast  of  the  Jews,  on  this  particular  day, 
six  days  before  the  passover,  was  always  peculiarly  liberal  and 
sumptuous. 

Hutcheson  observes :  "  It  is  not  unlawful  at  some  times  to  enjoy 
the  liberal  use  of  the  creatures  in  a  sober  manner.  Christ  doth 
not  decline  this  supper;  sometimes  He  went  to  the  feasts  of 
Pharisees,  and  sometimes  of  Publicans."  (Luke  vii.  36 ;  Matt. 
ix.  11.) 

[And  Martha  served.]  The  natural  temperament  of  this  good 
woman  comes  out  here  as  elsewhere.  She  could  not  sit  still  and 
do  nothing  while  her  Lord  was  in  her  house.  She  must  be 
actively  stirring  and  trying  to  do  something.  Grace  does  not 
take  away  our  peculiar  characteristics. 

[But  Lazarus. ..sat  at  the  table  with  him.]  This  appears  to  most 
commentators,  from  Chrysostom  downwards,  to  be  purposely 
mentioned,  in  order  to  show  the  reality  of  Lazarus'  resurrection. 
He  was  not  a  ghost  or  a  spirit.  He  had  really  been  raised  to  life 
with  a  real  body,  and  flesh  and  bones,  and  all  the  wants  and 
conditions  of  a  body.  Thus  we  are  practically  taught  that  though 
a  man's  body  dies,  it  may  yet  live  again. 

Is  not  this  feast  a  faint  type  of  the  Marriage  Supper  of  the 
Lamb?  Jesus  Christ  will  be  there;  those  believers  who  died 
and  are  raised  again  at  His  second  advent  will  be  there ;  and 
those  who  never  died,  but  are  found  alive  and  believing  when 
He  comes,  will  be  there.  Then  the  number  of  guests  will  be 
complete. 

8. — [Then  took  Mary... ointment... anointed... feet... Jesus,  etc.,  etc.] 
This  remarkable  action  of  Mary,  which,  according  to  our  Lord's 
saying  in  Matthew  and  Mark,  is  related  all  over  the  world,  de- 
serves our  special  consideration. 

The  action  itself  was  not  an  uncommon  one  in  Eastern  coun- 
tries, where  the  heat  is  very  great,  and  the  feet  exposed  to  it  by 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  313 


wearing  sandals  are  liable  to  suffer  much  from  dryness  and 
scorching.  There  was  nothing,  moreover,  out  of  the  common 
way  in  a  woman  doing  this  service.  To  "  wash  the  saints'  feet," 
St.  Paul  names  among  the  good  works  of  a  Christian  widow. 
(1  Tim.  v.  10.) 

The  motive  of  Mary,  in  doing  what  she  did,  was  evidently 
strong  and  grateful  love  to  her  Lord  and  Saviour.  Not  only 
from  what  she  had  learned  from  Him  for  her  own  spiritual  bene- 
fit, but  also  for  what  He  had  done  for  her  brother  Lazarus,  she 
felt  there  was  nothing  too  great  or  too  good  to  do  for  Him.  Her 
feelings  made  her  anxious  to  do  her  Master  the  highest  honour, 
regardless  of  expense,  and  indifferent  to  any  remark  that  wit 
nesses  might  make. 

The  extent  of  her  gratitude  is  shown  by  the  lavish  profuseness 
with  which  she  used  the  ointment  on  this  occasion,  although  it 
was  very  costly.  This  seems  indicated  by  her  "  wiping  our 
Lord's  feet  with  her  hair,"  having  poured  on  them  so  much  oint- 
ment that  they  needed  wiping;  and  also  by  the  "house  being 
filled  with  the  odour  of  the  oiutment."  She  poured  out  so  much 
ointment  that  the  scent  of  it  filled  the  whole  apartment  and  the 
whole  house  where  the  guests  were.  Any  one  who  knows  the 
powerful  odour  of  otto  of  roses,  in  the  present  day,  will  easily 
understand  this. 

What  this  "  ointment  of  spikenard  "  was  has  puzzled  the  com- 
mentators in  every  age,  as  the  Greek  word  throws  no  certain 
light  on  the  question.  Some  think  that  it  means  "  potable  "  oint- 
ment, that  might  be  drunk ;  some  that  it  means  perfectly  "  pure  " 
ointment,  that  might  be  trusted  as  genuine  and  unadulterated. 
Augustine  thinks  that  the  expression  denotes  the  place  from 
which  the  ointment  came.  The  question  is  of  no  importance, 
and  must  be  left  unexplained  for  want  of  materials  to  explain  it. 
Enough  for  us  to  know  that  it  was  something  very  valuable  and 
costly.  How  costly  an  ointment  might  be,  any  one  can  guess 
who  knows  the  value  of  pure  otto  of  roses. 

I  can  only  repeat  the  opinion  already  expressed,  that  this 
anointing  was  certainly  not  the  anointing  which  is  described  in 
Luke  vii. ;  and  most  probably  was  not  the  anointing  of  Mark 
xiv.  The  anointing  in  Mark  was  two  days  before  the  passover, 
while  this  was  six.  In  Mark  the  ointment  was  poured  on  the 
head,  and  here  it  was  poured  on  the  feet.  In  Matthew  and  Mark 
several  "disciples"  murmured, but  here  only  Judas  is  named. 
These  discrepancies,  in  my  judgment,  are  insuperable,  and  make 
it  necessary  to  believe  that  there  were  two  distinct  anointings 
at  Bethany  during  the  last  six  days  preceding  the  crucifixion.  I 
grant  that  it  is  a  choice  between  difficulties,  and  that  there  are 
difficulties  in  the  view  I  maintain.  But  I  do  not  think  them  so 
weighty  as  those  of  the  other  view.  At  any  late,  I  am  sup- 
ported by  the  great  authority  of  Chiysostom,  Chemnitius,  and 
Lightfoot,  as  well  as  of  Whitby  and  Henry. 
14 


314  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

What  the  significance  of  Mary's  wiping  our  Lord's  feet  with 
the  hairs  of  her  head  may  be,  is  a  difficult  question.  Perhaps, 
from  our  ignorance  of  Eastern  customs  in  the  days  of  our  Lord's 
earthly  ministry,  we  are  hardly  qualified  to  give  an  opinion  about 
it  now.  On  points  like  these,  where  we  are  ignorant,  it  is  wisest 
not  to  conjecture. 

Calvin  says  :  "  The  usual  practice  was  to  anoint  the  head,  and 
on  this  account  Pliny  reckons  it  an  instance  of  excessive  luxury 
that  some  anointed  the  ankles.  What  John  says  about  the  feet 
amounts  to  this,  that  the  whole  body  of  Christ,  down  to  the  feet, 
was  anointed." 

Bollock  observes  that  at  this  time  Mary  seems  to  have  had  a 
deeper  and  more  intimate  perception  of  what  there  was  in  Christ, 
and  of  the  real  dignity  of  His  person,  than  any  of  His  disciples. 

1. — {Then  saith. . .Judas  Iscariot,  Simon's  son.]  We  know  nothing 
of  this  Simon,  who  he  was,  or  why  he  is  specially  mentioned 
here.  It  is  worth  notice,  that  hardly  any  name  occurs  so  fre- 
quently in  the  New  Testament  as  this.  We  have  the  follow- 
ing:— 

1.  The  Apostle  Simon,  called  also  Peter. 

2.  The  Apostle  Simon,  called  also  Zelotes,  and  the  Canaanite. 

3.  Simon  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  mentioned  with  James 
and  Joses.     (Matt.  xiii.  55.) 

4.  Simon  the  leper,  in  whose  house  the  anointing  took  place. 
(Matt.  xxvi.  6.) 

5.  Simon  the  Cyrenian,  who  carried  the  cross.  (Matt,  xxvii. 
32.) 

6.  Simon  the  Pharisee.     (Luke  vii.  40.) 

7.  Simon  the  sorcerer  at  Samaria.     (Acts  viii.  9.) 

8.  Simon  the  tanner.     (Acts  ix.  43.) 

It  would,  of  course,  be  interesting  to  know  if  Judas  Iscariot 
was  son  of  any  of  these,     But  we  have  no  clue  to  guide  us. 

Wordsworth  sees  in  the  mention  of  Judas  by  name  a  strong 
internal  evidence  of  the  late  date  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  Com- 
pare with  this  the  fact  that  John  alone  mentions  Peter  and  Mal- 
chus  by  name.     (John  xviii.  10.) 

[Which  should  betray  him.']  These  words  would  be  more  lit- 
erally rendered,  "  the  one  who  was  about  to  betray  Him." 

On  the  occasion  of  the  anointing  related  in  Matt.  xxvi.  and 
dlark  xiv.,  it  is  worth  noticing  that  "some  of  the  disciples," 
and  not  Judas  only,  found  fault  with  the  action.  It  rather  adds 
probability  to  the  theory  that  there  were  two  anointings  at 
Bethany. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  315 


Chrysostora  remarks,  that  Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning 
that  Judas  was  a  traitor,  and  often  rebuked  him  with  such 
words  as,  "  One  of  you  is  a  devil."  (John  vi.  64.)  Augustine 
also  remarks  that  we  must  not  suppose  Judas  never  fell  till  he 
received  money  from  the  Jews.  He  was  false  from  the  begin- 
ning. He  also  says  that  he  was  present  at  the  institution  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  was  a  communicant. 

5.— [Why  was  not  this  ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  pence... poor?] 
This  carping  question  is  a  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  wicked 
men  often  try  to  depreciate  a  good  action,  and  specially  in  the 
matter  of  giving  money.  When  the  deed  is  done  they  do  not 
say  downright  that  it  ought  not  to  have  been  done,  but  suggest 
that  something  better  might  have  been  done !  Those  who  do 
good  must  be  prepared  to  find  their  actions  carped  at  and  their 
motives  depreciated,  and  themselves  charged  with  neglecting 
one  class  of  duties  in  over-zeal  for  doing  others.  If  we  do 
nothing  until  everybody  commends  and  praises  us,  we  shall  nev- 
er do  any  good  in  the  world. 

"We  may  learn  from  this  verse  the  costly  nature  of  Mary's  oint- 
ment. If  workmen's  wages  were  "a  penny  a  day,"  (Matt.  xx. 
2,)  about  7^cl.  of  our  money,  this  holy  woman  must  have  poured 
on  our  Lord's  feet  what  was  worth  between  £9  and  £10  of  our 
money,  according  to  the  estimate  of  Judas.  But  allowances 
must  perhaps  be  made  for  an  exaggerated  statement  being  made 
by  an  envious  and  wicked  man. 

We  may  note  here  that  giving  to  the  poor  was  evidently  as- 
sumed to  be  a  part  of  every  Christian's  duty.  Compare  this 
with  Gal.  ii.  10.  In  a  country  like  England,  where  there  is  a 
poor  law,  Christians  are  sadly  apt  to  forget  this.  The  duty  of 
"  giving  to  the  poor,"  and  not  merely  paying  rates  in  obedience 
to  law,  is  just  as  obligatory  now  as  it  was  1800  years  ago. 

Ecolampadius  remarks  that  the  more  wicked  and  graceless 
people  are,  the  more  ready  they  are  to  find  fault  with  and  blame 
others,  and  to  see  no  beauty  in  what  they  do. 

Quesnel  remarks,  that  Judas  made  a  great  ado  about  300 
pence, — viz.,  £10,  and  a  little  ointment,  when  he  was  about  to 
sell  the  Son  of  God  for  30  pieces  of  silver, — viz.,  £3  15s. 

Henry  observe,  "  Coldness  of  love  to  Christ,  and  a  secret 
contempt  of  serious  piety,  when  they  appear  in  professors  of 
religion,  are  sad  presages  of  final  apostasy." 

Stier  remarks  :  "  We  have  in  the  words  of  Judas  an  example 
of  those  judgments  which  have  their  foundation  in  the  favourite 
principles  of  utilitarianism,  and  which  may  too  often  be  applied 
falsely,  to  the  wounding  of  pious  hearts." — "  This  lays  bare  the 
root  of  that  suspicion  with  which  missionary  offerings  for  the 
extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  are  looked  at,  because  of  the  poor 
whom  we  have  at  home." — "  We  have  here,  furthermore,  an  ex- 
ample of  all  cold  judgments  passed  on  the  virtuous  emotions  of 


316  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


warm  hearts,  of  all  more  or  less  conscious  or  unconscious  cen« 
sures  of  the  artless  outgoings  and  acts  of  honest  feelings,  and 
of  all  narrow-hearted  criticism  of  others  according  to  our  own 
mind  and  temper." 

6. — [This  he  said  not... cared  for  the  poor.'}  This  is  one  of  those 
parenthetical  explanations  or  glosses,  which  are  so  frequent  in 
St.  John's  Gospel.  The  Evangelist  tells  us  the  true  character 
of  Judas,  and  the  reason  he  said  what  he  did.  He  did  not  really 
care  about  the  poor,  but  put  their  interest  forward  as  a  special 
and  plausible  argument  for  depreciating  Mary's  action,  and  dis- 
couraging such  actions  in  others. 

There  is  something  very  instructive  in  this.  The  argument 
of  Judas  is  frequently  reproduced  in  the  present  day.  Hundreds 
of  people  excuse  themselves  from  one  class  of  duties  by  pre- 
tended zeal  for  others,  and  compensate  for  neglecting  Christ's 
cause  by  affecting  great  concern  for  the  poor.  Yet  in  reality 
they  care  nothing  for  the  poor,  and  only  want  to  save  their  own 
money,  and  to  be  spared  contributing  to  religious  objects. 

Some,  for  instance,  will  never  give  money  to  benefit  the  souls 
of  their  fellow-countrymen,  and  tell  us  we  must  first  relieve 
their  property  and  feed  their  bodies.— Some  again  will  give 
nothing  to  help  missions  abroad,  and  tell  us  we  must  first  mind 
the  poor  at  home. — Even  the  shareholders  of  some  great  joint 
stock  companies  have  been  known  to  express  great  concern  for 
the  poor  and  working-classes,  as  an  excuse  for  carrying  on  their 
business  on  Sundays.— The  language  of  St.  John  about  Judas 
Iscariot  shows  us  that  this  apparent  zeal  for  the  poor  should 
always  be  regarded  with  suspicion,  and  submitted  to  close 
analysis  and  cross-examination.  He  talked  brave  words  about 
the  poor,  as  if  he  cared  more  for  them  than  any  one  !  Yet  there 
is  not  the  slightest  proof  in  the  Gospels  that  he  cared  more  for 
them  than  others.  Above  all,  the  conclusion  of  the  verse  lets 
out  the  truth,  and  the  unerring  pen  of  inspiration  reveals  the 
man's  true  motives.  These  things  are  written  for  our  learning. 
There  are  few  greater  impostors  in  the  wrorld  than  some  of 
those  who  are  pretending  perpetually  to  care  about  the  poor. 
The  truest  and  best  friends  of  the  working-classes  and  the  poor, 
the  people  who  give  most  and  do  most  for  them,  will  always  be 
found  among  those  who  do  most  for  Christ.  It  is  the  succes- 
sors of  Mary  of  Bethany,  and  not  of  Judas  Iscariot,  who  really 
"  care  for  the  poor."  But  they  do  not  talk  about  it.  While 
others  talk  and  profess,  they  act. 

[But  because  he  was  a  thief.}  This  is  strong  language,  and  a 
very  heavy  accusation.  It  seems  to  indicate  that  this  was  the 
habitual  character  of  Judas.  He  always  had  been,  and  always 
wras,  a  dishonest  man.  So  saj's  an  inspired  Apostle.  In  the  face 
of  this  expression,  it  appears  to  me  impossible  to  prove  that 
Judas  ever  had  the  grace  of  God  at  any  time,  and  that  he  only 
fell  away  at  last.  He  was  inwardly  wrong  at  heart  all  the  way 
through.     Again,  I  find  it  impossible  to  believe  that  Judas  was 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  317 


a  highsouled  and  noble-minded,  though  greatly  erring  man, 
and  that  his  motive  in  betraying  his  Lord  was  to  hasten  His 
kingdom,  and  to  cut  short  the  period  of  his  humiliation.  I 
cannot  reconcile  this  with  the  word  "thief." 

Let  us  note  here  how  far  a  man  may  go  in  Christian  profes- 
sion without  any  inward  grace.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
Judas  up  to  this  time  was  unlike  other  Apostles.  Like  them 
he  had  seen  all  Christ's  miracles,  heard  Christ's  teaching,  lived 
in  Christ's  company,  and  had  himself  preached  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Yet  he  was  at  bottom  a  graceless  man.  Privileges  alone 
convert  nobody. 

Ferus  remarks  :  "  Let  us  never  put  confidence  in  man,  or  in 
any  sanctity  of  position,  office,  or  dress.  If  apostleship  did  not 
make  Judas  a  saint,  neither  will  position,  office,  or  dress  make 
thee  a  saint.  In  fact,  unless  you  first  have  inward  holiness, 
and  have  sought  it  from  God,  it  may  be  that  your  office  may 
render  you  more  wicked." 

Let  us  note  the  amazing  power  of  the  love  of  money.  No  be- 
setting sin  seems  so  thoroughly  to  wither  up  and  blight  and 
harden  the  heart.  No  wonder  it  is  called  "the  root  of  all  evil." 
(1  Tim.  vi.  10.)  However  many  the  faults  and  infirmities  re- 
corded of  saints  in  the  Bible,  we  have  not  a  single  example  of 
one  that  was  covetous. 

Chrysostom  observes :  "  A  dreadful  thing  is  the  love  of 
money !  It  disables  both  eyes  and  ears,  and  makes  man  worse 
to  deal  with  than  a  wild  beast,  allowing  a  man  to  consider 
neither  conscience,  nor  friendship,  nor  fellowship,  nor  salva- 
tion." 

Quesnel  observes  that  "  Christ  allows  His  money  to  be  taken 
from  Him,  but  never  His  sheep." 

[And  had  the  bag.]  The  Greek  word  rendered  "  bag "  is  a 
curious  one.  The  original  idea  is  that  of  a  bag  in  which 
musicians  kept  the  mouthpieces  or  reeds  of  their  instruments. 
From  that,  the  idea  evidently  was  attached  to  it,  of  a  bag  carried 
about  by  any  member  of  a  company,  such  as  that  of  the  dis- 
ciples, on  behalf  of  his  companions.  Whether  the  common 
stock  of  provisions  as  well  as  of  money  was  not  kept  in  this 
bag  perhaps  admits  of  a  question. 

Theophylact  says,  that  some  think  that  Judas  was  trusted 
with  the  care  of  the  money  as  one  of  the  meanest  and  most  in- 
ferior of  Christian  duties.  Thus  in  Acts,  the  Apostles  would 
not  "  serve  tables."     (Acts  vi.  2.) 

[And  bare  vjhat  was  put  therein.']  The  last  words  would  be 
more  literally  rendered,  "  the  things  put  therein."  Some,  as 
Origen,  Theophylact,  Pearce,  Lampe,  Tittman,  Bloomfield,  and 
Clarke,  have  thought  that  the  word  "  bare"  means  "  took  away, 
carried  off,  stole,  secreted,  or  set  apart  for  himself."— I  doubt 


318  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

this.  I  prefer  the  simple  idea  of  "  carrying  about."  It  was  the 
office  of  Judas  to  be  the  purse-keeper  of  the  little  company  of 
disciples.  The  contributions  in  money  and  provisions  of  those 
friends  who  ministered  to  our  Lord,  such  as  "Joanna,  Susanna, 
and  many  others,"  (Luke  viii.  3,)  were  probably  meant  by  the 
things  here  mentioned.  It  is  clear  that  our  Lord  had  no 
earthly  wealth,  nor  His  disciples.  It  is  equally  clear  that  His 
friends,  scattered  all  over  Palestine,  must  have  thought  it  a 
privilege,  whenever  He  came  among  them,  to  contribute  to  His 
maintenance  and  support.  Of  these  contributions  in  all  proba- 
bility Judas  was  treasurer. 

Let  professing  Christians  note  that  to  have  money  passing 
through  their  hands  is  a  snare  and  a  temptation.  It  is  a  snare 
by  which  many  in  every  age  have  been  cast  down. 

7. — {Then  said  Jesus,  Let  her  alone.']  This  is  unquestionably  a  re- 
buke to  Judas,  and  a  somewhat  sharp  one.  It  shows  how 
jealously  our  Lord  regards  any  attempt  to  hinder,  check,  or 
discourage  the  zeal  of  His  own  people.  Even  now,  when  some 
of  His  weak  disciples  undertake  work  which  calls  forth  enmity 
and  opposition,  He  can  make  all  difficulties  vanish,  and  say,  "  Let 
them  alone." 

[Against  the  day... burying... kept  this."]  The  first  word  here 
would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "for"  the  day.  I  believe  we 
must  not  interpret  this  sentence  as  if  our  Lord  meant  that  Mary 
really  knew  that  our  Lord's  burial  was  at  hand.  I  think  it 
rather  signifies,  "  The  ointment  which  Mary  has  poured  on  my 
feet,  though  she  meant  it  only  as  a  mark  of  honour,  happens  to 
be  a  most  suitable  thing,  as  my  death  and  burial  are  approach- 
ing. She  little  knew,  in  doing  what  she  did,  the  nearness  of  my 
death ;  but,  as  it  happens,  her  action  is  most  seasonable." 

Some,  as  Chrysostom,  think  that  our  Lord  intended  to  prick 
the  conscience  and  soften  the  feelings  of  Judas  by  talking  of  His 
"  burial,"  and  by  the  language  of  the  next  verse,  "  Me  ye  have 
not  always."  It  may  possibly  be  so.  But  I  rather  think  that 
in  both  instances  He  intended  to  direct  the  minds  of  all  around 
Him,  as  He  had  evidently  been  doing  for  some  weeks,  to  His 
approaching  death  and  the  conclusion  of  His  ministry.  He 
brings  that  conclusion  in  at  every  turn  now. 

Some  think  that  the  word  "  kept "  refers  to  the  ointment 
having  been  originally  got  by  Mary  for  her  brother  Lazarus, 
and  that  there  had  been  a  long  hoarding  up  of  it  from  the  day 
when  Lazarus  died,  and  that  Judas  blamed  Mary  for  having 
"kept'*  it  so  long,  and  not  having  sold  it.  But  this  is  purely 
conjectural. 

May  we  not  learn,  from  our  Lord's  words  here,  that  Christians 
do  not  always  know  the  full  meaning  of  what  they  do?  God  uses 
them  as  His  instruments,  without  their  being  aware  of  it  at  the 
time.      (Compare  John  xii.  16.) 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  319 

Calvin  says  :  "  Those  are  absurd  interpreters  who  infer  from 
Christ's  reply,  that  costly  and  magnificent  worship  is  pleasing  to 
God.  He  rather  excuses  Mary,  on  the  ground  of  her  having 
rendered  an  extraordinary  service,  which  ought  not  to  be  regard- 
ed as  a  perpetual  rule  for  the  worship  of  God." 

8.— [For  the  poor  always. .  .with  you.']  It  is  clear  from  these  words 
that  poverty  will  always  exist;  and  we  need  not  wonder.  So 
long  as  human  nature  is  what  it  is,  some  will  always  be  rich  and 
some  poor,  because  some  are  diligent  and  some  idle,  some  are 
strong  and  some  weak,  some  are  wise  and  some  foolish.  We 
need  never  dream  that  by  any  arrangement,  either  civil  or 
ecclesiastical,  poverty  can  ever  be  entirely  prevented.  The  ex- 
istence of  pauperism  is  no  proof  whatever  that  States  are  ill 
governed,  or  that  churches  are  not  doing  their  duty. 

Ecolampadius  thinks  that  our  Lord  here  refers  to  the  poor  as 
being  His  members,  and  that  there  is  a  latent  reference  to  the 
language  of  the  twenty -fifth  chapter  of  Matthew,  about  works 
of  mercy  being  regarded  as  works  done  to  Christ's  brethren  and 
to  Christ  Himself.      (Matt.  xxv.  40.) 

It  is  uoteworthy  that  Jesus  in  this  sentence  passes  from  a 
singular  verb  to  a  plural  one,  and  seems  to  address  not  Judas 
only,  but  all  present. 

[But  me  ye  have  not  always.]  These  words  show,  for  one  thing, 
that  our  Lord's  bodily  presence  on  earth  was  a  great  and  mirac- 
ulous event,  and  as  such  deserved  to  be  marked  with  peculiar 
honour;  and  for  another  thing,  that  His  departure  was  at  hand, 
so  that  the  opportunities  for  doing  Him  honour  were  becoming 
very  few.  Moreover,  if  words  mean  anything,  the  sentence 
completely  overthrows  the  whole  theory  of  Christ's  body  being 
present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine,  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 
That  favourite  Romish  doctrine  can  never  be  reconciled  with 
"  Me  ye  have  not  always." 

We  may  surely  learn,  from  this  verse,  that  relieving  the  poor, 
however  good  a  work,  is  not  so  important  a  work  as  doing  honour 
to  Christ.  In  times  like  these  it  is  well  to  remember  this.  Not 
a  few  seem  to  think  all  religion  consists  in  giving  temporal  help 
to  the  poor.  Yet  there  are  evidently  occasions  when  the  relief 
of  the  poor  must  not  be  allowed  to  supersede  the  direct  work 
of  honouring  Christ.  Doubtless  it  is  well  to  feed,  and  clothe, 
and  nurse  the  poor;  but  it  is  never  to  be  forgotten,  that  to 
glorify  Christ  among  them  is  far  better.  Moreover,  it  is  much 
easier  to  give  temporal  than  spiritual  help,  for  we  have  our  re- 
ward in  thanks,  and  gratitude,  and  the  praise  of  man.  To  hon- 
our Christ  is  far  harder,  and  gets  us  no  praise  at  all. 

Augustine  remarks:  "In  respect  of  the  presence  of  His 
Majesty,  we  have  Christ  always;  in  respect  to  the  presence  of 
the  flesh,  it  was  rightly  said,  'Me  ye  will  not  have  always.' 
The  Church  had  Him  in  respect  of  the  fiesh  for  a  few  days; 
now  by  faith  it  holds,  not  with  eyes  beholds  Him." 


320  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Zwingle  observes  that  this  sentence  "excludes  Christ's 
corporal  presence  from  the  Lord's  Supper.  According  to  His 
Divine  nature,  Christ  is  always  present  with  His  people.  Ac- 
cording to  His  human  nature,  He  is  in  one  place  in  heaven,  at 
the  right  hand  of  God."  Most  of  the  other  reformers  make 
the  same  comment. 

Bollock  remarks,  that  our  Lord's  defence  of  Mary  in  this 
passage  must  not  be  alleged  as  a  warrant  for  extravagant  and 
profuse  expenditure  in  the  public  worship  of  Christians. 
Jesus  Himself  points  out  that  the  occasion  was  extraordinary 
and  singular;  viz.,  on  the  eve  almost  of  His  burial,  an  occasion 
which  could  only  happen  once.  This  seems  to  imply  that  on 
ordinary  occasions  such  an  expenditure  as  that  of  Mary  would 
not  have  been  justifiable. 

9. — [Much  people... knew... there.'}  We  need  not  doubt  that  the 
news  of  our  Lord's  arrival  at  Bethany  would  soon  spread,  like 
lightning,  partly  because  Bethany  was  so  near  Jerusalem,  partly 
because  of  the  recent  miracle  wrought  there,  partly  because  of 
the  order  of  the  rulers  to  give  information  where  Christ  was, 
partly  because  of  the  approach  of  the  Passover,  and  the  crowds 
assembling  all  around  Jerusalem. 

[They  come... not... Jesus'  sake. ..see  Lazarus... dead, .]  This  sen- 
tence is  a  genuine  exhibition  of  human  nature.  Curiosity  is  one 
of  the  most  common  and  powerful  motives  in  man.  The  love 
of  seeing  something  sensational  and  out  of  the  common  way  is 
almost  universal.  When  people  could  see  at  once  both  the 
subject  of  the  miracle  and  Him  that  worked  the  miracle,  we 
need  not  wonder  that  they  resorted  in  crowds  to  Bethany. 
Yet  within  ten  days  a  far  greater  miracle  was  to  take  place,  viz., 
our  Lord's  own  resurection. 

10.— [But  the  chief  priests  consulted.']  It  admits  of  doubt  whether 
the  word  rendered  "  consulted  "  would  not  be  better  rendered 
"purposed"  or  "determined,"  as  in  Acts  xv.  37;  xxvii.  39 ;  2 
Cor.  i.  17.     This  is  the  view  of  Schleusner  and  Parkhurst. 

[That  they  might  put  Lazarus...  death.]  It  is  difficult  to  con- 
ceive a  greater  proof  of  hardened  and  incorrigible  wickedness 
of  heart  than  this  sentence  exhibits.  The  chief  priests  could 
not  possibly  deny  the  fact  of  Lazarus  having  been  raised,  or  ex- 
plain it  away.  He  was  a  witness  whose  testimony  against  their 
unbelief  was  overwhelming.  They  must  therefore  stop  his  mouth 
by  killing  him.  And  these  were  the  chief  ecclesiastical  leaders 
of  Israel ! — Moreover  Lazarus  had  done  them  no  harm.  Though 
a  disciple,  there  is  no  proof  that  he  was  a  leading  follower  of 
Christ,  much  less  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel.  But  he  was  an  in- 
convenient standing  evidence,  and  so  he  must  be  removed ! 

11. — [Because... many... Jews  went  away.]  This  sentence  shows  the 
immense  effect  that  the  raising  of  Lazarus  had  on  the  public 
mind,  in  spite  of  all  the  priests  could  do  to  prevent  it.  In  every 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII. 


321 


age  people  will  think  for  themselves,  when  God's  truth  comes 
into  a  land.  Prisons  and  threats  and  penalties  cannot  prevent 
men  thinking.  Mind  and  thought  cannot  be  chained.  When 
ecclesiastical  tyrants  burn  martyrs,  aud  destroy  Bibles,  and  si- 
lence preachers,  they  forget  there  is  one  thing  they  cannot  do. 
They  cannot  stop  the  inward  machinery  of  people's  thoughts. 

The  expression,  "  went  away,"  will  hardly  bear  the  sense  put 
on  it  by  Pearce,  of  "  withdrawing  themselves  from  the  service 
of  the  synagogue."  It  probably  only  means  "  went  to  Bethany." 
Bloomfield  says,  "  it  denotes  their  ceasing  to  pay  that  regard  to 
the  teaching  of  the  Scribes,  which  they  formerly  had  done." 

[And  believed  in  Jesus.~\  I  dare  not  think  that  this  "  believing  " 
means  more  than  intellectual  conviction  that  Jesus  must  be  the 
Messiah.  I  see  no  evidence  that  it  means  the  faith  of  the  heart. 
Yet  it  is  probable  this  was  exactly  the  state  of  mind  in  which 
many  hundreds  or  thousands  of  Jews  were  before  the  crucifixion, 
the  resurrection,  and  the  day  of  Pentecost,  convinced  but  not 
converted,  persuaded  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  of  God,  but 
afraid  to  confess  Him.  Hence  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  we  can- 
not doubt  that  many  hundreds  of  Peter's  hearers  were  prepared 
to  believe.  The  stony  ground  of  prejudice  and  ignorant  adhe- 
sion to  Judaism  had  been  broken  to  pieces,  and  the  seed  fell  in- 
to soil  prepared  for  it. 

Poole  thinks  that  Lazarus  after  his  marvellous  resurrection, 
"possibly  spake  of  it,  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  God,"  and 
that  this  excited  the  special  anger  of  the  priests. 


JOHN  XII.    12—19. 


12  On  the  next  day  much  people  that 
were  come  to  the  feast,  when  they 
heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  Jeru- 
salem, 

13  Took  branches  of  palm  trees,  and 
went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  cried,  Ho- 
sanna:  Blessed  is  the  King  of  Israel 
that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

14  And  Jesus,  when  he  had  found  a 
young  ass,  sat  thereon ;  as  it  is  written, 

15  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion:  be- 
hold, thy  King  cometh,  sitting  on  an 
ass's  colt. 

16  These  things  understood  not  his 
disciples  at  the  first:  but  when  Jesus  | 


was  glorified,  then  remembered  they 
that  these  things  were  written  of  him, 
and  that  they  had  done  these  thinga 
unto  him. 

17  The  people  therefore  that  was 
with  him  when  he  called  Lazarus  out 
of  his  grave,  and  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  bare  record. 

18  For  this  cause  the  people  also  met 
him,  for  that  they  heard  that  he  had 
done  this  miracle. 

19  The  Pharisees  therefore  said 
among  themselves,  Perceive  ye  how 
ye  prevail  nothing?  behold,  the  world  ia 
gone  after  him. 


A  careful  reader  of   the    Gospels   can   hardly  fail    to 
observe   that  our  Lord   Jesus   Christ's   conduct,   at    this 


322  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

stage  of  His  earthly  ministry,  is  very  peculiar.  It  is 
unlike  auy thing  else  recorded  of  Him  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. Hitherto  we  have  seen  Him  withdrawing  as 
much  as  possible  from  public  notice,  retiring  into  the 
wilderness,  and  checking  those  who  would  have  brought 
Him  forward  and  made  Him  a  king.  As  a  rule  He  did 
not  court  popular  attention.  He  did  not  "  cry  or  strive, 
or  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets."  (Matt. 
xl:.  19.)  Here,  on  the  contrary,  we  see  Him  making 
a  public  entry  into  Jerusalem,  attended  by  an  immense 
crowd  of  people,  and  causing  even  the  Pharisees  to  say, 
"  Behold,  the  world  has  gone  after  Him." 

The  explanation  of  this  apparent  inconsistency  is  not 
hard  to  find  out.  The  time  had  come  at  last  when 
Christ  was  to  die  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  The  time 
had  come  when  the  true  passover  Lamb  was  to  be  slain, 
when  the  true  blood  of  atonement  was  to  be  shed,  when 
Messiah  was  to  be  "cut  off"  according  to  prophecy, 
(Dan.  ix.  26,)  when  the  wa}r  into  the  holiest  was  to 
be  opened  by  the  true  High  Priest  to  all  mankind. 
Knowing  all  this,  our  Lord  purposely  drew  attention 
to  Himself.  Knowing  this,  He  placed  Himself  promi- 
nently under  the  notice  of  the  whole  Jewish  nation.  It 
was  only  meet  and  right  that  this  thing  should  not  be 
"  done  in  a  corner."  (Acts  xxvi.  26.)  If  ever  there 
was  a  transaction  in  our  Lord's  earthly  ministry  which 
was  public,  it  was  the  Sacrifice  which  He  offered  up  on 
the  cross  of  Calvary.  He  died  at  the  time  of  year  when 
all  the  tribes  were  assembled  at  Jerusalem  for  the  pass- 
over  feast.  Nor  was  this  all.  He  died  in  a  week  when, 
by  His  remarkable  public  entry  into  Jerusalem,  He  had 
caused  the  eyes  of  all  Israel  to  be  specially  fixed  upon 
Himself. 

We  learn,  for  or.e  thing,  in  these  verses,  how  entirely 
voluntary  the  sujferings  of  Christ  were. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  323 

It  is  impossible  not  to  see  in  the  history  before  us 
that  our  Lord  had  a  mysterious  influence  over  the  minds 
tnd  wills  of  all  around  Him,  whenever  He  thought  fit 
to  use  it.  Nothing  else  can  account  for  the  effect  which 
His  approach  to  Jerusalem  had  on  the  multitudes  which 
accompanied  Him.  The}'  seem  to  have  been  carried  for- 
ward by  a  secret  constraining  power,  which  they  were 
obliged  to  obey,  in  spite  of  the  disapproval  of  the  leaders 
of  the  nation.  In  short,  just  as  our  Lord  was  able  to 
make  winds,  and  waves,  and  diseases,  and  devils  obey 
Him,  so  was  He  able,  when  it  pleased  Him,  to  turn 
the  minds  of  men  according  to  His  will. 

For  the  case  before  us  does  not  stand  alone.  The 
men  of  Nazareth  could  not  hold  Him  when  He  chose 
to  "  pass  through  the  midst  of  them  and  go  His  way." 
(Luke  iv.  30.)  The  angry  Jews  of  Jerusalem  could 
not  detain  him  when  they  would  have  laid  violent 
hands  on  Him  in  the  Temple ;  but,  "  going  through  the 
midst  of  them,  He  passed  by."  (John  viii.  59.)  Above 
all,  the  very  soldiers  who  apprehended  Him  in  the  garden, 
at  first  "  went  backward  and  fell  to  the  ground."  (John 
xviii.  6.)  In  each  of  these  instances  there  is  but  one 
explanation.  A  Divine  influence  was  put  forth.  There 
was  about  our  Lord  during  His  whole  earthly  ministry 
a  mysterious  "  hiding  of  His  power."  (Hab.  iii.  4.)  But 
He  had  almighty  power  when  He  was  pleased  to  use 
it. 

Why,  then,  did  He  not  resist  His  enemies  at  last? 
Why  did  He  not  scatter  the  band  of  soldiers  who  came 
to  seize  Him,  like  chaff  before  the  wind?  There  is  but 
one  answer.  He  was  a  willing  Sufferer  in  order  to  pro- 
cure redemption  for  a  lost  and  ruined  soul.  He  had 
undertaken  to  give  His  own  life  as  a  ransom,  that  we 
might  live  forever,  and  He  laid  it  down  on  the  cross 
with  all  the  desire  of  Hi';  heart.     He  did  not  bleed  and 


324  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

suffer  and  die  because  He  was  vanquished  by  superior 
force,  and  could  not  help  Himself,  but  because  He  loved 
us,  and  rejoiced  to  give  Himself  for  us  as  our  Substitute. 
He  did  not  die  because  He  could  not  avoid  death,  but 
because  He  was  willing  with  all  His  heart  to  make  His 
soul  an  offering  for  sin. 

Forever  let  us  rest  our  hearts  on  this  most  comfort- 
able thought.  We  have  a  most  willing  and  loving  Sav- 
iour. It  was  His  delight  to  do  His  Father's  will,  and 
to  make  a  way  for  lost  and  guilty  man  to  draw  near  to 
God  in  peace.  He  loved  the  work  He  had  taken  in  hand, 
and  the  poor  sinful  world  which  He  came  to  save.  Never, 
then,  let  us  give  way  to  the  unworthy  thought  that 
our  Saviour  does  not  love  to  see  sinners  coming  to  Him, 
and  does  not  rejoice  to  save  them.  He  who  was  a  most 
willing  Sacrifice  on  the  cross  is  also  a  most  willing 
Saviour  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  He  is  just  as  willing 
to  receive  sinners  who  come  to  Him  now  for  peace,  as 
He  was  to  die  for  sinners,  when  He  held  back  His  power 
and  willingly  suffered  on  Calvary. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses,  how  mi- 
nutely the  prophecies  concerning  Christ's  first  coming  were 
fulfilled. 

The  riding  into  Jerusalem  on  an  ass,  which  is  here 
recorded,  might  seem  at  first  sight  a  simple  action,  and 
in  no  way  remarkable.  But  when  we  turn  to  the  Old 
Testament,  we  find  that  this  very  thing  had  been  predicted 
by  the  Prophet  Zechariah  five  hundred  years  before. 
(Zech.  ix.  9.)  We  find  that  the  coming  of  a  Redeemer 
some  day  was  not  the  only  thing  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
had  revealed  to  the  Fathers,  but  that  even  the  least 
particulars  of  His  earthly  career  were  predicted  and 
written   down   with   precise  accurac}7. 

Such  fulfilments  of  prophecy  as  this  deserve  the  special 
attention  of  all  who   love   the   Bible   and   read   it  with 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  325 

reverence.  They  show  us  that  every  word  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture was  given  by  inspiration  of  God.  They  teach  us  to 
beware  of  the  mischievous  practice  of  spiritualizing  and 
explaining  away  the  language  of  Scripture.  We  must 
settle  it  in  our  minds  that  the  plain,  literal  meaning  of 
the  Bible  is  generally  the  true  and  correct  meaning. 
Here  is  a  prediction  of  Zechariah  literally  and  exactly 
fulfilled.  Our  Lord  was  not  merely  a  very  humble  person, 
as  some  spiritualizing  interpreters  would  have  explained 
Zechariah's  words  to  mean,  but  He  literally  rode  into 
Jerusalem  on  an  ass.  Above  all,  such  fulfilments  teach 
us  what  we  may  expect  in  looking  forward  to  the  second 
advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  show  us  that  we  must 
look  for  a  literal  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies  con- 
cerning that  second  coming,  and  not  for  a  figurative  and 
a  spiritual  one.  Forever  let  us  hold  fast  this  great  prin- 
ciple. Happy  is  that  Bible-reader  who  believes  the  words 
of  the  Bible  to  mean  exactly  what  they  seem  to  mean. 
Such  a  man  has  got  the  true  key  of  knowledge  in  looking 
forward  to  things  to  come.  To  know  that  predictions 
about  the  second  advent  of  Christ  will  be  fulfilled  literally, 
just  as  predictions  about  the  first  advent  of  Christ  were  ful- 
filled literally,  is  the  first  step  towards  a  right  understand- 
ing of  unfulfilled  prophecy. 

Notes.    John  XII.  12—19. 

12. — \_On  the  next  day.]  This  day  must  have  been  the  Sunday 
before  Easter,  which  is  commonly  known  in  England  as  "  Palm 
Sunday,"  from  the  circumstance  here  related. 

[Much  people... come  to  the  feast.']  This  must  include  many  of 
the  Jews  who  had  come  up  to  the  passover  from  Galilee,  and 
were  doubtless  well  acquainted  with  our  Lord's  ministry  and  the 
numerous  miracles  He  had  wrought  in  Galilee.  Some  of  them 
in  all  human  probability  had  formed  part  of  the  multitude 
whom  He  fed  with  a  few  loaves  in  the  wilderness. 

[When  they  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  Jerusalem.']  We 
must  suppose  that  by  some  means  our  Lord's  intention  of 
coming  to  Jerusalem  must  have  become  known,  either  by  Him* 


326  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


self  communicating  it,  or  by  His  disciples  learning  it  and  telling 
others.  This  information  would  be  carried  back  to  the  city  by 
those  who  came  from  thence  to  Bethany  on  Saturday.  Bethany, 
however,  was  on  the  direct  road  from  Jericho  to  Jerusalem,  and 
the  tidings  of  our  Lord's  approach  may  have  travelled  before 
Him  for  some  days. 

Rollock  thinks  this  multitude  must  have  been  chiefly  com- 
posed of  Jews  not  residing  in  Jerusalem.  The  Jerusalem  Jews, 
he  thinks,  are  an  instance  of  the  old  proverb,  which  he  quotes, 
"The  nearer  the  Church  the  further  from  God." 

13.— [  Took  branches  of  palm-trees,  and  went. ..meet  Mm.']  The  pre- 
cise motive  of  this  action  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  Palm 
branches  were  carried  by  processions  attending  kings  or  victo- 
rious generals  on  public  occasions.  The  triumphant  host  in 
heaven,  which  John  saw  in  vision,  was  composed  of  persons 
having  "palms  in  their  hands."  (Rev.  vii.  9.)  It  may  be  that 
some  of  the  crowd  on  this  occasion  believed  that  Jesus  was  the 
Messiah.  Others,  we  may  be  sure,  did  what  the  rest  did,  without 
any  special  motive  at  all.  At  most  we  can  only  suppose  that 
the  multitude  had  a  vague  idea  that  Jesus  was  somebody  very 
remarkable,  a  prophet,  or  some  one  raised  up  by  God,  and  as 
such  did  Him  honour. 

Rollock  thinks  the  custom  of  carrying  branches  at  the  feast 
of  tabernacles,  as  the  expression  of  joy,  was  the  motive  of  the 
crowd  here. 

[And  cried,  Ebsanna.]  This  Hebrew  word  is  taken  from 
Psalm  cxviii.  25,  and  signifies  "  Save  now,  we  beseech  thee." 

Calvin  thinks  this  phrase  testified  that  they  acknowledged 
Christ  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  considers  that  the  cxviii.  Psalm 
had  special  reference  to  Messiah's  coming. 

[Blessed.. .King  of  Israel  that  cometh... name. ..Lord.']  This 
sentence  would  be  more  literally  rendered  "Blessed  is  He  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  king  of  Israel."  It  is 
partly  taken  from  Psalm  cxviii.  26 ;  but  there  the  words  are 
simply  "Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord," 
and  no  mention  is  made  of  "  the  king." — We  can  only  con- 
jecture that  some  of  the  multitude  had  a  vague  idea  that  Jesus 
had  come  to  be  a  temporal  King,  and  a  conquering  Messiah, 
who  would  set  Israel  free  from  all  foreign  dominion.  These 
few  caught  up  the  words  of  the  Psalm,  and  their  cry  was  taken 
up  by  the  many  around  them,  perhaps  without  knowing  dis- 
tinctly what  they  did  or  said.  Nothing  is  so  soon  caught  up  as 
a  popular  cry.  From  "Hosanna  "  to  "  Crucify  Him  "  there  was 
only  an  interval  of  a  very  few  days!  Nothing  is  so  worthless 
as  popular  applause. 

Theophylact  holds  decidedly  that  the  multitude  honoured  our 
Lord  as  God.    But  I  cannot  think  it. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  327 

U.— [And  Jesus.. .found.. .ass,  sat  thereon.']  That  there  was  no 
chance  or  accident  in  the  ass  being  found,  we  know  from  St. 
Matthew's  Gospel,  where  we  read  that  the  disciples  were  sent 
to  get  the  ass  ready.  (Matt.  xxi.  7.)  Every  step  of  this  tri- 
umphal progress  into  Jerusalem  was  prearranged. 

To  ride  upon  an  ass,  we  must  always  remember,  was  not  so 
low  and  ignominious  a  mode  of  travelling  as  it  may  seem  to 
us.  The  Eastern  ass  is  a  very  different  creature  to  the  English 
ass,  larger,  stronger,  and  far  more  valuable.  Asses  are 
specially  named  as  part  of  the  wealth  of  Abraham,  Jacob,  and 
Job.  (Gen.  xii.  16;  xxx.  43;  Job  xlii.  12.)  Solomon  had  an 
officer  specially  over  the  asses.  (1  Chrou.  xxvii.  30.)  Abra- 
ham, Balaam,  Achsah,  Abigail,  and  the  Shunamite  rich  woman, 
all  rode  on  asses.  To  ride  on  white  asses  was  a  mark  of  great 
men  in  the  days  of  the  Judges.  (Judges  v.  10.)  The  idea 
therefore  of  anything  degrading  in  riding  on  an  ass  must  be 
entirely  dismissed  from  our  minds. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  ass  is  not  the 
animal  that  a  king  or  ruler,  in  any  age,  has  ever  chosen  to  use, 
on  public  occasions,  in  heading  a  procession.  The  horse  has 
always  been  preferred.  The  use  of  an  ass,  we  cannot  doubt, 
was  meant  to  show  that  our  Lord's  kingdom  was  utterly  unlike 
the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  No  Roman  soldier  in  the  garrison 
of  Jerusalem,  who,  standing  at  his  post  or  sitting  in  his  bar- 
rack-window, saw  our  Lord  riding  on  an  ass,  could  report  to 
his  centurion  that  He  looked  like  one  who  came  to  wrest  the 
kingdom  of  Judaea  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Romans,  drive  out 
Pontius  Pilate  and  his  legions  from  the  tower  of  Antonia,  and 
achieve  independence  for  the  Jews  with  the  sword ! 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "young ass"  here,  is  a  diminutive, 
and  seems  used  intentionally  to  show  that  it  was  a  very  young 
or  small  ass. 

[As  it  is  written.']  By  riding  on  an  ass  our  Lord  had  fulfilled 
the  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  in  which,  500  years  before,  the  prophet 
had  foretold  that  the  King  of  Zion  would  one  clay  appear  "  riding 
upon  an  ass."  At  the  time  when  he  prophesied  this,  there  were 
no  kings  in  Jerusalem.  The  kingdom  had  ceased  at  the  captivity. 
We  cannot  doubt  that  this  prophecy  was  well  known  among  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  taken  together  with  the  fact  that 
Daniel's  70  weeks  were  expiring,  our  Lord's  entry  into  Jerusalem 
in  this  fashion  must  have  raised  many  thoughts  in  their  hearts. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  many  like  events  in  our  Lord's  earthly 
ministry  were  foreknown  and  foretold  long  before  they  happened, 
and  with  increasing  minuteness  and  particularity  as  the  roll  of 
prophecy  drew  near  to  an  end. 

15.— [ Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion,  etc.]  It  will  be  observed,  of  course, 
that  John  does  not  quote  literally  and  exactly  all  that  Zechariah 
said.     He  omits  several  words.    The  explanation  is   simple. 


328  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 


lie  did  not  quote  from  memory  only,  and  so  forget  part;  but  he 
purposely  only  quoted  that  part  of  the  prediction  which  was  now 
especially  fulfilled;  viz.,  "the  riding  on  the  ass."  The  object 
of  the  prophecy,  when  it  was  first  delivered,  was  to  comfort 
the  Jews  in  their  low  and  decayed  state,  after  their  return  from 
Babylon,  by  a  promise  of  Messiah.  Therefore  Zechariah  was 
taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  say  things  which  may  be  paraphrased 
as  follows:  "Fear  not;  be  not  cast  down  or  depressed,  O 
daughter  of  Siou,  or  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Low  and  de- 
pressed as  your  condition  may  be  now,  there  will  be  a  day 
when  you  shall  have  a  King  again.  There  shall  come  One  who 
will  ride  on  a  certain  public  occasion  into  thy  gates, — a  King 
on  au  ass's  colt,  not  as  a  warrior,  with  a  sword  in  hand,  but  as 
a  peaceful  Prince,  a  just  and  holy  King,  better  even  than  David, 
Solomon,  Hezekiah,  or  Josiah,  and  bringing  with  Him  salvation 
lor  souls.  Therefore  think  not  thyself  "forsaken,  because  thou 
art  poor  now,  and  hast  no  king.  Look  forward  to  thy  coming 
King." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  Christ's  coming,  first  or  second,  is  always 
the  great  topic  of  comfort  in  prophetical  writings. 

16. — [  TJiese  tilings  understood  not... disciples. ..first.~]  It  is  clear  from 
this  and  other  kindred  passages,  that  our  Lord's  own  immediate 
followers  had  a  very  imperfect  knowledge  of  our  Lord's 
Person  and  work,  and  of  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  which  was 
going  on  around  them.  Brought  up  amidst  Jewish  notions  of  a 
glorious  temporal  Messiah,  they  failed  to  see  the  full  meaning 
of  many  of  our  Lord's  doings. 

Let  us  never  forget  that  men  may  be  true  Christians,  and 
right  hearted,  and  yet  be  very  ignorant  on  some  points. 
"Faith,"  says  Zwingle,  on  this  verse,  "admits  of  degrees  and 
increase."  In  estimating  others,  we  must  make  great  allowance 
for  early  training  and  associations. 

[But  when  Jesus  ivas  glorified.']  This  must  mean,  as  Theophy- 
lact  says,  our  Lord's  ascension.  After  that  time,  and  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  the  minds  of  the  disciples  were  greatly  enlight- 
ened. Compare  John  vii.  39  :  "  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given, 
because  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified." 

[Then  remembered... these  things... written  of  him.']  The  power 
of  memory  to  see  things,  long  after  they  happen,  in  a  new  Hght, 
and  then  to  recollect  them  vividly,  is  very  remarkable.  In  no 
case  does  it  appear  more  curiously  than  in  the  rising  again  in 
our  minds  of  texts  and  sermons  heard  long  ago,  which  at  the 
time  apparently  left  no  impression  on  us.  Preachers  and 
teachers  may  take  comfort  in  tais.  All  is  not  lost  that  they  say, 
although  their  hearers  and  scholars  may  seem  at  the  time  to 
pay  no  attention.  Their  words  in  many  cases  shall  have  a 
resurrection.  One  great  cause  of  this  is,  that  it  is  part  i>f  the 
Holy  Ghost's  office  "to  bring  things  to  remembrance."  (John 
xiv.  26.) 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  329 

I  And... they... done  these  things... him.']  The  disciples  found, 
long  after  the  triumphant  entry  into  Jerusalem,  that  they  had 
been  unconscious  actors  in  a  mighty  accomplishment  of  Scrip- 
ture. This  is  a  thought  for  us  all.  We  have  not  the  least  idea, 
during  the  greater  part  of  our  lives,  how  much  of  God's  great 
purposes  on  earth  are  being  carried  on  through  us  and  by  us, 
without  our  being  conscious  of  it.  The  full  extent  to  which 
they  are  carried  on  we  shall  never  know  till  we  wake  up  in 
another  world.  We  shall  then  discern  with  wonder  and  amaze- 
ment the  full  meaning  of  many  a  thing  in  which  we  were 
unconscious  agents  during  our  lives. 

Calvin  remarks  :  "  Then,  after  the  ascension,  did  it  occur  to 
the  disciples  that  Christ  did  not  do  these  things  rashly,  and  that 
these  men  were  not  employed  in  idle  amusement,  but  that  the 
whole  transaction  had  been  regulated  by  the  providence  of 
God." 

Poole  observes,  that  here  St.  John  "  confesseth  his  own  igno- 
rance." He  was  present,  and  saw  all  that  was  done,  but  did  not 
understand  it  at  the  time. 

17. — \Tlie  people  therefore.. .Lazarus... bare  record.]  I  feel  no  doubt 
that  this  verse  describes  one  part  of  the  multitude  which  met 
our  Lord,  and  the  following  verse  describes  another  part.  One 
part,  and  of  course  a  small  one,  consisted  of  those  who  had 
seen  the  raising  of  Lazarus.  The  other,  and  a  much  larger  one, 
consisted  of  those  who  had  only  heard  the  report. 

That  there  must  have  been  a  very  large  number  of  persons 
present  at  the  miracle  of  Bethany  is,  I  think,  indirectly  proved 
by  the  expression  here  used,  "  people  that  were  with  Him." 

The  words,  "  bare  record,"  must  mean  that  they  testified  that  a 
great  miracle  really  had  been  wrought,  and  that  this  same  Jesus, 
now  riding  on  an  ass  before  the  eyes  of  the  people,  was  that  very 
Person  who  had  wrought  it.  I  do  not  see  that  we  can  possibly 
get  more  out  of  the  expression,  and  I  cannot  suppose  that  these 
people  testified  their  belief  in  Christ's  Messiahship. 

The  double  expression,  "  called  out  of  his  grave,"  and  "  raised 
from  the  dead,"  deserves  notice.  It  is  doubtless  meant  to  keep 
before  our  minds  the  mighty  simplicity  of  the  means  used  by 
our  Lord.  He  spoke,  and  it  was  done.  He  "called"  to  Laza- 
rus to  come  forth,  and  he  was  "  raised  "  at  once. 

18. — [For  this  cause. ..people  met  him,  etc.]  This  verse  describes 
the  state  of  mind  of  the  larger  part  of  the  multitude  which  sur- 
rounded our  Lord  at  His  entry  into  Jerusalem.  It  consisted  of 
those  who  had  heard  the  report  of  His  raising  Lazams, — a 
story  magnified,  no  doubt,  in  the  telling.  Strong  curiosity  to 
see  the  Person  who  had  done  such  a  miracle  would  call  forth 
an  immense  crowd  in  any  city.  But  among  Jews,  familiar  with 
Old  Testament  miracles,  assembled  in  enormous  numbers  for 
the  Passover,  excited  by  the  rumour  of  Messiah  coming,— 


330  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

among  such  we  may  well  believe  that  the  report  of  Jesus  com- 
ing in  from  Bethany  would  draw  together  many  myriads  of 
spectators  to  meet  Him. 

The  Greek  words,  "  for  this  cause,"  here  seem  to  refer  for- 
ward to  the  latter  part  of  the  verse,  and  not  backward  to  the 
preceding  verse.  Compare  x.  17,  where  the  same  form  of  lan- 
guage is  used. 

19.— [The  Pharisees... said... prevail  nothing.]  This  is  the  language 
of  men  baffled,  angry,  and  at  their  wits'  end  from  vexation,  to 
see  their  plans  defeated.  Instead  of  finding  people  willing  to 
lay  hands  on  Jesus  as  a  malefactor,  and  to  deliver  Him  up  into 
their  power,  they  beheld  a  large  multitude  surrounding  Him 
with  joyful  acclamations,  and  saluting  Him  as  a  King!  Of 
course  they  could  do  nothing  but  sit  still  and  see  it.  The  least 
attempt  to  use  violence  against  our  Lord  would  have  raised  a 
tumult,  and  endangered  their  own  lives.  So  that  they  were 
obliged  to  see  their  most  hated  enemy  entering  Jerusalem  in 
triumph,  like  Mordecai  led  by  Haman.     (Esther  vi.  11.) 

"Perceive  ye,"  I  believe,  should  be  taken  as  an  imperative, 
and  not  as  an  interrogative  indicative.  It  sounds  like  the  lan- 
guage of  men  looking  on  from  the  city  walls  or  the  temple  courts, 
as  the  huge  procession  wound  slowly  through  the  gates  of  the 
city.  "  Behold  this  sight!  Behold  how  you  do  nothing  effect- 
ual to  stop  this  fellow's  course !  Your  order  to  denounce 
Him,  and  have  Him  apprehended,  is  utterly  useless  aud  unprofit- 
able." 

Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  think  that  those  who  said  this 
had  some  faith  and  felt  rightly,  but  had  not  courage  enough  to 
confess  Christ.  But  I  cannot  agree  with  them.  Calvin  and 
other  reformers  think,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  the  language 
of  Christ's  enemies. 

Bullinger  observes  that  wicked  men  show  their  wickedness 
especially  by  their  dislike  of  true  religion,  and  their  annoyance 
when,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  it  seems  to  enjoy  a  temporary 
popularity.  For  neglect  and  contempt  of  religion  they  show 
no  concern  at  all. 

[Behold... world.. .gone  after  him.']  Some  allowance  of  course 
must  be  made  for  the  exaggerated  language  which  angry  aud 
disappointed  men  use  under  the  influence  of  passion.  Neverthe- 
less the  word  "world"  may  not  be  really  so  extravagant  as  it 
appears  at  first,  when  we  consider  the  immense  number  of  Jews 
who  attended  the  passover  feast.  According  to  a  computation 
made  by  Josephus  there  were  nearly  three  millions  of  people  as- 
sembled on  such  occasions  at  Jerusalem.  At  this  rate  we  can  un- 
derstand that  the  crowd  drawn  together  by  our  Lord's  public  en- 
try might  well  be  so  large  as  to  warrant  the  saying,  "  The  world 
isgoue  after  him."  Most  of  the  crowd,  it  may  be  remembered, 
were  not  dwellers  in  Jerusalem,  but  strangers,  who  were  only 


JOHN,    CHA1?.    XII. 


331 


visitors  or  sojourners,  absent  from  home,  and  would  materially 
swell  a  crowd. 

In  leaving  this  passage  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that  there 
must  have  been  an  overruling,  constraining  influence  on  the 
minds  of  the  Jewish  people  on  the  occasion  of  our  Lord's  trium- 
phant entry  into  Jerusalem.  This,  no  doubt,  was  an  influence 
miraculously  exercised  by  our  Lord  in  order  to  draw  all  men's 
attention  to  Himself,  and  to  make  His  approaching  Sacrifice  on 
the  cross  as  public  an  event  as  possible. 

Rollock  observes  :  "A  secret  power  of  royal  authority  stirred 
up  the  minds  of  the  multitude  to  receive  Christ  as  a  king."  He 
also  observes  that  it  is  the  same  power  which  Christ  will  put 
forth  when  He  comes  at  the  last  day  to  judge  the  world. 


JOHN  XII.    20-2G. 


20  And  thero  wore  certain  Greeks 
among  them  that  came  up  to  worship 
at  the  feast: 

21  The  same  came  therefore  to  Phil- 
ip, which  was  of  Bethsaida  of  Galilee, 
and  desired  him,  saying,  Sir,  we  would 
see  Jesus. 

22  Philip  cometh  and  telleth  An- 
drew: and  again  Andrew  and  Philip 
tell  Jesus. 

23  And  Jesus  answered  them,  saying 
The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man 
should  bo  glorified. 


24  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the 
ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone:  but 
if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit. 

25  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose 
it;  and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this 
world  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eter- 
nal. 

26  If  any  man  serve  mo,let  him  fol- 
low me;  and  where  I  am,  there  shall 
also  my  servant  be :  if  any  man  serve 
me,  him  will  my  Father  honour. 


There  is  more  going  on  in  some  people's  minds  than  we  are 
aware  of.  The  case  of  the  Greeks  before  us  is  a  re- 
markable proof  of  this.  Who  would  have  thought 
when  Christ  was  on  earth,  that  foreigners  from  a  distant 
land  would  have  come  forward  in  Jerusalem,  and  said, 
"  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus  "  ?  Who  these  Greeks  were, 
what  they  meant,  why  they  desired  to  see  Jesus,  what 
their  inward  motives  were, — all  these  are  questions  we 
cannot  answer.  Like  Zaccheus,  they  may  have  been 
influenced  by  curiosity.  Like  the  wise  men  from  the 
East,  they  may  have  surmised  that  Jesus  was  the  prom- 
ised King  of  the  Jews,  whom  all  the  eastern  world  waa 


332  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

expecting.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  they  showed 
more  interest  in  Christ  than  Caiaphas  and  all  his  com- 
panions. Enough  to  know  that  they  drew  from  our 
Lord's  lips  sayings  which  are  still  read  in  one  hundred 
and  fifty  languages,  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the 
other. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  from  our  Lord's  words  in  this 
passage,  that  death  is  the  way  to  spiritual  life  and  glory. 
"  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground,  it  abideth 
alone  ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit." 

This  sentence  was  primarily  meant  to  teach  the  wonder- 
ing Greeks  the  true  nature  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  If 
they  thought  to  see  a  King  like  the  kings  of  this  world,  they 
were  greatly  mistaken.  Our  Lord  would  have  them  know 
that  He  came  to  carry  a  cross,  and  not  to  wear  a  crown. 
He  came  not  to  live  a  life  of  honour,  ease,  and  magnifi- 
cence, but  to  die  a  shameful  and  dishonoured  death.  The 
kingdom  He  came  to  set  up  was  to  begin  with  a  cruci- 
fixion, and  not  with  a  coronation.  Its  glory  was  to  take 
its  rise  not  from  victories  won  by  the  sword,  and  from 
accumulated  treasures  of  gold  and  silver,  but  from  the 
death  of  its  King. 

But  this  sentence  was  also  meant  to  teach  a  wider 
and  broader  lesson  still.  It  revealed,  under  a  striking 
figure,  the  mighty  foundation  truth,  that  Christ's  death 
was  to  be  the  source  of  spiritual  life  to  the  world.  From 
His  cross  and  passions  was  to  spring  up  a  mighty  harvest 
of  benefit  to  all  mankind.  His  death,  like  a  grain  of 
seed-corn,  was  to  be  the  root  of  blessings  and  mercies 
to  countless  millions  of  immortal  souls.  In  short,  the 
great  principle  of  the  Gospel  was  once  more  exhibited, — 
that  Christ's  vicarious  death  (not  His  life,  or  miracles,  or 
teaching,  but  His  death)  was  to  bring  forth  fruit  to  the 
praise  of  God,  and  to  provide  redemption  for  a  lost 
world. 


john,  chap.  xn.  333 

This  deep  and  mighty  sentence  was  followed  by  a  prac- 
tical application,  which  closely  concerns  ourselves.  "  He 
that  hateth  his  life  shall  keep  it."  He  that  would  be  saved 
must  be  ready  to  give  up  life  itself,  if  necessa^,  in  order 
to  obtain  salvation.  He  must  bury  his  love  of  the  world, 
with  its  riches,  honours,  pleasures,  and  rewards,  with  a 
full  belief  that  in  so  doing  he  will  reap  a  better  harvest, 
both  here  and  hereafter.  He  who  loves  the  life  that  now 
is  so  much  that  he  cannot  deny  himself  anything  for  the 
sake  of  his  soul,  will  find  at  length  that  he  has  lost 
everything.  He,  on  the  contrary,  who  is  ready  to  cast 
away  eve^thing  most  dear  to  him  in  this  life,  if  it  stands 
in  the  way  of  his  soul,  and  to  crucify  the  flesh  with  its 
affections  and  lusts,  will  find  at  length  that  he  is  no  loser. 
In  a  word,  his  losses  will  prove  nothing  in  comparison 
to  his  gains. 

Truths  such  as  these  should  sink  deeply  into  our  hearts, 
and  stir  up  self-inquiry.  It  is  as  true  of  Christians  as  it 
is  of  Christ, — there  can  be  no  life  without  death,  there 
can  be  no  sweet  without  bitter,  there  can  be  no  crown 
without  a  cross.  Without  Christ's  death  there  would 
have  been  no  life  for  the  world.  Unless  we  are 
willing  to  die  to  sin,  and  crucify  all  that  is  most  dear 
to  flesh  and  blood,  we  cannot  expect  any  benefit  from 
Christ's  death.  Let  us  remember  these  things,  and  take 
up  our  cross  daily,  like  men.  Let  us  for  the  joy  set 
before  us  endure  the  cross  and  despise  the  shame,  and 
in  the  end  we  shall  sit  down  with  our  Master  at  God's 
right  hand.  The  way  of  self-crucifixion  and  sanctifica- 
tion  may  seem  foolishness  and  waste  to  the  world,  just 
as  burying  good  seed-corn  seems  waste  to  the  child  and 
the  fool.  But  there  never  lived  the  man  who  did  not  find 
that,  by  sowing  to  the  Spirit,  he  reaped  life  everlasting. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  from  our  Lord's  words, 
that  if  we  profess  to  serve  Christ,  we  must  follow  Him. 


334  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

"If  any  man  serve  Me,"  is  the  saying,  "  le*    him    follow 
Me." 

That  expression,  "  following,"  is  one  of  wide  signifi- 
cation, and  brings  before  our  minds  many  familiar  ideas 
As  the  soldier  follows  his  general,  as  the  servant  follows 
his  master,  as  the  scholar  follows  his  teacher,  as  the  sheep 
follows  its  shepherd,  just  so  ought  the  professing  Chris- 
tian to  follow  Christ.  Faith  and  obedience  are  the  leading 
marks  of  real  followers,  and  will  alwaj^s  be  seen  in  true 
believing  Christians.  Their  knowledge  may  be  very  small, 
and  their  infirmities  very  great ;  their  grace  very  weak, 
and  their  hope  very  dim.  But  they  believe  what  Christ 
saj's,  and  strive  to  do  what  Christ  commands.  And  of 
such  Christ  declares,  "  They  serve  Me,  they  are  mine." 

Christianity  like  this  receives  little  from  man.  It  is  too 
thorough,  too  decided,  too  strong,  too  real.  To  serve 
Christ  in  name  and  form  is  easy  work,  and  satisfies  most 
people,  but  to  follow  Him  in  faith  and  life  demands  more 
trouble  than  the  generality  of  men  will  take  about  their 
souls.  Laughter,  ridicule,  opposition,  persecution,  are 
often  the  only  reward  which  Christ's  followers  get  from 
the  world.  Their  religion  is  one,  "  whose  praise  is  not  of 
men,  but  of  God."     (Rom.  ii.  29.) 

Yet  to  him  that  followeth,  let  us  never  forget,  the  Lord 
Jesus  holds  out  abundant  encouragement:  "Where  I 
am,"  He  declares,  "  there  also  shall  my  servant  be ;  if 
any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  my  Father  honour."  Let  us 
lay  to  heart  these  comfortable  promises,  and  go  forward 
in  the  narrow  way  without  fear.  The  world  may  cast  out 
our  name  as  evil,  and  turn  us  out  of  its  society ;  but  when 
we  dwell  with  Christ  in  glory,  we  shall  have  a  home  from 
which  we  can  never  be  ejected. — The  world  may  pour 
contempt  on  our  religion,  and  laugh  us  and  our  Chris- 
tianity to  scorn ;   but  when  the  Father  honours  us  at  the 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  335 

last  day,  before  the  assembly  of  angels  and  men,  we  shall 
find  that  His  praise  makes  amends  for  all. 

Notes.    John  XII.  20—26. 

20. — [And  there  icere  certain  Greeks,  etc.,  etc.']  Who  these  GreeKs 
were  has  exercised  the  conjectural  ingenuity  of  commentators. 
They  were  not  downright  heathens,  it  is  clear,  from  the  expres- 
sion that  they  were  of  those  "  that  came  to  worship  "  at  the 
feast.  No  heathen  would  be  admitted  to  the  passover. — They 
were  not  in  my  judgment  Jews  who  had  lived  among  Greeks 
until  they  were  more  Grecian  than  Jewish  in  their  language. 
The  word  we  have  rendered  "  Greeks"  seems  to  me  to  make 
that  impossible. — I  believe  they  were  men  who  were  by  birth 
heathens,  but  had  become  proselytes  to  Judaism,  and  as  such 
were  regular  attendants  on  the  Jewish  feasts.  That  there  were 
many  such  proselytes  wherever  Jews  lived,  is  a  simple  matter  of 
fact.  So  in  Acts  xvii.  4,  we  read  of  "  devout "  or  "  worshipping  " 
Greeks.  The  leavening  influence  of  Judaism,  in  every  part  of 
the  heathen  world  where  the  scattered  Jews  dwelt,  before  the 
coming  of  Christ,  was  probably  very  considerable.  It  is  worth 
notice  that  as  Gentiles,  the  wise  men  from  the  East,  were  among 
the  first  to  honour  our  Lord  when  He  was  born,  so  Gentiles  were 
among  the  first  to  show  interest  in  Him  just  before  His  cruci- 
fixion. 

Whether  the  circumstance  recorded  in  the  passage  before  us 
took  place  the  same  day  that  our  Lord  rode  in  triumph  into  Jeru- 
salem, or  whether  there  was  not  a  break  or  interval  of  a  day  or 
two,  admits  of  question.  Judging  from  the  inquiry  of  the  Greeks, 
"We  would  see  Jesus,"  it  seems  unlikely  that  it  happened  the 
same  day.  It  stands  to  reason  that  our  Lord,  at  a  time  when  He 
was  riding  into  Jerusalem  on  an  ass,  and  was  the  object  of 
popular  enthusiasm,  would  easily  have  been  distinguished  and 
recognized  by  the  Greeks.  Moreover,  one  cannot  suppose  that 
the  words  spoken  in  the  following  verse,  and  the  miracle  of  the 
voice  from  heaven,  belong  to  a  time  of  noise,  shouting,  and  popu- 
lar acclamation,  such  as  there  must  have  been  during  the  pro- 
cession. For  these  reasons  I  incline  to  the  opinion  that  we 
must  suppose  an  interval  of  a  day  or  two  between  this  verse  and 
the  preceding  one. 

21. — [TJie  same  came. .. Philip. ..Bethsaida... Galilee.]  Why  the 
Greeks  came  to  Philip  more  than  any  other  disciple  we  do  not 
know.  It  is  conjectured  that  Philip,  being  an  inhabitant  of  a 
town  in  North  Galilee,  was  more  likely  than  the  other  disciples 
to  be  acquainted  with  Greeks,  from  being  near  Tyre  and  Sidon. 
But  this  reason  applies  quite  as  much  to  Andrew,  Peter,  James, 
and  John,  who  were  all  Galileans,  as  it  does  to  Philip. — Is  it  not 
worth  noticing  that  Philip's  name  is  a  more  purely  Greek  name 
than  that  of  any  of  the  apostles?  Does  not  this  indicate  that  he 
probably  had  Greek  relatives  and  connections? 


336  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


The  mention  of  Bethsaida  accounts  for  Philip  speaking  to 
Andrew,  in  the  next  verse.  Bethsaida  was  the  native  place  of 
Andrew  and  Peter,  and  Philip  therefore  was  their  fellow-towns- 
man. 

[And  desired  him,  saying,  Sir.]  The  Greek  word  rendered 
"desired  "  is  more  frequently  translated,  "asked,"  "  besought," 
"  prayed."  It  implies  the  desire  of  an  inquirer  who  expresses  a 
wish  for  a  thing,  and  asks  whether  it  is  possible  for  him  to  have 
it. 

The  word  we  render  "  sir  "  is  almost  always  rendered  "  lord." 
When  rendered  "  sir  "  it  is  addressed  by  an  inferior  to  a  superior. 
Thus  the  servant  of  the  householder  says,  "  Sir,  didst  thou  not 
eowgoodseed?  "  (Matt.  xiii.  27.)  The  Pharisees  said  to  Pilate, 
"Sir,  we  remember  that  deceiver  said."  (Matt,  xxvii.  63.)  The 
Samaritan  woman  says  to  Jesus  three  times,  "  Sir."  (John  iv. 
II,  13,  19.)  Here  the  use  of  the  word  marks  the  respect  of  the 
Greeks  for  our  Lord  and  His  apostles. 

[We  would  see  Jesus."]  The  English  here  fails  to  express  the 
Greek  fully.     It  is  literally,  "  we  wish,  we  desire  to  see." 

Concerning  the  motive  of  the  Greeks,  in  asking  to  see  our 
Lord,  we  know  nothing  certain.  It  may  have  been  nothing  bu 
curiosity,  like  that  of  Zaccheus,  aroused  by  hearing  rumours 
about  Jesus,  and  sharpened  by  seeing  the  procession  of  the  palm- 
bearing  multitude  at  His  entry  into  the  city.  This  alone  was 
enough  to  excite  the  attention  of  Greeks  accustomed  to  the 
demonstrations  of  their  own  countrymen  on  public  occasions. — 
It  may  possibly  be  that,  like  the  Canaanitish  woman,  the  cen- 
turion of  Capernaum,  and  Cornelius,  they  had,  as  proselytes,  got 
hold  of  the  great  truths  which  underlaid  Judaism,  and  were 
actually  looking  for  a  Redeemer.    But  we  do  not  know. 

Bengel  thinks  that  at  this  moment  "  Jesus  was  engaged  in  the 
inner  part  of  the  temple,  to  which  an  entrance  was  not  open  to 
the  Greeks,"  and  for  this  reason  the  Greeks  could  not  get  at  Him, 
and  have  a  personal  interview. 

These  Greeks,  we  should  note,  sought  to  see  Jesus  at  the  very 
time  when  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  Him. 

22. — [Philip  cometh  and  telleth  Andrew.]  This  expression  seems  to 
favour  the  idea  that  this  whole  transaction  was  not  on  the  same 
day  that  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem.  On  such  a  day  there  would 
hardly  be  an  opportunity  for  one  disciple  coming  quietly  and 
telling  a  thing  to  another.  Why  Philip  chose  to  tell  Andrew 
we  have  seen.    He  was  His  fellow- townsman. 

[And  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell  Jesus.]  This  expression 
seems  to  imply  that  the  two  Apostles  consulted  together  before 
they  told  our  Lord.  Perhaps,  as  thorough  Jews,  they  did  not 
feel  sure  that  our  Lord  would  care  to  give  an  interview  to  Gen- 
tiles, and  at  first  hesitated  about  telling  Him.    They  remembered 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  337 

that  at  one  time  Jesus  had  said,  "Go  not  into  the  way  of  the 
Gentiles."  (Matt.  x.  5.)  On  reflection  they  probably  remem- 
bered our  Lord's  kindness  to  the  Canaanitish  mother,  and  the 
Roman  centurion,  and  resolved  to  tell  Him. 

Of  course  it  is  possible  that  the  Greeks  only  wanted  to  look  at 
our  Lord  and  see  what  He  was  like,  and  not  to  converse  with 
Him.  If  this  was  all,  the  disciples  may  have  doubted  whethei 
it  was  worth  mentioning  to  Jesus. 

23.— [And  Jesus  answered  them,  saying.]  It  is  doubtful  whether 
this  was  spoken  to  the  two  disciples  only, — or  to  them  and  the 
Greeks  before  mentioned, — or  to  the  twelve  alone.  I  incline  to 
think  it  must  mean  to  the  twelve,  and  specially  to  Andrew  and 
Philip. 

[The  hour  is  come. ..Son  of  man... glorified.']  The  true  key-note 
to  this  verse,  and  the  two  which  follow,  is  probably  this.  Our 
Lord  saw  the  state  of  mind  in  which  His  followers  were.  He 
saw  them  excited  by  His  triumphant  entry  into  Jerusalem,  and 
the  desire  of  strangers  like  the  Greeks  to  see  their  Master.  He 
saw  they  .were  secretly  expecting  a  glorious  kingdom  to  be 
immediately  set  up,  in  which  they  would  have  chief  places,  pow- 
er, and  authority.  He  proceeds  to  rectify  their  conceptions,  and 
to  remind  them  of  what  He  had  repeatedly  told  them,  His  own 
death. 

The  hour  has  certainly  arrived  for  my  being  glorified.  I  am 
about  to  leave  the  world,  ascend  up  to  my  Father,  finish  the 
work  I  came  to  do,  and  be  highly  exalted.  My  earthly  ministry 
of  humiliation  is  ending,  and  my  time  of  glory  is  drawing  nigh. 
But  all  this  is  to  be  brought  about  in  a  way  very  different  from 
that  which  you  are  thinking  about.  I  am  going  to  a  cross  first, 
and  not  a  throne.  I  am  going  first  to  be  condemned,  crucified, 
and  slain. 

That  "glorified"  means  "to  be  crucified,"  I  cannot  admit, 
with  such  texts  as  John  vii.  39  and  xii.  16  before  me.  That  the 
cross  led  to  glory,  and  that  through  the  crucifixion  came  the 
glorification,  I  believe  firmly.  But  the  glory  came  after  the 
suffering.     (Luke  xxiv.  26.) 

Let  us  note  that  "  the  hour  "  or  season  for  Christ  to  finish  His 
ministry  was  fixed  and  appointed.  Till  it  came  the  Jews  could 
do  nothing  to  stop  His  preaching  or  harm  His  person.  Just  so 
it  is  with  His  people  in  one  sense.  Each  is  immortal  till  his 
work  is  done. 

Does  it  not  seem  that  the  inquiry  of  the  Greeks  has  much  to 
do  with  our  Lord's  opening  words? — "The  Gentiles  are  begin- 
ning to  inquire  after  Me.  Thus  the  hour  is  manifestly  come  that 
my  work  should  be  finished,  and  my  kingdom  fully  set  up  in  the 
world,  by  my  crucifixion,  resurrection,  and  ascension." 

2i.~~[Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you.~\    This  is  one  of  those  solemn 
15 


338  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


prefaces  which  are  so  frequent  in  John's  Gospel,  and  indicate 
some  very  weighty  truth  coming.  I  think  "  to  you  "  must  surely 
include  not  only  Andrew  and  Philip,  but  all  the  company  arouud 
our  Lord. 

[Except  a  corn  of  wheat,  etc.,  etcl  Our  Lord  here  illustrates 
a  great  Scriptural  truth  by  a  very  familiar  fact  in  nature.  That 
fact  is,  that  in  plants  and  seeds  life  comes  by  death.  The  seed 
must  be  put  into  the  ground,  must  rot,  decay,  and  die,  if  we 
want  it  to  bear  fruit  and  produce  a  crop.  If  we  refuse  to  bury 
the  seed,  and  will  keep  it  without  sowing  it,  we  shall  never  reap 
any  harvest.     We  must  be  content  to  let  it  die  if  we  want  corn. 

The  wealth  of  spiritual  truth  which  this  beautiful  figure  un- 
folds is  very  great.  The  death  of  Christ  was  the  life  of  the 
world.  From  it,  as  a  most  prolific  seed,  was  to  spring  an  enor- 
mous harvest  of  blessing  to  souls,  and  of  glory  to  God.  His  substi- 
tution on  the  cross,  His  atoning  death,  were  to  be  the  beginning 
of  untold  blessings  to  a  lost  world.  To  wish  Him  not  to  die,  to 
dislike  the  idea  of  His  death,  (as  the  disciples  evidently  did,; 
was  as  foolish  as  to  keep  seed-corn  locked  up  in  the  granary,  and 
to  refuse  to  sow  it.  "I  am  the  corn  of  wheat,"  Jesus  seems  to 
say.  "  Unless  I  die,  whatever  you  in  your  private  opinion  may 
think,  my  purpose  in  coming  into  the  world  will  not  be  accom- 
plished.   But  if  I  die,  multitudes  of  souls  will  be  saved." 

Let  us  carefully  mark  here  the  immense  importance  which 
our  Lord  attaches  to  His  death.  Nothing  can  explain  this  but 
the  old  foundation  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  that  Christ's  sacrificial 
death  on  the  cross  is  the  only  satisfaction  and  atonement  for 
the  sin  of  the  world.  A  passage  like  this  can  never  be  thor- 
oughly explained  by  those  who  regard  Christ's  death  as  nothing 
more  than  a  martyrdom  or  an  example  of  self-denial.  It  was 
something  far  greater  and  more  important  than  this.  It  was 
the  dying  of  a  corn  of  wheat,  in  order  that  out  of  its  death 
should  spring  up  an  enormous  spiritual  harvest.  Christ's  vica- 
rious death  is  the  world's  life. 

Let  us  notice  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  Divine  wisdom  with 
which  our  Master  illustrated  spiritual  truth  by  earthly  figures. 
Illustrations,  fitly  chosen,  strike  men  much  more  than  abstract 
arguments.  Ministers  and  teachers  of  religion  should  study  to 
"  use  similitudes." 

Theophylact  thinks  our  Lord  meant,  by  this  beautiful  figure,  to 
encourage  His  disciples  not  to  be  offended  and  shaken  in  mind 
by  His  coming  death.  In  His  case,  as  in  the  natural  world,  they 
must  remember  life  comes  through  death. 

Zwingle  thinks  that  as  with  the  corn,  when  sown,  so  it  is 
with  the  body  of  Christ.  It  does  us  good  by  dying  for  us,  and 
not  by  our  eating  it. 

Gill  remarks,  that  by  "  abiding  alone,"  in  this  simile,  Christ 
meant  that  if  He  did  not  die, He  would  be  "alone"  in  heaven 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  339 

With  the  Father  and  the  elect  angels,  but  without  any  of  the 
sons  of  men.     Scott  says  the  same. 

25.— [He  that  loveth  his  life,  etc.']  There  are  few  of  our  Lord's  say- 
ings more  frequently  recorded  by  the  Holy  Ghost  than  this  pair 
of  paradoxes.  The  repetition  shows  its  great  importance.  It 
will  be  found  in  Matt.  x.  39 ;  xvi.  25 :  Mark  viii.  35 ;  Luke  ix.  24 ; 
xvii.  33 ;  as  well  as  here. 

The  meaning  is  plain  :  "  He  that  loves  his  life,  or  thinks  more 
of  the  life  that  now  is  than  that  which  is  to  come,  shall  lose  that 
which  is  the  best  part  of  his  life,  his  soul.  He  that  hateth  his 
life,  or  cares  little  for  it  compared  to  the  life  to  come,  shall  pre- 
serve to  eternal  glory  that  which  is  the  best  part  of  his  life,  to 
wit,  his  soul/' 

One  object  of  our  Lord  in  saying  these  words  was  evidently 
to  prevent  His  disciples  looking  for  good  things  in  this  life,  if 
they  followed  Him.  They  must  give  up  their  Jewish  ideas  about 
temporal  rewards  and  honours  in  Messiah's  service.  They  must 
understand  that  His  kingdom  was  entirely  spiritual,  and  that  if 
they  were  His  disciples  they  must  be  content  to  lose  much  in 
this  life,  in  order  to  gain  the  glory  of  the  life  to  come.  So  far 
from  promising  them  temporal  rewards,  He  would  have  them 
distinctly  know  that  they  must  give  up  much  and  sacrifice  much, 
if  they  wanted  to  be  saved. 

The  other  object  our  Lord  had  in  view  in  saying  these  words 
was  to  teach  all  Christians  in  every  age,  that  like  Him  they  must 
make  up  their  minds  to  sacrifice  much,  and  to  die  to  the  world, 
in  the  hope  of  a  harvest  of  glory  in  a  world  to  come.  Through 
death  we  must  seek  life.  Eternal  life  must  be  the  great  end  a 
Christian  looks  to.  To  attain  it  he  must  be  willing  to  give  up 
everything. 

The  practical  condemnation  which  this  verse  passes  on  the  life 
lived  by  many  should  never  be  overlooked.  How  few  hate  their 
lives  here  !  How  many  love  them,  and  care  for  nothing  but  how 
to  make  them  comfortable  and  happy !  The  eternal  loss  or  the 
eternal  gain  are  often  entirely  forgotten. 

Augustine  gives  a  wise  caution  :  "  Take  heed  lest  there  steal 
upon  thee  a  will  to  make  away  with  thyself,  while  thou  takest  in 
the  sense  that  it  is  a  duty  to  hate  thine  own  life  in  this  world. 
Hence  certain  malignant  and  perverse  men  give  themselves  to 
the  flames,  choke  themselves  in  the  water,  dash  themselves  in 
pieces,  aud  so  perish.  Christ  taught  not  this.  Not  by  himself, 
but  by  another,  must  that  man  be  put  to  death  who  would  follow 
in  Christ's  footsteps." 

The  word  "hate  "  here  must  be  taken  comparatively.  It  is  a 
Hebraism,  like  "  Jacob  have  I  loved,  and  Esau  have  I  hated." 
"  Your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth."  (Rom.  ix.  13;  Isai.  i. 
1*0 

Scott  thinks  this  verse  was  meant  to  teach  the  Greeks  and  all 


340  expositorf  thoughts. 


the  disciples  to  arm  themselves  with  a  mind  like  their  Master's 
if  they  wanted  to  follow  Him. 

26. — [If  any  man  serve  me... folio 10  me. ]  This  verse  seems  spoken 
for  the  benefit  and  information  of  the  Greeks  who  sought  to  see 
Jesus,  and  of  all  who  desired  to  become  His  disciples.  If  any 
man  desires  to  serve  Christ,  and  be  a  Christian,  he  mast  be  con- 
tent to  follow  His  Master,  walk  in  His  footsteps,  share  His  lot, 
do  as  He  did,  and  partake  of  His  Master's  inheritance  in  this 
world.  He  must  not  look  for  good  things  here, — for  crowns, 
kingdoms,  riches,  honours,  wealth,  and  dignity.  Like  His  Mas 
ter,  he  must  be  content  with  a  cross.  He  must,  in  a  woud 
"take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me."  (Matt.  xvi.  24.)  As  St. 
Paul  says,  "we  are  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ; 
if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  Him,  that  we  may  be  also  glorified 
together."     (Rom.  viii.  17.) 

[And  where  lam,  there.. .my  servant  be.~]  This  is  the  first  thing 
that  Christ  promises  to  those  who  follow  Him.  They  shall  be 
with  Christ  wherever  He  is,  in  paradise,  and  in  His  glorious 
kingdom.  He  and  His  servant  shall  not  be  parted.  Whatever 
the  Master  has,  the  servant  shall  have  also. 

It  is  a  comfortable  thought,  that  however  little  we  know  of 
the  life  to  come  and  the  state  after  death,  we  do  know  that  we 
shall  be  "  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  (Phil.  i.  23.) 

[If  any  man  serve  me. ..my  Father  honour.~\  This  is  the  second 
thing  which  Jesus  promises  to  His  disciples.  The  Father  shall 
give,  to  those  who  love  Christ,  such  honour  as  eye  hath  not  seen 
nor  ear  heard.  Honour  from  the  men  of  this  world  they  may 
not  have.     Honour  from  the  Father  shall  make  amends  for  all. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  see  throughout  this  verse  that  our 
Lord's  intention  is  to  discourage  the  carnal  and  earthly  expecta- 
tion of  His  Jewish  followers,  and  yet  to  encourage  them  by 
showing  what  they  might  confidently  look  for.  They  must  fol- 
low in  His  steps  if  they  were  his  true  servauts,  and  in  so  follow- 
ing they  would  find  a  cross,  and  not  a  crown,  whatever  they 
might  be  thinking,  at  that  moment,  while  the  hosannas  of  an 
excited  crowd  were  sounding  in  their  ears.  But  though  they 
had  a  cross,  they  should  not  miss  a  reward  finally,  which  would 
make  amends  for  all.  They  would  be  with  Christ  in  glory. 
They  would  be  honoured  by  God  the  Father. 

The  words,  "Him  will  my  Father  honour,"  of  course  admit 
of  being  applied  to  this  life  in  a  certain  sense :  "  Them  that 
honour  Me  I  will  honour."  (1  Sam.  ii.  30/  But  it  is  much  more 
agreeable  to  the  context,  I  think,  to  apply  them  to  the  honour 
which  shall  be  given  in  another  world. 

The  clearest  conception  we  can  form  of  heaven  is  that  which 
is  here  stated.  It  is  being  with  Christ,  and  receiving  honour 
from  God.     Heaven  is  generally  described  by  negatives.     This 


JOHN,    CHAP.    Xn. 


341 


is,  however,  an  exceptional  positive.    It  is  being  "with  Christ." 
(Compare  John  xiv.  3;  xvii.  24;  1  Thess.  iv.  17.) 

Let  us  note  how  wisely  and  mercifully  our  Lord  always  damped 
and  checked  the  unscriptural  expectations  of  His  disciples. 
Never  on  any  occasion  do  we  find  Him  keeping  back  the  cross, 
or  bribing  men  to  follow  Him,  as  Mahomet  did,  by  promising 
temporal  comfort  and  happiness. 


JOHN  XII.   27—33. 


27  Now  is  my  soul  troubled:  and 
Tvttat  shall  I  say?  Father,  save  me 
from  this  hour:  but  for  this  cause  came 
I  unto  this  hour. 

28  Father,  glorify  thy  name.  Then 
came  there  a  voice  from  heaven  saying, 
I  havo  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glo- 
rify it  again. 

29  The  people  therefore,  that  stood 
by,  and  heard  it,  said  that  it  thundered : 
others  said,  An  angel  spake  to  him. 


30  Jesus  answered  and  said,  This 
voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but  for 
your  sakes. 

31  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this 
world:  now  shall  the  prince  of  this 
world  be  cast  out. 

32  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me. 

33  This  he  said,  signifying  what 
death  he  should  die. 


These  verses  show  us  what  St.  Peter  meant,  when  he  said, 
"  There  are  some  things  hard  to  be  understood  "  in  Scrip- 
ture. (2  Pet.  iii.  16.)  There  are  depths  here  which  we 
have  no  line  to  fathom  thoroughly.  This  need  not  surprise 
us,  or  shake  our  faith.  The  Bible  would  not  be  a  book 
"  given  by  inspiration  of  God,"  if  it  did  not  contain  many 
things  which  pass  man's  finite  understanding.  With  all 
its  difficulties  it  contains  thousands  of  passages  which  the 
most  unlearned  may  easily  comprehend.  Even  here,  if  we 
look  steadily  at  these  verses,  we  may  gather  from  them 
lessons  of  no  mean  importance. 

We  have,  first,  in  these  verses,  a  great  doctrine  indirectly 
proved.  That  doctrine  is  the  imputation  of  man's  sin  to 
Christ. 

We  see  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  eternal  Son  of 
God  troubled  and  disturbed  in  mind :  "  Now  is  my  soul 
troubled."     We  see  Him  who  could  heal  diseases  with  a 


342  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

touch,  cast  out  devils  with  a  word,  and  command  the 
waves  and  winds  to  obey  Him,  in  great  agon}7  and  conflict 
of  spirit.     Now  bow  can  this  be  explained  ? 

To  say,  as  some  do,  that  the  only  cause  of  our  Lord's 
trouble  was  the  prospect  of  His  own  painful  death  on  the 
cross,  is  a  verj7  unsatisfactory  explanation.  At  this  rate  it 
might  justly  be  said  that  many  a  martyr  has  shown  more 
calmness  and  courage  than  the  Son  of  God.  Such  a  con- 
clusion is,  to  say  the  least,  most  revolting.  Yet  this  is  the 
conclusion  to  which  men  are  driven  if  they  adopt  the  mod- 
ern notion,  that  Christ's  death  was  only  a  great  example 
of  self-sacrifice. 

Nothing  can  ever  explain  our  Lord's  trouble  of  soul, 
both  here  and  in  Gethsemane,  except  the  old  doctrine,  that 
He  felt  the  burden  of  man's  sin  pressing  Him  down.  It 
was  the  mighty  weight  of  a  world's  guilt  imputed  to  Him 
and  meeting  on  his  head,  which  made  Him  groan  and 
agonize,  and  cry,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled."  Forever 
let  us  cling  to  that  doctrine,  not  only  as  untying  the  knot 
of  the  passage  before  us,  but  as  the  only  ground  of  solid 
comfort  for  the  heart  of  a  Christian.  That  our  sins  have 
been  really  laid  on  our  Divine  Substitute,  and  borne  by 
Him,  and  that  His  righteousness  is  really  imputed  to  us 
and  accounted  ours, —  this  is  the  real  warrant  for  Christian 
peace.  And  if  any  man  asks  how  we  know  that  our  sins 
were  laid  on  Christ,  we  bid  him  read  such  passages  as  that 
which  is  before  us,  and  explain  them  on  any  other  prin- 
ciple if  he  can.  Christ  has  borne  our  sins,  carried  our  sins, 
groaned  under  the  burden  of  our  sins,  been  "  troubled " 
in  soul  by  the  weight  of  our  sins,  and  really  taken  away 
our  sins.  This,  we  may  rest  assured,  is  sound  doctrine : 
this  is  Scriptural  theologj^. 

We  have,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  a  great  mystery 
unfolded.  That  mystery  is  the  possibility  of  much  inward 
conflict  of  soul  without  sin. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  343 

We  cannot  fail  to  see  in  the  passage  oefore  us  a  mighty 
mental  struggle  in  our  blessed  Saviour.  Of  its  depth  and 
intensity  we  can  probably  form  very  little  conception.  But 
the  agonizing  cry,  "  My  soul  is  troubled," — the  solemn 
question,  "What  shall  I  say?" — the  prayer  of  suffering 
flesh  and  blood,  "Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour," — the 
meek  confession,  "  For  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour," 
— the  petition  of  a  perfectly  submissive  will,  "Father, 
glorify  Thy  name," — what  does  all  this  mean?  Surely 
there  can  be  only  one  answer.  These  sentences  tell  of  a 
struggle  within  our  Saviour's  breast,  a  struggle  arising 
from  the  natural  feelings  of  one  who  was  perfect  man,  and 
as  man  could  suffer  all  that  man  is  capable  of  suffering. 
Yet  He  in  whom  this  struggle  took  place  was  the  Holy  Son 
of  God.  "  In  Him  is  no  sin."  (1  John  iii.  5.)  There  is 
a  fountain  of  comfort  here  for  all  true  servants  of  Christ, 
which  ought  never  to  be  overlooked.  Let  them  learn  from 
their  Lord's  example  that  inward  conflict  of  soul  is  not 
necessarily  in  itself  a  sinful  thing.  Too  many,  we  believe, 
from  not  understanding  this  point,  go  heavily  all  their 
days  on  their  way  to  heaven.  They  fancy  they  have  no 
grace,  because  they  find  a  fight  in  their  own  hearts.  They 
refuse  to  take  comfort  in  the  Gospel,  because  they  feel  a 
battle  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  Let  them  mark 
the  experience  of  their  Lord  and  Master,  and  lay  aside 
their  desponding  fears.  Let  them  study  the  experience  of 
His  saints  in  every  age,  from  St.  Paul  downwards,  and 
understand  that  as  Christ  had  inward  conflicts,  so  must 
Christians  expect  to  have  them  also.  To  give  way  to 
doubts  and  unbelief,  no  doubt  is  wrong,  and  robs  us  of 
our  peace.  There  is  a  faithless  despondency,  unques- 
tionably, which  is  blameworthy,  and  must  be  resisted, 
repented  of,  and  brought  to  the  fountain  for  all  sin,  that  it 
may  be  pardoned.  But  the  mere  presence  of  fight  and 
strife  and  conflict  in  our  hearts  is  in  itself  no  sin.      The 


344  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

believer  may  be  known  by  his  inward  warfare  as  well  as  by 
his  inward  peace. 

We  have,  thirdly,  in  theue  verses,  a  great  miracle  exhib- 
ited. That  miracle  is  the  heavenly  Voice  described  in  this 
passage, — a  voice  which  was  heard  so  plainly  that  people 
said  it  thundered, — proclaiming,  "I  have  glorified  my 
name,  and  will  glorify  it  again." 

This  wondrous  Voice  was  heard  three  times  during  our 
Lord's  earthly  ministry.  Once  it  was  heard  at  His 
baptism,  when  the  heavens  were  opened  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  descended  on  Him.  Once  it  was  heard  at  His 
transfiguration,  when  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  for  a 
season  with  Him,  before  Peter,  James,  and  John.  Once  it 
was  heard  here  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  midst  of  a  mixed 
crowd  of  disciples  and  unbelieving  Jews.  On  each  occa- 
sion we  know  that  it  was  the  Voice  of  God  the  Father. 
But  why  and  wherefore  this  Voice  was  only  heard  on  these 
occasions  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  The  thing  was  a  deep 
mystery,  and  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly  of  it. 

Let  it  suffice  us  to  believe  that  this  miracle  was  meant  to 
show  the  intimate  relations  and  unbroken  union  of  God  the 
Father  and  God  the  Son,  throughout  the  period  of  the  Son's 
earthly  ministry.  At  no  period  during  His  incarnation 
was  there  a  time  when  the  eternal  Father  was  not  close  to 
Him,  though  unseen  by  man. — Let  us  also  believe  that  this 
miracle  was  meant  to  signify  to  bystanders  the  entire 
approval  of  the  Son  by  the  Father,  as  the  Messiah,  the 
Redeemer,  and  the  Saviour  of  man.  That  approval  the 
Father  was  pleased  to  signify  by  voice  three  times,  as  well 
as  to  declare  by  signs  and  mighty  deeds,  performed  by  the 
Son  in  His  name.  These  things  we  may  well  believe. 
But  when  we  have  said  all,  we  must  confess  that  the  Voice 
was  a  mystery.  We  may  read  of  it  with  wonder  and  awe, 
but  we  cannot  explain  it. 

We   have,   lastly,   in    these    verses,   a   great  prophecy 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  345 

delivered.  The  Lord  Jesus  declared,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." 

Concerning  the  true  meaning  of  these  words  there  can 
be  but  one  opinion  in  any  candid  mind.  They  do  not 
mean,  as  is  often  supposed,  that  if  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
crucified  is  lifted  up  and  exalted  by  ministers  and  teachers, 
it  will  have  a  drawing  effect  on  hearers.  This  is  un- 
deniably a  truth,  but  it  is  not  the  truth  of  the  text.  They 
simply  mean  that  the  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  would 
have  a  drawing  effect  on  all  mankind.  His  death  as  our 
Substitute,  and  the  Sacrifice  for  our  sins,  would  draw  mul- 
titudes out  of  every  nation  to  believe  on  Him  and  receive 
Him  as  their  Saviour.  By  being  crucified  for  us,  and  not 
by  ascending  a  temporal  throne,  He  would  set  up  a  king- 
dom in  the  world,  and  gather  subjects  to  Himself. 

How  thoroughly  this  prophecjT  has  been  fulfilled  for 
eighteen  centuries,  the  history  of  the  Church  is  an  abun- 
dant proof.  Whenever  Christ  crucified  has  been  preached, 
and  the  story  of  the  cross  fully  told,  souls  have  been  con- 
verted and  drawn  to  Christ,  just  as  iron-filings  are  drawn 
to  a  magnet,  in  every  part  of  the  world.  No  truth  so  ex- 
actly suits  the  wants  of  all  children  of  Adam ,  of  every  col- 
our, climate,  and  language,  as  the  truth  about  Christ 
crucified. 

And  the  prophecy  is  not  yet  exhausted.  It  shall  yet  re- 
ceive a  more  complete  accomplishment.  A  day  shall  come 
when  every  knee  shall  bow  before  the  Lamb  that  was  slain, 
and  every  tongue  confess  that  He  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father.  He  that  was  u  lifted  up "  on  the  cross 
shall  yet  sit  on  the  throne  of  glory,  and  before  Him  shall 
be  gathered  all  nations.  Friends  and  foes,  each  in  their 
own  order,  shall  be  "  drawn  "  from  their  graves,  and  ap- 
pear before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Let  us  take 
heed  in  that  day  that  we  are  found  on  His  right  hand  I 


346  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Notes.    John  XII.  27—33. 

27.— [Now  is  my  soul  troubled,  etc.,  etc.]  This  remarkable  verse 
comes  in  somewhat  abruptly.  Yet  the  connection  is  not  hard 
to  trace.  Our  Lord  had  just  been  speaking-  of  His  own  atoning 
death.  The  thought  and  prospect  of  that  death  appears  to 
draw  from  Him  the  expressions  of  this  verse,  which  I  will  now 
examine  in  order. 

[Now  is  my  soul  troubled."]  This  sentence  implies  a  sudden, 
strong  mental  agony,  which  came  over  our  Lord,  troubling, 
distressing,  and  harassing  Him. — What  was  it  from  ?  Not  from 
the  mere  foresight  of  a  painful  death  on  the  cross,  and  the 
bodily  suffering  attending  it.  No  doubt  human  nature,  even 
when  sinless,  naturally  revolts  from  pain  and  suffering.  Yet 
mere  bodily  pain  has  been  endured  for  weeks  by  many  a 
martyr,  and  even  b;>  heathen  fanatics  in  India,  without  a  groan 
or  a  murmur. — No !  it  was  the  weight  of  the  world's  imputed 
sin  laid  upon  our  Lord's  head,  which  pressed  Him  downward, 
and  made  Him  cry,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled."  It  was  the 
sense  of  the  whole  burden  of  man's  transgression  imputed  to 
Him,  which,  as  He  drew  near  to  the  cross,  weighed  Him  down 
so  tremendously.  It  was  not  His  bodily  sufferings,  either  an- 
ticipated or  felt,  but  our  sins,  which  here,  at  Gethsemane,  and 
at  Calvary,  agonized  and  racked  His  soul. 

Let  us  notice  here  the  reality  of  Christ's  substitution  for  us. 
He  was  made  "  a  curse  "  for  us,  and  sin  for  us,  and  He  felt  it 
for  a  time  most  deeply.  (Gal.  iii.  13;  2  Cor.  v.  21.)  Those 
who  deny  the  doctrine  of  substitution,  imputation,  and  atone- 
ment can  never  explain  the  expressions  before  us  satisfac- 
torily. 

Poole  remarks :  "  There  is  a  vast  difference  between  this 
trouble  of  spirit  in  Christ,  and  that  which  is  in  us.  Our 
troubles  are  upon  reflection  for  our  own  sins,  and  the  wrath  of 
God  due  to  us  therefor;  His  troubles  were  for  the  wrath  of 
God  due  to  us  for  our  sins. — Our  troubles  are  because  we  have 
personally  grieved  God;  His  were  because  those  given  to  Him 
had  offended  God.  We  are  afraid  of  our  eternal  condemnation; 
He  was  only  afraid  by  a  natural  fear  of  death,  which  naturally 
riseth  higher  according  to  the  kind  of  death  we  die. — Our 
troubles  have  mixture  of  despair,  distrust,  sinful  horror;  there 
was  no  such  thing  in  His  trouble. — Our  troubles,  in  their  natu- 
ral teudency,  are  killing  and  destroying ;  only  by  accident  and 
the  wise  ordering  of  Divine  providence  do  they  prove  advanta- 
geous, and  lead  us  to  Him ;  His  trouble,  in  the  very  nature  of 
it,  was  pure,  and  clean,  and  sanative,  and  healing. — But  that  He 
was  truly  troubled,  and  that  such  a  trouble  did  truly  agree  to 
His  office  as  Mediator,  and  is  a  great  foundation  of  peace,  quiet, 
and  satisfaction  to  us,  is  out  of  question.  By  some  of  these 
stripes  we  are  healed." 

We  should  remember  and  admire  the  prayer  in  the  Litany  of 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  347 


the  Greek  Church, — "By Thine  unknown  sufferings,  good  Lord, 
deliver  us." 

Rollock  observes  here,  "  If  you  ask  me  what  the  Divine 
nature  in  Christ  was  doing  when  He  said,  '  My  soul  is 
troubled,'  and  whether  it  was  divided  asunder  from  His  human 
nature,  I  reply  that  it  was  not  divided,  but  contained  itself,  or 
held  itself  passive,  while  the  human  nature  was  suffering.  If 
it  had  exercised  itself  in  its  full  power  and  glory,  our  Lord 
could  not  possibly  have  suffered." 

(The  whole  of  Rollock's  remarks  on  this  difficult  verse  are 
singularly  good,  and  deserve  close  study.) 

Hutcheson  observes  :  "  The  rise  and  cause  of  this  trouble  was 
thus  :  the  Godhead  hiding  itself  from  the  humanity's  sense,  and 
the  Father  letting  out  not  only  an  apprehension  of  sufferings  to 
come,  but  a  present  taste  of  the  horror  of  His  wrath  due  to 
man  for  sin.  Christ  was  amazed,  perplexed,  and  overwhelmed 
with  it  in  His  humanity.  And  no  wonder,  since  He  had  the 
sins  of  all  the  elect  laid  upon  Him,  by  imputation,  to  suffer 
for." 

Hengstenberg  remarks :  "  The  only  solution  of  this  extreme 
trouble  is  the  vicarious  significance  of  the  sufferings  and  death 
of  Christ.  If  our  chastisement  was  upon  Him,  in  order  that  we 
might  have  peace,  then  in  Him  must  have  been  concentrated  all 
the  horror  of  dea  h.  He  bore  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  the 
wages  of  that  sin  was  death.  Death  therefore  must  to  Him 
assume  its  most  frightful  form.  The  physical  suffering  was 
nothing  compared  to  the  immeasurable  suffering  of  soul  which 
impended  over  the  Redeemer,  and  the  full  greatness  and  depth 
of  which  He  clearly  perceives.  Therefore,  in  Heb.  v.  7,  'a 
fear '  is  described  as  that  which  pressed  with  such  awful  weight 
upon  our  Lord.  When  God  freed  Him  from  that,  He  saved  Him 
from  death.  Thus,  when  the  suffering  of  Christ  is  apprehended 
as  vicarious  and  voluntary,  all  the  accompanying  circumstances 
can  be  easily  understood." 

Let  us  note  the  exceeding  guilt  and  sinfulness  of  sin.  The 
thing  which  made  even  God's  own  Son,  who  had  power  to  work 
works  that  none  else  did  beside  Him,  groan  and  cry,  "  My  soul 
is  troubled,"  can  be  no  light  thing.  He  that  would  know  the 
full  measure  of  sin  and  guilt  should  mark  attentively  this  verse, 
and  the  expressions  used  by  our  Lord  at  Gethsemane  and  Cal- 
vary. 

It  is  worth  noticing  that  this  verse,  Matt.  xxvi.  38,  and  Mark 
xiv.  34,  are  the  only  three  places  in  the  Gospels  where  our  Lord 
speaks  of  "  My  soul." 

The  word  "now,"  I  suspect,  is  emphatic:  "Now,  at  this 
special  time,  my  soul  has  begun  to  be  specially  troubled." 

[.And  what  shall  I  say?}    These  words  are  thought  by  some, 


348  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


as  Theophylact,  Grotius,  Bloomfield,  and  Barnes,  to  be  wrongly 
translated  in  our  English  version.  They  would  render  them, 
"And  what?  What  is  my  duty?  What  does  the  hour  require 
of  Me?  Shall  I  say,  Save  Me,"  etc.,  etc. — I  much  prefer  our 
English  version  as  it  is.  I  believe  the  question  is  strongly  sig- 
nificant of  the  agony  and  conflict  through  which  our  Lord's  soul 
was  passing. — "What  shall  I  say  under  this  sense  of  pressing, 
overwhelming  trouble?  My  human  nature  bids  me  say  one 
thing,  acting  alone  and  urging  me  alone.  My  knowledge  of  the 
purpose  for  which  I  came  into  the  world  bids  me  say  another 
thing.  What,  then,  shall  I  say?"  Such  a  question  as  this  is  a 
strong  proof  of  our  Lord's  real,  true  humanity. 

Bollock  observes  :  "  '  What  shall  I  say?  '  is  the  language  of 
the  highest  perplexity  and  anxiety  of  mind.  In  the  height  of 
anguish  is  the  height  of  perplexity,  so  that  a  man  knows  not 
what  to  say  or  do.  The  Lord  found  deliverance  in  prayer.  But 
the  perpetual  cry  of  the  lost  will  be,  '  What  shall  I  say?  What 
shall  I  do  ? '  From  that  perplexity  and  anguish  they  will  never 
be  delivered." 

Bengel  remarks  :  "  Jesus  says,  '  What  shall  I  say  ? '  not,  What 
shall  I  choose?  Compare  with  this  the  different  expression  of 
St.  Paul,  '  What  I  shall  choose  I  wist  not,  for  I  am  in  a  strait 
betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart.'  "     (Phil.  i.  22.) 

Ecolampadius  thinks  the  question  means,  "In  what  words 
shall  I  unfold  my  pain,  or  the  bitterness  and  ingratitude  of  the 
Jews?"  I  prefer  taking  it  as  the  language  of  perplexity  and 
distress. 

The  presence  of  two  natures,  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's 
person,  seems  clearly  taught,  when  we  compare  the  language 
used  by  our  Lord  in  this  verse,  with  the  language  of  the  fifth 
and  seventeenth  chapters  of  this  Gospel.  Here  we  see  unmis- 
takably our  Lord's  true  humanity.  There,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
see  no  less  plainly  His  divinity.  Here  He  speaks  as  man;  there 
as  God. 

[Father,  save  me  from  this  hour.~\  This  is  undoubtedly  a 
prayer  to  be  saved  from,  or  delivered  from,  the  agony  and 
suffering  of  this  hour.  It  is  the  language  of  a  humau  nature, 
which,  though  sinless,  could  suffer,  and  instinctively  shrank 
from  suffering.  It  would  not  have  been  real  human  nature  if  it 
had  not  so  shrunk  and  recoiled. 

The  idea  of  the  prayer  is  just  the  same  as  that  of  the  prayer 
in  Gethsemane, — "  Let  this  cup  pass  from  me."   (Matt.  xxvi.  39.) 

Let  us  learn  from  our  Lord's  example  that  there  is  nothing 
sinful  in  praying  to  be  delivered  from  suffering,  so  long  as  we 
do  it  in  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  Theie  is  nothing  wrong 
in  a  sick  person's  saying,  "  Father,  make  me  well,"  so  long  as 
the  prayer  is  offered  with  proper  qualification 

Bollock  observes  :  "  In  agonv  there  is  a  certain  forgetfulness 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  349 


of  all  things  except  present  pain.  This  seems  the  case  of  onr  Lord 
here.  Yet  even  here  He  turns  to  His  Father,  showing  that  He 
never  loses  the  sense  of  the  Father's  love.  The  lost  in  hell  will 
never  turn  to  the  Father." 

It  is  worth  noticing  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  the  Father  "  and 
•'My  Father"  at  least  one  hundred  and  ten  times  in  John's  Gospel. 

[But  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour.]  This  sentence  is  an 
elliptical  way  of  declaring  our  Lord's  entire  submission  to  His 
Father's  will,  in  the  matter  of  the  prayer  He  had  just  prayed. 
"  But  I  know  that  for  this  cause  I  came  into  the  world  and  have 
reached  this  hour,  to  suffer  as  I  am  now  suffering,  and  to 
agonize  as  I  am  now  agonizing.  I  do  not  refuse  the  cup.  If  it 
be  Thy  will,  I  am  willing  to  drink  it.  Only  I  tell  Thee  my 
feelings,  with  entire  submission  to  Thy  will." 

We  may  surely  learn  from  the  whole  verse  that  Christians 
have  no  cause  to  despair  because  they  feel  trouble  of  soul, — be- 
cause they  feel  perplexed,  and  know  not  what  to  say  in  the 
agony  of  inward  conflict, — because  their  nature  shrinks  from 
pain,  and  cries  to  God  to  take  it  away.  In  all  this  there  is 
nothing  wicked  or  sinful.  It  was  the  expression  of  the  human 
nature  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  and  in  Him  was  no  sin. 

Rollock  says  :  "  This  is  the  language  of  one  recollecting  him- 
self, and  collecting  his  thoughts  to  remember  something 
besides  his  agony  and  pain." 

[Father,  glorify  thy  name.']  This  passage  seems  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  strife  and  agony  of  soul  which  came  over  our  Lord 
at  this  particular  period.  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  I  leave  the 
matter  in  Thy  hand,  O  My  Father.  Do  what  Thou  seest  best. 
Glorify  Thy  name  and  Thy  attributes  in  Me.  Do  what  is  meet 
for  setting  forth  Thy  glory  in  the  world.  If  it  be  for  Thy 
glory  that  I  should  suffer,  I  am  willing  to  suffer  even  unto  the 
bearing  of  the  world's  sins." 

I  see  in  the  whole  event  here  described,  a  short  summary  of 
what  took  place  afterwards  more  fully  at  Gethsemane.  There 
is  a  remarkable  parallelism  at  every  step. 

(a)  Does  our  Lord  say  here,  "  My  soul  is  troubled"?  Just 
so  He  said  in  Gethsemane,  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful, 
even  unto  death."     (Matt.  xxvi.  38.) 

(6)  Does  our  Lord  say  here,  "  Father,  save  Me  from  this 
hour  "?  Just  so  he  says  in  Gethsemane.  "  O  my  Father,  if  it  be 
possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me."     (Matt.  xxvi.  39.) 

(c)  Does  our  Lord  say  here,  "  For  this  cause  came  I  unto 
this  hour"?  Just  so  he  says  in  Gethsemane,  "  If  this  cup  may 
not  pass  away  from  Me  except  I  drink  it,  Thy  will  be  done." 
(Matt.  xxvi.  42.) 

(d)  Does  our  Lord  say,  finally,  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name  "  ? 


350  EXPOSITORY    THOUGHTS. 

Just  so  our  Lord  says,  lastly,  "  The  cup  which  my  Father  hath 
given  Me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "     (John  xviii.  11.) 

The  brief  prayer  which  our  Lord  here  offers,  we  should 
remember,  is  the  highest,  greatest  thing  that  we  can  ask  God 
to  do.  The  utmost  reach  of  the  renewed  will  of  a  believer  is 
to  be  able  to  say  always,  "Father,  glorify  Thy  name  in  Me. 
Do  with  Me  what  Thou  wilt,  only  glorify  Thy  name."  The 
glory  of  God  after  all  is  the  end  for  which  all  things  were  created. 
Paul's  joyful  hope,  he  told  the  Philippiaus,  when  a  prisoner  at 
Rome,  was  "  that  in  all  things,  by  life  or  by  death,  Christ  might 
be  magnified  in  his  body."     (Philip  i.  20.) 

Rollock  says  :  "  This  is  the  language  of  one  who  now  forgets 
the  agony  and  pain,  remembers  only  His  Father's  glory,  and 
desires  it  even  together  with  His  own  passion  and  death."— He 
also  remarks  that  the  experience  of  God's  saints  in  great  trouble, 
is  in  a  sense  much  the  same.  For  a  time  they  forget  every- 
thing but  present  pain.  By  and  by  they  rise  above  their  suffer- 
ings, and  remember  only  God's  glory. 

[Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven.']  This  voice  was  un- 
doubtedly a  great  miracle.  God  the  Father  was  heard  speaking 
audibly  with  man's  voice  to  the  Son.  Three  t'mes  in  our  Lord's 
ministry  this  miracle  took  place  :  first,  at  His  baptism ;  secondly, 
at  His  transfiguration;  thirdly,  just  before  His  crucifixion. 
Rarely  has  the  voice  of  God  been  heard  by  large  crowds  of  un- 
converted men.  Here,  at  Mount  Sinai,  and  perhaps  at  our 
Lord's  baptism,  are  the  only  three  occasions  on  record. 

Of  course  we  can  no  more  explain  this  wonderful  miracle 
than  any  other  miracle  in  God's  Word.  We  can  only  reverently 
believe  and  admire  it.  The  intimate  nearness  of  the  Father  to 
the  Son,  all  through  His  ministry,  is  one  of  the  many  thoughts 
which  may  occur  to  our  minds  as  we  consider  the  miracle. 
Our  Lord  was  never  left  alone.  His  Father  was  alway  with 
Him,  though  men  knew  it  not.  How  could  it  be  otherwise? 
So  far  as  concerned  His  Divine  nature,  He  and  the  Father  were 
"  one." 

How  any  one,  in  the  face  of  this  passage,  can  deny  that  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are  two  distinct  Persons,  it  is  very  hard  to 
understand.  When  one  person  is  heard  speaking  to  another, 
common  sense  seems  to  point  out  that  there  are  two  persons, 
and  not  one. 

Hammond  maintains  that  there  really  was  a  loud  clap  of 
thunder,  as  well  as  a  voice  from  heaven.  Burkitt  also  seems  to 
think  the  same,  and  compares  it  to  the  thunder  which  accompa- 
nied the  giving  of  the  law  at  Sinai. 

[I  have  both  glorified  it  and  will  glorify  it  again.']  This  solemn 
sentence — far  more  solemn  in  the  pithy  and  expressive  Greek 
language  than  it  can  possibly  be  made  in  our  translation — 
admits,  as  Augustine  says,  of  being  interpreted  two  ways. 


JOHN,    CHAP.   XII.  351 

(a)  It  may  be  applied  solely  and  entirely  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself.  It  would  then  be  a  special  declaration  of  the 
Father  to  the  Son  :  "  I  have  glorified  my  name  in  Thy  incarna- 
tion, Thy  miracles,  Thy  words,  Thy  works.  I  will  yet  glorify 
it  again  in  Thy  voluntary  suffering  for  mankind,  Thy  death,  Thy 
resurrection,  and  Thy  ascension." 

Lightfoot  thinks  there  is  a  special  reference  to  our  Lord's 
conflict  with  the  devil.  "I  have  glorified  my  name  in  the  vic- 
tory Thou  formerly  didst  obtain  over  Satan's  temptation  in  the 
wilderness.  I  will  glorify  my  name  again,  in  the  victory  Thou 
shalt  have  in  this  conflict  also." 

(6)  It  may  be  applied  to  the  whole  course  of  God's  dealings 
with  creation  from  the  beginning.  It  would  then  be  a  declara- 
tion of  the  Father:  "I  have  continually  glorified  my  name  in 
all  the  dispensations  which  have  been, — before  the  flood,  in  the 
days  of  the  patriarchs,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  under  the  law, 
under  the  judges,  under  the  kings.  I  will  yet  glorify  it  once 
more  at  the  end  of  this  dispensation,  by  finishing  up  the  types 
and  figures,  and  accomplishing  the  work  of  man's  redemp- 
tion." 

Which  of  these  views  is  the  true  one,  I  cannot  pretend  to 
decide.  Either  makes  excellent  divinity,  and  is  reasonable 
and  consistent.  But  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  which 
is  correct.  If  I  have  any  opinion  on  the  point,  I  lean  to  the 
second  view. 

29. — [The  people  therefore,  etc. ~]  This  verse  apparently  is  meant 
to  describe  the  various  opinions  of  the  crowd  which  stood 
around  our  Lord,  about  the  voice  which  spoke  to  Him.  Some, 
who  were  standing  at  some  little  distance,  and  were  not  listen- 
ing very  attentively,  said  it  thundered.  Others,  who  were 
standing  close  by,  and  paying  great  attention,  declared  that  an 
invisible  being,  an  angel,  must  have  spoken.  Both  parties  en- 
tirely agreed  on  one  point.  Something  uncommon  had  hap- 
pened. An  extraordinary  noise  had  been  heard,  which  to  some 
sounded  like  thunder,  and  to  others  like  words.  But  nobody 
said  they  heard  nothing  at  all. 

That  the  voice  must  have  been  very  loud,  seems  proved  by 
the  supposition  that  it  was  "  thunder."  That  the  reality  and 
existence  of  angels  formed  part  of  the  popular  creed  of  the 
Jews,  seems  proved  by  the  readiness  of  some  to  take  up  the 
idea  that  a«  angel  had  spoken. 

Some  think  that  the  Greeks  before  mentioned,  not  knowing 
the  Hebrew  language  in  which  probably  the  voice  spoke,  fancied 
the  voice  was  thunder,  and  the  Jews  of  the  crowd  thought  it 
an  angel's  voice. 

80. — [Jesus  answered... This  voice. ..not.. .me. ..your  sakes.~\  In  this 
verse  our  Lord  tells  the  Jews  the  purpose  of  this  miraculous 
voice.     It  was  not  for  His  sake,— to  comfort  Him  and  help  Him,' 


352  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


but  for  their  sakes,— to  be  a  sign  and  a  witness  to  them.  The 
voice  could  tell  Him  nothing  that  He  did  not  know.  It  was 
meant  to  show  them  what  they  did  not  know,  or  doubted. 
The  sentence  would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  Not  on  ac- 
count of  Me  was  this  voice,  but  on  account  of  you."  It  was 
just  one  more  public  miraculous  evidence  of  His  Divine  mission, 
and  apparently  the  last  that  was  given.  The  first  evidence  was 
a  voice  at  His  baptism,  and  the  last  a  voice  just  before  His 
crucifixion. 

Augustine  remarks :  "Here  Christ  shows  that  his  voice  was 
not  to  make  known  to  Him  what  He  already  knew,  but  to  them 
to  whom  it  was  meet  to  be  made  known." 

1. — [iYow  is  the  judgment  of  this  world.]  This  is  undeniably  a 
difficult  saying.  The  difficulty  lies  principally  in  the  meaning  of 
the  word  "judgment." 

(a)  Some,  as  Barnes,  think  that  it  means,  "This  is  the  crisis, 
or  most  important  time  in  the  world's  history."  I  cannot  receive 
this.  I  doubt  whether  the  Greek  word  used  here,  will  ever  bear 
the  signification  of  our  word  "  crisis."  That  our  Lord's  atoning 
death  was  a  crisis  in  the  world's  history,  is  undoubtedly  true. 
But  that  is  not  the  question.  The  question  is,  what  do  the  Greek 
words  mean? 

(6)  Some,  as  Theophylact  and  Euthymius,  think  it  means, 
"Now  is  the  vengeance  of  this  world." — "I  will  cast  out  him 
by  whom  the  world  has  been  enslaved." — I  doubt  this  also. 

(c)  Some,  as  Zwingle,  think  that  "judgment"  means  the  dis- 
crimination or  separation  between  the  believing  and  the  unbe- 
lieving in  the  world.     (^Compare  John  ix.  39.) 

(d)  Some,  as  Calvin,  Brentius,  Beza,  Bucer,  Hutcheson, 
Flacius,  andGualter,  think  that  "judgment"  means  the  reforma- 
tion, or  setting  in  right  order  of  the  world. 

(e)  Some,  as  Grotius,  Gerhard,  Poole,  Toletus,  and  a  Lapide, 
think  "judgment"  means  the  deliverance,  and  setting  free  from 
bondage,  of  this  world. 

(/)  Some,  as  Pearce,  think  it  means,  "  Now  is  the  Jewish 
world  or  nation  about  to  be  judged  or  condemned  for  rejecting 
Me." 

(g)  Some,  as  Bengel,  think  it  means,  "Now  is  the  judgment 
concerning  this  world,  as  to  who  is  hereafter  to  be  the  rightful 
possessor  of  it." 

I  take  it  that  the  word  we  render  "judgment "  can  only  mean 
condemnation,  and  that  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  this: 
"  Now  has  arrived  the  season  when  a  sentence  of  condemnation 
shall  be  passed  by  my  death  on  the  whole  order  of  things  which 
has  prevailed  in  the  world  since  the  creation.  The  world  shall 
no  longer  be  let  alone,  and  left  to  the  devil  and  the  powers  of 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  353 


darkness.  I  am  about  to  spoil  them  of  their  dominion  by  my 
redeeming  work,  and  to  condemn  and  set  aside  the  dark,  godless 
order  of  things  which  has  so  long  prevailed  upon  earth.  It  has 
been  long  winked  at  and  tolerated  by  my  Father.  The  time  has 
come  when  it  will  be  tolerated  no  longer.  This  very  week,  by 
my  crucifixion,  the  religious  systems  of  the  world  shall  receive 
a  sentence  of  condemnation."  This  seems  Bullinger  and  Rol- 
lock's  view,  and  I  agree  with  it. 

In  order  to  realize  the  full  meaning  of  this  sentence,  we  must 
call  to  mind  the  extraordinary  condition  of  all  the  world,  with 
the  exception  of  Palestine,  before  Christ's  death.  To  an  extent 
of  which  now  we  can  form  no  conception,  it  was  a  world  without 
God,  plunged  iu  idolatry,  worshipping  devils, — in  open  rebel- 
lion against  God.  (Compare  1  Cor.  x.  20.)  When  Christ  died, 
this  order  of  things  received  its  sentence  of  condemnation. 

Bollock  f ays  :  "I  understand,  by  this  judgment,  the  condem- 
nation of  that  sin  of  which  the  world  was  so  full  when  Christ 
came,  and  which  had  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses."  Of  this 
undisturbed  reign  of  idolatry  Christ's  advent  made  an  end. 

Augustine,  on  this  verse,  says:  "The  devil  kept  possession 
of  mankind,  holding  men  as  criminals  bound  over  to  punishment 
by  the  handwriting  of  their  sins,  having  dominion  in  the  hearts 
of  the  unbelieving,  dragging  them,  deceived  and  captive,  to  the 
worship  of  the  creature,  for  which  they  had  deserted  the  Creator. 
But  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  confirmed  by  His  death  and  resur- 
rection, through  His  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins,  thou- 
sands of  believing  persons  obtain  deliverance  from  the  dominion 
of  the  devil,  are  joined  to  the  body  of  Christ,  and  quickened  by 
His  Spirit  as  faithful  members,  under  so  great  a  Head.  This  it 
was  that  He  called  judgment." 

[Now  shall... prince  of  this  world. ..cast  out.']  In  this  remark- 
able sentence  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Satan  is  meant  by  the 
"prince  of  this  world."  Up  to  the  time  of  our  Lord's  redeem- 
ing work,  the  entire  world  was  in  a  certain  sense  completely 
under  his  dominion.  When  Christ  came  and  died  for  sinners, 
Satan's  usurped  power  was  broken,  and  received  a  deadly  blow. 
Heathenism,  and  idolatry,  and  devil-worship  no  longer  governed 
all  the  earth  except  Palestine,  as  they  had  done  for  four  thou- 
sand years,  because  undisturbed.  In  a  wonderful  and  mysteri- 
ous manner  Christ  on  the  cross  "spoiled  principalities  aud 
powers,  and  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over 
them."  (Coloss.  ii.  15.)  To  this  victory  our  Lord  clearly  refers. 
"  Now  in  this  week,  by  my  vicarious  death  as  man's  Redeemer 
on  the  cross,  Satan,  the  Prince  of  this  world,  shall  receive  a 
deadly  blow,  and  be  dethroned  from  his  supremacy  over  man, 
and  cast  out.    The  head  of  the  serpent  shall  be  bruised." 

Of  course  our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  Satan  would  be  "cast 
out "  of  this  world  entirely,  and  tempt  it  no  more.  That  will  be 
done  at  the  second  advent,  we  know  from  Rev.  xx.  ;  but  it  was 


354  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


not  clone  at  the  first.  It  only  means  that  he  should  be  cast  out 
of  a  large  portion  of  the  dominion,  and  power,  and  undisturbed 
authority  he  had  hitherto  exercised  over  men's  souls. — The 
result  of  the  change  which  took  place  in  this  respect,  when 
Christ  died,  is  perhaps  not  enough  considered  by  Christians. 
We  probably  have  a  very  inadequate  idea  of  the  awful  extent  to 
which  Satan  carried  his  dominion  over  men's  souls  before  the 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  "  was  set  up.  Bodily  possession,  familiar 
spirits,  wizards,  heathen  oracles,  heathen  mysteries, — all  these 
are  things  which  before  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  were  much 
more  real  and  powerful  than  we  suppose. — And  why  ?  Because 
the  "  prince  of  this  world "  had  not  yet  been  cast  out.  He 
had  a  power  over  men's  bodies  and  minds  far  greater  than  he 
has  now.  When  Christ  came  to  the  cross  He  did  battle  with 
Satan,  won  a  victory  over  him,  stripped  him  of  a  large  portion 
of  his  authority,  and  cast  him  out  of  a  large  portion  of  his  do- 
minion. Does  not  the  whole  of  the  vision  in  Rev.  xii.  7—17, 
point  to  this  ?    This  view  is  supported  by  Lightfoot. 

This  sentence  shows  clearly  the  reality  and  power  of  the 
devil.  How  any  one  can  say  there  is  no  devil,  in  the  face  of 
6uch  expressions  as  "  the  prince  of  this  world,"  is  strange. 
How  any  one  can  scoff  and  think  lightly  of  a  being  of  such 
mighty  power,  is  stranger  still.  The  true  Christian,  however, 
may  always  take  comfort  in  the  thought  that  Satan  is  a  van- 
quished enemy.  He  was  stripped  of  a  large  part  of  his  domin- 
ion at  Christ's  first  advent.  He  is  still  "going  to  and  fro,'- 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour;  but  he  shall  be  completely  bound 
at  the  second  advent.     (1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Rom.  xxvi.  20;  Rev.  xx.  2.) 

The  whole  verse  appears  to  me  inexplicable,  unless  we  receive 
aud  hold  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  death  being  an  atonement  and 
satisfaction  for  man's  sin,  and  a  payment  of  man's  debt  to  God. 
That  thought  underlies  the  deep  statement  here  made  of  the 
mighty  work  about  to  be  done  by  our  Lord,  in  the  week  of  His 
crucifixion,  against  the  prince  of  this  world.  Once  adopt  the 
modern  notion  that  Christ's  death  was  only  a  beautiful  example 
of  self-sacrifice  and  martyrdom  for  truth,  like  that  of  Socrates, 
and  you  can  make  nothing  of  this  verse.  Hold,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  old  doctrine  that  Christ's  death  was  the  payment  of 
man's  debt,  and  the  redemption  of  man's  soul  from  the  power 
of  sin  aud  the  devil,  and  the  whole  verse  is  lighted  up  and  made 
comparatively  clear. 

Augustine  observes:  "The  Lord  in  this  verse  was  foretelling 
that  which  He  knew, — that  after  His  passion  aud  glorifying, 
throughout  the  whole  world  many  a  people  would  believe, 
within  whose  hearts  the  devil  once  was.  whom  wheu  by  faith 
they  renounce,  then  is  he  cast  out."  He  also  says  that  what 
formerly  took  place  in  a  few  hea:.*ts,  like  those  of  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets,  or  very  few  individuals,  is  now  foretold  as  about 
to  take  place  in  many  a  great  people. 

Euthymius  remarks,  that  as  the  first  Adam  by  eating  of  the 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII  355 

tree  was  cast  out  of  Paradise,  so  the  second  Adam  by  dying  on 
the  tree  cast  the  devil  out  of  his  usurped  dominion  in  the  world. 

Bucer  thinks  there  is  a  latent  reference  to  our  Lord's  former 
words  about  the  "  strong  man  armed  keeping  his  house,"  till  a 
stronger  comes  upon  him  and  spoils  him.     (Luke  xi.  21,  22.) 

82. — [And  I... lifted  up... draw  all  men  unto  me.~\  In  this  remark- 
able verse  our  Lord  plainly  points  to  His  own  crucifixion,  or 
being  lifted  up  on  the  cross.  It  is  the  same  expression  that  He 
used  to  Nicodemus :  "As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the 
wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up."  (John 
iii.  15.) 

The  promise,  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me,"  must,  I  think, 
meau  that  our  Lord  after  His  crucifixion  would  draw  men  of  all 
nations  and  kindreds  and  tongues  to  Himself,  to  believe  on 
Him  and  be  His  disciples.  Once  crucified,  He  would  become  a 
great  centre  of  attraction,  and  draw  to  Himself,  and  release 
from  the  devil's  usurped  power,  vast  multitudes  of  all  peoples 
and  countries,  to  be  His  servants  and  followers.  Up  to  this 
time  all  the  world  had  blindly  hastened  after  Satan  and  followed 
him.  After  Christ's  crucifixion  great  numbers  would  turn 
away  from  the  power  of  Satan  and  become  Christians. 

The  promise  doubtless  looks  even  further  than  this.  It  points 
to  a  time  when  every  knee  shall  bow  to  the  crucified  Son  of 
God,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.  The 
whole  world  shall  finally  become  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and 
of  His  Christ. 

Of  course  the  words  must  not  be  pressed  too  far.  We  must 
not  think  that  they  support  the  deadly  heresy  of  universal  sal- 
vation. We  must  not  suppose  them  to  mean  that  all  men  shall 
be  actually  saved  by  Christ's  crucifixion,  any  more  than  we 
must  suppose  that  Christ  actually  "lights"  everyone  iu  the 
world.  (See  John  i.  9.)  The  analogy  of  other  texts  shows  \ 
plainly  that  the  only  reasonable  sense  is,  that  Christ's  cruci-  I 
fixion  would  have  a  "  drawing  "  influence  on  men  of  all  nations, 
Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews.  Scripture  and  facts  under  our  eyes 
both  show  us  that  all  persons  are  not  actually  drawn  to  Christ. 
Many  live  and  die  and  are  lost  in  unbelief. 

The  word  "  draw  "  is  precisely  the  same  that  is  used  in  John 
vi.  44 :  "  No  man  cau  come  to  Me  except  the  Father  draw  him." 
Yet  I  doubt  whether  the  meaning  is  precisely  the  same.  In  the 
one  case  it  is  the  drawing  of  election,  when  the  Father  chooses 
and  draws  souls.  In  the  other  case,  it  is  the  drawing  influence 
which  Christ  exercises  on  labouring  and  heavy-laden  sinners, 
when  He  draws  them  by  His  spirit  tc  come  to  Him  and  believe. 
The  subjects  of  either  "  drawing  "  ar  \  the  same  men  and  women, 
and  the  drawing  in  either  case  is  irresistible.  All  who  are 
drawn  to  believe  are  drawn  both  t  y  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Without  this  drawing  no  one  would  ev  er  come  to  Christ. 


356 


EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


The  idea  of  some,  that  the  verse  may  be  applied  to  the  lifting 
up  or  exalting  of  Christ  by  ministers  in  their  preaching,  is  utterly 
baseless,  and  a  mere  play  upon  words.  That  the  preaching  of 
Christ  will  always  do  good,  more  or  less,  and  draw  souls  to 
Christ  by  God's  blessing,  is  no  doubt  true.  But  it  is  not  the 
/  doctrine  of  this  text,  and  ought  to  be  dismissed  as  an  unfair 
accommodation  of  Scriptural  language. 

Euthymius  observes  that  the  mission  of  Christ  began  to  draw 
souls  at  once,  as  in  the  case  of  the  penitent  thief  and  the  cen- 
turion. 

S3. — [This  he  said. ..what  death.. .die.']  This  explanatory  comment 
of  St.  John  on  our  Lord's  words  is  evidently  intended  to  make 
His  meaning  plain.  He  spoke  of  "  being  lifted  up  "  with  a  spe- 
cial reference  to  His  being  lifted  up  on  the  cross. — Of  course  it 
is  just  possible  that  the  reference  is  to  the  drawing  all  men,  and 
that  it  means,  "  He  spoke  of  drawing  all  men,  with  a  reference 
to  His  death  being  a  sacrificial  and  atoning  death,  which  would 
affect  the  position  of  all  men."  But  I  doubt  this  being  so  cor- 
rect a  view  as  the  other. 

"  He  should  die,"  is  literally,  He  was  "  about  to  die." 

It  is  curious  that,  in  the  face  of  this  verse,  some,  as  Bucerand 
Diodati,  maintain  that  our  Lord  by  "  being  lifted  up,"  refers  to 
His  exaltation  into  heaven  after  His  resurrection.  They  think 
that  then,  and  not  till  then,  could  He  be  said  to  "  draw  "  men. 
I  cannot  see  anything  in  this.  Our  Lord  appears  to  me  to  teach 
plainly,  that  after  His  crucifixion,  and  through  the  virtue  of  His 
crucifixion,  He  would  draw  men.  That  "lifting  up "  means  cru- 
cifixion is,  in  my  judgment,  plainly  taught  by  John  iii.  15. 


JOHN  XII.   34—43. 


34  The  people  answered  him,  We 
have  heard  out  of  the  law  that  Christ 
abide th  forever:  and  how  sayest  thou, 
The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up  ? 
who  is  this  Son  of  man  ? 

33  Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Yet  a 
little  while  is  the  light  with  you. 
Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest 
darkness  come  upon  you ;  for  he  that 
walkcth  in  darkness  knoweth  not 
whither  he  goeth. 

36  While  ye  have  light,  believe  in 
the  light,  that  ye  may  be  the  children 
of  light.  These  things  spake  Jesus, 
and  departed,  and  did  hide  himself 
from  them. 


37  But  though  he  had  done  so  many 
miracles  before  them,  yet  they  believed 
not  on  him: 

38  That  the  saying  of  Esaias  the 
prophet  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he 
spake,  Lord,  who  hath  believod  our 
report  ?  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of 
the  Lord  been  revealed  ? 

39  Therefore  they  could  not  believe, 
because  that  Esaias  said  again, 

40  He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
hardened  their  heart ;  that  they  should 
not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  understand 
with  their  heart,  and  be  converted,  and 
I  should  heal  them. 


JOHN,   cnAP.    XII. 


357 


41  These  things  said  Esaias,  when 
he  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him 

42  Nevertheless  among  the  chief 
rulers  also  many  believed  on  him:  but 
because  of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not 


confess   him,  lest   they  should  be  put 
out  of  the  synagogue : 

43  For  they  loved  the  praise  of  men 
more  than  the  praise  of  God. 


We  may  learn,  from  these  verses,  the  duty  of  using  present 
opportunities.  The  Lord  Jesus  says  to  us  all,  "  Yet  a 
little  while  is  the  light  with  you.  Walk  while  ye  have 
the  light,  lest  darkness  come  upon  you. — While  ye  have 
light  believe  in  the  light."  Let  us  not  think  that  these 
things  were  only  spoken  for  the  sake  of  the  Jews.  They 
were  written  for  us  also,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come. 

The  lesson  of  the  words  is  generally  applicable  to  the 
whole  professing  Church  of  Christ.  Its  time  for  doing 
good  in  the  world  is  short  and  limited.  The  throne  of 
grace  will  not  always  be  standing  :  it  will  be  removed  one 
day,  and  the  throne  of  judgment  will  be  set  up  in  its 
place.  The  door  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ  will  not 
always  be  open :  it  will  be  shut  one  day  forever,  and  the 
number  of  God's  elect  will  be  completed.  The  fountain 
for  all  sin  and  uncleanness  will  not  always  be  accessible ; 
the  way  to  it  will  one  day  be  barred,  and  there  will  remain 
nothing  but  the  lake  that  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone. 

These  are  solemn  thoughts ;  but  they  are  true.  They 
cry  aloud  to  sleeping  Churchmen  and  drowsy  congrega- 
tions, and  ought  to  arouse  great  searchings  of  heart; 
"  Can  nothing  more  be  done  to  spread  the  Gospel  at  home 
and  abroad?  Has  every  means  been  tried  for  extending 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified?  Can  we  lay  our  hands 
on  our  hearts,  and  say  that  the  Churches  have  left  nothing 
undone  in  the  matter  of  missions?  Can  we  look  forward 
to  the  Second  Advent  with  no  feelings  of  humiliation,  and 
say  that  the  talents  of  wealth,  and  influence,  and  oppor- 
tunities have  not  been  buried  in  the  ground?" — Such 
questions  may  well  humble  us,  when  we  look,  on  one  side, 


358  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

at  the  state  of  professing  Christendom,  and,  on  the  other, 
at  the  state  of  the  heathen  world.  We  must  confess  with 
shame  that  the  Church  is  not  walking  worthy  of  its 
light. 

But  the  lesson  of  the  words  is  specially  applicable  to 
ourselves  as  individuals.  Our  own  time  for  getting  good 
is  short  and  limited ;  let  us  take  heed  that  we  make 
good  use  of  it.  Let  us  "  walk  while  we  have  the 
light."  Have  we  Bibles  ?  Let  us  not  neglect  to  read  them. 
— Have  we  the  preached  Gospel?  Let  us  not  linger 
halting  between  two  opinions,  but  believe  to  the  saving 
of  our  souls. — Have  we  Sabbaths?  Let  us  not  waste 
them  in  idleness,  carelessness,  and  indifference,  but  throw 
our  whole  hearts  into  their  sacred  employments,  and  turn 
them  to  good  account. — Light  is  about  us  and  around  us 
and  near  us  on  every  side.  Let  us  each  resolve  to  walk 
in  the  light  while  we  have  it,  lest  we  find  ourselves  at 
length  cast  out  into  outer  darkness  forever.  It  is  a  true 
saying  of  an  old  divine,  that  the  recollection  of  lost 
and  misspent  opportunities  will  be  the  very  essence  of 
hell. 

We  may  learn,  secondly,  from  these  verses,  the  desperate 
hardness  of  the  human  heart.  It  is  written  of  our  Lord's 
hearers  at  Jerusalem,  that,  "  though  he  had  done  so 
many  miracles  before  them,  yet  they  believed  not  on 
Him." 

We  err  greatly  if  we  suppose  that  seeing  wonderful 
things  will  ever  convert  souls.  Thousands  live  and  die 
in  this  delusion.  They  fancy  if  they  saw  some  miraculous 
sight,  or  witnessed  some  supernatural  exercise  of  Divine 
grace,  they  would  lay  aside  their  doubts,  and  at  once 
become  decided  Christians.  It  is  a  total  mistake.  Nothing 
short  of  a  new  heart  and  a  new  nature  implanted  in  us 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  ever  make  us  real  disciples  of 
Christ.      Without  this,  a  miracle  might  raise  within  us  a 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  359 

little  temporary  excitement ;  but,  the  novelty  once  gone, 
we  should  find  ourselves  just  as  cold  and  unbelieving  as 
the  Jews. 

The  prevalence  of  unbelief  and  indifference  in  the 
present  day  ought  not  to  surprise  us.  It  is  just  one  of 
the  evidences  of  that  mighty  foundation-doctrine,  the  total 
corruption  and  fall  of  man.  How  feebly  we  grasp  and 
realize  that  doctrine  is  proved  by  our  surprise  at  human 
incredulity.  We  only  half  believe  the  heart's  deceitful- 
ness.  Let  us  read  our  Bibles  more  attentively,  and 
search  their  contents  more  carefully.  Even  when  Christ 
wrought  miracles  and  preached  sermons,  there  were  num- 
bers of  His  hearers  who  remained  utterly  unmoved. 
What  right  have  we  to  wonder  if  the  hearers  of  modern 
sermons  in  countless  instances  remain  unbelieving?  " The 
disciple  is  not  greater  than  his  Master/'  If  even  the 
hearers  of  Christ  did  not  believe,  how  much  more  should 
we  expect  to  find  unbelief  among  the  hearers  of  His 
ministers!  Let  the  truth  be  spoken  and  confessed.  Man's 
obstinate  unbelief  is  one  among  many  indirect  proofs  that 
the  Bible  is  true.  The  clearest  prophecy  in  Isaiah  begins 
with  the  solemn  question,  u  Who  hath  believed?  "  (Isai. 
liii.  1.) 

We  may  learn,  thirdly,  from  these  verses,  the  amazing 
power  which  the  love  of  the  world  has  over  men.  We  read 
that  "  among  the  chief  rulers  many  believed  on  Christ ; 
but  because  of  the  Pharisees  they  did  not  confess  Him, 
lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue.  For  they 
loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God." 

These  unhappy  men  were  evidently  convinced  that 
Jesus  was  the  true  Messiah.  Reason,  and  intellect,  and 
mind,  and  conscience,  obliged  them  secretly  to  admit  that 
no  one  could  do  the  miracles  which  He  did,  unless  God 
was  with  Him,  and  that  the  preacher  of  Nazareth  really 
was  the   Christ   of  God.     But   they  had   not   courage   to 


3 GO  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

confess  it.  They  dared  not  face  the  storm  of  ridicule,  if 
not  of  persecution,  which  confession  would  have  entailed. 
And  so,  like  cowards,  they  held  their  peace,  and  kept 
their  convictions  to  themselves. 

Their  case,  it  may  be  feared,  is  a  sadly  common  one. 
There  are  thousands  of  people  who  know  far  more  in 
religion  then  they  act  up  to.  They  know  they  ought 
to  come  forward  as  decided  Christians.  They  know  that 
they  are  not  living  up  to  their  light.  But  the  fear  of 
man  keeps  them  back.  They  are  afraid  of  being  laughed 
at,  jeered  at,  and  despised  by  the  world.  They  dread 
losing  the  good  opinion  of  societj^,  and  the  favourable 
judgment  of  men  and  women  like  themselves.  And  so 
they  go  on  from  to  year  to  year,  secretly  ill  at  ease  and 
dissatisfied  with  themselves, — knowing  too  much  of  re- 
ligion to  be  happy  in  the  world,  and  clinging  too  much 
to  the  world  to  enjo}^  any  religion. 

Faith  is  the  only  cure  for  soul  ailments  like  this. 
A  believing  view  of  an  unseen  God,  and  unseen  Christ 
an  unseen  heaven,  and  an  unseen  judgment-day, — this  is 
the  grand  secret  of  overcoming  the  fear  of  man.  The 
expulsive  power  of  a  new  principle  is  required  to  heal 
the  disease.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith."  (1  John  v.  4.)  Let  us  pray 
for  faith,  if  we  would  conquer  that  deadly  enemy  of 
souls,  the  fear  of  man  and  the  love  of  man's  praise.  And 
if  we  have  any  faith,  let  us  pray  for  more.  Let  our 
daily  cry  be,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  We  may  easily 
have  too  much  money,  or  too  much  worldly  prosperity ; 
but  we  can  never  have  too  much  faith. 

Notes.    John  XII.  34—43. 

34.— [The people  answered,  etc.']  This  verse  supplies  a  remarkable 
instance  of  the  perverse  and  hardened  blindness  of  the  Jews  in 
our  Lord's  time.  They  pretended  to  be  unable  to  reconcile  the 
Lord's  language  about  being  "  lifted  up,"  with  the  Old  Testa- 


JOHN,    CHAP.   XII.  361 


ment  prophecies  about  the  eternity  and  never  dying  of  Christ. — 
That  "  lifted  up  "  meant  being  put  to  death  on  the  cross,  they 
seem  to  have  understood.  That  our  Lord,  or  the  Son  of  man, as 
He  called  Himself,  claimed  to  be  the  Christ,  they  quite  under- 
stood. What  they  stumbled  at  was  the  idea  of  the  eternal  Christ 
being  put  to  death.  They  had  got  hold  of  the  idea  of  a  glorious, 
eternal  Messiah.  They  had  not  got  hold  of  the  idea  of  a  suffer- 
ing, dying  Messiah. 

Of  course  they  were  right  in  holding  that  "  Christ  abideth  for- 
ever." It  is  the  universal  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament.  (Com- 
pare Isai.  ix.  7;  Psalm  ex.  4;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  25;  Daniel  vii.  14; 
Micah  iv.  7.)  Our  Lord  had  never  for  a  moment  denied  this. 
He  was  the  promised  Saviour,  who,  as  Gabriel  said  to  Mary,  was 
to  "reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever."     (Luke  i.  33.) 

On  the  other  hand,  they  were  entirely  wrong  in  not  under- 
standing that  Christ  had  to  suffer  before  He  reigned,  and  to  go  to 
the  cross  before  He  wore  the  crown.  They  were  wrong  in  not 
seeing  that  His  sacrifice  as  our  Substitute  and  our  Passover  was 
the  very  corner-stone  of  revealed  religion,  and  that  the  very 
11  law"  of  which  they  made  so  much,  pointed  to  His  sacrifice  as 
clearly  as  to  His  eternal  glory.  They  forgot  that  Isaiah  says  that 
Messiah  is  to  be  "brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,"  and  that 
Daniel  speaks  of  His  being  "  cut  off."     (Isai.  liii.  7 ;  Dan.  ix.  26.) 

The  words  "we"  and  "thou,"  in  this  verse,  in  the  Greek  are 
emphatic.  "We  Jews  have  always  been  taught  to  believe  the 
eternity  of  Messiah.  Thou,  on  the  other  hand,  sayest  that  Mes- 
siah must  be  put  to  death,  and  lifted  up  on  the  cross.  How  is 
this?    How  are  we  to  understand  it?  " 

"  The  law,"  in  this  verse,  must  evidently  be  taken  for  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  Jews  charge  our  Lord  with 
saying  "the  Son  of  Man  must  be  lifted  up."  Yet  our  Lord  in 
the  last  verse  but  one  had  not  mentioned  the  Sou  of  man,  but 
had  only  said,  "I,  if  I  be  lifted  up." — It  is  also  singular  that 
our  Lord  nowhere  uses  the  expression  "  lifted  up  "  except  in  His 
conversation  with  Nicodemus,  in  John  iii.  14.  We  must  there- 
fore either  suppose  that  the  Jews  referred  to  the  saying  of 
Christ  when  He  spoke  to  Nicodemus,  (which  is  very  unlikely  ;)- 
or  else  that  the  expression,  "The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted 
up,"  was  so  frequently  on  our  Lord's  lips,  that  the  Jews  caught  it 
up  and  pressed  it  on  Him  here;— or  else  that  our  Lord  so  fre- 
quently spoke  of  Himself  as  the  Son  of  man,  that  when  He 
said,  "If  I  be  lifted  up,"  the  Jews  thought  it  equivalent  to  say- 
ing, "  If  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up." 

The  question  "Who  is  this  Son  of  man? "can  hardly  imply 
that  the  Jews  did  not  know  that  Christ  was  speaking  of  Him- 
self. Does  it  not  rather  mean,  "  Who,  and  what  kind  of  a  per- 
son dost  Thou  claim  to  be,  calling  Thyself  the  Son  of  man,  and 
yet  talking  of  being  lifted  up  on  the  cross?  Dost  Thou  really 
16 


362  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

mean  that  one  and  the  same  person  can  be  a  dying  person,  and 
yet  also  the  eternal  Christ?  Dost  Thou  claim  "to  be  the  eternal 
Christ,  and  yet  talk  of  being  lifted  up  on  a  cross?  Explain  this 
apparent  contradiction,  for  we  cannot  understand  it."— It  is  just 
the  old  story  over  again.  The  Jews  could  not  and  would  not 
understand  that  Messiah  was  to  suffer  as  well  as  to  reign,  to  die 
as  a  Sacrifice  as  well  as  to  appear  in  glory.  They  could  not  and 
would  not  see  that  the  two  things  could  be  reconciled,  and  could 
meet  in  one  person.  Hence  their  perplexity  exhibited  in  the 
question  of  the  text. 

The  title,  "  Son  of  man,"  is  first  found  applied  to  Messiah  in 
Daniel  vii.  13.  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  Jews  understood  and 
remembered  that  passage. 

Let  us  note  that  a  half  knowledge  of  Scripture,  a  suppression 
of  some  texts,  and  a  misapplication  of  other  texts,  will  account 
for  a  large  portion  of  mistakes  in  religion.  In  this  way  people 
get  a  heresy  or  a  crotchet  into  their  heads  on  some  doctrinal 
point,  and  seem  blind  to  the  truth.  No  heresies  are  so  obsti- 
nately defended,  and  so  difficult  to  meet,  as  those  which  are 
based  on  a  perverted  view  of  some  portion  of  Scripture.  In 
reading  our  Bibles,  we  must  be  careful  to  give  every  part  and 
portion  its  due  weight. 

Let  us  remember,  before  we  judge  the  blindness  of  the  Jews 
too  severely  in  this  place,  that  many  Christians  are  just  as  slow 
to  see  the  whole  truth  about  the  second  advent  of  Christ  and 
His  coming  glory,  as  the  Jews  were  to  see  the  whole  truth  about 
the  first  advent  and  the  cross.  Multitudes  apply  texts  to  the  first 
advent  which  only  belong  to  the  second  advent,  and  are  just  as 
much  prejudiced  against  the  second  personal  coming  of  Christ 
to  reign,  as  the  Jews  were  against  the  first  personal  advent  to 
suffer.  Not  a  few  Christians,  I  fear,  are  ready  to  say,  "  We  have 
heard  out  of  the  Scriptures  that  Christ  was  to  come  in  humilia- 
tion to  be  crucified ;  and  how  say  ye,  then,  that  Christ  must 
come  in  power  to  reign?  " 

The  expression,  "  this,"  is  rather  emphatic,  and  has  something 
contemptuous  about  it.  "  We  have  heard  of  a  Son  of  man  who 
is  eternal.  Who  is  this  Son  of  man  about  to  be  lifted  up  on  the 
cross,  of  whom  you  speak?  " 

35. [Then  Jesus  said  unto  them.. light  with  you.']  It  is  noteworthy 
that  our  Lord  makes  no  direct  answer  to  the  question  of  the 
Jews.  He  only  warns  them,  in  a  very  solemn  manner,  of  the 
danger  they  were  in  of  letting  their  dav  of  grace  slip  away  un- 
improved. He  draws  a  figure  from  the  light  of  day,  and  the 
acknowledged  importance  of  walking  and  journeying  while  we 
have  the  light.  By  "  the  light"  He  evidently  means  Himself. 
"  I,  the  Light  of  the  world,  am  only  going  to  be  with  you  a  very 
little,  longer.  My  day  is  drawing  to  a  close.  The  sun  will  soon 
set."     (Compare  Jer.  xiii.  15.) 

Here,  as  elsewhere,   we  see  how  clearly  and  distinctly  our 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  363 


Lord  saw  His  own  approaching  death  and  withdrawal  from  the 
world. 

Ecolampadius  thinks  that  there  is  a  latent  connection  between 
this  verse  and  the  question  of  the  Jews.  "You  ask  who  is  this 
Son  of  man?  I  reply  that  He  is  the  Light  of  the  world,  as  I 
have  often  told  you.  Like  the  sun,  He  is  about  to  be  eclipsed, 
or  withdrawn  from  your  eyes  very  shortly.  Make  haste,  and 
delay  not  to  believe  on  Him." 

Gerhard  justly  remarks  on  this  sentence,  how  far  from  infal- 
libility the  best  of  the  Fathers  were.  Even  Augustine,  from  his 
slight  acquaintance  with  Greek,  renders  the  sense,  "  There  is 
yet  a  little  light  in  your  hearts  !  " 

A  German  commentator  remarks,  that  Christ  seems  here  to 
rebuke  this  quibbling  and  questioning  about  phrases.  "  There 
was  no  time  now  for  sophistry  and  circumlocution.  It  was  a 
solemn  matter.  How  differently  ought  they  to  demean  them- 
selves in  their  little  residue  of  time",  and  not  to  fritter  it  away 
with  affected  contradictions !  How  earnestly  they  ought  to  seek 
at  once  for  refuge  to  the  light,  and  shield  themselves  against 
coming  darkness ! " 

[Walk  while  ye  have  the  light."}  This  solemn  exhortation  was 
meant  to  urge  the  Jews  to  do  for  their  souls'  safety,  what  a  wise 
traveller  would  do  to  get  safely  to  his  journey's  end.  "  Enter 
in  at  the  strait  gate :  walk  in  the  narrow  way :  flee  from  the  city 
of  destruction :  set  out  on  your  journey  towards  eternal  life  : 
rise,  and  be  moving,  while  I  and  my  Gospel  are  close  to  you, 
shining  on  you,  and  within  your  reach." 

Hengstenberg  remarks,  that  "  walking  here  denotes  activity, 
and  stands  opposed  to  an  idle  and  indifferent  rest." 

[Lest  darkness  come  upon  you.~]  Our  Lord  here  warns  the 
Jews  of  the  things  to  be  feared,  if  they  neglected  His  advice. 
Darkness  would  overtake,  catch,  and  come  upon  them.  He 
would  leave  the  world,  and  return  to  His  Father.  They  would 
be  left  in  a  state  of  judicial  darkness  and  blindness  as  a  nation, 
and,  with  the  exception  of  an  election,  would  be  given  over  to 
untold  calamities,  scattering,  and  misery.  How  true  these 
words  were,  we  know  from  the  history  of  the  Jews,  written  by 
Josephus,  after  our  Lord  left  the  world.  His  account  of  the 
extraordinary  state  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  during  the 
siege  of  the  city  by  Titus,  is  the  best  commentary  on  the  text 
before  us.  The  state  of  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  during  the  last 
days  of  Jerusalem,  can  only  be  described  as  "  darkness  that 
might  be  felt." 

[For  he... darkness. ..knoweth  not...goeth.~\  This  is  an  argu- 
ment drawn  from  the  acknowledged  helplessness  of  one  who 
attempts  a  difficult  journey  in  a  dark  night.  He  cannot  see  his 
way.  He  only  gets  into  trouble, and  perhaps  loses  his  life.  This 
was  exactly  the  case  of  the  Jewish  nation,  after  our  Lord  left 


364  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS, 


the  world.  Up  to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple, 
they  seemed  like  a  nation  of  madmen,  and  a  people  judicially 
bliuded, — conscious  that  they  were  in  a  wrong  position,  strug- 
gling furiously  to  get  out  of  it,  and  yet  only  plunging  deeper 
into  the  mire  of  hopeless  misery,  till  Titus  took  the  city,  and 
carried  the  whole  race  into  captivity.  They  had  put  out  their 
own  eyes  by  rejecting  Christ,  and  were  like  a  strong  man 
blinded,  maddened  by  a  sense  of  his  own  misery,  and  yet  im- 
potent to  get  out  of  it. 

86.— [IVhile  light. ..believe. ..children  of  light.']  This  sentence  would 
have  been  more  accurately  rendered,  "  While  ye  have  thh 
Light;"  that  is,  "while  ye  have  Me,  the  Light  of  the  world, 
with  you."  It  is  a  final,  affectionate  entreaty  to  the  Jews  repeat- 
ing in  more  plain  words  the  exhortation  of  the  last  verse,  "  To 
walk  in  the  light."  It  is  as  though  our  Lord  said,  "  Once  more 
I  beseech  you  to  believe  in  Me  as  the  Light  of  the  world,  while 
I  am  with  you."  The  end  and  object  for  which  they  are  to  be- 
lieve is  also  added,  "That  ye  may  become  my  children,  have 
light  in  your  hearts,  light  in  your  consciences,  light  in  your 
lives,  light  on  your  present  path,  light  in  your  future  pros- 
pects." There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  expression  "children 
of  light"  is  a  Hebraism,  signifying  "to  be  brought  inclose 
connection  with  or  under  the  full  influence  of  light." 

Let  us  note  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  believing  is  the  first  step, 
the  one  thing  needful.  The  exhortation  is  still  to  be  offered 
to  every  sinner  directly  and  personally, — "Believe,  that  thou 
mayest  be  a  child  of  light." 

[TJiese  tilings. .. spake... departed. ..hide... them.'}  "We  know  not 
exactly  on  what  day  in  the  last  week  of  our  Lord's  life  the  words 
just  recorded  had  been  spoken.  The  sentence  before  us  cer- 
tainly seems  to  mark  a  break  and  interval,  and  we  can  hardly 
suppose  that  the  short  address  from  the  forty-fourth  verse  to 
the  end  of  the  chapter  was  spoken  the  same  day,  or  was  contin- 
uously connected  with  the  discourse  ending  in  this  verse. 

To  me  it  seems  probable  that  our  Lord  "  departed  "  to  Beth- 
any after  the  miracle  of  the  Voice  from  the  heavens,  and  the 
commotion  that  followed  it. — The  words  of  our  English  version 
"  Did  hide  Himself,"  seem  to  me  rather  stronger  than  the  Greek 
warrants.  It  would  be  more  literally,  "  Was  concealed  from 
them."  Whether  this  was  by  miracle,  as  on  other  occasions,  is 
not  clear. 

Calvin  seems  to  think  that  our  Lord  only  departed  from  the 
hearers  immediately  round  Him,  and  went  to  the  temple,  where 
He  met  with  another  audience,  of  a  more  believing  kind.  Flacius, 
too,  thinks  it  was  only  a  short  and  temporary  withdrawal.  Poole, 
on  the  contrary,  takes  the  view  that  I  adopt,  and  says  that  our 
Lord  withdrew  to  Bethany. 

W. — [But  though. ..so  many  miracles. ..them.']  This  verse  begins  a 
long  parenthetical  comment,  which  John  was  inspired  to  make 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  305 

at  this  point,  on  the  peculiar  unbelief  of  the  Jerusalem  Jews. 
He  remarks  on  the  singular  hardness  of  this  section  of  the  na- 
tion, in  the  face  of  the  singularly  strong  evidence  which  they 
enjoyed  of  Christ's  M essiahship. 

The  expression,  "So  many  miracles,"  seems  to  point  out  that 
the  miracles  recorded  by  St.  John  are  by  no  means  all  the  mira- 
cles that  our  Lord  performed  in  and  near  Jerusalem.  Beside 
the  purifying  of  the  temple,  John  only  records  three :  the  healing 
of  the  impotent  man,  the  healing  of  the  blind,  and  the  raising  of 
Lazarus.  (John  v.,  ix.,  xi.)  Yet  John  expressly  speaks  of 
miracles,  (both  here,  and  in  John  ii.  23,)  and  the  Pharisees  say, 
"  This  Man  doeth  many  miracles."     (John  xi.  47.) 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  before,"  is  very  strong.  It  is  the 
same  that  is  "  In  the  sight  of,"  in  1  Thess.  i.  3 ;  and  "  In  the  pres- 
ence of,"  in  1  Thess.  ii.  19. 

[Yet  they  believed  not  on  him.']  In  estimating  the  peculiar 
hardness  and  unbelief  of  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  it  is  worth 
remembering  that  all  experience  proves  that  where  there  is  the 
greatest  quantity  of  the  form  of  religion,  there  is  often  the  great- 
est proportion  of  formality  and  unbelief.  The  places  where  men 
become  most  familiar  with  the  outside  and  ceremonial  of 
Christianity  are  precisely  the  places  where  the  heart  seems  to 
become  most  hard.  Witness  the  state  of  Rome  at  this  clay. 
Witness  too  often  the  state  of  cathedral  cities  in  our  own  land. 
We  need  not  wonder  that  the  city  in  which  was  the  temple,  the 
daily  sacrifice,  and  the  priesthood,  was  the  most  unbelieving 
place  in  Palestine. 

88. — [That. .. saying. ..Esaias... fulfilled.. .spake.]  We  must  not  sup- 
pose this  means  that  the  Jews  did  not  believe,  in  order  that  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  might  be  fulfilled.  This  would  be  teaching 
sheer  fatalism,  and  would  destroy  man's  responsibility.  The 
true  meaning  is,  "  So  that  by  this  unbelief  the  saying  of  Isaiah 
was  fulfilled."     (See  John  v.  20;  Rom.  v.  20;  2  Cor.  i.  17.) 

Chrysostom  observes:  "It  was  not  because  Isaiah  spake  that 
they  believed  not,  but  because  they  were  not  about  to  believe, 
that  he  spake." 

Augustine  says :  "The  Lord,  by  the  prophet,  did  predict  the 
unbelief  of  the  Jews, — predict,  however,  not  cause.  It  does  not 
follow  that  the  Lord  compels  any  man  to  sin,  because  He  knows 
men's  future  sins." 

Theophylact  and  Euthymius  say  much  the  same. 

[Lord,  who... believed  our  report.]  This  question  begins  the 
well-known  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah,  which  describes  with 
such  extraordinary  accuracy  our  Lord's  sufferings.  It  is  cer- 
tainly a  most  singular  fact,  that  the  very  chapter  which  the  Jews 
in  every  age  have  been  most  obstinately  unwilling  to  believe, 
should  begin  with  this  question.  It  is  a  Hebraism,  tantamount 
to  saying,  "Nobody  believes  our  report."    The  unbelief  of  the 


\QG  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Jews  was  a  thing  as  clearly  foretold  In  Scripture  ns  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ.  If  they  had  not  been  unbelieving,  the  Scriptures 
would  have  been  untrue. 

[To  whom. ..arm  of.. .Lord  revealed.']  The  expression,  "  Arm 
of  the  Lord,"  is  thought  by  Augustine  to  mean  Christ  Himself. 
It  may  be  so.  If  not,  it  must  mean,  "  To  whom  is  the  Lord's 
power  in  raising  up  a  Redeemer  and  an  atoning  sacrifice  re- 
vealed?" That  is,  the  Lord's  power  is  revealed  to  and  received 
by  none.  The  question  here  again  is  a  Hebraism,  equivalent  to 
an  assertion. 

Bullinger  observes,  that  "  some  might  perhaps  wonder  that 
the  Jews  did  not  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah.  To  this  John 
replies,  that  Isaiah  long  ago  foretold  that  they  would  prove  an 
unreasonable  and  uubelieving  nation." 

The  quotation  of  Isaiah  in  this  place  is  strong  evidence  that 
the  fifty-third  chapter  of  this  prophecy  applies  to  Christ,  and 
none  else. 

39. — [Therefore  they  could  not  believe,  because,  etc.]  This  is  un- 
deniably a  difficult  verse.  It  cannot  of  course  mean  that  the 
Jews  were  unable  to  believe,  although  really  desirous  to  do  so, 
and  were  prevented  by  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  What,  then, 
can  it  mean?  The  following  paraphrase  is  offered :  "  This  was 
the  cause  why  they  could  not  believe, — they  were  in  that  state 
of  judicial  blindness  and  hardness  which  Isaiah  had  described. 
They  were  justly  given  over  to  this  state,  because  of  their  many 
sins,  and  for  this  cause  they  had  no  power  to  believe." 

"  Therefore,"  is  literally,  "  on  account  of  this."  It  cannot, 
I  think,  look  backward,  but  forward.  (Compare  x.  17,  aud  xii. 
18.) 

"They  could  not,"  is  literally,  "they  were  not  able."  It 
precisely  describes  the  moral  inability  of  a  thoroughly  hardened 
and  wicked  man  to  believe.  He  is  thoroughly  under  the  mastery 
of  a  hardened  and  seared  conscience,  and  has,  as  it  were,  lost 
the  power  of  believing. — They  had  no  will  to  believe,  and  so 
they  had  no  power.  They  could  have  believed  if  they  would,  but 
they  would  not,  and  so  they  could  not.  The  expression  is 
parallel  to  the  well-known  words,  "  No  man  can  come  to  Me, 
except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  Me  draw  him."  There  the 
meaning  is,  "  No  man  has  any  will  to  come  unless  he  is  drawn, 
and  so  no  man  cau  come." 

Even  in  our  own  English  language  the  expression,  "  could 
not,  "  is  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  "  would  not."  Thus 
the  brethren  of  Joseph  "hated  him,  and  could  not  speak 
peaceably  of  him."     (Gen.  xxxvii.  4.) 

The  word  "  because  "  is  a  needlessly  strong  rendering  of  the 
Greek.    It  would  be  just  as  correctly  translated  "  for." 

Chrysostom  observes  :  "  In  many  places  Christ  is  wont  to  term 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  3G7 

choice  power.  So,  "  The  world  cannot  hate  you,  but  Me  it 
hateth."  So  in  common  conversation  a  mau  says,  "I  cannot 
love  this  or  that  person,  calling  the  force  of  his  will  power." 

Augustine  says  :  "  If  I  be  asked  why  they  could  not  believe,  I 
answer  in  a  word,  Because  they  would  not." — He  also  says,  "It 
is  said  of  the  Omnipotent,  He  cannot  deny  Himself  :  and  this  is 
the  power  of  the  Divine  will.  So  '  they  could  not  believe '  is 
the  fault  of  the  humau  will." 

Zwingle  also  says  that  "  could  not "  means  "  would  not." 

Ecolampadius  observes  :  "They  would  not,  and  therefore  they 
could  not  believe.  God  is  wont  to  punish  those  who  commit 
some  sin  by  giving  them  up  to  other  sins."  This,  he  remarks, 
is  the  heaviest  judgment  to  which  we  can  be  given  up, — to  have 
sins  punished  by  sins,  that  is,  by  being  let  alone  to  commit  them. 

Bishop  Hall  says:  "  They  could  not  believe,  because,  as  Isaiah 
says,  in  a  just  punishment  for  their  maliciousness  and  contempt, 
God  had  stricken  them  with  a  reprobate  sense,  so  that  their  eyes 
were  blinded." 

Quesnel  says  here  :  "  Let  us  bewail  this  inability  of  will  with 
which,  by  means  of  Adam's  sin,  we  are  all  born,  and  which,  by 
our  own  sins,  we  daily  increase.  Let  us  continually  have  re- 
course to  Him  who  said,  '  without  Me  ye  can  do  uothiug,'  and, 
'  No  man  can  come  to  Me,  unless  the  Father  draw  him.' " 

40. — [He  hath  blinded' their  eyes,  etc.~\  This  quotation  is  a  free 
paraphrase  of  the  general  view  of  a  verse  in  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10.  I 
think  it  can  only  have  one  meaning.  That  meaning  is,  that 
"  God  had  given  over  the  Jews  to  judicial  blindness,  as  a 
punishment  for  their  long-continued  and  obstinate  rejection  of 
His  warnings."  That  God  does  in  some  cases  give  people  over, 
as  a  punishment  for  obstinate  unbelief,  and  that  He  may  be 
justly  termed  the  cause  of  such  unbelief,  is  I  think,  quite  plain  in 
Scripture.  Pharaoh  is  a  case  in  point.  He  obstinately  refused 
God's  warnings,  and  so  at  last  He  was  given  over,  and  God  is 
said  to  have  "  hardened  his  heart."  Compare  Joshua  xi.  20: 
"  It  was  of  the  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts,  that  they  should 
come  against  Israel  in  battle,  that  He  might  destroy  them." 
(So  Deut.  ii.  30;  1  Sam.  ii.  25;  Rom.  ix.  18.) 

This  is  no  doubt  a  very  solemn  and  awful  subject.  It  seems 
at  first  sight  to  make  God  the  author  of  man's  destruction,  But 
surely  a  moment's  reflection  will  show  us  that  God  is  a  Sovereign 
in  punishing,  and  may  punish  in  any  way  he  pleases.  Some  He 
cuts  off  suddenly  the  moment  they  sin.  Others  He  gives  over 
to  judicial  blindness,  and  ceases  to  strive  with  their  consciences. 
"The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  certainly  do  right."  Those 
whom  He  is  said  to  "  harden  and  blind  "  will  always  be  found  to 
be  persons  whom  He  had  previously  warned,  exhorted,  and 
constantly  summoned  to  repent.  And  never  is  He  said  to 
harden  and  blind,  and  give  men  up  to  judicial  hardness  and 


368  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


blindness,   till   after  a  long  course  of   warnings.      This  was 
certainly  the  case  with  Pharaoh  and  with  the  Jews. 

The  consequence  of  God  blinding  and  hardening  a  person  is 
that  he  does  not  "see  "  his  danger  with  his  eyes,  or  "  under- 
stand "  his  position  with  his  heart.  The  result  is  that  he  holds 
on  his  way  unconverted,  and  dies  without  his  soul's  disease 
being  healed. — "Seeing"  and  "understanding"  are  essential 
parts  of  conversion.  No  simpler  reason  can  be  given  why 
myriads  of  church-goers  continue  careless,  unaffected,  un- 
moved, and  unconverted:  they  neither  "see"  nor  "under- 
stand." God  alone  can  give  them  seeing  eyes  and  understanding 
hearts,  and  ministers  cannot.  And  one  solemn  reason  why 
many  live  and  die  in  this  state  is,  that  they  have  resisted  God's 
warnings,  and  are  justly  punished  already  with  a  judicial  blind- 
ness and  hardness,  by  Him  whom  they  have  resisted. 

The  key  to  the  whole  difficulty,  after  all,  lies  in  the  answer 
we  are  prepared  to  give  to  the  question,  "Is  God  just  in 
punishing  the  sinner?" — The  true  Christian  and  honest  Bible 
reader  will  find  no  difficulty  in  answering  that  question  in  the 
affirmative.  Once  grant  that  God  is  just  in  punishing  the  un- 
godly, and  there  is  an  end  of  the  problem.  God  may  punish  by 
giving  over  the  obstinate  sinner  to  a  reprobate  mind,  as  really 
as  by  sentencing  him  to  everlasting  fire  at  the  last  day. 

One  thing  only  must  never  be  forgotten.  God  "  willeth  not  the 
death  of  any  sinner."  He  is  willing  to  soften  the  hardest  heart, 
and  to  open  the  blind  eyes  of  the  greatest  sinner.  In  dealing 
with  men  about  their  souls  we  must  never  forget  this.  We  may 
well  remind  them  that  by  hardened  impenitence  they  may  pro- 
voke God  to  give  them  up.  But  we  must  also  press  on  them 
that  God's  mercies  in  Christ  are  infinite,  and  that,  if  they  are 
finally  lost,  they  will  have  none  but  themselves  to  blame. 

Burgon  thinks  that  the  nominative  to  "blinded"  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  verse  is  not  God,  but  "  the  Jewish  people ;  "  and 
that  the  meaning  is,  "  This  people  hath  blinded  their  own 
eyes."  But  I  cannot  see  that  this  idea  can  be  supported  by  ref- 
erence to  Isaiah,  and  though  it  smooths  over  difficulties,  I  dare 
not  receive  it. 

Calvin  thinks  that  the  passage  applies  to  the  hardness  by 
which  God  punishes  the  wickedness  of  an  ungrateful  people. 
They  are  given  over  justly  to  an' unbelieving  and  judicially 
blinded  state  of  mind. 

Poole  observes:  "We  have  this  text,  than  which  there  is 
none  more  terrible,  no  less  than  six  times  quoted  in  the  New 
Testament.  In  all  places  it  is  quoted  and  given  as  a  reason  for 
the  Jews'  unbelief  in  Christ.  (Matt.  xiii.  14,  15;  Mark  iv.  12; 
Luke  viii.  10;  Acts  xxviii.  26,  27  ;  Rom.  xi.  8.)  It  is  not  quoted 
alike  in  all  places,  but  for  substance  it  is  the  same.  In  the 
original,  Isaiah  is  made  the  instrumental  cause.  Matthew  and 
Luke,  in  Acts,  mention  the  people  themselves  as  the  cause. 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  369 

All  the  other  texts  speak  of  it  as  God's  act.  The  thing  is  easily 
reconciled." — He  then  says :  "  The  Jews  first  shut  their  own 
eyes,  and  hardened  their  own  hearts.  Thus  behaving  them- 
selves, God  judicially  gave  them  up  to  their  own  lusts,  per- 
mitted their  hearts  to  harden,  and  suffered  them  to  close  their 
own  eyes,  so  that  they  could  not  repent,  believe,  or  return.  God 
did  not  infuse  any  malice  into  their  hearts,  but  withdrew  His 
grace  from  them." 

Rollock  makes  the  wise  and  deep  remark,  that  "Darkness 
does  not  blind  men  so  much  as  light,  unless  God  renews  their 
minds  by  His  Spirit." 

It  is  of  course  noteworthy  that  this  quotation  is  not  given 
literally  and  exactly  as  it  stands  in  the  Old  Testament.  But  it 
is  particularly  mentioned  by  Surenhusine,  in  his  book  upon  the 
quotations  in  the  New  Testament,  that  it  was  a  common  thing 
with  the  Hebrew  doctors  to  abbreviate  texts  in  quoting  them, 
and  to  be  content  with  giving  the  general  sense.  The  abbrevi- 
ation, therefore,  in  the  text  quoted  before  us,  would  not  strike 
John's  cotemporaries  as  at  all  extraordinary. 

Let  us  not  fail  to  remark  how  "seeing,  understanding,  being 
converted,  and  being  healed,"  are  linked  together. 

41.—  [These  things... Esaias... his  glory... him. ,]  To  see  the  full  force 
of  this  verse  we  should  read  the  sixth  chapter  of  Isaiah  in  its 
entirety.  We  should  there  see  a  magnificent  description  of  the 
Lord's  glory,  before  which  even  the  seraphim  veiled  their  faces. 
We  should  observe  their  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  of 
Hosts ! "  We  should  mark  how  Isaiah  says,  "  My  eyes  have 
seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  And  then  let  us  remember 
that  John  says,  "  Esaias  saw  Christ's  glory,  and  spake  of 
Christ ! " — How  any  one,  in  the  face  of  this  evidence,  can  say 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  not  very  God,  it  seems  hard  to  under- 
stand. 

Lightfoot  thinks  that  Isaiah  in  this  chapter  had  a  view  of  the 
glory  which  our  Lord  would  have  when  He  came  to  punish  the 
Jewish  nation.  He  thinks  this  is  pointed  out  by  "the  posts  of 
the  door  being  shaken;"  by  "the  temple  being  filled  with 
smoke ;  "  and  by  "  the  cities  being  wasted."     (See  Isaiah  vi.) 

42. — [Nevertheless... rulers... many  believed  him.']  Here  St.  John 
mentions  a  fact  which  he  would  have  us  take  together  with  his 
account  of  the  hardened  unbelief  of  most  of  the  Jews.  There 
were  some  who  were  not  so  utterly  hardened  as  the  rest.  They 
were  in  a  different  state  of  mind  :  not  blind,  but  convinced ;  not 
hardened  against  our  Lord,  but  secretly  persuaded  that  He  was 
the  Christ.  Many  even  of  the  chief  people  at  Jerusalem  be- 
lieved, in  their  own  secret  minds,  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ. 
This  faith  no  doubt  was  only  the  faith  of  the  head,  and  not  of 
the  heart.    But  they  did  believe. 

Let  us  note  that  there  is  often  far  more  going  on  in  people's 


370  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


minds  than  preachers  are  aware  of.    There  is  much  secret  con- 
viction. 

[But  because... Pharisees... not  confess  him.~\  They  dared  not 
openly  confess  their  faith  in  our  Lord,  for  fear  of  the  persecu- 
tion of  the  Pharisees.  They  were  cowards,  and  iufluenced  by 
the  fear  of  man.  No  wonder  that  our  Lord  spoke  so  strongly 
in  other  places  about  the  duty  of  confessing  Him. 

[Lest. ..put  out  of.. .synagogue."]  The  thing  that  they  feared 
was  excommunication.  We  can  have  little  idea  perhaps  of  the 
extreme  dread  with  which  a  Jew  regarded  exclusion  from  the 
visible  Jewish  Church.  Unlike  ourselves,  he  knew  no  other 
Church  in  the  whole  world.  To  be  shut  out  of  this  Church  was 
equivalent  to  being  shut  out  of  heaven.  The  dread  of  excom- 
munication in  the  Irish  Catholic  Church  is  perhaps  the  near- 
est thing  to  it  in  our  days. 

43.— [For.. .loved. .praise.. .man  more.. .God.']  St.  John  here  tells  us 
plainly  the  prevailing  motive  in  the  minds  of  the  cowardly 
Jews.  They  loved  above  everything  to  be  well  thought  of  by 
their  fellow- men.  They  thought  more  of  having  the  good 
opinion  of  man  than  the  praise  of  God.  They  could  not  bear 
the  idea  of  being  laughed  at,  ridiculed,  reviled,  or  persecuted 
by  their  fellow-men.  To  keep  in  with  them  and  have  their 
praise,  they  sacrificed  their  own  convictions,  and  acted  contrary 
to  their  conscience.  How  much  this  feeling  injures  the  soul  is 
shown  by  our  Lord's  words  in  a  former  place:  "How  can  ye 
believe  which  receive  honour  one  from  another?"  (John  v. 
44.) 

Let  us  remember  that  all  over  the  world  the  same  miserable 
motive  is  still  ruining  myriads  of  souls.  "The  fear  of  man 
bringeth  a  snare."  (Prov.  xxix.  25.)  Nothing  seems  so  diffi- 
cult to  overcome  as  the  desire  of  pleasing  man,  keeping  in  with 
man,  and  retaining  man's  praise.  Nothing  will  overcome  it  but 
thorough  faith.  "This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith."  (1  John  v.  4.)  The  expulsive  power 
of  a  new  principle,  making  us  see  God,  Christ,  heaven,  hell, 
judgment,  eternity,  as  realities,  is  the  grand  secret  of  getting 
the  victory  over  the  fear  of  man. 

Poole  says :  "  They  were  not  willing  to  part  with  their  great 
places  in  the  magistracy,  which  brought  them  respect,  honour, 
and  applause  from  men.  They  valued  this  more  than  God's 
praise." 


JOHN,   CHAP.    XII. 


371 


JOHN  XII.   44-50. 


eth  not  my  words,  hath  one  that  judg- 
eth  him:  the  word  that  I  have  spoken, 
the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last 
day. 

49  For  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself, 
but  the  Father  which  sent  me,  he  gave 
me  a  commandment,  what  I  should  say, 
and  what  I  should  speak. 

50  And  I  know  that  his  command- 
ment is  life  everlasting :  whatsoever  I 
speak  therefore,  even  as  the  Father 
said  unto  me,  so  I 


44  Jesus  cried  and  said,  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  me,  believeth  not  on  me, 
but  on  him  that  sent  me. 

45  And  he  that  seeth  me  seeth  him 
that  sent  me. 

46  1  am  come  a  light  into  the  world 
that  whosoever  believeth  on  me  should 
not  abide  in  darkness. 

47  And  if  any  man  hear  my  words, 
and  believe  not,  I  judge  him  not:  for 
I  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to 
save  the  world. 

48  He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  receiv- 


These  verses  throw  light  on  two  subjects  which  we  can 
never  understand  too  well.  Our  daily  peace  and  our  prac- 
tice of  daily  watchfulness  over  ourselves  are  closely  con- 
nected with  a  clear  knowledge  of  these  two  subjects. 

One  thing  shown  in  these  verses  is,  the  dignity  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  find  Him  saying,  "  He  that  seeth 
Me,  seeth  Him  that  sent  Me.  I  am  come  a  Light  into  the 
world,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  Me  should  not  abide  in 
darkness."  Christ's  oneness  with  the  Father,  and  Christ's 
office,  are  clearly  exhibited  in  these  words. 

Concerning  the  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  we  must 
be  content  to  believe  reverently  what  we  cannot  grasp 
mentally  or  explain  distinctly.  Let  it  suffice  us  to  know 
that  our  Saviour  was  not  like  the  prophets  and  patriarchs, 
a  man  sent  by  God  the  Father,  a  friend  of  God,  and  a  wit- 
ness for  God.  He  was  something  far  higher  and  greater 
than  this.  He  was  in  His  Divine  nature  essentially  one 
with  the  Father :  and  in  seeing  Him,  men  saw  the  Father 
that  sent  Him.  This  is  a  great  mystery  ;  but  a  truth  of 
vast  importance  to  our  souls.  He  that  casts  His  sins  on 
Jesus  Christ  by  faith  is  building  on  a  rock.  Believing  on 
Christ,  he  believes  not  merely  on  Him,  but  on  Him  that 
sent  Him. 

Concerning  the  office  of  Christ,  there  can  be  little  doubt 


372  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

that  in  this  place  He  compares  Himself  to  the  sun.  Like 
the  sun,  He  has  risen  on  this  sin-darkened  world  with  heal- 
ing on  His  wings,  and  shines  for  the  common  benefit  of  all 
mankind.  Like  the  sun,  He  is  the  great  source  and  centre 
of  all  spiritual  life,  comfort,  and  fertility.  Like  the  sun, 
He  illuminates  the  whole  earth,  and  no  one  need  miss  the 
way  to  heaven,  if  he  will  onty  use  the  light  offered  for  his 
acceptance. 

Forever  let  us  make  much  of  Christ  in  all  our  religion. 
We  can  never  trust  Him  too  much,  follow  Him  too  closely, 
or  commune  with  Him  too  unreservedly.  He  has  all  power 
in  heaven  and  earth.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
all  who  come  to  God  by  Him.  None  can  pluck  us  out  of 
the  hand  of  Him  who  is  one  with  the  Father.  He  can 
make  all  our  way  to  heaven  bright  and  plain  and  cheerful, 
like  the  morning  sun  cheering  the  traveller.  Looking  unto 
Him,  we  shall  find  light  in  our  understandings,  see  light 
on  the  path  of  life  we  have  to  travel,  feel  light  in  our 
hearts,  and  find  the  days  of  darkness,  which  will  come 
sometimes,  stripped  of  half  their  gloom.  Only  let  us  abide 
in  Him,  and  look  to  Him  with  a  single  eye.  There  is  a 
mine  of  meaning  in  His  words,  "  If  thine  eye  be  single, 
thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light."     (Matt.  vi.  22.) 

Another  thing  shown  in  these  verses  is,  the  certainty  of  a 
judgment  to  come.  We  find  our  Lord  saying,  "  He  that 
rejecteth  Me,  and  receiveth  not  my  words,  hath  One  that 
judgeth  him :  the  word  that  I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall 
judge  him  in  the  last  day." 

There  is  a  last  day !  The  world  shall  not  always  go  on 
as  it  does  now.  Buying  and  selling,  sowing  and  reaping, 
planting  and  building,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage, — 
all  this  shall  come  to  an  end  at  last.  There  is  a  time  ap- 
pointed by  the  Father  when  the  whole  machinery  of  crea- 
tion shall  stop,  and  the  present  dispensation  shall  be 
changed  for  another.     It  had  a  beginning,  and  it  shall  also 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  373 

have  an  end.  Banks  shall  at  length  close  their  doors  for- 
ever. Stock  exchanges  shall  be  shut.  Parliaments  shall 
be  dissolved.  The  very  sun,  which  since  Noah's  flood  has 
done  his  daily  work  so  faithfully,  shall  rise  and  set  no 
more.  Well  would  it  be  if  we  thought  more  of  this  day  ! 
Kent-days,  birth-days,  wedding-days,  are  often  regarded 
as  days  of  absorbing  interest ;  but  they  are  nothing  com- 
pared to  the  last  day. 

There  is  a  judgment  coming !  Men  have  their  reckon- 
ing days,  and  God  will  at  last  have  His.  The  trumpet 
shall  sound.  The  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible.  The 
living  shall  be  changed.  All,  of  every  name  and  nation, 
and  people  and  tongue,  shall  stand  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ.  The  books  shall  be  opened,  and  the  evi- 
dence brought  forth.  Our  true  character  will  come  out 
before  the  world.  There  will  be  no  concealment,  no  eva- 
sion, no  false  colouring.  Every  one  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God,  and  all  shall  be  judged  according  to  their 
works.  The  wicked  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  fire, 
and  the  righteous  into  life  eternal. 

These  are  awful  truths  !  But  they  are  truths,  and  ought 
to  be  told.  No  wonder  that  the  Roman  governor  Felix 
trembled  when  Paul  the  prisoner  discoursed  about  "  right- 
eousness, temperance,  and  judgment  to  come."  (Acts 
xxiv.  25.)  Yet  the  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
no  cause  to  be  afraid.  For  him,  at  any  rate,  there  is  no 
condemnation,  and  the  last  assize  need  have  no  terrors. 
The  bias  of  his  life  shall  witness  for  him  ;  while  the  short- 
comings of  his  life  shall  not  condemn  him.  It  is  the  man 
who  rejects  Christ,  and  will  not  hear  His  call  to  repentance, 
—  he  is  the  man  who  in  the  judgment-day  will  have  rea- 
son to  be  cast  down  and  afraid. 

Let  the  thought  of  judgment  to  come  have  a  practical 
effect  on  our  religion.  Let  us  daily  judge  ourselves  with 
righteous  judgment,  that  we  may  not  be  judged  and  con- 


374  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 

demned  of  the  Lord.  Let  us  so  speak  and  so  act  as  men 
who  will  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty.  Let  us  make 
conscience  of  all  our  hourly  conduct,  and  never  forget  that 
for  every  idle  word  we  must  give  account  at  the  last  day. 
In  a  word,  let  us  live  like  those  who  believe  in  the  truth  of 
judgment,  heaven,  and  hell.  So  living,  we  shall  be  Chris- 
tians indeed  and  in  truth,  and  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
Christ's  appearing. 

Let  the  judgment-day  be  the  Christian's  answer  and 
apology  when  men  ridicule  him  as  too  strict,  too  pre- 
cise, and  too  particular  in  his  religion.  Irreligion  may  do 
tolerably  well  for  a  season,  so  long  as  a  man  is  in  health 
and  prosperous,  and  looks  at  nothing  but  this  world.  But 
he  who  believes  that  he  must  give  account  to  the  Judge  of 
quick  and  dead,  at  His  appearing  and  kingdom,  will  never 
be  content  with  an  ungodly  life.  He  will  say,  "  There  is 
a  judgment.  I  can  never  serve  God  too  much.  Christ 
died  for  me.     I  can  never  do  too  much  for  Him." 

Notes.    John  XII.  44 — 50. 

44.— [Jesus  cried  and  said.]  The  connection  between  the  address 
which  begins  here  and  the  preceding  verse  is  not  very  plain  or 
easy  to  understand. 

Some  think  that  it  is  a  continuation  of  the  address  which 
ended  at  the  thirty-sixth  verse,  and  that  John's  comment  and 
explanation  in  the  last  seven  verses  must  be  regarded  entirely 
as  a  parenthesis.  This  is  rather  an  awkward  supposition,  when 
we  look  at  the  thirty-sixth  verse,  and  see  at  the  end,  "  These 
words  spake  Jesus  and  departed,  and  did  hide  Himself."  Unless 
we  suppose  that  as  He  was  walking  away,  "  He  cried  and  said, 
He  that  believeth  on  Me,"  etc.,  the  connection  seems  incapable 
of  proof.  Yet  it  appears  most  unlikely  that  our  Lord  would 
have  said  such  things  as  he  was  departing. 

Others,  as  Theophylact,  think  that  the  address  before  us  is  an 
entirely  new  and  distinct  one,  and  delivered  on  a  different  day 
from  that  ending  at  the  thirty-sixth  verse  :  viz.,  on  the  Tuesday, 
Wednesday,  or  Thursday,  in  Passion  Week.  This  certainly  ap- 
pears to  me  the  least  difficult  view  of  the  subject.  It  would 
then  mean  that  the  day  after  the  miracle  of  the  voice  from  heav- 
en, Jesus  appeared  again  publicly  in  Jerusalem,  and  "cried 
and  said." 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  375 


However,  it  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  abrupt  manner  in 
which  the  verse  before  us  and  the  following  verses  come  in  is 
a  difficulty,  and  one  which  we  know  not  exactly  how  to  explain. 
One  thing  only  is  very  clear :  this  was  probably  one  of  the  last 
public  discourses  which  our  Lord  delivered  in  Jerusalem,  and 
forms  a  kind  of  conclusion  to  His  ministry  in  that  city.  It  is  a 
short  but  solemn  winding  up  of  all  His  public  testimony  to  the 
Jews. 

It  deserves  notice,  that  some,  as  Tittman,  Stier,  Olshausen, 
Tholuek,  Bloomfield,  and  Alford,  consider  the  whole  of  the  pas- 
sage, from  verse  forty-four  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  to  be  not 
the  words  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  a  statement  of  John  the  Baptist 
himself,  concerning  the  doctrine  Jesus  taught  throughout  His 
ministry,  and  specially  at  Jerusalem.  From  this  view,  however, 
I  strongly  dissent.  The  beginning,  "  Jesus  cried,"  etc.,  seems 
utterly  inconsistent  with  the  theory.  There  seems  no  special 
necessity  for  adopting  it.  A  plain  reader  of  the  chapter  would 
never  dream  of  it. 

It  is  worth  remarking,  that  the  Greek  expression,  "  He  cried," 
is  very  seldom  applied  to  our  Lord  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is 
found  in  Matt,  xxvii.  50;  Mark  xv.  39;  John  vii.  28— 37,  and 
here.  In  every  instance  it  means  a  loud  cry,  such  as  any  one 
uses  to  call  attention  to  what  he  has  to  say. 

Flacius  thinks  that  the  address  beginning  here  is  a  kind  of 
peroration  and  summing  up  of  all  our  Lord's  public  teaching  to 
the  Jews.  In  it  He  repeats  the  proclamation  of  His  own  Divine 
office  and  dignity, — the  purpose  for  which  He  came,  to  be  a 
"  light," — the  danger  of  neglecting  His  testimony, — the  certainty 
of  a  final  judgment, — and  the  direct  procession  of  His  doctrine 
from  the  Father. 

[He  that  believeth...me...Hlm  that  sent  me.']  This  remarkable 
expression  seems  meant  to  proclaim,  for  the  last  time,  the  great 
truth  so  often  insisted  on  by  our  Lord, — the  entire  unity  between 
Himself  and  the  Father.  Once  more  Jesus  declares  that  there 
is  such  a  complete  and  mysterious  oneness  between  Himself  and 
the  Father,  that  he  who  believes  on  Him  believes  not  only  on 
Him,  but  on  Him  that  sent  Him. — Of  course  the  sentence  cannot 
literally  mean  that  the  man  who  believes  on  Christ  does  not 
believe  ou  Christ.  But  according  to  a  mode  of  speech  not  un- 
common in  the  New  Testament,  our  Lord  taught  that  all  who 
in  obedience  to  His  call  put  their  trust  in  Him,  would  fiud  that 
they  were  not  trusting  in  the  Son  only,  but  in  the  Father  also. 
In  short,  to  trust  in  the  Son,  the  sent  Saviour  of  sinners,  is  to 
trust  also  in  the  Father,  who  sent  Him  to  save.  The  Son  and 
the  Father  cannot  be  divided,  though  they  are  distinct  Persons 
in  the  Trinity;  and  faith  in  the  Son  gives  an  interest  in  the 
Father.  (Compare  John  v.  24 :  "  He  that  heareth  my  word, 
and  belie veth  on  Him  that  sent  Me."  And  1  Peter  i.  2)  :  "  Who 
by  Him  do  believe  in  God.") 


376  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


To  draw  a  wide  line  of  separation  between  the  Father  and  *he 
Son,  as  some  do,  and  to  represent  the  Father  as  an  angry  Being 
whom  the  Sou  appeases,  is  very  poor  theology,  and  the  highroad 
to  Tritheism.  The  true  doctrine  is  that  the  Godhead  of  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  is  one,  and  that  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead 
there  are  three  Persons,  and  yet  that  there  is  such  entire  unity 
between  the  Persons,  that  He  who  believes  in  the  Son  believes 
also  in  the  Father. 

Zwingle  thinks  the  latent  idea  is,  "  Do  not  think  it  is  a  small 
and  insignificant  thing  to  believe  on  Me.  To  believe  on  Me  is 
the  same  thing  as  believing  on  God  the  Father,  and  to  know  Me 
is  to  know  the  Father." 

Bucer  seems  to  think  that  the  address  in  this  verse  was  meant 
to  encourage  those  who  believed  Christ  to  be  the  Messiah,  but 
were  afraid  of  confessing  Him,  to  come  forward  boldly,  and  ac- 
knowledge their  belief. 

Poole  says,  that  in  like  manner  God  says  to  Samuel,  "  They 
have  not  rejected  thee,  but  have  rejected  Me,"  meaning  not  thee 
alone.     (1  Sam.  viii.  7.) 

45.— [And  he...seeth  me  seeth  him  that  sent  me.~\  This  deep  and 
mysterious  verse  proclaims  even  more  distinctly  than  the  last 
verse  the  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  It  cannot  mean 
that  any  one  who  saw  Christ  with  his  bodily  eyes,  did,  in  so 
seeing,  behold  the  First  Person  in  the  Trinity.  Such  beholding 
we  are  distinctly  told  is  impossible.  He  is  one  "  whom  no  man 
hath  seen  or  can  see."  (1  Tim.  vi.  16.)  What  our  Lord  seems 
to  mean  is  this :  "He  that  seeth  Me  seeth  not  Me  only,  as  an 
ordinary  man  or  a  Prophet,  like  John  the  Baptist.  In  seeing 
Me  he  beholds  one  who  is  one  with  the  Father,  the  brightness 
of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  Person."  (Heb.  i. 
3.)  Of  course  our  Lord  did  not  literally  mean,  "  He  that  sees  Me 
does  not  see  Me."  But  He  meant,  "  He  that  sees  Me  sees  not 
only  Me,  but  through  Me  and  by  Me  he  sees  Him  that  sent  Me, 
for  we  cannot  be  divided." 

The  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  seems  incontrovertibly  proved 
by  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one.  If  to  believe  in  Christ  is 
to  believe  in  the  Father,  and  to  see  Christ  is  to  see  the  Father, 
then  Jesus  Christ  must  be  equal  with  the  Father, — very  and 
eternal  God. 

The  supposition  of  some,  that  the  first  "  seeth  "  in  this  verse 
means  nothing  more  than  "  seeth  by  faith,"  appears  rather  in- 
credible. At  this  rate  the  verse  would  be  only  a  repetition  of 
the  one  preceding  it.  I  prefer  the  idea  that  "  seeth  "  means  liter- 
ally, "  Seeth  with  his  bodily  eyes."  Yet  Bengel  says  that 
"  seeth  "  refers  to  that  vision  which  faith  accompanies,  and  com- 
pares it  to  John  vi.  40. 

The  object  our  Lord  had  in  view  in  this  and  the  preceding 
verse  appears  to  have  been  twofold.    It  was  partly  to  proclaim 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  377 

once  more  the  unity  of  Himself  and  the  Father.  It  was  partly 
to  encourage  all  believers  in  Himself,  for  the  last  time,  before 
He  was  crucified.  Let  them  know  that  in  resting  their  souls  on 
Him,  they  were  resting  not  on  Him  alone  who  died  on 
Calvary,  but  on  one  who  was  one  with  the  Father,  and  there- 
fore were  resting  on  the  Father. 

Chrysostom  observes  on  the  expression  "  seeth  Him  that  sent 
me," — "  What  then?  Is  God  a  body?  By  no  means.  The  see- 
ing of  which  Jesus  here  speaks  is  that  of  the  mind,  thence  show- 
ing the  consubstantiality." 

Barnes  observes,  that  this  language  could  not  have  been  used 
about  any  mere  man.  To  say  it  of  Paul  or  Isaiah  would  have 
been  blasphemy. 

46. — [I  am  come  a  light  into  the  world,  etc.']  In  this  sentence  our 
Lord  proclaims  once  more  the  great  end  and  object  of  His  com- 
ing into  the  world.  He  does  it  by  using  His  favourite  figure  of 
light,  and  comparing  Himself  to  the  sun. — "  I  have  come  into  a 
world  full  of  darkness  and  sin,  to  be  the  source  and  centre  of 
life,  peace,  holiness,  happiness  to  mankind,  so  that  every  one 
who  receives  and  believes  in  Me  may  be  delivered  from  dark- 
ness and  walk  in  full  light." 

Let  us  note  that  the  form  of  language  used  here  seems  to  teach 
that  our  Lord  existed  before  He  entered  the  world.  The  saints 
"  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  but  they  do  not  "  come  a  light  into 
the  world. '"  This  could  only  be  said  of  Christ,  who  was  light 
before  His  incarnation,  just  as  the  sun  exists  and  shines  before 
it  rises  above  the  eastern  horizon. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord's  language  seems  to  teach  that  He 
came  to  be  a  common  Saviour  and  Messiah  for  all  mankind,  just 
as  the  sun  shines  for  the  good  of  all.  It  is  as  though  He  said, 
"  I  have  arisen  on  the  world  like  the  sun  in  the  firmament  of 
heaven,  in  order  that  every  one  who  is  willing  to  believe  in  Me 
should  be  delivered  from  spiritual  darkness,  and  be  enabled  to 
walk  in  the  light  of  spiritual  life." 

Once  more  we  may  remember  that  none  could  give  such  a 
majestic  description  of  His  mission,  but  one  who  knew  and  felt 
that  He  was  very  God.  We  never  find  Moses,  or  John  the  Bap- 
tist, or  Paul,  or  Peter,  using  such  language  as  this. 

The  quantity  of  precious  truth  taught  and  implied  in  this  verse 
is  very  noteworthy. — The  world  is  in  darkness. — Christ  is  the 
only  light. — Faith  is  the  only  way  to  have  interest  in  Christ. — 
He  that  believeth  no  longer  abides  in  darkness,  but  has  spiritual 
light. — He  that  does  not  believe  remains  and  continues  in  a  state 
of  darkness,  the  prelude  to  hell. 

The  expression,  "  not  abide  in  darkness,"  seems  to  have  a  la- 
tent reference  to  those  Jews  who  were  convinced  of  Christ's 
Messiahship,  but  were  afraid  to  confess  Him  openly.     Such  per- 


378  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


sons  are  here  exhorted  not  to  remain,  stick  fast,  and  continue  in 
darkness. 

Burgon  remarks  on  this  verse  :  "  This  verse  shows  that  (1) 
Christ  existed  before  His  incarnation,  even  as  the  sun  exists  be- 
fore it  appears  above  the  eastern  hills ;  (2)  that  Christ  is  the 
one  Saviour  of  the  world,  even  as  there  is  only  one  sun ;  (3) 
that  He  came  not  for  one  nation,  but  for  all,  as  the  sun  shines 
for  all  the  world." 

47. — [And  if  any. ..hear. ..believe  not.]  Having  shown  the  privilege 
of  those  who  believe  in  Him,  our  Lord  now  shows  the  danger 
and  ruin  of  those  who  hear  His  teachiug  and  yet  believe  not. 

[I  judge  him  not.']  These  words  can  only  mean,  "  I  judge  him 
not  now."  To  put  more  on  them  would  contradict  the  teaching 
of  other  places,  where  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the  Judge  of  all  at 
the  last  day.  Our  Lord's  meaning  evidently  is  to  teach  that  His 
First  Advent  was  not  for  judgment,  but  for  salvation,  not  to 
punish  and  smite  as  a  conqueror,  but  to  heal  and  save  as  a  phy- 
sician. 

[For  I  am  not... judge... save  the  world.']  These  words  are  an 
expansion  and  explanation  of  the  preceding  sentence,  "I  judge 
him  not."  They  are  evidently  meant  to  correct  the  Jewish  im- 
pression that  Messiah  was  to  come  only  to  judge,  to  execute  ven- 
geance, to  smite  clown  His  enemies,  and  to  punish  His  adver- 
saries. This  impression  arose  from  misapplied  views  of  the 
Second  Advent  and  the  judgment  yet  to  come.  Our  Lord,  for 
the  last  time,  declares  that  He  came  for  no  such  purpose. 
Wicked  as  unbelief  was,  He  did  not  come  to  punish  it  now.  He 
came  not  as  a  judge  at  His  First  Advent,  but  as  a  Saviour. 

We  must  take  care,  however,  that  we  do  not  misinterpret  this 
sentence.  It  affords  no  countenance  to  the  dangerous  doctrine 
of  universal  salvation.  It  does  not  mean  that  Christ  came  in 
order  to  actually  save  from  hell  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  whole 
world.  Such  a  meaning  would  flatly  contradict  many  other 
plain  passages  of  Scripture.     What,  then,  does  it  mean? 

It  means  that  our  Lord  came  at  His  First  Advent  not  to  be  a 
judge,  but  a  Saviour  not  to  inflict  punishment,  but  to  provide 
mercy.  He  came  to  provide  salvation  for  all  the  world,  so  that 
any  one  in  the  world  may  be  saved.  But  no  one  gets  any 
benefit  from  this  salvation  excepting  those  that  believe. — The 
true  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  the  contrast  between 
Christ's  first  coming  and  His  second  one.  The  first  was  to  set 
up  a  throne  of  grace  :  the  second  will  be  to  set  up  a  throne  of 
judgment.  The  expression  in  John  iii.  17  is  precisely  parallel, 
— "  God  sent  not  His  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world, 
but  that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved."  If  it  were 
lawful  to  coin  a  word,  the  true  exposition  of  the  sentence  would 
be,  "  I  came  that  the  world  might  be  waivable." 

But  while  I  say  all  this,  I  am  unable  to  see  how  such  ex- 


JOHN,    CHAP.    XII.  379 

pressions  as  this,  and  John  iii.  16, 17,  can  possibly  be  reconciled 
with  an  extreme  view  of  particular  redemption.  To  say,  on  the 
one  hand,  that  Christ's  death  is  efficacious  to  none  but  the  elect 
and  believers,  is  strictly  true.  Not  all  men  are  finally  saved  by 
Christ.  There  is  a  hell,  and  unbelievers  and  impenitent  people 
will  be  found  there.— But  to  say,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  no 
sense  did  Christ  do  anything  at  all  for  the  whole  world,  but 
that  He  did  everything  for  the  elect  alone,  seems  to  me  utterly 
irreconcilable  with  this  text.  Surely  Christ  came  to  provide  a 
salvation  sufficient  for  the  whole  "  world." 

I  am  aware  that  the  advocates  of  an  extreme  view  of  particu- 
lar redemption  say  that  "  the  world  "  here  does  not  mean  "the 
world,"  but  the  elect  of  all  nations,  as  compared  to  the  Jews. 
But  this  view  is  not  satisfactory,  and  looks  very  like  an  evasion 
of  the  plain  meaning  of  words. 

Why  the  same  Greek  word  is  rendered  by  our  English  trans- 
lators, "judge"  in  this  verse,  and  "  condemn "  in  the  parallel 
place  in  John  iii.  17,  it  is  not  easy  to  see. 

48.— [He  that  rejecteth  me...receiveth  not  my  words... judgeth  him.'] 
In  this  verse  our  Lord  declares  positively  the  future  judgment 
and  condemnation  of  those  who  reject  Him,  and  refuse  to 
believe  His  teaching. 

The  word  we  render  "  rejecteth  "  is  only  used  here  in  St. 
John's  Gospel.  The  idea  is  that  of  "  despising,  setting  at 
naught."  (See  Luke  x.  16.)  The  person  described  is  one  who 
despises,  and  sets  at  naught  Christ  Himself,  after  seeing  Him, 
and  deliberately  refuses  to  acknowledge  Him  as  the  Messiah,  in 
spite  of  all  the  evidence  of  His  miracles.  He  is  also  one  who 
will  not  receive  and  take  into  his  heart  the  doctrines  preached 
by  Christ.  In  short,  he  despises  His  person,  and  refuses  to 
believe  His  teaching. — "  Such  a  man  will  find  at  last,  though  I 
punish  him  not  now,  that  there  is  a  judgment  and  condemnation 
of  him.  He  will  not  find  that  rejection  of  Me,  and  his  unbelief, 
will  go  unpunished.  He  has  a  Judge  prepared  already.  There 
is  one  already,  though  he  knows  it  not,  who  will  witness 
against  him  and  condemn  him." 

[The  word... I  have  spoken... .judge  him... last  day.]  Our  Lord 
here  declares  that  the  thiugs  He  publicly  preached  to  the  Jews 
while  He  was  upon  earth  would  witness  finally  against  those 
who  did  not  believe,  at  the  last  day,  and  be  their  condemnation. 
They  will  not  then  be  able  to  deny  that  they  were  words  of 
wisdom,  words  of  mercy,  words  subversive  of  their  false  views, 
words  fully  explaining  Christ's  kingdom,  words  entirely  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  Scriptures.  And'the  result  will  be  that  they 
will  be  speechless.  The  witness  of  Christ's  words  will  be  un- 
answerable, and  in  consequence  of  that  witness  they  will  be 
condemned. 

We  see  here  that  the  words  of  those  who  speak  for  God  are 
not  thrown  away,  because  they  seem  not  believed  at  the  time. 


380  EXPOSITORY   THOUGHTS. 


Christ's  words,  though  despised  and  rejected  by  the  Jews,  did 
not  fall  to  the  ground.  Those  whom  they  did  not  save  they  will 
condemn.  There  will  be  a  resurrection  of  all  faithful  sermons 
at  the  last  day.— Great  is  the  responsibility  of  preachers !  Their 
words  are  always  doing  good,  or  adding  to  the  condemnation 
of  the  lost.  They  are  a  savour  of  life  to  some,  and  of  death  to 
others.  Great  is  the  responsibility  of  hearers !  They  may 
ridicule  and  despise  sermons;  but  they  will  rind  to  their  cost 
at  last  that  they  must  give  account  of  all  they  hear.  The  very 
sermons  they  now  despise  may  be  witnesses  against  them  to 
their  eternal  ruin. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  judgment  and  the  last 
day  as  great  realities.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  always  account 
them  such,  and  live  accordingly.  The  Christian's  best  answer 
to  those  who  ridicule  his  religion  is  to  say,  "I  believe  in  a 
judgment  and  a  last  day." 

Let  us  note  that  condemnation  is  taken  for  granted,  if  not 
directly  expressed,  as  the  portion  of  some  at  the  last  day. 
Then  let  us  not  listen  to  those  who  say  that  there  is  no  future 
punishment,  and  that  all  persons  of  all  characters,  both  good 
and  bad,  are  at  last  going  to  heaven. 

Zwingle  remarks  that  the  expression,  "  My  word  shall  judge," 
is  parallel  to  such  expressions  as,  "  The  law  puts  a  man  to  death," 
though  it  is  not  actually  the  law,  but  the  executioner  that  does 
it.  The  law  only  shows  him  to  be  worthy  of  death.  So 
the  works  and  words  of  Christ  will  show  the  unbelieving  to  be 
worthy  of  judgment  and  condemnation. 

49.— [For  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself.']  In  these  words  our  Lord 
once  more,, as  if  for  the  last  time,  declares  that  mighty  truth 
which  we  find  so  often  in  St.  John,— the  intimate  union  between 
Himself  and  His  Father.  "  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself,  of  my 
own  independent  mind,  and  without  concert  with  my  Father  in 
heaven." 

The  object  of  saying  this  is  evident.  Our  Lord  would  have  the 
Jews  know  what  a  serious  sin  it  was  to  refuse  His  words,  and 
not  believe  them.  In  so  doing  men  did  not  refuse  the  words  of 
a  mere  man,  or  a  prophet,  like  Moses  or  John  the  Baptist.  They 
were  refusing  the  words  of  Him  who  never  spake  alone,  but 
always  in  closest  union  with  the  Father.  To  refuse  to  receive 
the  words  of  Christ  was  to  reject  not  merely  His  words,  but 
the  words  of  God  the  Father. 

Here,  as  in  many  other  places  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  the  Greek 
does  not  mean,  "  I  have  not  spoken  concerning  myself,  but  out 
of  or  from  myself." 

[But  the  Father. ..gave.. .commandment. ..speak.']  Here  our 
Lord  explains  and  enforces  more  fully  what  He  said  of  "  not 
speaking  from  Himself."  He  declares  that  when  He  came  into 
the    world,   the  Father  gave   Him  a    'commandment"     oj   a 


john,  chap.  xn.  3dl 

commission,  as  to  what  He  should  say  and  speak  to  men.  The 
things  that  He  had  spoken  were  the  result  of  the  eternal 
counsels  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity.  The  works  that  He  had 
done  were  works  which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  do.  The  words 
which  He  spoke  were  words  which  the  Father  gave  Him  to 
speak.  Both  in  His  doing  and  speaking  nothing  was  left  to 
chance,  unforeseen,  unprovided,  or  unpremeditated.  All  was 
arranged  by  perfect  wisdom,  both  His  words  and  His  works. 

When  we  read  of  the  Father  "sending"  Christ,  and  giving 
Christ  a  "commandment,"  we  must  carefully  dismiss  from  our 
minds  all  idea  of  any  inferiority  to  God  the  Father  on  the  part 
of  God  the  Son.  The  expressions  are  used  in  condescension  to 
our  weak  faculties,  to  convey  the  idea  of  perfect  oneness.  We 
are  not  speaking  of  the  relation  that  exists  between  two  human 
beings  like  ourselves,  but  between  the  Persons  in  the  Divine 
Trinity. — The  "  sending  "  of  the  Son  was  the  result  of  the  eternal 
counsel  of  that  blessed  Trinity,  in  which  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  are  co-equal  and  co-eternal.  The  eternal  Son  was  as 
willing  to  be  "sent"  as  the  eternal  Father  was  to  "send" 
Him. — The  "  commandment "  given  by  the  Father  to  the  Son  as 
to  what  He  should  teach  and  do,  was  not  a  commandment  in 
which  the  Son  had  no  part  but  to  obey.  It  was  simply  the  charge 
or  commission  arranged  in  the  covenant  of  redemption,  by  all 
three  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  which  the  Son  was  as  willing  to 
execute  as  the  Father  was  willing  to  give. 

The  distinction  between  "say  "  and  "  speak  "  in  the  Greek  is 
not  very  clear.  Burgon  thinks  the  phrase  is  meant  to  include 
"  every  class  of  discourse ;  as  well  the  words  of  familiar  inter- 
course, as  the  grave  and  solemn  addresses."  But  lam  not  satis- 
fied that  this  can  be  proved, — "  A  Lapide"  says  that  "  to  say  is 
to  teach,  and  publish  a  thing  gravely,  and  to  speak  is  to  utter  a 
thing  familiarly." — Bengel,  however,  distinguishes  them  in  pre- 
cisely the  contrary  way ! 

There  certainly  seems  to  be  an  intention  in  the  verse  to  refer 
the  Jews  to  the  well-known  words  of  Deuteronomy,  concerning 
the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses.  "  I  will  raise  up  a  Prophet  from 
among  their  brethren,  like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  into 
His  mouth,  and  he  shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall  com- 
mand Him."  Our  Lord's  hearers,  familiar  from  their  infancy 
with  Scripture,  would  see  at  once  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the 
promised  Prophet.  The  Father's  words  were  in  His  mouth. 
ne  spoke  what  was  commanded  Him.     (See  Deut.  xviii.  18.) 

50. — [And  I  know. ..his  commandment.. .life  everlasting.]  The 
meaning  of  this  sentence  seems  to  be, — "I  know,  whether  you 
like  to  believe  it  or  not,  that  this  message,  commandment,  or 
commission,  which  I  have  from  my  Father,  is  life  everlasting  to 
all  who  receive  it,  and  believe.  You,  in  your  blindness,  see  no 
beauty  or  excellence  in  the  message  I  bring,  and  the  doctrine  I 
preach.     But  I  know  that  in  rejecting  it  you  are  rejecting  life 


382  EXPOSITORY   THOUGIITS. 

everlasting." — Thus  Peter  says  to  our  Lord,  "Thou  hast  the 
words  of  eternal  life,"  (John  vi.  68 ;)  that  is,  we  know  Thou  hast 
a  commission  to  proclaim  and  publish  eternal  life. — Thus  our 
Lord  says,  "  The  words  that  I  speak  are  spirit  and  life."  (John 
vi.  63.) 

Poole  and  others  say  this  sentence  means,  "  I  know  that  the 
way  to  life  everlasting  is  to  keep  His  commandments."  But  I 
cannot  think  this  is  the  meaning. 

Hall  paraphrases  the  sentence,  "  The  doctrine  which  by  His 
commandment  I  preach  unto  you,  is  that  which  will  surely  bring 
you  to  everlasting  life." 

[Whatsoever  I  speak... as  Father. ..so  I  speak.']  This  sentence 
seems  intended  to  wind  up  our  Lord's  public  discourses  to  the 
unbelieving  Jews  at  Jerusalem.  "  Whatsoever  things  I  am 
teaching  now,  or  have  spoken  to  you  all  through  my  ministry,  are 
things  which  the  Father  gave  to  Me  to  speak  to  you.  I  am  only 
speaking  to  you  what  the  Father  said  to  Me.  If  therefore  you 
reject  or  refuse  my  message,  know  once  more,  for  the  last 
time,  that  you  are  rejecting  a  message  from  God  the  Father 
Himself.  I  speak  nothing  but  what  the  Father  said  to  Me.  If 
you  despise  it,  you  are  despising  the  God  of  your  fathers,  the 
God  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob." 

Let  us  remember  that  the  holy  boldness  of  this  last  verse 
should  be  a  pattern  to  every  minister  and  preacher  of  the  Gospel. 
Sueh  a  man  ought  to  be  able  to  say  confidently,  "  I  know  and 
am  persuaded  that  the  message  I  bring  is  life  everlasting  to  all 
who  believe  it ;  and  that,  in  saying  what  I  do,  I  say  nothing  but 
what  God  has  showed  me  in  His  Word." 


END  OF  VOL.  H. 


530  BROADWAY,  NEW  YORK, 
November,  1876. 


ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS' 

^sTEW   BOOKS. 


Forty  Years  in  the  Turkish  Empire. 

Memoirs  of  Rev.  William  Goodell,  DD.,  late  Missionary  at  Con- 
stantinople.    By  E.  D.  G.  Prime,  D.D 2.50 

Dr.  Goodell  was  the  first  American  Missionary  at  Constantinople,  his  wife  the  first 
American  lady  that  ever  visited  the  Turkish  Capital,  and  they  hoth  remained  at  thia 
post  in  labors  of  usefulness,  until  in  their  old  age  they  returned  to  this  country  to  die 
among  their  kindred.  This  volume  is  largely  autobiographical,  being  compiled  from  Dr. 
Goodkll's  Letters  and  Journal,  containing  also  his  personal  Reminiscences  written  du- 
ring the  last  year  of  his  life.  He  was  inimitable  as  a  letter  writer,  and  everything  that 
came  from  his  pen  was  marked  by  spirituality,  a  peculiarly  apt  use  of  Scripture  language, 
and  a  spice  of  wit  that  enlivened  his  conversation  and  his  writings  to  the  day  of  his  death. 

Autobiography  and  Memoir  of  Dr.  Guthrie. 

2  vols.,  12mo.    3.00;  Cheap  Edition,  in  1  vol 2.00 

"  His  stories  which  give  sparkle  and  zest  to  the  narrative,  and  greet  us  on  almost 
every  page,  are  woven  together  in  a  picture  of  Scottish  life  that  is  wonderfully  graphic." 
Harper's  Magazine. 

The  Life  and  Works  of  Thomas  Guthrie,  D.D. 

10  vols.    In  a  box.     (The  volumes  are  sold  separately) 15.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Reformation. 

In  the  TIME  OF   CALVIN.    Vol.  7 2.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Reformation. 

In  the  TIME   OF  CALVIN.     7  vols 14.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Reformation. 

5  vols,  in  1.     8vo.,  3.00;  in  5  vols.,  12mo 6.00 

Without  doing  violence  to  historical  truth,  he  seems  to  invest  history  with  all  the 
charms  of  romance,  and  with  the  enthusiasm  and  skill  of  a  poet  he  sketches  on  the  his- 
toric page  his  fascinating  and  life-like  pictures. 


S  ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS'  NEW  BOOKS. 

Hugh  Miller's  Life  and  Works. 

New  edition,  very  neat.     12  vols.,  12mo 18.00 

FOOTPRINTS   OF    THE   CREATOR 1.50 

OLD   RED   SANDSTONE 1.50 

SCHOOLS  AND   SCHOOLMASTERS 1.50 

TESTIMONY   OF  THE  ROCKS 1.50 

CRUISE   OF  THE   BETSEY 1.50 

FIRST  IMPRESSIONS   OF  ENGLAND 1.50 

POPULAR    GEOLOGY 1.50 

TALES  AND    SKETCHES 1.50 

ESSAYS.      HISTORICAL   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL 1.50 

HEADSHIP   OF   CHRIST 1.50 

LIFE   AND   LETTERS.     2  vols 3.00 

*'  There  is  in  Hugh  Miller's  geological  works  a  freshness  of  conception,  a  depth 
of  thought,  and  a  purity  of  feeling  rarely  met  with  in  works  of  that  character."  —  Pro- 
fessor Agassiz. 

Hugh  Miller's  Life  and  Letters. 

By  Peter  Bayne.     2  vols 3.00 

Mr.  Bayne  carries  the  absorbed  reader  with  him  through  the  whole  period,  unfold- 
ing leaf  after  leaf  of  the  history  of  a  life,  certainly  one  of  the  most  interesting  and 
striking  as  well  as  useful  of  this  century. 

By  the  Author  of  "  The  Wide,  Wide  World." 

THE  LITTLE  CAMP  ON  EAGLE  HILL 1.25 

WILLOW  BROOK 1.25 

SCEPTRES  AND  CROWNS 1.25 

THE  FLAG  OF  TRUCE 1.25 

BREAD  AND  ORANGES 1.25 

THE  RAPIDS  OF  NIAGARA 1.25 

The  Say  and  Do  Series. 

Comprising  the  above  6  vols,  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.     In  a  neat  box  7.50 

"Every  new  work  of  fiction  by  this  gifted  author  we  receive  with  a  cordial  welcome, 
for  we  know  that  it  will  be  an  addition  to  that  pure,  elevating,  and  delightful  class  of 
books  which  we  may  love  as  the  fireside  literature  of  our  country.  She  writes  for  the 
home  circle." — N.  Y.  Observer. 

By  the  same  author : 

The  Story  of  Small  Beginnings.  House  of  Israel 1.50 

4  vols.    Inabox 5.00        The  Old  Helmet 2.25 

Walks  from  Eden 1.50        Melbourne  House 2.00 


Date  Due 

f?aajj 

• 

MAY  j  2  81 

M 

ill  i       n     4      tf\. 

9 

