The exposition of the Epistle of James. 


227.91 K299e | | | 10269 


Life Pacific College Alumni Librar 


Kelly, William, 


a 
Wee e AGES RG oe aie ae se eg 


nah | WHLGIAM | RGRDUY) 


DATE DUE 


—, 


The exposition of the epistle of James 


Kelly, William 


q 
_ LIFE Pacific College 


Alumni Library 
1100 West Covina Blvd. 
Gan Dimac CA O1772 


\ Rs, in 
Wig i oy 


BE XPOSELLON “OF 


ricer SLE OF JAMES 


§ Aa 
Rs ia Boy 


y] 
WMes Ca is be 


BXPOSHHON OF 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


(WITH A TRANSLATION OF AN AMENDED TEXT) 


BY 


WILLIAM KELLY 


LONDON : F. E. RACE 
3 & 4, Lonpon House Yarp 
PATERNOSTER Row, E.c. 


e 1913 


olla 
fo We 


L.F.E, College Library 
1100 Giendale Blvd. 
Lot Angeles, Calif, 90026 


CONTENTS 

PAGH 

Translation of an Amended Text i, — vii. 
Introduction - ae vr i 
Cuarran L, t4 oo ns 6 
” 5-4 + va 12 

” gtA 16 

” 13-45 23 

v 16-18 PY . 25 

” 19, 20 31 

yr 41, 22 ° 38 

” 23; 44 41 

” 25 44 

” 26 49 

” 27] . 51 
Cuartrur I, 1 56 
” 2-4 6x 

” 5-7 65 

” 8,9 70 

oF 10-12 ; 75 

” 13 ‘ Br 

- 14-17 85 

” 18, 19 P 88 

” 20, 21 93 

” 24, 24 ‘ 97 

” 25 . IOL 

” 26 106 


LIFE Pacific College 

Alumni Library 
1100 West Covina Bivd. 
NANRRA San Dimas. CA 91773 


vi. 


CuaPteR III. 1 


CONTENTS 


. 


PAGE 
108 


II3 
117 
120 
123 
126 
130 
133 
137 
140 
144 
148 
152 
155 
158 
162 
165 
168 
172 
175 
180 
182 
186 
189 


EDITOR’S PREFACE 

This Exposition of the Epistle General of James 
was written, and appeared in serial form, some 
fourteen years ago. It is now for the first time 
presented complete in one volume, with a trans- 
lation of an amended text as rendered by the 
author, prefixed, for the more ready convenience of 
the reader. 

It is hoped that the work as now published may 
find access to a yet larger body of readers than was 
reached by the long-known Monthly in which it 
originally saw the light. That it may, in the 
goodness of God, be graciously used of Him to the 
better understanding of this portion of Holy 


Scripture is the earnest prayer of the Editor } 


London, October, 1913 


THE. EPISTLE.-OF. JAMES 
CHAPTER I 


‘James, bondman of God and of [the] Lord Jesus Christ, to 
the twelve tribes that [are] in the dispersion, greeting, 
2Count [it] all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into various 
temptations, *knowing that the proving of your faith worketh 
out endurance; ‘but let endurance have a perfect work, that 
ye may be perfect and entire, lacking in nothing. ‘If any of 
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God that giveth to all freely 
and reproacheth not; andit shall be given him. ‘But let 
him ask in faith, nothing doubting, For he that doubteth is 
like a wave of the sea wind-driven and tossed “(for let not that 
man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord): 8a 
double-minded man, unstable in all his ways. 9%But let the 
lowly brother glory in his elevation, and the rich in his 
humiliation, because as flower of grass, he will pass away. 
UFor the sun arose with its scorching, and withered the 
grass, and its flower fell away, and the comeliness of its look 
perished : thus also will the rich one fade in his goings. 

12Blest [is] a man who endureth trial ; because, having been 
put to the proof, he shall receive the crown of life which He 
promised to those that love Him. Let none when tempted 
say, 1am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted by 
evils, and Himself tempteth none, But each is tempted 
when by his own lust drawn away and enticed; then lust 
having conceived bringeth forth sin; and sin when completed 
giveth birth to death. ‘Do not err, my beloved brethren. 
WEvery good giving and every perfect gift is from above, 
coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be 
no variation nor shadow of turning. 18Having purposed He 
begot us by [the] word of truth, that weshould be a certain 
first-fruits of His creatures. 


li. THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


19Ye know [it], my brethren beloved, but let every man be 
swift to hear, slow tospeak, slow to wrath ; %for man’s wrath 
worketh not God’s righteousness. 2!Wherefore, having laid 
aside every sort of filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, 
receive with meekness the implanted word which is able to 
save your souls. *But be word-doers, and not hearers only, 
deluding yourselves, Because if any one is a word-hearer, 
and nota doer, heis like a man considering his natural face in 
a mirror: 24for he considered himself and is gone away, and 
straightway forgot of what sort he was, *But he that 
closely looked into perfect law, that of liberty, and abode 
close, being not a quite forgetful hearer, but a work-doer, he 
shall be blessed in his doing. If any one thinks he is 
religious, not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his heart: 
this [man’s] religion is vain. ®7A religious service pure and 
undefiled before Him that is God and Father is this, to 
visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to keep himself 
unspotted from the world. 


CHAPTER II 


‘My brethren, do not with respectings of persons have the 
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, [Lord] of glory. For if 
there come into your meeting (Jit, synagogue) a man gold- 
ringed in splendid clothing, and there come in also a poor 
one in vile clothing ; 8and ye look upon him that weareth 
the splendid clothing, and say, Sit thou here well (or, in a 
good place) ; and ye say to the poor one, Stand thou there, 
or sit under my footstool, 4did you not make a difference 
among yourselves and become judges of evil thoughts? 

‘Hear, my beloved brethren; did not God choose the poor 
as to the world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which 
He promised to those that love Him? &But ye dishonoured 
the poor [man]. Do not the rich oppress you, and they drag 
you before tribunals? "Do not they blaspheme the worthy 


CHAPTER II iii. 


name that was called on you? ®If however ye fulfil law 
royal according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself, ye do well; °but if ye have respect to 
persons, ye work sin, being convicted by the law as trans- 
gressors. 1'°For whoever shall keep the law as a whole, but 
shall offend in one [point] is become guilty of all, For he 
that said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also, Thou 
shalt not kill. Andifthou-commit not adultery but killest, 
thou art become a transgressor of law. 1So speak, and so 
act, as about to be judged bya law of liberty; for the 
judgment [is] merciless to him that showed no mercy. Mercy 
glorieth over judgment, 

MWhat [is] the profit, my brethren, if one say he have 
faith, but have not works? Can faith save him? ‘If a 
brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and 
one from among you say to them, Go in peace, be warmed 
and filled, but ye give them not the things needful for the 
body, what [is] the profit? 1%So also faith, if it have not 
works, is dead in (or, by) itself. ‘But some one will say, 
Thou hast faith, and I have works. Show me thy faith 
apart from works, and out of (or, by) my works I will show 
thee my faith. ‘Thou believest that God is one ; thou doest 
well; the demons also believe and shudder. *But art thou 
willing to learn (know), O vain man, that faith apart from 
works is dead (or, idle)? Was not Abraham our father 
justified by works, when (or, in that) he offered Isaac his son 
upon the altar? ™Thou seest that faith wrought with his 
works, and by works faith was perfected. And the scripture 
was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was 
reckoned to him for righteousness, and he was called Friend 
of God. *Yesee that a man is justified by works, and not 
by faith only. %And likewise was not also Rahab the harlot 
justified by (out of) works in that she received the messengers 
and sent [them] out another way? For as the body 
without a spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead. 


iv. THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


CHAPTER III 


1Be not many teachers, my brethren, knowing that we 
shall receive greater judgment. 2For in many things (or, 
often) we all offend. If any one offendeth notin word, he [is] 
a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also. ‘Now if 
we put the horses’ bridles (or, bits) in their mouths, that 
they may obey us, we turn about their whole body also. 
4Behold, the ships also, though they are so great and are 
driven by rough winds, are turned about by a very small 
rudder, where the impulse of the helmsman may purpose, 
5So also the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great 
things. See how large a wood how little a fire kindleth! 
SAnd the tongue [is] fire, the world of iniquity; the tongue 
cometh to be in our members that which defileth the whole 
body, and setteth in a blaze the course [/i#, wheet] of nature, 
and is set ina blaze by gehenna. ‘For every nature of both 
wild beasts and birds, of both things that creep and things 
in the sea, is tamed and hath been tamed by the nature of 
man; ®but the tongue is none of men able to tame; an 
unsettled evil, full of deadly poison. ®Therewith we bless 
the Lord and [the] Father, and therewith we curse men that 
are made according to God’s likeness. Out of the same 
mouth cometh blessing and cursing. Not so, my brethren, 
ought these things to be. “Doth the fountain out of the 
same opening pour forth the sweet and the bitter? "Can, 
my brethren, a fig tree produce olives, or a vine, figs? 
Neither [can] salt water produce sweet. 

18Who [is] wise and understanding among you? Let him 
show out of his good conduct his works in meekness of 
wisdom. “But if ye have bitter emulation and faction in 
your heart, do not boast and lie against the truth. This 


CHAPTER III, IV Vv. 


wisdom is not descending from above, but earthly, natural, 
demoniacal. 1¢For where envying and faction [are], there 
disorder [is] and every bad deed. ‘But the wisdom from 
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be 
‘entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, uncontentious, 
impartial (or, unfeigned). ‘And righteousness’ fruit in 
peace is being sown for those that make peace. 


CHAPTER IV 


“Whence [are] wars and whence fightings among you? 
{Are they] not hence, from your pleasures that combat in 
your members. Ye lust and have not; ye kill and are 
jealous, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war; ye have not 
because ye ask not; °ye ask and receive not, because ye ask 
amiss, that ye may spend [it]in your pleasures. 4Adulteresses, 
know ye not that friendship with the world is enmity with 
God? Whosoever therefore shall be minded to be friend of 
the world is constituted enemy of God. Or think ye that 
the scripture saith in vain? Doth the Spirit that took his 
dwelling in us long unto envy? ‘But he giveth more grace; 
wherefore he saith, God setteth himself against haughty 
[men], but giveth grace to lowly. ‘Submit yourselves 
therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee trom you. 
®Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse 
hands, sinners, and purify hearts, ye double-minded. Sorrow, 
and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned unto 
mourning, and[your]joy unto heaviness. !©Humble yourselves 
before [the] Lord, and he will exalt you. 4Speak not against 
one another, brethren. He that speaketh against a brother, or 
judgeth his brother, speaketh against law and judgeth law; 
but if thou judgest law, thou art not a doer of law but a 
judge. One is the law-giver and judge that is able to save 
and destroy; but who art thou that judgest [thy] neighbour ? 


vi. THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


18Go to now, ye that say, To-day or to-morrow we will go 
to this city here, and spend there a year, and trafficand make 
gain, 4whereas ye know not what [will be] the morrow. Of 
what sort [is] your life? Why, it isa vapour that appeareth 
for a little and then disappeareth, “instead of your saying, 
If the Lord will, we shall both live and do this or that. 
16But now ye glory in your vauntings; all such glorying is 
wicked. 17To one therefore knowing to do a comely [thing], 
and not doing [it], it is a sin to him. 


CHAPTER V 


1Come then, ye rich, weep, howling over your miseries that 
are coming on. Your wealth is corrupted, and your 
garments are become moth-eaten, Your gold and [your] 
silver are rusted through, and their rust shall be for a 
witness to you, and shall eat your flesh as fire, Ye laid up 
treasure in [the] last days. “Behold, the hire of the labourers 
who reaped your fields, that is kept back of you [or, from 
you], calleth out, and the cries of those that reaped entered 
into the ears of Jehovah of hosts. ®Ye lived luxuriously on 
the earth and indulged yourselves ; ye nourished your hearts 
in a day of slaughter. Ye condemned, ye slew the just one; 
he doth not resist you. 

7Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of the 
Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious 
fruit of the earth, being patient for (or, over) it, until it 
receive early and latter rain. ®Be ye also patient; stablish 
your hearts ; for the coming of the Lordisat hand. ®Murmur 
(or, groan) not, brethren, one against another, that ye be not 
judged. Behold, the judgestandeth beforethe door. Take 
brethren, [for] an example of suffering and of patience, the 
prophets who spoke in the name of [the] Lord. Behold, 
we call them blessed who endured. Ye heard of the 
endurance of Job, and saw [the] Lord’s end; for the Lord is 
full of compassion, and merciful. 


APTLY A, 


_ —““is ore GA thangs, es nse, yest ott, ge oY 
ewes, non by Hee cette, not by ony Ht ote, oe 
| «ost yea te yeu, vik nay tiny, Wet. ye AB oteen phgatt. 
Pio any wnong, you wher uote? Le ten grey. 
Ie ony egy? Lot tise tag pds, As wy Gk goog 
you? Se ties Al to eid, tae Bhs Be Cate wane, wt 
le toon yay 9 heen, amtoaong, tie Wile Sh, ie Coe eaten 
tteelvh, hab tee oje A tte Gah save teeB) Ge 
tk, aad tee Lith WA seine ten wp, nh tee have com- 
wt, ts, 2 te be tatves is. tess tunctione 
yous Gas (ot, tame, to one cut, wa pray tt one 


| getter, Cea ye may te dhe Homes tots) 


 suptestiion tate nuts power Au wok, "Kits wea 
tits Ch ue yusthirs: wits wa, wate te pans prays Goat 
it mighst ut sae; out & ramet at on tae extte tor Cater 
yess cad tz ssoies, “tad te graye’ ogsin; 204 tee 
heaves gave 14m, ah the extts erouied boris ts tr. 
Wy trceuen, 2 aay smog youn tho et 0m the 
truth, aad one wxsn ten ack, Met kos tae Gost be fast 
taeutls back 4 Gane om the ctor Bh kis way ta seve 2 
Cod anager later napa ia 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


INTRODUCTION 


The Epistle by the title as well as by its 
contents proclaims its peculiarity. It addresses 
the twelve tribes that were in the dispersion, 
not the elect strangers of the dispersion, but 
the mass of the old people of Jehovah. Nor is 
this quite unexampled even in the apostle Paul’s 
feeling and phrase ; for on the occasion of his 
speech before king Agrippa and Festus the 
procurator of Judza he speaks of “our twelve 
tribes, earnestly serving day and night,” hoping 
to attain to the promise made by God unto the 
fathers (Acts xxvi.). There is thus, as has been 
remarked, a striking counterpart beween the Old 
and N.T. in this, that one book in the New is 
devoted as a testimony to Israel, as one in the 
Old (Jonah) is devoted similarly to the great 
Gentile city of that day (Nineveh), both excep- 
tional and proving the rule. 


Hence only is accounted for in this Epistle 
B 


2 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


appeal (chaps. iv. I, 4, 9; Vv. I-6) to unbelievers 
in Christ or unconverted Jews, interspersed with 
addresses to those Jews who did believe (chaps. 
UschyeBs G4. lh 3, TES Gaeta sh eteras amas 
ambiguity as to his own confession of the 
Messiah. From the very first verse of the 
Epistle he announces himself bondman not more 
of God than of the Lord Jesus Christ ; and he 
begins with the blessedness of enduring trial or 
holy temptation in a way that applies clearly 
to Christian Jews, while he proceeds to warn 
against sins which go beyond the faithful to 
mere profession in chap. ii. and afterwards farther 
still. 

As a whole the Epistle consists of exhorta- 
tion from beginning to end; even its doctrine 
bears closely on moral ways, as in chaps. i. 13-15, 
16-21 ; iii, 5-8, 15-18. James is pre-eminently 
a teacher of righteousness; and was used of 
God in Jerusalem to meet the transition state 
between the old state that was about to close 
and the Christianity that was known more 
simply and fully among Gentiles. Accordingly 
his teaching, though as truly inspired of God 
as that of Paul, does not develop redemption 
in itself, its source, its objects, or its effects, 
but connects itself with the new birth, and the 
life we have from God by the word of truth, 


INTRODUCTION 3 


as opposed to outbreaks of temper and tongue 
which are the workings of fallen nature. 

For this reason no one brings out more 
clearly than James “the law of liberty” (chaps. 
i, 25; ii 12), which is indeed his own phrase, 
in evident contrast with letter and its bondage. 
This, we shall see, supposes the new life which 
God’s grace gives the believer, and which finds 
its pleasure in the things which please Him as 
shown in His word. 

Nor is there the smallest excuse for imagin- 
ing discrepancy between the teaching of Rom, 
iii, iv.. and James’ chapter ii. on faith, however 
common the idea was of old as it is now. The 
object before each writer is wholly different. 
The apostle Paul unfolds to the Roman saints 
how an ungodly man is justified, and declares 
that it is by faith. The apostle James lays 
down to the twelve tribes that a dead faith, 
destitute of works, is vain, and that the only 
faith of real account is that which is displayed 
in ways which glorify God. Living faith pro- 
duces living works, He is exposing the worth- 
lessness of an intellectual reception of the 
gospel, which had even then grown up among 
the Jews. We see the same principle during 
our Lord’s ministry, and His repudiation of 
such faith. See John ii, 23-25; vi.66; xv. Nor 


4 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


is the self-same truth lacking even in the 
Epistle to the Romans, as in chap. i. 18 
(latter half), and also chap. ii. 5-11. He is 
destitute of living faith who does not walk in 
the ways, and by the word and Spirit, of God. 
“For if ye live after the flesh, ye must die; 
but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the 
body, ye shall live” (Rom. viii. 13). So 
thoroughly is the great apostle of the Gentiles 
at one with this pillar of the circumcision, when 
the occasion of a godly walk calls for notice in 
the very Epistle which ignorant haste conceives 
to stand opposed. All the ‘truth of God is in 
harmony, whether doctrinal, or ethical as this 
Epistle is eminently. 

It may be well to add that, whatever the 
doubts of Alford, Neander and others, the 
writer was no other than James “the little,” son 
of Alphzeus or Clopas (really the same Aramaic 
name rendered into Greek somewhat differ- 
ently)*: the same man who took the lead after 
the martyrdom of the son of Zebedee, as is 
plain in the Acts (chaps. xii. 17 ; xv. 13 3 xxi. 18), 
Compare'1 Cor. xv, 7;andsGalwil. o,f rar) shis 
words and ways elsewhere are strikingly in 
agreement with his letter, Patience and purity, 
love and lowliness, characterise the apostle and 
his writing for the sphere he laboured in. It is 


INTRODUCTION 5 


remarkable that his language, and style, consist 
of excellent Greek with great energy. But the 
work given him in the Lord was, not to unfold 
divine counsels or to insist on redemption, but 
the urgent assertion of the moral consistency day 
by day, in affection, speech, and ways, of those 
who are called to endure patiently the various 
temptations of this world. This becomes such 
men as look for the crown of life, being already 
begotten of God by the word of truth according 
to His sovereign will. 


CHAPTER I 


The title taken by the writer deserves our 
consideration : “James, bondman of God and of 
[the] Lord Jesus Christ.” It expressed his 
absolute devotedness to God as well as to the 
Lord Jesus Christ. He was bondman of both 
equally. He honoured the Son even as he 
honoured the Father. He avowed from the 
beginning his unqualified subjection to both. 
This was just what was most needed by the 
Israelites to whom he wrote. He sought the 
everlasting good of them all, as the style of 
his address attested: “to the twelve tribes that 
[are] in the dispersion, greeting” (ver. 1), The 
last word reminds us that it is in the letter which 
the apostles and elders with the whole assembly 
sent to the brethren from among the nations 
in defence of Christian liberty (Acts xv.). 
But here the letter is directed only to the 
ancient people of God in their entirety, now a 
long while in a state of dispersion. For the 
return from Babylon had not hindered this, as 
only a small minority had returned from their 
exile. To all the twelve tribes he wrote, as 
being of the circumcision, even more widely 
than did Peter when he addressed his two 


Cuap, 1.1 vy) 


Epistles to the sojourners in Asia Minor. For 
he qualified it by terms of vital Christianity, 
“elect according to foreknowledge of God 
the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto 
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of 
Jesus Christ.” No such restriction appears 
here, though James without reserve confesses 
his own self-abnegating service of the Lord 
Jesus Christ no less than of God, and specifies 
living faith in Him among those to whom he 
writes. 

But the Epistle is characteristically moral 
and hortative, not basing its appeals as the 
apostles in general did on an unfolding of 
grace and truth, so much as revealing by the 
way now and then the sovereign goodness that 
comes down from above, from the Father of 
lights, Who alone is reliable in a world of 
incessant change, and has quickened us by the 
word of truth, and has promised the crown of 
life to them that-love Him. 

Hence it opens with a cheering call to such 
as were in danger of being faint-hearted and 
cast down by their trials. The Jews naturally 
looked for outward marks of divine favour; yet 
psalms and prophets revealed deeper things. 
James goes farther still. 

“Count [it] all joy, my brethren, when ye 


8 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


fall into various temptations, knowing that the 
proving of your faith worketh out endurance ; 
but let endurance have a perfect work, that ye 
may be perfect and entire, lacking in nothing” 
(vers. 2-4). 

It is the counterpart of our Lord’s be 
atitudes in Matthew v. For the blessed in 
His eyes and mouth are, not only of no 
account in the world, but sufferers from it for 
righteousness’ sake, and for Christ’s, poor in 
spirit, meek, mourners, hungerers after righteous- 
ness, merciful, and more. They are called to 
rejoice and exult, for great is their reward in 
heaven. So here, “count it all joy, my 
brethren, when ye fall into various temptations.” 
In this world of sin and ruin, God not only 
works in grace but carries on a discipline of 
souls, and turns trials of all sorts into an 
occasion of blessing for all that own Him 
and seek His guidance. Self-will hardens 
itself against each trial, or yields to dis- 
couragement and even despair. Faith recog- 
nises the love that never changes, and judges 
the self that resists His will or despises His 
word ; and, as faith bows submissively, it reaps 
profit, and grows by the knowledge of Him. 

Hence is the believer entitled and 
emboldened to think it every sort of joy 


Cuap. I. 2-4 9 


whensoever he falls into varied trials, as 
indeed they may be of all kinds. It is not 
that Christians are exempt from sorrow—far 
from it, or that we should not feel the 
sorrow, any more than forget God’s grace. 
Thus the trial throws us back on Him with- 
out Whom not a sparrow falls on the ground 
and by Whom the very hairs of our head 
are all numbered. Affliction comes not forth 
of the dust, nor does trouble spring out of 
the ground. All is under His hand Who 
has made us His for glory, and meanwhile 
puts our faith to the test in this present 
evil age, habituating us not only to patience 
but to endurance. 

So it was that Christ walked here below, 
leaving us an example that we should follow 
His steps. His meat was to do the will of 
Him that sent Him and to accomplish His 
work; His joy was in His love and _ the 
glorious counsels which He knew, and which 
will soon be the manifest issue. He indeed 
endured the cross, as was only possible to 
Him; but He suffered all through in a way 
proper to Himself, and learned obedience 
through it (for before, He had only commanded) ; 
yet what was not His joy, man of sorrows 
though He was and acquainted with grief 


10 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


beyond all others! He could and did upbraid 
the cities wherein most of His mighty works 
were done, because they repented not; for 
their guilt was worse than the worst judged of 
old. But at that season it was that He 
answered and said, “I praise thee [I confess 
to Thee], Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
that Thou didst hide these things from wise 
and prudent, and didst reveal them to babes: 
yea, Father, for thus it was well-pleasing in 
Thy sight...Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn from -Me; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart; and ye shall find rest for your 
souls.” 

Here, too, the ground of joy in sorrrow is 
explained, knowing that the proving of our faith 
worketh out endurance, as the apostle in Rom. 
v. 4 speaks of the saints “ knowing that tribula- 
tion worketh out endurance.” Both are equally 
true; but it is plain that tribulation could pro- 
duce no such effect unless there was the faith that 
stood the test. And such was his prayer for 
the Colossians that they might be “strength- 
ened with all power according to the might of 
His glory unto all endurance and long-suffering 
with joy.” The character of the inspired 
writings may differ ever so much in suitability 
to God’s design in each; but there is unity of 


Cuap. I. 2-4 Il 


spirit also beyond all doubt in His revealed 
mind. He cannot deny Himself. 

There is an important caution added. 
“But let endurance have a perfect work, that 
ye may be perfect and entire, lacking in 
nothing.” The contrast of this we see in Saul, 
king of Israel, who did not wait out the full 
time and lost the kingdom (1 Sam. xiv.). 
Even in David we see failure of endurance 
when, fleeing from Saul, he sought Achish in 
Gath (1 Sam. xxvii-xxix.). Christ alone was 
perfect in this as in all else. Endurance has 
a perfect work, when we judge our own will 
and await God’s. Then and thus only are we 
perfect and entire, deficient in nothing. 
It cannot contradict chap. iii 2 for all 
that. 

When a soul has fairly entered on the path 
of trials, which faith never fails to experience 
in a world departed from God, he soon finds 
his lack of wisdom. But his comfort is that 
He with Whom he has to do is alone wise, and 
ready to guide those that wait on Him. How 
much better it is that wisdom should be in 
Him that we may be dependent on His 
guidance, than if it were a possession vested in 
us, exposed to the danger of our setting up to 
do without Him! Therefore comes the 


12 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


exhortation to pray (cf. Luke xviii. 1); for our 
need is all the greater because we are God’s 
children in a world where all is opposed to 
God. “If any of you lack wisdom, let him 
ask of God that giveth to all freely and re- 
proacheth not; and it shall be given him. But 
let him ask in faith, nothing doubting. For he 
that doubteth is like a wave of the sea wind- 
driven and tossed (for let not that man think 
that he shall receive anything of the Lord): a 
double-minded man, unstable in all his ways” 
(vers. 5-8). 

It is of the essence of the new nature that 
the believer has to live in dependence on God, 
and to find its present exercise in the midst of 
trials by cultivating that confidence in Him 
which finds its proper expression in prayer. 
Hence it is that, if any one becomes sensible 
of deficient wisdom in presence of the many 
difficulties of this life, he is directed to ask of 
God that gives to all freely and upbraids not. 
How full of cheer and _ re-assurance! Even 
Christ, Himself God’s wisdom, habitually waited 
on God, prayed at all times where men least 
look for it, and spent the night in prayer when 
the occasion called for it. If He then Who 
never lacked wisdom so lived, how much should 
we be ashamed of our failure in so drawing 


Cuap. I, 5-8 13 


near to God and drawing from Him what He 
so readily gives! 

The expression employed to encourage us 
is striking. He “giveth to all freely and 
reproacheth not.” Wisdom no doubt is primarily 
what is sought, as it is in our trials peculiarly 
requisite; but the Holy Spirit is pleased to 
enlarge our expectation, that we may know 
better “the giving God,’ “the unreproaching 
God.” And a word is used here to characterise 
Him, to which the apostle Paul exhorts the 
Christian in his giving (Rom. xii. 8): “He that 
giveth, in simplicity.” For how often do mixed 
motives seek entrance into the heart in giving! 
Liking rather than love here, dislike hindering 
there, self-importance, regard for character, 
sympathy with others on the one hand, and on 
the other prudential or unbelieving fear under 
questionable pleas. Hence the call on the 
giver among us to give with simplicity. Single- 
ness of eye here as elsewhere promotes love, 
as it ensures light; and the issue is liberality. 
And so the various English versions agree, from 
Wiclif to the Authorised. For both Wiclif and 
Purvey give the primary meaning “in simple- 
ness,” Tyndale, Cranmer, and the Geneva, 
“with singleness” ; Rheims “in simplicity,” and 
the Auth. “with simplicity.” Again, Wiclif, 


14 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


and the Wiclifite have in our text “largeli,” 
Tyndale and Cranmer “indifferently,” Geneva 
“freely,” Rheims “abundantly,” and the Auth. 
“liberally” : all of them a secondary meaning. 
Of these “ freely” seems to suit God best, as 
flowing readily from the primary force which 
hardly befits Him, while it well becomes us. 
And it may be added that these respective 
meanings are in excellent keeping with the 
writers; of whom Paul looks at the inner 
source, James rather at the result. 

That God in giving freely does not reproach 
the receiver is no small favour. How often in 
man’s case the fact is, that the grace is accom- 
panied with such a drawback express or implied ! 
God acts worthily of Himself Who is good. 

But ifa petition is thus freely and graciously 
given of God to him that asks, there is the 
requisite condition, “let him ask in faith, 
nothing doubting.” God will be enquired of 
suitably ; and the least of all does it become 
man, so favoured, to fail or to doubt in any- 
thing. “He that spared not His own Son but 
delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not 
also with Him freely give us all things?” 
Even in the very trials which are most painful— 
“in all these things we are more than 
conquerors through Him that loved us,” 


Cuap. I. 5-8 15 


“For he that doubteth is like a wave of 
the sea wind-driven and tossed (for let not 
that man think that he shall receive anything 
of the Lord): a double minded man, unstable 
in all his ways.” Here is the contrast, alas! 
not uncommon even of old. Collectively 
“surge” is a known sense of the word rendered 
“wave,” which is not the ordinary term («ipa) 
though this occurs repeatedly in the N.T. It 
is rather a billow singly, but here the sport of 
winds to and fro. How could it be otherwise 
in him who in his weakness does not lean on 
the Lord? Whatever may be given, there is 
no real receiving from the Lord on his part 
who does not trust Him. If in one way he 
speaks, in another he feels and acts, being of 
double soul. Instability marks all his course. 
Is not God ashamed to own such a one? 
(Plebesci7 16): 

There is indeed no excuse, for him that con- 
fesses the Lord Jesus Christ, to be a double- 
souled man. Without the knowledge of Hima 
man may easily be unstable in all his ways; 
and it is no real credit to him if he be firm in 
the pursuit of self, braving trial instead of bow- 
ing to God with profit and joy to his soul. 
Christ alone is the true measure of all; and 
such was His manifestation here below in 


16 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


absolute superiority not only to every circum- 
stance but to all evil. He and He only was the 
Faithful Witness. In Christ is God’s secret of 
stedfastness for man in a world of sin. And 
there is more, yea all, in Him to fill the heart 
with joy and give needed wisdom. 

“But let the lowly brother glory in his eleva- 
tion, and the rich in his humiliation, because as 
flower of grass he will pass away. For the sun 
arose with its scorching and withered the grass, 
and its flower fell away, and the comeliness of 
its look perished : thus also will the rich one fade 
in his goings, Blest [is] a man who endureth 
trial ; because, having been put to the proof, he 
shall receive the crown of life which He promised 
to those that love Him” (vers. 9-12). 

Here again it is Christ Who alone sheds the 
full light of God on the inequalities of position 
on the earth, and turns them into a ground not 
of acquiescence only, but of pleasing God in 
exercising suitably the new nature. In _ the 
world covetousness is the universal idolatry, and 
mammon its idol, And the Jew fell under a 
similar condition readily, as he looked for bless- 
ings on his obedience, in the city and in the 
field, in the family and in the flock, in the 
basket and in the kneading trough. But the 
day is coming when God will put down all evil, 


Cuap, I, 9-12 17 


stilling the roaring of the seas and the tumult 
of the peoples, and lifting Israel out of their low 
estate, when at the feet of Messiah they truly 
own the God of their salvation. Then will the 
outgoings of the morning and evening rejoice, 
when God visits the earth and waters, when He 
crowns the years with His goodness, and His 
paths drop fatness, and the hills are girded with 
joy, and the valleys, covered over with corn, 
shout for joy and sing. 

For God will have blessed Israel then, and 
thenceforward will for ever bless them, and all 
the ends of the earth shall fear Him. It will 
be the day, not of man, but of Jehovah, when a 
king shall reign in righteousness and princes 
shall rule in judgment, Jehovah (yet Man) the 
judge, Jehovah the lawgiver, Jehovah the king, 
when the inhabitants of His land shall not say, 
I am sick, for the people dwelling therein shall 
be forgiven their iniquity. Yea, the wilderness 
and the solitary place shall be glad, and the 
desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. It 
shall blossom abundantly and rejoice even with 
joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be 
given to it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. 
And no wonder: for they shall see the glory of 
Jehovah, the excellency of our God. And 


Jehovah will answer the heavens, and they the 
c 


18 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


earth; and the earth the corn and the wine and 
the oil; and they Jezreel. And Jehovah will 
sow her to Him in the land, and will have mercy 
on her that had not obtained mercy, and will 
say to Lo-Ammi [not My-people], My-people 
thou, and they shall say, My-God. 

But now the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven, 
is bearing witness to the church in one way, 
to the world in another. Christ is not ruling, 
as He will in power and glory during the age 
to come. It is the present evil age, out of which 
Christ, having given Himself for our sins, is 
delivering us who believe and constituting us 
members of His body for heavenly glory. We 
shall be displayed with Him on high when that 
day dawns on the earth. Thus, being called 
into God’s marvellous light, it is our privilege 
to have the mind of Christ, and judge all things 
according to God in this scene of confusion. 

Hence the lowly brother can glory in his 
elevation, for the glorified Christ is not ashamed 
to call him brother; and the rich one can glory 
in his humiliation, in fellowship with Him Who 
emptied and humbled Himself to the death of 
the cross. Whatever our natural place, we are 
now by grace not of the world as Christ is not. 
Thus we are enabled to read glory in the hum- 
blest believer ; the wealthy and honourable can 


Cuap. I. 9-12 19 


write nothingness on what the flesh values highly. 
For indeed as the Lord said, That which is 
exalted among men is an abomination in the 
sight of God (Luke xvi. 15). Truly and beauti- 
fully is the evanescence of all that men think 
great and stable, here compared to the fleeting 
bloom of grass, put in the past tense of tran- 
siency : as the Lord put his case who abides not 
in Him (John xv. 6). So certain is the passing 
away of that which flows not from life in Him. 
As flower of grass perishes before the scorching 
heat of the sun, “thus also will the rich one fade 
in his goings.” What is surer, or sooner 
forgotten ? 

From this parenthetical comparison in vers. 
g-II we return to a kind of summary of the 
previous exhortation ; and happy is pronounced 
aman who endures trial. So it was with men 
of marked faith of old, Job, Abraham, David, 
and the prophets; so it is now for every believer , 
and made plain by Him Who endured more 
than all, and as He alone could. And what an 
encouragement in the path of trial for him whom 
grace has called! “ Because, having been put to 
proof [or approved], he shall receive the crown 
of life, which He promised to those that love 
Him.” Faith receives the word of God that 
reveals God’s holy love in giving us a divine 


20 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Saviour Who died for our sins; and we love 
Him Who first loved us; but also how sweet 
while pilgrims and strangers to have so cheering 
a promise in the trial we endure! The new 
nature is exercised in trial and drawn out in its 
affections by God’s love, and becomes more con- 
versant with the things above and the coming 
glory. 

There is another class of trials, with which 
souls are everywhere conversant in Christendom, 
even though they know but little of the blessed 
ones, which our Epistle heretofore has brought 
before us. It is ridiculous to deny the evident 
distinction. How could it be said, Count it 
all joy, when ye fall into various temptations 
in the form of inward lusts? or, blessed is the 
man that endures solicitations to evil from his 
corrupt nature? We have already seen that 
thus far the trials are from without. Our Lord 
knew then not only as do others, His saints, 
but beyond any, as we hear not only in the 
three earlier Gospels, but in Heb. ii. 18 ; iv. 15, 
where it is expressly treated for our consolation, 
yet with the all-important reserve, “apart from 
sin.” He was tempted in all things in like 
manner, without sin, not without sins or sinning, 
but sin excepted. Of sinful temptation He 
knew nothing, for in Him was no sin. His 


Cuap. I. 9-12 21 


nature as born of Mary was holy. It was so 
constituted from the womb; and therefore it 
was said by the angel Gabriel, “ The holy thing 
which shall be born shall be called the Son 
of God.” 

But the believer, though born of God, has 
another principle—what the apostle calls “the 
flesh,” which is not subject to the law of God, 
for neither can it be. Its mind is enmity 
against God. Not that the Christian is 
excusable if he allow it to act, now that he has 
a new life, and the Holy Spirit also given to 
dwell in him expressly that he may in no way 
fulfil flesh’s lust but oppose it, and not do the 
things which he naturally desires. For “ the 
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meek- 
ness, self-control: against such things there is 
no law. But they that are of Christ Jesus 
crucified the flesh with its passions and _ its 
lusts.” 

_ From this, our naturally deplorable state, 
the person of our Lord Jesus was wholly 
exempt. He was the Holy One of God. Even 
the demons owned Him thus, though men are 
not wanting who have dared to blaspheme His 
moral glory by imputing to Him the same 
fallen nature with its  proclivities as we 


22 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


have. And such as thus lower His person are 
only too consistent with that fundamental error 
by obscuring or even annulling the true sense 
and power of His atonement, thus in their 
ignorance and unbelief humanising alike His 
person and His work. It is the working of 
the antichrist, of which we have heard that it 
comes, and now it is already in the world; nor 
is any error more dishonouring to God or more 
deadly to man, It is the more dangerous 
because with it is often mingled a good deal 
of truth apparently in advance of what is com- 
monly known, which some _ perceiving are 
enticed to accept the error. But no lie is of 
the truth; and no lie more sure or evil than 
that which denies the Christ, the Son of God. 

It is blessedly true that Christ died to sin 
once for all; but this was not for Himself but 
for us who had sin in the flesh, To teach that 
Christ could say till the resurrection, Not I 
but sin that dwelleth in me, is apostasy from 
the truth, and is Satan’s enmity to it, in order 
to degrade His person and to exalt ours; also 
to insinuate that sin in the flesh was conquered 
in Him as it may be in us, instead of being 
condemned in Him made sin. Never therefore 
is it, nor could it be, said, that the Lord mortified 
His members that were on the earth, never 


Cap. I. 13-15 23 


that He reckoned Himself dead to sin and 
alive to God. Precious as all this or more is 
for the Christian, it would be to the last degree 
false and derogatory to Him Who knew no 
sin but was made sin for us. 

The Epistle then turns from our holy trials 
to our unholy ones, and shows their source to 
be, not in God, but in sinful man. “Let none 
when tempted say, I am tempted of God; for 
God cannot be tempted by evils, and himself 
tempteth none. But each is tempted when by 
his own lust drawn away and enticed; then 
lust having conceived bringeth forth sin; and 
sin when completed giveth birth to death” 
(vers. 13-15). 

The distinctness is evident when we read 
on the one hand that God tempted or tried 
Abraham (Gen. xxii. I, and Heb. xi. 17), and 
on the other that Israel tempted God (Psa. 
Ixxviii. 18, 41, 56, compared with Exod. xvii. 
7). Never does God tempt any one to evil, 
but He may and does so bring out their faith 
and fidelity ; but it is alas! too sadly common 
for His people to tempt Him by doubts of 
His mercy and active care. Hence the word 
in Deut. vi. 16, “Ye shall not tempt Jehovah 
your God,” the Lord’s answer to the devil 
suggesting that He should cast Himself down 


24 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


from the pinnacle of the temple on the strength 
of Psa. xci. 11. But the Lord utterly refuses 
to test God, as if His protection were doubtful 
in the path of obedience. God is not to be 
tempted by evils, any more than He so tempts. 

The evil temptation comes from within 
man, though Satan may act on him, for he 
ever evilly tempts to evil. So it was man at 
the beginning was tempted when his nature 
was not evil; but instead of repelling it as the 
Lord did, he allowed and received it; so that 
henceforth the race was contaminated like its 
fallen head. The precise contrast is seen in 
Christ, to Whom the prince of the world came 
at the end, and had nothing in Him then any 
more than when first tempted. But it is 
wholly different with us, conceived in sin and 
shapen in iniquity as we are naturally, though 
now by grace born anew. ‘Therefore have we 
an altogether distinct class and character of 
temptation, which the Lord had not, as 
incompatible with His person as with His work. 
In Him was no lusting against the Spirit, no 
contrariety in Him, because He was, as no one 
else could be, the Holy One of God. The 
Word became flesh (John i. 14). Incarnation 
was true cf Him, but of Him alone. But the 
believer, though having life in the Son, has 


Cuap. I, 13-15 25 


the fallen nature, and hence is liable to evil 
temptation. 

“But each is tempted when by his own lust 
drawn away and enticed.” The Lord though 
tempted in all points similarly could not be 
in this way, because it would have denied and 
destroyed His moral glory, and it would have 
frustrated the purpose of God in saving us to 
His glory. That the Lord was in like manner 
tempted in all things has this immense limitation, 
“sin excepted,” not sinning only in fact, which 


” in the nature from 


is true of course, but “sin 
which He was absolutely exempt. He had 
not and could not have such evil temptations 
from a corrupt nature, because His was expressly 
holy. There was no lust of His own to draw 
away or allure. Evil suggestion from without 
He therefore uniformly rejected with indignation, 
even if an honoured apostle, shocked at the 
suffering before Him as inconsistent to his mind 
and feeling with His glory, repudiated His 
death and such a death as an impossibility, 
and received rebuke stern beyond example. 
With the believer too often is it likewise, when 
like Peter his mind is not on the things of 
God but on those of men. Christ sought His 
Father’s glory, and unrighteousness was not in 
Him, but He did always the things pleasing to 


26 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Him. Self-will there was none. He was come 
to do God’s will, and did it perfectly and at 
all cost. 

Far different is the saint when thus off his 
guard and ceasing ever so little from dependence 
on God. “Then lust, having conceived, bringeth 
forth sin; and sin, when completed, giveth birth 
to death.” How graphic and true! But it is 
the strict line of James who looks at the moral 
effects, and does not occupy himself or the 
reader with that deep sounding of causes which 
we find in the Epistles of Paul. It is scarce 
needed to say that both views are invaluable, 
and alike given by inspiration. 

There is no small danger of error on the 
subject of man’s nature as it is, and the new 
nature which the believer receives by grace. 
Mistakes abound to this day, as they ever have 
since very early days. How many speak of the 
original Adamic state as holy? It was merely 
one of innocence, which was lost at the fall 
irrecoverably. Through the word applied by 
the Spirit in the faith of Christ we become 
partakers of a divine nature. It is not restor- 
ation to the primeval creature estate, but an 
incomparably better life in Christ the Son of 
God, the ground of fellowship with the Father 
and the Son, and of a holy walk with God. 


Cuap. I. 13-15 27 


Christ Himself and alone was the manifestation 
of this eternal life on earth; and _ chosen 
witnesses were given to see and hear and come 
into the closest contact with Him, and enabled 
to bear witness by inspiration that we too 
might have fellowship with them. Never was 
there such intimacy, never such testing, never 
such scrutiny, that we might behold and know 
life eternal in every variety of circumstances, 
in the simplest as well as the most profound 
here below; and this is the life we have in 
Him. 

But while we have in Christ an incom- 
parably higher and sure standing, there is the 
effect of the fall in our old nature which abides 
for the present life with its lusts which Adam 
innocent had not. It is not a change merely, 
but a new life never possessed before. The 
disciples were born of water and the Spirit ; 
and what is so born is “spirit,” not flesh 
improved, changed, or annihilated. They were 
purged already because of the word which 
Christ had spoken to them before the gift of the 
Holy Ghost in power at Pentecost. The heart 
is purified by faith, yet there is a new life, life 
eternal, given in Christ ; and there is progress 
and growth through the truth. But besides, 
we are in Christ, and freed from all condem- 


28 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


nation, as we are purged by His blood from 
our sins once for all. Our being perfected in 
perpetuity (Heb. x.) is true of all Christians, 
as it is by His one offering in Whom and in 
which we believe. The notion of an attained 
state where no lusts work for a few superior 
souls is a mere delusion; it is the real un- 
holiness of denying sin in them and excusing 
evil because the will does not consent. The 
apostles Paul and John are no less opposed to 
the dream than James, though he is occupied 
with the process and result, rather than with 
its origin and spring as they. 

“Do not err, my beloved brethren. Every 
good giving and every perfect gift is from 
above, coming down from the Father of lights, 
with whom can be no variation nor shadow of 
turning. Having purposed He begot us by 
the word of truth, that we should be a certain 
first-fruits of his creatures” (vers. 16-18). 

Men’s thoughts being so far from the truth, 
as it is a subject altogether beyond his mind, 
we are the more bound to see that we be not 
misled, but subject to scripture. Here there is 
no obscurity, but all is light ; for God is light, 
and His love has communicated all that we 
need to know. As man’s nature is defiled 
and sinful, the God (Whom we know by faith 


Cuap. I. 16-18 29 


and with Whom grace has given us the nearest 
relationship) is good. He cannot be tempted 
by evil and tempts none in this way. He is 
so absolutely good that our Lord laid down 
that none is good save one, God: not of 
course as Himself disclaiming it if owned as 
God, but refusing it from him who saw no 
more than humanity in Him. 

But God. is much more; He is the source 
of all good. He gives freely and fully to those 
who were evil and enemies. So we are here 
told that “every good giving and every perfect 
gift is from above, coming down from the 
Father of lights.”” In Him is no darkness at 
all; in the world it is so dense that, though 
Christ His Son was here, the true Light, and 
shining in the darkness, the darkness compre- 
hended it not: so much did moral darkness 
exceed the natural which is dispelled by 
natural light. It is humbling that man, with 
all his boasting, should be proved thus evil. 
But Christ solved the difficulty, the giver of a 
life in Himself risen from the dead, after being 
made sin to annul it righteously. Thus of His 
will or purpose (for nothing was more remote 
from man or more opposed to his will) did 
God beget us. 

There is another consideration added, full 


30 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


of comfort. The greater the blessing, the more 
is the sorrow if it be exposed to loss or 
change. Now in our relationship with God we 
are assured that the goodness displayed suffers 
no diminution, nor eclipse. Even the greater 
light that rules the day, which men adored 
early and long, the bright orb of the sun to 
which they applied the epithet here predicated 
of our God, is liable to the variations of nature 
all day long, and is the salient example, in its 
apparent motions, of shadow that is cast by 
turning. But it is not so, as here declared, 
with the Father of lights, Whose unchangeable- 
ness is as perfect as His goodness, and His 
goodness to us who deserved nothing less, still 
in our weakness, and still in a world of evil. 

But His purpose is to have the world 
governed righteously. This cannot be accord- 
ing to God till His Son, the Lord Jesus 
come forth to make good the kingdom, the 
world-kingdom in power and glory; as He 
has already vindicated His God and Father 
in obedience and suffering that He might save 
to the uttermost. Of this the Old Testament 
prophets have spoken amply, and the New 
Testament reiterates the truth in all plain- 
ness of speech, as it shows also the more 
distant and glorious vista, when all evil shall 


Cuap. I. 19, 20 31 


be done away and the new heavens and a new 
earth shall be, not in measure and pledge 
only, but in fulness. For government shall 
yield to everlasting righteousness dwelling in 
unbreakable peace, after all judgment is 
executed by Him to Whom it is given. Of 
this we are a certain first-fruits already, for 
we are begotten by the word of truth, and 
this nature is holy. But there is another 
which we ought never to ignore, and which, 
if not judged, breaks out into sins; so that, 
till we are changed at Christ’s coming, we 
can only be called “a certain first-fruits.” 
We follow Christ’s steps and ought to walk 
as He walked; but we shall be like Him 
when we see Him as He is. 

The critical correction which opens verse 19 
rests not only on excellent authority, but on 
internal evidence of no small weight ; while the 
common reading followed by the A.V. seems a 
rather obvious change of transcribers who failed 
to apprehend the force of the verb here, 

“Ye know [it], my brethren beloved ; but let 
every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow 
to wrath; for man’s wrath worketh not God’s 
righteousness ” (vers. 19, 20). 

It is characteristic of Christianity to know 
not only the privileges and experience of saints 


32 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


but the depths of God, as we are told in 1 Cor. ii. 
10, and not simply as revealed objectively, but 
in inward spiritual consciousness, as being born 
of God and thus having a new nature derived of 
Him. Of this we were fully told in the verse 
before; and, as knowing it, we have important 
consequences now urged on us. It is not that 
saints of old were- destitute of that nature, as 
answering to faith which is the ground of all 
divine affections and of everything that pleases 
God in holy conduct. But it would be difficult 
to find, throughout the Law, the Psalms, and the 
Prophets, so simple an enunciation of it as our 
Epistle lays down; and this not as a_ novel 
communication to those addressed, but as a truth 
so known to them that there was no need of en- 
forcing the fact or enlarging on its importance. 
We are therefore led at once to weighty practical 
results. 

Others were given to set forth the work of re- 
demption in Christ, or His personal glory, which 
are outside the believer and of all moment 
for purging the conscience and filling the heart. 
But it was the place of James writing to those 
peculiarly liable to be content with objects of 
sight only, to instruct in that interior dealing 
with the heart which is no less essential to the 
Christian, and secured to faith, both by a life 


Cuap. I. 19, 20 33 


given in Christ and by the gift of the Holy 
Spirit consequent on His blood-shedding and 
ascension. Here James had taught them in the 
clearest terms, that of His own purpose God gave 
us birth by the word of truth. So in the Fourth 
Gospel the apostle told us that “as many as 
received Him (Christ), to them gave He title to 
become children of God, even to them that 
believe on His name: who were born, not of 
blood nor of flesh’s will, nor of man’s will, but 
of God.” It is inexcusable to mistake so plain 
an intimation, or (if seen) to lower its importance. 
The believer has already this new life, knows it, 
and is called to manifest it accordingly. Chris- 
tianity is not only the revelation of a Lord and 
Saviour not less truly divine than the Father, 
but this inseparably from a new nature now im- 
parted to the believer, who is responsible to walk 
suitably in the practical exercise of that life. 
The exhortation therefore here is: “let 
every man be swift to hear.” Christ Himself 
is the model of this, as of all else that is good. 
Though the Holy One of God, never was any so 
swift to hear God’s word. So the prophet 
distinguished Him, “The Lord Jehovah hath 
given me the tongue of them that are taught, 
that I should know how to speak a word to him 


that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morn- 
D 


34 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


ing, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as they that 
are taught. The Lord Jehovah hath opened 
mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither 
turned away backward.” Nor was it} otherwise 
with His bearing in presence of the tempter: 
the word of God was His constant resource, and 
only the more if Satan perverted it. “It is 
written again” was His lowly God-honouring 
answer. And soit is, and has ever been, with 
His sheep. They hear His voice, and follow 
Him ; they know not the voice of strangers. 

The word of truth abides in its value. By it 
they were begotten of God; by it the new life 
is fed, formed, directed, and strengthened. All 
the written word is prized as well as authorita- 
tive ; but for special instructions God has been 
pleased to furnish those communications we call 
the New Testament. If we rightly heed all 
scripture, we assuredly shall welcome every 
word that explains the new life and its duties, 
and His glory and grace Who is its spring 
and fulness. 

But we are told also to be “slow to speak.” 
For we have another nature which is self-confi- 
dent and impulsive ; and there do we need to be 
on our guard, that, knowing ourselves weak, 
ignorant, and naturally prone to evil, we may look 
up to God and wait dependently on Him, As 


Cuap I, 19, 20 35 


born of Him, it is ours to be jealous that we may 
neither misrepresent nor grieve Him. And 
therefore are we warned of another danger, when 
it is added “slow to wrath.” How often it is 
impotent and hasty self-will! We are now 
sanctified to do His will, to obey as Christ 
obeyed. There is of course a right occasion for 
wrath. So the Lord looked round about on 
those that misused the sabbath to oppose God’s 
grace in an evil world. But we are exhorted to 
be slow to wrath, and to let it soon be over. 
“Be ye angry and sin not: let not the sun go 
down upon your wrath; neither give place to the 
devil” (Eph. iv. 26, 27). 

A weighty reason is added which calls for 
explanation, because the similarity of phrase 
might lead the hasty to confound it with the 
well known but little understood language of 
the apostle Paul. The two writers can only be 
rightly appreciated by giving due weight to 
their respective aims. In Romans and elsewhere 
in that apostle’s writings, it isGod’s consistency 
with what is due to Christ’s work in redemption. 
God therefore justifies him that believes in 
Jesus according to the value of His atonnig 
death in His sight; and so we are made (or 
become) that righteousness in Him risen and 
ascended. But James is occupied with our 


36 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


practical ways in consistency with God’s sovereign 
will in begetting us with the word of truth, that 
we should be a kind of first-fruit of His creatures. 
And He looks for conduct according to that new 
nature He has given us by faith. Submissiveness 
of heart becomes us in hearkening to Him, and 
in avoiding our natural haste of speech and 
proneness to wrath; for, he adds, man’s wrath 
worketh not God’s righteousness. It is practical, 
not our standing according to Christ’s work as in 
Paul’s epistles ; and it recalls our Lord in Matt. 
vi. 33, “Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and 
His righteousness.” This again is not our stand- 
ing in Christ by virtue of God’s righteousness, 
but the power of His kingdom and character in 
our souls and ways. 

Conduct is bound to be according to re- 
lationship ; and this flows from what God our 
Father has already formed by the acting of 
His own purpose and mind in giving us_ birth 
by the word of truth; a fact which it was the 
more important to press on saints who were 
used to take their stand on being sprung from 
Abraham as their father. They were now 
taught how much higher and holier was the 
new descent; and this not only from God but 
in the most blessed way which gave full place 
to the Son as well as the Spirit, and had its 


Cuap. I. 19, 20 37 


title-deed indisputable in the written word. So 
the Lord had Himself laid down to the Jews, 
“If ye abide in My word, ye are truly My 
disciples; and ye shall know the truth; and 
the truth shall make you free..... If there- 
fore the Son shall make you free, ye shall be 
free indeed.” How little do souls, that loudly 
boast of their liberty, suspect that they are 
bondmen of sin and thus in Satan’s chains! 
Even the believers, whom Christ has set free, 
are but a kind of first-fruits with an evil 
nature in no way set aside as a fact by the 
new nature which is ours through the word and 
Spirit of God. In virtue of this we have by 
grace to judge and refuse every working of the 
old nature, living on the Living Bread whereof 
we have eaten, yea, eating His flesh and drinking 
His blood, and so living not merely by reason, 
but on account, of Him, as He did when here 
below. on account of the Father. No character 
of life for purity can compare with that which 
the word of truth conveys. How different and 
inferior is the being of blood or of flesh’s will 
or of man’s will, which we once sadly knew, 
as our only experience, and still know to be 
productive, if allowed, only of evil, even since 
we were born of God! 

But it is not enough, though it be much 


38 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


every way, to be swift to hear, slow to speak, 
slow to wrath. The exhortation follows definitely 
against imminent dangers. “ Wherefore, having 
laid aside every sort of filthiness and overflowing 
of wickedness, receive with meekness_ the 
implanted word which is able to save your 
souls. But be word-doers, and not hearers 
only, deluding yourselves” (vers. 21, 22). 

It is well to take note of the aorist in 
ver. 2I, as compared with the presentin ver. 22: 
in the last a constant continuous call, in the 
former acts done once for all. Pollution might 
be, as the apostle tells us in 2 Cor. vii. 1, of 
spirit no less than of flesh, and the more 
ensnaring because more subtle. But the call is 
to have once for all put every kind of filthiness 
away, as also of that rank growth of wickedness 
which is inherent in fallen nature. It would 
be indeed a hopeless call if we had not a new 
life in Christ; but this every believer possesses, 
and the Holy Spirit's indwelling to work 
suitably to Him Who is its source, fulness, 
and standard. The flesh is still there; but in 
the cross of Christ it has already received its 
condemnation in Him Who was the one and 
efficacious offering for sin (Rom. viii. 3). Thus 
there is no excuse for the believer allowing its 
evil working in himself or others: God con- 


CHaAp. £2 21,.22 39 


demned it fully when Christ thus suffered, that 
we might have even now this immense comfort 
for faith as a settled thing. 

“The word of truth,” which first reached us 
when under the dominion of the falsehood of 
sin and Satan, and delivered us through faith 
in Christ and His mighty work, is spoken of 
also as “the implanted word” which we are 
told to receive as an accomplished act. It is 
in contrast with a merely external rule that 
could only condemn what was opposed to itself. 
It works inwardly in that life which the believer 
has, being perfectly akin to it and congenial 
with it, as both are of God. Hence there is 
nothing strange in the call; and the call is to 
receive it “with meekness,” as becomes those 
who have already tasted that the Lord is 
good, and desire to profit more and more. For 
indeed only that word is “able to save our 
souls” (compare the end of 1 Pet. i., and the 
beginning of chap. ii). The God who began 
so gracious a work does not forget or relinquish 
His care. He exercises and disciplines our 
souls, He spares no fault; but He has proved 
fully in Christ that those whom He loved that 
were in the world He loved unto the end. 
Still He works not by rites or forms, but by 
our faith in His word (compare 1 Pet. i. 5). 


40 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


We are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the 
last time. 

But as this exceeding value of God’s word 
is capable of being abused into a school of 
dogma, and consequently of mere knowledge, 
the next verse summons us habitually to reduce 
the word to practice. “ But be word-doers, and 
not hearers only, deluding yourselves.” This is 
the great business of every day. Our Lord had 
already enforced His most solemn warning 
against the same self-delusion. ‘ Not every one 
that saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of the heavens; but he that doeth 
the will of my Father that is in heaven. Many 
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have 
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy 
name cast out demons, and in thy name done 
works of power? And then will I avow unto 
them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye 
that work lawlessness” (Matt. vii. 21-23). The 
word must not only be heard but produce 
fruit accordingly. To hear the Son is the 
urgent call of the Father, but it is to form 
the new life in obedience; otherwise it is to 
mock God and delude ourselves. And hence 
the grave caution here. 

Reality is indispensable. It was so of old 


Cuap. I. 23, 24 41 


and always; much more is it now due to God, 
who has done such great things for us in 
Christ. Begotten of God with the word of 
truth, we are called to walk accordingly. The 
higher or holier the speech, if it go no farther, 
the more are we _ self-condemned and _in- 
excusably guilty. Life is given to the believer 
for exercise in every way pleasing to God. 

“ Because if any one be a word-hearer, and 
not a doer, he is like a man considering his 
natural face in a mirror; for he considered 
himself and is gone away, and _ straightway 
forgot of what sort he was” (vers. 23, 24). 

It is a privilege of no small value to have 
the word, which is of God; and as it was 
that which revealed Him in Christ to the 
soul, so also it was made the means of 
quickening. It therefore is the appropriate 
nourishment of the life that was given, as the 
Holy Spirit used it thus efficaciously. So He 
does to the end, making us know that the 
Trinity is no mere idea nor objective dogma, 
but a living truth in active operation day by 
day for those who believe. Hence conscience 
is continually exercised; for we have another 
nature, not only human but fallen and prone 
to evil, as previous verses in this chapter fully 
notice ; and we pass through a world which is 


42 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


wholly opposed to God and His glory, having 
already been tested from the beginning and 
proving its enmity by crucifying the Lord of 
glory. Inwardly and outwardly therefore is 
the most real danger, especially when we take 
account of a subtle and sleepless power of 
evil, one who secretly avails himself of every 
means to compromise the saint and draw him 
into the dishonour of the Lord. 

Nor is there any way more perilous than 
ensnaring the believers into a merely formal 
reading of the revealed word. For the con- 
science may be satisfied that the word is heard, 
while the heart is unmoved; and thus all 
becomes powerless. Yet therein God _ has 
communicated the most solemn truths, and of 
the nearest interest to Himself as well as to 
us; so that reading them there perfunctorily 
inflicts deep moral loss on the soul, and leads 
into a hardened state that lays one open to a 
thousand snares. 

Therefore does our epistle urge us to be 
not hearers of the word only, but doers, com- 
paring him who is a mere hearer to a man 
considering in a mirror “the face of his birth,” 
as it literally runs. For, it is added, he 
considered himself and is gone away, and 
straightway forgot of what sort he was. A 


CHAP AT 23524 43 


similar warning, we have seen, had the Lord 
given in the close of what is called the sermon 
on the mount, as it is indeed not only for all 
that turn away from what they hear for the 
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, but 
expressly for such professors of His name as 
content themselves with reading or hearing 
His good word, which is able to make wise 
unto salvation. Life is not only receptive but 
energetic ; it is holy and works by love, for it 
is inseparable from the Son of God, Whose 
words are profitable indeed: “they are spirit, 
and they “are life,” as He: has told us. So 
also had He said, ‘“ That which is born of the 
Spirit, is spirit.” This no external institution, 
however important, can possibly effect; nothing 
but a divine person giving the soul to believe 
the word and Him who made it known. 
Thus is the truth kept sure and safe on all 
sides, without room for superstition or fanaticism. 
For the Holy Spirit ever employs the word 
which witnesses to Christ and His work, and 
thus brings into communion with God; and as 
one is thus born of God, so does he grow and 
work practically. Where only the mind is 
reached or the affections, it is no more than a 
sight of the natural face in a mirror. There 
is no abiding self-judgment, no going out after 


44 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Christ, no delight in God’s will intimated in His 
word. It was seen for a moment but forgotten. 

Approaching the close of this contrast which 
verse 22 began, we have a phrase of much and 
weighty import, which lets us into, or at least 
flows consistently with, the truth here insisted on, 
especially and expressly in verse 18. The law 
given by Moses was in no way a law of liberty 
but of bondage. It forbade and condemned the 
transgressions to which the flesh was prone. 
The curb it applied to man’s will provoked the 
old man, and the offence consequently abounded 
instead of diminishing. The law therefore could 
not but work out wrath; as it is the strength of 
sin, not of holiness. 

But here the Spirit of God presents, as the 
gift of God’s will and grace, the new nature 
which characterises the faithful, the effect of 
God’s giving birth to His own by word of truth. 
Christ, as we know from elsewhere, is this life, 
which he has who believes in Him, And this 
life, as in Him so in His, shows itself in 
obedience as its primary action. “What shall I 
do, Lord?” is the ready answer of the quickened 
soul to the revelation of “I am Jesus of Nazar- 
eth.” We are sanctified to obedience no _ less 
than to the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. 
The word of God has His authority over us; 


Cuap, I, 25 45 


and feeling our ignorance and the goodness of 
His word, we prize and welcome all that He 
gives to direct our way. And the indwelling 
_ Spirit of God, glorifying the Lord Jesus, is our 
power, now that we confess Him Lord and own 
Him as the Son of God, resting on His redemp- 
tion and beholding Him on high. 

Hence the word of truth, by which God begot 
us, is also our divine directory, and is here 
designated “a perfect law, that of liberty,” 
exercising faith and effecting obedience by grace. 
For those that are thus called by the gospel 
are made conscious of their new and holy 
relationship to God, as the Spirit of adoption 
gives them to cry, Abba, Father. Christ was 
the perfect expression of God, as well as perfect 
example of man; and He, being our life, as well 
as righteousness from God and before God, forms 
us here below accordingly. Begotten by the 
word, we have a new nature which loves the 
word as well as God Himself; and thus we in 
virtue of it wish to do what He wills, as 
communicated in His word, now fully revealed. 
“As the living Father sent me, and I live on 
account of the Father, he too that eateth me 
shall live on account of me’”’ (John vi. 57): how 
blessed, elevating and mighty the motive. May 
it be ours who follow Him! 


46 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


“But he that closely looked into perfect law, 
that of liberty, and abode close,” as living faith 
achieves, “ being not a quite forgetful hearer but 
a work-doer, he shall be blessed in his doing” 
(ver. 25). He has a nature in accord with the 
word which communicated it to his soul. It is 
not a law from without that forbids what he 
likes and demands what is irksome. He knows 
God’s love inwardly, and finds His word enjoins 
what the life he professes takes pleasure in. 
He delights in obeying God; and this is just 
what the word points out, what to do and how 
to do it, with Christ revealed Whose light 
shines and Whose love cheers and strengthens 
him. And thus it is the “law of liberty.” 
His heart purified by faith not only accepts 
but rejoices in the will of God—His good and 
acceptable and perfect will. This we behold in 
its untainted and unfailing fulness in our Lord 
Jesus. He that keeps His word, in him verily 
is the love of God perfected. And as there is 
no fear in love, so neither is there bondage 
therein; yet no chains are so mighty as its 
silken cords, The one obedient is accordingly 
blessed, not in his end only but in his ways— 
blessed in his doing. A real and great and 
vital truth it is, that Christ deigns to be our way 
by faith in a wilderness world where is no way. 


Cuap, I. 26 47 


Only the eye single to Him can see that way ; 
but: God is as faithful in this as in all else to 
the soul that is true to Christ’s word and 
name. 

Certainly the believer is not said to be 
blessed for his doing, but im it. The true 
light already shines; as it did perfectly in 
Christ when here, so now the Holy Spirit 
effects this in those begotten of God. He 
will have reality, now that the day of shadows 
and forms is past, grace and truth having 
come through Jesus Christ. If He is not here 
to maintain all, the Holy Spirit is sent forth 
and abides for this express purpose to the 
glory of Christ. No doubt, it is a day of 
knowing what God has revealed, and He has 
revealed nothing more fully than Himself in 
His<.Son,;.. But: it ,is a .day.of obedience 
for the faithful, no less than of life and 
peace, and of fellowship with the Father and 
the Son. Knowledge without obedience is a 
sad and shameful reproach, “If ye know 
these things,” said the Saviour, “ happy are ye 
if ye do them.” 

But there is another way in which we may 
glorify God, or do Him great dishonour ; not 
by our activity but by our speech, For out 
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, 


48 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


As our Lord added, “The good man out of 
the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth 
good things; and the wicked man out of the 
wicked treasure bringeth forth wicked things. 
But I say unto you, that every idle word 
which men shall say, they shall render an 
account of it in judgment-day; for by thy 
words thou shalt be justified, and by thy 
words shalt thou be condemned” (Matt. xii. 
35 - 37). On scarce anything are men, and 
even Christians, more distant practically from 
the mind of God than on the use and in the 
licence claimed for the tongue. On the other 
hand who does not know the dead and 
gloomy and resentful silence when the name 
of the Lord Jesus is brought into any 
general company? It matters not how 
reverent be the spirit in which it is uttered, 
or how apt the’ application, or how necessary 
and conclusive for the truth’s sake: man 
cannot forgive it. The name is inopportune 
save from a pulpit; it is an offence to the 
world, high or low, which cast Him out and 
crucified Him. Notwithstanding the desperate 
effort to make out that all is changed for 
so many ages, and that the adornment of 
the tomb, the picture, or the sculptor, proves 
the heart’s homage in our day, the implacable 


Cuap. I, 26 49 


enmity underneath does not fail to betray 
itself; and God is not deceived by a vain show. 
With the heart it is believed unto righteous- 
ness, and with mouth confession is made 
unto salvation. God will have His Son 
honoured as Himself where He was rejected ; 
and those who honour Him by hearing His 
words and believing Him Who sent Him have 
life eternal; while those who disbelieve Him 
must perish, their ways being as bad as their 
words to His dishonour. 

The same principle applies all through 
“Tf anyone thinks he is religious, not bridling 
his tongue but deceiving his heart, this 
[man’s] religion is vain” (ver. 26). The word 
“religious” here used refers to the manifesta- 
tion. It is neither evceBjc, pious or godly; nor 
is it Aarpebwy rendering a religious service or 
worship to God. It means religious practice 
outwardly paid. Compare Acts xxvi. 5; Col. 
ity E8523. 

Again, the form is hardly “seemeth” but 
“deemeth,” or “thinketh himself” It is not 
what appears to others that is in question, 
but his thought of himself. Wiclif and 
the Rhemish are right, following the Vulgate ; 
Tyndale misled Cranmer, the Geneva V. and 
the Authorised. The very fact that it is 


E 


50 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


not deeds but only the indulgence of speech 
gives occasion to self-deception. But he who 
calls on the Lord’s name is bound to follow 
His steps, and not to misrepresent Him, 
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
His mouth ; Who, reviled, reviled not again, and, 
suffering, threatened not. On the contrary as 
He was fairer than the sons of men, so grace 
was poured into His lips: therefore God 
blessed Him for ever. But each of us has 
imperative need to “bridle his tongue”; for 
we have an old man which was wholly absent 
from Him. If we do not, the evil of fallen 
nature finds a ready exit there; which, if we 
fail to judge, deceives the heart. And _ this 
man’s religion is as vain as his is faithful 
who abides close to the perfect law of 
liberty. 

The verse before us concludes this part of 
the Epistle. As the preceding one denied the 
weight or value of practical outward service, 
where an unbridled tongue betrayed a heart 
outside God’s presence, here we have a sample 
set forth positively. It is in danger of being 
overlooked; yet this cannot be because the 
sight is infrequent in this world of sin and 
sorrow, of want and bereavement, where gracious 
sympathy does much to bind up and_ together 


Cuap. I. 27 51 


wounded hearts. “Who is’ my _ neighbour?” 
said a lawyer who had no care to see one. 
“A religious service pure and undefiled 
before him that is * God and Father is this, to 
visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to 
keep himself unspotted from the world ” (ver. 27). 
Wiclif has it thus :—“ This is a _ clene 
religioun and unwemmyd anentis God and the 
fadir, for to visite pupilles, that is, fadirles or 
modtrles, ory bothe, and widewes in her tribu- 
lacioun, and for to kepe him silf undefoulid fro 
this world.” The Wiclifite gives, “A clene 
religioun and an vnwemmed anentis God and 
the fadir, is this, to visite fadirles and modirles 
children, and widewis in her tribulacioun, and to 
kepe hym silf vndefoulid fro this world.” “ Pure 
devocion and vndefiled (says Tyndale) before 
God the father, is this: to vysit the frendlesse 
and widdowes in their adversite, and to kepe 
him silfe vnspotted of the worlde.” Cranmer 
and the Genevese V. follow Tyndale save the 
latter in the word “religion” for ‘ devocion,” 
and for “frendlesse” both giving “ fatherlesse.” 
That of Rheims has, “ Religion cleane and vn- 
spotted vvith God and the Father, is this, to 


visite pupilles and vvidovves in their tribulation ; 


* There is ancient and excellent authority Xe-™- KL and more than 
50 cursives, &c., for omitting the article, which would give a 
characteristic force, ‘‘before a God and Father.” In either case 
*four” goes too far. 


52 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


and to keepe him self vnspotted from this 
vvorld.” 

There is often an exaggeration lent to these 
wholesome words, as if such duties as are here 
enjoined, or even the first part without the 
second, constituted the substance of “ religion.” 
The absence of the article here too is not 
without meaning, especially as it was prefixed 
to the same word only in the verse before. 
“The religion,” or the religious service, of the 
man there described is vain. Here its absence 
indicates that it is but a part of it, however 
weighty and becoming. For we have to do 
with God, not only as the patriarchs knew 
Him (an Almighty protector in their weakness), 
nor yet again as the Lord Jehovah of Israel 
(the moral governor of a people called to do 
His commandments), but as the Lord Jesus 
revealed Him, and as He alone perfectly 
enjoyed the relationship of Father. It is here 
that we find the richest display of love in the 
nearest way possible for the creature to know 
God. And this is quite in keeping with what 
the Epistle had already explained, the com- 
munication of a life to the believer capable of 
entering into His thoughts and affections, and 
of obeying His will as _ being begotten 
thereby. 


Cuap. |. 27 53 


It is a service then pure and _ undefiled 
before Him Who is God and Father, to look 
after the fatherless and widows. Compassionate 
love is thus drawn out. It is indeed in its 
measure the reflexion of God’s own character. 

So the Lord called him, who would give 
a dinner or supper, to ask not relatives nor 
the rich but the poor and wretched, assured 
of blessing all the more because they could 
not recompense him; but this too will come 
in the resurrection of the righteous, Our 
Epistle pursues its given line of blessing now 
in the doing or practice. 

But the latter clause benevolence cannot 
imitate; and one finds it generally dropt. Yet 
is it an exhortation eminently christian, and 
essential to spiritual well-being, “to keep 
himself unspotted from the world.” Never do 
we hear any word quite as full in the O.T., 
though at all times God has in His own 
sought love, and piety, and holiness; and His 
children have walked in them all, because they 
walked in faith. It is the Lord Jesus Who 
has fully brought out what the world is. Its 
thankless departure from God, its ready for- 
getfulness of Him and His manifold and 
persevering goodness, its setting up of grand 
material objects, like the sun, moon, and stars, 


54 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


its adoption of departed heroes to adore, its 
degradation in worship by the invention of 
imaginary beings as bad as themselves, its 
bowing down to the most ordinary creatures of 
earth, air, or the waters, even to reptiles, did 
not constitute its worst guilt. Plato yearned 
after some superhuman being to come and en- 
lighten and raise up the fallen race. But when 
the Father sent the Son, and (wondrous con- 
descension !) in the reality of man while most 
truly God, hatred of good came out as it never 
did nor could before; and they rejected Him 
alike in His words and His works. It mattered 
not that these all were light and love, as He 
was. But they brought God in Christ’s person 
the Holy and the True; and man would have 
none of Him: neither religious man, nor 
philosophical, nor political; Jew, Greek, Roman, 
despised and abhorred Him. As it was 
written beforehand, they hated Him without 
a cause, even those that had His law; they 
hated both the Son and the Father. 

This is the world; and the great standing 
proof is the cross of Christ. Hence our Lord, 
looking on to it, declared His own not to be 
of the world, as He is not; not merely that 
they ought not to be, but that they are not. 
And the Epistles follow this up, when the 


Cuap. I, 27 55 


Holy Spirit was given, with the utmost care 
for corresponding ways. Nor is there anything 
in which Christendom is more false and guilty 
than in seeking and courting it, and congra- 
tulating itself on possessing its countenance 
and its good things if it has them, or in 
coveting them when it has not. Popery is 
flagrant but not alone in this. 

Yet there is the plain and holy call of 
God to every child of His, “to keep himself 
unspotted from the world.” This cuts very 
closely indeed ; and we do well to suffer the 
word of exhortation if any can help us to 
steer clear; for its spirit may enter in subtle 
ways. But let us look to Him, Who loves 
us and discerns perfectly, to work in us by 
His all-searching word, that we may _ be 
strengthened to judge it unsparingly, and thus 
to keep ourselves unspotted from the world. 


CHAPTER II 


Our chapter opens with the distinct con- 
fession of Christ; so that we are in advance of 
the pious but general ground taken before, 
which, though quite compatible, to say the 
least, with faith in Him, does not expressly 
put His name forward, beyond the mention of 
it that was made in chap. i. 1. We shall see 
that there is good reason for this new step 
when it is duly weighed. 

“My brethren, do not with respectings of 
persons have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
[Lord] of glory” (ver. 1). 

The tendency was strong to sever faith 
from practice, and this quite as much among 
Jewish professors, this chapter shows, as among 
Greeks. It is the levity and selfishness of 
human nature. But the preceding chapter 
took a distinct and positive step in asserting 
the blessedness of enduring trial; and yet more, 
that of His own will God the Father begot 
the believers by the word of truth. This is 
incomparably more than holding sound views. 
It is not orthodoxy alone but a communicated 
“divine nature” as 2 Peter i, 4 expressly calls 

( 56 ) 


Cuap. If. 1 57 


it, and as 1 John throughout teaches with 
fulness and precision. 

Here the warning is against the incon- 
sistency of spirit and ways. The case first 
specified is “in respectings of persons.” For 
it might occur in many forms and in various 
degrees. But allowance in any shape is not 
to be indulged, as being an affront to “the 
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,” emphasised as 
it is here too, by speaking of “the glory” that 
belongs to Himself. 

No soul that believes in Christ can be 
ignorant of the death-blow He in His entire 
practice gives to such feelings or conduct. 
Mary of whom He deigned to be born was a 
Jewish maiden in the humblest position; so 
was Joseph the carpenter, His legal father 
through whose descent He derived His title to 
the throne of David and Solomon; and this 
was essential as a perfect claim to Messiahship. 
For Mary, daughter of Heli, was descended 
from David’s son Nathan who gave no such 
right. Again, when born, He was laid “in a 
manger, because there was no room for them 
in the inn.” So He grew, advancing in wisdom 
and stature and in favour with God and man. 
One lovely episode excepted, He abides in 
entire obscurity, going down and dwelling with 


58 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Mary and Joseph, in subjection to them and 
in despised Nazareth; yet was He King of 
kings and Lord of lords. 

When His public service called Him to 
speak out, what so uncompromising! ‘“ Blessed 
ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed ye that hunger now, for ye shall be 
filled. Blessed ye that weep now, for ye shall 
laugh. Blessed are ye when men shall hate 
you, and when they shall separate you, and 
shall reproach and cast out your name as 
wicked for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice 
in that day and leap [for joy]; for, behold, 
your reward is great in the heavens, for in 
the same manner did their fathers to the 
prophets. But woe to you the rich! for ye 
have received your consolation; woe to you 
that are filled now! for ye shall hunger. Woe, 
ye that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and 
weep. Woe, when all men speak well of you! 
for in the same manner did their fathers to 
the false prophets” (Luke vi. 20-26). 

To a similar effect might one transcribe 
our Lord’s habitual teaching; and His ways 
were in unwavering accord with it. He and 
He alone, when asked, “Who art thou?” could 
truly answer, “ Absolutely (in the principle of 
My being) that which I also speak to you” 


Cuap. II. 1 59 


(John viii. 25). His speech and His conduct— 
Himself—exactly tallied. He was in every 
way the truth: not a word to recall, nor a 
way to question. All was genuine—this always 
in Him Who was the Holy, the True, the 
Faithful and True Witness, the Beginning of 
the creation of God. 

And what shall one say of that mighty 
work of His which in depth exceeded all that 
was possible even throughout His days here 
below? Happily we have the Holy Spirit to 
pronounce unerringly. He, “subsisting in the 
form of God, counted it not a thing to be grasped 
to be on equality with God, but emptied Himself, 
taking a bondman’s form, becoming in likeness of 
men; and being found in fashion as a man, 
He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto 
death, yea, death of the cross” (Phil. ii. 6-8). 
“For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ that, though He was rich, yet for your 
sakes He became poor, that ye through His 
poverty might be rich” (2 Cor. viii. 9). 

Such is “the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
[Lord] of glory.” Can any considerations, can 
any words, rise up to the simple overwhelming 
strength of what God thus tells us of Him? 
Has He not said (Luke ix. 23, 26), “If any 
man would come after me, let him deny 


60 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow 
me?” and “whosoever shall be ashamed of me 
and of my words, of him shall the Son of 
man be ashamed when he cometh in his own 
glory, and of the Father, and of the holy 
angels?” Again, has He not laid down, 
“When thou makest a dinner or a supper, 
call not thy friends. nor thy brethren, nor thy 
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest haply 
they also bid thee again, and a recompense be 
made thee? But when thou makest a feast, 
bid the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind ; 
and thou shalt be blessed, because they have 
it not to recompense thee; for thou shalt be 
recompensed in the resurrection of the just” 
(Luke xiv. 12-14). What more withering of 
the world’s glory than “ what is exalted among 
men is an abomination in the sight of God” 
(Luke xvi. 15)? Do we truly believe it? And 
where was respect of persons then in His 
sight? It never had a moment’s place; nor 
should it have with us, who believe in Him. 
His glory may well and for ever eclipse every 
rival—that of the world especially which 
crucified Him. 

Respect of persons is the instinct of self, 
and the reflex of the world; but it denies 
Christ in practice, and the reality of that intimate 


CuHap, II. 2-4 61 


relationship which grace has formed between 
all that are His. The inspired writer singles 
out a particular case which he had _ probably 
witnessed, though put here hypothetically. 

“For if there come into your meeting (lit. 
synagogue) a man gold-ringed in splendid 
clothing, and there come in alsoa poor one in 
vile clothing; and ye look upon him that 
weareth the splendid clothing, and say, Sit thou 
here well (or, in a good place); and ye say to 
the poor one, Stand thou there, or sit under my 
footstool, did you not make a difference among 
yourselves and become judges of evil thoughts ” 
(vers. 2-4)? 

One can easily understand “synagogue” 
used by the writer to those addressed, not 
literally, but as applied by a ready transition to 
a Christian company. It is therefore here 
rendered “meeting” as perhaps the nearest 
analogue. No one could be surprised at so 
worldly a spirit in a literal synagogue; it was 
a grief if it passed to a Christian congregation. 
What was less congruous with Christ than a 
gold-ringed man in splendid clothing? Never 
was He bedizened save in the bitter mockery of 
those about to crucify Him. Yet could He have 
called in a moment all the wealth and grandeur 
of the world around Him, had it been seasonable 


62 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


either for Himself or for those that represent 
Him here below. On high He is crowned with 
glory and honour, as they will be at His coming. 
But faith recognises the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ that, though He was rich, for our sakes 
He became poor, that we through His poverty 
might be rich. Now, however, is the time to 
follow Him on earth, indifferent to all that flesh 
counts desirable, and counting all things loss for 
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus 
our Lord. 

Suffering for righteousness’ sake, yet more for 
Christ’s sake, ought to be precious in our eyes 
as Christians; and we might appropriately 
honour such as have won a good degree in any 
spiritual way. But to slight one for the garb 
that bespeaks his penury, and to honour another 
because of his gorgeous raiment attesting his 
wealth, is a two-fold contradiction of Christ. 
Even the law taught far higher principles than 
those that the Jews had fallen into, and that 
govern the Gentiles who know not God. For 
in the days of law it was touching to read the 
solicitude of God for the poor and afflicted, and 
the earnestness with which He urges on His 
people to consider them. But how much more 
deeply His compassion was shown in Him Who 
was His image! And forgetfulness of His 


Cuap. II. 2-4 63 


example was serious in the eyes of James for 
those who owe all to His grace, Himself the 
Lord of glory. 

Not that the scripture warrants the spirit of 
disrespect to the noble or the exalted. Render, 
says the apostle Paul, to all their dues: tribute 
to whom tribute [is due]; custom to whom 
custom ; fear to whom fear; honour to whom 
honour ; even as every soul is called to be sub- 
ject to the higher authorities, being set up by 
God in His providence, a terror not to a good 
work but to an evil one. Thus is the Christian 
relation to the powers that be in the outside 
world. But love is due to one another among 
all who bear the Lord’s name, and tender com- 
passion to such as are in danger of snare through 
their trials and poverty. Contempt to the poor 
Christian is as far from the mind that was in 
Christ as can be conceived. 

Hence we see, before this uncomely offence 
is touched, how this Epistle in the very first 
chapter exhorted brethren to count it all joy 
when they fell into varied temptations; which 
to unbelievers are nothing but sorrow and dis- 
appointment to be got rid of by all means 
possible. Hence the brother of low degree was 
to glory in his elevation, and the rich in his 
humiliation, because as the flower of grass he 


64 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


was to pass away. More than this he who en- 
dures temptation (he declares from God) is 
blessed; for it is not only that grace works 
moral profit now, but, having here been proved, 
he shall receive the crown of life promised of 
the Lord to those that love Him. If we endure, 
we shall also reign with Him, as assuredly as if 
we died with Him, we shall also live with Him. 
The cross of Christ is correlative to heavenly 
glory; and so here His glory precedes this 
rebuke to the worldly spirit that despised the 
poor and cringed to the rich, unworthy anywhere, 
most of all where those showed it who professed 
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, [the Lord] of 
glory. 

Dr. Whitby and others labour to explain this 
of judicial assemblies which the Jews held in 
their synagogues ; and they infer the probability 
that this was transferred by the converted 
Israelites to their meetings. This of course 
reduces the rebuke to partiality in case of trials 
between a poor man and a rich, instead of seeing 
that we have here a great principle universally 
applicable, and all the more necessary when 
ease and wealth and luxury began to flow in 
among professing Christians. So too Doddridge 
follows Beza in his lowering of ver. 4 (‘judices 
male ratiocinantes”), as he also makes the 


Cuap. Il. 5-7 65 
opening words to mean, “and distinguish not in 
yourselves” according to the different characters 
of these two men, but only regard their outward 
appearance, “you even become judges who reason 
ill” What is really intended is an evil moral 
state, out of all sympathy with our Lord, in 
making a difference among themselves, and be- 
coming judges of evil thoughts, 1.¢., characterised 
by having evil thoughts, instead of weighing and 
feeling as in the light of God and His love by 
faith. It was a worldly mind, 

Nor is it only that fawning on rich persons, 
even when believers are gathered together, is 
inconsistent with faith in Him Who in His 
grace became poor though Lord of glory. It 
is opposed to the law, and still more to the 
gospel and Christianity. It denies in effect 
relationship with Him as a secondary thing to 
the circumstances of the day and the lowest 
distinction in the world; and it is as far as 
possible from God’s mind, as His word shows 
and Christ impressively interpreted and livingly 
endorsed it. “The poor have the gospel 
preached to them.” What were they that 
received it in His eyes? To the pungent 
contrast already given we have an earnest 
appeal added. 


“Hear, my beloved brethren; did not God 
F 


66 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


choose the poor as to the world, rich in faith, 
and heirs of the kingdom which He promised 
to those that love Him? But ye dishonoured 
the poor [man]. Do not the rich oppress you, 
and they drag you before tribunals? Do not 
they blaspheme the worthy name that was 
called on you” (vers. 5-7)? 

Attention is drawn first to the plain and 
characteristic fact everywhere manifest in the 
church that not only is the gospel preached to 
the poor, but that the poor are those who asa 
class are chosen by God. So the apostle 
strongly set before the ease-loving intellectual 
Corinthians who liked to be on good terms 
with the world to the Lord’s dishonour and 
their own loss and danger. How little they 
had read aright the word of the cross which 
is to those that perish foolishness, but to the 
saved God’s power! For it is written, I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise and set aside 
the intelligence of the intelligent. Here it is 
the still more debased assumption of the rich. 
But in any case the foolishness of God, as they 
count Christ crucified, is wiser than men, and 
the weakness of God in the same cross is 
stronger than men. “For behold your calling, 
brethren, that [there are] not many wise 
according to flesh, not many mighty, not many 


Cuap. Il, 5-7 67 


high-born. But God chose the foolish things 
of the world, that he might put to shame 
the wise; and God chose the weak things 
of the world, that he might put to shame 
the strong things; and the ignoble things of 
the world and the despised God chose, and 
things that are not, that he might bring to 
nought the things that are; so that no flesh 
should boast before God” (1 Cor. i. 26-29). 

The humble estate of the poor is by grace 
made their decided advantage when they are 
called. For there is no bondage more 
imperious than that which “society” imposes 
on its votaries, nothing more at issue with the 
Lord of all Who judged it root and branch by 
being outside it all and ignoring its pretensions, 
and pursuing His path of holy goodness to 
all in unswerving obedience. This the poor 
believer sees, rich in faith, and escapes the will 
of his class to rise in the world by religious 
means as by every other way. His insight 
may not be profound or extensive, but he 
accepts with joy the gospel which elevates him 
spiritually, and he seeks no other now, looking 
onward confidently for the kingdom not of 
this world, which He, Whose it is, promised to 
those that love Him. 

The poor “of this world” of Tyndale, 


68 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Cranmer, Geneva, and the Auth. V. supposes 
a text which extant MSS. do not warrant, 
unless it be the exaggerated rendering of the 
article, without the demonstrative pronoun. 
This “of the world” has considerable support 
of both uncials and cursives, as well as 
ancient versions, &c, and is the text of 
Griesbach, Matthaei (both edd.) and Scholz. 
They were probably misled by the Vulgate, 
followed by Wiclif who preceded them, and 
by the Rhemish that came after them, “in this 
world,” which has one cursive (29) to this 
effect with the venerable Bede. “In the 
world” has the support of three junior MSS. 
(27, 43, 64). The true reading adopted by 
the latest critics is that of the most ancient 
and best uncials, though neglected by the 
ancient versions save the later or Philoxenian 
Syriac. It is r@ «dep», and appears to be 
the dative of reference, 7.e. poor in respect of, 
or as to, the world—a not uncommon usage. 
It may be remarked that “rich in faith” 
is the simple contrast by grace with their 
lowly circumstances here below, and qualifies 
them as a class without any question of 
different measure of comparison individually. 
Faith made them all rich if they had nothing 
otherwise ; and faith as well as love would 


Cuap. II. 5-7 69 


honour them accordingly now, as God 
surely will and before the universe in due time. 
Christ gave their confidence in Him, and love 
to Him. His promise encourages and strengthens 
them along the road. 

In open opposition is the haughty 
contempt which wealth naturally engenders. 
How strange and deplorable that the rich as 
a class should be of any account in Christian 
eyes? What is “the poor” man (whether in 
the case described in vers. 2-4 or in any 
other) but dishonoured by their unbelieving 
self-complacency? More unjust and selfish still 
is their attitude and habit. “Do not the rich 
oppress you? and [is it not] they [that] drag 
you into courts of justice? Do not they 
blaspheme the excellent name that was called 
on your” As a class, and so it is our 
Epistle speaks, they were hostile to the name 
of the Lord, which was everything to the 
poor that believed and confessed Him; as 
they were heartless toward themselves whose 
poverty exposed them to all manner of evil 
surmise and detraction, and so to persecution. 

In riches the enemy has a ready means of 
keeping up the spirit of the world against 
Christ and His poor. But what is here 
aimed at is the guilty tendency on the part 


7O THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


of any Christian, and especially the poor, to 
honour “the unrighteous mammon,” and those 
who have nothing else to boast. Friendship 
with the world is enmity with God. 
Scripture is dead against coveting their goods, 
or yet more wronging themselves, Neither 
this Epistle nor any other countenances 
levelling. Faith gives the only exultation of 
value in the spiritual realm; and this the 
church surely is, or it is worse than nothing, 
even salt that has lost its savour, and 
proper neither for land nor for dung. He 
that hath ears to hear let him hear. 

It is characteristic of this Epistle to employ 
the expression “royal law”; nor is it the only 
peculiar phrase that fell to it with striking 
propriety. We have already “the perfect law 
of liberty” in chap. i. 25, and we have “law 
of liberty” again in chap. ii. 12. 

“If however ye fulfil law royal according 
to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself, ye do well; but if ye have respect 
to persons, ye work sin, being convicted by the 
law as transgressors” (vers. 8, 9). 

This is admirable. The feeble saints of the 
circumcision, most of them poor, had so forgotten 
early fervour of faith, as to cringe before the 
wealthy, and this even in their assemblies if a 


Cuap, II. 8,9 71 


rich man entered therein, Yet were they not 
rich in faith, the poorest of them? Were they 
not heirs of the kingdom which He who chose 
them promised to those that love Him? What 
inconsistency to give themselves the air of 
valuing a little money, of closing the eye of 
faith to their own hopes of glory, though the 
least recollection of the Lord of glory dispelled 
those natural thoughts and brought back the 
promise which detects the false glitter of the 
world as it is. 

The third book of Moses had from early 
days asserted that great moral principle as far 
as Israel were concerned ; but where was the 
heart to prize it? where the nature capable 
of carrying it out unswervingly? Certainly it 
is not in the mind of the flesh, which is 
enmity against God and is no better really for 
man. “Love is of God; and every one that 
loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He 
that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is 
love.” Nothing more true or trenchant. The 
_ fulness and the manifestation of it is in Christ 
sent into the world that we might live through 
Him. This we cannot do till we receive Him 
from God, believing on His name, Then we 
live, and live to God; for he that believeth 
on Him hath life eternal. There is no other 


72 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


way. “He that believeth on the Son of God 
hath the witness in himself; he that believeth 
not God hath made him a liar, because he 
believeth not the witness that God gave of his 
Son. And this is the witness that God gave 
us life eternal, and this life is in his Son. He 
that hath the Son hath life; he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not life.” 

The believer then alone has this life, and 
loves according to Christ, Who, when challenged 
gave the first place to loving God, but also 
pressed in the next place loving one’s neighbour. 
Here in this world of need and misery even 
the law-teacher had not obeyed it, and asked, 
Who is my neighbour? To the Lord it was 
all plain enough. He came in love to seek 
and save the lost at all cost to Himself. Now 
that He is on high, His love is active in His 
own, and in them only. For as the apostle 
shows in Rom. viii. those that are in Christ 
walk according to the Spirit, not according to 
the flesh which is lawless and selfish, the very 
opposite of love or of any other good. The 
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus it is 
that freed the believer from the law of sin and 
death. Sin is no longer a law, the power of 
death was broken by Christ risen from among 
the dead; and He is our life. Such is one 


Cuap. II. 8, 9 73 


reason (ver. 2) why there is no condemnation 
for those in Christ. God cannot condemn that 
life which is now ours in Him. But then what 
of our evil nature, the flesh? The second (ver. 3) 
meets this. For what the law could not do 
in that it was weak through the flesh, God 
sending His own Son in likeness of flesh of 
sin, and for sin (@e. as a_ sin-offering) con- 
demned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness 
of the law, its righteous import, might be ful- 
filled in us who walk not after flesh but after 
Spirit. For it is only the believer who has 
the new life and the efficacy of Christ’s death 
in annulling his evil nature that walks according 
to the Spirit, loving God supremely and loving 
man so as to suffer or even die for his good. 

It is not that James brings out what was 
left for the apostle of uncircumcision. But he 
does characterise this grand moral claim of God 
as regards the neighbour as a “royal law.” 
Before it respect to persons is sentenced to 
death. The command to love one’s neighbour 
towers above any transient or artificial dis- 
tinctions among men. Who or what are the 
rich to wish it set aside in their favour? And 
what mean any rich in faith among the poor 
by ignoring it? It is a royal law, says our 
Epistle. Those who fix the eyes of their 


74 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


heart on our Lord Jesus, will not fail to fulfil 
it. It were a sad descent to look away from 
Him in glory, as He is, to the gold-ringed man 
of wealth. Even Jacob before the Lord Jesus 
came did better when brought into the presence 
of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He was not dazzled, 
any more than he petitioned for his family. 
But “Jacob blessed Pharaoh.” “And without 
all contradiction,” says Heb. vii. 7, “the less is 
blessed of the better.” May the poorest of the 
saints be strengthened to cherish undimmed 
the consciousness of his blessedness and the 
hope of the glory where the Lord is, and 
whither he himself is bound! 

Respect of persons is a violation of love 
and a transgression of the law that insists on 
love, as is added in the verse that follows. 
If a believer be poor, there is no ground in 
this why he should pander to worldliness, 
despise his poor brethren, puff up the wealthy, 
and dishonour the Lord of glory Who has 
shown us the clear contrary. “For ye know 
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, 
though he was rich, yet for your sakes he 
became poor, that ye through his poverty 
might be rich” (2 Cor. viii 9). “Let this 
mind be in you, which was also in Christ 
Jesus.” Weigh Phil. ii. 5-9. As our Epistle 


Cuap. II. 10-12 75 


declares, to have respect of persons is to work 
sin and to be convicted by the law as trans- 
gressors; as the Epistle says, Love worketh no 
ill to the neighbour; therefore love is the ful- 
filment of the law. 

There is hardly a fact more characteristic of 
the natural man than condemning another for 
the evil to which one is not addicted, while ex- 
tenuating one’s own sins by every excuse 
possible as a peccadillo. Truly man is not only 
fallen, but his nature is utterly unjust, and God 
is in none of his thoughts. One may plead the 
universal failure of mankind, and the inconsis- 
tency of the faithful. But Christ puts all such 
apologies to the rout, and shows us Man on 
earth in Whom was no sin and no guile in His 
mouth, now in glory, the Lord of glory. He, 
not Adam, nor Israel, is the standard here below 
as well as in heaven. Who can stand beside 
Him as He was, or be with Him as He 
is? 

Here, however, it is the law which is used 
to crush self-righteousness; and the law, being 
of God, cannot but be inflexible and resents all 
the evasionsof men. “For whoever shall keep 
the. law as a whole but shall offend in one 
[point] is become guilty of all. For he that 
said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also, 


70 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Thou shalt not kill. And if thou commit not 
adultery but killest, thou art become a trans- 
gressor of law. So speak, and so act, as about 
to be judged by a law of liberty” (vers. 10-12). 
Were there true obedience, one claim of God 
would be as binding as another, violence as hate- 
ful to us as corruption. To offend in one point 
violates God’s authority and brings us under the 
guilt of breaking all. The appeal reminds us of 
the apostle’s reasoning in Rom. ii. 17-29, where 
the Jew is convicted of folly in resting on law 
and boasting in God and teaching others as 
babes while failing to teach himself, and 
dishonouring God by the transgression of the 
law in which he _ professedly gloried. All 
attempt for sinful man (and a Jew made no 
difference) to acquire righteousness by the law, 
and stand on any such ground before God, is 
but fatal ignorance of self as well as of God. 
By deeds of law shall no flesh be justified in 
His sight. 

On the other hand the believer in the Lord 
Jesus is begotten by His word of truth. It is 
not only an operation on conscience and heart, 
but a new nature is imparted, which is of God, 
as indeed those who thus believe are declared 
to be born of God, and His children. As the 
life of the Spirit is by the word of truth, so it 


Cuap. II. 10-12 Vi: 


is formed, and nourished, developed and exer- 
cised in that word, which has for him who is 
thus begotten a character of holy freedom in 
entire contrast with the action of the law on the 
natural man. In this case it is an instrument of 
bondage, because the law is holy, and the com- 
mandment holy and just and good ; whereas the 
mind of the flesh, the natural man, is enmity 
against God; for it is not subject to the law of 
God, nor indeed can be ; only self-will is the law 
of its being. The law therefore, when truly 
applied, discovers to the sinner his essential 
alienation and can give no quarter but condemn 
and kill, It is no better in those born of God 
than in any other, as the latter half of Romans 
vii. elaborately shows. Flesh does not change 
into spirit. That which is born of the flesh is 
flesh. 

But as the word was used in God’s will to 
beget the believer by the impartation of a nature 
akin to Himself and His word, so it remains 
valid and intended for the need and admonition, 
refreshment, direction, and strengthening of the 
new life all through. This it is which is called 
a “law of liberty.” Its authority was recognized 
by the soul in hearing Christ’s word and passing 
from death unto life. Then ensued repentance 
toward God as truly as faith toward the Lord 


78 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Jesus Christ: self was judged as evil, grace and 
truth in Christ became most welcome. Then 
the word which communicated the knowledge of 
such a blessing is valued and confided in, to 
guide the soul through the mazes of a world 
departed from, and to lay bare the devices of 
the enemy to ensnare along the way. Light 
divine surrounds one’s going. It is accordingly 
a “law of liberty” which we love; as indeed we 
now know the God Who gave it us first and 
last as our best and truest Friend, proved and 
manifested in the Lord Jesus. 

It is of much interest to observe how the 
apostle Paul shows in Rom. viii. 3, 4 the way in 
which he contrasts with the law that worketh 
wrath, and slew him who sought thus to establish 
his standing, what he calls “the law of the 
Spirit of life in Christ,” which was characterised 
by emancipation, not bondage, and issued in a 
life of obedience pleasing to God. Each inspired 
writer has his points of difference ; both agree in 
testifying to a similar blessed result. 

Men easily satisfy themselves before a God 
who no longer manifests Himself visibly, Who 
does not act now as when the law ruled, or 
government was displayed in immediate rewards 
and punishments. And the error of men is 
apt to be so much the greater when they 


Cuap. II. 10-12 z 79 


regard the gospel as introducing a mitigation 
of legal severity. They fancy that a little sin 
here and there, now and then, will meet with 
mild dealing, so that there is no need of over- 
righteousness. The circumstances of those 
addressed in this Epistle would naturally expose 
souls to this snare, which is itself laid bare and 
torn to pieces in the verses already before us. 
No notion was more derogatory to His authority 
Who had spoken at Sinai, none more subversive 
of the law itself, which is necessarily inflexible. 
If broken in a single point, righteousness under 
it is gone, and the honour of the whole is 
compromised. If infraction in one respect were 
tolerated, licence would go on to expect more 
and more, till perhaps every point but one 
was surrendered, if indeed even one on such 
a principle could escape the encroaching will 
of man. But all such tolerance is unknown 
to the law, which demands nothing less than 
absolute, uncompromising, subjection. 

Is it argued then that the condition of man 
under it, no matter what his privileges and 
helps, is and must be hopeless? The answer 
is that so it is assuredly, because man is a 
sinner, Evil is there since the fall in his very 
nature, a law in his members, warring in 
opposition to what is holy and just and good. 


80 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


The apostle Paul goes to the root, and shows 
that death to the old man is the sole divine 
deliverance, amelioration of ourselves gradual 
or sudden being alike human and vain, the 
nostrums of theological empiricism, and not the 
remedy proclaimed to faith in God’s word. 
Again, ‘were it simply our death, it would be 
unavailable for us here below, and the blessed 
fruit would only be after death when we should 
be with Christ; and thus the victory that God 
intends now through our Lord Jesus would be 
shorn of a great part of its lustre and power. 
But it is not so. The death and resurrection 
of Christ gives far more now than most 
Christians believe, to their own loss. For it is 
not only that He died for us—for our sins, 
which are therefore blotted out and forgiven— 
He died also to sin, He Himself wholly 
without it. He knew no sin; yet God made 
Him sin for us; and we who believe are 
associated with Him in that death of complete 
deliverance from sin in principle, root and not 
fruits merely, as the apostle so elaborately 
discusses in Rom. v. 12 viii. Our very baptism 
signifies, not only that we washed our sins away, 
but that we died to sin and are justified from 
sin as well as sins. Hence we are called to 
reckon ourselves dead to sin and alive to God 
in Christ Jesus. 


CHAPS Ligtes13 81 


Our Epistle does not penetrate to such 
depths nor rise to such heights, as it was 
given to the great apostle of the uncircumcision, 
minister of the church no less than of the 
gospel, as he designates himself in Col. i. But 
it is no less inspired of God, no less necessary 
to man, in order to test mere profession where 
it most abounded and was most dangerous, to 
maintain the true character of that law which 
must be a ministry of death and condemnation 
to the guilty, and to insist on “a law of 
liberty” which exactly suits the new nature of 
those whom God in His purpose or will begot 
by the word of truth. The law was not 
accompanied by the rainbow, the beautiful sign 
of divine mercy in the covenant with creation 
(Gen. ix.), after Noah began the post-diluvian 
world with the burnt-offering, the sign of Christ’s 
sacrifice. Lightning and thunder, unearthly 
trumpet, and God’s voice more terrible than 
all to sinful man, inaugurated the law. It is 
Christ here below Who first shows us the law 
of liberty in all its fulness and perfection. 

This portion closes with the next two verses : 
“So speak and so act as about to be judged 
by a law of liberty; for the judgment [is] 
merciless to him that showed no mercy. Mercy 


glorieth over judgment” (vers. 12, 13). James 
G 


82 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


as ever was led of the Spirit to press in 
practice the manifestation of God’s will on 
those that have or say they have, the faith of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; and he resents, as we 
ought, the shame which a lax and spurious 
profession puts on the Lord “of glory.” Can 
any appeal be more wholesome now as then? 
They are indeed to be pitied as well as 
blamed who think it beneath scripture; and 
it is to be feared, that, even if at bottom true 
believers, they find the edge of the sword, as 
James wields it, too sharp for their ways. 
Otherwise it seems incomprehensible that they 
should not welcome his words as of great and 
permanent value for themselves as for others. 

Nor is it true that the Epistle is absorbed 
in the outward conduct. Speaking and doing 
are its exhortation as covering a very large 
part of our practical life; but it is carefully 
defined that both were to be of such a sort 
as was suited to those that are to be 
determined by a law of liberty: a principle of 
the inner man, and inscrutable to such as, 
having no faith, have no new life from God 
and no knowledge of His grace. As mercy is 
the spring of all we profess as God’s children, 
God is indignant at its absence in those that 
by grace claim kindred with Himself. They 


Cnap, II. 12, 13 83 


surely, of all mankind, are responsible to delight 
in mercy and to manifest it in word and deed, 
as having to do and to be judged by a law, 
not of bondage, but, of liberty. For God is 
not mocked but sanctified in those that come 
nigh Him, as all do who are begotten of Him; 
and He will be glorified in the solemn judgment 
of those that set Him at nought. As we here 
read, “for the judgment [is] merciless to him 
that showed no mercy.” Is not this as it 
should be? 

Say not in a depreciatory way, It is a 
sentiment suited to James the Just. Read on, 
and learn that God gives us much more through 
him: “Mercy glorieth over judgment.” Are 
not we who believe witnesses of it? Was not 
our Lord Jesus the proof of it, so exhaustively 
that there is no need, no room, for more? 
For all the vessels of mercy derive it through 
Him. Mercy is God’s habitual and congenial 
work ; judgment is His strange work, yet most 
righteous, against those who, having the utmost 
need, despise His mercy and most of all in 
the Lord of glory. Yet He has shown and 
proved it in its richest resources and its most 
affecting form, emptying Himself, yea, the true 
God humbling Himself, to save His ungodly 
enemies, But how blessed for those that 


84 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


believe! Beyond doubt “mercy glorieth over 
judgment” in Jesus Christ and Him crucified. 
But are not we who bear His name responsible 
to have it bright within us, that our practical 
conversation may be filled with it and governed 
by it? 

Thus the spirit of grace has been upheld, 
and a law of liberty which accompanies it, 
in contrast with a judicial spirit which avails 
itself of the law of bondage and ought to 
be as alien from an object of mercy as it 
displeases God. How solemn the warning of 
merciless judgment to him that showed no 
mercy! How sweet the assurance that mercy 
glories over judgment! Life, liberty, and 
grace go together for blessing. 

Thence the transition is simple and 
intelligible to the snare of setting up a bare 
creed. Israelites were above all exposed to 
this danger; so that the dealing with such 
a case is peculiarly appropriate to this 
Epistle. In judgment they had been used to 
a brotherhood after the flesh, as the seed of 
Abraham. When professors of Christ, they 
were liable to regard their new brotherhood 
as founded on no more than their common 
recognition of the Lord of glory. But it as 
plain in fact as it is in scripture that such 


Cuap. II. 14-17 85 


a recognition of Him might be no more 
than intellectual, having no root of divine 
life because it sprang from no work of 
conscience through the Holy Spirit’s applica- 
tion of the truth in revealing Christ. For 
we are not brought to know God = save 
through our wants and guilt, not as students 
of science, but as poor sinners in need of 
His mercy in Christ. A mental profession 
of faith was of no more value than the 
schools of differing thought, under different 
names as leaders to which Greek vanity was 
ever prone. It was even more fatal and in 
itself “natural,” as their contentious zeal was 
“carnal,” for so the apostle made the 
distinction. 

“What [is] the profit my brethren, if one 
say he have faith, but have not works? can 
faith save him? If a brother or a sister be 
naked and destitute of daily food, and one 
from among you say to them, Go in peace, 
be warmed and filled, but ye give them not 
the things needful for the body, what [is] the 
profit? So also faith, if it have not works, is 
dead in (or by) itself” (vers, 14-17). 

When the apostle Paul declared the gospel, 
he insisted on faith in Jesus Christ as justify- 
ing, apart from works of law; because it is 


86 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


God’s righteousness, not man’s, unto all, and 
upon all that believe, Jew and Greek being 
lost sinners. It is a question of being justified 
freely by God’s grace through the redemp- 
tion that is in Christ Jesus. Now, for our 
Epistle, it is the quite different question of a 
practical life in accord with Christian 
profession. Indeed Paul insists on this moral 
reality in Rom. ii. as strenuously as James 
does here. It is a worthless faith which does 
not produce fruit of righteousness that is by 
Jesus Christ unto God’s glory and praise. The 
scripture before us does not answer the 
question how a sinner is to be cleansed before 
God, but what conduct befits those that have 
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

To this end of necessary consistency are 
the questions. What is the profit for a man 
to profess faith and have no works as its 
witness? Can faith save him? This is 
illustrated by the heartlessness of dismissing a 
naked and hungry brother or sister with the 
words, Be warmed and filled, without any 
corresponding gift to help them. Does Christ 
own a faith that does not work through 
love? Here again we may observe how the 
apostle Paul’s words in Gal. v. 6 energetically 
express the practical aim of James. The 


Cuap. II, 14-17 87 


tongue may be active, the heart cold, the 
walk selfish as before; but are these the ways 
of a nature begotten to the Father of lights 
by truth’s word? Are such unreal talkers a 
kind of first-fruits of His own creatures? 
There is no need, however, to give the 
Greek article with Wakefield the force of 
“this,’? nor with Bede and the Revisers the 
emphasis of “that,” nor yet the more 
legitimate possessive sense of “his.” Faith is 
entitled, even apart from previous mention, to 
the article in Greek as an ideal object, the thing 
faith, or as we in English say “ faith,” as much 
as if it expressed the different sense of “the 
faith” required in many scriptures. The 
context can alone decide in which shade it is 
employed. Hence also we may observe that 
in ver. 17 scarce any person thinks of trans- 
lating the same words, } miorc, save as “ faith” ; 
and rightly so, for it is still used in the same 
general sense. This is not at all invalidated 
by the anarthrous form in ver. 14, where the 
insertion of the article would be improper. 
For in such cases the accusative is com- 
plementary to the transitive verb, and expresses 
the character of the action that resulted, 
unless it be intended to denote that which 
through some reason becomes a specific object 


88 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


before the mind; both of which cases may 
be seen again in ver. 18. 

The principle is stated concisely in ver. 
17: “faith, if it have no works, is dead in 
itself.” If it were divinely given (Eph. ii. 8: 
Phil. i 29), it would manifest its mighty and 
gracious effects. For Christ is its object, and 
His love above all thought of man, but 
influential beyond anything in us or around 
us to raise the soul accordingly. He is not 
only an example that powerfully acts on all 
He loves and loving Him, but a motive and 
a source, to form the affections and the 
walk of His own here below. It is easy for 
those who are no better than James describes 
in their human faith to decry its energy where 
the Holy Spirit has wrought livingly. In 
fact they know nothing of its divine reality. 
Their faith is dead in itself; and any works 
so wrought are no less intrinsically dead. 

We have now another saying in order to 
bring out the reality, as we had in vers. 14 and 
16. In the First Epistle of John we may see the 
contrast pursued more deeply. “But some one will 
say, Thou hast faith, and I have works, Show 
me thy faith apart from works, and out of (or, 
by) my works I will show thee my faith. 
Thou believest that God is one, thou doest 


Cuape. II. 18, 19 89 


well: the demons also believe and shudder 
(vers. 18, 19). 

The fact in the spiritual realm, which lies 
under the question here discussed, we have seen 
to be laid down with the utmost simplicity and 
clearness in chap.i.18. It is the possession of 
a new life, which is given to all who are begotten 
by the word of truth. No intellectual process 
can amount to such a boon, though a spiritual 
understanding never in operation before accom- 
panies it, as there are also new affections proper 
to it. We can readily apprehend how unpalat- 
able such teaching must be to those that were 
attached to the ancient system of ritual and law 
for a nation chosen as a whole, as well as to the 
still wider snare of crying up human _ powers, 
with no adequate sense of God or His kingdom 
on the one hand, or of man’s sin and ruin on the 
other. It was therefore urgently requisite that 
all should learn on divine authority that in 
christianity a mere action however powerful on 
a man’s faculties is altogether short of the truth. 
For there is communication of a life in Christ 
which he never possessed before, as well as the 
Holy Spirit thenceforward dwelling in him in 
power, the gift of God’s grace; so that he 
might know the things of God and the revealed 
objects, as the old nature was capable of knowing 


gO THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


the things of man and of the old creation 
subjected to him, 

This new nature, attaching to the family of 
God, and of course to every member of it, 
involves with sucha relationship the responsibility 
of a corresponding walk as well as inward com- 
munion with the source and giver of its blessed- 
ness. It was the allotted and appropriate work 
of James to charge home this all-important truth 
and its practical consequences on those he 
addresses, and indirectly but none the less really 
on all that have the faith of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Here he is resisting an abuse easily 
understood, and as dangerous as evil. He 
censures and repudiates a mere doctrinal scheme 
without life, and hence destitute of the works 
which attest a new nature from God. John, who 
was given to set forth the glory of Christ’s person 
beyond all others of the inspired, shows us life 
in Christ which the believer even now has, and 
the gift of the Spirit, the other Advocate. But 
here the same truth of the divine nature whereof 
we become partakers is no less truly revealed, the 
basis of all works acceptable to God, of all godly 
practice in word, deed, or feeling. 

“But some will say, Thou hast faith, and I 
have works :” a supposition that divorces what 
God joins inseparably, an evident fighting against 


Cuap. II. 18, 19 gI 


His word and nature, as also His will. For 
had he not affirmed in the Spirit, that God, the 
Father of lights, of His purpose begat us by the 
word of truth? To be doers of the word, not 
hearers only who are not so begotten, is our 
consistent and blessed place, a perfect law of 
liberty in which we by grace continue because 
our new nature loves Him and His word. Those 
who sever work from faith have no living asso- 
ciation with God and simply deceive them- 
selves. 

Hence the refutation in the next words :— 
“Show me thy faith apart from works, and out 
of my works I will show thee my faith.” It is 
an answer in both its parts conclusive. Faith is 
as it were the soul, and needs works as its body 
to be shown. To “show” faith separate from 
works is therefore an impossibility. He who 
believes by the Holy Spirit shows his faith by 
his works, as the rebuker rejoins. 

This very word “show,” as it falls in with 
the great aim of the Epistle is the key to the 
difficulty, which from of old till now so many 
uninstructed and unestablished souls have found 
in comparing the teaching of Paul and of James. 

Inasmuch as both were inspired, there can 
be no ground for it. The appearance is due 
solely to the ignorance of unbelief. The one is 


92 THE EPISTLE OPT JAMES 


occupied with the root, with what is “before 
God” (Rom. iv. 2); the other, with the fruit, 
and therefore ‘“‘show me” before men. Both 
agree that, where faith is divinely given and 
souls are begotten by the word of truth, good 
works are the fruit and the outward witness of 
faith, There is nothing in fact to reconcile, 
because there is no real variance. The one 
insists that a man is justified by faith apart 
from works of law ; the other, that he who claims 
to have faith is bound to show it by his works, 
In the one, the question is how a sinner can be 
justified by grace; in the other, what God looks 
for from him who professes faith. 

But the refutation goes farther. “Thou 
believest that God is one; thou believest well: 
the demons also believe and shudder.” It was 
well to own the unity of God, and wicked to 
hold a multiplicity of gods, which were no better 
than demons. Even these were not so insensible 
as those who boasted of their faith but had no 
works corresponding to show. For the demons 
shudder, as we see in the Synoptic Gospels. 
The mere professor of faith may not have as 
much feeling, though God’s word solemnly warns 
that such as he have no inheritance in the 
kingdom of the Christ and God. 

The allusion to the demons is a powerful 


CuapP., II. 20, 21 93 


illustration of the point in hand. None believe 
more decidedly than they; none anticipate 
their doom more surely or keenly. But such 
faith has no link with a new nature from God, 
nor does it issue in works that please Him. 
The demonsare subject to the evil will of their 
chief, the devil. Manalas! plays his part in a 
way most offensive to God, boasting of a faith 
with even less feeling than the demons, and 
without the works testifying to a life received 
from Him. There is nothing to ‘“ show,” as 
there ought to be and must be if the gospel 
were accepted as it is truly, not men’s but 
God’s word, which is also energetic in those 
that believe. 

“But art thou willing to learn, O vain man, 
that faith apart from works is dead (or, idle)? 
Was not Abraham our father justified by works, 
when (or, in that) he offered Isaac his son 
upon the altar?” (vers. 20, 21). 

As to the difference of reading in the first 
of these verses, the great majority of MSS. 
gives “dead”; but the witness for “idle” is, 
ancient and excellent. The shade is but slight, 
the substantial sense remains as before. Only 
there was here as elsewhere the danger of 
assimilation, for the chapter ends with the 
conclusion that faith apart from works is 


94 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


“dead.” If “idle” were the true text in ver. 
20, the language of ver. 26 would not be a 
repetition but a striking and effective climax. 
Hence Alford, Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelle 
with Westcott and Hort, prefer it. 

Then we are confronted with an appeal to 
Abraham’s case, always of the greatest weight 
with his descendants, and in the present instance 
an overwhelming disproof of the evil that is 
combated, “Was not Abraham our father 
justified by (or, out of) works when he offered 
Isaac his son upon the altar?” 

It is the more decisive, because the work of 
Abraham here adduced had nothing in common 
with the benevolent or philanthropic works 
which men mean by “ good,” and boast of as 
sure to weigh with God. To be willing to slay 
his son Isaac, on the contrary, this class of 
men would consider atrocious in Abraham, and 
only worthy of Moloch as they blasphemously 
add. They do not believe that God ever put 
Abraham to such a test, and become more 
and more bold in treating it as the Syrian 
legend of a barbarous age and of a heathen 
superstition. 

Our Epistle, and it is not alone in this (for 
the Epistle to the Hebrews, wholly distinct as 
it is in character, is emphatically in accord), 


Cuap. II. 20, 21 95 


cites it as a deed of the highest moral excel- 
lence, and proving Abraham to be justified 
by works. It was characteristically an act 
contrary to every instinct of a father. It was 
enhanced by the fact that Isaac was “thine 
only son, whom thou lovest,” as God said in 
putting Abraham to this extreme proof. There 
was, on the face of the demand, the apparent 
frustration of those blessed hopes of blessing, 
long promised by God, “In thee shall all families 
of the earth be blessed,” to say nothing of 
making of him a great nation, and making his 
name great. How could this be if Isaac must 
now die, and this so unaccountably by his 
father’s hand, as an offering to the God Who 
had wrought wondrously in giving him,and now 
strangely required his sacrifice? Doubtless God 
could give another son, and by Sarah if it so 
pleased Him; but this would not meet the case. 
For had not God said in calling his wife not 
Sarai but Sarah (Gen. xvii.) that the son of 
her, to make her mother of nations and of 
kings of peoples, would be this very Isaac, 
with whom He would establish His covenant 
for an everlasting covenant for his seed after 
him? There in fact it was Abraham’s faith 
rested. He laughed, we may say, at impossi- 
bilities, in contrast with Sarah’s laughter incred’ 


96 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


ulous at first. The real impossibility was for 
God to lie. He was sure therefore that if 
Isaac had now to die, God would raise him 
up from the dead in order to make the promise 
good. Abraham’s faith was now, not as before, 
that God would give him a son of Sarah, but 
that He could not fail to raise this son from 
the death now required, in order to fulfil all 
He had promised. Never such a trial of faith; 
never such a triumph by grace. 

Long before this event, if late in Abraham’s 
fruitful course, it is written that he believed in 
Jehovah, and He counted it to him for righteous- 
ness (Gen. xv. 16). This is the most express 
acknowledgment of him as justified by faith, 
And _ scripture uses it beyond controversy in 
this way and to this end, as in Rom, iv. But 
in Gen. xxii. as referred to in our Epistle, we 
behold the believing man “showing” his works 
and thereby justified. Nor can any thing be 
more certain than that Abraham’s work in 
offering Isaac his son on the altar derived all 
its value from his faith in God’s call; so much 
so that without this it would have been heinously 
evil. 

But the reasoning goes farther, and the 
weight of Abraham’s example is urged. yet 
more in a way as telling as simple. So did 


GHAR) Lh.23,24 97 


our Lord Himself when here below in divine 
wisdom and grace dealing with the Jews; so 
did the great apostle of the Gentiles repeatedly 
and in the power of the Spirit. 

“And the scripture was fulfilled which 
saith, Abraham believed God, and it was 
reckoned to him for righteousness, and he was 
called Friend of God. Ye see that a man is 
justified by works and not by faith only” 
(VETS: 123,524); 

It is a striking arrangement that the offering 
up of Isaac is introduced before the statement 
of Abraham’s believing God. This departure 
from the order of fact and of the inspired 
history was of course not only intentional, but 
essential to the question in hand. For it is 
asked in the first place if Abraham our father 
was not justified when he offered Isaac his son 
upon the altar. 

Greater trial than such a demand never 
was laid by God on a believing father. For 
many years had passed after the promise to 
make of him a great nation, to bless him, and 
to bless in him all the families of the earth 
(Gen. xii.). This was ere long enlarged by 
defining the land or visible scene of the 
blessing with a promise also of his seed made 


as the dust of the earth beyond number 
H 


98 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


(Gen. xiii). Later on, when there appeared to 
the childless man no possessor of his house 
but Eliezer of Damascus, Jehovah assured him 
that one to come forth from his own bowels 
should be his heir, and that as the stars (for 
He bade him look up) should his seed be. 
And he believed Jehovah, Who counted it to 
him for righteousness. Long years after this 
was the son born, at the set time of which 
God had spoken to him. And not a few 
years elapsed during which Isaac grew up, the 
object not only of the tenderest love but of 
hopes far deeper and higher than filled any 
other heart on earth, God then proved 
Abraham. It was not to resign him in death, 
as many a father has sorrowfully known. It 
was not to have another son as a_ substitute 
for Isaac. For, in the bitter trial of Ishmael 
sent away with his bondwoman mother, 
Abraham knew from God that in Isaac should 
his seed be called. In him only was the line 
of promise. Yet God, in no way softening 
the blow, “after these things” said, “Take 
now thy son, thine only one, Isaac, whom thou 
lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah ; 
and offer him there for a burnt offering upon 
one of the mountains which I will tell thee 
OF AGEN. exile), 


Cuap., II. 23, 24 99 


What! God, the true God, the God of 
grace, lay such a claim on His Friend—the 
demand on such a father of such a son, the 
surely and solely expected channel of blessing 
so immense and hopes so glorious! And not 
this only, but in a way so unexpected and so 
terrible, as a burnt. offering to Himself, and 
from his father’s hand as the slaughterer ! 
Yes, it was a trial beyond example, heightened 
by all that nature could feel, by the very 
faith that received the word of Jehovah so 
implicitly, and by the hope so fed by promise, 
and matured by experience of divine mercy 
beyond all he dared to ask when interceding, 
It was just to prove the faith unqualified 
which His grace had given to Abraham, and 
this not in word only but in deed and truth. 
Truly it was faith perfected by works. This 
could not be deduced from Gen. xv. It was 
manifest to the highest degree in Gen. xxii. 
And hence we see the ground which requires 
that this should take here the first place. 

But it is carefully added, “ And the scripture 
was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, 
and it was reckoned to him for righteousness,” 
as the earlier chapter has. For this was the 
joint result of a faith proved to be of God. 
The works had nothing in common with those 


100 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


activities of benevolence which fill the horizon 
of man and are the boast of such as make the 
creature all, but God nothing. Here it was 
one who looked death in the face and ina 
form incomparably harder to bear than if he 
had been called to die for his son,—to smite 
with the knife at God’s word his only and 
well-beloved son on whose life hung the 
promises of blessing for all mankind! It was 
not only to trust God for his own character 
who would seem the worst of murderers, but 
for raising from the dead him who must live 
again to make good the promised blessings for 
Israel and for man. 

Yet, however differently applied at the last, 
it was the same divinely-given faith on which 
God at the first had pronounced. “The 
scripture was fulfilled” No wonder he was 
called God’s Friend. So Jehovah treated him 
in Gen. xviii. when He disclosed His secret 
intentions. “Shall I hide from Abraham what 
I am doing?” So Jehovah treated him when 
drawing out his heart there in intercession. 
Hence in due time the pious king of Judah 
(2 Chron. xx. 7) and the prophet friend of 
another pious king (Isa, xli, 8) called Abraham 
Jehovah’s friend. 


But it was a work that man would never 


Cuap. II. 25 101 


have thought of, a work deriving all its virtue 
from absolute trust in the God Who demanded 
what He alone was entitled to ask, as He alone 
could have availed by resurrection power to 
conciliate it with His love, His truth, His 
character, and His purposes, turning it too, 
spite of appearances, to such experimental 
blessing as Abraham had never yet enjoyed, 
and to like blessing for the family of faith in 
their turn. We see from such a case how far 
Abraham was from a bare faith of the mind, 
when justified out of his works, and not out of 
the empty assent there denounced. How could 
it justify any one? Surely we may here apply 
the Lord’s word, Wisdom is justified of all her 
children. 

Another example is cited from the O.T. 
in support of faith not bare but working by 
love, so needful to impress on the Jewish mind. 
Rahab’s case is in its circumstances as different 
as can be conceived from that of the father of 
the faithful; for it is a woman a Gentile, of 
the accursed race, and of previously bad 
character; yet after believing she entered the 
line of great David, and hence became an 
ancestor of David’s greater Son. It was, 
therefore, no less pertinent and powerful. 

“And likewise was not also Rahab the 


102 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


harlot justified by (out of) works, in that she 
received the messengers and sent [them] out 
another way?” (ver. 25). 

Apart from faith the work of Rahab was 
no better than Abraham’s trial. If done 
without God as the object and spring and 
authority, both were not only of no value 
but abominable. Viewed humanly, one was 
willing to kill his own son and heir, the other to 
betray her king and country to their destroyers. 
As faith wholly changed the character of their 
respective acts, so those acts proved the divine 
principle and the living power of their faith. 
This has been pointed out in the former 
instance. Wherein did it consist in the latter? 

Rahab believed the two men to be the 
messengers of Jehovah’s people. “I know,” 
said she, “that Jehovah hath given you the 
land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, 
and that all the inhabitants of the land melt 
away before you.” How did she know this? 
Not a city was taken in Canaan, not an 
inch of its territory was annexed, not even 
a blow had yet been struck. Jordan ran its 
barrier against Israel on the other side, and it 
was at that time overflowing all its banks. 
How did Rahab know what neither king nor 
people of Jericho knew? It was by faith. 


Cuap, II. 25 103 


“For we have heard [and faith comes by 
hearing] how Jehovah dried up the water of 
the Red Sea before you when ye came out of 
Egypt; and what ye did to the two kings of 
the Amorites that were beyond Jordan, to 
Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed. 
We heard and our hearts melted, and there 
remained no more spirit in any man because 
of you; for Jehovah your God, he is God in 
the heavens above and on the earth beneath” 
(Joshua ii.). 

The rest of the inhabitants had heard no 
less than Rahab; but the word of the report 
did not profit them, not being mixed with 
faith in those that heard. It reached Rahab’s 
conscience, and she bowed to God in the face 
of every natural reason and _ feeling. She 
rightly judged the folly and the sin and the 
ruin of fighting against the God who had 
delivered His people from the power of Egypt, 
and crushed irretrievably their Amorite foes, 
His purpose to give Israel Canaan was 
notorious ; and therefore she hid the two spies 
as the representatives of the people to whom 
God gave the land by promise and oath: two 
immutable things in which it was impossible 
that God should lie. Her faith lay thereon. 
Could any anchor be more secure or firm? 


104 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Yet Rahab did not despair for herself or 
others; she counted on mercy in Jehovah's 
name, as true faith does. “And now, I pray 
you, swear to me by Jehovah, since I have 
dealt kindly with you, that ye will also deal 
kindly with my father’s house, and give me a 
sure sign, that ye will save alive my father 
and my mother and my brothers and my 
sisters, and all that they have, and deliver 
our souls from death.” The sign was given 
as solemnly as it was kept. As she received 
the messengers in faith, she sent them out 
by another way in the same faith. 

Thus Rahab’s faith, was self-evidently fruit- 
ful. She had swamped all patriotism in her fear 
of Jehovah. As she believed in the bond that 
attached Him to His people, she looked, and 
not in vain, that assuredly as He should 
destroy Jericho, He would rescue her and hers, 
In spite of her habits hitherto impure, not- 
withstanding her unscrupulous readiness to 
deceive and baffle where her heart was 
engaged, faith was energetically at work; and 
the heart-knowing God bore her witness. 
“And likewise was not also Rahab the harlot 
justified by works?” 

For her it was no barren acquiescence that 
Jehovah was the God of Israel. It was the 


Cuap. IT. 25 105 


living active faith that He would work on their 
behalf in Canaan as in Egypt, in the wilder- 
ness, and in the borders of the promised land. 
Hence she acted in a faith which issued in 
works exactly and highly suited to His 
purpose for His _ people. Unbelief might 
suggest failure for herself as well as for them, 
But her faith overcame all fears and _ rose 
above all difficulties. It was easy to conceive 
hitches, and to apprehend -the indignant and 
cruel destruction which must follow their 
discovery of her treason. But her faith was 
simple and strong in what Jenovah was to 
His people; and it expressed itself not in 
words only but in deeds which she well knew 
exposed her naturally to the most suffering 
and ignominious death. Her faith laid hold of 
the sound principle that the highest of all 
rights is that God should have His rights. 
Therefore she dreaded not the wrath of king 
or people, gave to the wind her fears, and 
endured, as seeing Him Who is invisible. Was 
not she too justified by works? 

The witnesses of faith and works here 
adduced are the most powerful that the O.T. 
affords; and from it this Epistle in God’s 
wisdom cites them as the weightiest and most 
conclusive for the purpose. Those of Israel 


106 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


who had the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ 
were as responsible as all others to manifest 
righteousness practically. It was the more 
relevant to press the godly walk which becomes 
faith, because, being brought out of a system 
of letter, they needed to be especially cautioned 
against relapse into what they had left behind. 
If they lived in the Spirit, they should the 
more seek to walk in the Spirit. For so is the 
will of God that with well-doing we may put 
to silence the ignorance of senseless men, as 
well as guard against our own tendencies. But 
there was more still in the cases before us; 
for even where works are most insisted on as 
evidence and proof of divine reality, these 
works owe all their value to the faith which 
gave them being. Without faith they would 
have been detestable, instead of being as they 
are the most solid testimony to their faith in 
God at all cost. 

“For as the body without a spirit is dead, 
so also faith without works is dead” (ver. 26). 

In ver. 17 it was said that faith, if it have 
not works, is “dead by itself”; in ver, 20 faith 
without works is “barren”; here at the end 
of the discussion faith without works is pro- 
nounced absolutely “dead,” and so it surely is. 
Where the manifestation of living reality is 


Cuap, II. 26 107 


sought, what can be more offensive than a dead 
body ? Emphatically it is so under the gospel, 
where the Lord Himself declares that He who 
believes has life eternal. To lack holy vitality 
is fatal. It is not to have the Son of God, 
Who is the sole spring of all that glorifies God. 
For what else is the believer left here below 
but to walk and serve and suffer and worship, 
while waiting for the Lord? For we are His 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good 
works which God before prepared that we should 
walk in them. 

Even in writing to the Thessalonian saints, 
recently brought to God from heathenism, the 
apostle remembers without ceasing their work 
of faith, and labour of love, and patience of 
hope. With them the gospel was not in word 
only but also in power. The very world out- 
side was telling the effect of the truth shown 
in their turning to God from idols to serve a 
living and true God, and to await His Son 
from the heavens, Whom He raised from the 
dead, Jesus our deliverer from the coming 
wrath. Israelitish confessors yet more required 
to be warned against a lifeless formalism. And 
here this is fully given. 


CHAPTER II 


We are here directed to a weighty matter 
in the believers practical life, already but 
briefly noticed in chap. i. 19, 26, now treated in 
full. It is opened with remarkable exhortation 
about “teachers,” as it unequivocally ought to 
be. The connexion with speaking confirms the 
required meaning, independent of philology 
though this of course admits of nothing else 
It would seem however that, in stages of our 
tongue now obselete, “ master” had not only the 
general sense of “superior” which is here quite 
out of place, but the special force of “ teacher.” 
So it was used in the English versions of the 
Gospels as the counterpart of the Hebrew 
“Rabbi.” And so it is rendered here by 
Wiclif and a Wiclifite (Oxford, iv. 599), Tyn- 
dale, Cranmer, Geneva, Rheims, as well as the 
A.V. It was as natural for Jews to claim 
external honour in that position, as it became 
Christian teachers to follow their Master in the 
lowly love which led Him to serve and to give 
His life a ransom for many. Nor did our Lord 
leave this to spiritual inference from such words 
as these; He enjoined it explicitly on the most 

( 108 ) 


Cuap, III. 1 109 


honoured of His disciples. “Ye know that the 
rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and the 
great ones exercise authority over them. Not so 
shall it be among you ; but whosoever would 
become great among you shall be your servant 
(or, minister), and whosoever would be first 
among you shall be your bondman” (Matt. 
sxe 25-27), 

“Be not many teachers, my brethren, 
knowing that we shall receive greater judgment ” 
(iii, 1). 

No Epistle in the N.T. is less ecclesiastical 
than this ; no one has less before it the gifts of 
the Lord for the perfecting of the saints. The 
task which the inspiring Spirit enabled the 
writer to perform was to warn against empty 
profession and to insist on holy practice in speech, 
walk, and affections, conformable with the new 
life begotten by the word of truth. This makes 
it all the more striking, that he, like the great 
apostle of the circumcision, should in this horta- 
tory preface use language which implies that 
liberty of ministry among the confessors of 
Christ, which fell to the greater apostle of the 
uncircumcision to develop with certainty, pre- 
cision, and fulness. The Acts of the Apostles 
historically presents the unspeakably momentous 
fact which accounts for and explains that liberty. 


IIO THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Again the Epistles make plain that it was also 
a question of responsibility to the Lord Who 
gave to His own bondmen His goods, to each 
according to his several ability ; as He will, 
when He comes, reckon with them on the use 
they made of His trust ; and woe shall be to the 
wicked and slothful servant who traded not with 
the talent given, because he was afraid and dis- 
trusted the grace of the Master. 

Here the openness of the church in apostolic 
times to receive instruction from all competent to 
impart it is beyond controversy. As gifted men 
were by that privilege bound to give it out, so 
were the saints bound to profit thereby. Thus 
we are taught in the capital seat of this funda- 
mental truth for the assembly, 1 Cor. xii.-xiv. 
There Paul lays down, in that great epistle of 
ecclesiastical order, the correction of their abuses 
about women’s place, the Lord’s Supper, and the 
assembly also. “If any one seemeth to be con- 
tentious, we have no such custom, neither the 
churches of God.” Human societies naturally 
fall into the inventions of men ; not so those that 
believe God has revealed His mind for the church 
as authoritatively as for every other thing on 
which He has spoken. 

If the Holy Spirit abide no longer with and 
in us, we are left orphans indeed. But it is not 


Cuap. III. 1 III 


so. The Father, who in answer to the Son’s 
request sent another Paraclete or Advocate, gave 
Him to abide with us forever. So abides the one 
body like the one Spirit. In chap. xii. we have 
this power shewn in His varied activity in the 
members, as His presence is their uniting energy. 
Not of course that all is given which once 
abounded as signs of Christ’s victory. Tongues 
and interpretations, powers and gifts of healings, 
did follow those that believed, as the Lord 
promised. But He never intimated that these 
were to continue “till the end of the age,” or in 
any equivalent phrase elsewhere. But the gifts 
needful to complete what the apostles and 
prophets began, as the foundation, are guaran- 
teed in Eph, iv.12. In 1 Cor. xiii, divine love is 
notably introduced, as requisite for the right 
exercise of this new relationship, and having its 
blessed scope there pre-eminently. And chap. 
xiv. closes the teaching by the authority of the 
Lord in His word, directing and controlling the 
action of gifts in the assembly; so that an 
unbeliever might report that God was indeed 
among those gathered, and the believers be 
responsible that all should be done to edification, 
comelily and in order. Nor is there any other 
order for the church as such sanctioned of God, 
Can the church change it or correct Him? 


112 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


But 1 Pet. iv. 10, 11 also furnishes a word of 
great price. “Each according as he received a 
gift, ministering the same one to another as good 
stewards of God’s manifold grace: if any one 
speaketh, as God’s oracles ; if any one ministereth, 
as of strength which God supplieth: that God 
in all things may be glorified through Jesus 
Christ, to whom is the glory and the might unto 
the ages of ages. Amen.” Here is the same 
liberty and the same responsibility as elsewhere, 
Each gifted one is bound to act as a good 
steward of God’s various free-gift. But the 
speaker is to speak as God’s mouthpiece, as 
God gives then and there; and service of another 
kind is to be full of strength which He supplies, 
that (not man but) God be glorified through 
Christ Jesus. Only the power of the Spirit could 
make either good. No creature ability could 
avail. It is alone through Christ to His 
glory. 

Our text adds another and characteristic 
lesson. Though the door be open, the solemn 
caution is heard: “ Be not many teachers, my 
brethren, knowing that we shall receive greater 
judgment.” Conscience is appealed to here, as 
faith by Peter. Let there be no haste, no levity, 
no self-confidence, no vanity in seizing the oppor- 
tunity; but there lay danger, the capability of 


OMAP. Libic2 113 


ready abuse. The guard however is no official 
restraint, as in Christendom generally, to shut 
out liberty, but the counsel in this case unmean- 
ing, against many teachers, knowing as we do 
that weshallincur greater judgment. Our Lord, 
denouncing every idle word and the account 
thereof to be rendered in the day of judgment, 
said “ By thy words thou shalt be justified, and 
by thy words thou shalt be condemned ;” so His 
servant here reminds us, that by thus speaking 
responsibility is increased. God is not mocked 
and remembers words lightly said, which might 
be urged on others, with little or no thought of 
our need. “Thou then that teachest another, 
teachest thou not thyself?” In every way judg- 
ment becomes heavier if teaching flow not from 
love and in the fear of God. But the inspired 
writer never thinks of closing the open door as a 
divine remedy. 

From the over-eagerness to teach, gift or 
no gift, we come in the next verse to a far 
wider range of caution, which is illustrated in 
the usual practical way, but with singular 
aptitude and force. 

“For in many things for, often] we all 
offend. If any one offendeth not in word, he 
{is} a perfect man able to bridle the whole body 


also” (ver. 2). 
I 


IIl4 THE. EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Thus the Spirit of God turns from the vain 
readiness to teach in public to the irrepressibility 
of speech in general. “For in many things 
we all offend.” The word translated “offend” 
passes from physical stumbling to moral failure, 
as in chapter ii. 10, the transition already being 
marked in Rom. xi. 11. Compare also 
2 Peter i, 10 with the double occurrence in 
our verse. 

Without doubt each saint is responsible in 
all humility as regards himself, to speak for 
the Lord where His glory and will, grace and 
truth, are plainly revealed. Alas, how much 
is said that has no higher source than self, 
however veiled it may be! But self when 
opposed is apt to break out into strife and 
party-work, with all their deadly accompani- 
ments and results. Nor are any souls more 
deceived than those who accredit themselves 
with the best motives, and fear not to assail 
with odious imputations those who reprove them. 
It is clear that James knew this deplorable 
evil but too well, as indeed the other inspired 
writers; nor did anyone perhaps suffer from 
bitter experience of the evil so much as the 
apostle Paul. It could not be otherwise, when 
we read of the state of the Galatians on the 
one hand and of the Corinthians on the other, 


Cuap, III, 2 115 


and of his own responsibility to pronounce on 
such early departure from both divine truth 
and the ways of the Lord. For they are 
ordinarily associated with a self-exalting and 
rebellious spirit. 

But these servants of the Lord did not 
refrain from the most trenchant denunciation 
of both errors and moral condition, any more 
than He Himself when here in perfect love, 
and because it was perfect. Who but He called 
Peter “Satan”? For he was an offence to 
Christ, because in the most amiable way he 
was minding the things of men, not those of 
God. How often too He had to mark and 
rebuke the rivalry of men, whom grace alone 
caused to differ from others, craving after their 
own honour, where He pointed the way to 
shame and suffering now (Himself alone entering 
its unfathomable depths), but to heavenly glory 
with Him shortly! Even after He rose, what 
could He say to the sorrow-stricken doubters, 
but “O senseless and slow of heart to believe 
in all the prophets spoke ?” 

Not less cuttingly does Paul remonstrate 
with the Corinthians as carnal and walking as 
men, to whom he gave milk, not meat as being 
not yet able to bear it. These were the men 
ready to sit in judgment on the apostle’s 


116 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


authority and practice! Were not the signs of 
an apostle wrought out among them in all 
patience? The humbling thing to his heart 
was that he should have one word to say 
about it to saints so deeply indebted to him. 
But he does not fail to speak with severity, 
whatever the anguish it might be to himself. 
How little they knew what it cost him, when 
they winced under the reproof! How far from 
feeling the love according to God that lay 
beneath the truth, which did not flatter them 
but laid bare their lofty thoughts and low 
ways ! 

Just so the apostle reproaches other children 
of his in the faith, “O senseless Galatians, 
who bewitched you? ...I am afraid of you, 
lest indeed I laboured in vain as toyou.... 
of whom I again travail in birth, until Christ 
be formed in you .... The persuasion is not 
of him that calleth you.” 

Let us not forget what spirit it was that 
resisted of old such faithful men as Moses and 
Aaron, or taxed them with taking too much 
on them, “seeing all the congregation are holy, 
everyone of them, and Jehovah among them.” 
It was their own self-sufficiency that left out 
His will and word in their eagerness to lift 
themselves up. And such gain-saying is not 


Cuap. III. 2 117 


obsolete. It is the spirit of the age increasingly, 
and displays itself religiously yet more than in 
the profane world. 

Yet even the most spiritual have to watch 
habitually and to judge self in this respect at 
least as much as in any other. “For in many 
things we all offend. If any one offendeth not 
in word, he is a perfect man, able to bridle 
the whole body also.” It is trying to hear 
men talk of matters which they are incom- 
petent to judge. And it is easy enough to 
overshoot the mark of a true and deserved 
horror of what no godly mind should tolerate ; 
and all the more because true discernment is 
fare; *~Christ"is “the pattern? “A ‘perfect’ man 
is he who offends not in word, able to bridle 
the whole body also. May our word as the 
rule be always with grace, seasoned with salt, 
May we also, if by God called to the duty, 
be brave to overthrow reasonings and every 
high thing that lifts itself up against the 
knowledge of God, and to lead every thought 
into the obedience of Christ. 

The figure of “bridling” in verse 2 suggests 
the illustration in verse 3, which again is 
strengthened once more in the verse that follows. 
In the received text we appear to have an 
error exceedingly frequent among the copyists, 


118 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


who are apt to confound «i and i where it 
does not affect the sense, and where here it 
does. Probably ido} in the beginning of verse 
4 led to the idea of commencing verse 3 with 
ide; but it ought rather to have induced 
hesitation, for why then vary the adverb? It 
would seem that <i dé was thus mistaken, and 
the more because the apodosis might easily be 
overlooked by being made part of the conditional 
protasis. 

“ Now if we put the horses’ bridles (or, bits) 
in their mouths, that they may obey us, we 
turn about their whole body also. Behold, the 
ships also, though they are so great and are 
driven by rough winds, are turned about bya 
very small rudder, where the impulse of the 
helmsman may purpose” (vers. 3, 4). 

The instances chosen energetically tell for 
the purpose in hand, being homely and familiar, 
It would be a palpable mistake to doubt the 
power of ‘a given object, because its size is 
diminutive. Such are the bits we insert into 
the horses’ mouths. Impetuous the animal may 
be ; but thereby as the rule it is reduced to 
obedience. Nor is it only the mouth or head 
that is governed, but “we turn about the whole 
body also.” Thus is complete contrast secured. 

It is true that we ought not to be as the 


Cuap. III. 3,4 119 


horse or as the mule which have no under- 
standing, whose trappings must be bit and 
bridle for restraint, or they will not come near 
unto thee (Psalm xxxii.). But this is restraint, 
and our shame where it is needed, as in the 
case supposed ; for it is our joy, when walking 
in the spirit of obedience, to know God’s 
guidance in the way we should go, counselled 
with His eye upon us. But if it be needed, 
He knows and fails not to restrain and to 
chastise. 

In another form is pointed out a like 
principle on the sea, as we have had on the 
land, and in an inanimate object of immensely 
greater proportions. Let the ship be of ever 
so vast bulk and driven sometimes by a wind 
however rough, yet is it turned about by a 
very small rudder, whither the steerman’s 
impulse may direct. The steering, if it could 
be questioned, is made evident in the sequel. 

We may notice by the way how little avails 
either a powerful mind or ponderous learning 
for the just interpretation of scripture, when 
such a commentator as Grotius could under- 
stand “the body” in these verses as said of the 
church. No inspired writer but the apostle 
Paul ever employs that figure. James means 
simply the outer man. He is still dealing with 


120 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


the extreme liability to fail with the tongue. 
If one does not fail in word, this is a perfect 
man; for he had owned that we all do fail. 
This he follows up by two illustrations, which 
show theinfluence of a small thing in controlling 
a great even in the most difficult circumstances, 
to impress the importance and the duty of 
governing our speech. Blessed indeed is it, 
when the tongue, under the guidance of God, 
testifies to the whole body under His control! 
He who more than any other urges works, in 
evidence of reality in those who profess faith 
in the Lord Jesus, warns us of licence in our 
words, so influential for evil if not for good; 
and all the more seriously as indicative of the 
inner man and involving the outer. 

Many there are in all ages disposed to take 
account of nothing but deeds. Freedom in 
speech seems a necessary prerogative of a man, 
and its excess of all things most venial. Far 
different was our Lord’s estimate of words 
(Matt. xii.), which yet more than deeds express 
the feelings and bent of the inner man. And 
similar is the language of His servant here, 
couched in terse, severe, highly figurative, but 
all the more unsparing, terms. “So also the 
tongue is a little member, and boasteth great 
things. See how large a wood how little a 


Cuap. Ill. 5,6 121 


fire kindleth! And the tongue is fire, the 
world of iniquity; the tongue cometh to be in 
our members that which defileth the whole 
body, and setteth in a blaze the course [lit. 
wheel] of nature, and is set in a blaze by 
gehenna” (vers, 5, 6). 

That the tongue should be physically 
diminutive only gives the more vividness to 
its capacity for mischief beyond reckoning or 
measure. Who can conceive the destructive 
effects of an evil word? Yet the tongue, little 
as it is, boasts habitually and also great things 
and is so much the more readily enticed to 
persevere and grow bolder, if sin is limited to 
deeds of the body. It may be _ observed 
that the word An (here, as generally, translated 
“wood” or “forest”) is often in philosophical 
writings used to express “matter,” and by 
historians or others, like “materia” in Latin 
authors, the stuff or material of anything, 
timber, &c. The A.V. had ground for its 
rendering, even if the preponderance lean to 
that view which is presented here. 

How energetic is the opening of ver. 6! 
“The tongue is fire.” It is not only that a 
mighty conflagration ensues from an appar- 
ently trivial spark; but the tongue itself is 
“fire” morally. However free from open acts 


122 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


of unrighteousness he may be who gives it 
loose rein without God before his eyes, it is, 
without going farther, “a world of iniquity.” 
He Whose ears are open to the cry of the 
righteous does not fail to mark unbridled 
licence of speech, which shrinks not from any 
imputation, however unjust, that ill-will can 
dictate. ! 

The best witnesses, both MSS. and Vv., 
omit the “so” which smooths the way for 
the second time “the tongue” is introduced. 
It is most forcible as it stands simply. “The 
tongue cometh to be in our members that 
which defileth the whole body,” and this is a 
sense which, prevailing in the best authors so 
that no detailed justification is necessary, seems 
to suit the clause, better than the bare “is” of 
the A.V. or “is constituted” as it frequently 
means. Here it is liable to give the erroneous 
notion of being divinely arranged to so evil an 
end; which is a thought impossible to a good 
conscience and wholly opposed to the truth. 
It is through the fall, and the self-will or law- 
lessness which characterises sin, that the tongue 
comes thus to be such a burning power of 
evil in the members. It is the defiler of the 
whole body, for there is no limit to its un- 
righteousness; “the world of iniquity,” 


Cuap. III. 7, 8 123 


deeming itself to have immunity as long as 
it only injures in word. 

But the latter clauses both enlarge the 
sphere of the evil, and deepen our sense of 
its source to the highest degree. For we are 
next told that “it setteth in a blaze the 
course of nature, and is set on a blaze by 
hell.”” The wheel or course of nature extends 
far beyond the whole body; and such is the 
inflammatory range for the malignant tongue. 
What then must be the spring? It is, as 
we lastly hear, “set on a blaze by hell.” 
The evil one is a murderer as well as a 
liar; and unceasing antagonism to Christ in 
both respects is its flagrant proof. 

Another consideration is now urged, and 
not a little humiliating to set souls on their 
guard in the allowance of the tongue, and to 
hinder surprise at the extravagance of its 
outbreaks. 

“For every nature of both wild beasts and 
birds, of both things that creep and things in 
the sea, is tamed and hath been tamed by 
the nature of man; but the tongue is none of 
men able to tame: an unsettled evil, full of 
deadly poison” (vers. 7, 8). 

Here the inspired writer alleges an 
indisputable fact. What savage brute has not 


124 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


yielded to the dominion of man? What has 
not been subdued and become his pet or play- 
mate? What bird of the air fierce or timorous 
has not bowed to his superiority and obeyed 
his will? Serpents even, however wily, power- 
ful, or venomous, have been often taught 
harmless familiarity ; while creatures of the sea 
have made friends and rendered homage or 
service to him. 

But where is the man that has truly tamed 
either his own tongue or another’s? Here one 
can appeal to universal observation, though not 
less forcibly and painfully to personal experience. 
It may and ought to be a heart-breaking con- 
fession ; but is it not most true? Who does not 
know how rapid and ready is the tongue to 
break bounds; how slow to seek or keep the 
peace? How vehement its invective, how 
irritating its insinuations, how bitter and un- 
measured its revilings! Is any one too obscure 
or feeble to escape its assault? Is any so 
venerable or exalted as to overawe its audacity ? 
What piety or godliness can suffice to shame 
its insolence, or to silence its malice? 

It is indeed, as it is here called, “an 
unsettled” or unstable “evil, full of deadly 
poison.” Nor is the poison ever more attractive 
and dangerous than when administered in a 


Cuap. III. 7, 8 125 


gilded pill. Good words and fair speeches to 
make the worse appear the better reason is a 
favourite device of the enemy, and peculiarly 
fitted to deceive the hearts of the guileless. 
Does this seem a too highly coloured picture 
of the tongue? It is from One Who knew 
what is in man, and needed none therefore to 
bear witness of him. And He Whom James 
served in this Epistle as in his life-ministry 
knew what it was to have a human heart and 
tongue, both bearing good and _ sweet» fruits 
continually to His God and Father. It is to 
Him that the believer looks and on Whose 
grace he counts. For underneath the gloomy 
description of a still gloomier reality, there is 
a streak of light divine. Is it written that 
absolutely none is able to tame the tongue? 
By no means. None “of men” can tame it. 
Ah! we can thank God. He is our desire, 
our expectation, and our strength. It were a 
wholly unchristian thought to subjugate our 
own tongue. It is our confidence to look up 
to God for that which is altogether beyond our 
capacity. And He works His wonders in 
every thing through Christ our Lord. If all 
the rude men of Nazareth bore Him witness 
and wondered at the words of grace which 
proceeded out of His lips, does not our God 


126 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


and Father use these to humble and to trans- 
form and to invigorate, so that the tongue, that 
once was our shame, should be by His grace 
truly our “glory,” according to the Hebrew 
phrase? Christ indeed was here perfect. 
“Never man spoke like this man,” said the 
officials who were no friends, to their superiors 
who were His foes. But we are His; and as 
He is our life, may we learn of Him in this 
respect as in every other. 

From this point our Epistle takes up the 
ground of manifest and gross inconsistency, 
None but the most heedless can regard lightly 
a fault so self-condemnatory ; nor can God 
either originate or sanction so plain a disorder 
and misuse of that excellent possession, the 
speech, conferred on man by His Creator. 
Least excusable is the inconsistency in such as 
own their relationship with God and the Lord. 

“Therewith we bless the Lord and [the] 
Father, and therewith we curse men that are 
made according to God’s likeness. Out of the 
same mouth cometh blessing and cursing. Not 
so, my brethren, ought these things to be” 


(vers. 9, IO). 
There is the article, and but one, to “ Lord 
and Father.” Grammatically therefore the 


phrase admits of meaning “Him Who is Lord 


Cuap. III. 9, ro 127 


and Father,” no less than “the Lord and (the) 
Father” brought together under that link of 
objects united here expressly though in them- 
selves distinct. This they could not be fittingly 
unless there were a common nature and glory. 
So we may see in such a phrase as “the king- 
dom of Christ and God.” Far be it from the 
heart or mouth to question in the least that 
Christ is God, which is declared comparatively 
so often. But ask for instance if we must, 
whether Eph. v. 5 means this, though the single 
article brackets together both terms. So we 
may see in “the apostles and prophets” of 
Eph. ii. 20, combined for the foundation, but 
given separately in Eph. iv. 11. 

The idiom is common enough even with 
proper names,as when the man in Acts iii. II 
held fast “ Peter and John” thus united, though 
in vers, I and 3 both names are presented his- 
torically without the article to either. Such is 
the reading of ample and good authority. But 
the Sinai, the Vatican, and the Alexandrine 
with half-a-dozen cursives insert the article before 
John, which if right would individualise, instead 
of combining in aspecial way, the two apostles. 
In chap. iv. 13, 19, there can hardly be a doubt 
that they are thus joined together. Both cases 
occur with Paul and Barnabas in chaps. xiii. 


128 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


xiv. Chap. xv. is instructive from varieties of 
form, each employed with exquisite propriety. 
Ver. 2 presents Paul and _ Barnabas, first 
severed, and then without emphasis as simple 
facty_as. also.in.ver.12.., But in. very22 _they 
are expressly combined in unity as in 25 (the 
order changed), as in ver. 35 the fact is merely 
stated historically. 

There seems no sufficient ground then for 
doubting that “the Lord” in the usual accept- 
ation of the term is here combined with “ the 
Father” as objects united in our praise. That 
it is unusual, all admit; but so it is in many 
a phrase of holy writ, that our narrowness of 
thought may be corrected and enlarged out of 
the fulness of divine truth. On the other hand 
no one should stumble at predicating “Lord” 
of the Father, if such were the aim of the 
inspiring Spirit here. For though the crucified 
Jesus was made by God both Lord and Christ 
(Acts ii, 36), and He is in distinctive office 
one sole Lord, as the Father is simply in His 
nature one sole God (1 Cor. viii. 6), it does not 
follow that “ Lord” may not be applied to the 
other Persons in the Godhead. Thus in 2 Cor. 
ili, it is predicated of the Spirit in the last 
clause of the last verse; as it is of God rather 
than of Christ (Who is distinguished as His 


Cuap. III. 9, 10 129 


Anointed) in Rev. xi. 15. It was the rarity of 
the combination, however taken, which no doubt 
led to substituting “God” (as in the common 
text, following the more modern MSS.) for “ the 
Lord.” But if we accept the ancient reading, 
our language, we must bear in mind, does not, 
like the Greek, admit but one article. 

The grand principle is plain beyond all 
question, that no inconsistency can be more 
gross than to employ the tongue, now in 
blessing the Supreme, now in cursing men that 
are made according to God’s likeness. We are 
objects of His loving counsels, begotten of Him 
by the word of truth, and should be the last 
to curse any, as being blessed ourselves of mere 
mercy. It is not that fallen men have any 
intrinsic moral worth, as we above all should 
know from our own humbling experience. So 
we at least should never forget how they were 
brought into being as in God’s likeness. How 
unbecoming in man, how shameless in us who 
bless the Lord and the Father, to curse men 
so made! Time was, beyond doubt, when we 
lived in malice and envy, hateful, hating one 
another; but the kindness and love of God 
our Saviour broke down our pride and purified 
our souls in obeying the truth through the 
Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, and 

K 


130 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


gave us a heart touched with divine grace to- 
ward all mankind. Instead then of cursing 
others, we want them to obey the truth, share 
the blessing, and join us in blessing Him Who 
is the source and giver of it all. 

The incongruity is heightened by the figure 
of the next verse (10), “Out of the same mouth 
cometh forth blessing and cursing ;” and by the 
quiet but pungent appeal, “ Not so, my brethren, 
ought these things to be.” The consistency of 
the Christian in its perfection is ever and only 
in Christ; and He is the sole and constant 
standard for us, What love in Him even for 
the vilest and bitterest of His foes! Called to 
inherit a blessing, may we not render evil for 
evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise 
blessing, knowing that we are thereunto called. 
This is surely, dear brethren, what it ought to 
be. 

Now we have, following, fresh illustrations to 
impress on the readers the incongruity and the 
enormity of injurious speech, all the worse for 
utterances of piety and propriety interchanged 
with it, and beyond just question condemnatory 
of it, as indicating the lack of the fear of God 
and of regard for man. The inspired writer's 
sense of its evil kindles into glowingly 
indignant questions, to which expostulation he 


Cuap, sli isa re 131 


himself supplies the answer in a few pregnant 
words. 

“Doth the fountain out of the same open- 
ing pour forth the sweet and the bitter? Can 
my brethren, a figtree produce olives, or a vine 
figs? Neither [can] salt water produce sweet ” 
(vers. II, 12). 

Here as elsewhere, the homeliness of the 
examples lends the more force to the reproof. 
To take the first instance; who ever heard of 
the fountain from the same slit emitting sweet 
water and bitter? Nature itself rebukes so 
shameless a mixture, and issues so contradictory, 
in those who praise the Lord and the Father. 
The great apostle of the Gentiles drew weapons 
from the same armoury in I Cor. xi. 14, 16 
for divine order, and in 2 Thess. iii. 10 also; 
as he did repeatedly to his confidential fellow- 
labourer Timothy in his First Epistle (ii. 12-15; 
iv. 3-5; vi. 6-8). But nowhere have we more 
telling thrusts of this kind than in the Epistle 
before us; where the impossible in nature is 
made to expose and castigate the ethically 
inconsistent, especially aggravated as it was by 
the profession of relationship to God and by 
the claim to enjoyment of His favour. Is the new 
nature to be disgraced by that which the old 
universal nature repudiates even though fallen? 


132 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


In the second the demand is still more 
peremptory. It is not, Does, but “Can a fig- 
tree produce olives, or a vine figs?” And we 
have the repetition of “my brethren” in this 
second case, though so soon after _ its 
dignified affectionate introduction just before in 
verse 10, in order to send the appeal home to 
their bosoms. One of the learned men who, 
setting up to interpret the words, set at nought 
its spirit, dares to compare the figure with our 
Lord’s in Matt. vii. 16-20 in order to disparage 
His servant here. But it is only another 
sample of ill-willed ignorance which so con- 
stantly appears where erudition is not subser- 
vient to faith; that is where man assumes to 
judge God, instead of seeking to profit by 
His word. For the Lord was there laying 
down the error of expecting good fruit from a 
bad tree; whereas His servant in order to 
rebuke the glaring inconsistency of calling on 
the Lord of glory and indulging evil speech 
confronts it with the natural impossibility of 
a tree producing any but its own proper 
fruit. Both are plainly true, and~ each 
exquisitely adapted to its purpose. Unbelief 
blindly errs, but only betrays its sinful 
presumption to those that know God and 
bow to His word. 


Cuapry Tisr1i12 133 


It is possible that the first word of the 
last clause (o¥re, neither) may have through 
hasty misapprehension given rise to the added 
etrwe— oso”) of the Text. “ Rec. Then 
came an effort to make the phrase more 
pointed by reading otdeuia mnyn (no fountain). 
The Sinaitic Uncial has otrwe oidé. But even 
Tischendorf, and Westcott and Hort decline 
to follow; for they with Alford, Lachmann, 
Tregelles, and Wordsworth read the text 
which yields the translation given above. 
There is, it would seem, a certain strangeness 
in reading otre rather than ovdé. But this 
appears to be explicable by the  writer’s 
carrying on in his mind the preceding clause. 
The insertion of the conjunction (kai, “and ”) 
in the last clause is opposed to the weightiest of 
the ancient witnesses, both MSS. and Vv. and loses 
the point of the true text, which varies the figure 
by a negation which is indisputable. 

From the preceding illustrations, so pungent 
and powerful, against the inconsistency and 
unnaturalness of unloving and unworthy 
language in lips which were avowedly consecrated 
to the glory of Jesus according to the character 
of a new nature, the Epistle turns to and raises 
the question of the wisdom and understanding 
which becomes His followers. 


134 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


“Who [is] wise and understanding among 
you? Let him show out of his good conduct 
his works in meekness of wisdom” (ver. 13). 

It is the opening of a new paragraph which 
continues to the end of this chapter, and 
passes indeed into the following one by way of 
contrast. The appeal here is searching. For 
assuredly those who set up so zealously to 
teach others did not doubt their own wisdom 
and understanding. Yet are they not rare and 
precious qualities? 

1 Cor. xii. speaks of the “ word of wisdom” 
and the “word of knowledge” as given through 
the Spirit, and presents them in the front place 
when he particularises the forms which “the 
manifestation of the Spirit” takes, as given to 
each for the common profit. On the other 
hand he puts in the last place “kinds of 
tongues” and “interpretation of tongues,” of 
which the light-minded and unspiritual Corin- 
thians had shewn themselves vain and had made 
a disorderly use. He is far from denying the 
divine source and character of either; on the 
contrary he declares that “all these things” 
(after giving a considerable list of powers then 
in action) “worketh the one and the same 
Spirit, dividing to each in particular as He 
will (or, pleaseth).” For He is sovereign as a 


Cuap. III. 13 135 


divine Person. But they had not all the 
same spiritual value. Some gifts edified the 
assembly by revealing God’s mind and counsels ; 
others nourished and directed the new life of 
individuals in His will; some strengthened for 
service, others issued in praise and thanks- 
giving. Again, some were for a sign to the 
unbelievers, while others were directed distinctly 
to the believers. And as prophesying had this 
latter character peculiarly, so tongues and the 
former had a lower place, though to outward 
appearance far the more extraordinary of the 
two. But here we may notice, as in 1 Cor. 
xii. 28 too, the apostle’s uniform guard against 
an estimate altogether human and erroneous, 
Why not desire earnestly the greater but less 
showy gifts? “Brethren, be not children in 
mind, but in malice be babes, but in mind be 
of full age” (1 Cor. xiv. 20). 

In our Epistle however there is no develop- 
ment of that which is so prominent in the 
First Epistle to the Corinthians, but a moral 
dealing with the danger there and_ then 
prevalent among those addressed. The aim 
is to correct the haste and the character of 
speech generally, and the readiness to teach in 
particular. From the beginning, not only of 
the Christian confession, but of Israel’s history, 


136 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


we may observe what importance was given to 
wisdom and understanding. Weigh such plain 
instances, -as: (Deut.4. 13, <Dss.and! 404552.00: 
“Take you wise men, and understanding, and 
known, according to your tribes, and I will make 
them heads over you.” “So I took the heads 
of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made 
them heads over you, captains of ‘thousands, 
and captains of hundreds, and captains of 
fifties, and captains of tens, and _ officers, 
according to your tribes.” “Behold, I have 
taught you statutes and judgments, even as 
Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye 
should do so in the midst of the land whither 
ye go in to possess it. Keep therefore and do 
them; for this is your wisdom and _ your 
understanding in the sight of the peoples, which 
shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely 
this great nation is a wise and understanding 
people.” Indeed the spirit of it runs through 
that remarkable book, as obedient heed to the 
word of God forms it. What else can be the 
condition of blessing for all in relationship with 
God, be it for earth or for heaven ? 

Here a similar object appears in the enquiry, 
“Who is wise and understanding among you?” 
and in the counsel that follows, “ Let him show 
out of his good course of conduct (that becomes 


Cuap. III. 14 SES 


such a man, in deed and in truth) his works 
(not self-complacently or ostentatiously, but) 
in meekness of wisdom.” What more holy, 
sober, or pertinent? What more sad than when 
wisdom seems assuming or harsh? It is 
abiding in Christ that produces fruit acceptable 
to our God and Father. But we need His 
words too, and prayer. 

Having exhorted him who was reported wise 
and understanding to show in the reality of 
comely works, not mere words, his good conduct 
or practical life in meekness of wisdom, not in 
superstitious criticism or self-conceit, the Epistle 
turns to warn of the dark side. 

“But if ye have bitter emulation and faction 
in your heart, do not boast and lie against the 
truth” (ver. 14). 

Such is man: self is his idol, selfwill his way. 
The profession of Christ in no way eradicates it, 
but makes it all the more sad and inconsistent, 
in Jew even more than Greek. As we see in 
1 Cor. i., iii, so we read here. “ Bitter emulation” 
in the disciple of the crucified Lord of glory! 
Alas! it was no hypothetical case, but a fact. 
“But if ye have”; and this not in the hasty 
speech, but “in your heart.” So early and 
everywhere did the Christian confessors slip away 
from the reason of their being, and rival the 


138 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


failure of Israel. So quickly did they forget 
that Christianity, while emphatically “faith” 
(Gal. iii, 25), in contrast with the law (the 
previous tutor), depends on life from God, or a 
divine nature partaken of, as we have noticed 
in this Epistle and may in every other. Now 
what room is there in that new life for “bitter 
emulation”? Christ condemns it, root and 
fruit. In Him was none of it, but meekness of 
wisdom, and zeal for God. First and last the 
zeal of His Father’s house ate Him up. When 
or where else do we hear of His taking discip- 
linary work in hand, expelling outrageous 
offenders, and pouring contempt on their pro- 
fane trade? Though the Holy and the High, 
when does He contend for His own glory, when 
and where does He resent the slight and scorn 
of guilty man? . 

If Christ be, as indeed He is, the Christian’s 
life, what is it for him to have “ bitter emulation” 
in his heart? Is it not the indulgence in an 
evil work of the old man, and the dishonour of 
the Master by the servant? This was bad, but 
“faction” is worse; because it is not only the 
individual gratifying the vanity of an evil nature, 
but its spread to others too ready to exalt self 
and depreciate such as ought to be loved and 
honoured. For is it not to this we are called 


CHAP. TETAI4 139 


here below? “Let nothing be (said the great 
apostle) according to faction or vain-glory, but 
in lowly-mindedness each esteeming one another 
more excellent than themselves” (Phil. ii. 3). 
We are entitled to regard them as saints beloved 
of God; though by grace the same, we cannot 
but feel our own unworthiness. What do we 
know of them as we know of ourselves? On 
every ground bitter emulation and faction be far 
from our heart. So pleads meekness of wisdom, 
that we may show out of our good conduct the 
works that now become that excellent Name by 
which we are called. 

But if we have in our heart these unclean 
things, bitter emulation and faction, “do not 
boast and lie against the truth.” Love, we know, 
is not emulous, nor does it rejoice at iniquity, 
but rejoices with the truth. But the vaunting, 
which accompanies emulation and faction, is 
against the truth; for the truth wholly exposes 
and condemns it as of the carnal mind which 
is enmity against God. He was the truth, Who 
was meek and lowly in heart, and bids us take 
His yoke upon us and learn of Him, and we 
shall find rest to our souls, For His yoke is easy 
and His burden is light. 

If we cherish these evils so contradictory of 
Christ, while called by His name, what is it but 


140 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


“lying against the truth”? So trenchantly does 
the Epistle denounce what the enemy ever 
seeks to introduce under cover of zeal for the 
truth. 

Wisdom, like faith, shows its character by the 
spirit and conduct that accompanies and reflects 
it. Every good gift and every perfect giving 
cometh down from above, from the Father of 
lights, Who of His own will begot us by the 
word of truth. What is the source and charac- 
ter of any wisdom, however pretentious, that 
coalesces with bitter emulation and faction? Is 
it not a lie against the truth? Does it flow 
from anything higher than hearts governed by 
self-will, instead of being purified by faith? 

“This wisdom is not descending from above, 
but earthly, natural, demoniacal. For where 
envying and faction [are], there disorder [is] 
and every bad deed” (vers. 15, 16). 

To describe it thus was to brand it as 
thoroughly evil and of the enemy. The tone of 
James differs from that of John and Jude, of 
Paul and of Peter; but all agree in testifying 
that Christ alone is, and shows us, the wisdom 
acceptable in God’s eyes and suitable for His 
children, Man’s wisdom is in truth his folly, 
for it is in disobedience of His word, and seeks 
independence of His will. The Lord of glory 


Cuap. III. 15, 16 141 


was the obedient man and gave the pattern of 
One on earth Who did not merely live through 
or by the Father but on account or by reason 
of Him. So perfectly was He the servant (and 
this is the perfection of man Godward) that He 
had no other motive in His living; and He 
lays this down for him that feeds on Himself— 
even he shall leave on account of Me (John 
vi. 57). Heis the Bread that came down from 
heaven and gives life to the world; but more 
than this, He gives His flesh for the life of the 
world. Less than this would not suffice to 
meet its ruin and accomplish the blessing God 
had in His heart for the believer. To eat His 
flesh and drink His blood is indispensable, if 
we are to have life in ourselves, as was His pur- 
pose of grace about us. He that thus eats and 
drinks has the communion of His death, and 
has life eternal, with the assurance of being 
raised by Him at the last day, yea more—of 
abiding in Him, and of His abiding in him, this 
day. 

No other wisdom therefore suits the believer, 
The wisdom of the first man, and of the world, 
has no link with heaven. It is at best earthly, 
and either seeks glory from men or yet more 
proudly tramples on other men as unworthy of 
a thought. The sage thinks he is the king, 


142 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


and will have not fellows but slaves, in the 
fulness of his self-complacency and disdain. The 
most offensive condition to his mind is to be a 
servant, to be God’s bondman. This is love’s 
place, and Christ took and filled it unfailingly ; 
and by His redemption we can follow in His 
path, having Him as our life, which He truly is, 
and are free to cultivate this wisdom coming 
down from above. For we too can love one 
another, because love is of God; and as every 
one that loves has been begotten of God, and 
knows God, so he that does not love never learnt 
God, because God is love. 

Further too, it is not only “earthly” wisdom, 
but “natural.” It has no true sense of God’s 
mind any more than of His love. As the apostle 
tells usin 1 Cor. ii, a natural or soulish man 
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness to him, and he cannot gain 
knowledge of them, because they are spiritually 
discerned ; whereas the spiritual man discerns 
them all, while himself is discerned by 
none. 

Another word completes the sad picture of 
wisdom outside Christ; it is “demoniacal.” It 
is quite enough to render it accurately ; for though 
demons may be distinguished from their prince, 
yet they are the emissaries of Satan and the 


Cuap. III. 15, 16 143 


instruments of his malicious power. How little 
do men believe that the wisdom of self, so coveted 
of mankind, is “demoniacal”! How little do 
the children of God seek that which is of Christ, 
the best proof that it is of God’s Spirit! For 
He is here to glorify Christ; and this He does 
by receiving of Christ’s, and announcing it to 
us. 

But are not God’s children exposed in their 
weakness to danger and evil? They are not in 
the flesh, but the flesh is in them; they are in 
the world with all its snares ; they are the object 
of the evil one’s incessant and _ subtle seduc- 
tions. But greater is He that is in them than 
he that is in the world. Have they not Christ ? 
And Christ is God’s wisdom no less than His 
power. Far from them to boast of wisdom or 
aught else in themselves. Indeed God chose 
the foolish things of the world to put to shame 
the sages. And of Him are they in Christ 
Jesus, “Who was made to us wisdom from God, 
and righteousness, and _ sanctification, and 
redemption.” 

Yet God does not fail to set even the weakest 
on their guard against the assumption of a wis- 
dom that is not of Him. Its moral character 
betrays its evil source, when smooth language 
and fair speaking might easily ensnare the un- 


144 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


wary. The least intelligent of saints who keeps 
the Lord Jesus before him can discern “envying 
and faction” ; and these allowed bring in speedily 
“confusion and every bad work.” By their 
fruits therefore the earthly wise become manifest 
ere long to those who are neither intelligent nor 
spiritual enough to discern otherwise. They are 
thus warned and kept by divine grace. 

In the next verse we have the qualities of 
divine wisdom drawn out for our cheer and 
profit; as in chap. i. 5 we were exhorted to 
ask it of God that gives to all liberally and 
without a reproach, though indeed even His 
own deserve blame. 

“But the wisdom from above is first pure, 
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits, uncontentious, 
impartial (or, unfeigned)” (ver. 17): few words 
but sound and deep, pregnant and penetrating, 
inspired of God as they really are. 

Now that grace has given us Christ, that 
we are begotten of God and have His Spirit, 
how suitable to look unto the same source for 
wisdom that springs not up from the earth or 
from man! But we are encouraged already, 
by the goodness proved when we deserved 
judgment and everlasting shame, to ask for all 
we need in our new responsibility because of 


Cuap. III. 17 145 


our new relationship. Earthly as we once 
were, our hearts rose not then above it; alas 
we wete prone to sink below it through the 
wiles of the enemy. Now that we are 
“heavenly” as the apostle Paul intimates 
(1 Cor. xv. 48) we constantly want a 
wisdom that is from above. Nor is there any 
other good gift from the Father of lights of 
deeper moment for His children. Will He 
not give it liberally to all that wait on Him 
in faith, and refuse all doubt? The love 
He has shewn us, and the assuring word 
He has written for us, rebuke every such 
questioning. If we have not, it is because we 
ask not. If we ask and receive not, it is 
because we ask amiss, that we may spend it 
on our pleasures. How could God consistently 
impart heavenly wisdom to those who mind 
earthly things? He gives in honour of Christ 
for His own glory. 

What then is the Spirit's delineation 
of this wisdom? It is “first pure.” How 
worthy of God and of the Lord Jesus by 
Whom we know what He is! Let God’s child 
advance as he may, he cannot claim this. 
How much there is always to mortify in our 
members on the earth! Assuredly “ whoso- 


ever is born of God doth not practise sin, 
L 


146 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


for his seed remaineth in him; and he can- 
not sin (dapravey, the course and character 
of our fallen nature), because he is born of 
God” (1 John iii. 9). Hatred of sin and living 
to God characterise all His family. But it is 
only when Christ shall be manifested, that we 
shall be seen to be like Him. We shall see 
Him as He is; then and thus shall we be 
conformed to His image. We shall bear the 
image of the earthly ; not till then shall we 
bear that of the Heavenly. But everyone that 
has this hope founded on Him purifies him- 
self, even as He is pure. We, though bathed 
all over, need the habitual washing of the 
word to wash our feet. We have to purify 
ourselves, because we contract defilement, and 
are not pure as He was and is. 

The wisdom from above savours of Him to 
meet our wants. It is first pure, “then 
peaceable,” an order much to be borne in mind. 
Even saints are apt to make peaceableness 
their prime object. But this would compromise 
the character and glory of God, Who will 
have the exclusion of all that  defiles. 
Sanctified to Jesus’ obedience and the sprink- 
ling of His blood, we are bound to see first 
that His will be our aim and purpose of heart, 
however important it is also and next to 


Cuap. III. 17 147 


promote peace. Such certainly is the spirit 
and working of the wisdom from above. So 
in the Gospels we see invariably in the words 
and ways of the Lord; and not otherwise do 
we read the Holy Spirit’s teaching in the Epistles. 

Again, it. is: “gentle,” and ~ “easy “to be 


entreated.” What a contrast with human 
wisdom, so apt to be stern and proud, so 
impatient of question or difference! | Where 


was its perfection ever seen, ever maintained 
without a flaw, but in our Lord Jesus? There- 
fore could He say, even at the close, “I am 
among you as he that serveth.” So He called 
on the greatest of His followers to be as 
the younger, and the leader to be as the 
servant. Heavenly wisdom feeds and fosters 
this gracious lowliness and waiting on others. 

Next, it is said to be “full of mercy and 
of good fruits,” a precious help in the midst of 
faulty souls, and their evil ways, For of all 
men those who feel and act with divine 
compassion toward wrong-doers require them- 
selves to walk in communion with Him Who 
is good to the ungrateful and the evil. There 
must be no real ground for insinuating that 
they are soft toward other offenders, because 
they would smooth over their own inconsis- 
tencies. 


148 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Lastly, it is “ uncontentious, impartial” (or, 
it may be, “unfeigned”): eminently called for 
in their place. For if children of God, are we 
not to walk as children of light, not only 
personally but in our bearing toward others 
and our converse with them? How is not 
the light dimmed by yielding to contention 
and indulgence in party work! How contrary 
to Christ when we give occasion to any just 
charge of insincerity or hypocrisy in our spirit! 
Heavenly wisdom eschews all such tendencies, 
earthly wisdom lives in and avails itself of 
such ways. The spirit of strife is apt to draw 
even an upright soul into feelings and conduct 
altogether unworthy of the new life and 
relationship. 

The beautiful description of the heavenly 
wisdom which the Epistle commends to the 
saints closes with its result in peace along the 
way. 

“And righteousness’ fruit in peace is being 
sown for those that make peace” (ver. 18). 

In the practical walk of the believer the 
fruit of righteousness is the prime requisite, but 
“in peace”; as we have seen the wisdom from 
above is “first pure, then peaceable.” In the 
natural man, as in the world, self-will reigns, 
the enemy of all righteousness, in an overbearing 


Cuap. III. 18 149 


spirit, the seed of an ever-growing harvest of 
contention, as the beginning of the next chapter 
clearly indicates. 

Even in the Lord Jesus we find the same 
order, as in Heb. vii. 2, “first being by inter- 
pretation king of righteousness, and after that 
also king of Salem, which is king of peace.” 
Such is the application of Melchizedek, king- 
priest of Salem. It is indeed a type more than 
fulfilled in the order of Christ’s priesthood even 
now, about to be fulfilled by-and-by in its 
exercise, when the battle is won over the Beast 
and the kings of the earth and their armies at 
the end of the age. 

When we look at redemption, if grace 
reigns as it does, it is through righteousness 
unto life eternal through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Only then, through Him dead and risen, could 
we, justified by faith, have peace with God. 
Therefore are the saints everywhere called on, 
walking righteously, to be in peace (if possible, 
as much as hangs on them) with all men. Nor 
do the Epistles to the Corinthians differ from 
that to the Romans: God hath called us in 
peace, says the First; rejoice, be adjusted, be 
encouraged, be of one mind, be in peace ; and 
the God of love and peace would be with them. 
Such is the exhortation and promise in the 


150 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Second. So tothe Galatians the apostle writes 
for as many as walk according to the rule of 
the new creation, peace be onthem and mercy; 
as to the Ephesians, having put on the breast- 
plate of righteousness, he would have their 
feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of 
peace. What a place peace has in the Philippian 
Epistle every reader ought to see; nor is it 
less deep in that to the Colossians where he 
would have Christ’s peace rule in their hearts ; 
as he prays for the Thessalonians in the First 
that the God of peace would sanctify them 
wholly, and in the Second that the Lord of 
peace Himself would give them peace continually 
in every way. And the Epistle to the Hebrews 
exhorts to pursue peace with all, and holiness, 
giving this however the primary and peremptory 
place in accordance with the doctrine else- 
where. 

But the fruit of righteousness in peace, 
though acceptable to God, a blessing in itself, 
and a comfort to fellow-believers, is far from 
welcome to men in general, who know not 
God and do not obey the gospel but unrighteous- 
ness, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating 
each other. It is sown, as we are here told, 
“for those that make peace.” The will of 
man, any more than the wrath of man, works 


Cuap. IIT. 18 151 


not God’s righteousness. Discord and every evil 
issue are the sad effect. “ Blessed,” says the Lord, 
“are the peace-makers; for they shall be called 
God’s sons.” But in that wondrous outpouring of 
blessing from His lips on the mount (Matt. v.), 
we may notice that the four descriptions of the 
blessed are of the righteous class (vers. 3-6), 
before the three of the gracious sort (vers. 7-9) ; 
with a blessing super-numerary on the persecuted 
for righteousness’ sake, and another yet richer 
on those persecuted for His own sake. Right- 
eousness necessarily precedes. For it is vain to 
think or speak of walking in grace, where we 
fail in consistency with our relationship. The 
fruit of righteousness in peace is being sown for 
those that make peace. Such are evidently 
walking in a spirit which grace produces; but 
the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for 
them. Some contend strongly that we should 
understand “by” rather than “for.” Grammati- 
cally the clause is susceptible of either sense ; 
but the former seems hardly so suitable to the 
bearing of the context. Let the Christian reader 
judge for himself. 


CHAPTER IV 


The new chapter turns to the source of the 
bitter contention against which from the first its 
warning lay—‘“ slow to wrath,” to its disastrous 
result. 

“Whence [are] wars and whence fightings 
among you? [Are they] not hence, from your 
pleasures that combat in your members? Ye 
lust and have not: ye kill and are jealous and 
cannot obtain: ye fight and war: ye have not 
because ye ask not: ye ask and receive not, 
because ye ask amiss, that ye may spend [it] 
in your pleasures” (vers. 1-3). 

These violent workings sprang from self un- 
judged. If deliberate and continuous they are 
called “wars”; if passing outbreaks, they are 
called “fightings” or “battles”; but they 
describe not effects of violence in the world, 
but among those addressed. The humiliating 
fact remains, that terms to describe them are 
drawn from the uncontrolled ways of men who 
knew not God. What a contrast with Him 
Who says, “Take my yoke upon you and 
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in 
heart: and ye shall find rest for your souls. 

( 152) 


Cuap. IV. 1-3 153 


For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light” 
(Matt. xi. 29, 30). “ Blessed” He pronounces 
“the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom 
of the heavens. Blessed they that mourn, for 
they shall be comforted. Blessed the meek, 
for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed they 
which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for 
they shall be filled. Blessed the merciful, for 
they shall obtain mercy. Blessed the pure in 
heart, for they shall see God. Blessed the 
peace-makers, for they shall be called sons of 
God. Blessed the persecuted for righteousness’ 
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens. 
Blessed are ye when they shall revile and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely for my sake” (Matt. v. 3-11). 


Next the proximate cause is stated. ‘“ [Are 
they] not hence, from your pleasures that 
combat in your members?” It was the 


gratification of fallen nature. The members of 
the body in this case play their part, unchecked 
by the will or fear of God: the throat, an open 
sepulchre ; the tongue, deceitful; the lips, with 
poison underneath; the mouth, full of bitter- 
ness; the eyes, full of adultery; the hands, 
ready for rapine; the heart, prone to covetous- 
ness; the feet, swift to shed blood. How 
hopelessly evil, if grace had not given another 


154 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


nature through and according to the word of 
truth (which is indeed, as the apostle calls it, 
Christ our life)! And the new has its pleasures 
after its source, hating what God hates, and 
delighting in what pleases Him. His word is 
then the law of liberty. 

But where Christ is not before the eye of 
faith working by love, how mournful the issue ! 
“Ve lust and have not; ye kill, and are 
jealous, and cannot obtain ; ye fight and war ; ye 
have not, because ye ask not; ye ask and receive 
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may spend 
[it] in your pleasures.” Here the evil is 
traced to that unhallowed desire that is called 
“Just,” whatever may be its object, and whether 
corrupt or violent. It is wholly in contrast 
with subjection to God and His word. It is 
therefore antagonistic to the affection and mind 
of the Holy Spirit, as is said in Gal. v. 17, 
“For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and 
the Spirit against the flesh; and these things 
are opposed one to the other, that ye should 
not do the things that ye would.” 

Here therefore we have, traced in unerring 
lines, the inevitable failure of such a _ course. 
There are desires which come to nothing ; there 
is violence to an extreme, and envy or jealousy 
to the full, yet still dissatisfaction; there is 


CHAP. IV. 4-6 155 


contention ever growing worse; there is no 
asking, and no answer of peace. If there be 
asking apparently, there is the reserve of 
selfishness; it is evilly done to squander on 
their pleasures. 

Violence was denounced in the opening of 
the chapter. Hence we have corruption 
indignantly rebuked to the face. 

“ Adulteresses,* know ye not that friendship 
with the world is enmity with God? Who- 
soever therefore shall be minded to be friend of 
the world is constituted enemy of God. Or 
think ye that the scripture saith in vain? t 
Doth the Spirit that took his dwelling in us 
long unto envy? But he giveth more grace; 
wherefore he saith, God setteth himself against 
haughty [men], but giveth grace to lowly” 
(vers. 4-6). © 

The shorter text as given here is attested 
by the great witnesses, both manuscripts and 
versions, The addition in later copies we can 
understand from the temptation to round the 
phrase and comprehend men and women; and 
this has tended to a literal sense instead of 
understanding it as a forcible and solemn 
appeal, the gender being easily apprehended 

* So run & pm A B 13, and, only in the masc,, Syr*h- Copt. Aeth. Arm. 


+ The punctuation and translation of ver. 5 may be questioned ; but 
I have faithfully given what seems best. 


156 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


from the nature of the offence. For the first 
duty of every Christian is fidelity to Christ ; 
and assuredly there is no question of failure on 
His part. With the saints it is far otherwise. 

Thus wrote the apostle to the Corinthians, 
“TI espoused you to one husband that I might 
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” Here 
each individual is more in view; but the 
principle is the same, and the figure of departure 
quite intelligible. The world corrupts from 
simplicity as to Christ many who would turn 
from immoral ways at once. For it looks fair 
enough, and offers a variety of attractions suited 
to our nature. And the question is often raised, 
What is the harm of this? Is there any wrong 
in that? But this Epistle lays bare the 
character of the enticement. Are we seeking 
or accepting the world? Now friendship with 
the world is enmity with God. Did not the 
world crucify the Lord of glory? Is it Christian 
then to value its approbation, or to court its 
honour? Is it loyal to the Lord to walk in 
familiar ease with the system which shed His 
blood and put Him to the vilest ignominy ? 
No one clears himself of that guilt save he 
who believing is washed, sanctified, and justified 
in the name of our Lord Jesus and by the 
Spirit of our God. Those who profess the 


Cuap. IV. 4-6 157 


name without the power are sure to weary of 
separateness to Christ and to hanker after 
earthly things. But the word is plain: ‘“ Who- 
soever therefore shall be minded to be friend 
of the world is constituted enemy of God.” 

The written word of God is as distinctly 
opposed to such unholy commerce as_ the 
Spirit Who dwells in us revolts from its spirit. 
“Or think ye that the scripture saith [it] in 
vain? Doth the Spirit that took His dwelling 
in us long unto envy?” What did our Lord 
teach on the mount or in His discourses 
habitually, and in His answers to men? 
Separation from the world is everywhere en- 
joined, or presumed, And what can be more 
adverse to the envy which characterises the 
world than the mind of the indwelling Spirit 
of God? Subjectively therefore as well as 
objectively what God _ gives in no way 
countenances friendship with the world. 

No doubt the difficulties and the dangers 
are great for the saint here below. “But he 
giveth more grace”; and all need it. Not 
content with imparting settled “access by faith 
into this grace wherein we stand’’ (Rom. v. 2), 
where is the Epistle, speaking ordinarily, which 
does not begin with “grace to you and peace 
from God our Father, and from our Lord 


158 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


Jesus Christ?” This is general, of course ; 
and so much the better for its purpose that so 
it should be. Here it is suited to the trial, 
and therefore appropriate to need. “But he 
giveth greater grace.” The more severe the 
strain, the greater is His outflow of goodness 
for seasonable help. ‘“ Wherefore he saith, God 
setteth himself against haughty [men], but 
giveth grace to lowly.” Not only 1 Sam. ii. 
and Luke x., but the Psalms and Proverbs 
furnish abundant testimony to both its parts. 

The assurance that God giveth grace to the 
lowly leads to the next exhortation. 

“Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist 
the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh 
to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse 
hands, sinners, and purify hearts, ye double- 
minded. Sorrow, and mourn, and weep; let 
your laughter be turned unto mourning, and 
your joy unto heaviness. Humble yourselves before 
the Lord, and he will exalt you” (vers. 7-10). 

There is much that helps the soul, as it is 
due to God, that we submit ourselves to Him. 
Undoubtedly it becomes one that knows Him 
to cherish obedient lowliness in His sight; 
and were we ever in our watchtower, we should 
be habitually thus submissive. But in fact a 
little thing is apt to excite, and the uprising of 


Cuap. IV. 7-10 159 


another too often rouses our own pride, instead 
of being only a grief to our souls as it should 
be. Hence the need of subjection to God 
which quiets the spirit and leads to gracious 
affections. 

But there is an adversary ever at work with 
whom we are called to have no terms, no com- 
promises, even where appearances are put forward 
ever so plausibly. “Resist the devil, and he 
will flee from you.” Christ is the test : the devil 
always works to thwart and defame the Lord 
Jesus. He may preach righteousness, he may 
stimulate zeal; but he never exalts Christ’s 
name in truth, any more than leads to suffering 
for His sake. Detested and resisted he will 
flee from us. To gratify flesh and the world 
are his ordinary snares. Let us never forget 
that to faith he is a vanquished enemy. Let us 
resist him in dependence on the Lord. On the 
other hand, we are called to “draw nigh to God, 
and he will draw nigh to you.” 

The new and living way is now open to 
Him Who sent His Son that all obstacles 
might be removed in the love that wrought 
and gave us a redemption worthy of Himself 
and of His Son. His written word now imparts 
the revealed certainty of His will in thus 
putting us in relationship with Himself, as we 


160 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


_ were shewn early in this Epistle. As He speaks 
freely to us in His love, so does He encourage 
us, “always confident,” to draw nigh to Him. 
Our asking of Him, whatever the need, the 
danger, or the difficulty, is grounded on His 
having addressed Himself to us in grace. And 
Christ, as He was “the faithful witness” of Him 
to us, is no less of us to Him, so as to keep 
up faith’s assurance alike when we draw nigh 
to God and when we resist the devil. 

But the thought in the next words seems 
an example of the peculiarity of an Epistle 
addressed to the twelve tribes of the Dispersion. 
“Sinners” and “double-minded” persons are 
appealed to as such. Such appeals are no- 
where found in the Epistles addressed to the 
saints in the N.T. Here the scope is so wide 
as to include souls not yet converted, though 
we have also seen a great deal in the Epistle 
which supposes the faith of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. But there is more here and to come in 
accordance with its being written to the ancient 
people of God as a whole, in whatever degree 
each believer may draw profit from all. The 
difficulty of the exhortation is thus accounted 
for, and the authority of the word maintained, 
without yielding to any strained interpretation. 
Nevertheless it is a call to faith in all these 


Cuap, IV. 7-10 161 


verses, and not to the slow process of human 
effort ; for cleansing of hands and purifying of 
hearts, no less than for submission to God and 
drawing nigh to Him before, or for sorrowings 
that follow. The verbs are all in what is 
called the aorist, and therefore imply that God 
calls for each and all of these calls to be done 
once for all as a settled thing for the soul. 
This grace alone could effect. Man otherwise 
must labour in vain. God gives to faith what 
He demands. 

Still where faith is, there is repentance also; 
and God will have evil felt and judged in 
those who are blessed of Him. Hence the 
summons, “Sorrow, and mourn, and weep: let 
your laughter be turned unto mourning, and 
your joy unto heaviness.” As the Lord said, 
“Blessed they that mourn; for they shall be 
comforted.” The Epistle of James will no more 
allow the moral side to be forgotten than the 
apostle Paul in showing us the characteristics 
of genuine repentance. How could it be other- 
wise, if we stand in faith before God confessing 
our sins? To make repentance only a change 
of mind is a serious dereliction from the truth. 
Sin is ignored as it is in God’s sight, and any 
divinely-given sense of our ruin., 

But a larger call follows, and of deep practical 

M 


162 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


moment. “Humble yourselves before the Lord, 
and he will exalt you.” This too is a call to 
have it done once for all, like the rest—an 
accomplished act, and not a mere process going 
on. But as in the other cases, so in this, the 
believer is bound ever after to watch against 
every inconsistency with what is so done. 

The next admonition is on evil speaking 
and the judicial spirit which is so often its 
root. 

«Speak not against one another, brethren. 
He that speaketh against a brother, or 
judgeth his brother, speaketh against law and 
judgeth law; but if thou judgest law, thou 
art not a doer of law but a judge. One is 
the law-giver and judge that is able to save 
and destroy ; but who art thou that judgest 
thy neighbour” (vers, II, 12)? 

Here was the suited place to apply 
particularly what the Epistle had in chap. ii. 
guarded against in a general way, when on all 
it impressed slowness in speaking as well as in 
wrath. This was pursued again in chap. iii. 
to the strict government of the tongue from 
over-readiness to teach; seeing that fair words 
and foul from the same lips ought not so 
to be, and may easily prove occasion of 
stumbling. Here it follows the exposure of 


CHap. FV; 17,) 12 163 


the inward spring of selfwill in violence and 
corruption, without duly heeding scripture and 
the Spirit Who leads to prayer with subjection 
to God, and confidence in Him and _ His 


grace. 
The exhortation is as to our ordinary but 
God-fearing intercourse. The necessities of 


godly discipline are not in question. Holy 
love is bound to rebuke what is wrong in 
those guilty of it, and to warn those who may 
be endangered by the evil example. Wrong 
in these cases must be laid bare though it 
ought to be in sorrow; but it is due to the 
Lord, and for the profit of those concerned. 
If there be a public snare and peril, this 
makes a corresponding admonition to be a 
duty, and is love in truth. 

But to spread disparagement or discreditable 
imputations without a call from God according 
to His word, and with no effort to seek the 
good of the alleged evil-doers, is not only far 
from Christ, but beneath even a Jew. There 
is neither truth nor jove in detraction, but 
constant liability to false witness: a multitude 
must not be followed to do such uncomely 
turns, any more than to favour a poor man 
in his cause. The nearness of our relation- 
ship is apt to lend occasion to freedom of 


164 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


speech, but it clearly ought rather to enforce 
on us the greater caution. “Speak not against 
one another, brethren.” Entreaty or re- 
monstrance may be called for; but angry 
and especially habitual depreciation is unworthy 
of those that bear the Lord’s name. Is it 
to injure? How does He regard it? “He 
that speaketh against a brother, or judgeth 
his brother, speaketh against law, and judgeth 
law ; but if thou judgest law, thou art not 
a doer of law but a judge.” Not only the 
uncharitable act, but the judicial assumption 
which it must involve, are here exposed with 
transparent soundness. The brother spoken 
against may be innocent; the evil speaker 
is certainly in a false position and an injurious 
state. The authority which all acknowledge 
condemns him, at least of being censorious, 
usurping the seat of judgment, and disputing 
the authority he invokes, Nor is God mocked : 
for we reap as we sow, if of flesh corruption ; 
if of Spirit, life everlasting, 

“But if thou judgest law, thou are not a 
doer of law but a judge.” How true it is 
that the readiest to blame others are the 
least careful over themselves, and need most 
correction for their heedless ways and_ their 
hasty judgments! 


CuHap,- 1Vi13-15 165 


How solemn too the appeal to conscience! 
“One is the law-giver and judge, that is 
able to save and destroy.” How grave 
is the rebuke to any who so offend! “But 
who art thou that judgest thy neighbour?” 
Grace and self-judgment can alone enable us 
to abhor the evil and cleave to the good: 
may we cultivate both. 

Thence the Epistle turns to that unbelieving 
spirit and inconsiderate speech too often bor- 
rowed from the world by those who know and 
ought to feel how all things hang on God’s 
will. 

“Go to now, ye that say, To-day or to- 
morrow we will go to this city here and spend 
there a year, and traffic and make gain, whereas 
ye know not what [will be] the morrow. Of 
what sort [is] your life? Why, it is a vapour 
that appeareth for a little and then disappeareth, 
instead of your saying, If the Lord will, we 
shall both live and do this or that” (vers: 
13-15). 

It is plain that the levity of the sentiment 
goes deeper than the words, and betrays the 
readiness of man’s mind to leave God out of the 
ordinary round of life, especially in the affairs of 
business. But to bring Him in and to refer to 
His will with integrity would cover the greater 


166 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


part of every day. Christ, yea Christianity also, 
shows that as there is nothing too great for us 
to receive from God, so there is nothing too 
little for God to direct us in. His will embraces 
all that is humble, all that is glorious. Christ is 
not the witness only but the fulness in both. 
Who ever came so low? Who is now gone so 
high? And He is the life of every Christian, 
who is therefore called to walk as He did. But 
there we fail, as Christ never did; in Whom 
nothing is more wonderful than His unwavering 
obedience; He is indeed the only Man Who 
always did without exception the things which 
pleased His Father. 

It is then our duty, as it is our privilege, to 
consult the will of our God and Father day by 
day, and throughout each day. In our prayer 
and in His word we find the means; or, as our 
Lord Himself put the case perfectly, “If ye 
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye 
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done to 
you.” For He begins with our constant reliance 
on Him, and He ends with the assurance of our 
having what we ask; for, so doing, one only 
asks what is according to God’s will. 

After knowing so blessed a reality as Christ’s 
walk on earth, leaving us an example that we 
should follow His steps, is it not then a dead 


Cuap. IV. 13-15 167 


loss and a deep wrong, that any Christian should 
walk as the heathen that know not God? One 
can understand Elijah taunting the recreant 
Jews. who followed Baal, and especially Baal’s 
priests who vainly called on that demon to 
answer by fire. “Cry aloud: for he is a god. 
Either he is musing, or he is gone aside, or he 
is on a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth 
and must be awaked.” But he who believes on 
Christ knows Him active in the richest love 
to bless now and evermore, God revealed too 
as His Father and our Father, His God and 
our God. Are we not then to lay before Him 
every difficulty and every desire? Are we not 
to respond to His grace by our devotedness? 
Are not we too sanctified by the Spirit unto 
obedience, and this obedience, not of a Jew 
under the law, but under grace, yea expressly 
to an obedience like His own, of sons with 
the Father? As children of obedience, it is not 
for us to fashion ourselves according to our 
former lusts in our ignorance; but as He that 
called us is holy, so may it be with us in all 
manner of living. Now the main spring of this 
practical course is seeking to walk in His 
will. 

But Christian profession, and _ perhaps 
especially among the Israelites, was fast slipping 


168 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


into worldliness and naturalism, as we hear it 
pungently described in these verses. Not only 
is it unworthy of God’s child; it is practical 
impiety. Who and what is a man that fears 
God to talk of his plans for to-day or to-morrow 
without a thought of Him? Who and what is 
he to leave where he is and go to this city here, 
to spend there a year? And how? To traffic 
and make gain! “Whereas,” says our Epistle 
“ye know not what will be on the morrow.” 
How simple yet withering! “Of what sort is 
your life? Why, it is a vapour that appeareth 
for a little and then disappeareth.” Of course 
no more is here spoken of than our earthly 
existence, our life in the world. Instead of that 
we ought to say, “If the Lord will, we shall 
both live and do this or that.” Impossible to 
resist the force of this appeal. Our living here 
below falls as much under the Lord’s will, as 
our doing this or that. How wretched to ignore 
Him! How happy to know His will and to do 
it | 

The closing verses disclose the root of this 
practical leaving God out of daily life and 
language, but deepen the censure by pointing 
to that unselfish goodness to which every one 
is called who has the faith of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


Cuap. IV. 16, 17 169 


“But now ye glory in your vauntings: all 
such glorying is wicked. To one knowing to 
do a comely thing, and not doing [it], it is a 
sin to him” (vers. 16, 17). 

The only befitting state of a creature is 
dependence on God; with this all vauntings, 
as if our life were within our power and every 
act of it free for our own disposal, is wholly 
at issue. Bought with a price, we with such 
feelings and ways defraud Him to Whom 
we belong; and all the more, if according 
to God’s own will we derive our new nature 
from Him by the word of truth. We are 
called to keep up the family character. Of 
this He Who had sovereign rights has set 
us the perfect exemplar; for Lord of glory 
as He is, He came down to be a bondman 
and was to the uttermost. Love animated Him 
in an obedience which never flagged; as love 
sent Him on our behalf, not only to save us 
when lost, but to conform us in heart and to 
fashion our ways and words. What can be 
more opposed than vauntings, unless it be to 
glory in them? Instead of it, let us be 
ashamed when we consider what we are in 
such godless pride, and what He was, Who, 
though rich, for our sakes became poor, that 
we through His poverty might be made rich, 


170 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


but rich only in the unseen and _ eternal. 
Are we any better in ourselves? Is it not 
solely in Him? How senseless, unworthy, 
and inconsistent to glory in our vauntings! 
Truly “all such glorying is wicked”; it savours 
not of Christ, but of the devil’s inflation. 

But we cannot, as confessors of the Lord 
Jesus deny what we have by faith seen and 
heard of Him. In virtue of life in Him we 
know the thing that becomes the Christian ; for 
we are not ignorant of that which was mani- 
fested in Him, Who was its fulness and 
never allowed the entrance of the least 
foreign element. It is not here goodness in 
the form of benevolence (ayadrv), though we 
are surely to follow Him in that path also 
(Gal. vi. 10). Here it is what is honourably right 
({cadov) in one who professes not to be a man 
only, but to be born of God. If knowing it 
therefore, we are engaged to do it; and if one 
does it not, to him it is sin, 

It is evident that this goes far beyond the 
Puritan and even more widely human 
perversion of 1 John iii, 4, which pervades 
systematic divinity. It ought to be absurd in 
any intelligent eyes to think that James 
penetrates more deeply than the beloved 
disciple. No law is in question but “the 


Cuap. IV. 16, 17 ai 


law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus”; it 
is the law of liberty, not of bondage. John 
however does not speak of “the transgression 
of the law,” which has its own _ proper 
expression elsewhere; he presents the true 
and faithful character of sin, even where law 
was unknown: “sin is lawlessness.” It is the 
principle and exercise of  self-will, and not 
only breach of the law. Being a_ reciprocal 
proposition, lawlessness is sin as truly as sin 
is lawlessness. Here our Epistle applies the 
truth on the positive side. God’s will is that 
we should do a thing that is right or comely 
when we know it: if we know and do it 
not, we sin. It is our own will that hinders; 
and this is always sin. 


CHAPTERS Y: 


The address at the beginning of the Epistle 
helps not a little to account for the peculiarity 
of the denunciation of the rich with which our 
chapter opens, as well as other passages after- 
wards and before it. If directed to the twelve 
tribes that are in the dispersion, there is no 
difficulty ; if it contemplated like Peter’s two 
Epistles only such as are saints, not a little 
would sound harsh, to say the least. But as 
the inspired writer was led to take wider ground 
from the start, the true key of interpretation 
is put into our hands thereby. 

“Come then, ye rich, weep, howling over 
your miseries that are coming on. Your wealth 
is corrupted, and your garments are become 
moth-eaten. Your gold and your silver are 
rusted through, and their rust shall be for a 
witness to you, and shall eat your flesh as 
fire. Ye laid up treasure in [the] last days, 
Behold, the hire of the labourers who reaped 
your fields, that is kept back of you, [or, from 
you] calleth out; and the cries of those that 
reaped entered into the ears of Jehovah of 
hosts. Ye lived luxuriously on the earth and 

(172) 


Cuap. V. 1-6 173 


indulged yourselves; ye nourished your hearts 
in a day of slaughter. Ye condemned, ye slew 
the just one: he doth not resist you” (vers. 1-6). 

The day of the Lord could not but be 
prominent before a godly Israelite imbued with 
the reiterated warnings of the prophets; and 
it is still hanging over man on the earth. The 
covenant people of old were prone to regard 
themselves as exceptions; but for their delusion 
they had no warrant or even excuse from 
scripture. The more privileged, if faithless, are 
the more guilty. “You only have I known of 
all the families of the earth; therefore I will 
punish you for all your iniquities.” The gospel 
brings in grace, and through faith deliverance ; 
but the moral principles of divine government 
are immutable. God’s wrath is revealed from 
heaven against all ungodlines, and unrighteous- 
ness of men that hold the truth in unrighteous- 
ness. 

The poor are sinners no less than the rich; 
each have their special snares and dangers. 
But it is far harder for a rich man than for 
a poor one to follow Christ truly. Therefore, said 
He to His disciples, “Verily I say to you, 
It is hard for a rich man to enter into the 
kingdom of the heavens, And again I say to 
you, It is easier for a camel to enter through 


174 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


the eye of a needle than for a rich man to 
enter into the kingdom of God.” 

Here however they in a _ general and 
unsparing way are warned solemnly of their 
miseries that are coming on. The reader may 
profitably compare Isa. ii. 7 to the end: only 
idols are not set forth by the Epistle as in the 
prophecy. But that day will deal with every 
one that is proud and lofty, and with every 
one that is lifted up, with every high tower, 
and every fenced wall, jwith all the ships of 
Tarshish and with all pleasant works of art. 
God is against their cherished wealth, and 
their endless store of raiment. To his eye that 
saw under the surface all was corruption, their 
gold and silver rusted throughout, the rust a 
witness to them and to eat their flesh as fire. 
The selfish unbelief that laid up treasures in 
closing days was no trifle in God’s sight. 

But they are charged with wanton cruelty 
and fraud in their dealings with the labourers 
who reaped their -fields. Their very wealth 
tempts the rich to withhold payment of wages 
to the poor; their own things are alone of 
moment in their eyes, while they postpone to 
a convenient season the claims of such as live 
from hand to mouth, But the debt cries aloud 
to Him Who ever feels for the poor, as He 


Cuap. V. 7-11 175 


showed Who alone made Him fully known. 
Yes, the cries of the reapers, which may not 
have reached the rich, entered into the ears of 
the Lord of hosts, and His blow would fall 
when least expected. 

The rich are next arraigned for their 
luxurious living on the earth, as if the God of 
heaven regarded it not. In a world of wretch- 
edness and want, they indulged themselves, as 
if they were not stewards and had no account 
to render ; they nourished their hearts in a day 
of slaughter, as heedless as the beasts slain for 
food of man. 

Another charge follows, still more tremendous : 
“Ye condemned, ye slew the just one: he doth 
not resist you.” This made their guilt less 
excusable. “ He did no sin, nor was guile found 
in his mouth; who, when reviled, reviled not 
again, when suffering, threatened not, but gave 
[himself] up to him that judgeth justly.” 

At this point the Holy Spirit brings in the 
coming of the Lord, It is indeed a truth of the 
utmost moment and cf the largest application 
practically; and all the inspired were led to 
interweave it into their communications. 

“Be patient, therefore, brethren, until the 
coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman 
waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, being 


176 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


patient for (or, over) it, until it receive early and 
latter rain. Be ye also patient; stablish your 
hearts; for the coming of the Lord is at hand. 
Murmur (or, groan) not, brethren, one against 
another, that ye be not judged. Behold, the 
judge standeth before the door. Take, brethren, 
for anexample of suffering and of patience, the 
prophets who spoke in the name of [the] Lord. 
Behold, we call them blessed who endured. Ye 
heard of the endurance of Job, and saw the 
Lord’s end; for the Lord is full of compassion, 
and merciful” (vers, 7-11). 

What motive to long suffering so powerful as 
the Lord’s coming! Good shall then be at ease, 
and evil be smitten down all over the earth. 
He will have the glory to Whom it is due. The 
heavens and earth shall be united under His head- 
ship Who is Heir of all things. His own, even in 
the body conformed to His image, as they once 
suffered with Him, shall then be glorified and 
reign with Him. Israel no longer idolatrous, 
the Jew despising no more their Messiah, shall 
have Him their King, Jehovah’s anointed King 
on His holy hill of Zion. All the nations will 
bow in willing subjection to His righteous sceptre, 
envious no more of His choice: all that see the 
elect people in that day shall acknowledge them, 
that they are the seed which Jehovah hath 


CHAP. V. 7-11 177 


blessed. In their Father’s kingdom on high shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun ; and, below, 
the Son of man shall send forth His angels, who 
shall gather out of His kingdom all stumbling- 
blocks and those that do iniquity. Then 
Jehovah will answer the heavens, and they shall 
answer the earth; and the earth shall answer 
the corn, and the wine and the oil; and they 
shall answer Jezree]l. And Jehovah will sow 
her unto Him in the land, and will have mercy 
on her that had not obtained mercy; and He 
will say to them which were not His people, 
Thou art my people, and they shall say, My 
God. And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, 
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and 
the calf and the young lion and the fatling 
together ; and a little child shalllead them. And 
the cow and the bear shall feed; their young 
ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall 
eat straw like the ox. The sucking child too 
shall play on the hole of the asp, and the 
weaned child shall put his hand on the basil- 
isk’s den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in 
all my holy mountain. For the earth shall be 
full of the knowledge of Jehovah, as the waters 
cover the sea. 

Such are the consequences of that glorious 


event. But His presence is more than all the 
N 


178 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


rest to those that love Himself. Nor is there 
any truth which has a mightier effect (next to 
faith in His person, His love, and His death) in 
detaching from the world and its snares on the 
one hand, and in sustaining under its hatred 
and persecution on the other. Be patient, 
therefore, brethren, until the coming of the Lord. 
It is not the providential dealing with Jerusalem 
and the Jews, any more than death ridding 
sufferers from the troubles of this life. These 
are the misinterpretations of fallen Christendom. 
The truth is the hope of His own coming, 
which will first act on all the saints dead or 
living to give them consummated blessedness, 
and next on the land and people of Israel, as 
well as on all the earth. 

Doubtless we have to await the moment of 
the Father’s will. So does the farmer for the 
good produce of the earth, till it receive the 
needed rain from above, both early and later. 
How much more should we stablish our hearts 
in patience, whose hope is so much more excel- 
lent, till the last believer is called! for the Lord’s 
coming hath drawn nigh. Can we not trust Him 
Who gave us His Son, and with Him all 
things ? 

There is another danger, besides impatience, 
which it corrects. We are apt to murmur, or 


Cuap. Vi weld 179 


groan, one against another. How unwise, un- 
gracious, and unbelieving! With what measure 
we mete, it shall be measured to us again. To 
judge is to be judged. How much better to 
wait in patience, overcoming evil with good! 
Why should we judge? “Behold, the judge 
standeth before the door.” The time is at 
hand. 

Incredulity says that this was the error of 
the apostolic church. On the contrary it was the 
simple strength of their hope; and they reaped 
the blessing it gave them. If they fell asleep, 
it was also to wait with Christ, instead of only 
for Him. It is the true, intended, and constant 
hope of the Christian, as living now as from 
the day of Pentecost. Christ Himself is waiting 
for that moment; so all saints were once, and 
all ought to be now. 

Nor is our Lord the only pattern for us. 
“Take, brethren, for an example of suffering 
and of patience, the prophets, who spoke in the 
name of the Lord.” We tread the same path 
with yet brighter hope, though in substance the 
same. Yet another incentive is added, of no 
slight force. “Behold, we call them blessed 
which endured. Ye heard of the endurance of 
Job, and saw the Lord’s end; for the Lord is full 
of compassion and merciful.” A whole book of 


180 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


scripture is devoted to this aim. How fully Job 
was vindicated against the detraction of friends ! 
And how blessed of Jehovah, when self was 
judged! Let us be of good cheer, not hearing 
only, but truly profiting. 

From the need of patient endurance we 
are next warned of the danger of light or 
thoughtless asseverations in ordinary speech: 
a common habit among both Jews and Greeks, 
but wholly unworthy of Him Who is the truth, 
the great exemplar for all who confess Him 
Lord. 

“But before all things, my brethren, swear 
not, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor 
by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, 
and nay nay, lest ye fall under judgment” 
(ver, 12). 

As sinning with the tongue is throughout 
denounced, so here in particular the lack of 
reverence. For though the oaths in question 
refer to the creature rather than to God, 
though they may affect care for His name by 
substituting other forms for His; who entitles 
men to adopt anything of the sort in daily 
intercourse? He is the Judge, Who has 
assured us that of every idle word that men 
speak they shall give account in the day that 
comes; “for by thy words thou shalt be 


CHAP. V. 12 181 


justified, and by thy words thou shalt be 
condemned.” 

Indeed on the mount, in the great series 
of discourses of which the first Gospel gives 
the summary, the Lord had pronounced on 
the same wrong. “Again, ye have heard that 
it was said to those of old time, Thou shalt not 
perjure thyself, but shalt perform to Jehovah 
thy vows; but I say to thee, Swear not at 
all: neither by the heaven, for it is God’s 
throne; nor by the earth, for it is the footstool 
of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the 
city of the great King. No more shalt thou 
swear by thy head ; for thou canst not make one 
hair white or black. But let your word be yea, 
yea; nay, nay; for that which is more cometh 
of evil” (or, the evil one). The self-same duty 
is enforced as in this Epistle. 

It is a total mistake to conceive that by 
either a judicial oath is forbidden. The 
specimens given preclude such an_ inference. 
They are not such as the magistrate puts in a 
court or other occasion; they were, or might 
be, the common phrases of every day. The 
sense therefore is clearly given by the A.V. 
rendering of “your communication.” It was 
not an answer to the demand of one entitled 
to ask in God’s name. This every one is 


182 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


bound to give. So our Lord was silent till 
the High Priest adjured, or put the oath, with 
that authority; as the O.T. claims it in 
Lev. v. 1. Here it is only the case of man with 
man. Even without a magistrate, but on an 
adequately solemn occasion we have the apostle 
confirming what he taught the saints by an 
equivalent as in Rom. i. 9; ix. 1; 2 Cor. i. 23; 
Gal. 4. 20 {Phil 1.83 2° Thess: i. $$ some 
adjures his brethren in 1 Thess. v. 27. 

It is quite enough that in our converse with 
brethren or other men, our yea should be yea, 
and our naynay. “That which is more cometh of 
evil.” The believer is as responsible to speak 
as to act as in the presence of God. This is 
his habitual privilege, and safeguard. It may 
be forgotten by others, or by himself to his 
loss. The evil one is a liar and the father of 
it. No small opportunity would it be to him 
if the Christian were not always watchful to 
speak truly, and needed such expletives to 
gain credit for it. 

From this earnest exclusion of an approach 
to profane speech, we are next exhorted to the 
course that befits in suffering or in joy, as well 
as sickness. 

“Doth any among you suffer trouble? let 
him pray. Is any happy? let him sing praise. 


Cuap. V. 13-15 183 


Is any sick among you? let him call to him 
the elders of the assembly, and let them pray 
over him, anointing him with oil, in the name 
of the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall 
save (heal) the sick, and the Lord will raise 
him up, and if he have committed sins, it shall 
be forgiven him” (vers. 13-15). 

We are short in Christian intelligence if we 
do not know that all things work together for 
good to them that love God, to those that are 
called according to purpose. God often sends 
trouble as chastening for the good of His 
children. Sometimes as in 1 Cor. xi. it is 
because of positive sin; but they totally 
mistake who suppose that it is restricted to 
that. Heb. xii. puts it on ground quite in- 
dependent of so sorrowful an occasion, and 
treats it as flowing from His Fatherly love, and 
for profit, that we might be partakers of His 
holiness. It is as much or more to hinder sin 
as in consequence of its indulgence. It often 
is a trial of faith and an honour from the 
Lord, as the apostles so well knew, and many 
a simple saint in no such prominence. For 
the disciples as such are called through many 
tribulations to enter into the kingdom of 
God. 

But in any case “doth any among you 


184 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


suffer trouble? let him pray.” God is the 
resource in trouble; and the saint, instead of 
only bearing it or sinking under it, is exhorted 
to “pray.” He is encouraged to expect 
blessing in crying to God about the trouble. 
It is a practical victory over the enemy who 
seeks our loss by it, if our mildness or for- 
bearance be made known to all men, and 
our requests be made known to God. With 
unbelief it is the contrary: insisting on our 
rights as and with men, as if God entitled 
any to such a plea; and making demands 
or requests on men, instead of looking only 
thus to God. 

Then there is a time when one experiences 
circumstances of joy. “Is any happy? let him 
praise.” For gladness has its dangers no less, 
perhaps more, than trouble. It is apt to 
elate the spirit, throw us off our balance in the 
Lord, and expose us to levity in feeling, word 
and deed. The resource is to turn to Him in 
praise. Singing is not only due to Him Who 
gives happiness, but a safety-valve for His feeble 
ones, who easily at such a time slip from 
dependence. His praise recalls us to Him- 
self, 

There may also be the general or special 
need created by sickness. “Is any sick 


Cuap. V. 13-15 185 


among you? let him call to him the elders 
of the assembly, and let them pray over 
him, anointing him with oil in the name of 
[the] Lord.” It is good where any dealing 
of the Lord leads us to turn to Him, expecting 
not evil but good. In those days too, elders 
of the assembly were there, men of moral 
weight and spiritual judgment, whose place it 
was to intervene in difficulties of a personal 
as well as public nature. They might not 
be evangelists or teachers; but apt to teach 
they were required to be, men able to take up 
in love and truth and faithfulness the burdens 
of their brethren. The sick man is exhorted 
to summon such as they are to pray for him 
with that application of oil which Romanism 
has distorted so wholly from God’s mind. 
Extreme unction is a mere invention of super- 
stition, to smooth the way when hope of 
recovery is gone. 

It is remarkable that the inspired writer, 
though encouraging honour to the elders, 
attaches healing virtue, not to their official 
place or special art, but to prayer, and _ this 
of an efficacious sort through faith. He says 
“And the prayer of faith shall save [or, heal] 
the sick, and the Lord will raise him up.” 
What a contrast this is with the gloomy 


186 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


superstition which sends “a priest” to absolve 
him and give extreme unction, because his 
death is regarded as inevitable! For if he 
recover, he will need the same hateful parody 
over again. Yes, unclean and drunken harlot, 
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return, 
with no resurrection as being without life, 
nothing but a system of darkness and death. 

Then comes the special character of the 
sickness, carefully discriminated from the 
common, “and if he have committed sins, it 
shall be forgiven him.” It is a nice and 
notable point in the true rendering of the 
clause that the sins are in the plural, the for- 
giveness is in the singular, It is right that 
each and all should be judged in order; but 
grace gives the forgiveness in full. 

Verses 14, 15, fully present the blessing 
which rested on the assembly, and the honour 
God put on the elders. They were encouraged 
to pray for the sick and assured that the prayer 
of faith should heal him, and the Lord raise 
him up. The added clause took notice of sins 
done, which might trouble the heart, but it 
assures forgiveness. This leads to a more 
general statement which follows, 

“Confess therefore your sins for, ‘offences’ 
as in the common text] to one another, and 


CuHap. V. 16-18 187 


pray for one another, that ye may be healed. 
A righteous [one’s] supplication hath much 
power if it work. Elijah was a man of like 
passions with us, and he prayed prayerfully 
that it might not rain; and it rained not on 
the earth for three years and six months. And 
he prayed again; and the heaven gave rain, 
and the earth sprouted forth its fruit” 
(vers. 16-18). 

Here we find Christians exhorted, where 
failure came in, to confess their sins mutually, 
and so to pray, that healing might be granted. 
For there is a divine government which has 
ever thus dealt with the saints here below, as 
we may see in the Psalms as well as in the 
history of the ancient people of God. So 
there was outside Israel, as in the book of Job. 
Neither the gospel nor the church has changed 
this. The saving grace of God has appeared, 
as it did not till Christ and His work; but as 
surely as we call on a Father, He judges 
without respect of persons according to each 
one’s work, as the Lord taught the disciples in 
John xv. Sovereign grace abides in all its 
efficacy; but God does not fail in faithfulness 
to deal with us if unfaithful. We are there- 
fore enjoined to pass the time of our 
sojourning in fear, not as if we doubted, but 


188 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


on the contrary, as knowing consciously that we 
were redeemed with Christ’s precious blood as 
of an unblemished and spotless lamb. 

This is the more consolatory in the present 
anomalous state of Christendom, where tradition 
has wrought boundless havoc with the truth, 
and ecclesiastical order has been swamped with 
inventions of men to please human activity 
and hide the ruin which lawlessness has every- 
where brought about. Properly, elders needed 
apostolic authority, direct or indirect. Where 
this was not, and elders were lacking, or even 
men not easily found who had the qualities on 
which the apostle insisted to Timothy, the 
saints could and ought to confess their sins to 
one another with prayer ; nor would the Lord’s 
grace fail toward the need. A righteous one’s 
supplication avails much, where really at work, 

For this Elijah is cited, as one of like 
nature with ourselves, as indeed his inspired 
history reveals. But it also reveals how, as a 
judgment of God, rain should not fall for three 
years and six months because of a people 
rebellious and even apostate. Here we have, 
not the solemn sentence the prophets pro- 
nounced from God, but the inner work in the 
soul which preceded it, for which we are wholly 
indebted to this Epistle. He prayed again, 


CuHap. V. 19, 20 189 


and the heaven gave rain, and the earth 
sprouted forth its fruit; but we learn this 
second praying in the history as well as in 
the Epistle. Miracles it is a proud un- 
becoming thought to expect in the actual 
confusion that exists, yet with God and His 
word acknowledged. But God hears prayers 
with fatherly pleasure, and never fails to answer 
that which faith pours into His ears. 

It is faith, practical faith, which has been 
urged, faith exercised in energetic prayer. The 
Epistle does not close without an earnest 
pressure of love in a similarly active way, and 
indeed in manifest connexion. 

“My* brethren, if any among you should err 
fromt+ the truth, and one turn him back, let 
him know} that he that turned back a sinner 
from the error of his way shall save a [or, his||] 
soul from death, and shall cover a multitude 
of sins” (vers. 19, 20). 

One of the saddest results of spiritual weakness 
among Christians is the rarity of restoration. 
Discipline even in extreme degree is no less 


* The omission of the pronoun, as in the Text. Rec. according to the 
more modern copies, against the ancient and best authorities, both 
MSS. and Vy., detracts from the tenderness of the appeal. 


+The way of ” the truth seems an enfeebling addition, as in the 
Sinaitic and good cursives, besides venerable Versions. The weight 
of testimony is adverse. 


{ The Vatican Uncial, &c., give the plural ‘‘ Know ye.” 
I SAP, some good cursives, and ancient Versions give “his.” 


190 THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


due to our Lord, to our sacrificed Lord (1 Cor. 
v. 7, 8), than requisite in the best interests of 
the saints. For true love of our brethren is 
inseparable from loving God and keeping His 
commandments (1 John v. 1,2). But our God 
attests often and clearly and strongly His deep 
concern in the recovery of the straying and 
fallen; where self-righteousness displays its 
bitterness and indifference. Zeal for the credit 
of a sect or party and anxiety to stand well 
morally are as far as possible from the love we 
owe to Christ’s body and every member of it. 

For we are exhorted to forgive (or, show 
grace to) one another, as God also in Christ 
forgave us (Eph, iv. 32); yea, to be imitators 
of God, as beloved children, and to walk in 
love, even as Christ loved us and gave Himself 
up for us. But this love divine is meant to 
arm us against fellowship with the ways of 
darkness, seeing that we are light in the Lord 
to walk as children of light, the fruit of which 
is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth 
(Eph. v. 7-9). Hence the spiritual, in a spirit 
of meekness, are to restore one taken in some 
fault, “considering thyself lest thou also be 
tempted.” Hardness is unworthy of a Christian. 
“If thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he 
repent, forgive him. And if he should sin 


Cuap. V. 19, 20 IgI 


against thee seven times in a day, and seven 
times return to thee, saying, I repent, thou 
shalt forgive him” (Luke xvii. 3, 4). 

So here, if one brought back him that erred, 
or was led astray from the truth, let him know 
that in such a recovery he that brought him 
back from his way of error should “save a soul 
from death.” Here it is not a striking answer 
to the prayer of faith, but a rich cheer to the 
love that sought and won the wanderer. To 
have the sick healed and raised up as the fruit 
of prayer may strike the eye more; but how 
blessed to “save a soul from death”! Thus 
would our God encourage a spirit of grace in 
the thankful knowledge that love has _ its 
victories in a world of self and hatred and 
evil; and this, not only in regard of him that 
erred from the truth and its way, but in 
furnishing occasion, for that which is so pleasing 
to God in His government—-to “cover a multi- 
tude of sins.” If love do not flow, wrongs 
multiply, and God chastens, it may be severely ; 
for where is Christ in such a case? But if love 
prevail through His grace, God is_ glorified, 
and love covers a multitude of sins, which 
otherwise must draw out His rebukes. 


F, E. RACH, 3 & 4, London House Yard, Paternoster Row, London, B.C. 


me 


“ 


et 


Peete eee tet 
2, y rash ame ireacenees 
i Eevenrersiey p 


