^7^^^ 


/v^* 
/\>'' 


^ 


J3SZ5bb 

"v.n 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


ST.  JOH:Nr.    VOL.  Ill, 


Rev.  J.  0.  RYIE'S 

EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS 

ON  THE  GOSPELS. 


MATTHEW $1.50 

MARK 1.50 

LUKE.    2  vols 3. 

JOHN.    3  vols 4.5© 


"  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle  is  among  the  writers  of  tlie  present  age 
"whose  works  will  have  a  permanent  value.  He  takes  time  to 
mature  his  thoughts,  and  spares  no  toil  necessary  to  the  collec- 
tion of  the  most  valuable  materials.  His  '  Expository  Thoughts ' 
are  the  result  of  years  of  patient  and  diligent  research,  conducted 
in  connection  with  severe  parochial  duties  and  extensive  pulpit 
labors." — Pittsburgh  Gliristian  Advocate. 

"  The  author  is  a  ripe  scholar,  and  presents  here  the  fruits  of 
much  careful  research  and  critical  study. "—Christian  Era. 

"  Mr.  Ryle  writes  in  a  thoroughly  evangelical  and  deeply  rev- 
erent spirit.  We  warmly  commend  his  exegesis  as  wholesome 
for  the  Christian  world." — Congregationalist. 

"  The  *  Expository  Thoughts '  are  excellent  and  useful  aids 
to  Bible  study  and  devotion,  and  many  souls  will  be  comforted, 
blessed  and  instructed  by  so  clear,  practical  and  evangelical  a 
work." — N.  T.  Observer, 


Expository  Thoughts 

ON 

THE    GOSPELS. 

FOR   FAMILY  AND    PBIVATF    UjSF, 

BY 

THE  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE,  M.A., 

VICAR  OF  8TRADBKOKE, 

HONORARY  CANON  OF  NORWICH,  AND  RURAL  DKAN  OP 
HORNE,  SUFFOLK. 


ST.  JOHN. 
Vol.  m. 


NEW  YORK: 

EGBERT  CARTER  AND  BROTHERS, 

530  Broadway. 

1878. 


PREFACE. 


The  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  completes  a 
work  which  I  began  sixteen  years  ago,  entitled  "  Expos- 
itory Thoughts  on  the  Gospels."  By  the  good  hand  of 
God  that  work  is  now  finished.  For  this  I  desire  to  be 
deeply  thankful.  "  Better  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than 
the  beginning  of  it."     (Eccles.  vii.  8.) 

In  concluding  that  portion  of  the  work  which  is  de- 
voted to  St.  John's  Gospel,  I  think  it  right  to  make  a 
few  prefatory  remarks  about  the  "  Kotes. "  They  occu- 
py so  large  a  part  of  my  three  volumes  on  St.  John,  that 
my  readers  may  not  unreasonably  expect  me  to  give 
some  account  of  them.  Filling  up,  as  they  do,  at  least 
two-thirds  of  the  woTk,  and  necessarily  increasing  its 
cost,  they  require  some  defence  and  explanation.  Ques- 
tions such  as  these  will  naturally  arise  in  some  minds, — 
"  What  are  these  notes  ?  What  is  their  object  ?  What 
is  their  doctrinal  tone  ?  What  helps  have  been  used 
in  preparing  them?" — These  questions  I  propose  to  an- 
swer. 

(1)  My  object  in  writing  these  notes  on  St.  John's 
Gospel  is  soon  stated.  I  have  tried  to  explain,  in  simple 
language,  everything  in  the  text  which  needs  explana- 
tion, and  to  bring  all  available  light  to  bear  on  every 
verse  in  the  book.  In  trying  to  attain  this  object,  I 
have  given  not  only  my  own  thoughts  and  opinions,  but 
also  the  results  of  a  patient  study  of  about  seventy 
Commentators,  both  ancient  and  modern,  of  almost 
every  Church  and  school  in  Christendom.     I  have  en- 


yj  ±*KEJ^'ACE. 

deavored  to  handle  every  subject  raised  by  the  text, 
however  high  and  deep,  and  to  meet  the  requirements 
of  every  class  of  readers,  whether  educated  or  uneducat- 
ed. I  have  evaded  no  hard  passage,  and  turned  away 
from  no  difficulty.  I  am  very  sensible  that  I  have  often 
failed  to  hit  the  mark,  and  I  have  not  been  ashamed  in 
many  places  to  confess  my  ignorance.  Competent  crit- 
ics will  probably  detect  in  the  work  not  a  few  errors 
and  mistakes.  I  lay  no  claim  to  infallibility.  But  I 
can  honestly  say  that  I  have  never  handled  the  Word 
partially  or  deceitfully,  and  have  done  my  best  to  show 
*'  the  thing  as  it  is."  (Job  xxvi.  3.)  Some  controvert- 
ed points  I  have  ventured  to  discuss  in  annotations  of 
more  than  ordinary  length,  and  of  these  a  list  will  be 
found  appended  to  this  concluding  volume.  On  the 
whole  I  cannot  help  hoping,  that,  in  spite  of  many  defi- 
ciencies, the  notes  will  be  found  a  help  to  thoughtful 
readers  of  St.  John's  Gospel. 

(2)  The  doctrinal  tone  of  the  notes,  I  must  frankly 
avow,  is  thoroughly  and  unmistakably  evangelical.  Af- 
ter patiently  studying  St.  John's  Gospel  for  twelve 
years,  with  much  thought,  much  labor,  much  examina- 
tion of  the  writings  of  others,  and,  I  hope  I  may  add, 
with  some  earnest  prayers,  my  theological  opinions  are 
what  they  were  when  I  began  to  write.  In  these  twelve 
years  I  trust  I  have  learned  many  things  :  but  I  can 
truly  say  that  I  have  seen  no  reason  to  alter  my  views 
of  doctrine.  My  conviction  is  firm  and  decided,  that 
the  theology  of  that  religious  school  in  the  Church  of 
England,  which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  is  called  Evangeli- 
cal, is  thoroughly  Scriptural,  and  a  theology  of  which 
no  Christian  man  need  be  ashamed. 

I  freely  confess  that,  with  increasing  years  and  ex- 
perience, I  have  learned  to  think  more  kindly  and  char- 
itably than  I  once  did,  of  theologians  who   belong  to 


PREFACE.  yjj 

other  schools  than  my  own.  I  am  more  and  more  con- 
vinced every  year  I  live,  that  there  are  many  Christians 
whose  hearts  are  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  while  their 
heads  are  very  wrong.  I  am  more  and  more  convinced, 
that  the  differences  between  schools  of  religious  thought 
are  frequently  more  nominal  than  real,  more  verbal  than 
actual,  and  that  many  of  them  would  melt  away  and 
disappear,  if  men  would  only  define  the  terms  and  words 
they  use  with  logical  accuracy.  But,  for  all  this,  I  can- 
not shrink  from  saying,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  at 
present  I  know  no  theology  which  appears  to  me  so 
thoroughly  in  accordance  with  Scripture  as  Evangelical 
theology.  In  the  belief  of  this  I  have  written  my  notes 
on  St.  John,  and  in  the  faith  of  this  I  hope  to  die. 
With  the  Bible  only  in  my  hands,  I  find  difficulties  in 
the  systems  of  non-Evangelical  schools,  which  to  ray 
mind  appear  insuperable. 

(3)  Concerning  the  Commentators  I  have  consulted, 
m  preparing  my  notes  on  St.  John,  I  wish  to  make  a 
few  remarks  for  the  benefit  of  my  younger  readers,  and 
of  those  who  have  not  access  to  large  libraries.  I  see 
no  reason  to  alter  the  opinions  which  I  expressed  seven 
years  ago,  in  the  Preface  to  my  first  volume.  After  pa- 
tiently studying  Cyril,  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and 
Theophylact,  for  twelve  years,  it  is  my  deliberate  con- 
viction that  their  Commentaries  on  the  Gospels  are 
often  overrated  and  overpraised,  and  that  those  who 
lead  young  students  of  theology  to  expect  to  find  "all 
wisdom "  in  the  Fathers,  are  neither  wise  nor  kind. 
After  an  equally  patient  examination  of  the  modern 
German  Commentators,  Tittman,  Tholuck,  Olshausen, 
Stier,  and  Hengstenberg,  T  am  obliged  to  say  that  I 
leave  them  with  a  feeling  of  disappointment.  About 
them  also  I  raise  a  warning  cry  for  the  benefit  of  young 
students.      I   advise   them   not    to    expect    too    much. 


YJiJ  PEEFACE. 

Writers  like  Hengstenberg  and  Stier  are  well  worth 
reading;  but  I  cannot  say  that  any  modern  German 
Commentators  seem  to  me  to  deserve  the  extravagant 
commendation  which  is  often  bestowed  on  them.  In 
fact  I  have  a  strong  suspicion  that  many  praise  German 
theology  without  having  read  it ! 

For  throwing  light  on  the  meaning  of  the  text  of  St. 
John,  and  for  raising  just  and  beautiful  thoughts  out  of 
it,  my  opinion  is  distinct  and  decided,  that  there  are  no 
Commentaries  equal  to  those  of  the  Continental  divines 
who  lived  immediately  after  the  Protestant  Reforma- 
tion. Unfortunately  they  wrote  in  Latin,  which  few 
persons  care  to  read  ;  and  their  books  are,  generally, 
huge,  lumbering  folios,  which  few  care  to  handle. 
Moreover,  they  are  sometimes  defective  in  verbal  criti- 
cism, and  were,  most  of  them,  more  familiar  with  Latin 
than  Greek.  But  taking  them  for  all  in  all,  as  Exposi- 
tors and  Elucidators  of  God's  Word,  in  my  judgment, 
there  is  nothing  like  them.  The  man  who  has  carefully 
read  the  expositions  of  Brentius,  Bullinger,  Gualter, 
Musculus,  and  Gerhard,  will  find  that  later  Commenta- 
ries rarely  contain  any  good  thoughts  which  are  not  to 
be  found  in  these  five  writers,  and  that  they  say  many 
excellent  things  which  have  not  occurred  to  later  writ- 
ers at  all.  Why  these  great  Expositors  are  so  totally 
ignored  and  neglected  in  the  nineteenth  century,  I  do 
not  pretend  to  explain.  Some  modern  theologians  seem 
not  even  to  be  aware  that  such  Commentators  as  Bren- 
tius, Musculus,  and  Gerhard,  ever  existed  !  But  the 
fact  is  one  which  reflects  little  credit  on  our  times. 

I  shall  say  little  or  nothing  about  the  works  of  Brit- 
ish Commentators.  This  is  a  department  of  theological 
literature  in  which,  I  must  plainly  say,  I  do  not  think 
my  fellow-countrymen  shine.  With  rare  exceptions, 
they  appear  to  me  to  fall  below  the  level  of  their  repu- 


PEEFACE.  ix 

tation.  I  shall  therefore  content  myself  with  naming  a 
few  Commentaries,  which  appear  to  me  more  than  or- 
dinarily useful  and  suggestive,  and  which  I  have  seldom 
consulted  in  vain. — Rollock  on  John  is  excellent  ;  and 
it  is  a  great  pity  that  the  whole  work  is  not  translated, 
instead  of  lying  buried  in  Latin. — Hutcheson  is  always 
good  ;  but  his  value  is  sadly  marred  by  his  interminable 
divisions,  uses,  applications,  and  inferences. — Matthew 
Henry  is  generally  rich  in  pious  thoughts  and  pleasing 
illustrations,  and  sometimes  exhibits  more  learning  and 
acquaintance  with  books,  than  he  is  commonly  credited 
with. — Poole's  "  Annotations "  are  sound,  clear,  and 
sensible  ;  and,  taking  him  for  all  in  all,  I  place  him  at 
the  head  of  English  Commentators  on  the  whole  Bible. 
— Alford  and  "Wordsworth  have  done  good  service  to 
the  Church  by  their  works  on  the  Greek  Testament,  and 
I  know  none  at  present  that  I  can  sooner  recommend  to 
a  student  of  the  original.  But  they  both  say,  occasion- 
ally, things  with  which  I  cannot  agree,  and  they  often 
seem  to  me  to  leave  important  texts  very  scantily  ex- 
pounded, or  entirely  unnoticed.*  A  fuller  and  more 
satisfactory  commentary  on  the  Greek  Testament  ap- 
pears to  me  to  be  still  wanted. — Burgon's  "  Plain  Com- 
mentary on  the  Gospels "  is  an  excellent,  suggestive, 
and  devout  work.  But  I  cannot  agree  with  him,  when 
he  touches  such  subjects  as  the  Church,  the  Sacraments, 
and  the  Ministry. — ^In  fact,  the  conclusion  I  arrive  at, 
after  a  diligent  examination  of  many  Commentators,  is 
always  one  and  the  same.  I  trust  none  of  them  unre- 
servedly, and  I  expect  nowhere  to  find  perfection.  All 
must  be  read  with  caution.  They  are  good  helps,  but 
they  are  not  infallible.     They  are  useful  assistants,  but 

*  As  examples  of  what  I  mean,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Words- 
worth on  John  xvii.  4-20,  very  scantily  expounded,  in  my  judg- 
ment ;  and  to  Alford  on  John  x.  27,  28,  not  expounded  at  all  I 


X  PEEFACE. 

they  are  not  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  I  advise  my 
younger  readers  to  remember  that.  Use  your  own 
judgment  prayerfully  and  diligently.  Use  commenta- 
ries; but  be  a  slave  to  none.     Call  no  man  master.* 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  express  my  regret, 
that  the  completion  of  my  "Expository  Thoughts  on 
the  Gospels  "  has  been  so  long  delayed.  The  delay  has 
arisen  from  causes  entirely  beyond  my  control.  The 
work  was  first  begun  in  a  little  quiet  parish  of  three 
hundred  people,  and  then  brought  to  a  standstill  by 
heavy  domestic  affliction.  It  has  been  resumed,  and 
carried  on,  amidst  many  interruptions,  in  an  isolated  ru- 
ral parish  of  1,300  souls,  in  which,  after  coming  into 
residence,  I  found  a  parsonage  had  to  be  repaired,  large 
schools  had  to  be  built,  and  a  huge  old  dilapidated 
church  had  to  be  restored.  In  the  face  of  these  difficul- 
ties and  distractions,  I  can  only  wonder  that  I  have 
been  enabled  to  finish  my  work  on  St.  John  at  all. 

The  book  is  now  sent  forth,  with  a  deep  conviction 
in  the  author's  mind,  that  it  contains  many  defects,  in- 
accuracies, and  blemishes,  but  with  an  earnest  desire 
and  prayer  that  it  may  help  some  readers  to  a  better 
understanding  of  one  of  the  most  interesting  portions 
of  Holy  Scripture.  I  never  felt  more  persuaded  than  I 
do  in  the  present  day  of  the  truth  of  the  old  saying, 
"  Ignorance  of  Scripture  is  the  root  of  all  error."  If 
I  can  lessen  that  ignorance  a  little  I  shall  be  very 
thankful. 

The  concluding  paragraph  of  Dean  Alford's  "  Prole- 
gomena "  to  his   "  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Revela- 

*  A  full  list  of  Commentators,  whom  I  have  consulted,  more 
or  less,  in  preparing  my  notes  on  St.  John,  will  be  found  in  the 
preface  to  my  first  volume.  From  that  list  the  following  authors 
were  omitted, — Hengstenberg  on  "John,"  Manton,  Newton,  Bur- 
gess, and  Traill,  on  the  "  17th  chapter  of  John,"  and  Bishop  An- 
drews' Sermons. 


PEEFACE.  Xi 

tion,"  so  thoroughly  expresses  my  own  feelings,  on 
completing  my  work  on  St.  John's  Gospel,  that  I  make 
no  excuse  for  inserting  it  here,  with  the  omission  of  a 
few  words : — 

"  I  have  now  only  to  commend  to  my  gracious  God 
and  Father  this  feeble  attempt  to  explain  a  most  glori- 
ous portion  of  His  revealed  Scripture.  I  do  it  with 
hnmble  thankfi/lness,  but  with  a  sense  of  utter  weakness 
before  the  power  of  His  word,  and  of  inability  to  sound 
the  depth  even  of  its  simplest  sentence.  May  he  spare 
the  hand  which  has  been  put  forward  to  touch  the  ark  ! 
May  He,  for  Christ's  sake,  forgive  all  rashness,  all  per- 
verseness,  all  uncharitableness,  which  may  be  found  in 
this  book  !  And  may  He  sanctify  it  to  the  use  of  His 
Church :  its  truth,  if  any,  for  teaching  ;  its  manifold  de- 
fects for  warning." 

J.  C.  RYLE. 
Stradbroke  Vicarage,  Suffolk, 
February,  1873. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


John.                *  page 

XIII.  1 — 5.    Christ's  patient  and  continuing  love, — 

the  deep  corruption  of   some  profes- 

sprs  ....               .        ,  1 — 4 

6 — 15.  Peter's  ignorance, — plain  practical  les- 
sons,— deep  spiritual  lessons  .  12 — 16 

16 — 20.  Christians  should  not  be  ashamed  to  imi- 
tate Christ, — uselessness  of  knowledge 
without  practice,  —  Christ's  perfect 
knowledge  of  all  His  people, — the  dig- 
nity of  discipleship        .        .        .  22—26 

21 — 30.  The  troubles  which  Christ  endured, — the 
power  and  malignity  of  the  devil, — the 
hardness  of  a  backslider        ,        .  29 — 33 

31 — 38.  The  crucifixion  glorifying  to  the  Father 
and  the  Son, — the  importance  of  broth- 
erly love, — the  self-ignorance  that  may 
be  in  a  true  believer       .        .        .  39 — 43 

XIV.  1 — 3.    Remedy  for  heart-trouble, — an  account 

of  heaven, — ground  for  expecting  good 

things 49—63 

4 — 11.  Believers  better  thought  of  by  Christ 
than  by  themselves, — glorious  names 
given  to  Christ, — only  one  way  to  God, 
— close  union  of  Father  and  Son  .  D7 — 61 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 
JOHN.  PAGE 

12 — 17.  Works  that  Cliristians  may  do, — ^things 
tliat  prayer  may  obtain, — promise  of 
the  Comforter         ....  66—70 

18 — ^20.  Christ's  second  coming, — Christ's  .life  the 
life  of  His  people, — perfect  knowledge 
not    attained    till    second    advent   of 


Christ 


74—77 


21 — ^26.  Keeping  Christ's  commandments  the  best 
test  of  love, — special  comforts  of  those 
who  love  Christ, — Holy  Ghost's  teach- 
ing and  reminding  work        ,        , 


79—82 


27 — 81.  Christ's    last    legacy  to    His    people,  — 
Christ's  perfect  sinlessness    . 


86—89 


XV.  1 — 6.  Close  union  of  Christ  and  believers, — 
false  Christians, — fruit  only  safe  evi- 
dence of  life, — God  increases  holiness 
by  providential  chastisement 


93—97 


7 — 11.  Promises  to  prayer,  —  fruitfulness  the 
best  evidence, — obedience  the  secret  of 
sensible  comfort     ....        103 — 107 

12 — 16.  Brotherly  love, — relation  between  Christ 

and  believers, — election  .        .        109 — 113 

17 — ^21.  What  Christians  must  expect  from  the 

world, — reasons  for  patience  .        117 — 118 


22 — ^27.  Misuse  of  privileges, — the  Holy  Ghost, — 

office  of  the  Apostles     -        .        .        121 — 125 

XVI.  1 — ^7.  A  remarkable  prophecy,  -warning  against 
taking  offence  at  trouble, — reasons  why 
Christ  went  away    ....        129—134 

8 — 15.  Holy  Ghost's  work  for  the  the  Jews, — 

Holy  Ghost's  work  for  the  world  .        139—142 


CONTENTS. 
JOHN. 

16 — 24.  Christ's  absence  a  sorrow  to  believers, — 
Christ's  second  coming  a  joy  to  believ- 
ers,—  duty   of  prayer  in   Christ's  ab- 


XV 


PAGE 


sence 


149—153 


25' — 33.  Importance  of  knowing  the  Father, — 
Christ's  kindness  to  those  who  have 
weak  grace,  —  believers  ignorant  of 
their  own  hearts,  —  Christ  the  true 
source  of  peace       ....        158 — 163 


X"VII.       1 — 8.    Christ's  office  and  dignity, — Christ's  gra- 
cious account  of  His  people   .        .        167- 


-170 


9 — 16.  Christ's  special  work  for  believers, — be- 
lievers not  taken  out  of  the  world,  but 


kept 


181—185 


17 — 26.  Christ's  prayer  for  His  people's  sanctifi- 
cation, — Christ's  prayer  for  His  people's 
unity, — Christ's  prayer  for  His  people's 
glorification 194—198 

XVni.  1 — 11.  Hardness  of  a  backslider's  heart, — volun- 
tariness  of  Christ's  sufferings, — Christ's 
care  for  His  people's  safety, — Christ's 


submission  to  His  Father's  will 


208—213 


12 — ^27.  Desperate  wickedness  of  unconverted 
men, — Christ's  condescension, —  weak- 
ness of  some  real  Christians  .        224 — ^238 


28—40.  False  scrupulosity  of  hypocrites, — ^nature 
of  Christ's  kingdom, — Christ's  mission, 
— Pilate's  question  .        .        241—247 

XIX.       1 — 16.  Portrait  of  Christ, — ^portrait  of  the  Jews, 

—portrait  of  Pilate        .        .        .        265—268 

17 — ^27.  Christ  bearing  His  cross, — Christ  cruci- 
fied as  a  King, — Christ's  care  for  His 
mother     .....        290—294 


jtvi  CONTENTS. 

JOHN.  PAGE 

28 — 37.  Scripture  fulfilled  in  every  part  of  the 
crucifixion, — It  is  finished, — reality  of 
Christ's  death  ....        314—318 

38 — 42.  Some  Christians  little  known, — some  end 

better  than  they  begin  .        .        .        333—338 

XX.  1 — 10.  Those  love   Christ  most  who  have  got 

most  from  Him, — diflerent  tempera- 
ments  of  believers, — much  ignorance 
remaining  in  believers  .        .        .        346 — 350 

11 — 18.  Lovo  receives  most  privileges,  —  fear 
and  sorrow  often  needless, — earthly 
thoughts  even  in  true  believers    .        365 — 370 

19 — ^23.  Christ's  kind  greeting, — evidence  of  res- 
urrection,— commission  of  the  Apos- 
tles   386—390 

24 — 31.  Danger  of  not  attending  assemblies  of 
Christians, — Christ's  kindness  to  dull 
believers, — Thomas's  glorious  confes- 
sion   403—408 

XXL  1 — 14.  Poverty  of  first  Disciples, — difference  in 
characters  of  Disciples, — abundant  evi- 
dence of  Christ's  resurrection        .        422 — 426 

15 — 17.  Christ's  question  to  Peter, — Peter's  an- 
swer to  Christ, — Christ's  command  to 
Peter 442-^45 

18 — ^25.  The  future  of  Christians  foreknown  to 
Christ, — believer's  death  glorifies  God, 
—our  own  duty  should  be  our  first 
thought,  —  number  and  greatness  of 
Christ's  works         ....        454r-4G0 


f 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS 


OK  THE  GOSPELS. 


JOHN  XIII.  1—5. 


1  Now  before  the  feast  of  the 
passover,  -when  Jesus  knew  that  his 
hour  was  come  that  he  should  de- 
part out  of  this  world  unto  the  Fa- 
ther, having  loved  his  own  which 
were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them 
unto  the  end. 

2  And  supper  being  ended,  the 
devil  having  now  put  into  the  heart 
of  Judas  Iscariot,  Simon's  son,  to 
betray  him ; 

3  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father 


had  given  all  things  into  his  hands, 
and  that  he  was  come  from  God 
and  went  to  God ; 

4  He  riseth  from  supper,  and 
laid  aside  his  garments  ;  and  took  a 
towel,  and  girded  himself. 

5  After  that  he  poureth  water 
into  a  bason,  and  began  to  wash  the 
disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them 
with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was 
girded. 


The  passage  we  have  now  read  begins  one  of  the 
most  interesting  portions  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  For 
five  consecutive  chapters  we  find  the  Evangelist  record- 
ing matters  which  are  not  mentioned  by  Matthew, 
Mark,  and  Luke.  We  can  never  be  thankful  enough 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  caused  them  to  be  written  for 
our  learning  !  In  every  age  the  contents  of  these  chap- 
ters have  been  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  pre- 
cious parts  of  the  Bible.  They  have  been  the  meat  and 
drink,  the  strength  and  comfort  of  all  true-hearted 
Christians.  Let  us  ever  approach  them  with  peculiar 
reverence.     The  place  whereon  we  stand  is  holy  ground. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  from  these  verses,  what 
patie7tt  and  continuing  love  there  is  in  Chrlst'^s  heart  to- 


2  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

wards  His  2')eople.  It  is  written  that  "  having  loved 
His  own  which  were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  untc 
the  end."  Knowing  perfectly  well  that  they  were  about 
to  forsake  Him  shamefully  in  a  very  few  hours,  in  full 
view  of  their  approaching  display  of  weakness  and  in- 
firmity, our  blessed  Master  did  not  cease  to  have  loving 
thoughts  of  His  disciples.  He  was  not  weary  of  them : 
He  loved  them  to  the  last. 

The  love  of  Christ  to  sinners  is  the  very  essence  and 
marrow  of  the  Gospel.  That  He  should  love  us  at  all, 
and  care  for  our  souls, — that  He  should  love  us  before 
we  love  Him,  or  even  know  anything  about  Him, — that 
He  should  love  us  so  much  as  to  come  into  the  world 
to  save  us,  take  our  nature  on  Him,  bear  our  sins,  and 
die  for  us  on  the  cross, — all  this  is  wonderful  indeed  ! 
It  is  a  kind  of  love  to  which  there  is  nothino:  like  amonor 
men.  The  narrow  selfishness  of  human  nature  cannot 
fully  comprehend  it.  It  is  one  of  those  things  which 
*3ven  the  angels  of  God  "desire  to  look  into."  It  is  a 
truth  which  Christian  preachers  and  teachers  should 
proclaim  incessantly,  and  never  be  weary  of  proclaim- 
ing. 

But  the  love  of  Christ  to  saints  is  no  less  wonderful, 
in  its  way,  than  His  love  to  sinners,  though  far  less  con- 
sidered. That  He  should  bear  with  all  their  countless 
infirmities  from  grace  to  glory, — that  He  should  never 
be  tired  of  their  endless  inconsistencies  and  petty  prov- 
ocations,— that  He  should  go  on  forgiving  and  forget- 
ting incessantly,  and  never.be  provoked  to  cast  them  oflf 
and  give  them  up, — all  this  is  marvellous  indeed  !  No 
mother  watching  over  the  waywardness  of  her  feeble 
babe,  in  the  days  of  its  infancy,  has  her  patience  so 
thoroughly  tried,  as  the  patience  of  Christ  is  tried  by 
Christians.     Yet  His  longsuflfering  is  infinite.     His  com- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  3 

passions  are  a  well  that  is  never  exhausted.     His  love  is 
"  a  love  that  passeth  knowledge." 

Let  no  man  be  afraid  of  beginning  with  Christ,  if  he 
desires  to  be  saved.  The  chief  of  sinners  may  come  to 
Him  with  boldness,  and  trust  Him  for  pardon  with  con- 
fidence. This  loving  Saviour  is  One  who  delights  to 
"receive  sinners."  (Luke  xv.  2.)  Let  no  man  be 
afraid  of  going  on  with  Christ  after  he  has  once  come 
to  Him  and  believed.  Let  him  not  fancy  that  Christ 
will  cast  him  off  because  of  failures,  and  dismiss  him 
into  his  former  hopelessness  on  account  of  infirmities. 
Such  thoughts  are  entirely  unwarranted  by  anything 
in  the  Scriptures.  Jesus  will  never  reject  any  servant 
because  of  feeble  service  and  weak  performance.  Those 
whom  He  receives  He  always  keeps.  Those  whom  He 
loves  at  first  He  loves  at  last.  His  promise  shall  never 
be  broken,  and  it  is  for  saints  as  well  as  sinners  :  "  Him 
that  cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  (John 
vi.  37.) 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  from  these  verses,  what 
deep  corruption  may  sometimes  he  found  in  the  heart  of 
a  great  professor  of  religion.  It  is  written  that  "  the 
devil  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  Simon's  son, 
to  betray  Christ." 

This  Judas,  we  must  always  remember,  was  one  of 
the  twelve  Apostles.  He  had  been  chosen  by  Christ 
Himself,  at  the  same  time  with  Peter,  James,  John,  and 
their  companions.  ■  For  three  years  he  had  walked  in 
Christ's  society,  had  seen  His  miracles,  had  heard  His 
preaching,  had  experienced  many  proofs  of  His  loving- 
kindness.  He  had  even  preached  himself  and  wrought 
miracles  in  Christ's  name ;  and  when  our  Lord  sent  out 
Plis  disciples  two  and  two,  Judas  Iscariot  no  doubt  must 
have  been  one  of  some  couple  that  was  sent.     Yet  here 


4  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

we  see  this  very  man  possessed  by  the  devil,  and  rush- 
ing headlong  to  destruction. 

On  all  the  coasts  of  England  there  is  nofsuch  a  bea- 
con to  warn  sailors  of  danger  as  Judas  Iscariot  is  to 
warn  Christians.  He  shows  us  what  length  a  man  may 
go  in  religious  profession,  and  yet  turn  out  a  rotten 
hypocrite  at  last,  and  prove  never  to  have  been  convert- 
ed. He  shows  us  the  uselessness  of  the  highest  privi- 
leges, unless  we  have  a  heart  to  value  them  and  turn 
them  to  good  account.  Privileges  alone  without  grace 
save  nobody,  and  will  only  make  hell  deeper.  He  shows 
us  the  uselessness  of  mere  head-knowledge.  To  know 
things  with  our  brains,  and  be  able  to  talk  and  preach 
and  speak  to  others,  is  no  proof  that  our  own  feet  are  in 
the  way  of  peace.  These  are  terrible  lessons :  but  they 
are  true. 

Let  us  never  be  surprised  if  we  see  hypocrisy  and 
false  profession  among  Christians  in  modern  days. 
There  is  nothing  new  in  it,  nothing  peculiar,  nothing 
that  did  not  happen  even  among  Christ's  own  immedi- 
ate followers,  and  under  Christ's  own  eyes.  Bad  money 
is  a  strong  proof  that  there  is  good  coin  somewhere. 
Hypocrisy  is  a  strong  indirect  evidence  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  true  religion. 

Above  all,  let  us  pray  daily  that  our  own  Christianity 
may  at  any  rate  be  genuine,  sincere,  real  and  true.  Our 
faith  may  be  feeble,  our  hope  dim,  our  knowledge  small, 
our  failures  frequent,  our  faults  many.  But  at  all  events 
let  us  be  real  and  true.  Let  us  be  able  to  say  with  poor, 
weak,  erring  Peter,  "Thou,  Lord,  who  knowest  all 
things,  knowest  that  I  love  Thee."     (John  xxi.  IV.) 

Notes.    John  xiii.  1—5. 

There  are  peculiarities  in  St.  Jolui's  narrative  of  the  end  of 
our  Lord's  life  on  earth,  which  seem  to  require  a  few  introduc- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  5 

lory  remarks  before  entering  into  the  substance  of  the  thir- 
teenth chapter. 

A  careful  reader  of  the  four  Gospels  can  hardly  fail  to  re- 
mark that  in  St.  John's  account  of  the  last  six  days  of  our 
Lord's  ministry,  many  things  mentioned  by  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  Luke,  are  entirely  omitted. 

The  parables  of  the  two  sons, — of  the  householder  who  let 
out  a  vineyard, — of  the  wedding  garment, — of  the  ten  virgins, 
— of  the  talents, — of  the  sheep  and  goats,  are  left  out.  The 
second  cleansing  of  the  temple, — the  cursing  of  the  barren  fig- 
tree, — the  public  discussion  with  the  chief  priests  and  elders 
about  John's  baptism, — the  silencing  of  the  Pharisees,  the  Sad- 
ducees,  and  the  lawyers, — the  public  denunciation  to  the  mul- 
titude of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees, — all  these  interesting  mat- 
ters are  found  in  the  first  three  Gospels,  but  passed  over  in 
silence  in  the  fourth.  We  cannot  doubt  that  there  were  wise 
reasons. 

But  the  most  striking  thing  in  St.  John's  narrative  at  this 
point,  is  the  entire  absence  of  our  Lord's  famous  prophecy  upon 
the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per. Both  these  deeply  interesting  portions  of  our  Lord's  last 
doings  before  His  crucifixion,  which  are  most  fully  given  in  the 
three  Gospels,  are  completely  omitted  in  the  fourth. 

The  reason  of  these  tAvo  remarkable  omissions  we  are  left  to 
conjecture,  "  God  giveth  no  account  of  His  matters."  If  we 
once  admit  that  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  we 
need  not  doubt  that  the  Gospel  writers  were  equally  guided  and 
directed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  both  in  the  things  they  omitted  and 
the  things  they  recorded.  Nevertheless  a  few  remarks  on  the 
subject  may  be  interesting  to  some  readers. 

(a)  Concerning  the  omission  of  the  prophecy  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  I  venture  the  following  conjecture.  I  think  it  is 
partly  accounted  for  by  the  time  when  St.  John's  Gospel  was 
given  to  the  Church.  That  must  have  been  very  near  the  tak- 
ing of  Jerusalem,  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  and  the  com- 
plete overthrow  of  the  Jewish  ceremonial.  Now  if  St.  John 
had  just  at  this  crisis  inserted  anew  this  prophecy  in  his  Gospel, 
it  would  have  confirmed  the  erroneous  notion  which  many  have 
always  held,  that  it  refers  only  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
and  does  not  extend  to  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  and  the  end 
of  the  world.  His  marked  silence  about  it  would  be  a  testi- 
mony against  the  misapplication  of  the  prophecy.  The  second 
reason  of  the  omission,  I  think,  is  the  striking  fact  that  the 
writer  of  the  fourth  Gospel  was  inspired  to  write  the  Book  of 
Revelation.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  he  was  directed  to 
pass  over  our  Lord's  prophecy,  when  he  was  about  to  write  at 
a  later  date  the  most  striking  prophetical  book  in  the  Bible. 

(6)  Concerning  the  omission  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  I  venture 
the  following  conjecture.     I  think  it  was  specially  intended  to 


6  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

be  a  witness  forever  against  the  growing  tendency  of  Chris- 
tians  to  make  an  idol  of  the  sacraments.  Even  from  the  begin- 
ning there  seems  to  have  been  a  disposition  in  the  Cliurch  to 
malie  Cliristianitv  a  religion  of  forms  and  ceremonies  rather 
than  of  heart,  and  to  exalt  outward  ordinances  to  a  place  which 
God  never  meant  them  to  fill.  Against  this  teaching  St.  John 
was  raised  up  to  testify.  The  mere  fact  that  in  his  Gospel  he 
leaves  out  the  Lord's  Supper  altogether,  and  does  not  even  name 
it,  is  strong  proof  that  the  Lord's  Supper  cannot  be,  as  many 
tell  us,  the  first,  foremost,  chief,  and  principal  thing  in  Chris- 
tianity. Its  perfect  silence  about  it  can  never  be  reconciled 
with  this  favorite  theory.  It  is  a  most  conspicuous  silence, 
which  the  modern  advocates  of  the  so-called  sacramental  sys- 
tem, can  never  get  over  or  explain  away.  If  the  Sacrament  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  really  is  the  first  and  chief  thing  in  Chris- 
tianity, why  does  St.  John  tell  us  nothing  about  it  ?  To  that 
question  I  can  only  see  one  answer :  it  is  because  it  is  not  a 
primary,  but  a  secondary  thing,  in  Christ's  religion. 

The  reason  assigned  for  the  omission  by  many  commentators, 
viz.,  that  St.  Jolm  thought  it  needless  to  repeat  the  account  of 
the  institution,  after  it  had  been  recorded  by  three  evangelists 
and  St.  Paul,  appears  to  me  entirely  insufficient. 

I. — [Now  hefo7'e...passover.]  We  should  observe  that  the  feast 
of  the  passover  is  always  carefully  mentioned  by  each  Gospel 
writer,  as  the  precise  time  of  tlie  year  when  Jesus  was  cruci- 
fied. It  was  ordered  of  God  that  it  should  be  at  this  particular 
time,  for  two  good  reasons.  ,  For  one  thing,  the  passover  lamb 
was  the  most  striking  and  remarkable  type  in  the  whole  Jewish 
ceremonial  of  Christ  Himself,  and  the  history  of  the  passover 
of  Christ's  work  of  redemption.  For  another  thing,  it  secured 
the  greatest  assembly  of  Israelites  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  our 
Lord's  crucifixion.  At  no  time  of  the  Jewish  year  were  so 
many  Jews  gathered  at  Jerusalem.  Anything  that  happened 
at  the  passover  would  be  reported  by  Jewish  worshippers,  on 
returning  home,  all  over  the  civilized  world.  For  these  two 
reasons  "  the  Lamb  of  God  "  was  slain  at  this  feast,  in  spite  of 
the  priests,  who  said, "  Not  on  the  feast  day." 

Let  us  remember  that  one  of  the  few  dates  we  know  for  cer- 
tainty of  the  events  in  our  Lord's  life,  is  the  time  of  His  cruci- 
fixion. Of  the  time  of  His  birth  and  baptism  we  know  nothing. 
But  that  he  died  at  Easter,  we  may  be  quite  sure. 

[When  Jesus  kneio... hour. ..come.]  Let  us  note  that  our  Lord 
knew  perfectly  beforehand  when  and  how  He  should  suffer. 
This,  whatever  we  may  think,  is  a  great  addition  to  sutiering. 
Our  ignorance  of  things  before  us  is  a  great  blessing.  Our 
I^ord  saw  the  cross  clearly  before  Him,  and  walked  straiglit  up 
to  it.  His  death  was  not  a  surprise  to  Him,  but  a  voluntary, 
foreknown  thing. 

[That...depart...world..,Father.'\    Let  us  observe  how  death  is 


JOHN,  CIIxVP.  XIII.  ^l 

epoken  of  here.  It  is  taking  a  journey — a  going  from  one  place 
to  anotlier.  In  the  case  of  our  Lord,  it  was  a  return  to  His 
Father's  house,  and  a  going  home,  after  finishing  the  work  He 
came  to  do.  So  a  believer's  death,  in  a  lower  sense,  is  going 
home. 

Calvin  observes,  "  This  definition  of  death  belongs  to  the 
•whole  body  of  the  Church.  It  is  to  the  saints  a  passage  to  the 
Father,  an  inlet  to  eternal  life." 

[^Having  loved  Ms  oicn... world. ..loved. ..end.']  The  meaning  of 
this  seems  to  be,  "  Having  always  loved  His  own  disciples,  and 
having  given  many  proofs  of  his  singular  affection,  He  now, 
before  leaving  them  alone  like  orphans  in  the  world,  gave  one 
more  striking  proof  of  His  love  by  washing  their  feet,  and 
thus  on  the  last  evening  before  His  death,  showed  that  He 
loved  them  to  the  very  end  of  His  ministry,  and  was  not  weary 
of  them." 

He  knew  perfectly  that  th^y  were  going  to  forsake  Him  and 
act  like  cowards,  but  that  did  not  prevent  Him  loving  them., 
with  all  their  weakness,  to  the  very  end. 

He  knew  perfectly  that  He  was  about  to  suffer  within  twenty- 
four  hours,  but  the  knowledge  and  foresight  of  it  did  not  ab 
sorb  His  thoughts  so  as  to  make  Him  forget  His  little  flock  of 
followers.  Saints,  when  they  are  dying,  often  ask  to  be  left 
alone  and  let  alone ;  Christ,  on  the  trial  of  His  crucifixion, 
thought  of  others,  and  loved  His  disciples  to  the  end. 

The  love  of  Christ  to  Christians  who  really  believe  on  Him, 
is  a  great  depth.  "  It  passeth  knowledge."  It  is  something 
that  our  poor  corrupt  nature  cannot  fully  comprehend  or  meas 
ure. 

The  expression,  "  His  own,"  applied  to  believers,  is  very  note 
worthy.  They  are  Christ's  peculiar  property,  given  to  Him  by 
the  Father,  and  His  own  special  care  as  members  of  His  body. 
Tittman's  idea  that  "  His  own  "means  all  mankind,  is  prepos- 
terous and  weak ,  and  ignores  the  privileges  of  believers. 

The  expression,  "  which  were  in  the  world,"  is  another  great 
depth.  Believers  are  not  in  heaven  yet,  and  find  it  out  to  their 
cost.  They  are  in  a  cold,  unkind,  persecuting  world.  Let 
them  take  comfort  in  the  thought,  that  Jesus  knows  and  re- 
members it.  "  I  know  thy  works  and  where  thou  dwellesl." 
(Rev.  ii.  13.) 

Theophylact  thinks  that  our  Lord  purposely  deferred  this 
act  of  washing  the  disciples'  feet  to  the  last  evening  of  His 
ministry,  in  order  to  leave  in  their  minds  a  pleasant  impression 
of  His  love  and  condescension. 

Melancthon  shows  that  the  three  greatest  marks  of  pity  and 
compassion  are  (1)  to  tolerate  the  wicked  for  a  season;  (2)  to 
abstain  from  exposing  their  sins  as  long  as  possible  ;  (3)  to 


3  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

warn  them  plainly  and  gently  before  leaving  them  for  ever 
All  this  appears  in  our  Lord's  dealing  with  Judas  in  this 
chapter. 

2. — [A?i.d  supper  being  ended.']  These  words  would  have  been 
more  literally  rendered, "  while  supper  was  going  on,"  or,  "  sup- 
per being  in  progress."  That  this  is  the  true  meaning  seems 
clear  from  the  twenty-sixth  verse.  If  supper  had  really  been 
ended,  we  should  not  have  heard  of  a  sop  being  given  out  of 
the  dish,  etc. 

It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  Scaliger  and  other  learned  men  in- 
sist that  the  Jews  had  more  than  one  supper  at  the  passover, — • 
one  a  legal  one,  strictly  according  to  ritual  ;  the  other  a  social 
one.  They  think  these  two  suppers  are  both  in  this  chapter. 
Gerhard  gives  this  opinion  at  length.  Whitby  seems  to  lean  to 
this  view,  and  maintains  that  our  Lord  twice  pointed  out  Judas 
as  the  traitor, — once  privately  and  once  publicly. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  our  Lord^s'  ministry  ended  with  a  supper, 
— that  the  last  ordinance  He  appointed  was  a  supper, — that  one 
promise  He  has  left  to  a  believer  is,  "  I  will  come  and  sup  with 
him  "  (Rev.  iii.  20), — and  that  the  first  thing  that  will  take  place 
at  His  second  advent  will  be  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. 
All  point  to  the  same  great  truth, — the  close  union,  familiarity, 
and  comfortable  intimacy  between  Christ  and  His  people.  It  is 
a  thing  far  too  little  known. 

What  supper  this  was  we  are  not  told,  and  are  left  to  conjec- 
ture.    It  is  a  point  on  which  opinions  widely  differ. 

Some,  as  Lightfoot,  think  that  the  supper  was  the  same  that 
took  place  at  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  two  days 
before  the  passover.  Rollock  also  thinks  it  was  not  the  pass- 
over. 

Others  think  it  was  the  ordinary  passover  supper,  which  our 
Lord  was  eating  with  His  disciples  the  night  before  His  cruci- 
fixion. This  certainly,  in  my  judgment,  seems  the  more  proba- 
ble view. 

One  thing  at  any  rate  is  pretty  clear.  It  was  not  the  institu- 
tion of  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  seems  highly  improbable  that  the 
washing  of  the  disciples'  feet  would  take  place  after  the  Lord's 
Supper.  That  blessed  ordinance  appears  to  come  in  after  the 
twentieth  verse.  Brentius  stands  alone  in  maintaining  that  it 
was  the  Lord's  Supper. 

[The  devil . . .  put . .  heart.']  This  does  not  mean  that  Judas 
now  for  the  first  time  left  the  faith,  and  became  an  apostate. 
Our  Lord  long  before  had  spoken  of  him  as  one  that  "  was  a  dcv- 
il."  (John  vi.  70.)  But  it  means  that  now  at  length  the  devil 
suggested  into  the  heart  of  this  unhappy  man  the  atrocious  idea 
of  betraying  his  Master.  It  was  the  last  and  final  heading  ud 
of  his  apostasy. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  9 

The  personality  of  Satan,  and  his  old  character  as  the  father 
of  all  wickedness,  are  forcibly  brought  out  here. 

The  word  rendered  "  put "  is  literally  "  cast."  This  graphic- 
ally describes  the  way  in  which  Satan  works.  He  casts  into  the 
heart  of  those  he  tempts  the  seeds  of  evil.  The  heart  is  tlie 
seed  plot  which  he  sows.  Suggestion  is  one  of  his  chief  weap- 
ons. The  sin  of  man  consists  in  opening  his  heart  to  the  sug- 
gestion ;  giving  it  a  place,  and  letting  it  sink  down.  This  is  ob- 
vious in  the  first  temptation  of  Eve  in  the  garden  of  Eden. 

Tittman's  idea  that  the  expression  is  only  a  "  popular  form  of 
speaking,"  is  utterly  untenable,  and  cannot  be  reconciled  wiih 
the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible  about  the  devil. 

[Judas  Iscariot,  Simon's  son.]  Here,  as  in  three  other  places, 
the  false  apostle  is  called  emphatically  "  Simon's  son."  Doubt- 
less this  was  to  mark  him  out  as  not  the  Judas  who  was  brother 
of  James  and  son  of  Alphgeus.  Who  this  Simon  was  we  do  not 
know.     (See  note  on  John  vi.  71.) 

[To  betray  him.]  There  seems  no  need  for  regarding  Judas'g 
betrayal  of  his  Master  as  anything  but  the  wicked  act  of  a  wick- 
ed man,  who  loved  money  more  than  his  soul.  The  theory  that 
he  was  a  high-minded,  impatient  disciple,  who  wished  his  Mas- 
ter no  harm,  but  desired  to  hasten  His  kingdom,  and  expected 
Him  to  work  a  miracle,  and  save  Himself  at  the  last,  is  ingen- 
ious, but  lacks  foundation.  Our  Lord's  word  applied  to  him,  "  a 
devil,"  and  the  word  of  St.  John,  "  a  thief,"  appear  to  me  to 
overturn  the  theory  altogether.  Judas  betrayed  Jesus  because 
he  loved  money  better  than  His  Master.  He  probably  did  not 
realize  the  full  consequence  of  his  act.  But  this  is  often  the 
case  with  wicked  men. 

3. — [Jesus,  knowing  that  the  Father,  etc.]  The  reason  why  this 
verse  comes  in  here  is  not  very  plain.  Why  are  we  told  that 
Jesus  "  washed  His  disciples'  feet,"  knowing  all  these  wonder- 
ful things?  What  is  the  special  point  and  object  of  the  sen- 
tence ? 

Some  think  that  the  words  mean  that  our  Lord  knew  the 
end  of  His  ministry  was  at  hand,  that  all  His  work  was  accom- 
plished,  that  the  Father  had  now  committed  to  Him  all  power 
in  heaven  and  earth,  and  that  having  come  from  God,  He  was 
about  to  return  to  God  very  shortly.  Knowing  this.  He  seized 
the  last  opportunity  that  remained  to  give  His  disciples  a  prac- 
tical  example  of  love  and  humility.  He  knew  that  His  time 
was  short,  and  that  He  must  give  the  lesson  this  night,  if  it 
was  to  be  given  at  all. 

Others,  as  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and  Zwingle,  think  that 
the  object  of  the  words  is  to  show  the  extent  and  depth  of  our 
Lord's  infinite  condescension  and  love  to  His  disciples.  With 
a  full  knowledge  that  the  Father  had  committed  all  power  into 
His  hands,  that  He  had  been  from  eternity  with  God,  and  wa3 

1=* 


10  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

going  back  to  God, — knowing  all  the  dignity  and  majesty  of 
His  person  and  oifice,  He  yet  condescended  to  perform  tlie 
most  menial  oifice,  and  to  minister  like  a  servant  to  His  disci- 
ples. 

Either  view  is  good  sense  and  good  divinity,  and  admissible 
as  a  fair  interpretation  of  the  words.  For  myself  I  prefer  the 
latter  view. 

Theophylact  points  out  that  to  argue  our  Lord's  inferiority 
to  the  Father  from  the  expression,  "  Delivered  all  things  into 
His  hand,"  is  unfair.  He  justly  remarks  that  you  might  as 
•well  infer  the  Father's  inferiority  to  the  Son  from  the  expres- 
sion in  Corinthians,  "  When  He  shall  have  delivered  up  the 
kingdom  to  the  Father." 

Bernard  remarks  that  "  Jesus  came  from  God,  not  leaving 
Him,  and  went  to  God,  not  leaving  us." 

4. — [He  riseth  from  supper,  etc.]  The  minuteness  with  which 
every  action  of  our  Lord  is  related  here  is  very  striking.  No 
less  than  seven  distinct  things  are  named, — rising,  laying  aside 
garments,  taking  a  towel,  girding  Himself ,  pouring  water  into  a 
bason,  washing  and  wiping.  This  very  particularity  stamps 
the  whole  transaction  with  reality,  and  is  the  natural  language 
of  an  astonished  and  admiring  eye-witness. 

The  "  laying  aside  garments  "  of  course  only  means  the  lay- 
ing aside  the  long,  loose,  outer  garment  which  people  in  the 
East  always  wear,  and  which  must  be  laid  aside  if  any  bodily 
exertion  is  used. 

The  "  girding  Himself  "  refers  to  the  well-known  practice  of 
tying  tightly  round  the  person  any  loose  garment  before  taking 
any  action  requiring  bodily  exertion.  A  good  servant  is  said 
to  have  "  his  loins  girded  and  his  lamp  burning,"  ready  for  any 
errand  or  duty. 

The  likeness  between  our  Lord's  action  here  and  the  words 
in  Luke  xii.  37,  are  very  striking  :  "  He  shall  gird  Himself — 
serve  them,"  etc. 

Jansenius  remarks,  that  the  "  rising  "  here  mentioned  seems 
like  a  clear  proof  that  this  supper  could  not  be  the  paschal  sup- 
per.    That  was  to  be  eaten  standing. 

The  use  of  the  present  tense  all  through  this  description  ia 
noteworthy.  It  brings  the  whole  transaction  before  us  like  a 
picture, 

Hengstenberg  says  here,  "  Jesus  had  seated  himself  at  the 
table,  and  Peter  probably  enjoyed  the  honor  of  washing  His 
feet.  After  this  he,  with  the  other  disciples,  sat  down  also  at 
table,  expecting  that  tlie  younger  would  spontaneously  assume 
the  function  of  feet-washer  for  all  the  rest.  But  pride  evoked 
pride.      The  younger    Apostles,   following  a  quick   impulse, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  Xni. 


11 


seated  themselves  also  at  table.  Thus  a  situation  of  deep  embar- 
rassment resulted  in  murmuring  and  contest.  Who  would  be 
the  first  to  rise  up  again  ?  Jesus  put  an  end  to  the  embarrass- 
ment, hy  rising  from  supper  and  washing  the  feet  of  His  disci- 
ples." This  is  possible;  but  it  is  only  conjecture. 
6 — [After  that  he  poureth  water,  etc.,  etc.]  Wonderful  as  all 
this  transaction  seems,  and  no  doubt  is,  when  we  remember  who 
our  Lord  was,  one  thing  must  never  be  forgotten.  The  actions 
here  described  would  not  seem  nearly  so  strange  to  the  disciples 
as  they  do  to  us.  They  were  simply  the  courteous  actions  of  a 
host  who  desired  to  show  the  utmost  degree  of  hospitable  at- 
tention to  the  guests.  Thus  Abraham  washed  the  feet  of  the 
three  angelic  messengers.  (Gen.  xviii.  4.  So  also  1  Sam.  xxv. 
41.)  In  a  hot  country  like  Palestine,  where  people  wore  no 
stockings,  and  the  heat  was  very  scorching  to  the  skin,  frequent 
washing  of  the  feet  was  an  absolute  necessity,  and  to  wash  the 
feet  of  guests  was  a  common  piece  of  hospitality.  It  is  one 
mark  of  a  deserving  widow,  that  she  has  "  washed  the  saints' 
feet."  (1  Tim.  v.  10.)  The  real  wonder  was  that  such  a  Master, 
on  such  a  solemn  occasion,  should  do  such  a  condescending  act 
to  such  weak  disciples.  It  was  not  so  much  the  action  as  the 
doer  of  it,  that  was  remarkable. 

After  all  tLere  was  a  touching  fitness  in  our  Lord's  choice  of 
an  instructive  action  on  this  solemn  occasion.  He  knew  that 
He  was  leaving  His  disciples,  like  poor  feeble  travellers,  in  a 
weary,  wicked  world.  He  would  therefore  wash  their  feet  be- 
fore parting,  and  strengthen  and  refresh  them  for  their  journey. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  work  was  not  left  unfinished  and 
half-done.  Like  a  perfect  servant,  our  Lord  "  wiped  "  the  feet 
as  well  as  "  washed  "  them. 


JOHN  XIII.  6—15. 


6  Then  cometh  he  to  Simon  Pe- 
ter :  and  Peter  saith  unto  him,  Lord, 
dost  thou  wash  my  feet  ? 

7  Jesus  aus-wered  and  said  unto 
him,  What  I  do  thou  kuowest  not 
now ;  but  thou  shalt  know  here- 
after. 

8  Peter  saith  unto  him,  tliou  shalt 
never  wash  my  feet.  Jesus  answered 
him,  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast 
no  part  with  me. 

9  Simon  Peter  saith  to  him.  Lord, 
not  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands 
and  my  head. 

10  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  He  that 
is  washed  ueedeth  not  save  to  wash 
his  feet,  but  is  clean  every  whit :  and 
ye  are  clean,  but  not  all. 


11  For  he  knew  who  should  be- 
tray him ;  therefore  said  he.  Ye  are 
not  all  clean. 

12  So  after  he  had  washed  their 
feet,  and  had  taken  his  garments,  and 
was  set  down  again,  he  said  unto 
them,  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  to 
you? 

13  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord  ; 
and  ye  say  well ;  for  so  I  am. 

14  If  I  then,  your  Lord  and  Mas- 
ter, have  washed  your  feet ;  ye  also 
ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet. 

15  For  I  have  given  you  an  ex- 
ample, that  ye  should  do  as  I  have 
done  to  you. 


12  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

-  The  verses  we  have  now  read  conclude  the  story  of 
our  Lord's  washing  the  feet  of  His  disciples,  the  nighu 
before  He  was  crucified.  It  is  a  story  full  of  touching 
interest,  which  for  some  wise  reason  no  Evangelist 
records  except  St.  John.  The  wonderful  condescension 
of  Christ,  in  doing  such  a  menial  action,  can  hardly  fail 
to  strike  any  reader.  The  mere  fact  that  the  Master 
should  wash  the  feet  of  the  servants  might  well  fill  us 
with  surprise.  But  the  circumstances  and  sayings  which 
arose  out  of  the  action  are  just  as  interesting  as  the 
action  itself.     Let  us  see  what  they  were. 

We  should  notice,  firstly,  the  hasty  ignorance  of  the 
Apostle  Peter.  One  moment  we  find  him  refusing  to  al- 
low his  Master  to  do  such  a  servile  work  as  He  is  about 
to  do  :—"  Dost  thou  wash  my  feet?"  "Thou  shalt 
never  wash  my  feet." — Another  moment  we  find  him 
rushing  with  characteristic  impetuosity  into  the  other 
extreme  : — "  Lord,  wash  not  my  feet  only,  but  my  hands 
and  my  head."  But  throughout  the  transaction  we  find 
him  unable  to  take  in  the  real  meaning  of  what  his  eyes 
behold.     He  sees,  but  he  does  not  understand. 

Let  us  gather  from  Peter's  conduct  that  a  man  may 
have  plenty  of  faith  and  love,  and  yet  be  sadly  destitute 
of  clear  knowledge.  "We  must  not  set  down  men  as 
graceless  and  godless  because  they  are  dull,  and  stupid, 
and  blundering  in  their  religion.  The  heart  may  often 
be  quite  right  when  the  head  is  quite  wrong.  We  must 
make  allowances  for  the  corruption  of  the  understand- 
ing as  well  as  of  the  will.  We  must  not  be  surprised 
to  find  that  the  brains  as  well  as  the  afiections  of  Ad- 
am's children  have  been  hurt  by  the  fall.  It  is  a  hum- 
bling lesson,  and  one  seldom  fully  learned  except  by 
long  experience.  But  the  longer  we  live  the  more  true 
shall  we  find  it,  that  a  believer,  like  Peter,  may  make 
many  mistakes  and  lack  understanding,  and  yet,  like  Pe- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  i^ 

tcr,  liave  a  heart  right  before  God,  and  get  to  heaven 
at  last. 

Even  at  our  best  estate  we  shall  find  that  many  of 
Christ's  dealings  with  us  are  hard  to  understand  in  this 
life.  The  "  why  "  and  "  wherefore  "  of  many  a  provi- 
dence will  often  puzzle  and  perplex  us  quite  as  much  as 
the  washing  puzzled  Peter.  The  wisdom,  and  fitness, 
and  necessity  of  many  a  thing  will  often  be  hidden  from 
our  eyes.  But  at  times  like  these  we  must  remember 
the  IMaster's  words,  and  fall  back  upon  them  : — "  What 
I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  here- 
after." There  came  days,  long  after  Christ  had  left  the 
world,  when  Peter  saw  the  full  meaning  of  all  that  hap- 
pened on  the  memorable  night  before  the  crucifixion. 
Even  so  there  will  be  a  day  when  every  dark  page  in 
our  life's  history  will  be  explained,  and  when,  as  we 
stand  with  Christ  in  glory,  we  shall  know  all. 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  the 
plain  practical  lesson  which  lies  upon  its  surface.  That 
lesson  is  read  out  to  us  by  our  Lord.  He  says,  "  I  have 
given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done 
to  you." 

Humility  is  evidently  one  part  of  the  lesson.  If  the 
only-begotten  Son  of  God,  the  King  of  kings,  did  not 
think  it  beneath  Him  to  do  the  humblest  work  of  a  ser- 
vant, there  is  nothing  which  His  disciples  should  think 
themselves  too  great  or  too  good  to  do.  No  sin  is  so 
offensive  to  God,  and  so  injurious  to  the  soul  as  pride. 
No  grace  is  so  commended,  both  by  precept  and  exam- 
ple, as  humility.  "  Be  clothed  with  humility."  "  He 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted." — "  Let  this 
mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus;  who, 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be 
equal  with  God :  but  made  Himself  of  no  reputation, 
and  took  upon  Him  tlie  form  of  a  servant,   and   was 


14:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

made  in  the  likeness  of  men :  and  being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,  He  humbled  Himself."  (1  Pet.  v.  5  ;  Luke 
xviii.  14  ;  Phil.  ii.  5 — 8.)  Well  would  it  be  for  the 
Church  if  this  very  simple  truth  was  more  remembered, 
and  real  humility  was  not  so  sadly  rare.  Perhaps  there 
is  no  sight  so  displeasing  in  God's  eyes  as  a  self-conceit- 
ed, self-satisfied,  self-contented,  stuck-up  professor  of 
religion.  Alas,  it  is  a  sight  only  too  common  !  Yet 
the  words  which  St.  John  here  records  have  never  been 
repealed.  They  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  many  at 
the  last  day,  except  they  repent. 

Lo>i  e  is  manifestly  the  other  part  of  the  great  prac- 
tical lesson.  Our  Lord  would  have  us  love  others  so 
much  that  we  should  delight  to  do  anything  which  can 
promote  their  happiness.  We  ought  to  rejoice  in  doing 
kindnesses,  even  in  little  things.  We  ought  to  count 
it  a  pleasure  to  lessen  sorrow  and  multiply  joy,  even 
when  it  costs  us  some  self-sacrifice  and  self-denial.  We 
ought  to  love  every  child  of  Adam  so  well,  that  if  in  the 
least  trifle  we  can  do  anything  to  make  him  more  happy 
and  comfortable,  we  should  be  glad  to  do  it.  This  was 
the  mind  of  the  Master,  and  this  the  ruling  principle  of 
His  conduct  upon  earth.  There  are  but  few  who  walk 
in  His  steps,  it  may  be  feared  ;  but  these  few  are  men 
and  women  after  His  own  heart. 

The  lesson  before  us  may  seem  a  very  simple  one ; 
but  its  importance  can  never  be  overrated.  Humility 
and  love  are  precisely  the  graces  which  the  men  of 
the  world  can  understand,  if  they  do  not  comprehend 
doctrines.  They  are  graces  about  which  there  is  no 
mystery,  and  they  are  within  reach  of  all  classes.  The 
poorest  and  most  ignorant  Christian  can  every  day  find 
occasion  for  practicing  love  and  humility.  Tlien  if  we 
would  do  good  to  the  world,  and  make  our  calling  and 
election  sure,  let  no  man  forget  our  Lord's  example  in 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  15 

this  passage.  Like  Him,  let  us  be  humble  and  loving 
towards  all. 

We  should  notice,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  the  deep 
spiritual  lessons  whicJi,  lie  beneath  its  surface.  They 
are  three  in  number,  and  lie  at  the  veryroot  of  religion, 
though  we  can  only  touch  them  briefly. 

For  one  thing,  we  learn  that  all  need  to  be  washed 
by  Christ.  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  in 
Me."  No  man  or  woman  can  be  saved  unless  his  sins 
are  washed  away  in  Christ's  precious  blood.  Nothing 
else  can  make  us  clean  or  acceptable  before  God.  We 
must  be  "  washed,  sanctified,  and  justified,  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 
(1  Cor.  vi.  11.)  Christ  must  wash  us,  if  we  are  ever  to 
sit  down  with  saints  in  glory.  Then  let  us  take  heed 
that  we  apply  to  Him  by  faith,  wash  and  become  clean. 
They  only  are  washed  who  believe. 

For  another  thing,  we  learn  that  even  those  who  are 
cleansed  and  forgiven  need  a  daily  application  to  the 
blood  of  Christ  for  daily  pardon.  We  cannot  pass 
through  this  evil  world  without  defilement.  There  is 
not  a  day  in  our  lives  but  we  fail  and  come  short  in 
many  things,  and  need  fresh  supplies  of  mercy.  Even 
"  he  that  is  washed  needs  to  wash  his  feet,"  and  to  wash 
them  in  the  same  fountain  Avhere  he  found  peace  of 
conscience  when  he  first  believed.  Then  let  us  daily 
use  that  fountain  without  fear.  With  the  blood  of 
Christ  we  must  begin,  and  with  the  blood  of  Christ  we 
must  go  on. 

Finally,  we  learn  that  even  those  who  kept  company 
with  Christ,  and  were  baptized  with  water  as  His  dis- 
ciples, were  "  not  all "  washed  from  their  sin.  These 
words  are  very  solemn, — "Ye  are  clean:  but  not  all." 
Then  let  us  take  heed  to  ourselves,  and  beware  of  false 
profession.     If   even  Christ's  own  disciples  are  not  all 


IQ  EXPOSITOKY  THONGIITS. 

cleansed  and  justified,  we  have  reason  to  be  on  our 
guard.  Baptism  and  Churchman  ship  are  no  proof  that 
we  are  right  in  the  sight  of  God. 

iNoTES.    John  xiii.  6—15. 

C. — \  Then  cometh  Jig  to  Simon  Peter i\  Whetlier  our  Lord  began 
with  Simon  Peter,  is  not  quite  clear  from  the  words  before  us. 
The  word  "  then,"  however,  certainly  does  not  mean  "  then,"  in 
the  sense  of  "  in  order." 

Chrysostom  and  Theophylact  hold  that  Jesus  washed  Judas 
Tscariot's  feet,  and  then  came  to  Peter.  From  the  subsequent 
action  of  dipping  and  giving  a  morsel  to  Judas,  it  certainly 
seems  probable  that  he  sat  very  near  our  Lord. 

Augustine  holds  that  Jesus  began  with  Peter.  Bellarmine 
eagerly  grasps  at  this,  and  gives  it  as  one  of  twenty-eight  alleged 
proofs  that  Peter  always  had  a  primacy  among  the  Apostles  I 

[And  Peter  saith  unto  him.']  The  word  "  Peter"  is  not  in  the 
Greek  text  here,  but  simply  "  he,"  or  "  that  man."  Our  trans- 
lators seem  to  have  inserted  it  to  make  the  meaning  plain. 

[Lord,  dost  thou  loash  my  feet  f]  The  English  language  here 
fails  to  give  the  full  emphasis  of  the  Greek.  It  would  be  liter- 
ally rendered,  "  Dost  Thou,  of  me,  wash  the  feet  ?  "  Such  an 
one  as  Thou  art,  wash  the  feet  of  such  an  one  as  I  am  !  It  is 
like  John  the  Baptist's  exclamation  when  our  Lord  came  to  his 
baptism  :  "  Comest  thou  to  me  ?  "     (Matt.  iii.  14.) 

7. — {Jesus  ansioered  and  said,  etc.]  The  famous  saying  of  this 
verse  stretches  far  beyond  the  literal  application  of  the  words. 
Primarily,  of  course,  it  means,  "  This  action  of  mine  has  a 
meaning  which  in  a  few  minutes  I  will  explain  and  you  will 
understand,  though  at  present  it  may  seem  to  you  strange  and 
unsuitable." — But  in  every  age  true  Christians  have  seen  a 
higher,  deeper,  broader  meaning  in  the  words,  and  a  pious 
mind  cannot  doubt  that  they  were  intended  to  bear  that  mean- 
ing. It  supplies  the  key  to  many  things  which  we  cannot  un- 
derstand in  the  providential  government  of  the  world,  in  the 
history  of  the  Church,  in  the  events  of  our  own  lives.  We 
must  make  up  our  minds  to  see  many  things  happening  which 
we  do  not  know  and  understand  now,  and  of  which  we  cannot 
at  present  see  the  wisdom.  But  we  must  believe  that  "we  shall 
know  hereafter"  the  full  purposes,  the  why  and  wherefore  and 
needs-be,  of  each  and  all.  It  is  a  golden  sentence  to  store  up  in 
our  memories.  God's  eternal  counsels,  the  wisdom  of  the  great 
Head  of  the  Church,  must  never  be  forgotten.  All  is  going  on 
well,  even  when  we  think  all  is  going  on  ill.  When  we  cannot 
Bee  it  we  must  believe.  In  sickness,  sorrow,  bereavement,  dis- 
appointment, we  must  summon  up  faith  and  patience,  and  hear 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  j^ 

Christ  saying  to  us,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but 
thou  shalt  kuow  hereafter." 

Musculus  has  some  happy  remarks  here  on  the  applicability 
of  this  expression  to  infant  baptism,  which  are  most  just  and 
true. 

8. — [Peter  saith... thou. ..never  wash  my  feet.]  Here,  again,  the 
English  version  fails  to  give  the  full  strength  of  the  Greek 
words.  This  sentence  would  be  rendered  literally,  "  Thou  shalt 
never  wash  my  feet  for  ever,"  or  unto  eternity. 

We  may  note  here,  in  Peter's  language,  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  "  a  voluntary  humility,"  which  runs  into  extremes. 

Hutcheson  remarks,  "  Men  may  have  much  seeming  humil 
ity  in  the  matters  of  God,  which  is  yet  but  preposterous  and 
sinful,  and  learned  from  carnal  reason."  Rollock  compares 
with  Peter's  conduct  here  the  Romish  worship  of  saints  and 
angels,  under  the  pretence  of  deep  humility  and  unworthiness 
to  approach  God. 

[Jesus  ansioered . .  .If  1  wash  . . .  not . .  .no  part . . . me.]  We 
need  not  doubt  that  this  sentence  was  meant  to  bear  a  deep  and 
full  meaning,  and  to  reach  far  beyond  the  primary  application. 
It  would  be  a  very  cold  and  tame  exposition  to  say  that  our 
Lord  only  meant,  "  Unless  thy  feet  are  washed  by  Me  to-night 
thou  art  not  one  of  ray  disciples." — It  means  a  great  deal  more. 
Our  Lord  seems  in  eflfect  to  say,  "  Thou  wilt  not  be  wise  to  ob- 
ject to  the  symbolical  action  which  I  am  performing.  Remem- 
ber no  one  can  be  saved,  or  have  any  part  in  Me  and  my  work 
of  redemption,  unless  I  wash  away  his  sins.  Except  I  wash 
away  thy  many  sins,  even  thou,  Simon  Peter,  hast  no  part  in 
Me.  I  must  wash  every  saved  soul,  and  every  saved  soul  must 
be  washed.  Surely,  therefore,  it  does  not  become  thee  to  ob- 
ject to  my  doing  an  instructive  and  figurative  act  to  thy  feet, 
when  I  must  needs  do  a  far  greater  work  to  thy  soul.'' 

The  sentence  is  one  of  wide,  deep,  and  sweeping  application. 
It  is  true  of  every  Christian  of  every  rank  and  position.  To 
each  one  Christ  says,  '*  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part 
in  Me."  It  is  not  enough  that  we  are  Churchmen,  professed 
communicants,  and  the  like.  The  great  question  for  every  one 
is  this  :  "  Am  I  washed  and  justified  ?  " 

The  common  assertion  that  this  "  washing  "  here  spoken  of 
is  baptism,  seems  to  me  unwarrantable.  Our  Lord  never  bap- 
tized any  one,  so  far  as  we  can  learn  from  Scripture.  Where 
is  it  said  that  He  baptized  Peter  V  Moreover,  if  baptism  were 
meant,  the  past  tense  would  have  been  used :  "  If  I  had  not 
washed  thee,  thou  wouldst  have  no  part  jn  Me."  The  wash- 
ing here  spoken  of  is  something  far  above  baptism. 

9. — [Simon  Peter  saith,  etc.]  The  exclamation  of  Peter  in  this 
verse  is  highly  characteristic  of  the  man.     Impulsive,  excita- 


;^3  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

ble,  zealous,  ardent,  witli  more  love  than  knowledge,  and  more 
feeling  than  spiritual  discernment,  lie  is  horrified  at  the  very 
idea  of  "  having  no  part  in  Christ."  Anything  rather  than 
that !  Not  seeing  clearly  the  deep  meaning  of  His  Master's 
words,  and  still  sticking  to  a  carnal,  literal  interpretation  of  the 
word  "  washing,"  he  cries  out  that  his  Master  may  wash  him 
all  over,  hands  and  head  as  well  as  feet,  if  an  interest  in  Christ 
depends  on  that. 

Great  zeal  and  love  are  perfectly  consistent  with  great  spirit- 
ual ignorance  and  dulness,  and  great  slowness  to  comprehend 
spiritual  truth. 

Rollock  remarks  that  Peter  erred  as  much  in  one  extreme 
now,  as  he  had  erred  before  in  another. 

Stie.r  remarks  that  the  passionate,  strong  expression  of  Peter 
in  this  verse,  is  just  the  language  of  a  warm-hearted  but  dull- 
minded  disciple,  just  beginning  to  understand,  as  if  light  had 
suddenly  flash  ed  on  him. 

W.— [Jesus  saitli  to  7dm,  He  that  is  washed,  etc.]  This  sentence 
of  our  Lord's  conveys  a  latent  rebuke  of  Peter's  spiritual  dul- 
ness. It  is  as  though  Jesus  said,  "  The  washing  of  head  and 
hands  whereof  thou  speakest  is  not  needed.  Even  assuming 
that  a  literal  washing  is  all  I  meant  in  saying,  '  If  I  wash  thee 
not,'  it  is  well  known  that  he  who  is  washed  needs  only  to 
wash  his  feet  after  a  journey,  and  is  accounted  clean  entirely 
after  such  a  partial  washing.  But  this  is  far  more  true  of  the 
washing  of  pardon  and  justification.  He  that  is  i^ardoned  and 
justified  by  Me  is  entirely  washed  from  all  his  sins,  and  only 
needs  the  daily  forgiveness  of  the  daily  defilement  he  contract? 
in  travelling  through  a  sinful  world.  Once  washed,  justified 
and  accepted  by  Me,  ye  are  clean  before  God :  although  not  all 
of  you.     There  is  one  painful  exception." 

The  great  practical  truth  contained  in  this  sentence  ought  to 
be  carefully  noted  and  treasured  up  by  all  believers.  Once 
joined  to  Christ  and  cleansed  in  His  blood,  they  are  completely 
absolved  and  free  from  all  spot  of  guilt,  and  are  counted  with- 
out blame  before  God.  But  for  all  this  they  need  every  day, 
as  they  walk  through  this  world,  to  confess  their  daily  fail- 
ures, and  to  sue  for  daily  pardon.  They  require,  in  short,  a 
daily  washing  of  their  feet,  over  and  above  the  great  washing 
of  justification,  which  is  theirs  the  moment  they  first  believe. 
He  that  neglects  this  daily  washing  is  a  very  questionable  and 
doubtful '  kind  of  Christian.  Luther  remarks  pithily,  "  The 
devil  allows  no  Christian  to  reach  heaven  with  clean  feet  all 
the  way." 

"Every  whit,"  in  this  verse,  means  literally  "the  whole 
man." 

The  deep  mine  of  meaning  which  often  lies  under  the  sur- 
face of  our  Lord's  language  is  strikingly  exemplified  in  this 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  ;|^9 

verse,  as  well  as  in  the  seventli  and  eighth.  There  is  far  more 
in  many  of  His  sayings,  we  may  believe,  than  has  ever  yet 
been  discovered. 

It  is  striking  to  observe  that  even  of  His  poor,  weak,  erring 
disciples  Jesus  says,  "  Ye  are  clean." 

Bullinger  observes  that  the  words  of  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
"  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,"  are  a  daily  confession  of  the  very 
thing  here  mentioned, — viz.,  the  need  of  daily  washing  of  our 
feet. 

Casaubon  remarks  that  those  who  come  out  of  a  bath,  as  a 
matter  of  constant  experience,  only  need  to  wash  their  feet, 
which,  stepping  on  the  ground  as  they  come  out,  must  needs 
contract  some  defilement.  In  Eastern  countries,  where  batliing 
was  very  common,  all  could  see  the  force  of  this. 

Hengstenberg  remarks,  that  "  the  expression, '  but  not  all/ 
was  intended  to  pierce  the  conscience  of  Judas,  whom  the  Re- 
deemer did  not  give  up  until  the  last  good  impulse  died  within 
him," 

The  common  idea  that  the  "  washing  "  here  spoken  of  refers 
to  the  baptism,  seems  to  me  quite  untenable.  He  that  is  washed 
must  mean  only  "  washed  in  a  spiritual  sense  from  his  sins  ; " 
as  Psalm  li.  4.  Hengstenberg's  discussion  of  the  point  is  worth 
reading. 

Burgon  observes,  "  The  traitor,  Judas,  though  washed  by  the 
hands  of  Christ  Himself,  was  filthy  still." 

11. — [For  he  knew...'betray  Jiim,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  perfect  fore- 
knowledge of  His  sufferings  and  the  manner  of  them,  and  His 
thorough  discernment  of  the  real  characters  of  all  His  disci- 
ples, are  alike  shown  in  this  verse.  He  did  not  suffer  because 
he  did  not  foresee  it,  and  was  taken  by  surprise.  He  walked 
up  to  death  knowing  every  step  he  was  about  to  tread. 

The  sentence  is  an  example  of  the  explanatory  glosses  which 
are  so  characteristic  of  St.  John's  Gospel. 

The  Greek  words  rendered  "  who  should  betray  Him,"  are 
literally,  "  the  person  betraying  Him,"  in  the  past  participle. 

12. — [So  after...was?ied...feet.]  After  the  conversation  between  our 
Lord  and  Peter,  the  washing  seems  to  have  gone  on  without 
interruption.  The  disciples  were  accustomed  to  see  their  Mas- 
ter do  things  they  did  not  understand,  and  they  submitted  in 
silence. 

[And  had  taken... garments... set  down  again.']  This  refers  to 
His  putting  on  again  the  long  loose  outer  robe,  which  was  laid 
aside  on  performing  any  action  requiring  exertion  in  the  East. 
Then  our  Lord  took  His  place  once  more  at  the  table,  and  com- 
menced a  discourse  which  seems  to  have  ushered  in  the  Lord's 
Supper.     Whether  the  washing  of  the  feet  was  meant,  among 


20  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

other  tilings,  to  teacli  the  need  of  special  preparation  for  that 
blessed  ordinance,  is  an  interesting* thought,  and  worth  consid- 
eration. It  certainly  seems  our  Lord's  last  action  before  He 
gave  the  bread  and  wine. 

[He  said.. .know  ye  what...done.,.you.']  This  question  was  meant 
to  stir  up  in  the  disciples'  minds  inquiry  as  to  the  meaning  of 
what  they  had  just  seen.  Understanding  and  intelligent  per- 
ception of  all  we  do  in  religion,  should  be  sought  after  and 
valued  by  all  true  Christians.  There  is  no  real  religion  in  blind 
devotion.  "  What,  mean  I  by  this  service  ? "  should  be  the 
question  often  impressed  on  our  minds. 

13. — [  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord.]  These  words  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "  Ye  call  Me,  or  speak  of  Me,  as  the  Master 
and  the  Lord."  The  expression  seems  to  show  that  this  was  the 
habitual  language  of  the  disciples  while  our  Lord  was  on  earth. 
So  Martha  says  to  Mary,  "  The  Master  is  come."     (John  xi.  28.) 

[  Ye  say  icell :  for  so  I  am.]  The  word  "  so  "  is  not  in  the 
Greek.  It  is  simply  "  for  I  am."  The  expression  is  a  beauti- 
ful warrant  for  applying  to  Jesus  especially  the  appellation 
"  the  Lord."  He  has  Himself  endorsed  it,  by  the  words,  "  Ye 
say  well." 

14. — [If  1  then,  your  Lord,  etc.]  The  argument  of  this  verse  is 
one  which  our  Lord  very  frequently  uses :  "  If  I  do  a  thing, 
much  more  ought  ye  to  do  it."  Literally  rendered  the  meaning 
is,  "  If  I,  the  Person  whom  ye  speak  of  as  *  the  Lord  '  and  *  the 
Master,'  have  washed  your  feet,  and  condescended  to  perform 
the  most  menial  act  of  attention  to  you,  ye  also  ought  to  feel  it 
a  duty  to  do  acts  of  the  same  kind  for  one  another, — acte  as 
condescending  as  washing  one  another's  feet." 

The  words  "  Your  Lord  and  Master  "  in  the  Greek  are  liter- 
ally, "  The  Lord  and  the  Master." 

"  Ye  ought "  is  a  very  strong  expression.  It  is  tantamount  to 
Baying,  "  It  is  your  duty  and  debt, — ye  are  under  an  obligation 
to  do  it." 

Paley  on  Evidences,  p.  2,  ch.  iv.,  has  a  remarkable  passage, 
showing  the  close  affinity  between  our  Lord's  conduct  here,  and 
His  conduct  when  taking  a  little  child  and  putting  him  in  the 
midst  of  the  disciples.  In  both  he  taught  humility,  that  rare 
grace,  by  action. 

15. — [For  1  havie  given  you  an  exam'ple,  etc.]  "  I  have,  in  my  own 
person,  given  you  a  pattern  of  what  your  own  conduct  sliould 
be.  The  duty  I  want  you  to  learn  is  of  such  vast  importance 
that  I  have  not  left  it  to  a  general  precept,  but  have  given  you 
an  example  of  my  meaning." 

Of  course  the  question  at  once  rises, — What  did  our  Lord 
really  mean  ?     Did  he  mean  that  we  all  ought  literally  to  do  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  21 

very  same  tiling  tliat  He  did  ?    Or  did  he  only  mean  tliat  we 
are  to  imitate  the  spirit  of  his  action  ? 

The  Church  of  Rome,  it  is  well-known,  puts  a  literal  sense 
on  our  Lord's  language.  Once  every  year,  about  Easter,  the 
head  of  the  Romish  Church  publicly  washes  the  feet  of  certain 
poor  persons  got  ready  for  the  occasion.  The  absurdity,  to  say 
the  least,  of  this  view  is  evident  on  a  moment's  reflection. 

It  seems  absurd  to  take  our  Lord's  words  literally,  and  to  sup- 
pose tliat  the  Pope's  literal  washing  of  a  few  feet  at  Easter  can 
supersede  the  duty  of  all  Christians  to  do  the  same.  Yet  it  is 
only  fair  to  remember  that  the  Moravians  to  tliis  day  take  a 
literal  view  of  those  words,  and  have  a  custom  called  "  pedi- 
lavium." 

It  is  in  any  case  absurd  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  would  require 
His  disciples  to  perform  a  duty  which  the  young  and  the  feeble 
would  be  physically  unable  to  do. 

It  is  inconsistent  with  the  general  tenor  of  our  Lord's  teach 
ing  to  suppose  that  He  would  ever  attach  so  much  importance 
to  a  mere  bodily  action.  "  Bodily  exercise  profiteth  little." 
(1  Tim.  iv.  8.)  A  formal  performance  of  bodily  acts  of  religion 
is  just  the  easiest  thing  that  can  be  imposed  on  people.  The 
thing  that  is  really  hard,  and  yet  always  required,  is  the  ser- 
vice of  the  heart. 

The  true  interpretation  of  the  two  verses  is  that  which  places 
a  spiritual  sense  on  our  Lord's  words.  It  is  a  practical  illus- 
tration of  Matt.  XX.  26 — 28.  He  wished  to  teach  His  disciples 
that  they  ought  to  be  willing  to  wait  on  one  another,  serve  one 
another,  minister  to  one  another,  even  in  the  least  and  lowest 
things.  They  should  think  nothing  too  low,  or  humble,  or 
menial  to  undertake,  if  they  can  show  love,  kindness,  and  con- 
descension to  another.  If  He,  the  King  of  kings,  condescended 
to  leave  heaven  to  save  souls,  and  dwell  thirty-three  years  in 
this  sin-defiled  world,  there  is  nothing  that  we  should  think  too 
lowly  to  undertake. 

Pride,  because  we  possess  wealth,  rank,  position,  place,  edu- 
cation, or  high-breeding,  is  condemned  heavily  in  this  passage. 
He  who  would  shrink  from  doing  the  least  kindness  to  the 
poorest  Christian,  has  read  these  verses  to  little  purpose,  and 
does  not  copy  his  JNIaster's  example. 

One  caution  only  we  must  remember.  Let  us  not  suppose 
that  an  ostentatious  attention  to  the  poor  constitutes  the  whole 
of  obedience  to  the  law  of  this  passage.  It  is  easy  work  com- 
paratively to  care  for  the  poor.  We  are  to  be  ready  to  do  the 
least  acts  of  kindness  to  our  equals  quite  as  much  as  to  the 
poor.  There  is  nothing  about  temporal  poverty  in  the  passage. 
The  disciples  were  told  their  duty  to  "  one  another."  'This  is  a 
very  important  point.     It  is  much  easier  and  more  sel  f-satisfy- 


22  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

ing  to  play  the  part  and  do  tlie  work  of  a  Cliristiau  to  the  poor 
than  to  our  equals. 

How  entirely  the  passage  overthrows  the  claim  of  mere  talk- 
ing, head-learned  professors  of  sound  doctrine,  to  be  accounted 
true  Christians,  it  is  needless  to  show.  Doctrinal  orthodoxy, 
without  practical  love  and  humility,  is  utterly  worthless  before 
God. 

Bullinger  remarks,  how  singularly  full  of  Christian  truth 
the  passage  is  which  ends  at  this  verse.  That  we  are  washed 
clean  from  all  sins,  by  Christ  our  Saviour, — that  although 
washed,  the  remainder  of  infirmity  sticks  to  us,  and  obliges  us 
to  wash  our  feet  daily, — that  the  duty  of  a  disciple  is  to  make 
Christ  his  example  in  all  things, — these  three  great  lessons 
stand  forth  most  prominently. 

Gurnall  observes,  "  The  master  here  doth  not  only  rule  the 
scholar's  book  for  him ;  but  writes  him  a  copy  with  his  own 
hand." 


JOHN  XIII.  16—20. 


16  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
The  servant  is  not  greater  than  liis 
lord ;  neither  he  thtit  is  sent  greater 
than  he  that  sent  him. 

17  If  ye  know  these  things,  hap- 
py are  ye  if  ye  do  them. 

18  I  speak  not  of  you  all :  I  know 
whom  I  have  chosen ;  but  that  the 
scripture  may  be  fulfilled,  He  that 


e.'iteth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up 
his  heel  against  me. 

19  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come, 
that,  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may 
believe  that  I  am  he. 

20  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you. 
He  thatreceiveth  whomsoever  I  send 
receiveth  me  ;  and  he  that  receiveth 
me  receiveth  him  that  sent  me. 


If  we  would  understand  the  full  meaning  of  these 
verses,  we  must  mark  carefully  where  they  stand  in 
the  chapter.  They  follow  hard  after  the  remarkable 
passage  in  which  we  read  of  Christ  washing  His  dis- 
ciples' feet.  They  stand  in  close  connection  with  His 
solemn  command,  that  the  disciples  should  do  as  they 
had  seen  Him  do.  Then  come  the  five  verses  which  we 
have  now  to  consider. 

We  are  taught,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  that 
Christians  must  never  he  ashamed  of  doing  anything 
that  Ch-ist  has  done.  We  read,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto 
you.  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  Lord  ;  neither 
lie  tliat  is  sent  greater  than  he  that  sent  him." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  23 

There  seeras  little  doubt  that  our  Lord's  all-seeing 
eye  saw  a  rising  unwillingness  in  the  minds  of  the  Apos- 
tles to  do  such  menial  things  as  they  had  just  seen  Him 
do.  Puffed  up  with  their  old  Jewish  expectation  of 
thrones  and  kingdoms  in  this  world,  secretly  self-satis- 
fied with  their  own  position  as  our  Lord's  friends,  these 
poor  Galileans  were  startled  at  the  idea  of  washing  peo- 
ple's feet!  They  could  not  bring  themselves  to  believe 
that  Messiah's  service  entailed  work  like  this.  They 
could  not  yet  take  in  the  grand  truth,  that  true  Chris- 
tian greatness  consisted  in  doing  good  to  others.  And 
hence  they  needed  our  Lord's  word  of  warning.  If  He 
had  humbled  Himself  to  do  humbling  work,  His  disci- 
ples must  not  hesitate  to  do  the  same. 

The  lesson  is  one  of  which  we  all  need  to  be  remind- 
ed. We  are  all  too  apt  to  dislike  any  work  which 
seems  to  entail  trouble,  self-denial,  and  going  down  to 
our  inferiors.  We  are  only  too  ready  to  depute  such 
work  to  others,  and  to  excuse  ourselves  by  saying,  "  It 
is  not  in  our  way."  When  feelings  of  this  kind  arise 
within  us  we  shall  find  it  good  to  remember  our  Lord's 
words  in  this  passage,  no  less  than  our  Lord's  example. 
We  ought  never  to  think  it  beneath  us  to  show  kind- 
ness to  the  lowest  of  men.  We  ought  never  to  hold  our 
hand  because  the  objects  of  our  kindness  are  ungrateful 
or  unworthy.  Such  was  not  the  mind  of  Him  who 
washed  the  feet  of  Judas  Iscariot  as  well  as  Peter.  He 
who  in  these  matters  cannot  stoop  to  follow  Christ's 
example,  gives  little  evidence  of  possessing  true  love  or 
true  humility. 

We  are  taught,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses, 
the  uselessness  of  religioits  knowledge  if  not  accomjKinied 
by  practice.  We  read,  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy 
are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  It  sounds  as  if  our  Lord  would 
warn  His  disciples  that  they  would  never  be  really  hap- 


24:  EXPOSITOET  THOUGHTS. 

py  in  His  service  if  they  were  content  with  a  barren 
head-knowledge  of  duty,  and  did  not  live  according  to 
their  knowledge. 

The  lesson  is  one  which  deserves  the  continual  re- 
membrance of  all  professing  Christians.  Nothing  is 
more  common  than  to  hear  people  saying  of  doctrine  or 
duty, — "We  know  it,  we  know  it;"  while  they  sit  still 
in  unbelief  or  disobedience.  They  actually  seem  to 
flatter  themselves  that  there  is  something  creditable 
and  redeeming  in  knowledge,  even  when  it  bears  no 
fruit  in  heart,  character,  or  life.  Yet  the  truth  is  pre- 
cisely the  other  way.  To  know  what  we  ought  to  be, 
believe,  and  do,  and  yet  to  be  unaffected  by  our  knowl- 
edge, only  adds  to  our  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God.  To 
know  that  Christians  should  be  humble  and  loving, 
while  we  continue  proud  and  selfish,  will  only  sink  us 
deeper  in  the  pit,  unless  we  awake  and  repent.  Prac- 
tice, in  short,  is  the  very  life  of  religion.  "  To  him  that 
knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin." 
(James  iv.  17.) 

Of  course  we  must  never  despise  knowledge.  It  is  in 
one  sense  the  beginning  of  Christianity  in  the  soul.  So 
long  as  we  know  nothing  of  sin,  or  God,  or  Christ,  or 
grace',  or  repentance,  or  faith,  or  conscience,  we  are  of 
course  nothing  better  than  heathens.  But  we  must  not 
overrate  knowledge.  It  is  perfectly  valueless  unless  it 
produces  results  in  our  conduct,  and  influences  our  lives, 
and  moves  our  wills.  In  fact  knowledge  without  prac- 
tice does  not  raise  us  above  the  level  of  the  devil.  He 
could  say  to  Jesus,  "  I  know  Thee  who  Thou  art,  the 
Holy  One  of  God."  The  devils,  says  St.  James,  "  believe 
and  tremble."  (James  ii.  20.)  Satan  knows  truth, 
but  has  no  will  to  obey  it,  and  is  miserable.  He  that 
would  be  happy  in  Christ's  service  must  not  only  know, 
but  do. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  25 

We  are  taught,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses, 
the  2'>erfect  knowledge  wJdch  Christ  has  of  all  Ills  peoj^le. 
lie  can  distinguish  between  false  profession  and  true 
grace.  The  Church  may  be  deceived,  and  rank  men  as 
Apostles  who  are  nothing  better  than  brethren  of  Judas 
Lscariot.  But  Jesus  is  never  deceived,  for  He  can  read 
liearts.  And  here  He  declares  with  peculiar  emphasis, 
"  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen." 

This  perfect  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
a  very  solemn  thought,  and  one  which  cuts  two  ways. 
It  ought  to  fill  the  hypocrite  with  alarm,  and  drive  him 
to  repentance.  Let  him  remember  that  the  eyes  of  the 
all-seeing  Judge  already  see  him  through  and  through, 
and  detect  the  want  of  a  wedding  garment.  If  he 
would  not  be  put  to  shame  before  assembled  worlds,  let 
him  cast  aside  his  false  profession,  and  confess  his  sin 
before  it  is  too  late.  Believers,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
think  of  an  all-knowing  Saviour  with  comfort.  They 
may  remember,  when  misunderstood  and  slandered  by 
an  evil  world,  that  their  Master  knows  all.  He  knows 
that  they  are  true  and  sincere,  however  weak  and  failing. 
A  time  is  coming  when  He  will  confess  them  before  His 
Father,  and  bring  forth  their  characters  clear  and  bright 
as  the  summer  sun  at  noon-day. 

We  are  taught,  finally,  in  these  verses,  the  true  dig- 
nity of  Chrises  disciples.  The  world  may  despise  and 
ridicule  the  Apostles  because  they  care  more  for  works 
of  love  and  humility  than  the  pursuits  of  the  world. 
But  the  Master  bids  them  remember  their  commission, 
and  not  be  ashamed.  They  are  God's  ambassadors,  and 
have  no  cause  to  be  cast  down.  "  Yerily,  verily,"  He 
declares,  "He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  send  receiv- 
eth  Me  ;  and  he  that  receiveth  Me  receiveth  Him  that 
Bent  Me." 

The  dDctrine  here  laid   down  is  full  of  encourafre- 


25  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

ment.  It  ought  to  cheer  and  hearten  all  who  lay  them- 
selves out  to  do  good,  and  specially  to  do  good  to  the 
fallen  and  the  poor.  Work  of  this  kind  gets  little 
praise  from  men,  and  they  who  give  themselves  up  to 
it  are  often  regarded  as  miserable  enthusiasts,  and  meet 
with  much  opposition.  Let  them  however  work  on, 
and  take  comfort  in  the  words  of  Christ  which  we  are 
now  considering.  To  spend  and  be  spent  in  trying  to 
do  good  makes  a  man  far  more  honorable  in  the  eyes  of 
Jesus  than  to  command  armies  or  amass  a  fortune.  The 
few  who  work  for  God  in  Christ's  way  have  no  cause  to 
be  ashamed.  Let  them  not  be  cast  down  if  the  children 
of  the  world  laugh  and  sneer  and  despise  them.  A  day 
comes  when  they  will  hear  the  words,  "  Come  ye  bless- 
ed children  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you."     (Matt.  xxv.  34.) 

Notes.    JOHN  XIIT.  16—30. 

16. — [Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  etc.]  Tliis  well-known  mode 
of  expression  is  doubtless  used  here  to  show  the  importance  of 
the  lessons  which  our  Lord  is  imposing  on  the  disciples  at  this 
point.  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  Do  not  think  lightly  of  what . 
I  am  teaching  you  now.  It  is  no  trifling  matter.  Love  and 
humility  are  weighty  things  in  my  service.  I  solemnly  charge 
you  to  remember  that,  as  1  have  often  told  you,  the  servant  is 
not  greater  than  his  master,  but  must  strictly  follow  his  example. 
The  messenger  sent  on  an  errand  is  not  greater  than  him  that 
sends  him,  and  must  carefully  do  as  he  is  bid.  If  I,  your  Mas- 
ter and  Head,  have  done  these  actions  of  love  and  humility, 
never  be  ashamed  of  doing  the  same,  or  similar  ones.  If  you 
are  really  my  disciples  and  messengers,  you  must  prove  it  by 
shrinking  from  nothing  which  you  have  seen  Me  do." 

The  Greek  word  which  we  render  here,  "  He  that  is  sent,"  is 
the  same  that  is  elsewhere  rendered  "  the  Apostle."  Our 
translators  seem  to  have  translated  the  word  as  they  have  to 
show  more  forcibly  the  connection  between  "  the  sender  "  and 
"  the  sent,"  which,  to  a  reader  ignorant  of  Greek,  would  not 
have  apx)eared  if  the  word  "  apostle  "  had  been  used. 

17. — If  ye  knoto... happy... do  them.']  The  object  of  this  verse  seems 
to  be  the  confirmation  of  the  preceding  one.  "  Be  not  content 
with  knowing  these  things  with  your  heads.  See  that  you 
actually  practice  them.     If  you  really  know  and  understand 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xm.  27 

my  meaning";  you  will  find  it  your  happiness  to  put  it  in  prac- 
tice." The  latent  idea  seems  to  be,  "  Wretched  and  miserable 
Christians  are  ye,  if  you  know  these  things,  and  then  stop 
short,  and  do  not  practice  them." 

Let  us  note  the  solemn  principle  which  lies  beneath  the  verse. 
Knowledge  without  practice  is  the  character  of  the  devil.  None 
knows  more  truth,  and  none  does  more  evil  than  he.  Let  us 
not  forget  that  1 

18. — [I  speak  not  of  you  all.]  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  our  Lord 
meant  by  these  words.  Some  think,  as  Bishop  Hall,  that  the 
connection  is  with  the  verse  before,  and  that  our  Lord  meant, 
"  When  I  speak  of  happiness,  knowledge,  and  practice,  I  do 
not  speak  as  if  there  was  no  false  Apostle  among  you." 

Others  think  that  the  sense  should  be  carried  forward.  "  I 
am  not  speaking  as  if  you  were  all  equally  faithful,  and  equally 
gent  by  Me." 

llknow  whom  I  have  c7^05e7^.]  This  sentence  again  admits  of 
being  taken  in  two  senses.  Some  think,  as  Calvin,  Poole,  Rol- 
lock,  and  Hutcheson,  that  it  refers  to  the  eternal  election  and 
choice  of  those  disciples  who  were  true  believers.  "  I  know 
whom  I  have  really  called  and  chosen  to  be  mine  by  my  Spirit." 

Others  think,  as  Zwingle,  Musculus,  Hall,  Whitby,  Hengsten- 
berg,  and  Burgon,  that  it  only  refers  to  the  official  choice  and 
calling  of  the  twelve  when  our  Lord  selected  them  to  be  His 
disciples,  and  has  no  reference  to  the  inward  call  of  grace.  It 
would  then  mean,  "  I  know  the  real  inward  character  of  all 
those  whom  1  have  called  to  be  my  professing  disciples."  It 
certainly  favors  this  view,  that  our  Lord  uses  precisely  the 
same  expression  in  John  vi.  70  :  "  Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve, 
and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?  " 

Any  one  who  cares  to  see  the  question  well  discussed,  will 
find  it  ably  examined  by  Gomarus. 

[But  that  the  Scripture.. .fulfilled.]  Our  Lord's  meaning  seems 
to  be  filled  up  in  the  following  way  :  "  I  speak  not  of  you  all, 
as  if  I  thought  you  all  faithful.  I  know  that  ye  are  not  all 
clean  and  trustworthy,  and  I  know  that  in  this  way  you  will 
see  the  words  of  Scripture  fulfilled." 

Here,  as  in  many  places  where  the  expression  occurs,  "  This 
was  done  that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,"  we  must  not 
for  a  moment  suppose  that  "  things  were  done  in  order  that 
Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,"  but  that  "  when  things  were  done 
the  Scripture  was  fulfilled."  "  I  know  the  characters  of  all  my 
disciples,"  our  Lord  seems  to  say,  "  and  I  know  that  very  soon 
something  will  happen  by  which  the  Scripture  will  be  fulfilled." 

[He  that  eateth  bread,  etc.]  The  forty-first  Psalm  is  here 
shown  to  apply  to  one  greater  than  David,  aud  one  worse  than 


28  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

AMtophel.  Tlie  nintli  verse  here  quoted  says,  "Mine  own 
familiar  friend,  wliicli  did  eat  of  my  bread,  hatli  lifted  up  his 
heel  against  me."  The  expression  implies  the  act  of  one  who 
like  a  stubborn  and  vicious  horse,  suddenly  turns  round  against 
his  master  and  kicks  at  him.  "  This,"  our  Lord  says,  "  is  about 
to  be  fulfilled  in  the  conduct  of  Judas  Iscariot  to  Me." 

It  cannot  of  course  be  said  that  this  quotation  is  positive 
proof  that  Judas  ate  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  it  certainly  rath- 
er increases  the  probability  of  it.  The  words,  "  eateth  bread 
with  Me,"  used  in  such  close  juxtaposition  to  the  institution  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  are  very  remarkable. 

The  grand  lesson,  that  we  must  be  prepared  for  much  disap- 
pointment in  friends  and  companions  in  this  life,  is  very  plain 
in  this  passage.     The  less  we  expect  from  man  the  better. 

19. — [^Now  I  tell  you  before,  etc.]  There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
this  verse  applies  to  the  warning  of  Judas'  approaching  apos- 
tasy which  our  Lord  had  just  given.  "  I  tell  you  of  the  com- 
ing fall  of  one  of  your  number  before  it  takes  i^lace,  in  order 
that  when  it  takes  place  you  may  not  be  confounded,  but  may 
see  fresh  reason  for  believing  that  I  am  the  promised  Mes- 
siah." 

The  expression,  "  I  am  He,"  in  the  Greek  is  literally,  "  I  am." 
Is  there  any  reference  to  the  famous  "  I  AM  "  hath  sent  me  in 
Exodus  ?  It  comes  in  close  connection  with  "  sending  "  in  the 
next  verse. 

20. — [  Verily,  verily  I  say,  etc.']  Our  Lord's  purpose  in  this  verse 
seems  to  be  to  encourage  and  cheer  His  faithful  disciples. 
"  Be  not  dismayed "  he  seems  to  say,  "  though  one  of  your 
number  is  unfaithful  and  falls  away.  Persevere  and  fear  not. 
Remember  the  high  dignity  of  your  office.  I  solemnly  declare 
to  you  that  he  who  receives  you  or  any  one  else  whom  I  send 
forth  to  preach  the  Gospel,  receives  Me,  because  ye  are  my  rep- 
resentatives. Nor  is  this  all.  He  that  receives  Me,  receives  not 
Me  only,  but  God  the  Father  who  sent  Me.  Ye  have  no  cause 
therefore  to  be  ashamed  of  your  calling  however  unworthily 
some  may  behave." 

Let  us  note  that  it  is  no  light  matter  to  reject  and  despise  a 
faithful  minister  of  Christ.  A  weak  and  ignorant  servant  may 
carry  a  message  for  a  royal  master,  and  for  his  master's  sake, 
ought  not  to  be  lightly  esteemed.  Contempt  for  Christ's  min- 
isters, when  they  are  really  faithful,  is  a  bad  symptom  in  a 
church  or  nation. 

The  connection  of  this  verse  with  the  preceding  passage  is 
certainly  not  easy  to  see,  and  has  puzzled  all  commentators. 
Some,  as  Alford,  have  thought  that  our  Lord  intended  to  show 
the  wickedness  of  Judas  in  giving  up  such  an  honorable  office 
as  that  of  the  Apostleship.  This  seems  far-fetched. — Some  re- 
fer it  back  to  the  command  to  imitate  our  Lord's  humility  by 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII. 


29 


wasliing  one  another's  feet,  and  think  it  is  meant  to  remind 
them  that  even  they  are  Christ's  ambassadors.  I  prefer  the 
view  already  given,  that  the  words  are  meant  to  clieer  and 
comfort  the  disciples.  Though  not  all  were  faithful,  the  true- 
hearted  ones  were  Christ's  commissioned  ambassadors. 

Stier  says.  "  The  whole  circle  of  the  Apostles  seemed  to  be 
disgraced  and  broken  up  by  the  treachery  of  Judas,  and  there- 
fore our  I  ord  confirms  the  faithful  in  their  election,  and  that 
very  fitly  by  repeating  an  earlier  promise." 


JOHN  XIII.  21—30. 


21  "When  Jesus  had  thus  said, 
he  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  testi- 
fied, and  said,  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  be- 
tray me. 

22  Tlien  the  disciples  looked 
one  on  another,  doubting  of  whom 
he  spake. 

23  Now  there  was  leaning  on  Je- 
sus' bosom  one  of  his  disciples, 
whom  Jesus  loved. 

24  Simon  Peter  therefore  beck- 
oned to  him,  that  he  should  ask 
who  it  should  be  of  whom  he  spake. 

25  He  then  lying  on  Jesus' 
breast  saith  unto  him,  Lord  who  is 
it? 

26  Jesus  answered,  he  it  is,  to 
whom  I  shall  give  a  sop,  when  1 


have  dipped  ii.  And  when  he  had 
dipped  the  sop,  he  gave  il  to  Judas 
Iscariot,  the  son  of  Simon. 

27  And  after  the  sop  Satan  en- 
tered into  him.  Then  said  Jesus 
unto  him,  That  thou  doest,  do 
quickly. 

28  Now  no  man  at  the  table 
knew  for  what  intent  he  sjjake  this 
unto  him. 

29  For  some  of  them  thought, 
because  Judas  had  the  bag,  that  Je- 
sus had  said  unto  him,  Buy  those 
things  that  we  have  need  of  against 
the  feast ;  or,  that  he  should  give 
something-  to  the  poor. 

30  He  then  having  received  the 
sop  went  immediately  out:  and  it 
was  night. 


The  subject  of  the  verses  before  iis  is  a  very  painful 
one.  They  describe  the  last  scene  between  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  false  Apostle  Judas  Iscariot. 
They  contain  the  last  words  which  passed  between  them 
before  they  parted  forever  in  this  Avorld.  They  never 
seem  to  have  met  again  on  earth,  excepting  in  the  gar- 
den when  our  Lord  was  taken  prisoner.  Within  a  short 
time  both  the  holy  Master  and  the  treacherous  servant 
were  dead.  They  will  never  meet  again  in  the  body  till 
the  trumpet  sounds,  and  the  dead  are  raised,  and  the 
judgment  is  set,  and  the  books  are  opened.  What  an 
awful  meeting  will  that  be ! 

Let  us  mark,  firstly,  in  this  passage,  tohat  ti'ouUe  our 


so  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Lord  Jesus  went  through  for  the  sake  of  our  souls.  We 
are  told  tliaf  shortly  after  washing  the  disciples'  feet, 
He  "  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  said,  One  of  you  shall 
betray  Me." 

The  whole  length  and  breadth  and  depth  of  our 
Master's  troubles  during  His  earthly  ministry  are  far 
beyond  the  conception  of  most  people.  His  death  and 
suffering  on  the  cross  were  only  the  heading  up  and 
completion  of  His  sorrows.  But  all  throughout  His 
life, — partly  from  the  general  unbelief  of  the  Jews, — 
partly  from  the  special  hatred  of  the  Pharisees  and  bad- 
ducees, — partly  from  the  weakness  and  infirmity  of 
His  few  followers, — He  must  have  been  in  a  peculiar 
degree  "  a  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief." 
(Isa.  liii.  3.) 

But  the  trouble  before  us  was  a  singular  and  excep- 
tional one.  It  was  the  bitter  sorrow  of  seeing  a  chosen 
Apostle  deliberately  becoming  an  apostate,  a  backslider, 
and  an  ungrateful  traitor.  That  it  was  a  foreseen 
sorrow  from  the  beginning  we  need  not  doubt  ;  but 
sorrow  is  not  less  acute  because  long  foreseen.  That 
it  was  a  peculiarly  cutting  sorrow  is  very  evident. 
Nothing  is  found  so  hard  for  flesh  and  blood  to  bear 
as  ingratitude.  Even  a  poet  of  our  own  has  said  that 
it  is  "  sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  to  have  a  thankless 
child."  Absalom's  rebellion  seems  to  have  been  David's 
heaviest  trouble,  and  Judas  Iscariot's  treachery  seems  to 
have  been  one  of  the  heaviest  trials  of  the  Son  of  David. 
When  He  saw  it  drawing  near  He  was  "troubled  in 
spirit." 

Passages  like  these  should  make  us  see  the  amazing 
love  of  Christ  to  sinners.  How  many  cups  of  sorrow 
He  drained  to  the  dregs  in  working  out  our  salvation, 
beside  the  mighty  cup  of  bearing  our  sins.  They 
show  us  how  little   reason   we  have  for    complaining 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xm.  31 

when  friends  fail  lis,  and  men  disappoint  us.  If  we 
share  our  Master's  lot  we  have  no  cause  to  be  surprised. 
Above  all,  they  show  us  the  perfect  suitableness  of 
Christ  to  be  our  Saviour.  He  can  sympathize  with  us. 
He  has  suffered  Himself,  and  can  feel  for  those  who 
are  ill-used  and  forsaken. 

Let  us  mark,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  the  poioer 
and  malignity  of  our  great  enemy  the  devil.  We  are 
told  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  that  he  "  put  it 
into  the  heart  "  of  Judas  to  betray  our  Lord.  We  are 
told  here  that  he  "  entered  into"  him.  First  he  suofcrests  : 
then  he  commands.  First  he  knocks  at  the  door  and 
asks  permission  to  come  in :  then,  once  admitted,  he 
takes  complete  possession,  and  rules  the  whole  inward 
man  like  a  tyrant. 

Let  us  take  heed  that  we  are  not  "  ignorant  of  Satan's 
devices."  He  is  still  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  He  is  about  our  path, 
and  about  our  bed,  and  spies  out  all  our  ways.  Our 
only  safety  lies  in  resisting  him  at  the  first,  and  not 
listening  to  his  first  advances.  For  this  we  are  all 
responsible.  Strong  as  he  is,  he  has  no  power  to  do 
us  harm,  if  we  cry  to  the  stronger  One  in  heaven, 
and  use  the  means  which  He  has  appointed.  It  is  a 
standing  principle  of  Christianity,  and  will  ever  be 
found  true.  "  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from 
you."     (James  iv.  7.) 

Once  let  a  man  begin  tampering  with  the  devil,  and 
he  never  knows  how  far  he  may  fall.  Trifling  with  the 
first  thoughts  of  sin, — making  light  of  evil  ideas  when 
first  offered  to  our  hearts, — allowing  Satan  to  talk  to  us, 
and  flatter  us,  and  put  bad  notions  into  our  hearts, — all 
this  may  seem  a  small  matter  to  many.  It  is  precisely 
at  this  point  that  the  road  to  ruin  often  begins.  He 
that  allows  Satan  to  sow  wicked  thoughts  will  soon  find 


32  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

within  his  heart  a  crop  of  wicked  habits.  Happy  is 
he  who  really  believes  that  there  is  a  devil,  and  believing, 
watches  and  prays  daily  that  he  may  be  kept  from  his 
temptations. 

Let  us  mark,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  extreme 
hardness  which  comes  over  the  heart  of  a  backsliding 
professor  of  religion.  This  is  a  thing  which  is  most 
painfully  brought  out  in  the  case  of  Judas  Iscariot. 
One  might  have  thought  that  the  sight  of  our  Lord's 
trouble,  and  the  solemn  warning,  "  One  of  you  shall 
betray  Me,"  would  have  stirred  the  conscience  of  this 
unhappy  man.  But  it  did  not  do  so.  One  might 
have  thought  that  the  solemn  words,  "  That  thou 
doest,  do  quickly,"  would  have  arrested  him,  and  made 
him  ashamed  of  his  intended  sin.  But  nothing  seems 
to  have  moved  him.  Like  one  whose  conscience  was 
dead,  buried,  and  gone,  he  rises  and  goes  out  to  do  his 
wicked  work,  and  parts  with  his  Lord  for  ever. 

The  extent  to  which  we  may  harden  ourselves  by  re- 
sisting light  and  knowledge  is  one  of  the  most  fearful 
facts  in  our  nature.  We  may  become  past  feeling,  like 
those  whose  limbs  are  mortified  before  they  die.  We 
may  lose  entirely  all  sense  of  fear,  or  shame,  or  remorse, 
and  have  a  heart  as  hard  as  the  nether  millstone,  blind 
to  every  warning,  and  deaf  to  every  appeal.  It  is  a 
sore  disease,  but  one  which  unhappily  is  not  uncommon 
among  professing  Christians.  None  seem  so  liable  to  it 
as  those  who,  having  great  light  and  privilege,  deliber- 
ately turn  their  backs  on  Christ,  and  return  to  the  world. 
Nothing  seems  likely  to  touch  such  people,  but  the  voice 
of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God. 

Let  us  watch  jealously  over  our  hearts,  and  beware 
of  giving  way  to  the  beginnings  of  sin.  Happy  is  he 
who  feareth  always,  and  walks  humbly  with  his  God. 
The  strongest  Christian  is  the  one  who  feels  his  weakness 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  33 

most,   and  cries   most  frequently,  "  Hold  Thou  me  up, 
and  I  shall  be  safe."     (Psalm  cxix.  117  ;  Prov.  xxviii.  14.) 

Notes.    John  xiii.  21—30. 

21. — [When  Jesus  had  thus  said. 1  This  would  be  more  literally- 
rendered,  "  had  said  these  things,"  referring  to  all  He  had  just 
been  saying. 

There  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  break  or  pause  in  the  narrative 
here.  This  is  the  point  in  St.  John's  narrative  where  the  in- 
stitution of  the  Lord's  Supper  seems  to  come  in.  At  any  rate 
there  seems  no  point,  comparing  his  account  of  this  evening 
with  that  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  where  it  can  be  so  well 
fitted  in.     This  is  the  view  of  Jansenius,  Lampe,  and  Burgon. 

[He  was  troubled  in  spirit.']  This  expression  applied  to  our 
Lord  is  peculiar  to  St.  John.  We  find  it  only  in  his  Gospel,  here 
and  at  xi.  33  and  xii.  27.  Here  it  seems  to  mean  principally  the 
pain  and  sorrow  which  our  Lord  experienced,  on  seeing  one  of 
his  own  chosen  Apostles  about  to  betray  him.  In  addition  to 
this,  it  probably  includes  that  peculiar  agony  and  distress  of 
soul  which  our  Lord  was  subject  to  under  the  presence  of  a 
world's  sin  laid  upon  Him,  and  which  we  see  intensified  in  tho 
garden  of  Gethsemane. 

Let  it  be  noted,  that  of  all  the  Gospel  writers  John  is  the  one 
who  dwells  most  fully  on  the  Divine  nature  of  our  Lord,  and 
also  is  the  one  who  describes  most  fully  the  reality  of  His  hu- 
man affections. 

Observe  that  to  be  troubled  and  disturbed  in  mind  is  not  in 
itself  sinful.  Brentius  remarks,  after  Augustine,  how  foolish 
were  the  Stoic  philosophers,  who  taught  that  a  wise  man  is 
never  disturbed  in  mind. 

Musculus  thinks  that  our  Lord's  distress  and  sorrow  at  the 
sight  of  the  wickedness  of  Judas  had  much  to  do  with  this 
"  trouble  of  spirit."  Nothing  so  sad  as  the  sight  of  a  hardened, 
incorrigible  backslider. 

[And  testified,  and  said.]  The  frequency  with  which  John 
used  the  word  "  testified  "  is  very  remarkable.  It  occurs  thirty- 
three  times  in  his  Gospel,  and  only  three  times  in  all  the  other 
three  Gospels.  Why  our  Lord  is  said  to  "  testify  "  in  this  place 
is  hard  to  see.  We  must  suppose  that  it  means  He  made  an 
open,  solemn  declaration  in  a  very  impressive  manner,  like  a 
witness  bearing  testimony  to  some  great  and  unexpected  fact. 

[  Verily...!  say. ..one  of  you...hetray  me.]  The  solemn  "  Amen, 
amen,"  here,  as  elsewhere,  was  calculated  to  arrest  the  atten- 
tion of  the  disciples  to  the  declaration  our  Lord  was  going  to 
make.  "  One  out  of  you  {i.  e.,  out  of  your  number)  shall  betray 
Me.     My  last  and  crowning  trial  draws  near.     1  am  about  to 


34  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

bear  a  tvorld's  sins,  in  my  own  "body  on  the  tree ;  and  painful  as 
it  is  to  say,  the  first  step  in  the  history  of  my  passion  shall  be 
my  betrayal  by  one  of  yourselves." 

Let  us  note  our  Lord's  thorough  foreknowledge  of  all  the  de- 
tails of  His  sufferings,  as  well  as  of  the  great  fact  that  He  was 
about  to  be  killed. 

22. — [The7i  the  disciples  looked... another. 1  The  first  effect  of  our 
Lord's  declaration  seems  to  have  been  silence.  Like  men 
stunned  and  amazed,  the  disciples  looked  at  one  another  in  as- 
tonishment. The  thing  announced  was  the  last  thing  they  ex- 
pected to  hear. 

[Doubting  of  whom  he  spake.}  The  word  "  doubting  "  hardly 
conveys  the  full  force  of  the  Greek  here.  It  is  rather,  as  2  Cor. 
iv.  8,  "  perplexed,"  "puzzled." 

Let  us  note  that  neither  here  nor  afterwards  does  any  sus- 
picion appear  to  have  fallen  on  Judas.  For  anything  we  can 
see  he  looked  as  good  as  Peter,  James,  and  John,  and  as  un- 
likely to  betray  his  Master.  The  length  to  which  hypocrisy 
can  go  is  very  awful. 

23. — [Wow... leaning... Jesus'  bosom.]  To  understand  this  we  must 
remember  the  customs  of  the  East,  in  the  time  of  our  Lord, 
about  the  position  and  attitude  of  the  guests  at  a  meal.  They 
did  not  sit,  but  reclined.  The  famous  picture  of  the  Last  Sup- 
per, by  Leonardo  Da  Vinci,  gives  a  totally  inaccurate  idea  of 
the  scene. 

[One.. .disciples. ..Jesus  loved.]  There  can  be  no  doubt  this  was 
John,  the  writer  of  this  Gospel.  It  is  the  first  time  he  speaks 
of  himself  in  this  way,  and  the  expression  occurs  afterwards 
four  times,  xix.  26,  xx.  7,  xx.  20. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  loved  "  deserves  notice.  It  signi 
fies  the  higher,  nobler,  and  more  refined  kind  of  love.  There 
are  two  words  in  the  Greek  language  translated  "  love  "  in  the 
New  Testament. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  general  special  love  with  which  our 
Lord  loved  all  His  disciples  did  not  prevent  His  having  a  par- 
ticular love  for  one  individual.  Why  He  specially  loved  John 
we  are  not  told.  Gifts  certainly  do  not  appear  so  much  in  John 
as  grace.  But  it  is  worth  noticing  that  love  seems  more  the 
characteristic  of  John  than  of  any  disciple,  and  that  in  this  he 
showed  more  of  the  mind  of  C'hrist.  It  is  quite  clear  that 
special  friendship  for  one  individual  is  quite  consistent  with 
love  for  all. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  of  all  the  writers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, none  goes  so  deep  and  reveals  so  much  of  the  hidden 
things  of  God  as  he  who  lay  in  the  bosom  of  Christ. 

24. — [Simon  Peter  therefore  beckoned,  etc.]    The  characteristic  foR 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  35 

wardness  and  zeal  of  Peter  come  out  strikingly  in  this  verse. 
None  seem  so  excited  by  our  Lord's  announcement  as  lie  is. 
None  is  so  anxious  to  know  of  wliom  our  Lord  can  be  speaking. 
He  cannot  wait  silently  like  the  others.  He  makes  a  sign  to 
John  to  ask  privately  who  it  can  be.  A  fisherman  by  early 
training,  like  John,  he  was  probably  intimate  with  him,  and 
could  make  himself  understood  by  signs. 

Let  us  note  that  the  whole  transaction  seems  to  show  that 
Peter  did  not  sit  next  our  Lord  in  the  post  of  honor  and  favor. 
That  place  was  given  to  John. 

Rollock  here  observes,  that  so  far  from  Peter  having  any  pri- 
macy among  the  Apostles,  he  here  uses  the  intercession  of 
John  1 

25. — [Jle  then  lying  on  Jesus'  breast,  etc.']  The  Greek  words  here 
would  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  He  having  fallen  upon." 
It  is  so  translated  in  eleven  out  of  twelve  other  places  where  it 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament.  The  idea  is  evidently  of  one 
moving  and  leaning  towards  another,  so  as  to  get  closer  to  him 
and  whisper  a  question,  so  as  not  to  be  heard  or  observed. 
That  this  is  what  John  did  is  evident.  It  is  plain  that  he  did 
not  say  out  aloud,  "  Lord,  who  is  it  ?  " 

26. — [Jesus  answered...  He...  sop...  dipped  it.']  The  action  by  which 
our  Lord  told  John  He  would  indicate  the  traitor  to  him,  was 
probably  so  common  at  an  Eastern  banquet,  that  no  one  at  the 
table  would  remark  anything  about  it.  That  it  was  a  common 
way  of  eating  is  shown  by  Ruth  ii.  14,  "  Dip  thy  morsel  in  the 
vinegar.'*'  The  word  "  sop,"  the  marginal  reading  tells  us, 
might  be  translated  "  morsel."  To  give  a  morsel,  as  our  Lord 
did,  was  probably  a  mark  of  favor  or  compliment. 

That  our  Lord's  answer  was  whispered,  is  evident.  No  one 
seems  to  have  noticed  it,  except  John. 

Hengstenberg  observes,  that  by  this  act  of  kindness  and  at- 
tention Jesus  "  would  touch  the  heart  of  Judas  once  more,  if 
haply  he  might  be  susceptible  of  better  emotions." 

[And  when. ..dipjjed... gave. ..Judas. ..Simon.]  The  word  "  gave  " 
is  literally  ."  gives,"  in  the  present  tense,  showing  the  immedi- 
ate action  which  followed  our  Lord's  reply  to  John's  question. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  noteworthy  that  John  specially  calls 
Judas  "  the  son  of  Simon,"  in  order  to  make  it  quite  clear  what 
Judas  it  was  who  did  this  foul  deed. 

Bengel  remarks,  "  How  very  near  to  Jesus  was  Judas  on  this 
occasion  !  But  in  a  short  time  after,  by  what  a  wide  gulf  did 
glory  separate  Jesus  from  Judas,  and  destruction  separate  Ju- 
das from  Jesus." 

27. — [And  after  the  sop...Satan  entered...him.]  Of  course  this 
does  not  mean  that  now  for  the  first  time  Satan  entered,  but 


36  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

that  from  tliis  moment  Satan  got  full  and  entire  possession  of 
the  haart  of  Judas.  Up  to  this  time  he  was  in  it,  but  now  he 
possessed  it. 

The  word  "then"  is  emphatically  given  in  the  Greek,  but 
omitted  by  our  translators.  It  should  be,  "  After  the  Supper, 
then  Satan  entered  into  him." 

Let  us  note  the  reality,  personality,  and  awful  power  of  our 
great  spiritual  enemy  the  devil.  There  are  degrees  in  his 
power  and  dominion  over  us.  If  his  first  temptations  are  not 
resisted,  he  may  in  the  end  gain  full  and  entire  possession  of 
every  part  of  our  soul,  and  lead  us  captive  to  be  his  slavea. 
This  seems  the  history  of  Judas. 

Musculus  observes  that  even  at  the  first  communion  Satan 
was  present,  and  busy  in  a  heart. 

[Then  said  Jesus,..that...doest...do  quickly.']  The  full  meaning 
and  purport  of  this  solemn  saying  it  is  not  easy  to  define  posi- 
tively. It  is  evidently  a  very  elliptical  saying,  and  we  can 
only  conjecture  about  it. 

Of  course  we  cannot  suppose  that  our  Lord  desired  to  hasten 
on  an  act  of  wickedness,  nor  yet  can  we  suppose  for  a  moment 
that  there  was  any  impatience  in  our  Lord,  or  unwillingness  to 
await  the  hour  of  His  sufferings. — But  we  must  remember  that 
our  Lord  foreknew  perfectly  all  that  was  before  Ilim  in  the 
next  twenty-four  hours.  Does  He  not  then  speak  to  Judas  as 
to  one  of  the  instruments  in  the  great  work  which  was  about 
to  be  accomplished  ?  Does  He  not  seem  to  say,  "  If  thou  must 
indeed  do  this  wicked  act — and  1  know  now  tliat  the  prince  of 
this  world  has  got  full  possession  of  thy  heart, — go  on  and  do 
it.  There  need  be  no  delay.  I  am  ready  to  suffer  and  to  die. 
Do  thy  pan,  and  I  will  do  mine.  The  Sacrifice  is  ready  to  be 
slain.  Do  thy  part  in  the  transaction,  and  let  there  be  no  un- 
necessary waste  of  time." 

Chrysostom  says,  "  This  is  not  the  expression  of  one  com- 
manding, nor  advising,  but  of  one  reproaching,  and  showing 
him  that  He  desired  to  correct  him ;  but  that  since  he  was  in 
corrigible.  He  let  him  go. 

Augustine  says,  "  This  was  a  word  rather  of  glad  readiness 
than  of  anger." 

Calvin  says,  "  Hitherto  Jesus  tried  by  various  methods  to 
bring  Judas  back,  but  to  no  purpose.  Now  He  addresses  him 
as  a  desperate  man":  '  Go  to  destruction,  since  you  have  re- 
solved to  go  to  destruction.'  In  doing  so  He  performs  the  of- 
fice of  a  Judge  who  condemns  to  death  not  those  whom  He 
drives  of  His  own  accord  to  ruin,  but  those  who  have  already 
ruined  themselves  by  their  own  fault." 

Cyril  starts  the  odd  idea  that  our  Lord  addresses  these  words 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xni.  3Y 

to  Satan  rather  tlian  Judas,  and  as  it  were  cliallenges  him  to  do 
his  worst ! 

Gerhard  sees  a  likeness  in  the  expression,  to  God's  words  to 
Balaam,  when  He  says,  "  Rise  up  and  go."  (Num.  xxii.  20.) 
They  did  not  signify  approbation,  but  only  a  permission.  Yet 
God's  anger  was  kindled  when  Balaam  went  with  Balak's  am- 
bassadors. 

Musculus  observes  the  use  of  the  present  tense  here.  It  is 
not  "  What  thou  art  going  to  do,"  but  "  What  thou  art  doing 
now."  Even  at  the  Lord's  table  wickedness  was  going  on  in 
Judas'  heart. 

Lightfoot  says,  "  I  take  this  expression  for  a  tacit,  severe 
threat,  pronounced  not  without  scorn  and  indignation :  '  I 
know  well  what  thou  art  contriving  against  Me.  What  thou 
doest,  do  quickly,  else  thy  own  death  may  prevent  thee ;  for 
thou  hast  but  a  very  short  time  to  live.  Thy  own  end  draws  on 
apace." 

Whitby  compares  it  to  Ezek.  xx.  39 :  "  Go  ye,  serve  every 
one  his  idols." 

Some,  as  Hengstenberg,  would  render  the  Greek  word  for 
quickly  "  more  quickly,"  as  if  our  Lord  wished  him  to  hasten 
his  work.     But  there  seems  no  necessity  for  this. 

After  all  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  disciples  did  not  know 
what  the  saying  meant  ;  and  even  John,  though  writing  forty 
or  iifty  years  afterwards,  by  inspiration  of  God,  was  not  direct- 
ed to  explain  it,  though  he  does  explain  our  Lord's  sayings  in 
other  places.  We  may  therefore  safely  leave  the  meaning 
somewhat  uncertain. 

That  our  Lord  spoke  these  mysterious  words  aloud  and 
openly,  so  that  all  the  company  heard,  is  quite  evident  from 
the  context.  John's  question  was  a  whisper  ;  his  reply  was 
another  whisper,  and  neither  was  remarked  or  heard  by  others. 
But  the  address  to  Judas  was  heard  by  all. 

28. — [^Now  no  man  at  the  table,  etc.'\  This  verse  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "  Now  this  thing  no  one  knew,  of  them 
that  were  sitting  at  table,  for  what  purpose  He  said  it  to  him." 
The  sentence  confirms  the  statement  above  made,  that  both 
John's  question  and  our  Lord's  answer  were  spoken  in  a  whis- 
per or  undertone,  and  not  noticed  by  any  one.  This  sudden 
address  of  our  Lord  to  Judas  would  therefore  take  the  disciplea 
by  surprise. 

29. — [For  some  of  them  thought,  etc.]  This  whole  verse  is  inter- 
esting, and  throws  light  on  some  curious  points. 

The  statement  that  "Judas  had  the  bag,"  shows  the  position 
he  occupied  among  the  Apostles.  He  was  so  far  from  being 
suspected,  that  he  had  the  charge  of  the  common  store  of  mon- 


38  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

ey.    Bullinger  even  thinks  that  he  must  have  been  a  man  re- 
markable for  wisdom,  prudence,  economy,  and  faithfulness. 

The  supposition  of  some,  that  Jesus  told  Judas  to  "  buy  the 
things  needed  against  the  feast,"  shows  clearly  that  our  Lord 
did  not  work  miracles  in  order  to  procure  the  necessaries  re- 
quired by  Himself  and  His  disciples.  Christians  must  buy  and 
sell  like  other  people,  and  must  manage  their  money  affairs 
with  prudence  and  economy.  It  shows  how  little  the  disciples 
realized  that  their  Master's  death  was  close  at  hand. 

The  supposition  of  others,  that  Jesus  told  Judas  to  "give 
something  to  the  poor,"  shows  plainly  what  was  our  Lord's  cus- 
tom in  the  matter  of  almsgiving.  He  sanctified  and  adorned 
the  practice  of  caring  for  the  poor  by  His  own  example.  This 
passage,  and  Gal.  ii,  10,  deserve  careful  consideration.  It  may 
be  doubted  whether  the  English  Poor  Law  has  not  tended  to 
shut  up  English  almsgiving  far  more  than  is  right  before  God. 

Let  us  mark  the  snares  which  attend  the  possession,  finger- 
Ing,  and  handling  of  money.  The  man  who  has  care  of  the 
money  in  our  Lord's  little  company  of  followers,  is  the  very 
man  who  makes  shipwreck  of  his  soul  forever,  through  the 
love  of  money,  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,"  should 
be  a  Christian's  frequent  prayer.     (Prov.  xxx,  8,) 

Bullinger  points  out  that  the  possession  of  money  is  evidently 
not  in  itself  sinful  and  wicked,  and  argues  from  the  verse  that 
the  Romish  mendicant  friars,  and  others  who  made  a  merit  of 
self-imposed  poverty,  are  under  a  complete  delusion.  It  is  not 
the  having,  but  the  misusing  money  which  is  sinful. 

80. — [He  then. ..receimd... sop. ..immediately  out.]  The  hasty  de 
parture  of  Judas  as  soon  as  our  Lord  had  given  him  the  mor- 
sel, and  spoken  the  remarkable  words  already  commented  on, 
may  easily  be  explained.  He  saw  at  once  that  our  Lord  knew 
all  his  plot,  and  dreaded  exposure.  His  conscience  condemned 
him,  and  he  dared  no  longer  sit  in  our  Lord's  company.  He  at 
any  rate  understood  what  our  Lord  meant,  if  nobody  else  did. 
He  felt  himself  detected  and  discovered,  and  for  very  shama 
got  up  and  went  away. 

It  is  curious  and  noteworthy  that  John,  at  all  events,  must 
have  known  Judas  to  be  the  traitor,  and  yet  he  seems  to  have 
said  nothing. 

It  seems  very  difficult  to  me  to  explain  this  part  of  the  his- 
tory of  this  memorable  evening,  unless  we  admit  that  Judas 
Iscariot  received  tlie  Lord's  Supper  with  the  other  Apostles, — 
From  this  point  to  the  seizure  of  our  Lord  in  the  garden,  the 
narrative  flows  on  without  break  or  interruption,  and  I  cannot 
see  any  place  at  which  the  Lord's  Supper  can  come  in.  I  there- 
fore hold  strongly  that  Judas  was  actually  a  communicant, — 
The  subject  is  very  fully  discussed  by  Gerhard,  who  takes  this 
view,  and  confirms  it  by  quotations  from  Cyprian,  Jerome  An- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  Xni. 


39 


gustine,  Clirjsostom,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Tlieodoret,  Eutliy- 
inius,  Aquinas,  FeruSjToletus,  Bellarmine,  Jansenius,  Baronius, 
Maldonatus,  Calvin,  Beza,  Martyr,  Bucer,  and  Whittaker.  After 
all  tlie  expression  of  Luke  xxii.  21  appears  to  me  unanswerable. 

[And  it  icns  night.']  This  emphatic  little  sentence  of  course 
is  not  inserted  without  a  meaning  ;  but  why,  we  are  left  to  con- 
jecture. 

Perhaps  it  was  meant  to  show  us  that  Judas  purposely  waited 
till  darkness,  to  accomplish  his  deed  of  darkness.  "  This  is 
your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness."     (Luke  xxii.  53.) 

Perhaps  it  was  meant  to  show  that  Judas  slunk  off  at  a  time 
when  nobody  could  see  where  he  went,  follow  him,  or  observe 
his  movements. 

Perhaps  it  was  meant  to  show  that  the  time  was  hastening 
on,  and  that  our  Lord  had  reason  to  say,  "  That  thou  doest,  do 
quickly." 

Perhaps  it  was  only  meant  to  mark  the  precise  time  when 
our  Lord  delivered  the  exquisite  address  of  the  next  three 
chapters.  St.  John  loves  to  mark  time  and  places  in  his  nar- 
rative. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  clear.  The  expression  shows 
that  the  first  Lord's  Supper  was  not  celebrated  by  day,  but  by 
night.  The  objections  to  an  evening  sacrament  commonly 
made  by  certain  persons,  are  really  so  untenable  in  the  face  of 
this  passage,  that  one  marvels  how  men  of  common  sense  can 
make  them. 


JOHN  XIII.  31—38. 


81  Therefore,  when  he  was  gone 
out,  Jesus  said,  Now  is  the  Son  of 
Man  glorified,  and  God  is  glorified 
in  him. 

32  If  God  be  glorified  in  him,  God 
shall  also  glorify  him  in  himself,  and 
Bball  straightway  glorify  him. 

33  Little  children,  yet  a  little 
while  I  am  with  you.  Ye  shall  seek 
me:  and  as  I  said  unto  the  Jews, 
"Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come  ;  so 
liow  I  say  to  you. 

34  A  new  "commandment  I  give 
unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another ; 
as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love 
one  another. 


35  By  this  shall  all  'tnen  know  that 
ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love 
one  to  another. 

36  Simon  Peter  said  unto  him, 
Lord,  whither  goest  thou?  Je*us 
answered  him,  Whither  I  go,  thou 
canst  not  follow  me  now  :  but  thou 
shalt  follow  me  afterwards. 

37  Peter  said  unto  him.  Lord,  why 
cannot  I  follow  thee  now  ?  I  will 
lay  down  ray  life  for  thy  sake. 

38  Jesus  answered  him.  Wilt  thou 
lay  down  thy  life  for  ray  sake  ?  Ver- 
ily, verily,  I  say  unto  tliec.  The  cock 
shall  not  crow,' till  thou  hast  denied 
me  thrice. 


In  this  passage  we  find  the  Lord  Jesus  at  last  alone 


40  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

with  His  eleven  faithful  disciples.  The  traitor,  Judas 
Iscariot,  had  left  the  room,  and  gone  out  to  do  bis 
wicked  deed  of  darkness.  Freed  from  his  painful 
company,  our  Lord  opens  His  heart  to  His  little  flock 
more  fully  than  He  had  ever  done  before.  Speaking  to 
them  for  the  last  time  before  His  passion.  He  begins  a 
discourse  which  for  touching  interest  surpasses  any  por- 
tion of  Scripture. 

These  verses  show  us  what  glory  the  crucifixion 
hrought  both  to  God  the  Father  and  to  God  the  Son.  It 
seems  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  this  was 
what  our  Lord  had  in  His  mind  when  He  said,  "  Now 
is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in 
Him." — It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  The  time  of  my  cru- 
cifixion is  at  hand.  My  work  on  earth  is  finished.  An 
event  is  about  to  take  place  to-morrow,  which,  however 
painful  to  you  who  love  Me,  is  in  reality  most  glorify- 
ing both  to  Me  and  My  Father." 

This  was  a  dark  and  mysterious  saying,  and  we  may 
well  believe  that  the  eleven  did  not  understand  it.  And 
no  wonder  !  In  all  the  agony  of  the  death  on  the  cross, 
in  all  the  ignominy  and  humiliation  which  they  saw  afar 
off,  or  heard  of  next  day,  in  hanging  naked  for  six  hours 
between  two  thieves, — in  all  this  there  was  no  appear- 
ance of  glory  !  On  the  contrary,  it  was  an  event  calcu- 
lated to  fill  the  minds  of  the  Apostles  with  shame, 
disappointment,  and  dismay.  And  yet  our  Lord's  say- 
ing was  true. 

The  crucifixion  brought  glory  to  the  Father.  It 
glorified  His  wisdom,  faithfulness,  holiness,  and  love.  It 
showed  Him  wise,  in  providing  a  plan  whereby  He  could 
be  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the  ungodly. — It  showed 
Him  faithful,  in  keeping  His  promise,  that  the  seed  of 
the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head. — It  showed 
Him  holy,  in  requiring  His  law's  demands  to  be  satisfied 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xni.  ^i 

by  our  great  Substitute. — It  showed  Him  loviug,  in  pro- 
viding such  a  Mediator,  such  a  Redeemer,  and  such  a 
Friend  for  sinful  man  as  His  co-eternal  Son. 

The  crucifixion  brought  glory  to  the  Son.  It  glori- 
fied His  compassion,  His  patience,  and  His  power.  It 
showed  Him  most  compassionate,  in  dying  for  us,  suffer- 
ing in  our  stead,  allowing  Himself  to  be  counted  sin  and 
a  curse  for  us,  and  buying  our  redemption  with  the  price 
of  His  own  blood. — ^It  showed  Him  most  patient,  in  not 
dying  the  common  death  of  most  men,  but  in  willingly 
submitting  to  such  horrors  and  unknown  agonies  as  no 
mind  can  conceive,  when  with  a  word  he  could  have 
summoned  His  Father's  angels,  and  been  set  free. — It 
showed  Him  most  powerful,  in  bearing  the  weight  of  all 
a  world's  transgressions,  and  vanquishing  Satan  and 
despoiling  him  of  his  prey. 

For  ever  let  us  cling  to  these  thoughts  about  the 
crucifixion.  Let  us  remember  that  painting  and  sculp- 
ture can  never  tell  a  tenth  part  of  what  took  place  on 
the  cross.  Crucifixes  and  pictures  at  best  can  only 
show  us  a  human  being  agonizing  in  a  painful  death. 
But  of  the  length  and  breadth  and  depth  and  height  of 
the  work  transacted  on  the  cross, — of  God's  law  hon- 
ored, man's  sins  borne,  sin  punished  in  a  Substitute,  free 
salvation  bought  for  man, — of  all  this  they  can  tell 
nothing.  Yet  all  this  lies  hid  under  the  crucifixion.  No 
wonder  St.  Paul  cries,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory, 
save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Gal.  vi.  14.) 

These  verses  show  us,  secondly,  what  great  impor- 
tance our  Lord  Jesus  attaches  to  the  grace  of  brotherly 
love.  Almost  as  soon  as  the  false  Apostle  had  left  the 
faithful  eleven,  comes  the  injunction,  "Love  one  an- 
other." Immediately  after  the  sad  announcement  that 
He  would  leave  them  soon,  the  commandment  is  given, 
"  Love  one  another."     It  is  called  a  "  new  "  command- 


42  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

ment,  not  because  it  bad  never  been  given  before,  but 
because  it  was  to  be  more  honored,  to  occupy  a  higher 
position,  to  be  backed  by  a  higher  example  than  it  ever 
had  been  before.  Above  all,  it  was  to  be  the  test  of 
Christianity  before  the  world.  "  By  this  shall  all  men 
know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to 
another." 

Let  us  take  heed  that  this  w^ell-known  Christian 
grace  is  not  merely  a  notion  in  our  heads,  but  a  prac- 
tice in  our  lives.  Of  all  the  commands  of  our  Master 
there  is  none  which  is  so  much  talked  about  and  so  little 
obeyed  as  this.  Yet,  if  we  mean  anything  when  we 
profess  to  have  charity  and  love  toward  all  men,  it  ought 
to  be  seen  in  our  tempers  and  our  words,  our  bearing 
and  our  doing,  our  behavior  at  home  and  abroad,  our 
conduct  in  every  relation  of  life.  Specially  it  ought  to 
show  itself  forth  in  all  our  dealing  with  other  Christians. 
We  should  regard  them  as  brethren  and  sisters,  and  de- 
light to  do  anything  to  promote  their  happiness.  "We 
should  abhor  the  idea  of  envy,  malice,  and  jealousy  to- 
wards a  member  of  Christ,  and  regard  it  as  a  downright 
sin.  This  is  what  our  Lord  meant  when  He  told  us  to 
love  one  another. 

Christ's  cause  in  the  earth  would  prosper  far  more 
than  it  does  if  this  simple  law  was  more  honored. 
There  is  nothing  that  the  world  understands  and  values 
more  than  true  charity.  The  very  men  who  cannot 
comprehend  doctrine,  and  know  nothing  of  theology, 
can  appreciate  charity.  It  arrests  their  attention,  and 
makes  them  think.  For  the  world's  sake,  if  for  no  other 
cause,  let  us  follow  after  charity  more  and  more. 

These  verses  show  us,  lastly,  how  much  self-igiiorance. 
there  may  he  in  the  heart  of  a  true  believer.  We  see  Si- 
mon Peter  declaring  that  he  was  ready  to  lay  down  his 
life  for  his  Master.     We  see  his  Master  tellino:  him  that 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  43 

in  that  very  night  he  would  "  deny  Him  thrice."  And 
we  all  know  how  the  matter  ended.  The  Master  was 
right,  and  Peter  was  wrong. 

Let  it  be  a  settled  principle  in  our  religion,  that 
there  is  an  amount  of  weakness  in  all  our  hearts,  of 
which  we  have  no  adequate  conception,  and  that  we 
never  know  how  far  we  might  fall  if  we  were  tempted. 
We  fancy  sometimes,  like  Peter,  that  there  are  some 
things  we  could  not  possibly  do.  We  look  pitifully 
upon  others  who  fall,  and  please  ourselves  in  the  thought 
tliat  at  any  rate  we  should  not  have  done  so.  We  know 
nothing  at  all.  The  seeds  of  every  sin  are  latent  in  our 
hearts,  even  when  renewed,  and  they  only  need  occa- 
sion, or  carelessness  and  the  withdrawal  of  God's  grace 
for  a  season,  to  put  forth  an  abundant  crop.  Like  Pe- 
ter, we  may  think  we  can  do  wonders  for  Christ,  and 
like  Peter,  we  may  learn  by  bitter  experience  that  we 
have  no  power  and  might  at  all. 

The  servant  of  Christ  will  do  wisely  to  remember 
these  things.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take 
heed  lest  he  falL"  (1  Cor.  x.  12.)  A  humble  sense  of 
our  own  innate  weakness,  a  constant  dependence  on  the 
Strong  for  strength,  a  daily  prayer  to  be  held  up,  be- 
cause we  cannot  hold  up  ourselves, — these  are  the  true 
secrets  of  safety.  The  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
said,  "When  I  am  weak,  then  I  am  strong."  (2  Cor. 
xii.   10.) 

Notes.    John  xiii.  31 — 38. 

81. — [Therefore,  when. ..gone  out,  Jesus  said.']  The  withdrawal  of 
Judas  from  the  company  of  the  disciples,  at  that  point,  forms  a 
distinct  break  in  the  narrative.  At  once,  from  this  time,  our 
Lord  seems  to  speak  as  one  relieved  by  the  absence  of  an  un- 
congenial mind.  There  is  a  manifest  alteration  in  the  tone  of 
all  He  says.     It  seems  pitched  in  a  higher  key. 

Bengel,  at  this  point,  interposes  an  entire  interval  of  a  night, 
and  thinks  that  a  new  discourse  begins  here.  It  seems  a  need- 
less  view,  and  is  very  unnatural. 


44  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

[Wow  is  the  Son  of  Man  glorified,  etc.,  etc.]  This  is  a  deep 
Baying,  and  not  least  so  because  both  the  verbs  are  in  the  past 
tense.  Literally  rendered  in  each  case,  the  verb  should  be 
"  has  been  glorified."  This  is  not  an  uncommon  mode  of 
speech.  The  glorification  is  so  near,  so  certain,  so  complete, 
that  it  is  spoken  of  as  a  thing  accomplished,  and  even  past.  It 
was  accomplished  in  purpose,  and  in  a  few  hours  would  be  ac- 
complished in  reality.  (iSo  John  xvii.  4.)  The  meaning  of  our 
Lord  may  probably  be  paraphrased  thus  :  "  Now  has  the  time 
come  that  I,  the  Son  of  Man,  should  be  glorified,  by  actually 
dying  as  man's  substitute,  and  shedding  my  blood  for  the  sins 
of  the  world.  Now  has  the  time  come  that  God  the  Father 
should  receive  the  highest  glory  by  my  sacrifice  on  the  cross." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Lord  regards  His  own  atoning  death 
on  the  cross  as  the  most  glorious  part  of  His  work  on  earth ; 
and  that  nothing  so  tends  to  glorify  the  Father's  attributes  of 
justice,  holiness,  mercy,  and  faithfulness  to  His  promises,  as 
the  death  of  the  Son. 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  Lord  does  not  speak  of  His  death  as 
a  punishment,  or  disgrace,  or  humiliation,  but  as  an  event  most 
glorious, — glorifying  both  to  Himself  and  to  the  Father.  So 
Christians  should  learn  to  "  glory  in  the  cross." 

If  we  do  not  take  this  view,  and  adhere  to  a  strictly  literal 
rendering  of  the  verb  glorified,  as  past,  as  Hengstenberg  does, 
we  must  suppose  it  to  mean,  "  Now  at  last,  by  my  perfect 
righteousness  in  life  and  willingness  to  suffer  in  death,  I,  the 
Son  of  man,  have  received  glory,  and  my  Fatlier  at  the  same 
time  has  received  glory  through  Me."  But  the  other  inter- 
pretation, taking  the  past  tense  for  the  present  or  future,  is 
better.  "The  sacrifice  has  begun.  The  last  act  of  my  redeem- 
ing work, — specially  glorifying  myself  and  my  Father, — has 
actually  commenced  or  is  commencing." 

Augustine  and  Ecolampadius  hold  that  the  expression,  "  Now 
is  the  Son  of  Man  glorified,"  has  a  special  reference  to  the  glo- 
ry which  surrounds  our  Lord  when  the  wicked  are  all  put 
away  from  Him,  and  He  is  attended  only  by  saints.  This  pe- 
culiar glory  was  on  Him  when  Judas  Iscariot  went  out,  and 
left  Him  and  His  faithful  disciples  alone. 

32. — [If  God  be  glorified  in  7iim,  etc.]  This  verse  may  be  para- 
phrased as  follows  :  "  If  God  the  Father  be  specially  glorified 
in  all  His  attributes  by  my  death,  He  shall  proceed  at  once  to 
place  special  glory  on  Me,  for  my  personal  work,  and  shall  do 
it  without  delay,  by  raising  Me  from  the  dead,  and  placing  Me 
at  His  right  hand."  It  is  like  the  famous  passage  in  Philippi- 
ans:  "Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  It  is 
the  same  idea  that  we  have  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  more 
fully :  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth ; — now,  O  Father, 
glorify  Thou  Me  with  Thine  own  self."  (Phil.  ii.  9;  John 
xvii,  5.) 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  4.5 

If  the  Son,  on  the  one  hand,  specially  glorifies  the  Father's 
attributes  of  holiness,  justice,  and  mercy,  by  satisfying  all  His 
demands  with  His  own  precious  blood  on  the  cross,  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  Father  specially  glorifies  the  Son,  by  exalting 
Him  above  all  Kings,  raising  Him  from  the  dead,  and  giving 
Him  a  name  above  every  name. 

*' In  Himself"  must  refer  to  that  special  and  peculiar  glory 
which,  in  the  counsels  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  is  conferred  on 
the  Second  Person,  on  account  of  His  incarnation,  cross,  and 
passion. 

It  is  hardly  needful  to  remind  Christians  that  "  if  "  does  not 
imply  any  doubtfulness,  but  is  rather  equivalent  to  "  since  "  as 
in  Coloss.  iii.  1 :  "If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ." 

If  any  one  wishes  to  adhere  rigidly  to  the  past  tense  in  the 
first  "  glorified  "  of  this  verse,  it  undoubtedly  makes  excellent 
meaning.  "  If  God  the  Father  has  been  glorified  on  the  earth 
by  my  life  and  perfect  obedience  to  His  law,  He  will  also  glo- 
rify Me  in  my  own  person,  by  raising  Me  from  the  dead,  and 
placing  Me  at  His  own  right  hand,  and  that  very  soon."  But  I 
doubt  this  being  the  full  meaning,  for  the  reasons  given  in  the 
preceding  verse. 

The  perfect  harmony  and  co-operation  of  the  Persons  in  the 
blessed  Trinity  shine  out  here.  The  Son  glorifies  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  glorifies  the  Son,  The  Son  shows  the  world  by 
His  death  how  holy  and  just  is  the  Father,  and  how  He  hates 
sin.  The  Father  shows  the  world,  by  raising  and  exalting  the 
Son  to  glory,  how  He  delights  in  the  redemption  for  sinners 
which  the  Son  has  accomplished. 

Chrysostom  thinks,  that  "  straightway  glorify  Him "  must 
refer  to  the  special  signs  and  wonders  which  appeared  from 
the  very  time  that  our  Lord  was  on  the  cross.  "  So  the  sun 
was  darkened,  the  rocks  rent,  the  veil  of  the  temple  parted, 
many  bodies  of  the  saints  arose,  the  tomb  had  its  seal,  the 
guards  sat  by,  and  while  a  stone  lay  on  the  grave,  the  body 
rose." 

Musculus  remarks,  that  here  you  have  the  great  principle 
asserted  which  is  always  true :  "  Those  who  glorify  God  shall 
be  glorified  by  God." 

33. — [Little  children.']  This  is  the  only  time  our  Lord  ever  calls 
His  disciples  by  this  name.  It  was  evidently  a  term  of  atFection 
and  compassion,  like  the  language  of  a  father  speaking  to  chil- 
dren whom  he  is  about  to  leave  alone  as  orphans  in  the  world. 
"  My  believing  followers,  whom  I  love  and  regard  as  my  chil- 
dren." 

Observe  that  the  expression  is  not  used  till  Judas  has  gone 
away.  Unbelievers  are  not  to  be  addressed  as  Christ's  chil- 
dren. 


46  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

[Yet  a  little  wMle  1  am  with  you.]  This  seems  to  mean,  "  I 
am  only  staying  a  very  little  longer  with  you.  The  time  is 
short.  The  hour  approaches  when  we  must  part.  Give  me 
your  best  attention  while  I  talk  to  you  for  the  last  time  before 
I  go." 

[Ye  sJiall  seek  Me.]  It  is  not  quite  clear  what  this  means. 
Of  course  it  cannot  refer  to  the  time  after  the  resurrection, 
when  the  disciples  were  fully  convinced  that  "  the  Lord  had 
risen."  Much  less  can  it  refer  to  the  time  after  the  ascension. 
I  can  only  suppose  it  means,  "  After  my  death  ye  shall  be  per- 
plexed, amazed,  and  confounded  for  a  little  season,  wanting  Me, 
seeking  Me,  wishing  for  Me,  and  wondering  where  I  am  gone. 
The  very  moment  the  little  child  is  left  alone  by  mother  or 
nurse,  it  begins  to  cry  after  her  and  want  her.  So  will  it  be 
with  you."     ^ 

[And  as  1  said  unto  the  Jews,  etc.]  This  sentence  can  only 
mean,  "  The  words  that  I  said  to  the  Jews  will  soon  apply  to 
you  also,  though  in  a  very  different  sense.  Whither  I  am  going 
you  cannot  follow  Me.  You  will  follow  Me  hereafter;  but  at 
present  there  is  a  gulf  between  us,  and  you  will  not  see  Me." 

Of  course  the  words  applied  to  the  Jews  meant  that  Jesus 
was  going  to  a  place  where  spiritually  and  morally  the  Jews 
were  unfit  to  go,  and  in  their  impenitent  state  could  not  go. 
The  words  applied  to  the  disciples  only  meant  that  Jesus  was 
going  into  a  world  where  they  could  not  follow  Him  till  they 
died.  They  were  remaining  on  earth,  and  He  was  going  to 
heaven. 

Hengstenberg  observes,  that  this  is  the  only  place  in  which 
Jesus  ever  spoke  to  His  disciples  concerning  "  the  Jews."  Else- 
where He  uses  the  expression  in  speaking  to  the  Samaritan 
woman  (John  iv.  22)  and  before  Caiaphas  and  Pilate. 

34. — [A  new  commandment,  etc.]  The  immense  importance  of 
Christian  love  or  charity  cannot  possibly  be  shown  more  strik- 
ingly than  by  the  way  that  it  is  urged  on  the  disciples  in  this 
place.  Here  is  our  Lord  leaving  the  world,  speaking  for  the 
last  tim.e,  and  giving  His  last  charge  to  His  disciples.  The  very 
first  subject  He  takes  up  and  presses  on  them,  is  the  great  duty 
of  loving  one  another,  and  that  with  no  common  love  ;  but 
after  the  same  patient,  tender,  unwearied  manner  that  He  has 
loved  them.  Love  must  needs  be  a  very  rare  and  important 
grace  to  be  so  spoken  of  I  The  want  of  it  must  needs  be  a 
plain  proof  that  a  man  is  no  true  disciple  of  Christ.  How  vast 
the  extent  of  Christian  love  ought  to  be !  The  measure  and 
standard  of  it  is  the  love  wherewith  Christ  loved  us.  His  was 
a  love  even  to  death. 

Melancthon  points  out  our  Lord's  great  desire  to  promote 
unity  and  concord  among  professing  Christians,  by  His  dwelling 
so  much  on  love  before  He  left  the  world. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIII.  ^^ 

WIiv  did  our  Lord  call  love  a  "  new  "  commandment?  Tliis 
is  a  rather  difficult  question,  and  has  called  forth  great  variety 
of  opinions.  One  thing  only  is  very  clear.  Jesus  did  not  mean 
to  say  that  "  love  "  was  a  grace  peculiar  to  the  Gospel,  and  was 
nowhere  taught  in  the  law  of  Moses.  To  say  this,  is  a  mark  of 
great  ignorance.  The  point  is  set  at  rest  by  the  words  in 
Lev.  xix.  18  :  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself." 
What  then  does  this  word  "  new  "  mean  ? 

Some  think,  as  Chrysostom,  that  our  Lord  refers  to  the  degree 
with  which  Christians  should  love, — even  as  He  had  loved 
them.  This  was  a  new  and  higher  standard  than  had  been  yet 
known.  Hitherto,  as  Cyril  says,  men  were  to  love  others  as 
themselves.  Now  they  were  to  love  them  more  than  them- 
selves.— Some  think  that  our  Lord  refers  to  the  great  duty  of 
Christians  to  love  one  another,  aad  cling  to  one  another  with  a 
special  and  peculiar  love,  over  and  above  the  love  they  had 
generally  to  all  mankind.  This  was  in  a  sense  a  novelty. — 
Some  think  that  our  Lord  only  meant  that  He  renewed  and  re- 
created the  great  law  of  love,  and  raised  it  to  so  much  higher  a 
position  than  it  had  ever  held  among  the  Jews,  that  it  might 
be  truly  called  a  "  new  commandment."  The  parable  of  the 
good  Samaritan  shows  how  little  the  Jews  realized  the  duty  of 
loving  their  neighbors.  He  had  in  view  the  utter  neglect  into 
which  the  law  of  love  had  fallen  among  Jewish  teachers  like 
the  Pharisees,  and  like  Isaac  digging  the  earth  out  of  the  old 
well,  would  give  the  law  a  second  beginning,  as  if  it  were  new. 

Some,  as  Maldonatus  and  Suicer,  think  that  the  expression  is 
only  a  Hebraism,  and  that  "  new,"  "  rare,"  and  "  excellent  " 
are  synonymous.  Thus  a  new  name,  a  new  song,  a  new  wine. 
(Rev.  ii.  17  ;  Psalm  xcv.  1 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  29.) 

Perhaps  there  is  something  in  each  and  all  of  these  views. 
One  thing  is  very  certain :  nothing  could  exalt  the  value  of  love 
so  highly  as  to  call  it  a  "  new  commandment." 

Scott  observes  that  the  law  of  love  to  others  "  was  now  to  be 
explained  with  new  clearness,  enforced  by  new  motives  and 
obligations,  illustrated  by  a  new  example,  and  obeyed  in  a  new 
manner. 
85. — [Bi/  this  shall  all  men  know,  etc.]  There  can  be  no  mistake 
about  these  words.  Love  was  to  be  the  grand  characteristic, 
the  distinguishing  mark  of  Christ's  disciples. 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord  does  not  name  gifts,  or  miracles,  or 
intellectual  attainments,  but  love,  the  simple  grace  of  love,  a 
grace  within  reach  of  the  poorest,  lowliest  believer,  as  the  evi- 
dence of  disciple  ship.  No  love,  no  grace,  no  regeneration,  no 
true  Christianity ! 

Musculus  observes,  with  withering  scorn,  how  little  likeness 
there  is  between  our  Lord's  mark  of  discipleship,  and  the 
dresses,  beads,  fastings,  and  self-imposed  austerities  of  the 
Church  of  Rome. 


48  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Let  us  note  what  a  heavy  condemnation  this  verse  pronounces 
on  sectarianism,  bigotry,  narrow-mindedness,  party-spirit,  strife, 
bitterness,  needless  controversy  between  Christian  and  Chris- 
tian. 

Let  us  note  how  far  from  satisfactory  is  the  state  of  those 
who  are  content  with  sound  doctrinal  opinions,  and  orthodox 
correct  views  of  the  Gospel,  while  in  their  daily  life  they  give 
way  to  ill-temper,  ill-nature,  malice,  envy,  quarrelling,  squab- 
bling, bickering,  surliness,  passion,  snappish  language,  and 
crossness  of  word  and  manner.  Such  persons,  whether  they 
know  it  or  not, -are  daily  proclaiming  thaf,  they  are  not  Christ's 
disciples.  It  is  nonsense  to  talk  about  justification,  and  regen- 
eration, and  election,  and  conversion,  and  the  uselessness  of 
works,  unless  people  can  see  in  us  practical  Christian  love. 

Whitby  remarks  that  in  the  primitive  ages  the  mutual  love 
of  Christians  was  notorious  among  heathens.  "  See  how  these 
Christians  love  one  another,"  was  a  common  saying,  according 
to  Tertullian,  Even  Julian  the  apostate  proposed  them  to  the 
heathen  as  a  pattern  in  this  respect. 

3G. — [Simon  Peter. ..Lord,  whitJier  goest  Thou  .?]  Here  as  else- 
where, the  forward,  impulsive  spirit  of  Peter  prompts  him  to 
ask  anxiously  what  our  Lord  meant  by  talking  of  going  : 
"  Whither  goest  Thou  ?  "  Can  we  doubt  however  that  in  this 
question  he  was  the  spokesman  of  all  ? 

How  very  little  the  disciples  had  ever  comprehended  our 
Lord's  repeated  saying  that  He  must  be  taken  prisoner,  cruci- 
fied, and  die,  we  see  in  this  place.  Often  as  He  had  told  them 
He  must  die,  they  had  never  realized  it,  and  are  startled  when 
He  talks  of  going  away,  it  is  marvellous  how  much  religious 
teaching  men  may  have,  and  yet  not  take  it  in,  receive,  or  be- 
lieve it,  especially  when  it  contradicts  preconceived  notions. 

[Jesus  answered  Mm,  etc.]  Our  Lord  graciously  explains  here 
a  part  of  His  meaning.  He  does  not  explicitly  tell  Peter  where 
He  is  going  ;  but  He  tells  him  He  is  going  to  a  place  where 
Peter  cannot  follow  Him  now  during  his  lifetime,  but  will  fol- 
low Him  after  his  death,  at  a  future  date.  It  is  not  unlikely, 
as  Cyril  observes,  that  these  words,  "  Thou  shalt  follow  Me," 
pointed  to  the  manner  of  Peter's  death  by  crucifixion.  He 
was  to  walk  in  his  Master's  steps,  and  enter  heaven  by  the  same 
road. 

37. — Peter  said... Lord,  why. ..follow  'fliee  now,  etc.]  This  question 
shows  how  little  Peter  realized  what  our  Lord  fully  meant,  and 
the  nearness  of  His  death  on  the  cross.  "  Why  cannot  I  follow 
Thee  now  ?  Where  is  the  place  Thou  art  going  to  on  earth, 
where  I  am  not  willing  and  ready  to  follow  Thee  ?  I  love  Thee 
BO  much,  and  am  so  determined  to  cling  to  Thee,  that  I  am 
ready  to  lay  down  my  life  rather  than  be  separate  from  Thee." 

These  words  were  well  meant,  and  Peter  never  doubted,  per- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  4.9 

haps,  that  lie  could  stand  to  tliem.  But  he  did  not  know  his 
own  heart.  There  was  more  feeling  than  principle  in  his  decla- 
ration.    He  did  not  see  all  that  was  in  himself. 

Let  us  note  the  mischief  of  self  ignorance.  Let  us  pray  for 
humility.  Let  us  beware  of  over-confidence  in  our  own  courage 
and  steadfastness.     Pride  goeth  before  a  fall. 

i. — [Jesus  answered  7dm,  Wilt  thou,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  meaning 
appears  to  be,  "  Wilt  thou  really  and  truly  lay  down  thy  life  for 
Me  ?  Thou  little  knowest  thy  own  weakness  and  feebleness. 
I  tell  thee  in  the  most  solemn  answer,  that  this  very  night,  be- 
fore the  cock  crow,  before  sunrise,  thou,  even  thou,  wilt  deny 
tliree  times  that  thou  knowest  Me.  So  far  from  laying  down 
thy  life,  thou  wilt  try  to  save  thy  life  by  cowardly  denying  that 
thou  hast  anything  to  do  with  Me." 

Let  us  note  the  wonderful  foreknowledge  of  our  Lord.  What 
an  unlikely  thing  it  seemed  that  such  a  professor  should  fall 
so  far  and  so  soon.     Yet  our  Lord  foresaw  it  all ! 

Let  us  note  the  wonderful  kindness  and  condescension  of  Je- 
sus. He  knew  perfectly  well  the  weakness  and  feebleness  of 
His  chief  disciple,  and  yet  never  rejected  him,  and  even  raised 
him  again  after  his  fall.  Christians  should  be  men  of  very 
pitiful  and  tender  feelings  toward  weak  brethren.  Their  in- 
consistencies may  be  very  great  and  provoking,  but  we  must 
never  forget  our  Lord's  dealing  with  Simon  Peter. 


JOHN  XIV.  1—3. 


1  Let  not  your  heart  be  troub- 
led :  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also 
in  me. 

2  In  ray  father's  house  are  many 
mausions :  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would 


have  told  you.    I  go  to  prepare  a 
place  for  you. 

3  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place 
for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  re- 
ceive you  unto  myself :  that  where 
I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also. 


The  three  verses  we  have  now  read  are  rich  in  pre- 
cious truth.  For  eighteen  centuries  they  have  been  pe- 
culiarly dear  to  Christ's  believing  servants  in  every  part 
of  the  world.  Many  are  the  sick  rooms  which  they 
have  lightened  !  Many  are  the  dying  hearts  which  they 
have  cheered  !     Let  us  see  what  they  contain. 

We  have,  first,  in  this  passage  a  precious  remedy 
against  an  old  disease.     That  disease  is  trouble  of  heart. 
That  remedy  is  faith. 
3 


50  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Heart-trouble  is  the  commonest  thing  in  the  world. 
No  rank,  or  class,  or  condition  is  exempt  from  it.  No 
bars,  or  bolts,  or  locks  can  keep  it  out.  Partly  from 
inward  causes  and  partly  from  outward, — partly  from 
the  body  and  partly  from  the  mind, — partly  from  what 
we  love  and  partly  from  what  we  fear,  the  journey  of 
life  is  full  of  trouble.  Even  the  best  of  Christiana 
have  many  bitter  cups  to  drink  between  grace  and  glo- 
ly.  Even  the  holiest  saints  find  the  world  a  vale  of 
tears. 

Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  only  sure  medicine  for 
troubled  hearts.  To  believe  more  thoroughly,  trust 
more  entirely,  rest  more  unreservedly,  lay  hold  more 
firmly,  lean  back  more  completely, — this  is  the  prescrip- 
tion which  our  Master  urges  on  the  attention  of  all  His 
disciples.  No  doubt  the  members  of  that  little  band 
which  sat  round  the  table  at  the  last  supper,  had  be- 
lieved already.  They  had  proved  the  reality  of  their 
faith  by  giving  up  everything  for  Christ's  sake.  Yet 
what  does  their  Lord  say  to  them  here  ?  Once  more  He 
presses  on  them  the  old  lesson,  the  lesson  with  which 
they  first  began :  "  Believe  !  Believe  more  !  Believe 
on  Me  !  "     (Isai.  xxvi.  3.) 

Never  let  us  forget  that  there  are  degrees  in  faith, 
and  that  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  weak  and 
strong  believers.  The  weakest  faith  is  enough  to  give  a 
man  a  saving  interest  in  Christ,  and  ought  not  to  be 
despised,  but  it  will  not  give  a  man  such  inward  com- 
fort as  a  strong  faith.  Vagueness  and  dimness  of  per- 
ception are  the  defect  of  weak  believers.  They  do  not 
see  clearly  what  they  believe  and  why  they  believe.  In 
such  cases  more  faith  is  the  one  thing  needed.  Like  Pe- 
ter on  the  water,  they  need  to  look  more  steadily  at  Je- 
sus, and  less  at.  the  waves  and  wind.     Is  it  not  written, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  ^i 

"  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  Thee"?     (Isai.  xxvi.  3.) 

"We  have,  secondly,  in  this  passage  a  very  comforta- 
ble account  of  heaven^  or  the  future  abode  of  saints.  It 
is  but  little  that  we  understand  about  heaven  while  we 
are  here  in  the  body,  and  that  little  is  generally  taught 
us  in  the  Bible  by  negatives  much  more  than  positives. 
But  here,  at  any  rate,  there  are  some  plain  things. 

Heaven  is  "  a  Father's  house," — the  house  of  that 
God  of  whom  Jesus  says,  "  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  your 
Father."  It  is,  in  a  word,  home :  the  home  of  Christ 
and  Christians.  This  is  a  sweet  and  touching  expres- 
sion. Home,  as  we  all  know,  is  the  place  where  we  are 
generally  loved  for  our  own  sakes,  and  not  for  our  gifts 
or  possessions ;  the  place  where  we  are  loved  to  the  end, 
never  forgotten,  and  always  welcome.  This  is  one  idea 
of  heaven.  Believers  are  in  a  strange  land  and  at 
school  in  this  life.  In  the  life  to  come  they  will  be  at 
home. 

Heaven  is  a  place  of  "  mansions," — of  lasting,  per- 
manent, and  eternal  dwellings.  Here  in  the  body  we 
are  in  lodgings,  tents,  and  tabernacles,  and  must  submit 
to  many  changes.  In  heaven  we  shall  be  settled  at  last, 
and  go  out  no  more.  "  Here  "we  have  no  continuing 
city."  (Heb.  xiii.  14.)  Our  house  not  made  with  hands 
shall  never  be  taken  down. 

Heaven  is  a  place  of  "  many  mansions,"  There  will 
be  room  for  all  believers  and  room  for  all  sorts,  for  little 
saints  as  well  as  great  ones,  for  the  weakest  believer  as 
well  as  for  the  strongest.  The  feeblest  child  of  God 
need  not  fear  there  will  be  no  place  for  him.  None 
will  be  shut  out  but  impenitent  sinners  and  obstinate 
unbelievers. 

Heaven  is  a  place  where  Christ  Himself  shall  be 
present.     He  will  not  be  content  to  dwell  without  His 


52  EXPOSITOEY  TnOUGHTS. 

people  : — "  Where  I  am,  there  ye  shall  be  also."  We 
need  not  think  that  we  shall  be  alone  and  neglected. 
Our  Saviour, — our  elder  Brother, — our  Redeemer,  who 
loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  shall  be  in  the  midst 
of  us  forever.  What  we  shall  see,  and  whom  we  shall 
see  in  heaven,  we  cannot  fully  conceive  yet,  while  we 
are  in  the  body.  But  one  thing  is  certain  :  we  shall  see 
Christ. 

Let  these  things  sink  down  into  our  minds.  To  the 
worldly  and  careless  they  may  seem  nothing  at  all.  To 
all  who  feel  in  themselves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  they  are  full  of  unspeakable  comfort.  If  we  ho2:)e 
to  be  in  heaven  it  is  pleasant  to  know  what  heaven  is 
like. 

We  have,  lastly,  in  this  passage  a  solid  ground  for 
expectinq  good  things  to  come.  The  evil  heart  of  unbe- 
lief within  us  is  apt  to  rob  us  of  our  comfort  about  heav- 
en. "  We  wish  we  could  think  it  was  all  true." — "  We 
fear  we  shall  never  be  admitted  into  heaven." — Let  us 
hear  what  Jesus  says  to  encourage  us. 

One  cheering  word  is  this, — "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you."  Heaven  is  a  prepared  place  for  a  prepared 
people  :  a  place  which  we  shall  find  Christ  Himself  has 
made  ready  for  true  Christians.  He  has  prepared  it  by 
procuring  a  right  for  every  sinner  who  believes  to  enter 
in.  None' can  stop  us,  and  say  we  have  no  business 
there. — He  has  prepared  it  by  going  before  us  as  our 
Head  and  Representative,  and  taking  possession  of  it  for 
all  the  members  of  His  mystical  body.  As  our  Fore- 
runner He  has  marched  in,  leading  captivity  captive, 
and  has  planted  His  banner  in  the  land  of  glory. — He 
has  prepared  it  by  carrying  our  names  with  Him  as  our 
High  Priest  into  the  holy  of  holies,  and  making  angels 
ready  to  receive  us.  They  that  enter  heaven  will  find 
they  arc  neither  unknown  nor  unexpected. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  53 

Another  cheering  word  is  this, — "  I  will  come  again 
and  receive  you  unto  myself."  Christ  will  not  wait  for 
believers  to  come  uj)  to  Him,  but  will  come  down  to 
them,  to  raise  them  from  their  graves  and  escort  them 
to  their  heavenly  home.  As  Joseph  came  to  meet 
Jacob,  so  will  Jesus  come  to  call  His  people  togetliei 
and  guide  them  to  their  inheritance.  The  second  advent 
ought  never  to  be  forgotten.  Great  is  the  blessedness 
of  looking  back  to  Christ  coming  the  first  time  to  suffer 
for  us,  but  no  less  great  is  the  comfort  of  looking  for- 
ward to  Christ  coming  the  second  time,  to  raise  and 
reward  His  saints. 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  passage  with  solemnized  feel- 
ings and  serious  self-examination.  How  much  they  miss 
who  live  in  a  dying  world  and  yet  know  nothing  of  God 
as  their  Father  and  Christ  as  their  Saviour  !  How  much 
they  possess  wlio  live  tlie  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God, 
and  believe  in  Jesus  !  With  all  their  weaknesses  and 
crosses  they  have  that  which  the  world  can  neither  give 
nor  take  away.  They  have  a  true  Friend  while  they 
live,  and  a  true  home  when  they  die. 

Notes.    John  xiv.  1—3. 

1. — [Let  not...7ieart...be  troubled.']  We  must  carefully  remember 
that  there  is  no  break  between  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  and 
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  chapters.  Our  Lord  is  continuing 
the  discourse  He  began  after  the  Lord's  Supper  and  the  de- 
parture of  Judas,  in  the  presence  of  the  eleven  faithful  disci- 
ples. A  slight  pause  there  certainly  seems  to  be,  since  lie  turns 
from  Peter,  to  whom  He  had  been  speaking  individually, to  the 
whole  body  of  the  Apostles,  and  addresses  them  collectively. 
But  the  place,  the  time,  and  tlie  audience  are  all  one. 

Our  liord's  great  object  throughout  this  and  the  two  follow- 
ing chapters  seems  clear  and  plain.  He  desired  to  comfort, 
etablish,  and  build  up  His  downcast  disciples.  He  saw  their 
"  hearts  were  troul>led  "  from  a  variety  of  causes, — partly  by 
seeing  their  Master  "troubled  in  Spirit"  (xiii.  21), — ])artly  by 
hearing  that  one  of  them  should  betray  Him, — partly  by  the 
mysterious  departure  of  Judas, — partly  by  their  Master's  an- 


54  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

nouncement  tliat  He  sliould  only  be  a  little  time  longer  with 
them,  and  that  at  last  they  could  not  come  with  Him, — and 
partly  by  the  warning  addressed  to  Peter,  that  he  would  deny 
his  Master  thrice.  For  all  these  reasons  this  little  company  of 
weak  believers  was  disquieted  and  cast  down  and  anxious. 
Their  gracious  Master  saw  it,  and  proceeded  to  give  them  en- 
couragement :  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled."  It  will  be 
noted  that  He  uses  the  singular  number  "  your  heart,"  not "  your 
hearts."    He  means  "  the  heart  of  any  one  of  you." 

Hengstenberg  gives  the  following  list  of  the  grounds  of  com- 
fort which  the  chapter  contains,  in  systematic  order,  which  well 
deserves  attention,  (a)  The  first  encouragement  is,  that  to  the 
disciples  of  Christ  heaven  is  sure  (v.  3,  3).  (6)  The  second  en- 
couragement is,  that  disciples  have  in  Christ  a  certain  way  to 
heaven  (v.  4 — 11).  (c)  The  third  encouragement  is,  that  disci- 
ples need  not  fear  that  with  the  departure  of  Christ  His  work 
will  cease  (v.  12 — 14).  {d)  The  fourth  encouragement  is,  that 
in  the  absence  of  Christ  disciples  will  have  the  help  of  the 
Spirit  (v.  15 — 17).  (e)  The  fifth  encouragement  is,  that  Christ 
will  not  leave  His  people  for  ever,  but  will  come  back  again 
(v.  18 — 24).  (/)  The  sixth  encouragement  is,  that  the  Spirit 
will  teach  the  disciples  and  supply  their  want  of  understand- 
ing when  left  alone  (v.  25,  26).  (g)  Finally,  the  seventh  en- 
couragement is,  that  the  legacy  of  peace  will  be  left  to  cheer 
them  in  their  Master's  absence  (v.  27.)  These  seven  points  are 
well  worthy  the  attention  of  all  believers  in  every  age,  and  are 
as  useful  now  as  when  first  pressed  on  the  eleven. 

Lightfoot  thinks  one  principal  cause  of  the  disciples'  trouble, 
was  their  disappointment  at  seeing  their  Jewish  expectations 
of  a  temporal  kingdom  under  a  temporal  Messiah  failing  and 
coming  to  an  end. 

[Ye  belieDe...Ood...delieve...Me.]  The  Gospel  words  rendered 
"  Ye  believe,"  and  "  believe,"  in  this  place,  admit  of  being  dif- 
ferently translated  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  certainly  whether 
our  English  version  is  right.  Some,  as  Luther,  think  both 
words  should  be  indicative  :  "  ye  believe  and  ye  believe."  Some 
think  both  should  be  imperative  :  "  believe  and  believe."  My 
own  opinion  is  decided,  tliat  the  English  version  is  right.  It 
seems  to  me  to  express  exactly  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the 
disciples  were.  They  did,  as  pious  Jews,  believe  in  God  already. 
They  needed,  as  young  Christians,  to  be  taught  to  believe  more 
thoroughly  in  Christ. 

Among  those  who  think  that  both  verbs  are  imperative  are 
Cyril,  Augustine,  Lampe,  Stier,  Hengstenberg,  and  Alford. 
Among  those  who  adhere  to  our  English  version,  and  make  the 
first  "  believe  "  indicative,  and  the  second  imperative,  are  Eras- 
mus, Beza,  Grotius,  and  Olshausen. 

Let  us  note  that  faith,  and  specially  more  strong  and  distinct 
faith  in  Christ,  is  the  truest  remedy  for  trouble  of  heart.    But 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  55 

we  must  never  forget  that  true  faith  admits  of  gro-wth  and  de- 
grees.    There  is  a  wide  gulf  between  little  and  great  faith. 

Ferus  remarks  that  our  Lord  does  not  say  "  Believe  my  divin- 
ity," but.  Believe  personally  in  Me. 

Toletus  observes  that  our  Lord  here  teaches  that  Jewish  faith 
was  somewhat  distinct  from  Christian  faith.  The  Jew,  not 
seeing  clearly  the  Trinity,  dwelt  chiefly  on  the  unity  of  God. 
The  Christian  was  intended  to  see  three  Persons  in  the  God- 
head. 

Wordsworth  remarks  that  the  verb  "  to  believe,"  followed  by 
a  preposition  and  an  accusative,  is  never  applied  to  any  but  God 
in  the  New  Testament. 

2. — [In  my  Father's  housed  This  phrase  can  bear  only  one  mean- 
ing. It  is  my  Father's  house  in  Heaven :  an  expression  accom- 
modated to  our  weakness.  God  needs  no  literal  house,  with 
walls  and  roof,  as  we  do.  But  where  He  dwells  is  called  His 
house.  (See  Deut.  xxvi.  15 ;  Psalm  xxxiii.  14 ;  2  Chron, 
xxxviii.  27  ;  2  Cor.  v.  1.)  There  is  something  very  touching 
and  comforting  in  the  thought  that  the  heaven  we  go  to  is  "  our 
Father's  house."     It  is  home. 

[There  are  many  mansions.']  The  word  rendered  "  mansions  " 
means  literally  "  abiding-places."  It  is  only  used  here,  and  in 
the  twenty-third  verse  of  this  chapter,  "  abode."  We  need  not 
doubt  that  there  is  an  intentional  contrast  between  the  un 
changing,  unvarying  house  in  heaven,  and  the  changing,  uncer 
tain,  dwellings  of  this  world.  Here  we  are  ever  moving  :  there 
we  shall  no  more  go  out.     (See  also  Heb.  xiii.  14.) 

Our  Lord's  intention  seems  to  be  to  comfort  His  disciples  by 
the  thought  that  nothing  could  cast  them  out  of  the  heavenly 
house.  They  might  be  left  alone  by  Him  on  earth  ;  they  might 
be  even  cast  out  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and  find  no  resting- 
place  or  refuge  on  earth  ;  but  there  would  be  always  room 
enough  for  them  in  heaven,  and  a  house  from  which  they 
would  never  be  expelled.  "  Fear  not.  There  is  room  enough 
in  heaven." 

Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and  several  other  ancient  writers 
think  the  "  many  mansions  "  mean  the  degrees  of  glory.  But 
the  argument  in  favor  of  the  idea  does  not  appear  to  me  satis- 
factory. Bishop  Bull,  Wordsworth,  and  some  few  modern 
writers  take  the  same  view.  That  there  are  degrees  of  glory  in 
heaven  is  undoubtedly  true,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  the  truth  of 
this  text. 

The  modern  idea,  that  our  Lord  meant  that  lieaven  was  a 
place  for  all  sorts  of  creeds  and  religions,  seems  utterly  unwar- 
ranted by  the  text.  From  the  whole  context  He  is  evidently 
speaking  for  the  special  comfort  of  Christians. 


56  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Lightfoot's  idea,  that  our  Lord  meant  to  teach  the  passing 
away  of  the  Jewish  economy,  and  the  admission  of  all  nations 
into  heaven  by  faith  in  Christ,  seems  fanciful. 

[7/*  it  were  not  so. ..told  you.]  This  is  a  gracious  way  of  assur- 
ing the  disciples  that  they  might  have  confidence  that  what 
their  Lord  said  was  true.  It  is  the  tender  manner  of  a  parent 
speaking  to  a  child.  "  Do  not  be  afraid  because  I  am  leaving 
you.  There  is  plenty  of  room  for  you  in  heaven.  You  will 
get  there  safe  at  last.  If  there  was  the  least  uncertainty  about 
it,  I  would  tell  you."  We  may  remember  that  our  Lord  called 
the  Apostles  "  little  children "  only  a  few  minutes  before. 
(John  xiii.  33.) 

[I go. ..prepare. ..place. ..you.l  This  sentence  is  meant  to  be 
another  ground  of  comfort.  One  of  the  reasons  why  our  Lord 
went  away.  He  says,  was  to  get  ready  a  dwelling-place  for  His 
disciples.  It  is  like  the  expression  in  the  Hebrews,  "  the  fore- 
runner."    (Heb.  vi.  20  ;  see  also  Num.  x,  33.) 

The  manner  in  which  Christ  prepares  a  place  for  His  people 
is  mysterious  and  yet  not  inexplicable.  He  enters  heaven  as 
their  High  Priest,  presenting  the  merit  of  his  sacrifice  for  their 
sins.  He  removes  all  barriers  that  sin  made  between  them  and 
God.  He  appears  as  their  proxy  and  representative,  and  claims 
a  right  of  entry  for  all  His  believing  members.  He  intercedes 
continually  for  them  at  God's  right  hand  ;  and  makes  them  al- 
ways acceptable  in  Himself,  though  unworthy  in  themselves. 
He  bears  their  names  mystically,  as  the  High  Priest,  on  His 
breast ;  and  introduces  them  to  the  court  of  heaven  before  they 
get  there. 

That  heaven  is  a  prepared  place  for  a  prepared  people  is  a 
very  cheering  and  animating  thought.  When  we  arrive  there 
we  shall  not  be  in  a  strange  land.  We  shall  find  we  have 
been  known  and  thought  of  before  we  got  there. 

8. — [And  if  I  go. ..come  again.. .receive.. .myself.]  These  words  con- 
tain another  strong  consolation.  Our  Lord  tells  the  disciples 
that  if  He  does  go  away,  they  must  not  think  it  is  forever.  He 
means  to  come  again  and  take  them  all  home,  and  gather  them 
round  Him  in  one  united  family  to  part  no  more. 

Poole  remarks  "  the  particle  '  if '  in  this  place  denotes  no  un- 
certainty of  the  thing,  but  hath  the  force  of  although,  or  after 
that."     (See  also  Col.  iii.  1.) 

Many  think,  as  Stier,  that  the  "  coming  again  "  here  spoken 
of  means  Christ's  coming  to  His  disciples  after  His  resurrec- 
tion, or  Christ's  coming  spiritually  to  His  people  in  comfort 
and  help  even  now,  or  Christ's  coming  to  remove  them  at  last 
by  death,  I  cannot  think  so.  I  believe  that,  as  a  rule,  when 
Christ  speaks  of  coming  again,  both  here  and  elsewhere,  He 
means  His  own  personal  second  advent  at  the  end  of  this  dis- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV. 


67 


pensation.  Tlie  Greek  word  rendered  "  I  will  come,"  is  in  the 
present  tense,  and  the  same  that  is  used  Id  Rev.  xxii,  20  :  "  I 
come  quickly."  The  first  and  second  advents  are  the  two 
great  events  to  which  the  minds  of  all  Christians  should  be 
directed.  This  is  Cvril's  view  of  the  passage,  and  Bishop 
Hall's. 

{That  loliere  I  am.. .ye. ..also.]  Here  is  one  more  comfort. 
The  final  end  of  Christ's  going  away  and  coming  again  is,  that 
at  last  His  disciples  may  be  once  more  with  Him,  and  enjoy 
His  company  forever.  "  We  part ;  but  we  shall  meet  again, 
and  part  no  more." 

Let  us  note  that  one  of  the  simplest,  plainest  ideas  of  heaven 
is  here.  It  is  being  "  ever  with  the  Lord."  Whatever  else  we 
see  or  do  not  see  in  heaven,  we  shall  see  Christ.  Whatever 
kind  of  a  place,  it  is  a  place  where  Christ  is.  (Phil.  i.  23.  1 
Thess.  iv.  17.) 


JOHN  XIV.  4—11. 


4  And  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and 
the  way  ye  know. 

5  Thomas  saith  unto  him,  Lord, 
we  know  not  whither  thou  goest ; 
and  how  can  we  know  the  way  ? 

6  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I  am  the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life :  no 
man  Cometh  unto  the  Father,  but 
by  me. 

7  If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  should 
have  known  my  Father  also :  and 
from  henceforth  ye  know  him,  and 
have  seen  him. 

8  Philip  saith  unto  him,  Lord, 
show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth 


9  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  Have  I 
been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet 
hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  ? 
He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the 
Father ;  and  how  sayest  thou  thenj 
Show  us  the  Father? 

10  Believest  thou  not  that  I  am 
in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in 
me  ?  The  words  that  I  speak  unto 
you  I  speak  not  of  myself:  but  the 
Father  that  dwellethiu  me,  he  doeth 
the  works. 

11  Believe  me  that  I  am  in  the 
Father  and  the  Father  in  me :  or 
else  believe  me  for  the  very  works' 


We  should  mark  in  these  verses  hoio  much  better  Je- 
sus speaks  of  believers  than  they  speak  of  themselves. 
He  says  to  His  disciples,  "Ye  know  whither  I  go,  and 
ye  know  the  way."  And  yet  Thomas  at  once  breaks  in 
with  the  remark,  "  We  know  neither  the  whither  nor 
the  way."  The  apparent  contradiction  demands  expla- 
nation     It  is  more  seeming  than  real. 

Certainly,  in  one  point  of  view,  the  knowledge  of 
the  disciples  was  very  small.     They  knew  little  before 


58  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

the  crucifixion  and  resurrection  compared  to  what  they 
might  have  known,  and  little  compared  to  what  they 
afterwards  knew  after  the  day  of  Pentecost.  About  our 
Lord's  purpose  in  coming  into  the  world,  about  His  sa- 
crificial death  and  substitution  for  us  on  the  cross,  their 
ignorance  was  glaring  and  great.  It  might  well  be 
said,  that  they  "  knew  in  part "  only,  and  were  children 
in  understanding. 

And  yet,  in  another  point  of  view,  the  knowledge  of 
the  disciples  was  very  great.  They  knew  far  more  than 
the  great  majority  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  received 
truths  which  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  entirely  rejected. 
Compared  to  the  world  around  them,  they  were  in  the 
highest  sense  enlightened.  They  knew  and  believed 
that  their  Master  was  the  promised  Messiah,  the  Son  of 
the  living  God ;  and  to  know  Him  was  the  first  step 
towards  heaven.  All  things  go  by  comparison.  Before 
we  lightly  esteem  the  disciples  because  of  their  igno- 
rance, let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  underrate  their 
knowledge.  They  knew  more  precious  truth  than  they 
were  aware  of  themselves.  Their  hearts  were  better 
than  their  heads. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  all  believers  are  apt  to  un- 
dervalue the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  their  own  souls,  and 
to  fancy  they  know  nothing  because  they  do  not  know 
everything.  Many  true  Christians  are  thought  more  of 
in  heaven  while  they  live  than  they  think  of  themselves, 
and  will  find  it  out  to  their  surprise  at  the  last  day. 
There  is  One  above  who  takes  far  more  account  of  heart- 
knowledge  than  head-knowledge.  Many  go  mourning 
all  the  way  to  heaven  because  they  know  so  little,  and 
fancy  they  will  miss  the  way  altogether,  and  yet  have 
hearts  with  whicli  God  is  well  pleased. 

We  should  mark,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  what  glori- 
ous names  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  Himself.     He   says, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  59 

"I  am  the  way,  the  trutli,  and  the  life."  The  fulness 
of  these  precious  words  can  probably  never  be  taken  in 
by  man.  He  that  attempts  to  unfold  them  does  little 
more  than  scratch  tlie  surface  of  a  rich  soil. 

Christ  is  "  the  way," — the  way  to  heaven  and  peace 
with  God.  He  is  not  only  the  guide,  and  teacher,  and 
lawgiver,  like  Moses ;  He  is  Himself  the  door,  the  lad- 
der, and  the  road,  through  whom  we  must  draw  near  to 
God.  He  has  opened  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life,  which 
was  closed  when  Adam  and  Eve  fell,  by  the  satisfaction 
He  made  for  us  on  the  cross.  Through  His  blood  we 
may  draw  near  with  boldness,  and  have  access  with 
confidence  into  God's  presence. 

Christ  is  "  the  truth," — the  whole  substance  of  true 
religion  which  the  mind  of  man  requires.  Without  Him 
the  wisest  heathen  groped  in  gross  darkness  and  knew 
nothing  about  God.  Before  He  came  even  the  Jews 
saw  "  through  a  glass  darkly,"  and  discerned  nothing 
distinctly  under  the  types,  figures,  and  ceremonies  of 
the  Mosaic  law.  Christ  is  the  whole  truth,  and  meets 
and  satisfies  every  desire  of  the  human  mind. 

Christ  is  "  the  life," — the  sinner's  title  to  eternal  life 
and  pardon,  the  believer's  root  of  spiritual  life  and  holi- 
ness, the  surety  of  the  Christian's  resurrection  life.  He 
that  believeth  on  Christ  hath  everlasting  life.  He  that 
abideth  in  Him,  as  the  branch  abides  in  the  vine,  shall 
bring  forth  much  fruit.  He  that  believeth  on  Him, 
though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live.  The  root  of  all 
life,  for  soul  and  for  body,  is  Christ. 

Forever  let  us  grasp  and  hold  fast  these  truths.  To 
use  Christ  daily  as  the  way, — ^to  believe  Christ  daily  as 
the  truth, — to  live  on  Christ  daily  as  the  life, — this  is 
to  be  a  well-informed,  a  thoroughly  furnished  and  an 
established  Christian. 

We  should  mark,  thirdly,  in  these  verses,  how  ex- 


QQ  EXPOSITOEY  THOCJGIITS. 

pressly  the  Lord  Jesus  shuts  out  all  ways  of  salvation 
hut  Himself.  "  No  man,"  He  declares,  "  No  man  cometh 
unto  the  Father  but  by  Me." 

It  avails  nothing  that  a  man  is  clever,  learned,  highly- 
gifted,  amiable,  charitable,  kind-hearted,  and  zealous 
about  some  sort  of  religion.  All  this  will  not  save  his 
soul  if  he  does  not  draw  near  to  God  by  Christ's  atone- 
ment, and  make  use  of  God's  own  Son  as  his  Mediator 
and  Saviour.  God  is  so  holy  that  all  men  are  guilty 
and  debtors  in  His  sight.  Sin  is  so  sinful  that  no  mortal 
man  can  make  satisfaction  for  it.  There  must  be  a 
mediator,  a  ransom-payer,  a  redeemer,  between  ourselves 
and  God,  or  else  we  can  never  be  saved.  There  is  only 
one  door,  one  bridge,  one  ladder,  between  earth  and 
heaven, — the  crucified  Son  of  God.  Whosoever  will 
enter  in  by  that  door  may  be  saved ;  but  to  him  who 
refuses  to  use  that  door  the  Bible  holds  out  no  hope  at 
all.     Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission. 

Let  us  beware,  if  we  love  life,  of  supposing  that  mere 
earnestness  will  take  a  man  to  heaven,  though  he  know 
nothing  of  Christ.  The  idea  is  a  deadly  and  ruinous 
error.  Sincerity  will  never  wipe  away  our  sins.  It  is 
not  true  that  every  man  will  be  saved  by  his  own  re- 
ligion, no  matter  what  he  believes,  so  long  as  he  is  dili- 
gent and  sincere.  We  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than 
God.  Christ  has  said,  and  Christ  will  stand  to  it,  "  No 
man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me." 

We  should  mark,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  how  close 
and  mysterious  is  the  union  of  God  the  Father  and 
God  the  Son.  Four  times  over  this  mighty  truth  is  put 
before  us  in  words  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  "  If  ye  had 
known  Me,  ye  would  have  known  my  Father." — "  He 
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father." — "  I  am  in  the 
Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me." — "The  Father  that 
dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth  the  works." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  Qi 

Sayings  like  these  are  full  of  deep  mystery.  We 
have  no  eyes  to  see  their  meaning  fully, — no  line  to 
fathom  it, — no  language  to  express  it, — no  mind  to  take 
it  in.  We  must  be  content  to  believe  when  we  cannot 
explain,  and  to  admire  and  revere  when  we  cannot 
interpret.  Let  it  suffice  us  to  know  and  hold  that  the 
Father  is  God  and  the  Son  is  God,  and  yet  that  they  are 
one  in  essence  though  two  distinct  Persons, — ineflably 
one,  and  yet  ineffiibly  distinct.  These  are  high  things, 
and  we  cannot  attain  to  a  full  comprehension  of  them. 

Let  us  however  take  comfort  in  the  simple  truth,  that 
Christ  is  very  God  of  very  God  ;  equal  with  the  Father 
in  all  things,  and  One  with  Him.  He  who  loved  us,  and 
shed  His  blood  for  us  on  the  cross,  and  bids  us  trust 
Him  for  pardon,  is  no  mere  man  like  ourselves.  He  is 
"  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,"  and  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  the  chief  of  sinners.  Though  our  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  He  can  make  them  white  as  snow.  He  that  casts 
his  soul  on  Christ  has  an  Almighty  Friend, — a  Friend 
who  is  One  with  the  Father,  and  very  God. 

Notes.    John  xiv.  4 — 11. 

4. — [And  wJdther  1  go  ye  know. .May  ye  know.']  This  remarkable 
sentence  was  evidently  meant  to  stir  and  cheer  tlie  disciples,  by 
reminding  them  of  what  their  Master  had  repeatedly  told  them. 
It  is  as  though  our  Lord  said,  "  Do  not  be  cast  down  by  my  go- 
ing away,  as  if  you  had  never  heard  Me  say  anything  about 
heaven  and  the  way  to  heaven.  Awake  from  your  despondency, 
stir  up  your  memories.  Surely  you  know,  if  you  retlect  a  little, 
that  I  have  often  told  you  all  about  it."  Is  it  not,  again,  like  a 
tender  parent  saying  to  a  frightened  child,  who  says  he  know? 
not  what  to  do,  and  is  ready  to  sit  down  in  despair,  "  Como 
you  know  well  enough,  if  you  will  only  consider  "  ? 

Poole  observes  on  this  verse,  "  It  is  pleasant  to  notice  how 
Christ  continueth  His  discourse  to  the  disciples,  like  a  mother 
speaking  to  a  little  child  crying  after  her  when  she  prepares  to 
go  abroad.  The  child  cries  ;  the  mother  bids  it  be  still,  for  she 
is  only  going  to  a  friend's  house.  It  still  cries  ;  she  tells  it  she 
is  only  going  to  prepare  a  place  for  it  there,  where  it  will  be 
much  happier  than  at  home.     It  is  not  yet  satislied  ;  she  tells  it 


^2  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

again,  tliat  though  she  goes,  she  will  come  again,  and  then  It 
shall  go  with  her,  and  she  will  part  from  it  no  more.  The  child 
is  yet  impatient ;  she  endeavoreth  to  still  it,  telling  it  that  it 
knoweth  whitlier  she  goeth,  and  it  knows  the  way  by  which,  if 
need  be,  it  may  come  to  her." 

Let  us  note  that  disciples  often  know  more  than  they  suppose 
or  admit,  but  do  not  use  their  knowledge,  or  keep  it  ready  for 
use.  Ferus  compares  them  to  infants  lying  in  their  cradles, 
who  have  fathers  and  fortunes,  but  do  not  know  it. 

Let  us  note  that  Christ  looks  graciously  on  the  little  knowl- 
edge His  people  possess,  and  make  the  most  of  it.  He  can 
make  allowance  for  their  minds  being  clouded  by  grief  or 
trouble,  and  their  consequent  forgetfulness  of  truth  for  a 
season. 

5. — [Thomas  saith  unto  Him,  etc.]  This  verse  shows  how  foolishly 
a  disciple  may  talk  under  the  influence  of  despondency.  Here 
is  one  of  the  eleven  faithful  Apostles  declaring  flatly  that  they 
neither  knew  where  their  Master  was  going,  nor  the  way  !  The 
saying  is  characteristic  of  the  man.  Thomas  always  appears  a 
doubting,  slow-minded  believer.  But  we  must  not  judge  dis- 
ciples too  sharply  for  words  spoken  under  deep  distress.  W^hen 
the  passions  and  affections  are  much  stirred,  the  tongue  often 
runs  away  with  a  man,  and  he  speaks  unadvisedly.  Nor  must 
we  forget  that  disciples  have  very  different  gifts.  All  have  not 
equally  strong  faith,  clear  understanding,  and  good  memory. 

Trapp  quaintly  remarks  that  believers  in  the  frame  of  Thomas 
are  like  people  who  hunt  for  their  keys  and  purses,  when  they 
have  got  them  in  their  pockets. 

6, — [Jesus  saith. .J. ..way. ..truth. ..life.]  This  wonderful  saying  is  a 
brilliant  example  of  a  foolish  remark  calling  out  a  gaeat  truth 
from  our  Lord's  lips.  To  the  ill  natured  remark  of  the  Phari- 
sees we  owe  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  (See  Luke  chapter 
XV.) ;  to  the  fretful  complaint  of  Thomas  we  owe  one  of  the 
grandest  texts  in  Scripture.  It  is  one  of  those  deep  utterances 
which  no  exposition  can  thoroughly  unfold  and  exhaust. 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  I  am  the  way,"  He  means,  "  the 
Father's  house  is  to  be  reached  through  my  mediation  and 
atonement.  Faith  in  Me  is  the  key  to  heaven.  He  that  be- 
lieveth  in  Me  is  in  the  right  road." 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  I  am  the  truth,"  He  means,  "  The  root 
of  all  knowledge  is  to  know  Me.  I  am  the  true  Messiah  to 
whom  all  revelation  points,  the  truth  of  which  the  Old  Testa- 
ment ceremonies  and  sacrifices  were  a  figure  and  shadow.  He 
that  really  knows  Me,  knows  enough  to  take  him  safe  to  heaven, 
though  he  may  not  know  many  things,  and  may  be  troubled  at 
his  own  ignorance." 

When  our  Lord  says  "  I  am  the  life,"  He  means,  "  I  am  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  63 

Boot  and  Fountain  of  all  life  in  religion,  ttie  Eedeemer  from 
death  and  the  Giver  of  everlasting  life.  He  that  knows  and 
believes  in  Me,  however  weak  and  ignorant  he  may  feel,  has 
spiritual  life  now,  and  will  have  a  glorious  life  in  my  Father's 
house  hereafter." 

Some  think  that  the  three  great  words  in  this  sentence  should 
be  taken  together,  and  that  our  Lord  meant,  "  I  am  the  true  and 
living  way."  Yet  the  general  opinion  of  the  best  comments 
tors  is  decidedly  unfavorable  to  this  view  of  the  sentence.  To 
my  own  mind  it  cuts  down  and  impoverishes  a  great  and  deep 
saying. 

Musculus  remarks  that  no  prophet,  teacher,  or  apostle  ever 
used  such  words  as  these.  They  are  the  language  of  one  who 
knew  that  He  was  God. 

[iVb  man...cometh... Father. ..hy  me.]  Here  our  Lord  teaches 
that  He  is  not  merely  the  way  to  our  Father's  home  in  heaven, 
but  that  there  is  no  other  way,  and  that  men  must  either  go  to 
heaven  by  His  atonement  or  not  go  there  at  all.  It  is  a  clear 
distinct  limitation  of  heaven  to  those  who  believe  on  Christ. 
None  else  will  enter  in  there.     Rejecting  Christ  they  lose  all. 

We  should  mark  carefully  what  an  unanswerable  argument 
this  sentence  supplies  against  the  modern  notion  that  it  does  not 
matter  what  a  man  believes, — that  all  religions  will  lead  men 
to  lieaven  if  they  are  sincere, — that  creeds  and  doctrines  are  of 
no  importance, — that  heaven  is  a  place  for  all  mankind — whether 
heathen,  Mahometan,  or  Christian, — and  that  the  Fatherhood 
of  God  is  enough  to  save  all  at  last,  of  all  sects,  kinds,  and 
characters !  Our  Lord's  words  should  never  be  forgotten. 
"  There  is  no  way  to  the  Father  but  by  Me."  God  is  a  Father 
to  none  but  to  those  who  believe  in  Christ.  In  short,  there  are 
not  many  ways  to  heaven.     There  is  only  one  way. 

"  Coming  to  the  Father,"  in  this  place,  we  must  remark,  in 
eludes  not  only  coming  to  Him  in  glory  at  the  last,  but  coming 
to  Him  in  a  friendly  relation  for  peace  and  comfort  now  in  this 
life, 

"By  Me,"  is  literally,  "through"  Me, — as  a  door,  a  gate,  a 
road,  a  path,  an  entrauce.  It  is  an  expression  which  would 
be  peculiarly  expressive  to  the  Jews,  taught  from  their  child- 
hood to  draw  near  to  God  only  through  the  priests. 

7. — {If...knoicn  me. ..Father  also.]  This  is  a  deep  saying,  like 
every  saying  which  handles  the  mysterious  union  of  the  Fa 
ther  and'  the  Son  in  St.  John's  Gospel.  The  meaning  seems  to 
be,  "  If  you  had  rightly,  properly,  and  perfectly  known  Me,  as 
the  Divine  Messiah,  in  all  the  fulness  of  my  nature,  you  would 
then  have  known  more  of  that  Father  to  whom  I  am  insepara- 
bly united.  No  one  can  rightly  know  Me  without  knowing  the 
Father,  because  I  and  the  Father  are  One." 


64  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

[Jnd  from  lienceforth... known.. ..seen  Ilim.]  The  meaninr^ 
of  these  words  seems  to  be,  "  Understand  from  this  time  for- 
ward, that  in  knowing  Me  you  know  the  Father,  and  in  seeing 
Me  see  the  Father,  so  far  as  the  Father  can  be  seen  and  known 
by  man."  Although  the  Son  and  the  Father  are  two  distinct 
persona  in  the  Trinity,  yet  there  is  so  close  and  mysterious  a 
union  between  them  that  he  who  sees  and  knows  the  Son,  in  a 
certain  sense,  sees  and  knows  the  Father.  Is  it  not  written  of 
the  Son  that  "  He  is  the  express  image  of  the  Father."  (Heo. 
i.2.) 

The  whole  difficulty  of  the  verse  arises  from  the  extreme 
mysteriousness  of  its  subject.  The  relation  between  the  eter- 
nal Father  and  the  eternal  Son  and  the  eternal  Spirit,  who, 
while  three  Persons,  are  one  God,  is  precisely  one  of  those  things 
which  we  have  no  minds  to  take  in,  and  no  language  to  ex- 
press. We  must  often  be  content  to  believe  and  reverence  it, 
without  attempting  to  explain  it.  This  only  we  may  lay  down 
with  certainty,  as  a  great  canon  and  maxim, — the  more  we 
know  of  Christ,  "  the  more  we  know  of  the  Father." 

fe. — [Philip. ..shew  us  the  Father. ..sufflceth  us.]  We  are  not  told 
Philip's  motive  in  making  this  request.  Perhaps,  like  Moses, 
he  and  the  other  disciples  had  a  pious  desire  to  see  a  more  full 
vision  and  revelation  of  God's  glory,  as  an  authentication  of 
their  Master's  Divine  mission.  "  Show  me  Thy  glory."  (Ex. 
xxxiii.  18.)  Perhaps  Philip's  petition  is  recorded  to  show  how 
little  clear  knowledge  the  Apostles  yet  had  of  their  Master's 
nature,  and  how  little  they  realized  that  He  and  the  Father 
were  One  : — "  If  we  could  only  see  once  for  all  the  Divine  Be- 
ing whom  Thou  dost  call  the  Father,  it  would  be  sufficient. 
We  should  be  satisfied  and  our  doubts  would  be  removed."  At 
any  rate  we  have  no  right  to  think  that  Philip  spoke  like  the 
unbelieving  Jews,  who  always  pretended  to  want  signs  and 
wonders.  Whatever  sense  we  put  on  the  words,  we  must  care- 
fully remember  not  to  judge  Philip  too  harshly.  Living  as  we 
do  in  the  nineteenth  century,  amidst  light  and  creeds  and 
knowledge,  we  can  have  faint  ideas  of  the  extreme  difficulty 
that  must  have  been  felt  by  the  disciples  in  fully  realizing 
their  Master's  nature,  in  the  days  when  He  was  "  in  the  form 
of  a  Servant,"  and  under  a  veil  of  poverty,  weakness,  and  hu- 
miliation. 

Melancthon  remarks  that  Philip's  petition  represents  the  nat- 
ural wish  of  man  in  §very  age.  Men  feel  an  inward  craving 
everywhere  to  see  God. 

9. — [Jesus  saith...so  long  time. ..Philip.']  This  verse  is  undoubt- 
edly a  gentle  rebuke.  The  expression,  "  so  long  time,"  is  note- 
worthy, when  we  remember  that  Philip  was  one  of  tlie  very 
first  disciples  whom  Jesus  called.  (See  John  i.  48.)  The  mean- 
ing seems  to  be,  "  After  three  long  years,  Philip,  dost  thou  not 
yet  thoroughly  know  and  understand  who  I  am  V  " 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  (55 

[7/f  ..seen  me...seen  the  Father^  This  deep  sentence  cl^n  only 
mean  "He  that  hath  thoroughly  seen  me  with  the  eye  of  faith, 
and  realized  that  I  am  the  eternal  Son,  the  Divine  Messiah, 
hath  seen  as  much  of  my  Father,  whose  express  image  I-  am,  as 
mortal  man  can  comprehend."  There  is  so  close  and  intimate 
a  union  between  persons  in  the  Trinity,  that  he  who  sees  the 
Sou  sees  the  Father.  And  yet  we  must  caref  ally  beware  that 
we  do  not,  like  some  heretics,  "  confound  the  Persons."  The 
Father  is  not  the  Son,  and  the  Son  is  not  the  Father. 

Musculus  observes  that  to  see  with  bodily  eyes  is  one  thing, 
and  to  see  with  the  eyes  of  faith  quite  another. 

[And  how  sayest  thou... show. ..Father^  This  question  is  a 
further  gentle  rebuke  of  Philip's  ignorance.  "  What  dost  thou 
mean  by  saying.  Show  us  the  Father?  What  clear  knowledge 
of  Me  canst  thou  have  if  thou  canst  ask  such  a  question  ?" 

Let  us  note  how  Jesus  calls  "  Philip  "  by  his  name.  It  was 
doubtless  meant  to  prick  his  conscience.  ''  Thou,  Philip,  an 
old  disciple,  so  ignorant !  Ought  not  thou,  after  following 
and  hearing  Me  for  three  years  to  have  known  better  than 
this  ?  " 

10. — [Believest  thou  not. ..I.. .in  Father...in  Me.]  This  question 
continues  the  rebuke  to  Philip.  It  means,  "  Dost  thou  not  yet 
believe  and  realize  what  I  have  taught, — that  there  is  a  mysti- 
cal union  between  Me  and  the  Father,  and  that  He  is  in  Me 
and  I  in  Him  ?  " 

This  question  surely  seems  to  indicate  that  our  Lord  had  oft- 
en taught  His  disciples  about  the  union  between  Himself  and 
the  Father.  But,  like  many  of  the  things  He  taught,  the 
mighty  truth  passed  over  their  heads  at  first,  and  was  not  re- 
membered till  afterwards.  How  little  reason  have  ministers  to 
complain  if  their  teaching  is  little  regarded,  when  this  was 
Christ's  experience  1 

[The  words  that  1  speak.. .Father. ..works.]  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that  this  is  a  very  elliptical  sentence.  The  full  meaning 
must  be  supplied  in  this  way.  "  The  words  that  I  speak  to 
you  I  speak  not  independently  of  the  Father ;  and  the  works 
that  I  do  I  do  not  do  them  independently  of  the  Father.  The 
Father  who  dwells  in  Me,  speaks  in  Me  and  works  in  Me.  My 
words  are  words  given  Me  to  speak,  and  my  works  are  works 
given  Me  to  do,  in  the  eternal  counsel  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  Both  in  speaking  and  working  I  and  my  Father 
are  one.  What  I  speak  He  speaks,  and  what  I  work  He 
works." 

The  whole  difficulty  of  the  verse  arises  from  forgetting  the 
close  and  mysterious  and  insoluble  union  between  the  Persons 
of  the  Trinity.  How  little  we  realize  the  fulness  of  the  expres- 
sion, "  The  Father  dwelleth  in  Me." 


QQ  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

11. — [Belie'De  Me. ..in  the  Father. ..in  ife.]  Direct  instruction  fol- 
lows the  rebuke  of  the  preceding  verse.  Our  Lord  repeats  for 
the  benefit  not  of  Pliilip  only,  but  of  all  the  eleven,  the  great 
doctrine  He  had  so  often  taught  them.  "  Once  more,  I  say, 
Believe,  all  of  you,  my  words,  when  I  say  that  I  and  the  Fa- 
ther are  so  closely  united  that  I  am  in  Him  and  He  in  Me." 

The  word  rendered  "  believe  "  in  this  verse  is  in  the  plurai 
number.  Our  Lord  does  not  address  Philip  only,  but  the 
whole  company  of  the  Apostles. 

What  an  example  we  have  here  of  the  necessity  of  repeating 
instruction  over  and  over  again.  Our  Lord  had  evidently 
taught  these  things  before  to  the  eleven,  and  yet  they  had 
either  not  understood  or  not  remembered. 

\0r  else  believe... loorks'  sake.]  Here  our  Lora  condescends  to 
the  weakness  of  the  disciples.  "  If  you  will  not  believe  the 
close  union  of  Myself  and  the  Father  because  of  my  word,  be- 
lieve it  because  of  the  works  T  work.  They  are  such  works  as 
no  one  could  work  of  himself,  and  without  the  Father." 

Let  us  carefully  observe  how  our  Lord  here,  as  elsewhere, 
specially  names  His  works,  or  miracles,  as  testimonies  of  His 
nature  and  Divine  mission.  To  leave  out  miracles  in  the  list 
of  the  evidences  of  Christianity  is  a  great  mistake. 


JOHN  XIV.  12—17. 


12  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  belicvcth  on  me,  the  works 
tluit  I  do  shall  he  do  also;    and 

greater  works  than  these  shall   he 
o ;  because  I  go  unto  iny  Father. 

13  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
in  my  name,  that  will  I  do,  that 
the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the 
Son. 

14  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my 
name,  I  will  do  it. 


15  If  ye  love  me  keep  my  com- 
mandments. 

16  And  I  will  pray  the  Father, 
and  he  shall  give  you  another  Com- 
forter, that  he  may  abide  with  you 
forever ; 

17  ^?;6«  the  Spirit  of  truth;  whom 
the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  liim  not,  neither  knoweth  him ; 
but  ye  know  liim  :  for  he  dwelletn 
with"you,  and  shall  be  in  you. 


These  verses  are  an  example  of  our  Lord's  tender 
consideration  for  the  weakness  of  His  disciples.  He 
saw  them  troubled  and  faint-hearted  at  the  prospect  of 
being  left  alone  in  the  world.  He  cheers  them  by  three 
promises,  peculiarly  suited  to  their  circumstances.  "  A 
word  spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  it ! " 

We  have  first  in  this  passage,  a  striking  promise 
about  the  loorks  that    Christians  may  do.      Our  Lord 


JOHN,  CIIAP.  XIV.  gY 

says,  "He  that  believeth  on  Me,  the  works  that  I  do 
shall  he  do  also  ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he 
do  ;  because  I  go  unto  my  Father." 

The  full  meaning  of  this  promise  is  not  to  be  sought 
in  the  miracles  which  the  Apostles  wrought  after  Christ 
left  the  world.  Such  a  notion  seems  hardly  borne  out 
by  facts.  We  read  of  no  Apostle  walking  on  the  water, 
or  raising  a  person  four  days  dead,  like  Lazarus.  What 
our  Lord  has  in  view  seems  to  be  the  far  greater  number 
of  conversions,  the  far  wider  spread  of  the  Gospel,  which 
would  take  place  under  the  ministry  of  the  Apostles, 
than  under  his  own  teaching.  This  was  the  case,  we 
know  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  read  of  no 
sermon  preached  by  Christ,  under  which  three  thousand 
were  converted  in  one  day,  as  they  were  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  In  short,  "  greater  works  "  mean  more  con- 
versions. There  is  no  greater  work  possible  than  the 
conversion  of  a  soul. 

Let  us  admire  the  condescension  of  our  Master  in  al- 
lowing to  the  ministry  of  His  weak  servants  more  suc- 
cess than  to  His  own.  Let  us  learn  that  His  visible 
presence  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  progress  of 
His  kingdom.  He  can  help  forward  His  cause  on  earth 
quite  as  much  by  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
and  sending  forth  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  by  walking  to  and 
fro  in  the  world.  Let  us  believe  that  there  is  nothing 
too  hard  or  too  great  for  believers  to  do,  so  long  as  their 
Lord  intercedes  for  them  in  heaven.  Let  us  work  on  in 
faith,  and  expect  great  things,  though  we  feel  weak  and 
lonely,  like  the  disciples.  Our  Lord  is  working  with  us 
and  for  us,  though  we  cannot  see  Him.  It  was  not  so 
much  the  sword  of  Joshua  that  defeated  Amalek,  as  the 
intercession  of  Moses  on  the  hill.     (Ex.  xvii.  11.) 

We  have,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  a  striking  prom- 
ise about  tilings  that  Christians  may  get  by  prayer.     Our 


68  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Lord  says,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that 
will  I  do.  ...  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I 
will  do  it." 

These  words  are  a  direct  encouragement  to  the  sim- 
ple, yet  great  duty  of  praying.  Every  one  who  kneels 
daily  before  God,  and  from  his  heart  "  says  his  prayers," 
has  a  right  to  take  comfort  in  these  words.  "Weak  and 
imperfect  as  his  supplications  may  be,  so  long  as  they 
are  put  in  Christ's  hands,  and  offered  in  Christ's  name, 
they  shall  not  be  in  vain.  We  have  a  Friend  at  Court, 
an  Advocate  with  the  Father;  and  if  we  honor  Him  by 
Bending  all  our  petitions  through  Him,  He  pledges  His 
word  that  they  shall  succeed.  Of  course  it  is  taken  for 
granted  that  the  things  we  ask  are  for  our  souls'  good, 
and  not  mere  temporal  benefits.  "  Anything "  and 
"whatsoever"  do  not  include  wealth,  and  money,  and 
worldly  prosperity.  These  things  are  not  always  good 
for  us,  and  our  Lord  loves  us  too  well  to  let  us  have 
them.  But  whatever  is  really  good  for  our  souls,  we 
need  not  doubt  we  shall  have,  if  we  ask  in  Christ's 
name. 

How  is  it  that  many  true  Christians  have  so  little  ? 
How  is  it  that  they  go  halting  and  mourning  on  the  way 
to  heaven,  and  enjoy  so  little  peace,  and  show  so  little 
strength  in  Christ's  service  ?  The  answer  is  simple  and 
plain.  "  They  have  not,  because  they  ask  not."  They 
have  little  because  they  ask  little.  They  are  no  better 
than  they  are,  because  they  do  not  ask  their  Lord  to 
make  them  better.  Our  languid  desires  are  the  reason 
of  our  languid  performances.  We  are  not  straitened  in 
our  Lord,  but  in  ourselves.  Happy  are  they  who  never 
forget  the  words,  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill 
it."  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  10.)  He  that  does  much  for  Christ,  and 
leaves  his  mark  in  the  world,  will  always  prove  to  be 
one  who  prays  much. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  g9 

We  have,  lastly,  in  this  passage,  a  striking  promise 
about  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Lord  says,  "  I  will  pray  the 
Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  .... 
even  the  Spirit  of  truth." 

This  is  the  first  time  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  men- 
tioned as  Christ's  special  gift  to  his  people.  Of  course 
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  He  did  not  dwell  in  the 
hearts  of  all  the  Old  Testament  saints.  But  He  was 
given  with  peculiar  influence  and  power  to  believers 
when  the  New  Testament  dispensation  came  in,  and  this 
is  tiie  special  promise  of  the  passage  before  us.  We 
shall  find  it  useful,  therefore,  to  observe  closely  the 
things  that  are  here  said  about  Him. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  spoken  of  as  "  a  Person."  To 
apply  the  language  before  us  to  a  mere  influence  or  in- 
ward feeling,  is  an  unreasonable  strain  of  words. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  truth."  It 
is  His  special  oftice  to  apply  truth  to  the  hearts  of 
Christians,  to  guide  them  into  all  truth,  and  to  sanctify 
them  by  the  truth. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  said  to  be  one  whom  "  the  world 
cannot  receive  and  does  not  know."  His  operations  are 
in  the  strongest  sense  foolishness  to  the  natural  man. 
The  inward  feelings  of  conviction,  repentance,  faith, 
hope,  fear,  and  love,  which  He  always  produces,  are 
precisely  that  part  of  religion  which  the  world  cannot 
understand. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  said  to  "  dwell  in"  believers,  and 
to  be  known  of  them.  They  know  the  feelings  that  He 
creates,  and  the  fruits  that  He  produces,  though  they 
may  not  be  able  to  explain  them,  or  see  at  first  whence 
they  come.  But  they  all  are  what  they  are, — new  men, 
new  creatures,  light  and  salt  in  the  earth,  compared  to 
the  worldly,  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  the  Church  of  the  elect, 


70  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

"  to  abide  with  them  "  until  Christ  comes  the  second 
time.  He  is  meant  to  supply  all  the  needs  of  believers, 
and  to  -fill  up  all  that  is  wanting  while  Christ's  visible 
presence  is  removed.  He  is  sent  to  abide  with  and  help 
them  until  Christ  returns. 

These  are  truths  of  vast  importance.  Let  us  take 
care  that  we  grasp  them  firmly,  and  never  let  them  go. 
Next  to  the  whole  truth  about  Christ,  it  concerns  our 
safety  and  peace  to  see  the  whole  truth  about  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Any  doctrine  about  the  Church,  the  ministry, 
or  the  Sacraments,  which  obscures  the  Spirit's  inward 
work,  or  turns  it  into  mere  form,  is  to  be  avoided  as 
deadly  error.  Let  us  never  rest  till  we  feel  and  know 
that  He  dwells  in  us.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."     (Rom.  viii.  9.) 

Notes.    John  xiv.  12 — 17. 

12. — [Verily. ..works. ..shall  Tie  do  also.']  Here  we  have  another 
comforting  word  addressed  to  the  disciples.  They  must  not 
suppose  there  would  be  an  end  of  miraculous  works  when  their 
Master  went  away,  and  that  they  would  be  left  weak  and  help- 
less, and  unable  to  do  any  thing  to  arrest  the  attention  of  an 
unbelieving  world.  On  the  contrary,  our  Lord  assures  them, 
with  two  emphatic  "  verilys,"  that  miracles  would  not  cease 
with  His  departure.  He  would  take  care  that  believers  should 
have  power  to  do  works  like  His  own,  and  to  confirm  their 
word  by  signs  following. 

I  cannot  doubt  that  this  promise  refers  to  the  miraculous 
gifts  which  the  first  generation  of  Christians  had  power  to 
exercise,  as  we  read  everywhere  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
That  the  sick  were  healed,  the  dead  raised,  and  devils  cast  out 
by  disciples  after  the  Lord  ascended,  is  quite  plain,  and  this 
fulfilled  the  words  now  before  us. 

I  can  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  meant  the  prom- 
ise to  be  fulfilled  after  the  generation  He  left  on  earth  was 
dead.  If  miracles  were  continually  in  the  Church,  they  would 
cease  to  be  miracles.  We  never  see  them  in  the  Bible  except 
at  some  great  crisis  in  the  Church's  history.  The  Irvingite 
theory,  tliat  the  Church  would  always  have  miraculous  gifts  if 
men  only  had  faith  seems  to  me  a  violent  straining  of  this 
text. 

\^And  greater  ioorks...do.'\     The  meaning  of  these  words  must 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  Yl 

be  sought  in  tlie  moral  and  spiritual  miracles  wliicli  followed 
the  preaching  of  the  Apostles  after  the  day  of  Pentecost.  It 
could  not  be  truly  said  that  the  physical  miracles  worked  by 
the  Apostles  in  the  Acts  were  greater  than  those  worked  by 
Christ.  But  it  is  equally  certain  that  after  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost they  did  far  more  wonderful  works  in  converting  souls 
than  our  Lord  did.  On  no  occasion  did  Jesus  convert  8,000  at 
one  time,  and  a  "great  company  of  priests." 

\Because  I  go... Father.']  These  words  must  point  to  the  great 
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Grliost  which  took  place  after  our  Lord's 
ascension  into  heaven,  whereby  the  miracles  of  conversion  were 
wrought.  There  was  an  immediate  and  mysterious  connection, 
we  must  remember,  between  our  Lord  ascending  up  on  high 
and  "  receiving  gifts  for  men."  If  He  had  not  gone  to  the 
Father  the  Spirit  would  not  have  been  sent  forth.   (Ephes.  iv.  8.) 

Melancthon  thinks  the  promise  of  this  text  is  clearly  bound 
up  with  the  following  verse,  "He  shall  do  greater  works  be- 
cause I  go  to  the  Father,  and  because  then  whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  I  will  do." 

13. — [And  w7iatsoever...ask...will  1  do.]  Here  comes  another  great 
piece  of  comfort  for  the  troubled  disciples  :  viz.,  a  promise  that 
Christ  will  do  everything  for  them  which  they  pray  for  in  His 
name  and  for  His  sake.  Whatever  help,  or  strength,  or  sup- 
port, or  guiding  they  need,  if  they  ask  God  for  it  in  Christ's 
name,  Christ  will  give  it. 

This  is  one  of  those  texts  which  authorizes  all  prayers 
being  made  through  Christ's  mediation,  as  in  Prayer-book 
collects. 

The  "  whatsoever  "  must  of  course  be  taken  with  the  quali- 
fying condition,  "  whatsoever  really  good  thing  ye  ask." 

The  connection  with  the  end  of  the  preceding  verse  should 
not  be  overlooked,  "  When  I  go  to  the  Father  I  will  do  what- 
soever ye  ask." 

{^That... Father...  glorified... Son.]  This  is  a  difficult  sentence 
The  meaning  probably  is,  "  I  will  do  whatsoever  ye  ask,  that 
my  Father  may  be  glorified  by  my  mediation,  by  sending  into 
the  world  a  Son  through  whom  sinners  can  obtain  such  bless- 
ings." Christ's  power  to  do  anything  that  He  is  asked,  brings 
glory  to  Him  who  sent  Him. 

14. — [lf...asJc  anything. ..will  do  it.]  This  verse  is  a  repetition  of 
the  preceding,  to  give  emphasis  and  assurance  to  the  promise. 
It  is  as  if  our  Lord  saw  how  slow  the  disciples  would  be  to  be- 
lieve the  efficacy  of  prayer  in  His  name,  "  Once  more  I  tell 
you  most  emphatically,  that  if  you  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I 
will  do  it." 

We  should  notice   both  in  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one. 


72  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

that  it  is  not  said  "  If  ye  ask  in  my  name,  the  Father  will  do 
it : "  but  "  I  will  do  it." 

15. — [If  ye  love. ..keep. ..commandments.']  Here  we  have  a  direct 
practical  exhortation.  "  If  ye  real]y  love  Me,  prove  your  love 
not  by  weeping  and  lamenting  at  my  departure,  but  by  striving 
to  do  my  will  when  1  am  gone.  Doing,  and  not  crying,  is  the 
best  proof  of  love,"  The  commandments  here  mentioned  must 
include  all  the  Lord's  moral  teaching  while  on  earth,  and  spe- 
cially such  rules  and  laws  as  He  had  laid  down  in  the  "  Sermon 
on  the  Mount." 

I  cannot  but  think  that  in  this  verse  our  Lord  had  in  view  the 
disposition  of  His  disciples  to  give  way  to  grief  and  distress  at 
His  leaving  them  ;  and  to  forget  that  the  true  test  of  love  was 
not  useless  and  barren  lamentation,  but  practical  obedience  to 
their  Master's  commands. 

Let  us  notice  how  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  my  commandments." 
We  never  read  of  Moses  or  any  other  servant  of  God  using 
such  an  expression.  It  is  the  language  of  one  who  was  one 
with  God  the  Father,  and  had  power  to  lay  down  laws  and 
make  statutes  for  His  Church. 

16. — [And  l...pray  the  Father,  etc.]  This  verse  holds  up  to  the 
eleven  another  grand  consolation,  viz,  the  gift  of  another  abid- 
ing Comforter  in  place  of  Christ,  even  the  Holy  Ghost.  "When 
I  go  to  heaven  I  will  ask  the  Father  to  give  you  another  friend 
and  helper,  to  be  with  you  and  support  you  in  my  stead,  and 
never  leave  you  as  I  do,"  In  this  remarkable  verse  several 
points  demand  special  notice. 

One  principal  point  is  the  mention  of  all  the  three  persons  in 
the  blessed  Trinity,  the  Son  praying,  the  Father  giving,  the 
Spirit  comforting. 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  1  will  pray  the  Father  and  He  shall 
give,"  we  must  needs  suppose  that  He  accommodates  language 
to  our  minds.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  appointed  in 
the  eternal  counsels  of  the  Trinity  ;  and  we  cannot  literally  say 
that  the  gift  depended  on  Christ  asking.  Moreover,  in  another 
place  our  Lord  says,  "  I  will  send  Him." 

Burkitt  remarks  that  the  future  tense  here  points  to  Christ's 
continual  intercession.  As  long  as  Christ  is  in  heaven,  Chris- 
tians shall  not  want  a  supply  of  comfort. 

When  we  read  of  the  Holy  Ghost  being  "  given,"  we  must 
not  think  that  He  was  in  no  sense  in  the  Church  before  the  day 
of  Pentecost.  He  was  ever  in  the  hearts  of  Old  Testament  be- 
lievers. No  one  ever  served  God  acceptably,  from  Abel  down- 
wards, without  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  John  the  Baptist 
was  "  filled"  with  Him.  It  can  only  mean  that  He  shall  come 
with  more  fulness,  influence,  grace,  and  manifestation,  than  He 
did  before. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  ^3 

When  we  read  of  the  "  Spirit  abiding  forever "  witli  disci- 
ples, it  means  that  He  will  not,  like  Christ  after  His  resurrec- 
tion, return  to  the  Father,  but  will  always  be  with  God's  peo- 
ple until  Christ  comes  again. 

The  word  "Comforter"  is  the  same  that  is  translated  "  Advo- 
cate,"  and  applied  to  Christ  Himself  in  1  John  ii.  2.  This  has 
caused  much  difference  of  opinion.  The  word  is  only  used  five 
times  in  the  New  Testament,  and  is  four  times  ai^plied  to  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Some,  as  Lightfoot,  Bishop  Hall,  and  Doddridge,  maintain 
that  our  translation  here  is  right,  and  that  it  is  the  office  of  the 
Spirit  to  comfort  and  strengthen  Christ's  people. 

Others,  as  Beza,  Lampe,  De  Dieus,  Gomarus,  Poole,  Pearce, 
Stier,  and  Alford,  maintain  that  the  word  here  should  have 
been  rendered  "  Advocate,"  as  in  John's  Epistle  ;  and  that  this 
word  aptly  expresses  the  office  of  the  Spirit  as  pleading  our 
cause,  and  making  intercession  for  the  saints,  and  helping 
them  in  prayer  and  preaching.  (See  Rom.  viii.  26  ;  Matt,  x, 
19,  20.)  I  decidedly  prefer  this  latter  view.  Those  who  wish 
to  see  an  able  argument  in  its  favor,  should  study  Canon 
Lightfoot's  volume  on  New  Testament  Revision  (p.  55). 

Lampe  sensibly  remarks  that  the  word  "  another  "  points  to 
the  phrase  meaning  "  Advocate  "  rather  than  "  Comforter. 
That  Jesus  is  our  "Advocate"  all  allow.  "  Well,"  our  Lord 
seems  to  say, "  you  shall  have  another  'Advocate '  beside  myself." 
Why  use  the  word  "  another  "  at  all,  if  "  Comforter  "  is  the 
meaning  ? 

It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  "  the  consolation  of  Israel "  was  a 
Jewish  name  of  Messiah  (Luke  ii.  25,)  and  that  some  think  that 
Christ  was  one  Comforter  and  the  Holy  Ghost  another.  But  I 
do  not  see  much  in  this. 

. — \^Even  the  Spirit  of  truth.]  The  Holy  Ghost  is  most  probably 
so  called  because  He  brings  truth  specially  home  to  men's 
hearts, — because  truth  is  His  great  instrument  in  all  His  opera- 
tions,— and  because  He  bears  witness  to  Christ  the  truth.  Else- 
where we  read,  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because 
the  Spirit  is  truth."     (1  John  v.  6.) 

[W7iom... world  cannot  receive. ..Icnoioeth  Him.']  Here  our  Lord 
teaches  that  it  is  one  great  mark  of  the  unbelieving  and  world- 
ly that  they  neither  receive,  nor  know,  nor  see  anything  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  This  is  strikingly  true.  Many  false  professors 
and  unconverted  people  receive  Christ's  name  and  talk  of  Him, 
while  they  know  nothing  experimentally  of  the  operations  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  written,  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not 
the  things  of  the  spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  to  him  ; 
neither  can  he  know  them."     (1  Cor.  ii.  14.) 

[But  ye  hnow...dwdleth...shall  he  in  you.]     Our  Lord's  mean- 

4 


74 


EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


ing-  here  must  be  that  the  eleven  knew  something"  experiment- 
ally of  the  Spirit's  work.  They  might  not  be  fully  acquainted 
with  Him  ;  but  He  was  actually  in  them,  making  them  what 
they  were,  and  He  would  remain  in  them,  and  carry  on  the 
work  He  had  begun  to  a  glorious  end.  "  "VS'hether  you  know  it 
thoroughly  and  rightly  or  not,  He  is  actually  in  you  now,  and 
shall  always  be  in  you  and  never  leave  you." 

Let  us  mark  in  this  and  in  the  preceding  verse  how  our  Lord 
speaks  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  "  a  Person."  We  should  never 
speak  of  Him  as  a  mere  "  influence,"  or  dishonor  Him  by  call- 
ing Him  "it." 

Let  us  never  forget  that  "  having  the  Spirit,  or  not  having 
the  Spirit,"  makes  the  great  distinction  between  the  children  of 
God  and  the  children  of  the  world.  Believers  have  Him 
Worldly  and  wicked  people  have  Him  not.    (Jude  19.) 


JOHN  XIV.  18—20. 


18  I  will  not  leave  you  comfort- 
less :  I  will  come  to  you. 

19  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world 
seeth  me  no  more  ;  but  ye  see  me  ; 


because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also. 

20  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that 
I  am  in  my  Father,  and  ye  in  me, 
and  I  in  you. 


The  short  passage  before  us  is  singularly  rich  in 
"precious  promises."  Twice  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
says,  "  I  will."     Twdce  He  says  to  believers,  "  Ye  shall." 

We  learn  from  this  passage,  that  Chrisfs  second 
coming  is  meant  to  he  the  special  comfort  of  believers. 
He  says  to  His  disciples,  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfort- 
less :  I  will  come  to  you." 

Now  what  is  the  "  coming  "  here  spoken  of?  It  is 
only  fair  to  say  that  this  is  a  disputed  point  among 
Christians.  Many  refer  it  to  our  Lord's  coming  to 
His  disciples  after  His  resurrection.  Many  refer  it  to 
His  invisible  coming  into  the  hearts  of  His  people  by 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Many  refer  it  to  His  com- 
mg  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  It  may  well  be  doubted,  however,  whether 
any  one  of  these  three  views  conveys  the  full  meaning 
of  our  Lord's  words,  "  I  will  come." 


JOHlSi,  OHAP.  XIV.  f^^ 

The  true  sense  of  the  expression  appears  to  be  the 
second  personal  coming  of  Christ  at  the  end  of  the 
world.  It  is  a  wide,  broad,  sweeping  promise,  intended 
for  all  believers,  in  every  age,  and  not  for  the  Apostles 
alone  : — "  I  will  not  stay  always  in  heaven :  I  will  one 
day  come  back  to  you."  It  is  like  the  message  which 
the  angels  brought  to  the  disciples  after  the  ascension  : 
— "  This  same  Jesus  shall  come  in  like  manner  as  yo 
have  seen  Him  go."  (Acts.  i.  11.)  It  is  like  the  last 
promise  which  winds  up  the  Book  of  Revelation  : — • 
"  Surely  I  come  quickly."  (Kev.  xxii,  20.)  Just  in  the 
same  way  the  parting  consolation  held  out  to  believers, 
the  night  before  the  crucifixion,  is  a  personal  return  : — 
"  I  will  come." 

Let  us  settle  it  in  our  minds  that  all  believers  are 
comparatively  "orphans,"  and  children  in  their  minority, 
until  the  second  advent.  Our  best  things  are  yet  to 
come.  Faith  has  yet  to  be  exchanged  for  sight,  and 
hope  for  certainty.  Our  peace  and  joy  are  at  present 
very  imperfect.  They  are  as  nothing  to  what  we  shall 
have  when  Christ  returns.  For  the  return  let  us  look 
and  long  and  pray.  Let  us  place  it  in  the  forefront  of 
ail  our  doctrinal  system,  next  to  the  atoning  death  and 
the  interceding  life  of  our  Lord.  The  highest  style  of 
Christians  are  the  men  who  look  for  and  love  the  Lord's 
appearing.     (2  Tim.  iv.  8.) 

We  learn  for  another  thing,  that  Christ^s  life  secures 
the  life  of  His  believing  people.  He  says,  "  Because  I 
live  ye  shall  live  also." 

There  is  a  mysterious  and  indissoluble  union  between 
Christ  and  every  true  Christian.  The  man  that  is  once 
joined  to  Him  by  faith,  is  as  closely  united  as  a  member 
of  the  body  is  united  to  the  head.  So  long  as  Christ, 
his  Head,  lives,  so  long  he  will  live.  He  cannot  die 
unless  Christ  can  be  plucked  from  heaven,  and  Christ's 


76  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

life  destroyed.  But  this,  since  Christ  is  very  God,  is 
totally  impossible  !  "  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead, 
dieth  no  more  :  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
Him."  (Rom.  vi.  9.)  That  which  is  divine,  in  the  very 
nature  of  things,  cannot  die. 

Christ's  life  secures  the  continuance  of  spiritual  life 
to  His  people.  They  shall  not  fall  away.  They  shall 
persevere  unto  the  end.  The  divine  nature  of  which 
they  are  partakers,  shall  not  perish.  The  incorruptible 
seed  within  them  shall  not  be  destroyed  by  the  devil 
and  the  world.  Weak  as  they  are  in  themselves,  they 
are  closely  knit  to  an  immortal  Head,  and  not  one 
member  of  His  mystical  body  shall  ever  perish. 

Christ's  life  secures  the  resurrection  life  of  His  people. 
Just  as  He  rose  again  from  the  grave,  because  death  could 
not  hold  Him  one  moment  beyond  the  appointed  time, 
BO  shall  all  His  believing  members  rise  again  in  the 
day  when  He  calls  them  from  the  tomb.  The  victory 
that  Jesus  won  when  He  rolled  the  stone  away,  and 
came  forth  from  the  tomb,  was  a  victory  not  only  for 
Himself,  but  for  His  people.  If  the  Head  rose,  much 
more  shall  the  members. 

Truths  like  these  ought  to  be  often  pondered  by  true 
Christians.  The  careless  world  knows  little  of  a  be- 
liever's privileges.  It  sees  little  but  the  outside  of  him. 
It  does  not  understand  the  secret  of  his  present  strength, 
and  of  his  strong  hope  of  good  things  to  come. 
And  what  is  that  secret  ?  Invisible  union  with  an  in- 
visible Saviour  in  heaven  !  Each  child  of  God  is  invisibly 
linked  to  the  throne  of  the  Rock  of  Ages.  When  that 
throne  can  be  shaken,  and  not  till  then,  we  may  despair. 
But  Christ  lives,  and  we  shall  live  also. 

We  learn,  finally,  from  this  passage,  that  full  and 
perfect  knowledge  of  divine  things  will  never  be  at- 
tained by  believers  until  the  second  advent.     Our  Lord 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  f^fj 

says,  "At  that  clay,"  the  clay  of  my  coming,  "ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  ye  in  Me,  and  I  in 
you." 

The  best  of  saints  knows  but  little  so  long  as  he  is  in 
the  body.  The  fall  of  our  fatlier  Adam  has  corrupted 
our  understandings,  as  well  as  our  consciences,  hearts, 
and  wills.  Even  after  conversion  we  see  through  a 
glass  darkly,  and  on  no  point  do  we  see  so  dimly  as 
on  the  nature  of  our  own  union  witli  Christ,  and  of  the 
union  of  Christ  and  the  Father.  These  are  matters 
in  which  we  must  be  content  to  believe  humbly,  and, 
like  little  children,  to  receive  on  trust  the  things  which 
we  cannot  explain. 

But  it  is  a  blessed  and  cheering  thought  that  when 
Christ  comes  again,  the  remains  of  ignorance  shall  be 
rolled  away.  Raised  from  the  dead,  freed  from  the 
darkness  of  this  world,  no  longer  tempted  by  the  devil 
and  tried  by  the  flesh,  believers  shall  see  as  they  have 
been  seen,  and  know  as  they  have  been  known.  We 
shall  have  light  enough  one  day.  What  we  know  not 
now,  we  shall  know  hereafter. 

Let  us  rest  our  souls  on  this  comfortable  thought, 
when  we  see  the  mournful  divisions  which  rend  the 
Church  of  Christ.  Let  us  remember  that  a  large  por- 
tion of  them  arise  from  ignorance.  We  know  in  part, 
and  therefore  misunderstand  one  another.  A  day  comes 
when  Lutherans  shall  no  longer  wrangle  with  Zwing- 
lians,  nor  Calvinist  with  Arminian,  nor  Churchman  with 
Dissenter.  That  day  is  the  day  of  Christ's  second  com- 
ing. Then  and  then  only  will  the  promise  receive  its 
complete  fulfilment, — '*  At  that  day  ye  shall  know." 

Notes.    John  xiv.  18 — 20. 

18 — [J  will  not  leave  you  comfortless.]    The  word  we  render  "  com- 
fortless," means  literally  "  orphans,"  and  is  so  translated  in  the 


78  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

marginal  reading  of  the  English  version.  It  beautifully  de- 
Bcribes  the  helpless,  solitary,  friendless  state,  by  comparison,  in 
which  the  disciples  of  Christ  were  left,  when  He  died  and  was 
withdrawn  from  their  bodily  eyes.  "  In  that  condition,"  says 
Jesus, "  I  will  not  leave  you.  You  shall  not  always  be  orphans." 
It  adds  to  tlie  beauty  of  the  expression  to  remember  that  He 
had  already  called  them  "  little  children  :  "  hence  there  was  a 
special  fitness  in  the  word  "  orphans." 

\^I  will  come  to  you.']  The  verb  here  is  in  the  present  tense  ; 
"  I  do  come."  About  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  there  is 
much  difEerence  of  opinion.  Even  the  Fathers,  as  Burgon  says, 
*'  explain  the  words  diversely."  There  is  no  more  unanimity, 
we  must  remember,  among  the  Fathers  than  among  modern 
divines.  The  "  consent  of  Catholic  antiquity,"  about  which 
many  make  so  much  ado,  is  more  imaginary  than  real. 

Some  think,  as  Chrysostom,  that  the  "  coming  "  means  only 
the  reappearing  of  Christ  after  His  resurrection  from  the  grave 
on  the  third  day. 

Others  think,  as  Hutcheson,  that  our  Lord  only  means  His 
coming  by  His  Spirit,  as  a  pledge  of  his  presence. 

Others  think,  as  Augustine  and  Bede,  that  our  Lord  looks  far 
forward  to  His  second  coming  at  the  end  of  the  world,  and 
speaks  the  words  to  the  whole  company  of  believers  in  every 
age  :  "  I  am  coming  again.     I  come  quickly." 

I  decidedly  prefer  this  last  view.  The  first  and  second  seem 
to  me  to  cramp,  narrow,  and  confine  our  Lord's  promise.  The 
last  is  in  harmony  with  all  His  teaching.  The  second  advent 
is  the  great  hope  of  the  Church.  In  the  last  chapter  of  the 
Bible,  the  Greek  for  "  I  come  quickly,"  is  precisely  the  same 
verb  that  is  used  here.     (Rev.  xxii.  20.) 

In  saying  this  I  would  not  be  mistaken.  I  admit  fully  that 
Jesus  came  to  His  Church  after  His  ascension,  invisibly,  does 
come  to  His  Church  continually,  is  with  His  Church  even  to  the 
end  of  the  world.  But  I  do  not  think  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
text. 

.19. — [Yet  a  little  io?dle...ye  see  Me!]  Again  the  meaning  of  our 
Lord  is  somewhat  obscure.  I  think  He  must  mean,  "Very 
shortly  the  wicked  unbelieving  world  will  no  longer  behold 
and  gaze  on  Me,  as  I  shall  be  withdrawn  from  it,  and  ascend 
into  heaven.  But  even  then  ye  see  Me,  and  will  continue  see- 
ing Me  with  the  eyes  of  faith."  I  cannot  think  that  the  present 
tense  here,  "  Ye  behold  Me,"  can  apply  to  the  second  advent. 
It  must  surely  refer  to  the  spiritual  vision  of  Christ  wliich 
believers  would  enjoy.  The  world  could  not  prevent  them 
seeing  Him.  The  Greek  word  for  "  ye  see "  implies  a  fixed, 
steady,  habitual  gaze. 

Bishop  Hall  says,  "  Ye  by  the  eye  of  faith  shall  see  and 
acknowledge  Me." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV. 


79 


[Because  1  live,  ye  shall  live  also.']  Tins  great  deep  saying  of 
Christ  seems  to  admit  of  a  very  wide  aud  full  signification 
"  Your  spiritual  life  now,  and  your  eternal  life  hereafter,  are 
both  secured  by  my  life.  The  life  of  the  Head  guarantees  the 
life  of  the  members.  I  live,  have  life  in  myself,  can  never  die, 
can  never  have  my  life  destroyed  by  my  enemies,  and  live  on 
to  all  eternity.  Therefore  ye  shall  live  also.  Your  life  is 
secured  for  you,  and  can  never  be  destroyed.  You  have  ever- 
lasting life  now,  and  shall  have  everlasting  glory  hereafter." 

That  word  "  I  live,"  is  a  great  full  saying,  and  we  cannot 
fathom  it  all.  It  does  not  merely  mean  "  I  shall  rise  from  the 
dead."  It  is  certainly  far  more  than  the  future  tense.  It  im- 
plies that  Christ  is  "  the  Living  One,"  the  source  and  fountain 
of  life.  It  is  like  "  In  Him  was  life," — and  "  as  the  Father  hath 
life  in  Himself,  even  so  hath  He  given  to  the'Son  to  have  life 
in  Himself."     (John  i.  4  ;  v.  26.) 

20. — [On  that  day  ye  shall  know,  etc.]  Here,  again,  I  believe,  with 
Cyril  aud  Au3:ustine,  that  our  Lord  specially  refers  to  the  day 
of  His  own  second  advent.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  His  disciples 
will  have  perfect  knowledge.  Now  they  see  and  know  in  part, 
and  through  a  glass  darkly.  Then  they  shall  fully  understand 
the  mystical  union  between  the  Father  and  Son,  and  between 
the  Son  and  all  His  believing  members. 

To  confine  the  "  day,"  as  Chrysostom  does,  to  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  from  the  dead,  seems  to  me  to  fall  short  of  its  full 
meaning. 


JOHN  XIV.  21—26. 


21  He  that  hatli  my  command- 
ments, and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
that  loveth  me :  aud  he  that  loveth 
me  shall  be  loved  of  my  father,  and 
I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest 
myself  to  him. 

22  Judas  saith  unto  him,  not  Is- 
cariot,  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt 
manifest  thyself  unto  us,  and  not 
unto  the  world  ? 

23  Jesus  answered  and  said  un- 
to him.  If  a  man  love  me  he  will 
keep  my  words,  and  my  father 
wiU  love  him,  and  we  will  come 


unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with 
him. 

24  He  til  at  loveth  me  not  keepeth 
not  my  sayings ;  aud  the  word  which 
ye  hear  is  not  m.ine,  but  the  Father's 
which  sent  me. 

25  These  things  have  I  spoken  un- 
to you,  being  yet  present  with  you. 

26  But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will 
send  in  my  name,  he  will  teach  you 
all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to 
your  remembrance  whatsoever  I 
have  said  unto  you. 


We  learn  from  these  verses   that   keeping  Christ^s 
eointnandments  is  the  best  test  of  love  to   Christ. 

This  is  a  lesson  of  vast   importance  and   one  that 


80  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

needs  continually  pressing  on  the  attention  of  Chris- 
tians. It  is  not  talking  about  religion,  and  talking 
fluently  and  well  too,  but  steadily  doing  Christ's  will 
and  walking  in  Christ's  ways,  that  is  the  proof  of  our 
being  true  believers.  Good  feelings  and  desires  are  use- 
less if  they  are  not  accompanied  by  action.  They  may 
even  become  mischievous  to  the  soul,  induce  hardness  of 
conscience,  and  do  positive  harm.  Passive  impressions 
which  do  not  lead  to  action,  gradually  deaden  and  par- 
alyze the  heart.  Living  and  doing  are  the  only  real 
evidence  of  grace.  Where  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  there  will 
always  be  a  holy  life.  A  jealous  watchfulness  over  tem- 
pers, words,  and  deeds,  a  constant  endeavor  to  live  by 
the  rule  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  this  is  the  best 
proof  that  we  loA^e  Christ. 

Of  course  such  maxims  as  these  must  not  be  wrested 
and  misunderstood.  We  are  not  to  suppose  for  a  mo- 
ment that  "  keeping  Christ's  commandments  "  can  save 
us.  Our  best  works  are  full  of  imperfection.  When 
we  have  done  all  we  can,  we  are  feeble  and  unprofitable 
servants.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith, — not 
of  works.'*  (Ep.  ii.  8.)  But  while  we  hold  one  class  of 
truths,  we  must  not  forget  another.  Faith  in  the  blood 
of  Christ  must  always  be  attended  by  loving  obedience 
to  the  will  of  Christ.  What  the  Master  has  joined  to- 
gether, the  disciple  must  not  put  asunder.  Do  we  pro- 
fess to  love  Christ  ?  Then  let  us  show  it  by  our  lives. 
The  Apostle  who  said,  "  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee  !" 
received  the  charge,  "  Feed  my  lambs."  That  meant, 
"  Do  something.  Be  useful  :  follow  my  example." 
(John  xxi.  17.) 

We  learn,  secondly,  from  these  verses,  that  there  are 
special  comforts  laid  up  for  those  loho  love  Christ,  and 
prove  it  by  keeping  His  words.  This,  at  any  rate, 
seems  the  general  sense  of  our  Lord's  language  :  "  My 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  gl 

Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and 
make  our  abode  with  him." 

The  full  meaning  of  this  promise,  no  doubt,  is  a  deep 
thing.  We  have  no  line  to  fathom  it.  It  is  a  thing 
which  no  man  can  understand  except  he  that  receives 
and  experiences  it.  But  we  need  not  shrink  from  be- 
lieving that  eminent  holiness  brings  eminent  comfort 
with  it,  and  that  no  man  has  such  sensible  enjoyment 
of  his  religion  as  the  man  who,  like  Enoch  and  Abraham, 
walks  closely  with  God.  There  is  more  of  heaven  on 
earth  to  be  obtained  than  most  Christians  are  aware  of. 
"  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him, 
and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant." — "  If  any  man 
hear  my  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him, 
and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."  (Ps.  xxv.  14 ;  Rev. 
iii.  20.]  Promises  like  these,  we  may  be  sure,  mean 
something,  and  were  not  written  in  vain. 

How  is  it,  people  often  ask,  that  so  many  professing 
believers  have  so  little  happiness  in  their  religion  ?  How 
is  it  that  so  many  know  little  of  "joy  and  peace  in  be- 
lieving," and  go  mourning  and  heavy-hearted  towards 
heaven  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  is  a  sorrowful 
one,  but  it  must  be  given.  Few  believers  attend  as 
strictly  as  they  should  to  Christ's  practical  sayings  and 
words.  There  is  far  too  much  loose  and  careless  obedi- 
ence to  Christ's  commandments.  There  is  far  too  much 
forgetfulness,  that  while  good  works  cannot  justify  us 
they  are  not  to  be  despised.  Let  these  things  sink  down 
into  our  hearts.  If  we  want  to  be  eminently  happy,  we 
must  strive  to  be  eminently  holy. 

We  learn,  lastly,  from  these  verses,  that  one  part  of 
the  Holy  Ghost^s  vjork  is  to  teach,  and  to  bring  things  to 
remembrance.  It  is  written,  "  The  Comforter  shall  teach 
you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remem 
brance." 

4* 


82  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

To  confine  this  promise  to  the  eleven  Apostles,  as 
some  do,  seems  a  narrow  and  unsatisfactory  mode  of  in- 
terpreting Scripture.  It  appears  to  reach  far  beyond 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  the  gift  of  writing  inspired 
books  of  God's  Holy  Word.  It  is  safer,  wiser,  and 
more  consistent  with  the  whole  tone  of  our  Lord's  last 
discourse,  to  regard  the  promise  as  the  common  property 
of  all  believers,  in  every  age  of  the  world.  Our  Lord 
knows  the  ignorance  and  forgetfulness  of  our  nature  in 
spiritual  things.  He  graciously  declares  that  when  He 
leaves  the  world,  His  people  shall  have  a  teacher  and 
remembrancer. 

Are  we  sensible  of  spiritual  ignorance  ?  Do  we  feel 
that  at  best  we  know  in  part  and  see  in  part  ?  Do  we 
desire  to  understand  more  clearly  the  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel  ?  Let  us  pray  daily  for  the  help  of  the  "  teach- 
ing "  Spirit.  It  is  His  office  to  illuminate  the  soul,  to 
open  the  eyes  of  the  understanding,  and  to  guide  us  into 
all  truth.  He  can  make  dark  places  light,  and  rough 
places  smooth. 

Do  we  find  our  memory  of  spiritual  things  defective  ? 
Do  we  complain  that  though  we  read  and  hear,  we  seem 
to  lose  as  fast  as  we  gain  ?  Let  us  pray  daily  for  the 
help  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  can  bring  things  to  our  re- 
membrance. He  can  make  us  remember  "  old  things 
and  new."  He  can  keep  in  our  minds  the  whole  system 
of  truth  and  duty,  and  make  us  ready  for  every  good 
word  and  work. 

Notes.    John  xiv.  21—26. 

21, — [He  that  hath...commandments...lovet7i  Me."]  Our  Lord  Beems 
to  return  to  the  lesson  of  the  fifteenth  verse,  and  to  repeat  it 
because  of  its  importance.  There,  however.  He  spoke  specially 
to  His  disciples  ;  here  He  lays  it  down  as  a  general  principle 
applicable  to  all  (Christians  in  all  time  : — "  He  that  not  only 
possesses  and  knows  my  commandments,  but  also  does  and 
practices  them,  he  is  the  man  that  really  loves  Me."     Obedi- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  33 

ence  is  the  true  test  of  real  love  to  Christ,  and  not  knowledge 
and  talk  only.     Many  have,  but  do  not  keep  Christ's  will. 

Burgon  observes,  "  This  amounts  to  a  declaration  that  the 
Bad  hearts  and  weeping  eyes  of  the  Apostles  would  not  be  ac- 
cepted by  their  Lord  as  any  proof  of  their  love.  Obedience 
was  the  test  He  chose." 

{He.Joveth  Me...loved... Father.]  Here  follows  an  encourage- 
ment to  practical  obedience  :  "  He  that  really  loves  Me,  and 
proves  his  love  by  his  life,  shall  be  specially  loved  by  my  Fa- 
ther.    My  Father  loves  those  who  love  Me." 

Let  us  carefully  note  that  there  is  a  special  love  of  God  the 
Father  which  is  peculiarly  set  on  believers,  over  and  above  the 
general  love  of  pity  and  compassion  with  which  He  regards  all 
mankind.  In  the  highest  sense  God  is  a  "  Father  "  to  none  but 
those  who  love  Christ.  The  modern  doctrine  of  a  "  Father- 
hood "  of  God  which  is  soul-saving  to  those  who  neglect  Christ, 
is  a  mere  delusion  of  man. 

[And  LJone... manifest. .Mm.']  Here  follows  another  encour 
agement  to  the  man  who  strives  to  keep  Christ's  command- 
ments. Christ  will  specially  love  that  man,  and  will  give  him 
special  manifestations  of  His  grace  and  favor,  invisibly  and 
spiritually.  He  shall  feel  and  know  in  his  own  heart  comforts 
-  and  joys  that  wicked  men  and  inconsistent  professors  know 
nothing  of.  That  the  "  manifesting  "  of  Himself  here  spoken 
of  is  a  purely  unseen  and  spiritual  thing,  is  self-evident.  It  is 
one  of  those  things  which  can  only  be  known  by  experience, 
and  is  only  known  by  holy  and  consistent  Christians. 

We  should  carefully  observe  here,  that  Christ  does  more  for 
the  comfort  of  some  of  His  people  than  He  does  for  others. 
Those  who  follow  Christ  most  closely  and  obediently  will  al- 
ways follow  Him  most  comfortably,  and  feel  most  of  His  in- 
ward presence.  It  is  one  thing,  as  St.  John  says,  to  know 
Christ,  another  to  know  that  we  know  Him.     (1  John  ii.  3.) 

22. — [Judas  saith...not  Iscariot.]  Jude,  the  writer  of  the  Epistle, 
and  brother  of  James,  was  the  Apostle  who  speaks  here.  He 
is  called  elsewhere  Lebbeus  and  Thaddeus.  Remembering 
that  James  is  called  in  Galatians  "  the  Lord's  brother,"  there 
must  have  been  some  relationship  between  him  and  our  Lord. 
Probably  he  was  a  cousin.  Whether  a  recollection  of  this  may 
have  been  in  His  mind  when  asking  the  question,  admits  of 
conjecture.  This  is  the  only  word  recorded  to  have  been  spo- 
ken by  Jude  in  the  Gospels. 

We  should  mark  the  careful  manner  in  which  St.  John  re- 
minds us  that  it  was  not  the  false  Apostle  who  asked. 

Let  us  note  that  out  of  each  saying  of  the  three  Apostles 
who  spoke  to  our  Lord,  interrupting  Him  in  His  last  discourse, 
a  great  truth   was   elicited   for  the  benefit  of    the   Church 


34  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Thomas,  Philip,  and  Jude,  ignorant  and  slow  as  they  were 
drew  out  of  our  Lord's  mouth  rich  and  precious  sayings. 

[^How  is  U...mauifest...us...not...ioorld.]  This  question  is  the 
simple  inquiry  of  one  guessing  after  the  truth,  and  not  able  to 
see  clearly  what  our  Lord's  words  meant, — whether  a  visible  or 
an  invisible  manifestation  of  Himself: — "What  is  the  precise 
distinction  of  privilege  between  ourselves  and  the  world  to 
which  you  point  ?  " 

The  Greek  for  "  how  is  it  ?  "  would  be  literally,  "  What  has 
happened  ?  "  The  Greek  for  "  Thou  wilt,"  is  literally,  "  Thou 
art  about." 

Whitby  thinks  that  Jude,  like  most  Jews  of  his  time,  expect- 
ed Messiah's  kingdom  to  be  a  visible  temporal  kingdom  over 
all  the  earth.  He  could  not  therefore  understand  a  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ  confined  to  the  disciples. 

83. — [Jesus  answered... will  love  him.]  This  sentence  is  simply  a 
repetition  of  the  truth  contained  in  the  fifteenth  and  twenty- 
first  verses  :  "  1  tell  you  again  emphatically  that  the  man  who 
really  loves  Me  will  keep  my  words,  and  obey  my  command- 
ments. And  I  repeat  that  such  a  man  will  be  specially  loved 
and  cared  for  by  my  heavenly  Father." 

Let  us  note  that  in  this  verse  our  Lord  does  not  say,  "  Keep 
my  commandments,"  but  my  "  word  "  generally,  in  the  singu- 
lar number,  inclading  all  His  whole  teaching. 

[And  we  will  come...dbide  with  him.]  These  words  can  only 
admit  of  one  sense, — a  spiritual  and  invisible  coming  and  abid- 
ing. The  Father  and  the  Son  will  come  spiritually  into  the 
heart  and  soul  of  a  true  saint,  and  will  make  their  continual 
dwelling  with  him.  This,  again,  is  a  purely  experimental 
truth,  and  one  that  none  can  know  but  he  that  has  felt  it. 

Let  us  note  the  condescension  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and 
the  high  privileges  of  a  believer.  No  matter  how  poor  and 
lowly  a  man  may  be,  if  he  has  faith  and  grace,  he  has  the  best 
of  company  and  friends.  Christ  and  the  Father  dwell  in  his 
heart,  and  he  is  never  alone,  and  cannot  be  poor.  He  is  the 
temple  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  The  use  of  the  plural 
number  "  we,"  is  very  noteworthy  in  this  place. 

24. — [He...lot)eth  Me  not. ..my  sayings^  Once  more  the  same  great 
principle  already  taught,  is  laid  down  again  from  the  negative 
side.  Where  there  is  no  obedience  to  Christ,  there  is  no  love. 
Nothing  can  be  more  plain  than  our  Lord's  repeated  warnings 
that  practical  obedience,  keeping  His  commandments  and  say- 
ings, doing  His  will,  is  the  only  sure  test  of  love  to  Him.  With- 
out this  obedience,  profession,  talk,  knowledge.  Churchman- 
ship,  yea,  even  feeling,  conviction,  weeping  and  crying,  are  all 
worthless  things. 
[And  word. ..not  mine. ..Father. ..sent  Me.]     The  purpose  of  this 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  35 

sentence  is  to  remind  the  disciples  of  the  authority  and  dignity 
of  our  Lord's  sayings  and  commandments.  They  are  not  His 
words  only,  but  His  Father's.  He  that  despises  them  despises 
the  Father,  and  He  that  honors  them  by  obedience  honors  the 
Father. 

25. — [These  things. ..spoken.. .present  with  you.']  Our  Lord  seems 
here  to  begin  to  wind  up  the  first  part  of  His  discourse  to  a 
conclusion.  Whether  "  these  things  "  mean  only  the  things  He 
spoke  this  evening,  or  all  the  things  He  had  taught  them  dur- 
ing His  ministry,  admits  of  doubt.  I  rather  incline  to  the  view 
that  the  expression  must  be  taken  in  the  widest  sense  :  "  These 
and  many  other  things  I  have  spoken  to  you,  while  abiding  and 
dwelling  among  you.  Your  hearts  are  troubled,  perhaps,  by 
the  thought  that  you  cannot  remember  them,  and  do  not  un- 
derstand them.     Here  there  are  some  grounds  of  comfort." 

2G. — [Bat... Comforter... Holy  Ghost. ..my  name.]  Here  comes  one 
more  grand  consolation  :  "  When  I  am  gone,  the  Holy  Gfliost, 
the  promised  x\dvocate,  whom  the  Father  will  send  on  my  ac- 
count, through  my  intercession,  and  to  glorify  Me,  shall  supply 
all  your  need,  and  provide  for  all  your  wants." 

Let  us  note  how  distinctly  the  Holy  Spirit  is  spoken  of  here 
as  a  Person,  and  not  an  inHuence. 

Let  us  note  how  the  Father  sends  the  Spirit,  but  also  sends 
Him  in  Christ's  name,  and  with  a  special  reference  to  Christ's 
work. 

[He  shall  teach  you  all  tilings.]  The  first  word  here  rendered 
"  He  "  is  unmistakably  applicative  to  none  but  a  person,  being 
a  masculine  pronoun.  The  "  teaching  "  here  promised  must 
mean,  firstly,  that  fuller  and  more  complete  instruction  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  evidently  gave  to  believers  after  our  Lord's  as- 
'cension.  No  one  can  read  the  "Acts  "  without  seeing  that  the 
eleven  ^ere  different  men  after  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  and  saw 
and  knew  and  understood  things  of  which  they  were  very  ignor- 
ant before.  But,  secondly,  the  "  teaching  "  most  probably  in- 
cludes all  that  teaching  and  enlightening  which  the  Spirit  im- 
parts to  all  true  believers  in  every  age.  Light  is  the  first  thing 
we  need,  and  He  gives  it.  It  is  His  special  office  to  "  open  the 
eyes  of  our  understandings." 

The  expression  "  all  things  "  must  plainly  be  limited  to  all 
things  needful  to  be  known  by  the  soul,  and  does  not  include 
all  knowledge  of  every  kind. 

[And  bring  all  things.. .remembrance.. .told  you.]  This  is  a 
special  consolation  for  the  weak  memories  of  the  troubled  dis- 
ciples. Our  Lord  promises  that  the  Spirit  would  bring  back  to 
their  memories  the  many  lessons,  both  doctrinal  and  practical, 
which  they  had  heard  from  Him  but  forgotten.  This  was  a 
very  needful  promise.  How  often  we  find  it  recorded  that  the 
disciples  did  not  understand  our  Lord's  sayings  and  doings  a* 


86 


EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


the  time  thev  heard  and  saw  them,  it  is  almost  needless  to  point 
out.     (Johnii.  22;.xii.  16.) 

Some  apply  these  words  especially  to  the  gift  of  inspiration 
by  which  the  Xew  Testament  Scriptures  were  written.  I  can- 
not see  this.  The  promise  was  to  the  whole  eleven,  of  whom 
only  five  were  allowed  to  write  !  This  is  strongly  dwelt  on  by 
Alford. 

Some  apply  these  words  exclusively  to  the  eleven.  I  cannot 
see  this  either.  To  my  eyes  they  seem  a  general  promise,  pri- 
marily no  doubt  applying  specially  to  the  eleven,  but  after 
them  belonging  also  to  all  believers  in  every  age.  As  a  matter 
of  experience  I  believe  tliat  the  awakening  of  the  memories  of 
true  Christians  is  one  of  the  peculiar  works  of  the  Holy  Grhost 
on  their  souls.  Once  converted,  they  understand  things  and  re- 
member things  in  a  way  they  did  not  before. 

Does  any  one  complain  of  his  own  ignorance  and  bad  mem- 
ory ?  Let  him  not  forget  that  there  is  One  whose  office  it  is  to 
"  teach  and  to  bring  to  remembrance."  Let  him  pray  for  the 
Holy  Spirit's  help. 


JOHN  XIV.  27-31. 


27  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my 
peace  1  give  unto  you ;  not  as  tiie 
world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.  Let 
not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither 
let  it  be  afraid. 

23  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said 
unto  yon,  I  go  away,  and  come 
again  unto  you.  If  ye'  loved  me,  ye 
would  rejoice,  because  I  said,  I  go 
unto  the  Father;  for  my  Father  is 
greater  than  I. 

29  And  now  I  have  told  you  be- 


fore it  come  to  pass,  that,  when  it  is 
come  to  pass,  ye  might  believe. 

80  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  mucX 
with  you :  for  the  prince  of  this 
world  Cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in 
me. 

31  But  that  the  world  may  know 
that  I  love  the  Father ;  aud  as  the 
Father  gave  me  commandment, 
even  so  I  do.  Arise,  let  us  go 
hence. 


We  ought  not  to  leave  the  closing  portion  of  this 
wonderful  chapter  without  noticing  one  striking  feature 
in  it.  That  feature  is  the  singular  frequency  with 
which  our  Lord  uses  the  expression,  "  My  Father,"  and 
"  the  Father."  In  the  last  five  verses  we  find  it  four 
times.  In  the  whole  chapter  it  occurs  no  less  than 
twenty-two  times.  In  this  respect  the  chapter  stands 
alone  in  the  Bible. 

The  reason  of  tliis  frequent  use  of  the  expression,  is  a 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  87 

deep  subject.  Perhaps  the  less  we  speculate  and  dog- 
matize about  it  the  better.  Our  Lord  was  one  who 
never  spoke  a  word  without  a  meaning,  and  we  need 
not  doubt  there  was  a  meaning  here.  Yet  may  we  not 
reverently  suppose  that  He  desired  to  leave  on  the 
minds  of  His  disciples  a  strong  impression  of  his  entire 
unity  with  the  Father  ?  Seldom  does  our  Lord  lay  claim 
to  such  high  dignity,  and  such  power  of  giving  and  sup- 
plying comfort  to  His  Church,  as  in  this  discourse.  Was 
there  not,  then,  a  fitness  in  His  continually  reminding 
His  disciples  that  in  all  His  giving  He  was  one  with  the 
Father,  and  did  nothing  without  the  Father  ?  This,  at 
any  rate,  seems  a  fair  conjecture.  Let  it  be  taken  for 
what  it  is  worth. 

We  should  observe,  for  one  thing,  in  this  passage, 
Chrisfs  last  legacy  to  His  people.  We  find  Him  saying, 
"  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you  ; 
not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you." 

Peace  is  Christ's  peculiar  gift  :  not  money,  not 
worldly  ease,  not  temporal  prosperity.  These  are  at 
•best  very  questionable  possessions.  They  often  do 
more  harm  than  good  to  the  soul.  They  act  as  clogs 
and  weights  to  our  spiritual  life.  Inward  peace  of  con- 
science, arising  from  a  sense  of  pardoned  sin  and  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  is  a  far  greater  blessing.  This  peace 
is  the  property  of  all  believers,  whether  high  or  low, 
rich  or  poor. 

The  peace  which  Christ  gives  He  calls  "my  peace." 
It  is  specially  His  own  to  give,  because  He  bought  it  by 
His  own  blood,  purchased  it  by  His  own  substitution, 
and  is  appointed  by  the  Father  to  dispense  it  to  a  per- 
ishing world.  Just  as  Joseph  was  sealed  and  commis- 
sioned to  give  corn  to  the  starving  Egyptians,  so  is 
Christ  specially  commissioned,  in  the  counsels  of  the 
Eternal  Tiinity,  to  give  peace  to  mankind. 


88  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  peace  that  Christ  gives  is  not  given  as  the 
world  gives.  What  He  gives  the  world  cannot  give  at 
all,  and  what  He  gives  is  given  neither  unwillingly,  nor 
sparingly,  nor  for  a  little  time.  Christ  is  far  more  will- 
ing to  give  than  the  world  is  to  receive.  AVhat  He 
gives  He  gives  to  all  eternity,  and  never  takes  away. 
He  is  ready  to  give  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can 
ask  or  think.  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,"  He  says,  "  and 
I  will  fill  it."     (Psalm  Ixxxi.  10.) 

Who  can  wonder  that  a  legacy  like  this  should  be 
backed  by  the  renewed  emphatic  charge,  "  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid  ?  "  There  is 
nothing  lacking  on  Christ's  part  for  our  comfort,  if  we 
will  only  come  to  Him,  believe,  and  receive.  The  chief 
of  sinners  has  no  cause  to  be  afraid.  If  we  will  only  look 
to  the  one  true  Saviour,  there  is  medicine  for  every 
trouble  of  heart.  Half  our  doubts  and  fears  arise  from 
dim  perceptions  of  the  real  nature  of  Christ's  Gospel. 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  in  this  passage, 
Chrisfs  perfect  holiness.  We  find  Him  saying,  "  The 
prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me." 

The  meaning  of  these  remarkable  words  admits  of 
only  one  interpretation.  Our  Lord  would  have  his  di& 
ciples  know  that  Satan,  "  the  prince  of  this  world,"  was 
about  to  make  his  last  and  most  violent  attack  on  Him. 
He  was  mustering  all  his  strength  for  one  more  tre- 
mendous onset.  He  was  coming  up  with  his  utmost 
malice  to  try  the  second  Adam  in  the  garden  of  Geth- 
semane,  and  on  the  cross  of  Calvary.  But  our  blessed 
Master  declares,  "  He  hath  nothing  in  Me." — "  There  is 
nothing  he  can  lay  hold  on.  There  is  no  weak  and  de- 
fective point  in  Me.  I  have  kept  my  Father's  command- 
ment, and  finished  the  work  He  gave  me  to  do.  Satan, 
therefore,  cannot  overthrow  Me.     He  can  lay  nothing  to 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  39 

my  charge.  He  cannot  condemn  Me.  I  shall  come 
forth  from  the  trial  more  than  conqueror." 

Let  us  mark  the  difference  between  Christ  and  all 
others  who  have  been  born  of  woman.  He  is  the  only 
one  in  whom  Satan  has  found  "  nothing."  He  came  to 
Adam  and  Eve,  and  found  weakness.  He  came  to 
Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  and  all  the  saints,  and 
found  imperfection.  He  came  to  Christ,  and  found 
"  nothing  "  at  all.  He  was  a  Lamb  "  without  blemish 
and  without  spot,"  a  suitable  Sacrifice  for  a  world  of 
sinners,  a  suitable  Head  for  a  redeemel  race. 

Let  us  thank  God  that  we  have  such  a  perfect,  sin- 
less Saviour ;  that  His  righteousness  is  a  perfect  right- 
eousness, and  His  life  a  blameless  life.  In  ourselves 
and  our  doings  we  shall  find  everything  imperfect  ;  and 
if  we  had  no  other  hope  than  our  own  goodness,  we 
might  well  despair.  But  in  Christ  we  have  a  perfect, 
sinless.  Representative  and  Substitute.  Well  may  we 
say,  with  the  triumphant  Apostle,  "  Who  shall  lay  any- 
thing to  our  charge?"  (Rom.  viii.  33.)  Christ  hath 
died  for  us,  and  suffered  in  our  stead.  In  Him  Satan 
can  find  nothing.  We  are  hidden  in  Him.  The  Father 
sees  us  in  Him,  unworthy  as  we  are,  and  for  His  sake  is 
well  pleased. 

Notes.    John  xiv.  27—31. 

27. — [Peace  1  leave  with  you.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  gives  His 
disciples  one  more  consolation.  He  bequeatlis  them  as  a  legacy, 
"  peace  : "  not  riches  or  worldly  honor,  but  peace, — peace  of 
heart,  conscience,  and  inward  man, — peace  from  a  sense  of  par- 
doned sin,  a  living  Saviour,  and  a  home  in  heaven. 

Matthew  Henry  remarks  here,  "  When  Christ  left  the  world, 
He  made  His  will.  His  soul  He  bequeathed  to  His  Father,  and 
His  body  to  Joseph.  His  clothes  fell  to  the  soldiers.  His 
mother  He  left  to  the  care  of  John.  But  what  should  He 
leave  to  His  poor  disciples,  who  had  left  all  for  Him?  Silver 
and  gold  He  had  none  ;  but  He  left  them  what  was  far  better, 
His  peace." 


90  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


I  My  peace  give  1  unto  you.]  The  expression  "  my  peace," 
Beems  to  indicate  something  peculiar  in  the  gift  here  promisee 
Does  it  not  mean  "  a  sense  of  that  peace  with  God  which  I  am^ 
purchasing  with  my  blood, — that  inward  calm  and  rest  of  soul 
which  faith  in  Me  procures  for  believers, — that  peace  which  it 
is  my  special  prerogative  to  give  to  my  people  "  f 

[Not  as. ..world  giveth...I...you.'\  The  first  and  fullest  meaning 
of  this  sentence  seems  to  lie  in  the  kind  of  things  which  Christ 
gives  :  "  I  give  you  possessions  which  the  world  cannot  give, 
because  it  has  not  got  them  to  give."  The  world  can  give  tem- 
porary carnal  satisfaction  and  excitement,  and  can  gratify  the 
passions  and  affections  and  pride  of  the  natural  man.  But  th© 
world  cannot  give  inward  peace  and  rest  of  conscience. 

Some,  however,  think  that  the  point  of  the  sentence  lies  ia 
the  manner  of  the  world's  giving, — temporarily,  defectively, 
imperfectly,  grudgingly,  and  the  like.  But,  however  true  thia 
may  be,  I  prefer  the  view  that  the  chief  point  is  in  the  nature 
of  the  world's  gifts  compared  to  Christ's. 

[Let  not  your  heart  he  troubled.]  This  is  a  repetition  of  the 
words  which  began  the  long  list  of  consolations  in  this  chapter 
"Once  more  I  say  to  you,  in  view  of  the  many  grounds  of  com- 
fort which  I  have  just  named,  do  not  give  way  to  trouble  of 
heart." 

[Neither  let  it  he  afraid.]  These  words  are  added  to  the  open- 
ing charge,  not  to  be  "  troubled."  They  point  to  a  frame  of 
mind  which  our  Lord  saw  creeping  over  the  disciples :  "  Let  not 
your  heart  give  way  to  cowardice.  Let  it  not  be  fearful."  It 
is  the  only  j^lace  in  the  New  Testament  where  this  word  ia 
used. 

We  need  not  doubt  that  the  whole  of  this  consoling  verse  is 
meant  to  be  the  property  of  all  believers  in  every  age. 

28. — [  Te  have  heard...said...go  away.]  This  sentence  must  refer  to 
ch.  xiii.  33 — 36,  and  xiv.  2,  3,  13.  The  disciples  seem  to  have 
understood  clearly  that  our  Lord  was  leaving  them,  and  that 
seems  to  have  been  one  chief  reason  of  their  trouble  and  dis- 
tress. 

[And  come.. .to  you.]  I  must  retain  the  opinion  that  this  com- 
ing refers  to  the  second  advent,  and  not  to  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  "  My  leaving  the  world  until  my  second  advent,  you 
have  heard  me  plainly  teach  and  declare." 

[If  ye  loved. ..rejoice.. .go. ..Father.]  These  words  mean, — "  if 
you  really  loved  Me  with  an  intelligent  love,  and  thoroughly 
understood  my  person,  nature,  and  work,  you  would  rejoice  to 
hear  of  my  leaving  the  world  and  going  to  the  Father,  because 
you  would  see  in  it  the  finishing  and  completion  of  the  work 
which  the  Father  sent  Me  to  do,"  Our  Lord  cannot  of  course 
mean  that  the  disciples  did  not  "  love  "  Him  at  all,  but  that  they 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIV.  Qi 

did  not  rightly  and  intelligently  love   Him ;    otlierwise  tliey 
would  have  rejoiced  at  His  completion  of  His  work. 

[For  my  Father  is  greater  than  i.]  This  famous  sentence  haa 
always  been  an  occasion  of  controversy  and  dispute.  It  presents 
two  difficulties. 

{a)  What  did  our  Lord  mean  by  saying,  "  My  Father  is  greater 
than  I "  ?  I  answer  that  the  words  of  the  Athanasian  Creed 
contain  the  best  reply.  Christ  is  no  doubt  "equal  to  the  Father 
as  touching  His  Godhead',  and  inferior  to  the  Father  as  touching 
His  manhood."  This  we  may  freely  and  fully  admit,  and  yet 
not  give  up  a  hair's  breadth  to  Arians  and  Socinians,  who  al- 
ways throw  this  text  in  our  teeth.  The  enemies  of  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  divinity  forget  that  Trinitarians  maintain  the 
humanity  of  Christ  as  strongly  as  His  divinity  ;  and  never 
shrink  from  admitting  that  while  Christ  as  God  is  equal  to  the 
Father,  as  man  He  is  inferior  to  the  Father.  And  it  is  in  this 
sense  that  He  here  says  truly,  "  My  Father  is  greater  than  1." 
It  was  specially  spoken  of  the  time  of  His  incarnation  and  hu- 
miliation. When  the  Word  was  "  made  flesh  "  He  took  on  Him 
"  the  form  of  a  servant."  This  was  temporary  inferiority. 
(Phil.  ii.  7.) 

(6)  But  what  did  our  Lord  mean  by  saying  that  the  disciples 
ought  to  rejoice  at  His  going  to  the  Father,  because  "  the  Father 
is  greater  than  I"?  This  is  a  hard  knot  to  untie,  and  has  re- 
ceived diflferent  solutions.  My  own  impression  is  that  the  mean- 
ing must  be  something  of  this  kind  : — "Ye  ought  to  rejoice  at 
my  going  to  the  Father,  because  in  so  going  I  shall  resume  that 
glory  which  I  had  with  Him  before  the  world  was,  and  which  I 
laid  aside  on  becoming  incarnate.  Here  on  earth,  during  the 
thirty-three  years  of  my  incarnation,  I  have  been  in  the  form 
of  a  servant,  and  dwelling  in  a  body  as  one  inferior  to  my  Father. 
In  leaving  this  world  I  go  to  take  up  again  the  equal  glory  and 
honor  which  I  had  with  the  Father  before  my  incarnation  ;  and 
to  lay  aside  the  position  of  inferiority  in  which  I  have  taber- 
nacled here  below.  I  go  to  be  once  more  Almighty  with  the 
Almighty,  and  to  share  once  more  my  Father's  throne,  as  a  Per- 
son in  that  Trinity  in  which  '  none  is  afore  or  after  other,  none 
is  greater  or  less  than  another.'  I  go  to  receive  the  kingdom 
and  honor  which  in  eternal  counsels  the  Father  has  prepared 
for  the  Son  ;  and  on  this  account,  if  you  really  knew  and  un- 
derstood all,  you  would  rejoice  at  my  going.  If  I  had  not  vol- 
untarily placed  myself  in  a  position  of  inferiority  to  the  Father 
by  becoming  man  for  man's  sake,  you  would  have  no  hope  for 
your  souls.  But  now  the  work  is  finished.  I  return  to  the 
Father,  and  leave  my  position  of  inferiority  and  humiliation, 
and  you  ought  to  rejoice  and  be  glad." 

29. — [And  now...told...hefore...to  pass,  etc.]  This  seems  to  refer  to 
our  Lord's  going  away.  "  I  have  told  you  plainly  that  I  am 
leaving  you  and  about  to  die  on  the  cross,  in  order  that  when  I 


92  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

do  die  and  go,  you  may  continue  believing,  and  not  have  your 

faitli  shaken." 

30. — [Hereafter. ..not  talk  much  with  you.]  This  must  mean  that 
our  Lord  would  not  talk  much  more  before  His  crucifixion. 
The  time  was  short,  and  the  betrayal  and  suffering  drew  nigh. 
It  does  not  refer  to  the  time  after  our  Lord's  resurrection,  and 
the  forty  days  before  His  ascension. 

[For...prince...cometh...not7dng  in  me.]  This  means  that  Sa- 
tan was  drawing  nigh  for  his  last  final  assault  on  our  Lord ; 
and  that  he  would  find  nothing  to  lay  hold  on,  and  no  weak 
point. 

It  is  very  striking  to  observe  that  our  Lord  does  not  say  "Ju- 
das, the  Romans,  the  Pharisees  are  coming."  It  is  only  the 
devil.  He,  as  at  the  fall,  is  at  the  bottom  of  all.  Others  are 
only  his  tools.  | 

We  should  note  how  the  devil  is  called  "  the  prince  of  this 
world,"  He  rules  and  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  the  vast  majority 
of  mankind.  The  whole  world  "  lieth  in  the  wicked  one."  Of 
the  extent  and  intensity  of  Satan's  infiuence  on  earth,  even  now 
we  have  probably  very  little  idea. 

Wlien  it  says  that  he  "  cometh,"  we  must  not  suppose  that  it 
means  "cometh  for  the  first  time."  All  through  our  Lord's 
earthly  ministry  He  was  tempted  and  assailed  and  opposed  by 
Satan.  It  must  mean,  "  He  is  coming  with  special  violence 
and  bitter  wrath  to  make  his  last  attack  on  Me  both  in  Geth- 
semane  and  on  Calvary."  There  are  evidently  degrees  at  dif- 
ferent seasons  in  the  intensity  and  virulence  of  Satan's  at- 
tacks. 

When  it  says  "  hath  nothing  in  Me,"  it  must  mean  that  our 
Lord's  heart  and  life  were  equally  without  spot  of  sin.  He 
knew  and  felt  that  He  the  second  Adam,  had  nothing  about 
Him  that  Satan  could  lay  hold  on.  No  one  but  Christ  our  Head 
could  say  that.     The  holiest  saint  could  never  say  it  I 

Sanderson  observes,  "  a  cunning  searcher  had  pried  narrowly 
into  every  corner  of  His  life  ;  and  if  there  had  been  anything 
amiss,  would  have  been  sure  to  have  spied  it,  and  proclaimed 
it.     But  he  could  find  nothing." 

31. — [But  that  the  world...so  I  do.]  This  is  a  somewhat  dark  and 
obscure  passage.  The  meaning  is  probably  something  of  this 
kind :  "  1  do  all  I  am  doing  now,  and  go  to  the  cross  volunta- 
rily, though  innocent,  that  the  world  may  have  full  proof  that 
I  love  the  Father  who  sent  Me  to  die,  and  am  willing  to  go 
through  everything  which  He  has  commanded  Me  to  go 
through.  Innocent  as  I  am,  and  without  one  spot  of  sin  that 
Satan  can  lay  to  my  charge,  1  willingly  go  forward  to  the  cross, 
to  show  how  I  love  the  Father's  will,  and  am  determined  to  do 
it  by  dying  for  sinners." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV. 


93 


[Arise,  let  us  go  hence.']  These  words  seem  to  indicate  a 
change  of  position,  and  probably  mean  tliat  oui  Lord  at  tliis 
point  rose  from  tlie  table  where  He  had  been  speaking,  and 
walked  out  towards  the  garden  of  Getbsemane.  The  rest  of 
His  discourse  He  seems  to  have  delivered  in  the  act  of  walking, 
without  a  single  interruption  from  any  of  the  disciples,  until 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  chapter.;  and  then,  at  some  point  un- 
known to  us,  He  probably  paused  and  offered  up  the  prayer  of 
the  seventeenth  chapter. 

This  is  the  view  of  Cyril  and  Augustine,  and  most  commen- 
tators. Yet  Jansenius,  Maldonatus,  Alford,  and  some  others, 
think  that  our  Lord  never  left  the  house,  and  only  rose  from 
table  at  this  point,  and  went  on  with  His  discourse  standing ! 

Lightfoot,  almost  alone,  maintains  the  strange  and  improba- 
ble notion  that  the  place  where  this  discourse  was  delivered 
was  Bethany,  that  the  interval  of  a  week  comes  into  the  narra- 
tive here,  that  at  the  end  of  this  week  the  paschal  supper  and 
the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  took  place,  and  then  came 
the  discourse  of  the  fifteenth  chapter. 

No  commentator  perhaps  can  leave  this  chapter  without 
deeply  feeling  how  little  he  knows  and  understands  of  the  full 
meaning  of  much  of  its  contents.  May  we  not  however  fairly 
reflect  that  one  great  cause  of  the  chapter's  difficulty  is  man's 
entire  inability  to  grasp  the  great  mystery  of  the  union  of  the 
Father,  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  in  the  Trinity  ?  We  are  contin- 
ually handling  matters  which  we  cannot  fully  comprehend, 
and  cannot  therefore  fully  explain,  and  must  be  content  hum- 
bly to  believe. 


JOHN  XV.  1—6. 


1  I  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Fa- 
ther is  the  husbandman. 

2  Every  branch  in  me  tliat  bear- 
eth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away :  and 
every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  he 
purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth 
more  fruit. 

3  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the 
word  which  1  have  spoken  unto 
you. 

4  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As 
the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  it- 
self,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine; 


no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in 
me. 

5  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the 
branches :  He  that  abidetli  in  me, 
and  I  in  him,  the  same  briugeth 
forth  much  fruit:  for  without  me  ye 
can  do  nothing. 

6  If  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is 
cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  with- 
ered ;  and  men  gather  them,  and 
cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are 
burned. 


These  verses,  we  must  carefully  remember,  contaia 
a  parable.  In  interpreting  it  we  must  not  forget  the 
great  rule  which  aj^plies  to  all  Christ's  parables.     The 


94  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

general  lesson  of  each  parable  is  the  main  thing  to  be 
noticed.  The  minor  details  must  not  be  tortured  and 
pressed  to  an  excess,  in  order  to  extract  a  meaning 
from  them.  The  mistakes  into  which  Christians  have 
fallen  by  neglecting  this  rule,  are  neither  few  nor  small. 

We  are  meant  to  learn  first,  from  these  verses,  that 
the  union  between  Christ  and  believers  is  very  close.  He 
is  "  the  Vine,"  and  they  are  "  the  branches." 

The  union  between  the  branch  of  a  vine  and  the 
main  stem,  is  the  closest  that  can  be  conceived.  It  is 
the  whole  secret  of  the  branch's  life,  strength,  vigor, 
beauty,  and  fertility.  Separate  from  the  parent  stem, 
it  has  no  life  of  its  own.  The  sap  and  juice  that  flow 
from  the  stem  are  the  origin  and  maintaining  power  of 
all  its  leaves,  buds,  blossoms,  and  fruit.  Cut  off  from 
the  stem,  it  must  soon  wither  and  die. 

The  union  between  Christ  and  believers  is  just  as 
close,  and  just  as  real.  In  themselves  believers  have  no 
life,  or  strength,  or  spiritual  power.  All  that  they  have 
of  vital  religion  comes  from  Christ.  They  are  what 
they  are,  and  feel  what  they  feel,  and  do  what  they  do, 
because  they  draw  out  of  Jesus  a  continual  supply  of 
grace,  help,  and  ability.  Joined  to  the  Lord  by  faith, 
and  united  in  mysterious  union  with  Him  by  the  Spirit, 
they  stand,  and  walk,  and  continue,  and  run  the  Chris- 
tian race.  But  every  jot  of  good  about  them  is  drawn 
from  their  spiritual  Head,  Jesus  Christ. 

The  thought  before  us  is  both  comfortable  and  in- 
structive. Believers  have  no  cause  to  despair  of  their 
own  salvation,  and  to  think  they  will  never  reach  heav- 
en. Let  them  consider  that  they  are  not  left  to  them- 
selves and  their  own  strength.  Their  root  is  Christ, 
and  all  that  there  is  in  the  root  is  for  the  benefit  of  the 
branches.  Because  He  lives,  they  shall  live  also. 
Worldly  people  have  no  cause  to  wonder  at  the  coutin- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  95 

nance  and  perseverance  of  believers.  Weak  as  they  are 
in  themselves,  their  Root  is  in  heaven,  and  never  dies. 
"  When  I  am  weak,"  said  Paul,  "  then  am  I  strong." 
(2  Cor.  xii.  10.) 

We  are  meant  to  learn,  secondly,  from  these  verses, 
that  there  are  false  Christians  as  well  as  true  ones. 
There  are  "  branches  in  the  vine  "  which  appear  to  be 
joined  to  the  parent  stem,  and  yet  bear  no  fruit.  There 
are  men  and  women  who  appear  to  be  members  of 
Christ,  and  yet  will  prove  finally  to  have  had  no  vital 
union  with  Him. 

There  are  myriads  of  professing  Christians  in  every 
Church  whose  union  with  Christ  is  only  outward  and 
formal.  Some  of  them  are  joined  to  Christ  by  baptism 
and  Church-membership.  Some  of  them  go  even  fur- 
ther than  this,  and  are  regular  communicants  and  loud 
talkers  about  religion.  But  they  all  lack  the  one  thing 
needful.  Notwithstanding  services,  and  sermons,  and 
sacrament,  they  have  no  grace  in  their  hearts,  no  faith, 
no  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  are  not  one 
with  Christ,  and  Christ  in  them.  Their  union  with  Him 
is  only  nominal,  and  not  real.  They  have  "  a  name  to 
live,"  but  in  the  sight  of  God  they  are  dead. 

Christians  of  this  stamp  are  aptly  represented  by 
branches  in  a  vine  which  bear  no  fruit.  Useless  and 
unsightly,  such  branches  are  only  fit  to  be  cut  off  and 
burned.  They  draw  nothing  out  of  the  parent  stem, 
and  make  no  return  for  the  place  they  occupy.  Just  so 
will  it  be  at  the  last  day  with  false  professors  and  nomi- 
nal Christians.  Their  end,  except  they  repent,  will  be 
destruction.  They  will  be  separated  from  the  company 
of  true  believers,  and  cast  out,  as  withered,  useless 
branches,  into  everlasting  fire.  They  will  find  at  last, 
whatever  they  thought  in  this  world,  that  there  is  a  worm 
that  never  dies,  and  a  fire  that  is  not  quenched. 


9g  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

We  are  meant  to  learn,  thirdly,  from  these  verses, 
that  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  the  only  satisfactory 
evide?ice  of  a  man  being  a  true  Ghristiaii.  The  disciple 
that  "  abides  in  Christ,"  like  a  branch  abiding  in  the 
vine,  will  always  bear  fruit. 

He  that  would  know  wliat  the  word  "  fruit "  means, 
need  not  wait  long  for  an  answer.  Repentance  toward 
God,  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  holiness  of 
life  and  conduct,  these  are  what  the  New  Testament 
calls  "  fruit."  These  are  the  distinguishing  marks  of 
the  man  who  is  a  living  branch  of  the  true  \^ine.  Where 
these  things  are  wanting,  it  is  vain  to  talk  of  possessing 
dormant  grace  and  spiritual  life.  Where  there  is  no 
fruit  there  is  no  life.  He  that  lacketh  these  things  is 
"  dead  while  he  liveth." 

True  grace,  we  must  not  forget,  is  never  idle.  It 
never  slumbers  and  never  sleeps.  It  is  a  vain  notion  to 
suppose  that  we  are  living  members  of  Christ,  if  the  ex- 
ample of  Christ  is  the  only  satisfactory  evidence  of 
saving  union  between  Christ  and  our  souls.  Where 
there  is  no  fruit  of  the  Spirit  to  be  seen,  there  is  no  vital 
religion  in  the  heart.  The  Spirit  of  Life  in  Christ 
Jesus  will  always  make  Himself  known  in  the  daily  con- 
duct of  those  in  whom  He  dwells.  The  Master  Himself 
declares,  "Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit." 
(Luke  vi.  44.) 

We  are  meant,  lastly,  to  learn  from  these  verses,  that 
God  will  often  increase  the  holi?iess  of  true  Ghristia7is 
by  His  providential  dealings  with  them.  "  Every 
branch,"  it  is  written,  "  that  beareth  fruit.  He  purgeth 
it,  that  it  may  bear  more  fruit." 

The  meaning  of  this  language  is  clear  and  plain. 
Just  as  the  vine-dresser  prunes  and  cuts  back  the 
branches   of  a   fruitful   vine,   in  order   to   make  them 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  9-7 

more  fruitful,  so  does  God  purify  and  sanctify  believers 
by  the  circumstances  of  life  in  which  He  places  them. 

Trial,  to  speak  plainly,  is  the  instrument  by  which 
our  Father  in  heaven  makes  Christians  more  holy. 
By  trial  He  calls  out  their  passive  graces,  and  proves 
whether  they  can  suffer  His  will  as  well  as  do  it.  By 
trial  He  weans  them  from  the  world,  draws  them  to 
Christ,  drives  them  to  the  Bible  and  prayer,  shows  them 
tiieir  own  hearts,  and  makes  them  humble.  This  is  the 
process  by  which  He  "  purges  "  them,  and  makes  them 
more  fruitful.  The  lives  of  the  saints  in  every  age,  are 
the  best  and  truest  comment  on  the  text.  Never,  hardly, 
do  we  find  an  eminent  saint,  either  in  the  Old  Testament 
or  the  New,  who  was  not  purified  by  suffering,  and,  like 
His  Master,  a  "  man  of  sorrows." 

Let  us  learn  to  be  patient  in  the  days  of  darkness,  if 
we  know  anything  of  vital  union  with  Christ.  Let  us 
remember  the  doctrine  of  the  passage  before  us,  and  not 
murmur  and  complain  because  of  trials.  Our  trials  are 
not  meant  to  do  us  harm,  but  good.  God  chastens  us 
"  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  His  holi- 
ness." (Heb.  xii.  10.)  Fruit  is  the  thing  that  our  Mas- 
ter desires  to  see  in  us,  and  He  will  not  spare  the  pruning- 
knife  if  He  sees  we  need  it.  In  the  last  day  we  shall  see 
that  all  was  well  done. 

Notes.    John  xv.  1 — 6. 

1. — [I am. ..Vine. ..Father. ..husbandman^  In  this  and  the  follow- 
ing chapter,  our  Lord  proceeds  to  give  instruction  rather  than 
consolation.  Having  cheered  and  comforted  the  timid  disciples 
in  the  fourteenth  chapter,  He  now  presses  on  their  attention 
certain  great  truths  which  He  would  have  them  specially  re- 
member when  He  was  gone.  And  He  begins  by  urging  the  ab- 
solute necessity  of  close  union  and  communion  with  Himself, 
by  means  of  the  illustration  of  a  vine  and  its  branches. 

We  must  always  remember  that  the  passage  before  us  is  a 
parable,  and  as  a  parable  must  be  interpreted.     We  must  be 

5 


98  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

careful  not  to  press  each,  sentence  in  it  too  far ;  and,  in  all 
parables,  we  must  look  at  the  great  lesson  which  it  contains, 
rather  than  at  each  clause. — The  old  saying  is  most  true,  that 
no  parable  stands  on  four  legs  ;"  and  in  all  parables  there  are 
parts  which  are  only  the  drapery  of  the  figure,  and  not  the 
figure  itself.  Neglect  of  this  caution  does  much  harm  to  the 
souls  of  Christians,  and  is  the  cause  of  much  crude  and  un- 
sound doctrine. — In  the  passage  before  us  we  must  remember 
that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not  literally  a  vine,  nor  are  be- 
lievers literal  branches,  nor  is  the  Father  literally  a  husband- 
man. We  are  dealing  with  figures  and  pictures,  mercifully 
used  in  order  to  meet  our  weak  capacities  ;  and  we  must  take 
care  we  do  not  draw  doctrinal  conclusions  from  them,  which 
contradict  other  plain  passages  of  Scripture. 

Even  Maldonatus,  the  Romish  commentator,  here  remarks  : 
•'All  the  several  parts  of  a  parable  are  not  always  meant  to  be 
fitted  to  the  thing  signified  by  the  parable.  Many  things  in 
parables  are  said  to  fill  up  or  adorn  the  narrative."  Toletus 
says  just  the  same. 

Burgon  remarks,  "  Let  us,  instead  of  perplexing  ourselves 
with  minor  details,  bear  in  mind  that  in  interpreting  each  of 
our  Lord's  parables,  the  great  purpose  for  which  it  was  de- 
livered is  ever  to  be  borne  in  mind,  if  we  would  understand  it 
rightly." 

Our  Lord's  reason  for  choosing  the  illustration  of  "  a  vine  " 
has  caused  much  speculation.  Some  think  that  He  drew  the 
figure  from  a  vine  trained  over  the  walls  and  windows  of  the 
upper  chamber  which  He  and  His  disciples  were  leaving. — Some 
think  that  He  drew  it  from  the  famous  golden  vine,  which  or- 
namented the  principal  gate  of  the  temple. — Some  think  that 
He  drew  it  from  the  vines  which  He  saw  by  the  wayside  as  He 
walked  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane. — Some  refer  it  to  the 
"  fruit  of  the  vine  "  at  the  Lord's  Supper. — After  all,  these  are 
only  guesses  and  conjectures.  It  was  night  when  our  Lord 
spoke,  and  of  course  nothing  could  be  seen  very  distinctly. 
Nor  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  drew  His  illustra- 
tion from  anything  but  His  own  mind. 

The  expression  "  the  true  "  applied  to  the  vine  is  an  argu- 
ment mudi  used  by  those  who  think  our  Lord  founded  His  par- 
able on  a  vine  under  His  eyes.  But  is  it  not  more  likely  that 
our  Lord  had  in  view  those  places  in  the  Old  Testament  where 
the  Jewish  Church  is  compared  to  a  vine  ?  (See  Psalm  Ixxx. 
8 ;  Jer.  ii.  21  ;  Ezek.  xv.  2  ;  Hosea  x.  L)  It  would  then  mean  : 
"  I,  and  not  the  decaying  Jewish  Church,  am  the  true  source  of 
spiritual  life."  This  to  Jewish  minds  would  be  a  very  useful 
lesson. 

For  the  use  of  the  word  "  true  "  in  a  precisely  similar  way, 
see  John  vi.  82  ;  "  the  true  bread."  It  means  the  true,  original, 
type  vine,  of  which  all  other  vines  are  only  types  and  shadows. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  99 

Liglitfoot  says,  "Hitherto  Israel  had  been  the  vine,  into 
which  every  one  that  would  worship  the  true  God  must  be 
grafted.  But  from  henceforward  they  were  to  be  planted  into 
the  profession  of  Christ." 

The  meaning  of  the  verse  seems  to  be  this : — "  The  relation 
between  you  and  Me  is  that  of  a  vine  and  its  branches.  I  am 
the  true  source  of  all  your  life  and  spiritual  vigor ;  and  you 
are  as  entirely  dependent  on  Me,  as  the  branches  of  the  vine 
are  on  the  parent  stem :  and  there  is  as  close  union  between 
you  and  Me,  as  between  a  vine  and  its  branches.  My  Father 
takes  the  same  tender  interest  in  you  that  tlie  vine-dresser  does 
in  the  branch  of  the  vine  ;  and  is  continually  watching  over 
your  health,  fruitfulness,  and  fertility.  Think  not  for  a  mo- 
ment that  my  Father  is  not  as  deeply  interested  in  your  spirit- 
ual prosperity  as  I  am  myself." 

The  interpretation  adopted  by  Alford  and  many  others,  that 
the  vine  means  "  the  visible  Church,"  of  which  Christ  is  the 
inclusive  Head,  appears  to  me  thoroughly  unsatisfactory. 
Our  Lord  is  speaking  specially  to  eleven  believers,  and  treating 
of  their  relation  to  himself.  To  apply  all  the  language  of  this 
parable  to  so  mixed  and  defective  a  body  as  the  "  visible 
Church,"  seems  to  me  to  lower  and  degrade  the  v/hole  passage. 

2. — ]^Every  branch. ..not  fruit. ..taketh  away.']  Perhaps  no  sentence 
in  the  parable  is  more  perverted,  and  wrested,  and  misapplied 
than  this.  Many  assert  that  it  teaches  that  a  man  may  be  a 
real  true  branch  of  the  vine,  a  member  of  Christ,  and  yet  lose 
all  His  grace,  and  be  finally  cast  away.  In  short,  the  sentence 
is  the  favorite  weapon  of  ail  Arminians,  of  all  who  maintain  an 
inseparable  connection  between  grace  and  baptism,  and  of  all 

•    who  deny  the  perseverance  in  faith  of  believers. 

I  will  not  urge  in  reply  that  this  view  of  the  sentence  cannot 
be  reconciled  with  other  plainer  texts  of  Scripture,  which  are 
not  parts  of  a  parable  like  this ;  and  that  we  should  always 
shrink  from  interpreting  Scripture  so  as  to  make  one  part  con- 
tradict another.  I  prefer  saying  that  the  sentence  before  us 
will  not  bear  the  sense  commonly  put  on  it. 

The  plain  truth  is  that  this  text  is  precisely  that  part  of  the 
parable  which  will  not  admit  of  a  literal  interpretation.  As 
a  matter  of  fact  it  is  not  true  that  the  Father  "  taketh  away  " 
all  unfruitful  branches.  When  does  He  do  it?  When  does 
He  remove  from  the  Church  all  graceless  Christians  ?  On  the 
contrary,  for  1800  years  He  has  allowed  them  to  exist  in  the 
Church,  and  has  not  taken  them  away.  Nor  will  He  take  them 
away  till  the  day  of  judgment.  If  the  expression  "taketh 
away  "  cannot  be  interpreted  literally  we  must  beware  of  inter- 
preting literally  the  expression, "  branch  in  Me."  As  the  one 
phrase  is  figurative,  so  also  is  the  other.  In  short  it  cannot  be 
shown  that  a  "  branch  in  Me  "  must  mean  a  believer  in  Me.  It 
means  nothing  more  than  "  a  professing  member  of  my  Church, 


100  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

a  man  joined  to  the  company  of  my  people,  but  not  joined  to 
me." 

The  true  meaning  of  the  verse  I  believe  to  be  this :  "  My 
Father  deals  with  my  mystical  body  just  as  the  vine-dresser 
deals  with  the  vine  and  its  branches.  He  will  no  more  allow 
any  of  my  members  to  be  fruitless  and  graceless,  than  a  vine- 
dresser will  allow  barren  branches  to  grow  on  the  vine.  My 
Father  will  take  care  that  all  who  are  in  Me  give  proof  of 
Iheir  union  by  their  fruitful  lives  and  conversation.  He  will 
not  tolerate  for  a  moment  such  an  inconsistent  being  as  an 
unfruitful  believer,  if  such  a  being  could  be  found.  In  a  word, 
fruitfulness  is  the  great  test  of  being  one  of  my  disciples  ;  and 
he  that  is  not  fruitful  is  not  a  branch  of  the  true  vine." 

Calvin  remarks,  "  Many  are  supposed  to  be  in  the  vine,  ac- 
cording to  man's  opinion,  who  actually  have  no  root  in  the 
vine." 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  the  Jewish  Church  is  primarily 
meant  here,  as  a  fruitless  branch  compared  to  the  Christian 
Church. 

[And  every  branch. ..purgeth... fruit.]  The  meaniug  of  this 
part  of  the  verse  is  happily  more  easy  than  the  other.  "  Just 
as  a  vine-dresser  prunes  and  cuts  all  healthy  branches  of  a  vine, 
in  order  to  prevent  it  running  to  wood  and  have  it  bear  more 
fruit,  so  does  my  Father  deal  with  all  my  believing  members. 
He  prunes  and  purifies  them  by  affliction  and  trouble,  in  order 
to  make  them  more  fruitful  in  holiness." 

Let  us  remember  that  this  sentence  throws  light  on  many  of 
the  afflictions  and  trials  of  God's  people.  They  are  all  part  of 
that  mysterious  process  by  which  God  the  Father  purifies  and 
sanctifies  Christ's  people.  They  are  the  "  pruning  "  of  the  vine- 
branches,  for  good  and  not  for  harm,  to  increase  their  fruitful- 
ness. All  the  most  eminent  saints  in  every  age  have  been  men 
of  sorrows,  and  often  pruned. 

Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  many  writers  in  all  ages,  remark, 
on  this  verse,  that  the  vine-branch,  which  is  not  sharply  pruned, 
is  peculiarly  liable  to  run  to  wood  and  bear  no  fruit. 

After  all,  in  leaving  this  difficult  verse,  we  must  not  forget 
that  a  man  may  appear  to  us  to  be  a  "  branch  in  Christ,"  and  a 
true  believer,  and  yet  not  be  one  in  the  sight  of  God.  The 
end  of  that  man  will  be  death.  He  will  be  "  taken  away  "  at 
last  to  punishment.  "  Every  one  that  seems  and  appears  to  be 
a  branch  of  the  true  vine,  and  yet  is  not  really  one,  will  be 
lost." — Two  principles  in  any  case  we  must  never  let  go.  One 
principle  is  that  no  one  can  be  a  branch  in  Christ,  and  a  living 
member  of  His  body,  who  does  not  bear  fruit.  Vital  union 
with  Christ  not  evidenced  by  life  is  an  impossibility,  and  a 
blasphemous  idea. — The  other  principle  is  that  no  living 
branch  of  the  true  vine,  no  believer  in  Christ,  will  ever  finally 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  IQjl^ 

perish.     They  that  perish  may  have  looked  like  believers,  but 
they  were  not  believers  in  reality. 

3. — [Now  ye  are  clean...word...unto  you.]  Having  described  the 
relation  between  Himself  and  His  people  generally,  our  Lord 
now  turns  to  His  disciples,  and  shows  them  their  present  posi- 
tion and  immediate  duty.  "  Now  you  are  comparatively 
cleansed  and  purified  by  the  doctrine  which  I  have  tauccht,  and 
you  have  received  and  believed.  But  do  not  be  content  with 
past  attainments.  Attend  to  the  counsel  which  I  am  about  to 
give  you." 

When  our  Lord  calls  His  disciples  "  clean  "  or  "  pure  "  in  this 
place,  we  cannot  doubt  that  He  uses  the  phrase  in  a  compara- 
tive sense.  Compared  to  the  unbelieving  Scribes  and  Phari- 
sees, compared  indeed  with  themselves  before  their  Lord  called 
and  taught  them,  the  disciples  were  a  cleansed  and  purified 
people, — imperfectly  and  very  partially  cleansed  no  doubt,  but 
cleansed. 

We  should  carefully  note  how  our  Lord  speaks  of  His 
"  Word"  as  the  great  instrument  of  cleansing  His  disciples.  It 
is  the  same  mighty  principle  that  is  found  in  Eph.  v.  2G  and  1 
Peter  i.  22.  God's  Word  is  God's  grand  means  of  converting 
and  sanctifying  souls. 

Henry  remarks  here,  "  Those  who  are  justified  by  the  blood, 
and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  are  in  Christ's  account 
clean  already,  notwithstanding  many  spots  and  manifold  imper- 
fections." 

4. — [Abide  in  Me. ...I in  you.]  Now  comes  the  direct  instruction 
which  our  Lord  desired  the  disciples  to  receive  : — "  Abide  in 
Me.  Cling  to  Me.  Stick  fast  to  Me.  Live  the  life  of  close 
and  intimate  communion  with  Me.  Get  nearer  and  nearer  to 
Me.  Roll  every  burden  on  Me.  Cast  your  whole  weight  on 
Me.  Never  let  go  your  hold  on  Me  for  a  moment.  Be  as  it 
were  rooted  and  planted  in  Me.  Do  this,  and  I  will  never  fail 
you.     I  will  ever  abide  in  you." 

This  word  "  abide,"  or  "  remain,"  is  used  no  less  than  ten 
times  in  the  first  eleven  verses  of  this  chapter.  It  implies  a 
constant  remaining  or  continuing  in  one  spot  or  place.  A  true 
Christian  must  be  always  "  in  Christ,"  as  a  man  dwelling  al- 
ways inside  the  walls  of  a  fortified  city. 

[As  the  branch.. .abide  in  Me.]  Here  our  Lord  returns  once 
more  to  the  figure  of  the  parable : — "  Just  as  the  branch  of  the 
vine  cannot  bear  fruit  separately  and  of  itself,  and  must  keep 
up  living  union  with  the  parent  stem,  and  out  of  it  draw  life 
and  strength,  just  so  you  cannot  bear  Christian  fruit  and  walk 
in  Christian  ways,  and  live  a  Christian  life,  except  you  keep  up 
constant  union  and  communion  with  Me." 

5. — [1  am...  Vine...ye...hranches.']    Once  more  our  Lord  repeats  the 


102  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

leading  idea  of  the  parable,  in  order  to  impress  tlie  lesson  He 
is  teacliing  on  the  disciples'  minds  : — "  I  repeat  the  assertion  I 
made.  The  relation  between  you  and  Me  must  be  as  close  and 
intimate  as  that  between  a  vine  and  its  branches." 

[He  that  abideth...much  fruity  Here  our  Lord  gives  encour- 
agement to  the  disciples  to  keep  up  the  habit  of  closest  union 
with  Him.  This  is  the  secret  of  bearing  "  much  fruit,"  and  be- 
ing an  eminently  holy  and  useful  Christian.  The  experience 
of  every  age  of  the  Church  proves  the  truth  of  this  saying. 
The  greatest  saints  have  always  lived  nearest  to  Christ. 

Do  we  not  see  here  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the  degrees 
of  f  ruitf  ulness  to  which  Christians  attain  ?  Is  there  not  a  tacit 
distinction  here  between  "  fruit  "  and  "  much  fruit  "  ? 

[For  icUhout  Me. ..do  nothing.']  The  marginal  reading  gives 
our  Lord's  meaning  more  completely :  "  Severed  from  Me,  sep- 
arate from  Me,  you  have  no  strength,  and  can  do  nothing. 
You  are  as  lifeless  as  a  branch  cut  off  from  the  parent  stem." 

We  must  always  take  care  that  we  do  not  misapply  and  mis- 
interpret this  text.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  hear 
some  ignorant  Christians  quoting  it  partially,  as  an  excuse  for 
indolence,  and  neglect  of  means  of  grace.  "  Yo-u  know  we  can 
do  nothing,"  is  the  cry  of  such  people.— This  is  dragging  out 
of  the  text  a  lesson  it  was  never  meant  to  teach.  He  that 
spoke  these  words  to  His  eleven  chosen  Apostles,  is  the  same 
Lord  who  said  to  all  men  who  would  be  saved, — "  Strive  to  en- 
ter in  ;  " — "  Labor  for  the  meat  which  endureth  to  everlasting 
life  ; " — "  Repent  and  believe." 

6. — [If  a  man  abide  not. ..turned^  The  consequence  of  not  abid- 
ing in  Christ,  of  refusing  to  live  the  life  of  faith  in  Christ,  are 
here  described  under  a  terrible  figure.  The  end  of  such  false 
professors  will  be  like  the  end  of  fruitless  and  dead  branches 
of  a  vine.  Sooner  or  later  they  are  cast  out  of  the  vineyard  as 
■withered,  useless  things,  and  gathered  as  firewood  to  be  burn- 
ed. Such  will  be  the  last  end  of  professing  Christians  who 
turn  their  backs  on  Jesus,  and  bear  no  fruit  to  God's  glory. 
They  will  finally  come  to  the  fire  that  is  never  quenched  in 
hell. 

These  are  awful  words.  They  seem,  however,  to  apply  spe- 
cially to  backsliders  and  apostates,  like  Judas  Iscariot.  There 
must  be  about  a  man  some  appearance  of  professed  faith  in 
Christ,  before  he  can  come  to  the  state  described  here.  Doubt- 
less there  are  those  Avho  seem  to  depart  from  grace,  and  to  go 
back  from  union  with  Christ ;  but  we  need  not  doubt  in  such 
cases  that  the  grace  was  not  real,  but  seeming,  and  the  union 
was  not  true,  but  fictitious.  Once  more  we  must  remember 
that  we  are  reading  a  parable. 

That  there  is  a  hell,  and  that  God  can  punish,  seems  plainly 
taught  in  this  verse. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  IQ^ 

Tt  is  notewortliy  that  tlie  Greek  would  be  more  literally  ren- 
dered, "  He  lias  been  cast  out,"  and  "  Has  been  withered,"  in 
the  past  tense.  Alford  thinks  that  this  is  because  the  whole 
is  spoken  as  if  the  great  day  of  judgment  were  come. — Also  the 
word  "  men  "  is  supplied  in  our  translation.  Literally  it  would 
be,  "  They  gather,"  "  They  cast,"  without  referring  to  any  per 
son  in  particular.  This  is  a  Hebraism  which  will  be  found  in 
Matt.  V.  15 ;  Luke  xvi.  9  ;  Acts  vii.  6. 

After  all,  the  final,  miserable  ruin  and  punishment  of  false 
professors,  is  the  great  lesson  which  the  verse  teaches.  Abid- 
ing in  Christ  leads  to  fruitfulness  in  this  life  and  everlasting 
happiness  in  the  life  to  come.  Departure  from  Christ  leads  to 
the  everlasting  fire  of  hell. 


JOHN  XV.  7—11. 


10  If  ye  keep  my  commandments, 
ye  shall  abide  in  my  love ;  even  as 
I  have  kept  my  Father's  command- 
ments, and  abide  in  his  love. 


11  These    things  have  I  spoken 
ny    joy  might 
id   that   yoi 


unto  you,  that  my   joy  might  re- 
main in  you, 
might  be  full. 


7  If  yt  abide  in  me,  and  ray 
words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask 
what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you. 

8  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified, 
that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shah  ye 
be  my  disciples. 

9  As  the  Father  hath  loved  me, 
BO  have  I  loved  you  :  continue  ye  in 
my  love. 

There  is  a  wide  difference  between  believers  and 
believers.  In  some  things  they  are  all  alike.  All  feel 
their  sins ;  all  trust  in  Christ ;  all  repent  and  strive  to 
be  holy.  All  have  grace,  and  faith,  and  new  hearts. 
But  they  differ  widely  in  the  degree  of  their  attain- 
ments. Some  are  far  happier  and  holier  Christians 
than  others,  and  have  far  more  influence  on  the  world. 

Now  what  are  the  inducements  which  the  Lord  Je- 
sus holds  out  to  His  people,  to  make  them  aim  at  emi- 
nent holiness  ?  This  is  a  question  which  ought  to  be 
deeply  interesting  to  every  pious  mind.  Who  would 
not  like  to  be  a  singularly  useful  and  happy  servant  of 
Christ  ?  The  passage  before  us  throws  light  on  the  sub- 
ject in  three  ways. 

In  the  first  place,  our  Lord  declares,  "  If  ye  abide  in 
Me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye 


104:  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  This  is  a  distinct 
promise  of  power  and  success  in  prayer.  And  what  does 
it  turn  upon  ?  We  must  "  abide  in  Christ,"  and  Christ's 
"  words  must  abide  in  us." 

To  abide  in  Christ  means  to  keep  up  a  habit  of  con- 
stant close  communion  with  Him, — to  be  always  leaning 
on  Him,  resting  on  Him,  pouring  out  our  hearts  to  Him, 
and  using  Him  as  our  Fountain  of  life  and  strength,  as 
our  chief  Companion  and  best  Friend. — To  have  His 
words  abiding  in  us,  is  to  keep  His  sayings  and  precepts 
continually  before  our  memories  and  minds,  and  to 
make  them  the  guide  of  our  actions  and  the  rule  of  our 
daily  conduct  and  behavior. 

Christians  of  this  stamp,  we  are  told,  shall  not  pray 
in  vain.  Whatever  they  ask  they  shall  obtain,  so  long 
as  they  ask  things  according  to  God's  mind.  No  work 
shall  be  found  too  hard,  and  no  difficulty  insurmount- 
able. Asking  they  shall  receive,  and  seeking  they  shall 
find.  Such  men  were  Martin  Luther,  the  German  Re- 
former, and  our  own  martyr.  Bishop  Latimer.  Such  a 
man  was  John  Knox,  of  whom  Queen  Mary  said,  that 
she  feared  his  prayers  more  than  an  army  of  twenty 
thousand  men.  It  is  written  in  a  certain  place,  "  The 
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
much."     (James  v.  16.) 

Now,  why  is  there  so  little  power  of  prayer  like  this 
in  our  own  time?  Simply  because  there  is  so  little 
close  communion  with  Christ,  and  so  little  strict  con- 
formity to  His  will.  Men  do  not  "  abide  in  Christ," 
and  therefore  pray  in  vain.  Christ's  words  do  not  abide 
ill  them,  as  their  standard  of  practice,  and  therefore 
their  prayers  seem  not  to  be  heard.  They  ask  and  re- 
ceive not,  because  they  ask  amiss.  Let  this  lesson  sink 
down  into  our  hearts.  He  that  would  have  answers  to 
his   prayers,   must   carefully   remember   Christ's  direc- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV. 


105 


tioiis.     We  must  keep  up  intimate  friendship  with  the 
great  Advocate  in  heaven,  if  our  petitions  are  to  prosper. 

In  the  second  place,  our  Lord  declares,  "Herein  is  my 
Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be 
my  disciples."  The  meaning  of  this  promise  seems  to 
be,  tha.t  fruitfulness  in  Christian  practice  will  not  only 
bring  glory  to  God,  hut  will  supply  the  best  evidence  to 
our  own  hearts  that  we  are  real  disciples  of  Christ. 

Assurance  of  our  own  interest  in  Christ,  and  our  con- 
sequent eternal  safety,  is  one  of  the  highest  privileges 
in  religion.  To  be  always  doubting  and  fearing  is  mis- 
erable work.  Nothing  is  worse  than  suspense  in  any 
matter  of  importance,  and  above  all  in  the  matter  of  our 
souls.  He  that  would  know  one  of  the  best  receipts  for 
obtaining  assurance,  should  diligently  study  Christ's 
words  now  before  us.  Let  him  strive  to  bear  much  fruit 
in  his  life,  his  habits,  his  temper,  his  words,  and  his 
works.  So  doing  he  shall  feel  the  "witness  of  the 
Spirit "  in  his  heart,  and  give  abundant  proof  that  he  is 
a  living  branch  of  the  true  Vine.  He  shall  find  inward 
evidence  in  his  own  soul  that  he  is  a  child  of  God,  and 
shall  supply  the  world  with  outward  evidence  that  can- 
not be  disputed.  He  shall  leave  no  room  for  doubt  that 
he  is  a  disciple. 

Would  we  know  why  so  many  professing  Christians 
have  little  comfort  in  their  religion,  and  go  fearing  an<i 
doubting  along  the  road  to  heaven  ?  The  question  re- 
ceives a  solution  in  the  saying  of  our  Lord  we  are  now 
considering.  Men  are  content  with  a  little  Christianity, 
and  a  little  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  do  not  labor  to  be 
holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation.  They  must  not 
wonder  if  they  enjoy  little  peace,  feel  little  hope,  and 
leave  behind  them  little  evidence.  The  fault  lies  with 
themselves.     God  has  linked  together  holiness  and  hap- 

5* 


IQQ  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

piness  ;  and  what  God  has  joined  together  we  must  not 
think  to  put  asunder. 

In  the  third  place,  our  Lord  declares,  "If  ye  keep  my 
commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love."  The  mean- 
ing of  this  promise  is  near  akin  to  that  of  the  preceding 
one.  The  man  who  makes  conscience  of  diligently/  ob- 
serving Chrisfs  precepts,  is  the  man  who  shall  continual' 
ly  enjoy  a  sense  of  Christ'' s  love  in  his  soul. 

Of  course  we  must  not  misunderstand  our  Lord's 
words  when  He  speaks  of  "keeping  His  command- 
ments." There  is  a  sense  in  which  no  one  can  keep 
them.  Our  best  works  are  imperfect  and  defective,  and 
when  we  have  done  our  best  we  may  well  cry,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Yet  we  must  not  run  into  the 
other  extreme,  and  give  way  to  the  lazy  idea  that  we 
can  do  nothing  at  all.  By  the  grace  of  God  we  may 
make  Christ's  laws  our  rule  of  life,  and  show  daily  that 
we  desire  to  please  Him.  So  doing,  our  gracious  Master 
will  give  us  a  constant  sense  of  His  favor,  and  make  us 
feel  His  face  smiling  on  us,  like  the  sun  shining  on  a 
fine  day.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  Him,  and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant."  (Ps. 
XXV.  14.) 

Lessons  like  these  may  be  legal  to  some,  and  bring 
down  much  blame  on  those  who  advocate  them.  Such 
is  the  narrow-mindedness  of  human  nature,  that  few  can 
look  on  more  than  one  side  of  truth  !  Let  the  servant 
of  Christ  call  no  man  his  master.  Let  him  hold  on  his 
way,  and  never  be  ashamed  of  diligence,  fruitfulness, 
and  jealous  watchfulness,  in  his  obedience  to  Christ's 
commands.  These  things  are  perfectly  consistent  with 
salvation  by  grace  and  justification  by  faith,  whatever 
any  one  may  say  to  the  contrary. 

Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter. 
The  Christian  who  is  careful  over  his  words  and  tem- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  iQ^j 

pers  and  works,  will  generally  be  the  most  happy  Chris- 
tian. *'  Joy  and  peace  in  believing  "  will  never  accom- 
pany an  inconsistent  life.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  our 
Lord  concludes  the  passage  :  "These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you,  that  your  joy  might  be  full." 

Notes.    John  v.  7-11. 

7. — [If  ye  abide  in  Me...done  unto  you.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
continues  to  encourage  the  disciples  to  "abide  in  Him,"  by- 
holding  up  to  them  a  gracious  promise.  Abiding  in  Christ, 
their  prayers  will  obtain  signal  and  special  replies.  They  shall 
ask  what  they  will,  and  it  sball  be  done  for  them. 

The  doctrine  here  laid  down  and  implied  is  a  very  remarka- 
ble one.  There  are  some  Christians  whose  prayers  are  more 
powerful  and  effectual  than  those  of  others.  The  nearer  a  man 
lives  to  Christ,  and  the  closer  his  communion  with  Him,  the 
more  effectual  will  his  prayers  be.  The  truth  of  the  doctrine 
is  so  self-evident  and  reasonable,  that  no  one  on  reflection  can 
deny  it.  He  that  lives  nearest  to  Christ  will  always  be  the 
man  that  feels  most,  and  prays  most  earnestly,  and  fervently, 
and  heartily.  Common  sense  shows  that  such  prayers  are 
most  likely  to  get  answers.  Many  believers  get  little  from 
God,  because  they  ask  little,  or  ask  amiss.  The  holiest  saints 
are  the  most  earnest  in  prayer,  and  they  consequently  get 
the  most. 

We  should  note  that  our  Lord  says  not  only  "  if  ye  abide  in 
Me,"  but  adds,  "and  my  words  abide  in  you."  This  means, 
"  If  my  doctrine  and  teaching  abide  fresh  in  your  memories, 
and  is  continually  influencing  your  lives."  Our  Lord  guards  us 
against  supposing  that  a  mere  indolent  abiding  in  Him,  with  a 
dreamy,  mystical  kind  of  religion,  is  what  He  means.  His 
words  must  be  burning  like  fire  within  us,  and  constantly  actu- 
ating our  characters  and  lives. 

When  He  says  "  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,"  we  must  of 
course  understand  that  His  promise  only  includes  things  accord- 
ing to  God's  mind  and  for  God's  glory.  Paul  asked  for  the 
"  thorn  in  the  flesh  "  to  depart ;  but  his  prayer  was  not  granted. 
We  need  not,  however,  hesitate  to  believe  that  there  is  a  special 
and  peculiar  power  in  the  prayers  of  eminent  saints.  "  The 
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much." 
(James  v.  16.)  The  prayers  of  Luther,  Latimer,  Knox,  Welsh, 
Baxter,  Herbert,  Romaine,  and  other  great  saints,  are  specially 
noted  by  their  contemporaries  as  possessing  power. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  it  shall  be  done,"  means  literally 
"  it  shall  come  to  pass." 


108  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

8. — {Herein.. .Father  glorified...disciples.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
supplies  two  more  reasons  wliy  His  disciples  should  abide  in 
Him,  and  strive  to  bring  forth  much  fruit  of  holiness.  One 
reason  is,  that  it  will  glorify  His  Father  in  heaven.  Their  good 
works  will  recommend  their  religion,  and  make  the  world  honor 
the  God  who  has  such  servants.  The  other  reason  is,  that  it 
will  give  evidence  of  their  being  real,  true,  genuine  disciples. 
Their  lives  will  prove  plainly  that  they  are  followers  of  Christ. 

The  expression  "  so  shall  ye  be,"  is  literally  "  all  ye  shall  be." 
It  must  mean,  "  Ye  shall  be  known  and  recognized  by  all  men 
as  my  disciples,  and  shall  feel  in  your  own  hearts  the  witness 
of  the  Spirit  that  ye  are  such." 

Poole  remarks,  "  In  Scripture,  being  often  signifieth  appear- 
ing," as  in  John  viii.  81,  and  Romans  iii.  4. 

9L — [As...Father... loved...!.. .you.]  This  remarkable  statement 
seems  intended  to  show  the  depth  and  magnitude  of  our  Lord's 
love  to  His  people.  We  can  form  no  adequate  idea  of  the  love 
of  the  Father  towards  the  Son.  The  feeling  of  one  eternal 
Person  in  the  Trinity  to  another  Person  is  a  high  thing  into 
which  we  cannot  enter.  Yet  even  such  is  the  love  of  C'hrist  to- 
wards those  who  believe  in  Him, — a  vast,  wide,  deep,  unmeas- 
urable  love  that  passeth  knowledge,  and  can  never  be  fully 
comprehended  by  man. 

[Continue  ye  in  my  love.]  This  must  mean, — "  Continue  rest- 
ing your  souls  on  this  love  of  mine  towards  you,  and  live  un- 
der a  constant  sense  of  it.  Remain  clinging  to  it,  as  within  a 
fortress  and  place  of  refuge."  Christ's  free,  and  continued, 
and  mighty  love  should  be  the  home  and  abiding  place  of  a  be- 
liever's soul. 

The  word  rendered  "  continue  "  is  the  same  that  is  rendered 
"  abide  "  in  verse  4,  and  ought  to  have  been  the  same  here. 

10. — [If. ..keep  commandments. ..love.]  Once  more  our  Lord  returns 
to  the  subject  of  practical  obedience  to  His  laws,  as  the  grand 
secret  of  a  happy  and  comfortable  religion.  "  If  you  keep  my 
commandments,  you  will  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  continued 
sense  of  my  love  to  your  souls,  and  feel  inwardly  that  you  are 
my  saved  people."  The  doctrine  here  laid  down  is  one  of  the 
great  principles  of  experimental  Christianity.  Holy  living  and 
assurance  of  an  interest  in  Christ  are  closely  connected.  Our 
own  happiness  and  enjoyment  of  religion  are  inseparably  bound 
up  with  our  daily  practical  living.  He  that  expects  assurance, 
while  he  neglects  Christ's  commandments,  and  gives  way  to 
daily  inconsistencies  of  temper  and  conduct,  is  expecting  what 
he  will  never  get.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  know  Him,  if  we 
keep  His  commandments."  (1  John  ii.  3.)  Let  those  who  will 
call  such  doctrine  "  legal."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  will  always 
be  found  true. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV. 


109 


[Even  as  I.. .Ms  love.]  The  statement  of  this  sentence  ig  one 
of  those  which  man  can  never  fully  grasp.  That  Christ  kept 
the  Father's  commandments  perfectly,  while  we  can  only  keep 
His  imperfectly,  and  that  He  abides  in  the  Father's  love  con- 
tinually and  without  defect,  while  our  abiding  in  His  love  is  at 
least  fitful  and  uncertain,  are  truths  which  no  intelligent  Chris- 
tian can  dispute.  In  this,  as  in  everything  else,  our  Lord's  ex- 
ample and  pattern  are  propounded  to  us  as  things  which  we 
must  strive  to  follow,  though  at  a  long  distance,  and  not  always 
with  sensible  comfort.  But  we  may  remember  that,  even  when 
Jesus  said  on  the  cross, — "  My  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
Me  ?  " — He  was  still  abiding  in  the  Father's  love. 

11. — [These  things... might  be  full.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  gives 
two  reasons  why  all  the  things  in  His  discourses  were  addressed 
to  the  disciples.  One  was  that  "  his  joy  might  abide  "  or  re- 
main "  in  them," — that  they  might  have  a  comfortable  share  of 
their  Master's  joy  in  their  salvation  and  redemption.  The  other 
was  that  their  own  individual  joy  might  be  filled  up  and  per- 
fected. Two  joys  are  named,  we  must  observe.  One  is  that 
special  joy  mentioned  in  Hebrews  xii.  2,  which  our  Lord  feels 
in  the  redemption  of  His  people.  The  other  is  that  joy  which 
His  people  feel  from  a  sense  of  Christ's  love  to  their  souls. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  we  should  note,  that  the  joy  of  believers 
is  a  thing  that  admits  of  degrees  and  increase. 

Cyril,  on  this  verse,  remarks  that  it  is  the  mark  of  prosperous 
Christians  to  rejoice  in  those  things  in  which  Christ  rejoices  ; 
and  that  this  is  the  special  object  of  the  phrase,  "my  joy," — 
"  that  ye  may  continually  rejoice  in  those  things  in  which  I  re- 
joice, and  so  your  own  inward  happiness  may  be  increased." 


JOHN  XV.  12—16. 


12  This  is  my  commandment, 
That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved  you. 

13  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than 
this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  friends. 

14  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do 
whatsoever  I  command  you. 

15  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  ser- 
vants ;  for  the  servant  knoweth  not 
what  his  Lord  doeth:  but  I  have 


called  you  friends;  for  all  things 
that  I  have  heard  of  my  Father  I 
have  made  known  unto  you. 

16  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  1 
have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you, 
that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth 
fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  re- 
main :  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
of  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  may 
give  it  you. 


Three  weighty  points  demand  our  attention  in  this 
passage.  On  each  of  these  the  language  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  full  of  striking  instruction. 


110  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

We  should  observe  first,  how  our  Lord  speaks  of 
the  grace  of  brotherly  love. 

He  returns  to  it  a  second  time,  though  He  has  already 
spoken  of  it  in  the  former  part  of  His  discourse.  He 
would  have  us  know  that  we  can  never  think  too  highly 
of  love,  attach  too  much  weight  to  it,  labor  too  much  to 
practice  it.  Truths  which  our  Master  thinks  it  needful 
to  enforce  on  us  by  repetition,  must  needs  be  of  first- 
class  importance. 

He  commands  us  to  love  one  another.  "  This  is  my 
commandment."  It  is  a  positive  duty  laid  on  our  con- 
sciences to  practice  this  grace.  We  have  no  more  right 
to  neglect  it  than  any  of  the  ten  precepts  given  on  Mount 
Sinai. 

He  supplies  the  highest  standard  of  love  :  "  Love  one 
another  as  I  have  loved  you."  No  lower  measure  must 
content  us.  The  weakest,  the  lowest,  the  most  ignorant, 
the  most  defective  disciple,  is  not  to  be  despised.  All 
are  to  be  loved  with  an  active,  self-denying,  self-sacri- 
ficing love.  He  that  cannot  do  this,  or  will  not  try  to 
do  it,  is  disobeying  the  command  of  his  Master. 

A  precept  like  this  should  stir  up  in  us  great  search- 
ings  of  heart.  It  condemns  the  selfish,  ill-natured, 
jealous,  ill-tempered  spirit  of  many  professing  Chris- 
tians, with  a  sweeping  condemnation.  Sound  views  of 
doctrine,  and  knowledge  of  controversy,  will  avail  us 
nothing  at  last,  if  we  have  known  nothing  of  love. 
Without  charity  we  may  pass  muster  very  well  as 
Churchmen.  But  without  charity  we  are  no  better, 
says  St.  Paul,  than  "sounding  brass  and  tinkling 
cymbal."  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1.)  Where  there  is  no  Christ- 
like love,  there  is  no  grace,  no  work  of  the  Spirit,  and 
no  reality  in  our  religion.  Blessed  are  they  that  do  not 
forget   Christ's   commandment!     They   arfe   those  who 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  Ill 

shall  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  enter  the  celestial 
city.     The  unloving  Christian  is  unmeet  for  heaven. 

We  should  observe,  secondly,  how  our  Lord  speaks 
of  the  relation  between  Himself  and  true  believers.  He 
says,  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants  ....  but  I 
have  called  you  friends." 

This  is  indeed  a  glorious  privilege.  To  know  (Jhrist, 
serve  Christ,  follow  Christ,  obey  Christ,  work  in  Christ's 
vineyard,  fight  Christ's  battles,  all  this  is  no  small  mat- 
ter. But  for  sinful  men  and  women  like  ourselves  to  be 
called  "  friends  of  Christ,"  is  something  that  our  weak 
minds  can  hardly  grasp  and  take  in.  The  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords  not  only  pities  and  saves  all  them  that 
believe  in  Him,  but  actually  calls  them  His  *'  friends." 
We  need  not  wonder,  in  the  face  of  such  language  as 
this,  that  St.  Paul  should  say,  the  "  love  of  Christ  passeth 
knowledge."     (Ephes.  iii.  19.) 

Let  the  expression  before  us  encourage  Christians  to 
deal  familiarly  with  Christ  in  prayer.  Why  should  we 
be  afraid  to  pour  out  all  our  hearts,  and  unbosom  all 
our  secrets,  in  speaking  to  one  who  calls  us  His 
*'  friends "  ?  Let  it  cheer  us  in  all  the  troubles  and 
sorrows  of  life,  and  increase  our  confidence  in  our  Lord. 
"  He  that  hath  friends,"  says  Solomon,  "  will  show  him- 
self friendly."  (Prov.  xviii.  24.)  Certainly  our  great 
Master  in  heaven  will  never  forsake  His  "friends." 
Poor  and  unworthy  as  we  are,  He  will  not  cast  us  oflT, 
but  will  stand  by  us  and  keep  us  to  the  end.  David 
never  forgot  Jonathan,  and  the  Son  of  David  will  never 
forget  His  people.  None  so  rich,  so  strong,  so  indepen- 
dent, so  well  off,  so  thoroughly  provided  for,  as  the  man 
of  whom  Christ  says,  "  This  is  my  friend  !  " 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  hoio  our  Lord  speaks  of 
the  doctrine  of  election.  He  says,  "  Ye  have  not  chosen 
Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  ....  that  ye  should  go  and 


112  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

bring  forth  fruit."  The  choosing  here  mentioned  is  evi- 
dently twofold.  It  includes  not  only  the  election  to  the 
Apostolic  office,  which  was  peculiar  to  the  eleven,  but 
the  election  to  eternal  life,  which  is  the  privilege  of  all 
believers.  To  this  last  "  choosing,"  as  it  specially  con- 
cerns ourselves,  we  may  profitably  direct  our  attention. 

Election  to  eternal  life,  is  a  truth  of  Scripture  which 
we  must  receive  humbly,  and  believe  implicitly.  Why 
the  Lord  Jesus  calls  some  and  does  not  call  others, 
quickens  whom  He  will,  and  leaves  others  alone  in  their 
sins,  these  are  deep  things  which  we  cannot  explain. 
Let  it  suffice  us  to  know  that  it  is  a  fact.  God  must 
begin  the  work  of  grace  in  a  man's  heart,  or  else  a  man 
will  never  be  saved.  Christ  must  first  choose  us  and 
call  us  by  His  Spirit,  or  else  we  shall  never  choose  Christ. 
Beyond  doubt,  if  not  saved,  we  shall  have  none  to  blame 
but  ourselves.  But  if  saved,  we  shall  certainly  trace  up 
the  beginning  of  our  salvation,  to  the  choosing  grace  of 
Christ.  Our  song  to  all  eternity  will  be  that  which  fell 
from  the  lips  of  Jonah  :  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord." 
(Jonah  ii.  9.) 

Election  is  always  to  sanctification.  Those  whom 
Christ  chooses  out  of  mankind,  He  chooses  not  only 
that  they  may  be  saved,  bat  that  they  may  bear  fruit, 
and  fruit  that  can  be  seen.  All  other  election  beside 
this  is  a  mere  vain  delusion,  and  a  miserable  invention 
of  man.  It  was  the  faith  and  hope  and  love  of  the 
Thessalonians,  which  made  St.  Paul  say,  *'  I  know  your 
election  of  God."  (1  Thess.  i.  4.)  Where  there  is  no 
visible  fruit  of  sanctification,  we  may  be  sure  there  is  no 
election. 

Armed  with  such  principles  as  these,  we  have  no 
cause  to  be  afraid  of  the  doctrine  of  election.  Like  any 
other  truth  of  the  Gospel,  it  is  liable  to  be  abused  and 
perverted.     But  to  a  pious  mind,  as  the  seventeenth  Ar- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  ■[]^3 

tide  of  the  Church  of  England  truly  says,  it  is  a  doc- 
trine '*full  of  sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable  com- 
fort." 

Notes.    John  xv.    12 — 16. 

12. — [This. ..commandment...iove... loved  you.]  In  this  verse  our 
Lord  returns  to  the  old  lesson  which  He  has  taught  before  :  the 
great  duty  of  love  towards  other  Christians.  He  backs  the 
command  by  His  own  example.  Nothing  less  than  His  match- 
less love  towards  sinners  should  be  the  measure  and  standard 
of  love  to  one  another. 

The  frequent  repetition  of  this  command  teaches  the  vast 
importance  of  Christian  charity,  and  the  great  rarity  of  it.  How 
any  one  can  pretend  to  Christian  hope  who  is  ignorant  of  Chris- 
tian love,  it  is  hard  to  understand.  He  that  supposes  he  is  right 
in  the  sight  of  God,  because  his  doctrinal  views  are  correct, 
while  he  is  unloving  in  his  temper,  and  sharp,  cross,  snappish, 
and  ill-natured  in  the  use  of  his  tongue,  exhibits  wretched 
ignorance  of  the  first  principles  of  Christ's  Gospel.  The  cross- 
ness, spitefulness,  jealousy,  maliciousness,  and  general  disa- 
greeableness  of  many  high  professors  of  "  sound  doctrine,"  are 
a  positive  scandal  to  Christianity.  Where  there  is  little  love 
there  can  be  little  grace. 

13. — [Greater  love.. .for  his  friends.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  teaches 
what  should  be  the  measure  and  degree  of  the  love  which 
Christians  should  have  to  one  another.  It  should  be  a  self- 
sacrificing  love,  even  to  death,  as  His  was.  He  proved  the 
greatness  of  His  love  by  dying  for  His  friends,  and  even  for  His 
enemies.  (Rom.  v.  6 — 8.)  It  would  be  impossible  for  love  to 
go  further.  There  is  no  greater  love  than  willingness  to  lay 
down  life  for  those  we  love.  Christ  did  this,  and  Christians 
should  be  willing  to  do  the  same. 

Let  us  note  here  that  our  Lord  clearly  speaks  of  His  own 
death  as  a  sacrificial  and  propitiatory  death.  Even  His  friends 
need  a  substitute  to  die  for  them. 

14. — [  Ye  are  my  friends...command  you.]  This  verse  seems  close- 
ly connected  with  the  preceding  one.  "  You  are  the  friends  for 
whom  I  lay  down  my  life,  if  you  do  whatever  things  I  com- 
mand you."  We  are  not  to  dream  that  we  are  Christ's  friends, 
if  we  do  not  habitually  practice  His  commands.  Very  striking 
is  it  to  observe  how  frequently  our  Lord  returns  to  this  great 
principle,  that  obedience  is  the  great  test  of  vital  Christianity, 
and  doing  the  real  mark  of  saving  faith.  Men  v/lio  talk  of  be- 
ing "  the  Lord's  people,"  while  they  live  in  sin  and  neglect 
Christ's  plain  commands,  are  in  the  broad  way  that  leads  to 
destruction. 


114:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

15. — [Henceforth  1  call  you  not  servants,  c&c]  Having  used  tlie 
word  "  friends,"  our  Lord  tells  His  disciples  that  He  has  used 
that  word  purposely  to  cheer  and  encourage  them.  "  Observe 
that  I  call  you  friends.  I  do  so  intentionally.  I  no  longer  call 
you  servants  ;  because  the  servant  from  his  position  knows  not 
all  his  master's  mind,  and  is  not  in  his  confidence.  But  to  you 
I  have  revealed  all  the  truths  which  my  Father  sent  me  to 
teach  the  world,  and  have  kept  nothing  back.  I  may  therefore 
justly  call  you  friends." 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  having  made  known  all  things  " 
to  the  disciples,  we  must  reasonably  suppose  that  He  means  all 
things  needful  to  their  spiritual  good,  and  all  things  that  they 
were  able  to  bear. 

The  high  privilege  of  a  believer  is  strikingly  taught  here. 
He  is  a  friend  of  Christ,  as  well  as  a  child  of  God.  No  one  need 
ever  say  I  have  no  "  friend  "  to  turn  to,  so  long  as  Christ  is  in 
heaven.  Oiice  only  before  this  place  does  Christ  call  the  disci- 
ples "  friends."    (Luke  xii.  4.) 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Abraham  is  the  only  person  in  the  Old 
Testament  who  is  called  "  the  friend  of  God  "  (Isa.  xli.  8,)  and 
of  him  the  Lord  says,  "  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing 
which  I  do  ?  "     (Gen.  xviii.  17.) 

16. — [  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  etc.,  etc.]  The  connecting  link  be- 
tween this  verse  and  the  passage  preceding  it  is  not  very  clear. 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  it  refers  to  the  commandment 
just  laid  down,  to  love  one  another.  "  I  may  fairly  lay  down 
laws  and  rules  for  your  conduct,  because  I  first  chose  and 
called  you  to.  be  members  of  my  church." 

I  much  prefer  thinking  that  our  Lord's  object  is  to  exalt 
the  privilege  of  discipleship  in  the  eyes  of  the  eleven.  "  Re- 
member, when  I  call  you  friends,  that  I  called  you  into  the 
number  of  my  people,  and  chose  you  before  you  chose  Me. 
See  then  how  great  and  free  and  deep  is  my  love  to  you." 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  choosing  "  in  this  verse,  I  think 
that  He  means  two  things  :  viz.,  His  choice  of  the  eleven  to  be 
His  apostles,  and  their  eternal  election  to  salvation.  There 
seems  to  be  a  peculiar  f  alness  in  the  phrase.  The  choice  of  the 
believer  to  eternal  life  is  not  the  whole  idea  that  our  Lord 
means  to  convey.  True  as  that  glorious  doctrine  is,  it  is  not 
the  whole  doctrine  of  this  verse.  The  "  choosing  "  includes  a 
choosing  for  an  office,  like  John  vi.  70,  and  seems  to  have  a 
special  reference  to  the  choice  of  the  eleven  faithful  apostles 
to  be  the  first  children  of  Christ's  Church. 

Calvin  certainly  says,  "  the  subject  now  in  hand  is  not  the  or- 
dinary election  of  believers,  by  which  tliey  are  adopted  to  be 
God's  children  ;  but  that  special  election  by  which  Christ  sets 
apart  His  disciples  to  the  office  of  preaching  the  gospel."     (See 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  1^5 

John  vi.  70.)  This  also  is  the  view  of  Chrysostom  and  Cyril, — 
But  most  of  the  Latin  fathers  apply  the  "  choice  "  to  eternal 
election.  So  also  does  Lampe.  My  own  impression  is,  that, 
for  once,  the  expression  includes  both  official  and  eternal 
election. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  ordained  "  means  simply,  "  I  have 
placed  you  "  in  a  certain  position  as  my  apostles. 

When  our  Lord  says, "  I  have  chosen  and  ordained  you  that 
ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,"  I  think  He  refers  to  the 
work  of  conversion  and  building  a  Church  in  the  world.  "  I 
chose  and  set  you  apart  for  this  great  purpose,  that  ye  should 
go  into  all  the  world  preaching  the  Gospel,  and  gathering  in 
the  harvest  and  fruit  of  saved  souls  ;  and  that  this  work  begun 
by  you  might  remain  and  continue  long  after  your  deaths." 
And  then  to  encourage  the  eleven,  He  adds,  "  It  was  part  of  my 
plan  that  so  bringing  forth  fruit,  ye  should  obtain  by  prayer 
everything  that  ye  need  for  your  work." 

It  is  vain  to  deny  that  the  verse  is  a  very  difficult  one  both 
as  to  its  connection  and  contents.  As  a  general  rule  I  hold 
strongly  that  the  things  spoken  by  our  Lord  in  this  last  dis- 
course decidedly  belong  to  all  believers  in  every  age,  and  not 
to  the  eleven  only.  Yet  there  are  perhaps  exceptions,  and  this 
verse  may  be  one. — The  expression  "  Go  and  bring  forth  fruit" 
certainly  seems  to  apply  peculiarly  to  the  eleven,  who  were  to 
"  GO  "  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel.  It  is  as  though 
our  liord  said  "  Take  comfort  in  the  thought  that  I  chose  you 
as  my  friends  for  this  great  purpose,  to  go  and  preach,  to  reap 
an  abundant  harvest  of  souls,  to  do  lasting  work,  and  to  obtain 
a  constant  supply  of  grace  and  help,  by  prayer." — I  cannot  see 
how  the  word  "go  "  can  apply  to  any  but  the  eleven  to  whom 
the  Lord  was  speaking  ;  and  this  weighs  heavily  with  me  in 
interpreting  it. — "  Th-at  your  fruit  should  remain,"  again,  is  a 
phrase  that  I  cannot  apply  to  anything  but  the  lasting  and 
abiding  work  which  the  Apostles  did  when  they  went  through 
the  world  preaching  the  Gospel.  But  I  freely  admit  that  I 
find  in  the  verse  "  things  hard  to  be  understood." 


JOHN  XV.  17-21. 


17  These  things  I  command  you, 
that  ye  love  one  another. 

18  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know 
that  it  hated  me  before  it  hated 
you. 

19  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the 
■vrorld  would  love  his  own  :  but  be- 
cause ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  1 
have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  you. 


20  Eemembei  the  word  that  I 
said  unto  you.  The  servant  is  not 
greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  have 
persecuted  me,  they  will  also  perse- 
cute you;  if  they  have  kept  my  say- 
ing, they  will  keep  yours  also. 

21  But  all  these  things  will  they 
do  unto  you  for  my  name's  sake, 
because  they  know  not  him  that 
sent  me. 


116  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

The  passage  before  us  opens  with  a  renewed  exhor- 
tation to  brotherly  love.  For  the  third  time  in  this  dis- 
course our  Lord  thinks  it  needful  to  press  this  precious 
grace  on  the  attention  of  His  disciples.  Rare,  indeed, 
must  genuine  charity  be,  when  such  repeated  mention  of 
it  is  made  !  In  the  present  instance  the  connection  in 
which  it  stands  should  be  carefully  observed.  Christian 
love  is  placed  in  contrast  to  the  hatred  of  the  world. 

We  are  shown  first,  in  this  passage,  what  true  Chris- 
tians must  expeet  to  meet  in  this  world^ — hatred  and  per- 
secution. If  the  disciples  looked  for  kindness  and  grati- 
tude from  man  they  would  be  painfully  disappointed. 
They  must  lay  their  account  to  be  ill-treated  like  their 
Master. — "The  world  hateth  you.  Be  not  moved  or 
surprised.  If  they  have  persecuted  Me,  they  will  also 
persecute  you ;  if  they  have  kept  my  saying,  they  will 
keep  yours  also." 

Facts,  painful  facts  in  every  age,  supply  abundant 
proof  that  our  Lord's  warning  was  not  without  cause. 
Persecution  was  the  lot  of  the  Apostles  and  their  com- 
panions wherever  they  went.  Not  more  than  one  or 
two  of  them  died  quietly  in  his  bed. — Persecution  has 
been  the  lot  of  true  believers  throughout  the  eighteen 
Christian  centuries  of  history.  The  doings  of  Roman 
Emperors  and  Roman  Popes,  the  Spanish  inquisition, 
the  martyrdoms  of  Queen  Mary's  reign,  all  tell  the  samei 
story. — Persecution  is  the  lot  of  all  really  godly  peo- 
ple at  this  very  day.  Ridicule,  mockery,  slander,  mis- 
representation, still  show  the  feeling  of  unconverted 
people  against  the  true  Christian.  As  it  was  in  St. 
Paul's  day,  so  it  is  now.  In  public  and  in  private,  at 
school  and  at  college,  at  home  and  abroad,  "  all  that 
will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution." 
(2  Tim.  iii  12.)  Mere  churchmanship  and  outward  pro- 
fession are  a  cheap  religion,  of  course,  and  cost  a  man 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  XI 7 

nothing.  But  real  vital  Christianity  will  always  bring 
with  it  a  cross. 

To  know  and  understand  these  things  is  of  the  ut- 
most importance  to  our  comfort.  Nothing  is  so  mis- 
chievous as  the  habit  of  indulging  false  expectations. 
Let  us  realize  that  human  nature  never  changes,  that 
"the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,"  and  against 
God's  image  in  His  people.  Let  us  settle  it  in  our 
minds  that  no  holiness  of  life  or  consistency  of  conduct 
will  ever  prevent  wicked  people  hating  the  servants  of 
Christ,  just  as  they  hated  their  blameless  Master.  Let 
us  remember  these  things,  and  then  we  shall  not  be  dis- 
appointed. 

We  are  shown  secondly,  in  this  passage,  two  reasons 
for  patience  under  the  persecution  of  this  world.  Each 
is  weighty,  and  supplies  matter  for  much  thought. 

For  one  thing,  persecution  is  the  cup  of  which  Christ 
Himself  drank.  Faultless  as  He  was  in  everything,  in 
temper,  word,  and  deed, — unwearied  as  He  was  in  works 
of  kindness,  always  going  about  doing  good, — never  was 
any  one  so  hated  as  Jesus  was  to  the  last  day  of  His 
earthly  ministry.  Scribes  and  High  Priests,  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  united  in  pouring 
contempt  on  Him,  and  opposing  Him,  and  never  rested 
till  He  was  put  to  death. 

Surely  this  simple  fact  alone  should  sustain  our 
spirits  and  prevent  our  being  cast  down  by  the  hatred 
of  man.  Let  us  consider  that  we  are  only  walking  in 
our  Master's  footsteps,  and  sharing  our  Master's  portion. 
Do  we  deserve  to  be  better  treated  ?  Are  we  better 
than  He?  Let  us  fight  against  these  murmuring 
thoughts.  Let  us  drink  quietly  the  cup  which  our 
Father  gives  us.  Above  all,  let  us  often  call  to  mind 
the  saying,  "  Remember  the  word  that  I  spake  unto 
you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  Master." 


lis  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

For  another  thing,  persecution  helps  to  prove  that 
we  are  children  of  God,  and  have  treasure  in  heaven. 
It  supplies  evidence  that  we  are  really  born  again,  that 
we  have  grace  in  our  hearts,  and  are  heirs  of  glory  : 
"If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his 
own :  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have 
chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth 
you."  Persecution,  in  short,  is  like  the  Goldsmith's 
Hall  mark  on  real  silver  and  gold:  it  is  one  of  the 
marks  of  a  converted  man. 

Let  us  nerve  our  minds  with  this  cheering  thought, 
when  we  feel  ready  to  faint  and  give  way  under  the 
world's  hatred.  No  doubt  it  is  hard  to  bear,  and  the 
more  hard  when  our  conscience  tells  us  we  are  innocent. 
But  after  all  let  us  never  forget  that  it  is  a  token  for 
good.  It  is  a  symptom  of  a  work  begun  within  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  which  can  never  be  overthrown.  We 
may  fall  back  on  that  wonderful  promise,  "Blessed  are 
ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and 
shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my 
sake.  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad:  for  great  is 
your  reward  in  heaven."  (Matt.  v.  11,  12.)  When  the 
world  has  said  and  done  its  worst,  it  cannot  rob  believers 
of  that  promise. 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  subject  with  a  feeling  of  deep 
pity  for  those  who  persecute  others  on  account  of  their 
religion.  Often,  very  often,  as  our  Lord  says,  they  do  it 
because  they  know  no  better.  "  They  know  not  Hira 
that  sent  Me."  Like  our  Divine  Master  and  His  servant 
Stephen,  let  us  pray  for  those  who  despitefuUy  use  us 
and  persecute  us.  Their  persecution  rarely  does  us  harm, 
and  often  drives  us  nearer  to  Christ,  the  Bible,  and  the 
throne  of  grace.  Our  intercession,  if  heard  on  high, 
may  bring  down  blessings  on  their  souls. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  iiQ 


Notes.    John  xy.  17 — 21. 

17. — [These  tilings  1  command.. .love  one  another."]  The  expression 
"  these  things,"  must  either  refer  backwards  to  what  has  just 
been  said,  or  forwards  to  what  is  going  to  be  said.  I  prefer  the 
latter  view.  "  1  press  on  you  these  repeated  charges  to  love  one 
another,  because  you  must  expect  the  hatred  of  the  world. 
The  more  the  world  hates  you,  the  more  you  ought  to  love  one 
another  and  stick  together." 

18. — [If. ..world  hate. ..hated  Me. ..you.']  The  object  of  this  verse  ia 
to  encourage  and  comfort  the  disciples  under  the  hatred  and 
enmity  of  the  unbelieving  Jews.  "  Do  not  be  surprised  and 
discouraged  if  you  find  yourselves  hated  and  persecuted  by  an 
unbelieving  world.  Do  not  think  the  fault  is  yours.  You  know, 
and  have  seen,  and  must  remember  that  this  same  world  has 
always  hated  and  persecuted  Me  before  you,  although  it  could 
lay  no  fault  to  my  charge." 

The  principle  of  the  verse  will  be  found  true  in  every  age. 
It  is  not  the  weaknesses  and  inconsistencies  of  Christians  that 
the  world  hates,  but  their  grace.  Christians  should  carefully 
remember  that  their  spotless  and  blameless  Master  was  bitterly 
hated  by  the  world  when  He  was  on  earth,  and  they  must  count 
it  no  strange  thing  if  they  are  treated  in  the  same  way. 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  the  words  "  ye  know  "  should  be 
taken  as  an  imperative,  and  not  an  indicative,  like  "  remem- 
ber," in  verse  20.  I  doubt  this ;  but  the  construction  of  the 
Greek  language  makes  it  an  open  question. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  before  "  is  literally  "  first."  It  ia 
the  same  that  is  translated  "  before  "  in  John  i.  15  and  30. 

19. — [If  ye  loere  of  the  world,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  shows 
the  disciples  that  the  hatred  of  the  world,  however  painful  to 
bear,  is  a  satisfactory  evidence  of  their  state  before  God.  It  ia 
like  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute 
you,"  and  "  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of 
you."  This  comes  out  more  clearly  if  we  invert  the  order  of 
the  verse.  "  The  world  hates  you  because  you  are  not  like 
itself,  but  have  a  different  faith  and  live  a  diiferent  life,  and 
because  I  have  drawn  you  out  of  it  to  be  my  disciples  and  apos- 
tles. The  world  always  loves  what  is  like  itself,  and  would 
love  you  if  your  standard  of  faith  and  life  was  like  its  own. 
The  very  hatred  of  the  world,  therefore,  is  a  satisfactory  evi- 
dence that  you  are  my  disciples." 

I.uther  remarks,  "  Towards  each  other,  apart  from  Christ,  the 
men  of  the  world  are  as  little  friends  as  dogs  and  cats.  In  all 
that  conceras  Christ  they  are  unanimous  in  hatred." 


120  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  expression  "  his  own,"  means  literally  "  its  own  thing," 
its  own  spirit,  tone,  character,  faith,  and  life. 

The  whole  verse  contains  rich  experimental  comfort  for  true 
Christians.  There  are  fe\v  things  that  we  are  so  slow  to  re- 
alize as  the  enmity  of  natural  man  against  God,  and  all  that 
have  anything  of  God's  image  ;  and  forgetf ulness  of  it  often 
brings  believers  into  much  trouble  and  perplexity  of  mind. 
They  do  not  expect  the  world's  hatred,  and  are  surprised  when 
they  meet  with  it.  This  verse  teaches  plainly  that  they  ought 
not  to  be  surprised. 

Burgon  quotes  a  saying  of  Bishop  Sanderson :  "  The  godly 
are  in  the  world  as  strangers,  and  in  a  foreign,  yea  in  an  ene- 
my's country  ;  and  they  look  upon  the  world,  and  are  looked 
upon  by  it,  as  strangers ;  and  are  used  by  it  accordingly." 

20. — [Eemember  the  word,  etc.']  Our  Lord  continues  in  this  verse 
the  same  subject:  viz.,  what  the  disciples  must  expect  from  the 
world.  He  reminds  the  eleven  of  the  things  He  had  said  before, 
when  He  first  sent  them  out  to  preach.  (Matt.  x.  24 ;  Luke  vi. 
40.)  He  had  always  told  them  that  they  must  not  expect  to  be 
better  treated  than  He  had  been  Himself.  He  quotes  the  pro- 
verbial saying  that  "  a  servant  must  not  expect  to  fare  better 
than  his  master."  "  Did  they  persecute  Me  ?  Then  they  will 
persecute  you.  Did  they  keep,  mind,  and  attend  to  my  teach- 
ing ?  As  a  rule  the  greater  part  did  not,  and  you  must  expect- 
the  same." 

We  ought  to  observe  carefully  how  strongly  this  lesson  about 
the  world  is  laid  down  by  our  Lord.  It  was  doubtless  spoken 
for  all  time,  and  with  a  special  reference  to  believers'  slowness 
to  realize  it.  If  there  is  anything  that  true  Christians  seem  in- 
cessantly forgetting,  and  seem  to  need  incessantly  reminding 
of,  it  is  the  real  feeling  of  unconverted  people  towards  them, 
and  the  treatment  they  must  expect  to  meet  with.  Wrong  ex- 
pectations are  one  great  cause  of  Christians  feeling  troubled 
and  perplexed.  That  word  "  remember," — "  do  you  remember," 
— has  a  mine  of  meaning  in  it. 

Gataker,  Bengel,  and  some  others,  think  that  the  Greek  word 
rendered  "  keep,"  here  means  "  to  observe  with  a  malicious  in- 
tention" to  carp  at  it :  but  this  seems  improbable.  Whether, 
however,  there  is  not  a  latent  irony  in  the  sentence  is  doubtful. 

21. — l^But  all  these  thing s...name'8  sake.]  Our  Lord  here  tells  His 
disciples  that  He  Himself  was  the  cause  of  all  the  enmity  and 
hatred  they  would  meet  with.  They  would  be  hated  on  ac- 
count of  their  Master,  more  than  on  account  of  themselves. 

"  These  things  "  must  refer  apparently  to  the  expression, 
*'  hate,  persecute,  and  keep  your  saying." 

It  may  be  some  comfort  to  a  persecuted  Christian  to  think 
that  it  is  for  his   Master's  sake  that  he  is  ill  used.    He  is 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV. 


121 


"  filling  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ." 
(Coloss,  i.  24.)  He  is  "  bearing  the  reproach  of  Christ."  (Heb. 
xi.  26.) 

{^Because  they  know  not. ..sent  Me.]  This  sentence  is  ellipti- 
cat.  It  means  that  dark  ignorance  was  the  great  cause  of  the 
conduct  of  the  unbelieving  Jews.  They  did  not  rightly  know 
God  the  Father  who  had  sent  Christ  into  the  world.  They  did 
not  know  that  Christ  was  the  Messiah  whom  the  Father  had 
promised  to  send.  In  this  state  of  ignorance  they  blindly  per- 
secuted Christ  and  His  disciples. 

This  judicial  blindness  and  hardness  of  the  Jewish  nation  in 
the  time  of  our  Lord  and  His  Apostles  is  a  thing  that  ought  to 
be  carefully  observed  by  all  Bible-readers.  (See  Acts  iii.  17  ; 
xiii.  27  ;  xxviii.  25-27  ;*  1  Cor.  ii.  8 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  14.)  It  was  a 
peculiar  judicial  blindness,  we  must  remember,  to  which  the 
whole  nation  was  given  over,  like  Pharaoh,  as  a  final  punish- 
ment for  many  centuries  of  idolatry,  wickedness  and  unbelief. 
Nothing  but  this  seems  thoroughly  to  account  for  the  extraor- 
dinary unbelief  of  many  of  our  Lord's  hearers. 

In  leaving  this  passage  we  should  not  fail  to  notice  the  sin- 
gular frequency  with  which  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  the  world." 
Six  times  he  mentions  it.  We  should  also  notice  the  singular 
resemblance  between  the  line  of  argument  adopted  in  the  pas- 
sage, and  the  line  of  St.  John  in  the  third  chapter  of  his  first 
Epistle.  The  Apostle  writes  his  Epistle  in  that  part,  as  if  he 
had  this  chapter  before  him. 


JOHN  XV.  22—27. 


22  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken 
unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin: 
but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for 
their  sin. 

23  He  that  hateth  me  hateth  my 
Father  also. 

24  If  1  had  not  done  among  them 
the  works  which  none  other  man 
did,  they  had  not  had  sin :  but  now 
have  they  both  seen  and  hated  both 
me  and  my  Father. 

25  B  jt  this  Cometh  topass,  that  the 


word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is  writ- 
ten in  their  law,  They  hated  me 
without  a  cause. 

26  But  when  the  Comforter  13 
come,  whom  1  will  send  unto  you 
from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  he  shall  testify  of  me  : 

27  And  ye  also  shall  bear  witness, 
because  ye  have  been  with  me  from 
the  begiuning. 


In  these  verses  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  handles  three 
subjects  of  great  importance.  They  are  difficult  sub- 
jects, no  doubt,  subjects  on  which  we  may  easily  fall 
into  error.  But  the  words  before  us  throw  much  light 
upon  them. 
6 


122  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

We  should  observe,  for  one  thing,  how  our  Lord 
speaks  of  the  misuse  of  religious  privileges.  It  intensifies 
man's  guilt,  and  will  increase  his  condemnation.  He 
tells  His  disciples  that  if  He  had  not  "  spoken "  and 
"  done  "  among  the  Jews  things  which  none  ever  spoke 
or  did  before,  "they  had  not  had  sin."  By  this,  we 
must  remember,  He  means,  "  they  had  not  been  so  sinful 
and  so  guilty  as  they  are  now."  But  now  they  were 
utterly  without  excuse.  They  had  seen  Christ's  works, 
and  heard  Christ's  teaching,  and  yet  remained  unbeliev- 
ing. What  more  could  be  done  for  them  ?  Nothing 
— absolutely  nothing  !  They  wilfully  sinned  against 
the  clearest  possible  light,  and  were  of  all  men  most 
guilty. 

Let  us  settle  it  down  as  a  first  principle  in  our  religion, 
that  religious  privileges  are  in  a  certain  sense  very 
dangerous  things.  If  they  do  not  help  us  toward 
heaven,  they  will  only  sink  us  deeper  into  hell.  They 
add  to  our  responsibility.  "To  whomsoever  much  is 
given,  of  him  shall  much  be  required."  (Luke  xii.  48.) 
He  that  dwells  in  a  land  of  open  Bibles  and  preached 
Gospel,  and  yet  dreams  that  he  will  stand  in  the  judg- 
ment day  on  the  same  level  with  an  untaught  Chinese, 
is  fearfully  deceived.  He  will  find  to  his  own  cost, 
except  he  repents,  that  his  judgment  will  be  according 
to  his  light.  The  mere  fact  that  he  had  knowledge 
and  did  not  improve  it,  will  of  itself  prove  one  of  his 
greatest  sins.  "  He  that  knew  His  Master's  will  and 
did  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes."  (Luke 
xii.  47.) 

Well  would  it  be  for  all  professing  Christians  in 
England,  if  this  point  was  more  thoroughly  considered ! 
Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  hear  men  taking 
comfort  in  the  thought  tliat  they  "  know  what "  is  right, 
while  at  the  same  time  they  are  evidently  unconverted, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  223 

and  unfit  to  die.  They  rest  in  that  unhappy  phrase, 
"  We  know  it,  we  know  it,"  as  if  knowledge  could  wash 
away  all  their  sins, — forgetting  that  the  devil  has  more 
knowledge  than  any  of  us,  and  yet  is  no  better  for  it. 
Let  the  burning  words  of  our  Lord  in  the  passage  now 
before  us,  sink  down  into  our  hearts,  and  never  be  for- 
gotten :  *'  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them, 
they  had  not  had  sin  :  but  now- they  have  no  cloke  for 
their  sin."  To  see  light  and  not  use  it,  to  possess 
knowledge  and  yet  not  turn  it  to  account,  to  be  able 
to  say  "  I  know,"  and  yet  not  to  say  "  I  believe,"  will 
place  us  at  the  lowest  place  on  Christ's  left  hand,  in 
the  great  day  of  judgment. 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses, 
how  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

He  speaks  of  Him  as  a  Person.  He  is  "  the  Com- 
forter "  who  is  to  come  ;  He  is  One  sent  and  "  proceed- 
ing ; "  He  is  One  whose  office  it  is  to  "  testify."  These 
are  not  words  that  can  be  used  of  a  mere  influence  or 
inward  feeling.  So  to  interpret  them  is  to  contradict 
common  sense,  and  to  strain  the  meaning  of  plain  lan- 
guage. Reason  and  fairness  require  us  to  understand 
that  it  is  a  personal  Being  who  is  here  mentioned,  even 
He  whom  we  are  justly  taught  to  adore  as  the  third 
Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity. 

Again,  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  One 
whom  He  "will  send  from  the  Father,"  and  One  "  who 
proceedeth  from  the  Father."  These  are  deep  sayings, 
no  doubt,  so  deep  that  we  have  no  line  to  fathom  them. 
The  mere  fact  that  for  centuries  the  Eastern  and 
Western  Churches  of  Christendom  have  been  divided 
about  their  meaning,  should  teach  us  to  handle  them 
with  modesty  and  reverence.  One  thing,  at  all  events, 
is  very  clear  and  plain.  There  is  a  close  and  intimate 
connection    between    the    Spirit,   the    Father,    and   the 


124:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Son.  Why  the  Holy  Ghost  should  be  said  to  be  sent 
by  the  Son,  and  to  proceed  from  the  Father,  in  this 
verse,  we  cannot  tell.  But  we  may  quietly  repose  our 
minds  in  the  thought  expressed  in  an  ancient  creed, 
that  "  In  this  Trinity  none  is  afore  or  after  other  :  none 
is  greater  or  less  than  another." — "  Such  as  the  Father 
is  such  is  the  Son,  and  such  is  the  Holy  Ghost." — Above 
all,  we  may  rest  in  the  comfortable  truth  that  in  the 
salvation  of  our  souls  all  three  Persons  in  the  Trinity 
equally  co-operate.  It  was  God  in  Trinity  who  said, 
"Let  us  create,"  and  it  is  God  in  Trinity  who  says, 
"  Let  us  save." 

For  ever  let  us  take  heed  to  our  doctrine  about  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Let  us  make  sure  that  we  hold  sound  and 
Scriptural  views  of  His  nature.  His  Person,  and  His 
operations.  A  religion  which  entirely  leaves  Him  out, 
and  gives  Him  no  place,  is  far  from  uncommon.  Let  us 
beware  that  such  a  religion  is  not  ours.  "  Where  is  the 
Lamb,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  should  be  the  first  test- 
ing question  about  our  Christianity.  Where  is  the 
Holy  Ghost  ? "  should  be  the  second  question.  Let  us 
take  good  heed  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  not  so 
buried  under  extravagant  views  of  the  Church,  the  min- 
istry, and  the  Sacraments,  that  the  real  Holy  Ghost  of 
Scripture  is  completely  put  out  of  sight.  "  If  any  man 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  (Rom. 
viii.  9.)  No  religion  deserves  to  be  called  Scriptural 
and  apostolic,  in  which  the  work  of  the  Spirit  does  not 
stand  forth  prominently,  and  occupy  a  principal  place. 

We  should  observe  lastly,  in  these  verses,  how  our 
Lord  speaks  of  the  special  office  of  the  Ajjostles.  They 
were  to  be  His  witnesses  in  the  world.  "  Ye  also  shall 
bear  witness." 

The  expression  is  singularly  instructive  and  full  of 
meaning.     It  taught  the  eleven  what  they  must  expect 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  225 

their  portion  to  be,  so  long  as  they  lived.  They  would 
have  to  bear  testimony  to  facts  which  many  would  not 
believe,  and  to  truths  which  the  natural  heart  would  dis- 
like. They  would  often  have  to  stand  alone,  a  few 
against  many,  a  little  flock  against  a  great  multitude. 
None  of  these  things  must  move  them.  They  must 
count  it  no  strange  thing  to  be  persecuted,  hated,  op- 
posed, and  discredited.  They  must  not  mind  it.  To 
witness  was  their  grand  duty,  whether  men  believed 
them  or  not.  So  witnessing,  their  record  would  be  on 
high,  in  God's  book  of  remembrance ;  and  so  witnessing, 
sooner  or  later,  the  Judge  of  all  would  give  them  a 
urown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away. 

Let  us  never  forget,  as  we  leave  this  passage,  that  the 
position  of  the  Apostles  is  that  which,  in  a  certain  sense, 
every  true  Christian  must  fill,  as  long  as  the  world 
stands.  We  must  all  be  witnesses  for  Christ.  We 
must  not  be  ashamed  to  stand  up  for  Christ's  cause,  to 
speak  out  for  Christ,  and  to  persist  in  maintaining  the 
truth  of  Christ's  Gospel.  Wherever  we  live,  in  town 
or  in  country,  in  public  or  in  private,  abroad  or  at  home. 
we  must  boldly  confess  our  Master  on  every  opportunity. 
So  doing,  we  shall  walk  in  the  steps  of  the  Apostles, 
though  at  a  long  interval.  So  doing,  we  shall  please  our 
Master,  and  may  hope  at  last  that  we  shall  receive  the 
Apostles'  reward. 

Notes.    John  xv.  32—27. 

22. — {^If  I  had  not  come,  etc.]  In  tliis  and  tlie  three  following 
verses  our  Lord  shows  the  peculiar  guilt  and  wickedness  of  the 
Jews  in  not  believing  Him. — "  If  I  had  not  come  among  them 
and  spoken  such  words  as  no  one  ever  spake  before,  and  taught 
such  truths  as  no  one  ever  taught  before,  they  would  not  have 
been  so  guilty  as  they  are.  But  now  they  have  no  excuse  for 
their  unbelief.  They  cannot  say  that  they  were  not  taught  in 
the  plainest  way  who  I  am  and  who  sent  Me." 

Does  not  our  Lord  in  this  verse  point  to  the  famous  prophecy 


126  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

(Deut.  xviii.  18,  19)  of  a  Prophet  to  be  raised  up  like  Moses,  to 
whom  the  Jews  were  to  hearken  ?  Does  He  not  seem  to  say, 
"  I  have  come  as  that  Prophet,  and  have  spoken  my  Father's 
words,  and  they  ought  to  have  received  and  hearkened  to 
them  ?  The  refusal  of  the  promised  Prophet  is  of  itself  their 
condemnation,  and  leaves  them  without  excuse."' 

The  word  rendered  "  cloke,"  would  have  been  better  as  in 
the  margin,  "  excuse."  The  clause  literally  is,  "  They  have 
now  no  excuse  concerning  their  sin." 

When  our  Lord  says  "  they  had  not  had  sin,"  He  does  not  of 
course  mean  they  would  not  have  been  sinners  at  all.  It  is 
only  another  way  of  putting  the  degree  of  their  guilt.  "  They 
would  have  been  less  guilty  than  they  are  now.  To  have  heard 
Me  and  not  believed  will  increase  their  condemnation."  (Com- 
pare John  ix.  41.) 

Let  us  note  that  there  are  degrees  of  sin,  and  that  nothing 
Beems  to  increase  man's  guiltiness  so  much  as  to  have  privi- 
leges, and  not  use  them  aright. 

23. — [He...hatet7i  Me. ..Father  also.']  The  object  of  this  verse  is  to 
supply  a  reason  why  the  guilt  of  hearing  Christ  without  be- 
lieving was  so  great.  It  was  because  Christ's  words  were  not 
only  His  words  but  the  Father's  also. — "He  that  hears  Me,  and 
hates  and  refuses  my  teachings,  is  hating  not  Me  only  but  my 
Father,  because  I  and  my  Father  are  one." — Once  more  we  are 
reminded  of  the  close  union  between  the  first  and  second  Per- 
sons of  the  Trinity.  The  idea  that  we  can  worship  and  serve 
God  while  we  neglect  Christ,  is  a  baseless  dream.  Neglecting 
Christ,  we  neglect  the  Father.     (See  Psalm  Ixix.  9.) 

Poole  remarks,  "  It  is  a  common  error  of  the  world,  that 
many  pretend  to  love  God,  while  yet  they  are  manifest  haters 
of  Christ  and  His  Gospel.  Our  Saviour  saith,  this  is  impossi- 
ble ;  whosoever  hateth  him  who  is  sent,  hateth  also  him  who 
sent  him." 

Hengstenberg  observes,  "  The  Jews  professed  that  they  lov- 
ed God,  and  that  on  the  ground  of  that  love  they  hated  Christ ; 
the  God,  however,  whom  they  loved  was  not  the  true  God,  but 
a  phantom  which  they  named  God.  The  fact  that  they  rejected 
Christ,  in  spite  of  all  His  words  of  spirit  and  truth,  showed 
them  to  be  enemies  of  the  Father." 

'M. — \_If  1  had  not  done,  etc.] — In  this  verse  our  Lord  gives  anoth- 
er proof  of  the  exceeding  wickedness  of  the  Jews.  They  had 
seen  works  and  miracles  done  under  their  eyes,  in  confirmation 
of  Christ's  Divine  mission,  more  numerous  and  mighty  than 
any  oiie  had  ever  worked  before,  and  yet  they  continued  unbe- 
lieving. The  more  they  saw  of  Him  the  more  they  hated 
Him ;  and  in  so  hating  Him,  they  hated  not  Him  only,  but  the 
Father  which  sent  Him. — "  The  Jews  would  not  be  so  guilty  as 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XV.  127 

tliey  now  are,  if  they  had  not  seen  my  miracles  as  well  as  heard 
my  words.  But  now  they  have  both  seen  and  heard  over- 
whelming proofs  of  my  Divine  mission,  and  yet  remain  unbe- 
lieving. They  have  had  the  clearest  evidence  that  could  be 
given — the  evidence  of  works  and  words  ;  and  yet  they  have 
persisted  in  hating  both  Me  and  the  Father  which  sent  Me." 

Burgon  here  remarks,  "  It  is  not  meant  that  every  single 
miracle  which  our  Lord  performed,  surpassed  in  wonder  any 
single  miracle  recorded  of  Moses,  Elijah,  or  Elisha ;  for  that 
would  not  be  trae.  But  Christ's  works  were  made  so  great  by 
the  way  He  wrought  them.  Without  effort,  by  a  mere  word, 
He  showed  that  ail  creation  was  obedient  to  His  will." 

Let  us  carefully  observe  how  our  Lord  appeals  to  His  mira- 
cles as  a  proof  of  His  Messiahship,  which  ought  to  have  con- 
vinced the  Jews.  They  are  a  part  of  the  evidences  of  Chris- 
tianity which  ought  never  to  be  kept  back  or  omitted. 

25. — [But  this  cometh  to  pass,  etc.]  The  manner  in  which  our 
Lord  quotes  Scripture  here  is  so  common  in  the  Gospels  that  it 
needs  little  remark.  The  things  He  mentions  did  not  happen 
in  order  that  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  but  by  their  happen- 
ing Scripture  was  fulfilled. 

"  Their  law  "  here  is  a  general  expression  denoting  the  Old 
Testament  Scripture. 

"  Without  a  cause  "  means  literally  "  gratuitously,  as  a  free 
gift."  The  word  occurs  only  nine  times  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Six  times  it  is  rendered  "freely,"  once  "in  vain,"  once 
"  for  nought,"  and  once  "  withoat  a  cause." 

What  precise  text  our  Lord  had  in  view  is  not  quite  clear, 
and  some  have  thought  that  He  only  referred  generally  to 
Scripture  testimony,  like  Matt.  ii.  23.  Others  however  point  to 
Psalm  xxxi.  19,  and  Psalm  Ixix.  4. 

Let  us  note  that  gratuitous,  ceaseless  hatred*  was  our  Lord's 
portion  on  earth  ;  and  His  true  disciples  in  every  age  must 
never  wonder  if  they  share  His  lot. 

26. — [But  when  the  Comforter,  etc.]  The  object  of  this  verse  ap- 
pears to  be  the  encouragement  of  the  disciples.  They  were  not 
to  despond  or  feel  hopeless  because  of  the  unbelief  and  hard- 
ness of  the  Jews.  A  witness  would  be  raised  up  by  and  by, 
whose  evidence  the  Jews  would  not  be  able  to  resist.  There 
would  come  One  who  would  give  such  testimony  to  the  Divine 
mission  of  Christ,  that  even  the  wicked  Jews  would  be  silenced 
and  crushed,  although  unconverted.  Who  was  this  promised 
witness  ?  It  was  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  was  to  come  forth  with 
peculiar  power  in  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  to  abide  in  the 
early  Church.  The  second  chapter  of  Acts  was  the  first  fulfil- 
ment of  the  verse.  The  irresistible  influence  which  the  Gos- 
pel obtained  in  Jerusalem,  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  scribe 


128  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

and  priest,  and  Pliarisee  and   Sadducee,  was  another  fulfil- 
ment. 

The  "  proceeding  "  here  spoken  of,  we  must  remember,  does 
not  merely  mean  that  the  Spirit  is  sent  by  the  Father,  and 
comes  from  the  Father.  All  the  best  interpreters  agree  in 
thinking,  that  it  means  the  eternal  procession  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

We  should  carefully  note  in  this  verse  the  language  which 
our  Lord  uses  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is  the  "  Com- 
forter," or  rather  the  Advocate,  as  we  have  seen  before.  He  is 
the  "  Spirit  of  truth,"  also,  as  we  have  seen  before.  But  we 
should  specially  mark  that  Christ  says,  "  1  will  send  Him  ; " 
and  also  says.  He  "  proceedeth  from  the  Father."  The  singu- 
lar number  is  used  :  "  He  proceedeth,"  not  "  will  proceed." — 
This  then  is  one  of  those  texts  which  appears  to  supply  evi- 
dence of  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeding  both  from  the  Father  and 
from  the  Son,  though  not  direct  evidence.  The  whole  Greek 
Church,  however,  denies  the  procession  from  the  Son  ;  and  it 
must  be  honestly  conceded  that  the  Scripture  does  not  so  dis- 
tinctly and  directly  assert  it  as  the  procession  from  the  Father. 
Yet,  on  tlie  other  hand,  it  is  hard  to  understand  how  the  Son 
can  send  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  in  no  serxBe  proceed  from  the 
Son.  The  subject  is  a  deep  and  mysterious  one,  and  we  have 
not  eyes  to  see  everything  about  it.  The  difference  between 
the  Eastern  and  Western  Churches  may  after  all  be  more  ap- 
parent than  real  ;  and  we  must  beware  of  denouncing  men  as 
heretics,  whom  perhaps  God  has  received.  But  in  any  case 
the  text  before  us  is  one  which  ought  to  be  carefully  noted,  as 
one  on  which  much  of  the  controversy  hinges.  Let  us  take 
that  care  we  ourselves  have  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts ;  and 
when  we  die  we  shall  know  all  about  the  point  in  dispute. 

One  thing  at  any  rate  comes  out  very  plainly  here,  and  that 
is  the  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  the  Greek  it  stands 
out  very  prominently  in  the  gender  of  the  pronouns,  which  our 
English  language  cannot  reach.  The  word  we  render  "  whom," 
in  the  Greek  text  is  masculine  ; — "  which  "  is  neuter  ; — and 
"  he  "  is  masculine  again. 

27. — [And  ye  also  shall  tear  witness.']  In  this  verse  our  Lord  con- 
tinues the  line  of  encouragement  which  He  began  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse.  Notwithstanding  all  the  hardness  and  unbelief 
of  the  Jews,  even  the  disciples  would  be  enabled  to  bear  a  tes- 
timony to  their  Lord's  Divine  mission,  which  none  of  their  ene- 
mies would  be  able  to  gainsay  or  resist.  How  remarkably  this 
was  fulfilled  we  know  from  the  first  seven  chapters  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  For  instance,  the  verse,  "  with  great  power 
gave  the  Apostles  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus "  (Acts  iv.  32),  is  an  exact  accomplishment  of  the  promise 
of  the  text.  * 

It  is  noteworthy  that  both  the  verbs  in  this  verse  are  in  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI. 


129 


present  tense.  They  would  be  naturally  rendered, "  Ye  do  bear 
witness,"  and,  "  Ye  are  with  Me."  Does  this  point  to  the  cer- 
tainty of  the  testimony  being  borne  ?  "  Ye  do  bear  witness  :  " 
you  are  sure  to  be  enabled  to  do  it. 

In  leaving  this  chapter,  let  us  not  fail  to  note  how  systemati- 
cally our  blessed  Master  gave  His  disciples  instruction  on  three 
most  important  points.  The  first  was  their  relation  to  Himself. 
They  were  to  abide  in  close  union  with  Him,  like  branches  in  a 
vine.  The  second  was  their  relation  to  one  another.  They 
were  to  love  one  another  with  a  deep,  self-sacrificing  love, 
like  their  Master's.  The  third  was  their  relation  to  the  world. 
They  were  to  expect  its  hatred,  not  be  surprised  at  it ;  to  bear 
it  patiently,  and  not  be  afraid  of  it. 


JOHN  XVI.  1—7. 


1  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto 
you,  that  ye  should  not  be  offended. 

2  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the 
synagogues:  yea,  the  time  cometh, 
that  whosoever  kiJleth  you  will  think 
that  he  doeth  God  service. 

3  And  these  things  will  they  do 
unto  you,  because  they  have  not 
known  the  Father,  nor  rae. 

4  But  these  things  liave  I  told  you, 
that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye 
may  remember  that  I  told  you  of 
them.    Aud  these  things  I  said  not 


unto  you  at  the  beginning,  because  I 
was  with  you. 

5  But  now  I  go  my  way  to  him  that 
sent  me ;  and  none  of  you  asketh  me, 
Whither  goest  thou  ? 

6  But  because  I  have  said  these 
things  unto  you,  sorrow  hath  filled 
your  heart. 

7  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth; 
It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away :  for  if  1  go  not  away,  the  Com- 
forter will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but 
if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you. 


The  opening  verses  of  this  chapter  contain  three  im- 
portant utterances  of  Christ,  which  deserve  our  special 
attention. 

For  one  thing,  we  find  our  Lord  delivering  a  re- 
markable prophecy.  He  tells  His  disciples  that  they 
will  be  cast  out  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and  persecuted 
even  to  the  death: — "  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  syna- 
gogues: yea,  the  time  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth 
you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service." 

How  strange  that  seems  at  first  sight !  Excom- 
munication, sufiering,  and  death,  are  the  portion  that 
the  Prince  of  Peace  predicts  to  His  disciples.  So  far 
from  receiving  them  and  their  message  with  gratitude, 
6* 


130  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

the  world  would  hate  them,  despitefully  use  them,  and 
put  them  to  death.  And,  worst  of  all,  their  persecutors 
would  actually  persuade  themselves  that  it  was  right  to 
persecute,  and  would  inflict  the  crudest  injuries  in  the 
sacred  name  of  religion. 

How  true  the  prediction  has  turned  out  !  Like  every 
other  prophecy  of  Scripture,  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the 
very  letter.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  show  us  how 
the  unbelieving  Jews  persecuted  the  early  Christians. 
The  pages  of  history  tell  us  what  horrible  crimes  have 
been  committed  by  the  Popish  Inquisition.  The  annals 
of  our  own  country  inform  us  how  our  holy  Reformers 
were  burned  at  the  stake  for  their  religion,  by  men  who 
professed  to  do  all  they  did  from  zeal  for  pure  Chris- 
tianity. Unlikely  and  incredible  as  it  might  seem  at 
the  time,  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church  has  been 
found  in  this,  as  in  everything  else,  to  have  predicted 
nothing  but  literal  truth. 

Let  it  never  surprise  us  to  hear  of  true  Christians 
being  persecuted,  in  one  way  or  another,  even  in  our 
own  day.  Human  nature  never  changes.  Grace  is 
never  really  popular.  The  quantity  of  persecution 
which  God's  children  have  to  suffer  in  every  rank  of 
life,  even  now,  if  they  confess  their  Master,  is  far  greater 
than  the  thoughtless  world  supposes.  They  only  know 
it  who  go  through  it,  at  school,  at  college,  in  the  count- 
ing-house, in  the  barrack-room,  on  board  the  ship. 
Those  words  shall  always  be  found  true :  "  All  that  will 
live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 
(2  Tim.  iii.  12.) 

Let  us  never  forget  that  religious  earnestness  alone 
is  no  proof  that  a  man  is  a  sound  Christian.  Not  all 
zeal  is  right:  it  may  be  a  zeal  without  knowledge.  No 
one  is  so  mischievous  as  a  blundering,  ignorant  zealot. 
Not  all  earnestness  is  trustworthy:  without  the  leading 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  13j[ 

of  God's  Spirit,  it  may  lead  a  man  so  far  astray,  that, 
like  Saul,  he  will  persecute  Christ  himself.  Some 
bigots  fancy  they  are  doing  God  service,  when  they  are 
actually  fighting  against  His  truth,  and  trampling  on 
His  people.  Let  us  pray  that  we  may  have  light  as 
well  as  zeal. 

For  another  thing,  we  find  our  Lord  explaining  His 
sjyecial  reaso7i  for  delivering  the  prophecy  just  referred 
to,  as  well  as  all  His  discourse.  "These  things,"  He 
says,  *'  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be 
oflTended." 

Well  did  our  Lord  know  that  nothing  is  so  danger- 
ous to  our  comfort  as  to  indulge  false  expectations.  He 
tlierefore  prepared  His  disciples  for  what  they  must 
expect  to  meet  with  in  His  service.  Forewarned,  fore- 
armed !  They  must  not  look  for  a  smooth  course  and  a 
peaceful  journey.  They  must  make  up  their  minds  to 
battles,  conflicts,  wounds,  opposition,  persecution,  and 
perhaps  even  death.  Like  a  wise  general.  He  did  not 
conceal  from  His  soldiers  the  nature  of  the  campaign 
they  were  beginning.  He  told  them  all  that  was  before 
them,  in  faithfulness  and  love,  that  when  the  time  of 
trial  came,  they  might  remember  His  words,  and  not  be 
disappointed  and  offended.  He  wisely  forewarned  them 
that  the  cross  was  the  way  to  the  crown. 

To  count  the  cost  is  one  of  the  first  duties  that  ought 
to  be  pressed  on  Christians  in  every  age.  It  is  no  kind- 
ness to  young  beginners  to  paint  the  service  of  Christ  in 
false  colors,  and  to  keep  back  from  them  the  old  truth, 
"Through  much  tribulation  w^e  must  enter  the  kingdom 
of  God."  By  prophesying  smooth  things,  and  crying 
"  Peace,"  we  may  easily  fill  the  ranks  of  Christ's  army 
with  professing  soldiers.  But  they  are  just  the  soldiers, 
who,  like  the  stony-ground  hearers,  in  time  of  tribula- 
tion will  fall  away,  and  turn  back  in  the  day  of  battle. 


1^2  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

No  Christian  is  in  a  healthy  state  of  mind  who  is  not 
prepared  for  trouble  and  persecution.  He  that  expects 
to  cross  the  troubled  waters  of  this  world,  and  to  reach 
heaven  with  wind  and  tide  always  in  his  favor,  knows 
nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know.  We  never  can  tell 
what  is  before  us  in  life.  But  of  one  thing  we  may  be 
very  sure:  we  must  carry  the  cross  if  we  would  wear 
the  crown.  Let  us  grasp  this  principle  firmly,  and  never 
forget  it.  Then,  when  the  hour  of  trial  comes,  we  shall 
"  not  be  offended." 

In  the  last  place,  we  find  our  Lord  giving  a  special 
reason  why  it  vms  expedient  for  Him  to  go  avjay  from 
His  disciples.  "  If  I  go  not  away,"  He  says,  "  the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you." 

We  can  well  suppose  that  our  gracious  Lord  saw  the 
minds  of  His  disciples  crushed  at  the  idea  of  His  leaving 
them.  Little  as  they  realized  His  full  meaning,  on  this, 
as  well  as  on  other  occasions,  they  evidently  had  a  vague 
notion  that  they  were  about  to  be  left,  like  orphans,  in 
a  cold  and  unkind  world,  by  their  Almighty  Friend. 
Their  hearts  quailed  and  shrunk  back  at  the  thought. 
Most  graciously  does  our  Lord  cheer  them  by  words  of 
deep  and  mysterious  meaning.  He  tells  them  that  His 
departure,  however  painful  it  might  seem,  was  not  an 
evil,  but  a  good.  They  would  actually  find  it  was  not  a 
loss,  but  a  gain.  His  bodily  absence  would  be  more 
useful  than  His  presence. 

It  is  vain  to  deny  that  this  is  a  somewhat  dark  say- 
ing. It  seems  at  first  sight  hard  to  understand  how  in 
any  sense  it  could  be  good  that  Christ  should  go  away 
from  His  disciples.  Yet  a  little  reflection  may  show  us 
that,  like  our  Lord's  sayings,  this  remarkable  utterance 
was  wise,  and  right,  and  true.  The  following  points,  at 
any  rate,  deserve  attentive  consideration. 

If  Christ  had  not  died,  risen  again,  and  ascended  up 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  133 

into  heaven,  it  is  plain  that  the  Holy  Ghost  could  not 
have  come  down  with  special  power  on  the  day  of  Pen- 
tecost, and  bestowed  His  manifold  gifts  on  the  Church. 
Mysterious  as  it  may  be,  there  was  a  connection  in  the 
eternal  counsels  of  God,  between  the  ascension  of  Christ 
and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit. 

If  Christ  had  remained  bodily  with  the  disciples.  He 
could  not  have  been  in  more  places  than  one  at  the 
same  time.  The  presence  of  the  Spirit  whom  He  sent 
down,  would  till  every  place  where  believers  were  as- 
sembled in  His  name,  in  every  part  of  the  world. 

If  Christ  had  remained  upon  earth,  and  not  gone  up 
into  heaven.  He  could  not  have  become  a  High  Priest 
for  His  people  in  the  same  full  and  perfect  manner  that 
He  became  after  His  ascension.  He  went  away  to  sit 
down  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  to  appear  for  us,  in 
our  human  nature  glorified,  as  our  Advocate  with  the 
Father. 

Finally,  if  Christ  had  always  remained  bodily  with 
His  disciples,  there  would  have  been  far  less  room  for 
the  exercise  of  their  faith  and  hope  and  trust,  than  there 
was  when  He  went  away.  Their  graces  would  not  have 
been  called  into  such  active  exercise,  and  they  would 
have  had  less  opportunity  of  glorifying  God,  and  exhib- 
iting His  power  in  the  world. 

After  all  there  remains  the  broad  fact  that  after  the 
Lord  Jesus  went  away,  and  the  Comforter  came  down 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  religion  of  the  disciples  be- 
came a  new  thing  altogether.  The  growth  of  their 
knowledge,  and  faith,  and  hope,  and  zeal,  and  courage, 
was  so  remarkable,  that  they  were  twice  the  men  they 
were  before.  They  did  far  more  for  Christ  when  He 
was  absent,  than  they  had  ever  done  when  He  was  pres- 
ent. What  stronger  proof  can  we  require  that  it  was 
expedient  for  them  that  their  Master  should  go  away  I 


134:  EXPOSITOEY  TIIOUGIITa. 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  subject  with  a  deep  convic- 
tion that  it  is  not  the  carnal  presence  of  Christ  in  the 
midst  of  us,  so  much  as  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  our  hearts,  that  is  essential  to  a  high  standard  of 
Christianity.  What  we  should  all  desire  and  long  for 
is  not  Christ's  body  literally  touched  with  our  hands 
and  received  into  our  mouths,  but  Christ  dwelling  spir- 
itually in  our  hearts  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Notes.    John  xvi.  1—7. 

1. — [These  things. ..spoken...not... offended.']  The  chapter  we  now 
begin  is  a  direct  continuation  of  the  last  chapter,  without  break 
or  pause.  Our  Lord's  object  in  this  first  verse  is  to  cheer  and 
revive  the  minds  of  the  Apostles,  and  to  prevent  them  being 
discouraged  by  the  persecution  of  the  unbelieving  Jews.  "  I 
have  spoken  the  things  which  I  have  just  been  speaking,  in 
order  to  obviate  the  depressing  effect  of  the  treatment  you  will 
receive.  Lest  you  should  be  stumbled  and  otfended  by  the 
conduct  of  your  enemies,  I  have  told  you  the  things  you  have 
just  heard." 

Stier  remarks  that  "  these  things  "  include  both  the  warning 
of  the  world's  hatred  and  the  promise  of  the  witnessing  Spirit. 
Foreknowledge  of  the  world's  hatred  would  prevent  the  disci- 
ples being  surprised  and  disappointed.  The  promise  of  the 
Spirit  would  cheer  and  encourage. 

The  word  "  oflfended  "  is  literally  "  scandalized."  It  is  a  re- 
markable instance  of  a  word  which  has  greatly  changed  its 
meaning  since  the  last  translation  of  the  Bible,  to  the  great 
perplexity  and  injury  of  many  Bible  readers. 

How  great  a  stumbling-block  it  often  is  to  young  and  unes- 
tablished  Christians  to  find  themselves  persecuted  and  ill-used 
for  their  religion,  it  is  needless  to  point  out.  Our  Lord  knew 
this,  and  took  care  to  arm  the  eleven  apostles  with  warnings. 
He  never  kept  back  the  cross,  or  concealed  the  difllculties  in 
the  way  to  heaven. 

2. — [They  shall  put...out...synagogu6.']  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
tells  the  disciples  most  plainly  what  they  must  expect.  "  They 
will  excommunicate  you,  and  cast  you  out  of  the  Jewish 
Cliurch,  and  expel  you  from  their  assemblies."  The  Greek 
words  are  curious  :  "  They  will  make  you  out-of -synagogue 
men."  How  great  a  grief  and  loss  this  was  to  a  Jew  we  have 
little  idea,  unless  we  have  studied  the  work  of  Christianity 
among  the  Jews  in  modern  times.  Nothing  affects  a  Jew  so 
much  as  expulsion  from  the  synago;'ue,  or  excommunication. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  135 

There  is  no  nominative  liere  to  wliicli  we  can  refer  "  tliey." 
It  is  an  Hebraism  equivalent  to  '■  You  will  be  put  out." 

Hengstenberg  observes,  "  The  disciples  were  not  to  depart 
voluntarily  out  of  the  synagogue,  but  to  await  what  would 
happen  to  them  on  a  full  proclamation  of  the  Gospel.  This 
gives  a  very  intelligible  hint  to  the  faithful  in  times  of  the 
Church's  decline :  viz.,  that  they  should  keep  far  from  their 
thoughts  the  idea  of  arbitrary  secession.  The  new  formation 
is  right  only  when  the  casting  out  has  gone  before." 

Calvin  remarks,  "  We  have  no  reason  to  be  alarmed  at  the 
Pope's  excommunications,  with  which  he  thunders  against  us 
on  account  of  the  Gospel.  They  will  do  us  no  more  injury 
than  those  ancient  excommunications  which  were  made  against 
the  apostles."     The  curse  causeless  shall  not  come. 

[Yea...ti7ne  comet7i..MUeth.. .service.]  In* this  clause  our  Lord 
warns  the  eleven  that  they  must  not  be  surprised  if  even  death 
was  the  final  result  of  discipleship.  There  would  be  no  length 
of  persecution  to  which  their  enemies  would  not  go.  "  The 
hour  comes  when  he  who  has  killed  you  will  think  that  in  so 
doing  he  offers  God  an  acceptable  service." 

How  true  this  has  proved,  the  history  of  all  religious  perse- 
cution has  abundantly  showed.  Who  can  doubt  that  Saul  be- 
fore his  conversion  was  sincere  ?  "I  verily  thought  that  I 
ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Naz- 
areth." (Acts  xxvi.  9.)  The  persecutions  carried  on  in  Spain, 
and  Portugal,  and  France,  and  England,  by  Romanists  against 
Protestants,  are  painful  examples  of  the  same  thing.  Men 
have  actually  thought  that  killing  people  was  doing  a  holy  and 
a  good  action. 

The  extent  to  which  conscience  may  be  blinded,  until  a  man 
actually  thinks  that  he  is  doing  a  godly  deed,  when  in  reality 
he  is  committing  a  huge  sin,  is  one  of  the  most  painful  phe- 
nomena in  human  nature.  Many  of  those  who  burned  our  Re- 
formers in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary  were  sincere  and  in  earnest. 
"  Earnestness"  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  a  man  is  right  in 
his  religion.  It  is  one  of  the  most  monstrous-  idols  of  modern 
times.  The  folly  of  those  who  are  content  with  "  earnestness," 
and  ^ay  that  all  "  earnest  "  men  go  to  heaven,  is  abundantly 
shown  by  this  text. 

Ferus  remarks  that  "  good  intentions  and  meanings  are  no 
better  than  impiety,  if  they  do  not  spring  from  God's  Word." 

3. — [And  these  things  will  they  do,  etc.]  Here,  as  in  a  former 
verse,  our  Lord  points  to  blind  ignorance  as  the  true  cause  of 
the  enmity  of  the  Jews  against  Himself  and  His  disciples. 
"  They  do  not  rightly  know  my  Father,  in  spite  of  their  profes- 
sions of  religious  knowledge ;  nor  Me,  whom  the  Father  hath 
sent.     Hence  they  hate  and  persecute."     (See  Ch.  xv.  21.) 


136  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

4. — [But  these  things  have  I  told,  etc.']  Here  once  more  our  Lord 
repeats  His  reasons  for  telling  tlie  disciples  what  they  must 
expect.  "  I  have  told  you  what  treatment  you  will  receive,  in 
order  that  you  may  not  be  surprised  when  the  time  of  trial 
conies,  but  may  remember  that  I  foretold  you  all,  and  not  be 
cast  down.  Nothing  unforeseen,  nothing  unpredicted,  you  will 
feel,  happens  to  us.     Our  Master  told  us  it  would  be  so." 

The  word  "  I,"  in  the  sentence,  "  that  ye  may  remember  that 
I  told  you,"  is  emphatic  in  the  Greek.  It  seems  to  mean,  "  Re- 
member that  I  myself,  your  Master,  told  you." 

Our  Lord  adds  the  reason  why  He  had  not  dwelt  on  these 
trials  before.  "  I  did  not  tell  you  much  of  these  things  at  the 
beginning  of  your  discipleship,  because  I  was  with  you,  and 
would  not  disturb  your  minds  with  painful  tidings  while  you 
were  learning  the  first  principles  of  the  Grospel.  But  now  that 
I  am  about  to  leave  you,  it  is  needful  to  forewarn  you  of  things 
you  are  likely  to  meet  with." 

Of  course  it  cannot  be  said  that  our  Lord  had  never  and  in  no 
sense  before  this  time  foretold  persecution  and  the  cross  to  His 
disciples.  But  it  must  mean  that  He  did  not  think  it  needful  to 
dwell  much  on  the  subject,  so  long  as  He  was  with  them  and 
taking  care  of  them. 

5. — [But  now  I  go.. .whither  goest  thou  ?  "]  These  words  seem  to 
convey  a  reproof  to  the  disciples  for  not  inquiring  more  ear- 
nestly about  the  heavenly  home  to  which  their  Master  was  go 
ing,  Peter,  no  doubt,  had  said  with  vague  curiosity,  "  Whither 
goest  Thou  ?  "  (John  xiii.  36) ;  but  his  question  had  not  origi- 
nated in  a  desire  to  know  the  place,  so  much  as  in  surprise  that 
His  Lord  was  going  at  all.  Our  Lord  seems  here  to  say,  "  If 
your  hearts  were  in  a  right  frame,  you  would  seek  to  under- 
stand the  nature  of  my  going  and  the  place  to  which  I  go." 

Let  us  observe  that  the  disciples,  with  all  their  grace,  were 
slow  to  use  their  opportunities,  and  to  seek  the  knowledge 
which  they  might  have  obtained.  They  had  not  because  they 
not. 


Let  us  observe  that  our  Lord  spoke  of  His  departure  as  a 
"  going  back  to  Him  that  sent  Him,"  His  mission  being  finished 
and  His  work  done. 

6. — [But  because. ..sorrow. ..your  heart.]  Here  our  Lord  continues 
the  reproof  of  the  last  verse.  The  minds  of  the  eleven  were  ab- 
sorbed and  overwhelmed  with  sorrow  at  the  thought  of  their 
Master  going,  and  they  could  think  of  nothing  else.  Instead 
of  seizing  the  little  time  that  was  left,  in  order  to  learn  more 
from  His  lips  about  His  place  and  work  in  heaven,  they  were 
completely  taken  up  with  sorrow,  and  could  think  of  nothing 
else  but  their  Master's  departure. 

We  should  do  well  to  mark  how  mischievous  overmuch  sor- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  137 

row  is,  and  to  seek  grace  to  keep  it  in  proper  control.  No 
affection,  if  uncontrolled,  so  disarranges  the  order  of  men's 
minds,  and  unfits  them  for  the  duties  of  their  calling. 

7. — [^Nevertheless,  I  tell  you  the  truth,  etc.']  In  this  verse  we  set 
our  Lord  mercifully  condescending  to  show  His  disciples  the 
necessity  for  His  leaving  them.  It  was  expedient.  It  was  for 
their  good.  It  was  for  the  real  ultimate  benefit  of  themselves 
and  the  whole  Church  that  He  should  go  away.  If  He  did  not 
go  away  the  great  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  often 
promised,  could  not  come  down  on  them  and  the  world.  If  He 
went  away  He  would  send  the  Comforter.  If  he  did  not  go 
away  the  Comforter  would  not  come. 

There  is  undeniably  much  that  is  deep  and  mysterious  about 
the  contents  of  this  verse.  We  can  only  speak  with  reverence 
of  the  matter  it  unfolds.  It  seems  clearly  laid  down  that  the 
Holy  Ghost's  coming  down  into  the  world  with  influence  and 
grace,  was  a  thing  dependent  on  our  Lord's  dying,  rising  again, 
and  ascending  into  heaven.  It  seems  to  be  part  of  the  eternal 
covenant  of  man's  salvation  that  the  Son  should  be  incarnate, 
die,  and  rise  again  ;  and  that  then,  as  a  consequence,  the  Holy 
Spirit  should  be  poured  out  with  mighty  influence  on  mankind, 
and  the  Gentile  Churches  be  brought  into  the  fold,  and  Chris- 
tianity spread  over  a  vast  portion  of  the  world.  This  seems 
plainly  taught,  and  this  we  must  simply  believe.  If  any  one 
asks  "  why  the  Holy  Ghost  could  not  be  poured  down  without 
Christ's  going  away  ? "  it  is  safest  to  reply,  that  we  do  not 
know. 

One  thing  is  very  clear.  The  universal  invisible  presence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church,  is  better  than  the  visible  bodily 
presence  of  Christ  with  the  Church.  Christ's  body  could  only 
be  in  one  place.  The  Holy  Ghost  can  be  everywhere  at  one  and 
the  same  time. — Wliatever  the  disciples  might  think,  it  was  far 
better  for  Christ  to  go  up  to  heaven,  and  sit  at  God's  right  hand 
as  their  Priest,  and  send  down  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  with  the 
Church  till  He  came  again,  than  for  Christ  to  tarry  with  them 
as  He  had  done. — Flesh  and  blood  might  have  liked  better  to 
keep  Christ  on  earth,  eating  and  drinking,  and  walking  and 
talking  in  Palestine.  But  it  was  far  better  for  the  souls  of 
men  that  Christ  should  finish  His  work,  go  up  to  heaven,  take 
up  His  ofiice  there  in  the  holy  of  holies,  and  send  down  the 
Holy  Spirit  on  the  Church  and  the  world. 

Calvin  remarks,  "  Far  more  advantageous  and  far  more  desir- 
able is  that  presence  of  Christ,  by  which  He  communicates 
Himself  to  us  through  the  grace  and  power  of  His  Spirit,  than 
if  He  were  present  before  our  eyes." 

Alford  remarks,  "  The  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  is  a  more 
blessed  manifestation  of  God  than  was  ever  the  bodily  presence 
of  the  risen  Saviour. 


138  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Bishop  Andrews  remarks,  "  We  sliall  never  see  tlie  absolute 
necessity  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  coming,  until  we  see  the  incon- 
venience of  His  not  coming." 

The  expression,  "  I  tell  you  the  truth,"  is  a  very  solemn, 
emphatic  one.  It  is  like,  "'  Verily,  verily  I  say,  whether  you 
believe  me  or  not,  it  is  true." 

The  expression,  "  I  will  send,"  seems  again  to  point  to  the 
equal  procession  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Son  and  the 
Father.  In  another  place  it  is,  "  The  Father  will  send."  Here, 
"  I  will  send." 

After  all  no  text  throws  more  light  on  this  deep  verse  than 
Psalm  Ixviii.  18  :  "  Thou  hast  ascended  up  on  high,  and  received 
gifts  for  men  ;  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them." 
These  words  surely  point  out  that  the  Holy  Ghost's  dwelling 
among  men  was  a  gift  purchased  by  the  Son. 

Does  not  the  verse  teach  us  that  those  who  make  much  of  the 
"  corporal  presence  "  of  Christ,  so  called  in  the  Lord's  Supper, 
as  a  thing  we  should  hold  and  believe,  are  in  great  error  ? 
There  is  something  of  far  more  importance  to  the  Church,  be- 
tween the  first  and  second  advents,  than  any  corporal  presence 
of  Christ,  and  that  is  the  presence  of  .the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is 
the  real  presence  we  should  make  much  of,  and  desire  to  feel 
more.  Our  question  should  be  not,  "  Is  Christ's  body  here  ?  " — 
but,  "is  the  Spirit,  the  Comforter  here?" — Excessive  craving 
after  Christ's  bodily  presence  before  the  second  advent,  is  in 
reality  a  dishonoring  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  should  make 
much  of  the  Spirit. 

Ecolampadius  remarks,  "  Those  who  try  to  defend  an  eating 
of  Christ,  or  a  presence  of  Christ,  in  the  Sacramental  bread,, 
as  if  His  body  was  at  the  same  time  with  us  and  in  heaven, 
are  manifestly  at  variance  with  this  text." 

Henry  remarks  here  :  "  The  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
a  greater  comfort  and  advantage  to  us  than  the  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  liesli.  Christ's  bodily  presence  was  comfortable, 
but  the  Spirit  is  more  intimately  a  Comforter  than  Christ 
in  His  tieshly  presence  ;  because  the  Spirit  can  comfort  all 
believers  at  once  in  all  places,  while  Christ's  bodily  presence 
can  comfort  but  few,  and  that  only  in  one  place  at  once. 
The  benefit  of  Christ's  presence  was  great,  but  the  advantage 
of  the  Spirit's  renovation  and  holy  inspiration  is  much  greater." 


JOHN  XVL  8—15. 


8  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will 
reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
rigtiteousuess,  and  of  judgment. 


9  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not 
on  me  ; 

10  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go 
to  my  Father  and  ye  see  me  no  more ; 


JOHN,  CHAP.   XVI.  ;]:  39 


11  Of  judgment,  beoause  the 
prince  of  this  world  is  judged. 

12  1  have  yet  many  things  to  say 
■unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now. 

13  Howbeit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into 
all  truth  :  for  he  shall  not  speak  of 
himself;    but  whatsoever  he    shall 


hear,   that  shall  he  speak ;  and  he 
will  shew  you  things  to  come. 

14  He  shall  glorify  me :  for  he  shall 
receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it 
unto  you. 

15  All  things  that  the  Father  hath 
are  mine  :  therefore  said  I,  that  he 
shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it 
unto  you. 


When  our  Lord  in  this  passage  speaks  of  the  Holy- 
Spirit  "  coming,"  we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not 
misunderstand  His  meaning.  On  the  one  hand,  we 
must  remember  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  in  all  believers 
in  the  Old  Testament  days,  from  the  very  beginning. 
No  man  was  ever  saved  from  the  power  of  sin,  and 
made  a  saint,  except  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Samuel,  and  David, 
and  the  Prophets,  were  made  what  they  were  by  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  On  the  other  hand,  we 
must  never  forget  that  after  Christ's  ascension  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  poured  down  on  men  with  far  greater  energy 
as  individuals,  and  with  far  wider  influence  on  the  na- 
tions of  the  world  at  large,  than  He  has  ever  poured  out 
before.  It  is  this  increased  energy  and  influence  that 
our  Lord  has  in  view  in  the  verses  before  us.  He  meant 
that  after  His  own  ascension  the  Holy  Ghost  would 
"come  "  down  into  the  world  with  such  a  vastly  increased 
power,  that  it  would  seem  as  if  He  had  "  come  "  for  the 
first  time,  and  had  never  been  in  the  world  before. 

The  difficulty  of  rightly  explaining  the  wondrous  say- 
ings of  our  Lord  in  this  place  is  undeniably  very  great. 
It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  full  meaning  of  His 
words  has  ever  been  entirely  grasped  by  man,  and 
whether  there  is  not  something  at  the  bottom  which  has 
not  been  completely  unfolded.  The  common,  superficial 
explanation,  that  our  Lord  only  meant  that  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  saving  individual  believers  is  to  convince 


140  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

them  of  their  own  sins,  of  Christ's  righteousness,  and  of 
the  certainty  of  judgment  at  last,  will  hardly  satisfy 
thinking  minds.  It  is  a  short-cut  and  superficial  way  of 
getting  over  Scripture  difficulties.  It  contains  excellent 
and  sound  doctrine,  no  doubt,  but  it  does  not  meet  the 
full  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words.  It  is  truth,  but  not 
the  truth  of  the  text.  It  is  not  individuals  here  and 
there  whom  He  says  the  Spirit  is  to  convince,  but  the 
loorld.  Let  us  see  whether  we  cannot  find  a  fuller  and 
more  satisfactory  interpretation. 

For  one  thing,  our  Lord  probably  meant  to  show  us 
what  the  Holy  Ghost  would  do  to  the  world  of  unbelieving 
Jews.  He  would  convince  them  "  of  sin,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  judgment." 

He  would  convince  the  Jews  "  of  sin."  He  would 
compel  them  to  feel  and  acknowledge  in  their  own 
minds,  that  in  rejecting  Jesus  of  Nazareth  they  had 
committed  a  great  sin,  and  were  guilty  of  gross  unbelief. 

He  would  convince  the  Jews  of  "righteousness." 
He  would  press  home  on  their  consciences  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  was  not  an  impostor  and  a  deceiver,  as  they 
had  said,  but  a  holy,  just,  and  blameless  Person,  whom 
God  had  owned  by  receiving  up  into  heaven. 

He  would  convince  the  Jews  of  "judgment."  He 
would  oblige  them  to  see  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had 
conquered,  overcome,  and  judged  the  devil  and  all  his 
host,  and  was  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  at 
the  right  hand  of  God. 

That  the  Holy  Ghost  did  actually  so  convince  the 
Jewish  nation  after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  is  clearly 
shown  by  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  It  was  He  who 
gave  the  humble  fishermen  of  Galilee  such  grace  and 
might  in  testifying  of  Christ,  that  their  adversaries  were 
put  to  silence.  It  was  His  reproving  and  convincing 
power  which  enabled  them  to  '*  fill  Jerusalem  with  their 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  ][4;[ 

doctrine."  Not  a  few  of  the  nation,  we  know,  were  sav- 
ingly convinced,  like  St.  Paul,  and  "  a  great  company 
of  priests  "  became  obedient  to  the  faith.  Myriads  more, 
we  have  every  reason  to  believe,  were  mentally  con- 
vinced, if  they  had  not  courage  to  come  out  and  take 
up  the  cross.  The  whole  tone  of  the  Jewish  people 
towards  the  end  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  unlike 
what  it  is  at  the  beginning.  A  vast  reproving  and  con- 
vincing influence  even  where  not  saving,  seems  to  have 
gone  over  their  minds.  Surely  this  was  partly  what  our 
Lord  had  in  view  in  these  verses  when  He  said,  "The 
Holy  Ghost  shall  reprove  and  convince." 

For  another  thing,  our  Lord  probably  meant  to  fore- 
tell lohat  the  Holy  Ghost  would  do  for  the  whole  of  man- 
hind,,  both  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews. 

He  would  reprove  in  every  part  of  the  earth  the  cur- 
rent ideas  of  men  about  sin,  righteousness,  judgment, 
and  convince  people  of  some  far  higher  ideas  on  these 
points  than  they  had  before  acknowledged.  He  w^ould 
make  men  see  more  clearly  the  nature  of  sin,  the  need 
of  righteousness,  the  certainty  of  judgment.  In  a  word, 
He  would  insensibly  be  an  Advocate  and  convincing 
Pleader  for  God  throughout  the  whole  world,  and  raise 
up  a  standard  of  morality,  purity  and  knowledge,  of 
which  formerly  men  had  no  conception. 

That  the  Holy  Ghost  actually  did  so  in  every  part 
of  the  earth,  after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  is  a  simple  mat- 
ter of  fact.  The  unlearned  and  lowly  Jews,  whom  He 
sent  forth  and  strengthened  to  preach  the  Gospel  after 
our  Lord's  ascension,  "  turned  the  world  upside  down," 
and  in  two  or  three  centuries  altered  the  habits,  tastes, 
and  practices  of  the  whole  civilized  world.  The  power 
of  the  devil  received  a  decided  check.  Even  infidels 
dare  not  deny  that  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  had  an 
enormous  effect  on  men's  ways,  lives,  and  opinions,  when 


142  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

they  were  first  preached,  and  that  there  were  no  special 
graces  or  eloquence  in  the  preachers  that  can  account 
for  it.  In  truth,  the  world  was  "  reproved  and  con- 
vinced," in  spite  of  itself ;  and  even  those  who  did  not 
become  believers  became  better  men.  Surely  this  also 
was  partly  what  our  Lord  had  in  view  when  He  said  to 
Ilis  discij^les,  "  When  the  Holy  Ghost  comes.  He  shall 
convince  the  world  of  sin,  and  righteousness,  and  judg- 
ment." 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  passage,  deep  and  difficult  as 
It  is,  with  a  thankful  remembrance  of  one  comfortable 
promise  which  it  contains.  "The  Spirit  of  truth,"  says 
our  Lord  to  His  weak  and  half-informed  followers, 
"  shall  guide  you  into  all  truth."  That  promise  was  for 
our  sakes,  no  doubt,  as  well  as  for  theirs.  What  ever 
we  need  to  know  for  our  present  peace  and  sanctifica- 
tion,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ready  to  teach  us.  All  truth  in 
science,  nature,  and  philosophy  of  course  is  not  included 
in  this  promise.  But  into  all  spiritual  truth  that  is  real- 
ly profitable,  and  that  our  minds  can  comprehend  and 
bear,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  ready  and  willing  to  guide  us. 
Then  let  us  never  forget,  in  reading  the  Bible,  to  pray 
for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  must  not  won- 
der if  we  find  the  Bible  a  dark  and  difficult  book,  if  we 
do  not  regularly  seek  light  from  Him  by  whom  it  was 
first  inspired.  In  tliis,  as  in  many  other  things,  "we 
have  not  because  we  ask  not." 

Notes.    John  xvi.  8-15. 

8. — [A77d  when  lie  is  come.]  These  words  would  be  rendered  more 
literally,  "  And  He  having  come."  Here,  as  in  other  places,  we 
must  remember  that  the  "  coming  "  of  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
mean  His  coming  for  the  first  time  into  the  world.  He  was  in 
all  the  old  Testament  saints,  and  no  one  ever  believed  or  served 
God  without  His  grace.  Wherever  there  has  been  a  true  ser- 
vant of  God,  there  has  been  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  "  coming  " 
here  mentioned  means  His  coming  down  with  larger  power  and 
infiaence  on  all  mankind  after  the  ascension  of  Christ,  and  spe- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  143 

cially  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  From  tliat  day  began  an  enor- 
mous extension  of  His  influence  and  operation  on  human  na- 
ture :  an  influence  so  much  wider  than  it  ever  was  before,  that 
He  is  said  to  have  "  come." 

Lightfoot  remarks  that  "  the  Holy  Spirit  had  absented  Him- 
Self  from  the  Jewish  nation  for  four  hundred  years !  "  Hence 
the  phrase  "  come  "  had  a  special  significance. 

[He  will  reprove. ..judgment.^  This  sentence  is  perhaps  one 
of  the  most  ditficult  in  the  whole  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  Men 
will  probably  never  agree  about  it  entirely  till  the  Lord  comes. 
There  is  something  in  it  which  seems  to  baffle  all  interpreters. 

The  commonest  explanation  is  that  which  regards  the  pas- 
sage as  describing  the  ordinary  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
saving  God's  people.  It  is  He  who  convinces  people  that  they 
are  sinners ;  convinces  them  that  they  must  be  saved  by 
Christ's  righteousness,  and  not  their  own  ;  and  convinces  them 
that  there  is  a  judgment  to  come.  This  interpretation  is  the 
one  adopted  by  Alford"  and  many  others. — No  doubt  it  contains 
truth,  but  it  is  not  at  all  clear  to  me  that  it  is  the  truth  of  the 
passage.  It  is  open,  in  short,  to  grave  objections,  and,  in  com- 
mon with  some  commentators,  I  cannot  feel  satisfied  with  it. 
For  popular  addresses  this  view  may  do  pretty  well.  But,  I 
venture  to  think,  no  man  who  sits  down  and  calmly  weighs  the 
meaning  of  words,  can  fail  to  see  that  it  is  open  to  very  serious 
objections. 

Inward  conviction  is  certainly  not  the  meaning  of  the  word 
rendered  "  reprove."  It  is  rather  refutation  by  proofs,  con- 
victing by  unanswerable  argument  as  an  advocate,  that  is 
meant. 

Believers  and  God's  people  are  not  said  to  be  the  subjects  of 
the  Spirit's  reproving  work.  It  is  the  "world"  that  is  to  be 
reproved ;  and  this  very  world,  in  this  last  sermon,  is  continu- 
ally put  in  contrast  with  Christ's  people. 

Add  to  all  this,  that  the  latter  part  of  the  ninth,  tenth,  and 
eleventh  verses  can  hardly  be  said  to  suit  and  square  in  with 
the  verse  we  are  considering.  If  our  Lord  had  simply  said, 
"  The  Spirit  shall  convince  your  hearers  of  their  own  sins,  of 
my  imputed  righteousness,  and  of  a  day  of  judgment,"  it 
would  have  been  plain  enough.  But  unfortunately  there  are 
several  things  added  which  really  do  not  chime  in  with  this 
mode  of  interpretation.  I  repeat,  that  no  intelligent  Christian, 
of  course,  will  think  of  denying  that  conviction  of  sin  is  a  spe- 
cial and  saving  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  hearts  of  be- 
lievers. But  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  it  is  the  thing 
taught  in  this  passage.  It  is  truth,  but  not  the  truth  of  the 
text. 

I  believe  the  meaning  to  be  something  of  this  kind. — "  After 


144  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

tlie  day  of  Pentecost  tlie  Holy  Ghost,  tlie  great  Advocate  of  Me 
and  my  people,  shall  come  into  this  world  with  such  mighty 
power  that  He  shall  silence,  convince,  and  stop  the  mouths  of 
your  enemies,  and  oblige  them,  however  unwillingly,  to  think 
of  Me  and  my  cause  very  differently  from  what  they  think 
now.  In  particular.  He  shall  convince  them  of  their  own  sin, 
of  my  righteousness,  and  of  the  victory  which  I  have  won  over 
Satan.  He  shall,  in  short,  be  a  crushing  Advocate  whom  the 
world  shall  not  be  able  to  resist  or  gainsay." 

That  this  was  one  effect  of  the  Holy  Ghost  coming  down  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  appears  so  frequently  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  that  it  is  needless  to  quote  texts.  It  is  clear  from  the 
wliole  narrative  of  the  earlier  portion  of  Acts,  that  after  the 
day  of  Pentecost  there  was  a  peculiar,  restraining,  irresistible 
power  accompanying  the  work  of  the  Apostles,  which  the  un- 
believing Jews,  in  spite  of  all  their  numbers  and  influence," 
were  unable  to  withstand.  Nor  was  this  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  confined  to  the  Jews.  Wherever  the  Apostles  and  their 
fellow-laborers  went,  the  same  convincing  power  accompanied 
them,  and  obliged  even  the  heathen  to  acknowledge  Christian- 
ity  as  a  great  fact,  even  when  they  did  not  believe.  Pliny's 
famous  letter  to  Trajan  about  the  Christians,  is  a  remarkable 
illustration  of  this. 

I  prefer  this  interpretation  to  the  one  above  mentioned,  as 
held  by  Alford  and  most  commentators,  for  two  simple  reasons. 
One  is  that  it  suits  the  language  of  the  passage,  and  the  other 
view  does  not.  The  other  reason  is  that  it  harmonizes  with 
the  context.  Our  Lord  is  encouraging  the  disciples  against  the 
world  by  the  presence  of  the  Comforter,  And  one  special  part 
of  the  encouragement  is,  that  the  Comforter  shall  do  for  them 
the  work  of  an  advocate,  by  silencing,  crushing,  refuting,  and 
convincing  their  enemies. 

After  all,  the  enormous  change  which  took  place  in  the  state 
of  "  the  world  "  within  a  few  centuries  after  Pentecost,  is  a 
strong  proof  to  my  own  mind  of  the  correctness  of  the  view  I 
advocate.  About  sin,  Christ,  and  judgment,  the  opinions  of 
men  were  completely  transformed,  even  though  men  were  un- 
converted. And  who  did  this  ?  The  Holy  Ghost.  Nothing 
can  account  for  the  change  but  the  miraculous  interposition  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. — I  frankly  confess  that  this  view  of  the  pas- 
sage before  us  is  not  that  of  the  vast  majority  of  commenta- 
tors. But  in  these  matters  I  dare  not  call  any  man  master, 
and  must  say  what  I  think.  Those  who  wish  to  see  the  view 
I  maintain  more  fully  argued  out  and  supported,  are  advised  to 
consult  "  Poole's  Annotations,"  and  Suicer's  "  Thesaurus  "  on 
the  Greek  word  which  we  translate  "  reprove."  Schleusner 
also  seems  to  support  the  view. 

Scott  remarks  here,  "  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  an  immense 
proportion  of  the  human  race,  since  the  pouring  oat  of  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  145 

Holy  Spirit  after  our  Lord's  ascension,  have  been  led  to  form 
such  sentiments  about  sin,  rigliteousness,  and  a  future  judg- 
ment, as  the  world  up  to  that  time  had  not  the  most  remote 
conception  of  ;  so  that  a  far  higher  standard  of  morals  has  been 
fixed  throughout  numerous  nations  than  was  at  all  thought  of 
before." 

9, — [Of  sin...beUeve  not. ..Me.]  I  think  this  verse  means,  "  The 
Holy  Ghost  shall  first  and  foremost  convince  the  world  con- 
cerning sin,  by  obliging  my  enemies  to  see,  though  too  late, 
that  in  not  believing  Me  they  made  an  enormous  mistake,  and 
committed  a  great  sin.  He  shall  make  them  feel  at  last  that 
in  rejecting  Me,  they  rejected  One  whom  they  ought  to  have 
believed." 

10. — [Of  righteousness. ..no  more.]  I  think  this  verse  means,  "  The 
Holy  Ghost,  secondly,  shall  convince  the  world  concerning  my 
righteousness,  that  I  was  a  righteous  Man,  and  not  a  deceiver. 
And  this  He  will  do  after  I  have  left  the  world,  when  the  Jews 
can  no  longer  see  Me,  and  form  any  opinion  of  Me.  I  go  to 
the  Father,  you  knoAv,  and  you  will  soon  see  me  no  more.  But 
after  1  am  gone  the  Holy  Ghost  will  oblige  my  enemies  to  feel 
that  I  was  a  just  and  righteous  Person,  and  was  unjustly 
elain."  Even  the  centurion  who  saw  our  Lord  crucified,  de- 
clared, "Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  man."  (Luke  xxiii. 
46.) 

11. — [Of  judgment. ..judged]  I  think  this  verse  means,  "  The  Ho- 
ly Ghost,  in  the  last  place,  shall  convince  the  world  concerning 
the  judgment  and  overthrow  of  Satan's  usurped  power,  by  set- 
ting up  a  new  kingdom  everywhere,  even  my  Church,  by  emp- 
tying the  heathen  temples  of  their  worshippers,  and  by  drying 
up  the  power  of  idolatry,  and  delivering  vast  portions  of  the 
world  from  its  dominion."  " 

The  "  Prince  of  this  world,"  of  course  means  the  devil.  How 
great  His  power  was  over  mankind  before  Christ  came  into  the 
world,  and  how  great  a  change  Christ's  death  and  resurrection 
produced  in  the  general  condition  of  mankind,  are  things 
which  at  this  period  of  time  we  can  hardly  realize.  The  com- 
ing of  the  "  kingdom  of  God,"  or  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  was  a 
reality  1800  years  ago,  of  which  we  can  now  form  little  idea. 
The  Holy  Ghost  produced  a  general  conviction  that  a  new  or- 
der of  tilings  had  begun,  and  that  the  old  king  and  tyrant  of 
the  world  was  dethroned  and  stripped  of  much  of  his  power. 

Such  is  the  view  that  I  take  of  this  passage.  I  do  not  pre- 
tend to  deny  that  there  are  difficulties  about  it.  I  only  main- 
tain that  these  difficulties  are  fewer  than  those  which  surround 
the  common  idea  attached  to  the  passage. 

Poole's  "  Annotations  "  perhaps  throw  more  light  on  the  pas- 
sage than  any  commentary  I  have  met  with.     But  even  he  says 

7 


14:6  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

tilings  which  appear  to  me  not  warranted  by  the  words  of  the 
evangelist. 

13. — [/  liaioe  yet  many  tilings. ..you^  This  clause  seems  to  refer 
to  the  higher,  fuller,  deeper  views  of  Christian  truth  which 
our  Lord  doubtless  revealed  to  His  disciples  during  the  forty 
days  between  His  resurrection  and  ascension,  when  He  was 
continually  "  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom 
of  God." 

The  absurdity  and  unreasonableness  of  concluding  from  this 
text  that  there  are  many  other  truths  which  Christ  after  His 
resurrection  revealed  to  the  Apostles,  but  which  are  not  record- 
ed in  Scripture,  is  well  exposed  by  Ecolampadius  and  other 
Protestant  commentators. 

[  Ye  cannot  hear  them  now.]  This  word  "  bear  "  means  liter- 
ally "  carry."  It  does  not  therefore  signify  things  that  the 
disciples  could  not  "  apprehend,"  but  things  that  their  minds 
were  not  yet  strong  enough  to  endure  and  digest. 

Do  we  not  see  here  that  there  are  steps  and  degrees  in  Chris- 
tian attainment  ?  A  man  may  be  a  good  man,  and  yet  not  able 
to  endure  the  whole  truth.  We  must  teach  people  as  they  are 
able  to  bear,  and  be  patient. 

13. — \IIoiDheit...He...gnide...nll  truth.']  Here  our  Lord  gives  anoth- 
er promise  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  shall  guide  disci- 
ples into  all  truth.  He  will  lead  and  direct  them  into  the  full 
knowledge  of  all  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and  all  the  truth 
they  need  to  know. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  "  all  truth  "  here  does  not  mean  all 
scientific  truth.     It  applies  specially  to  spiritual  truth. 

This  great  promise  does  not  appear  to  me  to  signify  "  inspi- 
ration," or  the  imparting  of  that  power  to  write  and  teach  in- 
fallibly which  the  Apostles  possessed.  I  much  prefer  the 
view,  that  it  is  a  wide  promise  belonging  to  the  whole  Church 
in  every  age.  It  means  that  special  office  of  "teaching"  by 
which  the  Spirit  illuminates,  guides,  and  informs  the  under- 
standings of  all  believers.  That  the  minds  of  true  Christians 
are  taught  and  enlightened  in  a  manner  wonderful  to  them- 
selves as  well  as  others,  is  a  simple  matter  of  Christian  expe- 
rience. That  enlightenment  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
the  first  step  in  saving  religion.  At  the  same  time  we  must 
never  forgot  that  the  disciples  received  an  immense  increase 
of  spiritual  knowledge  after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  saw 
everything  in  religion  far  more  clearly  than  they  did  before. 

Alford  observes,  "  No  promise  of  universal  knowledge,  nor  of 
infallibility,  is  liereby  conveyed  ;  but  it  is  a  promise  to  them 
and  us,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  teach  and  lead  us,  not  as  chil- 
dren  under  the  tutors  and  governors  of  legal  and   imperfect 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  147 

knowledge,  but  as  sons,  making  known  to  us  all  the  truth  of 
God.     (Gal.  iv.  6.) 

It  is  worth  notice  that  in  the  Greek  it  is  literally, "  guide  into 
all  THE  truth  ; "  as  if  it  specially  meant  *'  the  truth  concerning 
Me." 

Poole  remarks  that  the  Greek  word  rendered  "  guide,"  is  one 
of  great  emphasis,  signifying  not  only  a  guide  who  will  dis- 
cover truth  as  the  object  of  the  understanding,  hut  one  who 
will  bow  the  will  to  the  doctrines  of  truth. 

{For. ..not  speak...IIimself... hear. ..speak.']  Here  begins  a  list 
of  things  said  about  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  our  weak  capaci- 
ties can  hardly  take  in. 

The  clause  before  us  seems  meant  to  show  the  close  and  in- 
timate union  existing  between  the  Spirit  and  the  two  other 
Persons  in  the  blessed  Trinity.  "  He  shall  not  speak  from 
Himself,  independently  of  Me  and  my  Father.  He  shall  only 
speak  such  things  as  He  shall  hear  from  us." 

The  phrases  "  speak  "  and  "  hear  "  are  both  accommodations 
to  man's  weakness.  The  Spirit  does  not  literally  "  speak  "  or 
literally  "  hear."  It  must  mean,  "  His  teachings  and  guidings 
shall  be  those  of  One  who  is  in  the  closest  union  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son." 

"  Of  Himself  "  does  not  mean  *'  about  Himself,"  but  "  from 
Himself." 

{He  will  show. ..things  to  come.]  The  second  thing  said  about 
the  Spirit,  is  that  He  will  show  "  things  to  come."  I  can  only 
suppose  that  this  points  to  the  prophetical  revelation  of  the 
future  of  the  Church  which  the  Spirit  was  to  impart  to  the  dis- 
ciples. He  did  so  when  He  inspired  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  St.  Jude, 
and  St.  John  to  prophecy.  The  expression  probably  includes 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  removal  of  the  Mosaic  dispen- 
sation, the  scattering  of  the  Jews,  the  calling  in  of  the  Gentile 
Churches,  and  the  whole  history  of  their  rise,  progress,  and 
final  decay. 

14. — {He. ..glorify  Me.]  The  third  thing  said  of  the  Spirit,  is  that 
He  shall  "  glorify  Christ."  He  shall  continually  teach,  and 
lead,  and  guide  disciples  to  make  much  of  Christ.  Any  relig- 
ious teaching  which  does  not  tend  to  exalt  Christ,  has  a  fatal 
defect  about  it.     It  cannot  be  from  the  Spirit. 

{He  shall  receive. ..mine... s7i020  you.]  This  is  the  fourth  thing 
said  of  the  Spirit  in  this  place.  He  will  take  of  the  truth  about 
Christ,  and  show  it  or  reveal  it  to  disciples.  I  can  attach  no 
other  meaning  to  the  phrase  "  mijie."  It  is  in  the  singular 
number, — "  that  thing  which  is  mine," — and  I  cannot  see  what 
it  can  mean  but  "  truth  concerning  Me." 

Aiford  remarks,  "  This  verse  is  decisive  against  all  additions 


148 


EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


and  pretended  revelations,  subsequent  to  and  beside  Christ ;  it 
being  the  work  of  the  Spirit  to  testify  to  the  things  of  Christ, 
and  not  to  anything  new  or  beyond  Him." 
15. — [All  things. ..Father. ..mine,  etc.]  Tlie  object  of  this  deep  verse 
seems  to  be  to  show  the  entire  unity  between  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  revelation  of  truth  made  to  man.  "  The 
Holy  Spirit  shall  show  you  things  concerning  Me,  and  yet 
things  at  the  same  time  concerning  the  Father,  because  all 
things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine." 

Both  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one  are  strikingly  calcu- 
lated to  humble  a  Bible  reader,  and  make  him  feel  how  little  he 
knows,  at  his  very  best,  of  the  full  meaning  of  some  Scriptures. 
There  are  things  in  them  which  we  must  feel  we  do  not  com- 
prehend. Beyond  the  great  principle,  that  it  is  the  special 
office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  glorify  Christ,  and  to  show  disciples 
the  whole  truth  concerning  Christ,  it  is  very  hard  to  get. 

May  not  the  clause,  "  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are 
mine,"  be  specially  put  in  to  prevent  our  supposing  that  there 
can  be  any  real  separation  between  the  things  of  Christ  and  the 
things  of  the  Father  ?  It  is  like  "  I  and  my  Father  are  One." 
"  All  mine  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  mine." — '*  Think  not,"  our 
Lord  seems  to  say,  "  when  I  speak  of  the  Spirit  showing  you 
•  my  things,'  that  He  will  not  show  you  the  things  of  my  Father. 
That  would  be  impossible.  There  is  so  close  an  union  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  that  the  Spirit  cannot  show  or  teach 
the  things  of  the  one  without  the  things  of  the  other.  In  a 
word.  He  proceeds  from  the  Father  as  well  as  from  the  Son." 


JOHN  XVI.  16—24. 


16  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall 
not  see  me :  and  again,  a  little  while, 
and  ye  shall  see  me,  because  I  go  to 
the  i'ather. 

17  Then  said  some  of  his  disciples 
among  themselves,  What  is  this 
that  he  saith  unto  us,  A  little  while, 
and  ye  shall  not  see  me  :  and  again, 
a  little  wliile,  and  ye  shall  see  me : 
and,  Because  I  go  to  the  Father  ? 

18  They  said  therefore.  What  is 
this  that  he  saith,  A  little  while  ?  we 
cannot  tell  what  he  saith. 

19  Now  Jesus  knew  that  they 
were  desirous  to  ask  him,  and  said 
unto  them.  Do  ye  enquire  among 
yourselves  of  that  I  said,  A  little 
while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  mo  :  and 
again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
me? 

20  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you. 
That  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but 


the  world  shall  rejoice :  and  ye 
shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow 
shall  be  turned  into  joy. 

21  A  woman  when  she  is  in  tra- 
vail hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour 
is  come :  but  as  soon  as  she  is  de- 
livered of  the  child  she  remember- 
etli  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy 
that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world. 

22  And  ye  now  therefore  have 
sorrow:  but  I  will  see  you  again, 
and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and 
your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you. 

23  And  in  that  day  ye  Rha'll  ask 
me  notliing.  Verily,  verilv  I  say 
unto  you.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give 
it  you. 

24  Hitherto  Lave  ye  asked  noth- 
ing in  my  name  :  ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  2^9 

Not  all  Christ's  sayings  were  understood  by  His  dis- 
ciples. We  are  told  this  distinctly  in  the  passage  we 
have  now  read. — "  What  is  this  that  he  saith  ?  We, 
cannot  tell  what  he  saith." — None  ever  spake  so  plainly 
as  Jesus.  None  were  so  thoroughly  accustomed  to  His 
style  of  teaching  as  the  Apostles.  Yet  even  the  Apos- 
tles did  not  always  take  in  their  Master's  meaning. 
Surely  we  have  no  right  to  be  surprised  if  we  cannot  in- 
terpret Christ's  words.  There  are  many  depths  in  thera 
which  we  have  no  line  to  fathom.  But  let  us  thank 
God  that  there  are  many  sayings  of  our  Lord  recorded 
which  no  honest  mind  can  fail  to  understand.  Let  us 
use  diligently  the  light  that  we  have,  and  not  doubt  that 
"  to  him  that  hath  more  shall  be  given." 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  that  ChrisVs 
absence  from  the  earth  will  he  a  time  of  sorroio  to  believ- 
ers^ but  of  joy  to  the  world.  It  is  written,  "  Ye  shall 
weep  and  lament,  but  the  world  shall  rejoice."  To  con- 
fine these  words  to  the  single  point  of  Christ's  approach- 
ing death  and  burial,  appears  a  narrow  view  of  their 
meaning.  Like  many  of  our  Lord's  sayings  on  the  last 
evening  of  His  earthly  ministry,  they  seem  to  extend 
over  the  whole  period  of  time  between  His  first  and  sec- 
ond advents. 

Christ's  personal  absence  must  needs  be  a  sorrow  to 
all  true-hearted  believers.  "  The  children  of  the  bride- 
chamber  cannot  but  fast  when  the  bridegroom  is  taken 
from  them."  Faith  is  not  sight.  Hope  is  not  certainty. 
Reading  and  hearing  are  not  the  same  as  beholding. 
Praying  is  not  the  same  as  speaking  face  to  face.  There 
is  somethings  even  in  the  hearts  of  the  most  eminent 
saints,  that  will  never  be  fully  satisfied  as  long  as  they 
are  on  earth  and  Christ  is  in  heaven.  So  long  as  they 
dwell  in  a  body  of  corruption,  and  see  through  a  glass 
darkly,    -so  long  as  they  behold  creation  groaning  under 


150  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

the  power  of  sin,  and  all  things  not  put  under  Christ ; — ■ 
so  long  their  happiness  and  peace  must  needs  be  incom- 
plete. This  is  what  St.  Paul  meant  when  he  said,  "  We 
ourselves,  which  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  groan 
within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  our  body."     (Rom.  vii.  23.) 

Yet  this  same  personal  absence  of  Christ  is  no  cause 
of  sorrow  to  the  children  of  this  world.  It  was  not  to  the 
unbelieving  Jews,  we  may  be  sure.  When  Christ  was 
condemned  and  crucified,  they  rejoiced  and  were  glad. 
They  thought  that  the  hated  reprover  of  their  sins 
and  false  teaching  was  silenced  for  ever.  It  is  not  to 
the  careless  and  the  wicked  of  our  day,  we  may  be  sure. 
The  longer  Christ  keeps  away  from  this  earth,  and  lets 
them  alone,  the  better  will  they  be  pleased.  "  We  do 
not  want  this  Christ  to  reign  over  us,"  is  the  feeling  of 
the  world.  His  absence  causes  them  no  pain.  Their 
so-called  happiness  is  complete  without  Him.  All  this 
may  sound  very  painful  and  startling.  But  where  is 
the  thinking  reader  of  the  Bible  who  can  deny  that  it  is 
true  ?  The  world  does  not  want  Christ  back  again,  and 
thinks  that  it  does  very  well  without  Him.  What  a 
fearful  waking  up  there  will  be  by-and-by ! 

We  learn,  for  another  thing  in  this  verse,  that  Chrisfs 
personal  return  shall  he  a  source  of  boundless  joy  to 
His  helievi7ig  people.  It  is  written,  "I  will  see  you 
again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man 
taketh  from  you."  Once  more  we  must  take  care  that 
we  do  not  narrow  the  meaning  of  these  words  by  tying 
them  down  to  our  Lord's  resurrection.  They  surely 
reach  much  further  than  this.  The  joy  of  the  disciples 
when  they  saw  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  was  a  joy 
soon  obscured  by  His  ascension  and  withdrawal  into 
heaven.  The  true  joy,  the  perfect  joy,  the  joy  that  can 
never  be  taken  away,  will  be  the  joy  which   Christ's 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  l^l 

people  will  feel  when  Christ  returns  the  second  time,  at 
the  end  of  this  world. 

The  second  personal  advent  of  Christ,  to  speak  plainly, 
is  the  one  grand  object  on  which  our  Lord,  both  here 
and  elsewhere,  teaches  all  believers  to  fix  their  eyes. 
We  ought  to  be  always  looking  for  and  "  loving  His 
appearing,"  as  the  perfection  of  our  happiness,  and  the 
consummation  of  all  our  hopes.  (2  Peter  iii.  12;  2 
Tim.  iv.  8.)  That  same  Jesus  who  was  taken  up 
visibly  into  heaven,  shall  also  come  again  visibly,  even 
as  He  went.  Let  the  eyes  of  our  faith  be  always  fixed 
on  this  coming.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  look  back- 
ward to  the  cross,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  dying  for  our 
sins;  and  iqnoards  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  rejoice 
in  Christ's  interceding  for  every  believer.  We  must  do 
more  than  this.  We  must  look  forward  to  Christ's  re- 
turn from  lieaven  to  bless  His  people,  and  to  wind  up 
the  work  of  redemption.  Then,  and  then  only,  will  the 
prayer  of  eighteen  centuries  receive  its  complete 
answer, — "  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  Well  may  our  Lord  say  that 
in  that  day  of  resurrection  and  reunion  our  "  hearts 
shall  rejoice." — "  When  we  awake  up  after  His  likeness 
we  shall  be  satisfied."     (Psalm  xvii.  15.) 

We  learn,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  that  lohile  Christ  is 
absent  believers  tnust  ash  much  in  prayer.  It  is  written, 
"  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  My  name  :  ask  and 
ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." 

We  may  well  believe  that  up  to  this  time  the  dis- 
ciples had  never  realized  their  Master's  full  dignity. 
They  had  certainly  never  understood  that  He  was  the 
one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  in  whose  name  and 
for  whose  sake  they  were  to  put  up  their  prayers.  Here 
they  are  distinctly  told  that  henceforward  they  are  to 
"  ask  in  His  name."     Nor  can  we  doubt  that  our  Lord 


X52  ^       EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

would  have  all  His  people,  in  every  age,  understand 
that  the  secret  of  comfort  during  His  absence  is  to  be 
instant  in  prayer.  He  would  have  us  know  that  if  we 
cannot  see  Him  with  our  bodily  eyes  any  longer,  we  can 
talk  with  Him,  and  through  Him  have  special  access  to 
God.  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,"  He  proclaims  to 
all  His  people  in  every  age  ;  "  and  your  joy  shall  be 
full." 

Let  the  lesson  sink  down  deeply  into  our  hearts.  Of 
all  the  list  of  Christian  duties  there  is  none  to  which 
there  is  such  abounding  encouragement  as  prayer.  It 
is  a  duty  which  concerns  all.  High  and  low,  rich  and 
poor,  learned  and  unlearned, — all  must  pray.  It  is  a 
duty  for  which  all  are  accountable.  All  cannot  read,  or 
hear,  or  sing  ;  but  all  who  have  the  spirit  of  adoption 
can  pray.  Above  all,  it  is  a  duty  in  which  everything 
depends  on  the  heart  and  motive  within.  Our  words 
may  be  feeble  and  ill-chosen,  and  our  language  broken 
and  ungrammatical,  and  unworthy  to  be  written  dowm. 
But  if  the  heart  be  right,  it  matters  not.  He  that 
sits  in  heaven  can  spell  out  the  meaning  of  every 
petition  sent  up  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  can  make 
the  asker  know  and  feel  that  he  receives. 

"  If  we  know  these  things,  happy  are  we  if  we  do 
them."  Let  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  be  a  daily 
habit  with  us  every  morning  and  evening  of  our  lives. 
Keeping  up  that  habit,  we  shall  find  strength  for  duty, 
comfort  in  trouble,  guidance  in  perplexity,  hope  in 
sickness,  and  support  in  death.  Faithful  is  He  that 
promised,  "Your  joy  shall  be  full;"  and  He  will  keep 
His  word,  if  we  ask  in  prayer. 


Notes.    John  xvi.  16—24. 

16. — [A  little  while,  and  ye  shall,  etc.'l    There  is  a  diflficulty  in  this 
verse  which  requires  consideration.    To  what  time  does  oux  Lord 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  253 

refer  wlien  He  says,  "  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me," 
and  "  ye  shall  see  Me  "  ?     There  are  two  answers. 

(a)  Some  think,  as  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  Hengstenberg-,  that 
our  Lord  only  meant,  "  in  a  few  hours  I  shall  be  removed  by 
death,  and  buried,  and  then  you  will  not  see  Me  ;  and  again  after 
three  days  I  shall  rise  again,  and  then  you  will  see  Me." 

(6)  Others  think,  as  Augustine,  Maldonatus,  and  Wordsworth, 
that  our  Lord  meant,  "  In  a  short  time  I  shall  leave  the  world, 
ascend  up  to  heaven,  and  go  to  my  Father,  and  you  will  see  Me 
no  more  ;  and  again,  in  comparatively  short  time,  I  shall  return 
to  the  world  at  my  second  advent,  and  you  will  see  Me  again." 

I  decidedly  prefer  the  second  of  these  interpretations.  To" 
explain  the  words,  "  Ye  shall  not  see  Me,"  and  "  Ye  shall  see 
Me,"  by  our  Lord's  death  and  resurrection,  seems  to  me  a  forced 
and  unnatural  interpretation.  Moreover  it  completely  fails  to 
explain  the  words,  "  I  go  to  the  Father."  Both  here  and  all 
through  the  passage,  I  believe  our  Lord  is  speaking  for  the 
benefit  of  the  whole  Church  until  His  coming  again,  and  not 
merely  for  the  benefit  of  the  eleven  apostles.  The  true  sense 
is  best  seen  by  inverting  the  order  of  the  words.  "  The  time 
has  arrived  when  I  must  leave  the  world,  and  go  back  again  to 
my  Father.  The  consequence  is  that  in  a  little  time  you  will 
no  longer  see  Me  with  your  bodily  eyes,  for  I  shall  be  in  heaven 
and  you  on  earth.  But  take  comfort !  In  a  little  time  I  shall 
return  again  with  power  and  great  glory,  and  then  you  and  all 
my  believing  people  will  see  Me  again." 

It  is  worth  notice,  in  support  of  the  view  I  maintain,  that  the 
expression  in  Greek,  "  a  little  while,"  is  almost  the  same  as  in 
Heb.  X.  37,  when  the  second  advent  is  clearly  spoken  of.  More- 
over the  expression  "  1  go,"  is  distinctly  applied  in  several  places 
to  our  Lord's  final  departure  from  the  world,  and  seldom,  if  ever, 
to  our  Lord's  death  on  the  cross. 

Alford  thinks  His  meaning  is  manifold,  and  says,  "'Ye  shall 
see  Mo '  began  to  be  fulfilled  at  the  resurrection,  then  received 
its  main  fulfilment  at  Pentecost,  and  shall  have  its  final  fulfil- 
ment at  the  return  of  our  Lord."  This  strikes  me  as  a  very 
untenable  view. 

It  is  curious  that  the  first  "Ye  shall  see  "  is  in  the  present 
tense,  and  is  an  entirely  different  word  to  the  second,  which  is 
a  future.  The  first  would  be  rendered  literally,  "  Ye  behold,  or 
gaze  upon  Me  1 " 

17. — [TTien  said  some,  etc.]  This  whole  verse  shows  how  little  the 
disciples  realized  or  understood  our  Lord's  meaning  at  present, 
when  He  spoke  of  His  second  advent.  Yet  when  we  consider 
how  widely  different  are  the  meanings  put  on  our  Lord's  words 
by  Christians  in  this  day,  we  can  hardly  feel  surprised  that 
eleven  weak  believers,  like  the  apostles,  could  not  take  in  the 

7* 


154  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

full  sense  of  the  words  wlien  tliey  first  heard  tliem,  tlie  niglit 
before  the  crucifixion. 

18. — \_They  said  therefore. ..little  ^ohile.]  This  sentence  shows  that 
it  was  the  "  time  "  mentioned — "  a  little  while  " — which  per- 
plexed the  disciples.  We  may  conjecture  that  they  could  not 
make  out  whether  it  meant "  literally  "  a  few  days  or  hours,  or 
figuratively  a  comparatively  short  time.  And  is  not  this  pre- 
cisely the  point  on  which  all  students  of  unfulfilled  prophecy 
disagree  ?  The  verse  before  us  is  curiously  applicable  to  many 
a  prophetical  controversy. 

[We  cannot  tell... saith.]  The  words  would  be  more  literally 
rendered,  "  We  do  not  know  what  he  is  speaking  of." 

19. — [Wow  Jesus  knew. ..ask  Sim.]  Here,  as  in  other  places,  our 
Lord's  perfect  knowledge  of  the  hearts  and  thoughts  of  all 
around  Him  is  pointed  Out.  The  word  "ask,"  we  should  care- 
fully note,  is  literally  "  to  ask  questions  about  a  thing,"  It  is 
the  same  word  that  is  used  in  verse  23  :  "  at  that  day  ye  shall 
ask  Me  nothing." 

[And  said,  etc.]  The  word  rendered,  "  Do  ye  inquire  among 
yourselves  of  that  ?  "  would  be  more  literally,  "Concerning  this, 
do  ye  seek  with  each  other  ?  " 

20. — [Verily... say  unto  you.]  It  should  be  observed  in  this  verse 
that  our  Lord  gives  no  reply  to  the  inquiry  of  the  disciples. 
He  does  not  tell  them  what  He  meant  by  saying  "  a  little  while," 
Questions  about  times  and  dates  are  rarely  answered  in  Scrip- 
ture.    Our  attention  is  rather  turned  to  practical  things. 

[  Ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  etc.]  I  believe,  with  Augustine 
and  Bede,  that  the  whole  verse  is  meant  to  be  a  general  descrip- 
tion of  the  state  of  things  between  the  first  and  second  advents 
of  Christ.  "  During  my  absence  from  the  world  after  my  as- 
cension, you,  my  beloved  disciples,  and  believers  after  you,  shall 
have  many  reasons  to  lament  and  mourn,  like  a  bride  separate 
from  her  husband,  while  the  wicked  world  around  you  shall  re- 
joice in  my  absence,  and  not  wish  to  see  Me  return.  During 
this  long  weary  interval,  you  and  all  believers  after  you  shall 
often  have  sorrow  and  tribulation ;  but  at  last,  when  I  come 
again,  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy."  In  support  of  this 
view  I  advise  the  reader  to  study  Matt.  ix.  15.  The  idea  in 
each  place  seems  the  same.     (Compare  also  Is.  Ixv.  14.) 

Poole  remarks,  "  The  time  of  this  life  is  the  worldling's  hour, 
while  it  is  for  the  most  part  the  power  of  darkness  to  all  wlio 
love  and  fear  God.  But  as  the  worldling's  joy  shall  at  last  be 
turned  into  sorrow,  so  the  godly  man's  sorrow  shall  be  turned 
into  joy."     (Isai.  1.  11  ;  Matt.  xxv.  33.) 

The  interpretation  of  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  others,  which 
makes  the  wliole  verse  fulfilled  by  the  crucifixion  and  resur- 
rection of  our  Lord,  appears  to  me  very  unsatisfactory.    It  hardly 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  255 

affords  time  for  the  weeping  and  rejoicing  which  is  here  de- 
scribed. Nor  is  it  quite  clear  that  the  day  during  which  our 
Lord  lay  in  the  grave  was  a  day  of  rejoicing  to  His  enemies,  if 
we  may  judge  their  anxiety  to  prevent,  if  possible.  His  resur- 
rection from  the  dead. 

21. — [A  woman,  etc.]  This  verse  is  an  illustration  of  the  whole 
state  of  the  Church  between  the  first  and  second  advents  of 
Christ.  It  was  to  be  a  time  of  pain,  anxiety,  and  desire  for  de- 
liverance, from  which  the  only  cessation  would  be  at  the  per- 
sonal return  of  Christ. 

We  are  distinctly  told  in  Rom.  viii.  22,  that  "  the  whole  crea- 
tion groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  until  now."  It  is  the  nor- 
mal state  of  things  while  Christ  is  absent.  The  second  coming 
of  the  second  Adam  can  alone  restore  joy  to  the  world.  The 
Church  in  Rev.  vii.  2,  is  compared  to  a  woman  "  travailing  in 
birth,  and  pained  to  be  delivered."  The  wars  and  disturbances 
of  the  world  are  called  in  Matt,  xxiv,  8,  the  beginning  of  "  sor 
rows  ;  "  and  the  word  "  sorrows  "  there  means  literally  "  the 
pains  of  a  travailing  woman." 

The  whole  idea  of  the  verse  seems  to  be  that  the  interval  be- 
tween Christ's  first  and  second  advent  will  be,  to  the  Church,  a 
period  of  pain,  sorrow,  and  anxiety,  like  the  state  of  a  woman 
expecting  her  delivery, — that  the  end  of  this  period  will  be  the 
appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  second  time, — and  that 
when  our  Lord  does  come  the  second  time,  the  joy  of  the  true 
Church  will  be  so  great,  that  the  former  sorrow  and  tribulation 
will  be  comparatively  forgotten.  The  joy  of  seeing  Christ  will 
swallow  up  the  afflictions  of  His  absence.  (Compare  Rom.  viii. 
18—22  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17.) 

22. — [And  ye  now  therefore,  etc.]  I  apply  to  this  verse  the  same 
principle  of  interpretation  that  I  have  applied  to  the  preceding 
ones,  I  think  our  Lord  is  speaking  of  the  sorrow  and  pain 
which  believers  would  feel  during  the  interval  between  His 
first  and  second  advent,  "  You  are  now  entering  on  a  period 
of  pain,  sorrow,  and  tribulation.  But  fear  not.  It  shall  not  be 
for  ever,  I  will  return  and  see  you  again.  In  that  day  your 
heart  shall  be  filled  and  satisfied  with  joy,  a  joy  which  no  one 
can  ever  take  from  you,  a  joy  which  shall  be  for  ever." 

I  cannot  bring  myself  to  believe  that  this  "  see  you  again  " 
can  possibly  refer  to  the  short  period  of  forty  days  between 
the  resurrection  and  the  ascension  !  Above  all,  I  feel  strongly 
that  the  words,  "  Your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you,"  could  cer- 
tainly not  be  applied  to  the  times  of  trouble,  and  tribulation, 
and  persecution  even  unto  death,  which  the  primitive  Church 
passed  through  in  the  beginning  of  its  existence.  The  sensible 
joy  of  the  primitive  Church,  beyond  doubt,  was  often  taken 
away,  as  when  Stephen  was  martyred,  James  slain  with  the 
Bword,  and  Peter  put  in  prison.  The  second  coming  of  Christ 
is  the  only  time  of  uni^^ersal    and  unbroken  joy  to  which  be- 


156  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

lievers  can  look  forward.  Now  we  are  in  tlie  wilderness,  and 
our  sorrowless  home  is  yet  to  be  reached.  Then,  and  then  only, 
will  tears  be  wiped  from  all  eyes. 

23. — [And  in  that  day... ask... nothing. 1  In  the  first  part  of  this 
verse  I  believe,  with  Augustine,  that  the  "  day  "  spoken  of  is 
the  day  of  our  Lord's  second  advent.  The  "  asking  "  is  asking 
questions,  or  making  inquiries,  such  as  the  disciples  had  wanted 
to  make  in  verse  19.  "  They  were  desirous  to  ask  Him." 
The  Greek  word  is  the  same,  and  quite  different  from  the  word 
rendered  "  ask  "  in  the  latter  part  of  this  verse.  The  meaning 
of  the  sentence  is,  "  In  the  day  of  my  second  advent  you  will 
not  need  to  ask  Me  any  questions.  You  will  then  fully  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  many  things  which  you  do  not  understand 
now."  The  far  superior  light  which  believers  will  enjoy  in  the 
day  of  Christ's  second  coming,  is  the  chief  point  of  the  promise, 
as  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

Cyril  and  Chrysostom,  however,  apply  "  that  day  "  to  our 
Lord's  resurrection  and  the  forty  days  following  it. 

[  Verily,  verily. ..whatsoever. ..ask. ..give  it  you.]  In  this  portion 
of  the  verse  our  Lord  renews  and  repeats  His  former  promise 
about  prayer.  "  Until  that  day  when  I  come  again,  I  solemnly 
declare  that  whatsoever  tilings  you  shall  ask  in  prayer  from  the 
Father  in  my  name.  He  will  give  them  to  you." 

The  word  "  ask  "  in  the  Greek,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  verse 
is  entirely  different  from  the  word  rendered  "  ask  "  in  the  tor- 
mer  part.  Here  it  signifies  seeking  or  petitioning  in  prayer. 
There  it  meant  asking  questions. 

It  ia  worth  noticing  here  how  very  frequent  and  full  are  the 
encouragements  to  prayer  which   our  Lord  holds  out  in  the 

Gospels. 

The  "  whatsoever  "  of  the  text  must  of  course  be  limited  to 
whatsoever  things  are  really  for  God's  glory,  the  disciples'  good 
and  the  interests  of  Christ's  cause  in  the  world. 

24. — {Hither to... nothing  in  my  name.]  This  sentence  means  that 
up  to  this  time  the  disciples  had  not  prayed  for  anything  through 
the  name  and  mediation  of  Christ.  They  had  followed  Him  as 
a  teacher,  looked  up  to  Him  as  a  Master,  loved  Him  as  a  friend, 
believed  Him  as  the  Messiah  predicted  by  the  prophets.  But 
they  had  not  fully  realized  that  He  was  the  one  Mediator  be- 
tween God  and  man,  through  whom  alone  God's  mercy  could 
come  down  to  sinners,  and  sinful  creatures  could  draw  near  to 
God.  They  were  now  to  learn  that  their  Master  was  one  far 
higher  than  any  prophet,  yea,  even  than  Moses  himself. 

Daniel's  prayer,  "  Shine  on  Thy  sanctuary  for  the  Lord's  sake," 
is  almost  the  only  instance  of  a  prayer  in  Messiah's  name  in  the 
Old  Testament.     (Dan.  ix.  17.) 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI. 


157 


[Ask...receive... joy. ..full.']  This  sentence  means, "  From  lience- 
forth  begin  tiie  practice  of  asking  everything  in  my  name  and 
through  my  mediation.  Ask  fully  and  confidently,  and  you 
shall  receive  fully  and  abundantly.  So  asking,  you  shall  find 
the  joy  and  comfort  of  your  own  souls  enlarged  and  filled  up." 

John  Gerhard  here  remarks :  "  The  benefit  of  prayer  is  so 
great  that  it  cannot  be  expressed ! — Prayer  is  the  dove  which, 
when  sent  out,  returns  again,  bringing  with  it  the  olive-leaf, 
namely  peace  of  heart.  Prayer  is  the  golden  chain  which  God 
holds  fast,  and  lets  not  go  until  He  blesses.  Prayer  is  the 
Moses'  rod,  which  brings  forth  the  water  of  consolation  out  of 
the  rock  of  salvation.  Prayer  is  Samson's  jaw-bone,  which 
smites  down  our  enemies.  Prayer  is  David's  harp,  before  which 
the  evil  spirit  files.     Prayer  is  the  key  to  Heaven's  treasures." 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  full  "  means  literally  "  filled  up," 
being  the  perfect  participle  of  the  verb  "  to  fill  or  fulfil." 

The  sentence  teaches  us  that  the  joy  and  happiness  of  be- 
lievers admit  of  degrees,  and  may  be  fuller  at  one  time  than  at 
another.  It  also  teaches  that  the  joy  of  a  believer  depends 
much  on  his  fervency  and  earnestness  in  prayer.  He  that  prays 
little  and  coldly  must  not  expect  to  know  much  of  "  joy  and 
peace  in  believing," 

We  should  not  fail  to  observe  how  prayer  is  set  before  be- 
lievers here  as  a  plain  duty,  in  the  imperative  mood,  and  also 
how  desirous  our  Lord  is  that  His  people  should  be  rejoicing 
Christians  even  now  in  the  midst  of  a  bad  world.  That  religion 
which  makes  people  melancholy  and  miserable  and  wretched- 
looking,  is  a  very  low  type  of  Christianity,  and  far  below  the 
standard  of  Him  who  wished  "joy  to  be  full."  (Compare  1 
John  i.  4.) 


JOHN  XVI.  25—33. 


25  These  things  have  I  spoken 
unto  you  in  proverbs  :  but  the  time 
Cometh,  when  I  shall  no  more  speak 
unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  I  shall 
shew  you  plainly  of  the  Father. 

26  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my 
name ;  and  I  say  not  unto  you,  that  I 
will  pray  the  Father  for  you  : 

27  For  the  Father  himself  loveth 
you,  because  ye  have  loved  me,  and 
have  believed  that  I  came  out  from 
God. 

28  I  came  forth  from  the  Father, 
and  am  come  into  the  world  :  again, 
I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the 
Father. 

29  His  disciples  said  unto  him, 
Lo,  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and 
Bpeakest  no  proverb. 


30  Now  are  we  sure  that  thou 
knowest  all  things,  and  needest  not 
that  any  man  should  ask  thee :  by 
this  we  believe  that  thou  camest  forth 
from  God. 

31  Jesus  answered  them.  Do  ye 
now  believe  ? 

32  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea, 
is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scat- 
tered, every  man  to  his  own,  and 
shall  leave  me  alone  ;  and  yet  I  am 
not  alone,  because  the  father  is  with 
me. 

33  These  things  I  have  spoken  unto 
you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace. 
In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribula- 
tion ;  bat  be  of  good  cheer  ;  I  have 
overcome  the  world. 


158  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

The  passage  we  have  now  read  is  a  very  remarkable 
portion  of  Scripture,  for  two  reasons.  On  the  one  hand, 
it  forms  a  suitable  conclusion  to  our  Lord's  long  parting 
address  to  His  discij)les.  It  was  meet  and  right  that 
such  a  solemn  sermon  should  have  a  solemn  ending. 
On  the  other  hand  it  contains  the  most  general  and 
unanimous  profession  of  belief  that  we  ever  find  the 
Apostles  making  : — "  Now  are  we  sure  that  Thou  know- 
est  all  things  :....by  this  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  forth 
from  God." 

That  there  are  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  the 
passage  it  would  be  useless  to  deny.  But  there  lie  on 
its  surface  three  plain  and  profitable  lessons,  to  which 
we  may  usefully  confine  our  attention. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  that  dear  knowledge  of  God 
the  Father  is  one  of  the  foundations  of  the  Christian 
religion.  Our  Lord  says  to  His  disciples,  "The  time 
Cometh  when  I  shall  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father." 
He  does  not  say,  we  should  mark,  "  I  will  show  you 
plainly  about  myself."  It  is  the  Father  whom  He 
promises  to  show. 

The  wisdom  of  this  remarkable  saying  is  very  deep. 
There  are  few  subjects  of  which  men  know  so  little  in 
reality  as  the  character  and  attributes  of  God  the 
Father.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  it  is  written,  "  No 
man  knoweth  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to 
whomsoever  the  Son  shall  reveal  Him."  (Matt.  xi.  27.) 
'*  The  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  (John  i.  18.)  Thou- 
sands fancy  they  know  the  Father  because  they  think 
of  Him  as  great,  and  almighty,  and  all-hearing,  and 
wise,  and  eternal,  but  they  think  no  further.  To  think 
of  Him  as  just  and  yet  the  justifier  of  the  sinner  who 
believes  in  Jesus, — as  the  God  who  sent  His  Son  to 
suffer  and  die,—  as  God  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  159 

unto  Himself, — as  God  specially  well-pleased  with  the 
atoning  sacrifice  of  His  Son,  whereby  His  law  is  hon- 
ored; to  think  of  God  the  Father  in  this  way  is 
not  given  to  most  men.  No  wonder  that  our  Master 
says,  "  I  will  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father." 

Let  it  be  part  of  our  daily  prayers,  that  we  may 
know  more  of  "  the  only  true  God,"  as  well  as  of  Jesus 
Christ  whom  He  has  sent.  Let  us  beware  alike  of  the 
mistakes  which  some  make,  who  speak  of  God  as  if 
there  was  no  Christ  ;  and  of  the  mistakes  which  others 
make,  who  speak  of  Christ  as  if  there  was  no  God.  Let 
us  seek  to  know  all  three  Persons  in  the  blessed  Trin- 
ity, and  give  to  each  One  the  honor  due  to  him.  Let 
us  lay  hold  firmly  of  the  great  truth,  that  the  Gospel  of 
our  salvation  is  the  result  of  the  eternal  counsels  of  Fa- 
ther, Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  that  we  are  as  thor- 
oughly debtors  to  the  love  of  the  Father,  as  to  the  love 
of  the  Spirit,  or  the  love  of  the  Son.  No  one  has  learn- 
ed of  Christ  so  deeply  as  the  man  who  is  ever  drawing 
nearer  to  the  Father  through  the  Son, — ever  feeling 
more  childlike  confidence  in  Him, — and  ever  understand- 
ing more  thoroughly  that  in  Christ  God  is  not  an  angry 
judge,  but  a  loving  Father  and  Friend. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  in  this  passage,  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  makes  r)iuch  of  a  little  grace, 
and  speaks  kindly  of  those  who  have  it.  We  see  Him 
saying  to  the  disciples  :  "  The  Father  Himself  loveth 
you,  because  ye  have  loved  Me,  and  have  believed  that 
I  came  out  from  God." 

How  weak  was  the  faith  and  love  of  the  Apostles  ! 
How  soon,  in  a  very  few  hours,  they  were  buried  under 
a  cloud  of  unbelief  and  cowardice  !  These  very  men 
whom  Jesus  commends  for  loving  and  believing,  before 
the  morning  sun  arose  forsook  Him  and  fled.  Yet, 
weak  as  their  graces  were,  they  were  real  and  true  and 


IQQ  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS.      . 

genuine.  They  were  graces  which  hundreds  of  learned 
priests  and  scribes  and  Pharisees  never  attained,  and, 
not  attaining,  died  miserably  in  their  sins. 

Let  us  take  great  comfort  in  this  blessed  truth.  The 
Saviour  of  sinners  will  not  cast  off  them  that  believe  in 
Him,  because  they  are  babes  in  faith  and  knowledge. 
He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  or  quench  the  smok- 
ing flax.  He  can  see  reality  under  much  infirmity,  and 
where  He  sees  it  He  is  graciously  j^leased.  The  follow- 
ers of  such  a  Saviour  may  well  be  bold  and  confident. 
They  have  a  Friend  who  despises  not  the  least  member 
of  His  flock,  and  casts  out  none  who  come  to  Him,  how- 
ever weak  and  feeble,  if  they  are  only  true. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  in  this  passage,  that 
the  best  C7iristians  know  hut  little  of  their  own  hearts. 
We  see  the  disciples  professing  loudly,  "  Now  Thou 
speakest  plainly, — now  we  are  sure, — now  we  believe." 
Brave  words  these  !  And  yet  the  very  men  that  spoke 
them,  in  a  very  short  time  were  scattered  like  timid 
sheep,  and  left  their  Master  alone. 

We  need  not  doubt  that  the  profession  of  the  eleven 
was  real  and  sincere.  They  honestly  meant  what  they 
said.  But  they  did  not  know  themselves.  They  did 
not  know  what  they  were  capable  of  doing  under  the 
pressure  of  the  fear  of  men  and  of  strong  temptation. 
They  had  not  rightly  estimated  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh,  the  power  of  the  devil,  the  feebleness  of  their  own 
resolutions,  the  shallowness  of  their  own  faith.  All 
this  they  had  yet  to  learn  by  painful  experience.  Like 
young  recruits,  they  had  yet  to  learn  that  it  is  one  thing 
to  know  the  soldier's  drill  and  wear  the  uniform,  and 
quite  another  thing  to  be  steadfast  in  the  day  of  battle. 

Let  us  mark  these  things,  and  learn  wisdom.  The 
true  secret  of  spiritual  strength  is  self-distrust  and  deep 
humility.     "  When  I  am  weak,"  said  a  great  Christian, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  IQI 

"then  am  I  strong."  (2  Cor.  xii.  10.)  None  of  us,  per- 
haps, have  the  least  idea  how  much  we  might  fall  if 
placed  suddenly  under  the  influence  of  strong  tempta- 
tion. Happy  is  he  who  never  forgets  the  words,  "  Let 
him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall ;  " 
and,  remembering  our  Lord's  disciples,  prays  daily  : 
"  Hold  Thou  me  up  and  then  I  shall  be  safe." 

We  learn,  lasth^,  from  this  passage,  that  Christ  is 
the  true  source  of  peace.  We  read  that  our  Lord  winds 
up  all  His  discourse  with  these  soothing  words:  "  These 
things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  might  have 
peace."  The  end  and  scope  of  His  parting  address,  He 
would  have  us  know,  is  to  draw  us  nearer  to  Himself  as 
the  only  fountain  of  comfort.  He  does  not  tell  us  that 
we  shall  have  no  trouble  in  the  world.  He  holds  out 
no  promise  of  freedom  from  tribulation  while  we  are  in 
the  body.  But  He  bids  us  rest  in  the  thought  that  He 
has  fought  our  battle  and  won  a  victory  for  us.  Though 
tried,  and  troubled,  and  vexed  with  things  here  below, 
we  shall  not  be  destroyed.  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  is  His 
parting  charge :  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome 
the  world." 

Let  us  lean  back  our  souls  on  these  comfortable 
words,  and  take  courage.  The  storms  of  trial  and  perse- 
cution may  sometimes  beat  heavily  on  us  ;  but  let  them 
only  drive  us  closer  to  Christ.  The  sorrows,  and  losses, 
and  crosses,  and  disappointments  of  our  life  may  often 
make  us  feel  sorely  cast  down ;  but  let  them  only  make 
us  tighten  our  hold  on  Christ.  Armed  with  this  very 
promise  let  us,  under  every  cross,  come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  Let  us  often  say  to  our 
souls,  '*  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  and  why  art  thou  dis- 
quieted ?  "     And  let  us  often  say  to  our  gracious  Mas- 


1^2  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

ter, — "  Lord,  didst  not  Thou  say,  Be  of  good  cheer  ? 
Lord,  do  as  Thou  hast  said,  and  cheer  us  to  the  end." 

Notes.    John  xvi.  25 — ^^33. 

25. — {^These  t7dngs...proverhs.]  Our  Lord  seems  here  to  begin 
windiug  up  and  concluding  His  discourse.  The  expression 
"  these  things,'*  seems  to  nie  to  apply  to  all  that  He  had  been 
saying  since  Judas  went  out,  and  He  was  alone  with  the  elev- 
en. "  All  tliese  things  I  have  been  saying  to  you  in  language 
which  you  have  not  been  able  fully  to  understand,  insomuch 
that  I  seem  to  have  been  speaking  to  you  in  parables  or  pro- 
verbs." The  Greek  word  rendered  "  proverb  "  is  only  used  five 
times  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  John  x.  6  is  translated  par- 
able. 

Besser  observes  here,  "  From  the  very  first  words  of  our 
Lord's  farewell  discourse, —  '  In  my  Father's  house  are  many 
mansions,' — up  to  the  words  concerning  the  travailing  woman, 
the  heavenly  purport  of  the  discourse  is  enwrapped  in  various 
similes  and  parables." 

Do  we  not  learn  here  that  ministers  must  not  refrain  from 
telling  their  hearers  many  truths,  which  at  the  time  they  do 
not  fully  comprehend,  in  the  hope  that  they  will  seek  more 
knowledge,  and  comprehend  afterwards  the  meaning  of  the 
things  taught  ? 

[But  the  time  cometh...Father^  I  believe  the  "  time "  here 
mentioned  must  be  the  time  between  our  Lord's  resurrection 
and  ascension,  the  great  forty  days  when  He  taught  the  eleven 
disciples  more  fully  than  He  had  taught  them  before,  and 
spoke  more  openly  of  the  things  of  His  Father. — I  say  this 
with  diifidence.  But  I  can  see  no  other  time  to  which  oar 
Lord  could  refer  excepting  this.  It  is  evidently  some  personal 
inptruction  that  He  means,  and  not  instruction  by  the  invisible 
agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  *•  The  time  is  very  close  at  hand, 
when  my  sacrifice  on  the  cross  having  been  accomplished,  and 
my  resurrection  having  taken  place,  I  will  show  you  openly 
and  plainly  the  things  concerning  my  Father,  who  I  am,  and 
what  my  relation  to  Him,  and  will  no  longer  use  parables  and 
figures  to  convey  my  meaning." 

The  promise  may  possibly  include  the  continual  teaching  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  our  Lord  would  give  His  disciples  after 
His  ascension  ;  but  the  language  seems  rather  to  point  to  di- 
rect teaching  from  our  Lord's  own  mouth.  Moreover,  it  is  an 
"  hour  "  that  cometh.  in  the  Greek,  and  not  a  continuous  period 
of  time.     iSo  in  ver.  32,  "  the  hour  "  means  a  time  close  at  hand. 

26. — [At  that  day. ..ask  in  my  name.]  I  believe  this  sentence 
must  mean,  "  In  the  day  following  my  resurrection,  when  the 
full  nature  of  my  mission  and  office  is  at  last  understood,  you 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  2g3 

■will  begin  to  pray  and  ask  in  my  name.  Hitlierto  you  have  not 
done  it.  When  I  have  risen  from  the  dead,  and  opened  your 
understandings,  you  will  begin  to  do  it." 

I  see  insuperable  objection  to  any  other  view.  The  "day" 
spoken  of  c.mnot  be  the  day  of  Christ's  second  advent,  because 
prayer  will  not  be  needed  then.  Nor  yet  can  it  be  the  whole 
period  of  time  between  Christ's  first  and  second  advent,  because 
the  passage  which  it  is  here  bound  up  with  belongs  specially  to 
the  Apostles.  (See  ver.  27.)  There  remains,  in  my  judgment, 
no  reasonable  explanation  except  the  one  already  given. 

[A7id  Isay  not  ..'pray...Father...you.'\  The  meaning  of  this 
sentence  seems  to  be,  "  It  is  not  necessary  to  say  that  1  will 
pray  the  Father  to  hear  you  and  grant  your  requests.  Not 
only  shall  I  of  course  do  this,  but  my  Father  also  will  willing- 
ly hear  your  prayer."  This  is  the  most  natural  meaning  of  the 
passage,  in  my  judgment. 

It  is  singular  that  the  Greek  word  rendered  "  pray  "  at  the 
end  of  the  verse,  is  the  same  that  is  used  to  signify  "  ask  ques- 
tions," or  "  make  inquiry,"  in  ver.  23.  But  it  is  worth  notice 
that  the  word  seems  specially  used  when  our  Lord  is  described 
as  "  praying  "  to  the  Father.     (See  John  xvii.  9  ;  xv.  20.) 

27. — \^For  the  Father  Himself,  etc.^  This  verse  is  a  continuation 
of  the  encouragement  contained  in  the  verse  before.  "  You 
need  not  doubt  the  Father  doing  for  you  all  that  you  ask  in  my 
name,  because  he  loveth  you  for  having  loved  Me,  and  believed 

,  my  divine  mission.  He  loves  all  who  love  Me,  and  believe  on 
Me."    (See  John  xiv.  23.) 

Anton  paraphrases  the  verse,  "  ye  need  not  so  think  of  my 
intercession  as  if  the  Father  were  not  Himself  well  disposed, 
but  must  first  be  coerced  into  kindness.  No !  He  Himself 
loveth  you,  and  Himself  ordained  my  intercession." 

We  should  notice  here  how  graciously  our  Lord  acknowledges 
the  grace  there  was  in  the  disciples,  with  all  their  weakness. 
When  myriads  of  Jews  regarded  Jesus  as  an  impostor,  the 
eleven  loved  Him  and  believed  in  Him.  Jesus  never  forgets 
to  honor  true  grace,  however  much  it  may  be  mingled  with  in 
firmity. 

28. — \^I  came  forth,  etc ^  This  verse  seems  a  farewell  summary 
of  the  true  nature  of  our  Lord's  office  and  mission.  It  grows 
out  of  the  last  clause  of  the  preceding  verse.  "  You  have  be- 
lieved that  I  came  out  from  God.  In  so  believing  you  have 
done  well,  for  so  it  is.  For  the  last  time  I  repeat  that  my  mis- 
sion is  divine.  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  came  into 
the  world  to  be  man's  Redeemer ;  and  now,  my  work  being  fin- 
ished, I  am  about  to  leave  the  world,  and  to  go  back  again  to  my 
Father."  This  deep  sentence  contains  more  than  at  first  sight 
appears.  It  points  backward  to  our  Lord's  persecution ;  it 
points  forward  to  His  resurrection  and  ascension  into  glory. 


1^4  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Augustine,  quoted  by  Burgon,  remarks,  "  When  Christ  came 
forth  from  the  Father.  He  so  came  into  the  world  as  never  to 
leave  the  Father  ;  and  He  so  left  the  world  and  went  unto  the 
Father  as  never  to  leave  the   world." 

29. — l^His  disciples  said,  etc.']  The  words  of  the  disciples  seem  to 
be  a  reference  to  our  Lord's  statement  in  the  twenty-fifth  verse, 
that  "  the  time  was  coming  when  He  would  no  more  speak 
in  proverbs,  but  show  them  plainly  concerning  the  Father." 
The  eleven  appear  to  catch  at  that  promise.  "  Even  now  Thou 
art  speaking  to  us  more  plainly  that  we  have  ever  heard  Thee 
speaking  before,  and  not  in  figurative  language." 

80. — [Ifow  are  we  sure,  etc.]  This  is  a  peculiar  verse.  It  is  hard 
to  see  what  there  was  in  our  Lord's  statement  iu  ver.  28,  to 
carry  such  conviction  to  the  minds  of  the  eleven,  and  to  make 
them  see  things  about  their  Master  so  much  more  clearly  than 
they  had  seen  them  before.  But  the  precise  reason  why  words 
alfect  men's  minds,  and  lay  hold  on  their  attention  at  one  time 
and  not  at  another,  is  a  deep  mystery,  and  hard  to  explain. 
The  very  same  truths  which  a  man  hears  from  one  mouth  and 
is  utterly  unimpressed,  come  home  to  him  with  such  power 
from  another  moath,  that  he  will  declare  he  never  heard  them 
before  !  Nay,  more  :  the  very  same  speaker  who  is  heard  with- 
out attention  one  day,  is  heard  another  day  teaching  the  very 
same  things  with  the  deepest  interest,  by  the  same  hearers,  and 
they  will  tell  you  they  never  heard  them  before  ! 

The  words,  "  We  are  sure,"  are  literally,  "  We  know."  They 
mean,  "  We  know  now  that  Thou  knowest  all  things  concerning 
Thyself,  Thy  mission,  and  the  Father." 

The  words,  "  Thou  needest  not  that  any  man  should  ask 
Thee,"  mean,  "  Thou  hast  told  us  so  plainly  who  and  what 
Thou  art,  that  there  is  no  need  for  any  one  to  ask  Thee  ques- 
tions, or  seek  further  explanation." 

The  words,  "  By  this  we  believe,"  must  mean,  "  We  are  con- 
vinced and  persuaded  by  the  statement  Thou  hast  j  ist  made," 
in  ver.  28. 

31. — [Jesus  answered... now  believe.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  warns 
the  eleven  of  their  self -ignorance.  They  thought  they  believed. 
They  did  not  doubt  their  own  faith.  Let  them  not  be  too  con- 
fident. They  would  soon  find  they  had  an  evil  root  of  unbelief 
within.  Never  do  we  find  our  Lord  flattering  His  disciples. 
Warnings  against  self-confidence  need  to  be  continually  pressed 
on  believers.  Nothing  is  so  deceptive  as  feeling  and  excite- 
ment in  religion.     We  know  not  the  weakness  of  our  hearts. 

Alford  thinks  that  "do  ye  now  believe,"  should  not  be  ren- 
dered as  a  question,  but  as  an  affirmation.  "  You  now  believe, 
I  know,"  The  Greek  admits  of  either  view.  I  prefer  the 
question. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVI.  1^5 

32. — {Behold  the  hour. ..leave  Me  alone."]  In  this  sentence  onr  Lord 
reveals  to  his  confident  hearers,  the  amazing  fact  tliat  they, 
even  they,  w^ould  in  a  very  short  time  forsake  Him,  desert  Him, 
run  away  and  fail  in  faith  altogether.  "  Behold ! "  He  begins, 
to  denote  how  wonderful  it  was,  "  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now 
come.  This  very  night,  before  the  sun  rises,  the  thing  is  im- 
mediately going  to  take  place.  Ye  shall  be  scattered,  like 
sheep  fleeing  from  a  wolf,  one  running  one  way  and  another  an- 
other, every  man  going  off  to  his  own  things,  his  own  friends, 
or  his  own  house,  or  his  own  place  of  refuge.  Ye  shall  leave 
Me  alone.  You  will  actually  allow  Me  to  be  taken  off  by  my- 
self as  a  prisoner  to  the  high  priests  and  to  Pontius  Pilate,  and 
not  so  much  as  one  of  you  will  stand  by  Me." 

How  little  the  best  of  believers  know  of  their  own  hearts,  or 
understand  how  they  may  behave  in  times  of  trial !  If  any 
men  were  ever  fully  and  fairly  warned  of  their  coming  failure, 
the  disciples  were.  We  can  only  suppose  that  they  did  not 
understand  our  Lord,  or  did  not  realize  the  magnitude  of  the 
trial  coming  on  them,  or  fancied  that  He  would  work  some 
miracle  at  the  last  moment,  for  His  deliverance. 

The  Greek  phrase  rendered  "  His  own,"  means  literally, 
"  His  own  things."  It  may  either  be  "  His  own  business,"  or  as 
the  margin  renders  it,  "  His  own  home." 

{And  yet. ..not  alone. ..with  Me.}  In  this  teaching  and  touching 
sentence,  our  Lord  reminds  His  disciples  that  their  desertion 
would  not  deprive  Him  of  all  comfort.  "  And  yet,  when  you 
are  scattered,  ifud  have  left  Me,  I  am  not  entirely  alone,  because 
the  Father  is  always  with  Me." 

We  need  not  doubt  that  one  great  need  of  the  sentence  was 
to  teach  the  disciples  where  they  must  look  themselves  in 
their  own  future  trials.  They  must  never  forget  that  God  the 
Father  would  always  be  near  them  and  with  them,  even  in  the 
darkest  times.  A  sense  of  God's  presence  is  one  great  source 
of  the  comfort  of  believers.  The  last  promise  in  Matthew,  be- 
fore the  ascension,  was,  "  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world."     (Matt,  xxviii.  20.) 

John  Huss,  the  famous  martyr,  who  was  burned  at  Constance, 
is  said  to  have  drawn  special  comfort  from  this  passage,  during 
the  lonely  imprisonment  which  preceded  his  death. 

83. — [TJiese  tilings. ..peace.]  In  this  concluding  verse  our  Lord 
sums  up  the  reasons  why  He  has  spoken  the  things  contained 
in  this  whole  discourse.  "  All  these  things  I  have  spoken  for 
this  one  great  end, — that  you  may  have  inward  peace  by  rest- 
ing your  souls  on  Me,  and  keeping  up  close  communion  with 
Me."  It  is  one  great  secret  in  our  religion  to  draw  all  our  con- 
solation from  Christ,  and  live  on  Him.  "  He  is  our  peace." 
(Eph.  ii.  14.) 


166 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


[In  the  world.. .tribulation.]  Here  our  Lord  tells  tlie  eleven, 
plainly  and  honestly,  that  they  must  expect  trouble  and  perse- 
cution from  the  world.  He  does  not  conceal  that  tlie  way  to 
heaven  is  not  smooth  and  strewed  with  flowers.  On  the  con- 
trary, "  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  per- 
secution." (2  Tim.  iii.  12.)  To  keep  back  from  young  begin- 
ners in  religion  the  cross  and  the  battle,  is  not  teaching  as 
Christ  taught. 

[But  be. ..good  cheer  ...overcome... world .]  Here  our  Lord  winds 
up  all  by  bidding  the  disciples  take  courage,  cheer  up,  be  con- 
fident, and  go  forward  without  fear.  The  world  in  which  they 
lived  was  a  vanquished  enemy.  He,  their  Master,  had  "  over- 
come the  world."  This  means,  I  believe,  not  merely  that  He 
had  given  them  an  example  of  successful  fighting  by  overcom- 
ing the  fear  of  the  world  and  the  flattery  of  the  world,  but 
something  far  more  important.  He  had  overcome  the  Prince 
of  this  world,  and  was  just  about  to  win  His  final  victory  over 
him  on  the  cross.  Hence  His  disciples  must  remember  that 
they  were  contending  with  an  enemy  already  sorely  beaten. 
"  Ye  need  not  fear  the  world,  because  I  am  just  leading  captive 
its  King,  and  about  to  triumph  over  him  on  the  cross." 

Luther,  quoted  by  Besser,  here  remarks,  "  Thus  is  the  '  good- 
night '  said,  and  the  hand  shaken.  But  very  forcibly  does  He 
conclude  with  that  very  thing  around  which  His  whole  dis- 
course has  turned.  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled.  Be  of  good 
cheer." 

No  devout  commentator,  I  think,  can  leave  this  wonderful 
chapter  without  deeply  feeling  how  little  we  understand  of  the 
depths  of  Scripture.  There  are  many  words  and  sentences  in 
it  about  which  we  can  only  give  conjectures,  and  must  admit 
our  inability  to  speak  positively.  Nowhere  in  Scripture,  I 
must  honestly  confess,  do  commentators  appear  to  me  to  con- 
tribute so  little  light  to  the  text,  as  in  their  interpretation  of 
this  chapter. 


JOHN  XVII.  1—8. 


1  These  words  spake  Jesus,  and 
lifted  up  his  eyea  to  heaven,  and 
said,  Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glo- 
rify thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may 
glorify"  thee  : 

2  As  tliou  hast  given  him  power 
over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give 
eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast 
given  him. 

3  And  this  is  life  eternal,  that 
thiy  might  know  thee  the  only  true 
God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou 
hast  sent. 


4  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the 
earth:  I  have  finished  the  work 
which  thou  gavest  me  to  do. 

5  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify 
thou  me  with  thine  own  self  with 
the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  be- 
fore ttie  world  was. 

6  1  have  manifested  thy  name 
unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest 
me  out  of  the  world :  thine  they 
were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me  ; 
and  tliey  have  kept  thy  word. 

7  Now  they  have  known  that  all 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  -^Qf^ 


tilings  whatsoever  thou  hast  given 
me  are  of  thee. 
8  For  I  have  ffiven  unto  them  the 


they  have  received  tTiem,  and  have 
known  .surely  that  I  came  out  from 
thee,  and  they  have  believed  that 


words  which  thou  gavest  me  ;  and  •  thou  didst  send  me. 

These  verses  begin  one  of  the  most  wonderful  chap- 
ters in  the  Bible.  It  is  a  chapter  in  which  we  see  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  addressing  a  long  prayer  to  God  the 
Father.  It  is  wonderful  as  a  specimen  of  the  commu- 
nion that  was  ever  kept  up  between  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  during  the  period  of  the  Son's  ministry  on  eartli. — 
It  is  wonderful  as  a  pattern  of  the  intercession  which 
the  Son,  as  an  High  Priest,  is  ever  carrying  on  for  us  in 
heaven. — ISTot  least  it  is  wonderful  as  an  example  of  the 
sort  of  things  that  believers  should  mention  in  prayer. 
What  Christ  asks  for  His  people,  His  people  should  ask 
for  themselves.  It  has  been  well  and  truly  said  by  an 
old  divine,  that  "the  best  and  fullest  sermon  ever 
preached  was  followed  by  the  best  of  prayers." 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  chapter  before  us  con- 
tains many  deep  things.  It  could  hardly  be  otherwise. 
He  that  reads  the  words  spoken  by  one  Person  of  the 
blessed  Trinity  to  another  Person,  by  the  Son  to  the 
Father,  must  surely  be  prepared  to  find  much  that  he 
cannot  fully  understand,  much  that  he  has  no  line  to 
fathom.  There  are  sentences,  words,  and  expressions, 
in  the  twenty-six  verses  of  this  chapter,  which  no  one 
probably  has  ever  unfolded  completely.  We  have  not 
minds  to  do  it,  or  to  understand  the  matters  it  contains, 
if  we  could.  But  there  are  great  truths  in  the  chapter 
which  stand  out  clearly  and  plainly  on  its  face,  and  to 
these  truths  v.-'  shall  do  well  to  direct  our  best  atten- 
tion. 

We  should  notice,  firstly,  in  these  verses,  what  a 
glorious  account  they  contain  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ'*s 
office  and  dignity.  We  read  that  the  Father  has  "  given 
Him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  He  should  give  eternal 


IgS  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

life."  The  keys  of  heaven  are  in  Christ's  hands.  The 
salvation  of  every  soul  of  mankind  is  at  His  disposal. — 
We  read,  furthermore,  that  "  it  is  life  eternal  to  know 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  has  sent." 
The  mere  knowledge  of  God  is  not  sufficient,  and  saves 
none.  We  must  know  the  Son  as  well  as  the  Father. 
Go  i  known  without  Christ  is  a  Being  whom  we  can 
only  fear,  and  dare  not  approach.  It  is  "  God  in  Christ, 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,"  who  alone  can 
give  to  the  soul  life  and  peace. — We  read,  furthermore, 
that  Christ  "  has  finished  the  work  which  the  Father 
gave  Him  to  do."  He  has  finished  the  work  of  redeaip- 
tion,  and  wrought  out  a  perfect  righteousness  for  His 
people.  Unlike  the  first  Adam,  who  failed  to  do  God's 
will  and  brought  sin  into  the  world,  the  second  Adam 
has  done  all,  and  left  nothing  undone  that  He  came  to 
do. — Finally,  we  read  that  Christ  "  had  glory  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was."  Unlike  Moses  and  Da- 
vid, He  existed  from  all  eternity,  long  before  He  came 
into  the  world  ;  and  He  shared  glory  with  the  Father, 
before  He  was  made  flesh  and  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 

Each  of  these  marvellous  sayings  contains  matter 
which  our  weak  minds  have  not  power  fully  to  compre- 
hend. We  must  be  content  to  admire  and  reverence 
what  we  cannot  thoroughly  grasp  and  explain.  But 
one  thing  is  abundantly  clear:  sayings  like  these  can 
only  be  used  of  one  who  is  very  God.  To  no  patriarch, 
or  prophet,  or  king,  or  apostle,  is  any  such  language 
ever  applied  in  the  Bible.     It  belongs  to  none  but  God. 

Forever  let  us  thank  God  that  the  hope  of  a  Chris- 
tian rests  on  such  a  solid  foundation  as  a  Divine  Sa- 
viour. He  to  whom  we  are  commanded  to  flee  for 
pardon,  and  in  whom  we  are  bid  to  rest  for  peace,  is 
God  as  well  as  man.  To  all  who  really  think  about 
their   souls,    and   are   not    careless   and    worldly,    the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  159 

thought  is  full  of  comfort.  Such  people  know  and  feel 
that  great  sinners  need  a  great  Saviour,  and  that  no 
mere  human  redeemer  would  meet  their  wants.  Then 
let  them  rejoice  in  Christ,  and  lean  back  confidently  on 
Him.  Christ  has  all  power,  and  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  because  Christ  is  divine.  Office,  power,  and 
pi"e-existence,  all  combine  to  prove  that  He  is  God. 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  what  a 
gracious  account  they  contain  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's 
disciples.  We  find  our  Lord  Himself  saying  of  them, 
"  They  have  kept  Thy  Word, — they  have  known  that 
all  things  Thou  hast  given  Me  are  of  Thee, — they  have 
received  Thy  words, — they  have  known  surely  that  I 
came  out  from  Thee, — they  have  believed  that  Thou 
didst  send  Me." 

These  are  wonderful  words  when  we  consider  the 
character  of  the  eleven  men  to  whom  they  were  applied. 
How  weak  was  their  faith  !  How  slender  their  knowl- 
edge !  How  shallow  their  spiritual  attainments  !  How 
faint  their  hearts  in  the  hour  of  danger !  Yet  a  very 
little  time  after  Jesus  spoke  these  words  they  all  forsook 
Him  and  fled,  and  one  of  them  denied  Him  three  times 
with  an  oath.  No  one,  in  short,  can  read  the  four  Gos- 
pels with  attention,  and  fail  to  see  that  never  had  a 
great  master  such  weak  servants  as  Jesus  had  in  the 
eleven  apostles.  Yet  these  very  weak  servants  were  the 
men  of  whom  the  gracious  Head  of  the  Church  speaks 
here  in  high  and  honorable  terms. 

The  lesson  before  us  is  full  of  comfort  and  instruction. 
It  is  evident  that  Jesus  sees  far  more  in  His  believing 
]>eople  than  they  see  in  themselves,  or  than  others  see 
in  them.  The  least  degree  of  faith  is  very  precious  in 
His  sight.  Though  it  be  no  bigger  than  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed,  it  is  a  plant  of  heavenly  growth,  and 
makes  a  boundless  difierence  between  the  possessor  of 
8 


170  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

it  and  the  man  of  the  world.  Wherever  the  gracious 
Saviour  of  sinners  sees  true  faith  in  Himself,  however 
feeble,  He  looks  with  compassion  on  many  infirmities, 
and  passes  by  many  defects.  It  was  even  so  with  the 
eleven  apostles.  They  were  weak  and  unstable  as  water  ; 
but  they  believed  and  loved,  their  Master  when  millions 
refused,  to  own  Him.  And  the  language  of  Him  who 
declared  that  a  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  the  name  of 
a  disciple  should  not  lose  its  reward,  shows  clearly  that 
their  constancy  was  not  forgotten. 

The  true  servant  of  God  should  mark  well  the  feature 
in  Christ's  character  which  is  here  brought  out,  and  rest 
his  soul  upon  it.  The  best  among  us  must  often  see  in 
himself  a  vast  amount  of  defects  and  infirmities,  and 
must  feel  ashamed  of  his  poor  attainments  in  religion. 
But  do  we  simply  believe  in  Jesus  ?  Do  we  cling  to 
Him,  and  roll  all  our  burdens  on  Him  ?  Can  we  say 
with  sincerity  and  truth,  as  Peter  said  afterwards,  "  Lord, 
Thou  knowest  all  things:  Thou  knowest  that  I  love 
Thee  ?  "  Then  let  us  take  comfort  in  the  words  of  Christ 
before  us,  and  not  give  way  to  despondency.  The  Lord 
Jesus  did  not  despise  the  eleven  because  of  their  feeble- 
ness, but  bore  with  them  and  saved  them  to  the  end, 
because  they  believed.  And  He  never  changes.  What 
He  did  for  them.  He  will  do  for  us. 

Notes.    John  IlVii.  1—8. 

l.--[These  words  spake  Jesus.']  The  chapter  we  have  now  begun 
is  the  most  remarkable  in  the  Bible.  It  stands  alone,  and  there 
is  nothing  like  it.  A  few  introductory  remarks  will  not  be  out 
of  place. 

Henry  remarks  that  this  was  a  prayer  after  sermon,  a  prayer 
after  sacrament,  a  family  prayer,  a  parting  prayer,  a  prayer  be- 
fore a  sacrifice,  a  prayer  which  was  a  specimen  of  Christ's  in- 
tercession. 

We  have  here  the  only  long  prayer  of  the  liord  Jesus,  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  thought  good  to  record  for  our  learning. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVTI.  17j^ 

That  He  often  prayed  we  know  well ;  but  this  is  the  only  prayer 
reported.  We  have  many  of  His  sermons,  parables,  and  con 
versatious  ;  but  only  this  prayer. 

We  have  here  the  prayer  of  one  who  spake  as  never  man 
spake,  and  prayed  as  never  man  prayed, — the  prayer  of  the 
second  Person  in  the  Trinity  to  the  Father :  the  prayer  of  one 
whose  office  it  is,  as  our  High  Priest,  to  make  intercession  for 
His  people. 

We  have  a  prayer  offered  up  by  the  Lord  Jesus  on  a  specially 
interesting  occasion, — just  after  the  Lord's  Supper, — just  after 
a  most  striking  discourse, — ^just  before  His  betrayal  and  cruci- 
fixion,— ^just  before  the  disciples  forsook  Him  and  fled, — just  at 
the  end  of  His  earthly  ministry. 

We  have  here  a  prayer  which  is  singularly  full  of  deep  and 
profound  expressions  ;  so  deep,  indeed,  that  we  have  no  line  to 
them.  The  wisest  Christian  will  always  confess  that  there  are 
things  here  which  he  cannot  fully  explain. 

The  Bible  reader  who  attaches  no  weight  to  such  considera- 
tions as  these  must  be  in  a  very  strange  state  of  mind. 

Augustine  remarks,  "  The  prayer  which  Christ  made  for  us. 
He  hath  also  made  known  to  us.  Being  so  great  a  Master,  not 
only  what  He  saith  in  discoursing  to  the  disciples,  but  also 
what  He  saith  to  the  Father  in  praying  for  them,  is  their  edifi- 
cation." 

Calvin  remarks,  "  Doctrine  has  no  power,  unless  efficacy  is 
imparted  to  it  from  above.  Christ  holds  out  an  example  to 
teachers,  not  to  employ  themselves  only  in  sowing  the  Word, 
but  by  mingling  prayers  with  it,  to  implore  the  assistance  of 
God,  that  His  blessing  may  render  their  labor  fruitful." 

Bullinger  remarks  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Jewish  priest 
to  pray  for  the  people,  as  well  as  to  offer  sacrifice  for  them. 

About  the  place  where  this  prayer  was  offered  we  know 
nothing  certain.  Some,  as  Alford,  have  conjectured  that  it  was  in 
the  upper  room  where  the  Lord's  Supper  was  held.  This,  how- 
ever, seems  inconsistent  with  "Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  (Ch.  xiv. 
3L)  It  seems  more  likely  that  it  was  prayed  in  some  quiet  place 
outside  the  walls,  before  our  Lord  "  crossed  the  brook  Cedron." 
(John  xviii.  1.)  One  thing  at  least  is  almost  certain.  It  is  a 
totally  different  prayer  from  that  which  our  Lord  prayed  in  the 
Garden  of  Gethsemane,  although  Rupertus  asserts  it  was  the 
same. 

About  the  hearers  of  this  prayer,  there  seems  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  all  the  eleven  apostles  were  present,  and  all  heard 
it.  All  heard  the  discourses  of  the  last  three  chapters,  and  I 
cannot  see  why  all  should  not  have  heard  the  concluding 
prayer. 


172  EXPosrroEY  thoughts. 

About  the  general  plan  and  order  and  arrangement  of  the 
prayer,  I  decline  to  express  any  opinion,  thinking  it  more  rev- 
erent not  to  define  too  closely  such  a  matter.  We  can  all  see  at 
a  glance  that  our  Lord  prays  about  Himself,  prays  about  the 
disciples,  and  prays  about  those  who  were  after  to  be  disciples. 
But  it  is  best  to  pause  here,  and  not  to  dissent  and  analyze  and 
systematize  too  minutely  such  a  prayer.  One  tiling  only  may 
be  remarked,  and  that  is,  the  singular  frequency  with  which 
"  the  world "  is  mentioned.  The  phrase  occurs  no  less  than 
nineteen  times. 

I  conclude  these  introductory  observations  by  advising  all 
who  wish  to  study  thoroughly  this  wonderful  chapter  of  Scrip- 
ture, to  consult,  if  they  can,  the  following  works  specially  de- 
voted to  the  elucidation  of  it :  viz.,  "  Manton's  Sermons  on 
Seventeenth  John,"  400  folio  pages  ; "  George  Newton's  Expo- 
sition of  Seventeenth  John,"  560  pages  folio ;  and  "  Burgess's 
Expository  Sermons  on  Seventeenth  John,"  700  pages  folio. 
These  three  books,  having  been  written  by  Puritans  200  years 
ago,  are  ignored  by  some  and  despised  by  others.  I  simply 
venture  the  remark,  that  he  who  cares  to  examine  them  will 
find  that  they  richly  repay  perusal.  Manton's  work  especially 
will  bear  a  comparison  with  anything  written  on  this  chapter 
since  his  days.  It  is  curious  that  the  other  prayer,  commonly 
called  the  "  Lord's  Prayer,"  has  been  frequently  made  the  sub- 
ject of  books  and  expositions,  while  this  much  larger  "  prayer" 
has  been  comparatively  little  handled. 

Melancthon  says,  "  There  is  no  voice  which  has  ever  been 
heard,  either  in  heaven  or  earth,  more  exalted,  more  holy,  more 
fruitful,  more  sublime,  than  this  prayer. 

Luther  says,  "  In  proportion  as  this  prayer  sounds  plain  and 
simple,  it  is  in  reality  deep,  rich,  and  wide,  that  which  none  can 
fathom." 

[And  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven.]  This  sentence  shows  that 
bodily  gestures  in  prayer  and  worship  of  God  are  not  altogether 
to  be  overlooked  as  unmeaning.  There  is  a  decent  and  reverent 
manner  aud  gesture  which  suits  the  action  of  addressing  God. 
It  also  seems  clearly  to  show  that  the  prayer  was  prayed  before 
witnesses.  John  writes  as  one  describing  what  he  saw  and 
heard.  It  is  perhaps  too  much  to  say  that  the  expression  proves 
tlie  prayer  to  have  been  in  the  open  air.  A  person  may  look 
upward  and  heavenward  even  in  a  room.  Yet  it  certainly 
rather  increases  the  probability  that  our  Lord  was  in  the  open 
air. 

Calvin  says,  "  If  we  desire  to  imitate  Christ,  we  must  take 
care  that  our  outward  gestures  do  not  exj^ress  more  than  is  in 
our  mind,  but  that  inward  feeling  shall  direct  the  eyes,  the 
hands,  the  tongue,  and  everything  about  us." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  173 

Newton  observes  that  gesture  and  demeanor  in  God's  wor- 
sliip,  though  not  everything,  are  something, 

[And  said,  Father,  the  hour  is  come.']  The  "  hour  **  here 
named  is  the  hour  appointed  in  God's  eternal  counsels  for  the 
sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  final  accomplishment 
of  His  atonement.  That  time,  wliich  had  been  promised  by 
God,  and  expected  by  saints  for  4000  years,  ever  since  Adam's 
fall,  had  at  length  arrived  ;  and  the  seed  of  the  woman  was 
actually  about  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  by  dying  as  man's 
Substitute  and  Redeemer.  Up  to  tliis  night  "  the  hour  was  not 
yet  come  "  (John  vii.  30 ;  viii.  20) ;  and  till  it  had  come,  our 
Lord's  enemies  could  not  hurt  Him.  Now,  at  last,  the  hour  had 
come,  and  the  Sacrifice  was  ready. 

Augustine  says  here,  "  Time  did  not  force  Christ  to  die,  but 
Christ  chose  a  time  to  die.  So  also  the  time  at  which  He  was 
born  of  the  Virgin  He  settled  with  the  Father,  of  whom  He 
was  begotten  without  time." 

Let  us  remember,  though  in  a  far  lower  sense,  that  believers 
are  all  immortal  till  their  hour  is  come  ;  and  till  then  they  are 
safe,  and  cannot  be  harmed  by  death. 

Let  us  note  how  our  Lord  addresses  God  as  "  Father."  In  a 
lower  sense  we  may  do  the  same,  if  we  have  the  Spirit  of  adop- 
tion, and  are  His  children  in  Christ.  The  Lord's  prayer  teaches 
us  to  do  so. 

It  is  worth  notice  that  our  Lord  uses  the  phrase  "  Father"  six 
times  in  this  one  prayer. 

[Glorify  Thy  Son. ..glorify  Thee.]  I  think  the  meaning  of 
this  sentence  must  be  this  :  •'  Give  glory  to  Thy  Son,  by  carry- 
ing Him  through  the  cross  and  the  grave,  to  a  triumphant  com- 
pletion of  the  work  He  came  to  do,  and  by  placing  him  at  Thy 
right  hand,  and  highly  exalting  Him  above  every  name  that  is 
named.  Do  this,  in  order  that  He  may  glorify  Thee  and  Thy  at- 
tributes. Do  this,  that  He  may  bring  fresh  glory  to  Thy  holiness, 
and  justice,  and  mercy,  and  faithfulness,  and  prove  to  the  world 
that  Thou  art  a  just  God,  a  holy  God,  a  merciful  God,  and  a 
God  that  keepeth  His  word.  My  vicarious  death  and  my  resur- 
rection will  prove  this,  and  bring  glory  to  Thee.  Finish  tlie 
mighty  work.  Glorify  Me,  and  in  so  doing  glorify  Thyself. 
Finish  Thy  work,  not  least,  that  Thy  Son  may  glorify  Thee  by 
bringing  many  redeemed  souls  to  heaven,  to  the  glory  of  Thy 
grace." 

Stier  remarks,  "  These  words  prove  the  Son  is  equal  to  the 
Father,  as  touching  His  Godhead.  What  creature  could  stand 
before  his  Creator,  and  say,  *  Glorify  Me,  that  I  may  glorify 
Thee?'" 

The  glory  of  God  and  His  attributes  is  the  grand  end  of  all 
creation,  and  of  all  God's  arrangements  and  providences.     No- 


l^^  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

tiling  brings  such  glory  to  God  as  tlie  completion  of  tlie  re- 
deeming work  of  Christ,  by  His  death,  resurrection,  and  ascen- 
sion into  heaven.  Our  Lord  seems  to  me  to  ask  that  His  death 
may  at  once  take  place,  that  He  through  death  may  be  taken 
up  to  glory,  and  that  there  the  justice,  holiness,  mercy,  and 
faithfulness  of  the  Father  may  be  glorified  and  exhibited  to  all 
creation,  and  many  souls  be  at  once  saved  and  glorify  the  Di- 
vine wisdom  and  power. 

Augustine  remarks,  "  Some  take  the  Father's  glorifying  the 
Son  to  consist  in  this, — that  He  spared  Him  not,  but  delivered 
Him  up  for  us  all.  But  if  He  be  said  to  be  glorified  by  passion, 
how  much  more  by  resurrection?  For  in  the  passion  it  is  more 
His  humility  than  His  glory  that  is  shown  forth,  as  the  Apostle 
Bays  in  Phil.  ii.  7 — 11." 

2. — [As  Thou  hast  given  Him  poicer,  etc.]  The  Greek  of  part  of 
this  verse  is  peculiar,  as  it  contains  a  nominative  absolute  ;  and 
a  literal  translation  seems  impossible.  It  would  be, "  That  with 
regard  to  all  that  body  or  thing  which  Thou  hast  given  Him, 
He  should  give  eternal  life  to  thsm."  There  seems  a  distinc- 
tion between  the  whole  body  and  the  particular  individual  mem- 
bers. The  body  is  given  to  Christ,  in  the  mass,  from  all  eterni- 
ty. The  members  of  that  body  are  called  in  time,  separately 
and  one  by  one,  and  eternal  life  given  to  them. 

There  certainly  seems  a  connection  between  this  verse  and 
the  concluding  clause  of  the  preceding  verse.  "  Let  Thy  Son 
glorify  Thee  by  saving  souls,  even  as  Thou  hast  appointed  He 
should  do,  seeing  that  Thou  hast  given  Him  power  and  authori- 
ty over  all  flesh,  to  give  eternal  life  to  all  the  members  of  that 
mystical  body  which  Thou  hast  given  Him." 

When  we  read  here  of  "  the  Father  giving  power  to  the  Son," 
•we  must  carefully  remember  that  it  is  not  the  giving  of  a  supe- 
rior to  an  inferior.  It  signifies  that  arrangement  in  the  coun- 
sels of  the  eternal  Trinity,  by  which  the  Father  gives  to  the 
Son  especially  the  carrying  out  of  the  work  of  redemption. 
Newton  thinks  the  "  power"  includes  the  dignity  of  judgment 
at  the  last  day,  as  in  John  v.  22. 

The  expression  "all  flesh"  seems  to  me,  as  it  does  to  Augus- 
tine, BuUinger,  Newton,  and  others,  to  denote  all  mankind. 
All  are  not  saved,  but  Christ  has  power  and  authority  over  all. 
Some  confine  it  to  the  "  elect,"  but  I  cannot  see  the  force  of 
their  argument.  To  my  eyes  i.t  is  like  John  iii.  16,  where 
"  world "  and  "  believers "  are  in  contradistinction.  So  it 
seems  here,  "  all  flesh  "  and  "  given  ones." 

Chrysostom  thinks  that  the  phrase  "  all  flesh "  had  special 
reference  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church  ;  and 
that  our  Lord  meant  that  henceforward  He  was  to  be  "  Saviour 
of  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  175 

The  plirase  "eternal  life  "  includes  everytliing  tliat  is  neces- 
Barj  to  the  complete  salvation  of  a  soul, — the  life  of  justifica- 
tion, sanctification,  and  final  glory. 

The  Son  gives  "  eternal  life  "  to  none  but  those  who  are 
"  given  to  Him,"  in  the  everlasting  counsels  of  the  Trinity,  from 
all  eternity.  Who  these  are  man  cannot  say.  "  Many  of  the 
gwen  ones,"  says  Traill,  "  do  not  for  a  long  time  know  it."  All 
are  invited  to  repent  and  believe,  without  distinction.  No  one 
is  warranted  in  saying,  "  I  was  not  given  to  Christ,  and  cannot 
be  saved."  But  that  the  last  day  will  prove  that  none  are  saved 
except  those  given  to  Christ  by  the  Father,  is  clear  and  plain. 

Poole  remarks,  "  We  need  not  ascend  up  to  heaven  to  search 
the  rolls  of  the  eternal  counsels.  All  whom  the  Father  hath 
given  to  Christ  shall  come  to  Christ ;  and  not  only  receive  Him 
as  Priest,  but  give  themselves  up  to  be  ruled  and  quickened  by 
Him.  By  such  a  receiving  of  Christ  we  shall  know  whether 
we  are  of  the  number  of  those  that  are  given  to  Christ." 

Traill  remarks,  "  This  giving  of  men  to  the  Son  to  be  re- 
deemed and  saved  is  the  same  thing  with  election  and  predes- 
tination." 

"  There  is  a  twofold  giving  of  men  to  the  Son  by  the  Father. 
One  is  eternal,  in  the  purpose  of  His  grace  ;  and  this  is  mainly 
meant  here.  The  other  is  in  time  ;  when  the  Father  by  His 
Spirit  draws  men  to  Christ.  (John  vi,  44.)  All  the  elect  are 
given  from  eternity  to  the  Son,  to  be  redeemed  by  His  blood  ; 
and  all  the  redeemed  are  in  due  time  drawn  by  the  Father  to 
the  Son,  to  be  kept  to  eternal  life," 

8  ^-[And  this  is  life  eternal,  etc.]  This  verse  is  mercifully  given  to 
us  by  our  Lord  as  a  description  of  saved  souls.  "  The  secret  of 
possessing  eternal  life, — of  being  justified  and  sanctified  now, 
and  glorified  hereafter, — consists  simply  in  this  :  in  having  a 
right  saving  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God,  and  of  that  Jesus 
Christ  whom  He  has  sent  to  save  sinners."  In  short,  our  Lord 
declares  that  he  who  rightly  knows  God  and  Christ  is  the  man 
who  possesses  eternal  life. 

Of  course  we  must  distinctly  understand  that  mere  head- 
knowledge,  like  that  of  the  devil,  is  not  meant  by  our  Lord  in 
this  verse.  The  knowledge  He  means  is  a  knowledge  which 
dwells  in  the  heart  and  influences  the  life.  A  true  saint  is  one 
who  "  knows  the  Lord."  To  know  God  on  the  one  hand — His 
holiness,  His  purity.  His  hatred  of  sin ;  and  to  know  Christ  on 
the  other  hand — His  redemption,  His  mediatorial  office.  His 
love  to  sinners, — are  the  two  grand  foundations  of  saving  re- 
ligion. 

Right  knowledge  after  all  lies  at  the  root  of  all  vital  Chris- 
tianity, as  light  was  the  beginning  of  creation.  We  need  to  be 
"  renewed  in  knowledge."  (Col.  iii.  10.)  We  must  know  what 
we  believe,  and  we  cannot  properly  worship  an  unknown  God, 


176  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Do  we  know  God,  and  do  we  know  Christ  ar»glit  ?  are  the  two 
great  questions  to  be  considered.  God  known  out  of  Christ  is 
a  consuming  fire,  and  will  fill  us  with  fear  only.  Christ  known 
without  God  will  not  be  truly  valued  :  we  shall  see  no  meaning 
in  His  Cross  and  passion.  To  see  clearly  at  the  same  time  a 
holy,  pure,  sin-hating  God,  and  a  loving,  merciful,  sin-atoning 
Christ,  is  the  very  A  B  C  of  comfortable  religion.  In  short,  it 
is  life  eternal  to  know  rightly  God  and  Christ.  "  To  know  God 
without  Christ,"  says  Newton,  "  is  not  to  know  Him  savingly." 

Traill  remarks,  "  The  secret  moth  and  poison  in  many  peo- 
ple's religion  is,  that  it  is  not  Christianity  at  all.  God  out  of 
Christ  is  a  consuming  fire  ;  God  not  worshipped  in  Christ  is  an 
idol  ;  all  hopes  of  acceptance  out  of  Christ  are  vain  dreams  ;  a 
heaven  out  of  Christ  is  little  better  than  the  Turk's  paradise." 

The  Greek  of  the  phrase, "  that  they  might  know,"  would 
have  been  better  rendered,  "  to  know."  It  is  the  same  phrase 
that  is  so  rendered  in  John  iv.  34  :  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will." 
Literally,  this  is,  "  My  meat  is  that  I  may  do  the  will." 

Let  us  learn  that  knowledge  is  the  chief  thing  in  religion, 
though  we  must  not  make  it  an  idol.  Most  wicked  men  are 
what  they  are  because  they  are  ignorant.  Godly  people  are 
often  described  in  Scripture  by  one  single  phrase  :  "  They  kno  w 
God." 

The  argument  which  Arians  and  Socinians  have  always  loved 
to  found  on  this  verse  appears  to  me  extremely  weak.  Their 
idea,  that  our  Lord  did  not  lay  claim  to  divinity,  because  He 
speaks  of  the  Father  as  the  "  only  true  God,"  is  foolish  and 
unreasonable.  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Toletus,  and  others,  remark 
very  sensibly,  that  the  word  "  only  "  was  not  meant  to  exclude 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  only  those  idols  and  false  gods 
with  which  the  heathen  religions  had  filled  the  earth  when 
Christ  appeared.  The  very  fact  that  eternal  life  consists  in 
knowing  not  only  God,  but  Christ,  goes  far  to  prove  Christ's 
divinity. 

Manton  remarks  that  the  expression  in  this  verse  had  a  two- 
fold object ;  firstly,  to  exclude  the  idols  and  false  gods ;  and 
secondly,  to  show  the  order  and  economy  of  salvation." 

Let  us  note  that  this  is  the  only  place  in  the  New  Testament 
where  our  Lord  calls  Himself  "  Jesus  Christ." 

4. — [I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earthJ]  The  meaning  of  these 
words  I  take  to  be  this.  "  I  have  now  glorified  Thee  during 
my  life  on  earth  by  keeping  Thy  law  perfectly,  so  that  Satan 
can  find  no  defect  or  blemish  in  Me, — by  witnessing  faithfully 
to  Thy  truth  in  opposition  to  the  sins  and  false  teaching  of  the 
Jews, — by  showing  Thee  and  Thy  mind  towards  man  in  a  way 
that  was  never  known  before." 

[/  have  finished  the  work...to  do.l    The  meaning  of  theoa 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  177 

words  I  take  to  be  this.  "  I  have  completed  the  work  of  re- 
demption which  Thou  didst  send  Me  into  the  world  to  accom- 
plish,— My  death  and  resurrection  being  so  near  that  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  it  is  finished." 

On  the  use  of  the  past  tense  here  instead  of  the  future,  Au- 
gustine remarks,  *'  Christ  saith  He  has  finished  that  which  He 
most  surely  knows  He  will  finish.  Thus  long  before  in  proph- 
ecy he  used  verbs  of  past  tense,  when  that  which  He  said  was 
to  come  to  pass  after  many  years.  '  They  pierced,'  says  He, 
*  my  hands  and  my  feet : '  not  they  will  pierce."  (Psalm  xxii. 
16.) 

It  has  been  truly  remarked  that  Christ  alone,  of  all  born  of 
woman,  could  say  literally  "  I  have  finished  the  work  Thou 
gavest  Me  to  do."  He  did  what  the  first  Adam  failed  to  do, 
and  all  the  saints  in  every  age  fail  to  do :  He  kept  the  law  per- 
fectly, and  by  so  keeping  it  brought  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness for  all  them  that  believe.  Yet  here  is  the  model  we 
ought  to  keep  before  our  eyes  continually.  We  must  aim  to 
finish  the  work  our  Father  appoints  for  us,  whether  great  or 
small. 

Musculus  remarks,  that  true  godly  obedience  is  to  be  seen 
not  merely  in  doing  such  work  as  we  arbitrarily  take  up,  but 
in  doing  such  work  as  God  appoints  us  to  do. 

It  admits  of  doubt,  whether  there  is  not  a  latent  reference  in 
the  end  of  this  verse  to  Daniel's  prophecy,  that  Messiah  would 
"  finish  transgression,  make  an  end  of  sins,  make  reconciliation 
for  iniquity,  and  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness."  (Dan. 
ix.  34.) 

Let  it  be  carefully  noted  that  Christ's  redeeming  work  on 
earth  was  "  work  which  the  Father  gave  Him  to  do."  He  was 
the  Person  commissioned  in  the  counsels  of  the  everlasting 
Trinity  to  do  this  work. 

"  On  the  earth  "  must  include  the  whole  period  of  Christ's 
incarnation,  from  His  birth  until  His  ascension.  During  all 
that  period  He  glorified  the  Father  by  perfect  unvarying  holi- 
ness. 

5. — \_And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  Thou  Me,  etci\  Having  briefly 
recited  His  work  on  earth,  or,  as  it  were,  rendered  an  account 
of  His  ministry,  our  Lord  now  repeats  the  one  prayer  with 
which  He  began  :  "  Glorify  Me."  The  meaning  of  this  verse  I 
take  to  be  as  follows :  "  Father,  my  earthly  work  being  now 
finished,  I  ask  to  be  restored  to  that  heavenly  glory  which  in 
an  unspeakable  manner  I  had  with  Thee,  as  one  of  the  co-equal 
and  undivided  Trinity,  long  before  this  world  existed.  The 
period  of  my  humiliation  and  self-imposed  weakness  being  ac- 
complished, let  Me  once  more  share  Thy  glory,  and  sit  with 
Thee  on  Thy  throne  as  I  did  before  my  incarnation." 

8* 


178  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  things  asked  in  this  prayer, 
both  here  and  elsewhere,  are  very  deep,  and  reach  far  beyond 
man's  understanding.  The  glory  which  the  Son  had  with  the 
Father,  in  the  time  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  is  a  mat- 
ter passing  our  comprehension.  But  the  pre-existence  of 
Christ,  tlie  doctrine  that  Father  and  Son  are  two  distinct  per- 
sons, and  the  equal  glory  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  are  at  any 
rate  taught  here  very  plainly.  It  seems  perfectly  impossible 
to  reconcile  the  verse  with  the  Socinian  theory, — that  Christ 
was  a  mere  man,  like  David  or  Paul,  and  did  not  exist  before 
He  was  born  at  Bethlehem. 

Let  us  also  learn  the  practical  lesson,  that  a  prayer  for  glory 
comes  best  from  those  who  have  done  work  upon  earth  for 
God.  A  lazy  wish  to  go  to  glory  without  working  is  not  ac- 
cording to  Christ's  example. 

6. — [/  have  manifested  Thy  name.]  In  this  part  of  the  prayer 
our  Lord  begins  to  speak  of  His  believing  people :  directly  of 
the  eleven  apostles,  but  indirectly  and  partially  of  all  believers 
in  every  age.  And  the  rest  of  the  prayer  from  this  point  is  en- 
tirely taken  up  with  the  case  of  the  disciples. 

The  sentence  before  us  means,  "  I  have  made  known  Thy- 
self, Thy  character,  and  Thine  attributes  to  my  disciples." 
The  word  "  name  "  is  continually  used  in  this  sense  in  the  Bi- 
ble. Thus  :  Psalm  xxii.  22  ;  lii.  9  ;  cxix.  55  ;  Is.  xxvi.  8  ;  Acts 
ix.  14  ;  Prov.  xviii.  10.  A  right  knowledge  of  God  the  Father 
was  the  first  thing  which  Christ  revealed  and  taught  to  His 
disciples. 

Burgon  remarks,  "  The  word  name  is  here  used  in  that  large 
signification,  so  well  known  to  readers  of  Scripture,  whereby 
it  is  made  to  stand  for  God  himself.  (Psalm  xx.  I.)  The  evan- 
gelist says,  "  They  shall  call  His  name  Emmanuel ;"  meaning, 
that  our  Saviour  would  be  what  the  name  Emmanuel  means  : 
viz, '  God  with  us.'  As  often  thus  as  our  Lord  made  known  to 
men  the  mind  and  will  of  the  eternal  Father,  so  often  did  He 
manifest  His  name." 

Traill  remarks,  "  What  is  the  Father's  name  ?  Many  think 
they  know  it,  to  whom  Christ  never  revealed  it.  If  you  ask 
them  whether  they  know  Christ's  Father's  name,  they  have  a 
ready  answer.  He  is  the  first  Person  in  the  Trinity.  He  is 
the  Almighty,  the  maker  and  ruler  of  heaven  and  earth.  Yes  :. 
but  this  is  tlie  name  of  God  only,  and  that  in  general !  The 
name  of  Christ's  Father  is  that  name  and  discovery  of  God 
wherein  He  stands  related  to  the  Son." 

[  Unto  the  men...gavest  them  Me.]  In  this  sentence  our  Lord 
describes  His  disciples.  He  calls  them  "  men  whom  the  Fa- 
ther gave  Him  out  of  the  world, — men  who  were  the  elect  chil- 
dren of  the  Father,  and  whom  the  Father  committed  and  en- 
trusted to  His  care  as  to  a  good  Shepherd."     Lampe  thinks 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII. 


179 


that  "  men  "  are  emphatically  mentioned  here  to  the  seclusion 
of  angels. 

Believers  are  "  given  "  to  Christ  by  the  Father,  according  to 
an  everlasting  covenant  made  and  sealed,  long  before  they 
were  born ;  and  taken  out  from  the  world,  by  the  calling  of 
the  Spirit,  in  due  time.  They  are  the  Father's  peculiar  prop- 
erty, as  well  as  the  property  of  the  Son.  They  were  of  the 
world,  and  nowise  better  than  others.  Their  calling  and  elec- 
tion out  of  the  world  to  be  Christ's  people,  and  not  any  fore- 
seen merit  of  their  own,  is  the  real  foundation  of  their  charac- 
ter. 

These  are  deep  things,  things  to  be  read  with  peculiar  rever- 
ence, because  they  are  the  words  of  the  Son  addressed  to  the 
Father,  and  handling  matter  about  believers,  which  the  Eter- 
nal Trinity  alone  can  handle  with  positiveness  and  certainty. 
Who  those  are  who  are  given  to  Christ  by  the  Father,  we  can 
only  certainly  know  by  outward  evidences.  But  that  all  be- 
lievers are  so  given  by  the  Father,  predestined,  elect,  chosen, 
called  by  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  their  names  and  exact 
number  known  from  all  eternity,  is  truth  which  we  must  rev- 
erently believe,  and  never  hesitate  to  receive.  So  long  as  we 
are  on  earth  we  have  to  do  with  invitations,  promises,  com- 
mands, evidences,  and  faith  ;  and  God's  election  never  destroys 
our  responsibility.  But  all  true  believers,  who  really  repent 
and  believe  and  have  the  Spirit,  may  fairly  take  comfort  in  the 
thought,  that  they  were  known  and  cared  for  and  given  to 
Christ  by  an  eternal  covenant,  long  before  they  knew  Christ  or 
cared  for  Him.  It  is  an  unspeakable  comfort  to  remember 
that  Christ  cares  for  that  which  the  Father  has  given  Him. 

[And  they  have  kept  Thy  word.]  Here  our  Lord  continues 
the  description  of  His  disciples,  and  names  things  about  them 
which  may  be  seen  by  men  as  well  as  God.  He  says,  "  They 
have  kept,  or  observed,  or  attended  to,  the  Word  of  the  Gospel, 
which  tliou  didst  send  them  by  Me.  While  others  would  not 
attend  to  or  keep  that  Word,  these  eleven  men  had  hearing 
ears  and  attentive  hearts,  and  diligently  obeyed  Thy  message." 
Practical  obedience  is  the  first  great  test  of  genuine  disciple- 
ship. 

. — []Vow  they  have  knoicn,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  proceeds 
to  give  an  account  of  His  disciples.  The  meaning  seems  to  be, 
"  They  have  now  attained  such  a  degree  of  knowledge,  that 
they  know  that  the  words  they  have  heard  and  the  works  they 
have  seen  from  Me,  are  words  and  works  given  Me  to  speak 
and  do  by  Thee." 

The  idea  is  that  they  know  my  mission  to  be  divine.  "  They 
know  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  hast  com- 
missioned Me  to  speak  and  act  as  I  have  done." 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  striking  to  obser^'e  how  Jesus  dwells 


180  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

on  a  right  knowledge  of  the  Father  as  the  great  truth  which 
He  came  into  the  world  to  reveal. 

8. — [For  1  hane  given... words. ..gavest  Me.]  In  this  sentence  our 
Lord  declares  what  He  had  done  in  teaching  His  disciples  :  He 
had  given  them  the  words,  doctrines  or  truths,  which  the  Fa- 
ther had  given  Him  to  proclaim  to  the  world.  The  words 
which  our  Lord  spoke,  and  the  works  which  He  did,  were  both 
alike  given  Him  by  the  Father  to  speak  and  to  do,  in  the  eter- 
nal counsels  of  the  Trinity  about  man's  salvation. 

For  the  peculiar  use  of  the  phrase,  "  words,"  to  denote  the 
truths  or  doctrines  taught  by  our  Lord,  see  John  iii.  34  ;  vi.  68 ; 
sii.  48  ;  xiv.  10.  Specially  we  should  remark  Peter's  saying, 
"  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 

[They  have  received,  etc.,  etc.]  Our  Lord  here  declares  three 
remarkable  things  about  His  disciples.  They  had  willingly 
received  and  embraced  the  truths  He  brought  them  from  the 
Father.  They  had  known  and  acknowledged  that  their  Master 
came  from  God  the  Father.  They  believed  and  were  persuad- 
ed that  the  Father  sent  Him  to  be  the  Messiah.  And  all  this 
had  taken  place  when  the  vast  majority  of  their  countrymen 
neither  acknowledged  nor  believed  anything  of  the  kind. 

We  should  carefully  note  the  high  character  given  to  the 
disciples  by  our  Lord.  It  seems  wonderful,  at  first  sight,  when 
we  remember  their  many  defects  in  faith  and  knowledge,  that 
our  Lord  should  commend  them  for  "  knowing"  and  "  believ- 
ing." Yet  when  we  think  of  their  immensely  difficult  position, 
and  the  opposition  they  had  to  meet,  we  shall  see  it  was  no 
light  matter  to  believe  at  all.  It  is  after  all  a  very  comforta- 
ble reflection  that  our  Lord  does  not  despise  weak  grace  ;  and 
that  He  honors  reality  and  sincerity  of  faith,  although  it  may 
be  very  small.  Believers  make  a  better  appearance  in  heaven 
than  they  do  upon  earth. 

The  word  rendered  "  surely  "  is  literally  "  truly."  It  is  trans- 
lated "surely"  in  Matt.  xxvi.  73;  Mark  xiv.  70.  The  idea  is, 
"  They  have  known  for  a  sure  and  undoubted  truth." 

Manton  observes,  "  The  faith  of  the  Apostles  was  weak.  They 
had  but  a  confused  view  of  Christ's  Godhead  and  eternal  gene- 
ration. They  knew  little  of  His  death,  were  filled  with  the 
thought  of  a  terrene  kingdom  and  a  pompous  Messiah,  and 
understood  not  His  prediction  of  His  death  and  passion. 
Though  they  knew  Him  to  be  the  Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  the 
world,  yet  the  manner  of  His  death  and  passion  they  knew  not. 
'  We  trusted  that  it  had  been  He  that  should  have  redeemed 
Israel.'  Yet  observe  how  Christ  commendeth  their  weak  faith  I 
Certainly  lie  loveth  to  encourage  poor  sinners,  when  He  praisetli 
their  mean  and  weak  beginnings." 

Traill  observes,  "  Christ  tells  all  the  good  He  can  of  His  dia- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII. 


181 


ciples,  and  covers  their  failings.  How  poorly  had  they  re- 
ceived Christ's  Word !  How  weak  and  staggering  was  their 
faith  !  How  oft  had  Clirist  reproved  them  sharply  for  their 
unbelief  and  other  faults  !  Yet  not  a  word  of  all  this  in  Christ's 
representing  them  to  His  Father  !  This  is  the  constant,  gra- 
cious way  of  our  High  Priest.  He  makes  no  mention  of  Hia 
Israel's  faults  in  heaven,  but  for  their  expiation." 


JOHN  XVn.  9—16. 


9  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for 
the  world,  but  for  them  which  tliou 
hast  given  me ;  for  they  are  thine. 

10  And  all  mine  are  thine,  and 
thine  are  mine :  and  I  am  glorified 
in  them. 

11  And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the 
world,  but  these  are  in  the  world, 
and  I  come  to  thee.  Holy  Father, 
keep  through  thine  own  name  those 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they 
may  be  one,  as  we  are. 

12  While  I  was  with  them  in  the 
world,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name; 
those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have 
kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lost,  but 


the  son  of  perdition:  that  the  Scrip- 
ture might  be  fulfilled. 

13  And  now  come  I  to  thee :  and 
these  things  I  speak  in  the  world, 
that  they  might  have  my  joy  ful- 
filled in  themselves. 

14  I  have  ^iven  them  thy  word; 
and  the  world  hath  hated  them,  be- 
cause they  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 

15  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that 
thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the 
evil. 

16  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even 
as  I  am  not  of  the  world. 


These  verses,  like  every  part  of  this  woriderfiil  chap- 
ter, contain  some  deep  things  which  are  "  hard  to  be 
understood."  But  there  are  two  plain  points  standing 
out  on  the  face  of  the  passage  which  deserve  the  special 
attention  of  all  true  Christians.  Passing  by  all  other 
points,  let  us  fix  our  attention  on  these  two. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  does 
things  for  JIls  believing  people  which  He  does  not  do  for 
the  wicked  and  unbelieving.  He  helps  their  souls  by 
special  intercession.  He  says,  "  I  pray  for  them:  I  pray 
not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  Thou  hast  given 
Me." 

The  doctrine  before  us  is  one  which  is  specially  hated 
by  the  world.  Nothing  gives  such  offence,  and  stirs  up 
such  bitter  feeling  among  the  wicked,  as  the  idea  of 
God  making  any  distinction  between  man  and  man,  and 


182  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

loving  one  person  more  than  another.  Yet  tlie  world's 
objections  to  the  doctrine  are,  as  usual,  weak  and  un- 
reasonable. Surely  a  little  reflection  might  show  us  that 
a  God  who  regarded  good  and  bad,  holy  and  unholy, 
righteous  and  unrighteous,  with  equal  complacency  and 
favor,  would  be  a  very  strange  kind  of  God  !  The 
special  intercession  of  Christ  for  His  saints  is  agreeable 
to  reason  and  to  common  sense. 

Of  course,  like  every  other  Gospel  truth,  the  doc- 
trine before  us  needs  careful  statement  and  Scriptural 
guarding.  On  the  one  hand,  we  must  not  narrow  the 
love  of  Christ  to  sinners,  and  on  the  other  we  must  not 
make  it  too  broad.  It  is  true  that  Christ  loves  all  sin- 
ners, and  invites  all  to  be  saved  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that 
He  specially  loves  the  "  blessed  company  of  all  faithful 
people,"  whom  He  sanctifies  and  glorifies.  It  is  true 
that  He  has  wrought  out  a  redemption  sufficient  for  all 
mankind,  and  offers  it  freely  to  all  ;  but  it  is  also  true 
that  His  redemption  is  effectual  only  to  them  that  be- 
lieve. Just  so  it  is  true  that  He  is  the  Mediator  between 
God  and  man  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  He  intercedes 
actively  for  none  but  those  that  come  unto  God  by  Him. 
Hence  it  is  written,  "  I  pray  for  them:  I  pray  not  for  the 
world." 

This  special  intercession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  one 
grand  secret  of  the  believer's  safety.  He  is  daily 
watched,  and  thought  for,  and  provided  for  with  un- 
failing care,  by  One  whose  eye  never  slumbers  and 
never  sleeps.  Jesus  is  "  able  to  save  them  to  the  utter- 
most who  come  unto  God  by  Him,  because  He  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  (Heb.  vii.  25.) 
They  never  perish,  becauss  He  never  ceases  to  pray  for 
them,  and  His  prayer  must  prevail.  They  stand  and  per- 
severe to  the  end,  not  because  of  their  own  strength  and 
goodness,  but  because  Jesus  intercedes  for  them.     When 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  183 

Judas  fell  never  to  rise  again,  while  Peter  fell,  but  re- 
pented, and  was  restored,  the  reason  of  the  difference 
lay  under  those  words  of  Christ  to  Peter,  "  I  have  prayed 
for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not.".    (Luke  xxii.  32.) 

The  true  servant  of  Christ  ought  to  lean  back  his 
soul  on  the  truth  before  us,  and  take  comfort  in  it.  It 
is  one  of  the  peculiar  privileges  and  treasures  of  a  be- 
liever, and  ought  to  be  well  known.  However  much  it 
may  be  wrested  and  abused  by  false  professors  and 
hypocrites,  it  is  one  which  those  who  really  feel  in 
themselves  the  workings  of  the  Spirit  should  hold  firmly 
and  never  let  go.  Well  says  the  judicious  Hooker, — 
"  No  man's  condition  so  safe  as  ours :  the  prayer  of 
Christ  is  more  than  sufiicient  both  to  strengthen  us,  be 
we  never  so  weak ;  and  to  overthrow  all  adversary 
power,  be  it  never  so  strong  and  potent."  ("  Hooker's 
Sermons."     Nisbet's  edit.,  1834,  p.  171.) 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses,  that 
CJirist  does  not  wish  His  believing  people  to  he  taken 
out  of  the  iGorld^  hut  to  he  heptfrom  the  evil  of  it. 

We  need  not  doubt  that  our  Lord's  all-seeing  eye 
detected  in  the  hearts  of  His  disciples  an  impatient  de- 
sire to  get  away  from  this  troubled  world.  Few  in 
number  and  weak  in  strength,  surrounded  on  every 
side  by  enemies  and  persecutors,  they  might  well  long 
to  be  released  from  the  scene  of  conflict,  and  to  go 
home.  Even  David  had  said  in  a  certain  place,  "  Oh, 
that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove,  then  would  I  flee  away 
and  be  at  rest  !  "  (Psalm  Iv.  6.)  Seeing  all  this,  our 
Lord  has  wisely  placed  on  record  this  part  of  His  prayer 
for  the  perpetual  benefit  of  His  Church.  He  has  taught 
us  the  great  lesson  that  He  thinks  it  better  for  His  peo- 
ple to  remain  in  the  world  and  be  kept  from  its  evil, 
than  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world  and  removed  from  the 
presence  of  evil  altogether. 


184:  EXPOsrroKY  thoughts. 

Kor  is  it  difficult  on  reflection  to  see  the  wisdom  of 
our  Lord's  mind  about  His  people,  in  this  as  in  every 
thing  else.  Pleasant  as  it  might  be  to  flesh  and  blood 
to  be  snatched  away  from  conflict  and  temptation,  we 
may  easily  see  that  it  would  not  be  profitable.  How 
could  Christ's  people  do  any  good  in  the  world,  if  taken 
away  from  it  immediately  after  conversion  ? — How  could 
they  exhibit  the  power  of  grace,  and  make  proof  of 
faith,  and  courage,  and  patience,  as  good  soldiers  of  a 
crucified  Lord  ? — How  could  they  be  duly  trained  for 
heaven,  and  taught  to  value  the  blood  and  intercession 
and  patience  of  their  Redeemer,  unless  they  purchased 
their  experience  by  suffering  ? — Questions  like  these  ad- 
mit of  only  one  kind  of  answer.  To  abide  here  in  this 
vale  of  tears,  tried,  tempted,  assaulted,  and  yet  kept  from 
falling  into  sin,  is  the  surest  plan  to  promote  the  sancti- 
fication  of  Christians,  and  to  glorify  Christ.  To  go  to 
heaven  at  once,  in  the  day  of  conversion,  would  doubt- 
less be  an  easy  course,  and  would  save  us  much  trouble. 
But  the  easiest  course  is  not  always  the  path  of  duty. 
He  that  would  win  the  crown  must  carry  the  cross,  and 
show  himself  light  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  and  salt  in 
the  midst  of  corruption.  "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also 
reign  with  Him."     (2  Tim.  ii.  11.) 

If  we  have  any  hope  that  we  are  Christ's  true  dis- 
ciples, let  us  be  satisfied  that  Christ  knows  better  than 
we  do  what  is  for  our  good.  Let  us  leave  "  our  times 
in  His  hand,"  and  be  content  to  abide  here  patiently  as 
long  as  He  pleases,  however  hard  our  position,  so  l6ng 
as  He  keeps  us  from  evil.  That  He  will  so  keep  us  we 
need  not  doubt,  if  we  ask  Him,  because  He  prays  that 
we  may  be  "  kept."  Nothing,  we  may  be  sure,  glorifies 
grace  so  much  as  to  live  like  Daniel  in  Babylon,  and 
the  saints  in  Nero's  household, — in  the  world  and  yet 
not  of  the  world, — tempted  ou  every  side  and  yet  con- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xvn.  185 

querors  of  temptation,  not  taken  out  of  the  reach  of 
evil  and  yet  kept  and  preserved  from  its  power. 

Notes.    John  xvii.  9 — 16. 

9. — {1  pray  for  them,  etc.  etc.]  In  tins  verse  our  Lord  begins  that 
part  of  His  prayer  which  is  specially  intercessory,  and  pro- 
ceeds to  name  things  which  He  asks  for  His  disciples,  from  this 
point  down  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  It  may  be  convenient  to 
remember  that  the  things  He  asks  may  be  divided  under  four 
heads.  He  prays  that  His  disciples  may  be  (a)  kept,  {b)  sancti 
fied,  (c)  united,  (d)  and  be  with  Him  in  glory.  Four  more  im- 
portant things  cannot  );e  desired  for  believers. 

To  say,  as  some  have  said,  that  our  Lord's  intercessory  prayer 
is  an  exact  specimen  of  what  He  does  in  heaven  as  our  High 
Priest,  is  straining:  a  point,  and  going  too  far.  To  suppose  that 
the  Son  literally  asks  things  of  the  Father  by  prayer  in  heaven, 
is  in  my  judgment  unreasonable,  and  a  very  limited,  narrow 
view  of  Christ's  intercession.  We  are  reading  a  prayer  made 
by  our  Lord  during  the  time  of  His  earthly  ministry,  before 
His  ascension  and  session  at  God's  right  hand  ;  and  we  are  not 
reading  an  account  of  what  He  does  for  us,  as  our  Priest,  within 
the  veil.  Let  it  suffice  us  to  believe  that  the  intercession  of 
this  chapter  exhibits  accurately  Christ's  mind  toward  believers. 
His  desires  for  believers,  the  active  interest  He  takes  in  believers, 
and  the  graces  He  would  fain  see  in  believers.  Above  all,  let 
us  believe  that  if  we  seek  for  ourselves  the  same  four  things 
that  Jesus  here  names,  we  have  a  Friend  in  heaven  who  will 
take  care  that  we  do  not  seek  in  vain  and  will  make  our  prayer 
eflFectual. 

There  are  two  interpretations  of  our  Lord's  meaning,  when 
He  speaks  of  praying  for  the  disciples,  and  "  not  praying  for 
the  world." 

Some,  as  Bengel  and  Alford,  think  that  our  Lord  meant,  "At 
this  present  moment  I  pray  specially  for  my  disciples,  and  not 
for  the  world."  They  will  not  admit  that  our  Lord  does  not 
pray  and  intercede  in  any  way  for  the  wicked  and  unbelieving  ; 
and*  they  quote  with  some  show  of  reason  His  prayer  at  the 
crucifixion  for  His  murderers, — "  Father,  forgive  them."  (Luke 
xxiii.  34.) 

Others,  as  Hutcheson  and  Lampe,  think  that  our  Lord  meant, 
^'I  pray  specially  for  my  disciples,  because  now  and  always  it  is 
their  special  privilege  to  be  prayed  for  and  interceded  for  by 
Me."  The  advocates  of  this  view  maintain  that  it  is  deroga- 
tory to  our  Lord's  honor  to  suppose  that  He  can  ever  ask  any- 
thing in  vain  ;  and  that  His  intercession  specially  belongs  to 
"  those  who  come  unto  God  by  Him."    (Heb.  vii.  25.) 


186  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  point  in  dispute  is  a  nice  and  delicate  one,  and  will 
probably  never  be  settled.  On  the  one  hand  we  must  take 
care  that  we  do  not  forget  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  does 
take  a  special  interest  in  His  believing  people,  and  does  do 
special  things  for  tliem  which  He  does  not  do  for  the  wicked 
and  unbelieving. — On  the  other  hand  we  must  not  forget  that 
our  Lord  pities  all,  cares  for  all,  and  has  x>rovided  salvation 
sufficient  for  all  mankind.  There  is  no  escaping  the  text  which 
says  of  the  wicked  that  they  "  deny  the  Lord  that  bought 
them."  (2  Peter  ii.  1.)  The  most  fair  and  honest  interpreta- 
tion of  the  text,  "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  (John  iii.  16),  is 
to  regard  "  the  world  "  as  meaning  all  mankind. 

The  whole  dispute  turns,  as  is  often  the  case  in  such  dis- 
putes, on  the  meaning  we  put  on  a  word.  If  by  "intercession" 
we  mean  vaguely  and  generally  the  whole  mediatorial  work  of 
Christ  on  behalf  of  mankind,  it  is  then  true  that  Christ  inter- 
cedes for  all,  both  good  and  bad  ;  and  this  text  before  us  must 
mean,  "  I  pray  at  this  moment  sj)ecially  for  my  people,  and  am 
only  thinking  of  them." — If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  mean  by 
"  intercession  "  that  special  work  which  Christ  does  for  His 
people,  in  order  to  carry  them  to  heaven,  after  calling,  pardon- 
ing, justifying,  renewing,  and  sanctifying  them,  it  is  then  plain 
that  Christ  intercedes  for  none  but  believers,  and  that  the 
words  before  us  mean,  "  I  pray  now,  as  always,  specially  for 
my  disciples,  and  not  for  the  world." 

If  I  must  give  an  opinion,  I  must  own  that  I  decidedly  hold 
the  second  or  last  view  of  which  I  have  spoken.  I  believe  that 
Christ  never,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,  "  makes  inter- 
cession "  for  the  wicked.  I  believe  that  such  intercession  is  a 
peculiar  privilege  of  the  saints,  and  one  grand  reason  of  their 
continuance  in  grace.  They  stand,  because  there  is  One  in 
heaven  who  actively  and  effectually  intercedes. 

I  will  give  place  to  no  one  in  maintaining  that  Jesus  loves  all 
mankind,  came  into  the  world  for  all,  died  for  all,  provided  re- 
demption suificient  for  all,  calls  on  all,  invites  all,  commands  all 
to  repent  and  believe  ;  and  ought  to  be  offered  to  all — freely, 
fully,  unreservedly,  directly,  unconditionally — without  money 
and  without  price.  If  I  did  not  hold  this,  I  dare  not  get  into  a 
pulpit,  and  I  should  not  understand  how  to  preach  the  Gospel. 

But  while  I  hold  all  this,  I  maintain  firmly  that  Jesus  does 
ppecial  work  for  those  who  believe,  which  He  does  not  do  for 
others.  He  quickens  them  by  His  Spirit,  calls  them  by  His 
grace,  washes  them  in  His  blood — justifies  them,  sanctifies 
them,  keeps  them,  leads  them,  and  continually  intercedes  for 
them — that  they  may  not  fall.  If  I  did  not  believe  all  this,  I 
should  be  a  very  miserable,  unhappy  Christian. 

Holding  this  opinion,  I  regard  the  text  before  us  as  one  which 
describes  our  Lord's  special  intercession  for  His  people  ;  and  I 
take  the  meaning  to  be  simply,  "  I  pray  for  them,  as  my  peculiai 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  187 

people,  that  they  may  be  kept,  sanctified,  united,  and  glorified  ; 
but  I  do  not  pray  for  the  world." 

The  famous  text,  "  Father,  forgive  them  "  (Luke  xxiii.  34),  is 
at  best  a  doubtful  one.  Will  any  one  undertake  to  say,  that 
those  for  whom  our  Lord  prayed  were  never  forgiven  and 
gaved  ? — Have  we  forgotten  that  within  fifty  days  after  that 
prayer  3,000  souls  were  converted  at  Pentecost,  of  whom  Peter 
said,  "  By  wicked  hands  ye  crucified  and  slew  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  "  ?  (Acts  ii.  23.)  Who  can  prove  that  the  very  men 
who  crucified  our  Lord  were  not  among  the  number  converted, 
and  were  thus  the  answer  to  our  Lord's  prayer  ? — These  how- 
ever are  conjectures  at  the  very  best.  The  matter  is  one  which 
is  not  necessary  to  salvation,  and  one  about  which  Christians 
must  agree  to  differ,  and  must  not  excommunicate  one  another. 
**  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind."  (Rom. 
xiv.  5.) 

Hengstenberg  remarks,  "  The  world  maybe  viewed  under  two 
aspects.  First,  there  is  the  susceptibility  of  grace,  which,  de- 
spite the  depths  of  the  sinful  depravation  of  Adam's  race,  still 
remains  in  it.  Of  the  world  in  this  sense  Jesus  says,  *  I  came 
not  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world.' 
(John  i.  29  ;  iii.  17.)  Viewed  under  this  aspect,  the  world  is  the 
subject  of  Christ's  intercession.  The  disciples  themselves  were 
won  from  the  world.  But  the  world  may  also  be  viewed  as 
ruled  by  predominantly  ungodly  principles.  Of  the  world  in 
this  sense  we  read  that  it  cannot  receive  the  *  Spirit  of  truth.' 
(John  xiv.  27.)  To  pray  for  the  world,  thus  viewed,  would  be 
as  vain  as  to  pray  for  the  prince  of  this  world." 

Manton  suggests  that  we  must  draw  some  distinction  between 
the  intercession  of  Christ  as  a  Divine  Mediator,  and  the  prayers 
of  Christ  as  a  man,  wherein  He  is  an  example  to  His  people. 
Yet,  however  just  this  remark,  it  hardly  seems  to  apply  to  this 
peculiarly  solemn  prayer. 

[For  tliem... given  Me...t7iine.]  Our  Lord  here  repeats  the  de- 
scription of  His  disciples  which  He  had  given  before.  They 
were  men  whom  "  the  Father  had  given  Him"  to  teach  and 
feed,  and  save.  They  were  His  Father's  sheep,  intrusted  to 
His  charge.  Therefore,  He  seems  to  argue,  "  I  am  specially 
bound  to  pray  for  them,  and  ask  for  them  everything  that  their 
souls  need.  Like  a  good  Shepherd,  I  must  give  an  account  of 
them  one  day." 

10. — [And  all  mine  ..thine. ..mine.l  This  sentence  seems  to  come 
in  parenthetically,  and  to  be  a  reassertion  of  the  great  truth  of 
the  perfect  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  The  words  in  the 
Greek  mean  literally  "  things,"  and  not  "  persons."  "  All  my 
things  are  Thy  things,  and  all  Thy  things  are  my  things,  Aa 
with  everything  else,  these  eleven  disciples  are  not  mine  more 
than  Thine,  or  Thine  more  than  mine."  This  continual  asser- 
tion of  the  doctrine  of  the  perfect  unity  of  the  Godhead,  and 


188  EXPOSTTOEY  THOUGHTS. 

tlie  distinction  of  tlie  Persons  in  tlie  Trinity,  is  very  remark- 
able and  instructive. 

[I  am  glorified  in  them.'\  In  this  sentence  our  Lord  seems  to 
return  to  the  disciples.  "  I  have  been  and  am  glorified  in  them, 
by  their  faith,  and  obedience  and  love,  when  the  vast  majority 
of  their  countrymen  have  hated  and  rejected  Me,  They  have 
honored  Me  and  brought  glory  to  Me,  by  continuing  with  Me  in 
my  tribulation.  Therefore  I  now  make  special  prayer  and  in- 
tercession for  them." 

Let  us  mark  here  that  the  weakest  faith  and  love  to  Christ 
brings  Him  some  glory,  and  is  not  overlooked  by  Him. 

11. — [And  now  1  am. ..come  to  TJieei]  In  the  beginning  of  this 
verse  our  Lord  describes  the  position  of  the  disciples,  and  shows 
the  special  reason  wliy  they  required  prayer  and  intercession  to 
be  made  for  them.  They  were  about,  for  the  first  time,  to  be 
left  alone  like  orphans,  and  thrown  on  their  own  resources,  in 
a  certain  sense.  Hitherto  they  had  always  had  their  Master  at 
their  side,  and  could  turn  to  Him  in  every  case  of  need. 
Now  they  were  about  to  enter  on  a  totally  different  condition  of 
things. — "  The  time  of  my  departure  from  the  world  is  at  hand. 
I  am  very  soon  about  to  ascend  into  heaven  and  come  to  Thee. 
But  these  few  sheep,  these  weak  disciples,  are  not  coming  to 
heaven  with  Me.  They  are  going  to  be  left  alone  in  a  wicked, 
cold,  persecuting  world." 

Poole  observes,  "  Christ  here  speaks  of  Himself  as  one  who 
had  already  died,  and  was  already  risen,  and  ascended,  though 
none  of  all  these  things  were  past,  because  they  were  so  soon 
and  suddenly  to  come." 

Let  us  not  fail  to  note  how  our  Lord  remembers  the  position 
of  His  people  here  on  earth, — cares  tenderly  for  them,  and 
will  make  all  needful  provision  for  their  safety  and  comfort. 
"  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  dwellest."     (Rev.  ii.  13.) 

{Hol^  Father.']  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  Gospel  where 
we  find  our  Lord  addressing  the  Father  by  this  epithet.  There 
is  doubtless  some  good  reason  for  it.  It  may  be  that  there  is 
a  fitness  in  asking  the  "  Holy  "  Father  to  keep  the  disciples 
holy  and  free  from  the  dominion  of  evil.  "As  Thou  art  holy, 
BO  keep  these  my  disciples  holy." 

[Keep  through  Thine.. .name...given  Me.]  Here  is  the  first  pe- 
tition that  our  Lord  puts  up  for  His  disciples.  He  asks  that 
they  may  be  kept  and  preserved  from  evil,  from  falling  away, 
from  fal'se  doctrine,  from  being  overcome  by  temptation,  from 
being  crushed  by  persecution,  from  every  device  and  assault  of 
the  devil.  Danger  was  around  them  on  every  side.  Weakness 
was  their  present  characteristic.  Preservation  was  what  He 
asked. 

The  expression,  "  Keep   through   Thine   own  name,"  is  re. 


;  JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  ISO 

markable.  I  take  it  to  mean,  "  Through  Thine  own  attributes 
of  power,  love,  and  wisdom."  The  "  name  "  of  God,  as  before 
remarked,  is  frequently  used  in  Scripture  to  signify  His  char- 
acter and  attributes. 

[TJiat  tlieymay  he  one,  as  we  are.]  Here  our  Lord  mentions 
one  special  object  for  which  He  desires  that  His  people  may  be 
kept :  viz.,  their  unity  :  that  they  may  be  one. — "Keep  them, 
thai  they  may  be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind,  striving  together 
against  common  foes  and  for  common  ends,  and  not  broken  up, 
weakened,  and  paralyzed  by  internal  quarrels  and  divisions." 

He  adds  the  highest  model  and  pattern  of  unity, — "  one,  as 
we  are," — the  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Of  course 
there  cannot  be  literally  such  union  between  Christian  and 
Christian,  as  there  is  between  two  Persons  in  the  Trinity.  But 
the  unity  which  Jesus  prays  the  disciples  may  aim  at,  should 
be  a  close,  intimate,  unbroken  unity  of  mind,  and  will,  and 
opinion,  and  feeling. 

Burgon  remarks  here,  "  The  word  rendered  '  as,'  both  here 
and  in  ver.  21,  does  not  denote  strict  correspondence,  but  only 
general  resemblance  ;  as  in  the  Athanasian  Creed,  where  the 
union  of  two  natures  in  the  one  Person  of  Christ,  is  popularly 
illustrated  by  the  union  of  the  '  reasonable  soul  and  flesh '  in 
man."     (Comp.  Matt.  v.  48  ;  Luke  vi.  86.) 

The  importance  attached  by  our  Lord  to  "  unity "  among 
Christians,  is  very  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  prominent  place 
assigned  to  it  in  this  verse.  The  very  first  object  for  which  He 
desires  the  preservation  of  the  disciples,  is  that  they  may  be 
kept  from  division.  Nor  can  we  wonder  at  this,  when  we  con- 
sider the  interminable  divisions  of  Christians  in  every  age,  the 
immense  harm  they  have  done  in  the  world,  and  the  astound- 
ing indifference  with  which  many  regard  them,  as  if  they  were 
perfectly  innocent  things,  and  as  if  the  formation  of  new  sects 
was  a  laudable  work  ! 

12. — [While.. Mith  tJiem... kept... Thy  name.]  Our  Lord  here  recites 
what  He  had  done  for  the  disciples  during  His  ministry : 
"  Throughout  the  three  years  in  which  I  have  been  with  these 
eleven  discij^les  in  the  world,  I  used  to  keep  them  from  all 
harm,  through  Thy  power  and  name." — I  can  see  no  reason 
why  the  same  Greek  words  should  not  be  rendered  "  through 
Thy  name,"  in  this  verse,  as  well  as  in  the  preceding  one.  In 
both  cases  the  idea  seems  the  same, — a  preservation  through 
the  grace,  power,  and  attributes  of  God  the  Father. 

[T7iou...gavest...kept...none...lost.]  The  word  rendered  "  kept " 
in  this  clause,  is  quite  different  from  the  word  so  rendered  in 
the  first  part  of  the  verse.  There  it  means  simply,  "I  have 
preserved."  Here  it  means,  "  I  have  guarded,"  like  a  shepherd 
guarding  a  flock,  or  a  soldier  guarding  a  treasure.     "  1  have  sc 


190  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS.  | 

carefully  guarded  those  disciples  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me, 
that  not  one  of  them  has  perished,  or  is  lost." 

[But  the  son  of  perdition.']  This  remarkable  expression  of 
course  refers  to  Judas  Iscariot,  the  traitor,  the  only  one  of  the 
A])Ostles  who  was  lost  and  cast  away  in  hell.  The  name  given 
to  Judas  is  a  strong  Hebraism,  and  means  "  a  person  worthy  of 
perdition,  or  only  tit  to  be  lost  and  cast  away,  by  reason  of  his 
wickedness."  David  says  to  Saul's  servants,  "  Ye  are  worthy 
to  die  :  "  or,  as  the  margin  says,  "  sons  of  death,"  (1  Sam. 
XX vi.  16.)  Again,  he  says  to  Nathan,  "  The  man  that  hath 
done  this  thing  shall  surely  die,"  or,  "  is  a  son  of  death."  (3 
Sam.  xxvi.  5  ;  see  also  Ps.  Ixxix.  11  ;  Matt.  xiii.  88 ;  Luke  xvi. 
8.)  It  is  a  tremendously  strong  expression  to  come  from  the 
lips  of  our  merciful  and  loving  Saviour,  It  shows  the  despe- 
rate helplessness  of  any  one  who,  living  in  great  light  and 
privileges  like  Judas,  misuses  his  opportunities,  and  deliber- 
ately follows  the  bent  of  his  own  sinful  inclinations.  He  be- 
comes the  "  child  of  hell,"     (Matt,  xxiii,  15.) 

A  question  of  very  grave  importance  arises  out  of  the  words 
before  us.  Did  our  Lord  mean  that  Judas  was  originally  one 
of  those  that  the  Father  "  gave  to  him,"  and  was  primarily  a 
true  believer?  Did  he  therefore  fall  away  from  grace  ? — Many 
maintain,  as  Hammond,  Alford,  Burgon^  and  Wordsworth,  that 
Judas  was  at  one  time  a  true  believer,  like  Peter,  James,  and 
John, — that  the  text  is  an  unanswerable  proof  that  grace  may 
be  lost, — and  that  a  man  may  be  converted,  and  have  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  yet  finally  fall  away,  and  perish  forever  in  hell. — 
This  is  not  only  a  very  uncomfortable  doctrine,  but  one  which 
it  is  hard  to  reconcile  with  many  plain  texts  of  Scripture,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  seventeenth  Article  of  our  own  Church. — 
But  does  the  text  before  us  clearly  prove  that  Judas  was  one 
of  those  who  were  "given"  to  Christ  by  the  Father?  I  be- 
lieve firmly  that  it  does  not,  I  maintain  that  the  "  but "  in  the 
text  is  not  an  "  exceptive  "  word,  but  an  "  adversative  "  one. 
I  hold  the  right  meaning  to  be,  "  Those  whom  Thou  gavest  Me 
I  have  kept,  and  out  of  them  not  one  is  lost.  But  there  is  one 
man  who  is  lost,  even  Judas,  the  son  of  perdition  ;  not  one  who 
was  ever  given  to  Me,  but  one  whom  I  declared  long  ago  to  be 
a  '  devil,'  a  man  whose  hardened  heart  fitted  him  for  destruc- 
tion," 

It  is  easy  of  course  to  say  that  this  view  is  a  far-fetched  and 
non-natural  one.  I  ask  those  who  say  this  to  observe,  that  the 
same  Greek  words  here  rendered  "  but."  are  used  in  other 
places  in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  is  impossible  to  put  an 
"exceptive"  sense  on  them,  and  where  the  "adversative" 
meaning  is  the  only  one  they  can  possibly  bear, — I  challenge 
any  one  to  deny  that  "  but,"  in  such  texts  as  Matt.  xii.  4,  "  but 
only  for  the  priests," — Mark  xiii.  33,  "  but  the  Father," — Rev. 
ix.  4,  "  but  only  those  men," — Rev.  xxi.  27,  "  but  they  which 
are  written," — must  be  interpreted  as  an  "  adversative,"  and 


Jt't^N,  CHAP.  XVII.  IQI 

cannot  possibly  be  an  "  exceptive  "  word.  (See  also  Acts  xxvii. 
22  and  2  Kings  v.  17.)  And  so  it  is  here.  Our  Lord  does  not 
mean,  "  No  one  of  those  given  to  Me  is  lost  except  the  son  of 
perdition." — What  He  does  mean  is,  "  Not  one  of  those  given 
to  Me  is  lost.  On  the  other  hand,  and  in  contrast,  Judas,  a  man 
not  given  to  Me,  a  graceless  man,  is  lost." 

Let  me  add,  in  confirmation  of  the  view  I  maintain,  that  in 
the  very  next  chapter  the  expression  here  used  is  referred  to 
by  St.  John,  in  his  account  of  our  Lord's  capture.  He  says, 
"  The  saying  was  fulfilled  which  He  spake :  Of  them  which 
Thou  gavest  Me  have  I  lost  none  "  (John  xviii.  9)  ;  and  not  one 
hint  does  he  give  of  any  exception  having  been  made  by  our 
Lord,  when  he  heard  Him  use  the  expression  before. 

The  view  I  advocate  is  maintained  by  De  Dieu,  Gomarus, 
Lampe,  Hutcheson,  and  Manton. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  even  in  our  own  English  language, 
Milton,  writing  in  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  last  re- 
vision of  our  Bible  took  jDlace,  has  used  the  word  "  except"  in 
the  same  way.     He  says  of  Satan,  in  "  Paradise  Lost : " — 

"  God  and  His  Son  except,  created  thing 
Nought  valued  He  or  shunned." 

"  Except  "  there  must  clearly  be  "  adversative."  God  and  His 
Son  are  not  created  things !  Both  Brown  (on  xvii.  John)  and 
Doddridge  quote  this  sentence  of  Milton. 

Bishop  Beveridge,  quoted  by  Ford,  remarks,  "  Judas,  here 
called  the  son  of  perdition,  though  he  seemed  to  be  given  to 
Christ,  and  to  come  to  Him,  yet  really  did  not.  Therefore, 
though  he  was  lost,  as  the  Scripture  had  foretold,  yet  Christ's 
word  is  stil]  true,  that  He  never  casts  out,  nor  loseth  any,  that 
really  come  to  Him." 

[That  Scripture.. .fulfilled^  Here,  as  in  many  places,  it  does 
not  mean  that  Judas  was  lost  in  order  to  fulfill  Scripture,  but 
that  the  Scripture  was  fulfilled  by  the  loss  of  Judas.  The 
place  referred  to  is  Psalm  cix.  8. 

Let  us  not  fail  to  note  the  high  honor  put  on  Scripture  in 
this  place.  Even  in  a  prayer  of  the  utmost  solemnity  address- 
ed by  the  Son  to  the  Father,  we  find  reverent  allusion  to  the 
written  word  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  to  that  oft-quoted 
book,  the  Psalms. 

13. — [And  now  1  come  to  Thee,  etc.']  This  is  a  somewhat  ellipti- 
cal verse.  I  take  the  meaning  to  be  something  of  this  kind : 
"  I  am  now  soon  leaving  the  world,  and  coming  to  Thee.  Be- 
fore leaving  the  world,  I  speak  these  things  openly  in  prayer 
in  the  hearing  of  these  my  disciples,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
cheered  and  comforted,  and  feel  the  joy  which  I  give  to  them 
filled  up  and  abounding  in  their  hearts." 


192  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

I  can  liardly  tliink  tliat  our  Lord  is  referring  to  the  discourse 
wliich  preceded  this  prayer.  It  seems  more  natural  to  apply 
"  these  things  I  speak  "  to  His  prayer. 

The  expression,  "  my  joy,"  occurs  before,  in  chapter  xv.  11. 
It  must  mean  that  peculiar,  inward  sense  of  comfort  that  Christ 
imparts  to  believers,  and  which  no  one  knows  excepting  him 
who  receives  it. 

14. — [/  have  given  them  Thy  Word,  etc.l  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
appears  to  describe  more  fully  the  position  of  the  disciples  as 
an  introduction  to  a  more  full  repeated  prayer  for  their  preser- 
vation. It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  I  do  not  pray  that  my  disci- 
ples may  be  kept  without  good  reason.  I  have  given  them  the 
Word  of  the  Gospel,  and  they  have  received  it,  and  have  been 
at  once  persecuted  and  ill-treated  for  receiving  it.  In  short, 
the  world  has  hated  them  ever  since  they  became  my  disci- 
ples, because,  like  myself,  they  are  not  of  the  world,  neither 
holding  the  world's  principles,  nor  walking  in  the  world's 
ways." 

Let  us  not  fail  to  remark  that  true  believers  must  expect  the 
hatred  and  enmity  of  the  wicked  in  every  age.  They  must  not 
be  surprised  at  it.  Christ  and  His  disciples  had  to  endure  it, 
and  all  real  Christians  must  endure  it  too.  The  reason  of  this 
enmity  is  the  continual  testimony  which  believers  bear  against 
the  world's  opinions  and  practices.  The  world  feels  itself  con- 
demned, and  hates  those  whose  faith  and  lives  condemn  it.  If 
believers  were  more  bold,  decided,  and  consistent,  they  would 
soon  find  these  things  out  more  than  they  do  now.  The  good 
opinion  of  the  world  is  about  the  last  thing  a  true  Christian 
should  expect  or  desire.  If  all  men,  speak  well  of  his  opinions 
and  ways  in  religion,  he  may  well  doubt  whether  there  is  not 
something  very  wrong  and  defective  about  them.  We  are  not 
to  court  the  world's  enmity.  A  narrow,  morose,  uncourteous, 
and  exclusive  spirit,  is  downright  wrong.  But  we  are  never 
to  be  the  least  surprised  by  the  world's  enmity  if  we  meet  with 
it ;  and  the  more  holy  we  are,  the  more  we  shall  meet  with  it. 
Christ  was  perfect  in  holiness ;  but  the  world  hated  Him. 

15. — [Ipray  not  that  Thou,  etc.,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  re- 
peats, and  develops  more  fully.  His  prayer  that  His  disciples 
may  be  kept.  His  meaning  appears  to  be  this : — **  Wicked  and 
persecuting  as  the  world  is,  1  pray  not  that  Thou  wouldst  take 
my  disciples  immediately  out  of  it.  Such  removal  would  be 
bad  for  themselves  and  bad  for  the  world.  What  I  do  pray  is, 
that  remaining  in  the  world,  Thou  wouldst  keep  them  from 
the  evil  of  the  world.  Though  in  it,  let  them  not  be  spoiled  or 
corrupted  by  it." 

The  deep  wisdom  of  this  prayer  is  very  instructive.  There 
are  few  Christians  who  would  not  like  to  go  to  heaven  without 
trouble,  conflict,  and  persecution.  Yet  it  would  not  be  for 
their  own  sanctificatiou,  and  it  would  deprive  the  world  of  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  193 

benefit  of  their  teacliing  and  example.  Believers  would  never 
value  Clirist  and  heaven  as  much  as  they  will  do  one  day,  if 
thej  were  not  kept  here  on  earth  a  good  deal,  taught  to  know 
their  own  hearts,  and,  like  their  Master,  "perfected  by  sufier- 
ing."     (Heb.  ii.  10.) 

Hutcheson  remarks,  "  However  much  we  ought  to  have  our 
eye  upon  our  rest,  and  make  ready  for  it,  yet  we  are  not  anx- 
iously to  long  for  it  till  God's  time  come,  nor  to  be  weary  of 
life  because  of  any  trouble,  persecution,  or  inconvenience  we 
meet  with  in  His  service." 

There  is  a  strong  indirect  argument  here,  as  Bullinger  and 
Gaulter  remark,  against  the  favorite  theory  of  many,  that  en- 
tire retreat  from  the  world,  by  going  into  monasteries  and  con- 
vents, is  the  secret  of  eminent  holiness.  Eminent  holiness  is 
most  seen  by  publicly  winning  a  victory  over  evil,  and  not  by 
a  cowardly  desertion  of  our  post  in  society. 

Three  of  the  only  prayers  not  granted  to  saints,  recorded  in 
Scripture,  are  the  prayers  of  Moses,  Elijah,  and  Jonah,  to  be 
"  taken  out  of  the  world." 

Gerhard  remarks  that  the  Apostles  were  to  be  the  first 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  and  the  light  of  the  world.  If  they 
had  been  taken  away  immediately  after  their  Lord,  the  world 
would  have  been  left  in  darkness.  Moreover,  the  cross  is  the 
school  of  faith  and  patience,  and  without  remaining  in  the 
world  they  could  not  have  become  eminent  saints. 

George  Newton  remarks,  "  The  world  is  the  place  where  we 
bring  glory  to  the  Lord ;  in  the  world  to  come  we  are  glorified 
by  Him.  Oh,  let  us  be  so  ingenuous  as  to  desire  to  be  awhile 
where  we  may  glorify  God,  rather  than  where  we  may  have 
glory  from  Him.  Let  us  not  be  so  eager  for  our  wages  and  our 
rest,  till  we  have  finished  our  work  and  served  our  generation. 
When  we  have  done  so  God  will  glorify  us  with  Himself  for 
ever." 

The  meaning  of  the  phrase,  "  the  evil,"  is  a  point  on  which 
there  is  much  difference  of  opinion. 

Some  think  that  it  means  simply,  as  our  translation  of  the 
Bible  has  it, — evil  in  the  abstract, — all  e^nl  of  every  kmd, — 
like  "  deliver  us  from  evil"  in  the  Lord's  prayer;  and  they 
think  that  it  includes  all  evil  that  may  assail  us  from  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 

Others  think  that  the  words  would  have  been  better  rendered, 
"  the  evil  one,"  and  apply  the  expression  to  the  devil,  as  the 
first  great  cause  and  beginner  of  evil.  The  word  is  so  rendered 
in  Matt.  xiii.  19—38 ;  1  John  ii.  13,  14  ;  iii.  12  ;  v.  18. 

The  question  is  one  which  will  probably  never  be  settled,  and 
the  Greek  phrase  may  be  translated  either  way.  Nevertheless 
I  decidedly  incline  to  think  that  our  translation  is  right.     It  is 

9 


194: 


EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


"  evil  "  in  tlie  abstract,  and  not  tlie  devil,  that  our  Lord  means 
I  think  so,  partly  because  the  devil  is  not  anywhere  brought 
forward  in  this  prayer,  and  partly  because  it  is  more  consistent 
to  reason  to  suppose  our  Lord  would  have  His  disciples  kept 
from  ,all  kind  of  "  evil,"  than  from  the  devil  only.  This  is  the 
more  clear  to  my  mind,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  "  the  world," 
and  its  hatred  and  enmity,  which  our  Lord  has  just  been  speak- 
ing of,  and  not  the  devil.  However,  I  freely  admit  that  it  is  an 
open  question. 

16. — {They  are  not  of  the  world,  etc.]  These  words  are  a  literal 
repetition  of  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  verse,  and  need  no  fur- 
ther comment.  Our  Lord  seems  to  repeat  them  in  order  to  add 
emphasis  to  the  request  He  has  just  made ;  and  the  repetition 
strengthens  my  opinion  that  it  is  "  the  evil  in  the  world  "  which 
He  specially  desires  His  people  to  be  kept  from.  "  They  need 
to  be  specially  kept  and  preserved,  because,  I  repeat,  there  is  an 
entire  want  of  harmony,  a  gulf  of  separation  between  them  and 
this  wicked  world,  in  which  I  leave  them.  They  are  much 
hated,  and  need  to  be  much  kept." 

Repetitions  in  real,  earnest  prayer,  we  may  observe,  are  not 
wrong :  Christ's  example  warrants  them.  It  is  "  vain  repeti- 
tions," such  as  were  common  among  the  heathen,  repeating  the 
same  w^ords  over  and  over  again,  without  thought  or  feeling, 
against  which  we  are  warned  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 
(Matt.  vi.  7.) 


JOHN  XVII.  17- 


17  Sanctify  them  through  thy 
truth  :  thy  word  is  truth. 

18  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the 
■world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them 
into  the  world. 

19  And  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify 
myself,  that  they  also  might  be 
sanctified  through  the  truth. 

20  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone, 
but  for  them  also  which  shall  be- 
lieve on  me  through  their  word ; 

21  That  they  all  may  be  one :  as 
thou,  Father,  aft  in  me,  and  I  in 
thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in 
us :  that  the  world  may  believe  that 
thou  hast  sent  me, 

22  And  the  glory  which  thou 
gavest  me  I  have  given  them:  that 
they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are 
one: 


23  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me, 
that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in 
one ;  and  that  the  world  may  know 
that  thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast 
loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  me. 

24  Father,  I  will  that  they  also, 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with 
me  where  I  am :  that  they  may  he- 
hold  my  glory,  which  thou  hast 
given  me :  for  thou  lovedst  me  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world. 

25  O  righteous  Father,  the  world 
hath  not  known  thee ;  hut  I  have 
known  thee,  and  these  have  known 
that  thou  hast  sent  me. 

26  And  I  have  declared  unto  them 
thy  name,  and  will  declare  it :  that 
the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved 
me  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them. 


TuESE  wonderful  verses  form  a  fitting  conclusion  o 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  195 

the  most  wonderful  prayer  that  was  ever  prayed  on 
earth, — the  last  Lord's  prayer  after  the  first  Lord's  Sup- 
per. They  contain  -three  most  important  petitions 
which  our  Lord  ofiered  up  in  behalf  of  His  disciples. 
On  these  three  petitions  let  us  fix  our  attention.  Pass- 
ing by  all  other  things  in  the  passage,  let  us  look  steadi- 
ly at  these  three  points. 

We  should  mark,  first,  how  Jesus  prays  that  His  peo- 
ple may  he  sanctified.  "Sanctify  them,"  He  says, 
"  through  thy  truth  :  Thy  word  is  truth." 

We  need  not  doubt  that,  in  this  place  at  any  rate,  the 
word  "  sanctify "  means  '*  make  holy."  It  is  a  prayer 
that  the  Father  would  make  His  people  more  holy,  more 
spiritual,  more  pure,  more  saintly  in  thought  and  word 
.  and  deed,  in  life  and  character.  Grace  had  done  some- 
thing for  the  disciples  already, — called,  converted,  re- 
newed, and  changed  them.  The  great  Head  of  the 
Church  prays  that  the  work  of  grace  may  be  carried 
higher  and  further,  and  that  His  people  may  be  more 
thoroughly  sanctified  and  made  holy  in  body,  soul,  and 
spirit, — in  fact  more  like  Himself. 

Surely  we  need  not  say  much  to  show  the  matchless 
wisdom  of  this  prayer.  More  holiness  is  the  very  thing 
to  be  desired  for  all  servants  of  Christ.  Holy  living  is 
the  great  proof  of  the  reality  of  Christianity.  Men  may 
refuse  to  see  <-he  truth  of  our  arguments,  but  they  cannot 
evade  the  evidence  of  a  godly  life.  Such  a  life  adorns 
religion  and  makes  it  beautiful,  and  sometimes  wins 
those  who  are  not  "  won  by  the  Word."  Holy  living 
trains  Christians  for  heaven.  The  nearer  we  live  to  God 
while  we  live,  the  more  ready  shall  we  be  to  dwell  for 
ever  in  His  presence  when  we  die.  Our  entrance  into 
heaven  will  be  entirely  by  grace,  and  not  of  works ;  but 
heaven  itself  would  be  no  heaven  to  us  if  we  entered  it 
with  an  unsanctified  character.     Our  hearts  must  be  in 


196  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

tune  for  heaven  if  we  are  to  enjoy  it.  There  must  be 
a  moral  "  meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light,"  as  well  as  a  title.  Christ's  blood  alone  can  give 
us  a  title  to  enter  the  inheritance.  Sanctification  must 
give  us  a  capacity  to  enjoy  it. 

Who,  in  the  face  of  such  facts  as  these,  need  wonder 
that  increased  sanctification  should  be  the  first  thing 
that  Jesus  asks  for  His  people?  Who  that  is  really 
taught  of  God  can  fail  to  know  that  holiness  is  happi- 
ness, and  that  those  who  walk  with  God  most  closely, 
are  always  those  who  walk  with  Him  most  comfortably  ? 
Let  no  man  deceive  us  with  vain  words  in  this  matter. 
He  who  despises  holiness  and  neglects  good  works,  un- 
der the  vain  pretence  of  giving  honor  to  justification  by 
faith,  shows  plainly  that  he  has  not  the  mind  of  Christ. 

We  should  mark,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  how  Jesus 
prays  for  the  uiiity  and  oneness  of  His  people,  "That 
they  all  may  be  one, — that  they  may  be  one  in  Us, — that 
they  may  be  one  even  as  We  are  one," — and  "  that  so 
the  world  may  believe  and  know  that  Thou  hast  sent 
Me," — this  is  a  leading  petition  in  our  Lord's  prayer  to 
His  Father. 

We  can  ask  no  stronger  proof  of  the  value  of  unity 
among  Christians,  and  the  sinfulness  of  division,  than 
the  great  prominence  which  our  Master  assigns  to  the 
subject  in  this  passage.  How  painfully  true  it  is  that 
in  every  age  divisions  have  been  the  scandal  of  religion, 
and  the  weakness  of  the  Church  of  Christ !  How  often 
Christians  have  wasted  their  strength  in  contending 
against  their  brethren,  instead  of  contending  against  sin 
and  the  devil !  How  repeatedly  they  have  given  occa- 
sion to  the  world  to  say,  "  When  you  have  settled  your 
own  internal  differences  we  will  believe  !  "  All  this,  we 
need  not  doubt,  the  Lord  Jesus  foresaw  with  prophetic 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xvn.  297 

eye.  It  was  the  forebight  of  it  which  made  Him  pray  so 
earnestly  that  believers  might  be  "  one." 

Let  the  recollection  of  this  part  of  Christ's  prayer 
abide  in  our  minds,  and  exercise  a  constant  influence  on 
our  behavior  as  Christians.  Let  no  man  think  lightly, 
as  some  men  seem  to  do,  of  schism,  or  count  it  a  small 
thing  to  multiply  sects,  parties,  and  denominations. 
These  very  things,  we  may  depend,  only  help  the  devil 
and  damage  the  cause  of  Christ.  "If  it  be  possible,  as 
much  as  lieth  in  us,  let  us  live  peaceably  with  all  men." 
(Rom.  xii.  18.)  Let  us  bear  much,  concede  much,  and 
put  up  with  much,  before  we  plunge  into  secessions  and 
separations.  They  are  movements  in  which  there  is 
often  much  false  fire.  Let  rabid  zealots  who  delight  in 
sect-making  and  party-forming,  rail  at  us  and  denounce 
us  if  they  please.  We  need  not  mind  them.  So  long 
as  we  have  Christ  and  a  good  conscience,  let  us  patient- 
ly hold  on  our  way,  follow  the  things  that  make  for 
peace,  and  strive  to  promote  unity.  It  was  not  for 
nothing  that  our  Lord  prayed  so  fervently  that  Ilis  peo- 
ple might  be  "  one." 

We  should  mark,  finally,  in  these  verses,  how  Jesus 
prays  that  Ills  people  may  at  last  he  with  Ilirn  and  he- 
hold  His  glory.  "  I  will,"  He  says,  "  that  those  whom 
Thou  hast  given  Me,  be  with  Me  where  I  am  :  that  they 
may  behold  my  glory." 

This  is  a  singularly  beautiful  and  touching  conclu- 
sion to  our  Lord's  remarkable  prayer.  We  may  well 
believe  that  it  was  meant  to  cheer  and  comfort  those 
who  heard  it,  and  to  strengthen  them  for  the  parting 
scene  which  was  fast  drawing  near.  But  for  all  who 
read  it  even  now,  this  part  of  his  prayer  is  full  of  sweet 
and  unspeakable  comfort. 

We  do  not  see  Christ  now.  We  read  of  Him,  hear 
of  Him,  believe  in  Him,  and  rest  our  souls  in  His  finish- 


198  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

ed  work.  But  even  the  best  of  us,  at  our  best,  walk  by 
faith  and  not  by  sight,  and  our  poor  halting  faith  often 
makes  us  walk  very  feebly  in  the  way  to  heaven.  There 
shall  be  an  end  of  all  this  state  of  things  one  day.  We 
shall  at  length  see  Christ  as  He  is,  and  know  as  we  have 
been  known.  We  shall  behold  Him  face  to  face,  and 
not  through  a  glass  darkly.  We  shall  actually  be  in 
His  presence  and  company,  and  go  out  no  more.  If 
faith  has  been  pleasant,  much  more  will  sight  be  ;  and 
if  hope  has  been  sweet,  much  more  will  certainty  be. 
No  wonder  that  when  St.  Paul  has  written,  "  We  shall 
ever  be  with  the  Lord,"  he  adds,  "  Comfort  one  another 
with  these  words."     (1  Thess.  iv.  17,  18.) 

We  know  little  of  heaven  now.  Our  thoughts  are 
all  confounded,  when  we  try  to  form  an  idea  of  a  future 
state  in  which  pardoned  sinners  shall  be  perfectly  hap- 
py. "  It  does  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  (1 
John  iii.  2.)  But  we  may  rest  ourselves  on  the  blessed 
thought,  that  after  death  we  shall  be  "  with  Christ." 
Whether  before  the  resurrection  in  paradise,  or  after  the 
resurrection  in  iinal  glory,  the  prospect  is  still  the  same. 
True  Christians  shall  be  "  with  Christ."  We  need  no 
more  information.  Where  that  blessed  Person  is  who 
was  born  for  us,  died  for  us,  and  rose  again,  there  can 
be  no  lack  of  anything.  David  might  well  say,  "  In  Thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  Thy  right  hand  are 
pleasures  forevermore."     (Psalm  xvi.  11.) 

Let  us  leave  this  wonderful  prayer  with  a  solemn 
recollection  of  the  three  great  petitions  which  it  con- 
tains. Let  holiness  and  unity  by  the  way,  and  Christ's 
company  in  the  end,  be  subjects  never  long  out  of  our 
thoughts  or  distant  from  our  minds.  Happy  is  that 
Christian  who  cares  for  nothing  so  much  as  to  be  holy 
and  loving  like  his  Master,  while  he  lives,  and  a  com- 
panion of  his  Master  when  he  dies. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  199 


Notes.    John  xvii.  17—26. 

17. — [Sanctify  them,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  proceeds  to 
name  the  second  thin<^  He  asks  for  His  disciples  in  prayer. 
Preservation  was  the  first  thing,  and  sanctification  the  secoad. 
Ho  asks  His  Father  to  make  the  disciples  more  holy,  to  lead 
them  on  to  higher  degrees  of  holiness  and  purity.  He  asks 
Him  to  do  it  "  through  the  truth," — by  bringing  truth  to  bear 
more  effectually  and  powerfully  on  their  hearts  and  consciences 
and  inner  man.  And  to  prevent  mistake  as  to  what  He  meant 
by  truth,  lie  adds,  "  Thy  Word,  Thy  revealed  Word,  is  the 
truth  that  I  mean." 

Some,  as  Maldonatus,  maintain  that  the  sentence  only  means 
"  sanctify  them  truly," — in  opposition  to  that  legal  sanctifica- 
tion of  priests,  of  which  we  read  in  Exodus  and  Leviticus. 
This,  however,  seems  a  very  cold,  thin,  shallow  sense  to  put  on 
the  words. 

Some,  again,  as  Mede,  Pearce,  and  Burgon,  maintain  that  our 
Lord  is  only  praying  that  His  Apostles  may  be  consecrated,  fit- 
ted, and  set  apart  for  the  great  work  of  the  ministry,  and  that 
this  is  all  the  meaning  of  "  sanctify."  This  appears  to  me  an 
imperfect  and  defective  view  of  the  sentence. 

No  doubt  the  word  "  sanctify "  originally  and  primarily 
means  "  set  apart,  separate  for  religious  uses  ; "  and  it  might 
be  used  of  a  vessel,  a  house,  or  an  animal.  But  inasmuch  as  in 
human  beings  this  separation  is  principally  evidenced  by  holi 
ness  and  godliness  of  life  and  character,  the  secondary  sense  of 
*'  sanctify  "  is  "  to  make  holy,"  and  holy  and  godly  people  are 
"  sanctified."  This  I  hold  to  be  the  meaning  here  most  decid- 
edly. It  is  a  prayer  for  the  increased  holiness  and  practical 
godliness  of  Christ's  people.  In  short,  the  petition  comes  to 
this  :  "  Separate  them  more  and  more  from  sin  and  sinners,  by 
making  them  more  pure,  more  spiritual-minded,  and  more  like 
Thyself."  This  is  the  view  of  Chrysostom  and  all  the  leading 
commentators. 

Four  great  principles  may  be  gathered  from  this  text. 

a)  The  importance  of  sanctification  and  practical  godliness. 
Our  Lord  specially  asks  it  for  His  people.  Those  that  despise 
Christian  life  and  character,  and  think  it  of  no  importance  so 
long  as  they  are  sound  in  doctrine,  know  very  little  of  the 
mind  of  Christ.  Our  Christianity  is  worth  nothing,  if  it  does 
not  make  us  value  and  seek  practical  sanctification. 

(6)  The  wide  difference  between  justification  and  sanctifica- 
tion. Justification  is  a  perfect  and  complete  work  obtained 
for  us  by  Christ,  imputed  to  us,  and  external  to  us,  as  perfect 
and  complete  the  moment  we  believe,  as  it  can  ever  be,  and 
admitting  of  no   degrees. — Sanctification  is  an  inward  work 


200  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

wrought  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  never  quite  per- 
fect so  long  as  we  live  in  this  body  of  sin.  The  disciples  need- 
ed no  prayer  for  justification  ;  they  were  completely  justified 
already.  They  did  need  prayer  for  their  sanctification ;  for 
they  were  not  completely  sanctified, 

(c)  Sanctification  is  a  thing  that  admits  of  growth  ;  else  why 
should  our  Lord  pray,  "  Sanctify  them"?  The  doctrine  of  im- 
puted sanctification  is  one  that  I  can  find  nowhere  in  the  Word 
of  God.  Christ's  imputed  righteousness  I  see  clearly,  but  not 
an  imputed  holiness.  Holiness  is  a  thing  imparted  and  in- 
wrought, but  not  imputed. 

(d)  The  word  is  the  great  instrument  by  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  carries  forward  the  work  of  inward  sanctification.  By 
bringing  that  Word  to  bear  more  forcibly  on  mind  and  will, 
and  conscience,  and  affection,  we  make  the  character  grow  more 
holy.  Sanctification  from  without  by  bodily  austerities  and 
asceticism,  and  a  round  of  forms,  ceremonies,  and  outward 
means,  is  a  delusion.  True  sanctification  begins  from  within. 
Here  lies  the  immense  importance  of  regularly  reading  the 
written  Word,  and  hearing  the  preached  Word.  It  surely, 
though  insensibly,  promotes  our  sanctification.  Believers  who 
neglect  the  Word  will  not  grow  in  holiness  and  victory  over 
sin. 

Calvin  remarks,  "  As  the  apostles  were  not  destitute  of  grace, 
we  ought  to  infer  from  Christ's  words  that  sanctification  is  not 
instantly  completed  in  us  on  the  first  day,  but  that  we  make 
progress  in  it  through  the  whole  course  of  our  life." 

Hutcheson  remarks,  "  It  is  not  enough  that  men  have  a  begun 
work  of  sanctification  in  them,  unless  they  grow  up  in  it  daily 
more  and  more.  Christ  prayeth  for  those  who  were  already 
converted  and  sanctified." 

Augustine  thinks  that  "  Thy  Word  "  in  this  place  means  the 
Personal  Word,  Christ  Himself.  But  in  this  opinion  I  can  find 
no  one  holding  with  him,  except  Rupertus. 

18  — [As  thou  hast  sent  Me,  etc.}  The  connection  between  this 
verse  and  the  preceding  one  seems  to  me  to  be  this  :  "  I  ask  for 
the  increased  sanctification  of  my  disciples,  because  of  the  po- 
sition they  have  to  occupy  on  earth.  Just  as  Thou  didst  send 
Me  to  be  Thy  Messenger  to  this  sinful  world,  so  have  I  now 
sent  them  to  be  my  messengers  to  the  world.  It  is  therefore  of 
the  utmost  importance  that  they  should  be  holy — the  holy 
messengers  of  a  holy  Master, — and  so  stop  the  mouths  of  their 
accusers."  Believers  are  Christ's  witnesses,  and  the  character 
of  a  witness  should  be  spotless  and  blameless.  For  this  reason 
our  Lord  specially  prays  that  His  disciples  may  be  "  sanctified.'' 

19, — [A7id  for  t/ieir  sakes  1  sanctify  myself]  This  is  a  rather 
hard  passage.  In  one  sense,  of  course,  our  Lord  needed  no 
sanctification.     He  was  always  perfectly  holy  and  without  sin. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  201 

I  believe,  with  Clirysostom,  the  meaning-  must  be,  "  I  consecrate 
myself,  and  ofter  myself  up  as  a  sacrifice  and  a  priest,  for  one 
special  reason,  to  say  nothing  of  others  :  in  order  that  these  my 
disciples  may  be  sanctified  by  the  truth,  and  made  a  holy  peo- 
ple."— Is  it  not  as  good  as  saying,  "  The  sanctification  no  less 
than  the  justification  of  my  people  is  the  end  of  my  sacrifice  ? 
I  want  to  have  a  people  who  are  sanctified  as  well  as  justified. 
So  much  importance  do  I  attach  to  this  that  this  is  one  princi- 
pal reason  why  I  now  ofier  myself  to  die  as  a  sacrifice." — The 
same  idea  seems  to  lie  in  the  text ;  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us 
that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto 
himself  a  peculiar  people."  And  again  :  "  Christ  loved  the 
Church,  and  gave  Himself  for  it,  that  He  might  sanctify  it." 
(Titus  ii.  14  ;  Eph.  v.  26 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24.) 

Melancthon  remarks,  "  The  word  *  I  sanctify  myself,'  in  this 
place,  without  doubt,  is  taken  from  priests  and  victims." 

20. — \Neither  pray  1  for  these  alone,  etc.]  In  this  and  the  three 
following  verses  our  Lord  proceeds  to  name  another  thing  that 
He  prays  for  His  people.  He  asks  that  they  may  be  "  one." 
He  had  already  named  this  on  behalf  of  the  eleven  Apostles. 
But  He  takes  occasion  now  to  enlarge  the  prayer,  and  to  include 
others  beside  the  eleven, — the  whole  company  of  future  be- 
lievers. "  I  now  pray  also  for  all  who  shall  believe  on  Me 
through  the  preaching  of  my  disciples  in  all  future  time,  and 
not  for  my  eleven  apostles  only."  All  believers  needed  preser- 
vation and  sanctification  in  every  age  ;  but  none  so  much  as  the 
eleven,  because  they  were  the  first  to  attack  the  world  and  bear 
the  brunt  of  the  battle.  In  some  respects  it  was  more  easy  to 
be  "  one  "  at  the  first  beginnings  of  the  Church,  and  harder  to 
be  kept  and  "  sanctified."  As  the  Church  grew,  it  would  be 
more  difiicalt  to  keep  unity. 

Let  us  mark  how  wide  was  the  scope  of  our  Lord's  interces-. 
sory  prayer.  He  prayed  not  only  for  present,  but  for  future  be- 
lievers. So  should  it  be  with  our  prayers.  We  may  look  for- 
ward and  pray  for  believers  yet  to  be  born,  though  we  may  not 
look  back  and  pray  for  believers  who  are  dead. 

George  Newton  observes  what  an  encouragement  it  should  be 
to  us  in  praying  for  others,  for  a  child  or  a  friend,  to  remember 
that  perhaps  Christ  is  asking  him  or  her  of  God  too.  He  here 
prays  for  those  who  did  not  yet  believe,  but  were  to  believe  one 
day. 

Let  us  mark  how  the  "  word  "  preached  is  mentioned  as  the 
means  of  making  men  believe.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing. 
The  Church  which  places  Sacraments  above  the  preaching  of 
the  Word,  will  have  no  blessing  of  God,  because  it  rejects  God's 
order. 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  the  "  word  "  here  must  include  the 
writings  of  the  Apostles  as  well  as  their  sermons. 

9* 


202  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

21. — [TJiat  they  all. ..one  in  us.]  The  meaning  of  this  sentence  1 
take  to  be,  "  I  pray  that  both  these  my  disciples,  and  those  who 
hereafter  shall  become  my  disciples,  may  all  be  of  one  mind, 
one  doctrine,  one  opinion,  one  heart,  and  one  practice,  closely 
united  and  joined  together,  even  as  Thou,  Father,  and  I  are  of 
one  mind  and  one  will,  in  consequence  of  that  ineffable  union 
whereby  Thou  art  in  Me  and  I  in  Thee," 

Here,  as  in  verse  11,  we  must  carefully  remember  that  the 
unity  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  is  one  which  the  unity 
of  believers  cannot  literally  attain  to.  They  must  however 
imitate  it. 

The  true  secret  of  the  unity  of  believers  lies  in  the  expres- 
sion, "  one  in  us."  They  can  only  be  thoroughly  "  one  "  by  be- 
ing joined  at  the  same  time  to  one  Father  and  to  one  Saviour. 
Then  they  will  be  one  with  one  another. 

Ferus  thinks  that  one  thing  in  our  Lord's  mind  in  this  sen- 
tence was  the  union  of  Jew  and  Gentile  into  one  Church,  and 
the  removal  of  the  "  wall  of  partition." 

[T7iat  the  world...'beUem...sent  Me.]  Here  our  Lord  brings  in 
one  important  reason  why  He  prays  for  His  people  to  be  "  one." 
It  will  help  to  make  the  world  believe  His  Divine  mission. 
*'  When  the  world  sees  my  people  not  quarrelling,  not  divided, 
but  one  in  judgment,  heart,  and  life,  then  the  world  will  begin 
to  believe  that  the  Saviour,  who  has  such  a  people,  must  really 
be  a  Saviour  sent  from  God." 

Let  us  carefully  note  how  well  our  Lord  foresaw  the  effect 
which  the  lives,  ways,  and  opinions  of  professing  Christians 
have  on  the  world  around  them.  The  want  of  unity,  and  con- 
sequent strife  among  English  Christians  in  the  last  800  years, 
has  been  a  miserable  example  of  the  enormous  damage  that 
believers  may  do  their  Master's  cause  by  neglecting  this  sub- 
ject. "  How  much,"  says  George  Newton,  "  Our  blessed  Saviour 
and  His  Gospel  suffer  by  the  hot  contentions  of  those  who  call 
themselves  saints." 

22. — {And  the  glory,  etc.,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  repeats  His 
deep  desire  for  the  unity  of  His  people.  He  declares,  "  that  in 
order  that  they  may  be  one.  He  has  given  them  the  glory  which 
the  Father  gave  Him."  This  is  a  very  difficult  expression,  and 
one  which  seems  to  puzzle  all  commentators.  The  whole 
question  is,  what  did  our  Lord  mean  by  "  the  glory  "  which  He 
gave. 

(a)  Some,  as  Calvin,  think  that  "  glory  "  means  the  image  and 
likeness  of  God,  by  which  the  disciples  were  renewed.  (3  Cor. 
iii.  18.) 

(6)  Some,  as  Bengel,  think  that  "glory"  means  that  insensi- 
ble power,  influence,  and  authority,  which  accompanied  all  our 
Lord  did  and  said  during  His  earthly  ministry.    Thus  Moses  had 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  203 

"  glory  "  in  liis  countenance  when  coming  down  from  the  mount 
(2  Cor.  iii.  7.)  This  same  power  and  influence  Christ  gave  to 
the  Apostles.    (See  Acts  iv.  38.) 

(c)  Some,  as  Zwingle,  Brentius,  Gualter,  and  Pearce,  think 
that  "  o-lory  "  means  tlie  power  of  working  miracles,  which  was 
the  special  and  peculiar  glory  of  our  Lord  while  He  was  on. 
earth.  Thus,  we  read,  "  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by 
the  glory  of  the  Father."     (Rom.  vi.  4.) 

(d)  Some,  as  Augustine,  Ecolampadius,  Bullinger,  and  Man- 
ton,  think  that  "  glory  "  means  the  heavenly  glory  and  immor- 
tality which  our  Lord  promised  to  His  disciples, — a  glory  which 
they  should  have  after  faithfully  serving  Him  on  earth.  (Horn, 
viii.  18.) 

(e)  Toletus  makes  the  strange  suggestion,  that  the  "  glory  " 
means  that  which  is  communicated  to  us  in  the  Lord's  Supper  1 
Burgon  seems  to  take  the  same  view. 

(/)  Stier  and  Hengstenberg  hold  that  the  "  glory  "  means 
unity  of  mind  and  heart. 

(g)  Some,  as  Gregory  Nyssen,  Ammonius,  Theophylact,  and 
Bucer,  think  that  "  glory  "  means  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  else 
where  called  "  the  Spirit  of  glory."     (1  Pet.  iv.  14.) 

The  question  will  probably  never  be  settled.  If  I  must  give 
an  opinion,  I  prefer  the  last  view  to  any  other.  It  suits  the 
end  of  the  verse  better  than  any  other.  Nothing  was  so  likely 
to  make  the  disciples  "  one  "  as  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

23. — [1  in  them  and  Thou  in  Me,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  sim- 
plifies His  declarations  about  unity,  and  expands  them  more 
fully,  in  order  to  show  emphatically  how  great  importance  He 
attached  to  unity.  I  take  the  meaning  to  be  something  of  this 
kind :  "  I  pray  that  my  disciples  may  be  so  closely  united — I 
dwelling  in  them,  and  Thou  dwelling  in  Me, — that  they  may  be 
compacted  and  perfected  into  one  body, — having  one  mind,  one 
will,  one  heart,  and  one  judgment,  though  having  many  mem- 
bers,— and  that  then  the  world,  seeing  this  unity,  may  be 
obliged  to  confess  that  Thou  didst  send  Me  to  be  the  Messiah, 
and  that  Thou  lovest  my  people  even  as  Thou  lovest  Me." 

In  leaving  this  deep  and  difficult  passage  about  unity,  it  is 
well  to  remember  that  the  Church,  whose  unity  the  Lord  de- 
sires and  prays  for,  is  not  any  particular  or  visible  Church,  but 
the  Church  which  is  His  Body,  the  Church  of  the  elect,  the 
Church  which  is  made  up  of  true  believers  and  saints  alone. 

Moreover,  the  unity  which  our  Lord  prays  for  is  not  unity  of 
forms,  discipline,  government,  and  the  like  ;  but  unity  of  heart, 
and  will,  and  doctrine,  and  practice.  Those  who  make  uni- 
formity the  chief  subject  of  this  part  of  Christ's  prayer,  entire 
ly  miss  the  mark.  There  may  be  uniformity  without  unity,  as 
in  many  visible  Churches  on  earth  now.     There  may  be  unity 


204  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

without  uniformity,  as  between  godly  Episcopalians  and  godly 
Presbyterians.  Uniformity  no  doubt  may  be  a  great  help  to 
unity,  but  it  is  not  unity  itself. 

The  unity  which  our  Lord  prays  about  here  is  that  true,  sub- 
stantial, spiritual,  internal,  heart  unity,  which  undoubtedly  ex- 
ists among  all  members  of  Christ  of  every  Church  and  denom- 
ination. It  is  the  unity  which  results  from  one  Holy  Ghost 
having  made  the  members  of  Christ  what  they  are.  It  is  unity 
which  makes  them  feel  more  of  one  mind  with  one  another 
than  with  mere  professors  of  their  own  party.  It  is  unity 
which  is  the  truest  freemasonry  on  earth.  It  is  unity  which 
shakes  the  world,  and  obliges  it  to  confess  the  truth  of  Chris- 
tianity.— For  the  continued  maintenance  of  this  unity,  and  an 
increase  of  it,  our  Lord  seems  to  me  in  this  prayer  specially  to 
pray.  And  we  need  not  wonder.  The  divisions  of  mere  world- 
ly professors  are  of  little  moment.  The  divisions  of  real  true 
believers  are  the  greatest  possible  injury  to  the  cause  of  the 
Gospel.  If  all  believers  at  this  moment  were  of  one  mind,  and 
would  work  together,  they  might  soon  turn  the  world  upside 
down.     No  wonder  the  Lord  prayed  for  unity. 

24. — [^Father,  lwill...my  glory. ..given  Me]  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
names  the  fourth  and  last  thing  which  He  desires  for  His  dis- 
ciples in  His  prayer.  After  preservation,  sanctification,  and 
unity,  comes  participation  of  His  glory.  He  asks  that  they 
may  be  "  with  Him  "  in  the  glory  yet  to  be  revealed,  and  "  be- 
hold," share,  and  take  part  in  it. 

"  I  will "  is  a  remarkable  phrase,  though  it  must  not  be 
pressed  and  strained  too  far.  (See  Mark  vi.  25  ;  x.  35.)  The 
daughter  of  Herodias  asking  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist,  said, 
"  I  will  that  thou  give  me."  It  may  be  nothing  more  than  the 
expression  of  a  strong  "  wish."  Yet  it  is  the  wish  of  Him  who 
is  one  with  the  Father,  and  only  wills  what  the  Father  wills. 
It  is  probably  used  to  assure  the  mind  of  the  disciples.  "  I 
will,"  and  it  will  be  done. 

Hutcheson  says,  " '  I  will '  doth  not  import  any  imperious 
commanding  way,  repugnant  to  His  former  way  of  humble 
supplication  ;  but  it  only  imports  that  in  this  His  supplication, 
He  was  making  His  last  will  and  Testament,  and  leaving  His 
legacies,  which  He  was  sure  would  be  effectual,  being  pur- 
chased by  His  merits,  and  prosecuted  by  His  affectionate  and 
earnest  requests  and  intercessions." 

Traill  remarks,  "  Christians,  behold  the  amazing  difference 
betwixt  Christ's  way  of  praying  against  His  own  hell  (if  I  may 
so  call  it)  and  His  praying  for  our  heaven  !  When  praying 
for  Himself,  it  is,  '  Father,  if  it  be  Thy  will,  let  this  cup  pas» 
from  Me.'  But  when  Christ  is  praying  for  His  people's  heav- 
en, it  is, '  Father,  I  will  that  they  may  be  with  Me.'  " 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVII.  205 

Stier  maintains  that  "  I  will  "  "  is  no  other  tlian  a  testament 
ary  word  of  the  Son,  who  in  the  unity  of  the  Father,  is  ap 
pointing  what  He  mills,  at  the  second  limit  of  the  prayer  where 
petition  ceases." 

Alford  says  "  this  is  an  expression  of  will  founded  on  ac- 
knowledged right." 

The  expression, "  Be  with  Me  where  I  am,"  is  one  of  those 
deeply  interesting  phrases  which  show  the  nature  of  the  fu- 
ture dwelling-place  of  believers.  Wherever  it  may  be,  wheth- 
er before  or  after  the  resurrection,  it  will  be  in  the  company 
of  Christ.  It  is  like  "  with  Me  in  Paradise,"  "  depart  and  be 
with  Christ,"  and  "  forever  with  the  Lord."  (Luke  xxiii.  43  ; 
Phil.  i.  23  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  17.)  The  full  nature  of  the  future  state 
is  wisely  hidden  from  us.  It  is  enough  for  believers  to  know 
that  they  will  be  "  with  Christ."  It  is  company,  and  not  place, 
which  makes  up  happiness. 

Traill  remarks,  "  Heaven  consists  in  the  perfect  immediate 
presence  of  Christ.  Perfect  presence  is,  when  all  on  both 
sides  is  present ;  all  of  Christ,  and  all  of  the  Christian.  But 
now  all  of  Christ  is  not  with  us,  and  all  of  us  is  not  with  Him. 
On  His  part  we  have  Christ's  Spirit,  word,  and  grace.  On  our 
part  there  is  present  with  Him  our  hearts,  and  the  workings  of 
our  faith  and  love  and  desire  towards  Him.  But  the  presence 
is  imperfect,  and  mixed  with  much  distance  and  absence." 

The  expression,  "  Behold  my  glory,"  of  course  must  not  be 
confined  to  the  idea  of  "  looking  on  as  spectators."  It  includes 
participation,  sharing,  and  common  enjoyment.  (Compare 
John  iii.  3 — 36 ;  viii.  51 ;  Rev.  xviii.  7.) 

The  expression,  "  Which  Thou  hast  given  Me,"  seems  to 
point  to  that  special  glory  which  the  Father,  in  everlasting 
covenant,  has  appointed  for  Christ  as  the  reward  of  the  work 
of  redemption.     (Philip,  ii.  9.) 

l^For  Thou  lovedst  Me... foundation. ..icorld.']  This  sentence 
seems  specially  inserted  in  order  to  show  that  the  glory  of 
Christ  in  the  next  world  is  a  glory  which  had  been  prepared 
from  all  eternity,  before  time  began,  and  before  the  creation  of 
man,  and  that  it  was  not  only  something  which,  like  Moses  or 
John  the  Baptist,  He  had  obtained  by  His  faithfulness  on 
earth  ;  but  something  which  He  had,  as  the  eternal  Son  of  the 
eternal  Father,  from  everlasting.  "  Thou  lovedst  Me,  and  did 
assign  Me  this  glory  long  before  this  world  was  made,"  that  is, 
from  all  eternity.  This  is  a  very  deep  saying,  and  contains 
things  far  above  our  full  comprehension. 

25. — [0  righteous  Father,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  begins  the 
final  winding  up  of  His  wonderful  prayer.  He  does  it  by  de- 
claring the  position  of  things  in  which  He  was  about  to  leave 
the  world  and  His  disciples.     I  take  the  meaning  to  be  this  :  "  1 


206  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

come  to  Thee  from  a  world  wliicti  knows  Thee  not,  and  has  re- 
fused to  know  Thee  throughout  my  ministry.  But  in  the 
midst  of  this  world  I  have  known  Thee  and  steadily  adhered 
to  Thee.  And  these  my  disciples  have  acknowledged  and  con 
fessed  that  Thou  didst  send  Me  to  be  the  Messiah." 

It  is  not  clear  why  our  Lord  uses  the  expression,  "  Righteous 
Father."  It  is  one  which  stands  alone.  It  may  possibly  be 
intended  to  bring  out  in  strong  contrast  the  wickedness  of  a 
world  which  "  knew  not  the  Word,''  when  the  Word  was  in  it 
(see  John  i.  10),  and  the  justice  of  God  in  punishing  this  world, 
which  refused  to  know  Christ  while  the  disciples  received 
Him. 

The  expression,  "  I  have  known  Thee,"  seems  to  point  to  the 
veil  of  humiliation  which  covered  our  Lord  during  the  whole 
period  of  His  incarnation.  "  Even  then,"  He  seems  to  say,  "  I 
never  ceased  to  know  and  honor  Thee." 

The  high  testimony  borne  to  the  disciples  once  more  deserves 
notice.  With  all  their  infirmity,  "  they  have  known  my  Di- 
vine mission." 

26. — [Ajid  I  have  declared. ..declare  it.]  In  this  sentence  our  Lord 
briefly  sums  up  what  He  had  done,  and  was  still  doing  for  the 
disciples  :  "  I  have  made  known  to  them  Thy  name  and  charac- 
ter and  attributes,  as  the  sender  of  salvation  to  a  lost  world, 
and  will  continue  to  declare  it  after  my  ascension,  by  the  Holy 
Spirit." 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  our  Lord  again  declares  that  to  make 
known  the  Father  was  one  great  object  of  His  ministry. 

The  expression,  "  I  will  declare  it,"  says  George  Newton,  is 
a  proof  that  "  Jesus  Christ  will  be  continually  making  further 
declarations  of  His  Father's  name  to  other  nations  and  other 
persons,  to  the  end  of  the  world.  He  will  be  ever  teaching 
new  scholars  to  spell  it  and  understand  it,  in  every  generation, 
while  the  world  eudureth." 

[That...in  them...l  in  them.']  Our  Lord  ends  His  prayer  by 
expressing  His  wish  that  the  Father's  love  may  dwell  in  the 
hearts  of  His  disciples,  and  that  He  Himself  may  dwell  in  their 
hearts.  "  My  great  desire  is  that  they  may  know  and  feel  the 
love  wherewith  Thou  dost  love  Me,  and  that  I  may  ever  dwell 
in  their  hearts  by  faith." 

Let  us  not  forget  that  one  great  wish  of  St.  Paul  in  his  Epis- 
tle to  the  Ephesians,  was  that  "  Christ  might  dwell  in  their 
hearts  by  faith."  (Eph.  iii.  15.)  He  also  tells  the  Romans 
*'  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts."     (Rom.  v.  5.) 

The  expression,  "  I  will  declare  my  love,"  is  a  difficult  one. 
It  can  only  mean,  *'  I  will  declare  it  personally  during  the  in- 
terval between  my  resurrection  and  my  ascension,"  or  "  I  will 
continue  to  declare  it  by  my  Spirit's  continual  teaching  after 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  207 

I  leave  the  world."    The  latter  seems  the  more  probable  mean- 
ing. 

The  expression,  "  Thy  love  may  be  in  them,"  is  another 
grave  difficulty.  It  must  either  be  "  That  Thy  love,  the  same 
love  wherewith  Thou  lovest  Me,  may  be  directed  on  and  to- 
ward them  ;  "  or  else,  "  That  they  may  feel  in  their  own  hearts 
a  sense  of  that  same  love  toward  them  wherewith  Thou  lovest 
Me."     I  prefer  the  latter  sense. 

George  Newton  remarks  on  this  verse,  "  If  Christ  is  in  you, 
let  me  give  you  this  caution  :  let  Him  live  quiet  in  your  hearts. 
Do  not  molest  Him  and  disturb  Him  ;  do  not  make  Him  vex 
and  fret.  Let  it  not  be  a  penance  to  Him  to  continue  in  you. 
But  labor  every  way  to  please  Him,  and  give  Him  satisfaction 
and  content,  that  so  the  house  He  hath  chosen  may  not  be  dark 
and  doleful,  but  delightful  to  Him." 

Manton  remarks,  "  If  an  earthly  King  lie  but  one  night  in  a 
house,  what  care  there  is  taken  that  nothing  be  offensive  to 
him,  and  that  all  be  neat  and  sweet  and  clean.  How  much 
more  careful  ought  you  to  be  to  keep  your  hearts  clean,  to  per- 
form service  acceptable  to  Him,  to  be  in  the  exercise  of  faith, 
love,  and  other  graces,  that  so  you  may  entertain,  as  you  ought, 
your  heavenly  King,  who  comes  to  take  up  His  continual  abode 
in  your  hearts." 

We  may  well  feel  humbled,  as  we  leave  this  chapter,  when 
we  think  of  our  ignorance  of  the  true  meaning  of  many  of  its 
phrases.  How  much  of  our  exposition  is  nothing  better  than 
feeble  conjecture  !  We  seem  only  to  scratch  the  surface  of  the 
field.  Let  us  only  remember  that  the  four  things  prayed  for 
by  our  Lord  are  things  that  every  Christian  should  daily  desire, 
— preservation,  sanctification,  unity,  and  final  glory  in  Christ's 
company. 

George  Newton  closes  his  Exposition  of  the  whole  chapter 
with  these  touching  words  : — "  How  earnest  and  importunate  is 
Christ  with  God  the  Father,  that  we  may  be  one  here,  and  that 
we  may  be  in  one  place  hereafter !  Oh,  let  us  search  into  the 
heart  of  Jesus  Christ,  laid  open  to  us  in  this  abridgment  of  His 
intercession  for  us,  that  we  may  know  it  and  the  workings  of 
it  more  and  more,  until  at  length  the  precious  prayer  comes  to 
its  full  elfect,  and  we  be  taken  up  to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord, 
and  where  He  is  there  we  may  be  also  1 " 


JOHN  XVIII.  1—11. 


1  When  Jesus  had  spoken  these 
words,  he  went  forth  with  his  dis- 
ciples over  tlie  brook  Cedrou,  where 
was  a  garden,  into  the  which  he  en- 
tered, and  his  disciples. 


2  And  Judas  also,  which  betrayed 
him,  knew  the  place  :  for  Jesus  oft- 
times  resorted  thither  with  his  dis 
ciples. 

3  Judas  then,  having  received  • 


208 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


band  of  men  and  officers  from  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees,  cometh 
thither  with  lanterns  and  torches 
and  weapons. 

4  Jesus  therefore,  knowing  all 
things  that  should  come  upon  him, 
went  forth,  and  Bald  unto  them. 
Whom  seek  ye  ? 

5  They  answered  him,  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  Jesus  said  unto  them,  I 
am  lie.  And  Judas  also,  which  be- 
trayed him,  stood  with  them. 

6  As  soon  then  as  he  had  said  unto 
them,  I  am  lie^  they  went  backward, 
and  fell  to  the  ground. 

7  Then    asked   he  them    again, 


Whom   seek  ye?    And   they  said, 
Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

8  Jesus  answered,  I  have  told  yon 
that  I  am  lie  ;  if  therefore  ye  seek 
me,  let  these  go  their  way  : 

9  That  the  saying  might  be  ful- 
filled which  he  spake,  Of  them  which 
thou  gavest  me  have  I  lost  none. 

10  Then  Simon  Peter  having  a 
sword  drew  it,  and  smote  the  high 
priest's  servant,  and  cut  off  his  right 
ear.  The  servant's  name  was  Mal- 
chus. 

11  Then  said  Jesus  unto  Peter, 
Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath : 
the  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given 
me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ? 


These  verses  begin  St.  John's  account  of  Christ's 
sufferings  and  crucifixion.  We  now  enter  on  the  closing 
scene  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  and  pass  at  once  from 
His  intercession  to  His  sacrifice.  We  shall  find  that, 
like  the  other  Gospel-writers,  the  beloved  disciple  enters 
fully  into  the  story  of  the  cross.  But  we  shall  also  find, 
if  we  read  carefully,  that  he  mentions  several  interesting 
points  in  the  story,  which  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  for 
some  wise  reasons,  have  passed  over. 

We  should  notice,  first,  in  these  verses,  the  exceeding 
hardness  of  heart  to  which  a  backsUdiiig  professor  may 
attain.  We  are  told  that  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve 
Apostles,  became  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus.  We 
are  told  that  he  used  his  knowledge  of  the  place  of  our 
Lord's  retirement,  in  order  to  bring  His  deadly  enemies 
upon  Him;  and  we  are  told  that  when  the  band  of 
men  and  ofiicers  approached  his  Master,  in  order  to 
make  Him  prisoner,  Judas  "  stood  with  them." — Yet 
this  was  a  man  who  for  three  years  had  been  a  constant 
companion  of  Christ,  had  seen  His  miracles,  had  heard 
His  sermons,  had  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  His  private  in- 
struction, had  professed  himself  a  believer,  had  even 
worked  and  preached  in  Christ's  name ! — "  Lord,"  we 
may  well  say,  "  what  is  man  ?  "     From  the  highest  de- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIIl.  209 

gree  of  privilege  down  to  the  lowest  depth  of  sin,  there 
is  but  a  succession  of  steps.  Privileges  misused  seem  to 
paralyze  the  conscience.  The  same  fire  that  melts  wax, 
will  harden  clay. 

Let  us  beware  of  resting  our  hopes  of  salvation  on 
religious  knowledge,  however  great,  or  religious  advan- 
tages, however  many.  We  may  know  all  doctrinal  truth 
and  be  able  to  teach  others,  and  yet  prove  rotten  at  heart, 
and  go  down  to  the  pit  with  Judas.  We  may  bask  in 
the  full  sunshine  of  spiritual  privileges,  and  hear  the  best 
of  Christian  teaching,  and  yet  bear  no  fruit  to  God's 
glory,  and  be  found  withered  branches  of  the  vine,  only 
fit  to  be  burned.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth, 
take  heed  lest  he  fall."  (1  Cor.  x.  12.)  Above  all,  let 
us  beware  of  cherishing  within  our  hearts  any  secret  be- 
setting sin,  such  as  love  of  money  or  love  of  the  world. 
One  faulty  link  in  a  chain-cable  may  cause  a  shipwreck. 
One  little  leak  may  sink  a  ship.  One  allowed  and  un- 
mortified  sin  may  ruin  a  professing  Christian.  Let  him 
that  is  tempted  to  be  a  careless  man  in  his  religious  life, 
consider  these  things,  and  take  care.  Let  him  remember 
Judas  Iscariot.     His  history  is  meant  to  be  a  lesson. 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  the  entire 
vohintariness  of  Chrises  sufferings.  We  are  told  that 
the  first  time  that  our  Lord  said  to  the  soldiers,  "  I  am 
He,  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  ground."  A 
secret  invisible  power,  no  doubt,  accompanied  the  words. 
In  no  other  way  can  we  account  for  a  band  of  hardy 
Roman  soldiers  falling  prostrate  before  a  single  unarmed 
man.  The  same  miraculous  influence  which  tied  the 
priests  and  Pharisees  powerless  at  the  triumphant  entry 
into  Jerusalem, — which  stopped  all  opposition  when  the 
temple  was  purged  of  buyers  and  sellers, — that  same 
mysterious  influence  was  present  now.  A  real  miracle 
was  wrought,  though  few  had  eyes  to  see  it.     At  the 


210  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

moment  when  our  Lord  seemed  weak,  He  showed  that 
He  was  strong. 

Let  us  carefully  remember  that  our  blessed  Lord 
suffered  and  died  of  His  own  free  will.  He  did  not  die 
because  He  could  not  help  it ;  He  did  not  suffer  be- 
cause He  could  not  escape.  All  the  soldiers  of  Pilate's 
army  could  not  have  taken  Him,  if  He  had  not  been 
willing  to  be  taken.  They  could  not  have  hurt  a  hair  of 
His  head,  if  He  had  not  given  them  permission.  But 
here,  as  in  all  His  earthly  ministry,  Jesus  was  a  willing 
sufferer.  He  had  set  His  heart  on  accomplishing  our 
redemption.  He  loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us, 
cheerfully,  willingly,  gladly,  in  order  to  make  atonement 
for  our  sins.  It  was  "the  joy  set  before  Him"  which 
made  Him  endure  the  cross,  and  despise  the  shame,  and 
yield  Himself  up  without  reluctance  into  the  hands  of 
His  enemies.  Let  this  thought  abide  in  our  hearts,  and 
refresh  our  souls.  "VVe  have  a  Saviour  who  was  far  more 
willing  to  save  us  than  we  are  willing  to  be  saved.  If 
we  are  not  saved,  the  fault  is  all  our  own.  Christ  is 
just  as  willing  to  receive  and  pardon,  as  He  was  willing 
to  be  taken  prisoner,  to  bleed,  and  to  die. 

We  should  notice,  thirdly,  in  these  verses,  our  LorcTs 
tender  care  for  His  disciples'  safety.  Even  at  this 
critical  moment,  when  His  own  unspeakable  sufferings 
were  about  to  begin,  He  did  not  forget  the  little  band 
of  believers  who  stood  around  Him.  He  remembered 
their  weakness.  He  knew  how  little  fit  they  were  to  go 
into  the  fiery  furnace  of  the  High  Priest's  Palace,  and 
Pilate's  judgment-hall.  He  mercifully  makes  for  them 
a  way  of  escape. — "  If  ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go  their 
way." — It  seems  most  probable  that  here  also  a  miracu- 
lous influence  accompanied  his  words.  At  any  rate,  not 
a  hair  of  the  disciples'  heads  was  touched.     While  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  211 

Shepherd  was  taken,  the  sheep  were  allowed  to  flee  away 
unharmed. 

We  need  not  hesitate  to  see  in  this  incident  an  in- 
structive type  of  all  our  Saviour's  dealings  with  His 
people  even  at  this  day.  He  will  not  suffer  them  "  to  be 
tempted  above  that  which  they  are  able  to  bear."  He 
will  hold  the  winds  and  storms  in  His  hands,  and  not 
allow  believers,  however  sifted  and  buffeted,  to  be  utter- 
ly destroyed.  He  watches  tenderly  over  every  one  of 
His  children,  and,  like  a  wise  physician,  measures  out 
the  right  quantity  of  their  trials  with  unerring  skill. 
"They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  one  pluck 
them  out  of  His  hand."  (John  x.  28.)  For  ever  let  us 
lean  our  souls  on  this  precious  truth.  In  the  darkest 
hour  the  eye  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  upon  us,  and  our  final 
safety  is  sure. 

We  should  notice,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  our  Lord^s 
perfect  suhTnission  to  his  Father'' s  will.  Once,  in  another 
place,  we  find  Him  saying,  "If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  Me  :  nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou 
wilt."  Again,  in  another  place,  we  find  Him  saying, 
"  If  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  Me  except  I  drink 
it,  Thy  will  be  done."  Here,  however,  we  find  even  a 
higher  pitch  of  cheerful  acquiescence  :  "  The  cup  that 
my  Father  hath  given  Me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?  "  (Matt, 
xxvi.  39—42.) 

Let  us  see  in  this  blessed  frame  of  mind,  a  pattern 
for  all  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  Far 
as  we  may  come  short  of  the  Master's  standard,  let  this 
be  the  mark  at  which  we  continually  aim.  Determina- 
tion to  have  our  own  way,  and  do  only  what  we  like,  is 
one  great  source  of  unhappiness  in  the  world.  The 
habit  of  laying  all  our  matters  before  God  in  prayer,  and 
asking  Him  to  choose  our  portion,  is  one  chief  secret  of 
peace.     He  is  the  truly  wise  man  who  has  learned  to  say 


212  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

at  every  stage  of  his  journey,  "  Give  me  what  thou  wilt^ 
place  me  where  Thou  wilt,  do  with  me  as  Thou  wilt  , 
but  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  This  is  the  man 
who  has  the  mind  of  Christ.  By  self-will  Adam  and 
Eve  fell,  and  brought  sin  and  misery  into  the  world. 
Entire  submission  of  will  to  the  will  of  God  is  the  best 
preparation  for  that  heaven  where  God  will  be  all. 

Notes.    John  xvni.  1 — 11. 

1. — [Wlien  Jesus. ..these  words.']  This  would  have  been  more  liitr- 
ally  rendered,  "  Jesus  having  said  these  things."  The  "  tilings  " 
referred  to,  seem  to  me  to  include  the  discourse  of  the  fifteenth 
and  sixteenth  chapters,  as  well  as  the  prayer  of  the  seven- 
teenth. 

Henry  observes,  "  the  office  of  the  priest  was  to  teach  and 
pray  and  offer  sacrifice.  Christ,  after  teaching  and  praying, 
applies  Himself  to  make  atonement.  He  had  said  all  He  had 
to  say  as  a  prophet.  He  now  addresses  Himself  to  His  work 
as  priest." 

[He  went  forth...disciples.'}  The  question  arises,  "  From  what 
place  did  He  go  forth  ?  "  and  it  receives  very  different  answers. 

Many,  as  Cyril,  Ecolampadius,  Maldonatus,  Doddridge,  and 
Ellicott,  think  that  it  only  means  He  went  forth  from  the  room 
where  He  had  held  the  Lord's  Supper  and  delivered  His  part 
ing  address  and  prayer.  The  advocates  of  this  view  hold  that 
our  Lord  did  not  actually  go  out  of  the  room,  when  He  said,  at 
the  end  of  the  fourteenth  chapter,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence," 
and  that  He  probably  continued  His  discourse,  and  prayed 
standing.     This,  to  say  the  least,  seems  a  very  unnatural  view. 

Some,  as  Burgon,  think  that  our  Lord  spoke  the  latter  part  of 
His  address  and  prayer  within  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  and 
that  the  words  before  us  mean  that  He  moved  away  from  the 
temple.  This,  however  seems  hardly  probable.  It  was  night, 
we  know.  There  is  no  evidence  that  gatherings  of  people  by 
night  were  held  within  the  temple  precincts. 

The  most  probable  view,  in  my  opinion,  seems  to  be  that 
Jesus  went  forth  out  of  the  city,  after  concluding  His  discourse 
and  prayer,  and  that  after  leaving  the  room  where  our  Lord's 
Supper  was  held,  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  chapter,  He  spoke 
and  prayed  near  the  gates,  or  within  the  city  walls.  He  left  the 
room  when  He  said,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  Then  having 
reached  some  quiet  spot  near  the  walls.  He  continued  His  dis- 
course and  prayed.  Then  after  that  he  went  out  of  the  city 
This  seems  to  me  the  more  natural  account. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  213 

[Over  the  hrook  Cedron.l  The  Cedron  here  mentioned,  is  the 
game  as  the  Kidron  named  more  than  once  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  word  "  brook  "  means,  literally,  a  "  winter  torrent," 
and  this,  according  to  all  travellers,  is  precisely  what  the  Kid- 
ron is.  Excepting  in  winter,  or  after  rains,  it  is  merely  the  dry 
bed  of  a  water-course.  It  lies  on  the  east  side  of  Jerusalem, 
between  the  city  and  the  Mount  of  Olives.  It  is  the  same  Kid- 
ron which  David  passed  over  weeping,  when  obliged  to  flee  from 
Jerusalem  by  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  (2  Sam.  xv.  2o.)  It  is 
the  same  Kidron  by  the  aide  of  which  Asa  burnt  the  idol  of  his 
mother  Maachah  (2  Chron.  xv.  16),  and  into  which  Josiah  cast 
the  dust  of  the  idolatrous  altars  which  he  destroyed.  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  12.) 

Lampe  says  that  the  way  by  which  our  Lord  left  the  city,  was 
the  way  by  which  the  scape-goat,  Azazel,  was  annually  sent  out 
into  the  wilderness  on  the  great  day  of  atonement. 

Bishop  Andrews  says  that  "  the  first  breach  made  by  the  Ko- 
mans,  when  Titus  took  Jerusaltm,  was  at  the  brook  Cedron, 
where  they  took  Christ," 

[Where  was  a  garden. ..disciples.]  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  this  garden  is  the  same  as  the  "  place  called  Gethsemane." 
What  kind  of  a  garden  it  was  we  know  not,  unless  a  garden  of 
olive  trees.  Probably  it  was  neither  a  garden  of  flowers  nor  of 
herbs,  but  simply  a  place  enclosed,  where  trees  were  sheltered 
and  encouraged  to  grow,  in  order  to  provide  a  quiet  shady  re- 
tirement away  from  the  bustle  of  the  city.  Whether  it  was  a 
public  garden,  or  private  property,  we  know  not.  Hengsten- 
berg  conjectures  that"  the  owner  of  the  place  must  have  stood 
in  some  special  relation  to  Jesus,"  and  that  this  accounts  for 
His  frequent  and  free  resort  to  the  place.  He  also  conjectures 
that  the  '*  young  man"  named  in  Mark  xiv.  51,  52,  must  have 
belonged  to  the  family  of  the  owner.  This  however,  is  pure 
conjecture. 

Almost  all  commentators  notice  the  curious  fact  that  the  fall 
of  Adam  and  Eve  took  place  in  a  garden,  and  Christ's  passion 
also  began  in  a  garden,  and  the  sepulchre  where  Christ  was  laid 
was  in  a  garden,  and  the  place  where  He  was  crucified  was  in 
a  garden.     (John  xix.  41.) 

Augustine  remarks,  "  It  was  fitting  that  the  blood  of  the 
Physician  should  there  be  poured  out,  where  the  disease  of  the 
Bick  man  first  commenced," 

Gualter  remarks  that  the  first  Adam  had  everything  that  was 
pleasant  in  the  Grarden  of  Eden,  and  yet  fell.  The  second  Adam 
had  everything  that  was  painful  and  trying  in  the  Garden  of 
Gethsemane,  but  was  a  glorious  conqueror. 

The  agony  in  Gethsemane,  we  may  observe,  is  entirely 
passed  over  by  John  in  His  Gospel ;  and  for  wise  reasons,  we 
need  not  doubt.     But  it  is  evident  that  it  took  place  at  this  point 


214  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

of  the  narrative.  The  order  of  things  is  :  first,  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per,— then  the  long  discourse  recorded  by  John  alone, — then 
the  marvellous  prayer, — then  the  going  over  Cedron  into  the 
garden, — then  the  agony, — and  then  the  arrival  of  Judas  and 
the  capture  of  our  Lord.  It  is  plain  therefore  that  there  is  a 
pause  in  the  narrative  of  John's  Gospel  at  this  point,  and  that 
we  must  allow  a  little  space  of  time  for  the  agony,  after  our 
Lord  "  went  out "  of  the  city  and  crossed  the  Cedron.  This 
would  make  the  arrival  of  Judas  and  the  soldiers  far  on  in  the 
night. 

Lightfoot  mentions  a  curious  fact  which  he  draws  from  a 
Jewish  writer, — that  the  blood  from  the  sacrifices  in  the  temple 
ran  down  a  drain  into  the  brook  Kidron,  and  was  then  sold  to 
the  gardeners  for  the  purpose  of  dressing  their  gardens.  The 
blood  having  been  consecrated,  could  not  be  put  to  common 
uses  without  sin,  and  therefore  the  gardeners  paid  for  it  as 
much  as  would  buy  a  trespass  offering.  This  is  curious,  if 
true. 

2. — [And  Judas  also,  etc.]  This  verse  is  one  of  John's  peculiar 
explanatory  comments.  He  tells  us  that  this  garden  was  a  place 
where  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  were  in  the  habit  of  assem- 
bling together,  when  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the  great 
Jewish  feasts.  At  such  seasons  the  crowd  of  worshippers  was 
very  great ;  and  many  had  to  content  themselves  with  such 
shelter  as  they  could  find  under  trees,  or  rocks,  in  the  open  air. 
This  is  what  Luke  means  when  he  says,  "At  night  He  went  out 
and  abode  in  the  mount  that  is  called  the  Mount  of  Olives." 
(Luke  xxi.  37.)  Excepting  at  the  celebration  of  the  first  Lord's 
Supper,  we  have  no  mention  of  our  Lord  ever  being  in  any  7ious6 
in  Jerusalem. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  '*  It  is  evident  from  this  that  Jesus 
generally  passed  the  night  out  of  doors." 

Bucer  thinks  that  Judas  specially  knew  the  place  where  our 
Lord  used  to  pray.  Our  Lord's  habits  of  prayer  were  as  well 
known  as  those  of  Daniel. 

The  fact  that  the  traitor  Judas  "  knew  the  place,"  while  our 
Lord  deliberately  went  there,  shows  three  things.  One  is,  that 
our  Lord  went  to  His  death  willingly  and  voluntarily  ;  He  went 
to  the  "  garden,"  knowing  well  that  Judas  was  acquainted  with 
the  place. — Another  thing  is,  that  our  Lord  was  in  the  habit  of 
going  to  this  garden  so  "  often,"  that  Judas  felt  sure  He  would 
be  found  there. — Another  thing  is,  that  the  heart  of  Judas  must 
have  been  desperately  hard,  when,  after  so  many  seasons  of 
spiritual  refreshment  as  he  must  have  seen  in  tliis  garden,  he 
could  use  his  knowledge  for  the  purpose  of  betraying  his  Mas- 
ter. He  "knew  the  place,"  because  he  had  often  heard  hia 
Master  teaching  and  praying  there.  He  knew  it  from  spiritual 
associations,  and  yet  turned  his  knowledge  to  wicked  ends  ! 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  215 

May  we  not  learn  from  this  verse  that  there  is  nothing  to  be 
ashamed  of,  nothing  wrong,  in  loving  one  place  more  than  an- 
other, and  choosing  one  place  more  than  another,  for  com- 
munion with  God?  Even  our  blessed  Lord  had  one  special 
place,  near  Jerusalem,  more  than  other  places,  to  which  He 
often  resorted.  The  common  idea  of  some,  that  it  matters  not 
where  or  in  what  place  we  worship,  and  that  it  is  unspiritual 
and  wrong  to  care  for  one  seat  in  church  more  than  another,  can 
hardly  be  reconciled  with  this  verse. 

The  Greek  words  rendered  "  resorted  thither,"  are  literally 
"  were  gathered  together  there." 

S. — [Judas  then  having  received,  etc^  This  verse  begins  John's 
circumstantial  account  of  the  taking  and  subsequent  passion  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  A  careful  reader  will  not  fail  to  ob- 
serve that  Jolin  entirely  passes  over  several  points  in  this  his- 
tory which  are  mentioned  by  the  three  other  Gospel  writers, 
and  not  least  tlie  bargaining  of  Judas  with  the  priests  to  betray 
our  Lord  for  money.  But  it  is  evident  that  John  assumes  that 
his  readers  were  acquainted  with  the  other  three  Gospels,  and 
purposely  dwells  on  points  which  they  had  not  mentioned. 

The  expression  "  a  band  of  men,"  can  only  mean  "  the  de- 
tachment of  Koman  soldiers  "  which  had  been  lent  by  Pilate  to 
the  priests  for  the  occasion.  Some  think  that  it  means  literally 
•'  a  cohort,"  which  was  the  tenth  part  of  a  legion,  and  consisted 
of  four  or  five  hundred  men.  This,  however,  seems  doubtful. 
Yet  Matthew  speaks  of  Judas  coming,  and  "  a  great  multitude 
with  him."     (Matt.  xxvi.  47.) 

The  "  officers  "  mean  the  Jewish  servants  of  the  priests  and 
Pharisees,  who  accompanied  the  Roman  soldiers.  The  party, 
therefore,  which  Judas  led  consisted  of  two  distinct  elements, 
— Romish  soldiers  detached  from  the  garrison  of  Jerusalem, 
and  Jewish  servants  got  together  by  the  leaders  of  the  Jews. 
Gentiles  and  Jews  were,  therefore,  equally  concerned  in  the  ar- 
rest. The  number  of  the  party  was  probably  large,  from  the 
fear  of  an  attempt  at  a  rescue  by  the  Galilean  Jews,  who  were 
supposed  to  favor  our  Lord.  They  would  be  at  Jerusalem  in 
large  numbers  at  the  Passover,  and  after  our  Lord's  recent  tri- 
umphal entry  into  Jerusalem,  the  priests  might  well  feel  doubts 
whether  they  would  allow  Him  to  be  made  a  prisoner  without 
a  struggle. 

Chrysostom  remarks  that  "  these  men  had  often,  at  other 
times,  been  sent  to  seize  Him,  but  had  not  been  able.  Hence  it 
is  plain  that  at  this  time  He  voluntarily  surrendered  Himself." 

The  "  lanterns  and  torches  "  at  first  sight  may  seem  to  have 
been  needless,  as  the  moon  at  Passover  time  was  full.  But  they 
were  doubtless  intended  to  assist  the  party  in  searching  for  our 
Lord  if  he  endeavored  to  hide  Himself  amonfj:  the  rocks  and 


216  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

trees.    And  in  a  deep  valley  tliere  would  be  many  dark  and 
shady  places. 

The  "  weapons  "  most  probably  apply  to  the  Jewish  servants 
of  the  priests.  It  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  Roman  sol- 
diers would  ever  move  without  their  arms.  For  fear  of  resist- 
ance the  Jewish  portion  of  the  party  took  arms  also. 

Burkitt  remarks  on  the  activity  and  energy  of  wicked  men, 
"  At  the  very  time  when  Peter,  James,  and  John  were  sleeping 
in  the  garden,  Judas  and  his  bloody  followers  were  gathering, 
marching,  and  planning  a  murder." 

The  confidence  of  Judas  that  our  Lord  would  be  in  the  garden, 
shows  plainly  how  familiar  he  was  with  our  Lord's  habits  on 
the  occasion  of  his  visits  to  Jerusalem. 

4. — [Jesus. ..knoioing... come  iipon  Him.]  This  sentence  shows  our 
Lord's  perfect  foreknowledge  of  everything  that  was  about  to 
happen  to  Him.  Never  was  there  a  more  willing,  deliberate, 
and  voluntary  suflferer  than  our  Lord.  The  words  "  things  that 
should  come"  would  be  more  literally  rendered  "the  things 
coming,"  in  the  present  tense. 

The  best  of  martyrs,  like  Ridley  and  Latimer,  did  not  know 
for  certain,  up  to  the  moment  of  their  deaths,  that  something 
might  not  occur  to  alter  the  mind  of  their  persecutors  and  save 
their  lives.  Our  Lord  knew  perfectly  well  that  His  death  was 
sure,  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God, 

Ford  quotes  a  saying  of  Pinart,  that  "  what  rendered  Christ's 
suflFerings  most  terrible  was  the  perfect  foreknowledge  He  had 
of  the  torments  He  should  endure.  From  the  first  moment  of 
His  life  He  had  present  to  His  mind  the  scourge,  the  thorns, 
the  cross,  and  the  agonizing  death  which  awaited  Him.  Saw 
He  a  lamb  in  the  meadow  or  a  victim  in  the  temple,  the  sight 
reminded  Him  that  He  was  the  lamb  of  God,  and  that  He  was 
to  be  offered  up  a  sacrifice." 

[Wejit  forth.]  This  must  mean  that  our  Lord  came  forward 
from  that  part  of  the  garden  where  He  was,  and  did  not  wait 
for  the  party  of  Judas  to  find  Him.  On  the  contrary  he  sud- 
denly showed  Himself,  and  met  them  face  to  face.  The  effect 
of  this  action  alone  must  have  been  startling  to  the  soldiers. 
They  would  feel  at  once  that  they  had  to  do  with  no  common 
person. 

Henry  remarks,  "  When  the  people  would  have  forced  Him 
to  take  a  crown  and  wished  to  make  Him  a  king  he  withdrew 
and  hid  Himself.  (John  vi.  15.)  Bat  when  they  came  to  force 
Him  to  His  cross  He  offered  Himself.  He  came  to  this  world  to 
suffer,  and  went  to  the  other  world  to  reign." 

Lampe  remarks  that  the  first  Adam  hid  himself  in  the  gar- 
den. The  second  Adam  went  forth  to  meet  His  enemies.  The 
first  felt  guilty,  the  second  innocent. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  217 

[And  said...  Whom  seek  ye  ?]  Jesus  Himself  was  tlie  first  to 
epeak,  and  did  not  wait  to  be  challenged  or  commanded  to  sur- 
render. This  sudden  question  no  doubt  would  take  the  party 
of  Judas  by  surprise,  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  mighty  mir- 
acle which  followed.  The  soldiers  must  needs  have  felt, 
"  this  is  not  the  language  or  manner  of  a  malefactor  or  a  guilty 
man." 

5. — \_They  answered... Jesus. ..Nazareth.l  This  would  be  more  lit- 
erally rendered  "  Jesus  the  Nazarene."  It  is  certainly  hard  to 
suppose  that  those  who  said  this  could  have  known  that  Jesus 
Himself  was  speaking  to  them.  It  looks  as  if  they  did  not 
know  our  Lord  by  sight,  or  could  not  believe  that  the  bold 
speaker  before  them  could  be  the  prisoner  they  came  to  appre- 
hend. That  many  of  the  party  did  not  know  our  Lord  by 
sight,  is  clear  from  the  fact  mentioned  by  Matthew  and  Mark, 
that  Judas  had  given  them  a  sign  :  "  Whomsoever  1  kiss,  that 
same  is  He  :  hold  Him  fast,"  This  sign,  therefore,  had  not  yet 
been  given.  Probably  there  was  no  time  for  it.  The  coming 
forward  and  question  of  our  Lord  had  taken  place  so  suddenly 
that  they  took  the  whole  party  by  surprise. 

Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theophylact,  Gualter,  Brentius,  Gerhard, 
and  Ferus,  think  that  our  Lord  miraculously  blinded  the  eyes 
of  the  party,  so  that  they  did  not  recognize  him,  as  Elisha 
blinded  the  Syrians.  (2  Kings  vi.  18.)  They  had  lights,  and 
they  must  have  known  his  voice.  But  they  seem  to  have  been 
unable  to  know  him.  Musculus  thinks  they  did  not  recognize 
Him,  and  thought  Him  a  disciple. 

{Jesus  saith...l  am  He.]  Our  Lord  here  makes  a  plain,  bold, 
full  avowal  that  He  is  the  very  person  whom  they  seek.  It 
must  have  been  a  most  startling  announcement. 

The  words  in  the  Greek  are  literally  "  I  am."  Some  have 
thought  that  there  was  an  intentional  reference  to  the  famous 
passage  in  Exodus,  where  the  Lord  says,  "  I  AM  hath  sent 
you."  (Exodus  iii.  14),  to  which  also  our  Lord  certainly  did  re- 
fer in  John  viii.  58.  But  it  seems  very  doubtful  whether  such 
a  reference  would  have  been  used  in  speaking  to  such  a  party 
as  those  who  came  to  seize  our  Lord. 

[And  Judas. ..stood  with  them.]  It  is  not  quite  clear  why 
this  little  sentence  is  put  in  here.  It  may  be  meant  to  show  the 
desperate  wickedness  of  Judas.  He  stood  side  by  side  with  the 
enemies  of  Jesus. — It  may  be  meant  to  show  that  even  Judas 
himself  was  staggered  and  confounded  by  our  Lord's  boldness, 
and  did  not  give  his  companions  the  promised  sign,  not  recog- 
nizing him  any  more  than  the  others.  The  false  apostle  stood 
there  like  one  struck  dumb. — It  may  be  meant  to  show  that 
Judas  himself  was  a  witness  and  a  subject  of  one  of  the  last 
great  miracles  our  Lord  wrought.  He  himself  was  once  more 
to  feel,  and  experience  proof,  that  the  Master  he  betrayed  had 


218  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

divine  power,     Tliere  seems  to  me  mucli  probability  in  this 
last  idea. 

6  — [As  soon  then  as  He  had  said,  etc.]  I  cannot  doubt  tliat  tbe 
thing  here  related  was  a  great  miracle.  I  have  not  the  slight- 
est sympathy  with  Alford  and  others,  who  try  to  explain  it 
away  partially,  by  reminding  us  of  the  awe  and  reverence 
which  a  great  and  good  man  sometimes  inspires  in  inferior 
minds.  Such  an  explanation  will  never  account  for  the  fact 
here  recorded, — that  the  band  of  Homan  soldiers  and  the  ser- 
vants of  the  priests,  in  fact  the  whole  body  of  armed  men  who 
came  to  seize  on  our  Lord,  "  went  backward  and  fell  on  the 
earth,"  on  hearing  our  Lord  say,  "  I  am  He."  The  Roman  sol- 
diers, especially,  knew  nothing  about  our  Lord,  and  had  no 
cause  to  fear  Him.  The  only  reasonable  account  of  the  event 
is  that  it  was  a  miracle.  It  was  an  exercise  for  the  last  time  of 
that  same  Divine  power  by  which  our  Lord  calmed  the  waves, 
stilled  the  winds,  cast  out  devils,  healed  the  sick,  and  raised 
the  dead.  And  it  was  a  miracle  purposely  wrought  at  this 
juncture,  in  order  to  show  the  disciples  and  their  enemies  that 
our  Lord  was  not  taken  because  He  could  not  help  it,  or  cruci- 
fied because  He  could  not  prevent  it ;  but  because  He  was  will- 
ing to  suffer  and  die  for  sinners.  He  came  to  be  a  willing  suf- 
ferer for  our  sins,  that  the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled. 
(Comp,  Matt,  xxvi,  53.)  The  effect  of  the  miraculous  influence 
put  forth  by  our  Lord,  seems  to  have  been  that  the  party  who 
came  to  seize  Him  were  for  a  little  time  struck  down  to  the 
ground,  like  men  struck  down,  but  not  killed,  by  lightning, 
and  rendered  so  helpless  that  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  might 
easily  have  escaped.  How  long  they  lay  on  the  ground  we  are 
not  told,  but  there  certainly  seems  to  be  some  pause  at  the  end 
of  the  verse.  It  seems  clear  to  me  that  the  miracle  saved  the 
disciples  from  being  taken  prisoners,  and  so  far  awed  the  party 
of  Judas  that  they  were  satisfied  to  seize  our  Lord  only,  and 
either  intentionally  let  the  eleven  go,  or  in  their  fear  of  some 
further  display  of  miraculous  power,  neglected  them,  and  gave 
them  time  to  escape.  That  it  also  made  the  whole  party  of 
Judas  without  excuse,  is  equally  clear.  They  could  never  say 
they  had  no  evidence  of  our  Lord's  divine  power.  They  had 
felt  it  in  their  own  persons. 

Burgon  sees  in  this  incident  something  which  recalls  to 
mind  the  prophetic  words  of  the  Psalmist :  "  When  the  wick- 
ed, even  mine  enemies  and  my  foes,  came  upon  me  to  eat  up 
my  flesh,  they  stumbled  and  fell."     (Psal.  xxvii.  2.) 

Augustine  remarks,  "  What  shall  He  do  when  He  comes  to 
judge,  who  did  this  when  about  to  be  judged  ?  Wliat  shall  be 
His  might  when  He  comes  to  reign,  who  had  this  might  when 
He  was  at  the  point  to  die  ?  " 

The  effort  of  some  to  lessen  the  miraculous  character  of  this 
circumstance,  by  quoting  such  a  case  as  the  classical  story  of 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  219 

the  soldier  being  daunted  by  the  appearance  of  the  Eoman 
General  Caius  Marius,  is  weak  and  evasive.  A  whole  cohort 
of  Roman  soldiers  would  not  fall  down  without  miraculous  in- 
terference. If  not  a  miracle,  the  event  is  utterly  inexplicable 
and  contrary  to  experience. 

7. — [Then  asked  He  them  again,  etc.]  Our  Lord  repeats  His  ques- 
tion, as  if  to  test  the  effect  of  the  miraculous  exhibition  of 
power  which  He  had  just  given  to  His  enemies.  But  they 
were  hardened,  like  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians  under  the  mi- 
raculous plagues  of  Egypt.  As  soon  as  they  rose  from  the 
ground,  they  proved,  that  though  frightened,  they  were  not 
turned  from  tlieir  purpose.  They  still  seek  to  take  Jesus  of 
Nazareth. 

8. — [Jesus  answered...!  am  He.]  The  dignity  and  calmness  of  our 
Lord  at  this  point  are  very  striking.  Knowing  full  well  all 
the  insults  and  barbarous  usage  about  to  begin  in  a  few  min- 
utes, He  repeats  His  declaration.  "  I  am  He  whom  you  seek. 
Behold  Me;  here  I  am,  ready  to  surrender  myself  into  your 
hands." 

[//  therefore. ..Me.. .let  them. ..way.]  The  tender  thoughtful- 
ness  of  our  Lord  for  His  weak  disciples  is  strikmgly  shown  in 
this  sentence.  Even  at  this  trying  moment  He  thought  more 
of  others  than  of  Himself.  "  If  I  alone  am  the  person  you  seek 
to  make  prisoner,  if  your  commission  is  to  seize  Me  only,  then 
let  these  my  followers  go  away,  and  do  not  harm  them."  Once 
more,  we  need  not  doubt  tliat  the  miraculous  power  accompa- 
nied these  words,  and  that  insensibly  a  restraint  was  laid  upon 
our  Lord's  enemies,  so  that  they  felt  obhged  to  let  the  disciples 
escape. 

The  tender  sympathy  and  consideration  of  our  great  High 
Priest  for  His  people  come  out  very  beautifully  in  this  place, 
and  would  doubtless  be  remembered  by  the  eleven  long  after- 
wards. They  would  remember  that  the  very  last  thought  of 
their  Master,  before  He  was  nmde  a  prisoner,  was  for  them  and 
their  safety. 

Christ's  protecting  power  over  all  His  believing  people  is 
plainly  taught  in  this  passage. 

Jansenius  remarks,  that  to  this  saying  we  may  attribute  the 
safety  of  Peter,  though  he  smote  with  the  sword  and  got  inside 
the  high  priest's  palace,  and  of  John,  though  he  stood  by  the 
cross. 

Besser  quotes  a  saying  of  Luther,  that  this  was  as  great  a 
miracle  as  that  of  casting  the  party  to  the  ground.  To  tie  the 
hands  of  the  party  of  Judas  and  prevent  them  touching  His 
disciples,  was  a  mighty  exercise  of  Divine  power. 

9. — [That  the.  sayinrj  might  he  fuljilled,  etc.]  In  this  verse  we 
have    one    of    tliose    parenthetical    comments    or    explanations 


220  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

"svhicTi  are  so  often  found  in  John's  Gospel.  He  reminds  us 
that  our  Lord's  interference  to  secure  the  safety  of  His  disci- 
ples at  this  crisis  was  a  fulfilment  in  fact  of  His  expression  in 
prayer,  "  none  of  them  is  lost." 

Some  persons  see  a  difiiculty  here,  and  object  that  in  the 
prayer  our  Lord  speaks  of  eternal  salvation,  while  here  He  is 
only  speaking  of  temporal  safety.  Yet  there  seems  no  solid 
ground  for  the  objection.  Our  Lord's  preservation  of  His  dis- 
ciples included  the  means  as  well  as  the  end.  One  means  of 
preserving  them  from  making  shipwreck  of  the  faith  altogether, 
was  to  keep  them  from  being  tempted  above  what  they  could 
bear.  Our  Lord  knew  that  they  would  be  so  tempted,  and  that 
their  souls  were  not  strong  enough  to  bear  tlie  trial.  If  they 
had  been  taken  prisoners  and.  brought  before  Caiaphas  and 
Pilate,  with  Himself,  their  faith  would  have  failed  entirely. 
He  therefore  provides  for  their  escape,  and  overrules  the  plans 
of  His  enemies,  so  that  the  eleven  were  "  let  go."  And  thus 
He  literally  carried  out  what  he  had  mentioned  in  prayer.  He 
prevented  any  of  them  being  lost.  They  would  have  Ijeen  lost 
so  far  as  man's  eye  can  judge,  if  He  had  not  provided  a  way  of 
escape,  and  prevented  them  being  tempted  beyond  their  strength- 
The  care  of  Jesus  over  His  people  provides  the  means  of  per- 
severance and  continuance  in  the  faith,  as  well  as  the  great  end 
of  eternal  salvation. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  By  loss  He  doth  not  here  mean  tem- 
poral death,  but  eternal. 

Calvin  remarks,  "  The  Evangelist  does  not  speak  merely  of 
their  bodily  life,  but  means  that  Christ,  sparing  them  for  a 
time,  provided  for  their  eternal  salvation.  Consider  how  great 
their  weakness  was.  What  do  we  think  they  would  have  done 
alone,  if  brought  to  the  test  ?  Christ  did  not  choose  they  should 
be  tried  beyond  the  strength  He  had  given,  and  rescued  them 
from  eternal  destruction." 

It  seems  to  me  most  probable  that  at  this  point  of  the  history 
the  "  kiss  "  of  Judas  and  His  "  Hail  Master  "  come  in.  At  any 
rate  it  is  diflScult  to  suppose  that  Judas  could  have  kissed  our 
Lord,  when  he  first  "  went  forth,"  and  surprised  the  band  by 
meeting  them.  There  does  not  seem  time  for  the  salutation, 
nor  does  it  seem  probable  that  Judas  would  first  kiss  our  Lord 
and  then  fall  to  the  ground.  Nor  does  the  repeated  answer  of 
the  band  to  the  question  "  Whom  seek  ye  ?  "  give  the  idea  that 
they  had  as  yet  recognized  our  Lord,  or  had  any  sign  from 
Judas.  I  give  this  as  my  own  conjecture,  and  admit  that  the 
maiter  is  doubtful.  But  I  must  think  that  as  soon  as  the  band 
of  soldiers  recovered  their  presence  of  mind,  Judas  came  for- 
ward and  kissed  our  Lord,  and  then  the  capture  took  place. 
This  is  the  order  of  events  maintained  by  Chrysostom,  Cyril, 
Theophylact,  Gerhard,  Jansenius,  Lightfoot,  Stier,  and  Alford. 

10.-    \Thc)i  Simon,  Peter  having  a  sword,  etc.l    The  event  her^ 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  221 

mentioned  is  recorded  by  all  the  four  Gospel- writers,  but  John 
alone  gives  tiie  name  of  Peter  as  the  striker,  and  of  Malchus  as 
the  person  struck.  The  reason  commonly  assigned  for  this  is 
prol^ably  correct.  John's  Gospel  was  written  long  after  the 
other  three,  when  Peter  and  Malchus  were  both  dead,  and  their 
names  could,  therefore,  be  safely  mentioned. 

Peter's  impetuous  temperament  comes  out  in  the  action  be- 
fore us.  Impulsive,  earnest,  zealous,  and  inconsiderate  of  con- 
sequences, he  acted  hastily,  and  his  zeal  soon  cooled  down  and 
was  changed  into  fear.  It  is  not  those  who  are  for  a  time  most 
demonstrative  and  fervent,  whose  religion  is  deepest.  John 
never  smote  with  the  sword  ;  but  John  never  denied  his  Lord, 
and  was  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  when  Christ  died. 

The  use  of  the  article  "  the"  before  "  servant "  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  Malchus  was  some  person  well  known  as  an  at 
tendant  of  Caiaphas. 

Whether  the  ear  was  cut  olBF  entirely,  or  only  so  cut  as  to 
hang  down  by  the  skin,  may  be  left  to  conjecture.  In  any  case 
we  know  that  it  gave  occasion  for  the  last  miracle  of  bodily 
cure  which  our  Lord  ever  wrought.  Luke  tells  us  that  He 
"  touched  "  the  ear,  and  it  was  instantaneously  healed.  To  the 
very  end  of  His  ministry  our  Lord  did  good  to  His  enemies,  and 
gave  proof  of  His  divine  power.  But  His  hardened  enemies 
gave  no  heed.  Miracles  alone  convert  no  one.  As  in  the  case 
of  Pharaoh,  they  only  seem  to  make  some  men  harder  and  more 
wicked. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  Peter  meant  to  kill  Malchus  with  this 
blow,  which  was  probably  aimed  at  his  head.  His  own  agita- 
tion probably,  and  the  special  interposition  of  God,  alone  pre- 
vented him  taking  away  the  life  of  another,  and  endangering 
his  own  life  and  that  of  his  fellow-disciples.  What  might  have 
happened  if  Malchus  had  been  killed,  no  one  can  tell. 

Musculus  remarks  how  entirely  Peter  seems  to  have  forgot- 
ten all  His  Master's  frequent  predictions  that  He  would  be  de- 
livered to  the  Gentiles  and  be  condemned  to  death,  and  acts  as 
if  he  could  prevent  what  was  coming.  It  was  clearly  an  im- 
pulsive act,  done  without  reflection.  Zeal  not  according  to 
knowledge  often  drives  a  man  into  foolish  actions,  and  makes 
work  for  repentance. 

11.— [Then  said  Jesus. .Me  sheath.]  This  was  the  language  of 
firm  and  decided  rebuke.  It  was  meant  to  teach  Peter,  and  all 
Christians  in  every  age.  that  the  Gospel  is  not  to  be  propagated 
or  maintained  by  carnal  weapons,  or  by  smiting  and  violence. 
Matthew  adds  the  solemn  words  "All  they  that  take  the  sword 
phall  perish  with  the  sword."  How  needful  the  rebuke,  and 
how  true  the  comment,  have  often  been  proved  by  the  history 
of  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  appeal  to  the  sword  can  rarely 
be  justified,  and  has  often  recoiled  on  the  lieadof  its  promoters. 


223  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

The  wars  of  the  Protestants  on  the  Continent  after  the  Refor- 
mation, and  the  American  war  between  North  and  South,  fur- 
nished melancholy  proofs  of  this.  Some  of  the  best  Christians 
have  died  on  battle  fields.  Taking  the  sword,  they  perished  by 
the  sword. 

St.  John,  for  wise  reasons,  does  not  mention  the  miraculous 
healing  of  Malchus.  Burgon  takes  occasion  to  remark  that 
even  in  the  hour  of  our  Lord's  apparent  weakness  He  gave  His 
enemies  a  miracle  of  power  and  a  miracle  of  mercy, — power  in 
striking  them  to  the  ground,  mercy  in  healing. 

[The  cup... Father. ..given...drink  it.]  This  beautiful  saying  is 
peculiar  to  St.  John's  Gospel.  It  was  meant  to  show  our  Lord's 
perfect  willingness  and  readiness  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  of  suf- 
fering which  was  before  Him.  It  should  always  be  read  in 
connection  with  the  two  other  expressions  about  "the  cup" 
which  our  Lord  had  very  shortly  before  used  in  the  garden  of 
Gethsemane.  First  came  the  prayer,  "  If  it  be  possible  lettliis 
cup  pass  from  Me."  Then  came  the  resigned  declaration,  "  If 
this  cup  may  not  pass  from  Me  except  I  drink  it,  Thy  will  be 
done."  And  last  of  all  comes  the  firm  and  composed  assertion 
of  perfect  readiness  for  anything  :  *'  Shall  I  not  drink  the  cup 
given  to  Me  by  my  Father  ?  "  The  three  expressions  taken  to- 
gether are  deeply  instructive.  They  show  that  our  Lord  in  His 
agony  prayed  for  relief.  They  show  that  His  prayer  was  first 
answered  by  His  being  able  to  submit  entirely  to  His  Father's 
will.  They  show  that  His  prayer  was  finally  answered  by  His 
being  able  to  show  complete  willingness  to  sufibr.  What  an 
example  this  is  for  all  believers  in  the  time  of  trouble  !  Like 
our  Master  we  may  pray  about  it,  and  hope  that  like  Him  we 
shall  obtain  help  by  prayer.  What  a  proof  this  is  of  our  Lord's 
power  to  sympathize  with  suffering  believers.  He  knows  their 
conflicts  by  experience. 

The  absolute  voluntariness  of  Jesus  Christ's  suifering  for  us 
is  nowhere  perhaps  more  remarkably  brought  out  than  in  this 
passage.  He  resents  and  rebukes  the  effort  of  a  zealous  dis- 
ciple to  repel  force  by  force.  He  speaks  of  His  sufferings  as 
"a  cup"  given  to  Him  by  His  Father,  and  appointed  in  the 
everlasting  counsels  of  the  Trinity,  and  as  one  which  He  cheer- 
fully and  willingly  drinks.  "  Shall  I  not  drink  it?  Would  you 
have  me  refuse  it  ?  Would  you  prevent  my  dying  for  sinners  ?  " 
It  is  the  more  marvellous  when  we  reflect  that  He  who  thus 
willingly  suffered  was  God  Almighty  as  well  as  man.  Nothing 
can  account  for  the  whole  scene  but  the  doctrine  of  atonement 
and  substitution. 

To  the  eye  of  some,  our  Lord's  sufferings  were  forced  on  Him 
by  the  Jews.  Yet  when  He  speaks  of  them  here.  He  looks  far 
above  second  causes.  He  says.  His  sufferings  were  "  the  cup 
given  to  Him  by  the  Father."  Are  not  all  the  sufferings  of 
God's  children  to  be  regarded  in  the  same  light  ? 


juniN,  CHAP.  XVIIL 


223 


Calvin  warns  us  here  that  while  we  ought  to  be  ready  to  drink 
any  cup  appointed  by  our  Father,  "  we  must  not  listen  to  those 
fanatics  who  tell  us  that  we  may  not  seek  remedies  for  diseases 
and  any  other  kind  of  distresses,  lest  we  reject  the  cup  pre- 
sented to  us  by  our  heavenly  Father." 

Henry  observes  on  the  word  "  cup  "  as  applied  to  affliction  : 
"  It  is  but  a  cup,  a  small  matter  comparatively,  be  it  what  it 
will. — It  is  not  a  sea,  a  Red  sea,  or  a  Dead  sea,  for  it  is  not  hell ; 
it  is  light,  and  but  for  a  moment. — It  is  a  cup  that  is  given  us : 
suflferings  are  gifts. — It  is  given  us  by  a  Father,  by  one  who 
has  a  Father's  authority,  and  does  us  no  wrong, — a  Father's 
affection,  and  means  us  no  hurt." 

Bengel  remarks  that  John  here  evidently  pre-supposes  the 
particulars  detailed  by  Matthew  about  "  the  cup,"  named  by 
our  Lord  in  prayer,  to  be  things  known  by  his  readers.  Paley 
also  notices  the  expression  as  one  of  the  undesigned  coinci- 
dences of  Scripture. 


JOHN  XVIII.  12—27. 


12  Then  the  band  and  the  captain 
and  officers  of  the  Jews  took  Jesus, 
and  bound  him, 

13  And  led  him  away  to  Annas 
first ;  for  he  was  father  in  law  to 
Caiaphas,  which  was  the  high  priest 
that  satne  year. 

14  Now  Caiaphas  was  he,  which 
gave  counsel  to  the  Jews,  that  it  was 
expedient  that  one  man  should  die 
for  the  people. 

15  And  Simon  Peter  followed 
Jesus,  and  so  did  another  disciple  : 
that  disciple  was  known  nnto  the 
high  priest,  and  went  in  Math  Jesus 
^uto  the  palace  of  the  h'irh  priest. 

■•6  But  Peter  stood  .-vt  the  door 
wi^  lOut.  Then  went  out  that  other 
disciple,  which  was  known  unto 
the  high  priest,  and  spake  unto  her 
that  kept  the  door,  and  brought  in 
Peter. 

17  Then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept 
the  door  unto  Peter,  Art  not  thou 
•Iso  one  of  this  man's  disciples? 
He  saith  I  am  not. 

18  And  tke  servants  and  officers 
#tood  there,  who  had  made  a  fire  of 
"toals ;  for  it  was  cold:  and  they 
warmed  themselves  :  and  Peter  stood 
ivith  them,  and  warmed  himself. 

19  The  high   priest  then    asked 


Jesus  of  his  disciples  and  his  doc- 
trine. 

20  Jesus  answered  him,  I  spake 
openly  to  the  world ;  I  ever  taught 
in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the  temple, 
whither  the  Jews  always  resort ;  and 
in  secret  have  I  said  nothing. 

21  Why  ask  est  thou  me  ?  ask  their 
which  heard  me,  what  I  have  said 
unto  them  :  behold,  they  know  what 
I  said. 

22  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken, 
one  of  the  officers  which  stood  by 
struck  Jesus  with  the  palm  of  his 
hand,  saying,  Answerest  thou  the 
high  priest  so  ? 

23  Jesus  answered  him,  if  I  have 
spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil : 
but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me  ? 

24  Now  Annas  had  sent  him  bound 
unto  Caiaphas  the  high  priest. 

25  And  Simon  Peter  stood  ana 
warmed  himself  They  said  there 
fore  unto  him.  Art  thoii  not  also  onti 
of  his  disciples  ?  He  d<jni>-d  it,  and 
said,  I  am  not. 

26  One  of  the  servants  of  the  high 
priest,  being  his  kinsman  whose  ear 
Peter  cut  off,  saith,  Did  not  I  see 
thee  in  t^-e  garden  with  him  1 

27  Peier  then  denied  again  :  an  1 
immediately  the  cock  crew. 


224  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

In  this  part  of  St.  John's  history  of  Christ's  suifer- 
ingg,  three  wonderful  things  stand  out  upon  the  surface 
of  the  narrative,  lo  these  three  let  us  confine  our  at- 
tention. 

We  should  mark,  for  one  thing,  the  amazing  hard- 
ness of  unconverted  men.  We  see  this  in  the  conduct 
of  the  men  by  whom  our  Lord  was  taken  prisoner. 
Some  of  them  most  probably  were  Roman  soldiers,  and 
some  of  them  were  Jewish  servants  of  the  priests  and 
Pharisees.  But  in  one  respect  they  were  all  alike. 
Both  parties  saw  our  Lord's  divine  power  exhibited, 
when  they  "  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  ground." 
Both  saw  a  miracle,  according  to  St.  Luke's  Gospel, 
when  Jesus  touched  the  ear  of  Malchus  and  healed 
him.  Yet  both  remained  unmoved,  cold,  indifferent 
and  insensible,  as  if  they  had  seen  nothing  out  of  tie 
common  way.  They  went  on  coolly  with  their  odious 
business.  "  They  took  Jesus,  bound  Him,  and  led  Him 
away." 

The  degree  of  hardness  and  insensibility  of  con- 
science to  which  men  may  attain,  when  they  live  twen- 
ty or  thirty  years  without  the  slightest  contact  with  re- 
ligion, is  something  awful  and  appalling.  God  and  the 
things  of  God  seem  to  sink  out  of  sight  and  disappear 
from  the  mind's  eye.  The  world  and  the  things  of  the 
world  seem  to  absorb  the  whole  attention.  In  such 
jases  we  may  well  believe  miracles  would  produce  little 
or  no  effect,  as  in  the  case  before  us.  The  eye  would 
gaze  on  them,  like  the  eye  of  a  beast  looking  at  a  ro- 
mantic landscape,  without  any  impression  being  made 
on  the  heart.  He  who  thinks  that  seeing  a  miracle 
would  convert  him  into  a  thorough  Christian  has  got 
much  to  learn. 

Let  us  not  wonder  if  we  see  cases  of  hardness  and 
unbelief  in  our  own  day  and  generation.    Such  cases  will 


JOHN,  CHAP    XViiL  225 

continually  be  found  among  tho^se  classes  cf  mankind, 
who  from  their  profession  or  position  are  completely 
cut  off  from  means  of  grace.  Twenty  or  thirty  years 
of  total  irreligion,  without  the  influence  of  Sunday, 
Bible,  or  Christian  teaching,  will  make  a  man's  heart 
hard  as  the  nether  mill-stone.  His  conscience  at  latt 
will  seem  dead,  buried,  and  gone.  He  will  appear  past 
feeling.  Painful  as  these  cases  are,  we  must  not  think 
them  peculiar  to  our  own  times.  They  existed  under 
Christ's  own  eyes,  and  they  will  exist  until  Christ  re- 
turns. The  Church  which  allows  any  portion  of  a  pop- 
ulation to  grow  up  in  practical  heathenism,  must  never 
be  surprised  to  see  a  rank  crop  of  practical  infidelity. 

We  should  mark,  for  another  thing,  the  amazing 
condescension  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  see  the 
Son  of  God  taken  prisoner  and  led  away  bound  like  a 
inalefactor, — arraigned  before  wicked  and  unjust  judges, 
— insulted  and  treated  with  contempt.  And  yet  this 
unresisting  prisoner  had  only  to  will  His  deliverance, 
and  He  would  at  once  have  been  free.  He  had  only  to 
command  the  confusion  of  His  enemies,  and  they  would 
at  once  have  been  confounded.  Above  all  He  was  One 
who  knew  full  well  that  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  and  all 
their  companions,  would  one  day  stand  before  His  judg- 
ment seat  and  receive  an  eternal  sentence.  He  knew 
all  these  things,  and  yet  condescended  to  be  treated  as 
a  malefactor  without  resisting. 

One  thing  at  any  rate  is  very  clear.  The  love  of 
Christ  to  sinners  is  "  a  love  that  passeth  knowledge." 
To  suffer  for  those  whom  we  love,  and  who  are  in  some 
sense  worthy  of  our  affections,  is  suffering  that  we  can 
understand.  To  submit  t6  ill-treatment  quietly,  when 
we  have  no  power  to  resist,  is  submission  that  is  both 
gracf^ful  and  wise.  But  to  suffer  voluntarily,  when  we 
have  the  power  to  prevent  it,  and  to  suffer  for  a  world 


9,26  EXPOblTOKY  THOUGHTS. 

of  unbelieving  ana  ungodly  sinners,  unasked  and  un- 
hanked, — this  is  a  line  of  conduct  which  passes  man's 
understanding.  Never  let  us  forget  that  this  is  the  pe- 
culiar beauty  of  Christ's  sufferings,  when  we  read  the 
wondrous  story  of  His  cross  and  passion.  He  was  led 
away  captive,  and  dragged  before  the  High  Priest's 
bar,  not  because  He  could  not  help  Himself,  but  because 
He  had  set  His  whole  heart  on  saving  sinners, — by  bear- 
ing their  sins,  by  being  treated  as  a  sinner,  and  by  be- 
ing punished  in  their  stead.  He  was  a  willing  prisoner, 
that  we  might  be  set  free.  He  was  willingly  arraigned 
and  condemned,  that  we  might  be  absolved  and  declar- 
ed innocent. — "He  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the 
unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God." — "  Though 
He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor,  that  we 
through  His  poverty  might  be  rich." — "  He  was  made 
sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  (1  Peter  iii.  18  ;  2  Cor. 
viii.  9  ;  v.  21.)  Surely  if  there  is  any  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel  which  needs  to  be  clearly  known,  it  is  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  voluntary  substitution.  He  suffered  and 
died  willingly  and  unresistingly,  because  He  knew  that 
He  had  come  to  be  our  substitute,  and  by  substitution 
to  purchase  our  salvation. 

We  should  mark,  lastly,  the  amazmg  degree  of  weak- 
ness that  may  he  found  in  a  real  Christian,.  We  see 
this  exemplified  in  a  most  striking  manner,  in  the  con- 
duct of  the  Apostle  Peter.  We  see  that  famous  disci- 
ple forsaking  his  Master,  and  acting  like  a  coward, — 
running  away  when  he  ought  to  have  stood  by  His  side, 
— ashamed  to  own  Him  when  he  ought  to  have  confess- 
ed Him, — and  finally  denying  three  times  that  He  knew 
Him.  And  this  takes  place  immediately  after  receiving 
the  Lord's  Supper — after  hearing  the  most  touching 
address  and  prayer  that  mortal  ear  ever  heard — after 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  227 

the  plainest  possible  warnings — under  ihe  pressure  of 
no  very  serious  temptation.  "  Lord,"  we  may  well  say, 
"  what  is  man  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  "  "  Let 
him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
(1  Cor.  X.  12.) 

This  fall  of  Peter  is  doubtless  intended  to  be  a  lessor 
to  the  whole  Church  of  Christ.  It  is  recorded  for  our 
learning,  that  we  be  kept  from  like  sorrowful  overthrow. 
It  is  a  beacon  mercifully  set  up  in  Scripture,  to  prevent 
others  making  shipwreck.  It  shows  us  the  danger  of 
pride  and  self-confidence.  If  Peter  had  not  been  so  sure 
that  although  all  denied  Christ,  he  never  would,  he 
would  probably  never  have  fallen. — It  shows  us  the  dan 
ger  of  laziness.  If  Peter  had  watched  and  prayed,  when 
our  Lord  advised  him  to  do  so,  he  would  have  found 
grace  to  help  him  in  the  time  of  need. — It  shows  us,  not 
least,  the  painful  influence  of  the  fear  of  man.  Few  are 
aware,  perhaps,  how  much  more  they  fear  the  face  of  man 
whom  they  can  see,  than  the  eye  of  God  whom  they  can- 
not see.  These  things  are  written  for  our  admonition. 
Let  us  remember  Peter  and  be  wise. 

After  all  let  us  leave  the  passage  with  the  comforta- 
ble reflection  that  we  have  a  merciful  and  pitiful  High 
Priest,  who  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  in- 
firmities, and  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed.  Peter  no 
doubt  fell  shamefully,  and  only  rose  again  after  heart- 
felt repentance  and  bitter  tears.  But  he  did  rise  again. 
He  was  not  left  to  reap  the  consequence  of  his  sin,  and 
cast  off"  for  evermore.  The  same  pitiful  hand  that  saved 
him  from  drowning,  when  his  faith  failed  him  on  the 
waters,  was  once  more  stretched  out  to  raise  him  when 
he  fell  in  the  High  Priest's  hall.  Can  we  doubt  that  he 
rose  a  wiser  and  better  man  ?  If  Peter's  fall  has  made 
Christians  see  more  clearly  their  own  great  weakness 


228  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

and  Christ's  great  compassion,  then  Peter's  fall  has  not 
been  recorded  in  vain. 

Notes.    John  xvin.  12—27. 

12. — [Then  the  hand  and  the  captain,  etc.]  This  verse  begins  tlie 
story  of  our  Lord  when  He  was  actually  in  the  hands  of  His 
deadly  enemies.  For  the  first  time  in  His  earthly  ministry  we 
see  Him  not  a  free  agent,  but  submitting  to  be  a  passive  sufferer, 
and  allowing  His  foes  to  work  their  will.  Tht  Hst  miracle 
had  been  wrought  in  vain.  Like  a  malefactor  He  Is  seized  and 
put  in  chains. 

The  "  captain "  must  mean  the  Roman  officer  who  com- 
manded the  "  band,"  cohort,  or  detachment,  which  was  sent  to 
apprehend  our  Lord.  The  "  officers  "  must  mean  the  civil  ser- 
vants of  the  priests  who  accompanied  them.  The  "  binding  " 
must  mean  the  putting  of  chains  or  handcuffs  on  our  Lord's 
arms  and  wrists. 

13. — [And  led  Him  aicay  to  Annas,  etc,]  This  is  a  fact  which  is 
mentioned  by  no  Gospel-writer  except  John.  The  explanation 
of  it  is  probably  something  of  this  kind.  In  the  time  when  our 
Lord  Jesus  was  on  earth,  the  office  of  the  high  priest  among 
the  Jews  was  filled  up  with  the  utmost  disorder  and  irregular- 
ity. Instead  of  the  high  priest  being  high  priest  for  life,  he 
was  often  elected  for  a  year  or  two,  and  then  deposed,  and  his 
office  given  to  another.  There  were  often  living- at  one  time 
several  priests  who  had  served  the  office  of  high  priest,  and 
then  ceased  to  hold  it,  like  sheriffs  or  mayors  among  ourselves. 
In  the  case  before  us  Annas  appears,  after  ceasing  to  be  high 
priest  himself,  to  have  lived  in  the  same  palace  with  his  son-in- 
law  Caiaphas,  and  to  have  assisted  him  as  an  assessor  and  ad- 
viser in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  which  from  his  age  and 
official  experience  he  would  be  well  qualified  to  do.  Remem- 
bering this,  we  may  understand  our  Lord  being  "  led  away  to 
Annas  first,"  and  then  passed  on  by  him  to  Caiaphas.  So  inti- 
mate were  the  relations  between  the  two,  that  in  Luke  iii.  2  we 
are  told  that  "  Annas  and  Caiaphas  were  high  priests."  In  Acts 
iv.  6,  Annas  is  called  "  the  high  priest."  Yet  it  is  very  certain 
that  Caiaphas  was  the  acting  high  priest  the  year  that  our  Lord 
was  crucified.     John  distinctly  asserts  it. 

The  gross  inconsistency  of  the  Jews  in  making  such  ado 
about  the  law  of  Moses,  while  they  permitted  and  tolerated 
such  entire  departures  from  its  regulations  about  the  high 
priest's  office,  is  a  curious  example  of  what  blindness  uncon- 
verted men  may  exhibit.  As  to  there  being  two  high  priests  at 
the  same  time,  we  must  in  fairness  remember  that  even  in  holy 
David's  time  "  Zadok  and  Abiathar  were  the  priests."  (3  Sam. 
XX.  25.)  The  gross  irregularity  in  our  Lord's  time  consisted  in 
making  the  high  priest's  office  an  annual  one. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  229 

Tlie  object  of  tlie  Jews  in  bringing  our  Lord  before  the  liigb 
priest  and  in  the  Sanhedrim  first,  is  very  plain.  They  wished 
to  convict  him  of  heresy  and  blasphemy,  and  then  after  that  to 
denounce  him  to  the  Romans. 

Augustine  thinks  that  Caiaphas  arranged  that  our  Lord 
should  be  taken  to  Annas  first,  because  he  was  his  father-in- 
law.  He  also  thinks  that  these  two  held  the  office  of  high 
priest,  each  in  his  turn,  year  by  year.  Calvin  thinks  that  our 
Lord  was  only  taken  to  Annas  first,  because  his  house  \iappened 
to  be  convenient,  till  the  high  priest  and  council  assembled 
Cyril  and  Musculus  think  that  Annas  was  the  conti  ver  and 
designer  of  all  done  against  Christ. 

Cyril  here  interposes  the  verse  which  in  most  Bibles  cornea 
in  as  twenty-fourth  :  "  Annas  at  once  sent  Him  bound  to  Caia- 
phas the  high  priest,"  Luther,  Flacius,  and  Beza,  incline  to 
approve  of  this.  But  it  is  fair  to  say  that  there  is  great  lack  of 
authority  for  this  change. 

Many  commentators  think  that  Jesus  was  taken  to  Annas 
first,  by  way  of  exhibiting  to  that  old  "  enemy  of  all  righteous- 
ness "the  triumphant  success  of  the  attempt  to  capture  the 
prisoner,  whom  the  Sanhedrim  had  agreed  to  slay.  They  think 
that  he  was  just  shown  to  Annas,  and  then  passed  on  to  Caia- 
phas. But  I  cannot  think  this  probable.  I  hold,  with  Alford 
and  Ellicott,  that  our  Lord  was  examined  by  Annas. 

Cornelius  a'Lapide  suggests  that  Annas  was  very  likely  the 
person  with  whom  Judas  bargained  to  betray  our  Lord  for 
money  ;  and  that  when  the  capture  was  effected,  Judas  brought 
the  prisoner  to  the  house  of  Annas,  and  remained  there  to  claim 
his  price,  after  Annas  had  seen  Him.  He  observes  with  some 
acuteness  that  Judas  does  not  appear  after  this  in  the  history 
of  the  examination  of  our  Lord. 

Lightfoot  quotes  a  Jewish  writer,  who  says  that  "  in  the  sec- 
ond temple,  which  only  stood  four  hundred  and  twenty  years, 
there  were  in  that  time  more  than  three  hundred  high  priests  !  " 

Henry  remarks,  "  It  was  the  ruin  of  Caiaphas  that  he  was 
high  priest  that  year,  and  so  became  a  ringleader  in  putting 
Christ  to  death.  Many  a  man's  advancement  has  lost  him  hia 
reputation  ;  and  he  would  not  have  been  dishonored  if  he  had 
not  been  preferred  and  promoted." 

14. — [Now  Caiaphas  was  he,  etc.]  This  verse  contains  one  of 
John's  peculiar  explanatory  comments,  and  as  such  comes  in 
parenthetically.  It  is  as  though  he  said,  "  Let  us  not  forget 
that  this  was  the  very  Caiaphas,  who  after  the  raising  of  Laza- 
rus, had  said  publicly  that  it  was  expedient  that  one  mau 
should  die  for  the  people.  Behold  how  he  is  made  the  uncon- 
scious instrument  of  bringing  that  saying  to  pass,  though  in  a 
widely  different  sense  from  that  which  he  intended  1 "  Calvin 
compares  him  to  Balaam. 


230  EXPO«LTOKY  THOUGHTS. 

Let  us  note  how  tlie  great  wicked  men  of  this  world — the 
Sennacheribs  and  Neros,  and  bloody  Marys,  and  Napoleons — 
are  used  by  God  as  His  saws  and  axes  and  liammers  to  do  His 
work  and  carry  out  the  Building  of  His  Church,  though  they 
are  not  themselves  in  the  least  aware  of  it.  Indeed  Caiaphaa 
helps  forward  the  one  great  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world  1 

]5. — [And  Simon  Peter  followed  Jesus.]  The  first  flight  and  run- 
ning away  of  the  disciples  is  passed  over  entirely  by  John.  He 
simply  mentions  that  Peter  followed  his  Master,  though  at  a 
distance,  lovingly  anxious  to  see  what  was  done  to  Him,  yet 
not  bold  enough  to  keep  near  Him  like  a  disciple.  Any  one 
can  see  that  the  unhappy  disciple  was  under  the  influence  of 
very  mixed  feelings.  Love  made  him  ashamed  to  run  awav 
and  hide  himself.  Cowardice  made  him  afraid  to  show  his  co» 
ors,  and  stick  by  his  Lord's  side.  Hence  he  chose  a  middk 
course,  the  worst,  as  it  happened,  that  he  could  have  followed 
After  being  self-confident  when  he  should  have  been  humble, 
and  sleeping  when  he  ought  to  have  been  praying,  he  could  not 
have  done  a  more  foolish  thing  than  to  flutter  round  the  fire, 
and  place  himself  within  reach  of  temptation.  It  teaches  the 
foolishness  of  man  when  his  grace  is  weak.  No  prayer  is  more 
useful  than  the  familiar  one  :  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  " 
Peter  forgot  it  here. 

[And  so  did  another  disciple.]  This  would  be  more  lit- 
erally rendered.  "  the  other  disciple."  The  opinion  of  many 
commentators  is,  that  this  disciple  was  John.  Precisely  the 
same  expression  is  used  in  four  successive  verses  (John  xx,  3,  3, 
4,  and  8),  where  John  is  clearly  referred  to.  This  is  the  view 
of  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Alford,  Wordsworth,  and  Burgon. 

Chrysostora  and  Cyril  observe  that  it  was  John's  humility 
that  made  him  conceal  his  name  both  here  and  elsewhere. 
Here  he  would  not  proclaim  that  he  stood  while  Peter  fell. 
Ferus  suggests  that  the  presence  of  a  disciple  is  mentioned  in 
order  to  show  that  John  saw  with  his  own  eyes  all  that  went 
on  at  our  Lord's  examination. 

[That  disciple.... knoicn... priest.]  How  and  in  what  mannei 
this  acquaintance  originated  we  are  not  told,  nor  is  there  anj 
clue  to  a  knowledge  of  it.  On  the  face  of  things  it  certainly 
seems  strange  that  a  humble  Galilean  fisherman,  like  John, 
should  be  personally  known  to  Caiaphas  !  On  the  other  hand 
we  must  not  forget  that  every  devout  Jew  went  up  to  Jerusa- 
lem at  the  three  great  feasts ;  and  on  these  occasions  might 
easily  have  become  acquainted  with  the  high  priest  ;  and  the 
more  likely  to  get  acquainted,  if  a  conscientious  and  godly 
man.  Moreover  we  must  remember  that  John  was  once  a  dis- 
ciple of  John  the  Baptist,  and  that  there  was  a  time  when  "  Je- 
rusalem and  all  Judca  "  attended  on  John's  ministry.  Ac- 
quaintance miglit  have  been  formed  then.  Some  have  thought 
that  John's  calling  as  a  fisherman  might  easily  bring  him  int« 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  ^31 

communication  witli  the  family  of  Caiaplias,  wlien  le  visited 
Jerusalem  on  business.  All  these,  it  must  be  confessed,  are 
only  conjectures ;  and  it  is  perhaps  the  safest  to  admit  our  ig- 
norance. Enough  for  us  to  read  that  the  high  priest  knew 
John  ;  but  why  and  how  we  cannot  tell. 

Hengstenberg  suggests  an  explanation,  which  is  so  singular 
that  1  think  it  best  to  give  it  in  his  own  words  :  "  The  charac- 
ter of  John  leads  to  the  obvious  supposition  that  his  acquaint- 
ance with  the  high  priest  rested  on  religious  grounds.  Search- 
ing for  goodly  pearls,  John  had  earlier  sought  from  the  liigh 
priest  what,  after  the  intervening  ministry  of  the  Baptist,  he 
found  in  Christ.  With  what  eyes  he  had  formerly  regarded 
the  position  of  high  priest,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  though  a 
disciple  of  Christ,  he  nevertheless  assigned  to  the  word  of  the 
high  priest  a  prophetic  significance.  (John  xi.  51.)  John,  by 
his  internally  devout  nature,  had  so  attracted  the  good  will  of 
the  high  priest,  that  he  did  not  wholly  cast  liim  off  even  after 
he  had  gone  over  to  the  true  High  Priest.  Nor  had  John  en- 
tirely abandoned  Caiaphas.  Real  love  cannot  be  so  easily  root- 
ed from  the  heart ;  and  it  is  characteristic  of  John  to  retain  a 
pious  regard  to  earlier  relations.  In  the  love  which  hopeth  all 
things,  he  might  hope  yet  to  win  the  hi  xh  priest  to  Christ." 
I  make  no  comment  on  this  extraordinary  suggestion.  I  can- 
not see  the  slightest  warrant  for  it ;  but  others,  perhaps,  who 
like  the  Athenians  love  new  things,  may  see  more  in  it  than  I 
can. 

After  all,  it  is  only  fair  to  remember  that.  Augustine,  Ge- 
rhard, Calovius,  Lightfoot,  Lampe,  and  many  others,  think  it 
quite  uncertain  who  this  disciple,  "  known  to  the  high  priest," 
was.  Grotius  and  Poole  think  it  may  have  been  the  master  oi 
the  house  where  Jesus  had  the  Lord's  Supper.  Toletus  thinks 
it  was  one  of  those  to  whom  the  garden  belonged.  Bengel 
thinks  it  was  Nicodemus.  One  German  commentator  suggests 
tliat  it  was  Judas  Iscariot.  Calvin  thinks  it  most  improbable 
that  a  proud  high  priest  would  have  known  so  mean  a  person 
as  a  fisherman.  Yet,  singularly  enough,  Gualter  and  others 
lean  strongly  to  the  theory  that  John's  business  as  a  fisherman 
Tuay  have  made  liim  acquainted  with  the  high  priest.  It  cer- 
tainly is  rather  remarkable  that  when  John  was  brought  be- 
fore Annas  and  Caiaphas  shortly  after,  they  do  not  appear  to 
have  known  much  of  him,  except  that  he  was  unlearned  and 
ignorant,  and  had  been  with  Jesus.  (Acts  iii.  13.)  The  ques- 
tion, "  who  it  was,"  is  one  which  will  probably  never  be  set- 
tled. 

[And  went  in  with  Jesus. ..palace. ..priest.]  This  sentence 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  John  went  together  with  our  Lord, 
either  by  His  side,  or  in  the  crowd  around  Him,  from  the  gar- 
den where  He  was  taken,  to  the  house  of  Annas  and  Caiaphas. 
VVf  can  hardly  doubt  that  at  first  he  fled,  when  we  read,  "All 
^ors.>ok   Him  and  fled    ''  but  we  must  suppose  that  he  soon 


232  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

turned  back,  and  mixed  with  the  multitude  escorting  our  Lord, 
which  he  might  easily  do  by  night,  and  amidst  the  confusion 
of  the  whole  event. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  some  think  the  houses  of  Caiaphas  and 
Annas  were  adjacent,  and  that  "  the  hall"  was  common  to  both 
of  them.  I  am  strongly  disposed  to  think  that  this  is  a  cor- 
rect view,  and  a  remembrance  of  it  may  help  us  over  several 
difficulties  in  the  narrative  of  the  four  evangelists  when  com- 
pared. 

16. — [But  Peter  stood...door  without!]  This  seems  to  indicate 
that  at  first  Peter  stood  outside  the  door  of  the  palace,  not  dar- 
ing to  go  in.  It  is  a  little  detail  in  the  story  of  his  fall  which 
the  three  other  Gospel-writers  omit  to  mention.  Again  we  see 
in  him  the  mixture  of  good  and  bad  feelings,  cowardice  and 
love  contending  for  the  mastery.  Happy  would  it  have  been 
for  him  if  he  had  stayed  outside  the  door ! 

Rollock  remarks  that  when  Peter  found  the  door  shut,  he 
ought  not  to  have  stood  there,  but  gone  away.  "  It  was  by 
God's  providence  the  door  was  shut.  He  got  a  warning  then  to 
leave  ofl',  but  would  not.  These  impediments,  cast  in  our  way 
when  we  purpose  to  do  a  thing,  should  not  be  idly  looked  at 
but  should  make  us  carefully  try  the  deed,  whether  it  be  law 
ful." 

[Then  went  out  that  otlier...hrought  in  Peter.]  Here  we  sei 
how  Peter  got  inside  the  palace.  It  was  through  the  mistaken, 
though  well-meant,  kindness  of  John.  He  must  have  seen 
through  the  door,  when  it  occasionally  opened,  the  well-known 
figure  of  his  brother  disciple,  and  with  the  best  intentions  got 
him  admission.  It  is  plain  that  John  must  have  been  well 
known  to  the  household  of  the  high  priest,  or  else  we  should 
not  be  told  that  he  had  only  to  speak  to  the  door-keeper,  to  get 
admission  for  Peter. 

Let  us  mark  what  mistakes  even  the  best  believers  make  in 
dealing  with  their  brethren.  John  thought  it  would  be  a  kind 
and  useful  thing  to  bring  Peter  into  the  high  priest's  house. 
He  was  perfectly  mistaken,  and  was  unintentionally  one  link 
in  the  chain  of  causes  which  led  to  his  fall.  People  may  harm 
each  other  with  the  best  intentions. 

Quesnel  remarks,  "  Men  sometimes  imagine  they  do  a  consid- 
erable piece  of  service  to  their  friends  who  are  clergymen,  by 
introducing  them  to  the  great ;  and  thereby  they  undesignedly 
expose  them  to  sin  and  eternal  damnation." 

17 — [Then  saith... damsel. ..door. ..Peter.]  Those  who  are  best  ac- 
quainted with  Jewish  customs  say  that  it  was  a  common  prac- 
tice to  employ  women  as  door-keepers.  Thus  a  damsel  named 
Rlioda  went  to  the  gate,  when  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of 
Mary's  house  in  Jerusalem,  after  hia  miraculous  escape  from 


JOHN,  CHAP.  xvni.  233 

pri»:)n.     (Acts  xii.  13.)     It  is  the  same  in  large  houses  in  Paria 
to  this  very  day. 

[Art  not  thou...l  am  not.]  This  was  the  first  trial  of  Peter's 
faith  and  courage.  A  woman  asks  him  a  simple  question. 
There  is  nothing  to  show  that  she  does  it  in  a  threatening  man- 
ner, as  if  she  desires  to  harm  him.  But  at  once  the  Apostle's 
courage  breaks  down.  He  answers  with  a  direct  lie  :  "  I  am 
not." — How  little  we  know  our  own  hearts !  Twelve  hours  be- 
fore Peter  would  have  told  us  this  lie  was  impossible.  "  Is 
Thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  " — Why  this 
door-keeper  shoiild  have  asked  the  question  we  know  not. 
Perhaps  Peter's  dress  and  appearance,  like  a  Galilean  fisher- 
man of  the  very  same  stamp  and  style  as  John,  made  her  guess 
that,  like  John,  he  was  a  disciple. — Perhaps  Peter's  manner 
and  demeanor  made  her  guess  it.  There  may  have  been  agita- 
tion, anxiety,  fear  in  the  apostle's  countenance. — Perhaps  the 
woman  may  have  seen  him  in  Jerusalem  in  company  with  Je- 
sus.— Perhaps  the  mere  fact  that  John  knew  him,  and  asked 
her  to  admit  him,  made  her  assume  that  he  was  a  friend  of 
John,  and  like  John  a  disciple  of  Christ. — Perhaps  the  Galile- 
ans were  marked  men,  not  often  seen  in  high  priests'  houses, 
and  known  to  be  specially  favorable  to  the  cause  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth. — Any  one  of  these  solutions,  or  all,  may  be  correct. 
In  any  case  the  woman  only  asked  a  simple  question,  and  per- 
haps from  no  other  motive  than  curiosity,  and  at  once  the 
great  apostle  falls  into  sin.  How  weak  we  are,  when  left  to 
reap  the  consequence  of  self-confidence,  and  laziness,  and  neg- 
lect of  prayer.  Even  an  apostle,  we  see,  could  tell  a  cowardly 
lie. 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  What  sayest  thou,  Peter  ?  Didst  not 
thou  declare  but  now,  '  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  Thee '  ? 
What  hath  happened  then  that  thou  canst  not  endure  the  ques- 
tioning of  a  door-keeper  ?  Is  it  a  soldier  who  questions  thee  ? 
Is  it  one  of  those  who  seized  Him  ?  No  ;  it  is  a  mean  and  ab- 
ject door-keeper.  Nor  is  the  questioning  of  a  rough  kind.  She 
eaith  not.  Art  thou  a  disciple  of  that  cheat  and  corrupter, — but 
of  that  man  ;  which  was  the  expression  rather  of  pitying  and 
relenting.  But  Peter  could  not  bear  any  of  these  words.  The 
expression  *  Art  not  thou  also,'  is  used  because  John  was  al- 
ready within." 

Augustine  remarks,  "  Behold  that  most  firm  pillar  of  the 
Church,  touched  but  by  one  breath  of  danger,  trembles  all  over. 
Where  is  now  that  boldness  of  promising, — that  confident 
vaunting  of  himself  ?  " 

Brentius  remarks  how  the  impulsive,  unstable  character  of 
the  apostle  Peter  comes  out  here.  One  hour  he  draws  his 
Bword  against  a  whole  multitude  of  armed  men.  Another  hour 
he  is  frightened  out  of  his  Christian  profession,  and  driven 
into  lying  by  one  woman. 


234  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

18. — [And.. .servants. ..officers. ..stood  there.]  Tliis  seems  to  indicate 
that  when  Peter  entered,  the  hall,  he  found  the  common  ser- 
vants, and  the  higher  attendants  of  the  high  priest,  standing 
round  a  fire.  It  is  the  pluperfect  tense,  "  they  had  stood,"  or 
"  had  been  standing  there  "  some  little  time. 

[  Who  had  made... fire. ..coals...cold...them8elves.]  It  is  remarked 
by  all  travellers  in  Palestine,  that  the  nights  in  that  country 
about  Easter  time,  are  often  so  extremely  cold  that  a  fire  is 
very  acceptable.  The  servants  and  officers  were  in  the  act  of 
warming  themselves  when  Peter  entered. 

It  is  worth  notice  that  the  Greek  word  rendered  "  a  fire  of 
coals  "  is  only  used  here  and  at  John  xxi.  9,  in  the  marvellous 
account  of  Jesus  appearing  to  the  disciples  at  the  sea  of  Gali- 
lee. Some  have  thought  that  tlie  "  fire  of  coals"  on  that  latter 
occasion  was  purposely  intended  by  our  Lord  to  remind  Peter 
of  his  fall. 

[And  Peter  stood  with  them. ..himself.'] — The  Greek  words  here 
would  be  more  literally  rendered  "and  there  was  among  them 
Peter,  standing  and  warming  himself."  The  tense  is  imperfect, 
and  conveys  the  idea  of  continuous  action  for  a  little  time.  The 
apostle  stood  among  the  crowd  of  his  Master's  enemies,  and 
warmed  himself  like  one  of  them,  as  if  he  had  nothing  to 
think  of  but  his  bodily  comfort ;  while  his  beloved  Master  stood 
in  a  distant  part  of  the  hall,  cold,  and  a  prisoner.  Who  can 
doubt  that  Peter,  in  his  miserable  cowardice,  wished  to  appear 
one  of  the  party  who  hated  his  Master,  and  thought  to  conceal 
his  real  cliaracter  by  doing  as  they  did  ?  And  who  can  doubt 
that  while  he  warmed  his  hands  he  felt  cold,  wretched,  and 
comfortless  in  his  own  soul  ?  "  The  backslider  in  heart  is  filled 
with  his  own  ways." 

How  many  do  as  others  do,  and  go  with  the  crowd,  while  they 
know  inwardly  they  are  wrong  ! 

Cyril  suggests  that  Peter  wished  to  conceal  his  disciplesliip 
by  warming  himself,  and  trying  to  look  comfortable  among  tho 
high  priest's  servants. 

19, — [The  high  jyricst... asked... disciples... doctrine.]  This  verse  de- 
scribes the  first  judicial  examination  that  our  Lord  underwent. 
He  was  questioned  concerning  "  His  disciples," — that  is,  who 
they  were,  how  many,  what  position  they  occupied,  and  what 
were  their  names.  And  concerning  "  His  doctrine," — that  is, 
what  were  the  principal  points  or  truths  of  His  creed,  what 
were  the  peculiar  things  He  called  on  man  to  believe.  The 
object  of  this  preliminary  inquiry  seems  manifest.  It  was 
meant  to  elicit  some  admission  from  our  Lord's  mouth,  on  which 
some  formal  charge  of  heresy  and  blasphemy  before  the  San 
hedrim  might  be  founded.  There  are  two  grave  difficulties 
growing  out  of  this  verse,  both  of  which  require  consideration. 

(a)  Who  was  the  "  High  Priest  "  in  this  verse  ?    Most  com- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  235 

jaentators  think  it  was  Caiaplias.  He  alone  is  called  by  John 
"  tlie  higli  priest,"  that  same  year  in  which  Jesus  was  crucified. 
Some  few  think  it  was  "Annas,"  because  Jolm  says  Jesus  was 
brought  to  him.  (Ver.  13.)  This  at  first  sight  seems  the  plain 
meaning  of  the  narrative,  and  is  confirmed  by  verse  24.  Yet 
this  theory  is  open  to  the  serious  objection,  tliat  it  makes  John 
call  Annas  the  high  priest,  and  that  it  makes  John  omit  alto- 
gether our  Lord's  examination  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhe- 
drim. Yot  notwithstanding  all  these  difficulties,  I  own  to  the 
opinion  that  this  is  the  true  view  of  the  history.  Augustine, 
Chrysostom,  Casaubon,  Ferus,  Besser,  Stier,  Alford,  and  Ellicott 
maintain  this  view,  but  most  of  the  commentators  do  not.  We 
must  remember  that  "Annas "  is  distinctly  called  "  the  High 
Priest "  in  Acts  iv.  6,  and  this  probably  before  the  year  of  the 
crucifixion  had  completely  run  out.  Even  in  David's  time  Zadok 
and  Ahimelech  are  called  "  the  priests  "  (2  Sam.  viii.  17),  as  if 
both  were  high  priests. 

(&)  What  was  the  examination  recorded  in  this  verse  ?  It 
seems  to  be  one  entirely  passed  over  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and 
Luke.  They  only  record  what  took  place  before  Caiaphas, 
which,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  part  of  the  history  passed  over 
by  John.  It  seems  a  kind  of  preliminary  inquiry,  intended  to 
prepare  the  case  for  the  Sanhedrim.  In  spite,  therefore  of  the 
common  opinion,  I  decidedly  hold  the  theory,  thai  the  examina- 
tion here  related  is  only  described  by  John.  It  seems  more- 
over to  have  been  an  examination  conducted  by  Annas  only, 
and  quite  of  a  separate  character  from  that  which  took  place 
at  "  day-break  "  before  tlie  whole  Sanhedrim.  This  at  any  rate 
seems  to  my  mind  by  far  the  most  reasonable  account  of  the 
passage,  and  the  difficalties  in  the  way  of  any  other  interpre- 
tation appear  to  me  insuperable. 

Ellicott  remarks,  "  It  only  requires  the  simple  and  reasonable 
supposition  that  Annas  and  Caiaphas  occupied  one  common 
official  residence,  to  unite  their  testimony,  and  to  remove  many 
of  the  difficulties  with  which  this  portion  of  the  sacred  nar- 
rative is  specially  marked.  Be  this  as  it  may,  we  can  scarcely 
doubt,  from  the  clear  statement  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  that  a 
preliminary  examination  of  an  inquisitorial  nature,  in  which 
our  Lord  was  questioned,  perhaps  conversationally,  about  His 
followers  and  His  teaching,  and  which  the  brutal  conduct  of 
one  attendant  present  seems  to  show  was  private  and  informal, 
took  place  in  the  palace  of  Annas.  There,  too,  it  would  seem, 
we  must  place  the  three  denials  of  St.  Peter." 

20. — [Jesus  answered  1dm,  e^c]  This  verse  contains  a  calm,  digni- 
fied statement  from  our  Lord,  of  the  general  course  of  His 
ministry.  He  had  done  nothing  in  a  clandestine  or  underhand 
way.  He  had  always  spoken  openly  "  to  the  world,"  and  not 
confined  His  teaching  to  any  one  class.  He  had  always  taught 
publicly  in  synagogues,  and  in  the  temple  where  the  Jews  re- 


0.36  EXPOSITOE"i:  THOUGHTS. 

sorted.     He  had  said  nothing  privately  and  secretly,  as  if  He 
had  any  cause  to  be  ashamed  of  it. 

The  verse  is  mainly  remarkable  for  the  strong  light  it  throws 
on  our  Lord's  habit  of  teaching  throughout  the  three  years  of 
His  ministry.  It  shows  that  He  was  eminently  a  public  teacher, 
— kept  back  no  part  of  His  message  from  any  class  of  the  popu- 
lation,— and  proclaimed  it  with  equal  boldness  in  every  place. 
There  was  nothing  whatever  of  reserve  about  His  Gospel.  This 
is  His  own  account,  and  we  therefore  know  that  it  is  correct. 
"  I  have  spoken  in  the  most  public  manner,  and  taught  in  the 
most  public  places,  and  done  nothing  in  a  corner." 

Calvin  remarks,  "  When  Jesus  says  that  He  spoke  nothing  in 
secret,  this  refers  to  the  substance  of  His  doctrine,  which-  was 
always  the  same,  though  the  form  of  teaching  it  was  various." 

We  should  observe  that  our  Lord  did  not  refuse  to  use  the 
synagogue  and  the  temple  on  account  of  the  corruption  of  the 
Jewish  Church  !  Four  times  we  read  in  St.  John  of  our  Lord 
being  at  Jerusalem  at  the  feasts  (John  ii.  13,  v.  l,vii.  14,  x.  22), 
and  each  time  speaking  in  the  temple. 

21. — [Why  askest  thou  Me,  etc.]  This  verse  is  a  remonstrance 
against  the  gross  injustice  of  Annas's  line  of  examination. 
Our  Lord  appeals  to  him  whether  it  is  reasonable,  and  just, 
and  fair  to  call  upon  a  prisoner  to  criminate  himself,  and  to 
supply  evidence  which  may  be  used  against  himself.  "  Why 
dost  thou,  the  judge,  ask  information  of  Me,  the  prisoner, 
about  my  disciples  and  my  doctrine  ?  Ask  rather  of  those  who 
have  heard  Me  teach  and  preach,  what  I  have  said  to  them. 
These  know  well,  and  can  tell  you  what  things  Ihave  said." 

Cyril  thinks  there  may  be  a  reference  here  to  those  servants 
of  the  priest,  who  were  sent  on  a  former  occasion  to  take  Jesus, 
and  returned,  saying,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."  (John 
vii.  46.) 

The  boldness  and  dignity  of  our  Lord's  reply  to  Annas  in  this 
verse  are  very  noteworthy.  They  are  an  example  to  all  Chris- 
tians of  the  courageous  and  unflinching  tone  which  an  innocent 
defendant  may  j  ustly  adopt  before  the  bar  of  an  unrighteous 
judge.    "  The  righteous  is  bold  as  a  lion." 

The  wide  difference  between  the  language  of  our  Lord  here, 
and  that  which  He  uses  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim,  as 
recorded  in  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  is  very  remarkable.  It 
affords  strong  additional  evidence  that  we  are  reading  an  ac- 
count of  an  examination  of  a  more  private  kind  before  Annas, 
quite  distinct  from  that  which  took  place  before  Caiaphas.  The 
careful  reader  of  the  other  three  Gospels  cannot  fail  to  observe 
that  not  a  word  of  all  this  is  recorded  in  them. 

Bengel  and  Stier  tliink  that  the  expression,  "  these,"  points  to 
the  people  there  in  the  court,  hearing  and  standing  by. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIH.  237 

23. — [And  when  Re  had  thus  spohen,  etc.']  This  verse  mentions  an 
event  which  John  alone  has  recorded.  One  of  the  attendants 
standing  by  rudely  interrupts  our  Lord  by  striking  Him,  and 
coarsely  taxing  Him  with  impertinence  and  disrespect  in  so 
speaking,  as  He  had  spoken  to  the  high  priest. 

The  Greek  words  literally  rendered,  mean  "  gave  a  blow  on 
the  face  ;"  but  whether  with  the  palm  of  the  hand,  or  with  a 
stick,  cannot  be  determined.  The  marginal  reading  renders  it 
quite  uncertain.  Some  see  in  the  action  a  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy,  "  They  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod 
upon  the  cheek."     (Micah  v.  1.) 

Stier  remarks  that  this  was  the  first  blow  which  the  holy 
body  of  Jesus  received  from  the  hands  of  sinners. 

We  may  learn  from  this  circumstance  what  a  low,  degraded, 
and  disorderly  condition  the  Jewish  courts  of  Ecclesiastical  law 
must  have  been  in  at  this  period,  when  such  a  thing  as  publicly 
striking  a  prisoner  could  take  place,  and  when  violence  could 
be  shown  to  a  prisoner  in  a  full  court  of  justice  for  answering 
boldly  for  himself.  It  supplies  strong  evidence  of  the  miser- 
ably fallen  state  of  the  whole  Jewish  nation,  when  such  an  act 
could  be  done  under  the  very  eyes  of  a  judge.  Nothing  is  a  surer 
index  of  the  real  condition  of  a  nation  than  the  conduct  of  its 
courts  of  justice,  and  its  just  or  unjust  treatment  of  prisoners. 
The  sceptre  had  clearly  fallen  from  Judah,  and  rottenness  was 
at  the  core  of  the  nation,  when  the  thing  mentioned  in  this 
verse  could  happen.  Our  Lord's  assailant  evidently  held  that 
a  prisoner  must  never  reply  to  his  judge,  however  unjust  or 
corrupt  the  judge  might  be. 

Theophylact  suggests  that  the  man  who  struck  our  Lord  waa 
one  who  had  heard  our  Lord  preach,  and  was  now  anxious  to 
free  himself  from  the  suspicion  of  being  one  of  His  friends. 

There  is  a  striking  resemblance  between  the  treatment  our 
Lord  received  here,  and  the  treatment  which  Latimer,  Ridley, 
Rogers,  and  other  English  martyrs,  received  at  their  examina- 
tion before  the  Popish  bishops. 

Hutcheson  remarks,  "Corrupt  masters  have  generally  corrupt 
{servants." 

23. — [Jesus  answered  Mm,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  reply  to  him  who 
smote  is  a  calm  and  dignified  reproof.  "  If  I  have  spoken 
wickedly,  bear  witness  in  a  just  and  orderly  way  becoming  a 
court  of  law;  but  do  not  strike  Me.  If  on  the  contrary  I  have 
spoken  well,  what  reasonable  cause  canst  thou  allege  for  strik- 
ing Me  either  here  or  out  of  court  ?  " 

Let  us  note  that  our  Lord's  conduct  at  this  point  teaches  that 
His  maxim,  "  If  any  one  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to 
him  the  other  also"  (Matt.  v.  39),  is  a  maxim  which  must  be 
taken  with  reserve,  and  is  not  of  unlimited  application.     There 


238  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

may  be  times  wlien,  in  defence  of  truth  and  for  tlie  honor  of 
justice,  a  Christian  must  firmly  protest  against  violence,  and 
publicly  refuse  to  countenance  it  by  tame  submission. 

Augustine  observes,  "  Our  Lord  here  showed  that  His^reat 
precepts  of  patience  are  to  be  put  in  practice,  not  by  outward 
show  of  the  body,  but  by  preparedness  of  heart.  Visibly  to 
present  the  other  cheek  is  no  more  than  an  angry  man  can  do. 
How  much  better  then  that  with  mild  answer  he  speak  the 
truth,  and  with  tranquil  mind  endure  worse  outrages." 

24. — [JS'ow  Annas  had  sent  Rim.. .CaiapJias... priest]  This  verse 
undoubtedly  contains  a  difficulty.  Most  commentators  seem  to 
think  that  it  states  a  fact  which  ought  to  come  in  after  the 
thirteenth  verse ;  and  that  the  questioning  and  smiting  of  the 
last  four  verses  took  place  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim, 
and  not  before  Annas.  Some  think  that  up  to  this  point  John 
only  describes  what  took  place  before  Annas ;  and  that  he  en- 
tirely passes  over  all  that  took  place  before  Caiaphas,  as  bein^ 
well  known  to  his  readers.  The  question  is  undoubtedly  rath- 
er a  puzzling  one,  and  there  is  much  to  be  said  on  both  sides. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  seems  curious  that  the  examination  of 
our  Lord  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim  should  be  so  com- 
pletely omitted  by  John  in  his  Gospel,  as  it  must  be,  if  we  take 
the  high  priest  of  the  nineteenth  verse  to  be  Annas. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  see  why  John  should  so  care- 
fully mention  our  Lord  being  "  led  to  Annas  first,"  if  after  all 
Annas  did  not  examine  Him  at  all,  and  sent  Him  at  once  to 
Caiaphas. 

If  I  must  give  an  opinion,  I  must  say  that  I  agree  with  Stier, 
Ellicott,  and  Alford,  and  consider  that  this  twenty-fourth  verse 
describes  our  Lord's  first  appearance  before  Caiaphas, — that  for 
some  wise  reason  John  entirely  omits,  and  silently  passes  over, 
our  Lord's  examination  before  the  Sanhedrim, — and  that  the  ex- 
amination of  the  nineteenth  and  four  following  verses  was  a 
kind  of  private,  preliminary  examination  before  Annas,  which 
•Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  entirely  omit.  My  grounds  for  this 
conclusion  are  as  follows  : — 

(a)  The  whole  tone  of  John's  narrative  would  make  any  or- 
dinary readerosuppose  that  Annas,  and  not  Caiaphas,  was  the 
examiner  and  high  priest  of  the  nineteenth  verse.  The  story 
reads  straight  on  upon  this  theory  ;  while  upon  the  other  it  io 
most  awkward  and  seemingly  contradictory,  and  the  twenty- 
fourth  verse  seems  to  come  in  at  the  wrong  place. 

(&)  The  tone  of  the  high  priest's  examination  in  John,  is  en- 
tirely dilferent  from  that  of  the  other  three  Gospels,  and  so  also 
are  our  Lord's  answers. 

(c)     There  is  nothing  uncommon  in  John  omitting  something 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  239 

which  is  fully  recorded  in  tlie  other  three  Gospels.  The  insti- 
tution of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  an  example.  His  Gospel  was  em- 
inently supplementary.  Writing  later  than  the  others,  he  was 
specially  inspired  to  dwell  at  great  length  on  the  examination 
of  Jesus  before  Pilate  the  Gentile  ruler,  and  to  say  comparative- 
ly little  about  the  proceedings  in  the  Jewish  courts. 

(d)  Last,  but  not  least,  the  Greek  of  the  twenty-fourth  verse 
cannot  fairly  and  honestly  bear  the  same  sense  which  our 
translators  have  put  upon  it.  They  have  really  strained  the 
words  to  make  the  sense  square  with  tlieir  evident  interpreta- 
tion. The  word  "  sent "  is  not  a  pluperfect  at  all  in  the  Greek  1 
The  verse  literally  translated  is,  '*  Annas  sent  Him  bound  to 
Caiaphas  the  high  priest."  It  is  rather  "  did  then  send  Him," 
than  "now  had  sent  Him."  The  natural  sense  that  any  ordi- 
nary reader  would  put  on  it  is,  that  "  Annas  having  asked  our 
Lord  about  His  disciples  and  His  doctrine,  and  having  found 
by  His  reply  that  he  could  make  nothing  of  Him,  did  then  send 
Him  bound  to  Caiaphas."  As  to  what  then  took  place  before 
Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim  John  tells  us  nothing,  and  leaves 
us  to  learn  it  from  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke. 

Such  are  my  reasons  for  the  view  which  I  adopt.  If  the 
reader  does  not  think  them  valid,  he  must  regard  the  twenty- 
fourth  verse  as  one  of  Jolm's  parenthetical  explanations  or 
comments,  and  carry  the  true  place  of  the  fact  mentioned  back- 
wards to  verse  thirteenth  ;  and  must  suppose  that  the  examina- 
tion of  our  Lord  in  the  nineteenth  and  four  following  verses  is 
the  examination  before  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim,  and  only 
another  part  of  what  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  describe ! 
— Not  least,  he  must  suppose  that  "  did  send  "  in  the  twenty- 
fourth  verse,  means  "  had  sent  "  some  time  before  ! 

Chrysostom  says,  "  Annas  questioned  Jesus  about  His  doc- 
trine ;  and  having  heard  Him,  sent  Him  to  Caiaphas  ;  and  he 
having  in  his  turn  questioned  Him,  and  discovered  nothing, 
sent  Him  to  Pilate." 

25. — [And  Simon  Peter. ..warmed  himself.]  This  would  be  more 
literally  rendered,  "  was  standing  and  warming  himself."  The 
expression  seems  to  indicate,  that  all  the  time  during  which 
Annas  was  questioning  and  examining  our  Lord,  Peter  was 
standing  by  the  fire  in  another  part  of  the  hall,  and  warming 
himself  comfortably  among  the  enemies  of  our  liOrd,  like  one 
of  them.  May  not  the  light  of  the  fire,  as  it  burned  up,  have 
made  Peter's  face  and  appearance  more  easily  recognizable  ? 

[They  said. ..art  not  thou... disciple  ?]  Here  comes  Peter's  sec- 
ond trial.  After  a  time,  when  the  fire  had  burned  up,  and  men 
could  see  better  and  felt  more  warm,  they  looked  at  Peter  stand- 
ing among  them,  and  recognizing  either  by  his  dress  and  talk 
that  he  was  a  Galilean,  or  suspecting  by  his  anxious  manner 
that  he  was  a  friend  of  our  Lord,  they  asked  him  plainly,  "  Art 


240  jfiXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

tliou  not  one  of  this  prisoner's  disciples  ?  "     We  see  wliat  trials 
people  bring  on  themselves  by  going  where  they  ought  not. 

{He  denied  it. ..lam  not.]  A  second  time  we  find  the  unhappy 
Apostle  telling  a  lie,  and  this  time  it  is  added  emphatically, 
"he  denied  it."  The  further  a  backslider  goes,  the  worse  he 
becomes.  The  first  time  he  seems  to  have  said  quietly,  "  I  am 
not."  The  second  time  he  flatly  "denies."  Even  an  apostle 
can  fall  into  being  a  liar ! 

Bloomfield  suggests  that  Peter  heard  our  Lord's  examination, 
and  was  terrified  at  hearing  inquiry  made  about  His  disciples. 
This,  he  supposes,  hastened  his  fall. 

26. — [Ofie  of  the  servants,  etc.,  etc.]  Here  comes  Peter's  last  trial. 
Attention  seems  to  have  been  roused  by  his  strong  denial,  and 
eyes  were  fixed  on  him.  And  the  one  who  had  seen  him  in  the 
garden,  and  marked  him  as  a  forward  man  among  the  disciples 
by  his  using  the  sword,  presses  home  the  painful  question, 
"  Did  not  I  see  thee  ?  " 

27. — [Peter  then  denied  again.]  This  denial  we  know  from  the 
other  Gospels,  was  more  loud  and  emphatic  than  any,  and  was 
made  with  cursing  and  swearing  !  The  further  a  man  falls,  the 
heavier  his  fall. 

Calvin  remarks  on  the  course  of  a  backslider,  "  At  first  the 
fault  will  not  be  very  great ;  next,  it  becomes  habitual ;  and  at 
last,  after  the  conscience  has  been  laid  asleep,  he  who  Ijas  ac- 
customed himself  to  despise  God  will  think  nothing  unlawful, 
but  will  dare  to  commit  the  greatest  wickedness." 

Henry  remarks,  "  The  sin  of  lying  is  a  fruitful  sin,  and  there- 
fore exceeding  sinful.  One  sin  needs  another  to  support  it,  and 
tliat  needs  another." 

[And  immediately  the  cock  crew.]  There  was  nothing  uncom- 
mon in  this,  of  course.  Every  one  knows  that  cocks  crow  at 
night.  But  the  bird's  familiar  crow  no  doubt  sounded  in 
Peter's  ear  like  a  clap  of  thunder,  because  it  awoke  him  to  a 
sense  of  his  sin  and  his  fall. 

It  will  be  noted  that  for  wise  reasons  John  says  nothing 
about  Peter's  weeping,  or  about  our  Lord  turning  and  looking 
at  him,  or  about  Peter  going  out.  He  seems  to  have  left  the 
hall  when  the  cock  crew,  without  any  attempt  being  made  to 
detain  him.  This  too  may  have  been  the  overruling  work  of 
his  gracious  Master. 

As  long  as  the  world  stands,  Peter's  fall  will  be  an  instructive 
example  of  what  even  a  great  saint  may  come  to  if  he  neglects 
to  work  and  pray, — of  the  mercy  of  Christ  in  restoring  such  a 
backslider, — and  of  the  honesty  of  the  Gospel  writers  in  re- 
cording such  a  history. 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  Peter's  fall  is  one  of  those  few 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVm. 


241 


facts  whicli  all  four  Gospel  writers  carefully  record  for  our 
learninsr. 


JOHN  XVIII.  28—40. 


28  Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caia- 
phus  unto  the  hall  of  judgment : 
and  it  was  early;  and  they  them- 
selves went  not  into  the  judgment 
hall,  lest  they  should  be  defiled ; 
but  that  they  might  eat  the  pass- 
over. 

29  Pilate  then  went  out  unto 
them,  and  said.  What  accusation 
bring  ye  againat  this  man  ? 

30  They  answered  and  said  unto 
him,  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor, 
we  would  not  have  delivered  him 
up  unto  thee. 

31  Then  said  Pilate  unto  them, 
Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  accord- 
ing to  your  law.  The  Jews  there- 
fore said  unto  him,  It  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death  : 

32  That  the  saying  of  Jesus  might 
be  fulfilled,  which  he  spake,  signify- 
ing what  death  he  should  die. 

33  Then  Pilate  entered  into  the 
judgment  hall  again,  and  called 
Jesus,  and  said  unto  him,  Art  thou 
the  King  of  the  Jews  ? 

34  Jesus  answered  him,  Sayest 
thou  this  thing  of  thyself,  or  did 
others  tell  it  thee  of  me  ? 

35  Pilate  answered,  Am  I  a  Jew  ? 


Thine  own  nation  and  the  chief 
priests  have  delivered  thee  unto 
me ;  what  hast  thou  done  ? 

36  Jesus  answered^  My  kingdom 
is  not  of  this  world :  if  my  kingdom 
were  of  this  world,  then  would  my 
servants  fight,  that  I  should  not  be 
delivered  to  the  Jews :  but  now  is 
my  kingdom  not  from  hence. 

37  Pilate  therefore  saith  unto  him, 
Art  thou  a  king  then  ?  Jesus  an- 
swered, Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a 
king.  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and 
for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world, 
that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the 
truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the 
truth  heareth  my  voice. 

38  Pilate  saith  unto  him.  What  is 
truth?  And  when  he  had  said 
this,  he  went  out  again  unto  the 
Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I  find  in 
him  no  fault  at  all. 

39  But  ye  have  a  custom,  that 
I  should  release  unto  you  one  at 
the  passover :  will  ye  therefore  that 
I  release  unto  you  the  King  of  the 
Jews? 

40  Then  cried  they  all  ag£un, 
saying.  Not  this  man,  but  Barab- 
bas.    Now  Barabbas  was  a  robber. 


The  verses  v^e  have  now  read  contain  four  striking 
points,  which  are  only  found  in  St.  John's  narrative  of 
Christ's  passion.  We  need  not  doubt  that  there  were 
good  reasons  why  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  were  not 
inspired  to  record  them.  But  they  are  points  of  such 
deep'  interest,  that  we  should  feel  thankful  that  they 
have  been  brought  forward  by  St.  John. 

The  first  point  that  we  should  notice  is  the  false  con- 
scientiousness of  our  LordPs  wicked  enemies.  We  are 
told  that  the  Jews  who  brought  Christ  before  Pilate 
would  not  go  into  "  the  judgment  hall,  lest  they  should 
be  defiled ;  but  that  they  might  eat  the  passover." 
II 


242  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

That  was  scrupulosity  indeed  !  These  hardened  men 
•were  actually  engaged  in  doing  the  wickedest  act  that 
mortal  man  ever  did.  They  wanted  to  kill  their  own 
Messiah.  And  yet  at  this  very  time  they  talked  of  be- 
ing "  defiled,"  and  were  very  particular  about  the  pass- 
over  ! 

The  conscience  of  unconverted  men  is  a  very  curious 
part  of  their  moral  nature.  While  in  some  cases  it  be- 
comes hardened,  seared,  and  dead,  until  it  feels  nothing; 
in  others  it  becomes  morbidly  scrupulous  about  the 
lesser  matters  of  religion.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to 
find  people  excessively  particular  about  the  observance 
of  trifling  forms  and  outward  ceremonies,  while  they 
are  the  slaves  of  degrading  sins  and  detestable  immoral- 
ities. Robbers  and  murderers  in  some  countries  are 
extremely  strict  about  confession,  and  absolution,  and 
prayers  to  saints.  Fastings  and  self-imposed  austerities 
in  Lent,  are  often  followed  by  excess  of  world liness 
when  Lent  is  over.  There  is  but  a  step  from  Lent  to 
Carnival.  The  attendants  at  daily  services  in  the  morn- 
ing are  not  unfrequently  the  patrons  of  balls  and  thea- 
tres at  night.  All  these  are  symptoms  of  spiritual 
disease,  and  a  heart  secretly  dissatisfied.  Men  who 
know  they  are  wrong  in  one  direction,  often  struggle  to 
make  things  right  by  excess  of  zeal  in  another  direction. 
That  very  zeal  is  their  condemnation. 

Let  us  pray  that  our  consciences  may  always  be  en- 
lightened by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  we  may  be  kept 
from  a  one-sided  and  deformed  Christianity.  A  reli- 
gion that  makes  a  man  neglect  the  weightier  matters  of 
daily  holiness  and  separation  from  the  world,  and  con- 
centrate his  whole  attention  on  forms,  sacraments,  cere- 
monies, and  public  services,  is  to  say  the  least,  very 
suspicious.  It  may  be  accompanied  by  immense  zeal 
and  show  of  earnestness,  but  it  is  not  sound  in  the  sight 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  243 

of  God.  The  Pharisees  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise,  and 
cummin,  and  compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  prose- 
lytes, while  they  neglected  "judgment,  mercy,  and 
faith."  (Matt,  xxiii.  23.)  The  very  Jews  who  thirsted 
for  Christ's  blood  were  the  Jews  who  feared  the  defile- 
ment of  a  Roman  judgment  hall,  and  made  much  ado 
about  keeping  the  passover!  Let  their  conduct  be  a 
beacon  to  Christians,  as  long  as  the  world  stands.  That 
religion  is  worth  little  which  does  not  make  us  say,  "  I 
esteem  all  Thy  commandments  concerning  all  things  to 
be  right,  and  I  hate  every  false  way."  (Ps.  cxix.  128.) 
That  Christianity  is  worthless  which  makes  us  com- 
pound for  the  neglect  of  heart  religion  and  practical 
holiness,  by  an  extravagant  zeal  for  man-made  ceremo- 
nies or  outward  forms. 

The  second  point  that  we  should  notice  in  these 
verses,  is  the  acGount  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gives 
of  His  kingdom.  He  says,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this 
world."  These  famous  words  have  been  so  often  per- 
verted and  Avrested  out  of  their  real  sense,  that  their 
true  meaning  has  been  almost  buried  under  a  heap  of 
false  interpretations.  Let  us  make  sure  that  we  know 
what  they  mean. 

Our  Lord's  main  object  in  saying  "  My  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world,"  was  to  inform  Pilate's  mind  concern- 
ing the  true  nature  of  His  kingdom,  and  to  correct  any 
false  impression  he  might  have  received  from  the  Jews. 
He  tells  him  that  He  did  not  come  to  set  up  a  kingdom 
which  would  interfere  with  the  Roman  Government. 
He  did  not  aim  at  establishing  a  temporal  power,  to  be 
supported  by  armies  and  maintained  by  taxes.  The 
only  dominion  He  exercised  was  over  men's  hearts,  and 
the  only  weapons  that  His  subjects  employed  were  spir- 
itual weapons.  A  kingdom  which  required  neither 
money  nor  servants  for  its  support,  was  one  of  which 


244  EXPOSITOKT  THOUGHTS. 

the  Roman  Emperors  need  not  be  afraid.  In  the  high- 
est sense  it  was  a  kingdom  "  not  of  this  world." 

But  our  Lord  did  not  intend  to  teach  that  the  kings 
of  this  world  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  and 
ought  to  ignore  God  altogether  in  the  government  of 
their  subjects.  No  such  idea,  we  may  be  sure,  was  in 
His  mind.  He  knew  perfectly  well  that  it  was  written, 
"  By  Me  kings  reign"  (Prov.  viii.  15),  and  that  kings 
are  as  much  required  to  use  their  influence  for  God,  aa 
the  meanest  of  their  subjects.  He  knew  that  the  pros- 
perity of  kingdoms  is  wholly  dependent  on  the  blessing 
of  God,  and  that  kings  are  as  much  bound  to  encourage 
righteousness  and  godliness,  as  to  punish  unrighteous- 
ness and  immorality.  To  suppose  that  He  meant  to 
teach  Pilate  that,  in  His  judgment,  an  infidel  might  be 
as  good  a  king  as  a  Christian,  and  a  man  like  Gallio  as 
good  a  ruler  as  David  or  Solomon,  is  simply  absurd. 

Let  us  carefully  hold  fast  the  true  meaning  of  our 
Lord's  words  in  these  latter  days.  Let  us  never  be 
ashamed  to  maintain  that  no  Government  can  expect  to 
prosper  which  refuses  to  recognize  religion,  which  deals 
with  its  subjects  as  if  they  had  no  souls,  and  cares  not 
whether  they  serve  God,  or  Baal,  or  no  God  at  all. 
Such  a  Government  will  find,  sooner  or  later,  that  its 
line  of  policy  is  suicidal,  and  damaging  to  its  best  inter- 
ests. No  doubt  the  kings  of  this  world  cannot  make 
men  Christians  by  laws  and  statutes.  But  they  can  en- 
courage and  support  Christianity,  and  they  will  do  so  if 
they  are  wise.  The  kingdom  where  there  is  the  most 
industry,  temperance,  truthfulness,  and  honesty,  will  al- 
ways be  the  most  prosperous  of  kingdoms.  The  king 
who  wants  to  see  these  things  abound  among  his  sub- 
jects, should  do  all  that  lies  in  his  power  to  help  Chris- 
tianity and  to  discourage  irreligion. 

The  third  point  that  we  should  notice  in  these  verses 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  24:5 

is  the  account  that  our  Lord  gives  of  His  own  mission. 
He  says,  '*  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause 
came  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto 
the  truth." 

Of  course  we  are  not  to  suppose  our  Lord  meant  that 
this  was  the  only  end  of  His  mission.  No  doubt  He 
spoke  with  special  reference  to  what  He  knew  was  pass- 
ing through  Pilate's  mind.  He  did  not  come  to  win  a 
kingdom  with  the  sword,  and  to  gather  adherents  and 
followers  by  force.  He  came  armed  with  no  other 
weapon  but  "  truth."  To  testify  to  fallen  man  the  truth 
about  God,  about  sin,  about  the  need  of  a  Redeemer, 
about  the  nature  of  holiness, — to  declare  and  lift  up 
before  man's  eyes  this  long  lost  and  buried  "  truth," — 
was  one  great  purpose  of  His  ministry.  He  came  to  be 
God's  witness  to  a  lost  and  corrupt  world.  That  the 
world  needed  such  a  testimony,  He  does  not  shrink  from 
telling  the  proud  Roman  Governor.  And  this  is  what 
St.  Paul  had  in  view,  when  he  tells  Timothy,  that  "  be- 
fore Pontius  Pilate  Christ  witnessed  a  good  confession." 
(1  Tim.  vi.  13.) 

The  servants  of  Christ  in  every  age  must  remember 
that  our  Lord's  conduct  in  this  place  is  meant  to  be  their 
example.  Like  Him  we  are  to  be  witnesses  to  God's 
truth,  salt  in  the  midst  of  corruption,  light  in  the  midst 
of  darkness,  men  and  women  not  afraid  to  stand  alone, 
and  to  testify  for  God  against  the  ways  of  sin  and  the 
world.  To  do  so  may  entail  on  us  much  trouble,  and 
even  persecution.  But  the  duty  is  clear  and  plain.  If 
we  love  life,  if  we  would  keep  a  good  conscience,  and 
be  owned  by  Christ  at  the  last  day,  we  must  be  "wit- 
nesses." It  is  written,  "  Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of 
Me  and  of  my  words  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  gene- 
ration, of  him  also  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed, 


246  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

when  He  cometh  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  with  the 
holy  angels."     (Mark  viii.  38.) 

The  last  point  that  we  should  notice  in  these  verses 
is  the  question  that  Pontius  Pilate  addressed  to  our 
Lord.  We  are  told  that  when  our  Lord  spoke  of  the 
truth,  the  Roman  Governor  replied,  "  What  is  truth  ?  " 
We  are  not  told  with  what  motive  this  question  was 
asked,  nor  does  it  appear  on  the  face  of  the  narrative 
that  he  who  asked  it  waited  for  an  answer.  It  seems  l^r 
more  likely  that  the  saying  was  the  sarcastic,  sneering 
exclamation  of  one  who  did  not  believe  that  there  was 
any  such  thing  as  "  truth."  It  sounds  like  the  language 
of  one  who  had  heard,  from  his  earliest  youth,  so  many 
barren  speculations  about  "  truth  "  among  Roman  and 
Greek  philosophers,  that  he  doubted  its  very  existence. 
"  Truth  indeed !     What  is  truth  ?  " 

Melancholy  as  it  may  appear,  there  are  multitudes  in 
every  Christian  land  whose  state  of  mind  is  just  like  that 
of  Pilate.  Hundreds,  it  may  be  feared  among  the  upper 
classes,  are  continually  excusing  their  own  irreligion  by 
the  specious  plea  that,  like  the  Roman  Governor,  they 
cannot  find  out  "  what  is  truth."  They  point  to  the 
endless  controversies  of  Romanists  and  Protestants,  of 
High  Churchmen  and  Low  Churchmen,  of  Churchmen 
and  Dissenters,  and  pretend  to  say  that  they  do  not  un- 
derstand who  is  right  and  who  is  wrong.  Sheltered 
under  this  favorite  excuse,  they  pass  through  life  with- 
out any  decided  religion,  and  in  this  wretched,  comfort- 
less state,  too  often  die. 

But  is  it  really  true  that  truth  cannot  be  discovered  ? 
Nothing  of  the  kind  !  God  never  left  any  honest, 
diligent  inquirer  without  light  and  guidance.  Pride  is 
one  reason  why  many  cannot  discover  truth.  They  do 
not  humbly  go  down  on  their  knees  and  earnestly  ask 
God  to  teach  then. — Laziness  is  another  reason.   They  do 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  247 

not  honestly  take  pains,  and  search  the  Scriptures.  The 
followers  of  unhappy  Pilate,  as  a  rule,  do  not  deal  fairly 
and  honestly  with  their  consciences.  Their  favorite 
question, — What  is  truth  ? — is  nothing  better  than  a 
pretence  and  an  excuse.  The  words  of  Solomon  will  be 
found  true  as  long  as  the  world  stands  :  "  If  thou  criest 
after  knowledge,  and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understand- 
ing ;  if  thou  seekest  her  as, silver,  and  searchest  for  her 
as  for  hid  treasures  ;  then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."  (Prov. 
ii.  4,  5.)  No  man  ever  followed  that  advice  and  missed 
the  way  to  heaven. 

Notes.    John  xviii.  28 — 40. 

28. — l^Then  led  they  Jesus  from  Caiaplias.']  A  careful  reader  of 
tlie  Gospels  will  not  fail  to  observe  here,  that  John  entirely 
passes  over  the  examination  of  Caiaphas  and  the  Sanhedrim  of 
the  Jews,  which  is  so  f  ally  described  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and 
Luke.  Specially  he  omits  our  Lord's  confession,  when  adjured, 
that  He  was  the  Christ.  He  takes  it  all  for  granted,  as  a  thing 
well  known,  and  passes  on  to  dwell  on  his  far  more  important 
examination  before  Pilate,  the  Roman  Governor.  In  this  he 
brings  out  many  striking  particulars,  which,  for  wise  reasons, 
Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke  did  not  record.  Writing,  as  John 
did,  long  after  the  other  three,  and  writing  more  especially  for 
Gentile  readers,  we  can  well  understand  that  he  would  give  far 
more  prominence  to  the  proceedings  before  the  Gentile  Gover- 
nor, than  to  those  before  the  Jewish  Ecclesiastical  Court.  Yet 
it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  a  remarkable  curtness  and 
brevity  in  his  statement  of  facts  at  this  point.  The  Greek  is 
literally  they  "  lead," — in  the  present  tense. 

[  Unto  the  hall  of  judgment.']  This  is  a  Latin  word,  and  ad- 
mits of  two  views.  The  marginal  reading,  according  to  Schleus- 
ner  and  Parkhurst,  is  the  correct  translation.  It  is  the  "  Gover- 
nor's palace,"  rather  than  the  hall  of  judgment.  According  to 
Josephus,  the  praetors,  or  governors  of  Judaea,  who  ordinarily 
lived  at  Caesarea,  when  they  were  at  Jerusalem,  used  Herod's 
palace,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  city,  as  their  residence.  Some 
say  it  was  the  famous  tower  of  Antonia. 

[And  it  was  early.]  The  precise  time  here  meant  we  cannot 
exactly  tell.  It  cannot  have  been  so  early  as  day-break,  because 
we  are  especially  told  by  Luke  that  the  elders  and  chief  priests 
and  the  Sanhedrim  assembled  to  examine  our  Lord  "  as  soon  as 


^48  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

it  was  day."  (Lake  xxii.  66.)  Considering  that  the  day  begins 
at  the  equinox  about  six,  we  may  assume  that  '  early  "  cannot 
mean  sooner  than  seven  or  eight  o'clock. 

[And  they  went  not...judgment  hall... defiled.']  The  meaning  of 
this  sentence  is,  that  the  Jews  would  not  go  within  the  walls  of 
Pilate's  palace,  lest  by  so  doing  they  should  contract  ceremonial 
Tincleanness.  Pilate  was  a  Gentile.  Peter  says  in  the  Acts, 
"  It  is  unlawful  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew  to  keep  company  or 
come  unto  one  of  another  nation."  (Acts  x  28.)  If  the  Jews 
had  gone  inside  Pilate's  house,  they  would  have  been  made 
ceremonially  unclean,  and  would  have  considered  themselves 
defiled. 

The  sentence  is  an  extraordinary  example  of  the  false  scru- 
pulosity of  conscience  which  a  wicked  man  may  keep  up,  about 
forms  and  ceremonies  and  trifling  externals  in  religion,  at  the 
very  time  when  he  is  deliberately  committing  some  gross  and 
enormous  sin.  The  notorious  fact  that  Italian  bandits  and  mur- 
derers will  make  much  of  fasting,  keeping  Lent,  confession, 
absolution,  Virgin  Mary  worship,  saint  worship,  and  image 
worship,  at  the  very  time  when  they  are  arranging  robberies 
and  assassinations,  is  an  accurate  illustration  of  the  same  prin- 
ciple. The  extent  to  which  formality  and  wickedness  can  go 
side  by  side  is  frightful,  and  little  known.  The  Jews  were 
afraid  of  being  defiled  by  going  into  a  Gentile's  house,  at  the 
very  moment  when  they  were  doing  the  devil's  work,  and  mur- 
dering the  Prince  of  life  ! — Just  so,  many  people  in  England 
will  attach  immense  importance  to  fasting  and  keeping  Lent 
and  attending  saints'-day  services,  while  they  see  no  harm  in 
going  to  races,  operas,  and  balls,  at  other  times  !  Persons  who 
have  very  low  notions  about  the  Seventh  Commandment,  will 
actually  tell  you  that  it  is  wrong  to  be  married  in  Lent !  The 
very  same  persons  who  totally  disregard  Sunday  abroad,  will 
make  much  ado  about  saints'-day  at  home !  Absurd  strict- 
ness about  Lent,  and  excess  of  riot  and  licentiousness  in  carni- 
val, will  often  go  together. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  Though  they  had  taken  up  a  deed 
which  was  unlawful,  and  were  shedding  blood,  they  are  scru- 
pulous about  the  place,  and  bring  forth  Pilate  unto  them." 

Augustine  remarks,  "  O  impious  blindness  1  They  would  be 
defiled,  forsooth,  by  a  dwelling  which  was  another's,  and  not 
be  defiled  by  a  crime  which  was  their  own.  They  feared  to  be 
defiled  by  the  praetorium  of  an  alien  judge,  and  feared  not  to 
be  defiled  by  the  blood  of  an  innocent  brother." 

Bishop  Hall  remarks,  "  Woe  unto  you  priests,  scribes,  elders, 
hypocrites !  can  there  be  any  roof  so  unclean  as  that  of  your 
own  breasts  ?  Not  Pilate's  walls,  but  your  own  hearts,  are  im- 
pure. Is  murder  your  errand,  and  do  you  stick  at  a  local  infec- 
tion ?  God  shall  smite  you,  ye  whited  walls  !  Do  you  long  to 
be  stained  with  blood — with  the  blood  of  God  ?    And  do  ye 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  249 

fear  to  be  defiled  witli  the  toucli  of  Pilate's  pavement  ?  Doth 
so  small  a  gnat  stick  in  your  throats,  while  ye  swallow  such  a 
camel  of  flagitious  wickedness  ?  Go  out  of  Jerusalem,  ye  false 
disbelievers,  if  ye  would  not  be  unclean  !  Pilate  hath  more 
cause  to  fear,  lest  his  walls  should  be  defiled  with  the  presence 
of  such  prodigious  monsters  of  iniquity." 

Poole  remarks,  "  Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  persons 
over  zealous  about  rituals  to  be  remiss  about  morals." 

\^That...eat...passox)eri\  This  sentence  contains  an  undeniable 
difficulty.  How  could  the  Jews  eat  the  passover  now,  when 
our  Lord  and  His  disciples  had  eaten  it  the  evening  before  ? 
That  our  Lord  would  eat  the  passover  at  the  right  time  we 
may  assume  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  that  time  was  Thurs- 
day evening.  WTiat  then  can  be  meant  by  the  chief  priests, 
and  elders,  and  leaders  of  the  Jews,  eating  the  passover  on 
Friday?  This  is  a  question  which  has  received  various  an- 
swers. 

{a)  Some  think  that  in  our  Lord's  time  the  whole  Jewish 
Church  had  fallen  into  such  disorder,  and  had  so  fallen  away 
from  original  purity,  that  the  passover  was  not  kept  strictly 
according  to  the  primary  institution,  and  might  be  eaten  on  al- 
most any  day  within  the  passover  feast. 

(&)  Some  think  that  it  was  considered  allowable  to  eat  the 
passover  at  any  time  between  sunset  one  day  and  sunset  the 
next  day,  so  long  as  it  was  eaten  within  the  twenty- four  hours. 

(c)  Some  think  that  the  passover  eating  here  mentioned  was 
not  the  eating  of  the  passover  lamb,  but  the  eating  of  the  pass- 
over  feast,  called  "  chagigah,"  which  took  place  every  day  dur- 
ing the  passover  week. — This  is  Lightfoot's  view. 

{d)  Some  think  that  as  there  is  no  law  without  an  exception, 
and  even  the  law  of  the  passover  admitted  of  alteration  in  case 
of  necessity  (see  Num.  ix.  11),  so  the  chief  priests  persuaded 
themselves  that  as  they  had  been  occupied  by  duty — the  duty 
(forsooth  !)  of  apprehending  our  blessed  Lord — throughout  the 
night  when  they  ought  to  have  kept  the  passover,  they  were 
justified  in  deferring  it  till  the  ne^t  day. 

All  these,  it  must  be  confessed,  are  only  conjectures.  There 
is  probably  some  explanation  which,  at  this  distance  of  time, 
we  are  unable  to  supply.  For  the  present  the  third  and  fourth 
suggestions  seem  to  me  the  most  reasonable. 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  Either  John  calls  the  whole  feast  the 
passover,  or  means  that  they  were  then  keeping  the  passover  ; 
while  Jesus  delivered  it  to  His  followers  one  day  sooner,  reserv- 
ing His  own  sacrifice  for  His  preparation  day,  when  also  of  old 
His  passion  was  celebrated."' 

One  thing  at  any  rate  is  very  plain  and  noteworthy.  The 
chief  priests  and  their  party  made  much  ado  about  eating  the 


250  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

passover  lamb  and  keeping  tlie  feast,  at  the  very  time  when 
they  were  about  to  slay  the  true  Lamb  of  God,  of  whom  thia 
passover  was  a  type  1  No  wonder  that  Samuel  says,  "  To  obey 
is  better  than  sacrifice."     (1  Sam.  xv.  22.) 

Bullinger  calls  attention  here  to  the  wide  difference  between 
inward  sanctification  of  the  heart,  and  outward  sanctimonious- 
ness about  forms,  ordinances,  and  ceremonies. 

Calvin  remarks,  that  it  is  one  mark  of  hypocrisy,  "  that  while 
it  is  careful  in  performing  ceremonies,  it  makes  no  scruple  of 
neglecting  matters  of  the  highest  importance." 

29. — [Pilate  then  went  out. ..said,  etc.]  This  "  going  out  "  means 
that  Pilate  hearing  that  the  chief  priests  had  brought  a  pris- 
oner to  the  courtyard,  or  open  space  before  his  palace,  and 
knowing  from  experience,  as  a  governor  of  Judaea,  that  they 
would  not  come  into  his  palace  for  fear  of  defilement,  but 
waited  for  him  to  come  out  to  them,  went  out  and  spoke  to 
them.  His  first  question  is  one  which  became  his  office  as  a 
magistrate  and  judge.  He  inquires  what  is  the  charge  or  accu- 
sation brought  against  the  prisoner  before  him.  "  Of  what 
crime  do  you  accuse  this  man  ?  " 

The  well-known  Valerian  law  among  the  Romans  made  it 
unlawful  to  judge  or  condemn  any  one  without  hearing  the 
charge  against  him  stated. 

30. — [They  answered  and  said,  etc.]  The  reply  of  the  chief  priests 
to  Pilate's  inquiry,  as  given  by  John,  is  peculiar  and  elliptical. 
They  began  by  saying  that  the  prisoner  was  a  convicted  evil- 
doer according  to  their  law,  or  else  they  would  not  have 
brought  Him  there.  They  had  found  Him,  by  examination  be- 
fore the  Sanhedrim,  to  be  a  breaker  of  the  law,  and  they  only 
came  there  to  have  sentence  pronounced  on  Him  by  Pilate.  "  If 
He  were  not  a  person  guilty  and  worthy  of  death,  we  would  not 
have  delivered  Him  up  to  thee.  We  have  discovered  Him  to 
be  such  a  person,  and  we  now  ask  thee  to  sentence  Him  to 
death.  We  have  convicted  Him,  and  we  ask  thee,  as  our  chief 
ruler,  to  slay  Him."  There  is  a  proud,  haughty,  supercilious 
tone,  we  may  remark,  about  this  answer,  which  was  not  likely 
to  please  a  Roman  Governor. 

It  is  plain,  by  a  comparison  with  St.  Luke's  Gospel,  that  at 
this  point  the  Jews  added  a  statement  which  St.  John  has  omit- 
ted. "  If  thou  wouldst  know  the  precise  nature  of  this  prison- 
er's evil-doing,  we  tell  thee  that  we  found  Him  perverting  the 
nation,  and  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  Caesar,  and  saying  that 
He  is  a  King."  (Luke  xxiii.  2.)  Why  St.  John  omitted  this 
we  cannot  tell,  but  he  evidently  takes  it  for  granted  that  his 
readers  knew  this  accusation  was  made,  by  telling  us  in  verse 
thirty-three,  that  Pilate  asked  Him  if  He  was  "  the  King  of  the 
Jews." 

Tholuck  remarks,  that  "  if  the  authorities  had  not  regarded 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  251 

the  prisoner  as  worthy  of  death,  they  would  not  have  brought 
him  to  the  procurator,  as  none  but  criminal  cases  needed  con- 
firmation by  him." 

81. — [Then  said  Pilate.. ..take... judge. ..lawl]  This  sentence  indi- 
cates a  desire  on  Pilate's  part  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
case.  From  the  very  first  he  evidently  wished  to  put  it  away 
from  him,  and,  if  he  could,  to  avoid  condemning  our  Lord. 
How  this  feeling  originated,  we  cannot  tell.  Matthew  and 
Mark  say  that  he  knew  Jesus  was  delivered  to  him  from  "  en- 
vy." Matthew  says  that  his  wife  warned  him  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  that  "just  person."  (Matt  xxvii.  18 ;  xxvii.  19; 
Mark  xv.  10.)  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  fame  and  character 
of  Jesus  had  reached  Pilate's  ears  long  before  He  was  brought 
before  him.  It  is  hard  to  suppose  that  such  miracles  as  our 
Lord  wrought,  would  never  be  talked  of  within  the  palace  of 
the  chief  ruler  of  Judaea.  The  raising  of  Lazarus  must  surely 
have  been  reported  among  his  servants.  Our  Lord's  triumphal 
entry  into  Jerusalem,  attended  by  myriads  of  people  shouting, 
"  Blessed  is  the  King,"  must  surely  have  been  noted  by  the 
soldiers  and  officers  of  Pilate's  guard.  Can  we  wonder  that  all 
this  made  him  regard  our  Lord  with  something  like  awe  ? 
Wicked  men  are  often  very  superstitious.  His  language  now 
before  us  is  that  of  one  who  would  gladly  evade  the  whole 
case,  and  leave  the  responsibility  entirely  with  the  Jews.  "  If 
He  is,  as  you  say,  a  malefactor,  take  Him  into  your  own  hands, 
and  condemn  Him  to  death  according  to  your  own  law.  Do 
as  you  like  with  Him  ;  but  do  not  trouble  me  with  the  case." 
The  word  we  render  "judge,"  is  literally  much  stronger  in 
sense.  It  is  rather  condemn  to  death.  The  only  punishment 
the  Jews  might  inflict,  if  any  (which  is  more  than  doubtful), 
was  death  by  stoning. 

The  pitiable  and  miserable  character  of  Pilate,  the  Roman 
Governor,  begins  to  come  into  clear  light  from  this  point.  We 
see  him  a  man  utterly  destitute  of  moral  courage, — knowing 
what  was  right  and  just  in  the  case  before  him,  yet  afraid  to 
act  on  his  knowledge, — knowing  that  our  Lord  was  innocent, 
yet  not  daring  to  displease  the  Jews  by  acquitting  Him, — 
knowing  that  he  was  doing  wrong,  and  yet  afraid  to  do  right. 
"  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare."  (Prov.  xxix.  25.) 
Wretched  and  contemptible  are  those  rulers  and  statesmen 
whose  first  principle  is  to  please  the  people,  even  at  the  ex- 
pense of  their  own  consciences,  and  who  are  ready  to  do  what 
they  know  to  be  wrong  rather  than  ofiend  the  mob  !  Wretch- 
ed are  those  nations  which  for  their  sins  are  given  over  to  be 
governed  by  such  statesmen  !  True  godly  rulers  should  lead 
the  people,  and  not  be  led  by  them,  should  do  what  is  right 
and  leave  consequences  to  God.  A  base  determination  to  keep 
in  with  the  world  at  any  price,  and  a  slavish  fear  of  man's 
opinion,  were  leading  principles  in  Pilate's  character.  There 
are  many  like  him.     Nothing  is  more   common   than  to  see 


252  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

statesmen  evading  the  plain  line  of  duty,  and  trying  to  shuffle 
responsibility  on  others,  rather  than  give  offence  to  the  mob. 
This  is  precisely  what  Pilate  did  here.  The  spirit  of  his  reply 
to  the  Jews  is,  **  I  had  rather  not  be  troubled  with  the  case  : 
cannot  you  settle  it  yourselves,  without  asking  me  to  interfere  V 

Ellicott  remarks,  "  It  seems  clear  that  from  the  first  the  sharp- 
sighted  Roman  perceived  that  this  was  no  case  for  his  tribunal, 
that  it  was  wholly  a  matter  of  religious  difference  and  religious 
hate,  and  that  the  meek  prisoner  who  stood  before  him  was  at 
least  innocent  of  the  political  crime  laid  to  his  charge  with  such 
an  unwonted  and  suspicious  zeal."  He  also  quotes  the  just  and 
pertinent  remark  of  a  German  writer,  "  Pilate  knew  too  much 
of  Jewish  expectations  to  suppose  that  the  Sanhedrim  would 
hate  and  persecute  one  who  would  free  them  from  Roman  au- 
thority." 

Calvin  thinks  that  Pilate  said  this  ironically,  as  he  would  not 
have  allowed  them  to  inflict  capital  punishment.  Gerhard  also 
regards  the  saying  as  sarcastic  and  sneering.  "  If  this  prisoner 
has  done  anything  against  your  Jewish  superstitions,  settle  it 
yourselves."  Yet  a  comparison  with  Luke  makes  this  rather 
improbable  in  my  opinion.  The  Jews  there  tell  him  plainly 
that  Christ  made  Himself  a  King.  (Luke  xxiii.  1.)  This,  even 
a  Roman  must  allow,  was  a  serious  charge. 

Henry  suggests  that  perhaps  Pilate  thought  they  did  not 
really  want  to  kill  Jesus,  but  only  to  chastise  Him. 

[The  Jews.. .not  lawful  for  us...death.'\  This  answer  of  the 
Jews  completely  defeated  the  wretched  Pilate's  attempt  to  put 
away  the  case  before  him,  and  avoid  the  necessity  of  judging 
our  Lord.  They  reminded  the  Roman  Governor  that  the  power 
of  taking  away  life  was  no  longer  in  their  hands,  and  that  it 
was  impossible  for  them  to  do  as  he  suggested,  and  settle  our 
Lord's  case  in  their  own  way. 

Let  us  mark  here  what  a  striking  confession  the  Jews  here 
-  made,  whether  they  were  aware  of  it  or  not.  They  actually 
admitted  that  they  were  no  longer  rulers  and  governors  of  their 
own  nation,  and  that  they  were  under  the  dominion  of  a  for- 
eign power.  They  were  no  longer  independent,  but  subjects  of 
Rome.  He  that  has  power  of  condemning  to  death,  and  taking 
away  the  life  of  a  prisoner,  he  is  the  governor  of  a  country. 
"  It  is  not  lawful  for  us,"  said  the  Jews,  "  to  take  away  life. 
You,  the  Roman  Governor,  alone  can  do  it,  and  therefore  we 
come  to  thee  about  this  Jesus."  By  their  own  mouth  and  their 
own  act  they  publicly  declared  that  Jacob's  prophecy  was  ful- 
filled, "  that  the  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judali,"  that  they 
had  no  longer  a  lawgiver  of  their  own  stock,  and  that  conse- 
quently the  time  of  Shiloh,  the  promised  Messiah,  must  have 
come.  (Gen.  xlix.  10.)  How  unconscious  wicked  men  are  that 
they  fulfil  prophecy  ! 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  253 

The  idea  of  Clirysostom  and  Augustine,  that  the  sentence  only 
means  that  the  Jews  could  not  put  any  one  to  death  during  the 
passover  feast,  looks  to  me  utterly  improbable. 

32. — [That  the  saying...fulfiUed,  etc.]  This  verse  is  one  of  John's 
peculiar  parenthetical  comments,  which  are  so  frequent  in  his 
Gospel.  Here,  as  in  many  other  instances,  the  meaning  is,  "  By 
this  the  saying  of  Jesus  was  fulfilled  ;  "  and  not  "  The  thing 
took  place,  in  order  that  the  saying  might  be  fulfilled."  What 
precise  saying  is  referred  to,  is  a  point  on  which  commentators 
have  not  quite  agreed. 

(a)  Some  think,  as  Theophylact,  Bullinger,  Musculus,  and 
Gerhard,  that  St.  John  refers  to  the  saying  recorded  in  this  very 
Gospel  (John  xii.  33) ;  and  that  the  expression,  "  what  death," 
only  refers  to  the  particular  manner  of  His  death  by  cruci 
fixion. 

(&)  Others  think,  as  Augustine,  Calvin,  and  Beza,  that  St. 
John  refers  to  the  fuller  saying  in  Matt.  xx.  19,  where  our  Lord 
foretells  His  own  delivery  to  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  His  cruci 
fixion. 

Of  the  two  views,  the  second  seems  to  me  the  preferable  one. 
The  previous  verse  distinctly  points  to  the  inability  of  the  Jews 
to  put  Jesus  to  death,  and  the  necessity  of  the  Gentiles  doing 
the  murderous  work.  And  John  remarks  that  this  was  just 
what  Jesus  had  predicted, — that  He  would  die  by  the  hand  of 
the  Gentiles.  I  think,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  crucifixion 
was  probably  included,  being  the  death  which  the  Gentiles  in  ■ 
flicted,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Jewish  custom  of  stoning. 

33. — [TTien  Pilate  entered  into  the  judgment  hall.']  The  meaning 
of  this  must  be  that  Pilate,  disappointed  in  his  attempt  to  put 
away  the  case  from  him,  retired  into  his  palace  again,  where  he 
knew  the  Jews  would  not  follow  him,  from  fear  of  contracting 
ceremonial  defilement,  and  resolved  to  have  a  private  interview 
with  our  Lord,  and  examine  Him  alone. — It  is  quite  clear  that 
the  conversation  which  follows,  from  this  point  down  to  the 
middle  of  the  thirty-eighth  verse,  took  place  within  the  Roman 
Governor's  walls,  and  most  probably  without  the  presence  of 
any  Jewish  witnesses.  If  that  was  so,  the  substance  of  it  could 
only  be  revealed  to  John  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Pilate's  soldiers  and  a  few  guards  of  the  prisoner  may  have 
been  present.  But  it  is  highly  improbable  that  John,  or  any 
friend  of  our  Lord's,  could  have  got  inside  the  Governor's 
palace.  If  the  beloved  Apostle  did  manage  to  get  in  and  hear 
the  conversation,  it  is  a  striking  example  of  his  attachment  to 
his  Master.     "  Love  is  strong  as  death."     (Cant.  viii.  6.) 

[And  called  Jesus^  This  expression  literally  means,  that  he 
called  Jesus  with  a  loud  voice  to  follow  him  inside  the  palace  ; 
and  came  out  of  the  outer  court,  or  area,  where  he  had  first  met 
the  party  which  had  brought  the  Prisoner  to  him.     It  is  as 


254:  EXFOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

though  he  said,  "  Come  in  hither.  Prisoner,  that  I  may  speak 
with  thee  privately !  " 

[And  said... art  Thou. .. King...  Jews  ?^  The  first  question  that 
Pilate  asked  of  our  Lord,  was  whether  he  really  admitted  that 
He  was  what  the  Jews  had  just  accused  Him  of  being.  "  Tell 
me,  is  it  true  that  Thou  art  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  Dost  thou 
really  profess  to  be  the  King  of  this  ancient  people,  over  whom 
I  and  my  soldiers  are  now  rulers  ?" — It  is  far  from  improbable 
that  Pilate,  living  so  long  in  Jerusalem,  may  have  often  heard 
of  the  old  Jewish  kings,  and  of  the  dominion  they  received.  It 
is  far  from  unlikely,  moreover,  that  he  thought  it  possible  he 
had  before  him  one  of  those  mock  Messiahs,  who,  like  Theudas, 
rose  up  at  this  period,  and  kept  the  minds  of  the  Jews  in  agi- 
tation. "  They  accuse  Thee  of  setting  up  Thyself  as  a  King? 
Art  Thou  really  a  King  ?  Dost  Thou  lay  claim  to  any  royal  au- 
thority '{ "  The  humble  attire  and  lowly  appearance  of  our 
Lord  can  hardly  fail  to  have  struck  Pilate.  "  Can  it  be  true, 
that  Thou,  a  poor  man,  with  no  signs  of  a  kingdom  about  Thee, 
art  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?  " 

In  order  to  estimate  aright  this  question  which  Pilate  put,  we 
must  remember  that  Suetonius,  the  Roman  historian,  distinctly 
says  that  a  rumor  was  very  prevalent  throughout  the  East  at 
this  period,  that  a  King  was  about  to  arise  among  the  Jews, 
who  would  obtain  dominion  over  the  world.  This  singular 
rumor,  originating  no  doubt  from  Jewish  prophecies,  had  of 
course  reached  Pilate's  ears,  and  goes  far  to  account  for  his 
question. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  each  of  the  four  Gospel  writers  dis- 
tinctly records  that  this  was  the  first  question  that  Pilate  put  to 
our  liord.  It  seems  to  show  that  the  chief  thing  impressed  on  the 
mind  of  Pilate  about  Jesus,  was  that  He  was  a  King.  As  a 
King  he  examined  Him,  as  a  King  he  sentenced  Him,  and  as  a 
King  he  crucified  Him.  And  one  main  object  that  he  seems  to 
have  had  in  view  in  questioning  our  Lord,  was  to  ascertain  what 
kind  of  a  kingdom  He  ruled  over,  and  whether  it  was  one  that 
would  interfere  with  the  Roman  authority.  On  the  whole,  the 
question  seems  a  mixture  of  curiosity  and  contempt, 

34. — {Jesus  answered  Jiim,  Say  est  thou,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  motive  in 
this  answer  to  Pilate  was  probably  to  awaken  Pilate's  conscience: 
"■  Dost  thou  say  this  of  thine  own  independent  self,  in  conse- 
quence of  any  complaints  thou  hast  heard  against  Me  as  a  se- 
ditious person  ?  Or  dost  thou  only  ask  it  because  the  Jews  have 
just  accused  Me  of  being  a  King?  Hast  thou,  during  all  the 
years  thou  hast  been  a  Governor,  ever  heard  of  Me  as  a  leader 
of  insurrection,  or  a  rebel  against  the  Romans  "l  If  thou  hast 
never  heard  anytliing  of  this  kind  against  Me,  and  hast  no  per- 
sonal knowledge  of  my  being  a  rebel,  oughtest  thou  not  to  pay 
very  little  attention  to  the  complaint  of  my  enemies  ?  Their 
bare  assertion  ought  not  to  weigh  with  thee." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  255 

Grotius  paraplirases  tlie  verse  tlius  :  "  Thou  hast  been  long  a 
ruler,  and  a  careful  defender  of  tlie  Roman  majesty.  Hast 
thou  ever  heard  anything  that  would  impeach  Me  of  a  desire  to 
usurp  authority  against  Rome  ?  If  thou  hast  never  known  any- 
thing of  thyself,  but  others  have  suggested  it,  beware  lest  thou 
be  deceived  by  an  ambiguous  word." 

There  is  undoubtedly  some  little  obscurity  around  the  verse, 
and  it  becomes  us  to  handle  it  reverently.  It  certainly  looks 
like  an  appeal  to  the  Roman  Governor's  conscience.  "  Before  I 
answer  thy  question  let  Me  ask  thee  one.  For  what  reason  and 
from  whal  motive  art  thou  making  this  inquiry  about  my  being 
a  King  ?  Canst  thou  say,  from  thy  own  personal  knowledge, 
that  thou  hast  ever  heard  Me  complained  of  as  setting  up  a  king- 
dom ?  Thou  knowest  thou  canst  not  say  that.  Art  thou  only 
asking  Me  because  thou  hast  heard  the  Jews  accuse  Me  of  being 
a  King  to-day?  If  this  is  so,  judge  for  thyself  whether  such 
a  King  as  I  appear  to  be  is  likely  to  interfere  with  thy  author- 
ity." 

Poole  says,  "  Our  Saviour  desired  to  be  satisfied  from  Pilate, 
whether  he  asked  Him  as  a  private  person  for  his  own  satisfac- 
tion, or  as  a  judge,  having  received  any  such  accusation  against 
Him.  If  he  asked  Him  as  a  judge,  he  was  bound  to  call  others 
to  prove  what  they  had  charged  Him  with." 

Burgon  remarks  that  Jesus  did  not  need  information  in  asking 
this  question.  He  asked,  as  the  Lord  asked  Adam,  "  Where  art 
thou  ? "  (Gen.  iii.  9)  in  order  to  arouse  Pilate  to  a  sense  of  the 
shameful  injustice  of  the  charge. 

35. — [Pilate  answered,  etc.]  The  answer  of  Pilate  exhibits  the 
haughty,  high-minded,  supercilious,  fierce  spirit  of  a  Roman 
man  of  the  world.  So  far  from  responding  to  our  Lord's  ap- 
peal to  his  conscience,  he  fires  up  at  the  very  idea  of  knowing 
anything  of  the  current  opinions  about  Christ. — "  Am  I  a  Jew  ? 
Thinkest  thou  that  a  noble  Roman  like  me  knows  anything 
about  the  superstitions  of  Thy  people.  I  only  know  that  Thine 
own  countrymen,  and  the  very  leaders  of  Thy  nation,  have 
brought  Thee  unto  me  as  a  prisoner  worthy  of  death.  What 
they  mean  I  do  not  pretend  to  understand.  But  I  suppose  there 
is  some  ground  for  their  accusation.  Tell  me  plainly  what 
Thou  hast  done." 

Pilate's  answer  seems  tantamount  to  an  acknowledgment 
that  he  knew  nothing  against  our  Lord.  But  as  He  had  been 
brought  before  him  as  a  prisoner,  and  he  was  pressed  to  con- 
demn Him,  he  asks  Him  what  He  has  done  to  bring  this  hatred 
of  the  Jews  upon  Him. 

He  that  would  know  the  depth  of  scorn  contained  in  that 
sentence,  "  Am  I  a  Jew  ?  "  should  mark  the  contemptuous  way 
in  which  Horace,  Juvenal,  Tacitus,  and  Pliny  speak  of  the 
Jews. 


256  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

Stier  remarks,  "  Tlie  Romans  were  only  concerned  with  what 
was  DONic;  not  with  dreams,  like  the  J(iwa  ;  nor  with  wis- 
dom, like  the  Greeks."  Pilate's  question  was  characteristic  of 
his  nation. 
30. — [JeHUH  anawfived..  kingdom... not... world.]  In  this  famous  sen- 
tence our  Lord  Ije^ins  His  answer  to  Pilate's  question,  "Art 
'J'hou  the  Kin^  of  the  .Jews  V"  "  Thou  askest  wlietlK^r  I  am  a 
Kin^.  1  reply  that  I  certainly  have  a  kingdom,  but  it  is  a 
kingdom  entirely  unlike  the  kingdoms  of  tliis  world,  it  is  a 
kingdom  which  is  n(;ither  begun,  nor  propagated,  nor  defended 
by  the  power  of  this  world,  by  the  world's  arms  or  the  world's 
money.  It  is  a  kingdom  wliich  took  its  origin  from  heaven, 
and  not  from  earth, — a  spiritual  kingdom, — a  kingdom  over 
hearts  and  wills  and  consciences, — a  kingdom  which  needs  no 
armies  or  revenues, — a  kingdom  which  in  no  way  interferes 
with  the  kingdoms  of  this  world." 

The  literal   rendering  of  the  Greek    would  be  "  out  of  this 

/world."  But  it  evidently  means  "  belonging  to,  dep(!ndent  on, 
springing  from,  connected  with."  It  is  the  same  prejjosition 
that  we  find  in  John  viii.  2;J :  "  Ye  are  from  beneath ;  1  am 
from  above :  ye  are  of  this  world  ;  I  am  not  of  this  world." 

That  the  above  was  our  Lord's  j)lain  meaning,  when  He 
spoke  the  words  before  us,  is  to  my  mind  as  evident  as  the  sun 
at  noonday.  The  favorite  theory  of  certain  Christians  that  this 
text  forbids  Governments  to  have  anything  to  do  with  religion, 
and  condemns  the  union  of  Church  and  State,  and  renders  all 
Kstablished  Churches  unlawful,  is,  in  my  judgment,  baseless, 
preposterous,  and  utterly  devoid  of  common  sense.  Whether 
the  union  of  Church  and  State  be  right  or  wrong,  it  appears  to 
me  alwurd  to  say  that  it  is  forbidden  by  this  text.  The  text 
declares  that  Christ's  kingdom  did  not  spring  from  the  powers 
of  this  world,  and  is  not  dependent  on  them  ;  but  the  text  does 
not  declare  tliat  the  powers  of  this  world  ought  to  have  noth- 
ing to  do  with  Christ's  kingdom.  Christ's  kingdom  can  get  on 
very  well  without  them;  but  they  cannot  get  on  very  well 
without  Christ's  kingdom. 

The  following  leading  principles  are  worth  remembering,  in 
looking  at  this  vexed  (question  : — 

(a)  Every  Government  is  responsible  to  God,  and  no  Govern- 
ment can  ex[)ect  to  prosper  without  God's  blessing.  Every 
Government  therefore  is  bound  to  do  all  that  lies  in  its  jjower 
to  obtain  God's  favor  and  blessing.  The  Government  that  does 
not  strive  to  i)romote  true  religion,  has  no  right  to  expect  God's 
blessing. 

(h)  Every  good  Government  should  endeavor  to  promote  truth 
.charity,  temperance,  honesty,  diligence,  industry,  chastity, 
among  its  subjects.  True  religion  is  the  only  root  from  which 
these  things  can  grow.  The  Government  that  does  not  labor 
to  promote  true  religion  cannot  be  called  either  wise  or  good. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  257 

(c)  To  tell  us  that  a  Government  must  leave  religion  alone, 
because  it  cannot  promote  it  without  favoring  one  church  more 
than  another,  is  simply  absurd.  It  is  equivalent  to  saying  that, 
as  we  cannot  do  good  to  everybody,  we  are  to  sit  still  and  do  no 
good  at  all. 

(d)  To  tell  us  that  no  Government  can  find  out  what  true  re- 
ligion is,  and  that  consequently  a  Government  should  regard 
all  religions  with  equal  indifference,  is  an  argument  only  fit  for 
an  infidel.  In  England  at  any  rate  a  belief  that  the  Bible  is 
true  is  a  part  of  the  Constitution ;  an  insult  to  the  Bible  is  a 
punishable  offence,  and  the  testimony  of  an  avowed  atheist 
goes  for  nothing  in  a  court  of  law. 

(e)  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  Christ's  kingdom  is  a  king- 
dom independent  of  the  rulers  of  this  world,  and  one  which 
they  can  neither  begin,  increase,  nor  overthrow.  But  it  is  ut- 
terly false  that  the  rulers  of  this  world  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Christ's  kingdom,  may  safely  leave  religion  entirely  alone,  and 
may  govern  their  subjects  as  if  they  were  beasts  and  had  no 
souls  at  all. 

Chrysostom  says  that  our  Lord's  reply  meant,  "  I  am  indeed 
a  King;  bat  not  such  a  King  as  thou  suspectest,  but  one  far 
more  glorious." 

[If  my  kingdom. ..servants  fight.. .Jews.']  Our  Lord  proceeds  to 
give  proof  that  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  and  there- 
fore not  likely  to  interfere  with  the  Roman  authority.  "  If  the 
kingdom  of  which  I  am  head,  were  like  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world,  and  supported  and  maintained  by  worldly  means,  then 
my  disciples  would  take  up  arms  and  fight,  to  prevent  my  be- 
ing delivered  to  the  Jews.  This,  as  thou  mayest  know  by  in- 
quiry, is  the  very  thing  which  I  forbade  last  night.  Thine 
own  soldiers  can  tell  thee  that  they  saw  Me  reprove  a  disciple 
for  fighting,  and  heard  Me  tell  him  to  put  up  his  sword." 

Let  as  mark  that  a  religion  propagated  by  the  sword,  of  by 
violence,  is  a  most  unsatisfactory  kind  of  Christianity.  The 
weapons  of  Christ's  warfare  are  not  carnal.  Even  true  Chris- 
tians who  have  appealed  to  the  sword  to  support  their  opinions, 
have  often  found  themselves  losers  by  it.  Taking  the  sword, 
they  have  perished  by  the  sword.  Zwingle  dying  in  battle, 
and  the  Scotch  Covenanters,  are  examples. 

Stier  thinks  that  by  "  my  servants  "  in  this  verse  our  Lord 
meant  the  angels  !     This,  however,  seems  very  improbable. 

Bullinger  makes  some  good  remarks  on  this  sentence,  in  re- 
ply to  the  Anabaptists  of  his  time.  He  says,  among  other 
things,  "  Just  as  it  does  not  follow  that  the  Church  is  worldly, 
because  we  who  are  flesh  and  blood,  and  are  the  world,  are 
m.embers  of  the  Church, — so  no  one,  unless  he  wants  common 
sense,  will  say  that  the  Church  is  worldly,  because  in  it  Kings 


258  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

and  Princes  serve  God,  by  defending  the  good  and  punisliing 
the  bad." 

Calvin  observes  that  this  sentence  "  does  not  hinder  Princes 
from  defending  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  partly  by  appointing 
external  discipline,  and  partly  by  lending  their  protection  to 
the  Church  against  wicked  men."     Beza  says  mnclx  the  same. 

Hutcheson  observes,  "  This  text  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if 
Christ  disallowed  that  they  to  whom  He  has  given  the  sword 
should  defend  His  kingdom  therewith  ;  for  if  magistrates  were 
as  magistrates  should  be,  nursing  parents  to  the  Church,  and 
ought  to  kiss  the  Son,  then  certainly  they  may  and  should  em- 
ploy their  power  as  magistrates  for  removing  idolatry,  and  set- 
ting up  the  true  worship  of  God,  and  defending  it  against  vio- 
lence." 

[But  now...my  kingdom  not.. .hence.']  The  true  meaning  of  this 
little  sentence  is  not  very  clear.  May  it  not  mean,  "  Now,  in 
this  dispensation,  my  kingdom  is  not  an  earthly  one,  and  is  not 
of  this  world.  A  day  will  come  by  and  by,  after  my  second  ad- 
vent, when  my  kingdom  will  be  a  visible  one  over  the  whole 
earth,  and  my  saints  shall  rule  over  the  renewed  world." — This 
may  seem  fanciful  to  some ;  but  I  have  a  strong  impression 
that  it  is  the  true  meaning.  The  adverb  "  now  "  is  very  decid- 
ed and  emphatical. 

87. — [Pilate  therefore. ..Art  TJiou  a  King  f]  Here  Pilate  returns 
to  his  question,  though  he  puts  it  in  a  different  way  :  "  Art 
Thou  in  some  sense  a  King,  if  not  such  a  King  as  the  Kings  of 
this  world  ?  Thou  speakest  of  Thy  kingdom  and  Thy  ser- 
vants. Am  I  to  understand  that  Thou  art  a  King  ? "  We 
should  observe  the  distinction  in  the  language  here,  compared 
with  that  of  verse  thirty-three.  There  it  was,  "  Art  Thou  the 
King  of  the  Jews  ?"    Here  it  is  simply,  "  Art  Thou  a  King  ?  " 

[Jesus  ansicered,  Thou  sayest...!  am  a  King.]  This  sentence 
is. a  direct  acknowledgment  from  our  Lord's  lips  that  He  is  a 
King;  a  King  only  over  hearts,  consciences,  and  wills,  but  still 
a  real  true  King.  "  Thou  sayest,"  is  equivalent  to  an  affirma- 
tion. "  Thou  sayest  truly  :  I  am  what  thou  askest  about.  I 
admit  that  I  am  a  King." 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  "  is  the  good  confession  be- 
fore Pontius  Pilate,"  which  St.  Paul  specially  impresses  on  the 
attention  of  the  timid  disciple  Timothy,  in  his  pastoral  epistle. 
(1  Tim.  vi.  13.) 

[To  this  end... horn... witness... truth.]  Here  our  Lord  informs 
Pilate  what  was  the  great  end  and  purpose  of  His  incarnation. 
"  It  is  true  that  I  am  a  King,  but  not  a  King  after  the  manner 
of  the  world.  I  am  only  a  King  over  hearts  and  minds.  The 
principal  work  for  which  I  came  into  the  world,  is  to  be  a  wit- 
ness of  the  truth  concerning  God,  concerning  man,  and  concern- 
ing the  way  of  salvation.     This  truth  has  been  long  hidden  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  259 

lost  sight  of.     I  came  to  bring  it  to  light  once  more,  and  to  be 
the  King  of  all  who  receive  it." 

I  think  the  "  truth  "  in  this  sentence  must  be  taken  in  the 
widest  and  fullest  sense.  The  true  doctrine  about  man,  and 
God,  and  salvation,  and  sin,  and  holiness,  was  almost  buried, 
lost,  and  gone,  when  Christ  came  into  the  world.  To  revive 
the  dying  light,  and  erect  a  new  standard  of  godliness  in  a  cor- 
rupt world,  which  neither  Egypt,  Assyria,  Greece  nor  Rome 
could  prevent  rotting  and  decaying,  was  one  grand  end  of 
Christ's  mission.  He  did  not  come  to  gather  armies,  build  cit- 
ies, amass  treasure,  and  found  a  dynasty,  as  Pilate  perhaps 
fancied.  He  came  to  be  God's  witness,  and  to  lift  up  God's 
truth  in  the  midst  of  a  dark  world.  He  that  would  know  how 
miserably  small  is  the  amount  of  truth  which  even  the  most 
civilized  nations  know  without  Christianity,  should  examine 
the  religion  and  morality  of  the  Chinese  and  Hindoos  in  the 
present  day. 

Some  think  that  "  I  was  born  "points  to  Christ's  humanity, 
and  "  came  into  the  world,"  to  His  divinity. 

{Every  one.. .of  truth. ..Tiearetli  my  voice.']  I  think  that  in  this 
sentence  our  Lord  tells  Pilate  who  are  His  subjects,  disciples, 
and  followers.  "  Wouldest  thou  know  who  are  the  members 
of  my  kingdom  ?  I  tell  thee  that  it  consists  of  all  who  really 
love  the  truth  and  desire  to  know  more  of  God's  truth.  All 
such  hear  my  voice,  are  pleased  with  my  principles,  and  sub- 
jects of  my  kingdom."  It  is  like  our  Lord's  words  to  Nicode- 
mus :  "  He  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light."    (John  ill.  21.) 

Thus  our  Lord  shows  Pilate  that  His  kingdom  was  not  an 
earthly  kingdom,  that  His  business  was  not  to  wear  a  crown 
and  found  an  earthly  monarchy,  but  to  proclaim  truth  ;  and 
that  His  followers  were  not  soldiers  and  warriors,  but  all 
earnest  seekers  after  truth.  Pilate  therefore  might  dismiss 
from  his  mind  all  idea  of  His  kingdom  interfering  with  the  au- 
thority of  Rome. 

Let  us  note  that  the  position  of  Christ  in  the  world  must  be 
the  position  of  all  Christians.  Like  our  Master  we  must  be 
witnesses  for  God  and  truth  against  sin  and  ignorance.  We 
must  not  be  afraid  to  stand  alone.     We  must  testify. 

The  expression  "  every  one  that  is  of  the  truth  "  is  remarka- 
ble. It  must  mean  every  one  that  really  and  honestly  desires 
to  know  the  truth,  receives  my  teaching,  and  follows  Me  as  a 
Master.  Does  it  not  show  that  our  Lord,  when  He  appeared, 
gathered  around  Him  all  who  were  true-hearted  lovers  of  God's 
revealed  will,  and  were  seeking,  however  feebly,  to  know  more 
of  it  ?  (Compare  John  iii.  20  ;  and  viii.  47.)  that  there  were 
many  such,  like  Nathanael,  among  the  Jews,  anxiously  look- 
ing for  a  Redeemer,  we  cannot  doubt.  "  These,"  says  our  Lord, 
"are  my  subjects  and  make  up  my  kingdom."     Just  as  when 


260  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

He  speaks  of  Himself  as  a  sTieplierd,  He  says,  "  My  sheep  hear 
my  voice ; "  so  wlien  He  speaks  of  Himself  as  God's  great  wit- 
ness to  trutL,  He  says,  "  All  friends  of  truth  hear  my  voice." 

The  wise  condescension  with  which  our  Lord  adapts  His  lan- 
guage to  Pilate's  habits  of  thought  as  a  Roman,  is  very  note- 
worthy. If  He  had  used  Jewish  figures  of  speech,  drawn  from 
Old  Testament  language,  Pilate  might  well  have  failed  to  un- 
derstand Him.  But  every  Roman  in  high  position  must  have 
heard  the  arguments  of  philosophers  about  "  the  truth."  There- 
fore our  Lord  says,  "  I  am  a  witness  to  truth."  In  speaking  to 
unconverted  people,  it  is  wise  to  use  terms  which  they  can 
understand. 

Theophylact  suggests  that  here  is  an  appeal  to  Pilate's  con- 
science :  "  If  you  are  a  real  seeker  after  truth  you  will  listen  to 
Me." 

38. — [Pilate  saith...  Wliat  is  truth  f]  This  famous  question,  in  my 
judgment,  can  only  admit  of  one  interpretation.  It  is  the  cold, 
sneering,  sceptical  interjection  of  a  mere  man  of  the  world,  who 
has  persuaded  himself  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  truth,  that 
all  religions  are  equally  false,  that  this  life  is  all  we  have  to 
care  for,  and  that  creeds  and  modes  of  faith  are  only  words  and 
names  and  superstitious,  which  no  sensible  person  need  attend 
to.  It  is  precisely  the  state  of  mind  in  which  thousands  of 
great  and  rich  men  in  every  age  live  and  die.  Expanded  and 
paraphrased,  Pilate's  question  comes  to  this  : — "  Truth  indeed  1 
What  is  truth  ?  I  have  heard  all  my  life  of  various  philosophi- 
cal systems,  each  asserting  that  it  has  found  the  truth,  and 
each  differing  widely  from  the  others.  Who  is  to  decide  what 
is  truth  and  what  is  not  ?  " — The  best  proof  that  this  is  the 
right  view  of  the  sentence  is  Pilate's  behavior  when  he  has 
asked  the  question.  He  does  not,  as  Lord  Bacon  remarked  two 
centuries  ago,  wait  for  an  answer,  but  breaks  off"  the  conversa- 
tion and  goes  away. — The  supposition  that  he  asked  a  question, 
as  an  honest  inquirer,  with  a  real  desire  to  get  an  answer,  is  too 
improbable  and  unreasonable  to  require  any  comment.  The 
right  way  to  understand  Pilate's  meaning  is  to  put  ourselves  in 
his  place,  and  to  consider  how  many  sects  and  schools  of  philos- 
ophers there  were  in  the  world  at  the  time  when  our  Lord  ap- 
peared,— some  Roman,  some  Grecian,  and  some  Egyptian, — all  al- 
leging  that  they  had  got  the  truth,  and  all  equally  unsatisfactory. 
In  short  Gallio,  who  thought  Christianity  a  mere  "  question  of 
words  and  names," — Festus,  who  thought  the  dislike  of  the 
Jews  to  Paul  arose  from  "  questions  of  their  own  superstition," 
— and  Pontius  Pilate,  •  were  all  much  alike.  The  worldly- 
minded  Roman  noble  speaks  like  a  man  sick  and  weary  of  phi- 
losophical speculations  ; — "  What  is  truth  indeed  ?  Who  can 
tell  ?  " — Nevertheless  truth  was  very  near  him.  If  he  had 
waited  he  might  have  learned  ! 

Lightfoot  alone  thinks  that  Pilate  only  meant,  "  What  is  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  261 

true  state  of  affairs  ?    How  can  one  so  poor  as  Thou  art  be  a 
King  ?     How  canst  Thou  be  a  King  and  yet  not  of  this  world ! " 

[And  when. ..said  this. ..went  out...Jews.']  The  meaning  of  this 
sentence  is  that  Pilate  "  went  out "  of  the  palace  where  he  had 
been  conversing  with  our  Lord  apart  from  the  Jews,  and  re- 
turned to  the  courtyard,  or  open  space  at  the  gate,  where  he 
had  left  the  Jews  at  the  thirty-third  verse.  He  broke  off  the 
conversation  at  this  point.  Very  likely  the  mention  of  "  truth  " 
touched  his  conscience,  and  he  found  it  convenient  to  go  out 
hurriedly,  and  cover  his  retreat  with  a  sneer.  A  bad  conscience 
generally  dislikes  a  close  conversation  with  a  good  man. 

Augustine  says,  "  I  suppose  that  when  Pilate  said,  '  What  is 
truth  ? '  the  Jews'  custom,  that  one  should  be  released  at  the 
passover,  came  into  his  mind  at  that  instant,  and  for  this  rea- 
son he  did  not  wait  for  Jesus  to  tell  him  what  truth  was,  that 
no  time  might  be  lost ! "  This,  however,  seems  rather  improb- 
able. 

[And  saith...l  find.. .no  fault  at  all.]  In  this  sentence  comes 
out  the  true  impression  of  Pilate  about  our  Lord. — "  After  ex- 
amining this  man  I  can  discern  in  Him  no  guilt,  and  nothing 
certainly  to  warrant  me  in  condemning  Him  to  death.  He  says, 
no  doubt,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  avow  it,  that  He  is  a  King. 
But  I  find  that  His  kingdom  is  not  one  which  interferes  with  the 
authority  of  Caesar.  Such  Kings  as  this  we  Romans  do  not 
care  for,  or  regard  as  criminals.  In  short,  your  charge  against 
Him  entirely  breaks  down,  and  I  am  disposed  to  dismiss  Him 
as  not  guilty." 

Our  Lord,  we  may  remember,  came  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  our 
sins.  It  was  only  fitting  that  he  who  was  one  of  the  chief 
agents  in  killing  Him,  should  publicly  declare  that,  like  a  lamb 
without  blemish,  there  was  "  no  fault  in  Him." 

89. — [But  ye  have  a  custom,  etc.]  In  this  verse  we  see  the  coward- 
ly, weak,  double-minded  character  of  Pilate  coming  out.  He 
knows  in  his  own  conscience  that  our  Lord  is  innocent,  and 
that  if  he  acts  justly  he  ought  to  let  Him  go  free.  But  he  fears 
offending  the  Jews,  and  wants  to  contrive  matters  so  as  to 
please  them.  He  therefore  prepares  a  plan  by  which  he  hoped 
that  Jesus  might  be  found  guilty  and  the  Jews  satisfied,  and 
yet  Jesus  might  depart  unhurt,  and  his  own  secret  desire  to 
acquit  Him  be  gratified. — The  plan  was  this.  The  Jews  had  a 
custom  that  at  passover  time  they  might  obtain  from  the  Roman 
Governor  the  release  of  some  notable  prisoner.  Pilate  craftily 
suggests  that  the  paisoner  released  this  passover  should  be  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. — "  Let  us  suppose  that  Jesus  is  guilty,"  he 
seems  to  say  :  "  I  am  willing  to  condemn  Him,  and  declare  Him 
a  criminal  worthy  of  death,  and  a  malefactor,  in  order  to  please 
you.  But  having  pronounced  Him  a  guilty  criminal,  what  say 
you  to  my  letting  Him  go  free,  according  to  the  passover  cus- 
tom ?  " — This  cowardly  and  unjust  judge  Loped  in  this  way  to 


2G2  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

please  tlie  Jews,  by  declaring  an  innocent  person  guilty,  and 
yet  at  the  same  time  to  please  himself  by  getting  His  life 
spared.  Such  are  the  ways  of  worldly  and  unprincipled  rulers. 
Between  the  base  fear  of  men,  the  desire  to  please  the  mob, 
and  the  secret  dictates  of  their  own  conscience,  they  are  contin- 
ually^ doing  wicked  things,  and  pleasing  nobody  at  all,  and 
least  of  all  themselves. 

About  this  "  custom,"  and  when  it  began,  we  know  nothing, 
St.  Mark's  account  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  as  soon  as  Pi- 
late came  out  of  his  palace,  the  multitude  cried  out  for  the 
usual  passover  favor  to  be  granted  to  them.  (See  Mark  xv.  8.) 
Pilate  would  seem  to  have  caught  at  the  idea  at  once,  and  to 
have  suggested  that  Jesus  should  be  the  person  released. 

There  seems  a  latent  meaning  in  Pilate's  use  of  the  expres- 
sion "  the  King  of  the  Jews."  Some  think  that  it  is  a  sneer. — 
*'  This  miserable,  poor,  lowly  King  ;  will  you  not  have  Him 
let  go  ?  " — Others  think  that  Pilate  had  in  view  our  Lord's 
claim  to  be  the  Messiah.  "  Would  it  not  be  better  to  release 
this  man  who  asserts  that  He  is  your  own  Messiah  ?  Would  it 
not  be  a  scandal  to  your  nation  to  kill  Him  ?  " — A  desire  to  re- 
lease our  Lord,  side  by  side  with  a  cowardly  fear  of  offending 
the  Jews  by  doing  what  was  just  and  right,  runs  through  all 
Pilate's  dealings.  He  evidently  knows  what  he  ought  to  do, 
but  does  not  do  it. 

Henry  thinks  Pilate  must  have  heard  how  popular  Jesus  was 
with  some  of  the  Jews,  and  must  have  known  of  His  triumphal 
entry  into  Jerusalem  a  few  days  before.  "  He  looked  on  Him 
as  the  darling  of  the  multitude,  and  the  envy  of  the  rulers. 
Therefore  he  made  no  doubt  they  would  demand  the  release  of 
Jesus  ;  and  this  would  stop  the  prosecution,  and  all  would  be 
well."  But  he  had  not  reckoned  on  the  influence  of  the  priests 
over  the  fickle  multitude. 

40. — [Then  cried  they  all,  etc.]  This  verse  describes  the  complete 
failure  of  Pilate's  notable  plan,  by  which  he  hoped  to  satisfy 
the  Jews  and  yet  release  Jesus.  The  fierce  and  bigoted  party 
of  Caiaphas  would  not  listen  to  his  proposal  for  a  moment. 
They  declared  they  would  rather  have  Barabbas,  a  notorious 
prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  released  than  Jesus. 
Nothing  would  Content  them  but  our  Lord's  death.  Barabbas, 
we  know  from  St.  Luke  (xxiii.  19),  was  a  murderer  as  well  as 
a  roljber.  The  Jews  were  asked  to  decide  whether  the  holy 
Jesus  or  the  vile  criminal  should  be  let  go  free  and  released 
from  prison. — Such  was  their  utter  hardness,  bitterness,  cruel- 
ty, and  hatred  of  our  liord,  that  they  actually  declare  they 
would  rather  have  Barabbas  set  free  than  Jesus  !  Nothing  in 
short  would  satisfy  them  but  Christ's  blood.  Thus  they  com- 
mitted the  great  sin  which  Peter  charges  home  on  them  not 
long  after :  "  Ye  denied  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  Pilate,  when 
lie  was  determined  to  let  Him  go. — Ye  denied  the  Holy  One 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XVIII.  2G3 

and  tlie  Just,  and  desired  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto  you." 
(Acts  iii.  13,  14.)  They  publicly  declared  that  they  liked  a  rob- 
ber and  a  murderer  better  than  Christ  1 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  cried,"  signifies  a  very  loud  cry 
or  shout.  It  is  the  same  word  that  occurs  at  the  raising  of 
Lazarus.     "  He  cried,  Lazarus,  come  forth  !  "  (John  xi.  43.) 

The  expression  "  again  "  must  either  refer  to  the  loud  cries 
the  Jews  had  raised,  when  they  first  brought  Jesus  to  Pilate 
and  demanded  His  condemnation  ;  or  else  it  must  refer  to  a 
former  cry  for  Barabbas  to  be  released.  According  to  Matthew 
they  TWICE  demanded  this,  with  an  interval  of  time  between. 
(Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  15 — 26.) 

The  singularly  typical  character  of  all  this  transaction  should 
be  carefully  noticed.  Even  here  at  this  juncture  we  have  a 
lively  illustration  of  the  great  Christian  doctrine  of  substitu- 
tion. Barabbas,  the  real  criminal,  is  acquitted  and  let  go  free. 
Jesus,  innocent  and  guiltless,  is  condemned  and  sentenced  to 
death.  So  is  it  in  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  We  are  all  by 
nature  like  Barabbas,  and  deserve  God's  wrath  and  condemna- 
tion ;  yet  he  was  accounted  righteous  and  set  free.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  perfectly  innocent  ;  and  yet  He  is  counted  a 
sinner,  punished  as  a  sinner,  and  put  to  death  that  we  may  live. 
Christ  suffers,  though  guiltless,  that  we  may  be  pardoned.  We 
are  pardoned,  though  guilty,  because  of  what  C!hrist  does  for 
us.  We  are  sinners,  and  yet  counted  righteous.  Christ  is 
righteous,  and  yet  counted  a  sinner.  Happy  is  that  man  who 
understands  this  doctrine,  and  has  laid  hold  on  it  by  faith  for 
the  salvation  of  his  own  soul. 

In  leaving  this  chapter,  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  there  are  occa- 
sional difficulties  in  harmonizing  the  four  different  accounts  of 
our  Lord's  examination  and  crucifixion.  This  of  course  arises 
from  one  Gospel  writer  dwelling  more  fully  on  one  set  of  facts, 
and  another  on  another.  But  we  need  not  doubt  that  all  is  ])er- 
fectly  harmonious,  and  that  if  we  do  not  see  it,  the  reason  lies 
in  our  present  want  of  perception.  If  each  Evangelist  had  told 
the  story  in  precisely  the  same  words,  the  whole  result  would 
have  been  far  less  satisfactory.  It  would  have  savored  of  im- 
posture, concert,  and  collusion.  The  varieties  in  the  four  ac- 
counts are  just  what  might  have  been  expected  from  four  hon- 
est independent  witnesses,  and,  fairly  treated,  admit  of  expla- 
nation. 

Augustine  remarks,  "  How  all  the  Evangelists  agree  together 
and  nothing  in  any  one  Evangelist  is  at  variance  with  the  truth 
put  forth  by  another, — this  whosoever  desires  to  know,  let  him 
seek  it  in  laborious  writings,  and  not  in  popular  discourses,  and 
not  by  standing  and  hearing,  but  by  sitting  and  reading,  or  by 
lending  a  most  attentive  ear  and  mind  to  him  that  readeth.  Yet 
let  him  believe,  before  he  knows  it,  that  there  is  nothing  writ- 


264 


EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


ten  by  any  one  Evangelist,  tliat  can  possibly  be  contrary  either 
to  his  own  or  another's  narration." 

Melancthon  suggests  that  the  whole  history  of  the  passion,  in 
this  chapter,  is  a  vivid  typical  picture  of  the  history  of  Christ's 
Church  in  every  age.  He  bids  us  observe  what  a  multitude  of 
portraits  it  contains  !  Saints  both  weak  and  strong, — enemies 
of  many  kinds — traitors,  hypocrites,  tyrants,  priests,  rulers, 
mobs,  violence,  treachery,  the  flight  of  friends,  the  bitter  lan- 
guage of  foes.  What  is  it  but  a  kind  of  prophetic  history  of 
Christ's  Church  ? 

The  character  of  Pontius  Pilate  is  so  ably  drawn  out  by 
Ellicott,  that  it  may  be  well  to  quote  it,  in  concluding  this 
chapter.  "  Pilate  was  a  thorough  and  complete  type  of  the 
later-Roman  man  of  the  world.  Stern,  but  not  relentless, — 
shrewd  and  world-worn, — prompt  and  practical, — haughtily 
just, — and  yet,  as  the  early  writers  correctly  observed,  self-seek- 
ing and  cowardly, — able  to  perceive  what  was  right,  but  with- 
out moral  strength  to  follow  it  out, — the  Procurator  of  Judaea 
stands  forth  a  sad  and  terrible  instance  of  a  man  whom  the  fear 
of  endangered  self-interest  drove  not  only  to  act  against  the 
deliberate  convictions  of  his  heart  and  conscience,  but  further 
to  commit  an  act  of  cruelty  and  injustice,  even  after  those  con- 
victions had  been  deepened  by  warnings  and  strengthened  by 
presentiment." 


JOHN  XIX.  1—16. 


1  Then  Pilate  therefore  took  Jesus, 
and  scourged  liim. 

2  And  the  soldiers  platted  a  crown 
of  thorns,  aud  put  it  on  his  head, 
and  they  put  on  him  a  purple  robe, 

3  And  said,  Hail,  King  of  the 
Jews  !  and  they  smote  him  with 
fheir  hands. 

4  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  again 
and  saith  unto  them,  Behold  I  bring 
him  forth  to  you,  that  ye  may  know 
that  I  find  no  fault  in  him. 

5  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing 
the  crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple 
robe.  And  Pilate  saith  unto  them, 
Beiiold  the  man  ! 

6  When  the  chief  priests  therefore 
and  officers  saw  him,  they  cried  out, 
saying.  Crucify  Am,  crucify  Am.  Pi- 
late saith  unto  them,  Take  ye  him, 
and  crucify  Jam :  for  I  find  no  fault 
in  him. 

7  The  Jews  answered  him.  We 
have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought 


to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the 
Son  of  God. 

8  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that 
saying,  he  was  the  more  afraid  j 

9  And  went  again  into  the  judg- 
ment hall,  and  saith  unto  Jesus, 
Whence  art  thou?  But  Jesus  gave 
him  no  answer. 

10  Then  saith  Pilate  unto  him, 
Speakest  thou  not  unto  me  ?  know- 
est  thou  not  that  I  have  power  to 
crucify  thee,  and  have  power  to  re- 
lease thee  ? 

11  Jesus  answered.  Thou  conldest 
have  no  power  at  all  against  me,  ex- 
cept it  were  given  thee  from  above  : 
therefore  he  that  delivered  me  unto 
thee  hath  the  greater  sin. 

12  And  from  thenceforth  Pilate 
sought  to  release  him  :  but  the  Jews 
cried  out,  saying,  If  thou  let  this 
man  go,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend : 
whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king 
speaketh  against  Caesar. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX. 


265 


IS  "When  Pilate  therefore  heard 
that  saying,  he  brought  Jesus  forth, 
and  sat  down  in  the  judgment  seat 
in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pave- 
ment, but  in  the  Hebrew,  Gabbatha. 

14  And  it  was  the  preparation  of 
the  passover,  and  about  the  sixth 
hour :  and  he  saith  unto  the  Jews, 
Behold  your  King  I 


15  But  they  cried  out,  Away  with 
Mm,  away  with  him,  crucify  him. 
Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Shall  I  cru- 
cify your  King  ?  The  chief  priests, 
answered,  We  have  no  king  but 
Caesar. 

16  Then  delivered  he  him  there- 
fore unto  them  to  be  crucified.  And 
they  took  Jesus,  and  led  Mm  away. 


These  verses  exhibit  to  our  eyes  a  wonderful  picture, 
a  picture  which  ought  to  be  deeply  interesting  to  all 
who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  Like  every 
great  historical  picture,  it  contains  special  points  on 
which  we  should  fix  our  special  attention.  Above  all, 
it  contains  three  life-like  portraits,  which  we  shall  find 
it  useful  to  examine  in  order. 

The  first  portrait  in  the  picture  is  that  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Himself. 

We  see  the  Saviour  of  mankind  scourged,  crowned 
with  thorns,  mocked,  smitten,  rejected  by  His  own  peo- 
ple, unjustly  condemned  by  a  judge  who  saw  no  fault  in 
Him,  and  finally  delivered  up  to  a  most  painful  death. 
Yet  this  was  He  who  was  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  whom 
the  Father's  countless  angels  delighted  to  honor.  This 
was  He  who  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and 
after  living  a  blameless  life  for  thirty  years,  spent  the 
last  three  years  of  His  time  on  earth  in  going  about  do- 
ing good,  and  preaching  the  Gospel.  Surely  the  sun 
never  shone  on  a  more  wondrous  sight  since  the  day 
of  its  creation ! 

Let  us  admire  that  love  of  Christ  which  St.  Paul 
declares,  "  passeth  knowledge,"  and  let  us  see  an  end- 
less depth  of  meaning  in  the  expression.  There  is  no 
earthly  love  with  which  it  can  be  compared,  and  no 
standard  by  which  to  measure  it.  It  is  a  love  that 
stands  alone.  Never  let  us  forget  when  we  ponder 
this  tale  of  suflering,  that  Jesus  sufi*ered  for  our  sins, 
the  Just  for  the  unjusjb,  that  He  was  wounded  for  our 
12 


266  EXPOSITOKT  THOUGHTS. 

transgressions  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities,  and  that 
with  His  stripes  we  are  healed. 

Let  us  diligently  follow  the  example  of  His  patience 
in  all  the  trials  and  afflictions  of  life,  and  specially  in 
those  which  may  be  brought  upon  us  by  religion. 
When  He  was  reviled,  He  reviled  not  again  ;  when  He 
suffered.  He  threatened  not,  but  committed  Himself  to 
Him  that  judgeth  righteously.  Let  us  arm  ourselves 
with  the  same  mind.  Let  us  consider  Him  who  endured 
such  contradiction  of  sinners  without  a  murmur,  and 
strive  to  glorify  Him  by  suffering  well,  no  less  than  by 
doing  well. 

The  second  portrait  in  the  picture  before  us,  is  thai 
of  the  unhelieviiig  Jews  who  favored  our  ILord^s 
death. 

We  see  them  for  three  or  four  long  hours  obstinately 
rejecting  Pilate's  offer  to  release  our  Lord, — fiercely  de- 
manding His  crucifixion,  savagely  claiming  His  con- 
demnation to  death  as  a  right, — persistently  refusing  to 
acknowledge  Him  as  their  King, — declaring  that  they 
had  no  King  but  Caesar, — and  finally  accumulating  on 
their  own  heads  the  greater  part  of  the  guilt  of  His  mur- 
der. Yet  these  were  the  children  of  Israel  and  the  seed 
of  Abraham,  to  whom  pertained  the  promises  and  the 
Mosaic  ceremonial,  the  temple  sacrifices  and  the  temple 
priesthood.  These  were  men  who  professed  to  look  for 
a  Proi:)het  like  unto  Moses,  and  a  son  of  David  who  was 
to  set  up  a  kingdom  as  Messiah.  Never,  surely,  was 
there  such  an  exhibition  of  the  depth  of  human  wicked- 
ness since  the  day  when  Adam  fell. 

Let  us  mark  with  fear  and  trembling  the  enormous 
danger  of  long-continued  rejection  of  light  and  knowl- 
edge. There  is  such  a  thing  as  judicial  blindness  ;  and 
it  is  the  last  and  sorest  judgment  which  God  can  send 
upon  men.     He  who,  like  Pharaoji  and  Ahab,  is  often  re- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  257 

proved  but  refuses  to  receive  reproof,  will  finally  have  a 
heart  harder  than  the  nether  mill-stone,  and  a  conscience 
past  feeling,  and  seared  as  w^ith  a  hot  iron.  This  was 
the  state  of  the  Jewish  nation  during  the  time  of  our 
Lord's  ministry  ;  and  the  heading  up  of  their  sin  was 
their  deliberate  rejection  of  Him,  when  Pilate  desired  to 
let  Him  go.  From  such  judicial  blindness  may  we  all 
I)ray  to  be  delivered  !  There  is  no  worse  judgment  from 
God  than  to  be  left  to  ourselves,  and  given  over  to  our 
own  wicked  hearts  and  the  devil.  There  is  no  surer  w^ay 
to  bring  that  judgment  upon  us  than  to  persist  in  refus- 
ing warnings  and  sinning  against  light.  These  words 
of  Solomon  are  very  awful  :  "  Because  I  have  called, 
and  ye  refused;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no 
man  regarded  ;  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  coun- 
sel, and  would  none  of  my  reproof :  I  also  will  laugh  at 
your  calamity ;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh." 
(Prov.  i.  24-26.)  Never  let  it  be  forgotten,  that,  like 
the  Jews,  we  may  at  length  be  given  up  to  strong  de- 
lusion, so  that  we  believe  lies,  and  think  that  we  are 
doing  God  service  while  we  are  committing  sin.  (2 
Thess.  ii.  11.) 

The  thirds  and  last  portrait  in  the  picture  before  us, 
is  that  of  Pontius  Filate. 

We  see  a  Roman  Governor, — a  man  of  rank  and 
high  position, — an  imperial  representative  of  the  most 
powerful  nation  on  earth, — a  man  who  ought  to  have 
been  the  fountain  of  justice  and  equity, — halting  be- 
tween two  opinions  in  a  case  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noon- 
day. We  see  him  knowing  what  was  right,  and  yet 
afraid  to  act  up  to  his  knowledge, — convinced  in  his  own 
conscience  that  he  ought  to  acquit  the  prisoner  before 
him,  and  yet  afraid  to  do  it  lest  he  should  displease  His 
accusers, — sacrificing  the  claims  of  justice  to  the  base 
fear   of  man, — sanctioning    from   sheer   cowardice,    an 


268  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

enormous  crime, — and  finally  countenancing,  from  love 
of  man's  good  opinion,  the  murder  of  an  innocent  per- 
son. Never  perhaps  did  human  nature  make  such  a  con- 
temptible exhibition.  Never  was  there  a  name  so  justly 
handed  down  to  a  world's  scorn  as  the  name  which  is 
embalmed  in  all  our  creeds, — the  name  of  Pontius  Pi- 
late. 

Let  us  learn  what  miserable  creatures  great  men  are, 
when  they  have  no  high  principles  within  them,  and 
no  faith  in  the  reality  of  a  God  above  them.  The  mean- 
est laborer  who  has  grace  and  fears  God,  is  a  nobler  be- 
ing in  the  eyes  of  his  Creator  than  the  King,  ruler,  or 
statesman,  whose  first  aim  it  is  to  please  the  people.  To 
have  one  conscience  in  private  and  another  in  public, — 
one  rule  of  duty  for  our  own  souls,  and  another  for  our 
public  actions, — to  see  clearly  what  is  right  before  God, 
and  yet  for  the  sake  of  popularity  to  do  wrong, — this 
may  seem  to  some  both  right,  and  politic,  and  states- 
manlike, and  wise.  But  it  is  a  character  which  no  Chris- 
tian man  can  ever  regard  with  respect. 

Let  us  pray  that  our  own  country  may  never  be 
without  men  in  high  places  who  have  grace  to  think 
right,  and  courage  to  act  up  to  their  knowledge,  without 
truckling  to  the  opinion  of  men.  Those  who  fear  God 
more  than  man,  and  care  for  pleasing  God  more  than 
man,  are  the  best  rulers  of  a  nation,  and  in  the  long  run 
of  years  are  always  most  respected.  Men  like  Pontius 
Pilate,  who  are  always  trimming  and  compromising,  led 
by  popular  opinion  instead  of  leading  popular  opinion, 
afraid  of  doing  right  if  it  gives  offence,  ready  to  do 
wrong  if  it  makes  them  personally  popular,  such  men 
are  the  worst  governors  that  a  country  can  have.  Tliey 
are  often  God's  heavy  judgment  on  a  nation  because  of 
a  nation's  sins. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  269 


Notes.    John  xix.  1 — 16. 

1. — [TJien  Pilate...took  Jesus. ..scourged  Him.']  Tlie  cruel  injury 
inflicted  on  our  Lord's  body,  in  this  verse,  was  probably  far 
more  severe  tlian  an  English  reader  might  suppose.  It  was  a 
punishment  which  among  the  Romans  generally  preceded  cru- 
cifixion, and  was  sometimes  so  painful  and  violent  that  the  suf- 
ferer died  under  it.  It  was  often  a  scourging  with  rods,  and 
not  always  with  cords,  as  painters  and  sculptors  represent. 
Josephus,  the  Jewish  historian,  in  his  "  Antiquities,"  particu- 
larly mentions  that  malefactors  were  scourged,  and  tormeuted 
in  every  way  before  they  were  put  to  death.  Smith's  Diction- 
ary of  the  Bible  says,  that  under  the  Roman  mode  of  scourg- 
ing, "  the  culprit  was  stripped,  stretched  with  cords  or  thongs 
on  a  frame,  and  beaten  with  rods," 

As  to  Pilate's  reason  for  inflicting  this  punishment  on  our 
Lord,  there  seems  little  doubt.  He  secretly  hoped  that  this 
tremendous  scourging,  in  the  Roman  fashion,  would  satisfy  the 
Jews  ;  and  that  after  seeing  Jesus  beaten,  bleeding,  and  torn 
with  rods,  they  would  be  content  to  let  Him  go  free.  As  usual, 
he  was  double-minded,  cruel  and  deceitful.  He  tried  to  please 
the  Jews  by  ill-treating  our  Lord  as  much  as  possible,  and  at 
the  same  time  he  hoped  to  please  his  own  conscience  a  little  by 
not  putting  Him  to  death.  He  told  the  Jews,  indeed,  according 
to  Luke's  account,  what  he  wanted  :  "  I  will  chastise  Him  and 
release  Him."  (Luke  xxiii.  16.)  How  entirely  this  weak  de- 
sign failed  we  shall  see  by-and-by. 

Chrysostom  says,  "  Pilate  scourged  Jesus,  desiring  to  exhaust 
and  soothe  the  fury  of  the  Jews.  Being  anxious  to  stay  the 
evil  at  this  point,  he  scourged  Him,  and  permitted  to  be  done 
what  was  done,  and  the  robe  and  crown  to  be  put  on  Him,  in 
order  to  relax  their  anger."  Augustine  and  Cyril  say  much  the 
same. 

The  importance  of  this  particular  portion  of  our  Lord's  suf- 
ferings is  strongly  shown  by  the  fact  that  Isaiah  specially  says, 
"  by  His  stripes  we  are  healed  ; "  and  that  St.  Peter  specially 
quotes  that  text  in  his  first  epistle.  (Isaiah  liii.  5.  1  Peter  ii. 
24.)  Our  Lord  Himself  particularly  foretold  that  He  would  be 
scourged.     (Luke  xviii.  33.) 

It  may  seem  needless  to  say  that  Pilate  did  not  scourge  Jesus 
with  his  own  hands.  Any  plain  reader  will  at  once  conclude 
that  the  scourging  was  inflicted  by  his  soldiers  or  attendants. 
Yet  the  venerable  Bede  thinks  that  Pilate  himself  scourged 
Jesus.  And  it  is  worth  remembering  that  a  modern  sceptical 
writer  has  actually  argued  that  the  book  of  Leviticus  must  be 
uninspired,  because  in  that  book  the  priest  is  commanded  to  lift, 
and  move,  and  oifer  up  the  bodies  of  slain  sacrifices,  which  alone 
he  could  not  do  !     Surely  he  might  have  recollected  that  a  man 


270  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

is  said  to  do  things,  when  he  does  them  by  the  hands  of  ser- 
vants and  attendants !  It  was  thus,  no  doubt,  that  Pilate 
Bcourged  Jesus.  The  word  "  took  "  probably  means,  "  com- 
manded Him  to  be  seized." 

Hengstenberg  thinks  that  the  remarkable  incident  of  Pilate's 
"  washing  his  hands  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  24),  and  declaring  his  inno- 
cence of  Christ's  blood,  comes  in  between  this  verse  and  the 
preceding  chapter.  I  would  rather  place  it  after  the  fifteenth 
verse  of  this  nineteenth  chapter. 

The  place  where  this  horrible  indignity  was  inflicted  on  our 
Lord's  holy  person  (according  to  St.  Matthew  xxvii.  27)  was  the 
prtetoriura,  or  common  hall,  which  was  probably  a  kind  of 
guard-room,  where  the  Roman  soldiers  used  to  spend  their 
time,  and  keep  themselves  in  readiness  to  do  anything  the  Gov- 
ernor wished.  What  kind  of  a  place  the  guard-room  of  a  body 
of  rough  Roman  soldiers  can  have  been  we  can  hardly  con- 
ceive, even  if  we  visit  the  worst  regimental  guard-rooms  of 
modern  days. 

Some  think  that  our  Lord  was  scourged  twice;  once  at  the 
beginning  of  Pilate's  examination,  and  once  after  His  final  con- 
demnation. This  however  seems  to  me  very  doubtful.  The 
idea  probably  arises  from  not  carefully  observing  that  the  pro- 
ceedings before  Pilate,  after  the  scourging  recorded  here,  are 
peculiar  to  St.  John's  Gospel,  and  omitted  by  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  Luke. 

Besser  remarks,  "  Before  the  message,  '  Christ  our  righteous- 
ness '  was  revived,  and  the  Lutheran  •  Christ  for  us  '  was  again 
the  refreshment  of  weary  souls,  men  could  not  draw  much  re- 
freshment from  Christ's  scourging.  Before  the  Reformation 
whole  hosts  of  self-bewailing  penitents  came  forth  from  Italy 
and  spread  over  Germany.  They  were  called  'Flagellants;' 
and  naked  to  the  waist  they  roamed  through  towns  and  villa- 
ges, singing  penitential  hymns  like  Dies  Irse,  and  flogging  one 
another." 

2. — [And. ..soldiers... crown.. Morns...7iead.]  About  the  object  of 
the  soldiers  in  this  act  there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  was  done  in 
mockery  and  ridicule  of  our  blessed  Lord,  and  to  pour  contempt 
on  the  idea  of  His  being  a  King.  These  rude  men  would  show 
how  they  defied  such  a  King.  We  can  well  believe  that  rough 
heathen  soldiers,  like  Roman  legionaries,  were  expert  and 
trained  by  practice  in  the  best  way  of  torturing  a  prisoner. 

Thorns,  according  to  Tristram,  are  so  common  in  Palestine, 
that  the  soldiers  would  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  materials 
for  weaving  this  crown.  Hasselquist,  quoted  in  Smith's  Dic- 
tionary, says,  "  The  plant  called  '  nebk  '  (zizyphus  spina  Christi) 
Was  very  suitable  for  the  purpose,  as  it  has  many  sharp  thorns, 
and  its  flexible,  pliant,  and  round  branches,  might  easily  be 
plaited  in  the  form  of  a  crown ;  and  what,  in  my  opinion, 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX  271 

seems  the  greatest  proof  is,  that  the  leaves  most  resemble  those 
of  ivy,  as  they  are  of  a  very  deep  green.  Perhaps  the  enemies  of 
Christ  would  choose  a  plant  like  that  witli  which  Emperors 
and  Generals  used  to  be  crowned,  that  there  might  be  calumny 
even  in  the  punishment."  How  painful  and  irritating  such  a 
crown  of  thorns  would  be,  sticking  into  the  forehead  or  head 
of  one  whose  hands  were  bound,  we  can  easily  imagine. 

Here,  as  in  every  step  of  Christ's  passion,  we  see  His  com- 
plete and  perfect  substitution  for  sinners.  He,  the  innocent 
sin-bearer,  wore  the  crown  of  thorns,  that  we,  the  guilty, 
might  wear  a  crown  of  glory.  Vast  is  the  contrast  which  there 
will  be  between  the  crown  of  glory  that  Christ  will  wear  at 
His  second  advent,  and  the  crown  of  thorns  which  He  wore  at 
His  first  coming. 

Lightfoot  remarks  that  "  it  was  a  most  unquestionable  token 
that  Christ's  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  when  He  was 
crowned  only  with  thorns  and  briars,  which  are  the  curse  of 
the  earth."  It  was,  moreover,  a  striking  symbol  of  the  conse- 
quences of  the  fall  being  laid  on  the  head  of  our  divine  Substi- 
tute. In  Leviticus  it  is  written  that  Aaron  shall  lay  his  hands 
"  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess  over  him  all  the 
iniquities  of  the  Children  of  Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions 
in  all  their  sins,  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat." 
(Lev.  xvi.  21.) 

History  says  that  in  the  Crusades,  when  Godfrey  of  Bouillon, 
the  Christian  General,  was  made  King  of  Jerusalem,  he  refused 
to  be  crowned  with  a  golden  crown, — saying  that  "  it  did  not 
become  him  to  wear  a  crown  of  gold,  in  the  city  where  his  Sa- 
viour had  worn  a  crown  of  thorns." 

Rollock  observes,  "  Ye  shall  find  these  soldiers  even  worse 
inclined  than  Pilate  was.  This  falls  out :  if  the  master  com- 
mand them  to  do  one  evil  deed,  often  the  servants  will  do  two." 

When  John  Huss,  the  martyr,  was  brought  forth  to  be  burn- 
ed, they  put  a  paper  over  his  head,  on  which  were  pictured 
three  devils,  and  the  title  "  heresiarch."  When  he  saw  it,  he 
said,  "  My  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  my  sake,  did  wear  a  crown  of 
thorns :  why  should  not  I,  therefore,  for  His  sake,  wear  this  ig- 
nominious crown  ?  " 

[And  tJiey  put...purple  rohe.]  This  again  was  done  as  a  mark 
of  contempt  and  derision.  A  mock  royal  robe  was  thrown  over 
our  Lord's  shoulders,  in  order  to  show  how  ridiculous  and  con- 
temptible was  the  idea  of  His  kingdom.  The  color,  "  purple," 
was  doubtless  meant  to  be  a  derisive  imitation  of  the  well- 
known  imperial  purple,  the  color  worn  by  Emperors  and  Kings. 
Some  have  thought  that  this  robe  was  only  an  old  soldier's 
cape,  such  as  a  guard-house  would  easily  furnish.  Some,  with 
more  show  of  probability,  have  thought  that  this  "  robe  "  must 
be  the  "  gorgeous  robe  "  which  Herod  put  on  our  Lord  men- 


272  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

tioned  by  St.  Luke,  wlien  he  sent  Him  back  to  Pilate  (Luke 
xxiii.  11),  a  circumstance  which  Jolin  has  not  recorded.  In  any 
case  we  need  not  doubt  that  the  "  robe  "  was  some  shabby,  cast- 
off  garment.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  this  brilliant  color, 
scarlet  or  purple,  would  make  our  blessed  Lord  a  most  conspic- 
uous object  to  every  eye,  when  He  was  led  through  the  streets 
from  Herod,  or  brought  forth  from  Pilate's  house  to  the  assem- 
bled multitude  of  Jews. — Once  more  we  should  call  to  mind 
the  symbolical  nature  of  this  transaction  also.  Our  Lord  was 
clothed  with  a  robe  of  shame  and  contempt,  that  we  might  be 
clothed  with  a  spotless  garment  of  righteousness,  and  stand  in 
white  robes  before  the  throne  of  God. 

d.~-[And  said,  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews/]  This  again  was  evi- 
dently done  to  pour  contempt  upon  our  Lord,  The  words  of 
the  soldiers  were  spoken  in  contemptuous  imitation  of  the 
words  addressed  to  a  Roman  Emperor,  on  his  assuming  Impe- 
rial power:  "Hail,  Emperor!  aoe  Imperator  / "  It  was  as 
much  as  saying,  "  Thou  a  King  indeed  1  Thou  and  thy  king- 
dom are  alike  base  and  contemptible." 

Hengstenberg  observes,  "  It  was  the  kingdom  of  the  Jews  it- 
self that  »,he  soldiers  laughed  at.  They  regarded  Jesus  as  the 
representative  of  the  Messianic  hope  of  the  Jews.  They  would 
turn  to  ridicule  tliese  royal  hopes,  which  were  known  far  in 
the  heathen  world,  more  especially  as  they  aspired  to  the  do- 
minion of  the  whole  earth." 

Let  us  not  fail  to  remark  at  this  point  that  ridicule,  scorn, 
and  contempt,  were  one  prominent  portion  of  our  blessed  Mas- 
ter's suiferings.  Any  one  who  knows  human  nature,  must 
know  that  few  things  are  more  difficult  to  bear  than  ridicule, 
especially  when  we  know  that  it  is  undeserved,  and  when  it  is 
for  religion's  sake.  Those  who  have  to  endure  such  ridicule 
may  take  comfort  in  the  thought  that  Christ  can  sympathize 
with  them  ;  for  it  is  a  cup  which  He  Himself  drank  to  the  very 
dregs.  Here  again  He  was  our  Substitute,  He  bore  contempt, 
that  we  might  receive  praise  and  glory  at  the  last  day. 

Henry  remarks,  "  If  at  any  time  we  are  ridiculed  for  well- 
doing, let  us  not  be  ashamed,  but  glorify  God ;  for  thus  we  are 
partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings," 

[And  they  smote. ..hands.]  The  words  so  rendered  would  be 
equally  well  translated,  "  they  gave  Him  blows  with  a  rod  or 
stick."  The  same  Greek  word  in  the  singular  is  so  translated 
in  the  marginal  reading  of  John  xviii,  23,  When  we  compare 
Matt,  xxvii.  27,  30,  where  it  says  the  soldiers  took  a  reed  and 
smote  Him  with  it  on  the  head,  it  seems  highly  probable  that 
this  was  the  action  here  recorded.  According  to  Matthew,  the 
soldiers  put  the  reed  in  our  Lord's  hand  as  a  mock  sceptre ;  and 
when,  as  Lampe  observes,  "  He  refused  to  retain  it  in  His  right 
hand,  because  He  came  to  suffer  indignities,  but  not  to  perform 
them,"  they  snatched  it  out  of  His  hand,  and  brutally  struck 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  273 

Him  witli  it  on  tlie  bead.  This  appears  to  me  a  reasonable  and 
Batisfactory  supposition,  and  makes  it  most  likely  that  the  blow- 
here  was  not  "  with  the  hand." 

If  the  blows  were  inflicted  on  the  head,  whether  with  hand 
or  reed,  we  can  readily  conceive  what  acute  bodily  pain  they 
might  occasion  to  a  head  crowned  with  thorns.  The  thorns 
would  be  driven  into  the  skin,  till  the  blood  ran  down  the  face 
and  forehead  and  neck  of  our  Lord.  Truly  "  He  was  bruised 
for  our  iniquities."     (Isaiah  liii.  5.) 

4,,— [Pilate  therefore  went  forth,  etc.]  This  verse  opens  a  new 
'  scene  of  the  painful  story  of  the  passion.  The  scourging  being 
over,  and  the  mockery  of  the  soldiers  having  gone  on  as  long 
as  Pilate  thought  it  worth  while,  the  Roman  Governor  went 
forth  outside  the  palace  where  he  lived,  to  the  Jews,  who  were 
waiting  to  hear  the  result  of  his  private  interview  with  our 
Lord.  We  must  remember  that,  under  the  influence  of  hypo- 
critical scrupulosity,  they  would  not  go  inside  the  Gentile  Gov- 
ernor's house,  lest  forsooth  they  should  be  "  defiled,"  and  were 
therefore  waiting  in  the  court  outside.  Now  Pilate  comes  out 
of  his  palace  and  speaks  to  them.  The  words  of  the  verse  seem 
to  show  that  Pilate  came  out  first,  and  that  our  Lord  was  led 
out  behind  him. — "Behold  I  am  bringing  Him  oui side  again, 
that  you  may  know  that  I  can  find  no  fault  or  cause  of  con- 
demnation in  Him,  and  no  ground  for  your  charge  that  He  is  a 
stirrer  up  of  sedition  and  a  rebel  King.  He  is  only  a  weak, 
harmless  fanatic,  who  lays  claim  to  no  kingdom  of  this  world, 
and  I  bring  Him  forth  to  you  as  a  poor,  contemptible  person 
worthy  of  scorn,  but  not  one  that  I  can  pronounce  worthy  of 
death.  I  have  examined  Him  myself,  and  I  inform  you  that  I 
can  see  no  harm  in  Him." 

It  seems  to  me  quite  plain  that  Pilate's  private  interview 
with  our  Lord  has  completely  satisfied  the  Gov^ernor  that  He 
was  a  harmless,  innocent  person,  and  made  him  feel  a  strong 
desire  to  dismiss  Him  unhurt ;  and  he  secretly  hoped  that  the 
Jews  would  be  satisfied  when  they  saw  the  prisoner  whom  they 
liad  accused  brought  out  beaten  and  bruised,  and  treated  with 
scorn  and  contempt,  and  that  they  would  not  press  the  charge 
any  further.  How  thoroughly  this  cowardly  double-dealing 
man  was  disappointed,  and  what  violence  he  had  to  do  to  his 
own  conscience,  we  shall  soon  see. 

It  is  very  noteworthy  that  the  expression,  "  I  find  no  fault  in 
Him,"  is  used  three  times  by  Pilate,  in  the  same  Greek  words, 
in  St.  John's  account  of  the  passion.  (John  xviii.  88  ;  xix.  4-6.) 
It  was  meet  and  right  that  he  who  had  the  chief  hand  in  slay- 
ing the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Sacrifice  for  our  sins,  should  three 
"times  publicly  declare  that  he  found  no  spot  or  blemish  in  Him. 
He  was  proclaimed  a  Lamb  without  spot  or  fault,  after  a  search- 
ing examination,  by  him  that  slew  Him. 

5.—[Then...Jesusfort7i...t7i07'7is...robe.']    The  language  of  this  sen- 

12* 


274  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

tence  appears  to  me  to  show  tliat  Pilate  went  outside  the  pal- 
ace first,  and  announced  that  he  was  goino-  to  bring  out  the 
prisoner,  and  that  then  our  Lord  followed  him.  The  word 
"  forth,"  both  in  this  and  the  preceding  verse,  means  literally, 
"  outside,"  or  "  without."  It  is  the  same  that  is  used  in  the 
texts, "  His  brethren  stood  without "  (Matt.  xii.  46) ;  and  "  With- 
out are  dogs."     (Rev.  xxii.  15.) 

That  our  blessed  Lord,  the  eternal  Word,  should  have  meek- 
ly submitted  to  be  led  out  after  this  fashion,  as  a  gazing-stock 
and  an  object  of  scorn,  with  an  old  purple  robe  on  His  shoulders 
and  a  crown  of  thorns  on  His  head,  His  back  bleeding  from 
scourging  and  His  head  from  thorns,  to  feast  the  eyes  of  a 
taunting,  howling,  blood-thirsty  crowd,  is  indeed  a  wondrous 
thought !  Truly,  "  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He 
became  poor."  (2  Cor.  viii.  9.)  Since  the  world  began,  the  sun 
never  shone  on  a  more  surprising  spectacle  both  for  angels  and 
men. 

[And  PUate...BeJiold  the  Man.]  This  famous  sentence,  so 
well  known  as  "  Ecce  Homo,"  in  Latin,  admits  of  two  views 
being  taken  of  it.  Pilate  may  have  spoken  it  in  contempt : 
"  Behold  the  Man  you  accuse  of  setting  Himself  up  as  a  King ! 
See  what  a  weak,  helpless,  contemptible  creature  He  is." — Or 
else  Pilate  may  have  spoken  it  in  pity  :  "  Behold  the  poor  fee- 
ble Man  whom  you  want  me  to  sentence  to  death.  Surely  your 
demands  may  be  satisfied  by  what  I  have  done  to  Him.  Is  He 
not  punished  enough? " — Perhaps  both  views  are  correct.  In 
any  case  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  latent  feeling  of 
Pilate  was  the  hope  that  the  Jews,  on  seeing  our  Lord's  misera- 
ble condition,  would  be  content,  and  would  allow  Him  to  be  let 
go.  In  this  hope,  again,  we  shall  find  he  was  completely  de- 
ceived. 

Pilate  probably  threw  a  strong  emphasis  on  the  expression 
"  Man,"  indicative  of  contempt.  This  may  have  led  to  the  Jews 
saying  so  strongly,  in  the  seventh  verse,  that  the  prisoner  "  made 
Himself  the  y6'o/i  of  God,"  and  claimed  to  be  Divine,  and  not  a 
mere  "  man,"  as  Pilate  had  said.  He  probably  also  meant  the 
Jews  to  mark  that  he  said,  "  Behold  the  man,"  not  "  your 
King,"  but  a  mere  common  man. 

6. — [Wlien  the  chief  priests... crucify  Rim.]  We  see  in  this  verse 
the  complete  failure  of  Pilate's  secret  scheme  for  avoiding  the 
condemnation  of  our  Lord.  The  pitiful  sight  of  the  bleeding  and 
despised  prisoner  had  not  the  effect  of  softening  down  the  feel 
ings  of  His  cruel  enemies.  They  would  not  be  content  with 
any  thing  but  His  death,  and  the  moment  He  appeared  they 
raised  the  fierce  cry,  "  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him." 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  chief  priests  wer6  the  foremost  in 
raising  the  cry  for  crucifixion.  It  is  a  painful  fact  that  in  every 
age,  none  have  been  such  hard,  cruel,  unfeeling,  and  bloody- 
minded  persecutors  of  God's  saints,  as  the  ministers  of  religion. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  275 

Tlie  conduct  of  Bisliop  Bonner,  in  the  reign  of  bloody  Mary,  to- 
wards some  of  our  martyred  Reformers,  is  a  melauclioly  proof 
of  this. 

The  "  officers  "  here  mentioned  were  the  attendants,  and  ser- 
vants, and  immediate  followers  of  the  priests,  who  would  nat- 
urally take  up  any  cry  raised  by  their  masters. 

The  word  rendered  "  cried  out,"  means  a  loud  shout  or  clam- 
orous cry,  and  is  peculiar  to  John's  account  of  this  part  of  the 
passion.  It  is  the  same  word  that  is  used  of  our  Lord  at  the 
grave  of  Lazarus  :  "  He  cried,  Lazarus,  come  forth."  (John  si. 
43.)  It  is  the  same  that  is  u?ed  of  the  multitude  at  Jerusalem, 
when  they  would  no  longer  listen  to  Paul  speaking  to  them  on 
the  stairs :  "  They  cried  out,  and  cast  ofE  their  clothes,  and 
threw  dust  into  the  air."     (Acts  xxii,  23.) 

The  cry  "  Crucify  "  was  equivalent  to  a  demand  that  our 
Lord  might  be  put  to  death  after  the  Roman  manner. 

Cyril  remarks,  "  When  the  multitude  would  perhaps  have 
blushed  with  shame  at  the  sight  of  what  had  been  done,  re- 
membering Christ's  miracles,  the  priests  are  the  first  to  cry  out, 
and  so  inflame  and  stir  up  the  mob." 

He  who  would  know  to  what  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
blood-thirstiness  a  mob  may  be  stirred  up  when  once  excited, 
should  study  the  history  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  at  Paris,  dur- 
ing  the  first  French  revolution. 

[Pilate  saith...Take  ye...  in  Him.']  This,  as  Cyril  justly  ar- 
gues,  is  the  language  of  one  vexed,  and  irritated,'  and  made  im- 
patient by  the  pertinacity  with  which  the  priests  stuck  to  their 
point.  "  Do  your  bloody  work  yourselves,  if  you  must  needs 
have  it  done.  Take  your  prisoner  away,  and  do  not  trouble  me 
with  the  case.  I  find  no  fault  in  Him,  and  I  dislike  being 
made,  your  tool  in  this  matter."  It  seems  impossible  to  put 
any  other  construction  on  Pilate's  words.  He  could  not  have 
meant  gravely  and  seriously  that  he  would  allow  the  Jews  to 
put  the  prisoner  to  death,  and  thus  admit  the  precedent  of  let- 
ting them  inflict  capital  punishment.  Temper,  vexation,  and 
irony,  seem  to  lie  at  the  bottom  of  his  words ;  and  the  chief 
priests  seem  to  have  taken  his  words  in  this  sense.  We  cannot 
doubt  that  they  would  gladly  have  taken  away  our  liord  and 
crucified  Him  at  once,  if  they  had  thought  Pilate  really  meant 
they  should  do  so. 

For  the  third  time  we  should  notice  Pilate's  emphatic  decla- 
ration :  "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him."  Three  times  he  vainly  tried 
to  evade  condemning  our  Lord,  or  to  make  the  Jews  desist 
from  their  bloody  design  :  once  by  asking  the  Jews  to  choose 
between  Christ  and  Barabbas, — once  by  sending  Him  to  Herod, 
—once  by  scourging  Him,  and  exhibiting  Him  in  a  contempti- 
ble light  before  the  people.     Three  times  he  failed  utterly. 


276  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS.  - 

Burkitt  remarks,  "  Hypocrites  within  tlie  pale  of  the  visible 
Church  may  be  guilty  of  sucli  monstrous  acts  of  wickedness,  as 
even  the  consciences  of  heathens  without  the  Church  may  bog- 
gle at  and  protest  against." 

7. — \_The  Jews  answered  him,  etc.]  In  this  verse  we  find  the 
priests  taking  up  a  new  ground  of  accusation  against  our  Lord. 
They  saw  that  their  political  accusation  had  failed.  Pilate 
would  not  condemn  Him  as  a  King,  and  refused  to  see  any  fault 
in  Him  on  that  score.  They,  therefore,  charge  our  Lord  with 
blasphemy,  and  committing  an  offence  against  their  law.  As 
to  Pilate's  ironical  words,  "  Take  yd  Him  and  crucify  Him," 
they  made  no  remark  on  them,  as  though  they  knew  they  were 
not  meant  to  be  taken  seriously.  The  whole  sense  must  be 
filled  up  in  some  such  way  as  this, — "  It  is  no  use  telling  us  to 
crucify  this  prisoner  ourselves,  because  you  well  know  that  it 
is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death  ;  but  seeing  that 
you  will  not  condemn  Him  as  a  political  offender,  we  now 
charge  Him  with  an  offence  against  our  religion,  which,  as  our 
Governor,  you  are  bound  to  defend  and  protect.  We  call  upon 
you  to  condemn  Him  to  death  for  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  which,  according  to  our  law,  is  blasphemy,  and  a  capital 
crime."  This  is  a  lengthy  paraphrase,  undoubtedly,  but  one 
which  is  necessary,  if  we  would  fill  up  the  sense  of  the  verse, 
and  understand  what  the  Jews  meant. 

The  "  law  "  referred  to  by  the  Jews  is  probably  Levit.  xxiv. 
16.  But  it  is  curious  that  "  stoning  "  is  the  punishment  there 
mentioned,  and  not  a  word  is  said  of  crucifixion.  This  they  do 
not  tell  Pilate.  There  is,  perhaps,  more  fullness  in  the  expres- 
sion "  a  law  "  than  appears  at  first.  It  may  mean,  "  we  Jews 
have  a  law  given  us  by  man  from  God,  which  is  our  rule  of 
faith  in  religion.  It  is  a  law,  we  know,  not  binding  on  Gen- 
tiles, but  it  is  a  law  which  we  feel  bound  to  obey.  One  of  the 
articles  of  that  law  is,  that  "  He  that  blasphemeth  the  name  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  stoned.'  We  ask  that  this  article  may  be 
enforced  in  the  case  of  this  man.  He  lias  blasphemed  by  call- 
ing Himself  the  Son  of  God,  and  He  ought  to  be  put  to  death. 
We,  therefore,  demand  His  life."  There  certainly  seems  aa 
emphasis  in  the  Greek  on  the  word  "  we,"  as  if  it  meant  "  we 
Jews,"  in  contradistinction  to  Gentiles. 

The  expression  "  He  ought  "  is  literally,  "  he  owes  it,"  he  is 
a  debtor,  he  is  under  an  obligation  or  penalty  of  death,  accord- 
ing to  the  terms  of  our  code  of  law. 

The  expression  "  made  Himself,"  must  mean  appointed,  con- 
stituted, or  declared  Himself  the  Son  of  God.  Compare  Mark 
iii.  14,  John  vi.  15 — viii.  53,  Acts  ii.  36,  Heb.  iii.  2,  Rev.  i.  6. 

The  expression  "  Son  of  God "  meant  far  more  to  a  Jewish 
mind  than  it  does  to  us.  We  see  in  John  v.  18  that  the  Jewa 
considered  that  when  our  Lord  said  that  God  was  His  Father 
He  made  Himself  "  equal  with  God."     See  also  John  x.  33. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  277 

One  tliino;  at  any  rate  is  very  clear :  whatever  Socinians  may- 
say,  our  Lord  distinctly  laid  claim  to  divinity,  and  the  Jews 
distinctly  understood  Him  to  mean  that  He  was  God  as  well  as 
man. 

Cyril  well  remarks  that  if  the  Jews  had  dealt  justly,  they 
would  have  told  the  Gentile  ruler  that  the  person  before  him 
had  not  only  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  but  had  also  done 
many  miracles  in  proof  of  His  divinity. 

Rollock  observes,  "  Look,  wliat  blinds  them  !  The  Word  of 
God  that  should  make  them  see,  blinds  them  so  that  they  use 
it  to  their  ruin.  The  best  things  in  the  world,  yea,  the  Word 
of  God  itself,  serve  to  wicked  men  for  nothing  else  but  their 
induration.  The  more  they  read,  the  blinder  they  are.  And 
why  ?  Because  they  abuse  the  word,  and  make  it  not  a  guide 
to  direct  their  affections  and  actions." 

— [  When  Pilate. .Jieard... was  afraid.']  In  this  verse  we  see  Pilate 
in  a  different  frame  of  mind.  This  new  charge  of  blasphemy 
against  our  Lord  threw  a  new  light  over  his  feelings.  He  be- 
gan to  be  really  frightened  and  uncomfortable.  Tlie  thought 
that  the  meek  and  gentle  Prisoner  before  him  might  after  all 
be  some  superior  Being,  and  not  a  mere  common  man,  filled  his 
weak  and  ignorant  conscience  with  alarm.  What  if  he  had  be- 
fore him  some  God  in  human  form  ?  What  if  it  should  turn 
out  that  he  was  actually  inflicting  bodily  injuries  on  one  of  the 
Gods  ?  As  a  Roman  he  had  doubtless  heard  and  read  many 
stories,  drawn  from  the  heathen  mythology  of  Greece  and 
Rome,  about  Gods  coming  down  to  earth,  and  appearing  in  hu- 
man form.  Perhaps  the  prisoner  before  him  was  one  !  The 
idea  raised  new  fears  in  his  mind.  Already  he  had  been  made 
very  uncomfortable  about  Him.  Our  Lord's  calm,  dignified, 
and  majestic  demeanor  had  doubtless  made  an  impression.  His 
evident  innocence  of  all  guilt,  and  the  extraordinary  malice  of 
His  enemies,  whose  characters  Pilate  most  likely  knew  well, 
had  produced  an  effect.  His  own  wife's  dream  had  its  influence. 
Even  before  the  last  charge  of  the  Jews  the  Roman  judge  had 
been  awe-struck,  and  secretly  convinced  of  our  Lord's  inno- 
cence, and  anxious  to  have  Him  set  free,  and  actually  "  afraid  " 
of  his  prisoner.  But  when  he  heard  of  His  being  the  "  Son  of 
God,"  he  was  made  more  afraid. 

Burgon  remarks,  "  Like  Gamaliel  in  the  Acts,  Pilate  was 
seized  with  a  salutary  apprehension,  lest  haply  he  be  found 
even  to  fight  against  God." 

The  "  saying  "  referred  to  must  mean  the  expression,  "  Son 
of  God." 

The  word  "more  "  deserves  attention.  It  shows  clearly  that 
from  the  first  Pilate  had  been  "  afraid,"  and  uneasy  in  con- 
science. He  had  never  liked  the  case  being  brought  before  him 
at  all.     To  have  such  an  extraordinary  preacher,  and  a  worker 


278  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

of  sucli  miracles  as  our  Lord,  brought  to  his  bar,  frightened 
him.  But  now  when  he  heard  that  He  laid  claim  to  divinity, 
he  was  "  more  afraid."  We  must  never  forget  that  Pilate,  as 
Roman  Governor  of  Judaa,  charged  with  the  management  of  a 
most  turbulent  and  troublesome  province,  was  doubtless  in- 
formed by  spies,  as  well  as  by  the  officers  of  his  army,  of  every- 
thing that  went  on  in  J  udsea.  Can  we  doubt  for  a  moment  that 
he  must  have  heard  many  accounts  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  and 
specially  of  His  miracles  and  astonishing  power  over  the  sick 
and  the  dead  ?  Can  we  doubt  that  he  heard  of  the  raising  of 
Lazarus  at  Bethany,  within  a  walk  of  Jerusalem  ?  Remember- 
ing all  this,  we  may  well  suppose  that  lie  regarded  the  whole 
case  brought  before  him  by  the  Jews  with  much  anxiety  from 
the  very  first,  and  we  can  well  understand  that  when  he  heard 
that  Jesus  was  "  the  Son  of  God,"  he  was  more  than  ever 
alarmed.     Unprincipled  rulers  have  an  uneasy  position. 

Bishop  Hall  thinks  that  tlie  cause  of  Pilate's  fear  was  only 
the  increased  rage  and  excitement  of  the  people.  He  was  afraid 
of  a  riot  and  tumult ! 

9. — \And  went  again.. .judgment  hall.]  This  means,  that,  on  hear- 
ing this  fresh  charge  of  blasphemy,  Pilate  retired  again  from 
the  outside  of  the  palace  into  the  inner  part,  where  he  had  be- 
fore conversed  with  our  Lord,  once  more  leaving  the  Jews  out- 
side. This  new  charge  was  so  serious  that  he  did  not  care  to 
enter  into  it  publicly,  and  preferred  examining  our  Lord  about 
it  privately. 

[And  saitJi...  Whence  art  T7iou?]  This  qaestion  I  think  can 
admit  of  only  one  meaning.  It  meant, — "  Who  art  Thou  ? 
What  art  Thou  ?  Art  Thou  from  heaven  ?  Art  Thoa  one  of  the 
gods  come  down  to  earth,  of  whom  I  have  heard  the  priests 
talk  ?  What  is  Thy  real  nature  and  history  ?  If  Thou  art  some 
superior  being,  more  than  a  common  man,  tell  me  plainly,  that 
I  may  know  how  to  deal  with  Thy  case.  Tell  me  privately, 
while  these  Jews  are  not  present,  tliat  I  may  know  what  line  to 
take  up  with  Thine  enemies." — We  may  well  believe  that  Pilate 
caught  at  the  secret  hope  that  Jesus  might  tell  him  something 
about  Himself,  which  would  enable  Him  to  make  a  firm  stand 
and  deliver  Him  from  the  Jews.  In  this  hope,  again,  the  Ro- 
man Governor  was  destined  to  be  disappointed. 

[But  Jesus  gave  him  no  answer.']  Our  Lord's  silence,  when 
this  appeal  was  made  to  him  by  Pilate,  is  very  striking.  Hith- 
erto He  had  spoken  freely  and  replied  to  questions  ;  now  He  re- 
fused to  speak  any  more.  The  reason  of  our  Lord's  silence 
must  be  sought  in  the  state  of  Pilate's  soul.  He  deserved  no 
answer,  and  therefore  got  none.  He  had  forfeited  his  title  to  any 
further  revelation  about  his  Prisoner.  He  had  been  told  plainly 
the  nature  of  our  Lord's  ki7igdom,  and  the  purpose  of  our  Lord's 
coming  into  the  world,  and  been  obliged  to  confess  publicly  his 
innocence.     And  yet,  with  all  this  light  and  knowledge,  he  had 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  279 

treated  our  Lord  with  flagrant  injustice,  scourged  Him,  allowed 
Him  to  be  treated  with  the  vilest  indignities  by  his  soldiers, 
and  held  Him  up  to  scorn,  knowing  in  his  own  mind  all  the 
time  that  He  was  a  guiltless  person.  He  had,  in  short,  sinned, 
away  his  opportunities,  forsaken  his  own  mercies,  and  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  the  cries  of  his  own  conscience.  Hence  our  Lord 
would  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him,  and  would  tell  him 
nothing  more.     "  He  gave  him  no  answer." 

Here,  as  in  many  other  cases,  we  learn  that  God  will  not  force 
conviction  on  men,  and  will  not  compel  obstinate  unbelievers 
to  believe,  and  will  not  always  strive  with  men's  consciences. 
Most  men,  like  Pilate,  have  a  day  of  grace,  and  an  open  door 
put  before  them.  If  they  refuse  to  enter  in,  and  choose  their 
own  sinful  way,  the  door  is  often  shut,  and  never  opened  again. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  "  day  of  visitation,"  when  Christ 
speaks  to  men.  If  they  will  not  hear  His  voice,  and  open  the 
door  of  their  hearts,  they  are  often  let  alone,  given  over  to  a 
reprobate  mind,  and  left  to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  sins.  It 
was  so  with  Pharaoh,  and  Saul,  and  Aliab  ;  and  Pilate's  case  was 
like  theirs.  He  had  his  opportunity,  and  did  not  choose  to  use 
it,  but  preferred  to  please  the  Jews  at  the  expense  of  his  con- 
science, and  to  do  what  he  knew  was  wrong.  We  see  the  con- 
sequence.    Our  Lord  will  tell  him  nothing  more. 

In  saying  all  this,  I  think  we  must  not  forget  that  Pilate's 
wicked  refusal  to  listen  to  his  own  conscience,  and  our  Lord's 
consequent  refusal  to  speak  to  him  any  more,  were  all  over- 
ruled by  the  eternal  counsels  of  God  to  the  carrying  out  of  His 
purpose  of  redemption.  In  handling  such  a  point  we  must 
speak  with  reverence.  But  it  is  plain  that  if  our  Lord  had  re- 
vealed to  Pilate  who  He  was,  and  forced  Pilate  to  see  it,  the 
crucifixion  might  perhaps  never  have  taken  place,  and  the  great 
sacrifice  for  a  world's  sins  might  never  have  been  oflered  up  on 
the  cross.  Our  Lord's  silence  was  just  and  well  merited.  But 
it  was  also  part  of  God's  counsels  about  man's  salvation. 

Let  us  note  that  there  is  "  a  time  to  be  silent,"  as  well  as  "  a 
time  to  speak."  This  is  a  matter  in  the  social  intercourse  of 
daily  life,  about  which  we  all  need  to  pray  for  wisdom.  To  be 
always  saying  to  everybody  everything  we  know,  is  not  the  line 
of  a  wise  follower  of  Christ. 

Let  us  note  that  if  we  do  not  make  a  good  use  of  light  and 
opportunities, — and  if  we  resist  Christ  speaking  to  our  con- 
science,— a  time  may  come  when,  like  Pilate,  we  may  speak  to 
Christ,  and  ask  things  of  Him,  and  He  may  give  us  no  answer. 
It  is  written  in  a  certain  place,  "  They  would  none  of  my  coun- 
sel, they  despised  all  my  reproof ;  therefore  shall  they  eat  of 
the  fruit  of  their  own  way."  "  Then  shall  they  call  upon  Me, 
but  I  will  not  answer."     (Pro v.  i.  24 — 32.) 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  Christ  answered  nothing,  because  He 
knew  that  Pilate  asked  all  the  questions  idly." 


<-2^()  KxroHri'oiiv  'j'iioij(iii'j's. 

IJciHHrsr  r«itriarlcH,  "A  pc^iilion  tr>  (!liriHt  for  onll^liieninont, 
even  wIkmi  olTorrrI  ii[)  in  a  iidim'h  IhhI  iiiodkwiIh  from  u  (IcutJi 
bed,  n(iv<!r  failH  of  Ixiin/jf  JiiiHW<!nMl,  if  odiiirod  in  Hiiwmrity  arid 
from  Mid  iHriirt, ;  mid  ol>l,uinH  for  tlio  Hiippliunl/UH  iniich  ^rn,c()  art 
Ih  ucodtul  for  Kalva,l,loii.     Jiiit  to  a  l?ilato  Johuh  iu  Hiloiit." 

10. — \Tlirn  itaUli.  PilfUc,  ctn.]  In  tiiiw  vf'.rHo  w(j  h(!o  tlio  iinprriouH, 
lUivt'A'i,  liRiif.,'lil.y,  arrogant,  i(im|)(!r  of  tim  ltoiiia,n  (Jovcriior  bnuiii- 
'u\^  oiiL  AccuHl.omod  to  hc-o  priHonorH  <;riii^''iii<,''  Ixiforo  him,  an(i 
willing  to  do  aiiytliiii/^  to  (thl.aiii  ITih  favor,  Ik;  could  not  undctr- 
Htand  our  liord'H  Hilonc-o.  lie,  addrcrH.Sf^H  him  in  a  tono  of  an^j^tir 
and  MurpriHo  comhincd  :  -  "  Why  doMtThou  not  annwrr  my  (jn(!H 
lion?  l)(»Ht'rii<>n  know  whn.t  Thou  art  doin;^  in  olliuidin;^  nioV 
J)o.Mt  'I'hou  not  know  tha,t  Thou  art  at  my  nntrcy,  and  that  I 
liavn  pow(!r  to  criic-ify  Thno  or  ndnaHo  Thoo,  according  an  I. 
think  ri^htV" — I  mu  hoo  no  othnr  n',a,H(»nahl()  ('.onHtniction  that 
can  he  put  on  Pihito'H  wordn.  Tho  ichia  that  ho  wan  only  p(!r- 
Huadin^  onr  Lord,  and  ^i^cntly  romindin/!^  I  lirti  of  hin  own  pow»!r, 
nH  nttfirly  iinr<!aHonal)h!,a,n(l  incoiiHiMtcnt  witli  tho  followin;^ 


HO( 
V(irno 


to  oxcrciHo  it. 


It  Ih  only  fair  to  ronunidxir  tluit  the  (J rook  word  nMuh^n^d 
"  ])Ovv«ir,"  mi^clit  l>n  nmchinMl  "authority,"  or  "  <',ommiHnion  ;  " 
and  in  thin  hcuho  I'ihito  mi^^lif,  only  nmaji,  "  1  have  (*,ommiMHion 
from  tho  lionnin  (iovtu-nnntnt  to  Hontonco  prinoncrH  to  <l(taih  or 
lot  them  /,^o  frcio  :  would  it  not  1x5  rorThinn  inlrrc.st  to  npoak  to 
mo  V  " 

11. — [Jrsns  (inmncrcd,  cic,.^  Our  Ijonl'rt  reply  to  I*ilat(5  in  thirt  vcrHo 
JM  rcinarkiihly  calm  and  di^niliod,  thou^j^h  not  without  Homo 
«liHicull1(^H,  hecauHo  of  itn  «dlipticn,l  conntrucLion.  It  may  ho 
piiraplirMHc<l  thuH  :  "Thou  HpcakcHt  of  power,  'riieii  do.st  not 
know  that  hoth  thou  and  the  .)ew.M  are  only  tool.s  in  tlie  hand  of 
a  hi;^;her  Hein;!f,and  t.ha,t  iIkmi  couldHt  have  no  power  whatever 
a/j;ninHt  M(!,  if  it  wei-e  not  ;^^iven  theel)y(h)(l.  'I'his,  h<»W(iVer, 
tlM>u  <h)Ht  not  underHtH,nd,  and  a,rt  therefore  h^Hrt  guilty  than  the 
JinvH.  'IMio  .lewH  who  (hdiven^l  Me  into  thine  hand,  do  know 
that  all  power  iH  from  (Jod.  'IMiuH  their  knowledge  nuikciH  I  hem 
morci  K"'''y  than  'i'hou.  Hoth  thou  and  they  are  committing  a 
/j;r()a,t  Hin  ;  hut  their  nin  in  a  nin  a/^ainnt  knowh-di^e,  and  ihino 
JH  <"(unpa.ra,t,ively  at-in  uf  i/j^n(U'a.nc.e.  Vou  a,re  hol.h  uncouMcioiiMly 
nnu't)  in.sti'umentM  in  the  hand  of  (Jod,  and  you  could  <lo  nothinuf 
uyainnt  Me,  if  (Jod  did  not  ixrmit  and  overrule  it."     The  loijical 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  281 

connection  of  tlie  former  and  latter  parts  of  the  verse  is  hy  no 
means  clear.  The  precise  object  of  "  therefore,"  and  the  reason 
why  God's  overruling  providence  made  the  Jews  more  guilty 
than  the  Gentiles,  are  things  which  it  is  not  easy  to  explain. 
But  I  must  think  that  the  latent  idea  of  our  Lord  was  to  remind 
Pilate  how  ignorantly  he  was  acting,  and  how  little  he  knew 
what  he  was  about  compared  to  the  Jews. 

That  the  possession  of  superior  knowledge  increases  the  sin- 
fulness of  a  sinner's  sin,  seems  taught  by  implication  in  this 
verse.  It  was  more  sinful  in  the  Jews,  with  all  their  knowl- 
edge of  the  law  and  the  prophets,  to  deliver  up  Christ  to  be 
crucified,  than  it  was  in  Pilate,  an  ignorant  heathen,  to  condemn 
llim  and  put  Him  to  death. 

The  word  "  he  "  is  differently  interpreted.  Some  think  that 
it  must  refer  to  Caiaphas,  as  the  high  priest  and  chief  actor  in 
the  whole  affair  of  our  Lord's  murder.  Some  even  think  it  re- 
fers to  Judas  Iscariot.  Tlie  more  probable  idea  is  that  it  refers 
to  the  whole  Jewish  people,  personified  by  "  he,"  and  repre 
senied  by  their  high  priest. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  certain.  This  was  the  last 
word  that  Jesus  spoke  during  His  trial.  Henceforth  He  was 
"like  a  lamb  before  his  shearers,  dumb." 

Hengstenberg  remarks,  that  in  apportioning  the  comparative 
guilt  of  Pilate  and  of  the  Jews,  our  Lord  shows  Himself  even 
at  this  crisis  the  true  Judge  of  mankind. 

Lampe  remarks,  "  The  sin  of  the  Jews  was  heavier  than  that 
of  Pilate.  Pilate  was  a  Gentile,  ignorant  alike  of  the  Messiah 
and  His  distinguishing  marks  :  the  Jews  liad  read  the  prophe- 
cies about  Him.  Pilate  could  only  have  heard  sometbing  about 
our  Lord's  great  miracles  by  rumor  and  report :  they  were  all 
done  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  Jews.  Pilate  injured  Jesus 
unwillingly,  and  from  cowardice  :  they  injured  Him  from  hatred 
and  envy.  Finally,  Pilate  was  only  the  instrument :  the  Jews 
were  the  impelling  cause.  Thus  our  Lord  pronounces  His 
opinion  concerning  His  judges,  an  opinion  according  to  which 
He  will  one  day  judge  them." 

The  expression  "  therefore,"  or  literally  "  on  account  of  this,'* 
is  rather  a  difficult  one.  Markland  says  it  means,  "Because  he 
has  not  this  power  from  above,  which  thou  hast,  the  Jew  has 
the  greater  sin."     Pearce  takes  much  the  same  view. 

Rollock  observes,  speaking  of  the  inquisition  in  Spain,  "  The 
Papists,  when  they  have  caught  a  Christian  who  confesseth 
Jesus  Christ,  after  trying  him,  put  him  in  the  hands  of  the 
Emperor  or  King  of  Spain.  Then  they  wash  their  hands,  as 
clean  of  His  blood  ;  and  who  took  his  life  but  tlie  King  of 
Spain  ?  But  the  wrath  of  God  persecutes  them,  and  the  blood 
of  the  innocent  lies  on  them,  because  they  delivered  them  into 
their  hands  to  be  tormented." 


282  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Hutclieson  observes,  tliat  "  tlie  greatest  height  of  impiety  ia 
found  within  the  visible  Church,"  where  there  is  most  knowl- 
edge. 

When  all  has  been  said,  we  must  admit  that  there  is  proba 
bly  something  in  the  verse  more  deep  than  we  have  line  to 
fathom.  The  two  propositions  of  the  verse  are  both  quite  in- 
telligible ;  but  the  connecting  link,  "  therefore,"  is  a  hard  knot, 
which  has  not  yet  been  fairly  untied. 

Augustine  paraphrases  this  sentence  thus :  "  He  sins  worse 
who  of  ill-will  delivers  up  the  innocent  to  tlie  power  to  be  put 
to  death,  than  doth  the  power  itself,  if  for  the  fear  of  another 
greater  power  it  puts  to  death  the  innocent.  The  Jews  de- 
livered Me  unto  the  power,  as  having  ill-will  aga,iust  Me  ;  but 
thou  art  about  to  exercise  thy  power  against  Me,  as  being  afraid 
for  thyself.  Not  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  put  to  death  an  in- 
nocent person  from  fear ;  but  to  put  to  death  out  of  hatred  is 
much  more  evil  than  to  put  to  death  out  of  fear."  Cyril  says 
much  the  same. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  clear.  There  are  degrees  in 
Bin.  All  are  not  equally  sinful.  The  servant  who  knew  his 
master's  will  and  did  it  not,  was  more  guilty  than  he  who  knew 
it  not. 

13, — [And  from  thenceforth  Pilate  sought  to  release  Him.]  This 
is  a  remarkable  sentence.  It  evidently  means  that  from  this 
point  of  the  case  Pilate  sought  more  diligently  than  ever  to 
have  our  Lord  acquitted  and  set  free.  Before  he  wished  it : 
now  he  really  took  pains  to  effect  it.  Whether  this  was  occa- 
sioned by  our  Lord's  manner  and  demeanor  in  speaking  the 
words  of  the  preceding  verse,  or  by  some  meaning  which  He 
attached  to  the  words,  we  cannot  tell.     But  so  it  was. 

How  and  in  what  manner  Pilate  "  sought  to  release  "  Jesus, 
we  are  not  told  by  John.  But  it  is  evident  that  he  left  our  Lord 
in  the  hall,  where  he  had  been  asking  Him,  "  Whence  art 
Thou  ?  "  and  went  out  alone  to  the  Jews,  to  tell  them  he  could 
make  nothing  of  their  charge  of  blasphemy,  and  wished  to  let 
the  prisoner  go.  This  must  have  taken  place  outside  the  doors, 
because  the  Jews  scrupulously  refused  to  go  inside.  Moreover, 
the  Jews  could  not  have  known  of  this  fresh  desire  to  release 
Jesus,  if  Pilate  had  not  come  forth  and  communicated  it  to  them. 
In  this  verse,  therefore,  be  it  remembered,  we  have  Pilate  and 
the  Jews  alone,  outside  the  palace,  and  our  Lord  left  inside. 
Pilate  proposes  to  release  Him,  and  the  Jews  protest  against  it. 
Then  we  shall  find  Pilate  goes  in  again,  and  brings  Jesus  out 
for  the  last  time, 

[But  the  Jews  cried  out. ..Caesar.']  In  these  words  we  see  the 
Jews  stopping  Pilate  short,  in  his  weak  efforts  to  get  our  Lord 
released,  by  an  argument  which  they  well  knew  would  weigh 
heavily  on  a  Roman  mind.     They  tell  him  plainly  that  they  will 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XTX.  283 

accuse  him  to  Caesar,  the  Roman  Emperor,  as  a  governor  un- 
friendly to  the  Imperial  interests. — "  You  are  no  friend  to  Caesar 
if  you  let  o.T  this  prisoner.  Every  one  who  sets  himself  up  as 
a  king,  be  his  kingdom  what  it  may,  is  usurping  part  of  Caesar's 
authority,  and  is  a  rebel.  If  you  pass  over  this  man's  claim  to 
be  a  king,  and  set  Him  at  liberty,  we  shall  complain  of  you  to 
Caesar." — This  was  a  settling  and  clinching  argument.  Pilate 
knew  well  that  his  own  government  of  Judaea  would  not  bear 
any  investigation.  He  also  knew  well  the  cold,  suspicious, 
cruel  character  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  the  Emperor  of  Rome,  which 
is  specially  mentioned  by  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,  the  Roman  his- 
torians, and  he  might  well  dread  the  result  of  any  appeal  to 
him  from  the  Jews.  From  this  moment  all  his  hopes  of  get- 
ting rid  of  this  anxious  case,  and  letting  our  Lord  go  away 
unharmed,  were  dashed  to  the  ground.  He  would  rather  con- 
nive at  a  murder  to  please  the  Jews,  than  allow  himself  to  be 
charged  with  neglect  of  Imperial  interests  and  unfriendliness 
to  Caesar. 

It  is  hard  to  say  which  was  the  more  wretched  and  contempti- 
ble sight  at  this  point  of  the  history, — Pilate  trampling  on  his 
own  conscience  to  avoid  the  possible  displeasure  of  an  earthly 
monarch,  or  the  Jews  pretending  to  care  for  Caesar's  interests, 
and  warning  Pilate  not  to  do  anything  unfriendly  to  him  I  It 
was  a  melancholy  exhibition  of  cowardice  on  the  one  side,  and 
duplicity  on  the  other  ;  and  the  whole  result  was  a  foul  mur- 
der ! 

13. — [  When  Pilate  heard  that  saying,  etc.]  The  "  saying  "  here 
refers  to  the  Jews'  saying  about  Caesar  in  the  preceding  verse. 
When  Pilate  heard  the  dreaded  name  of  Caesar  brought  up,  and 
found  himself  threatened  with  a  possible  complaint  to  Rome  as 
a  neglecter  of  Imperial  interests,  he  saw  plainly  that  nothing 
more  could  be  done,  and  that  he  must  give  way  to  the  demands 
of  the  Jews  and  sacrifice  an  innocent  prisoner.  He  therefore 
returned  to  the  palace,  brought  forth  Jesus  again,  and  for  the 
first  time  took  his  seat  on  the  throne  of  judgment  outside  the 
palace,  in  the  courtyard,  or  paved  area  adjacent  to  it.  The  case 
was  now  over.  Pilate's  weak  eiForts  to  deliver  an  innocent 
prisoner  from  unjust  accusation  were  useless.  He  dared  no 
longer  oppose  the  bloody  demands  of  the  Jews.  There  re- 
mained nothing  to  be  done  but  to  take  his  seat  publicly  on  the 
throne  of  judgment  and  pronounce  the  sentence. 

The  word  "  forth  "  here,  as  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  verses, 
means  literally  "  outside."  Pearce  remarks,  that  "  this  is  the 
fifth  time  that  Pilate  came  forth  and  tried  to  prevail  with  the 
Jews  that  Jesus  might  not  be  crucified." 

On  the  "judgment  seat,"  Parkhurst  remarks  :  "  In  the  Roman 
provinces,  justice  was  administered  in  the  open  air,  the  presid- 
ing judge  sitting  on  a  tribunal,  on  a  raised  ground  covered  with 
marble." 


284:  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  "  pavement "  means  tlie  marble,  or  Mosaic  levelled  space 
on  wLicli  the  judge's  chair  was  placed.  Parkhurst  says  that 
Roman  Governors  used  sometimes  to  carry  with  them  tlie  mate- 
rials to  form  such  a  pavement. 

The  word  "Gabbatha,"  according  to  Hammond,  is  more  Syriac 
than  Hebrew ;  "  According  to  the  custom  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, which  calls  Syriac,  at  that  time  the  vulgar  language  of 
the  Jews,  Hebrew."  Parkhurst  says  that  the  word  means  lit- 
erally a  raised  place  ;  and  remarks  that  John  does  not  mean  in 
this  verse  that  Gabbatha  means  pavement, — but  that  the  same 
place  which  in  Greek  was  called  "  pavement,"  was  called  in 
Hebrew  "  the  raised  place." 

[And  it  was. ..preparation  of  the  passover.]  This  remarkable 
expression  cannot  mean  that  "  this  was  the  hour  for  preparing 
the  passover  meal,"  for  it  was  not.  It  means,  "  this  was  the 
day  before  the  great  sabbath  of  the  passover  week,  a  day  well 
known  among  the  Jews  as  the  preparation,  or  day  of  preparing 
for  the  passover  sabbath,  which  was  peculiarly  a  high  day." 
St.  Mark  expressly  says  this  in  his  account  of  the  passion. 
(Mark  xv.  42.)  That  all  the  Jewish  feasts  had  their  "  eves,"  or 
preparation  days,  is  quite  clear  from  Rabbinical  writers. 

We  should  observe  how  accurately  and  precisely  John  marka 
the  day  of  the  crucifixion. 

[And  about  the  sixth  hour.]  This  expression  raises  a  grave 
difficulty,  and  one  which  in  every  age  has  perplexed  the  minds 
of  Bible  readers.  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that  Mark  in 
his  Gospel  expressly  says,  "  it  was  the  third  hour,  and  they 
crucified  Him  "  (Mark  xv.  25) ;  while  John  in  this  place  says 
our  Lord  was  only  condemned  at  the  sixth  hour !  Yet  both 
Evangelists  wrote  by  inspiration,  and  both  were  incapable  of 
making  a  mistake.  How  then  are  we  to  reconcile  and  harmo- 
nize these  two  conflicting  statements.  The  solutions  of  the 
difficulty  suggested  are  many  and  various. 

{a)  Some  say,  as  the  rationalistic  writers,  that  one  of  the  two 
Evangelists  made  a  blunder,  and  that  one  of  the  accounts  there- 
fore is  false.  This  is  a  solution  which  will  satisfy  no  reverent- 
minded  Christian.  If  Bible  writers  could  make  blunders  like 
this,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  inspiration,  and  there  is  an  end 
of  all  confidence  in  Scripture  as  an  infallible  guide. 

(&)  Some  say,  as  Theophylact,  Beza,  Nonnus  (in  his  poetical 
paraphrase),  Tittman,  Leigh,  Usher  (vol.  vii.  176),  Kuinoel, 
Bengel,  Pearce,  Alford,  Scott,  and  Bloomfield,  that  the  discrep- 
ancy has  probably  been  caused  by  an  error  of  the  manuscript 
writers,  and  that  the  true  reading  in  St.  John  should  be 
**  third,"  and  not  "  sixth  hour."  This,  however,  is  a  very  short- 
cut road  out  of  the  difficulty,  and  the  immense  proportion  of 
old  manuscripts  are  flatly  against  it. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  285 

(c)  Some  say,  as  Augustine  does  in  one  place,  and  Bullinger, 
"  that  at  tlie  third  hour  the  Lord  was  crucified  by  the  tongues 
of  the  Jews,  and  at  the  sixth  by  the  hands  of  the  soldiers." 
This,  however,  to  say  the  least,  is  a  weak  and  childish  explana 
tion.  Moreover,  it  is  open  to  the  grave  objection  that  it  would 
make  out  our  Lord  to  have  been  only  three  hours  on  the  cross, 
and  all  that  time  in  the  dark,  and  not  seen  consequently  by 
any  one  !  At  this  rate,  the  inscription  over  His  head  on  the 
cross  would  certainly  not  have  been  read  by  many  !  "  There 
was  darkness  over  all  the  land  from  the  sixth  to  the  ninth 
hour." 

(d)  Some  say  that  Mark  reckoned  time  on  the  Jewish  plan, 
by  which  the  hours  began  to  count  from  the  morning,  and  their 
seven  o'clock  answered  to  our  one;  while  John  reckoned  time 
on  our  English  plan,  which  is  the  same  as  the  Roman  one,  and 
John's  sixth  hour  meant  literally  about  six  in  the  morning. 
According  to  this  theory  Jesus  was  condemned,  in  John's  ac- 
count of  the  passion,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  cruci- 
fied, in  Mark's  account,  at  nine  o'clock. 

This  explanation  is  very  commonly  adopted,  and  is  support- 
ed by  Wordsworth,  Lee,  and  Biirgon,  But  it  is  open  to  very 
serious  objections.  I  see  no  proof  whatever  that  John  reckons 
time  on  the  Rom-an  and  English  plan,  and  not  on  the  Jewish 
plan.  The  passage  in  the  story  of  the  Samaritan  woman, 
which  is  commonly  quoted  as  a  proof,  is  no  proof  at  all,  and  on 
reflection  will  cut  directly  the  other  way.  If  the  "  sixth  hour," 
when  Jesus  sat  on  the  well  (see  John  iv.  6),  meant  really  our 
English  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  it  makes  it  impossible  to 
understand  how  the  conversation  with  the  woman,  her  return 
to  her  native  village,  the  telling  of  the  men  to  come  and  see 
Jesus,  the  coming  of  the  men,  the  return  of  the  disciples  with 
meat,  could  all  be  brought  into  the  short  space  of  one  evening  ! 
The  thing  would  have  been  impossible. — Moreover,  it  is  an  ad- 
ditional objection,  that  if  Jesus  was  condemned  at  six  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  there  are  left  three  long  hours  between  the 
condemnation  and  the  crucifixion  unaccounted  for  and  unex- 
plained. I  am  obliged  to  say  tliat  in  my  judgment  this  way  of 
explaining  the  difficulty  completely  fails. 

(e)  Some  think,  as  Calvin,  Bucer,  Gaulter,  Brentius,  Muscu- 
ius,  Gerhard,  Lampe,  Hammond,  Poole,  Jansenius,  Burkitt, 
Hengstenberg,  and  Ellicott,  that  John's  sixth  hour  means  any 
time  after  our  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  any  time,  in  fact, 
within  the  space  begun  by  the  Jewish  third  hour.  They  say 
that  the  Jews  divided  the  twelve  hours  of  their  day  into  four 
great  portions :  from  six  to  nine,  from  nine  to  twelve,  from 
twelve  to  three,  and  from  three  to  six.  They  also  say  that  any 
part  of  the  time  after  our  six  in  the  morning  would  be  called 
the  third  hour,  and  any  time  after  our  nine  in  the  morning 
would  be  called  the  sixth  hour.  And  they  conclude  that  both 
the  condemnation  and  the  crucifixion  took  place  soon  after  nine 


286  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

o'clock, — Mark  calling  it  the  third  hour,  because  it  was  near 
our  nine  o'clock  ;  John  calling  it  the  sixth  hour,  because  it  was 
Bome  time  between  our  nine  and  twelve. 

Grotius  says,  in  Parkhurst,  that  the  third,  sixth,  and  ninth 
hours,  which  were  most  esteemed  for  prayer  and  other  servi- 
ces, were  marked  by  the  sounding  of  a  trumpet,  and  that  after 
the  trumpet  sounding  at  the  third  hour,  the  sixth  hour  was 
considered  to  be  at  hand.  Glass  and  Lampe  support  this  opin- 
ion ;  and  Lampe  shows  from  Maimonides,  a  famous  Jewish 
writer,  that  the  Jews  really  divided  the  day  into  four  quarters. 
Hengstenberg  also  remarks  that  the  fourth  and  fifth  hours  are 
never  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament. 

This  theory  undoubtedly  brings  the  two  Evangelists  near  to 
one  another,  if  it  does  not  quite  reconcile  them. 

(/)  Some  think,  as  Augustine  in  a  second  place  suggests,  and 
Harmer,  quoted  in  Parkhurst,  following  him,  that  the  "  sixth 
hour  here  does  not  refer  to  the  time  of  day,  but  to  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  passover;" — and  that  the  meaning  is,  "  It  was  the 
preparation  of  the  passover,  and  about  the  sixth  hour  after 
that  preparation  began."  But  as  that  preparation  often  began 
very  early  indeed  in  the  morning,  or  about  our  three  o'clock, 
six  hours  counted  from  that  time  would  bring  us  down  to 
Mark's  third  hour,  or  our  nine  o'clock.  Lightfoot  supports 
this  view,  which  is  certainly  very  ingenious,  and  would  clear 
away  all  difficulty.  But  it  may  fairly  be  objected  that  plain 
readers  would  hardly  attach  such  a  meaning  as  Harmer  sug 
gests  to  "  the  sixth  hour." 

The  difficulty  is  one  of  those  which  will  probably  never  be 
solved.  God  has  been  pleased  to  leave  it  in  Scripture  for  the 
trial  of  our  faith  and  patience,  and  we  must  wait  for  its  solu- 
tion. Questions  of  time  and  date,  like  this,  are  often  the  most 
puzzling,  from  our  inability  to  place  ourselves  in  the  position 
of  the  writer,  and  from  the  widely  different  manner  in  which 
measures  and  points  of  time  are  expressed  in  the  language  of 
different  nations  and  in  difFerent  ages.  This  very  difficulty  be- 
fore us,  perhaps,  i^resented  no  difficulty  whatever  to  the  Apos- 
tolic Fatliers,  such  as  Poly  carp  and  Clement.  Perhaps  they 
possessed  some  simple  clue  to  its  solution  of  which  we  know 
nothing.  It  is  our  wisdom  to  be  patient,  and  to  believe  that  it 
admits  of  explanation,  tliough  we  have  not  eyes  to  see  it. 

If  I  must  venture  an  opinion,  I  think  there  is  more  to  be  said 
for  the  fifth  of  the  six  solutions  I  have  given  than  for  any 
other.  But  I  allow  that  it  is  incomplete.  In  any  case  we  must 
in  fairness  remember  that  St.  John  does  not  say,  distinctly  and 
expressly,  "  it  was  the  sixth  hoar,"  but  "  about  the  sixth  hour." 
Tlvis  shows  that  some  latitude  may  be  allowed  in  interpreta- 
tion, and  that  the.  acknowledged  discrepancy  between  John  and 
Mark,  must  not  bo  too  far  pressed,  or  made  of  too  much  impor- 
tance.    One  thing,  at  all  events,  appears  to  me  quite  inadmis- 


287 

sible.  We  cannot  allow  ourselves  to  suppose  that  Jesus  was 
not  crucified  till  twelve  o'clock  in  the  day,  when  the  miracu- 
lous darkness  began,  and  that  He  only  hung  on  the  cross  three 
hours. 

[And  he  saith...Be7iold  your  King  !'\  These  words  must  have 
been  spoken  in  bitter  irony,  anger,  and  contempt.  "  Behold 
the  Man  whom  you  accuse  of  setting  Himself  up  as  a  King  and 
being  an  enemy  to  Csesar  !  Behold  this  bleeding,  weak,  hum- 
ble, meek,  helpless  prisoner! — this  wretched,  harmless  Person, 
you  pretend  to  be  afraid  of,  and  want  me  to  crucify !  You 
wish  your  own  King  to  be  put  to  death  ?  This,  I  am  to  under- 
stand, is  what  you  desire.     Look  at  Him,  and  say  I  " 

15. — [But  they  cried...away... crucify  Him.^  As  oe  former  occa- 
sions, Pilate's  public  appeal  had  not  the  slightest  efi'ect  on  the 
Jews.  Once  more  they  raised  their  fierce,  relentless,  obstinate, 
cry,  and  demanded  the  Prisoner's  death  by  crucifixion.  Noth- 
ing but  His  blood  would  satisfy  them.  The  horrible  excesses 
of  the  Parisian  mob,  during  the  infamous  Reign  of  Terror  in 
the  first  French  revolution,  give  us  some  faint  idea  of  the  sav- 
age spirit  which  can  run  through  a  crowd,  by  a  kind  of  infec- 
tion, when  their  hatred  is  stirred  up  against  an  individual. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  away  with  him,"  is  literally, 
"  take  him  away  ; "  and  often  means,  "  take  him  away  to  exe- 
cution or  destruction." 

Henry  remarks,  that  this  public  rejection  of  Christ  fulfilled 
two  prophecies  of  Isaiah  :  "  Him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth  " 
(Isa.  xlvii.  7) ;  and  "  We  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him." 
(Isa.  liii.  2.) 

[Pilate  saitli... crucify  your  King .?]  For  the  last  time  Pilate 
put  the  question  to  the  Jews,  and  gave  them  a  last  chance  of 
relenting.  In  bitter  irony  he  asked, — "  Shall  1  then  really  cru- 
cify your  own  King  ?  Shall  I,  a  Roman,  order  a  King  of  the 
Jews  to  be  put  to  an  ignominious  death  ?  Is  this  your  wish 
and  desire  ?  " 

[The  chief  priests... no  king  "but  Ccesar.']  These  memorable 
words  inflicted  indelible  disgrace  on  the  leaders  of  the  Jews, 
and  stamped  the  Jews  forever  as  a  fallen,  blinded,  God-forsak- 
ing, God-forsaken,  and  apostate  nation.  They,  who  at  one 
time  used  to  say,  "  The  Lord  God  is  our  King,"  renounced  the 
faith  of  their  forefathers,  and  publicly  declared  that  Caesar  was 
their  king,  and  not  God.  They  stultified  themselves,  and  gave 
the  lie  to  their  own  boasted  declaration  of  independence  of  for- 
eign powers.  Had  they  not  said  themselves,  "  We  be  Abra- 
ham's seed,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man  "  ?  (John 
viii.  33.)  Had  they  not  tried  to  entrap  our  Lord  into  saying 
something  in  favor  of  Caesar,  that  they  might  damage  His  rep- 
utation ?  "  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Caesar  ?  "  (Matt.  xs. 
17.)     And  now,  forsooth,  they   shout  out,  "  We  have  no  king 


288  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

but  Caesar  !  "  Above  all  tliey  madly  proclaimed  to  the  world, 
though  they  knew  it  not,  that  "  the  sceptre  had  departed  from. 
Judah,"  and  that  Messiah  must  have  come.  (Gen.  xlix.  10.) 
Truly  the  sceptre  had  departed,  when  chief  priests  could  say, 
"  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar." 

Cyril  remarks,  that  "  while  other  nations,  all  over  the  world, 
cling  tenaciously  to  their  own  religion,  and  honor  those  whom 
they  call  gods,  and  will  not  forsake  them,  Israel  revolted  from 
God;  cast  ofE  His  authority,  and  claimed  Caesar  as  their  king. 
Justly  therefore  they  were  delivered  over  into  Caesar's  hands, 
and  endured  the  heaviest  calamities." 

Henry  remarks, — "  They  would  have  no  king  but  Caesar,  and 
never  have  they  had  any  other  to  this  day,  '  but  have  been 
many  days  without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince '  (Hos.  iii.  4), 
that  is,  without  any  of  their  own,  and  the  kings  of  the  nations 
have  ruled  over  them.  Since  they  will  have  no  king  but  Caesar, 
60  shall  their  doom  be :  themselves  have  decided  it." 

Lampe  compares  the  conduct  of  the  priests  in  this  place  to 
that  of  the  trees  in  Jotham's  parable,  who  said  to  the  bramble, 
"  Come  and  reign  over  us."  (Judges  ix.  14.)  The  very  men 
who  ought  to  have  taught  the  people  to  hope  for  the  Messiah, 
here  publicly  renounce  the  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  declare 
themselves  contented  with  Caesar  ! 

I  cannot  but  think  that  Pilate's  public  washing  of  his  hands 
before  the  people,  and  saying,  "  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of 
this  just  person  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  24),  must  come  in  at  this  part  of 
St.  John's  narrative. 

16. — [The7i  delivered,  etc.]  This  verse  describes  the  conclusion  of 
the  most  unjust  trial  of  our  blessed  Lord,  when,  "  in  His  hu- 
miliation,  His  judgment  was  taken  away."  (Acts  viii.  33.)  All 
was  now  over.  The  last  appeal  had  been  made  to  the  Jews, 
and  for  the  last  time  they  had  rejected  it.  What  happened  is 
described  by  Luke,  but  passed  over  by  John.  "  Pilate  gave 
sentence  that  it  should  be  as  they  required."  (Luke  xxiii,  24.) 
He  then  formally  delivered  over  our  Lord  into  the  hands  of  the 
chief  priests,  and  formally  gave  them  permission  to  put  Him  to 
death  by  crucifixion.  These  hardened  and  wicked  men  at 
once  "  took  Jesus  and  led  Him  away." — Of  course  we  must 
not  suppose  that  the  *'  chief  priests "  themselves  laid  hands 
on  our  Lord,  and  with  their  own  hands  led  Him  away.  No 
doubt  the  Koman  soldiers  of  Pilate  were  the  executioners,  and 
a  centurion  had  charge  of  all  the  bloody  transaction  of  the  ex- 
ecution. But  inasmuch  as  the  soldiers  only  carried  out  the 
wishes  of  the  priests,  the  priests  were  the  responsible  persons 
and  prime  agents  in  this  judicial  murder.  Luke  says,  "  He  de- 
livered Jesus  to  their  wilL"     (Luke  xxiii.  25.) 

Let  us  remember,  when  we  read  that  word  "  delivered,"  that 
it  is  expressly  written.  He  was  "  delivered  for  our  offences," 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  289 

and  that  God  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up 
for  us  all."  (Rom.  iv.  25 ;  viii.  30.)  Christ  was  delivered  to 
death,  that  we  might  be  delivered  from  death  and  set  free. 
Here  is  substitution. 

Let  us  remember,  as  we  read  the  word  "  led,"  that  Isaiah  ex- 
pressly foretold  that  Messiah  should  be  brought,  or  led,  as  a 
Lamb  to  the  slaughter."     (Isaiah  liii.  7 ;   Acts  viii.  33.) 

Alford  thinks  it  possible  that  at  this  point  the  scourging  of 
our  Lord  was  repeated.  But  I  see  no  satisfactory  proof  of  this. 
Considering  what  a  Roman  scourging  was,  it  is  not  probable 
that  any  body  could  have  endured  it  twice  in  one  day. 

Let  us  note,  that  according  to  the  narrative  of  John,  there 
seems  no  delay  between  the  condemnation  of  our  Lord  and  His 
crucifixion.  He  went  at  once  from  Gabbatha  to  Golgotha,  and 
from  the  judgment  to  execution.  At  this  rate  the  theory,  sup- 
ported by  Burgon  and  others,  that  there  was  a  delay  of  three 
hours,  between  six  o'clock  and  nine,  after  condemnation,  is  com- 
pletely overthrown.  If  we  looked  at  Matthew  and  Mark  alone, 
we  might  fancy  that  Pilate  saw  nothing  more  of  our  Lord  after 
He  had  been  scourged  and  mocked  by  the  soldiers.  But  it  ap- 
pears plain  to  me,  if  we  carefully  compare  John's  account  with 
that  of  Matthew  and  Mark,  that  they  have  not  recorded  our 
Lord's  last  appearance  before  Pilate,  which  John  relates.  Nor 
can  I  feel  surprised  at  this,  when  I  remember  that  throughout 
John's  Gospel,  he  supplies  what  the  other  evangelists  have 
omitted.  In  particular  he  supplies  our  Lord's  examination  be- 
fore Annas,  and  His  private  conversation  with  Pilate,  when  the 
Jews  would  not  enter  Pilate's  palace,  and  entirely  omits  the  ex- 
amination before  Caiaphas.  So  likewise  I  think  he  supplies 
the  last  scene  in  our  Lord's  trial,  which  Matthew  and  Mark  en- 
tirely omit,  for  some  wise  reason.  Holding  this  theory,  which 
to  me  seems  the  most  natural  account  of  the  order  of  things,  I 
cannot  see  any  room  for  an  interval  of  time  between  the  final 
condemnation  and  the  crucifixion. 

Henry  remarks  with  much  shrewdness, "  Judgment  was  no 
sooner  pronounced,  than  with  all  possible  expedition  the  prose- 
cutors, having  gained  their  point,  resolved  to  lose  no  time,  lest 
Pilate  should  change  his  mind  and  order  a  reprieve,  and  also 
lest  there  should  be  an  uproar  among  the  people." 

How  St.  John  became  acquainted  with  all  the  details  of  our 
Lord's  trial,  and  the  private  conversations  between  Him  and 
Pilate,  is  a  question  which  none  can  answer  satisfactorily  who 
do  not  hold  the  doctrine  of  plenary  inspiration.  That  John 
was  in  and  about  the  palace  of  the  high  priest,  and  not  far  from 
our  Lord  all  the  time,  from  the  seizure  in  Gethsemane  up  to  His 
death,  we  may  well  believe  ;  but  that  he  could  have  overheard 
the  private  conversations  between  Jesus  and  Pilate,  seems 
simply  impossible.     How  then  could  he  know  anything  about 

13 


290 


EXPOSITOET  THOUGHTS. 


them,  and  write  them  down  ?    There  is  but  one  answer.     He 
wrote  them  by  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Why  the  common  people,  who  always  •'  heard  Jesus  gladly," 
permitted  our  Lord's  crucifixion  so  easily,  and  made  no  resist- 
ance, is  at  first  sight  rather  hard  to  understand.  The  Galileans, 
who  would  have  made  Jesus  King  at  one  time,  were  of  course 
at  Jerusalem  in  great  numbers,  on  account  of  the  passover  feast. 
The  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  when  an  immense  multi- 
tude cried,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  ! — blessed  is  the  King 
that  Cometh ! "  had  happened  only  a  few  days  before.  The 
priests  themselves  were  afraid  of  an  uproar  among  the  "  peo- 
ple," Yet  there  is  not  a  symptom  of  any  opposition  to  the 
judicial  murder  which  was  arranged,  and  carried  into  execution, 
How  was  this  ? 

In  reply,  we  must  probably  take  into  account  the  following 
considerations.  (.1)  There  was  a  superstitious  reverence  for 
the  priests  among  all  Jews.  The  mere  fact  that  the  high 
priests  accused  Jesus  would  have  immense  weight.  (2)  The 
fear  of  the  Roman  garrison  kept  the  people  back.  (3)  The 
followers  and  friends  of  Jesus  were  almost  entirely  the  poor 
and  lower  orders.     (4)  All  multitudes  are  fickle  and  capricious 


JOHN  XIX.  17—27. 


17  And  he  bearing  his  cross  went 
forth  into  a  place  called  tTie  place  of 
a  skull,  which  is  called  in  the  He- 
brew Golgotha : 

18  Where  they  crucified  him,  and 
two  other  with  him,  on  either  side 
one,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst. 

19  And  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and 
put  it  on  the  cross.  And  the  writ- 
ing was,  JESUS  OF  NAZARETH 
THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS. 

20  This  title  then  read  many  of 
the  Jews  :  for  the  place  where  Jesus 
was  crucified  was  nigh  to  the  city  : 
and  it  was  written  in  Hebrew,  and 
Greek,  and  Latin. 

21  Then  said  the  chief  priests  of 
the  Jews  to  Pilate,  Write  not.  The 
King  of  the  Jews ;  but  that  he  said, 
1  am  King  of  the  Jews. 

22  Pilate  answered.  What  I  have 
written  I  have  written. 

23  Then  the  soldiers  when  they 
had  crucified  Jesus,  took  his  gar- 
ments, and  made  four  parts,  to  ev- 


ery soldier  a  part;  and  also  hi$ 
coat:  now  the  coat  was  without 
seam,  woven  from  the  top  through- 
out, 

24  They  said  therefore  among 
themselves,  Let  us  not  rend  it,  but 
cast  lots  for  it,  whose  it  sliall  be : 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
which  saith.  They  parted  my  rai- 
ment among  them,  and  for  my  vest- 
ure they  did  cast  lots.  These  things 
therefore  the  soldiers  did. 

25  Now  there  stood  by  the  cross 
of  Jesus  his  mother,  and  his  moth- 
er's sister,  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas, 
and  Mary  Magdalene. 

26  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  his 
mother,  and  the  disciple  standiu'Z 
by,  whom  he  loved,  he  saith  unto 
his  mother,  Woman,  behold  thy 
son ! 

27  Then  saith  he  to  the  disciple, 
Behold  thy  mother !  And  from 
that  hour  that  disciple  took  her  unto 
hia  own  home. 


He  that  can  read  a  passage  like  this  without  a  deep 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  29X 

sense  of  man's  debt  to  Christ,  must  have  a  very  cold,  or 
a  very  thoughtless  heart.  Great  must  be  the  love  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  sinners,  when  He  could  voluntarily  endure 
such  sufferings  for  their  salvation.  Great  must  be  the 
sinfulness  of  sin,  when  such  an  amount  of  vicarious  suf- 
fering was  needed  in  order  to  provide  redemption. 

We  should  observe,  first,  in  this  passage,  hoxo  our 
Lord  had  to  hear  His  cross  lohen  He  went  forth  from  the 
city  to  Golgotha. 

We  need  not  doubt  that  there  was  a  deep  meaning 
in  all  this  circumstance.  For  one  thing,  it  was  part  of 
that  depth  of  humiliation  to  which  our  Lord  submitted 
as  our  substitute.  One  portion  of  the  punishment  im- 
posed on  the  vilest  criminals,  was  that  they  should  car- 
ry their  own  cross  when  they  went  to  execution ;  and 
this  portion  was  laid  upon  our  Lord.  Li  the  fullest  sense 
He  was  reckoned  a  sinner,  and  counted  a  curse  for  our 
sakes. — For  another  thing,  it  was  a  fulfilment  of  the 
great  type  of  the  sin-offering  of  the  Mosaic  law.  It  is 
written,  that  "  the  bullock  for  the  sin-ofiering,  and  the 
goat  for  the  sin-oftering,  whose  blood  was  brought  in  to 
make  atonement  in  the  holy  place,  shall  one  carry  forth 
without  the  camp."  (Lev.  xvi.  27.)  Little  did  the 
blinded  Jews  imagine,  when  they  madly  hounded  on  the 
Romans  to  crucify  Jesus  outside  the  gates,  that  they 
were  unconsciously  perfecting  the  mightiest  sin-offering 
that  was  ever  seen.  It  is  written,  "  Jesus,  that  He  might 
sanctify  the  people  with  His  own  blood,  suffered  with- 
out the  gate."     (Heb.  xiii.  12.) 

The  practical  lesson  which  all  true  Christians  should 
gather  from  the  fact  before  us,  is  one  that  should  be 
kept  in  continual  remembrance.  Like  our  Master,  we 
must  be  content  to  go  forth  "  without  the  camp,"  bearing 
His  reproach.  We  must  come  out  from  the  world  and 
be  separate,  and  be  willing,  if  need  be,  to  stand  alone. 


292  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Like  our  Master,  we  must  be  willing  to  take  up  our 
cross  daily,  and  to  be  persecuted  both  for  our  doctrine 
and  our  practice.  Well  would  it  be  for  the  Church 
if  there  was  more  of  the  true  cross  to  be  seen  among 
Christians !  To  wear  material  crosses  as  an  ornament, 
to  place  material  crosses  on  churches  and  tombs,  all 
this  is  cheap  and  easy  work,  and  entails  no  trouble. 
But  to  have  Christ's  cross  in  our  hearts,  to  carry 
Christ's  cross  in  our  daily  walk,  to  know  the  fellowship 
of  His  suiferings,  to  be  made  conformable  to  His  death, 
to  have  crucified  affections,  and  live  crucified  lives, — all 
this  needs  self-denial  ;  and  Christians  of  this  stamp  are 
few  and  far  between.  Yet,  this,  we  may  be  sure,  is  the 
only  cross-bearing  and  cross-carrying  that  does  good  in 
the  world.  The  times  require  less  of  the  cross  outwardly 
and  more  of  the  cross  within. 

We  should  observe,  secondly,  in  this  passage,  hoxo 
our  Lord  was  crucified  as  a  Kijig. 

The  title  placed  over  our  Lord's  head  made  this  plain 
and  unmistakable.  The  reader  of  Greek,  or  Latin,  or 
Hebrew,  could  not  fail  to  see  that  He  who  hung  on  the 
central  cross  of  the  three  on  Golgotha,  had  a  royal  title 
over  His  head.  The  overruling  hand  of  Goi  so  ordered 
matters,  that  the  strong  will  of  Pilate  overrode  for  once 
the  wishes  of  the  malicious  Jews.  In  spite  of  the  chief 
priests  our  Lord  was  crucified  as  "  the  King  of  the  Jews." 

It  was  meet  and  right  that  so  it  should  be.  Even 
before  our  Lord  was  born,  the  angel  Gabriel  declared  to 
the  Virgin  Mary,  "  The  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him 
the  throne  of  His  father  David:  and  He  shall  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  His  kingdom  there 
shall  be  no  end."  (Luke  i.  32,  33.)  Almost  as  soon  as 
He  was  born,  there  came  wise  men  from  tlie  East,  saying, 
"  Where  is  He  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  (Matt, 
ii.  2.)     The  very  week  before  the  crucifixion,  the  multi- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  293 

tude  who  accompanied  our  Lord  at  His  triumphal  entry 
into  Jerusalem,  had  cried,  "  Blessed  is  the  King  of 
Israel  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  (John 
xii.  13.)  The  current  belief  of  all  godly  Jews  was,  that 
when  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David  came.  He  would  come 
as  a  King.  A  kingdom  of  heaven  and  a  kingdom  of 
God  was  continually  proclaimed  by  our  Lord  through- 
out His  ministry.  A  King  indeed  He  was,  as  He  told 
Pilate,  of  a  kingdom  utterly  unlike  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world,  but  for  all  that  a  true  King  of  a  true  kingdom, 
and  a  Ruler  of  true  subjects.  As  such  He  was  born. 
As  such  He  lived.  As  such  He  was  crucified.  And  as 
such  He  will  come  again,  and  reign  over  the  whole  earth, 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 

Let  us  take  care  that  we  ourselves  know  Christ  as 
our  King,  and  that  His  kingdom  is  set  u^)  within  our 
hearts.  They  only  will  find  Him  their  Saviour  at  the 
last  day,  who  have  obeyed  Him  as  King  in  this  world. 
Let  us  cheerfully  pay  Him  that  tribute  of  faith,  and  love, 
and  obedience,  which  He  prizes  far  above  gold.  Above 
all,  let  us  never  be  afraid  to  own  ourselves  His  faithful 
subjects,  soldiers,  servants  and  followers,  however  much 
He  may  be  despised  by  the  world.  A  day  will  soon 
come  when  the  despised  l^azarene  who  hung  on  the  cross, 
shall  take  to  Himself  His  great  power  and  reign,  and 
put  down  every  enemy  under  His  feet.  The  kingdoms 
of  this  world,  as  Daniel  foretold,  shall  be  swept  aside, 
and  become  the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ. 
And  at  last  every  knee  shall  bow  to  Him,  and  every 
tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord. 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  how  ten- 
derly  our  Lord  took  thougJit  for  Mary^  His  mother. 

We  are  told  that  even  in  the  awful  agonies  of  body 
and  mind  which  our  Lord  endured,  He  did  not  forget 
her  of  whom  He  was  born.     He  mercifully  remembered 


^94  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

her  desolate  condition,  and  the  crushing  effect  of  the  sor- 
rowful sight  before  her.  lie  knew  that,  holy  as  she  was, 
she  was  only  a  woman,  and  that,  as  a  woman,  she  must 
deeply  feel  the  death  of  such  a  Son.  He  therefore  com- 
mended her  to  the  protection  of  His  best-loved  and  best- 
loving  disciple,  in  brief  and  touching  words:  "  Woman," 
He  said,  '^  behold  thy  son  !  Then  saith  He  to  the  dis- 
ciple. Behold  thy  mother  !  And  from  that  hour  that 
disciple  took  her  unto  his  own  home." 

We  surely  need  no  stronger  proof  than  we  have  here, 
that  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  was  never  meant  to  be 
honored  as  divine,  or  to  be  prayed  to,  worshipped,  and 
trusted  in,  as  the  friend  and  patroness  of  sinners.  Com- 
mon sense  points  out  that  she  who  needed  the  care  and 
protection  of  another,  was  never  likely  to  help  men  and 
women  to  heaven,  or  to  be  in  any  sense  a  mediator  be 
tween  God  and  man  !  It  is  not  too  much  to  say,  how- 
ever painful  the  assertion,  that  of  all  the  inventions  of 
the  Church  of  Rome,  there  never  was  one  more  utterly 
devoid  of  foundation,  both  in  Scripture  and  reason,  than 
the  doctrine  of  Mary- worship. 

Let  us  turn  from  points  of  controversy  to  a  subject 
of  far  more  practical  importance.  Let  us  take  comfort 
in  the  thouglit  that  we  have  in  Jesus  a  Saviour  of 
matchless  tenderness,  matchless  sympathy,  matchless 
consideration  for  the  condition  of  His  believing  people. 
Let  us  never  forget  His  words,  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the 
will  of  God,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister,  and 
mother."  (Mark  iii.  35.)  The  heart  that  even  on  the 
cross  felt  for  Mary,  is  a  heart  that  never  changes.  Jesus 
never  forgets  any  that  love  Him,  and  even  in  their  worst 
estate  remembers  their  need.  No  wonder  that  Peter 
says,  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him;  for  He  careth 
for  you."     (1  Pet.  v.  7.) 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  295 


Notes.    John  xix.  17 — 27. 

17. — [And  He  hearing  His  cross.']  It  was  the  Roman  custom  to 
compel  criminals,  sentenced  to  crucifixion,  to  carry  tlieir  own 
cross.  Our  Lord  was  thus  treated  like  the  vilest  felon.  "  Fur- 
cifer,"  was  the  Latin  name  of  ignominy  and  contempt  given  to 
the  worst  criminals.     It  means,  literally,  "  cross-bearer." 

Besser  observes  that  our  Lord,  when  a  workman  in  the  car- 
penter's shop  at  Nazareth,  had  willingly  carried  pieces  of  tim- 
ber in  the  service  of  His  foster-father.  Here,  with  no  less 
cheerfulness,  He  bears  to  Golgotha  the  timber  of  the  cross,  in 
order  to  raise  the  altar  on  which  He  is  to  be  sacrificed,  and  to 
do  the  will  of  his  Father  in  heaven. 

Whether  the  "  cross "  that  our  Lord  bore,  was  a  straight 
piece  of  timber,  with  another  transverse  piece  fixed  across  it, 
for  the  hands  of  the  criminal  to  be  nailed  to, — or  whether  it 
was  a  tree  with  two  forked  arms,  admits  perhaps  of  some  little 
doubt.  The  almost  universal  tradition  of  the  Churches  is  that 
it  was  the  former :  viz.,  a  cross  made  of  two  pieces.  Yet  it  is 
worth  remembering  that  it  was  very  common  to  crucify  on  a 
tree  such  as  I  have  described, — that  the  Latin  word  for  "  cross- 
bearer,"  means,  literally,  "  forked-tree-bearer," — and  that  our 
Bible  translators  have  four  times  spoken  of  the  "  wood "  on 
which  our  Lord  was  crucified  as  "  the  tree."  (Acts  v.  30  ;  x. 
89  ;  xiii.  29  ;  1  Peter  ii.  24.)  The  matter  therefore  is  not  quite 
BO  clear  as  some  may  think,  though  of  course  it  is  one  of  no 
consequence.  The  cross  of  two  pieces  at  right  angles,  is  cer- 
tainly more  picturesque  than  a  common  tree  shaped  like  the 
letter  Y,  and  the  habitual  use  of  the  cross  in  Christian  art,  and 
the  general  tradition  of  ecclesiastical  history,  have  combined  to 
make  most  people  regard  the  question  as  a  settled  one.  Yet 
tha  undeniable  use  of  forked  trees  in  crucifying  criminals,  and 
the  equally  undeniable  difficulty  of  carrying  a  cross  of  two 
transverse  pieces,  compared  with  a  forked  tree,  are  points  that 
really  ought  not  to  be  ov^erlooked.  The  matter,  after  all,  is  one 
of  pure  conjecture.  But,  to  say  the  least,  it  is  quite  a  disputa- 
ble point  whether  the  cross  Avith  which  Christendom  is  so  fa- 
miliar, on  the  gable  ends  of  churches,  on  tombs,  in  painted 
windows,  in  crucifixes,  or  in  the  simple  ornamental  form  which 
ladies  are  so  fond  of  wearing, — the  cross,  I  say,  of  two  trans- 
verse pieces  at  right  angles,  is  really  and  truly  the  kind  of 
cross  on  which  Christ  was  crucified  1  There  is  no  proof  posi- 
tive that  the  whole  of  Christendom  is  not  mistaken.  Of  course, 
if  the  cross  itself  had  been  preserved  and  found,  it  would  set- 
tle the  dispute.  But  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  it  was  preserved,  or  treated  with  any  respect,  either 
by  Jews,  Romans,  or  disciples.  The  famous  story  of  the  "  dis- 
covery or  invention  of  the  cross "  by  the  Empress  Helena  in 
326  A.  D.,  is  a  mere  apocryphal  legend  invented  by  man,  and 


296  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

deserves  no  more  attention  than  the  many  pretended  pieces  of 
the  true  cross,  which  are  exhibited  in  Romish  churches  as  sa- 
cred relics. 

Ambrose  says,  quaintly  enough,  that  the  form  of  the  cross  is 
that  of  a  sword  with  the  point  downward ;  above  is  the  hilt 
toward  heaven,  as  if  in  the  hand  of  God  ;  below  is  the  point 
toward  earth,  as  if  thrust  through  the  head  of  the  old  serpent 
the  devil. 

One  thing  only  is  very  certain.  Whatever  was  the  shape  of 
the  cross  on  which  Jesus  was  crucified,  it  could  not  have  been 
the  huge,  tall,  heavy  thing  which  painters  and  sculptors  have 
continually  represented  it  to  be.  To  suppose  that  any  man 
could  carry  such  an  enormous  weight  of  timber,  as  the  cross  is 
made  to  be  in  Rubens'  famous  picture  of  the  "  Descent  from 
the  Cross,"  is  preposterous  and  absurd.  A  cross  was  mani- 
festly not  a  larger  thing  than  could  be  lifted  and  borne  on  the 
shoulders  of  one  person.  Some  get  over  the  difficulty  by  main- 
tainiug  the  theory  that  the  trsnsverse  piece  was  the  only  part 
of  the  cross  which  the  criminal  carried.  But  there  is  no  suifi- 
cient  evidence  that  this  was  the  case. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  John  is  the  only  Evangelist  who  says 
that  our  Lord  bore  His  own  cross.  Matthew,  Mark  and  Luke, 
all  say  that  Simon  the  Cyrenian  was  compelled  to  bear  it.  The 
explanation  is  probably  this.  Our  Lord  bore  the  cross  for  a 
short  part  of  the  way  from  the  judgment-seat  to  Golgotha. 
Weakness  and  physical  exhaustion,  after  all  the  mental  and 
bodily  suffering  of  the  last  night,  rendered  it  impossible  for 
Him  to  carry  it  all  the  way.  Just  at  the  moment  when  His 
strength  failed,  perhaps  at  the  city  gate,  the  soldiers  saw  Si- 
mon coming  into  the  city,  and  pressed  him  into  the  service. 
As  on  other  occasions,  John  records  a  fact  which  the  other 
Evangelists  for  wise  reasons  passed  over.  It  is  interesting  to 
remember  that  the  circumstance  is  one  which  John  must  have 
Been  in  ail  probability  with  his  own  eyes. 

That  our  blessed  Lord,  who  had  a  body  like  our  own,  and 
not  a  body  of  superhuman  vigor,  should  have  been  unable  to 
carry  the  cross  more  than  a  little  way,  need  not  surprise  us  at 
all,  if  we  consider  all  that  He  had  gone  through  to  try  His 
physical  strength,  and  tax  His  nervous  system  to  the  utter- 
most,  in  the  eighteen  hours  preceding  His  crucifixion. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  the  type  of  Isaac  bear- 
ing the  wood  for  the  sacrifice  on  Moriah,  in  which  he  himself 
was  to  be  the  victim,  was  here  fulfilled  by  our  Lord.  It  is 
moreover  a  c&rious  circumstance,  mentioned  by  Bishop  Pear- 
son, that  a  Jewish  commentator  on  Gen.  xxii.  6,  speaks  of  Isaac 
carrying  the  wood  for  the  burnt  oflering,  "  as  a  man  carries  his 
cross  upon  his  shoulders." 

iWent  forth.]    That  expression  shows  clearly  that  our  Lord 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX. 


297 


went  oat  of  the  city  to  be  crucified.  He  was  condemned  in  tlie 
open  air,  and  "  went  forth  "  cannot  mean  out  of  Pilate's  house, 
but  went  outside  of  Jerusalem,  without  the  gates.  Trifling-  as 
this  incident  may  seem  to  a  careless  reader,  it  as  a  striking- 
fulfilment  of  one  of  the  great  types  of  the  Mosaic  law.  Tiie 
sin  offering  on  the  great  day  of  atonement  was  to  be  carried 
forth  "  without  the  camp,"  (Lev.  xvi.  27.)  Our  Lord  came  to 
be  the  true  sin  offering,  to  give  His  soul  an  offering  for  our 
sins.  Therefore  it  was  divinely  overruled  of  God,  that,  in  or- 
der to  fulfil  the  type  perfectly.  He  should  suffer  outside  the 
city.  (See  also  Lev.  vi.  12 — 21.)  St.  Paul  specially  refers  to 
this  when  he  tells  the  Hebrew  Christians,  who  were  familiar 
with  the  law  of  Moses,  that  "  Jesus  suffered  without  the  gate." 
(Heb.  xiii.  12.)  The  minutest  details  of  our  Lord's  passion 
have  a  deep  meaning. 

[Into  a  place. ..skull. ..Golgotha.]  The  precise  position  of  this 
place  is  not  known  certainly,  and  can  only  be  conjectured.  We 
only  know  (from  verse  twenty)  that  it  was  *'  nigh  to  the  city  " 
that  it  was  "  outside  "  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of 
our  Lord's  crucifixion,  and  that  it  was  near  some  public  road, 
as  there  is  mention  in  one  Gospel  of  them  "  that  passed  by." 
(Matt,  xxvii.  39.)  So  many  changes  have  taken  place,  during 
the  long  period  of  1800  years,  in  the  boundary  walls  and  the 
soil  of  Jerusalem,  that  no  wise  man  will  speak  positively  as  to 
the  exact  whereabouts  of  Golgotha  at  this  day.  Though  out- 
side the  walls  1800  years  ago,  it  is  far  from  unlikely  that  it  is 
within  the  walls  at  this  time. 

(a)  Some  maintain,  as  most  probable,  that  Golgotha  was  a 
place  between  the  then  existing  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  de- 
scent into  the  valley  of  the  Kidron,  oq  the  east  side  of  the  city, 
near  the  road  leading  to  Bethany.  In  this  case  the  cross  must 
have  been  in  full  view  of  any  one  standing  on  the  tower  of 
Antonia,  in  the  temple  courts,  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  or  upon 
the  eastern  wall  of  the  city.  If  this  is  correct,  the  crucifixion 
might  have  been  seen  by  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  at 
once  with  perfect  ease  ;  and  from  the  sufferer  being  lifted  up, 
as  it  were,  in  the  air,  must  have  been  an  event  of  extraordi- 
nary publicity.  According  to  the  advocates  of  this  theory,  the 
traditional  site  now  assigned  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre  is  the  true 
one. 

(5)  Others,  however,  who  have  carefully  examined  the  topog- 
raphy of  Jerusalem,  and  are  extremely  likely  to  be  wise  and 
impartial  judges,  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  Golgotha  was 
on  the  north  side  of  Jerusalem,  near  the  Damascus  gate;  and 
they  repudiate  altogether  the  site  commonly  assigned  to  the 
holy  sepulchre  at  the  present  time.  An  old  and  valued  friend, 
who  has  walked  repeatedly  over  this  "  debateable  land,"  says, 
"  1  think  the  crucifixion  took  place  on  the  north  side  of  the 
city,  near  the  present  Damascus  gate,  on  a  platform  of  rock, 
just  above  a  valley  which  runs  on  in  endless  tombs  nearly  two 

13* 


298  EXFOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

miles.     Beneath,  tliis  platform  is  a  garden  of  olives  still,  full  of 
excavations.     In  one  of  these,  I  think,  was  the  sepulchre." 

(c)  Others,  and  among  them  another  friend,  who  has  travel- 
led much  in  Palestine,  and  published  the  results  of  his  travels, 
inclined  to  think  that  Golgotha  was  on  the  west  side  of  Jerusa- 
lem, near  the  Jaffa  gate.  The  friend  I  refer  to  says,  in  a  letter 
to  me  on  this  subject,  "  When  I  was  first  in  Jerusalem  in  1857, 
I  visited  some  extraordinary  fissures  and  cracks  in  the  rocks 
west  of  the  city,  reminding  me  of  the  expression,  the  rocks  rent. 
(Matt,  xxvii.  51.)  These  fissures  are  now  all  filled  up."  Much, 
lie  adds,  depends  on  the  question  whether  Pilate  resided  in  the 
tower  of  Antonia,  and  had  his  judgment  hall  there,  or  in  the 
tower  of  Hippicus.  This,  however,  we  have  no  means  of  as- 
certaining. 

In  the  face  of  sucb  conflicting  opinions  I  dare  not  speak  pos- 
itively, and  I  must  leave  my  readers  to  judge  for  themselves. 
The  question  is  one  about  which  no  one,  it  is  clear,  has  any 
right  to  be  heard,  unless  he  has  actually  seen  Jerusalem. 

Why  the  place  was  called  "  the  place  of  a  skull "  we  are  not 
told,  and  are  left  entirely  to  conjecture. 

{a)  Some  think,  as  Gualter,  Bullinger,  Musculus,  Gerhard, 
Burgon,  Alford,  Besser,  and  others,  that  the  verse  points  to  the 
bones,  skeletons,  and  skulls,  of  executed  criminals,  which  were 
lying  about  on  Golgotha,  as  the  common  place  of  execution. 
This  theory,  however,  is  open  to  the  grave  objection,  that  it  is 
most  unlikely  that  dead  men's  bones  would  be  left  lying  above 
ground,  so  near  the  city,  when,  according  to  the  Mosaic  law, 
they  made  any  Jew  unclean  who  touched  them.  The  Pliari 
sees,  with  their  excessive  scrupulosity  about  externals,  were 
not  likely  to  tolerate  such  a  source  of  defilement  close  to  the 
holy  city  ! — Moreover,  John  expressly  says,  that  in  the  place 
where  Jesus  was  crucified  "  there  was  a  garden."  (John  xix. 
41.)  This  does  not  look  like  a  place  where  dead  men's  bones 
and  the  skulls  of  criminals  would  be  left  lying  about !  The 
very  mention  of  this  "  garden  "  would  suggest  the  idea  that  the 
place  was  not  ordinarily  used  for  execution,  and  that  the  Phar- 
isees chose  it  only  for  its  singular  publicity.  If  it  was  on  the 
east  side,  we  can  well  believe  that  they  felt  a  diabolical  pleas- 
ure in  tormenting  our  Lord  to  the  last,  by  making  Him  die  with 
the  temple,  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  His  favorite  Gethsemane 
before  His  eyes. 

(&)  Some  think,  as  Lampe,  Ellicott,  and  others,  that  the  name, 
"  place  of  a  skull,"  arose  from  the  shape  of  the  small  rising 
ground,  like  a  skull,  on  which  the  cross  was  fixed.  That  such 
small  elevations  of  limestone  rock  are  to  be  found  in  that  vicin- 
ity, is  asserted  by  some  travellers.  To  me  there  seems  more 
prolmbility  in  this  theory  than  in  the  other.  The  name  "  Cal 
vary,"  we  should  remember,  is  never  used  in  the  Greek ;  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  299 

the  marginal  reading  in  Luke  xxiii.  33  ought  certainly  to  be  in 
the  text. 

One  thing  alone  is  very  certain.  There  is  not  the  slightest 
authority  for  the  common  idea,  that  the  place  where  our  Lord 
was  crucified  was  a  hill,  or  mountain.  The  common  expression 
in  hymns  and  religious  poetry,  "  Mount  Calvary,"  is  utterly  in- 
correct and  unwarrantable,  and  the  favorite  antithesis,  or  com- 
parison between  Mount  Sinai  and  Mount  Calvary,  is  so  com- 
pletely destitute  of  any  Scriptural  basis,  that  it  is  almost  pro- 
fane. Anything  more  unlike,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  than  Sinai 
and  Golgotha,  cannot  be  conceived. 

Origen,  Cyprian,  Epiphanius,  Augustine,  Jerome,  and  Theoph- 
ylact,  all  mention  an  old  tradition,  that  Golgotha  was  the  place 
where  the  first  Adam,  our  forefather  was  buried,  and  that  the 
second  Adam  was  buried  near  the  first !  This  of  course  is  a 
ridiculous,  lying  fable,  as  Noah's  flood  must  have  swept  away 
all  certainty  about  Adam's  grave. 

18. — [  Where  they  crucified  Him.]  This  famous  mode  of  execu- 
tion is  so  well  known  to  every  one  that  little  need  be  said  of  it. 
The  common  mode  of  inflicting  it,  in  all  probability,  was  to 
strip  the  criminal, — to  lay  him  on  the  cross  on  his  back, — to 
nail  his  hands  to  the  two  extremities  of  the  cross-piece,  or  fork 
of  the  cross, — to  nail  his  feet  to  the  upright  piece,  or  principal 
stem  of  the  cross, — then  to  raise  the  cross  on  end,  and  drop  it 
into  a  hole  prepared  for  it, — and  then  to  leave  the  suflferer  to  a 
lingering  and  painful  death.  It  was  a  death  which  combined 
the  maximum  of  pain  with  the  least  immediate  destruction  of 
life.  The  agony  of  having  nails  driven  through  parts  so  full 
of  nerves  and  sinews  as  the  hands  and  feet,  must  have  been  in- 
tense. Yet  wounds  of  the  hands  and  feet  are  not  mortal,  and 
do  not  injure  any  great  leading  blood-vessel.  Hence  a  crucified 
person,  even  in  an  eastern  climate,  exposed  to  the  sun,  might 
live  two  or  three  days,  enduring  extreme  pain,  without  being 
relieved  by  death,  if  he  was  naturally  a  very  strong  man  and  in 
vigorous  health.  This  is  what  we  must  remember  our  blessed 
Lord  went  through,  when  we  read  "  they  crucified  Him."  To 
a  sensitive,  delicate-minded  person,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  any 
capital  punishment  more  distressing.  This  is  what  Jesus  en- 
dured willingly  for  us  sinners.  Hanging,  as  it  were,  between 
earth  and  heaven.  He  exactly  filled  the  type  of  the  brazen  ser- 
pent, which  Moses  lifted  up  in  the  wilderness.     (John  iii.  14.) 

Whether  the  person  crucified  was  bound  to  the  cross  with 
ropes,  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  breaking  off"  from  the 
nails  in  convulsive  struggling, — whether  He  was  stripped  com- 
pletely naked,  or  had  a  cloth  round  His  loins, — whether  each 
foot  had  a  separate  nail,  or  one  nail  was  driven  through  both  feet, 
— are  disputed  points  which  we  have  no  means  of  settling.  Some 
think,  following  Irenaeus,  Tertullian,  and  Justin  Martyr,  that 
there  was  a  kind  of  seat  or  projection  in  the  middle  of  the  stem 


300  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

of  the  cross,  to  bear  up  the  weight  of  the  body,  and  also  a  place 
for  the  feet  to  rest  on.  Jeremy  Taylor  thinks,  in  support  of  this 
view,  that  the  body  of  a  crucified  person  could  not  rest  only  on 
the  four  wounds  of  hands  and  feet.  Bishop  Pearson  also  quotes 
a  passage  from  Seneca,  which  seems  to  favor  the  idea. — As  tD 
the  nails,  Nonnus  and  Gregory  Nazianzen  say  there  were  only 
three,  and  that  one  was  driven  through  both  feet  at  once.  Cy- 
prian says  there  were  four. — But  these  are  matters  about  which 
we  really  know  nothing,  and  it  is  useless  to  guess  and  speculate 
about  them.  Of  one  thing  however  we  may  be  very  sure.  The 
feet  of  a  crucified  person  were  much  nearer  the  ground  than  is 
commonly  supposed,  and  very  likely  not  more  than  a  foot  or 
two  from  the  earth.  In  this,  as  in  other  points,  most  pictures 
of  the  crucifixion  are  grossly  incorrect,  and  the  cross  is  made 
out  to  be  a  piece  of  timber  so  long  and  so  thick  that  no  one 
mortal  man  could  ever  have  carried  it. 

Concerning  the  precise  amount  of  physical  suffering,  and  the 
precise  effect  on  the  human  body  in  a  crucifixion,  the  following 
medical  account  by  a  German  physician,  named  Richter,  quoted 
in  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  can  hardly  fail  to  interest  a 
Bible  reader.  He  says,  "(1)  The  unnatural  position  and  violent 
tension  of  the  body  caused  a  painful  sensation  from  the  least 
motion.  (2)  The  nails  being  driven  through  parts  of  the  hands 
and  feet  which  are  full  of  nerves  and  tendons,  and  yet  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  heart,  created  the  most  exquisite  anguish.  (3) 
The  exposure  of  so  many  wounds  and  lacerations  brought  on 
inflammation,  which  tended  to  become  gangrene,  and  every  mo- 
ment increased  the  poignancy  of  suffering.  (4)  In  the  dis- 
tended parts  of  the  body  more  blood  flowed  through  the  arte- 
ries than  could  be  carried  back  into  the  veins  :  and  hence  too 
much  blood  found  its  way  from  the  aorta  into  the  head  and 
stomach,  and  the  blood  vessels  of  the  head  became  pressed  and 
swollen.  The  general  obstruction  of  circulation  caused  an  in- 
ternal excitement,  exertion,  and  anxiety,  more  intolerable  than 
death  itself.  (5)  There  was  the  inexpressible  misery  of  gradu- 
ally increasing  and  lingering  anguish.  (6)  To  all  this  we  may 
add  burning  and  raging  thirst."  (Smith's  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible  :  article.  Crucifixion.)  On  the  whole  subject  of  the  cross, 
and  the  sufferings  connected  with  crucifixion,  "  Lipsius  de 
Cruce  "  (published  in  1595)  is  a  most  exhaustive  book. 

When  we  remember,  beside  all  this,  that  our  Lord's  head  was 
crowned  with  thorns.  His  back  torn  with  savage  scourging,  and 
His  whole  system  weighed  down  by  the  mental  and  bodily 
agony  of  the  sleepless  night  following  the  Lord's  Supper,  we 
may  have  some  faint  idea  of  the  intensity  of  His  sufferings. 

When  we  read  "  they  "  crucified,  we  are  left  to  conjecture  who 
it  can  refer  to.  It  cannot  be  the  Jews,  because  they  could  only 
stand  by,  and  superintend  at  the  most,  as  the  Roman  soldiers 
would  certainly  not  let  the  punishment  be  inflicted  by  any  other 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  301 

hands  than  their  own.  It  must  either  be  the  four  soldiers  who 
were  the  executioners,  or  else  it  must  be  interpreted  generally- 
after  the  manner  of  other  places,  for  "  He  was  crucified."  Thus 
in  John  xvi.  2,  "They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues." 
In  that  sentence  "  they  "  cannot  refer  to  any  person  in  particu- 
lar. The  simplest  plan  is  to  refer  it  generally  to  the  whole 
party, — Jews  and  Gentiles  together. 

[And  two  others  with  Him,  etc.]  We  know  from  the  other 
Gospels  that  these  other  two  were  malefactors  and  thieves. 
The  object  of  crucifying  our  Lord  between  them  is  plain.  It 
was  intended  as  a  last  indignity  and  injury.  It  was  a  public 
declaration  that  He  was  counted  no  better  than  the  vilest  crim 
inals. 

Little  as  our  Lord's  enemies  meant  it,  this  very  crucifixion 
between  two  thieves  did  two  great  things.  One  was,  that  it 
precisely  fulfilled  Isaiah's  prophecy  about  Messiah  :  "  He  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors."  (Isai  liii.  12.)  The  other 
was,  that  it  gave  our  Lord  the  opportunity  of  working  one  more 
mighty  miracle,  even  in  His  last  hours, — the  miracle  of  con- 
verting the  penitent  thief,  forgiving  his  sins,  and  opening  to 
him  paradise.  If  His  enemies  had  been  content  to  crucify  Him 
alone,  this  last  trophy  could  not  have  been  won,  and  our  Lord's 
power  over  sin  and  the  devil  would  not  have  been  exhibited. 
So  easy  is  it  for  God  to  bring  good  out  of  evil,  and  to  make  the 
malice  of  His  enemies  work  round  to  His  praise. 

Augustine  remarks,  that  three  very  different  persons  hung 
together  on  the  three  crosses  on  Golgotha.  One  was  the  Saviour 
of  sinners.  One  was  a  sinner  about  to  be  saved.  One  was  a 
sinner  about  to  be  damned.     (On  Psa.  xxxiv.) 

Cyril  sees  in  the  two  malefactors  a  type  of  the  Jewish  and 
Gentile  Churches :  the  one  rejected,  impenitent,  and  lost;  the 
other  believing  at  the  eleventh  hour,  and  saved. 

Many  pious  commentators  remark,  that  even  on  the  cross  our 
Lord  gave  an  emblem  of  His  kingly  power.  On  His  right  hand 
was  a  saved  soul  whom  He  admits  into  His  kingdom  ;  on  His 
left  hand,  a  lost  soul  whom  He  leaves  to  reap  the  fruit  of  his 
own  Avays.  There  was  right  and  left  on  the  cross,  even  as  there 
will  be  right  and  left,  saved  and  unsaved,  when  He  sits  on  the 
judgment-seat,  wearing  the  crown  at  the  last  day. 

It  only  remains  to  add  that  the  cruel  punishment  of  cruci- 
fixion was  formally  abolished  by  the  Emperor  Constantino,  to- 
v/ards  the  end  of  his  reign.  It  is  an  awful  historical  fact  that 
when  Jerusalem  was  taken  by  Titus,  he  crucified  so  many  Jews 
around  the  city,  that  Josephus  says  that  space  and  room  failed 
for  crosses,  and  crosses  could  not  be  found  in  sufficient  number 
for  bodies  !  Reland  well  remarks,  "  They  who  had  nothing  but 
'  crucify  '  in  their  mouths,  were  therewith  paid  home  in  theil 
bodies." 


3Q2  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTb. 

19. — [And  Pilate  wrote  a  title. ..cross.']  To  fix  a  board  witli  an 
inscription  over  the  head  of  the  person  cracified,  appears  to 
have  been  a  well-known  custom,  and  is  mentioned  as  such  by 
classical  writers.  Some  vsay  it  was  a  board  covered  with  white 
gypsum,  with  letters  of  black,  and  others  say  that  the  letters 
were  red.  Pilate  therefore  did  nothing  unusual.  In  our  Lord's 
case  it  served  two  ends,  whether  Pilate  meant  them  or  not.  For 
one  thing,  it  proclaimed  to  all  passers-by,  all  who  saw  the  cru- 
cifixion, that  Jesus  did  really  suffer,  that  He  was  not  at  the  last 
moment  released,  and  another  punished  in  His  stead,  and  that 
He  was  not  taken  away  by  miraculous  interference  from  His 
enemies'  hands.  For  another  thing,  it  drew  the  attention  of  all 
witnesses  and  passers-by  to  our  Lord,  and  made  it  quite  certain 
on  which  of  the  three  crosses  He  huug.  Without  this,  a  person 
looking  at  three  naked  figures  hanging  on  their  crosses,  from  a 
little  distance  off,  might  well  have  doubted  which  of  the  three 
was  Jesus.  The  title  made  it  plain.  That  our  Lord  was  re- 
garded as  no  common  e very-day  criminal,  and  that  it  was 
thought  right  to  call  special  attention  to  Him,  is  evident  from 
this  title  being  put  on  His  cross. 

[Jesus. ..N'azaretli... King. ..Jews.]  Pilate's  reasons  for  choosing 
to  place  this  description  of  our  Lord  over  His  cross,  we  are  left 
to  conjecture.  My  own  decided  opinion  is  that  he  worded  the 
title  as  he  did,  in  anger  and  vexation,  and  with  an  intention  to 
annoy  and  insult  the  Jews.  He  publicly  held  up  to  scorn  their 
King,  as  a  poor  criminal  from  a  mean  village  in  Galilee,  a  fitting 
king  for  such  a  people  ! — Whatever  his  motive  may  have  been, 
it  was  curiously  overruled  by  God  that  even  on  the  cross  our 
Lord  should  be  styled  a  "  King."  He  came  to  be  a  King,  and 
as  a  King  He  lived  and  suffered  and  died,  though  not  acknowl- 
edged and  honored  by  His  subjects.  "  Nazarene  "  identified  our 
Lord  as  the  well-known  Teacher  from  Galilee,  who  for  three 
years  had  stirred  the  Jewish  mind,  "  King  "  identified  Him  as 
the  Person  accused  by  the  chief  priests  for  claiming  a  kingdom, 
and  formally  rejected  by  them,  on  the  plea  that  they  had  no 
king  but  Caosar.     It  was  a  very  full  and  significant  title. 

A  careful  reader  of  the  Gospels  will  not  fail  to  observe,  that 
each  Gospel  writer  gives  this  title  in  a  slightly  different  form, 
and  that  there  are  in  fact  four  versions  of  it.  The  question 
naturally  arises.  Which  is  correct  ?  The  versions  do  not  at  all 
contradict  one  another  ;  but  that  of  Mark,  "  the  King  of  the 
Jews,"  is  much  shorter  than  that  of  John.  No  two,  in  a  word, 
are  exactly  alike. — In  reply,  it  is  fair  to  remind  the  reader,  that 
the  inscription  was  written  in  three  languages  ;  and  that  it  is 
far  from  unlikely  that  it  was  in  one  form  in  one  language,  and 
in  another  form  in  another.  The  one  common  point  in  all  the 
four  versions  is,  "  the  King  of  the  Jews,"  and  this  was  probably 
the  only  point  that  Mark,  in  his  brief  and  condensed  history, 
was  taught  to  record.  John  gives  the  whole  inscription,  be- 
cause he  alone  narrates  the  dispute  between  the  priests  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  303 

Pilate  about  it.  If  I  may  venture  a  conjecture,  I  stould  guess 
that  Mark  gives  the  Latin  inscription,  Luke  the  Greek,  and 
Matthew  and  John  the  Hebrew  one.  But  wliy  it  seemed  good 
to  the  Holy  Ghost  that  Matthew  should  omit  the  expression  "of 
Nazareth,"  which  John  mentions,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say.  It 
is  precisely  one  of  those  things  in  which  it  is  wisest  to  confess 
our  ignorance,  and  to  be  willing  to  wait  for  more  light. 

St.  John  alone  records  that  Pilate  "  wrote  "  and  "  put  "  on  the 
cross  this  title.  We  are  not  obliged  to  suppose  that  he  did  both 
with  his  own  hands.  The  writing  was  almost  certainly  his 
own  act.  The  putting  the  title  on  the  cross  he  probably  left  to 
the  soldiers. 

The  common  pictures  of  the  crucifixion,  showing  a  kind  of 
scroll,  or  parchment  over  our  Lord's  head  on  the  cross,  are  most 
probably  in  this,  as  in  other  details,  most  incorrect  representa- 
tions of  the  real  facts.  Moreover  most  painters  seem  to  forget 
that  it  was  written  three  times  over,  being  in  three  languages  I 

20. — [TJiis  title  then  read  many,  etc.']  This  seems  to  be  one  of 
John's  parenthetical  comments.  It  also  reads  like  the  report  of 
an  eye-witness  ;  and  this  we  know  John  was.  He  stood  by  and 
saw  all  that  happened.  It  is  as  though  he  said,  "  I  can  testify 
that  many  of  the  Jews  saw  and  read  this  title, — some  as  they 
passed  along  the  road  which  ran  by, — some  from  the  walls  of 
the  city,  for  the  place  was  near  the  walls.  It  was  an  inscrip- 
tion moreover  so  contrived,  that  hardly  any  one  in  Jerusalem 
could  fail  to  understand  it ;  for  it  was  written  in  the  three  lan- 
guages most  likely  to  be  known, — in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and 
Latin." 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  the  title  was  in  Hebrew,  be- 
cause every  Jew  would  know  it,  the  oldest  language  in  the 
world,  and  the  language  of  the  Old  Testament, — in  Greek,  be 
cause  this  was  the  language  most  known  in  all  eastern  countries, 
and  the  language  of  all  literary  and  educated  people, — in  Latin, 
because  this  was  the  language  of  the  Romans,  the  ruling  nation 
in  the  world.  The  Roman  soldiers  would  all  understand  the 
Latin  ;  the  Greek  proselytes  and  Hellenistic  Jews  would  all  un- 
derstand the  Greek  ;  and  the  pure  Jews  from  Galilee  and  Judaea, 
and  every  part  of  the  earth,  assembled  for  the  passover,  would 
all  understand  the  Hebrew.  All  would  go  away  to  spread  the 
tidings  that  one  Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews,  had  been  put  to 
death  by  crucifixion  at  the  passover  feast. 

Henry  remarks,  "  In  the  Hebrew,  the  oracles  of  God  were  re- 
corded  ;  in  Greek,  the  learning  of  the  philosophers  ;  and  in  Latin, 
the  laws  of  the  empire.  In  each  of  these  languages  Christ  is 
proclaimed  King,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  revela- 
tion, wisdom  and  power." 

To  this  very  day  it  is  certain  that  no  three  languages  can  be 
more  useful  for  a  Christian  minister  to  know,  if  he  would  be 
familiar  with  his  Bible,  than  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin. 


^4:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

The  last  day  alone,  perhaps,  will  disclose  the  effect  this  title 
had  on  those  who  read  it.  When  the  priests  and  their  com- 
panions saw  it,  they  mocked  and  scoffed  :  "  King  indeed  I  Let 
Christ  the  King  of  Israel  descend  from  the  cross,  and  we  will 
helieve."  (Mark  xv.  32.)  But  there  was  one  man  who  saw  the 
title  probably  with  very  different  eyes.  The  penitent  thief 
perhaps  grasped  at  the  word  "  King,"  and  believed.  Who  can 
tell  that  this  was  not  tlie  root  of  his  cry,  "  Lord  remember  me, 
when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom."  (Luke  xxiii.  42.)  Per- 
haps Pilate's  title  helped  to  save  a  soul ! 

Brentius  remarks,  that  when  we  think  of  the  cross  of  Christ, 
and  tlie  title  on  it,  which  so  many  read,  we  should  remember 
there  was  another  handwriting  nailed  to  that  cross  spiritually, 
which  no  mortal  could  read.  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  vicarious 
death  for  us,  "  Blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that 
was  against  us,  which  was  contrary  to.us,  and  took  it  out  of  the 
way,  nailing  it  to  His  cross."     (Col,  ii.  14.) 

21. — {Then  said  the  chief  priests,  etc.]  This  verse  brings  out  the 
feeling  which  the  sight  of  Pilate's  title  excited  in  the  minds  of 
the  chief  priests.  They  were  annoyed  and  angry.  They  did  not 
like  tlie  idea  of  this  crucified  criminal  being  publicly  declared 
"  the  King  of  tlie  Jews."  They  detected  the  latent  scorn  and 
irony  which  guided  Pilate's  hands,  and  lay  at  the  bottom  of  his 
mind.  They  did  not  like  so  public  an  announcement  that  they 
had  crucified  their  own  King,  and  wanted  "  no  King  but  Caesar." 
They  were  vexed  at  the  implied  reflection  on  themselves.  Be- 
sides this,  they  were  probably  uncomfortable  in  conscience. 
Hardened  and  wicked  as  they  were,  they  had,  many  of  them, 
we  may  be  sure,  a  secret  conviction  which  they  vainly  tried  to 
keep  down,  that  they  were  doing  a  wrong  thing,  and  a  thing 
which  by  and  by  they  would  find  it  hard  to  defend  either  to 
themselves  or  others.  Hence  they  tried  to  get  Pilate  to  alter 
the  title,  and  to  make  it  appear  that  our  Lord  was  only  a  pre- 
tended King, — an  impostor  who  "  said  that  He  was  King." 
This,  they  doubtless  thought,  would  shift  some  of  the  guilt  off 
their  shoulders,  and  make  it  appear  that  our  Lord  was  crucified 
for  usurping  a  title  to  which  He  was  legally  proved  to  have 
no  claim. 

When  and  where  the  chief  priests  said  this  to  Pilate  does  not 
appear.  It  must  either  have  been  when  the  whole  party  was 
leaving  the  judgment-seat  for  Golgotha,  or  after  our  Lord  was 
nailed  to  the  tree,  or  while  the  soldiers  were  nailing  Him. 
Looking  at  St.  John's  account,  one  might  fancy  that  the  centu- 
rion sent  word  to  Pilate  that  the  prisoner  was  being  nailed  to 
the  cross,  and  asked  for  a  title  to  put  over  His  head,  before  the 
cross  was  reared.  If  we  do  not  suppose  this,  we  must  believe 
that  Pilate  actually  accompanied  the  party  outside  the  walls, 
and  was  only  at  a  little  distance  off  during  the  last  horrible 
preparations.     In  that  case  he  might  easily  write  a  title,  and  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  305 

priests  might  easily  be  standing  bj.  The  difficulty  is  to  under- 
stand where  the  parties  could  be,  when  the  priests  said  "  write 
not ;  "  and  it  is  one  which  must  be  left  unsettled.  It  seems, 
however,  certain  that  once  put  over  our  Lord's  head,  the  title 
was  not  expected  to  be  taken  down  ;  and  the  request  was  not 
to  alter  it,  after  being  put  up,  but  to  write  a  different  title  be- 
fore it  was  put  up. 

Bengel  observes,  that  this  is  the  only  place  in  St.  John's  Gos- 
pel where  the  chief  priests  are  called  "  the  chief  priests  of  the 
Jews."  He  thinks  it  is  intended  to  mark  emphatically  the  bit- 
ter hatred  with  which  the  priests  of  the  Jews  regarded  the 
King  of  the  Jews. 

We  may  well  believe  that  even  the  wickedest  men  at  their 
worst,  are  often  more  sore  and  uncomfortable  inwardly  than 
they  appear  outwardly.  This  it  was  that  probably  lay  at  the 
bottom  of  the  cliief  priests'  remonstrance  about  the  title. 
Herod's  cry,  "  It  is  John  the  Baptist,"  after  John  was  dead,  is 
another  case  in  point. 

22. — \_Pilat6  answered...!  have  written.']  The  hard,  haughty,  im- 
perious character  of  the  wicked  Roman  Governor  comes  out 
forcibly  in  these  words.  They  show  his  contempt  for  the 
Jews  : — "  Trouble  me  not  about  the  title  :  I  have  written  it,  and 
I  shall  not  alter  it  to  please  you." — They  suggest  the  idea  that 
he  was  willing  enough  to  be  revenged  on  them  for  their  obsti- 
nate refusal  to  meet  his  wishes,  and  consent  to  our  Lord's  re- 
lease. He  was  glad  to  hold  them  up  to  scorn  and  contempt,  as 
a  people  who  crucified  their  own  king.  It  is  likely  enough  that 
between  his  wife  and  his  own  conscience  and  the  chief  priests, 
the  Roman  Governor  was  vexed,  worried,  and  irritated,  and 
savagely  resolved  not  to  gratify  the  Jews  any  further  in  any 
matter.  He  had  gone  as  far  as  he  chose,  in  allowing  them  to 
murder  an  innocent  and  just  person.  He  would  not  go  an  inch 
further.  He  now  made  a  stand,  and  showed  that  he  could  be 
firm  and  unyielding  and  unbending  when  he  liked.  It  is  no 
uncommon  thing  to  see  a  wicked  man,  when  he  has  given  way 
to  the  devil  and  trampled  on  his  conscience  in  one  direction, 
trying  to  make  up  for  it  by  being  lirm  in  another. 

Calvin  observes  that  Pilate,  by  publishing  in  three  languages 
Christ's  title,  was  "  by  a  secret  guidance  made  a  herald  of  the 
Gospel."  He  contrasts  his  conduct  with  that  of  the  Papists 
who  prohibit  the  reading  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Scriptures  by 
the  common  people.     Gualter  says  much  the  same. 

Bullinger  remarks  that  Pilate  acted  like  Caiaphas  when  he 
said,  "  It  is  expedient  that  one  die  for  the  people,  not  knowing 
what  he  said."  Just  so  Pilate  little  knew  what  testimony  he 
was  bearing  to  Christ's  kingly  office. 

Leigh  quotes  a  saying  of  Augustine :  "If  a  man  like  Pilate 
can  say,  what  I  have  written  I  have  written,  and  will  not  alter, 


306  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

can  we  tliink  that  God  dotli  write  any  in  His  book  and  blot  it 
out  again  ?  " 

23. — [Then  the  soldiers,  etc.]  The  soldiers  having  now  finished 
their  bloody  work,  having  nailed  our  Lord  to  the  cross,  put  the 
title  over  His  head  and  reared  the  cross  on  end,  proceeded  to 
do  what  they  probably  always  did, — to  divide  the  clothes  of 
the  crucified  criminal  among  themselves.  In  most  countries 
the  clothes  of  a  person  put  to  death  by  the  law  are  the  perqui- 
site of  the  executioner.  So  it  was  with  our  Lord's  clothes. 
They  had  most  likely  first  stripped  our  Lord  naked,  before  nail- 
ing his  hands  and  feet  to  the  cross,  and  had  laid  his  clothes  on 
one  side  till  they  had  finished  their  work.  They  now  turned 
to  the  clothes,  and,  as  they  had  done  many  a  time  on  such  oc- 
casions, proceeded  to  divide  them.  All  four  Evangelists  partic- 
ularly mention  this,  and  evidently  call  our  special  attention  to  it. 

The  division  into  four  portions  shows  clearly  that  there  were 
four  soldiers  employed,  beside  the  centurion,  in  the  work  of 
crucifixion.  Many  commentators  see  in  them  emblems  of  the 
four  quarters  of  the  Gentile  world.  This,  however,  seems  to 
me  fanciful.  A  quaternion,  a  small  party  of  four,  was  a  com- 
mon division  of  soldiers  in  those  days,  just  as  "  a  file  "  of  men 
is  among  ourselves.    (See  Acts  xii.  4.) 

What  the  four  portions  of  garments  were  we  are  left  to  con- 
jecture. Hengstenberg  thinks  that  they  consisted  of  the  cover- 
ing of  the  head,  the  girdle,  the  shoes,  and  the  under  garment 
fitting  to  the  body.  Matthew's  report  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  contains  a  clear  distinction  between  a  coat  and  a  cloak. 
(Matt.  V.  40.)  For  these  four  portions  the  soldiers  probably 
cast  lots,  in  order  that  each  one  might  have  his  part  decided, 
and  to  prevent  wrangling  about  the  unequal  value  of  the  por- 
tions. 

Others  tliink  that  the  language  of  St.  John  about  the  coat 
which  was  "  not  rent,"  is  strong  evidence  that  all  the  rest  of 
our  Lord's  clothes  were  rent  into  four  pieces,  and  that  Hengs- 
tenberg's  division  of  them  v/ill  not  stand.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  there  is  much  probability  in  this.  It  seems  very  unlikely 
that  so  much  should  be  said  about  this  seamless  garment  being 
not  rent,  if  the  other  garments  had  not  been  torn  in  dividing 
them. 

Concerning  the  "  coat "  here  mentioned,  it  is  not  easy  to  say 
positively  what  part  of  our  Lord's  dress  it  was. 

(a)  Most  commentators  say  that  it  was  the  long  inner  tunic, 
girt  about  the  wjiist,  and  reaching  almost  to  the  feet,  which 
was  the  i)rincipal  garment  of  an  inhabitant  of  the  East, — a 
kind  of  loose  smock-frock  with  sleeves,  such  as  any  one  may 
Bee  a  pattern  of,  in  Leonardo  da  Vinci's  famous  picture  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  The  objection  to  this  view,  to  my  mind,  is  the 
grave  difiiculty  of  explaining  how  such  a  garment  could  be 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  307 

seamless  and  woven  throughout, — though  I  doubt  not  our  Lord 
wore  it,  and  it  was  the  hem  of  such  a  garment  the  woman 
touched. 

(b)  Some  few  commentators  think  it  was  the  outer  garment, 
a  loose  mantle  or  cape,  thrown  over  the  shoulders,  which  many 
wore  above  the  tunic.  Such  a  garment,  having  no  sleeves, 
might  easily  be  made  in  one  piece  without  any  seam,  and  per- 
haps was  only  drawn  together  or  clasped  about  the  shoulders. 
It  is  fair,  nevertheless,  to  say  that  the  Greek  word  here  ren- 
dered "  coat,"  ordinarily  means  the  inward  garment  or  tunic. 
(See  Suicer  and  Parkhurst.)  Becker's  Charicles,  however,  on 
this  Greek  word,  shows  some  reason  for  thinking  it  sometimes 
means  the  outward  coat. 

The  reader  must  judge  for  himself.  The  question  is  one 
which  cannot  be  settled  positively  either  way,  and  happily  is 
not  of  any  moment.  To  my  own  mind,  the  objection  to  the 
first  and  common  view  is  very  serious  indeed,  if  not  insupera- 
ble ;  but  it  may  not  appear  so  to  others.  The  only  thing  we 
know  for  certain  is  that  one  portion  of  our  Lord's  dress  was 
not  rent,  but  made  the  subject  of  casting  lots  as  to  who  should 
have  it.  As  to  the  ancient  fable  that  our  Lord's  coat  was  wov- 
en  by  his  mother  Mary  when  He  was  a  child,  grew  with  His 
growth,  and  never  waxed  old  or  wore  out,  it  is  a  foolish  apoc- 
ryphal legend. 

Bengel  observes  that  we  never  read  of  our  Lord  "  rending  " 
His  own  garments  in  desperate  sorrow,  like  Job,  Jacob,  Joshua, 
Caleb,  Jephthah,  Hezekiah,  Mordecai,  Ezra,  Paul,  and  Barnabas. 
(See  Gen.  xxxvii.  9  ;  Numb.  xiv.  6  ;  Judges  xi.  35  ;  2  Kings 
xix.  3  ;  Esther  iv.  1 ;  Ezra  ix.  3  ;  Job  i.  20  ;  Acts  xiv.  14.) 

On  the  incident  recorded  in  this  verse,  Luther  remarks, 
**  This  distribution  of  garments  served  for  a  sign  that  every- 
thing was  done  with  Christ,  just  as  with  one  who  was  aban- 
doned, lost,  and  to  be  forgotten  forever."  Even  among  our 
selves,  the  division,  sale,  or  giving  away  of  a  man's  clothes,  is 
a  plain  indication  of  his  being  dead,  or  given  up  for  lost ,  just 
as  among  soldiers  and  sailors,  when  dead  or  missing,  the  effects 
are  sold  or  distributed. 

Henry  thinks  that  "  the  soldiers  hoped  to  make  something 
more  than  ordinary  out  of  our  Lord's  clothes,  having  heard  of 
cures  wrought  by  the  touch  of  the  hem  of  His  garment,  or  ex- 
pecting that  His  admirers  would  give  any  money  for  them." 
But  this  seems  unlikely  and  fanciful. 

Our  Lord  was  treated,  we  should  observe,  just  like  all  com 
mon  criminals, — stripped  naked,  and  His  clothes  sold  under 
His  eyes,  as  one  dead  already  and  cast  off  by  man. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  this,  as  in  many  other  things,  our 
Lord  was,  in  a  striking  manner,  our  substitute.  He  was  strip- 
ped naked,  and  reckoned,  and  dealt  with  as  a  guilty  sinner,  in 


308  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

order  that  we  miglit  be  clothed  with  the  garment  of  His  perfect 
righteousness  and  reckoned  innocent. 

24. — [Thet/  said  therefore  among  themselves,  etc.]  In  this  verse 
we  are  told  that  the  conduct  of  the  soldiers  was  a  precise  ful- 
filment of  a  prophecy  delivered  a  thousand  years  before.  (Ps. 
xxii.  18.)  That  i)ropliecy  foretold  not  only  that  Messiah's  gar- 
ments should  be  parted  and  distributed,  but  that  men  should 
"  cast  lots  for  His  vesture."  Little  did  the  four  rough  Roman 
soldiers  think  that  they  were  actually  supplying  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  the  Scriptures  1  They  only  saw  that  our  Lord's  "  coat  " 
was  a  good  and  serviceable  garment,  which  it  was  a  pity  to  rend 
or  tear  and  therefore  they  agreed  to  cast  lots  who  should  have  it. 
And  yet,  in  so  doing,  they  added  to  the  great  cloud  of  witnesses 
who  prove  the  divine  authority  of  the  Bible.  Men  little  con- 
sider that  they  are  all  instruments  in  God's  hand  for  accom- 
plishing His  purposes. 

.  The  importance  of  interpreting  prophecy  literally,  and  not 
figuratively,  is  strongly  shown  in  this  verse.  The  system  of 
interpretation  which  unhappily  prevails  among  many  Chris- 
tians— I  mean  the  system  of  spiritualizing  away  all  the  plain 
statements  of  the  prophets,  and  accommodating  them  to  the 
Church  of  Christ — can  never  be  reconciled  with  such  a  verse 
as  this.  The  plain,  literal  meaning  of  words  should  evidently 
be  the  meaning  placed  on  all  the  statements  of  Old  Testament 
prophecy.  This  remark  of  course  does  not  apply  to  symbolical 
prophecies,  such  as  those  of  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials  in 
Kevelation. 

The  typical  meaning  of  this  seamless  and  unrent  coat  of  our 
Lord  is  a  point  on  which  fanciful  theological  writers  have  lov- 
ed to  dwell  in  every  age  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  repre- 
sented, we  are  told  by  Augustine  and  many  others,  the  unity 
of  the  Church,  and  it  was  an  allusion  to  the  priesthood  of  the 
Divine  wearer !  I  frankly  confess  that  I  am  unable  to  believe 
such  notions,  and  I  doubt  extremely  whether  they  were  intended 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  it  is  a  fact  mentioned  by  Henry,  that 
"  those  who  opposed  Luther's  separation  from  the  Church  of 
Rome,  urged  much  this  seamless  coat  as  an  argument,  and  laid 
BO  much  stress  on  it,  that  they  were  called  luconsutilistae, — the 
seamless  ones ! " 

As  to  the  lying  legend  that  this  seamless  coat  was  preserved 
and  handed  down  to  the  Church  as  a  precious  relic,  it  is  scarce- 
ly worth  while  to  mention  it,  except  as  a  melancholy  illustra- 
tion of  the  corruption  of  man,  and  the  apostacy  of  the  Church 
of  Rome.  The  holy  coat  of  Treves,  and  its  exhibition,  are  a 
scandal  and  disgrace  to  Christianity.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  any 
one  who  can  seriously  believe  that  our  Lord's  seamless  coat, 
after  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  heathen  Romish  soldier,  was 
finally  treasured  up  as  a  relic,  or  that  the  cross  itself  was  kept 
safe  and  escaped  destruction,  must  be  so  credulous  a  person 
that  argument  is  thrown  away  on  him. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  309 

It  is  wortli  remembering,  that  when  the  first  Adam  fell  hy 
Bin  and  was  cast  out  of  Eden,  God  mercifully  clothed  him  and 
covered  his  nakedness.  When  the  second  Adam  died  as  our 
substitute,  and  was  counted  "  a  curse  "  for  us  on  the  cross.  He 
was  stripped  naked  and  His  clothes  sold. 

The  object  for  which  John  concludes  the  verse  with  the 
words,  "  These  things  therefore  the  soldiers  did,"  is  not  very 
apparent.  Burgon  suggests  it  may  mean,  "  Such  was  the  part 
which  the  soldiers  played  in  this  terrible  tragedy.  Uninflu- 
enced by  the  Jews,  without  any  direction  from  Pilate,  these 
things  the  soldiers  did."  This  however  seems  hardly  satisfac- 
tory, because  this  was  not  all  that  the  soJdiers  did, — I  prefer 
thinking  that  St.  John  means  to  say,  that  he  was  actually  an 
eye-witness  of  the  soldiers  unconsciously  fulfilling  an  ancient 
prophecy :  "  I  myself  saw,  with  mine  own  eyes,  the  four  sol- 
diers casting  lots  on  my  Lord's  coat  ;  and  I  can  testify  that  I 
saw  the  words  of  the  Psalmist  literally  fulfilled." 

Lampe  thinks  that  St.  John  makes  this  remark,  in  order  to 
show  how  literally  Scripture  was  fulfilled  by  men  who  were 
totally  ignorant  of  Scripture.  The  Roman  soldiers  of  course 
knew  nothing  of  the  Psalms,  yet  did  the  very  things  predicted 
in  the  Psalms. 

25. — [Hoio  there  stood  hy  the  cross,  etc.]  A  wonderfully  striking 
incident  is  recorded  in  this  and  the  two  following  verses,  which 
is  not  found  in  the  other  three  Gospels.  St.  John  tells  us  that 
at  this  awful  moment,  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  other 
women,  two  if  not  three,  stood  by  the  cross  on  which  our  Lord 
hung.  "  Love  is  strong  as  death  ;  "  and  even  amidst  the  crowd 
of  taunting  Jews  and  rough  Roman  soldiers,  these  holy  women 
were  determined  to  stand  by  our  Lord  to  the  last,  and  to  show 
their  unceasing  aflection  to  Him,  When  we  remember  that 
our  Lord  was  a  condemned  criminal,  peculiarly  hated  by  the 
chief  priests,  and  executed  by  Roman  soldiers,  the  faithfulness 
and  courage  of  these  holy  women  can  never  be  sufiiciently  ad- 
mired. As  long  as  the  world  stands  they  supply  a  glorious 
proof  of  what  grace  can  do  for  the  weak,  and  of  the  strength 
that  love  to  Christ  can  supply.  When  all  men  but  one  forsook 
our  Lord,  more  than  one  woman  boldly  confessed  Him.  Wo- 
men, in  short,  were  the  last  at  the  cross  and  the  first  at  the 
tomb. 

It  is  interesting  to  consider  who  and  what  they  were,  that 
stood  by  our  Lord's  cross  as  He  hung  upon  it.  John,  the  be- 
loved disciple,  was  there,  we  know  ;  though  with  characteris- 
tic modesty  he  does  not  directly  name  it.  But  the  twenty-sixth 
verse  shows  clearly  that  he  was  one  of  the  party.  He  might 
well  be  the  one  that  "  Jesus  loved."  No  Apostle  seems  to  have 
had  such  deep  feeling  towards  our  Lord  as  John. — Mary,  the 
mother  of  our  Lord  {netier  called  the  Virgin  Mary  in  Scripture) 
was  there.     We  must  suppose  that  she  had  come  up  f  j-om  Gali- 


310  EXPOSITOET  THOUGHTS. 

lee  to  tlie  feast  of  tlie  passover,  in  company  witli  the  other 
women  who  ministered  to  our  Lord.  She  must  now  have  been 
comparatively  old,  at  least  forty-eight  years  old.  To  represent 
her  in  pictures  as  a  beautiful  young  woman  at  the  time  of  the 
crucifixion  is  absurd.  Who  can  doubt  that  when  she  saw 
her  Son  hanging  on  the  cross,  she  must  have  realized  the  truth 
of  old  Simeon's  prophecy,  "  A  sword  shall  pierce  through  thine 
own  soul  also,"  (Luke  ii.  35.)  Very  striking  and  instructive  is 
it  to  observe  how  very  rarely  she  is  named  in  the  Gospel  histo- 
ry.— Mary,  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  or  Alpheus,  was  there.  The 
Greek  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  it  means  daughter  or  wife ; 
but  nearly  all  think  it  must  be  wife.  She  seems  to  Jiave  been 
the  mother  of  James  and  Jude  the  Apostles,  and  to  have  been 
related  in  some  way  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  either  as  sister  or 
sister-in-law.  Hence  James  is  called  the  "  Lord's  brother." 
She  too  must  have  been  nearly  as  old  as  the  Virgin  Mary,  if  we 
may  judge  by  her  having  two  sons  who  were  Apostles. — Mary 
of  Magdala,  in  Galilee,  commonly  called  Mary  Magdalene,  was 
also  there.  Of  her  we  only  know  that  Jesus  had  cast  out  of  her 
seven  devils,  and  that  none  of  all  the  women  who  ministered  to 
our  Lord,  seem  to  have  felt  such  deep  gratitude  to  our  Saviour, 
and  to  have  demonstrated  such  deep  affection.  The  common 
doctrine  that  she  had  once  been  a  notorious  breaker  of  the 
seventh  commandment  has  no  foundation  in  Scripture.  She 
probably  was  the  youngest  of  all  the  party,  and  as  such  had  to 
risk  more,  and  sacrifice  her  own  feelings  more  than  any,  in 
pressing  through  a  crowd  of  enemies  to  the  foot  of  the  cross. 

But  were  there  only  three  women  at  the  cross  ?  This  is  a 
disputed  question,  and  one  which  will  probably  never  be  set- 
tled, since  the  Greek  wording  of  the  verse  before  us  leaves  the 
poiDt  open  either  way. 

(a)  Most  commentators  think  that  the  words,  "  His  mother's 
sister,"  belongs  to  "  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas,"  and  are  meant 
to  define  the  relationship  between  that  Mary  and  Mary  the 
mother  of  our  Lord. 

(b)  Others,  as  Pearce,  Bengel,  and  Alford,  think  that  "  His 
mother's  sister  "  means  a  fourth  woman,  and  that  this  woman 
was  Salome,  the  mother  of  James  and  John.  The  strongest  ar- 
gument in  favor  of  this  view  is  the  distinct  statement  in  Mat- 
thew's account  of  the  crucifixion,  that  many  women  beheld  the 
sight,  "  among  which  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  Mary  the 
mother  of  James  and  Joses,  and  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  chil- 
dren,"— that  is,  Salome.  (Matt,  xxvii.  5"6.)  If  she  stood  with 
Mary  Magdalene  looking  on,  why  should  we  doubt  that  she 
stood  with  her  at  the  cross  ?  The  suppression  of  her  name  is 
quite  characteristic  of  John.  She  was  his  own  mother,  and  he 
modestly  keeps  back  her  name,  as  he  keeps  back  his  own.  In 
what  way  she  was  the  "  sister  "  to  the  mother  of  our  Lord  we 
do  not  know.  But  there  is  no  reason  against  it,  that  I  know  of. 
According  to  this  view,  the  women  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  were 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  311 

four :  viz,  (1)  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus.  (2)  The  sister  of  our 
Lord's  mother :  i.e.,  Salome,  the  mother  of  John,  who  wrote 
this  Gospel.  (3)  Mary,  the  wife  of  Alpheus  and  mother  of  two 
Apostles.     (4)  Mary  Magdalene. 

The  reader  must  decide  for  himself.  The  question  happily 
is  not  one  affecting  our  salvation.  For  myself  I  must  frankly 
declare  my  belief  that  the  second  view  is  the  right  one,  and 
that  there  were  four  women,  and  not  three  only,  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross.  The  objection  that  the  word  "  and  "  is  omitted  be- 
fore "  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas"  is  worthless.  In  almost  ev- 
ery catalogue  of  the  Apostles  the  same  omission  may  be  noticed. 
(See  Acts  i.  13  ;  Matt.  x.  2  ;  Luke  vi.  14.) 

Whether  all  Christian  women  should  always  come  forward 
and  put  themselves  in  such  public  and  prominent  positions  as 
these  holy  w^omen  took  up,  is  a  grave  question,  about  which 
each  Christian  woman  must  judge  for  herself.  Considerations 
of  physical  strength  and  nervous  self-command  must  not  be 
overlooked.  The  four  women  who  stood  by  the  cross  neither 
fainted  nor  went  into  hysterics,  but  were  self-controlled,  and 
calm.  Let  every  one  be  persuaded  in  their  own  minds.  Some 
women  can  do  what  others  cannot. 

Why  the  fierce  enemies  of  our  Lord  among  the  Jews,  and  the 
rough  Roman  soldiers,  permitted  these  holy  women  to  stand  un- 
disturbed by  the  cross,  is  a  question  we  have  no  means  of  de- 
ciding. Possibly  the  Romans  may  have  thought  it  only  fair 
and  reasonable  to  let  a  criminal's  relatives  and  friends  stand  by 
him,  when  he  could  do  the  State  no  more  harm,  and  they  could 
not  rescue  him  from  death.  Possibly  the  centurion  who  super- 
intended the  execution,  may  have  felt  some  pity  for  the  little 
weeping  company  of  weak  women.  Who  can  tell  but  his  kind- 
ness was  a  cup  of  cold  water  Avhich  was  repaid  him  a  hundred- 
fold? He  said  before  the  day  ended,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son 
of  God."  (Matt,  xxvii.  54.)  Possibly  John's  acquaintance  with 
the  high  priest,  already  mentioned,  may  have  procured  him 
and  his  companions  some  favor.  All  these,  however,  are  only 
conjectures,  and  we  cannot  settle  the  point. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  stood  "  is  literally  "  had  stood." 
Does  not  this  mean  from  the  beginning  of  the  crucifixion  ? 

26,  27.— [  When  Jesus  therefore  saw  His  Mother,  etc.]  The  incident 
recorded  in  these  two  verses  is  wonderfully  touching  and  af- 
fecting.  Even  in  this  trying  season  of  bodily  and  mental  ago- 
ny, our  blessed  Lord  did  not  forget  others. — He  had  not  forgot- 
ten His  brutal  murderers  ;  but  had  prayed  for  them :  "  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." — He  had  not 
forgotten  His  fellow- sufferers  by  His  side.  When  one  of  the 
crucified  malefactors  cried  to  him,  "  Lord,  remember  me,"  He 
had  at  once  answered  him,  and  promised  him  a  speedy  entrance 
into  Paradise. — And  now  He  did  not  forget  His  mother.  He  saw 
her  standing  by  the  cross,  and  knew  well  her  distress,  and  felt 


312  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

tenderly  for  her  desolate  condition,  left  alone  in  a  wicked  world, 
after  having  lost  such  a  Son.  He  therefore  commended  her  to 
the  care  of  John,  His  most  loving  and  tender-hearted  and  faith- 
ful disciple.  He  told  John  to  look  on  her  as  his  mother,  and 
told  His  mother  to  look  on  John  as  her  son.  No  better  and 
wiser  arrangement  could  have  been  made  in  every  way.  None 
would  care  so  much  for  the  mother  of  Jesus  as  the  disciple 
whom  Jesus  loved,  and  who  lay  in  His  bosom  at  the  last  sup- 
per. No  home  could  be  so  suitable  to  Mary,  as  the  home  of  one 
who  was,  according  to  the  view  maintained  above,  son  to  her 
own  sister  Salome. 

The  lessons  of  the  whole  transaction  are  deeply  instructive. 

{a)  We  should  mark  the  depth  and  width  of  our  Lord's  sym- 
pathies and  affections.  The  Saviour  on  whom  we  are  bid  to  re- 
pose the  weight  of  our  sinful  souls  is  one  whose  love  passeth 
knowledge.  Shallow,  skin-deep  feelings  in  others,  we  all  know 
continually  chill  and  disappoint  us  on  every  side  in  this  world. 
But  there  is  one  whose  mighty  heart  affection  knows  no  bot- 
tom.    That  one  is  Christ. 

(6)  We  should  mark  the  high  honor  our  Lord  puts  on  the 
fifth  commandment.  Even  in  His  last  hour  He  magnifies  it, 
and  makes  it  honorable,  by  providing  for  His  mother  according 
to  the  flesh.  The  Christian  who  does  not  lay  himself  out  to 
honor  father  and  mother — both  one  and  the  other  parent,  is  a 
very  ignorant  religionist. 

(c)  We  should  mark  that  when  Jesus  died  Joseph  was  prob- 
ably dead,  and  that  Mary  had  no  other  children  beside  our  Lord. 
It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  would  have  commended 
Mary  to  John,  if  she  had  had  a  husband  or  son  to  support  her. 
The  theory  of  some  few  writers,  that  Mary  had  other  children 
by  Joseph  after  Jesus  was  born,  is  very  untenable,  and  grossly 
improbable. 

{d)  We  should  mark  what  a  strong  condemnation  the  passage 
supplies  to  the  whole  system  of  Mary- worship,  as  held  by  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  Tliere  is  not  here  a  trace  of  the  doc- 
trine that  Mary  is  patroness  of  the  saints,  protectress  of  the 
Church,  and  one  who  can  help  others.  On  the  contrary,  we  see 
her  requiring  protection  herself,  and  commended  to  the  care 
and  protection  of  a  disciple!  Hengstenberg  remarks,  "Our 
Lord's  design  was  not  to  provide  for  John,  but  to  provide  for 
His  mother."  Alford  observes,  "  The  Romanist  idea  that  the 
Lord  commended  all  His  disciples,  as  represented  by  the  be- 
loved one,  to  the  patronage  of  His  mother,  is  simply  absurd." 

{e)  Finally,  we  should  mark  how  Jesus  honors  those  who 
honor  and  boldly  confess  Him.  To  John,  who  alone  of  all  the 
eleven  stood  by  the  cross.  He  gives  the  high  privilege  of  taking 
charge  of  His  motlier.  As  Henry  pleasantly  remarks,  it  is  a 
sign  of  great  confidence,  and  a  mark  of  great  honor,  to  be  made 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  313 

a  trustee  and  a  guardian  by  a  great  person,  for  those  lie  leaves 
behind  at  his  death.  To  the  women  Jesus  gives  the  honor  of 
being  specially  named  and  recorded  for  their  faithfulness  and 
love,  in  a  Gospel  which  is  read  all  over  the  world  in  200  lan- 
guages. 

The  Greek  words  rendered  "  his  own  home,"  mean  literally, 
"his  own  things."  It  is  a  thoroughly  indefinite  expression. 
We  can  only  suppose  it  means,  that  in  future,  from  that  day, 
wherever  John  abode  the  mother  of  our  Lord  abode  also.  Hi3 
home,  in  a  word,  became  her  home.  There  is  no  evidence  what- 
ever that  John  had  any  home  in  Jerusalem.  If  he  had  any 
home  at  all,  it  must  have  been  in  Galilee,  near  the  lake  of  Gen- 
nesaret. 

Bengel,  Besser,  Ellicott,  and  Alford,  from  the  phrase  "  hour," 
suggest  that  John  took  Mary  home  immediately,  so  that  she  did 
not  see  our  Lord  die,  and  then  returned  to  the  cross.  This, 
however,  seems  to  me  very  improbable.  The  mother  of  our 
Lord  would  surely  stay  by  the  cross  to  the  last,  if  any  woman 
did.  John  would  not  leave  the  cross,  in  my  opinion,  for  a  min- 
ute. His  narrative  of  the  crucifixion  reads  like  that  of  an  eye- 
witness from  first  to  last. 

Hengstenberg  takes  the  same  view  that  I  do. 

The  word  "  woman  "  in  the  twenty  sixth  verse,  is  noteworthy. 
It  must  not  be  pressed  too  far  as  implying  the  slightest  disre- 
spect or  want  of  affection.  The  whole  transaction  here  narrated 
overthrows  such  an  idea.  But  I  think  it  is  remarkable  that  our 
Lord  does  not  say  "  Mother."  And  I  cannot  help  thinking  that, 
even  at  this  awful  moment.  He  would  remind  her  that  she  must 
never  suffer  herself  or  others  to  presume  on  the  relationship 
between  her  and  Him,  or  claim  any  supernatural  honor  on  the 
ground  of  being  His  mother.  Henceforth  she  must  daily  re- 
member, that  her  first  aim  must  be  to  live  the  life  of  faith  as  a 
believing  woman,  like  all  other  Christian  women.  Her  bless- 
edness did  not  consist  in  being  related  to  Christ  according  to 
the  flesh,  but  in  believing  and  keeping  Christ's  Word.  I  firmly 
believe  that,  even  on  the  cross,  Jesus  foresaw  the  future  heresy 
of  "  Mary- worship."  Therefore  he  said  "  Woman,"  and  did  not 
Bay  "  Mother." 

Besser  remarks,  "  Some  old  writers,  as  Bonaventura,  say  that 
Christ  perhaps  avoided  the  sweet  name  of  mother,  that  He 
might  not  lacerate  Mary's  heart  with  such  a  tender  word  of 
farewell.  Others  see  in  Christ's  manner  of  speaking  a  refer- 
ence to  the  seed  of  the  looman  who  was  to  bruise  the  serpent's 
head.  The  most  obvious  view  is,  that  the  Lord,  through  this 
name  woman,  would  direct  His  mother  into  that  love  which 
knows  Christ  no  more  after  the  flesh  (2  Cor.  v.  16),  and  would 
also  declare  to  us  that  in  the  midst  of  His  work  of  atonement 
He  felt  Himself  equally  bound  close  to  all  sinners,  and  that  He 
was  not  nearer  to  His  mother  than  He  was  to  thee  and  me." 

14 


314 


EXrOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


JOHN  XIX.  28—37. 


28  After  this,  Jesus  knowing  that 
all  things  were  now  accomplished, 
that  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled, 
Baith,  I  thirst. 

29  Now  there  was  set  a  vessel  full 
of  vinegar  :  and  they  filled  a  sponge 
with  vinegar,  and  put  it  upon  hyssop, 
and  put  it  to  his  mouth. 

30  When  Jesus  therefore  had  re- 
ceived the  vinegar,  he  said,  it  is 
finished:  and  he  bowed  his  head 
and  gave  up  the  ghost. 

31  The  Jews  therefore,  because  it 
was  the  preparation,  that  the  bodies 
Bhould  not  remain  upon  the  cross  on 
the  sabbath  day,  (for  that  sabbath 
day  was  an  high  day,)  besought  Pi- 
late that  their  legs  might  be  broken; 
and  that  they  might  be  taken  away. 


32  Then  came  the  soldiers  and 
brake  the  legs  of  the  first,  and  of  the 
other  which  was  crucified  with  him. 

33  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus, 
and  saw  that  he  was  dead  already, 
they  brake  not  his  legs  : 

34  But  one  of  the  soldiers  with  a 
spear  pierced  his  side,  and  forthwith 
came  there  out  blood  and  water. 

35  And  he  that  saw  it  bare  record, 
and  his  record  is  true  :  and  he  know- 
eth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might 
believe. 

36  For  these  things  were  done,  that 
the  scripture  should  be  fulfilled,  A 
bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken. 

37  And  again  another  scripture 
saith,  they  shall  look  on  him  whom 
they  pierced. 


This  part  of  St.  John's  narrative  of  Christ's  passion, 
contains  points  of  deep  interest,  which  are  silently- 
passed  over  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  The  reason 
of  this  silence  we  are  not  told.  Suffice  it  for  us  to  re- 
member that,  both  in  what  they  recorded  and  in  what 
they  did  not  record,  all  four  Evangelists  wrote  by  in- 
spiration of  God. 

Let  us  mark,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  the  frequent 
fulfilments  of  prophetic  Scripture  throughout  every  part 
of  Chrisfs  crucifixion.  Three  several  predictions  are 
specially  mentioned,  in  Exodus,  Psalms,  and  Zechariah, 
which  received  their  accomplishment  at  the  cross. 
Others,  as  every  well-informed  Bible-reader  knows, 
might  easily  be  added.  All  combine  to  prove  one  and 
the  same  thing.  They  prove  that  the  death  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  Golgotha  was  a  thing  foreseen  and 
predetermined  by  God.  Hundreds  of  years  before  the 
crucifixion,  every  part  of  the  solemn  transaction  was 
arranged  in  the  Divine  counsels,  and  the  minutest  par- 
ticulars were  revealed  to  the  Prophets.     From  first  to 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  315 

last  it  was  a  thing  foreknowiij  and  every  portion  of  it 
was  in  accordance  with  a  settled  plan  and  design.  In 
the  highest,  fullest  sense,  when  Christ  died,  He  "  died 
according  to  the  Scriptures."     (1  Cor.  xv.  3.) 

We  need  not  hesitate  to  regard  such  fulfilments  of 
prophecy  as  strong  evidence  of  the  Divine  authority  of 
God's  Word.  The  Prophets  foretell  not  only  Christ's 
death,  but  the  particulars  of  His  death.  It  is  impossi- 
ble to  explain  so  many  accomplishments  of  predicted 
circumstances  upon  any  other  theory.  To  talk  of  luck, 
chance,  and  accidental  coincidence,  as  sufficient  expla- 
nation, is  preposterous  and  absurd.  The  only  rational 
account  is  the  inspiration  of  God.  The  Prophets  who 
foretold  the  particulars  of  the  crucifixion,  were  inspired 
by  Him  who  foresees  the  end  from  the  beginning ;  and 
the  books  they  wrote  under  His  inspiration  ought  not 
to  be  read  as  human  compositions,  but  Divine.  Great 
indeed  are  the  difficulties  of  all  who  pretend  to  deny 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible.  It  really  requires  more  un- 
reasoning faith  to  be  an  infidel  than  to  be  a  Christian. 
The  man  who  regards  the  rej^eated  fulfilments  of  minute 
prophecies  about  Christ's  death,  such  as  the  prophecies 
about  His  dress.  His  thirst.  His  pierced  side,  and  His 
bones,  as  the  result  of  chance,  and  not  of  design,  must 
indeed  be  a  credulous  man. 

We  should  mark,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  the  pecu- 
liarly solemn  saying  which  came  from,  our  LorcVs  lii^s 
just  before  He  died.  St.  John  relates  that  "  when  He 
had  received  the  vinegar.  He  said,  it  is  finished  ;  and 
He  bowed  His  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost."  It  is  sure- 
ly not  too  much  to  say,  that  of  all  the  seven  famous  say- 
ings of  Christ  on  the  cross,  none  is  more  remarkable  than 
this,  which  John  alone  has  recorded. 

The  precise  meaning  of  this  wondrous  expression, 
'•'  It  is  finished,"  is  a  point  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  not 


316  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

thought  good  to  reveal  to  us.  There  is  a  depth  about 
it,  we  must  all  instinctively  feel,  which  man  has  proba- 
bly no  line  to  fathom.  Yet  there  is  perhaps  no  irrever- 
ence in  conjecturing  the  thoughts  that  were  in  our  Lord's 
mind,  when  the  word  was  spoken.  The  finishing  of  all 
the  known  and  unknown  sufferings  which  He  came  to 
endure,  as  our  Substitute, — the  finishing  of  the  ceremo- 
nial law,  which  He  came  to  wind  up  and  fulfil,  as  the 
true  Sacrifice  for  sin, — the  finishing  of  the  many  prophe- 
cies, which  He  came  to  accomplish, — the  finishing  of  the 
great  work  of  man's  redemption,  which  was  now  close  at 
hand, — all  this,  we  need  not  doubt,  our  Lord  had  in  view 
when  He  said,  "It  is  finished."  There  may  have  been 
more  behind,  for  aught  we  know.  But  in  handling  the 
language  of  such  a  Being  as  our  Saviour,  on  such  an 
occasion,  and  at  so  mysterious  a  crisis  of  His  history, 
it  is  well  to  be  cautious.  "The  place  whereon  we 
stand  is  holy  ground." 

One  comfortable  thought,  at  all  events,  stands  out 
most  clearly  on  the  face  of  this  famous  expression.  We 
rest  our  souls  on  a  "  finished  work,"  if  we  rest  them  on 
the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  We  need  not  fear 
that  either  sin,  or  Satan,  or  law  shall  condemn  us  at  the 
last  day.  We  may  lean  back  on  the  thought,  that  we 
have  a  Saviour  who  has  done  all,  paid  all,  accomplished 
all,  performed  all  that  is  necessary  for  our  salvation. 
We  may  take  up  the  challenge  of  the  Apostle,  "  Who  is 
he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died  :  yea,  rath- 
er that  is  risen  again ;  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God ;  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us."  (Rom. 
viii.  34.)  When  we  look  at  oar  own  works,  we  may 
well  be  ashamed  of  their  imperfections.  But  when  we 
look  at  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  we  may  feel  peace. 
We  "  are  complete  in  Him,"  if  we  believe.  (Colos.  ii. 
10.) 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  317 

"We  should  mark,  lastly,  iji  these  verses,  the  reality 
and  truth  of  Chrisfs  death.  We  are  told  that  "  one  of 
the  soldiers  with  a  spear  pierced  His  side,  and  forth- 
with came  there  out  blood  and  water."  This  incident, 
small  as  it  may  seem  at  first  sight,  supplies  probable 
proof  that  the  heart  of  our  blessed  Lord  was  pierced, 
and  that  life  was  consequently  extinct.  He  did  not 
merely  faint,  or  swoon  away,  or  become  insensible,  as 
some  have  dared  to  insinuate.  His  heart  actually  ceas- 
ed to  beat,  and  He  actually  died.  Great,  indeed,  was 
the  importance  of  this  fact.  We  must  all  see,  on  a  mo- 
ment's reflection,  that  without  a  real  death  there  could 
be  no  real  sacrifice;  that  without  a  real  death  there 
could  be  no  real  resurrection  ;  and  that  without  a  real 
death  and  real  resurrection,  the  whole  of  Christianity  is 
a  house  built  on  sand,  and  has  no  foundation  at  all. 
Little  indeed  did  that  reckless  Roman  soldier  dream  that 
he  was  a  mighty  helper  of  our  holy  religion,  when  he 
thrust  his  spear  into  our  Lord's  side. 

That  the  "  blood  and  water  "  mentioned  in  this  place 
had  a  deep  spiritual  meaning,  we  can  hardly  doubt. 
St.  John  himself  seems  to  refer  to  them  in  his  first  Epis- 
tle, as  highly  significant.  "  This  is  He  that  came  by 
water  and  blood."  (1  John  v.  6.)  The  Church  in  every 
age  has  been  of  one  mind  in  holding  that  they  are  em- 
blems of  spiritual  things.  Yet  the  precise  meaning  of 
the  blood  and  water  is  a  subject  about  which  Christians 
have  never  agreed,  and  perhaps  will  never  agree  until 
the  Lord  returns. 

The  favorite  theory  that  the  blood  and  water  mean 
the  two  Sacraments,  however  plausible  and  popular, 
may  be  reasonably  regarded  as  somewhat  destitute  of 
solid  foundation.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  were 
ordinances  already  in  existence  when  our  Lord  died,  and 
they  needed  no  reappointing.     It  is  surely  not  necessary 


318  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

to  drag  in  these  two  blessed  Sacraments  on  every  occa- 
sion, and  to  insist  on  thrusting  them  forward,  as  the 
hidden  sense  of  every  disputed  text  where  the  number 
"  two  "  is  mentioned.  Such  pertinacious  application 
of  hard  places  in  Scripture  to  Baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  does  no  real  good,  and  brings  no  real  honor  to 
the  Sacraments.  It  is  questionable  whether  it  does 
not  tend  to  vulgarize  them,  and  bring  them  into  con- 
tempt. 

The  true  meaning  of  the  blood  and  water  is  probably 
to  be  sought  in  the  famous  prophecy  of  Zechariah, 
where  he  says,  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain 
opened  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  for  sin  and  uncleanness."  (Zech,  xiii.  1.) 
When  was  that  fountain  so  truly  and  really  opened  as 
in  the  hour  when  Christ  died  ?  What  emblem  of  atone- 
ment and  purification  was  so  well  known  to  the  Jews  as 
blood  and  water?  Why  then  should  we  hesitate  to  be- 
lieve that  the  flow  of  "  blood  and  water "  from  our 
Lord's  side  was  a  significant  declaration  to  the  Jewish 
nation,  that  the  true  fountain  for  sin  was  at  length 
thrown  open,  and  that  henceforth  sinners  might  come 
boldly  to  Christ  for  pardon,  and  wash  and  be  clean  ? 
Tills  interpretation,  at  any  rate,  deserves  serious 
thought  and  consideration. 

Whatever  view  we  take  of  the  blood  and  water,  let 
us  make  sure  that  we  ourselves  are  "  washed  and  made 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  (Rev.  vii.  14.)  It 
will  matter  nothing  at  the  last  day,  that  we  held  during 
life  the  most  exalted  view  of  the  sacraments,  if  we  never 
came  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  never  had  personal  deal- 
ings with  Him.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  one  thing  need- 
ful. "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath 
not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life."     (1  John  v.  12.) 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  319 


Notes.    John  xix.  38—37. 

28. — [After  tMs.]  When  our  Lord  had  commended  His  mother, 
Marj,  to  John,  I  believe  that  the  miraculous  darkness  for  three 
hours  came  on.  During  those  three  hours  I  believe  our  Lord 
said  nothing,  except  "  My  God,  my  Uod,  why  hast  Thou  forsak- 
en Me  ? "  As  the  darkness  was  passing  away,  He  said,  "  I 
thirst."  This,  and  the  two  last  sayings,  "  It  is  finished,"  and 
*'  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,"  were  all  that 
He  said  during  the  last  three  hours.  Thus  three  of  Hi»  seven 
sayings  on  the  cross  were  before  the  darkness,  and  four  after  it, 
or  during  it. 

The  order  of  the  famous  seven  sayings  was  as  follows : — 

1.  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.'* 

2.  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise." 

3.  "  Woman  behold  thy  son.     Behold  thy  mother." 

4.  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me." 

5.  "  I  thirst." 

6.  "  It  is  finished." 

7.  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

[Jesus  knovning... accomplished,  etc.]  In  order  to  understand 
this  verse  aright,  there  is  one  point  concerning  our  Lord's 
death  which  must  be  carefully  remembered.  His  death  was 
entirely  a  voluntary  act  on  His  part.  In  this  one  respect  His 
death  was  unlike  that  of  a  common  man  ;  and  we  need  not 
wonder  at  it  when  we  consider  that  He  was  God  and  man  in 
one  Person.  The  final  separation  between  body  and  soul,  in 
His  case,  could  not  take  place  until  He  willed  it ;  and  all  the 
power  of  Jews  and  Romans  together  could  not  have  effected  it 
against  His  will.  We  die  because  we  cannot  help  it ;  Christ 
died  because  He  willed  to  die,  and  not  until  the  moment  ar- 
rived when  He  saw  it  best.  He  said  Himself,  "  No  man  taketh 
life  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself.  I  have  power  to 
lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  (John  x.  18.) 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  know  that  our  Lord  was  crucified  about 
nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  that  He  died  about  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day.  Mere  physical  suf- 
fering would  not  account  for  this.  A  person  crucified  in  full 
health  was  known  sometimes  to  linger  on  alive  for  three  days  ! 
It  is  evident  therefore  that  our  Lord  willed  to  give  up  the 
ghost  in  the  same  day  that  He  was  crucified,  for  some  wise  rea- 
son. This  reason,  we  can  easily  suppose,  was  to  secure  the 
fullest  publicity  for  His  atoning  death.  He  died  in  broad  day- 
light, in  the  sight  of  myriads  of  spectators  ;  and  thus  the  real- 
ity of  His  death  could  never  be  denied.  This  voluntariness 
and  free  choice  of  His  death,  and  of  the  hour  of  His  death,  in 
my  judgment,  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the  verse  before  us.. 


320  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

Remembering  all  this,  I  believe  tbat  the  sense  of  the  verse 
before  us  must  be  paraphrased  in  the  following  way :  "  After 
this,  Jesus  knowing  in  His  own  mind  that  all  things  were  now 
practically  accomplished,  which  he  came  into  the  world  to  do, 
and  knowing  that  it  wa:S  expedient  that  His  death  should  be  a 
most  public  event,  in  the  face  of  the  crowds  assembled  to  view 
His  crucifixion,  proceeded  to  say  the  last  words  which  He  in- 
tended to  say,  before  giving  up  the  ghost  at  three  o'clock,  and 
by  saying  them  fulfilled  a  prophecy  of  Scripture." — Nothing  in 
the  details  of  our  Lord's  death,  we  must  always  remember,  was 
accidental  or  by  chance.  Every  part  of  the  great  sacrifice  fop 
sin  was  foreordained  and  arranged  in  the  eternal  counsels  of 
the  Trinity,  even  to  the  words  which  He  was  to  speak  on  the 
cross. 

The  expression  "  T  thirst,"  was  chiefly  used,  I  believe,  in  or- 
der to  afford  a  public  testimony  of  the  reality  and  intensity  of 
His  bodily  suiferings,  and  to  prevent  any  one  supposing,  be- 
cause of  His  marvellous  calmness  and  patience,  that  He  wag 
miraculously  free  from  sufiering.  On  the  contrary,  He  would 
have  all  around  Him  know  that  He  felt  what  all  severely 
wounded  persons,  and  especially  what  all  crucified  persons,  felt, 
— a  burning  and  consuming  thirst.  So  that  when  we  read  that 
"  He  suffered  for  sins,"  we  are  to  understand  that  He  really  and 
truly  suffered. 

Henry  observes,  "  The  torments  of  hell  are  represented  by  a 
violent  thirst,  in  the  complaint  of  the  rich  man  who  begged  for 
a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  tongue.  To  that  everlasting  thirst 
we  had  all  been  condemned,  if  Christ  had  not  suffered  on  the 
cross,  and  said,  '  I  thirst.'  " 

Scott  observes  that  Christ  suffered  thirst,  in  order  that  we 
might  drink  the  water  of  life  for  ever,  and  thirst  no  more. 

Quesnel  remarks,  "  The  tongue  of  Jesus  Christ  underwent  its 
own  particular  torment,  in  order  to  atone  for  the  ill-use  which 
men  make  of  their  tongues  by  blasphemy,  evil-speaking,  vanity, 
lying,  gluttony,  and  drunkenness." 

The  theory  that  Christ  only  said  "  I  thirst,"  in  order  to  fulfil 
Scripture,  is  to  my  mind  unsatisfactory  and  unreasonable.  His 
saying  "  I  thirst,"  was  a  fulfilment  of  Scripture,  but  He  did  not 
merely  say  it  in  order  to  fulfil  Scripture.  St.  John,  according 
to  his  style  of  writing,  only  meant  that  by  His  saying  "  I  thirst," 
and  having  His  thirst  relieved  by  vinegar,  the  words  of  Psalm 
Ixix.  21,  were  fulfilled. 

The  Greek  word  which  is  rendered  "  accomplished,"  is  the 
same  that  is  rendered  "  finished  "  in  the  thirtieth  verse.  This 
difference,  within  two  verses,  in  translating  the  same  word,  is 
one  of  those  blemishes  in  our  authorized  version  which  must 
be  regretted. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  321 

The  connection  of  the  sentence,  "  that  the  Scripture  might  be 
fulfilled,"  is  not  very  clear  to  my  mind.  Is  it  to  be  taken  with 
the  words  that  follow  in  the  verse,  or  with  those  that  immedi- 
ately precede  it  ? — The  common  view  taken,  undoubtedly,  is  to 
connect  the  sentence  with  "  I  thirst."  The  sense  will  then  be 
"  Jesus  saith,  I  thirst,  so  that  by  this  the  Scripture  was  ful- 
filled." But  is  it  necessary  to  make  this  connection  ?  Might 
not  the  sentence  be  connected  with  the  one  which  precedes  ? 
The  sense  will  then  be,  "  Jesus  knowing  tliat  all  things  were 
now  accomplished,  so  that  the  Scripture  was  fulfilled  concern- 
ing Himself,  said,  I  thirst."  In  three  other  places  in  St.  John 
where  the  sentence  occurs,  "  that  the  Scripture  might  be  ful- 
filled," the  connection  is  with  what  goes  before,  and  not  with 
what  follows.  (John  xvii.  12  ;  xix.  24 — 86.)  Semler  and 
Tholuck  incline  to  take  this  view.  But  I  admit  that  the  matter 
is  doubtful,  and  it  certainly  is  not  one  of  vital  importance. 
One  thing  only  we  must  remember.  Our  Lord  did  not  say,  "  I 
thirst,"  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  fulfil  the  Scriptures.  He 
spoke  with  far  deeper  and  stronger  reasons,  and  yet  by  His 
speaking  and  afterwards  drinking  vinegar,  a  passage  in  the 
prophetical  Psalms  was  fulfilled. 

29. — \_NoiD  there  was  set... vessel. ..vifiegar.]  This  would  be  more  lit- 
erally rendered  "  there  was  lying  "  a  vessel.  In  all  probability 
this  was  a  vessel  full  of  tLe  sour  wine  in  common  use  among 
the  Roman  soldiers. 

[A7id  they  filled  a  sponge,  etc.]  The  persons  here  spokeu  of 
seem  to  be  the  Roman  soldiers  who  carried  out  the  detailo  of 
the  crucifixion.  The  vinegar  was  theirs,  and  it  is  not  likely  that 
any  one  would  have  dared  to  interfere  with  the  criminal  hang- 
ing on  the  cross,  except  the  soldiers.  The  act  recorded  here 
must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  that  recorded  in  Matt, 
xxvii.  34,  and  is  the  same  as  that  recorded  in  Matt,  xxvii.  48. 
The  first  drink  of  vinegar  and  gall,  commonly  given  to  crimi- 
nals to  deaden  their  pains,  our  Lord  refused.  The  second,  here 
mentioned,  was  given,  I  believe,  notwithstanding  what  some 
writers  say,  in  kindness  and  compassion,  and  our  Lord  did  not 
refuse  to  accept  it.  A  sponge  filled  with  vinegar  and  put  on 
the  end  of  a  stick,  was  far  the  easiest  and  most  convenient  way 
of  giving  drink  to  one  whose  head  was  at  least  seven  or  eight 
feet  from  the  ground,  and  whose  hands,  being  nailed  to  the 
cross,  were  of  course  unable  to  take  any  cup,  and  put  it  to  his 
mouth.  From  a  sponge  full  of  liquid,  pressed  against  the  lips, 
a  crucified  person  might  suck  some  moisture,  and  receive  some 
benefit. 

What  this  "  hyssop  "  here  mentioned  was,  is  a  point  by  no 
means  clearly  ascertained.  Casaubon  speaks  of  the  question  as 
a  proverbial  difficulty.  Some  think  that  it  was  a  branch  of  the 
plant  hyssop  fastened  to  the  end  of  a  reed.  This  seems  very 
improbable,  because  of  the  "sponge."  Dr.  Forbes  Royle  main- 
tains that  it  was  the  caper  plant,  which  bears  a  stick  about 
14* 


322  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

three  or  four  feet  long.  Hengstenberg  gives  evidence  from 
Talmudic  writers  that  the  hyssop  was  among  the  branches  used 
at  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  and  that  its  stalk  was  an  ell  long. 
Like  many  other  questions  of  Bible  natural  history,  the  point 
must  probably  be  left  obscure.  Some  see  deep  meaning  in  the 
mention  of  hyssop,  as  the  plant  used  in  the  ceremonial  sprink- 
lings of  the  law  of  Moses.  (See  Heb.  ix.  19.)  Hyssop,  more- 
over, was  used  at  the  passover  in  sprinkling  the  door  posts  with 
blood.  (Exod.  xii.  22.)  Yet  the  allusion,  to  say  the  least,  seems 
doubtful,  nor  is  it  quite  clear  how  any  typical  meaning  can  be 
got  out  of  the  mention  of  the  plant  in  this  place. 

It  is  very  noteworthy  that  even  in  the  roughest,  hardest  kind 
of  men,  like  these  heathen  soldiers,  there  is  sometimes  a  ten- 
der and  compassionate  spot  in  the  breast.  According  to  Mat- 
thew's account  the  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  must  have  followed  soon 
after  the  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me." 
This  exhibition  of  great  mental  and  bodily  agony  combined,  in 
my  opinion,  touched  the  feelings  of  the  soldiers,  and  one  of 
them  at  least  ran  to  give  our  Lord  vinegar.  We  should  remem- 
ber this  in  dealing  with  men.  Even  the  worst  have  often  a  soft 
place,  if  we  can  find  it  out,  in  their  inward  nature. 

Cyril  maintains  strongly,  I  must  admit,  that  the  act  of  the 
soldiers  in  giving  our  Lord  the  sponge  full  of  vinegar,  was  not 
an  act  of  kindness,  but  of  mockery  and  insult,  I  cannot  how- 
ever, agree  with  him.  He  does  not  appear  to  distinguish  be- 
tween the  first  drink  which  our  Lord  refused  at  the  beginning 
of  His  crucifixion,  and  the  last  which  He  accepted  ;  but  speaks 
of  them  as  one  and  the  same.     Theophylact  agrees  with  Cyril. 

80. — [When  Jesus  therefore... finished.']  Our  Lord  having  now 
given  plain  proof  that  He  had  endured  intense  bodily  suffering, 
and  that  like  any  other  human  sufferer  He  could  appreciate  a 
slight  relief  of  thirst,  such  as  the  vinegar  afforded,  proceeded 
to  utter  one  of  His  last  and  most  solemn  sayings  :  "  It  is  fin- 
ished." 

This  remarkable  expression,  in  the  Greek,  is  one  single  word 
in  a  perfect  tense,  "  It  has  been  completed."  It  stands  here  in 
'  majestic  simplicity,  without  note  or  comment  from  St.  John,  and 
we  are  left  entirely  to  conjecture  what  the  full  meaning  of  it  is. 
For  eighteen  hundred  years  Christians  have  explained  it  as  they 
best  can,  and  some  portion  of  its  meaning  in  all  likelihood  has 
been  discovered.  Yet  it  is  far  from  unlikely  that  such  a  word 
spoken  on  such  an  occasion,  by  such  a  person,  at  such  a  mo- 
ment, just  before  death,  contains  depths  which  no  one  has  ever 
completely  fathomed.  Some  meanings  there  are,  which  no  one 
perhaps  will  dispute,  belonging  to  this  grand  expression,  which 
I  will  briefiy  mention.  No  one  single  meaning,  we  may  be 
sure,  exhausts  the  whole  phrase.  It  is  rich,  full,  and  replete 
with  deep  truths. 

{a)  Our  Lord  meant  that  His  great  work  of  redemption  was 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  323 

finished.  He  had,  as  Daniel  foretold, "  finished  transgression, 
made  an  end  of  sin,  made  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  brought 
in  everlasting  righteousness."  (Dan,  ix.  24.)  After  thirty-three 
years,  since  the  day  when  He  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  He  had 
done  all,  paid  all,  performed  all,  suflPered  all  that  was  needful  to 
save  sinners,  and  satisfy  the  justice  of  God.  He  had  fought 
the  battle  and  won  it,  and  in  two  days  would  give  proof  of  it  by 
rising  again. 

(6)  Our  Lord  meant  that  God's  determinate  counsel  and  fore- 
will  concerning  His  death  was  now  accomplished  and  finished. 
All  that  had  been  appointed  from  all  eternity  that  He  should 
suffer.  He  had  now  suffered. 

(c)  Our  Lord  meant  that  He  had  finished  the  work  of  keeping 
God's  holy  law.  He  had  kept  it  to  the  uttermost,  as  our  head 
and  representative,  and  Satan  had  found  nothing  in  Him.  He 
had  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honorable,  by  doing  per- 
fectly all  its  requirements.  "  Woe  unto  us,"  says  Burkitt,  "  if 
Christ  had  left  but  one  farthing  of  our  debt  unpaid.  We  must 
have  lain  in  hell  insolvent  to  all  eternity." 

{d)  Our  Lord  meant  that  He  had  finished  the  types  and  figures 
of  the  ceremonial  law.  He  had  at  length  offered  up  the  perfect 
sacrifice,  of  which  eveiy  Mosaic  sacrifice  was  a  type  and  sym- 
bol and  there  remained  no  more  need  of  offerings  for  sin.  The 
old  covenant  was  finished. 

{e)  Our  Lord  meant  that  He  had  finished  and  fulfilled  the 
prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  At  length,  as  the  Seed  of 
the  woman,  he  had  bruised, the  serpent's  head,  and  accomplish- 
ed the  work  which  Messiah  was  engaged  by  covenant  to  come 
and  perform. 

(/)  Finally,  our  Lord  meant  that  His  sufferings  were  finish- 
ed. Like  His  Apostle,  He  had  "  finished  His  course,"  His 
long  life  of  pain  and  contradiction  from  sinners,  and  above  all 
His  intense  sufferiugs,  as  bearer  of  our  sins  on  Gethsemane  and 
Calvary,  were  at  last  at  an  end.  The  storm  was  over,  and  the 
worst  was  passed.  The  cup  of  suffering  was  at  last  drained  to 
the  very  dregs. 

Thoughts  such  as  these  come  to  my  own  mind,  when  I  read 
the  solemn  phrase,  "  It  is  finished."  But  I  am  far  from  saying 
that  the  phrase  does  not  contain  a  great  deal  more.  In  inter- 
preting such  a  saying,  I  am  deeply  conscious  that  there  is  an 
inexhaustible  fulness  in  our  Lord's  words,  I  am  sure  we  are 
more  likely  to  make  too  little  of  them  than  to  make  too  much. 

Luther  remarks,  "  In  this  word,  '  It  is  finished,'  will  I  com- 
fort myself.  I  am  forced  to  confess  that  all  my  finishing  of  the 
will  of  God  is  imperfect,  piecemeal  work,  while  yet  the  law 
urges  on  me  that  not  so  much  as  one  tittle  of  it  must  remain 
unaccomplislifid,  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law.  What  it  re- 
quires, Christ  has  performed." 


324  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

To  the  objection  of  some  persons,  that  all  things  were  not 
completely  finished  and  accomplished,  until  Jesus  rose  again 
and  ascended  into  heaven,  Calvin  replies  that  Jesus  knew  that 
all  things  were  now  practically  accomplished,  and  that  noth- 
ing now  remained  to  hinder  His  finishing  the  work  He  came  to 
do. 

{^And  He  bowed  His  head.]  This  is  the  action  of  one  dying. 
When  the  will  ceases  to  exercise  power  over  muscles  and  nerves, 
at  once  those  parts  of  the  body  which  are  not  rigid  like  the 
bones,  collapse  and  fall  in  any  direction  to  which  their  centre 
of  gravity  inclines  them.  The  head  of  a  crucified  person 
would  naturally  in  death  droop  forward  on  the  breast,  the  neck 
being  no  longer  kept  stiff  by  the  will.  This  is  what  seems  to 
have  happened  in  the  case  of  our  Lord. 

May  we  not  gather  from  this  expression,  that  our  Lord  up  to 
this  moment  held  up  His  head  erect,  firm,  steady,  and  unmov- 
ed, even  under  extreme  pain  ? 

Alford  remarks  how  this  little  incident  was  evidently  record- 
ed by  an  eye-witness.  The  miraculous  darkness  must  have 
now  passed  away,  in  order  to  let  this  movement  of  the  head  be 
seen. 

[And  gave  up  the  ghost. 1  These  words  mean,  literally,  "  de- 
livered up  the  spirit."  It  is  an  expression  never  used  of  any 
dying  person  in  the  Bible  except  our  Lord,  It  is  an  expression 
denoting  voluntary  action.  He  delivered  up  His  spirit  of  His 
own  free  will,  because  the  hour  was  come  when  He  chose  to 
do  it.  He  had  just  said,  after  using  the  phrase,  "  It  is  finished,'* 
—  "  Father  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit," — and  then 
He  proceeded  to  deliver  up  His  spirit  into  the  hands  of  God  the 
Father.  It  is  the  Father,  and  none  else,  to  whom  the  words, 
"  He  delivered  up,"  must  apply. 

Augustine  observes,  "  Not  against  His  will  did  the  Saviour's 
spirit  leave  His  flesh,  but  because  He  would,  and  when  He 
would,  and  how  He  would.  Who  is  there  that  can  even  go  to 
sleep  when  He  will,  as  Jesus  died  when  He  would  ?  Who  thus 
puts  off  his  clothes  when  he  will,  as  Jesus  unclothed  Himself 
of  His  flesh  when  He  would  ?  Who  goes  thus  out  of  his  door 
when  he  will,  as  Jesus,  when  He  would,  went  out  of  this 
world  ?  " 

In  death,  as  well  as  in  life,  our  Lord  has  left  us  an  example. 
Of  course  we  cannot,  like  Him,  choose  the  moment  of  our 
death,  and  in  this,  as  in  everything  else,  we  must  be  content  to 
follow  Him  at  an  enormous  distance.  The  best  of  saints  is  a 
miserable  copy  of  his  Master.  Nevertheless,  we  too,  as  Cyril 
observes,  must  endeavor  to  put  our  souls  into  God's  hands,  if 
God  is  really  our  Father,  when  the  last  hour  of  our  lives  comes  ; 
and  like  Jesus,  to  place  them  by  faith  in  our  Father's  keeping 
and  trust  our  Father  to  take  care  of  them. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  325 

Above  all,  let  us  never  forget,  as  we  read  of  Christ's  death, 
that  He  died  for  our  sins,  as  our  Substitute.  His  death  is  our 
life.  He  died  that  we  might  live.  We  who  believe  on  Christ 
shall  live  forevermore,  sinners  as  we  are,  because  Christ  died 
for  us,  the  innocent  for  the  guilty.  Sataji  cannot  drag  us  away 
to  everlasting  death  in  hell.  The  second  death  cannot  harm, 
us.  We  may  safely  say, — "  Who  can  condemn  me,  or  slay  my 
soul  ?  I  know  well  that  I  deserve  death,  and  that  I  ought  to 
die,  because  of  my  sins.  But  then  my  blessed  Head  and  Sub- 
stitute died  for  me,  and  when  He  died,  I,  His  poor  weak  mem- 
ber, was  reckoned  to  die  also.  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  for 
Christ  was  crucified  and  died.  My  debt  is  paid,  and  thou  canst 
not  demand  it  twice  over." — Forever  let  us  bless  God  that 
Christ  "  gave  up  the  ghost,"  and  really  died  upon  the  cross,  be- 
fore myriads  of  witnesses.  That  "  giving  up  the  ghost "  was 
the  hinge  on  which  all  our  salvation  turned.  In  vain  Christ's 
life  and  miracles  and  preaching,  if  Christ  had  not  at  last  died 
for  us  !  We  needed  not  merely  a  teacher,  but  an  atonement, 
and  the  death  of  a  Substitute.  The  mightiest  transaction  that 
ever  took  place  on  earth  since  the  fall  of  man,  was  accomplish- 
ed when  Jesus  "  gave  up  the  ghost."  The  careless  crowd 
around  the  cross  saw  nothing  but  the  common  death  of  a  com- 
mon criminal.  But  in  the  eyes  of  God  the  Father  the  prom- 
ised payment  for  a  world's  sin  was  at  last  effected,  and  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  was  thrown  wide  open  to  all  believers. 
The  finest  pictures  of  the  crucifixion  that  artists  have  ever 
painted,  give  a  miserably  insufficient  idea  of  what  took  place 
when  Jesus  "  gave  up  the  ghost."  They  can  show  a  suffering 
man  on  a  cross,  but  they  cannot  convey  the  least  notion  of 
what  was  really  going  on, — the  satisfaction  of  God's  broken 
law,  the  payment  of  sinners'  debt  to  God,  and  the  complete 
atonement  for  a  world's  sin. 

The  precise  physical  cause  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  a  very 
interesting  subject,  which  must  be  reverently  approached,  but 
deserves  attention.  Dr.  Stroud,  in  his  book  on  the  subject, 
takes  a  view  which  is  supported  by  the  opinions  of  three  emi- 
nent Edinburgh  physicians,  the  late  Sir  James  Simpson,  Dr. 
Begbie,  and  Dr.  Struthers.  This  view  is  that  the  immediate 
cause  of  our  Lord's  decease  was  rupture  of  the  heart.  Dr. 
Simpson  argues  that  all  the  circamstances  of  our  Lord's  death, 
— His  crying  with  a  loud  voice  just  before  death,  not  like  an 
exhausted  person,  and  His  sudden  giving  up  the  ghost, — con- 
firm this  view  very  strongly.  He  also  says  that  "  strong  men- 
tal emotions  produce  sometimes  laceration  or  rupture  of  the 
walls  of  the  heart ; "  and  he  adds,  "  If  ever  a  human  heart  was 
riven  and  ruptured  by  the  mere  amount  of  mental  agony  en- 
dured, it  would  surely  be  that  of  our  Redeemer."  Above  all, 
he  argues  that  the  rupture  of  the  heart  would  go  far  to  account 
for  the  flow  of  blood  and  water  from  our  Lord's  side,  when 
pierced  with  a  spear.     Dr.  Simpson's  very  interesting  letter  on 


326  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

tlie  subject  will  be  found  in  tbe  appendix  to  "  Hanna's  Last 
Days  of  our  Lord's  Passion." 

Concerning  the  deep  question  as  to  wbat  became  of  our 
Lord's  soul  wken  He  gave  up  the  ghost,  it  must  suffice  to  be- 
lieve that  His  soul  went  to  paradise,  the  place  of  the  departed 
spirits  of  believers.  He  said  to  the  penitent  thief,  "  To-day 
shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise."  (Luke  xxiii.  43.)  This  is 
the  true  meaning  of  the  article,  "  descended  into  hell,"  in  the 
Belief.  "  Hell "  in  that  clause  certainly  does  not  mean  the 
place  of  punishment,  but  the  separate  state  or  place  of  depart- 
ed spirits. 

Some  theologians  hold  that,  between  His  death  and  resurrec- 
tion "  He  went  and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison  "  (1  Peter 
iii.  19) ;  and  proclaimed  the  accomplishment  of  His  work  of 
atonement.  This,  to  say  the  least,  is  doubtful.  But  Athana- 
sius,  Ambrose,  Zwingle,  Calvin,  Erasmus,  Calovius,  and  Alford 
hold  this  view. 

Concerning  the  miraculous  signs  which  accompanied  our 
Lord's  death, — the  darkness  from  twelve  o'clock  to  three,  the 
earthquake,  the  rending  of  the  temple  veil, — St.  John  is  silent, 
and  doubtless  for  some  wise  reason.  But  we  may  well  believe 
that  they  struck  myriads  with  awe  and  astonishment,  and  per- 
haps smoothed  the  way  for  our  Lord's  burial  in  Joseph's  tomb, 
without  opposition  or  objection. 

81. — [2%6  Jews  therefore,  hecause  it  was,  etc.]  The  "Jews"  in 
this  verse,  as  in  many  other  places  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  can 
only  mean  the  chief  priests  and  leaders  of  the  nation  at  Jerusa- 
lem ;  the  same  men  who  had  pressed  on  Pilate  our  Lord's  cru- 
cifixion,— Annas,  Caiaphas,  and  their  companions. 

The  "  preparation "  means  the  day  preceding  the  passover 
sabbath.  That  sabbath  being  pre-eminently  a  "  high  day,"  or, 
to  render  the  Greek  literally,  a  "great"  day  in  the  year,  the 
Friday,  or  day  preceding  it,  was  devoted  to  special  preparations. 
Hence  the  day  went  by  the  name  of  "  the  preparation  of  the 
sabbath."  The  expression  makes  it  certain  tliat  Jesus  was  cru- 
cified on  a  Friday.  The  Jews  saw  clearly  that,  unless  they 
took  active  measures  to  prevent  it,  the  body  of  our  Lord  would 
remain  all  night  hanging  on  the  tree  of  the  cross,  the  law 
would  be  broken  (Deut.  xxi.  28),  and  a  dead  body  would  hang 
throughout  the  sabbath  in  full  view  of  the  temple,  and  close 
by  the  city  walls.  Therefore  they  made  haste  to  have  Him 
taken  down  from  the  cross  and  buried. 

The  "breaking  of  the  legs  "  of  crucified  criminals,  in  order  to 
despatch  them,  seems  to  have  been  a  common  accompaniment 
of  this  barbarous  mode  of  execution,  when  it  was  necessary  to 
make  an  end  of  them,  and  get  them  out  of  the  way.  In  asking 
Pilate  to  allow  this  breaking  of  the  legs,  they  did  nothing  but 
what  was   usual.      But  for  anything  we  can   see,  the   thing 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  327 

■would  not  have  been  done  if  the  Jews  had  not  asked. — The 
verse  supplies  a  wonderful  example  of  the  way  in  which  God 
can  make  the  wickedest  men  unconsciously  carry  out  His  pur- 
poses, and  promote  His  glory.  If  the  Jews  had  not  interfered 
this  Friday  afternoon,  for  anything  we  can  see,  Pilate  would 
have  allowed  our  Lord's  body  to  hang  upon  the  cross  till  Sun- 
day or  Monday,  and  perhaps  to  see  corruption.  The  Jews  pro- 
cured our  Lord's  burial  the  very  day  that  He  died,  and  thus  se- 
cured the  fulfilment  of  His  famous  prophecy  :  "  Destroy  this 
temple  of  my  body,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  (John 
ii.  19.)  If  He  had  not  been  buried  till  Sunday  or  Monday,  He 
could  not  have  risen  again  the  third  day  after  His  death.  As 
it  was,  the  Jews  managed  things  so  that  our  Lord  was  laid  in 
the  grave  before  the  evening  of  Friday,  and  was  thus  enabled 
to  fulfil  the  famous  type  of  Jonah,  and  give  the  sign  He  had 
promised  to  give  of  His  Messiahship,  by  lying  three  days  in 
the  earth,  and  then  rising  again  the  third  day  after  He  died. 
All  this  could  not  have  happened  if  the  Jews  had  not  interfer- 
ed, and  got  Him  taken  from  the  cross  and  buried  on  Friday 
afternoon ! — How  true  it  is  that  the  wickedest  enemies  of  God 
are  only  axes  and  saws  and  hammers  in  His  hands,  and  are  ig- 
norantly  His  instruments  for  doing  His  work  in  the  world. 
The  restless,  busy,  meddling  of  Caiaphas  and  his  companions, 
was  actually  one  of  the  causes  that  Christ  rose  the  third  day 
after  death,  and  His  Messiahship  was  proved.  Pilate  was  their 
tool :  but  they  were  God's  tools  !  The  Romans,  in  all  probabil- 
ity, would  have  left  our  Lord's  body  hanging  on  the  cross  till 
sun  and  rain  had  putrefied  and  consumed  it,  had  such  a  thing 
been  possible.  Bishop  Pearson  says  it  was  a  common  rule  of 
Roman  law  not  to  permit  sepulture  to  the  body  of  a  crucified 
person.  The  burial,  therefore,  was  entirely  owing  to  the  re- 
quest of  the  Jews.  The  providence  of  God  ordered  things  so 
that  they  who  interceded  for  His  crucifixion  interceded  for  His 
burial.  And  by  so  doing  they  actually  paved  the  way  for  the 
crowning  miracle  of  His  resurrection  ! 

Let  us  mark  the  miserable  scrupulosity  that  is  sometimes 
compatible  with  the  utmost  deadness  of  conscience.  Thus  we 
see  men  making  ado  about  a  dead  body  remaining  on  the  cross 
on  the  Sabbath,  at  the  very  time  when  they  had  just  murdered 
an  innocent  living  person  with  the  most  flagrant  injustice  and 
monstrous  cruelty.  It  is  a  specimen  of  "  straining  out  a  gnat, 
and  swallowing  a  camel." 

82. — {^Then  came  the  soldiers,  etc.']  Pilate  having  given  his  con- 
sent to  the  request  of  the  Jews,  the  Roman  soldiers  proceeded 
to  break  the  legs  of  the  criminals,  and  began  with  the  two 
thieves.  Why  they  began  with  them  is  by  no  means  clear.  If 
the  three  crosses  were  all  in  a  row,  it  is  hard  to  see  why  the 
two  outer  criminals  of  the  three  should  have  their  legs  broken 
first,  and  the  one  in  the  centre  be  left  to  the  last.  We  must 
suppose  one  ©f  three  things  in  order  to  explain  this. 


328  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

(a)  Possibly  two  of  the  soldiers  broke  the  legs  of  one  male- 
factor, and  the  other  two  the  legs  of  the  other.  Reason  and 
common  sense  point  out  that  it  does  not  require  four  men  to 
do  this  horrid  work  on  a  helpless,  unresisting,  crucified  person. 
Thus,  having  finished  their  work  at  the  two  outward  crosses, 
they  would  come  last  to  the  centre  one. 

(6)  Possibly  the  two  outward  crosses  may  have  been  rather 
forwarder  in  position  than  the  central  one,  so  that  the  sufferers 
might  see  each  others'  faces.  In  that  case  the  soldiers  would 
naturally  begin  with  the  crosses  they  came  to  first.  This,  per- 
haps, would  account  for  the  penitent  thief  having  read  the 
word  "  King  "  over  our  Lord's  head  on  the  cross. 

(c)  Possibly  the  soldiers  saw  that  our  Lord  was  dead,  even 
before  they  came  up  to  Him.  At  any  rate  they  probably  saw 
that  He  was  still  and  motionless,  and  thus  suspecting  that  He 
was  dead,  they  did  not  trouble  themselves  with  His  body,  but 
began  with  the  two  who  evidently  were  yet  alive. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  penitent  thief,  even  after  his  con- 
version, had  more  suffering  to  go  through  before  he  entered 
paradise.  The  grace  of  God  and  the  pardon  of  sin  did  not  de- 
liver him  from  the  agony  of  having  his  legs  broken.  When 
Christ  undertakes  to  save  our  souls.  He  does  not  undertake  to 
deliver  us  from  bodily  pains  and  a  conflict  with  the  last  enemy. 
Penitents,  as  well  as  impenitents,  must  taste  death  and  all  its 
accompaniments.  Conversion  is  not  heaven,  though  it  leads 
to  it. 

Scott  remarks  that  those  who  broke  the  legs  of  the  penitent 
thief,  and  hastened  his  end,  were  unconscious  instruments  of 
fulfilling  our  Lord's  promise,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me 
in  Paradise." 

How  the  legs  of  crucified  criminals  were  broken  we  do  not 
know ;  but  it  was  probably  done  in  the  roughest  manner. 
With  such  tools  at  hand  as  the  haminers  used  for  driving  in 
the  nails,  and  the  mattocks  and  spades  used  for  putting  the 
cross  in  the  ground,  the  soldiers  could  hardly  want  instru- 
ments. It  must  be  remembered  that  a  simple  fracture  would 
not  cause  death.  The  Greek  word  which  we  render  "  break," 
means,  literally,  "  shiver  to  pieces."  May  it  not  be  feared  that 
this  is  the  true  meaning  here  ? 

33. — \^But  when  they  came  to  Jems,  etc.]  This  verse  contains  the 
first  proof  of  the  mighty  fact  that  our  Lord  really  died.  We 
are  told  that  the  soldiers  did  not  break  His  legs,  because  they 
"  saw  that  He  was  dead  already."  Accustomed  as  Roman  sol- 
diers necessarily  were  to  see  death  in  every  form,  wounds  of 
every  kind,  and  dead  bodies  of  every  description,  and  trained, 
to  take  away  human  life  by  their  profession,  they  were  of  all 
men  least  likely  to  make  a  mistake  about  such  a  matter.  Thua 
we  have  it  most  expressly  recorded,  that  the  soldiers  "  saw 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  329 

that  He  was  dead  already,"  and  therefore  did  not  break  His 
legs.  Our  salvation  hinges  so  entirely  on  Jesus  Christ's  vicari- 
ous death,  that  a  moment's  reflection  will  show  us  the  divine 
wisdom  of  the  fact  being  thoroughly  proved.  His  unbelieving 
enemies  could  never  say  that  He  did  not  really  die,  and  that 
He  was  only  in  a  swoon,  or  fainting-fit,  or  state  of  insensibility. 
The  Roman  soldiers  are  witnesses  that  on  the  centre  cross  of 
the  tree  they  saw  a  dead  man. 

34. — [But  one.. .spear. ..pierced  His  side.]  Here  we  have  the  sec- 
ond proof  that  our  Lord  did  really  die.  One  of  the  soldiers, 
determined  to  make  sure  work  and.  leave  nothing  uncertain, 
thrust  his  spear  into  our  Lord's  side,  in  all  probability  directing 
his  thrust  at  the  heart,  as  the  seat  of  vitality.  That  thrust 
made  it  certain,  if  there  had  been  any  doubt  before,  that  the 
body  on  the  central  cross  was  actually  dead.  They  believed  it 
from  appearance,  and  perhaps  from  touch,  when  they  first 
came  up  to  the  cross.  They  made  it  quite  certain  by  the 
thrust  of  the  spear.  The  body  of  a  person  in  a  swoon  would 
have  given  some  sign  of  life,  when  pierced  with  a  spear. 

The  gross  inaccuracy  of  those  pictures  which  represent  this 
soldier  as  a  horseman,  is  worth  noticing.  Our  Lord's  body  was 
easily  witliiu  reach  of  the  thrust  of  a  spear  in  the  hand  of  a 
foot  soldier.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  that  any  Roman 
cavalry  were  near  the  cross  ! 

The  theory  of  Bishop  Pearson,  that  this  soldier  pierced  our 
Lord's  side  in  anger  and  impatience,  as  if  provoked  to  find  Him 
dead,  does  not  appear  to  me  well-founded.  It  is  not  likely  that 
the  soldiers  would  be  angry  at  finding  a  state  of  things  which 
saved  them  trouble.  To  me  it  seems  far  more  likely  that  the 
thrust  was  the  hasty,  careless  act  of  a  rough  soldier,  accustom- 
ed to  prove  in  this  way  whether  a  body  was  alive  or  dead.  I 
have  heard  it  said  by  an  eye-witness,  that  some  of  the  Cossacks 
who  followed  our  retreating  cavalry,  after  the  famous  Bala- 
clava charge,  in  the  Crimean  war,  were  seen  to  prick  the  bodies 
of  fallen  soldiers  with  their  spears,  in  order  to  see  whether 
they  were  dead  or  alive. 

Theophylact  suggests  that  this  soldier  thrust  the  spear  into 
our  Lord's  side  in  order  to  gratify  the  wicked  Jews  who  stood 

by. 

Besser  remarks  most  sensibly,  "  Even  the  soldier's  spear  was 
guided  by  the  Father's  hand." 

[And  forthwith.. .Uood  and  water ^  The  remarkable  fact  here 
recorded  has  given  rise  to  considerable  difEerence  of  opinion. 

(a)  Some,  as  Grotius,  Calvin,  Beza,  and  others,  hold  that 
this  issue  of  blood  and  water  was  a  proof  that  the  heart  or  peri- 
cardium was  pierced,  and  death  in  consequence  quite  certain. 
They  say  that  the  same  result  would  follow  from  a  thrust  into 
the  side  of  any  person  lately  dead,  and  that  blood  and  water,  or 


330  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

something  closely  resembling"  it,  would  immediately  flow  out. 
They  maintain,  therefore,  that  there  was  nothing  supernatural 
in  the  circumstance  recorded. 

(6)  Others,  as  most  of  the  Fathers,  Brentius,  Musculus,  Calo- 
vius,  Lampe,  Lightfoot,  Rollock,  Jansenius,  Bengel,  Horsley, 
and  Hengstenberg,  hold  that  this  issue  of  blood  and  water  was 
supernatural,  extraordinary,  unusual,  and  contrary  to  all  expe- 
rience ;  and  they  maintain  that  it  was  a  special  miracle. 

The  question  is  one  of  those  which  will  probably  never  be 
settled.  We  are  not  in  possession  of  sufficiently  precise  infor- 
mation to  justify  a  very  positive  opinion.  We  do  not  know  for 
a  certainty  that  the  left  side  of  our  Lord  was  pierced  and  not 
the  right.  We  do  not  know  exactly  how  much  blood  and  wa- 
ter flowed  out,  whether  a  large  quantity  or  a  very  little.  That 
a  miracle  might  take  place  at  such  a  death,  on  such  an  occa- 
sion, and  in  the  body  of  such  a  Person,  we  have  no  right  to  de- 
ny. The  mere  facts  that,  when  our  Lord  hung  on  the  cross, 
the  sun  was  darkened,  and,  when  He  gave  up  the  ghost,  the 
veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain,  and  the  rocks  rent,  and 
the  earth  quaked,  might  well  prepare  our  minds  to  see  nothing 
extraordinary  in  a  miracle  taking  place,  and  almost  to  expect 
it.  Perhaps  the  safest  line  to  adopt  is  to  combine  both  views. 
The  thrust  of  the  spear  into  the  side  caused  blood  to  flow,  and 
proved  that  the  seat  of  vitality  in  the  body  was  pierced.  The 
extraordinary  and  unusual  flow  of  blood  and  water  was  a  su- 
pernatural event,  and  meant  to  teach  spiritual  lessons. 

I  may  be  allowed  to  say  that  three  eminent  medical  men  in 
large  practice,  whom  I  have  ventured  to  consult  on  this  verse, 
are  all  of  one  mind, — that  any  large  flow  of  blood  and  water 
from  a  dead  body  is  contrary  to  all  ordinary  experience.  Each 
of  them,  singularly  enough,  has  expressed  this  opinion  inde- 
pendently, and  without  any  communication  with  the  other 
two. 

Concerning  the  symbolical  meaning  of  this  flow  of  "  blood 
and  water  "  from  our  Lord's  side  much  has  been  written  in 
every  age  of  the  Church.  That  it  had  a  deep  spiriti:al  sense 
appears  almost  certain  from  St.  John's  words  in  his  first  Epis- 
tle. (1  John  V.  6 — 8.)  But  what  the  real  symbolical  meaning 
was,  is  a  very  disputable  question. 

(a)  The  common  opinion  is,  that  the  blood  and  water  symbol- 
ized the  two  sacraments  of  baptipm  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  both 
given  by  Christ  and  emanating  from  Him,  and  both  symbols  of 
atonement,  cleansing,  and  forgiveness.  This  is  the  view  of 
Chrysostom,  Augustine,  Andrews,  and  a  large  body  of  divines, 
both  ancient  and  modern.  I  cannot  myself  receive  this  opinion. 
In  matters  like  this  I  dare  not  call  any  man  master,  or  endorse 
an  interpretation  of  Scripture,  when  I  do  not  feel  convinced  that 
it  is  true.     I  cannot  see  the  necessity  of  dragging  in  the  sacra- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  331 

ments  at  every  point  in  the  exposition  of  God's  Word,  as  some 
do. 

(6)  My  own  opinion  is  most  decided,  that  the  flow  of  blood 
and  water,  whether  supernatural  or  not,  was  meant  to  be  a  sym- 
bolical fulfilment  of  the  famous  prophecy  in  Zechariah  :  "  In 
that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David 
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  unclean- 
ness."  (Zech.  xiii,  1.)  It  was  a  practical  declaration,  by  fact 
and  deed,  to  all  Jews,  that  by  Christ's  death  that  famous  pro- 
phecy was  fulfilled,  and  that  now  at  last  there  was  a  fountain 
opened  by  Christ's  death.  The  moment  He  was  dead  this  foun- 
tain was  opened  and  began  to  flow.  Over  the  bleeding  side  of 
our  Lord  there  might  have  been  written,  "  Behold  the  fountain 
for  all  sin."  It  is  no  small  evidence  to  my  mind,  in  favor  of 
this  view,  that  this  famous  prophecy  occurs  only  five  verses 
after  the  text  immediately  quoted  by  St.  John  in  this  very  chap- 
ter, "  they  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  pierced."  (Zech. 
xii.  10.) 

Augustine  sees  a  type  of  this  wound  in  our  Lord's  side,  from 
which  flowed  blood  and  water,  in  the  door  in  the  side  of  Noah's 
ark,  by  which  the  living  creatures  entered  in  and  were  pre- 
served from  drowning !  He  also  sees  another  type  of  the 
transaction  in  the  first  Adam  sleeping  and  Eve  being  formed 
out  of  his  side. 

The  opinion  held  by  some,  that  this  "  blood  and  water  "  war- 
rant the  mixture  of  water  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper, 
seems  to  me  utterly  untenable.  As  Musculus  sensibly  observes, 
it  was  not  "  wine  and  water,"  but  "  blood  and  water "  that 
flowed  from  our  Lord's  side.  There  is  not  the  slightest  evi- 
dence that  our  Lord  used  water  at  the  institution  of  the  Lord's 
Supper. 

That  "  blood"  was  the  symbol  of  atonement,  and  "  water  "  of 
cleansing,  every  careful  reader  of  the  Old  Testament  must 
know.  The  two  things  are  brought  together  by  St.  Paul  in 
Heb.  ix.  19.  The  smiting  of  the  rock  by  Moses,  and  water 
flowing  forth,  was  also  typical  of  the  event  before  us.  Light- 
foot  mentions  a  Jewish  tradition  that  blood  and  water  flowed 
from  the  rock  at  first. 

Henry  says,  "  The  blood  and  water  signified  the  two  great 
benefits  which  all  believers  partake  of  through  Christ, — justi- 
ficatioa  and  sanctification.  Blood  stands  for  remission,  water 
for  regeneration ;  blood  for  atonement,  water  for  purification. 
The  two  must  always  go  together.  Christ  hath  joined  them 
together,  and  we  must  not  think  to  put  them  asunder.  They 
both  flowed  from  the  pierced  side  of  our  Redeemer." 

35. — [And  he  tJiat  saw  it  hare  record,  etc.]  This  singular  verse, 
by  common  consent,  can  only  refer  to  St.  John.  It  is  as  though 
lie  said,  "  The  fact  that  1  now  testify  to  I  saw  with  my  own 


332  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

eyes  ;  and  my  testimony  is  true,  and  accurate,  and  trustworthy, 
and  I  know  that  I  say  true  things  in  recording  the  fact,  so  that 
you  to  whom  I  write  need  not  hesitate  to  believe  me.  1  stood 
by.  I  saw  it.  I  was  an  eye-witness,  and  I  do  not  write  by 
hear-say." 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  true  "  in  the  second  place  in  this 
verse,  means  literally,  "  true  things." 

The  question  arises  naturally.  To  what  does  John  refer  in 
this  peculiar  verse  ?  (a)  Does  he  refer  only  to  the  issue  of 
blood  and  water  from  our  Lord's  side,  as  a  singularly  miracu- 
lous event?  (&)  Or  does  he  refer  to  the  thrust  of  the  spear  into 
our  Lord's  side,  as  a  convincing  proof  that  our  Lord  really  died  ? 
(c)  Or  does  he  refer  to  the  fact  that  our  Lord's  legs  were  not 
broken,  and  that  he  thus  saw  the  great  type  of  the  passover- 
lamb  fulfilled  ? 

I  decidedly  lean  to  the  opinion  that  the  verse  refers  to  all  the 
three  things  I  have  mentioned  together,  and  not  to  any  one  of 
them  only.  All  three  things  were  so  remarkable,  and  so  calcu- 
lated to  strike  the  mind  of  a  pious  and  intelligent  Jew,  and  all 
happened  in  such  close  and  rapid  succession,  that  John  em- 
phatically records  that  he  saw  all  the  three  with  his  own  eyes. 
He  seems  to  say,  "  I  saw  myself  that  not  a  bone  of  the  Lamb 
of  God  was  broken,  so  that  He  fulfilled  the  type  of  the  pass- 
over.  I  saw  myself  a  spear  thrust  into  His  heart,  so  that  He 
was  a  true  Sacrifice,  and  really  died.  And  I  saw  myself  that 
blood  and  water  came  out  of  His  side,  and  I  beheld  a  fulfil- 
ment of  the  old  prophecy  of  a  fountain  for  sin  being  opened." 
When  we  consider  the  immense  importance  and  significance  of 
all  these  three  things,  we  do  not  wonder  that  John  should  have 
been  inspired  to  write  this  verse,  in  which  he  emphatically  tells 
his  readers  that  he  is  writing  down  nothing  but  the  plain  naked 
truth,  and  that  he  actually  saw  these  three  things, — the  un- 
broken legs,  the  pierced  side,  the  flow  of  blood  and  water, — 
with  his  own  eyes. 

Pearce  and  Alf ord  think  that  the  expression  "  that  ye  might 
believe,"  signifies  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  did  really 
die  on  the  cross.  Others  decidedly  prefer  thinking  that  it 
means,  "  that  ye  may  believe  that  blood  and  water  did  really 
flow  from  the  side  of  Jesus  after  His  death."  Others  take  the 
phrase  in  a  general  sense,  "  that  ye  may  believe  more  firmly 
than  ever  on  Christ,  as  the  true  sacrifice  for  sin." 

36^  37. — [For  these  things  mere  done,  etc.]  In  these  two  verses 
John  explains  distinctly  to  his  readers  why  two  of  the  facts  he 
has  just  mentioned,  however  trifling  they  might  seem  to  an 
ignorant  person,  were  in  reality,  of  great  importance.  By  one 
of  these  facts, — the  not  breaking  a  bone  of  our  Lord's  body, — 
the  text  was  fulfilled  which  said  that  not  a  bone  of  the  pass- 
over-lamb  should  be  broken.  (Ex.  xii.  46.)  By  the  other  fact, 
— the  piercing  of  our  Lord's  side, — the  prophecy  of  Zechariah 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX. 


333 


was  fulfilled,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  *'  should  look 
on  him  whom  they  pierced."     (Zech.  xii.  10.) 

Alford  observes  that  the  expression,  "  they  shall  look,"  does 
not  refer  to  the  Roman  soldiers,  but  to  the  repentant  in  the 
world,  who  at  the  time  this  Gospel  was  written  had  begun  to 
fulfil  this  prophecy  ;  and  that  it  also  contains  a  prophetic  refer- 
ence to  the  future  conversion  of  Israel,  who  were  here  the  real 
piercers,  though  the  act  was  done  by  the  hands  of  others." 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  the  passage,  like  many  others, 
does  not  mean  that  these  things  were  done  in  order  that  Scrip- 
ture might  be  fulfilled,  but  that  by  these  things  being  done  the 
Scripture  was  fulfilled,  and  God's  perfect  foreknowledge  about 
the  least  details  of  Christ's  death  was  proved.  Nothing  in  the 
great  sacrifice  happened  by  chance,  luck,  or  accident.  All  was 
arranged  as  appointed,  from  first  to  last,  many  centuries  before, 
by  the  determinate  counsel  of  God.  Caiaphas,  Pilate,  the  Ro- 
man soldiers,  were  all  unconscious  instruments  in  carrying  into 
effect  what  God  had  long  predicted  and  foretold  to  the  least  jot 
and  tittle. 

Let  us  carefully  note  here  what  strong  evidence  these  verses 
supply  in  favor  of  a  literal,  and  not  a  merely  spiritual,  fulfil- 
ment of  Old  Testament  prophecies. 

Rollock  observes,  "  If  God  have  ordained  and  said  anything, 
it  lies  not  in  the  hands  of  any  man  to  disannul  it.  If  God  shall 
Bay,  "  There  shall  not  be  one  bone  of  my  anointed  broken," 
great  Caesar  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  King  of  Spain, 
and  the  Pope,  and  all  their  adherents,  shall  not  be  able  to  do 
the  contrary.  So.  in  the  midst  of  all  fear  and  danger,  let  us  de- 
pend on  the  providence  of  God. 


JOHN  XIX.  38—42. 


38  And  after  this  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathaea,  being  a  disciple  of  Jesus, 
but  secretly  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  be- 
sought Pilate  that  he  might  take 
away  the  body  of  Jesus  :  and  Pilate 
gave  Mm  leave.  He  came  therefore, 
and  took  the  body  of  Jesus. 

39  And  there  came  also  Nicode- 
mus,  Avhichatthe  lirst  came  to  Jesus 
by  night,  and  brought  a  mixture  of 
myrrh  and  aloes,  about  an  hundred 
pound  woight. 


40  Then  took  they  the  body  of 
Jesus,  and  wound  it  iu  linen  clothes 
with  the  spices,  as  the  manner  of 
the  Jews  is  to  bury. 

41  Now  in  the  place  where  he  was 
crucified  there  was  a  garden  :  and  in 
the  garden  a  new  sepulchre,  where- 
in was  never  man  yet  laid. 

42  Tliere  laid  they  Jesus  there- 
fore because  of  the  iTews'  prepara- 
tion day;  for  the  sepulchre  was 
nigh  at  hand. 


There  is  a  peculiar  interest  attached  to  these  five 
verses  of  Scripture.     They  introduce  us  to  a  stranger, 


334  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

of  whom  we  never  heard  before.  They  bring  in  an  old 
friend,  whose  name  is  known  wherever  the  Bible  is  read. 
They  describe  the  most  important  funeral  that  ever  took 
place  in  this  world.  From  each  of  these  three  points  of 
interest  we  may  learn  a  very  profitable  lesson. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  from  these  verses,  that  there 
are  some  true  Christians  in  the  world  of  whom  very  lit- 
tle is  knoicn.  The  case  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  teaches 
this  very  plainly.  Here  is  a  man  named  among  the 
friends  of  Christ,  whose  very  name  we  never  find  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament,  and  whose  history,  both 
before  and  after  this  crisis,  is  completely  withheld  from 
the  Church.  He  comes  forward  to  do  honor  to  Christ, 
when  the  Apostles  had  forsaken  Him  and  fled.  He  cares 
for  Him  and  delights  to  do  Him  service,  even  when  dead, 
— not  because  of  any  miracle  which  he  saw  Him  do, 
but  out  of  free  and  gratuitous  love.  He  does  not  hesi- 
tate to  confess  himself  one  of  Christ's  friends,  at  a  time 
when  Jews  and  Romans  alike  had  condemned  Him  as  a 
malefactor,  and  put  Him  to  death.  Surely  the  man 
who  could  do  such  things  must  have  had  strong  faith  ! 
Can  we  wonder  that,  wherever  the  Gospel  is  preached, 
throughout  the  whole  world,  this  pious  action  of  Joseph 
is  told  of  as  a  memorial  of  him  ? 

Let  us  hope  and  believe  that  there  are  many  Chris- 
tians in  every  age,  who,  like  Joseph,  are  the  Lord's  hid- 
den servants,  unknown  to  the  Church  and  the  world,  but 
well  known  to  God.  Even  in  Elijah's  time  there  were 
seven  thousand  in  Israel  who  had  never  bowed  the  knee 
to  Baal,  although  the  desponding  prophet  knew  nothing 
of  it.  Perhaps,  at  this  very  day,  there  are  saints  in 
the  back  streets  of  some  of  our  great  towns,  or  in 
the  lanes  of  some  of  our  country  parishes,  who  make 
no  noise  in  the  world,  and  yet  love  Christ  and  are  loved 
by  Him.     Ill-health,  or  poverty,  or  the   daily  cares  of 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  335 

some  laborious  calling,  render  it  impossible  for  them 
to  come  forward  in  public ;  and  so  they  live  and  die 
comparatively  unknown.  Yet  the  last  day  may  show 
an  astonished  world  that  some  of  these  very  people, 
like  Joseph,  honored  Christ  as  much  as  any  on  earth, 
and  that  their  names  were  written  in  heaven.  After  all, 
it  is  special  circumstances  that  bring  to  the  surface  spe- 
cial Christians.  It  is  not  those  who  make  the  greatest 
show  in  the  Church,  who  are  always  found  the  fastest 
friends  of  Christ. 

We  learn,  for  another  thing,  from  these  verses,  that 
there  are  some  servants  of  Christ  whose  latter  end  is 
better  than  their  beginning.  The  case  of  Kicodemus 
teaches  that  lesson  very  plainly.  The  only  man  who 
dared  to  help  Joseph  in  his  holy  work  of  burying  our 
Lord,  was  one  who  at  first  "  came  to  Jesus  by  night," 
and  was  nothing  better  than  an  ignorant  inquirer  after 
truth.  At  a  later  period  in  our  Lord's  ministry  we 
find  this  same  Nicodemus  coming  forward  with  some- 
what more  boldness,  and  raising  in  the  Council  of  the 
Pharisees  the  question,  "  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man, 
before  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he  doeth  ?  "  (John 
vii.  51.)  Finally,  we  see  him  in  the  passage  before  us, 
ministering  to  our  Lord's  dead  body,  and  not  ashamed 
to  take  an  active  part  in  giving  to  the  despised  Naza- 
rene  an  honorable  burial.  How  great  the  contrast  be- 
tween the  man  who  timidly  crept  into  the  Lord's  lodging 
to  ask  a  question,  and  the  man  who  brought  a  hundred 
pounds  weight  of  myrrh  and  aloes  to  anoint  His  dead 
body  !  Yet  it  was  the  same  Nicodemus.  How  great 
may  be  a  man's  growth  in  grace,  and  faith,  and  knowl- 
edge, and  courage,  in  the  short  space  of  three  years. 

We  shall  do  well  to  store  up  these  things  in  our 
minds,  and  to  remember  the  case  of  Nicodemus,  in  form- 
ing our  estimate  of  other  people's  religion.     We  must 


330  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

not  condemn  otljera  as  graceless  and  godless,  because 
they  do  not  see  the  whole  truth  at  once,  and  only  reach 
decided  Christianity  by  slow  degrees.  The  Holy  Ghost 
always  leads  believers  to  the  same  foundation  truths, 
and  into  the  same  highway  to  heaven.  In  these  there  is 
invariable  uniformity.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not 
always  lead  believers  through  the  same  experience,  or  at 
the  same  rate  of  speed.  In  this  there  is  much  diversity 
in  His  operations.  He  that  says  conversion  is  a  needless 
thing,  and  that  an  unconverted  man  may  be  saved,  is 
undoubtedly  under  a  strange  delusion.  But  he  that 
says  that  no  one  is  converted  except  he  becomes  a  full- 
blown and  established  Christian  in  a  single  day,  is  no 
icss  under  a  delusion.  Let  us  not  judge  others  rashly 
and  hastily.  Let  us  believe  that  a  man's  beginnings  in 
religion  may  be  very  small,  and  yet  his  latter  end  may 
greatly  increase.  Has  a  man  real  grace  ?  Has  he  with- 
in him  the  genuine  work  of  the  Spirit?  This  is  the 
grand  question.  If  he  has,  we  may  safely  hope  that  his 
grace  will  grow,  and  we  should  deal  with  him  gently, 
and  bear  with  him  charitably,  though  at  present  he  may 
be  a  mere  babe  in  spiritual  attainments.  The  life  in  a 
helpless  infant  is  as  real  and  true  a  thing  as  the  life  in  a 
full-grown  man  :  the  difference  is  only  one  of  degree. 
"  Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  "  (Zech. 
iv.  10.)  The  very  Christian  who  begins  his  religion 
with  a  timid  night-visit,  and  an  ignorant  inquiry,  may 
stand  forward  alone  one  day,  and  confess  Christ  boldly 
in  the  full  light  of  the  sun. 

We  learn,  lastly,  from  these  verses,  that  the  burial  of 
the  dead  is  an  act  which  God  sanctions  and  approves. 
We  need  not  doubt  that  this  is  part  of  the  lesson  which 
the  passage  before  us  was  meant  to  convey  to  our  minds. 
Of  course,  it  supplies  unanswerable  evidence  that  our 
Lord  really  died,  and  afterwards  really  rose  again ;  but 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  337 

it  also  teaches  that,  when  the  body  of  a  Christian  is 
dead,  there  is  a  fitness  and  meetness  in  burying  it  with 
decent  honor.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  the  burials  of 
Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  Joseph,  and  Moses 
are  carefully  recorded  in  holy  writ.  It  is  not  for  noth- 
ing that  we  are  told  that  John  the  Baptist  was  laid 
in  a  tomb  ;  and  that  "  devout  men  carried  Stephen  to 
his  burial,  and  made  great  lamentation  over  him." 
(Acts  viii.  2.)  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  we  are  told  so 
particularly  about  the  burial  of  Christ. 

The  true  Christian  need  never  be  ashamed  of  regard- 
ing a  funeral  with  peculiar  reverence  and  solemnity. 
It  is  the  body,  which  may  be  the  instrument  of  commit- 
ting the  greatest  sins,  or  of  bringing  the  greatest  glory 
to  God.  It  is  the  body,  which  the  eternal  Son  of  God 
honored  by  dwelling  in  it  for  thirty  and  three  years,  and 
finally  dying  in  our  stead.  It  is  the  body,  with  which 
He  rose  again  and  ascended  up  into  heaven.  It  is  the 
body,  in  which  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and 
represents  us  before  the  Father,  as  our  Advocate 
and  Priest.  It  is  the  body,  which  is  now  the  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  while  the  believer  lives.  It  is  the  body, 
which  will  rise  again,  when  the  last  trumpet  sounds, 
and,  re-united  to  the  soul,  will  live  in  heaven  to  all  eter- 
nity. Surely,  in  the  face  of  such  facts  as  these,  we  nev- 
er need  suppose  that  reverence  bestowed  on  the  burial 
of  the  body  is  reverence  thrown  away. 

Let  us  leave  the  subject  with  one  word  of  caution. 
Let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  regard  a  sumptuous 
funeral  as  an  atonement  for  a  life  wasted  in  carelessness 
and  sin.  We  may  bury  a  man  in  the  most  expensive 
style,  and  spend  hundreds  of  pounds  in  mourning.  "We 
may  place  over  his  grave  a  costly  marble  stone,  and  in- 
scribe on  it  a  flattering  epitaph.  But  all  this  will  not 
save  our  souls  or  his.  The  turning  point  at  the  last  day 
15 


338  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

will  not  be  how  we  are  buried,  but  whether  we  were 
"  buried  with  Christ,"  and  repented  and  believed. 
(Rom.  vi.  4.)  Better  a  thousand  times  to  die  the  death 
of  the  righteous,  have  a  lowly  grave  and  a  pauper's 
funeral,  than  to  die  graceless,  and  lie  under  a  marble 
tomb ! 

Notes.    John  xix.  38—43. 

38. — [And  after  tJiis  Joseph  of  Arimathma.]  This  verse  begins 
St.  John's  account  of  our  Lord's  burial.  The  manner  of  that 
burial  was  one  of  the  things  predicted  by  Isaiah  (ch.  liii.  9),  in 
a  verse  which  is  not  correctly  translated.  It  should  be,  "  His 
grave  was  appointed  with  the  wicked :  but  with  the  rich  man 
was  His  tomb."  The  details  of  His  burial  are  carefully  re- 
corded by  all  the  four  Evangelists.  Each  of  them  names 
Joseph  as  the  prime  agent  in  the  transaction,  and,  singularly 
enough,  each  mentions  something  that  the  other  three  Gospel- 
writers  do  not  mention.  St,  Matthew  alone  says  that  he  was 
"  a  rich  man."  (Matt,  xxvii,  51.)  St.  Mark  alone  says  that  he 
was  "  an  honorable  counsellor,  which  also  waited  for  the  king- 
dom of  God."  (Mark  xv.  43.)  St.  Luke  alone  says  that  he  was 
"  a  good  man  and  a  just,"  who  had  "  not  consented  to  the  coun- 
sel and  deed  of  them,  .  .  .  who  himself  waited  for  the  king- 
dom of  God."  (Luke  xxiii.  50,  51.)  St.  John  alone  says  here 
that  he  was  "'  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the 
Jews."  It  is  another  singular  fact  about  Joseph,  that  we  never 
hear  a  word  about  him  in  Scripture,  except  on  this  occasion  of 
our  Lord's  burial.  Both  before  and  after  this  interesting 
event,  the  Bible,  for  some  wise  reason,  is  entirely  silent  about 
him.  Nor  can  we  explain  how  an  inhabitant  of  Arimathaea 
happened  to  have  a  new  tomb  at  Jerusalem.  We  must  either 
suppose  tliat,  as  a  rich  man,  he  had  two  residences,  or  else  that, 
though  born  at  Arimathaea,  he  had  lately  removed  to  Jerusa- 
lem. The  utmost  we  know  is  that  the  article  in  tae  Greek  be- 
fore "  Joseph,"  and  before  "  of  Arimathaea,"  seems  to  indicate 
that  he  was  a  person  well  known  by  history  to  the  readers  of 
St.  John's  Gospel. 

About  the  place  whence  Joseph  came,  "Arimathaea,"  nothing 
certain  is  known.  Some  think  that  it  is  Ramali,  where  Sam- 
uel dwelt,  (1  Sam.  vii.  17.)  The  Septuagint  Greek  translator 
certainly  calls  Ramah  "  Arraathaim,"  which  looks  like  it.  St. 
Luke  calls  it  a  "  city  of  Judaea."  Nothing  certain  seems  to  be 
known  about  it. 

[Being  a  disciple. ..secretly. ..Jews.']  The  Greek  word  rendered 
*'  secretly,"  is  literally  "  a  concealed  "  disciple, — a  past  participle. 
The  expression  teaches  the  interesting  fact  that  there  were 
Jews  who  secretly  believed  that  Jesua  was  the  Messiah,  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  339 

yet  liad  not  courage  to  confess  Him  before  His  crucifixion.  We 
are  distinctly  told  in  John  xii.  42,  that  "  many  of  the  chief 
rulers  believed,  but  did  not  confess  Christ,  because  of  the  Phar- 
isees." But  the  character  given  of  them,  that  "  they  loved  the 
praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God,"  is  so  condemnatory, 
that  we  may  well  doubt  whether  Joseph  was  one  of  these. 
Want  of  physical  or  moral  courage  was  probably  the  flaw  in 
his  character.  It  is  only  fair  to  remember  that,  as  "  a  rich  man 
and  a  counsellor,"  he  had  far  more  to  sacrifice,  and  far  more 
opposition  to  encounter,  than  poor  fishermen  or  publicans 
would  have.  His  backwardness  to  confess  Christ  cannot  of 
course  be  defended.  But  his  case  teaches  us  that  there  is 
sometimes  more  spiritual  work  going  on  in  men's  minds  than 
appears.  We  must  not  set  down  every  one  as  utterly  graceless 
and  godless,  who  is  not  bold  and  outspoken  at  present.  We 
must  charitably  hope  that  there  are  some  secret  disciples, 
who  at  present  hold  their  tongues  and  say  nothing,  and  yet, 
like  Joseph,  will  one  day  come  forward,  and  be  courageous  wit- 
nesses for  Christ.  All  is  not  gold  that  glitters,  and  all  is  not 
dross  that  now  looks  dirty  and  makes  no  show.  We  must  be 
charitable  and  hope  on. — His  case  should  also  teach  us  the 
great  power  of  that  mischievous  principle,  the  fear  of  man. 
Open  sin  kills  its  thousands,  but  the  fear  of  man  its  tens  of 
thousands.  Let  us  watch  and  pray  against  it.  Faith  is  the 
grand  secret  of  victory  over  it.  Like  Moses,  we  must  ever  live 
as  those  who  "  see  Him  that  is  invisible."  (Heb.  xi.  27.)  And  to 
faith  must  be  added  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  principle, — 
the  fear  of  God.  "  I  fear  God,"  said  holy  Col.  Gardiner,  "  and 
there  is  none  else  that  I  need  fear." 

[Besought  Pilate.. .take.. .body. ..Jesus.]  The  conduct  of  Joseph 
deserves  our  praise  and  admiration,  and  his  name  will  be  held 
in  honor  by  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  consequence  of  it,  as  long 
as  the  world  stands.  Whatever  Joseph  was  at  first,  he  shone 
brightly  at  last.  "  The  last  are  first "  sometimes.  Let  us  see 
what  he  did. 

(a)  Joseph  honored  Christ,  when  our  Lord's  own  apostles  had 
forsaken  Him.  He  showed  more  faith  and  courage  than  His 
nearest  and  dearest  friends. 

{b)  Joseph  honored  Christ,  when  it  was  a  dangerous  thing  to 
do  Him  honor.  To  come  forward  and  avow  respect  for  one 
condemned  as  a  malefactor,  for  one  cast  out  by  the  High 
Priests  and  leaders  of  the  Jews, — to  say  practically,  "  I  am 
Christ's  friend,"  was  bold  indeed.  St.  Mark  particularly  says, 
"  He  went  in  boldly  unto  Pilate  "  (Mark  xv.  43),  showing  plain- 
ly that  it  was  an  act  of  uncommon  courage. 

(c)  Joseph  honored  Christ,  when  He  was  a  lifeless  corpse, 
and  to  all  appearance  could  do  nothing  for  Him^  It  was  not 
when  Jesus  was  doing  miracles  and  preaching  wonderful  ser- 
mons, but  when  there  remained  nothing  of  Him  but  a  dead 
body,  that  he  came  forward  and  asked  leave  to  bury  Him. 


340  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

"V^Tiy  Joseph's  "  fear  "  departed,  and  he  acted  with  such  mar- 
vellous boldness  now,  is  a  question  which  we  have  no  means 
of  settling.  But  reason  points  out  that  in  all  probability  he 
had  been  an  eye-witness  of  much  that  had  happened  this  event- 
ful day.  He  had  possibly  stood  within  a  short  distance  of  the 
cross,  and  seen  all  that  took  place,  and  heard  every  one  of  our 
Lord's  seven  sayings.  The  miraculous  darkness  for  three 
hours,  and  the  earthquake,  must  have  arrested  his  attention. 
Surely  it  is  not  presumptuous  to  conjecture,  that  all  this  must 
have  had  a  mighty  effect  on  Josei3h's  soul,  and  made  him  re- 
solve at  once  to  cast  fear  away,  and  avow  himself  openly  one 
of  Christ's  friends.  It  is  almost  certain  that  he  must  have 
been  near  the  cross  at  three  o'clock,  when  our  Lord  gave  up 
the  ghost,  or  else  how  could  he  have  known  of  His  death,  and 
had  time  to  think  of  burying  Him  ? 

After  all  it  is  a  deep  truth,  that  circumstances  bring  out 
character  in  an  extraordinary  way.  Just  as  the  developing 
liquid  brings  out  of  the  dull  grey  glass  in  the  photographer's 
hands,  a  latent  image  which  you  never  suspected  before,  so  do 
circumstances  bring  out  in  some  men  a  decision  and  power  of 
character,  which  before  you  would  have  thought  impossible. 

Rollock  remarks,  "  When  Christ  was  working  wonders,  and 
speaking  as  never  man  spake,  all  this  moved  not  Joseph  to 
come  forth  and  show  himself.  But  now,  Oirist  beiug  dead  and 
in  shame,  he  comes  out.  Whereunto  do  I  ascribe  this?  I  as- 
cribe it  to  the  force  that  comes  from  the  death  of  Christ. 
There  was  never  a  living  man  in  the  world  that  had  such  pow- 
er as  that  dead  body  had.  More  mighty  was  His  death  than 
His  life." 

[And  Pilate  gave  him  leave.]  The  entire  absence  of  difficul- 
ties in  Joseph's  way  is,  at  first  sight,  rather  remarkable.  We 
may  easily  believe  that  Pilate  was  willing  enough  to  grant 
Joseph's  request.  He  did  not  grant  it  till  the  centurion  certi- 
fied that  Jesus  was  actually  dead,  and  the  ends  of  justice  (so 
called)  attained.  Then  at  once  he  gave  permission.  It  is  fair 
to  remember  that  he  had  regarded  our  Lord  as  guiltless  all 
along,  that  if  left  to  his  own  free  will  he  would  have  released 
Him.  It  is  probable,  moreover,  that  he  was  vexed  and  annoyed 
at  the  obstinate  pertinacity  with  which  the  Jews  pressed  for 
our  Lord's  death  against  his  wish,  and  that  he  would  be  glad 
enough  to  pay  them  off,  and  spite  them,  by  gratifying  any 
friend  of  our  Lord.  But  we  must  also  remember  that  to  the 
burial  of  our  Lord's  body  the  Jews  themselves  had  no  objec- 
tion, and  had  even  asked  that  the  death  of  the  criminals  might 
be  hastened  and  the  dead  bodies  got  out  of  the  way.  Wliat 
they  would  have  done  with  the  body  of  our  Lord,  if  Joseph 
had  not  come  forward,  we  cannot  certainly  tell.  Lightfoot 
Bays  there  was  a  common  grave  for  the  bodies  of  malefactors. 
In  any  case  Joseph's  request  was  not  likely  to  meet  with  ob- 
jection either  from  Gentile  or  Jew.     But,  for  all  that  we  must 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  341 

not  forget  tliat  it  made  him  a  marked  man,  as  a  friend  of 
Christ,  and  utterly  ruined  his  character  with  Caiaphas  and  the 
high  priests. 

[He  came  therefore...took...hody...Jesus.']  The  word  rendered 
"  took  "  here,  is  the  same  that  is  rendered  "  took  away  "  j  ust 
above. — Some  think,  as  Tholuck  and  Ellicott,  that  the  Roman 
Boldiers  took  the  body  down  from  the  cross.  But  I  see  no  cer- 
tain proof  of  this,  and  I  think  it  unlikely  they  would  take  the 
trouble  to  do  it,  if  others  were  willing  to  undertake  the  task. 
The  meaning,  in  my  opinion,  is  that  Joseph  came  up  to  the 
cross,  raised'  and  lifted  from  it  the  lifeless  corpse  of  our  Lord 
and  took  it  away  for  burial.  Whether  this  was  done  by  rear- 
ing a  ladder  against  the  cross,  as  Rubens'  famous  picture  rep- 
resents, and  so  letting  down  the  body  after  drawing  out  the 
nails  ;  or,  whether  by  taking  up  the  cross  out  of  the  hole  in 
which  it  was  fixed,  laying  it  on  the  ground,  and  then  taking 
out  the  nails,  is  a  question  which  we  have  no  means  of  decid- 
ing. To  me  it  seems  far  more  probable  that  the  latter  plan 
would  be  adopted  than  the  former,  and  that  as  the  cross  was 
most  likely  reared  up  with  the  body  on  it,  so  it  was  taken  down 
again  with  the  body  on  it.  But  every  reader  must  judge  for 
himself. 

In  whatever  way  the  body  was  taken  down,  or  taken  off  the 
cross,  everything  seems  to  me  to  indicate  that  Joseph  was  the 
person  who  did  it  with  his  own  hands.  This  is  the  more  re- 
markable, when  we  consider  that  to  touch  a  dead  body  made  a 
Jew  ceremonially  unclean,  and  that  this  was  the  afternoon  pre- 
ceding the  passover  Sabbath.  There  seems,  however,  no  rea- 
son why  we  should  suppose  that  no  one  helped  Joseph.  He 
could  hardly  lift  the  cross,  or  reverently  lift  oif  the  body  of  a 
full-grown  person  in  the  prime  of  life,  without  some  aid.  Why 
should  we  hesitate  to  believe  that  John  and  Nicodemus  helped 
him? 

It  is  a  curious  coincidence,  though  perhaps  only  a  coinci- 
dence, that  it  was  a  "  Joseph,"  who  probably  first  touched  and 
received  our  Lord's  body  when  He  was  born  into  the  world  at 
Bethlehem,  and  again  a  "  Joseph,"  who  was  the  last  to  hold, 
and  lift,  and  handle  the  dead  body  of  the  same  Lord,  when  He 
was  buried. 

39. — [And  there  came  also  Nicodemus... night.']  The  fact  here  re- 
corded is  quite  peculiar  to  St.  John's  Gospel.  For  wise  rea- 
sons, neither  Matthew,  Mark,  nor  Luke,  ever  mention  the  name 
of  Nicodemus.  John  mentions  him  three  times, — first  as  a  se- 
cret inquirer  (John  iii,  1)  ;  secondly,  as  a  timid  advocate  of  jus- 
tice towards  our  Lord  in  the  Jewish  Council  (John  vii.  10); 
and  lastly,  in  this  place.  Both  here  and  on  the  second  occa- 
sion, he  emphatically  inserts  the  explanatory  comment,  that  it 
was  the  same  Nicodemus  which  "  at  first  came  to  Jesus  by 
night." 


34:2  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

The  verse  before  us  seems  to  show  that  Nicodemus  came  for- 
ward as  a  volunteer,  and  helped  to  bury  our  Lord,  and  did  not 
Bhrink  to  take  part  with  Joseph  in  his  good  work.  I  can  hard- 
ly think  that  he  went  with  Joseph  to  Pilate.  There  is  not  a 
word  to  show  this  in  any  of  the  four  Gospels. 

Some  think  that  by  agreement  Nicodemus  went  to  fetch  the 
hundred  pounds'  weight  of  spice  (no  slight  burden  to  carry), 
while  Joseph  went  to  Pilate. 

I  should  rather  conjecture,  that  when  Nicodemus  saw  Joseph 
coming  boldly  forward  and  showing  anxiety  to  honor  our 
Lord's  body, — Joseph,  whom  doubtless  as  a  Pharisee  and  coun- 
sellor, he  knew  well, — his  own  heart  was  stirred  within  him, 
his  own  timidity  fell  to  the  ground,  and  he  came  forward  and 
offered  to  aid.  In  so  doing  he  deserves  praise  and  honor, 
though  in  a  lower  degree,  like  Joseph,  He  showed  more  rev- 
erence and  love  to  our  Lord  when  dead  than  he  had  ever  done 
when  alive.  Once  more  we  see  that  circumstances  bring  out 
character  in  very  unexpected  ways.  The  man  that  began  seek- 
ing Jesus  by  night,  at  last  confesses  Jesus  openly  before  the 
world,  in  the  full  light  of  day. 

The  case  of  Nicodemus  is  deeply  instructive.  It  shows  us 
how  small  and  weak  the  beginning  of  true  religion  may  be  in 
the  soul  of  man.  It  shows  us  that  we  must  not  despair  of  any 
one  because  he  begins  with  a  little  timid,  secret  inquiry  after 
Christ,  It  shows  us  that  there  are  wide  differences  and  varie- 
ties in  the  characters  of  believers.  Some  are  brought  into  full 
light  at  once,  and  take  up  the  cross  without  delay.  Others  at- 
tain light  very  slowly,  and  halt  long  between  two  opinions.  It 
shows  us  that  those  who  make  the  least  display  at  first,  some- 
times shine  brightest  and  come  out  best  at  last.  Nicodemus 
confessed  his  love  to  Christ  when  Peter,  James,  and  Andrew, 
had  all  run  away.  What  need  we  have  for  patience  and  char- 
ity in  forming  an  estimate  of  other  people's  religion  !  There 
are  more  successors  of  Nicodemus  in  the  Church  of  Christ  than 
we  are  aware  of.  We  may  see  some  marvellous  changes  in 
Bome  persons,  if  we  live  with  them  a  few  years.  The  strong- 
est, hardiest  trees,  are  often  the  slowest  in  growth.  He  that 
sets  down  men  and  women  as  graceless  and  godless,  if  they  do 
not  profess  full  assurance  of  hope  the  first  day  they  take  up 
religion  and  hear  the  Gospel,  forgets  the  case  of  Nicodemus, 
and  exhibits  his  own  ignorance  of  the  ways  of  the  Spirit.  All 
God's  elect  are  led  to  Christ,  undoubtedly,  but  not  all  at  the 
same  speed,  or  through  the  same  experience. 

Calvin  remarks  on  the  conduct  of  Joseph  and  Nicodemus, 
"  Here  we  have  a  striking  proof  that  Christ's  death  was  more 
quickening  than  His  life.  So  great  was  the  efficacy  of  that 
Bweet  savor  which  the  death  of  Christ  conveyed  to  the  minds 
of  these  two  men,  that  it  quickly  extinguished  all  the  passions 
of  the  flesh." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  343 

Quesnel  observes,  "Wonderful  is  the  power  of  Christ's 
death,  which  gives  courage  to  confess  Him  in  His  deepest  hu- 
miliation, to  those  who,  when  He  was  doing  miracles,  came  to 
Him  only  in  secret." 

Henry  observes  that  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  showed  weak 
faith,  but  strong  love.  "  A  firm  faith  in  Christ's  resurrection 
would  have  saved  them  this  cost  and  expense."  But  they 
showed  their  deep  love  to  our  Lord's  person  and  teaching. 

[And  brought. ..myrrh... aloes. ..loeight.]  The  mixture  here 
mentioned  was  probably  in  the  shape  of  powder.  The  two  in- 
gredients were  strongly  aromatic  and  antiseptic.  The  large 
quantity  brought  shows  the  wealth  and  the  liberal  mind  of 
Nicodemus.  It  also  shows  his  wise  forethought,  A  dead  body 
go  torn  and  lacerated  as  that  of  our  blessed  Lord,  would  need 
an  unusually  large  quantity  of  antiseptics  or  preservatives,  to 
check  the  tendency  to  corruption  which  such  a  climate  would 
cause,  even  at  Easter.  Considering  also  that  everything  must 
have  been  done  with  some  haste,  the  large  quantity  of  spices 
used  was  probably  meant  to  compensate  for  the  want  of  time 
to  do  the  work  slowly  and  carefully. 

40. — [Then  took. ..tody. ..wound. ..clothes... spices. 1  Here  we  are  told 
the  precise  manner  of  the  preparation  of  our  Lord's  body  for 
burial.  As  always  in  that  time  and  country;  He  was  not  put 
into  a  coffin.  He  was  simply  wrapped  up  in  linen  cloths,  on 
which  the  preparation  of  myrrh  and  aloes  had  been  laid.  Thus 
the  powder  would  be  nest  to  our  Lord's  body,  and  interpose  be- 
tween the  linen  and  His  skin.  How  the  linen  clothes  were 
provided,  we  are  told  by  St.  Mark.  Joseph  "  bought  fine  linen." 
(Mark  xv.  4G.)  Joseph,  being  a  rich  man,  had  no  difliculty  in 
supplying  funds  for  this  purpose. 

The  word  "  wound  "  means  literally  "  bound." 

The  sentence  before  us  supplies  one  more  strong  evidence  of 
the  reality  of  Christ's  death.  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  could  not 
possibly  be  deceived.  When  they  touched  and  handled  the 
body,  and  wrapped  it  in  linen  clothes,  they  must  have  felt  con- 
vinced that  the  heart  had  ceased  to  beat,  and  that  life  was  ex- 
tinct.    There  is  no  mistaking  the  feel  of  a  dead  body. 

{As  the  manner...  Jeios... bury.]  This  is  one  of  those  occasional 
comments  or  explanatory  remarks,  which  St.  John  sometimes 
makes  in  his  Gospel,  supplying  strong  internal  evidence  that 
he  wrote  for  all  the  Church  of  Christ  in  every  land.  Gentiles 
as  well  as  Jews,  and  that  he  thought  it  wise  to  explain  Jewish 
customs.  The  reference  appears  to  be  to  the  wrapping  of  the 
body  in  linen,  rather  than  to  the  use  of  the  spices.  Lazarus  at 
Bethany  came  out  of  the  grave  wrapped  around  with  cloths. 

The  wise  foresight  of  the  Spirit  of  God  appears  strongly  in 
the  details  here  given  of  our  Lord's  burial.  The  quantity  of 
spices  used  was  so  great,  that  it  anticipates  the  objection  that 


344  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

our  Lord's  body  miglit  possibly  "  see  corruption"  in  some  degree 
before  His  resurrection.  At  the  same  time  the  special  mention 
of  Joseph  being  "  a  rich  man,"  and  Nicodemus  "  a  ruler  "  help- 
ing him,  completely  stops  the  mouths  of  those  who  would  have 
said  that  the  followers  of  our  Lord  could  never  have  found 
means  to  prevent  the  wounds  of  His  body  corrupting.  By  God's 
superintending  providence,  inclining  rich  men  to  come  forward, 
the  difficulty  was  obviated,  and  the  means  provided. 

Besser  says,  "  Twice  was  Jesus  Christ  rich  in  the  days  of 
His  poverty.  Once,  immediately  after  His  birth,  when  the  wise 
men  from  the  East  offered  Him  gold  and  frankincense,  and 
myrrh  ;  and  now,  after  His  ignominious  death,  when  a  rich 
man  buries  him,  and  a  distinguished  man  provides  spices  to 
anoint  Him.  Yea,  a  rich  Joseph  has  taken  the  place  of  that 
poor  Joseph  who  stood  by  the  manger." 

41. — [iVbwJ  in  the  place... crucified. ..g<irden.]  This  verse  tells  us 
the  place  where  our  Lord  was  buried.  It  was  in  "  a  garden  " 
close  to  the  spot  called  Golgotha,  where  He  was  crucified.  This 
fact  alone  seems  to  dispose  of  the  theory,  that  the  "  place  of  a 
skull "  meant  a  place  where  the  skeletons  and  bones  of  executed 
criminals  were  lying  about !  Reason  and  common-sense  point 
out,  that,  even  if  there  were  no  argument  against  the  theory 
from  the  Jewish  customs  about  bones,  it  is  very  unlikely  that 
"  a  garden  "  would  have  been  near  such  a  loathsome  place. 
Golgotha  could  hardly  be  a  place  of  execution,  or  a  place  where 
criminals  were  frequently  crucified,  if  there  was  a  garden  near ! 
The  pictures  that  commonly  represent  the  scene  of  the  cruci- 
fixion as  a  bleak  desolate-looking  rocky  hill,  are  manifestly 
quite  incorrect.  It  was  a  place  near  to  which,  or  where  "  there 
was  a  garden." 

The  curious  coincidence  that  the  fall  of  the  first  Adam,  the 
agony,  the  cross,  and  the  sepulchre  of  the  second  Adam,  were 
all  alike  connected  with  a  garden,  can  hardly  fail  to  strike  a 
reflecting  mind. 

[And  in  the  garden.. .new  sepulchre. ..laid.1  Here  we  have  the 
very  receptacle  described  in  which  our  Lord's  sacred  body  was 
laid.  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  all  tell  us  it  was  "  hewn  out 
of  a  rock," — the  limestone  rock,  which  is  the  rock  of  the  place. 
John  tells  us  that  it  was  "  new  ; "  and,  like  St.  Luke,  adds  that 
"  never  man  was  laid  in  "  it  before. 

It  is  curious  that  Matthew  alone  tells  us  that  this  tomb  was 
Joseph's  own,  "  which  he  had  hewn  out  of  a  rock."  (Mati. 
xxvii,  60.)  Theophylact  remarks,  that  it  is  a  striking  proof  of 
our  Lord's  poverty,  that  while  He  lived  He  had  no  house  of 
His  own,  and  when  He  died  He  was  buried  in  another's  tomb. 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  both  the  conditions  of  the 
sepulchre  above  mentioned  are  of  great  importance,  and  deserve 
careful  notice,    (a)  Our  Lord's  tomb  was  hewn  out  of  a  hard 


.JOHN,  CHAP.  XIX.  345 

limestone  rock.  This  made  it  clearly  impossible  for  any  one  to 
gay,  that  the  disciples  made  a  subterraneous  entrance  into  the 
tomb  by  night  and  stole  the  body  away.  By  the  entrance  that 
it  was  carried  into  the  sepulchre,  by  the  same  it  must  be  car- 
ried out. — (6)  Our  Lord's  tomb  was  a  new  one,  in  which  no  one 
had  ever  been  laid.  This  made  it  impossible  for  any  one  to 
say,  after  the  resurrection,  that  there  was  no  proof  that  Jesus 
rose  from  the  dead,  and  that  it  might  possibly  be  some  one  else. 
This  could  not  be,  when  His  body  was  the  first  and  only  body 
that  was  ever  laid  in  this  grave.  Wonderful  is  it  to  see  how 
at  every  turn  the  overruling  wisdom  of  God  has  stopped,  ob- 
viated, and  frustrated,  by  wise  provisions,  the  objections  of 
infidels. 
42. — [Then  laid  they  Jesus,  etc.]  In  order  to  see  the  full  meaning 
of  this  verse,  we  should  slightly  invert  the  order  of  the  words, 
and  paraphrase  them  in  some  such  way  as  this  : — "  In  this  new 
rock-hewn  tomb,  therefore,  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  laid  the 
body  of  Jesus,  because  it  was  conveniently  nigh  at  hand,  and 
because  the  Jews '  preparation  day,  or  day  preceding  the  pass- 
over  sabbath,  left  them  little  time,  and  made  it  necessary  to 
hasten  their  proceedings." — We  may  well  believe  that  these 
two  holy  men  had  but  little  time,  when  we  consider  that  our 
Lord  did  not  give  up  the  ghost  till  three  o'clock,  that  the  day 
ended  at  six,  and  that  only  three  hours  were  left  for  Joseph  to 
go  to  Pilate  and  get  leave  to  remove  the  body  from  the  cross, 
for  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  to  take  the  nails  out  and  lift  the 
body  from  the  tree,  for  wrapping  the  body  in  linen  with  a  hun- 
dred pounds  of  myrrh  and  aloes,  and  for  finally  carrying  it  to 
the  tomb  and  rolling  a  huge  stone  to  the  mouth  of  the  tomb. 
When  we  remember,  besides  this,  that  the  body  of  a  full-grown 
man  wrapped  in  linen  with  a  hundred  pounds  of  additional 
•weight  in  myrrh  and  aloes,  would  be  a  most  awkward  and  diffi- 
cult burden  for  two  men  to  carry,  we  may  well  believe  that 
nothing  but  severe  exertion  could  have  enabled  Joseph  and 
Nicodemus  to  finish  their  labor  of  love  before  six  o'clock.  The 
wonder  is  that  they  managed  to  do  it  at  all.  It  certainly  could 
not  have  been  done  if  they  had  not  got  a  sepulchre  nigh  at 
hand.  Again  the  Holy  Ghost  appears  to  me  to  foresee  the  ob- 
jection that  there  was  not  time  to  bury  our  Lord,  and  merciful- 
ly supplies  the  words  which  answer  it:  "the  sepulchre  was 
nigh  at  hand."  Even  then  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  John  and 
the  women  from  Galilee  must  have  lent  some  help.  At  all 
events  it  is  distinctly  recorded  that  the  women  were  present, 
and  that  they  were  sitting  by  and  beheld  where  the  body  was 
laid. 

Thus  ended  the  most  wonderful  funeral  the  sun  ever  shone 
upon.  Such  a  death  and  such  a  burial, — so  little  understood  by 
man  and  so  important  in  the  sight  of  God, — there  never  was, 
and  never  can  be  again.  Who  need  doubt  the  love  of  Christ, 
when  we  consider  the  deep  humiliation  that  Christ  went  through 
for  our  sakes  !    To  tabernacle  in  our  fiesh  at  all,  to  die  after  th« 

1%* 


34:6 


EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 


manner  of  a  man,  to  allow  his  holy  body  to  hang  naked  on  a 
cross,  to  suffer  it  to  be  lifted,  handled,  carried  like  a  lump  of 
cold  clay,  and  shut  up  in  a  dark,  silent,  solitary  tomb, — this  was 
indeed  love  tliaf,  passeth  knowledge.  What  true  believer  need 
fear  the  grave  now  ?  Solemn  as  is  the  thought  of  our  last  nar- 
row bed,  we  must  never  forget  that  "it  is  the  place  where  the 
Lord  lay."  (Matt,  xxviii.  6.)  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin,  and 
the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks  be  to  God  who 
giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1  Cor. 
XV.  56.) 

Henry  observes,  "  Christ's  death  should  comfort  us  against 
the  fear  of  death.  The  grave  could  not  long  keep  Christ,  and 
it  shall  not  long  keep  us.  It  was  a  loathsome  prison  before,  it 
is  a  perfumed  bed  now.  He  whose  Head  is  in  heaven,  need  not 
fear  to  put  his  feet  into  the  grave." 

Every  Bible  reader  knows  that  Isaiah's  famous  prophecy  con- 
tains the  words,  "  He  made  His  grave  with  the  wicked,  and 
with  the  rich  in  His  death."  (Isa.  liii.  9.)  But  not  every  one 
knows  the  interesting  fact  that  the  more  correct  translation  of 
the  Hebrew  words  would  be,  "  His  grave  was  appointed  to  be 
with  the  wicked  ;  but  with  the  rich  man  was  His  tomb."  This 
is  the  opinion  of  such  eminent  scholars  as  Capellus,  Vitringa, 
Bishop  Lowth,  and  Bishop  Horsley. 


JOHN  XX.  1—10. 


1  The  first  day  of  the  week  cometh 
Mary  Magdalene  early,  when  it  was 
yet  dark,  unto  the  sepulchre,  and 
eeeth  the  stone  taken  away  from 
the  sepulchre. 

2  Then  she  runneth,  and  cometh 
to  Simon  Peter,  and  to  the  other 
disciple,  whom  Jesus  loved,  and 
Baith  unto  them,  They  have  taken 
away  the  Lord  out  of  the  sepulclire, 
and  we  know  not  where  they  have 
laid  him. 

3  Peter  therefore  went  forth,  and 
that  other  disciple,  and  came  to  the 
Bepulchre. 

4  So  they  ran  both  together :  and 
the  other  disciple  did  outrun  Peter, 
and  came  first  to  the  sepulchre. 

5  And  he  stooping  down,  and  look- 


ing in,  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying ; 
yet  went  he  not  in. 

6  Then  cometh  Simon  Peter  fol- 
lowing him,  and  went  into  the  sep- 
ulchre, and  seeth  the  linen  clothes 
lie, 

7  And  the  napkin,  that  was  about 
his  head,  not  lying  with  the  linen 
clothes,  but  wrapped  together  in  a 
place  by  itself. 

8  Then  went  in  also  that  other 
disciple,  which  came  first  to  the  sep- 
ulchre, and  he  saw,  and  believed. 

9  For  as  yet  they  knew  not  the 
scripture,  that  he  must  rise  again 
from  the  dead. 

10  Then  the  disciples  went  away 
again  unto  their  own  home. 


The  chapter  we  have  now  begun  takes  us  from 
Christ's  death  to  Christ's  resurrection.  Like  Matthew, 
Mark,  and  Luke,  John  dwells  on  these  two  great  events 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX. 


347 


with  peculiar  fulness  and  particularity.  And  we  need 
not  wonder.  The  whole  of  saving  Christianity  hinges 
on  the  two  facts,  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  and  rose 
again  for  our  justification.  The  chapter  before  our  eyes 
deserves  special  attention.  Of  all  the  four  evangelists, 
none  supplies  such  deeply  interesting  evidence  of  the 
resuiTection,  as  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved. 

We  are  taught  in  the  passage  before  us,  that  those 
who  love  Christ  most  are  those  who  have  received  most 
benefit  from  Him. 

The  first  whom  St.  John  names  among  those  who 
came  to  Christ's  sepulchre,  is  Mary  Magdalene.  The 
history  of  this  faithful  woman,  no  doubt,  is  hidden  in 
much  obscurity.  A  vast  amount  of  needless  obloquy 
has  been  heaped  upon  her  memory,  as  if  she  was  once 
an  habitual  sinner  against  the  seventh  commandment. 
Yet  there  is  literally  no  evidence  whatever  that  she  was 
anything  of  the  kind  !  But  we  are  distinctly  told  that 
she  was  one  out  of  whom  the  Lord  had  cast  "  seven  dev- 
ils "  (Mark  xvi.  9  ;  Luke  viii.  2), — one  who  had  been 
subjected  in  a  peculiar  way  to  Satan's  possession, — and 
one  whose  gratitude  to  our  Lord  for  deliverance  was  a 
gratitude  that  knew  no  bounds.  In  short,  of  all  our 
Lord's  followers  on  earth,  none  seem  to  have  loved  Him 
so  much  as  Mary  Magdalene.  None  felt  that  they  owed 
BO  much  to  Christ.  None  felt  so  strongly  that  there  was 
nothing  too  great  to  do  for  Christ.  Henx;e,  as  Bishop 
Andrews  beautifully  puts  it, — "She  was  last  at  His 
cross,  and  first  at  His  grave.  She  staid  longest  there, 
and  was  soonest  here.  She  could  not  rest  till  she  was 
up  to  seek  Him.  She  sought  Him  while  it  was  yet 
dark,  even  before  she  had  light  to  seek  Him  by."  In  a 
word,  having  received  much,  she  loved  much ;  and  lov- 
ing much,  she  did  much,  in  order  to  prove  the  reality 
of  her  love. 


348  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  case  "before  us  throws  broad  and  clear  light  on  a 
question,  which  ought  to  be  deeply  interesting  to  every 
true-hearted  servant  of  Christ.  How  is  it  that  many 
who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians,  do  so  little 
for  the  Saviour  whose  name  they  bear  ?  How  is  it  that 
many,  whose  faith  and  grace  it  would  be  uncharitable 
to  deny,  work  so  little,  give  so  little,  say  so  little,  take 
so  little  pains,  to  promote  Christ's  cause,  and  bring 
glory  to  Christ  in  the  world  ?  These  questions  admit 
of  only  one  answer.  It  is  a  low  sense  of  debt  and  obli- 
gation to  Christ,  which  is  the  account  of  the  whole  mat- 
ter. Where  sin  is  not  felt  at  all,  nothing  is  done  ;  and 
where  sin  is  little  felt,  little  is  done.  The  man  who  is 
deeply  conscious  of  his  own  guilt  and  corruption,  and 
deeply  convinced  that  without  the  blood  and  interces- 
sion of  Christ  he  would  sink  deservedly  into  the  lowest 
hell,  this  is  the  man  who  will  spend  and  be  spent  for 
Jesus,  and  think  that  he  can  never  do  enough  to  show 
forth  His  praise.  Let  us  daily  pray  that  we  may  see 
the  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  the  amazing  grace  of  Christ, 
more  clearly  and  distinctly.  Then,  and  then  only,  shall 
we  cease  to  be  cool,  and  lukewarm,  and  slovenly  in  our 
work  for  Jesus.  Then,  and  then  only,  shall  we  under- 
stand such  burning  zeal  as  that  of  Mary  ;  and  compre- 
hend what  Paul  meant  when  he  said,  "The  love  of 
Christ  constraineth  us ;  because  we  thus  judge  that  if 
One  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead :  and  that  He  died 
for  all,  that  they  which  live  should  not  henceforth  live 
unto  themselves,  but  unto  Him  which  died  for  them, 
and  rose  again."     (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15.) 

We  are  taught,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  that  there 
are  widely  different  temperaments  in  different  believers. 

This  is  a  point  which  is  curiously  brought  out  in  the 
conduct  of  Peter  and  John,  when  Mary  Magdalene  told 
them  that  the  Lord's  body  was  gone.     We  are  told  that 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  34.9 

they  both  ran  to  the  sepulchre  ;  but  John,  the  disciple 
whom  Jesus  loved,  outran  Peter,  and  reached  the  empty 
grave  first.  Then  comes  out  the  difierence  between  the 
two  men.  John,  of  the  two  more  gentle,  quiet,  tender, 
reserved,  retiring,  deep-feeling,  stooped  down  and  looked 
in,  but  went  no  further.  Peter,  more  hot,  and  zealous, 
and  impulsive,  and  fervent,  and  forward,  cannot  be  con- 
tent without  going  down  into  the  sepulchre,  and  actual- 
ly seeing  w^ith  his  own  eyes.  Both,  we  may  be  sure, 
were  deeply  attached  to  our  Lord.  The  hearts  of  both, 
at  this  critical  juncture,  were  full  of  hopes,  and  fears, 
and  anxieties,  and  expectations,  all  tangled  together. 
Yet  each  behaves  in  his  own  characteristic  fashion. 
We  need  not  doubt  that  these  things  were  intentionally 
written  for  our  learning. 

Let  us  learn,  from  the  case  before  us,  to  make  allow- 
ances for  wide  varieties  in  the  inward  character  of  be- 
lievers. To  do  so  will  save  us  much  trouble  in  the 
journey  of  life,  and  prevent  many  an  uncharitable 
thought.  Let  us  not  judge  brethren  harshly,  and  set 
them  down  in  a  low  place,  because  they  do  not  see  or 
feel  things  exactly  as  we  see  and  feel,  and  because  things 
do  not  affect  or  strike  them  just  as  they  affect  and  strike 
us.  The  flowers  in  the  Lord's  garden  are  not  all  of  one 
color  and  one  scent,  though  they  are  all  planted  by  one 
Spirit.  The  subjects  of  His  kingdom  are  not  all  exactly 
of  one  tone  and  temperament,  though  they  all  love  the 
same  Saviour,  and  are  written  in  the  same  book  of  life. 
The  Church  of  Christ  has  some  in  its  ranks  who  are  like 
Peter,  and  some  who  are  like  John ;  and  a  place  for  all, 
and  a  work  for  all  to  do.  Let  us  love  all  who  love 
Christ  in  sincerity,  and  thank  God  that  they  love  Him 
at  all.     The  great  thing  is  to  love  Jesus. 

We  are  taught,  finally,  in  these  verses,  that  there  may 
he  much  ignorance  even  in  true  believers. 


350  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

This  is  a  point  which  is  brought  out  here  with  singu- 
lar force  and  distinctness.  John  himself,  the  writer  of 
this  Gospel,  records  of  himself  and  his  companion  Pe- 
ter, "  As  yet  they  knew  not  the  Scripture,  that  He  must 
rise  again  from  the  dead."  How  truly  wonderful  this 
seems !  For  three  long  years  these  two  leading  Apos- 
tles had  heard  our  Lord  speak  of  His  own  resurrection 
as  a  fact,  and  yet  they  had  not  understood  Him.  Again 
and  again  He  had  staked  the  truth  of  His  Messiahship 
on  His  rising  from  the  dead,  and  yet  they  had  never 
taken  in  His  meaning.  We  little  realize  the  power  over 
the  mind  which  is  exercised  by  wrong  teaching  in  child- 
hood, and  by  early  prejudices  imbibed  in  our  youth. 
Surely  the  Christian  minister  has  little  right  to  com- 
plain of  ignorance  among  his  hearers,  when  he  marks 
the  ignorance  of  Peter  and  John,  under  the  teaching  of 
Christ  Himself. 

After  all  we  must  remember  that  true  grace,  and  not 
head  knowledge,  is  the  one  thing  needful.  We  are  in 
the  hands  of  a  merciful  and  compassionate  Saviour,  who 
passes  by  and  pardons  much  ignorance,  when  He  sees 
"  a  heart  right  in  the  sight  of  God."  Some  things  in- 
deed we  must  know,  and  without  knowing  them  we 
cannot  be  saved.  Our  own  sinfulness  and  guilt,  the 
office  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  the  necessity  of  repentance 
and  faith, — such  things  as  these  are  essential  to  salva- 
tion. But  he  that  knows  these  things  may,  in  other 
respects,  be  a  very  ignorant  man.  In  fact,  the  extent 
to  which  one  man  may  have  grace  together  with  much 
ignorance,  and  another  may  have  much  knowledge  and 
yet  no  grace,  is  one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  in  religion, 
and  one  which  the  last  day  alone  will  unfold.  Let  us 
then  seek  knowledge,  and  be  ashamed  of  ignorance. 
But  above  all  let  us  make  sure  that,  like  Peter  and 
John,  we  have  grace  and  right  hearts. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  351 


Notes.    John  xx.  1 — 10. 

The  two  last  chapters  of  St.  John's  Gospel  are  taken  up  with 
accounts  of  oar  Lord's  appearances  after  His  resurrection. 
Like  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  St.  John  dwells  very  fully  on 
the  history  of  the  crucifixion  and  resurrection.  But,  as  in 
other  parts  of  his  Gospel,  so  here  also,  he  supplies  many  deep- 
ly interesting  details,  which  the  other  Evangelists,  for  some 
wise  reasons,  have  not  recorded.  A  few  preliminary  remarks 
on  the  whole  subject  will  not  perhaps  be  found  uninteresting. 
The  matter  is  one  about  which  every  Christian  ought  to  have 
very  clear  and  correct  views. 

(a)  Concerning  the  importance  of  Jesus  Christ's  resurrection 
from  the  dead,  it  would  be  hard  to  speak  too  strongly.  It  is 
a  cardinal  article  of  the  Christian  faith,  second  to  none  in  val- 
ue.— It  is  the  grand  proof  that  He  was  the  promised  Messiah 
whom  the  Prophets  had  foretold.  It  is  the  one  great  sign 
which  He  named  to  the  Jews  when  asked  to  give  convincing 
evidence  of  His  Divine  mission, — the  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jo- 
nas, the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  after  destruction.  (Matt.  xii. 
89  ;  John  ii.  19 — 2i.)  If  He  did  not  rise  again  after  three  days, 
they  were  not  to  believe  Him. — It  is  the  completion  of  the 
work  of  redemption  which  He  came  into  the  world  to  accom- 
plish. It  proved  that  the  ransom  was  accepted,  and  the  victory 
over  sin  and  death  obtained.  Christ  "  was  delivered  for  our 
offences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification." — "  We  are  be- 
gotten again  unto  a  lively  hope,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead." — (Rom.  iv.  25  ;  Pet.  i.  3.)  If  He  had  not 
risen  again,  our  hope  would  have  been  a  huge  uncertainty. — It 
is  a  fact  which  has  the  closest  connection  with  the  spiritual 
life,  and  position  before  God,  of  all  believers.  They  are  count- 
ed by  God  as  "  risen  with  Christ,"  and  they  should  regard  them- 
Belves  as  partakers  of  Christ's  resurrection  life,  and  sitting  in 
heavenly  places. — Not  least,  it  is  the  pledge  and  assurance  of 
our  own  resurrection  at  the  last  day.  We  need  not  fear  death, 
and  look  at  the  grave  with  despair,  when  we  remember  that 
Jesus  Christ  rose  again  in  the  body.  As  surely  as  the  Head 
rose,  so  shall  the  members  be  raised. — Let  these  points  never 
be  forgotten.  When  we  think  of  them  we  may  understand 
why  the  Apostles,  in  their  preaching  and  Epistles,  dwell  so 
much  upon  the  resurrection.  Well  would  it  be  if  modern 
Christians  thought  more  about  it.  Myriads  seem  unable  to 
look  at  anything  in  the  Gospel  except  the  sacrifice  and  death 
of  Christ,  and  altogether  pass  over  His  resurrection. 

(6)  Concerning  the  evidences  of  Christ's  resurrection, — the 
proofs  that  He  actually  did  rise  again  from  the  grave  with  Hia 
body, — it  is  most  remarkable  to  observe  how  full  and  various 
they  are.  He  was  seen  at  least  eleven  times  after  He  rose 
again,  at  different  times  of  day,  in  dififeient  ways,  and  by  ditfer- 


352  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

ent  witnesses.  He  was  seen  first  bv  one  woman  alone,  tlien  by 
several  women  together,  then  by  one  man,  then  by  two  men, 
and  each  time  in  the  open  air.  Then  He  was  seen  by  ten  dis- 
ciples in  the  evening  iu  a  room,  then  by  eleven  disciples  again 
in  a  room,  and  afterwards  on  five  different  occasions,  at  one  of 
which  no  less  than  five  hundred  people  were  present.  Those 
to  whom  He  appeared,  touched  Him,  talked  with  Him,  and 
saw  Him  eat  and  drink.  (Matt,  xxviii.  9  ;  John  xx.  27  ;  Luke 
xxiv.  42.)  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  all  who  saw  Him 
were  most  unwilling  at  first  to  believe,  and  most  slow  to  credit 
the  report  of  His  resurrection.  Yet  they  were  all  finally  con- 
vinced !  If  there  is  any  fact  in  Christianity  that  is  well  sup- 
ported by  evidence,  it  is  the  fact  of  Christ  rising  again  from 
the  dead.  It  is  the  one  fact  that  no  infidel  has  ever  fairly 
grappled  with.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is  most  undeniably  cer- 
tain, and  no  infidel  can  escape  it.  The  Apostles  a  few  weeks 
after  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  were  utterly  and  entirely  different 
men  in  every  way  from  what  they  were  before  the  crucifixion, 
— bolder,  more  decided,  more  unhesitating  followers  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  than  they  used  to  be,  to  a  most  enormous  extent. 
Even  such  men  as  the  German  Rationalists,  Paulus  and 
Strauss,  according  to  Tholuck,  are  obliged  to  make  the  curious 
admission, — "  Something  extraordinary  must  have  occurred." 

(c)  Concerning  the  best  mode  of  harmonizing  the  accounts 
which  the  four  Evangelists  give  of  our  Lord's  appearances, 
after  He  rose  again  from  the  dead,  there  is  undeniably  some 
difficulty.  But  it  is  probably  far  more  apparent  than  real. 
Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  each  tell  their  own  story. 
There  is  a  most  decided  absence  of  any  appearance  of  concert 
or  collusion  about  them.  How  to  reconcile  the  seeming  dis- 
crepancies in  their  narratives,  has  exercised  the  skill  of  com- 
mentators in  every  age.  Dean.  Alford  says  fiatly,  that  he 
*'  attempts  no  harmony  of  the  accounts,  and  that  he  believes  all 
such  attempts  to  be  fruitless."  I  do  not  agree  with  him  at  all, 
and  I  think  the  statement  to  be  unworthy  of  the  able  writer 
who  makes  it.  I  think  the  accounts  can  be  harmonized  and 
reconciled,  and  that  too  without  any  unfair  violence  to  the  nar- 
ratives of  the  four  Gospels. 

The  order  of  Christ's  eleven  appearances  between  His  resur- 
rection and  ascension,  I  believe  to  be  as  follows :  (1)  to  Mary 
Magdalene  alone  (Mark  xvi.  9  ;  John  xx.  14) ;  (2)  to  certain 
women  returning  from  the  sepulchre  (Matt,  xxviii.  9,  10)  ;  (8) 
to  Simon  Peter  alone  (Luke  xxiv.  34) ;  (4)  to  two  disciples  go- 
ing to  Etnmaus  (Luke  xxiv.  lo);  (o)  to  ten  Apostles  at  Jerusa- 
lem, and  some  other  disciples,  Thomas  being  absent  (John  xx. 
19) ;  (0)  to  eleven  Apostles  at  Jerusalem,  Thomas  being  pres- 
ent (John  XX.  2G — 29);  (7)  to  seven  disciples  fishing  at  "the  sea 
of  Tiberias  (John  xxi.  1) ;  (8)  to  eleven  Apostles  on  a  mountain 
in  Galilee,  and  perhaps  some  others  with  them  (Matt,  xxviii. 
16) ;  (9)  to  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  (1  Cor.  xv.  7) ; 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  353 

(10)  to  James  only  (1  Cor,  xv.  7) ;  (11)  to  all  the  Apostles,  and 
probably  some  others,  on  Mount  Olivet,  at  His  ascension. 

Most  of  these  eleven  appearances  require  little  or  no  expla- 
nation. The  ninth  and  tenth  in  the  list  are  only  recorded  by 
St.  Paul ;  and  some  think  that  the  appearance  to  five  hundred 
at  once,  is  the  same  as  that  to  the  eleven  in  Galilee,  though  I 
doubt  it.  The  appearance  to  Peter  is  one  of  which  we  know 
nothing  except  the  fact ;  and,  in  my  judgment,  it  certainly  is 
not  the  same  as  the  appearance  to  the  two  who  were  walking 
to  Emmaus.  The  only  appearances,  after  all,  about  which 
there  is  any  difficulty,  are  the  two  first  in  the  list,  and  to  my 
own  mind  the  difficulty  is  by  no  means  insuperable.  The  knot 
to  be  untied  is  this.  St.  Mark  expressly  says  that  our  Lord  ap- 
peared first  to  Mary  Magdalene.  (Mark  xvi.  9.)  St.  John  also 
describes  this  appearance ;  and  it  is  quite  plain  from  his  ac- 
count that  Mary  Magdalene  was  alone.  (John  xx.  11 — 13.) 
Yet  St.  Matthew  says  that  Mary  Magdalene  and  the  other  Ma- 
ry came  to  the  sepulchre  together, — saw  an  angel,  and  heard 
that  our  Lord  had  risen, — ran  to  bring  the  tidings  to  the  disci- 
ples, and  were  met  on  the  way  by  Jesus,  and  both  saw  Him  at 
the  same  time.  Now  how  is  this  to  be  explained  ?  How  can 
the  account  of  these  three  witnesses  be  made  to  harmonize  and 
agree  ?     I  will  try  to  show. 

(1)  I  believe  that  Mary  Magdalene  and  the  other  Mary  did 
not  go  alone  to  the  sepulclire,  on  the  morning  of  the  resurrec- 
tion. By  comparing  Mark  xvi.  1,  and  Luke  xxiii.  55,  and  xxiv. 
1,  with  Matt,  xxviii.  1,  it  is  quite  evident  that  several  "  other 
women  "  accompanied  them. 

(3)  I  believe  that,  on  drawing  nigh  the  sepulchre,  the  com- 
pany of  women  saw  the  stone  rolled  away  from  its  mouth.  At 
once,  on  seeing  this,  it  flashed  on  the  mind  of  Mary  Magdalene 
that  the  body  of  Jesus  had  been  removed  from  the  tomb,  and, 
without  waiting  a  moment,  she  ran  off  to  Peter  and  John,  and 
told  them,  as  recorded  in  John  xx.  1,  2.  This  is  the  view  of 
Chrysostom  and  Cyril. 

(3)  I  believe  that,  while  Mary  Magdalene  ran  off  to  tell  Peter 
and  John,  the  other  women  went  up  to  the  sepulchre,  found 
the  body  gone,  saw  a  vision  of  angels,  were  told  that  Jesus  had 
risen,  and  were  commanded  to  go  and  tell  the  disciples.  They 
departed  to  tell  the  news.  Some  went  in  one  direction  and 
gome  in  another ;  Mary  and  Salome  with  one  party  ;  Joanna 
with  another. 

(4)  I  believe  that  while  this  was  going  on,  Mary  Magdalene, 
who  had  run  off  alone  to  tell  Peter  and  John,  had  found  them, 
and  that  they  all  three  came  to  the  sepulchre  shortly  after  the 
other  women  went  away.  Whether  Mary  got  there  so  soon  aa 
Peter  and  John,  perhaps  admits  of  doubt. 

(5)  I  believe  that  Peter  and  John  saw  the  empty  sepulchre, 
and  went  away,  leaving  Mary  Magdalene  weeping  there. 


354:  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

(6)  I  believe  tliat,  as  soon  as  Peter  and  John  went  away,  Mary 
Magdalene  saw  the  two  angels,  and  immediately  after  saw  our 
Lord  Himself,  and  was  told  to  carry  a  message  to  His  brethren. 
(John  XX  17.) 

(7)  I  believe  that  in  the  meantime  the  other  women  had  gone 
in  two  or  three  directions,  to  tell  the  other  disciples  who  lived 
in  a  different  part  of  Jerusalem  from  that  where  Peter  and  John 
lived.  Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Salome,  were  yet  on 
their  way  when  Jesus  met  them,  very  shortly  after  He  had 
appeared  to  Mary  Magdalene. 

(8)  I  believe  that  one  party  of  the  women,  with  Joanna  at  their 
head,  saw  nothing  of  our  Lord,  but  went  to  the  disciples  and 
told  them  the  message  of  the  angels. 

(9)  I  believe  that,  shortly  after  this,  our  Lord  appeared  to 
Simon  Peter,  who  very  likely  had  gone  again  to  the  grave  on 
hearing  Mary  Magdalene's  report. 

(10)  I  believe  that  in  the  course  of  the  same  day  our  Lord 
appeared  to  the  two  disciples  on  the  way  to  Emmaus,  who  had 
left  Jerusalem  after  Joanna  and  the  women  reported  the  vision 
of  angels,  but  before  our  Lord  had  appeared  to  Peter. 

(11)  Finally,  I  believe  that  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day 
our  Lord  appeared  to  the  Apostles,  and  others  with  them, 
Thomas  being  absent.  Luke  says,  "  The  eleven  Apostles  were 
gathered  together."  But  he  evidently  means  the  Apostles  gen- 
erally, as  a  body.  (See  my  note  on  Luke  xxiv.  34.)  This  was 
our  Lord's  fifth  appearance  on  the  day  that  He  rose. 

I  know  not  whether  this  scheme  of  reconciliation  will  satisfy 
all  my  readers.  On  a  point  so  much  controverted,  it  becomes  a 
commentator  to  speak  humbly  and  diffidently.  I  content  my- 
self with  saying  that  I  see  far  fewer  difficulties  in  it  than  in 
any  other  scheme  that  I  have  met  with.  1  see,  moreover,  noth- 
ing unfair  or  unreasonable  about  it,  and  nothing  which  is  not 
consistent  with  the  variety  that  may  justly  be  expected  from 
the  testimony  of  four  independent  witnesses. 

To  those  who  wish  to  study  the  subject  more  fully,  I  strongly 
recommend  a  careful  study  of  "  West  on  the  Resurrection," 
and  "  Birks's  Horae  Evangelicae." 

1. — \_The  first  day  of  the  week.]  This,  I  need  hardly  say,  means 
our  Sunday,  the  Lord's  day,  the  first  day  following  the  Jewish 
sabbath.  Between  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  chapter  and  these 
words,  we  must  suppose  an  interval  of  thirty-six  hours  to  have 
passed  away.  During  these  hours  our  blessed  Lord's  body  lay 
still  in  the  tomb,  and  His  soul  was  in  paradise,  while  the  disci- 
ples were  quiet  in  their  respective  abodes,  and  honored  the 
fourtli  commandment.  The  chief  and  principal  breakers  of 
this  Sabbath  were  the  priests  and  Pharisees,  who  came  to  Pilate 
and  obtained  leave  to  set  a  watch  around  the  tomb,  and  put  a 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  355 

seal  on  tlie  stone  wliicli  lay  at  its  mouth.  The  very  men  who 
made  a  boast  of  the  law,  through  breaking  of  the  law  dishon- 
ored God,  and  disgraced  themselves.  The  very  followers  of 
Him  whom  they  had  slain,  kept  the  law  more  strictly  than  they 
did. 

[Cometh  Mary  Magdalene... early. ..dark...sepulchre^  St.  John 
names  none  bat  Mary.  Yet  it  is  clear,  by  examining  the  account 
of  the  other  three  Gospel  writers,  that  she  did  not  come  alone. 
She  was  only  one  among  several  women  from  Galilee, — includ- 
ing Mary  the  wife  of  Cleophas,  or  Alpheus,  Salome  the  mother 
of  John  and  James,  and  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's 
steward.  These  all  appear  to  have  been  near  our  Lord  when 
He  was  crucified,  and  to  have  looked  on,  if  they  did  not  active- 
ly help,  when  He  was  buried.  They  then  probably  agreed  to 
come  to  the  tomb  early  on  the  morning  after  the  sabbath  in  or- 
der to  do  more  for  our  Lord's  body  than  there  was  time  to  do 
on  Friday  afternoon.  On  the  sabbath  they  rested  according  to 
the  commandment.  They  now  came  as  early  as  they  could, 
even  before  the  sun  was  up,  in  order  to  begin  their  pious  work 
as  soon  as  they  had  light  to  do  it.  Foremost  among  the  whole 
party  was  Mary  Magdalene. 

Rupertus  and  Ferus  maintain  that  Mary  Magdalene  lived  at 
Bethany,  and  therefore  came  alone  to  the  sepulchre,  from  a  dif- 
ferent road  to  that  by  which  the  other  women  came.  But  this 
seems  pure  conjecture,  and  probably  arises  from  confounding 
Mary  Magdalene  with  Mary  the  sister  of  Lazarus. 

[And  8eeth...stone... sepulchre.]  It  seems  to  me,  from  these 
words,  that  Mary  Magdalene  was  the  first  who  detected  in  the 
dim  twilight  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away  from  the  mouth  of 
the  tomb.  It  may  be  that  she  was  in  advance  of  the  other  wo- 
men, and  thus  saw  it  first.  It  may  be  that  strong  feeling  and 
anxiety  made  her  more  quick-sighted  and  keen  of  observation 
than  her  companions.  Indeed  we  do  not  know  for  a  certainty 
that  all  the  women  came  together  in  a  body.  For  anything  I 
can  see  they  may  have  come  separately,  or  by  twos  and  threes, 
and  Mary  may  have  been  the  first  of  the  party.  It  is  quite  con- 
sistent with  her  character  to  suppose  this.  In  any  case  her 
conduct  this  memorable  morning  was  so  remarkable  and  promi- 
nent, that  St.  John  speaks  of  her  alone.  All  the  women  showed 
faith  and  courage  and  love,  he  seems  to  intimate  ;  but  none  so 
pre-eminently  as  Mary  Magdalene.  She  was  first  to  come  near 
the  tomb,  first  to  discover  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away,  first  to 
conjecture  that  something  remarkable  had  happened,  and  first 
to  act  at  once  on  what  she  saw. 

Let  us  note  Mary's  courage,  and  zeal  to  honor  her  huried 
Lord.  Not  every  woman  would  have  dared  to  go  outside  the 
city  while  it  was  yet  dark,  to  a  grave,  and  specially  during  the 
passover  feast,  when  thousands  of  strangers  were  probably 
sleeping  under  any  slight  shelter  near  the  walls  of  Jerusalem. 


356  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Let  us  note  how  St.  John  takes  it  for  granted  that  his  readers 
were  acquainted  with  the  other  three  Gospels,  and  knew  that 
"  a  stone  "  had  been  rolled  to  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  He 
here  speaks  of  "  the  stone."  Yet  he  has  said  nothing  about  it 
before. 

There  seems  strong  internal  evidence  that  Mary,  and  the 
other  women  who  agreed  to  come  with  her  to  the  sepulchre, 
could  not  have  known  of  the  Roman  guard  having  been  placed 
around  it.  It  seems,  at  all  events,  highly  improbable  that  they 
would  have  gone  there  before  the  sun  was  up,  if  they  had  ex- 
pected to  find  Koman  soldiers  at  the  place. 

Andrews  observes  that  four  special  favors  were  granted  to 
Mary  in  one  day  :  (1)  To  see  the  angels ;  (2)  To  see  Christ  at  all; 
(3)  To  see  Him  first  of  all ;  (4)  To  be  employed  by  Christ  to 
carry  a  heavenly  errand.  And  why  ?  Because  she  loved  much. 
He  adds,  "  We  cannot  say  that  she  believed  much.  By  her 
thrice  repeated  saying  her  Lord  was  '  taken  away '  (2,  13,  15 
verses),  it  seems  she  believed  no  more  than  the  high  priest 
would  have  had  the  world  believe,  that  He  was  taken  away  by 
night." 

2.—  {Thensherunneth?i  I  believe  this  expression  means  that 
Mary  Magdalene,  the  moment  she  saw  the  stone  rolled  away 
from  its  place,  ran  off  alone  to  tell  the  news  to  Peter  and  John. 
She  did  not  go  a  step  nearer  the  tomb,  but  left  the  other  wo- 
men to  go  up  to  the  grave  and  look  in,  and  thus  missed  seeing 
the  angel  whom  they  saw.  She  waited  for  nothing.  The  stone 
was  moved.  The  body,  she  at  once  concluded,  had  been  taken 
away.  She  turned  on  her  heel  at  once  and  ran  off  to  tell  the 
two  chief  Apostles.  The  rest  of  the  party  probably  drew  near 
to  the  grave  slowly  and  hesitatingly,  not  knowing  what  to  think 
or  expect ;  and  Mary  was  probably  a  long  way  on  the  road  to 
the  dwelling  of  Peter  and  John,  before  they  finally  turned 
away  from  the  tomb.  This  should  be  carefully  noticed,  if  we 
would  reconcile  the  narratives  of  Matthew  and  John.  It  is 
clear  to  my  own  mind  that  there  was  something  peculiar  and 
striking  in  the  conduct  of  Mary  Magdalene  this  wonderful 
morning,  and  St.  John  desires  on  that  account  to  direct  our 
special  attention  to  it.  "  Mary,"  he  seems  to  say,  "  was  the 
first  to  come  to  the  tomb,  the  first  to  see  that  the  stone  was 
removed,  and  the  one  that  ran  off  alone  to  tell  me  and  Peter. 
Many  of  the  Galilean  women  showed  faith,  and  love,  and  zeal 
that  morning,  but  none  more  than  Mary." 

\^And  cometh...Peter... other  disciple.Joved.']  The  other  disci- 
ple here  mentioned  was  unquestionably  John.  Mary's  reasons 
for  running  to  tell  these  two  first  were  probably  these,  {a) 
They  were  chief  men  among  the  Apostles,  (b)  They  had  been 
the  two  who  had  stuck  most  closely  to  Jesus  up  to  the  last,  and 
Bhown  most  faith  and  love,  and  were  naturally  most  anxious  to 
know  about   His  body,    (c)  Wherever  John  was,  Mary  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  357 

motlier  of  our  Lord  was.  Can  we  doubt  tliat  Mary  Magdalene 
would  think  of  her  as  one  among  the  first  to  be  told  about  the 
stone  being  rolled  away  ?  It  is  moreover  highly  probable, 
though  a  matter  of  conjecture  only,  tbat  Peter  and  John  were 
staying  at  some  house  very  near  the  sepulchre.  It  is  most  likely 
that  the  other  Apostles  were  "  scattered,"  according  to  our 
Lord's  prophecy,  in  diiferent  parts  of  Jerusalem,  and  none  were 
so  near  the  tomb  as  Peter  and  John. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  how,  all  through  the  Gospels  and 
Acts,  Peter  and  John  seem  to  have  been  peculiarly  drawn  to- 
gether, and  to  have  been  close  friends  and  companions.  As 
fishermen,  we  are  told  that  James  and  John  were  partners 
with  Simon.  (Luke  v.  10.)  Three  times  the  name  of  James  is 
joined  with  theirs, — on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  at  the 
house  of  Jairus,  and  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  But  the 
special  intimacy  between  Peter  and  John  comes  out  at  the  last 
supper,  in  the  high  priest's  house,  on  the  occasion  now  before 
us,  at  the  Sea  of  Tiberias,  at  the  end  of  this  Gospel,  and  in  the 
third  of  Acts,  where  the  lame  man  was  healed.  All  point  to 
that  mysterious  drawing  together  between  two  men  of  widely 
different  temperaments,  which  every  observing  eye  must  occa- 
sionally see  in  the  world.  John  alone,  of  all  the  Apostles,  had 
witnessed  Peter's  sad  fall  in  the  high  priest's  house,  and  ob- 
served his  bitter  weeping  afterwards.  Can  we  not  understand 
that  from  Friday  night  to  Sunday  morning  John  would  be 
lovingly  employed  in  binding  up  the  broken  heart  of  his  brother, 
and  telling  him  of  our  Lord's  last  words  ?  Can  we  doubt  that 
they  were  absorbed  and  occupied  in  converse  about  their  Master 
on  this  very  morning,  when  Mary  Magdalene  suddenly  ran  in 
with  her  wonderful  news? 

The  love  and  tender  charity  of  John's  character  come  out 
beautifully  in  his  affection  for  Peter,  even  after  his  denial  of 
Christ.  How  many  modern  Churches  would  have  excommuni- 
cated Peter,  and  put  him  in  a  low  place  for  months.  John 
clings  to  him,  and  has  him  under  his  own  roof,  wherever  that 
was.  When  Judas  fell,  he  had  no  friend  to  raise  and  cheer 
him.  When  Peter  fell,  there  was  a  "  brother  born  for  adversi- 
ty," who  did  not  despise  him. 

Bengel  thinks,  from  the  repetition  of  the  preposition  "  to," 
in  the  Greek, — "  to  Peter,  to  John," — that  the  disciples  were  not 
together.     But  I  cannot  think  this  at  all  likely. 

[And  saith... taken  away. ..know  not. ..laid  Him.]  Mary's  an- 
nouncement was  a  very  short  one.  Whether  she  had  actually 
looked  inside  the  tomb  and  seen  that  it  was  empty,  seems  more 
than  doubtful.  It  would  rather  appear,  by  comparison  of  the 
four  Gospels,  that  she  had  only  seen  the  stone  rolled  away  from 
the  door.  But  that  was  enough  for  her.  She  had  at  once 
jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  the  body  of  "the  Lord"  was 
taken  away,  and  so  she  announces  it.     And  after  all  she  had 


358  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

reason  on  her  side.  Who  would  have  taken  the  trouble  of  roll- 
ing away  the  stone,  but  one  who  wanted  to  take  away  the  body  ? 
If  the  stone  was  rolled  away,  she  justly  concluded  the  body 
was  gone. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  will  be  observed  by  every  one  who 
carefully  compares  St.  John's  narrative  with  that  of  the  other 
three  Evangelists.  Mary  Magdalene  had  evidently  not  seen 
"  the  vision  of  angels  "  which  the  other  women  saw,  or  else  she 
would  certainly  have  mentioned  it  to  Peter  and  John.  She 
does  not  say  a  word  about  it !  She  had  not  heard  the  comfort- 
able tidings  that  the  Lord  had  "  risen,"  or  else  she  would  surely 
have  told  it.  She  clearly  knew  nothing  of  all  this ;  and  the 
conclusion  is  plain  to  my  mind,  that  she  ran  off  as  soon  as  she 
saw  the  stone  rolled  away,  and  waited  for  no  companion. 

Another  thing  should  be  observed.  St.  John's  narrative  here 
lets  out  the  fact  that  Mary  Magdalene  did  not  go  to  the  sepul- 
chre alone.  For  what  does  she  say  ?  She  speaks  in  the  plural 
number :  "  We  know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him."  That 
"  we  "  can  only  apply  to  herself  and  the  other  women  who  had 
gone  with  her  to  the  grave. 

We  should  notice  that  Mary's  mournful  announcement  is  al- 
most the  same  that  she  made  to  the  angels,  when  they  asked 
her  why  she  wept.  (Verse  13.)  Her  repeated  dwelling  on  the 
body  being  gone,  and  her  wanting  to  know  where  it  was  "  laid," 
should  be  noticed.  May  we  not  suspect  that  this  holy  woman, 
with  all  her  faith  and  love,  had  not  yet  realized  the  great  truth 
that  Jesus  was  to  rise  again.  She  talks  of  His  body,  and  longs 
to  know  where  it  is  laid,  and  seems  to  think  it  must  be  a  cold 
dead  corpse  still,  and  wishes  to  do  it  more  honor.  But  she  has 
forgotten  altogether  His  repeated  prediction  that  He  would  rise 
again  !  Alas,  how  little  of  Christ's  teaching  the  best  of  us  take 
in  1     How  much  we  let  fall ! 

By  the  word  "  they  "  we  must  suppose  Mary  meant  our  Lord's 
enemies, — the  chief  priests,  or  the  Roman  soldiers.  Perhaps 
we  should  not  press  the  word  too  closely.  It  may  be  that  the 
good  woman,  in  her  excitement  and  trouble,  hardly  knew  whom 
she  meant,  and  spoke  indefinitely  ; — "  somebody  "  has  taken 
away.  She  can  hardly  have  meant  that  the  chief  priests  had 
taken  away  the  body,  in  order  to  exhibit  it  as  the  dead  corpse 
of  a  conquered,  wicked  impostor. 

It  is  fair  to  say  that  Ecolampadius  actually  thinks  that  Mary 
saw  the  angels,  talked  with  them,  and  received  the  message  for 
the  disciples  that  Clirist  had  risen,  but  quite  forgot  it !  This, 
however,  seems  to  me  an  extremely  improbable  view. 

3.  —[Peter  therefore  went  forth,  and  that  other  discijyle,  etc.']  The 
announcement  of  Mary  Magdalene  was  so  startling,  that  the 
two  disciples  arose  at  once,  and  went  to  the  sepulchre,  in  order 
to  find  out  what  this  rolling  aw^y  of  the  stone  meant,  and  to 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  359 

make  sure  that  the  Lord's  body  was  gone.  We  need  not  doubt 
that  they  would  at  once  ask  Mary,  "  How  do  you  know  the  body 
is  gone  ?  "  and  would  receive  the  answer,  "  Because  the  stone  is 
rolled  away."  But  finding  then,  that  Mary  had  not  actually 
been  inside  the  sepulchre,  and  seen  it  empty,  they  judged  it 
best  to  go  and  see  for  themselves.  When  we  remember  that 
Mary  the  mother  of  our  Lord  was,  in  all  human  probability,  in 
the  house  where  Peter  and  John  were,  we  may  well  imagine 
that  she  would  be  deeply  anxious  to  have  the  whole  matter 
cleared  up  at  once. 

St.  Luke,  we  may  recollect,  only  mentions  Peter  going  to  the 
sepulchre.  The  verse  before  us  fills  up  the  narrative,  and  tella 
us  that  John  went  with  him.  Two  witnesses  would  be  better 
than  one. 

4. — [So  they  ran  both  together,  etc.]  The  simple  fact  here  men- 
tioned shows  the  anxiety  and  excitement  of  the  two  loving 
Apostles.  We  can  well  suppose  that  Mary  Magdalene's  sudden 
announcement  completely  overwhelmed  them,  so  that  they  knew 
not  what  to  think.  Who  can  tell  that  thoughts  did  not  come 
into  their  mind,  as  they  ran,  about  our  T^ord's  oft-repeated  pre- 
diction of  His  resurrection  ?  Could  it  really  be  true  ?  Could 
it  possibly  prove  that  all  their  deep  sorrow  was  going  to  turn 
to  joy  ?  These  are  all  conjectures,  no  doubt.  Yet  a  vast  quan- 
tity of  thoughts  may  ruu  through  a  mind,  at  a  great  crisis,  in  a 
very  few  minutes.  Those  who  have  had  a  narrow  escape  from 
drowning  know  that  very  well. 

Why  John  outran  Peter  we  know  not.  The  common  opinion 
is  that  John  was  the  younger  man  of  the  two,  and  so  he  has 
been  always  represented  by  painters  in  every  age  of  the  Church. 
The  only  evidence,  however,  we  have  of  this  difference  of  age, 
is  the  fact  that  John's  father  is  mentioned  as  being  alive,  fol- 
lowing his  calling  as  a  fisherman  with  his  sons,  while  Peter's 
father,  Jonas,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  same  way.  Moreover, 
John  outlived  all  the  rest  of  the  Apostles  by  many  years.  So 
he  may  have  been  a  comparatively  young  man,  when  our  Lord 
called  him  to  be  an  Apostle. 

After  all,  the  matter  is  of  little  importance.  Bodily  strength 
and  agility  are  no  evidence  that  a  man  possesses  superior  grace. 
The  holiest  saints  have  often  had  very  weak  and  infirm  bodies. 
Holy  and  zealous  as  John  was,  we  have  no  right  to  contend  that 
he  felt  more  zeal  than  penitent,  broken  hearted  Peter,  when  he 
outran  him  on  this  eventful  morning. 

Lampe  thinks  it  just  possible  that  Peter  was  troubled  in  con- 
science by  reason  of  his  recent  fall,  and  therefore  went  to  the 
grave  with  a  slow  and  hesitating  step.     But  1  doubt  this. 

5. — [And  he  stooping  down,  etc.]  The  opinion  of  well-informed 
persons  who  have  seen  the  tombs  near  Jerusalem,  is,  that  our 
Lord's  sepulchre  was  a  kind  of  cave  hewn  out  of  the  side  of  a 


360  Ei  POSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

rocky  hill,  and  that  there  was  either  a  hollow  place,  hewn  out 
at  a  little  distance  within  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  to  receive 
the  body,  or  that  the  grave  ploped  gradually  backwards,  and 
the  body  was  laid  at  the  back  part  of  the  cave.  In  either  case 
we  may  understand  that  a  person  coming  to  the  door  of  the 
cave  (which  must  have  been  small,  if  a  single  stone  could  close 
it),  could  only  see  what  was  inside,  by  "  stooping  down,"  as  we 
are  here  told  John  did. 

When  John  looked  in,  he  saw  nothing  whatever  but  the 
empty  grave,  and  the  linen  clothes  in  which  our  Lord's  body  had 
been  wrapped  lying  together.  Not  going  in,  it  is  evident  that 
he  could  not  see  very  clearly  the  precise  state  of  a  dark  cave, 
with  only  one  small  entrance.  He  only  saw  enough  to  satisfy 
him  at  a  glance  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  not  there,  and  that 
the  linen  clothes  were  there. 

Why  the  beloved  apostle  "  went  not  in,"  we  do  not  know,  and 
are  left  to  conjecture.  It  may  be  that  he  was  at  once  satisfied 
that  the  body  of  his  Master  was  gone,  and  that  was  all  he  cared 
to  know.  It  may  be  that  he  felt  a  holy  reverence  for  the  place 
where  our  Lord  had  lain,  and  shrunk  from  going  in.  It  may 
possibly  be  that  he  felt  some  fear,  and  hardly  knew  what  to  ex- 
pect next,  remembering  the  earthquake  and  the  rending  of 
graves  on  the  previous  Friday.  It  may  be  that,  being  the 
younger  man  of  the  two,  he  waited  for  his  elder  brother  to  take 
the  lead,  and  would  touch  nothing,  do  nothing,  and  take  no  step, 
without  another  witness  besides  himself.  We  cannot  tell.  The 
incident  is  precisely  one  of  those  little  circumstantial  details 
which  bring  out  men's  natural  temperament. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  John  himself  is  the  writer  who  records 
that  he  "  went  not  in."  Be  the  motive  what  it  may,  he  gener- 
ously gives  his  brother  Peter  the  whole  honor  and  credit  of  be- 
ing the  first  of  the  two  to  go  inside  the  grave,  and  thoroughly 
investigate  the  condition  of  it  in  every  particular. 

We  should  not  forget  that  the  simple  fact  of  the  "  linen 
clothes  lying,"  was  enough  to  satisfy  any  thinking  mind,  that 
something  extraordinary  must  have  occurred.  No  enemy  or 
thief,  in  removing  our  Lord's  body,  would  have  taken  the 
trouble  to  remove  the  linen  clothes  in  which  he  was  wrapped. 
Reason  points  out  that  it  would  save  time  and  trouble  to  take 
the  body  as  it  was,  with  the  linen  wrapped  around  it. 

Jjampe  thinks  it  possible  that  John  did  not  go  in  from  fear 
of  being  made  unclean  by  a  dead  body.  But  I  can  hardly  think 
this. 

6. — [Then  Cometh  Simon  Peter,  etc.']  In  this  verse  we  see  how 
diflferently  different  men  act  under  the  same  circumstances. 
Grace  does  not  alter  natural  temperaments,  when  it  changes 
hearts.  What  John  for  some  reason  would  not  do,  Peter  did. 
On  arriving,  he  went  down  at  once  through  the  mouth  of  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  3(51 

cave  into  the  inside  of  the  sepulchre.  Then  he  saw,  as  John 
had  seen,  that  the  body  of  our  Lord  was  not  there,  and  that 
the  linen  clothes  in  which  the  body  had  been  wrapped  were 
lying  there,  and  had  been  removed  in  some  way  from  the  body. 
How  much  linen  was  used  by  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  we  can- 
not tell.  But  when  we  consider  that  one  hundred  pounds  of 
aromatic  powder  had  been  used  in  wrapping  up  the  body,  it  is 
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  many  yards  of  linen  had  been 
employed.  The  quantity  of  linen  wrapped  round  the  corpse  of 
an  Egyptian,  we  know  from  the  mummies,  was  prodigious.  It 
is  probable  that  the  linen  wrapped  round  our  Lord's  body, 
which  Peter  saw  "  lying,"  was  no  small  heap. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  two  different  Greek  words  are  used,  in 
this  and  the  preceding  verse,  to  express  seeing.  St.  John  "  saw" 
at  a  glance.  St.  Peter  saw  as  a  spectator,  looking  round  and 
examining.  The  Gr reek  word  rendered  "lying"  in  one  verse 
and  "  lie  "  in  the  other,  is  pi-ecisely  the  same,  and  without  rea- 
son our  translation  varies.     In  both  it  should  be  "  lying." 

l.—[And  the  napkin,  etc.,  etc.]  The  object  of  this  verse  seems  to 
be  to  show  that  Peter  found  in  the  empty  tomb  the  clearest 
evidence  of  a  deliberate,  orderly,  and  calmly-done  transaction. 
The  linen  clothes,  in  which  our  Lord's  body  had  been  wrapped, 
were  lying  by  themselves.  The  napkin  which  had  been  tied 
round  his  head  was  rolled  up  by  itself  in  another  place,  sepa- 
rate from  the  linen  clothes.  There  were  no  symptoms  of 
hurry,  haste,  or  fear.  All  had  been  done  decently  and  in  order. 
Everything  that  Peter  saw  contradicted  the  idea  that  the  body 
had  been  stolen.  No  thief  would  have  taken  so  much  trouble 
about  the  clothes  and  napkin.  In  fact  the  person  who  had  re- 
moved the  body,  whoever  it  was,  must  have  entailed  on  him- 
self needless  labor,  if  he  removed  it  as  a  dead  corpse,  by  un- 
wrapping the  linen  clothes  in  which  the  corpse  was  buried. 
The  easiest  plan  would  have  been  to  carry  away  the  body  just 
as  he  found  it,  wrapped  up  in  linen.  Why  were  the  linen 
clothes  taken  off  and  left  behind  ?  Why  were  the  removers 
of  the  body  so  careful  to  take  away  nothing  but  the  body  ? 
Questions  like  these  must  have  sorely  perplexed  Peter's  mind. 
The  body,  he  saw  plainly,  was  gone.  But  there  was  some- 
thing in  the  whole  appearance  of  things  which  he  could  not 
understand. 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  The  linen  cloths  lying  was  a  sign  of 
the  resurrection.  For  neither  if  any  person  had  removed  the 
body,  would  they,  before  doing  so,  have  stripped  it ;  nor  if  any 
had  stolen  it,  would  they  have  taken  the  trouble  to  remove  the 
napkin,  and  roll  it  up,  and  lay  it  in  a  place  by  itself.  They 
would  have  taken  the  body  as  it  was.  On  this  account,  John 
tells  us,  by  anticipation,  that  it  was  buried  with  much  myrrh, 
which  glues  linen  to  the  body  not  less  firmly  than  lead,  in  or- 
der that  when  thou  hearest  that  the  napkin  lay  apart,  thou 
mayest  not  endure  those  who  say  He  was  stolen.     A    thief 

16 


362  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

would  not  liave  been  so  foolish  as  to  spend  so  mucli  time  on  a 
superfluous  matter.  Why  should  he  undo  the  cloths  ?  How 
could  he  have  escaped  detection  if  he  had  done  so  ?  He  would 
probably  have  spent  much  time  in  doing  it,  and  been  found 
out  by  delaying.  But  why  did  the  clothes  lie  apart  while  the 
napkin  was  wrapped  together  by  itself?  That  thou  mayest 
learn  that  it  was  not  the  action  of  men  in  confusion  or  haste, 
the  placing  some  in  one  place  and  some  in  another,  and  the 
wrapping  them  together." 

Theophylact,  as  usual,  follows  Chrysostom  ;  and  adds,  that 
linen  cloths  wrapped  round  the  body  with  myrrh,  would  stick 
to  it  like  pitch. 

The  word  translated  "  napkin,"  is  only  used  four  times  in 
the  Xew  Testament.  On  one  occasion,  and  one  only,  it  is  ren- 
dered "  handkerchief."     (Acts  xix.  12.) 

8. — [Then  went  in  also  that  other  disciple,  etc.]  We  are  here  told 
how  John  at  last  followed  Peter,  and  went  inside  the  tomb. 
He  does  not  seem  to  have  gone  in  at  first  with  Peter,  but  to 
have  waited  without,  while  his  brother  Apostle  investigated 
and  examined  everything.  Then,  on  hearing  his  report,  he  re- 
solved to  go  inside  himself,  and  see  with  his  own  eyes.  Why 
he  hesitated  at  first,  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  Perhaps,  like 
Mary  Magdalene,  he  was  so  absorbed  and  overwhelmed  by  the 
fact  that  his  Master's  body  was  gone,  that  he  could  pay  no  at- 
tention to  the  minor  details  of  the  transaction.  But  when  he 
did  go  inside  the  tomb,  and  saw  with  his  own  eyes  the  clear 
evidence  of  a  deliberate,  orderly  removal  of  the  body  only,  and 
the  cloths  left  behind,  it  seems  to  have  flashed  across  his  mind 
that  the  Lord  must  have  risen.  For  we  are  told  that  he  "be- 
lieved." 

Concerning  the  true  meaning  of  this  word  "  believed "  in 
this  place,  there  has  been  some  dispute,  but  without  good 
cause.  It  cannot  of  course  mean  that  John  became  a  true  be- 
liever now  for  the  first  time.  Such  an  idea  is  absurd.  Nor 
yet  can  it  only  mean,  I  think,  that  John  at  last  believed  that 
the  body  of  our  Lord  was  not  there.  Such  an  interpretation 
seems  to  me  cold,  tame,  and  shallow.  I  hold  that  it  can  only 
bear  one  meaning,  and  that  is,  that  John,  when  he  saw  the 
state  of  the  tomb,  believed  that  Christ  had  really  risen  from 
the  dead.  In  short,  he  was  the  first  of  all  our  Lord's  followers 
that  believed  His  resurrection. 

0,_[ii^6»r  as  yet  they  knew  not,  etc.]  This  parenthetical  comment 
of  the  Evangelist  is  hardly  rendered  with  accuracy  in  our  Eng- 
lish version.  It  would  be  more  literally  translated,  "  As  yet 
they  had  not  known,"  in  the  pluperfect  tense.  The  meaning 
obviously  is, — "  Uj)  to  this  time  these  two  disciples,  like  all  the 
rest  of  our  Lord's  followers,  had  not  fully  understood  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Scriptures,  which  taught  that  Christ  must  rise  again 
from  the  dead,  after  dying  for  our  sina." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  363 

Augustine  suggests  that  one  reason  why  the  disciples  did 
not  understand  our  Lord's  prediction  of  His  own  resurrection, 
was  His  custom  of  using  parables  in  His  teacliing.  "Being 
accustomed  to  be  spoken  to  in  parables  by  Him,  they  supposed 
Him  to  be  signifying  some  other  thing,"  But  the  worthy  Fa- 
ther rather  seems  to  forget  that  although  our  Lord  spoke  para- 
bles to  the  multitude,  "  when  He  was  alone  He  expounded  all 
things  to  His  disciples."  Yet  the  suggestion  is  worth  remem- 
bering. Dwellers  in  the  cold  prosaic  north,  can  have  little 
idea  of  the  enormous  quantity  of  figurative  and  flowery  lan- 
guage used  in  oriental  countries.  An  Englishman  going  for 
the  first  time  among  Orientals,  finds  it  hard  to  know  whether 
those  around  him  are  using  flowery  expressions  which  mean 
nothing,  or  speaking  of  facts. 

Whether  St.  John  referred  to  any  particular  text,  in  using 
this  expression  about  "  Scripture,"  is  matter  of  doubt.  To  me 
it  is  far  more  likely  that  he  had  in  view  the  general  teaching 
of  the  whole  Old  Testament,  both  in  types  and  typical  events, 
as  well  as  in  direct  texts.  I  suspect  that  he  refers  to  such 
things  as  the  receiving  back  of  Isaac  by  Abraham  on  Moriah 
after  he  had  offered  him,  the  whale  casting  up  Jonah  on  the 
dry  land,  the  living  bird  being  let  go  free  in  cleansing  the  lep. 
er,  the  scape-goat  being  let  go  alive  on  the  day  of  atonement^ 
and  other  like  things  written  for  our  learning. 

The  subject,  I  must  honestly  say,  is  a  very  deep  one.  It  is 
vain  to  deny  that  the  manner  in  which  texts  are  quoted  from 
the  Old  Testament  in  the  New  Testament,  is  sometimes  very 
puzzling.  The  safest  and  most  reverent  line  of  thought  is  to 
believe  that  there  is  a  fulness  in  Scripture  which  many  of  us 
have  never  realized  ;  and  that  scores  of  texts  refer  to  Christ's 
life,  death,  and  resurrection,  though  we  know  it  not. 

When  it  says  here,  "  He  must  rise  again,"  the  meaning  is  lit- 
erally, "  It  is  necessary,  or  it  is  becoming  that  He  should  rise." 
It  was  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  man's  redemption, 
and  for  the  completion  of  the  work  wliich  Jesus  came  to  do  as 
our  Substitute  and  Representative.  The  second  Adam  must 
die  and  rise  again,  in  order  to  win  back  what  the  first  Adam 
lost. 

The  case  of  the  Apostles  is  a  striking  example  of  the  extent 
of  spiritual  ignorance  there  may  be  in  a  man,  while  his  heart 
is  right  with  God.  Who  would  think  of  denying  that  Peter 
and  John  were  true  believers,  and  loved  Christ,  and  were  oa 
the  way  to  heaven  ?  Yet  here  we  are  plainly  told  that  up  to 
this  time  they  had  not  understood  that  Jesus  must  rise  again 
on  the  third  day,  after  dying  for  our  sins  on  the  cross.  Surely 
we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  hastily  condemn  men  as  her- 
etics, and  set  them  down  as  graceless  and  godless,  because  they 
are  deficient  in  head-knowledge.  After  all,  how  many  Chris- 
tiana  there  arc  in  the  present  day,  who  talk  about    Christ's 


364  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

blood  and  Christ's  death,  but  seem  to  know  nothing  of  Christ's 
resurrection,  and  hardly  give  it  a  place  in  their  religion,  except 
as  a  fact. 

It  is  very  noteworthy,  that  while  Peter  and  John  and  their 
companions  seem  to  have  overlooked  and  forgotten  our  Lord's 
predictions  that  He  would  rise  again  the  third  day,  there  were 
certain  Jews  who  did  not  forget  them  at  all.  And  who  were 
they  ?  The  very  last  men  that  we  might  have  expected, — the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  !  It  is  written  in  Matthew  (ch.  xxvii. 
63 — 64),  that  they  went  to  Pilate,  and  said,  "  We  remember  that 
deceiver  said,  while  He  was  yet  alive,  after  three  days  I  will 
rise  again."  What  a  curious  fact  is  that !  Peter  and  John  for- 
got their  Lord's  predictions,  while  Caiaphas  and  his  wicked 
companions  remembered  them  ! 

Burgon  quotes  from  Ainsworth,  a  saying  of  a  Jew,  comment- 
ing on  Gen.  xxii.  4 :  "  There  are  many  a  three  things  in  the 
Holy  Scripture,  of  which  one  is  the  resurrection  of  the  Mes- 
siah."— I  add  to  this,  that  any  one  who  examines  Ainsworth's 
commentary  on  this  verse  will  find,  that  he  gathers  together  as 
many  as  fifteen  places  in  the  Old  Testament  where  "  three  "  is 
spoken  of  as  a  mystical  number. 

10. — {^Then  the  disciples  iDent...their  own  hoiise.]  This  verse  de- 
scribes the  end  of  the  visit  which  Peter  and  John  made  to  the 
grave.  They  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes  proofs  positive  that 
Mary  Magdalene's  report  was  true.  The  grave  was  empty,  and 
their  Master's  body  was  gone.  They  both  felt  that  there  was 
no  need  for  tarrying  at  au  empty  sepulchre,  and  resolved  to  re- 
turn to  their  lodging.  They  could  do  no  good  by  staying 
longer.  They  might  do  good  by  going  away.  They  therefore 
went  home  :  Peter  confounded  and  perplexed,  and  unable  to 
account  for  what  he  had  seen  ;  John  convinced  and  persuaded 
by  what  he  had  seen,  that  his  Master  had  risen  from  the  dead. 
Doubtless  he  could  not  prove  it  yet,  had  not  seen  Him  alive, 
and  could  not  convince  Peter  of  it.  But  for  all  that  he  be- 
lieved it. 

The  Greek  words  which  we  render,  "  To  their  own  home," 
mean  literally,  "  To  themselves."  It  can  only  signify,  in  my 
judgment,  the  lodging  which  they  occupied  in  Jerusalem. 
Though  John  was  acquainted  with  the  high  priest,  and  may 
have  occasionally  visited  Jerusalem  on  the  business  of  his  fish- 
erman's calling,  there  is  not  the  least  likelihood  that  he  had  a 
house  there.  Wherever  John  was  in  Jerusalem  it  is  interest- 
ing to  remember,  in  looking  at  the  events  of  this  wonderful 
morning,  that  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  Avas  probably  un- 
der his  roof,  in  accordance  with  our  Lord's  last  command.  May 
we  not  fairly  suppose  that  one  reason  why  the  disciples  did  not 
linger  at  the  tomb,  like  Mary  Magdalene,  was  their  earnest  de- 
v3ire  to  return  home,  and  tell  the  mother  of  our  Lord  what  they 
had .  seen  ?  I  see  nothing  fanciful  or  unreasonable  in  the 
thought. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX. 


3G5 


Cyril  suggests,  with  some  probability,  that  one  reason  why 
Peter  and  John  went  away  from  the  tomb  so  soon,  was  fear  of 
the  Jews.  They  might  well  expect  that  the  anger  of  Caiaphas 
and  his  companions  on  finding  the  sepulchre  was  empty,  and 
the  body  of  Jesus  gone,  would  be  very  great,  and  they  would 
naturally  turn  their  wrath  on  the  helpless  disciples.  The  day 
was  breaking,  and  the  sooner  they  got  home  the  better.  Mary 
Magdalene  might  stay  near  the  tomb  with  more  safety. 

Beza  thinks  that  this  verse  leaves  John,  Peter,  and  Mary  in 
three  different  states  of  mind.  John  was  convinced,  and  be 
lieved  that  Jesus  was  risen  from  the  dead.  Peter  was  uncer- 
tain,  wondering,  and  amazed.  Mary  could  not  yet  believe  it 
at  all. 


JOHN  XX.  11—18. 


11  But  Mary  stood  without  at  the 
sepulchre  weeping:  and  as  she  wept, 
she  stooped  down  and  looked  iuto 
the  sepulchre, 

12  And  seeth  two  angels  in  white 
Bitting,  the  one  at  the  head,  and  the 
other  at  the  feet,  where  the  body  of 
Jesus  had  lain. 

13  And  they  say  unto  her,  "Woman, 
why  weepest  thou  ?  She  saith  unto 
thein,  Because  they  have  taken  away 
my  Lord,  and  I  know  not  where 
they  have  laid  him. 

14  And  when  she  had  thus  said, 
she  turned  herself  back,  and  saw 
Jesus  standing,  and  knew  not  that 
it  was  Jesus. 

15  Jesus  saith  unto  her.  Woman, 
why  weepest  thou?  whom  seekest 


thou?  She,  supposing  hini  to  be 
the  gardener,  saith  unto  him.  Sir, 
if  thou  have  borne  him  hence,  tell 
me  where  thou  hast  laid  him,  and  I 
will  take  him  away. 

16  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Mary, 
She  turned  herself,  and  saith  unto 
him,  Kabboni ;  which  is  to  say.  Mas- 
ter. 

17  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  touch  me 
not ;  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to 
my  Father  :  but  go  to  my  brethren, 
and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto 
my  Father,  and  your  Father ;  and  to 
my  God,  and  your  God. 

18  Mary  Magdalene  came  and  told 
the  disciples  that  she  had  seen  the 
Lord,  and  that  he  had  spoken  these 
thincfs  unto  her. 


The  interview  between  the  Lord  Jesus  and  Maiy 
Magdalene  immediately  after  His  resurrection,  described 
in  these  verses,  is  a  narrative  peculiar  to  St.  John.  No 
other  Evangelist  has  been  inspired  to  record  it.  Of  all 
the  accounts  of  the  appearances  of  our  Lord,  after  He 
rose  from  the  dead,  none  perhaps  is  so  pathetic  and 
touching  as  this.  He  that  can  read  this  simple  story 
without  a  deep  interest,  must  have  a  very  cold  and  un- 
feeling heart. 

We   see,  first,  in  these  verses,  that  those  who  love 


3gg  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS 

Christ  most  diligently  and  perseveringly,  are  those  who 
receive  most  privileges  from  Christ'' s  hand.  It  is  a 
touching  fact,  and  one  to  be  carefully  noted,  that  Mary- 
Magdalene  would  not  leave  the  sepulchre,  when  Peter 
and  John  went  away  to  their  own  home.  Love  to  her 
gracious  Master  would  not  let  her  leave  the  place  where 
He  had  been  lain.  Where  He  was  now  she  could  not 
tell.  What  had  become  of  Him  she  did  not  know.  But 
love  made  her  linger  about  the  empty  tomb,  where 
Joseph  and  Nicodemus  had  lately  laid  Him.  Love  made 
her  honor  the  last  place  where  His  precious  body  had 
been  seen  by  mortal  eyes.  And  her  love  reaped  a  rich 
reward.  She  saw  the  angels  whom  Peter  and  John  had 
never  observed.  She  actually  heard  them  speak,  and 
had  soothing  words  addressed  to  her.  She  was  the  first 
to  see  our  Lord  after  He  rose  from  the  dead,  the  first  to 
hear  His  voice,  the  first  to  hold  conversation  with  Him. 
Can  any  one  doubt  that  this  was  written  for  our  learn- 
ing ?  Wherever  the  Gospel  is  preached  throughout  the 
world,  this  little  incident  testifies  that  those  who  honor 
Christ  will  be  honored  by  Christ. 

As  it  was  in  the  morning  of  the  first  Easter  day,  so  will 
it  be  as  long  as  the  Church  stands.  The  great  principle 
contained  in  the  passage  before  us,  will  hold  good  until 
the  Lord  comes  again.  All  believers  have  not  the  same 
degree  of  faith,  or  hope,  or  knowledge,  or  courage,  or 
wisdom  ;  and  it  is  vain  to  expect  it.  But  it  is  a  certain 
fact  that  those  who  love  Christ  most  fervently,  and 
cleave  to  Him  most  closely,  will  always  enjoy  most  com- 
munion with  Him,  and  feel  most  of  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit  in  their  hearts.  It  is  precisely  those  who  wait  on 
the  Lord,  in  the  temper  of  Mary  Magdalene,  to  whom 
the  Lord  will  reveal  Himself  most  fully,  and  make  them 
know  and  feel  more  than  others.  To  know  Christ  is 
good  ;  but  to  "  know  that  we  know  Him  "  is  far  better. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  3(57 

We  see,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  that  the  fears  and 
sorrows  of  believers  are  often  quite  needless.  We  are 
told  that  Mary  stood  at  the  sepulchre  weeping,  and 
wept  as  if  nothing  could  comfort  her.  She  wept  when 
the  angels  spoke  to  her  :  "  Woman,"  they  said,  "  why 
weepest  thou  ?  " — She  was  weeping  still  when  our  Lord 
spoke  to  her :  "  Woman,"  He  also  said,  **  why  weepest 
thou  ?  " — And  the  burden  of  her  complaint  was  always 
the  same:  "They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I 
know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him." — Yet  all  this 
time  her  risen  Master  was  close  to  her,  with  "body, 
flesh,  and  bones,  and  all  things  pertaining  to  the  per- 
fection of  man's  nature."  (Article  IV.)  Her  tears  were 
needless.  Her  anxiety  was  unnecessary.  Like  Hagar 
in  the  wilderness,  she  had  a  well  of  water  by  her  side, 
but  she  had  not  eyes  to  see  it. 

What  thoughtful  Christian  can  fail  to  see,  that  we 
have  here  a  faithful  picture  of  many  a  believer's  ex- 
perience? How  often  we  are  anxious  when  there  is  no 
just  cause  for  anxiety  !  How  often  we  mourn  over  the 
absence  of  things  which  in  reality  are  within  our  grasp, 
and  even  at  our  right  hand  !  Two-thirds  of  the  things 
we  fear  in  life  never  happen  at  all,  and  two-thirds  of  the 
tears  we  shed  are  thrown  away,  and  shed  in  vain.  Let 
us  pray  for  more  faith  and  patience,  and  allow  more 
time  for  the  full  development  of  God's  purposes.  Let 
us  believe  that  things  are  often  working  together  for  our 
peace  and  joy,  which  seem  at  one  time  to  contain  noth- 
ing but  bitterness  and  sorrow.  Old  Jacob  said  at  one 
time  of  his  life,  "all  these  things  are  against  me" 
(Gen.  xlii.  36) ;  yet  he  lived  to  see  Joseph  again,  rich 
and  prosperous,  and  to  thank  God  for  all  that  had 
happened.  If  Mary  had  found  the  seal  of  the  tomb 
unbroken,  and  her  Master's  body  lying  cold  within,  she 
might  well  have  wept !     The  very  absence  of  the  body 


368  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

whieh  made  her  weep,  was  a  token  for  good,  and  a  cause 
of  joy  for  herself  and  all  mankind. 

We  see,  thirdly,  in  these  verses,  what  low  and  earthly 
thoughts  of  Christ  may  creep  into  the  mind  of  a  true  be- 
liever. It  seems  impossible  to  gather  any  other  lesson 
from  the  solemn  words  which  our  Lord  addressed  to 
Mary  Magdalene,  when  He  said,  "  Touch  Me  not  ;  for  I 
am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father." — No  doubt  the 
language  is  somewhat  mysterious,  and  ought  to  be  deli- 
cately and  reverently  handled.  Yet  it  is  only  reasona- 
ble to  suppose  that  the  first  surprise,  and  the  reaction 
from  great  sorrow  to  great  joy,  was  more  than  the  mind 
of  Mary  could  bear.  She  was  only  a  woman,  though  a 
holy  and  faithful  woman.  It  is  highly  probable  that,  in 
the  first  excess  of  her  joy,  she  threw  herself  at  our  Lord's 
feet,  and  made  greater  demonstrations  of  feeling  than 
"were  seemly  or  becoming.  Very  likely  she  behaved 
too  much  like  one  who  thought  all  must  be  right  if  she 
had  her  Lord's  bodily  presence,  and  all  must  be  wrong 
in  His  bodily  absence.  This  was  not  the  highest  style 
of  faith.  She  acted,  in  short,  like  one  who  forgot  that 
her  Master  was  God  as  well  as  man.  She  made  too 
little  of  His  divinity,  and  too  much  of  His  humanity. 
And  hence  she  called  forth  our  Lord's  gentle  rebuke, 
"Touch  Me  not!  There  is  no  need  of  this  excessive 
demonstration  of  feeling.  I  am  not  yet  ascending  to 
my  Father  for  forty  days :  your  present  duty  is  not  to 
linger  at  my  feet,  but  to  go  and  tell  my  brethren  that  I 
have  risen.  Think  of  the  feelings  of  others  as  well  as 
of  your  own." 

After  all,  we  must  confess  that  the  fault  of  this  holy 
woman  was  one  into  which  Christians  have  always  been 
too  ready  to  fall.  In  every  age  there  has  been  a  ten- 
dency in  the  minds  of  many,  to  make  too  much  of 
Christ's  bodily  presence,  and  to  forget  that  He  is  not  a 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  369 

mere  earthly  friend,  but  one  who  is  "  God  over  all, 
blessed  forever,"  as  well  as  man.  The  pertinacity  with 
which  Romanists  and  their  allies  cling  to  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  real  corporal  presence  in  the  Lord's  Supper, 
is  only  another  exhibition  of  Mary's  feeling  when  she 
wanted  Christ's  body,  or  no  Christ  at  all.  Let  us  pray 
for  a  right  judgment  in  this  matter,  as  in  all  other 
things  concerning  our  Lord's  person.  Let  us  be  con- 
tent to  have  Christ  dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith,  and 
present  when  two  or  three  are  met  in  His  name,  and  to 
wait  for  the  real  presence  of  Christ's  body  till  He  comes 
again.  What  we  really  need  is  not  His  literal  flesh, 
but  His  Spirit.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  it  is  written, 
*'  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth :  the  flesh  profiteth 
nothing."  "  If  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh, 
yet  henceforth  know  we  Him  no  more."  (John  vi.  63  ; 
2  Cor.  V.   16.) 

We  see,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  how  kindly  and  gra- 
ciously our  Lord  speaks  of  His  discip>les.  He  bids  Mary 
Magdalene  carry  a  message  to  them  as  "  His  brethren." 
He  bids  her  tell  them  that  His  Father  was  their  Father, 
and  His  God  their  God.  It  was  but  three  days  before 
that  they  had  all  forsaken  Him  shamefully,  and  fled. 
Yet  this  merciful  Master  speaks  as  if  all  was  forgiven 
and  forgotten.  His  first  thought  is  to  bring  back  the 
wanderers,  to  bind  up  the  wounds  of  their  consciences, 
to  reanimate  their  courage,  to  restore  them  to  their  for- 
me>r  place.  This  was  indeed  a  love  that  passeth  knowl- 
edge. To  trust  deserters,  and  to  show  confidence  in 
backsliders,  was  a  compassion  which  man  can  hardly 
understand.  So  true  is  that  word  of  David  :  "  Like  as 
a  Father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them 
that  fear  Him.  For  He  knoweth  our  frame ;  He  remem- 
bereth  that  we  are  dust."     (Psalm  ciii.  13,  14.) 

Let  us  leave  the  passage  with  the  comfortable  reflec- 
i6* 


370  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

tion  that  Jesus  Christ  never  changes.  He  is  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever.  As  He  dealt  with  His 
erring  disciples  in  the  morning  of  His  resurrection,  so 
will  He  deal  with  all  who  believe  and  love  Him,  until 
He  comes  again.  When  we  wander  out  of  the  way  He 
will  bring  us  back.  When  we  fall  He  will  raise  us 
again.  But  he  will  never  break  His  royal  word:  "  Him 
that  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  (John 
vi.  37.)  The  saints  in  glory  will  have  one  anthem  in 
which  every  voice  and  heart  will  join :  "  He  hath  not 
dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according 
to  our  iniquities."     (Psalm  ciii.  10.) 

Notes.    John  xx.  11—18. 

11. — [But  Mary  stood  without. ..weeping.]  The  question  naturally 
arises,  "  Wliy  did  not  Mary  go  away  from  the  tomb  with  Peter 
and  John  ?  " — The  answer  to  that  question  must  probably  be 
found  in  the  curiously  different  temperaments  of  men  and 
women.  Mary  acted  like  a  woman,  and  Peter  and  John  acted 
like  men.  The  head  of  a  woman  is  generally  weaker  than 
that  of  a  man,  but  the  affections  are  generally  stronger. — In  the 
case  before  us  the  heart  of  Mary  was  not  satisfied.  Her  mind 
was  not  convinced,  like  that  of  John,  that  our  Lord  had  risen 
from  the  dead.  It  was  not  enough  for  her  to  know  that  the 
body  was  gone,  and  the  tomb  empty,  and  something  wonderful 
had  occurred,  as  it  was  for  Peter.  Her  strong  love  aiid  grati- 
tude towards  our  Lord  made  her  linger  near  the  tomb,  in  the 
faint  hope  that  something  might  yet  turn  up  to  explain  where 
the  body  was  gone.  At  any  rate  she  could  not  tear  herself 
away  from  the  place  where  her  Master's  body  had  last  been 
seen,  and  when  Peter  and  John  departed  she  stayed  behind, 
like  a  real  warm-hearted  woman,  and  gave  a  natural  vent  to 
her  feelings  in  tears.  She  felt  as  if  she  must  see  something, 
before  she  could  be  satisfied,  and  so  lingered  near  the  grave, 
perhaps  hardly  knowing  what  she  expected  to  see.  The  Lord 
had  compassion  on  her.     Her  deep  love  was  richly  rewarded. 

On  Mary  staying  at  the  sepulchre,  Andrews  remarks,  "  The 
going  away  of  Peter  and  John  commends  Mary's  staying  be- 
hind. To  the  grave  she  came  before  them,  from  the  grave  she 
went  to  tell  them,  to  the  grave  she  returned  with  them,  at  the 
grave  she  remains  behind  them."  "  To  stay,  while  others  do 
BO,  while  company  stays,  that  is  the  world's  love.  But  Peter 
is  gone,  and  John  too  ;  all  are  gone  and  she  left  alone.  Thus 
to  stay  is  love,  and  constant  love." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  371 

Epiphanius  an  ancient  writer  (a.  d.  390),  according  to  Hein- 
eius,  maintains  the  monstrous  theory  that  the  Mary  here  spo- 
ken of  is  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  and  not  Mary  Magdalene  I 
It  is  well  to  know  that  the  ancient  Fathers  were  not  always 
wise,  and  are  certainly  not  infallible  in  expounding  Scripture. 

Tholuck  thinks  that  Mary  did  not  go  to  the  sepulchre  with 
Peter  and  John,  but  followed  them  alone,  more  slowly.  This 
is  possible  ;  but  I  rather  doubt  it. 

[And  as  she  wept. ..stooped.. .sepulchre.]  How  long  Mary  wept, 
after  she  was  left  alone,  we  are  left  to  conjecture.  Probably 
not  very  long.  At  last  it  came  into  her  mind  to  stoop  down 
and  look  into  the  grave,  through  the  small  door  or  opening 
against  which  the  stone  had  been  rolled.  It  is  worth  noticing 
that  we  are  not  told  that  she  had  either  entered,  or  looked  into 
the  sepulchre,  before.  Up  to  this  time  apparently  she  had 
only  heard  the  report  of  Peter  and  John.  Now,  left  alone,  she 
probably  felt  a  natural  curiosity  and  anxiety  to  see  with 
her  own  eyes  what  they  had  reported,  and  so,  in  the  middle  of 
her  weeping,  she  stooped  down  and  looked  in,  and  at  once  saw 
a  wondrous  sight. 

I  think  Mary's  case  teaches  us  that  heart  is  of  more  value  in 
God's  sight  than  intellect.  Those  who  feel  most  and  love  most 
get  most  privileges.  The  more  we  love,  the  more  we  are  like 
to  Christ. 

12. — [And  seeth  two  angels. ..white. ..sitting,  etc.}  The  incident  here 
recorded  is  very  remarkable  and  interesting.  Mary  saw  figures 
in  white  sitting  inside  the  grave.  They  evidently  looked  like 
men,  but  they  were  in  reality  angels, — two  of  those  mysteriou.s 
ministering  spirits  whom  the  Bible  teaches  us  God  is  pleased 
to  employ  on  great  occasions.  An  angel  announced  the  coming 
birth  of  John  Baptist  and  of  Christ  himself.  Angels  told  the 
shepherds  that  Christ  was  born.  Angels  ministered  to  our  Lord 
after  the  temptation,  and  an  angel  strengthened  him  in  Geth- 
semane.  And  now  also  angels  appeared  in  the  day  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection.  They  first  announced  that  He  was  born,  and 
they  again,  after  thirty-three  years,  announced  that  He  was 
risen. 

The  whole  subject  of  angels  is  very  deep  and  mysterious, 
and  one  about  which  we  must  beware  of  holding  anything  that 
is  not  revealed.  But  the  case  before  us  teaches  one  or  two 
wonderful  things,  which  we  should  do  well  to  remember. 
These  angels  evidently  came  and  went  away,  appeared  and 
disappeared,  after  a  manner  supernatural,  invisible,  and  inex- 
plicable to  our  minds.  It  is  clear  that  angels  were  at  the  tomb, 
when  the  party  of  women  arrived  there,  after  Mary  Magdalene 
had  run  to  tell  Peter  and  John.  It  is  equally  clear  that  they 
were  not  to  be  seen,  when  Peter  and  John  ran  to  the  grave  on 
hearing  Mary's  report.  Not  one  word  do  we  read  of  their  see- 
ing angels.    Yet  it  is  equally  clear  that  when  Mary  Magdalen© 


372  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

looked  in,  after  Peter  and  John  went  away,  she  saw  two  angels 
and  talked  with  them.  These  are  very  deep  things.  They 
prove  plainly  that  the  angels  of  God  appear  and  disappear,  are 
visible  or  invisible,  instantaneously  and  supernaturally,  accord- 
ing as  God  commissions  them.  In  short  they  are  beings  of  a 
totally  different  nature  to  our  own,  and  are  in  all  the  condi- 
tions of  their  constitution  totally  unlike  us.  For  anything  we 
know,  they  were  in  the  tomb  when  Peter  and  John  inspected 
it,  but  at  that  moment  were  invisible.  For  anything  we  know, 
they  are  now  very  near  us  every  minute  of  our  existence,  and 
doing  God's  will  concerning  us,  though  we  are  utterly  unaware 
of  their  presence.  All  this  no  doubt  is  very  mysterious,  and 
past  the  power  of  man  to  explain  and  comprehend.  One  thing, 
however,  is  very  certain.  Neither  here  nor  elsewhere  do  we 
ever  find  the  slightest  warrant  in  Scripture  for  praying  to 
angels,  any  more  than  to  dead  saints,  or  for  giving  them  the 
smallest  portion  of  worship,  as  if  they  were  divine.  Like  our- 
selves, after  all,  they  are  only  God's  creatures. 

The  expression  "  in  white,"  means  literally  "  in  white  robes 
or  garments."  It  is  an  adjective  and  we  are  left  to  supply  the 
substantive.  The  Holy  Ghost  here  abstains  from  telling  us  the 
precise  fashion  of  apparel  which  these  angels  wore.  The  gar- 
ment worn  by  the  angel  mentioned  in  Mark,  at  the  resurrection, 
was  a  long  stole  or  flowing  robe.  (Mark  xvi.  5.)  It  is  worth 
noticing  that  "  white  "  was  the  color  of  the  Lord's  raiment  in 
the  transfiguration,  and  which  is  the  color  in  which  the  angels 
always  seem  to  have  appeared.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the 
color  is  symbolical  of  that  perfect  purity  and  freedom  from  de- 
filement, which  is  the  character  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven. 
It  will  be  the  garment  of  the  saved  souls  in  glory.  (Rev.  iii. 
4;vii.  9.) 

The  attitude  in  which  the  angels  were  seen  by  Mary  deserves 
attention.  "  Sitting  one  at  the  head  and  the  other  at  the  feet," 
where  our  Lord's  body  had  lain,  they  would  seem  to  have  been 
placed  there  by  God  as  watchmen  and  guards  over  the  sacred 
body  of  our  Lord,  during  the  time  He  was  in  the  grave.  It  is 
written,  "  He  shall  give  His  angels  charge  over  Thee." 
(Psalm  xci.  11.) 

Some  have  thought  that  the  position  of  the  angels  points  to 
that  of  the  Cherubim,  who  sat  on  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy- 
seat,  over  the  ark,  with  their  faces  toward  each  other.  (Exo'd. 
XXV.  20  ;  2  Chron.  iii.  13.) 

Bengel  thinks  that  this  "  sitting  "  was  meant  to  intimate  that 
their  work  was  done.  This  seems  to  me  doubtful,  because  an- 
gels need  no  rest. 

Cyril  thinks  that  the  attitude  of  the  two  angels  was  meant 
to  show  Mary,  thafc  our  Lord's  body  had  been  safely  guarded  by 
them,  and  that  no  one  could  have  stolen  it  away  against  their 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  373 

consent.    If  one  angel   could  slay  180,000  of  Sennacherib's    X 
army,  what  could  two  do  ? 

Andrews  observes,  "  We  learn  tliat  between  the  angels  there 
was  no  striving  for  places.  He  that  sat  at  the  feet  was  as  well 
content  with  his  place,  as  he  that  sat  at  the  head.  We  should 
learn  from  their  example.  With  us  both  angels  would  have 
been  at  the  head,  and  never  a  one  at  the  feet.  With  us  none 
would  be  at  the  feet  by  his  good  will :  we  must  be  head-an- 
gels all ! " 

13, — [And  they  say  unto  her,  Woman,  why,  etc.]  The  address  of 
the  angels  to  Mary  is  that  of  gentle  and  kind  inquiry.  We 
cannot  doubt  that  they  knew  well  why  she  wept.  They  ask 
the  question  in  order  to  stir  up  in  her  mind  self-inquiry,  as  to 
whether  she  had  cause  to  weep  or  not.  "  What  is  the  reason 
of  this  excessive  lamentation  ?  Search  your  own  heart.  Are 
you  quite  sure  that  this  empty  tomb  does  not  show  that  you 
ought  to  be  rejoicing  ?  " 

Mary's  reply  to  the  angels  is  almost  word  for  word  what  she 
had  told  Peter  and  John,  only  in  the  singular  number.  It 
shows  plainly  that  the  one  thing  that  weighed  on  her  mind  was 
the  disappearance  of  our  Lord's  body,  and  her  ignorance  what 
had  become  of  it.  Of  His  resurrection  she  evidently  had  no 
idea  at  present.  Her  only  thought  was  that  his  body  was  dead, 
that  it  had  been  taken  away,  and  that  she  wanted  to  know 
where  it  was.  To  this  one  notion  she  sticks,  and  not  even  the 
appearance  of  angels  can  make  her  give  it  up.  And  yet  the 
good  woman  must  have,  often  heard  our  Lord  foretell  His  death 
and  resurrection.  How  slow  we  are  to  give  up  long-standing 
prejudices!  How  backward  to  receive  truths  which  contra- 
dict our  little  private  systems  of  religion  I 

It  should  be  observed  that  Mary  told  Peter  and  John  that 
"the  Lord"  was  taken  away.  When  she  speaks  to  the  angels 
here,  she  says,  "  My  Lord."  In  both  cases  she  speaks  indefin- 
itely of  "  they,"  without  indicating  whom  she  means. 

The  calmness  of  manner  with  which  Mary  speaks  to  these 
two  angels  can  hardly  fail  to  strike  us.  She  cannot  have  sup- 
posed that  they  were  two  men  only,  whether  enemies  or  friends. 
The  mere  fact  that  Peter  and  John  had  not  seen  them  in  the 
grave,  must  surely  have  shown  her  that  they  were  angels. 
Yet  she  answers  their  question  without  hesitation,  like  one  wh» 
feared  nothing  in  her  anxiety  about  her  Lord.  May  we  not 
however  consider  that  a  belief  in  the  reality  and  ministry  of 
angels  was  far  more  common  among  Jews  than  it  is  among 
Christians  ?  They  perhaps  believed  too  much  about  them.  It 
may  be  feared  that  we  go  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and  believe 
too  little, 

Andrews  remarks  on  Mary's  needless  weeping,  "  All  was  in 
error :  tears  of  grief, — but  false  grief,  imagining  that   to  be 


374:  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

"wliich  was  not,  and  Him  to  be  dead  whicli  was  alive.  She 
weeps,  because  she  finds  the  grave  empty,  which,  God  forbid  she 
should  have  found  full,  for  then  Christ  must  have  been  dead 
Btill,  and  there  would  be  no  resurrection.  And  this  case  of 
Mary  Magdalene  is  our  case  oftentimes.  It  is  the  error  of  our 
conceit  to  weep  when  we  have  no  cause,  and  to  joy  when  we 
have  as  little.  False  joys  and  false  sorrows,  false  hopes  and 
false  fears,  this  life  of  ours  is  full  of.     God  help  us ! " 

14. — [And  w7ien.. .turned. ..hack. ..saw  Jesus  standing.']  Why  Mary 
turned  back  at  this  moment  we  are  not  told.  I  feel  no  doubt 
there  was  some  reason.  The  Greek  words  are  very  emphati- 
cal :  "  She  turned  to  the  things  or  places  behind  her."  (a)  It 
may  be  that  she  turned  away  from  the  questioners,  as  not  car- 
ing to  continue  conversation  with  them,  {b)  It  may  be  that  she 
heard  a  footstep  behind  her,  and  turned  to  see  who  it  was.  (c)  It 
may  be  that  the  shadow  of  some  one  behind  her  fell  on  the  en- 
trance to  the  tomb.  The  sun  would  be  in  the  east,  and  if  the 
tomb  faced  that  way,  its  horizontal  rays  would  throw  the 
shadow  of  any  person  behind  her  on  the  tomb.  (cZ)  It  may  be 
that  she  observed  some  gesture  or  motion  on  the  part  of  the 
angels  with  whom  she  was  talking,  which  told  her  that  some 
one  was  behind  her.  Who  can  tell  but  these  holy  spirits,  who 
doubtless  recognized  the  Lord,  rose  respectfully  from  their  sit- 
ting position,  as  soon  as  they  saw  Jesus  appear.  I  like  this 
last  solution  best,  for  my  own  part.  I  cannot  for  a  moment 
suppose  that  the  angels  would  remain  sitting  motionless,  when 
Jesus  appeared.  And  I  believe  that  Mary,  as  she  talked  with 
them,  detected  at  once  by  their  altered  manner,  that  there  was 
some  one  behind  her.  This  it  was  that  made  her  "  turn  herself 
back."  Such  little  touches  give  a  wonderful  life  and  reality  to 
the  whole  narrative,  in  my  j  udgment. 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  While  Mary  was  speaking,  Christ 
suddenly  appearing  behind  her,  struck  the  angels  with  awe ; 
and  they,  beholding  their  Ruler,  showed  immediately  by  their 
bearing,  their  look,  their  movements,  that  they  saw  the  Lord. 
This  drew  the  woman's  attention,  and  caused  her  to  turn." 

The  same  view  is  taken  by  Athanasius,  Theophylact,Brentiua, 
Gerhard,  and  Andrews. 

[And  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus.]  There  are  but  three  ways 
in  whicli  we  can  explain  Mary  not  recognizing  Christ  at  once. 
{a)  She  was  weeping  bitterly,  and  her  eyes  were  dim  with  tears. 
This,  however,  seems  very  improbable,  (b)  It  was  not  broad 
day-light  yet,  and  it  was  too  dusky  to  distinguish  any  one. 
This  is  Cyril's  view;  but  it  can  hardly  be  correct,  considering 
all  that  had  already  occurred  this. Sunday  morning,  (e)  Her 
eyes  were  liolden  supcrnaturally,  like  those  of  the  disciples 
walking  to  Emmaus,  so  that  she  did  not  distinguish  the  figure 
before  her  to  be  that  of  our  Lord.  This  appears  to  me  by  far 
the  most  likely  solution,  miraculous  as  the  circumstance  cer 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  375 

tainly  was.  But  the  condition  of  our  Lord's  risen  bodj  was 
altogether  different  from  that  of  His  body  before  crucifixion. 
We  cannot  pretend  to  explain  in  the  least  where  He  was,  and 
what  He  was  doing  in  the  intervals  between  His  various  ap- 
pearances, during  the  forty  days  before  His  ascension.  We 
need  not  therefore  hesitate  to  believe  that  He  could  assume 
Buch  an  appearance,  that  even  a  disciple  like  Mary  did  not  re- 
cognize Him  at  first,  or  that  He  could  cause  her  eyes  to  be  un- 
able to  distinguish  Him,  even  when  close  to  her. 

After  all,  what  a  striking  emblem  this  little  incident  supplies 
of  the  spiritual  experience  of  hundreds  of  Christ's  believing 
people  even  at  this  very  day.  How  many  are  ever  mourning 
and  sorrowing,  and  have  no  comfort  in  their  religion,  while 
Christ  is  close  to  them.  But  they  do  not  know  it,  and,  like 
Mary,  go  on  weeping. 

15. — [Jesus  saith...  Why  iceepest  thou...seekest  thou.]  The  first  ques- 
tion that  Jesus  asked  of  Mary  was  precisely  the  same  that  the 
angels  had  asked.  "  Woman,  why  art  thou  weeping  ?  Art 
thou  quite  sure  that  thou  art  right  to  weep  over  this  empty 
grave,  and  oughtest  not  rather  to  rejoice?  " — The  second  ques- 
tion was  even  more  searching  than  the  first.  "  Whom  seekest 
t^^ou  ?  Who  is  this  person  that  thou  art  seeking  among  the 
dead  ?  Hast  thou  not  forgotten  that  He  whom  thou  seekest  is 
one  who  has  power  to  take  life  again,  and  who  predicted  that 
He  would  rise  ?  " — I  must  think  that  in  both  these  questions 
there  was  a  gentle  latent  reproof  intended  for  this  holy  woman. 
Faithful  and  loving  as  she  was,  she  had  too  much  forgotten  her 
Master's  teaching  about  His  death  and  resurrection.  These 
questions  were  meant  to  rouse  her  to  a  recollection  of  things 
often  said  in  her  hearing.  Of  course  our  Lord  knew  perfectly 
well  why  she  was  weeping,  and  whom  she  was  seeking.  He 
needed  not  to  ask  her.  He  asked  for  her  benefit  rather  than 
His  own  information.  But  excessive  grief  has  an  absorbing 
and  stupefying  etfect  on  the  mind  and  memory.  Mary  could 
think  of  nothing  but  that  her  Lord's  body  was  gone,  and  this 
swallowed  up  all  her  thoughts. 

[She  supposing  Him,  etc.]  Here  we  see  what  Mary's  first 
thought  was,  when  she  heard  a  strange  voice,  and  saw  a  strange 
figure.  She  catches  at  the  idea  that  this  person  may  be  the 
keeper  of  the  garden  in  which  Joseph's  sepulchre  was,  and 
that,  having  probably  been  keeping  watch  over  the  garden  all 
night,  he  may  know  what  had  become  of  her  Master's  body,  or 
may  even  have  removed  it  himself.  "  Sir,"  she  says,  "  If  thou 
art  the  person  who  has  taken  away  my  Lord  out  of  the  tomb, 
only  tell  me  where  thou  hast  carried  His  body,  and  I  will  take 
Him  away." — Once  more  we  see  that  this  holy  woman  could 
only  think  of  her  Master  as  one  dead,  and  that  her  one  absorb- 
ing idea  was  how  she  could  recover  His  corpse  and  do  it  honor. 
As  for  His  resurrection  and  victory  over  death,  she  seems  utter- 
ly unable  to  get  hold  of  it  at  present.     Wonderful  is  it  to  see 


376  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

how  mucli  of  Christ's  teaching  was  apparently  thrown  away  on 
His  disciples,  and  clean  forgotten  !  Ministers  who  complain  of 
the  ignorance  of  their  hearers,  should  learn  patience,  when 
they  mark  the  imperfect  knowledge  of  Christ's  own  followers. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  Sir,"  in  this  verse,  might  have 
been  equally  correctly  rendered  "  Lord."  But  it  is  rendered 
"  Sir,"  in  like  manner,  in  the  conversation  between  our  Lord 
and  the  Samaritan  woman,  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  Gospel. 
In  both  cases  it  is  a  term  of  respect,  such  as  a  Jewish  woman 
would  address  to  a  man. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Mary  does  not  name  her  Master  to  the 
supposed  gardener.  She  simply  says  "  Him," — "  if  thou  hast 
borne  Him  hence,  1  will  take  Him  away."  It  is  the  language 
of  one  so  absorbed  in  the  thought  of  our  Lord,  that  she  thinks 
it  needless  to  name  Him  ;  and  assumes,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
that  the  gardener  will  understand  whom  she  means. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Mary  talks  of  "  taking  Him  away.'* 
How  one  weak  woman  like  her  could  suppose  that  she  was  able 
to  lift  and  carry  away  the  dead  body  of  a  man,  we  cannot  of 
course  understand.  It  is  clear  that  she  either  meant  {a)  that 
she  would  soon  find  friends  who  would  remove  the  body,  or 
else  ip)  that  she  spoke  hurriedly,  fervently,  impulsively,  and 
passionately,  without  reflecting  on  what  she  was  saying.  I  in- 
cline to  think  the  latter  view  is  the  correct  one. 

Luther,  quoted  by  Besser,  remarks  on  this  verse,  "  Mary's 
heart  was  so  filled  up  with  Christ  and  thoughts  about  Christ, 
that  besides  Him  she  neither  hears  nor  sees  anything.  She 
is  not  frightened  at  the  sight  of  angels.  She  addresses  Christ 
abruptly,  supposing  Him  to  be  the  gardener;  and  if  he  has 
taken  Him  away,  she  is  ready  to  carry  Him  back  to  the  sepul- 
chre." 

Andrews  observes,  "  Him  is  enough  with  love.  Who  knows 
not  who  it  is,  though  we  never  tell  His  name,  nor  say  a  word 
more  ?  " 

16. — [Jesus  saitJi  unto  her,  Mary,  etc.']  We  are  here  told  how  our 
Lord  at  last  revealed  Himself  to  this  faithful  disciple,  after  her 
patience,  love,  and  boldness  had  been  fully  proved.  Little  as 
she  had  shown  herself  able  to  understand  the  great  truth  of  her 
Saviour's  resurrection,  she  had  at  any  rate  shown  that  none 
loved  Him  more,  or  clung  to  Him  more  tenaciously,  than  she 
did.  And  she  had  her  reward.  One  single  word  was  enough 
to  open  her  eyes,  to  let  the  whole  truth  shine  in  upon  her  mind, 
and  to  reveal  the  great  fact  that  her  Saviour  was  not  dead  but 
alive,  and  that  He  had  won  a  victory  over  the  grave. — Speaking 
in  His  usual  well-known  voice,  our  Lord  addressed  her  by  her 
name, — the  name  by  which,  no  doubt,  He  had  often  addressed 
her  before.  That  single  word  touched  a  spring,  as  it  were,  and 
opened  her  eyes  in  a  moment.    Need  we  doubt  that  at  once  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  37"^ 

whole  world  seemed  turned  upside  down  to  the  astonished  wo- 
man ;  and  that  under  the  influence  of  such  an  amazing  revul- 
sion of  feeling  as  that  much-loved  voice  must  have  caused,  her 
mind  could  only  find  expression  in  one  passionate  word — "  Kab- 
boni,"  or  Master. 

The  expression,  "  turned  herself,"  in  this  verse,  is  rather 
curious.  We  know,  from  the  fourteenth  verse,  that  Mary  had 
already  turned  once  from  the  grave,  when  Jesus  appeared  be- 
hind her.  Here  again  we  are  told  that  she  *'  turned  herself." 
The  simplest  explanation  seems  to  be,  that  when  she  did  not 
recognize  the  person  who  spoke  to  her,  and  thought  He  had 
been  the  gardener,  she  partially  turned  away,  as  a  woman 
naturally  would  from  a  strange  man, and  hardly  looked  at  Him, 
while  she  spoke  of  taking  the  body  away.  But  the  moment 
the  voice  of  Jesus  sounded  in  her  ears,  she  turned  again  directly 
to  Him,  aad  made  some  movement  towards  Him,  as  she  uttered 
the  cry,  "  liabboni." — Thus  there  were  three  movements  :  first, 
a  turning  round  to  see  who  was  behind  her  ;  second,  a  partial 
turning  away,  when  she  heard  a  voice  she  did  not  recognize  ; 
and  finally,  a  quick,  passionate  turning  round  entirely,  when 
the  well-known  voice  of  her  Master  said,  "  Mary."  So  at  least 
it  appears  to  me. 

Chrysostom  says,  "  It  seems  to  me  that  after  having  said, 
'Where  hast  thou  laid  Him  ?  '  she  turned  to  the  angels  to  ask 
why  they  were  astonished  ;  and  that  then  Christ,  by  calling  her 
by  name,  turned  her  back  to  Himself  from  them,  and  revealed 
Himself  by  His  voice." 

The  boundless  compassion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  His 
believing  people  comes  out  wonderfully  in  this  verse.  He 
can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  He  knows 
how  weak  our  bodily  frame  is,  and  how  much  excessive  sorrow 
can  unnerve  and  stupefy  our  minds.  He  can  pass  over  much 
darkness  of  understanding,  much  slowness  of  comprehension, 
when  He  sees  real,  genuine,  hearty,  bold,  persevering,  thorough 
love  to  Himself  and  His  Person.  We  see  this  prominently 
brought  out  in  His  dealing  with  Mary  Magdalene,  when  He  re- 
vealed Himself  to  her.  He  graciously  pardons  her  forgetful- 
ness  of  His  oft -repeated  declaration  that  He  would  rise  again 
after  His  death,  pities  her  deep  sorrow,  and  abundantly  rewards 
her  love.  These  things  are  written  for  our  learning.  Jesus 
never  changes.  What  He  was,  when  He  revealed  Himself  to 
Mary  Magdalene,  He  is  at  this  day, 

Rabboni,  according  to  Parkhurst,  "  is  nearly  of  the  same  im- 
port as  Rabbi.  St.  John  explains  both  by  the  same  word, — 
teacher.  But  Lightfoot  and  others  say  it  was  a  term  of  higher 
respect."  Parkhurst  thinks  it  is  formed  from  the  Chaldee,and 
includes  the  idea,  "  my  Master." 

17. — [Jesus  saith... Touch  Me  not. ..my  Father.]     This  saying  of  our 
liOrd  is  undeniably  a  very  "  deep  thing,"  and  the  real  meaning 


378  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

of  it  is  a  point  wliich  lias  greatly  perplexed  commentators.  I 
Buspect  it  is  one  of  tliose  things  which  will  never  be  fully  settled 
until  the  Lord  comes.  In  the  meantime  we  must  be  content  to 
make  humble  conjectures.  It  will  clear  our  way  to  remember 
that  our  Lord  could  not  possibly  mean  by  saying,  "  Touch  Me 
not,"  that  there  was  anything  sinful  or  wrong  in  Mary  touching 
His  risen  body.  The  mere  fact  that  a  few  minutes  after  this 
interview  wuth  Mary,  he  allowed  the  other  women  who  had 
been  to  the  grave  to  "hold  Him  by  the  feet"  (Matt,  xxviii.  9), 
completely  settles  that  point.  Moreover,  within  a  week  after  this 
very  day,  He  says  to  Thomas, "  Reach  hither  thy  hand  and  thrust 
it  into  my  side."  (John  xx.  27.)  This  alone  entirely  contradicts 
the  notion  that  our  Lord's  body  might  not  be  touched  before 
His  ascension.  But  having  cleared  the  way  negatively,  the 
question  yet  remains,  "  What  did  our  Lord  mean  positively  ?  " 

In  order  to  understand  the  meaning  of  "  Touch  Me  not,"  we 
must  try  to  realize  the  state  of  mind  in  which  Mary  Magdalene 
was,  when  our  Lord  revealed  Himself  to  her.  A  very  slight 
knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  especially  of  woman's  nature, 
will  tell  us  that  the  sudden  discovery  that  Jesus  was  alive  and 
standing  before  her,  would  throw  her  into  a  violent  state  of 
excitement,  and  produce  an  immense  revulsion  of  feeling,  from 
deep  despondency  to  extravagant  joy.  May  we  not  well  be- 
lieve that  under  the  influence  of  this  excitement,  this  holy  wo- 
man might  be  more  demonstrative  than  was  seemly,  and  might 
exhibit  her  feelings  by  actions  and  gestures  that  our  Lord  saw 
it  absolutely  needful  to  repress  ?  Can  we  not  understand  that 
a  warm-hearted,  impulsive  Jewish  woman,  holy  and  pure- 
minded  as  she  certainly  was,  would  be  likely  to  cast  herself  at 
our  Lord's  feet,  to  say  the  least,  in  a  passionate  ecstasy  of  de- 
light, and  to  hold  them  fast,  kissing  and  embracing  them,  like 
the  woman  in  Simon's  house,  as  if  she  would  never  let  them  go  ? 
— And  can  we  not  well  understand  that  our  wise  Master,  who 
knew  all  hearts,  thought  it  good  to  check  and  repress  her,  and 
therefore,  for  her  soul's  benefit,  and  not  unkindly,  said,  "  Touch 
Me  not." — Nothing  would  be  more  likely  to  calm  the  good  wo- 
man's mind,  and  to  recall  her  to  a  reverent  sense  of  what  was 
due  to  herself  and  to  her  Lord,  than  this  prohibition  to  "  touch." 
Such  is  my  view  of  this  wonderful  expression.  It  is  to  my 
mind  a  very  suggestive  one,  and  deserves  the  especial  attention 
of  ministers,  in  carrying  on  their  private  pastoral  work.  But 
I  forbear.  Let  it  however  never  be  forgotten  (and  I  desire  to 
speak  with  the  utmost  reverence  and  delicacy),  that  when  our 
Lord  allowed  the  women,  mentioned  by  St.  Matthew  (Matt, 
xxviii.  9),  to  "  hold  Him  by  the  feet,"  there  were  several  women 
present  together,  and  some  of  them  mothers  and  not  young. 
When,  on  the  contrary.  He  said  to  Mary  Magdalene,  "  Touch 
Me  not,"  He  spoke  to  one  who  in  all  probability  was  a  young 
woman,  and  He  and  she  were  alone  1 

The  Greek  word  we  render  "  touch,"  according  to  Liddell 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  379 

and  Scott's  Lexicon,  frequently  means  "fasten  oneself  to, 
cling  to,  hang  on  by,  lay  hold  of,  or  grasp."  Homer  constantly 
uses  the  word  in  this  sense.  This  deserves  special  notice. 
Schleusner  and  Parkhurst  agree  with  Liddell  and  Scott. 

The  words,  "  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father,"  are 
even  more  difficult  than  "  Touch  Me  not ; "  and  the  connection 
between  the  two  sayings  is  the  hardest  knot  of  all  the  sen- 
tence. 

(a)  Some  think  that  the  sense  is,  "  I  have  not  yet  ascended  to 
my  Father.  Till  1  have  ascended  and  taken  my  seat  at  His 
right  hand,  my  work  as  your  Saviour  is  not  perfect  and  com- 
plete. Do  not  therefore  touch  Me  and  fasten  upon  Me,  as  if 
you  would  fain  keep  Me  upon  earth  forever,  now  that  I  have 
risen  again.  Remember  that  my  ascension  is  as  much  a  part 
of  my  great  work  of  redemption  as  my  crucifixion  and  resur- 
rection, I  have  not  yet  ascended.  Do  not,  therefore,  behave 
as  though  you  wished  to  detain  Me  here  below,  and  never  to 
part  with  Me  again." 

(6)  Some  think  that  the  sense  is,  "  I  am  not  yet  ascending  to 
my  Father.  I  shall  not  ascend  for  forty  days.  There  will, 
therefore,  be  abundant  time  for  seeing,  touching,  hearing,  and 
conferring  with  Me.  Do  not  therefore  now  waste  precious 
time  on  this  eventful  morning  by  embracing  my  feet,  and  dem- 
onstrating your  affection  to  my  person.  Kather  rise,  and  lose 
no  time  in  going  to  my  brethren,  and  telling  them  that  I  am 
risen.  Think  of  others ;  and  do  not  occupy  yourself,  as  you 
are  disposed  to  do,  in  touching  my  feet  and  gratifying  your 
own  feelings.  Natural  as  it  is,  there  is  other  work  to  do  now. 
Go  and  do  it,  and  do  not  linger  here.  Touch  Me  not."  This  is 
the  view  of  Beza,  Brentius,  and  Bishop  Hall. 

(c)  Some  think,  as  Melancthon,  that  our  Lord  had  in  view 
His  second  advent  and  kmgdom,  when  all  who  have  known 
and  loved  Him  on  earth,  shall  at  length  dwell  with  Him  in  ho- 
ly familiarity,  and  go  out  from  His  presence  no  more.  Me- 
lancthon says,  "  It  is  as  if  Christ  would  say,  Then  shall  you 
touch  Me,  when  I  have  ascended  to  my  Father :  that  is,  when 
I  shall  bring  thee  and  all  my  Church  to  the  Father  at  the  last 
day.  Another  kingdom  and  another  life  remains  yet  to  be 
given,  in  which  you  shall  enjoy  fellowship  with  Me  and  my 
Father." 

I  honestly  confess  that  I  find  it  almost  impossible  to  say 
which  of  the  three  opinions  I  have  here  described  deserves 
most  attention.  If  I  must  decide,  I  incline  to  prefer  the  second 
one,  and  I  think  it  is  more  in  keeping  with  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse.  The  weakest  point  of  this  view  is  the  future  sense 
which  it  puts  on  the  words,  "  I  am  not  ascended."  The  Greek 
word  is  in  the  perfect  tense,  and  the  perfect  is  undoubtedly 
used  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  a  future.  (Compare  Horn.  xiv. 
23,  John  xvii.  10 ;  and  see  Telf's  Greek  Grammar,  vol.  ii.,  p. 


380  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

65  ;  and  Winer's  Grammar,  p.  288.  Clark's  edition.)  But  it  is 
rather  awkward  that  "  I  ascend "  comes  immediately  after  in 
the  present  tense.  The  reader  must  decide  for  himself  which 
view  he  prefers. 

Chrysostom  says,  "  Methinks  Mary  wished  still  to  converse 
with  Jesus  as  before,  and  in  her  joy  perceived  nothing  great 
in  Him,  although  He  had  become  far  more  excellent  in  the 
flesh.  To  lead  her  therefore  from  this  idea,  and  that  she 
might  speak  to  Him  with  awe  (for  neither  with  the  disciples 
doth  He  henceforth  appear  so  familiar  as  before).  He  raiseth 
her  thoughts,  that  she  should  give  more  reverent  heed  to  Him. 
To  have  said,  *  Approach  Me  not  as  you  did  before,  for  matters 
are  not  in  the  same  state  ;  nor  shall  I  henceforth  be  with  you 
in  the  same  way,'  would  have  been  harsh  and  high-sounding. 
But  the  saying, '  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father,'  though 
not  painful  to  hear,  was  the  same  thing.  For  by  saying,  *  I  am 
not  yet  ascended,'  He  showeth  that  He  hasteth  and  passeth 
thither,  and  that  it  was  not  meet  that  one  about  to  depart  thith- 
er, and  no  longer  to  converse  with  men,  should  be  looked  on 
with  the  same  feelings  as  before." 

Augustine  says,  "  There  is  a  spiritual  meaning  latent  here. — 
Either  this  is  so  spoken,  '  Touch  Me  not,  for  1  am  not  yet  as- 
cended,' that  the  woman  is  a  figure  of  the  Church  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, which  did  not  believe  on  Christ  until  He  was  ascended 
unto  the  Father  ; — or  else  Jesus  would  have  men  so  believe  in 
Him,  or  touch  Him  spiritually,  as  knowing  that  Himself  and 
the  Father  are  one. — Mary  might  believe  in  such  a  way  as  if 
she  thought  Him  unequal  to  the  Father,  which  thought  is  for- 
bidden to  her.  '  Touch  Me  not ' :  i.  e.,  '  Do  not  believe  in  Me  in 
such  wise  as  thou  art  yet  minded  in  thy  thoughts  of  Me :  let 
not  thy  perception  reach  only  to  the'thing  I  was  made  for  thee, 
without  passing  beyond  to  that  by  which  thou  wast  made.  I 
am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father.  Then  shalt  thou  touch 
Me,  when  thou  believest  Me  to  be  God  not  unequal  to  the  Fa- 
ther." 

Calvin  says,  "  The  meaning  of  these  words  is,  that  Christ's 
state  of  resurrection  would  not  be  full  and  complete,  until  He 
should  sit  down  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 
Therefore  Mary  did  wrong  in  satisfying  herself  with  having 
nothing  more  than  the  half  of  His  resurrection,  and  desiring 
only  to  enjoy  His  presence  in  the  world." 

Lightfoot  says,  "  These  words  relate  to  what  Christ  had  spo- 
ken formerly  about  sending  the  Comforter,  and  that  He  would 
not  leave  them  comfortless,  but  would  come  to  them.  Christ 
says  to  Mary,  '  I  must  first  ascend  to  my  Father,  before  I  can 
bestow  those  things  upon  you  which  I  have  promised.  Do  not 
therefore  touch  Me,  and  detain  Me  upon  any  expectation  of 
that  kind.  Rather  wait  for  my  ascension,  and  go  and  tell  the 
same  thing  to  my  brethren  for  their  encouragement." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  381 

Poole  says,  "  The  best  opinion  seems  to  be  the  opinion  of 
those  who  think  oar  Saviour  saw  Mary  too  fond,  as  if  she 
thought  He  had  been  raised  up  to  such  a  converse  with  them 
as  He  liad  before  His  death.  This  error  is  all  He  tasks  her  of, 
not  forbidding  any  kind  of  touching,  so  as  to  satisfy  herself  He 
was  truly  risen,  but  restraining  any  gross  conception. — He  re- 
minded Mary  that  He  was  about  to  ascend  to  His  Father, 
though  He  had  not  yet  ascended,  and  was  therefore  not  to  be 
enjoyed  by  them  with  so  much  freedom  and  familiarity  as  be- 
fore." 

Bishop  Hall  says,  "  There  may  be  a  kind  of  carnality  in  spir- 
itual notions.  "  If  I  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  from 
henceforth  I  know  Him  no  more.'  That  Thou  livedst  here,  my 
Saviour,  in  this  shape,  that  color,  this  stature,  that  habit,  I 
should  be  glad  to  know :  nothing  that  concerns  Thee  can  be 
unusef ul.  Could  I  say,  here  Thou  safest,  here  Thou  layest, 
here  Thou  wast  crucified,  here  Thou  wast  buried,  I  should 
with  much  content  see  and  recount  those  ceremonials  of  Thy 
presence.  But  if  I  shall  so  fasten  my  thoughts  on  them,  as  not 
to  look  higher,  to  the  spiritual  part  of  these  achievements,  to 
the  power  and  issue  of  Thy  resurrection,  1  am  none  the  bet- 
ter.' " 

Rollock  says,  "  The  meaning  in  effect  is  this.  It  is  not  time 
for  thee  to  touch  Me  now,  till  that  time  I  be  in  glory,  and  then 
touch  Me  by  the  arm  of  faith  as  much  as  thou  canst  or  may  est. 
Ye  must  consider,  that  she  was  too  much  addicted  to  His  bodily 
presence.  She  thought  He  should  have  remained  and  dwelt 
on  earth  as  He  did  before.  Therefore  He  would  not  let  her 
come  near  Him,  until  He  instructed  her  of  a  spiritual  touching, 
and  that  He  was  not  to  stay  here,  but  to  dwell  with  His  Father 
in  heaven. 

"  Mark  this  lesson.  Some  men  love  the  Lord  entirely,  and 
yet  when  they  come  to  His  service  they  fail :  for  such  is  the 
grossness  of  our  nature  that  we  cannot  incline  to  that  spiritual 
service  which  He  chiefly  requires.  Popery  is  full  of  this  gross- 
ness. They  can  do  nothing  if  they  have  not  His  carnal  pres- 
ence, either  in  Himself,  or  in  a  stock  or  stone,  or  in  a  piece  of 
bread,  and  therefore  they  draw  a  bodily  presence  of  Him  in 
the  sacrament.  All  their  religion  is  earthly, — no  grace,  no 
spirit  in  it.  But  did  the  Lord  accept  that  gross  service  that 
Mary  offered?  I  am  certain  He  loved  Mary  better  than  the 
Pope  and  all  his  priests  ;  yet  well  as  He  liked  Mary,  He  liked 
not  her  service.  He  says  to  her,  Touch  Me  not !  The  Lord 
keep  us  from  gross  service,  and  make  us  touch  Him  by  faith." 

Andrews  says,  "  The  most  we  can  make  is  that  here  Mary 
failed  in  somewhat.  Not  that  she  did  it  in  any  immodest  or 
indecent  manner.  God  forbid  !  Never  think  of  that.  But  she 
was  only  a  little  too  forward,  it  may  be  :  not  with  the  due  re- 
spect that  was  meet." — "  I  tell  you  plainly  I  do  not  like  her 
Kabboni.      It  was  no  Easter-day  salutation ;    it   should  have 


382  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

been  some  better  term,  expressing  more  reverence." — "The 
touch  was  not  the  riglit  touch,  and  all  for  want  of  expressing 
more  regard  ;  not  for  want  of  reverence  at  all,  but  of  reverence 
enough." — "  It  is  no  excuse  to  say  it  was  all  out  of  love.  Nev- 
er lay  it  upon  that.  Love,  Christ  loves  well.  But  love,  if  it 
be  right,  doth  nothing  uncomely,  keeps  decorum,  forgets  not 
what  belongs  to  duty  and  decency,  carries  itself  accordingly." 

"  A  strange  kind  of  love,  when  for  very  love  to  Christ  we 

care  not  how  we  use  Him,  or  carry  ourselves  toward  Him. 
Which,  being  Mary's  case,  she  heard  and  heard  quickly. 
Touch  Me  not, — you  are  not  now  in  case  till  you  shall  have 
learned  to  touch  after  a  more  regardful  manner. 

Sibbes  says,  "  Mary  was  too  much  addicted  to  Christ's  bodily 
presence.  It  is  this  that  men  have  labored  for  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world, — to  be  too  much  addicted  to  present  things 
and  to  sense.  They  will  worship  Christ ;  but  they  must  have 
a  picture  before  them.  They  will  adore  Christ ;  but  they  must 
bring  His  body  down  to  a  piece  of  bread :  they  must  have  a 
presence.  And  so  instead  of  raising  their  hearts  to  God  and 
Christ  in  a  heavenly  manner,  they  pull  down  God  and  Christ  to 
them.  And,  therefore,  saith  Christ,  '  Touch  Me  not  in  that 
manner :  it  is  not  with  Me  as  it  was  before.'  We  must  take 
heed  of  mean  and  base  conceits  of  Christ." 

Sherlock,  in  his  "  Trial  of  the  Witnesses,"  says,  "  The  natural 
sense  of  this  place  is  this  :  Mary  Magdalene,  upon  seeing  Jesus 
fell  at  His  feet  and  laid  hold  on  them,  and  held  them  as  if  she 
never  meant  to  let  them  go.  Then  Christ  said  to  her,  "  Touch 
Me  not,  or  hang  not  about  Me  now.  You  will  have  other  op- 
portunities of  seeing  Me,  for  I  go  not  yet  to  my  Father.  Lose 
no  time  then,  but  go  quickly  with  my  message  to  my  brethren." 

West,  on  the  Resurrection,  says,  "  I  take  Christ's  forbidding 
Mary  to  touch  Him,  to  have  been  meant  as  a  signification  of 
His  intention  to  see  her  and  the  disciples  again  ;  just  as  in  or- 
dinary life,  when  one  friend  says  to  another, '  Do  not  take  leave 
for  I  am  not  going  yet,'  he  means  to  let  him  know  that  he  pur- 
poses to  see  him  again  before  he  sets  out  on  his  journey." 

Lampe  mentions  a  strange  view  of  "Touch  Me  not"  main- 
tained by  Bauldry,  a  German  professor.  He  would  put  a  full 
stop  at  "  not,"  and  place  it  first  in  the  sentence,  rendering  it 
thuj,  "  No  !  I  am  not  the  gardener.  Touch  Me,  and  see  that 
I  am  Thy  Saviour  risen."  He  also  mentions  a  view  held  by 
many,  that  it  means,  "  Do  not  try  whether  I  am  risen  by  touch- 
ing Sle.  It  is  1  myself."  Both  views,  however,  seem  very  im- 
probable. 

Paul  us,  the  German  theologian,  maintains  the  monstrous  no- 
tion that  our  I-.ord  meant,  "  Do  not  lay  a  fing(ir  on  Me,  because 
my  wounds  still  smart."  This  is  simply  ridiculous,  to  say  the 
least. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  333 

Hengstenberg  says,  "  The  reason  of  the  prohibition  must  be 
Bought  iu  the  personal  character  of  Mary,  and  in  the  passion- 
ate nature  of  the  touch  which  sprang  from  that  character.  ISlie 
tliought  that  the  limits  which  had  formerly  existed  between 
herself  and  the  Lord  {the  old  style  of  confidence  is  a  very  incor- 
?'ec^ic?6f/.)  were,  now  that  the  Saviour  had  passed  into  another 
form  of  existence,  removed,  and  that  she  might  now  give  free 
course  to  her  feelings  without  fearing  the  admixture  of  any- 
thing human  in  her  sentiment  toward  her  Lord.  But  her  Lord 
repelled  her  :  Touch  Me  not." 

Wordsworth  says,  "  The  term  (in  the  Greek)  indicates  not 
only  a  prohibition  of  a  particular  act,  but  forbids  a  habit :  i.  e., 
of  clinging  to  Ilim  with  a  bodily  touch.  And  the  words,  '  I 
have  not  ascended,'  contain  a  precept  concerning  the  time  when 
the  habit  of  touching  Christ  may  be  exercised.  He  ia  to  be 
touched  after  He  has  ascended,—  that  is.  He  is  then  to  be  truly 
touched,  when  He  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  bodily  touch. 
And  one  of  the  purposes  of  His  absence  and  His  ascension  into 
heaven  was  to  elicit  and  exercise  that  touch, — the  touch  of 
faith." 

Burgon  remarks  what  a  strange  thing  it  is,  that  "  both  the 
old  world  and  the  new  should  have  begun  witli  the  same  pro- 
hibition, Touch  not." 

[But  go. ..my  brethren. ..say  unto  them.]  This  sentence  is 
strikingly  full  of  wisdom,  tender  thoughtfulness,  and  kind- 
ness. Wisely  our  Lord  summons  Mary  Magdalene  to  an  act  of 
duty  to  others.  He  bids  her  n(jt  spend  time  in  demonstrations 
of  affection,  but  arise  and  be  useful. — Thoughtfully  our  Lord's 
first  consideration  is  for  His  poor  scattered  disciples.  Weak 
and  erring  as  they  had  been,  He  still  loved  them,  and  at  once 
sends  them  a  message.  He  did  not  mean  to  cast  them  off,  or 
forget  them. — Kindly  He  calls  them  "my  brethren."  All  was 
pardoned  and  forgiven.  He  still  regarded  them  as  His  dear 
brethren, — risen,  conqueror  over  the  grave  as  He  was, — and 
would  have  them  look  on  Him  as  a'n  elder  brother.  This  is  the 
first  time  our  Lord  ever  called  the  disciples  "  brethren." 

Bucer  thinks  that  "  my  brethren"  in  this  place  really  means 
•*  my  brethren  according  to  the  flesh  :"  i.  e.,  James  and  others, 
whose  faith  was  weaker  y^erhaps  than  that  of  the  other  Apos- 
tles. But  the  vast  majority  of  commentators  see  in  the  ex- 
pression  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  regard  it  only  as  a  term  of 
affection  applied  to  all  the  Apostles.  Calvin  properly  refers  us 
to  Psalm  xxii.  22  :  "  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren." 
See  also  Heb.  ii.  11. 

Andrews  remarks  that  the  words  "  my  brethren  "  was  "  a  word 
to  be  touched  and  taken  hold  of.  It  was  so  once  when  Benha- 
dad's  servant  laid  hold  on  the  word  of  the  King  of  Israel, '  He 
is  my  brother.'  "     (1  Kings  xx.  32,  33.)     He  adds  that  it  implied 


384  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

identity  of  nature,  and  identity  of  love  and  affection  after  tlie 
resurrection,  and  no  change. 

Let  us  mark  wliat  a  strong  proof  we  have  here  of  the  duty 
of  telling  others  the  good  news  of  the  Gospel.  The  very  first 
work  that  a  risen  Christ  proposes  to  the  first  disciple  to  whom 
He  revealed  Himself  is  the  work  of  telling  others.  It  was  a 
deep  saying  of  the  four  leprous  men  :  "  This  day  is  a  day  of 
good  tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace  :  if  we  tarry  till  the  morn- 
ing light,  some  mischief  will  come  upon  us."     (2  Kings  vii.  9.) 

Cyril  remarks  what  an  honor  was  put  on  woman,  when  a 
woman  was  commissioned  to  be  the  first  person  to  proclaim  the 
tidings  of  the  resurrection. 

[/  ascend.. .my  Father...your  God.]  The  message  which  our 
Lord  desires  Mary  to  carry  to  His  disciples  is  remarkable. 
He  does  not  bid  her  say  "  1  have  risen,"  but  "  I  ascend."  He 
would  evidently  have  them  understand  that  His  resurrection 
was  only  a  step  towards  His  ascension,  and  that  He  did  not 
rise  again  in  order  to  tarry  with  them  upon  earth,  but  in  order 
to  go  up  to  heaven  as  a  conqueror,  and  sit  down  at  God's  right 
hand  as  their  forerunner,  representative,  priest,  advocate,  and 
friend.  The  message  is  clearly  elliptical.  It  is  as  though  our 
Lord  said,  "  Say  unto  them  that  I  have  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
that  I  am  soon  about  to  ascend  into  heaven,  to  Him  who  is  my 
Father  and  my  God,  and  their  Father  and  their  God  also." 

When  our  Lord  dwells  on  His  ascension  more  than  His  resur- 
rection, it  seems  to  me  that  He  names  it  as  the  great  conclusion 
and  accomplishment  of  the  work  He  came  to  do,  and  the  neces- 
sary consequence  of  His  rising  again.  It  is  as  though  He  said, 
"  My  work  is  finished,  my  battle  is  won,  and  I  shall  not  be 
much  longer  with  you  in  the  world.  Get  ready  to  receive  my 
last  instructions." 

Calvin  says,  "  Christ  forbids  the  Apostles  to  fix  their  whole 
attention  on  His  resurrection  viewed  simply  in  itself,  but  ex- 
horts them  to  proceed  further,  until  they  come  to  the  spiritual 
kingdom,  the  heavenly  glory,  and  God  Himself." 

Andrews  remarks,  "  We  ourselves  had  better  lie  still  in  our 
graves,  better  never  rise,  than  rise  and  rising  not  ascend." 

Flavel  remarks,  "If  Christ  had  not  ascended,  He  could  not 
have  interceded,  as  He  now  does  in  heaven  for  us.  And  do  but 
take  away  Christ's  intercession,  and  you  starve  the  hope  of  the 
saints." 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  God  as  ""My  Father  and  my  God," 
He  seems  as  usual,  to  point  to  the  close  and  intimate  union 
which  He  always  declared  to  exist  between  Himself  and  the 
First  Person  in  the  Trinity.  "  The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ"  (1  Peter  i.  3),  is  a  kindred  expression. — He  does 
not,  we  should  observe,  say,  I  ascend  unto  "  our  Father,"  etc.. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  385 

but  "  my  Father  and  your  Father."  He  thus  shows  that  there 
is  a  certain  distinction  between  His  relation  to  the  Father  and 
ours.  Believers  are  not  naturally  sons  of  God :  they  only  be- 
come so  by  grace,  by  adoption,  and  by  virtue  of  union  with 
Christ.  Christ,  on  the  contrary,  is  in  His  nature  the  Son  of  God 
by  an  eternal  generation. 

When  our  Lord  speaks  of  "  Your  Father  and  your  God,"  He 
seems  to  me  to  speak  with  a  special  view  to  the  consolation  of 
His  disciples.  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  Do  not  be  troubled  be- 
cause I  go  away.  He  to  whom  I  go  is  your  Father  and  your 
God  as  well  as  mine.  All  that  He  is  to  me,  the  Head,  He  is  also 
to  you,  the  members." 

It  may  well  be  doubted,  when  we  read  this  verse,  whether 
Christians,  as  a  rule,  assign  sulficient  importance  to  the  great 
truth  of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven.  Let  us  never  forget 
that  if  our  Lord  had  not  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sat  down  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,  His  resurrection  would  have  been  but 
of  little  value.  It  is  His  going  into  heaven  itself,  to  appear  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us.  that  is  the  great  secret  of  Christian 
comfort.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  St.  Paul  answers  the  ques- 
tion, "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "  by  saying,  "  Christ  hath 
died, — yea,  rather  hath  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us."  (Rom. 
viii.  34.)  The  death,  the  resurrection,  the  ascension,  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ,  are  four  great  facts  that  should  never  be  sepa- 
rated. 

It  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  that  there  seems  to  be  a  close 
connection  between  the  ascension  of  Christ  and  the  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This,  at  least,  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of 
the  text  in  the  Psalms,  quoted  by  St.  Paul :  "  When  He  had  as- 
cended up  on  high.  He  led  captivity  captive,  and  received  gifts 
for  men."     (Psalm  Ixviii.  18.     Ephes.  iv.  8.) 

18. — \Mary  Magdalene  came  and  told,  etc.]  In  this  verse  we  see 
the  effect  that  our  Lord's  words  had  on  the  loving  disciple  to 
whom  He  first  appeared.  She  meekly  accepts  the  reproof  of 
her  over-forward  zeal  to  touch  Him,  without  gainsaying  or  an- 
swering again.  Like  a  good  servant,  she  proceeds  at  once  to 
do  what  she  is  told.  The  use  of  the  present  tense  shows  the 
promptness  of  her  obedience.  The  Greek  words  would  be 
more  literally  rendered,  "  Mary  Magdalene  cometh,  telling  or 
declaring  to  the  disciples  that  she  has  seen  the  Lord,  and  that 
He  has  said  these  things  to  her," — that  He  has  given  her  this 
message  to  carry  to  them,  and  that  He  calls  them  His  brethren. 
The  use  of  the  participle  makes  the  words  sound  as  if  she  went 
open-mouthed,  telling  every  disciple  as  she  went,  and  hardly 
stopping  to  sit  down,  till  she  had  told  every  one  whom  she 
could  find  in  Jerusalem.  We  need  not  doubt  that  the  first 
house  she  went  to  was  that  where  Peter  and  John  lodged,  and 
one  of  the  first  persons  to  whom  she  told  the  joyful  news  was 

17 


386  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

the  mother  of  our  Lord.  A  few  minutes  after  she  departed  on 
her  joyful  errand — running,  we  need  not  doubt,  as  she  had  run 
before, — our  Lord  appeared  to  the  other  women,  as  is  recorded 
by  St.  Matthew.    (Matt,  xxviii.  9.) 

Brentius  remarks  what  honor  this  passage  puts  on  women. 
Sin  came  into  the  world  by  Eve,  a  woman.  Yet  God,  in  mercy, 
ordered  things  so  that  of  a  woman  Christ  was  born,  to  a  wo- 
man Christ  first  appeared  after  He  rose  from  the  dead,  and  a 
woman  was  the  first  to  carry  the  news  of  His  resurrection.  He 
quaintly  says,  '  Jesus  made  Mary  Magdalene  an  Apostle  to  the 
Apostles." 

Cecil  remarks,  "  Singular  honor  is  reserved  for  solitary  faith. 
Mary  has  the  first  personal  manifestation  of  Christ  after  His 
resurrection.  She  is  the  first  witness  of  this  most  important 
and  illustrious  fact,  and  the  first  messenger  of  it  to  His  disci- 
ples." 


JOHN  XX.  19—23. 


21  Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again. 
Peace  be  unto  you  :  as  my  Father 
hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you. 

22  And  when  he  had  said  this, 
he  breathed  on  ihem^  and  saith  unto 
them,  Eeceive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost: 

23  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit, 
they  are  remitted  unto  them;  and 
whose  soever  sins  ye  retain,  they 
are  retained. 


19  Then  the  same  day  at  evening, 
being  the  first  day  of  the  week, 
when  the  doors  were  shut  where  the 
disciples  were  assembled  for  fear  of 
the  Jews,  came  Jesus  and  stood  in 
the  midst,  and  saith  unto  them, 
Peace  he  unto  you. 

20  And  when  he  had  so  said,  he 
shewed  unto  them  his  hands  and 
his  side.  Then  were  the  disciples 
glad,  when  they  saw  the  Lord. 

Ths  verses  we  have  now  read  contain  things  hard  to 
be  understood.  Like  all  the  events  which  followed  our 
Lord's  resurrection,  there  is  much  in  the  facts  before  us 
which  is  mysterious,  and  requires  reverent  handling. 
Our  Lord's  actions,  in  suddenly  appearing  among  the 
disciples  when  the  doors  were  closed,  and  in  breathing 
upon  them,  might  soon  draw  us  into  unprofitable  specu- 
lation. It  is  easy,  in  such  cases,  to  darken  counsel  by 
words  without  knowledge.  We  shall  find  it  safer  and 
wiser  to  confine  our  attention  to  points  which  are  plain 
and  instructive. 

We  should  observe,  for  one  thing,  the  remarkable 
language  loith  which  our  Lord  greeted  the  apostles,  when 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  387 

He  first  met  them  after  His  resurrection.  Twice  over 
he  addressed  them  with  the  kindly  words,  "  Peace  be 
unto  you."  We  may  dismiss  as  untenable,  in  all  proba- 
bility, the  cold  and  cautious  suggestion,  that  this  was 
nothing  better  than  an  unmeaning  phrase  of  courtesy. 
He  who  "  spake  as  never  man  spake,"  said  nothing  with- 
out meaning.  He  spoke,  we  may  be  sure,  with  special 
reference  to  the  state  of  mind  of  the  eleven  apostles, 
with  special  reference  to  the  events  of  the  last  few  days, 
and  with  special  reference  to  their  future  ministry. 
"Peace"  and  not  blame, — **  peace  "  and  not  fault-find- 
ing,— "  peace "  and  not  rebuke, — was  the  first  word 
which  this  little  company  heard  from  their  Master's  lips, 
after  He  left  the  tomb. 

It  was  meet,  and  right,  and  fitting,  that  it  should  be 
80,  and  in  full  harmony  with  things  that  had  gone  be- 
fore. "  Peace  on  earth  "  was  the  song  of  the  heavenly 
host,  when  Christ  was  born.  Peace  and  rest  of  soul, 
was  the  general  subject  that  Christ  continually  preach- 
ed for  three  years.  Peace,  ani  not  riches,  had  been  the 
great  legacy  which  He  had  left  with  the  eleven  the 
night  before  His  crucifixion.  Surely  it  was  in  full  keep- 
ing with  all  the  tenor  of  our  Lord's  dealings,  that,  when 
He  revisited  His  little  company  of  disciples  after  His 
resurrection.  His  first  word  should  be  "  Peace."  It  was 
a  word  that  would  soothe  and  calm  their  minds. 

Peace,  we  may  safely  conclude,  was  intended  by  our 
Lord  to  be  the  key-note  to  the  Christian  ministry.  That 
same  peace  which  was  so  continually  on  the  lips  of  the 
Master,  was  to  be  the  grand  subject  of  the  teaching  of 
His  disciples.  Peace  between  God  and  man  through 
the  precious  blood  of  atonement, — peace  between  man 
and  man  through  the  infusion  of  grace  and  charity, — to 
spread  such  peace  as  this  was  to  be  the  work  of  the 
Church.     Any  religion,  like  that  of  Mahomet,  who  made 


388  EXPOSTTOEY  THOUGHTS. 

converts  with  tlie  sword,  is  not  from  above  but  from 
beneath.  Any  form  of  Christianity  which  burns  men  at 
the  stake,  in  order  to  promote  its  own  success,  carries 
about  with  it  the  stamp  of  an  apostasy.  That  is  the 
truest  and  best  religion  which  does  most  to  spread  real, 
true  peace. 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses, 
the  remarkahle  evidence  which  our  Lord  supplied  of 
His  own  resurrection.  He  graciously  appealed  to  the 
senses  of  His  trembling  disciples.  He  showed  them 
"His  hands  and  His  side."  He  bade  them  see  with 
their  own  eyes,  that  He  had  a  real  material  body,  and 
that  He  was  not  a  ghost  or  a  spirit.  "  Handle  Me  and 
see,"  were  His  words,  according  to  St.  Luke  :  "  a  spirit 
hath  not  flesh  and  bone,  as  ye  see  Me  have."  Great  in- 
deed was  the  condescension  of  our  blessed  Master,  in 
thus  coming  down  to  the  feeble  faith  of  the  eleven 
Apostles  !  But  great  also  was  the  principle  which  He 
established  for  the  use  of  His  Church  in  every  age,  until 
He  returns.  That  principle  is,  that  our  Master  requires 
us  to  believe  nothing  is  contrary  to  our  senses.  Things 
above  our  reason  we  must  expect  to  find  in  a  religion 
that  comes  from  God,  but  not  things  contrary  to  reason. 

Let  us  lay  firm  hold  on  this  great  principle,  and  nev- 
er forget  to  use  it.  Specially  let  us  take  care  that  we 
use  it,  in  estimating  the  effect  of  the  sacraments  and  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  require  people  to  believe 
that  men  have  the  quickening  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
when  our  eyes  tell  us  they  are  living  in  habitual  care- 
lessness and  sin,  or  that  the  bread  and  wine  in  the 
Lord's  Supper  are  Christ's  real  body  and  blood,  when 
our  senses  tell  us  they  are  still  bread  and  wine, — this  is 
to  require  more  belief  than  Christ  ever  required  of  His 
disciples.  It  is  to  require  that  which  is  flatly  contra- 
dictory to  reason  and  common  sense.     Such  requisitions 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  339 

Christ  never  made.  Let  us  not  try  to  be  wiser  than  our 
Lord. 

We  should  observe,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  re- 
markahle  commission  which  our  Lord  conferred  upon 
His  eleven  Apostles.  We  are  told  that  He  said,  "  As 
my  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you.  And 
when  He  had  said  this,  He  breathed  on  them,  and  saith 
unto  them,  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost:  whose  soever 
sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them ;  and  whose 
soever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained."  It  is  vain  to 
deny  that  the  true  sense  of  these  solemn  words  has  been 
for  centuries  a  subject  of  controversy  and  dispute.  It 
is  useless  perhaps  to  expect  that  the  controversy  will 
ever  be  closed.  The  utmost  that  we  can  hope  to  do 
with  the  passage  is  to  supply  a  probable  exposition. 

It  seems  then  highly  probable  that  our  Lord  in  this 
place  solemnly  commissioned  His  Apostles  to  go  into  all 
the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  as  He  had  preached  it. 
He  also  conferred  on  them  the  power  of  declaring  with 
peculiar  authority  whose  sins  were  forgiven,  and  whose 
sins  were  not  forgiven.  That  this  is  precisely  what  the 
Apostles  did  is  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  which  any  one 
may  verify  for  himself  by  reading  the  book  of  the  Acts. 
When  Peter  proclaimed  to  the  Jews,  "  Repent  ye,  and 
be  converted," — and  when  Paul  declared  at  Antioch  of 
Iconium, — "  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent," — 
"  Through  this  man  is  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  by  Him  all  that  believe  are  justified," — they  were 
doing  what  this  passage  commissioned  the  Apostles  to 
do.  They  were  opening  with  authority  the  door  of  sal- 
vation, and  inviting  with  authority  all  sinners  to  enter 
in  by  it  and  be  saved.     (Acts  iii.  19 ;  xiii.  26 — 38.) 

It  seems,  on  the  other  hand,  most  improbable  that 
our  Lord  intended  in  this  verse  to  sanction  the  practice 
of  private   absolution,  after  private  confession  of  sins. 


390  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

Whatever  some  may  please  to  say,  there  is  not  a  single 
instance  to  be  found  in  the  Acts  of  any  Apostle  using 
such  absolution  after  confession.  Above  all,  there  is 
not  a  trace  in  the  two  pastoral  Epistles  to  Timothy  and 
Titus,  of  such  confession  and  absolution  being  recom- 
mended, or  thought  desirable.  In  short,  whatever  men 
may  say  about  private  ministerial  absolution,  there  is 
not  a  single  precedent  for  it  in  God's  Word. 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  passage  with  a  deep  sense  of 
the  importance  of  the  minister's  office,  when  that  office 
is  duly  exercised  according  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  No 
higher  honor  can  be  imagined  than  that  of  being  Christ's 
ambassadors,  and  proclaiming  in  Christ's  name  the  for- 
giveness of  sins  to  a  lost  world.  But  let  us  ever  beware 
of  investing  the  ministerial  office  with  one  jot  more  of 
power  and  authority  than  Christ  conferred  upon  it.  To 
treat  ministers  as  being  in  any  sense  mediators  between 
God  and  man,  is  to  rob  Christ  of  His  prerogative,  to 
hide  saving  truth  from  sinners,  and  to  exalt  ordained 
men  to  a  position  which  they  are  totally  unqualified  to 
fill. 

Notes.    John  xx.  19—33. 

19. — [Then  the  same  day  at  evening,  etc.]  This  verse  describes  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  first  appearance  to  the  Apostles,  in  a  body, 
after  He  rose  from  the  dead.  It  took  place  in  the  evening  of 
the  same  Sunday  when  He  had  appeared  to  Mary  Magdalene  in 
the  morning.  Between  that  morning  and  that  evening  He  had 
already  appeared  three  times, — once  to  the  company  of  women 
returning  from  the  sepulchre,  as  described  by  St.  Matthew, — 
once  to  Simon  Peter,  as  we  are  told  by  St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul, — 
and  once  to  the  two  disciples  walking  to  Emmaus.  (Matt, 
xxviii.  9  ;  Luke  xxiv.  34  ;  1  C'or.  xv.  5  ;  Luke  xxiv.  13,  etc.)  This, 
therefore,  was  the  fifth  appearance  which  our  Lord  graciously 
vouchsafed.  Each  of  the  five  appearances,  we  should  observe, 
was  peculiar  in  its  circumstances,  and  unlike  the  others.  We 
need  not  wonder  that  this  Sunday,  from  the  earliest  ages,  was 
always  marked  by  the  Ohurch  as  a  day  which  ought  to  be  had 
in  remembrance,  and  kept  with  peculiar  honor. 

The  beginning  of  the  verse  would  be  more  literally  rendered. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  391 

*'  When  it  was  evening  on  that  day,  tlie  first  day  of  the  week." 
The  precise  houi'  is  not  specified  ;  but,  considering  all  things,  it 
seems  probable  that  it  was  after  sunset,  and  when  it  was  dark, 
in  order  to  avoid  observation. — The  cause  of  the  disciples  as- 
sembling, we  may  reasonably  suppose,  was  the  tidings  received 
from  no  less  than  four  distinct  sets  of  witnesses,  that  Jesus  had 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  was  alive.  It  would  have  been  strange 
indeed  if  they  did  not  assemble  on  hearing  such  news. — The 
place  where  the  disciples  assembled  is  not  mentioned.  But  at 
a  time  like  the  passover  feast  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  find 
some  "  upper  room,"  where  ten  men  might  meet  together.  1 
can  see  no  improbability  in  the  supposition  that  the  very  room 
where  the  Lord's  Supper  was  instituted  on  the  previous  Thurs- 
day evening,  might  be  the  same  room  where  the  disciples 
gathered  together  on  Sunday  night.  The  words  of  St.  Mark 
incline  me  to  think  that  the  person  to  whom  the  "  upper  room  " 
belonged  was  one  of  those  Jews  who  were  friendly  to  Christ, 
though  they  had  not  courage  to  confess  Him  openly.  (Mark 
xiv.  13—15.) 

That  the  "  doors  "  should  be  "  shut,  where  the  disciples  were 
assembled,  for  fear  of  the  Jews,"  is  a  circumstance  that  need 
not  surprise  us.  The  Apostles  might  well  regard  their  lives  as 
being  in  imminent  danger,  when  they  remembered  how  their 
Master  had  just  been  treated.  Moreover,  the  story  of  the  guard 
placed  round  the  sepulchre,  that  "  the  disciples  had  stolen  the 
body  of  Jesus,"  might  reasonably  incline  them  to  expect  fur- 
ther ill-treatment  themselves.  They  did  their  best  therefore  to 
avoid  observation,  and  closed  the  doors  of  the  room  where  they 
assembled  after  sunset. 

Concerning  the  precise  manner  in  which  our  Lord  appeared 
to  the  disciples,  there  is  no  little  difference  of  opinion,  {a) 
Some  think,  as  Calvin,  and  many  of  the  divines  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  that  He  suddenly  caused  the  doors  to  open, 
passed  through  them  when  open,  and  suddenly  stood  in  the 
midst  of  the  company  assembled.  (&)  Some  think,  as  Chrysos- 
tom,  Cyril,  Augustine,  the  Romanists,  and  nearly  all  Lutherans, 
that  the  doors  continued  fastened,  and  that  our  Lord  miracu- 
lously appeared  standfing  in  the  room  where  the  disciples  were, 
instantaneously,  in  a  moment,  and  without  notice.  I  do  not 
know  that  it  signifies  much  which  view  we  take.  Ta  either 
case  a  miracle  was  wrought.  Our  Lord's  risen  body  must  evi- 
dently have  had  a  power  of  moving  from  one  place  to  another, 
and  of  being  visible  or  invisible,  as  He  thought  fit,  according  to 
His  good  pleasure,  after  a  manner  that  we  cannot  understand. 
In  any  case,  we  must  carefully  remember  that  it  was  a  real, 
material  body, — a  body  that  could  be  touched,  and  felt,  and 
seen,  and  handled,  and  yet  a  supernatural  and  peculiar  body. 
With  such  a  body  it  was  as  easy  for  our  Lord  to  appear  sud- 
denly standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  while  the  doors  re- 
mained fastened,  as  it  was  to  open  the  doors  (as  He  did  the 


392  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS 

doors  of  Peter's  prison),  and  to  walk  into  the  room,  like  another 
man.  To  my  own  mind  there  is  no  proof  positive  either  way, 
and  I  must  leave  it  to  my  readers  to  choose  for  themselves. 
One  thing  alone  we  must  not  forget.  Even  if  our  Lord  did  ap- 
pear in  the  room,  without  unfastening  the  doors,  it  is  no  proof 
that  He  can  be  literally,  and  locally,  and  corporally  present  in 
the  Lord's  Supper,  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine.  More- 
over, it  does  not  follow,  because  He  could  move  from  place  to 
place  invisibly,  that  His  body  could  ever  be  in  more  than  one 
place  at  one  and  the  same  time.  When  He  rose  from  the  dead. 
He  rose  with  a  body  of  a  far  more  spiritual  kind  than  He  had 
before,  but  a  body  for  all  that  which  was  a  real  human  body, 
and  not  a  mere  seeming  and  shadowy  body,  like  that  of  a  ghost 
or  a  spirit. 

The  first  words  that  our  Lord  spake  to  the  disciples  afford  a 
beautiful  proof  of  His  loving,  merciful,  tender,  thoughtful, 
pitiful,  and  compassionate  spirit.  He  said,  "  Peace  be  unto 
you."  That  expression,  in  my  opinion,  must  on  no  account  be 
taken  as  a  mere  formal  salutation,  without  meaning.  It  was 
intended  to  reassure  and  cheer  the  minds  of  the  disciples,  by 
exhibiting  at  once  His  mind  towards  them.  Not  a  word  of  re- 
proof, or  rebuke,  or  fault-finding,  or  blame  falls  from  our  Lord's 
lips,  notwithstanding  all  their  sad  faint-heartedness  and  deser- 
tion on  the  preceding  Thursday  night.  All  is  forgiven  and  for- 
gotten. The  very  first  word  is  "  Peace."  This  was  almost  the 
last  word  that  our  Lord  had  spoken  on  Thursday  night  before 
He  prayed  :  "  These  things  I  have  spoken,  that  in  Me  ye  might 
have  peace,"  (John  xvi.  88.)  This  was  the  last  legacy  He  had 
left  His  disciples  :  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you  :  my  peace  I  give 
unto  you.  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,"  (John  xiv.  27.) 
Can  we  doubt  that  this  comfortable  word  would  cheer  and  calm 
the  minds  of  the  little  company,  when  our  Lord  suddenly  ap- 
peared?-" Once  morel  stand  among  you:  and  once  more  I 
proclaim  peace  ; — not  excommunication,  not  rejection  from  my 
friendship,  not  rebuke,  but  peace."  We  cannot  realize  the  ful- 
ness of  comfort  which  the  word  would  supply,  unless  we  bear 
in  mind  the  events  of  the  last  few  days,  and  especially  the  con- 
duct of  the  Apostles  on  the  night  before  the  crucifixion,  when, 
after  loudly  professing  their  faithfulness,  they  all  "  forsook  Him 
and  fled," 

The  parallel  account  in  St.  Luke  would  lead  us  to  conclude 
that  there  were  others  present  on  this  occasion  beside  the  Apos- 
tles. He  speaks  of  "  Them  that  were  with  them."  (Luke 
xxiv.  33.) 

20. — [And  when  He  had  so  said,  etc.]  After  speaking,  our  Lord 
proceeded  most  graciously  to  supply  tangible  evidence  that  He 
had  really  risen  from  the  dead,  and  stood  before  His  disciples 
with  a  material  living  body.  When  it  says  He  "  showed  them 
His  hands  and  side,"  we  cannot  doubt  that  He  bade  them  touch 
Him.    lu  fact  St.  Luke,  when  describing  this  very  same  inter 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  393 

view,  expressly  records  that  our  Lord  said,  "  Behold  my  hands 
and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myself :  handle  me,  and  see ;  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  Me  have."  (Luke 
xxiv.  39.) 

The  mention  of  the  "  hands  and  side  "  points  clearly  to  the 
wounda  made  by  the  nails  on  the  one,  and  by  the  spear  in  the 
other.  Those  wounds  appeared  visibly  and  unmistakably  in 
His  risen  body,  and  our  blessed  Master  was  not  ashamed  of 
them.  Even  in  the  glory  of  heaven,  according  to  Revelation, 
John  saw  Him  appear  as  a  "  Lamb  that  had  been  slain."  (Rev. 
v.  6.)  I  think  we  need  not  doubt  that  when  He  ascended  up 
into  heaven,  those  wounds  went  with  Him,  and  are  a  perpetual 
witness  to  angels  that  He  has  actually  suffered  for  man's  sins. 
When  we  see  His  real  presence  in  the  day  of  His  appearing, 
we  shall  see  "the  man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  see  the  marks  of  His 
crucifixion.  I  give  this  however  as  my  private  opinion,  and  I 
think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  many  divines  think  differently.  For 
instance,  Calvin  strongly  holds  that  our  Lord's  '*  use  of  the 
wounds  was  only  temporary,  until  the  Apostles  were  fully  con- 
vinced, and  that  His  glorified  body  is  without  them."  I  cannot, 
however,  agree  with  him.  After  a  great  victory,  the  scars  of  a 
conqueror  are  marks  of  honor. 

Concerning  the  actual  condition  of  our  Lord's  wounds  it  be- 
comes us  to  speak  reverently.  A  very  slight  acquaintance 
with  surgery  will  tell  us,  of  course,  that  a  lacerated  wound  in 
the  hand  or  foot,  or  a  deep  wound  in  the  side  inflicted  on  Fri- 
day, would  naturally,  to  say  the  least,  be  very  painful  and  in 
flamed  on  Sunday  night.  But  we  must  carefully  remember 
that  our  Lord's  risen  body,  though  a  real  and  material  body, 
was  evidently  not  subject  to  all  the  conditions  of  an  ordinary 
human  body,  or  of  His  own  body  before  His  death.  It  was  in 
fact  such  a  body,  as  we  may  hope  to  have  when  we  rise  again. 
We  may,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  wounds  made  by  the 
nails  and  spear  were  not  wounds  that  were  sore  and  inflamed, 
though  it  is  equally  certain  that  they  were  not  closed  up,  and 
only  scars  left  behind. 

How  it  was  that  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus  did  not 
recognize  our  Lord  by  the  wounds  in  His  hands  and  feet,  is  a 
question  that  admits  of  two  answers.  Either  we  must  suppose 
that  "  their  eyes  were  hoi  den,"  and  that  they  were  miracu- 
lously unable  to  discern  who  it  was  that  walked  with  them, 
and  did  not  even  know  Him  by  His  voice ;  or  else  we  must 
suppose  that  our  Lord's  hands  and  feet  were  covered  during 
the  walk,  and  that  they  only  saw  the  wounds  in  His  hands 
when  He  broke  the  bread.  St.  Mark's  account  would  lead  ua 
to  believe  that  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  assume  another  body 
on  the  way  to  Emmaus.  He  says,  "  He  appeared  in  another 
form."     (Mark  xvi.  12.) 

The  expression  "  were  glad  when  they  saw/'  would  be  more 

17* 


394  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

literally  rendered  "  rejoiced  seeing,"  and  "  having  seen."  I 
cannot  myself  think  tliat  these  words  fulfilled  our  Lord's  say- 
ing, "  1  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice." 
(John  xvi.  22.)  That  joy,  I  believe,  is  the  joy  of  the  whole 
Church  at  the  Lord's  second  advent,  and  is  yet  to  come.  It  is 
a  joy  of  which  our  Lord  said,  "  No  man  taketh  it  from  you." 
I  believe  the  phrase  before  us  simply  means  that  the  disciples 
"were  greatly  delighted  and  rejoiced,  when  they  saw  before 
them  their  risen  Master.  It  relieved  their  anxious  minds,  re- 
vived their  hopes,  and  set  at  rest  all  their  fears.  "  Our  Master 
is  actually  alive  again  and  has  overcome  death.  Now  all  will 
be  right." 

We  should  not  fail  to  observe  how  our  Lord  condescended  to 
satisfy  the  senses  of  His  disciples, — the  sense  of  sight,  and  the 
sense  of  touch, — when  He  showed  Himself  to  them  after  His 
resurrection.  If  their  senses  had  contradicted  the  news  that 
His  body  had  risen  again  to  life.  He  would  not  have  required 
them  to  believe  it.  Things  above  reason  and  sense  the  Gos- 
pel calls  on  us  to  believe  often,  things  contrary  to  reason  and 
sense  never.  This  is  precisely  what  we  should  remember 
when  a  Romanist  bids  us  believe  that  the  consecrated  wafer  in 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  real  Body  of  Christ.  Sense,  sight, 
taste,  and  chemical  analysis,  combine  to  tell  us  that  the  wafer 
is  still  bread.  The  Romanist,  therefore,  has  no  right  to  de- 
mand our  belief. 

Rollock  remarks,  "  When  I  mark  this  place,  I  see  in  it  what 
then  shall  be  the  estate  of  the  godly,  when  they  shall  meet 
with  their  Lord.  The  first  sight  shall  so  ravish  them,  that 
they  shall  wonder  there  ever  could  be  such  glory.' 

21. — [Then  said  Jesus... again,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  pro- 
ceeds to  tell  the  disciples  the  work  which  He  now  wished  them 
to  do,  but  in  general  terms.  He  meant  to  send  them  forth  into 
the  world  to  be  His  ministers,  messengers,  and  witnesses,  even 
as  the  Father  had  sent  Him  into  the  world  to  be  His  messenger 
and  witness.  (Heb.  iii,  1  ;  John  xviii.  37.)  As  He  had  gone  up 
and  down  preaching  the  Gospel,  testifying  against  the  evil  of 
the  world,  and  proclaiming  rest  and  peace  to  the  heavy  laden, 
BO  He  intended  them  to  go  up  and  down,  as  soon  as  He  had  as- 
cended up  into  heaven.  In  short.  He  at  once  prepared  their 
minds  for  the  work  which  was  before  them.  They  were  to 
dismiss  from  their  minds  the  idea  that  the  day  of  ease  and  re- 
ward had  come,  now  that  their  Master  had  risen  and  was  with 
them  once  more.  So  far  from  that  being  the  case,  their  real 
work  was  now  to  begin.  He  Himself  was  about  to  leave  the 
world;  and  He  meant  them  to  take  His  place.  And  one  purpose 
for  which  lie  appeared  among  them  was  to  give  them  their 
commission. 

The  repetition  of  the  salutation,  "  Peace  be  unto  you,"  is  very 
noteworthy.  1  cannot  doubt  that  it  was  specially  intended  to 
cheer,  and  comfort,  and  animate  the  disciples.    Glad  as  they 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  395 

doubtless  were  to  see  the  Lord,  we  may  easily  believe  that  they 
were  frightened,  and  overcome  by  a  mixture  of  feelings  ;  and 
the  more  so  when  they  remembered  how  they  had  behaved 
when  they  had  last  seen  their  Lord,  Jesus  read  the  condition 
of-  their  hearts,  and  mercifully  makes  assurance  doubly  sure  by 
repeating  the  gracious  words,  "  Peace  be  unto  you."  As  Joseph 
said  to  Pharaoh,  "  the  thing  was  doubled,"  in  order  to  make  it 
sure  and  prevent  the  possibility  of  mistake. 

Augustine  says,  *'  The  iteration  is  confirmation.  It  is  the 
*  peace  upon  peace  '  promised  by  the  prophet."     (Isa.  Ivii.  19.) 

It  is  curious  that  two  entirely  diflferent  Greek  words  are  used 
to  express  the  English  "  sent "  and  "  send "  in  this  verse. 
Parkhurst  says  that  the  word  used  where  our  Lord  says  "  My 
Father  hath  sent  Me,"  is  a  more  solemn  word  than  the  one  used 
when  our  Lord  says,  "  I  send  you."  Yet  I  do  not  think  this  is 
proved ;  and  certainly  Liddell  and  Scott  flatly  contradict  the 
idea.  At  any  rate  the  second  or  less  solemn  word  is  repeated- 
ly used  in  St.  Luke  in  the  most  solemn  sense.  (John  v.  2'6,  24, 
30.)  It  is  just  one  of  those  things  which  we  ought  to  notice, 
but  cannot  explain.  There  is  doubtless  some  reason  why  two 
words  are  used,  but  what  it  is  has  not  yet  been  discovered. 

22. — [^And  when  He  had  said...lreathed,  etc.}  In  this  verse  our 
Lord  proceeds  to  confer  a  special  gift  on  the  disciples,  and,  as 
it  were,  to  ordain  them  for  the  great  work  which  He  intended 
them  to  do.  And  we  have  in  it  a  remarkable  emblematical  ac- 
tion, and  a  no  less  remarkable  saying. 

The  action  of  our  Lord,  "  He  breathed  on  them,"  is  one  thai 
stands  completely  alone  in  the  New  Testament,  and  the  Greek 
word  is  nowhere  else  used.  On  no  occasion  but  this  do  we  find 
the  Lord  "  breathing  "  on  any  one.  Of  course  it  was  a  symbol- 
ical action,  and  the  only  question  is,  What  did  it  symbolize? 
and  Why  was  it  used  ?  My  own  belief  is  that  the  true  expla- 
nation is  to  be  found  in  the  account  of  man's  creation  in  Gene- 
eis.  There  we  read,  •'  The  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust 
of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life, 
and  man  became  a  living  soul."  (Gen.  ii.  7.)  Just  as  there 
was  no  life  in  man  until  God  breathed  into  him  the  breath  of 
life,  so  I  believe  our  Lord  taught  the  disciples,  by  this  action 
of  breathing  on  them,  that  the  beginning  of  all  ministerial 
qualification  is  to  have  the  Holy  Spirit  breathed  into  as  ;  and 
that,  until  the  Holy  Ghost  is  planted  in  our  hearts,  we  are  not 
rightly  commissioned  for  the  work  of  the  ministry. 

1  do  not  however  feel  sure  that  this  view  completely  exhausts 
the  meaning  of  our  Lord  when  He  breathed  on  the  disciples. 
I  cannot  forget  that  they  had  all  forsaken  their  Master  the 
night  that  He  was  taken  prisoner,  fallen  away  from  their  pro- 
fession, and  forfeited  their  title  to  confidence  as  Apostles.  May 
we  not  therefore  reasonably  believe  that  this  breathing  pointed 
to  a  revival  of  life  in  the  hearts  of  the  Apostles,  and  to  a  resto- 


396 


EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


ration  of  tlieir  privileges  as  trusted  and  commissioned  messen- 
gers, notwithstanding  their  grievous  fall  ? — I  cannot  help  sus- 
pecting that  this  lesson  was  contained  in  the  action  of  breathing. 
It  not  only  symbolized  the  infusion  for  the  first  time  of  special 
ministerial  gifts  and  graces.  It  also  symbolized  the  restoration 
to  complete  power  and  confidence  in  their  Master's  eyes,  even 
after  their  faith  had  so  nearly  breathed  its  last,  and  given  up 
the  ghost.  The  first  symptom  of  returning  life,  when  a  man 
is  recovered  from  drowning,  is  his  beginning  to  breathe  again. 
To  set  the  lungs  breathing,  in  such  cases,  is  the  first  aim  of  a 
skilful  doctor. 

When  we  remember  that  the  wind  is  pre-eminently  an  em- 
blem of  the  Holy  Ghost  (John  iii.  8  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  9  ;  Acts.  ii. 
2),  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that  there  is  a  beautiful  fitness  in  the 
symbolical  action  which  our  Lord  has  employed. 

Lampe  thinks  that  our  Lord  breathed  on  all  the  disciples  at 
once,  and  not  on  each  one  separately.  It  is  probable  that  it 
was  so,  in  my  judgment. 

Hooker  remarks  (Eccles.  Pol.  6,  v.  c.  77),  "  The  cause  why  we 
breathe  not,  as  Christ  did  on  the  disciples  unto  whom  He  im- 
parted power,  is  that  neither  Spirit  nor  spiritual  authority  may 
be  thought  to  proceed  from  us,  who  are  but  delegates  and  as- 
signs to  give  men  possession  of  His  grace." 

The  words,  **  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  are  almost  as  deep 
and  mysterious  as  the  action  of  breathing.  They  can  only  sig- 
nify, "  I  bestow  on  you  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  in  what  sense 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  bestowed,  is  a  point  that  demands  atten- 
tion, and  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  run  into  error. 

(a)  Our  Lord  cannot  have  meant  that  the  disciples  were  now 
to  "  receive  the  Holy  Ghost "  for  the  first  time.  They  had 
doubtless  received  Him  in  the  day  when  they  were  first  con- 
verted and  believed.  Whether  they  realized  it  or  not,  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  in  their  hearts  already.  "  No  man  can  say  that 
Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."     (1  Cor.  xii.  3.) 

(&)  Our  Lord  cannot  have  meant  that  the  disciples  were  now 
to  "  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  for  the  purpose  of  working  mira- 
cles and  speaking  with  tongues.  They  had  worked  many  mir- 
acles already,  and  the  gift  of  speaking  with  tongues  was  spe- 
cially conferred  afterwards,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  they 
were  endued  with  power  from  on  high. 

(c)  Our  Lord,  in  my  opinion,  must  have  meant,  "  Receive  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  the  Spirit  of  knowledge  and  understanding.'' 
He  must  have  meant  that  He  now  conferred  on  them  a  degree 
of  light  and  knowledge  of  divine  truth,  which  hitherto  they  had 
not  possessed.  They  had  been  greatly  deficient  in  light  and 
knowledge  up  to  this  time.  With  all  their  faith  and  love  to- 
wards our  Lord's  Person,  they  had  been  sadly  ignorant  of  manj 
things,  and  particularly  of  the  true  purpose  of  His  coming,  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  397 

the  necessity  of  His  death  and  resurrection. — "  Now,"  says  our 
Lord,  "  I  bestow  on  you  the  Spirit  of  knowledge.  Let  the  time 
past  suffice  to  have  seen  through  a  glass  darkly.  Receive  the 
Holy  Ghost,  open  your  eyes  and  see  all  things  clearly." — In  fact 
I  believe  the  words  point  to  the  very  thing  which,  St.  Luke 
says,  our  Lord  did  on  this  occasion  :  "  then  opened  He  their 
understanding  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures." 
(Luke  xxiv.  45.)  Light  was  the  first  thing  made  in  the  day  of 
creation.  Light  in  the  heart  is  the  first  beginning  of  true  con- 
version. And  light  in  the  understanding  is  the  first  thing  re- 
quired in  order  to  make  a  man  an  able  minister  of  the  New 
Testament.  Our  Lord  was  commissioning  His  first  ministers, 
and  sending  them  out  to  carry  on  His  work.  He  begins  by 
giving  them  light  and  knowledge  : — "  Receive  ye  the  Holy 
Ghost.  I  commission  you  this  day,  and  confer  on  you  the  office 
of  ministers.  And  the  first  gift  I  confer  on  you  is  spiritual 
knowledge."  That  this  is  the  true  view  of  the  words,  is  proved 
to  my  own  mind  by  the  extraordinary  difference  in  doctrinal 
knowledge  which  from  this  day  the  Apostles  exhibited. 

Theophylact  thinks  that  our  Lord  only  meant,  "  Become  fit 
for  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost."     This  seems  weak  and  poor. 

The  expression  before  us  is  one  of  those  which  seem  to  me 
to  supply  strong  indirect  proof  of  the  doctrine  of  the  procession 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Son,  as  well  as  from  the  Father.  It 
seems  to  me  that  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  could  say  with 
authority,  "  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  it  is  very  strange  to  say 
that  tlie  Holy  Ghost  does  not  proceed  from  Him !  Yet  the 
Greek  Church  does  not  admit  this. 

The  expression  before  us  is  one  which,  strictly  speaking,  no 
one  but  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  could  use.  It  is  evident  that  no 
mortal  man  has  the  power  of  conferring  the  Holy  Ghost  upon 
another.  This  is  a  prerogative  of  God  alone  and  of  His  Christ. 
When,  therefore,  the  ordination  service  for  Presbyters,  in  the 
Church  of  England  Prayer-book,  puts  into  the  Bishop's  mouth 
these  solemn  words,  "  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost."  I  have  never 
felt  a  doubt  that  the  compilers  of  our  Liturgy  only  meant  the 
words  to  be  used  as  in  an  optative,  and  not  a  positive  sense,  as  a 
'prayer  :  "  I  pray  that  thou  mayest  receive  the  Holy  Ghost." — 
Archbishop  Whitgift,  in  his  Reply  to  the  objections  of  the  fa- 
mous Cartwright,  says,  "  To  use  these  words  in  ordaining  of 
ministers,  which  Christ  Himself  used  in  appointing  His  Apos- 
tles, is  no  more  ridiculous  and  blasphemous  than  it  is  to  use 
the  words  that  he  used  in  the  Lord's  Supper." — "  The  Bishop, 
by  speaking  these  words,  doth  not  take  upon  him  to  give  the 
Holy  Ghost,  no  more  than  he  doth  to  remit  sins,  when  he  pro- 
nounceth  the  remission  of  sins ;  but  by  speaking  these  words 
of  Christ,  he  doth  show  the  principal  duty  of  a  minister,  and 
assureth  him  of  the  assistance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  if  he  labor 
in  the  same  accordingly."  (See  Blakeney  on  the  Common 
Prayer,  p.  513.)    While,  however,  I  say  this,  I  shall  never 


398  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

shrink  from  expressing  my  regret  that  the  words,  "  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  were  adopted  by  the  compilers  of  our  Prayer-book. 
They  do  not  trouble  my  conscience,  but  I  consider  them  likely 
to  offend  the  consciences  of  many,  and  I  think  it  would  have 
been  wiser  to  throw  them  distinctly  and  unmistakably  into  the 
form  of  a  prayer.  It  is  a  simple  historical  fact  which  ought  not 
to  be  forgotten,  that  these  words  were  never  used,  in  the  ordi- 
nation of  ministers,  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  after 
Christ !     (See  Nicholls  and  Blakeney  on  the  Common-Prayer.) 

One  practical  lesson,  at  any  rate,  is  very  plain  in  this  expres- 
sion. The  first  thing  that  is  necessary,  in  order  to  make  a  man 
a  true  minister  of  the  Gospel,  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Bishops  and  presbyters  can  lay  hands  on  men,  and 
make  them  clergymen.  The  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  make  a 
"  man  of  God,"  and  a  minister  of  God's  Word. 
23, — [  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord  con- 
tinues and  concludes  the  commission  for  the  office  of  ministers, 
which  He  now  gives  to  His  Apostles  after  rising  from  the  dead. 
His  work  as  a  public  Teacher  was  now  finished.  The  Apostles 
henceforth  were  to  carry  it  on. — The  words  which  form  this  com- 
mission are  very  peculiar,  and  demand  close  attention.  The 
meaning  of  the  words,  I  believe,  may  be  paraphrased  thus  :  "  I 
confer  on  you  the  power  of  declaring  and  pronouncing  authori- 
tatively whose  sins  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  not  forgiven. 
I  bestow  on  you  the  office  of  pronouncing  who  are  pardoned,  and 
who  are  not,  just  as  the  Jewish  high  priest  pronounced  who  were 
clean,  and  who  were  unclean,  in  cases  of  leprosy." — I  believe  that 
nothing  more  than  this  authority  to  declare  can  be  got  out  of  the 
words,  and  I  entirely  repudiate  and  reject  the  strange  notion 
maintained  by  some,  that  our  Lord  meant  to  depute  to  the 
Apostles,  or  any  others,  the  power  of  absolutely  pardoning  or 
not  pardoning,  absolving  or  not  absolving,  any  one's  soul.  My 
reasons  for  maintaining  tliis  view  of  the  text  are  as  follows : 

(a)  The  power  of  forgiving  sins,  in  Scripture,  is  always  spoken 
of  as  the  special  prerogative  of  God.  The  Jews  themselves  ad- 
mitted this,  when  they  said,  "  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God 
only?"  (Mark  ii.  7,  Luke  v.  21.)  It  is  monstrous  to  suppose 
that  our  Lord  meant  to  overthrow  and  alter  this  great  principle 
when  He  commissioned  His  disciples. 

(6)  The  language  of  the  Old  Testament  Scripture  shows  con- 
clusively, that  the  Prophets  were  said  to  "  DO  "  things,  when 
they  "  DECLARED  them  about  to  be  done."  Thus  Jeremiah's 
commission  runs  in  these  words,  "  I  have  this  day  set  thee  over 
the  nations,  and  over  the  kingdoms,  to  root  out,  and  to  pull 
down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  throw  down,  to  build,  and  to  plant." 
(Jer.  i.  10.)  This  can  only  mean  to  declare  the  rooting  out  and 
pulling  down,  etc. — So  also  Ezekiel  says,  "  I  came  to  destroy  the 
city  "  (Ezck.  xliii.  3  ;)  where  the  marginal  reading  is,  "  I  came 
to  prophesy  the  city  should  be  destroyed."  The  Apostles  were 
doubtless  well  acquainted  with  prophetical  language,  and  I  be- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  399 

lieve  they  interpreted  our  Lord's  words  in  tkis  place  accord- 
ingly. 

(c)  There  is  not  a  single  instance  in  the  Acts  or  Epistles,  of 
an  Apostle  taking  on  himself  to  absolve,  pardon,  or  forgive  any 
one.  The  Apostles  and  preachers  of  the  New  Testament  de- 
clare in  the  plainest  language  whose  sin  is  pardoned  and  ab- 
solved, but  they  never  take  on  themselves  to  pardon  and  ab- 
solve. When  Peter  said  to  Cornelius  and  his  friends,  "  Whoso- 
eve:  believeth  in  Him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins"  (Acts 
xvi.  43) ;  when  Paul  said  at  Antioch,  in  Pisidia,  "  We  declare 
unto  you  glad  tidings  ;  "  "  Through  this  Man  is  preached  unto 
you  the  forgiveness  of  sins "  (Acts  xiii.  82,  38) ;  and  when 
Paul  said  to  the  Philippian  jailor,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  "  (Acts  xvi.  31), — in  each  case 
they  fulfilled  the  commission  of  the  text  before  us.  They  "  de- 
clared whose  sins  were  remitted,  and  whose  were  retained." 

(d)  There  is  not  a  single  word  in  the  three  pastoral  Epistles, 
written  by  St.  Paul  to  Timothy  and  Titus,  to  show  that  the 
Apostle  regarded  absolution  as  part  of  tlie  ministerial  office. 
If  it  was  he  would  surely  have  mentioned  it,  and  urged  the 
practice  of  it  on  young  ministers,  for  the  relief  of  burdened 
souls. 

(e)  The  weakness  of  human  nature  is  so  great,  that  it  is 
grossly  improbable  that  such  a  tremendous  power  as  that  of 
absolutely  pardoning  and  absolving  souls,  would  ever  be  com- 
mitted to  any  mortal  man.  It  would  be  highly  injurious  to  any 
man  to  trust  him  with  such  a  power,  and  would  be  a  continued 
temptation  to  him  to  usurp  the  office  of  a  Mediator  between 
God  and  man. 

(/)  The  experience  of  the  Romish  Church,  in  which  the 
priests  are  practically  regarded  as  having  the  power  to  absolve 
sinners,  and  shut  heaven  against  persons  not  absolved,  affords 
the  strongest  indirect  evidence  that  our  Lord's  words  can  only 
have  meant  to  bear  a  "  declarative  "  sense.  Anything  worse  or 
more  mischievous,  both  to  minister  and  people,  than  the  re- 
sults of  the  Romish  system  of  penance  and  absolution,  it  is  im- 
possible to  conceive.  It  is  a  system  which  has  practically  de- 
graded the  laity,  puffed  up  and  damaged  the  clergy,  turned  peo- 
ple away  from  Christ,  and  kept  them  in  spiritual  darkness  and 
bondage. 

A  question  of  no  small  interest  arises  out  of  the  text  before 
us,  which  it  may  be  well  to  consider.  Was  the  ministerial 
office  and  commission  conferred  on  the  Apostles  by  our  Lord  in 
this  place  an  office  which  they  transmitted  to  others,  with  all 
its  privileges  and  powers  ? 

I  answer,  without  hesitation,  that  in  the  strictest  sense  the 
commission  of  the  Apostles  was  not  transmitted,  but  was  con- 
fined to  them  and  St.  Paul.  I  challenge  any  one  to  deny  that 
the  Apostles  possessed  certain  ministerial  qualifications  which 


^00  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

were  quite  peculiar  to  tliem,  and  which  they  could  not  transmit, 
and  did  not  transmit  to  others.  (1)  They  had  the  gift  of  de- 
claring the  Gospel  without  error,  and  with  infallible  accuracy, 
to  an  extent  that  no  one  after  them  did.  (2)  They  confirmed 
their  teaching  by  miracles.  (3)  They  were,  some  of  them, 
plenarily  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  write  portions  of  the 
New  Testament.  (4)  They  had  the  power  of  discerning  spirits, 
and  knowing  the  hearts  of  others  to  an  extent  that  no  one  after 
them  possessed,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  Peter's  dealing  with 
Ananias,  Sapphira,  and  Simon  Magus.  In  all  these  respects 
they  stood  alone,  and  had  no  successors.  In  the  strictest  sense 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  Apostolical  succession.  Modern  min- 
isters are  not  successors  of  the  Apostles,  but  of  Timothy  and 
Titus.  The  Apostles  were  peculiarly  qualified,  and  gifted,  and 
furnished  for  the  very  peculiar  work  they  had  to  do,  as  the  first 
founders  of  Churches.  But,  in  the  strictest  and  most  accurate 
sense,  their  office  was  one  which  was  not  transmitted.  With 
them  it  began,  and  with  them  it  ended. 

But  while  I  say  all  this,  I  maintain  as  strongly  as  any  one, 
that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  verse  now  before  us  applies 
to  all  Christian  ministers,  and  in  this  sense  their  commission 
resembles  that  of  the  Apostles.  It  is  the  office  of  every  min- 
ister of  Christ  to  declare  boldly,  authoritatively,  and  with  de- 
cision, out  of  God's  Word,  who  they  are  whose  sins  are  for- 
given, and  who  they  are  whose  sins  are  retained.  This  is  his 
commission,  and  this  the  work  for  which  he  is  set  apart  and  or- 
dained. Whenever  a  minister  in  his  pulpit  proclaims  the  full 
Gospel  of  Christ  faithfully,  he  does  the  work  which  our  Lord 
in  this  verse  commissioned  the  Apostles  to  do,  and  may  take 
comfort  in  the  thought  that  he  may  expect  our  Lord's  blessing. 
He  cannot  do  it  with  such  infallible  power  as  the  Apostles,  but 
in  a  sense  he  is  really  their  follower  and  successor. 

The  whole  subject  opened  up  in  this  verse  is  so  important  in 
modern  days,  that  I  make  no  apology  for  quoting  the  following 
passage  from  Bishop  Jewell's  Apology,  which  throws  light  on 
it:— 

Jewell  says,  "  We  say,  that  Christ  has  given  to  His  ministers 
the  power  of  binding  and  loosing,  of  opening  and  shutting. 
And  we  say,  that  the  power  of  loosing  consists  in  this,  that  the 
minister,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  offers  to  dejected  minds 
and  true  penitents,  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  absolution, 
and  doth  assure  them  a  certain  remission  of  their  sins,  and  the 
hopes  of  eternal  salvation;  or,  secondly,  reconciles,  restores, 
and  receives  into  the  congregation  and  unity  of  the  faithful, 
those  penitents,  who  by  any  grievous  scandal  or  known  and 
public  offence  have  offended  the  minds  of  their  brethren,  and 
in  a  sort  alienated  and  separated  themselves  from  the  common 
society  of  the  Church  and  the  body  of  Christ.  And  we  say  the 
minister  doth  exercise  the  power  of  binding  or  shutting,  when 
he  shutteth  the  gate  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  un 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  401 

believers  and  obstinate  persons,  and  denouncetli  to  them  the 
vengeance  of  God  and  eternal  punishment ;  or  excludeth  out  of 
the  bosom  of  the  Church,  those  that  are  publicly  excommuni- 
cated ;  and  that  God  Himself  doth  so  far  approve  whatever  sen- 
tence His  ministers  shall  so  give,  that  whatsoever  is  either 
loosed  or  bound  by  their  ministry  here  on  earth,  He  Avill  in  like 
manner  bind  or  loose  and  confirm  in  heaven.  The  key  with 
which  these  ministers  do  shut  or  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
we  say,  with  St.  Chrysostom,  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Scripture  ; 
with  Tertullian,  is  tJie  interpretation  of  the  law ;  and  with 
Eusebius,  is  the  Word  of  God.  We  say  the  disciples  of  Christ 
received  this  power  (from  Him)  not  that  they  might  hear  the 
private  confessions  of  the  people,  and  catch  their  whispering 
murmurs,  as  the  Popish  priests  everywhere  now  do,  and  that  in 
Buch  a  manner  as  if  all  the  force  and  use  of  the  keys  con- 
sisted only  in  this ;  but  that  they  might  go  and  preach  and  pub- 
lish the  Gospel,  that  so  they  might  be  a  savor  of  life  unto 
life,  to  them  that  did  believe  ;  and  that  they  might  be  also  a 
savor  of  death  unto  death,  to  those  that  did  not  believe  ;  that 
the  minds  of  those  who  were  affrighted  with  the  sense  of  their 
former  ill  lives  and  errors,  after  they  beheld  the  light  of  the 
Gospel,  and  believed  in  Christ,  might  be  opened  by  the  Word 
of  God,  as  doors  are  with  a  key :  and  that  the  wicked  and  stub- 
born, who  would  not  believe  and  return  into  the  way,  might  be 
left,  shut  up,  and  locked,  and,  as  St.  Paul  expresseth  it  (2  Tim. 
iii.  13),  might  "  wax  worse  and  worse."  This  we  take  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  keys,  and  that  in  this  manner  the  consciences  of 
men  are  either  bound  or  loosed." 

Calvin  observes,  "  When  Christ  enjoins  the  Apostles  to  for- 
give sins.  He  does  not  convey  to  them  what  is  peculiar  to  Him- 
self. It  belongs  to  Him  to  forgive  sins.  This  honor,  so  far  as 
it  belongs  peculiarly  to  Himself,  He  does  not  surrender  to  the 
Apostles.  He  only  enjoins  them,  in  His  name,  to  proclaim  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  that  through  their  agency  He  may  recon- 
cile men  to  God." 

Brentius  says,  "  This  is  the  true  and  heavenly  mode  of  re- 
mitting sins  :  to  wit,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Those  who  do  not  preach  the  Gospel  of  Christ  have  no 
power  of  either  remitting  or  retaining  sins." 

Bullinger  says,  "  The  Apostles  remitted  men's  sins,  when  by 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  they  taught  that  the  sins  of  be- 
lievers were  remitted,  and  eternal  life  granted  through  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  retained  men's 
Bins  when  they  announced  that  the  wrath  of  God  remained  on 
those  who  believed  not." 

Gualter  says,  *'  At  this  day  ministers  are  said  to  remit  sins 
when  they  promise  remission  of  them  in  Christ  to  those  who 
believe,  and  to  retain  sins  when  they  denounce  damnation  on 
the  unbelieving  and  obstinately  impenitent." 


402  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Musculus  says  tliat  this  promise  does  not  belong  "  to  every 
and  any  minister,  but  to  the  real  minister  of  the  G^ospel,  who 
teaches  nothing,  promises  nothing  else  but  this, — that  those 
who  repent  and  believe  on  Christ  have  remission  of  sin  and 
eternal  life,  and  that  those  who  are  impenitent  and  unbeliev- 
ing remain  in  their  sins  and  death.  Doctrine  like  this  is  rati- 
fied and  confirmed  before  God,  because  it  is  agreeable  to  the 
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God." 

Lightfoot  thinks  that,  in  interpreting  these  words,  we  must 
carefully  remember  that  they  were  probably  spoken  in  close 
connection  with  our  Lord's  words  in  St.  Liike,  when  He  says 
that  "  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in 
His  name,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  (Luke  xxiv.  46.)  He 
thinks  that  on  hearing  these  words,  scruples  might  arise  in  the 
Apostles'  minds:  "Is  this  so  indeed?  Must  remission  of  sin 
be  really  preached  in  Jerusalem  to  men  stained  with  Messiah's 
blood  V  "  And  then  he  thinks  these  words  are  spoken  to  en- 
courage them.  "  Yes :  you  are  to  begin  at  Jerusalem.  For 
whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them."  Fi- 
nally,  Lightfoot  asks,  with  much  sense,  "  On  what  foundation 
and  with  what  confidence  could  the  Apostles  have  preached  re- 
mission of  sins  to  such  wretched  men  as  the  murderers  of  their 
Lord,  unless  authorized  by  a  peculiar  commission  granted  by 
the  Lord  Himself  ?  " 

Poole  says,  "  The  question  among  divines  is  whether  Christ 
in  this  text  has  given  authority  to  His  ministers  actually  to  dis- 
charge men  of  the  guilt  of  their  sins ;  or  only  to  declare  to 
them  that  if  their  repentance  and  faith  be  true,  their  sins  are 
really  forgiven.  The  former  view  is  contended  for  by  many. 
But  it  does  not  seem  reasonable  (1)  that  God  should  betrust 
man  with  such  a  piece  of  His  prerogative ;  and  (2)  that  God 
who  knoweth  the  falsehood  of  men's  hearts,  and  the  inability 
of  the  best  minister  to  judge  of  the  truth  of  any  man's  repent- 
ance and  faith,  as  also  the  passions  to  which  they  are  subject, 
should  give  to  any  of  the  sous  of  men  an  absolute  power  under 
Him  to  discharge  any  from  the  guilt  of  sin.  Certain  it  is  that 
without  true  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ  no  man  hath  his 
gins  forgiven  ;  so  that  no  minister,  who  knoweth  not  the  hearts 
of  men,  can  possibly  say  to  any  man  with  certainty.  Thy  sins 
are  forgiven.  What  certainty  the  Apostles  might  have  had  by 
the  Spirit  of  discernment,  we  cannot  say.  But  certain  it  is, 
that  none  hath  now  such  certainty  of  any  man's  faith  and  re- 
pentance. Hence  it  is  to  me  apparent,  that  no  man  hath  any 
further  power  from  Christ  than  to  declare  to  men,  that  if  they 
truly  repent  and  believe,  their  sins  are  really  forgiven.  Only 
the  minister,  being  Christ's  interpreter  and  ambassador,  and 
better  able  to  judge  of  true  faith  and  repentance  than  others 
(though  not  certainly  and  infallibly),  such  declarations  from  a 
faithful,  able  minister  are  of  more  weight  and  authority  than 
from  others.  This  is  the  most,  1  conceive,  should  be  in  this 
matter." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX. 


403 


I  leave  the  whole  passage  with  one  general  word  of  caution. 
Whatever  sense  we  place  on  the  words,  let  us  beware  that  we 
do  not  give  to  ministers,  of  any  name  or  denomination,  a  place, 
power,  authority,  position,  or  privilege,  which  Christ  never 
gave  them.  Putting  ministers  out  of  their  proper  place  has 
been  the  root  of  ezidless  superstition  and  corruption  in  Christ's 
Church.  To  regard  ministers  as  mediators  between  Christ  and 
the  soul,  to  confess  to  them  privately  and  receive  private  abso- 
lution from  them,  is  a  system  for  which  there  is  no  authority 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  the  high  road  to  every  kind  of  evil. 
It  is  a  system  equally  mischievous  to  ministers  and  to  people, 
utterly  subversive  of  the  Gospel,  and  thoroughly  dishonoring 
to  the  priestly  office  of  Christ. 

The  three  absolutions  found  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church 
of  England,  (1)  that  in  the  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  (2) 
that  in  the  Communion  Service,  and  (3)  that  in  the  Visitation 
for  the  Sick,  were  all,  in  my  judgment,  intended  to  bear  only  a 
declarative  sense.  But  I  can  never  refrain  from  saying  that 
the  absolution  in  the  Visitation  Service  is  liable  to  be  misun- 
derstood, and  its  wording  is  to  be  regretted. 

Shepherd,  on  the  Common  Prayer,  remarks,  "  The  Church  of 
England  neither  maintains  nor  countenances  the  opinion,  that 
a  priest,  by  virtue  of  his  ordination,  has  an  absolute,  uncondi- 
tional power  to  forgive  sin.  The  pov\'er  that  the  clergy  have 
received  and  exercised,  is  purely  ministerial,  being  defined  and 
limited  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  expressly  declares  upon 
what  condition  sin  shall  be  remitted,  and  upon  what  retained. 
To  suppose  that  any  minister  of  Christ,  since  the  Apostles,  pos- 
sesses the  power  of  remitting  or  retaining  sin  at  his  discretion, 
is  repugnant  to  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  to 
every  dictate  of  reason  and  common  sense." 


JOHN  XX.  24r-31. 


24  But  Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve, 
called  Didymus,  was  not  with  them 
when  Jesua  came. 

25  The  other  disciples  therefore 
said  unto  him.  We  have  seen  the 
Lord.  But  he  said  unto  them,  Ex- 
cept I  shall  see  in  his  hands  the 
print  of  the  nails,  and  put  my  finger 
mto  the  print  of  the  naus,  and  thrust 
my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not  be- 
lieve. 

26  And  after  eight  days  again  his 
disciples  were  within,  and  Thomas 
with  them:  then  came  Jesus,  the 
doors  being  shut,  and  .stood  in  the 
midst,  and  said,  Peace  he  unto  you. 

27  Tlien  saith  he  to  Thomas, 
Keach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold 
my  hands;   and  reach  hither  thy 


hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side: 
and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing. 

28  And  Thomas  answered  and 
said  unto  him,  My  Lord  and  my 
God. 

29  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thomas, 
because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou 
hast  believed  :  blessed  are  they  that 
have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  be- 
lieved. 

30  And  many  other  signs  truly 
did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  his  dis- 
ciples, which  are  not  written  in  this 
book  : 

31  But  these  are  written,  that  ye 
might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  that  be- 
lieving ye  might  have  life  through 
his  name. 


404:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

The  story  of  the  unbelief  of  Thomas,  related  in 
these  verses,  is  a  narrative  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  of  St. 
John.  For  wise  and  good  reasons  it  is  passed  over  in 
silence  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,  and  was  probably 
not  given  to  the  world  till  Thomas  was  dead.  It  is  pre- 
cisely one  of  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  supply 
strong  internal  evidence  of  the  honesty  of  the  inspired 
writers.  If  impostors  and  deceivers  had  compiled  the 
Bible  for  their  own  private  advantage,  they  would  nev- 
er have  told  mankind  that  one  of  the  first  founders  of  a 
new  religion  behaved  as  Thomas  here  did. 

We  should  mark,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses,  how 
much  Christians  may  lose  hy  not  regularly  attending  the 
assemblies  of  God?s  people,  Thomas  was  absent  the 
first  time  that  Jesus  appeared  to  the  disciples  after  His 
resurrection,  and  consequently  Thomas  missed  a  bless- 
ing. Of  course  we  have  no  certain  proof  that  the  ab- 
sence of  the  Apostle  could  not  admit  of  explanation. 
Yet,  at  such  a  crisis  in  the  lives  of  the  eleven,  it  seems 
highly  improbable  that  he  had  any  good  reason  for  not 
being  with  his  brethren,  and  it  is  far  more  likely  that  in 
some  way  he  was  to  blame.  One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is 
clear  and  plain.  By  being  absent  he  was  kept  in  sus- 
pense and  unbelief  a  whole  week,  while  all  around  him 
were  rejoicing  in  the  thought  of  a  risen  Lord.  It  is  dif- 
ficult to  suppose  that  this  would  have  been  the  case,  if 
there  had  not  been  a  fault  somewhere.  It  is  hard  to 
avoid  the  suspicion  that  Thomas  was  absent  when  he 
might  have  been  present. 

We  shall  all  do  well  to  remember  the  charge  of  the 
Apostle  St.  Paul  :  "  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  your- 
selves together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is."  (Heb.  x. 
25.)  Never  to  be  absent  from  God's  house  on  Sundays, 
without  good  reason, — never  to  miss"  the  Lord's  Supper 
when  administered  in  our  own  congregation, — never  to 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  405 

let  our  place  be  empty  when  means  of  grace  are  going 
on,  this  is  one  way  to  be  a  growing  and  prosperous 
Christian.  The  very  sermon  that  we  needlessly  miss, 
may  contain  a  precious  word  in  season  for  our  souls. 
The  very  assembly  for  prayer  and  praise  from  which  we 
stay  away,  may  be  the  very  gathering  that  would  have 
cheered,  and  stablished,  and  quickened  our  hearts.  We 
little  know  how  dependent  our  spiritual  health  is  on  lit- 
tle, regular,  habitual  helps,  and  how  much  we  suffer  if 
we  miss  our  medicine.  The  wretched  argument  that 
many  attend  means  of  grace  and  are  no  better  for  them, 
should  be  no  argument  to  a  Christian.  It  may  satisfy 
those  who  are  blind  to  their  own  state,  and  destitute  of 
grace,  but  it  should  never  satisfy  a  real  servant  of  Christ. 
Such  an  one  should  remember  the  words  of  Solomon: 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at 
my  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors."  (Prov. 
viii.  34.)  Above  all  he  should  bind  around  his  heart 
the  Master's  promise  :  '*  Wheresoever  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst 
of  them."  (Matt,  xviii.  20.)  Such  a  man  will  rarely  be 
left  like  Thomas,  shut  out  in  the  cold  chill  of  unbelief, 
while  others  are  warmed  and  filled. 

We  should  mark  for  another  thing  in  this  verse, 
how  hind  and  merciful  Christ  is  to  dull  and  slow  be- 
lievers.  Nowhere,  perhaps,  in  all  the  four  Gospels,  do 
we  find  this  part  of  our  Lord's  character  so  beautifully 
illustrated  as  in  the  story  before  our  eyes.  It  is  hard  to 
imagine  anything  more  tiresome  and  provoking  than 
the  conduct  of  Thomas,  when  even  the  testimony  of  ten 
faithful  brethren  had  no  effect  on  him,  and  he  doggedly 
declared,  "Except  I  see  with  my  own  eyes  and  touch 
with  my  own  hands,  I  will  not  believe."  But  it  is  im- 
possible to  imagine  anything  more  patient  and  compas- 
sionate, than  our  Lord's  treatment  of  this  weak  disciple. 


406  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

He  does  not  reject  him,  or  dismiss  him,  or  excommuni- 
cate him.  He  comes  again  at  the  end  of  a  week,  and 
apparently  for  the  special  benefit  of  Thomas.  He  deals 
with  him  according  to  his  weakness,  like  a  gentle  nurse 
dealing  with  a  froward  child: — "Reach  hither  thy  fin- 
ger, and  behold  my  hands  ;  reach  hither  thy  hand,  and 
thrust  it  into  my  side."  If  nothing  but  the  grossest, 
coarsest,  most  material  evidence  could  satisfy  him,  even 
that  evidence  was  supplied.  Surely  this  was  a  love  that 
passeth  knowledge,  and  a  patience  that  passeth  under- 
standing. 

A  passage  of  Scripture  like  this,  we  need  not  doubt, 
was  written  for  the  special  comfort  of  all  true  believers. 
The  Holy  Ghost  knew  well  that  the  dull,  and  the  slow, 
and  the  stupid,  and  the  doubting,  are  by  far  the  com- 
monest type  of  disciples  in  this  evil  world.  The  Holy 
Ghost  has  taken  care  to  supply  abundant  evidence  that 
Jesus  is  rich  in  patience  as  well  as  compassion,  and  that 
He  bears  with  the  infirmities  of  all  His  people.  Let  us 
take  care  that  we  drink  into  our  Lord's  spirit,  and  copy 
His  example.  Let  us  never  set  down  men  in  a  low 
place,  as  gracious  and  godless,  because  their  faith  is  fee- 
ble and  their  love  is  cold.  Let  us  remember  the  case 
of  Thomas,  and  be  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy. 
Our  Lord  has  many  weak  children  in  His  family,  many 
dull  pupils  in  His  school,  many  raw  soldiers  in  His 
army,  many  lame  sheep  in  His  flock.  Yet  He  bears 
with  them  all,  and  casts  none  away.  Happy  is  that 
Christian  who  has  learned  to  deal  likewise  with  his 
brethren.  There  are  many  in  the  Church,  who,  like 
Thomas,  are  dull  and  slow,  but  for  all  that,  like  Thom- 
as, are  real  and  true  believers. 

We  should  mark,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  how  Christ 
was  addressed  by  a  disciple  as  "  God^^^  loithout  prohibi- 
tion or  rebuke  on  His  /^ar^.      The  noble   exclamation 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  407 

which  burst  from  the  lips  of  Thomas,  when  convinced 
that  his  Lord  had  risen  indeed, — the  noble  exclamation, 
"My  Lord  and  my  God," — admits  of  only  one  meaning. 
It  was  a  distinct  testimony  to  our  blessed  Lord's  divin- 
ity. It  was  a  clear,  unmistakable  declaration  that 
Thomas  believed  Him,  whom  he  saw  and  touched  that 
day,  to  be  not  only  man,  but  God.  Above  all,  it  was  a 
testimony  which  our  Lord  received  and  did  not  prohibit, 
and  a  declaration  which  He  did  not  say  one  word  to  re- 
buke. When  Cornelius  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  Peter 
and  would  have  worshipped  him,  the  Apostle  refused 
such  honor  at  once  :  "  Stand  up ;  I  myself  also  am  a 
man."  (Acts  x.  26.)  When  the  people  of  Lystra  would 
have  done  sacrifice  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  "  they  rent 
their  clothes,  and  ran  in  among  the  people,  saying,  Sirs, 
w^hy  do  ye  these  things  ?  We  also  are  men  of  like  pas- 
sions with  you."  (Acts  xiv.  14.)  But  when  Thomas 
says  to  Jesus,  '*  My  Lord  and  my  God,"  the  words  do 
not  elicit  a  syllable  of  reproof  from  our  holy  and  truth- 
loving  Master.  Can  we  doubt  that  these  things  were 
written  for  our  learning  ? 

Let  us  settle  it  firmly  in  our  minds  that  the  divinity 
of  Christ  is  one  of  the  grand  foundation  truths  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  let  us  be  willing  to  go  to  the  stake  rather 
than  let  it  go.  Unless  our  Lord  Jesus  is  very  God  of 
very  God,  there  is  an  end  of  His  mediation,  His  atone- 
ment. His  advocacy.  His  priesthood,  His  whole  work  of 
redemption.  These  glorious  doctrines  are  useless  blas- 
phemies, unless  Christ  is  divine.  Forever  let  us  bless 
God  that  the  divinity  of  our  Lord  is  taught  everywhere 
in  the  Scriptures,  and  stands  on  evidence  that  can  never 
be  overthrown.  Above  all,  let  us  daily  repose  our  sin- 
ful souls  on  Christ  with  undoubting  confidence,  as  one 
who  is  perfect  God  as  well  as  perfect  man.  He  is  man, 
and  therefore  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  in- 


^Qg  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS 

firraities.  He  is  God,  and  therefore  is  "  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him."  That 
Christian  has  no  cause  to  fear,  who  can  Iook  to  Jesus  by- 
faith,  and  say  with  Thomas,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God." 
With  such  a  Saviour  we  need  not  be  afraid  to  begin  the 
life  of  real  religion,  and  with  such  a  Saviour  we  may 
boldly  go  on. 

Notes.    John  xx.  24—31. 

2i.—[But  Thomas  one...tweUe...Didymus^  The  story  of  the  sec- 
ond appearance  of  Christ  to  the  whole  company  of  the  Apostles, 
for  the  special  benefit  of  Thomas,  is  one  of  those  narratives 
which  are  only  found  in  St.  John's  Gospel.  We  ought  to  feel 
thankful  that  it  has  been  recorded.  It  is  precisely  one  of  those 
stories  which  supply  strong  indirect  evidence  of  the  divine  in- 
spiration of  the  Scriptures  and  the  genuine  honesty  of  the  Gos- 
pel writers.  An  uninspired  man,  much  less  a  dishonest 
impostor,  would  not  have  told  us  of  the  unbelief  of  a  chosen 
Apostle.  Moreover  it  is  one  of  those  stories  which  throw  most 
useful  light  on  a  very  interesting  subject.  That  subject  is  the 
great  variety  of  temperament  which  may  be  found  among  true 
Christians. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  Observe  the  truthfulness  of  the  disci- 
ples. They  hide  no  faults,  either  their  own  or  others  ;  but  re- 
cord them  with  great  veracity." 

Cardinal  Bellarmine,  according  to  Gerhard,  goes  so  far  as  to 
Bay  that  the  history  of  Thomas,  like  that  of  Noah's  drunken- 
ness, David's  adultery,  and  Peter's  denial,  is  a  reason  why  the 
laity  ought  not  to  read  the  Bible,  lest  forsooth  they  should  get 
harm  !  The  worthy  Cardinal  forgets  that  we  need  beacons  to 
warn  us  against  danger,  and  examples  of  Christ's  mercy  to  sin- 
ful and  dull  people  in  order  to  encourage  us  to  repent. 

Concerning  the  Apostle  Thomas  we  know  little.  Twice  in 
the  G'ospel  of  St.  John  we  find  him  saying  something,  and  on 
each  occasion  he  appears  in  the  same  character.  When  our 
Lord  declared  His  intention  of  going  to  Bethany,  and  saya 
plainly  that  Lazarus  is  dead,  Thomas  says  to  his  fellow-disci- 
ples, "  Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  Him."  (John  xi. 
16.)  When  our  Lord  in  His  parting  address  to  His  disciples 
said,  "  Whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know.  Thomas 
saith  unto  Him,  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  Thou  goest;  and 
how  can  we  know  the  way?"  (John  xiv.  4,  5.)  He  always 
seems  to  be  one  of  those  desponding,  fearful,  gloomy-minded 
Christians,  who  look  at  the  dark  side  of  every  subject  and  con- 
dition, and  can  never  see  a  bit  of  blue  sky, — who  go  on  their 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  409 

way  to  heaven  with  real  faith  and  true  grace,  but  are  so  full 
of  doubts  and  fears  that  they  are  unable  to  enjoy  religion,  and 
are  a  trouble  to  themselves  and  all  around  them.  This  I  be- 
lieve to  be  the  true  account  of  his  character.  The  modern  the- 
ory that  he  was  a  man  of  free  thought  and  wide  range  of  in- 
tellect, who  wisely  required  reasonable  evidence  of  everything 
in  religion,  and  properly  dreaded  taking  anything  on  trust,  is  a 
theory  which  I  believe  to  be  utterly  without  foundation,  and  I 
cannot  receive  it  for  a  moment.  He  was  simply  a  good  man 
with  a  very  doubting  and  gloomy  turn  of  mind  ; — a  man  that 
really  loved  Jesus  and  was  willing  to  die  with  Him,  but  a  man 
who  saw  little  but  the  dangers  attending  everything  that  a  dis- 
ciple had  to  do,  and  the  difficulties  belonging  to  everything 
which  a  disciple  had  to  believe.  There  are  many  like  him.  It 
is  a  very  useful  picture.  John  Bunyan's  "  Fearing,"  "  Despon- 
dency," and  "  Much  afraid,"  in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  are  types  of 
a  large  class  of  Christians,  who  are  successors  of  the  Apostle 
Thomas. 

[Was  not  with  them... Jesus  came.']  The  reasons  why  Thomas 
was  not  with  the  other  ten  Apostles  on  Sunday  night  when 
Jesus  appeared  to  them,  are  not  given,  and  we  have  no  clue 
whatever  to  them.  Most  commentators  consider  that  he  was  to 
blame  ;  and  that  by  his  absence  he  missed  a  blessing,  and  was 
kept  in  suspense  a  week.  I  admit  that  this  may  be  true,  and  I 
think  his  example  teaches  indirectly  that  it  is  unwise  to  be  ever 
absent  from  the  assembly  of  God's  people  without  good  cause. 
But  I  believe  we  must  not  press  this  point  too  far,  and  must  not 
lay  too  much  blame  on  the  Apostle,  in  the  absence  of  direct 
evidence  that  he  was  in  fault.  For  anything  we  know,  he  may 
have  lodged  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  place  of  meeting 
than  any  of  the  eleven,  and  thus  been  unable  to  reach  the  place 
at  an  earlier  hour  ;  or  he  may  have  been  detained  by  necessary 
business.  One  thing  is  very  certain  :  the  disciples  found  no 
fault  with  Thomas  for  his  absence  when  they  said,  "  We  have 
Been  the  Lord."  Moreover,  our  Lord  Himself,  when  He  ap- 
pears, does  not  blame  Thomas  for  having  been  absent  on  a  for- 
mer occasion,  but  only  chides  his  unbelief.  The  simplest  view 
of  the  subject  appears  to  me  to  be,  that  Thomas's  absence  was 
a  part  of  his  character.  He  was  slow  and  dull  in  action  as  well 
as  in  perception, — the  sort  of  man  would  always  have  been  last 
in  Church,  and  last  in  a  meeting.  In  the  present  instance  I  ven- 
ture to  conjecture  that  he  meant  no  harm,  and  intended  to  have 
been  present  when  the  ten  Apostles  met ;  but  that  he  probably 
started  late,  walked  slow,  and  was  so  absorbed  in  doubts,  and 
fears,  and  anxious  meditations  about  the  prospects  of  Christ's 
disciples,  that  he  never  reached  the  place  of  meeting  till  Christ 
had  withdrawn  Himself. 

The  question  has  been  needlessly  raised  by  some,  whether 
Thomas  was  not  deprived  of  the  gifts  and  privileges  conferred 
on  the  other  Apostles  by  his  absence  ?    Lightfoot  sensibly  re- 

18 


4-10  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

plies,  *'  Surely  not :  it  was  a  privilege  common  to  tlie  whole 
Ape  <tolate,  and  peculiar  to  them  as  Apostles.  St.  Paul  was 
distant,  while  these  things  happened,  both  from  apostleship 
and  religion.  Yet,  when  made  an  Apostle,  he  was  at  once 
adorned  with  this  privilege."  Some  think  that  his  case  is  like 
Eldad  and  Medad,  who  had  their  share  of  the  Spirit,  though 
absent,  like  the  rest  of  the  seventy  elders.     (Num.  xi.  27.) 

25. — [^The  other  disciples. ..said. ..seen  the  Lord.]  We  are  not  told 
when  and  where  the  disciples  said  this.  I  incline  to  believe 
that  they  said  it  the  very  evening  that  our  Lord  first  appeared 
to  them,  and  that  Thomas  came  into  the  assembly  very  shortly 
after  the  Lord  disappeared.  To  my  eyes  it  reads  as  if  the  ten 
Apostles  all  exclaimed  together,  full  of  joy  and  delight  at  what 
they  had  seen  and  heard,  "  Thomas,  we  have  just  seen  our  Lord 
aud  Master !  If  you  had  been  here  a  little  sooner,  you  also 
would  have  seen  Him."  I  think  this  for  two  reasons,  {a)  The 
words  of  the  twenty-sixth  verse,  "  after  eight  days,"  seem  to 
indicate  that  there  were  eight  days  between  our  Lord's  first  ap- 
pearance and  his  second,  and  also  eight  days  between  Thomas's 
expression  of  unbelief  and  his  being  convinced.  (&)  It  seems 
highly  improbable  that  Thomas  would  allow  a  whole  day  and 
night  to  pass  away,  after  the  rumor  of  our  Lord's  body  having 
been  removed  from  the  sepulchre  had  spread  through  Jerusa- 
lem, without  seeking  out  the  other  Apostles  and  inquiring  what 
it  meant.  Slow  and  dull  in  faith  as  he  was,  he  would  hardly 
sleep  without  finding  out  somethiDg  about  it.  These  consid- 
erations incline  me  to  believe,  that  before  the  ten  Apostles  had 
time  to  separate,  after  our  Lord's  appearance  to  them,  Thomas 
came  in.  Then  they  told  him  immediately,  that  they  had  just 
seen  the  Lord.  And  then  came  the  remarkable  declaration 
which  the  doubting  Apostle  made. 

[But  he  said  unto  them.  Except,  etc.]  The  unbelief  of  Thomas, 
expressed  in  this  famous  sentence,  was  a  sad  fault  in  a  good 
man,  which  cannot  be  explained  away.  He  refused  to  believe 
the  testimony  of  ten  competent  witnesses,  who  had  seen  Christ 
in  the  body  with  their  own  eyes.  He  refused  to  believe  the 
testimony  of  ten  true  friends  and  brethren,  who  could  have  no 
object  in  deceiving  him.  He  passionately  declares  that  he  will 
not  believe,  unless  he  himself  sees  and  touches  our  Lord's 
body.  He  presumes  to  prescribe  certain  conditions,  which  must 
be  fulfilled  before  he  can  credit  the  report  of  his  brethren.  He 
uses  singularly  emphatic  language  to  express  his  scepticism  : 
— "  Others  may  believe  if  they  like  ;  but  I  shall  not  and  will 
not  believe  until  I  see  and  touch  for  myself." — All  this  was 
very  sad  and  very  sinful.  Thomas  might  have  remembered 
that  at  this  rate  nothing  could  ever  be  proved  by  witnesses  ; 
and  that  he  himself,  as  a  teacher,  could  never  expect  men  to 
believe  him.  His  case  shows  us  how  foolishly  and  weakly  a 
believer  may  speak  sometimes,  and  how,  under  the  influence  of 
depression  and  doubt,  he  may  say  things  of  which  afterwards 
he  is  heartily  ashamed. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  411 

After  all,  the  case  of  Thomas  is  not  an  uncommon  one.  Some 
people  are  so  strangely  constituted  that  they  distrust, every- 
body, regard  all  men  as  liars,  and  will  believe  nothing  except 
they  can  see  it  all,  and  work  it  all  out  for  themselves.  They 
have  a  rooted  dislike  to  receive  anything  on  trust,  or  from  the 
testimony  of  others,  and  must  always  go  over  the  ground  for 
themselves.  In  people  of  this  kind,  though  they  know  it  not, 
there  is  often  a  vast  amount  of  latent  pride  and  self-conceit ; 
and  it  is  almost  ludicrous  to  observe  how  entirely  they  forget 
that  the  business  of  daily  life  could  never  go  on,  if  we  were 
always  doubting  everything  which  we  could  not  see  for  our- 
selves. Nevertheless  they  exist  in  the  Church,  and  always  will 
exist ;  and  the  case  of  Thomas  shows  what  trouble  they  bring 
on  themselves. 

Two  things  must,  in  fairness,  be  remembered,  which  form 
some  slight  extenuation  of  Thomas's  unbelief.  For  one  thing 
it  does  not  appear  that  any  one  of  our  Lord's  Apostles  ever  un- 
derstood, up  to  the  time  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  that  he  was 
really  going  to  be  crucified,  buried,  and  rise  again.  Simple  a3 
these  great  facts  appear  to  us  now,  it  is  perfectly  certain  that 
they  formed  no  part  of  the  creed  of  the  Apostles,  so  long  as  our 
Lord  was  with  them.  This  may  seem  astonishing,  but  it  is 
true.  They  believed  that  Christ  was  the  Messiah,  but  they  did 
not  realize  a  crucified  Messiah.  Of  these  Apostles,  I  would  re- 
mind the  reader,  Thomas  was  one.  Does  not  all  this  throw  a 
little  light  on  his  extraordinary  scepticism  about  the  reality  of 
the  resurrection  ?  For  another  thing  we  must  remember,  that 
Thomas,  like  all  Jews,  had  a  firm  belief  in  the  reality  of  spirits 
and  ghosts,  and  the  possibility  of  their  appearing.  Even  after 
this,  when  Peter  was  delivered  from  prison,  and  came  to  the 
house  of  John,  surnamed  Mark,  the  disciples  said,  "  It  is  his 
angel."  (Acts  xii.  15.)  May  we  not  therefore  conceive  it  possible 
that  Thomas,  overwhelmed  and  confounded  at  the  astounding 
news  that  Christ  had  been  seen,  would  cling,  with  his  character- 
istic incredulity,  to  the  notion  that  the  Apostles  had  only  seen 
Christ's  spirit  or  ghost  ?  That  they  had  seen  something  he  did  not 
dispute,  but  that  what  they  had  seen  was  the  real  material  body 
of  his  Lord,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  believe.  These 
things  are  worth  considering.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  excuse  or 
defend  Thomas.  I  only  remind  those  who  condemn  him  whole- 
sale, and  can  find  no  words  strong  enough  to  use  about  his  un- 
belief, that  it  was  not  quite  so  easy  for  a  pious  Jew,  brought 
up  and  trained  as  Thomas  had  been,  to  receive  at  once  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord  as  a  proved  thing,  as  it  may  appear  at 
first  sight  to  an  English  mind. 

Musculus  remarks,  how  extraordinary  the  unbelief  of  Thomas 
seems,  when  we  consider  that  he  not  only  had  heard  our  Lord 
frequently  foretell  His  resurrection,  but  had  actually  within  a 
few  weeks  seen  Lazarus  raised  from  the  dead  at  Bethany  1 

Bengel  remarks,  "  No  doubt  Thomas  seemed  to  himself  to  be 


412  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

entertaining  and  expressing  sentiments  altogether  judicious. 
But  unbelief,  while  it  attributes  defects  in  judgment  to  otliers, 
often  itself  discovers  and  betrays  hardness  of  heart,  and  in  that 
hardness  slowness  of  belief." 

26. — [And  after  eight  days  again,  etc.]  This  verse  describes  how 
Jesus  was  graciously  pleased  to  appear  again  to  the  company  of 
the  Apostles,  for  the  express  purpose  of  convincing  and  satisfy- 
ing the  mind  of  Thomas. 

He  came  "  after  eight  days."  That  means  a  week  according 
to  the  Jewish  manner  of  expressing  a  space  of  time,  by  which 
the  first  and  last  days  were  always  reckoned  in,  if  any  part  of 
them  was  employed.  Thus  our  Lord  was  buried  on  Friday  af- 
ternoon and  rose  again  on  Sunday  morning,  and  was  actually 
only  thirty-six  hours  in  the  grave.  But  a  Jew  would  say  that 
He  was  "  three  days  "  buried.  It  thus  appears  that,  both  on  the 
first  and  second  times  when  our  Lord  appeared  to  the  Apostles, 
it  was  a  Sunday.  Poole  remarks  that  we  have  here  the  begin- 
ning of  keeping  holy  the  first  day  of  the  week. 

He  came  when  the  disciples  were  "  within."  That  means  that 
they  were  assembled  in  a  room,  and  probably  in  the  same  house 
where  they  had  assembled  before.  The  conviction  and  reproof 
of  a  weak  disciple  was  a  thing  which  was  mercifully  transacted 
in  private,  and  among  friends.  We  cannot  doubt,  moreover, 
that  at  this  period  the  disciples  would  hardly  dare  to  assemble 
in  the  open  air  anywhere  about  Jerusalem.  The  rumor  that 
they  stole  the  body  of  our  Lord  would  still  be  rife  in  the  city, 
and  they  might  well  feel  the  necessity  of  caution. 

He  came  when  "  Thomas  was  with  them."  That  means  that 
He  timed  His  visit,  so  that  not  one  of  the  Apostles  were  miss- 
ing. He  knew  exactly  who  were  assembled,  and  where  they 
were  assembled,  and  He  ordered  His  appearance  accordingly.  It 
should  be  a  great  comfort  to  believers  to  remember  that  their 
Lord's  eye  is  always  upon  them,  and  that  He  knows  exactly  in 
what  place  and  in  what  company  they  are. 

He  came  "  when  the  doors  were  shut."  That  means  that  He 
appeared  exactly  under  the  same  circumstances  under  which  He 
appeared  a  week  before,  in  an  evening,  when  the  doors  were 
carefully  closed  for  fear  of  the  Jews.  Thus,  as  on  the  previous 
Sunday,  He  suddenly,  without  a  moment's  notice,  stood  in  the 
midst  of  the  assembled  disciples. 

He  came  with  the  same  gracious  salutation  with  which  He 
had  appeared  before.  Once  more,  the  first  word  that  fell  from 
His  lips  is  "  Peace  be  unto  you."  Thomas  was  there.  The  dis- 
ciple who  made  his  emphatic  declaration  of  unbelief,  might 
well  expect  to  hear  some  word  of  rebuke.  But  our  Lord  makes 
no  exception.  He  saw  Thomas,  and  well  knew  all  that  Thomas 
had  said  ;  and  yet  to  him,  as  well  as  to  the  other  ten.  He  onco 
more  says  "  Peace." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  413 

We  should  note  carefully  the  amazing  kindness  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  a  weak  disciple,  and  the  trouble  He  was  pleased 
to  take,  if  I  may  use  such  a  phrase  with  due  reverence,  about 
one  single  soul.  The  unbelief  of  Thomas  was  most  provoking 
and  inexcusable,  and  if  he  had  been  cast  out  of  the  company 
of  disciples  we  could  not  have  said  His  excommunication  was 
undeserved.  But  our  Lord  cares  tenderly  for  this  weak  mem- 
ber of  His  mystical  body,  and  specially  appears  in  order  to  heal 
and  restore  him.  What  a  wonderful  example  He  gives  to  all 
His  people  !  How  kind  we  ought  to  be  to  weak  brethren,  and 
how  ready  to  take  any  pains  and  trouble  if  we  can  only  do  them 
good !  The  Christian  of  modern  times,  who  is  ready  to  excom- 
municate every  one  who  cannot  speak  his  shibboleth,  and  see 
every  point  of  doctrine  and  ceremonial  with  his  eyes, — the 
Christian  who  is  ready  to  turn  away  from  every  brother  who  is 
overtaken  in  a  fault,  as  graceless,  godless,  and  unconverted, — 
Buch  a  Christian  may  flatter  himself  that  he  is  very  zealous  and 
faithful.  But  he  is  a  Christian  who  lias  not  got  the  mind  of 
Christ.  What  Christ  did  for  Thomas,  we  ought  to  be  ready  to 
do  for  others. 

T>et  us  not  forget  that  Thomas  continued  a  whole  week  in 
unbelief  and  doubt,  while  his  brethren  around  him  were  re- 
joicing. We  may  well  believe  that  it  was  not  a  very  happy 
week  with  him.  He  that  sows  a  short  period  of  scepticism 
often  reaps  a  long  period  of  trouble. 

Rupertus,  almost  alone,  maintains  that  the  second  appearance 
of  our  Lord,  for  the  special  benefit  of  Thomas,  was  in  Galilee, 
in  Nazareth,  at  the  house  of  Mary.  But  the  vast  majority  of 
commentators  think  that  it  was  at  Jerusalem. 

Musculus  observes  how  kind  and  brotherly  was  the  dealing 
of  the  ten  Apostles  with  Thomas.  They  did  not  excommuni- 
cate him,  and  cast  him  out  of  their  society  for  his  unbelief,  but 
allowed  him  to  assemble  with  them  as  before. 

RoUock  observes,"The  loving  dealing  of  the  Lord  with  Thomas 
teaches  us  this  comfortable  lesson.  The  Lord  marks  not  nar- 
rowly the  infirmities  and  wants  that  are  in  His  own.  He  looks 
not  narrowly  to  the  weakness  of  their  faith,  to  the  imperfec- 
tions and  wants  of  their  prayers  and  requests,  for  their  prayers 
are  full  of  imperfections,  He  oversees  their  infirmities.  He  mis- 
knows  the  corruption  wherein  their  faith  and  prayers  and  de- 
sires are  involved,  and  hath  a  regard  to  their  faith,  albeit  they 
have  it  in  small  measure." 

2,7.— [TJien  saith  He  to  Thomas,  etc.']  The  verse  before  us  is  a 
wonderful  instance  of  Christ's  pitifulness  and  condescension. 
To  come  into  the  world  at  all,  and  take  a  body  on  Him, — to  al- 
low that  body  to  be  scourged,  crowned  with  thorns,  nailed  to 
the  cross,  and  laid  in  the  grave, — all  this,  beyond  doubt,  was 
astonishing  condescension.  But  when  the  victory  over  sin  and 
death  was  won,  and  He  had  taken  on  Him  His  resurrection 


4,14:  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

body,  to  come  to  a  doubting,  sceptical  disciple,  and  bid  him 
touch.  Him,  put  his  finger  into  the  nail-prints  on  His  hands,  and 
put  his  hand  into  the  great  wound  in  His  side, — all  this  was  a 
condescension  which  we  can  never  sufficiently  admire  and 
adore. 

The  last  sentence  of  the  verse  is  a  rebuke  and  an  exhorta- 
tion at  the  same  time.  It  would  have  been  more  literally  ren- 
dered, "  Be  not  an  unbeliever,  but  a  believer."  It  is  not  merely 
a  reproof  to  Thomas  for  his  scepticism  on  this  particular  occa- 
sion, but  an  urgent  counsel  to  be  of  a  more  believing  turn  of 
mind  for  time  to  come. — "  Shake  off  this  habit  of  doubting, 
questioning,  and  discrediting  every  one.  Give  up  thine  unbe- 
lieving disposition.  Become  more  willing  to  believe  and  trust, 
and  give  credit  to  testimony  for  time  to  come." — No  doubt  the 
primary  object  of  the  sentence  was  to  correct  and  chastise 
Thomas  for  his  sceptical  declaration  on  the  preceding  Sunday. 
But  I  believe  our  Lord  had  in  view  the  further  object  of  cor- 
recting Thomas's  whole  character,  and  directing  his  attention 
to  his  besetting  sin.  How  many  there  are  among  us  who  ought 
to  take  to  themselves  our  Lord's  words  1  How  faithless  we 
often  are,  and  how  slow  to  believe  ! 

Let  us  note  here,  as  already  remarked,  that  the  wounds  on 
our  Lord's  body  must  have  been  still  open,  from  the  language 
He  addresses  to  Thomas,  and  that  the  wound  in  His  side  must 
have  been  a  very  large  wound,  from  His  telling  Thomas  to 
thrust  in  his  hand. 

Let  us  not  fail  to  observe  our  Lord's  perfect  knowledge  of 
all  that  passed  on  the  previous  Sunday,  of  all  that  the  Apostles 
had  said,  and  of  the  sceptical  declaration  which  Thomas  had 
made.  Such  knowledge  showed  clearly  that  He  was  God  and 
not  man.  He  hears  every  idle  word  that  we  say,  and  notes  all 
our  conversation. 

Let  us  observe  our  Lord's  thorough  acquaintance  with  the 
special  faults  and  besetting  sins  of  every  one  of  His  people. 
He  saw  that  Thomas's  defect  was  his  unbelief,  and  so  He  says, 
"  Be  not  faithless,  but  believing." 

28. — [And  Thomas. ..my  Lord. ..my  God.]  The  famous  answer  of 
Thomas,  contained  in  this  verse,  is  precisely  the  short  interjec- 
tional  exclamation  of  a  man  taken  by  surprise,  convinced  at 
once  of  his  own  grievous  mistake,  and  so  overwhelmed  by  a 
variety  of  feelings  that  he  is  unable  for  the  moment  to  use 
many  words.  It  is  the  language  of  amazement,  delight,  re- 
pentance, faith  and  adoration,  all  combined  in  one  sentence. 

Whether  it  is  to  be  taken  in  the  third  person,  as  an  exclama- 
tion, "  It  is  my  Lord  and  my  God !  "  or  in  the  second  person, 
as  an  adoring,  loving,  believing  address,  "  Thou  art  my  Lord 
and  my  God,"  is  an  open  question  which  the  original  GreeK 
does  not  settle.  If  I  must  give  an  opinion,  I  prefer  the  second 
person.    But  in  either  case  the  sense  is  good. 


JOHN,  CUAP.  XX.  4X5 

The  text  before  us  is  one  of  those  which  are  justly  quoted, 
as  an  unanswerable  proof  of  the  divinity  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  He  is  called  "  God  "  in  the  presence  of  ten  witnesses, 
and  He  accepts  the  language,  and  does  not  say  one  word  to  re- 
prove the  person  who  uses  it.  Unless  a  person  is  prepared  to 
deny  the  inspiration  of  St.  John's  Gospel  generally,  or  the  gen- 
uineness and  correctness  of  this  text  in  particular,  it  is  hard  to 
see  how  the  force  of  the  sentence  in  favor  of  Christ's  divinity 
can  be  evaded.  The  suggestion  of  Theodoras  of  Mopsuestia, 
and  some  modern  Socinians,  that  Thomas  only  used  a  kind  of 
oath  or  exclamation,  which  he  did  not  mean  to  apply  to  Christ 
Himself,  is  utterly  untenable,  and  almost  profane.  It  is  un- 
reasonable to  suppose  that  a  pious  Jew,  like  Thomas,  would 
take  God's  name  in  vain  and  break  the  third  commandment, 
however  much  he  might  be  surprised.  Moreover,  there  is  no 
proof  whatever,  although  a  careless  Greek,  Romau,  or  English- 
man, might  say  "  My  God,"  when  suddenly  taken  by  surprise, 
that  any  such  expression  was  in  use  among  the  Jews.  In  short 
there  is,  in  my  judgment,  but  one  way  of  regarding  the  text, 
if  we  treat  it  honestly.  It  is  an  incontrovertible  proof  that 
Thomas  looked  on  Christ  as  God,  and  addressed  Him  to  His  face 
as  God,  and  that  our  Lord  made  no  objection,  and  did  not  re- 
prove him. 

Bullinger  remarks  how  emphatically  Thomas  says, "  My  Lord 
and  MY  God,"  showing  the  reality  of  his  faith. 

Rollock  says,  "  If  we  compare  Thomas  with  the  other  Apos- 
tles, we  shall  see  that  as  he  surpassed  them  all  in  unbelief,  so 
he  surpassed  them  far  in  believing  and  confessing  the  Lord." 
But  he  adds,  "  Jesus  praises  not  Thomas  for  his  faith,  because 
he  tied  his  faith  to  his  senses.  He  calls  him  not  blessed  for  it, 
but  pronounces  them  blessed  who  believe  without  seeing." 

Whether,  after  all,  Thomas  did  actually  touch  our  Lord's 
wounds,  as  he  was  told  to  do,  is  an  open  question,  which  we 
have  no  means  of  deciding.  "There  is  certainly,  as  Augustine 
observes,  no  proof  that  he  did,  and  his  exclamation  reads  as  if 
it  was  sudden  and  immediate,  and  not  the  result  of  examina- 
tion and  deliberation.  May  we  not  well  believe  that  the  dis- 
covery of  our  Lord's  perfect  acquaintance  ^with  every  word 
that  he  had  said  on  the  previous  Sunday,  combined  with  the 
evidence  of  his  own  eyes  that  he  saw  before  him  a  material 
body,  and  not  a  spirit,  would  be  enough  to  convince  him  ?  The 
question  is  an  open  one,  and  every  reader  must  form  his  own 
opinion  about  it.  We  are  neither  told  that  Thomas  did  touch 
our  Lord,  nor  yet  that  he  did  not.  Certainly  our  Lord  says  in 
the  next  verse,  "  Because  thou  hast  seen  Me,  thou  hast  be- 
lieved." 

29. — [Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thomas,  etc.']  This  verse  contains  a 
grave  and  solemn  rebuke  to  Thomas,  and  a  warning  to  all  who 
are  disposed  to  demand  an  excessive  amount  of  evidence  before 
ihej  believe.    The  first  part  of  our  Lord's  words   would  be 


416  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

translated  more  literally,  "  Because  tliou  hast  seen  Me,  Tliom- 
as,  thou  hast  believed."  The  whole  sentence  may  be  thus  par- 
aphrased and  expounded.  "  Thomas,  thou  hast  at  last  believed 
my  resurrection,  because  thou  hast  seen  Me  with  thine  own 
eyes,  and  touclied  Me  with  thine  own  hands.  It  is  well.  But 
it  would  have  been  far  better  if  thou  hadst  believed  a  week 
ago,  on  the  testimony  of  thy  ten  brethren,  and  not  waited  to 
see  Me.  Remember  from  henceforth,  that  in  my  kingdom 
they  are  more  blessed  and  honorable  who  believe  on  good  tes- 
timony, without  seeing,  than  those  who  insist  first  on  seeing, 
before  they  believe." 

The  sentence  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet 
have  believed,"  would  be  rendered  literally,  "  Blessed  are 
those  persons  not  having  seen  and  having  believed," — consist- 
ing, as  it  does,  of  two  participles  connected  with  "  blessed." 
The  idea  that  our  Lord  had  in  view  any  particular  person,  such 
as  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  the  prophets,  and,  generally,  the 
Old  Testament  saints,  appears  to  me  utterly  untenable.  I  be- 
lieve our  Lord  had  in  view  no  individual  case,  but  only  laid 
down  a  great  general  principle  which  Thomas  had  forgotten, 
as  a  lesson  to  him  and  the  whole  Church  in  every  age.  The 
construction  of  the  Greek  language  allows  us  to  regard  the 
past  tense  as  a  present,  in  such  a  sentence  as  this.  (See  Jelf's 
Greek  Grammar,  401,  403  ;  and  Farrar's  Greek  Syntax,  130.) 

Gregory  well  says,  "  The  incredulity  of  Thomas  has  done  us 
more  good  than  the  faith  of  Mary."  He  means  that  if  Thomas 
had  never  doubted,  we  should  not  have  had  such  full  proof 
that  Christ  rose  from  the  dead. 

The  principle  contained  in  the  sentence  before  us,  is  one  of 
vast  importance  in  every  age,  and  specially  in  our  own.  In  a 
day  of  scepticism,  free  inquiry  and  rationalism,  so-called,  when 
hundreds  are  continually  railing  against  creeds,  and  dogma- 
tism, and  priestcraft,  the  sentence  deserves  close  attention  and 
consideration.  Nothing  is  more  common  now-a-days  than  to 
hear  people  say,  that  they  "  decline  to  believe  tilings  above 
their  reason,  that  they  cannot  believe  what  they  cannot  entire- 
ly understand  in  religion,  that  they  must  see  everything  clearly 
before  they  can  believe."  Such  talk  as  this  sounds  very  fine, 
and  is  very  taking  with  young  persons  and  superficially  edu- 
cated people,  because  it  supplies  a  convenient  reason  for  neg- 
lecting vital  religion  altogether.  But  it  is  a  style  of  talking 
which  shows  a  mind  either  proud,  or  foolish,  or  inconsistent. 

In  matters  of  science,  what  sensible  man  does  not  know  that 
we  must  begin  by  believing  much  which  we  do  not  under- 
stand, taking  many  positions  on  trust,  and  accepting  many 
things  on  the  testimony  of  others  ?  Even  in  the  most  exact 
science  the  scholar  must  begin  with  axioms  and  postulates. 
Faith  and  trust  in  our  teachers  is  the  very  first  condition  of  ac- 
quiring knowledge.     He  that  begins  his  studies  by  saying  "  I 


JOHN,  CHAT.  XX.  4.^^ 

Bhall  not  believe  anything  which  I  do  not  see  clearly  demon 
etrated  from  the  very  lirst,"  will  make  very  little  progress. 

In  the  daily  business  of  life,  what  sensible  man  does  not 
know  that  we  take  many  important  steps  on  no  other  ground 
than  the  testimony  of  others  V  Parents  send  sons  to  Australia, 
New  Zealand,  China,  and  India,  without  ever  having  seen 
these  countries,  in  faith  that  the  report  about  them  is  depend- 
able and  true.  Probability,  in  fact,  is  the  only  guide  of  most 
parts  of  our  life. 

In  the  face  of  such  facts  as  these,  where  is  the  common  sense 
of  saying,  as  many  rationalists  and  sceptics  now  do,  that  in 
such  a  mysterious  matter  as  the  concern  of  our  souls,  we  ought 
to  believe  nothing  that  we  do  not  see,  and  ought  to  receive 
nothing  as  true  which  will  not  admit  of  mathematical  demon 
Btration  ? — Christianity  does  not  at  all  refuse  to  appeal  to  our 
intellects,  and  does  not  require  of  us  a  blind,  unreasoning  faith. 
But  Christianity  does  ask  us  to  begin  by  believing  many  things 
that  are  above  our  reason,  and  promises  that,  so  beginning,  we 
shall  have  more  light  and  see  all  things  clearly. — The  would- 
be  wise  man  of  modern  times  says,  "1  dislike  any  religion 
which  contains  any  mystery.  1  must  first  see,  and  then  I  will 
believe."  Christianity  replies,  "You  cannot  avoid  mystery, 
unless  you  go  out  of  the  world.  You  are  only  asked  to  do  with 
religion  what  you  are  always  doing  with  science.  You  must 
first  believe  and  then  you  will  see." — The  cry  of  the  modern 
sceptic  is,  '*  If  1  could  see  I  would  believe."  The  answer  of 
the  Christian  ought  to  be,  "  If  you  would  only  believe,  and 
humbly  ask  for  Divine  teaching,  you  would  soon  see." 

The  plain  truth  is  that  modern  freethinkers  are  like  the 
Jews,  who  were  always  demanding  some  visible  sign  that  our 
Lord  was  the  Messiah,  and  pretended  that  they  would  believ^e 
if  they  only  saw  it.  Just  in  the  same  way  there  are  hundreds 
of  people  in  this  latter  age  of  the  world,  who  tell  us  they  can 
believe  nothing  which  is  above  their  reason,  and  that  they 
want  stronger  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  and  fact 
of  Christianity  than  probability.  Like  Thomas  they  must  first 
see  before  they  believe. — But  what  an  extraordinary  fact  it  is 
that  the  very  men  who  say  all  this,  are  continually  acting  all 
their  lives  on  no  better  evidence  than  probability  !  They  are 
continually  doing  things  on  no  other  ground  than  the  report  of 
others,  and  their  own  belief  that  this  report  is  probably  true. 
The  very  principle  on  which  they  are  incessantly  acting,  in  the 
affairs  of  their  bodies,  their  families,  and  their  money,  is  the 
principle  on  which  they  refuse  to  act  in  the  affairs  of  their 
souls  1  In  the  things  of  this  world  they  believe  all  sorts  of 
things  which  they  have  not  seen,  and  only  know  to  be  proba 
ble,  and  act  on  their  belief.  In  the  things  of  the  eternal  world 
they  say  they  can  believe  nothing  which  they  do  not  see,  and 
refuse  the  argument  of  probability  altogether.  Never,  in  fact, 
was  there  anything  so  unreasonable  and  inconsistent  as  ration 

18* 


418  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

alism,  so  called  1  No  wonder  that  our  Lord  laid  down,  for  the 
benefit  of  Thomas  and  the  whole  Church,  that  mighty  principle, 
•*  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed," 

The  remarks  of  Richard  Cecil,  on  the  subject  before  us,  are 
so  apposite,  that  I  make  no  apology  for  quoting  them.  They 
will  be  found  in  his  "  Original  Thoughts."  (Vol.  i.,  p.  440— 
442.) 

"  When  a  man  doubts,  after  proper  evidence,  3od  calls  it 
folly.  When  we  complain  and  want  more  evidence,  the  fault 
is  in  us  and  not  in  God's  dispensations.  A  humble  spirit  will 
accept  a  glimmering  light,  and  not  refuse  to  walk  because  it 
has  not  the  noonday  sun.  Incredulity,  as  to  divine  truth,  has 
its  root  in  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  and  is  accompanied  by 
much  rashness  and  ignorance.  It  presumes  to  understand  and 
comprehend  everything  that  is  proposed  to  it.  The  incred- 
ulous man  calls  for  demonstration.  The  feeble  creature,  who 
cannot  explain  the  nature  of  his  own  formation,  would  have 
things  made  out  as  plain  as  that  '  two  and  two  make  four.' 
The  true  believer  receives  the  truths  of  the  Bible  as  he  re- 
ceives the  kingdom  of  heaven, — with  the  simplicity  of  a  little 
child."— 

— "  Let  us  beware  of  the  danger  of  following  our  own  im 
aginations.  A  man  may  make  one  demand  after  another,  till, 
at  last,  nothing  will  satisfy  him  ;  and  the  next  step  is,  that, 
when  he  will  not  be  content  with  what  God  shows  him,  ho 
shall  be  left  in  darkness  and  perplexity. — Consider  the  nature 
of  believing ;  it  is  not  like  believing  that  two  and  two  make 
four.  Do  not  men  believe  on  probability  in  other  things? 
God  has  given  all  the  evidence  that  man  requires  or  needs  ; 
and  if  in  a  right  mind,  we  shall  thank  God  for  the  dispensation 
of  light  we  have,  willing  to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight. 
If  we  do  not  get  on  in  this  way,  we  shall  not  get  on  at  all. 
Divine  justice  punishes  incredulity  by  credulity  ;  by  giving 
up  the  unbelieving  to  the  dominion  and  bondage  of  strong 
delusions.  When  men  get  into  a  high  mind  and  an  unbe- 
lieving spirit,  and  reject  the  truth,  God  punishes  them  by  letting 
them  '  believe  a  lie.'  Let  us  take  heed  how  we  say,  like 
Thomas,  we  will  not  walk  at  all  without  such  light  as  we  think 
proper." 

The  opinion  expressed  by  Dean  Stanley,  following  Dr.  Ar- 
nold (in  Smith's  "  Bible  Dictionary,"  Article  "  Thomas  "),  that 
Thomas  is  a  remarkable  example  of  "  free  inquiry  combined 
with  fervent  belief,"  is  one  which  I  only  mention  in  order  to 
express  my  dissent  f lom  it. — I  see  nothing  like  "  free  inquiry  " 
in  this  Apostle.  I  read  of  no  question  he  asked  of  his  breth- 
ren. I  see  no  trace  of  any  willingness  to  investigate,  sift, 
weigh,  and  consider  the  testimony  which  they  bore.  I  dis- 
cover no  readiness  to  go  to  the  grave,  to  examine  the  linen 
clothes,  to  talk  with  Mary  Magdalene,  to  question  the  two  dis- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  4j^9 

ciples  who  journeyed  to  Emmaus,  All  this  would  have  been 
"  free  inquiry."  But  I  see  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  only  see  a 
dull,  obstinate,  desponding  declaration  that,  whatever  his  ten 
friends  may  say,  he  will  not  believe  till  he  sees.  This  cannot 
surely  deserve  the  name  of  "  free  inquiry  !  " — As  to  the  "  fer- 
vent belief"  of  Thomas,  no  doubt,  at  last,  when  his  most  com- 
passionate Saviour  almost  forced  conviction  on  him,  in  pity  for 
his  dulness,  and  made  unbelief  quite  impossible,  he  made  a 
most  beautiful  confession  of  faith.  But  it  was  a  confession, 
we  must  remember,  that  came  out  only  at  the  last  moment,  and 
was  extracted,  as  it  were,  by  a  miracle  of  kindness.  Above 
all,  beautiful  as  it  was,  it  did  not  prevent  his  gracious  Master 
speaking  words  of  grave  and  solemn  rebuke.  Beyond  doubt, 
Thomas  lay  down  that  night  a  pardoned  and  forgiven  man, — a 
man  raised  from  faithlessness  to  strong  faith.  But  we  must 
not  forget  that  he  was  not  praised  and  commended,  though 
raised,  convinced,  and  pardoned.  If  words  mean  anything,  he 
had  received  a  reproof,  and  one  that  I  doubt  not  he  felt  deeply. 
To  me  therefore  it  appears  that,  to  represent  him  as  an  exam- 
ple of  "  free  inquiry  combined  with  fervent  belief,"  is  an  en- 
tire mistake,  and  a  misapprehension  both  of  his  character  and 
of  the  whole  drift  of  the  remarkable  narrative  of  this  passage. 

If,  as  I  believe,  St.  Mark's  remarkable  words  apply  to  this 
appearance  of  our  Lord  for  the  special  benefit  of  Thomas,  it  is 
impossible  to  regard  our  Lord's  language  to  Thomas  in  any 
other  sense  than  that  of  rebuke.  St.  Mark  says,  "  He  appeared 
unto  the  eleven  as  they  sat  at  meat,  and  upbraided  them  with 
their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,  because  they  believed  not 
them  which  had  seen  Him  after  He  was  risen."  (Mark  xvi.  14.) 
Most  commentators  certainly  take  this  view.  Chrysostom  says 
that  Thomas  received  a  "  sharp  rebuke."  ' 

80,  31. — [And  many  other  signs,  etc.]  The  two  last  verses  in  this 
chapter  contain  one  of  those  parenthetical  comments,  or  glosses, 
which  are  so  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  It  must  be 
admitted  that  they  seem  to  break  the  thread  of  the  narrative, 
and  come  in  with  a  rather  startling  effect.  We  need  not,  there- 
fore, wonder  that  the  right  meaning  of  the  two  verses  has  long 
been  a  subject  of  dispute. 

(a)  Some  think,  as  Calvin,  Ecolampadius,  Brentius,  Poole, 
Bollock,  Lampe,  Hengstenberg,  Pearce,  and  Alford,  that  St, 
John  refers  to  the  whole  history  of  Christ's  ministry,  and  is 
comparing  his  own  Gospel  with  the  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  Luke.  They  would  paraphrase  the  two  verses  in  the  fol- 
lowing way :  — "  Jesus  did  many  other  miracles  during  His 
ministry,  under  the  eyes  of  His  disciples,  which  are  not  recorded 
in  this  Gospel  of  mine,  though  they  are  recorded  in  the  other 
three.  But  those  few  which  are  recorded  in  this,  my  Gospel, 
are  recorded  in  order  that  you  who  read  it  may  be  convinced 
that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  the  Christ  of  God,  and  that  believing 
on  Him  you  may  have  eternal  life  through  His  name."— It  is  a 


420  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

heavy  obj  ection  to  this  interpretation,  that  the  two  verses,  on 
this  view,  appear  to  come  in  rather  abruptly,  and  without  much 
connection  with  what  goes  either  before  or  after.  In  short,  it  is 
not  very  easy  to  explain  why  they  come  in  here  at  all. — More- 
over, it  is  not  very  easy  to  see  the  drift  of  the  expression, 
"  signs  in  presence  of  His  disciples,"  considering  that  many  of 
our  Lord's  greatest  miracles  were  worked  before  people  who 
were  not  disciples  at  all. — Furthermore,  it  is  not  very  clear 
what  St.  John  can  mean  by  saying  "  other"  signs.  That  word 
"  other"  seems  to  point  to  miracles  just  performed,  yet  there 
was  no  special  miracle  performed  at  this  particular,  beyond,  of 
course,  our  Lord's  miraculous  appearances. 

(6)  Others,  as  Chrysostom,  Theophylact,  Rupertus,  Beza,  Bul- 
linger,  Calovius,  Musculus,  Gerhard,  Ferus,  Toletus,  Maldo- 
natus,  Henry,  Tholuck,  Scott,  Bloomfield,  and  Olshausen,  think 
that  St.  John  writes  these  two  verses  with  a  special  reference 
to  the  wDndrous  signs  and  evidences  which  the  Lord  had  just 
given  to  the  disciples  of  His  own  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
They  would  paraphrase  the  two  verses  in  this  way  : — "  Many 
other  wondrous  proofs  did  the  Lord  give  to  the  Apostles  of  His  • 
own  resurrection,  which  are  not  written  down  in  this  (iospel, 
though  they  are  written  in  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  But 
the  three  appearances  which  I  have  narrated,  are  written  down 
in  order  to  convince  you  that  Jesus  is  the  true  Messiah,  the 
Christ  of  God,  and  that,  believing  this  firmly,  you  may  have 
eternal  life  through  faith  in  His  name." — According  to  this  view 
the  two  verses  refer  to  nothing  but  this  twentieth  chapter,  and 
are  a  parenthetical  comment  on  it.  It  is  as  though  John  would 
say,  "  Do  not  suppose  that  these  three  appearances  of  Christ 
are  the  only  wondrous  signs  and  proofs  of  His  resurrection. 
There  are  others  which  you  will  iind  recorded  in  the  other 
three  Gospels.  But  I  have  related  these  three  in  order  to  con- 
firm your  faith,  and  to  show  you  that  in  believing  on  a  risen 
Saviour  you  are  resting  on  solid  ground." 

Of  the  two  views  I  prefer  the  second  one,  as  involving  the 
fewest  diflBculties.  It  is  more  probable,  considering  John's 
peculiar  style  of  writing,  to  suppose  that  he  makes  a  short 
parenthetical  remark  about  a  single  chapter,  than  to  suppose 
that  he  makes  it  about  the  whole  of  his  Gospel.  Above  all  this 
second  view  gets  over  the  hnavy  objection  that,  after  bringing 
his  whole  Gospel  to  a  conclusion  by  a  general  remark  on  the 
whole  of  it  as  compared  to  the  other  three  Gospels,  St.  John 
seems  to  begin  again  in  the  twenty-first  chapter,  and  to  write 
a  postscript  or  appendix. — In  short  the  common  theory,  that 
these  two  verses  apply  to  the  whole  Gospel,  makes  St.  John 
finish  his  history,  lay  down  his  pen,  complete  his  work,  and 
then  suddenly  take  up  his  pen  again,  and  add  the  twenty-first 
chapter  as  a  kind  of  after-thought.  To  say  the  least,  this  is 
an  undignified,  not  to  say  rather  irreverent,  view  of  the  com- 
position of  an  inspired  writer  ! — The  other  theory,  or  the  theory 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XX.  421 

which  strictly  confines  the  application  of  the  two  concluding 
yerses  of  the  twentieth  chapter  to  the  matter  contained  in  that 
chapter,  viz.,  the  signs  which  our  Lord  gave  of  His  resurrec- 
tion, is  entirely  in  keeping  with  St.  John's  style  of  writing  liis 
Gospel.  He  simply  remarks  parenthetically  that  there  are 
other  proofs  of  Christ's  resurrection,  which  are  to  be  found  in 
the  other  Gospels,  and  that  he  has  only  written  down  such  ac- 
counts as  he  was  guided  by  the  Spirit  to  consider  most  calcu- 
lated to  stablish  the  faith  of  his  readers. 

I  frankly  confess  that  the  passage  appears  to  come  in  abrupt- 
ly under  any  view,  and  I  cannot  expect  that  all  will  adopt  the 
explanation  which  I  have  advocated.  If  the  Gospel  of  St. 
John  had  ended  with  this  twentieth  chapter,  I  might  perhaps 
have  acquiesced  in  the  theory  that  the  two  verses  were  meant 
to  form  a  brief  concluding  remark  about  the  whole  of  the 
Evangelist's  work  ;  and  a  brief  admission  of  the  fact  that  he 
passed  over  many  miracles  recorded  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and 
Luke.  But  I  cannot  acquiesce  in  the  theory,  when  I  see  that 
St.  John  goes  on  to  write  the  twenty-first  chapter.  The  ex- 
istence of  that  chapter  alone  satisfies  me  that,  in  the  two  verses 
before  us,  St.  John  is  only  speaking  of  the  signs  of  Christ's 
resurrection,  which  he  has  supplied,  and  is  admitting  that  there 
are  others  in  the  other  Gospels.  As  a  rule,  moreover,  when  I 
find  a  parenthetical  comment  or  gloss  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  I 
prefer  to  apply  it  to  the  immediate  subject  of  which  he  is 
speaking.  It  is  the  habit  of  this  Evangelist  to  turn  aside  for 
a  moment,  and  make  a  short  explanatory  remark  ;  and  then  to 
take  up  the  thread  again,  and  go  on  with  his  history.  Of  this 
habit,  I  think  the  two  verses  before  us  are  an  example.  When 
the  Holy  Ghost  plenarily  inspired  the  writer  of  any  Book  of 
Scripture,  both  as  to  his  faith  and  his  words,  He  did  not  pre- 
vent him  writing  in  his  own  peculiar  style. 

Whatever  view  we  may  take  of  the  matter  in  dispute  about 
these  two  verses,  there  are  things  in  them  which  are  abundant- 
ly clear  and  ought  never  to  be  forgotten.  For  one  thing,  St. 
John  generously  recognizes  the  existence  of  other  books  beside 
his  own,  and  disclaims  the  idea  of  his  own  Gospel  being  the 
only  one  which  Christians  ought  to  read.  Happy  is  that  author 
who  can  humbly  say,  "  My  book  does  not  contain  everything 
about  the  subject  it  handles.  There  are  other  books  about  it. 
Read  them." — For  another  thing,  we  should  note  the  grand  end 
and  object  for  which  this  and  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment were  written.  They  were  written  to  glorify  Christ,  to 
make  us  believe  on  Him  as  the  only  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  to 
lead  us  to  eternal  life  through  faith  in  His  name. 

It  is  interesting  to  remember  that  ecclesiastical  historians 
assign  to  Thomas  the  honor  of  being  the  Apostle  who  first 
preached  the  Gospel  in  India  ;  and  they  also  say  that  he  there 
suffered  martyrdom.      A   society  of  Christians  in  MalaT^ar  is 


422 


EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


Baid  to  be  still  known  by  bis  name.     Unbappily,  tbe  truth  of 
all  this  is  very  doubtful,  and  rests  on  a  very  sandy  foundation. 


JOHN  XXI.  1—14. 


1  After  these  things  Jesus  she-wed 
himself  again  to  the  disciples  at  the 
sea  of  Tiberias;  and  on  this  wise 
shewed  he  himself. 

2  There  were  together  Simon  Pe- 
ter, and  Thomas  called  Didymus, 
and  Nathanael  of  Cana  in  Galilee, 
and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  two 
other  of  his  disciples. 

3  Simon  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I 
go  a  fishing.  They  say  uuto  him, 
We  also  go  with  thee.  They  went 
forth,  and  entered  into  a  ship  im- 
mediately ;  and  that  night  they 
caught  nothing. 

4  But  when  the  morning  was  now 
come,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore  :  but 
the  disciples  knew  not  that  it  was 
Jesus. 

5  Then  Jesus  saith  unto  them. 
Children,  have  ye  any  meat?  they 
answered  him,  No. 

6  And  he  said  unto  them.  Cast  the 
1^  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  and 
ye  shall  find.  They  cast  therefore, 
and  now  they  were  not  able  to  draw 
it  for  the  multitude  of  fishes. 

7  Therefore  that  disciple  whom 
Jesus  loved  saith  unto  Peter,  iLis 
the  Lord.    Now  when  Simon  Peter 


heard  that  it  was  the  Lord,  he  girt 
Ms  fisher's  coat  unto  Mm  (for  he  was 
naked),  and  did  cast  himself  into  the 
sea. 

8  And  the  other  disciples  came  in 
a  little  ship  (for  they  were  not  far 
from  land,  but  as  it  were  two  hun- 
dred cubits) ;  dragging  the  net  with 
fishes. 

9  As  soon  then  as  they  were  come 
to  land,  they  saw  a  fire  of  coals  there, 
and  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread. 

10  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Bring 
of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  caught. 

11  Simon  Peter  went  up,  and  drew 
the  net  to  land  full  of  great  fishes, 
an  hundred  and  fifty  and  three  :  and 
for  all  there  were  so  many,  yet  was 
not  the  net  broken. 

12  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  CpDoe 
ajid  dine.  And  none  of  the  disciples 
durst  ask  him.  Who  art  thou  ?  know- 
ing that  it  was  the  Lord. 

13  Jesus  then  cometh,  andtaketh 
bread,  and  giveth  them,  and  fish 
likewise. 

14  This  is  now  the  third  time  that 
Jesus  shewed  himself  to  his  dis- 
ciples, after  that  he  was  risen  from 
the  dead. 


The  appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  after  His 
resurrection,  described  in  these  verses,  is  a  deeply  inter- 
esting portion  of  the  Gospel  history.  The  circum- 
stances attending  it  have  always  been  regarded  as  liiglily 
allegorical  and  figurative,  in  every  age  of  the  Church. 
It  may,  however,  be  justly  doubted  whether  commenta- 
tors and  interpreters  have  not  gone  too  far  in  this  direc- 
tion. It  is  quite  possible  to  spiritualize  and  filter  away 
the  narratives  of  the  Gospels,  until  we  completely  lose 
eight  of  the  plain  meaning  of  words.  In  the  present 
case  we  shall  find  it  wise  to  confine  ourselves  to  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  423 

great,  simple  lessons,  which  the  passage  undoubtedly 
contains. 

We  should  observe,  for  one  thing,  in  these  verses, 
the  poverty  of  the  first  disciples  of  Christ.  We  find 
them  working  with  their  own  hands,  in  order  to  supply 
their  temporal  wants,  and  working  at  one  of  the  hum- 
blest of  callings, — the  calling  of  a  fisherman.  Silver 
and  gold  they  had  none,  lands  and  revenues  they  had 
none,  and  therefore  they  were  not  ashamed  to  return  to 
the  business  to  which  they  had,  most  of  them,  been 
trained.  Striking  is  the  fact,  that  some  of  the  seven 
here  named  were  fishing,  when  our  Lord  first  called 
them  to  be  Apostles,  and  again  fishing,  when  He  ap- 
peared to  them  almost  the  last  time.  We  need  not 
doubt  that  to  the  minds  of  Peter,  James,  and  John,  the 
coincidence  would  come  home  with  peculiar  power. 

The  poverty  of  the  Apostles  goes  far  to  prove  the 
divine  origin  of  Christianity.  These  very  men  who 
toiled  all  night  in  a  boat,  dragging  about  a  cold  wet 
net,  and  taking  nothing, — these  very  men  who  found  it 
necessary  to  work  hard  in  order  that  they  might  eat, — 
these  very  men  were  some  of  the  first  founders  of  the 
mighty  Church  of  Christ,  which  has  now  overspread 
one-third  of  the  globe.  These  were  they  who  went 
forth  from  an  obscure  corner  of  the  earth,  and  turned 
the  world  upside  down.  These  were  the  unlearned  and 
ignorant  men,  who  boldly  confronted  the  subtle  systems 
of  ancient  philosophy,  and  silenced  its  advocates  by  the 
preaching  of  the  cross.  These  were  the  men  who  at 
Ephesus,  and  Athens,  and  Rome,  emptied  the  heathen 
temples  of  their  worshippers,  and  turned  away  multi- 
tudes to  a  new  and  better  faith.  He  that  can  explain 
these  facts,  except  by  admitting  that  Christianity  came 
down  from  God,  must  be  a  strangely  incredulous  man. 
Reason  and  common  sense  lead  us  to  only  one  conclu- 


424  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

Bion  in  the  matter.  Nothing  can  account  for  the  rise 
and  progress  of  Christianity  but  the  direct  interposition 
of  God. 

We  should  observe,  for  another  thing,  in  these  verses, 
tlie  different  characters  of  different  disciples  of  Christ, 
Once  more,  on  this  deeply  interesting  occasion,  we  see 
Peter  and  John  side  by  side  in  the  same  boat,  and  once 
more,  as  at  the  sepulchre,  we  see  these  two  good  men 
behaving  in  different  ways.  When  Jesus  stood  on  the 
shore,  in  the  dim  twilight  of  the  morning,  .John  was  the 
first  to  perceive  who  it  was,  and  to  say,  "  It  is  the 
Lord ; "  but  Peter  was  the  first  to  spring  into  the  water, 
and  to  struggle  to  get  close  to  his  Master.  In  a  word, 
John  was  the  first  to  see ;  but  Peter  was  the  first  to  act. 
John's  gentle  loving  spirit  was  quickest  to  discern  ;  but 
Peter's  fiery,  impulsive  nature  was  quickest  to  stir  and 
move.  And  yet  both  were  believers,  both  were  true- 
hearted  disciples,  both  loved  the  Lord  in  life,  and  were 
faithful  to  Him  unto  death.  But  their  natural  tempera- 
ments were  not  the  -same. 

Let  us  never  forget  the  practical  lesson  before  us. 
As  long  as  we  live,  let  us  diligently  use  it  in  forming 
our  estimate  of  believers.  Let  us  not  condemn  others 
as  graceless  and  unconverted,  because  they  do  not  see 
the  path  of  duty  from  our  stand-point,  or  feel  things 
exactly  as  we  feel  them.  "  There  are  diversities  of  gifts, 
but  the  same  Spirit."  (1  Cor.  xii.  4.)  The  gifts  of 
God's  children  are  not  bestowed  precisely  in  the  same 
measure  and  degree.  Some  have  more  of  one  gift,  and 
some  have  more  of  another.  Some  have  gifts  which 
shine  more  in  public,  and  some  which  shine  more  in  pri- 
vate. Some  are  more  bright  in  a  passive  life,  and  some 
are  more  bright  in  an  active  one.  Yet  each  and  all  the 
members  of  God's  family,  in  their  own  way  and  in  their 
own  season,  bring  glory  to  God.     Martha  was  "  careful 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  425 

and  troubled  about  much  serving,"  when  Mary  "  sat  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus  and  heard  His  word."  Yet  there  came 
a  day  at  Bethany,  when  Mary  was  crushed  and  pros- 
trated by  overmuch  sorrow,  and  Martha's  faith  shone 
more  brightly  than  her  sister's.  (Luke  x.  39,  40;  John 
xi.  20 — 28.)  Nevertheless  both  were  loved  by  our 
Lord.  The  one  thing  needful  is  to  have  the  grace  of 
the  Spirit,  and  to  love  Christ.  Let  us  love  all  of  whom 
this  can  be  said,  though  they  may  not  see  with  our  eyes 
in  everything.  The  Church  of  Christ  needs  servants  of 
all  kinds,  and  instruments  of  every  sort ;  penknives  as 
well  as  swords,  axes  as  well  as  hammers,  chisels  as  well 
as  saws,  Marthas  as  well  as  Marys,  Peters  as  well  as 
Johns.  Let  our  ruling  maxim  be  this,  "  Grace  be  with 
all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.'* 
(Ephes.  vi.  24.) 

"VVe  should  observe,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  the  abun- 
dant evidence  which  Scripture  supplies  of  our  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ''s  resurrection.  Here,  as  in  other  places,  we 
find  an  unanswerable  proof  that  our  Lord  rose  again 
with  a  real  material  body,  and  a  proof  seen  by  seven 
grown-up  men  with  their  own  eyes,  at  one  and  the 
same  time.  We  see  Him  sitting,  talking,  eating,  drink- 
ing, on  the  shore  of  the  lake  of  Galilee,  and  to  all  ap- 
pearance for  a  considerable  time.  The  morning  sun  of 
spring  shines  down  on  the  little  party.  They  are  alone 
by  the  well-known  Galilean  lake,  far  away  from  the 
crowd  and  noise  of  Jerusalem.  In  the  midst  sits  the 
Master,  with  the  nail-prints  in  His  hands, — the  very 
Master  whom  they  had  all  followed  for  three  years,  and 
one  of  them,  at  least,  had  seen  hanging  on  the  cross. 
They  could  not  be  deceived.  Will  any  one  pretend  to 
say  that  stronger  proof  could  be  given  that  Jesus  rose 
from  the  dead?  Can  any  one  imagine  better  evidence 
of  a  fact  ?     That  Peter  was  convinced  and  satisfied  we 


426  EXPOSITOKT  THOUGHTS. 

know.  He  says  himself  to  Cornelius,  We  did  "  eat  and 
drink  with  Him  after  He  rose  from  the  dead."  (Acts  x. 
41.)  Those  who  in  modern  times  say  they  are  not  con- 
vinced, may  as  well  say  that  they  are  determined  not 
to  believe  any  evidence  at  all. 

Let  us  all  thank  God  that  we  have  such  a  cloud  of 
witnesses  to  prove  that  our  Lord  rose  again.  The  resur- 
rection of  Christ  is  the  grand  proof  of  Christ's  divine 
mission.  He  told  the  Jews  they  need  not  believe  He 
was  the  Messiah,  if  He  did  not  rise  again  the  third  day. 
— The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  top-stone  of  the  work 
of  redemption.  It  proved  that  He  finished  the  work  He 
came  to  do,  and,  as  our  Substitute,  had  overcome  the 
grave. — The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  miracle  that  no 
infidel  can  explain  away.  Men  may  carp  and  cavil  at 
Balaam's  ass,  and  Jonah  in  the  whale's  belly,  if  they 
please,  but  till  they  can  prove  that  Christ  did  not  rise 
again  we  need  not  be  moved. — Above  all,  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  is  the  pledge  of  our  own.  As  the  grave 
could  not  detain  the  Head,  so  it  shall  not  detain  the 
members.  Well  may  we  say  with  Peter,  "  Blessed  be 
the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath 
begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."     (1  Peter  i.  3.) 

Notes.    John  xxi.  1 — 14. 

The  last  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel  requires  a  few  prelim- 
inary observations.  Certain  very  objectionable  theories  have 
been  propounded  about  it.  {a)  Some,  as  Grotius,  maintain 
that  the  chapter  was  not  written  by  John  at  all,  that  his  Gos- 
pel ended  with  the  last  verse  of  the  twentieth  chapter,  and 
that  the  twenty-first  chapter  is  the  work  of  another  writer,  per- 
haps one  John,  an  Ephesian  presbyter  !  (p)  Others  do  not  go  so 
far  as  this,  and  yet  maintain  that  the  chapter  must  be  regarded 
as  a  postscript  or  appendix  to  the  Gospel,  and  was  probably 
added,  as  an  afterthought,  by  St.  John  himself,  some  years  af- 
ter the  rest  of  the  Gospel.  The  chief  ground  on  which  these 
theories  are  bailt  is  the  passage  with  which  the  twentieth 
chapter  ends.     Men  tell  us  that  the  two  concluding  verses  of 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  427 

that  chapter  were  evidently  intended  to  finish  and  wind  up 
John's  narrative,  and  that  the  twenty-first  chapter  comes  in 
awkwardly  and  abruptly. 

From  all  these  theories  I  entirely  dissent,  and  repudiate  them 
altogether.  I  see  no  proof  whatever  that  the  two  last  verses 
of  the  twentieth  chapter  were  intended  to  be  a  winding  up  of 
the  whole  Gospel.  To  me  they  appear  to  be  a  characteristic 
comment  of  the  Evangelist,  such  as  he  often  makes,  on  the  ac- 
count he  has  given  in  the  chapter  of  our  Lord's  appearances  to 
the  disciples  after  His  resurrection,  and  nothing  more.  To  me 
it  appears  perfectly  natural  that  he  should  go  on  writing,  and 
give  a  further  account  of  our  Lord's  most  instructive  appear- 
ance at  the  sea  of  Galilee ;  and  I  see  in  the  narrative  no  ab- 
ruptness or  awkward  fitting  whatever.  On  the  contrary,  I  see 
a  peculiar  beauty  in  the  selection  of  the  matter  which  the 
twenty-first  chapter  contains.  It  seems  to  me  a  most  fitting 
conclusion  to  the  whole  narrative  of  the  Gospel,  to  tell  us  our 
Lord's  last  sayings  about  two  such  Apostles  as  Peter  and  John. 
— Concerning  Peter,  it  should  be  remembered  that  none  of  the 
Apostles  had  professed  so  much,  and  yet  fallen  so  sadly  as  he 
had.  John  takes  care  to  tell  us  how  graciously  and  emphat- 
ically Jesus  restores  him  to  his  commission,  and  specially  bids 
him  feed  His  Church,  and  foretells  his  end. — Concerning  John, 
it  should  be  remembered  that  he  had  been  peculiarly  mention- 
ed, as  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.  He  meekly  tells  us  that 
the  only  prediction  about  himself,  if  it  can  be  called  one,  was 
that  his  future  end  was  left  in  obscurity  by  his  Lord.  And 
thus  he  concludes  his  Gospel.  If  any  one  thinks  that  such  a 
chapter  comes  in  awkwardly,  and  is  not  a  fitting  conclusion  to 
John's  narrative  after  the  twentieth  chapter,  I  cannot  agree 
with  him. 

Of  evidence,  whether  external  or  internal,  that  the  theories  I 
have  referred  to  deserve  consideration,  there  is  a  conspicuous 
absence.  There  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  any  trustworthy 
ancient  writer  ever  regarded  the  last  chapter  of  St,  John's  Gos- 
pel, as  less  genuine  and  less  inspired  than  the  rest  of  the  book. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  language  or  style  of  the  chapter,  to 
create  any  suspicion  that  any  other  person  than  John  composed 
it.  Those  who  wish  to  see  this  subject  fully  investigated,  are 
advised  to  study  Wordsworth's  Appendix  to  St.  John's  Gospel, 
in  his  Commentary. 

When  I  add  to  this  statement  the  fact  that,  in  every  age,  the 
■wisest  and  holiest  commentators  have  seen  in  this  chapter  sev- 
eral singularly  deep  and  interesting  types  of  the  history  and 
position  of  Christ's  Church  in  the  world,  I  think  I  shall  have 
said  enough  to  satisfy  many  readers,  that  they  may  approach 
the  last  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel  with  as  much  reverence, 
and  as  much  reasonable  expectation  of  getting  benefit  from  it 
as  any  other  chapter  in  the  book. 


428  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

1,—  [After  these  things.]  This  expression  is  indefinite.  It  only 
means  that  the  appearance  of  our  Lord,  about  to  be  described 
in  this  chapter,  took  place  "  after"  His  appearance  on  the 
eighth  day  following  His  resurrection.  The  time  therefore,  in 
the  verse  before  us,  is  some  day  between  the  eighth  and  the 
fortieth  day,  when  He  ascended  up  into  heaven.  But  what 
precise  day  we  cannot  tell.  One  thing  at  any  rate  we  may  be 
sure  of.  It  was  not  the  Sabbath  day,  or  else  the  disciples 
would  not  have  gone  fishing.  Even  on  the  day  following  the 
crucifixion,  Christ's  disciples  "  rested  according  to  the  com- 
mandment."    (Luke  xxiii.  56.) 

[Jesus  showed  Himself  again.. .disciples.]  A  deep  question 
naturally  rises  out  of  the  expression  before  us.  Where  was 
our  Lord  on  the  days  when  He  did  not  "  manifest  or  show  Him- 
self" to  His  disciples?  It  is  evident  that  He  was  not  with 
them  always,  and  that  He  only  visited  them  at  intervals. 
Where  was  He  then  in  the  mean  time  ? — Not  in  heaven,  we 
may  be  sure,  because  He  had  not  yet  ascended.  But  where 
was  He  on  earth  ?  I  speak  of  course  of  His  human  nature. 
As  God,  He  is  everywhere.  But  where  was  He,  as  a  man? 
This  is  a  mysterious  matter,  and  one  about  which  it  is  useless 
to  speculate.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  our  Lord  was  visi- 
ble, or  invisible,  and  appeared  suddenly  in  one  place  or  another 
place,  and  assumed  one  form  or  another  form,  at  His  own  will, 
after  a  manner  that  we  cannot  understand.  But  it  is  quite 
plain  that,  when  we  read  the  words  in  Acts,  "  being  seen  of 
them  forty  days "  (Acts  i.  o),  we  must  not  suppose  them  to 
mean  that  our  Lord  was  seen  every  day.  It  only  means  that 
during  forty  days  He  was  seen  at  intervals.  Each  appearance, 
we  doubt  not,  had  its  own  special  purpose  and  intention. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  It  is  clear  from  the  words  '  showed 
Himself,'  that  Christ  was  not  seen  (after  His  resurrection)  un- 
less He  condescended,  because  His  body  was  henceforth  incor- 
ruptible, and  of  unmixed  purity." 

[At  the  Sea  of  Tiberias.]  Concerning  this  remarkable  piece 
of  water,  sometimes  called  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret,  and  some- 
times the  Sea  of  Galilee,  I  have  already  said  something  in  my 
note  on  John  vi.  1.  (Vol.  1,  "  Expository  Thoughts  on  John," 
p.  329.)  It  is  a  fresh-water  lake,  through  which  the  river  Jor- 
dan runs,  twelve  and  a  half  miles  long  and  six  and  three-quar- 
ters broad,  and  remarkable  in  a  geological  point  of  view,  as 
being  six  hundred  and  fifty-five  feet  below  the  level  of  the 
Mediterranean  Sea.*  In  a  theological  point  of  view  it  must 
always  be  most  interesting  to  a  Christian,  because  some  of  our 
Lord's  mightiest  miracles  were  wrought  on  it,  or  close  to  it. 


*  I  give  the  above  measurements  from  Tristram's  "  Topogra- 
phy  of  the  Holy  Land,"  as  I  believe  they  are  more  trustworthy 
than  those  which  I  gave  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  429 

Here  our  Lord  walked  on  tlie  waters,  and  came  to  the  disciples 
toiling  in  rowing.  Here  He  stilled  tlie  wind  and  waves  with  a 
word.  Here  He  granted  to  four  of  His  Apostles  a  miraculous 
draught  of  fishes.  Here  He  provided  payment  of  the  tribate- 
money,  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  fish  which  He  commanded  Peter 
to  catch.  On  the  banks  of  this  lake  He  fed  a  multitude  with 
a  few  loaves  and  fishes.  On  a  high  ground  overhanging  this 
lake  He  cast  out  the  legion  of  devils,  and  allowed  them  to 
drive  2,000  swine  into  the  sea.  In  the  towns  upon  this  lake, 
Choraziu,  Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum,  He  did  some  of  His 
mightiest  works.  Sitting  in  a  boat  on  this  lake.  He  delivered 
the  parable  of  the  Sower.  In  short,  of  all  the  districts  in 
which  our  Lord  preached  and  wrought  miracles,  there  was 
none  which  saw  and  heard  so  much  as  the  district  round  "  the 
Sea  of  Tiberias." 

Can  we  doubt,  when  we  remember  all  this,  that  our  Lord  had 
a  deep  purpose  and  meaning,  in  appearing  to  His  disciples  at 
the  Sea  of  Tiberias  ?  Can  we  doubt  that  He  meant  to  remind 
them  of  all  they  had  seen  in  former  days  of  his  wisdom,  love, 
and  power,  by  the  side  of  these  well-known  waters  ?  He  knew 
well  the  influence  which  scenery  and  places  exercise  over  the 
mind  of  man.  He  wouJd  recall  to  the  memory  of  His  disciples 
all  that  they  had  witnessed  in  the  early  days  of  His  ministry. 
Above  all  He  would  stir  the  hearts  of  Peter  and  James  and 
John,  by  saying  some  of  His  last  things  to  them,  at  the  very 
place  where  He  had  first  called  them  to  leave  their  boats  and 
nets,  to  follow  Him,  and  to  become  fishers  of  men.  Where  He 
had  begun  with  them,  there  He  would  have  one  of  His  last  in- 
terviews with  them,  before  leaving  the  world. 

The  exact  spot  where  our  Lord  appeared  at  the  Sea  of  Tibe- 
rias, is  of  course  unknown.  But  when  we  remember  that 
Bethsaida,  at  the  north  end  of  the  lake,  was  "  the  city  of  An- 
drew and  Peter,"  (John  i.  44),  we  may  safely  conjecture  that 
the  scene  of  this  chapter  was  somewhere  near  Bethsaida.  The 
boat  In  which  Peter  went  fishing  would  most  probably  either 
be  his  own  boat,  or  the  property  of  some  relative  or  friend  in 
his  native  city. 

{And  on  this  wise  shewed  He  Himself. '\  This  is  a  somewhat 
curious  sentence.  It  does  not,  I  think,  only  mean  "  The  man- 
ner of  His  appearance  was  as  follows."  I  suspect  that  it  was 
inserted  emphatically,  in  order  to  direct  our  special  attention 
to  all  the  little  details  of  the  occurrence,  and  to  remind  us  that 
even  the  minutest  parts  of  it  have  a  deep  spiritual  meaning. 

2.—{^There  were  together  Simon  Peter,  etcl  This  verse  contains 
the  names  of  the  seven  witnesses,  before  whom  the  remarkable 
appearance  of  Christ,  about  to  be  described,  took  place.  Seven, 
we  may  remember,  is  the  number  of  perfection,  and  the  evi- 
dence of  seven  witnesses  was  regarded  as  the  most  complete 
evidence  that  could  be  given.     Two  of  the  seven,  we  shall  ob- 


430  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTb 

serve,  are  not  named,  and  we  are  left  entirely  to  conjecture 

who  these  two  were.  Most  commentators  think  they  must 
have  been  Andrew  and  Philip, — Andrew  because  he  was  Pe- 
ter's brother,  and  Philip  because  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  Beth- 
saida,  on  the  lake.  But  we  really  do  not  know,  and  it  is  use- 
less to  guess. 

Why  these  seven  alone,  out  of  the  eleven,  were  here,  we  are 
not  told.  But  we  need  not  doubt  there  was  good  reason.  All 
the  company  of  the  Apostles,  we  may  believe,  went  into  Gali- 
lee when  the  passover  feast  was  over,  according  to  our  Lord's 
command,  and  probably  very  soon  after  His  appearance  for  the 
benefit  of  Thomas.  But  where  Matthew,  Simon,  James  the 
less,  and  Jude,  were,  on  the  present  occasion,  we  do  not  know. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  this  is  the  only  place  in  St.  John's 
Gospel,  where  he  mentions  the  name  of  his  own  father,  Zebe- 
dee. 

Why  these  seven  disciples  in  particular  were  together,  is 
worth  inquiry.  The  presence  of  Simon  Peter,  as  he  lived  in 
Galilee,  and  had  a  special  message  from  our  Lord  that  He  was 
going  into  Galilee,  we  can  understand.  Thomas,  once  convinced 
that  Jesus  had  risen,  would  very  likely  take  care  to  stick  close 
to  Peter  and  John.  Nathanael  lived  at  Cana  in  Galilee,  and  was 
probably  Bartholomew.  Augustine,  however,  doubts  this.  The 
two  sons  of  Zebedee  were  Simon's  partners,  and  are  always 
found  together  with  him  on  great  occasions. 

The  message  of  our  Lord  about  Galilee,  we  must  remember, 
was,  "  Tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  Galilee  :  there  shall 
they  see  Me."  (Matt,  xxviii.  10.)  These  were  our  Lord's  own 
words. — The  angel  also  said  to  the  women,  "  He  goeth  before 
you  into  Galilee  :  there  shall  ye  see  Him."  (Matt,  xxviii.  7.) 
We  might  reasonably  expect  to  find  the  Apostles  in  Galilee  after 
this. 

On  Thomas  being  one  of  the  party,  Henry  remarks,  "  Thomas 
is  named  next  to  Peter,  as  if  he  now  kept  closer  to  the  meetings 
of  the  Apostles  than  ever.  It  is  well  if  losses  by  our  neglect 
make  us  more  careful  afterwards  not  to  let  opportunities  slip." 

3. — \^8imoji  Peter  saith  unto  them,  etc.]  Some  worthy  commenta- 
tors have  presumed  to  find  fault  with  Peter  for  going  a  fishing. 
They  say  that  he  showed  a  disposition  to  return  to  the  world, 
and  to  follow  his  worldly  calling  once  more.  From  this  view 
I  entirely  dissent.  I  see  no  harm  whatever  in  Peter's  conduct 
on  this  occasion.  He  and  his  companions  were  poor  men,  and 
must  needs  work  in  order  to  provide  for  their  subsistence. 
There  was  nothing  wrong  in  the  act  of  fishing,  and  it  was  only 
natural  to  take  up  the  business  with  which  they  were  most  famil- 
iar. The  great  business  of  going  out  as  our  Lord's  messengers, 
to  preach  the  Gospel,  was  not  to  begin  until  His  ascension,  and 
in  the  interval  it  was  better  to  follow  an  honest  calling  than  to 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  431 

be  idle.  Neither  in  Peter's  proposal,  nor  in  tlie  simple  frank 
consent  of  his  companions,  can  I  detect  a  jot  of  proof  that  any- 
thing wrong  was  done.  Idleness  does  Christians  far  more  in- 
jury  than  work.  Among  tbe  Jews  every  man,  whatever  his 
rank  or  position  might  be,  was  required  to  learn  a  worldly  call- 
ing. 

Chrysostom  remarks,  "  Since  neither  Christ  was  with  them 
continually,  nor  was  the  Spirit  yet  given,  nor  they  at  that  time 
entrusted  with  anything,  having  nothing  to  do,  they  went  after 
their  trade." 

Augustine  observes,  "  The  Apostles  were  not  forbidden  to 
seek  their  necessary  subsistence  by  the  exercise  of  their  craft, 
a  lawful  and  permitted  one,  if  at  any  time  they  had  no  other 
means  of  subsistence."  He  also  remarks  that  they  were  no 
more  to  blame  than  St.  Paul  was,  when  he  wrought  with  his 
own  hands  as  a  tent-maker,     (xlcts  xviii.  3.) 

Calvin  remarks,  "  Peter  had  not  yet  been  enjoined  to  appear 
in  public,  for  the  discharge  of  his  oifice  of  teaching,  but  had 
only  been  reminded  of  his  future  calling  (John  xx,  21 — 23),  that 
he  and  others  might  understand  that  they  had  not  in  vain  been 
chosen  from  the  beginning.  Meanwhile,  they  were  to  do  what 
they  were  accustomed  to  do,  and  what  belonged  to  men  in  pri- 
vate life." 

Ferus  remarks  that  a  lawful  business  is  not  sinful.  If  Mat- 
thew had  gone  back  to  a  publican's  life  it  would  have  been  a 
very  different  thing  from  Peter  going  to  fish. 

Stier  remarks  that  this  going  to  fish  was  only  carrying  out 
our  Lord's  words.  "  But  now,  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him 
take  it,  and  likewise  his  scrip :  and  he  that  hath  no  sword,  let 
him  sell  his  garment  and  buy  one."     (Luke  xxii.  36.) 

The  expression  "  a  boat  "  should  have  been  translated  "  the 
boat."  Does  not  the  use  of  the  article  show  that  this  was  that 
well-known  boat,  which  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  had  always 
used,  when  they  went  on  the  lake  ? 

In  the  fact  that  "  they  caught  nothing  that  night,"  there  is 
nothing  that  would  surprise  a  fisherman.  Of  all  callings  by 
which  men  earn  their  living  none  is  more  uncertain  than  that 
of  a  fisherman.  (Luke  v.  4.)  "  Night  "  is  the  time  when  most 
fish  are  caught,  as  all  who  are  familiar  with  fishing  know. 
That  there  was  probably  a  deep  typical  meaning  in  all  this,  I 
shall  hope  to  show  when  I  reach  the  end  of  the  passage.  I 
think  it  better  to  reserve  all  remarks  upon  that  point,  until 
I  can  present  them  to  the  reader  in  one  continuous  form.— For 
the  present,  both  here  and  throughout  the  passage,  I  shall 
simply  comment  on  the  facts  as  facts. 

Burgon  remarks,  "  One  thing  is  certain,  and  the  circumstance 
is  full  of  interest.     It  must  have  been  their  necessities  which 


432  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

sent  forth  the  Apostles  on  this  lowly  errand  of  fishing.  And 
yet  these  were  they  on  whom  the  Church  was  to  be  built  1 
These  seven  were  among  the  names  written  on  the  twelve 
foundations  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem." 

Burgon  also  thinks  that  the  words  "  went  forth,"  point  to  the 
Apostles  sitting  together  indoors,  in  the  evening,  and  very  like- 
ly on  a  Sabbath  evening. 

4. — [But  when  the  morning. ..come.']  This  probably  means  "  When 
the  day  began  to  break,  so  that  an  object  at  a  little  distance 
could  be  seen."  As  soon  as  there  was  enough  light,  through 
the  grey  dawn,  the  party  in  the  boat  saw  the  figure  of  a  person 
on  the  shore.  There  is  little  or  no  twilight  in  countries  so  far 
south  as  Palestine.  Night  goes,  and  day  follows,  much  more 
suddenly  than  with  us. 

[Jesus  stood  on  the  shore^  This  reads  like  a  sudden  and  in- 
stantaneous appearance,  like  that  which  took  place  when  our 
Lord  appeared  the  first  time  in  the  midst  of  the  disciples.  Just 
in  the  same  manner,  it  seems  to  me,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twink- 
ling of  an  eye,  Jesus  appeared  standing  on  the  shore  of  the 
lake.  The  risen  body  of  our  Lord,  we  must  remember,  ap- 
peared or  disappeared, — was  present  or  absent,  according  to  His 
will,  in  a  moment  of  time. 

Grotius  remarks  that  our  Lord  never  went  on  the  sea  after 
His  resurrection.  (Comp.  Eev.  xxi.  1.)  "  There  was  no  more 
Bea." 

[But  the  disciples  knew  not. ..was  Jesus.']  The  disciples  did 
not  recognize  our  Lord,  in  my  opinion,  because  He  appeared  in 
another  form,  just  as  He  appeared  to  the  two  who  were  journey- 
ing to  Enimaus.  I  reject  entirely  the  idea  that  the  dim  light 
of  the  early  morning  was  the  reason  why  they  did  not  know 
Him.  It  is  evident  to  me  that  our  Lord's  risen  body  did  not,  on 
any  occasion,  after  He  rose  again,  for  some  mysterious  reason, 
look  exactly  like  the  body  He  had  before  His  crucifixion.  It 
- — was  the  same,  and  yet  not  the  same,  if  I  may  so  speak.  Will 
it  not  be  so  with  our  own  bodies  when  we  rise  again  at  the  last 
day  ?     We  shall  be  the  same,  and  yet  not  the  same. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Greek  words  here  used,  were  exact- 
ly those  that  were  used  about  Mary  Magdalene,  when  she 
thought  the  gardener  spoke  to  he*",  and  "  knew  not  that  it  was 
Jesus."     (John  xx.  14.) 

5. — [Then  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  etc.]  We  cannot  suppose  for  a 
moment,  that  our  Lord  did  not  know  whether  the  disciples  had 
any  meat,  when  He  asked  the  question  of  this  verse.  It  is 
clear  to  me  that  He  asked  it  in  order  to  raise  attention  in  the 
minds  of  the  disciples,  and  to  put  them  at  ease  in  conversing 
with  them.  He  appeared  as  a  stranger,  who  was  graciously 
pleased  to  say  something  familiar  and  friendly.  Does  it  not  re- 
mind us  of  the  way  in  which  He  began  conversation  with  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  433 

woman  of  Samaria,  and  broke  the  ice,  as  it  were,  between  Him 
and  her  ?  **  Give  Me  to  drink,"  He  said.  (John  iv.  7.)  Noth- 
ing sets  people  so  much  at  ease,  when  they  meet  as  strangers, 
as  courteous  inquiries  about  the  simple  matters  of  daily  life. 

The  word  "  meat "  is  a  striking  example  of  the  change  which 
comes  over  the  meaning  of  English  words  in  the  course  of 
time.  It  means  literally  "  anything  eatable." — Two  centuries 
ago  the  word  "  meat  "  was  a  translation  which  no  Englishman 
would  misunderstand.  Now,  unfortunately,  it  is  a  word  con- 
fined entirely  to  "  flesh."  No  translation  can  ever  be  perfect. 
All  require  occasional  reverent  revision. 

The  context  seems  to  me  to  show  that  our  Lord's  inquiry  was 
specially  meant  to  apply  to  the  success  of  the  disciples  in  fish- 
ing. "  Have  ye  caught  anything  that  can  be  eaten  ?  "  The 
disciples  evidently  took  it  in  this  sense. 

It  is  worth  noticing  that  our  Lord  must  have  spoken  in  a  very 
loud  voice,  when  He  addressed  His  disciples  in  this  verse.  We 
are  distinctly  told  that  the  boat  was  two  hundred  cubits,  at 
least  one  hundred  yards,  from  land,  in  the  eighth  verse,  and 
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  disciples  put  out  further  into 
the  lake,  when  our  Lord  told  them  to  cast  in  their  net  again. 
I  mention  this,  because  some,  as  Gerhard,  Henry,  and  Besser, 
think  that  there  was  something  curt,  rough,  and  rather  abrupt 
in  the  answer  of  the  disciples.  But  they  seem  to  forget  that 
a  conversation  carried  on  over  a  hundred  yards  of  water,  could 
only  be  carried  on  in  very  brief  and  abrupt  phrases. 

The  word  "  children  "  in  this  verse,  rendered  "  sirs  "  in  the 
margin,  is  to  my  mind  rightly  rendered  in  the  text.  It  is  a 
familiar,  friendly  mode  of  address,  like  our  English  "  boys  "  or 
"  lads,"  not  necessarily  implying  great  youth  in  the  persons  ad- 
dressed. 

— [And  He  said... cast. ..rigJit  side... find.]  Our  Lord  now  goes  a 
step  further  in  order  to  discover  Himself  to  His  disciples.  He 
gives  a  command  or  counsel  to  cast  their  net,  which  they  had 
apparently  hauled  into  the  boat,  once  more  into  the  water,  and 
upon  the  right  side  of  the  ship.  Such  advice,  and  such  a  prom- 
ise of  success  from  a  stranger,  could  hardly  fail  to  strike  the 
disciples.  Would  it  not  raise  in  the  quick  mind  of  John  a  sus- 
picion, that  this  was  no  common  stranger  who  spoke  ?  Would 
not  he  and  Peter  both  remember  a  former  occasion,  when  they 
'•  toiled  all  the  night  and  took  nothing,"  and  yet,  at  the  com- 
mand of  their  Master,  had  let  down  their  nets  again  with  mar- 
vellous success  ?     I  think  they  would. 

To  me  it  seems  highly  probable  that  the  disciples  had  finished 
their  night's  work,  had  hauled  up  their  net  into  the  boat,  and 
were  rowing  toward  home,  tired  of  their  profitless  toil,  when 
our  Lord  appeared  and  spoke  to  them. 

19 


434:  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

{They  cast,  therefore,  and  now. ..fishes^  In  the  fact  that  the 
disciples  found  a  multitude  of  fishes  in  their  net  the  momenc 
they  acted  on  our  Lord's  advice,  there  is,  in  one  point  of  view, 
nothing  extraordinary.  Many  fish  swim  in  shoals,  and  it  is 
quite  a  matter  of  common  experience  among  fishermen,  that 
one  boat  may  take  nothing,  while  a  few  yards  off  another  boat 
has  an  immense  haul.  The  miracle  consisted  in  the  perfect 
knowledge  that  our  Lord  possessed,  as  to  where  the  fish  were, 
and  on  which  side  of  the  boat  to  cast  the  net.  This  alone 
proved  that  He  was  omniscient. 

Whether  it  is  likely  that  seven  tired  fishermen,  after  work- 
ing all  night,  and  hauling  up  their  net  and  stowing  it  away, 
■would  stop  on  their  way  home  at  the  advice  of  a  stranger,  and 
cast  in  their  net  once  more  in  broad  daylight,  is  a  point  which 
admits  of  question.  My  own  impression  is  that  a  secret  power 
and  influence  went  with  our  Lord's  words,  and,  without  know- 
ing wliy,  the  seven  disciples  felt  irresistibly  constrained  to  do 
what  the  mysterious  stranger  advised. 

7. — {Therefore  that  disciple.. .the  Lord.]  The  first  to  recognize 
Jesus  was  the  disciple  who  first  believed  the  resurrection, — the 
beloved  disciple  John,  who  as  usual  does  not  give  his  own  name. 
With  characteristic  quickness  and  sensitiveness,  he  at  once  felt 
convinced  that  the  mysterious  stranger  must  be  his  beloved 
Master.  Love  is  always  keen-sighted.  It  suddenly  flashed 
across  his  mind  that  the  advice  given  by  the  stranger,  and  the 
result  of  following  the  advice,  had  been  precisely  the  same 
three  years  before.  The  stranger  must  surely  know  what  hap- 
pened then,  and  must  have  been  present !  The  stranger  must 
be  the  Lord  Himself !  Thoughts  such  as  these  most  probably 
passed  through  his  mind  far  quicker  than  we  can  describe  them  ; 
and  at  once  he  said  to  his  friend  Peter,  who  was  most  likely  the 
leading  man  in  the  boat,  "  It  is  the  Lord." 

RoUock  thinks  it  was  the  wonderful  draught  of  fishes  that 
made  John  know  it  was  the  Lord.  "He  saw  in  it  not  only 
miraculous  power,  but  wonderful  bountif ulness  and  liberality," 
just  like  His  Divine  Master. 

[1^020  when  Simon  Peter  heard,  etc.]  The  conduct  of  the 
Apostle  Peter,  here  described,  is  eminently  characteristic  of  the 
man.  It  is  just  what  might  have  been  expected  from  the  dis- 
ciple who  went  out  of  the  ship  to  walk  on  the  water  on  a  for- 
mer occasion,  and  drew  his  sword,  and  began  to  smite,  when  our 
Lord  was  surrounded  by  His  enemies.  Fervent,  warm-hearted, 
impulsive,  impetuous,  affectionate,  thinking  nothing  of  conse- 
quences, acting  on  the  spur  of  present  feeling,  he  at  once 
plunges  into  the  ?ea,  when  he  hears  that  his  Lord  is  on  the 
shore,  and  struggles  to  get  close  to  Him.  Whatever  we  may 
think  of  his  hasty  behavior,  we  must  all  admire  his  love.  Zeal 
for  Christ  deserves  respect,  even  when  it  leads  a  man  into 
hasty  action.  Enthusiasm,  even  when  it  runs  to  seed,  is  better 
than  indifference. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  435 

We  should  note  how  Peter  rushed  into  action,  the  very  mo- 
ment that  he  "  heard  "  the  words,  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  He  did 
not  wait  to  see,  like  Thomas  on  another  occasion,  hut  was 
satisfied  with  a  word  from  his  brother  Jolin,  A  single  spark  is 
enough  to  kindle  tinder,  and  a  single  word  is  enough  to  stir  a 
heart,  when  its  affections  are  deeply  concerned. 

The  Greek  word  which  is  rendered  "  fisher's  coat,"  is  only 
found  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Theophylact  says  it  was 
the  upper  garment  of  a  Syrian  fisherman.  The  context  seems 
to  show  that  it  was  a  sort  of  garment  which  a  fisherman  laid 
aside  when  in  the  very  act  of  handling  his  nets. 

When  we  read  that  Peter  was  "  naked,"  I  see  no  reason  why 
we  should  suppose  that  he  was  entirely  without  clothes.  I 
think  the  meaning  is,  that  he  was  comparatively  naked,  having 
laid  aside  all  his  looser  garments,  as  a  fisherman  in  that  hot 
climate  naturally  would,  in  order  to  be  able  to  handle  wet  nets 
and  fish  with  greater  convenience.  And  when  we  read  that  he 
girt  around  him  his  fisher's  coat,  I  think  it  simply  means  that 
he  took  up  the  loose  outward  garment  that  he  wore  when  he 
went  on  the  lake  to  fish,  and  girded  it  tightly  round  his  waist 
before  jumping  into  the  sea. 

When  we  read  that  Peter  "  cast  himself  into  the  sea,"  I  see 
no  reason  for  supposing  that  he  swam  to  land.  In  order  to 
Bwim,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would  put  on  more  clothes  ! — I 
rather  think  that  the  water  where  he  and  his  companions  were 
was  shallow,  and  that  he  waded  to  land.  He  knew  that  his 
large  fishing-boat  drew  too  much  water  to  get  near  shore,  and 
he  was  too  impatient  to  wait  for  the  slow  process  of  launching 
the  little  boat,  and  coming  ashore  in  it.  I  cannot  doubt,  as  he 
jumped  into  the  water,  that  he  remembered  going  out  of  the 
same  ship  on  a  former  occasion,  and  walking  on  the  water  "  to 
go  to  Jesus." 

It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  Chrysostom  thinks  that  Peter  swam. 
On  the  other  hand  Brentius,  Gerhard,  and  Archbishop  Whately 
(see  Bengel's  "  Gnomon,"  English  translation),  think  that  he 
walked  on  the  water,  in  a  miraculous  manner,  as  on  the  former 
occasion ! 

8. — [And  the  other  disciples  came,  etc.]  Here  we  see,  placed  in 
strong  contrast  with  Peter's  action,  the  way  in  which  the  six 
remaining  Apostles  came  to  land.  They  came  in  the  boat  ("  a 
little  ship  "  is  a  defective  translation),  which  means  the  skiff  or 
punt  which  most  large  fishing  vessels  have  with  them.     The 

•  water  was  evidently  too  shallow  for  the  large  fishing  vessel  to 
get  near  shore.  And  they  came  slowly,  Ave  may  be  sure,  be- 
cause, for  two  hundred  cubits,  or  one  hundred  yards,  they  had 
to  drag  behind  their  little  boat  a  net  full  of  fish.  How  heavy  a 
drag  such  a  net  makes  on  a  little  boat's  progress  through  the 
"water,  those  only  know  who  have  had  exj^erience. 


436  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  we  are  not  told  that  Peter  got  to  shore 
at  all  sooner  than  his  brethren.  This  point  is,  singularly- 
enough,  passed  over  in  silence.  But  wading  through  deep  wa- 
ter is  slow  work,  and  the  fact  that  Peter  put  his  coat  on  before 
plunging  into  the  sea,  is,  to  my  own  mind,  strong  indirect  proof 
that  he  did  not  swim,  but  wade. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Peter  forgot  fish,  and  net,  and  boat,  and 
everything  else,  in  his  anxiety  to  reach  Christ.  It  was  like  the 
Samaritan  woman  who  "  left  her  waterpot."     (John  iv.  28.) 

9. — [As  soon  then.. .fire...coals...fish... bread.]  I  cannot  doubt  that 
this  verse  records  a  miracle.  Our  blessed  Lord  made  prepara- 
tion for  the  bodily  wants  of  His  wearied  disciples,  and  merci- 
fully "  furnished  a  table  for  them  in  the  wilderness."  (Ps. 
Ixxviii.  19.)  The  burning  tire,  the  fish  lying  on  it,  the  bread, 
were  all  the  creation  of  Him  who  had  but  to  will  a  thing  and 
it  was  done.  Ever  thoughtful,  ever  compassionate,  our  Lord 
thought  good  at  this  appearing,  to  show  His  poor  toiling  dis- 
ciples that  He  cared  for  their  bodies  as  well  as  their  souls,  and 
remembered  that  they  were  men.  Who  can  tell  but  this  mira- 
cle took  place  near  the  very  spot  where  He  had  formerly  fed 
five  thousand  men  with  a  little  bread  and  fish  ?  I  cannot  doubt 
that  the  bread  and  fish  thus  miraculously  created  would  remind 
the  Apostles  of  "  loaves  and  fishes  "  multiplied.  Once  more 
they  saw  the  same  miraculous  food,  bread  and  fish,  provided 
by  the  same  Almighty  power  of  their  Lord. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  fire  of  coals,"  is  only  found  in 
two  places  in  the  New  Testament,  here  and  in  the  account  of 
the  scene  in  the  High  Priest's  hall  at  our  blessed  Lord's  exami- 
nation before  Annas.  (John  xviii.  18.)  It  was  a  "  fire  of  coals  " 
at  which  the  servants  of  the  High  Priest  warmed  themselves, 
and  before  which  the  Apostle  Peter  denied  his  Lord.  Some 
think  that  our  Lord  had  a  special  object  in  view  by  having  a 
"  fire  of  coals  "  in  this  place,  and  that  was  to  remind  Peter  of 
his  fall.     But  perhaps  the  idea  is  far-fetched. 

Stier  argues  strongly,  but  needlessly  in  my  judgment,  that 
this  provision  of  bread  and  fish  was  made  by  the  angels.  In 
any  case  it  was  a  miracle,  and  an  act  of  creation. 

Quesnel  observes,  "  Here  are  miracles  upon  miracles.  The 
same  power  which  filled  the  net  with  fishes  in  the  midst  of  the 
eea,  created  others  upon  land,  to  show  His  disciples  that  it  was 
not  from  want  of  power  to  give  them  fish  that  Christ  asked  for 
Bome,  and  ordered  them  to  fish  for  them." 

10. — [Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Bring,  etc.]  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
calls  on  the  disciples  to  bring  proof  that,  in  casting  the  net  at 
His  command,  they  had  not  labored  in  vain.  It  was  the  second 
Baying  that  He  spoke,  we  must  remember,  on  this  occasion. 
The  first  saying  was,  "  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side,  and  ye 
shall  find."     The  second  saying  was,  "  Bring  up  the  fish  which 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  437 

ye  have  now  caught,"  with  a  strong  emphasis  on  the  word 
"now."  I  believe  our  Lord's  object  was  to  show  the  disciples 
that  the  secret  of  success  was  to  work  at  His  command,  and  to 
act  with  implicit  obedience  to  His  word.  It  is  as  though  He 
said,  "  Draw  up  the  net ;  and  see  for  yourselves  how  profitable 
it  is  to  do  what  I  tell  you."  Fish  for  food  they  did  not  want 
now,  for  that  was  provided  for  them.  Proof  of  the  power  of 
Christ's  blessing,  and  the  importance  of  working  under  Him 
was  the  lesson  to  be  taught,  and  as  they  drew  up  the  net  they 
would  learn  it. 

11. — [Simon  Peter  went  up,  etc.]  I  see  no  reason  for  supposing, 
in  this  verse,  that  Peter  alone  drew  up  the  net.  I  think  it  rea- 
sonable to  suppose  that  he  is  named  as  leader  of  the  party,  and 
captain  of  the  boat.  But  I  believe  that  all  the  others  helped 
him.  The  "  going  up  "  must  mean  that  Peter  went  on  board 
the  little  boat. 

Once  more  we  see  two  miracles  recorded  in  this  verse.  One 
miracle  was  the  singularly  large  catch  of  fish  which  the  net 
contained,  a  quantity  evidently  exceeding  what  was  generally 
taken  at  one  haul.  The  other  miracle  was  the  singular  fact, 
that,  in  spite  of  this  large  quantity  of  fish,  the  net  was  "  not 
broken."  Miracle  on  miracle  passed  under  the  eyes  of  the  as- 
tonished disciples. — Can  we  doubt  that  their  minds  recalled  the 
miraculous  draught  of  fishes  on  a  former  occasion,  when  "  their 
net  brake,"  and  our  Lord's  words,  "  Fear  not ;  from  henceforth 
thou  shalt  catch  men  ;  "  and  also  his  original  saying,  "  Follow 
Me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men  ?  "  And  can  we  doubt 
that  some  of  them  remembered  the  parable  of  the  kingdom  of 
Heaven  being  like  to  "  a  net  cast  into  the  sea,"  and  finally 
drawn  to  shore  ?    (Luke  v.  10.     Matt.  iv.  19  ;  xiii.  47.) 

Concerning  the  number  one  hundred  and  fifty-three,  we 
know  nothing,  and  it  is  useless  to  speculate.  Some  have 
thought  that  it  refers  to  the  languages,  and  some  to  the  tribes 
or  nations  of  the  world, — each,  it  is  alleged,  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  in  number.  But  this  is  only  guess-work.  Yet  it  is 
worth  remembering,  that  the  strangers  whom  Solomon  em 
ployed  in  building  the  first  temple  were  precisely  one  hundred 
and  fifty -three  thousand  and  six  hundred.  Let  the  remark  be 
taken  for  what  it  is  worth.     (2  Chron.  ii.  17.) 

Pearce  calls  attention  to  a  remark  of  Jerome,  that  Oppian,  a 
Greek  poet  of  Cilicia,  in  the  second  century,  who  wrote  on  fish 
ing,  "  has  given  an  account  of  the  number  of  fishes  known  to 
him  in  his  time,  being  exactly  one  hundred  and  fifty-three." 
This,  at  any  rate,  is  curious. 

Scott  makes  the  remark,  that  "  this  draught  of  fishes  might 
be  sold  for  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  which  the  Apostles 
would  have  need  of,  on  their  return  to  Jerusalem  before  the 
day  of  Pentecost."    There  may  be  something  in  the  idea. 


438  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

12. — [Jesus  sait7i...Come  and  dine.]  Tlie  object  of  this  gracious 
invitation  seems  to  me  to  have  been  two-fold.  It  was  meant 
partly  to  show  our  Lord's  tender  compassion  for  the  weary 
bodies  of  His  disciples.  Though  risen,  He  knew  and  felt  for 
their  wants,  and  would  supply  food  for  them  when  hungry  and 
fatigued.  It  was  meant  partly  to  show  that,  though  risen  from 
the  dead,  with  a  glorified  body.  He  would  be  on  the  same  lov- 
ing terms  of  familiarity  and  kindness  as  before  with  His  disci- 
ples. They  need  not  be  frightened  at  Him.  He  had  not  for- 
gotten them.  He  did  not  mean  to  keep  them  at  a  distance.  He 
was  still  one  who  would  eat  and  drink  with  them,  as  a  man 
eateth  and  drinketh  with  his  friends.  It  is  written,  "  I  will 
come  in  to  him,  and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."  (Rev. 
iii.  20.)  An  old  divine  says,  "  Christ  loveth  to  deal  familiarly 
with  men." 

The  Greek  word  rendered  "  dine,"  does  not  necessarily  mean 
a  mid-day  meal.  Parkhurst  shows,  on  the  contrary,  from  Xen- 
ophon,  that  it  may  mean  a  morning  repast.  As  things  are  in 
England  now,  the  translation  is  a  peculiarly  unfortunate  one. 
Two  or  three  centuries  ago,  when  people  dined  at  eleven 
o'clock,  the  unfitness  of  it  would  not  have  been  so  remarkable. 
The  meaning  evidently  is,  "  Come  and  partake  of  a  morning 
meal." 

[And  none. ..durst  ask. ..the  Lord.]  These  words  describe  the 
Btate  of  mind  in  which  the  disciples  were  at  this  moment. 
They  all  felt  convinced  and  satisfied  that  the  Person  before 
them  was  the  Lord.  They  felt  no  doubt ;  and  no  one  was  the 
least  disposed  to  say,  "  Who  art  thou?"  Nevertheless  they 
all  felt  awed  and  solemnized  by  His  presence.  A  deep  sense 
of  the  mysterious  nature  of  their  Lord,  in  consequence  of  His 
resurrection,  filled  their  minds  with  an  indefinable  sensation  of 
mingled  embarrassment,  reverence,  and  fear.  Surely  we  can 
all  understand  this  !  Even  when  Joseph  spoke  lovingly  to  his 
brethren,  and  revealed  himself  to  them,  they  were  "  troubled 
at  his  presence."  (Gen.  xlv.  3.)  To  sit,  and  eat,  and  drink,  in 
the  company  with  one  who  had  risen  from  the  dead,  and  ap- 
peared and  disappeared  after  a  supernatural  manner,  was  no 
light  thing.     Who  can  wonder  that  they  felt  awed  ? 

Chrysostom  says,  "  Seeing  that  His  form  was  altered,  and 
full  of  awfulness,  they  were  amazed,  and  desired  to  ask  some- 
thing concerning  it.  But  fear,  and  their  knowledge  that  He 
was  not  some  other  but  the  same,  checked  the  inquiry ;  and 
they  only  ate  what  He,  with  greater  exertion  of  power  than 
before,  created  for  them.  For  here  Jesus  no  more  looked  up 
to  heaven,  nor  performed  those  human  acts,  showing  that 
those  also  which  He  did  formerly  were  done  by  way  of  conde- 
Bcension." 
13. — [Jesus  then  cometh  and  taketh  bread,  etc.]  This  verse  ae- 
Bcribes  what  took  place  at  this  meal,  or  as  our  Bible  calls  it, 
this  dinner.    Our  Lord  came  forward,  aa  the  host  and  enter- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  439 

tainer  of  tlie  seven  astonislied  disciples,  and  gave  tliem  bread 
and  fisli,  as  He  had  doubtless  often  done  on  former  occasions, 
and  perliaps  at  the  same  place.  He  doubtless  meant  to  give 
the  disciples  one  more  plain  proof  that  He  had  risen  from  the 
dead.  Alone  by  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  in  the  open  air,  far  from 
the  fear  of  interruption,  in  broad  daylight,  He  eats  and  drinks 
at  a  social  meal.  Could  these  seven  men  ever  doubt  from  that 
day,  if  they  had  doubted  before,  that  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead  ? 
He  meant,  furthermore,  to  encourage  them  to  continue  looking 
to  Him,  as  they  had  done  before,  as  a  loving,  familiar,  sympa- 
thizing friend.  Though  risen,  He  would  have  them  see  prac- 
tical proof  that  He  could  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  their 
infirmities,  and  cared  for  their  bodies  as  well  as  their  souls.  He 
meant,  not  least,  to  remind  them  of  His  great  miracle  of  feed- 
ing the  multitude  with  a  few  loaves  and  fishes.  He  would 
freshen  their  memory  of  that  wondrous  miracle,  and  show 
them  that  He  would  continue  doing  for  them  what  He  had  for- 
merly done  for  those  who  followed  Him  in  the  wilderness. 

Chrysostom  here  remarks,  that  we  are  not  directly  told  that 
Jesus  ate  with  the  disciples,  but  that  it  is  probable  from  Luke's 
words  in  Acts  i.  4,  that  He  did.  "  How,"  he  remarks,  "  it  is 
not  ours  to  say.  These  things  came  to  pass  in  too  strange  a 
manner.  His  nature  did  not  even  need  food.  It  was  an  act 
of  condescension  in  proof  of  the  resurrection."  (See  Gen. 
xviii.  8.) 

14. — {^This  is  noio  the  third  time,  etc.]  In  this  verse  St.  John 
winds  up  the  wonderful  story  he  has  just  told,  by  one  of  his 
peculiar  parenthetical  comments.  Concerning  the  meaning  of 
the  expression  "  third  time,"  there  has  been,  in  my  judgment, 
much  needless  dispute.  No  doubt  it  is  perfectly  true  that  this 
was  not  literally  the  third  time  that  our  Lord  was  seen  by  any 
one  after  His  resurrection.  On  the  contrary,  we  know  of  at 
least  six  different  appearances  before  this  one :  viz.  (1)  to  Mary 
Magdalene,  (2)  to  Joanna  and  other  women,  (o)  to  Simon  Peter, 
(4)  to  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus,  (5)  to  ten  Apostles  to- 
gether, (6)  to  the  eleven,  for  the  special  benefit  of  Thomas. — 
But  it  is  no  less  true  that  this  is  strictly  and  literally  the  third 
time  that  Jesus  appeared  to  any  number  of  the  disciples  gath- 
ered together. — And  it  is  also  the  thi?'d  day,  as  Augustine  re- 
marks, that  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  appear  at  all.  The  first 
five  appearances  were  all  on  the  very  same  day  when  He  rose 
from  the  dead.  The  sixth  was  a  week  afterwards,  when  He 
appeared  to  rebuke  the  unbelief  of  Thomas.  And  the  appear- 
ance recorded  in  this  chapter,  though  the  seventh  in  number, 
took  place  on  the  third  day  only,  that  any  one  on  earth  saw 
Him  after  He  rose. 

The  question  now  remains  to  be  considered.  Has  the  narra- 
tive contained  in  these  fourteen  verses  any  deep  spiritual  and 
allegorical  meaning  ?  Were  we  intended  to  read  the  passage 
Bimply  as  a  description  of  one  of  our  Lord's  appearances  aftei 


440  EXPOSITOKT  THOUGHTS. 

His  resurrection,  and  an  account  of  one  of  His  miracles  ?  Or 
is  the  narrative  a  typical  one  ?  Is  the  passage  intended  to  con- 
vey, under  figures  and  symbols,  great  prophetical  truths  con- 
cerning the  work  of  the  ministry,  and  the  history  of  the  Church 
in  every  age,  until  the  Lord  comes  ?  The  question  is  a  serious 
one,  and  demands  serious  consideration. 

(a)  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  undeniable  danger  in  the  habit 
of  seeking  spiritual  and  allegorical  meanings  in  the  plain  his- 
torical facts  of  God's  Word.  We  may  go  so  far  in  this  direc- 
tion, that,  like  Origen,  and  too  often  Augustine,  we  may  lose 
Bight  of  the  primary  simple  meaning  of  Scripture,  and  turn 
the  Bible  into  a  mere  book  of  riddles,  which  is  useless  to  any 
common  man,  and  useful  only  to  those  who  have  very  fertile 
and  fanciful  imaginations.  In  fact,  if  we  are  always  extract- 
ing figurative  meanings  out  of  Scripture,  we  may  destroy  the 
usefulness  of  the  Book  altogether.  There  must  be  some  limit 
to  the  system  of  figurative  interpretation.  As  a  rule,  I  shrink 
intuitively  from  putting  any  sense  on  God's  Word,  which  is 
not  the  obvious  and  plain  sense  of  its  language.  Hooker's 
words  are  weighty  and  wise :  "  When  a  literal  construction  of 
a  text  will  stand,  that  which  is  furthest  from  the  letter  is  com- 
monly the  worst." 

(&)  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  all 
Christ's  miracles  were  meant,  more  or  less,  to  teach  great  spir 
itual  truths,  under  allegories  and  figures  ;  and  the  passage  be 
fore  us  is  a  miracle.  In  addition  to  this,  we  must  remember 
that  the  occasion  of  the  miracle  before  us  was  a  peculiarly  sol- 
emn one, — that  the  Apostles  needed  certain  great  truths  to  be 
impressed  on  their  attention  with  peculiar  force,  by  facts  as 
well  as  by  words, — and  that,  on  the  eve  of  His  ascension  into 
heaven,  our  Lord  would  be  exceedingly  likely  to  remind  them 
of  their  duty,  and  their  position  as  ministers,  by  things  under 
their  eyes  as  well  as  by  instruction  in  their  ears.  Finally  let 
us  try  to  put  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the  seven  Apostles  on 
the  occasion  before  us,  and  try  to  imagine  what  they  thought 
and  felt  about  the  incidents  of  this  remarkable  morning.  It  is 
very  hard  to  imagine  that  they  saw  nothing  but  a  simple  mira- 
cle in  all  that  happened.  I  cannot  think  so. — I  think  their 
hearts  must  have  burned  within  them,  and  old  spiritual  truths, 
which  they  had  heard  before,  must  have  revived  in  their  minds 
with  fresh  power,  and  been  written  on  their  souls  as  with  the 
point  of  a  diamond,  never  to  be  effaced. 

On  the  whole,  then,  I  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion,  that  the 
familiar  verses  before  us  probably  contain,  under  symbolical 
facts,  great  spiritual  truths.  I  think  we  are  fairly  justified  in 
regarding  the  passage  as  a  great  parable,  or  vision,  or  allegory^ 
intended  to  convey  to  the  Church  of  Christ  lessons  for  all  time. 
And  I  am  strengthened  in  this  conclusion  by  the  remarkable 
fact,  that  almost  all  commentators,  of  every  school  and  in  every 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  4.^1 

age,  have  taken  this  view  of  the  passage.  Even  Grotius,  cold 
and  rationalistic  as  his  tone  of  exposition  too  frequently  is, 
puts  a  figurative  sense  on  several  circumstances  of  the  passage. 
Other  expositors,  of  a  more  figurative  and  imaginative  turn  of 
mind,  go  into  heights  and  depths,  where  I  cannot  pretend  to 
follow  them.  I  shall  content  myself  with  pointing  out  the 
more  obvious  spiritual  lessons  which  I  think  the  passage  waa 
probably  meant  to  convey. 

{a)  I  think  that  Christ's  remarkable  appearance  to  the  disci- 
ples, when  they  were  in  the  act  of  fishing,  was  meant  to 
remind  them  and  the  whole  Church  of  the  primary  duty  of 
ministers.  They  were  doing  work  which  was  strikingly  em- 
blematic of  their  calling.     They  were  to  be  "  fishers  of  men." 

(&)  I  think  the  want  of  success  in  catching  fish  which  the 
disciples  had,  until  the  Lord  appeared,  was  meant  to  teach 
that  without  Christ's  presence  and  blessing  ministers  can  do 
nothing. 

(c)  I  think  the  marvellous  success  which  attended  the  cast  of 
the  net,  when  Christ  gave  the  command,  was  meant  to  teach 
that,  when  Christ  is  pleased  to  give  success  to  ministers,  noth- 
ing can  prevent  souls  being  brought  into  the  Gospel  net,  con- 
verted and  saved. 

(d)  I  think  the  drawing  of  the  net  to  shore  at  last,  was  meant 
to  remind  the  disciples  and  all  ministers,  of  what  will  happen 
when  the  Lord  comes  again.  The  work  of  the  Church  will  be 
completed,  and  the  reckoning  of  results  will  take  place. 

(e)  I  think  the  dinner  prepared  and  provided  for  the  disci- 
ples, when  the  net  was  drawn  to  the  shore,  was  meant  to  re- 
mind ministers  that  there  will  be  the  great  "  marriage  supper 
of  the  Lamb  "  at  last,  when  Christ  Himself  shall  welcome  His 
faithful  servants  and  ministers,  and  "  come  forth  and  serve 
them."    (Luke  xii.  37.) 

(/)  T  think,  besides  this,  that  the  respective  positions  of  the 
disciples  and  Christ,  when  they  first  saw  Him,  may  possible/  be 
intended  to  represent  the  respective  positions  of  Christ  and  His 
people  during  this  dispensation.  They  were  on  the  water  of 
the  sea.  He  was  looking  at  them  from  the  land.  Just  so 
Christ  is  In  heaven  looking  at  us,  and  we  are  voyaging  over 
the  troublous  waters  of  this  world. 

(g)  Finally,  I  think  that  our  Lord's  sudden  appearing  on 
shore,  when  the  morning  broke,  may  possibly  represent  our 
Lord's  second  advent.  "  The  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is 
at  hand."     When  the  morning  dawns,  Christ  will  appear. 

With  these  conjectures  I  leave  the  passage.  They  may  not 
commend  themselves  to  some  readers.  I  only  say  that  they 
appear  to  me  to  deserve  consideration  and  reflection. 

19* 


442  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


JOHN  XXL  15—17. 


15  So  wlien  they  had  dined,  Je- 
8U8  saith  to  Simon  Peter,  Simon,  son 
of  Jonas,  ]o vest  thou  me  more  than 
these?  He  saith  unto  him.  Yea, 
Lord ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love 
thee.  He  saith  unto  him,  Feed  my 
lambs. 

16  He  saith  to  him  again  the  sec- 
ond time,  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lov- 
est  thou  me?  He  saith  unto  him, 
Yea,   Lord ;    thou  knowest  that  I 


love  thee.    He  saith  unto  him,  Feed 
my  sheep. 

17  He  saith  unto  him  the  third 
time,  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 
thou  me  ?  Peter  was  grieved  be- 
cause he  said  unto  him  the  third 
time,  Lovest  thou  me?  And  he 
said  unto  him,  Lord,  thou  knowest 
all  things  ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love 
thee, 
my  sheep. 


These  verses  describe  a  remarkable  conversation 
"between  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostle  Peter. 
To  the  careful  Bible  reader,  who  remembers  the  Apos- 
tle's thrice-repeated  denial  of  Christ,  the  passage  cannot 
fail  to  be  a  deeply  interesting  portion  of  Scripture. 
Well  would  it  be  for  the  Church,  if  all  "  after-dinner  " 
conversations  among  Christians  were  as  useful  and  edi- 
fying as  this. 

We  should  notice  first,  in  these  verses,  Chrisfs  ques- 
tion to  JPeter :  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  ?  " 
— Three  times  we  find  the  same  inquiry  made.  It  seems 
most  probable  that  this  three-fold  repetition  was  meant 
to  remind  the  Apostle  of  his  own  thrice-repeated  denial. 
Once  we  find  a  remarkable  addition  to  the  inquiry  : 
"  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  ?  "  It  is  a  reasona- 
ble supposition  that  those  three  words  "  more  than 
these,"  were  meant  to  remind  Peter  of  his  over-confi- 
dent assertion  :  "  Though  all  men  deny  Thee,  yet  will 
not  I." — It  is  just  as  if  our  Lord  would  say,  "  Wilt  thou 
now  exalt  thyself  above  others  ?  Hast  thou  yet  learned 
thine  own  weakness  ?  " 

"  Lovest  thou  Me  "  may  seem  at  first  sight  a  simple 
question.  In  one  sense  it  is  so.  Even  a  child  can  un- 
derstand love,  and  can  say  whether  he  loves  another  or 
not.  Yet  "Lovest  thou  Me"  is,  in  reality,  a  very 
Bearching    question.      We    may  know    much,  and    do 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  443 

much,  and  profess  much,  and  taljj  much,  and  work 
much,  and  give  much,  and  go  through  much,  and  make 
much  show  in  our  religion,  and  yet  be  dead  before  God, 
from  want  of  love,  and  at  last  go  down  to  the  pit.  Do 
we  love  Christ  ?  That  is  the  great  question.  Without 
this  there-  is  no  vitality  about  our  Christianity.  We 
are  no  better  than  painted  wax  figures,  lifeless  stuffed 
beasts  in  a  museum,  sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cym- 
bals.    There  is  no  life  where  there  is  no  love. 

Let  us  take  heed  that  there  is  some  feeling  in  our 
religion.  Knowledge,  orthodoxy,  correct  views,  regu- 
lar use  of  forms,  a  respectable  moral  life, — all  these  do 
not  make  up  a  true  Christian.  There  must  be  some  per- 
sonal feeling  towards  Christ.  Feeling  alone,  no  doubt, 
is  a  poor  useless  thing,  and  may  be  here  to-day  and 
gone  to-morrow.  But  the  entire  absence  of  feeling  is  a 
very  bad  symptom,  and  speaks  ill  for  the  state  of  a 
man's  soul.  The  men  and  women  to  whom  St.  Paul 
wrote  his  Epistles  had  feelings,  and  were  not  ashamed 
of  them.  There  was  One  in  heaven  whom  they  loved, 
and  that  One  was  Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  Let  us  strive 
to  be  like  them,  and  to  have  some  real  feeling  in  our 
Christianity,  if  we  hope  to  share  their  reward. 

We  should  notice,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  Peter's 
ansicer  to  Chrisfs  question.  Three  times  we  find  the  / 
Apostle  saying,  "Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee." 
Once  we  are  told  that  he  said,  "  Thou  knowest  all 
things."  Once  we  have  the  touching  remark  made, 
that  he  was  "  grieved  to  be  asked  the  third  time."  We 
need  not  doubt  that  our  Lord,  like  a  skilful  physician, 
stirred  up  this  grief  intentionally.  He  intended  to 
prick  the  Apostle's  conscience,  and  to  teach  him  a  sol- 
emn lesson.  If  it  was  grievous  to  the  disciple  to  be 
questioned,  how  much  more  grievous  must  it  have  been 
to  the  Master  to  be  denied  I 


444  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

The  answer  that  the  humbled  Apostle  gave,  is  the 
one  account  that  the  true  servant  of  Christ  in  every  age 
can  give  of  his  religion.  Such  an  one  may  be  weak, 
and  fearful,  and  ignorant,  and  unstable,  and  failing  in 
many  things,  but  at  any  rate  he  is  real  and  sincere. 
Ask  him  whether  he  is  converted,  whether  he  is  a  be- 
liever, whether  he  has  grace,  whether  he  is  justified, 
whether  he  is  sanctified,  whether  he  is  elect,  whether  he 
is  a  child  of  God, — ask  him  any  one  of  these  questions 
and  he  may  perhaps  reply  that  he  really  does  not  know  ! 
— But  ask  him  whether  he  loves  Christ,  and  he  will  re- 
ply, "  I  do."  He  may  add  that  he  does  not  love  Him 
as  much  as  he  ought  to  do  ;  but  he  will  not  say  that  he 
does  not  love  Him  at  all.  The  rule  will  be  found  true 
with  very  few  exceptions.  Wherever  there  is  true 
grace,  there  will  be  a  consciousness  of  love  towards 
Christ. 

^^  What,  after  all,  is  the  great  secret  of  loving  Christ  ? 
It  is  an  inward  sense  of  having  received  from  Him  par- 
don and  forgiveness  of  sins.  Those  love  much  who  feel 
much  forgiven.  He  that  has  come  to  Christ  with  his 
sins,  and  tasted  the  blessedness  of  free  and  full  absolu- 
tion, he  is  the  man  whose  heart  will  be  full  of  love  to- 
wards his  Saviour.  The  more  we  realize  that  Christ  has 
suffered  for  us,  and  paid  our  debt  to  God,  and  that  we 
are  washed  and  justified  through  His  blood,  the  more 
we  shall  love  Him  for  having  loved  us,  and  given  Him- 
self for  us.  Our  knowledge  of  doctrines  may  be  defec- 
tive. Our  ability  to  defend  our  views  in  argument  may 
be  small.  But  we  cannot  be  prevented  feeling.  And 
our  feeling  will  be  like  that  of  the  Apostle  Peter : 
"  Thou,  Lord,  who  knowest  all  things.  Thou  knowest  my 
heart ;  and  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee." 

We  should  notice,  lastly,  in  these  verses,  GhrisVs 
command  to  Peter.     Three  times  we  find  Him  saying, 


i 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  445 

"  Feed  "  my  flock  :  once,  "  Feed  my  lambs  ;  "  and  twice 
my  "  sheep."  Can  we  doubt  for  a  moment  that  this 
thrice-repeated  charge  was  full  of  deep  meaning  ?  It 
was  meant  to  commission  Peter  once  more  to  do  the 
work  of  an  Apostle,  notwithstanding  his  recent  fall. 
But  this  was  only  a  small  part  of  the  meaning.  It  was 
meant  to  teach  Peter  and  the  whole  Church  the  mighty 
lesson,  that  usefulness  to  others  is  the  grand  test  of  love, 
and  working  for  Christ  the  great  proof  of  really  loving 
Christ.  It  is  not  loud  talk  and  high  profession  ;  it  is 
not  even  impetuous,  spasmodic  zeal,  and  readiness  to 
draw  the  sword  and  fight, — it  is. steady,  patient,  labori- 
ous effort  to  do  good  to  Christ's  sheep  scattered  through- 
out this  sinful  world,  which  is  the  best  evidence  of  being 
a  true-hearted  disciple.  This  is  the  real  secret  of  Chris- 
tian greatness.  It  is  written  in  another  place,  "  Whoso- 
ever will  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be  your  minister  ; 
and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,  let  him  be  your 
servant  :  even  as  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  min- 
istered unto,  but  to  minister."     (Matt.  xx.  26 — 28.) 

Forever  let  the  parting  charge  of  our  blessed  Master 
abide  in  our  consciences,  and  come  up  in  the  practice  of 
our  daily  lives.  It  is  not  for  nothing  we  may  be  sure, 
that  we  find  these  things  recorded  for  our  learning,  just 
before  He  left  the  world.  Let  us  aim  at  a  loving,  doing, 
useful,  hard-working,  unselfish,  kind,  unpretentious  re- 
ligion. Let  it  be  our  daily  desire  to  think  of  others, 
care  for  others,  do  good  to  others,  and  to  lessen  the  sor- 
row, and  increase  the  joy  of  this  sinful  world.  This  is 
to  realize  the  great  principle  which  our  Lord's  command 
to  Peter  was  intended  to  teach.  So  living,  and  so  labor- 
ing to  order  our  ways,  we  shall  find  it  abundantly  true, 
that  *'  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  (Acts 
XX.  35.) 


I 


44:6  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 


Notes.    John  xxi.  15—17. 

15. — [8o  when  they  had  dined.']  In  the  verses  we  now  begin,  we 
pass  away  from  the  region  of  allegory,  parable,  symbol,  mira- 
cle, and  vision,  to  a  plain,  unmistakable  conversation  between 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostle  Peter.  It  is  a  conver- 
sation of  a  deeply  interesting  character,  of  which  every  letter 
deserves  to  be  written  in  gold.  He  that  supposes  that  any 
"  John,"  except  John  the  Apostle,  could  have  written  these 
three  verses,  gives  little  evidence  of  possessing  a  sound  judg- 
ment. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  our  Lord  does  not  begin  His  conversa. 
tion  till  the  social  meal  was  over.  Trifling  as  this  circumstance 
may  seem,  it  deserves  attention,  and  conveys  a  lesson.  Noth- 
ing was  so  likely  to  set  the  Apostles  at  ease  with  their  Master, 
and  to  prepare  them  to  receive  any  word  that  fell  from  His 
lips  with  love  and  affection,  as  to  deal  familiarly  and  intimately 
with  them,  and  let  them  "  eat  and  drink  "  in  His  company. 

[Jesus  saith  to  Simon  Peter.']  The  object  of  our  liord  in  ad- 
dressing Simon  Peter  in  these  verses  should  be  carefully  re- 
membered, and  not  misunderstood.  That  there  was  a  distinct 
object  in  singling  him  out  from  the  seven  disciples  sitting 
round  our  Lord,  and  specially  speaking  to  him,  I  cannot  doubt. 
But  what  was  that  object?  This  question  can  only  be  answered 
by  considering  the  peculiar  character  of  St.  Peter,  and  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  his  history  during  the  last  day  of 
our  Lord's  ministry,  before  the  crucifixion.  None  had  made  so 
high  a  profession.  None  had  spoken  so  confidently  of  his  own 
strength.  None  had  shown  such  instability  in  the  hour  of 
trial.  None  had  fallen  so  sadly,  by  denying  his  Master  three 
times.  Remembering  all  this,  X  believe  that  our  Lord  had  a 
special  object  in  addressing  Peter  on  this  occasion  ;  and  I  see  a 
special  wisdom  in  the  address  and  conversation  being  recorded, 
as  taking  place  before  six  witnesses. 

(a)  I  believe  our  Lord's  first  object  was  to  remind  Peter  of  his 
Bad  fall,  through  over-confidence,  and  want  of  watchfulness 
and  prayer.  He  would  have  him  know  that,  though  raised, 
pardoned  and  forgiven,  he  must  never  forget  what  had  hap- 
pened. Three  times  he  had  denied  his  Master.  Three  times 
he  must  be  publicly  asked  whether  he  loved  his  Master. 
Hengstenberg  maintains  that  Peter's  fall  was  not  at  all  in  our 
Lord's  mind  in  this  remarkable  convers'ation.  But  I  cannot 
agree  with  him. 

(6)  I  believe  our  Lord's  second  object  was,  as  Cyril  remarks, 
to  restore  Peter  to  his  former  position  as  a  trusted  Apostle  and 
minister  in  the  presence  of  six  witnesses.  The  thought  might 
possibly  come  across  the  minds  of  some  Christians,  in  future 
days,  that  Peter  forfeited  his  claim  to  be  an  Apostle  and  leader 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  44.7 

of  the  Cliurcli,  by  liis  thrice  repeated  denial  of  his  Master. 
Our  Lord  in  mercy  guards  against  this  possibility,  by  publicly 
commissioning  Peter  once  more  to  do  the  work  of  a  pastor  in 
the  Church. 

(c)  I  believe  our  Lord's  third  object  was  to  teach  Peter  what 
should  be  the  primary  aim  of  an  Apostle  and  minister.  The 
true  qualification  for  the  ministerial  office,  he  must  learn, 
was  not  high  profession  of  more  courage  and  zeal  than  others, 
not  loud  talk,  or  even  readiness  to  fight  ;  but  loving,  patient 
usefulness  to  the  souls  of  others,  and  diligent  care  for  the  sheep 
of  Christ's  flock. 

Calvin  remarks, "  The  Evangelist  now  relates  in  what  manner 
Peter  was  restored  to  that  rank  of  honor  from  which  he  had 
fallen.  The  treacherous  denial,  which  has  been  formerly  de- 
scribed, had  undoubtedly  rendered  him  unworthy  of  the  apos- 
tleship  ;  for  how  could  he  be  capable  of  instructing  others  in 
the  faith,  who  had  basely  revolted  from  it  ?  He  had  been  made 
an  Apostle,  but  it  was  along  with  Judas  ;  and  from  the  time 
that  he  acted  the  part  of  a  coward  and  traitor,  he  had  been  de- 
prived of  the  honor  of  apostleship.  Now  therefore  the  liberty, 
as  well  as  the  authority  of  teaching  is  restored  to  him,  both  of 
which  he  had  lost  through  his  own  fault.  And  that  the  dis- 
grace of  his  apostacy  might  not  stand  in  the  way,  Christ  blots 
out  and  destroys  the  remembrance  of  it.  Such  a  restoration 
was  necessary,  both  for  Peter  and  his  hearers  :  for  Peter,  that 
he  might  the  more  boldly  execute  his  office,  being  assured  of 
the  calling  with  which  Christ  had  again  invested  him  ;  for  his 
hearers,  that  the  stain  which  attached  to  his  person  might  not 
be  the  occasion  of  despising  the  Gospel,  To  us  also,  in  the 
present  day,  it  is  of  very  great  importance  that  Peter  comes 
forth  to  us  as  a  new  man,  from  whom  the  disgrace  that  might 
have  lessened  his  authority,  is  removed." 

The  Roman  Catholic  theory,  that  our  Lord  specially  addressed 
Peter,  on  this  occasion,  in  order  to  mark  him  out  as  head  of  the 
Church,  is  one  which  I  repudiate  as  preposterous,  unreasonable, 
improbable,  and  utterly  destitute  of  solid  foundation.  Neither 
here,  nor  elsewhere,  is  there  a  tittle  of  evidence  to  show  that 
any  primacy  was  ever  intended  to  be  given  to  Peter.  On  the 
contrary,  the  fact  that  our  Lord  specially  appeared  on  one  oc 
casion  to  James  alone,  and  that  afterwards  James  was  the  pre- 
siding Apostle  in  the  first  Council  at  Jerusalem,  would  seem  to 
indicate  that,  if  He  conferred  primacy  on  any  Apostle,  He  con- 
ferred it  on  James.  But  there  is  no  proof  that  primacy  was 
conferred  on  any  one  at  all. 

Burgon  says.  "  The  profane  and  ridiculous  pretentions  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  are  based  in  great  part  on  the  words  of  our 
Saviour  addressed  to  St.  Peter  in  this  passage.  The  Papists 
assume  (1)  that  He  hereby  appointed  St.  Peter  to  be  His  vicar 
upon  earth ;  (2)  that  St.  Peter  was  the  first  Bishop  of  Rome ; 


448  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

(3)  that  St.  Peter  transmitted  to  the  Bishops  of  the  same  See,  in 
endless  succession,  his  own  supposed  authority  over  the  rest  of 
Christendom,  Each  one  of  these  assumptions  is  simply  un- 
founded and  untrue  ;  opposed  alike  to  Scripture  and  to  reason  ; 
to  the  records  of  the  Early  Church  and  the  opinions  of  the 
primitive  Fathers.  With  such  fictions,  nevertheless,  do  Romish 
writers  distort  the  true  image  of  Christianity  ;  disfiguring  their 
commentaries  therewith,  and  betraying  with  a  reckless  eager- 
ness to  obtrude  their  ambitious  and  unscriptural  theory  on  all 
occasions,  their  secret  misgivings  as  to  its  real  value." 

[Simon,  son  of  Jonas.]  This  mode  of  address,  thrice  repeated 
in  this  remarkable  conversation,  is  only  used  by  our  Lord  on 
this  occasion,  and  when  Peter  first  came  to  Him.  (John  i.  42.) 
I  do  not  find  that  any  Commentator  gives  a  satisfactory  expla- 
nation of  it,  and  we  are  left  to  conjecture  the  reason,  (a)  Some 
think  that  our  Lord  purposely  avoided  the  name  Peter,  in  order 
to  remind  the  Apostle  how  on  a  recent  occasion  he  had  shown 
himself  not  firm  as  a  "  rock,"  agreeably  to  his  name,  but  weak 
as  a  reed,  (b)  Some  think  that  our  Lord  meant  to  remind  the 
Apostle  of  the  memorable  day  when  he  first  began  to  be  a  dis- 
ciple, when  Jesus  said  to  him,  "  Thou  art  Simon,  the  son  of 
Jona."  (c)  Some  think  that  our  Lord  would  remind  the  Apos- 
tle of  the  day  when  he  said, "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Barjona," 
after  the  good  confession  which  Peter  had  made.  (Matt.  xvi.  17.) 
(d)  Some  think  that  our  Lord  intended  to  remind  Peter  of  the 
lowly  origin  from  which  he  sprung,  as  son  of  one  who,  like 
Zebedee,  in  all  probability,  was  only  an  humble  fisherman,  {e) 
Some  tliink  that  the  expression  was  only  used  to  distinguish. 
Simon  Peter  from  the  other  Simon,  who  may  possibly  have  been 
in  company,  as  one  of  the  two  unnamed  disciples.  (Ch.  xxi.  2.) 
My  own  impression  is,  if  I  must  give  an  opinion,  that  our  Lord 
intended  to  carry  Peter's  mind  back  to  the  day  when  he  first 
began  to  be  a  disciple  of  Christ,  and  to  all  the  three  years  that 
had  elapsed.  It  is  as  though  He  said,  "  Simon,  sou  of  Jonas, 
thou  rememberest  the  day  when  thou  didst  first  come  to  Me, 
and  believe  on  Me  as  the  Lamb  of  God.  (John  i.  35 — 42.)  Thou 
knowest  all  that  thou  hast  been,  and  all  that  thou  hast  gone 
through  since  that  day.  Once  more  I  address  thee  by  the  same 
name  with  which  I  began.  Before  sending  thee  forth,  and 
commissioning  thee  once  more,  in  the  presence  of  these  six 
brethren,  as  a  restored  and  trusted  disciple,  I  ask  thee.  Dost 
thou  love  Me?"  I  throw  out  the  thought  as  a  conjecture.  I 
see  more  in  it  than  in  any  other  view. 

[Lovest  thou  Me .?]  The  question  which  Jesus  asked  of  Peter 
was  very  simple,  but  very  searching.  It  was  simple,  because  it 
appealed  to  his  feelings.  Even  a  child  knows  what  he  feels, 
and  whom  he  loves.  If  our  Lord  had  asked, — "  Dost  thou  be- 
lieve ?  Art  thou  converted  ?  Art  thou  elect  ?  Hast  thou  faith  ? 
Hast  thou  grace?  Art  thou  born  again  ?  Hast  thou  the  Spirit? 
Art  thou  sanctified?  Art  thou  justified?" — anyone  of  these 
questions  would  have  been  perhaps  very  difficult  to  answer. 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  449 

But  Peter  could  surely  tell  what  he  felt  towards  Christ. — A  t 
the  same  time  the  question  was  very  searching.  It  is  as  though 
our  Lord  said,  "  Simon,  1  know  all  thy  history.  I  know  what 
thou  hast  done,  and  what  thou  hast  been,  about  the  time  of  my 
betrayal  and  crucifixion,  and  I  am  ready  to  look  over  all,  and 
pardon  all.  But  one  thing  I  must  have  in  my  disciples,  and 
that  is,  a  sincere  and  loving  heart.  I  can  look  over  want  of 
knowledge  and  want  of  faith  ;  but  I  must  have  love.  Now, 
before  these  six  brethren,  before  commissioning  thee  once  more 
as  an  accredited  and  trustworthy  Apostle,  I  ask  thee  solemnly. 
Dost  thou  love  Me  ?  " 

Cyril  thinks  that  Peter  had  received  such  special  mercy,  par- 
don, and  forgiveness,  that  he  might  be  reasonably  required  to 
feel  special  love. 

[More  than  these.]  This  remarkable  expression,  which  is  only 
used  in  this  verse,  admits  of  three  interpretations,  (a)  It  may 
mean.  Dost  thou  love  Me  more  than  thou  lovest  these  thy 
brethren  and  friends  around  thee,  and  art  thou  willing  to  give 
them  up  for  my  sake,  and  follow  Me  alone,  if  need  be?  (5)  It 
may  mean,  as  Whitby  says,  Dost  thou  love  Me  more  than  these 
boats  and  fishing  nets,  among  which  thou  hast  spent  so  much 
of  thy  life,  from  which  I  did  first  call  thee,  and  in  the  midst  of 
which  I  find  thee  to-day  ?  Art  thou  willing  for  my  sake  to 
give  them  all  up,  and  devote  thyself  to  preaching  the  Gospel  ? 
(c)  It  may  mean,  as  the  great  majority  of  commentators  think. 
Dost  thou  love  Me  more  than  thy  brethren  love  Me  ?  Thou  re- 
memberest  a  certain  day  when  thou  didst  confidently  say, 
**  Though  all  men  forsake  Thee,  yet  will  not  I."  Thou  wast  con 
fident  then,  that  thou  wast  more  faithful  than  others.  Will 
thou  say  that  now  ?  After  all  that  has  happened,  art  thou  sure 
that  thy  heart  is  better  than  that  of  others?" — I  decidedly  pre- 
fer this  last  view  to  either  of  the  others.  I  think  it  was  meant 
to  teach  Peter,  that  the  two  grand  qualifications  for  a  faithful 
pastor  were  love  and  humility. 

Musculus  observes,  that  Jesus  did  not  ask  Peter  this  thrice- 
repeated  question,  as  if  He  was  ignorant  and  desired  to  learn, 
but  in  order  to  remind  him  before  others  of  his  future  duty. 

Bullinger  suggests,  that  one  reason  among  others  why  Jesus 
said,  "  more  than  these  ? "  was  Peter's  forwardness  to  spring 
into  the  water,  and  come  to  shore,  before  the  other  six  Apostles, 
who  were  in  the  boat  with  him. 

Pollock  observes,  on  our  Lord's  merciful  and  loving  dealing 
with  Peter,  "  Rebukers  should  be  lovers.  If  thou  rebuke  a 
man,  love  him  ;  otherwise  speak  not  to  him,  but  close  thy 
mouth.  If  thou  season  not  thy  rebukes  with  *  love,'  then  that 
which  should  have  been  as  medicine  will  be  turned  into  poison. 
They  that  would  be  instructors  and  admonishers  should  be  lov- 
ers. Wherefore,  whatever  thou  doest,  do  it  in  lenity  and  meek- 
ness.   A  bitter  teacher  is  not  worth  a  penny.     This  is  what  St, 


4,50  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

Paul  requires  wlien  he  says, '  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not 
strive  ;  but  be  gentle  to  all  men.'  (2  Tim.  ii.  24.)  All  should 
be  in  gentleness  :  teaching  in  gentleness.  Wherefore  ?  Be- 
cause, if  gentleness  be  lacking,  there  will  be  no  edification,  no 
comforting,  no  instruction." 

l^He  saith...  Yea,  Lord...knowe8t...I  love  Thee.]  The  answer  of 
Simon  Peter  in  this  verse  is  a  beautiful  example  of  sincerity 
and  humility.  He  appeals  to  our  Lord's  knowledge  of  his 
heart  :  "  I  may  be  very  defective  in  knowledge,  faith,  courage, 
wisdom.  I  am  a  debtor  to  mercy  and  grace  above  many.  Yet, 
Lord,  thou  knowest  that,  with  all  my  faults  and  infirmities,  I 
do  love  Thee."  He  does  not  venture  to  say  a  word  about  others. 
He  does  not  pretend  to  compare  his  love  with  that  of  his 
brethren.  If  he  has  done  so  in  time  past  he  will  do  so  no  more. 
— "  I  know  not  whether  others  love  Thee  more  or  less  than  I 
do.  I  only  know  my  own  heart ;  and  I  feel  sure  that  1  love 
Thee." 

Let  UB  carefully  note  that  love  to  Christ  is  one  of  the  sim- 
plest tests  of  a  true  Christian.  He  may  not  feel  sure  that  he  is 
converted,  or  that  he  repents  or  believes  aright.  But  if  he  is 
real,  he  will  be  able  to  say  that  he  loves  Christ. 

[He  saith. ..Feed  my  lambs ^  Having  received  from  Peter  a 
public  profession  of  his  sincere  love,  our  Lord  proceeds  to  tell 
him  how  that  love  is  to  be  shown,  and  to  give  him  his  commis- 
sion for  the  future.  He  bids  him  prove  the  reality  of  his  love 
by  "  feeding  His  lambs." — When  our  Lord  said  "  feed,"  I  be- 
lieve He  meant  that  Peter  was  to  feed  souls  with  the  precious 
food  of  God's  Word,  to  supply  them  with  that  bread  of  life 
which  a  man  must  eat  or  die,  and  to  watch  carefully  and  dili- 
gently over  their  spiritual  interests,  like  a  good  shepherd  watch- 
ing his  flock.  When  our  Lord  spoke  of  "  lambs,"  1  believe  He 
meant  the  least,  the  weakest,  and  feeblest  members  of  that 
flock  which  is  Flis  Church.  It  is  as  though  Jesus  said, — 
'  Simon,  if  indeed  thou  dost  love  Me,  know  that  the  beat  proof 
of  love  is  to  devote  thyself  to  the  great  work  of  shepherding 
souls.  Live  for  others.  Care  for  others.  Minister  to  others. 
Do  good  to  others.  Seek  out  and  search  for  my  sheep  in  this 
wicked  world,  and  think  it  not  beneath  thee  to  attend  to  the 
wants  of  the  feeblest  among  them.  Herein,  remember,  is  true 
love.  It  does  not  consist  in  talking,  professing,  fighting,  or 
seeking  pre-eminence  over  others.  It  is  best  seen  in  walking 
in  my  steps.  I  came  to  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost.  I 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister.  Go  and  do 
likewise.     He  loves  most  who  is  most  like  Me." 

I  cannot  think  that  "  lambs  "  in  this  place  was  Intended  to 
apply  to  young  children,  as  it  is  often  interpreted.  All  such 
interpretations  I  regard  as  nothing  better  than  pious  accommo- 
dations. I  believe  that "  lambs,"  in  contradistinction  to  "  sheep," 
mean  those  who  are  young  and  weak  in  spiritual  experience. 
Peter  was  not  to  neglect  and  despise  them  because  weak.   Peter 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  45 X 

remembered  these  ringing  words,  we  may  be  sure,  when  lie 
wrote  in  his  Epistle, "  Feed  the  flock  of  God  that  is  among 
you."     (1  Peter  v.  2.) 

Augustine  observes  that  Christ,  both  here  and  in  the  two 
following  verses,  says,  "  my  "  and  not  "  thy."  The  Church  is 
His  property,  and  not  the  property  of  ministers. 

Bullinger  observes  that  Christ  passes  from  the  calling  of  the 
fisherman  to  that  of  the  shepherd,  as  representing,  more  than 
any  other  callings,  the  ministerial  oflBce. 

16. — [Re  saith  to  him  again,  etc.]  This  verse  is  simply  a  repeti- 
ti<m  of  the  preceding  one,  with  three  exceptions. — For  one 
thing,  the  expression,  "  more  than  these,"  is  omitted. — For  an- 
other thing,  the  word  which  we  render  "  feed,"  in  the  Greek  is 
a  wider,  fuller  word  than  the  one  employed  in  the  preceding 
verse. — For  another  thing,  our  Lord  speaks  of  His  "  sheep"  in- 
stead of  His  "  lambs."  By  "  sheep  "  I  believe  our  Lord  meant 
those  members  of  His  flock  who  were  of  more  advanced  ex- 
perience and  strength  in  grace,  than  the  class  He  had  spoken 
of  in  the  preceding  verse.  Both  classes  demanded  the  atten- 
tion of  a  faithful  pastor. 

The  repetition  of  the  inquiry  was  doubtless  intended  to 
rouse  Peter's  attention,  and  to  impress  the  whole  subject  on 
his  mind. 

Lightfoot  thinks  that  the  "  threefold  repetition, — feed,  feed, 
feed,  may  most  fitly  apply  to  the  threefold  object  of  St.  Peter's 
ministry:  viz.,  the  Gentiles,  the  Jews,  and  the  dispersed  ten 
tribes."  But  this  seems  to  me  fanciful.  Bengel  thinks  it  re- 
fers to  the  three  periods  of  Peter's  ministry. 

Whitby  observes,  "  Those  who  argue  for  Peter's  supremacy 
above  other  Apostles,  from  this  passage,  are  vain  in  their  im- 
agination. If  by  these  words  Christ  required  Peter  to  feed  all 
His  sheep  and  lambs,  it  is  certain  he  was  wanting  in  his  duty. 
He  never  exercised  an  act  of  supremacy  over  the  rest  of  the 
Apostles ;  but  being  sent  by  them,  obeyed  (Acts  viii.  14),  and 
being  reproved  by  St.  Paul,  held  his  peace  (Gal.  ii.  11 — 16),  and 
was  so  far  from  feeding  all  Christ's  sheep,  that  he  never  fed 
any  of  the  province  of  St,  Paul." 

17.—  [He  saith  unto  him  the  third  time,  etc.]  This  verse  again  is 
a  repetition  of  the  two  preceding  verses,  but  contains  two 
points  of  difference.  For  one  thing  we  are  told  that  "  Peter 
was  grieved,"  on  being  asked  the  same  question  three  times. 
For  another  thing,  Peter  uses  stronger  language  when  he  ap- 
peals to  our  Lord's  knowledge  of  his  heart.  "  Lord,"  he  says 
"  Thou  knowest  all  things." 

I  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt  that  our  Lord  asked  Peter  this 
remarkable  question  three  times,  in  order  to  remind  him  that 
lie  had  denied  Him  thrice.    Our  sins  ought  never  to  be  forgot- 


452  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 

ten  by  us,  tliougli  they  are  wiped  out  of  the  book  of  God's  re- 
membrance. The  very  "grief"  which  Peter  felt  at  being 
thrice  asked  about  his  love,  was  intended  to  do  him  good.  It 
was  meant  to  remind  him  that  if  he  was  grieved  to  be  asked 
thrice,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  how  much  more  must  his  Master 
have  been  grieved  when  he  thrice  denied  Him  ! 

Whitby  observes,  "  Here  is  an  argument  that  Christ,  in  Pe- 
ter's judgment,  was  truly  God.  He  says,  '  Thou  knowest  all 
things.'  It  is  to  God  alone  that  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  lie 
open." 

There  are  little  nice  distinctions  in  the  original  Greek  of  these 
three  verses,  in  the  words  that  are  used,  which  the  English 
language  cannot  convey.  But  they  deserve  notice,  and  are  not 
without  meaning.  Two  different  words  are  used  to  express 
our  one  word  "  love."  One  of  these  two  words  means  a  high- 
er, calmer,  nobler  kind  of  love  than  the  other.  This  is  the 
word  which  our  Lord  uses  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  verses, 
where  He  asks  the  question,  "  Lovest  thou  Me?" — The  other 
of  the  two  words  means  a  more  passionate  and  lower  kind  of 
love.  This  is  the  word  which  Peter  always  uses  when  he  says, 
"  I  love  thee  !  "  and  our  Lord  once  uses  it  in  the  seventeenth 
verse. — Again :  two  different  words  are  employed  to  express 
our  one  English  word  "  feed."  One  means  simply  "  provide 
food  and  pasture,"  and  is  used  in  the  fifteenth  and  seventeenth 
verses.  The  other  means  not«only  "  provide  food,"  but  "  gov- 
ern, lead,  direct,  and  generally  do  the  work  of  a  shepherd." 

Some  of  the  Roman  Catholic  writers  try  to  make  out  that 
"  lambs "  in  this  remarkable  passage  mean  the  laity,  and 
*'  sheep  "  the  clergy  ;  and  that  supremacy  over  clergy  and  laity 
alike  is  intended,  by  these  words,  to  be  conferred  on  Peter  and 
his  successors  at  Ptome!  Archbishop  Trench  (on  Miracles) 
justly  condemns  this  interpretation,  as  "  groundless  and  tri- 
fling." He  observes,  "  The  commission  should  at  least  have 
run,  *  Feed  my  sheep  and  feed  my  shepherds,'  if  any  such  con- 
clusion could  be  drawn  from  Christ's  words,  though  an  infinite 
deal  would  still  remain  to  be  proved." 

The  lessons  which  the  whole  passage  is  meant  to  teach  the 
Church  of  Christ,  are  many  and  deep,  and  have  been  far  too 
much  neglected  in  every  age.  I  can  only  indicate  them,  and 
then  leave  the  reader  to  work  them  oat  in  his  own  mind. 

(a)  Love  to  Christ's  person  is  one  of  the  most  important 
graces  that  can  adorn  a  Christian,  and  specially  a  minister. 
Without  it,  correct  doctrinal  views,  zeal  for  proselytizing, 
knowledge,  eloquence,  liberality,  diligence  in  visiting  the  sick 
and  relieving  the  poor,  are  worth  very  little,  and  will  do  very 
little  good.  With  it,  God  is  pleased  to  look  over  many  infirmi- 
ties. A  minister  may  be  somewhat  defective  in  some  of  his 
views,  and  even  in  some  of  his  proceedings,  but  if  he  loves 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  453 

Christ  and  "has  a  warm  heart,  God  will  seldom  allow  him  to 
lack  a  blessing. 

Hengstenberg  shrewdly  remarks,  that  Christ's  emphatical 
question  about  love  to  Himself,  and  omission  of  any  question 
about  love  to  Qod,  is  strong  indirect  pl-oof  of  Christ's  divinity. 

(b)  True  love  to  Christ  is  chiefly  to  be  seen  in  usefulness  to 
others,  in  doing  as  Christ  did,  in  walking  in  His  steps,  in  labor- 
ing to  do  good  in  this  bad  world.  He  that  talks  of  loving 
Christ,  and  idles  on  through  life,  nev^er  trying  to  do  good  to 
others,  is  deceiving  himself,  and  will  find  at  length  that  he  had 
better  never  have  been  born. 

(c)  A  vast  amount  of  so-called  Christianity  is  perfectly  use- 
less in  the  sight  of  God,  and  will  only  add  to  people's  condem- 
nation. Church-goers  and  chapel-goers,  who  are  content  to  at- 
tend services  and  hear  sermons,  but  know  nothing  of  fervent 
love  to  Christ's  person,  and  never  lay  themselves  out  to  imitate 
Him,  are  in  the  broad  way  that  leads  to  destruction. 

Rollock  observes,  "  A  profane  man  or  woman  will  say,  •  I 
love  God  ; '  but  if  it  manifest  not  itself  in  an  action,  thou  art 
but  a  liar,  and  lovest  Him  not.  Faith  and  love  must  ever  utter 
themselves  in  good  actions.  Hast  thou  gotten  a  heart,  hands, 
and  feet  ?  Do  some  good.  Otherwise,  if  thou  doest  never  a 
good  deed,  thy  profession  of  faith  and  love  is  vain." 

He  also  says, — "  The  pastor  is  not  worth  a  penny  who  strives 
not  to  get  a  sense  of  the  love  of  Christ  into  his  heart.  There 
are  so  many  difficulties  and  impediments  cast  before  a  pastor, 
when  he  is  about  to  discharge  his  duty,  that  he  never  can  be 
able  to  overcome  them,  except  he  both  love  the  Lord,  and  be 
sensible  of  the  Lord's  love  to  him.  If  the  Apostles  and  mar- 
tyrs had  not  loved  Jesus  exceedingly,  they  would  soon  have 
fainted." 

Leighton  observes,  "  Love  is  the  great  endowment  of  a  true 
pastor  of  Christ's  flock.  He  says  not  to  Peter, '  Art  thou  wise  ? 
or  learned  ?  or  eloquent  ?  '  but  *  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  '  Then, 
*  feed.'  Love  to  Christ  begets  love  to  His  people's  souls,  which 
are  so  precious  to  Him,  and  a  care  of  feeding  them." 

Scott  observes,  "  Those  who  have  been  greatly  tempted,  and 
have  had  much  humbling  experience  of  their  own  sinfulness, 
and  have  had  much  forgiven  them,  generally  prove  the  most 
tender,  compassionate,  and  attentive  pastors,  of  weak,  bruised, 
and  trembling  believers/' 

(d)  The  true  test  of  reality  in  our  religion  is  to  be  able  to 
appeal  confidently  to  God's  knowledge  of  our  hearts.  It  mat- 
ters nothing  what  friends,  and  relatives,  and  fellow-worship- 
pers, may  think  and  say  of  us.  They  may  praise  us,  when  we 
do  not  deserve  it,  or  condemn  us,  when  we  are  innocent.  It 
matters  nothing.     If  we  have  the  witness  of  our  own  hearts, 


454: 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS. 


that  we  can  appeal  to  Jesus,  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  and  say, 
"  Thou,  wlxo  kuowest  all  things,  knowest  that  I  love  Thee,"  we 
need  not  be  afraid. 

(e)  If  we  really  and  truly  feel  love  to  Christ,  we  may  thank 
God  and  take  courage.  Of  our  own  faith,  and  grace,  and  con- 
version, and  sanctiticatiou,  we  are  poor  judges.  But  do  we 
really  and  sincerely  feel  that  we  love  Christ  ?  That  is  the 
great  question.  The  very  existence  of  such  love  is  a  good 
sign.  We  sliould  not  love  Christ,  if  we  had  not  got  something 
from  Him. 

Brentius  remarks  that  Peter's  charge  to  the  elders,  in  his 
epistle,  clearly  shows  that  our  Lord's  thrice-repeated  charge, 
"  Feed,"  was  not  meant  for  him  only,  as  the  Romanists  say,  but 
for  all  ministers  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  without  exception. 
"  The  elders  which  are  among  you,  I  exhort ; — Feed  the  flock 
of  God."    (1  Peter  v.  1.) 


JOHN  XXI.  18—25. 


18  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee, 
"When  thou  wast  young,  thou  gird- 
edst  thyself,  and  walkedst  whither 
thou  wouldst :  but  when  thou  shalt 
be  old,  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy 
hands,  and  another  shall  gird  thee, 
and  carry  thee  whither  thou  would- 
est  not. 

19  This  spake  he,  signifying  by 
what  death  he  should  giorit'y  God. 
And  when  he  had  spoken  this,  he 
saith  unto  him,  Follow  me. 

20  Then  Peter,  turning  about, 
Beeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
following  ;  which  also  leaned  on  his 
breast  at  supper,  and  said.  Lord, 
which  is  he  that  betrayeth  thee  ? 

21  Peter  seeing  him  saith  to  Jesus, 
Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do  ? 


22  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  If  I  will 
that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  ia 
that  to  thee  i  follow  thou  me. 

23  Then  went  this  saying  abroad 
among  the  brethren,  that  that  disci- 
ple should  not  die ;  yet  Jesus  said 
not  unto  hira,  He  shall  not  die ; 
but,  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I 
come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 

24  This  is  the  disciple  which  tes- 
tifieth  of  these  things  and  wrote 
these  things  :  and  we  know  that  his 
testimony  is  true. 

25  And  there  are  also  many  other 
things  which  Jesus  did,  the  which, 
if  they  should  be  written  every  one^ 
I  suppose  that  even  the  world  itseit 
could  not  contain  the  books  that 
should  be  written.    Amen. 


These  verses  form  the  conclusion  of  St.  John's  Gos- 
pel, and  bring  to  an  end  the  most  precious  book  in  the 
Bible.  The  man  is  much  to  be  pitied  who  can  read  the 
passage  without  serious  and  solemn  feelings.  It  is  like 
listening  to  the  parting  words  of  a  friend,  whom  we 
may  possibly  not  see  again.  Let  us  reverently  consider 
the  lessons  which  this  Scripture  contains. 

We  learn,  for  one  thing,  from  these  verses,  that  the 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  455 

future  history  of  Christians,  both  in  life  and  death,  is 
foreknown  by  Christ.  The  Lord  tells  Simon  Peter, 
"  When  thou  art  old,  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  hands, 
and  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee  whither 
thou  wouldest  not."  These  words,  without  controversy, 
were  a  prediction  of  the  manner  of  the  Apostle's  death. 
They  were  fulfilled  in  after  days,  it  is  commonly  sup- 
posed, when  Peter  was  crucified  as  a  martyr  for  Christ's 
sake.  The  time,  the  place,  the  manner,  the  painfulnesa 
to  flesh  and  blood  of  the  disciple's  death,  were  all  mat- 
ters foreseen  by  the  Master. 

The  truth  before  us  is  eminently  full  of  comfort  to  a 
true  believer.  To  obtain  foreknowledofe  of  thinors  to 
come  would,  in  most  cases,  be  a  sorrowful  possession. 
To  know  what  was  going  to  befall  us,  and  yet  not  to  be 
able  to  prevent  it,  would  make  us  simply  miserable. 
But  it  is  an  unspeakable  consolation  to  remember,  that 
our  whole  future  is  known  and  forearranged  by  Christ. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  luck,  chance,  or  accident  in 
the  journey  of  our  life.  Everything  from  beginning  to 
end  is  foreseen, — arranged  by  One  who  is  too  wise  to 
err,  and  too  loving  to  do  us  harm. 

Let  us  store  up  this  truth  in  our  minds,  and  use  it 
diligently  in  all  the  days  of  darkness  through  which  we 
may  yet  have  to  pass.  In  such  days  we  should  lean 
back  on  the  thought,  "  Christ  knows  this,  and  knew  it 
when  He  called  me  to  be  His  disciple."  It  is  foolish  to 
repine  and  murmur  over  the  troubles  of  those  whom  we 
love.  We  should  rather  fall  back  on  the  thought  that 
all  is  well  done.  It  is  useless  to  fret  and  be  rebellious, 
when  we  ourselves  have  bitter  cups  to  drink.  We 
should  rather  say,  "This  also  is  from  tlie  Lord:  He 
foresaw  it,  and  would  have  prevented  it,  if  it  had  not 
been  for  my  good."  Happy  are  those  who  can  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  that  old  saint,  who  said,  "  I  have  made 


4.56  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

a  covenant  with  my  Lord,  that  I  will  never  take  amiss 
anything  that  He  does  to  me."  We  may  have  to  walk 
sometimes  through  rough  places,  on  our  way  to  heaven. 
But  surely  it  is  a  resting,  soothing  reflection,  "  Every 
step  of  my  journey  was  foreknown  by  Christ." 

We  learn,  secondly,  in  these  verses,  that  a  heliever^s 
death  is  intended  to  glorify  God.  The  Holy  Ghost  tells 
us  this  truth  in  plain  language.  He  graciously  inter- 
prets the  dark  saying,  which  fell  from  our  Lord's  lips 
about  Peter's  end.  He  tells  us  that  Jesus  spake  this, 
"  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glorify  God." 

The  thing  before  us  is  probably  not  considered  as 
much  as  it  ought  to  be.  We  are  so  apt  to  regard  life 
as  the  only  season  for  honoring  Christ,  and  action  as 
the  only  mode  of  showing  our  religion,  that  we  overlook 
death,  except  as  a  painful  termination  of  usefulness. 
Yet  surely  this  ought  not  so  to  be.  We  may  die  to  the 
Lord  as  well  as  live  to  the  Lord  ;  we  may  be  patient 
sufferers  as  well  as  active  workers.  Like  Samson,  we 
may  do  more  for  God  in  our  death,  than  we  ever  did  in 
our  lives.  It  is  probable  that  the  patient  deaths  of  our 
martyred  Reformers  had  more  effect  on  the  minds  of 
Englishmen,  than  all  the  sermons  they  preached,  and 
all  the  books  they  wrote.  One  thing,  at  all  events,  is 
certain, — the  blood  of  the  English  martyrs  was  the  seed 
of  the  English  Church. 

We  may  glorify  God  in  death,  by  being  ready  for  it 
whenever  it  comes.  The  Christian  who  is  found  like  a 
sentinel  at  his  post,  like  a  servant  with  his  loins  girded 
and  his  lamp  burning,  with  a  heart  packed  up  and 
ready  to  go,  the  man  to  whom  sudden  death,  by  the 
common  consent  of  all  who  knew  him,  is  sudden  glory, 
— this,  this  is  a  man  whose  end  brings  glory  to  God. — 
We  may  glorify  God  in  death,  by  patiently  enduring 
its  pains.     The  Christian  whose  spirit  has  complete  vie- 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  457 

tory  over  the  flesh,  who  quietly  feelS  the  pins  of  his 
earthly  tabernacle  plucked  up  with  great  bodily  ago- 
nies, and  yet  never  murmurs  or  complains,  but  silently 
enjoys  inward  peace, — this,  this  again,  is  a  man  whose 
end  brings  glory  to  God. — We  may  glorify  God  in 
death,  by  testifying  to  others  the  comfort  and  support 
that  we  find  in  the  grace  of  Christ.  It  is  a  great  thing, 
when  a  mortal  man  can  say  with  David,  "  Though  I 
walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil."  (Psalm  xxiii.  4.)  The  Christian  who, 
like  Standfast  in  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  can  stand  for  a 
while  in  the  river,  and  talk  calmly  to  his  companions, 
saying,  "  My  foot  is  fixed  sure  :  my  toilsome  days  are 
ended," — this,  this  is  a  man  whose  end  brings  glory  to 
God.  Deaths  like  these  leave  a  mark  on  the  living,  and 
are  not  soon  forgotten. 

Let  us  pray,  while  we  live  in  health,  that  we  may 
glorify  God  in  our  end.  Let  us  leave  it  to  God  to 
choose  the  where,  and  when,  and  how,  and  all  the  man- 
ner of  our  departing.  Let  us  only  ask  that  it  may 
"  glorify  God."  He  is  a  wise  man  who  takes  John  Bun- 
yan's  advice,  and  keeps  his  last  hour  continually  in 
mind,  and  makes  it  his  company-keeper.  It  was  a 
weighty  saying  of  John  Wesley,  when  one  found  fault 
with  the  doctrines  and  practices  of  the  Methodists, — 
"  At  any  rate  our  people  die  well." 

We  learn,  thirdly,  in  these  verses,  that  whatever  we 
may  think  about  the  condition  of  other  people^  vne  should 
think  first  about  our  oicn.  When  Peter  inquired  curi- 
ously and  anxiously  about  the  future  of  the  Apostle 
John,  he  received  from  our  Lord  an  answer  of  deep 
meaning  :  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is 
that  to  thee?  Follow  thou  Me."  Hard  to  understand 
as  some  part  of  that  sentence  may  be,  it  contains  a  prac- 
tical lesson  which  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  commands 
20 


458  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

every  Christian  to  remember  his  own  heart  first,  and  to 
look  at  home. 

Of  course  our  blessed  Lord  does  not  wish  us  to  neg- 
lect the  souls  of  others,  or  to  take  no  interest  in  their 
condition.  Such  a  state  of  mind  would  be  nothing  less 
than  uncharitable  selfishness,  and  would  prove  plainly 
that  we  had  not  the  grace  of  God.  The  servant  of 
Christ  will  have  a  wide,  broad  heart,  like  his  Master, 
and  will  desire  the  present  and  eternal  happiness  of  all 
around  him.  He  will  long  arid  labor  to  lessen  the  sor- 
rows, and  to  increase  the  joys,  of  every  one  within  his 
reach,  and,  as  he  has  opportunity,  to  do  good  to  all  men. 
But,  in  all  his  doing,  the  servant  of  Christ  must  never 
forget  his  own  soul.  Charity,  and  true  religion,  must 
both  begin  at  home. 

It  is  vain  to  deny  that  our  Lord's  solemn  caution  to 
His  impetuous  disciple  is  greatly  needed  in  the  present 
day.  Such  is  the  weakness  of  human  nature,  that  even 
true  Christians  are  continually  liable  to  run  into  ex- 
tremes. Some  are  so  entirely  absorbed  in  their  own  in- 
ward experience,  and  their  own  heart's  conflict,  that 
they  forget  the  world  outside.  Others  are  so  busy 
about  doing  good  to  the  world,  that  they  neglect  to  cul- 
tivate their  own  souls.  Both  are  wrong,  and  both  need 
to  see  a  more  excellent  way ;  but  none  perhaps  do  so 
much  harm  to  religion  as  those  who  are  busy-bodies 
about  others'  salvation,  and  at  the  same  time  neglecters 
of  their  own.  From  such  a  snare  as  this  may  the  ring- 
ing words  of  our  Lord  deliver  us  !  Whatever  we  do 
for  others  (and  we  never  can  do  enough),  let  us  not  for- 
get our  own  inner  man.  Unhappily,  the  Bride,  in  Can- 
ticles, is  not  the  only  person  who  has  cause  to  complain : 
"They  made  me  keeper  of  the  vineyards ;  but  my  own 
vineyard  I  have  not  kept."     (Cant.  i.  6.) 

We  learn,  lastly,  from  these  verses,  the  number  and 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  459 

greatness  of  Christ'* s  works  during  His  earthly  ministry, 
St.  John  concludes  his  Gospel  with  these  remarkable 
words,  "There  are  many  other  things  which  Jesus  did, 
the  which,  if  they  should  be  written  every  one,  I  sup- 
pose the  world  itself  could  not  contain  the  books  that 
should  be  written." — Of  course  we  must  not  torture 
these  words,  by  j^ressing  them  to  an  excessively  literal 
interpretation.  To  suppose  that  the  Evangelist  meant 
the  world  could  not  hold  the  material  volumes  which 
would  be  written,  is  evidently  unreasonable  and  absurd. 
The  only  sensible  interpretation  must  be  a  spiritual  and 
figurative  one. 

As  much  of  Christ's  sayings  and  doings  is  recorded 
as  the  mind  of  man  can  take  in.  It  would  not  be 
good  for  the  world  to  have  more.  The  human  mind, 
like  the  body,  can  only  digest  a  certain  quantity.  The 
world  could  not  contain  more,  because  it  would  not. 
As  many  miracles,  as  many  parables,  as  many  sermons, 
as  many  conversions,  as  many  words  of  kindness,  as 
many  deeds  of  mercy,  as  many  journeys,  as  many  prayers, 
as  many  warnings,  as  many  promises,  are  recorded,  as  the 
world  can  possibly  require.  If  more  had  been  recorded 
they  would  have  been  only  thrown  away.  There  is 
enough  to  make  every  unbeliever  without  excuse,  enough 
to  show  every  inquirer  the  way  to  heaven,  enough  to  sat- 
isfy the  heart  of  every  honest  believer,  enough  to  con- 
demn man  if  he  does  not  repent  and  believe,  enough  to 
glorify  God,  The  largest  vessel  can  only  contain  a  cer- 
tain quantity  of  liquid.  The  mind  of  all  mankind  would 
not  appreciate  more  about  Christ,  if  more  had  been 
written.  There  is  enough  and  to  spare.  This  witness 
is  true.     Let  us  deny  it  if  we  can. 

And  now  let  us  close  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  with 
mingled  feelings  of  deep  humility  and  deep  thankful- 
ness.    We    may  well   be  humble  when  we    think  how 


460  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

ignorant  we  are,  and  how  little  we  comprehend  of  the 
treasures  which  this  Gospel  contains.  But  we  may  well 
be  thankful,  when  we  reflect  how  clear  and  plain  is  the 
instruction  which  it  gives  us  about  the  way  of  salvation. 
The  man  who  reads  this  Gospel  profitably,  is  he  who  "  be- 
lieves that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and,  believing,  has  life 
through  His  Name."  Do  we  so  believe  ?  Let  us  never 
rest  till  we  can  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  that  ques- 
tion ! 

Notes.    John  xxl  18—25. 

18. — [Verily,  verily,  1  say  unto  thee,  etc.']  Tn  this  verse  our 
Lord  forewarns  the  Apostle  Peter,  what  death  he  must  expect 
to  be  the  conclusion  of  his  ministry.  After  restoring  him  to 
his  office,  and  commissioning  him  to  be  a  pastor,  He  tells  him 
plainly  what  his  end  will  be.  He  holds  out  no  prospect  of 
temporal  ease  and  an  earthly  kingdom.  On  the  contrary.  He 
bids  him  look  forward  to  a  violent  death.  If  he  shows  his 
love  by  feeding  his  Master's  sheep,  he  must  not  be  surprised  if 
he  is  made  partaker  of  his  Master's  sufferings.  And  so  it  was. 
Peter  lived  to  be  persecuted,  beaten,  imprisoned,  and  at  length 
slain  for  Christ's  sake.  It  happened  exactly  as  his  Master  had 
predicted.  Most  ecclesiastical  historians  say  that  he  suffered 
martyrdom  at  Rome,  in  one  of  the  first  persecutions,  and  was 
crucified  with  his  head  downwards. 

Melancthon  remarks  that  Peter,  like  most  Jews,  was  proba- 
bly expecting  that,  after  our  Lord's  resurrection,  He  would  take 
to  Himself  His  kingdom,  and  reign  in  glory  with  His  disciples. 
Jesus  warns  him  that  he  must  expect  nothing  of  the  kind. 
Tribulation  and  not  glory,  was  the  prospect  before  him  in  this 
world. 

It  is  fair  to  say  that  some  learned  writers  deny  entirely  that 
Peter  ever  was  at  Rome,  and  consequently  deny  the  truth  of 
the  ecclesiastical  tradition,  that  he  was  crucified  there  with  his 
head  downward.  Calovius  gives  a  long  passage  from  Casau- 
bon,  maintaining  this  view.  Whether  it  was  so,  or  not,  does 
not  affect  the  passage  before  us.  In  any  case,  wherever  he 
died,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Peter  died  a  violent 
death. 

The  expression,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,"  is  thorough- 
ly characteristic  of  St.  John's  Gospel.  We  cannot  doubt  that 
Peter  would  remember  how  solemn  were  the  former  occasions 
when  our  Lord  used  this  phrase,  and  would  see  a  peculiar 
solemnity  in  the  words  of  this  verse.  Specially  would  Peter 
remember  the  night  when  our  Lord  was  betrayed,  when  Ilia 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  461 

Master  said  to  liim,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee.  The  cock 
eliall  not  crow,  till  tliou  hast  denied  Me  thrice."    (John  xiii.  38.) 

The  expression,  "  When  thou  wast  young,"  is  commonly 
thought  to  indicate  that  Peter  was  now  an  old  man,  when  these 
words  were  spoken.  Perhaps  too  much  stress  is  laid  on  the 
words,  especially  considering  the  context.  I  think  the  safe 
plan  is  to  interpret  it  as  meaning, "  When  thou  wast  a  younger 
man  than  thou  art  now." 

The  expression, "  Thou  girdedst  thyself,  and  walkedst  whither 
thou  wouldest,"  appears  to  me  a  general  phrase,  denoting  the 
freedom  from  restraint  and  independence  of  movement,  which 
Peter  enjoyed,  when  he  followed  his  calling  as  a  young  fifiher- 
tnan,  before  he  was  called  to  be  a  disciple  and  Apostle.  I  can- 
not, like  some  commentators,  see  any  allusion  to  Peter's  recent 
action,  when  he  put  his  "fisher's  coat  about  him,"  cast  himself 
into  the  sea,  and  waded  to  the  shore.  I  rather  regard  it  as  a 
proverbial  phrase.  A  young  Jewish  fisherman,  when  inclined 
to  go  here  or  there,  would,  according  to  oriental  custom,  gird 
up  his  loins  and  walk  off  upon  his  journey,  at  the  pleasure  of 
his  own  will.  "  This,"  says  our  Lord  to  Peter,  "  thou  didst  use 
to  do  when  a  young  man." 

The  expression,  "  When  thou  shalt  be  old,"  seems  to  denote 
at  any  rate  that  Peter  would  be  an  older  man  than  he  then  was, 
before  he  died,  and  would  suffer  martyrdom  in  his  old  age.  It 
certainly  condemns  the  idea  entertained  by  many,  that  the 
Apostle  Peter  was  an  aged  man,  when  our  Lord  left  the  world. 
Old  age,  in  his  case,  is  clearly  represented  as  a  thing  future. 

The  expression,  "  Thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thine  hands,  and 
another  shall  gird  thee,"  is  regarded  by  almost  all  commenta- 
tors, as  an  intimation  of  the  manner  of  Peter's  death.  He  was 
to  stretch  forth  his  hands  at  the  command  of  another,  that  is, 
of  an  executioner,  and,  in  all  probability,  to  be  bound  by  that 
executioner  to  the  cross  on  which  he  was  to  suffer.  If  this  be 
a  correct  interpretation  of  the  words,  it  certainly  favors  the 
idea  that  crucified  persons  were  "  bound,"  as  well  as  "  nailed," 
to  the  cross.  The  phrase  "gird"  may  possibly  refer  to  a  cus- 
tom of  girding  a  person's  loins,  and  putting  cords  round  his 
middle  before  crucifying  him.  The  contrast  would  then  be 
more  natural  between  a  man  girding  up  his  own  loins  to  walk, 
and  another  girding  him  round  the  loins  for  execution. 

The  expression  "  carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not," 
must  mean  that  the  executioner  having  bound  Peter  to  the 
cross,  would  carry  him  so  bound  to  the  place  where  the  cross 
would  be  reared  up,  after  a  manner  which  would  be  repugnant 
and  painful  to  flesh  and  blood.  It  cannot,  of  course,  mean  that 
Peter  would  object  to  his  punishment  and  resist  it.  It  can  only 
mean  that  his  punishment  would  be  one  which  must  needs  bo 
a  heavy  trial  to  his  natural  will. 


462  EXPOSITOKY  THOUGHTS. 

Brentius  thinks  tliat  "  another,"  in  this  sentence,  refers  to 
*'  Nero,"  or  the  "  executioner." 

We  should  note,  in  this  wonderful  prophecy,  the  unhesi 
tating  positiveuess  aud  decision  with  which  our  Lord  speaks 
of  things  to  come.     He  knew  perfectly  all  the  circumstances  of 
His  Apostle's  death,  long  before  it  took  place. 

We  should  note  how  faithfully  and  unreservedly  our  Lord 
tells  Peter  what  the  consequences  of  his  apostleship  would  be. 
He  does  not  tempt  him  onward  by  promises  of  earthly  success 
and  temporal  rewards.  Suffering,  death,  and  the  cross,  are 
plainly  exhibited  before  the  eyes  of  his  mind,  as  the  end  to 
which  he  must  look  forward. 

We  should  note  how  even  our  Lord  intimates  that  suffering 
is  painful  to  flesh  and  blood.  He  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing  that 
Peter  will  most  naturally  shrink  from : — *'  Thou  wouldest  not." 
Our  Lord  does  not  expect  us  to  ''  enjoy  "  bodily  pain  and  suf- 
fering, though  He  asks  us  to  be  willing  to  endure  it  for  His 
sake. 

Chrysostom  observes,  "  Christ  here  speaks  of  natural  feeling, 
and  the  necessity  of  the  flesh,  and  shows  that  the  soul  is  un- 
willingly torn  away  from  the  body.  Though  the  will  was 
firm,  even  then  nature  would  be  found  in  fault.  For  no  one 
lays  aside  the  body  without  feeling  ;  God  having  suitably  or- 
dained this  in  order  that  violent  deaths  might  not  be  many. 
For  if,  even  as  things  are  now,  the  devil  has  been  able  to  effect 
this,  and  has  led  thousands  (by  suicide)  to  precipices  and  pits, 
had  not  the  soul  felt  such  an  affection  for  the  body,  many 
would  have  rushed  to  this  under  any  common  discourage- 
ment." 

Augustine  observes,  "  No  man  likes  to  die  :  a  state  of  feeling 
BO  natural,  that  not  even  old  age  had  power  to  remove  it  from 
blessed  Peter,  to  whom  Jesus  said,  '  Thou  shalt  be  led  whither 
thou  wouldest  not.'  For  our  consolation,  we  may  remember, 
that  even  our  Saviour  took  this  state  of  feeling  on  Himself, 
saying, '  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  ! '  " 
— He  also  says,  "  Were  there  nothing,  or  little  of  irksomeness 
in  death,  the  glory  of  the  martyr  would  not  be  so  great  as  it  is." 

Calvin  observes,  "  This  must  be  understood  as  referring  to 
the  conflict  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit,  which  believers 
feel  within  themselves.  We  cannot  obey  God  in  a  manner  so 
free  and  unrestrained,  as  not  to  be  drawn,  as  it  were,  by  ropes, 
in  an  opposite  direction,  by  the  world  and  the  flesh.  Besides, 
it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  the  dread  of  death  is  naturally 
implanted  in  us  ;  for,  to  wisli  to  be  separated  from  the  body  is 
revolting  to  nature." — Again  he  says,  "  Even  the  martyrs  expe- 
rienced a  fear  of  death  similar  to  our  own,  so  that  they  could 
not  gain  a  triumph  over  the  enemies  of  truth  but  by  contend- 
ing with  themselves." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  453 

Beza  remarks  that  on  one  occasion,  when  Peter  and  John 
had  been  beaten  and  threatened  by  the  Jewish  Council,  "  they 
departed,  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  for  His  Name."  (Acts  v.  41.)  The  expression,  "  whith- 
er thou  wouldest  not,"  can  therefore  only  refer  to  the  natural 
will  of  flesh  and  blood.  Flesh  will  feel.  Holy  Baxter  in  his 
last  illness  used  to  say,  "  I  groan  ;  but  I  do  not  grumble." 

When  Bishop  Ridley  was  being  chained  to  the  stake,  before 
he  was  burned  as  a  martyr,  at  Oxford,  he  said  to  the  smith 
who  was  knocking  in  the  staple,  "  Good  fellow,  knock  it  in 
hard ;  for  the  flesh  will  have  its  way." 

Ambrose,  quoted  by  Jansenius,  mentions  a  legend  that  when 
Peter  was  in  prison  at  Rome  before  his  martyrdom,  he  escaped, 
and  was  going  out  of  the  city.  Then  Jesus  Christ  Himself  ap- 
peared to  him  in  a  vision,  and  on  Peter  asking,  "  Whither  go- 
est  thou?"  replied,  "To  Rome,  to  be  crucified  again."  On 
hearing  this,  Peter  returned  to  prison.  The  whole  story  is 
apocryphal,  and  destitute  of  historical  foundation.  But  it 
shows  the  current  of  feeling  among  early  Christians. 

19. — [27m  spake  He. ..what  death.. .glorify  God.]  We  have  here 
one  of  John's  peculiar  parenthetical  comments,  and  one  for 
which  we  may  be  specially  thankful.  Who  can  tell  what 
Commentators  might  have  made  of  our  Lord's  prediction  to 
Peter,  if  John  had  not  been  mercifully  inspired  to  tell  us  that 
Jesus  spoke  of  his  death  ? 

The  expression  "  what  death  "  means  "  what  kind  of  death," 
and  is  generally  considered  to  indicate  that  the  preceding  verse 
describes  death  by  crucifixion. 

The  expression  "  glorify  God  "  is  peculiarly  interesting,  be- 
cause it  teaches  that  a  Christian  may  bring  glory  to  God  by  his 
death,  as  well  as  by  his  life.  He  does  so  when  he  bears  it  pa- 
tiently, does  not  murmur,  exhibits  sensible  peace,  enjoys  evi- 
dent hope  of  a  better  world,  testifies  to  others  of  the  truth  and 
consolation  of  the  Gospel,  and  leaves  broad  evidences  of  the 
reality  of  his  religion  behind  him.  He  that  so  ends  glorifies 
God.  The  deaths  of  Latimer,  Ridley,  Hooper,  Bradford,  Rog- 
ers, Rowland  Taylor,  and  many  other  English  martyrs,  in  the 
days  of  Queen  Mary,  were  said  to  have  done  more  good  even 
than  their  lives,  and  to  have  had  immense  influence  in  helping 
forward  the  Protestant  Reformation. 

[And  when...t7ds...saith... Follow  Me.]  The  precise  meaning  of 
this  short  and  emphatic  phrase  is  not  very  plain. 

(a)  Some  think  that  it  must  be  interpreted  literally,  and  that 
our  Lord  simply  meant,  "  Follow  Me  in  the  direction  where  I 
am  now  going.  We  have  tarried  here  long  enough.  Let  us 
be  going."  At  first  sight  this  seems  a  thin  and  weak  interpre- 
tation. But  before  we  reject  it  entirely,  we  should  carefully 
observe  the  language  of  the  next  verse. 


464  EXPOSITOEY  TIIOUGHTS. 

(&)  Some  think  that  *'  Follow  Me  "  must  be  interpreted  spir- 
itually, and  that  our  Lord  used  the  expression  as  a  kind  of 
watchword  for  Peter's  course  in  life  from  that  day  forward. 
"  Walk  in  my  steps.  Do  as  I  have  done.  Follow  Me  whither- 
soever I  lead  thee,  even  though  it  be  to  prison  and  death." 

I  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  adopt  both  views.  There 
is  such  a  depth  and  fulness  in  our  Lord's  sayings,  that  I  think 
we  may  safely  do  so.  I  therefore  think  it  most  probable  that 
our  Lord  not  only  meant,  "  Arise,  and  follow  Me  now ; "  but 
also  meant,  "  Always  follow  Me  through  life,  whatever  be  the 
consequences."  After  all,  Christ's  three  great  words  to  Chris- 
tians are,  "  Come  to  Me, — Learn  of  Me, — and  Follow  Me." 
(Matt.  xi.  28,  29.) 

Is  there  not  in  the  words,  "  Follow  Me,"  a  latent  reference  to 
the  remarkable  saying  of  our  Lord  to  Peter,  on  the  night  that 
Peter  denied  Him  thrice :  "  Whither  I  go,  thou  canst  not  fol- 
low Me  now ;  but  thou  shalt  follow  Me  afterwards."  (John 
xiii.  36.) 

20. — [Then  Peter,  turning,  seetli,  etc.]  This  verse  brings  in  the 
Apostle  John  Himself,  described  with  more  than  usual  feeling 
and  particularity,  as  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  and  who 
leaned  on  his  breast  at  supper,"  as  if  to  prevent  the  possibility 
of  mistake. 

The  expressions,  "  turning,"  and  "  following,"  seem  to  me  to 
place  it  beyond  doubt,  that  our  Lord  began  to  move  away  from 
the  scene  of  the  social  meal,  when  He  said,  "  Follow  Me."  No 
other  view  can  explain  them.  There  was  a  movement  in  a 
certain  direction.  As  our  Lord  moved  away,  Peter  followed 
Him.  As  he  followed,  Peter  turned  round,  and  saw  John  fol- 
lowing also.  After  John,  I  believe,  the  other  five  disciples 
followed  also,  or  else  they  could  hardly  have  heard  the  re- 
markable saying  about  "tarrying  till  1  come,"  which  they  evi- 
dently did  hear. 

Tittman  suggests  that  "  When  Peter  saw  John  following  he 
was  displeased,  as  Jesus  had  ordered  Peter  alone  to  follow, 
with  the  intention  of  saying  something  to  him  apart.  He 
therefore  asked  why  Jesus  permitted  John  to  follow  unbid- 
den."— He  then  thinks,  if  we  adopt  this  interpretation,  that  the 
remarkable  words  of  the  following  verse  may  only  mean, — "  If 
I  wish  him  to  remain  with  the  other  disciples  until  I  return  to 
them,  that  is  no  business  of  thine.  Just  follow  Me." — This 
however  seems  to  me  rather  a  tame  interpretation. 

Stier  observes,  "  There  was  something  wrong  at  first  in  Pe- 
ter's act  of  turning  himself.  He  was  commanded  to  follow, 
and  not  to  look  around.  Thus  there  was  certainly  an  uncalled- 
for,  and  not  artless,  looking  aside,  a  side-glance  once  more  of 
comparison  with  others  I  After  his  deep  humiliation  here  ia 
Btill  some  light  trace  of  the  ancient  Simon." 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  465 

21.— [Peter  seeing. ..Lord...w7iat... this  man  do^  Tlie  Greek  words 
of  Peter's  question  would  be  literally  rendered,  "  Lord :  and 
this  man  what?"  The  precise  meaning  and  object  of  the 
question  are  a  point  which  has  been  much  disputed. 

{a)  Some  think  that  the  question  was  entirely  one  of  broth- 
erly love,  interest,  and  affection.  They  regard  the  inquiry  as 
one  which  arose  from  Peter's  tender  feeling  toward  John,  as 
the  disciple  whom  he  loved  most  among  the  Apostles.  He 
would  fain  know  what  was  to  be  the  future  lot  of  his  beloved 
friend  and  brother. 

(6)  Some  think  that  the  question  was  one  of  unseemly  curi- 
osity. They  regard  it  as  one  which  Peter  ought  not  to  have 
asked.  If  our  Lord  did  not  volunteer  any  prediction  about 
John,  Peter  ought  not  to  have  made  any  inquiry. 

(c)  Some  think,  as  Flacius,  that  there  was  a  latent  jealousy 
in  Peter's  question,  and  that  he  seemed  to  suspect  that  John, 
not  having  denied  Christ,  would  die  an  easier  death  than  him- 
self I     I  cannot  think  this  for  a  moment. 

My  own  belief  is  that  there  is  truth  in  both  the  two  first 
views.  Our  Lord's  reply  to  Peter,  recorded  in  the  next  verse, 
certainly  indicates  to  my  mind  that  Peter  ought  not  to  have 
been  so  forward  to  ask.  On  the  other  hand,  I  should  be  sorry 
to  say  that  Peter's  inquiry  arose  entirely  out  of  curiosity,  when 
I  mark  Peter's  unvarying  connection  with  John  on  all  occa- 
sions, and  evident  brotherly  love  towards  him.  In  feeling  con- 
cern about  John's  future,  after  hearing  about  his  own,  Peter 
was  not  to  blame.  Grace  does  not  require  us  to  be  cold  and 
unfeeling  about  our  friends.  But  in  the  manner  of  Peter's 
inquiry  there  certainly  seems  to  have  been  something  to  blame. 
Is  there  not  about  it  a  little  touch  of  the  old  over-readiness  to 
talk  of  others  ?  It  was  once,  "  Though  all  men, — all  others, — 
forsake  Thee  yet  will  not  I."  It  is  now,  "If  I  am  to  die  a  vio- 
lent death,  what  are  others  to  do  ?  " 

It  is  certainly  my  own  impression  that  Peter's  question  had 
special  reference  to  John's  end :  "  If  I  am  to  die  a  violent 
death,  what  is  to  be  the  end  of  my  brother  John  ?  " 

Leighton,  quoted  by  Burgon,  remarks,  "  This  was  a  transient 
stumbling  in  one  who,  but  lately  recovered  of  a  great  disease, 
did  not  walk  firmly.  But  it  is  the  common  track  of  most,  to 
wear  out"  their  days  with  impertinent  inquiries.  There  is  a 
natural  desire  in  men  to  know  the  things  of  others,  and  neglect 
their  own  ;  and  to  be  more  concerned  about  things  to  come  than 
things  present." 

Henry  remarks,  "  Peter  seems  more  concerned  for  another 
than  for  himself.  So  apt  are  we  to  be  busy  in  other  men's  mat- 
ters, but  negligent  in  the  concerns  of  our  own  souls, — quick- 
sighted  abroad,  but  dim-sighted  at  home, — judging  others,  and 
prognosticating  what  they  will  do,  when  we  have  enoagh  to  do 

20* 


4:QQ  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

to  prove  our  own  works,  and  understand  our  own  ways.  Peter 
seems  more  concerned  about  events  than  about  duty.  John  was 
younger  than  himself,  and  in  the  course  of  nature  likely  to 
survive  him.  '  Lord,'  he  says, '  what  times  shall  he  be  reserved 
for  ? '  Whereas,  if  God,  by  His  grace,  enable  us  to  persevere  to 
the  end,  and  finish  well,  and  get  safely  to  heaven,  we  need  not 
ask,  *  What  shall  be  the  lot  of  those  that  shall  come  after  us  ? 
Is  it  not  well  if  peace  and  truth  shall  be  in  my  days  ?  Scrip- 
ture predictions  must  be  eyed  for  the  direction  of  our  conscience, 
not  for  the  satisfying  of  our  curiosity." 

It  is  a  curious  fact  worth  remembering,  that  John  was  one  of 
the  only  two  Apostles,  whose  future  lot  had  already  been 
spoken  of  by  Christ.  "  He  shall  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink 
of,  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  I  am  baptized  with." 
(Mark  x.  39.) 

23. — [Jesus  saith  unto  him,  If  I  will,  etc.]  Our  Lord's  answer  to 
Peter  can  only  be  taken,  in  my  judgment,  as  a  rebuke.  It  was 
meant  to  teach  the  Apostle  that  he  must  first  attend  to  his  own 
duty,  mind  his  own  soul,  fulfil  his  own  course,  and  leave  the 
future  of  other  brethren  in  the  hands  of  a  wise  and  merciful 
Saviour.  He  must  not  pry  too  curiously  into  God's  counsels 
concerning  John.  What  good  would  it  do  him  to  know  whether 
John  was  to  live  a  long  life  or  a  short  one  ;  to  die  a  violent  death 
or  a  natural  one  ?  Our  Lord  seems  to  say, "  Leave  off  inquiring 
about  thy  brother's  future  lot.  Thou  knowest  that  he  is  one 
of  my  sheep,  and  as  such  shall  never  perish,  and  is  in  safe 
keeping.  What  is  the  rest  to  thee  ?  Have  faith  to  believe  that 
all  will  be  well  done  about  him.  Look  to  thine  own  soul  and 
be  content  to  follow  Me." — I  cannot  help  seeing  a  latent  resem- 
blance between  this  place  and  the  well-known  passage  at  the 
end  of  Daniel's  prophecy.  "  Then  said  I,  0  my  Lord,  what 
shall  be  the  end  of  these  things?  And  He  said,  Go  thy  way, 
Daniel :  for  the  words  are  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  time  of 
the  end," — "  Go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be  :  for  thou  shalt  rest, 
and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days."  (Dan.  xii.  8,  9, 13.) 

Theophylact  suggests  that  our  Lord  saw  that  Peter  was  vehe- 
mently attached  to  John,  and  unwilling  to  be  separated  from 
him,  and  therefore  meant  to  teach  him  that  he  must  do  his  own 
work  and  follow  Christ,  wherever  He  might  lead  him,  even 
though  separation  from  John  might  be  the  consequence. 

After  all  we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  omit  the  special 
point  of  our  Lord's  words.  What  our  Lord  rebukes  is  not  gen- 
eral concern  about  the  souls  of  others,  but  over-anxiety  and 
restless  curiosity  about  the  future  of  our  friends.  Such  over- 
anxiety  indicates  want  of  faith  :  we  ought  to  be  willing  to  leave 
their  future  in  God's  liands.  To  know  their  future  would,  in 
all  probability,  not  make  us  one  jot  more  ha]ipy.  I  can  imagine 
nothing  more  miserable  than  to  see  in  the  distance  tribulation 
and  sorrow  coming  on  our  friends,  and  not  to  be  able  to  avert 
it.    Of  what  use  would  it  have  been  to  Peter,  to  know  that  his 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  ^Q^ 

beloved  brother  John  would  one  day  be  cast  into  a  caldron  of 
boiling  oil,  at  Ephesus,  during  a  persecution  ?  What  good 
would  it  have  done  Peter,  to  know  that  John  would  spend 
years  of  weary  captivity  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  and  finally 
outlive  all  the  company  of  the  Apostles,  and  be  left  last  and 
latest  on  the  stormy  sea  of  this  troublous  world  ?  To  know  all 
this  would  not  have  done  Peter  the  slightest  good,  and  would 
more  likely  have  added  to  his  own  sorrow.  Wisely  and  well 
did  our  Lord  say,  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  "  Wisely  and  well 
does  He  teach  us  not  to  be  over-anxious  about  the  future  of  our 
children,  our  relatives,  and  our  friends.  Far  better  for  us,  and 
far  happier,  to  have  faith  in  God,  and  to  let  the  great  unknown 
future  alone. 

Burkitt  observes, "  There  are  two  great  varieties  in  men  with 
reference  to  knowledge.  The  one  is  a  neglect  to  know  what  it 
is  our  duty  to  know.  The  other  is  a  curiosity  to  know  what  it 
doth  not  belong  to  us  to  know." 

In  any  case,  the  words  "  Follow  Me  "  should  always  teach  ns 
that  our  first  duty  in  religion  is  to  look  to  our  own  souls,  and 
to  take  heed  that  we  ourselves  follow  Christ,  and  walk  with 
God.  Whatever  others  may  do  or  not  do,  suffer  or  not  suffer, 
our  own  duty  is  clear  and  plain.  People  who  are  always  look- 
ing at  others,  and  considering  others,  and  shaping  their  own 
course  accordingly,  commit  a  great  mistake.  Of  all  weak  and 
foolish  reasons  assigned  by  some  for  not  coming  to  the  Lord's 
Supper,  the  weakest  perhaps  is  that  very  common  one, — the 
conduct  of  others  who  are  communicants  !  To  such  persons  the 
words  of  our  Lord  apply  with  emphatical  force,  "  What  is  that 
to  thee  ?    Follow  thou  Me." 

The  words  of  our  Lord,  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come," 
are  a  deep  and  mysterious  saying,  and  in  every  age  of  the  Church 
have  received  different  interpretations. 

(a)  Some,  as  Gerhard,  Maldonatus,  and  Wordsworth,  hold 
that  Jesus  meant,  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  a  long  time  on  earth, 
lingering  here  long  after  thou  art  gone,  until  I  come  for  him  at 
death,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  " — I  cannot,  however,  admit  thia 
interpretation  for  a  moment.  Death  and  the  coming  of  Christ 
are  two  totally  different  things,  and  it  is  an  entire  mistake  to 
confound  them,  as  people  often  do  (with  very  good  intentions), 
in  selecting  texts  for  tombstones,  as  part  of  epitaphs.  There 
is  not  a  single  passage  in  the  New  Testament,  where  the  com- 
ing of  the  Lord  means  death.  Moreover,  the  very  next  verse 
in  this  chapter  seems  to  place  the  two  things  in  strong  contrast, 
as  not  the  same. 

(&)  Some  actually  hold  that  Jesus  meant  that  the  Apostle  John 
was  never  to  die  at  all,  but  to  remain  alive  until  the  second  ad- 
vent !  This,  however,  is  a  wild  and  preposterous  interpreta- 
tion, which  will  satisfy  no  sober  mind.  Moreover,  it  is  contra- 
dicted by  the  whole  tenor  of  ecclesiastical  history.    All  early 


4.68  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

writers,  of  any  weight  and  authority,  declare  that  John  died  a 
natural  death  in  extreme  old  age, 

Theophylact  mentions  a  strange  tradition  that  John  is  kept 
alive  somewhere,  and  is  to  be  slain,  together  with  Elias,  by 
j^ntichrist,  when  he  appears  I 

(c)  Some,  as  Grotius,  Hammond,  Lightfoot,  Whitby,  Scott, 
Alford,  and  Ellicott,  hold  that  Jesus  meant  by  His  coming,  not 
His  second  advent  at  the  end  of  the  world,  but  His  coming 
spiritually  in  judgment,  for  the  punishment  of  the  Jews,  the 
destruction  of  the  temple,  and  the  overthrow  of  the  whole 
Jewish  dispensation  by  the  Romans.  I  cannot  see  this  at  all. 
I  find  no  clear  proof  in  the  New  Testament,  that  the  over- 
throw of  the  Jewish  dispensation  is  ever  called  the  "  coming  of 
the  Lord."  Moreover,  it  is  an  awkward  fact,  that  it  is  com- 
monly agreed  that  the  Apostle  John  lived  for  many  years  after 
Jerusalem  was  taken,  and  the  temple  burned  by  Titus.  Ge- 
rhard declares  positively,  that  there  is  not  one  instance  in  Scrip- 
ture of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  being  called  the  "  coming 
of  the  Lord." 

(d)  Bengel  and  Stier  think  it  means  that  John  was  to  tarry 
till  the  Lord  came  to  reveal  to  him  the  visions  recorded  in  the 
Book  of  Revelation. 

(e)  Some,  as  Hutcheson  and  Trench,  think  that  Jesus  did  not 
mean  to  predict  anything  particular  about  John's  future,  but 
only  used  a  general  hypothetical  expression.  "  Supposing  I  do 
will  that  he  stay  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  I  do  not  say 
that  I  do  will  him  to  stay.  But  supposing  it  is  my  will,  this  is 
no  affair  of  thine,  and  it  becometh  thee  not  to  inquire." 

The  question  is  one  that  will  never  be  settled,  and  the  sen 
tence  seems  purposely  left  under  a  veil  of  mystery.  If  I  must 
give  an  opinion,  I  decidedly  lean  to  the  last  of  the  five  views 
which  I  have  stated. 

2S.—[Then  went  this  saying,  etc.]  In  this  verse  John  carefully  de- 
scribes the  rise  of  the  earliest  ecclesiastical  tradition.  He  says 
that  it  became  a  common  saying  among  the  brethren,  that  he 
was  not  to  die.  Some  very  likely  took  it  into  their  heads  that, 
like  Enoch  and  Elijah,  he  was  to  be  translated  and  never  see 
death,  but  pass  into  glory  without  dying.  The  Apostle  takes 
pains  to  point  out  that  Jesus  never  said  that  he  was  not  to  die, 
and  had  only  supposed  the  possibility  of  his  "  tarrying  till  He 
came."  To  my  own  mind  his  manner  of  stating  the  point  is 
strongly  confirmatory  of  the  view  I  have  already  supported : 
viz.,  that  our  Lord  only  used  a  hypothetical  expression,  and  did 
not  at  all  intend  to  make  a  positive  prediction. 

We  should  carefully  notice  in  this  passage  how  easy  it  is  for 
traditions  to  begin  ;  and  how  soon,  even  with  the  best  inten- 
tions, unfounded  reports  originate  among  religious  men.  Noth- 
ing is  more  unsatisfactory,  nothing  more  uncertain,  nothing 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  4^9 

more  destitute  of  solid  foundation,  than  tliat  huge  mass  of 
matter  which  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  has  heaped  together, 
and  professes  to  respect,  called  "  Catholic  tradition."  The  mo- 
ment a  Christian  departs  from  God's  Word  written,  and  allows 
"  Catholic  tradition  "  any  authority,  he  plunges  into  a  jungle 
of  uncertainty,  and  will  be  happy  if  he  does  not  make  ship- 
wreck of  his  faith  altogether. 

Flacius  observes,  that  not  observing  our  Lord's  "  if "  gave 
rise  to  a  tradition  1  A  single  word  omitted  in  a  text  may  do 
harm. 

Henry  remarks,  "  Let  us  learn  here  the  uncertainty  of  hu- 
man tradition,  and  the  folly  of  building  faith  upon  it.  Her.e 
was  a  tradition,  an  apostolical  tradition,  a  saying  that  went 
abroad  among  the  brethren.  It  was  early  ;  it  was  common  ;  it 
was  public ;  and  yet  it  was  false.  How  little  then  are  those 
unwritten  traditions  to  be  relied  upon,  which  the  Council  of 
Trent  has  decreed  to  be  worthy  to  be  received  with  a  venera- 
tion and  pious  affection  equal  to  that  which  is  owing  to  Holy 
Scripture." 

Henry  also  remarks,  "  Let  us  learn  the  aptness  of  men  to 
misinterpret  the  sayings  of  Christ.  The  grossest  errors  have 
sometimes  shrouded  themselves  under  the  umbrage  of  incon- 
testable truth,  and  the  Scriptures  themselves  have  been  wrest- 
ed by  the  unlearned  and  unstable.  We  must  not  think  it 
strange  if  we  hear  the  sayings  of  Christ  misinterpreted,  and 
quoted  to  patronize  the  errors  of  antichrist." 

The  Greek  phrase"  which  we  render  "  should  not  die,"  is  lit- 
erally, "  does  not  die." 

It  seems  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion,  that  the  words 
which  Jesus  addressed  to  Peter  were  heard  by  the  other  five 
Apostles.  Otherwise,  the  saying,  or  report  referred  to  in  this 
verse,  could  not  have  gone  forth. 

24. — [TJiis  is  the  disciple,  etc.']  In  this  verse  the  Apostle  John 
makes  a  solemn  declaration  of  his  own  authorship  of  the  Gos- 
pel which  bears  his  name,  and  of  the  truth  of  the  matters 
which  the  Gospel  itself  contains.  As  usual,  with  characteris- 
tic humility,  he  does  not  give  his  name,  but  modestly  speaks 
of  himself  in  the  third  person.  It  is  as  though  he  said, — "  Fi- 
nally, I,  John  the  Apostle,  who  leaned  on  Jesus's  breast,  de- 
clare that  I  am  the  person  who  here  testifies  of  these  sayings 
and  doings  of  Christ,  and  who  has  here  written  them  down  in 
this  book,  and  I  know  that  I  have  told  nothing  but  what  ia 
true,  and  that  my  testimony  may  be  implicitly  trusted." 

The  first  person  plural  is  here  used  by  John,  we  should  ob- 
Berve^  just  as  it  is  in  the  beginning  of  his  first  Epistle. 

The  verse  seems  written  in  order  to  assure  all  readers  of 
John's  Gospel  that  they  need  feel  no  doubt  whatever  that  they 


470  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

have  in  tliis  Gospel  a  faithful  and  true  record  of  things  that 
Jesus  said  and  did,  and  that  this,  the  last  of  the  four  narratives 
of  Christ's  history,  is  just  as  trustworthy,  credible,  and  depend- 
able as  the  books  written  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke. 

25. — [And  there  are  also  many  other  things,  etc.]  In  this  verse 
John  seems  to  wind  up  his  book,  by  breaking  forth  into  a  fer- 
vent declaration  about  the  wonderful  things  which  his  Lord 
and  Master  had  done.  It  is  as  though  he  said,  "  Though  I  fin- 
ish my  Gospel  here,  I  have  not  told  all  the  marvellous  things 
that  Jesus  did  while  He  was  upon  earth.  There  are  many 
other  things  which  he  did,  and  many  other  words  which  He 
spoke,  which  are  not  recorded  in  my  Gospel,  nor  yet  in  the 
Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  Indeed,  if  they  were 
written  down  every  one,  I  suppose  the  world  would  not  receive 
them,  and  could  not  comprehend  their  value." 

The  words  which  we  render,  "  The  books  that  should  be 
written,"  would  be  more  literally  translated,  "  The  books  writ- 
ten." 

Brentius  calls  attention  to  the  very  large  number  of  miracles 
which,  according  to  St.  Matthew,  were  wrought  by  our  Lord, 
of  which  we  have  no  special  record  in  any  of  the  Gospels. 
(See  Matt.  iv.  23,  24  ;  xi.  5.)  He  justly  argues  that  if  these 
were  all  put  down  and  described,  it  would  greatly  swell  the 
Gospel  narrative.  What  we  have  recorded  is  only  a  sample  of 
what  Jesus  did. 

Henry  observes,  that  books  might  easily  have  been  multi- 
plied about  Christ.  "  Everything  that  Christ  said  or  did  was 
worth  our  notice,  and  capable  of  being  improved.  He  never 
spoke  an  idle  word,  and  never  did  an  idle  thing ;  nay.  He  never 
spoke  or  did  anything  mean,  little,  or  trifling,  which  is  more 
than  can  be  said  of  the  wisest  of  men." — But  he  wisely  adds, 
"  If  we  do  not  believe  and  improve  what  is  written  already, 
neither  should  we  if  there  had  been  much  more." 

The  expression  which  St.  John  uses  in  this  verse  about  "  the 
world  not  receiving  the  boolvs,"  is  not  without  diificulty.  It 
cannot  of  course  mean  that  the  material  bulk  of  the  books 
would  be  so  large  that  the  universe  could  not  receive  them. 
This  would  be  absurd,  as  the  "  things  "  spoken  of  are  only  the 
things  which  Jesus  did  and  said  during  the  three  years  of  His 
ministry.     But  what  does  the  expression  mean  ? 

{a)  Some,  as  Heiusius  and  Whitby,  think  that  it  means  "  the 
world,  or  unconverted  portion  of  mankind,  could  not  jeceive, 
take  in,  or  comprehend  more,  if  more  was  written.  There  is 
enough  recorded  for  the  conviction  of  sinners,  and  for  the 
guidance  of  all  who  honestly  want  to  be  saved." — It  is  a  grave 
objection  to  this  view,  that  the  text  does  not  say  "  the  world  " 
simply,  but  "  the  world  itself."  Yet  in  fairness  it  must  be  al- 
lowed that  in  this  sense  the  expression  is  rather  like  that  in 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  47i 

Amos :  "  The  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  His  words."    (Amos 
vii.  10.) 

(b)  Some  think  that  the  phrase  must  be  taken  as  a  strong 
hyperbolical  description  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  Christ's 
works  and  words,  during  the  period  of  His  ministry,  and  that 
we  must  not  press  an  excessively  literal  interpretation  of  the 
phrase.  They  argue  that  the  figure  called  "  hyperbole  "  is  not 
at  all  uncommon  in  the  Scripture,  and  that  language  is  often 
used,  when  the  idea  to  be  conveyed  is  that  of  very  great  size, 
value,  quantity,  or  number,  which  evidently  cannot  be  inter- 
preted literally.  On  the  whole,  I  incline  to  think  that  this  is 
the  right  view  of  the  expression,  and  that  it  harmonizes  well 
with  the  fervent,  warm-hearted,  loving  character  of  the  Apos- 
tle who  lay  on  Jesus'  breast,  and  was  commissioned  to  write 
the  fourth  Gospel.  He  ends  with  a  heart  full  of  Christ,  and 
running  over  with  love  to  Him,  and  zeal  for  His  glory,  and  so 
he  winds  up  just  like  himself. 

The  objection,  sometimes  made,  that  hyperbolical  language  is 
not  consistent  with  inspiration,  does  not  appear  to  me  at  all  valid. 
No  intelligent  and  careful  reader  of  the  Bible  can  fail  to  see 
that  the  inspired  writers  often  use  hyperbolical  phrases, — 
phrases,  I  mean,  that  cannot  possibly  bear  a  literal  interpreta- 
tion, and  must  be  regarded  as  a  condescending  accommodation 
to  the  weakness  of  man.  For  example  ;  "  Cities  walled  up  to 
heaven."  (Deut.  i.  28.)  "  A  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and 
honey,"  (Josh.  v.  6.)  "  Camels  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  for  mul- 
titude." (Judges  vii.  12.)  All  these  are  phrases  which  cannot 
be  interpreted  literally,  and  which  any  sensible  person  knows 
to  be  figurative  and  hyperbolical.  Our  Lord  Himself  speaks 
of  "  Capernaum  being  exalted  unto  heaven  ; "  and  says,  "  If 
any  man  come  after  Me,  and  hate  not  his  father  and  mother 
he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  (Matt.  xi.  23  ;  Luke  xiv.  26.)  In 
both  cases  His  language  evidently  cannot  be  construed  liter- 
ally. 

Calvin  observes,  "  If  the  Evangelist,  casting  his  eyes  on  the 
mightiness  of  the  majesty  of  Christ,  exclaims  in  astonishment, 
that  even  the  whole  world  could  not  contain  a  full  narrative  of 
it,  ought  we  to  wonder  ?  Nor  is  he  at  all  to  be  blamed,  if  he 
employs  a  frequent  and  ordinary  figure  of  speech  for  com- 
mending the  excellence  of  Christ's  works.  For  he  knew  how 
God  accommodates  Himself  to  the  ordinary  way  of  speaking, 
on  account  of  our  ignorance." 

This  view  is  adopted  by  Augustine,  Cyril,  Bucer,  Musculus, 
Gualter,  Gerhard,  Flacius,  Ferus,  Toletus,  Maldonatus,  Corne- 
lius a  Lapide,  Jansenius,  Pearson,  Henry,  Pearce,  Scott,  Titt- 
man,  Bloomfield,  Barnes,  Alford,  Wordsworth,  and  Burgon. 

Lampe  protests  strongly  against  the  idea  of  any  hyperbole 
being  used,  as  barely  reverent.  But  I  cannot  see  any  force  in 
his  argument. 


472  EXPOSITOEY  THOUGHTS. 

The  Greek  word  wMcli  we  render  "  contain,"  is  the  same 
that  is  rendered  in  Matt.  xix.  11  "  receive,"  and  in  the  same 
sense  that  it  appears  used  here  :  "  All  men  cannot  receive  this 
saying." 

The  change  from  the  plural  "  we  know,"  in  verse  24,  to  the 
singular  "  I  suppose,"  in  this  verse,  is  undoubtedly  peculiar. 
But  there  are  parallel  cases  quoted  by  Doddridge.  (Rom  vii 
14,  and  1  Thess,  ii.  18.)  Euthymius  notes  it,  and  thinks  the 
insertion  of  "  I  suppose  "  was  meant  to  soften  down  the  hyper- 
bole. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  word  "  Amen  "  is  the  concluding 
word  of  each  of  the  four  Gospels.  It  is  equivalent  to  saying, 
"  In  truth,  verily,  it  is  so."  It  is  equally  noteworthy  that  our 
Lord  is  the  only  person  who  ever  uses  the  word  at  the  begin- 
ning of  a  sentence. 


I  have  now  completed  my  Notes  on  St.  John's  Gos- 
pel. I  have  given  my  last  exj^lanation.  I  have  gather- 
ed my  last  collection  of  the  opinions  of  Commentators. 
I  have  offered  for  the  last  time  my  judgment  upon 
doubtful  and  disputed  points.  I  lay  down  my  pen  with 
humbled,  thankful,  and  solemnized  feelings.  The  clos- 
ing words  of  holy  BuUinger's  Commentary  on  the 
Gospels,  condensed  and  abridged,  will  perhaps  not  be 
considered  an  inappropriate  conclusion  to  my  "  Expos- 
itory Thoughts  on  St.  John." 

"  Reader,  I  have  now  set  before  thee  thy  Saviour  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  very  Son  of  God,  who  was  be- 
gotten by  the  Father  by  an  eternal  and  ineffable  gener- 
ation, consubstantial  and  coequal  with  the  Father  in  all 
things  ; — but  in  these  last  times,  according  to  prophet- 
ical oracles,  was  incarnate  for  us,  suffered,  died,  rose 
again  from  the  dead,  and  was  made  King  and  Lord  of 
all  things. — This  is  He  who  is  appointed  and  given  to 
us  by  God  the  Father,  as  the  fulness  of  all  grace  and 
truth,  as  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sins  of 
the  world,  as  the  ladder  and  door  of  heaven,  as  the  ser- 
pent lifted  up  to  render  the  poison  of  sin  harmless,  as 


JOHN,  CHAP.  XXI.  473 

the  water  which  refreshes  the  thirsty,  as  the  bread  of 
life,  as  the  light  of  the  world,  as  the  redeemer  of  God's 
children,  as  the  shepherd  and  door  of  the  sheep,  as  the 
resurrection  and  the  life,  as  the  corn  of  wheat  which 
springs  up  into  much  fruit,  as  the  conqueror  of  the 
prince  of  this  world,  as  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life, 
as  the  true  vine,  and  finally,  as  the  redemption,  salva- 
tion, satisfaction,  and  righteousness  of  all  the  faithful  in 
all  the  world,  throughout  all  ages.  Let  us  therefore 
pray  God  the  Father,  that,  being  taught  by  His  Gospel, 
we  may  know  Him  that  is  true,  and  believe  in  Him  in 
whom  alone  is  salvation ;  and  that,  believing,  we  may 
feel  God  living  in  us  in  this  world,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  may  enjoy  His  eternal  and  most  blessed  fellow- 
Bhip."     Amen  and  Amen,  j^;;^ 


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX 

Of  subjects  treated  with  more  than  ordinary 
fulness  in  the  Notes  on  John. 


Abraham  saw  my  day,  etc.  . 
Angels:  their  nature 
Angel  troubling  the  water  . 
Anointings  of  Christ :  how  many 


Baptism  of  Holy  Ghost 
Believing  in  Christ  , 
Blood  and  water  . 
Born  of  water  and  the  Spirit 
Brethren  of  Christ 


Character  of  Judas   .... 
Christ's  appearance  after  resurrection 
Christ's  ascension :  its  importance    . 
Christ's  care  for  His  mother 
Christ  declaring  God        .        , 
Christ's  divine  nature  .... 
Christ's  eternal  generation       ,        , 
Christ's  examination  before  Annas 
Christ's  incarnation  .... 
Christ's  intercession      .... 
Christ's  kingdom  not  of  this  world 
Christ's  prayer :  introductory  remarks 
Christ's  prediction  of  His  resurrection 
Christ's  promise  to  Nathanael 
Christ's  resurrection  :  its  importance 
Christ's  soul  troubled   .... 
Christ  taking  away  sin  of  the  world 


VOL. 

II. 

III. 

I. 


II. 


I. 

III. 

I. 

I. 


II. 
III. 
III. 
III. 

I. 

I. 


I. 
III. 

I. 
III. 
III. 
III. 

I. 

I. 

III. 

II. 

I. 


FAeB 

130—131 
371—373 
270—271 
236—237 

65—67 

156—159 

329—331 

130—136 

107 

314—315 
351—354 

384—385 
311—313 

40—41 
6—9 

32—33 
228—236 

28—31 
185—188 
256—259 
170—172 
113—114 

84—87 
351—352 
346—349 

58—62 


4:76 


INDEX. 


roL. 

Christ  the  Light  of  world II. 

Christ  walking  on  the  sea        ...  I. 

Cross  :  its  shape  and  size III. 

Crown  of  thorns III. 

Crucifixion  :  nature  of  the  punishment  .  .  III. 
Christ  giving  up  the  ghost        ....      III. 

Doing  Christ's  will  the  way  to  knowledge        .    II. 

Earthly  and  heavenly  things  ....  I. 

Eating  Christ's  flesh,  etc I. 

Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall,  etc.  ...  II. 
Except  the  son  of  perdition  ....  III. 
Expediency  of  Christ  going  away    ,        .        .      III. 


Feast  of  tabernacles    .... 
For  Judgment  am  I  come 

General  resurrection  of  good  and  bad 
Genuineness  of  John  viii.  1 — 11 
Genuineness  of  John  xxi.    , 
God's  love  to  the  world    . 
Golgotha :  where  was  it  ?     , 
Grace  for  grace         .... 


Jesus  groaning  and  weeping 
Jesus  stooping  and  writing  . 
John's  baptism  . 
John  not  Elias 
Judgment  of  this  world  . 


II. 
II. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

I. 

m. 
I. 


His  own  country I. 

Holy  Ghost  not  given II. 

Holy  Ghost  reproving  the  world  .        .        .  III. 

Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter        ....      III. 
Hours  of  day  :  how  reckoned  by  John       .        .      I. 

I  have  given  them  the  glory  ....       III. 
I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  heard  Me      .        .    II. 

I  thirst III. 

If  he  called  them  gods II. 

Introductory  remarks  on  St.  John's  Gospel    .  I. 

It  is  finished III. 


II. 

II. 
L 
I. 

II 


PAQB 

78—81 
340—342 
295—296 
270—271 
299—301 
324—326 

19—21 

149 
397—401 

338 
190—191 
137—138 

5—7 
170—171 

298—299 
65—68 
426—427 
156—160 
297—298 
39 

255—257 

48—50 

143_146 

71—72 
198—200 

202-203 
285—286 
319—321 
222—223 
5 
322—323 

275—281 
70-71 

174—176 
48—49 

352—353 


INDEX. 


477 


Judicial  blindness 


VOL. 

II. 


Labor  for  enduring  meat 
Lessons  of  "  Lovest  thou  me  "    . 
Light  wbich  ligbteth  every  man     . 
Life  eternal  to  know  God  and  Christ 

Living  water 

Love,  a  new  commandment 
Love  to  Christ ;  its  importance 


Man's  moral  impotence 

Miracle  by  Sea  of  Tiberias :  an  allegory 

Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread    , 

Moses  lifting  up  the  serpent    , 

My  father  greater  than  I      .        .        , 

No  man  hath  ascended     ,        .        • 

Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth 
Out  of  Galilee  no  prophet 

Parable  of  good  shepherd    . 
Parable  of  vine  and  branches 
Procession  of  Holy  Spirit    . 
Prophecy  of  Caiaphas 


Raising  of  Lazarus 
Rationalism  and  scepticism 
Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost  . 
Regeneration     .        .        .        . 
Remitting  and  retaining  sins 
Rivers  of  living  water 

Sanctification 
Scourging  of  Christ 
Seamless  coat 
Search  the  Scriptures 
Seeking  and  not  finding 
Sheep  of  Christ  never  perish  . 
Sixth  hour    .... 


I. 

in. 

I. 
III. 

I. 

IIL 
III. 


I. 
III. 

I. 

L 
IIL 


II. 
IL 

II. 
III. 
III. 

II. 


II. 
III. 

ni. 

I. 

III. 

II. 

III. 
III. 
in. 

I. 

II. 

II 
III. 


Tarry  till  I  come 

That  they  might  eat  the  passover 


III. 
III. 


PAGB 

367—369 

851—354 
448—452 

18—20 
175—176 
210—212 

46—48 
452—454 

384—388 
440—442 
363—364 
152—154 
91 

150—151 

249—250 
59—60 

192—200 
97—103 

127—128 
298—302 

281—290 
415—419 
395—398 
126—129 
398—404 
45—48 

199—201 
269—270 
308 
811—313 
91—93 
211—212 
284—287 

467—468 
249—250 


478 


INDEX. 


That  thou  doest  do  quickly 

The  disciple  known  to  the  high  priest 

The  Father  loveth  the  Son 

The  greater  sin 

The  hireling 

The  Romans  shall  come      .... 
The  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house 
The  Spirit  quickeneth          .... 
The  world  could  not  contain  the  books  . 
Things  purposely  omitted  in  John's  Gospel 
Title  on  Cross        ...,,. 
Touch  me  not 


Unity  of  Father  and  Son- 
XJnity  of  Father  and  Son 
Unity  of  Father  and  Son 


We  speak  that  we  know  .... 
What  is  that  to  thee  ?  . 
What  shall  this  man  do  ? 
Whither  thou  wouldst  not    . 
Why  Jesus  questioned  Peter  three  times 
Women  by  the  cross     .... 
Worship  in  spirit  and  truth     . 
Wrath  of  God 


VOL. 

III. 

III. 

I. 

,    III. 

II. 


II. 

II. 

I. 

III. 

III. 

III. 

IIL 


III. 
II. 


I. 

III. 
III. 
Ill 
III. 
III. 

I. 

I. 


Ye  have  not  chosen  Me 
Your  father  the  devil  . 


III. 
II. 


PAGB 

86—38 
230—232 
187—188 
280—281 
194—195 
296—298 
107 
411—413 
470—472 
5—7 
302—307 
377—384 

285 
272—273 
213—214 

147—148 
466—467 
464—465 
460—463 
446—448 
309—311 
224—225 
189 

114-115 
118-120 


530  BROADWAY,  NEW  YOBK, 
November,  1876, 


ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS' 
ISTET^   BOOKS. 


Forty  Tears  in  the  Turkish  Empire. 

Memoirs  of  Rev.  William  Goodell,  DD.,  late  Missionary  at  Con- 
stantinople.    By  E.  D.  G.  Prime,  D.D 2.50 

Dr.  Goodell  was  the  first  American  Missionary  at  Constantinople,  his  wife  the  first 
American  lady  that  ever  visited  the  Turkish  Capital,  and  they  both  remained  at  this 
post  in  labors  of  usefulness,  until  in  their  old  age  they  returned  to  this  country  to  die 
among  their  kindred.  This  volume  is  largely  autobiographical,  being  compiled  from  Dr. 
Goodell's  Letters  and  Journal,  containing  also  his  personal  Reminiscences  written  du- 
ring the  last  year  of  his  life.  He  was  inimitable  as  a  letter  writer,  and  everything  that 
came  from  his  pen  was  marked  by  spirituality,  a  peculiarly  apt  use  of  Scripture  language, 
and  a  spice  of  wit  that  enlivened  his  conversation  and  his  writings  to  the  day  of  his  death. 

Autobiography  and  Memoir  of  Dr.  Guthrie. 

2  vols.,  12mo.     3.00;  Cheap  Edition,  in  1  vol 2.00 

"  His  stories  which  give  sparkle  and  zest  to  the  narrative,  and  greet  us  on  almost 
every  page,  are  woven  together  in  a  picture  of  Scottish  life  that  is  wonderfully  graphic.'* 
Harper's  Magazine. 

The  Life  and  Works  of  Thomas  Guthrie,  D.D. 

10  vols.    In  a  box.     (The  volumes  are  sold  separately) 15.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Keformation. 

In  the  TIME  OF  CALVIN.    Vol.  7 2.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Reformation. 

lathe  TIME   OF  CALVIN.    7  vols 14.00 

D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Reformation. 

5  vols,  in  1.    8vo.,  3.00;  in  5  vols.,  12mo 6.00 

"Without  doing  violence  to  historical  truth,  he  seems  to  invest  history  with  all  the 
charms  of  romance,  and  with  the  enthusiasm  and  skill  of  a  poet  he  sketches  on  the  his- 
toric page  his  fascinating  and  life-like  pictures. 


ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS'  NEW  B00K8. 


Hugh  Miller's  Life  and  "Works. 

New  edition,  very  neat.     12  vols.,  12mo 18.00 

rOOTPRINTS  OF  THE  CREATOR 1.60 

OLD  RED  SANDSTONE 1.50 

SCHOOLS  AND  SCHOOLMASTERS 1.50 

TESTIMONY  OF  THE  ROCKS 1.50 

CRUISE  OF  THE  BETSEY 1.50 

FIRST  IMPRESSIONS  OF  ENGLAND 1.50 

POPULAR    GEOLOGY 1.50 

TALES  AND    SKETCHES 1.50 

ESSAYS.     HISTORICAL  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL 1.50 

HEADSHIP  OF  CHRIST 1.50 

LIFE   AND  LETTERS.     2  vols 3.00 

"  There  is  in  Hugh  Miller's  geological  works  a  freshness  of  conception,  a  depth 
of  thought,  and  a  purity  of  feeling  rarely  met  with  in  works  of  that  character."  —  Pro- 
fessor Agassiz. 

Hugh  Miller's  Life  and  Letters. 

By  Peter  Bayne.     2  vols 3.00 

Mr.  Bayne  carries  the  absorbed  reader  with  him  through  the  whole  period,  unfold- 
ing leaf  after  leaf  of  the  history  of  a  life,  certainly  one  of  the  most  interesting  and 
striking  as  well  as  useful  of  this  century. 

By  the  Author  of  "  The  Wide,  Wide  World." 

THE  LITTLE  CAMP  ON  EAGLE  HILL 1.25 

WILLOW  BROOK 1.25 

SCEPTRES  AND  CROWNS 1.25 

THE  FLAG  OF  TRUCE 1.25 

BREAD  AND  ORANGES 1.25 

THE  RAPIDS  OF  NIAGARA 1.25 

The  Say  and  Do  Series. 

Comprising  the  above  6  vols,  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.     In  a  neat  box  7.50 

"  Every  new  work  of  fiction  by  this  gifted  author  we  receive  with  a  cordial  welcome, 
for  we  know  that  it  will  be  an  addition  to  that  pure,  elevating,  and  delightful  class  of 
books  which  we  may  love  as  the  fireside  literature  of  our  country.  She  writes  for  the 
home  circle."— JV.  Y.  Observer. 

By  the  same  author  : 

The  Story  of  Small  Beginnings.  House  of  Israel 1.50 

4  vols.    In  a  box 6.00        The  Old  Helmet 2.25 

Walks  from  Eden 1.50        Melbourne  House 2.00 


BOBERT  CARTER  &   BROTHERS  NEW  BOOKS. 


Elsie's  Santa  Claus. 

By  Miss  Joanna  H.  Mathews,  author  of  the  **  Bessie  Books."....  1.25 

Miss  Ashton's  Girls. 

By  Miss  Joanna  H.  Mathews.  Comprising  **  Fanny's  Birthday 
Gift,"  '*  The  New  Scholars,"  " Rosalie's  Pet,"  "Eleanor's  Visit," 
"Mabel  Walton's  Experiment,"  and  "Elsie's  Santa  Claus."  6 
voh).    In  a  box 7.50 

B^  the  same  author  : 

The  Bessie  Books.    6  vols 7.50        Little  Sunbeams.    6  vols 6.00 

The  Flowerets.     6  vols 3.60        Kitty  and  Lulu  Books.     6  vols  6.00 

"  The  children  in  Miss  Mathews'  stories  are  perfectly  natural.  They  get  into  trouble 
and  get  out  of  it.  They  say  sweet  things,  and  sharp  things,  and  funny  things,  yet  all  the 
time  childish  things.  They  illustrate  the  right  and  the  wrong,  but  in  either  case  in  a 
manner  to  attract  to  the  former." — Albaxiy  Express. 

Dare  to  Do  Eight  Series. 

By  Miss  Julia  A.  Mathews.     5  vols 5.50 

"Miss  Julia  A.  Mathews'  boys  are  as  live  and  wide-awake  as  any  one  could  wish, 
into  mischief,  now  and  then,  like  the  majority  of  boys,  yet  frank  and  manly  withal,  and 
not  ashamed  to  '  own  up '  when  they  find  themselves  in  fault." — Hearth  and  Home. 

Coulyng  Castle ;  or,  a  Knight  of  the  Olden  Days. 

By  Agnes  Giberne.     16mo 1.50 

By  the  same  author : 

Aimee;  a  Tale  of  James  II....  1.50        The  Curate's  Home 1.25 

Day  Star;  or.  Gospel  Stories...  1.25         Floss  Silverthorn 1.25 

The  Odd  One. 

By  Mrs.  A.  M.  Mitchell  Payne.    16mo 1.25 

By  the  same  author : 
Cash  Boy's  Trust 1.00        Rhoda's  Corner 1.25 

Fred  and  Jeanie :  How  they  learned  about  God. 

By  Jennie  M.  Deinkwater.     16mo 1.25 

By  the  same  author: 
Only  Ned 1.25        Not  Bread  Alone 1.25 


ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS  NEW  BOOKS. 


Brentford  Parsonage. 

By  the  author  of  **  Win  and  Wear."     16mo 1.25 

£7/  the  same  author  : 

WHO  WON? 125 

MABEL  HAZARD'S  THOROUGHFARE 1.25 

DOORS  OUTWARD 1.25 

Wm  and  Wear  Series.     6  vols.  7.50        Ledgeside  Series.    6  vols 7.50 

Green  Mountain  Stories.  5  vols  6.00        Butterfly's  Flights.     3  vols 2.25 

Imogen ;  a  Tale. 

By  Emily  Sarah  Holt 1.50 

£1/  the  same  author : 

Isoult  Barry.     16mo 1.50        Ashcliffe  Hall.    16mo 1.25 

Robin  Tremayne.     12mo 1.50        Verena.     12mo 1.50 

The  Well  in  the  Desert.   16mo  1.25        White  Rose  of  Langley.    12mo  1.50 

Mind  and  Words  of  Jesus,  Faithful  Promisor, 
and  Morning  and  Night  Watches. 

By  J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.     All  in  one  vol.     Red  Line  Edition. 

Handsomely  bound  in  cloth,  gilt 1.50 

Bi/  the  same  author  : 

Footsteps  of  St.  Paul 1.50         Hart  and  Water  Brooks 1.00 

Family  Prayers 1.25         Memories  of  Olivet 2.00 

Memories  of  Gennesaret 1.50         Noontide  at  Sychar 1.50 

Memories  of  Bethany 1.00         Memories  of  Patmos 2.00 

Bow  in  the  Cloud 0.50        St.  Paul  in  Rome 1.25 

Grapes  of  Eschol 1.00         Tales  of  Warrior  Judges 1.00 

Sunsets  on  Hebrew  Mountains  1.50        Comfort  i'e,  Comfort  Ye 1.50 

Thoughts  of  God 0.50        The  Healing  Waters  of  Israel..  1.25 

Prophet  of  Fire 1.50        The  Gates  of  Prayer 1.00 

Altar  Incense 1.00        A  Golden  Sunset 0.35 

Shepherd  and  his  Flock 1.50        Clefts  of  the  Rock 1.50 

The  Pilgrim's  Progress. 

Twenty  full-page  pictures.      Handsomely  bound  in  cloth.      Gilt 
and  black,  4to 2.00 

"  The  Carters  have  done  a  good  service  to  the  cause  of  juvenile  literature  in  pub* 
lishingthe  'Pilgrim's  Progress'  in  a  style  more  attractive  for  boys  and  girls  than  any 
other  edition  before  the  public." — Christian  Observer. 


ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS'  NEW  BOOKS.  6 

Nurses  for  the  Needy. 

By  L.  N.  R 1.25 

The  Golden  Chain. 

By  Miss  Marsh 0.90 

Four  Years  in  Ashantee. 

By  Ramseyer  and'  Kuhne 1.75 

Twelve  Months  in  Madagascar. 

By  Dr.  Mullens 1.75 

Little  Brothers  and  Sisters. 

By  Marshall.    16mo 1.25 

New  A.  L.  0.  E.  Books. 

AN  EDEN  IN  ENGLAND.     16mo.,  1.25;  18mo 0.75 

FAIRY  FRISKET 0.75 

THE  LITTLE  MAID 0.75 

THE  SPANISH  CAVALIER 0.75 

Alice  Neville  and  Riversdale. 

By  C.  E.  BowEN.     4  illustrations 1.25 

All  about  Jesus. 

By  Rev.  Alexander  Dickson.     12mo 2.00 

"I  have  read  it  with  the  delight  which  every  reader  of  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress'  re- 
calls. Compared  with  the  current  literature  of  the  time  it  produces  a  feeling  akin  to 
that  of  one  who  passes  from  barren  sand  into  the  verdure  and  fragrance  of  a  spring  gar- 
den, when  each  lily  and  rose  is  still  touched  with  the  morning  dew,  and  rejoicing  in  the 
early  sunshine." — From  Judge  John  K.  Porter. 

This  hook  has  been  re-printed  in  England  at  the  earnest  request  of  Mr, 
Moody,  who  gave  away  nearly  100  copies  to  friends  in  Great  Britain  before 
parting ,  each  containing  his  autograph. 

Nature  and  the  Bible. 

By  J.  W.  Dawson,  L.L.D.,  Principal  of  McGill  University,  Mon- 
treal, Canada.     With  ten  full-page  illustrations 1.75 

"It  contains  the  well-considered  opinions  of  one  who  is  a  student  of  natare,  and  of 
the  sacred  record  as  well.  The  questions  considered  are  of  interest  to  a  great  many, 
both  in  the  religious  and  scientific  world."— Presftyterian. 


6  ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS*  NEW  BOOKS. 

The  Shadowed  Home,  and  the  Light  Beyond. 

By  llev.  E.  H.  Bickersteth,  author  of  ''Yesterday,  To-day,  and 
Forever." 1.60 

By  the  same  author  : 

Yesterday,  To-Day,  and  Forever. 

12rao.  edition,  mor.,  5.00;  full  gilt,  3.00;  cloth 2.00 

Cheap  edition,  IGmo 1.26 

The  Reef,  and  other  Parables. 

By  Rev,  E.  H.  Bickersteth.     16  illustrations 1.25 

Dr.  Williams  on  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

12mo 1.25 

Dr.  Williams  on  Religious  Progress. 

12mo 1.25 

The  Suffering  Saviour. 

By  F.  W.  Kru;mmacher 1.50 

The  Works  of  James  Hamilton,  D.D. 

Comprising  "Royal  Preacher,"  '<  Mount  of  Olives,"  "Pearl  of 
Parables,"  "Lamp  and  Lantern,"  "Great  Biography,"  "Harp 
on  the  Willows,"  "Lake  of  Galilee,"  "Emblems  from  Eden," 
and  "  Life  in  Earnest."     In  4  handsome  uniform  16mo.  vols 5.00 

Earth's  Morning ;  or.  Thoughts  on  Genesis. 

By  Rev.  Horatius  Bonar,  D.D 2.00 

The  Rent  Veil. 

By  Dr.  Bonar 1.25 

Follow  the  Lamb ;  or.  Counsels  to  Converts. 

By  Dr.  Bonar 0.10 

^Carters'  Cheap  S.  S.  Library.     No.  1. 

Fifty  vols,  in  neat  cloth.     In  a  wooden  case.     Net 20.00 

^Carters'  50-volume  S.  S.  Library.     JSTo.  2. 

Net 20.00 

These  fifty  choice  volumes  for  the  Sabbath  School  Library,  or  the  home  circle,  are 
printed  on  good  paper,  and  very  neatly  bound  in  fine  light-brown  cloth.  They  contain 
an  aggregate  of  12,350  pages,  and  are  put  up  in  a  wooden  case. 


ROBERT  CARTER  &   BROTHERS'  NEW  BOOKS. 


The  Wonder  Case. 

By  Rev.  K  Newton,  D.D.     6  vols.    In  a  box 7.50 

The  Jewel  Case. 

By  the  same.     6  vols.     In  a  box 7.50 

Golden  Apples ;  or,  Fair  Words  for  the  Young. 

By  Rev.  Edgar  Woods.     16mo 1.00 

The  Scottish  Philosophy.      Biograpbical,  Expository,  Critical. 
By  James  McCosh,  LL.D.,  President  of  Princeton  College.    8vo...  4.00 
By  the  same  author : 

Method  of  Divine  Government  2.50         Logic 1.50 

Typical  Forms 2.50        Christianity  and  Positivism....  1.75 

The  Intuitions  of  the  Mind....  3.00         Royal  Law  of  Love.     Paper...  0.25 
Defence  of  Fundamental  Truth  3,00         Reply  to  Tyndall 0.50 

Christian  Theology  for  the  People. 

By  Willis  Lord,  D.D.,  LLD.     8vo 4.00 

Christianity  and  Science. 

A  Series  of  Lectures,  by  A.  P.  Peabodt,  D.D.,  of  Harvard  College  1.75 

A  Lawyer  Abroad. 

By  Henry  Day,  Esq.     Twelve  full-page  illustrations 2.00 

The  Period  of  the  Reformation — 1517  to  1648. 

By  Prof.  LuDwiQ  Hausser.     Crown  8vo 2.50 

*Songs  of  the  Soul. 

Gathered  out  of  many  Lands  and  Ages.  By  S.  I.  Prime,  D.D. 
Elegantly  printed  on  fine  paper,  and  sumptuously  bound  in  Tur- 
key Morocco,  9.00;  cloth,  gilt 5  00 

Thought  Hives. 

By  Rev.  T.  L.  Cuyler 1.75 

The  Empty  Crib. 

By  Rev.  T.  L.  Cutler 1.00 


8 


EGBERT  CARTER  &   BROTHERS*  NEW  BOOKS. 


Cheap  Editions  of  Important  Theological  Works. 

CHARNOCK  ON  THE  ATTRIBUTES 3.00 

McCHEYNE'S  WORKS.     2  vols,  in  1 3.00 

DR.  CHALMERS'S  SERMONS.    1105  pages 3.00 

LEIGHTON'S  COMPLETE  WORKS 3.00 

DICK'S  THEOLOGY.     2  vols,  in  1 • 3.00 

JOHN  NEWTON'S  WORKS 3.00 

*JOHN  HOWE'S  WORKS.    2  vols.,  8vo 6.00 

THEOLOGICAL  SKETCH  BOOK.     2  vols,  in  1 3.50 

Dr.  JOHN  BROWN  ON  THE  DISCOURSES  AND  SAYINGS  OF 
CUB.  Lord.     2vols.ini 3.50 

^MURDOCK'S  MOSHEIM'S  CHURCH  HISTORY.    3  vols 5.00 

*THE  WORKS  OF  JONATHAN  EDWARDS.    4  vols.,  8vo 12.00 

DAVIES'  SERMONS.    3  vols 3.75 


SETS    IN    BOXES. 


A.  L.  0.  E.  Library.  37  vols..28.00 
*Clieap  S.  S.  Library.  No.  1.. 20.00 
*Cheap  S.  S.  Library.     No.  2..20.00 

The  Jewel  Case.     6  vols 7.50 

Tbe  Wonder  Case.     6  vols 7.50 

Win  and  Wear  Series.  6  vols.  7.50 
Green  Mountain  Stories,  5  vols  6.00 

Ledgeside  Series.     6  vols 7.50 

Butterfly's  Flights.     3  vols....  2.25 

The  Bessie  Books.     6  vols 7.50 

The  Flowerets.     6  vols 3. GO 

Little  Sunbeams.     6  vols 6.00 

Kitty  and  Lulu  Books.  6  vols  6.00 
Miss  Ashton's  Girls.  6  vols...  7.50 
Drayton  Hall  Series.    6  vols...  4.50 


Golden  Ladder  Series.  6  vols  3.00 
Dare  to  Do  Right  Series.  5  vols  5.50 
Tales  of  Christian  Life.  5  vols  5.00 
Tales  of  Many  Lands.  5  vols.  5.00 
Ellen  Montgomery.  5  vols...  5,00 
Stories  of  Vinegar  Hill.  6  vols  3.00 
The  Say  and  Do  Series.  6  v.  7.50 
Story  of  Small  Beginnings.  4  v  5.00 
Young  Ladies'  Biog.  Lib'y.  5  v  5.00 
Ministering  Children  Library..  3.00 
Little  Kitty's  Library.  6  vols.  3.00 
Harry  and  Dolly  Library.    6  v.  3,00 

Rainbow  Series.'    5  vols 3.00 

Primrose  Series.     6  vols 3.00 

The  Lily  Series.     6  vols 2.00 


Helps  to  Bible  Study, 


PUBLISHED   BY 


l^OBERT    ;pARTER    8}    ^ROTHERg. 


♦MATTHEW  HENRY'S  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BIBLE. 

In  9  volumes,  8vo.,  cloth,        -        -        -         -         $27.00 
In  5  volumes,  quarto,  sheep,  -        -        -  25.00 

It  would  be  easy  to  name  commentators  more  critical,  more  philosophical,  or 
more  severely  erudite  ;  but  none  so  successful  in  making  the  Bible  understood.  In 
the  words  of  the  late  James  Hamilton,  D.D.,  who  has  done  as  much  as  any  man  to 
promote  the  circulation  of  Henry's  Commentary,  "  It  has  now  lasted  more  than  one 
hundred  and  forty  years,  and  is  at  this  moment  more  popular  than  ever,  gathering 
strength  as  it  rolls  down  the  stream  of  time  ;  and  it  bids  fair  to  be  the  Comment 
for  all  coming  time.  True  to  God,  true  to  nature,  true  to  common  sense,  how  can  it 
ever  be  superseded?  Waiting  pilgrims  will  be  reading  it  when  the  last  trumpet 
sounds.  Come  to  judgment!"  Or,  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Alexander,  "  Taking  it  as  a 
whole,  and  as  adapted  to  every  class  of  readers,  this  Commentary  may  be  said  to  com- 
bine more  excellence  than  any  work  of  the  kind  which  was  ever  written  in  any  lan- 
guage." 

*POOL'S  ANNOTATIONS  ON  THE  BIBLE. 

3  volumes,  royal  8vo.,       -----         iS«oo 

Richard  Cecil  says  '*  Pool  is  incomparable." 

Edward  Bickersteth  says  "  Judicious  and  full.** 

T.  H.  HoRNE  says  "  He  who  wishes  to  understand  the  Scriptures  will  rarely 
coasult  them  without  advantage." 


10  HELPS   TO   BIBLE   STUDY. 


*HORNE'S  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE 
Bible. 

One  volume,  royal  8vo.,  sheep,         -        -        -  ^.oo 

*'  An  indispensable  work  for  a  theological  library.  *  *  *  It  is  a  work 
of  gigantic  labor.  The  results  of  the  research  and  erudition  of  scholars  of  all  coun- 
tries and  in  all  time  are  here  faithfully  garnered." — Evangelist. 

KITTO'S  BIBLE  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

4  volumes,  i2mo.,      ------  7.00 

**  I  cannot  lose  this  opportuity  of  recommending,  in  the  strongest  language  and 
most  emphatic  manner  I  can  command,  this  invaluable  series  of  books.  I  believe  for 
the  elucidation  of  the  historic  parts  of  Scripture,  there  is  nothing  comparable  with 
them  in  the  English  or  any  other  language." — John  Angel  James, 

DR.  HANNA'S  LIFE  OF  CHRIST. 

3  volumes, -         -  4.50 

"  We  can  most  heartily  commend  the  •  Life  of  our  Lord'  by  Dr.  Hanna." — Con^ 
gregational  Quarterly. 

"  Sabbath-school  teachers  will  find  Dr.  H  anna's  work  very  helpful." — 3".  .S".  Times. 

"  From  a  perusal  of  these  volumes  we  believe  that  the  sympathetic  reader  will 
carry  away  a  more  distinct  image  of  the  character  and  life  of  Christ,  and  his  relation 
to  his  contemporaries,  than  he  can  gain  from  the  more  brilliant  page  of  Pressensb, 
or  the  more  elaborate  discussions  of  Neander,'" — North  British  Review, 

DR.  JACOBUS'  COMMENTARIES. 

Genesis,  2  volumes  in  one,  -        -        -        -  i.^o 

Exodus.     Part  I,         -----        -  i.oo 

Matthew  and  Mark,    ------  1.50 

Luke  and  John,  ------  i.^o 

Acts, 1.50 

The  value  of  Dr.  Jacobus*  Notes  is  evinced  by  the  fact 
that  over  one  hundred  thousand  volumes  of  them  have  been 
sold  in  this  country  alone,  without  counting  the  circulation  in 
Great  Britain. 

Drs.  Hodge,  Green,  and  others  of  Princeton,  say:  "The  excellent  Commen- 
taiies  of  Dr.  Jacobus  have  deservedly  attained  a  high  reputation.  They  present,  in 
a  brief  compass,  the  results  of  extensive  erudition,  abound  injudicious  exposition  and 
pertinent  illustration,  and  are,  moreover,  distinguished  by  doctrinal  soundness,  evan« 
gelical  character,  and  an  eminently  devout  spirit." 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Libraries 


1    1012  01210  8751 


Date  Due 

^  1  ',;■  -  '•,^-;T- 

Ap  4     'i 

k) 

%  :,C  li 

k 

r       -^ 

1 

Vl  t,           L- 

m'j   *:  ' : 

^'     -a3. 

) 

MY  k~  '53 

AP5   '55 

^R2  2 

^ 

oW^^^'*^'' 

» 

"~"" ■— 

^-fSam" 

f) 

,fS^ 


•/V     V\     itiii: 


^%\ 


