"Presented  to 


-I  oroutG, 
By  Trederick 


November,  1SS5 


mvdm 

STACKS  *          ^ 


TORONTO. 


Bo 


REGISTER  No *&(. 


/ ~ 


.•18. 


EZEKIEL 


BOOK    OF    HIS    PROPHECY 


tir 


PATRICK    FAIRBAIRN,    D.D., 

PRINCIPAL  OF  THE  FREE  CHURCH  COLLEGE,  GLASGOW, 

AUTHOR    of    'TYPOLOGY    OK    SCRIPTURE,'    ETC.. 


FOURTH  EDITION 


EDINBURGH: 

T.  &  T,  CLARK,  38  GEORGE  STREET. 
1876. 


MURRAY  AND  GIBB,  EDINBURGH, 
PRINTERS  TO  HKR  MAJESTY'S  STATIONERY  OFFICE. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION, 


IT  is  some  time  since  the  first  impression  of  the  following  Expo 
sition  was  exhausted ;  and  the  opportunity,  which  the  call  for  a 
New  Edition  has  presented,  of  introducing  a  few  alterations  and 
improvements  has  not  been  neglected.  The  changes,  however, 
are  not  material  as  regards  the  substance  of  the  work,  or  even 
the  interpretation  of  particular  parts.  On  a  very  few  passages 
only,  and  these  not  of  primary  moment,  has  a  different  view  been 
presented  from  the  one  formerly  given.  But  the  Exposition  has 
been  rendered  more  uniform  by  a  translation  of  the  whole  Book, 
wrhile  in  the  First  Edition  this  was  limited  to  the  more  difficult 
parts;  and  that  has  necessarily  led  to  a  number  of  minor  changes 
and  re-adjustments.  It  has  also  rendered  necessary  the  print 
ing  of  the  translation  in  a  smaller  type,  as  otherwise  the  size,  and 
consequently  the  expense  of  the  volume  must  have  been  increased 
beyond  what  was  deemed  advisable.  An  Introduction,  besides, 
has  been  prefixed,  in  which  certain  topics  of  a  preliminary  kind, 
that  were  not  altogether  omitted  in  the  former  edition,  but  rather 
too  briefly  noticed,  have  been  more  fully  discussed.  These,  which 
constitute  the  chief  alterations  in  matter  and  form,  it  is  hoped 
will  be  found  to  have  added  somewhat  to  the  usefulness  of  the 
volume. 

The  reception  it  has  met  with  in  its  first  shape  has  been,  for  the 
most  part,  so  favourable  and  encouraging,  that  anything  beyond 
the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  the  author  would  be  here  out 
of  place.  He  did  not  expect  that  all  would  agree  with  him  in 


IV  PREFACE. 

the  views  embodied  in  his  interpretations,  or  would  entirely 
approve  of  the  form  which  he  has  given  to  his  Exposition. 
Some,  he  has  observed,  have  sought  to  account  for  the  latter  by 
supposing  it  to  have  been,  in  the  first  instance,  preached  to  a 
congregation.  In  this,  he  takes  leave  to  state,  they  are  mistaken ; 
and  it  is  on  principle,  and  from  a  regard  merely  to  what  he  thinks 
should  be  found  in  an  Exposition  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  in 
particular  of  the  writings  of  Ezekiel,  that  he  has  introduced  so 
much  of  the  spiritual  and  practical  element.  But,  as  this  point 
has  been  noticed  in  the  Introduction,  it  is  needless  to  say  more 
on  it  at  present.  If  the  volume  shall  be  made,  by  the  Divine 
blessing,  instrumental  in  promoting  a  more  exact  acquaintance 
with  this  portion  of  Prophecy,  or  advancing  the  study  of  the 
prophetic  Word  in  general,  the  great  desire  of  the  Author  will 
be  fulfilled. 

ABERDEEN,  May  1855. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION. 


THIS  New  Edition  of  the  Commentary  on  Ezekiel  scarcely  calls 
for  any  prefatory  notice,  as  it  differs  in  no  material  respect  from 
the  immediately  preceding  one.  Alterations  of  some  moment 
were  introduced  into  the  Second  Edition ;  but  the  general  revi 
sion  which  the  work  then  underwent  has  rendered  unnecessary 
any  marked  changes  in  the  edition  now  issued.  The  few  which 
have  been  introduced  are  chiefly  confined  to  verbal  alterations, 
and  some  occasional  enlargements  of  the  Explanatory  Notes. 
Since  the  publication  of  the  last  edition,  no  work  of  any  im 
portance,  so  far  as  known  to  me,  has  appeared  on  the  writings 
of  our  Prophet,  either  in  this  country  or  on  the  Continent ;  and 
in  regard  to  productions  bearing  on  particular  passages,  one  or 
two  fresh  references  comprise  all  that  I  have  thought  requisite. 
The  views  previously  given  on  all  the  more  characteristic  passages 
and  features  of  the  book  remain  undisturbed  ;  and  I  have  only 
to  wish  for  this,  as  I  did  for  the  last  edition,  that  it  may,  with 
the  Divine  blessing,  be  made  instrumental  in  promoting  a  more 
intelligent  acquaintance  with  the  prophetic  Word  in  general,  and 
in  particular  with  this  somewhat  peculiar,  but  most  interesting 
and  instructive  portion  of  it. 

GLASGOW,  November  1862. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGK 

INTRODUCTION,         ........         1 

CHAP.  I.— The  Time  and  Manner  of  Ezekiel's  Entering  on  the  Prophetical 

Office,         ........       17 

CHAP.  II.,  III.  1-11.—  Call  to  the  Prophetical  Office,          .  .       34 

CHAP.  III.    12-27. — Ezekiel's  Entrance   on   his   Mission,   and   the   First 

Message  imparted  to  Him,  .  .  .  .  .39 

CHAP.  IV. — The  Vision  of  the  Siege  and  the  Iniquity-Bearing,    .  .       45 

CHAP.  V.,  VI. — The  Vision  of  the  Shorn    Hair,  and  its  Foreshadowing 

Desolations,  .......       61 

CHAP.  VII. — Lamentation  over  the  Guilt  and  Fall  of  Israel,  .  .       7tf 

CHAP.  VIII. — The  Vision  of  the  Image  of  Jealousy,  and  other  Abomina 
tions  at  Jerusalem,  .  .  .  .  .  .79 

CHAP.  IX.— The  Vision  of  the  Sealing,        .  .  .94 

CHAP.  X.— The  Vision  of  the  Coals  of  Fire,  .  .     100 

CHAP.  XI. — Destruction  of  a  Corrupt  Priesthood,   with  the  Promise  of 

Grace  and  Blessing  to  a  Believing  Remnant  among  the  Exiles,     .     1 05 
CHAP.  XII. — The  Vision  of  Ezekiel's  Typical  Removing  as  an  Exile,  and 

accompanying  Instructions,  .  .  .  .  .     IKi 

CHAP.  XIII. — The  False  in  Prophecy,  its  Character  and  Doom,     .  .     12H 

CHAP.  XIV. — Hypocritical  Inquirers  after  God— their  Wickedness  Dis 
covered  and  Rebuked,        .  .  .  .  .  .141 

CHAP.  XV. — The  Guilt  and  Condemnation  of  Israel  parabolically  Repre 
sented,        .  ....  .154 

CHAP.  XVI.— The  Story  of  Israel's  Guilt  and  Punishment,  .  .157 

CHAP.  XVII.— The  Parable  of  the  Two  Great  Eagles,  and  the  Cropping  of 

the  Cedar  of  Lebanon,        .  .  .  .  .179 

CHAP.  XVIII.— The  Retributive  Righteousness  of  God,      .  .  .187 

CHAP.  XIX.— The  Lamentation  over  the  Fall  of  the  Royal  House,  .     202 

CHAP.  XX.  1-44. — A  Display  of  the  People's  long-continued  Sinfulness, 

and  the  Lord's  long-suffering  Mercy  and  Goodness,  .  .     209 

CHAP.  XX.  45-49,  XXL— The  Vision  of  the  Lord's  Fire  and  Sword,          .     230 
CHAP.  XXII. — The  Lord's  Judgment  upon  the  All-pervading  Sinfulness  of 

Jerusalem,  .......     247 

CHAP.  XXIII.  —  The  Story  of  Israel's  Sin  and  Punishment  parabolically 

Exhibited  under  the  names  of  Aholah  and  Aholibah,        .  .251 

CHAP.  XXIV.— The  Vision  of  the  Boiling  Cauldron,  and  of  the  Death  of 

Ezekiel's  Wife,  .     258 


vi  ii  CONTENTS. 

PAO8 

CHAP.  XXVr. — The  Judgment  of  Israel's  Immediate  Neighbours  and  Rivals, 

— Aminon,  Moab,  Edom,  and  the  Philistines,       .  .  .     270 

CHAP.  XXVI.— The  Judgment  of  Tyre,       .  .     281 

CHAP.  XXVII. — The  Lamentation   upon  Tyre,   with  an  Account  of  her 

Former  Greatness  and  Prosperity,  .  .  .     297 

(  ';HAP.  XXVIII.  1-19. — The  Criminatory  Address  to  the  King  of  Tyre,  and 

the  Lamentation  over  His  Coming  Downfall,         .  .  .     304 

CHAP.  XXVIII.  20-26.     The  Judgment  of  Sidon,  and  the  Ultimate  Peace 

of  Israel,     .  .  .316 

CHAP.  XXIX.—  The  Judgment  of  Egypt,  its  Desolation  for  Forty  Years 
and  Subsequent  Degradation — the  First  Instrument  of  Chastise 
ment,  Nebuchadnezzar,      .  .  .  .  .  .321 

CHAP.  XXX.—  Continuation  of  Egypt's  Judgment,  .  .     335 

('HAP.  XXXI. — The  Certainty  of  Pharaoh's  Doom  Confirmed,  by  a  Para 
bolical  Relation  of  Assyria's  Greatness  and  Destruction,   .  .      340 
CHAP.  XXXII.— Songs  of  Lamentation  over  the  Fall  of  Pharaoh  and  his 

Kingdom.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .345 

<  'HAP.  XXXIII. — Renewal  of  Ezekiel's  Commission,  his  Office  as  Watchman,     354 
CHAP.  XXXIV.— The  Promise  of  the  True  Shepherd,  after  the  False  Shep 
herds  have  been  Punished  and  Removed.  .  .      366 
CHAP.  XXXV".— The  Judgment  of  Edom,    .            .            .            .            .381 

(  'HAP.  XXX VI. — Israel  Revenged  and  Comforted  —the  New  Heart  and  the 

Blissful  Heritage,  ......      386 

CHAP.  XXXVII.— The  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones  Restored  to  Life  again,  as 

Symbolical  of  Israel's  Death  and  Resurrection,      .  .  .      400 

CHAP.  XXXVIII. ,  XXXIX.— The  Assault  of  Gog  and  his  Destruction,     .      414 
Preliminary  Remarks  on  the  Vision  in  Chap.  XL. — XLVIIL,  with  respect 

to  the  Principles  on  which  it  ought  to  be  interpreted,       .  .431 

CHAP.  XL.  1-48.— The  Position,  Walls,  Gates,  and  Courts  of  the  Temple,     450 
CHAP.  XL.  48,  49,  XLI.— The  Temple  itself,  .     460 

CHAP.  XLII.  —  Chambers  of  the  Temple  and  its  Boundary  Walls,  .      466 

CHAP.  XLIII. — The  Lord's  Return  to  the  Temple,  .  .     470 

('HAP.  XLIV. — Ordinances  for  the  Prince  and  the  Priesthood,        .  .     476 

CHAP.  XLV.— The  Sacred  Allotments  in  Land  and  Gifts,  .     481 

CHAP.  XLV1. — Additional  Ordinances  for  the  Prince  and  People,  .     486 

CHAP.  XLVII.  1-12.— Vision  of  the  Temple  Waters,  .  .     489 

CHAP.  XLVII.  13-23,  XLVIIL— The  Boundaries  and  Re-distribution  of 

the  Land,   .  .  .  495 


INTRODUCTION. 


IT  will  not  be  necessary  to  detain  our  readers  long  at  the 
threshold,  nor  would  it  be  proper  to  go  here  into  discussions 
which  might  presuppose  and  require  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  writings  of  our  author.  The  purposes  of  a  general 
introduction  will  be  served,  if  we  present  a  brief  but  distinct 
view  of  the  personal  position  and  circumstances  of  Ezekiel,  the 
more  distinctive  features  of  his  prophetical  character,  the  nature 
of  his  style  and  diction  as  a  sacred  writer,  the  order  and  classi 
fication  of  his  prophecies,  and  the  literature  connected  with 
their  interpretation. 

I.  On  the  first  of  these  points  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  much, 
for  the  whole  that  is  known  with  certainty  of  Ezekiel  is  furnished 
by  his  own  hand,  and  is  so  closely  interwoven  with  his  discharge 
of  the  prophetical  office,  that  it  is  only  by  following  him  through 
the  one  we  can  become  properly  acquainted  with  the  other. 
We  know  nothing  of  what  he  was  or  did  as  a  man,  but  only 
of  what  he  saw  and  spake  as  a  prophet.  That  he  was  the  son 
of  Buzi,  a  priest,  and  entered  on  his  prophetical  career  by  the 
river  Chebar  or  Chaboras,  in  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiachin's  cap 
tivity,  which  was  the  same  also  of  his  own  (comp.  chap.  i.  1, 
and  xxxiii.  21),  he  has  expressly  informed  us ;  and  Josephus 
transmits  the  additional  information  (Ant.  x.  6.  3)  that  he  had 
become  a  captive  when  he  was  still  a  young  man.  This,  how 
ever,  has  been  as  often  questioned  as  believed;  and  among 
recent  commentators,  while  Evvald  sees  reason  to  conclude 
that  the  prophet  "  was  pretty  young  when  he  was  carried  into 
exile,"  Havernick,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  "  the  vigorous 
priestly  spirit  which  prevails  throughout  his  prophecies 
furnishes  evidence  of  a  greater  age,  and  that  he  had  un 
doubtedly  for  some  considerable  time  performed  the  service  of 
a  priest  in  the  temple  "  before  he  left  Judea.  These  diversities 
of  opinion  show  that  the  precise  age  of  Ezekiel  at  the  period  of 
his  exile  can  at  most  be  only  a  matter  of  probability.  But  from 
certain  considerations  that  will  be  adduced  on  the  dates  men- 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

tioned  in  the  opening  verses  of  his  book,  there  is  ground  to 
believe  that  the  probability  is  mainly  on  the  side  of  his  having 
been  at  the  time  of  his  removal  to  Chaldea  a  comparatively 
young  man — in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age.  And  as  one 
of  his  later  prophecies  makes  mention  of  the  twenty-seventh 
year  of  his  captivity  (chap.  xxix.  17),  this,  added  to  the  original 
number  of  twenty-five,  brings  him  to  an  advanced  stage  of  life, 
though  still  not  to  the  close  of  his  prophetical  agency.  For 
some  of  his  later  predictions  appear  to  have  been  uttered  at  a 
period  subsequent  to  the  time  to  which  the  prediction  in  chap. 
xxix.  belongs.  There  is  reason,  therefore,  to  conclude,  that 
Ezekiel's  public  life  both  began  early,  and  was  prolonged  to 
the  season  of  mature  age. 

But  of  the  absolute  cessation  of  his  prophetical  gift,  we  have 
no  definite  chronological  information ;  nor,  except  from  in 
cidental  notices  sometimes  introduced  into  his  communications, 
do  we  learn  anything  of  the  experiences  and  results  that 
attended  its  exercise.  The  direct  historical  notices  in  his 
writings,  apart  from  the  record  of  the  visions  he  saw,  and  the 
messages  of  good  and  evil  he  received  from  above,  are  compara 
tively  few.  But  in  the  messages  themselves  references  are  not 
unfrequently  made  to  the  circumstances  amid  which  he  was 
placed,  and  the  trials  or  sorrows  connected  with  his  official 
ministry.  From  those  scattered  notices  we  can  easily  gather, 
that  as  the  time  was  marked  by  the  fearful  prevalence  of  evil 
in  a  moral,  not  less  than  in  an  outward  and  worldly  respect,  so 
there  was  the  application,  on  his  part,  of  an  unwearied  activity, 
and  the  energy  of  a  devoted  zeal,  striving  against  gigantic 
difficulties  and  vexing  discouragements.  He  had  to  plead  the 
cause  of  God  in  an  atmosphere  of  rebellion  ;  prove  himself  to 
be  faithful  amidst  many  faithless ;  and,  without  palliation  or 
reserve,  lay  open  evils  in  the  condition  of  his  companions  in 
exile,  which  they  sought  most  anxiously  to  cover  out  of  sight. 
Hence,  while  he  appears  as  one  tenderly  sympathising  with 
them  in  their  depression  and  gloom  (chap.  iii.  15),  there  is 
nothing  to  indicate  that  they  ever  properly  sympathised  with 
him  in  his  contendings  for  truth  and  righteousness.  They 
recognise  him,  indeed,  as  a  prophet  of  the  Most  High,  and 
collect  around  him,  from  time  to  time,  to  hear  what  message 
he  might  have  received  for  their  behoof,  or  to  make  inquiry 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

through  him  concerning  the  mind  of  God  (chap.  viii.  1,  xi.  25, 
xiv.  1,  etc.);  but  it  was  never  without  having  a  rebuke  admini 
stered  to  them  on  account  of  the  frame  of  mind  in  which  they 
appeared,  or  some  intimation  given  respecting  the  light  and 
captious  humour  they  were  wont  to  exhibit  towards  him  (chap. 
xiv.  1,  xviii.,  xxxiii.  30-33,  etc.).  So  that  his  official  career,  we 
can  have  no  doubt,  was  connected  with  much  that  was  trying 
and  painful ;  and,  like  too  many  of  our  Lord's  prophetical 
types,  he  also  in  no  slight  degree  had  to  "endure  the  contra 
diction  of  sinners  against  himself." 

Yet  this  must  not  be  understood  of  his  connection  with  the 
whole  band  of  exiles,  nor  probably  of  the  later  period  of  his 
public  ministry  nearly  so  much  as  of  the  earlier.  For  amid  the 
prevailing  iniquity  there  are  not  wanting  occasional  indications 
of  a  better  spirit  among  the  captives  (chap.  xi.  16  ;  Jer.  xxiv.)  ; 
and  at  a  period  not  very  distant  from  the  close  of  his  ministra 
tions,  a  very  marked  and  general  amendment  had  undoubtedly 
taken  place  among  them.  It  could  not  greatly,  if  it  did  at  all, 
exceed  thirty  years  from  the  cessation  of  his  active  labours,  when 
the  decree  was  issued  for  the  return  of  the  captives  ;  and  not 
withstanding  the  corruptions  which  still  lingered  among  them, 
and  which  soon  began  to  appear  in  the  infant  colony,  there  was 
a  general  repudiation  of  idolatry,  and  an  adherence  to  the  law 
of  Moses,  very  different  from  what  had  existed  at  the  era  of  the 
captivity,  or  for  a  considerable  time  previous  to  it.  Nor  can 
there  be  any  doubt,  that  among  the  agencies  which  contributed 
to  effect  this  beneficial  change,  a  prominent  place  must  be 
ascribed  to  the  ministry  of  Ezekiel.  Thus  by  the  results  that 
appeared,  decisive  evidence  was  borne  to  the  fact,  that  a  prophet 
had  been  among  them,  who  had  not  laboured  in  vain ;  and  we 
can  scarcely  doubt,  from  the  whole  circumstances  of  the  case, 
that  the  satisfaction  was  afforded  our  prophet — a  satisfaction 
which  was  denied  to  his  great  contemporary  Jeremiah — of 
witnessing  the  commencement  of  the  spiritual  renovation  for 
which  he  so  earnestly  laboured. 

II.  It  naturally  follows,  from  what  has  been  said  of  the  posi 
tion  and  circumstances  of  Ezekiel,  that,  in  respect  to  his  pro 
phetical  agency,  one  of  the  leading  characteristics  was  that  of 
active  and  energetic  working.  He  had,  almost  single-handed,  to 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

begin  and  direct  the  process  of  a  general  reformation,  which  no 
one  can  do  with  effect,  even  now,  without  force  of  character  and 
energy  of  action  ;  and  still  less  could  it  be  done  then,  when 
writing  and  reading  were  so  much  less  in  use,  and  practical 
effects  on  communities  were  necessarily  more  dependent  upon  the 
instrumentality  of  the  living  voice.  This  consideration  is  of  it 
self  sufficient  to  disprove  the  idea  entertained  by  Ewald,  and 
more  recently  espoused  by  Ilitzig,  of  the  comparatively  quiescent 
and  chiefly  literary  character  of  Ezekiel  as  a  prophet.  "  As  we 
see  him  in  his  book,"  says  Ewald, "he  appears  more  as  a  writer 
than  as  a  prophet  taking  part  in  public  life.  The  writer  may 
have  his  individual  peculiarities  of  a  kind  quite  foreign  to  a  pro 
phet  of  the  elder  sort  ;  and  so,  in  point  of  fact,  Ezekiel  as  an 
author  surpasses  all  the  earlier  prophets,  in  particular  Jeremiah, 
in  finish,  beauty,  and  completeness;  but  the  more  the  man  grows 
as  an  author  and  a  cultivator  of  learning,  he  loses  in  the  same 
proportion  as  a  genuine  prophet."  He  therefore  contemplates 
the  great  book  of  Ezekiel  as  "proceeding  almost  entirely  from 
the  study  of  a  learned  retreat;"  and  Ilitzig,  following  in  the  same 
track,  and  speaking  as  from  the  most  intimate  acquaintance  with 
the  facts  of  the  case,  tells  us  that,  as  Ezekiel  was  driven  from 
the  external  world  by  the  badness  of  the  times,  he  "  but  culti 
vated  the  more  the  internal  world — he  flew  to  his  books,  and 
gave  himself  up  to  literature,  leading  a  kind  of  dusky  retirement 
in  the  law  and  his  own  past  reminiscences  "  (Vorbem.  §  2).  If 
so,  wre  might  certainly  affirm,  never  did  an  author's  course  of 
life  present  a  greater  contrast  to  the  character  of  his  writings, 
or  appear  less  adapted  to  the  aim  he  professes  to  have  in  view. 
The  work  to  which  he  owns  himself  to  have  been  called,  from 
its  very  nature,  required  the  most  resolute  and  devoted  agency : 
he  was  expressly  called  to  do  the  part  of  a  watchman  in  the 
midst  of  abounding  danger  and  corruption,  where  success  in 
any  degree  must  have  seemed  utterly  hopeless,  excepting  as  the 
result  of  unwearied  diligence  and  self-denying  labour.  And 
though,  it  is  true,  in  his  writings,  as  in  those  of  the  prophets 
generally,  we  have  the  record  of  little  else  than  his  direct  com 
munications  with  Heaven,  and  his  more  special  messages  to  the 
people,  yet  these  breathe  throughout  such  a  Jiving  earnestness 
and  practical  vigour,  as  clearly  bespeaks  the  man  of  active  labour, 
not  the  learned  leisure  and  meditative  quiet  of  the  recluse. 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

This  moral  Seivorr)?,  or  fervent  energetic  striving  after  a  prac 
tical  result,  is  stamped  upon  the  whole  of  EzekiePs  writings, 
although  it  comes  out  more  palpably  in  some  portions  than  in 
others.  The  book  possesses  much  of  a  rhetorical  character,  and 
has,  in  a  manner,  but  one  aim — that  of  moral  suasion.  Hence 
the  more  peculiar  difficulties  connected  with  its  interpretation  are 
not  those  which  attach  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  or  the  con 
struction  of  sentences,  but  such  rather  as  inhere  in  the  general 
form  and  substance  of  the  prophet's  communications.  Though 
the  former  are  occasionally  found,  it  is  the  latter  which  chiefly 
prevail ;  and  some  even  of  the  most  profound  and  enigmatical 
portions  are  remarkable  for  the  perfect  plainness  and  simplicity 
of  the  style.  At  the  same  time,  while  we  thus  maintain  the 
essential  incorrectness  of  the  view  given  of  Ezekiel's  prophetical 
character  by  Ewald  and  Hitzig,  we  are  not  insensible  to  a  differ 
ence,  in  the  line  indicated  by  them,  between  the  writings  of  this 
prophet  and  the  other  prophetical  books ;  this  book  is  charac 
terized  in  a  quite  peculiar  manner  by  a  tendency  to  minute, 
detailed,  and,  as  might  seem,  elaborate  descriptions.  But  this 
arose  from  the  native  bent  of  the  prophet's  mind — not  from  the 
retired  and  studious  character  of  his  life. 

For,  as  another  distinctive  peculiarity  in  Ezekiel,  there 
appears  a  very  marked  individuality  in  his  cast  of  mind — such 
as  gives  a  kind  of  uniqueness  to  his  writings,  and  plainly  dis 
tinguishes  them  as  productions  from  those  of  the  other  prophets. 
It  is  true  that  in  the  one  as  well  as  in  the  other  we  have  the 
inspired  utterances  of  men  speaking  as  they  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  But  it  is.  not  the  less  true,  that  in  thus  moving 
them,  the  Spirit  of  God  had  respect  to  their  diverse  natural 
characteristics,  and  allowed  their  constitutional  peculiarities  to 
give  their  full  impress  to  the  form  and  method  of  the  messages 
they  delivered.  The  doctrine  of  inspiration  does  not  imply, 
however  often  it  has  been  so  represented,  that  the  persons  who 
were  the  subjects  of  it  should  be  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit 
as  a  kind  of  mechanical  instruments,  whose  natural  faculties 
were  suspended  under  the  violent  and  impulsive  agency  of  a 
higher  power.  On  such  a  supposition,  we  could  never  account 
for  the  diversities  of  manner  which  characterize  the  sacred 
oracles,  and  which  not  only  shed  over  them  the  charm  of  an 
instructive  and  pleasing  variety,  but  also  endow  them  with  a 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

manifold  adaptation  to  the  different  tastes  and  capacities  of  men. 
The  Spirit  did  not  suspend,  or  imperiously  control,  but  most 
wisely  and  skilfully  used  the  mental  peculiarities  and  individual 
relations  of  his  human  instruments  of  working.  And  as  through 
the  employment  of  these  the  Divine  Author  of  the  communica 
tions  has  sought  to  find  Ids  way  more  thoroughly  to  our  under 
standings  and  our  sympathies,  so  it  is  by  making  due  account 
of  the  same  that  we  must  endeavour  to  find  our  way  to  what,  in 
the  communications  themselves,  may  be  the  mind  of  the  Spirit. 
In  the  simply  literary  department  of  the  religious  sphere,  we 
readily  concede  a  full  play  to  the  varied  idiosyncrasies  of  mind, 
and  the  diversified  methods  they  naturally  fall  into  in  the  exhibi 
tion  of  Divine  truth.  A  clear  and  solid  judgment,  practical 
wisdom  and  sagacity,  rapt  fervour  of  spirit,  logical  accuracy,  the 
playful  sportings  of  fancy  or  the  bolder  flights  of  imagination  ; 
the  direct  and  the  veiled,  the  homely  and  the  refined,  the  his 
torical  and  the  allegorical — all  find  here  their  peculiar  province, 
and  have  each  their  appropriate  use.  And  in  reaping  the  bene 
fit  which  they  are  severally  fitted  to  render  to  the  cause  of  truth, 
and  to  minister  of  personal  instruction,  every  one  knows  that 
they  must  each  be  treated  after  their  own  kind,  and  judged  by 
their  distinctive  characteristics  of  thought  and  expression.  Now 
there  is  the  same  variety  in  the  natural  gifts  and  endowments  of 
the  inspired  writers  ;  and  they  must  be  dealt  with  in  the  same 
manner,  if  we  would  catch  aright  their  spirit,  and  receive  just 
impressions  from  the  discourses  they  delivered.  For  example, 
in  the  case  more  immediately  before  us,  in  the  prophet  Ezekiel 
we  have  an  example  of  the  Spirit's  theopneustic  agency  in  one 
of  the  more  uncommon  and  eccentric  class  of  minds, — a  mind 
susceptible  of  deep  emotions,  possessed  of  an  aerial  fancy,  and 
intensely  energetic  in  its  aims  and  movements  ;  a  mind,  there 
fore,  strongly  realistic  in  its  tendencies,  so  that  it  must  be  ever 
striving  after  the  living  presence  or  the  life-like  representation 
of  things,  beholding  the  unseen  mirrored  in  the  seen,  and 
arraying  the  dim  perspective  of  the  future  in  the  familiar 
garniture  of  the  past  or  present.  To  such  a  mind,  the  distinc 
tions,  in  a  manner,  vanish  between  history  and  prophecy, 
symbol  and  reality,  flesh  and  spirit ;  the  one  seems  insensibly  to 
merge  into  the  other,  or  to  be  related  to  it  only  as  the  exterior 
form  of  the  life  that  dwells  within.  And  the  Spirit  of  God,  in 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

serving  Himself  of  such  a  mind,  as  a  channel  of  Divine  com 
munications  to  the  Church,  must  be  understood  to  have  left 
these  marked  peculiarities  to  their  native  operation,  and  only  to 
have  given  them  the  proper  impulse,  and  furnished  them  with 
the  necessary  materials  of  working.  It  was,  in  truth,  precisely 
such  a  mind  that  was  needed  in  the  crisis  at  which  the  affairs 
of  the  covenant-people  had  then  arrived,  when,  the  external 
framework  of  the  Divine  kingdom  having  fallen  to  pieces,  the 
interest  of  God  seemed  ready  to  perish,  and  the  very  founda 
tions  of  the  faith  were  tottering  to  their  base.  No  ordinary 
man,  at  such  a  time,  was  fitted  anew  to  raise  the  standard  of 
God's  truth,  and  rally  the  prostrate  forces  of  the  kingdom. 
One  was  needed  who  should  be  capable  of  living  alike  in  the 
past  and  the  future,  and  who  could  see  as  with  open  eye,  and 
grasp  as  with  a  gaint's  hand,  the  hidden  realities  of  faith. 

The  peculiarities,  therefore,  of  Ezekiel's  mental  constitution 
stood  in  very  close  connection  with  his  special  calling  as  a  pro 
phet  ;  and  due  account  must  be  made  of  them  by  all  who  would 
either  understand  aright  his  mission  to  the  Church,  or  read  in 
an  intelligent  and  discerning  spirit  the  book  of  his  prophecy. 
If  we  should  expect  to  find  there,  as  in  some  of  the  other  pro 
phets,  fine  displays  of  tender  feeling,  or  descriptions  remarkable 
for  their  flow  of  pleasing  sentiment  and  artistic  beauty  of  com 
position,  we  shall  certainly  be  disappointed.  This  is  not  the 
field  for  gems  of  such  a  nature.  The  mind  of  the  prophet  was 
concentrated  upon  one  great  object, — to  give  life  and  reality, 
body  and  freshness,  to  the  objects  of  faith,  so  as  thereby  to 
reanimate  an  expiring  Church,  and  recall  men's  confidence  to  an 
almost  forgotten  and  unknown  God.  Whatever  might  serve  this 
purpose,  whether  in  the  real  or  ideal  world,  in  the  symbols  of  re 
ligion  or  in  the  facts  of  sacred  history,  he  freely  lays  under  con 
tribution  to  effect  it.  Even  strange  combinations  and  grotesque 
forms  are  often  resorted  to,  when  by  means  of  them  he  can  add 
to  the  graphic  power  and  moral  force  of  his  delineations.  And 
comparatively  regardless  of  the  mode,  intent  mainly  on  the 
effect  of  his  communications,  he  indulges  in  frequent  reitera 
tions,  and  invests  his  imagery  with  such  specific  and  minute 
details  as  one  naturally  connects  with  a  felt  and  present  reality. 

The  characteristics  now  noticed  in  the  prophetic  agency  of 
Ezekiel  seem  to  call  for  a  species  of  commentary  which  shall 


8  INTRODUCTION. 

be  more  parcenetical  than  exegetical;  in  other  words,  which  shall 
rather  handle  the  different  communications  as  doctrinal  or 
practical  discourses  on  particular  subjects,  than  break  them 
up  into  detached  fragments  for  minute  explanatory  remarks. 
There  would  otherwise  be  a  want  of  fitting  correspondence  in 
form  between  the  text  and  the  kind  of  interpretation  subjoined 
to  it.  And  this  it  is  our  purpose  to  keep  steadily  in  view,  not 
slurring  over  difficulties  in  the  text,  or  refusing  any  aid  we  can 
find  for  elucidating  its  import ;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  dwelling 
chiefly  on  the  great  principles  of  truth  and  duty,  to  which  all 
that  is  either  more  common  or  more  peculiar  in  the  prophet  is 
rendered  principally  subservient.1 

It  is  impossible  not  to  notice,  as  another  distinguishing 
element  in  Ezekiel's  prophetical  character,  his  strong  priestly 
feeling.  For  the  most  part  the  prophets  belonged  either  to  the 
priestly  or  the  Levitical  order  ;  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  cases  of 
Samuel  and  Jeremiah,  prominence  is  given  to  the  fact  of  their 
having  been  by  birth  connected  with  those  more  select  portions 
of  the  community.  But  in  Ezekiel  alone  of  the  later  prophets 
does  the  priestly  element  become  so  peculiarly  prominent  and 
pervading  as  to  give  a  tone  and  impress  to  the  general  cha 
racter  of  his  ministrations,  and  to  render  ever  his  prophetical 
labours  a  kind  of  priestly  service.  His  thoughts  seem  perpetu 
ally  to  linger  about  the  temple,  and  even  delight  to  find  in  its 
symbolical  materials  and  forms  of  worship  the  channels  through 
which  to  unfold  the  truths  he  was  commissioned  to  declare. 
This,  however,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  less  owing  to  any 

1  We  are  glad  to  see  that  there  is  a  growing  recognition  of  the  fitness  of 
this  in  regard  to  the  exposition  of  Scripture  generally.  Hengstenberg,  in 
the  preface  to  his  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  expresses  it  as  his 
opinion,  that  the  present  times  demand  a  kind  of  exposition  of  Scripture 
which  is  in  accordance  with  its  great  doctrinal  and  practical  design.  And 
Stier,  in  his  preface  to  the  4th  vol.  of  his  Reden  Jesu,  thus  vindicates  his 
adoption  of  such  a  form  of  commentary  :  "  Our  older  expositors,  as  is  well 
known,  gave  to  their  exegesis  very  much  of  the  same  form,  in  respect  to 
edification ;  it  is  only  in  the  present  age,  in  our  unhappy  divorce  between 
the  Church  and  the  professorial  chair,  that  such  can  appear  to  be  of  a 
mongrel  character.  Intentionally  and  on  principle  I  abandon  the  wholly 
unpractical  manner  of  the  schools,  which  coldly  and  stiffly  guards  itself 
against  the  use  of  any  word  that  might  speak  from  heart  to  heart,  and 
which  must  always  carry  an  unnatural  and  unseemly  appearance  in  every, 
even  the  most  learned,  treatment  of  the  living  word  of  God." 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

individual  peculiarity  or  personal  choice,  than  to  the  circum 
stances  of  his  position  and  the  nature  of  his  calling.  It  sprang 
more  immediately  from  the  desire  of  satisfying  the  spiritual 
want  occasioned  first  by  the  absence,  and  then  by  the  destruc 
tion  of  the  outward  temple,  which  it  was  of  importance  to  meet 
by  something  of  a  corresponding  nature.  But  of  this  more 
will  be  said  under  the  opening  verses. 

Still  further,  the  prophetical  gift  itself  possessed  and  exercised 
by  Ezekiel  was  of  the  higher  kind.  Beyond  all  question,  he 
belongs  to  the  first  rank  of  those  who,  under  the  old  covenant, 
were  called  to  the  regular  discharge  of  the  prophetical  office. 
As  with  the  prophets  generally,  his  gift  was  exercised  as  well 
in  regard  to  the  present  as  the  future ;  and  in  both  respects  it 
proved  itself  to  be,  as  Witsius  terms  it,  "  incomparable."1  It 
enabled  him  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  existing  state  of 
matters,  not  less  than  a  clear  apprehension  of  what  was  going 
to  take  place.  His  spiritually  enlightened  eye  takes  the  true 
gauge  and  measure  of  what  was  around  him;  looks  through 
the  appearances  into  the  realities  of  things;  so  that,  with  the 
assured  confidence  of  one  who  knew  the  mind  of  God,  he  gives 
forth  the  judgment  of  Heaven  respecting  them.  His  anticipa 
tions  of  the  future  are  not  less  remarkable.  Even  De  Wette 
admits  that  not  only  are  there  here  actual  predictions,  but  that 
tl  in  none  of  the  ancient  prophets  are  there  found  such  definite 
predictions  as  in  this."  The  last  part  of  the  statement  may 
certainly  be  questioned  by  those  who  believe  in  the  genuineness 
of  Daniel's  prophecies ;  yet  the  predictions  of  Ezekiel  are  both 
of  great  variety,  and  singularly  minute  and  faithful  in  their  de 
lineations  of  coming  events.  Partly,  however,  from  some  of  the 
events  referred  to  in  them  lying  not  far  remote  from  the  utter 
ance  of  the  predictions,  and  partly  also  from  the  strongly  figura 
tive  form  into  which  not  a  few  of  the  others  are  cast,  their 
apologetical  value  in  the  present  day,  against  the  adversaries  of 
the  faith,  is  not  altogether  in  proportion  to  their  number  or 
their  definiteness.  Of  many  of  them  it  must  be  said,  that  they 
are  fitted  rather  for  confirming  the  faith  and  strengthening  the 
convictions  of  those  who  already  believe,  than  for  removing  the 
doubts  of  such  as  are  still  opposed  to  the  truth.  Yet  we  should 
deem  it  impossible  for  any  one,  in  a  spirit  of  candour  and  sin- 
1  Miscel.  Sac.  i.  p.  243. 


1 0  INTRODUCTION. 

cerity,  to  peruse  the  wonderful  and  discriminating  predictions 
contained  in  his  writings,  respecting  either  the  Jews  themselves 
(those,  for  example,  in  chap,  v.,  vi.,  xi.,  xvii.,  xxi.),  or  the  neigh 
bouring  nations,  more  particularly  those  of  Tyre  and  Egypt — 
predictions  which  foretold  in  regard  to  the  subjects  of  them 
very  different  and  varying  fortunes,  and  such  as  necessarily  re 
quired  ages  for  their  accomplishment ; — we  should  conceive  it 
impossible  for  any  one  in  a  proper  spirit  to  examine  these,  and 
compare  them  with  the  facts  of  history,  without  being  persuaded 
that  they  afford  indubitable  evidence  of  a  supernatural  insight 
into  the  far  distant  future.  No  spirit  of  human  divination, 
or  mere  worldly  sagacity,  could  possibly  have  enabled  him  to 
descry  events  at  once  so  remote  in  time,  and  so  different  from 
what  might,  on  many  accounts,  have  been  supposed  likely  to 
happen. 

III.  In  respect  to  the  style  and  diction  of  Ezekiel,  different 
estimates  have  been  formed  by  different  writers,  and  exaggerated 
representations,  as  well  of  a  favourable  as  of  an  unfavourable 
kind,  are  still  to  be  met  with.  The  comparative  estimate  of 
Lovvth  may  certainly  be  characterized  as  in  some  respects  over 
drawn  ;  but  he  says,  with  substantial  correctness,  "  that  in  his 
images  he  is  fertile,  magnificent,  harsh,  and  sometimes  almost 
deformed;  in  his  diction  grand,  weighty, austere, rough,  and  some 
times  unpolished ;  abounding  in  repetitions,  not  for  the  sake  of 
ornament  or  gracefulness,  but  through  indignation  or  violence" 
(Prselec.  xxi.).  His  diction,  he  adds,  is  sufficiently  perspicuous, 
almost  all  his  obscurity  lying  in  the  matter ;  and  notwithstand 
ing  the  obvious  want  of  parallelism  which  pervades  the  greater 
part  of  the  book,  Lovvth  is  disposed  to  claim  most  of  it  as  poetical, 
although,  he  admits,  "the  sentences  are  often  so  rude  and  void 
of  composition,  that  he  was  often  doubtful  what  to  determine  in 
that  respect."  In  truth,  he  was  here  trying  the  productions  of 
the  prophet  by  a  somewhat  mistaken  standard.  And  altogether 
the  view  taken  and  the  estimate  formed  by  Ewald  are  much  more 
correct.  The  latter  says  (Propheten,  p.  212):  "Considered  simply 
as  a  writer,  this  prophet  exhibits  great  excellences,  especially  as 
living  in  so  dismal  a  period.  His  mode  of  representation,  indeed, 
like  that  of  most  of  the  later  writers,  has  a  tendency  to  length 
and  expansion,  with  sentences  often  very  much  involved,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  1 1 

rhetorical  breadth  and  copiousness  ;  yet  it  seldom  dwindles  down 
like  that  of  Jeremiah,  readily  recovers  itself,  and  usually  makes 
a  fine  conclusion.  His  language  has  scattered  through  it  several 
Aramaic  and  foreign  expressions,  in  which  one  may  perceive  the 
influence  of  his  exiled  condition  ;  though,  for  the  most  part,  it  is 
formed  after  the  elder  and  better  models.  His  diction,  besides, 
is  rich  in  rare  comparisons,  often  alike  attractive  and  striking, 
full  of  varied  terms,  and  commonly  wrought  out  with  much 
beauty  (for  example,  chap,  xxxii.).  Where  the  discourse  rises 
higher  to  the  delineation  of  the  sublime  visions  presented  to  him 
(as  in  chap.  i.  and  x.),  it  exhibits  the  vividness  of  genuine  dra 
matic  composition.  It  has  also  a  certain  evenness  and  repose,  a 
quality  which  distinguishes  this  prophet  from  Jeremiah  ;  he  but 
seldom  soars  into  lyrical  strains  (chap,  vii.),  or  becomes  vehe 
mently  moved  (chap,  xxi.)."  It  is  added,  that  the  verse  is  often 
rough,  and  the  strophe-arrangement  much  obscured,  on  account 
of  the  tendency  to  lengthen  out  the  sentences  ;  but  they  are  still 
regarded  as  to  some  extent  existing,  though  they  are  only  to  be 
found  in  a  distinct  and  regular  form  in  a  few  select  portions, 
such  as  chap.  vii.  and  xxi. 

In  one  respect  Ewald  also  has  given  an  erroneous  view  of  the 
character  of  Ezekiel  as  a  writer — representing  this  as  in  a  certain 
sense  interfering  with  his  character  as  a  prophet.  This  is  done 
more  especially  in  respect  to  the  symbolical  actions  and  parabo 
lical  discourses,  which  abound  so  much  in  his  writings.  "  The 
writer  here,"  he  says,  li  overpowers  the  prophet.  The  writer 
seeks  for  excellent  images,  similitudes,  and  enigmas,  and  the 
merely  literary  prophet  finds  therein  the  readiest  helps  and  sup 
ports  to  his  fancy  ;  and  so  Ezekiel  very  commonly  sets  out  from 
an  image,  conducts  this  with  all  possible  varieties  of  form  and 
embellishments,  and  then  unfolds  it  in  proper  discourse;  or  he 
draws  long  delineations  marked  by  genuine  poetic  beauty  :  but 
the  point  and  keenness  of  the  prophetic  style  suffer  much  there 
by,"  etc.  This  line  of  remark  proceeds  on  the  misapprehension 
already  noticed  respecting  the  prophetical  character  of  Ezekiel. 
It  has  been  well  met,  as  to  the  particular  point  now  under  con 
sideration,  by  Havernick,  who  says  :  u  It  is  quite  correct  that  a 
certain  amount  of  skill  is  discoverable  in  this  mode  of  represen 
tation  ;  but  it  is  to  misapprehend  the  nature  of  prophecy,  when 
this  artistic  impulse  is  viewed  as  the  productive  power  of  such 


1 2  INTRODUCTION. 

compositions.  Prophecy  has  its  root  in  quite  other  soil  ;  and 
were  it  after  this  fashion  drawn  into  the  mere  province  of  art,  it 
should  cease  to  be  genuine  prophecy,  and  should  belong  to  the 
class  of  degenerate  productions — spurious  imitations  of  the  true. 
The  writer's  skill  evinces  itself  here  rather  in  giving  forth  with 
the  greatest  vividness  and  fidelity  his  internal  perceptions  with 
the  full  impress  of  their  irnmediateness  and  originality.  It  is 
the  historical  skill  of  the  narrator  of  internal  facts,  a  simply 
reproductive  and  not  a  productive  faculty,  which  must  be  con 
ceded  to  the  prophet,  and  in  which  he  shows  a  perfect  mastery" 
(Comm.  p.  24).  ' 

We  simply  add,  under  this  head,  that  the  darkness  to  a  cer 
tain  extent  inseparably  connected  with  our  prophet's  delight  in 
the  use  of  parable  and  symbol,  was,  when  rightly  contemplated, 
by  no  means  at  variance  with  his  great  design  as  a  prophet. 
His  primary  object  was  impression, — to  rouse  and  stimulate,  to 
awaken  spiritual  thoughts  and  feelings  in  the  depths  of  the  soul, 
and  bring  it  back  to  a  living  confidence  and  faith  in  God.  And 
for  this,  while  great  plainness  and  force  of  speech  were  neces 
sary,  mysterious  symbols  and  striking  parabolical  delineations 
were  also  fitted  to  be  of  service.  They  showed  the  prophet's 
mind  to  be  on  the  stretch  to  arrest  the  attention  of  his  people, 
and  lead  them  to  penetrate  into  the  deep  things  of  God.  To 
the  great  majority  of  them  such  things  appeared  deep,  chiefly 
on  account  of  that  superficial  habit  of  mind  which  rests  satisfied 
with  looking  at  the  exterior,  and  mistakes  shadows  for  realities, 
— the  same  habit  substantially  which  has  led  the  modern  Jews 
to  magnify  to  such  a  height  the  obscurities  of  this  book  of 
Ezekiel,  ordaining  that  no  one  should  read  it  till  he  had  passed 
his  thirtieth  year,  with  other  foolish  and  extravagant  things  of  a 
like  nature.  Had  either  the  earlier  or  the  later  Jews  understood 
it  aright,  they  would  have  felt  that  the  profound  and  enigma 
tical  character  of  some  of  the  visions,  especially  when  viewed  in 
connection  with  the  awful  directness  and  pungency  of  others, 
was  itself  a  witness  against  them,  and  formed  a  call  to  serious 
consideration  and  anxious  inquiry.  And  thus  in  respect  to  the 
more  peculiar  part  of  the  form  and  clothing,  as  well  as  the  matter 
of  his  revelations,  wisdom  is  here  also  justified  of  her  children. 

IV.  The  order  and  classification  of  his  prophecies  next  de- 


INTRODUCTION.  1 3 

mand  some  notice.  And  here  it  ought  first  of  all  to  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  whatever  arrangement  may  be  made  respecting  them 
as  to  their  subjects,  an  order  and  progression  belongs  to  them 
as  a  whole,  as  well  as  a  homogeneousness  of  nature,  which  fits 
them  for  mutually  throwing  light  on  each  other ;  and  in  par 
ticular,  one  large  portion  of  them  (chap,  i.-xxxii.),  which  is 
mainly  conversant  with  sin  and  judgment,  in  a  great  degree  sup 
plies  the  key,  by  which  the  later  announcements — more  cheering 
in  their  tone,  but  more  remote  in  their  objects — are  to  be  in 
terpreted.  There  is  in  this  respect  a  unity  in  the  character  of 
the  book  which  calls  for  an  orderly  and  progressive  perusal 
of  its  contents.  And  should  any  one,  heedless  of  this  charac 
teristic,  overleap  all  the  earlier  portions  of  the  prophecy,  and 
proceed  at  once  to  grapple  with  some  of  the  later  and  more 
peculiar  visions,  he  would  only  take  the  course  most  likely  to 
involve  himself  in  perplexity  or  disappointment. 

A  general  classification  of  the  contents  of  the  book,  as  has  just 
been  noticed,  may  be  made  into  those  which  have  respect  pre 
dominantly  to  sin  and  judgment,  and  those  which  are  more 
peculiarly  appropriated  to  the  revelation  of  grace  and  mercy. 
We  can  only,  however,  speak  of  prevailing,  not  by  any  means  of 
exclusive,  characteristics  of  this  sort.  For  in  the  one  part  mercy 
is  often  found  intermingling  with  the  judgment,  as  in  the  other 
judgment  occasionally  alternates  witli  the  mercy.  The  more 
specific,  and  at  the  same  time  quite  natural  divisions  are  com 
monly  indicated  by  the  prophet  himself,  in  the  several  dates 
which  he  has,  at  certain  intervals,  placed  as  superscriptions  to 
the  messages  he  successively  received.  These  are  altogether 
eight.  1.  The  first  is  introductory,  containing  a  description  of 
the  first  vision,  and  in  connection  witli  it  of  the  call  of  the  prophet 
— (chap,  i.-iii.  15).  2.  The  next  portion,  embracing  the  remain 
ing  verses  in  chap,  iii.,  and  reaching  to  the  close  of  chap,  vii.,  is 
occupied  chiefly  with  a  more  explicit  announcement  of  the  pro 
phet's  commission  and  charge,  and  his  entrance  on  the  work  it 
devolved  upon  him,  by  setting  forth  the  enormous  guilt  of  the 
people,  the  certainty  of  the  coming  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  with 
still  subsequent  calamities,  and  the  prostrate  condition  of  the 
whole  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  3.  The  next  section  embraces 
chap,  viii.-xix.,  but  falls  into  two  parts.  The  first,  including  chap, 
viii.-xi.,  contains  still  further  revelations  of  the  people's  sinful- 


1 4  INTRODUCTION. 

ness,  especially  as  connected  with  the  profanation  of  the  temple 
and  the  corruption  of  the  priesthood;  the  determination  of  God, 
in  consequence,  to  forsake  his  sanctuary,  with  severe  executions 
of  vengeance  on  the  wicked,  though  not  without  gracious  inter 
positions  for  the  safety  of  the  few  who  remained  faithful ;  and 
then,  the  twofold  work  of  destruction  and  preservation  being 
(symbolically)  done,  his  actual  departure  from  the  temple-mount, 
that  he  might  go  and  reveal  himself  in  tenderness  and  power  to 
an  inquiring  and  afflicted  people  in  exile.  In  the  second  part  of 
this  division,  which  includes  chap,  xii.-xix.,  the  prophet  prose 
cutes  in  detail  his  exposure  of  the  sins  which  were  bringing  down 
such  inflictions  of  judgment,  and  shows  how  all  classes  as  well 
as  the  priests — prophets,  princes,  and  the  people  generally — had 
corrupted  their  ways,  and  should  severally  share  in  the  destruction 
that  was  impending.  4.  In  chap,  xx.-xxiii.  the  same  subject  is 
continued,  though,  as  the  time  of  judgment  had  approached 
nearer,  there  is  an  increased  keenness  and  severity  in  the  pro 
phet's  tone ;  he  sits,  as  it  were,  in  judgment  upon  the  people, 
brings  out  in  full  form  the  Divine  indictment  against  them,  and 

O  O  / 

with  awful  distinctness  and  frequent  reiteration,  announces  both 
their  consummate  guilt  and  its  appropriate  judgment.  5.  Then 
comes,  in  chap,  xxiv.,  the  actual  announcement  of  the  end,  as 
regards  Jerusalem  and  its  guilty  people,  with  a  representation 
of  the  behaviour  suitable  for  such  as  survived  the  calamity  ;  the 
prophet  himself  being  required  to  share  in  the  confusion  and 
silence  which  were  proper  at  such  a  time.  6.  Chap,  xxv.-xxxii. 
form  a  group  by  themselves,  containing  the  announcements 
respecting  sin  and  judgment,  which,  during  the  interval  of  the 
prophet's  silence  towards  his  own  people,  he  wras  commanded  to 
utter  against  the  surrounding  nations.  The  great  object  of  them 
was  to  show,  that  if  judgment  had  begun  at  the  house  of  God, 
it  would  assuredly  embrace,  and  visit  with  still  more  overwhelm 
ing  calamities,  the  ungodly  world.  There  are  various  headings  in 
this  section  ;  and  some  of  the  revelations  were  given  at  periods 
considerably  later  than  others  ;  but  they  began  to  be  uttered 
immediately  after  the  doom  of  Jerusalem,  and  all  manifestly 
relate  to  one  great  theme.  7.  In  chap,  xxxii.-xxxix.  we  have 
a  series  of  predictions  given  to  the  prophet  in  the  twelfth  year  of 
the  captivity,  after  the  appearance  in  Chaldea  of  the  remnant 
that  had  escaped  from  Jerusalem  (chap,  xxiii.  21)  ;  a  series 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

which  points  more  particularly  to  the  better  times  in  prospect, 
and  unfolds,  with  considerable  fulness  and  variety,  the  revival  of 
God's  cause  among  the  covenant-people,  the  re-establishment  of 
the  Divine  kingdom,  and  its  sure  and  final  victory  over  all  the 
sources  of  evil,  which  had  prevailed  so  much  against  it  in  the 
past.  8.  Then,  after  an  interval  of  thirteen  years,  comes  the 
closing  vision,  in  chap,  xl.-xlviii.,  disclosing,  under  the  symbo 
lical  representation  of  a  new  temple,  city,  and  commonwealth, 
the  restored  condition,  with  the  perfect  order  and  beauty,  of  the 
people  and  kingdom  of  God. 

V.  All  that  is  necessary  for  the  present  time  to  be  said  on  the 
literature  of  the  subject  may  soon  be  told.  Our  own  country 
has  done  comparatively  little  in  relation  to  it.  The  bulky  and 
tedious  work  of  Greenhill,  reprinted  some  years  ago  in  a  cheap 
form,  is,  like  most  of  the  Puritan  writings,  of  small  account  in  an 
exegetical  respect ;  and  is  rather  a  collection  of  commonplaces 
founded  on  Ezekiel,  with  a  multitude  of  parallel  passages  from 
other  Scriptures,  than  a  commentary  in  the  proper  sense.  The 
only  English  work  calling  for  special  notice  here  is  the  Transla 
tion,  with  Notes,  by  Archbishop  Newcome,  published  in  1788. 
The  notes  are  of  a  very  brief  description,  chiefly  explanatory  of 
the  meanings  given  in  the  translation  ;  and  both  the  translation 
and  the  notes  proceed  to  a  large  extent  on  the  vicious  principle, 
very  prevalent  at  the  time,  of  getting  rid  of  difficulties  in  the 
sense  by  proposed  emendations  of  the  text.  This  false  and  super 
ficial  style  of  criticism  has  now  deservedly  fallen  into  discredit ; 
although  Ewald,  and  after  him  Hitzig,  still  pursue,  to  some 
extent,  the  same  course,  and  not  seldom,  like  Newcome,  would 
correct  the  Hebrew  text  from  the  Septuagint.  How  little  con 
fidence  can  be  placed  in  emendations  derived  from  such  a  source, 
no  one  can  need  to  be  told  who  is  in  the  least  degree  acquainted 
with  the  character  of  the  Septuagint  translation  generally,  and, 
in  particular,  with  its  translation  of  this  book.  Hitzig  himself 
admits  that  many  of  its  variations  from  the  true  sense  have  arisen 
from  palpable  mistakes ;  and  that,  as  a  whole,  it  is  pervaded  by 
frequent  and  systematic  deviations  from  the  correct  import,  while 
the  Hebrew  text  is  remarkable  for  its  degree  of  purity,  are 
among  the  surest  results  of  a  sound  biblical  criticism.  We  have, 
therefore,  but  rarely  paid  any  regard  to  the  diverse  readings 


1 6  INTRODUCTION. 

derived   from  the  Septuagint,  and  with  the  rarest  exceptions 
have  adhered  to  the  existing  text. 

By  far  the  most  elaborate  work  ever  published  on  the  prophe 
cies  of  Ezekiel  was  the  joint  production  of  two  Spanish  Jesuits, 
Pradus  and  Villalpandus,  in  three  huge  folios  (Rome,  1596). 
The  first  volume,  which,  with  a  slight  exception,  was  executed 
by  Pradus,  and  reaches  to  the  close  of  chap,  xxviii.,  is  the  best 
portion  of  the  work;  now,  however,  chiefly  valuable  as  a  reper 
tory  of  the  opinions  of  the  Fathers.  The  two  other  volumes  are 
occupied  with  interminable  discussions  in  reference  to  the  temple, 
and,  as  will  appear  from  our  preliminary  remarks  to  chap,  xl.— 
xlviii.,  proceed  throughout  on  a  wrong  principle.  The  expository 
discourses  of  Calvin  extend  only  to  the  first  twenty  chapters,  and 
are  distinguished  by  his  usual  acumen  and  discrimination,  also 
by  his  hearty  appreciation  of  the  great  moral  principles  exhibited 
by  the  prophet ;  but  afford  little  help  in  regard  to  some  of  the 
more  peculiar  difficulties  connected  with  the  interpretation  of  the 
book.  The  same  also  may  be  said  of  the  commentaries  of  Rosen- 
miiller  and  Maurer,  though  both  are  deserving  of  consultation, — 
the  former  more  especially  for  the  judicious  and  extensive  use  it 
makes  of  existing  materials  ;  the  latter  (which,  as  to  the  sense, 
very  commonly  follows  Rosenmuller),  for  its  grammatical  exact 
ness  and  acute  remarks  on  particular  passages.  The  translation 
of  Ewald,  with  its  brief  notes,  forming  part  of  his  Hebrew 
Prophets,  though  unsatisfactory  as  a  whole,  is  yet  of  considerable 
value,  and  has  frequently  been  consulted.  But  a  much  more 
valuable  contribution  to  the  study  of  Ezekiel  appeared  very 
shortly  after  it— that  of  Havernick,  which  issued  from  the  press 
in  1843,  a  year  or  two  before  the  lamented  death  of  its  author. 
Though  I  cannot  always  adopt  the  views  and  conclusions  arrived 
at  in  this  work,  yet  I  gratefully  acknowledge  my  deep  obligations 
to  it.  The  commentary  of  Hitzig,  of  still  later  date  (1847),  is 
the  production  of  an  accurate  scholar,  but  of  a  very  inferior  mind 
to  that  of  Hiivcrnick ;  and  while  it  is  entitled  to  an  honourable 
place  as  regards  the  grammatical  sense  and  connection,  it  has 
added  nothing  to  the  general  elucidation  of  the  book,  or  done 
aught  to  enhance  its  value  as  part  of  the  Inspired  Volume.  In 
this  respect  it  is  rash  and  superficial,  and  partakes  of  the  wonted 
leanness  and  spiritual  poverty  of  Rationalism.  The  few  passages 
of  Ezekiel  examined  by  Hengstenberg  in  his  Christology  are 
treated  with  his  usual  accuracy  and  penetration. 


THE    BOOK 


OF 


THE    PROPHET    EZEKIEL, 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE   TIME   AND   MANNER   OF   HIS   ENTERING   UPON  THE 
PROPHETICAL    OFFICE. 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  thirtieth  year,  on  the  fifth  of  the  fourth 
month,  while  I  was  among  the  captives  by  the  river  Chebar,  the  heavens 
were  opened,  and  I  saw  visions  of  God.  2.  On  the  fifth  of  the  month ;  it 
was  the  fifth  year  of  king  Jehoiachin's  (Heb.  Jojakhin's)  captivity.  3.  The 
word  of  Jehovah  did  verily  come  l  to  Ezekiel  2  the  priest,  the  son  of  Buzi, 
in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  by  the  river  Chebar  ;  and  the  hand  of  Jehovah 
was  upon  him. 

THE  information  contained  in  these  introductory  verses,  respect 
ing  the  person  of  Ezekiel,  and  the  time  at  which  he  entered  on 
his  prophetical  calling,  is  very  explicit  upon  some  points,  but 
indefinite  or  doubtful  upon  others.  It  tells  us  that  he  was  of 
the  priestly  order,  and  that  his  father's  name  was  Bazi ;  but  it 
does  not  indicate  with  what  particular  family  of  the  priesthood 
he  was  connected ;  nor  does  it  state  that  he  had  ever  personally 

1  "We  have  here,  at  the  outset,  a  striking  example  of  our  prophet's  love 
of  emphasis.     He  does  not  say  simply,  after  the  usual  manner,  the  word  of 
Jehovah  was  or  came  pITI  to  him  ;  but  rpH  HS"I    using  the  infinitive  absol. 

along  with  the  verb,  according  to  a  common  Hebrew  usage,  to  strengthen 
the  meaning.  The  Authorized  Version  employs  the  adverb  expressly  to  bring 
out  the  force  of  this  peculiar  construction ;  but  it  is  rather  the  felt  assurance 
with  which  the  revelation  came,  than  its  expressness,  which  is  indicated. 

2  Ezekiel,  composed  of  ^  pin1*    God  will  strengthen. 

B 


]  £  EZEKIEL  I. 

discharged  the  duties  of  the  priestly  office  in  the  temple.  The 
more  special  part  of  the  description  has  respect  to  his  position 
and  calling  as  a  prophet  to  his  exiled  countrymen  on  the  banks 
of  the  Chebar.  He  was,  indeed,  the  only  individual  raised  up 
amone  them  to  fulfil  there  the  prophetical  office.  Daniel,  it  is 
true,  flourished  during  the  same  period  in  exile,  and  was  also 
richly  furnished  with  prophetical  gifts  ;  but  Daniel  might  more 
fitly  be  called  a  seer  than  a  prophet,  since  the  spirit  of  prophecy 
imparted  to  him  was  not  given  to  fit  him  for  the  discharge  of  a 
spiritual  office,  but  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  him  to  disclose 
beforehand  coming  events  in  the  providence  of  God.  Chosen 
bv  the  king  of  Babylon  from  that  portion  of  his  countrymen 
who  were  distinguished  by  their  superior  rank  and  accomplish 
ments,  the  sphere  which  Divine  Providence  marked  out  for  him 
in  the  land  of  exile  was  one  that  required  bis  application  to  the 
affairs  of  worldly  business,  not  to  the  employments  of  a  sacred 
ministry.  His  lot  was  to  dwell  in  king's  palaces  ;  and  in  giving 
counsel  to  princes  and  directing  the  movements  of  empire,  he 
found  his  proper  vocation.  Hence  the  revelations  vouchsafed 
to  him  had  respect  chiefly  to  the  outward  relations  of  God's 
kingdom, — its  connection  with  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and 
their  ever-shifting  dynasties.  It  is  on  this  account,  and  not  for 
the  fanciful  reasons  sometimes  alleged,  that  the  later  Jews  place 
the  book  of  Daniel  not  among  the  prophetical  scriptures, — the 
writings  of  strictly  prophetical  men, — but  among  those  of  a  more 
general  character, — the  Hagiographa,  or  sacred  writings. 

The  sphere  which  Ezekiel  was  called  to  occupy  was  entirely 
different.  His  was  the  distinctive  work  and  calling  of  a  pro 
phet.  Himself  of  priestly  origin,  and  hence  devoted  from  his 
birth  to  the  peculiar  service  of  God,  he  had  to  do  more  especially 
with  the  inward  concerns  of  the  Divine  kingdom  ;  and  it  was  in 
connection  with  this  essentially  spiritual  vocation  that  the  high 
calling  and  supernatural  gifts  of  a  prophet  were  conferred  on 
him.  When  sent  into  exile,  his  duty  of  service  was  but  trans 
ferred  from  the  visible  temple  in  Jerusalem  to  the  spiritual 
temple  in  Chaldea,  as  it  was  also  withdrawn  from  ministrations 
of  a  more  common  and  formal,  to  those  of  a  more  select  and 
elevated  kind.  Therefore,  as  it  was  Daniel's  part  to  guide  the 
machinery  of  government,  and  transact  with  affairs  of  state,  it 
was  Ezekiel's  to  deal  in  God's  behalf  with  the  hearts  and  con- 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  1 9 

sciences  of  men.  And  as  the  one  was  called  to  raise  the  standard 
of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  high  places  of  the  world's  pomp 
and  corruption,  so  the  other  had  to  battle  with  the  forms  of  evil 
that  were  nestling  in  the  bosom  of  the  Jewish  community,  and 
contend  against  the  abominations  which  were  laying  waste  the 
heritage  of  God. 

The  place  where  Ezekiel  wras  called  to  discharge  the  functions 
of  this  high  ministry  is  said  to  have  been  "  in  the  land  of  the 
Chaldeans,  by  the  river  Chebar"  (ver.  3), — which  Chebar  is 
universally  agreed  to  have  been  the  river  that  is  more  commonly 
known  by  the  name  of  Chaboras,  a  river  in  Upper  Mesopotamia, 
flowing  into  the  Euphrates  near  the  ancient  Carchemish,or  Circe- 
sium,  at  the  distance  of  about  two  hundred  miles  above  Babylon. 
It  was  among  the  captive  Jews  settled  there  that  Ezekiel's  lot 
was  cast,  and  for  them  more  immediately  that  he  had  to  do  the 
work  of  a  prophet.  But  whence  came  those  captive  brethren  ? 
and  when  had  they  settled  there?  They  consisted,  mainly  at 
least,  of  that  portion  of  the  captivity  which  was  carried  away 
with  Jehoiachin,  on  the  second  occasion  that  the  Babylonian 
army  made  reprisals  upon  the  land  and  people  of  Judah.  The 
first  occasion  was  about  eight  years  earlier,  in  the  third  or 
fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  the  father  of  Jehoiachin  ; 
of  which  there  is  no  particular  account  in  the  historical  books  of 
Scripture,  though,  from  being  the  occasion  on  which  Daniel  was 
carried  into  exile,  it  has  found  an  explicit  record  at  the  com 
mencement  of  his  book.1  The  captives,  however,  of  this  first 
successful  expedition  of  the  Chaldeans  against  Judea,  appear  to 
have  been  few  compared  with  those  who  suffered  in  the  second 
expedition,  when,  having  first  quelled  Jehoiakim's  rebellion,  and 

1  Dan.  i.  1.  In  2  Kings  xxiv.  1  it  is  merely  said  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
king  of  Babylon  came  up  and  besieged  Jerusalem,  and  Jehoiakim  became 
his  servant.  Daniel  places  his  deportation  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  third 
year  of  Jehoiakim,  while  Jeremiah  (chap.  xxv.  1)  says  that  the  fourth  year 
of  Jehoiakim  was  coincident  with  the  first  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  which  same 
year,  he  also  states,  Nebuchadnezzar  gained  a  victory  over  the  Egyptians  at 
Carchemish.  The  probability  is,  that  it  was  shortly  before  this  battle,  in 
the  end  of  the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  came  against 
Jerusalem  and  took  away  some  captives  (among  others  Daniel).  If  his 
assault  on  Jerusalem  was  after  the  battle,  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  and 
those  in  Chaldea  must  have  dated  the  commencement  of  his  reign  diffe 
rently. 


20  EZEKIEL  I. 

put  him  to  death,  the  army  proceeded  to  carry  off  his  successor, 
Jehoiachin,  with  all  the  flower  of  the  people.  The  kingdom 
was  then  left  in  a  feeble  and  dependent  state,  and  so  continued 
for  about  eleven  years  longer,  when  the  infatuated  revolt  of 
Zedekiah  provoked  a  third  incursion  of  the  Chaldeans,  who  now 
reduced  Jerusalem  to  a  heap  of  ruins — the  remaining  inhabitants 
being  partly  killed,  partly  taken  captive  to  Babylon,  and  partly, 
also,  dispersed  to  other  regions. 

It  is  not  expressly  said  that  the  whole  of  the  captives  who  had 
been  carried  away  with  Jehoiachin  were  settled  near  Carchemish, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  though  the  probability  is  that  the 
great  body  of  them  had  been  located  there.  Ezekiel's  call  was 
to  labour  among  "  the  captivity," — or,  as  we  prefer  rendering  it, 
the  captives, — and  he  constantly  represents  these  captives  as 
having  their  local  habitation  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  If 
there  was  any  considerable  number  of  captives  taken  from 
Judea  on  the  first  incursion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  it  is  probable 
that  the  most  of  them  were  settled  there  after  the  battle  of 
Carchemish  ;  these  would  form  the  older  portion  of  the  Jewish 
settlers  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  And  as  the  leading  object 
of  those  deportations  was  evidently  to  consolidate  the  Chaldean 
empire,  by  what  seemed  a  wise  allocation  of  its  subjects,  it 
could  scarcely  fail  to  be  regarded  as  a  politic  arrangement,  to 
attach  the  succeeding  and  much  larger  companies  of  captive  Jews 
to  those  already  settled  there,  as  they  would  thus  more  readily  feel 
at  home  in  their  new  habitations,  and  with  less  difficulty  become 
reconciled  to  the  change  that  had  passed  over  their  condition. 
So  that  when  we  hear  of  the  Jews,  time  after  time,  being 
carried  to  Babylon,  or  again  delivered  from  it,  we  are  not  to 
understand  by  this  the  city  of  Babylon  itself,  in  which,  appar 
ently,  a  mere  fraction  of  their  number  was  appointed  to  dwell, 
but  the  Chaldean  region  at  large,  and  especially  this  particular 
district  of  it  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  The  place  of  exile 
was  identified  with  Babylon  merely  because  the  centre  of  power 
and  influence  was  there,  and  the  fortunes  of  the  whole  region 
were  necessarily  bound  up  with  those  of  the  capital. 

In  a  moral  point  of  view,  the  situation  of  the  exiles  on  the 
Chebar  was  peculiarly  trying  and  perilous,  and  never  more  so 
than  during  the  eleven  years'  reign  of  Zedekiah, — the  period  that 
elapsed  between  the  captivity  of  the  chief  part  of  them  and  the 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  2 1 

utter  prostration  of  their  country.  Encompassed,  as  they  now 
were,  by  the  atmosphere  of  a  triumphant  heathenism,  the  more 
degenerate  portion  were  in  imminent  danger  of  burying  them 
selves  in  the  world's  darkness  and  corruption  ;  while  those  who 
had  attained  to  more  correct  views  both  of  Divine  truth  and  of 
their  own  position,  were  exposed  to  a  variety  of  influences,  which 
tended  to  nourish  false  expectations  in  their  bosom,  and  to  take 
off  their  minds  from  what  should  have  been  their  grand  concern, 
— the  work  of  personal  reformation.  The  kingdom  seemed  now 
to  have  become  in  some  degree  consolidated  in  the  hands  of 
Zedekiah ;  and  why  might  they  not  hope,  after  a  few  years  more 
had  elapsed,  to  get  permission  from  the  king  of  Babylon  to  re 
turn  and  dwell  peaceably  in  their  native  land  ?  Even  without 
any  express  leave  on  his  part,  the  matter  did  not  seem  entirely 
hopeless — relief  might  still  possibly  come  through  the  interven 
tion  of  Egypt ;  for  though  that  power  had  sustained  a  severe 
blow  by  its  defeat  at  Carchemish,  it  was  not  so  far  broken  as 
altogether  to  exclude  the  prospect  of  its  again  taking  the  field 
against  the  king  of  Babylon.  It  was  precisely  this  expectation 
which  misled  Zedekiah  to  his  ruin ;  for  it  induced  him  to  enter 
into  a  treacherous  alliance  with  Egypt,  which  proved  the  fore 
runner  of  his  utter  discomfiture  and  final  overthrow.  Nor  were 
persons  wanting,  as  we  learn  from  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  who 
sought  to  inspire  the  exiles  at  Chebar  with  the  same  delusive 
hopes.  And  it  is  more  than  probable,  though  we  have  no 
explicit  information  on  the  subject,  that  some  of  the  earlier 
predictions,  especially  those  of  Isaiah  and  Habakkuk,  which  so 
clearly  foretold  the  downfall  of  Babylon,  were  employed  to 
countenance  and  support  them  in  the  false  prospects  they  enter 
tained.  Then,  for  the  small  remnant  of  sound  believers  who 
existed  there,  like  a  few  grains  of  wheat  among  heaps  of  chaff, 
how  much  was  there,  if  not  to  betray  them  into  those  vain  con 
fidences,  at  least  to  fill  their  souls  with  depression  and  gloom  ? 
Cut  off,  as  by  an  impassable  gulf,  from  the  temple  of  the  Lord, 
while  their  more  favoured  brethren  in  Judea  were  still  allowed 
to  frequent  its  courts,  how  apt  must  they  have  been  to  feel  that 
they  were  cast  out  of  God's  sight,  and  to  mourn,  in  the  plaintive 
strains  of  the  Psalmist,  "  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech, 
that  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Kedar." 

We  find  that  Jeremiah,  amid  the  severe  and  painful  struggles 


22  EZEKIEL  I. 

which  beset  his  course  in  Judea,  was  not  unmindful  of  these 
endangered  and  forlorn  exiles  in  the  land  of  the  enemy.  On  the 
occasion  of  an  embassy  going  from  King  Zedekiah  to  Babylon, 
he  despatched  communications  to  them  by  the  hand  of  Seraiah, 
such  as  their  circumstances  required.  One  of  these — the  pro 
phecy  contained  in  Jer.  li. — announced  the  certain  downfall  of 
Babylon,  but  was  probably  committed  to  Seraiah  in  confidence, 
that  he  might  impart  its  tidings  only  to  such  as  were  likely  to 
profit  by  them.  The  other  was  a  letter  addressed  to  the  captives 
generally,  in  which  he  warned  them  not  to  believe  the  false  pro 
phets,  who  held  out  flattering  hopes  of  their  speedy  and  certain 
return  to  the  land  of  their  fathers ;  assured  them  that  there 
should  be  no  return  till  the  period  of  seventy  years  had  been  ac 
complished  in  their  captivity;  and  exhorted  them  to  submit  them 
selves  to  the  hand  of  God,  and  to  seek  him  with  all  their  hearts 
(chap.  xxix.).  So  far  were  the  views  expressed  in  this  letter  from 
coinciding  with  those  prevalent  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  that 
one  of  the  captives,  we  are  informed,  wrote  back  to  the  high 
priest  at  Jerusalem,  and  even  complained  of  his  allowing  Jere 
miah  to  go  at  large,  since  he  was  acting  more  like  a  madman 
than  a  prophet  (chap.  xxix.  24-28).  And  it  was  in  immediate 
connection  with  these  transactions,  and  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
a  full  utterance  and  a  pointed  application  to  the  truths  and 
lessons  which  had  been  expressed  in  the  communications  of 
Jeremiah,  that  one  was  raised  up  among  the  captives  themselves 
to  do  the  work  of  a  prophet, — the  fervent  and  energetic  Ezekiel. 
For  as  it  was  in  the  fourth  year  of  Zedekiah's  reign  that  those 
communications  went  from  Jeremiah  to  the  captives  (Jer.li.  59), 
so  it  was  very  shortly  after,  namely,  in  the  fifth  year  and  fourth 
month  of  the  same  reign,  or,  which  is  all  one,  of  Jehoiachin's 
captivity  (E/ek.  i.  2),  that  Ezekiel  was  called  to  the  prophetical 
office;  whence  he  begins  with  the  usual  historical  formula, "And 
it  came  to  pass,"  as  if  what  was  going  to  be  recorded  was  merely 
the  resumption  of  a  thread  that  had  somehow  been  broken  or 
suspended,  a  continuation  in  a  new  form  of  the  testimony  that 
had  been  delivered  by  other  servants  of  God.  In  him  the  truth 
found  a  most  important  witness,  both  as  regards  the  nature  and 
variety  of  the  communications  with  which  he  was  charged.  By  his 
very  name  and  call  to  the  prophetical  office,  he  was  a  witness  of 
the  Lord's  faithfulness  to  his  people,  as,  by  the  tone  and  character 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  23 

of  his  ministrations,  he  gave  strong  expression  to  the  high  and 
holy  principles  of  God's  government  over  them  ;  for,  as  has  been 
justly  said,  "  He  was  one  who  raised  his  voice  like  a  trumpet, 
and  showed  to  Israel  his  misdeeds;  whose  word,  like  a  threshing 
machine,  passed  over  all  their  sweet  hopes  and  purposes,  and 
ground  them  to  the  dust;  whose  whole  manifestations  furnished 
the  strongest  proof  that  the  Lord  was  still  among  his  people  ; 
who  was  himself  a  temple  of  the  Lord,  before  whom  the  apparent 
temple,  which  still  stood  for  a  short  time  at  Jerusalem,  sunk  back 
into  its  own  nothingness;  a  spiritual  Samson,  who  with  a  strong 
arm  seized  the  pillars  of  the  temple  of  idols,  and  dashed  it  to  the 
ground  ;  an  energetic,  gigantic  nature,  who  was  thereby  suited 
effectually  to  counteract  the  Babylonish  spirit  of  the  times,  which 
loved  to  manifest  itself  in  violent,  gigantic,  grotesque  forms  ; 
one  who  stood  alone,  but  was  yet  equal  to  a  hundred  scholars 
of  the  prophets."  ] 

We  have  referred  as  yet  only  to  the  more  explicit  date 
assigned  by  Ezekiel  for  his  entrance  on  the  prophetical  office, 
viz.  the  fifth  day  of  the  fourth  month  of  the  fifth  year  of  Je- 
hoiachin's  captivity.  Before  this,  however,  he  mentions  another, 
which  he  simply  designates  "  the  thirtieth  year" — a  date  which 
has  been  very  variously  understood.  Some,  in  the  first  instance, 
Jewish  authorities,  in  particular  Kimchi  and  Jarchi;  recently,  in 
this  country,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  in  his  "  Times  of  Daniel," 
p.  35  ;  and  on  the  Continent,  Hitzig — regard  the  prophet  as 
reckoning  from  the  last  jubilee.  By  some  misapprehension,  the 
Duke  of  Manchester  represents  Jerome  and  Theodoret  as  being 
of  this  opinion;  both,  on  the  contrary,  reject  it.  Jerome's  words 
are :  "  Tricesimus  annus,  non  ut  plerique  gestimant,  aatatis  pro- 
phetse  dicitur,  nee  Jubilsei,  qui  est  annus  remissionis,  sed  a  duo 
decimo  anno  Josise,"  etc.  The  chief  objection  to  this  view  is, 
that  it  rests  entirely  on  hypothesis,  there  being  no  historical 
notice  of  a  jubilee  about  the  time  referred  to,  nor  any  other  in 
stance  of  such  an  occurrence  being  taken  by  a  prophet  as  an  era 
from  which  to  date  either  his  own  entrance  on  the  prophetical 
office,  or  any  other  event  of  importance  to  the  Church.  It  seems 
the  more  unlikely  that  Ezekiel  should  fix  upon  an  era  of  that 
description,  since  it  already  lay  so  far  in  the  distance ;  and  so 
many  painful  and  humiliating  events  had  occurred  in  the  interval, 
1  Hengstenberg's  Christol.  vol.  ill  p.  450,  Eng.  Trans. 


24  EZEKIEL  I. 

that  no  one  almost  would  naturally  think  of  it,  or  feel  as  if,  in 
existing  circumstances,  anything  had  depended  on  it.  Of  what 
moment  was  it  to  Ezekiel  or  his  countrymen  that  thirty  years  ago 
there  had  been  a  jubilee  in  the  land  of  Judah,  when  now  the  whole 
nation  was  in  bondage,  and  the  best  of  its  people  were  miserable 
captives  in  a  foreign  land  ?  The  more  common  opinions  are,  that 
the  thirty  years  date  either  from  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah's 
reign,  when,  with  the  finding  of  the  book  of  the  Law  in  the  temple, 
a  notable  reformation  began — so  the  Chaldee,  Jerome,  Theodoret, 
Grotius,Calov,  Piscator,  Ideler,  Havernick  (some  also  of  the  Rab 
binical  writers  combine  their  idea  of  the  jubilee  with  this  period) 
— or  from  the  Nabopolassarian  era,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  father,  and  of  the  Chaldean  dynasty 
— soPradus,Scaliger,Perizonius,  Michaelis,Rosenmiiller,Ewald. 
Of  these  two  epochs,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  eighteenth  of 
Josiah's  reign  did  stand  at  the  distance  of  thirty  years  from  the 
fifth  year  of  Jehoiachin's  captivity  (14  of  Josiah's  reign,  11  of 
Jehoiakim's,  and  5  of  the  captivity);  and  recent  chronological 
investigations  have  rendered  it  probable  that  the  Nabopolassarian 
era  must  also  have  nearly,  if  not  altogether,  coincided  with  it. 
But  it  unquestionably  seems  strange  that  either  of  these  epochs 
should  have  been  indicated  by  giving  only  the  number  of  years 
that  had  elapsed,  with  no  explicit  mention  of  the  point  from 
which  they  commenced  to  run.  Neither  of  them  could  then 
possess  so  marked  and  settled  a  character  in  history  that,  without 
being  expressly  named,  the  one  or  the  other  might  have  been 
expected  at  once  to  present  itself  to  the  mind.  The  very  cir 
cumstance  that  two  seem  almost  with  equal  right  to  claim  the 
distinction,  implies  that  neither  of  them  stood  so  prominently 
forward  as  to  render  the  specific  mention  of  them  unnecessary. 
If  it  were  established,  however  (though  it  cannot  possibly  be  so), 
that  the  Chaldean  era  had  then  come  into  general  use,  the 
opinion  which  would  date  the  thirty  years  from  it  would  be  the 
most  probable,  as  the  era  would,  in  that  case,  have  formed  a 
definite  note  of  time,  which  it  had  been  quite  natural  for  a  pro 
phet  in  Chaldea  to  point  to;  while  no  period  of  internal  reforma 
tion,  like  that  in  Josiah's  reign,  is  ever  taken  by  the  prophets  as 
a  chronological  starting-point.  In  this  uncertainty  as  to  any 
reference  to  a  public  historical  epoch,  we  cannot  but  think  more 
weight  is  due  than  has  latterly  been  given  to  an  ancient  opinion, 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  25 

that  the  prophet  had  respect  to  himself  in  this  number,  and  meant 
simply  to  denote  by  it  the  thirtieth  year  of  his  own  life.  It  was 
customary  for  the  Levites,  and,  we  may  infer,  also  for  the  priests, 
to  enter  on  their  duty  of  service  at  the  temple  in  their  thirtieth 
year ;  and  though  the  prophets  were  not  wont  to  connect  the 
period  when  they  received  their  predictions  with  their  own  age 
at  the  time  of  their  receiving  them,  yet  the  case  of  Ezekiel  was 
somewhat  peculiar.  As  the  Lord,  by  his  special  presence  and 
supernatural  revelations,  was  going  to  become  a  sanctuary  to  the 
exiles  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar  (see  especially  chap.  xi.  16),  so 
Ezekiel,  to  whom  these  revelations  were  in  the  first  instance  made, 
was  to  be  to  the  people  residing  there  in  the  room  of  the  mini 
stering  priesthood.  By  waiting  upon  his  instructions  they  were 
to  learn  the  mind  of  God,  and  to  have  what,  situated  as  matters 
now  were  in  Jerusalem,  would  prove  more  than  a  compensation 
for  the  loss  of  the  outward  temple  service.  It  seems,  therefore, 
to  have  been  the  intention  of  the  prophet,  by  designating  himself 
so  expressly  a  priest,  and  a  priest  that  had  reached  his  thirtieth 
year,  to  represent  his  prophetic  agency  among  his  exiled  country 
men  as  a  kind  of  priestly  service,  to  which  he  was  divinely  called 
at  the  usual  period  of  life.  And  then  the  opening  vision  wThich 
revealed  a  present  God,  enthroned  above  the  cherubim,  came  as 
the  formal  institution  of  that  ideal  temple,  in  connection  with 
which  he  was  to  minister  in  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of 
God.  Such  appears  to  me,  on  full  and  careful  consideration,  by 
much  the  most  natural  view  of  the  subject ;  and  it  seems  chiefly 
from  overlooking  the  distinctive  character  and  design  of  Ezekiel's 
agency  as  a  prophet,  that  the  difficulty  respecting  the  thirtieth 
year  has  been  experienced.  The  prophet  wished  to  mark  at  the 
outset,  by  what  he  said  of  his  own  position  and  calling,  the  priestly 
relation  in  which  he  stood  both  to  God  and  to  the  people.  And 
thus  also  the  end  fitly  corresponds  with  the  beginning  ;  for  it  is 
as  a  priest  delineating  the  rise  of  a  new  and  more  glorious 
temple  that  he  chiefly  unfolds  the  prospect  of  a  revived  and 
flourishing  condition  to  the  remnant  of  spiritual  worshippers 
among  whom  he  laboured. 

In  regard  to  the  revelation  itself,  which  formed  at  once  the 
call  of  Ezekiel  to  the  prophetical  office,  and  the  commencement 
of  his  mission,  there  are  altogether  four  expressions  employed, — 
the  three  first  having  respect  to  what  was  objectively  presented 


26  EZEKIEL  I. 

to  the  prophet,  and  the  other  to  his  internal  fitness  for  appre 
hending  what  was  presented.  "  The  heavens  were  opened  " — 
"  he  savv  visions  of  God  " — and  (in  connection  with  these  Divine 
visions,  as  the  aim  and  object  of  them),  "  the  word  of  Jehovah 
did  verily  come  to  him," — all  indicating,  and  that  in  the  first 
instance,  the  reality  of  the  supernatural  manifestation,  both  in 
action  and  speech,  that  was  made  to  him.  Without  such  actual 
appearances  and  communications  on  the  part  of  God,  nothing  in 
the  state  of  the  prophet  himself  would  have  been  of  any  avail  as 
to  the  certain  revelation  of  God's  mind  and  will.  At  the  same 
time,  a  corresponding  state  of  spiritual  excitation  was  needed  on 
his  part, to  fit  him  for  perceiving  what  was  exhibited  in  the  Divine 
sphere,  and  for  being  the  organ  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  making 
known  the  truth  of  God  to  the  Church.  Hence  the  prophet 
adds  in  respect  to  this,  "  And  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was  upon 
him ; "  as  in  the  case  of  St.  John  (Rev.  i.  17,  "And  he  laid  his 
right  hand  upon  me  saying,  Fear  not "),  and  of  Daniel  (chap.  x. 
10,  18),  the  Lord  now,  by  a  Divine  touch,  invigorated  his  frame 
and  endowed  him  with  strength  of  eye  and  elevation  of  soul  for 

O  */ 

the  lofty  sphere  he  was  to  occupy.  And  thus  raised  on  high  by 
the  immediate  agency  of  God,  he  was  in  a  condition  for  witnessing 
and  reporting  aright  what  passed  in  the  region  of  his  inner  man. 

Ver.  4.  And  I  looked,  and  behold  a  whirlwind  coming  from  the  north,  a 
great  cloud,  and  a  fire  kindling  itself,  and  a  brightness  round  about  it  (the 
cloud),  and  from  out  of  it  (the  fire)  like  the  bright  glitter  of  Chashmal  in 
the  midst  of  the  fire.1  5.  And  out  of  the  midst  of  it  the  likeness  of  four 

1  This  fourth  verse  is  peculiar  in  almost  every  one  of  the  expressions  con 
tained  in  it.  The  nn^flD  $K  is  literally,  fire  catching  itself ;  but  the 
only  definite  meaning  we  can  attach  to  this  is,  that  of  fire  kindling  itself— 
self-communicating  from  one  part  to  another.  The  expression  occurs  only 
in  another  passage  (Ex.  ix.  24),  where  it  is  plainly  used  to  denote,  as  here, 
the  awful  intensity  and  living  force  of  the  fire.  The  twc#te,  being  of  diffe 
rent  genders  in  the  original,  plainly  refer,  the  one  to  the  cloud,  the  other  to 
the  fire;  and  I  have  marked  this  by  inserting  the  words  for  the  two  objects 
respectively.  The  fe^nn  py3  is  rendered  by  our  translators,  "as  the  colour 
of  amber."  But  py  is  not  properly  colour;  it  is  the  eye,  the  look,  the  glance, 
such  as  the  eye  itself  or  anything  brilliant  gives  forth.  Amber  also  is  not  the 
right  word  here  for  Chashmal.  The  derivation  of  the  word  is  uncertain,  but 
it  is  generally  understood  to  denote  a  sort  of  mixed  metal,  a  composition  of 
gold  and  silver,  which  is  expressed  by  the  fa^oy  of  the  LXX.  Gesenius, 
however,  takes  it  as  equivalent  to  the  Nehosheth  Kdlal,  furbished  or  glittering 
brass,  of  ver.  7.  The  glance  of  this  glittering  metal  in  the  midst  of  so  intense 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  27 

living  creatures  ;  and  this  was  their  appearance— they  had  the  likeness  of  a 
man.  6.  And  four  faces  were  to  each,  also  four  wings  to  each  of  them.  7. 
And  their  feet  were  straight  feet ;  and  the  sole  of  their  feet  like  the  sole  of 
a  calf's  foot;  and  they  sparkled  like  the  glitter  of  polished  brass.1  8.  The 
hand  of  each  (literally,  his  hand)  was  that  of  a  man  underneath  their  wings 
on  their  four  sides;  and  they  four  had  their  faces  and  their  wings.  9.  Their 
wings  were  joined  one  to  another ;  they  turned  not  when  they  went  ;  they 
went  each  straight  forward.  10.  And  for  the  likeness  of  their  faces,  there 
was  the  likeness  of  a  man  and  the  likeness  of  a  lion  on  the  right  side  to  the 
four  of  them  ;  and  the  likeness  of  an  ox  to  the  left  side  to  the  four,  and  the 
likeness  of  an  eagle  to  the  four.  11.  And  their  faces  and  their  wings  were 
separated  from  above ;  two  of  each  joined  one  another,  and  two  covering 
their  bodies.2  12.  And  they  went  every  one  of  them  straight  forward  ; 
whither  the  spirit  was  to  go  they  went ;  they  turned  not  when  they  went. 
13.  And  for  the  likeness  of  the  living  creatures,  their  appearance  was  like 
burning  coals  of  fire,  as  the  appearance  of  torches  ;  it  went  up  and  down 
between  the  living  creatures;  and  there  was  brightness  in  the  fire,  and 
from  the  fire  went  forth  lightning.  14.  And  the  living  creatures  ran  and 


a  fire  suggests  the  highest  possible  splendour.  And  as  it  is  this  quality  of  it 
that  the  prophet  here  has  in  view,  it  is,  for  us,  better  to  give  prominence  to 
the  shining  than  the  mixed  character  of  the  metal.  The  appearance  of  this 
fiery  cloud  is  said  to  have  been  from  the  north,  we  believe  simply  on  natural 
grounds  ;  it  was  of  the  nature  of  a  storm,  hence  it  seemed  to  come  from 
the  hilly  Caucasian  region  to  the  north — the  natural  region  of  clouds  and 
tempests.  T\re  regard  it  as  quite  fanciful  in  Huv.  to  suppose  that  the 
prophet  conceives  himself  in  the  temple,  and  points  to  the  north  as  the 
quarter  from  which  the  instruments  of  God's  displeasure,  the  Chaldeans,  were 
to  come.  Besides,  there  is  mercy  as  well  as  judgment  indicated  in  the  vision. 

1  Hitzig  would  translate  this  last  expression,  molten  Irass  or  metal,  deriv 
ing  ^?p  from  n!>p,  to  roast  or  burn  in  the  fire.    But  the  transition  from  roast 
to  melt  does  not  appear  at  all  easier,  in  respect  to  such  an  article  as  brass, 
than  from  to  be  light  to  make  light  (the  common  meaning  of  b^p)>  ^°  ^ur" 
bish  or  brighten.     For  nothing  is  more  usual  than  to  say  of  any  piece  of 
metal,  it  is  heavy  or  light  in  appearance,  according  as  it  is  well  or  ill  polished. 
I  therefore  retain  the  common  meaning,  which  was  quite  correctly  given 
by  Stephanus  in  his  Thes.  as  "  refulgens,  a  consequent!  tamen,  cum  proprie 
politum  ac  tersum  declaret." 

2  The  import  of  what  is  said  in  this  llth  verse  regarding  their  faces  and 
wings  is,  that  they  were  each  separate  or  distinct  both  in  regard  to  their 
heads  and  wings,  but  that  the  tips  of  the  two  outstretched  wings  reached  to 
one  another,  while  the  other  two  wings,  in  token  of  humble  and  reverential 
awe,  formed  a  sort  of  veil  or  covering  for  the  middle  or  lower  parts  of  their 
bodies.     Very  commonly  the  first  clause  is  rendered,  "  and  their  faces  and 
their  wings  were  expanded  from  above,"  or  spread  forth  upwards.     But  one 
does  not  see  how  that  could  properly  be  said  of  the  faces,  as  well  as  the 
wings,  and  the  verb  -pa  is  never  used  but  in  the  sense  of  separating,  dis 
persing,  or  scattering.     The  Septuagint  leave  out  the  faces  altogether,  in 
order,  apparently,  to  make  the  sense  of  expanding  (sx.TtTotp.fvou)  more  suitable. 


28  EZEKIEL  I. 

returned  like  the  appearance  of  the  meteor-flash.1  15.  And  as  I  was  looking 
at  the  living  creatures,  behold  one  wheel  upon  the  earth  beside  the  living 
creatures  for  its  four  faces  (or,  according  to  its  four  sides,  i.e.  as  there 
was  a  side  or  direction  for  each  of  the  four  creatures,  so  a  wheel  for  each 
of  the  sides).  16.  The  appearance  of  the  wheels  and  their  work  was 
like  the  glance  of  the  tartessus-stone  ;2  and  there  was  one  likeness  for  the 
four ;  and  their  appearance  and  their  work  was  as  if  there  were  a  wheel 
in  the  midst  of  a  wheel.  17.  When  they  went,  they  went  by  their  four 
sides  (or  directions),  they  turned  not  when  they  went.  18.  As  for  their 
rings  (felloes),  they  were  both  high  and  dreadful ;  and  their  rings  were  full 
of  eyes  round  about  them  four.  19.  And  when  the  living  creatures  went, 
the  wheels  went  beside  them  ;  and  when  the  living  creatures  were  lifted 
up  from  off  the  earth,  the  wheels  were  lifted  up.  20.  Whithersoever  the 
spirit  was  for  going,  thither  they  went — the  spirit  was  for  going  ;  and  the 
wheels  were  lifted  up  beside  them  ;  for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creatures 
was  in  the  wheels.3  2 1.  When  those  went,  they  went ;  and  when  those  stood, 


1  The  pn  here,  which  I  render  by  the  meteor -flash,  is  not  found  in  Heb. 
as  a  verb,  but  has  in  Arabic  and  Syriac  the  sense  of  to  scatter,  spread  ; 
hence  Huv.  prefers  the  meaning  of  spark-fire.     But  this  hardly  conies  up  to 
what  seems  to  be  required  here  ;  and  something  of  the  same  nature  as  light 
ning,  only  more  diffuse  and  sporadic  in  its  appearance,  must  be  understood. 
Such  is  meteor  or  sheet-lightning  ;  and  such  is  at  least  one  of  the  meanings 
ascribed  to  the  word  by  Ephraim  :  either  a  flash  of  lightning,  or  a  meteor, 
falling-star.     Many  in  ancient  and  modern  times  prefer  the  first ;    but  we 
should  then  have  expected  p~Q,  which  occurs  in  the  verse  immediately  before. 

The  leading  features  of  the  description  so  far  are,  first,  the  portentous 
cloud,  radiant  round  about,  and  within  glowing  with  the  fervour  and  bright 
ness  of  a  living  self -fed  flame.  Then,  in  the  midst  of  this  awful  heat  and 
lightning-splendour,  the  four  living  creatures,  in  whom  the  general  form  and 
appearance  was  that  of  a  man,  though  conjoined  with  this  were  also  the  like 
nesses  of  a  lion,  an  ox,  and  an  eagle — each  looking  to  its  own  quarter — a  face 
each  way,  so  that  wherever  the  living  creatures  moved,  they  did  not  need  to 
turn  ;  there  was  a  face  in  that  direction.  Each  were  separate  in  respect  to 
the  others,  yet  by  the  two  wings  that  were  expanded  for  flying,  they  were 
in  immediate  juxtaposition  above;  and  were  all  moved  and  animated  by  one 
living  spirit,  by  whose  mighty  impulse  they  shot  like  meteors  from  place  to 
place,  and  in  all  their  movements  and  appearance  reflected  the  "bright, 
burning  splendour  of  the  fiery  element  in  which  they  were  seen  to  exist. 
At  chap.  x.  1  they  are  expressly  called  cherubim. 

2  Our  translators  have  given  beryl  as  the  stone  here  meant ;  but  it  is  now 
more  commonly  regarded  as  the  chrysolite  of  the  ancients,  though  this  also 
is  not  quite  certain. 

3  Both  Hav.  andHitzig  here  render  rrnn  Pin  the  spirit  or  breath  of  life, 
the  living  principle,  holding  that  if  the  living  creatures  had  been  meant,  the 
usual  term  rrisn  would  have  been  used.     But  in  the  very  next  verse  except 
one,  we  have  the  same  word  as  here  for  what  must  mean  the  living  creatures 

-"  the  heads  of  the  living  creatures  ;  "  and  there  Hitzig,  as  usual,  is  obliged 
to  suppose  a  corruption  in  the  text,  and  correct  from  the  LXX.  But  in  both 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  29 

they  stood  ;  and  when  those  were  lifted  up  from  off  the  earth,  the  wheels 
were  lifted  up  beside  them  ;  for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creatures  was  in 
the  wheels.  22.  And  above  the  heads  of  the  living  creatures  was  the  like 
ness  of  the  firmament,  as  the  glitter  of  crystal,  terrible,  stretched  over  their 
heads  above.  23.  And  under  the  firmament  their  wings  erect,  one  toward 
another ;  each  one  had  two  covering  on  this  side,  and  each  one  two  covering 
on  that  side  their  bodies.1  24.  And  I  heard  the  sound  of  their  wings  as  the 
noise  of  many  waters,  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty ;  when  they  went  there 
was  a  tumultuous  noise,  like  the  noise  of  a  camp; 2  when  they  stood,  they  let 
down  their  wings.  25.  And  there  came  a  voice  from  above  the  firmament 
that  was  over  their  heads  when  they  stood ,  and  they  let  down  their  wings. 


places  the  word  is  most  naturally  taken  collectively,  just  as  in  Gen.  vii.  14, 
viii.  1,  for  living  creatures  :  that  which  has  life,  the  living  creature-hood,  for 
the  living  creatures.  So  here  the  prophet  has  spoken  of  the  creatures 
separately  ;  he  now  views  them  collectively,  as  being  together  the  aggregate 
creaturely  forms  in  which  the  spirit  resided  and  manifested  itself.  The 
clause  in  the  middle  of  the  verse,  "  the  spirit  was  for  going,"  seems  to  have 
been  thrown  in  for  greater  explicitness,  to  indicate  expressly  that  it  was 
not  the  wheels  themselves,  but  the  spirit  working  in  them,  that  was  the 
source  of  motion.  I  see  no  need,  therefore,  for  rejecting  the  clause. 

The  description  in  this  second  part  of  the  vision  is  to  the  following  effect  : 
By  the  side  of  each  cherub  (that  is,  apparently,  on  the  same  side  and  exterior 
to  the  cherub)  there  was  a  gigantic  wheel,  or  more  properly  a  double  wheel 
— one  within  another,  going  through  each  other  transversely  ;  for  the 
wheels,  like  the  cherubim  with  their  four  faces,  did  not  need  to  turn  when 
they  moved  from  one  direction  to  another ;  and  this  could  only  be  effected 
by  a  sort  of  double  wheel  to  every  cherub,  each  running  transversely  through 
the  other,  so  that  to  whichever  quarter  the  movement  might  point,  there 
could  be  a  motion  of  the  wheel  towards  it.  The  felloes  or  outer  rings  of 
these  wheels  were  set  round  with  eyes,  and  were  each  also  instinct  with 
the  same  spirit  of  life  and  power  that  wrought  in  the  cherubim,  so  that 
the  motions  of  all  were  simultaneous. 

1  This  looks  somewhat  like  a  contradiction  to  what  was  said  in  ver.  11, 
where  simply  four  wings  were  assigned  to  each  cherub,  two  for  flying  and 
two  for  covering  their  bodies.     Here  it  seems  as  if  each  had  four  for  covering 
their  bodies.     But,  possibly,  what  is  meant  is,  not  that  four  wings  existed 
specially  for  this  purpose,  but  that  the  use  of  the  four  wings  altogether  was 
such  as  to  act  like  a  covering  for  the  body  :  the  whole  body  was  over 
shadowed  by  them,  and  kept  out  of  sight. 

2  A  tumultuous  noise,  n ?£>!"!  ?ip    so  the   expression  is  now  commonly 
understood.     Our  translators  have  given  to  the  phrase  the  meaning  of  "the 
voice  of  speech."    But  this  hardly  makes  sense,  and  is  also  against  the  point 
ing.     The  only  other  passage  where  the  word  occurs  is  in  Jer.  xi.  16,  and 
there  our  translators  have  rendered  tumult,  and  the  connection  here  evidently 
requires  something  of  that  description.     The  LXX.  omits  the  clause,  as  it 
does  various   others  in  this  chapter,  but  the  Vulgate  translates:    "  sonus 
multitudinis."     The  expression  here,  therefore,  may  be  regarded  as  equiva- 


30  EZEK1EL  I. 

26.  And  above  the  firmament  that  was  over  their  heads,  as  of  the  appearance 
of  a  sapphire-stone,  was  the  likeness  of  a  throne ;  and  upon  the  likeness  of 
the  throne,  the  likeness  after  the  appearance  of  a  man  upon  it  aloft.  27. 
And  I  saw  like  the  glitter  of  Chashmal,  as  the  appearance  of  fire  within  it 
round  about,  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins  and  upwards,  and  from  the 
appearance  of  his  loins  and  downwards,  I  saw  as  it  were  the  appearance  of 
fire,  and  it  was  bright  all  around.  28.  As  the  appearance  of  the  bow  that 
is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day  of  rain,  so  was  the  appearance  of  the  brightness 
round  about.  It  was  the  appearance  of  the  likeness  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah. 
And  I  was  looking,  and  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  I  heard  a  voice  speaking. 

To  gather  up  now  the  leading  features  and  symbolic  purport 
of  this  wonderful  vision,  we  can  easily  perceive  that  the  ground 
work  of  it  was  derived  from  the  patterns  of  Divine  things  in  the 
most  holy  place  in  the  temple ;  yet  very  considerably  modified 
and  changed,  to  adapt  it  to  the  present  occasion.  Here  also  there 
is  the  throne  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  but  not  wearing  the  humble 
and  attractive  form  of  the  mercy-seat ;  more  like  Sinai,  with  its 
electric  clouds  and  pealing  sounds,  and  bursting  effusions  of  liv 
ing  flame.  Here,  too,  are  the  composite  forms  about  the  throne 
— the  cherubim  with  outstretched  wings  touching  each  other ; 
but  instead  of  the  two  cherubic  figures  of  the  temple,  four,  each 
with  four  hands,  four  wings,  four  faces,  looking  in  so  many 
directions — doubtless  with  respect  to  the  four  quarters  of  the 
earth,  toward  which  the  Divine  power  and  glory  was  going  to 
manifest  itself.  These  four  are  here  further  represented  as  pecu 
liarly  liciny  creatures,  full  of  life  and  motion,  and  not  only  with 
wings  for  flight,  but  wheels  also  of  gigantic  size  beside  them, 
revolving  with  lightning  speed,  and  all  resplendent  with  the 
most  intense  brightness.  The  general  correspondence  between 
what  Ezekiel  thus  saw  in  the  visions  of  God,  and  what  was  to 

lent  in  meaning  to  the  very  similar  one  *]^n  ^p,  which  is  more  frequently 
employed.  (Dan.  x.  6  ;  Isa.  xiii.  4.  See  Ges.  Lex.) 

The  description  in  this  third  and  last  part,  which  is  that  of  manifested 
Godhead  in  the  likeness  of  enthroned  humanity,  closely  resembles  the 
description  given  in  Ex.  xxiv.  10,  only  more  extended  and  particular. 
Here,  as  there,  we  have  the  sky-blue  sapphire-stone,  and  the  heavens' 
crystal  clearness,  emblem  of  Divine  splendour,  only  here  the  splendour  is 
of  a  more  dreadful  aspect ;  and  there  is  seen  not  merely  a  pavement,  but 
a  throne  also  as  of  sapphire,  while  the  glorious  being  that  sat  on  it  was 
radiant  with  the  bright  lustre  of  celestial  fire.  From  that  throned  firma 
ment  also  were  heard  voices  of  terrific  majesty  and  power,  at  the  utterance 
of  which  the  cherubic  forms  continually  let  down  their  wings,  as  in  the 
attitude  of  reverent  and  listening  silence. 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  31 

be  found  in  the  temple,  indicated  that  it  was  the  same  God 
who  dwelt  between  the  cherubim  in  the  temple  and  who  now 
appeared  to  his  servant  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar;  while  the 
differences  bespoke  certain  manifestations  of  the  Divine  charac 
ter  to  be  now  at  hand,  such  as  required  to  be  less  prominently 
displayed  in  his  ordinary  procedure. 

1.  That  he  appeared  specially  and  peculiarly  as  the  God  of 
holiness;  this,  first  of  all,  was  intimated  by  the  presence  of  the 
cherubim.  For  here,  as  in  the  temple,  the  employment  of  these 
composite  forms  pointed  back  to  their  original  destination  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  to  keep  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life,  from  which 
man  had  been  debarred  on  account  of  sin  ;  ideal  creatures,  as  the 
region  of  pure  and  blessed  life  they  occupied,  had  now  become 
to  men  an  ideal  territory.  Yet  still  they  were  creatures,  not  of 
angelic,  but  of  human  mould  ;  they  bore  the  predominant  like 
ness  of  man,  with  the  likenesses  superadded  of  the  three  highest 
orders  of  the  inferior  creation  (the  lion,  the  ox,  the  eagle).  "  It 
is  an  ideal  combination  ;  no  such  composite  creature  as  the  cherub 
exists  in  the  actual  world ;  and  we  can  think  of  no  reason  why 
the  singular  combination  it  presents  of  animal  forms  should  have 
been  set  upon  that  of  man  as  the  trunk  or  centre  of  the  whole, 
unless  it  were  to  exhibit  the  higher  elements  of  humanity  in  some 
kind  of  organic  connection  with  certain  distinctive  properties 
of  the  inferior  creation.  The  nature  of  man  is  immensely  the 
highest  upon  earth,  and  towers  loftily  above  all  the  rest  by  powers 
peculiar  to  itself.  And  yet  we  can  easily  conceive  how  this  very 
nature  of  man  might  be  greatly  raised  and  ennobled  by  having 
superadded  to  its  own  inherent  qualities  those  of  which  the  other 
animal  forms  here  mentioned  stand  as  the  appropriate  types." — 
"  These  composite  forms  are  here  called  nvn  •  for  which  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  and  John  in  the  Apocalypse,  use  the  synonymous  term 
£wa — living  ones.  The  frequency  with  which  this  name  is  used  of 
the  cherubim  is  remarkable.  In  Ezekiel  and  the  Apocalypse 
together  it  occurs  nearly  thirty  times,  and  may  consequently  be 
regarded  as  peculiarly  expressive  of  the  symbolical  meaning  of 
the  cherubim.  It  presents  them  to  our  view  as  exhibiting  the 
property  of  life  in  its  highest  state  of  power  and  activity, — as 
forms  of  creaturely  existence,  altogether  instinct  with  life.  And 
the  idea  thus  conveyed  by  the  name  is  further  substantiated  by 
one  or  two  traits  associated  with  them  in  Ezekiel  and  the  Apo- 


30  EZEKIEL  I. 

calypse.  Such,  especially,  is  the  very  singular  multiplicity  of 
eyes  attached  to  them,  appearing  primarily  in  the  mystic  wheels 
that  regulated  their  movements,  and  at  a  later  stage  (chap.  x.  12) 
in  the  cherubic  forms  themselves.  For  the  eye  is  the  symbol  of 
intelligent  life,  the  living  spirit's  most  peculiar  organ  and  index. 
And  to  represent  the  cherubim  as  so  strangely  replenished  with 
eyes  could  only  be  intended  to  make  them  known  as  wholly  in 
spirited.  Hence,  in  ver.  20,  "  the  spirit  of  the  living  creatures" 
is  said  to  have  been  in  the  wheels  ;  where  the  eye  was,  there  also 
was  the  intelligent,  thinking,  directive  spirit  of  life.  Another 
and  quite  similar  trait  is  the  quick  and  restless  activity  ascribed 
to  them  by  Ezekiel,  who  represents  them  as  ic  running  and  re 
turning"  with  lightning  speed;  and  then  by  John,  when  he 
describes  them  as  "  resting  not  day  and  night."  Incessant  motion 
is  one  of  the  most  obvious  symptoms  of  a  plenitude  of  life.  We 
instinctively  associate  the  property  of  life  even  with  the  inani 
mate  things  that  exhibit  motion — such  as  fountains  and  running 
streams,  which  are  called  living,  in  contradistinction  to  stagnant 
pools,  that  seem  comparatively  dead.  So  that  creatures  which 
appeared  to  be  all  eyes,  all  motion,  are,  in  plain  terms,  those  in 
which  the  powers  and  properties  of  life  are  quite  peculiarly  dis 
played.  But  life,  it  must  be  remembered,  most  nearly  and 
essentially  connected  with  God, — life  as  it  is,  or  shall  be  held 
by  those  who  dwell  in  his  immediate  presence,  and  form  in  a 
manner  the  very  enclosure  and  covering  of  his  throne, — pre 
eminently,  therefore,  holy  and  spiritual  life."  l 

2.  But  this  idea  of  holy  and  spiritual  life,  as  connected  with 
the  presence  and  glory  of  God,  was  greatly  strengthened  in  the 
vision  by  the  fervid  appearance,  as  of  metallic  brightness  and 
flashes  of  liquid  flame,  which  shone  from  and  around  all  the  parts 
and  figures  of  the  vision.  It  denoted  the  intense  and  holy 
severity  in  God's  working,  which  was  either  to  accomplish  in  the 
objects  of  it  the  highest  good,  or  to  produce  the  greatest  evil. 
Precisely  similar  in  meaning,  though  somewhat  differing  in  form, 
was  the  representation  in  Isaiah's  vision  (chap  vi.),  where  in 
stead  of  the  usual  name  cherubim,  that  of  seraphim  is  applied  to 
the  symbolical  attendants  of  God, — the  burning  ones,  as  the  word 
properly  signifies,  burning  forms  of  holy  fire,  the  emblems  of 

1  The  Typology  of  Scripture,  3d  ed.  vol.  i.  pp.  229-248,  where  the  whole 
subject  of  the  cherubim  is  fully  investigated. 


THE  OPENING  VISION.  33 

God's  purifying  and  destroying  righteousness.  Hence  their  cry 
one  to  another  was,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  of 
Hosts."  Arid  in  token  of  the  twofold  working  of  this  holiness, 
it  was  by  the  application  of  a  burning  coal  to  his  lips  that  the 
prophet,  as  the  representative  of  the  elect  portion  of  the  people, 
was  hallowed  for  God's  service,  while  in  the  message  that  follows, 
the  ungodly  mass  are  declared  to  be  for  burning  (as  the  word 
literally  is  in  ver.  13).  The  same  element  that  refined  and 
purified  the  one  for  God's  service  was  to  manifest  itself  in  the 
destruction  of  the  other.  And  it  is  this  also  that  is  symbolically 
taught  here  by  the  dazzling  light,  the  glowing  embers,  and  fiery 
coruscations,  with  which  all  was  enveloped  and  emblazoned.  It 
made  known  God's  purpose  to  put  forth  the  severer  attributes 
of  his  character,  and  to  purify  his  Church  by  a  the  spirit  of 
judgment  and  by  the  spirit  of  burning." 

3.  Even  these  fiery  appearances,  however,  in  the  cherubim 
and  the  other  objects  of  the  vision   did  not  sufficiently  express 
what  was  here  meant  to  be  conveyed;   and  therefore,  to  make 
out  the  idea  more  completely,  wheels  of  vast  proportions  were 
added  to  the  cherubim.      The  prophet  would  thus  render  pal 
pable  to  our  view  the  gigantic   and  terrible  energy  which  was 
going  to  characterize  the  manifestations  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
A  spirit  of  awful  and  resistless  might  was  now  to  appear  in  his 
dealings;  not  proceeding,  however,  by  a  blind  impulse,  but  in 
all  its  movements  guided  by  a  clear-sighted  and  unerring  saga 
city.     How  striking  a  representation  did  such  a  spirit  find  for 
itself  in  the  resolute  agency  and  stern  utterances  of  Ezekiel !    In 
this  respect  he  comes  nearest  of  all  the  later  prophets  to  Elijah. 

4.  Finally,  above  the   cherubim  of  glory  and  their  wonderful 
wheel- work    was    seen,  first,  the  crystal  firmament,  and  then, 
above  the  firmament,  the  throne  of  God,  on  which  he  himself 
sat  in  human  form, — a  form,  as  here  displayed,  beaming  with 
the  splendour  of  heavenly  fire,  but  at  the  same  time   bearing 
the  engaging  aspect  of  a  man,  and  surrounded  with  the  attrac 
tive  and  pleasing  halo  of  the  rainbow.      In  this  shone  forth  the 
mingled  majesty  and  kindness  of  God, — the  overawing  authority 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  gracious  sympathy  and  regard  on  the 
other,  which  were  to  distinguish  his  agency,  as  now  to  be  put 
forth  for  the  reproof  of  sin  among  the  covenant-people,  and  the 
establishment  of  truth  and  righteousness.     The  terror  which  the 


;U  EZEKIEL  1 1. -III.  1-11. 

manifestation  was  fitted  to  inspire  was  terror  only  to  the  guilty ; 
while,  for  the  penitent  and  believing,  there  was  to  be  the  bright 
est  display  of  covenant  love  and  faithfulness.  Especially  was 
this  indicated  by  the  crowning  appearance  of  the  rainbow; 
which,  from  bein^  the  token  of  God's  covenant  with  Noah,  in 
respect  to  the  future  preservation  of  the  earth,  was  like  the 
hanging  out  from  the  throne  of  the  Eternal  of  ;i  flag  of  peace, 
giving  assurance  to  all  that  the  purpose  of  Heaven  was  to 
preserve  rather  than  to  destroy,  and  to  fulfil  that  which  was 
promised  in  the  covenant.  Even  if  the  Divine  work  now  to 
be  carried  forward  in  the  spiritual  world  should  require,  as  in 
the  natural  world  of  old,  a  deluge  of  wrath  for  its  successful 
accomplishment,  still  the  faithfulness  and  love  of  God  would  be 
sure  to  the  children  of  promise,  and  would  only  shine  forth  the 
more  bright Iv  at  last,  in  consequence  of  the  tribulations  which 
might  be  needed  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  ultimate  good. 

Such,  then,  was  the  form  and  import  of  this  remarkable 
vision.  There  was  nothing  about  it  accidental  or  capricious; 
all  was  wisely  adjusted  and  arranged,  so  as  to  convey  beforehand 
suitable  impressions  of  that  work  of  God  to  which  Ezekiel  was 
now  called  to  devote  himself.  It  was  substantially  an  exhibi 
tion  by  means  of  emblematical  appearances  and  actions  of  the 
same  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  government  which  were 
to  be  unfolded  in  the  successive  communications  made  by 
Ezekiel  to  the  covenant-people.  By  a  significant  representa 
tion,  the  Lord  gathered  into  one  magnificent  vision  the  sub 
stance  of  what  was  to  occupy  the  prophetic  agency  of  his 
servant;  as  in  later  times  was  done  by  our  Lord  to  the  Evangelist 
.John  in  the  opening  vision  of  the  Apocalypse. 


CHAPTER  1I.-III.  1-11. 


CALL   TO    THE    PROPHETICAL    OFFICE. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,1  stand  upon  thy  feet,  and  I  will 
speak  to  thee.     2.  And  the  spirit  came  into  me  as  he  spoke  to  me,  and  he 

1  Hiivernick,  after  many  leading  commentators,  both  ancient  and  modern, 


CALL  TO  THE  PROPHETICAL  OFFICE.  35 

set  me  upon  my  feet  and  I  heard  him  speaking  to  me.  .°>.  And  he  said  to 
me,  Son  of  man,  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel,  to  the  rebellious 
peoples,1  who  have  rebelled  against  me  ;  they  and  their  fathers  have  trans 
gressed  against  me,  unto  this  very  day.  4.  And  they  are  children  of  a  stiff 
countenance,  and  an  hard  heart.  I  do  send  thee  unto  them,  and  thou 
shall  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  5.  And  they,  whether 
they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear — for  they  are  a  rebellious  house 
— shall  yet  know  that  a  prophet  was  among  them.  G.  And  thou,  son  of 
man,  be  not  afraid  of  them,  neither  be  afraid  of  their  words  ;  for  nettles  2 
and  thorns  are  with  thee,  and  thou  dwellest  with  scorpions  ;  be  not  afraid 
of  their  words,  neither  be  confounded  at  their  faces,  for  they  are  a  re 
bellious  house.  7.  And  thou  shalt  speak  my  words  to  them,  whether 
they  shall  hear,  or  whether  they  shall  forbear;  for  they  are  rebellious. 
8.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  hear  what  I  Hay  to  thee;  be  not  thou  re 
bellious  like  the  rebellious  house;  open  thy  mouth,  and  eat  what  I  give 
thee.  9.  And  I  looked,  and  behold  a  hand  stretched  toward  me,  and  behold 
in  it  a  book-roll.  10.  And  he  spread  it  out  before  me,  and  it  was  written 
within  and  without;  and  there  was  written  on  it  lamentations,  and  mourn 
ing,  and  woe. 

Chap.  iii.  ver.  1.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  that  which  thou  findest, 
eat ;  cat  this  roll,  and  go  speak  to  the  house  of  Israel.  2.  And  I  opened  rny 
mouth,  and  he  made  me  eat  that  roll.  .'}.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man, 


still  lays  stress  on  this  expression,  "  son  of  man,''  so  frequently  applied  to 
Kzckiel,  and  regards  it  as  containing  a  perpetual  admonition  to  him  of  his 
own  weakness  and  frailty.  It  seems  rather  strange,  however,  that  this 
prophet  alone  should  be  so  often  plied  with  such  an  admonition,  and  that  it 
should  have  been  conveyed  under  so  general  a  form.  We  are  rather  disposed 
to  concur  with  Lightfoot :  "  This  expression  is  of  frequent  use  in  Scripture,  in 
the  Hebrew  Rabbins,  but  more  especially  in  the  Chaldean  and  Syrian  tongues. 
.  .  .  Why  Ezekiel  and  no  other  prophet  should  have  been  so  often  styled 
thus,  has  been  ascribed  to  different  reasons  by  different  commentators.  To 
me,  at  least,  who  am  much  inferior  to  them  all,  the  principal  reason  appears 
to  be  this,  that  as  his  prophecy  was  written  during  the  Babylonish  cap 
tivity,  he  naturally  made  use  of  the  Chaldean  phrase,  So»  of  man — that  is, 
0  man.  The  same  phrase  was  also  used  by  Daniel  in  Chaldea,  chap.  x. 
16."  Erubim,  chap.  iv. 

1  It  is,  literally,  to  peoples,  the  rebellious  ones — Israel  being  not  only 
called  peoples  (p^U,  the  common  epithet  of  the  heathen),  but  with  the 
additional  epithet  of  the  rebellious.     They  were  thus  virtually  put  on  a  level 
with  the  heathen,  who  might  be  addressed  by  God  as  Loammi,  not  my 
people ;  with  the  additional  aggravation,  that  they  had  brought  themselves 
into  that  condition  after  having  been  in  covenant  with  God.     The  Septua- 
gint,  with  its  characteristic  laxity,  altogether  omits  the  expression. 

2  The  precise  meaning  of  D'OID  is  involved  in  some  doubt.     The  sense 
of  rebellious  or  refractory  has  often  been  ascribed  to  it,  which  it  bears  in 
the  Chaldee ;  but  this  would  not  suit  here,  being  coupled  with  thorns,  and 
hence  that  of  pricking  briers  or  nettles  has  been  adopted.     Gesenius,  how 
ever,  still  prefers  rebels. 


3G  EZEKIEL  II.-III.  1-11. 

cause  thy  belly  to  eat,  and  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  great  roll  which  I  give 
thee.  And  I  did  eat  it ;  and  it  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  sweetness. 
4.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  go,  get  thee  to  the  house  of  Israel,  and 
speak  my  words  to  them.  5.  For  not  to  a  people  of  obscure  speech  and 
hard  language  l  art  thou  sent, — to  the  house  of  Israel.  6.  Not  to  many 
nations  of  obscure  speech  and  hard  language,  whose  words  thou  dost  not 
understand.  Surely,  had  I  sent  thee  to  them,  they  would  have  listened  to 
thee.  7.  And  the  house  of  Israel  will  not  be  willing  to  hearken  to  thee  : 
for  they  are  not  willing  to  hearken  to  me  ;  for  all  the  house  of  Israel  are  of 
an  hard  forehead,  and  a  stiff  heart.  8.  Behold,  I  make  thy  face  hard 
against  their  faces,  and  thy  forehead  hard  against  their  foreheads.  9.  As  an 
adamant  harder  than  flint  I  make  thy  forehead  ;  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of 
them,  nor  be  confounded  at  their  looks;  for  they  area  rebellious  house. 
10.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  all  my  words  that  I  shall  speak  to  thee 
receive  in  thine  heart,  and  hear  with  thine  ears.  11.  And  get  thee  away 
to  the  captives,  to  the  children  of  thy  people,  and  speak  to  them,  and 
say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  whether  they  will  hear,  or 
whether  they  will  forbear. 

THE  most  striking  thing  in  this  section  is  the  strong  delinea 
tion  that  is  mven  of  the  backslidden  state  and  confirmed  de- 

o 

generacy  of  the  people.  Not  only  are  they  compared  to  such 
noxious  productions  as  briers  and  scorpions,  but  with  painful 
and  emphatic  reiteration  they  are  declared  to  be  altogether  in 
fected  with  the  spirit  of  rebellion,  setting  their  face,  with  deter 
mined  and  insolent  effrontery,  against  the  wrill  and  purpose  of 
Heaven.  No  doubt  the  description  is  to  be  taken  with  some 
limitation,  as  applicable  in  its  full  sense  to  the  greater  portion  of 
the  captives,  though  not  absolutely  to  the  whole.  But  that  such 
a  general  description  should  have  been  given  of  them  by  the 
God  of  truth  was  a  clear  indication  that  they  were  in  a  most 
sunk  and  degraded  condition,  and  that  the  remnant  who  were 
animated  by  a  better  spirit  must  have  been  comparatively  few. 

How  distinguished  a  proof  of  covenant  love  and  faithfulness 
in  God,  that  he  should  condescend  to  deal  with  such  a  people, 
and  send  a  prophet  yet  again  to  instruct  them  !  And  for  that 
prophet,  with  an  arduous  and  vexing  enterprise,  to  prosecute 
among  them  the  business  of  a  faithful  ambassador  of  Heaven  ! 

But  to  render  him  more  fully  alive  to  what  awaited  him  in 
this  respect,  a  symbolical  action  was  added.  Looking  up,  he 
saw  a  hand  stretched  out  toward  him,  and  in  the  hand  the  roll 
of  a  book,  written  within  and  without,  but  written  only  "  with 

1  The  expressions  are  literally,  "  deep  of  lip,  and  heavy  of  tongue,"  which 
can  only  mean  obscurity  of  speech,  and  language  hard  to  be  understood — a 
foreign  tongue. 


CALL  TO  THE  PROPHETICAL  OFFICE.  37 

lamentations,  and  mourning,  and  woe."  This  was  significant  of 
the  heavy  tidings  which  were  to  form  the  chief  burden  of  his 
communications  to  the  people.  For,  broken  and  afflicted  as 
they  already  were  in  their  condition,  they  were  not  yet  weaned 
from  their  false  hopes,  nor  had  they  reached  the  darkest  period 
of  their  history.  Troubles  and  calamities  still  more  disastrous 
than  those  which  had  yet  been  experienced  were  needed  to 
crush  their  proud  refractory  spirit ;  and  in  such  a  time  of 
spiritual  disorder  and  corruption,  it  was  only  through  a  season 
of  midnight  darkness  that  light  could  arise  to  the  people  of  God. 
Therefore  the  prophetic  roll  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Ezekiel 
was  necessarily  much  written  with  the  dark  forebodings  of  tribu 
lation  and  sorrow.  And  as  God's  representative  at  such  a  time, 
and  to  such  a  people,  he  must  eat  it  (chap.  iii.  1,  2), — not  of 
course  literally  swallow  the  roll,  but  so  receive  and  appropriate 
its  unsavoury  contents,  that  these  should  infuse  themselves,  as  it 
were,  into  his  very  moisture  and  blood,  and  imbue  his  soul  with 
a  feeling  of  their  reality  and  importance.  Hence  the  bitter  as 
well  as  the  sweet  which  followed  in  the  experience  of  the  pro 
phet  (chap.  iii.  3,  14), — "  sweet  as  honey  in  his  mouth,"  yet 
afterwards  causing  him  to  go  "  in  bitterness,  in  the  heat  of  his 
spirit;" — bitter  indeed,  because  he  had  to  announce  a  message 
and  prosecute  a  work  which  was  to  be  peculiarly  painful  and 
arduous ;  but  sweet  notwithstanding,  because  it  was  the  Lord's 
service  in  which  he  was  to  be  en^a^ed,  and  a  service  which  had 

C>     O         7 

the  full  consent  and  approval  of  his  own  mind.  It  was  sweet  to 
be  the  representative  and  agent  of  the  Most  High,  however 
contrary  to  flesh  and  blood  might  be  the  special  embassy  on 
which  he  was  sent;  as  Jeremiah  also  says,  chap.  xv.  16,  "I 
found  thy  words  and  ate  them ;  and  thy  words  were  to  me  the 
joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart :  for  I  am  called  by  thy  name,  O 
Lord  God  of  Hosts."  "The  action  denotes  that  the  prophet, 
being  carried  in  a  manner  out  of  himself,  entered  into  the  room 
of  God;  and  divesting  himself  of  carnal  affection,  rising  into  the 
region  of  pure  and  spiritual  contemplation,  whatever  the  will  of 
God  might  call  him  to  do  for  magnifying  the  justice  as  well  as 
goodness  of  God,  he  was  thoroughly  to  approve  in  his  own 
mind,  and  derive  pleasure  from  the  words  of  God,  whatever 
might  be  the  tenor  of  their  announcements."  l  In  short,  like 
1  Yitringa  in  Apoc.  p.  441,  on  chap.  x.  8-11. 


38  EZEK1EL  II.-III.  1-11. 

every  true  reformer,  and  every  faithful  ambassador  of  Heaven, 
it  must  henceforth  be  his  to  count  God's  glory  his  own  highest 
<rood,  and  to  make  all  subordinate  to  the  one  end  of  fulfilling 
with  joy  the  ministry  he  had  received  from  above. 

And  most  nobly  did  this  man  of  God  execute  his  high 
commission,  proving  himself  to  be  an  Ezekiel  indeed — a  man 
strengthened  with  the  might  of  God — a  most  powerful  and 
effective  instrument  of  Divine  working.  In  the  resolute  and 
devoted  spirit  of  his  pious  ancestry,  "  he  said  not  unto  his  father 
and  to  his  mother,  I  have  seen  them  ;  neither  did  he  acknowledge 
his  brethren,  nor  know  his  own  children,  that  he  might  teach 
Jacob  thy  judgments,  and  Israel  thy  law  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  9). 
How  valiantly  did  his  heroic  bearing  rebuke  the  general  spirit 
of  despondency,  and  against  hope  still  inspire  the  hope  of  better 
days  to  come  !  And  even  now,  when  he  has  so  long  since  rested 
from  his  labours,  may  it  not  be  an  instructive  and  soul-refreshing 
thing  to  look  back  upon  the  struggle  which  he  so  vigorously 
maintained, — to  see  him  lifting  his  giant  form  above  the  deep 
waters  of  adversity  that  were  surging  around  him,  and  the  more 
the  evil  prevailed,  nerving  himself,  in  God's  name,  to  a  more 
determined  and  strenuous  resistance  against  it !  In  such  a 
spiritual  hero  we  recognise  a  sign  of  the  ever-during  strength 
and  perpetual  revirescence  of  the  cause  of  God,  which,  like  its 
Divine  author,  carries  in  its  bosom  the  element  of  eternity — 
survives  all  changes — amid  all  death,  lives.  If  this  cause  should 
for  a  season  be  found  to  droop  and  languish,  let  us  never  doubt 
that  it  shall  again  clothe  itself  with  freshness  and  vigour.  Its 
winters  are  sure  to  be  succeeded  by  returning  springs.  And 
standing,  as  it  pre-eminently  does,  in  the  righteous  principles 
which  have  a  witness  and  an  echo  in  every  bosom,  there  only 
needs  the  consecrated  energies  of  courageous  hearts  and  strenu 
ous  arms,  like  those  of  Ezekiel,  to  raise  it  from  the  most  de 
pressed  condition,  and  infuse  into  it  the  warmth  of  a  renovated 
life.  Lord  God  of  Ezekiel,  imprint  the  image  of  this  thy  faith 
ful  and  devoted  servant  deep  upon  our  hearts  !  Let  the  thought 
of  his  holy  daring  and  triumphant  faith  put  to  shame  our 
cowardice  and  inaction  !  And  do  thou  find  for  thyself,  in  these 
days  of  evil,  many  who  shall  be  willing,  like  him,  to  make 
Heaven's  cause  their  own,  and  shall  count  nothing  so  dear  to 
them  as  its  prosperity  and  progress  ! 


THE  PROPHET'S  CHARGE.  39 


CHAPTER  III.  12-27. 

EZEKIEL'S  ENTRANCE  ON  ins   MISSION,  AND  THE  FIRST  MESSAGE 

IMPARTED    TO    HIM. 

Ver.  12.  And  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  I  heard  behind  me  the  voice 
of  aloud  tumultuous  noise,  "Blessed  be  the  glory  of  Jehovah  from  his  place." 
13.  And  I  heard  the  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  creatures  embracing 
each  other,  and  the  noise  of  the  wheels  over  against  them,  and  the  voice  of 
a  loud  tumultuous  noise.  14.  And  the  spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  laid  hold  of 
me,  and  I  went  in  bitterness,  in  the  heat  of  my  spirit ;  and  the  hand  of 
Jehovah  was  strong  upon  me.  15.  And  I  came  to  the  captives  at  Tel-abib, 
that  were  dwelling  (or  sitting)  by  the  river  Chebar,  and  I  beheld  them  dwell 
ing  there  ; l  and  I  sat  down  there  seven  days  (i.e.  in  lonely  and  silent  grief) 
among  them.  16.  And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  seven  days,  that 
the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  17.  Son  of  man,  I  have  set  thee  a 
watchman  to  the  house  of  Israel ;  and  thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth, 

1  This  clause  has  from  an  early  period  been  felt  to  be  a  difficulty,  and 
given  rise  to  different  modes  of  solution.  The  Jewish  critics  could  not  find 
their  way  to  the  interpretation,  as  is  evident  by  their  suggesting  for  "l^KI  of 
the  text,  the  Kri  nt^'Xl  which  has  been  adopted  by  our  translators  :  "  And  I 
sat  where  they  sat."  Various  conjectures,  though  not  of  a  satisfactory  kind, 
have  been  resorted  to,  with  a  view  of  making  out  a  somewhat  similar  meaning 
from  the  text.  Rosenmuller,  for  example,  by  ascribing  to  "II^K  the  sense  of 
the  Chaldean  &n&?,  and  Maurer's,  who  would  identify  it  with  -)DX-  Havernick 
would  take  it  simply  for  the  relative,  and  renders  the  clause,  "  And  those 
who  were  settled  there,"  that  is,  as  he  supposes,  the  older  class  of  settlers,  as 
contradistinguished  from  the  more  recent  ones,  who  were  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  clause  as  sitting  down  or  settling  beside  the  Chebar.  But  the 
distinction,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  very  faintly  marked,  if  two  separate  com 
panies  were  meant,  and  there  is  no  difference  of  time  noted  in  the  verbs.  I 
incline,  on  the  whole,  to  agree  with  Hifczig,  that  the  pointing  should  be  "IB'NJ, 
from  the  verb  -n$,  to  view  or  behold.  (For  similar  cases  he  refers  to  1  Kings 
iii.  21  ;  Zech.  vi.  1 ;  Lev.  xx.  23  ;  and  for  n!D!"l,  in  the  sense  of  them,  Jer. 
xlvi.  5.)  The  prophet  first  went  to  them,  then  observed  their  condition,  and 
lastly  sat  down  in  pensive  solitude,  giving  vent  to  his  grief  ;  for  such  the 
verb  wyy  imports,  rather  than  being  astonished.  As  for  the  idea  of  Hav., 
that  the  older  settlers,  whom  he  supposes  to  be  mentioned  here,  were  the 
captives  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  that  the  Habor  in  2  Kings  xvii.  6  is  but 
another  name  for  the  Chaboras,  it  is  against  all  probablity.  The  region  of 
the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  "  cities  of  the 
Medes,"  and  by  "  the  river  Gozan,"  viz.  the  Kissilozan,  that  runs  into  the 
Caspian. 


40  EZEKIEL  III.  12-27. 

and  give  them  warning  from  me.  18.  When  I  say  to  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt 
surely  die;  and  thou  dost  riot  warn  him,  and  dost  not  speak  to  warn  the 
wicked  away  from  his  wicked  way  that  he  may  live,  he  that  is  wicked 
shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  and  his  blood  will  I  require  at  thy  hand.  19.  And 
thou,  if  thou  dost  warn  the  wicked,  and  he  does  not  turn  from  his  wicked 
ness,  and  from  his  wicked  way,  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity  ;  and  thou  hast 
delivered  thine  own  soul.  20.  And  when  a  righteous  man  turns  from  his 
righteousness,  and  commits  iniquity,  and  I  lay  a  stumbling-block  before  him 
{i.e.  appoint  for  him  an  occasion  and  instrument  of  rebuke),  he  shall  die ; 
because  thou  didst  not  warn  him,  he  shall  die  in  his  sin,  and  his  righteous 
ness  which  be  has  done  shall  not  be  remembered,  and  his  blood  will  I  require 
at  thy  hand.  "21.  And  thou,  if  thou  dost  warn  the  righteous  that  the 
righteous  should  not  sin,  and  he  does  not  sin,  he  shall  surely  live  ;  for  he 
was  warned,  and  thou  hast  delivered  thine  own  soul. 

Yer.  22.  And  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was  upon  me  there ;  and  he  said  to 
me,  Arise,  go  forth  into  the  plain,  and  there  will  I  speak  with  thee.  23. 
And  I  arose,  and  went  forth  into  the  plain  ;  and,  behold,  there  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  stood,  as  the  glory  which  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar  :  and  I  fell  on 
my  face.  24.  And  the  spirit  came  into  me,  and  made  me  stand  upon  my 
feet,  and  spake  with  me,  and  said  to  me.  Go,  shut  thyself  within  thy  house. 
25.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  behold,  they  lay  bands  upon  thee,  and  bind  thee 
with  them,  that  thou  mayest  not  go  forth  amongst  them.  26.  And  I  will 
make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  thy  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  be  dumb, 
and  shalt  not  be  to  them  for  a  reprover  ;  for  they  are  a  rebellious  house. 
27.  And  -when  I  speak  to  thee,  I  will  open  thy  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  say 
to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  let  him  hear  that  will  hear,  and  let 
him  forbear  that  will  forbear  ;  for  they  are  a  rebellious  house. 


THIS  section,  which  should  have  formed  a  separate  chapter, 
records  the  entrance  of  Ezekiel  on  his  high  vocation,  and  con 
tains  the  first  message  delivered '  to  him  respecting  it.  His 
former  place  of  abode,  it  would  seem,  was  not  the  most  advan 
tageously  situated  for  prosecuting  with  success  the  work  com 
mitted  to  him ;  and  in  consequence,  he  removed  to  Tel-abih, 
which  is  nowhere  else  mentioned,  but  was  in  all  probability  the 
best  peopled  locality,  or  the  chief  town  of  the  Jewish  colony. 
When  he  came  and  saw  the  captives  dwelling  there  in  a 
dejected  and  mournful  condition,  he  sat  down  among  them  for 
seven  days  continuously — sitting  being  the  common  attitude  of 
grief  (Ezra  ix.  3;  Lam.  i.  1-3),  and  seven  days  being  the 
usual  period  for  the  manifestation  of  the  heaviest  sorrow 
(Job.  ii.  13).  By  thus  spending,  at  the  outset,  so  many  days  of 
desolation  and  sadness,  he  gave  proof  of  his  deep  fellow-feeling 
with  his  exiled  brethren  in  their  depressed  condition,  and  showed 
how  entirely  he  entered  into  their  state.  Thus  sorrowing  in 
their  sorrow,  and  breathing  the  tenderness  of  a  sympathizing 
spirit  toward  them,  he  sought  to  win  their  confidence  and  secure 


THE  PKOPHET'S  CHARGE.  41 

a  favourable  hearing  for  the  words  of  mercy  and  of  judgment 
which  he  was,  from  time  to  time,  to  press  upon  their  notice. 

The  prophet,  however,  did  not  go  alone  to  this  mournful  field 
of  prophetic  agency.  He  was  borne  thither  under  the  conscious 
might  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  was  attended  by  the  symbols  of 
the  Divine  presence  and  glory.  When  he  rose  to  proceed  on 
his  course,  the  whole  machinery  of  the  heavenly  vision  began 
also  to  move;  and  amid  the  crashing  or  tumultuous  noise  which 
broke  upon  his  spiritual  ear,  he  heard  the  words,  "  Blessed  be 
the  glory  of  Jehovah  Trom  his  (or  its)  place," — certainly  a  some 
what  peculiar  utterance,  and  one  not  found  in  any  other  part  of 
Scripture  ;  yet  not  materially  different  from  another  in  frequent 
use,  "  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  The  glory  of  Jehovah 
here  was  that  manifested  glory  which  had  appeared  in  vision  to 
the  prophet,  and  which  was,  in  other  words,  a  revelation  of  his 
glorious  name.  To  pronounce  it  blessed  from  its  place  was  in 
effect  to  bless  God  himself,  as  thus  and  there  revealing  his 
adorable  perfections  and  Divine  will.  And  as  the  prophet  was 
going  to  be  the  representative  and  herald  of  these  in  a  sphere 
where  there  was  much  to  damp  his  spirit  and  withstand  his 
faithful  agency,  it  was  fit  that  he  should  go  with  the  solemn 
word  pealing  in  his  ears,  from  those  ideal  ministers  of  heaven, 
"  Blessed  be  the  glory  of  the  Lord ; "  as  much  as  to  say,  Let 
this  above  all  be  magnified ;  whatever  is  experienced  or  done, 
let  nothing  interfere  with  that  pure  and  majestic  glory  of 
Jehovah,  which  has  now  in  emblem  been  exhibited. 

In  regard  to  the  message  communicated  to  the  prophet,  after 
the  seven  days  of  sadness  had  expired,  there  is  also  something 
peculiar  in  it ;  for  it  is  only  Ezekiel  among  the  prophets  who  is 
described  as  a  watchman  appointed  by  God,  to  give  timely  and 
faithful  warning  to  the  people.  Habakkuk  speaks  of  standing 
upon  his  watch-tower  (chap.  ii.  1),  but  this  was  only  in  respect 
to  his  eager  and  anxious  outlook  for  the  manifestations  he  was 
expecting  of  Divine  power  and  faithfulness.  Ezekiel  alone  is 
represented  as  called  to  do  for  others  the  part  of  a  watchman  ; 
and  in  doing  it,  he  was  most  strictly  charged,  on  the  one  hand, 
to  receive  all  his  instructions  from  God  as  to  the  existence  of 
whatever  danger  there  might  be  in  the  condition  of  the  people, 
and,  on  the  other,  to  sound  a  loud  and  solemn  alarm  when  he 
might  perceive  it  actually  besetting  them.  That  such  should 


42  EZEKIEL  III.  12-27. 

have  been  the  distinctive  character  given  to  his  position  and 
calling,  manifestly  bespoke  the  very  perilous  condition  of  those 
to  whom  he  was  sent.  It  indicated  that  he  had  something  else 
to  do  than  merely  to  sympathize  with  them  in  their  afflicted  state, 
and  speak  soothing  words  to  their  downcast  and  drooping 
spirits.  It  was  to  be  his  rather  to  open  their  eyes  to  the 
profounder  evils  that  encompassed  them,  to  break  the  spell  of 
inveterate  and  cherished  delusions,  and  raise  the  cry  of  danger 
where  none  was  suspected.  So  that  the  very  form  of  the  com 
mission  given  to  him  was  like  the  deliverance  of  a  strong  and 
impressive  testimony  to  the  people  of  the  latent  corruptions  and 
imminent  perils  with  which  they  were  beset. 

If  we  look  also  to  the  substance  of  the  communication,  or  to 
the  particular  instructions  given  to  the  prophet  concerning  the 
discharge  of  his  office,  we  see  at  once  the  grand  principle  dis 
closed  on  which  the  destiny  of  Israel  was  to  turn.  The  ques 
tion,  whether  life  or  death,  blessing  or  cursing,  was  to  be  their 
portion,  hung  upon  another,  whether  they  were  to  make  right 
eousness  or  sin  their  choice?  Their  return  to  righteousness  was 
the  indispensable  condition  of  their  restoration  to  blessing.  If 
in  despite  of  this  the  wicked  should  persevere  in  his  evil  ways, 
or  even  the  righteous  man  should  turn  aside  and  practise  iniquity, 
a  visitation  of  wrath  must  be  looked  for, — the  original  sentence 
against  sin,  to  which  the  language  designedly  points,  that  the 
purpose  of  God  in  this  respect  might  be  seen  to  be  fixed  and  un 
alterable — the  sentence  that  he  who  transgresses  "  shall  surely 
die,"  must  take  effect ;  for  God  is  unchangeably  the  same,  and 
what  he  appointed  at  first  as  the  wages  of  sin  must  continue  to 
be  its  wages  still. 

But  while  this  part  of  the  charge  cut  off  all  hope  from  a 
backsliding  and  impenitent  people,  the  other  part  of  it  held  out 
ample  encouragement  to  such  as  remained  stedfast  in  the  cove 
nant  of  God,  or  repented  of  their  evil  ways.  The  man  who 
continued  to  love  the  paths  of  righteousness,  and  the  man  also 
who,  after  having  forsaken,  again  returned  to  them,  was  to  be 
assured  of  the  blessings  of  life ;  these  should  as  surely  live  as 
the  others  should  die.  For  the  prophet,  as  God's  watchman, 
was  to  represent  the  mercy  as  well  as  the  justice  of  God's 
administration ;  he  was  to  have  a  wakeful  eye  upon  the  good, 
not  less  than  the  evil,  that  appeared  among  the  people  ;  and  was 


THE  PROPHET'S  CHARGE.  43 

to  stretch  out  the  hand  of  fellowship,  and  display  the  banner  of 
Divine  love  and  protection  in  behalf  of  all  who  might  be  inclined 
or  moved  to  cleave  to  the  service  of  Heaven.  Thus  were  they 
to  know  from  the  outset,  that  for  the  people  as  a  whole,  and  for 
each  individual  amongst  them,  this  one  path  lay  open  for  their 
return  to  peace  and  blessing. 

We  shall  not  go  into  the  question  too  often  raised  from  this 
representation,  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  righteous  falling  from 
a  state  of  grace.  For  it  seems  to  us  a  misapplication  of  this 
passage  to  introduce  it  in  such  a  connection.  Its  direct  and 
immediate  bearing  bad  respect  only  to  the  inseparable  connec 
tion  between  righteousness  and  life,  sin  and  death.  And  cer 
tainly  by  the  former  is  meant  a  real  participation  of  the  Divine 
likeness  and  blessing,  and  by  the  latter  the  loss  of  both.  Calvin 
plainly  errs  in  maintaining  the  contrary.  But  whether  this  loss 
may  ever  be  sustained  by  any  who  have  properly  enjoyed  the 
good, — whether  those  who  have  been  truly  renewed  by  grace 
ever  fall  back  again  into  the  corruption  and  ruin  of  nature, — 
this  is  not  to  be  determined  by  a  passage  like  the  present,  which 
being  intended  only  for  a  direction  to  the  prophet  in  regard  to 
his  public  ministrations,  of  necessity  spake  of  the  appearances, 
rather  than  the  absolute  realities  of  things.  Unquestionably 
there  were  persons  then,  as  there  are  persons  still,  who  to  all 
human  appearance  have  lived  for  a  time  in  the  fellowship  and 
favour  of  God,  and  yet  afterwards  turn  again  to  folly.  Such  are 
known  by  their  fruits  to  be  not  of  the  true  fold  of  Christ.  But 
it  is  well  that  the  possibility  of  what  looks  so  much  like  a  falling 
from  grace  should  be  borne  in  mind  both  by  pastors  and  people, 
that  there  may  be  exercised  a  wakeful  jealousy  in  regard  to  the 
vital  bond  which  connects  life  with  righteousness,  and  death 

^>  ' 

with  sin.  Even  the  most  established  believer  is  not  safe,  unless 
he  keep  constantly  in  mind  the  dangers  of  his  condition,  and, 
with  a  godly  jealousy  over  himself,  perpetually  watch  and  pray 
lest  he  fall  into  evil. 

At  the  very  outset,  therefore,  and  by  the  terms  of  his  Divine 
commission,  the  prophet  seeks  to  recall  the  people  to  the  main 
point  at  issue,  and  urges  them  to  a  right  settlement  of  the  con 
troversy  between  them  and  God.  Individually  and  collectively 
they  must  come  to  be  at  one  with  him  in  respect  to  the  love  of 
righteousness  and  the  hatred  of  iniquity.  This  is  the  grand 


44  EZEKIEL  III.  12-27. 

turning-point  on  which  hangs  the  destiny  that  awaits  them,  as 
it  is  also  the  vital  thread  that  runs  through  all  the  prophet's 
future  ministrations  and  announcements.  Once  and  again  he 
presses  it  on  their  notice  in  the  same  terms  that  he  does  here, 
only  with  more  fulness  of  detail,  and  greater  urgency  in  the 
application  (chap,  xviii.,  xxxiii.),  while,  in  one  form  or  another, 
the  subject  is  perpetually  referred  to  throughout  the  book  of  his 
prophecy.  Here  also  he  was  reminded  of  the  necessity  of  this 
repeated  earnestness  in  the  matter,  and  of  the  arduous  and  diffi 
cult  task  that  was  given  him  to  accomplish  in  respect  to  it.  For, 
immediately  after  he  has  received  his  charge,  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  upon  him,  and  he  was  ordered  to  go  forth  into  the 
plain,  that  the  Lord  might  there  talk  with  him  alone  (ver.  22). 
And  when  there,  and  favoured  again  with  a  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory,  as  at  the  first,  the  spirit  enters  into  him,  and 
directs  him  to  go  and  shut  himself  up  in  his  house ;  thus  giving 
him  to  understand,  that  in  the  work  he  had  to  do  he  must  look 
for  no  sympathy  and  support  from  man,  but  must  be  alone  with 
his  God,  reverently  hearing  Ids  word,  and  receiving  strength 
from  his  hand.  The  reason  follows:  "And  thou,  son  of  man, 
behold,  they  lay  bands  upon  thee,  and  bind  thee  with  them,  that 
thou  mayest  not  go  forth  amongst  them  ;"  that  is,  their  obstinate 
and  wayward  disposition  shall  be  felt  upon  thy  spirit  like  fetters 
of  restraint,  repressing  the  energies  of  thy  soul  in  its  spiritual 
labours,  so  that  thou  shalt  need  to  look  for  thy  encouragement 
elsewhere  than  from  fellowship  with  them.  For  that  the  im 
position  of  bands  must  be  understood  spiritually  of  the  damping 
effect  to  be  produced  upon  his  soul  by  the  conduct  of  the  people, 
can  admit  of  no  doubt.  It  is  a  marked  specimen  of  the  strong 
idealism  of  our  prophet,  which  clothes  everything  it  handles 
with  the  distinctness  of  flesh  and  blood.  "  And  I  will  make  thy 
tongue  (it  is  added)  cleave  to  the  roof  of  thy  mouth,  and  thou 
shalt  be  dumb,  and  shalt  not  be  to  them  for  a  reprover ;  for  they 
are  a  rebellious  house."  So  deeply  rooted  and  inveterate  is  the 
evil  in  them,  that  it  shall  prevail  over  thee ;  thou  shalt  not  pre 
vail  over  it ;  after  thou  hast  plied  every  weapon,  thou  shalt  need 
to  sit  down  in  silence,  as  one  baffled  of  his  purpose ;  but  still  not 
as  if  the  work  were  altogether  in  vain,  or  the  cause  absolutely 
hopeless.  It  is  Jehovah's  word  that  is  to  be  spoken,  and  tin's 
cannot  for  ever  be  in  vain  :  "  And  when  I  speak  to  thee,  I  will 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  45 

open  thy  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Let  him  hear  that  will  hear,  and  let  him  forbear 
that  will  forbear ;  for  they  are  a  rebellious  house."  The  word  is 
true,  and  must  ultimately  prevail,  because  it  is  Divine ;  and 
however  those  may  deal  with  it  to  whom  it  is  immediately 
addressed,  it  is  thine  to  utter  it  with  unswerving  faithfulness  as 
the  Lord's  true  message. 

A  salutary  lesson  is  conveyed  here  to  all  who  are  put  in  trust 
with  souls,  as  well  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  charge  itself,  as 
to  the  manner  in  which  it  ought  to  be  fulfilled.  It  is  emphati 
cally  the  work  of  God  they  have  to  do,  and  the  instrument  to  be 
wielded  in  the  doing  of  it  is  his  own  word.  Let  this  be  plied 
with  unwearied  diligence,  with  affectionate  tenderness  and  fer 
vency  of  spirit ;  for  the  work  is  of  infinite  importance,  and 
results  past  reckoning  depend  on  it.  Eternal  weal  or  woe  grows 
out  of  it  to  all  who  come  within  the  field  of  its  operations.  And 
for  oneself — whatever  may  be  the  result  for  others — the  path  of 
duty  is  the  only  path  of  safety ;  faithfulness  to  God  must  be  the 
supreme  rule,  and  his  glory  the  chief  aim.  "I  have  a  commis 
sion  to  fulfil,  I  must  deliver  my  own  soul," — let  this  be  the  one 
answer  to  all  counter-solicitations  from  the  flesh  or  the  world  ; 
and  it  will  also  be  the  best  guarantee  of  ultimate  success.  For 

O 

it  is  to  the  labours  of  those  who  thus  supremely  eye  and  honour 
God  that  the  harvest  of  souls  is  usually  given  ;  and  the  more 
that  any  one  proves  himself  to  be  such  a  workman,  the  less  shall 
he  need  to  be  ashamed  either  here  or  hereafter. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE   VISION   OF   THE   SIEGE   AND   THE   INIQUITY-BEARING. 

Yer.  1.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  brick,  and  set  it  before  thce, 
and  engrave  on  it  the  city  Jerusalem.  2.  And  lay  siege  against  it,  and  build 
a  watch-tower  1  against  it,  and  cast  a  mound  against  it,  and  order  a  camp 


1  The  sense  oifort,  which,  in  the  received  translation,  as  in  most  earlier 
versions  and  commentators,  was  ascribed  here  to  p"H,  is  now  generally  aban 
doned,  and  it  is  most  commonly  taken  in  the  sense  of  watch-tower,  such 


46 

against  it,  and  set  against  it  battering-rams  round  about.1  3.  And  do  tliou 
take  thee  an  iron  pan  and  set  it  for  a  wall  of  iron  between  thee  and  the  city, 
and  direct  thy  face  against  it,  and  it  shall  be  besieged,  and  thou  shalt  lay  siege 
against  it.  It  is  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel.  4.  And  thou  shalt  lie  upon  thy 
left  side,  and  lay  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon  it ;  according  to  the 
number  of  the  days  that  thou  shalt  lie  upon  it,  thou  shalt  bear  their  iniquity. 
5.  And  I  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of  their  iniquity,  according  to  the 
number  of  the  days — three  hundred  and  ninety  days  ;  and  thou  shalt  bear 
the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel.  6.  And  when  thou  hast  accomplished 
these,  thou  shalt  lie  again  upon  thy  right  side,  and  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of 
the  house  of  Judah  forty  days  ;  a  day  for  a  year,  a  day  for  a  year,2  have  I 
appointed  it  to  thee.  7.  And  thou  shalt  set  thy  face  toward  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem,  and  thine  arm  uncovered  ;  and  thou  shalt  prophesy  against  it. 
8.  And  behold  I  lay  upon  thee  bands,  that  thou  mayest  not  turn  from  one 
side  to  another,  till  thou  hast  accomplished  the  days  of  thy  besieging.  9. 
And  do  thou  take  to  thee  wheat,  and  barley,  and  beans,  and  lentils,  and 
millet,  and  spelt,  and  put  them  into  one  vessel,  and  make  thee  bread  of 
them  ;  according  to  the  number  of  the  days  that  thou  liest  upon  thy  side, 
three  hundred  and  ninety  days  shalt  thou  eat  thereof.  10.  And  thy  food 
which  thou  shalt  eat  is  by  weight,  twenty  shekels  a  day  ;  from  time  to  time 
shalt  thou  eat  it.  11.  And  water  by  measure  shalt  thou  drink,  the  sixth 
part  of  an  hin  ;  from  time  to  time  shalt  thou  drink  it.3  1*2.  And  barley- 
cakes  (i.e.  after  the  manner  of  these)  shalt  thou  eat  it ;  and  thou  shalt  bake 
it  with  dung  that  cometh  out  of  man,  in  their  sight.  13.  And  Jehovah  said 
to  me,  Thus  shall  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their  denied  bread  among  the 
Gentiles,  whither  I  will  drive  them.  14.  And  I  said,  Ah,  Lord  Jehovah, 

as  besiegers  were  wont  to  erect  in  front  of  a  city,  for  the  purpose  of  descry 
ing  the  motions  of  the  besieged.  So  it  is  taken  by  the  Syriac,  and  though 
the  Septuagint  has  here  vrsotrsixo;,  yet,  in  chap.  xxvi.  8,  it  uses  TrgocpyAaxjJ 
for  the  same  word.  So,  too,  Gesenius,  in  his  Thes.,  and  latterly  in  Lex.,  also 
Havernick,  Henderson  (on  Jer.  Ivi.  4),  and  Maurer.  The  last,  however, 
hesitates  between  this  sense,  according  to  which  the  word  is  derived  from 
pn  to  look  out,  tpccnlari,  still  found  in  the  Aramaic,  and  that  of  a  batter 
ing  machine,  from  pp^ 

1  Instead  of  battering-rams,  Havernick  would  render  D"H3  through-borers, 
or  through-breakers,  on  the  ground  that  13  does  not  signify  rain,  but  lamb, 
and  in  particular  a  fat  lamb.     He  would,  therefore,  take  it  as  a  noun  from 
rn3,to  dig  or  bore  through.    The  thing  indicated,  however,  is  still  much  the 
same  ;  and,  allowing  the  derivation,  which  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain, 
there  seems  no  need  for  altering  the  translation,  which  gives  the  usual  term 
for  the  old  warlike  instrument  referred  to.     The  Targum  gives  the  same 
sense,  and  Kimchi  explains,  "  iron  rams  to  batter  down  the  walls."     The 
LXX.,  however,  render  by  the  more  general  term  faKMTeurtis,  engines  for 
throwing  some  sort  of  missiles. 

2  The  expression,  "  a  day  for  a  year,"  is  twice  used,  as  in  Num.  xiv.  34, 
instead  of  a  day  for  every  year,  in  order  to  render  the  reference  to  the  pas 
sage  in  Numbers  more  manifest. 

3  The  allowance  of  provisions  specified  would  form,  if  reduced  to  English 
measure,  about  a  pound  weight  of  bread  per  day,  and  from  a  pint  and  a  half 
to  two  pints  of  water— barely  enough  to  support  life. 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  47 

behold,  my  soul  has  not  been  polluted,  and  neither  of  carcase  nor  of  what 
is  torn  in  pieces  have  I  eaten  from  my  youth  even  until  now ;  nor  has 
abominable  flesh  come  into  my  mouth.  15.  And  he  said  to  me,  See  I  have 
given  thee  cow's  dung  instead  of  human  ordure,  and  thou  shalt  make  thy 
bread  of  it.  16.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  behold  I  break  the  staff  of 
bread  in  Jerusalem,  and  they  shall  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with  care ;  and 
they  shall  drink  water  by  measure,  and  in  desolateness  ;  17.  That  they 
may  want  bread  and  water,  and  be  desolate  one  toward  another,  and  pine 
away  in  their  iniquities. 

THE  prophet  is  here  commanded  to  take  a  tile  or  brick,  and 
engrave  on  it  an  outline  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem.     Having  done 
this,  he  is  instructed  to  direct  against  the  city  the  usual  means 
and  appliances  of  a  siege, — to  build  a  tower  of  observation,  to 
cast  up  a  mound  against  it,  to  prepare  battering-rams,  or  instru 
ments  for  effecting  breaches  in  the  walls  ;  and  with  an  iron 
frying-pan,  set  up  between  him  and  the  city,  and  as  with  a  Avail 
of  metal  separating  him  from  it,  to  carry  on  a  close  and  vigorous 
siege.     At  the  same  time,  and  while  this  action  was  proceeding 
(see  vers.  7  and  8),  the  prophet  is  enjoined  to  lie  first  on  his  left 
side  for  390  days,  bearing  for  so  long  a  time  the  iniquity  of  the 
house   of   Israel  ;  then    turn  to  the  other  side,  and  for  40  days 
more  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Judali.     These  days  of 
iniquity-bearing,  he   is  also   given  to  understand,  represent  so 
many  years,  during  which  the  people  whom  he  personified  were 
destined  to  bear  their  iniquity.     Nor  was  there  to  be  any  release 
from  the  appointed  doom  ;  for  in  token  of  the  Divine  determina 
tion  to  execute  what  was  decreed,  bands  were  to  be  laid  upon 
him,  to  hold  him  in  his  place  till   the  whole  was  accomplished. 
Still  further,  he  is  directed  to  take  different  kinds  of  grain,  from 
the  richest  to  the  poorest  (wheat,  barley,  beans,  lentils,  millet, 
spelt  or  dhourra,  the  three  last  being  the  poorer  kinds  of  grain), 
and  mix  them  all  together  for  bread*  as  if  no  choice  was  to  be 
exercised  about  the  quality,  but  the   worst  as  well  as  the  best 
had  to  be  turned  to  account.     He  was  also  to  bake  them  with  the 
foulest  and  most  offensive  ingredients ;  and  eat  what  was  baked 
in  scanty  portions,  with  an  accompanying  pittance  of  water,  as 
is  usual  in  times  of  straitness  and  scarcity.     This  he  was  to  do 
for  the  period  of  "  390  days, — the  days  he  was  to  lie  upon  his 
side ;  "  for  thus,  it  is  added  by  way  of  explanation,  "  even  thus 
shall  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their  defiled  bread  among  the 
Gentiles,  whither  I  will  drive  them."     And  after  having  com 
plained  of  the  defilement  necessarily  connected  with  the   order 


48  EZEKIEL  IV. 

("  All  !  Lord  God,  behold,  my  soul  hath  not  been  polluted  !  "), 
and  having  obtained  a  slight  modification  of  the  order,  though 
the  bread  was  still  to  be  scant  and  abominable,  the  Divine  com 
munication  was  thus  briefly  and  mournfully  wound  up:  "And. 
he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  behold  I  break  the  staff  of  bread  in 
Jerusalem  ;  and  they  shall  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with  care  ; 
and  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure,  and  in  desolateness  ;  that 
they  may  want  bread  and  water,  and  be  desolate  one  toward 
another,  and  pine  away  in  their  iniquities." 

In  this  singular  communication  there  is  fortunately  no  diffi 
culty  worth  naming  as  regards  the  meaning  of  the  words  or  the 
construction  of  the  sentences.  And  in  regard  to  the  part  required 
to  be  played  by  the  prophet  himself,  however  it  may  have  been 
understood  in  former  times,  we  should  suppose  few  now  will  be 
disposed  to  doubt  that  the  successive  actions  spoken  of  took  place 
only  in  vision,  and  are  no  more  to  be  ranked  among  the  occur 
rences  of  actual  life  than  the  eating  of  the  prophetic  roll  men 
tioned  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Indeed,  such  actions  as  are 
described  here,  though  well  fitted  when  rehearsed  as  past,  and 
read  as  narratives  of  things  ideally  done,  to  make  a  strong  and 
vivid  impression  upon  the  mind,  would  plainly  have  had  an 
opposite  effect  if  transacted  in  real  life.  It  would  have  been 
impossible  for  ordinary  spectators  to  see  Ezekiel  conducting  a 
miniature  siege  with  a  tile  and  a  sauce-pan,  and  such  like  im 
plements  of  war,  without  a  feeling  of  the  puerile  and  ludicrous 
being  awakened  ;  and  the  other  symbolical  actions  mentioned, 
especially  his  lying  for  390  days  motionless  on  one  side,  if 
literally  understood,  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  coming  within 
the  limits  of  the  possible.  And  along  with  the  physical  im 
possibility  of  one  part  of  the  requirement,  there  was  the  moral 
impossibility  of  another ;  since  to  eat  bread  composed  of  such 
abominable  materials  would  have  been  (if  performed  in  real 
life)  a  direct  contravention  of  the  law  of  Moses, — that  law, 
respectful  submission  to  which  was  ever  held  to  be  the  first 
and  most  essential  characteristic  of  a  true  prophet  (compare 
Deut.  xiv.  3,  xxiii.  12-14,  with  xiii.  1-5).  Besides,  we  find  the 
prophet  (chap.  viii.  1)  represented  as  sitting  in  his  house  before 
the  number  of  the  days  to  be  spent  in  a  lying  posture  could 
have  been  completed.1  So  that,  on  every  account,  it  is  necessary 

1  Dr.  Pradus  and  others  have  sought  to  lengthen  out  the  time  between  the 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BE  AKIN  G.  49 

to  consider  the  actions  to  have  taken  place  in  vision,  as  indeed 
was  usually  the  case  in  prophetical  actions,  and  uniformly  so, 
as  we  shall  find,  in  Ezekiel. 

But  if  there  is  little  room  for  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the 
visionary  nature  of  the  scene  described  in  this  chapter,  or  to  the 
import  of  the  terms  employed,  when  we  look  to  the  message  it 
self  contained  in  the  vision,  there  is  something  so  peculiar  and 
enigmatical  in  its  structure,  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  point  to 
a  single  chapter  in  the  whole  prophetical  scriptures  where  our 
commentators  have  found  themselves  so  entirely  at  sea,  and  so 
unable  to  satisfy  either  themselves  or  their  readers.  It  is  of 
great  importance,  however,  to  find  the  right  clue  here,  as  a  good 
deal  depends  on  it  for  a  correct  understanding  of  the  peculiar 
manner  of  our  prophet  generally,  and  for  the  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  more  obscure  portions  of  his  writings.  Nor 
is  there  any  insurmountable  difficulty  in  the  way,  if  only  we 
view  the  different  parts  of  the  vision  in  their  due  connection 
one  with  another,  and  give  to  the  language  of  the  prophet  its 
fair  and  legitimate  import. 

1.  Let  it  first  be  noted,  then,  for  a  right  interpretation  of  the 
vision,  that  the  several  parts  form  but  one  great  whole.  What 
is  first  symbolized  by  the  prophet's  laying  siege  to  Jerusalem  is 
not  to  be  regarded  as  something  diverse  and  apart  from  what  is 
afterwards  indicated  by  his  lying  so  many  days  upon  his  side, 
and  eating  scant  and  abominable  bread  ;  for  the  two  actions  are 
distinctly  represented  as  contemporaneous.  It  is  while  in  the 
act  of  lying  upon  his  side  that  he  is  to  set  his  face  toward  Jeru 
salem,  and  to  stretch  out  toward  it  his  uncovered  arm,  as  a  sign 
of  the  Lord's  displeasure  manifested  against  it  (vers.  7,  8).  Nor 
is  he  allowed  to  change  his  posture  "  till  the  days  of  the  siege 
are  ended."  So  that  the  second  line  of  action  must  have  been 
designed  to  be  supplementary  to  the  first,  and  was  merely  added 
to  bring  out  more  fully  and  distinctly  the  instruction  sought  to 
be  conveyed.  But  such  being  the  case,  the  action  of  the  siege, 
which  forms  the  first  part  of  the  vision,  cannot  have  been  in- 

two  periods  given  at  the  beginning  of  this  and  the  eighth  chap.,  by  resorting 
to  the  fiction  of  an  intercalary  month.  But  shifts  of  this  kind,  to  say  the 
least,  are  always  unsatisfactory,  and  the  defective  time,  taken  along  with  the 
other  considerations  mentioned,  are  quite  conclusive  against  a  literal  under 
standing  of  the  vision. 

D 


50  EZEKIEL  IV. 

tended  to  depict  the  calamity  of  an  actual  siege  of  Jerusalem ; 
for  then,  by  the  other  and  contemporaneous  actions,  it  must  needs 
have  been  protracted  for  centuries,  and  must  also  have  been  a 
calamity  in  which  the  house  of  Israel  shared  as  well  as  the  house 
of  Judah.  AVe  must,  therefore,  dismiss  from  our  minds  the 
thought  of  an  actual  siege  (which  has  so  commonly  embarrassed 
the  views  of  interpreters),  excepting  in  so  far  as  that  may  have 
formed  a  constituent  part  of  the  contemplated  troubles.  Jeru 
salem,  the  common  mother,  the  centre  of  the  whole  covenant- 
people,  appearing  as  a  besieged  city,  assailed  with  all  the  means 
and  implements  of  war,  and  these  plied  by  the  immediate  direc 
tion  and  agency  of  the  living  God, — this  stands  here  as  an  image 
of  the  people  themselves  lying  under  the  ban  of  Heaven,  given 
up  as  a  prey  to  the  powers  of  evil,  and  doomed  to  experience  at 
their  hands  the  most  severe  and  painful  indignities.  Hence,  also, 
as  the  siege  itself  was  comprehensive  of  the  whole  that  was  to  be 
experienced,  we  are  told  merely  of  its  continued  pressure,  but  not 
of  its  result ;  for,  in  the  present  case,  nothing  really  depended  on 
that,  and  the  mention  of  it  might  even  have  tended  to  convey  a 
false  impression,  by  leading  us  to  fix  our  minds  simply  on  a 
literal  siege  and  overthrow  of  Jerusalem. 

2.  It  must  be  noted  again,  in  regard  to  the  second  action  in 
the  vision,  that  by  the  bearing  of  the  people  s  iniquity  must  be 
understood  the  punishment  due  to  their  sins.  If  the  expression 
had  been  in  itself  a  doubtful  one,  the  instruction  we  have  seen  to 
be  imparted  by  the  action  of  the  siege  would  have  obliged  us  to 
take  it  in  the  sense  now  mentioned.  But  the  expression  is -one 
that  very  frequently  occurs  in  Scripture,  and  always  in  the  sense 
of  sustaining  the  punishment  due  to  sin.  We  point  only  to  a  few 
examples  out  of  many  which  might  be  given:  Num.  xiv.  33; 
Lev.  xix.  8  ;  Isa.  liii.  12  ;  and  in  Ezekiel  himself,  chap,  xviii.  19, 
20,  xxiii.  35.1  The  corresponding  years,  therefore,  on  the  part 

1  It  is  scarcely  worth  while,  perhaps,  to  refer  to  a  recent  small  publication 
of  Mr.  Galloway  on  this  chapter,  in  which  he  admits  the  expression  "  some 
times  ha&  the  force  of  bearing  the  punishment  of  iniquity."  We  affirm  it 
always  has  so  in  the  passages  which  are  at  all  parallel  to  the  one  before  us. 
For  to  bring  in  here,  as  Mr.  G.  does,  the  idea  of  bearing  in  the  sense  of 
atoning  is  entirely  out  of  place,  since  there  is  nothing  here  of  expiation  by 
sacrifice,  the  only  valid  means  of  atonement ;  and  to  bear  or  atone  by  doing 
penance,  which  would  with  his  views  be  the  sense  really  imposed  on  the 
passage,  is  utterly  foreign  to  our  prophet,  and  to  Scripture  generally. 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  51 

of  the  people,  represented  by  the  days  of  iniquity-bearing  in  the 
prophet,  must  be  years  of  trouble  and  affliction,— years  not  of 
committing  sin,  but  of  receiving  chastisement  for  sin  already  com 
mitted, — years  during  which  the  Divine  judgment,  rather  than 
the  Divine  mercy  and  forbearance,  came  into  exercise.  The 
same  also  appears  still  further  from  the  kind  of  treatment  they 
were  to  receive  during  the  period  in  question,  which  has  its  most 
prominent  representation  in  the  destination  to  eat  defiled  bread, 
and  that  only  in  small  portions,  among  the  Gentiles.  What 
could  more  impressively  denote  a  people  bearing  a  load  of  unpar- 
doned  guilt,  and  groaning  under  the  rebuke  and  chastisement  of 
Heaven?  It  implies  that  Israel's  peculiar  distinction,  as  compared 
with  others.,  was  to  be  virtually  abolished,  and  that  as  they  had 
degraded  themselves  spiritually  to  a  level  with  the  heathen,  so 
the  Lord  would  make  their  condition  outwardly  to  correspond,  by 
subjecting  them  to  a  base  and  dishonourable  treatment  before  the 
world.  This  is  said  with  respect  more  immediately  to  the  house 
of  Israel ;  but  of  entirely  similar  import  is  the  other  and  less 
prominent  part  of  the  representation,  which  points  more  directly 
to  the  house  of  Judah  :  that  they  should  u  eat  bread  by  weight 
and  with  care  ;  and  drink  water  by  measure  and  in  desolateness, 
and  consume  away  in  their  iniquities."  In  respect  to  both 
departments  alike  of  the  covenant-people,  it  is  manifestly  the 
infliction  of  a  penalty  that  is  meant  by  the  evil  suffered, — the 
just  desert  of  sin. 

3.  These  things  being  premised  and  explained,  we  come  now 
to  what  may  be  called  the  grand  difficulty  of  the  scene, — the  time 
during  which  the  iniquity-bearing  was  to  proceed  with  its  humi 
liating  and  afflicting  treatment :  390  years  for  the  house  of  Israel, 
and  40  for  the  house  of  Judah.  It  is  clear  from  the  remarks 
already  made,  that  the  period  mentioned  can  have  no  respect  to 
the  time  that  may  have  actually  been  consumed  at  the  last  siege 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans-.  For  it  is  not  a  literal  siege  at 
all  which  the  vision  properly  contemplates ;  and  if  it  could  be 
proved  (which  it  never  can  with  certainty)  that  the  time  actually 
spent  by  the  Chaldeans  in  besieging  Jerusalem  precisely  corre 
sponded  with  the  number  of  days  during  which  the  prophet  was 
to  lie  on  his  two  sides,  what  should  thereby  be  gained  ?  These 
days  have  no  independent  worth  in  themselves ;  they  merely 
represented  the  number  of  years  during  which  the  people  were  to 


52  EZEK1EL  IV. 

he  dealt  with  for  their  sins.  Neither  can  the  periods  mentioned 
bear  respect  to  the  times  during  which  the  houses  of  Israel  and 
Judah  respectively  pursued  their  course  of  rebellion,  provoking, 
but  still  not  properly  experiencing,  the  execution  of  Heaven's 
judgments :  as  if  it  might  be  enough  to  verify  the  prophetic 
delineation,  could  390  years  be  ascertained  of  open  defection  for 
the  house  of  Israel,  and  40  for  the  house  of  Judah,  before  the  de 
struction  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  palpably  the  reverse,  at  least  in  the 
case  of  Judah  ;  for  the  vigorous  reformation  of  Josiah  took  place 
within  these  last  forty  years,  and  the  history  of  the  period  does 
not  present  such  a  continued  prosecution  of  rebellious  courses  as 
the  supposition  would  require.  But  besides  this  evident  failure 
in  respect  to  the  one  house,  such  a  line  of  inquiry  leads  entirely 
in  the  wrong  direction  for  both  houses,  as  it  refers  to  the  time 
of  iniquity  being  committed,  not  of  iniquity  being  borne, — to  the 
contracting  of  the  guilt,  not  to  the  enforcing  of  the  penalty. 
Calculations,  therefore,  of  the  kind  just  referred  to  tend  only  to 
mislead ;  and  we  must  look  elsewhere  altogether  for  the  proper 
clue  to  this  part  of  the  vision.1 

The  390  years  for  the  house  of  Israel  and  40  for  the  house  of 
Judah,  it  will  be  observed,  make  up  together  430  years, — a  period 
famous  in  the  earlier  history  of  the  covenant-people,  being  the 
term  of  their  sojourn  in  the  land  of  Egypt  (Ex.  xii.  40,  41). 
The  thought  of  a  reference  to  this  could  scarcely  escape  the 

3  It  is  by  the  neglect  of  the  considerations  adduced  above  that  the  false 
interpretations  of  the  vision — which  unfortunately  comprehend  all  that  have 
been  current  in  this  country — have  gone  so  much  astray.  They  all  lose 
themselves  in  unsatisfactory  and  needless  attempts  to  show,  partly  how  the 
number  of  days  assigned  to  the  prophet  for  lying  on  his  side  coincided  with 
the  time  consumed  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  partly  how  the  390  years 
for  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  40  for  the  house  of  Judah,  corresponded  with 
the  respective  periods  of  transgression,  clown  to  the  taking  of  Jerusalem. 
The  Duke  of  Manchester,  in  his  Times  of  Daniel,  p.  20,  etc.,  has  recently  pro 
duced  some  calculations  of  his  own  on  the  subject,  and  dates  the  390  years 
from  the  first  public  defalcation  of  Rehoboam,  a  little  before  the  revolt  of  the 
ten  tribes,  the  usual  starting-point,  in  order  to  make  the  time  square  more 
exactly  with  the  390  of  the  prophet;  and  the  40  years  he  transfers  altogether 
to  another  age, — to  the  period  between  John  the  Baptist's  public  appearance 
and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Eomans.  It  is  needless  to  go  into 
such  calculations  and  conjectures,  as  they  proceed  on  an  entire  misconception 
of  the  subject,  and  refer  the  prophetic  periods  to  times  of  God's  forbearance 
with  iniquity,  instead  of  times  of  direct  and  formal  chastisement  for  its  guilt. 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  53 

notice  of  a  Hebrew  scholar  or  careful  student  of  the  prophet ; 
and  accordingly  we  learn  from  Jerome,  in  his  notes  on  the 
passage,  that  the  Jews  of  his  time  understood  the  prophet  to 
intimate  that,  uas  the  children  of  Israel  had  been  430  years 
in  Egypt,  so  in  the  same  number  would  their  final  captivity 
be  completed."  The  commencement  of  this  final  captivity,  he 
further  tells  us,  they  dated  from  the  second  year  of  Vespasian, 
when  Jerusalem  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  and  the  temple 
destroyed ;  and  they  were  living  in  the  hope  that  when  430 
years  from  that  memorable  era  had  run  their  course,  a  career 
of  uninterrupted  prosperity  was  to  be  entered  on  by  the  Jewish 
people.  In  this  anticipation,  however,  they  showed  but  too 
clearly  that  they  had  already  lost  the  key  to  the  right  interpre 
tation  of  the  mystery, — which  requires  us,  indeed,  to  connect  the 
whole  time  specified  with  the  430  years  formerly  spent  in  the 
house  of  bondage,  yet  so  as  not  to  overlook  the  division  of  this 
term  into  the  two  unequal  portions  of  390  and  40.  For  in  the 
40  years  assigned  to  the  house  of  Judah,  there  is  the  recurrence 
of  another  remarkable  period  in  the  history  of  ancient  Israel, — 
that  of  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  We  can  the  less  suppose 
this  latter  period  to  have  been  overlooked  by  the  prophet,  as  in 
the  very  structure  of  this  part  of  the  vision — in  the  adoption  of 
the  principle  a  day  for  a  year — there  is  an  evident  reference  to 
that  passage  in  Numbers  which  records  the  doom  of  the  Israel 
ites  to  their  long  sojourn  in  the  desert :  "  And  your  children 
shall  wander  in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  and  bear  your  whore 
doms,  until  your  carcases  be  wasted  in  the  wilderness.  After 
the  number  of  the  days  in  which  ye  searched  in  the  land,  forty 
days,  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear  your  iniquities,  even 
forty  years;  and  ye  shall  know  my  breach  of  promise"  (Num. 
xiv.  32-34).1 

1  Of  course  it  will  be  understood  that  the  two  periods  of  430  years  for 
Egypt,  an  1  40  for  the  desert,  are  referred  to  as  well-known  periods  of  chas 
tisement  and  trouble,  marked  historical  periods  of  that  description,  although 
in  reality  a  portion  of  each  of  them  was  not  exactly  of  that  description. 
Their  leading  character  as  great  passages  in  God's  dealings  with  his  people 
is  constantly  presented  in  that  light.  There  is,  therefore,  no  necessity  for 
raising  the  question,  whether  the  whole  430  years  were  actually  spent  by  the 
children  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  or  whether  this  period  did  not  also  comprehend 
the  previous  sojourning  of  the  patriarchs  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  The  Sama 
ritan  Pentateuch  and  the  Septuagint  translation  have  both  changed  the  text 


54  EZEKIEL  IV. 

Keeping  in  view,  then,  this  twofold  allusion  in  the  periods  be 
fore  us  to  the  earlier  history  of  the  covenant-people,  the  solution 
of  the  prophet's  enigma  will  not  occasion  any  extreme  difficulty. 
But  it  will  open  itself  out  more  easily  and  naturally  to  our  view, 
if  we  first  point  to  one  or  two  prior  revelations,  which  in  a 
simpler  form  set  forth  the  principle  of  the  representation,  and 
prepared  the  way  for  its  development  in  the  more  hidden  and 
enigmatical  shape  it  assumes  in  the  hands  of  Ezekiel.  The  first 
is  the  word  of  Moses,  in  Deut.  xxviii.  68)  where,  speaking  of  the 
evils  which  were  likely  to  befall  the  people  for  their  sins,  he  says  : 
"And  the  Lord  shall  brino-  theeinto  Eo-ypt  a^ainwith  ships,  bv 

JD  cv  L          &  L     '      v 

the  way  whereof  I  spake  to  thee,  Thou  shalt  see  it  no  more  again: 
and  there  ye  shall  be  sold  to  your  enemies  for  bondmen  and  bond 
women,  and  no  man  shall  buy  you."  This  striking  announce 
ment  of  Moses  had  already  proved  a  fertile  word  for  Hosea,  who 
says,  with  manifest  reference  to  it,  u  Now  will  he  remember 
their  iniquity,  and  visit  their  sins  :  they  shall  return  to  Egypt." 
And  again:  "They  shall  not  dwell  in  the  Lord's  land:  but  Eph- 
raim  shall  return  to  Egypt,  and  they  shall  eat  unclean  things  in 
Assyria"  (IIos.  viii.  13,  ix.  3).  This  last  clause  shows  beyond 
a  doubt  that  when  the  prophet  speaks  of  the  Israelites  being 
sent  back  to  Egypt,  it  is  not  the  exact  country,  but  the  state  of 
bondage  and  misery  with  which,  from  past  experience,  that 
country  had  become  identified  in  their  minds,  that  he  has  in 
view.  For  as  the  power  that  was  now  in  readiness  to  do  the 
part  of  the  oppressor  was  the  proud  Assyrian,  so  it  was  in  this 
direction,  the  opposite  one  to  where  it  formerly  had  been,  that 
the  new  Egypt  was  to  be  found  ;  they  were  to  "  eat  unclean 

at  Ex,  xii.  40  so  as  to  express  this  latter  idea,  thereby  reducing  the 
sojourn  in  Egypt  to  about  the  half  only  of  the  430.  This  appears  to  have 
been  done  with  the  view  of  making  the  Egyptian  period  suit  better  with 
the  genealogical  table  in  Ex,  vi.,  which  gives  only  three  generations 
between  Levi  and  Moses.  But  it  is  well  known  that  particular  links  in  the 
chain  were  often  omitted  in  such  tables  ;  and  as  in  another  table  (1  Chron. 
vii.  23-27)  so  many  as  eight  generations  are  given  for  another  tribe  during 
the  same  period,  it  might  from  this  table  be  equally  argued  that  the  whole 
430  years  were  spent  in  Egypt.  The  subject  is  involved  in  some  difficulty, 
and  cannot  be  summarily  decided  either  way.  But  \vhatever  the  decision, 
is  of  no  great  moment  for  the  case  in  hand.  The  prophet  is  merely  to  be 
regarded  as  pointing  to  the  well-known  historical  period,  and  to  it  as  pre 
dominantly  a  period  of  depression  and  bondage. 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  55 

tilings  in  Assyria."  That  such  was  really  the  meaning  of  Hosea 
is  rendered  still  more  manifest  by  another  passage  (chap.  xi.  5): 
"  He  shall  not  return  into  the  land  of  Egypt,  but  the  Assyrian 
shall  be  his  king."  He  shall  return  there,  and  yet  not  return. 
What  can  this  mean  ?  what  but  that  the  Egypt-state  shall  once 
more  become  his,  the  prevalence  of  sin  calling  for  another  house 
of  bondage  with  its  oppressions  and  miseries,  though  the  place 
where  the  evil  was  to  be  endured  should  no  longer  be  the  same: 
it  should  be  transferred  to  Assyria  ?  Nor,  indeed,  did  the  original 
announcement  of  Moses  mean  otherwise;  for  in  the  same  chap 
ter  in  which  he  held  out  the  threat  of  a  return  to  Egypt,  he  also 
speaks  of  their  being  brought  to  a  nation  "  which  neither  they 
nor  their  fathers  had  known,"  and  of  their  being  "scattered 
among  all  people,  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other."  So 
that  what  was  indicated  by  the  return  to  Egypt  might  be  found 
in  any  region  of  the  earth  where  God  was  pleased  to  drive  them 
in  his  anger.  And  the  same  also  substantially  holds  of  another 
prophecy  of  Hosea  (chap.  ii.  14,  15),  where  the  Lord  speaks  of 
bringing  Israel  again  into  the  wilderness,  of  giving  them  their 
vineyards  from  thence,  and  rendering  the  valley  of  Achor  to 
them  a  door  of  hope  ;  that  is,  he  was  to  deal  with  them  much  as 
he  had  dealt  with  their  forefathers,  when  he  tried  and  humbled 
them  in  the  wilderness. 

Now,  Ezekiel  here  resumes  these  earlier  announcements  of 
prophecy,  and  with  that  minuteness  of  detail  and  vividness  of 
colouring  which  so  remarkably  characterize  his  prophetical 
delineations,  throws  the  ideas  they  embody  into  a  specific  and 
numerical  form.  The  covenant-people,  as  a  whole  (for  they 
must  still  in  some  sense  be  regarded  as  one),  were  now  again 
to  suffer  for  their  sins  the  same  sort  of  hardship  and  discipline 
which  had  of  old  been  laid  upon  their  fathers  during  the  period 
of  their  servitude  in  Egypt ;  the  doleful  past  was  again  sub 
stantially  to  repeat  itself  in  the  future  ;  the  dark  season  of 
oppression  and  exile  was  again  to  come  back  with  its  sad  and 
sorrowful  experiences.  Yet,  with  this  general  similarity,  there 
was  also  a  difference, — a  difference  first  in  the  respective 
spiritual  conditions  of  the  two  branches  of  the  covenant-people, 
and  requiring  to  be  met  by  a  corresponding  difference  in  the 
dealing  they  might  expect  from  God.  The  house  of  Israel 
were  spiritually  in  a  much  worse  case  than  Judah  ;  for  from 


5G  EZEKIEL  IV. 

the  time  of  their  revolt  they  threw  off  their  allegiance  to  God, 
and  separated  themselves  from  his  life-giving  ordinances  of 
worship ;  in  defiance,  also,,  of  God's  appointment,  they  re 
nounced  their  connection  with  the  house  of  David,  to  which, 
by  an  everlasting  covenant,  he  had  given  the  power  and  the 
dominion.  Therefore,  by  much  the  greater  part,  not  far  from 
the  whole  of  the  period  which  symbolized  the  Egypt-state  of 
bondage  and  exile,  is  assigned  to  this  house  of  Israel ;  for 
with  them,  all,  in  a  manner,  was  out  of  course — they  were  on 
the  borders  of  perdition — they  virtually  needed  to  be  again 
redeemed. 

But  with  the  house  of  Judah,  notwithstanding  their  many 
sins  and  backslidings,  there  icas  redemption,  although  they  had 
greatly  impaired  its  value,  had  well-nigh  rendered  it  of  no  effect, 
by  their  continued  obstinacy  and  perverseness.     They  had  the 
covenant  of  promise,  and  the  tabernacle  of  David,  with  which 
God  had  irrevocably  associated  the  good  of  the  world.     The 
elements  of  life,  the  true  grounds  of  hope  were  theirs,  yet  mixed 
up  with  so  much  that  was  false  and  perilous,  that  severe  and 
painful  experiences  were  needed  to  fit  them  for  enjoying  the 
good  that  was  within  their  reach.     Therefore,  if  not  precisely 
the  Egypt-state  of  bondage  in  all  its  rigour,  yet  that  which  was 
most  nearly  akin  to  it,  what  was  indeed  but  a  continuation  of  it 
in  a  modified  form,  and  in  more  hopeful  circumstances, — the 
course  of  trial  and  discipline  in  the  wilderness  :  this  must  now 
again  substantially  become  the  portion  for  a  season  of  the  house 
of  Judah.     They  needed  it  much  as  their  fathers  of  old,  who, 
even  after  they  were  redeemed  from  the  house  of  bondage,  still 
required  the  forty  years  of  additional  troubles  and  discipline  in 
the  wilderness  to  prepare  them  for  the  inheritance  and  service 
of  God.     So  these  degenerate  children  of  the  house  of  Judah, 
who  could  not  be  moved  by  all  they  had  experienced  of  the 
goodness  and  severity  of  God  to  forsake  their  evil  ways,  who 
had  seen  their  brethren  of  the  house  of  Israel  sent  anew  into 
the  Egypt-state  of  worldly  oppression  and  seemingly  hopeless 
exile,  and  yet  would  not  be  warned  to  abandon  the  paths  of 
ungodliness  and  corruption, — for  them  now  there  was  of  neces 
sity  coming  a  relegation  of  privations  and  trials  like  those  of  the 
wilderness,  through  which  they  must  be  made  to  know,  after 
the  manner  of  their  forefathers,  the  determination  of  God  to 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY- BEARING.  57 

have  a  people  cleansed  from  the  abominations  of  sin,  before 
they  could  be  raised  to  the  sunshine  of  his  favour  and  blessing. 
Thus  understood,  the  several  parts  of  the  vision  receive  a  per 
fectly  natural  and  harmonious  meaning.  Jerusalem  in  a  state 
of  siege  represents  the  covenant-people  as  a  whole  straitened 
and  oppressed  by  the  powers  of  this  world,  as  the  instruments 
of  God's  just  displeasure.  And  the  prophet  being  appointed  to 
bear,  during  its  continuance,  the  iniquity  of  the  people,  with 
stinted  and  foul  provisions,  points  in  another  form  to  the  same 
visitation  of  evil — only  with  a  more  particular  respect  to  the 
cause  from  which  it  was  to  spring,  and  the  penal  character  it 
should  wear.  That  the  time  specified  should  have  been  in  all 
430  years,  denoted  that  the  dealing  was  to  form  a  kind  of  fresh 
Egyptian  exile  and  bondage  to  the  elements  of  the  world ;  but 
much  more  so  in  the  case  of  the  one  house  than  in  that  of  the 
other.  The  house  of  Israel  having  cast  off  nearly  all  that  was 
distinctive  in  the  position  and  privileges  of  the  covenant-people, 
they  had  consequently  sunk  into  a  condition  of  greatest  danger, 
one  bordering  on  heathen  darkness  and  perdition — nigh  unto 
cursing.  What  they  might  expect  was  to  be  bruised  and  crushed 
to  the  dust,  as  if  under  the  rod  of  Egypt.  But  Judah  was  not 
so  far  gone  ;  she  had  the  true  priesthood  to  minister  at  her 
altars,  and  the  house  of  David  to  rule  by  Divine  right  over  the 
heritage  of  God  ;  so  that  her  subjection  to  the  powers  of  evil 
was  only  to  be  like  the  time  of  chastisement  and  trial  in  the 
wilderness,  out  of  which  she  might  again  emerge  into  a  state  of 
peace  and  blessing.  As  the  prophet  also  again  declared  in  a 
later  prophecy,  u  And  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
peoples"  (not  the  wilderness  merely,  but  the  wilderness  of  the 
peoples,  to  show  that  it  was  to  be  the  same  only  in  character  as 
of  old,  but  not  in  geographical  position),  "  and  there  will  I  plead 
with  you  face  to  face ;  like  as  I  pleaded  with  your  fathers  in 
the  wilderness  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  will  I  plead  with  you, 
saith  the  Lord  God"  (chap.  xx.  35-28).  A  new  time  of 
chastisement,  but  mingled  as  of  old  with  mercy ;  severe  and 
earnest  dealing,  but  for  a  gracious  result, — that  they  might 
be  refined  and  purified,  so  as  to  become  fit  for  enjoying  the 
good,  which  as  a  redeemed  people  was  secured  to  them  for 
a  heritage  of  blessing.  And  if  any  hope  remained  for  the  other 
branch,  the  house  of  Israel — if  they  were  ever  to  escape  from 


53  EZEK1EL  IV. 

their  state  of  Egyptian  darkness  and  bondage,  it  must  be  by 
their  going  to  join  their  brethren  of  Judah  in  the  wilderness, 
and  sharing  in  their  peculiar  treatment  and  prospects.  On 
which  account  it  is  not  the  whole  of  the  430  years  of  the 
Egypt-state  that  is  appointed  toward  the  house  of  Israel  in  the 
vision,  but  this  shortened  by  the  40  years  of  the  wilderness 
sojourn;  to  teach  them  that  a  way  still  lay  open  for  their 
return  to  life,  but  only  by  their  having  the  Egypt-state  merged 
into  that  of  the  wilderness  ;  in  other  words,  by  ceasing  from 
their  rank  idolatries  and  open  apostaey  from  the  way  of  God, 
and  coming  to  seek,  along  with  Judah,  through  God's  covenant 
and  ordinances,  a  restoration  to  righteousness,  and  peace,  and 
blessing.1 

4.  But  why  should  the  prophet,  in  thus  announcing  the  future 
dealings  of  God,  have  thrown  the  delineation  into  so  peculiar,  so 

1  It  may  not  be  improper  to  note  further,  that  it  is  the  prophet's  desire 
TO  make  quite  plain  the  reference  for  Judah  to  the  40  years'  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness,  and  the  modified  character  of  the  evil  this  suggested,  that  an  ex 
planation  arises  of  an  apparent  anomaly,  of  which  no  express  notice  has  been 
taken  above.  At  ver.  9  he  is  ordered  to  "make  bread  according  to  the 
number  of  the  days  that  he  should  lie  upon  his  side  ;  three  hundred  and 
ninety  days  shalt  thou  eat  thereof."  H-ere  the  40  days  are  left  out,  although 
daring  them  also  he  was  to  lie  upon  his  side, — not,  as  commentators  generally, 
aad  still  also  Havernick,  suppose,  from  the  first  period  being  by  much  the 
larger  of  the  two,  and  as  such  standing  for  the  whole  ;  but  to  keep  the  refer 
ence  clear  to  the  distinctive  character  of  the  wilderness -period,  which  was 
the  point  chiefly  to  be  had  in  view  by  the  Jewish  exiles.  The  eating  of  pol 
luted  bread  as  a  symbol  properly  implied  a  constrained  residence  in  a  Gentile 
country — an  unclean  region  ;  hence,  in  the  explanation  given  of  the  symbol 
at  ver.  13,  it  is  declared  of  the  house  of  Israel,  that  "  they  shall  eat  their 
defiled  bread  among  the  Gentiles.'1'1  But  in  the  wilderness  Israel  stood  quite 
separate  from  the  Gentiles,  though  still  under  penal  treatment,  and  in  a  sense 
still  connected  with  Egypt  (hence  "  the  wilderness  of  Egypt,"  xx.  36)  ;  and 
so  they  who  were  in  a  manner  to  return  to  that  state  again  were  merely  to 
"  eat  bread  by  weight,  and  with  care,  and  drink  water  by  measure,  and  in 
desolateness ; "  i.e.  a  state  of  chastisement  and  trouble,  but  not  by  any  means 
so  heathen-like,  so  depressed  and  helpless,  as  the  other. — It  is  proper  to 
state  that  the  path  to  the  right  interpretation  of  the  vision  as  a  whole  began 
to  be  opened  up  by  Hengstenberg  in  his  Christology  and  his  work  on  the 
Pentateuch,  though  without  any  special  reference  to  this  passage  of  Ezekiel. 
Havernick  has  taken  the  right  course  in  regard  to  its  general  character  ;  but 
by  understanding  the  first  part  of  an  actual  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  eat 
ing  of  defiled  bread  only  of  subsequent  calamities,  he  has  greatly  embarrassed 
his  interpretation  ;  he  has  also  failed  to  bring  fully  out  the  application  of 
the  periods  of  chastisement  to  Israel  and  Judah  respectively. 


VISION  OF  SIEGE  AND  INIQUITY-BEARING.  59 

enigmatical  a  form  ?  Why  should  he  have  presented  it  to  the 
view  as  a  returning  again  "  of  the  years  of  former  generations?  " 

Not,  certainly,  on  the  principle  of  a  bald  and  meagre  literalism, 
as  if  he  meant  us  to  understand  that  the  clock  of  Providence 
was  actually  to  be  turned  back,  and  the  identical  ground  trodden 
over  again,  the  precise  measures  of  time  filled  up  anew  of  which 
we  read  in  the  earlier  history  of  the  chosen  race.  He  who  would 
interpret  in  such  a  style  the  symbolical  visions  of  an  Ezekiel,  is 
incapable  of  entering  into  the  rapt  emotions  of  such  a  mind,  and 
must  necessarily  flounder  at  every  step.  For  here  we  have  to 
do  not  only  with  a  lively  and  fervid  spirit,  which  is  ever  breath 
ing  life,  as  it  were,  into  the  dead,  but  that  spirit  in  a  state  of 
ecstatic  elevation,  in  which  the  mind  naturally  served  itself  of 
the  more  remarkable  facts  and  providences  in  the  past ;  yet 
only  as  aids  to  the  utterance  of  prophetic  thought, — appropriate 
forms  wherein  to  clothe  the  new  things  concerning  God's  king 
dom,  that  were  through  the  Spirit  imaging  themselves  to  the 
prophet's  vision.  And, indeed,  the  very  imperfection  that  usually 
appears  in  the  frame  of  such  historical  visions  as  compared  with 
the  past  realities, — the  partial  mingling  together  here,  for  ex 
ample,  of  the  two  great  consecutive  periods  of  past  judgment 
and  trial  in  the  history  of  the  covenant-people,  so  as  to  make  the 
second  begin  before  the  first  had  ended, — this  very  imperfection 
shows,  as  it  was  doubtless  intended  to  do,  that  an  exact  reproduc 
tion  of  the  past  was  not  in  the  eye  of  the  prophet ;  and  that  the 
nature  of  God's  contemplated  designs,  rather  than  any  definite 
bounds  and  limits  respecting  them,  was  imaged  under  those 
ancient  periods  of  tribulation  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness. 

There  were  three  reasons  chiefly  why  the  prophets  in  general, 
and  this  prophet  in  particular,  might  be  often  led  to  speak  of  the 
future  under  the  form  and  image  of  the  past.  In  the  first  place, 
as  the  meaning  obviously  did  not  lie  upon  the  surface,  it  called 
for  serious  thought  and  inquiry  regarding  the  purposes  of  God. 
A  time  of  general  backsliding  and  corruption  is  always  a  time  of 
superficial  thinking  on  spiritual  things..  And  just  as  our  Lord 
by  his  parables,  that  partly  veiled  while  they  disclosed  the  truth 
of  God,  so  the  prophets  by  their  more  profound  and  enigmatical 
discourses,  sought  to  arouse  the  careless  from  their  security,  to 
awaken  inquiry,  and  stir  the  depths  of  thought  and  feeling  in  the 
soul.  It  virtually  said  to  them,  You  are  in  imminent  peril ; 


GO  EZEKIEL  IV. 

direct  ordinary  discourse  no  longer  suits  your  case  ;  bestir  your 
selves  to  look  into  the  depths  of  things,  otherwise  the  sleep  of 
death  shall  overtake  you. 

Then,  again,  it  conveyed  in  a  few  words,  by  means  of  a  brief 
allusion,  what  the  most  lengthened  description  without  it  could 
scarcely  have  accomplished.  It  was  employing  a  device  which 
the  most  powerful  and  effective  orators  have  sometimes  resorted 
to  with  the  oreatest  effect, — as  in  the  memorable  words  of  Mira- 

O  ' 

beau,  when,  wishing  to  repel  the  thought  of  danger,  he  flashed 
out  the  pregnant  interrogation,  "  Is  Hannibal  at  the  gates  ?  " 
In  like  manner  the  prophet  here,  seeking  to  impress  upon  his 
countrymen  the  certainty  and  the  awf  ulness  of  God's  impending 
judgments  on  account  of  sin,  carries  them  back  to  the  past ;  he 
brings  up  to  their  view  Egypt  and  the  wilderness  as  ready  to 
renew  themselves  again  in  their  experience.  What  thoughts  of 
terror  and  alarm  were  these  fitted  to  awaken  in  their  minds ! 
Centuries  of  bondage  and  oppression  !  A  wearisome  sojourn 
amid  drought  and  desolation  !  And  then  this  foreshadowing  of 
the  future,  not  only  rendered  more  distinct,  but  also  strengthened 
as  to  its  credibility,  authenticated  by  those  stern  realities  of  the 
past !  It  assuredly  has  been,  shall  it  not  be  again  ? 

But  this  suggests  another  and  indeed  still  deeper  reason  for 
such  a  mode  of  representation  having  been  adopted.  For  such 
renewed  exhibitions  of  the  past  were  among  the  means  specially 
chosen  by  God  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  on  men's  notice  the 
uniformity  of  his  dealings,  and  teaching  them  to  regard  the  pro 
vidential  facts  of  one  age  as  substantial  predictions  of  what  are 
to  be  expected  in  another.  It  told  men  then,  and  it  tells  us 
now  (only  it  was  more  peculiarly  adapted  to  those  who  lived  in 
ancient  times,  as  the  revelations  they  possessed  consisted,  much 
more  than  now,  in  the  records  of  history — yet  it  tells  all  alike), 
that  the  forms  alone  are  transitory  in  which  Divine  truth 
and  righteousness  manifest  themselves,  while  the  principles 
embodied  in  these  forms  are  eternal,  and  can  never  cease,  amid 
all  outward  varieties,  to  be  giving  forth  similar  exhibitions  of 
their  life  and  power  to  those  which  have  already  appeared.  The 
eye  that  can  thus  look  through  the  shell  into  the  kernel  may 
see  the  future  things  of  God's  administration  mirrored  in  the 
past, — not,  indeed,  the  exact  copy  and  image  of  what  is  to  be, 
yet  its  essential  character  and  necessary  result.  Even  those 


VISION  OF  THE  SHORN  HAIR.  61 

very  periods  of  bygone  tribulation  and  chastisement,  which  the 
prophet  here  represents  as  coming  to  life  again  in  his  day,  have 
they  not  also  a  voice  for  other  times  ?  Are  they  not  still  reiter 
ating  their  lessons,  and  perpetually  renewing  their  existences,  in 
the  case  of  impenitent  transgressors,  now  as  well  as  formerly,  in 
that  of  drooping  exiles  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes,  or  on  the 
banks  of  Chebar  ?  One  of  these  periods — the  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness — the  Baptist  still  finds  prolonging  itself  to  the  era  of 
his~own  ministry.  His  word  of  stern  expostulation  and  solemn 
warning  makes  itself  heard  as  a  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the 
wilderness;"  for  he  sees  everywhere  around  him  trackless  deserts, 
where  ways  of  God  need  to  be  opened  up, — elements  of  corrup 
tion  working  which  require  to  be  purged  away  by  the  searching 
application  of  Divine  righteousness,  before  the  Canaan  of  God's 
inheritance  can  be  properly  entered  and  enjoyed.  And  the 
lukewarm  and  fruitless  professor  still,  so  long  as  he  cleaves  to 
the  ways  of  iniquity,  and  refuses  to  yield  a  hearty  surrender  to 
the  will  of  God,  what  else  is  his  condition  ?  He  is  in  bondage 
to  the  elements  of  the  world,  and  therefore  can  have  no  part  in 
that  good  inheritance  which  flowetli  with  milk  and  honey.  The 
doom  of  Heaven's  condemnation  hangs  suspended  over  his  head  ; 
and  if  not  averted  by  a  timely  submission  to  the  righteousness 
of  God,  and  a  cordial  entrance  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant, 
he  shall  infallibly  perish  in  the  wilderness  of  sin  and  death. 


CHAPTER  V.  VI. 

THE   VISION    OF   THE   SHORN  HAIR   AND   ITS  FORESHADOWING 
DESOLATIONS. 

Chap.  v.  1.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  sword;  a  barber's 
razor  shalt  thou  take  to  thee.  and  cause  it  to  pass  over  thy  head,  and  over 
thy  beard  ;  and  take  the  weighing-balances,  and  divide  them  (i.e.  the  hairs). 
2.  A  third  part  thou  shalt  burn  with  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  city,  when  the 
days  of  the  siege  are  accomplished  ;  and  thou  shalt  take  the  third  part,  to 
smite  with  the  sword  round  about  it ;  and  the  third  part  (viz.  the  remain 
ing  third  part)  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the  wind  :  and  I  will  draw  out  a  sword 
after  them.  3.  And  take  of  them  a  few  in  number,  and  bind  them  in  thy 
skirts.  4.  And  take  of  them  again,  and  cast  them  in  the  midst  of  the  fire, 
and  burn  them  in  the  fire  ;  from  it  (i.e.  from  the  fire,  emblem  of  God's 
righteous  judgment)  shall  go  forth  a  fire  to  all  the  house  of  Israel.  5.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  This  is  Jerusalem  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  nations  did 
I  set  her,  and  the  countries  were  round  about  her.  6.  And  she  rebelled 
against  my  judgments,  for  wickedness  1  (i.e.  to  increase  their  wickedness,  to 

1  The  Authorized  Version,  along  with  some,  both  ancient  and  modern,  ex- 


62  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

practise  it)  above  the  heathen,  and  against  my  statutes,  more  than  the  coun 
tries  that  were  round  about  her  ;  for  they  have  refused  my  judgments,  and  in 
my  statutes  they  have  not  walked.  7.  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jeho 
vah,  Because  ye  have  acted  more  outrageously  than  the  heathen  l  which  were 
round  about  you,  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  and  my  judgments  have 
not  kept,  nor  have  done  according  to  the  judgments  of  the  nations  that  were 
round  about  you  ;  8.  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am 
against  thee,  even  I,  and  I  will  execute  judgments  in  the  midst  of  thee,  in  the 
sight  of  the  heathen.  9.  And  I  will  do  in  thee  that  which  I  have  not  done, 
and  the  like  of  which  I  shall  not  do  any  more,  because  of  all  thine  abomina 
tions.  10.  Therefore,  fathers  shall  eat  their  sons  in  the  midst  of  thee,  and 
sons  shall  eat  their  fathers  ;  and  I  shall  execute  judgments  upon  thee,  and  the 
whole  remnant  of  thee  I  will  scatter  to  every  wind.  11.  Therefore,  as  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  surely  because  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary  with 
all  thy  detestable  things,  and  with  all  thine  abominations,  I  also  will  with 
draw,2  and  mine  eyes  shall  not  spare,  neither  also  will  I  have  any  pity.  12.  A 
third  part  of  thee  shall  die  of  the  pestilence,  and  with  famine  they  shall  be 
consumed  in  the  midst  of  thee  :  and  the  third  part  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
roundabout  thee  ;  and  the  third  part  will  I  scatter  to  every  wind,  and  will 
draw  out  the  sword  after  them.  13.  And  mine  anger  is  accomplished,  and 
I  will  make  my  fury  to  rest  upon  them,  and  am  comforted ;  and  they  know 
that  I  Jehovah  have  spoken  in  my  zeal,  while  I  expend  my  fury  upon  them. 
14.  And  I  will  make  thee  a  desolation,  and  a  reproach  among  the  nations 
which  are  round  about  thee,  in  the  sight  of  all  that  pass  by.  15.  And  it 
shall  be  a  reproach  and  a  taunt,  an  instruction  and  an  astonishment,  to  the 
nations  that  are  round  about  thee,  when  I  shall  have  executed  in  thee  judg 
ments  in  anger,  and  in  fury,  and  in  vehement  rebukes — I,  Jehovah,  have 


positors,  have  rendered  this  clause,  "  And  hath  changed  my  judgments  into 
wickedness/'  But  the  verb  rn»  never  signifies  to  change  ;  it  is  always  used 
in  the  sense  of  resisting,  rebelling  against,  or  something  similar,  and  is 
often,  as  here,  coupled  with  the  accusative  of  the  object  against  which  the 
resistance  is  made,— the  Lord's  word  or  statutes,  Num.  xx.  24  ;  1  Sam. 
xii.  15  ;  Jer.  iv.  17,  etc.  The  sin  of  the  Israelites  lay,  not  in  changing  the 
Lord's  statutes,  but,  from  their  prevailing  wickedness,  setting  them  aside, 
and  so  exceeding  the  heathen  in  guilt. 

1  Probably  the  precise  meaning  of  DDiOH  here  is  that  given  by  Gesenius 
in  his  Thes. :  "  tumultuamini,"  ye  tumultuate  ;  and  this  sense  we  substantially 
adopt,  though  the  meaning  given  in  the  received  translation  is  entitled  to 
regard,  and  makes  an  intelligible  sense.  The  children  of  Israel  had  "  mul 
tiplied,"  or  heaped  up,  in  the  line  here  referred  to  by  the  prophet,  above 
the  heathen  ;  that  it  had  outdone  them  in  iniquity.  The  verb  certainly  is 
not  found  in  this  sense,  but  its  derivative  jion  is  often  used  for  multitude  or 
heaps,  only  with  the  collateral  idea  of  noise'  or  turmoil.  And  as  it  seems 
probable  that  the  tendency  of  a  multitude  to  cause  snch  noise  or  turmoil  was 
the  reason  of  the  noun  coming  to  have  the  sense  of  multitude,  we  rather 
incline  to  take  the  verb  in  the  same  sense.  It  also  agrees  well  with  what 
was  said  before  about  their  doing  the  part  of  rebels  ;  as  such  they  raged,  or 
did  outrageously. 

2  This  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  verb  jna ;  and  though  it  may  seem 
here  to  be  used  somewhat  abruptly,  yet  if  viewed,  as  it  should  be,  with  refer- 


VISION  OF  THE  SHORN  HAIR.  63 

spoken  it.  16.  When  I  shall  send  upon  them  the  evil  arrows  of  famine  which 
are  for  their  destruction,  which  I  will  send  to  destroy  you ;  and  I  will  increase 
famine  upon  you,  and  will  break  for  you  the  staff  of  bread.  17.  And  I  will 
send  upon  you  famine  and  evil  beasts,  and  they  shall  bereave  thee ;  and 
pestilence  and  blood  shall  pass  through  thee  ;  and  I  will  bring  the  sword 
upon  thee — I,  Jehovah,  have  spoken  it.1 

Chap.  vi.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me  saying,  2.  Son  of 
man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and  prophecy  against  them 
and  say,  o.  Ye  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  ; 
thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  to  the  mountains  and  to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers 
ami  to  the  valleys,  Behold  I,  even  I,  am  bringing  a  sword  upon  you,  and  I 
will  destroy  your  high  places  ;  4.  And  your  altars  shall  be  desolate,  and  your 
images  shall  be  broken ;  and  I  will  make  your  slain  to  fall  before  your  idols. 
5.  And  I  will  lay  the  carcases  of  the  children  of  Israel  before  their  idols,  and 
scatter  their  bones  round  about  your  altars.  6.  In  all  the  places  of  your 
abode  the  cities  shall  be  laid  waste,  and  the  high  places  shall  be  desolate  : 
that  your  altars  may  be  laid  waste  and  made  desolate,  arid  your  idols  be  broken 
and  abolished,  and  your  images  be  cut  down,  and  your  works  be  extirpated, 
7.  And  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah.  8.  And  I  will  leave  a  remnant,  in  that  there  shall  be  some  escaped 
to  you  from  the  sword  among  the  nations,  when  ye  are  scattered  among  the 
countries.  9.  And  those  of  you  that  escape  shall  remember  me  among  the 
heathen  whither  they  shall  be  led  captive,  whose  wanton  heart,  that  de- 
parteth  from  me,  I  will  break,  and  their  eyes  that  lust  after  their  idols ;  and 
they  shall  loathe  themselves  for  the  evils  which  they  have  done  in  respect 
to  all  their  abominations.  10.  And  they  shall  know  that  I,  Jehovah,  have 
not  in  vain  declared  that  I  would  bring  this  evil  upon  them.  11.  Thus  saitli 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  smite  with  thy  hand  and  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  say, 
Ah  !  to  all  the  vile  abominations  of  the  house  of  Israel !  that  they  shall  fall 
by  the  sword,  by  the  famine,  and  the  pestilence.  12.  He  that  is  far  off  shall 
die  by  the  pestilence,  and  he  that  is  near  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  he 
that  remains  and  is  besieged  shall  die  by  the  famine  ;  and  I  will  accomplish 
my  fury  upon  them.  13.  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  when  their 
slain  shall  be  among  their  idols,  round  about  their  altars,  at  every  high  hill, 
upon  all  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and  under  every  green  tree,  and  under 
every  thick  oak  ;  the  place  where  they  offered  sweet  savour  to  all  their 
idols.  14.  And  I  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  them,  and  make  the  land 
desolate,  and  a  desolation  more  than  the  wilderness  toward  Diblath,-2  in 
all  the  places  of  their  abode  ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

ence  to  Deut.  iv.  2,  where  the  people  were  forbidden  to  withdraw  anything 
from  God's  statutes,  its  propriety  and  force  will  be  manifest.  They  had 
now  withdrawn  from  God's  sanctuary  all  its  sacredness,  and  in  return  he 
withdraws  from  them — namely,  his  favour  and  protection,  life  and  blessing. 

1  Very  characteristic,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  of  Ezekiel's  style, 
are  the  frequent  transitions  from  the  objective  to  the  subjective,  and  in 
versely, — they  and  you,  it  and  thou,  alternating  with  each  other  ;  also  the 
tendency  to  repeat  over  and  over  again  the  same  thought,  and  even  the 
same  expressions,  for  the  sake  of  deepening  the  impression. 

2  It  is  not  certain  what  precise  district  is  referred  to  by  the  name  of 
Diblath.     We  read  elsewhere  of  the  cities  that  had  Diblathaim  as  part  of 
their  names  (Num.  xxxiii.  46 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  22),  but  not  of  any  wilderness 
so  designated.     It  is  needless  to  notice  the  different  conjectures  which  have 
been  thrown  out  upon  the  subject,  for  110  certain  result  has  been  attained. 


C  4  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

Ix  the  vision  of  the  siege  and  the  iniquity-bearing,  a  heavy 
burden  of  troubles,  partly  in  progress,  and  partly  still  impending, 
had  been  announced  by  the  prophet  as  determined  against  the 
covenant-people.  The  afflictions  of  Egypt  and  the  trials  of  the 
wilderness  were,  in  a  manner,  to  pass  over  them  again.  But 
even  that  was  not  enough ;  for  as  their  guilt  exceeded  the  guilt 
of  their  forefathers,  so  the  chastisement  now  to  be  received  from 
the  hand  of  God  was  to  surpass  all  that  had  been  experienced 
in  the  history  of  the  past.  This  more  severe  message  is  unfolded 
in  the  next  vision,  that  recorded  in  these  chapters, — in  which  the 
prophet  is  commanded  (after  having  finished  the  days  of  the 
siege,  i.  e.  spent  in  vision,  not  in  real  life,  the  time  during  which 
it  was  to  be  prosecuted)  to  take  a  sharp  sword,  and  also  a  razor, 
to  shave  off  the  whole  hair  of  his  head  and  beard, — itself  a  sym 
bol  of  violent  and  humiliating  treatment.  For  the  priests  were 
enjoined  to  nourish  their  hair,  and  avoid  baldness,  in  token  of 
their  peculiar  consecration  to  the  Lord  (Lev.  xxi.  5).  There 
fore,  to  have  this  hair,  which  was  at  once  the  natural  ornament 
of  the  head  and  the  symbol  of  sacredness,  cut  off  by  an  instru 
ment  of  war,  plainly  bespoke  a  work  of  severe  and  desolating 
judgment.  But  the  same  was  still  more  strikingly  indicated  by 
the  use  to  be  made  of  the  hair, — of  which  one-third  part  was  tobe 
burned  in  the  fire,  another  smitten  about  with  a  sword,  and  the 
last  scattered  to  the  winds  and  pursued  by  a  drawn  sword.  A 
few  of  this  last  division  the  prophet  was  instructed  to  bind  in  the- 
skirts  of  his  garment,  in  token  of  safe  preservation, — for  even  of 
these,  a  portion  only  were  to  be  saved, — while  others  were  to  be 
again  cast  into  the  fire  and  burned,  a  flame  issuing  from  the  con 
flagration  which  was  to  "  come  forth  against  all  the  house  of 
Israel." 

In  these  last  words,  which  form  the  conclusion  of  ver.  4,  the 
description  of  the  symbol,  as  sometimes  happens  in  the  prophets, 
passes  into  the  reality,  the  house  of  Israel  being  substituted  for 
the  hairs  which  represented  it.  This  is  followed,  however,  by 
an  express  and  pointed  application  of  the  different  parts  of  the 
vision  to  the  circumstances  and  prospects  of  the  covenant-people. 
Jerusalem,  we  are  again  told,  was  the  object  of  the  whole ;  but 
Jerusalem,  as  in  the  former  vision,  standing  for  the  people  at 
large,  of  which  it  was  the  proper  centre  and  natural  represen 
tative.  For  the  prophet  presently  proceeds  to  speak  of  this 


VISION  OF  THE  SHORN  HAIR.  65 

Jerusalem  as  a  people  set  in  the  midst  of  surrounding  heathen ; 
and  in  the  two  following  chapters,  which  are  merely  a  con 
tinuation  and  further  enlargement  of  what  is  contained  in  chap, 
v.,  we  find  substituted  for  the  name  of  Jerusalem,  "  the  moun 
tains  of  Israel/'  "  the  land  of  Israel,"  and  "  the  children  of 
Israel."  There  can  be  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  prophecy 
has  the  most  extensive  bearing,  and  that  we  are  no  more  in  this 
case,  than  in  that  of  the  siege,  to  think  of  the  single  city  Jeru 
salem, — though,  from  being  the  appointed  centre  of  the  whole, 
both  the  city  itself,  and  that  portion  of  the  people  more  imme 
diately  connected  with  it,  might  expect  their  full  share  in  the 
judgments  announced. 

The  judgments  themselves  are  distributed  into  three  classes, 

according  to  the  threefold  division  of  the  hair :  the  sword  was  to 
o 

devour  one-third  of  the  people ;  famine  and  pestilence,  another ; 
and  that  which  remained  was  to  be  scattered  among  the  nations. 
The  strongest  language  is  employed  to  describe  the  calamities 
indicated  under  these  various  heads,  and  everything  is  introduced 
that  might  have  the  effect  of  conveying  the  most  appalling  idea 
of  the  coming  future.  Amid  the  horrors  to  be  produced  by 
famine  and  pestilence,  the  dreadful  words  of  Moses,  that  u  their 
fathers  should  eat  their  sons  in  the  midst  of  them,"  are  reiterated, 
with  the  addition  of  the  still  darker  feature,  that  "the  sons 
should  also  eat  their  fathers  "  (ver.  10).  The  wild  beasts  of  the 
field,  too,  were  to  embitter  by  their  ravages  the  calamities  pro 
duced  by  the  evil  arrows  of  famine ;  and  the  sword  was  to  pass 
through  the  land  in  such  fury  that  none  should  be  able  to 
escape,  rendering  all  a  desolate  wilderness  (chap.  vi.  14),  destroy 
ing  also  their  idols,  and  scattering  around  them  the  dead  carcases 
of  the  people,  so  that  the  things  in  which  they  had  foolishly 
trusted  should  only  in  the  day  of  evil  prove  the  witnesses  and 
companions  of  their  ruin  (chap.  vi.  3-6).  Finally,  in  respect  to 
those  who  should  escape  the  more  immediate  evils,  not  only 
should  they  be  scattered  far  and  wide  among  the  nations,  but 
should  there  also  meet  with  taunting  and  reproaches;  nay,  a 
sword  should  be  drawn  out  after  them,  as  had  already  been 
predicted  by  Moses  (chap.  v.  12 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  33) ;  they  too 
were  to  be  for  burning  (so  also  Isa.  vi.  13)  ;  for  the  anger  of  the 
Lord  was  still  to  pursue  after  them  with  u  furious  rebukes," 
until  he  had  completely  broken  their  rebellious  hearts,  and 

E 


66  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

wrought  in  them  a  spirit  of  true  contrition  for  sin  and  perfect 
reconciliation  of  heart  with  God  (chap.  vi.  9). 

Nothing  of  a  definite  nature  is  mentioned  as  to  time  and 
place  in  this  dark  outline  of  revealed  judgments.  That  the 
doom  of  evil  was  by  no  means  to  be  exhausted  by  the  troubles 
connected  with  the  Chaldean  conquest  is  manifest;  for  that 
portion  of  the  people  who  were  to  go  into  exile  and  be  dispersed 
among  the  nations  were  appointed  to  other  and  still  future 
tribulations.  There  was  to  be  a  germinating  evil  in  their  destiny, 
because  there  would  be,  as  the  Lord  clearly  foresaw,  a  germinat 
ing  evil  in  their  character ;  and  so  long  as  this  root  of  bitterness 
should  still  be  springing  up  into  acts  of  rebellion  against  God, 
it  should  never  cease  to  be  recoiling  upon  them  with  strokes  of 
chastisement  in  providence.  In  this  there  was  nothing  abso 
lutely  singular  as  to  the  principle  on  which  the  Divine  govern 
ment  proceeded;  only,  as  God  had  connected  himself  with 
Israel  in  a  manner  he  never  had  done  with  any  nation  before, 
nor  would  with  any  other  again,  there  should  be  a  certain  sin 
gularity  in  their  case  as  to  the  actual  experience  of  suffering  on 
account  of  sin.  In  their  history  as  a  people,  the  footsteps  of 
God's  righteous  judgment  would  leave  impressions  behind  it  of 
unexampled  severity,  according  to  the  word  here  uttered  :  u  And 
I  will  do  in  thee  that  which  I  have  not  done,  and  whereunto  I 
will  not  do  any  more  the  like,  because  of  all  thine  abominations." 

But  there  is  no  caprice  in  the  dealings  of  God.  When  he 
afflicts  with  the  rod  of  chastisement  and  rebuke,  it  is  only  be 
cause  the  righteous  principles  of  his  government  demand  it;  and 
the  fearful  burden  of  evils  here  suspended  over  the  heads  of 
ancient  Israel  sounds  also  a  warning  note  of  judgment  to  all 
nations  and  all  ages  of  the  world.  There  have  been,  it  is  true, 
such  changes  introduced  into  the  outward  administration  of  God's 
kingdom  as  render  it,  for  the  most  part,  impossible  to  trace 
the  execution  of  his  judgments  with  the  same  ease  and  certainty 
with  which  we  can  mark  their  course  in  the  history  of  ancient 
Israel.  But  it  is  not  the  less  certain  that  the  principles  which 
produced  such  marked  effects  then  are  in  active  operation  still ; 
and  whenever  Israel's  guilt  is  incurred  anew,  there  will  infallibly 
be  experienced  a  renewal  of  Israel's  doom.  For  the  gospel  has 
brought  no  suspension  of  God's  justice  any  more  than  of  his 
mercy.  It  contains  the  most  glorious  exhibition  of  his  grace  to 


VISION  OF  THE  SHORN  HAIR.  67 

sinners,  but  along  with  this  it  contains  the  most  affecting  and 
awful  display  of  his  righteous  indignation  against  sin.  Both 
features,  indeed,  of  the  Divine  character  have  reached  under  the 
gospel  a  higher  stage  of  development;  and  so  far  has  the  intro 
duction  of  the  new  covenant  been  from  laying  an  arrest  on  the 
severity  of  God,  that  not  till  it  appeared  did  the  Jews  themselves 
experience  the  heaviest  portion  of  the  evils  threatened  against 
them ;  then  only  did  the  wratli  begin  to  fall  upon  them  to  the 
uttermost,  and  the  days  of  darkness  and  tribulation  come,  such 
as  had  not  hitherto  been  known.  This  vision  of  woe,  therefore, 
extends  alike  over  both  dispensations,  and  speaks  to  men  of 
every  age  and  clime ;  it  is  a  mirror  in  which  the  justice  of  God 
reflects  itself  for  the  world  at  large,  with  no  further  alteration 
for  gospel  times  than  such  as  is  implied  in  the  words  of  the 
apostle :  "  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he 
be  thought  worthy  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God, 
and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was 
sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit 
of  grace  ?  " 

Such  being  the  case  in  respect  to  the  execution  of  Divine 
judgment,  it  becomes  the  more  necessary  that  we  should  mark 
distinctly  the  nature  of  the  guilt  on  account  of  which  the  judg 
ment  was  to  be  executed.  We  are  the  rather  called  to  be  par 
ticular  in  marking  this,  as  the  prophet  so  emphatically  and 
repeatedly  presses  the  circumstance,  that  the  treatment  to  be 
given  to  Israel  in  the  way  of  punishment  was  to  be  a  dealing 
with  them  after  their  own  ways,  or  a  meting  back  to  them  of 
their  own  measure.  The  passages  which  more  particularly  refer 
to  this  portion  of  the  subject  are  the  following: — "This  is  Jeru 
salem  :  in  the  midst  of  the  nations  I  set  her,  and  the  countries 
were  round  about  her.  And  she  rebelled  against  my  judgments, 
for  wickedness  above  the  heathen  and  against  my  statutes  more 
than  the  countries  that  are  round  about  her,"  etc.  And  again : 
"  Surely  because  thou  hast  denied  my  sanctuary  with  all  thy 
detestable  things,  and  with  all  thine  abominations,  therefore 
will  I  also  withdraw,  neither  shall  mine  eye  spare,  neither  will 
I  have  any  pity." 

The  stress  laid  here  upon  defilement  of  the  sanctuary  is  in 
tended  to  single  out  this  profanation  as  the  very  climax  of  the 
prevailing  iniquity,  and  the  sign  that  it  had  now  reached  the 


68  EZEKIELV.  VI. 

last  stage  of  Heaven-daring  wickedness.  But  the  grand  charge 
which  the  prophet  evidently  means  to  bring  against  them,  was 
the  utter  discordance  which  appeared  between  their  conduct  and 
their  calling ;  they  had  failed  to  maintain  the  position  and  fulfil 
the  ends  for  which  more  especially  they  had  been  settled  in 
Canaan,  and  had  acted  so  as  to  cause  the  name  of  God  to  be 
blasphemed  in  them  rather  than  honoured.  Let  us  glance  for 
a  little  both  at  what  the  calling  itself  was,  and  at  this  unfaith 
fulness  in  regard  to  it,  that  we  may  thus  more  clearly  perceive 
the  reasonableness  of  this  severity  which  the  Lord  exercised 
toward  them,  and  discern  the  lessons  of  instruction  which  the 
whole  furnishes  to  future  times. 

1.  In  respect  to  the  peculiar  calling  of  the  Israelites,  the  pro 
phet  represents  them  as  having  been  placed  by  God,  with  the 
charge  of  his  statutes  and  judgments,  in  the  midst  of  the  nations. 
This  is  not,  certainly,  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  adopted  by 
some  of  the  earlier  commentators,  that  Jerusalem  stood  precisely 
in  the  centre  of  the  natural  world,  and  on  this  account  was 
chosen  to  be  the  peculiar  dwelling-place  of  God.  But  neither  is 
it  to  be  understood,  \vith  many  later  ones,  as  simply  meaning 
that  Israel  in  Canaan  alone  possessed  as  a  nation  the  true  know 
ledge  of  God,  and  that  the  surrounding  nations  were  all  plunged 
in  heathenish  darkness  and  corruption.  It  rather  indicates  that 
the  land  of  Canaan  did  form  a  kind  of  centre  for  the  nations  of 
heathen  antiquity,  and  was  designed  on  that  account  to  be  a 
position  of  power  and  influence  in  respect  to  the  knowledge  and 
worship  of  God.  Viewing  the  world  as  it  existed  at  the  time  of 
Israel's  settlement  in  Canaan,  and  for  a  thousand  years  after 
wards,  we  believe  it  would  be  impossible  to  fix  upon  a  single 
region  so  admirably  fitted  at  once  to  serve  as  a  suitable  dwelling- 
place  for  such  a  people,  and  to  enable  them,  as  from  a  central 
and  well-chosen  vantage-ground,  to  act  with  success  upon  the 
heathenism  of  the  world.  It  lay  nearly  midway  between,  the 
oldest  and  most  influential  states  of  antiquity, — on  the  one  side 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  with  their  dependencies;  on  the  other, 
Babylon,  Nineveh,  India, — the  seats  of  art  and  civilisation 
when  the  rest  of  the  world  still  lay  in  comparative  barbarism, 
and  to  which  the  much  later,  but  ultimately  more  powerful,  com 
monwealths  of  Europe  were  primarily  indebted  for  their  skill, 
and  even  their  philosophy  and  religion.  Then,  in  the  immediate 


VISION  OF  THE  SHORN  HAIR.  69 

neighbourhood  were  the  Phoenician  mariners,  whose  sails  fre 
quented  every  harbour  of  the  civilised  world ;  and  all  around, 
the  Ishmaelite  tribes,  the  great  inland  traders,  who  kept  up  a 
perpetual  and  most  extensive  intercourse  among  the  different 
communities  of  southern  Asia  and  northern  Africa.  So  that, 
isolated  as  the  land  of  Canaan  in  some  respects  was,  it  was  the 
very  reverse  of  being  withdrawn  to  a  corner ;  and  no  region  in 
the  whole  ancient  world  could  have  been  selected  that  afforded 
more  obvious  and  varied  facilities  for  exerting  a  beneficial  and 
commanding  influence  on  the  mind  of  ancient  heathendom. 

That  the  children  of  Israel,  by  being  appointed  to  occupy  such 
a  central  position,  were  also  called  to  take  advantage  of  it  for 
making  known  the  character  and  extending  the  worship  of 
Jehovah,  was  to  be  understood  of  itself  from  their  being  the 
chosen  depositories  of  God's  will,  and  the  peculiar  seed  "  in 
whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed."  The 
distinguished  marks  of  Divine  favour  they  were  to  enjoy,  and 
the  political  ascendancy  that  was  to  be  granted  them,  over  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  were  made  expressly  to  depend  upon  their 
remaining  stedfast  to  the  covenant  of  God,  and  being  faithful 
witnesses  of  its  truth  and  holiness.  "  This."  said  Moses,  in 
Deut.  iv.  6,  when  urging  them  to  fidelity  in  keeping  God's 
statutes  and  judgments,  "  this  is  your  wisdom  and  your  under 
standing  in  the  sight  of  the  nations,  which  shall  hear  all  these 
statutes,  and  say,  Surely  this  great  nation  is  a  wise  and  under 
standing  people."  And  again,  in  chap,  xxviii.,  he  holds  out  to 
them  the  elevated  prospect,  if  they  would  only  keep  the  com 
mandments  of  God  and  walk  in  his  ways,  of  being  "  the  head 
only  and  not  the  tail,  above  only  and  not  beneath,"  and  of  causing 
"  all  the  people  of  the  earth  to  see  that  Jehovah  had  established 
them  to  be  an  holy  people  to  himself,  and  called  them  by  his 
name."  How  thoroughly  David  and  other  pious  men  in  the 
better  periods  of  Israel's  history  understood  the  high  calling 
they  thus  held  of  God,  is  evident  from  many  passages  in  the 
Psalms.  For  example,  in  Ps.  ix. :  "  Thou  hast  rebuked  the 
heathen,  thou  hast  destroyed  the  wicked.  .  .  .  Sing  praises 
to  the  Lord,  which  dwelleth  in  Zion,  declare  among  the  people 
his  doings."  In  Ps.  lix.,  perhaps  one  of  the  earliest  of  David's 
compositions :  "  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  awake 
to  visit  all  the  heathen.  .  .  .  Consume  them  (mine  enemies) 


70  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

in  wrath  ;  consume  them  that  they  may  not  be  ;  and  let  them 
know  that  God  ruleth  in  Jacob  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
So  again  in  Ps.  Ixviii.,  probably  one  of  his  latest,  "  Because 
of  thy  temple  in  Jerusalem  shall  kings  bring  presents  unto 
thee.  Princes  shall  come  out  of  Egypt ;  Ethiopia  shall  soon 
stretch  out  her  hands  to  God.  Sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms 
of  the  earth,"  etc.  And  in  the  Psalm  immediately  before 
this,  the  inspired  writer,  in  the  name  of  the  true  Israel,  and 
in  the  most  enlarged  spirit  of  philanthropy,  entreats  God  to 
make  his  face  to  shine  upon  them,  that  so  his  way  might  be 
known  upon  earth,  and  his  saving  health  among  all  nations. 
He  desired  an  increased  manifestation  of  Divine  goodness,  not 
so  much  for  its  own  sake,  as  for  the  ulterior  good  of  which  it 
might  be  productive  :  "  God  shall  bless  us,  and  all  ends  of  the 
earth  shall  fear  him."  Undoubtedly  this  wide-spreading  effect 
may,  in  such  cases,  have  been  contemplated  as  very  much  a 
result  that  was  to  grow  spontaneously  out  of  the  good  that 
should  appear  in  Israel,  the  mere  exhibition  of  God's  rich  bless 
ing  upon  them  being  expected  to  prompt  and  allure  the  nations 

of  the  earth  to  seek  that  the  same  might  be  realized  also  in  their 

o 

own  experience.  But  still  the  personal  good  for  Israel  was 
viewed  as  strictly  subservient  to  the  more  general  good  for  the 
nations  ;  and  such  desires  and  expectations  toward  the  world  at 
large  could  not  possibly  be  cherished  without  the  obligation 
being  recognised  and  felt  to  employ  every  available  means  for 
extending  the  true  knowledge  of  God  in  the  world.  So  utterly 
false  is  the  idea — the  spurious  brood  of  an  unscriptural  and 
exclusive  Pharisaism — that  the  Israelites  were  placed  in  Canaan 
for  their  exclusive  benefit,  and  in  a  sort  of  unfriendly  anta 
gonism  to  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  !  On  the  contrary,  they 
were  placed  there  as  on  a  high  vantage-ground,  for  acting  the 
part  of  the  world's  benefactors  ;  placed  aloft  as  God's  lights  in 
the  earth,  that  through  them  the  nations  around  might  learn 
his  will,  and  come  to  obtain  an  interest  in  his  blessing. 

This  calling  of  Israel  in  respect  to  the  nations  of  the  world 
is  precisely  that  which  now  rests  upon  the  Christian  Church. 
There  is  no  difference  between  the  two  in  nature,  though,  in 
regard  to  the  manner  of  its  execution,  the  change  that  has 
meanwhile  entered  into  the  character  of  God's  kingdom,  and 
the  general  aspect  of  the  world's  condition,  naturally  gives  rise 


ISRAEL'S  PECULIAR  CALLING  AND  GUILT.  7 1 

to  corresponding  differences.  It  was  necessary  that  the  impulse 
should  be  communicated  more  nationally  before,  more  individ 
ually  now.  And  as  the  religion  of  God's  ancient  people  was 
predominantly  of  a  symbolical,  outward,  and  national  character, 
so,  in  the  manner  of  its  propagation  in  the  world,  fleshly 
weapons,  outward  prosperity,  the  visible  sunshine  of  Heaven's 
favour  and  loving-kindness,  necessarily  played  an  essential  and 
prominent  part.  But  now,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  dis 
coveries  of  the  gospel  have  laid  open  Divine  realities  themselves 
to  the  eye  of  faith,  and  thereby  given  a  more  spiritual  and 
elevated  tone  to  the  true  religion,  there  is  greatly  less  need  of 
those  external  appliances.  The  grand  element  of  power  now  lies 
in  the  truth  itself  ;  and  by  means  of  this,  exhibited  in  the  lives  of 
God's  people,  and  plied  on  every  hand  by  their  instrumentality, 
is  the  triumph  of  righteousness  chiefly  to  be  sped  forward  in  the 
world.  With  such  differences,  however,  as  to  the  method  of 
working,  the  obligation  itself  remains  substantially  the  same. 
The  Christian  Church  is  now,  just  as  Israel  was  of  old,  set  in 
the  midst  of  the  nations,  and  charged  in  all  her  members  to  give 
faithful  testimony  to  the  truth,  by  which  she  has  herself  been 
blessed,  that  others  may  come  and  partake  of  the  blessing. 
What  a  noble  function  !  and,  as  the  result  of  its  faithful  dis 
charge,  what  an  unspeakable  good  has  to  be  realized  !  Nothing 
less  than  the  possession  of  the  world  under  Christ  as  the  field 
which  the  Lord  doth  bless  !  The  right  to  this  possession  is 
Christ's,  who  has  received  from  the  Father  the  heritage  of  the 
earth  ;  and  he  commits  it  to  his  Church,  as  the  instrument  of  his 
working,  to  make  good  the  title.  With  her  people,  therefore, 
lies  the  weighty  responsibility  of  the  world's  regeneration ;  they 
are  individually  and  collectively  the  light  of  the  world ;  they 
are  the  salt  of  the  earth.  Happy  if  they  are  so  in  reality !  but 
if  not,  heavy  above  all  others  must  be  their  condemnation. 

2.  In  the  case  of  ancient  Israel,  it  was  their  misfortune  to 
incur  the  condemnation.  They  failed  to  take  advantage  of 
their  favourable  position  for  extending  the  knowledge  and  glory 
of  God  among  the  nations  ;  but,  imbibing  the  corruptions  they 
should  have  striven  to  abolish,  they  dealt  more  treacherously 
toward  the  true  religion  than  the  surrounding  nations  did  toward 
their  false  ones.  That,  in  charging  them  with  an  excess  over 
these  very  nations,  the  prophet  meant  that  they  went  absolutely 


72  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

beyond  them  in  the  practice  of  abominable  idolatries,  we  can 
scarcely  suppose.  But  in  sinning  against  such  privileges  and 
obligations,  their  guilt  was  unquestionably  much  greater  ;  and 
in  going  so  readily  over  to  the  corruptions  of  heathenism,  they 
so  far  did  worse  than  others,  that  they  betrayed  a  looser  attach 
ment  to  their  religion  than  those  heathens  did  to  their  respective 
idolatries.  "  They  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  neither 
have  kept  my  judgments,  neither  have  done  according  to  the 
judgments  of  the  nations  that  are  round  about  you;"  neither 
adhered  to  the  one,  nor  wholly  espoused  the  other, — therefore 
inferior  in  point  of  religious  principle  to  those  wretched  idolaters 
who  cling  with  inveterate  fondness  to  their  several  superstitions. 
Jeremiah  had  already  called  attention  to  this  singular  fact,  and 
mourned  over  the  amazing  infatuation  it  displayed  :  "  Pass  over 
the  isles  of  Chittim,  and  see ;  and  send  unto  Kedar,  and  con 
sider  diligently,  and  see  if  there  be  such  a  thing  :  Hath  a  nation 
changed  her  gods,  which  yet  are  no  gods?  but  my  people  have 
changed  their  glory  for  that  which  doth  not  profit"  (chap.  ii. 
10,  11). 

There  must  have  been  some  ground  in  the  nature  of  things 
for  this  apparent  anomaly, — some  very  powerful  and  constraining 
impulse  which  so  incessantly  led  Israel,  in  the  face  of  all  remon 
strances  and  warnings  in  providence,  to  prefer  and  fall  in  with 
the  Gentile  superstitions — where  shall  we  seek  it  ?  Undoubt 
edly  the  main  and  fundamental  reason  is  to  be  sought  in  their 
own  prevailing  carnality  and  corruption  of  heart,  which  the 
mere  nature-religions  of  heathenism  did  nothing  to  check,  but 
rather  fostered  and  sanctioned.  Outward  and  carnal  as  the 
Jewish  worship  was  in  its  character  compared  with  the  Christian, 
it  still  was  immeasurably  less  so  than  the  idolatrous  religions  of 
Paganism,  in  which  not  only  every  god  had  its  representation 
in  a  visible  idol,  but  the  gods  themselves  were  precisely  such  as 
the  natural  heart  desires, — gods  "  whose  attributes  were  pride, 
revenge,  and  lust."  In  Judaism,  on  the  contrary,  amid  all  that 
was  outward  and  showy  in  its  observances,  there  still  was  in  the 
bosom  of  every  service  a  spiritual  and  holy  God  as  the  sole 
object  of  veneration,  and  a  conformity  to  his  righteous  will  as 
the  one  great  end  to  be  aimed  at.  Therefore,  whenever  the 
people  lost  the  true  spirit  of  piety,  they  of  necessity  lost,  at  the 
same  time,  their  relish  for  the  pure  service  of  Jehovah;  they 


ISRAEL'S  PECULIAR  CALLING  AND  GUILT.  73 

became  at  once  unfit  for  its  duties  and  ashamed  of  its  sanctity, 
and  gladly  accepted  from  the  hands  of  their  neighbours  what 
might  render  their  religion  more  palatable  to  their  ungodly 
dispositions. 

Shall  we  wonder  at  such  behaviour  in  Israel  ?  We  may, 
indeed,  wonder  at  it  when  we  think  of  their  singular  advan 
tages,  and  the  astonishing  things  which  God  had  done  in  their 
behalf ;  but  the  same  perversity  which  ran  such  a  career  of 
wickedness  in  them,  lives  still  in  the  Christian  Church ;  nor  is 
there  a  country  in  Christendom  where  Israel's  folly  is  not  on  a 
large  scale  perpetually  repeating  itself.  What  are  the  corrup 
tions  of  Popery  but  so  many  accommodations  of  the  pure  spirit 
of  the  gospel  to  the  grovelling  tendencies  of  the  flesh  ?  And 
even  in  Protestant  lands,  with  by  far  the  greater  proportion  of 
worshippers,  the  religion  actually  embraced  is  not  that  of  the 
Bible,  but  this  moulded  and  shaped  into  a  form  more  agreeable 
to  the  natural  heart.  It  borrows  from  the  thoughts  and  maxims 
of  the  world  fully  as  much  as  it  derives  from  the  gospel ;  and 
gathers  up  from  the  two  such  a  compound  of  flesh  and  spirit, 
purity  and  corruption,  as  the  natural  man  finds  little  occasion 
either  to  quarrel  with  or  to  be  ashamed  of.  Hence  the  spiritual 
languor,  the  worldly-mindedness,  the  numberless  forms  of  vanity 
and  pollution,  which  are  so  commonly  seen  going  hand  in 
hand  with  a  religious  profession,  and  which  have  at  once  robbed 
the  Church  of  her  power  to  conquer  and  bless  the  world,  and 
miserably  curtailed  her  own  inheritance  of  good.  The  spiritual 
adversary  who  sought  in  vain  to  strangle  Christianity  in  her 
birth  has  too  well  succeeded  in  impeding  her  progress,  by 
corrupting  the  purity  of  her  worship,  and  replenishing  her  with 
the  means  of  worldly  honour  and  enjoyment.  Nor  can  she  ever 
fulfil  aright  her  destiny,  or  be  safe  from  the  rod  of  chastisement 
and  rebuke,  till  the  foul  admixtures  she  has  contracted  from  the 
world  are  purged  out,  and,  in  the  simple  spirit  of  an  implicit 
reliance  on  the  Divine  word,  and  an  unswerving  adherence  to 
the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  she  goes  forth  to  resist 
and  put  down  whatever  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  Heaven. 

It  may  be  proper,  before  closing  our  remarks  on  the  vision 
contained  in  these  three  chapters,  to  refer  to  a  style  of  inter 
pretation  which  is  unhappily  too  current  in  the  present  times, 
and  which  is  equally  remarkable  for  the  groundlessness  and  the 


74  EZEKIEL  V.  VI. 

confidence  of  its  assertions.  "  Look,"  says  a  popular  writer, 
in  a  discourse  on  Ezekiel  ix.  4-6,  "into  the  fifth  chapter  of 
Ezekiel,  ver.  12,  and  you  will  see  a  passage  which  was  not 
fulfilled  in  the  days  of  Zedekiah.  There  it  was  predicted  that 
a  third  part  of  the  nation  should  die  by  pestilence,  that  a  third 
part  should  die  by  the  sword,  and  that  another  third  part  of 
the  nation  should  be  scattered  unto  all  the  winds,  and  a  sword 
sent  after  them.  In  the  days  of  Zedekiah  no  such  thing 
occurred.  There  was  nothing  of  famine  or  pestilence;  there 
was  no  destruction  of  a  third  part  with  the  sword  ;  and  those 
that  were  carried  captive,  instead  of  being  scattered  unto  all 
the  winds,  were  taken  into  one  country,  and  were  kept  in  one 
country  all  the  time  of  their  captivity." 

It  is  not  saying  too  much  of  this  passage,  that  it  contains  as 
many  errors  as  sentences.  For,  (1)  in  regard  to  the  threefold 
destination  of  the  people  to  the  pestilence,  the  sword,  and  dis 
persion,  it  might  be  as  correct  to  affirm  that  no  such  thing  was 
spoken  by  Ezekiel  of  the  days  of  Zedekiah,  as  that  no  such  thing 
occurred  then.  The  prophet,  as  we  have  already  shown,  is  not 
here  speaking  of  Jerusalem  alone,  or  even  of  the  people  of  Judah 
alone,  but  of  the  covenant-people  at  large,  as  inhabitants  of  the 
land  of  Canaan ;  so  that  we  are  to  take  in  not  simply  what 
happened  in  the  days  of  Zedekiah,  but  what  all  Israel  had  been 
suffering,  or  were  still  to  suffer,  by  means  of  the  calamities 
which  the  Lord  sent  against  them  for  their  sins.  (2)  It  is  a 
rash  and  utterly  groundless  affirmation  to  say,  even  of  those 
who  lived  in  the  days  of  Zedekiah,  that  a  third  part  were  not 
destroyed  by  pestilence,  and  a  third  by  the  sword  ;  for  that  vast 
numbers  perished  by  both  causes  is  manifest  from  the  face  of 
the  history — and  where  did  the  author  learn  that  it  was  less 
than  two-thirds  ?  As  for  the  remaining  third  being  all  carried 
captive  to  one  country,  and  kept  there,  we  have  simply  to  ask 
whence,  then,  came  the  Jews  mentioned  in  the  book  of  Esther, 
who  were  scattered  through  all  the  provinces  of  the  Persian 
empire  ?  Or  how  should  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  authorizing  their 
return  to  Palestine,  have  been  addressed  to  the  seed  of  Israel 
throughout  the  whole  kingdom,  to  "  every  man  in  the  place 
where  he  sojourneth"?  Or  why  should  a  special  curse  have 
been  pronounced  over  Edom,  because  they  sought  to  cut  off, 
and  to  some  extent  did  cut  off,  the  miserable  fugitives  from  the 


ISRAEL'S  PECULIAR  CALLING  AND  GUILT.  75 

land  of  Israel,  who,  in  the  day  of  their  calamity,  fled  from  the 
face  of  the  adversary?  (Obad.  v.  14.)  In  short,  it  is  a  mere 
assertion,  and  utterly  opposed  to  the  well-known  facts  of  history, 
to  affirm  that  all  who  survived  the  Chaldean  desolation  were 
carried  to  the  region  of  Babylonia  and  kept  there.  The  larger 
portion  were  so,  but  by  no  means  the  whole ;  there  was  a  scat 
tering  to  the  winds  of  heaven.1  (3)  It  is  quite  untenable,  and 
is  in  fact  betraying  the  truthfulness  of  the  prophet  into  the 
enemies'  hands,  to  assert,  regarding  such  a  vision  as  this,  that 
the  infliction  of  those  calamities,  which  it  marks  as  presently  to 
be  expected,  was  to  be  postponed  for  many  centuries,  and  not  to 
take  place  till  an  entirely  different  state  of  things  had  entered. 
For,  in  the  prophecy,  the  calamities  announced  are  not  merely 
predicted  as  events,  but  threatened  as  Divine  judgments  for  the 
sins  of  that  particular  period ;  and  if  they  were  not  inflicted  in 
connection  with  that  period,  they  were  plainly  not  inflicted  at 
all ;  the  penalties  threatened  against  the  prevailing  sinf  illness 
were  not  enforced ;  the  prophecy,  as  it  stands  here,  lies  unful 
filled.  Besides,  when  the  prophet  so  distinctly  indicates  a  cer 
tain  series  of  judgments,  and  so  solemnly  and  repeatedly  declares 
that  the  time  was  close  at  hand  for  their  taking  effect, — if,  after 
all,  they  were  not  to  take  effect  till  seven  hundred  years  had 
elapsed,  and  the  condition  of  things  in  Israel  had  become  so 
essentially  changed  that  the  special  characteristics  here  given 
— the  copying  after  the  ways  of  the  heathen,  and  the  erection  of 
many  altars — were  precisely  those  most  carefully  avoided  at  that 
later  period, — then  it  is  manifest  we  must  have  different  rules 
for  interpreting  such  portions  of  Scripture  from  those  we  would 
adopt  in  regard  to  any  other  book.  The  process  of  interpreta 
tion,  in  short,  becomes  a  matter  of  caprice,  and  the  manner  of 
fulfilment  is  simply  what  the  interpreter  himself  thinks  fit,  not 
what  the  writing  itself  seems  to  indicate.  If  the  prophetical 
scriptures  really  needed  such  arbitrariness  of  interpretation  to 
preserve  their  conformity  with  the  course  of  things,  sceptics 
would  require  nothing  more  to  justify  their  unbelief.  But  in  the 
present  case  it  is  merely  the  interpreter,  and  not  the  prophetic 
word,  that  is  at  fault.  Amid  the  desolations  of  long  sieges  and 

1  See  also  chap.  xvii.  21,  where  the  remnant  of  the  people  of  the  very 
king  that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  to  carry  to  Babylon  is  expressly  said  to  be 
scattered  to  all  the  winds  of  heaven. 


76  EZEKIEL  VII. 

bloody  conquest,  produced  by  the  invading  hosts  of  the  Assy 
rians  and  Chaldeans,  beyond  all  doubt  one  large  portion  of  the 
people  perished  by  famine  and  pestilence,  and  another  large 
portion  by  the  sword  ;  and  that  the  remaining  portion  was  scat 
tered  into  many  countries,  and  even  amid  these  was  subjected  to 
ever-recurring  troubles  and  calamities,  is  as  certain  as  anything 
of  which  a  credible  record  has  been  handed  down  to  us  from 
ancient  times.  To  deny  this  is  at  once  to  throw  discredit  on  the 
plainest  utterances  of  prophecy,  and  bring  into  doubt  the  most 
unquestionable  facts  of  history. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

LAMENTATION   OVER   THE   GUILT   AND    FALL   OF  ISRAEL. 

THIS  chapter  does  not  contain  anything  properly  new.  It  simply 
describes  the  mournful  feelings  and  reflections  which  the  pre 
ceding  revelations  of  guilt  and  judgment  had  awakened  in  the 
mind  of  the  prophet ;  and  it  hence  naturally  takes  the  form  of  a 
poetical  dirge  or  lamentation  over  the  unhappy  case  of  his  infatu 
ated  country.  Some  particular  words  and  allusions  require  ex 
planation;  but  otherwise  the  sentiments  uttered  are  so  simple 
and  appropriate,  that  no  comment  is  needed  to  exhibit  their 
import. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying  :  2.  And  thou,  son 
of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  to  the  land  of  Israel :  An  end !  the 
end  is  come  upon  the  four  corners  of  the  land  !  3.  Even  now  the  end  is 
upon  thee  ;  and  I  send  forth  mine  anger  against  thee ;  and  I  judge  thee 
according  to  thy  ways  ;  and  I  lay  upon  thee  all  thine  abominations.  4. 
And  mine  eye  shall  not  have  compassion  upon  thee,  nor  shall  I  pity  ;  for 
I  lay  thy  ways  upon  thee,  and  thine  abominations  shall  be  in  the  midst  of 
thee  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

5.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah:  Evil,  alone  evil,1  behold  it  cometh.  6.  An 
end  cometh — come  is  the  end  :  it  waketh  for  thee,  lo  !  it  cometh.  7.  The 
morning  has  come  to  thee,2  0  inhabitant  of  the  land  ;  the  time  has  come  ; 
the  day  is  near,  the  day  of  distress,  and  there  is  no  brightness  upon  the 

1  It  might  be  rendered  singular,  or  remarkable  evil,  for  in  that  sense  DHN 
is  here  plainly  taken,  as  of  a  thing  by  itself,  sui  generis.     So  also  at  Job 
xxiii.  12  ;  Cant.  vi.  9. 

2  The  morning,  n^BS? ;  this  is  a  word  of  very  doubtful  import  and  deriva 
tion,  and  there  is  great  diversity  among  commentators  as  to  the  proper  way 
of  rendering  it.     The  most  probable  sense,  however,  is  that  adopted  by  our 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  GUILT  AND  FALL  OF  ISRAEL.          77 

mountains.1  8.  Already  am  I  about  to  pour  out  my  fury  upon  thee  ;  and  I 
accomplish  mine  anger  upon  thee,  and  I  judge  thee  according  to  thy  ways, 
and  I  lay  upon  thee  all  thy  abominations.  9.  And  mine  eye  spares  not,  nor 
pities  ;  according  to  thy  ways  I  lay  upon  thee  ;  and  thy  abominations  shall 
be  in  the  midst  of  thee  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  it  is  I  Jehovah  that  smiteth. 
10.  Behold  the  day !  Behold  it  cometh  !  The  morning  goeth  forth;  the 
rod  sprouts ;  pride  blossoms.  11.  Violence  is  risen  up  for  a  rod  of  the  wicked  ; 
there  is  no  more  of  them  (the  wicked),  nor  of  their  store,  nor  of  their  anxiety, 
nor  is  there  any  beauty  in  them.2  12.  The  time  is  come,  the  day  is  at  hand  ; 
let  not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller  mourn,  for  wrath  is  upon  all  its  (the 
land's)  store.  13.  For  the  seller  shall  not  return  to  the  sold  possession, 
although  he  should  still  live  among  the  living,  for  the  vision  is  upon  all  its 
store  :  he  shall  not  return,  and  no  one  by  his  iniquity  shall  invigorate  his  life.3 

translators,  aurora,  the  morning — a  sense  which  has  been  preserved  both  ill 
the  Syriac  and  the  Chaldee.  Gesenius  renders,  The  turn  comes  to  thee, 
which  makes  a  suitable  meaning. 

1  No  brightness  upon  the  mountains:  taking  *]n,  with  Htivernick,  for  an 
unusual  form  of  *iin,  splendour,  brightness.     This  also  was  the  rendering  of 
Jerome,  who  supports  himself  by  the  authority  of  Theodotion.     The  whole 
passage  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  Joel  ii.  2 :  'A  day  of  darkness  and 
gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness,  as  the  morning  spread 
upon  the  mountains." 

2  What  is  meant  here  by  the  "rod  that  sprouts,"  "the  pride,  or  proud 
one,  that  blossoms,"  and  "  the  violence  that  rises  into  a  rod  of  the  wicked," 
is  not  the  evil  proceeding  to  its  utmost  length  within  Israel,  but  the  evil 
without  ripening  into  an  instrument  of  vengeance  for  Israel, — the  Babylonish 
power.     It  is  God's  rod  of  chastisement  for  punishing  the  wicked,  and  now, 
under  His  superintending  providence,  fast  assuming  that  appearance  of 
towering  pride  and  conquering  energy  which  would  speedily  put  in  exe 
cution  the  judgments  written. 

The  jion  in  ver.  11,  which  we  render  store  rather  than  multitude,  originally 
signifies  noise  or  tumult,  but  is  used  also  of  a  multitude  of  persons,  or  of 
heaps  of  riches  that  are  gotten  by  noisy,  bustling  activity.  It  is  in  this  latter 
sense  that  it  appears  to  be  used  by  the  prophet  in  this  and  the  two  follow 
ing  verses.  The  word  store,  which  suggests  something  of  care  and  trouble 
with  what  is  possessed,  expresses  the  meaning  more  nearly,  perhaps,  than 
any  other  word  in  our  language.  The  next  and  closely  related  word,  QH^n, 
is  best  understood  as  a  derivative  from  nftn  to  make  a  noise  or  tumult ; 
hence,  restless  application,  careful  solicitude  or  anxiety.  The  last  word, 
Hi,  is  now  commonly  taken  in  the  sense  of  attraction  or  beauty.  (Sec 
Ges.  Lex.) 

3  The  idea  expressed  in  vers.  12  and  13  can  only  be  understood  by  keeping 
in  view  the  law  respecting  the  year  of  jubilee,  as  recorded  in  Lev.  xxv.     Ac 
cording  to  that  law,  all  buying  and  selling  of  possessions  in  Israel  was  bounded 
by  this  ever-recurring  season  of  release  ;  for  then  every  one  returned  to  his 
proper  possession,  though  he  might  in  the  interval  have  been  obliged  to  part 
with  it.     But  now,  says  the  prophet,  there  is  to  be  a  suspension  of  all  such 
transactions :  neither  may  the  purchaser  rejoice  in  what  he  has  got,  nor  the 


78  EZEKIEL  VII. 

14.  Let  them  blow  with  the  trumpet,1  and  get  all  in  readiness ;  yet  there 
is  none  to  go  forth  to  battle,  for  my  wrath  is  upon  all  its  store.  15.  The 
sword  without,  and  the  famine  and  pestilence  within  ;  he  that  is  in  the  field 
shall  die  by  the  sword,  and  he  that  is  in  the  city,  famine  and  pestilence  shall 
devour  him.  16.  And  let  those  escape  that  do  escape,  and  they  shall  be  upon 
the  mountains  like  doves  of  the  valleys,  all  of  them  sighing,  each  one  for  his 
iniquity.  17.  All  hands  shall  be  faint  and  all  knees  shall  become  water.  18. 
And  they  shall  gird  on  sackcloth,  and  horror  shall  be  a  covering  for  them  ; 
and  to  all  faces  there  shall  be  shame,  and  upon  all  heads  baldness.  19.  Their 
silver  they  shall  cast  into  the  streets,  and  their  gold  shall  be  for  filth  ;  their 
silver  and  their  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
anger,  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls,  nor  fill  their  bowels,  for  it  is  the  stumbling- 
block  of  their  iniquity.  20.  And  his  beautiful  ornament  he  has  used  for 
pride,  and  the  images  of  their  abominations,  their  detestable  things,  they 
have  made  in  it ;  therefore  do  I  give  it  to  them  for  filth.  21.  And  I  give 
it  into  the  hands  of  strangers  for  a  prey,  and  to  the  wicked  of  the  earth  for 
a  spoil,  and  they  shall  profane  it.  22.  And  I  turn  away  my  face  from 
them,  and  they  profane  my  secret  place  (my  sanctuary),  and  robbers  come 
into  it  and  profane  it.  23.  Make  a  chain,  for  the  land  is  full  of  murderous 
judgment,  and  the  city  full  of  violence.  24.  And  I  cause  wicked  nations  to 
come,  and  they  possess  their  houses ;  and  I  make  the  loftiness  of  the  strong 
to  cease,  and  their  sanctuaries  shall  be  profaned.2 

distressed  debtor  mourn  over  what  he  has  been  constrained  to  sell ;  the  vision 
of  coming  wrath  stretches  over  all  that  can  be  made  matter  of  merchandise ; 
and  even  though  the  seller  may  live  to  see  the  year  of  jubilee,  yet  he  shall  not 
be  able  to  return  to  his  sold  possession,  for  one  Sabbath  of  rest  alone  remains 
for  the  land, — that  which  it  is  to  enjoy  in  the  absence  of  all  its  inhabitants 
(Lev.  xxvi.  34,  etc. ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21).  "And  no  one,"  adds  this  prophet, 
in  words  that  have  seldom  been  correctly  rendered,  from  the  allusion  not 
having  been  distinctly  apprehended,  "  no  one  by  his  iniquity  shall  invigorate 
(or  strengthen)  his  life."  The  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord  generally,  and  in  par 
ticular  the  Sabbath  of  the  year  of  jubilee,  brought  a  kind  of  revivification  to 
the  whole  commonwealth  of  Israel ;  the  disorders  and  troubles  that  from 
time  to  time  crept  in  were  then  rectified,  and  the  enervated  or  diseased  state 
of  the  body  politic  sprung  up  again  into  renewed  health  and  vigour.  But 
what  the  Lord  thus  provided  for  being  done  by  His  own  beneficent  arrange 
ments,  let  no  one  think  he  can  himself  do  by  his  iniquity;  from  such  a  source 
no  such  strengthening  or  invigoration  of  life  can  be  derived;  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  this  very  iniquity  which  is  bringing  all  to  desolation  and  ruin. 

1  "  Let  them  blow  with  the  trumpet,"  etc.     The  meaning  is:  when  the 
moment  of  danger  arrives  that  is  now  at  hand,  they  may  set  themselves 
to  meet  it  with  warlike  preparation  ;  let  them  do  so  if  they  please,  it  will 
be  of  no  avail ;  for  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  set  against  them,  and  He  will 
strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  men  of  war,  and  render  all  their  efforts 
fruitless.     The  coming  desolation  was  inevitable,  and  it  would  be  the  part 
of  wisdom  to  consult  for  safety  by  flight,  not  by  resistance  ;  even  that  a 
few  only  would  be  able  to  accomplish,  and  in  the  midst  of  deep  lamenta 
tions  and  manifold  distresses. 

2  In  vers.  19-24,  a  threefold  example  is  given  of  the  Divine  lex  taUoms. 
But  we  must  first  explain,  in  regard  to  the  vny  'OV  in  ver.  20,  his  beautiful 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  GUILT  AND  FALL  OF  ISRAEL.  79 

25.  A  close  comes,  and  they  seek  for  peace,  and  there  is  none.  26.  Woe 
upon  woe  shall  come,  and  rumour  shall  be  upon  rumour,  and  they  shall  seek 
a  prophet's  vision  ;  and  the  law  shall  perish  from  the  priest,  and  counsel  from 
the  ancients.  27.  The  king  shall  mourn,  and  the  prince  be  clothed  with  de 
solation,  and  the  hands  of  the  people  of  the  land  shall  be  troubled  ;  after  their 
ways  will  I  do  unto  them,  and  according  to  their  judgments  will  I  judge  them, 
and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE   IMAGE    OF   JEALOUSY   AND    OTHER   ABOMINATIONS   AT 
JERUSALEM. 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth  year,  in  the  sixth  (month),  in  the 
fifth  of  the  month,  I  was  sitting  in  my  house,  and  the  elders  of  Judah  were 
sitting  before  me,  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  fell  upon  me  there.  2. 

ornament,  that  we  differ  from  Hav.  and  Hitzig,  and  indeed  the  majority  of 
recent  commentators,  and  agree  with  some  earlier  ones  and  Hengstenberg 
(on  Dan.  ix.  27),  who  understand  it  of  the  temple.  The  gold  and  riches 
generally  of  the  people  might  doubtless  have  had  such  an  expression  applied 
to  them  ;  but,  as  used  here,  it  seems  plainly  to  point  to  something  that,  by 
way  of  eminence,  was  the  glory  and  ornament  of  the  nation,  and  which,  un 
doubtedly,  was  the  temple.  This,  it  is  said  here,  they  used  fltfAj  for  the 
nourishment  of  pride ;  and  much  the  same  thing  is  again  said  in  chap.  xxiv. 
21,  where  the  temple  is  expressly  called  "the  pride  of  their  strength." 
What  is  said  here,  too,  that  "in  it  they  made  (or  did)  their  abominations,'' 
exactly  applies  to  the  temple  ;  while  the  threatened  retaliation  of  profaning 
it,  at  the  close  of  ver.  21,  alone  suits  the  temple.  In  itself  it  was  their 
beautiful  ornament ;  but  they  had  first  turned  it  into  an  occasion  of  carnal 
glorying,  and  then  had  defiled  it  with  their  impurities,  whence  God  must 
outwardly  desecrate  it.  The  retaliation  then  proceeds  thus : — The  people 
have  abused  their  wealth,  by  making  idols  of  gold  and  silver,  and  all  manner 
of  ornaments  for  vainglorious  display,  so  that  it  has  become  "  the  stumbling- 
block  of  their  iniquity  ;  "  now,  it  was  to  be  seized  as  a  spoil  by  the  enemy, 
and,  in  respect  to  their  deliverance,  should  be  found  worthless  as  the  mire 
of  the  streets.  They  have  carried  their  abominations  into  God's  sanctuary, 
and  defiled  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  ;  now,  the  whole  is  to  be  laid 
open  to  the  unhallowed  feet  of  the  stranger,  and  robbers  are  to  be  sent  to 
walk  at  liberty  where  saints  only  should  have  been  permitted  to  enter. 
They,  by  their  daring  wickedness,  have  made  the  land  full  of  violence  and 
blood  ;  therefore  shall  they  themselves  be  bound  with  a  chain  by  the  ungodly 
heathen,  and  their  best  possessions  be  turned  into  the  prey  of  the  lawless 
and  the  profane.  "  Their  holy  places  shall  be  defiled,"  as  they  have  already 
defiled  miit e.  So  truly  was  God  to  do  to  them  according  to  their  ways,  and 
judge  them  according  to  their  judgments. 


80  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

And  Hooked,  and  behold,  a  resemblance  (i.e.  of  a  human  figure)  as  the  appear 
ance  of  fire :  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins  and  downwards,  fire  ;  and  from 
his  loins  and  upwards  as  the  appearance  of  light-splendour,  as  the  glitter  of 
Chashmal.  3.  And  he  put  forth  the  form  of  a  hand,  and  took  hold  of  me  by 
a  lock  of  my  head  ;  and  the  spirit  raised  me  up  between  the  earth  and  the 
heavens,  and  brought  me  to  Jerusalem  in  the  visions  of  God,  to  the  door  of 
the  inner  gate  that  looks  toward  the  north,  where  is  the  seat  of  the  image  of 
jealousy  that  provokes  to  jealousy.  4.  And  behold  there  was  the  glory  of 
the  God  of  Israel,  as  in  the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the  plain.  5.  And  he  said 
to  me,  Son  of  man,  lift  up  thine  eyes  now  by  the  north  way  (i.e.  the  line  of 
approach  through  the  north  gate) ;  and  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  northward,  and 
behold  on  the  north  at  the  gate  of  the  altar  this  image  of  jealousy,  at  the 
entrance.  6.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  are  doing? 
the  great  abominations  which  the  house  of  Israel  are  practising  here,  that  I 
should  go  far  off  from  my  sanctuary?  And  yet  turn  again,  thou  shalt  see 
greater  abominations.  7.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  court ;  and 
I  looked,  and  behold  there  was  a  hole  in  the  wall.  8.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son 
of  man,  dig  now  in  the  wall ;  and  I  dug  in  the  wall,  and  behold  a  door.  9. 
And  he  said  to  me,  Come  and  see  the  evil  abominations  which  they  are  prac 
tising  here.  10.  And  I  came  and  looked,  and  behold  every  form  of  creeping 
things,  and  abominable  beasts,  and  all  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  por 
trayed  everywhere  upon  the  wall  round  about.  11.  And  there  stood  before 
them  seventy  men,  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  Jaazaniah  the  son  of 
Shaphan,  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  each  man  with  his  censer  in  his  hand, 
and  the  prayer  (or  worship)  l  of  the  cloud  of  incense  ascending.  12.  And  he 
said  to  me,  Hast  thou  seen,  son  of  man,  what  the  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel 
are  doing  in  the  dark,  every  man  in  his  chambers  of  imagery?  2  for  they  say, 
Jehovah  does  not  see  us,  Jehovah  has  forsaken  the  earth  (or,  the  land). 

13.  And  he  said  to  me,  Turn  yet  again,  thou  shalt  see  greater  abomina 
tions  that  they  are  doing.  14.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  gate 
of  the  Lord's  house  toward  the  north,  and  behold  there  women  did  sit,  weep 
ing  for  Tammuz.  15.  And  he  said  to  me,  Hast  thou  seen  ^  son  of  man  ? 
Turn  yet  again,  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations  than  these.  16.  And  he 
brought  me  to  the  inner  court  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  behold  at  the  door  of 
the  temple  of  the  Lord,  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  as  many  as  five-and- 
twenty  men,  with  their  back  toward  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  their  faces 
to  the  east,  and  they  themselves  worshipping  the  sun  toward  the  east.3  17. 


1  Our  translators  have  here  taken  iny  as  an  adjective,  rendering  it  thick. 
But  it  is  evidently  a  noun,  and  must  be  understood  either  generally  in  the 
sense  of  worship,  or  more  specially  in  that  of  prayer.     To  supplicate  or  pray 
is  the  common  meaning  of  the  verb,  and  in  Zeph.  iii.  10,  where  it  occurs  as  a 
noun,  it  is  in  the  sense  of ' '  suppliant, "  or  worshipper.    It  is  here  explanatory 
of  the  offering  of  incense,  which  was  a  symbol  of  the  highest  act  of  worship, 
believing  prayer,  which  those  elders  were  prostituting  to  the  basest  idolatry. 

2  The  chambers  of  imagery  were  so  called  from  being  painted  all  round 
with  the  images  referred  to  in  ver.  10  ;  and  they  are  called  each  man's  cham 
bers  of  imagery,  or  the  chambers  of  7m  imagery,  because  the  idolatrous  spirit 
of  each  had  its  representation  there,  and  made  the  chambers  what  they  were 
in  pollution. 

3  The  persons  mentioned  in  this  16th  verse  are  said  to  have  been  in  number 
D'H'f  JJ3>  about  twenty,  as  it  is  usually  put ;  but  in  such  a  description,  in 


VISION  OF  THE  IMAGE  OF  JEALOUSY.  81 

Hast  thou  seen  it,  son  of  man  ?  Is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  house  of  Judah  to 
do  the  abominations  which  they  commit  here  ?  For  they  have  filled  the  land 
with  violence,  and  have  returned  (i.e.  given  themselves  again)  to  provoke  me 
to  anger :  and,  lo,  they  put  the  branch  to  the  nose.1  18.  And  I  also  will  deal 
in  fury  ;  mine  eyes  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have  pity  ;  and  they  shall 
cry  in  mine  ear  with  a  loud  voice,  and  I  will  not  hear  them. 

A  NEW  stage  of  the  prophetic  agency  of  Ezekiel,  and  of  his 
spirit-stirring  communications  to  the  captives  on  the  banks  of 

numbers  and  names  alike  have  a  significance,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  number  here  was  meant  to  be  left  indefinite.  The  3  of  similitude, 
therefore,  must  be  taken  in  its  more  exact  sense  of  likeness  in  such  a  manner 
or  to  such  an  extent ;  he  saw  the  appearance  as  of  twenty  men,  as  many  as 
that.  To  express  the  act  of  homage  in  which  these  men  were  engaged, 
the  Hebrew  text  has  a  peculiar,  a  sort  of  corrupt  form  :  not  D^nfit^D,  but 
DrVinri^E) — a  slip  of  the  pen,  says  Ewald,  and  after  him  Hitzig.  But  with 
more  reverence  and  better  taste,  Lightfoot,  in  the  very  form  of  the  word,  saw 
a  reference  to  the  monstrous  abominations  the  men  were  practising.  To  him 
also  Havernick  assents,  perceiving  in  the  word  a  strong  irony  ;  as  if  the  pro 
phet  was  so  impressed  with  the  corruptness  of  the  service  he  was  describing 
that  he  instinctively  corrupted  the  word  usually  employed  to  express  acts  of 
homage  and  obeisance. 

1  It  is  impossible  to  determine  precisely  the  meaning  of  this  singular  ex 
pression,  "  they  put  the  branch  to  their  nose."  The  Septuagint  translator 
evidently  took  it  for  a  proverbial  expression,  indicating  a  scornful  or  con 
temptuous  behaviour :  "  And  lo !  these  are  as  persons  turning  up  the  nose  " 
(or  scorning).  The  other  more  ancient  translators  seem  also  to  have 
understood  it  as  expressive  of  insolent  or  contemptuous  feelings,  though  the 
exact  rendering  is  different ;  but  Jerome  took  it  literally,  and  supposed  it  to 
refer  to  the  use  of  palm  branches  in  the  worship  of  the  sun.  Various  devices 
have  been  fallen  upon  to  extract  a  plain  and  satisfactory  meaning  from  the 
words,  but  with  so  little  success  that  we  deem  it  enough  to  refer  to  the  two 
last.  Havernick  views  it  as  a  pointing  to  the  Adonis-festival ;  and  changing 
the  usual  meaning  of  the  two  principal  words,  translates :  ' '  And  lo !  they  send 
forth  the  mournful  ditty  to  their  anger"  (viz.  the  anger  they  are  provoking 
against  themselves).  But  Hitzig,  who  justly  rejects  this  fanciful  interpreta 
tion,  and  takes  m'lttt  in  the  sense,  not  of  a  branch,  but  of  a  pruning-knife, 
renders  :  "  And  lo  !  they  are  applying  the  knife  to  their  nose," — the  people 
being  silently  likened  to  a  vine,  and  their  nose  to  a  branch,  which  they  were 
themselves  by  their  infatuated  policy  cutting  off  !  Had  it  been  their  throat 
or  their  head  to  which  the  knife  was  applied,  one  could  have  seen  seme 
shadow  of  probability  in  the  idea,  but  none  as  it  is.  Besides,  the  sense  ascribed 
to  the  word  in  question  is  quite  arbitrary,  as  it  never  occurs  but  in  the  sense 
of  a  branch,  especially  a  vine-branch,  as  in  chap.  xv.  2.  From  the  connec 
tion  in  which  the  clause  stands,  one  would  expect  it  to  denote  something  that 
rendered  their  sinful  ways  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  God ;  and  as  nothing  would 
more  readily  do  this  than  feelings  of  fancied  security  or  insolent  scorn,  so 

F 


82  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

the  Chebar,  opens  with  this  chapter,  and  proceeds  onwards  in 
an  uninterrupted  strain  to  the  end  of  the  eleventh.  These  four 
chapters  form  one  discourse  (as  the  preceding  portion  had  also 
done,  from  chap.  iii.  12  to  the  close  of  chap,  vii.),  and  a  discourse 
somewhat  more  specific  in  its  character  and  bearing  than  the 
revelations  previously  made.  The  vision  of  the  siege  and  of  the 
iniquity-bearing,  described  in  chap,  iv.,  had  respect  to  the 
covenant-people  generally — including,  indeed,  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  yet  so  as  also  to  comprehend  the  scattered  portions  of 
Judah  and  Israel.  This,  too,  was  the  case  with  the  vision  of  the 
shaven  hair,  and  its  foreshadowing  desolations,  contained  in  chap, 
v.-vii.  The  burden  there  delivered  was  an  utterance  of  Divine 
judgments  against  the  whole  covenant-people  on  account  of  sin; 
because,  having  been  planted  as  the  witnesses  and  heralds  of 
God's  truth  in  the  midst  of  the  nations,  they  had  themselves 
fallen  before  the  heathen  corruptions,  which  it  was  their  special 
calling  to  have  resisted  to  the  uttermost.  Therefore  in  just 
retribution  for  the  betrayal  of  God's  cause  into  the  enemies' 
hands,  the  heathen  were  become  his  instruments  of  vengeance, 
to  inflict  on  the  whole  house  of  Israel  the  various  forms  of  a 
severe  arid  prolonged  chastisement.  But  now,  in  the  section  of 
prophecy  which  commences  with  chap,  viii.,  the  people  of  Jeru 
salem,  and  the  small  remnant  of  Judah  who,  under  Zedekiah, 
continued  to  hold  a  flickering  existence  in  Canaan,  form  the  im 
mediate  object  of  the  prophet's  message,  not  only  as  apart  from 
the  Babylonish  exiles,  but  even  as  standing  in  a  kind  of  contrast 
to  them.  And  it  is  of  essential  moment  to  a  proper  understand 
ing  of  the  purport  of  the  vision,  that  we  rightly  apprehend  and 
estimate  the  circumstances  which  led  to  so  partial  and  specific 
a  direction  in  the  message  now  delivered. 

In  the  sixth  year  of  the  captivity,  the  sixth  month,  and  the 
fifth  day  of  the  month,  the  prophet  was  sitting,  we  are  told,  in 
his  own  house  ;  and  the  elders  of  Judah,  namely,  of  that  portion 
of  Judah  who  sojourned  with  him  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar, 
sat  before  him.  No  express  reason  is  assigned  for  their  sitting 
there,  though  we  can  have  little  doubt  that  it  was  for  the  purpose 
of  receiving  from  his  lips  some  communication  of  the  Divine  will. 
The  Lord  also  was  present,  to  impart  suitable  aid  to  his  servant ; 

the  likelihood  is,  as  the  Septuagint  understood,  that  the  "putting  the  branch 
to  the  nose,"  was  a  proverbial  expression  for  something  of  that  nature. 


VISION  OF  THE  IMAGE  OF  JEALOUSY.  83 

but  lo  1  instead  of  prompting  him  to  address  his  speech  directly 
to  those  before  him,  the  Spirit  carried  him  away  in  the  visions  of 
God  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  that  he  might  obtain  an  insight 
into  the  state  of  corruption  prevalent  there,  and  might  learn  the 
mind  of  God  respecting  it.  The  message  delivered  to  the  elders 
who  sat  around  him  consisted  mainly  in  the  report  of  what  he 
witnessed  and  heard  in  those  Divine  visions  ;  and  it  falls  into 
two  parts, — the  account  given  of  the  reigning  abominations  con 
tained  in  chap,  viii.,  and  the  dealings  of  judgment  and  of  mercy 
which  were  to  be  pursued  toward  the  respective  parties  in  Israel, 
as  unfolded  in  the  three  succeeding  chapters. 

Now  what  should  have  led  the  prophet  to  throw  his  message 
into  such  a  form  as  this,  but  that  some  connection  existed 
between  the  exiles  of  Chebar  and  the  remnant  in  Jerusalem, 
which  made  the  report  of  what  more  immediately  belonged  to 
the  one  a  seasonable  and  instructive  communication  to  the 
other  1  We  formerly  had  occasion  to  notice,  that  among  the 
exiled  portion  there  were  some  who  still  looked  hopefully  toward 
Jerusalem,  and,  so  far  from  believing  things  there  to  be  on 
the  verge  of  ruin,  were  persuaded  that  ere  long  the  way  would 
be  opened  up  for  their  own  return  thither  in  peace  and  comfort. 
Among  those  also  who  were  still  resident  in  Jerusalem  and 
its  neighbourhood,  it  appears  there  were  some  who  not  only 
looked  upon  themselves  as  secure  in  their  position,  but  eyed 
their  exiled  brethren  with  a  kind  of  haughty  indifference  or 
contempt,  as  if  these  had  no  longer  anything  in  common  with 
them  !  That  it  was  this  latter  state  of  feeling  which  more 
immediately  led  to  the  present  interview  between  the  elders  and 
the  prophet,  and  the  revelations  which  ensued,  we  may  not 
doubtfully  gather  from  the  allusion  made  to  it  near  the  close  of 
the  vision  (chap.  xi.  15),  where  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
are  represented  as  saying  to  the  exiles,  "  Get  you  far  (rather, 
Be  ye  far,  continue  in  your  state  of  separation  and  distance) 
from  the  Lord ;  unto  us  is  this  land  given  in  possession."  As 
much  as  to  say,  "It  may  well  befit  you  to  be  entertaining 
thoughts  of  evil  and  dark  forebodings  of  the  future ;  your  out 
cast  condition  cuts  you  off  from  any  proper  interest  in  God,  and 
renders  such  sad  anticipations  natural  and  just.  Abide  as  you 
are;  but  as  for  us,  we  dwell  near  to  God,  and  by  his  good  hand 
upon  us  have  the  city  and  land  of  our  fathers  in  sure  possession." 


84  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  this  taunting  declaration  of  their  own 
fancied  superiority  and  assured  feeling  of  safety  had  been  called 
forth  by  the  tidings  rej£jiing  Jerusalem  of  the  awful  judgments 
announced  in  Ezekiel's  earlier  predictions;  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  express  and  pointed  reference  made  here  to  that  declaration 
leaves  little  room  to  doub£"that  the  rumour  of  it  had  been  heard 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  and  had  led  the  elders  of  Judah  to 
present  themselves  in  the  house  of  the  prophet.  For  in  their 
unhappy  circumstances,  the  knowledge  of  such  thoughts  and 
feelings  being  entertained  toward  them  at  Jerusalem  must 
have  exercised  a  most  depressing  influence  on  their  minds,  and 
could  not  but  seem  an  adequate  occasion  for  their  endeavouring 
to  ascertain  the  mind  of  the  Lord  as  between  them  and  their 
countrymen  in  Judea. 

Eaised,  therefore,  by  the  Spirit  into  a  state  of  Divine  ecstasy, 
the  prophet  forthwith  beheld  in  vision  the  Lord  of  glory,  though 
in  human  form,  yet  glowing  with  celestial  fire  from  his  loins 
downwards,  and  radiant  with  the  splendour  of  light  in  the  upper 
parts;  that  is,  as  well  explained  by  Zlillig  at  Eev.  viii.  2,  "below, 
toward  the  earth,  the  person  on  the  throne  appeared  in  the  glow 
ing  ire  of  his  function  as  judge  and  avenger,  above,  in  the  pure 
splendour  of  his  calm,  untroubled,  heavenly  majesty."  In  the 
presence  of  this  glorious  majesty  the  prophet  was  suddenly  trans 
ported,  by  a  Divine  hand,  to  the  north  entrance  into  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem.  There,  at  the  altar-gate,  as  it  is  called  in  ver.  5 
(because  the  gate  that  opened  into  the  inner  court,  and  led 
straight  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering),  he  sees  in  vision  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  as  it  had  formerly  appeared  to  him  on  the  plain  of 
Chebar/Viz.  in  the  parts  standing  nearest  to  the  earth,  the  Divine 
likeness  with  the  appearance  of  fire,  indicating  that  he  came  in 
the  fervent  heat  of  his  indignation;  while  still  the  upper  parts  of 
the  form  presented  the  aspect  of  the  holy  majesty  of  heaven  in 
its  pure  and  unsullied  brightness.  The  vision  appeared  a  little 
to  the  north  of  "  the  seat  of  the  image  of  jealousy  which  provok- 
eth  to  jealousy."  What  precisely  is  to  be  understood  by  this 
image  of  jealousy  has  long  been  matter  of  dispute,  or  rather  of 
various  conjecture,  among  commentators.  The  more  common 
opinion  has  been  that  Baal  was  meant,  while  some  have  under 
stood  it  rather  of  the  Syrian  Venus,  called  the  Aschera  or  Astarte 
(the  word  used  in  the  original  for  that  Queen  of  Heaven  in 


VISION  OF  THE  IMAGE  OF  JEALOUSY.  85 

2  Kings  xxi.  3,  7,  xxiii.  4,  7,  where,  unhappily,  the  translation 
grove  has  been  adopted  in  our  version).  Havernick,  however, 
has  recently  advanced  the  opinion  that  it  was  an  image  in  wax 
or  clay  of  the  Tammuz  or  Adonis  mentioned  afterwards,  and 
called  "the  image  that  provoketh  to  jealousy,"  with  special  refer 
ence  to  the  youthful  and  attractive  beauty  of  the  object  it  repre 
sented  ;  and  that  all  the  scenes  of  idolatrous  worship  described 
in  the  chapter  were  but  the  several  and  successive  portions  of 
the  grand  festival  held  shortly  before  at  Jerusalem  in  honour  of 
Adonis.  Some  show  of  support  for  this  idea  is  derived  from  the 
view  presented  of  the  Adonis-festival  by  recent  writers  on  the 
mythology  of  the  ancients ;  but  it  is  still  entirely  fanciful,  and 
on  many  accounts  to  be  rejected.  For,  first,  it  is  against  all 
probability  to  suppose,  that  when  disclosing  the  abominations 
which  were  ready  to  bring  down  the  consuming  judgments  of 
Heaven  upon  the  land,  those  only  should  have  been  delineated 
which  were  connected  with  a  single  occasion,  and  that  the  festival 
of  a  comparatively  inferior  object  of  idol-worship.  Then  the 
idolatrous  scenes  described  one  after  another  have  manifestly 
the  appearance  of  separate  and  cumulative  proofs  of  the  people's 
appetite  for  heathenish  pollutions,  rather  than  the  united  and 
consecutive  parts  of  some  one  religious  festival.  And  still 
further,  as  the  scenes  in  question  were  those  submitted  to  the 
eye  of  the  prophet  in  the  visions  of  God,  what  we  are  naturally 
led  to  expect  in  them  is,  not  a  plain  matter-of-fact  description  of 
things  literally  enacted  at  any  set  time  in  the  temple,  but  rather 
a  combined  and  concentrated  view  of  the  prevailing  idolatries 
gathered  from  every  side,  and  portrayed,  as  in  one  dark  and 
revolting  picture,  within  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  That  temple 
was  the  image  as  well  as  the  centre  of  the  whole  kingdom.  As 
the  heart  of  the  nation  had  its  seat  there,  so  there  also,  in  the 
mongrel  and  polluted  character  of  the  worship  celebrated,  the 
guilt  of  the  people  found  its  representation ;  and  hence,  when 
the  object  was  to  give  a  clear  and  palpable  exhibition  of  the  cry 
ing  abominations  that  existed  in  the  land,  the  scene  was  most 
fitly  laid  in  the  temple,  and  assumed  the  form  of  things  seen  and 
transacted  in  its  courts.  But  we  are  no  more  to  regard  the 
things  themselves  in  the  precise  form  and  combination  here 
given  to  them,  as  all  actually  meeting  together  at  any  particular 
moment  in  the  temple- worship,  and  simply  transcribed  by  the 


86  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

prophet  from  the  occurrences  of  real  life,  than  to  regard  the 
instructions  that  immediately  follow — to  set  a  mark  for  preser 
vation  on  the  foreheads  of  some,  and  to  destroy  the  rest  with 
weapons  of  slaughter — as  actually  put  in  force  at  the  time  and 
in  the  manner  there  described.  In  both  cases  alike  the  descrip 
tion  is  of  what  took  place  in  the  visions  of  God  ;  therefore  not 
the  mere  outward  and  naked  literalities  which  the  bodily  eye 
might  have  perceived,  and  the  pen  of  history  noted  down,  but  a 
representation  so  contrived  and  arranged  as  might  serve  most 
fitly  to  express  to  the  apprehension  of  the  mind,  and  render  in 
a  manner  palpable  to  the  sight,  the  realities  of  Israel's  guilt  and 
judgment.1 

While,  then,  we  see  ample  reason  for  holding  that  by  "the 
image  of  jealousy  "  the  statue  of  Adonis  is  not  to  be  understood, 
we  are  further  disposed  to  think,  from  the  ideal  character  of  the 
representation,  that  it  should  not  be  limited  to  any  specific  deity. 
The  prophet,  we  are  persuaded,  purposely  made  the  expression 
general,  as  it  was  not  so  much  the  particular  idol  placed  on  a 
level  with  Jehovah,  as  the  idol-worship  itself  which  he  meant  to 
designate  and  condemn.  So  sunk  and  rooted  were  the  people  in 
the  idolatrous  feeling,  that  where  Jehovah  had  an  altar,  there 
some  idol-form  must  have  its  "  seat" — a  fixed  residence,  to  de- 

1  Entirely  similar  in  principle,  though  differing  in  the  particular  form,  as 
also  much  briefer  in  detail,  is  the  representation  given  in  Amos  ix.  1 :  "  I 
saw  the  Lord  standing  upon  the  altar  ;  and  he  said,  Smite  the  lintel  of  the 
door,  that  the  posts  may  shake :  and  cut  them  in  the  head  all  of  them,"  etc., 
where,  though  the  work  of  judgment  had  respect  to  the  house  of  Israel  as 
well  as  Judah — to  the  whole  covenant-people — yet  it  is  upon  the  one  altar 
at  Jerusalem  that  the  Lord  is  seen  in  vision  coming  forth  to  execute  it,  and 
as  if  the  people  were  all  assembled  there,  appearing  to  bring  the  temple  in 
ruins  upon  them.  The  reason  is  that  there,  as  the  services  of  the  people 
should  have  been  ever  coming  up  for  acceptance  and  blessing,  so  now  their 
abominations  were  lying  unpardoned,  and  crying  for  vengeance,  though  in 
reality,  and  in  point  of  space,  they  had  mostly  been  committed  elsewhere. 
Therefore  from  that,  as  from  the  place  of  collective  guilt,  the  work  of  judg 
ment  proceeds,  both  in  Amos  and  here  also  in  the  next  chapter  ;  only,  while 
Amos  simply  supposes  the  sins  to  be  all  clustered  around  the  altar  and 
temple,  Ezekiel  first  gives  an  embodied  representation  of  them  as  all  appear 
ing  and  nestling  there.  Compare  also  the  visions  of  a  somewhat  marked  de 
scription,  such  as  Jacob's  (Gen.  xxviii.  xxxi.  11-13)  ;  Pharaoh's  (Gen.  xli.)  ; 
Daniel's  and  Nebuchadnezzar's  (Dan.  ii.  iv.  vii.)  ;  in  all  of  which  there  was 
given  an  ideal  picture,  not  a  prosaic  account  of  the  things  to  which  they 
referred. 


VISION  OF  THE  IMAGE  OF  JEALOUSY.  87 

note  that  it  was  no  occasional  thing  its  being  found  there,  but  a 
regular  and  stated  arrangement.  And  whatever  it  might  for 
the  time  be, — whether  it  was  Baal,  or  Moloch,  or  Astarte  that 
the  image  represented, — as  it  was  necessarily  set  up  for  a  rival 
of  Jehovah,  to  share  with  him  in  the  worship  to  which  he  alone 
was  entitled,  it  might  justly  be  denominated  "the  image  of 
jealousy,"  as  it  provoked  that  jealousy,  and  called  for  that  visita 
tion  of  wrath,  against  which  the  Lord  had  so  solemnly  fore 
warned  his  people  in  the  second  commandment.  That  "he 
should  go  far  off  from  his  sanctuary  "  was  so  certainly  the  result 
of  such  an  abomination,  that  in  ver.  6  it  is  represented  as  its 
very  aim  ;  and  the  moment  of  his  departure  must  also  be  the 
signal  for  the  execution  of  vengeance. 

That  we  do  right  in  thus  taking  into  account  the  ideal  ele 
ment  in  the  representation  appears  yet  more  obviously  from  the 
next  scene,  of  which  no  clear  and  satisfactory  explanation  can 
be  rendered  but  by  ascribing  to  some  of  the  leading  traits  a  non- 
literal  or  symbolical  meaning.  Being  commanded  to  turn  again, 
that  he  might  see  other  great  abominations,  the  prophet  pre 
sently  finds  himself  at  the  door  of  the  court,  where  he  espies  a 
hole  in  the  wall,  and  after  digging  as  he  was  enjoined,  he  dis 
covers  a  door  (a  door,  of  course,  not  patent  or  accessible  from 
without,  as  it  only  became  visible  when  the  wall  was  cleared 
away) ;  and  entering  within,  he  saw  "  every  form  of  creeping 
things,  and  abominable  beasts,  and  all  the  idols  of  the  house  of 
Israel  portrayed  upon  the  wall  round  about.  And  there  stood 
before  him  seventy  men  of  the  ancients  (elders)  of  the  house  of 
Israel ;  and  in  the  midst  of  them  stood  Jaazaniah,  the  son  of 
Shaphan,  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his  hand  ;  and  the  prayer 
of  a  cloud  of  incense  went  up."  Now,  that  the  prophet  could  not 
mean  this  to  be  understood  of  any  actual  exhibition  that  was 
wont  to  be  made  in  the  temple  is  evident,  first,  from  the  entire 
seclusion  of  the  chamber  in  which  the  idolatrous  scene  is  laid, — a 
recess  so  hidden  from  public  view,  and  so  closely  walled  up,  that 
an  entrance  could  only  be  made  good  by  a  process  of  digging ; 
an  inexplicable  mystery  if  understood  as  a  chamber  actually  fre 
quented  by  temple-worshippers,  but  plain  enough  if  regarded  as 
a  symbol  of  the  conscious  guilt  and  cunning  secrecy  with  which 
the  foul  rites  in  question  were  sought  after  among  the  covenant- 
people.  It  is  also  evident  from  the  kind  and  variety  of  the  ob- 


88  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

jects  said  to  have  been  portrayed  against  the  wall, — "  every  form 
of  creeping  things,  and  all  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel," — 
necessarily  a  huge  hyperbole  if  taken  literally,  but  a  perfectly 
intelligible  trait  if  regarded  as  an  ideal  representation  of  the 
prevailing  tendency  to  idolize  after  the  manner  of  Egypt,  where 
the  portraying  of  such  objects  was  so  usual,  and  at  the  same 
time  so  peculiar  to  that  country  among  the  nations  of  antiquity, 
that  it  might  with  the  utmost  propriety  be  given  as  the  charac 
teristic  mark  of  an  Egyptizing  spirit  in  religion.  It  is  evident, 
once  again,  from  the  persons  who  are  described  as  occupying  the 
chamber,  and  filling  it  with  the  incense  of  devotion — the  seventy 
elders.  A  reference  is  plainly  had  here  to  those  passages  in  the 
Pentateuch  where  the  same  number  of  elders  appear  in  connec 
tion  with  Israel,  and  especially  to  Ex.  xxiv.  1,  where  seventy 
elders  as  representatives  of  the  congregation  go  up  with  Moses 
to  the  mount,  to  behold  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  be  witnesses 
of  the  more  secret  transactions  which  related  to  the  establishment 
of  the  covenant.  By  mentioning,  therefore,  precisely  this  num 
ber  of  elders,  the  prophet  sets  before  us  a  representation  of  the 
whole  people, — an  ideal  representation,  and  of  such  a  kind  as  to 
indicate  the  strong  contrast  that  existed  between  former  and  pre 
sent  times,  the  original  seventy  being  employed  in  immediate 
connection  with  God's  glory  and  covenant,  while  these  here  were 
engaged  in  an  act  which  bespoke  the  dishonouring  of  God's  name 
and  the  virtual  dissolution  of  his  covenant.  To  render  the  con 
trast  still  more  palpable  between  what  was  and  what  should  have 
been,  the  prophet  singles  out  one  from  among  the  seventy,  and 
places  him  in  the  midst — Jaazaniah,  the  son  of  Shaphan.  This 
he  does  not  from  any  natural  or  official  superiority  in  that  per 
son  above  the  rest,  but  from  the  expressive  import  of  his  name, 
which  means  Jehovah  hears,  while  by  their  deeds  the  whole  com 
pany  were  intimating,  what  in  the  next  verse  they  are  reported 
to  have  said,  "  The  Lord  seeth  us  not,  the  Lord  hath  forsaken 
the  earth."  The  very  prominence  given  to  this  person  on  account 
of  his  name — the  representation  of  the  people  by  the  primitive 
number  of  seventy  elders—the  attributing  of  an  act  of  worship 
to  these  elders,  the  offering  of  incense  in  censers,  which  was  one 
of  the  most  distinctive  prerogatives  not  of  the  elders,  but  of  the 
priesthood — and  the  express  declaration  that  what  they  were  col 
lectively  doing  there  was  just  what  "  every  man  was  doing  in  the 


VISION  OF  THE  CHAMBERS  OF  IMAGERY.  89 

chambers  of  his  imagery," — all  plainly  denote  that  it  is  no  actual 
service  which  is  here  described,  but  an  ideal  or  pictorial  repre 
sentation  of  the  debasing  idolatries  which  the  people  had  begun 
secretly  to  practise  in  their  own  dens  of  pollution,  beyond  what 
they  were  willing  to  own  and  exhibit  in  the  light  of  day.  In 
a  word,  we  are  told  their  idolatrous  spirit  had  outrun  even 
their  public  defections,  and  was  already  drinking  up  the  rank 
poison  of  Egypt,  though  in  nothing  did  the  transactions  of  their 
earlier  history  raise  a  louder  and  more  emphatic  protest  than 
against  such  a  retrograding  to  the  foul  region  of  Egyptian 
idolatry.1 

From  the  secret  abominations  practised  in  the  chambers  of 
imagery,  the  prophet's  attention  was  next  turned  to  a  scene  in 
the  outer  court,  at  the  north  door,  where  he  beholds  women  sit 
ting  in  an  attitude  of  grief  and  weeping  for  Tammuz.  We  have 
the  explicit  testimony  of  Jerome  that  this  was  the  Hebrew  and 
Syriac  name  for  Adonis,  the  fancied  paramour  of  Venus,  who  was 
fabled  to  have  been  killed  by  a  boar,  and  restored  to  life  again  ;  in 
which  the  mystery  is  said  to  have  been  couched  of  the  sun's  yearly 
declension  and  return,  or,  more  generally,  nature's  annual  decay 
and  renovation.  However  that  may  have  been,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Adonis-festival,  which  had  first  its  original  seat  at 
Byblos  in  Phoenicia,  was  celebrated  by  doleful  lamentations,  as 
for  one  lost  or  dead,  and  then  by  extravagant  libidinous  rejoic 
ings,  on  again  finding  the  object  of  affection.  This  fantastical 
and  impure  piece  of  worship  bore  in  its  nature  so  strong  a 
resemblance  to  the  Egyptian  orgies  connected  with  the  lost  and 

1  How  little  the  commentators  have  succeeded  in  giving  any  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  leading  points  above  noticed,  on  the  simply  literal  plan, 
may  be  learned  from  the  solutions  of  the  latest  of  them,  Hitzig.  He  admits 
a  side  chamber  could  hardly  be  supposed  large  enough  to  hold  seventy  wor 
shippers  at  once,  but  then  it  was  only  in  spirit  the  prophet  saw  them  there 
together !  That  the  entrance  was  closed  up  by  a  wall  was  a  still  remaining 
proof  of  Josiah's  reformation ;  but,  no  doubt,  the  elders  had  some  private 
door  to  enter  by — as  if  the  prophet  could  not  have  discovered  that,  and  as  if 
now,  amid  the  corruptions  of  Zedekiah's  time,  they  needed  to  go  about  the 
matter  so  stealthily !  And  then,  in  regard  to  what  is  said  of  every  man's 
doing  so  "  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery,"  as  this  seems  to  point  to  separate 
scenes  of  idol- worship  enacted  in  private,  why,  most  likely  the  text  is  corrupt ; 
it  should  have  been  simply,  what  each  one  did  in  that  one  chamber  in  the 
dark  ! !  With  such  an  elastic  style  of  interpretation,  what  convenient  or 
wished-for  meaning  may  not  be  extracted  from  the  sacred  text? 


90  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

recovered  Osiris,  that  not  a  few  both  earlier  and  later  mytholo- 
gists  are  disposed  to  trace  the  matter  up  to  this  source ;  although 
there  seems  no  reason  to  question  the  Phoenician  caste  of  the 
superstition,  as  practised  in  Asia  and  Greece.  And  the  women 
seen  in  vision  by  the  prophet  sitting  and  weeping  at  the  outer 
gate  on  the  north,  betokened  that  it  had  now  also  found  its  way 
into  Judea.  It  was  but  a  fragment,  as  it  were,  of  the  idolatrous 
scene  which  met  his  eye,  but  enough  to  indicate,  in  accordance 
with  the  pictorial  style  of  the  whole  description,  that  this  Phoe 
nician  abomination  had  become  one  of  the  festering  sores  of 
Judah's  disease. 

But  turning  from  this,  the  prophet  is  once  more  directed  to 
another,  and  what  is  expressly  called  a  greater  abomination, — 
greater,  not  as  betokening  a  worse  idolatry,  but  implying,  on 
account  of  the  persons  and  the  place  connected  with  it,  a  more 
direct  and  flagrant  dishonour  to  God.     In  the  inner  court  of  the 
Lord's  house,  and  immediately  before  the  door  of  the  temple, 
between  the  porch  and  the  altar, — where  only  the  most  solemn 
services   should  have  been  conducted,  and  where  the  priests 
never  advanced  but  on  some  rare  and  extraordinary  occasions, 
when  the  most  earnest  cries  were  to  be  put  forth  for  sparing  mercy 
(Joel  ii.  17), — there  the  prophet  sees  twenty-five  men.     The 
place  where  they  were  seen  could  be  trodden  only  by  the  priests ; 
and  beyond  doubt,  the  right  idea  was  expressed  by  Lightfoot 
(in  his  Chronica  Temporum),  when    he    understood  by  them 
the  leaders  of   the  twenty-four  classes  into  which  the  priests 
were  divided  by  David,  with  the  high  priest  at  their  head.     With 
reference,  apparently,  to  the  same  division,  and  the  presidency 
of  the  several  classes  naturally  connected  with  it,  Isaiah  speaks 
(chap,  xliii.  28)  of  "  the  princes  of  the  sanctuary,"  and  Jeremiah 
(chap.  xxxv.  4)  of  "  the  chamber  of  the  princes ;"  while  in  2 
Chron.  xxxvi.  14  we  not  only  read  of  "  the  chief  of  the  priests," 
but  are  also  told  of  their  having  «  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord 
which  he  hallowed  in  Jerusalem."     Therefore  twenty-five  men 
of  priestly  rank,  "  the  princes  of  the  sanctuary,"  would  be  the 
precise  number  to  represent  the  whole  priesthood,  just  as  the 
seventy  elders  were   the   proper   representation    of    the  whole 
people,  and  for  that  purpose  had  been  employed  in  an  earlier 
part  of  the  vision.     But  how  melancholy  the  appearance  pre 
sented  here  by  the  elite  of  the  priesthood !     Their  backs  toward 


VISION  OF  ABOMINATIONS  AT  JERUSALEM.  9 1 

the  temple,  at  the  very  threshold  of  which  they  stood  (the  re 
verse  position  of  all  devout  worshippers,  1  Kings  viii.  44 ;  Dan. 
vi.  10),  and  their  faces  toward  the  east,  doing  obeisance  to  the 
rising  sun  !  Thus  they  bore  witness  that  the  highest  places 
in  the  land  had  become  infected  with  the  Parsee  element 
of  fire-worship.  And  not  then,  indeed,  for  the  first  time ; 
for  in  the  reformation  effected  by  Josiah,  we  are  told  of  his 
putting  away  those  who  burnt  incense  to  the  sun,  and  moon, 
and  other  heavenly  bodies,  with  the  horses  and  chariots  that 
had  been  consecrated  to  the  sun  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5,  11).  But 
the  corruption  had  taken  too  deep  root  to  be  thus  destroyed  ;  it 
again  revived,  with  other  heathenish  customs,  and  now,  in  the 
days  of  Zedekiah,  had  attained  to  a  high  ascendancy. 

Thus,  from  the  various  scenes  that  met  the  eye  of  the  prophet 
in  his  ideal  walk  through  the  precincts  of  the  temple  at  Jeru 
salem,  it  was  but  too  clearly  manifest,  that  so  far  from  the  wor 
ship  of  God  being  preserved  there  in  its  purity,  the  land  had 
become  the  common  sink  of  heathenism.  Tit  ere  was  to  be  seen, 
side  by  side  with  the  altar  of  Jehovah,  the  image  of  the  Syrian 
lord  of  nature,  whether  known  by  the  name  of  Baal  or  Moloch, 
or  aught  besides,  the  abhorred  rival  of  heaven's  real  King ;  there 
also  was  the  Egyptian  beast-worship,  with  the  foul  rites  of  Phce- 
nician  licentiousness,  and  the  more  refined  but  still  idolatrous 
and  corrupting  services  of  the  Eastern  fire  or  sun  worship.  Yet 
even  these  heathenish  pollutions,  the  Lord  proceeds  to  testify  in 
the  ears  of  the  prophet,  were  not  enough  to  satisfy  the  people's 
depraved  appetite  for  evil ;  it  was  but  a  light  thing,  as  it  were, 
that  they  should  thus  dishonour  God  in  the  things  immediately 
connected  with  his  service ;  they  had,  besides,  filled  the  land 
with  violence,  trampling  as  flagrantly  upon  the  second  table  of 
the  law  in  their  dealings  one  toward  another,  as  by  their  hea 
thenish  abominations  they  were  trampling  on  the  first.  u  And 
they  have  returned,"  the  Lord  concludes,  a  to  provoke  me  to 
anger ;  and  lo  !  they  put  the  branch  to  their  nose.  Therefore 
will  I  also  deal  in  fury ;  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I 
have  pity ;  and  though  they  cry  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud  voice, 
yet  will  I  not  hear  them."  Even  the  most  fervent  supplications, 
such  as  those  recommended  by  Joel,  would  be  of  no  avail. 

But  to  revert  now  to  the  occasion  of  these  fearful  disclosures, 
how  does  this  state  of  heathenish  corruption  and  rampant  ini- 


92  EZEKIEL  VIII. 

quitj  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem  comport  with  the  proud  satisfac 
tion  the  people  there  are  represented  to  have  felt  regarding  their 
own  case,  as  compared  with  that  of  their  exiled  brethren  ?     It 
was  well  with  themselves,  they  had  been  saying,  because  they 
were  near  to  the  Lord,  and  this  made  them  sure  of  the  continued 
possession  of  the  land ;  while,  according  to  the  vision  now  deli 
neated,  they  seemed  to  be  rejoicing  in  anything  rather  than  the 
conscious  presence  of  God — nay,  were  giving  vent  to  the  impious 
sentiment  which  is  again,  with  marked  emphasis,  ascribed  to 
them  in  the  next  chapter,  "  The  Lord  seeth  us  not,  the  Lord 
hath  forsaken  the  earth."     There  was  certainly  a  deep  practical 
inconsistence  between  the  two  states  of  feeling  indicated,  if  tried 
by  the  truth  of  God's  word  ;  but  not  such  an  inconsistence  as 
ought  to  shake  our  belief,  or  even  greatly  excite  our  wonder. 
Among  the  false  religionists  of  our  Lord's  time,  the  very  same 
inconsistence  again  reappears,  only  somewhat  modified  and  chas 
tened  by  the  altered  circumstances  of  the  times.     In  them  also 
we  see  both  the  elements  above  noticed  very  prominently  dis 
played.     There  was  proud  self-complacence,  as  of  persons  who 
plumed  themselves  on  their  peculiar  nearness  to  God,  not  without 
feelings  of  settled  scorn  toward  such  as  seemed  to  stand  at  a 
remoter  distance.     Yet  along  with  this  there  was  the  absence  of 
any  real  love  to  God,  and  a  plentiful  distrust  of  his  power  and 
goodness,  appearing  in  their  vain  traditions,  their  secret  wicked 
ness,  their  fleshly  confidences,  their  manifold  idolatry  of  a  present 
world,  and  expectations  of  mere  earthly  deliverances ;  so  that 
with  the  most  perfect  truth  it  might  be  said  of  them,  they  were 
cherishing  the  spirit  and  doing  the  deeds  of  their  fathers  in  the 
days  of  Zedekiah.    And  wherever  religion  loses  its  true  childlike 
spirit  of  faith  and  love,  and  degenerates  into  a  superstition,  the 
same  practical  inconsistence  is  sure,  in  some  form  or  another,  to 
manifest  itself.     For  there  being  in  such  cases  no  genuine  love 
of  God  in  the  heart,  but  a  slavish  dread  of  him,  the  affections  of 
the  soul  will  naturally  flow  into  forbidden  channels,  while  the 
very  pains  and  services  to  which  it  is  prompted  by  that  slavish 
dread  will  as  naturally  tend  to  beget  a  feeling  of  presumptuous 
confidence  toward  God,  and  contemptuous    behaviour   toward 
those  who  take  another  mode  of  serving  him.     Is  not  this  pre 
cisely  what  we  see  in  the  deluded  votaries  of  Rome?     On  the 
one  hand  the  most  perfect  conviction  that  they  are  peculiarly  the 


VISION  OF  ABOMINATIONS  AT  JERUSALEM.  93 

people  of  God ;  and  on  the  other,  the  most  flagrant  corruptions 
of  the  simplicity  of  his  truth  and  worship,  ways  and  services,  such 
as  seem  rather  to  bespeak  their  sense  of  an  absent  or  angry,  than 
of  a  near  and  loving  Father.  Or  look  to  the  superstitious  man 
generally.  Did  not  Milton  correctly  delineate  him  when  he 
said,  "  In  very  deed  the  superstitious  man  by  his  good  will  is  an 
atheist  [since,  having  only  a  dread  of  God,  he  would  rather  that 
God  were  not,  and,  as  often  as  he  can,  strives  to  keep  God  away 
from  his  thoughts  and  feelings] ;  but  being  scared  from  thence 
by  the  pangs  and  gripes  of  a  boiling  conscience,  all  in  a  pudder 
he  shuffles  up  to  himself  such  a  God  and  such  a  worship  as  is 
most  agreeable  to  remedy  his  fear ;  which  fear  of  his,  as  also  is  his 
hope,  fixed  only  upon  the  flesh,  renders  likewise  the  whole  faculty 
of  his  apprehension  carnal ;  and  all  the  inward  acts  of  worship 
issuing  from  the  native  strength  of  the  soul  run  out  lavishly  to 
the  upper  skin,  and  there  harden  into  a  crust  of  formality  "  ?  In 
a  word,  the  inward  desires  and  spontaneous  movements  of  minds 
given  to  superstition,  as  well  as  many  of  their  outward  actions, 
virtually  declare  that  God — the  spiritual  and  holy  God  of  the 
Bible — either  does  not  exist,  or,  at  least,  is  not  near  enough  to 
regard  them  in  their  perverse  and  crooked  ways.  But  yet  if  any 
one  should  talk  to  them  of  salvation,  none  apparently  are  so  sure  of 
it ;  for  this  to  their  view  is  inseparable  from  the  formal  ritualism 
in  which  they  have  encrusted  themselves.  Such  a  religion  is  as 
vain  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  whole  genius  of  the  gospel.  We 
err  from  the  simplicity  of  the  faith  whenever  we  resort  to  other 
means  and  influences  for  obtaining  life  and  peace  to  the  soul 
than  those  which  God  has  himself  sanctioned  and  approved  in 
his  word.  And  we  err  not  less  plainly  from  its  spirit  of  child 
like  confidence  and  devoted  love,  if  we  are  not  giving  to  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  undivided  homage  of 
our  hearts,  and  habitually  realizing  his  gracious  presence  as  alike 
our  safeguard  from  evil,  and  our  most  inspiring  motive  to  faith 
fulness  in  every  good  work. 


94  EZEKIEL  IX. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE   VISION   OF   THE   SEALING. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  cried  in  mine  ears  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Let  the  over 
seers  of  the  city  come  near,1  and  every  man  his  weapon  of  destruction  in  his 
hand.  2.  And,  behold,  six  men  came  by  the  way  of  the  upper  gate,  which 
looks  toward  the  north,  and  every  man  his  slaughter-weapon  in  his  hand ;  and 
one  man  among  them  clothed  in  linen,  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  by  his  side  : 
and  they  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  brazen  altar.  3.  And  the  glory  of 
the  God  of  Israel  ascended  from  above  the  cherub,  whereupon  it  was,  to  the 
threshold  of  the  house.  And  he  called  to  the  man  that  was  clothed  in  linen, 
who  had  the  writer's  iukhorn ;  4.  And  Jehovah  said  to  him,  Go  through  the 
midst  of  the  city,  through  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  set  a  mark  (literally, 
mark  a  mark)  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men  that  sigh  and  that  cry  over 
all  the  abominations  that  are  done  in  the  midst  of  it.  5.  And  to  the  others 
he  said  in  my  hearing,  Go  ye  after  him  through  the  city,  and  smite  ;  let  not 
your  eye  spare,  nor  have  pity.  6.  Slay  utterly  old  and  young,  maids  and 
little  children,  and  women ;  and  on  every  man  who  has  the  mark  upon  him, 
come  not  near  him  ;  and  begin  at  my  sanctuary.  And  they  began  at  the 
elders  who  were  before  the  house.  7.  And  he  said  to  them,  Defile  the  house, 
and  fill  its  courts  with  slain  :  go  ye  forth.  And  they  went  forth,  and  smote 
in  the  city.  8.  And  it  came  to  pass,  while  they  were  slaying  them,  and  I 
was  left,  that  I  fell  upon  my  face,  and  I  cried,  and  said,  Ah,  Lord  Jehovah  ! 
wilt  thou  slay  all  the  remnant  of  Israel  when  thou  art  pouring  out  thy  fury 
upon  Jerusalem  ?  9.  And  he  said  to  me,  The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel 
and  Judah  is  exceedingly  great,  and  the  land  is  filled  with  blood,  and  the 
city  is  full  of  perverseness :  for  they  say,  Jehovah  has  forsaken  the  earth, 
and  Jehovah  sees  not.  10.  And  I  also,  mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  nor  will  I 
pity  ;  their  way  I  recompense  upon  their  head.  11.  And,  behold,  the  man 
clothed  in  linen,  who  had  the  writer's  inkhorn  at  his  side,  reported  the 
matter,  saying,  I  have  done  according  as  thou  didst  command  me. 

THE  vision  depicted  in  chap.  viii.  was  intended  to  lay  open  the 
various  workings  of  that  apostate  and  rebellious  spirit  which  had 
infected  the  people  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  And  as  such  a 
wide-spread  and  leprous  state  of  guilt  manifestly  called  for  the 
interposition  of  a  righteous  God,  the  prophet  proceeds  to  unfold 
the  course  of  procedure  which  was  to  be  adopted  regarding  it. 

1  The  language  in  this  opening  verse,  as  well  as  the  communication  that 
follows,  shows  that  what  is  said  here  is  merely  the  continuation  and  proper 
sequel  of  the  preceding  vision.  In  the  last  words  of  the  eighth  chapter, 
mention  was  made  of  a  cry  being  heard  in  the  Lord's  ears,  a  loud  cry  for 
mercy  from  the  doomed  city  ;  and  now  the  prophet  is  made  to  hear  in  his 
ears  a  loud  cry  for  vengeance— in  itself  a  sign  how  fruitless  the  other  cry 
should  be.  The  persons  addressed,  ideal  executioners  of  justice,  are  called 
fiYnjpSl,  which  properly  means  offices,  but  it  is  also  used  concretely  for  those 
holding  office,  or  having  charge — for  example,  Isa.  Ix.  17  ;  2  Chron. 
xxiv  11. 


VISION  OF  THE  SEALING.  95 

1.  He  first  of  all  hears  the  Lord  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  as 
in  a  matter  of  great  urgency,  and  in  a  state  of  vehement  indig 
nation,  summoning  the  officers  or  overseers  of  the  city  into  his 
presence,  and  ordering  them  to  bring  each  in  their  hand  a  weapon 
for  slaughter.  The  persons  who  answered  to  this  summons  were 
six  in  number,  but  along  with  these,  and  in  the  midst  of  them 
as  being  the  leader  of  the  party,  there  was  one  in  different  habi 
liments — clothed  in  linen,  and  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  at  his 
side.  That  these  should  have  been  in  all  precisely  seven  in 
number  is  chiefly  to  be  accounted  for  from  the  sacreclness 
attached  to  that  number  in  ancient  times,  and  especially  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures.  It  indicated  that  the  action  now  to  be  pro 
ceeded  with  bore  that  sacred  character  which  belongs  to  everv- 

O  v 

thing  that  comes  from  the  hand  of  God.  With  reference  to  the 
same  import,  we  read  in  Zechariah  of  the  seven  eyes  of  the  Lord 
(chap.  iii.  9),  and  in  the  Apocalypse  of  the  seven  spirits  before 
the  Lord  (Rev.  v.  6),  The  persons  in  question,  although  called 
men,  are  evidently  to  be  regarded  as  the  inhabitants  of  a  higher 
sphere — the  special  messengers  of  Jehovah  ;  and  they  appeared 
in  the  character  of  officers,  who  had  the  charge  of  the  city  com 
mitted  to  them,  because  they  had  come  to  execute  the  judgments 
of  righteousness,  which  the  proper  officers  should  have  put  in 
force.  Their  approach  was  from  the  north,  where  also  the  dif 
ferent  forms  of  idolatry  had  been  seen  by  the  prophet ;  and  they 
stood  beside  the  brazen  altar,  waiting  to  receive  the  command  of 
Jehovah.  It  was  there,  as  we  said  before,  that  the  people's  guilt 
lay  unpardoned ;  and  according  to  the  principle,  "  where  the 
carcass  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together,"  from  the 
same  quarter  must  proceed  the  work  of  judgment.  a  While  those 
ministers  of  the  Divine  justice,"  says  Hengstenberg  excellently,1 
"  tread  beside  the  brazen  altar,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  moves  to 
ward  them  out  of  the  holy  of  holies,  and  appears  to  them  at  the 
threshold  of  the  temple.  It  imparts  to  him  who  is  clothed  in 
linen  the  commission  to  preserve  the  pious,  to  the  others  to  de 
stroy  the  ungodly  without  mercy.  Now  who  is  the  one  clothed 
in  linen  1  No  other  than  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  This  appears 
from  Dan.  x.  5,  xii.  6,  7,  where  Michael,  but  another  name  for 
the^angel  of  the  Lord,  is  designated  in  the  same  way, — a  remark- 

1  Christology,  on  Amos  ix.  1. 


96  EZEKIEL  IX. 

able  agreement  in  two  contemporary  prophets.     It  is  also  evident 
from  the  subject  itself.     The  clothing  is  that  of  the  earthly  high 
priest ;  but  the  heavenly  high  priest  and  intercessor  is  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  (Zech.  i.  12).     He  who  was  clothed  in  linen  is 
not,  however,  to  be  regarded  as  solely  engaged  in  the  work  of 
delivering  the  pious ;  not  as  standing  in  contrast  with  the    six 
ministers  of  righteousness.     These  are  rather  to  be  considered 
as  subordinate  to  him,  as  accomplishing  the  work  of  destruction 
only  by  his  command  and  under  his  authority.     The  punish 
ment  proceeds  from  him  no  less  than  the  prosperity.     This  ap 
pears  even  from  general  grounds.     Both  have  the  same  root, 
the  same  object — the  prosperity  of  the  kingdom  of  God.     The 
six  cannot  be  regarded  as  evil  angels.     This  would  be  in  con 
tradiction  to  the  whole  doctrine  of  Scripture  on  the  subject.    It 
uniformly  attributes  the  punishment  of  the  ungodly  to  the  good 
angels,  and  the  trial  of  the  pious,  under  God's  permission,  to 
the   evil ;    as   is   seen,  for  example,  in  the  trial  of    Job,   the 
temptation  of  Christ,  the  buffeting  of  Paul  by  a  messenger  of 
Satan.     If  this,  then,  be  established,  it  is  equally  so  that  the 
judgment  on  this  occasion  belongs  to  the  angel  of  the  Lord. 
For  all  inferior  angels  are  subordinate  to  him,  the  prince  of  the 
heavenly  host,  so  that  all  they  do  is  done  by  his  command.  But 
in  addition  to  these  general  grounds,  there  are  special  reasons, 
which  are  entirely  decisive.     It  deserves  consideration  that  he 
who  was  clothed  in  linen  appears  in  the  midst  of  the  six.    They 
surround  him  as  his  followers,  his  servants.    Still  more  weighty, 
however,  and  of  itself  sufficient,  is  chap.  x.  2,  7:  "And  the  Lord 
spake  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  and  said,  Go  between  the 
wheels  under  the  cherubim,  and  fill  thy  hand  with  coals  of  fire, 
which  are  between  the   cherubim,  and  scatter  them  over  the 
city;  and  he  went  before  mine  eyes.     And  a  cherub  stretched 
out  his  hand  between  the  cherubim,  to  the  fire  that  was  between 
the  cherubim,  and  took  and  gave  it  into  the  hands  of  him  who 
was  clothed  in  linen.     And  he  took  it  and  went  forth."      The 
fire  is  an  image  of  the  Divine  anger.     The  angel  of  the  Lord 
is  here,  therefore,  expressly  designated  as  the  one  who  executes 
the  judgments  of  the  Divine  justice.     The  importance  of  the 
transaction    extends    beyond   the  explanation    of    the   passage 
before  us.     We  have  here  the  Old  Testament  foundation  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  New,  that  all  judgment  has  been  committed 


VISION  OF  THE  SEALING.  97 

to  the  Son  ;  and  a  remarkable  example  of  the  harmony  of  the 
two  Testaments,  which  in  recent  times  has  been  but  too  much 
overlooked.  (Comp.  Matt.  xiii.  41,  xxv.  31.) 

In  regard  to  what  was  ordered  to  be  done  on  the  present 
occasion  by  the  angel  of  the  covenant  and  his  attendant 
ministers  of  righteousness,  a  few  particulars  deserve  to  be  noted. 
(1)  It  was  pre-eminently  a  work  of  judgment  against  sin.  Of 
this  the  moving  of  the  Divine  glory  from  the  inner  sanctuary 
to  the  threshold  without  was  itself  an  impressive  sign,  indicat 
ing  that  God  was  rising  out  of  his  place  to  punish  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  land ;  yet  even  in  doing  this,  the  Lord  showed  the 
care  and  fidelity  with  which  he  watched  over  his  own.  For  the 
first  part  of  the  charge  given  to  the  presiding  angel  has  respect 
to  the  safety  of  the  good — the  small  remnant  of  faithful  ones, 
who,  so  far  from  going  along  with  the  prevailing  tide  of  evil, 
were  daily  sighing  and  crying  for  the  abominations  that  were 
proceeding  around  them.  These  were  to  be  kept  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty,  while  destruction,  like  a  whirlwind, 
was  sweeping  on  every  side  of  them.  So  has  it  ever  been  in 
the  history  of  God's  judgments.  The  angels  who  were  charged 
with  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  declared  they 
could  do  nothing  till  righteous  Lot  had  made  good  his  escape. 
Nor  was  the  destroying  angel  sent  forth  to  slay  the  first-born 
in  Egypt  till  the  families  of  Israel  found  time  to  sprinkle  on 
their  door-posts  the  blood  of  reconciliation.  So  also  in  Revela 
tion,  before  the  great  tribulations  begin,  the  peremptory  com 
mand  was  given,  "  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,  nor  the 
trees,  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  God  in  their  fore 
heads."  Refreshing  thought !  The  Divine  faithfulness  still 
abides  sure  to  the  true  children  of  the  covenant,  even  though 
they  should  exist  but  as  a  few  grains  of  wheat  among  heaps  of 
chaff  destined  to  destruction.  Let  such,  therefore,  trust  in  the 
Lord  at  all  times,  and  fear  not  that  it  shall  be  well  with  the 
righteous. 

(2)  In  respect,  again,  to  the  method  taken  to  separate 
between  this  faithful  remnant  and  others,  though  there  is 
something  peculiar  in  it,  yet  it  evidently  points  to  the  preserva 
tion  of  Israel  in  Egypt  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  paschal  blood 
on  the  door-posts.  Here,  however,  as  it  was  not  for  families, 
but  for  individuals  that  the  sign  was  needed,  a  change  in  the 

G 


98  EZEKIEL  IX. 

mode  was  necessarily  adopted.  "  Set  a  mark  (literally,  mark  a 
mark)  upon  their  foreheads,"  is  the  command  given  to  the 
angel  of  the  covenant.  What  kind  of  mark  is  not  specified, 
and  indeed  would  scarcely  have  been  suitable,  as  it  was  a  mere 
symbol  of  the  personal  security  of  the  individuals  referred  to — 
not  a  mark  to  be  actually  imprinted  and  seen  upon  their  persons, 
but  as  an  indication  of  the  place  they  held  in  the  watchful 
oversight  and  directing  agency  of  God.  And  that  the  fore 
head  is  named — the  most  prominent  and  conspicuous  part  of 
the  person — as  that  on  which  the  mark  was  to  be  set,  this  was 
simply  to  show  how  clear  and  certain  their  interest  was  in  the 
guardianship  and  protection  of  Heaven  ;  it  was  as  if  God  would 
have  all  men  to  take  notice  of  their  connection  with  his  service, 
and  their  sure  inheritance  of  blessing  from  his  hand,1 

(3)  Further,  we  cannot  but  perceive  in  regard  to  the 
sentence  of  judgment  executed  upon  the  rest  of  the  commun 
ity,  that  it  is  ordered  so  as  most  fitly  to  express  the  utter  loath 
ing  and  abhorrence  with  which  the  sins  of  the  people  had 

1  The  practice  of  imprinting  marks  upon  men  in  a  religious  connection 
was  in  ancient  times  not  unknown  in  real  life,  as  we  learn  from  Herodotus 
(ii.  113),  who  says  in  respect  to  a  temple  of  Hercules  in  Egypt,  "that  if 
the  slave  of  any  one  takes  refuge  there,  and  has  sacred  marks  impressed 
upon  him,  it  is  not  lawful  to  lay  hands  on  him."  In  opposition,  however,  to 
what  is  said  above,  and  apparently  under  the  idea  that  an  actual  mark  was 
to  be  made  on  the  persons  in  question,  some  of  the  Fathers  (Tertullian, 
Origen,  Jerome),  and  the  Roman  Catholic  writers  generally,  have  strenu 
ously  contended  for  the  specific  sign  of  the  cross  as  being  the  mark  intended. 
The  chief  philological  ground  for  this  idea  is,  that  as  the  word  used  for 
mark  is  tau,  the  name  of  the  last  letter  of  the  alphabet,  the  old  form  of  that 
letter  was  a  cross.  On  this  ground,  though  withoufrespect  to  the  use  made 
of  it  by  the  Catholics,  Hitzig  translates:  "mark  across."  But  the  more 
ancient  versions,  the  Sept.,  Aq.,  and  Symm.,  all  render  generally  a  mark. 
And  Vitringa  justly  observes,  that  "  nowhere  throughout  Scripture  are  those 
words,  which  are  now  employed  as  names  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and 
several  of  which  occur,  ever  used  to  denote  those  letters  themselves  or  their 
figures.  Besides,  there  is  connected  with  the  word  tau  in  this  text  the  verb 
fpfi,  from  which  the  other  is  derived.  And  as  among  the  Hebrews  such 
conjunctions  of  verbs  with  nouns  sprung  from  them  are  common,  it  is  pro 
bable  that  the  tau  here  is  of  the  same  meaning  with  the  verb  with  which  it 
is  joined.  Is  it  not  also  the  case  that  in  the  parallel  passage  (Rev.  vii.  3), 
where  a  fact  of  the  same  kind  is  recorded,  no  mention  is  made  of  any  special 
mark  ?  "We  therefore  gladly  embrace  the  version  of  the  Septuagint,  which 
accords  with  the  interpretations  of  the  most  eminent  Jews,  and  simply 
render :  mark  a  signS'—Obs.  Sac.  lib.  ii.  chap.  xv.  sec.  8. 


VISION  OF  THE  SEALING.  99 

filled  the  mind  of  God.  The  work  of  slaughter  was  appointed 
to  begin  at  the  sanctuary,  that  all  its  courts  might  be  defiled 
with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  In  consequence  of  the  aggravated 
and  shameful  guilt  of  the  worshippers,  it  had  already  lost  the 
reality  of  holiness,  and  in  accordance  with  its  true  character, 
the  appearance  of  an  abominable  place  must  now  be  given  to  it. 
Not  only  so,  but  the  very  first  persons  whose  blood  is  reported 
to  have  been  shed  there  was  that  of  "  the  ancient  men  before 
the  house," — the  seventy  elders  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
chapters,  themselves  the  more  aged  and  venerable  portion  of 
the  worshippers,  and  those  who  might  naturally  be  regarded  as 
occupying  the  foremost  rank  among  the  people  at  large.  The 
slaying  of  such  persons  first  was  an  indication  of  the  unsparing 
severity  with  which  the  Divine  judgment  was  to  proceed, 
involving  alike  in  destruction  "  old  and  young,  maids  and  little 
children,  and  women."  So  terrible  was  the  sight,  that  the 
prophet  himself  for  the  moment  forgets  the  assurance  that  had 
been  given  by  the  act  of  sealing  a  preserved  remnant ;  and, 
overcome  by  his  intense  feelings,  falls  down  and  exclaims,  "  Ah, 
Lord  God !  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  residue  of  Israel  in  the 
pouring  out  of  thy  fury  upon  Jerusalem  ?  "  A  cry  for  mercy 
which  has  no  other  effect  than  to  call  forth  a  fresh  declaration 
from  the  Lord  of  the  greatness  of  the  people's  guilt,  and 
of  the  necessity  of  vengeance  being  executed  against  it. 

So  very  broadly  marked  in  this  portion  of  the  vision  is  the 
distinction  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  !  In  the  ideal 
territory  which  the  vision  occupies,  the  treatment  awarded  to 
each  is  as  different  as  the  character  respectively  belonging  to 
them  ;  but  was  the  distinction  equally  preserved  amid  the  real 
transactions  that  followed  I  In  the  calamities  that  so  soon  fell 
like  an  overwhelming  flood  on  the  city,  did  the  wicked  alone 
suffer,  and  the  good  escape  unhurt  ?  Such,  certainly,  we  are 
warranted  to  infer  would  in  general  be  the  case,  as  we  see  in 
Jeremiah  and  the  false  prophets — the  one  faithfully  guarded, 
though  surrounded  on  every  hand  with  instruments  of  destruc 
tion,  while  the  others  miserably  perished.  Yet  we  cannot 
suppose  the  line  of  demarcation  would  be  preserved  with  such 
perfect  exactness,  as  that  all  the  wicked  should  be  destroyed, 
and  all  the  righteous  defended  from  evil.  The  records  of 
history  prove,  indeed,  the  reverse.  "  But  it  must  be  noted,"  as 


100  EZEKIEL  X. 

Calvin  justly  remarks,  "that  while  God  apparently  sends 
trouble  to  his  people  in  common  with  the  wicked,  there  is  still 
this  distinction  on  the  side  of  the  former,  that  nothing  befalls 
them  but  what  shall  turn  to  their  salvation.  When  God,  there 
fore,  forbids  the  Chaldeans  to  touch  his  faithful  servants,  he 
does  not  mean  that  they  should  be  free  from  all  trouble  and 
annoyance,  but  promises  that  matters  should  be  ordered  so 
differently  with  them,  as  compared  with  the  wicked,  that  they 
should  know  in  their  own  experience  God  had  not  forgotten  his 
faithful  word.  It  may  be,  indeed,  that  God  shall  not  spare 
his  own  so  as  to  exempt  them  from  having  their  faith  and 
patience  exercised ;  yet  he  will  spare  so  far  as  not  to  allow 
anything  deadly  to  befall  them, — so  far  as  always  to  prove 
himself  their  faithful  guardian.  But  when  he  appears  to  extend 
pardon  to  the  wicked,  this  only  tends  to  their  destruction, 
because  they  are  rendered  by  it  more  and  more  inexcusable." 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE   VISION   OF  THE   COALS   OF   FIRE. 

As  soon  as  the  prophet's  attention  was  withdrawn  from  what 
had  for  the  time  completely  absorbed  it, — the  proceedings 
connected  with  the  preservation  of  the  good  and  the  destruction 
of  the  wicked, — he  was  favoured  with  another  vision  of  the  glory 
of  Jehovah,  such  as  he  had  already  beheld  on  the  plains  of 
Chebar.  The  scene  only  of  the  Divine  manifestation  was  dif 
ferent,  the  manifestation  itself  was  substantially  the  same.  Here 
also  there  were,  as  had  formerly  been  seen,  the  cloud  of  glory 
and  the  dazzling  splendour  filling  the  field  of  vision — the 
cherubim  with  the  likeness  of  a  throne  above,  surmounted  by  the 
sapphire  firmament — gigantic  wheels  by  the  side  of  the  cheru 
bim,  full  of  eyes  round  about,  instinct  with  life  and  motion, 
and  themselves  moving  in  the  midst  of  the  glowing  fire — the 
voice,  from  time  to  time,  of  these  cherubim,  pealing  in  the  ears 
of  the  prophet  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty, — all  serving  by 
the  nature  of  their  appearance  and  the  character  of  their 
movements  to  shadow  forth  the  mind  and  will  of  Him 
who,  amid  such  accompaniments  of  Divine  majesty,  occupied 


VISION  OF  THE  COALS  OF  FIRE.  101 

the  throne.  The  presentation  of  this  glorious  vision  to  the  eye 
of  the  prophet  took  place  in  the  midst  of  the  appointed  execu 
tions  of  judgment — one  part  being  already  past,  while  another 
was  still  to  come.  And  the  leading  object  of  it  seems  to  have 
been  to  bring  distinctly  into  view  the  immediate  agency  of  God 
in  the  matter,  and  to  show  how  all  proceeded,  as  by  a  law  of 
imperious  necessity,  from  the  essential  holiness  of  his  nature. 
But  let  us  first  give  the  prophet's  description  of  the  scene  itself: 

Ver.  1.  And  I  looked,  and,  behold,  in  the  firmament  that  was  over  the  head 
of  the  cherubim  like  a  sapphire-stone,  as  the  appearance  of  the  likeness  of  a 
throne  was  seen  upon  them.  2.  And  he  spoke  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen, 
and  said,  Go  in  between  the  wheels,  to  below  the  cherub,  and  fill  thy  hand 
with  coals  of  fire  from  between  the  cherubim,  and  scatter  them  over  the  city. 
And  he  went  in  my  sight.  3.  And  the  cherubim  stood  on  the  right  side  of 
the  house  when  the  man  went  in  ;  and  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  court.  4. 
And  the  glory  of  Jehovah  went  up  from  above  the  cherub,  over  the  threshold 
of  the  house  ;  and  the  house  was  filled  with  the  cloud,  and  the  court  was 
full  of  the  brightness  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah.  5.  And  the  sound  of  the 
cherubim's  wings  was  heard  to  the  outer  court,  as  the  voice  of  the  Almighty 
God  when  he  speaks.  6.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  commanded  the  man 
clothed  in  linen,  saying,  Take  fire  from  between  the  wheels,  from  between  the 
cherubim,  that  he  went  in,  and  stood  beside  the  wheel.  7.  And  the  cherub 
(viz.  the  one  at  that  wheel)  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  between  the 
cherubim  to  the  fire,  which  was  between  the  cherubim,  and  lifted  and  gave 
to  the  hand  of  him  who  was  clothed  in  linen,  and  he  took  it  and  went  forth. 
8.  And  there  appeared  in  the  cherubim  the  likeness  of  the  hand  of  a  man 
under  their  wings.  9.  And  I  looked,  and  behold  there  were  four  wheels  beside 
the  cherubim,  one  wheel  beside  one  cherub,  and  one  wheel  beside  another 
cherub:  and  the  appearance  of  the  wheels  was  as  the  glitter  of  the  tartessus- 
stone.  10.  And  for  appearance,  there  was  one  likeness  to  the  four,  as  it  were 
a  wheel  in  the  midst  of  a  wheel.  11.  When  they  went,  they  went  toward 
their  four  sides  (i.e.  in  one  or  other  of  the  four  directions  to  which  the  wheels 
severally  pointed)  ;  they  turned  not  when  they  went ;  for  to  what  direction 
the  face  looked,  thither  they  went ;  they  turned  not  whea  they  went.  12. 
And  their  whole  flesh,  and  their  backs,  and  their  hands,  and  their  wings,  and 
their  wheels  were  full  of  eyes  round  about,  the  wheels  of  the  four  of  them 
(i.e.  were  full  of  eyes).  13.  As  for  the  wheels,  to  them  it  was  cried  in  my 
hearing,  The  whirling.1  14.  And  every  one  bad  four  faces  :  the  first  face 
i i . 

1  This  has  been  unhappily  rendered  in  the  authorized  version,  O  wheel. 
In  the  original  there  are  two  words  used  in  this  chapter,  which  we  ciin  scarcely 
avoid  translating  by  the  same  word,  wheel, — |2itf?  which  strictly  means  a 
wheel ;  and  ^3  which  comprehends  the  entire  machinery  of  wheel- work, 
wheel  within  wheel,jso  called  from  its[quick,  whirlwind-like  movements.  This 
is  what  the  word  properly  means,  anything  having  a  swift  rotatory  motion  ; 
whence  it  denotes  a  whirlwind,  Ps.  Ixxvii.  18.  It  was  this  last  word  which 
was  here  proclaimed  in  the  prophet's  ears,  for  the  purpose  partly  of  indicating 
their  nature,  and  partly  of  calling  them  to  put  themselves  in  motion.  For  by 
their  rapid  energetic  motion  they  symbolized  the  resistless  speed  and  certainty 


102  EZEKIEL  X. 

the  face  of  a  cherub,  and  the  second  face  the  face  of  a  man,  and  the  third  the 
face  of  a  lion,  and  the  fourth  the  face  of  an  eagle.1  15.  And  the  cherubim 
rose  upwards  :  it  is  the  living  creature  which  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar.  16. 
And  when  the  cherubim  went,  the  wheels  went  with  them  ;  and  when  the 
cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings  to  mount  up  from  off  the  earth,  the  wheels 
also  did  not  turn  from  beside  them.  17.  When  the  one  stood  the  other  stood, 
when  the  one  rose  the  other  rose  ;  for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  was  in 
them.  18.  And  the  glory  of  Jehovah  went  forth  from  above  the  threshold 
of  the  house,  and  stood  over  the  cherubim.  19.  And  the  cherubim  lifted 
up  their  wings,  and  ascended  from  the  earth  in  my  sight,  when  they  went 
forth  and  the  wheels  at  their  side ;  and  it  (i.e.  the  whole  appearance)  stood 
at  the  door  of  the  east  gate  of  the  house  of  Jehovah,  and  the  glory  of  the  God 
of  Israel  was  over  them  aloft.  20.  This  is  the  living  creature  which  I  saw 
under  the  God  of  Israel  by  the  river  Chebar,  and  I  knew  that  they  were  the 
cherubim.  21.  Each  one  had  four  faces  apiece,  and  four  wings  apiece ;  and 
the  likeness  of  the  hand  of  a  man  was  under  their  wings.  22.  And  the  like 
ness  of  their  faces — they  are  the  same  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar, 
their  appearance  and  themselves  :  they  each  go  right  forward. 

The  Divine  manifestation  here  described  as  having  been  pre 
sented  in  vision  to  Ezekiel  is  distinctly  connected  with  the  one 
previously  given  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  It  is  substantially 
a  renewal  of  the  former  vision,  though  differing  as  to  the  locality 
where  the  manifestation  was  given,  and  the  symbolical  actions 

with  which  the  Divine  agency  accomplishes  its  purposes.  Bottcher,  quoted 
by  Maurer,  renders :  "  To  the  wheels,  to  these  was  it  always  cried  in  my  ears, 
the  Roll — Roll ;  "  meaning  that  they  were  called  to  be  continually  revolv 
ing.  The  Septuagint  is  still  more  literal,  for  it  simply  gives  the  original 
word,  TgAysA. 

1  The  peculiarity  in  this  description  of  the  personal  aspect  of  the  cheru 
bim  is,  that  while  they  are  said  to  have  had  each  four  faces,  that  is,  to  have 
combined  in  their  visage  the  fourfold  aspect  of  ox,  man,  lion,  and  eagle,  the 
first  is  represented  as  having  simply  the  appearance  of  a  cherub,  and  the 
others  that  of  a  man,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle  respectively.  Some  commentators, 
as  Maurer,  confess  that  they  see  no  proper  way  of  explaining  this ;  many 
more  pass  on  without  offering  any  explanation  ;  and  others,  comparing  the 
passage  with  chap.  i.  10,  where  the  ox  is  mentioned  as  the  fourth  component 
element  in  the  composition  of  the  cherub,  take  cherub  here  for  ox,  and  sup 
pose  that  the  cherubic  structure  had  some  peculiar  affinity  with  the  form  of 
the  ox,  on  account  of  which  the  name  of  cherub  might  be  substituted  for  that 
of  ox.  But  this  is  without  any  foundation,  and,  indeed,  contrary  to  the  de 
scription  in  chap,  i.,  according  to  which,  as  formerly  stated,  the  form  of  man 
was  undoubtedly  predominant  in  the  appearance.  The  explanation  I  take  to 
be  this :  the  prophet  simply  describing  what  he  saw,  and  standing  at  the 
time  right  in  front  of  one  of  the  cherubim,  the  one  who  gave  the  live  coals 
to  the  angel,  could  not  say  in  regard  to  this  cherub  which  particular  form 
was  prominent,  the  whole  cherubic  figures  appeared  in  the  face;  while, 
having  only  a  side  view  of  the  others,  they  each  presented  to  his  eye  the 
different  forms  he  specifies. 


VISION  OF  THE  COALS  OF  FIRE.  103 

with  which  it  was  accompanied.  Looking  to  the  two  manifes 
tations  in  their  common  features,  and  with  respect  to  their 
general  design,  we  can  have  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  both  the 
propriety  and  importance  of  such  displays  of  the  Divine  pre 
sence  and  glory  having  been  vouchsafed  to  the  prophet,  espe 
cially  near  the  commencement  of  his  career.  They  were  needed 
to  qualify  him  for  the  discharge  of  his  high  function,  and  for 
maintaining  the  arduous  conflict  he  had  to  wage  against  unbelief 
and  corruption.  "  The  Divine  presence,"  to  use  the  words  of 
Havernick,  "  was  discovered  to  him  in  such  glorious  manifes 
tations, — first,  for  the  purpose  of  calling  him  to  do  the  part  of  a 
witness  of  that  glory  in  the  midst  of  his  God-forgetting  people  ; 
then  for  the  purpose  of  taking  leave  of  the  visible  locality  with 
which  the  old  manifestations  of  Deity  were  connected,  and  with 
which  they  were  never  to  be  associated  in  the  ancient  manner 
again.  These  two  occasions  of  a  Divine  manifestation  so  pecu 
liarly  glorious  were  periods  never  to  be  forgotten  in  the  life  of 
Ezekiel ;  to  exhibit  them  in  their  harmonious  agreement  was 
what  he  could  on  no  account  omit.  Twice  had  his  spiritual  eye 
beheld  the  very  God  of  Israel  upon  the  cherubim ;  this  was  the 
seal  of  truth  which  he  stamped  on  his  announcements  ;  this  for 
himself  was  the  dearest  pledge  of  the  Divine  condescension — an 
inexpressible  grace,  which  he  felt  constrained  by  a  lively  sense 
of  the  Lord's  presence  to  record  with  candour  and  delight." 

When  we  look  to  the  differences  between  this  vision  and  the 
earlier  one,  the  appearances  themselves,  and  the  actions  con 
nected  with  them,  for  the  most  part  admit  of  a  ready  explanation. 
The  particular  feature  mentioned  here  respecting  the  cherubim, 
that  they  were  in  every  part  full  of  eyes,  and  not  mentioned  in 
the  former  description,  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a  difference ; 
for  it  seems  to  be  merely  a  more  specific  detail,  which  the 
prophet's  second  and  closer  inspection  of  the  appearance  enabled 
him  to  observe  and  note.  He  expressly  states  that  the  living 
creature  was  the  same  that  he  had  seen  at  first ;  which  implies 
that  it  had  each  time  the  same  composite  and  peculiar  structure. 
Here,  however,  the  throne  which  appeared  above  the  cherubim 
is  without  the  accompaniment  of  the  rainbow,  for,  on  this  parti 
cular  occasion,  it  is  the  work  of  judgment  alone  that  is  symbol 
ized.  The  sign  of  returning  grace  after  floods  of  wrath  might 
still,  indeed,  be  said  to  be  there,  in  the  background,  for  the 


10-4  EZEKIEL  X. 

judgment  was  not  to  be  utterly  annihilating ;  a  remnant  was 
still  to  be  spared,  and  a  door  left  open  for  fresh  manifestations 
of  covenant-love  and  faithfulness.  But  this  had  already  been 
indicated  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  vision  (chap,  ix.),  by  the 
action  of  the  sealing  of  those  who  had  kept  aloof  from  the 
reigning  abominations,  and  reserving  them  for  a  purpose  of 
mercy  in  the  future.  What  is  unfolded  in  the  present  chapter 
is  simply  the  following  out  to  its  proper  conclusion  of  the  work 
of  judgment.  The  sinners  in  Zion  were  already  slain;  their 
carcasses  are  seen  lying  throughout  the  streets  of  the  city,  and 
some  of  them  were  defiling  the  house  which  their  rampant 
iniquity  had  so  fearfully  profaned.  And  now  it  only  remained 
that  the  work  of  severity  should  be  consummated,  by  destroying 
the  city  itself  where  all  the  abominations  had  been  practised. 
The  Lord  therefore  appears  on  his  throne  of  judgment ;  and, 
to  make  it  more  manifest  that  the  judgment  is  in  vindication  of 
his  injured  holiness,  and  on  account  of  the  sins  which  had  been 
committed  against  his  covenant,  the  scene  of  the  judicial  action 
is  laid  in  the  temple  itself.  The  cherubic  machinery,  moved 
close  to  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
not  only  stood  above  it,  but  also  pressed  inwards,  so  that  the 
whole  house  was  filled  with  the  cloud — the  emblem  of  God's 
awful  majesty  and  hot  displeasure.  There,  in  immediate  contact 
with  the  sanctuary,  a  cherub,  at  the  Divine  command,  gives  a 
portion  of  the  fire  which  glowed  between  the  wheelworks  of  the 
cherubim  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen — the  angel  of  the 
covenant — that  he  might  scatter  it  over  the  city  and  reduce  the 
whole  to  ashes.  This  fire  may  certainly,  with  Hengstenberg  (on 
Rev.  viii.  5),  be  called  elemental  fire,  since  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  given  was  to  consume  the  devoted  city.  But  this 
surely  does  not  render  it  less  (as  he  conceives)  a  symbol  of 
the  holy  wrath  and  judgment  of  God,  for  that  consumption 
of  the  city  was  no  merely  natural  operation,  but  a  solemn  act 
of  judgment,  in  vindication  of  the  honour  and  majesty  of 
God.  Nothing  here,  either  in  the  vision  itself  or  in  the 
actions  represented  as  proceeding,  belongs  simply  to  the  natural 
sphere;  even  the  natural  powers  and  agencies,  of  which  the 
cherubic  appearances  and  the  wheel-work  were  partly  sym 
bolical,  have  their  place  in  the  vision,  from  their  subservience  to 
the  moral  ends  and  purposes  in  progress.  But  it  deserves  to  be 


DESTRUCTION  OF  A  CORRUPT  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  105 

noted,  with  Calvin  (though  he  errs,  we  think,  in  other  parts  of 
his  explanation),  that  the  fire  is  represented  as  being  taken  not 
from  the  altar  of  God,  which  had  so  much  to  do  with  the  work 
of  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  hut  from  the  ideal  source  specially 
provided  for  purposes  of  judgment  suited  to  the  occasion. 
And  that  a  man's  hand  supplied  this  material  element  of 
fire  for  the  work  of  destruction  may  naturally  be  regarded  as 
indicating  that  human  agents  should  not  be  wanting,  at  the 
proper  time,  to  carry  into  effect  the  judgment  written ;  the 
Lord  would  not  need,  as  in  the  case  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
to  rain  down  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven,  but  would  find 
among  men  instruments  properly  fitted  for  executing  his  pur 
pose.  The  whole  prophetic  burden  contained  in  this  and  the 
preceding  chapter  is  to  be  found  in  plain  language,  and  with 
much  detail,  in  many  parts  of  Jeremiah's  writings,  and  indeed 
was  comprised  long  before  in  the  following  brief  but  awful 
passage  of  Isaiah  (chap,  xxiii.  12  sq.)  :  "  The  people  shall  be  as 
the  burnings  of  lime,  as  thorns  cut  up  shall  they  be  burned  in  the 
fire.  The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid  ;  fearfulness  hath  surprised 
the  hypocrites.  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring 
fire  ?  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ?  " 

Another  scene  of  destruction,  however,  was  yet  to  be  presented 
to  the  eye  of  the  prophet,  before  the  revelation  could  properly  be 
made  of  the  purpose  of  mercy  that  was  in  reserve ;  a  special 
work  of  judgment  must  prepare  the  way  for  its  accomplishment. 
This  we  have  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  next  chapter,  after  which, 
in  the  latter  part,  comes  the  exhibition  of  the  purpose  of  mercy. 


CHAPTER  XL 

DESTRUCTION  OF  A  CORRUPT  PRIESTHOOD,  WITH  THE  PROMISE  OF 
GRACE  AND  BLESSING  TO  A  BELIEVING  REMNANT  AMONG  THE 
EXILES. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  Spirit  lifted  me  up  and  brought  me  to  the  east  gate  of 
the  house  of  Jehovah  that  looks  toward  the  east;  and  behold  at  the  entrance 
of  the  gate  five  and  twenty  men ;  and  in  the  midst  of  them  I  saw  Jaazaniah 
the  sou  of  Azur,  and  Pelatiah  (Heb.  Pelatjahu),  son  of  Benaiah  (Heb. 
Binajahu),  princes  of  the  people.  2.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  these 
are  the  men  that  devise  mischief,  and  give  evil  counsel  in  this  city  ;  3.  Who 


106  EZEKIEL  XL 

say,  Not  at  hand  (literally,  not  in  the  nearness)  is  the  building  of  houses  ;T 
this  is  the  caldron,  and  we  are  the  flesh.  4.  Therefore  prophesy  against 
them,  prophesy,  son  of  man.  5.  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  me, 
and  he  said  to  me,  Say :  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Thus  have  ye  said,  0  house  of 
Israel :  and  whatever  has  risen  up  in  your  mind,  I  have  known  it.  6.  Ye 
have  multiplied  your  slain  in  this  city,  and  have  filled  its  streets  with  the 
slaughtered.  7.  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Your  slain,  which  ye 
have  laid  in  the  midst  of  it,  these  are  the  flesh,  and  this  city  is  the  caldron: 
and  I  will  cause  you  to  go  forth  out  of  the  midst  of  it.  8.  Ye  have  feared 
the  sword  ;  and  the  sword  will  I  bring  upon  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 
9.  And  I  will  make  you  go  forth  from  the  midst  of  it,  and  will  give  you  into 
the  hand  of  strangers,  and  will  execute  judgments  against  you.  10.  Ye  shall 
fall  by  the  sword  :  upon  the  border  of  Israel  (i.e.  at  the  extremity  of  the 
land)  will  I  judge  you  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  11.  This 
city  shall  not  be  to  you  for  a  caldron,  nor  shall  you  be  in  the  midst  of  it  as 
flesh  ;  at  the  border  of  Israel  will  I  judge  you.  12.  And  ye  shall  know  that 
I  am  Jehovah  ;  in  whose  statutes  ye  did  not  walk,  and  whose  judgments  ye 
did  not  execute  ;  but  did  according  to  the  judgments  of  the  heathen  that 
are  round  about  you.  13.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  while  I  was  prophesy 
ing,  Pelatiah  the  son  of  Benaiah  died  :  and  I  fell  upon  my  face  and  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  said,  Ah,  Lord  Jehovah  !  wilt  thou  make  a  complete 
end  of  the  remnant  of  Israel  ?  14.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me 
saying.  15.  Son  of  man,  thy  brethren,  thy  brethren  are  the  men  of  thy  re 
demption  (thy  Goalim — thy  redemption-men),  and  all  the  house  of  Israel, 
the  whole  to  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  say,  Be  ye  far  from  the 
Lord,  to  us  is  given  this  land  for  an  inheritance.  16.  Therefore  say,  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  I  have  removed  them  far  off  among  the 
heathen,  and  because  I  have  scattered  them  among  the  countries,  and  have 
been  to  them  for  a  sanctuary  during  a  little  season  in  the  countries  whither 
they  have  come  :  17.  Therefore  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  will 
also  gather  you  from  the  peoples,  and  will  assemble  you  from  the  countries 
whither  ye  have  been  scattered,  and  I  will  give  to  you  the  territory  of  Israel. 
18.  And  they  come  thither,  and  they  take  away  all  its  detestable  things, 
and  all  its  abominations  out  of  it.  19.  And  I  give  them  one  heart,  and 
will  put  a  new  spirit  within  them :  and  I  will  take  away  the  heart  of  stone 
from  their  flesh,  and  give  to  them  an  heart  of  flesh.  20.  In  order  that  they 
may  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  may  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them  :  and 
may  be  to  me  for  a  people,  and  I  may  be  a  God  to  them.  21.  And  for  those 
whose  heart  goes  after  the  heart  of  their  detestable  things  and  their  abomi 
nations,  their  way  I  bring  upon  their  heads,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  22. 
And  the  cherubims  lifted  up  their  wings  with  the  wheels  at  their  side ;  and 
the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  over  them  aloft.  23.  And  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  went  up  out  of  the  midst  of  the  city,  and  stood  over  the  mount 
that  is  to  the  east  of  the  city.  24.  And  the  Spirit  lifted  me  up  and  brought 
me  to  Chaldea,  to  the  captives,  in  a  vision  by  the  Spirit  of  God  :  and  the 
vision  which  I  had  seen  went  up  from  me.  25.  And  I  spake  to  the  captives 
all  the  words  of  Jehovah  that  he  had  made  me  see. 


1  This  is  the  plain  import  of  the  original  here,  and,  as  will  be  shown  after 
wards,  gives  the  best  sense.  The  meaning  adopted  by  Calvin,  and  followed 
by  the  authorized  version  and  many  commentators,  is,  "  It  is  not  near  (viz. 
the  destruction  of  the  city)  ;  let  us  build  houses  ; "  or,  "  to  build  houses."  Let 
us  proceed  to  that,  and  we  can  do  so  with  safety.  This,  as  Maurer  has  justly 
objected,  would  have  required  the  inf.  absol. ;  not  rta  but  nJ3-  Ewald 


DESTRUCTION  OF  A  CORRUPT  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  107 

WHEN  the  prophet  was  going  to  witness  the  new  scene  of  de 
struction  with  which  this  chapter  opens,  he  was  made  to  change 
his  position.  For  the  manifested  glory  of  God  had  fixed  its 
residence  at  the  entrance  of  the  east  gate  of  the  Lord's  house 
(chap.  x.  19),  the  principal  entrance  to  the  temple,  as  through 
that  the  way  lay  straight  into  the  sanctuary.  The  Spirit  lifted 
the  prophet  up,  and  placed  him  at  that  gate,  in  the  immediate 
presence  of  the  Divine  glory.  There  the  first  thing  that  met  his 
eye  was  a  company  of  twenty-five  men,  two  of  whom  also  are 
expressly  named,  and  called  u  princes  of  the  people."  This 
number  naturally  leads  us  to  think  of  the  twenty-five  mentioned 
in  chap,  viii.,  whom  we  identified  with  the  heads  of  the  twenty- 
four  classes  into  which  the  families  of  the  priests  were  divided, 
with  the  high  priest  as  their  superior, — the  natural  representa 
tives  of  the  whole  priesthood.  Nor  is  there  anything  in  what  is 
said  here  to  prevent  us  from  supposing  that  the  same  persons 
are  again  brought  into  notice.  That  they  should  be  called,  not 
as  in  Isa.  xliii.  28,  "  princes  of  the  sanctuary,"  or  in  2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  14,  "  chief  (princes)  of  the  priests,"  but  "  princes  of  the 
people,"  is  sufficiently  explained  from  the  light  in  which  they  are 
here  contemplated,  as  ringleaders  in  the  general  profligacy  and 
corruption.  Hence  it  is  immediately  added,  u  These  are  the 
men  that  devise  mischief,  and  give  wicked  counsel  in  this  city  ; " 
for  they  had  taken  advantage  of  their  influential  position  to  lead 
the  people  astray  from  God,  and  infuse  perverse  counsel  into  their 
minds;  and  on  this  account  might  justly  be  called,  though  not 
perhaps  without  some  mixture  of  irony,  "princes  of  the  people." 
This  view  is  also  confirmed  by  the  place  assigned  to  these 
twenty-five  men  in  the  vision.  Already  has  the  wrath  of  God 
come  forth  with  consuming  power  against  the  people  as  repre 
sented  by  the  elders,  who  were  then  worshipping  in  the  courts 
of  the  Lord's  house.  Nor  only  this ;  but  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
has  also  been  seen  leaving  its  proper  habitation  in  the  most  holy 
place,  and,  like  the  cherubim  of  old,  and  the  flaming  sword  in 
the  garden  of  Eden,  has  gone  forth  to  occupy  the  gate  that  leads 
into  the  now  deserted  sanctuary.  Of  what  use,  then,  any  more 

would  take  the  words  interrogatively,  "  Is  it  not  in  the  nearness  to  build 
houses?"  i.e.  Cannot  we  do  so  with  perfect  safety?  Grammatically,  the 
interpretation  is  admissible  ;  but  it  does  not  give  a  natural  sense,  nor  the 
one  best  fitted  to  explicate  the  meaning  ;  rather,  indeed,  the  reverse. 


108  EZEKIEL  XI. 

the  ministrations  of  an  apostate  and  polluted  priesthood  in  this 
sanctuary  ?  Nay,  is  it  not  time  that  judgment  should  alight 
upon  such  a  priesthood  ?  and  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  should 
break  forth  upon  them  before  they  are  again  permitted  to  enter 
the  sacred  precincts  ?  This  is  precisely  what  we  should  expect 
to  take  place  from  the  order  of  the  Divine  vision,  and  the  point 
at  which  things  had  arrived ;  and  when  viewed  in  connection 
with  what  had  been  previously  said  of  the  twenty-five,  as  to 
their  ministering  on  peculiarly  holy  ground,  and  now  of  their 
appearing  at  the  eastern  approach  to  the  temple,  leaves  no 
proper  room  to  doubt  that  these  were  the  representatives  of 
the  priesthood  in  Judah. 

The  two  who  are  named  in  this  representative  company  of 
priests  appear  to  have  been  singled  out,  as  was  formerly  done  in 
the  case  of  the  seventy  elders,  on  account  of  the  peculiar  signi 
ficance  of  their  names,  and  to  mark  the  contrast  that  now 
existed  between  the  idea  and  the  reality.  "  Jaazaniah  (God 
hears),  the  son  of  Azur  (help)  ;  and  Pelatiah  (God  delivers),  the 
son  of  Benaiah  (God  builds)."  Such  names  should  have  been 
regarded  as  perpetual  monitors,  reminding  them  where  they 
should  have  sought,  and  where  also  they  should  have  found, 
their  confidence  and  safety.  Had  they  but  remained  stedfast  in 
the  covenant  of  God,  he  would  assuredly  have  heard  and  helped 
them  in  the  time  of  need,  delivered  them  from  danger,  and  built 
them  up.  But  now  it  was  their  very  relation  to  God  which 
proved  the  source  of  their  greatest  danger,  and  the  immediate 
cause  of  their  overwhelming  destruction.  For  not  only  the 
corruptions  they  had  introduced  into  his  service,  but  also  their 
insolent  contempt  of  his  authority,  had  reached  such  a  height 
that  he  could  no  longer  refrain  from  manifesting  his  righteous 
ness  in  their  punishment.  Setting  themselves  in  direct  opposi 
tion  to  the  will  of  God,  they  had  given  wicked  counsel  to  the 
people,  and  said,  "Not  in  the  nearness  is  the  building  of  houses; 
this  is  the  caldron,  and  we  are  the  flesh." 

It  is  not  quite  obvious,  at  first  sight,  how  these  words  convey 
so  bad  a  meaning  as  the  connection  in  which  they  are  intro 
duced  leads  us  to  expect ;  for  it  is  in  them,  apparently,  that  the 
extreme  wickedness  of  the  priesthood  expresses  itself,  while  the 
words  themselves  might  seem  to  imply  nothing  particularly  bad. 
This  alone  suggests  to  us  the  propriety  of  seeking  for  some 


DESTRUCTION  OF  A  CORRUPT  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  109 

covert  reference  in  the  language,  such  as  might  impart  to  it  a 
peculiar  force  and  intensity  of  meaning.     And  the  connection 
between  the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel  and  those  of  Jeremiah,  for 
merly  adverted  to,  supplies  here  precisely  what  we  need  ;  for  it 
enables  us  to  perceive,  in  the  short  speech  here  put  into  the 
lips  of  a  corrupt  priesthood,  an  insolent  and  scornful  parody 
of  words  that  had  been  previously  uttered  by  Jeremiah.     In 
the    letter   that    prophet    sent   to    the   captives    among    whom 
Ezekiel  lived,  the  very  first    announcement    was,    "  Build   ye 
houses,  and  dwell  in  them  "  (chap.  xxix.  5) ;  because  the  time 
of  their  sojourn  there  was  not  to  be,  as  the  great  majority  of 
the  people  thought,  for  a  brief  space,  but  for  the  long  period  of 
seventy  years.     On  the  other  hand,  in  regard  to  the  people  at 
Jerusalem,  and  indicative  of  the  short  respite  that  was  to  be 
allowed  them  there,  Jeremiah  had  seen  in  a  vision  a  caldron 
or  seething-pot  (chap.  i.  13),  with  its  mouth  towards  the  north  ; 
which  was  interpreted  to  mean,  that  the  kingdoms  of  the  north, 
with  Babylon  at  their  head,  would  come  and  take  possession  of 
Jerusalem.     Now   it  is  these  two  speeches — the  one   bearing 
respect  more  immediately  to  the  exiles,  the  other  to  the  remnant 
in  Judah — which  the  impious  and  ungodly  priesthood  are  re 
presented  here  as  parodying  ;  they  take  the  words  of  the  Lord's 
servant  into  their  mouth,  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  showing 
how  they   could   make  light  of   the   most    solemn    messages  : 
"  Those  who  are  far  off  in  the  land  of  exile  may,  if  they  please, 
take  the  prophet's   advice  and  set  about  building  houses   for 
themselves ;  that  does  not  concern   ws,  it  is  too  remote  a  thing 
for  our  needing  to  be  at  all  careful  about  it.     And  as  for  the 
pot  you  have  seen,  which  is  ready  to  smoke  and  boil  under  the 
fury  of  a  hostile  invasion  from  the  north,  let  it  be  so — let  Jeru 
salem  be  the  pot,  then  we  shall  be  the  flesh  within  it;  its  strong 
fortifications  and  sure  defences  shall  preserve  us  against  any 
flame  of  war  that  may  kindle  around  us.    We  know  our  ground, 
and  have  no  occasion  to  be  terrified  with  such  visions." 

Such  plainly  appears  to  have  been  the  spirit  in  which  the 
words  were  uttered  by  the  priesthood,  and  the  sense  they  con 
veyed.  And  viewed  thus,  the  language  reveals  as  by  a  flash  of 
lightning  the  real  state  of  the  priesthood  in  Jerusalem, — show 
ing  not  only  how  contemptuously  they  eyed  their  brethren  in 
exile  (the  circumstance  which  gave  rise  to  the  whole  of  this 


110  EZEKIEL  XI. 

series  of  visions),  but  how  completely  their  heart  had  departed 
from  the  Lord,  and  gone  to  rest  in  fleshly  confidences.  The 
threatenings  of  the  Lord's  servant  were  now  bandied  about  as 
idle  words,  or  twisted  into  any  shape  that  might  suit  their  own 
perverse  inclinations.  And  as  if  the  Lord  had  indeed  forsaken 
the  earth,  or  was  destitute  of  means  to  execute  his  own  word, 
they  looked  to  the  bulwarks  of  their  city  as  amply  sufficient  to 
protect  them  from  all  the  assaults  that  could  be  made  against 
it.  Nay,  they  had  the  presumption  to  intimate,  by  the  turn 
they  gave  to  the  prophet's  similitude,  that  the  city  must  stand 
for  their  sakes,  even  as  the  pot  exists  for  the  safety  and  due 
preparation  of  the  flesh  that  is  put  into  it.  In  like  manner, 
because  they  must  as  a  matter  of  necessity  continue  to  abide  and 
flourish,  the  city  cannot  but  stand  them  in  good  stead  against 
the  coming  evil!1 

It  was  impossible  that  a  holy  God  could  permit  such  a  pre 
sumptuous  and  scornful  degree  of  impiety  to  pass  unpunished, 
especially  when  it  appeared  in  those  who  stood  nearest  to  God, 
and  held  the  highest  places  of  influence  in  the  land.  Therefore 
the  Divine  judgment  is  immediately  announced.  As  perfectly 
cognisant  of  their  vain  imaginations  and  their  wicked  courses, 
the  Lord  declares  that  he  is  ready  to  take  vengeance  on  their 
inventions.  Their  miserable  sophistries  and  external  defences 
would  be  equally  unavailing  in  the  day  of  rebuke.  Those  whom 
they  had  cunningly  deceived  or  violently  overborne  to  their 
ruin,  these  would  really  be  as  the  flesh  in  the  midst  of  the 
caldron,  the  hapless  victims  of  destruction;  but  the  treacherous 
and  wicked  priesthood  would  have  to  answer  for  their  blood, 

1  The  state  of  mind  implied  in  the  speech  here  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
priests  is  vividly  represented,  and  with  substantial  accuracy,  by  Calvin.  He 
also  perceived  a  reference  to  both  the  passages  in  Jeremiah  above  noticed  ; 
though,  as  formerly  stated,  he  gave  an  untenable  view  of  the  first  part,  and 
understood  it  of  the  security  the  people  now  thought  they  had  to  build 
houses  in  Jerusalem.  Various  other  modes  of  explanation  have  been  adopted, 
— of  which  none,  certainly,  are  more  ridiculous  than  one  of  the  last,  that  of 
Hitzig,  who  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  priesthood  the  very  tame  and  quite 
inappropriate  sentiment:  "War  is  at  hand,  we  are  going  to  revolt ;  it  is 
therefore  not  a  time  for  building  houses,  but  rather  for  laying  in  provisions  !  " 
That  of  Hiivernick,  which  we  have  followed,  is  the  only  one  which  at  once 
gives  to  the  words  their  proper  rendering,  and  extracts  from  them  a  senti 
ment  entirely  suited  to  the  occasion. 


FORMATION  OF  A  NEW  PRIESTHOOD.  Ill 

and  as  an  abhorred  race  would  be  driven  from  their  imagined 
sanctuary,  and  slain  by  the  hands  of  heathen  in  the  borders  of 
the  land, — thus  finding,  as  they  deserved,  a  violent  death  and  a 
polluted  grave.  (Comp.  Jer.  xxxix.  4,  5.) 

As  soon  as  the  communication  was  made  of  this  purpose  to 
execute  judgment  on  the  corrupt  priesthood,  Pelatiah  (God 
delivers)  fell  down  dead, — a  manifest  sign  that  now  all  hope  of 
a  better  issue  was  gone,  that  their  defence  was  departed  from 
them,  and  that  the  doom  pronounced  was  sure  of  taking  effect. 
The  prophet  at  once  perceived  the  meaning  of  this  sign  ;  and, 
overwhelmed  with  the  fearful  carnage  that  now  burst  in  pro 
spect  upon  his  view,  he  again  prostrated  himself,  and  exclaimed, 
u  Ah,  Lord  God !  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the  remnant  of 
Israel  1 "  Shall  this  be  a  final  and  exterminating  judgment  ? 
Must  all  perish,  and  the  name  Pelatiah  henceforth  be  a  lie  ? 

It  is  this  question  that  brings  out  the  gleam  of  hope  that 
still  lingered  amid  all  those  dark  and  dismal  proceedings.  But 
this  was  not  to  be  found  in  any  mitigation  of  the  purpose  to 
execute  judgment  upon  Jerusalem  and  to  destroy  the  confi 
dences  of  those  who  lived  there.  There  must  be,  in  that  respect, 
a  sweeping  desolation  ;  and  in  that  very  exile,  which  the  priests 
and  princes  of  Jerusalem  affected  to  look  upon  with  such 
disdain,  it  was  that  the  hope  of  Israel  now  lay,  and  from  thence 
was  the  prospect  of  better  days  to  begin.  "  Son  of  man,  thy 
brethren,  thy  brethren  are  the  men  of  thy  redemption  (thy 
Goalim — redemption-men),  and  all  the  house  of  Israel,  the 
whole  to  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  have  said,  Be 
ye  far  from  the  Lord  :  to  us  is  this  land  given  in  posses 
sion.  Therefore  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,"  etc.,  vers. 
15-21. 

The  full  import  of  the  first  part  of  this  declaration  has  been 
considerably  obscured  by  regarding  the  Goalim  spoken  of  at 
the  beginning  as  simply  the  relations  or  kindred  of  the  prophet 
(which  the  word  never  properly  means),  and  by  mistaking  the 
precise  object  of  the  affirmation  made  respecting  them.  The 
prophet,  by  birth  a  priest,  felt  when  he  saw  the  priesthood  in 
Jerusalem  doomed  to  destruction,  as  if  his  own  nearest  kinsmen 
were  given  up  to  ruin ;  so  that  it  behoved  him  to  do  for  them 
the  part  of  the  Goel^  and  plead  or  vindicate  their  cause.  Ac 
cording  to  the  law  of  Moses,  the  right  of  the  Goel  belonged 


112  EZEKIEL  XL 

only  to  the  brother,  or,  failing  him,  to  the  relative  who  stood 
nearest  in  blood,  and  so  might  fitly  be  regarded  as  the  proper 
advocate,  deputy,  or  avenger  of  the  individual  (Lev.  xxv.  25, 
48).  Hence  it  was  quite  natural  for  the  priest  Ezekiel  to 
identify  himself  with  the  priesthood  in  Jerusalem,  so  far  as  to 
feel  called  upon  to  espouse  their  cause,  and  even  to  regard  his 
own  interest  as,  in  a  manner,  bound  up  with  theirs.  But  that 
natural  feeling,  the  Lord  now  taught  him,  must  give  way  to  a 
higher  one.  "  Thy  brethren,  thy  brethren  " — the  repetition  of 
the  word  indicating,  as  very  commonly  in  Hebrew,  the  stress 
that  was  intended  to  be  laid  upon  the  relationship — "  thy  proper, 
thy  real  brethren,  these  are  no  longer  the  priests  in  Jerusalem, 
with  whom  thou  art  bound  by  the  natural  ties  of  blood  and  a 
common  right  to  serve  in  the  temple  ;  in  place  of  these,  doomed 
to  destruction  for  their  incorrigible  wickedness,  a  new  brother 
hood  must  henceforth  become  known  to  thee, — a  royal  priesthood, 
which  the  Lord  is  going  to  form  for  himself  out  of  the  wreck 
of  the  natural  community.  Look  no  more  to  Jerusalem,  but 
to  thine  expatriated  countrymen,  thy  fellow-exiles  on  the  banks 
of  the  Chebar,  and  the  house  of  Israel  generally,  the  whole  of 
them  that  survive.  And  in  them,  despised  as  they  are  by  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  see  the  true  brethren,  whom  the  Lord 
is  preparing  as  a  spiritual  seed  for  the  glory  of  his  name.  Go 
and  do  for  them  the  GoeVs  part ;  seek  their  deliverance." 

The  great  evangelical  principle  comes  out  here,  that  not  those 
who  are  most  highly  esteemed  among  men,  or  who  may  appear 
to  themselves  nearest  to  the  kingdom,  are  those  whom  God 
chooses,  but  rather  the  poor  and  despised,  and  such  as,  in  a 
sense,  are  not.  A  spiritual  priesthood,  such  as  the  Lord 
sought,  could  only  be  found  among  the  broken  hearts  of  the 
captivity.  Weaned  there  from  their  fleshly  confidences,  hum 
bled  in  the  dust,  nay,  melted  and  fused  in  the  hot  furnace  of 
affliction,  they  were  in  a  condition  to  receive  the  riches  of 
Divine  grace,  and  repair  anew  to  God  for  strength  and  bless 
ing.  And  so  then,  as  continually  since,  "  the  last  were  first " — 
for  only  through  tribulation  could  the  kingdom  be  entered.  No 
door  of  hope  at  such  a  time  but  in  the  valley  of  Achor. 

The  Lord  did  not  overlook  the  contrariety  which  his  word  to 
Ezekiel  presented  to  outward  appearances,  and  to  the  taunts 
which  had  been  thrown  out  by  the.  priest  respecting  the  exiles, 


FORMATION  OF  A  NEW  PRIESTHOOD.  1 1 3 

as  to  their  being  far  from  the  Lord.  "  Therefore,  say  to  them," 
the  Lord  continued,  "  because  I  have  cast  them  far  off  among 
the  heathen,  and  because  I  have  scattered  them  among  the 
countries,  and  have  been  to  them  for  a  sanctuary  during  a  little 
season  in  the  countries  whither  they  have  come;  therefore  I  also 
will  gather  you  from  the  peoples,"  etc.  As  much  as  to  say,  It 
is  true,  they  are  in  a  sense  far  removed,  and  miserably 
scattered  ;  but  that  by  no  means  necessarily  involves  their  being 
also  in  a  state  of  distance  from  God.  They  have  lost  access  to 
the  outward  temple,  where  fellowship  with  God  has  chiefly  been 
maintained  ;  but  God  himself  has  come  near  to  them ;  he  has 
become  their  sanctuary;  and  as  his  presence  can  make  any 
place  a  temple,  so  it  has  proved  a  present  sanctuary  to  them,  in 
the  room  of  that  which  has  become  an  abomination  of  desolation 
at  Jerusalem.  Therefore  these  are  the  true  priesthood,  and  in 
due  time  shall  be  gathered  again,  and  reinstated  in  the  land. 

A  great  truth  unfolds  itself  here  for  all  times, — that  the  Lord 
is  not  confined  to  temples  made  with  hands,  and  that  if  there  be 
but  the  lowly  and  spiritual  heart,  he  is  to  be  found  in  the  most 
remote  and  lonely  regions,  not  less  than  in  the  place  more  espe 
cially  consecrated  to  his  service  and  glory.  Yea,  though  it  may 
be  their  own  sins  which  have  conducted  them  into  such  regions, 
and  in  their  very  position  they  can  discern  too  plainly  the  signs 
of  an  offended  God,  yet,  if  even  then  they  cry  to  him,  they  need 
not  doubt  that  he  is  near  to  give  the  blessing.  But  in  so  par 
ticularly  unfolding  this  truth  here  for  the  people  in  exile,  it  is 
impossible  not  to  see  how  the  Lord  was  preparing  the  way  for 
the  better  times  of  the  gospel,  when  the  material  temple  should 
pass  away,  and  the  spiritual  alone  should  rise  into  view.  It  was 
the  peculiar  temptation  of  those  who  lived  under  the  old 
economy,  that  even  when  not  chargeable  with  corrupting  the 
service  of  God,  their  minds  were  apt  to  contract  themselves  to 
the  earthly  pattern  of  sacred  things  exhibited  before  them,  and 
they  could  scarcely  realize  a  present  God  apart  from  the  out 
ward  temple  and  the  land  of  Canaan.  So  natural  and  so  strong 
was  this  tendency,  that  we  find  the  prophet  Jonah  attempting 
to  evade  the  Lord's  presence  by  endeavouring  to  withdraw  to 
Tarshish.  And  if  the  feeling  had  been  allowed  to  grow  un 
checked — if  some  great  dispensation  in  Providence  had  not  been 
sent  in  time,  to  loosen  in  some  degree  the  tie  that  bound  them 

H 


1 1 4  EZEKIEL  XI. 

to  the  outward  and  material,  to  expand  and  elevate  their  con 
ceptions  of  God,  we  can  easily  conceive  how  alien  and  repulsive 
to  the  views  of  the  most  devout  worshippers  must  have  been  the 
idea  of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom  and  universal  Church. 

In  this  respect  the  dispersion,  besides  being  a  just  chastisement 
on  account  of  sin,  and  a  salutary  discipline  to  lead  the  heart  of 
the  people  back  to  God,  had  an  important  end  to  accomplish  as 
a  preparatory  movement  in  Providence  for  opening  the  way  for 
Messiah's  kingdom.  It  was  very  far  from  being  an  unmixed 
evil.  As  a  mere  external  arrangement,  it  was  destined  to  be  of 
great  service  in  diffusing  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  providing 
materials  for  the  first  foundations  of  the  Christian  Church,  by 
giving  the  bearers  of  God's  truth  a  place  and  an  influence  in 
many  of  the  most  commanding  positions  in  the  heathen  world. 
But  still  more  important  and  necessary  was  the  end  it  had  to 
serve  in  spiritualizing  the  views  of  the  better  part  of  the  Jews 
themselves,  and  training  them  to  the  knowledge  and  service  of 
God,  without  the  help  of  a  material  temple  and  an  earthly  king 
dom.  Practically  it  had  the  effect  of  indefinitely  widening  the 
bounds  of  Canaan,  or  of  giving  to  the  world  at  large  somewhat 
of  its  distinctive  characteristics,  since  the  devout  worshipper  at 
Babylon,  Alexandria,  Rome,  or  wherever  he  might  be  placed, 
found  himself  a  partaker  of  God's  presence  and  blessing  as  well 
as  in  Jerusalem.  What  a  mighty  advance  did  the  kingdom  of 
God  thus  make  toward  the  possession  of  the  world  !  And  in 
rendering  the  dispersion  of  his  people  instrumental  to  the  attain 
ment  of  such  a  result,  how  strikingly  did  the  Lord  manifest  his 
power  to  overrule  a  present  evil  for  the  accomplishment  of  an 
ultimate  good  !  Nor  were  it,  perhaps,  too  much  to  say,  having 
respect  to  the  issues  of  things,  that  the  dispersion  of  the  Israelites 
among  the  nations  was  fraught  with  as  much  blessing  for  the 
Church  and  the  world,  as  even  their  original  settlement  in  Canaan. 

At  the  time,  however,  of  this  vision,  when  the  old  economy 
had  still  ages  to  run  before  it  could  give  way  to  a  better,  the 
Lord  could  not  allow  the  chosen  land  and  the  outward  temple, 
with  which  it  was  so  essentially  connected,  to  lie  long  in  a  state 
of  desolation.  The  separation  of  the  covenant-people  from  them 
could  only  be  temporary.  And  the  very  circumstance  of  God's 
promising  to  be  a  sanctuary  to  his  people  in  exile— ready  to 
meet  them  there  with  tokens  of  his  presence — with  refreshments 


FORMATION  OF  A  NEW  PRIESTHOOD.  1 1 5 

and  gifts  of  the  Spirit — was  itself  an  assurance  that  a  restora 
tion  could  not  be  far  distant.  Hence  the  Lord  couples  with  the 
promise  a  limitation  in  respect  to  time :  he  was  to  be  to  them  a 
sanctuary  for  a  little — not  a  little  sanctuary^  as  in  our  common 
version  and  many  others,  which  gives  a  sense  derogatory  to  the 
majesty  of  God,  and  one  also  unsuited  to  the  connection.  The 
thought  expressed  is,  that  God  would  be  to  his  people  in  exile, 
instead  of  the  temple,  a  sanctuary  so  long  as  that  exile  lasted ; 
but  bounds  were  to  be  set  to  it — it  would  not  need  to  continue 
for  a  long  period,  as  a  return  must  again  be  opened  up  for  them 
to  the  land  of  the  covenant.  Therefore  the  Lord  immediately 
proceeds  to  declare  his  purpose  to  gather  them  out  of  the  nations 
among  which  they  had  been  scattered  ;  and  to  do  so  expressly  on 
the  ground  that  he  had  been  to  them  for  a  sanctuary  in  their 
dispersed  and  scattered  condition.  Their  scattering,  in  one  sense, 
had  been  in  another  a  gathering ;  it  had  driven  them  to  take  up 
their  refuge  in  God,  thereby  preparing  and  fitting  them  for  being 
again  restored  to  the  land  of  their  fathers.  And  so,  as  their 
sanctuary,  God  proceeds  to  make  promise  of  his  grace  to  re 
new  and  sanctify  their  natures,  to  change  their  hearts  as  from 
stone  to  flesh,  that  when  they  returned  they  might  put  away  all 
the  abominations  which  had  brought  such  floods  of  judgment  on 
the  land.  These  abominations  had  rendered  it  what  it  origin 
ally  was  when  its  inhabitants  were  given  up  to  the  curse  of 
Heaven ;  but,  returning  to  it  with  a  heart  utterly  opposed  to 
such  defilements,  they  would  make  it  again  a  holy  and  blessed 
habitation.  Yet  only  in  the  event  supposed — only  if  they  heark 
ened  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  cherished  the  spirit  of  holiness 
and  love  he  sought  to  implant  within  them.  If  any  among  them 
were  still  bent  upon  going  after  the  heart  of  their  vile  and  abo 
minable  things,  they  must  reap  in  bitterness  the  fruit  of  their 
doings,  and  a  threatening  to  that  effect  closes  the  communication. 
The  promise  of  a  return  to  Canaan,  therefore,  was  not  given 
to  the  exiles  here,  no  more  than  its  original  possession  had  been 
granted,  as  an  absolute  and  unconditional  good.  What  it  should 
be  would  still  depend  upon  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  people 
themselves,  whether  they  received  or  frustrated  the  grace  brought 
to  them  through  such  messengers  as  Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  and  the 
other  men  of  God  raised  up  from  time  to  time  among  the  people. 
And  comparing  the  promise  of  what  should  have  been  with  the 


116  EZEKIEL  XII. 

record  of  what  actually  was,  we  find  that  the  word  received  but 
a  partial  fulfilment — just  because  the  spiritual  renovation  had 
been  so  partially  undergone ;  and  Canaan,  as  occupied  by  the 
restored  remnant,  was  not  the  region  of  holiness  here  represented. 
Still  the  promise  did  not  fail ;  the  Lord  did  provide  for  himself  a 
spiritual  offspring  from  the  captivity,  and  plant  them  anew  as  a 
seed  of  blessing  in  the  land  of  their  fathers, — enough  to  show 
that  he  was  mindful  of  his  word,  and  enough  also  to  furnish  a 
pledge  that  the  sum  of  all  promise — the  work  of  reconciliation 
in  Christ,  and  the  inheritance  by  a  redeemed  people  over  his 
everlasting  kingdom — would,  in  due  time,  be  brought  to  com 
pletion. 

Thus  closes  this  remarkable  series  of  visions.  As  soon  as  the 
last  communication  was  uttered,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  with  the 
attendant  cherubim,  withdrew  altogether  from  the  temple  and 
its  courts,  "  leaving  the  house  to  them  desolate,"  and  retired  even 
beyond  the  bounds  of  the  city  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  there  to 
watch  upon  the  evil  that  was  to  befall  the  city.  The  prophet  is 
borne  back  again  in  spirit  to  the  elders  who  sat  before  him,  and, 
descending  from  his  state  of  ecstasy,  reports  to  them  what  had 
passed  in  vision  before  the  eye  of  his  mind.  That  report  itself 
formed  the  message  which  their  present  circumstances  required  ; 
and  it  certainly  contained  much  that  was  fitted  to  cheer  them 
under  the  gloom  that  hung  around  their  condition,  as  well  as  to 
awe  and  solemnize  their  hearts,  by  the  thought  of  such  appalling 
judgments  ready  to  be  executed  against  the  guilty. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE   VISION   OF   EZEKIEL'S   TYPICAL   REMOVING   AS  AN   EXILE,   AND 
ACCOMPANYING  INSTRUCTIONS. 

Yer.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  the  rebellious  house,  with  those  who  have  eyes 
to  see,  and  see  not ;  who  have  ears  to  hear,  and  hear  not :  for  they  are  a  rebel 
lious  house.  3.  And  do  thou,  son  of  man,  make  thee  an  exile's  implements,1 

1  The  expression  rAfa  "63  does  not  mean  properly  "stuff  for  removing," 
but  the  articles  or  implements  which  are  proper  to  a  person  going  as  an  exile 


VISION  OF  EZEKIEL'S  TYPICAL  EXILE.  1 1 7 

and  go  into  exile  before  their  eyes  ;  and  thou  shalt  remove  from  thy  place 
to  another  place  before  their  eyes,  if  perchance  they  will  see,  for  they  are 
a  rebellious  house.  4.  And  thou  shalt  bring  forth  thy  implements  as  an 
exile's  implements  by  day  before  their  eyes  ;  and  in  the  evening  thou  shalt 
go  forth  before  their  eyes  as  the  going  forth  of  the  exile.  5.  Before  their 
eyes  dig  thee  through  in  the  wall,  and  go  forth  thereby.  6.  Before  their 
eyes  bear  upon  the  shoulder,  carry  out  in  the  dark  night ; l  thou  shalt  cover 
thy  face,  that  thou  see  not  the  earth  ;  for  I  have  set  thee  as  a  portent  2  to 
the  house  of  Israel.  7.  And  I  did  as  I  was  commanded  ;  I  brought  forth 
implements  by  day  as  the  implements  of  an  exile  ;  and  in  the  evening  I 
dug  for  me  in  the  wall  with  the  hand;  in  the  darkness  of  night  I  brought 
out  upon  the  shoulder,  I  bore  before  their  eyes. 

8.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me  in  the  morning,  saying,  9.  Son  of 
man,  does  not  the  house  of  Israel,  the  rebellious  house,  say  to  thee,  What 
doest  thou  ?  10.  Say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  The  prince 
is  this  burden  in  Jerusalem,  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  in  their  midst.3 
11.  Say,  I  am  a  portent  to  you ;  according  as  I  have  done  so  shall  it  be 
done  to  you  ;  as  exiles,  as  captives  (literally,  in  exile,  in  captivity),  they 
shall  go  forth.  12.  And  the  prince  that  is  in  the  midst  of  them  shall  bear 
upon  his  shoulder  in  the  darkness  of  night,  and  shall  go  forth  ;  through 
the  wall  they  shall  dig  to  carry  forth  by  it ;  he  shall  cover  his  face,  that  he 
see  not  the  earth  with  his  eye.  13.  And  I  shall  spread  my  net  over  him, 


or  captive  to  a  distant  land ;  in  particular,  a  staff,  a  scrip,  and  a  knapsack, 
with  a  few  supplies  of  food  and  clothing.  The  word  n^fan,  which  is  so  often 
used  by  Ezekiel  to  denote  the  collected  body  of  the  exiles,  is  so  used  (as  has 
been  shown  by  Hengstenberg  on  Zech.  xiv.  2)  by  way  of  personification,  the 
captives  being  viewed  collectively  in  the  light  of  a  female  humbled  and 
depressed.  The  same  kind  of  personification  is  applied,  and  carried  out  at 
considerable  length,  in  reference  to  Babylon,  in  Isa.  xlvii.  Hence  those  who 
returned  to  Jerusalem  are,  in  Ezra  viii.  35,  not  only  said  to  have  "  come  out 
of  captivity,"  but  also  to  be  "the  children  of  the  captivity,"  i.e.  of  the 
captives.  Denoting  properly  a  captive  or  exiled  state,  it  may,  of  course, 
be  understood  of  any  in  that  state,  whether  one  or  many.  The  same  phrase 
as  in  our  text  is  used  by  Jeremiah,  chap.  xlvi.  19,  of  Egypt,  where  the 
marginal  reading  in  our  Bibles  is,  "  make  thee  instruments  of  captivity." 

1  The  expression  nt^Sp is  s°  seldom  used,  that  there  might  be  some  dubiety 
as  to  its  exact  meaning,  were  it  not  for  the  passage  Gen.  xv.  17,  where  the 
word  certainly  means  the  thick  darkness  of  night.     We  may  suppose  it  here 
to  refer  to  any  part  of  the  night,  though  naturally  to  the  earlier  part ;  but 
to  the  night  as  enveloping  the  person  in  a  deep  shade,  and  so  affording  the 
opportunity  of  a  secret  escape. 

2  Portent  seems  to  come  nearer  to  the  import  of  DQift  than  sign.     It  is 
properly  a  wonder,  a  miracle,  then  something  extraordinary  and  ominous — 
here,  ominous  of  evil — a  portent.     What  was  now  done  by  Ezekiel  in  vision 
typically  foreshadowed  fearful  transactions  of  a  like  kind  in  real  life. 

3  The  pouncing  at  once  here  on  the  prince  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  foremost 
object  in  the  prophetic  burden,  is  very  emphatic  ;  it  proclaimed  aloud  that 
the  man  in  whom  they  were  trusting  for  safety  was  himself  to  be  the  chief 
sufferer  in  the  impending  calamities. 


118  EZE KIEL  XII. 

and  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare  ;  and  I  will  bring  him  to  Babylon,  to  the 
land  of  the  Chaldeans ;  yet  he  shall  not  see  it,  and  there  shall  he  die. 
14.  And  all  that  are  round  about  him  I  will  scatter,  and  all  his  forces  will  I 
scatter  to  every  wind ;  and  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them.  15.  And 
they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I  scatter  them  among  the  nations 
and  disperse  them  among  the  countries.  16.  And  I  shall  leave  of  them  a 
few  men  (literally,  men  by  number),  from  the  sword,  from  the  famine,  and 
from  the  pestilence  ;  in  order  that  they  may  declare  all  their  abominations 
among  the  heathen  among  whom  they  come ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I 
am  Jehovah. 

17.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  18.  Son  of  man, 
eat  thy  bread  with  quaking,  and  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  with 
carefulness.  19.  And  say  to  the  people  of  the  land,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  towards  the  land  of  Israel,  They 
shall  eat  their  bread  with  carefulness,  and  their  water  shall  they  drink  in 
desolateness,  that  her  land  may  be  made  desolate,  because  of  the  violence  of 
all  that  dwell  therein.  20.  And  the  cities  that  are  inhabited  shall  be  laid 
waste,  and  the  land  shall  be  desolate  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

21.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  22.  Son  of  man, 
what  is  that  proverb  ye  have  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  The  days  are  pro 
longed,  and  every  vision  fails  ?  23.  Therefore  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  I  will  make  this  proverb  to  cease,  and  they  shall  no  more  use 
it  as  a  proverb  in  Israel ;  but  say  unto  them,  The  days  are  at  hand,  and  the 
word  (viz.  in  its  fulfilment)  of  every  vision.  24.  For  there  shall  be  no 
more  any  vain  vision,  nor  flattering  divination,  within  the  house  of  Israel. 
25.  For  I  Jehovah  will  speak  whatever  word  I  will  speak,  and  it  shall  be 
done  ;  it  shall  be  no  more  prolonged  ;  for  in  your  days,  0  rebellious  house, 
will  I  speak  the  word,  and  will  perform  it,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  26.  And 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  27.  Son  of  man,  behold  the 
house  of  Israel  say,  The  vision  which  he  sees  is  for  many  days,  and  he  pro 
phesies  of  the  times  that  are  far  off.  28.  Therefore  say  unto  them,  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  No  longer  shall  any  of  my  words  be  prolonged  ; 
whatever  word  I  may  speak,  it  shall  be  done,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

THEEE  is  nothing  absolutely  new  in  this  portion,  if  viewed  simply 
in  regard  to  the  great  objects  of  the  tidings  it  conveys.  The 
burden  of  some  of  the  preceding  visions  is  again  resumed,  and 
several  striking  particulars  added,  to  confirm  the  certainty  of 
the  coming  evil,  and  beget,  if  possible,  a  deeper  impression  of 
its  fearful  nature.  The  elders,  it  would  seem,  had  withdrawn,  to 
whom  the  prophet  had  communicated  the  visions  already  im 
parted  to  him  respecting  the  crying  abominations  and  approach 
ing  doom  of  Jerusalem.  He  is  to  all  appearance  alone  at  the 
time  of  the  Spirit's  next  descent  upon  him  ;  and  indeed,  the 
persons  immediately  interested  in  the  revelation  given  were  not 
those  around  him  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  but  those  still  resid 
ing  in  Jerusalem,—"  the  rebellious  house,"  as  they  are  described 
in  ver.  2,  in  words  originally  addressed  by  Moses  to  their 
fathers  (Deut.  xxix.  4),  "  who  have  eyes  to  see,  and  see  not;  and 
ears  to  hear,  and  hear  not."  Yet  he  is  spoken  of  as  dwelling  in 


VISION  OF  EZEKIEL'S  TYPICAL  EXILE.  119 

the  midst  of  them,  and  is  commanded  to  exhibit  in  his  own  person 
a  typical  representation  of  what  was  to  happen.  a  It  may  be," 
said  the  Lord,  "they  will  see,  though  they  are  a  rebellious  house." 

Two  things  were  to  be  done  by  Ezekiel.  He  was,  first,  in  open 
day,  and  in  the  sight  of  his  neighbours,  to  provide  for  himself 
the  articles  usually  taken  by  one  who  was  going  to  flee  as  for 
his  life,  or  be  dragged  as  a  captive  to  a  foreign  land.  Then, 
being  thus  provided,  he  was  ordered  to  wait  till  the  evening,  and 
depart  "  as  they  that  go  forth  into  captivity."  The  expression 
in  the  original  refers  properly  not  to  the  persons  of  such  as  went 
into  exile,  but  to  the  period  usually  chosen  for  their  doing  so ; 
it  is  literally,  "  as  the  goings  forth  of  the  exile,"  viz.  amid  the 
darkness  and  silence  of  night,  when  he  can  most  easily  effect 
his  escape.  If  more  exactly  defined,  the  period  intended  would 
be  certainly  the  earlier  part  of  the  night,  yet  still  not  simply  the 
evening,  nor  the  twilight,  as  is  improperly  given  by  our  trans 
lators  in  ver.  6,  but  rather  by  night,  after  it  had  become  dark. 
When  it  is  said,  therefore  (in  ver.  3),  that  the  prophet  was  to 
remove  uby  day  before  their  eyes,"  the  meaning  is,  not  that  he 
should  then  actually  change  his  abode,  but  that  he  should  be 
employed  in  the  business  of  removing,  so  as  to  give  clear  evi 
dence  to  all  that  this  was  his  object,  which  he  only  waited  for 
the  shades  of  evening  to  carry  into  effect.  Nor  was  this  all ; 
the  nocturnal  departure  was  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  indicate 
the  approaching  future;  he  must  also  effect  his  escape  through 
a  hole  in  the  wall,  as  one  too  closely  watched  by  hostile  parties 
to  adventure  into  the  open  street,  and  must  cover  his  face,  as 
too  sorrowful  or  abashed  even  to  look  upon  the  ground. 

The  instructions  thus  given  are  reported  to  have  been  faith 
fully  complied  with  by  the  prophet ;  and  on  the  morrow  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him  in  explanation  of  the  action, 
telling  him,  that  in  all  that  he  had  done  he  was  merely  fore 
shadowing,  as  in  a  type,  what  was  presently  to  take  place  with 
Zedekiah  and  his  people  at  Jerusalem.  And  then  he  goes  on 
to  portray,  with  an  appalling  distinctness  of  vision  and  minute 
ness  of  detail,  the  disasters  that  had  been  prefigured,  first  and 
most  prominently  in  the  case  of  Zedekiah,  and  then  in  the  case 
of  the  people  at  large.  In  this  detail  he  specifies  not  only  the 
fact  of  Jerusalem's  approaching  overthrow,  but  also  the  king's 
hurried  and  disgraceful  flight  under  cover  of  night — the  failure 


120  EZEKIEL  XII. 

of  his  attempt  to  escape — his  seizure  by  the  Chaldeans — his 
deportation  to  Babylon,  though  in  a  state  in  which  he  should 
not  be  able  to  see  it — the  utter  prostration  of  his  host — the  dis 
persion  of  his  people  among  the  nations — and  the  miserable 
desolation  of  the  whole  land.  The  variety  of  particulars  men 
tioned  in  this  prediction,  coupled  with  the  confirmation  given  to 
them  in  the  subsequent  history,  as  recorded  in  2  Kings  xxv. 
and  Jer  lii.,  is  of  a  very  striking  nature,  and  entitles  the 
prophecy  to  a  place  among  the  more  remarkable  delinea 
tions  of  coming  events  in  Scripture.  Nor  can  we  wonder  at 
the  statement  made  by  Josephus  (Ant.  b.  x.  c.  7),  though  we 
have  no  other  evidence  of  its  truth,  that  Ezekiel  sent  a  copy  of 
it  to  Zedekiah.  The  report  carries  the  more  probability  with  it, 
as  Jeremiah's  letter  of  sympathy  and  counsel  to  the  captives  on 
the  river  Chebar  was  what  instrumentally  called  forth  at  first 
the  agency  of  Ezekiel ;  and  it  was  no  more  than  might  be 
expected  that  he  should  endeavour  to  strengthen  the  hands  of 
his  spiritual  father  in  the  land  of  Judah,  by  sending  in  turn 
a  message  to  Jerusalem,  confirmatory  of  the  warnings  already 
uttered  there  by  Jeremiah.  On  the  supposition  of  this  having 
been  actually  done  by  Ezekiel,  the  further  report  of  Josephus, 
as  to  the  effect  produced  upon  Zedekiah  by  the  communication, 
readily  commends  itself  to  our  belief.  He  states  that  the 
infatuated  prince,  instead  of  simply  receiving  the  word  of  God, 
began  to  compare  together  the  predictions  of  Jeremiah  and 
Ezekiel,  and  finding  that  the  one  declared  he  should  be  carried 
to  Babylon,  while  the  other  affirmed  he  should  indeed  be 
brought  to  Babylon,  but  should  not  see  it,  he  presently  con 
cluded  that  the  two  predictions  were  at  variance  with  each  other, 
and  rejected  both  as  false.  In  this  he  but  showed  the  captious 
disposition  of  superficial  inquirers  and  shallow  unbelievers  of  all 
ages,  who  no  sooner  discover  some  obvious  difficulties  on  the  sur 
face  of  revelation,  than  they  conclude  the  whole  to  be  a  cunningly 
devised  fable,  or  treat  it  as  unworthy  of  their  serious  considera 
tion.  Would  they  but  search  a  little  deeper,  and  survey,  in  a 
spirit  of  impartiality,  the  entire  field  of  revelation,  they  would 
find  that  the  things  which  at  first  stagger  their  belief  dis 
appear  on  closer  inspection,  or  remain  only  as  difficulties  insepar 
able  from  communications  which  bear  respect  to  the  character 
and  purposes  of  Godhead.  They  would  not  unfrequently  find, 


VISION  or  EZEKIEL'S  TYPICAL  EXILE.  121 

what  was  found  by  Zedekiah  too  late  for  his  own  good,  that  the 
very  things  which  are  most  apt  at  first  to  create  a  feeling  of 
distrust  or  suspicion  are  those  which  contain  the  most  undoubted 
evidences  of  the  finger  of  God.  Human  sagacity  might  pos 
sibly  have  foreseen,  or  by  a  happy  conjecture  anticipated,  the 
coming  rupture  between  Zedekiah  and  the  Chaldeans,  and  the 
consequent  overthrow  of  the  city  Jerusalem  ;  but  that  Zedekiah 
should  endeavour  to  make  his  escape  from  it  by  night,  should 
be  caught  in  the  attempt,  should  meet  face  to  face  with  the 
king  of  Babylon,  should  himself  be  carried  to  Babylon,  though 
(from  his  eyes  having  been  meanwhile  put  out)  should  not 
actually  behold  the  place, — that  such  a  train  of  peculiar  cir 
cumstances  should  have  been  delineated  beforehand  by  the 
hand  of  a  prophet  manifestly  bespoke  the  directing  agency  of 
that  Spirit  who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning. 

The  circumstance  that  the  burden  contained  in  this  Divine 
communication  had  direct  reference  to  the  king  and  people  of 
Jerusalem,  alone  renders  it  highly  probable  that  the  symbolical 
action  here  also  took  place  not  externally  but  in  vision.  So  far 
as  the  parties  immediately  interested  were  concerned,  the  repre 
sentation  would  have  been  equally  significant  if  confined  to  that 
region  within  which  the  prophet's  soul  properly  moved  when 
supernaturally  acted  on  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  if  exhibited 
under  the  form  of  an  outward  and  ordinary  transaction.  Indeed, 
the  action  is  described  as  proceeding  among  the  very  people  for 
whom  the  instruction  was  peculiarly  intended,  "  the  rebellious 
people  among  whom  he  dwelt,"  as  if  his  abode  had  actually  been 
transferred  from  Chebar  to  Jerusalem.  So,  too,  when  the  action 
was  done,  it  was  still  the  same  "  rebellious  house,  the  house  of 
Israel,"  who  are  represented  as  saying  to  him,  "  What  doest 
thou?"  Throughout  the  representation  the  prophet  appears 
present  in  the  spirit  at  Jerusalem,  and  transacting  there  directly 
with  its  people ;  but  how  he  could  be  and  transact  there,  while 
personally  resident  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  otherwise  than 
in  vision,  it  seems  impossible  to  understand.  Besides,  if  the 
action  had  taken  place  on  the  territory  of  real  life,  how  could  it 
have  appeared  to  be  other  than  an  incongruous  thing  for  an 
individual,  himself  living  in  exile,  to  personate,  by  his  removal, 
the  going  of  his  brethren  into  exile  from  their  proper  home  in 
Judea?  The  action  would  rather  have  carried  a  contrary 


122  EZEKIEL  XII. 

import — would  most  naturally  have  signified  the  return  of  his 
fellow-exiles  to  Judea — unless  it  proceeded  on  the  supposition 
of  his  being  for  the  time  located,  of  course  as  an  ideal  inhabi 
tant,  in  his  native  land.  At  the  same  time,  holding  the  action 
to  have  taken  place  in  vision,  as  it  certainly  bore  respect  more 
immediately  to  the  king  and  people  of  Jerusalem,  we  are  not 
to  imagine  that  the  instruction  was  without  meaning  for  the 
prophet's  fellow-captives  in  Chaldea.  For  many  of  these,  pro 
bably  by  much  the  larger  portion  of  them,  were  still  hanging 
their  hopes  upon  the  fallacious  confidence  that  matters  should 
ere  long  right  themselves  with  the  house  of  David,  so  as  to  admit 
of  their  returning  again  to  the  land  of  their  fathers.  They  were 
but  externally  dwelling  at  a  distance,  for  Jerusalem  still  lived 
in  their  hearts ;  the  delusions  which  were  reigning  at  the  one 
place  had  found  a  home  also  in  the  other  ;  and,  just  as  in  the 
preceding  visions  the  communications  given  to  the  prophet  for 
the  behoof  of  his  fellow-captives  were  fitted  also  to  admonish  and 
warn  the  people  at  Jerusalem,  so  now,  inversely,  the  word  re 
ceived,  and  most  probably  sent  as  soon  as  received,  for  the  use  of 
the  people  of  Jerusalem,  was  fraught  with  wholesome  instruction 
to  those  among  whom  he  lived  and  laboured  on  the  Chebar. 

If  anything  could  have  broken  the  spell  of  delusion  which  lay 
upon  the  minds  of  Zedekiah  and  his  counsellors,  or  their  adher 
ents  in  Chaldea,  one  might  suppose  this  instructive  action  of  the 
prophet  would  have  done  it,  especially  when  followed  up  by  such 
a  minute  and  varied  detail  of  approaching  calamities.  Nor  was 
it  merely  the  certainty  of  those  calamities  being  appointed  which 
he  thus  sought  to  impress  upon  them  ;  he  was  equally  explicit  in 
regard  to  their  nearness.  For,  well  knowing  how  some  were 
ready  to  treat  the  message  with  scorn,  and  others,  though  not 
prepared  utterly  to  despise  it,  were  yet  disposed  to  put  away 
from  them  the  evil  day,  the  Lord  spake  further  in  the  ears  of  the 
prophet,  "  Son  of  man,  what  is  that  proverb  ye  have  in  the  land 
of  Israel,  saying,  The  days  are  prolonged,  and  every  vision  fails? 
Tell  them,  therefore,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  will  make 
this  proverb  to  cease,  and  they  shall  no  more  use  it  as  a  proverb 
in  Israel ;  but  say  unto  them,  The  days  are  at  hand,  and  the 
word  of  every  vision."  It  would  seem  the  class  of  persons  here 
referred  to  had  succeeded  in  persuading  themselves,  that  as  the 
evil  had  so  often  been  threatened  and  still  postponed,  the  evil 


VISION  OF  EZEKIEL'S  TYPICAL  EXILE.  123 

itself  had  no  reality;  the  experience  of  God's  forbearance  had 
effaced  their  impressions  of  his  truthfulness ;  so  that  on  hearing 
such  an  unwelcome  message  as  that  contained  in  the  earlier  part 
of  this  chapter,  they  were  ready  to  dispose  of  it  by  the  slighting 
remark,  "Ah,  we  have  heard  many  words  like  these  before,  yet 
matters  have  not  turned  out  so  bad  !  "  They  not  merely  thought 
much  time  had  still  to  elapse  before  the  prophetic  roll  discharged 
its  burden  of  woe,  but  a  spirit  of  unbelief  had  taken  possession 
of  their  minds  regarding  the  reality  of  the  burden  itself ;  it 
seemed  to  them  but  a  dream  of  the  prophet's  own  mind.  And 
there  were  others  who  simply  presumed  upon  the  delay  they 
expected  to  intervene,  and,  as  is  said  in  Amos  vi.  3,  "  put  far 
from  them  the  evil  day."  They  did  not  deny  that  a  day  of  evil 
was  coming,  but  indulged  the  hope  that  it  might  still  be  at  a 
considerable  distance.  They  were  disposed  to  say,  as  Ezekiel 
himself  reports  their  words  in  ver.  27,  "  The  vision  that  he  sees 
is  for  many  days  to  come,  and  he  prophesies  of  the  times  that 
are  far  off."  But  to  them  also  the  prophet  was  commanded  to 
reply,  "  There  shall  none  of  my  words  be  prolonged  any  more, 
but  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  shall  be  done,  saith  the  Lord." 
The  incredulous  and  secure  feeling  which  is  here  ascribed  to 
the  people  of  Jerusalem,  growing  as  the  hour  of  destruction 
approached,  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  testimony  recorded 
in  other  prophetical  scriptures.  Thus  Zephaniah  declares  the 
Lord's  determination  "  to  search  Jerusalem,  and  punish  the  men 
that  are  settled  on  their  lees ;  that  say  in  their  heart,  The 
Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil"  (chap.  i.  12). 
In  a  spirit  of  practical  atheism,  they  had  grown  into  the  con 
viction  that  there  should  be  no  special  interposition  of  Heaven 
at  all,  and  that,  whatever  the  people  might  do,  events  would 
take  their  natural  course.  But  still  more  expressly  Jeremiah, 
"  Behold,  they  say  unto  me,  Where  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  ? 
Let  it  come  now"  (chap.  xvii.  15).  That  this  was  said  in  a 
feeling  of  scornful  disbelief  regarding  the  evil  he  had  so  often 
foretold,  is  evident  from  the  vindication  he  immediately  presents 
for  himself,  protesting  before  God  that  "  he  had  not  desired  the 
evil  day,"  but  spake  only  that  which  God  had  put  into  his  lips. 
And  again,  in  chap,  xx.,  he  describes  the  anguish  of  soul  he 
experienced  on  account  of  the  treatment  that  was  given  to  the 
word  of  God,  which  had  nearly  prevailed  on  him  to  yield  to  the 


124  EZEKIEL  XII. 

temptation  of  ceasing  to  utter  it  any  more.  "  I  cried  out,  I 
cried  violence  and  spoil ;  because  the  word  of  the  Lord  was 
made  a  reproach  to  me,  and  a  derision  daily.  Then  I  said,  I 
will  not  make  mention  of  him,  nor  speak  any  more  in  his  name. 
But  it  was  in  mine  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  bones, 
and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not  stay." 
No  wonder,  then,  that  Ezekiel,  in  his  distant  exile,  should  have 
sympathized  with  his  afflicted  brother  in  Judah,  and  should  have 
sought  to  strengthen  him  in  his  conflict  with  evil,  by  levelling  a 
word  of  severe  reproof  against  the  vain  presumptions  and  false 
confidences  which  were  so  offensively  rearing  their  head  among 
the  people  of  Jerusalem.  The  one  prophet  did  for  the  other 
the  part  of  a  true  fellow-labourer  in  the  service  of  God.  He 
came  boldly  to  his  help  in  the  day  of  blasphemy  and  rebuke, 
and  gave  fresh  support  to  the  cause  of  righteousness  and  truth, 
by  proclaiming  from  another  watch-tower  the  faithful,  though 
despised,  warning  note  of  danger. 

We  cannot  but  think  with  wonder,  when  we  look  back  upon 
the  times  of  these  Old  Testament  prophets,  of  the  obstinate 
incredulity  and  measureless  content  in  which  so  many  of  the 
people  seem  to  have  shut  themselves  up,  alike  in  defiance  of  the 
most  solemn  warnings  of  God,  and  in  spite  of  several  lowring 
appearances  in  Providence,  which  seemed  to  give  no  doubtful 
indications  of  a  coming  storm.  So  too,  doubtless,  thought  the 
next  generation  of  the  Jews  themselves,  when,  in  the  language 
of  Zechariah,  they  saw  how  "  God's  words  and  statutes,  which 
he  commanded  his  servants  the  prophets,  had  taken  hold  of 
their  fathers "  (chap.  i.  6).  But  it  is  well  for  us  to  bear  in 
mind,  that  the  spirit  of  unbelief  and  false  security  which  pre 
vailed  so  extensively  then  is  ever  springing  forth  anew,  and  is 
plainly  announced  in  New  Testament  Scripture  as  destined  to 
form  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  last  times.  It  was  a 
significant  question  of  our  Lord,  and  evidently  pointed  to  the 
great  defect  in  this  respect  that  should  discover  itself  before  the 
consummation  of  all  things,  "When  the  Son  of  man  comes,  shall 
he  find  faith  in  the  earth  ?  "  Such  faith,  namely,  as  he  had 
been  speaking  of, — faith  realizing  in  firm  confidence  the  certainty 
of  the  Lord's  manifestation  to  put  a  final  end  to  the  evils  that 
afflict  his  Church,  and  in  this  confidence  waiting,  hoping,  pray 
ing  to  the  last.  The  Apostle  Peter  also  still  more  distinctly 


VISION  or  EZEKIEL'S  TYPICAL  EXILE.  125 

intimates  in  his  second  epistle  what  might  be  looked  for : 
"  There  shall  come  in  the  last  days,  scoffers,  walking  after  their 
own  lusts,  and  saying,  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ? 
for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  It  will  readily  be  understood 
that  the  danger  from  this  source  to  this  faith  of  God's  elect  will 
always  be  the  greater,  the  more  the  time  is  lengthened  out  that 
is  to  intervene  between  the  first  and  second  coming  of  the  Lord. 
For  time,  which  is  justly  said  to  try  all  things,  in  this  respect 
also  tries  faith,  that  it  silently  impairs  in  men's  minds  the  foun 
dation  on  which  faith  rests — the  word  of  God.  In  common 
with  other  things  of  meaner  value,  this,  too,  seems  to  wax  old  as 
time  proceeds,  and  to  become,  the  longer  it  is  in  use,  the  less  in 
power  and  value.  Even  already  it  is  looked  upon  by  many  as 
comparatively  antiquated,  out  of  date ;  the  facts  of  which  it 
testifies  are  but  faintly  descried  in  the  distant  past ;  centuries 
have  rolled  away  since  they  took  place  and  were  put  on  record ; 
and  the  record  itself  has  been  so  long  in  existence,  so  frequently 
handled,  and  so  fully  discussed,  that  with  those  to  whom  nothing 
is  interesting  but  what  possesses  the  freshness  of  novelty,  the 
sacred  volume,  so  far  from  being  able  to  nourish  and  support  a 
living  faith,  has  itself  become  stale  and  dead. 

Thus  it  is  that  natural  men  judge  of  God's  word,  as  if,  like 
their  own  productions,  it  were  subject  to  wasting  and  decay. 
They  know  not  that  this  word  of  God,  being  the  expression  of 
his  own  eternal  nature,  has  in  it  what  lives  and  abides  for  ever, 
— what  is  as  new  and  fresh  to  the  heart  of  faith  still  as  the  very 
moment  when,  ages  ago,  it  proceeded  from  the  lips  of  those  who 
spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then,  along 
with  a  prevailing  ignorance  or  forgetfulness  of  this  great  truth, 
there  is  the  fascinating  influence  which  is  apt  to  be  wielded  over 
men's  minds  by  the  onward  movements  of  society  in  knowledge 
and  civilisation.  Here  they  find  an  attractive  contrast  to  the 
stationary  character  of  the  ground  and  objects  of  faith.  For 
everything  in  this  lower  field  seems  constantly  in  progress,  and 
big  with  hope  for  the  future.  It  is  deemed  incredible  that 
while  such  vital  powers  are  at  work,  and  such  a  career  of 
advancement  is  in  prospect,  God  should  lay  a  sudden  arrest  on 
the  vast  machinery,  and  wind  up  the  affairs  of  the  world  by 
bringing  in  the  fixed  and  final  issues  of  eternity.  Nay,  the 


126  EZE KIEL  XIII. 

belief  of  a  personal  God,  separate  from  the  workmanship  of  his 
own  hands,  and  capable  of  suddenly  introducing  a  state  of  things 
altogether  new,  is  in  many  quarters  fast  giving  way.  In  a  new 
and  peculiarly  subtle  form,  the  old  carnal  and  idolatrous  tenden 
cies  are  reviving,  impiously  commingling  the  Divine  and  human, 
identifying  the  creature  with  the  Creator.  And  judging  from 
present  appearances,  there  is  too  much  reason  to  conclude  that, 
precisely  as  before  Christ  came  to  execute  judgment  upon  Jeru 
salem  a  rage  for  worldly  saviours  was  one  of  the  reigning  delu 
sions  of  the  time,  so,  as  the  period  draws  on  for  his  coming  to 
execute  judgment  upon  the  world,  a  like  rage  will  prevail  for  a 
worldly  gospel^ — one  that  will  seek  to  confound  heaven  and 
earth,  God  and  man,  and,  in  a  manner  possibly  even  more 
daring  and  presumptuous  than  in  the  Papacy,  will  dispose  man 
to  "exalt  himself  in  the  temple  of  God,  and  show  himself  that 
he  is  God."  What  need,  then,  for  those  who  would  escape  the 
condemnation  of  the  wicked  to  look  well  to  the  foundation  of 
their  faith,  and  to  see  that  this  stands  not  in  the  wisdom  of  man, 
but  in  the  word  of  God !  How  careful  should  each  be  to  dwell 
beside  the  fountain  of  Israel !  For  times  of  trial  manifestly  are 
coming,  in  which  they  only  who  are  taught  of  God,  and  kept  by 
the  power  of  his  Spirit,  can  expect  to  resist  the  swelling  tide  of 
delusion,  and  maintain  even  the  appearance  of  godliness. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE   FALSE  IN   PROPHECY,  ITS   CHARACTER   AND   DOOM. 

A  VERY  close  connection  exists  between  the  subject  of  this 
chapter  and  the  one  immediately  preceding.  The  former  had 
denounced  the  false  expectations  of  the  people  respecting  the 
safety  of  Jerusalem  ;  this  denounces  the  persons  who  were  the 
chief  instruments  in  feeding  these  expectations.  And  in  this 
case,  still  more  directly  than  in  the  other,  Ezekiel  stretches  out 
the  hand  to  Jeremiah,  and  comes  forward  as  a  second,  though 
perfectly  independent  witness,  to  reiterate  and  confirm  the  testi 
mony  already  delivered  in  substance  by  his  fellow-servant  in 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  CHARACTER  AND  DOOM.       127 

Judea.  One  of  the  sorest  trials — and,  indeed,  one  of  the  most 
baffling  difficulties  Jeremiah  had  there  to  contend  with — arose 
from  the  false  pretenders  to  the  prophetical  gift,  who  were  con 
stantly  delivering,  in  the  name  of  God,  messages  which  tended 
only  to  foster  prevailing  sins,  arid  to  lend  the  appearance  of  a 
Divine  sanction  to  the  popular  delusions.  "  Mine  heart  within 
me  is  broken,"  he  says  in  chap,  xxiii.  9,  "  because  of  the  pro 
phets  ;  all  my  bones  shake ;  I  am  like  a  drunken  man."  It  is 
more  than  probable  that  most  of  these  false  prophets  were  per 
fectly  conscious  of  the  fraud  they  were  practising  upon  the 
people,  and  laid  claim  to  Divine  communications  only  as  a  pre 
text  for  more  readily  securing  their  own  selfish  though  short 
sighted  purposes.  But  it  seems  evident,  especially  from  what  is 
written  in  Jeremiah,  that  there  were  at  least  some  who  had 
become  the  dupes  of  their  own  delusions,  and  were  fully  as  much 
fanatics  as  knaves.  A  crafty  diviner,  who  plays  upon  the  cre 
dulity  of  others  for  the  sake  of  his  own  gain  or  aggrandizement, 
will  always  be  careful  to  make  his  announcements  run  in  such  a 
strain,  that  while  they  obviously  tend  to  feed  the  desires  and 
prejudices  of  the  persons  he  addresses,  they  at  the  same  time 
furnish  no  clear  and  definite  grounds  for  detecting  his  hypocrisy. 
And  whenever  such  vain  pretenders  to  a  supernatural  insight 
into  the  Divine  will  begin  to  hazard  deliverances  which  admit 
of  being  distinctly  falsified  as  well  as  confirmed  by  approaching 
events  in  Providence,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  spirit  of  fanaticism 
has  risen  to  the  ascendant  in  their  bosoms,  and  that,  if  they  de 
ceive  others,  they  have  themselves  already  been  deceived. 

Such,  unquestionably,  was  the  case  at  Jerusalem  in  the  time 
of  Jeremiah.  Not  only  were  there  persons  in  considerable 
numbers  who  prophesied  falsely,  and  gave  forth  general  assur 
ances  of  continued  peace  (Jer.  v.  31,  vi.  14,  xiv.  13),  but  there 
were  also  those  who,  in  the  most  confident  tone,  held  out  the 
promise  of  specific  events  in  the  immediate  future,  and  fixed  the 
period  of  their  fulfilment.  Thus  Hananiah  of  Gibeon  said  to 
Jeremiah  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  in  the  presence  of  the  priests 
and  of  all  the  people :  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the 
God  of  Israel,  saying,  I  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  king  of 
Babylon.  Within  two  full  years  will  I  bring  again  into  this 
place  all  the  vessels  of  the  Lord's  house,  which  Nebuchadnezzar 
took  away  from  this  place,  and  carried  them  to  Babylon.  And 


128  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

I  will  bring  again  to  this  place  Jeconiah,  the  son  of  Jehoiakim, 
king  of  Judah,  with  all  the  captives  of  Judah  that  went  into 
Babylon,  saith  the  Lord ;  for  I  will  break  the  yoke  of  the  king 
of  Babylon"  (chap,  xxviii.  2-4).  No  man  in  his  senses  would 
have  ventured  on  such  a  circumstantial  prediction,  unless  he  had 
himself  firmly  believed  it ;  for  he  was  plainly  committing  his 
entire  credit  as  an  authorized  ambassador  of  Heaven  to  contin 
gencies  over  which  he  had  no  control,  and  which  might  shortly 
take  a  turn  that  would  expose  him  to  reprobation  as  an  arrant 
impostor.  By  whatever  process  the  persuasion  may  have  been 
reached,  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  had  become  thoroughly  per 
suaded  in  his  own  mind  of  the  truth  of  his  prediction  before 
he  proclaimed  it  in  the  public  ear.  And  we  must  keep  in  mind 
the  fact  that  there  were  such  self-deceived  impostors  at  Jeru 
salem, — a  fact,  as  we  shall  see,  pointedly  referred  to  in  this 
chapter  of  Ezekiel, — both  to  understand  correctly  the  circum 
stances  of  the  time,  and  to  derive  from  them  the  improvement 
they  are  fitted  to  convey. 

It  is  to  be  further  borne  in  mind,  that  while  the  spirit  of  false 
prophesying  chiefly  prevailed  in  Judea,  it  had  also  extended  to 
the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  There  it  no  doubt  existed  in  com 
parative  feebleness,  having  few  of  the  outward  stimulants  to 
nurse  it  into  activity  and  strength  which  were  supplied  in  abun 
dance  by  the  peculiar  position  and  circumstances  of  Jerusalem  ; 
and  it  probably  did  little  more  than  re-echo  the  utterances  which 
proceeded  from  its  centre  of  influence  in  Judea.  Yet  that  there 
was  such  a  spirit  at  work  also  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar  is 
manifest  alone  from  the  letter  addressed  by  Jeremiah  to  the 
captives,  in  which  he  charged  them  "  not  to  be  deceived  by  their 
prophets  and  their  diviners  that  were  in  the  midst  of  them,  for 
they  prophesied  falsely  in  the  Lord's  name  ; "  and  he  even  men 
tioned  three  persons  by  name,  Ahab,  Zedekiah,  and  Shemaiah, 
who  were  acting  the  part  of  false  prophets  among  them  (chap. 
xxix.  8,  9,  21,  etc.).  So  that  the  evil  against  which  the  com 
munication  in  this  chapter  is  directed  was  not  without  its  abet 
tors  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Ezekiel,  although,  in 
the  rampant  and  offensive  form  here  delineated,  it  was  to  be 
found  only  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  word,  therefore,  must  be  re 
garded  as  directly  and  primarily  intended  for  the  use  of  those 
who  still  resided  there.  For  this  reason,  also,  it  is  that  the  word 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  CHARACTER  AND  DOOM.         129 

of  Ezekiel  joins  itself  so  closely  to  similar  words  previously 
delivered  by  Jeremiah  on  the  spot,  and,  in  the  very  language 
employed,  bears  unrnistakeable  references  especially  to  the  23d 
chapter  of  that  prophet's  writings. 

But  it  is  time  to  come  to  the  more  particular  examination  of 
the  passage  itself.  It  naturally  falls  into  two  principal  parts, — 
the  one  bearing  respect  to  the  false  prophets,  and  the  other  to 
the  false  prophetesses.  Each  of  these  again  admits  of  a  twofold 
division, — a  first  part,  delineating  the  operations  and  symptoms 
of  the  false  spirit  in  question,  and  a  second,  disclosing  the  judg 
ment  of  God  upon  those  who  yielded  themselves  to  its  sway. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
prophesy  against  the  prophets  of  Israel  that  prophesy,  and  say  unto  the  pro 
phets  out  of  their  own  hearts,  Hear  ye  the  word  of  Jehovah  ;  3.  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  Woe  to  the  foolish  prophets,  that  follow  their  own  spirit 
and  have  seen  nothing.  4.  As  foxes  in  the  deserts  have  been  thy  prophets, 
0  Israel.  5.  Ye  have  not  gone  up  into  the  breach,  nor  have  ye  drawn  a 
wall  around  the  house  of  Israel,  to  stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the  Lord. 
6.  They  have  seen  vanity  and  lying  divination,  saying,  Jehovah  saith — and 
Jehovah  hath  not  sent  them,  and  hoped  to  establish  their  word.1  7.  Have 
ye  not  seen  a  vain  vision,  and  spoken  a  lying  divination  ?  And  ye  say  Jeho 
vah  saith,  and  I  have  not  spoken.  8.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jeho 
vah,  Because  ye  have  spoken  vanity  and  seen  a  lie,  therefore,  behold,  I  am 
against  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  9.  And  my  hand  will  come  upon  the 
prophets  who  prophesy  vanity  and  divine  falsehood  ;  in  the  council  of  my 
people  they  shall  not  be,  nor  shall  they  be  written  in  the  book  of  the  house 
of  Israel ;  and  unto  the  land  of  Israel  they  shall  not  come ;  and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord  Jehovah.  10.  Because,  even  because  they  have 
seduced  my  people,  saying,  Peace,  and  there  was  no  peace ;  and  the  one  (viz. 
the  people)  build  a  wall,  and  the  others  (viz.  the  prophets)  plaster  it  with 
whitewash.2  11.  Say  unto  them  who  plaster  it  with  whitewash,  and  it  shall 


1  This  last  clause  is  rendered  in  the  authorized  version,  "and  they  made 
others  to  hope,  that  they  would  confirm  the  word."  But  prp  with  ^>,  as 
Havernick  remarks,  always  means  to  expect  or  hope  for  something.  The 
correct  interpretation,  therefore,  is  that  which  refers  the  hope  to  the  pro 
phets  themselves.  Seeker:  "They  hoped  to  establish  the  word."  Michaelis: 
"  They  hoped  that  their  words  would  be  fulfilled."  Hitzig's  attempt  to 
change  the  reference — "  Jehovah  has  not  sent  them,  that  they  should  hope 
for  the  confirmation  of  their  words  " — is  quite  arbitrary,  and  has  been  re 
sorted  to  merely  because  he  thought  the  prophets  could  not  be  so  self- 
deceived.  But  there  are  sufficient  grounds,  as  we  shall  show,  for  holding 
that  they  were  so.  And  such  expressions  as  those  in  Jeremiah :  "  I  have 
not  sent  these  prophets,  yet  they  ran  ;  I  have  not  spoken  by  them,  yet  the 
people  said,"  "  They  say  the  burden  of  the  Lord  "  (chap,  xxiii.  21,  34),  be 
token  the  working  of  a  strong  spirit  of  delusion. 

2  "Daub  with  untempered  mortar,"  is  the  phrase  used  for  this  operation  in 

I 


1  30  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

fall  :  There  is  coming  a  flood  of  rain,  and  ye,  0  great  hailstones,  shall  fall, 
and  a  stormy  wind  shall  break  forth.1  12.  And  lo  !  the  wall  falls  :  shall  it 
not  be  said  to  you,  Where  is  the  plastering  with  which  ye  plastered  it?  13. 
Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  cause  to  break  forth  a  stormy 
wind  in  my  wrath,  and  a  flood  of  rain  shall  come  in  mine  anger,  and  great 
hailstones  in  fury  to  consume.  14.  And  I  destroy  the  wall  which  ye  have 
plastered  with  whitewash,  and  bring  it  down  to  the  ground  ;  and  its  founda 
tions  are  discovered,  and  it  falls,  and  ye  are  consumed  in  the  midst  of  it  ; 
and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  15.  And  I  accomplish  my  wrath 
upon  the  wall,  and  upon  them  that  plastered  it  with  whitewash,  and  will 
say  unto  you,  The  wall  is  not,  and  they  are  not  that  plastered  it:  16.  The 
prophets  of  Israel,  that  prophesy  to  Jerusalem,  and  see  a  vision  of  peace  for 
her  while  there  is  no  peace  —  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

17.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy 
people  that  prophesy  out  of  their  own  heart,  and  prophesy  against  them. 
18.  And  thou  shalt  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Woe  to  the  women 
that  sew  cushions  (or  coverings)  upon  all  the  joints  of  the  hands,  and  make 
coverings  upon  the  head  of  every  stature,  to  catch  (as  a  hunter)  souls!  Will 
ye  catch  the  souls  of  my  people,  and  save  your  own  souls  alive?  2  19.  And 


the  authorized  version,  as  in  many  others,  ancient  and  modern.  It  partly, 
however,  suggests  a  false  idea.  The  word  ^Qfi,  when  used  in  a  physical  sense, 
is  simply  coating  or  whitewash,  such  as  is  usually  laid  on  the  outside  of  walls. 
Jarchi  :  est  terra  similis  calci.  Hitzig  renders  expressly,  and  not  improperly, 
chalk.  The  idea  intended  is,  that  the  false  prophets,  countenancing  the 
people  in  their  delusions,  sought  merely  to  make  the  outside  fair  —  to  give  to 
the  fabric  the  people  raised  a  showy  and  promising  appearance,  while  still 
there  was  no  real  solidity  or  inherent  strength.  Hence  St.  Paul's  word  to 
the  high  priest,  "  Thou  whited  wall,"  Acts  xxiii.  3,  and  the  "  whited 
sepulchre  "  of  our  Lord  in  Matt,  xxiii.  27. 

1  The  verb  y^n  commonly  signifies  to  cleave  or  rend  asunder;  in  the  Piel, 
to  cleave,  for  example,  wood,  or  tear  an  object  like  a  wild  beast.     Hence 
it  has  here  commonly  been  understood  of  rending  or  breaking  down  the 
wall.     But  the  object  of  the  rending  is  not  expressed  ;  and  in  ver.  13  it 
seems  plainly  to  be  applied  in  the  casual  form  to  the  wind  itself  :  I  make  it 
rend  or  break  forth.    It  is  best,  therefore,  to  understand  it  in  the  same  sense 
also  in  ver.  11.     The  Latins  use  the  quite  similar  phrase,  ventus  frangit,  for 
a  violent  gale.    In  Greek  also,  py-ywpi  is  often  applied  to  the  breaking  forth 
of  storms  and  showers. 

2  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  make  out  with  certainty  the  precise  meaning  of 
some  of  the  expressions  in  this  verse,  reference  being  made  to  customs  of 
which  we  have  no  exact  description.     What  is  meant  by  the  cushions,  or 
pillows  (as  it  is  in  the  common  translation,  and  in  the  Rabbins  pulvinar 
longius),  was  probably  some  sort  of  soft  covering  or  tapestry  used  for  pur 
poses  of  luxury.    They  are  said  to  have  been  sewed  for  "  all  the  joints  of  the 
hands  "—so  the  words  literally  mean  ;  referring,  probably,  to  the  wrists  and 
elbow-joints.    By  comparing  Jer.  xxxviii.  12  and  xli.  9,  we  learn  that  it  was 
used  of  shoulder  or  elbow-joints  ;  and  in  ver.  20  here,  the  articles  of  dress  are 
spoken  of  as  going  to  be  torn  from  the  arms  of  the  wearers.     The  head 
dresses  or  kerchiefs  on  every  stature  seem  to  be  the  mantles  or  coverings 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  CHARACTER  AND  DOOM.        131 

will  ye  pollute  me  among  my  people  for  handfuls  of  barley  and  for  pieces  of 
bread,  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  die,  and  to  save  alive  souls  that  should 
not  live,  by  your  lying  to  my  people  that  hearken  to  lies?  20.  Therefore, 
thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  your  cushions,  with  which 
ye  there  catch  souls  for  flying  (or  making  to  fly;1  and  I  will  tear  them  from 
off  your  arms,  and  let  the  souls  go,  the  souls  that  ye  catch  to  make  to  fly. 
21.  And  I  will  tear  off  your  coverings  (for  the  head),  and  will  deliver  my 
people  out  of  your  hand ;  and  they  shall  be  no  more  in  your  hand  to  be 
caught;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  22.  Because  ye  have  made 
sad  with  lies  the  heart  of  the  righteous,  whom  I  did  not  make  sad  ;  and 
have  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  turn  from  his 
wicked  way  that  he  might  live;  23.  Therefore  ye  shall  see  no  more  vanity, 
nor  divine  divinations  ;  and  I  will  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  hand,  and 
ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

with  which  the  women  of  the  East  envelop  their  heads,  and  which  are  some 
times  made  both  of  large  dimensions  and  of  costly  workmanship.  And  as  it 
would  certainly  be  a  peculiar  expression,  "  coverings  upon  the  head  of  every 
stature,"  if  by  every  stature  were  meant  persons  of  different  heights,  it  is 
better,  perhaps,  with  Havernick,  to  regard  "coverings  upon  the  head  "as  a 
complex  phrase,  like  "  head- coverings,"  qualified  by  the  "  every  stature  "  or 
size,  to  denote  the  different  conditions  and  ages  of  persons  who  had  such 
articles  of  seduction  provided  and  fitted  for  them.  The  persons  who  are 
described  as  doing  such  things  are  obviously  represented  as  plying  the  arts 
of  seduction  proper  to  the  most  abandoned  characters ;  and  in  ver.  19  are 
still  further  assimilated  to  them  by  seeking  for  their  reward  only  "handfuls 
of  barley  and  pieces  of  bread," — the  smallest  pittances. 

1  I  retain  the  rendering  of  fiima?  given  in  the  authorized  version;  which 
is  that  also  adopted  by  Gesenius  for  this  passage,  and  is  supported  by  the 
Syriac.  It  certainly,  however,  does  not  yield  a  very  distinct  or  plain  mean 
ing.  The  sense  in  which  the  word  is  commonly  found  is  that  of  sprouting 
or  flourishiny— in  which  sense  it  occurs  also  in  Ezekiel  at  chap.  xvii.  24. 
Gussetius  would  retain  that  sense  here,  and  renders,  ut  efflorescant,  that 
they  may  flourish  or  be  prosperous.  But  it  is  somewhat  incongruous  to 
apply  such  a  term  to  those  who  are  represented  immediately  before  under 
the  image  of  snared  birds.  The  Septuagint  renders  dg  liaaxo^'Triapov,  for 
scattering  or  dispersion— probably  understanding  the  sort  of  flying  meant 
to  be  that  of  a  forced  flight  to  other  and  distant  regions.  Ewald  interprets: 
"  as  if  they  were  birds  of  passage;"  differing  little  from  the  sense  given  by 
old  Pradus:  "with  which  ye  catch  souls  for  birds,  i.e.  as  if  they  were  birds 
— animas  volantes"  This  mode  of  interpretation,  which  seems  competent, 
would  make  the  flying  an  indication  of  the  light  and  unstable  character  of 
the  persons  so  caught.  But  probably  the  more  natural  meaning  is,  to  regard 
it  as  pointing  to  the  result,  expressed  so  as  to  indicate,  with  a  certain  degree 
of  irony,  the  contrariety  between  what  was  promised  and  what  actually 
happened.  The  souls  were  caught  like  silly  birds,  expecting  to  get  as  it 
were  new  wings  to  fly  aloft  in  ample  freedom  and  prosperity;  but  it  was 
only  to  fly  away  from  their  native  home  to  the  land  of  captivity.  Haveruick's 
interpretation  of  diversions  (wanton  pleasures)  is  without  any  proper  founda 
tion,  and  has  only  certain  analogies  to  support  it. 


132  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

I.  We  look  first  at  the  case  of  the  false  prophets. 

1.  These  are  variously  described  ;  and  first,  in  regard  to  the 
fundamental  distinction  that  existed  betwixt  them  and  the  true. 
"  Son  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  prophets  of  Israel  that  pro 
phesy,  and  say  thou  unto  the  prophets  out  of  their  own  hearts, 
Hear  ye  the  word  of  Jehovah  :  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Woe  unto  the  foolish  prophets  that  follow  their  own  spirit,  and 
have  seen  nothing."  A  threefold  error, — first,  in  regard  to  the 
source  from  which  their  messages  were  derived,  "their  own 
hearts"  (so  also  in  Jer.  xxiii.  16,  17)  ;  then  in  the  point  aimed 
at,  going  "  after  their  own  spirit,"  or  following  the  bent  of  their 
natural  inclinations ;  and  finally,  in  the  result  attained,  "  they 
saw  nothing,"  and  yet  spake  as  if  they  had  seen  something. 
Expressed  in  philosophical  language,  the  whole  was  subjective 
merely  without  any  objective  reality — hence,  but  a  vision  in  the 
air,  a  baseless  and  shadowy  superstructure.  The  true  prophet 
differed  in  each  particular  from  the  false  one  :  He  prophesied  not 
from  his  own  heart,  but  from  the  heart  of  God ;  in  conceiving 
and  uttering  his  message,  he  followed  not  his  own  spirit,  but  the 
Spirit  of  God ;  and  consequently,  the  message  he  delivered  was 
charged  with  a  Divine  reality.  There  was,  first  of  all,  something 
objective  in  his  experience,  something  presented  to  his  soul  from 
above,  which  gave  rise  to  whatever  belonged  to  him  of  a  subjec 
tive  character — at  once  lighted  and  fed  the  flame.  Hence  the 
expression  we  sometimes  meet  with  in  the  prophets,  of  their  seeing 
as  a  vision  what  they  had  to  utter:  u  The  vision  of  Isaiah,  the 
son  of  Amos,  which  he  saw;"  "The  burden  which  Habakkuk 
the  prophet  did  see;"  and  the  still  more  peculiar  expression, 
which  is  frequently  employed,  of  seeing  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
(Isa.  ii.  1,  xiii.  1  ;  Amos  i.  1  ;  Mic.  i.  1).  "The  perception  of 
the  Word,  which  God  communicated  to  the  prophets,  was  made 
by  means  of  the  spiritual  sense,  the  apprehension  of  which  is 
named,  in  reference  to  the  noblest  of  the  natural  senses,  a  seeing. 
For  what  enters  into  the  consciousness  of  the  prophet  as  such,  is 
not  the  product  of  his  own  natural  power  of  reflection,  but  an 
object  presented  to  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God  as  from  without, 
and  by  himself  discerned  through  the  opened  spiritual  eye.  The 
Word  itself,  indeed,  is  not  seen,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  body,  in  a 
manner,  of  the  thought  which  has  come  into  the  region  of  his 
sensible  apprehensions.  But  as  the  communication  of  the  Divine 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  CHARACTER.  133 

Word  to  the  prophet  is  to  be  conceived  of  as  a  purely  internal, 
not  a  corporeally  audible  one  (unless  the  contrary  is  distinctly 
specified),  and  the  Divine  idea  presents  itself  not  mediately 
through  the  natural  sense,  but  directly  to  the  spirit  of  the 
prophet,  so  the  notion  of  seeing  is  in  its  proper  place ;  the 
prophet  perceives  that  \vhich  thereafter  forms  itself  in  his  soul, 
as  the  cover  (veil)  of  the  external  word."1 

Here,  then,  lay  the  grand  characteristic  of  the  true  prophet, 
as  distinguished  from  the  false.  There  was  exhibited  objectively 
to  his  soul,  through  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  thought 
or  succession  of  thoughts — an  action,  perhaps,  revealing  the  mind 
and  will  of  God ;  and  then  taking  up  this  in  the  apprehension 
of  his  mind,  he  went  forth  to  declare  it  to  others,  as  from  his 
own  inward  consciousness,  clothed  in  such  words  as  fitly  ex 
pressed  what  had  been  seen  within.  With  the  false  prophet,  on 
the  other  hand,  even  supposing  him  to  be  perfectly  sincere  in 
what  he  uttered,  all  proceeded  from  the  impulse  of  his  own 
inflated  imagination  or  excited  feelings ;  the  whole  was  from 
within  merely,  nothing  from  without,  from  above.  Yet  with 
this  distinction  so  clearly  traced,  and  traced  for  the  express  pur 
pose  of  drawing  the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  true  and 
the  false  in  prophetic  utterances,  we  are  still  presented  with  views 
and  theories  of  inspiration,  which,  in  the  case  of  inspired  men 
generally,  prophets  as  well  as  evangelists  and  apostles,  if  they  do 
not  altogether  discard  the  objective,  render  the  subjective  alone 
prominent, — make  so  much  account  of  the  internal  consciousness 
or  intuitional  sense  of  the  subject  of  inspiration,  as  necessarily  to 
throw  into  the  background  the  Divine  communication  made  to 
him  from  above.  But  in  the  two  classes  of  prophets  here  pre 
sented  to  our  notice,  the  one  could  lay  claim,  as  well  as  the  other, 
to  the  internal  consciousness  of  some  spiritual  thought  or  idea ; 
the  only  question  was,  whence  came  the  idea?  Did  it  spring 
up  from  within,  as  of  itself?  or  was  it  presented  there  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  ?  Was  the  mind's  consciousness  of  the  thoughts 
and  feelings  it  experienced  of  its  own  awakening,  or  was  it 
awakened  by  a  Divine  and  formal  communication  from  above  ? 
If  we  lose  sight  of  this  important  distinction,  we  virtually  make 
no  account  of  what  constitutes  the  fundamental  element  of  a 
Divine  revelation,  and  leave  ourselves  without  a  fixed  landmark 

1  Delitzsch,  Der  Prophet  Habakkuk  ausgelegt,  p.  3. 


134  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

between  the  movements  of  God's  Spirit  and  the  capricious 
workings  of  human  fancy.  And  confounding  thus  things  that 
essentially  differ  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  a  revelation,  we  lay 
ourselves  open  to  the  further  error  of  disparaging  the  value  of  a 
revelation  when  made ;  we  totally  change  it  indeed,  and  lower- 
its  character,  and  assign  it  only  a  kind  of  higher  room  among 
the  views  and  cogitations  of  men's  own  imagining. 

The  Church  of  God  will  do  well  to  watch  with  the  utmost 
jealousy  against  any  attempts  in  this  direction,  from  whatever 
quarter,  and  under  whatever  show  of  reason  or  piety  they  may 
be  introduced.  How  well  had  it  been  for  Germany  had  the 
churches  there  listened  to  the  warning  voice  which  the  learned 
Bengel  in  his  day  lifted  against  the  evil,  when  it  was  just 
beginning  to  appear  among  them,  though  still  only  in  its  infancy 
and  breathing  the  odour  of  an  elevated  devotion  !  "  What 
some,"  says  he,  in  his  work  on  the  Apocalypse,  u  are  forward  to 
teach  about  the  inward  word,  is  likely  to  occasion  much  fearful 
evil,  as  soon  as  philosophy  shall  officiously  take  such  a  subject 
in  hand.  Persons  who  are  always  dwelling  upon  that  subject 
are  impatient  to  get  possession  of  the  kernel  without  its  foster 
ing  shell ;  every  such  appurtenance  is  with  them  an  imper 
tinence  ;  in  other  words,  they  would  have  Christ  without  the 
Bible.  But  notwithstanding  this  favourite  refinement,  they  are 
insensibly  approximating  to  an  opposite  extreme,  and  they  will 
arrive  at  it.  For  as  it  often  happens  that  extremes  meet,  so 
are  fanaticism  and  gross  deism  found  at  last  to  coincide  ;  and 
mischiefs  symptomatic  of  the  one  and  of  the  other  may  already 
be  seen  occasionally  in  one  and  the  same  beclouded  mind." 

It  is  only,  however,  at  the  commencement  of  a  process  of  this 
kind  that  there  is  likely  to  be  the  appearance  of  extremes  meet 
ing  ;  for  the  fanatical  or  hypocritical  spirit  can  never  be  very 
long  in  betraying  its  essential  agreement  with  the  deistical,  or, 
at  least,  worldly  spirit,  by  its  visible  distaste  for  the  pure  and 
elevating  character  of  those  revelations  which  come  from  God. 
Here  also  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  The  Spirit  of  God 
must  have  a  holy  vessel  for  the  subject  and  channel  of  his 
Divine  communications, — even  for  such  as  are  of  a  more  ordinary 
kind  ;  but  how  much  more  when  he  comes  to  put  forth  his 
loftier  breathings  in  the  soul,  and  make  it,  in  a  peculiar  manner, 
the  oracle  of  Heaven's  counsels  !  The  true  prophet,  therefore, 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY, -ITS  CHARACTER.  135 

unlike  the  false  one,  who  lived  and  breathed  merely  in  the  ele 
ment  of  his  own  corruption,  behoved  to  be  in  the  strictest  sense 
a  man  of  God, — one  who  was  accustomed  to  tread  the  higher 
walks  of  the  spiritual  life ;  for  thus  only  could  he  possess  the 
necessary  adaptation  for  the  Spirit's  agency  in  his  soul, — the 
receptive  faculty,  or,  as  we  may  rather  call  it,  the  spiritual 
sympathy  to  apprehend  aright  what  was  communicated  from 
above,  and  appropriate  it  as  his  own.  If  at  any  time  this  spiri 
tual  adaptation  was  wanting,  or  but  imperfectly  attained,  the 
agency  of  the  Spirit  could  not  fail  to  exhibit  something  fitful 
and  irregular,  or  even  violent,  in  its  working, — as  we  see  espe 
cially  in  the  case  of  Balaam,  when  he  was  constrained  to  do  the 
part  of  a  true  prophet.  Nor  could  it  be  otherwise  with  the  in 
spired  writers  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures ;  in  their  case, 
the  personal  adaptation  must  rather  be  of  a  higher,  more  regular, 
and  equable  kind.  For  the  Spirit's  work  in  them  did  not  so  much 
consist,  as  formerly  in  the  case  of  the  prophets,  in  raising  them 
at  times  with  rapt  emotion  above  present  objects,  and  giving  them 
a  supernatural  insight  into  particular  circumstances  and  events, 
as  in  enabling  them  to  stand  upon  the  elevated  platform  of  the 
objective  realities  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  and  thence  to  read 
forth,  according  to  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  the  manifold  views 
of  Christian  truth,  and  obligations,  and  hope,  which  spring  from 
those  realities  as  from  their  common  ground.  But  for  this  it 
was  plainly  necessary  that  they  should  habitually  live  in  the 
region  of  the  Spirit's  presence,  and  not  merely  as  in  a  few 
ecstatic  moments,  but  in  the  regular  tone  and  temper  of  their 
minds,  be  prepared  for  entertaining  and  uttering  the  thoughts 
of  the  Spirit.  And  if  "holy  men  of  old"  were  needed  as  in 
struments  of  Divine  communication  to  <(  speak  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  still  more,  may  we  say,  were  such 
needed  at  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  to  declare  with  infallible 
certainty,  and  in  "  words  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth,"  the 
things  that  are  now  freely  given  us  of  God.  The  Spirit's  work 
must  reflect  itself  in  the  character  of  the  agents  he  employed,  as 
well  as  in  the  nature  of  the  communications  they  imparted. 

But  to  return  to  the  charge  of  Ezekiel  against  the  false  pro* 
phets.  Having  exposed  the  hollowness  of  their  pretensions  in 
regard  to  God,  he  now  unfolds  the  pernicious  results  of  their 
course  in  relation  to  the  people.  He  compares  them  to  "  the 


136  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

foxes  in  the  deserts,"  and  adds,  "  Ye  have  not  gone  up  into  the 
breach,  neither  have  drawn  a  wall  around  the  house  of  Israel,  to 
stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the  Lord."  The  description 
proceeds  upon  a  silent  comparison  between  the  covenant-people 
and  a  vineyard,  a  similitude  already  in  established  use  (Isa.  v. 
1-7,  xxvii.  2  ;  Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.).  It  was  the  special  duty  of 
the  prophets  to  do  the 'part  of  watchmen  and  overseers  in  this 
spiritual  vineyard.  By  their  quick  discernment  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  and  their  faithfulness  in  disclosing  his  mind  and  will  to 
the  people,  they  should  have  protected  the  sacred  enclosure 
against  the  assaults  of  the  adversaries,  repaired  the  breaches  as 
they  arose,  and  repressed,  with  holy  energy,  the  first  risings  of 
corruption.  But  the  reverse  of  all  this  was  done  by  the  false  pro 
phets,  while  they  consulted  merely  their  own  ease,  and  humoured 
the  perverse  inclinations  of  the  people.  In  respect  to  the  safety 
and  well-being  of  the  commonwealth,  they  did  the  part  of  foxes, 
"which  spoil  the  vines"  (Song  ii.  15), — nay,  foxes  in  waste 
or  desert  places,  the  most  savage  and  insatiable  of  their  species. 
Yet  no  suspicion  of  this  seemed  to  have  crossed  their  own  minds  ; 
they  looked  with  the  most  perfect  complacence  upon  the  success 
of  their  mission,  and  "hoped,"  as  is  said  in  ver.  6,  "to  confirm 
(or  establish)  their  word."  The  subjective  existed  with  them  in 
full  vigour,  though  utterly  destitute  of  everything  objective;  for, 
in  the  just  retribution  of  God,  they  had  been  given  up  to  such 
strong  delusion  that  they  came  to  believe  their  own  lie. 

2.  The  punishment  threatened  against  these  false  prophets  is 
one  exactly  suited  to  the  nature  of  their  sin.  They  had  sought, 
by  making  high  pretensions  to  communion  with  Heaven,  to  be 
come  persons  of  great  note  and  influence  among  the  people,  while 
still  the  true  foundation  for  such  greatness  was  wanting.  There 
fore  the  Lord  declared  his  determination  to  make  their  fate 
answer  to  their  condition  ;  he  would  unmask  their  hypocrisy  and 
discover  their  nothingness,  cast  them  out  of  his  kingdom  as 
empty  and  worthless  creatures,  and,  as  with  a  destroying  and 
desolating  blast,  lay  all  their  pretensions  and  hopes  in  the  dust. 
Instead  of  ruling  the  counsels  of  the  nation,  they  should  not,  he 
tells  them  (vers.  8,  9),  be  so  much  as  found  in  the  assembly  of 
his  people ;  their  names  should  not  even  be  written  in  the  roll  of 
the  house  of  Israel,  nor  their  persons  be  permitted  any  more  to 
enter  the  land  of  Israel ;  inheriting  the  curse  of  the  covenant, 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  DOOM.  137 

"  they  should  be  cut  off  from  among  their  people."  Then,  in 
regard  to  their  work  of  vanity  and  delusion,  a  similar  visitation 
of  severe  judgment  and  exterminating  ruin  is  foretold.  By  that 
work  they  had  but  ministered  to  the  foolish  desires  and  vain 
confidences  of  the  people ;  so  that  while  the  one  was  like  the 
builders  of  a  loose  and  incompact  wall,  the  others  were  as  per 
sons  coming  after  and  daubing  it  over  with  a  thin  and  showy, 
but  still  feeble  and  unsubstantial  covering.  Wherefore,  it  must 
be  assailed  with  the  storm  of  the  Lord's  fury, — a  storm  that  is 
represented  as  combining  the  three  most  destructive  agents  of 
the  lower  heavens — wind,  rain,  and  hailstones.  Particular  stress 
is  laid  upon  the  hailstones,  because  these  were  more  out  of  the 
usual  course  of  nature  in  those  parts  of  the  world,  and  on  that 
account  were  sometimes  in  reality  given  as  tokens,  as  they  are 
also  often  poetically  referred  to  as  emblems,  of  the  most  severe 
expression  of  God's  displeasure  upon  the  adversaries  (Ex.  ix.  18; 
Jos.  x.  10 ;  Jobxxxviii.  22  ;  Ps.  xviii.  12,  13,  etc.).  Here,  too, 
to  give  the  reference  to  them  a  more  intense  form,  and  render 
the  emblem  more  strikingly  expressive  of  the  unsparing  judg 
ment  that  was  to  be  executed,  the  prophet  employs,  instead  of 
the  usual  epithet  for  hailstones,  what  is  literally  ice  or  crystal 
stones.  And  like  one  who  actually  beheld  the  devastation  made 
by  these  and  the  other  emblematical  instruments  of  vengeance, 
lie  winds  up  the  whole  description  by  a  kind  of  solemn  attestation 
to  the  effect  produced :  "  Thus  I  accomplish  my  wrath  upon 
the  wall,  and  upon  them  that  plastered  it  with  whitewash,  and 
say  unto  you,  The  wall  is  not,  nor  they  that  plastered  it, — the 
prophets  of  Israel  who  prophesy  concerning  Jerusalem,  and  who 
see  a  vision  of  peace  for  her,  and  there  is  no  peace,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah." 

II.  Such  is  the  interpretation  given  in  this  vivid  picture  of  the 
character  and  doom  of  the  false  prophets ;  and  we  turn  now  to 
the  closely  related  delineation  of  the  false  prophetesses,  which 
occupies  the  remainder  of  the  chapter. 

1.  These  are  plainly  represented  here  as  also  playing  an  im 
portant  part  in  strengthening  the  reigning  delusions  of  the  time, 
and  lulling  the  people  into  a  false  security.  It  is  somewhat 
singular  that  in  no  other  passage  are  they  spoken  of  in  such  a 
connection ;  probably  because  the  pernicious  influence  they  ex- 


138  EZEKIEL  XIII. 

erted  was  more  from  the  seductive  courses  they  pursued  than 
from  the  false  prophecies  they  uttered.  For  mention  is  fre 
quently  enough  made,  both  in  this  prophet  and  Jeremiah,  of  the 
active  share  the  women  took  at  that  time  in  introducing  and 
maintaining  the  evil  practices  of  idolatry,  but  only  in  this  place 
of  the  guilt  they  incurred  by  pretending  to  supernatural  reve 
lations  ;  and  here  also  it  is  coupled  with  strong  representations 
of  the  deceitful  and  corrupt  practices  they  followed.  That  they 
should,  however,  have  made  pretensions  of  this  kind,  and  in  such 
numbers  as  to  call  for  the  special  rebuke  of  Heaven,  is  itself  a 
convincing  proof  of  the  great  excitement  which  prevailed  at  the 
period  ;  since  it  was  not  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  but  only 
in  peculiar  emergencies,  that  either  the  Lord  might  be  expected 
to  bestow  on  women  the  gift  of  prophecy,  or  that  men  would  be 
disposed  to  receive  from  their  lips  the  revelation  of  God's  will. 
There  were  not  wanting  instances  in  the  history  of  the  past  which 
warranted  the  supposition  that  God  might  sometimes  employ 
female  instruments  in  making  known  his  purpose  to  men, — such 
as  Miriam,  Deborah,  Huldah, — though  the  rareness  of  these  in 
stances,  and  the  extraordinary  nature  of  the  occasions  which  gave 
rise  to  them,  tended  considerably  to  aggravate  the  guilt  of  those 
who  falsely  pretended  to  a  Divine  commission.  Like  the  false 
prophets,  these  are  also  represented  as  prophesying  "out  of  their 
own  hearts ;"  and  being  themselves  of  one  mind  and  spirit  with 
the  people  at  large,  no  higher  result  was  achieved,  or  was  aimed 
at  by  their  prophesyings,  than  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the 
prevailing  delusions. 

In  the  case  of  these  prophetesses,  however,  the  false  direction 
given,  assumed,  if  the  common  view  be  correct,  a  more  palpably 
effeminate  and  luxurious  character ;  it  aimed  not  only  at  encour 
aging  the  people  in  their  false  security,  but  also  at  pampering 
their  love  of  fleshly  ease  and  personal  indulgence.  They  are 
described  as  "  sewing  pillows  for  all  arm-holes,"  or  making  soft 
cushions  for  all  arm-joints — apparently  articles  of  some  sort  to  be 
used  in  reclining,  so  as  to  give  to  the  person  using  them  the  soft 
ness  of  an  agreeable  repose.  Not  content  with  this,  they  made 
also  "  kerchiefs,"  or  coverings,  u  upon  the  head  of  every  stature," 
—some  kind  of  fashionable  and  attractive  head-dress,  fitted  to  act 
as  a  lure  in  winning  others  to  their  corrupt  and  sinful  ways. 
For  the  great  object  they  had  in  view  in  making  such  articles  of 


THE  FALSE  IN  PROPHECY,  ITS  DOOM.  139 

luxury  was  to  "hunt,"  or  "catch  souls;"  so  that,  with  their 
high  pretensions  to  communion  with  Heaven,  the  real  design  and 
tendency  of  their  arts  was  no  other  than  that  of  the  profligate 
characters  described  in  Prov.  vi.  and  vii. — to  ensnare  and  ruin 
the  unwary.  It  is  possible,  however,  and  indeed,  we  think,  most 
probable,  that  the  prophet,  in  his  description  of  the  conduct  of 
these  women,  is  not  to  be  understood  literally,  but  that  he  un 
folds  the  design  and  tendency  of  their  deceitful  ways  under  the 
image  of  gay  and  luxurious  clothing.  So  was  it  with  his  de 
scription  of  the  false  prophets,  when  he  spoke  of  them  as  acting 
the  part  of  foxes,  and  whitewashing  an  unsubstantial  wall, — that 
is,  ministering  to  a  false  security,  as  the  prophetesses  here  did 
to  a  false  comfort  and  delight.  In  this  case,  it  was  their  fair 
speeches  and  lying  divinations  which  were  the  cushions  and  the 
tapestry  mentioned  by  the  prophet.  But  this  makes  no  altera 
tion  on  the  nature  of  their  conduct :  they  acted  a  most  wicked 
part.  Therefore  the  prophet  turns  on  them  with  a  question  of 
fiery  indignation  and  sharp  rebuke,  "  Will  ye  hunt  (catch)  the 
souls  of  my  people,  and  save  your  own  souls  alive  ?  And  will 
ye  pollute  me  among  my  people  for  handfuls  of  barley,  and  for 
pieces  of  bread,  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  die,  and  to  save 
alive  the  souls  that  should  not  live,  by  your  lying  to  my  people 
that  hear  a  lie  (being  of  themselves  inclined  to  listen  to  false 
hood)?"  Acting  the  part  of  soul-destroyers  to  others,  it  was 
vain  to  expect  that  they  should  themselves  escape  the  coming 
vengeance.  And  the  less  so,  as  it  was  for  so  paltry  a  considera 
tion  they  were  carrying  on  the  infamous  traffic  of  decoying  others 
to  destruction.  Of  course,  the  largest  prospects  of  personal  gain 
would  have  been  totally  insufficient  to  justify  them  in  such  prac 
tices  ;  but  that  they  should  have  been  ready  to  prostitute  the 
name  of  God,  and  ply  the  arts  of  hypocrisy  and  deceit  for  such 
miserable  pittances  of  present  good,  showed  the  grovelling  de 
basement  and  intense  selfishness  of  their  spirits.  It  stamped 
them  as  in  the  strongest  sense  "  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than 
lovers  of  God." 

2.  In  regard  to  the  punishment  threatened,  there  is  nothing 
peculiar  or  difficult,  so  far  as  the  act  of  Divine  retribution  is 
concerned.  The  Lord  simply  declares  his  purpose  to  defeat  the 
crooked  and  carnal  policy  of  those  false  prophetesses,  and,  by 
terrible  things  in  righteousness,  to  put  it  beyond  their  power  to 


140  EZEK1EL  XIII. 

employ  much  longer  their  pernicious  arts.  He  would  rend  in 
pieces  their  articles  of  luxury,  or  defeat  the  corrupt  and  capti 
vating  wiles  which  they  used  as  gins  to  ensnare  and  catch  men's 
souls,  so  that  these  might  find  an  escape  from  their  foils ;  though 
still  nothing  is  said  as  to  the  particular  way  in  which  the  retri 
bution  was  to  be  effected.  But  as  it  had  been  plainly  enough 
indicated  in  the  case  of  the  false  prophets  that  the  work  of  pun 
ishment  was  to  be  accomplished  by  weapons  of  awful  violence 
and  unsparing  destruction,  it  was  naturally  to  be  inferred,  that 
these  female  associates  would  share  the  same  fate,  and  that  their 
power  to  use  the  seductive  arts  they  had  hitherto  plied  with  such 
fatal  success  was  to  cease  and  determine,  because  they  should 
themselves  be  involved  in  the  common  ruin,  and  the  vanity  of 
their  pretensions  would  become  manifest  to  all. 

It  is  a  part  of  Satan's  policy  to  avoid  a  formal  repetition  of 
exploded  errors,  and  to  shift  and  adapt  his  stratagems  as  the 
ever-changing  temper  of  the  times  may  require.  We  may  not, 
therefore,  expect  to  see  exactly  the  same  devices  resorted  to,  and 
the  same  scenes  enacted  over  again,  which  have  passed  under 
our  review  in  this  chapter.  But  we  may  not  the  less  certainly 
expect  that  the  evils  here  depicted  shall  be  perpetually  recurring, 
with  such  modifications  in  respect  to  manner  and  form  as  may 
be  likely  to  render  them  more  effectual  in  their  mischievous 
operation.  Our  Lord  plainly  forewarned  the  Church  of  false 
prophets,  who  should  arise  and  deceive  many.  And  the  work 
ing  of  the  Antichristian  power,  of  which  Paul  spake  so  dis 
tinctly,  was  represented  to  be  u  with  signs  and  lying  wonders, 
and  with  all  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that 
perish."  But,  as  in  all  ages,  and  under  all  forms  alike,  the  ob 
ject  of  Satan  is  to  corrupt  and  overthrow  the  truth  of  God,  so  it 
ever  remains  the  sure,  as  it  also  is  the  only  effectual,  safeguard 
against  his  delusions,  to  hold  by  that  truth  in  the  simplicity 
and  confidence  of  faith.  The  danger  in  such  cases  is  merely,  as 
the  apostle  intimated,  to  those  who  will  not  believe  the  truth, 
and  receive  it  in  love.  And  whether  it  be  in  the  form  of  pre 
tended  revelations  concerning  the  things  of  God  that  the  temp 
tation  comes,  or  in  the  more  common  but  not  less  dangerous 
arts  of  fleshly  indulgence  and  worldly  allurement,  let  there  be  but 
an  enlightened  knowledge  of  the  word  of  God,  and  a  lively  ap 
prehension  of  its  great  doctrinal  and  moral  principles,  and  there 


THE  FALSE  PROPHETESS.  141 

will  be  no  material  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  the  evil 
and  the  good.  Satan  may  transform  himself  for  a  time  into  an 
angel  of  light ;  his  agents  may  assume,  when  prosecuting  their 
work  of  delusion,  the  most  lamb-like  and  winning  appearance ; 
but  there  still  is  one  thing  too  hard  for  them  to  accomplish — they 
cannot  identify  the  saving  truth  of  God  with  falsehood  and  cor 
ruption  ;  and  the  childlike  spirit,  the  soul  that  is  taught  of  God 
and  abides  in  the  simplicity  of  the  'faith,  has  a  rock  beneath  its 
feet  which  cannot  be  moved,  and  a  way  of  peace  and  safety 
which  no  force  or  stratagem  can  turn  into  a  pathway  of  ruin. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

HYPOCRITICAL    INQUIRERS   AFTER    GOD — THEIR    WICKEDNESS    DIS 
COVERED   AND    REBUKED. 

Ver.  1.  And  there  came  to  me  some  of  the  elders  of  Israel  and  sat  before 
me.  2.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  3.  Son  of  man,  these 
men  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their  hearts,  and  the  stumbling-block  of  their 
iniquity  have  they  put  before  their  face ;  should  I  be  at  all  inquired  at  for 
them  ?  4.  Therefore  speak  to  them,  and  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Every  man  of  the  house  of  Israel  that  sets  up  his  idols  in  his  heart, 
and  puts  the  stumbling-block  of  his  iniquity  before  his  face,  and  conies  to  the 
prophet,  I  Jehovah  will  answer  him  according  to  it,  according  to  the  multi 
tude  of  his  idols.1  5.  That  I  may  take  the  house  of  Israel  in  their  own 


1  This  last  clause  is  given  in  the  authorized  version,  as  by  many  others, 
"  I  the  Lord  will  answer  him  that  cometh  according  to  the  multitude  of  his 


idols,"  following  the  Kri,  which  has  ^3  TTjjn  instead  of  ,-Q  'JTpVJ.  There 
is  no  need,  however,  for  such  a  change.  Reading  nil  (which  ought  to  be  the 
pointing),  we  have,  as  Havernick  remarks,  a  perfectly  common  Aramaic 
construction,  according  to  which  the  subject  expressed  in  the  following  noun 
is  anticipated  by  a  pronoun  going  before,  so  that  the  latter  is  not  a  mere 
pleonasm,  but  employed  for  the  purpose  of  giving  increased  emphasis  to  the 
following  substantive  :  "  I  the  Lord  will  answer  him  according  to  it,  accord 
ing  to  the  multitude  of  his  idols."  The  use  of  the  Niphal  of  nay  in  the  sense 
of  answering,  or  making  answer,  is  certainly  a  peculiarity,  as  elsewhere  the 
common  meaning  is,  to  be  answered,  or  to  receive  answer.  Both  Ewald  and 
Havernick  have  tried  to  establish  new  renderings,  but  without  any  satisfac 
tory  result.  The  context  plainly  obliges  us  to  adhere  to  the  general  and 
common  import  of  the  verb.  Literally,  "  I  the  Lord  am  answered  to  him, 
according  to  it  ;  "  or  reflectively,  as  the  Niphal  is  often  used,  "  I  the  Lord 
answer  myself  (or,  for  myself)  to  him,  according  to  it."  The  same  senti- 


142  EZEKIEL  XIV. 

heart,  since  they  are  all  estranged  from  me  through  their  idols.  6.  There 
fore  say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Turn  and  come 
back  from  your  idols  (literally,  from  off  your  idols),  and  from  all  your  abomi 
nations  turn  away  your  faces.  7.  For  every  one  of  the  house  of  Israel  and 
of  the  stranger  that  sojourns  in  Israel,  and  separates  himself  from  me,  and 
sets  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and  puts  the  stumbling-block  of  his  iniquity  be 
fore  his  face,  and  comes  to  the  prophet  to  inquire  of  him  concerning  me,  I 
Jehovah  will  answer  him  myself  concerning  me.  8.  And  I  will  set  myself 
against  that  man,  and  will  make  him  a  sign  and  a  proverb  ;  and  I  will  cut 
him  off  from  among  my  people  ;  and  he  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  :  9. 
And  the  prophet,  if  he  let  himself  be  enticed  (viz.  by  love  of  money  or  any 
other  motive),  and  speak  a  word,  I  Jehovah  have  enticed  that  prophet,  and 
will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him,  and  will  destroy  him  from  among  my 
people  Israel.  10.  And  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity  ;  as  the  iniquity  of 
him  that  inquires  so  is  the  iniquity  of  the  prophet.  11.  That  the  house  of 
Israel  may  go  no  more  astray  from  rne,  and  may  no  more  be  polluted  with 
all  their  transgressions  ;  and  that  they  may  be  to  me  a  people,  and  I  may 
be  to  them  a  God,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

12.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  13.  Son  of  man,  if  a 
land  sin  against  me  by  acting  very  treacherously,  and  I  stretch  out  my  hand 
upon  it,  and  break  for  it  the  staff  of  bread,  and  send  against  it  famine,  and 
cut  off  from  it  man  and  beast :  14.  And  there  were  in  the  midst  of  it  these 
three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  these  three  men  should  deliver  (only) 
their  own  souls  by  their  righteousness,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  15.  If  I 
cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through  the  land,  and  they  spoil  it,  and  it  be 
comes  a  desolation,  so  that  no  one  passes  through  because  of  the  beasts: 
16.  These  three  men  in  the  midst  of  it — saith  the  Lord  Jehovah — should 
not  deliver  either  sons  or  daughters  ;  they  alone  should  be  delivered  ;  and 
the  land  shall  be  a  desolation.  17.  Or  should  I  bring  a  sword  upon  that 
land,  and  say,  Sword,  pass  through  the  land,  and  cut  off  from  it  man  and 
beast :  18.  And  these  three  men  were  in  the  midst  of  it — saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah — they  should  not  deliver  either  sons  or  daughters  ;  but  themselves 
alone  should  be  delivered.  19.  Or  should  I  send  a  pestilence  upon  that 
land,  and  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  it  in  blood,  to  cut  off  from  it  man  and 
beast :  20.  And  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  were  in  the  midst  of  it,  As  I  live, 


ment,  with  a  very  slight  variation,  is  repeated  in  ver.  7  :  "And  cometh  to 
the  prophet  to  inquire  of  him  concerning  me  (S2l),  I  Jehovah  will  answer  him 
myself  concerning  me  ^a)."  The  '3  should  in  each  case  be  alike  rendered 
"  concerning  me,"  and  not  in  the  latter  case,  as  in  the  common  version,  "  by 
myself."  For  the  meaning  is  not,  as  most  commentators,  and  among  others 
Havernick,  seem  to  suppose,  that  God  would  give  an  answer  directly  and 
personally,  as  from  himself,  without  the  intervention  of  a  prophet ;  for  in  the 
very  next  verse  but  one,  the  case  is  supposed  of  a  deceived  prophet  giving 
to  such  persons  a  wrong  answer,  while  the  Lord  affirms  that  even  such 
answer  would  be  from  him.  Such  would  be,  at  least,  one  of  the  modes  of 
his  meeting  these  hypocritical  inquirers.  But  the  Lord  would  show,  by  the 
kind  of  answer  given,  however  it  might  be  communicated,  that  he  had  taken 
the  matter  into  his  own  hand,  and  that  he  dealt  with  them  not  according  to 
their  desires  and  expectations,  but  to  their  deserts.  He  would  take  them, 
as  it  is  said  in  ver.  5,  in  their  own  heart,  or  would  make  them  feel  that  he 
was  cognisant  of  their  great  idolatries  and  perverse  ways. 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  143 

saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  neither  son  nor  daughter  should  they  deliver  by  their 
righteousness  ;  they  should  but  deliver  their  own  souls.  21.  For  thus  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  How  much  more  x  when  I  send  my  four  severe  judgments 
— sword,  and  famine,  and  noisome  beasts,  and  pestilence — against  Jerusalem, 
to  cut  off  from  it  man  and  beast !  22.  And  behold  there  shall  be  left  in  it 
a  remnant,  that  shall  be  brought  forth,  sons  and  daughters ;  they  shall 
come  forth  to  you,  and  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  doings,  and  shall 
be  comforted  concerning  the  evil  which  I  shall  have  brought  upon  Jerusalem, 
in  all  that  I  shall  have  brought  upon  it.  23.  And  they  shall  comfort  you  ; 
for  not  without  cause  do  I  perform  all  that  I  do  perform  against  it,  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah. 

THIS  chapter  opens  with  a  statement  that  "certain  of  the 
elders  of  Israel  came  to  the  prophet  and  sat  before  him."  By 
these  elders  we  are  certainly  to  understand  persons  holding  that 
dignity  among  the  exiles  of  Chebar,  and  not,  as  some  have 
erroneously  supposed,  deputies  from  the  people  still  resident  in 
Judah  and  Jerusalem.  For  what  purpose  they  came — whether 
to  ask  counsel  from  the  prophet  regarding  some  point  of  diffi 
culty  that  had  occurred  to  themselves,  or  to  hear  what  he  might 
be  prompted  by  the  Spirit  to  communicate  of  seasonable  instruc 
tion — we  are  not  expressly  told.  But  that  they  came  in  the 
character  of  inquirers  may  be  almost  certainly  inferred  from 
ver.  3,  where  the  Lord  at  once  proceeds,  through  his  servant,  to 
repudiate  the  idea  of  his  being  inquired  at  by  persons  of  such  a 
character, — persons  who  had  "set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart, 
and  put  the  stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity  before  their  face." 
After  this  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  doubt  that  they  came  in  the 
character  of  inquirers  ;  though  what  might  be  the  precise  object 
of  their  inquiry  is  nowhere  indicated  in  what  follows,  unless  we 
can  suppose  (what  is  in  the  highest  degree  probable)  that  the 
message  of  the  prophet  was  so  framed  as  in  some  part  to  meet 
the  proposed  subject  of  inquiry,  and  thus  incidentally  to  discover 
what  the  subject  itself  really  was.  This  supposition  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact,  which  strikes  us  the  moment  we  glance  over  the 
contents  of  the  chapter,  that  it  falls  into  two  parts, — the  first 

1  The  "  how  much  more  when  "  here,  which  we  retain  as  it  is  in  the 
English  Bible,  expresses  rather  the  thought  indicated  than  the  exact  force 
of  the  original — 13  cj^-  The  prophet  had  announced  what  would  take  place 
on  each  of  the  supposed  cases  separately ;  and  he  comes  now  to  say,  Surely 
shall  it  be  so  now,  when  I  send,  etc.  The  particles  are  strongly  affirmative, 
and  intimate  the  much  greater  necessity  that  existed  for  what  was  now  to 
be  declared. 


144  EZEKIEL  XIV. 

(vers.  3-11)  referring  to  the  preliminary  point  respecting  the 
character  of  the  inquirers,  and  the  remaining  portion  addressing 
itself  to  a  subject  entirely  distinct, — God's  method  of  dealing 
with  a  land  and  people  when  they  have  reached  a  state  of  hope 
less  corruption  and  depravity.  It  is  more  than  probable,  there 
fore,  that  while  God  refused  to  give  any  formal  answer  to  such 
inquirers  as  those  who  now  sat  before  the  prophet,  he  yet,  in 
this  latter  portion  of  the  message,  gave  a  substantial  deliverance 
on  the  question  about  which  their  anxiety  had  been  raised. 

The  previous  communications  of  the  prophet  had  disclosed  an 
amazing  degree  of  wickedness  prevailing  generally  among  the 
people  of  Juclah,  and  extending  even  to  those  who  should  have 
set  themselves  vigorously  to  check  and  reform  it, — the  priestly 
and  prophetical  orders.  It  was  not  to  be  denied,  however,  with 
all  the  truth  there  might  be  in  such  representations,  that  there 
still  were  some  noble  expectations.  Among  the  prophets  there 
was,  at  least,  the  faithful  and  unflinching  Jeremiah;  and  there 
were  others,  beyond  doubt,  of  a  kindred  spirit,  both  in  the 
priesthood  and  among  the  laity.  How  naturally,  then,  in  such 
a  case  might  the  thought  arise,  that  possibly  after  all,  the  exist 
ence  of  this  faithful  remnant  would  tell  favourably  upon  the  pro 
cedure  of  God,  and  throw  a  kind  of  shield  over  the  land  of  Juclah 
for  its  preservation !  It  is  even  conceivable,  that  the  thought 
might  assume  in  the  minds  of  some  a  more  decided  form,  and 
that  they  might  be  tempted  to  ask,  how,  with  such  an  admixture 
of  righteousness  in  the  midst  of  them,  God  could  justly  proceed 
to  pour  down  his  exterminating  judgments  on  the  land  !  Such 
cogitations  and  inquiries  were  by  no  means  unnatural  at  the 
time,  especially  when  it  is  known  how  loath  the  people  were — as 
well  that  portion  of  them  which  was  already  in  exile,  as  those  who 
still  dwelt  in  Jerusalem — to  think  of  the  nation  going  to  ruin. 
And  if  these  were  the  points  respecting  which  the  elders  on  this 
occasion  came  to  confer  with  the  prophet,  the  message  delivered 
in  the  latter  division  of  the  chapter  might  certainly  be  regarded 
as  forming  a  most  direct  and  explicit  deliverance  upon  their 
intended  inquiries. 

1.  But  there  was  a  strong  reason  for  the  prophet  addressing 
himself,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  preliminary  point  connected 
with  the  character  of  the  inquiries,  on  account,  more  especially, 
of  the  close  relation  that  subsisted  between  such  an  exhibition  of 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  145 

character  in  them,  and  the  false  spirit  of  prophecy  which  had 
already  been  so  severely  condemned.  However  they  might  wish, 
by  coming  to  the  Lord's  true  prophet,  to  be  regarded  as  of  a  dif 
ferent  spirit  from  the  false  prophets  and  their  deluded  followers 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter,  they  were  in  reality  of  one 
spirit  with  them,  and,  under  another  form,  pursuing  the  same 
infatuated  course.  Therefore,  when  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
describing  them  as  persons  who  were  each  setting  up  their  idol 
in  their  heart,  and  putting  the  stumbling-block  of  iniquity  before 
their  face,  their  hypocrisy  was  at  once  unmasked,  and  they  were 
themselves  identified  with  the  corrupt  idolaters  and  incorrigible 
backsliders  in  Judea.  "You,"  the  prophet  virtually  said  to  them, 
discerning  through  the  Spirit  the  real  state  and  purposes  of  their 
heart,  "you  also  are  living  in  idolatry,  and  differ  only  in  outward 
semblance  from  those  who  are  openly  worshipping  false  gods; 
you  have  not  yet  returned  in  truth  to  the  living  God,  but  are 
each  bent  on  the  love  and  pursuit  of  things  which  are  utterly 
opposed  to  his  mind  and  will.  And  that  you  may  be  encouraged 
in  these,  not  that  you  may  learn  with  childlike  docility  what 
God  would  have  you  to  do,  is  the  object  that  lies  nearest  to  your 
heart.  In  such  a  state,  what  presumption  is  it  not  in  you  to 
expect  any  friendly  communications  from  God?  " 

The  expression  of  "setting  up  their  idols  in  their  heart"  (lit. 
making  their  idols  to  go  up  upon  their  heart),  as  Calvin  justly 
remarks,  implies  a  silent  comparison  between  God  and  idols. 
For,  as  God  erects  the  seat  of  his  empire  in  our  hearts,  when 
we  set  up  idols  there  we  of  necessity  endeavour  to  subvert  the 
throne  of  God,  and  to  render  his  supremacy  of  no  account.  So 
also  in  the  other  expression,  "  putting  the  stumbling-block  of 
iniquity  before  their  face,"  a  contrast  is  implied  between  the  law 
of  God  and  the  perverse  inclinations  of  their  own  hearts.  What 
should  have  been  set  before  their  eyes  for  their  constant  observ 
ance  was  the  law  of  God,  respecting  which  the  exhortation  had 
been  given,  "  Let  it  not  depart  from  thine  eyes ;  then  shalt 
thou  walk  in  thy  way  safely,  and  thou  shalt  not  stumble  "  (Prov. 
iii.  21,  23).  But  displacing  this  unerring  rule  of  Divine  counsel 
and  direction,  and  adopting  in  its  stead  the  course  dictated  by 
their  own  selfish  and  corrupt  passions,  they  were  as  surely  run 
ning  into  mischief  as  if  they  had  deliberately  placed  a  stumbling- 
block  in  their  path.  So  that,  in  both  respects,  they  were  warring 


H6  EZEKIEL  XIV. 

with  the  mind  of  God — being  at  once  idolatrous  at  heart  and 
perverse  in  their  ways. 

For  such  persons  to  come  and  inquire  of  God,  at  the  mouth  of 
his  servant,  was  plainly  but  a  mockery  of  God;  it  was  professing 
to  have  a  desire  to  know  God's  will,  and  a  heart  ready  to  fall  in 
with  its  requirements,  while  in  reality  their  mind  was  made  up 
to  a  plan  and  purpose  of  its  own,  which  set  at  nought  the  Divine 
authority.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  Lord  should  at  once  have 
repelled  the  thought  of  his  being  inquired  at  by  such  persons  ; 
since,  to  use  the  words  of  Jerome,  "  he  does  not  deserve  to  hear 
the  truth  who  seeks  for  it  in  a  fraudulent  manner,  but  ought  to 
be  taken  in  his  own  heart."  Seeing,  however,  in  these  elders 
types  of  a  class  unhappily  very  numerous  among  the  Jews, 
both  in  Juclea  and  in  exile,  the  prophet  proceeded  to  inform 
them  how,  if  they  persisted  in  their  course,  they  might  expect 
to  be  dealt  with.  They  should  certainly  find  an  answer  to  their 
inquiries,  and  that  answer  in  a  sense  also  from  the  Lord ;  but 
one,  at  the  same  time,  after  their  own  heart's  lusts,  not  in  con 
formity  with  the  truth  of  things — u  that  I  may  take,"  it  is 
added,  "  the  house  of  Israel  in  their  own  heart,  because  they 
are  all  estranged  from  me  through  their  idols." 

Yet,  that  this  was  not  what  the  Lord  properly  wished — that 
the  giving  of  such  an  answer,  and  the  ruinous  consequences  it 
was  sure  to  entail,  was  a  judgment  which  the  Lord  would  fain 
avert,  if  he  righteously  could,  he  again  charged  the  prophet  to 
say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Turn, 
and  come  back  from  your  idols,  and  turn  away  your  faces  from 
your  abominations."  He  wished  them  distinctly  to  understand 
that  if  they  really  sought  to  be  on  terms  of  friendship  with  God, 
and  to  obtain  answers  of  peace  to  their  inquiries,  there  was  one 
thing  essential  to  be  done :  they  must  thoroughly  reform  their 
ways,  and  abandon  the  polluted  objects  on  which  they  had  set 
their  hearts.  On  this  condition  alone  could  they  expect  to  be 
graciously  dealt  with  by  God ;  and  if  they  refused  to  comply 
with  the  terms,  they  might  indeed  go  to  a  prophet,  and  receive 
an  answer  to  their  inquiries,  but  it  must  be  with  a  sure  reversion 
of  evil ;  their  own  measure  would  be  meted  back  to  them.  They 
should,  in  that  case,  be  dealing  deceitfully  toward  God,  and  the 
prophet  in  turn  would  deal  deceitfully  toward  them.  Both  sub 
jects  of  a  common  delusion,  they  should  also  at  last  become  the 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  147 

victims  of  a  common  ruin.  "  And  they  shall  bear  the  punish 
ment  of  their  iniquity  ;  the  iniquity  of  the  prophet  shall  be  even 
as  the  iniquity  of  him  that  inquires  at  him  ;  that  the  house  of 
Israel  may  go  no  more  astray  from  me,  and  may  no  more  be 
polluted  with  all  their  transgressions ;  but  that  they  may  be  to 
me  a  people,  and  I  may  be  to  them  a  God,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah." 

The  point  chiefly  to  be  noticed  in  this  deliverance  of  the  mind 
of  God  is  the  connection  between  the  self-deceived  people  and 
the  deceiving  prophet ;  regarding  whom  it  is  said,  in  peculiarly 
strong  language,  "  I  the  Lord  have  enticed  (or  deceived)  that 
prophet."  It  is  an  example  in  the  highest  sphere  of  the  lex 
talionis.  If  the  people  were  sincere  in  their  desire  to  know  the 
mind  of  God,  for  the  purpose  of  obeying  his  will,  the  path  was 
plain.  They  had  but  to  forsake  their  idolatries,  and  the  Lord 
was  ready  to  meet  them  with  direction  and  blessing.  But  if,  on 
the  other  hand,  they  were  bent  on  playing  the  hypocrite,  pro 
fessing  to  inquire  concerning  him  while  their  hearts  in  reality 
were  cleaving  to  corruption,  punishment  was  sure  to  overtake 
them,  and  that  too,  in  the  first  instance,  after  the  form  of  their 
own  iniquity.  God  would  chastise  their  sin  with  a  correspond 
ing  sin  ;  and  as  they  had  rejected  the  safe  direction  of  the  true 
light,  he  would  send  the  pernicious  delusion  of  a  false  one. 
Prophets  would  be  given  them,  who  should  re-echo  the  deceit- 
fulness  that  already  wrought  in  their  own  bosom,  so  that  their 
iniquity  should  prove  their  ruin. 

The  people  themselves  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  such  a 
procedure,  for  they  had  from  the  first  been  distinctly  fore 
warned  of  it  by  Moses.  At  the  beginning  of  the  13th  chapter 
of  Deuteronomy,  the  supposition  is  made  of  a  false  prophet 
arising,  who,  by  dreams  and  visions,  should  attempt  to  lead 
away  the  people  from  the  true  worship  and  service  of  Jehovah. 
In  that  event  they  were  expressly  discharged  from  hearkening 
to  his  words — nay,  were  commanded  to  put  him  at  once  to 
death ;  and  wrere  instructed  to  regard  such  occurrences  as 
among  the  means  of  trial  which  the  Lord  appointed  for  the 
purpose  of  proving  and  purifying  them.  u  For  the  Lord  your 
God  proveth  you,"  it  is  said,  "  to  know  whether  ye  love  the 
Lord  your  God  with  all  your  heart,  and  with  all  your  soul." 
The  very  appearance  of  such  characters,  then,  was  a  judicial 


148  EZEKTEL  XIV. 

act  on  the  part  of  God.  It  implied  that  he  detected  the  ex 
istence  of  sin  among  the  people,  and  required,  for  the  ends  of 
his  righteous  government,  to  apply  a  touchstone,  by  which  to 
effect  a  separation  between  the  precious  and  the  vile.  Not  as  of 
itself,  but  as  a  form  of  chastisement  under  the  hand  of  God,  did 
the  false  spirit  of  prophecy  arise — a  sure  indication  that  the  day 
of  visitation  had  begun.  So,  too,  it  had  happened  in  the  case 
of  Saul,  when  an  evil  spirit  was  sent  to  trouble  him,  in  the  room 
of  that  blessed  Spirit  whose  guidance  he  had  rejected  ;  a  mes- 
seno-er  of  Satan,  indeed,  but  one  that  should  not  have  been 

O  77 

suffered  to  appear  unless  there  had  been  a  call  for  judgment ! 
It  was  the  Lord's  instrument  of  correction  for  indulged  sin. 

The  most  notable  and  striking  example  of  this  sort  in  ancient 
history,  and  one  to  which  the  prophet  here  evidently  refers,  is 
that  recorded  in  1  Kings  xxii.  19,  etc.,  where  the  prophet 
Micaiah  says  to  Ahab  :  "  Hear  thou,  therefore,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  :  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  his  throne,  and  all  the  host  of 
heaven  standing  by  him,  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left.  And 
the  Lord  said,  Who  shall  persuade  Ahab,  that  he  may  go  up  and 
fall  at  Eamoth-Gilead  ?  And  one  said  on  this  manner,  and 
another  said  on  that  manner.  And  there  came  forth  a  spirit, 
and  stood  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  I  will  persuade  him.  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Wherewith  ?  And  he  said,  I  will  go 
forth ;  and  I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  his  pro 
phets.  And  he  said,  Thou  shalt  persuade  him,  and  prevail  also  ; 
go  forth  and  do  so."  Here,  it  is  plain,  the  spirit  of  falsehood, 
entering  into  and  working  in  the  false  prophets,  appears  to 
come  elsewhere  than  from  God  ;  but  not  less  plain,  also,  that 
the  giving  up  of  Ahab  and  his  people  to  the  influence  of  such 
a  spirit  was  of  God, — an  act  of  judgment,  standing  midway 
between  the  sins  of  a  past  life  and  the  approaching  doom  of 
a  fearful  retribution.  It  was  God  who,  in  righteousness,  fixed 
the  doom,  and  who  also  appointed  this  particular  mode  of  carry 
ing  it  into  execution.  Yet  the  power  by  the  immediate  instru 
mentality  of  which  it  was  to  be  effected  was  no  magical  one, 
such  as  might  fascinate  and  control  the  minds  of  Ahab  and  his 
people,  independently  of  their  own  free  will.  On  the  contrary, 
it  was  their  voluntary  adherence  to  the  spirit  of  delusion,  and 
their  obstinate  surrender  to  its  influence,  which  led  God  to 
abandon  them  to  this  new  and  more  fatal  subjection  to  its  power. 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  149 

And  hence,  both  in  the  case  of  Ahab,  and  here  again  in  the 
representation  by  Ezekiel,  the  yielding  to  that  spirit,  whether  in 
the  way  of  persuading  or  of  being  persuaded,  is  treated  as  a 
crime,  drawing  after  it  its  appropriate  punishment :  the  Lord 
stretches  out  his  hand,  and  punishes  both  the  prophet  and  him 
that  inquires  at  him. 

The  facts  and  statements  now  referred  to  clearly  imply  some 
thing  more  on  the  part  of  God  than  that  bare  permission,  by 
which  many  commentators,  both  in  earlier  and  later  times,  have 
sought  to  explain  his  entire  connection  in  such  cases  with  evil. 
"  I  have  deceived  that  prophet,"  that  is,  says  Dr.  Adam  Clarke, 
"  He  ran  before  he  was  sent ;  he  willingly  became  the  servant  of 
Satan's  illusions ;  and  I  sufered  this  to  take  place,  because  he 
and  his  followers  refused  to  consult  and  serve  me."     So  also 
Maurer,  who  explains  the  statement  thus :  "  I  will  suffer  him  to 
be  deceived ;  I  will  not  hinder  him  from  being  so ;  I  will  sur 
render  him  to  his  fate."     True,  no  doubt,  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  a 
portion  of  the  truth  still  remains  to  be  told.     There  is  not  merely 
a  negative,  but  also  a  positive  relation  on  God's  part  to  sin,  in 
asmuch  as  he  controls  and  directs  its  operations,  so  that  they 
may  fit  suitably  into  his  Divine  plan,  and  may  develope  them 
selves  in   such  forms  and  ways  as  are  demanded  by  the  order 
and  rectitude  of  his  administration.     Should  a  spirit  of  delusion, 
for  example,  break  out  in  any  particular  place  or  time,  it  is  cer 
tainly  in  itself  to  be  regarded  as  an  emanation  from  the  prince  of 
darkness ;  but  that  it  should  appear  in  the  precise  form  it  does, 
at  such  a  time,  or  with  such  results,  must  be  ascribed  to  the 
directing  agency  and  overruling  providence  of  God.      So  the 
apostle  evidently  teaches,  when,  speaking  of  what,  in  Christian 
times,  should  correspond  to  the  false  prophesying  of  an  earlier 
period,  he  says:  "And  for  this  cause" — viz.  because  they  received 
not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved — "  God  shall 
send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie ;  that 
they  all   might   be   damned  who   believe   not   the   truth,  but 
had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness"  (2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12).     "God 
punishes  sin  with  sin.     Therefore  upon  the  lost,  who  in  their 
guilt  would  not  cherish  a  love  of  the  truth  in  their  hearts,  he 
sends  forth  a  powerful  delusion,  that  they  might  believe  a  lie. 
The  force  of  the  expressions  must  not  be  weakened,  so  as  to 
describe  anything  less  than  a  judicial  hardening.     The  l  strong 


150  EZEKIEL  XIV. 

delusion,'  as  to  its  ultimate  ground,  points  to  Antichrist  himself, 
who,  in  i  the  working  of  Satan,'  sets  forward  his  deceit ;  but  the 
1  sending'  indicates  the  coming  of  Antichrist  to  be  of  God. 
The  Lord  does  not  make  Antichrist,  so  far  as  he  is  evil,  but  he  cer 
tainly  does  make  him,  in  so  far  as  he  manifests  himself  in  this  par 
ticular  shape  and  form,  under  these  circumstances  and  relations."1 

II.  But  we  pass  on  to  the  second  part  of  the  chapter,  which, 
as  before  noticed,  speaks  to  a  case  entirely  different,  and  one 
that  probably  coincided  with  the  inquiry  proposed  by  the  elders. 
It  has  respect  to  the  question,  what  effect  the  existence  of  a 
few  righteous  persons  among  the  Jewish  people  might  be  ex 
pected  to  have  at  such  a  time  on  the  purposes  of  God?  The 
Lord  had  already  told  Jeremiah  that  the  guilt  of  the  people 
was  too  great  to  be  pardoned  on  account  of  his  intercession, 
and  that  even  if  Moses  and  Samuel,  to  whom  the  Lord  had 
listened  on  former  occasions  of  grievous  backsliding  and  apostasy 
(Ex.  xxxii. ;  Num.  xiv. ;  1  Sam.  vii.),  were  now  present  to 
plead  in  their  behalf,  it  would  be  altogether  in  vain  (Jer.  xiv. 
2,  xv.  1).  It  was  in  immediate  connection  with  the  forms  of 
evil,  which  are  so  prominently  exhibited  in  this  portion  of 
Ezekiel's  writings,  viz.  the  prevalence  of  the  spirit  of  false 
prophecy,  and  the  readiness  of  the  people  to  listen  to  its  lying 
divinations,  which  called  forth  in  Jeremiah  that  strong  declara 
tion  of  the  utter  inefficacy  of  prayer  to  meet  and  remedy  such 
a  case  as  this.  And  as  in  regard  to  the  subject  itself  Ezekiel 
treads  in  the  footsteps  of  Jeremiah,  so  also,  in  the  judgment 
pronounced  upon  it,  he  merely  supplements  the  representation 
previously  given  by  Jeremiah,  by  bringing  another  moral 
element  into  play,  and  declaring  also  its  incompetence  to 
prevent  or  rectify  the  evil  in  such  a  time  of  apostasy  and 
rebuke.  The  two  most  powerful  and  honoured  intercessors, 
Moses  and  Samuel,  could  not  do  it  by  their  intercession.  Jeremiah 
had  said.  No,  responds  Ezekiel  from  the  banks  of  the  Chebar ; 
nor  could  three  of  the  most  righteous  men  that  have  ever  lived, 
either  in  past  or  present  times,  do  it  by  their  righteousness. 
Though  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  were  all  at  this  moment  in  the 
land,  they  could  not  stay  the  judgment  of  God  from  proceeding. 

Many  frivolous  reasons  have  been  assigned,  especially  by  the 

1  Olshausen  on  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12. 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  151 

Fathers,  why  these  three  men  in  particular  should  have  been 
singled  out  for  such  distinguished  honour  on  this  occasion.  But 
the  real  reasons  are  not  far  to  seek.  For  these  three  individuals 
were  all  eminently  distinguished  for  their  personal  righteousness, 
and,  on  account  of  this,  were  saved  from  overwhelming  calami 
ties  which  destroyed  others.  Yet  not  without  some  striking 
diversities  of  circumstance,  evidently  in  the  eye  of  the  prophet. 
Noah  was  saved  amid  the  wreck  and  desolation  of  a  world,  and 
had  the  members  of  his  family,  but  these  alone,  given  to  him. 
Daniel  was  saved  from  the  unreasonable  fury  of  the  king  of 
Babylon,  and  prevailed  also  to  shield  from  destruction  a  few 
companions  of  kindred  spirit,  though  inferior  standing  to  himself 
(Dan.  ii.).  But  Job  was  stript  even  of  his  family  and  household, 
not  a  son  nor  a  daughter  left  to  him ;  and  of  the  three,  there 
fore,  was  the  most  striking  monument  of  the  simple  righteous 
ness  of  God  preserving  the  good  and  punishing  the  bad.  On 
this  account,  probably,  his  name  comes  last  in  order,  since,  in 
his  case,  the  principle  under  consideration  found  its  most  strin 
gent  application.  In  all  these  cases,  God  had  signally  stamped 
their  righteousness  with  his  approbation ;  yet  if  the  whole  three 
should  now  stand  before  him,  they  could  not  alter  his  determina 
tion  to  inflict  the  sore  judgments  which  were  impending  over 
the  king  and  people  of  Judah  ;  the  cup  of  iniquity  was  full ;  the 
stroke  of  vengeance  must  come  down ;  and  the  utmost  that  the 
righteousness  of  such  men  could  do,  would  be  to  deliver  their 
own  souls — only  a  Job's  escape  could  be  given  to  them,  without 
either  son  or  daughter.1 

The  manner  of  the  prophet  in  unfolding  this  sentiment  is 

1  Exception  has  been  taken  very  unreasonably  against  the  mention  of 
Daniel  along  with  Noah  and  Job,  and  an  argument  raised  out  of  it  against 
the  authenticity  of  Daniel's  history.  But  at  the  time  Ezekiel  now  wrote, 
Daniel  had  been  at  least  fourteen  years  in  Babylon,  and  the  circumstances 
which  first  spread  abroad  his  fame  so  much — those  recorded  in  the  two  first 
chapters  of  his  book — are  understood  to  have  occurred  very  shortly  after  his 
going  to  Babylon.  There  was,  therefore,  ample  time  for  his  extraordinary 
worth  to  be  generally  known  and  familiarly  referred  to ;  the  more  so,  as  the 
Jews  would  naturally,  in  their  present  low  condition,  think  with  pride  of 
one  who  had  acquired  so  much  glory  for  their  nation  at  the  very  seat  of 
empire,  and  would  probably  even  be  disposed  to  count  unduly  upon  the 
benefits  to  be  derived  from  his  virtues  and  influence.  See  Hengstenberg's 
Beitr.  i.  pp.  70-72. 


152  EZEKTEL  XIV. 

highly  rhetorical.  He  first  puts  the  case  in  the  form  of  a  gene 
ral  supposition, — the  case  of  a  land  sinning  grievously,  and  liable 
to  one  of  the  grievous  judgments  threatened  in  the  law  against 
hardened  transgressors  (Lev.  xxvi.  22,  33) ;  he  repeats  succes 
sively  the  four  different  kinds  of  Divine  judgment,  as  ready  to  be 
executed,  and  in  respect  to  each  affirms  the  impossibility  of  the 
three  righteous  men  arresting  the  course  of  justice,  or  prevailing 
to  deliver  more  than  their  own  souls.  Then,  at  ver.  21,  concen 
trating  the  whole  of  the  supposed  cases,  with  their  corresponding 
judgment,  as  in  one  mass  of  condemnation  and  woe  upon  Jeru 
salem,  he  proceeds :  "  How  much  more  when  I  send  my  four 
severe  judgments  upon  Jerusalem,  the  sword,  and  the  famine,  and 
the  noisome  beast,  and  the  pestilence,  to  cut  off  from  it  man  and 
beast ! "  As  much  as  to  say,  "  This  land  has  now  reached  such 
a  state  of  utter  abandonment  and  hopeless  depravity,  that  it 
deserves  to  have  not  one  merely,  but  the  whole  of  my  sore  judg 
ments  let  loose  upon  it  in  combined  fury ;  and  if  those  righteous 
men  could  not  save  a  land,  when  one  only  was  due,  how  foolish 
to  think  that  they  could  save  such  a  land  as  this ! " 

And  even  this  does  not  reveal  the  whole  of  the  severity 
that  was  to  be  exercised  upon  Jerusalem  ;  for  the  two  concluding 
verses,  while  they  point  to  a  remnant  escaping  the  flood  of  judg 
ments,  point  at  the  same  time  to  the  necessity  of  still  further 
severity  being  made  to  follow  them.  It  is  a  word  of  threatening, 
not  of  promise,  as  the  great  majority  of  commentators  suppose, 
and  our  translators  also  appear  to  have  understood  it.  "  And, 
behold,  therein  shall  be  left  a  remnant  that  shall  be  brought 
forth,  sons  and  daughters :  behold,  they  shall  come  forth  unto 
you,  and  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  doings ;  and  ye  shall 
be  comforted  concerning  the  evil  that  I  shall  have  brought  upon 
Jerusalem,  in  all  that  I  shall  have  brought  upon  it.  And  they 
shall  comfort  you,  when  ye  see  their  ways  and  their  doings ;  and 
ye  shall  know  that  I  have  not  done  without  cause  all  that  I 
have  done  in  it,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah."  The  word  is  formally 
addressed  to  the  people  already  in  exile,  who  are  regarded  as 
viewing  the  destruction  about  to  be  executed  on  Jerusalem  with 
astonishment,  and  some  degree  of  dissatisfaction.  The  prophet 
tells  such  there  would  certainly  be  a  remnant — not,  however,  in 
the  proper  sense,  as  if  they  were  themselves  deserving  persons, 
or  spared  for  blessing  for  the  sake  of  the  pious  among  them,  but 


HYPOCRITICAL  INQUIRIES  AFTER  GOD.  153 

a  remnant  still  so  wedded  to  sin,  and  so  manifestly  deserving  of 
severe  chastisement,  that  every  one  would  recognise  the  justice 
of  God's  dealings  toward  them.  aYe  shall  see,"  to  use  the 
language  of  Calvin,  who  here  caught  the  real  meaning  of  the 
prophet,  tl  the  men  to  be  so  wicked,  that  ye  shall  be  forced  to 
confess  the  city  was  deserving  of  destruction,  and  the  men  them 
selves  worthy  of  death.  And  instead  of  murmuring  and  fretting 
against  God,  ye  shall  be  satisfied,  it  could  not  have  been  other 
wise  ordered,  their  wickedness  was  of  so  desperate  a  nature ;  so 
that,  with  soothed  and  tranquil  minds,  ye  shall  henceforth  pro 
claim  my  righteousness,  and  cease  any  more  to  utter  the  com 
plaints  which  now  disturb  your  minds." 

This,  we  have  no  doubt,  is  the  correct  view  of  the  passage, 
for  it  has  respect  simply  to  God's  justice  in  visiting  them  with 
such  severity  ;  and  there  is  not  a  word  dropped,  either  of  their 
being  brought  to  repentance  when  in  exile,  or  of  God's  extend 
ing  mercy  to  them  when  there.  It  is  the  severe  aspect  of  the 
Divine  procedure  that  is  exhibited  throughout.  Doubtless  the 
view  given  is  to  be  understood  with  certain  limitations ;  there 
was  mercy,  to  some  extent,  to  be  found  mingling  with  the 
judgment,  as  there  would  also  be  some  grains  of  wheat  concealed 
among  the  heaps  of  chaff  that  were  to  be  driven  forth  into  Chal- 
dea.  Other  prophecies  speak  also  of  these ;  but  the  word  here 
has  to  do  only  with  the  work  of  judgment  on  account  of  sin. 
Yet,  even  in  regard  to  that,  it  challenges  the  concurring  judg 
ment  and  approval  of  all  who  should  be  at  pains  to  acquaint 
themselves  with  the  entire  circumstances.  For  God  must  ever 
be  justified  when  he  is  judged  with  knowledge  and  impartiality. 
Dissatisfaction  with  his  ways,  or  quarrelling  with  his  purposes, 
springs  up  only  where  ignorance  and  sinful  prejudice  exist.  And 
when  all  things  shall  at  last  be  made  manifest,  there  is  not  an 
act  in  his  administration,  however  stern  and  severe,  which  shall 
not  call  forth  the  response  from  every  intelligent  bosom  :  He 
hath  done  all  things  well ;  his  ways  are  righteousness  and  truth. 


154  EZEKIEL  XV. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

THE  GUILT   AND    CONDEMNATION  OF   ISRAEL   PARABOLICALLY 
REPRESENTED. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
what  is  the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree  (or,  the  vine-wood  more  than  any 
wood),  the  branch  that  is  among  the  trees  of  the  forest?  3.  Shall  wood  be 
taken  of  it  to  do  any  work  ?  or  will  they  take  a  pin  from  it  to  hang  thereon 
any  vessel?  4.  Behold,  it  is  given  to  the  fire  for  fuel;  the  two  ends  of  it 
are  burnt  by  the  fire ;  and  its  middle  part  is  on  flame.  Is  it  fit  for  any  work? 
5.  Behold,  when  it  was  entire,  it  did  not  serve  for  work ;  how  much  less 
when  the  fire  has  devoured  of  it,  and  it  is  on  flame.  Is  it  still  to  be  taken  for 
any  work?  6.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  As  the  vine-wood 
among  the  wood  of  the  forest,  which  I  have  given  for  fuel  to  the  fire,  so  have 
I  given  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  7.  And  I  set  my  face  against  them  ; 
from  the  fire  they  go  out,  and  the  fire  still  devours  them ;  and  ye  shall  know 
that  I  am  Jehovah  when  I  set  my  face  against  them.  8.  And  I  make  the 
land  a  desolation,  because  they  have  acted  most  treacherously,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah. 


THIS  chapter  is  so  closely  related  to  the  following,  that  the  one 
may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  introduction  to  the  other.  It  re 
presents  briefly,  and  by  way  of  parable,  what  chap.  xvi.  exhibits 
at  length,  and  with  all  the  minuteness  of  historical  detail.  The 
subject  of  both  alike  is  the  inveterate  and  incorrigible  wicked 
ness  of  the  covenant-people  in  its  two  branches,  Israel  and 
Judah,  which  had  defeated  the  ends  of  their  high  calling,  and 
rendered  them  obnoxious  to  the  severest  penalties. 

In  this  introductory  chapter  the  prophet  begins  with  asking, 
"  What  is  the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree — the  branch  that  is 
among  the  trees  of  the  forest?  "  The  point  of  comparison  lies 
in  the  wood  belonging  respectively  to  the  vine  and  the  forest- 
trees, — what  is  the  vine-wood  more  than  any  forest-wood  ?  In 
this  respect  it  has  nothing  to  entitle  it  to  any  pre-eminence  above 
the  others,  but  quite  the  reverse ;  it  is  inferior  to  them  all.  Its 
soft  and  brittle  nature  renders  it  unfit  for  being  made  into  any 
useful  implements,  even  of  the  most  common  kind ;  not  so  much 
as  a  pin  can  be  made  from  it ;  it  is  fit  only  for  fuel  to  the  fire. 
Such  were  the  chosen  people  of  God,  if  viewed  simply  as  a 
people  of  this  world,  who  had  no  longer  any  peculiar  connection 
with  the  higher  purposes  of  the  Divine  government.  They  have 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  VINE.  155 

often  been  compared  to  the  vine,  and  sometimes  even  to  vines  of 
the  choicest  kind  (Deut.  xxxii.  32  ;  Isa.  v.;  Ps.  Ixxx. ;  Jer.  ii. 
21 ;  Hos.  x.  1),  but  always  with  respect  to  the  fruitful  qualities 
of  the  vine,  as  significant  of  the  prolific  goodness  that  ought  to 
have  been  found  in  them,  as  the  people  whom  God  had  chosen. 
Destitute  of  this,  what  were  they  better  than  others  ?  Nay,  in 
respect  of  those  things  which  constitute  the  natural  greatness  of 
kingdoms, — antiquity  of  origin,  extent  of  territory,  abundance 
of  resources,  attainments  in  arts  and  science, — what  could  they 
boast  of,  in  comparison  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Babylon,  and  the 
greater  kingdoms  of  the  earth  !  Their  inferiority  was  palpable  ; 
and  whenever  they  lost  their  distinction  as  the  nation  that  kept 
the  truth  of  God,  and  wrought  righteousness  in  the  earth,  they 
were  no  longer  capable  of  holding  a  place  of  power  and  influ 
ence  in  the  destinies  of  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  like  salt 
that  had  lost  its  savour,  they  had  become  fit  only  to  be  cast  out, 
or  committed  as  a  piece  of  vine-wood  to  the  fire. 

Such  is  the  representation  here  given  of  the  covenant-people 
as  a  whole,  considered  even  in  their  state  of  undiminished  ful 
ness  and  noontide  glory.  But  they  were  far  from  being  in  that 
state  when  Ezekiel  wrote  ;  and  in  vers.  4  and  5  he  modifies  this 
description  of  the  worthless  vine,  so  as  exactly  to  suit  their  case  : 
"  Behold,  it  is  given  to  the  fire  for  fuel ;  the  fire  has  consumed 
both  the  ends  of  it,  and  its  middle  part  is  on  flame.  Is  it  (viz.  the 
scorched  part  that  still  remains)  fit  for  work  ?  Behold,  when  it 
was  entire,  it  did  not  serve  for  work  ;  how  much  less  when  the 
fire  has  devoured  of  it,  and  it  is  on  flame,  shall  it  still  be  taken 
for  work !  "  The  allusion  is  to  the  impoverished  and  reduced 
state  of  the  covenant-people  ;  it  was  with  them  as  if  the  two  ends 
were  already  consumed  in  the  fire,  and  the  middle  portion  that 
remained  also  very  severely  scorched.  The  ten  tribes  had  been 
carried  away  into  Assyria,  and  the  nation,  not  large  or  powerful 
at  the  best,  had  been  brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin  ;  they  existed 
only  as  a  brand  plucked  from  the  burning,  or  rather  with  the 
fire  still  kindlingaround  them.  Therefore,  if  incapable  on  merely 
natural  grounds,  and  in  respect  to  purposes  of  an  inferior  kind,  of 
coping  with  other  kingdoms,  they  were  immeasurably  more  so 
now;  and  it  might  be  evident,  even  to  the  most  careless  and  un 
reflecting,  that  they  were  in  danger  of  complete  destruction. 
"  And  I  set  my  face  against  them  ;  from  the  fire  they  go  out, 


156  EZEKIEL  XV. 

and  the  fire  still  devours  them ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah  when  I  set  my  face  against  them.  And  I  make  the 
land  a  desolation,  because  they  have  acted  most  treacherously, 
saith  the  Lord." 

The  parable  indicates,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  the  strictly 
moral  nature  of  the  ends  for  which  God  chooses  a  people  out  of 
the  world,  and  teaches  them  to  expect  in  immediate  connection 
with  these  all  their  security,  and  power,  and  glory.  It  is  the 
same  truth,  only  applied  to  other  times  and  altered  circumstances, 
which  is  brought  out  by  John  the  Baptist,  when  he  says  in  re 
gard  to  the  approaching  work  and  kingdom  of  Messiah :  a  And 
now  the  axe  is  laid  to  the  root  of  the  trees;  therefore  every  tree 
which  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into 
the  fire."  The  same  also  which  our  Lord  himself  taught  in  the 

O 

parables  of  the  wicked  husbandmen  and  of  the  fruitless  fig-tree 
in  the  vineyard  (Matt.  xxi.  33-41  ;  Luke  xiii.  6-9),  and  which 
he  still  further  embodied  in  the  parabolical  action  of  the  cursing 
of  the  fruitless  fig-tree  by  the  way-side  (Mark  xi.  12-14).  The 
truth,  therefore,  is  for  all  times  and  stages  of  the  Church's  history. 
It  matters  not  that  her  members  are  now  intermingled  with  the 
world,  and  not,  as  of  old,  placed  in  a  state  of  visible  separation 
and  distance  from  it.  They  still  are  a  chosen  seed,  distinguished 
with  the  highest  privileges  and  most  elevating  hopes,  but  all  for 
the  single  end  of  withdrawing  them  from  the  pollutions  of  the 
world,  and  rendering  them  to  God  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works.  If  they  only  pursue  after  this  high  end  with  un- 
deviating  purpose  and  steady  aim,  they  shall  be  found  full  of  the 
favour  and  strong  in  the  might  of  God ;  they  shall  successfully 
contend  with  principalities  and  powers,  and  will  prove  themselves 
the  appointed  channels  of  conveying  life  and  blessing  to  a  perish 
ing  world.  But  if  they  are  themselves  drawing  back  to  the  ways 
of  corruption  ;  if  they  begin  to  breathe  the  spirit  of  the  world, 
and  do  its  works,  as  they  must  be  of  all  men  the  most  guilty,  so 
are  they  also  the  most  sure  to  inherit  the  woes  of  condemnation. 
They  oppose  and  frustrate  the  very  end  for  which  they  have  been 
called  to  the  enjoyment  of  such  distinguished  privileges,  and  so 
belong  to  the  unhappy  class  of  whom  our  Lord  has  said,  that  it 
shall  "  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day 
of  judgment  than  for  them." 

Having  prepared  the  way,  by  the  parabolical  delineation  of 


THE  STOKT  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  157 

the  fifteenth  chapter,  the  prophet  proceeds,  in  the  long  historical 
detail  of  the  next  chapter,  to  make  application  of  its  principles 
to  Israel.  In  this  ideal  narrative  the  covenant-people  are  per 
sonified  as  a  single  individual, — the  daughter  Jerusalem,  under 
the  image  of  whose  life  the  most  vivid  picture  is  presented  of 
the  history  of  God's  connection  with  them,  and  their  behaviour 
toward  him. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT  AND  PUNISHMENT. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
make  Jerusalem  know  her  abominations,  3.  And  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah  to  Jerusalem,  Thy  origin  and  thy  birth1  were  of  the  land  of  the 
Canaanite  ;  thy  father  was  the  Amorite,  and  thy  mother  the  Hittite.2  4. 
And  for  thy  birth,  in  the  day  that  thou  wast  born  thy  navel  was  not  cut, 
neither  wast  thou  washed  with  water  for  cleansing  :  thou  wast  not  salted  at 
all,  nor  wast  thou  wrapt  in  swaddling-bands.3  5.  No  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do 

1  Hiivernick  would  render  here :  the  place  of  thy  production  and  the  place 
of  thy  birth.    But  no  instance  can  be  produced  in  which  the  terms  are  used 
distinctly  to  express  the  locality  in  which  the  action  or  event  took  place. 
And  if  it  had  been  the  locality  that  was  here  pointed  to,  what  follows  would 
have  been  not  o/,  but  m,  the  land  of  Canaan.     The  words  are  literally,  tliy 
diggings,  or  originatings,  and  thy  bringings  forth,  to  which  substantially 
correspond  thy  origin  and  thy  birth. 

2  Not  simply  an  Amorite  and  a  Hittite,  but  these  two  tribes  themselves 
personified ;  as  if  all  the  peculiarities  respectively  belonging  to  them  united 
in  the  parentage  of  the  Israeli tish  people. 

3  The  use  of  water  is  here  said  to  be  'V^Dp — which  occurs  only  here,  and 
has  been  very  commonly  rendered  "for  suppling,"  as  from  yy$,to  stroke  or 
smear.     Gesenius  gives  cleansing  as  the  meaning,  which,  with  most  recent 
authorities,  we  adopt.     The  latter  is  certainly  the  more  natural  sense.     In 
the  Septuagint  the  word  is  altogether  omitted.     The  application  of  salt  to 
new-born  infants  in  ancient  times  is  known  to  have  been  a  common  practice, 
supposed  to  have  been  used  medicinally,  for  the  purpose  of  hardening  the 
skin  ;  but  probably,  also,  not  without  reference  to  the  symbolical  import  of 
salt,  as  an  emblem  of  purity  and  incorruption.     Jerome  says  on  the  passage  : 
"The  tender  bodies  of  infants,  while  they  still  retain  the  heat  of  the  womb, 
and  by  their  cries  give  evidence  of  the  first  commencement  of  this  toilsome 
life,  are  wont  to  be  sprinkled  with  salt  by  the  nurses,  to  make  them  more  dry 
and  firm."     Galen  speaks  of  it,  De  Sanit.  i.  7. 


158  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

one  of  these  things  to  thee,  to  have  compassion  upon  thee  ;  and  thou  wast 
thrown  upon  the  open  field,  with  contempt  of  thy  life,1  in  the  day  that  thou 
wast  born.  6.  And  I  passed  by  thee,  and  saw  thee  ready  to  be  trampled 
on  in  thy  blood,  and  I  said  to  thee  in  thy  blood,  Live ;  yea,  I  said  to  thee 
in  thy  blood,  Live.  7.  A  myriad  like  the  produce  of  the  field  I  made  thee  ; 
and  thou  didst  increase  and  wax  great,  and  became  most  beautiful ; 2  thy 
breasts  formed,  and  thy  hair  grew,  and  thou  wast  naked  and  bare.3  8. 
And  I  passed  by  thee,  and  looked  upon  thee,  and,  behold,  thy  time  was  a 
time  of  love;  and  I  spread  my  skirt  over  thee,4  and  covered  thy  nakedness  ; 
and  I  sware  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  covenant  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  and  thou  becamest  mine.  9.  And  I  washed  thee  with  water,  and 
rinsed  thy  blood  from  off  thee,  and  anointed  thee  with  oil.  10.  And  I 
clothed  thee  with  broidered  work,  and  gave  thee  shoes  of  tachash,5  and 


1  "With  contempt  of  thy  life,"  seems  to  come  nearer  to  the  idea  here  ex 
pressed  than  the  "  loathing  of  thy  person."    For  t$M,  though  often  used  for 
Z«/e,  never  precisely  means  person;  and  when  the  treatment  is  said  to  have 
been  done  with  loathing  of  this,  it  is  much  the  same  as  we  would  express  by 
contempt,  or  disdainful  indifference,  to  the  life. 

2  It  is  literally,  "  and  didst  come  to  ornament  of  ornaments."     The  word 
t-jy  has  no  other  well-ascertained  meaning;  and  the  attempts  of  Havernick 
and  Hitzig  to  change  the  sense  are  both  quite  unsuccessful.     See  Hengsten- 
berg  on  Ps.  xxxii.  9.      It  is  there  also  used  somewhat  peculiarly, — of  the 
bit  and  bridle  of  a  horse,  "whose  ornaments  are  bit  and  bridle,"  meaning 
that  the  nature  of  a  horse  is  such  as  to  require  decorations  of  that  sort. 

3  The  meaning  of  this  last  clause  is  much  obscured  in  the  Authorized  Ver 
sion,  by  giving  the  conjunction  and  the  adversative  force  of  whereas,  thereby 
making  the  nakedness  and  bareness  here  mentioned  point  to  a  condition 
prior  to  that  described  in  the  preceding  terms.     But  it  is  only  the  literal 
rendering  that  conveys  the  proper  idea.     The  prophet  means  to  say,  that 
even  when  grown  to  womanhood  and  ripe  for  marriage,  she  was  still  naked 
and  bare  ;  beautiful,  indeed,  in  person,  but  as  to  other  things  in  an  unfur 
nished  and  poor  condition. 

4  This  expression,  of  "throwing  the  skirt  over  her,"  as  appears  also  from 
what  immediately  follows,  is  synonymous  with  entering  into  the  marriage  re 
lation.    It  is  taken  from  Ruth  iii.  9  :  "Spread  thy  skirt  over  thine  handmaid ; 
for  thou  art  a  near  kinsman."    It  gives  a  very  feeble  sense  when  explained, 
as  it  often  is,  of  taking  under  the  wing  of  Divine  protection  and   support. 
The  passage  in  Ruth,  and  collateral  passages  in  the  law  (Deut.  xxii.  30,  xxvii. 
20),  fully  bear  out  the  other  and  more  specific  meaning.     Nor  are  similar 
expressions  wanting  in  the  Greek  poets  for  indicating  the  marriage  union  ; 
as  in  Sophocles1  Trachin,  v.  536.     See  also  Grotius  here. 

5  It  is  not  ascertained  with  certainty  what  was  meant  by  tachash ;  it  is 
always  used  in  connection  with  skin,  or  articles  made  of  skin  ;  for  example, 
the  tabernacle  was  covered  with  tachash  skins,  Ex.  xxv.  5.    The  ancient  ver 
sions  understood  it  to  denote  the  colour  of  the  skins,  red  or  blue  ;  but  the 
Talmudists  and  Hebrew  interpreters  take  it  for  the  name  of  the  animal  from 
which  the  skins  were  obtained,  probably  the  badger  or  seal ;  and  this  is  now 
generally  acquiesced  in. 


THE  STOKY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  159 

girded  thee  with  fine  linen,  and  covered  thee  with  silk.  11.  And  I  decked 
thee  with  ornaments,  and  I  put  bracelets  upon  thy  hands,  and  a  chain  upon 
thy  neck.  12.  And  I  put  a  jewel  in  thy  nose,  and  ear-rings  in  thine  ears, 
and  a  beautiful  crown  upon  thy  head.  13.  And  thou  wast  adorned  with 
gold  and  silver  ;  and  thy  clothing  was  of  fine  linen  and  silk  and  broidered 
work;  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil  didst  thou  eat ;  and  thou  wert  exceed 
ingly  beautiful,  and  didst  prosper  into  a  kingdom.  14.  And  thy  name  went 
forth  among  the  nations  on  account  of  thy  beauty ;  for  it  was  perfect  by 
reason  of  my  adornment,  which  I  put  upon  thee,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  15. 
But  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  beauty,  and  didst  play  the  wanton  upon  thy  name,1 
and  didst  pour  out  thy  fornications  upon  every  one  that  passed  by ;  it  was  his 
(viz.  thy  beauty).  16.  And  thou  didst  take  of  thy  garments,  and  didst  make 
to  thyself  high  places  of  divers  colours,  and  didst  play  the  wanton  upon 
them — (such  as)  had  not  come  in,  nor  did  exist.  17.  And  thou  didst  take 
thy  beautiful  articles,  of  my  gold  and  my  silver,  which  I  put  upon  thee,  and 
didst  make  for  thyself  statues  of  men,  and  didst  commit  fornication  with 
them.  18.  And  thou  tookest  thy  broidered  garments,  and  didst  cover  them  ; 
and  my  oil  and  my  incense  thou  didst  set  before  them.  19.  And  my  bread 
which  I  gave  thee,  fine  flour  and  oil  and  honey,  that  I  fed  thee  with,  thou 
hast  also  set  it  before  them  for  a  sweet  savour  :  and  it  was  so,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah.  20.  And  thou  didst  take  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  whom  thou 
barest  to  me,  and  to  them  hast  thou  sacrificed  them  to  be  devoured:  21. 
Were  thy  whoredoms  too  little,  that  thou  shouldest  have  slain  my  children, 
and  given  them  by  making  them  pass  through  the  fire  for  them?  22.  And 
with  all  thy  abominations  and  thy  whoredoms,  didst  not  remember  the  days 
of  thy  youth,  when  thou  wert  naked  and. bare,  wert  ready  to  be  trampled 
on  in  thy  blood.  23.  And  it  came  to  pass,  after  all  thy  wickedness  (woe, 
woe  to  thee,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah),  24.  That  thou  didst  build  to  thee  a 
chamber,2  and  didst  make  for  thee  a  high  place  in  every  street.  25.  At 
every  corner  of  a  way  hast  thou  built  thy  high  place,  and  hast  made  thy 
beauty  to  be  abhorred,  and  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  every  one  that  passed  by, 
and  hast  multiplied  thy  whoredoms.  26.  And  thou  hast  played  the  wanton 
with  the  Egyptians,  thy  neighbours,  great  of  flesh,3  and  hast  multiplied  thy 
whoredoms,  to  provoke  me  to  anger.  27.  And,  behold,  I  have  stretched  out 


1  The  most  literal  rendering  here  is  to  be  preferred.    Havernick's,  "against 
thy  name,"  with  a  reference  to  Judg.  xix.  2,  is  rather  forced.     She  played 
the  wanton  upon  her  name,  because  her  renown,  with  the  riches  and  honour 
on  which  it  was  grounded,  carried  her  away  into  sin. 

2  It  seems  probable  that  what  is  meant  here  by  3$  is  such  a  chamber  as 
the  Latins  denoted  \yyfornix,  here  suitably  rendered  by  the  Septuagint 
own/act  TTO^VDCOV — a  class  of  apartments  too  frequently  associated  with  the 
impure  religions  of  antiquity. 

3  This  epithet,  "great  of  flesh,"  applied  to  the  Egyptians,  seems  to  point 
to  the  gross  and  lustful  character  of  their  religion  (comp.  chap,  xxiii.  20). 
How  much  the  Egyptian  religion  partook  of  such  a  character  has  been 
abundantly  established.    See,  for  example,  Hengstenberg  on  the  Pentateuch, 
ii.  p.  118  sq. ;  also  Herod,  ii.  46.     It  may  be  doubted,  however,  whether 
committing  adultery  with  the  Egyptians  means  worshipping  their  idols.    We 
would  rather  understand  it,  with  Calvin,  of  their  improper  trust  in  the  power 
of  Egypt,  which  was  itself  an  act  of  unfaithfulness  toward  God.     So  also 
may  be  understood  what  is  said  of  the  Assyrians. 


160  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

my  hand  upon  thee,  and  have  diminished  thy  allowance,  and  have  given  thee 
to  the  desire  of  them  that  hate  thee,  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines,  that 
are  ashamed  of  thy  lewd  way.1  28.  Thou  hast  played  the  wanton  also  with 
the  Assyrians,  because  thou  wast  not  satisfied,  and  didst  play  the  wanton, 
and  still  wast  not  satisfied.  29.  And  thou  didst  multiply  thy  whoredoms 
toward  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  far  as  Chaldea,2  and  even  still  wast  not  satis 
fied  with  this.  30.  How  weak  is  thine  heart,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah:  since 
thou  doest  all  these  things,  the  doing  of  an  adulterous  imperious  woman ;  31. 
Since  thou  buildest  thy  chamber  at  the  corner  of  every  way,  and  makest 
thy  high  place  in  every  street;  and  hast  not  been  as  an  harlot,  to  scorn  the 
hire.3  32.  The  adulterous  woman,  who  receives  strangers  while  under  her 
husband!4  33.  To  all  harlots  they  give  gifts;  but  thou  bestowest  gifts  on  all 
thy  lovers,  and  bribest  them  to  come  to  thee  on  every  side  by  thy  whoredoms. 
34.  And  there  is  in  thee  the  contrary  of  woman,  in  thy  committing  whore 
doms  while  it  is  not  played  the  wanton  after  thee ;  and  in  thy  giving  of  a 
reward,  while  a  reward  is  not  given  to  thee  ;  so  that  thou  art  contrary. 

35.  Therefore,  0  harlot,  hear  the  word  of  Jehovah:  3G.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thy  filthiness  has  been  poured  out,  and  thou  hast 
discovered  thy  nakedness  by  thy  whoredoms  upon  thy  lovers,  and  upon  all 
the  idols  of  thy  abominations,  and  by  the  blood  of  thy  children  whom  thou 
didst  give  to  them ;  37.  Behold,  therefore,  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers,  with 
whom  thou  hast  had  pleasure,  even  all  whom  thou  hast  loved,  with  all  that 
thou  hatest ;  and  I  will  gather  them  against  thee  round  about,  and  discover 
thy  nakedness  to  them,  and  they  shall  see  all  thy  nakedness.  38.  And  I  will 
judge  thee  according  to  the  judgments  of  adulteresses  and  those  who  shed 
blood;  and  I  will  make  thee  blood  of  fury  and  jealousy.  39.  And  I  will  give 


1  "The  daughters  of  the  Philistines"  seem  here  to  be  taken  generally  as  a 
name  for  heathen  adversaries.     They  were  not  actually  the  parties  to  whom 
Israel  was  given  up,  when  her  allowance  was  diminished,  or  her  inheritance 
curtailed  ;  but  those  to  whom  they  were  given  up  might  be  called  daughters 
of  the  Philistines,  from  their  character  and  position. 

2  The  meaning  of  this  fresli  charge,  which  we  render  quite  literally,  seems 
to  be  this,  that  the  people  multiplied  still  further  their  backslidings  and 
pollutions,  such  as  belonged  to  the  land  of  Canaan  under  its  original  inhabi 
tants,  and  that  by  going  even  to  Chaldea;  bringing  in  Chaldea  to  aggravate 
the  Canaanitish  character  of  their  evil  ways.     We  greatly  prefer  this  sense 
to  taking  Canaan  as  an  appellative,  and  rendering,  "  the  merchant-land  to 
Chaldea." 

3  The  practice  of  harlots  is  referred  to,  scoffing  at  or  scorning  the  offered 
hire,  in  order  to  obtain  more.     Unlike  such,  worse  even  than  those  pro 
fligates,  Israel  seemed  to  be  indifferent  to  the  result  of  her  procedure  ;  she 
did  not  care  whether  she  got  much  or  little — heedlessly  bent  on  the  way  of 
ruin.     The  rendering  of  this  clause  by  the  Vulgate  is  particularly  happy  : 
Nee  facia  essicut  meretrix  fastidio  augens  pretium. 

4  The  common  version  misses  the  exact  import  of  this  verse,  by  rendering, 
"taketh  strangers  instead  of  her  husband."     The  sin  charged  is  that  of 
taking  or  receiving  strangers  while  under  the  law  of  her  husband.    It  refers 
to  Num.  v.  19,  20,  29,  where  the  rendering  should  be,  "goeth  aside  under 
her  husband,"  i.e.  turns  aside  to  another  while  properly  under  him. 


THE  STOEY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  161 

thee  into  their  hand,  and  they  shall  throw  down  thy  chambers,  and  shall 
prostrate  thy  high  places;  and  they  shall  strip  thee  of  thy  clothes,  and  shall 
take  thy  beautiful  jewels,  and  leave  thee  naked  and  bare.  40.  And  they 
shall  make  to  go  up  against  thee  a  company,  and  they  shall  stone  thee  with 
stones,  and  thrust  thee  through  with  their  swords.  41.  And  they  shall  burn 
thy  houses  with  fire,  and  execute  judgments  upon  thee  in  the  sight  of  many 
women;  and  will  make  thee  cease  from  playing  the  wanton,  nor  also  shaft 
thou  give  hire  any  more.  42.  And  I  will  make  my  fury  to  rest  in  thee,  and 
my  jealousy  shall  depart  from  thee ;  and  I  will  be  quiet,  and  will  no  more 
be  angry.  43.  Because  thou  hast  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy  youth, 
and  hast  provoked  me  in  all  these  things  ;  behold,  I  also  recompense  thy  way 
upon  thy  head,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah ;  and  will  not  do  what  is  scandalous 
upon  all  thine  abominations.1 

44.  Behold,  every  one  that  deals  in  proverbs  shall  utter  a  proverb  upon  thee, 
saying,  As  is  the  mother,  so  is  the  daughter.  45.  Thou  art  thy  mother's 
daughter,  that  dost  loathe  her  husband  and  her  children ;  and  the  sister  of 
thy  sisters  art  thou,  who  did  loathe  their  husbands  and  their  children ;  your 
mother  was  a  Hittite,  and  your  father  an  Amorite.  46.  And  thine  elder  sister 
is  Samaria,  she  and  her  daughters  that  dwell  on  thy  left ;  and  thy  younger 
sister,  that  dwells  on  thy  right,  are  Sodom  and  her  daughters.  47.  And  thou 
hast  not  walked  after  their  ways,  and  done  according  to  their  abominations  ; 
it  was  accounted  but  a  little  thing;  and  thou  hast  been  corrupted  more  than 
they  in  all  thy  ways.  48.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Sodom  thy 
sister  has  not  done,  she  nor  her  daughters,  as  thou  hast  done,  and  thy  daughters. 
49.  Behold,  this  was  the  iniquity  of  Sodom  thy  sister,  pride,  fulness  of  bread, 
and  secure  rest  was  in  her  and  in  her  daughters  ;  and  she  did  not  strengthen 
the  hand  of  the  poor  and  needy.  50.  And  they  were  haughty,  and  com 
mitted  abomination  before  me ;  and  I  removed  them  according  to  what  I 
saw.2  51.  And  Samaria  has  not  committed  the  half  of  thy  sins  ;  and  thou 
hast  multiplied  thy  abominations  above  them,  and  hast  justified  thy  sisters 
by  all  thine  abominations  which  thou  hast  done.  52.  Thou  also,  who  hast 
vindicated  3  thy  sisters,  bear  thine  own  shame  ;  by  thy  sins,  in  which  thou 


1  This  last  clause  is  very  commonly,  and  also  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
rendered,  "  And  thou  shalt  not  commit  this  lewdness  above  all  thy  abomina 
tions  " — but  what  lewdness  ?     Nothing  had  been  mentioned  separate  from 
the  abominations  themselves.     The  verse  treats  of  God's  proceedings,  not 
Israel's,  and  this  clause  is  plainly  a  continuation  of  what  he  declared  it  his 
purpose  to  do  to  Israel.     He  will  deal  with  her  according  to  her  sins,  and  will 
not  be  guilty  of  the  scandalous  part  (such  is  the  precise  import  of  the  phrase) 
of  encouraging  her  in  her  sinful  courses.     The  expression  refers  to  the  con 
duct  of  a  father  who  should  encourage  his  daughter  to  play  the  harlot,  as 
recorded  in  Lev.  xix.  29.     The  very  same  term  is  also  used  there. 

2  The  expression  here  has  been  misunderstood,  from  not  perceiving  that  it 
refers  to  Gen.  xviii.  21,  where  the  Lord  said  to  Abraham,  that  he  would  go 
down  and  would  see  whether  the  iniquity  of  Sodom  was  according  to  the  cry 
that  came  into  his  ears :  he  did  according  to  what  he  saw. 

3  The  proper  meaning  of  the  verb  ^Q  seems  to  be  to  judge  for,  to  under 
take  or  vindicate  the  cause  of  any  one,  and  in  this  sense  it  is  plainly  used  in 
1  Sam.  ii.  25.     It  is  used  also  in  Piel  in  the  sense  of  judging  generally;  but 
most  commonly  in  Hithpael  in  the  sense  of  entreating  for,  or  supplicating — 

L 


162  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

hast  done  more  abominably  than  they,  they  are  justified  above  thee ;  and  also 
be  thou  confounded,  and  bear  thy  shame,  in  that  thou  hast  justified  thy 
sisters.  53.  And  I  shall  turn  again  the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters, 
and  the  captivity  of  Samaria  and  her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of  thy 
captives  in  the  midst  of  them  j1  54.  That  thou  mayest  bear  thy  shame,  and 
be  confounded  for  all  thou  hast  done,  in  making  thyself  a  comfort  to  them. 
55.  And  thy  sisters,  Sodom  and  her  daughters,  shall  return  to  their  former 
state,  and  Samaria  and  her  daughters  shall  return  to  their  former  state,  and 
thou  and  thy  daughters  shall  return  to  your  former  state.  56.  Though 
Sodom  thy  sister  was  not  for  a  report  in  thy  mouth  in  the  day  of  thy  pride ; 
57.  Before  thy  wickedness  was  discovered,  as  at  the  time  of  the  reproach  of 
the  daughters  of  Syria  (i.e.  apparently,  the  time  when  thou  becamest  an 
object  of  reproach  to  them),  and  all  round  about  her,  the  daughters  of  the 
Philistines,  that  despise  thee  round  about.  58.  Thy  scandalous  behaviour 
and  thine  abominations,  thou  shalt  bear  them,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  59. 
For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  will  even  deal  with  thee  as  thou  hast 
done,  who  hast  despised  the  oath  to  break  the  covenant.  60.  But  I  will  re 
member  my  covenant  with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  establish 
with  thee  an  everlasting  covenant.  61.  And  thou  shalt  remember  thy  ways 
and  be  ashamed,  when  thou  shalt  receive  thy  sisters,  thine  elder,  and  thy 
younger,  and  I  give  them  to  thee  for  daughters — yet  not  by  thy  covenant. 
62.  And  I  will  establish  with  thee  my  covenant;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I 
am  Jehovah.  63.  To  the  end  thou  mayest  remember,  and  be  confounded, 
and  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I  grant 
forgiveness  to  thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

1.  THE  history  recorded  so  graphically  in  this  chapter  natur 
ally  falls  into  several  successive  portions ;  and  of  these,  the  first, 
which  ends  with  ver.  7,  unfolds  Israel's  beginnings  as  a  people — 

a  sense  very  naturally  arising  out  of  what  we  suppose  to  be  the  primary  one 
of  judging,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  cause  or  right  of  any  one. 
Here  the  meaning  is,  that  Israel  by  her  greater  guilt  had,  as  it  were,  given 
judgment  in  favour  of  her  less  guilty  neighbours. 

1  I  adhere  to  the  common  rendering  of  the  phrase  nsQK*  niBS  in  preference 
to  that  so  strenuously  contended  for  by  Hengstenberg  in  his  Beitr.  ii.p.  104, 
and  again  on  Ps.  xiv.  6.  It  is  quite  true,  that  in  other  expressions  the  verb 
is  used  intransitively — to  turn  back  to,  or  return  to  anything.  That,  how 
ever,  does  not  conclusively  prove  it  may  not  be  used  actively  in  a  proverbial 
expression  like  this ;  indeed,  the  fitf  here  between  the  verb  and  the  noun, 
pointing  out  the  one  as  the  object  of  the  other,  seems  to  demand  the  active 
sense ;  and  in  Jer.  xlix.  6  the  Hiphil  form  is  employed,  to  render  the  force 
of  the  expression  more  apparent :  "  I  will  cause  to  return— i.e.  I  will  bring 
back— the  captivity  of  the  children  of  Ammon."  See  also  Nah.  ii.3.  The 
difference,  however,  between  the  two  interpretations  is  merely  philological ; 
it  respects  simply  the  original  import  of  the  words,  whether  they  mean  pre 
cisely  a  turning  back  of  the  captivity,  or  a  turning  back  to  it,  viz.  on  the 
Lord's  part,  with  a  view  to  its  removal.  The  meaning  is  still,  in  either  case, 
substantially  the  same.  The  expression  is  a  proverbial  one,  to  denote  the 
undoing  of  an  existing  evil,  and  is  often  used  of  cases  where  there  was  no 
real  captivity,  as  in  Job  xlii.  10,  and  Jer.  xxx.  18. 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  163 

when  they  were  struggling  into  national  existence.  It  takes  its 
commencement  with  the  birth  of  the  female  child,  and  terminates 
with  her  advance  to  womanhood.  The  two  features  that  are 
brought  prominently  out  in  this  portion  of  the  history  are  the 
naturally  helpless,  unpromising,  and  polluted  condition  of  Israel, 
and  the  wonderful  mercy  and  loving-kindness  of  God  in  preserv 
ing  their  existence  and  nursing  them  to  maturity.  "  The  origin 
and  the  birth  "  of  this  child  are  said  to  have  been  "  in  the  land 
of  Canaan  ;"  and  it  is  added,  "  Thy  father  was  the  Amorite,  and 
thy  mother  the  Hittite."  To  connect  the  chosen  people  with 
such  a  parentage  was  one  of  the  most  impressive  ways  that 
could  be  taken  to  mark  their  inveterately  depraved  and  sinful 
character.  The  original  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  and  in  parti 
cular  the  Amorites  and  the  Hittites,  who,  from  beino-  the  most 

7  n 

important  and  powerful  tribes,  are  sometimes  named  as  repre 
sentatives  of  the  whole,1  were  so  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God,  on 
account  of  their  sinful  and  corrupt  ways,  that  he  had  decreed 
their  utter  extermination  from  the  land,  which  was  given  as  a 
possession  to  the  children  of  Israel.  Therefore,  to  represent 
these  Israelites  now  as  the  legitimate  offspring  of  the  very  out 
casts  they  had  supplanted,  was  in  the  strongest  manner  to  iden 
tify  the  state  and  manners  of  the  one  with  those  of  the  other. 
It  was  adopting  substantially  the  same  figure  when  John  the 
Baptist  called  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  his  day  u  a  generation 
of  vipers  " — the  serpent's  brood  ;  and  when  our  Lord  charged 
many  others  with  being  "  of  their  father  the  devil,  and  doing  the 
lusts  of  their  father."  2  Even  Hosea,  whose  language  is  tame 
compared  to  Ezekiel's,  had  already  addressed  Israel  on  one  occa 
sion  by  the  name  of  Canaan  (chap.  xii.  7,  where  we  should  read, 
"  Canaan  !  the  balances  of  deceit  are  in  his  hands")  ;  and  Isaiah, 

1  Thus,  in  Gen.  xv.  16,  "  The  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full," 
evidently  meaning  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  generally.    (Comp.  also  Amos 
ii.  9.)     So  again  in  Jos.  i.  4,  "All  the  land  of  the  Hittites"  is  used  as  a 
designation  of  the  whole  land  of  Canaan.     In  naming  a  Hittite  mother,  an 
allusion  is  doubtless  intended  to  Esau's  wives,  daughters  of  Heth,  whose 
ways  vexed  the  heart  of  Rebekah  (Gen.  xxvi.  46). 

2  The  same  figure  was  in  familiar  use  among  the  Greeks  and  Latins  : 
"  Sons  of  Hercules,"  "  Daughters  of  Apollo,"  etc. ;  and  in  Virgil  the  much 
stronger  expression,  which  finds  a  parentage  in  the  most  senseless  part  of 
inanimate  nature,  uDurisgenuit  te  cautious  horrens  Caucasus"  (JEn.  iv. 
366). 


164  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

earlier  still,  had  gone  to  the  utmost  length  in  the  use  of  the  figure 
when,  in  proclaiming  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  his  countrymen, 
he  addressed  them  as  the  "  rulers  of  Sodom,  and  the  people  of 
Gomorrah  !  "  (chap.  i.  10.)  It  was  virtually  saying,  the  people 
no  longer  deserved  the  name  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  but  were 
rather  to  be  classed  with  the  worst  and  vilest  portion  of  mankind. 

When  the  prophet  has  thus  marked  the  native  vileness  and 
depravity  of  the  people,  by  ascribing  to  them  a  Canaanitic  origin, 
he  proceeds  to  exhibit,  under  a  few  striking  traits,  the  miserable 
helplessness  and  destitution  out  of  which  their  national  existence 
had  emerged.  The  child  that  personifies  them  is  represented  as 
a  despised  and  neglected  infant,  that  was  denied  the  commonest 
acts  of  parental  regard — its  very  life  a  miracle — neither  ban 
daged,  nor  washed,  nor  salted,  nor  swaddled,  at  its  birth,  but 
cast  forth  as  a  worthless  and  polluted  thing  on  the  face  of  the 
earth,  and  mercilessly  abandoned  to  the  elements  of  nature.  So 
wretched  and  forlorn  in  the  first  stage  of  being,  had  Israel  been 
left  to  their  own  resources,  they  would  certainly  have  perished 
under  the  adverse  influences  against  which  they  had  to  struggle, 
or,  which  is  all  one  in  this  connection,  would  have  failed  to  reach 
an  independent  national  existence.  But  here  now  appears,  in 
striking  contrast  to  the  evil,  the  other  prominent  feature  of  the 
description, — the  wonderful  grace  and  mercy  of  God,  which  pre 
vailed  over  all  that  was  abject  and  repulsive  in  their  condition, 
and  fostered  the  feeble  life  into  full-grown  maturity.  His  eye 
pitied  the  poor  and  wretched  little  one,  and  with  a  word  of  power 
he  bade  it  live  ;  and  not  only  live,  but  grow  and  strengthen  to 
its  full  proportions.  "  I  made  thee,"  as  the  words  literally  and 
properly  are  in  ver.  7,  "  a  myriad,  like  the  increase  of  the  field, 
and  thou  didst  multiply,  and  wax  great,  and  became  most  beau 
tiful  ;  thy  breasts  formed,  and  thy  hair  grew,  and  thou  (still)  wast 
naked  and  bare."  The  idea  obviously  is,  that  under  the  protect 
ing  and  fostering  care  of  God,  the  small  and  despised  people,  who 
had  been  at  first  ready  to  perish,  rapidly  grew  into  considerable 
numbers  and  strength,  capable  of  being  used  for  some  important 
purpose,  though  still,  from  their  low  and  impoverished  state,  the 
aid  of  a  gracious  and  powerful  hand  would  be  needed  to  bring  it 
into  accomplishment. 

The  period  of  Israel's  history  embraced  in  this  part  of  the 
description  is  undoubtedly  that  of  the  sojourn  in  Egypt ;  for  it 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  165 

was  then,  properly,  that  their  existence  as  a  people  began.  It 
was  a  beginning,  however,  impressed  with  the  most  humiliating 
marks  of  feebleness  and  contempt.  Even  when  the  family  of 
Jacob  were,  for  Joseph's  sake,  treated  to  distinguished  favour,  it 
was  not  without  accompanying  tokens  of  a  contrary  description  : 
on  account  of  their  occupation  as  shepherds,  they  were  eyed  with 
disdain  by  the  Egyptians,  and  had  to  dwell  by  themselves  as  an 
inferior  caste.  But  this  natural  antipathy  soon  expressed  itself 
in  a  more  actively  offensive  form,  and  a  tide  of  undisguised 
hatred  and  cruel  oppression  set  in  against  them,  which,  with  few 
interruptions,  continued  to  flow  for  centuries.  Everything  was 
done  which  an  unscrupulous  tyranny  could  devise  to  depress 
their  condition,  and  even  extinguish  their  existence.  Yet  so 
carefully  did  the  Lord  watch  over  them  during  this  long  season 
of  peril,  that  not  only  was  their  being  preserved,  but  their  growth 
also  was  supernaturally  increased  :  "  They  were  fruitful,"  it  is 
said,  u  and  swarmed,  and  multiplied,  and  increased  most  exceed 
ingly  ;  "  and  "  the  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they  multi 
plied  and  grew  "  (Ex.  i.  7,  12).  This  paternal  kindness  and 
watchful  oversight  on  the  part  of  God  was  the  more  striking, 
and  should  have  produced  the  deeper  impression  on  the  national 
mind  of  Israel,  as  it  was  exercised  not  merely  amid  destructive 
influences  working  from  without,  but  also  in  the  face  of  much 
spiritual  corruption  prevailing  within.  The  families  of  Israel 
had  become  most  deeply  infected  with  the  foul  leprosy  of  Egypt ; 
and  to  the  contempt  arising  from  their  political  feebleness,  there 
was  also  to  be  overcome  the  disgust  which  could  not  fail  to  be 
produced  by  their  sensual  idolatries.  Doubtless  there  was  then, 
as  through  all  subsequent  periods  of  their  history  there  still  was, 
a  faithful  remnant,  in  whose  bosoms  the  hidden  life  of  faith  was 
maintained.  The  covenant  of  Abraham,  pledging  to  him  in 
perpetuity  a  spiritual  seed,  indispensably  required  this  ;  and  the 
brief  notices  of  the  period  abundantly  testify  that  it  was  not 
altogether  wanting.  Still,  viewed  as  a  whole,  the  people  were  in 
a  most  degenerate  and  polluted  condition.  The  general  mean 
ness  and  poverty  of  their  external  circumstances  was  but  the 
symbol  of  their  spiritual  state  ;  and  while  in  respect  to  number 
they  had  now  become  suited  to  the  higher  purposes  of  God,  they 
still  lacked  what  was  most  essentially  needed  to  fit  them  for  the 
execution  of  his  will.  But  in  all  this,  believers  of  every  age 


166  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

must  see  the  image  of  their  own  state  by  nature,  and  the  ground 
of  their  infinite  obligations.  What  have  they  of  their  own? 
Only,  like  Israel,  the  elements  of  weakness,  pollution,  and  death. 
It  is  the  grace  of  God  alone  that  breathes  life  into  the  soul,  and 
at  once  reveals  the  things  that  are  to  be  received  and  done  in 
God's  service,  and  confers  the  power  for  receiving  and  doing 
them  aright.  Whence  the  first  and  last  feeling  in  every  regen 
erate  bosom  must  be  one  of  deep  abasement,  and  entire  renuncia 
tion  of  self,  spontaneously  yielding  the  praise  and  glory  to  God. 
2.  The  second  stage  of  this  allegorical  history,  exhibited  in 
vers.  8-14,  represents  the  singular  honour  and  glory  conferred  on 
the  ideal  virgin  in  her  exaltation  to  the  rank  of  a  spouse  to  the 
King  of  Zion,  and  her  decoration  with  apparel  suited  to  her  ele 
vated  station.  Here,  again,  everything  is  fragrant  with  the 
matchless  grace  and  loving-kindness  of  God.  She  has  nothing 
of  her  own  to  entitle  her  to  such  an  ennobling  distinction,  and 
nothing  of  her  own  to  fit  her  for  adorning  it.  It  is  not  she  that 
makes  the  advance  to  God,  but  God  that  makes  the  advance  to 
her;  "  the  Lord  passes  by  her"  now  as  he  had  done  at  the  first, 
and  fixes  on  her  the  regard  of  his  love.  And  that  love  not  a 

O 

mere  general  benevolence,  but  such  a  special  affection  as  one 
cherishes  toward  the  person  he  would  betroth  for  his  wTife ;  for 
when  the  Lord  passed  by  her,  u  he  spread  his  skirt  over  her  ;" 
a  yea,"  he  adds,  explaining  more  distinctly  what  was  meant  by 
the  transaction,  "  I  sware  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  cove 
nant  with  thee,saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and  thou  becamest  mine." 
That  is,  she  became  his  in  the  same  sense  in  which  a  woman 
becomes  a  man's  when  united  to  him  by  the  marriage  oath  and 
covenant,  in  respect  to  which,  as  usually  connected  with  the 
solemnization  of  marriage,  the  proper  wife  of  an  Israelite  is  called, 
in  Mai.  ii.  14,  "  the  wife  of  thy  covenant."  And  as  it  was  cus 
tomary  for  brides,  when  entering  into  union  with  earthly  kings 
and  potentates,  to  pass  through  a  period  of  purification  (Esth. 
ii.  12),  so  this  betrothed  spouse  of  the  king  of  Zion,  all  unfitted 
as  she  naturally  was  for  such  a  glorious  union,  is  declared  to  have 
been  specially  prepared  for  the  occasion  :  "  And  I  wash  thee  with 
water,  and  I  rinse  thy  blood  from  off  thee  (that,  namely,  of  her 
original  impurity  still  cleaving  to  her),  and  I  anoint  thee  with 
oil."  When  thus  personally  prepared  for  the  solemnity,  she  is 
furnished  with  all  the  usual  articles  of  a  bride's  apparel, — raiment 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  167 

of  rich  embroidery,  shoes  of  tachasli,  silk  and  fine  linen,  ear-rings, 
jewels,  ornaments  of  silver  and  gold,  and  a  beautiful  crown  upon 
the  head ;  for,  being  the  spouse  of  a  king,  she  was  raised  to  the 
highest  dignity,  and  must  bear  the  emblem  of  royalty.  And  as 
the  consequence  of  this  instalment  in  high  and  honourable  state, 
she  was  furnished  with  the  best  provisions — with  flour,  and  honey, 
and  oil — and  prospered,  and  became  great,  so  that  the  fame  of 
her  comely  and  beautiful  appearance  spread  all  around,  and  she 
attracted  the  admiration  and  envy  of  her  heathen  neighbours. 

The  description  presents  a  vivid  and  impressive  image  of 
the  singular  goodness  of  God  to  Israel,  from  the  time  that  he 
visited  them  in  Egypt,  and  raised  them  from  the  low  and 
depressed  condition  which  they  held  there,  to  the  nearest  fellow 
ship  with  himself,  and  the  highest  place  among  the  kingdoms  of 
the  earth.  The  relation  formed  between  Jehovah  and  Israel  at 
that  interesting  period  had  already  been  more  than  once  repre 
sented  under  the  image  of  the  marriage-union.  To  say  nothing 
of  various  descriptions  founded  on  this  image  in  Isaiah  (such  as 
chap.  1.  1,  liv.  1),  it  forms  the  basis  of  the  whole  series  of  repre 
sentations  given  by  Hosea  in  the  three  first  chapters  of  his 
writings  ;  and  Jeremiah,  referring  expressly  to  the  period  of  the 
deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  what  immediately  followed,  says 
in  one  of  his  earliest  prophecies  (chap.  ii.  2)  :  "  I  remember  thee, 
the  kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  when 
thou  wentest  after  me  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  land  not  sown." 
Indeed,  no  earthly  relation  could  so  fitly  have  been  employed  as 
that  of  marriage  to  exhibit  the  nature  of  that  hallowed  union, 
in  virtue  of  which  the  Lord  not  only  conferred  upon  them  the  rich 
dowry  of  temporal  good,  but  also  graciously  condescended  to 
maintain  with  them  a  most  intimate  and  endearing  interchange 
of  love.  For,  as  Havernick  justly  remarks,  while  the  external 
greatness  and  glory  afterwards  imparted  to  Israel  are  not  ex 
cluded  from  the  representation,  they  are  by  no  means  (as 
Grotius,  and  interpreters  of  a  kindred  spirit  imagine)  alone 
intended.  It  is  the  internal  relationship  established  between 
them  and  God,  and  the  spiritual  blessings  immediately  growing 
out  of  it,  which  are  here  primarily  and  chiefly  referred  to. 
Even  the  outward  temporal  blessing  secured  in  the  covenant, 
and  in  part  also  realized,  should  never  have  been  viewed  as  an 
ultimate  and  independent  good,  but  rather  as  the  expression 


168  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

and  emblem  of  something  higher  and  better.  They  were  not 
properly  blessings  at  all,  except  in  so  far  as  they  were  held  in 
connection  with  the  favour  of  Heaven,  and  bespoke  the  fellow 
ship  of  love  that  subsisted  between  Jehovah  and  his  people. 
Canaan  itself  derived  its  chief  value  as  a  covenant-good  from  its 
being  the  Lord's  possession — the  land  which  he  claimed  as 
peculiarly  his  own,  and  in  which  his  people  dwelt  as  a  sojourners 
with  liim"  It  is,  therefore,  their  close  relationship  to  God,  and 
their  high  place  in  respect  to  the  affairs  of  his  spiritual  king 
dom,  which  is  most  directly  indicated  under  the  idea  of  their 
marriage-union  to  the  Lord.  The  same,  substantially,  which  is 
otherwise  expressed  by  their  being  made  a  kingdom  of  priests ; 
and  still  again  by  their  having  put  upon  them  the  name  of 
Israelites — God's  wrestlers. 

But  considering  the  state  in  which  they  were  found  in  Egypt, 
they  much  needed  to  undergo  a  process  of  purification,  to  fit 
them  for  bearing  aright  so  high  and  ennobling  a  character. 

O  O  ^  O 

That  many  rites  of  cleansing  should  have  been  prescribed  to 
them,  and  a  long  course  of  preparatory  discipline  appointed, 
only  betokened  the  Lord's  earnest  desire  to  have  them  qualified 
for  the  exalted  state  and  destiny  he  wished  them  to  fill.  And 
throughout,  nothing  was  wanted  of  tender  compassion  and  faith 
ful  dealing  on  his  part.  From  the  first  he  crowned  them  with 
marks  of  his  goodness.  A  fulness  of  power  and  glory  rested  on 
them,  far  surpassing  what  their  numbers  alone  might  have 
warranted  them  to  expect.  And  when  the  kingdom  at  last 
rose  to  meridian  splendour,  and  received  the  confirmation  and 
enlargement  given  to  it,  especially  in  the  days  of  David  and 
Solomon,  the  surrounding  heathen  were  compelled  to  own  that 
there  is  a  great  reality  in  the  favour  and  blessing  of  Heaven. 
They  saw  in  Israel,  as  a  people,  living  monuments  of  the  mighty 
efficacy  of  Divine  grace,  how  it  can  exalt  the  feeble,  and  lay 
the  powers  of  the  world,  as  well  as  the  bounties  of  nature,  under 
contribution  to  the  furtherance  of  its  beneficent  designs.  And 
assuredly,  the  children  of  grace  should  be  such  monuments 
still ;  nor,  if  true  to  their  principles,  and  faithful  to  their 
heavenly  calling,  can  they  fail  to  be  so.  "  Washed,  sanctified, 
and  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit 
of  our  God,"  they  are  admitted  into  the  very  secret  of  the 
Lord's  presence ;  and  all  things  become  theirs — all  things  need- 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  169 

ful  for  their  present  and  final  welfare.  They  dwell  "where 
angels  visit,"  "where  beams  descend  from  the  Eternal  Sun," 
where  flows  that  river  of  life  which  makes  glad  the  city  of  God, 
— partakers  even  now  of  a  blessing  which  the  world  may  well 
envy,  but  which,  blessed  be  God,  it  can  as  little  take  away  as  it 
can  give. 

3.  In  the  preceding  section,  the  prophet  has  magnified  the 
grace  and  goodness  of  God  to  Israel,  and  in  the  next,  embracing 
vers.  15-34,  he  exhibits,  in  the  most  pungent  terms,  the  ungrate 
ful  and  treacherous  conduct  of  Israel  toward  God.  The  much- 
beloved  spouse,  who  has  been  treated  to  such  high  honours,  and 
replenished  with  so  many  precious  and  costly  gifts,  proves  un 
faithful  to  her  husband,  employs  the  very  ornaments  and  pro 
visions  he  has  conferred  on  her  to  the  shameful  purpose  of 
feeding  her  wanton  disposition  and  compassing  her  sinful  ends  ; 
and  instead  of  seeking,  as  in  duty  bound,  to  promote  his  credit 
and  renown  in  the  world,  acts  rather  as  if  her  object  were  to 
show  how  low  a  place  he  held  in  her  esteem,  and  how  much 
she  preferred  others  before  him. 

In  this  part  of  the  narrative  the  allegorical  style  is  perhaps  as 
closely  preserved  as  it  could  have  been  consistently  with  vivid 
ness  and  accuracy  in  the  representation  ;  but  it  is  impossible  not 
to  notice  at  various  points  how  the  fictitious  garb  drops  off,  and 
the  plain  reality  discovers  itself, — as  when  mention  is  made  of  the 
children  being  sacrificed  by  passing  through  the  fire  (ver.  21), 
and  the  Egyptians  and  Assyrians  are  specified  among  those  with 
whom  a  forbidden  intercourse  was  carried  on  (vers.  26,  28).  We 
can  only  view  the  representation  generally,  and  with  respect  to 
its  leading  features ;  as  from  the  very  nature  of  the  image  it  is 
iuipossible  to  be  minute  without,  at  the  same  time,  falling  into 
indelicacy.  But  we  see  at  a  glance  that  the  primary  evil 
charged,  and  the  spring  of  all  the  abominations  that  followed, 
was  the  misappropriation  of  God's  goodness — viewing  the  gifts 
conferred  apart  from  the  bounteous  Giver,  and  applying  them  to 
selfish  purposes.  "Thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  beauty,  and 
didst  play  the  wanton  upon  thy  name,"  or  renown  :  such  is  the 
first  crime  laid  to  her  charge.  Instead  of  holding,  as  Israel 
manifestly  should  have  done,  all  their  mercies  and  privileges  in 
humble  dependence  on  God,  and  using  them  for  his  glory,  they 
looked  upon  them  as  in  the  strictest  sense  their  own,  and  turned 


170  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

them  into  instruments  and  occasions  for  exalting  themselves  in 
the  eyes  of  others.  They  became  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and 
seemed  to  enter  into  a  sort  of  senseless  rivalry  with  their  neigh 
bours,  for  the  countenance  and  support  of  their  false  gods.  It 
may  possibly  appear  as  if  the  picture  were  somewhat  overdrawn, 
when  Israel  is  represented  as  courting  the  attention  of  those  foul 
divinities,  and,  for  that  purpose,  turning  to  account  her  beautiful 
ornaments  and  stores  of  plenty.  But  a  deep  truth  lies  at  the 
bottom  of  the  representation.  For  what  were  the  false  gods  in 
question  but  the  personification  of  those  carnal  desires  and  affec 
tions  which  the  good  things  so  amply  poured  into  Israel's  lot  had 
but  served  to  feed?  deified  human  nature  in  its  manifold  varie 
ties  of  lust  and  earthliness?  So  that  their  zeal  in  worshipping 
such  gods,  and  lavishing  on  them  costly  tokens  of  their  regard, 
very  much  resolves  itself  into  an  anxiety  to  have  the  countenance 
of  Heaven  upon  the  gratification  of  their  own  grovelling  and 
earthly  propensities.  And  hence  it  was  that,  when  replenished 
with  a  fulness  of  worldly  comforts,  Israel  so  naturally  preferred 
the  worship  of  idols  to  that  of  Jehovah,  and,  like  a  treacherous 
spouse,  breaking  loose  from  the  holy  restraints  of  wedlock, 
yielded  themselves  to  the  service  of  these  impure  rivals ;  for 
thus  they  could  give  freer  play  to  the  corrupt  affections  of  nature. 
Their  conduct  in  this  was  simply  an  example  of  the  native  effect 
of  the  world  upon  the  heart,  according  to  the  circumstances  of 
the  time ;  and  when  our  Lord,  speaking  for  all  times,  sets  before 
us  the  prodigal  son,  selfishly  coveting  his  portion  of  goods,  and 
going  to  spend  them  in  alienation  from  his  father's  house,  he  but 
presents  us  with  another  exhibition,  differently  modified,  of  the 
same  great  truth.  Let  the  heart  of  nature  be  fed  to  the  full 
with  gifts,  and  there  will  never  fail  to  appear,  in  one  form  or 
another,  the  idolatry  of  self  and  the  world. 

The  fervid  and  glowing  character  of  Ezekiel's  mind,  however, 
is  not  satisfied  with  this  general  description  of  the  idolatrous 
spirit  that  discovered  itself  in  Israel's  history.  It  must  give 
stroke  after  stroke,  and  heap  one  particular  upon  another,  to 
make  the  impression  complete.  And  therefore  he  goes  on  to 
tell  how  everything  that  Israel  had  received  of  good, — her  gar 
ments  of  divers  colours,  jewels  of  gold  and  silver,  oil,  flour, 
honey,  incense, — were  all  employed  in  the  service  of  corruption  ; 
and  how  new  ways  were  sought  out,  and  special  places  erected 


THE  STOKY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  171 

for  the  prosecution  of  her  unhallowed  purposes.  Nor  does  he 
fail  to  notice,  in  thus  filling  up  the  picture  of  evil,  one  or  two 
revolting  traits,  which  give  a  peculiar  hideousness  to  the  cha 
racter  of  Israel's  degeneracy.  The  sacrificing  of  the  children,  by 
making  them  pass  through  the  fire,  is  one  of  these ;  and  the 
Lord  calls  them  his  own  children,  rather  than  hers, — "my 
children," — because  they  had  been  born  under  his  covenant  with 
Israel,  and  bore  the  sign  of  the  covenant  upon  them.  Another 
also  is  given  toward  the  close  of  the  description,  when,  after 
having  declared  the  readiness  of  Israel  to  take  up  with  every 
form  of  idolatry  in  Canaan  and  all  round  to  Chaldea,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  Egypt  on  the  other,  the  cutting  remark  is  brought  in, 
that  none  of  these  nations  followed  her — the  treacherous  and 
wanton  dealing  was  all  on  Israel's  part — she  conceded  everything 
to  them,  they  yielded  back  nothing  in  return  to  her — her  wicked 
ness  was  gratuitous  and  unrequited  folly.  A  solemn  and  preg 
nant  truth,  which  the  Church  of  God  should  never  forget.  She 
loses  all,  and  the  world  gains  all,  when  she  foolishly  stoops  to 
impair  the  testimony  of  God,  or  adjust  the  claims  and  services 
of  religion  to  the  tastes  and  practices  of  the  carnal  mind.  A 
nominal  advance  or  apparent  reconciliation  may  possibly  be 
achieved  by  the  manoeuvre,  but  it  can  be  no  more  than  nominal 
and  apparent ;  the  interests  that  really  profit  by  such  a  policy 
are  those  of  the  flesh  and  the  world.  It  is  only  when  the  Church 
is  faithful  to  her  testimony — when  she  stands  in  the  truth  of 
Christ,  and  in  that  truth  shines  forth  "  bright  as  the  sun,  clear 
as  the  moon,"  that  she  is  found  also,  in  her  conflict  with  evil, 
"  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners." 

4.  The  next  section — vers.  35-52 — is  chiefly  occupied  with  the 
denunciation  of  judgment,  though  at  different  places,  and  espe 
cially  toward  the  close,  the  peculiar  greatness  of  Israel's  sin 
is  again  brought  into  view,  to  justify  the  awful  severity  of  the 
punishment.  Here  also,  as  in  the  other  parts,  the  prophet  in 
dulges  in  considerable  amplification,  and  descends  to  much 
minuteness  of  detail.  But  the  substance  of  the  representation 
consists  in  denouncing  against  the  faithless  spouse  the  sentence 
of  death  written  in  the  law  against  conjugal  infidelity,  and  this 
to  be  executed  by  the  hand  of  her  guilty  paramours.  In  the 
law  there  were  two  modes  sanctioned  of  capital  punishment, — 
the  one  for  individuals,  the  other  for  communities ;  in  the  first 


172  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

case,  stoning  ;  in  the  other,  destroying  with  the  sword.     As  adul 
tery  belonged    to  the    first    of    these    classes,  the    appropriate 
punishment  for  it  was  stoning  to  death.1     And  as  the  conjugal 
infidelity  in  this  case  was  coincident  with  two  other  heinous 
crimes, — apostasy  from  the  true  worship,  and  the  sacrificing  of 
children  to  Moloch, — which  were  also  adjudged  to  the  same  pun 
ishment  (Deut.  xiii.  10;  Lev.  xx.  1-5),  the  doom  might  be  said 
here  to  be  doubly  due.     But  a  single  form  of  punishment,  even 
though  a  capital  one,  does  not  seem  adequately  to  express  the 
full  measure  of  condemnation  that  was  provoked  by  such  aggra 
vated  guilt;  and  therefore  the  other  also,  which  was  decreed 
against  an  apostate  city  (Deut.  xiii.  15),  is  conjoined  with  it, 
though  the  consistence  of  the  allegory  suffers  by  the  conjunc 
tion  :  u  They  shall  bring  up  a  company  against  thee,  and  they 
shall  stone  thee  with  stones,  and  thrust  thee  through  with  their 
sword."      For  the  same  purpose  of  rendering  what  was  done 
more  fully  expressive  of  the  Lord's  sore  displeasure  against  the 
sin,  the  execution  of  the  doom  is  coupled  with  all  manner  of 
indignities, — exposing  the  faithless  spouse  to  shame  before  others, 
demolishing  her  high   places,  spoiling  her  of  her  jewels  and 
apparel,  burning  her  houses,  and  reducing  her  in  all  respects  to 
the  most  abject  and  humiliating  condition.     And  that  the  whole 
was  to  be  accomplished  in  the  presence  and  by  the  instrument 
ality  of  those  nations  whose  evil  manners  Israel  had  followed, 
and  whose  treacherous  alliance  she  had  courted,  is  intended  to 
mark  the  dealing  of  God  toward  her  as  more  signally  exemplify 
ing  the  Divine  law  of  recompense.     It  was  to  bring  prominently 
into  view,  through  her  melancholy  experience,  the  grand  lesson, 
that  tl  God  will  make  him  who  leaves  God  for  the  world,  dis 
graced  even  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  indeed  the  more  so, 
the  nearer  he  formerly  stood  to  himself."  2 

The  result  of  this  severe  execution  of  judgment  is  intimated 


1  Lev.  xx.  10,  which,  though  it  simply  mentions  putting  to  death,  is  yet 
to  be  connected  with  ver.  1  as  to  the  manner  of  inflicting  the  punishment. 
Also  John  viii.  5,  which  shows  the  Jewish  mind  on  the  subject.     And, 
indeed,  generally,  stoning  to  death  appears  to  have  been  the  only  legal 
form  of  capital  punishment  for  individual  sins. 

2  Hengstenberg's  Christol.  on  Hos.  ii.  12  ;  also  Isa.  xlvii.  3  ;  Jer.  xiii.  26  ; 
Nah.  iii.  6,  in  all  which  the  same  idea  is  unfolded,  only  less  fully  and 
broadly. 


THE   STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  173 

in  a  peculiarly  strong  manner  of  expression,  though  already  in 
substance  employed  at  chap.  v.  13  :  a  I  will  make  my  fury  to 
rest  in  thee,  and  my  jealousy  shall  depart  from  thee,  and  I  will 
be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  angry."  The  meaning  is,  that 
the  Divine  vengeance  called  forth  by  people's  sins  should  then 
have  run  its  course ;  God's  holiness  and  majesty  should  have  un 
folded  themselves  in  measures  of  justice  toward  the  people,  cor 
responding  to  their  extreme  and  incorrigible  wickedness  toward 
him.  The  one  followed  upon  the  other  by  a  close  and  stringent 
necessity ;  since,  for  God  to  have  acted  otherwise  would  have 
been  to  show  himself  indifferent  to  the  interests  of  holiness,  or 
rather  to  appear  as  the  patron  of  sin.  Hence  the  very  singular 
and  too  commonly  misunderstood  asseveration,  with  which  the 
Lord  winds  up  this  part  of  the  description  :  "  And  also  I,  behold, 
I  recompense  thy  way  on  thy  head,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and 
will  not  do  what  is  scandalous  upon  all  thine  abominations."  I 
thus  vindicate  myself  from  any  participation  in  the  guilt,  and 
show  that  I  do  not  act  the  shameful  part  of  countenancing  thee 
in  thy  abominable  ways,  but  by  these  judgments  raise  a  solemn 
and  effective  protest  against  them. 

Yet,  as  if  there  might  seem  an  undue  severity  in  the  judg 
ments  pronounced,  the  prophet  again  dwells  at  some  length  on 
the  greatness  of  the  provocation.  And  to  give  his  discourse 
here  more  pungency  and  force  to  those  whom  it  immediately 
respected,  he  narrows  the  application  to  that  portion  of  the 
covenant-people  with  whom  alone  he  had  properly  to  do — those 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  Viewing  Jerusalem  now  in  this 
restricted  sense,  he  charges  her  with  having  exceeded  in  the 
measure  of  her  criminality  the  very  worst  and  guiltiest  of  her 
neighbours.  The  legitimate  daughter  of  a  Hittite  mother  and  an 
Amorite  father,  she  had  also  proved  herself  the  genuine  sister 
of  Samaria  (called  the  elder,  because  in  a  moral  respect  more 
nearly  related)  on  the  north,  and  Sodorn  on  the  south.  For 
she  had  trodden  anew  in  their  polluted  ways,  but  with  still 
greater  perverseness  of  disposition  and  wantonness  of  behaviour, 
so  that  she  might  even  be  said  to  have  justified  them ;  they 
could  shelter  themselves  when  accused  of  sin  under  her  worse 
example.  Not  that  the  unrighteous  and  perverse  ways  followed 
in  Judah  were  in  themselves  of  a  darker  and  more  abominable 
character  than  those  which  had  already  given  such  an  unhappy 


174  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

notoriety  to  Samaria  and  Sodom.  This  had  well-nigh  been  im 
possible.  But  the  evil  deeds  here  having  been  committed  on  holier 
ground,  in  the  midst  of  more  distinguished  privileges,  and  in 
defiance  of  warnings  and  protestations  altogether  peculiar,  bore 
upon  them  a  far  deeper  impression  of  guilt.  It  was  simply  on 
the  territory  of  heathenism,  and  from  being  carried  away  by  the 
full  tide  of  worldly  prosperity  poured  into  their  lot,  that  Sodom 
and  her  daughter  cities  of  the  plain  became  to  an  unusual  de 
gree  immersed  in  the  vices  of  pride,  carnality,  and  lust.  And 
even  Samaria,  though  occupying  higher  ground  than  Sodom, 
and  sinning  against  greater  privileges,  still  held,  in  comparison 
of  Judah,  a  much  inferior  position.  For  it  was  the  peculiar 
distinction  of  Judah,  that  she  had  in  her  very  bosom  the  temple 
of  God,  a  legal  priesthood,  the  order  of  government  which  God 
himself  had  appointed,  kings  often  of  eminent  piety,  prophets 
endowed  with  the  richest  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  addition  to 
all,  the  spectacle  before  her  eyes  of  God's  judgments  resting  both 
on  Samaria  and  Sodom — on  each  hand  appalling  monuments  of 
Divine  vengeance !  Her  sins,  therefore,  were  relatively  of  a 
much  deeper  dye  than  those  of  her  erring  neighbours,  and  it 
was  in  the  highest  degree  impossible  that  she  should  escape  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God.  But  if  she,  in  comparison  of  them, 
incurred  such  pre-eminent  guilt  and  condemnation,  much  more, 
again,  sinners  under  the  gospel  in  comparison  of  her ;  for  now  it 
is  emphatically  that  the  clear  light  shines,  and  that  the  many 
talents  of  knowledge  and  grace  are  held  in  God's  kingdom. 
Sin  committed  in  such  circumstances  acquires  its  darkest  cha 
racter,  and  the  judgment  that  alights  must  come  with  correspond 
ing  severity.  As  our  Lord,  indeed,  intimated  in  that  solemn 
word  to  the  Jews,  which  may  still  be  substantially  addressed  to 
every  impenitent  transgressor  :  u  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken 
to  them,  they  had  not  had  sin,  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for 
their  sin." 

5.  The  last  portion,  which  reaches  from  ver.  53  to  the  close  of 
the  chapter,  subjoins  a  word  of  promise  to  the  long  series  of  ex 
postulation  and  threatening,  and  lets  in  a  gleam  of  hope  as  to 
the  future  condition  of  the  people.  Of  course,  this  again  could 
only  be  done  at  the  expense  of  the  allegorical  representation ; 
for  on  the  supposition  of  the  faithless  spouse  having  been  actually 
stoned  to  death  and  thrust  through  with  the  sword,  all  hope 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  175 

must  of  necessity  have  been  cut  off.  But  truth  required  that 
the  form  in  this  case  should  be  sacrificed  to  the  substance  of  the 
delineation.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  to  show  that,  however 
severe  the  judgments  of  God  were  to  be  against  the  apostasy 
of  Judah,  they  were  not  to  be  utterly  exterminating,  and  that  a 
people  of  God  should  still  survive  for  honour  and  blessing. 

The  particular  form  given  to  this  more  cheering  part  of  the 
representation  was  chosen  with  an  especial  view  to  the  lowly  and 
abased  spirit,  which  the  prophet  would  have  them  to  understand 
was  absolutely  necessary  before  they  could  find  a  return  of  the 
Lord's  favour  and  goodness.  Even  the  humiliating  providences 
and  manifold  tribulations,  which  were  to  pass  over  the  remnant 
of  the  house  of  Judah,  would  fail  to  be  sufficiently  productive  of 
the  desired  effect ;  it  would  come  only  with  the  returning  showers 
of  the  Divine  goodness.  For  this  end,  to  render  the  spiritual 
result  in  question  more  certain,  the  offending  sisters,  who  had 
shared  before  Judah  in  the  punishment,  are  also  named  before 
her  as  partakers  of  the  benefit,  that  self-boasting  on  her  part 
might  be  excluded  :  "  And  I  shall  turn  again  their  captivity, 
the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of 
Samaria  and  her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of  thy  captivities 
(i.e.  thy  very  grievous  captivity)  in  the  midst  of  them.  And 
thy  sister,  Sodom  and  her  daughters  shall  return  to  their  former 
state,  and  Samaria  and  her  daughters,  shall  return  to  their  former 
state,  and  thou  arid  thy  daughters  shall  return  to  your  former 
state  : "  they  not  less  than  thou ;  even  Sodom  too,  though  she, 
as  is  presently  mentioned  in  ver.  56,  "  was  not  for  a  report  in  thy 
mouth  (not  viewed  and  spoken  of  as  a  case,  of  which  thou 
shouldst  have  been  mindful,  and  from  which  thou  shouldst  have 
learned  wisdom)  in  the  day  of  thy  glory."  She  has  disdained  to 
be  admonished  by  her  example,  and  even  afterwards  by  the  chas 
tisements  she  personally  received  at  the  hand  of  the  Syrians,  the 
Philistines,  and  other  warlike  neighbours,  whom  the  Lord  occa 
sionally  employed  against  her  as  instruments  of  rebuke ;  for  her 
sin  was  still  not  fully  discovered,  she  did  not  yet  see  to  the  depth 
of  it,  and  would  not  receive  correction  (ver.  57).  Whence  it 
became  necessary  to  have  the  whole  brought  clearly  to  light, 
and  judgments  corresponding  to  it  laid  on  her  (vers.  58,  59). 

But  what  precisely  is  to  be  understood  of  the  returning,  or 
bringing  back  of  the  captivity,  here  promised  ?  The  expression, 


176  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

as  we  have  stated  in  a  previous  note,  is  used  proverbially  for  the 
removal  of  an  afflicted  condition  in  general,  and  the  appointment 
of  a  happy  and  prosperous  one.  Its  application  to  the  case  of 
Job — u  and  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job  "  (chap.  xlii. 
10) — puts  this  beyond  a  doubt.  And  even  here,  though  the 
import  of  the  phrase  appears  to  be  rendered  more  express  by 
specifying  a  return  to  the  former  state,  yet  when  it  is  spoken  of 
Sodom  and  her  neighbour  cities,  as  well  as  of  Samaria  and 
Jerusalem  and  their  neighbour  cities,  it  manifestly  could  not 
be  intended  to  intimate  specifically  and  properly  a  return  from 
exile,  and  a  re-inhabitation  of  the  old  places.  This  was  obviously 
impossible  in  the  case  of  Sodom  and  the  cities  of  the  plain.  The 
promise  is  simply  one  of  restored  prosperity ;  the  approaching 
tide  of  desolation  should  ao;ain  be  turned  back,  and  a  state  of 

O  / 

prosperity  and  happiness,  as  of  old,  be  appointed.  Not  that 
exactly  which  had  been,  line  for  line  ;  but  what,  in  the  altered 
circumstances  of  another  time,  might  be  regarded  as  correspond 
ing  to  it.  "  The  safe  and  prosperous  condition  of  former  times," 
says  Havernick  justly,  "is  the  determinate  form  under  which 
the  prophet  descries  also  the  future  ;  but  presently,  again,  this 
appears  arrayed  in  so  ideal  a  splendour,  that  that  very  form 
bursts  asunder,  and  a  new  world  in  reality  comes  into  view. 
There  is  the  old  God,  with  his  old  gifts  of  love ;  but  the  subjec 
tive  condition  has  became  quite  different,  and  hence  the  old 
blessings  are  also  of  a  new  kind,  and  the  whole  state,  in  conse 
quence,  rises  into  something  far  more  elevated  and  glorious  than 
the  old  one."  It  is  as  if  an  assurance  were  given  to  a  child, 
whose  family  had  become  enveloped  in  misfortune,  that  he 
should  live  to  see  the  former  prosperity  return  again  ;  but  mean 
while  he  himself  springs  to  manhood,  and  having  now  other 
wants  to  satisfy,  and  higher  relations  to  fill  than  formerly,  the 
revived  prosperity  must  bring  new  and  nobler  gifts  within  his 
reach,  to  place  him  on  the  same  relative  position  he  originally 
occupied.  In  short,  the  bringing  back  of  the  captivity,  and  re 
turning  to  the  former  state,  as  applied  to  the  covenant-people, 
indicates  nothing  as  to  the  outward  form  of  things  to  be  enjoyed, 
but  points  only  to  their  nature  and  character,  as  similar  to  what 
already  had  been.  And  in  regard  to  the  manner  of  accomplishing 
the  promised  good,  by  coupling  Sodom  and  Samaria  with  Jeru 
salem  in  the  happy  prospect,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 


THE  STORY  OF  ISRAEL'S  GUILT.  177 

representation  is  figurative ;  it  is  the  truth  represented  and 
embodied  in  an  ideal  history ;  and  nothing  more  can  fairly  be 
deduced  from  the  particular  trait  now  referred  to,  than  that  the 
covenant-people,  as  they  had,  in  the  aggravation  and  magnitude 
of  their  guilt,  sunk  below  the  most  depraved  nations  around 
them,  so  they  might  expect  the  return  of  God's  favour  and 
blessing  only  when  they  came  to  view  their  case  in  its  real  enor 
mity,  and  cherish  on  account  of  it  a  suitable  feeling  of  abasement. 
They  must  be  ready  to  put  themselves  on  a  level  with  the  lowest, 
as  the  necessary  condition  of  their  being  visited  anew  with 
honour  and  enlargement.  Hence  it  is  entirely  out  of  place  here 
to  move  any  question,  with  some  commentators,  as  to  the  building 
anew  of  Sodom  and  the  other  cities  of  the  plain.  This  were  to 
turn  the  figure  into  a  reality,  and  also  to  transfer  the  subject 
itself  from  the  moral  region  of  God's  government  toward  men, 
to  the  merely  natural  region  of  his  providential  arrangements 
respecting  the  material  world.  And  if  it  is  out  of  place  to  move 
such  a  question  regarding  Sodom,  it  is  equally  unnecessary,  at 
least,  regarding  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  It  is  the  kind,  not  the 
precise  form  of  things,  which  is  to  be  kept  in  view ;  and  the 
promise  of  good  here  given  for  the  future  might  be  brought  to  a 
full  accomplishment,  and  carried  even  to  its  highest  perfection, 
though  the  cities  of  Judah  and  Israel  should  continue,  like  those 
of  the  plain,  monuments  of  desolation  and  ruin.  For  the  happi 
ness  and  glory  of  the  covenant-people,  which  alone  is  to  be 
regarded  here,  however  it  might  be  connected  with  them,  might 
also  be  attained  without  them  ;  and  so  far  from  being  necessarily 
tied  to  them,  may  even  be  found  in  largest  measure  while  the 
old  things  in  that  respect  are  gone  into  utter  oblivion. 

The  closing  verses,  while  they  carry  forward  substantially  the 
same  line  of  thought,  in  respect  especially  to  the  necessity  of 
profound  humiliation  on  the  part  of  the  people,  and  the  proposed 
manifestation  of  rich  grace  on  the  part  of  God,  also  render  pro 
minent  a  remarkable  difference  between  those  represented  by 
this  ideal  woman  and  others.  With  all  her  guilt  and  baseness, 
she  still  had  what  they  had  not,  and  what  in  the  day  of  return 
ing  grace  would  bring  them  to  her,  rather  than  send  her  to  them 
for  blessing, — she  had  the  covenant  of  God,  which,  however  it 
had  been  suffered  to  fall  into  abeyance,  had  never  been  repudiated 
by  him.  "  And  I  remember,"  the  Lord  says,  "  my  covenant 

M 


178  EZEKIEL  XVI. 

with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  establish  for  thee  an 
everlasting  covenant."  That  covenant  made  with  them  in  the 

O 

days  of  their  youth,  as  to  its  promise  of  blessing,  was  God's  word, 
which  he  could  not  suffer  to  pass  unfulfilled.  And  though  there 
was  in  this  respect  an  Old  and  a  New,  yet  so  little  was  there  of 
contrariety  between  them,  when  rightly  understood,  that  the 
one  was  properly,  as  here  represented,  the  root  of  the  other ;  the 
Old,  the  germ  out  of  which  all  the  coming  good  was  to  spring 
and  develope  itself.  A  glorious  rise,  indeed,  was  to  take  place 
from  a  lower  to  a  higher,  when  the  Old  passed  into  the  New ; 
but  by  no  means  an  antagonism,  as  from  bad  to  good.  The 
better  things  to  come,  when  they  appeared,  merely  filled  up  arid 
completed  what  had  been  shadowed  forth  and  promised  in  the 
Old;  and  precisely  by  being  thus  filled  up  and  completed,  did 
the  covenant  become  what  it  is  here  called,  an  everlasting  one. 
Grace  reigns  now  in  a  manner  it  never  did  before,  and  the  bless 
ing  rests  upon  better  promises,  because  there  is  a  much  fuller 
manifestation  of  Divine  power  and  goodness  associated  with  them. 
And  on  this  account  there  is  no  longer  the  same  room  for  the 
former  breaches  and  desolations  to  enter ;  the  inheritance  is 
made  sure  for  ever  to  all  the  seed  of  blessing. 

But  the  more  that  everything  appears  to  stand  in  the  grace 
and  loving-kindness  of  God,  the  more  is  there  to  abase  and 
humble  the  partakers  of  the  blessing;  especially  when  they 
consider  the  freeness  with  which  grace  not  only  comes  from  the 
bosom  of  God,  but  also  sheds  forth  its  abundance  on  the  worst 
and  the  vilest.  Those  who  had  been  sisters  to  Judah  in  guilt 
and  punishment  were  now  also  to  become  partners  with  her  in 
experiences  of  blessing,  and  were  to  be  given  to  her  for  daugh 
ters — because  through  her  they  should  attain  to  the  inheritance 
of  blessing.  Yet  "  not  by  thy  covenant,"  it  is  added,  lest  she 
should  again  arrogate  the  glory  to  herself  ;  not  by  virtue  of  any 
transaction  or  league  of  her  own  framing,  such  as  of  old  she  was 
ever  attempting  to  form ;  not  by  any  such  covenant  of  thine,  but 
by  mine — the  Old,  and  yet  New — the  everlasting  covenant, 
which  I  make  with  you,  and  establish  for  the  good  of  the  world.1 

1  Such  must  be  held  to  be  the  meaning  here.  The  "not  by  thy  covenant  " 
cannot  possibly  refer  to  the  old  covenant  made  with  Israel,  as  contradis 
tinguished  from  the  new,  for  God  had  already  traced  to  that  covenant,  as 
its  fountain-head,  all  the  grace  and  blessing  that  was  to  be  conferred.  And, 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  TWO  GREAT  EAGLES.       179 

And  so,  as  the  result  of  all,  "  Thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord ;  to  the  end  thou  mayest  remember,  and  be  confounded,  and 
never  open  thy  mouth  any  more  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I 
am  pacified  toward  thee  (or,  when  I  grant  forgiveness  to  thee) 
for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah." 

So  ought  it  to  be  also  in  our  experience.  The  humbling  and 
salutary  lessons,  so  strikingly  brought  out  in  this  wonderful  his 
tory,  should  take  such  deep  and  abiding  hold  of  our  hearts  that  we 
shall  ever  be  careful  to  avoid  the  evils  against  which  it  warns  us. 
And  especially  since  God  has  now  laid  open  to  us  the  marvellous 
riches  of  his  grace,  and  called  us  to  the  inheritance  of  his  king 
dom,  we  should  strive  to  remember  how  unworthy  we  naturally 
are  of  such  singular  goodness,  and  how  often,  by  our  light  and 
sinful  behaviour,  we  have  provoked  him  to  withdraw  it  again ; 
so  that  we  may  give  to  him  all  the  glory,  and  may  set  our  hearts 
more  upon  that  better  country,  where  imperfection  shall  be  for 
ever  done  away,  and  the  strivings  between  nature  and  grace  shall 
be  wholly  unknown. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  TWO  GREAT  EAGLES,  AND  THE  CROPPING 
OF  THE  CEDAR  OF  LEBANON. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
put  forth  a  riddle,  and  utter  a  parable  (or  similitude)  to  the  house  of  Israel. 
3.  And  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  The  great  eagle,  large  of  wing, 
with  long  pinions  and  full  plumage,  having  many  colours,  came  to  Lebanon, 
and  pluckt  the  topmost  branch1  of  the  cedar.  4.  The  top  of  his  young  twigs 
he  cropt  off,  and  brought  it  to  a  land  of  traffic;  in  a  city  of  merchants  he  set 
it.  5.  And  he  took  of  the  seed  of  the  land,  and  committed  it  to  a  fruitful 


as  Calvin  justly  remarks  here,  while  there  were  important  differences  be 
tween  the  two  covenants,  as  noticed  by  Jeremiah  in  chap.  xxxi.  and  xxxii., 
yet  the  new  covenant  so  sprung  from  the  old,  that  it  is  well-nigh  the  same 
in  substance,  though  different  in  form. 

1  The  term  rnE¥  *s  peculiar  to  Ezekiel,  but  from  the  use  of  it  here,  and  in 
chap.  xxxi.  3-14,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  means  the  summit,  or  top 
most  branch — the  woolly  part  of  the  tree  at  the  farthest  extremity. 


180  EZEKIEL  XVII. 

field ;  took  (it)  beside  great  waters,  set  it  (as)  a  willow.1  6.  And  it  grew, 
and  became  a  spreading  vine  of  low  stature,  for  turning  (i.e.  of  a  kind  natu 
rally  fitted  for  turning  from  its  need  of  support)  its  branches  toward  him 
(viz.  the  eagle  that  planted  it),  and  its  roots  were  under  him  :  and  it  be 
came  a  vine,  and  brought  forth  branches,  and  shot  out  twigs.  7.  And  there 
was  another  great  eagl^,  large  of  wing  and  with  full  plumage ;  and,  behold, 
this  vine  bent  her  roots  toward  him,  and  sent  forth  her  branches  to  him, 
that  he  might  water  it  out  of  the  garden  bed  in  which  it  was  planted.  8. 
Upon  a  good  field,  beside  copious  streams  was  it  planted,  that  it  might  bring 
forth  branches,  and  might  bear  fruit,  so  as  to  become  a  goodly  vine.  9.  Say, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Shall  it  flourish?  will  he  not  pull  up  its  roots, 
and  cut  off  its  fruit  that  it  may  wither  ?  All  its  sprouting  leaves  shall  wither, 
and  without  great  strength  or  many  people  to  lift  it  up  by  the  roots.  10. 
And,  behold,  though  planted,  shall  it  nourish  ?  Shall  it  not  utterly  wither 
as  soon  as  the  east  wind  touches  it  ?  Upon  the  plot  where  it  grew  shall  it 
wither. 

11.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  12.  Say  now  to  the 
rebellious  house,  Know  ye  not  what  these  things  be?  say,  Behold,  the  king 
of  Babylon  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  took  her  king  and  her  princes,  and 
brought  them  along  with  him  to  Babylon.  13.  And  he  took  of  the  royal 
seed,  and  made  a  covenant  with  it,  and  brought  it  under  an  oath  ;  and  the 
mighty  of  the  land  he  also  took.  14.  That  the  kingdom  might  be  in  a  low 
condition,  that  it  might  not  lift  itself  up,  that  it  might  keep  his  covenant 
and  establish  it.  15.  But  he  rebelled  against  him,  in  sending  his  ambas 
sadors  to  Egypt,  that  they  might  give  him  horses  and  much  people.  Shall 
he  flourish?  Shall  he  escape  who  does  this?  And  shall  he  break  the 
covenant  and  escape  ?  16.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  surely  in  the 
place  of  the  king  that  made  him  king,  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  whose 
covenant  he  broke,  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  shall  he  die.  17.  Neither  shall 
Pharaoh,  with  mighty  power  and  a  great  host,  accomplish  for  him  by  war, 
by  casting  up  mounds,  and  by  building  towers,  to  cut  off  many  souls.  18. 
And  he  despised  the  oath,  to  break  the  covenant,  and  lo!  he  gave  his  hand ; 
yea,  he  did  all  these  things;  he  shall  not  escape.  19.  Therefore  thus  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  As  I  live,  surely  my  oath  which  he  despised,  and  my 
covenant  which  he  broke,  that  will  I  bring  upon  his  own  head.  20.  And  I 
will  spread  my  net  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  snare,  and  I  will 
bring  him  to  Babylon,  and  I  will  reckon  with  him  there  for  his  treacherous 
dealing  toward  me.  21.  And  all  his  fugitives  with  all  his  bands  shall  fall 
by  the  sword,  and  those  that  are  left  of  them  shall  be  scattered  to  every 
wind  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I,  Jehovah,  have  spoken. 

22.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  take  (namely,  when  those  things 
have  come  to  pass)  of  the  topmost  branch  of  the  high  cedar,  and  set — from 
the  top  of  its  shoots,  I  pluck  off  a  slender  one,  and  I  plant  it  upon  a  moun- 


1  We  have  here  also  another  word  peculiar  to  Ezekiel,  nSVSV,  which  is 
usually  rendered  willow,  and  in  that  sense  has  the  support  of  Jewish  autho 
rity.  Indeed,  this  is  the  only  Eabbinical  meaning  of  the  term.  If  any 
modification  whatever  were  allowable,  it  might  be  supposed,  with  Hitzig,  to 
denote  generally  a  water-plant,  a  shrub  or  tree  naturally  growing  in  or  be 
side  waters.  It  was  probably  applied  as  a  designation  of  the  willow  on  this 
account,  being  derived  from  f]^,  to  flood  or  overflow.  Set  where  it  was,  the 
cedar-twig  became  a  willow  for  growth,  and  a  spreading  luxuriant  vine  for 
fruitfulness. 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  TWO  GEE  AT  EAGLES.        181 

tain  high  and  elevated.  23.  Upon  the  mountain-height  of  Israel  I  will 
plant  it;  and  it  shall  raise  aloft  its  branch,  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  become 
a  glorious  cedar :  and  under  it  shall  dwell  all  birds  of  every  kind  (literally, 
every  bird  of  every  wing,  as  at  Gen.  vii.  14),  in  the  shade  of  its  branches 
shall  they  dwell.  24.  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that  I, 
Jehovah,  bring  down  the  high  tree,  exalt  the  low  tree,  dry  up  the  green 
tree,  and  make  the  dry  tree  to  nourish  :  I,  Jehovah,  speak  and  do. 

THE  prophet  is  here  commanded  to  put  forth  to  the  house  of 
Israel  a  parable  or  similitude;  which  is  also  denominated  a  riddle, 
because  it  was  to  be  fraught  with  a  meaning  that  should  by  no 
means  discover  itself  at  first  sight,  and,  even  with  the  aid  of  an 
accompanyingexplanation,  would  require  the  most  careful  thought 
and  consideration  to  be  understood  in  its  profound  and  wide- 
reaching  import.  A  great  eagle  first  presents  itself  in  vision  to 
the  eyes  of  the  prophet  (literally,  the  great  eagle,  emblem  of  the 
well-known,  pre-eminently  great  king),  large  and  long  of  wing, 
very  full  and  variegated  in  its  plumage — the  noblest  of  its  kind. 
He  sees  it  directing  its  course  to  Lebanon,  and  when  there, 
plucking  off  the  topmost  shoot  of  the  cedar,  and  the  summit  of 
its  young  branches,  which  it  thence  carried  away  to  a  land  of 
traffic,  and  placed  in  a  city  of  merchants.  He  sees  the  same 
eagle  taking  of  the  seed  of  the  land — not  a  foreign  production, 
but  one  native  to  the  region — and  planting  it  in  a  fruitful  field, 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  great  waters,  where  it  possessed  every 
natural  advantage  for  growth  and  fruitfulness.  Yet  still  only 
within  certain  limits.  Its  growth  was  not  to  be  like  that  of  the 
strong  and  lofty  cedar,  but  such  merely  as  belonged  to  the  low 
and  spreading  vine, — and  a  vine  whose  branches  were  instinctively 
turned  toward  the  eagle  that  planted  it,  and  whose  roots  shot 
under  him,  as  if  doing  fealty  to  the  power  to  which  it  owed  its 
separate  existence  and  its  flourishing  condition. 

But  another  eagle  now  comes  on  the  field  of  vision,  also  of 
great  bulk,  with  large  wings  and  many  feathers,  though  not  of 
such  long  pinions  and  richly-coloured  plumage  as  the  former. 
Yet  the  vine,  as  if  it  descried  an  attractive  beauty  in  this  bird, 
which  the  other  had  not,  presently  begins  to  bend  its  roots,  and 
turn  its  branches  towrard  him,  that  he  might  water  it  out  of  the 
garden-bed  in  which  it  was  planted.  It  was  ambitious  of  getting 
a  larger  growth,  and  reaching  a  greater  altitude  than  it  was 
likely  to  attain  as  it  stood  ;  and,  with  this  view,  sought  the  agency 
of  a  new  power  to  supply  it  more  abundantly  with  the  means  of 


182  EZEKIEL  XVII. 

refreshment.  An  extravagant  and  vain  imagination  !  For  it 
was  already  planted  in  a  good  soil,  on  the  banks  of  a  copious 
river,  and  with  everything  necessary  to  render  it  healthful  and 
flourishing.  Therefore,  going  against  nature  in  this  new  attempt 
after  enlargement,  so  far  from  succeeding  according  to  its  wishes, 
it  should  be  made  to  feel  the  withering  blast  of  the  east  wind, 
nay,  should  be  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  left  to  perish  and 
die ;  and  that  not  as  a  matter  of  arduous  achievement,  but  with 
out  great  power,  or  multitudes  of  people,  as  a  thing  of  easy 
accomplishment. 

Such  is  the  parabolical  delineation  contained  in  the  first  sec 
tion  of  the  chapter,  vers.  1-10;  and  in  the  next,  vers.  11-21,  the 
interpretation  is  given.  The  first  eagle,  is  the  king  of  Babylon, 
who  had  come  to  Jerusalem,  the  seat  of  civil  honour  and  dignity 
in  Canaan,  as  Lebanon  was  of  external  elevation  and  forest 
grandeur.  Like  the  eagle,  in  plucking  off  and  carrying  away  the 
tops  of  the  highest  branch,  and  of  the  young  shoots  of  the  cedar, 
so  the  king  of  Babylon  had  taken  away  the  head  of  the  royal 
house,  Jehoiachin,  to  Babylon,  a  place  renowned  from  the  earliest 
times  for  its  merchandise ;  and,  along  with  him,  many  of  the 
younger  members  of  the  seed-royal,  the  princes  of  Jerusalem. 
But  while  he  thus  humbled  the  house  of  David,  he  did  not 
entirely  overthrow  it ;  he  still  conceded  to  it  a  certain  degree  of 
honour ;  and  with  one  of  the  king's  seed,  his  uncle  Zedekiah,  he 
made  a  covenant,  and  set  him  on  the  throne.  The  kingdom  was 

/  o 

now  unquestionably  in  a  comparatively  enfeebled  and  dependent 
state, — no  longer  like  a  tall  and  stately  cedar,  king  of  the  forest; 
but  rather  as  a  low  and  creeping  vine,  incapable  of  rising  high, 
or  standing  altogether  alone.  Yet  still  it  was  capable  of  such 
strength  and  prosperity  as  is  characteristic  of  the  vine, — if  only 
they  had  been  content  with  the  measure  of  good  allotted  them  by 
God, — if  they  had  but  seen  the  overruling  Providence  of  his  hand 
in  their  depressed  condition,  and  had  bowed  with  chastened  hearts 
to  his  will.  In  that  case  they  had  resembled  a  vine-tree  planted 
beside  flowing  streams,  and  in  a  fertile  soil.  But  they  acted  in 
an  entirely  different  spirit.  Fretting  under  the  thought  of  their 
dependence  on  Babylon,  they  eagerly  grasped  at  the  proffered 
alliance  of  the  king  of  Egypt, — represented  by  the  other  eagle, 
less  strong  in  pinion  and  rich  in  plumage  ;  and  so  provoked  their 
former  master  to  visit  them  with  a  severe  and  merciless  retalia- 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  TWO  GREAT  EAGLES.       183 

tion.  By  acting  thus,  the  house  of  David  gave,  in  its  earthly 
relations,  a  new  manifestation  of  that  treacherous  and  deceitful 
spirit  which  it  had  already  so  often  and  so  perversely  displayed 
in  regard  to  the  covenant  of  God.  Indeed,  as  the  covenant  with 
Babylon  had  been  sworn  to  in  the  Lord's  name,  it  also  was  vir 
tually  his  covenant  (ver.  19) ;  and  he  must  himself  revenge  the 
breach  of  it,  and  prevent  the  infatuated  policy  from  succeeding. 
11  And  I  will  spread  my  net  upon  him," — it  is  now  future  time, 
for  the  prophecy  dates  upwards  of  three  years  at  least  before  the 
final  downfall  of  Jerusalem ; l  u  and  he  shall  be  taken  in  my 
snare,  and  I  will  bring  him  to  Babylon,  and  will  reckon  with 
him  there  for  his  treacherous  dealing  toward  me.  And  all  his 
fugitives,  with  all  his  bands,  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  those 
that  are  left  of  them  shall  be  scattered  to  every  wind ;  and  ye 
shall  know  that  I,  Jehovah,  have  spoken." 

In  the  charge  that  is  here  brought  against  the  house  of  David, 
the  radical  error  evidently  stood,  first,  in  their  not  humbling  them 
selves  sufficiently  on  account  of  the  chastisement  they  had  re 
ceived,  in  being  subjected  to  the  yoke  of  Babylon ;  and  then, 
in  what  was  the  natural  consequence  of  this,  their  resorting  to 
deceitful  courses  and  wretched  contrivances  of  their  own  to  re 
cover  their  lost  standing.  Destitute  of  the  true  fear  of  God,  they 
looked  upon  the  disasters  that  had  taken  place  as  the  result 
merely  of  untoward  circumstances,  and  as  such,  capable  of  being 
retrieved  by  some  more  skilful  manoeuvre,  or  more  propitious 
turn  of  the  world's  affairs.  God,  therefore,  must  keep  a  jealous 
and  watchful  eye  upon  their  movements,  and  utterly  defeat  their 
crooked  policy.  He  must  constrain  them  in  deep  prostration 
and  abasement  of  spirit  to  feel,  that  as  his  hand  had  brought 
them  down,  so  his  hand  alone  could  lift  them  up  again ;  arid 
that  never  should  the  lost  glory  return  to  the  house  of  David, 
or  to  the  people  of  God  through  it,  till  they  had  effectually 
learned  to  cease  from  man,  and  had  come  to  put  their  trust 
wholly  in  the  grace  and  power  of  Jehovah. 

But  it  is  from  this  point  of  depression  that  the  new  and  better 
turn  of  affairs  takes  its  rise.  When  the  execution  of  deserved 
judgment  should  have  accomplished  the  utter  prostration  of  the 

1  The  time  lies  between  the  two  dates,  that  of  the  6th  month  of  the  6th 
year  of  Zedekiah's  reign,  or  Jehoiachin's  captivity,  in  chap,  viii.,  and  that 
of  the  5th  month  of  the  7th  year,  in  chap.  xx. 


184  EZEKIEL  XVII. 

house  of  David,  and  scattered  all  their  false  confidences  and 
hopes  to  the  wind, — when  matters  should  have  been  reduced  so 
low,  that  to  the  eye  of  man  everything  would  seem  finally  and 
irretrievably  gone,  the  Lord  himself  re-appears  upon  the  scene, 
to  rectify  the  evil,  and  in  the  concluding  portion  (vers.  22-24) 
gives  the  assurance  of  a  restoration  to  the  greatest  honour  and 
prosperity.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  take  (or,  I 
too  take)  of  the  topmost  branch  of  the  high  cedar,  and  set — 
from  the  top  of  its  shoots  I  pluck  off  a  slender  one,  and  I  plant 
it  upon  a  mountain  high  and  elevated.  Upon  the  mountain- 
height  of  Israel  I  will  plant  it ;  and  it  shall  raise  aloft  its  branch 
and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  become  a  glorious  cedar :  and  under 
it  shall  dwell  all  birds  of  every  kind,  in  the  shade  of  its  branches 
shall  they  dwell.  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that 
I,  Jehovah,  bring  down  the  high  tree,  exalt  the  low  tree,  dry  up 
the  green  tree,  and  make  the  dry  tree  to  flourish  :  I,  Jehovah, 
speak  and  do." 

Here  the  Lord  presents  himself  as  the  rival  of  the  king  of 
Babylon,  and  the  doer  of  a  work  precisely  opposite  in  its  charac 
ter  and  effects  to  that  which  the  earthly  potentate  had  accom 
plished.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  been  allowed  for  a  time  to  wield 
a  magisterial  power  and  authority  regarding  the  house  of  David, 
which,  in  the  nature  of  things,  could  yield  nothing  more  than  an 
inferior  and  temporary  good,  and  in  reality  issued  in  a  complete 
prostration.  Now,  however,  the  Lord  manifests  himself  for  the 
gracious  purpose  of  reviving  the  house  of  David  from  the  state 
of  apparent  hopelessness  to  which  it  had  been  reduced,  and  even 
of  raising  it  to  a  degree  of  power  and  glory  hitherto  unknown. 
But  in  doing  this  he  would  not  infuse  new  vigour  into  that  par 
ticular  branch  of  it  which  Nebuchadnezzar  was  seeking  to  pro 
tect  and  foster,  the  native  seed  he  had  planted  in  a  fruitful  field 
— Zedekiah ;  this  was  doomed  to  certain  perdition.  He  would 
neither  revive  that,  nor  take  an  altogether  new  seed,  but  would 
pluck  a  slender  twig  from  the  summit  of  the  same  lofty  cedar, 
which  had  previously  been  pluckt  by  the  king  of  Babylon  ;  that 
is,  a  scion  of  the  house  of  David,  to  which  the  kingdom  belonged 
by  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  of  no  new  or  secondary  forma 
tion,  but  in  the  old,  direct,  and  proper  line.  This  slender  twig 
Jehovah  would  plant  upon  Mount  Zion — by  pre-eminence  the 
high  and  elevated  mountain,  because  morally  the  grand  centre 


CHOPPING  OF  THE  CEDAR  OF  LEBANON.  185 

of  grace  and  glory  to  the  world.1  And  there  it  springs  and  rises 
aloft,  arid  becomes  a  tree  so  magnificent  in  stature,  and  so  ample 
in  foliage,  that  it  commands  the  admiration  and  homage  of 
the  world;  every  tree  of  the  field  owns  its  superiority,  every 
fowl  of  heaven  seeks  its  shelter;  in  other  words,  all  rival 
powers,  and  all  intelligent  creatures,  unite  in  regarding  this 
as  the  wonderful  impersonation  of  Divine  power  and  glory  in 
the  earth. 

It  is  vain  to  seek  the  realization  of  this  prophetic  image  any 
where  but  in  the  Messiah.  In  no  other  individual  do  the  lines 
meet  of  the  prophet's  delineation  ;  but  in  him  they  meet  with 
the  greatest  possible  exactness — and  in  him,  as  the  w7hole  tenor 
of  the  representation  might  have  led  us  to  expect,  primarily  as 
an  individual,  though  not  without  respect  also  to  his  character 
as  the  head  and  representative  of  the  Divine  kingdom.  The 
earlier  features  in  the  description  had  each  pointed  to  indi 
viduals, — to  Jehoiachin,  Zedekiah,  and  through  them  also  to 
Nebuchadnezzar  and  Pharaoh, — but  to  these  as  individuals,  in 
whose  outward  state  and  condition  were  reflected  those  of  the 
whole  commonwealth  of  Israel.  So,  certainly,  it  is  Messiah  as 
an  individual  that  is  here  indicated;  first,  as  a  tender  scion  of 
the  house  of  David,  in  the  direct  and  proper  line,  then  grown 
into  a  stately  tree,  and,  finally,  risen  to  the  highest  place  of 
honour,  and  power,  and  glory.  But  the  Messiah,  who  was  to 
appear  on  earth  only  for  the  sake  of  the  Divine  kingdom,  could 
not  be  regarded  as  apart  from  the  kingdom  itself ;  its  fortunes 
must  stand  inseparably  bound  up  with  his  history,  and  partake 
along  with  it  of  evil  or  of  good.  So  that  here,  as  in  our  Lord's 
own  parable  of  the  mustard-seed,  the  smallness  of  the  promised 
beginning  tells  at  once  of  the  lowliness  of  his  appearance,  and 
the  depressed  condition  of  the  kingdom  at  the  time ;  and  the 

1  "  There  can  be  no  doubt,"  says  Calvin,  "  that  God  means  Mount  Zion, 
which  in  itself  was  a  little  hill.  But  Isaiah  gives  us  the  reason  of  its  being 
lofty,  when  he  shows  it  should  surpass  every  elevation  in  the  world  in 
dignity  and  excellence.  The  supereminence,  indeed,  was  not  to  be  patent 
to  the  eye,  for  the  prophet  declares,  at  the  same  time,  it  should  consist  in 
this,  that  the  law  should  go  forth  from  Zion  and  the  word  of  God  from 
Jerusalem.  Accordingly  we  see  Mount  Zion,  though  little  among  the 
hills,  yet  raised  aloft  above  the  highest  mountains ;  because  from  it  shone 
forth  the  glory  of  God,  which  has  been  seen  even  to  the  farthest  bounds  of 
the  earth." 


186  EZEKIEL  XVII. 

surpassing  greatness  afterwards  to  be  reached,  while  it  announces 
his  personal  elevation  to  the  highest  rank  of  honour  and  glory 
in  the  heavenly  places,  makes  promise  also  of  the  world-wide 
extension  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  prolific  fulness  of  its  blessings 
to  all  who  might  seek  shelter  in  its  bosom.  But  when  it  is  said 
so  emphatically,  that  God  himself  should  do  all  this,  and  that 
all  the  trees  of  the  field  (the  other  nations  or  powers  of  the  earth) 
should  thereby  be  constrained  to  own  that  he  exalts  the  humble 
and  abases  the  high,  what  could  this  import  ?  Certainly,  that 
the  whole  should  be  effected  in  a  way  different  from  that  of 
nature,  and  superior  to  it, — not  by  fleshly  weapons,  or  any  means 
and  appliances  of  a  worldly  kind,  but  by  the  peculiar  operation 
of  the  power  of  God,  securing  for  his  own  kingdom  a  gradual 
and  growing  ascendancy  over  everything  earthly  and  human. 
Whatever  glory  should  come  from  the  accomplishment  of  the 
Divine  plan,  must  redound  to  God,  not  to  man  ;  the  pride  of  all 
flesh  should  be  stained  by  it. 

Such  is  the  vision  here  presented  to  us  of   God's  future  pur 
poses  in  respect  to  his  kingdom  among  men — how  truly  the  vision 
of  a  Divine  seer !     What  a  sublime  reach  and  elevation  of  soul 
must  have  been  attained  by  him  who  could  appear  thus  at  home 
with  the  far  distant  future,  and,  with  such  clear  foresight  and 
firm  assurance,  could  tell  of  things  that  were  not  as  if  they  were! 
It  is  greatness  of  spirit,  too,  the  more  surprising,  that  it  was  pos 
sessed  by  one  whose  outward  condition  seemed  so  deeply  marred 
with  depression  and  gloom.     Himself  but  a  poor  exile  on  the 
banks  of  the  Chebar,  with  the  cry  perpetually  sounding  in  his 
ears  of  shattered  fortunes  and  ruined  expectations  ;  yet,  like  the 
royal  bird,  of  which  he  here  serves  himself  as  an  image,  he 
wings  his  flight  aloft,  and  in  the  bright  radiance  of  heaven's  own 
light  looks  afar  upon  the  field  of  Providence,  and  brings  up  to 
view  the  very  shape  and  aspect  of  its  yet  undeveloped  movements. 
If  we  look  to  the  unerring  skill  and  precision  with  which  he 
drew  so  long  beforehand  the  pattern  of  what  was  to  come,  we 
might  have  supposed  him  a  mere  automaton,  unconsciously  obey 
ing  the  impulse  of  a  higher  hand ;  but  if  we  regard  the  manner 
in  which  he  does  it,  never  did  a  poet's  fancy  seem  to  move  with 
more  natural  and  unconstrained  freedom  in  framing  its  concep 
tions,  or  selecting  the  most  appropriate  imagery  for  their  expres 
sion.    And  then  how  divinely  strong  the  faith  which  could  pierc 


THE  RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  187 

through  the  dark  and  portentous  cloud  of  evils  that  then  over 
hung  the  spiritual  firmament,  which  could  still  hold  its  confi 
dence  in  the  Divine  faithfulness,  and,  instead  of  being  staggered 
with  the  signs  of  approaching  desolation,  could  descry  in  these 
but  the  necessary  condition  and  presage  of  ultimate  good?  What 
a  noble  superiority  does  it  show  him  to  have  reached  above  that 
weakness  of  nature,  which  is  ever  apt  in  times  of  trouble  to  raise 
doubt  and  despondency  in  our  minds  !  May  such  an  example 
of  the  higher  gifts  of  grace  not  pass  before  us  in  vain !  And 
especially,  may  the  conviction  settle  itself  in  our  minds,  as  an 
abiding  ground  of  consolation,  that  the  word  of  God  is  un 
failingly  true,  even  in  its  most  peculiar  announcements,  and 
that  none  who  trust  in  it  ever  can  be  disappointed  ! 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

THE   RETRIBUTIVE   RIGHTEOUSNESS   OF   GOD. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Why  do  ye 
use  this  proverb  upon  the  land  of  Israel,  saying,  The  fathers  have  eaten 
sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge?  3.  As  I  live,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  ye  shall  no  longer  use  this  proverb  in  Israel.  4.  Behold,  all 
the  souls  are  mine;  behold,  as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the 
son  is  mine  ;  behold,  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  5.  And  when  there 
is  a  man  that  is  righteous,  and  does  judgment  and  justice:  6.  On  the  moun 
tains  has  not  eaten,  nor  has  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of 
Israel,  and  has  not  polluted  the  wife  of  his  neighbour,  nor  drawn  near  to  an  un 
clean  woman ;  7.  And  has  not  oppressed  a  man,  has  restored  his  debt-pledge, 
has  practised  no  robbery,  has  given  of  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  the 
naked  has  clothed  with  raiment ;  8.  Has  not  given  forth  on  usury,  nor  has 
taken  increase,  has  withheld  his  hand  from  iniquity,  has  executed  true  judg 
ment  between  man  and  man  ;  9.  Has  walked  in  my  statutes,  and  kept  my 
judgments  to  deal  truly  ;  righteous  is  he,  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah.  10.  And  should  he  beget  a  son  a  robber,  a  shedder  of  blood,  and 
a  doer  of  any  one  of  such  things,  11.  But  does  none  of  all  those,  yea,  be 
sides,  has  eaten  upon  the  mountains,  and  polluted  his  neighbour's  wife,  12. 
Has  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy,  has  practised  robbery,  has  not  restored 
a  pledge,  and  to  the  idols  has  lifted  up  his  eyes,  working  abomination,  13. 
Has  given  forth  on  usury,  and  taken  increase;  shall  he  live?  he  shall 
not  live ;  he  has  done  all  these  abominations;  he  shall  surely  die;  his  blood 
shall  be  upon  him.  14.  And,  lo,  shall  he  beget  a  son,  that  sees  all  the  sins 
of  his  father  which  he  has  done,  yea,  shall  see  and  not  do  according  to  them, 
15.  Shall  not  eat  upon  the  mountains,  nor  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the 
house  of  Israel,  nor  pollute  his  neighbour's  wife,  16.  And  shall  not  oppress 
a  man,  take  no  pledge,  practise  no  robbery,  give  his  bread  to  the  hungry, 


188  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

and  clothe  the  naked  with  raiment,  17.  From  the  poor  shall  not  turn  back 
his  hand,  shall  not  take  usury  and  increase,  execute  my  judgments,  walk  iu 
my  statutes ;  he  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his  father;  he  shall  surely 
live.  18.  His  father,  since  he  did  most  unjustly,  fraudulently  spoiled  his 
brother,  and  did  what  is  not  good  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  behold,  he  shall 
die  in  his  iniquity. 

19.  And  ye  say,  Wherefore?  Does  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
father?  Nay,  should  the  son  do  justice  and  righteousness,  keep  all  my 
statutes,  and  do  them,  he  shall  surely  live.  20.  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it 
shall  die.  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  nor  the  father 
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  son :  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon 
him,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon  him.  21.  And  if  the 
wicked  shall  turn  from  all  his  sins  which  he  hath  done,  and  shall  keep  all  my 
statutes,  and  do  judgment  and  righteousness,  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not 
die.  22.  None  of  his  transgressions  which  he  has  done  shall  be  remembered 
against  him  ;  in  his  righteousness  that  he  has  done  he  shall  live.  23.  Have 
I  any  pleasure  at  all  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ?  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  ; 
and  not  that  he  turn  from  his  way  and  live  ?  24.  But  when  the  righteous 
turns  from  his  righteousness,  and  commits  iniquity,  doing  according  to  all 
the  abominations  which  the  wicked  does,  shall  he  then  live?  Nothing  of  all 
his  righteousness  which  he  has  done  shall  be  remembered ;  in  his  trespass 
that  he  has  trespassed,  and  in  his  sin  that  he  has  sinned,  in  them  shall  he 
die.  25.  Yet  ye  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal.  Hear  now,  0  house 
of  Israel,  is  not  my  way  equal?  are  not  your  ways  unequal?  26.  When  a 
righteous  man  turns  from  his  righteousness,  and  committeth  iniquity,  and 
dies  upon  them  (i.e.  on  account  of  his  acts  of  iniquity),  for  his  iniquity  that 
he  has  done  he  dies.  27.  And  when  the  wicked  turns  away  from  his  wicked 
ness  that  he  has  committed,  and  does  that  which  is  just  and  right,  he  shall 
save  his  soul  alive.  28.  And  should  he  see  and  return  from  all  his  trans 
gressions  that  he  has  committed,  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die.  29. 
But  the  house  of  Israel  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal.  Are  not  my 
ways  equal,  0  house  of  Israel?  are  not  your  ways  unequal?  30.  Therefore 
every  man  according  to  his  way  will  I  judge  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah.  Return,  and  come  back  from  all  your  transgressions,  and 
iniquity  shall  not  be  your  ruin.  31.  Cast  away  from  you  all  your  trans 
gressions,  by  which  ye  have  transgressed  ;  and  make  you  a  new  heart  and 
a  new  spirit ;  and  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel?  32.  For  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dies,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  therefore1 
return  and  live  ye. 

THE  prophet  passes  from  the  purposes  of  God  respecting  the 
future  establishment  of  his  kingdom  and  glory  in  the  world — as 
disclosed  in  the  preceding  chapter — to  an  expostulation  with  the 
people  on  account  of  sin,  and  an  earnest  pleading  on  behalf  of 
righteousness.  He  wished  them  to  understand  that,  however 
gracious  the  intentions  of  Heaven  might  be,  and  however  cer 
tainly  they  would  reach  their  destined  accomplishment,  they 
were  not  to  move  as  in  an  orbit  of  their  own,  independently  of 
the  condition  of  the  people ;  nor  might  the  people  expect  any 

1  The  van  here  must  plainly  be  taken  as  an  example  of  the  inferential  use 
of  the  conjunction — so  then  therefore  (Ges.  Gr.  sec.  152,  Id). 


THE  RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  189 

benefit  from  them,  if  wedded  to  the  love  and  practice  of  sin. 
While,  on  the  one  hand,  God  might  confidently  be  expected 
to  do  what  he  had  promised,  they,  on  the  other,  should  not  be 
entitled  to  look  for  any  blessing,  unless  they  applied  themselves 
in  earnest  to  do  what  he  required  at  their  hands. 

The  chapter  preserves  throughout  the  form  of  a  controversial 
pleading ;  because  the  people  are  contemplated  by  the  prophet 
as  in  a  self-righteous  condition,  disposed  to  shift  off  themselves 
the  blame  of  what  was  evil  in  their  lot,  and  lay  it  partly  on  their 
fathers,  partly  on  God  himself.  We  suffer,  it  is  true,  they  were 
complacently  saying  among  themselves,  under  the  rod  of  chas 
tisement,  but  that  we  do  so  is  our  misfortune,  rather  than  our 
sin ;  it  is  not  we,  but  our  fathers,  who  ate  the  sour  grapes,  and 
now,  inheriting  what  was  justly  due  to  their  transgression,  our 
teeth  are  set  on  edge.  What  was  it  but  in  effect  to  say,  God  can 
have  no  proper  quarrel  with  us  ?  We  are  dealing  faithfully  by 
the  commandments  of  his  law,  and  we  can  no  otherwise  account 
for  his  subjecting  us  to  punishment  than  on  the  principle  of  our 
being  made  to  bear  the  iniquities  of  those  who  have  gone 
before  us. 

The  mere  fact  of  their  taking  up  such  a  view  of  their  case, 
and  putting  it  forth  in  vindication  of  themselves,  was  obviously 
a  proof  of  some  sort  of  reformation  having  been  accomplished. 
The  feeling  could  not  have  sprung  up,  and  taken  shape  in  their 
minds  as  a  ground  of  defence,  without  at  least  an  ostensible  jus 
tification  in  the  present,  as  compared  with  the  past.  To  what 
extent  this  might  actually  be  the  case,  either  with  the  remnant  at 
Jerusalem,  or  with  the  captives  on  the  Chebar,  we  have  no  very 
specific  data  for  ascertaining.  Reckoning  from  the  period  of 
Manasseh's  reign,  when  the  practice  of  all  manner  of  corruption 
seemed  to  have  reached  its  climax,  we  can  have  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  in  both  divisions  of  the  Jewish  people  a  visible  reform 
had  taken  place — more  particularly  with  the  captives,  as  their 
actual  experience  of  God's  judgments  would  naturally  have 
forced  on  them  a  more  serious  and  thoughtful  examination  of 
their  ways.  But  ample  grounds  exist,  both  in  this  prophet  and 
Jeremiah,  for  holding  that  in  each  division  alike  there  still  was 
no  thorough  and  general  renunciation  of  iniquity.  The  partial 
improvements  that  had  been  made  were  chiefly  of  a  superficial 
nature,  and  seem  to  have  had  no  other  effect  than  in  fostering 


190  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

the  self-righteous  spirit,  which  induced  them  to  seek  elsewhere 
than  in  themselves  the  cause  of  their  troubles  and  calamities. 
Therefore,  in  a  word  of  severe  expostulation  and  rebuke,  which, 
if  called  forth  by  what  then  existed,  has  been  no  less  applicable 
to  succeeding  generations  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  prophet 
exposes  the  vanity  of  their  imaginations,  and  declares  them  to 
be  still  at  war  with  the  principles  of  God's  righteous  admini 
stration.1 

In  doing  this,  Ezekiel  first  announces  the  general  principle  of 
God's  righteousness  as  a  principle  of  fair  and  impartial  dealing 
with  each  individual  according  to  his  actions ;  then  he  explains 
and  illustrates  the  operation  of  this  principle  in  a  series  of  sup 
posed  cases;  and  finally  calls  the  people  to  repentance  and 
amendment  of  life,  as  being  still  far  from  righteousness,  and 
in  danger  of  perdition. 

1.  There  is,  first,  a  general  announcement  made  of  the  principle 
of  God's  righteousness ;  which  is  declared  to  be  a  principle  of 
fair  and  impartial  dealing  with  each  individual,  according  to  his 
actions  :  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  ye  shall  no  longer  use 
this  proverb  in  Israel.  Behold,  all  the  souls  are  mine ;  as  the 
soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine  ;  the  soul 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  "  (vers.  3,  4)  ; — it  alone  shall  die,  as 
having,  through  sin,  incurred  the  law's  penalty;  others,  who 
have  lived  righteously,  shall  be  treated  according  to  their  desert, 
not  as  persons  appointed  to  die,  but  rather  as  entitled  to  the 
blessings  of  life.  And  this  on  the  broad  and  comprehensive 
ground  that  God  is  alike  the  maker  of  all,  and  can  have  no 
reason  for  adjudging  some  to  a  punishment  from  which  he 
exempts  others,  except  the  different  manner  in  which  they 
conduct  themselves  toward  him. 

Here,  of  course,  the  question  naturally  arises,  whether  such 
has  always  been  the  principle  of  God's  dealing?  or,  whether  the 
announcement  made  by  the  prophet  marked  a  change  in  the 
Divine  administration  ?  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  law 
did  sanction  the  principle  of  a  certain  visitation  of  the  sins  of  the 

1  How  little  the  Jews  of  modern  times  have  learned  from  what  was  spoken 
to  their  ancestors,  may  be  gathered  from  the  defence  Orobius  makes,  as 
noticed  by  Warburton  in  his  Dedication  to  the  Jews,  for  the  evils  of  their 
long  dispersion :  "They  suffer,"  says  he,  "not  for  their  own  sins,  but  for  the 
sins  of  their  forefathers." 


THE  RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  191 

fathers  upon  the  children  :  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous 
God,  visiting  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto 
the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me,  and  show 
ing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me  and  keep  my 
commandments."  But  then  this  principle,  it  would  seem,  re 
mained  still  in  active  operation,  neither  suspended,  nor  in  any 
way  materally  affected,  by  what  is  written  here.  For  the  pro 
phet  Jeremiah  expressly  connects  the  judgments  which  were 
shortly  afterwards  to  alight  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  with 
the  sins  of  Manasseh's  time  in  the  preceding  generation  (chap. 
xv.  4) ;  and  again  in  Lam.  v.  7,  after  the  judgments  had  actually 
been  inflicted,  "  our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  are  not ;  and  we 
have  borne  their  iniquities."  Even  in  gospel  times  we  find  our 
Lord  speaking  of  the  principle  as  still  in  force,  nay,  as  ready 
to  be  acted  on  with  such  fearful  severity  in  the  case  of  that 
generation,  that  upon  them  was  to  be  charged  and  visited  the 
righteous  blood  shed  in  all  preceding  ages  of  the  Church's  history 
(Matt,  xxiii.  34-36). 

Yet  neither  our  Lord  in  later,  nor  the  prophets  in  earlier, 
times,  seem  to  have  had  the  least  suspicion  of  any  contrariety 
existing  between  the  principle  which  thus  connected  the  child 
with  the  parent  in  visitations  of  evil,  and  the  direct  and  proper 
responsibility  of  each  person  for  the  actions  merely  of  his  own 
life.  How  thoroughly  the  gospel  is  pervaded  by  this  latter  prin 
ciple  requires  no  particular  proof ;  there  every  one  is  made  to 
feel  that  his  condition  and  destiny  depend  upon  the  course  he 
himself  takes  in  respect  to  the  will  of  God.  And  the  prophet 
Jeremiah,  when  addressing  God  as  "  recompensing  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  into  the  bosom  of  the  children  after  them,"  in  the 
very  next  breath  celebrates  his  impartial  administration  of  justice 
to  all  according  to  their  doings:  "  Great  in  counsel  and  mighty  in 
work ;  for  thine  eyes  are  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men, 
to  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the 
fruit  of  his  doings"  (Jer.  xxxii.  18,  19).  In  the  law  itself,  in 
deed,  there  is  as  strong  an  assertion  of  this  principle  of  individual 
responsibility  as  anywhere  in  Scripture,  in  the  charge  that  is 
given  to  the  judges:  a  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for 
the  children,  neither  shall  the  children  be  put  to  death  for  the 
fathers ;  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin  " 
(Deut.  xxiv.  16)  ;  a  charge  which  never  would  have  been  given 


192  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

to  God's  representatives  on  earth,  unless  it  were  in  full  accord 
ance  with  the  character  of  his  own  administration.  It  is  clear, 
therefore,  from  these  distinct  and  unambiguous  testimonies,  that 
the  two  principles  in  question  must  have  been  perfectly  consis 
tent  with  each  other,  and  that  only  the  perverseness  or  misappre 
hensions  of  the  people  could  have  led  to  their  being  viewed  as 
in  any  sort  of  antagonism.  Nor  is  the  ground  of  the  reconcilia 
tion  far  to  seek.  The  principle  of  a  descending  curse  to  families 
on  account  of  sin  proceeds  on  the  assumption  of  a  descending 
guilt  as  the  reason  of  the  appointment.  The  iniquity  was  to  be 
visited  from  father  to  son,  because  the  iniquity  itself  wras  viewed 
as  passing  with  cumulative  force  from  the  one  to  the  other. 
Hence  the  line  of  descent  is  characterized  as  "  the  generations  of 
them  that  hate  God,"  while  the  superabundant  flow  of  mercy  on 
the  other  side  is  declared  to  be  "  to  thousands  of  them  that  love 
him."  In  truth,  the  principle  which  has  its  connection  with  the 
jealousy  of  God,  as  most  intently  watching  the  movements  of 
sin,  is  just  the  manifestation  of  God's  righteousness  in  respect 
to  the  tendency  of  sin  to  spread  and  perpetuate  itself  in  the 
world,  and  especially  to  go  downward  from  parent  to  child  as  a 
growing  and  swelling  tide  of  corruption.  So  that,  if  successive 
generations,  yielding  to  this  tendency,  should  become  known  as 
a  hereditary  band  of  evil-doers,  God  must  in  turn  unite  them 
in  a  bond  of  chastisement,  and  proportion  his  visitations  of 
wrath  to  the  degree  of  perverseness  and  obstinacy  shown  in  pur 
suing  the  course  of  iniquity.  But  respect  was  ever  had,  at  the 
same  time,  to  the  personal  responsibility  and  behaviour  of  each; 
and  only  because  the  son  was  regarded  as  consenting  to  his 
father's  iniquity,  and  deliberately  choosing  it  as  his  own  inheri 
tance,  did  the  Lord  visit  him  for  both  together.1 

1  It  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  loose  and  arbitrary  manner  in  which  subjects 
of  this  kind  were  handled  half  a  century  ago  in  this  country,  that  such  a 
man  as  Paley  could  deliberately,  and  with  apparent  satisfaction,  state,  "that 
the  only  way  of  reconciling  them  (the  principle  set  forth  in  the  second  com 
mandment,  and  that  in  this  passage  of  Ezekiel)  together,  is  by  supposing 
that  the  second  commandment  related  solely  to  temporal,  or  rather  family 
adversity  and  prosperity,  and  Ezekiel's  chapter  to  the  rewards  and  punish 
ments  of  a  future  life  "  (Serm.  xiii).  As  if  the  very  point  under  debate 
in  this  chapter  were  not  why  the  covenant-people  were  subjected  to  their 
present  temporal  troubles  and  misfortunes.  Drop  this,  and  there  is  no 
question  agitated  between  them  and  the  prophet.  As  for  the  view  of  War- 


RETKIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  193 

When  the  Lord,  then,  declares  in  this  passage  that  the  people 
should  no  longer  have  occasion  to  use  the  proverb  of  the  fathers 
having  eaten  the  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  being  set 
on  edge,  allusion  is  not  made  to  any  projected  change  in  the 
government  of  God,  but  merely  to  the  sharp,  personal  dealing 
he  was  going  to  hold  with  each,  which  would  not  permit  them 
any  more  to  throw  upon  others  the  blame  that  was  properly  their 
own.  "  It  was  just  as  if  he  had  said,"  to  use  the  excellent  words 
of  Calvin,  "I  will  drive  out  of  you  this  boasting,  by  laying  bare 
your  iniquity,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  whole  world  shall  per 
ceive  you  to  suffer  the  punishment  you  yourselves  deserve,  and 
you  shall  not  be  able,  as  you  have  been  hitherto  endeavouring, 
to  cast  the  burden  on  your  fathers."  It  was  to  be  made  fully 
manifest  that  their  punishment  only  corresponded  to  their  own 
guilt.  And  the  circumstance  of  the  Lord  prefacing  this  declara 
tion  with  his  oath,  "As  I  live,  it  shall  be  done,"  was  like  a 
solemn  and  earnest  protest  against  the  injurious  and  blasphemous 
character  of  the  thought,  which  led  them  to  impute  to  him  a 
partial  and  arbitrary  principle  of  dealing  with  his  people. 

This  very  protest,  however,  against  the  wrong  principle  of 
dealing  falsely  imputed  to  God,  carried  along  with  it  a  strong 
assertion  of  the  necessity  of  the  opposite  principle — that  of  hold 
ing  those  liable  to  punishment  who  were  guilty  of  sin.  If  it  is 
abhorrent  to  the  mind  of  God  to  render  the  just  desert  of  sin  in 
the  wrong  quarter,  because  contrary  to  the  essential  principles 
of  justice,  it  must  be  equally  abhorrent,  and  for  the  same  reason, 
to  withhold  punishment  from  the  quarter  where  it  is  due.  For 
to  protect  and  countenance  the  sinner  is  all  one  with  discourag- 

burton,  that  the  principle  of  the  second  commandment  was  introduced  to 
supply  the  want  of  a  future  state,  and  that  the  word  by  Ezekiel  amounted 
to  a  virtual  abrogation  of  it,  now  that  the  hope  of  immortality  was  going  to 
be  brought  in,  it  can  only  be  characterised  as  an  utterly  groundless  assertion, 
proceeding  on  a  mistaken  view  of  the  Divine  dispensations.  The  idea  of  an 
innocent  posterity  suffering  for  a  guilty  parentage  is  justly  designated  by 
Havernick  as  a  heathenish  one.  "  When  men  lost  the  faith  of  a  living  God. 
they  were  impelled  to  the  worship  of  a  blind  Nemesis — a  fate  pregnant  with 
mischief.  The  sentiments  uttered  by  the  people  here  are  precisely  what  we 
find  in  those  words  of  Solon  with  Stobseus  (Eel.  ix.  p.  100),  'AAA'  6  per  avrix. 
friasv,  etc.,  and  in  the  well-known  passage  of  Horace's  Delicta  majorum  im- 
meritus  lues,  Romane  (Od.  iii.  6.  1,  comp.  iii.  2.  30).  See  also  Homer,  II. 
iv.  161  ss." 

N   ' 


194  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

ing  and  depressing  the  righteous.  Therefore,  the  soul  that 
sinneth  must  die ;  and  the  less  God  can  punish  the  innocent  for 
the  guilty,  the  less  also  can  he  refrain  from  dealing  with  the 
guilty  according  to  their  transgressions.  Thus,  the  severe  im 
partiality  of  God,  while  it  is  a  wall  of  security  and  defence  for 
the  good,  becomes  of  necessity  like  a  consuming  fire  to  the 
wicked  ;  and  if  death  is  not  yet  actually  their  portion,  it  can  only 
be  because  the  long-suffering  of  God  is  still  waiting  for  their 
repentance. 

2.  So  much  for  the  principle  itself  of  fair  and  impartial  deal 
ing,  which  the  prophet  here  asserts  for  God  in  his  government 
toward  men.  Let  us  now  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  series  of 
supposed  cases,  by  which  the  prophet  explains  and  illustrates  the 
operation  of  the  principle.  There  are  altogether  four  distinct 
cases  specified,  which  are  also  followed  up  toward  the  close  by  a 
renewed  vindication  of  the  Lord's  method  of  dealing  in  respect 
to  them. 

(1.)  The  first  case  supposed  is  that  of  a  righteous  man,  who 
applies  with  sincere  and  honest  purpose  of  heart  to  keep  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  (vers.  5-9).  And  because  very  lax  and  imper 
fect  notions  prevailed  concerning  God's  ways,  the  prophet  enters 
into  some  particulars,  with  the  view  of  exhibiting  clearly  the 
nature  of  the  requirements  which  the  Divine  law  made  at  the 
hands  of  men,  and  thereby  administering  a  reproof  for  prevailing 
evils.  His  enumeration  of  excellences  was,  doubtless,  chosen 
with  a  respect  to  existing  circumstances,  that  the  mass  of  his 
countrymen  might  perceive  how  far  they  were  deviating  in  their 
conduct  from  the  character  they  ought  to  have  maintained. 
And  if,  in  one  or  two  features  of  the  representation,  undue  pro 
minence  seems  to  be  given  to  points  which  in  themselves  were 
less  important  than  others  that  might  have  been  mentioned,  a 
ready  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  prevailing  character  of 
the  times.  The  prophet  must  adapt  his  description  to  the  per 
sons  whom  he  sought  more  especially  to  benefit  by  it.  And 
when  he  has  thus  delineated  one  who  stood  aloof  from  the  reign 
ing  corruptions,  and  gave  ample  proof  of  having  the  law  of  God 
within  his  heart,  the  prophet  draws  the  conclusion  in  his  favour, 
that  he  shall  live:  "He  is  just;  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the 
Lord  God." 

Perhaps  what  will  strike  most  readers  in  the  present  day  as 


RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  195 

chiefly  peculiar  in  the  description  given  of  the  righteous  man, 
is  the  stress  laid  upon  his  abstaining  from  usury:  "He  hath  not 
given  forth  upon  usury,  neither  hath  taken  any  increase."  We 
find  the  same  prominence,  however,  given  to  this  feature  in  the 
still  briefer  description  of  the  righteous  by  the  Psalmist  in  the 
15th  Psalm  :  "  Putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury."  It  arose 
in  both  cases  from  the  strict  prohibition  in  the  law  against  lend 
ing  money  for  interest  to  an  Israelite  (Ex.  xxii.  25  ;  Lev.  xxv. 
35,  37 ;  Deut.  xxiii.  19,  20).  In  several  of  the  passages  it  is 
clearly  implied  that  the  money  to  be  lent  was  to  the  poor,  which 
consequently  ought  to  have  been  done  in  a  spirit  of  brotherly 
love,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  taking  advantage  of  their  necessi 
ties,  and  turning  the  loan  into  an  occasion  of  trouble  and  oppres 
sion.  The  word  denoting  usury,  "|$J  (from  the  verb  to  bite  or 
eat\  has  respect  to  this  vexatious  and  selfish  mode  of  dealing 
with  a  brother's  poverty — making  gain  out  of  the  distress  of  the 
borrower.  But  as  the  law  permitted  the  lending  of  money  on 
usury  to  strangers,  it  of  course  indicated  that  the  practice  was 
not  in  all  circumstances  improper.  The  law  had  respect  to  a 
very  simple  state  of  society,  and  a  polity  which  was  designed  to 
form  a  check  on  speculation  in  trade  and  commerce,  and  diffuse 
a  general  well-being  and  comfort ;  hence  it  was  important  to 
encourage  liberality  to  the  poorer  members  of  the  commonwealth, 
and,  on  the  part  of  the  richer,  repress  the  tendency  to  undue 
exactions ;  though,  in  corrupt  times,  the  spirit  of  selfishness  was 
always  breaking  through  the  restrictions.  In  the  artificial  and 
complicated  affairs  of  modern  times,  the  prohibitions  of  the  law 
against  usury  cannot  fairly  be  stretched  farther  than  to  regard 
them  as  involving  the  imperative  obligation  of  dealing  in  a  kind 
and  liberal  spirit  toward  our  poorer  brethren,  lending  to  them 
when  they  have  need,  without  expecting  anything  again,  and  to 
discourage  the  spirit  of  rash  and  ambitious  speculation.1 

We  notice,  in  regard  to  another  part  of  the  description,  "the 

1  The  general  feelings  of  remote  antiquity  perfectly  harmonized  with  those 
expressed  in  the  Jewish  law.  Usury  was  unknown  among  the  ancient  Ger 
mans  (Tacit.  Ger.  26).  Even  in  Greece,  Aristotle  and  other  superior  men 
pronounced  it  unworthy  of  an  honourable  citizen  to  lend  money  on  interest ; 
and  at  Rome,  Cato  went  so  far  as  to  denounce  the  practice  as  a  heinous 
crime.  They  regarded  it  as  among  the  discreditable  tricks  of  trade,  and  left 
it  to  the  lower  class  of  citizens.  See  Grote's  Greece,  iii.  pp.  145-7. 


196  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

not  eating  upon  the  mountains,"  in  ver.  6,  that  it  has  respect  to 
the  tendency,  which  so  naturally  and  so  frequently  also  mani 
fested  itself  in  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  of  holding  their 
sacrificial  feasts  upon  the  neighbouring  mountains,  instead  of  re 
pairing  to  the  place  God  had  chosen.  Even  when  these  feasts 
were  held  in  honour  of  Jehovah,  they  were  contrary  to  the 
express  enactments  of  the  law  (Deut.  xii.  13,  etc.),  but  of  course 
they  became  much  more  so  when  they  were  coupled,  as  they  too 
commonly  were,  with  the  worship  of  false  gods.  The  righteous 
man  is  described  as  not  so  much  as  u lifting  up  his  eyes  to  these 
false  gods,"  that  is,  not  cherishing  any  wistful  desire  toward  them 
in  his  heart.  And  with  this  shrinking  abhorrence  of  idolatry, 
or  abstinence  from  whatever  is  idolatrous  and  sensual  in  the  ser 
vices  of  religion,  he  is  further  described  as  carefully  shunning 
any  manifestation  of  such  a  spirit  in  his  earthly  relations;  he 
is  sober,  chaste,  and  faithful.  (Upon  the  last  clause  in  ver.  6 
Cocceius  well:  "  notatur  castitas  observanda  in  matrimonio  ; 
nam  etiam  propria  conjuga  potest  quis  abuti.") 

(2.)  The  next  case  supposed  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  the 
preceding  one  ;  it  is  that  of  a  son  refusing  to  follow  the  example 
of  a  righteous  parent,  and  turning  aside  to  the  ways  of  vanity 
and  corruption.  Here,  again,  to  make  the  charge  pointed  and 
specific,  the  prophet  descends  to  an  enumeration  of  the  particular 
deeds  in  which  he  held  the  unrighteousness  to  consist.  But  it 
differs  in  nothing  material  from  that  already  given — the  son 
being  simply  represented  as  doing  the  bad  things,  which  were 
shunned  by  the  father,  and  leaving  undone  the  good  which  he 
did.  Therefore,  being  guilty  of  such  flagrant  offences  against 
the  Divine  law,  this  ungodly  son  must  bear  his  own  doom  ;  his 
pious  parentage,  which  only  aggravated  his  guilt,  cannot  be 
allowed  to  screen  him  from  judgment ;  "  he  has  done  all  these 
abominations  ;  he  shall  surely  die;  his  blood  shall  be  upon  him." 

(3.)  The  third  supposition,  again,  presents  a  reverse  picture ; 
it  is  the  case  of  a  son  of  such  an  unrighteous  person  as  the  one 
just  described,  seeing  the  evil  of  his  father's  doings,  and  turning 
from  them  to  do  the  will  of  God.  Having  more  respect  to  the 
authority  of  God  than  to  the  pernicious  example  of  a  degenerate 
parent,  he  obtains  an  exemption  from  the  heritage  of  evil  ; 
though  "  the  father  dies  in  his  iniquity,"  yet  "the  son  shall  not 
die  for  the  iniquity  of  the  father;  he  shall  surely  live." 


RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  1 9  7 

Here  the  people  are  introduced  objecting  to  the  word  of  the 
prophet,  and  in  their  objection  apparently  seeking  for  a  con 
tinuance  of  that  which  they  had  originally  preferred  as  a  com 
plaint.  It  seemed  to  be  their  burden  that  the  son  was  made  to 
bear  "  the  iniquity  of  the  father,"  as  to  that  principle  in  the  Di 
vine  government  they  ascribed  their  present  suffering  condition 
(ver.  2).  But  now  when  they  have  heard  the  prophet,  in  the 
Lord's  name,  repudiating  this  alleged  principle,  and  asserting 
the  Divine  impartiality  in  dealing  with  each  according  to  his 
ways,  they  interpose  and  say  :  "  Wherefore  ?  Doth  not  the  son 
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father?  "  or  as  we  might  read,  "  Where 
fore  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father?  "  Is  not 
such  actually  the  case  ?  We  had  thought  this  was  an  undoubted 
principle  of  the  Divine  government, and  on  it  alone  could  account 
for  what  otherwise  was  quite  inexplicable  to  us.  It  seems  now  as 
if  it  would  be  a  consolation  for  them  to  think  that  the  son  might 
suffer  for  the  father's  misdeeds,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  pro 
verb,  that,  while  the  fathers  ate  the  sour  grapes,  the  children's 
teeth  should  be  set  on  edge.  And  the  reason,  no  doubt,  was 
that  they  found  it  more  agreeable  to  their  carnality,  and  more 
soothing  to  their  pride,  to  regard  themselves  as  innocent  sufferers 
for  sins  they  had  not  personally  committed,  than  to  ascribe  their 
troubles  to  their  own  departures  from  the  law  of  righteousness. 
For  in  the  one  case  they  were  furnished  with  an  excuse  for 
continuing  to  live  on  still  as  they  had  been  doing  in  the  past ; 
while  in  the  other,  as  the  evil  came  to  be  traced  up  to  their  own 
misdeeds,  the  necessity  forced  itself  upon  them  of  striving,  if 
they  really  wished  to  get  rid  of  it,  to  realize  the  high  pattern  of 
righteousness  set  before  them  in  the  descriptions  of  the  prophet. 
This,  however,  they  were  by  no  means  inclined  to  do  ;  and  hence 
it  came  upon  them  rather  as  a  disappointment,  to  have  the 
querulous  complaint  taken  out  of  their  mouths,  that  the  innocent 
children  were  suffering  for  the  sins  of  their  guilty  parents.  But 
the  prophet  will  not  allow  them  to  enjoy  this  miserable  solace, 
or  to  rest  in  a  confidence  so  utterly  groundless.  He  must  con 
vince  them  of  their  own  sinf  ulness,  and  lead  them  to  repentance 
and  amendment  of  life,  as  the  one  way  of  escape  from  their  de 
pressed  and  abject  condition.  Therefore,  in  reply  to  their  query, 
he  again  reiterates  the  great  truth  of  each  man's  treatment  being 
according  to  his  personal  condition  and  character  before  God : 


198  EZEKIEL  XVIII. 

"  When  the  son  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  hath 
kept  all  my  statutes  and  hath  done  them,  he  shall  surely  live. 
The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die  ;  the  son  shall  not  bear  the  ini 
quity  of  the  father,  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity  of 
the  son  :  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him, 
and  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon  him." 

(4.)  And  now,  having  repudiated  the  false  imagination  of  the 
people,  as  to  the  innocent  suffering  for  the  guilty,  and  asserted 
anew  the  great  principle  of  God's  impartiality  in  dealing  with 
each  according  to  his  desert,  the  prophet  comes  to  his  last  hypo 
thetical  case — the  case,  namely,  of  a  supposed  change,  not,  as 
hitherto,  in  the  character  of  one  generation  as  compared  with 
another,  but  in  the  character  of  one  and  the  same  individual, 
from  bad  to  good  and  from  good  to  bad.  This  was  more  espe 
cially  the  practical  case  for  the  persons  here  addressed  by  the 
prophet,  and  therefore  he  reserved  it  to  the  last ;  as  it  enabled 
him  to  shut  them  up  to  the  alternative  of  either  abandoning  at 
once  their  sinful  ways,  or  of  charging  upon  their  own  hardened 
impenitence  all  that  they  might  still  experience  of  the  troubles 
and  afflictions  that  pressed  upon  them.  For  the  message  here 
is,  that  so  far  from  laying  to  men's  charge  the  burden  of  ini 
quities  that  had  been  committed  by  others,  the  Lord  would  not 
even  visit  them  for  their  own,  if  they  sincerely  repented  and 
turned  to  the  way  of  righteousness;  while  on  the  other  hand,  if 
they  should  begin  to  fall  away  into  transgression,  they  must  not 
expect  their  earlier  goodness  to  screen  them  from  judgment, — 
because  in  that  case,  having  taken  up  with  a  new  condition,  it 
was  just  and  proper  that  a  corresponding  change  should  be  in 
troduced  into  the  Divine  procedure  toward  them:  "If  the 
wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins  that  he  has  committed,  and 
keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he 
shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die.  None  of  his  transgressions  that 
he  has  committed  shall  be  remembered  against  him  :  in  his  right 
eousness  that  he  has  done  he  shall  live.  Have  I  any  pleasure  at 
all  that  the  wicked  should  die?  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and 
not  that  he  turn  from  his  way  and  live?  But  when  the  right 
eous  turns  away  from  his  righteousness,  and  commits  iniquity, 
and  does  according  to  all  the  abominations  that  the  wicked 
does,  shall  he  live?  Nothing  of  all  his  righteousness  that  he 
has  done  shall  be  remembered  :  in  his  trespass  that  he  has 


RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  199 

trespassed,  and  in  his  sin  that  he  has  sinned,  in  them  shall  he 
die." 

What  a  beautiful  simplicity  and  directness  in  the  statement ! 
It  is  like  the  lawgiver  anew  setting  before  the  people  the  way 
of  life  and  the  way  of  death,  and  calling  upon  them  to  determine 
which  of  the  two  they  were  inclined  to  choose.  Then,  what  a 
moving  tenderness  in  the  appeal,  "  Have  I  any  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked  ?  saith  the  Lord  God."  You  think  of  me  as 
if  I  were  a  heartless  being,  indifferent  to  the  calamities  that  be 
fall  my  children,  and  even  delighting  to  inflict  chastisement  on 
them  for  sins  they  have  not  committed.  So  far  from  this,  I  have 
no  pleasure  in  the  destruction  of  those  who  by  their  own  trans 
gressions  have  deserved  it,  but  would  rather  that  they  turn  from 
their  ways  and  live.  Thus  he  presents  himself  as  a  God  of  holy 
love, — love  yearning  over  the  lost  condition  of  his  wayward  chil 
dren,  and  earnestly  desiring  their  return  to  peace  and  safety, — 
yet  still  exercising  itself  in  strict  accordance  with  the  principles 
of  righteousness,  and  only,  in  so  far  as  these  might  admit,  seek 
ing  the  good  of  men.  For  however  desirous  to  secure  their  sal 
vation,  he  neither  can  nor  will  save  them,  except  in  the  way  of 
righteousness. 

The  people,  however,  being  still  wedded  to  their  own  sinful- 
ness,  continued  as  before  to  find  fault ;  and,  looking  superficially 
to  the  outward  diversity  that  appeared  in  God's  dealings  with 
men,  they  raised  the  objection,  u  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not 
equal."  An  outward  inequality  the  prophet,  indeed,  had  ad 
mitted  ;  it  was  the  very  design  of  his  expostulation  to  prove  that 
such  must  have  place  according  to  the  varying  conditions  of  those 
with  whom  he  had  to  do  ;  but  only  so  as  to  establish  a  real 
equality  in  a  moral  point  of  view.  Therefore  the  prophet  turns 
the  accusation  against  the  people  themselves :  "  Hear,  now,  O 
house  of  Israel !  is  not  my  way  equal?  Are  not  your  ways  un 
equal  ?  "  My  way  is  equal,  he  virtually  affirms,  because  I  deal 
with  the  guilty  backslider  and  the  penitent  transgressor,  each 
according  to  his  behaviour — the  one  as  deserving  of  death,  the 
other  as  a  proper  subject  of  life  and  blessing.  But  your  ways 
are  unequal,  since,  living  in  idolatry  and  corruption,  you  expect  to 
be  dealt  with  as  if  you  were  following  the  paths  of  uprightness. 

3.  Therefore,  finally,  having  driven  the  people  from  all  their 
false  imaginations  and  captious  objections — having  shut  them  up 


200  EZEKIEL  XVIIT. 

to  the  conclusion,  that  as  they  were  in  a  depressed  and  suffering, 
they  must  also  be  in  a  sinful  condition,  the  prophet  closes  his 
expostulation  by  urging  them  to  repent  and  turn  from  all  their 
unrighteous  ways,  that  so  they  might  not  perish  in  their  sins : 
"  Therefore  I  will  judge  you,  O  house  of  Israel,  every  one  ac 
cording  to  his  ways,  saith  the  Lord  God.  Return,  and  come 
back  from  all  your  transgressions,  and  iniquity  shall  not  be  your 
ruin  (more  properly  :  and  iniquity  shall  not  be  for  a  snare  to  you, 
the  occasion  of  restraining  you  from  good,  and  entangling  you 
in  ruin).  Cast  away  from  you  all  your  transgressions,  whereby 
ye  have  transgressed  ;  and  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new 
spirit ;  and  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?  For  I  have 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah  ;  but  turn  ye,  and  live." 

The  charge  is  given  to  the  whole  house  of  Israel ;  for  the 
people,  as  a  whole,  are  regarded  by  the  prophet  as  in  a  state  of 
apostasy  and  alienation  from  God.  And  it  was  no  slight  or 
partial  reformation  that  was  needed  to  restore  them  to  the  favour 
and  blessing  of  God,  but  an  entire  and  radical  change.  There 
fore  they  are  called  upon  not  only  to  repent  and  cast  away  their 
transgressions,  but  also  to  get  possession  of  a  new  heart  and  a 
new  spirit,  nay,  even  to  make  such  to  themselves,  as  if  it  were  a 
matter  that  lay  within  the  compass  of  their  own  responsible 
agency.  This  has  an  appearance  of  strangeness,  as  already,  in 
chap,  xi.,  and  again  in  chap,  xxxvi.,  the  imparting  of  such  a  new 
heart  and  spirit  is  represented  as  the  great  boon  which  at  some 
future  period  they  were  to  receive  from  the  grace  and  mercy  of 
God.  Nor,  indeed,  is  there  anything  more  clearly  announced, 
or  more  frequently  stated  in  the  word  of  God,  than  that  a  re 
generated  condition  can  only  be  reached  through  the  quickening 
power  of  his  grace ;  he  must  himself  be  the  author  of  this  new 
creation,  wherever  it  is  brought  into  being,  as  he  was  at  first  of 
the  old.  But  why  then  should  God  call  upon  men  to  make  to 
themselves  a  new  heart,  seeing  he  alone  is  able  to  produce  it  1 
Does  not  such  a  call  but  seem  to  mock  men's  impotence,  or  to 
beget  in  them  false  expectations?  By  no  means.  It  was  rather 
intended  to  set  before  them  what  was  necessary  to  rectify  their 
state  in  so  strong  and  startling  a  manner,  that  from  the  very 
height  of  the  requirement  they  would  despair  of  themselves,  and 
betake  to  the  promised  grace  of  God.  For,  as  Calvin  justly  re- 


RETRIBUTIVE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD.  201 

marks,  "it  must  always  be  considered  for  what  end  God  speaks 
in  such  a  manner,  viz.  that  being  convinced  of  their  sinfulness, 
men  may  cease  to  lay  the  blame  elsewhere,  as  they  constantly 
endeavour  to  do,  there  being  nothing  to  which  we  are  more  prone 
than  shifting  the  ground  of  our  condemnation  away  to  some  other 
quarter,  that  we  ourselves  may  seem  to  be  just,  and  God  unjust. 
Therefore,  because  this  perversity  is  prevalent  among  men,  the 
Holy  Spirit  demands  of  us  what  no  man  can  deny  he  ought  to  do, 
And  so  far  as  regards  God's  elect  people,  when  he  shows  what 
they  ought  to  do,  and  what  they  are  conscious  they  can  never  of 
themselves  perform,  they  then  have  recourse  to  the  promised  aid 
of  the  Spirit;  so  that  the  outward  command  becomes  the  occasion 
or  instrument  which  God  employs  for  conferring  the  grace  of 
his  Spirit.  ...  As  often,  therefore,  as  such  passages  meet  us, 
let  the  well-known  saying  of  Augustine  come  to  our  mind,  i Da 
quod  jules,  et  jube  quod  velis '  (give  what  thou  requirest,  and  re 
quire  what  thou  pleasest).  For  otherwise,  if  God  should  lay 
upon  us  the  least  tittle  of  commanded  duty,  we  shall  not  be  able 
to  bear  it ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  our  strength  shall  suffice 
for  whatever  he  may  exact  of  us,  if  only  he  himself  shall  give 
the  supply,  and  we  shall  not  be  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  that 
nothing  more  is  demanded  in  his  precepts  than  what  we  have 
power  in  ourselves  to  do." 

Such,  then,  is  the  case  which  the  prophet  presses  on  the  cove 
nant-people  as  the  result  of  this  long  and  earnest  expostulation 
with  their  sinfulness.  The  Lord  demands  of  them  a  renovated 
condition — a  heart  that  should  dispose  them  to  yield  a  sincere 
and  ready  obedience  to  his  commandments.  Never  till  such  a 
spiritual  change  was  effected  could  they  expect  his  judgments 
to  be  turned  into  blessings.  Never  could  they  hope  to  see  and 
reap  the  accomplishment  of  that  promise  of  renewed  prosperity 
at  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter,  according  to  which  the 
little  twig  of  the  Lord's  planting  was  to  become  a  mighty  tree, 
with  fowl  of  every  wing  lodging  in  its  branches.  And  never 
can  the  Church  of  God  in  any  age  justly  expect  to  be  safe  and 
prosperous  in  her  condition,  and  to  be  a  fit  instrument  in  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  for  executing  his  righteous  purposes,  till  she 
becomes  possessed  through  all  her  members  of  such  a  spirit  of 
obedience  as  shall  prompt  her  to  embrace  heartily  his  Divine 
will,  and  keep  the  way  of  his  commandments.  Oh  !  need  we 


202  EZEKIEL  XIX. 

wonder,  when  we  see  how  little  this  is  really  possessed,  that  the 
flow  of  the  Divine  goodness  should  be  arrested,  and  that  we 
should  seem  so  often  to  be  dwelling  among  the  tombs,  instead  of 
basking,  as  we  should  be,  in  the  sunshine  of  life  and  blessing? 
In  how  many  forms  is  the  controversy  still  maintained  with  the 
righteousness  of  God?  and  with  all  her  privileges  of  grace,  how 
far  is  the  Church  oftChrist,  either  individually  or  collectively, 
from  the  measure  of  perfection  that  ought  to  be  reached  ?  How 
much  cause  still  for  the  prayer,  Turn  us  again,  Lord  God  of 
hosts,  and  cause  thy  face  to  shine,  and  we  shall  be  saved  !  Re 
kindle  in  the  bosoms  of  thy  people  the  love  of  holiness,  which  so 
sadly  languishes  and  droops  ;  and  let  not  iniquity  and  death  pre 
vail,  where  only  righteousness  and  blessing  should  be  found ! 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  ROYAL  HOUSE. 

THE  expostulation  contained  in  the  last  chapter  was  held  with 
the  covenant-people  as  a  whole,  and  its  final  aim  was  to  put  them 
on  the  only  way  of  recovering  the  prosperity  they  had  lost, 
namely,  by  a  sincere  and  hearty  return  to  the  paths  of  righteous 
ness.  But  in  this  chapter  the  vision  of  the  prophet  is  confined 
to  the  more  distinguished  portion  of  Israel,  the  princes  of  the 
house  of  David  (for  the  spirit  of  prophecy  recognises  no  other 
princes  besides  those  who  belonged  to  that  house) ;  and  the  only 
word  he  receives  concerning  them  is  one  of  doleful  lamentation 
over  their  inevitable  ruin.  In  expostulating  with  the  people,  it 
was  taken  for  granted  that  a  period  of  revival  and  blessing  still 
awaited  them,  and  that  the  only  question  was  as  to  the  course 
of  procedure  on  their  part  which  might  warrant  them  to  expect 
its  arrival.  But  no  ray  of  hope  mingles  with  the  sombre  repre 
sentation  he  gives  respecting  the  princes  of  Israel ;  in  what  had 
already  befallen,  and  what  was  yet  to  befall  them,  there  was 
room  only  for  the  wail  of  sorrow  and  despair.  It  is  true  the 
royal  house  was  not  to  become  utterly  extinct;  it  was  still 
destined  to  furnish  a  head  to  the  people  of  God,  under  whom  the 
cause  of  righteousness  and  truth  was  to  attain  a  glory  it  had  never 


LAMENTATION  UPON  THE  PRINCES.  203 

reached  before.  This  had  been  most  distinctly  announced  by 
our  prophet  himself  at  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  chapter,  under 
the  image  of  a  tender  shoot  plucked  by  the  hand  of  Jehovah  from 
the  topmost  bough  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  and  planted  on  the 
lofty  mountain  of  Israel.  But  the  very  character  of  the  descrip 
tion  thus  given  of  a  coming  glory — that  it  was  to  be  a  tender  shoot, 
which  was  to  be  plucked,  and  that  its  plantation  on  the  mountain 
of  Israel,  its  marvellous  growth,  and  ultimate  unparalleled  great 
ness,  were  so  peculiarly  to  mark  the  overruling  power  and 
sovereignty  of  God — clearly  implied  that  the  prospect  was  to  be 
realized  in  a  way  quite  different  from  the  ordinary  course  and 
expectations  of  nature,  and  in  defiance,  as  it  might  seem,  of  all 
outward  appearances.  And  the  melancholy  dirge  contained  in 
the  present  chapter  may  be  regarded  as  supplying  the  further 
information,  that  now  and  henceforth  appearances  were  indeed 
to  be  of  the  most  humiliating  kind  as  concerned  the  members  of 
the  royal  house,  that  their  outward  glory  was  waning  to  extinc 
tion,  and  that  they  forfeited  all  claim  to  any  restoration  of  the 
worldly  greatness  which  they  had  hitherto  enjoyed.  Viewed 
simply  as  princes  in  the  earth,  their  place  was  lost  beyond  recovery. 

Yer.  1 .  And  do  thou  take  up  a  lamentation  for  the  princes  of  Israel ; 
2.  And  say,  What  was  thy  mother  ?  A  lioness  ;  she  lay  down  among  lions, 
among  young  lions  she  nourished  her  whelps.  3.  And  she  brought  up  one 
of  her  whelps  ;  he  became  a  young  lion,  and  he  learned  to  catch  prey ;  he 
devoured  men.  -4.  And  the  nations  heard  of  him ;  in  their  pit  was  he  taken, 
and  they  brought  him  in  chains  to  the  land  of  Egypt.  5.  And  she  saw  that 
deferred,  perished  was  her  hope  ; 1  and  she  took  another  of  her  whelps  and 
made  him  a  young  lion.  6.  And  he  went  up  and  down  among  the  lions  ;  he 
became  a  young  lion ;  and  he  learned  to  catch  prey ;  he  devoured  men. 

1  In  the  rendering  of  this  clause,  there  is  only  a  choice  of  difficulties,  and 
it  is  impossible  to  obtain  anything  like  satisfaction.  According  to  the  natural 
construction,  both  the  verbs  should  refer  to  the  hope  as  their  object ;  and  this 
construction,  I  think,  must  be  retained.  But  then  there  is  no  well  ascertained 
meaning  of  the  first  of  the  two  verbs,  ni?m:,  which  altogether  makes  sense. 
It  properly  means  to  wait  or  hope  for  anything ;  but,  undoubtedly,  what 
presents  itself  as  a  thing  to  be  waited  for  has,  to  an  ardent  mind,  a  deferred 
and  almost  forlorn  appearance.  The  transition  to  this  sense  cannot  be  re 
garded  as  unnatural  or  harsh.  In  Gen.  viii.  12  it  occurs  very  nearly  in  that 
sense,  importing  simply  a  putting  off  or  delaying  from  one  period  to  another. 
I  prefer,  therefore,  with  Havernick,  to  render  as  in  the  text,  and  deem  both 
improbable  and  unnecessary  the  other  derivations  and  senses  which  have 
been  adopted.  The  LXX.  seem  to  have  had  or  made  a  different  text ;  and 
Hitzig,  as  very  commonly,  prefers  following  them. 


204  EZEKIEL  XIX. 

7.  And  he  defiled  their  widows  (i.e.  the  widows  of  the  men  devoured);1  and 
laid  waste  their  cities  ;  and  the  land  and  all  its  fulness  was  desolate,  by  the 
noise  of  his  roaring.  8.  And  the  nations  from  the  provinces  around  set 
against  him,  and  spread  upon  him  their  net ;  in  their  pit  was  he  taken. 
9.  And  they  put  him  in  ward,  in  chains,  and  brought  him  to  the  king  of 
Babylon  ;  they  brought  him  into  a  stronghold,  that  his  voice  might  no  more 
be  heard  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel.  10.  Thy  mother  was  like  a  vine, 
planted  when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood2  beside  waters;  she  was  fruitful  and 
full  of  branches  by  reason  of  many  waters.  11.  And  she  had  strong  rods 
for  sceptres  to  those  who  bear  rule,  and  elevated  was  her  height  up  among 
the  clouds,  and  she  was  seen  (conspicuous)  because  of  her  greatness,  because 
of  the  multitude  of  her  branches.3  12.  But  she  is  plucked  up  in  fury;  she 
is  cast  down  to  the  ground  ;  and  the  east  wind  has  dried  up  her  fruit;  broken 
and  withered  are  her  strong  rods,  the  fire  has  devoured  them.  1)3.  And  now 
she  is  planted  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  dry  and  parched  land.  14.  And  a  fire 


1  The  literal  rendering  here  is :  And  he  knew  their  widows — but  the 
sense  is  that  given  above.     There  is  no  good  authority  for  ascribing  to 
ni^ftta  the  meaning  of  palaces,  or  any  other  than  that  of  widows.    Of  course 
the  image  is  violated  by  the  lion  being  spoken  of  thus  in  connection  with 
widows ;  the  reality  breaks  through  the  veil ;  but  that  is  no  uncommon 
thing,  as  we  have  seen,  with  Ezekiel ;  various  examples  of  it  occur  in  chap.  xvi. 

2  Our  translators  have  here  inserted  in  the  margin  two  other  meanings  for 
in  thy  Hood :  in  thy  quietness,  in  thy  likeness.     The  former  of  these  two  is 
the  one  adopted  by  Havernick,  deriving  QT  here  from  DV1,  HOT,  to  be  silent, 
to  be  at  rest ;  a  state  of  repose  or  rest,  therefore,  is  what  he  understands  to 
be  indicated.    Ewald  and  Hitzig  prefer,  in  thy  likeness.    The  LXX.  appear 
to  have  read  jiEfp,  a  pomegranate,  and  are  followed  by  Newcome  and  others. 
But  there  is  really  no  need  for  any  change  in  the  received  text,  or  departing 
from  the  most  natural  and  simplest  rendering  ;  especially  since  the  prophet, 
in  chap  xvi.,  had  once  and  again  used  the  same  expression,  "in  thy  blood," 
for  denoting  the  earliest  stage  of  existence.     In  his  peculiar  phraseology,  it 
was  all  one  with  saying,  "When  thou   wast  in  the  very  infancy  of  thy 
being,"  even  then  the  mother  of  the  royal  house  was  like  a  vine  planted 
beside  waters,  full  of  strength  and  vigour ;  she  could  look  for  great  things 
for  her  offspring. 

3  A  sudden  change  of  gender  takes  place  here  in  the  original,  from  the 
feminine  to  the  masculine,  which  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  imitate. 
Ezekiel  uses  considerable  freedom  in  that  way.     A  similar  anomaly  occurs 
again  in  the  latter  part  of  ver.  12.     The  expression  D'Tlhy  pa  ^y  ought  cer 
tainly  to  be  "up,"  or  "  aloft  among  the  clouds"  (comp.'  chap.  xxxi.  3,  10, 
14).     There  it  evidently  denotes  the  highest  elevation,  and  "among  the 
thick  branches"  will  not  make  sense.     The  later  interpreters  agree  in  this 
result,  but  differ  somewhat  in  their  way  of  reaching  it.     Ewald  and  Hengs- 
tenberg  regarding  ntojJ,  clouds,  as  one  of  those  nouns  which  came  gradually 
to  lose  their  plural  meaning ;  and  so  Ezekiel  forms  a  new  plural  by  adding 
D*1 ;  while  Havernick,  we  think  with  less  probability,  supposes  an  interchange 
to  have  taken  place  between  the  meanings  of  ny  and  JYnj?,  so  that  the  latter, 
in  the  plural,  was  used,  not  for  thickets,  but  for  thicket- clouds. 


LAMENTATION  UPON  THE  PRINCES.  205 

goes  out  of  the  rod  of  her  branches,  that  devours  her  fruit,  and  there  is  not 
in  her  a  strong  rod,  a  sceptre  for  a  ruler.  It  is  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be 
for  a  lamentation. 

Thus  we  see  that,  in  order  to  make  the  import  of  his  message 
more  plain  and  palpable,  the  prophet  gives  it  the  benefit  of  a 
twofold  representation.  But  in  each  case  the  representation  is  so 
highly  figurative,  that  to  seek  a  very  close  and  minute  corre 
spondence  between  the  symbol  and  the  reality  cannot  be  neces 
sary,  and  may  even  tend  to  mislead.  Interpreters  have  commonly 
run  into  this  error,  when  at  the  outset  they  begin  to  inquire,  who 
is  to  be  understood  by  the  mother?  As  might  be  expected,  very 
different  answers  are  given  to  the  question, — some,  as  Pradus, 
answering  Jerusalem;  others,  as  Lowth,  the  land  of  Israel;  others 
again,  as  Havernick,  the  theocratic  Israel  at  large ;  and  still 
others,  as  Hitzig,  the  more  peculiarly  regal  portion,  the  tribe  of 
Judah.  To  descend  upon  limitations  of  this  sort  is  to  lose  sight 
of  the  bold  and  luxuriant  character  of  Ezekiel's  style;  and  one 
might  as  well  have  asked,  in  regard  to  the  figurative  representa 
tion  of  the  sixteenth  chapter,  which  of  the  progenitors  of  the 
Jewish  people  could  be  meant,  when  it  was  said  that  their 
father  was  an  Arnorite  and  their  mother  a  Hittite.  We  must 
keep  in  view  the  general  object  of  the  representation,  which,  in 
the  case  now  before  us,  was  to  exhibit  the  princes  of  Israel  in 
such  a  light  as  sufficiently  to  account  for  their  being  allowed  to 
fall  into  overwhelming  and  hopeless  ruin.  For  instead  of  feel 
ing,  as  they  should  have  done,  that  they  were  set  up  in  the  high 
position  they  occupied,  as  sons  of  God  in  particular,  to  carry  out 
in  all  things  his  will,  and  promote  the  interests  of  truth  and 
righteousness,  they  acted  in  such  a  wild,  lawless,  arbitrary  man 
ner  as  might  seem  to  befit  only  those  who  were  possessed  of  the 
most  savage  and  ungovernable  natures.  It  seemed,  judging 
from  their  behaviour,  as  if  a  lioness  had  been  their  mother — a 
lioness  who  had  herself  lived  among  the  other  wild  beasts  of  her 
species,  and  who  had  reared  her  young  amid  the  ravening  and 
ferocious  tenants  of  the  forest.  Hence,  when  they  ceased  to  be 
under  the  mother's  care,  and  began  to  act  for  themselves,  it  was 
after  the  capricious  and  unruly  manner  of  such  fierce  and  un 
tamed  natures — without  regard  to  any  will  but  their  own,  and 
with  no  desire  but  the  gratification  of  their  own  selfish  purposes. 
The  particular  course  followed  would,  of  course,  differ  in  each, 


206  EZEKIEL  XIX. 

according  to  their  natural  temperaments,  though  the  prophet 
simply  represents  it,  according  to  the  image  he  has  chosen,  as  a 
catching  of  prey,  devouring  men,  and  spreading  around  scenes 
of  horror  and  desolation.  We  are  not  to  suppose  from  this  that 
the  princes,  more  particularly  in  the  eye  of  the  prophet,  were  all 
alike  remarkable  for  the  ferocity  of  their  disposition,  and  the 
heartless  manner  in  which  they  sported  themselves  with  the 
calamities  and  ruin  of  others,  or,  indeed,  that  any  of  them  did 
so.  There  is  nothing  in  the  history  to  countenance  the  idea 
that  either  Jehoahaz  first,  or  afterwards  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah, 
were  peculiarly  characterised  by  such  a  disposition.  The  whole 
we  are  to  understand  by  the  representation  is,  that  like  the  lion 
among  beasts,  so  they  among  men  followed  recklessly  the  bent 
of  their  own  minds,  and  pursued,  without  let  or  hindrance,  their 
sinful  courses,  regardless  of  the  mischief  which  they  might 
thereby  bring  upon  the  people  they  were  bound  to  watch  over 
and  protect.  Their  conduct  was  as  wayward,  and  the  disastrous 
consequences  that  flowed  from  it  were  as  great,  as  if  their  object 
had  been  to  tear  in  pieces  and  spread  desolation  throughout  the 
land.  So  that  it  was  simply  to  mete  to  them  according  to  their 
own  measure,  and  reward  them  after  their  own  doings,  to  allow 
the  surrounding  nations,  first  Egypt  (in  respect  to  Jehoahaz), 
and  then  Babylon,  with  her  multitudinous  hosts  (in  respect  to 
the  rest),  to  come  and  snare  them  as  wild  beasts,  and  lay  them 
under  perpetual  arrest,  "  that  their  voice  should  no  more  be 
heard  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel."  Thus  these  two  foreign 
kingdoms,  and  more  especially  Babylon,  became  in  a  manner 
the  grave  of  the  earthly  pomp  and  dominion  of  the  princes  of 
Israel. 

The  figurative  representation  now  given  has  respect  more 
immediately  to  the  character  of  the  princes,  and  the  punishment 
it  both  provoked  and  was  destined  to  receive.  But  to  com 
plete  the  gloomy  picture,  the  prophet  adds  another,  taken  from 
the  vine,  chief  of  the  fruit-bearing  trees,  as  the  lion  is  of  the 
beasts  of  prey  ;  having  respect  more  especially  to  the  royal  house 
itself,  and  the  contrast  between  its  original  and  its  now  altered 
and  doomed  condition.  This  royal  house,  the  source  of  all  the 
individual  princes  that  sprung  from  it,  is  represented  as,  from  the 
first,  like  a  healthy  and  fruitful  vine,  planted  beside  streams  of 
water  for  abundance  of  nourishment,  so  that  she  shot  forth  her 


LAMENTATION  UPON  THE  PRINCES.  207 

branches,  which  were  like  so  many  royal  sceptres,  aloft  in  the 
air,  and  drew  upon  her  the  eyes  of  all  on  account  of  her  impos 
ing  attitude  and  flourishing  appearance.  But  without  saying 
how, — it  is  to  be  understood  from  the  preceding  delineation,  on 
account  of  the  corrupt  fruit  that  was  borne  by  those  rods  of 
command  and  rule, — this  vine  becomes  the  object  of  irresistible 
fury,  which  plucks  her  up  from  the  fertile  situation  she  had 
hitherto  occupied,  dries  up  her  fruit,  breaks  off  and  burns  in  the 
fire  her  once  vigorous  branches ;  and  not  only  this,  but  trans 
plants  the  tree  itself  into  a  dry  and  sapless  region,  where  it 
could  no  longer  flourish,  and  where  the  little  fruitfulness 
that  still  appeared  in  it  was  to  be  devoured  by  a  fire  coming  out 
of  itself.  For  such  was  the  wilful  infatuation  and  folly  of  the 
royal  house,  that  even  when  reduced  and  crippled  on  every 
hand  by  the  punitive  justice  and  restraining  providence  of  God, 
it  acted  so  as  only  to  provoke  further  visitations  of  wrath,  until 
it  was  rendered,  like  the  vine-tree  of  the  prophet,  without  either 
fruit  to  yield  or  a  rod  of  sufficient  strength  to  form  a  sceptre 
to  rule.  In  other  words,  the  royal  house  of  Israel,  as  to  this 
earthly  power  and  glory,  becomes  utterly  wasted  and  gone  ;  the 
fit  theme  only  of  a  present  and  coming  lamentation. 

A  doleful  picture  indeed,  but  how  exactly  accordant  with  the 
truth  of  things  !  Who  but  the  unerring  Spirit  of  God  could 
have  guided  the  hand  of  the  prophet  to  exhibit  so  faithful  a 
representation  of  the  coming  future  ?  It  might  have  been  clear 
enough  to  a  discerning  mind,  from  the  signs  of  the  times  in 
which  Ezekiel  lived,  that  the  princes  of  Israel  were  likely  to  be 
further  shorn  of  their  power  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  pos 
sibly  even  removed  to  other  parts  of  his  dominions ;  but  that  their 
princely  power  and  glory  should  thus  actually  expire,  that  the 
royal  house  of  Israel  itself  should  finally  lose  its  place  among 
the  princedoms  of  the  world,  while  yet  the  Lord  should  one 
day  bring  out  of  its  seeming  ruin  a  king,  that  should  rise  to  the 
dominion  in  spite  of  all  the  powers  of  this  world,  and  ultimately 
gather  them  all  under  his  universal  sway, — a  train  of  events  so 
peculiar  and  extraordinary  as  this,  and  so  entirely  corresponding 
with  the  future  issues  of  Providence,  could  only  have  been 
tracked  out  beforehand  by  him  who  sees  the  things  that  are  not 
as  though  they  were.  But  still,  let  us  keep  all  in  its  proper 
place.  This  wonderful  anticipation  of  the  future  regarding  the 


208  EZEKIEL  XIX. 

house  of  David  was  not  intended  merely,  nor  even  primarily,  as 
a  proof  of  Divine  foresight  to  the  Church  and  the  world,  but 
rather  as  a  grand  demonstration,  reaching  from  the  past  into 
the  future,  of  the  righteous  principles  of  God's  administration. 
It  was  to  embody  and  exhibit  these  principles  in  connection 
with  the  highest  power  and  authority  in  the  realm,  that  God 
originally  chose  out  of  Israel  a  royal  house,  to  which  he  dele 
gated,  in  a  measure,  his  own  rightful  supremacy.  But  the  seed 
of  royalty  forgot  the  nature  of  their  calling,  and  abused,  to 
purposes  of  selfishness  and  corruption,  the  honour  they  had 
received  from  above.  And  as,  in  the  case  of  the  people  at 
large,  their  falling  away  from  the  righteous  purposes,  for  which 
especially  they  were  planted  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  carried 
along  with  it  the  forfeiture  of  all  their  blessings,  so  in  the  house 
of  David,  their  inveterate  attachment  to  sinful  and  worldly 
aims  must  of  necessity  involve  the  extinction  of  all  its  rank  and 
consideration  among  men.  It  must  go  down,  engulphed  in  that 
worldly  element  to  which  it  had  so  fondly  and  perversely 
wedded  itself;  and  there  must  it  lie,  till,  through  the  special 
interposition  of  Heaven,  it  should  again  revive  in  One,  in  whom 
the  spiritual  should  so  clearly  bear  the  ascendancy  over  the 
earthly — One  who  should  make  himself  so  peculiarly  known  as 
loving  righteousness  and  hating  iniquity,  that  none  could  fail  to 
regard  him  as  of  one  mind,  in  this  respect,  with  God,  and  God 
himself  should  for  ever  anoint  him  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above 
his  fellows.  We  must  ever  keep  this  in  view,  as  the  main  key 
to  the  mystery  of  God's  work,  the  fundamental  and  all-pervad 
ing  element  of  those  wonderful  and  otherwise  unaccountable 
evolutions  in  providence,  which  prophets  were  so  early  instructed 
to  disclose  to  the  people.  And  let  it  never  be  forgotten,  that 
precisely  as  men  enter  into  God's  mind,  and  embrace  the 
righteous  principles  on  which  the  government  of  his  kingdom  is 
conducted,  are  they  prepared  either  to  fulfil  the  part  assigned 
them  as  members  of  the  kingdom,  or  to  enjoy  the  benefits 
which  it  provides  for  those  who  are  destined  to  inherit  it !  For, 
as  it  is  in  righteousness  the  King  of  Zion  is  to  reign  and 
prosper,  it  can  only  be  in  proportion  as  we  are  embued  with  his 
spirit  of  righteousness  that  we  are  fitted  for  taking  part  with 
him  in  what  concerns  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  and  for  rising 

O  7  O 

to  a  proper  inheritance  in  his  blessings. 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  209 


CHAPTER  XX. 

A    DISPLAY    OF   THE    PEOPLE'S    LONG-CONTINUED    SINFULNESS    AND 
THE  LORD'S  LONG-SUFFERING  MERCY  AND  GOODNESS. 

A  NEW  series  of  prophecies  begins  here,  and  stretches  to  the 
close  of  the  twenty-third  chapter.  It  commences  with  a  definite 
period  of  time,  marked  as  the  seventh  year,  fifth  month,  and 
tenth  day  of  the  month  (nearly  a  year  later  than  the  last  pre 
vious  date  given),  and  took  its  rise  in  a  specific  occasion. 
The  entire  series  is  of  a  peculiarly  dark,  objurgatory,  and 
threatening  character,  interspersed  with  only  some  occasional 
gleams  of  light  and  distant  prospects  of  a  still  coming  good. 
No  substantial  amendment  had  been  produced  by  the  earlier 
communications  of  the  prophet,  and  the  contemporary  efforts  of 
other  servants  of  God.  Hence  the  guilt  having  become  so 
much  greater,  and  the  time  drawn  nearer  for  the  execution 
of  judgment,  the  burden  which  the  prophet  had  to  deliver 
was  but  the  more  fearfullv  charged  with  intimations  of  broodin^ 

•<  D  e> 

woe. 

The  occasion  of  this  series  of  discourses  was  furnished  by 
certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel  coming  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  at 
the  mouth  of  the  prophet.  What  might  be  the  precise  object 
of  their  inquiry  is  kept  in  the  background,  as  it  was  also  on  a 
former  occasion  (chap.  xiv.).  There  can  be  little  doubt,  how 
ever,  that  it  had  respect  in  some  shape  to  the  then  depressed 
and  suffering  condition  of  the  covenant-people,  and  implied,  at 
least,  if  it  did  not  openly  express,  a  desire  to  ascertain  some 
thing  more  definite  about  God's  purposes  respecting  them.  But 
here,  again,  a  preliminary  objection  arose  from  the  moral  state  of 
the  persons  inquiring,  which  was  such  as  precluded  them  from 
any  right  to  expect  a  friendly  response  from  God  to  their  desire 
for  further  information.  Regarding,  as  they  did,  iniquity  in 
their  heart,  the  Lord  could  not  hear  them.  He  therefore,  at 
the  outset,  denounced  the  presumption  of  such  persons  in  corn 
ing  to  inquire  at  his  servant,  and  called  upon  the  prophet  to  do 
toward  them  the  part  of  a  judge,  by  charging  upon  them  the 
rebellious  spirit  of  their  fathers,  and  showing  how  little  either 


210  EZEKIEL  XX. 

they  or  their  fathers  had  received  in  chastisement  from  God 
compared  with  what  they  had  deserved. 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fifth  (month)  of  the  seventh  year,  in 
the  tenth  of  the  month,  that  some  of  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  inquire  of 
the  Lord,  and  they  sat  before  me.  2.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me 
saying,  o.  Son  of  man,  speak  to  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  say  to  them, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Have  ye  come  to  inquire  of  me  ?  As  I  live,  I 
shall  not  be  inquired  of  by  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  4.  Wilt  thou  not 
judge  them?  wilt  thou  not  judge,  son  of  man?  *  Make  them  to  know  the 
abominations  of  their  fathers.  5.  And  thou  shalt  say  to  them,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah  :  In  the  day  that  I  chose  Israel,  and  lifted  up  my  hand  to 
the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  made  myself  known  to  them  in  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  lifted  up  my  hand  to  them,  saying,  I  am  Jehovah,  your  God. 
6.  In  that  day  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  them,  that  I  should  bring  them  forth 
from  the  land  of  Egypt  to  a  land  that  I  had  espied  for  them,  flowing  with 
milk  and  honey,  the  most  beautiful  of  all  lands.2  7.  And  I  said  to  them, 
Cast  ye,  every  man,  away  the  pollution  of  his  eyes,  and  defile  not  yourselves 
with  the  idols  of  Egypt ;  I  am  Jehovah,  your  God.  8.  And  they  rebelled 
against  me,  and  were  not  willing  to  hearken  to  me ;  they  did  not,  every 
man,  cast  away  the  pollutions  of  his  eyes,  nor  forsake  the  idols  of  Egypt; 
and  I  said  that  I  would  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them,  that  I  would  accom 
plish  my  anger  in  them  within  the  land  of  Egypt.  9.  But  I  wrought  for 
my  name's  sake,  that  it  might  not  be  polluted  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen, 
among  whom  they  were,  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known,  to  bring  them 
forth  from  the  land  of  Egypt.  10.  And  I  led  them  forth  from  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  brought  them  into  the  wilderness.  11.  And  I  gave  to  them  my 
statutes,  and  my  judgments  I  made  known  to  them,  which  if  a  man  do,  he 
shall  live  in  them.  12.  And  I  also  gave  them  my  sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  be 
tween  me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  who  sanctifies 
them.  13.  But  the  house  of  Israel  rebelled  against  me  in  the  wilderness  ; 
they  did  not  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  they  despised  my  judgments,  which  if 
a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them  ;  and  they  grievously  profaned  my  sabbaths; 
and  I  said  that  I  should  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them  in  the  wilderness  to 
consume  them.  14.  But  I  wrought  for  my  name's  sake,  that  it  might  not 
be  polluted  before  the  heathen,  in  whose  sight  I  brought  them  out.  15.  And 
also  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  them  in  the  wilderness,  that  I  would  not  bring 
them  into  the  land  which  I  had  given,  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  the  most 
beautiful  of  all  lands.  16.  Because  they  acted  despitef ully  against  my  judg- 

1  The  interrogative  has  here  the  force  of  a  command,  the  n  being  equiva 
lent  to  the  usual  fc^n,  Wilt  thou  not  ?    And  the  interrogation  is  repeated  to 
show  the  strength  of  feeling  on  the  part  of  God,  and  the  urgency  of  the  oc 
casion  :    Wilt  thou  not  do  it  ?     Wilt  thou  not  do  it  ?    Why  delay  ?     There 
is  here  the  loudest  call  for  the  exercise  of  judgment ;  do  it  promptly. 

2  It  is,  literally,  the  ornament  or  beauty  of  all  lands ;    and  from  being 
applied  to  Canaan  before  the  Israelites  took  possession  of  it,  the  epithet 
must,  of  course,  be  understood  in  its  natural  sense,  as  denoting  the  native 
excellence  and  desirableness  of  the  country.     The  same  epithet  is  applied 
in  Isa.  xiii.  19  to  Babylon  as  a  kingdom,  and  several  times  in  Daniel  to 
Palestine  (chap.  viii.  9,  xi.  16).     We  may  understand  by  it,  not  so  properly 
the  absolute  superiority  of  Canaan,  as  its  relative  superiority,  considered  as 
the  abode  and  heritage  of  the  Lord's  people. 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  211 

raents,  and  did  not  walk  in  iny  statutes,  and  profaned  my  sabbaths — for 
their  heart  went  after  its  idols :  17.  Yet  mine  eye  spared  them  from  being 
destroyed,  neither  did  I  make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilderness.  18.  And  1 
said  to  their  children  in  the  wilderness,  Walk  ye  not  in  the  statutes  of  your 
fathers,  and  do  not  keep  their  judgments,  and  with  their  idols  defile  not 
yourselves.  19.  I  Jehovah  am  your  God  ;  walk  in  my  statutes  and  keep  my 
judgments,  and  do  them.  20.  And  sanctify  my  sabbaths,  and  they  shall  be 
a  sign  between  me  and  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  I  Jehovah  am  your  God. 
21.  But  the  children  rebelled  against  me;  they  did  not  walk  in  my  statutes, 
and  kept  not  my  judgments  to  do  them,  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in 
them ;  they  profaned  my  sabbaths  ;  and  I  said  that  I  would  pour  out  my 
wrath  upon  them,  that  I  would  accomplish  my  anger  in  them,  in  the  wilder 
ness.  22.  But  I  turned  back  my  hand,  and  wrought  for  my  name's  sake, 
that  it  might  not  be  polluted  among  the  heathen,  in  whose  sight  I  brought 
them  forth.  23.  Also  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  them  in  the  wilderness,  that  I 
would  scatter  them  among  the  nations,  and  that  I  would  disperse  them 
among  the  countries  ;  24.  Because  they  did  not  execute  my  judgments,  and 
despised  my  statutes,  and  profaned  my  sabbaths,  and  their  eyes  were  after 
the  idols  of  the  heathen.  25.  And  I  also  gave  to  them  statutes  that  were 
not  good,  and  judgments  by  which  they  should  not  live.  26.  And  I  polluted 
them  in  their  gifts,  in  the  presentation  (literally,  the  causing  to  pass  over) 
of  all  their  firstborn,1  that  I  might  make  them  desolate,  that  they  might 
know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  27.  Therefore,  son  of  man,  speak  to  the  house 
of  Israel,  and  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  In  this  again  your 
fathers  have  dishonoured  me  in  their  treacherous  dealings  toward  me.  28. 
And  I  brought  them  into  the  land  which  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  give  to  them, 
and  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  every  thick  tree,  and  they  offered  there 
their  sacrifices,  and  there  they  presented  the  provocation  of  their  offering, 
and  there  they  set  forth  their  sweet  savours,  and  there  they  poured  out  their 
drink-offerings.  29.  And  I  said  to  them,  What  is  the  high  place  to  which 
ye  come  ?  And  its  name  was  called  Bamali  (high  place)  unto  this  day.2 


1  The  expression  here,  of  "  making  to  pass  over,"  does  not  refer  to  the 
horrid  practice  of  making  children  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moloch,  as  our 
translators  have  unhappily  understood  it.     That  was  a  later  abomination, 
and  as  such  is  mentioned  in  ver.  31,  where  subsequent  corruptions  are  his 
torically  related  ;  but  what  is  here  meant,  is  the  consecration  of  the  first 
born  to  the  Lord.     It  is  the  same  term  that  is  used  to  express  the  act  of 
consecration  in  Ex.  xiii.  12,  where  the  original  ordinance  is  given  :  "  The 
firstborn  shall  all  be  made  to  pass  over  to  the  Lord."    Here,  however,  to  the 
Lord  is  omitted,  and  on  purpose.     As  if  to  say :  They  kept  up  the  ceremony, 
indeed,  the  outward  service  was  still  gone  through  ;  but  I  did  not  own  it  as 
done  to  me,  since  it  was  mingled  with  such  pollutions. 

2  Such  is  the  literal  translation  of  this  passage,  and  that  also  which  yields 
the  best  meaning.    Various  interpretations  and  renderings  have  been  given. 
Havernick  would  regard  it  as  charging  them  with  having  confounded  the 
difference  between  God's  temple  and  other  places  of  worship  ;  but  it  seems 
rather  to  indicate  what  God  himself  held  their  worship  to  be  :  he  gave  the 
name  Bamah  to  every  place  of  their  worship,  and  held  by  that  as  the 
proper  name,  for  the  worship  was  essentially  of  a  polluted  and  heathenish 
character.      Quite  parallel  is  Hos.  iv.  15,  where  Bethel,  God's  house,  is 
changed  into  Bethaven,  the  House  of  Iniquity. 


2 1  2  EZEKIEL  XX. 

30.  Therefore  say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  In 
the  way  of  your  fathers  ye  have  polluted  yourselves,  and  after  their  abomi 
nations  have  ye  wantonly  gone.  31.  And  in  the  offering  of  your  gifts,  in 
making  your  children  to  pass  through  the  fire,  ye  have  polluted  yourselves 
with  all  your  idols  to  this  day  : — and  shall  I  be  inquired  of  by  you,  0  house 
of  Israel  ?  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  shall  not  be  inquired  of  by 
you.  32.  And  that  which  has  come  up  in  your  minds  shall  not  be  at  all, 
that  ye  say,  We  will  be  as  the  heathen,  as  the  families  of  the  nations,  to 
serve  wood  and  stone. 

33.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Surely  with  a  strong  hand,  and 
with  a  stretched-out  arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule  over  you. 
34.  And  I  will  bring  you  out  from  among  the  peoples,  and  will  gather  yon 
from  the  countries  wherein  ye  were  scattered,  with  a  strong  hand,  and  with 
a  stretched-out  arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out.  35.  And  I  will  bring  you 
into  the  wilderness  of  the  peoples,  and  will  contend  with  you  there  face  to 
face.  36.  Like  as  I  contended  with  your  fathers  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  so  will  I  contend  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  37. 
And  I  will  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  will  bring  you  into  the  bond 
of  the  covenant.  38.  And  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  rebels  and 
them  that  transgress  against  me  :  I  will  bring  them  forth  out  of  the  country 
where  they  sojourn,  and  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of  Israel ;  and  ye 
shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  39.  And  you,  0  house  of  Israel,  thus  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  Go,  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols;  but  afterward  if  ye  will 
not  (i.e.  surely  ye  will — the  usual  form  of  strong  asseveration)  hearken  unto 
me,  and  ye  will  not  pollute  my  holy  name  with  your  gifts  and  your  idols. 
40.  For  in  my  holy  mountain,  in  the  mountain -height  of  Israel,  there  shall 
all  the  house  of  Israel,  all  of  them  in  the  land,  serve  me  ;  there  will  I  accept 
them,  and  there  will  I  require  your  offerings,  and  the  first-fruits  of  your 
oblations,  with  all  your  holy  things.  41.1  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet 
savour,  when  I  shall  have  brought  you  out  from  the  peoples,  and  gathered 
you  from  the  countries  wherein  ye  have  been  scattered,  and  I  will  be 
sanctified  in  you  before  the  heathen.  42.  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah,  when  I  shall  have  brought  you  into  the  land  of  Israel,  to  the 
country  which  I  lifted  up  my  hand  that  I  would  give  it  to  your  fathers. 
43.  And  there  shall  ye  remember  your  ways,  and  all  your  doings  wherewith 
ye  have  been  defiled  ;  and  ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for 
all  your  evils  that  ye  have  committed.  44.  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah,  when  I  have  wrought  with  you  for  my  name's  sake,  not  accord 
ing  to  your  wicked  ways,  nor  according  to  your  corrupt  doings,  0  house  of 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

I.  The  chapter  naturally  falls  into  two  great  portions,  the 
first  of  which  consists  of  what  fell  from  the  prophet  in  the 
execution  of  his  office  of  judgment.  It  extends  to  the  close  of 
ver.  32,  and  proceeds  historically,  dividing  the  entire  course  of 
Israel  into  so  many  sections,  in  each  of  which  substantially  the 
same  spirit  of  rebelliousness  is  charged  upon  the  people,  and 
the  same  purpose  of  severity  is  ascribed  to  God,  but  constantly 
tempered  and  restrained  by  manifestations  of  mercy.  Five 
distinct  periods  are  thus  rehearsed  in  order, — the  first,  when 
the  Lord  came  to  visit  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt ;  the 
second,  when  they  were  brought  into  the  wilderness ;  the  third, 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  213 

when,  near  the  close  of  their  sojourn  there,  a  new  generation 
had  come  into  being ;  a  fourth,  when  they  were  settled  in  the 
land  of  Canaan ;  and  the  last,  the  period  comprehending  the 
generation  now  addressed  by  the  prophet.  There  is  no  difficulty 
in  discovering  the  import  of  what  is  said,  either  with  respect  to 
the  people's  behaviour  during  those  successive  periods,  or  to  the 
manifestations  of  God's  mind  and  will  concerning  them.  The 
language  throughout  is  remarkably  plain,  and  free  from  ambi 
guity  or  darkness  of  any  sort,  so  that  verbal  criticism  has  here 
scarcely  any  occasion  for  its  exercise.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  not  a  little  that  calls  for  explanation  or  remark  in  the 
things  that  are  affirmed  both  respecting  the  people's  sinfulness 
and  the  manner  in  which  this  was  dealt  with  on  the  part  of 
God.  We  must  therefore  look  at  what  is  written  of  each 
period  in  succession. 

1.  In  regard  to  the  earliest  period  named,  we  find  a  very 
specific  charge  not  only  of  idolatry,  but  even  of  obstinate  and 
perverse  attachment  to  the  corruptions  of  idolatry,  brought 
against  the  Israelites  as  a  people.  In  that  mere  infancy  of  their 
national  existence,  "  the  day,"  as  it  is  called,  "  when  God  chose 
Israel,  and  lifted  up  his  hand  (or  swore)  unto  the  seed  of 
Jacob,  and  made  himself  known  unto  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
to  bring  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  into  a  land  that  he 
had  espied  for  them,"  then  he  said  to  them,  "  Cast  ye  every  man 
away  the  pollutions  of  his  eyes,  and  defile  not  yourselves  with 
the  idols  of  Egypt :  I  am  Jehovah,  your  God.  But,"  it  is  added, 
"  they  rebelled  against  me,  and  were  not  willing  to  hearken  to 
me ;  they  did  not  every  man  cast  away  the  pollutions  of  their 
eyes,  neither  did  they  forsake  the  idols  of  Egypt.  And  I  said 
that  I  would  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them,  that  I  would 
accomplish  my  anger  in  them  within  the  land  of  Egypt "  (vers. 
5-8). 

There  is  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  period  referred  to,  to 
countenance  the  idea  that  the  words  here  attributed  to  the 
Lord  were  actually  spoken  to  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  or  that 
the  injunctions  upon  the  one  side  and  the  disobedience  on  the 
other  took  the  formal  and  definite  shape  here  given  to  them. 
The  description  is  according  to  the  prophet's  usual  manner, 
whose  vivid  imagination,  when  transporting  him  either  into  the 
past  or  the  future^  constantly  seeks  to  give  a  living  and  embodied 


214  EZEKIEL  XX. 

form  to  the  truths  exhibited  to  his  view.  Moses  has  not  even 
left  any  direct  notice  of  the  people's  addictedness  to  idolatry  in 
Eo;ypt,  nor  has  he  spoken  of  any  resistance  made  by  them  to 
the  Divine  injunctions  issued  regarding  it.  The  only  kind  of 
resistance  to  the  word  of  God,  which  he  expressly  mentions, 
is  that  which  arose  out  of  the  cruel  treatment  practised  upon 
them.  "  They  hearkened  not  unto  Moses  for  anguish  of  spirit 
and  for  cruel  bondage  "  (Ex.  vi.  9).  In  more  than  one  passage, 
however,  he  has  given  no  doubtful  indication  of  the  real  state 
of  matters  in  this  respect  ;  as  when  in  Ex.  xxxii.  he  represents 
the  whole  people  as  so  speedily  lapsing  again  into  the  practice 
of  Egyptian  idolatry  ;  or  when,  in  Lev.  xvii.  7,  contrasting 
what  should  now  be  done  with  what  had  previously  existed,  he 
says,  "And  they  shall  no  more  offer  their  sacrifices  unto  devils 
(literally,  Seirim,  he-goats),  after  whom  they  have  gone  a 
lusting."1  Indeed  the  very  form  given  to  the  commission  of 
Moses,  to  go  and  vindicate  the  children  of  Israel  for  God  that 
they  might  come  forth  and  serve  him,  was  itself  a  proof  how 
much  the  worship  of  Jehovah  had  fallen  into  abeyance,  and 
how  generally  the  people  had  allowed  themselves  to  sink  into  the 
prevailing  idolatries.  They  must  go  out  of  the  polluted  region, 
where  other  lords,  spiritual  as  well  as  temporal,  have  had 
dominion  over  them,  that  they  may  stand  free  to  worship  and 
serve  Jehovah.  And  so  the  whole  design  and  purport  of  the 
commission  of  Moses  might  be  regarded  as  a  protest  against  their 
connection  with  the  abominations  of  Egypt,  and  a  call,  not  only 
to  Pharaoh  to  let  the  people  go,  but  also  to  the  people  themselves 
to  come  out  and  be  separate,  as  a  seed  whom  the  Lord  had 
chosen. 

Now  that  they  did  not  properly  respond  to  this  call  of  God 
—  that,  oppressed  and  afflicted  as  they  were,  they  would  rather 
have  remained  where  they  were  than  gone  forth  to  join  them 
selves  to  the  pure  worship  and  service  of  Jehovah  —  is  but  too 
manifest  from  the  subsequent  history.  They  were  not  themselves, 
indeed,  at  the  time  fully  aware  of  the  contrariety  that  existed 
in  their  heart  and  ways  to  what  was  to  be  required  of  them  in 


o  re  rpuyos,  x.a.1  6  Tlav  ctiyvxTtari,  Mej'Oi??  (Herod,  ii.  46). 
And  this  Pan  was  one  of  the  chief  gods  of  Egypt,  viewed  as  personified, 
incarnate  in  the  he-goat,  which  was  hence  deemed  sacred.  (See  Hengst. 
Beitr.  ii.  p.  119.) 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  215 

the  Lord's  service ;  for  as  yet  their  views  were  very  crude  and 
imperfect.  But  the  Lord  knew  well  how  matters  actually  stood, 
and  could  easily  descry,  through  the  apathy,  the  impatience,  and 
partial  opposition  that  discovered  themselves  in  their  behaviour, 
the  signs  of  a  deep-rooted  opposition  to  his  righteous  and  just 
demands.  Nor  can  we  doubt,  especially  from  what  afterwards 
occurred,  that  the  thing  most  grievous  to  the  eye  of  Jehovah 
during  the  whole  of  that  dreadful  conflict  which  was  maintained 

£3 

with  the  powers  of  evil  in  Egypt,  was  the  debased  and  corrupt 
state  of  those  in  whose  behalf  it  was  more  immediately  main 
tained — the  comparatively  slight  difference,  in  a  spiritual  respect, 
that  existed  between  them  and  the  people  of  Egypt.  They 
evinced  no  intelligent  or  hearty  sympathy  with  the  high  ends  and 
purposes  for  which  such  a  conflict  was  waged;  so  that  if  the  Lord 
had  acted  toward  them  according  to  the  strict  requirements  of 
justice,  he  would  even  have  poured  out  his  anger  upon  them. 
And  nothing  but  a  regard  to  his  own  name, — that  he  might 
appear  true  to  the  promises  he  had  made  to  the  seed  of  Israel, 
and  that  the  heathen  themselves  might  see  what  a  glorious 
thing  it  was  to  have  an  interest  in  his  covenant -love  and 

O 

faithfulness, — nothing  but  this  could  have  moved  God  in 
such  circumstances  to  work  so  marvellously  for  the  deliver 
ance  of  his  people  from  the  house  of  bondage.  Such  is  the 
testimony  of  the  prophet  regarding  the  first  period  brought 
under  consideration. 

2.  The  next  period  embraces  the  first  part  of  the  sojourn  in 
the  wilderness.  When  conducted  thither,  the  Lord  gave  them, 
it  is  testified,  "his  statutes,  and  showed  them  his  judgments, 
which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them."  There  is  nothing 
properly  new  or  peculiar  in  this  part  of  the  statement,  though  it 
has  not  unfrequently  been  perverted  to  a  wrong  purpose.  The 
same  thing  substantially  had  been  said  by  Moses,  when  in  respect 
to  the  laws  and  ordinances,  which  through  his  ministration  had 
been  imposed  on  Israel,  he  declared  he  had  set  before  the  people 
life  and  death, — life  if  they  loved  the  Lord,  and  walked  in  his 
ways,  and  kept  his  commandments  and  statutes  and  judgments, 
but  if  otherwise,  death  (Deut.  xxx.  16).  But  neither  Moses  nor 
Ezekiel,  it  is  obvious,  meant  that  the  life  spoken  of,  which  com 
prehends  whatever  is  really  excellent  and  good,  was  to  be  ac 
quired  by  means  of  such  conformity  to  the  enactments  of  Heaven ; 


216  EZEKIEL  XX. 

for  life  in  that  sense  was  already  theirs,  freely  given  and  secured 
by  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  covenant  of  promise.  What  they 
meant  was,  that  only  thus  could  the  children  of  Israel  retain 
possession  of  what  was  given,  or  attain  to  the  secure  and  con 
tinued  enjoyment  of  it.  For  as  the  statutes  and  ordinances, 
which  God  enjoined  them  to  keep,  were  to  constitute  the  out 
ward  form  and  expression  of  their  spiritual  being,  so  by  the 
measure  of  their  conformity  to  these  must  necessarily  be  deter 
mined  what  should  belong  to  them,  either  of  the  goodness  or  of 
the  blessedness  of  life.  If  life  existed  at  all,  this  was  the  channel 
through  which  it  was  to  flow,  these  were  the  signs  and  exhibi 
tions  which  it  was  to  give  of  itself.  And  just  as  in  the  natural 
sphere  the  exercise  and  discharge  of  all  the  appropriate  functions 
is  the  way  to  sustain  and  invigorate,  as  well  as  to  exhibit,  the 
principle  of  life ;  so  it  might  be  said  of  Israel  in  respect  to  their 
covenant  life,  that  by  following  the  appointed  channel  of  God's 
institutions,  it  was  to  preserve  itself  in  healthfulness  and  vigour. 
Doing  those  things,  they  lived  in  them  ;  because  life  thus  had 
its  due  exercise  and  nourishment,  and  was  in  a  condition  to 
enjoy  the  manifold  privileges  and  blessings  secured  in  the  cove 
nant.  And  the  very  same  may  be  said  of  the  precepts  and 
ordinances  of  the  gospel :  a  man  lives  after  the  higher  life  of  faith, 
only  in  so  far  as  he  walks  in  conformity  with  these;  for  though 
lie  gets  life  by  a  simple  act  of  faith  in  Christ,  he  cannot  exercise, 
maintain,  and  enjoy  it  but  in  connection  with  the  institutions 
and  requirements  of  the  gospel. 

It  was  manifestly  the  design  of  Ezekiel  here,  as  also  of  Moses 
in  the  passage  referred  to  in  Deuteronomy,  in  coupling  life  so 
expressly  with  the  observance  of  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the 
old  covenant,  to  show  the  necessary  connection  between  what 
was  required  of  God  and  what  was  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  people. 
They  were  thus  taught  to  regard  it  as  an  act  of  kindness  that 
lie  should  have  set  before  them  such  laws  and  ordinances  and 
could  not  fret  and  turn  aside  from  them  without  wrono;ino;  their 

O        O 

own  souls.  But  there  is  one  ordinance  in  particular,  of  which 
special  mention  is  made  by  the  prophet,  in  connection  with  this 
period  of  Israel's  history  :  ll  And  also  my  Sabbaths  I  gave  them, 
to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that 
I  am  Jehovah  who  sanctifies  them."  Along  with  Neh.  ix.  14, 
this  passage  is  often  appealed  to  as  a  proof  of  the  later  origin  of 


ISRAEL'S  SIXFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  21 7 

the  Sabbath,  arid  its  essentially  Jewish  character,  as  if  from  its 
being  given  to  the  Israelites,  and  made  to  stand  as  a  sign 
between  the  Lord  and  them,  it  must  then  for  the  first  time  have 
come  into  existence.  But  one  might  as  well  affirm,  that  up  till 
that  period  they  were  altogether  without  the  statutes  and  judg 
ments  by  which  they  could  live ;  for  these  too  are  connected 
with  the  same  period,  and  of  necessity  were  also,  to  a  certain 
extent,  signs  between  God  and  Israel.  The  proper  view  rather 
is,  that  the  Sabbatical  institution  was  then  brought  more  pro 
minently  out,  and  more  formally  enacted,  than  it  had  hitherto 
been  ;  and  that,  from  its  very  nature,  as  requiring  for  its  proper 
observance  the  general  ascendancy  of  religious  principle,  it  was 
specially  fitted  to  serve  as  a  sign  of  the  people's  faithfulness  to 
the  covenant  of  God.  If  they  kept  the  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord, 
whether  in  their  weekly  recurrence,  or  as  connected  with  the 
annual  feasts,  as  he  required  them  to  be  kept,  it  would  be  a 
living  and  palpable  proof  of  their  having  entered  into  the  spirit 
of  the  dispensation  they  were  under,  while  their  neglect  and  pro 
fanation  of  the  Sabbath  would  equally  serve  as  a  proof  of  their 
unfaithfulness.  Hence  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  is  here 
so  expressly  mentioned  in  connection  with  their  sanctification :  "a 
sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  I  am 
•Jehovah  who  sanctifies  them."  It  was,  in  truth,  their  sanctifica 
tion,  or  their  holiness  in  heart  and  conduct,  which  was  the  grand 
sign  and  evidence  of  Israel's  being  the  chosen  people  of  God. 
In  so  far  as  they  complied  with  the  exhortation,  "  J3e  ye  holy, 
for  I  am  holy,"  they  possessed  the  mark  of  his  children.  And 
the  proper  observance  of  the  Sabbatical  rest  being  so  specially 
designated  a  sign  in  this  respect,  could  only  have  arisen  from  its 
singular  importance  to  the  interests  of  religion  and  morality. 
These,  it  was  virtually  said,  would  thrive  and  flourish  if  the 
Sabbath  was  duly  observed,  but  would  languish  and  die  if  it  fell 
into  desuetude.  And  for  this  reason  the  prophet  Isaiah,  at  the 
close  of  a  long  expostulation  with  the  people  regarding  sin,  presses 
the  dutiful  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  as  sure  to  carry  along 
with  it  the  remedy  of  the  evil :  "  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from 
the  Sabbath,  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day  ;  and  call 
the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  and  honourable ;  and 
shalt  honour  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine 
own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words :  then  shalt  thou 


218  EZEKIEL  XX. 

delight  thyself  in  the  Lord ;  and  I  will  cause  thee  to  ride  upon 
the  hieh  places  of  the  earth,  and  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of 

t)         1  '  O 

Jacob  thy  father :  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it " 
(Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14).  This  passage  may  justly  be  taken  as  an  ex 
planation  of  the  sense  in  which  the  Lord  meant  the  people  to 
regard  his  Sabbaths  as  a  sign  between  them  and  him.  Such 
paramount  importance  could  never  have  been  attached  by  the 
prophet  to  this  sacred  institution,  nor  could  it  have  been  so 
peculiarly  connected  with  the  blessing  of  the  covenant,  if  the 
mere  outward  rest  had  been  all  that  the  institution  contemplated. 
This  is  what  those  who  hold  mistaken  views  on  this  subject 
almost  uniformly  take  for  granted,  as  if  the  people  should  have 
been  properly  sanctified  by  simply  resting  every  Sabbath  from 
their  usual  labours.  The  command  must  have  had  a  far  deeper 
import,  and  required  a  great  deal  more  at  the  hands  of  the 
people,  in  order  to  prove  an  adequate  sign  between  them  and 
God.  It  must  have  been,  and  it  was,  intended  not  only  to 
separate  them  from  their  worldly  employments,  but  also  to  call 
out  their  hearts  in  suitable  exercises  of  faith  and  love  to  God, 
and  in  brotherly  acts  of  kindness  and  good-will  toward  those 
around  them.  On  no  other  account  could  its  faithful  observance 
be  represented  as  indicative  of  a  sound  and  healthful  state  of 
religion  generally.  And  we  might  ask,  without  the  least  fear 
of  contradiction,  if  the  same  practical  value  is  not  attached  to 
the  careful  observance  of  the  Lord's  day  now  by  those  who 
have  an  enlightened  regard  to  the  interests  of  religion  ?  When 
this  day  ceases  to  be  devoutly  observed,  all  experience  and 
observation  testify  that  there  never  fails  to  ensue  a  corresponding 
decline  in  the  life  and  actings  of  religion.1 

But,  to  return  to  the  subject  more  immediately  before  us,  the 
prophet  brings,  in  regard  to  these  statutes  and  ordinances  which 
the  Lord  imposed  upon  the  Israelites,  as  soon  as  he  had  led  them 
into  the  wilderness,  substantially  the  same  charge  that  had  been 

1  We  cannot  help  noticing  with  regret,  that  Havernick  here  contents  him 
self  with  expressing  his  concurrence  in  the  view  of  Bahr,  who  regards  the 
Jewish  Sabbath  as  simply  a  day  of  outward  rest,  in  memorial  of  creation, 
and  in  token  of  the  people's  looking  to  God  as  the  final  resting-place  of  their 
souls.  But  something  of  a  more  positive  nature  was  necessary  to  secure  the 
design  of  the  Sabbath;  it  required  spiritual  employments  and  holy  convoca 
tions.  See  Typology  of  Scripture,  vol.  ii.  p.  118,  where  the  subject  is  more 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  219 

already  brought  against  them  in  regard  to  the  period  of  their 
sojourn  in  Egypt.  He  declares  that  they  showed  the  same  spirit 
of  rebellion  as  formerly,  but  in  a  more  directly  offensive  manner, 
as  there  was  now  more  of  positive  precept  to  transgress.  They 
did  not  walk  in  his  judgments,  they  despised  his  statutes,  they 
polluted  his  Sabbaths,  of  which  the  historical  records  of  the  period 
contain  but  too  ample  evidence.  These  also  relate  how,  as  is 
testified  here,  the  Lord  once  and  again  threatened  to  pour  out 
his  fury  upon  them,  and  consume  them,  but  was  again  restrained 
by  a  regard  to  his  own  glory,  that  his  name  might  not  be  pol 
luted  among  the  heathen,  especially  those  of  them  in  \vhose  sight 
he  had  brought  out  Israel,  and  set  them  in  a  state  of  freedom 
(Ex.  xxxii.  10,  11  ;  Num.  xiv.  11,  etc.).  So  far  he  did  allow 
his  righteous  displeasure  to  proceed,  that  he  would  not  permit 
the  generation  that  came  out  of  Egypt  to  enter  the  land  of 
Canaan,  but  caused  them  to  sojourn  and  die  in  the  wilderness, 
though  he  did  not  there  make  an  end  of  the  people  themselves. 
There  was  a  visitation  of  judgment,  but  one  so  light  when  com 
pared  with  the  sins  which  provoked  it,  that  it  might  rather  be 
characterised  as  the  triumph  of  mercy  over  judgment ! 

3.  The  next  period  of  special  dealing  mentioned  by  the  pro 
phet  is  that  which  comprises  the  latter  part  of  the  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness,  and  has  respect  to  the  younger  generation,  the  children 
of  those  who  had  come  out  of  Egypt  as  full-grown  men.  To 
them,  it  is  said,  the  Lord  repeated  the  charge  he  had  given  to 
their  fathers  respecting  his  statutes  and  judgments  and  Sabbaths, 
and  had  also  distinctly  warned  them  not  to  follow  the  ways,  nor 
defile  themselves  with  the  idols,  of  their  fathers.  But  neither  did 
this  new  generation  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord ;  they  rebelled 
against  him,  by  setting  at  nought  his  commandments  and  ordi 
nances,  so  that  the  Lord  again  said  he  would  pour  out  his  fury 

fully  discussed.     Herbert  only  expressed  the  sentiment  that  pervades  the 
bosoms  of  pious  men  in  every  age  when  he  wrote  : 

"  Sundays  the  pillars  are 

On  which  heaven's  palace  arched  lies ; 

The  other  days  fill  up  the  spare 
And  hollow  room  with  vanities. 

They  are  the  fruitful  beds  and  borders 
In  God's  rich  garden  :  that  is  bare 

Which  parts  their  ranks  and  orders." 


220  EZEKIEL  XX. 

upon  them,  to  accomplish  his  anger  against  them  in  the  wilder 
ness.  There  is  an  apparent  contrariety  in  what  is  thus  said  of  the 
generation  that  grew  up  in  the  wilderness,  to  the  testimony  borne 
partly  respecting  them,  and  partly  respecting  the  former  genera 
tion,  by  Jeremiah,  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  chapter  of  his 
writings  :  "  I  remember  thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love 
of  thine  espousals,  when  thou  wentest  after  me  in  the  wilderness, 
in  a  land  that  was  not  sown.  Israel  was  holiness  to  the  Lord, 
the  first-fruits  of  his  increase  ;  all  that  devour  him  shall  offend  ; 
evil  shall  come  upon  them,  saith  the  Lord."  But  this  testimony 
is  not  to  be  understood  of  the  actual  condition  of  Israel ;  it  rather 
indicates  what  they  were  in  appearance,  what,  in  the  freshness 
and  ardour  of  their  youthful  zeal,  they  professed  and  seemed  to 
be,  than  what  they  really  were.  At  the  very  most,  it  cannot  be 
regarded  as  more  than  a  comparative  statement ;  for  the  prophet 
himself,  immediately  afterwards,  represents  them  as  beginning  to 
defile  the  land,  as  soon  as  they  entered  it ;  and  the  historical  re 
cords  also  of  the  period  too  clearly  show,  that  the  congregation  as 
a  whole  were  far  from  being  what  they  should  have  been.  It  was 
near  the  close  of  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness  that  the  rebellion 
of  Korah  and  his  company  appears  to  have  taken  place  ;  as  also 
the  murmuring  for  water  in  Kadesh,  which  proved  the  occasion 
to  Moses  and  Aaron  of  their  losing  the  prospect  of  entering 
Canaan.  And  worse  than  all,  the  fearful  apostasy  on  the  plains 
of  Moab  belongs  to  this  period,  and  did  not  occur  till  after  the 
congregation  had  finally  left  the  wilderness.  Such  facts  decisively 
show,  that  however  this  new  generation  excelled  the  one  that  had 
come  out  of  Egypt,  elements  of  corruption  were  still  plentifully 
at  work  in  it ;  and  it  was  not  without  ample  reason  that  Moses 
spoke  of  them  as,  notwithstanding  the  many  signs  and  wonders 
they  had  witnessed,  not  having  got  a  heart  to  perceive,  or  eyes 
to  see,  or  ears  to  hear,  unto  this  day  (Deut.  xxix.  4).  It  was 
also  to  that  generation  peculiarly,  and  no  doubt  because  they 
needed  the  warning,  that  the  threatening  was  proclaimed  of  a 
future  dispersion  among  the  heathen,  as  recorded  in  Deut.  xxviii., 
and  referred  to  here  by  Ezekiel  in  ver.  23. 

Our  prophet,  however,  not  only  represents  God  as  lifting  up 
his  hand,  threatening  a  dispersion  to  them  on  account  of  sin,  but 
adds  further :  "  Wherefore  I  gave  them  also  statutes  that  were 
not  good,  and  judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live," — words 


ISRAEL'S  SIXFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  221 

which  from  the  earliest  times  have  been  variously  misunderstood. 
Among  the  Fathers,  the  opinion  was  so  common  as  to  be  almost 
universal  (Jerome  alone  tries  to  qualify  it),  that  the  law  in 
general,  and  in  particular  its  sacrificial  rites,  must  be  understood 
by  those  statutes  not  good,  and  judgments  in  which  men  could 
not  live — although  the  prophet  expressly  opposes  them  to  those 
which  God  had  given  in  the  wilderness,  and  which  must  have 
comprehended  all  the  sacrificial  institutions.  Others,  again, 
have  sought  to  distinguish  between  one  part  of  the  law  and 
another,  giving  to  the  decalogue  especially  the  honour  of  being 
accounted  good  and  life-sustaining;  while  the  other  and  more 
burdensome  parts  of  the  ritual  are  assigned  to  the  class  of  not 
good,  and  tending  to  death  (so  Spencer,  Warburton,  etc.).  As 
if  only  the  decalogue  had  been  given  to  the  generation  that  had 
come  out  of  Egypt,  and  at  the  commencement  of  the  wilderness 
sojourn,  while  all  the  rest  had  been  reserved  to  the  close,  and 
made  known  to  the  generation  that  succeeded  !  On  the  contrary, 
all  the  distinctive  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  old  covenant  were 
imposed  during  the  first  and  second  year  after  the  deliverance 
from  Egypt ;  and  consequently  were  given,  not  principally  to 
the  generation  here  spoken  of  by  the  prophet,  but  to  their  fathers, 
who  had  been  brought  out  of  Egypt.  It  was  also  of  these  laws 
and  ordinances,  of  the  whole  legislation  of  God  by  Moses,  that 
Moses  himself  spake  when  he  told  the  people  that  they  had 
therein  the  way  of  life  set  before  them. 

It  must  therefore  be  something  quite  diverse  and  opposite  ; 
it  can  only,  indeed,  be  the  polluted  customs  and  observances  of 
heathenism  that  the  prophet  here  characterizes  as  statutes  not 
good,  and  judgments  in  which  life  was  not  to  be  found.  By  a 
strong  expression  (and  yet  not  so  strong  as  that  in  Isa.  Ixiii. 
17:  "  O  Lord,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from  thy  ways  and 
hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear?"),  God  is  said  to  have  given 
death-bringing  ordinances  to  the  Israelites,  when  he  saw  their 
wayward  and  perverse  behaviour  in  regard  to  the  commandments 
and  duties  of  his  service ;  since,  to  punish  their  unfaithfulness, 
he  subjected  them  to  influences  which  carried  them  still  farther 
astray,  and  brought  on,  first  spiritual,  then  also,  in  due  time, 
outward  desolation  and  ruin.  We  have  precisely  the  same  pro 
cess  described,  and  in  still  stronger  language,  in  2  Thess.  ii., 
where,  of  those  who  u  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,"  it  is 


222  EZEKIEL  XX. 

said,  ll  And  for  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion, 
that  they  should  believe  a  lie,  and  that  they  might  be  damned," 
— first,  the  corrupting  influences  that  bring  spiritual  blighting 
and  disaster  let  loose  upon  them,  and  then,  when  these  have 
wrought  their  full  effect,  the  doom  executed  upon  them  of  final 
perdition.  Such  entirely  was  the  case  with  the  Israelites,  who 
were  led  into  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  as  a  proof  of  what  might 
be  expected  there — a  solemn  pre-intimation  and  warning  of  the 
future — the  troubles  were  allowed  to  befall  them,  which  took 
place  on  the  plains  of  Moab,  in  the  matter  of  Baal-peor.  It  was 
in  chastisement  for  existing  unfaithfulness  to  God's  covenant 
that  the  votaries  of  Baal  were  permitted  on  that  occasion  to  ply 
them  with  solicitations  to  apostasy,  as  is  but  too  clearly  evinced 
by  the  melancholy  success  which  attended  the  experiment ;  a 
widespread  degeneracy  alone  could  have  accounted  for  this. 
The  very  direction  of  events,  therefore,  so  as  to  expose  them  to 
this  unhappy  temptation,  was  itself  an  act  of  judgment,  and  a 
judgment  exactly  of  the  kind  now  under  consideration ;  it  sur 
rendered  the  people  to  influences  which  were  sure,  as  matters 
then  stood,  to  entangle  them  in  the  abominations  of  heathenism, 
as  these,  again,  were  sure  to  bring  down  upon  them  the  stroke  of 
Divine  retribution.  The  first  step  in  the  Divine  procedure  was 
necessary  to  render  manifest  the  corruption  they  were  secretlv 
harbouring  in  their  bosom  ;  and  the  second,  to  drive  it  out  by  the 
rod  of  chastisement.  Would  that  succeeding  generations  had 
sufficiently  considered  the  solemn  lesson  !  How  many  renewals 
of  the  same  severe  and  wholesome  discipline  might  have  been 
spared  them  !  But  to  their  own  shame  and  confusion,  they 
constantly  forgot  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  remembered  not 
his  judgments. 

That  the  view  now  given  of  ver.  25  is  the  correct  one,  becomes 

o  * 

still  more  evident  when  we  look  at  the  next  verse,  which  ought 
to  be  regarded  as  explanatory  of  the  other :  "  And  I  polluted 
them  in  their  gifts  (viz.  as  the  results  of  the  bad  statutes  and 
judgments  now  brought  in  upon  them)  ;  in  the  presentation  of 
all  their  firstborn,  that  I  might  make  them  desolate,  that  they 
might  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  When  the  Lord  speaks  of 
polluting  them  in  their  gifts,  something  more  is  to  be  understood 
than  Havernick's,  "  I  declared  them  to  be  impure,  I  treated 
them  as  such."  They  really  were  impure,  and  God  had,  in 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  223 

righteous  judgment,  ordered  his  providence  so  as  to  render  this 
impurity  palpable.  He  speaks,  therefore,  as  if  he  himself  had 
polluted  them,  that  he  might  lead  the  people  to  regard  the  blind 
ness  and  infatuation  of  mind,  which  disposed  them  to  submit  to 
heathenish  influences,  as  the  result  of  his  just  displeasure. 
Whence  also  it  further  came  to  pass  that  the  Lord's  face 
was  turned  away  from  them — that  even  wrhen  they  brought 
their  gifts  according  to  the  law,  in  particular  when  they  pre 
sented  their  firstborn,  by  which  each  succeeding  generation 
should  have  been  consecrated  to  the  Lord,  all  was  regarded  by 
him  as  defiled  through  the  heathenish  admixture,  nor  would  he 
even  own  it  as  properly  done  to  himself.  But  in  proportion 
as  such  feelings  were  entertained  by  God,  he  must  make  it 
manifest  by  the  outward  executions  of  judgment ;  he  must 
render  their  condition  desolate,  that,  thus  chastened  and  humbled, 
they  might  come  to  know  the  Lord,  and  return  to  him  in 
truth. 

4.  The  next  period  in  this  religious  history  is  the  somewhat 
indefinite  one  that  followed  the  settlement  in  the  land  of 
Canaan  ;  it  comprehends  generally  the  procedure  of  the  fathers 
of  the  generation  who  lived  in  the  prophet's  time,  from  the  era 
of  their  settlement  in  Canaan  downwards.  It  is  characterized 
as  substantially  of  the  same  nature  with  those  which  had  pre 
ceded  it ;  their  fathers  still  went  on,  it  is  stated  by  the  prophet, 
trespassing  against  God,  and  blaspheming  his  name:  "For 
when  I  had  brought  them  into  the  land,  which  I  lifted  up  my 
hand  to  give  to  them,  then  they  saw  every  high  hill,  and  every 
thick  tree,  and  they  offered  there  their  sacrifices,  and  there  they 
presented  the  provocation  of  their  offering,  and  there  they  set 
forth  their  sweet  savours,  and  there  they  poured  out  their  drink- 
offerings.  And  I  said  to  them,  What  is  the  high  place  to 
which  ye  come  ?  And  its  name  wras  called  Bamah  (high-place) 
unto  this  day."  That  is,  their  worship  (viewed  generally)  has 
been  still  a  mere  high-place  celebration,  a  mongrel  combination 
of  the  false  and  the  true ;  and  that  wherever  performed, 
whether  on  Mount  Zion  or  on  the  other  places  chosen  for  the 
purpose  throughout  the  land,  the  scene  of  their  dovotions  has 
ever  been,  in  my  sight,  but  a  high-place — its  name  is  Bamah — 
it  has  no  proper  sacredness  about  it,  nor  have  the  services  pre 
sented  come  with  acceptance  before  me. 


224  EZEKIEL  XX. 

5.  Nothing  more  is  said  of  the  fathers  who  had  hitherto 
been  occupying  the  land  of  Canaan.  The  prophet  is  impatient 
to  get  at  the  children, — the  generation  who  then  lived,  and  with 
whom  he  had  more  immediately  to  do.  He  is  anxious  to  bring 
home  to  them  the  charge  of  being  of  the  same  spirit  with  their 
fathers,  and  therefore  having  no  right  to  expect  that  the  Lord 
would  deal  with  them  on  friendly  terms,  and  return  a  peaceful 
answer  to  their  inquiries.  "  Therefore  say  unto  the  house  of 
Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  In  the  way  of  your  fathers 
ye  have  polluted  yourselves ;  and  after  their  abominations  have 
ye  wantonly  gone.  And  in  the  offering  of  your  gifts,  in  the 
making  pass  (or  presentation)  of  your  children  through  the  fire, 
are  ye  defiled  with  all  your  idols  to  this  day.  And  shall  I  be 
inquired  of  by  you,  O  house  of  Israel  ?  As  I  live,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  I  shall  not  be  inquired  of  by  you.  And  that  which 
comes  up  into  your  mind  shall  not  be  at  all,  in  that  ye  say,  We 
shall  be  like  the  heathen,  like  the  families  of  the  nations,  to 
serve  wood  and  stone  "  (vers.  30-32). 

Thus  he  describes  the  spirit  of  apostasy  as  reaching  its  climax 
in  the  existing  generation.  They  were  not  satisfied  with  tread 
ing  generally  in  the  footsteps  of  their  fathers,  but  they  must 
even  aspire  to  a  perfect  conformity  to  heathen  customs,  as  if  it 
was  a  privilege  they  were  ambitious  to  reach,  or  a  consumma 
tion  they  desired.  And  so  the  dedication  of  the  children,  which 
of  old  had  been  done  with  so  much  of  foreign  admixture  that 
the  Lord  could  not  own  it  as  done  to  him,  now  takes  the 
hideous  form  of  a  committing  of  them  to  the  flames  in  honour 
of  their  false  deities  ;  and  instead  of  simply  mingling  up  Jehovah 
and  Baal  together,  as  their  fathers  had  done,  they  must  now  be 
altogether  on  a  footing  with  the  wretched  idolaters,  who  bowed 
down  to  wood  and  stone. 

II.  Now,  having  thus  fulfilled  the  office  of  judgment,  and 
disclosed  with  all  plainness  the  estimation  in  which  the  Lord 
held  the  people  of  Israel,  represented  by  the  inquiring  elders 
before  him,  the  prophet  thenceforth  proceeds  to  the  second 
great  division  of  his  message.  It  stretches  from  vers.  33  to  44, 
where,  in  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the  chapter  terminates,  as  it  mani 
festly  should  have  done  also  in  the  English  Bible.  And  the 
leading  purport  of  what  is  said  is  to  make  known  the  mingled 


ISEAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  225 

goodness  and  seventy  with  which  the  Lord  was  now  going 
to  deal  with  them,  to  the  end  that  he  might  thoroughly  wean 
them  from  their  abominations,  and  bring  them  into  a  state  in 
which  he  could  return  to  bless  them  and  do  them  good. 

The  chief  peculiarity  in  the  representation  consists  in  the  his 
torical  form  into  which  it  is  thrown  ;  what  was  to  be  is  exhibited 
as  a  doing  over  again  of  what  had  already  been  done  in  the 
earlier  periods  of  their  history.  A  striking  example  of  this 
species  of  representation  has  previously  come  under  our  notice, 
when  at  chap.  iv.  we  found  the  prophet  disclosing  the  awful 
period  of  iniquity-bearing,  or  chastisement  for  sins,  that  was 
ready  to  befall  them,  under  the  double  form  of  a  return  of 
Egyptian  bondage  and  oppression,  and  of  the  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness.  Here,  again,  it  is  precisely  the  same  periods  that 
are  represented  as  returning,  but  under  a  somewhat  different 
aspect — not  so  much  as  ages  of  gloom  and  desolation  rolling 
over  them,  as  rather  successive  stages  of  providential  dealing, 
of  the  same  nature,  but  more  perfect  in  their  kind  than  those 
formerly  experienced.  In  the  carnal  and  idolatrous  state  into 
which  they  had  sunk,  they  were  beginning  to  think  of  abandon 
ing  all  their  distinctive  privileges  and  hopes,  as  the  chosen  people 
of  God,  and  amalgamating  themselves  with  the  heathen  nations 
around  them.  This  was  what  formerly  had,  to  a  large  extent, 
been  done  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  where,  as  we  had  occasion 
already  to  notice,  the  distinction  in  a  spiritual  respect  between 
Israel  and  their  oppressors  became  in  process  of  time  all  but 
obliterated.  The  Lord  declares,  however,  he  will  not  suffer  this 
contemplated  amalgamation  to  take  place — he  will  no  more  do 
so  now  than  he  did  formerly ;  and  to  prevent  it,  he  will  resort 
to  the  same  kind  of  stern  and  wholesome  discipline.  " As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  surely  with  a  strong  hand,  and  with 
a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule  over 
you."  And  being  thus  held  under  the  grasp  of  Almightiness, 
and  made  to  feel  in  their  peeled  and  scattered  condition  how 
powerful  a  Sovereign  ruled  over  them,  and  was  reckoning  with 
them  for  their  iniquities,  they  were  also  to  know  for  what  holy 
and  beneficent  ends  he  held  them  bound  by  this  special  lordship. 
"  And  I  will  bring  you  out  from  among  the  peoples  (it  is  pre 
supposed  they  had  been  dispersed  among  these),  and  will  gather 
you  out  of  the  countries  wherein  ye  are  scattered,  with  a  strong 

P 


226  EZEKIEL  XX. 

hand,  and  with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  fury  poured  out. 
And  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the  peoples,  and  there 
will  I  contend  with  you  face  to  face.  Likeas  I  contended  with 
your  fathers  in  the  wilderness  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  will  I 
contend  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  And  I  will  cause 
you  to  pass  under  the  rod  (the  shepherd  rod  or  staff  of  the 
Lord),  and  I  will  bring  you  into  the  bond  (or  discipline)  of  the 
covenant.  And  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  rebels, 
and  them  that  transgress  against  me.  And  I  will  bring  them 
forth  out  of  the  country  where  they  sojourn,  and  they  shall  not 
enter  into  the  land  of  Israel ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah"  (vers.  34-38). 

Here  the  state  of  dispersion  and  exile,  which  was  soon  to  be 
consummated,  and  which  was  of  necessity  a  state  of  subjection 
and  trouble,  corresponds  to  the  period  of  affliction  in  Egypt ;  on 
which  account  also  the  region  of  exile  is  in  the  last  verse  called 
"the  country  of  their  sojourn,"  the  very  common  designation 
of  Egypt  in  the  Pentateuch  (Ex.  xii.  40;  Lev.  xix.  33,  34; 
Deut.  xxvi.  5  ;  Ps.  cv.  23,  etc.).1  And  between  the  calling  out 
of  the  people  from  this  Egyptian-like  condition,  between  the 
termination  of  their  sojourn  in  the  enemies'  land  and  their 
entrance  into  their  own  land,  lies  now,  just  as  of  old,  a  tempo 
rary  abode  in  the  wilderness,  where  the  Lord  enters  into  very 
close  and  special  dealing  with  them,  refines  them  as  in  the  fire, 
purges  out  from  among  them  the  rebels,  who,  though  delivered 
from  the  land  of  exile,  are  not  suffered  to  come  into  the  land  of 
blessing,  and  so  prepares  the  people  for  fulfilling  aright  their 
covenant  obligations.  Now,  what  precisely  is  to  be  understood 
by  this  wilderness?  The  prophet  expressly  distinguishes  it  from 
the  "wilderness  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  in  which  of  old  the 
people  had  been  thus  dealt  with  by  God ;  so  that  we  are  not  to 
think  of  an  actual  return  to  the  desert  that  lay  between  Egypt 
and  Canaan.  He  further  calls  it  "the  wilderness  of  the  peoples," 
or  nations,  which  many,  and  still  some  of  the  latest  interpreters 

1  By  a  strange  misapprehension  of  this  part  of  the  description,  Havernick 
supposes  here  a  reference  to  the  sojournings  of  the  patriarchs  in  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  considers  the  land  of  exile  to  be  called  "the  country  of  their 
sojourn"  by  a  bitter  irony.  A  very  forced  and  unnatural  idea.  Egypt,  in 
such  a  connection  as  this,  was  manifestly  the  historical  place  of  the  people's 
sojourn. 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  227 

(most  recently,  Hitzig),  understand  of  the  desert  that  lies  be 
tween  Babylon  and  Judea,  on  account  of  its  being  frequented 
by  wandering  tribes ; — as  if  the  wilderness  on  the  other  side,  be 
tween  Judea  and  Egypt,  were  not  equally  and  even  more  fre 
quented  by  such  !  The  correct  view  is  given  by  Hengstenberg 
in  his  Christology,  on  Hos.  ii.  16,  where  God's  future  dealings 
with  his  people  are  presented  under  the  very  same  image  of  a 
re-enacting  of  the  scenes  of  the  wilderness :  "  /  will  bring  you 
into  the  wilderness  of  the  nations,  stands  in  direct  reference  to,  / 
will  bring  you  out  from  the  nations.  Hence  it  appears  that  the 
peoples  to  whom  the  Israelites  were  brought  could  be  no  other 
than  those  out  of  the  midst  of  whom  they  were  to  be  led  forth. 
In  the  earlier  leading  of  the  Israelites,  the  two  spiritual  con 
ditions  also  outwardly  existed  ;  the  first  belonged  to  Egypt,  the 
second  to  the  desert.  But  it  is  not  to  be  so  in  the  above-pre 
dicted  repetition  of  this  leading.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
second  condition,  the  Israelites  are  only  spiritually  led  forth  out 
of  the  midst  of  the  people,  among  whom  outwardly  they  still 
remain.  The  desert  is  in  the  second  Egypt  itself.  The  resi 
dence  in  the  desert  is  repeated  only  as  to  its  essential,  not  its 
accidental  outward  form.  Hence  we  acquire  the  important 
result,  that  the  leading  of  God  predicted  here  is  not  limited  to 
one  place."  So  far  from  that,  it  was  to  be  looked  for  on  as  ex 
tensive  a  scale  as  the  dispersion  itself ;  this  was  to  bring  them 
into  the  wilderness  of  the  nations,  and  while  they  were  there — no 
matter  whether  locally  in  Babylon  or  in  Egypt,  on  the  banks  of 
the  Chebar,  or  in  the  cities  of  Greece  or  Rome — the  Lord  was 
to  meet  with  them  for  the  purpose  of  judgment,  separation,  and 
cleansing. 

But  such  being  the  case — the  wilderness  in  this  new  aspect  of 
Jehovah's  dealings  being,  as  to  its  outward  position,  identified 
with  the  new  Egypt  out  of  which  they  were  to  be  delivered — it 
would  evidently  be  to  put  an  entirely  false  construction  upon 
such  a  prediction  to  surround  it  on  every  side  with  local  and 
definite  landmarks,  as  if  all  now  must  have  the  same  outward 
and  ostensible  realization  as  of  old.  The  prophet  has  guarded 
against  this  error  by  throwing  the  wilderness  and  Egypt,  as  it 
were,  together ;  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  mark  precisely 
where  the  one  ended  and  the  other  began.  And  as  thus  a 
certain  degree  of  indefiniteness  was  made  to  inhere  in  the  pre- 


228  EZEKIEL  XX. 

diction  in  one  respect,  the  same  might  also  to  some  extent  be 
looked  for  in  others  ;  the  more  especially  as  we  see  indications 
of  it  at  the  very  outset.  According  to  the  representation  of  the 
prophet,  the  new  Egypt-state  of  bondage  and  affliction  is  the 
exile  into  other  countries ;  and  yet  how  plainly  did  such  a  state 
begin  before  the  exile  was  actually  consummated  !  It  did  not 
take  place  all  at  once,  as  the  descent  of  old  into  Egypt,  but  by 
many  successive  strokes  and  fresh  removals.  Even  before  some 
of  the  later  deportations,  the  remnant  that  still  existed  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  enfeebled  and  sore  broken  as  it  was,  crippled  in 
its  resources,  and  overridden  by  the  might  of  heathen  powers, 
had  become  in  a  manner  subject  to  the  yoke  of  Egypt.  And  if, 
in  point  of  fact,  Egypt  did  thus  begin  in  Canaan,  and  the  wil 
derness  was  to  begin  while  they  still  continued  to  reside  in  the 
countries  of  their  dispersion,  might  not  this  wilderness-condition 
(i.e.  the  period  of  trial,  discipline,  and  purification)  be  prolonged 
also  beyond  the  outward  sojourn  in  the  nations,  and  extend 
into  Canaan  again  ?  It  is  not  precise  boundaries  the  prophet 
seeks  to  determine,  but  rather  successive  spiritual  conditions  on 
the  part  of  the  people,  and  corresponding  methods  of  dealing  on 
the  part  of  God.  Hence,  as  Calvin  justly  remarks,  they  might 
even  be  in  exile,  though  in  the  land  of  ^Judea  itself;  and  in 
reality,  God  did  come  anew  to  plead  with  them  after  he  had  led 
them  back  thither  from  the  Babylonish  exile.  The  writings  of 
the  three  last  prophets,  but  especially  those  of  Malachi,  con 
clusively  show,  that  as  the  Egypt-state  began  before  they  left 
Canaan,  so  the  wilderness-state,  to  a  large  extent,  continued 
even  after  the  return.  The  separation  between  the  precious 
and  the  vile  was  still  far  from  being  complete,  and  the  bond 
of  the  covenant  was  never  more  than  imperfectly  entered  into. 
Canaan  could  not,  therefore,  properly  be  to  them  what  it  is 
described  in  the  word  of  promise ;  for  in  spirit  they  had  not 
properly  emerged  from  the  wilderness,  and  God  could  not  be 
present  with  the  full  bestowal  of  his  gifts  and  blessings.  Nay, 
as  if  scarcely  anything  in  these  respects  had  yet  been  done, 
Malachi,  after  severe  but  comparatively  ineffectual  reproofs 
against  the  prevailing  evils,  hands  over  the  returned  remnant  of 
the  children  of  the  covenant  generally  to  the  searching  ministry 
of  the  Baptist,  and  the  personal  dealings  of  the  Lord  himself, 
who  were  still  to  find  them  as  in  the  wilderness,  and  were  to 


ISRAEL'S  SINFULNESS  AND  GOD'S  MERCY.  229 

effect,  in  another  manner  than  hitherto,  the  still  needed  separa 
tion  between  sin  and  holiness  among  the  people. 

But  Ezekiel,  in  the  passage  before  us,  does  not  go  into  detail. 
He  merely  sketches  the  general  outline.  The  children  of  Israel, 
he  virtually  says,  by  reason  of  their  sinful  craving  after  heathen 
ish  pollutions,  must  have  the  old  things  in  their  history  revived 
again,  only  with  such  variations  in  outward  form  as  the  altered 
circumstances  of  the  time  might  require.  They  are  already 
sinking  anew  into  the  bondage  and  affliction  of  Egypt,  out  of 
which  they  shall  in  process  of  time  be  brought,  that  they  may 
be  sifted  and  purged  and  prepared  for  the  heritage  of  Jacob  by 
earnest  pleadings  and  sharp  discipline,  such  as  belonged  of  old 
to  the  period  of  Israel's  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  Then  shall 
they  reach  the  state  of  peace  and  rest  which  they  desire,  and 
then  shall  they  be  in  a  condition  for  attaining  to  the  blessed  end 
of  their  calling.  Therefore,  on  the  ground  of  this  fixed  deter 
mination  of  God,  and  in  the  prospect  of  this  coming  good,  the 
prophet  addresses  himself  to  the  present  generation:  "As  for 
you,  O  house  of  Israel,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Go  ye,  serve 
ye  every  one  his  idols  (do  so,  if  you  have  a  mind ;  I  am  prepared 
to  expect  no  better  from  you) ;  but  afterwards,  surely  ye  will 
hearken  unto  me,  and  ye  will  not  pollute  my  holy  name  with 
your 'gifts  and  your  idols.  For  (this  is  the  reason  why  they 
should  not  do  so — the  Lord  will  accomplish  his  gracious  purpose) 
in  my  holy  mountain,  in  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel 
(high,  because  holy,  spiritually,  not  outwardly  pre-eminent;  see 
chap.  xvii.  23),  there  shall  all  the  house  of  Israel,  all  of  them 
in  the  land,  serve  me  :  there  will  I  accept  them,  and  there  will  I 
require  your  offerings,  and  the  first-fruits  of  your  oblations,  with 
all  your  holy  things,"  etc.  (vers.  39-44.) 

Thus  the  perfected  condition  to  which  matters  were  to  be 
brought,  takes  also  to  the  prophet's  view  the  form  of  a  revival  of 
the  old ; — the  regenerated  people,  the  pure  and  acceptable  wor 
ship,  the  glorious  inheritance  of  blessing,  presented  themselves 
as  the  return,  and  more  than  the  return,  of  the  best  in  the  past — 
it  was  to  be  the  full  realization  of  what  should  have  been,  yet  never 
was  more  than  in  part.  How  far,  however,  similar  qualifications 
to  those  connected  with  the  other  points  in  the  prediction  were  to 
have  place  here,  could  only  be  determined  by  the  event.  But  since 
such  a  compass  was  given  in  the  earlier  part  to  the  wilderness, 


230  EZEKIEL  XX.  45-49,  XXI. 

there  can  be  no  reason,  from  the  nature  of  the  prophecy,  why  a 
like  enlargement  might  not  also  be  given  to  the  land,  and  moun 
tain,  and  people  of  the  latter  part.  By  the  new  and  better  state 
of  things  introduced  through  the  gospel,  Mount  Zion  lias  risen 
to  a  nobler  elevation  than  of  old,  and  Canaan  has  burst  its 
ancient  bounds,  and  the  elect  people  have  spread  themselves  far 
and  wide  in  the  earth.  Wherever  there  is  a  true  believer  in 
Christ,  there  also  is  a  genuine  member  of  the  house  of  Israel,  a 
pure  worshipper  coming  to  Mount  Zion,  a  free-born  citizen,  who 
feeds  on  the  heritage  of  Jacob  his  father ;  for  they  who  are 
Christ's  are  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise. 
But  other  and  more  fitting  opportunites  will  occur  for  con 
sidering  how  far  the  promised  good  to  Israel  is  to  be  understood 
as  merging  in  the  good  of  the  Christian  Church.  See  especially 
at  chap,  xxxiv.,  and  at  the  beginning  of  chap,  xl.,  where  the 
principles  of  interpretation  applicable  to  such  prophecies  are 
more  fully  discussed. 


CHAPTER  XX.  45-49,  XXI. 

THE  .VISION   OF   THE   LORD'S   FIRE   AND    SWORD. 

THE  five  concluding  verses  in  chap,  xx.,  as  already  noticed, 
should  evidently  have  been  connected  with  chap,  xxi.,  and  are 
justly  regarded  by  interpreters  as  a  kind  of  general  introduction 
to  what  follows,  or  a  brief  delineation  under  one  aspect  of  what 
is  afterwards  more  fully  and  explicitly  described  under  another. 
The  leading  import  of  the  vision  is  plain  enough ;  but  it  is 
written  throughout  in  a  style  so  singularly  abrupt,  and  in  some 
parts  so  utterly  enigmatical,  that  it  may  certainly  be  considered, 
as  a  whole,  one  of  the  darkest  portions  of  Ezekiel's  writings. 
Even  Horsley,  who  was  not  scrupulous  in  forcing  a  way  where 
none  naturally  presented  itself,  has  here  simply  left  a  record 
of  his  inability  to  proceed,  in  the  brief  note,  "  The  difficulties 
of  this  passage  are  to  me  insuperable."  For  once,  at  least,  his 
ready  resort  to  a  change  in  the  text  proved  insufficient  to 
bring  the  necessary  relief.  Various  emendations  of  the  text 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  FIRE  AND  SWORD.  231 

have  been  suggested  by  late  authors  ;  but  these,  being  of  an 
entirely  arbitrary  and  conjectural  character,  are  incapable  of 
yielding  satisfaction,  and  are  seldom  even  deserving  of  notice. 
I  cannot,  certainly,  pretend  to  say  that  I  see  my  way  through 
all  the  obscurities  of  the  passage,  as  it  stands,  and  shall  not 
hesitate  to  state  my  doubts  as  to  the  real  meaning,  where  I  have 
failed  to  get  them  removed.  But  the  portions  of  this  kind  are 
not,  after  all,  very  numerous,  and  will  be  found  to  interfere 
comparatively  little  with  the  general  import  of  the  prophet's 
communication. 

For  the  greater  facility  and  clearness  of  interpretation,  we 
shall  take  the  passage  in  successive  portions. 

Chap.  xx.  ver.  45.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  46. 
Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  by  the  way  on  the  right  (south),  and  pour  forth 
toward  the  south,  and  prophesy  towards  the  forest  of  the  field  in  the  south. 
47.  And  say  to  the  forest  of  the  south,  Hear  the  word  of  Jehovah  :  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  about  to  kindle  a  fire  in  thee  ;  and  it 
will  devour  every  green  tree  in  thee,  and  every  dry  tree  ;  the  glowing 
flame1  shall  not  be  quenched,  and  all  faces  shall  be  scorched  by  it,2  from 
the  south  to  the  north.  48.  And  all  flesh  shall  see  that  I  Jehovah  have 
kindled  it  ;  it  shall  not  be  quenched.  49.  And  I  said,  Ah  !  Lord  God,  they 
say  of  me,  Does  he  not  speak  in  parables  ? 

In  this  portion  there  is  an  obscurity,  but  it  is  an  obscurity 
that  arises  simply  from  the  want  of  precision  in  defining  the 
exact  sphere  of  the  vision.  That  it  indicates  a  severe  and  con 
suming  judgment  from  the  Lord  upon  some  land  and  people, 
situated  somewhere  to  the  south  of  the  prophet,  admits  of  no 
doubt.  For  the  substitution  in  one  place  of  faces  instead  of  trees, 
as  the  subjects  of  the  burning,  renders  it  manifest  that  the  vision 
has  respect  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  country.  And  when  the  con 
flagration  is  represented  as  falling  upon  every  tree,  the  green  as 
well  as  the  dry,  those  that  were  apparently  not  fit  as  well  as 


1  The  two  words  here  used,  rDPIp^  ^[P  are  Ver7  li^e  m  sound,  and  also 
not  very  different  in  meaning,  although  they  are  not  quite  so  synonymous 
as  our  translators  have  taken  them  to  be.     The  second  rather  means  ardent, 
glowing  heat,  than  flame  in  the  ordinary  sense.     What  is  meant  is  evidently 
a  flame  of  intense  fervency. 

2  Here,  as  not  unfrequently  with  Ezekiel,  the  figure  is  dropt,  or  rather, 
figure  and  reality  are  mingled  together.     He  lets  out  the  secret,  that  men 
are  represented  by  the  trees,  when  he  speaks  of  all  faces  being  burnt.     (See 
similar  violations  in  chap.  xix.  7,  and  various  passages  in  chap,  xvi.) 


232  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

those  that  were  fit  fuel  for  the  flame,  this  could  only  be  meant  to 
express  the  fearfully  comprehensive  character  of  the  coming 
judgment,  as  not  sparing  even  the  better  part,  who  might  seem 
undeserving  of  such  a  visitation.  It  is  in  the  same  way,  and  with 
reference,  doubtless,  to  this  part  of  the  vision,  that  our  Lord, 
pointing  from  the  troubles  that  were  befalling  himself,  to  those 
which  were  soon  to  befall  the  Jewish  people,  said,  "  For  if  they 
do  these  things  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry?  " 
(Luke  xxiii.  31)  ;  if  such  things  befall  one  who  has  done  nothing 
to  provoke  them,  what  may  be  expected  for  those  who  are  the 
fit  objects  of  Heaven's  vengeance?  or,  if  the  righteous  suffer  thus, 
what  must  be  the  measure  of  severity  that  is  preparing  to  over 
take  the  wicked  ?  So  that  by  the  green  trees  can  only  be  under 
stood  the  more  righteous,  and  by  the  dry  trees  the  more  wicked 
portions  of  the  community  ;  they  were  all  alike  to  be  involved  in 
the  coming  desolation.  But  who  precisely  were  the  people  thus 
to  be  visited,  or  by  what  kind  of  instrumentality  the  desolation 
was  to  be  brought  upon  them,  the  vision  so  far  is  entirely  silent ; 
and  it  might  truly  be  said  in  this  respect,  that  the  prophet 
was  speaking  in  parables.  He  notices  the  complaint  that  was 
sometimes  made  respecting  the  parabolical  character  of  his 
communications,  as  if  on  this  occasion,  at  least,  it  might  justly 
be  complained  of.  And  he  presently  obtains  from  the  Lord 
what  may  be  called  a  duplicate  of  the  vision,  only  of  such  a 
kind  as  served  to  make  perfectly  intelligible  both  who  the 
objects  of  the  foreseen  calamity  were,  and  who  also  were  to  be 
the  instruments  of  inflicting  these  upon  them. 

Chap.  xxi.  vcr.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  2. 
Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem,  and  pour  forth  toward  the  holy 
places,  and  prophesy  toward  the  land  of  Israel.  3.  And  say  to  the  land  of 
Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  and  will  draw  forth 
my  sword  out  of  its  scabbard,  and  will  cut  off  from  thee  righteous  and 
wicked.  4.  Because  I  cut  off  from  thee  righteous  and  wicked,  therefore  my 
sword  shall  go  forth  out  of  its  scabbard  against  all  flesh  from  south  to  north. 
5.  And  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  Jehovah  do  make  my  sword  to  go  forth 
out  of  its  scabbard;  nor  shall  it  return  again.  6.  And  thou,  son  of  man, 
sigh  with  breaking  of  loins,  and  with  bitterness  sigh  before  their  eyes.  7. 
And  it  shall  be,  when  they  say  to  thee,  Wherefore  dost  thou  sigh?  that 
thou  shalt  say,  For  the  tidings ;  because  it  comes,  and  every  heart  melts, 
and  all  hands  hang  down,  and  every  spirit  faints,  and  all  knees  become 
water ;  lo !  it  comes,  and  shall  be  brought  to  pass,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

Here  the  darkness  and  ambiguity  that  hung  over  the  earlier 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  FIRE  AND  SWORD.  233 

part  of  the  vision,  so  far  as  the  precise  locality  is  concerned,  is 
entirely  removed.  The  region  of  judgment  and  desolation  is 
now  expressly  determined  to  be  the  land  of  Israel,  and  more 
especially  Jerusalem  and  its  holy  places.  And  if  any  doubt  had 
remained  as  to  the  extent  of  meaning  indicated  in  the  former 
vision  by  the  burning  up  of  "  every  green  and  every  dry  tree," 
the  declaration  that  the  sword  to  be  presently  drawn  was  to  cut 
off  both  "  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,"  must  have  set  it  com 
pletely  at  rest.  But  the  announcement  that  there  was  going  to 
be  such  an  indiscriminate  and  unsparing  execution  of  judgment 
in  Judea  is  startling,  and  presents  an  apparent  contrariety  to  the 
command  given  in  an  earlier  vision  (chap.  ix.  4),  to  seal  the  fore 
heads  of  the  righteous,  as  persons  set  apart  and  entrusted  to  the 
safe  custody  of  God  against  the  coming  evil.  It  was,  no  doubt, 
the  stumbling-block  of  this  seeming  contrariety  which  prompted 
the  translator  in  the  Septuagint  to  make  a  violent  change  in 
the  text,  so  as  to  express  the  sense,  "  I  will  destroy  out  of  thee 
the  lawless  and  unjust"  (e%o\o6pev<TW  etc  crov  avofjiov  Kal  aSiKOv). 
But  it  is  only  on  a  superficial  consideration  that  the  one  passage 
will  appear  at  all  contradictory  to  the  other.  For  here,  as  is 
manifest  from  the  whole  nature  of  the  representation,  it  is  the 
merely  external  aspect  of  the  visitation  which  the  prophet  has 
in  his  eye.  The  sword  of  the  Lord's  judgment,  he  announced, 
was  to  pass  through  the  land,  and  accomplish  such  a  sweeping 
overthrow,  that  all,  without  exception,  would  be  made  to  suffer 
in  the  fearful  catastrophe.  This  did  not  prevent,  however,  but 
that  there  might  be,  in  the  midst  of  the  outward  calamities  which 
were  thus  to  burst  like  a  mighty  tempest  over  the  land,  a  vigilant 
oversight  maintained,  and  special  interpositions  of  Providence 
exercised,  in  behalf  of  the  pious  remnant  who  still  continued 
faithful  to  the  covenant  of  God.  It  was  this  distinguishing  good 
ness  to  some,  even  amid  the  horrors  of  a  general  desolation, 
which,  as  we  showed  before,  was  the  real  object  of  that  sealing  of 
God's  servants  on  the  forehead  in  a  former  vision  ;  while  here,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  merely  the  general  desolation  itself  which  is 
contemplated  by  the  prophet.  And  the  very  circumstance  that 
he  should  now  have  looked  so  exclusively  on  the  outward  scene 
of  carnage  and  distress,  which  he  descried  in  the  approaching 
future,  seemed  to  say  that  this  was  to  be  the  grand  feature  of  the 
time,  and  that  the  special  interpositions  which  were  to  be  put 


234  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

forth  in  behalf  of  the  better  portion  would  be  so  few  that  they 
scarcely  required  to  be  taken  into  account.  It  is  obvious,  too, 
that  the  description  given  even  of  the  general  desolation  must  be 
understood  with  some  limitation.  For,  that  the  sword  should 
literally  be  unsheathed  against  all  flesh  from  north  to  south  in  the 
land,  and  should  cut  off  or  destroy  all  within  its  borders,  whether 
righteous  or  wicked,  would  not  only  be  at  variance  with  the  other 
prophecies  of  Ezekiel,  but  would  even  not  consist  with  the  sequel 
of  this  prediction  itself,  which,  as  we  shall  see,  still  speaks  of  a 
purpose  of  mercy  in  behalf  of  the  covenant-people.  But  un 
doubtedly  he  wished  to  convey  the  impression  of  a  very  fearful 
and  overwhelming  destruction.  The  immediate  prospect  of  this 
national  disaster  had  called  his  mind  back  again  from  the  bright 
vision  of  distant  glory  he  had  unfolded  at  the  close  of  the  pre 
ceding  communication,  and  as  seeing  all  now  overshadowed  with 
gloom,  his  soul  was  filled  with  the  deepest  trouble  and  anguish. 
Agitated  and  rent,  as  he  thus  was,  with  the  most  painful  and 
violent  emotions,  he  naturally  proceeds  to  give  utterance  to  his 
feelings  in  abrupt  sentences  and  plaintive  reiterations. 

Ver.  8.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  sajnng,  9.  Son  of  man, 
prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Say  a  sword,  a  sword  sharpened, 
and  also  furbished !  10.  Sharpened  in  order  that  it  may  kill,  kill ;  fur 
bished  in  order  that  it  may  glitter  as  lightning.1  Perchance  the  sceptre  of 
my  son  rejoiceth  ;  it  (the  sword)  despiseth  every  tree.2  11.  And  it  is 


1  Literally,  that  the  lightning-flash  may  belong  to  it.     It  was  to  look 
terrible,  as  well  as  to  execute  fearful  desolations.     The  language  evidently 
has  respect  to  Dent,  xxxii.  41,  where  the  Lord  also  speaks  of  "  whetting  his 
glittering  sword,  and  his  hand  taking  hold  of  judgment." 

2  We  have  here  only  a  choice  of  difficulties.     The  sentence  is  so  enigmati 
cal,  that  the  greater  part  of  commentators  have  supposed  the  text  to  be  cor 
rupted,  and  suggest  alterations  of  various  kinds.     The  LXX.  express  an 
entirely  different  sense  from  what  can  be  made  out  by  any  construction  from 
the  present  text.     But  the  arbitrary  change  made  at  ver.  3  clearly  shows 
that  the  Greek  translator  was  not  scrupulous  in  making  a  plain  sense  when 
he  thought  the  original  did  not  afford  it.     He  renders  here,  <r(px£e,  i%ovli»ei 
cx.7ro6ov  KO.V  %vho'j,  slay,  set  at  nought,  despise  every  tree.     Jerome  notices 
this  strange  rendering  of  the  LXX.,  and  himself  translates  with  more  regard 
to  the  Hebrew,  but  still  with  some  licence,  qui  moves  sceptrum  filii  mei, 
succidisti  omne  lignum, — thou  that  shakest  the  sceptre  of  my  son,  hast  felled 
all  wood.     The  modern  versions  are  endlessly  varied.     Of  those  which  take 
the  text  as  it  stands,  perhaps  the  nearest  to  our  authorized  version  is  De 
"Wette's, — "or  shall  we  rejoice  ourselves?  the  rod  of  my  son  despises  all 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  FIRE  AND  SWOKD.  235 

given  to  be  furbished,  that  it  may  be  taken  into  the  hand  ;  it  is  a  sword 
sharpened  and  furbished,  that  it  may  be  put  into  the  hand  of  the  destroyer. 
12.  Cry  and  howl,  son  of  man  ;  for  it  shall  be  upon  my  people,  upon  all  the 
princes  of  Israel,  who  are  given  up1  to  the  sword  with  my  people  ;  therefore 
smite  upon  thy  thigh.  13.  For  it  makes  trial  (or  impersonally,  trial  is  made), 
and  what  if  it  (the  sword)  despise  also  the  sceptre  ?  It  (the  sceptre)  shall 
not  be  (i.e.  shall  cease  to  exist),  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.2  14.  And  thou, 
son  of  man,  prophesy,  and  let  hand  strike  against  hand,  and  the  sword  shall 
be  doubled  threefold  ;3  it  is  the  sword  of  the  pierced -through,  it  is  the  sword 

wood ;  "  a  rendering,  however,  which  is  grammatically  inadmissible,  and, 
besides,  makes  no  very  intelligible  sense.  Havernick  translates,  "  or  shall, 
on  the  other  hand,  my  son's  sceptre  bear  itself  proudly,  else  despising  every 
wood  ?"  not  only  coupling  the  masculine  DD^'  with  the  feminine  nDNE?  but 
giving  also  a  quite  arbitrary  meaning  to  b^b'j-  The  meaning  I  have  given 
has,  at  least,  the  merit  of  doing  no  violence  to  the  existing  text,  or  to  the 
received  import  of  the  words  :  "  perchance  (a  quite  common  meaning  of  itf) 
the  sceptre  (rod)  of  my  son  rejoiceth,"  or  is  glad — spoken,  as  I  take  it, 
ironically,  as  if  the  king  of  Judah,  proudly  presuming  on  being  God's  son 
(2  Sam.  vii.  12,  14),  could  afford  to  exult  at  the  display  of  God's  sword, 
because  either  expecting  it  to  be  drawn  on  behalf  of  his  throne,  or  so,  at 
least,  as  not  to  overthrow  it.  But  the  vain  confidence  is  dispelled  as  soon 
as  conceived.  It  (the  sword,  nnn,  the  only  feminine  nominative  in  the  pre 
ceding  context  to  agree  with  nDNft)  despises  every  tree,  or  all  wood.  It  has 
no  respect  to  the  rod  or  sceptre  of  Judah,  no  more  than  if  it  were  a  piece 
of  ordinary  wood.  And  accordingly  he  goes  on  to  say,  that  it  is  to  be  used 
against  both  the  princes  and  the  people  of  Judah. 

1  The  word  ""TOD,  as  is  now  commonly  admitted,  is  the  participle  from 
"O£,  to  fall  to,  or  throw.     The  princes  of  Israel  were  thrown  to  the  sword, 
or  given  up  to  it. 

2  Here,  again,  the  expression  is  very  abrupt  and  difficult.     Numberless 
modes  of  solution  have  been  proposed,  which  it  is  needless  to  recount.     The 
rendering  adopted  above  is  at  once  the  simplest  and  the  most  easily  under 
stood.     According  to  it,  the  prophet  represents  the  sword  of  the  Lord  as 
the  instrument  by  which  all  were  to  be  subjected  to  a  stern  ordeal ;  such 
an  ordeal  as  would  not  respect  the  very  sceptre  of  the  king,  and  hence 
would  bring  it  to  nothing.     This,  no  more  than  other  things,  could  stand 
the  severe  process  of  judgment,  but  should  be  made  to  disappear. 

3  I  have  simply  given  the  literal  rendering  of  the  passage  ;  but  it  is  hard 
to  say  what  is  meant  by  the  doubling  of  the  sword  threefold.     De  "Wette 
gives,  "  Let  it  be  repeated  for  the  third  time  ;  "  and  Hav.,  "  Let  it  be  multi 
plied  into  threefold."    But  ^33  occurs  elsewhere  only  in  the  sense  of  doub 
ling  (Ex.  xxvi.  9,  xxviii.  16),  etc.     Perhaps  it  maybe  taken  as  a  pregnant 
construction, — The  sword  shall  be  doubled,  shall  even  go  into  threefold, 
nnt^"6$ — the  n  indicating  motion  towards,  the  tendency  in  this  direction  : 
into  twofold,  as  far  even  as  threefold,  according  to  the  works  of  judgment 
to  be  executed. 


236  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

of  one  pierced  through,  even  of  the  mighty  (the  singular,  pointing  more 
especially  to  the  king),  that  penetrates  to  them.1  15.  In  order  that  the 
heart  may  faint,  and  that  ruins  (literally,  stumbling-blocks)  may  be  multi 
plied,  against  all  their  gates  do  I  appoint  the  glance  (or  whirl)  of  the  sword  ;2 
ah,  it  is  made  for  flashing,  prepared  for  the  slaughter.3  15.  Concentrate 
thyself  (addressing  the  sword)  on  the  right,  set  thyself  on  the  left,  whither 
soever  thy  face  is  directed.  17.  I  also  will  strike  my  hands  together,  and  I 
will  cause  my  fury  to  rest ;  I  Jehovah  have  said  it. 

While  these  verses  abound  with  critical  difficulties,  there  is 
very  little  that  calls  for  special  remark  in  respect  to  the  train  of 
thought.  The  passage,  as  a  whole,  is  descriptive  of  the  fearful 
devastation  that  was  to  be  made  by  the  Lord's  sword  of  ven 
geance,  and  of  the  painful  and  agitated  feelings  thence  produced 
in  the  bosom  of  the  prophet.  The  coming  judgment  is  repre 
sented  as  a  sweeping  calamity,  taking  the  circuit  of  the  whole 
land,  and  reaching  even  to  the  highest  personages  within  it,  its 
king  and  princes.  And  as  if  the  desolation  were  already  pro 
ceeding  under  the  eye  of  the  prophet,  he  is  called  upon  to  howl 
and  strike  his  hands  together — the  natural  indications  of  exces 
sive  and  violent  grief.  But  in  this  he  acted  only  as  the  repre 
sentative  of  God,  and  so  Jehovah  himself  is  spoken  of  as  in  like 
manner  striking  his  hands  together,  on  account  of  the  mournful 
desolations  that  had  taken  place ;  while  still  there  was  no  excess 
of  evil,  when  viewed  in  respect  to  the  occasion  that  called  it 

1  So  the  older  Hebrew  interpreters  substantially  understood  the  expression, 
DH?  rmhn.     They  took  the  verb  as  a  denominative  from  Tin,  penetralia, 
or  inner  chamber  ;  hence  gave  it  the  meaning  of  penetrating  into,  or  reach 
ing  within.     The  explanation  has  recently  been  somewhat  modified  from 
the  Aramaic,  where  the  noun  has  the  import  of  a  shut  in,  an  enclosed  place  ; 
and  so  Ewald,  and  after  him  Hav.,  Hitzig,  render  the  expression  in  the 
text,  "  that  encloses  them."   The  other  seems  to  me  to  be  more  natural,  both 
as  suiting  the  fierce  action  of  the  sword,  and  also  because  of  the  preposition 
7,  which  seems  to  denote  motion  of  some  sort  towards,  up  to. 

2  The  expression  inrmros  is  the  glance  or  whirl  of  the  sword.     It 
occurs  nowhere  else.     But  nrOK  is  understood  to  be  =  n3!!N,  from  "ipK,  to 
turn,  or  involve  itself.     It  may  indicate  either  the  whirling  glance,  or  the 
whirling  motion  of  the  sword,  as  going  to  be  presented  at  all  the  gates. 
The  one  shade  of  meaning  is  preferred  by  some,  and  the  other  by  others. 

3  The  only  ascertained  meaning  of  nLDy  ^s  t°  veil  or  cover ;  hence  flE^E 
r\3tJ?  should  be  covered  for  the  slaughter.     Hav.  gives  from  the  Arabic, 
"  drawn  for  slaughter."     The  LXX.  have  iv  yiyovsv.     It  seems  to  be  used  in 
some  secondary  sense,  denoting  fitness  or  preparation  for  the  terrible  work. 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  FIRE  AND  SWORD.  237 

forth,  all  was  needed  in  order  to  make  the  Lord's  fury,  or  his 
indignation  on  account  of  sin,  to  cease. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  indicate  more  expressly  the 
nature  of  the  visitation  which  was  to  be  employed  as  the  Lord's 
sword  of  vengeance.  And  the  connection  in  this  respect,  as  well 
in  regard  to  the  subsequent  as  to  the  preceding  context,  is  so 
justly  stated  by  Havernick,  that  we  shall  here  simply  translate 
his  words  :  "  The  question  might  now  naturally  arise,  Whither 
shall  the  sword  of  Jehovah  turn  itself?  Shall  the  punishment 
be  altogether  confined  to  the  theocracy?  Shall  the  enemies  of 
this  escape  ?  An  opportunity  was  thus  furnished  to  the  prophet 
for  drawing  a  parallel  between  Judah  and  Ammon.  This 
parallel  exhibits  the  punishment  in  respect  to  its  more  internal 
and  profound  meaning,  by  discovering  wherein  these  two  nations 
resembled  each  other,  and  wherein  they  differed :  Judah  has, 
like  Ammon,  become  an  enemy  of  God,  therefore  the  same 
judgment  alights  on  both.  Nay,  the  apostate  covenant-people 
first  fall  under  the  stroke  of  the  Divine  sword.  By  God's 
command,  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  instrument  of  Jehovah's  anger, 
must  first  be  sent  against  Jerusalem,  and  then  against  Ammon. 
Both  fall  through  the  hand  of  one  slayer.  A  sword  lights  upon 
their  head  that  had  long  been  destined  to  this  end  by  God. 
Again,  both  similarly  despised  the  threatening  judgment,  held 
God's  hand  to  be  mere  delusion  and  vanity  (vers.  23  and  29)  ; 
they  show  themselves  after  the  same  manner,  sinners  and  daring 
rebels  against  God.  Judah's  sin  is  brought  into  remembrance 
even  by  the  Chaldean  monarch ;  for  Animon,  the  theocracy  is 
an  object  only  of  scorn  and  emnity  (vers.  23,  28,  and  30).  So 
that  in  both  alike  the  measure  of  iniquity  is  full :  the  end  must 
come  to  them.  But  this  very  end  is  what  also  marks  the  great 
difference  between  the  two.  The  theocracy  is  devoted  to  the 
sword,  robbed  of  its  splendour  and  its  king ;  but  still  the  old 
promises  do  not  on  that  account  perish.  Through  the  awful 
process  of  deep  humiliation  and  indescribable  misery,  Judah 
reaches  the  consummation  of  its  height  and  glory.  But  the  end 
of  Ammon  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  this ;  it  perishes  without 
hope ;  its  end  is  an  end  of  terrors,  out  of  which  no  new  state 
arises  ;  it  is  devoted  to  absolute  destruction." 

Yer.  18.  And  the.  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  19.  And  thou, 
son  of  man,  set  thee  two  ways,  by  which  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon 


238  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

may  come  ;  from  one  land  they  shall  both  proceed  ;  and  make  a  finger-post,1 
at  the  head  of  the  way  to  the  city  make  it.  20.  Set  a  way  for  the  sword  to 
come  to  Rabbath  of  the  children  of  Ammon,  and  to  Judah,  into  Jerusalem 
the  fortified.2  21.  For  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way 
(the  cross- way,  the  point  where  the  way  to  those  two  cities  diverged),3  at 
the  head  of  the  two  ways,  to  use  divination ;  he  shakes  the  arrows  ;  he  in 
quires  at  the  teraphim  ;  he  inspects  the  liver.4  22.  In  his  right  hand  is  the 


1  Literally,  make  or  engrave  a  hand,  N"lH  TV     The  old  rendering  of 
"  appoint  a  place,"  is  now  justly  exploded ;  for  neither  does  T  ever  signify 
exactly  a  place,  or  &O3  to  appoint.     That  the  word  *T»  was  sometimes  used 
in  much  the  same  sense  that  our  word  liand  is,  as  something  to  indicate  or 
point  out  what  was  to  be  observed  or  known,  is  evident  from  1  Sam.  xv.  12, 
2  Sam.  xviii.  18,  where  hand-post  or  index-pillar  must  be  meant.     See  also 
Deut.  xxiii.  12  :  "  And  a  hand  (or  sign-post)  shall  be  to  thee  without  the 
camp  ;"  and  Isa.  Ivi.  5.     That  join  is  used  in  the  sense  of  forming  or  en 
graving,  needs  no  proof. 

2  The  expressions  here  are  chosen  with  great  care  to  bring  out  an  impres 
sive  sense  :  This  way  for  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  was  not  only  to 
lead  to  Judah,  but  into  Jerusalem,  to  settle  and  rest  there,  in  the  fortified — 
what  then  will  its  fortifications  avail  ?     In  such  a  connection,  the  fortified 
has  a  strongly  ironical  meaning. 

3  The  phrase  "]~nn  DN,  mother  of  the  way,  is  peculiar,  but  there  isno  reason 
to  think  with  H;iv.  that  the  Arabic  sense  of  highway  should  be  given  to  it. 
The  point  where  the  king  stood  was,  as  it  \vere,  the  parent  of  ways.     Two 
directions  issued  from  it;  the  king  hesitated  which  to  take,  and  the  prophet 
was,  as  by  a  finger-post,  to  indicate  his  course. 

4  These  things  are  plainly  mentioned  as  the  practices  that  would  naturally 
be  followed  by  an  idolater,  such  as  the  king  of  Babylon,  in  seeking  direction 
regarding  the  course  it  was  advisable  for  him  to  pursue.     The  inspection  of 
the  liver  is  known  to  have  been  particularly  resorted  to  in  such  cases,  even 
in  the  later  periods  of  Greek  and  Roman  History.    The  shaking  of  the  arrows 
is  not  mentioned  as  a  practice  in  divination  among  ancient  European  nations, 
although  some  earlier  commentators,  and  still  also  Hitzig,  held  it  to  be  much 
the  same  as  the  pehofixvriot  among  the  Greeks  ;  but  it  is  referred  to  in  some 
old  Arabic  writings  as  formerly  in  use,  Pockocke  Specil.  Hist.  Arab.  p.  329, 
etc. ;  also  Sale's  Koran,  Prelim.  Disc.  sec.  5,  makes  mention  of  seven  arrows 
kept  in  the  temple  at  Mecca,  for  the  purpose  of  divining,  though  only  three 
were  customarily  used.     The  practice  is  condemned  in  the  Koran  among 
other  superstitions  (c.  5).     In  one  of  the  sculptures  brought  from  Nine 
veh,  a  representation  is  given  of  the  king  with  a  cup  in  his  right  hand, 
his  left  resting  upon  his  bow,   and  then  again  with  two  arrows  in  his 
right  hand  and  his  bow  in  the  left ;    and  there  is  reason  for  supposing 
that  he  there  appears  practising  the  arts  of  divination,  both  by  cup  and 
arrows  (Bonomi's  Nineveh,  pp.  2G3-5).     The  other  action  mentioned,  in 
quiring  at  the  teraphim,  was  an  idolatrous  practice  too  frequently  resorted 
to  by  the  covenant-people  themselves.     Indeed,  this  is  the  only  passage 
where  the  use  of  teraphim  is  expressly  ascribed  to  a  heathen,  although  in 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  FIRE  AND  SWORD.  239 

divination  of  Jerusalem  (i.e.  the  lot  determining  that  he  should  first  direct 
his  course  to  Jerusalem),  to  place  battering-rains,  to  open  the  mouth  in 
slaughter  (i.e.  to  raise  the  war-cry  of  death),  to  lift  the  voice  with  shouting, 
to  place  battering-rams  against  the  gates,  to  cast  a  mount,  to  erect  a  watch- 
tower.  23.  And  it  is  to  them  as  a  divination  of  nothingness  in  their  eyes 
(the  eyes  of  those)  that  have  sworn  oaths  to  them  ;x  but  he  remembers  the 


1  Sam.  xv.  23,  it  is  stigmatized  as  of  an  essentially  heathen,  and  consequently 
obnoxious  character,  "  Stubbornness  is  as  iniquity  and  teraphirn."  They 
first  appear  as  idol-gods  of  Mesopotamia,  whence  Rachel  brought  them  by 
stealth  out  of  her  father's  house,  who  expressly  styles  them  "  his  gods." 
From  the  connection  in  which  they  are  afterwards  found,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  they  were  a  sort  of  household  gods,  a  kind  of  family  talisman, 
worshipped  with  the  general  design  of  obtaining  a  blessing  on  the  family,  and 
at  times  also  for  the  more  special  purpose  of  getting  direction  respecting  the 
future.  There  was  consequently  always  a  degree  of  superstition  and  idolatry 
connected  with  their  use,  and  the  idea  of  Horsley  (on  Hos.  iii.  4),  that  they 
were  probably  at  first  symbolical  figures,  somewhat  like  the  cherubim,  and 
not  improperly  used  in  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  is  entirely  without  foundation. 
The  very  first  mention  of  them  is  in  the  way  of  disapprobation,  as  not  only 
did  Jacob  disown  having  anything  to  do  with  them,  but  afterwards  caused 
them  to  be  buried  under  the  oak  at  Shechem  (Gen.  xxxv.  4).  The  setting 
up  of  teraphim  by  Micah,  as  recorded  in  Judg.  xvii.  etc.,  and  coupling  them 
with  the  ephod  (made  after  that  of  the  high  priest,  by  which  he  inquired 
of  God),  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  what  has  been  said:  it  indicated  a 
family -worship,  considerably  corrupt,  and  closely  connected  with  divination. 
And  so  must  we  regard  the  use  of  them  here  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  direction  in  his  course  ;  the  more  so  as  he  came  from 
Mesopotamia,  the  original  country  of  the  teraphim.  In  Zech.  x.  2  the  false 
prophets  are  said  to  get  their  lying  answers  from  teraphim. 

1  Here,  again,  there  is  room  for  considerable  diversity  of  opinion.  We 
have  adopted  the  most  natural  rendering,  and  understand  by  the  persons 
who  had  sworn  oaths,  the  Jews,  and  by  the  Babylonians,  the  them  to  whom 
they  had  sworn.  It  certainly  is  rather  strange  that  these  Babylonians,  to 
whom  the  them  in  this  case  refers,  had  not  been  previously  mentioned,  at 
least  no  further  than  as  they  were  represented  by  the  king  of  Babylon.  To 
avoid  this  harshness,  various  other  interpretations  have  been  adopted.  Hav. : 
"  Oaths  of  oaths  are  to  them;"  meaning,  they  had  very  solemn  oaths  from 
the  Lord,  or  pledges  of  his  protection  and  support,  on  which  they  falsely 
relied — a  very  far-fetched  interpretation.  Ewald :  "They  thought  they 
were  to  have  weeks  upon  weeks  " — changing  the  punctuation.  But  what 
even  if  they  thought  that  ?  It  still  would  not  have  evinced  the  divination  to 
be  false  in  their  account.  There  is  more  of  apparent  reason  in  the  inter 
pretation  of  Jerome  and  some  of  the  ancients,  who  take  the  words  in  sub 
stantially  the  same  sense,  but  understood  them  as  referring  especially  to  the 
seventh  day :  keeping  Sabbaths  as  if  they  were  perfectly  secure.  But  this 
also  is  strained  and  untenable.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  the 
words  refer  to  the  Jews  ;  the  divination  which  directed  the  course  of  Nebu- 


240  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

iniquity,  that  they  may  be  taken.  24.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Because  your  iniquities  are  remembered  for  you,  by  reason  of  the 
discovering  of  your  transgressions,  to  make  your  sins  appear  in  all  your 
doings,  because  of  your  being  remembered,  ye  shall  be  taken  with  the  hand. 
25.  And  thou,  pierced  through,1  wicked  prince  of  Israel,  whose  day  comes  at 
the  time  of  the  sin  of  the  end  (i.e.  the  last  stage  of  guilt,  when  the  iniquity 
being  full,  the  final  arrest  must  be  laid  on  it,  chap.  xxxv.  5).  26.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  the  mitre  is  removed,2  and  the  crown  is  taken  off ; 
this  is  not  this ;  the  low  is  exalted  and  the  high  is  brought  down.  27.  An 
overturning,  overturning,  overturning  will  I  render  it ;  also  this  shall  not 
be  until  he  comes,  to  whom  belongs  righteousness,  and  I  will  give  it  to  him. 

This  remarkable  passage,  in  its  earlier  part  representing 
Nebuchadnezzar  as  hesitating  whether  he  was  to  take  the  road 
that  led  to  Rabbath  or  that  to  Jerusalem,  and  brought  ulti 
mately  to  decide  upon  the  latter  by  the  usual  appliances  of 
divination,  contains  as  to  its  form  a  striking  specimen  of  Ezekiel's 
manner.  He  does  not  simply  announce  the  event  that  was  to 
happen,  as  the  prophets  generally  do,  but  gives  it  life  and 
motion;  exhibits  the  springs  of  action  as  actually  at  work  before 
our  eyes.  It  were  entirely  to  mistake  the  character  of  the  repre 
sentation  (however  commonly  it  is  done),  to  suppose  that  the 
scene  here  described,  as  it  appeared  to  the  illuminated  sense  of 
the  prophet,  was  in  real  life  to  take  place  precisely  after  this  form ; 
not  less  than  it  would  be  to  maintain  that  the  two  ways  toward 
Jerusalem  and  Rabbath,  with  the  directing  sign  at  the  point  of 
divergence,  must  have  been  actually  constructed  by  the  prophet's 

chadnezzar  to  them,  and  promised  him  a  successful  siege,  appear  unworthy 
of  credit  to  them,  even  as  nothingness  in  their  view — though  they  were  in 
closest  compact  with  the  invaders  (so  I  would  be  inclined  to  take  the  allusion, 
somewhat  ironically),  had  sworn  oaths  of  allegiance  to  them;  these  no  longer 
secure  unanimity  of  mind,  or  suffice  to  avert  the  brooding  evil,  because  the 
iniquity  of  those  who  had  sworn  comes  into  remembrance  for  chastisement. 

1  That  ppn  here  should  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  in  which  it  occurs  at 
ver.  14,  seems  quite  manifest;  for  it  was  evidently  used  there  in  the  singular, 
and  with  the  additional  epithet  ^nan,  the  mighty  one,  with  express  allusion 
to  the  king.     The  apparent  contrariety  between  this  sense  and  the  actual 
result  in  history  has  led  very  generally  to  the  adoption  of  the  meaning  of 
profane.    But  the  word  never  properly  signifies  profane,  and  the  grammatical 
sense  must  be  retained,  whatever  consequences  follow.    The  contrariety,  how 
ever,  is  only  apparent,  as  we  shall  show. 

2  nS3V!p  is  never  used  for  the  crown  of  a  king,  but,  as  is  now  on  all  hands 
admitted,  denotes  the  mitre  or  head   ornament  of   the   high  priest  (Ex. 
xxviii.  4,  etc.).     See  Ges.  Lex.,  and  Hengstenberg's  Christol.  on  this  passage. 


VISION  OF  THE  LOKD'S  SWORD.  241 

hand.  The  whole  is  a  delineation  in  a  vision  of  what,  as  to  the 
substance,  was  to  happen  in  the  regular  course  of  things.  All 
would  occur  precisely  as  if  the  lively  scene  here  described  were 
to  pass  into  reality.  Nebuchadnezzar  would  assuredly  move 
toward  the  south  with  his  hosts  and  implements  of  war,  and, 
advancing  under  the  auspices  of  his  religion,  would  as  assuredly 
direct  his  inarch,  in  the  first  instance,  toward  Jerusalem.  What 
a  sublime  proof  of  the  overruling  providence  and  controlling 
agency  of  Jehovah !  The  mightiest  monarch  of  the  world, 
travelling  at  the  head  of  almost  unnumbered  legions,  and  him 
self  consciously  owning  no  other  direction  than  that  furnished 
by  the  blind  instruments  of  his  own  superstition,  yet  having 
his  path  marked  out  to  him  beforehand  by  this  servant  of  the 
living  God  !  How  strikingly  did  it  show  that  the  greatest  poten 
tates  on  earth,  and  even  the  spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places, 
have  their  bounds  appointed  to  them  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  that 
however  magisterially  they  may  seem  to  conduct  themselves,  still 
they  cannot  overstep  the  prescribed  limits,  and  must  be  kept  in  all 
their  operations  subservient  to  the  higher  purposes  of  Heaven  ! 
The  chief  point,  however,  in  the  representation,  is  the  view 
that  is  given  in  the  concluding  part  of  the  senseless  security  of 
the  people  at  Jerusalem  while  the  portentous  cloud  was  gather 
ing  in  the  north,  and  of  the  tremendous  fury  with  which  it  was 
soon  to  discharge  itself  upon  their  heads.  They  who  were  ready 
to  believe  every  divination  among  themselves  that  fell  in  with 
their  own  vain  and  corrupt  imaginations,  would  pay  no  regard 
either  to  the  oracles  of  superstition,  or  to  the  solemn  utterances 
of  God's  Spirit,  when  these  told  against  the  infatuated  and 
perilous  course  they  were  pursuing.  Remaining  confident  and 
secure  to  the  last,  the  evil  was  destined  to  come  upon  them  as  a 
resistless  whirlwind  of  destruction.  And  to  show  how  in  this 
fearful  convulsion  all  was  to  be  really  of  God,  while  human 
instruments  alone  outwardly  appeared — to  show  that  the  ap 
proaching  storm  of  violence  and  uproar  was  to  be  all  directed  by 
the  hand  of  him  whom  they  had  so  long  offended  and  provoked 
by  their  sins — the  king  of  Babylon  and  his  forces  are  now  in  a 
manner  lost  sight  of,  and  Jehovah  alone  seems  to  speak  and  act. 
It  is  he  who  brings  into  remembrance  the  transgressions  of  the 
people,  and  punishes  them  for  their  sin  ;  he  who  utterly  subverts 
the  order  of  things  then  existing,  because  of  the  prevailing  and 

Q 


242  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

incorrigible  wickedness ;  yet  so  as,  at  the  same  time,  not  to  in 
volve  all  in  complete  and  final  destruction,  but  only  to  level  with 
the  dust  what  had  become  so  offensive  to  the  eye  of  his  holiness, 
and  hold  the  prospect  of  a  new^  and  better  destiny  in  reserve  for 
one  who  could  accomplish  it  in  righteousness. 

It  is  from  this  change  in  the  mode  of  representation — from  the 
Lord  himself  being  here  again  brought  directly  upon  the  stage, 
that  we  are  to  account  for  the  peculiar  language  employed, 
especially  in  regard  to  king  Zedekiah.  By  a  lively  and  energetic 
turn  in  the  discourse,  the  prophet  passes  from  the  people  at  large 
to  address  himself  immediately  to  Zedekiah,  and  styles  him  not 
only  wicked,  but  also  pierced  through ;  although,  it  is  well 
known,  he  was  not  actually  slain  in  the  calamities  that  ensued. 
But  it  is  not  exactly  what  was  to  be  done  by  the  external  sword 
of  the  Babylonians  that  comes  here  into  vie\v ;  it  is  the  execu 
tion  of  the  Lord's  judgment,  under  the  same  form  and  aspect  of 
severity  as  that  which  had  been  presented  in  the  former  part  of 
the  vision — the  terrors  of  his  drawn  sword.  This  sword  is  but 
an  image  of  the  judgment  itself,  precisely  as  the  devouring  fire 
had  been  in  the  vision  immediately  preceding ;  and  it  is  not  the 
less  true  that  Zedekiah  fell  under  its  powerful  stroke,  though 
he  personally  survived  the  catastrophe.  Driven  ignominiously 
from  his  throne,  doomed  to  see  his  family  slain  before  his  eyes, 
to  have  these  eyes  themselves  put  out,  and  to  be  led  as  a  miser 
able  and  helpless  captive  in  chains  to  Babylon,  he  might  with 
the  most  perfect  propriety  be  regarded  as  the  grand  victim  of 
the  Lord's  swrord — already,  in  a  manner,  pierced  through  with 
it ;  for,  to  the  strongly  idealistic  spirit  of  the  prophet,  the 
wickedness  and  the  sword,  the  sin  and  its  punishment,  appear 
inseparably  connected  together.  The  overthrow  to  which  he 
was  destined  seemed  to  the  prophet's  eye  at  once  so  inevitable 
and  so  near,  that  he  could  speak  of  it  no  otherwise  than  as  a 
thing  already  in  existence. 

But  it  was  to  be  no  merely  personal  loss  and  degradation ;  the 
overthrow  to  be  accomplished  on  Zedekiah  was  to  draw  along 
with  it  the  complete  subversion  of  the  present  state  of  things. 
Therefore,  while  the  prophet  represents  the  day  of  visitation  as 
coming  upon  him,  he  also  speaks  of  it  as  being  at  the  time 
when  sin  generally  had  reached  its  consummation,  and  the  com 
pleteness  of  the  guilt  was  to  have  its  parallel  in  the  complete  and 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  SWORD.  243 

terminal  character  of  the  judgment.  All  must  now  be  made 
desolate ;  the  mitre  of  the  high  priest  (the  emblem  of  his  official 
dignity  and  honour,  as  the  representative  of  a  consecrated  and 
priestly  people),  as  well  as  the  crown  of  the  king,  was  to  be  put 
away,  and  everything  turned  upside  down.  Such  a  convulsed 
and  disorganized  state  of  things  was  approaching,  that,  as  it  is 
said,  "this  should  no  longer  be  this;"  in  other  words,  nothing 
should  be  allowed  to  remain  what  it  had  been,  it  should  be 
another  thing  than  formerly ;  as  is  presently  explained  in  what 
follows,  "  the  low  is  exalted  and  the  high  is  brought  down," — a 
general  revolution,  in  which  the  outward  relations  of  things 
should  be  made  to  change  places,  in  just  retaliation  upon  the 
people  for  having  so  grossly  perverted  the  moral  relations  of 
things.1  Yet  the  agents  and  participators  in  these  revolutions 
are  warned  not  to  expect  any  settled  condition  to  come  out  of 
them ;  "  this  also,"  it  is  said,  "  shall  not  be,"  it  shall  not  attain 
to  permanence  and  security.  And  so  overthrow  is  to  follow 
overthrow ;  "  nowhere  shall  there  be  rest,  nowhere  security,  all 
things  shall  be  in  a  state  of  fluctuation,  until  the  appearing  of 
the  great  restorer  and  prince  of  peace."2 

When  the  passage  is  viewed  thus  in  its  proper  connection  and 
comprehensive  import,  the  objections  vanish  which  have  been 
raised  (by  Pradus  and  others)  against  the  mention  of  the  high 
priest's  insignia,  and  in  justification  of  their  understanding  all  of 
the  king — such  as,  that  it  is  the  king  alone  who  is  personally 
addressed  in  the  preceding  context,  and  the  priesthood  is  not 
immediately  contemplated  in  any  other  part  of  the  discourse. 
But  the  king  himself,  who  is  expressly  named,  is  not  introduced 
as  if  he  alone  were  concerned  in  what  is  said  ;  he  comes  thus 
prominently  into  notice  only  as  the  political  head  and  represen 
tative  of  the  covenant-people ;  and  the  day  of  his  calamity  was 
to  be  for  them  also  the  time  of  the  end,  as  regarded  their  exist 
ing  privileges  and  comforts.  The  loss  of  these  could  not  be  more 
strikingly  represented  than  by  the  removal,  at  one  blow,  of 
the  distinctions  of  the  high  priest  and  the  king;  for  what  should 
become  of  all  that  peculiarly  belonged  to  them  as  a  people,  if 

1  Quite  similar  descriptions  are  given  of  great  revolutions  and  subversions 
of  the  established  order  of  things  in  the  other  prophets— for  example,  Isa. 
xxiv.  1,  ii.  12. 

2  Hengstenberg  on  the  verse. 


244  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

there  was  no  one  either  to  hold  the  reins  of  government,  or  to 
make  intercession  with  Heaven  !  Everything,  in  such  a  case, 
must  be  in  a  state  of  prostration  and  ruin. 

Yet  only  for  a  time,  and  as  regarded  the  existing  order  of 
things ;  the  period  of  trouble  and  desolation  was  to  have  a  limit; 
it  was  only  to  last  till  one  should  come,  who  would  prevail  to 
rectify  the  disorder  and  retrieve  the  ruin.  We  can  have  no 
hesitation  in  understanding  by  this  person  the  Messiah,  whether 
we  translate,  u  till  he  comes  to  whom  the  right  is,"  or,  "  till  he 
comes  to  whom  the  judgment  belongs;"1  "  and  I  give  it  to  him." 
It  is  not  expressly  said  what  was  to  be  given  him,  and  should 
stand  waiting  for  its  proper  possessor  till  he  should  come ;  but 
the  context  plainly  forbids  us  to  understand  anything  less  than 
what  was  taken  away — the  things  represented  by  the  priestly 
mitre  and  the  royal  crown.  The  true  priestly  dignity  and  the 
proper  regal  glory  were  to  be  gone  for  a  time  into  abeyance ; 
some  partial,  temporary,  and  fluctuating  possession  of  them 
might  be  regained,  but  nothing  more ;  the  adequate  and  perma 
nent  realization  was  only  to  be  found  in  the  person  of  Messiah, 
because  in  him  alone  was  there  to  be  a  fitting  representation  of 


1  I  am  inclined  to  adopt  the  latter  view ;  authorities  are  very  nearly 
equally  divided  on  the  matter.  But  I  scarcely  think  the  passages  referred 
to  for  ascribing  to  BBEflD  the  sense  of  right  or  prerogative,  bear  out  that 
meaning,  especially  when  used  absolutely,  as  here.  The  common  and  usual 
meaning  of  the  word  undoubtedly  is  judgment,  or  right  objectively,  right  as 
administered  and  done,  the  execution  of  righteousness.  Now,  while  this  in 
the  full  and  primary  sense  is  ascribed  to  God  (Deut.  i.  17),  it  is  also  ascribed, 
subordinately,  to  rulers,  but  especially  to  Messiah,  as  the  grand  representa 
tive  and  revealer  of  Godhead  in  the  affairs  of  men  (Ps.  Ixxii. ;  Isa.  ix.  7,  etc.). 
He  is  held  out  to  men's  hopes,  in  these  and  many  similar  passages,  as  the 
great  avenger  of  evil,  and  the  administrator  of  righteousness.  Finally,  this 
view  appears  to  suit  the  connection  much  better.  The  contrast  between 
those  who  then  were  in  office  and  him  that  was  to  come  was  not  as  to  the 
right  to  rule,  but  to  the  fitness  and  power  for  exercising  the  right.  They 
had  the  right,  but  abused  it ;  he  was  to  exercise  it  with  perfect  rectitude ; 
they  had  put  all  wrong,  he  was  to  put  all  right.  I  therefore  hold  with 
Havernick  here,  in  opposition  to  Hengstenberg,  Hitzig,  and  many  others, 
and  believe  with  him  that  the  promise  has  some  reference  to  the  word  in 
Gen.  xlix.  10.  The  sceptre  was  not  to  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver 
from  between  his  feet,  till  Shiloh  come ;  but  now,  says  Ezekiel,  there  shall 
be  no  crown  till  the  Just  One  comes — a  certain  withdrawal  meanwhile  takes 
place — a  mere  fragment  remains  till  then. 


VISION  OF  THE  LORD'S  SWORD.  245 

the  Divine  righteousness.  It  is  true  there  was  something  like 
a  restoration  of  the  standing  and  honour  of  the  priesthood  after 
the  return  from  the  Babylonish  exile ;  and  if  the  ideas  currently 
entertained  upon  the  subject  were  correct,  there  might  appear 
in  that  a  failure  of  the  prophecy.  But  there  was  no  right  resto 
ration  of  the  priestly,  any  more  than  of  the  regal  dignity  at  the 
time  specified ;  it  was  but  a  shadow  of  the  original  glory.  For 
there  was  no  longer  the  distinctive  prerogative  of  the  Urim  and 
Thummim,  nor  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  nor  the  glory  overshadow 
ing  the  mercy-seat ;  all  was  in  a  depressed  and  mutilated  con 
dition,  and  even  that  subject  to  many  interferences  from  the 
encroachments  of  foreign  powers.  So  much  only  was  given,  both 
in  respect  to  the  priesthood  and-  the  kingdom,  as  to  show  that 
the  Lord  had  not  forsaken  his  people,  and  to  serve  as  pledge 
of  the  coming  glory.  But  it  was  to  the  still  prospective,  rather 
than  the  present  state  of  things,  that  the  eye  of  faith  was  directed 
to  look  for  the  proper  restoration.  And  lest  any  should  expect 
otherwise,  the  prophet  Zechariah,  after  the  return  from  Babylon, 
took  up  the  matter,  as  it  were,  where  Ezekiel  had  left  it,  and  in 
timated  in  the  plainest  manner  that  what  was  then  accomplished 
was  scarcely  worth  taking  into  account ;  it  was,  at  the  most,  but 
doing  in  a  figure  what  could  only  find  its  real  accomplishment 
in  the  person  and  work  of  Messiah.  Especially  at  chap.  vi.  14: 
"  And  he  (the  branch)  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and 
he  shall  bear  the  glory ;  and  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne, 
and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne."  Thus  the  mitre  and 
the  crown  were  both  to  meet  in  him,  and  the  temple  in  its 
noblest  sense  be  built,  and  the  glory  be  obtained,  such  as  it 
became  the  Lord's  anointed  to  possess.  Meanwhile,  all  was  but 
preparatory  and  imperfect. 

But  now,  with  this  glimpse  of  coming  revival  and  future  glory 
peering  through  the  dark  cloud  of  judgment  and  tribulation, 
which  for  the  present  hung  around  the  covenant-people,  let  us 
listen  to  the  prophet's  announcement  of  the  doom  of  Ammon,  in 
which  there  is  no  such  perspective  of  future  recovery. 

Ver.  28.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say :  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah  concerning  the  Ammonites  and  their  reproach  (or  scorn)  ;  even  say 
thou,  A  sword,  a  sword,  drawn  for  slaughter,  furbished  to  the  utmost,1  that 

1  The  literal  rendering  here  (taking  farf?  as  the  infinitive  of  ^3j  which 


240  EZEKIEL  XXI. 

it  might  flash  !  29.  While  they  see  nothingness  for  thee,  while  they  divine 
lies  to  thee  (while  this  delusive  process  is  going  on,  and  thou  art  giving 
heed  to  it,  there  is  that  drawn  and  furbished  sword  flashing  in  the  dis 
tance),  to  lay  thee  upon  the  necks  of  the  pierced-through  godless  ones, 
whose  day  has  come,  at  the  time  of  the  final  iniquity.1  30.  Let  it  return 
to  the  scabbard ;  in  the  place  where  thou  wast  formed,  in  the  land  of  thy 
nativity,  will  I  judge  thee.2  31.  And  I  will  pour  out  my  indignation  upon 
thee ;  with  the  fire  of  my  wrath  will  I  blow  upon  thee,  and  will  give  thee 
into  the  hand  of  savage  men,  forgers  of  destroying  weapons.3  32.  Thou 
shalt  be  for  fuel  to  the  fire ;  thy  blood  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land ; 
thou  shalt  not  be  remembered,  for  I  Jehovah  have  spoken  it. 

Here  all  is  darkness,  trouble,  and  desolation.  The  Ammonites 
had  not  only  sinned,  like  other  heathen  nations,  but  they  had 
also  taken  up  a  taunt  and  reproach  against  the  covenant-people 
in  the  time  of  their  declension,  and  had  pressed  forward,  and,  in 
the  proud  spirit  of  conquerors,  spread  themselves  over  a  part  of 
Israel's  territory  (Zeph.  ii.  8  ;  Jer.  xlix.  1).  They  might,  there 
fore,  be  fitly  taken  here  as  representatives  of  the  enemies  gene 
rally  of  the  people  of  God.  And  in  them  the  Lord  was  going 
to  show,  by  a  palpable  demonstration,  that  while  Israel  could 
not  escape  this  righteous  judgment,  when  they  walked  like  the 
heathen,  their  fall  would  be  no  gain  to  the  heathen  adversaries, 
but  only  the  forerunner  of  a  still  more  severe,  even  a  remediless 
destruction.  A  germ  of  life  and  blessing  still  existed  in  the 
one.  which  Babylon  with  all  its  might  could  not  extirpate ;  but 
in  the  other  there  was  no  such  divine  element,  and  when  the 
sword  of  vengeance  was  drawn,  it  must  accomplish  a  final  end. 
So  was  it  with  the  Ammonites  as  a  people.  A  few  years  after 

seems  the  most  natural  derivation)  would  be — furbished  for  what  it  was  cap 
able,  or  as  much  as  possible ;  the  infinitive  of  the  verb  being  taken  adverbially. 

1  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  these  Ammonites  were  to  be  added  to  the 
slain  in  Judah, — thrown,  as  it  were,  upon  the  decapitated  bodies  of  those 
wricked  men  who  had  there  perished  in  judgment,  and  whom  they  had  imi 
tated  in  their  foolhardy  and  sinful  ways. 

2  The  destruction  was  to  overtake  them  in  their  own  territory  ;  and  the 
sentence  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  "Let  it  return  to  the  scabbard,"  may 
be  understood  thus  : — 'The  sword  must  do  the  work  of  destruction  for  which 
it  is  drawn  ;  do  not  trouble  yourselves  to  move  out  of  your  place  ;  let  it  do' 
its  work,  and  then  be  sheathed ;  it  is  in  vain  to  resist  or  strive  against  the 
doom. 

3  The  word  here  is  singular  in  the  Hebrew,  flWD,  though  it  scarcely 
admits  of  being  rendered  but  in  the  plural,— forgers  of  that  which  destroys 
—slaughter-weapons.     There  is  an  evident  allusion  to  the  language  in  Isa. 
liv.  16.     But  compare  also  Jer.  v.  26. 


THE  ALL-PERVADING  SINFULNESS.  247 

the  fall  of  Jerusalem,,  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon  were 
turned  against  them,  and  desolated  their  country.  But  this 
was  only  the  beginning  of  their  troubles,  for  they  never  at 
tained  again  to  political  power  and  importance ;  they  gradually 
dwindled  away,  till  their  separate  existence  ceased,  and  their 
place  was  no  more  known.  u  So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  O 
Lord  (so  shall  they  indeed  perish — in  the  destruction  of  these 
aliens  and  scorners  the  doom  of  all  is  reflected) ;  but  let  them 
that  love  thee  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  strength." 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

THE  LORD'S  JUDGMENT  UPON  THE  ALL-PERVADING  SINFULNESS 
OF  JERUSALEM. 


'  Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  "Wilt  thou  (not) 
judge,  wilt  thou  (not)  judge  the  bloody  city?  and  make  her  to  know  all  her 
abominations?  3.  And  thou  shalt  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  The 
city  is  one  that  sheds  blood  in  the  midst  of  it,  that  her  time  may  come,  and 
has  made  idols  for  herself,  that  she  may  be  defiled.  4.  By  thy  blood  which 
thou  hast  shed,  thou  hast  become  guilty ;  and  by  thine  idols  which  thou 
hast  made,  thou  art  defiled  ;  and  thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  draw  near, 
and  hast  reached  thine  years ;  therefore  have  I  made  thee  a  reproach  to  the 
heathen,  and  a  mocking  to  all  countries.  5.  Those  that  are  near,  and  those 
that  are  far  from  thee,  shall  mock  thee  (saying),  "  Thou  polluted  one  in 
name,  and  full  of  confusion!"1  6.  Behold,  the  princes  of  Israel,  each  one 
according  to  his  power,  were  in  thee,  in  order  that  they  might  shed  blood 
(as  if  that  were  the  only  purpose  of  their  existence).  7.  Father  and  mother 
have  been  set  light  by  in  thee ;  in  thee  they  have  treated  the  stranger  with 
injustice ;  the  widow  and  the  fatherless  have  been  oppressed  in  thee.  8. 
Thou  hast  despised  my  holy  things,  and  hast  profaned  my  Sabbaths.  9.  Men 
of  slander  have  been  in  thee,  that  they  might  shed  blood ;  and  on  the 
mountains  have  they  eaten  in  thee ;  scandalous  things  have  they  done  in 
the  midst  of  thee.  10.  A  father's  nakedness  has  been  discovered  in  thee ; 
they  have  humbled  in  thee  her  that  was  set  apart  as  polluted.  11.  And  one 
has  committed  abomination  with  his  neighbour's  wife ;  and  another  has 
shamefully  defiled  his  daughter-in-law  ;  and  another  has  humbled  in  thee  his 
sister,  the  daughter  of  his  father.  12.  They  have  taken  bribes  in  thee  that 


1  These  words  are  best  understood  as  the  reproach  itself,  which  the  sur 
rounding  countries  cast  against  Jerusalem.  They  held  her  up  to  derision  as 
utterly  soiled  in  reputation,  and,  at  the  same  time,  involved  in  mischief. 
In  name  and  reality  alike  evil. 


248  EZEKIEL  XXII. 

they  might  shed  blood ;  thou  hast  taken  usury  and  increase,  and  hast  over 
reached  thy  neighbour  by  extortion,  and  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah.  13.  And,  behold,  I  have  smitten  my  hand  at  thy  overreach 
ing  which  thou  hast  committed,  and  at  the  blood  which  is  in  the  midst  of  thee. 
14.  Can  thy  heart  endure,  or  thy  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days  that  I  shall 
deal  with  thee?  I  Jehovah  have  spoken,  and  I  will  do  it.  15.  And  I  will 
scatter  thee  among  the  heathen,  and  disperse  thee  among  the  countries,  and 
will  consume  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee.  16.  And  thou  art  polluted  by  thy 
self1  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen  ;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

17.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  18.  Son  of  man,  the 
house  of  Israel  has  become  to  me  dross ;  the  whole  of  them  are  brass,  and 
tin,  and  iron,  and  lead,  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace — the  dross  of  silver  are 
they.  19.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  ye  have  all  be 
come  dross,  therefore,  behold,  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  Jerusalem. 
20.  As  silver,  and  brass,  and  iron,  and  lead,  and  tin  are  gathered  into  the 
midst  of  the  furnace,  to  blow  the  fire  upon  it  that  it  may  melt ;  so  will  I 
gather  in  my  anger  and  my  fury,  and  I  will  leave  and  melt  you.  21.  And  I 
will  collect  you,  and  will  blow  upon  you  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath,  and  ye  shall 
be  melted  in  the  midst  of  it.  22.  As  silver  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the 
furnace,  so  shall  ye  be  melted  in  the  midst  of  it ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I 
Jehovah  have  poured  out  my  fury  upon  you.  23.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah 
came  to  me,  saying,  24.  Son  of  man,  say  to  her,  Thou  art  the  laud  that  is 
not  cleansed,  not  rained  upon  in  the  day  of  indignation.  25.  The  conspiracy 
of  prophets  in  the  midst  of  her  is  like  a  roaring  lion  ravening  for  the  prey ; 
they  have  devoured  souls ;  they  have  taken  treasure  and  precious  things ; 
they  have  multiplied  her  widows  in  the  midst  of  her.  26.  Her  priests  have 
done  violence  to  my  law,2  and  have  profaned  my  holy  things  ;  they  have  put 
no  difference  between  holy  and  profane,  nor  taught  between  polluted  and 
clean,  and  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  Sabbaths,  and  I  am  profaned  among 
them.  27.  Her  princes  in  the  midst  of  her  are  as  wolves  ravening  for  their 
prey,  to  shed  blood,  to  destroy  souls,  that  they  may  get  unjust  gain.  28.  And 
her  prophets  have  plastered  for  them  with  whitewash,  seeing  vanity,  and 
divining  lies  to  them,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah 
has  not  spoken.  29.  The  people  of  the  land  have  used  oppression,  and 
exercised  robbery,  and  oppressed  the  poor  and  needy,  and  overreached  the 
stranger  by  going  against  the  right.  30.  And  I  sought  for  a  man  among 
them  that  should  make  up  the  wall,  and  stand  in  the  breach  before  me  for 


1  Our  translators  have  here  put  the  proper  rendering  in  the  margin,  and 
retained  a  quite  wrong  one  in  the  text.     Most  of  the  old  translators  and  in 
terpreters  give  the  sense,  "  And  I  shall  be  profaned  by  thee."     Conjectural 
emendations  of  the  text  are  resorted  to  by  Ewald  and  others,  but  without 
any  necessity.     The  thought  expressed  is,  that  Jerusalem  now  appeared, 
from  her  depraved  and  miserable  condition,  as  a  polluted  thing  in  the  eyes 
of  her  heathen  neighbours  ;  and  she  had  brought  the  reproach  upon  herself. 
It  had  not  come  upon  her  as  a  calamity,  which  she  had  no  power  to  prevent ; 
but  she  had,  with  her  own  hand,  made  herself  vile. 

2  Such,  undoubtedly,  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression  '•rnin  1D»n.     It 
does  not  mean  simply,  that  the  priests  personally  transgressed  the  law,  but 
that  they  dealt  violently  with  it — wrested  it  in  a  way  to  suit  their  own 
selfish  ends. 


THE  ALL-PERVADING  SIXFULNESS.  249 

the  land,  that  I  might  not  destroy  it ;  but  I  found  none.  81.  And  I  pour 
out  upon  them  my  indignation ;  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath  I  consume  them :  I 
recompense  their  way  upon  their  head,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

A  VERY  few  remarks  will  suffice  on  this  chapter,  as  it  presents 
scarcely  any  difficulty  in  interpretation,  and  in  its  theme  differs 
very  little  from  some  portions  that  have  already  passed  under 
consideration.  It  stands  closely  related,  however,  to  the  last 
chapter,  and  may  fitly  be  regarded  as  supplementary  to  it ;  the 
former  having  presented  a  striking  delineation  of  the  Lord's  pur 
pose  to  execute  the  severity  of  his  displeasure  upon  the  people  of 
Jerusalem,  while  this  returns  to  lay  open  the  fearful  mass  of  cor 
ruption  on  account  of  which  such  severity  was  to  be  inflicted. 
In  what  is  written  here,  there  is  nothing  properly  new ;  in  its 
general  purport,  it  is  a  repetition  of  the  charges  which  were  urged 
in  chap,  xx.;  and  so  the  chapter  begins  much  in  the  same  way, 
with  a  call  upon  the  prophet  to  judge  the  people,  and  set  before 
them  their  iniquities.  There,  however,  the  charge  took  the  form 
of  an  historical  review,  for  the  purpose  of  connecting  the  present 
state  of  wickedness  with  the  past,  and  showing  how  continuously 
the  stream  of  corruption  had  flowed  through  all  periods  of  their 
national  existence.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  prophet  looks 
exclusively  to  the  present,  and  brings  out  in  fearful  array  the 
many  heinous  and  rampant  sins  which  were  crying  in  Heaven's 
ear  for  vengeance. 

The  first  section,  reaching  to  the  end  of  ver.  16,  is  chiefly 
occupied  with  detailing  the  various  kinds  of  transgression  that 
were  practised  in  the  land, — the  idolatry,  revelry,  and  lust,  the 
selfishness,  treachery,  oppression,  and  bloodshed,  with  which  all 
were  polluted.  The  dark  picture  is  drawn  so  as  to  exhibit  a 
sharp  contrast  between  the  impure  condition  to  which  Israel 
had  now  come,  and  the  pure  one  which  Moses  had  of  old  repre 
sented  them  as  called  to  maintain  (Lev.  xviii.-xx.).  In  all 
that  was  holy,  virtuous,  and  good,  they  were  to  stand  honourably 
apart  from  the  heathen  nations,  while  in  reality  they  had  sunk 
to  a  level  with  these  in  the  practice  of  every  species  of  enormity. 
Hence  the  necessity  of  a  dealing  in  judgment — not  utterly  to 
exterminate  them  as  a  people,  but  to  purge  out  the  corruptions 
which  were  defeating  the  design  of  their  calling  and  election  of 
God.  "And  I  will  scatter  thee  among  the  heathen,"  is  the 
closing  denunciation  of  this  part,  "and  disperse  thee  in  the 


250  EZEKIEL  XXII. 

countries,  and  will  consume  thy  filthincss  out  of  thee.  And  tbou 
art  polluted  by  thyself  (i.e.  by  thy  own  sinful  doings,  and  the 
judgments  these  have  deservedly  brought  down  on  thee)  in  the 
eyes  of  the  heathen ;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  Jehovah." 

The  next  section,  vers.  17-22,  is  a  sort  of  figurative  episode, 
in  which  the  prophet,  as  if  impatient  to  see  so  much  wickedness 
visited  with  its  due  chastisement,  introduces  a  description  of  the 
righteous  judgment  that  was  ready  to  be  executed  upon  them. 
The  nation  is  represented  as  a  miserable  compound  of  the  baser 
metals  and  of  the  dross  of  silver — silver  that  has  become  dross; 
for  it  is  the  degeneracy  from  good  to  bad,  as  well  as  the  actual 
state  of  corruption,  which  the  prophet  would  have  us  to  mark. 
They  were,  therefore,  to  be  thrown  into  the  burning  furnace  of 
the  Lord's  anger,  so  as  to  be  blown  upon,  and  melted  ;  that  the 
bad — a  result  implied,  though  not  actually  expressed — might  be 
consumed,  and  the  good  separated  and  preserved.  It  was  in 
Jerusalem  this  refining  process  was  to  be  undergone  ;  so  that 
the  doom  threatened  is  but  another  form  of  the  evil  already 
announced  under  the  images  of  a  devouring  fire  and  a  piercing 
sword.  It  was,  in  other  words,  the  desolations  to  be  accom 
plished  by  the  king  of  Babylon. 

In  the  last  and  concluding  section  (vers.  23-31),  the  prophet 
again  returns  to  the  charge  of  guilt,  but  with  a  more  especial 
reference  to  the  different  ranks  and  orders  of  society  in  the  land, 
showing  how  each  had  corrupted  their  ways,  and,  as  it  were, 
conspired  together  to  bring  on  the  catastrophe.  The  land,  as  a 
whole,  presents  itself  to  his  eye  as  a  polluted  region,  and,  as 
such,  not  to  be  blessed — not  to  be  rained  upon  (one  of  the  great 
covenant-blessings)  in  the  day  of  indignation.  The  prophets 
have  acted  like  beasts  of  prey,  intent  only  on  their  personal  gain 
(ver.  25)  ;  the  priests  have  done  violence  to  the  law,  wrested  it 
to  improper  ends,  and  have  practically  allowed  the  distinctions 
between  good  and  evil,  clean  and  unclean,  to  go  into  desuetude 
(ver.  26)  ;  the  princes  have  exercised  cruelty  and  oppression, 
countenanced  and  encouraged  by  the  prophets  (vers.  27,  28);  the 
people  at  large  have  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  their  leaders,  and 
.done  iniquity  as  they  could,  each  one  against  his  neighbour 
(ver.  29).  "And  I  sought,"  it  is  added,  "  f  or  a  man  among 
them  that  should  make  up  the  wall,  and  stand  in  the  breach 
before  me  for  the  land,  that  I  might  not  destroy  it ;  but  I  found 


STORY  OF  AIIOLAH  AND  AHOLIBAH.  251 

none."  It  does  not  mean  that  there  was  literally  not  a  righteous 
man  in  it ;  for  Jeremiah  was  still  there,  and  doubtless  others  of 
a  kindred  spirit  beside  him.  But  Jeremiah  had  been  discharged 
from  praying  for  the  people  (chap.  xi.  14),  as  being  now  doomed 
to  destruction  ;  and  the  meaning  here  is,  that  no  one  now,  know 
ing  the  state  to  which  things  had  come,  and  understanding  the 
Lord's  mind  concerning  them,  would  any  longer  undertake  to  do 
the  part  of  a  repairer  of  the  breach,  so  as  to  have  matters  brought 
right  again.  "  Therefore,"  the  inevitable  conclusion  follows,  "  I 
pour  out  my  indignation  upon  them;I  consume  them  in  the 
fire  of  my  wrath  ;  I  recompense  their  way  upon  their  head,  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah." 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

THE    STORY    OF    ISRAEL'S    SIN   AND    PUNISHMENT    TARABOLICALLY 
EXHIBITED  UNDER  THE  NAMES  OF  AIIOLAH  AND  AHOLIBAH. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
there  were  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother,  o.  And  in  Egypt  they 
played  the  wanton ;  in  their  youth  they  wantoned  ;  there  were  their  breasts 
pressed,  and  there  were  the  teats  of  their  virginity  bruised.  4.  And  their 
names  were  Aholah  the  elder,  and  Aholibah  her  sister ;  and  they  were  mine, 
and  they  bare  sons  and  daughters ;  and  their  names  were  Samaria- Aholah, 
and  Jerusalem- Aholibah.  5.  And  Aholah,  when  under  me  (see  on  chap.  xvi. 
32),  played  the  wanton  ;  and  doted  upon  her  lovers,  on  the  Assyrians  her 
neighbours.1  6.  Clothed  in  purple,  captains  and  governors,  all  of  them 
desirable  young  men,  knights  riding  upon  horses.  7.  And  she  bestowed  her 
wantonness  upon  them,  all  the  choice  of  the  sons  of  Assyria ;  and  with  all  on 
whom  she  doted,  with  all  her  idols  she  polluted  herself.  8.  And  her  whore 
doms,  which  she  brought  from  Egypt,  she  did  not  leave ;  for  in  her  youth 


1  There  is  no  ground  for  doubting  that  D'OiTp  was  used  to  express  near 
ness  of  relation — neighbours ;  either  in  respect  to  juxtaposition,  or  to  close 
ness  of  connection,  as  friends.  Ps.  xxxviii.  11  alone  proves  this,  and  seems 
also  favourable  to  the  meaning  neighbour  in  the  ordinary  sense,  rather  than 
to  that  of  relationship.  The  Assyrians,  who  at  the  time  referred  to  were 
extending  their  dominions  on  every  side,  might  properly  enough  be  called, 
even  locally,  the  neighbours  of  Israel.  On  the  north-east  the  one  kingdom 
certainly  bordered  on  the  other.  Ewald's  change  of  the  text,  and  Hitzig's 
fanciful  analysis  to  establish  the  sense  red,  can  yield  no  satisfaction. 


252  EZEKIEL  XXIII. 

they  lay  with  her,  and  they  bruised  the  breasts  of  her  virginity,  and  poured 
their  whoredoms  upon  her.  9.  Therefore  did  I  give  her  into  the  hand  of  her 
lovers,  into  the  hand  of  the  Assyrians,  upon  whom  she  doted.  10.  These 
discovered  her  nakedness ;  took  her  sons  and  her  daughters,  and  slew  her 
with  the  sword  ;  and  she  became  a  warning  (literally,  a  name)  to  women  ; 
and  they  executed  judgment  upon  her. 

1 1.  And  her  sister  Aholibah  saw  it,  and  did  corruptly  in  inordinate  love 
more  than  she,  and  in  her  whoredoms  more  than  the  whoredoms  of  her  sister. 
12.  She  doted  upon  the  Assyrians  her  neighbours,  captains  and  governors, 
clothed  most  gorgeously,  knights  riding  upon  horses,  all  of  them  desirable 
young  men.  13.  And  I  saw  that  she  was  denied  ;  they  had  both  one  way. 
14.  And  she  increased  her  whoredoms ;  and  saw  men  portrayed  upon  the 
wall,  the  likenesses  of  the  Chaldeans  portrayed  with  vermilion  ;  15.  Girded 
with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  wearing  long  coloured  turbans  upon  their 
heads,1  all  of  them  having  the  appearance  of  leaders,  with  Chaldea  for  the 
land  of  their  birth.  16.  And  she  doted  upon  them  as  soon  as  her  eyes  be 
held  them,  and  she  sent  messengers  to  them  into  Chaldea.  17.  And  the 
Babylonians  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love,  and  they  defiled  her  with 
their  whoredom,  and  she  was  polluted  with  them  ;  and  her  soul  was  satiated 
with  them  (or,  loathed  on  account  of  them).  18.  And  she  discovered  her 
whoredoms,  and  discovered  her  nakedness ;  and  my  soul  did  loathe  in  re 
spect  to  her,  like  as  my  soul  loathed  respecting  her  sister.  19.  And  she 
multiplied  her  whoredoms,  to  call  to  remembrance  the  days  of  her  youth,  in 
which  she  played  the  wanton  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  '20.  And  she  doted 
upon  their  paramours,  whose  fle^h  is  as  the  flesh  of  asses,  and  whose  issue 


1  Gesenius  renders  this  clause,  "  redundant  with  mitres  upon  their  heads," 
that  is,  "  wearing  long  turbans  hanging  down  from  their  heads."  In  this 
explanation  he  omits  the  idea  of  dyed  or  coloured  usually  connected  with 
the  D  v^QE,  and,  we  think,  without  any  sufficient  reason ;  for  the  word  is 
most  naturally  derived  from  730>  to  dip,  whence  dyed  and  coloured  readily 
flow.  It  is  also  matter  of  historical  certainty  that  the  Assyrians  delighted 
not  only  in  loose  and  flowing,  but  also  in  richly  coloured  dresses.  The  recent 
discoveries  amid  the  remains  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  have  thrown  fresh  light 
upon  this  subject,  and  supply  many  illustrations  of  the  description  of  Ezekiel 
in  this  chapter.  In  respect,  generally,  to  the  representations  upon  the  monu 
ments,  we  find  that  "  the  dresses  furnish  us  with  a  proof  of  a  state  of  great 
luxury.  The  robes  of  the  Assyrians  were  generally  ample  and  flowing,  but 
differed  in  form  from  those  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  Persians.  They  con 
sisted  of  tunics  or  robes  varying  in  length,  in  mantles  of  divers  shapes,  of 
long  fringed  scarfs,  and  of  embroidered  girdles.  Ornaments  were  scattered 
with  profusion  over  these  dresses,  some  of  which  appear  to  have  been  emble 
matic  of  certain  dignities  or  employments.  .  .  .  Cyrus  likewise  is  related 
by  Xenophon  to  have  given  each  of  his  superior  officers  and  allies  a  dress  of 
the  Median  fashion,  i.e.  long  robes  of  a  variety  of  the  brightest  colours,  and 
richly  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver,"  etc.  (Bonomi's  Nineveh,  p.  319.) 
It  is  needless  to  adduce  quotations  in  proof  of  the  practice  of  engraving  and 
painting  the  figures  of  men,  and  especially  of  war  scenes,  upon  the  walls  of 
houses,  as  it  is  now  familiarly  known  to  all.  In  these  sculptures  also  the 
remains  have  been  found  of  colouring  in  red,  blue,  and  black. 


STORY  OF  AHOLAH  AND  AHOLIBAH.  253 

as  the  issue  of  horses.  21.  And  thou  didst  repeat  (literally,  visit,  go  back 
upon)  the  lewdness  of  thy  youth  in  the  bruising  of  thy  teats  by  the  Egyp 
tians,  because  of  thy  youthful  breasts. 

22.  Therefore,  0  Aholibah,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  will 
stir  up  thy  lovers  against  thee,  those  with  whom  thou  hast  had  loathing  in 
thy  soul,  and  they  shall  come  against  thee  round  about.  23.  The  Babylon 
ians  and  all  the  Chaldeans,  Pekod,  and  Shoa,  and  Koa,1  all  the  Assyrians 
with  them,  desirable  young  men  all  of  them,  captains  and  governors,  leaders 
and  men  of  renown,  riding  every  one  on  horses.  24.  And  they  shall  come 
against  thee  with  chariots,  waggons,  and  wheel-work,  and  with  an  assembly 
of  people ;  they  shall  set  against  thee  buckler  and  shield,  and  helmet  round 
about ;  and  I  set  before  them  judgment,  and  they  shall  judge  thee  according 
to  their  judgments.  25.  And  I  lay  against  thee  my  jealousy,  and  they  shall 
deal  with  thee  in  fury  ;  they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears  ;  and 
thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword ;  they  shall  take  thy  sons  and  thy 
daughters,  and  thy  remnant  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire.  26.  And  they 
shall  strip  thee  of  thy  clothes,  and  take  away  thy  beautiful  jewels.  27.  And 
I  make  thy  lewdness  to  cease  from  thee,  and  thy  whoredoms  from  the  land  of 
Egypt ;  and  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  thine  eyes  to  them,  nor  remember  Egypt 
any  more.  28.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  give  thee  into 
the  hand  of  such  as  thou  hatest,  whom  thy  soul  has  loathed.  29.  And  they 
shall  deal  with  thee  in  hatred  ;  and  they  shall  take  away  all  thy  labour,  and 
shall  leave  thee  naked  and  bare  ;  and  the  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall 
be  discovered,  and  thy  lewdness,  and  thy  wanton  courses.  80.  I  will  do  these 
things  to  thee  because  thou  hast  gone  a-whoring  after  the  heathen,  because 
thou  art  defiled  with  their  idols.  31.  In  the  way  of  thy  sister  hast  thou 
gone,  and  her  cup  I  put  into  thy  hand.  32.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Thou  shalt  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  which  is  deep  and  large ;  thou  shalt  be 
for  laughter  and  mockery,  as  much  as  possible  (see  note  on  chap.  xxi.  28). 
33.  Thou  shalt  be  filled  with  drunkenness  and  sorrow — the  cup  of  astonish 
ment  and  desolation — the  cup  of  thy  sister  Samaria.  34.  Thou  shalt  even 
drink  and  lick  it,  and  its  ware  shalt  thou  break,  and  thy  breasts  shalt  thou 
pluck  off ;  2  I  have  spoken  it  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  35.  Therefore,  thus 


1  The  chief  peculiarity  in  this  part  of  the  description  is  the  accumulation 
of  names  respecting  the  Babylonians,  at  ver.  23 :"  Sons  of  Babel,  and  all  the 
Chaldeans,  Pekod,  and  Shoa,  and  Koa  ; "  but  it  is  one  in  regard  to  which  little 
information  can  be  given.     The  LXX.  simply  give  the  Hebrew  words.     That 
they  are  designations,  in  some  respect,  of  the  Babylonians  generally,  and  not 
names  of  persons  or  tribes  belonging  to  the  empire,  seems  certain.     By  a 
seriesof  transformations,  Hitzig  brings  them  to  signify  different  ranks — noble, 
and  prince,  and  lord ;  good  enough,  certainly,  if  one  could  only  get  solid 
footing  as  to  the  ground  on  which  liberties  are  taken  with  the  particular 
words.     Pekod  is  used  by  Jeremiah  (chap.  1.  21)  as  a  designation  of  Babylon 
— visitation,  punishment,  denoting  it  as  peculiarly  the  land  of  judgment. 
Perhaps  it  is  used  here  to  indicate  that  it  was  to  be  punishment  in  a  double 
sense — first,  actively  against  Judah,  as  well  as  afterwards  passively  in  respect 
to  herself.     Shoa  and  Koa  are  explained  by  the  ancient  interpreters  to  mean 
much  the  same  thing — rich  and  noble,  or  powerful :  designations  of  the 
Babylonians  as  possessed  of  great  resources — having  all  the  world's  dignity 
and  opulence  at  their  command. 

2  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is,  that  she  acted  after  receiving  the  cup  of 


254  EZEKIEL  XXIII. 

saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  hast  cast  me 
behind  thy  back,  do  thou  also  bear  thy  lewdness  and  thy  whoredoms. 

36.  And  Jehovah  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  wilt  thou  (not)  judge  Aholah 
and  Aholibah?  and  declare  to  them  their  abominations  ?  37.  For  they  have 
committed  adultery ;  and  blood  is  in  their  hands,  and  with  their  idols  they 
have  committed  adultery  ;  and  also  their  children  that  they  have  borne  to  me 
they  have  made  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  them.  38.  This  besides  have 
they  done  to  me,  they  have  deliled  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day,  and  pro 
faned  my  sabbaths.  39.  And  when  they  had  slain  their  children  to  their 
idols,  they  then  came  on  the  same  day  into  my  sanctuary  to  profane  it ;  and 
behold,  thus  did  they  do  in  the  midst  of  my  house.  40.  And  further,  thou 
didst  send  for  men  coming  from  afar,  to  them  was  a  messenger  sent ;  and 
lo !  they  came,  for  whom  thou  didst  wash  thyself,  paint  thine  eyes,  and  deck 
thyself  with  ornaments.  41.  And  thou  satest  upon  a  stately  bed,  with  a 
table  prepared  before  it,  and  my  incense  and  my  oil  didst  thou  set  upon  it. 
42.  And  there  was  a  voice  of  a  multitude  in  security  with  her ;  and  with 
men  from  the  mass,  men  that  came  from  the  wilderness,  Sabeans  ;  and  they 
put  bracelets  upon  their  hands,  and  crowns  of  beauty  upon  their  heads.  43. 
And  I  said  to  her  worn  out  with  adulteries,  Will  they  now  commit  her 
whoredoms?  and  she?  44.  And  they  went  in  unto  her,  as  they  go  in  to 
a  harlot ;  so  did  they  go  in  to  Aholah  and  to  Aholibah,  the  lewd  women. 
45.  And  the  righteous  men,  they  judged  them  with  the  judgment  of  an 
adulteress,  and  the  judgment  of  those  that  shed  blood ;  for  they  are 
adulteresses,  and  blood  is  in  their  hands.  46.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  I  will  bring  up  a  company  against  them,  and  will  give  them  to  be 
removed  and  spoiled.  47.  And  the  company  shall  stone  them  with  stones, 
and  despatch  them  with  their  swords ;  they  shall  slay  their  sons  and  their 
daughters,  and  burn  up  their  houses  with  fire.  48.  And  I  will  make  lewd- 
ness  to  cease  from  the  earth,  and  all  women  shall  be  instructed,  and  they 
shall  not  do  after  your  lewdness.  49.  And  they  shall  recompense  your 
lewdness  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  idols,  and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

THE  figure  employed,  and  the  train  of  thought  presented  under 
it  in  this  chapter,  are  so  much  akin  to  those  already  contained  in 
chap,  xvi.,  that  I  deem  it  unnecessary  to  give  more  than  the 
briefest  outline  of  the  subject.  The  nature  of  the  representation 
also  forbids  any  minuteness  of  detail.  It  is  the  covenant-people 
in  both  its  branches,  Israel  and  Judah,  and  not  the  latter  merely, 
as  in  chap,  xvi.,  that  the  prophet  here  has  in  view.  Hence  there 
are  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother — the  name  of  the 
one  Aholah  (her  tent,  her  being  taken  in  the  sense  of  her  own\ 
of  the  other  Aholibah  (my  tent  in  her).  The  former  repre 
sents,  we  are  told,  Samaria,  or  the  portion  of  the  covenant-people 
whose  capital  Samaria  was,  and  the  latter  Jerusalem,  or  that 

the  Lord's  anger,  like  a  person  utterly  devoid  of  sense  and  reason,  breaking 
in  pieces  the  vessel  itself  from  which  she  had  drunk,  and  tearing  her  very 
breasts.  The  image  of  the  cup  in  Scripture,  as  given  from  the  Lord  to  an 
enemy,  always  conveys  the  idea  of  utter  prostration  and  helpless  impotence. 
— Coinp.  Jer.  li.  7 ;  Nahum  iii.  11  ;  Obad.  v.  16  ;  Hab.  ii.  15,  16. 


STORY  OF  AHOLAH  AND  AHOLIBAH.  255 

other  portion  whose  capital  was  there.  The  names  of  the  two 
divisions  respectively  were  evidently  chosen  for  the  purpose  of 
expressing  the  relation  in  which  each  stood  to  God ; — the  one, 
Samaria,  having,  at  the  very  commencement  of  her  separate 
existence,  apostatized  from  Jehovah,  and  set  up  a  tent  or  standard 
for  herself ;  while  the  other,  Jerusalem,  still  had  in  her  the 
tabernacle  of  God,  the  true  symbols  of  worship,  and  the  divinely 
appointed  means  of  obtaining  God's  favour  and  blessing.  This 
difference,  however,  vanishes  in  the  sequel :  at  least,  no  further 
appears  than  in  the  precedence  in  guilt  and  punishment  ascribed 
to  Samaria,  on  which  account  also  she  is  called  the  elder  sister. 
Iniquity  in  her  reached  its  maturity  earlier,  and  sooner  also 
received  its  deserved  recompense ;  but  without  the  effect  of  de 
terring  the  other  sister  from  pursuing  the  same  infatuated  course; 
she  was  of  a  kindred  spirit,  and  came  in  process  of  time  to  the 
same  miserable  end. 

It  is  to  be  noted  here  also,  in  respect  to  the  representation  on 
both  sides,  that  the  breach  of  conjugal  fidelity  charged  against 
the  daughters  has  reference  not  so  much  to  their  idolatrous  prac 
tices  as  to  their  worldly  spirit — their  disposition  to  form  alli 
ances  with  heathen  nations,  and  to  look  to  them,  instead  of  God, 
for  their  protection  and  safety.  The  one,  no  doubt,  was  very 
closely  connected  with  the  other,  and  was  no  more,  indeed,  than 
its  natural  outgoing  and  result.  Hitzig  plainly  carries  the  matter 
too  far,  when  he  denies  that  there  is  any  reference  whatever  here 
to  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  and  that  the  heathen  nations  them 
selves  are  alone  the  idols.  This  obliges  him  to  hold  the  last 
clause  in  ver.  7,  "with  all  their  idols  she  defiled  herself,"  to  be  a 
corruption ;  and  it  also  overlooks  the  inseparable  connection  be 
tween  the  two  false  directions.  The  spirit  of  heathenish  idolatry, 
situated  as  Israel  was,  naturally  led  to  the  copying  after  heathenish 
manners,  and  the  forming  of  heathenish  alliances;  and  with  every 
step  taken  in  the  one  direction,  the  other  was  sure  to  follow. 
We  cannot,  therefore,  suppose  that  the  prophet  should  have  en 
tirely  omitted  any  reference  to  the  idolatrous  spirit  which  formed 
the  root  of  the  evil.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  undoubtedly  the 
other  direction  which  he  has  throughout  chiefly  in  view;  partly 
because  the  former  one  had  already  received  very  strong  and 
repeated  delineations  (especially  in  chap.  xvi.  and  xx.),  and 
partly  because  the  prophet  wished  to  make  the  people  under- 


256  EZEKIEL  XXIII. 

stand  how  God  had  in  righteous  judgment  resolved  to  turn 
their  false  confidences  into  the  immediate  instruments  of  their 
ruin.  It  was  their  crime  to  have  sought  after  such  lovers,  and 
it  was  to  be  their  punishment  that  these  lovers  should  become 
their  destroyers. 

In  the  case  of  Aholah,or  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  the  apostatizing 
disposition  is  represented  as  discovering  itself  not  only  in  the 
foulness  they  contracted  in  Egypt,  and  their  still  hankering  after 
that  when  they  were  settled  in  Canaan,  but  also  in  that  they  be 
came  enamoured  of  the  Assyrians.  These  Assyrians  are  called 
their  neighbours  (ver.  5),  as  they  are  also  of  the  other  division  of 
the  covenant-people  (ver.  12)  ;  and  are  described  as  having  the 
gallant  appearance  and  the  gay  attire  which  were  fitted  to  work 
upon  such  light  and  inconstant  hearts.  The  meaning  simply  is, 
that  they  saw  in  that  great  neighbouring  power  all  the  elements 
of  worldly  rank  and  prosperity  which  they  desired  to  possess 
themselves,  and  trusted  to  their  connection  with  it,  rather  than 
their  interest  in  God,  for  the  strength  they  needed.  The  notices 
which  the  historical  books  contain  respecting  the  commencement 
of  this  connection  are  so  brief,  that  it  would  be  improper  to 
refer  to  them  for  complete  information  on  the  subject. 

The  first  express  mention  of  the  Assyrians  in  connection  with 
the  kingdom  of  Israel,  in  the  reign  of  Men  ah  em,  when  Pul  is 
said  to  have  come  against  the  land  (2  Kings  xv.  19),  has  all  the 
appearance  of  a  notice  depending  upon  something  going  before 
— a  prior  connection,  which  gave  him,  as  he  thought,  a  right  to 
interfere  amid  the  troubles  that  then  prevailed.  The  word  of 
the  prophet  seems  plainly  to  imply  that  the  first  movement  in 
this  direction  was  on  the  part  of  Israel — that  she  herself  courted 
the  alliance ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  as  well  from  the  history 
as  from  the  word  of  the  prophet,  that  the  connection  ended  most 
disastrously  for  Israel ;  that  she  was  indeed  given  up  by  God 
into  the  hands  of  that  heathen  power,  to  be  humbled,  and 
smitten,  and  brought  to  desolation. 

In  regard  to  the  people  of  Judah,  represented  by  Aholibah, 
the  delineation  is  quite  similar,  only  that  their  folly  and  guilt 
were  aggravated  by  having  before  them  the  ruin  which  befell 
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  They  are  described  as  being  captivated 
and  allured  by  the  Assyrians  first,  and  then  by  the  Babylonians, 
so  that  their  heart  departed  from  the  Lord  to  lean  upon  an  arm 


STORY  OF  AHOLAH  AND  AHOLIBAH.  257 

of  flesh.  The  historical  notices  regarding  this  portion  of  Judah's 
course,  from  the  time  of  Ahaz  downwards,  which  are  much 
fuller  than  those  given  of  the  like  period  of  Israel's  history, 
amply  bear  out  the  language  of  the  prophet.  And  how  com 
pletely  the  remaining  part  of  the  description  was  also  verified, 
how  intense  a  loathing  was  created  between  the  two  parties,  and 
how  utter  a  destruction  was  brought  upon  the  people  of  Judah 
by  those  objects  of  their  former  confidence  and  admiration,  it 
is  needless  at  present  to  relate. 

The  closing  part  of  the  description  represents  the  two  women, 
and  especially  the  one  that  personated  the  people  of  Judah,  as 
persevering  to  the  last  in  their  wicked  and  profligate  courses. 
Like  persons  in  the  final  stages  of  abandonment,  they  went  on 
rioting  in  the  ways  of  evil,  unchecked  by  all  the  troubles  and 
humiliations  they  had  experienced  in  the  past ;  and  now,  there 
fore,  as  utterly  reprobate  and  hardened  and  hopeless,  they  must 
be  adjudged  to  the  doom  appointed  against  such  incorrigible  and 
shameless  offenders.  So  the  doleful  story  ends.  The  prophet 
looks  only,  from  first  to  last,  to  the  course  of  crime  and  its  de 
served  recompense ;  and  he  allows  the  curtain  to  drop  without 
one  gleam  of  hope  as  to  the  future.  He  sees  that  the  hammer 
of  the  law  in  its  strongest  form  is  needed  to  break  the  hard  and 

O 

stony  heart  of  the  people.  So  urgent  was  the  call  for  a  work  of 
conviction,  and  so  great  the  danger  of  that  not  being  effectually 
wrought,  that  he  would  not  drop  a  word  which  might  lighten  the 
impression  of  guilt  upon  their  minds,  or  afford  the  least  excuse 
for  delay.  His  message  was,  Now  or  never.  Judged  by  the 
sense  of  right  and  wrong  current  among  men,  your  conduct  to 
ward  God  calls  for  judgment  without  mercy.  And  if  there  be 
not  immediately  awakened  the  contrition  of  sincere  repentance, 
you  have  nothing  to  expect  but  the  most  unsparing  visitations 
of  wrath. 


258  EZEKIEL  XXIV. 


CIIAPTEE  XXIV. 

THE   VISION    OF   THE   BOILING   CALDttON,   AND    OF  THE 

DEATH  OF  EZEKIEL'S  WIFE. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me  in  the  ninth  year,  in  the 
tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  of  the  month,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man,  write  thee 
the  name  of  the  day,  this  self-same  day  ;  it  is  the  very  day  on  which  the  king 
of  Babylon  lay  against  Jerusalem.1  3.  And  utter  a  parable  to  the  rebellious 
house,  and  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Set  on  a  caldron,  set 
it  on,  and  also  pour  water  into  it.  4.  Gather  into  it  its  pieces  {i.e.  those  which 
properly  belong  to  it,  and  are  in  a  sense  its  own),  every  good  piece,  thigh  and 
shoulder,  of  the  choice  of  bones  full  (i.e.  the  pieces  that  not  only  are  in  them 
selves  best,  but  also  enclose  the  strongest  arid  firmest  bones — for  it  means 
bones  in  the  meat,  not  separate  from  it).  5.  Of  the  choice  of  the  flock  take 
thou,  and  also  pile  the  bones  under  it  (the  bony  parts  as  distinguished  from  the 
fleshy)  ;  boil  it  thoroughly,  and  let  them  seethe  the  bones  that  are  in  the  midst 
of  it.2  6.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Woe  to  the  bloody  city ! 
the  caldron  whose  poisonous  scum  (verdigris)  is  in  it.  And  the  poisonous 
scum  has  not  gone  forth  from  it ;  on  its  every  piece  let  it  go  forth ;  let  no  lot 
fall  on  it.3  7.  For  her  blood  is  in  the  midst  of  her  ;  upon  the  parched  rock 


1  The  usual  meaning  of  "jlpD  is  to  lay  against,  to  lean  upon.     Michaelis, 
Gesenius,  and  others  have  here  imposed  a  different  meaning  on  the  word,  and 
taken  it  in  the  sense  of  drawing  near  to,  approaching.     But  Hav.,  Hitzig, 
properly  adhere  to  the  more  exact  and  only  ascertained  meaning  of  laying 
against,  or  throwing  oneself  upon. 

2  There  is  no  need  for  any  change  in  the  clause  iTI-inn  D^EVyn  IVn,  either 
by  regarding  rvnnM  with  Dathe,  as  superfluous,  or  with  Newcome  and  many 
others  substituting    DsVyn   wood,  for  bones.     What  the  prophet  means  is, 
that  the  best,  the  fleshiest  parts,  full  of  the  strongest  bones,  representing  the 
most  exalted  and  powerful  among  the  people,  were  to  be  put  within  the  pot 
and  boiled  ;  but  that  the  rest,  the  very  poorest,  were  not  to  escape  :  these, 
the  mere  bones,  as  it  were,  were  to  be  thrown  as  a  pile  beneath,  suffering 
first,  and,  by  increasing  the  fire,  hastening  on  the  destruction  of  the  others. 
1Y1  is  properly  a  noun,  a  pile ;  literally:  And  also  let  there  be  a  pile  of  the 
bones  underneath.     The  expression  cannot  signify,  with  Hav.,   a  pile  of 
wood  for  the  bones ;  for  ~\yr\  is  simply  a  pile,  not  a  pile  of  wood,  and  when 
coupled  with  bones,  can  only  mean  a  heap  of  these. 

3  This  seems  to  me  the  preferable  way  of  understanding  the  latter  part  of 
ver.  6.     Most  commentators,  including  Havernick  and  Hitzig,  render:  bring 
forth  piece  after  piece.     But  why  drop  the  it  connected  with  the  verb 
rlfcO^in  ?     Bring  it  out — then,  what  it  ?     The  only  thing  made  prominent  in 
the  preceding  context  is  the  poisonous  scum  ;  but  it  does  not  make  sense  to 
speak  of  bringing  it  forth  piece  by  piece.     This  poisonous  scum  would  not 


VISION  OF  THE  BOILING  CALDRON.  259 

she  has  put  it ;  she  did  not  pour  it  forth  upon  the  earth,  to  cover  it  with  dust. 
8.  In  order  that  fury  may  come  up,  that  vengeance  may  be  executed,  I  have 
put  her  blood  upon  the  parched  rock,  that  it  might  not  be  covered.1  9. 
Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Woe  to  the  bloody  city ;  also  I  will 
make  the  pile  great :  10.  Heap  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  consume  the  flesh, 
and  boil  it  into  a  compound,2  and  let  the  bones  be  burned.  11.  And  let  it 
be  set  upon  the  coals  empty,  so  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot,  and  may 
burn,  and  that  its  filthiness  may  be  dissolved  in  the  midst  of  it,  its  poisonous 
scum  consumed.  12.  The  toilsome  labours  it  has  wearied  out  (exhausted),3 


go  out,  the  prophet  had  said,  by  such  dealings  as  had  already  been  resorted 
to ;  let  it  go  out,  then,  he  adds,  upon  each  of  the  pieces  in  the  pot ;  let  the 
pot  and  its  contents  become  alike  infected  with  the  corrupting  taint :  there 
is  to  be  no  lot  cast,  as  if  some  were  to  escape  ;  all  were  to  be  in  the  same 
category  of  evil.  The  communication  of  the  poisonous  scum  is  only  to  pre 
pare  the  way  for  the  application  of  the  same  consuming  judgment  to  the 
caldron  and  its  contents.  And  so  the  prophet  immediately  goes  on  to  declare 
how  the  heaven-daring  guilt  was  within  and  throughout  the  city,  just  as  the 
poisonous  scum  was  all  through  the  pot  and  its  pieces ;  whence  all  alike  must 
suffer  the  vengeance  of  God's  destroying  judgment.  The  confusion  here 
commonly  fallen  into  has  arisen  chiefly  from  pressing  too  closely  the  refer 
ence  to  chap.  xi.  7,  where,  certainly,  the  Lord  speaks  of  fetching  the  people 
out  of  the  caldron,  and  giving  them  up  to  strangers.  But,  in  the  passage 
before  us,  the  idea  throughout  is  of  their  being  kept  in  the  caldron  till  they 
were  there  utterly  wasted  and  consumed. 

1  Blood  is  here  mentioned  as  the  consummation  of  all  wickedness ;  that, 
the  existence  of  which  presupposes  every  other  form  of  guilt.     It  is  also 
brought  specially  into  notice  with  a  view  to  Gen.  iv.  10,  where,  even  though 
the  ground  did  receive  the  blood  of  Abel,  still  it  cried  to  Heaven  for  ven 
geance.     Here  the  people  are  represented  as,  with  shameless  and  hardened 
effrontery,  setting  the  blood  they  had  shed  in  the  most  exposed  and  promi 
nent  place,  on  the  naked  rock,  where  there  was  nothing  to  conceal  it,  or  inter 
cept  its  cry  to  Heaven.     And  the  Lord  says  not  only  that  they  had  spilt  it 
there,  but  that  he  himself  also  had  set  it  there  ;  that  is,  he  had  ordered  mat 
ters  so  as  to  make  the  blood  appear  thus  prominent,  that  the  connection  be 
tween  the  guilt  and  the  punishment  might  be  more  easily  perceived.     Hence 
the  proposal  of  some,  after  the  Septuagint,  to  change  the  text  in  ver.  7,  so  as 
to  read  :  upon  the  parched  rock  /  have  put  it,  etc.,  instead  of  she,  proceeds 
upon  a  superficial  view  of  the  passage.     It  was  the  city  herself  that  did  so, 
yet  not  without  the  overruling  providence  of  God  outwardly  turning  things 
into  that  direction ;  so  that  in  one  respect  it  might  be  said,  she  had  set  it, 
and  in  another,  God  had  set  it  on  the  rock. 

2  The  radical  meaning  of  the  verb  npl  appears  to  be  the  artificial  amalga 
mation  of  various  substances  into  one,  as  in  the  case  of  the  formation  of  sweet 
spices  or  ointments,  usually  done  by  pounding  and  boiling.     Hence  the 
meaning  here  of  nnplftil  np*in  is,  let  it  be  sodden  into  a  compound,  or 
reduce  it  to  a  pulp.     Vulgate  :  coquatur  universa  compositio. 

3  This  is  substantially  the  rendering  of  the  Vulgate  :  multo  labor -e  suda- 


260  EZEKIEL  XXIV. 

and  yet  its  great  poisonous  scum  has  not  gone  forth ;  in  the  fire  be  its 
poisonous  scum !  13.  In  thy  filthiness  is  infamy,  because  I  have  purged 
thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged  ;  thou  shalt  not  be  purged  from  thy  filthi 
ness  any  more  till  I  have  caused  my  fury  to  rest  on  thee.  14.  I  Jehovah 
have  spoken  it ;  it  comes,  and  I  do.  I  will  not  relax,1  I  will  not  spare,  and 
I  will  not  repent ;  according  to  thy  ways,  and  according  to  thy  doings,  shall 
they  judge  thee,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

THESE  fourteen  verses  contain  the  first  part  of  the  message 
given  to  Ezekiel  on  this  occasion.  The  occasion  was  a  melan 
choly  one,  being  marked  by  the  actual  investiture  of  Jerusalem  by 
the  armies  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  was  the  ninth  year  of  Jehoi- 
achin's  captivity,  and  the  tenth  day  of  the  tenth  month.  This  is 
noted  in  other  passages  (2  Kings  xxv.  1 ;  Jer.  xxxix.  1)  as  the  day 
and  time  on  which  the  siege  properly  commenced.  And  that 
this  fact  should  have  been  communicated  to  Ezekiel  among  the 
Babylonian  exiles,  and  announced  by  him  immediately  after, 
must  have  been  to  afford  another  proof  of  his  true  prophetical 
character.  By  such  an  announcement  he  put  his  Divine  com 
mission  in  pledge,  as  he  did  still  further,  and  more  remarkably, 
by  the  clear  delineation  of  the  disastrous  results  in  which  lie 
declared  the  siege  thus  begun  was  sure  to  terminate. 

The  image  which  is  chosen  for  the  purpose  of  unfolding  the 
message  to  be  delivered  on  this  painful  subject,  that  of  a  caldron 
set  upon  the  fire  to  boil,  with  the  best  pieces  of  the  meat  in  it, 
and  the  bones  piled  underneath,  was  evidently  suggested  by  the 
proverb  formerly  noticed  as  having  been  bandied  about  among 
the  people  :  "  The  city  is  the  caldron  and  we  are  the  flesh  "  (chap. 

turn  est.  It  indicates  the  pains  or  toilsome  labours  God  had  taken  with 
Jerusalem  to  get  her  purified,  but  without  effect;  she  had  wearied  them 
out,  or  allowed  them  to  exhaust  themselves  without  parting  with  her  sins. 
D'Otffi  nowhere  else  occurs  in  the  sense  here  ascribed  to  it ;  but  there  is 
now  a  general  agreement  that  it  bears  this  sense  here,  derived  from  the 
root  piN,  which  sometimes  has  the  meaning  of  trouble  or  distress,  and  in 
Arab.,  of  being  fatigued. 

1  The  verb  jna  is  used  with  considerable  latitude.  But  the  primary 
meaning  seems  to  be  that  of  uncovering,  or  making  bare,  in  which  sense  it 
occurs  in  Num.  v.  18,  and  other  parts  of  the  Pentateuch.  Hence  the 
secondary  meaning  of  loose,  relax,  or  dissolve,  in  which  sense,  probably, 
it  is  used,  Ex.  xxxii.  25,  for  the  people  were  not  properly  naked,  but  in 
a  relaxed  and  dissolute  state.  I  take  it  in  this  sense  also  here.  In  Prov. 
i.  25,  and  other  places,  it  bears  the  still  stronger  sense  of  unbridled,  law 
less,  or  contemptuous  treatment.  It  never  means  to  go  back. 


VISION  OF  THE  BOILING  CALDRON.  261 

xi.  3).  In  a  proud  feeling  of  fancied  security  they  had  spoken 
thus  ;  but  they  were  now  to  find,  in  bitter  experience,  that  there 
was  a  dreadful  truth  couched  in  the  image,  which  was  to  rebuke 
their  senseless  folly.  So  far  from  the  city  proving  to  them  a 
place  of  secure  strength,  like  the  iron  ribs  of  a  strong  caldron, 
it  was  to  be  set  as  a  seething-pot  upon  the  fire;  and  the  people, 
like  so  many  pieces  of  meat  destined  to  be  devoured,  were  to  be 
put  into  it  and  subjected  to  a  boiling  heat.  None  were  to  be 
spared ;  the  mighty  and  the  noble,  as  well  as  the  comparatively 
poor  and  mean,  were  to  suffer  in  the  calamity ;  the  only  difference 
should  be  like  that  between  consumption  in  the  fire  at  once — the 
punishment  of  the  poorer  sort — and  perishing  by  the  somewhat 
slower  and  more  lingering  process  of  boiling,  from  which  the  rich 
could  not  escape. 

After  having  briefly  given  the  ground  of  the  parabolical  de 
scription,  the  prophet  proceeds,  in  vers.  6-14,  to  make  special  and 
pointed  application  of  it.  His  leading  object  is  to  show  that  it 
was  the  excessive  and  inveterate  wickedness  of  the  people  which 
provoked,  and  even  rendered  necessary,  the  severe  dealing  to 
which  they  were  now  subjected. 

All  measures  of  a  less  extreme  kind  had  been  tried  in  vain  ; 
those  were  now  exhausted ;  and  as  the  iniquity  appeared  to  be 
entwined  with  the  whole  fabric  and  constitution  of  things, 
nothing  remained  but  to  subject  all  to  the  crucible  of  a  severe 
and  overwhelming  catastrophe.  This  is  represented  by  keeping 
the  caldron  on  the  fire  till  its  contents  were  stewed  away,  and 
the  very  bones  burnt.  And  as  if  even  this  were  not  enough,  as 
if  something  more  were  necessary  to  avenge  and  purge  out  such 
scandalous  wickedness,  the  caldron  itself  must  be  kept  hot  and 
burning  till  the  pollution  should  be  thoroughly  consumed  out 
of  it.  The  wicked  city  must  be  laid  in  ruins.  It  is  the  very 
same  thought  which  occurs  in  Isa.  iv.  4,  where  the  filth  of  the 
daughters  of  Zion  is  said  to  be  washed  away,  and  the  blood  of 
Jerusalem  to  be  purged  from  the  midst  of  it,  by  the  spirit  of 
judgment  and  the  spirit  of  burning ;  only,  after  the  manner  of 
our  prophet,  the  image  is  extended  to  many  minute  and  par 
ticular  details.  In  plain  terms,  the  Lord  was  no  longer  going 
to  deal  with  them  by  half-measures ;  their  condition  called  for 
the  greatest  degree  of  seventy  compatible  with  their  preserva 
tion  as  a  distinct  and  separate  people,  and  so  the  indignation 


262  EZEKIEL  XXIV. 

of  the  Lord  was  to  rest  on  them  till  a  separation  was  effected 
between  them  and  sin. 

As  to  the  principle  of  dealing,  there  is  no  essential  difference 
between  what  God  did  then  with  Israel  and  what  he  still  does 
with  those  who  stand  in  a  similar  relation  to  him  and  pursue  a 
similar  course.  Where  there  is  the  profession  of  a  belief  in  God's 
word  and  a  regard  to  God's  authority,  though  intermingled  with 
much  that  is  false  in  sentiment  or  unrighteous  in  conduct,  there 
must  still  be  dealings  of  severity  and  rebuke,  to  bring  the  pro 
fessor,  if  possible,  to  a  sense  of  his  sin  fulness,  and  lead  him  to 
renounce  it ;  but  failing  this,  to  vindicate  concerning  him  the 
righteousness  of  God,  and  leave  him  without  excuse  if  his  ini 
quity  should  prove  his  ruin.  In  the  case  of  sincere,  God-fearing 
people,  the  severity  exercised  will  always  be  attended  with  salu 
tary  results ;  for  they  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  them,  and 
are  sure  to  profit  by  the  chastening  of  the  Lord.  But  with  those 
who  have  the  profession  only,  without  the  principle  of  true  god 
liness,  the  iniquity  is  clung  to  in  spite  of  all  the  severity  that  is 
exercised,  until  the  wrath  falls  on  them  to  the  uttermost.  There 
is  enough  in  New  Testament  Scripture,  and  the  experience  of  men 
under  the  present  dispensation,  to  warrant  us  to  expect  so  far  a 
similarity  in  God's  method  of  procedure  to  the  representation  here 
given  of  his  conduct  toward  Israel.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
difference  may  also  be  expected,  in  so  far  as  his  dealings  now, 
in  accordance  with  the  genius  of  the  new  dispensation,  respect 
men  more  as  individuals,  less  as  public  communities,  and  bear 
more  immediately  upon  their  inward  state  and  spiritual  relations. 
He  who  would  regard  aright  the  operations  of  the  Lord's  hand, 
and  profit  by  the  corrections  of  his  rod  of  chastisement,  must  keep 
a  watchful  eye  upon  the  things  that  concern  his  own  experience 
and  history.  There  may  be  signs  of  the  Divine  displeasure, 
sufficient  to  startle  the  tender  conscience  and  call  for  deep 
humiliation  of  spirit,  while  nothing  appears  outwardly  wrong,  and 
all  may  even  wear  a  smiling  aspect,  as  far  as  regards  social  and 
public  relations.  Should  there  be  a  restraining  of  Divine  grace 
within,  an  absence  of  spiritual  refreshments,  a  felt  discomfort  of 
mind,  or  an  obvious  withdrawal  of  spiritual  privileges,  there  is 
beyond  doubt  the  commencement  of  a  work  of  judgment ;  and  if 
such  marks  of  God's  displeasure  are  slighted,  others  of  a  more 
severe  and  alarming  kind  may  assuredly  be  looked  for.  But  as 


VISION  OF  THE  BOILING  CALDRON.  263 

men's  tempers  and  circumstances  in  life  are  infinitely  varied,  so 
there  is  a  corresponding  variety  in  the  methods  employed  by  God 
to  check  the  risings  of  sin  and  expel  its  poison  from  the  heart. 
And  it  is  the  part  of  spiritual  wisdom  to  seek  for  the  wakeful  ear 
and  the  discerning  eye,  which  may  enable  one  to  catch  even  the 
earliest  intimations  of  God's  displeasure,  and  so  improve  these 
as  to  render  unnecessary  the  heavier  visitations  of  wrath. 

The  second  part  of  the  vision  which  Ezekiel  saw  on  this  oc 
casion  bore  respect  more  immediately  to  himself,  although  it 
was  really  a  revelation  to  the  people. 

Ver.  15.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  16.  Sou  of  man, 
behold,  I  take  away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  stroke ;  and  thou 
shalt  not  mourn,  nor  weep,  neither  shall  thy  tears  flow.  17.  Forbear  to  cry, 
make  not  mourning  for  the  dead,1  bind  the  tire  of  thy  head  upon  thee,  and 
put  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet,  and  cover  not  the  chin,  nor  eat  the  bread  of 
men.2  18.  And  I  spoke  to  the  people  in  the  morning  ;  and  at  even  my  wife 
died ;  and  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  commanded.  19.  And  the  people 
said  to  me,  Wilt  thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  import  to  us  that  thou 
doest?  20.  And  I  said  to  them,  The  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying, 
21.  Say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I 
am  going  to  profane  my  sanctuary,  the  pride  of  your  strength,  the  desire 
of  your  eyes,  and  that  which  your  soul  pitied ;  and  your  sons  and  your 
daughters  whom  ye  have  left  shall  fall  by  the  sword.  22.  And  ye  shall  do 
as  I  have  done ;  ye  shall  not  cover  the  chin,  nor  shall  ye  eat  the  bread  of 
men.  23.  And  your  tires  shall  be  upon  your  heads,  and  your  shoes  upon 
your  feet ;  ye  shall  not  mourn  nor  weep ;  and  ye  shall  pine  away  in  your 
iniquities,  and  bemoan  yourselves  one  toward  another.  24.  And  Ezekiel  shall 
be  to  you  for  a  portent ;  according  to  all  that  he  has  done  shall  ye  do  ;  when 
it  comes  ye  shall  then  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  Jehovah.  25.  And  thou,  son 
of  man,  shall  it  not  be  in  the  day  that  I  take  from  them  their  strength,  the 
delight  of  their  glory,  the  desire  of  their  eyes,  and  the  wish  of  their  souls, 
their  sons  and  their  daughters  ?  26.  In  that  day  he  that  escapes  shall  come 
to  thee,  to  make  it  heard  in  the  ears.  27.  In  that  day  shall  thy  mouth  be 
opened  to  him  that  is  escaped,  and  thou  shalt  speak  and  be  no  more  dumb  ; 
and  thou  shalt  be  to  them  for  a  portent;  and  they  shall  know  that  lam  Jehovah. 

1  The  literal  rendering  here  is  :  dead-persons'  mourning  thou  shalt  not  do 
or  make.     Storr,  and  after  him  Havernick,  render  :  the  dead  shalt  thou  not 
make  for  mourning,  i.e.  shalt  not  take  for  an  occasion  or  object  of  mourning. 
A  very  artificial  sort  of  construction,  and  liable,  besides,  to  the  objection  of 
mentioning  dead  persons  as  those  for  whom  the  mourning  should  naturally 
have  been  made,  while  in  reality  there  was  only  one.     The  expression  is  evi 
dently,  like  all  the  rest,  of  a  quite  general  kind,  referring  to  what  was  wont 
to  take  place  on  such  occasions ;  so  that  dead-persons'  mourning  was  mourn 
ing  appropriate  to  such. 

2  "  Bread  of  men  "  can  only  mean  such  bread  as  men  in  circumstances  of 
bereavement  and  distress  usually  eat ;  and  hence,  though  it  undoubtedly 
suggests  the  idea  of  poor  or  unsavoury  food,  yet  we  are  not  on  that  account 
to  render  with  some  :  the  bread  of  the  mourning,  or  the  wretched. 


264  EZEKIEL  XXIV. 

The  portion  of  these  verses  which  relates  to  the  personal  ex 
perience  and  behaviour  of  the  prophet  was  well  fitted  to  strike 
both  himself  and  others.  In  ordinary  circumstances  such  a 
calamity  as  the  sudden  death  of  a  beloved  wife  would  naturally 
have  called  forth,  and  would  also  have  justified,  the  most  affect 
ing  demonstrations  of  grief, — doleful  cries  and  lamentations, 
mourning  attire,  the  uncovering  of  the  feet  (2  Sam.  xv.  30  ;  Isa. 
xx.  2) ;  uncovering  also  the  head  in  the  case  of  one  who,  like 
Ezekiel,  was  a  priest,  and  wore  a  peculiar  head-dress  (comp.  Lev. 
x.  7,  xxi.  10,  12  ;  Josh.  vii.  6  ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  19  ;  Esth.  iv.  1,  3  ; 
Isa.  Ixi.  3,  etc.),1  putting  a  cloth  on  the  chin  (Lev.  xiii.  45  ; 
Micah  iii.  7),  and  eating  the  bread  of  sorrow.  But  not  one  of 
these  tilings  was  the  prophet  to  be  permitted  to  do.  He  was 
neither  to  shed  a  tear  nor  to  raise  a  cry,  not  to  make  dead-per 
sons'  mourning — the  mourning  which  was  wont  to  be  made  in 
honour  of  the  dead — nor  throw  aside  his  priestly  head-dress,  nor 
put  off  his  shoes,  nor  cover  his  chin,  nor  eat  the  bread  which  it 
was  customary  for  men  to  eat  in  seasons  of  calamity  and  distress. 

No  reason  is  given  for  these  singular  restrictions  as  regards 
the  prophet's  own  case.  He  simply  hears  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
telling  him  what  was  to  happen,  and  how  he  was  to  conduct 
himself  when  it  did  happen.  Then  he  relates  that  in  the  even 
ing  his  wife  died,  and  that  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  command, 
he  abstained  from  all  the  usual  expressions  of  grief  and  mourn 
ing.  The  people,  he  further  relates,  came  next  day  to  inquire 

1  The  two  first  of  the  passages  referred  to  show  that  it  was  a  natural  and 
becoming  sign  of  grief  in  priests  to  take  off  their  head-dress,  at  least  in  times 
of  peculiar  distress  ;  while  others,  it  would  seem,  rather  veiled  and  covered 
their  heads  in  times  of  mourning  (2  Sam.  xv.  30,  etc.).  The  reason,  doubt 
less,  was,  that  the  priests  had  their  head-dress  given  them  for  ornament,  as 
an  appropriate  badge  of  office  ;  and  on  this  account,  as  well  as  from  being 
made  of  fine  twined  linen,  it  was  unsuitable  for  a  time  of  mourning.  Besides 
this  and  other  ornaments  peculiar  to  himself,  the  high  priest  also  had  on  his 
head  the  holy  anointing  oil,  and  was  therefore  forbidden,  as  mentioned  in 
the  second  of  the  above  passages,  to  lay  aside  his  head-dress  in  any  case  of 
mourning ;  since  it  would  have  been  to  dishonour  that  by  which  he  was 
specially  consecrated  to  his  high  office,  to  disrobe  himself  of  his  mitre,  and, 
after  the  common  custom,  wrap  his  head  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  The  priests 
generally,  however,  might  do  this,  though  only  in  the  case  of  the  death  of 
their  nearest  relatives  (Lev.  xxi.  1-3).  It  is  of  course  to  be  understood 
that  the  putting  off  of  the  mitre  or  head-band  in  such  cases  was  in  order 
to  the  putting  on  of  inferior  attire,  with  the  addition  of  dust  or  ashes. 


DEATH  OF  EZEKIEL'S  WIFE.  265 

what  these  tilings  signified  to  them.  Not  really  in  the  outward 
transactions  of  life ;  for  what  we  have  here  is  not  a  historical 
narrative  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  the  account  of  a  Divine  com 
munication  between  God  and  the  prophet's  own  soul.  The  things 
all  took  place  in  the  sense  and  feeling  of  the  prophet,  and  are 
recorded  as  transactions  that  he  personally  witnessed  and  took 
part  in  ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of  all  his  other  visions,  the  scene  of 
the  transactions  lay  in  the  ideal,  not  in  the  actual  world,  in  that 
spiritual  sphere  in  which  as  a  prophet  he  communed  with  God. 
Hence,  as  showing  that  he  still  was  in  that  region,  and  was  there 
dealing  directly  with  heaven,  at  ver.  25,  immediately  after  the 
explanation  given  to  the  people  of  the  sign,  he  is  addressed  by 
God  with  what  is  but  a  continuation  of  the  message:  "And 

O 

thou,  son  of  man,  shall  it  not  be,"  etc.  The  whole  account,  there 
fore,  belongs  to  that  spiritual  sphere  in  which  the  prophets  lived 
and  acted  when  they  received  communications  from  above  ;  and 
it  stands  upon  the  same  footing  as  the  narrative  of  the  caldron 
in  the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter,  the  vision  of  the  iniquity-bear 
ing  in  the  fourth,  or  indeed  any  of  the  preceding  communications 
in  this  book.  What  was  done  and  said  in  his  case,  as  immedi 
ately  transacting  with  God,  was  an  acted  lesson  for  the  people, 
to  give  force  and  distinctness  to  the  instructions  to  be  delivered 
respecting  themselves.  So  they  are  given  to  understand  in  the 
application  of  what  took  place.  They  were  soon  actually  to  lose 
what  was  pre-eminently  clear  to  them — the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord, 
which  is  called,  first,  "  the  pride  of  their  strength,"  because  in 
connection  with  it,  to  a  large  extent,  had  grown  up  their  feelings 
of  false  security  ( Jer.  vii.  4) ;  then,  "  the  desire  of  their  eyes  and 
that  which  their  soul  pitied,"  or  yearned  over,  because  it  was 
what  they  peculiarly  delighted  in  and  clung  to  with  a  kind  of 
conjugal  regard.  But  now  it  was  to  be  profaned,  which,  in 
the  circumstances,  could  only  mean  laid  in  the  dust,  like  the 
prophet's  wife.  And  not  only  that,  but  also  their  sons  and 
their  daughters,  whom  they  had  left  behind  them  in  Judea, 
were  to  be  given  up  to  the  sword.  Yet  with  such  singular 
occasions  of  grief,  the  usual  signs  of  affliction  were  not  to  be 
found  in  them — they  were  neither  to  mourn  nor  to  weep, 
their  accustomed  dress  was  to  be  retained,  and  their  ordinary  fare 
partaken  of ;  but  not  as  if  their  spirits  were  unmoved  by  what 
should  have  taken  place,  and  no  feeling  of  gloom  sat  upon  their 


266  EZEK1EL  XXIV. 

bosoms ;   on  the  contrary,  a  they  should  pine  away  in  their  sins, 
and  bemoan  themselves  one  toward  another"  (ver.  23). 

It  appears  to  us  almost  unaccountable  how  any  person  of  or 
dinary  discernment  should  understand  the  prophet  here  to  mean, 
that  those  Jews  were  to  receive  the  coming  catastrophe  in  a 
callous  and  indifferent  manner,  sullenly  yielding  to  their  fate, 
but  without  any  sensible  movement  of  the  springs  of  sorrow  and 
regret.  Yet  such  is  the  view  taken  of  the  passage  by  some 
leading  commentators  abroad  (in  particular,  by  Eichhorn,  Ewald, 
Hitzig),  although  the  express  declaration  at  the  close,  and  the 
whole  character  of  the  representation,  plainly  lead  to  an  opposite 
conclusion.  In  the  typical  part  of  the  delineation,  it  was  not 
because  the  prophet  was  insensible  to  the  loss  he  sustained  by 
the  death  of  his  wife  that  he  was  to  abstain  from  the  habili 
ments  and  usages  of  mourning,  but  because  there  was  another 
source  of  grief  behind  of  which  this  was  but  the  sign  and  pre 
sage,  and  in  itself  so  much  greater  and  more  appalling  that  his 
spirit,  instead  of  venting  itself  in  expressions  of  sorrow  at  the 
immediate  and  ostensible  calamity,  was  rather  to  brood  in  silent 
agony  and  concern  over  the  more  distressing  evil  it  foresha 
dowed.  And  in  like  manner  with  the  people,  when  all  their 
fond  hopes  and  visions  were  finally  exploded,  when  the  destruc 
tion  of  their  beautiful  temple  and  the  slaughter  of  their  sons  and 
daughters  came  home  to  them  as  dreadful  realities,  they  could 
only  refrain  from  bewailing  the  loss  of  what  had  so  deep  a  hold 
on  their  desires  and  affections,  by  having  come  to  discern  in  this 
the  sign  of  what  was  still  greatly  more  dreadful  and  appalling. 
And  what  might  that  be  but  the  blood-stained  guilt  of  their 
iniquities,  which  had  brought  on  the  catastrophe  ?  Had  it  been 
that  portion  of  the  people  who  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  that  the  pro 
phet  here  more  immediately  referred  to,  there  might  have  been 
some  room  for  supposing  (with  Pradus  and  others)  that  he 
pointed  merely  to  the  overawing  terror  of  the  enemy,  and  to  the 
breathless  horror  and  astonishment  connected  with  the  capture 
of  the  city,  when  he  spake  of  such  an  arrest  being  laid  on  the 
common  outgoings  of  grief.  But  it  is  the  captives  at  Chebar  of 
whom  he  more  immediately  speaks,  who  he  well  knew  would 
be  living  in  outward  quiet,  far  removed  from  the  scene  of  uproar 
and  destruction.  It  could  not,  in  their  case,  be  the  presence  of 
a  Babylonian  host,  or  the  turmoil  and  consternation  caused  by 


DEATH  OF  EZEKIEL'S  WIFE.  267 

the  success  of  the  Babylonian  arms,  which  should  check  the  cus 
tomary  expressions  of  grief;  it  would  be  the  overwhelming  sense 
that  should  then  break  in  upon  them  of  the  iniquities  to  which 
they  had  clung  with  such  fatal  perverseness,  absorbing  their 
spirits,  and  turning  their  meanings  into  a  new  and  higher  direc 
tion.  The  agonies  of  breavement  would  be  in  a  manner  lost 
under  the  self-inflicted  pains  of  contrition  and  remorse  (comp. 
chap.  vii.  16). 

Yet  while  this  seems  obviously  the  meaning  of  the  prophet's 
announcement — of  the  not  mourning  in  one  way,  and  still  pining 
away  with  distress  and  sorrow  in  another — the  description  must 
be  understood  with  certain  qualifications,  and,  indeed,  is  to  be 
viewed  as  the  somewhat  ideal  delineation  of  a  state  of  things 
that  should  be  found,  rather  than  the  exact  and  literal  description 
of  what  was  actually  to  take  place.  The  representation  would 
otherwise  stand  in  palpable  contrariety,  as  well  with  undoubted 
facts,  as  with  statements  elsewhere  made  both  by  Ezekiel  and 
by  his  great  contemporary  in  Judea.  That  many  on  the  fall  of 
.Jerusalem  did  really  exhibit  the  usual  signs  of  mourning,  and 
give  the  fullest  vent  to  their  feelings  of  distress,  may  be  inferred 
with  the  utmost  certainty  from  what  is  written  in  the  Lamenta 
tions  of  Jeremiah,  where  wre  read  of  all  the  common  symptoms 
and  appliances  of  grief, — "  elders  sitting  upon  the  ground,  cast 
ing  dust  upon  their  heads,  girding  themselves  with  sackcloth," 
and  the  prophet  himself,  though  he  had  been  told  not  to  lament 
or  bemoan  (chap.  xvi.  5),  weeping  till  a  his  eyes  failed  with 
tears,  and  his  liver  was  poured  on  the  earth,  for  the  destruction 
of  the  daughter  of  his  people."  Nay,  while  Ezekiel  here  speaks 
as  if  all  the  indications  of  mourning  should  be  restrained  at  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  he  had  previously  spoken  of  the  people 
being  so  filled  with  distress  on  account  of  it  that  "  they  should 
gird  themselves  with  sackcloth,  and  have  baldness  upon  their 
heads  "  (chap.  vii.  18),  and  had  himself  also  been  instructed  to 
howl  and  cry  in  contemplation  of  the  approaching  troubles  (chap. 
xxi.  12).  There  can  be  no  doubt,  also,  on  the  other  side,  that 
the  conscience  of  sin,  however  powerfully  it  might  work  in  some 
bosoms  and  absorb  other  feelings,  would  be  very  far  from  being 
universally  felt  as  it  ought  to  have  been.  The  prophets  were  by 
no  means  disposed  to  cherish  exaggerated  views  on  the  subject. 
Jeremiah  had  even  spoken  of  the  people  carrying  their  iniquities 


268  EZEKIEL  XXIV. 

with  them  into  other  lands,  and  there  serving  other  gods  day 
and  night  (chap.  xvi.  13).  And  Ezekiel  himself,  in  chap.  xx., 
represents  them  as  still  needing,  after  they  had  been  all  scattered 
among  the  nations,  to  be  brought  as  into  the  wilderness,  that 
they  might  there  be  dealt  with  for  iniquities  not  yet  forsaken, 
and  purged  from  still  remaining  abominations. 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  description  in  the  passage  before 
us  must  not  be  understood  in  the  absolute  sense,  as  if  it  were 
intended  to  portray  what  was  certainly  to  be  realized  among 
the  people  at  large  on  the  taking  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  what 
should  have  been  realized  in  all,  but  what,  in  point  of  fact,  was 
to  have  its  realization  only  in  part.  The  people  should,  on  the 
occurrence  of  such  a  fearful  catastrophe,  have  sunk  under  an 
overpowering  sense  of  their  guilt  and  folly,  and,  like  the  prophet, 
turned  the  tide  of  their  grief  and  mourning  rather  against  the 
gigantic  evil  that  lay  behind,  seen  only  in  the  chambers  of 
imagery,  than  what  outwardly  appeared ;  they  should  have  be 
wailed  the  enormous  sins  that  had  provoked  the  righteous  dis 
pleasure  of  God,  rather  than  the  present  troubles  in  which  that 
displeasure  had  taken  effect.  Their  sorrow  should  have  chiefly 
flowed  in  this  more  inward  and  spiritual  direction,  for  it  was 
here  pre-eminently  that  the  evil  stood.  And  such,  undoubtedly, 
was  the  case  with  the  better  and  more  enlightened  portion  of 
the  people ;  but  many  still  cleaved  to  their  idols,  and  would  not 
receive  the  instruction  given  them,  either  by  the  prophet's 
parabolical  example  or  by  the  reality  of  God's  afflicting  dis 
pensations. 

But  if  in  respect  to  the  people  we  see  the  ideal  here  ex 
hibited  of  a  suitable  and  appropriate  behaviour  still  destined 
to  be  marred  by  the  prevalence  of  sin,  the  light  in  which  the 
prophet  himself  appears  in  this  vision  is  every  way  befitting  his 
character  and  calling.  With  solemn  and  affecting  grandeur  it 
closes  the  first  period  of  his  high  ministry !  He  had  entered  on 
this  ministry  under  the  most  appalling  discouragements,  in  a 
time  of  peculiar  depression,  and  with  the  clear  understanding 
that,  as  to  immediate  results,  it  was  to  be  at  once  a  thankless  and 
a  hopeless  task  which  was  given  him  to  do.  But  not  the  less 
did  he  imbibe  the  spirit  of  his  office,  and  throw  his  energetic 
soul  into  the  wrork  of  reformation.  Message  after  message  came 
forth  from  him,  charged  with  the  weightiest  tidings  and  breath- 


DEATH  OF  EZEKIEL'S  WIFE.  269 

ing  throughout  the  lively  feelings  of  an  affectionate  and  earnest 
heart ;  but  without  the  slightest  effect  in  arresting  the  fatal 
current  that  was  bearing  Israel  onwards  to  the  gulf  of  ruin. 
And  now,  when  all  remonstrance  had  failed,  when  it  was  found 
that  warnings  had  been  uttered  and  counsels  given  only  that 
they  might  be  treated  with  cold  indifference  or  insolent  con 
tempt,  the  man  of  God  is  made  in  spirit  to  anticipate  the  now 
inevitable  doom,  and  undergoes  in  his  communings  with  God 
the  same  affecting  experience  of  evil  which  was  soon  to  be  the 
common  lot  of  his  countrymen ;  thus  showing,  that  although 
he  was  not  a  partaker  in  their  sins,  he  was  yet  a  fellow-sufferer 
in  their  condition,  and  made  their  case  in  a  manner  his  own. 

But  here,  for  the  present,  Ezekiel  ceases  from  his  labours 
for  the  good  of  Israel.  He  has  exhausted  his  commission  in 
respect  to  the  disclosure  of  the  people's  sins,  and  the  revelation 
of  the  Lord's  judgments.  He  has  done  all  that  could  be  done 
to  impress  on  men's  minds  the  necessity  and  the  nearness  of 
the  Divine  retribution,  and  laid  open  on  every  side  the  purposes 
of  God  in  connection  with  it.  He  must  now,  therefore,  cease 
from  his  activity  in  this  direction,  and  wait  in  silence  the 
mournful  issue.  And  so  the  word  spoken  to  him  at  the  com 
mencement  of  his  labours  passes  into  fulfilment:  "And  I  will 
make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  thy  mouth,  and  thou 
shalt  be  dumb,  and  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  reprover ;  for  they 
are  a  rebellious  house"  (chap.  iii.  26).  But  this  was  only  to  be 
for  a  season.  When  the  calamity  had  actually  come,  and  the 
escaped  remnant  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem  had  joined  their 
brethren  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  "  in  that  day  his  mouth 
(it  was  said)  should  be  opened  to  him  that  is  escaped,  and  he 
should  speak,  and  be  no  more  dumb."  A  new  series  of  com 
munications,  suited  to  the  altered  circumstances  of  his  people, 
was  then  to  be  given  him,  and  he  would  yet  do  for  them  the 
part  of  a  faithful  friend  and  comforter  in  the  time  of  their 
greatest  desolation. 


270  EZEKIEL  XXV. 


CHAPTEE  XXV. 

THE  JUDGMENT  OF  ISRAEL'S  IMMEDIATE  NEIGHBOURS  AND  RIVALS 
— AMMON,  MOAB,  EDOM,  AND  THE  PHILISTINES. 

THE  period  of  Ezekiel's  silence  toward  Israel  is  broken  for 
the  first  time  by  the  word  contained  in  chap,  xxxiii. ;  and  the 
eight  intervening  chapters  are  filled  with  intimations  of  Divine 
judgment  against  the  surrounding  heathen,  accompanied  by 
delineations  of  their  guilt.  The  prophetic  agency  of  Ezekiel  did 
not  cease ;  it  only  turned  into  a  new  direction — from  what  im 
mediately  concerned  his  own  countrymen,  to  what  concerned  the 
communities  and  nations  around.  This  was  precisely  the  place 
for  such  a  series  of  judgments  respecting  the  worldly  kingdoms 
coming  in.  The  prophet  has  finished  his  work,  as  God's  repre 
sentative,  in  pronouncing  judgment  on  Israel.  And  now,  there 
fore,  is  the  time  to  make  it  manifest  to  all,  that  if  the  judgment 
begins  there,  it  must  proceed  onwards  and  envelop  the  ungodly 
world, — that  if  the  covenant-people  fall  under  the  stroke  of 
Divine  justice,  their  fall,  so  far  from  being  the  gain  of  the  world, 
is  but  the  sure  presage  and  forerunner  of  its  doom.  It  was 
necessary,  as  matters  then  stood,  that  God  should  employ  heathen 
instruments  in  executing  his  displeasure  upon  Jerusalem  and 
scattering  the  strength  and  glory  of  her  people  ;  so  that  in  her 
humiliation  she  could  not  but  appear  for  a  time  in  a  worse  con 
dition  than  her  enemies.  But  the  heathen  nations  were  not  to 
be  left  with  the  idea  that  they  really  held  a  position  of  greater 
security  and  permanence  than  that  which  belonged  to  Israel ; 
they  must  be  taught  that  their  doom  also  was  written  in  heaven, 
and  that  the  downfall  of  that  kingdom  with  which  God  had 
peculiarly  associated  his  name  rung,  in  a  manner,  the  knell  of 
their  perdition,  as  it  proclaimed  God's  high  determination  to 
take  vengeance  on  sin  wherever  it  might  be  found,  and,  con 
sequently,  to  destroy  the  nations  that  were  wholly  devoted  to 
its  interests ; — worse  with  them  still  than  with  Israel,  because 
they  had  not,  like  her,  the  saving  health  of  Divine  truth  min 
gling  with  their  corruption  ;  their  downfall  should  be  complete, 
without  the  prospect  of  any  future  recovery.  This  essential 


JUDGMENT  OF  ISRAEL'S  NEIGHBOURS  AND  RIVALS.  271 

difference  between  Israel  and  the  heathen  nations  is  frequently 
referred  to  by  the  prophets,  and  by  Jeremiah  in  particular  is 
very  strongly  expressed,  when,  in  the  midst  of  desolating  judg 
ments  ready  to  alight  on  others,  he  exclaims,  "But  fear  thou 
not,  O  Jacob,  my  servant,  saith  the  Lord,  for  I  am  with  thee ; 
for  I  will  make  a  full  end  of  all  the  nations  whither  I  have  driven 
thee ;  but  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  thee,  but  will  correct 
thee  in  measure,  and  will  not  make  thee  utterly  clean,"  or  deso 
late  (for  so  the  last  clause  should  be  rendered),  chap.  xlvi.  28. 

It  cannot  be  regarded  as  accidental  that  the  heathen  nations 
who  came  here  within  the  range  of  the  prophet's  vision  for 
judgment  are  precisely  seven;  first  four,  who  are  briefly  dis 
posed  of  in  chap,  xxv.,  and  then  three,  whose  case  is  spread  over 
the  seven  following  chapters.  Considering  the  use  that  is  made 
generally  in  Scripture,  and  particularly  in  some  portions  of  pro 
phetical  Scripture  (such  as  Daniel,  Zechariah,  the  Apocalypse), 
of  the  number  seven  as  a  symbol  of  completeness,  we  may  not 
unreasonably  suppose  that  the  prophet  named  those  seven  on 
the  present  occasion  with  some  reference  to  this  symbolical  im 
port  of  the  number.  And  in  that  case  he  must  be  understood 
to  intimate  that  the  Divine  judgment  would  not  exhaust  itself 
on  those,  but  would  also  take  effect  on  others  who  were  similarly 
situated, — that  in  process  of  time  the  execution  of  God's  ven 
geance  on  sin  would  traverse  the  entire  round  of  its  domain  in 
the  world.  We  may  the  rather  adopt  this  supposition,  as  in  the 
second  division  we  find  Sidon  named  separately  from  Tyre, 
though  properly  but  a  part  of  the  same  maritime  power ;  and 
yet  on  another  account  there  was  not  wanting  a  reason  for  the 
special  mention  of  Sidon,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to  the 
place.  The  rest  were  all  such  as  might  have  been  expected, 
and,  with  one  grand  exception,  the  whole,  perhaps,  that  might 
have  been  expected  in  a  catalogue  like  the  present:  Ammon, 
Moab,  Edom,  the  Philistines — all  the  immediate  neighbours 
and  hereditary  rivals  and  enemies  of  Israel ;  and,  less  hostilely 
affected,  but  still  occupying  somewhat  of  the  same  unfriendly 
relation,  Tyre,  Sidon,  and  Egypt.  What  we  specially  miss  is 
Babylon  herself — in  Ezekiel's  time  the  great  impersonation  of 
the  world's  sinfulness  and  power,  and  above  all  others  the 
enemy  of  Israel's  pre-eminence  among  the  nations ;  yet  neither 
here  nor  elsewhere  in  this  prophet's  writings  is  she  expressly 


272  EZEKIEL  XXV. 

named  as  an  object  of  vengeance.  It  is  obviously  impossible 
to  account  for  such  an  omission  from  a  desire  not  to  exceed  the 
number  seven,  for  had  this  been  all,  some  inferior  state  could 
easily  have  been  sacrificed  to  make  room  for  Babylon.  Nor 
could  the  omission  have  arisen  from  EzekiePs  residence  in 
Chaldea,  as  if  he  was  too  near  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  to 
announce  its  coming  downfall, — a  supposition  which  the  fearless 
character  of  the  prophet  forbids  us  to  make,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  fact  of  Daniel's  once  and  again  proclaiming,  in  the  very 
presence  of  the  Chaldean  monarch,  the  certain  and  not  very 
distant  overthrow  of  his  empire.  The  reason  most  probably 
was,  that  as  Babylon  is  constantly  viewed  by  the  prophet  as  the 
rod  of  God's  vengeance,  it  stood  in  some  sense  apart  from  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  and  seemed  too  closely  connected  with  the 
present  execution  of  God's  purposes  to  be  fitly  represented  as  an 
object  of  his  retributive  justice.  The  more  especially  may  such 
a  consideration  have  weighed  with  the  prophet,  as  one  of  the 
prevailing  tendencies  of  the  time  was  to  overlook  the  hand  of 
God  in  the  present  elevation  of  Babylon  to  its  high  ascendancy, 
and  to  fret  against  the  dominion  which  God  for  a  season  had 
given  her  over  the  nations.  Her  final  desolation,  however,  in 
common  with  that  of  all  earthly  dominions,  was  included  in  the 
prophecy  already  considered  (chap.  xvii.  22-24),  and,  as  we  shall 
see,  is  still  more  distinctly  embraced  in  some  subsequent  predic 
tions.  But  to  proceed  now  with  the  denunciations  contained  in 
this  chapter. 

I.  The  judgment  of  Ammon  (vers.  1-7). 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man,  set 
thy  face  toward  the  children  of  Ammon,  and  prophesy  upon  them  :  3.  And 
say  unto  the  children  of  Ammon,  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thou  sayest  Aha,  to  my  sanctuary — for  it  is 
profaned  ;  and  to  the  land  of  Israel — for  it  is  desolate ;  and  to  the  house  of 
Judah — for  it  has  gone  into  captivity ; l  4.  Therefore,  behold,  I  give  thee  to 
the  children  of  the  east  for  a  possession,  and  they  shall  pitch  in  thee  their 
folds,2  and  make  their  dwellings  in  thee  ;  they  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and  drink 

1  The  13  in  these  three  clauses  ought  plainly  to  be  taken  in  the  usual 
sense,  for,  assigning  the  cause  of  the  joy  and  contempt  of  the  Ammonites* 
and  not  when,  as  in  our  common  version  and  many  others. 

2  The  common  meaning  of  HTtp    is  undoubtedly  a  pen  or  fold  for  flocks, 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  AMMON.  273 

thy  milk.  5.  And  I  turn  Kabbah  into  a  stable  for  camels,  and  the  children 
of  Ammon  into  couching  of  flocks ; x  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 
6.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thou  hast  clapped  thy  hand 
and  stamped  with  the  foot,  and  rejoiced  with  all  thy  disdain,  with  relish 
(literally,  with  soul,  i.e.  the  most  hearty  delight  or  relish),  toward  the  land 
of  Israel ;  7.  Therefore,  behold,  I  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  thee,  and  I 
give  thee  for  a  prey  2  to  the  nations,  and  I  will  cut  thee  off  from  among  the 
peoples,  and  will  cause  thee  to  perish  from  among  the  countries ;  I  will 
destroy  thee  ;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

The  feelings  attributed  to  the  Ammonites  in  these  verses  are 
evidently  those  of  bitter  hostility  toward  the  covenant-people, 
and  that  mainly  on  religious  grounds.  The  first  element  in 
their  joy  respecting  the  desolations  of  Israel  was  because  the 
sanctuary  of  God  was  profaned,  seeing  in  that,  as  they  thought, 
the  triumph  of  heathenism  over  the  rival  claims  of  Jehovah. 
At  an  earlier  period,,  most  probably  in  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat, 
we  find  this  feeling  ascribed  to  them  in  its  most  offensive  form  in 
Ps.  Ixxxiii.,  where  the  combined  enemies  of  Judah,  headed  by 
Ammon  and  Moab  (for  it  is  said  of  the  others  merely,  that  "  they 
stretched. out  the  hand  to  the  children  of  Lot"),  are  represented 
as  saying:  "Let  us  cut  them  off  from  being  a  nation,  that  the 
name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  in  remembrance  ;  let  us  take  the 
houses  of  God  for  a  possession."  Now,  at  length,  this  impious 
wish  was  for  the  present  realized.  The  long-cherished  grudge 

and  is  the  only  suitable  meaning  here,  where  the  discourse  is  of  shepherd 
tribes.  Palaces,  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version,  is  quite  unsuitable. 

1  "Into  couching  of  flocks."     I  take  ftf^-yinipip  to  be  a  sort  of  complex 
phrase,  made  up  of  the  noun  denoting  the  subject,  and  the  participle  indicat 
ing  the  position  or  attitude;  couching  flocks,  or  flocks-in  a  couching  position  ; 
couching  being  added  to  render  the  idea  more  graphic — flocks  for  men,  and 
not  that  merely,  but  flocks  in  a  state  of  perfect  repose.     It  makes  no  proper 
sense  :  children  of  Ammon  into  a  couching-place  of  flocks  ;  for  what  sort  of 
revolution  could  change  men  into  places,  lairs  for  flocks  ?    What  the  prophet 
means  to  declare  is  evidently  that  flocks  were  to  take  the  place  of  men, 
or  that  the  fertile  parts  of  the  territory  were,  by  changes  to  the  worse,  to 
become  pastoral. 

2  The  Kri  reading  here,  \~&  instead  of  317,  is  almost  universally  adopted. 
Hav.  defends  the  text,  and  would  derive  the  word  from  the  Sanscrit,  lihagga, 
part  or  portion.     This,  of  course,  would  render  the  meaning  nearly  the  same, 
whichever  word  were  adopted.     But  as  Jl^  is  nowhere  else  found  in  Hebrew, 
and  so  many  codices  also  read  fX>  that  it  has  been  actually  received  into  the 
text  in  the  Complutensian  Bible,  we  incline  to  prefer  the  latter.     The  ancient 
versions  express  this  sense. 


274  EZEKIEL  XXV. 

against  the  chosen  seed  is  gratified  ;  and,  as  persons  in  an  ecstasy 
of  delight  at  what  they  greatly  desired,  but  hardly  expected  to 
see  accomplished,  they  clapped  their  hands  and  shouted  their 
huzzas  over  the  prostrate  and  captive  foe.  It  would  appear  also, 
from  2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  that  they  took  an  active  part,  along  with 
the  Chaldeans,  in  accomplishing  the  destruction. 

Viewed,  therefore,  in  respect  to  their  state  of  feeling,  the 
Ammonites  \vere,  in  the  strictest  sense,  enemies  of  God  ;  they 
were  warring  with  the  purposes  of  Heaven ;  and  expressly  on 
this  account  is  the  judgment  here  denounced  against  them, — a 
judgment  which  declared  that  their  then  fertile  and  cultivated 
region  should  be  overrun  by  the  children  of  the  East  (the  sons  of 
Ishmael,  Arabians),  that  their  lands  and  cities  should  be  pastured 
by  flocks,  and  their  name  as  a  separate  people  become  utterly 
extinct.  The  prediction  began  very  soon  to  be  fulfilled,  for  the 
territory  of  Ammon  wras  a  portion  of  the  lands  which  were 
shortly  afterwards  ravaged  by  the  armies  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Jer.  xlix.  28,  etc. ;  Josephus,  Ant.  x.  9.  1).  And  though  the 
Ammonites  still  existed  as  a  separate  people  when  the'  Jews  re 
turned  from  Babylon,  and  gave  indications  of  their  old  hostility, 
yet  they  appear  to  have  been  in  an  enfeebled  condition.  Some 
generations  later  they  became  subject,  with  other  tribes  in  that 
district,  to  the  Ptolemies  of  Egypt ;  and  one  of  the  Ptolemies 
(Philadelphia)  found  their  capital  Rabbah  in  so  ruined  a  state 
that  he  caused  it  to  be  built  anew,  and  called  it  after  himself 
Philadelphia.  The  Ammonites  are  never  afterwards  heard  of  as 
a  separate  and  independent  people,  and  seem  to  have  become 
gradually  merged  in  the  general  Arab  population.  There  is 
enough  surely  in  these  facts  to  justify  the  prediction  of  Ezekiel ; 
and  to  point  to  the  desolations  of  that  region,  as  described  by 
travellers  in  the  present  day,  seems  to  us  somewhat  beside  the 
purpose  ;  for  the  region  has  long  since  ceased  to  be  the  territory 
of  the  children  of  Ammon,  and  it  was  simply  as  connected  with 
them  that  any  judgment  was  pronounced  against  it.  The 
moment  it  became  a  desolation  for  the  people  then  inhabiting 
it,  and  they  themselves  became  scattered  and  dispersed,  the  word 
of  Ezekiel  was  fulfilled;  then  God's  displeasure  against  their 
enmity  had  taken  full  effect.  It  mattered  little  what  might 
subsequently  become  of  the  region ;  and  if  under  new  occu 
pants  and  a  settled  government  it  should  again  rise  into  fertility 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  MOAB.  275 

and  cultivation,  the  word  uttered  by  Ezekiel  would  not  in  the 
least  be  affected  by  it. 

II.  The  judgment  of  Moab  (vers.  8-11). 

Ver.  8.  Thus  saitli  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  Moab  says,  and  Seir,  Lo ! 
like  all  the  nations  is  the  house  of  Judah ;  9.  Therefore,  behold,  I  open  the 
side  of  Moab  from  the  cities,  from  his  cities,  from  his  end,  a  glorious  land, 
— Beth-jeshimoth,  Baal-meon,  and  Kiriathaim ;  10.  To  the  men  of  the 
east,  over  (or  upon)  the  children  of  Ammon  (elliptically,  for :  to  the  men  of 
the  east,  who  have  overrun  the  children  of  Ammon,  the  tide  of  conquest 
being  viewed  as  flowing  onwards  from  the  territory  of  Ammon  to  that  of 
Moab),  and  I  give  it  for  a  possession  ;  in  order  that  the  children  of  Ammon 
may  not  be  remembered  among  the  nations ;  11.  And  against  Moab  will  I 
execute  judgments ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

There  is  a  certain  degree  of  indistinctness  in  this  sentence 
upon  Moab,  arising  chiefly  from  the  manner  in  which  it  is  mixed 
up  with  Seir  and  Ammon.  Yet  we  have  no  reason  to  think  there 
is  any  corruption  in  the  text.  In  regard  to  Seir,  which  is  coupled 
with  Moab  at  the  beginning  as  joining  in  the  congratulation 
that  it  was  no  better  with  Judah  than  the  rest  of  the  nations, 
Hitzig,  in  his  usual  smart  and  somewhat  flippant  way,  declares 
it  to  be  out  of  place,  as  it  is  also  omitted  in  the  LXX.,  and 
supposes  it  to  have  been  introduced  by  some  ignorant  emendator, 
probably  from  chap.  xxxv.  10.  It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  resort 
to  any  such  supposition.  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Edom  were  all 
contiguous  countries,  stretching  from  the  land  of  Gilead  on 
the  north,  in  an  unbroken  line,  to  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea, 
and  acted  very  much,  in  concert  in  their  hostile  feelings  and 
operations  toward  the  covenant-people.  It  was  not,  therefore, 
unnatural,  though  it  might  be  somewhat  out  of  the  most  exact 
order,  for  the  prophet  to  connect  the  two  latter  of  these  together 
in  the  expression  of  delight  over  the  downfall  of  Judah,  to  show 
how  generally  the  sentiment  was  participated  in.  And  that 
Moab  and  Ammon  should  toward  the  close  be  coupled  together 
as  alike  suffering  under  the  same  inundation  of  eastern  hordes, 
and  perishing,  as  it  were,  together — this  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at,  considering  that  the  two  tribes  were  originally  of  one  origin, 
and  kept  so  close  together  that  their  respective  territories  were 
not  separated  from  each  other  by  any  very  definite  landmarks. 
It  was  inevitable  that  the  same  destroying  wave  which  swal 
lowed  up  the  one  of  these  nations  should  also  sweep  over  the 
other. 


276  EZEKIEL  XXV. 

It  would  seem  that  the  territory  of  Moab  was,  upon  the 
whole,  of  a  richer  and  more  cultivated  character  than  that  of 
Ammon.  It  comprehended  the  district  which  goes  by  the 
name  of  the  Belka,  and  which,  even  in  the  present  times,  is 
described  by  travellers  as  the  best  in  all  the  southern  parts  of 
Syria,  and  on  that  account  is  the  scene  of  many  a  contest 
among  the  Bedawin.  Hence  it  is  called  here  by  the  prophet  a 
glorious  land  (literally,  an  ornament  of  a  land)  ;  and  hence  also 
he  makes  particular  mention  of  the  cities  belonging  to  it — natural 
indications  of  prosperity,  and,  in  times  of  danger,  important 
means  of  defence.  Yet  the  prophet  declares,  these  should  not 
protect  them  against  the  coming  desolation  ;  for  the  Lord  was 
going  to  lay  open  the  side  or  border  of  Moab  from  the  cities — 
those  cities  belonging  to  him  upon  his  end,  or  extremity — viz. 
the  extreme  north-western  border,  where  the  cities  here  specially 
mentioned  lay,  considerably  beyond  the  river  Arnon  (the  old 
boundary  of  the  kingdom  in  that  direction),  and  even  within  the 
territory  usually  assigned  to  Ammon.  These  cities,  with  various 
others  in  the  same  region,  were  among  those  apportioned  to 
Keuben  in  Joshua  (chap.  xiii.  15-21),  but  had  again  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  their  original  owners.  Yet  only  for  a  time. 
The  men  of  the  East  were  to  come  down  from  Ammon,  through 
the  cities  on  the  frontier,  and  were  to  waste  the  land  of  Moab, 
till  it  had  ceased  to  be  an  independent  nation,  and  had  melted 
away  among  the  hordes  of  the  desert. 

Of  the  precise  manner  and  period  of  the  accomplishment  of 
this  prophecy  we  have  no  record.  We  know  that  the  country 
was  overrun  by  the  arms  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  must  conse 
quently  have  become  impaired  in  strength.  But  it  was  chiefly 
by  the  encroachments  of  the  men  of  the  East,  the  wandering 
Bedawin,  the  great  enemies  of  civilised  and  settled  life,  that  the 
desolation  was  to  be  produced.  And  so  completely  had  this 
been  done,  that  long  before  the  time  of  Christ  all  traces  had 
ceased  of  Moab's  separate  existence  as  a  people ;  and  for  many 
an  age  their  country  has  worn  the  bare  and  ruined  aspect  which 
are  the  unfailing  characteristics  of  an  Arabian  ascendancy. 

III.  The  judgment  of  Edom  (vers.  12-14). 

Ver.  12.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because'of  the  doing  of  Edom  in 
wreaking  revenge  on  the  house  of  Judah,  and  they  have  made  themselves 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM.  277 

very  guilty,  and  have  dealt  revengefully  against  them  ;  13.  Therefore,  thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  also  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  Edom,  and  I  cut 
off  from  it  man  and  beast ;  and  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  Teman  (in  the 
south)  to  Dedan  (in  the  west)  ; l  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword.  14.  And  I 
will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom  by  the  hand  of  my  people  Israel ;  and 
they  shall  do  in  Edom  according  to  my  anger,  and  according  to  my  fury ; 
and  they  shall  know  my  vengeance,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

Here,  as  in  the  prophets  generally,  the  specific  sin  charged 
against  Edom  is  not  that  simply  of  hatred  or  opposition  to  the 
covenant-people,  but  of  deep,  brooding,  implacable  vengeance. 
It  was  the  hereditary  spirit  of  wickedness  which  descended  from 
their  father  Esau,  who  could  not  forgive  his  brother  Jacob  for 
getting  precedence  in  regard  to  the  blessing,  but  nursed  for 
many  a  year  his  deadly  purpose  of  revenge.  It  yielded  at  last 
to  the  unexpected  and  extraordinary  kindness  of  Jacob,  accom 
panied  by  the  blessing  of  him  with  whom  Jacob  wrestled  to  the 
dawning  of  the  day ;  and  the  two  brothers  appear  to  have  spent 
their  latter  days  in  peace  and  amity.  When  Israel,  however, 
grew  to  be  a  great  people  under  God's  fostering  care  in  Egypt, 
and  marched,  with  his  mighty  power  on  their  side,  to  take 
possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  old  spirit  revived  in  the 
posterity  of  Esau.  They  could  not  bear  to  see  the  younger 
branch  rising  to  the  pre-eminence  in  rank  and  glory,  which 
they  thought  belonged  of  right  to  themselves.  And  thenceforth 

•/O  O  O 

every  opportunity  was  seized  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  the 
children  of  Israel — for  the  most  part  only  to  draw  down  a 
deeper  humiliation  upon  themselves,  and  never  more  than 
with  a  partial  and  temporary  triumph — till  the  great  period  of 
the  Babylonian  conquest,  when,  with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  they 
supposed  that  their  object  was  for  ever  gained.  So  intense 
then  was  their  spirit  of  malignity,  that  they  are  represented  as 
not  merely  taking  part  with  the  Babylonians  in  the  last  cata 
strophe,  but  even  as  hounding  on  these  ruthless  conquerors  to 
consummate  the  work  of  destruction,  and  watching  along  the 
byways  to  cut  off  the  poor  fugitives  who  fled  from  the  presence 
of  the  enemy  to  seek  an  asylum  in  other  lands,  (Comp.  espe 
cially  Ps.  cxxxviL;  Amos  i.  11  ;  Obad.  v.  1L) 

Neither  the  vengeful  spite  of  Edom,  however,  nor  the  might 

1  The  accents  are  manifestly  wrong  here,  as  the  to  Dedan  is  required  after 
from  Teman  to  complete  the  sense.  Our  translators,  by  following  them, 
have  confused  the  meaning  of  the  passage. 


278  EZEKIEL  XXV. 

of  the  Babylonian  conqueror,  could  defeat  the  purposes  of  God  ; 
and  according  to  the  Divine  word,  it  proved  that  though  Israel 
was  sore  broken  and  depressed  by  these  calamities,  he  was  not 
destroyed.  Edom's  malicious  joy  was  but  of  short  continuance  ; 
for  he  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  his  old  enemy  return  to 
occupy  the  former  habitation,  and  from  comparatively  small 
beginnings  rise  again  to  the  position  of  a  formidable  power. 
The  children  of  Edom  had  meanwhile  been  moving  northwards 
(having  been  themselves  gradually  dispossessed  in  the  south  by 
the  Nabathseans),  and  occupied  the  territory  of  Judah  as  far  as 
Hebron.  But  this  greater  proximity  to  the  seed  of  Israel,  and 
partial  encroachment  on  their  possessions,  only  paved  the  way 
for  their  utter  extinction  as  a  nation  ;  for  after  many  hostile 
encounters  between  the  two  races,  the  Edomites  were  finally  sub 
dued  by  John  Ilyrcanus,  who  compelled  them  to  be  circumcised, 
that  they  might  be  incorporated  with  the  Jewish  people.  The 
amalgamation  of  course  could  only  take  place  gradually ;  but 
the  circumstance  of  the  Ilerodian  family,  who  were  of  Idumean 
origin,  reigning  as  Jews  over  the  entire  region  occupied  by  the 
two  races,  is  abundant  proof  that  it  had  been  substantially 
effected  about  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era.  From 
that  time  they  ceased  to  be  known  as  a  distinct  people,  and 
shared  partly  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Jews  and  partly  in  those  of 
the  neighbouring  Arab  population. 

In  this  external  subjection  of  Edom  to  the  power  and  do 
minion  of  Israel,  there  was  a  certain  measure  of  fulfilment  given 
to  the  word  :  "  I  lay  my  vengeance  upon  Edom  by  the  hand  of 
my  people  ; "  a  word  which  clearly  pointed  to  the  original  promise, 
tl  The  older  shall  serve  the  younger,"  and  virtually  declared  that 
still  God's  purpose  should  stand — Israel  is  the  divinely  consti 
tuted  governor  of  Edom.  But  it  is  only  in  a  certain  limited 
and  imperfect  measure  that  we  see  in  such  external  victories  and 
forced  compliances  the  fulfilment  of  this  and  similar  predictions. 
These  were  but  the  shadow  and  symbol  of  what  should  be 
accomplished,  when  in  Israel  the  characteristic  of  the  a  my 
people"  came  to  be  fully  realized — when  they  rose,  in  Christ 
and  the  New  Testament  Church,  to  be  the  head  of  all  authority 
and  power  and  dominion  in  the  world.  Viewed  in  respect  to 
that  elevated  position,  all  Edomite  rivalry  and  spite,  all  carnal 
opposition  and  counter-dominion,  is  doomed  to  give  way,  for,  in 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM.  279 

Christ,  Israel  is  governor  among  the  nations ;  all  must  serve 
him,  and  the  nation  which  does  not  serve  him  must  perish.  So 
that  there  is  what  may  be  called  a  twofold  revenge.  There 
is  first  the  noble  revenge,  of  which  Jacob's  victory  over  Esau, 
by  means  of  prayer  and  personal  kindness,  was  the  type — 
the  revenge  that  melts  enmity  into  love,  and  overcomes  evil 
with  good ;  or,  according  to  the  process  described  by  Obadiah, 
"  deliverance  arising  first  on  Mount  Zion,"  and  then  "  saviours 
coming  up  there  to  judge  the  mount  of  Esau,"  making  Esau's 
offspring  partakers  in  Jacob's  blessing,  whereby  botli  alike 
became  members  of  that  kingdom  which  is  the  Lord's  (vers.  17, 
21).  But  in  so  far  as  this  blessed  result  fails,  in  so  far  as  Edom 
still  retains  the  old  hatred,  and  refuses  to  bow  the  neck  to  the 
yoke  of  Jesus,  then  there  inevitably  comes  the  vengeance  of 
deserved  and  final  destruction — a  vengeance  executed  no  longer 
in  human  passion  or  for  selfish  aggrandizement,  but,  as  here 
expressed,  in  full  accordance  with  the  Lord's  mind  and  purpose, 
"  according  to  his  anger  and  fury." 

This  mode  of  understanding  the  prophecy  satisfies  to  the  full 
all  its  requirements,  for  on  both  sides  it  brings  the  matter  into 
connection  with  the  perfect  adjustments  of  God's  kingdom  in 
Christ;  but  we  are  at  a  loss  to  see  how  it  can  otherwise  meet 
with  any  adequate  fulfilment.  For  since  it  speaks  of  the 
Edomites  as  a  people,  and  these  have  long  since  ceased  to  be 
a  people,  the  work  of  complete  and  perfect  retribution  it  an 
nounces  must  either  have  taken  effect  in  the  manner  now 
described,  or  it  never  can  be  accomplished.  The  people  being 
gone,  no  changes  upon  the  land  they  once  occupied  can  satisfy 
the  conditions  of  the  prophecy. 

IV.  The  judgment  of  the  Philistines  (vers.  15-17). 

.  Ver.  15.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  of  the  doing  of  the  Phil 
istines  in  vengeance,  and  they  have  taken  vengeance  with  disdain,  with  a 
mind  to  destroy  (literally,  with  the  soul,  for  destruction),  an  everlasting 
enmity ;  16.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  stretch  out 
my  hand  upon  the  Philistines,  and  I  will  cut  off  the  Cherethim,1  and  destroy 
the  remnant  of  the  sea-coast.  17.  And  I  will  execute  upon  them  great 
vengeance,  with  furious  rebukes ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah, 
when  I  lay  my  vengeance  upon  them. 

1  There  is  a  paronomasia  here  in  the  original,  which  is  preserved  in  the 
Vulgate:  interficiam  interfectores,  I  will  slay|the  slayers — the  Philistines 


280  EZEKIEL  XXV. 

Little  requires  to  be  said  on  this  part  of  the  prediction.  The 
Philistines  were  the  immediate  neighbours  of  the  people  of  Judah, 
on  the  opposite  side  to  that  occupied  by  Ammon  and  Moab. 
Their  hereditary  enmity  to  the  covenant-people  is  sufficiently 
known.  In  the  later  times  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  they 
appear  to  have  been  in  a  very  reduced  condition,  and  to  be  quite 
unable  to  cope  with  Judah  even  in  its  comparatively  enfeebled 
state.  They  were  discomfited  by  Uzziah,  and  had  their  chief 
towns  dismantled  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  G).  They  were  still  further 
humbled  and  subdued  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii. 
8).  From  that  time  we  hear  nothing  more  of  them  in  the  his 
torical  books  of  Scripture  ;  but  as  they  still  retained  their  enmity 
to  the  cause  and  people  of  God,  they  were  made  the  subject  of 
severe  denunciations  in  the  prophets;  not,  however,  without  some 
prospects  being  intermingled  of  coming  good,  and  even  of  an 
interest  in  the  peculiar  blessings  of  the  covenant  (comp.  especially 
Zech.  ix.  7).  As  the  country  lay  on  the  direct  route  from  Egypt 
to  Chaldea,  it  suffered  exceedingly  in  the  wars  that  were  carried 
on  between  these  rival  kingdoms,  and  was  the  scene  of  some 
bloody  conflicts.  The  wandering  Arabs  also  gradually  spread 
themselves  over  the  district,  and  produced  the  usual  results. 
Even  at  the  Christian  era  it  no  longer  appears  as  the  residence 
of  a  separate  and  independent  people ;  so  that  the  vengeance 
threatened  might  even  then  be  said  to  have  reached  its  com 
pletion.  Gaza  alone,  from  its  favourable  position,  has  been 
able  to  retain  something  of  its  ancient  importance,  yet  merely 
as  a  place  of  comparative  wealth  and  commerce,  and  was  for 
centuries  the  seat  of  a  Christian  bishop.  In  every  way,  both  in 
respect  to  the  evil  and  the  good,  the  word  of  the  Lord  has  taken 
full  effect ;  and  while  Israel  has  risen  aloft  by  being  the  root  out 
of  which  has  come  the  world's  Deliverer  and  heaven-appointed 
King,  the  Philistines  have  become  the  heirs  only  of  trouble  and 
desolation,  excepting  in  so  far  as  they  yielded  themselves  to  the 
sway  of  the  King  of  Zion,  and  partook,  as  spiritual  Israelites,  of 
the  blessings  of  the  kingdom. 

being  perhaps  so  designated  from  their  warlike  and  cruel  disposition.  But 
Cherethirn  is  also  used  as  a  proper  name,  the  same  probably  with  Cretans 
— the  Philistines  being  supposed  to  be  of  Cretan  extraction.  (Comp.  Jer. 
xlvii.  4 ;  Amos  ix.  7 ;  Deut.  ii.  23 ;  Vitringa  on  Isa.  xiv.  28.) 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  281 

.• 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE   JUDGMENT   OF   TYRE. 

THE  relative  importance  of  the  prophet's  communication  in 
respect  to  Tyre  is  marked  at  the  commencement  by  his  prefix 
ing  the  date,  while  in  the  four  preceding  cases  the  judgments 
alone  are  recorded,  without  any  express  mention  of  the  time  of 
their  communication.  The  date  given  in  the  case  before  us  has 
this  peculiarity,  that  it  omits  the  month,  and  mentions  only  the 
year  and  the  day  :  tl  the  eleventh  year,  and  the  first  day  of  the 
month."  Various  con jectures  have  been  made  to  account  for  or 
supply  this  omission.  Havernick  supposes  that  the  month  which 
might  be  regarded  such  by  way  of  distinction  was  meant — the 
month,  namely,  in  which  Jerusalem  was  taken  and  destroyed  by 
the  Chaldeans.  This,  however,  is  open  to  the  objection  (which 
indeed  is  urged  by  Hitzig),  that  the  event  in  question,  as  appears 
from  the  history,  was  spread  over  two  months — Jerusalem  hav 
ing  been  taken  in  the  fourth  month,  but  not  actually  reduced  to 
ashes  till  the  fifth  (Jer.  Hi.  6,  12).  Some  recent  commentators 
(Ewald,  Hitzig)  think  the  month  has  dropped  out  of  the  text, 
but  that  it  must  have  been  one  near  the  close  of  the  year,  by 
which  time  the  report  of  what  had  taken  place  in  Judea  may 
have  reached  the  banks  of  the  Chebar.  The  more  probable 
supposition  is  that  thrown  out  by  the  Rabbi  David,  and  followed 
by  Pradus,  Grotius,  and  others,  that  as  the  prophet  immediately 
refers  to  the  language  of  Tyre  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and 
takes  that  as  the  ground  of  his  communication  to  Tyre,  the 
month  most  fitly  to  be  understood  is  the  fifth ;  since  Jerusalem 
having  been  taken  in  the  fourth,  and  Tyre  being  situated  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood,  she  may  well  be  conceived  to  have 
uttered  her  taunt  before  the  close  of  the  same  month,  while  on 
the  first  day  of  the  next  the  prophet  meets  it  with  a  reply  from 
heaven.  This  seems  to  rne  the  most  probable  opinion,  but  cer 
tainty  is  unattainable,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  comparatively  little 
moment.  That  the  communication  was  given  in  the  eleventh 
year  determines  the  period  of  its  announcement  to  be  very 
nearly  contemporaneous  with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem ;  the  doom 


282  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

of  Tyre  was  pronounced  during  the  same  year  that  witnessed 
the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem. 

It  is  well  known  that  there  were  properly  two  Tyres, — one 
situated  on  the  mainland  of  the  Phoenician  coast,  in  a  rich  and 
fertile  plain,  commonly  called  Palsetyrus,  or  Old  Tyre ;  and 
another  on  a  rocky  isle,  lying  immediately  opposite,  and  less 
than  half  a  mile  distant  from  the  shore,  which  was  sometimes 
also  called  New  Tyre.  The  opinion  has  been  very  generally 
entertained,  and  is  expressed  in  many  of  our  most  approved 
works  (for  example,  Prideaux's  Connection,  Lowth's  Commen 
tary,  Jahn's  Hebrew  Commonwealth),  that  the  city  upon  the 
mainland  was  the  only  one  that  existed  down  to  the  time  of 
Nebuchadnezzar ;  that  while  he  was  besieging  this,  the  inhabi 
tants  removed  their  property  to  the  adjacent  island,  where  they 
built  and  fortified  the  new  and  much  stronger  city ;  and  that  as 
it  had  been  the  continental  Tyre  before,  so  afterwards  it  was  the 
insular  Tyre  which  was  renowned  for  its  commercial  greatness 
and  prosperity.  More  accurate  investigations,  however,  have 
shown  the  groundlessness  of  this  opinion.  Vitringa  (on  Isa. 
xxiii.),  who  is  also  followed  by  Bishop  Newton  on  the  Prophecies, 
has  produced  authorities  to  show  that  both  the  cities  existed  at  a 
time  considerably  prior  to  that  of  our  prophet,  and  that  insular 
Tyre  appears,  from  the  earliest  accounts,  to  have  laid  claim  to  a 
very  remote  antiquity.  He  understands  Josephus  to  speak  of 
this  Tyre,  when  he  says  that  it  was  built  240  years  before  the 
Temple  of  Solomon  (Antiq.  viii.  3.  1).  Besides,  it  is  evident 
from  the  passage  quoted  by  Josephus  out  of  Menancler  (Antiq. 
ix.  14.  2),  a  passage  avowedly  taken  from  the  Tynan  archives, 
that  it  was  not  the  continental  but  the  insular  city  which  Shal- 
maneser,  king  of  Assyria,  besieged  for  five  years,  and  with  so 
little  success  that  he  was  obliged  to  relinquish  the  attempt.  At 
that  time,  therefore,  nearly  a  century  and  a  half  before  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  it  not  only  existed,  but  had  reached 
such  maturity  of  strength  that  it  could  withstand  the  whole 
might  of  the  Assyrian  empire. 

Indeed,  the  evidences  that  remain  of  the  strength  and  im- 

7  O 

portance  of  ancient  Tyre  seem  all  to  point  to  the  insular  rather 
than  the  continental  city.  The  name  also,  "ftf,  Zor,  rock,  rock- 
city,  suits  exactly  the  insular,  but  not  the  continental  one,  which 
was  built  on  a  smooth  plain.  Hence  some  have  recently  main- 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  283 

tained  (in  particular,  Hengstenberg,  De  Rebus  Tyriorum,  also 
Havernick  here)  that  the  insular  Tyre  was  the  original,  as  it 
certainly  was  the  chief  city,  and  that  Palsetyrus  was  a  more 
recent  and  inferior  place,  though  closely  connected  with  the 
other,  and  rather  a  suburb  of  it  than  an  entirely  separate  and 
independent  city.  This  view  obtains  some  confirmation  from 
what  is  known  of  the  procedure  of  many  of  the  early  Grecian 
colonists  in  founding  maritime  settlements.  "  An.  island  close 
adjoining  to  the  coast,  or  an  outlying  tongue  of  land  connected 
with  the  continent  by  a  narrow  isthmus,  and  presenting  some 
hill  sufficient  for  an  acropolis,  seems  to  have  been  considered  as 
the  most  favourable  situation  for  Grecian  colonial  settlement."  l 
Possibly  enough  the  Tyrian  settlers  would  not,  at  the  very  out 
set  of  their  career,  resort  to  the  island  to  lay  the  foundations  of 
their  future  greatness ;  it  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of 
probability,  and  with  the  natural  course  of  things,  to  suppose 
that  a  city  existed  first  upon  the  shore,  and  that  the  island  only 
came  to  be  occupied  after  a  considerable  degree  of  prosperity  had 
already  been  reached,  and  when  the  advantages  of  its  position  for 
security  and  defence  had  been  fully  ascertained.  But  it  is  quite 
compatible  with  this  opinion  that  the  rock-island  may  have 
given  to  both  places  the  name  by  which  they  are  known  to  his 
tory;  first,  because  the  protection  and  harbourage  it  afforded  were 
of  prime  importance  even  to  the  continental  city,  and  then  be 
cause  in  process  of  time  the  other  actually  became  the  chief  seat 
of  government  and  commerce.  Such  is  the  view  maintained  at 
great  length  by  Movers  (Das  Phonizische  Alterthum,  I.  c.  6)  ,who 
believes  continental  Tyre  to  have  been  actually  the  oldest  and, 
till  the  time,  at  least,  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  the  greatest  of  the 
two ;  but  holds  that  they  were  properly  but  one  city,  and  were 
often  so  viewed  by  ancient  writers,  who  under  the  general  name 
of  Tyre  sometimes  refer  more  to  the  one,  sometimes  more  to 
the  other,  or  include  both. 

But  leaving  the  question  of  the  comparative  priority  of  the 
two  cities,  which  is  of  no  practical  moment,  the  fact  chiefly  to 
be  borne  in  mind  when  proceeding  to  consider  the  prophecy  on 
Tyre  is,  that  there  actually  were  two  cities  which  then  went  by 
the  name  of  Tyre,  and  that  the  insular  one  is  kept  prominently 
in  view.  In  some  parts  of  the  description  reference  is  made 
1  Grote's  Hist,  of  Greece,  III.  p.  240. 


284  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

to  a  population  and  cities  upon  the  land ;  but  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Tyre  spoken  of  as  the  seat  of  commercial  power 
and  greatness  is  the  sea-girt  rock  and  city,  perched,  as  it  were, 
in  pride  and  security  among  the  waters.  Keeping  in  view  this 
as  the  actual  state  of  things^  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  see 
ing  the  propriety  of  the  different  parts  of  the  prophet's  delinea 
tion,  and  we  shall  also  find  that  the  judgment  denounced  is  in 
perfect  accordance  with  the  historical  results  in  respect  to  the 
state  and  cities  of  Tyre. 

The  word  uttered  by  Ezekiel  on  the  subject  falls  into  three 
parts,  which  are  distributed  into  so  many  chapters.  The  first, 
contained  in  chap,  xxvi.,  records  specifically  the  sin  on  account 
of  which  Tyre  was  destined  to  become  the  object  of  Divine  retri 
bution,  the  severe  and  terrible  overthrow  that  was  to  be  brought 
upon  her  greatness,  and  the  means  and  instruments  that  were  to 
be  employed  in  effecting  it.  The  second,  which  occupies  the 
whole  of  chap,  xxvii,,  is  a  lamentation  over  the  downfall  and 
prostration  of  so  much  earthly  magnificence,  busy  merchandise, 
and  long-continued  prosperity.  And  the  last,  which  takes  up 
nearly  the  whole  of  chap,  xxviii.,  consists  of  another  lamentation, 
more  immediately  addressed  to  the  king,  and  forming  a  sort  of 
elegy  upon  the  humiliation  and  dishonour  which  were  to  come 
over  all  the  pride  and  vain-glory  that  in  him  had  towered  aloft 
above  everything  human,  and  had  even  vaunted  itself  against 
the  Most  High.  The  prophecy  in  its  entire  compass  affords 
a  most  characteristic  specimen  of  the  peculiarities  of  Ezekiel's 
manner,  especially  in  regard  to  the  singularly  life-like  character 
of  his  representations,  his  tendency  to  crowd  the  picture  by  a 
multiplicity  of  minute  details,  and  his  disposition  to  see  the  old 
reviving  itself  again  in  the  new.  There  is  also  this  further 
peculiarity,  which  pervades  all  Ezekiel's  predictions  regarding 
the  heathen  kingdoms,  that  the  dark  side  only  is  exhibited  to  our 
view.  The  judgments  he  utters  are  judgments  without  mercy, 
reigning  to  complete  destruction,  because  the  kingdoms  are 
contemplated  by  him  simply  in  their  relation  of  hostility  to  the 
cause  and  kingdom  of  the  Lord.  He  would  lead  us  to  behold 
in  them  so  many  exemplifications  of  the  fall  and  doom  of  hea 
thendom,  in  contrast  to  the  destiny  of  Israel,  to  which  belonged 
the  resurrection  and  the  life,. the  dominion  and  the  glory.  Hence 
he  looks  no  farther 'here  than  to  the  ruin  of  Tyre;  while  in  the 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  285 

closely-related  and  earlier  prophecy  of  Isaiah  (chap,  xxiii.),  the 
prospect  is  held  out  at  the  close  of  a  period  of  blessing,  when, 
partially  recovered  from  her  desolations,  Tyre  should  turn  to  the 
Lord,  and  her  merchandise  and  her  hire  should  be  holiness  to 
him. 

The  word  contained  in  this  26th  chapter  naturally  falls  into 
four  divisions  :  —  The  sin  of  Tyre  ;  her  coming  doom  ;  the  instru 
ments  and  means  of  executing  it  ;  and  the  effect  to  be  produced 
on  other  nations  by  her  sad  reverse  and  miserable  downfall. 

The  first  of  these  divisions  is  despatched  in  a  single  verse  : 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  first  of  the 
month,  that  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  "2.  Son  of  man, 
because  Tyre  hath  said  against  Jerusalem,  Aha  !  broken  is  the  gate  of  the 
peoples  j1  it  has  turned  itself  to  me  ;  I  shall  be  replenished  ;  she  is  become 
desolate. 

The  mind  of  Tyre  is  uttered  in  a  few  broken  sentences,  but 
these  plainly  enough  indicating  her  satisfaction  at  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  hope  she  entertained  of  turning  it  to  good 
account.  Tyre  being  a  city  of  merchants,  all  bent  on  the  one 
object  of  plying  their  worldly  interest  and  increasing  their  gains, 
she  is  represented  as  contemplating  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  in  a 
merely  commercial  light.  To  some  extent  Jerusalem  had  been 
a  rival,  as  her  gate  —  in  Oriental  cities  the  common  resort  for 
business  as  well  as  justice  —  had  been  a  market-place,  where  the 
inland  traders  of  different  countries  had  been  wont  to  meet  for 
traffic.  And  it  appeared  a  matter  of  congratulation  to  Tyre 
that  this  should  no  longer  be  the  case  ;  for  the  tide  of  merchan 
dise  which  had  hitherto  flowed  in  that  direction  would  now,  she 
expected,  find  its  way  to  her  ;  she  would  obtain  a  still  more 
exclusive  command  of  the  Syrian  trade,  and  so  would  get  her 
own  coffers  more  abundantly  replenished  by  means  of  the 
desolation  that  was  alighting  on  Jerusalem. 

It  does  not  appear  that  there  was  anything  like  direct  hos 
tility  between  Tyre  or  the  people  of  Phoenicia  generally,  and 


1  There  is  here  a  peculiarity  in  the  construction,  nirta  —  a  plural  being 
coupled  with  a  verb  in  the  singular.  We  find  quite  a  similar  construction 
in  Jer.  li.  58,  in  regard  to  the  walls  of  Babylon.  And  here,  probably,  the 
plural  has  reference  merely  to  the  folding-leaves  of  the  gates  —  the  single 
gate  composed  of  two  parts,  as  at  chap.  xli.  24. 


286  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

the  inhabitants  of  Jnclah.  It  would  rather  seem  that  the  relation 
between  the  two  regions  was  throughout  of  a  peaceful  character, 
as  it  was  connected  with  mutual  advantage.  Even  in  the  days 
of  David  and  Solomon,  when  Israel  was  at  the  very  summit  of 
her  glory,  there  is  no  appearance  of  bitter  animosity  or  jealous 
rivalry  on  the  part  of  the  Tyrians,  such  as  was  displayed  by 
other  surrounding  nations;  but  on  the  contrary,  a  ready  co 
operation  in  the  transactions  of  business,  and  a  neighbourly 
interchange  of  the  civilities  of  life.  This  was  no  more  than 
what  might  have  been  expected,  as  the  Phoenicians  were  chiefly 
devoted  to  commerce;  and  being  possessed  of  a  small  land-terri 
tory,  it  was  their  obvious  interest  to  cultivate  friendly  relations 
with  the  Jews  and  the  other  inhabitants  of  Syria,  from  whom 
they  derived  their  principal  supplies  of  corn.  It  was  impossible, 
however,  that  there  should  have  been  an  intimate  and  cordial 
agreement  between  them  and  Israel,  so  long  as  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  was  not  altogether  proscribed  at  Jerusalem.  One  of 
the  most  formidable  adversaries  with  which  that  worship  ever 
had  to  contend  had  sprung  from  the  Phoenician  territory, — the 
infamous  Jezebel  having  been  a  daughter  of  the  king  of  Zidon. 
And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  commercial  intercourse 
that  subsisted  between  the  Phoenicians  and  the  covenant-people, 
considering  the  strong  idolatrous  tendencies  of  the  latter,  must 
often  have  proved  a  snare  to  their  souls,  or  even  a  direct  source 
of  corruption.  This,  indeed,  is  plainly  intimated  by  Ezekiel, 
when,  in  immediate  connection  with  the  desolating  judgments 
that  were  to  be  executed  upon  the  Phoenicians,  he  brings  out 
the  result,  that  a  pricking  "  brier  should  no  longer  be  found  to 
the  house  of  Israel,  nor  a  grieving  thorn  in  those  that  were 
round  about  them  "  (chap,  xxviii.  24). 

Yet  we  must  distinguish  between  this  kind  of  latent  anti 
pathy  and  the  avowed  hostility,  the  persecuting  bitterness,  mani 
fested  by  the  nations  whose  doom  is  recorded  in  the  preceding 
chapter.  Nothing  of  the  latter  description  is  here,  or  anywhere 
else,  charged  upon  Tyre.  It  was  her  intense  worldly-minded- 
ness,  her  all-engrossing  pursuit  of  the  interests  of  merchandise, 
and  the  selfish  avarice  and  pride  engendered  -by  her  commercial 
greatness  and  political  strength, — it  was  simply  this,  though 
viewed  also  as  having  its  sin  fulness  aggravated  by  her  heartless 
indifference  regarding  the  fate  of  Jerusalem,  her  hope  of  being 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  287 

able  to  turn  even  that  to  personal  advantage,  and  subsequently, 
an  actual  trafficking  in  the  lives  and  liberties  of  the  vanquished 
Jews  (Amos  i.  9  ;  Joel  iii.  6),  that  constituted  the  peculiar  guilt 
of  Tyre,  and  called  for  the  righteous  retributions  of  Heaven.  In 
that  particular  region  where  God  had  been  pleased  to  set  up  his 
kingdom,  she  stood  pre-eminently  the  world's  representative,  in 
its  towering  ambition,  its  fleshly  confidences,  and  its  eager  pro 
secution  of  selfish  ends  and  purposes,  in  utter  disregard  or  proud 
defiance  of  the  will  and  glory  of  Jehovah.  And  being  such,  in 
a  situation  where  she  might  have  learned  better  things,  it  was 
her  just  doom  that  she  should  be  made  a  perpetual  monument 
of  the  instability  and  emptiness  of  all  that  the  world  can  secure 
for  its  most  successful  votaries.  u  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  pur 
posed  it,  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory,  and  to  bring  into  con 
tempt  all  the  honourable  of  the  earth  "  (Isa.  xxiii.  9). 

This  coming  doom  of  Tyre  is  described  with  graphic  energy, 
and,  in  respect  to  its  last  issues,  in  four  simple  verses : 


Ver.  3.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  thee, 
0  Tyre,  and  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  against  thee,  as  the  sea 
makes  his  waves  to  come  up.  4.  And  they  shall  destroy  the  walls  of  Tyre, 
and  break  down  her  towers :  and  I  will  sweep  off  her  dust  from  her,  and 
render  her  a  bare  rock.  5.  A  spreading-ground  for  nets  shall  she  be  in  the 
midst  of  the  sea  ;  for  I  have  spoken,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  and  she  shall 
become  a  spoil  to  the  nations.  6.  And  her  daughters  that  are  in  the  field 
(i.e.  the  filial  or  dependent  towns  and  villages  on  the  Phoenician  coast) 
shall  be  slain  by  the  sword ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  (vers.  3-6). 


There  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  prophecy  so  striking  and 
minute  a  description  of  the  melancholy  reverse  which  was  to 
take  place  in  the  fortunes  of  Tyre,  and  of  the  utter  prostration 
to  which  she  was  to  be  reduced.  But  before  looking  at  the  par 
ticular  parts  of  the  description,  and  inquiring  how  far  it  corre 
sponds  with  the  facts  of  history,  we  must  bring  into  view  the 
next  section,  which  connects  with  the  coming  desolation  the 
instruments  that  were  to  be  employed  in  producing  it. 


Ver.  7.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  bringing  against 
Tyre,  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon,  from  the  north,  a  king  of  kings, 
with  horses,  and  with  chariots,  and  with  horsemen,  and  a  multitude,  and 
much  people.  8.  Thy  daughters  in  the  field  he  shall  slay  with  the  sword, 
and  set  a  watch-tower  against  thee,  and  cast  up  against  thee  a  rampart, 
and  lift  up  against  thee  the  buckler.  9.  And  his  enginery  of  destruc- 


288  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

tion1  he  will  set  against  thy  walls,  and  thy  towers  be  will  break  down  with 
his  swords.2  10.  By  the  abundance  of  his  horses  their  dust  shall  cover 
thee  ;  by  the  noise  of  his  horsemen,  the  wheelwork,3  and  chariots,  thy  walls 
shall  shake  when  he  enters  into  thy  gates  as  those  that  enter  into  a  city 
taken  by  breach.4  11.  With  the  hoofs  of  his  horses  he  shall  trample  upon 
all  thy  streets,  he  shall  slay  thy  people  with  the  sword,  and  the  pillars  of  thy 
strength  he  shall  cast  down  to  the  ground.5  12.  And  they  shall  spoil  thy 

1  I  give  here  what  I  take  to  be  the  proper  meaning  of  the  words,  rather 
than  a  literal  translation.     Tltt  is  evidently  a  noun  from  ni"lD,  which,  as 
Havernick  notes,  is  always  used  in  the  sense  of  destroying,  extirpating,  etc. ; 
therefore,  not  percussio,  as  many  take  it,  but  rather  extirpatio,  destruction, 
^jp  is  anything  in  front  of   or  opposition  to  another;    hence  i^qp  is  a 
general  designation  of  what  the  enemy  was  to  put  in  hostile  array  against 
the  walls  of  Tyre — his  enginery.     So  that  the  two  words  together  may  best 
be  rendered:  his  enginery  of  destruction,  or  the  destruction  of  his  enginery. 

2  It  certainly  sounds  rather  strange  to  speak  of  breaking  down  towers  with 
swords ;  and  on  this  account  our  translators,  with  the  greater  part  of  com 
mentators,  substitute  axes  or  hatchets  for  swords.     But  nnn  is  not  else 
where  used  of  any  warlike  instrument,  except  the  sword.     In  Ex.  xx.  25,  it 
seems  to  denote  an  iron  tool  for  hewing  stones ;  and  perhaps  the  general 
meaning  of  iron  or  steel  might,  with  Ewald,  be  adopted  here  :  Thy  towers 
he  breaks  down  with  his  iron.     It  is  rather  against  this,  however,  that  the 
word  is  plural,  and  so  appears  to  denote  specific  instruments.     We  there 
fore  adhere  to  the  usual  meaning,  swords ;  believing,  with  Havernick,  that 
the  coupling  of  swords  with  the  destruction  of  towers   was  intended  to 
heighten   the  idea  of  the  extraordinary  and  resistless  character   of   the 
Babylonians,  who,  as  God's  instruments  of  vengeance,  would  do  with  their 
swords  what  common  warriors  could  not  attempt.     Compare  as  a  like  mark 
of  the  peculiar  and  extraordinary,  though  on  a  different  account,  the  lines 
in  the  ode  on  Sir  John  Moore : — 

"  We  buried  him  darkly  by  dead  of  night, 
The  sods  with  our  bayonets  turning." 

3  It  seems  evident  from  the  use  of  ^3  here,  and  in  chap,  xxiii.  24,  also 
x.  13,  that  it  is  employed  by  our  author  not  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  wheel*, 
as  part  of  a  conveyance,  but  for  a  separate  conveyance  or  instrument  of 
operations.     He  means  by  it  some  sort  of  wheelwork,  whether  as  a  car  for 
riding  on,  or  for  the  operations  of  the  siege. 

4  Imbreached,  if  we  had  such  a  word,  would  be  the  exact  meaning  of  the 
original  here.     The  prophet  intimates,  that  strong  and  impregnable  as  the 
fortifications  of  Tyre  were  deemed,  a  breach  would  be  made  in  them,  through 
which,  as  in  other  vanquished  cities,  the  army  should  enter.     Even  Tyre's 
sea-girt  position,   and   massy  walls   to   the  water's  edge,  would  not  be 
sufficient  to  prevent  the  catastrophe. 

5  I  adhere  to  the  usual  meaning  of  rnjflD,  a  statue  or  pillar.      It  is  no 
where  found  in  the  sense  of  garrison,  as  a  thing  that  could  be  thrown 
down, — a  military  fort  or  building.     It  is  commonly  used  of  sacred  or 
monumental  pillars.      And  possibly  some  allusion  is  made  here  to  the 
famous  pillars  in  the  temple  of  Hercules  (Herod,  ii.  44). 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  289 

wealth,  and  make  a  prey  of  thy  merchandise,  and  break  down  thy  walls, 
and  destroy  thy  pleasant  houses ;  and  thy  stones,  and  thy  wood,  and  thy 
dust  they  shall  lay  in  the  midst  of  the  waters.  13.  And  I  will  make  to 
cease  the  noise  of  thy  songs,  and  the  sound  of  thy  harps  shall  no  more  be 
heard.  14.  And  I  will  render  thee  a  bare  rock,  a  spreading-ground  for 
nets  shalt  thou  be ;  thou  shalt  not  be  built  again :  for  I  Jehovah  have 
spoken,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

It  is  necessary  here,  first  of  all,  to  look  to  the  part  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  predicted  to  take  in  the  punishment  of 
Tyre;  for  it  admits  of  no  doubt  that  the  prophet  represents  the 
victorious  assault  of  that  monarch  as  the  commencement  of 
Tyre's  degradation.  But  to  what  extent  precisely  do  the  terms 
of  the  prediction  warrant  us  to  carry  the  result  of  Nebuchad 
nezzar's  hostility?  Does  it  positively  ascribe  to  him  both  the 
capture  and  the  complete  destruction  of  the  city  ?  Unquestion 
ably  the  capture  of  it,  and,  of  course,  along  with  that  the 
destruction,  to  some  extent,  of  its  power  and  splendour ;  but 
not  necessarily  anything  further.  It  is  plainly  foretold  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  army  should  enter  the  city  by  storm, 
spread  terror  and  dismay  among  its  inhabitants,  and  generally 
inflict  a  blow  on  the  strength  and  prosperity  of  the  state.  But 
no  one  even  moderately  acquainted  with  the  characteristics  of 
the  prophetic  style,  can  be  ignorant  how  usual  it  is  to  connect 
a  delineation  of  events  with  some  grand  starting-point,  as  if  all 
were  to  spring  immediately  from  it,  while  ages,  perhaps,  were 
needed  to  consummate  the  process.  Thus  Isaiah,  in  announcing 
the  doom  of  Babylon  (chap,  xiii.),  introduces  the  Medes  as  the 
instruments  of  her  coming  fall ;  and  without  a  break,  without 
an  intimation  of  any  future  conquerors  or  any  other  adverse  in 
fluences,  goes  on  to  paint,  in  the  strongest  terms,  her  utter  ruin 
and  desolation,  though  this  end  was  not  to  be  reached  till  many 
a  century  had  revolved  after  the  conquest  by  the  Medes,  and 
many  a  hostile  element  besides  had  played  its  part  on  the  devoted 
city.  But  still  it  was  neither  mistake  nor  caprice  to  connect  the 
result  so  peculiarly  with  the  Median  conquest ;  for  that  was  the 
first  link  in  the  long  chain  of  evil — the  first  deadly  blow  that 
was  never  to  be  properly  healed  again ;  it  was  such  a  beginning 
of  sorrows  as  already  foreboded  the  coming  end.  In  like  man 
ner  Jeremiah,  speaking  of  the  Philistines  (with  whom  he  also 
couples  those  of  Tyre  and  Sidon),  and  foretelling  the  destined 
prostration  of  the  country,  even  to  a  state  of  hopeless  exhaustion, 

T 


290  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

points  merely  to  the  destructive  agency  of  the  king  of  Babylon, 
as  if  he  saw  in  that  the  fountainhead  of  the  whole  evil.  How 
many  similar  examples  also  might  be  referred  to  of  predictions 
entirely  opposite  as  to  their  substance,  but  perfectly  alike  as 
to  the  mode  of  representation — predictions  of  good  and  not  of 
evil,  but  which  connect  with  a  particular  event  (such  as  the 
birth  of  Christ)  a  long  line  of  operations  or  issues  which  many 
an  age  should  be  required  to  develope?  In  all  such  cases,  the 
Omniscient  Spirit  that  animated  the  prophets  perceived  in  the 
particular  fact  specified  the  commencement  of  the  entire  series 
of  related  events ;  so  that  from  the  outset  he  made  known  this 
as  the  germinant  force — the  sure  sign  and  earnest  of  all  that 
might  otherwise  be  needed  to  accomplish  the  predicted  result.1 

Such,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  is  the  manner  in  which 
the  prophecy  respecting  Tyre  ought  to  be  interpreted.  The 
prophet  distinctly  announces  Nebuchadnezzar  as  the  beginner 
of  the  work  of  judgment,  but  not  on  that  account  its  sole  and 
final  executor.  It  would  have  been  to  act  against  all  probability, 
in  despite  of  the  commonest  rules  and  lessons  of  experience,  if  he 
had  given  it  forth  as  his  conviction  that  one  individual  should 
extinguish  the  very  existence  of  Tyre,  and,  as  by  a  single  stroke, 
reduce  her  from  being  the  first  commercial  power  in  the  world 
to  the  condition  of  a  shattered  fortress  and  a  nearly  unpeopled 
rock.  Common  sense  alone,  apart  from  the  principles  of  the  pro 
phetic  style,  might  satisfy  us  that  such  could  not  be  the  meaning 
of  the  prophet ;  and  the  change  in  the  narration  at  ver.  12,  from 
the  individual  to  the  general,  gives  no  obscure  intimation  of  the 
real  import  of  the  description.  Up  to  that  point  it  is  Nebuchad 
nezzar  who  does  all ;  he  who  storms  the  city,  effects  a  breach 
in  its  walls,  slays  and  subdues  and  triumphs.  But  as  if  what  he 
did  only  served  to  pave  the  way  for  what  was  to  be  carried  for- 

1  Cautious  and  reverential  students  of  the  prophetic  word  have  in  every 
age  noted  the  peculiarity  above  referred  to,  though  they  have  not  always 
made  a  judicious  use  of  it.  Even  Abarbinel  has  the  following  remark  con 
cerning  it:  morem  Jiunc  esse  prophetarum,  etc.,  "that  it  is  the  custom  of 
the  prophets  in  their  predictions  to  have  respect  at  once  to  a  near  and  a 
remote  period  ;  so  that  prophecies  pointing  to  very  distant  times  are  found 
amongst  others  which  relate  to  the  immediate  future.  Whence  we  may  the 
more  certainly  conclude,  that  God  might  threaten  the  Tyrians  with  the 
destruction  of  their  city,  though  it  might  be  brought  on  at  different  times 
and  by  gradual  advances." 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  291 

ward  by  many  other  hands,  the  language  then  becomes  quite 
general :  "  And  they  shall  spoil  thy  wealth,  and  make  a  prey  on. 
thy  merchandise,"  etc. ;  in  short,  a  progressive  work  of  spoliation 
and  trouble,  until  she  becomes  a  helpless  and  a  hopeless  ruin. 

We  shall  not  say  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  fastening  upon  the 
prophet  a  more  distinct  charge  of  error,  when  Hitzig  alleges  it 
as  certain  that  the  passage  ascribes  to  Nebuchadnezzar  the  total 
destruction  of  Tyre, — a  thing  "  which  notoriously  was  not  accom 
plished  "  (p.  227), — but  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  such 
an  assertion  is  made  in  palpable  disregard  of  one  of  the  com 
monest  principles  of  prophetical  interpretation.  The  whole  that 
the  prophet  can  in  fairness  be  understood  to  declare  is,  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  should  by  violent  means  become  master  of  Tyre, 
and  thus  commence  the  process  of  her  downfall — a  process  which 
might  be  delayed,  but  would  never  altogether  cease  till  the 
period  of  her  complete  destruction.  But  the  question  still  remains: 
Did  the  king  of  Babylon  actually  do  what  is  here  affirmed  of 
him  ?  Did  he  in  truth  gain  possession  of  the  city,  and  subject 
Tyre  to  his  dominion  ?  This  is  now  positively  denied  (by  Hitzig, 
first  in  his  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  chap,  xxiii.,  and  again  in  his 
Commentary  on  Ezekiel ;  also  by  Winer  in  his  Real  Wort.,  art. 
Tyrus)  ;  and  the  charge  is  distinctly  brought  against  Ezekiel,  of 
having  uttered  a  prediction  which  failed  in  its  accomplishment. 
Nay,  Ezekiel  himself  is  adduced  as  chief  evidence  in  support  of 
the  assertion,  since  at  chap.  xxix.  18  he  makes  mention  of  the 
Divine  commission  to  Nebuchadnezzar  to  go  against  E<*ypt, 

O  O  O»/  i      J 

because  a  he  had  served  a  great  service  against  Tyre,  yet  had  he 
no  wages  for  his  army."  This  is  construed  into  a  virtual  con 
fession  that  he  had  not  taken  and  spoiled  Tyre,  but  had  been 
obliged  to  desist  from  the  undertaking  after  the  loss  of  much 
time  and  treasure.  But  it  is  manifestly  a  hasty  conclusion  ;  for 
the  passage  indicates  nothing  as  to  the  result  of  the  expedition 
against  Tyre,  excepting  that  it  yielded  no  booty  as  a  recompense 
adequate  to  the  toil  and  labour  that  had  been  spent  in  it.  And 
surely  this  might  well  have  been  the  case,  even  if  the  expedition 
had  been  successful,  considering  that  it  lasted  for  the  extra 
ordinary  period  of  thirteen  years.  For  how  much  of  the  avail 
able  wealth  of  the  Tyrians  must  have  been  wasted  during  such 
a  protracted  contest.  And  how  likely  that,  before  the  close, 
they  would  take  the  precaution  of  securing  what  was  left  in  their 


202  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

ships  or  their  colonies.  This  is  what  Jerome  expressly  affirms  to 
have  been  done  ;]  and  it  is  also  what  we  know  to  have  happened 
to  a  very  considerable  extent  in  connection  with  the  next  great 
siege  Tyre  sustained,  though  it  only  lasted  as  many  months  as 
the  other  did  years — that,  namely,  conducted  by  Alexander  the 
Great  (Quint.  Cur.  iv.  3 ;  Diod.  Sic.  xvii.  41). 

It  is,  therefore,  to  adduce  that  subsequent  passage  in  Ezekiel 
for  more  than  it  can  fairly  substantiate,  when  it  is  produced  as 
a  counter  testimony  to  the  one  before  us ;  for  anything  that  it 
contains,  Nebuchadnezzar  may  have  executed  to  the  full  what 
is  here  ascribed  to  him  respecting  Tyre.  And  this  oracle  is  so 
far  borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  collateral  testimony,  that  both 
Menander  of  Ephesus  and  Philostratus  report,  from  the  Phoe 
nician  annals,  a  thirteen  years'  siege  of  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Josephus,  c.  Apion,  i.  20  ;  Ant.  x.  11.  1).  True,  but  then  it  is 
one  thing  to  besiege,  and  another  to  carry  the  siege ;  these  pro 
fane  authors  make  no  mention  of  this,  and  that  no-mention  is 
held  as  a  proof  by  those  who  would  fain  detect  some  flaw  in  the 
evidence,  that  the  city  was  not  taken  by  the  king  of  Babylon. 
One  would  have  thought  that,  on  the  supposition  of  only  selfish 
principles  influencing  the  mind  of  Ezekiel — allowing  him  but  a 
measure  of  common  sense,  to  say  nothing  of  any  higher  endow 
ments — he  would  have  cancelled  that  portion  of  his  writings  which 
had  announced  Nebuchadnezzar  as  the  conqueror  of  Tyre  if 
the  word  had  palpably  proved  a  mistaken  augury.  Could  he 
possibly  wish  to  appear  before  the  world  as  a  self-convicted  im 
postor  ?  Or,  if  he  was  so  regardless  himself  about  the  character 
of  his  own  consistency,  how  certainly  would  Ezra  and  the  elders, 
when  making  up  the  Jewish  canon,  have  rejected  an  oracle 
which  events,  still  fresh  in  the  recollection  of  all,  had  proved  to 
be  false  !  The  supposition  is  every  way  incredible ;  and  besides, 
there  is  not  an  entire  want  of  external  evidence  that  Nebuchad 
nezzar  succeeded  in  his  attempts  against  Tyre,  for  both  the 
heathen  writers  above  referred  to,  in  the  passages  quoted  by 
Josephus  from  their  abstract  of  Phoenician  affairs,  represent  the 

1  "  Quod  quum  viderent  Tyrii  jam  jamque  perfectum,  et  percussione 
arietum,  murorum  fundamenta  quaterentur,  quidquid  pretiosum  in  auro, 
argento,  vestibusque,  et  varia  supellectili  nobilitas  habuit,  impositura 
navibus  ad  insulas  asportavit ;  ita  ut  capta  urbe,  nihil  dignum  labore  suo 
inveniret  Nebuchodonosor  "  (on  chap.  xxix.  18). 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  293 

king  of  Babylon  as  having  made  himself  master  of  all  Phoenicia, 
which  could  with  no  propriety  have  been  done  if  the  principal 
Phoenician  state  had  successfully  withstood  his  assault.  And 
it  admits  of  no  doubt  that  in  the  history  of  the  period  the  Phoe 
nician  interest  is  presently  afterwards  found  in  a  depressed  con 
dition,  the  hereditary  monarchy  of  Tyre  ceases,  and  she  is  first 
governed  by  a  joint  magistracy,  then  gets  a  king  from  Babylon ; 
also  during  the  Persian  dynasty,  which  very  soon  supplanted 
that  of  Babylon,  Tyre  is  named  after  Zidon,  as  if  it  had  become 
the  second  in  rank,  and  both  Tyre  and  Zidon  appear  in  the 
train  of  the  new  lords  of  the  world  as  tributary  states, — all  plainly 
implying  some  great  work  of  conquest  going  before,  and  com 
pelling  the  proud  mistress  of  the  seas  to  take  this  inferior  place. 
To  say  that  the  long  siege  of  thirteen  years  may  have  so  far 
wasted  her  resources  as  to  render  it  politic  or  necessary  for  her 
to  descend  to  such  a  subordinate  position,  is  an  assumption  alike 
gratuitous  and  improbable,  since  nothing  could  have  contributed 
so  much  to  foster  the  pride  and  confirm  the  ascendancy  of  Tyre 
as  the  circumstance  of  having  so  long,  if  she  had  but  successfully, 
defied  the  mighty  conqueror  of  nations.  Not  her  successful 
resistance,  but  only  her  subjection,  could  account  for  so  altered 
a  turn  in  her  affairs.1 


1  For  the  proof  of  the  facts  last  referred  to,  see  the  passages  from  Me- 
nander  and  Philostratus  in  Josephus;  also  Ezra,  iii.  7;  Herod,  vii.  99,  100; 
viii.  67  ;  or  Movers'  Das  Phonizische  Alterthum,  c.  11,  where  the  matter  is 
fully  investigated.  Even  Gesenius,  on  Isa.  xxiii.,  holds  it  as  certain  that  the 
Tyrians,  if  not  actually  overthrown,  must  have  been  brought  to  terms  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  "  as  we  see  that  subsequently  the  Tyrians  sent  to  Babylon 
to  fetch  Merbal,  one  of  their  later  kings  "  (referring  to  Jos.  c.  Ap.  i.  21).  In  a 
matter  of  this  kind,  it  is  only  the  broader  statements  of  history  that  should 
be  brought  into  notice,  especially  as  the  historical  fragments  to  be  depended 
on  are  from  the  pen,  not  of  contemporary  writers,  but  of  persons  who  lived 
two  or  more  centuries  after  the  events  in  question,  and  who  merely  wrote 
compends  of  history.  In  such  a  case  it  is  unwise  to  urge  little  points,  as 
it  only  gives  the  adversary  an  opportunity  of  pressing  improbabilities  or 
inconsistencies  in  the  accounts  relied  on.  Hengstenberg,  and  in  part  also 
Havernick,  have  in  this  way  laid  themselves  open,  at  various  points,  to  the 
attacks  of  a  sharp  and  unsparing  writer  like  Hitzig,  who  has  a  quick  eye  for 
any  small  discrepance  or  mistake,  but  does  not  know  often  how  to  estimate 
things  of  greater  moment.  It  is  unwise,  also,  to  speculate  about  the 
probable  way  which  Nebuchadnezzar  took  to  carry  the  siege  of  Tyre,  whether 
by  mounds,  floats,  or  ships,  or  by  any  other  means.  No  information  has 


294  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

In  regard  to  the  future  fortunes  of  Tyre,  all  is  matter  of 
well-known  and  ascertained  history ;  and  the  result  has  been  a 
remarkable  verification  of  the  words  of  the  prophet.  After  the 
times  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  next  great  blow  struck  at  its  great 
ness  and  prosperity,  was  the  conquest  of  it  by  Alexander,  which 
took  place  about  322  years  before  the  Christian  era,  and  which 
was  only  gained  after  he  had,  with  incredible  pains,  connected 
the  mainland  with  the  island  by  a  mound  or  causeway.  The 
stones  of  old  Tyre  were  all  used  in  the  construction  of  this  huge 
work  of  art;  and  so  well  compacted  had  it  been  from  the  first, 
that  it  continued  ever  afterwards  to  stand,  and  in  the  course  of 
time  has  grown,  by  the  gradual  accumulations  of  sand,  to  the 
breadth  of  about  half  a  mile.  The  site  of  Tyre,  therefore,  ceased 
from  the  time  of  Alexander  to  be  an  isolated  rock,  and  became, 
what  it  still  remains,  a  peninsula.  It  again,  however,  endured 
a  long  siege  in  the  time  of  Antigonus,  one  of  Alexander's 
successors,  but  was  obliged  to  yield  at  last.  Still,  even  in  New 
Testament  times,  it  had  not  altogether  lost  its  prosperity.  It 
was  even  then  a  place  of  considerable  traffic,  and  was  known 
in  the  first  centuries  as  the  seat  of  a  Christian  bishop.  Though 
nothing  compared  with  what  it  had  been  in  former  ages,  it 
continued  to  be  a  place  of  considerable  importance  and  great 
strength.  The  Crusaders  in  1124  only  got  possession  of  it  after 
a  siege  of  nearly  five  months,  and  were  surprised  at  the  splen 
dour  of  its  houses  and  the  strength  of  its  fortifications.  Though 

O  o 

it  continued  for  a  long  period  to  withstand  the  arms  of  the 
Saracens, yet  ultimately  (about  the  beginning  of  the  14th  century) 
it  fell  into  their  hands,  and  they  appear  to  have  soon  razed  its 
fortifications,  as  they  did  also  those  of  Sidon  and  Beirut ;  for 
shortly  afterwards  Abulfeda  speaks  of  it  as  being  in  a  state  of 
desolation  and  ruin.  The  travellers  who  in  more  recent  times 
have  been  on  the  spot,  have  all  delivered  an  unvarying  testi 
mony  concerning  it,  describing  it  as  a  heap  of  ruins,  "  not  so 
much  as  one  entire  house  left,  and  only  a  few  poor  fishermen 
harbouring  themselves  in  the  vaults  "  (Maundrell).  The  growth 
and  export  of  tobacco  to  Egypt  has  tended  slightly  to  improve 

come  down  to  us  on  the  subject;  but  surely  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  such 
a  monarch  as  Nebuchadnezzar,  accustomed  to  such  gigantic  undertakings, 
was  to  conduct  a  thirteen  years'  siege  without  resorting  to  prodigious 
appliances  of  some  sort.  See  for  proof  of  such  in  Movers,  p.  446,  sq. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  295 

its  condition  during  the  present  century;  but  the  accumulation 
of  sand  in  its  harbours,  which  has  rendered  them  too  shallow  for 
large  vessels,  and  the  more  favourable  position  of  Beirut  at  a 
short  distance,  prevent  the  hope  of  Tyre's  ancient  glory  ever 
returning  to  her.  The  remains  of  her  former  magnificence  lie 
for  ever  buried  in  the  deep,  and  she  can  never  again  be  the 
homestead  of  merchant  princes,  but  only  at  most  the  abode  of 
fishermen  and  a  resort  for  the  smaller  craft  of  traders.  So 
surely  does  the  word  of  God  travel  on  to  its  accomplishment, 
though  ages  may  elapse  in  the  process,  and  seeming  impossi 
bilities  have  to  be  vanquished  before  the  destined  result  can  be 
reached. 

The  remaining  verses  in  the  chapter  (vers.  15-21)  have 
respect  to  the  impression  which  the  overthrow  of  Tyre  was  fitted 
to  produce  upon  other  maritime  nations,  and  more  especially 
her  own  colonial  possessions. 

Ver.  15.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Shall  not  the  isles  (or  more  gene 
rally,  the  sea-coasts)  shake  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall,  at  the  cry  of  the  wounded, 
arid  the  great  slaughter  made  in  the  midst  of  thee  ?  16.  And  all  the  princes 
of  the  sea  shall  come  down  from  their  thrones,  and  lay  aside  their  robes,  and 
put  off  their  embroidered  garments  ;  with  terrors  they  shall  clothe  them 
selves,  upon  the  ground  shall  they  sit,  and  they  tremble  every  moment,  and 
are  astonished  at  thee.  17.  And  they  shall  take  up  a  lamentation  over  thee, 
and  say  to  thee,  How  art  thou  destroyed,  thou  inhabitant  of  the  seas,1  the 
renowned  city,  that  was  strong  in  the  sea,  she  and  her  inhabitants,  who  did 
put  their  terror  upon  all  her  inhabitants  !  2  18.  Now  shall  the  sea-coasts 
tremble  in  the  day  of  thy  fall,  and  the  isles  that  are  in  the  sea  be  terrified 
at  thy  exit  (or  end).  19.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  I  make 
thee  a  desolate  city,  like  the  cities  which  are  not  inhabited,  because  I  bring 

1  Literally,  Thou  that  art  inhabited  from  the  seas.  The  rendering  adopted 
by  our  translators,  "inhabited  of  sea-faring  men,"  though  supported  by 
Grotius  and  others,  is  quite  untenable,  as  it  arbitrarily  substitutes  sea-farers 
for  seas,  and  regards  such  sea-farers,  persons  merely  coming  for  traffic  to 
Tyre,  as  its  proper  inhabitants.  The  Targum  and  the  Peschito  already  give 
the  correct  meaning,  habitatrix  marium  ;  the  Vulgate,  not  quite  so  correctly, 
quse  habitas  in  mari.  It  denotes  Tyre  as  a  prosperous  city  rising  out  of  the 
seas,  appearing  as  if  she  had  got  thence  her  very  inhabitants,  being  peopled 
so  closely  down  to  the  waters.  The  rendering  of  the  LXX.,  which  gives, 
"  destroyed  out  of  the  sea,"  is  another  specimen  of  the  loose  character  of 
their  translation  of  Ezekiel.  They  evidently  mistook  the  verb  for  a  part 


2  Hitzig,  with  some  reason,  ridicules  the  very  forced  and  artificial  con 
struction  adopted  by  Havernick  of  this  clause:  Tyre's  inhabitants  (her 
home  -people),  who  kept  in  terror  all  the  inhabitants  (namely,  the  inhabit- 


296  EZEKIEL  XXVI. 

up  upon  thee  the  deep  and  the  covering  of  many  waters  ;  20.  And  I  make 
thee  to  go  down  with  those  that  go  down  to  the  pit,  to  the  people  of  ancient 
time,  and  I  make  thee  dwell  in  the  land  of  deep  places,  an  eternal  desola 
tion,  with  those  that  go  down  to  the  pit,  that  thou  mayest  not  be  inhabited, 
nor  set  as  an  ornament  in  the  land  of  the  living ; l  21.  Ruins  will  I  make 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  not  be ;  and  thou  shalt  be  sought,  and  shalt  not  be 
found  any  more  for  ever,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

By  the  isles  or  sea-coasts,  and  princes  of  the  sea,  in  the  earlier 
part  of  this  passage,  are  chiefly  to  be  understood  the  maritime 
powers  in  different  places,  colonies  of  Tyre,  with  which  she 
traded  and  kept  up  a  very  close  connection.2  Even  the  greatest 
and  most  influential  of  these,  Carthage  in  Africa,  was  accus 
tomed  to  send  a  yearly  present  of  gifts  to  the  temple  of  the 
Tyrian  Hercules ;  and,  as  the  mother-city,  Tyre  still  had  the 
honour  of  giving  high-priests  to  her  colonial  dependencies.  Being 
thus  connected  by  the  sacred  tie  of  religion,  as  well  as  by  the 
regular  intercourse  of  trade  with  these  maritime  settlements  along 
the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean,  we  can  easily  understand  how 
her  humiliation  would  send  a  thrill  of  distress  through  all  the 
affiliated  states,  and  make  them  fear  also  for  their  own  prosperity. 
The  description  given  of  this,  however,  evidently  partakes  to  a 
considerable  extent  of  the  ideal ;  and  we  are  not  to  suppose  that 
the  rulers  of  these  states  were  actually  to  divest  themselves  of 

ants  of  her  colonies,  who  might  still  be  called  her  own).  Understood  thus, 
it  is  certainly,  as  Hiivernick  styles  it,  "a  somewhat  enigmatical  sentence." 
Hitzig  supposes,  as  very  commonly,  a  corruption  in  the  text,  and  would 
prefer  the  more  abbreviated  reading  of  the  LXX. :  "the  renowned  city 
that  put  her  terror  on  all  her  inhabitants" — finding  inhabitants  only  once  in 
the  passage.  But  there  is  no  need  for  this  change.  When  the  prophet  had 
said  that  Tyre  was  strong  in  the  sea,  he  specifies  both  the  city  itself  and 
its  inhabitants  as  sharing  in  this  strength  ;  and  then  adds,  that  they  (the 
people  and  city  viewed  complexly — the  state)  put  their  terror  upon  all  her 
inhabitants — that  is,  not  only  were,  as  a  whole,  objects  of  fear  to  others,  but 
communicated  of  this  to  every  one  of  her  people ;  causing  the  name  of  a 
Tyrian  to  be  everywhere  dreaded. 

1  The  negative  in  this  verse  ought  undoubtedly  to  be  applied  to  both 
clauses :  not  be  inhabited,  and  not  set  as  an  ornament.     The  Chaldee,  and 
those  who  followed  it,  understood  the  last  clause  to  refer  to  Judah,  and  hence 
took  it  positively.     But  the  LXX.  properly  understood  both  clauses  of  Tyre, 
and  took  both  negatively.     The  because  or  in  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
whole  passage,  is  to  be  explained  as  a  construction  ad  sensum.     The  reason 
is  here  given  of  what  goes  before. 

2  For  the  extraordinary  number  and  extent  of  these  colonial  possessions 
of  Tyre,  see  Heeren,  Phoenicians,  chap.  ii. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  TYRE.  297 

their  royal  garments,  and  sit  as  mourners  upon  the  ground  : 
what  is  meant  is,  that  the  effect  produced  would  be  of  a  kind 
that  would  have  its  just  and  fitting  expression  in  such  natural 
indications  of  sorrow.  The  prophet  seems  to  have  before  his  eye 
the  account  of  Nineveh's  repentance  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah. 
And  the  feeling  of  trouble  and  dismay  which  then  pervaded  that 
great  city,  when  it  seemed  to  stand  on  the  verge  of  destruction, 
was  now,  in  like  manner,  to  pervade  the  colonial  settlements  and 
trading  associates  of  Tyre  when  they  heard  the  report  of  her 
overthrow. 

What  is  said  of  Tyre  herself  at  the  close  is  also  entirely 
figurative.  She  is  described  as  a  person  going  to  be  submerged 
under  the  waters  that  encompassed  her,  and  sent  from  the  land 
of  the  living  to  tenant  the  lower  regions  of  the  dead,  the  land 
of  gloom  and  forgetfulness,  where  the  departed  of  primeval 
time  had  their  abode.  In  plain  terms,  Tyre  (like  the  king  of 
Babylon,  in  the  14th  chapter  of  Isaiah)  was  to  take  rank  with 
the  dead,  and  be  no  more  numbered  with  the  living.  But,  of 
course,  it  is  the  Tyre  that  then  was  which  is  meant — the  proud, 
imperial  mistress  of  the  seas ;  as  such,  she  was  to  cease  to  have 
a  local  habitation  and  a  name  in  the  earth,  she  was  to  be  found 
only  among  the  departed.  That  there  should  still  be  a  Tyre  on 
the  same  spot  where  the  ancient  city  stood,  is  nothing  against 
the  description ;  for  this  poor  and  shrivelled  thing  is  no  longer 
the  Tyre  of  the  prophet — that  is  gone,  never  to  return  again. 
And  to  apply  such  expressions  as  "  she  shall  be  no  more,"  a  she 
shall  be  sought  for,  but  not  be  found,"  only  to  old  Tyre,  as  we 
find  modern  travellers  very  commonly  doing, — because  the  very 
site  of  this  is  not  precisely  known, — is  to  misapprehend  the 
nature  of  the  description,  it  is  to  turn  a  figurative  into  a 
literal  delineation,  and  to  apply  only  to  a  portion  of  the  city 
what  was  plainly  meant  of  the  whole.  It  is  of  Tyre  in  her 
completeness,  insular  as  well  as  continental,  that  the  prophet 
speaks,  and  she  is  long  since  written  among  the  dead. 


298  EZEKIEL  XXVII. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

THE   LAMENTATION  UPON  TYRE,   WITH   AN   ACCOUNT    OF   HER 
FORMER   GREATNESS   AND   PROSPERITY. 

IT  seems  somewhat  like  a  freak  of  fancy  in  Ezekiel  to  dwell 
at  such  length,  as  he  does  in  this  chapter,  on  the  commercial 
greatness  of  Tyre  ;  and  to  point  out,  with  such  elaborate  minute 
ness,  both  the  circumstances  connected  with  her  thriving  and 
wide-spread  merchandise,  and  the  notes  of  lamentation  and  pity 
that  should  be  raised  over  her  coming  ruin.  It  is  the  mark,  cer 
tainly,  of  a  somewhat  peculiar  cast  of  mind,  and  has  no  exact 
parallel  in  any  of  the  other  prophets,  who  usually  present  us 
with  only  a  few  general  and  characteristic  traits,  when  they 
have  occasion  to  speak  of  the  existing  condition  of  a  state  or 
people,  as  contrasted  with  what  they  may  be  destined  to  be 
come.  Yet  the  prophet,  in  this  singular  delineation,  was  not 
the  less  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  what  he  wrote,  nor  was 
the  delineation  itself  less  fitted  to  serve  the  ends  for  which  such 
prophecies  were  written.  It  was  just  Ezekiel's  way — the  way 
peculiarly  suited  to  his  lively  and  realistic  cast  of  thought — of 
conveying  a  distinct  and  deep  impression  concerning  the  things 
of  Tyre ;  first,  her  pre-eminent  greatness  as  the  centre  of  the 
world's  wealth  and  merchandise,  and  then  her  complete  annihi 
lation  in  respect  to  all  that  had  formerly  distinguished  her  ;  that 
so  the  omniscient  eye  of  God,  in  foretelling  what  was  to  happen, 
and  his  overruling  providence  in  accomplishing  it,  might  be 
more  strikingly  exhibited.  With  so  full  and  lively  a  picture 
before  us  of  wrhat  Tyre  wras  in  the  prophet's  own  time,  we  can 
the  more  easily  discern  the  hand  of  God  in  rendering  her  what 
she  has  become,  and  also  the  Divine  foresight  which  so  long 
beforehand  declared  that  it  was  certainly  to  be. 

In  regard  to  the  form  of  the  delineation,  it  is  a  trope.  Tyre's 
existing  condition  and  coming  destiny  are  exhibited  under  the 
figure  of  a  ship,  constructed  of  the  best  materials,  manned  and 
equipped  in  the  first  style,  trading  in  all  mercantile  commodi 
ties,  and  with  all  parts  of  the  commercial  world ;  but  at  length 
brought  into  tempestuous  seas,  shipwrecked,  and  involved  in 


LAMENTATION  UPON  TYRE.  299 

irrecoverable  ruin.  This  is  the  general  character  of  the  descrip 
tion  ;  but,  as  usually  happens  in  the  more  lengthened  tropes  of 
the  prophet,  the  figure  occasionally  gives  place  to  the  reality ; 
the  desire  to  be  clear  and  graphic  breaks  in,  at  various  points, 
on  the  uniformity  of  the  representation.  This  is  particularly 
the  case  at  ver.  9,  where  all  the  ships  of  the  sea  are  represented 
as  having  a  place  in  this  figurative  vessel ;  and  at  ver.  11,  where 
towns  and  walls,  and  an  armed  force,  as  of  a  city,  are  mentioned. 
But  for  so  long  a  description  the  figure  is  wonderfully  sus 
tained,  though  it  has  in  several  places  been  marred  by  wrong 
translations.  We  shall  simply  present  a  translation  of  the  whole, 
and  subjoin  a  few  explanatory  remarks  on  those  parts  which  are 
more  obscure,  deeming  it  unnecessary  to  enter  at  any  length 
into  the  historical  points  referred  to  in  the  description  as  regards 
the  commercial  relations  of  antiquity.  These  have  more  in 
them  of  an  antiquarian  than  of  a  religious  interest,  and  may 
be  examined  by  such  as  have  a  taste  for  the  pursuit  in  Bochart's 
Phaleg,  the  Phonizier  of  Movers,  or  what  is  now  more  acces 
sible,  Heeren's  Historical  Researches,  where  the  trade  and  policy 
of  the  Phoenicians  have  received  due  attention. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  And  thou, 
son  of  man,  lift  up  a  lamentation  over  Tyre ;  3.  And  say  to  Tyre,  0  thou 
that  dwellest  by  the  entrances  (ports  or  havens)  of  the  sea,1  the  peoples' 
merchantess  into  many  sea-coasts,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Tyre,  thou 
sayest,  I  am  perfect  in  beauty.  4.  In  the  midst  of  the  seas  is  thy  territory  ; 
thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  beauty.  5.  Of  fir-trees  from  Senir  they  con 
structed  all  thy  boards ;  cedar  from  Lebanon  have  they  taken  to  make  a 
mast  for  thee.2  6.  Of  oaks  of  Bashan  they  made  thy  oars  ;  thy  plank-work 
they  made  ivory  with  boxes  (or  cedars,  i.e.  those  and  ivory  combined)  from 

1  The  Qi  DJ031D  are  the  openings,  the  inlets  or  outlets,  by  which  one 
finds  communication  with  the  sea,  in  going  and  coming;  hence  its  ports 
(as  from  the  Latin  porta,  the  gate  that  opens  out  and  in  to  a  city,  there  is 
portus,  that  does  the  same  to  the  sea).     Insular  Tyre  was  remarkable  for  its 
good  harbours  :  ancient  writers  specially  notice  two — one  on  the  north,  and 
another  on  the  south. 

2  Senir  was  the  Sidonian  name  for  Hermon  (Deut.  iii.  9).     Instead  of 
fir-trees,  some  read  cypresses,  which  is  countenanced  by  Sirach,  xxiv.  33, 
where  the  cypress  is  named  as  the  peculiar  production  of  Hermon.     The 
names  of  trees,  in  Scripture,  are  not  very  accurately  defined.     The  cedar  of 
Lebanon  is  well  known  from  its  height,  durability,  and  strength ;  hence,  well 
adapted  for  the  purpose  here  mentioned — making  masts.     It  is  also  matter 
of  history  that  the  Tyrians  obtained  wood  for  their  costlier  buildings  from 
these  mountains.     See  especially  Josephus,  Antiq.  viii.  5. 


300  EZEKIEL  XXVII. 

the  isle  of  Cyrus.1  7.  Fine  linen  with  broidered  -work  from  Egypt  was  thy 
sail,  to  serve  for  a  banner  (streamer)  to  thee ;  bluish  and  red  purple  from  the 
sea-coasts  of  Elislia  (Greece)  were  thy  awning.2  8.  The  inhabitants  of  Zidon 
and  Arvad  were  thy  rowers ;  thy  wise  men,  Tyre,  that  were  in  thee,  were 
thy  steersmen.3  9.  Men  of  mature  age  from  Gebal  and  her  skilled  ones  were 
thy  calkers  (literally,  stoppers  of  chinks) ;  all  the  ships  of  the  sea  with  their 
mariners  were  in  thee  to  handle  thy  merchandise.  10.  Persia,  and  Lud,  and 
Phut4  were  in  thy  army,  thy  men  of  war ;  the  shield  and  helmet  they  hung 
in  thee  ;  they  made  thee  glorious.  11.  The  men  of  Arvad  and  thine  army 
were  upon  thy  walls  round  about,  and  men  of  daring  were  in  thy  towers ;  5 
they  hung  their  shields  upon  thy  walls  round  about ;  they  perfected  thy 


1  Instead  of  the  punctuation  of  the  Hebrew  text,  making  two  words 
of  D'H^arDS,  the  junction  of  the  two,  long  ago  proposed  by  the  Chaldee  : 
asseres  buxeos  ebore  obductos,  also  adopted  by  Rabbi  Solomon,  has  been  sanc 
tioned  by  Bochart,  and  is  now,  indeed,  generally  acquiesced  in.     It  becomes 
then,  until  basliurim,  a  sort  of  trees.     But  instead  of  the  box-tree,  Ges.  Thes. 
would  understand  a  species  of  cedar  to  be  meant;  the  same  as  "li^'Nfi  in 
Isa.  xli.  19,  Ix.  13 — though  here  he  retains  the  received  text,  and  renders 
transtra  tuafecerunt  ex  cbore,Jilia  cedorum,  i.e.  cedro  incluso.     He  refers  for 
a  parallel  to  Virgil,  Aen.  x.  137,  inclusum  buxo  cbnr.     By  the  "ntthp  have 
very  commonly  been  understood,  the  benches  on  which  the  rowers  sat ;  but 
as  there  were  tiers  of  these  at  each  side  of  the  vessel,  the  singular  is  rather 
against  the  supposition.     It  is  more  probably  the  deck,  as  Hitzig  suggests, 
that  is  meant,  which  was  one  piece,  though  made  up  of  separate  parts. 

2  The  meaning  of  the  verse  is,  that  the  fine  quality  of  the  sailcloth, 
and  the  embroidery  upon  it,  was  instead  of  a  pennant  or  standard  ;  it 
served  the  purpose  of  this.     Several  of  the  plates  in  Wilkinson's  Egypt  show 
what  expense  was  sometimes  gone  into  by  the  ancients  in  decorating  their 
sails.     There  is  a  general  agreement  among  commentators  that  by  Elisha 
Greece  is  to  be  understood,  but  they  differ  in  the  mode  of  explanation — 
some  identifying  it  with  Elis  in  the  Peloponesus ;  others,  with  Hellas. 
Laconian  purple  was  renowned. 

3  When  the  men  of  Zidon  and  Arvad  (Aradus)  are  mentioned  as  oars 
men  in  the  ships  of  Tyre,  it  denotes  the  relative  superiority  of  Tyre ; 
these  also  were  very  important  Phoenician  cities,  yet  their  men  sought  em 
ployment  in  the  merchant  vessels  of  Tyre,  certainly  not  working  as  slaves, 
but  with  the  view  of  bettering  their  condition. 

4  The  people  of  Lud  and  Phut  are  not  certainly  known,  but  most  probably 
were  Lydians  and  Libyans.    See  at  ch.  xxx.  5,  where  the  words  again  occur. 

5  The  Gammadims  of  our  version  ought  to  be  translated ;  there  is  no  trace 
whatever  of  such  a  people  ;  and  the  position  which  the  persons  in  question 
are  said  to  have  occupied,  that  of  keeping  watch  in  the  towers,  is  one  that 
would  never  have  been  entrusted  to  foreigners.     The  sense  also  adopted  by 
Hitzig  and  some  others,  deserters  (namely,  from  other  countries)  is  arbitrary 
and  unsuitable.     I  follow  those,  among  whom  is  Havernick,  who,  from  the 
Arabic,  obtain  the  sense  of  hardy,  strong,  daring,  or  enterprising.     The 
stout-hearted  and  daring  occupied  her  watch-towers. 


LAMENTATION  UPON  TYEE.  301 

beauty.  12.  Tarshish  was  thy  dealer  from  the  abundance  of  all  sort  of 
wealth  ;  with  silver,  with  iron,  with  tin,  and  with  lead,  they  did  barter  with 
thee.1  13.  Javan,  Tubal,  and  Mesech,  they  were  thy  merchants  ;  with  souls 
of  men  and  articles  of  brass  they  did  barter  with  thee.2  14.  They  of  the 
house  of  Togarmah  in  horses,  riding-steeds,  and  mules,  did  barter  with  thee.3 
15.  The  men  of  Dedan  were  thy  merchants  ;  many  sea-coasts  were  the  mart 
of  thy  hand  (i.e.  were  dependent  on  thee  for  their  trade)  ;  horns  of  ivory  and 
ebony  they  brought  in  return  as  thy  reward.4  16.  Syria  was  thy  mart  for 
the  multitude  of  thy  works;  with  carbuncle,  purple,  and  embroidery,  and  fine 
cotton,  and  corals,  and  brilliants,  they  transacted  in  thy  exchanges.5  17. 
Judah  and  the  land  of  Israel,  they  were  thy  dealers  with  wheat  of  Minnith, 
and  Pannag,  and  honey,  and  oil,  and  balm,  they  transacted  thy  business.6 
18.  Damascus  was  thy  mart  for  the  multitude  of  thy  works,  for  the  fulness 
of  all  kind  of  wealth,  with  wine  of  Chalybon,  and  the  whitest  wool.7  19. 
Vedan  and  Javan  from  Uzal  transacted  in  thy  exchanges,  with  wrought 


ru»  not  as  in  tne  received  translation,  "they  traded  in  thy 
fairs  ;  "  but,  they  made  thy  exchanges,  or  did  barter  with  thee.  The  noun  is 
from  the  verb  2ty,  to  leave  ;  hence,  "  that  which  you  leave  to  any  one,  for 
something  else  given  you  by  him  in  regular  barter"  (Gussetius).  So  also 
Ewald,  Havernick,  and  others.  The  richness  of  Tarshish,  the  Latin  Tar- 
tessus,  and  that  part  of  Spain  in  which  it  was  situated,  in  the  precious 
metals  mentioned  in  this  part  of  the  text,  is  well  known. 

2  Javan,  the  loniaus  or  Greeks  ;  Mesech,  the  Moschi,  in  the  Moschian 
mountains,  between  Armenia,  Iberia,  and  Colchis,  a  rough  and  warlike  race; 
Tubal,  the  Tibareni  in  Pontus  ;  all,  in  short,  of  Greece,  or  connected  with 
it.     The  souls  of  men,  in  which  these  races  are  said  to  have  trafficked  with 
Tyre,  are  the  slaves  which,  when  obtained  from  certain  parts  of  Greece  and 
the  surrounding  countries,  were  particularly  prized  in  ancient  times. 

3  The  Q^'"|Q  must  here  mean  a  certain  kind  of  horses  —  horses  for  riding; 
as  it  could  not  be  the  prophet's  design  to  class  horsemen  with  horses  and 
mules  as  articles  of  trade.     That  the  word  has  this  meaning  also  in  other 
passages,  see  Gesenius,  Lex.     Togarmah  is  Armenia. 

4  "  Horns  of  ivory,"  were  so  called  because  of  the  resemblance  of  ivory, 
in  its  original  state,  to  horns  ;  not,  as  some  have  gratuitously  supposed, 
because  the  ancients  falsely  imagined  ivory  was  obtained  from  the  horns  of 
certain  animals. 

5  Instead  of  Syria,  Aram,  some  codices,  LXX.,  Peschito,  read  Edom  ;  and 
many  commentators  prefer  this  reading.      Neither  of  the  two  names  is 
unsuitable,  though   from  the  connection  we  might  rather  have  expected 
Edom  than  Aram.     The  precious  stone  meant  by  TJBJ,  according  to  the 
most  ancient  authorities,  was  carbuncle,  not  emerald  —  so  Sept.,  Josephus, 
Epiphanius,  and  the  Jer.  Talmud.     See  Ges.  Thes. 

6  Minnith  was  originally  an  Ammonite  city  (Judg.  xi.  33).     Of  Pannag 
we  know  nothing  ;  hence  some  translate  it  here,  and  give  it  the  meaning  of 
sweet  things  generally.    But  if  held  to  be  a  proper  name,  then  it  and  Min 
nith  must  be  regarded  as  places  remarkable  for  the  finest  qualities  of  wheat. 

7  Wine  of  Chalybon  was  so  famous,  that  the  kings  of  Persia  are  reported 
to  have  used  it  in  preference  to  all  others. 


302  EZEKIEL  XXVII. 

(polished)  iron,  cassia,  and  calamus,  they  did  business  with  thee.1  20.  Dedan 
was  thy  merchant  with  splendid  coverings  for  chariots.  21.  Arabia,  and  all 
the  princes  of  Kedar,  they  were  dealers  in  thine  employ  (literally,  of  thy 
hand)  ;  with  lambs,  and  rams,  and  goats — with  these  they  were  thy  dealers.2 
22.  The  merchants  of  Shebah  and  Raamah,  they  were  thy  dealers ;  with  the 
choice  of  every  sort  of  spicery,  and  with  every  precious  stone,  and  gold,  they 
transacted  thy  exchanges.3  23.  Haran,  Canneh,  and  Eden,  the  merchants  of 
Sheba,  Ashur-Ohilmad,  were  thy  dealers.4  2-4.  These  were  thy  dealers  in 
beautiful  things,  in  cloaks  of  blue,  and  embroidery,  and  bundles  of  damask 
wound  about  with  thread,  and  strong,5  among  thy  merchandise.  25.  The 
ships  of  Tarshish  were  thy  walls  as  to  thy  merchandise ;  and  thou  wast 
replenished  and  wert  very  glorious  in  the  midst  of  the  seas.6 

Ver.  26.  Thy  rowers  bring  thee  into  great  waters ;  the  east  wind  breaks 


1  There  is  great  difficulty  in  determining  how  the  proper  names  in  this 
verse  ought  to  be  taken.     "  And  Dan,"  with  which  the  verse  begins  in  our 
version,  is  open  especially  to  the  two  objections — that  none  of  the  parts  in  the 
prophet's  enumeration  begin  with  And,  and  that  Dan  also  would  be  quite 
out  of  place  here.     It  seems  better,  therefore,  to  read  Vedan  as  one  word,  and 
to  understand  it  of  some  place  unknown.     From  the  products  specified,  one 
would  expect  to  find  some  Arabian  cities  or  people  mentioned.     The  conjec 
ture  of  Tuch  (on  Gen.  x.  27),  that  by  Javan  here  might  possibly  be  meant  a 
Greek  settlement  in  Arabia  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Uzal,  a  town  in  Yemen, 
is  not  improbable.     Yemen  was  distinguished  for  its  manufacture  of  fine 
sword -blades,  which  may  be  the  wrought  or  polished  iron  here  specified. 
The  other  things  were  the  natural  products  of  Arabia. 

2  When  Arabia  is  mentioned  separately,  it  is  commonly  the  Nomadic 
portion  that  is  meant ;  and  especially  must  that  be  understood  here  when  it 
is  coupled  with  the  princes  of  Kedar,  the  heads,  in  a  manner,  of  the  shepherd 
tribes.     Hence  the  articles  of  traffic  named  are  of  the  flocks. 

3  Shebah  and  Raamah,  two  ancient  places  in  Arabia  (Gen.  x.  7). 

4  I  follow  Horsley  in  this  way  of  reading  the  names  of  the  verse,  which 
appears  to  me  decidedly  preferable  to  Havernick's  :  "  Haran  and  Canneh  and 
Aden  are  dealers  of  Saba  ;  (but)  Assur,  Chilmad  are  thy  customers."     For  it 
seems  very  unnatural  to  bring  in  here  those  who  dealt  with  Saba,  and  not 
less  so,  to  couple  all  Assyria  with  some  obscure  place  or  district  like  Chilmad. 
I  think  they  ought  all  to  be  regarded  as  mentioned  here  simply  on  account 
of  their  relation  to  Tyre.     The  places  appear  partly  to  be  Arabian  and 
partly  Assyrian. 

5  The  D^ptf  here  is  now  generally  taken  for  part.  pas.  of  an  unused  root, 
in  the  sense  of  closely  bound  together;  hence,  compact,  strong — a  sense  still 
retained  in  the  Arabic.     In  this  sense  it  is  a  fit  designation  of  the  wares 
spoken  of,  the  D^pPa — a  very  doubtful  word,  found  only  here,  but  supposed 
to  mean  woven  stuffs,  made  up  of  various  kinds  of  threads — damasks.     If 
the  D^PK  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  cedars  ;  or,  as  an  adj.  cedrine  (with  Ges.), 
it  must  qualify  not  the  wares  spoken  of,  but  the  bundles  or  chests  in  which 
they  were  put — as  if  the  prophet  laid  stress  on  the  mere  ornamenting  of 
the  exterior  of  the  packages. 

6  To  call  the  ships  of  Tarshish  the  walls  of  Tyre,  has  been  thought  so 


LAMENTATION  UPON  TYRE.  303 

thee  in  the  midst  of  the  seas.  27.  Thy  wealth,  and  thy  barterings,  thy  mer 
chandise,  thy  mariners  and  thy  pilots,  thy  calkers,  and  the  transactors  of 
thy  merchandise,  and  all  thy  men  of  war,  that  are  in  thee,  and  in  all  thy 
company  that  is  in  the  midst  of  thee,  sink  down  in  the  midst  of  the  seas,  in 
the  day  of  thy  ruin.  28.  At  the  noise  of  the  cry  of  thy  pilots  the  suburbs 
shake.  29.  And  from  their  ships  come  down  all  that  handle  the  oar,  the 
mariners,  all  the  pilots  of  the  sea,  upon  the  ground  they  stand.  30.  And 
they  make  themselves  to  be  heard  of  thee  with  their  voice,  and  they  cry 
bitterly,  and  they  cast  dust  upon  their  heads,  they  wallow  in  ashes.  31. 
And  they  make  themselves  utterly  bald  for  thee,  and  gird  on  sackcloth,  and 
weep  for  thee  with  bitterness  of  heart,  with  bitter  mourning.  32.  And  they 
lift  up  for  thee  in  their  wailings  a  lamentation,  and  lament  over  thee,  Who 
is  like  Tyre?  as  a  destroyed  one  in  the  midst  of  the  sea?  33.  When  thy 
commodities  went  forth  from  the  seas,  thou  didst  replenish  many  peoples  ; 
with  the  abundance  of  thy  wealth  and  thy  merchandise  thou  didst  enrich 
kings  of  the  earth.  34.  Now  thou  art  broken  by  the  waters  in  the  depths 
of  the  sea,,  thy  merchandise  and  all  thy  company  in  the  midst  sink  down. 
35.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coasts  are  astonished  at  thee,  and  their 
kings  are  horribly  afraid,  they  are  troubled  in  their  countenances.  36.  The 
merchants  among  the  nations  hiss  at  thee ;  ruins  shalt  thou  be,  and  shalt  be 
no  more,  even  for  ever. 

It  may  be  noted  that  the  remark  made  at  the  close  of  last 
chapter  is  equally  applicable  here.  The  coming  destruction  of 
Tyre  is  viewed  in  contrast  with  her  existing  greatness ;  and  as 
it  was  her  commercial  prosperity  which  made  her  what  she  was, 
so  the  loss  of  this,  which  the  prophet  foresaw  was  certainly  to 
take  place,  would  in  a  manner  terminate  her  existence.  It  is, 
of  course,  quite  consistent  with  this,  that  some  remains  of  a  city 
may  still  be  found ;  it  is  plainly  implied  in  other  parts  of  the 
prophecy  that  such  should  be  the  case,  as  when  she  is  spoken  of 

peculiar  as  to  justify  a  departure  from  the  received  meaning  of  rr1l$.  But 
there  is  endless  diversity  in  the  renderings  adopted.  The  Vulgate :  princi- 
pes ;  our  translators :  kings  :  and  to  mention  no  more,  Hitzig,  the  last  com 
mentator,  while  on  Jer.  v.  10,  he  had  proposed  for  the  passage  before  us 
ship-masts, — he  now  abandons  this,  and  would  read  "priilfr}  thy  fields :  "  The 
fitting  out  and  freighting  of  ships  with  goods  was,  in  a  manner,  the  cultiva 
tion  of  the  land.  The  importation  of  all  the  treasures,  which  the  ships 
brought  back  in  return,  was  the  land's  produce  "  ! !  A  strong  figure  truly ! 
For  ourselves,  we  think  the  received  text,  and  the  ascertained  meaning  of 
walls,  afford  a  greatly  more  natural  explanation.  The  ships  of  Tarshish, 
meaning  by  these,  perhaps,  not  so  much  the  ships  that  belonged  to  that 
particular  place,  as  rather  ships  of  the  size  usually  trading  thither,  the 
largest  and  finest  merchant-vessels — these  were  the  walls  of  thy  merchandise, 
or  as  to  thy  merchandise ;  at  once  the  bulwarks  of  thy  commercial  great 
ness,  and  the  means  by  which  its  traffic  was  carried  on.  To  name  such 
ships  as  peculiarly  hers,  seemed  all  one  with  naming  walls  of  security  and 
defence  as  to  her  mercantile  prosperity. 


304  EZEKIEL  XXVIII. 

as  a  spreading-ground  for  nets ;  for  who  were  to  spread  these 
but  the  fishermen  still  frequenting  her  ports,  and  still  dwelling 
among  her  ruins  ?  But  the  Tyre  of  antiquity  no  longer  exists  ; 
her  place  is  no  more  found ;  and  a  voice  of  lamentation  over 
her  fallen  and  irrecoverable  greatness  is  naturally  raised  by 
those  who  contemplate  her  condition. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII.  1-19. 

THE   CRIMINATORY   ADDRESS    TO   THE   KING   OF   TYRE,   AND    THE 
LAMENTATION   OVER   HIS   COMING   DOWNFALL. 

THE  portion  of  chap,  xxviii.  which  relates  to  Tyre,  may  be 
regarded  as  a  kind  of  episode  to  the  prophecy  of  the  two  pre 
ceding  chapters.  It  properly  adds  nothing  to  the  great  theme 
of  the  prophecy,  but  only  presents  it  in  a  somewhat  new  aspect, 
by  bringing  prominently  forward  the  king  of  Tyre,  and  viewing 
all — the  prosperity,  the  self-elation  it  produced,  the  condemna 
tion  thence  arising,  and  the  subsequent  desolation  and  ruin — 
as  embodied  in  his  personal  condition  and  history.  It  is  rather  a 
matter  of  surprise  to  find  that  a  state  so  thoroughly  commercial 
as  Tyre,  and  possessed  of  so  limited  a  territory,  should  have  had 
a  king  at  all ;  but  in  the  regions  of  the  East,  and,  indeed, 
generally  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  world,  royalty  seems  to 
have  been  regarded  as  an  indispensable  element  to  the  right 
management  and  proper  dignity  of  a  state.  In  such  an  active, 
bustling,  and  enterprising  state  as  Tyre,  however,  it  could  not 
exist  in  the  same  absolute  and  despotic  form,  nor  could  it  sur 
round  itself  with  the  same  circumstances  of  imposing  grandeur 
and  majesty  as  usually  distinguished  it  in  the  larger  monarchies 
of  the  East. 

That  proper  scope  and  security  might  be  found  for  the  active 
energies  of  the  Tyrians,  it  was  necessary  that  a  certain  amount 
of  freedom  should  be  enjoyed  by  the  citizens,  and  even  a  con 
siderable  share  obtained  in  the  administration  of  civil  affairs. 
The  king  there  must  have  been  a  limited,  not  a  despotic  sove 
reign,  and  could  only  rule  as  a  prince  among  merchants,  who 
were  themselves  princes. 


CRIMINATORY  ADDRESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYRE,  305- 

It  is  not  only  certain  that  there  was  a  hereditary  king  in 
Tyre,  but  the  fragments  of  Phoenician  history  already  referred 
to  in  the  preceding  chapters  have  also  preserved  the  name  of 
the  king  who  at  that  precise  time  occupied  the  throne — Ithobal 
ir.  And  in  the  king,  as  the  natural  head  and  representative 
of  the  whole  state,  the  prophet  sees  the  full  embodiment,  the 
extreme  culmination,  of  the  spirit  by  which  the  state  in  general 
was  pervaded — the  spirit  of  self-sufficiency,  carnal  security,  and 
immoderate  pride.  These  feelings,  the  natural  product  of  un- 
sanctified  prosperity,  penetrated  the  whole  community  of  Tyre ; 
but  in  the  bosom  of  its  monarch  they  might  justly  be  supposed 
to  find  their  chosen  seat,  and  their  ripest  development.  And 
assuming,  as  they  necessarily  did,  an  attitude  of  lofty  indiffer 
ence,  or  even  of  high  disdain,  in  respect  to  the  God  of  Israel, 
whose  cause  seemed  then  to  be  sinking  amid  deep  waters  while 
Tyre  still  held  on  her  majestic  course,  the  prophet's  bosom 
heaved  with  violent  emotion,  and  in  a  vein  of  severe  and 
cutting  irony,  he  exhibits  the  fancied  superhuman  greatness,  the 
godlike  independence  and  ascendancy  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  that 
he  might  magnify  the  more  the  infinite  power  and  supremacy 
of  him  whose  overruling  providence  was  to  lay  all  prostrate  in 
the  dust.  It  is  substantially  the  same  form  of  representation 
with  that  which  was  adopted  by  Isaiah  respecting  the  king  of 
Babylon,  in  the  14th  chapter  of  his  writings,  where  the  proud 
heart  of  that  aspiring  monarch  is  described  as  scaling  the  very 
heavens,  and  claiming  to  be  as  the  Most  High,  but  only  that 
it  might  be  cast  down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit,  and  trodden 
upon  as  a  carcase  under  feet  of  men.  But  here,  as  usual,  our 
prophet  is  not  satisfied  with  depicting  in  a  few  lively  strokes  the 
towering  ambition  of  the  earthly  prince ;  he  ransacks  alike  the 
past  and  the  present  for  the  most  varied  and  striking  imagery, 
under  which  to  body  forth  its  pretensions,  that  so  he  might 
present,  in  more  vivid  contrast,  what  it  impiously  aspired  to  be, 
with  what  it  really  was.  While  it  was  neither  new  nor  peculiar 
to  our  prophet  to  speak  in  ironical  language  on  such  a  subject, 
there  is  no'  single  passage  of  Scripture,  either  in  the  Old  or  in 
the  New  Testament,  where  the  irony  is  of  so  detailed  a  form, 
and  is  cast  in  altogether  so  peculiar  a  mould.  Yet  it  is  the 
Spirit  of  God  that  breathes  in  the  words,  revealing  to  our  souls 
the  impiety  of  all  ambition,  and  the  vanity  of  all  greatness, 

U 


306  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  1-19. 

which  seeks  its  foundation  and  support  elsewhere  than  in  the 
power  and  goodness  of  the  Eternal. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
say  to  the  prince  of  Tyre,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thy  heart 
is  lifted  up,  and  thou  sayest  I  am  God  (El),  a  God's  seat  I  occupy  in  the 
midst  of  the  seas ;  and  (though)  thou  art  man  and  not  God,  thou  settest 
thy  heart  as  the  heart  of  God.  3.  Behold,  thou  art  wiser  than  Daniel ;  no 
secret  is  hid  from  thee.  4.  By  thy  wisdom  and  by  thy  understanding  thou 
hast  gotten  to  thee  power;  and  thou  hast  gotten  gold  and  silver  in  thy 
treasures.  5.  By  thy  great  wisdom  in  thy  traffic  thou  hast  increased  thy 
power,  and  thy  heart  is  lifted  up  on  account  of  thy  power. 

It  is  the  feeling  of  superhuman  might  and  strength  which  the 
prophet  evidently  means  to  ascribe  to  the  king  of  Tyre  in  the 
first  part  of  this  representation.  Hence  it  is  God  as  the  El,  the 
Supreme  in  power,  the  Mighty  One,  whose  name  and  prerogative 
he  is  described  as  impiously  arrogating  to  himself.  And  the  idea 
is  further  expanded  by  the  thought  that  he  sits  as  a  God,  or 
occupies  a  God's  seat  in  the  midst  of  the  seas  ;  holding  his  place, 
as  it  were,  in  impregnable  security  amid  the  stormiest  elements 
of  nature,  and  knowing  how  to  wield  and  control  them  so  as  to 
render  them  subservient  to  his  own  ends  and  interests.  To  ascribe 
this  sentiment,  with  Hitzig,  to  the  king  of  Tyre,  "  because  his 
residence  juts  up  out  of  the  water,  much  as  the  palace  of  God 
does  out  of  the  heavenly  ocean  above"  (Ps.  civ.  3),  is  indescrib 
ably  flat,  and  a  palpable  misapplication  besides  of  the  passage  of 
Scripture  referred  to.  The  Psalmist  is  there  speaking  not  of  the 
throne  or  habitation  of  God  standing  out  from  the  boundless  ocean 
of  immensity  (of  which  there  is  nowhere  a  word  in  Scripture), 
but  of  his  constructing  a  sort  of  visible  habitation  for  himself 
out  of  the  watery  vapours  of  the  sky — the  clouds,  which  he 
makes  his  chariots.  The  idea  also  of  Pliivernick,  though  in  better 
taste  than  that  of  Hitzig,  that  respect  is  had,  in  the  language 
here  ascribed  to  the  king  of  Tyre,  to  the  species  of  Divine  honour 
paid  to  Oriental  monarchs  (notice  of  which  is  taken  in  Curtius, 
x.  11.  1 ;  Josephus,  ix.  6.  1),  is  fanciful.  It  was  scarcely  possible 
in  a  city  like  Tyre,  where  the  subjects  necessarily  pressed  so 
close  upon  the  king,  that  he  could  be  the  subject  of  properly 
religious  homage.  There  wTas  no  room  there  for  those  wonder 
ful  personal  exploits,  or  that  mysterious  seclusion  and  grandeur, 
which  always  formed  the  ground  and  nutriment  of  such  pro-, 
found  veneration.  What  is  here  spoken  as  from  the  heart  of 


CRIMINATORY  ADDRESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYRE.  307 

the  king  of  Tyre,  is  the  proud  consciousness  of  strength  and 
security,  which  was  engendered  by  the  naturally  strong  position 
and  the  immense  maritime  resources  of  the  state  over  which  he 
reigned.  This  gave  him  such  a  sense  of  elevation  and  inde 
pendence,  as  is  only  put  into  words  when  he  is  represented  as 
claiming  for  himself  the  name  and  posture  of  Deity.  It  might 
certainly  tend  to  foster  and  strengthen  this  feeling,  as  Hiivernick 
not  improbably  conceives,  that  the  island,  which  was  the  seat 
and  stronghold  of  the  Tyrian  state,  possessed  somewhat  of  a 
sacred  character,  and  was  regarded  as  peculiarly  connected  with 
the  powers  above.  It  is  expressly  called  "  the  holy  island  "  by 
Sanconiathon  (p.  36,  ed.  Orelli)  ;  and,  as  already  noticed,  was  so 
distinguished  for  the  worship  of  Hercules,  that  the  Tyrian  colonies 
all  reverenced  it  as  the  mother-city  of  their  religion,  not  less 
than  the  original  source  of  their  political  existence.  And  it  was 
only  in  the  spirit  of  ancient  heathenism  to  conclude  that  a  state, 
which  was  considered  to  stand  in  so  close  a  connection  with  the 
Divine,  might  be  warranted  in  claiming,  through  its  head,  exemp 
tion  from  the  common  casualties  of  fortune,  and  even  something 
like  supernatural  strength  and  absolute  perpetuity  of  being. 

In  the  succeeding  verses  (vers.  3-5)  the  prophet  merely  follows 
out,  and  ironically  applies  the  thought  which  he  had  already 
ascribed  to  the  king  of  Tyre.  Exalting  himself  as  a  God,  he  was 
of  course,  in  his  own  imagination,  superior  in  intelligence  and 
sagacity  to  the  wisest  of  mortals;  wiser  even  than  Daniel,  who,  by 
special  assistance  received  from  Heaven,  was  known  far  and  wide 
to  have  put  to  shame  the  renowned  wisdom  of  Chaldea ;  and  so 
unerring  in  counsel,  so  far-reaching  in  discernment,  as  to  have 
surrounded  the  smallest  territory  with  the  most  extensive  com 
merce  and  the  amplest  resources.  Not  perceiving  that  this  is 
spoken  ironically  by  the  prophet,  and  for  the  purpose  merely  of 
giving  a  tongue  to  the  foolish  thoughts  which  swelled  the  heart 
of  the  king  of  Tyre,  that  their  folly  and  wickedness  might  appear 
to  all,  the  ancient  interpreters  have  given  some  of  the  sentences 
an  interrogative  turn  :  Art  thou  wiser  ?  etc. ;  and  most  of  the 
earlier  commentators  have  supposed  that  the  words  here,  and 
afterwards  in  vers.  12-14,  were  not  properly  used  of  Tyre,  but 
were  rather  to  be  understood  mystically  of  Satan.1  It  is  not 

1  The  views  of  the  Fathers  who  held  this  opinion,  comprehending  those  of 


308  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  1-19. 

necessary  now,  however,  to  defend  the  plain  sense  of  Scripture 
from  such  arbitrary  modes  of  interpretation,  which  need  only 
to  be  applied  to  other  portions,  to  extract  from  the  Bible  any 
doctrine  or  meaning  that  the  capricious  fancies  of  men  might 
wish  to  find  in  it.  Even  Jerome  silently  admits  as  much ;  for 
however  differently  he  has  expressed  himself  elsewhere,  when  he 
comes  to  write  his  commentary  on  the  passage,  he  understands 
the  whole  discourse  of  the  prince  of  Tyre,  though  he  still  could 
very  imperfectly  find  his  way  to  a  correct  explanation  of  the 
import.  Let  only  the  real  character  of  the  description  be  borne 
in  mind,  and  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  its  fitting 
application  to  the  king  of  Tyre.  It  belongs  to  that  species  of 
composition  common  to  all  languages,  and  frequently  resorted 
to,  especially  by  those  who  have  to  deal  with  the  errors  and 
delusions  of  men,  in  which — instead  of  directly  disputing  the 
mistaken  views  they  hold,  or  arguing  with  the  false  spirit  that 
actuates  them — such  a  graphic  representation  is  given  of  these 
as  carries  its  own  exposure  or  refutation  along  with  it.  Thus, 
here,  when  the  prophet  has  asserted  of  the  king  of  Tyre  that 
while  he  was  but  a  man  he  bore  himself  as  God,  and  then  pro 
ceeds  to  give  utterance  to  the  sentiments  that  necessarily  grew 
out  of  this  absurd  and  impious  pretension, — that  he  was  wiser 
than  Daniel,  that  he  could  reveal  all  secrets,  that  his  own  intelli 
gence  and  sagacity  had  secured  for  him  the  possession  of  all  his 
wealth, — this  could  not  fail  to  convey  to  every  reflecting  mind 
an  impression  of  the  thoroughly  profane  and  godless  spirit  that 
reigned  in  the  bosom  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  and  of  his  ripeness 
for  the  judgment  of  Heaven*  The  carcase  manifestly  was 
there ;  now,  therefore,  must  the  eagles  be  gathered  together. 

Yer.  6.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thou  hast  set 
thine  heart  as  the  heart  of  God,  7.  Therefore,  behold,  I  bring  upon  thee 
strangers,  the  terrible  of  the  nations ;  and  they  shall  draw  their  sworcls  against 
the  beauty  of  thy  wisdom,  and  pierce  through  thy  splendour :  8.  To  the  pit 
shall  they  bring  thee  down,  and  thou  shalt  die  the  deaths1  of  the  pierced- 
through  in  the  midst  of  the  seas.  9.  Wilt  thou  indeed  say,  I  am  God,  in 
the  presence  of  him  that  slays  thee  ?  and  thou  art  man  (that  is,  thou  art 

Origen,  Tertullian,  Jerome,  Ambrose,  and  Augustine,  are  carefully  brought 
together  in  Villalpandus,  who  himself  agrees  with  those  who  took  a  middle 
course,  ascribing  what  was  said  partly  to  the  prince  of  Tyre  and  partly  to 
Satan. 

1  Why  deaths  here,  and  in  ver.  10,  and  not  rather  death?    Because,  say 


CRIMINATORY  ADDRESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYRE.  309 

assuredly  man),  and  not  God,  in  the  land  of  him  that  pierces  thee  through. 
10.  The  deaths  of  the  uncircumcised  thou  shalt  die  by  the  hand  of  strangers  : 
for  I  have  spoken,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

The  judgment  to  be  executed  on  the  king  of  Tyre  was  thus 
to  be  exactly  adapted  to  his  guilt ;  it  was  to  be  such  as  would 
force  on  him  the  conviction  that  he  had  not  the  might  and 
wisdom  of  God  at  his  command,  but,  like  other  frail  and  erring 
mortals,  was  liable  to  be  overcome  and  brought  to  destruction. 
This  judgment,  it  is  simply  declared,  was  going  to  be  executed 
by  the  hand  of  strangers,  the  terrible  ones  of  the  nations — an 
epithet  elsewhere  given  to  the  Chaldeans  (chap.  xxx.  11,  xxxi. 
12) ;  though  there  is  no  necessity  here  for  absolutely  confining 
it  to  them.  Here  it  only  intimates  that  terrible  instruments  of 
vengeance  should  be  provided,  fit  for  executing  the  Divine 
purpose  of  retribution ;  so  that  destruction  would  surely  come 
in  its  appointed  time — the  death,  as  of  persons  given  up  to  the 
slaughter,  or  as  of  the  uncircumcised,  who  had  no  interest  in 
the  covenant  of  Heaven,  and  were  doomed  to  perish. 

The  delineation  we  have  considered,  first  of  the  high  pre 
sumption  and  peerless  glory  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  and  then  of  his 
Divine  chastisement  and  utter  ruin,  is  followed  by  another  in 
which  precisely  the  same  topics  are  again  handled,  and  in  the 
same  order.  The  representation,  however,  at  the  beginning,  of 
the  king's  greatness  and  glory,  while  it  is  drawn  in  the  same 
ironical  vein  as  in  the  former  case,  is  cast  in  an  entirely  different 
mould,  and  is  intended  to  exhibit  this  proud  monarch  as  a  kind 
of  normal  or  primeval  man,  the  type  of  humanity  in  its  best  and 
most  divjrie-like  form ;  but  only  'for  the  purpose  of  showing- 
how  incapable  he  was  of  bearing  the  glory,  and  how  necessary 
it  was  that  he  should  be  visited  with  Divine  chastisement,  and 
brought  to  final  ruin.  The  passage  is  not  without  its  difficulties  ; 
but  these  have  often  been  greatly  aggravated  by  not  perceiving 
the  exact  point  of  view  from  which  the  delineation  is  drawn ; 

some,  various  kinds  of  death  are  referred  to  ;  or,  because  the  abstract  idea 
(as  made  up  of  the  several  particulars)  is  thus  denoted  when  raised  to  its 
highest  form.  No,  says  Hav.,  "  the  plural  is  only  used  of  death  when  several 
persons  are  spoken  of."  This  is  not  so  clear.  Isa.  liii.  9  is  not  quite  easily 
explained  on  that  principle.  And  certainly  the  apostle  Paul,  whose  style 
of  thought  was  quite  Hebraistic,  used  the  plural  in  reference  to  different 
kinds,  when  he  says,  "  in  deaths  oft." 


310  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  1-19. 

and  hence,  from  the  LXX.  downwards,  all  manner  of  liberties 
have  been  taken  with  the  original. 

Yer.  11.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  12.  Son  of  man, 
raise  a  lamentation  over  the  king  of  Tyre,  and  say  to  him,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Thou  sealest  completeness,1  full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in 
beauty.  13.  In  Eden,  the  garden  of  God,  thou  wast ;  every  precious  stone 
was  thy  covering,  the  ruby,  the  topaz,  and  the  diamond,  the  chrysolite,  the 
onyx,  and  the  jasper,  the  sapphire,  the  carbuncle,  and  the  emerald,  and  gold  ;2 


1  Literally,  according  to  the  present  text  and  punctuation,  which  I  take 
to  be  correct,  "  Thou  art  the  one  sealing  exactness."     For  Dflin  is  the  par 
ticiple,  and  consequently  means  obsignans,  sealing,  the  person  sealing.     In 
stead  of  rVjDfl,  all  the  ancients  appear  to  have  read  JV^FI,  as  they  give  the 
sense  of  similitude  or  resemblance,  and  many  moderns  still  prefer  this  to  the 
received  text.     But  this,  of  course,  necessitates  the  further  change  of  DP.in 
for  DDin,  seal  for  sealing ;  and  is  to  be  rejected  as  arbitrary.     The  noun  is 
from  pn,  to  weigh,  to  measure  exactly,  to  level,  etc. ;  hence  applicable  to  any 
thing  that  is  of  an  exact  or  perfect  nature.     In  chap,  xliii.  10,  the  prophet 
uses  it  of  the  complete  or  perfect  pattern  he  had  exhibited  of  the  temple ; 
and  here  more  generally,  of  what  is  every  way  exact  or  complete.     To  say 
of  the  king  of  Tyre  that  he  sealed  up  this,  was,  in  other  words,  to  declare 
him  every  way  complete :  he  gave,  as  it  were,  the  finishing  stroke,  the  seal, 
to  all  that  constitutes  completeness ;  or,  as  we  would  now  say  it,  he  was  a 
normal  man — one  formed  after  rule  and  pattern.     Hence  it  is  immediately 
explained  by  what  follows  :  "  full  of  wisdom  and  perfect  in  beauty; "  in  this 
stood  his  sealing  completeness.     Thus,  without  any  alteration  in  the  text,  or 
even  in  the  punctuation,  we  get  a  much  more  suitable  meaning  than  can 
be  obtained  even  by  conjectural  emendations.     Take,  for  example,  Hitzig's  : 
"  Thou  art  a  curiously  wrought  seal-ring,"  a  seal-ring  full  of  wisdom.     No 
wonder  that,  with  such  a  commencement,  he  should  have  had  to  resort  to  many 
other  alterations,  and  should  have  held  the  whole  passage  to  be  very  corrupt. 

2  The  representation  of  the  king  of  Tyre  as  the  normal  or  perfect  man,  not 
unnaturally  led  the  prophet  back  to  the  garden  of  Eden,  where  the  man  that 
really  was  such  had  his  abode ;  and  so  he  ironically  represents  this  assumed 
pattern  of  perfection  as  having  his  local  habitation  there,  in  the  normal 
land — just  as  afterwards  (chap.  xxxi.  8,  9,  xxxvi.  35)  the  garden  of  Eden  is 
variously  employed  by  him  as  the  region  of  ideal  beauty  and  perfection. 
But  occupying  such  a  blessed  region,  all  objects  of  natural  preciousness  and 
beauty  of  course  lay  at  the  king's  command ;  and  as  we  are  told  in  Genesis 
(chap,  ii.)  of  the   gold  and   the  jewels  with  which   that  land  originally 
abounded,  so  here  the  prophet  speaks  of  them  as  forming  the  very  apparel 
of  the  king.     How  much  also  Oriental  monarchs  are  in  the  habit  of  bespang 
ling  and  almost  literally  covering  themselves  with  such  things,  is  well  known. 
A  notion  very  early  prevailed,  that  the  precious  stones  here  mentioned  were 
those  of  the  high-priest's  breastplate  ;  and  on  that  account,  it  is  supposed, 


CRIMINATORY  ADDEESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYRE.  311 

the  service  of  thy  tambourines  and  of  thy  females  were  prepared  with  thee  in 
the  day  when  thou  wast  created.1  14.  Thou  art  the  cherub  of  anointing 
(an  anointed  or  consecrated  cherub)  that  overshadows ;  and  I  did  set  thee 
so ;  upon  the  holy  mount  of  God  thou  wert,  and  thou  didst  walk  among 
stones  of  fire.2  15.  Perfect  wert  thou  in  thy  ways  from  the  day  of  thy 

the  LXX.  translator  made  up  their  number  to  twelve.  Even  still  Ewald 
and  Hitzig  think  that  respect  was  had  to  those  sacred  gems  in  this  enumera 
tion,  and  the  former  even  regards  the  mention  of  them  here  as  connected 
with  an  instrument  of  oracular  wisdom  and  purposes  of  divination.  The 
idea  in  any  form  is  entirely  gratuitous  and  out  of  place.  The  rendering  of 
the  names  for  the  different  jewels  is  what  is  now  generally  adopted.  AYe 
deem  it  needless  to  enter  into  details. 

1  Endless  changes  and  arbitrary  meanings  have  been  resorted  to  from  the 
earliest  times,  to  lighten  the  difficulty  of  this  last  clause  of  ver.  13.     I  adhere 
to  the  received  text,  and  the  most  natural  meanings.     Q^n  has  no  other 
signification  in  Scripture  than  tambourines,  or  kettle-drums,  an  instrument 
of  music  in  frequent  use  among  the  Orientals,  and  commonly  played  on  by 
women.     D^pJ,  on  the  other  hand,  is  never  found  of  a  musical  instrument, 
such  as  pipes,  the  rendering  adopted  by  our  translators  and,  many  others. 
Indeed,  as  a  plural  word  it  never  occurs  at  all ;  and  the  only  single  word 
which  can  be  thought  of  is  rQj51,  female.     Elsewhere,  however,  it  is  used 
only  to  denote  the  female  sex,  not  precisely  women ;  and  there  is  besides 
the  anomaly  of  a  masculine  instead  of  a  feminine  termination.     Yet  this  is 
not  without  a  parallel,  as  appears  from  such  examples  as  0^,  women,  and 
on  the  other  side,  fTOtf ,  fathers,  the  first  with  a  masculine,  the  other  with  a 
feminine  termination.     I  think,  therefore,  with  Havernick,  that  the  objects 
denoted  here  are  the  musical  instruments,  tambourines,  and  the  women  who 
played  on  them ;   and  that  this  peculiar  word  pQpJ,  female,  rather  than  any 
other,  was  used,  because  of  the  reference,  which  the  passage  bears  to  Gen.  i. 
27,  "  Male  and  female  created  he  them."     Tambourines,  and  female  musi 
cians  to  play  on  them,  were  provided  for  this  king  of  Tyre  on  the  day  of  his 
creation;  that  is,  from  the  very  first,  from  the  period  of  his  being  a  king,  he 
was  surrounded  with  the  customary  pleasures,  as  well  as  the  peculiar  treasure, 
of  kings.     The  royal  house  of  Tyre  (for  it  is  of  this  at  large  that  the  discourse 
must  be  understood)  had  not,  like  many  others,  to  work  its  way  with  diffi 
culty  and  through  arduous  struggles,  but  started  at  once  into  the  full  pos 
session  of  royal  power  and  splendour;  no  sooner  formed  than,  like  Adam, 
surrounded  with  fitting  attendants  and  paradisiacal  delights.     So  already 
Michaelis :  "All  things  poured  in  around  thee  which  could  minister  to  thy 
necessities,  thy  comfort,  or  even  thy  pleasure,  as  they  did  formerly  to  Adam 
in  the  garden  of  Eden,  which  God  granted  to  him." 

2  Here,  again,  a  great  many  expedients  have  been  resorted  to,  both  in  the 
way  of  textual  alterations,  and  extraordinary  meanings.     The  chief  verbal 
difficulty  hangs  on  n$pO,  which  nowhere  else  occurs ;  and  the  Vulgate  ren 
dering  of  extentus  (the  LXX.  omits  it  altogether)  has  led  to  the  supposition 
that  it  was  derived  from  some  Aramaic  root,  signifying  to  extend.     But  there 


312  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  1-19. 

creation  until  iniquity  was  found  in  thee.  16.  By  the  greatness  of  thy  traffic 
they  have  filled  thy  midst  with  violence,  and  thou  hast  sinned  ;  and  I  profane 
thee  from  the  mount  of  God  (i.e.  cast  thee  from  it  as  a  polluted  thing),  and 
I  destroy  thee,  thou  cherub  that  overshadowest  from  the  midst  of  the  stones 
of  fire.1  17.  Thy  heart  hast  been  lifted  up  through  thy  beauty  ;  thou  hast 


is  no  solid  ground  for  this,  though  it  has  the  authority  of  Gesenius.  The 
'Chaldaic  version  gives  the  sense  of  anointing,  taking  it  as  a  derivative  from 
HE'D  in  its  usual  meaning.  And  one  does  not  see  why  there  might  not  be 
nt."'cip,  anointing,  from  n^D,  as  well  as  "13££),  sale,  from  130,  or  i>^?2E>, 
government,  from  ?^D-  Indeed,  in  this  very  chapter,  in  ver.  24,  we  have  a 
verbal  adjective  formed  in  precisely  the  same  way,  TXED  from  kiphil  of  ")N£, 
bitter  or  painful,  from  to  make  bitter.  Cherub  of  anointing  would  thus  make 
substantially  the  same  sense  as  the  anointed  cherub,  'JVnK-TSn  2V13 ;  the  cherub 
that  is  consecrated  to  the  Lord  by  the  anointing  oil.  In  regard  to  the  next 
difficulty  in  the  passage,  which  respects  "the  holy  mountain  of  God  on  which 
he  was,"  Hiivcrnick  says,  it  would  indeed  be  a  wonderful  representation,  if 
the  prophet  described  the  king  of  Tyre  as  having  been  placed  on  Mount  Sion, 
and  he  therefore  renders  a  holy  God's  mount,  on  which  he  was  raised  aloft, 
as  a  being  of  a  higher  nature,  as  one  of  those  hill-gods,  whom  the  Syrians 
worshipped  (1  Kings  xx.  23).  But  the  liolij  hill  of  God  can  only  be  under 
stood  of  a  mount  which  has  been  consecrated  by  peculiar  manifestations  of 
Godhead— therefore,  either  Mount  Sinai,  or  Mount  Sion,  which  is  elsewhere 
named  "  the  holy  hill  of  God."  And  if  the  king  of  Tyre  could  be  placed  in 
God's  garden,  surely  he  might  also  be  placed  on  God's  hill.  The  objection 
proceeds  on  a  misapprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  representation.  Haver- 
nick  is  no  happier  in  regard  to  the  next  expression,  the  stones  of  fire,  amid 
which  the  king  is  said  to  have  walked.  He  considers  it  to  have  respect  to 
the  worship  of  the  Tyrian  Hercules  as  the  fire-god,  and  to  the  two  pillars  in 
his  temple,  the  one  of  gold,  the  other  of  emerald,  which  were  kept  shining 
by  night.  But  as  Hitzig  justly  remarks,  these  were  not  stones,  but  pillars, 
and  only  one  of  them  of  stone,  and  even  that  not  fiery,  though  resplendent. 
Besides,  what  a  confusion  would  it  make  to  throw  together  in  one  sentence 
God's  holy  mount  and  any  emblems  of  fire-worship  in  the  city  of  Tyre! 
The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  description  in  Ex.  xxiv.,  where  Moses  and 
the  elders  of  Israel  are  said  to  have  gone  up  to  the  mount  to  meet  God, 
and  to  see  "under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of  sapphire- stone,"  while 
"the  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of  the 
mount."  It  is  just  another  mode  of  expressing  the  peculiar  nearness  of  the 
King  of  Tyre  to  God :  he  was  on  God's  holy  mount,  where  he  trod,  as  it 
were,  the  very  stones  that  are  beneath  the  feet  of  God — stones  of  fire  ;  for 
all  is  fire  where  God  has  his  dwelling. 

1  This  IGth  verse  also  contains  several  difficulties;  at  least  what  have  been 
regarded  as  such.  The  clause,  "they  have  filled  thy  midst  with  violence," 
which  beyond  all  question  is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  text,  has  been  thought 
to  give  an  unsuitable  meaning — one  applicable  rather  to  the  city  as  a  whole 
than  personally  to  the  king — and  hence  supposed  corruptions  in  the  text,  and 


CRIMINATORY  ADDRESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYEE.  313 

corrupted  thy  wisdom  together  with  thy  splendour  ;  I  throw  thee  down  to 
the  earth,  I  lay  thee  before  kings,  that  they  may  look  upon  thee.  18. 
Through  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquities,  by  the  dishonesty  of  thy  traffic, 
thou  hast  profaned  thy  sanctuaries  ; l  and  I  make  fire  to  go  out  from  the 
midst  of  thee,  it  shall  devour  thee,  and  I  will  turn  thee  into  ashes  upon  the 
earth  before  all  that  see  thee.  19.  All  that  know  thee  among  the  peoples 
shall  be  astonished  at  thee ;  thou  shalt  be  ruins,  and  shalt  be  no  more  for  ever. 


also  violent  renderings.  We  refer  only  to  Havernick's,  who  abides  by  the 
existing  text,  but  forces  it  into  a  meaning  strictly  applicable  to  the  king ; 
therefore  7]in  must  denote  middle  in  the  physical  sense  of  venter,  belly,  or 
the  body  with  respect  to  its  middle  part ;  and  the  plural  verb  must  be  ex 
plained  by  a  peculiar  construction,  according  to  which  an  active  is  sometimes 
substituted  in  the  place  of  a  passive,  even  where  it  is  not  quite  suitable;  thus 
the  sense  is  obtained,  "they  have  filled  thy  body,"  for  "thou  art  filled  as  to 
thy  body,  with  violence."  It  is  not  sense  after  all.  If  it  had  been  lust,  or 
wickedness  generally,  that  was  represented  as  filling  him,  one  could  have 
made  something  of  such  an  interpretation.  And  so,  indeed,  Havernick 
shoves  in  frevei,  wickedness,  instead  of  violence,  when  he  comes  to  give  the 
general  import,  but  without  any  right  to  do  so.  The  Vulgate  long  ago  gave 
substantially  the  same  rendering  :  in  multitudine  negotiationis  tux  repleta 
sunt  interiora  tua  iniquitate.  But  besides,  no  example  can  be  produced  of 
TpJ-l  ever  signifying  either  the  inward  parts  of  a  man  or  his  body  in  general; 
though  used  with  great  frequency,  it  is  always  in  the  sense  of  midst — the 
middle  of  a  great  city,  a  people,  or  such  like.  Therefore  I  adopt,  as  the  only 
natural  rendering,  "  they  have  filled  thy  midst  with  violence  ;  "  which  un 
doubtedly  has  respect  to  the  city,  but  not,  it  must  be  remembered,  without 
at  the  same  time  implicating  the  king.  He,  as  head  of  the  state,  is  to  a  cer 
tain  extent  identified  with  the  whole  of  it;  and  he  is  evidently  viewed  in  that 
light  here.  For  when  the  prophet  says,  "  by  the  greatness  of  thy  traffic," 
he  plainly  includes  the  state  along  with  the  king ;  and  when  he  says  further, 
that  through  this  "  his  midst  was  filled  with  violence,"  what  does  it  indicate 
but  that  he  had  not  ruled  as  he  should  have  done,  for  righteousness  ?  He 
had  become  the  head  of  a  state  that  was  filled  with  violence;  and  so  it  is 
immediately  added,  "  and  thou  hast  sinned."  Thou  hast  not  restrained  the 
iniquity  that  prevails  around  thee ;  so  far  from  it,  thou  art  thyself  also  a 
transgressor.  Thus  understood,  there  is  quite  a  natural  meaning,  and  a 
regular  progression  of  thought.  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  fe 
of  the  received  text  is  for  ^yf?Q  (which  also  stands  in  many  codices),  as  iffe 
for  "Tlttta  in  Job  xxxii.  18.  The  expression,  "and  I  profane  thee  from  the 
mount  of  God,"  is  quite  similar  to,  "thou  hast  profaned  his  crown  to  the 
ground,"  in  Ps.  Ixxxix.  39.  In  both  cases  it  is  a  pregnant  construction,  and 
means  that  the  person  was  dealt  with  as  no  longer  sacred  but  profane,  and 
as  such  was  driven  from  the  position  of  honour  he  had  hitherto  held  to  a 
despicable  place. 

1  The  sanctuaries  which  the  king  of  Tyre  is  charged  with  having  profaned, 
are  to  be  understood  of  the  sacred  places  with  which  the  prophet  had  in  the 


314  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  1-19. 

It  is  clear  from  the  very  commencement  of  this  singular 
passage,  from  the  mention  made  here  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  that 
the  representation  contained  in  it  is  of  an  ideal  character ;  that 
it  is,  in  short,  an  historical  parable.  The  kings  of  Tyre  are  first 
personified  as  one  individual — an  ideal  man,  and  one  complete 
in  all  natural  excellence,  perfect  manhood.  Not  unnaturally  so, 
since  Tyre  having  sprung  from  a  barren  rock,  and  grown  till  she 
had  become  the  mistress  of  the  world's  commerce,  was  a  kind  of 
new  creation  in  the  earth — as  a  state  the  most  singular  product 
in  existence  of  human  energy  and  enterprising  skill.  There 
fore  this  ideal  man,  the  representative  of  whatever  there  was  of 
greatness  and  glory  in  Tyre,  and  in  whom,  consequently,  the 
Tyrian  spirit  of  self-elation  and  pride  appear  in  full  efflorescence, 
is  ironically  viewed  by  the  prophet  as  the  type  of  humanity  in 
its  highest  states  of  existence  upon  earth.  All  that  is  best  and 
noblest  in  the  history  of  the  past  he  sees,  in  imagination,  meet 
ing  in  this  so-called  beau-ideal  of  humanity.  It  was  he  who  in 

O  */ 

primeval  time  trod  the  hallowed  walks  of  paradise,  and  used  at 
will  its  manifold  treasures,  and  regaled  himself  with  its  corporeal 
delights.  It  was  he  who  afterwards  assumed  the  form  of  a  cherub 
—ideal  compound  of  the  highest  kinds  of  animal  existence — type 
of  humanity  in  its  predestined  state  of  ultimate  completeness  and 
glory ;  and  as  such,  had  a  place  assigned  him  among  the  con 
secrated  symbols  of  God's  sanctuary  in  the  holy  mount,  where,  in 
the  immediate  presence  of  the  Most  High,  he  overshadowed  the 
mercy-seat.  Thus  occupying  the  highest  spheres  of  created  life, 
and  familiar  even  with  the  sight  of  the  Divine  glory,  he  knew 
what  it  was  to  dwell  amidst  the  consuming  fire,  and  to  walk  as  on 
burning  stones  of  sapphire.  Whatever  humanity  has  had,  or  has 

preceding  verses  associated  him,  viz.  the  holy  mount  of  God,  and  the  garden 
of  God.  It  is  his  ideal  position  there,  not  his  actual  position  in  the  city  of 
Tyre,  that  is  meant ;  for  the  latter  could  in  no  proper  sense  be  called  his 
sanctuary,  still  less,  in  the  plural,  his  sanctuaries.  And  the  fire,  that  is 
presently  afterwards  represented  as  going  out  of  his  midst  and  reducing  him 
to  ashes — so  different  as  an  instrument  of  destruction  from  the  violent  hands 
of  strangers  shortly  before  mentioned — was  doubtless  suggested  by  the  stones 
of  fire  amid  which  in  those  ideal  sanctuaries  he  had  his  abode.  So  far  from 
finding  it  a  good  thing  for  him  to  have  dwelt  there,  now  that  he  had  sinned, 
there  would  proceed  thence,  as  it  were,  a  consuming  fire  against  him ;  his 
very  elevation,  having  been  abused,  carried  with  it  the  element  of  his 
destruction. 


CRIMINATORY  ADDRESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  TYRE.  315 

been  typified  to  have,  of  dignity  and  honour  in  the  past  history 
of  God's  administration,  it  has  been  thine  to  possess.  So  thou 
thinkest,  thou  ideal  man,  thou  concentration  of  human  excel 
lence,  thou  quintessence  of  human  greatness  and  pricfe.  Thou 
thinkest  that  manhood's  divinest  qualities,  and  most  honourable 
conditions  of  being,  belong  peculiarly  to  thyself,  since  thou  dost 
nobly  peer  above  all  and  standest  alone  in  thy  glory.  Let  it  be 
so.  But  thou  art  still  a  man,  and,  like  humanity  itself  in  its 
most  favoured  conditions,  thou  hast  not  been  perfect  before 
God,  thou  hast  yielded  thyself  a  servant  to  corruption.  With 
creaturely  waywardness  and  inconstancy  thou  hast  gone  astray 
on  thy  high  places,  and  hast  abused  to  the  gratification  of  thine 
own  lust  and  vanity  the  ample  gifts  and  resources  which  should 
have  been  all  employed  in  subservience  to  the  will  and  glory  of 
God.  Therefore  thou  must  be  cast  down  from  thy  proud 
elevation ;  thou  must  lose  thy  cherubic  nearness  to  God ;  the 
sacred  and  blissful  haunts  which  thou  hast  defiled  with  thy 
abominations  shall  no  longer  know  thee;  and  thou  shalt  hence 
forth  be  a  monument  to  all  of  forfeited  honours,  abused  privi 
leges,  and  hopeless  ruin. 

Such  we  take  to  be  the  style  and  import  of  this  vision.  It  is 
one  of  the  most  highly  figurative  representations  in  prophecy, 
and  is  only  to  be  compared  with  Isaiah's  lamentation  (in  chap, 
xiv.)  over  the  downfall  of  the  king  of  Babylon.  It  character 
istically  differs  from  this,  however,  in  that  while  it  moves  with 
equal  boldness  and  freedom  in  an  ideal  world,  it  clothes  the 
ideal  according  to  the  usage  of  our  prophet  in  an  historical 
drapery,  and  beholds  the  past  revived  again  in  the  personified 
existence  of  which  it  treats.  But  it  is  no  wild  play  of  fancy,  or 
arbitrary  indulgence  of  a  lawless  imagination.  A  sublime  moral 
runs  through  the  parable.  It  reads  over  again  the  great  lesson 
of  man's  weakness  and  degeneracy,  and  shows  how  inevitably 
the  good,  when  unaccompanied  by  a  really  Divine  element, 
turns  in  him  to  corruption  and  ruin.  In  the  royal  head  of  the 
state  of  Tyre  a  new  trial  was  made  of  humanity  with  the  greatest 
earthly  advantages,  he  being  endowed  with  the  amplest  re 
sources  of  wealth  and  art,  and  placed  on  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of 
the  world's  wisdom  and  prosperity.  But  all  in  vain.  The  good 
only  served,  as  in  other  cases,  to  feed  the  well-spring  of  human 
depravity;  and  the  day  of  retribution  could  not  fail  to  come  with 


316  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  20-26. 

its  recompenses  of  evil,  and  God's  justice  be  as  conspicuously 
displayed  in  the  overthrow  of  Tyre  as  his  goodness  had  been  in 
her  singular  rise  and  prosperity.  So  that  the  cry  which  the 
prophet  would  utter  through  this  parabolical  history  in  the  ears 
of  all  is,  that  man  in  his  best  estate — with  everything  that  art 
or  nature  can  bring  to  his  aid — is  still  corruption  and  vanity. 
The  flesh  can  win  nothing  for  itself  that  is  really  and  perma 
nently  good.  It  carries  in  its  bosom  a  principle  of  self-destruc 
tion,  and  the  more  that  it  can  surround  itself  with  the  comforts 
and  luxuries  of  life,  the  more  does  it  pamper  the  godless  pride 
of  nature,  and  draw  down  upon  itself  calamity  and  destruction. 
Therefore  "  let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither 
let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might ;  let  not  the  rich  man 
glory  in  his  riches;  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that 
he  understandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which 
exercises  loving-kindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness  in  the 
earth ;  for  in  these  things  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord." 


CHAPTER  XXVIII.  20-26. 

THE   JUDGMENT    OF    SIDON,    AND    THE   ULTIMATE    PEACE 
OF  ISRAEL. 

WE  have  already  remarked,  in  the  introduction  to  this  series 
of  prophecies,  that  Sidon  was  not  so  properly  an  independent 
state,  as  rather  an  integral  portion  of  the  great  maritime  power 
of  which  Tyre  was  the  centre.  Hence  in  the  description  given 
by  the  prophet  in  chap,  xxvii.  of  the  resources  of  Tyre,  Sidon  is 
mentioned  as  contributing  of  her  mariners  to  man  the  Tyrian 
vessels.  Though  thus,  however,  politically  merged  in  Tyre,  Sidon 
had  possessed  a  religious  connection  with  the  covenant-people, 
which  does  not  appear  to  have  extended  to  Tyre,  and  which 
furnished  an  historical  reason  for  the  separate  mention  of  Sidon, 
in  addition  to  the  circumstance  of  its  being  necessary  to  complete 
the  number  seven.  Whether  it  arose  from  Sidon  being  the  elder 
city,  or  from  her  citizens  having  more  frequent  intercourse  with 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  SIDON.  317 

the  Israelites,  or,  finally,  from  the  character  of  the  religion 
prevalent  in  Sidon  being  of  a  more  seductive  and  infectious 
character,  the  fact  is  certain,  that  a  corrupting  influence  flowed 
in  upon  Israel  from  Sidon  such  as  is  never  mentioned  in  connec 
tion  with  Tyre.  So  early  as  the  time  of  the  Judges,  the  gods  of 
Sidon  are  named  among  the  false  deities  that  had  acquired  an 
ascendency  over  the  children  of  Israel  (Judg.  x.  6).  In  the 
days  of  Solomon,  the  worship  of  Ashtoreth,  the  goddess  of  the 
Sidonians,  was  again  openly  practised  (1  Kings  xi.  33).  And 
that  this  influence  never  became  wholly  extinct,  and  continued 
even  to  the  times  of  the  prophet,  is  evident  from  the  scene 
described  in  chap,  viii,,  of  women  sitting  in  the  attitude  of 
mourners,  and  weeping  for  Tarnmuz.  This  was  undoubtedly  an 
importation  from  the  -territory  of  Sidon,  where  the  Tammuz  or 
Adonis-worship  had  its  origin.  And  that  the  circumstance  now 
referred  to  was  not  without  its  weight  in  determining  the  prophet 
to  give  a  separate  place  to  Sidon,  may  be  certainly  inferred,  not 
only  from  the  strongly  historical  bias  of  the  prophet's  mind,  but 
also  from  the  express  mention  at  the  close,  of  the  freedom  that 
was  to  be  acquired  for  Israel,  by  the  overthrow  of  such  neigh 
bours  as  the  Sidonians,  from  the  corrupting  influences  that  had 
vexed  and  troubled  them  in  times  past. 

The  prophecy  itself  against  Sidon  is  of  the  most  general  de 
scription  : 

Ver.  20.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  21.  Son  of  man, 
set  thy  face  toward  Sidon,  and  prophecy  against  it ;  and  say,  22.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold  I  am  against  thee,  Sidon,  and  shall  be  glori 
fied  in  the  midst  of  thee  :  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I 
shall  have  executed  judgments  in  her,  and  shall  he  sanctified  in  her.  23. 
And  I  will  send  against  her  pestilence,  and  blood  shall  be  in  her  streets,  and 
the  slain  shall  be  judged  in  her  midst  by  the  sword  against  her  from  every 
side  ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

It  was  the  less  necessary  to  enter  here  into  particulars,  as  from 
the  nature  of  Sidon's  relation  to  Tyre  it  would  naturally  be 
understood  that  the  fortunes  of  the  larger  city  must  be  shared  in 
by  the  less.  If  Tyre  was  to  fall  before  the  adverse  influences 
that  were  to  assail  her,  and  become  a  scene  of  desolation,  much 
more  should  Sidon,  which  had  far  inferior  resources  to  meet 
the  danger.  It  passed  through  many  a  siege,  and  consequently 
suffered  many  successive  blows ;  and  though  it  has  never 
altogether  ceased  to  be  an  inhabited  place,  it  has  possessed  for 


318  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  20-26. 

ages  nothing  of  the  relative  greatness  and  importance  which 
belonged  to  it  in  the  time  of  Ezekiel.  God  has  indeed  been 
sanctified  in  her  by  means  of  the  humiliating  reverses  she  has 
been  made  to  undergo. 

And  now  the  prophet  turns  from  these  scenes  of  desolation  to 
the  prospect  of  better  days  to  come  for  the  covenant-people,  to 
whom  the  downfall  of  these  neighbouring  heathen  powers  be 
tokened  good,  as  it  indicated  the  purpose  of  God  to  rid  them  of 
what  had  hitherto  vexed  and  troubled  their  condition. 

Ver.  24.  And  there  shall  not  be  any  more  to  the  house  of  Israel  a  vexing 
brier1  and  a  grieving  thorn  of  all  that  are  round  about  them,  that  despise 
them;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  Jehovah.  25.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Because  I  will  gather  the  house  of  Israel  from  the  peoples 
whither  they  are  scattered,  and  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  them  in  the  eyes 
of  the  nations,  and  they  shall  sit  down  upon  the  land  which  I  gave  to  my 
servant  Jacob ;  26.  And  they  shall  dwell  upon  it  securely,  and  build  houses, 
and  plant  vineyards,  and  dwell  securely,  since  I  execute  judgments  upon  all 
that  hate  them  round  about  them ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah 
their  God. 

This  concluding  part  of  the  prophecy  evidently  has  respect  to 
what  was  said  by  Moses,  in  Num.  xxxiii.  55,  regarding  such  of 
the  original  inhabitants  of  Canaan  as  the  Israelites  in  their 
unfaithfulness  might  fail  to  drive  out :  "  They  shall  be  pricks  in 
your  eyes,  and  thorns  in  your  sides,  and  shall  vex  you  in  the 
land  wherein  you  dwell."  Such  in  sad  experience  they  found  to 
be  the  case,  and  in  regard  to  the  Sidonians  not  less  than  others. 
The  territory  of  Sidon  lay  within  the  bounds  of  the  tribe  of  Asher; 
and  it  is  expressly  recorded  that  this  tribe  could  not  dispossess 
the  inhabitants  of  Sidon  (Judg.  i.  31).  A  peaceful  relation  in 
process  of  time  sprung  up  between  the  Sidonians  and  their 
Israelitish  neighbours  ;  but  this  only  opened  the  way,  as  we  have 
seen,  to  a  more  pernicious  and  destructive  influence  than  the 
open  assaults  of  \var.  In  leading  them  to  depart  from  the  pure 
worship  of  Jehovah,  by  the  introduction  of  the  foul  rites  of 

1  The  only  verbal  peculiarity  in  the  passage,  is  in  the  epithet  here  applied 
to  brier,  T'XIpE).  Gesenius  derives  it  from  n^E  taken  as  synonymous  with 
"HO,  to  be  bitter ;  hence  the  word  here,  anything  causing  bitterness,  vexing. 
rpNftD  is  applied  to  the  leprosy,  when  found  to  be  fixed  and  settled  (Lev. 
xiii.  51,  52),  where  our  translators  have  rendered  it  fretting.  The  ancient 
versions,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  express  the  sense  of  bitterness  in  the  passage 
before  us ;  the  noun  evidently  requires  something  of  that  sort. 


THE  ULTIMATE  PEACE  OF  ISKAEL.  319 

Ashtoreth  and  Adonis,  the  Sidonians  proved  in  the  worst  sense 
thorns  in  the  side  of  the  covenant-people.  But  the  result  of 
those  judgments  which  God  was  now  going  to  execute  should 
be  to  put  an  end  to  these  vexatious  and  perverting  influences. 
What  the  people  themselves  had  failed  to  do,  on  account  of 
their  unfaithfulness  to  the  covenant,  the  faithful  Jehovah  would 
accomplish  by  the  execution  of  his  judgments ;  he  would  extir 
pate  these  annoying  briers  and  thorns,  and  allow  the  people  to 
enjoy  in  undisturbed  freedom  and  repose  the  heritage  he  had 
given  in  covenant  to  their  father  Jacob. 

The  latter  part  of  the  prediction,  which  foretells  a  future 
period  of  peace  and  security  to  Israel,  is  a  promise  of  coming 
good  thrown  into  the  form  of  the  past — a  prophecy  cast  in  the 
mould  of  history.  That  the  good  would  be  realized  to  the  full 
extent  promised,  we  must  certainly  hold  ;  but  not,  therefore,  that 
it  would  be  realized  to  the  full  in  the  precise  form  here  adopted. 
For  if  our  past  investigations  into  the  meaning  of  this  prophet 
have  taught  us  anything,  it  is  that  we  must  know  how  to  distin 
guish  between  the  form  and  the  reality.  Even  the  immediately 
preceding  vision  respecting  the  king  of  Tyre  is  remarkable 
for  nothing  so  much  as  the  tendency  displayed  in  it  to  use  the 
historical  as  the  merely  ideal  form  of  the  thoughts  and  feelings 
sought  to  be  conveyed  by  the  prophet.  In  the  earlier  part  of 
it  a  completely  ideal  representation  is  given  us,  though  under 
the  form  of  history,  of  the  pre-eminent  greatness  and  glory  of 
the  king  of  Tyre ;  while  in  the  latter  part  the  form  is  changed, 
and  is  neither  so  boldly  figurative  nor  is  it  thrown  into  the 
historical  type.  How  far,  therefore,  in  this  concluding  pro 
phecy  regarding  Israel  the  historical  form  should  be  regarded, 
cannot  be  pronounced  on  with  absolute  certainty  from  the  words 
themselves,  but  must  be  gathered  from  the  course  of  Divine 
providence.  The  positive  element  in  the  promise — that  which 
must  be  found  in  history,  otherwise  the  word  fails — is,  that 
God's  future  dealings  with  his  covenant-people  should  be  such 
as  to  rid  them  from  the  annoyance  and  the  danger  to  which  in 
past  times  they  had  been  exposed  from  the  worldly  greatness 
and  the  idolatrous  spirit  of  their  immediate  neighbours ;  so 
that  they  should  enjoy  the  peculiar  blessing  of  the  covenant  in 
comparative  peace  and  security.  And  doubtless  the  Lord 
might  fulfil  this  promise3  while  all  the  ancient  relations  were 


320  EZEKIEL  XXVIII.  20-26. 

allowed  to  stand — Israel  restored  to  their  proper  territory,  and 
the  surrounding  nations  either  entirely  driven  from  their  pos 
sessions,  or  so  completely  changed  in  their  feelings  toward  Israel, 
and  so  reduced  in  outward  circumstances,  as  to  be  no  longer 
snares  to  Israel's  peace  and  prosperity.  To  a  very  considerable 
extent  this  was  the  case.  Such  of  the  people  as  afterwards 
returned  from  their  dispersions,  and  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan, 
had  comparatively  few  struggles  with  their  old  neighbours, 
either  as  political  or  religious  adversaries.  Those  neighbours 
had  themselves  become  too  broken  and  enfeebled  by  the  reverses 
they  experienced  to  exert  religiously  the  deleterious  influence,  or 
politically  to  inflict  the  evils  which  in  their  former  flourishing 
condition  they  were  quite  able  to  produce.  And  though  for  a 
period  there  were  trials  and  contests  which  Israel  was  obliged 
to  maintain  with  them,  yet  these  proved  only  occasional  interrup 
tions  to  the  general  peace  ;  and  for  generations  before  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  it  might  justly  be  said,  that  Israel  had  no  longer 
a  thorn  or  a  brier  to  plamie  them  in  their  immediate  neighbours. 

i      o  CD 

In  a  religious  point  of  view — which  is  the  one  here  chiefly 
meant — the  Jews  were  even  enabled  to  make  reprisals  upon  the 
heathen  ;  and  it  was  not  so  much  the  worship  of  Jehovah  that 
had  to  be  afraid  of  the  corrupting  influence  of  heathenism,  as 
rather  the  religions  of  heathenism  that  were  endangered  by  the 
knowledge  and  worship  of  Jehovah.  For  instead  of  melting  away, 
as  of  old,  under  the  pernicious  agency  of  surrounding  idolatries 
and  corruptions,  Judaism  could  number  its  converts  out  of  all 
lands,  rescued  from  the  crumbling  superstitions  of  heathendom. 
It  thus  appears  that  even  in  regard  to  the  historical  form  of 
this  prediction,  it  received  a  very  striking  and  wonderful  degree 
of  fulfilment  ages  after  he  who  uttered  it  had  slept  with  his 
fathers.  The  Lord  did  bring  back  Israel  to  their  o\vn  land,  and 
by  reason  of  the  judgments  he  executed  upon  those  who  in  past 
ages  had  troubled  and  vexed  them,  they  were  permitted  to  dwell 
in  comparative  peace,  and  even  attained  to  a  place  of  relative 
strength  and  moral  ascendancy.  But  the  prophecy  should  not 
be  limited  to  that  temporary  and  partial  fulfilment.  We  see  its 
full  extent  and  compass  of  meaning  only  when,  looking  through 
the  historical  drapery  and  the  shell  of  ancient  relations,  we 
contemplate  Israel  rising  in  Christ  and  the  Church  of  the  New 
Testament  to  be  the  head  and  centre  of  all  that  is  great,  per- 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  321 

manent,  and  good  in  the  world,  before  which  everything  that  is 
adverse  must  fall.  The  heritage  of  Jacob  is  now  no  longer  the 
narrow  stripe  of  territory  which  was  given  to  the  seed  of  blessing 
as  a  temporary  type  and  earnest,  but  the  whole  ransomed  earth, 
which  to  its  uttermost  bounds  is  the  destined  possession  of 
Christ  and  his  Israel  offspring.  Till  this  great  consummation 
is  reached,  the  prophecy  still  waits  for  its  full  realization.  And 
believing  that  it  shall  be  realized,  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  God 
to  humble  and  destroy  every  adverse  power,  and  exalt  the  saints 
with  Christ  to  possess  the  kingdom,  let  the  Church  of  God  ply 
with  every  means  at  her  command  the  blessed  work  of  the 
world's  regeneration,  and  "  bate  not  a  jot  in  heart  or  hope  "  on 
account  of  the  evil  influences  against  her.  Since  it  is  the  cause 
of  truth  and  righteousness  for  which  she  contends,  the  victory 
cannot  fail  to  be  ultimately  on  her  side. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT — ITS  DESOLATION  FOR  FORTY  YEARS, 
AND  SUBSEQUENT  DEGRADATION — THE  FIRST  INSTRUMENT  OF 
CHASTISEMENT,  NEBUCHADNEZZAR. 

WE  come  now  to  the  last  of  the  wordly  kingdoms  against 
which  in  this  series  the  prophet  was  commissioned  to  utter 
the  judgments  of  the  Lord.  It  is  also  the  one  that  occupies 
the  largest  space  in  the  visions  of  the  prophet,  as  might  not 
unnaturally  have  been  expected  from  the  relative  importance 
of  Egypt,  and  the  position  it  had  so  long  occupied  in  the  world's 
history.  Though  standing  as  to  local  situation  at  a  much 
greater  distance  from  the  children  of  Israel  than  Tyre,  it  yet 
held  as  a  kingdom  a  much  closer  connection  with  them,  and 
sought  to-  obtain  the  same  ascendancy  in  the  dominion  of  the 
world  that  Tyre  did  in  its  commerce.  It  was  with  this  view, 
and  not  from  any  desire  to  benefit  the  little  kingdom  of  Judah, 
that  the  king  of  Egypt  began,  about  the  time  now  under  con 
sideration,  to  cultivate  a  friendly  understanding  with  Zedekiah, 
and  by  sending  an  army  to  his  relief,  obliged  the  Chaldeans  for* 

X 


322  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

a  time  to  raise  the  siege  against  Jerusalem  (Jer.  xxxvii.  7-11). 
The  real  object  of  the  king  of  Egypt  was  to  create  a  diversion 
against  the  Babylonian  monarch,  and,  if  possible,  arrest  the 
victorious  career  of  that  dangerous  rival.  The  monarch  who 

c5 

then  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Egypt  was  Apries,  the  commence 
ment  of  whose  reign  was  prosperous,  and  he  was  considered 
"  the  most  fortunate  monarch  who  had  hitherto  ruled  in  Egypt, 
next  to  his  grandfather  Psammitichus.  He  sent  an  expedition 
against  the  island  of  Cyprus,  besieged  and  took  Gaza  (Jer. 
xlvii.  1)  and  the  city  of  Sidon,  engaged  and  vanquished  the 
king  of  Tyre  by  sea,  and,  being  uniformly  successful,  he  made 
himself  master  of  Phoenicia  and  Palestine,  recovering  much  of 
the  territory  and  that  influence  in  Syria  which  had  been  taken 
from  Egypt  by  the  victories  of  Nebuchadnezzar,"  *  especially  the 
great  victory  at  Carchemish,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign 
of  Jehoiakirn  (Jer.  xlvi.  2 ;  2  Kings  xxiv.  7).  So  proud  wras 
this  king  of  his  successes,  and  so  secure  did  he  think  himself 
of  his  power  and  dominion,  that  he  is  reported  to  have  said,  not 
even  a  god  could  deprive  him  of  his  kingdom.2 

It  wras  while  such  a  king  held  the  sceptre  of  Egypt,  and 
while  he  still  was  in  the  noontide  of  his  prosperity,  that  Ezekiel 
began  to  utter  the  prophecies  here  recorded  against  him.  We 
can  therefore  the  more  easily  understand  how  these  prophecies 
should  speak  so  strongly  of  the  pride  and  lordly  bearing  of 
Egypt  and  her  king,  as  if  an  absolute  and  independent  power 
had  become  enthroned  there.  And  we  may  also  understand  how 
divine  was  the  insight  of  Ezekiel,  which  enabled  him  at  such  a 
time  to  announce  the  downfall  of  Egypt  from  her  high  pre 
eminence,  and  her  final  destination  to  a  comparatively  low  place 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  It  could  not  be  human  sagacity 
which,  against  all  present  appearances,  spake  so  fearlessly  of  the 
coming  future;  it  was  the  unerring  foresight  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  prophecy  consists  of  four  separate  pieces,  which  have  each 
their  respective  dates ;  the  first  coinciding  with  the  tenth  year 
of  the  prophet's  captivity,  and  the  last  in  the  order  of  insertion 
with  the  close  of  the  twelfth.  But  one  is  introduced  between 
the  first  and  second,  of  a  much  later  date,  not  having  been  given 
till  the  twenty-seventh  year  (chap.  xxix.  17,  xxx.  19),  and  which 
had  its  place  assigned  there  as  the  most  appropriate  position  in 
1  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  169.  2  Herodotus,  ii.  169. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  323 

respect  to  its  contents.  The  first  in  order  is  a  general  announce 
ment,  in  parabolical  style,  of  the  punishment  of  the  king  of 
Egypt  on  account  of  his  intolerable  self-sufficiency  and  pride. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  tenth  year,  in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  twelfth  day  of  the 
month,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man,  set  thy 
face  against  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  prophesy  against  him,  and  against 
all  Egypt.  3.  Speak  and  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am 
against  thee,  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  the  great  crocodile  that  lieth  in  the 
midst  of  his  streams  ;T  who  says,  My  own  is  my  river,  and  I  have  made  it 
to  me.2  4.  And  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  jaws,  and  I  make  the  fish  of  thy 
streams  to  stick  in  thy  scales  ;  and  I  cause  thee  to  come  up  out  of  the  midst 
of  thy  streams,  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  streams  shall  stick  in  thy  scales.3 
5.  And  I  will  throw  thee  to  the  wilderness,  thee  and  all  the  fish  of  thy 
streams ;  upon  the  face  of  the  ground  shalt  thou  fall ;  thou  shall  not  be 
gathered,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  assembled:  I  give  thee  for  food  to  the 
beasts  of  the  earth,  and  the  fowls  of  heaven.  6.  And  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Egypt  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  because  of  their  being  a  staff  of 
reed  to  the  house  of  Israel.  7.  When  they  take  hold  of  thee  by  thy  hand, 
thou  art  crushed,  and  rendest  for  them  the  whole  shoulder  ;  and  when  they 
lean  upon  thee,  thou  breakest,  and  lettest  all  their  loins  stand.4 


1  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  it  is  the  crocodile  which  is  here 
meant  by  D^fl-     Both  it  and  the  word  leviathan  are  used  in  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  with  considerable  latitude,  and  in  a  kind  of  general  sense  denot 
ing  any  huge  aquatic  animal,  or  the  larger  species  of  serpents — monsters, 
whether  of  the  water  or  of  the  dry  land.     The  crocodile  was  this  peculiarly 
in  respect  to  the  Nile,  and  precisely  answers  to  the  description  here,  being- 
covered  with  scales,  each  with  a  high  horned  crest,  which  render  the  skin 
almost  impenetrable  through  them,  and  give  to  the  animal  a  very  formidable 
appearance.     To  the  ancients  generally  it  was  an  object  of  great  dread, 
though  in  some  parts  of  Egypt  it  was  worshipped  as  a  divinity.    More  com 
monly,  however,  it  was  killed  as  an  object  of  horror,  and  was  usually  caught 
by  means  of  hooks.     The  term  streams  was  very  often  applied  to  the  Nile 
in  antiquity,  with  reference  to  the  canals  and  branches  that  were  derived 
from  it,  and  also  probably  its  various  mouths. 

2  The  expression  here  is  evidently  elliptical,  "  I  have  made  (it)  me,"  for 
"  I  have  made  (it)  to  me."     The  suffix  has  therefore  the  force  of  *tj. 

3  The  crocodile  is  here  plainly  regarded  as  the  lord  of  the  Nile,  just  as 
Pharaoh  was  of  Egypt.     The  fish,  therefore — the  smaller  inhabitants  of  the 
water — are  viewed  as  properly  belonging  to  this  monster,  and  following  his 
fate  ;  so  that  when  he  was  caught,  and  laid  out  as  a  helpless  carcase  on  the 
sandy  desert,  these  all  came  along  with  him,  and  lay  there  too.    It  intimates 
that  Pharaoh  and  his  people  together  should  be  brought  forth  as  victims  for 
slaughter. 

4  That  is,  as  I  understand  it,  lettest  them  stand  the  best  way  they  can,  stand 
themselves,  if  they  are  able  for  it — if  not,  fall.     Most  modern  commentators 
consider  that  there  is  a  transposition  of  the  letters,  and  that  moyn  is  for 


324  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

This  passage  represents,  under  striking  and  appropriate  ima 
gery,  the  high  sense  the  king  of  Egypt  had  of  his  invincible 
might  and  glory,  and  the  state  of  utter  helplessness  and  ruin  to 
which  he  should  be  reduced ;  as  also  the  damage  that  should  be 
sustained  by  those  who  were  dependent  upon  him  for  help.  It 
was  the  old  controversy  which  had  formerly  been  waged  in  the 
land  of  Egypt  itself,  only  under  a  somewhat  modified  form,  and 
with  altered  relations  in  respect  to  the  covenant-people.  The 
Pharaoh  of  Moses'  time  stepped  forth  into  open  rivalry  with 
God,  and  sought  in  personal  conflict  to  contend  with  him  for 
the  mastery.  The  Pharaoh  of  Ezekiel's  time,  presuming  on  his 
godlike  sufficiency,  gave  himself  out  as  not  only  able  to  stand 
his  own  ground  against  all  powerful  assailants,  but  as  also  quali 
fied  to  take  the  place  of  God  in  regard  to  the  covenant-people, 
and  minister  help  to  them  in  the  hour  of  need.  But  never  could 
the  means  of  Israel's  deliverance  come  from  that  old  house  of 
bondage  ;  and  the  very  attempt  to  seek  it  there  was  to  be  met 
with  the  rod  of  chastisement.  So  far,  indeed,  the  resorting  of 
Zedekiah  and  his  people  to  such  an  helper  did  avail  them,  as  it 
caused  the  Babylonians  to  raise  for  a  time  the  siege  of  Jeru 
salem  ;  but  it  was  only  to  provoke  these  powerful  adversaries  to 
a  severer  vengeance,  and  to  accelerate  the  day  of  calamity.  The 
staff  altogether  failed  them,  when  they  were  especially  desiring 
to  lean  on  it ;  and  they  were  left  a  helpless  prey  in  the  hands  of 
their  ruthless  conquerors.  But  this  proved  insufficiency  on  the 

n"!yE>n,  winch  is  used  in  Ps.  Ixix.  23,  in  connection  also  with  loins ;  so  that 
the  sense  would  be,  and  dost  make  all  their  loins  to  shake.  This  seems  to 
have  been  the  view  taken  by  the  earlier  translators,  as  the  LXX.  has  avA- 
Khuactg ;  the  Vulgate,  dissolvisti ;  the  Syr.,  concussisti.  Yet  I  do  not  feel 
warranted  in  resorting  to  this  licence  with  the  text.  Besides  the  meaning 
obtained  is  rather  flat.  The  mere  crushing  of  the  reed  is  said  to  have  rent 
their  shoulder  by  the  splinters  that  flew  off  from  it ;  and  one  would  naturally 
expect  something  more  to  come  from  the  utter  breaking  of  it  than  the  mere 
shaking  or  trembling  of  their  loins.  A  piercing  to  death  would  have  been 
more  according  to  our  expectations.  The  prophet,  as  I  understand  him, 
refrains  from  expressing  this  result  in  so  many  words ;  but  yet  virtually 
expresses  it,  by  saying  that  the  effect  of  leaning  on  the  reed  was  that  it 
broke  and  left  the  loins  to  stand  for  themselves — loins  that  felt  they 
could  not  so  stand,  and  whose  worst  misfortune  was  to  be  thus  bereft  of 
the  power  that  had  failed  them  ;  for  falling  and  destruction  then  became 
inevitable.  The  image  is  plainly  borrowed  from  Isa.  xxxvi.  6 ;  but  is  to 
be  understood  of  present  not  of  former  times. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  325 

part  of  Pharaoh  to  give  efficient  aid  was  only  the  prelude  to  his 
own  overthrow  ;  and  the  mournful  reverses  which  were  to  befall 
him  and  his  land  were  to  be  such  as  would  effectually  prevent 
him  from  ever  henceforth  presuming  to  act — as  he  had  been 
impiously  doing  in  the  past — the  part  of  God.  This,  however, 
is  more  plainly  disclosed  in  the  verses  that  follow : — 

Yer.  8.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  going  to 
bring  upon  thee  a  sword,  and  I  will  cut  off  from  thee  man  and  beast.  9.  And 
the  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation  and  a  desert ;  and  they  shall  know 
that  I  am  Jehovah  ;  because  he  says,  The  river  is  mine,  and  I  have  made  it. 
10.  Therefore,  behold,  I  am  against  thee  and  against  thy  streams;  and  I  will 
make  the  land  of  Egypt  utterly  waste,  and  a  desolation  from  Migdol  to  Syene, 
and  to  the  border  of  Ethiopia.1  11.  No  foot  of  man  shall  pass  through  it, 
nor  foot  of  beast  pass  through  it ;  and  it  shall  not  be  inhabited  forty  years. 
12.  And  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate  in  the  midst  of  countries 
that  are  desolate,  and  her  cities  in  the  midst  of  the  cities  that  are  laid  waste 
shall  be  desolate  forty  years ;  and  I  will  scatter  the  Egyptians  among  the 
nations,  and  sow  them  among  the  countries.  13.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  At  the  end  of  forty  years  I  will  gather  the  Egyptians  from  among 
the  peoples  whither  they  were  scattered  ;  14.  And  I  will  turn  again  the 
captivity  of  Egypt,  and  I  make  them  return  to  the  land  of  Pathros,  to  the 
land  of  their  nativity ; 2  and  they  shall  be  there  a  low  kingdom.  15.  It  shall 
be  the  lowest  of  kingdoms,  and  shall  not  lift  itself  up  any  more  above  the 
nations ;  and  I  diminish  them,  so  that  they  shall  not  be  great  among  the 
nations.  16.  And  it  shall  not  be  any  more  to  the  house  of  Israel  for  a  con 
fidence,  a  remembrancer  of  iniquity,3  by  their  turning  away  after  them;  and 
they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  Jehovah. 


1  Our  translators  have  obscured  the  meaning  of  this  clause,  by  translating 
Migdol,  and  rendering,  from  the  tower  of  Syene.     The  words  mark  the 
two  extremities  of  the  land  :  Migdol,  the  same  as  Magdolum,  a  fortress  near 
Pelusium  on  the  north,  and  Syene  in  the  farthest  south ;  then  across  to  the 
borders  of  Ethiopia. 

2  By  Pathros  is  understood  the  upper  part  of  Egypt,  as  distinguished  from 
the  lower — the.  Thebaid.     That,  it  is  now  generally  agreed,  was  the  most 
ancient  part  of  Egypt,  as  to  civilisation  and  art — "the  school  of  learning 
and  the  parent  of  Egyptian  science,"  as  Wilkinson  calls  it  (vol.  i.  p.  4). 
He  also  afterwards  quotes  Aristotle's  words,  "  that  the  Thebaid  was  formerly 
called  Egypt ;"  and  those  of  Herodotus,  that  "  Egypt  in  ancient  times  was 
called  Thebes."     This  part  of  the  country  in  particular  is  here  named  the 
birthplace  of  the  Egyptians,  or  rather,  Egypt  under  this  name  is  styled  the 
native  region  of  the  people ;  because  that  district  appears  to  have  had  the 
priority  over  the  rest,  and  now  matters  had  to  start  as  it  were  from  a  new 
beginning. 

3  It  was  from  Egypt  setting  herself  forth,  and  being  accepted  by  Israel  as 
a  ground  of  confidence,  that  she  was  a  remembrancer  of  iniquity ;  for  she 
thus  served  as  a  witness  in  regard  to  the  people's  departure  from  God. 
But  she  was  to  be  too  much  reduced  to  do  that  any  more. 


326  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

In  this  part  of  the  prophecy  we  have  another  very  peculiar 
exemplification  of  the  characteristic  style  of  our  prophet,  in 
respect  to  his  disposition  to  serve  himself  of  history  for  the  par 
ticular  hue  and  form  of  his  announcements.  But  as  we  cannot 
properly  elucidate  the  meaning,  and  exhibit  the  fulfilment  of 
this  portion,  without  referring  to  the  additional  portion  which 
occupies  the  remainder  of  the  chapter,  and  which  may  fitly  be 
regarded  as  the  complement  of  the  one  before  us,  we  shall  first 
give  this,  that  we  may  have  the  whole  in  our  view  at  once. 

Ver.  17.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  twenty  and  seventh  year,  in  the  first 
month,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  say 
ing,  18.  Son  of  man,  Nebuchadrezzar,  king  of  Babylon,  caused  his  army  to 
serve  a  great  service  against  Tyre,  every  head  made  bald,  and  every  shoulder 
peeled,  and  there  were  not  wages  to  him  and  his  army  from  Tyre,  for  (or 
after)  the  service  that  he  served  against  it.1  19.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Behold  I  give  Nebuchadrezzar,  the  king  of  Babylon,  the  land 
of  Egypt ;  and  he  shall  bear  off  her  store,2  and  seize  her  spoil,  and  lay  hold 
of  her  prey ;  and  she  shall  be  for  wages  to  his  army.  20.  For  his  work 
which  he  served  in  it,  I  give  to  him  the  land  of  Egypt,  because  they  did  it 
for  me,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  21.  In  that  day  I  shall  make  a  horn  to  bud 
forth  to  the  house  of  Israel,  and  to  thee  I  will  give  the  opening  of  the  mouth 
in  their  midst ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

Viewing  this  prophecy  on  Egypt  in  a  general  light,  and  with 
respect  more  especially  to  the  part  assigned  in  it  to  Nebuchad 
nezzar,  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  fulfilment  which  it  is  not 
very  difficult  to  establish.  Take  for  example  the  distinct  and 
so  far  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  matter  by  Sir  G.  Wilkin 
son.  He  had  previously  related  the  earlier  successes  of  Apries, 
then  the  reverses  that  began  to  come  upon  him,  issuing  in  the 

1  I  give  here  the  most  literal  rendering  possible,  to  show  that  the  words 
do  not,  as  formerly  mentioned,  imply  an  utter  failure  and  the  loss  of  all 
profit  in  respect  to  the  siege  of  Tyre,  but  only  one  in  no  degree  propor 
tioned  to  the  time  and  labour  expended,  and  in  that  respect  as  good  as  none. 
For  the  service  is  equivalent  to  according  to  the  service ;  so  ^>y  is  used  in 
other  places;  for  example,  in  Ps.  ex.  4,  "after  (according  to)  the  order  of 
Melchizedec." 

2  jiftn  cannot  signify  multitude  here  in  the  sense  of  crowds  or  masses  of 
people  ;  for  in  that  case  $&}  could  not  have  been  the  verb  coupled  with  it. 
This  plainly  denotes  that  it  was  property  of  some  sort  which  Nebuchad 
nezzar  was  to  take  up  and  carry  away  with  him.     It  was  this  also,  and  not 
people,  which  formed  a  proper  reward  for  him.     I  therefore  take  the  word 
here,  as  in  chap.  vii.  12,  13,  and  in  chap.  xxx.  4,  etc.,  for  multitude,  in  the 
sense  of  great  possessions — store. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  327 

revolt  of  Amasis,  and  the  defeat  and  ultimately  the  death  of 
Apries.  Having  stated  that  the  information  on  these  points  is 
given  on  the  authority  of  Herodotus,  who  professed  to  have 
derived  it  from  the  Egyptian  priests,  he  proceeds :  a  But  no 
mention  was  made  of  the  signal  defeat  their  army  experienced, 
or  of  that  loss  of  territory  in  Syria,  which  resulted  from  the 
successes  of  the  victorious  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  is  therefore 
reasonable  to  conclude,  they  disguised  the  truth  from  the  Greek 
historian ;  and  without  mentioning  the  disgrace  which  had 
befallen  their  country,  and  the  interposition  of  a  foreign  power, 
attributed  the  change  in  the  succession,  and  the  elevation  of 
Amasis  to  the  throne,  solely  to  his  ambition  and  the  choice 
of  the  Egyptian  soldiery.  Megasthenes  and  Berosus  affirm 
that  Nebuchadnezzar  conquered  a  great  part  of  Africa,  and 
having  invaded  Egypt,  took  many  captives,  who  were  committed 
to  the  charge  of  persons  appointed  to  conduct  them  after  him  to 
Babylon,  But  as  this  is  said  to  have  happened  at  the  period  of 
his  father's  -death,  and  consequently  in  the  reign  of  Necho,  it 
cannot  refer  to  the  point  in  question.  Josephus,  however, 
expressly  states  that  the  Chaldean  monarch  i  led  an  army  into 
Coelo-Syria,  of  which  he  obtained  possession,  and  then  waged  war 
on  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites.  These  being  subdued,  he 
invaded  and  conquered  Egypt,  and  having  put  the  king  of  that 
country  to  death,  he  appointed  another  in  his  stead '  (Antiq.  x. 
9.  7).  If  Josephus  be  correct  in  his  statement,  there  is  reason 
to  suppose  he  alludes  to  Apries  being  deposed  and  succeeded  by 
Amasis ;  and  we  can  readily  imagine  that  the  Assyrians,  having 
extended  their  conquests  to  the  extremity  of  Palestine,  would, 
on  the  rumour  of  intestine  commotions  in  Egypt,  hasten  to  take 
advantage  of  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  them  of  attacking 
the  country.  And  the  civil  war  and  the  fatal  consequences  of 
the  disturbed  state  of  Egypt  appear  to  be  noticed  by  Isaiah  in 
the  following  prophecy  : — <  I  will  set  the  Egyptians  against  the 
Egyptians,  and  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  brother, 
and  every  one  against  his  neighbour,  city  against  city,  and 
kingdom  against  kingdom ;  ,  .  »  and  the  Egyptians  will  I  give 
over  into  the  hand  of  a  cruel  lord,  and  a  fierce  king  shall  rule 
over  them'  (chap.  xix.  2,  11). 

"  From  a  comparison  of  all  these  authorities,  I  conclude  that 
the  civil  war  between  Apries  and  Amasis  did  not  terminate 


328  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

in  the  single  conflict  at  Momemphis,  but  lasted  several  years ; 
and  that  either  Amasis  solicited  the  aid  and  intervention  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  or  this  prince,  availing  himself  of  the  dis 
ordered  state  of  the  country,  of  his  own  accord  invaded  it, 
deposed  the  rightful  sovereign,  and  placed  Amasis  on  the 
throne,  on  condition  of  paying  tribute  to  the  Assyrians.  The 
injury  done  to  the  land  of  Egypt  by  this  invasion,  and  the  dis 
grace  with  which  the  Egyptians  felt  themselves  overwhelmed 
after  such  an  event,  would  justify  the  account  given  in  the 
Bible  of  the  fall  of  Egypt;  and  to  witness  many  of  their 
compatriots  taken  captive  to  Babylon,  and  to  become  tributary 
to  an  enemy  whom  they  held  in  abhorrence,  would  be  con 
sidered  by  the  Egyptians  the  greatest  calamity,  as  though 
they  had  for  ever  lost  their  station  in  the  scale  of  nations."1 

It  is  quite  sufficient,  in  a  general  point  of  view,  to  justify  the 
prediction  uttered  by  Ezekiel,  regarding  the  adverse  change 
that  was  presently  to  be  brought  over  the  affairs  of  Egypt  by 
the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  And  it  may  still  further  be  con 
firmed  by  the  nearly  contemporary  word  of  Jeremiah,  which 
was  spoken  after  he  had  been  violently  carried  to  Egypt,  and 
in  the  immediate  prospect  of  the  troubles  it  foretold.  Had  the 
troubles  not  actually  come,  it  certainly  would  never  have  been 
allowed  to  stand  among  his  writings :  tl  Behold,  I  will  send 
and  take  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of  Babylon,  my  servant, 
and  will  set  his  throne  upon  these  stones  that  I  have  hid ;  and 
he  shall  spread  his  royal  pavilion  over  them.  And  he  comes, 
he  smites  the  land  of  Egypt — such  as  are  for  death,  to  death  ; 
and  such  as  are  for  captivity,  to  captivity;  and  such  as  are  for 
the  sword,  to  the  sword.  And  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the  houses  of 
the  gods  of  Egypt ;  and  he  burns  them,  and  carries  them  away 
captives ;  and  he  clothes  himself  with  the  land  of  Egypt  as  a 
shepherd  puts  on  his  garments;  and  he  goes  forth  from  it  in 
peace"  (chap,  xliii.  10-12). 

But  it  is  obvious,  admitting  all  this,  that  a  wide  chasm  still 
exists  between  the  terms  of  Ezekiel's  prophecy,  and  the  recorded 
or  even  probable  facts  of  history,  if  the  prophecy  is  to  be  taken 
in  the  simply  literal  sense.  For  what  it  predicts  respecting  the 
land  of  Egypt  is  a  forty  years'  desolation,  during  which  it  should 
not  so  much  as  be  trodden  by  man  or  beast — should  be,  in  fact, 
1  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  176-8. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  329 

in  a  wilderness  condition;  while  the  inhabitants  also  should  be 
dispersed  into  other  countries,  and  only  restored  again  after  the 
forty  years  had  run  their  course.  What  is  there  in  the  annals 
of  ancient  Egypt  to  bear  out  such  statements  ?  "  We  cannot 
prove,"  says  Bishop  Newton  in  his  work  on  the  Prophecies, 
"from  heathen  authors  that  this  desolation  of  the  country  con 
tinued  exactly  forty  years,  though  it  is  likely  enough  that  this 
as  well  as  the  other  conquered  countries  did  not  shake  off  the 
Babylonian  yoke  till  the  time  of  Cyrus,  which  was  about  forty 
years  after  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Nebuchadnezzar."  But 
even  if  we  could  prove  what  is  thus  held  to  have  been  within  the 
bounds  of  the  probable,  it  would  still  avail  little  to  the  point 
under  consideration;  for  the  word  of  prophecy  is  an  absolute  and 
determinate  thing — it  cannot  be  verified  by  halves.  It  is  either 
wholly  true, — namely,  in  the  sense  of  its  real  import, — or  it  is 
not  entitled  to  rank  as  prophecy  at  all.  And  such  a  subjection 
as  the  Bishop  notices  of  Egypt  to  Babylon,  even  supposing  it 
to  have  lasted  precisely  forty  years,  comes  very  far  short  of  that 
blighted  and  desolate  condition,  as  of  an  untrodden  wilderness, 
coupled  with  the  general  dispersion  of  her  people,  of  which  the 
prophet  speaks.  It  is  as  certain  as  anything  in  ancient  history 
can  be,  that  a  sweeping  desolation  of  this  kind  never  in  reality 
took  place  in  Egypt  during  the  period  of  Chaldean  ascendancy. 
And  we  cannot  but  express  our  wonder  how  interpreters,  with 
this  palpable  fact  staring  them  in  the  face,  should  be  able  to  glide 
over  the  surface  of  what  is  written  in  the  easy  manner  they  do, 
as  if  they  needed  to  look  no  farther  than  to  the  literal  sense  of 
the  words.  Literalism  here,  in  the  hands  of  a  fair  and  honest 
interpreter,  can  lead  but  to  one  result — the  manifest  failure  of 
the  prediction.  But  is  it  just  or  reasonable  to  deal  after  this 
fashion  with  a  prophet,  whose  representations  usually  partake  so 
much  of  the  ideal,  and  with  whom  the  ideal  so  frequently  clothes 
itself  in  the  garb  of  history  ?  Were  it  not  more  in  accordance 
with  the  true  interpreting  spirit  to  inquire  whether  the  definite 
terms  and  external  conditions  of  the  prophecy  might  not  be  here 
also  used  in  a  historico-ideal  sense,  symbolical  and  not  literal, 
expressive  of  the  nature  rather  than  the  precise  bounds  and 
limits  of  the  predicted  events?  Such  a  course  is  the  more  called 
for  on  the  present  occasion,  as  the  period  of  forty  years  is  one 
that  stands  out  so  prominently  in  the  history  of  God's  dispensa- 


330  EZEEIEL  XXIX. 

tions,  and  one  that  on  this  account  had  already  been  employed 
by  the  prophet  in  an  ideal  manner  respecting  the  future  treat 
ment  of  the  covenant-people.  In  the  vision  of  the  iniquity 
bearing,  in  chap,  iv.,  he  had  been  commanded  to  lie  forty  days 
on  his  right  side  as  typical  of  the  forty  years  during  which  they 
were  to  be  dealt  with  in  chastisement  for  their  sins ;  a  word, 
as  we  there  showed,  which  could  mean  nothing  else  than  that 
another  season  was  to  pass  over  them,  similar  in  its  character  as 
a  time  of  chastisement  and  discipline  to  that  of  the  forty  years' 
sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  but  by  no  means  corresponding  to  it 
in  duration.  So  again,  we  have  seen  (at  chap.  xx.  35,  etc.) 
that,  without  mentioning  the  years,  the  prophet  names  the 
wilderness  condition,  with  its  stringent  dealings  and  sifting 
trials,  as  what  must  be  undergone  by  Israel  anew7,  while  he  not 
obscurely  intimates  that  what  was  to  be  should  not  be  the  mere 
copy  of  what  had  been — not  the  literal  repetition  of  the  wilder 
ness  life,  but  the  substantial  renewal  of  its  spiritual  treatment. 
And  why  should  it  be  thought  that  the  reference  here  to  the 
same  great  period  is  to  be  understood  otherwise  ?  Even  Jerome, 
however  he  failed  in  making  a  right  application  of  the  idea, 
could  not  overlook  the  respect  had  to  the  import  of  the  number 
forty :  "  which,"  he  says,  "  is  always  the  number  of  chastisement 
and  affliction.  Whence  also  Moses,  and  Elias,  and  the  Saviour 
himself,  fasted  forty  days  and  nights,  and  for  forty  years  the 
people  were  kept  in  solitude."  Let  the  prophet  thus  be  taken 
as  his  own  interpreter,  and  we  shall  naturally  conclude  that  what 
he  meant  by  Egypt  becoming  a  desolation  and  a  wilderness  for 
forty  years,  was  that  a  season  of  severe  chastisement  and  hard 
discipline  should  be  made  to  pass  over  them,  similar  to  what  in 
days  of  yore  had  passed  over  Israel  when  inhabiting  the  desert. 
It  was  to  be  with  these  proud  and  fleshly  Egyptians  precisely  as 
it  had  then  been  with  the  proud  and  fleshly  Israelites ;  their 
pleasant  land  was,  as  it  were,  to  be  converted  into  a  lonesome 
wilderness — a  field  of  trial,  wrhere  "  alone  they  must  strive  with 
God,"  and  be  brought  down  from  their  self-complacent  trust,  to 
learn  and  realize  their  own  nothingness.  So  that  it  is  not  the 
precise  number  of  years  that  we  are  to  look  to — these  only  served 
to  indicate,  through  their  historical  value,  the  character  of  the  pre 
dicted  dealings;  and  if  something  like  an  external  correspondence 
may  be  descried  in  the  first  period  of  Egypt's  calamities  with  that 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  331 

particular  number  of  years,  it  should  only  be  regarded  as  a  sign 
in  Providence  to  help  to  the  deeper  import  of  the  prophecy. 

There  is  indeed  some  sort  of  outward  correspondence  discern 
ible,  though  not  in  the  way  noticed  by  Bishop  Newton.  From 
what  has  been  already  mentioned,  there  is  good  ground  for 
believing  that  the  invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar  took  place  about 
the  commencement  of  the  reign  of  Amasis.  Now  this  monarch, 
it  is  known,  occupied  the  throne  for  a  very  long  period — accord 
ing  to  Herodotus,  for  44  years,  and  according  to  Diodorus,  55 
years ;  and  it  is  also  known,  both  from  the  historical  reports  and 
from  the  character  of  the  monuments  erected  by  him,  that  Egypt 
enjoyed  a  high  degree  of  prosperity  in  his  reign,  which  in  the 
circumstances  must  have  chiefly  belonged  to  the  later  portion 
of  it,  after  Egypt  had  recovered  to  some  extent  from  the  blow 
of  the  Chaldean  conquest,  consequently  somewhere  toward  the 
completion  of  the  forty  years.  But  as  this  point  is  incapable 
of  proper  proof,  so  it  is  not  to  be  pressed;  nothing  material 
depends  on  it.  It  is  of  necessity  the  character  of  the  approaching 
troubles,  not  their  precise  duration,  of  which  we  are  chiefly  to 
think  under  the  forty  years'  wilderness  desolation ;  the  more 
especially  as  the  dealing  of  severity  referred  to  was  not  confined 
to  one  period,  but  was  often  repeated ;  and  in  the  time  of  Carn- 
byses,  it  returned  with  still  more  painful  and  humiliating  circum 
stances,  than  in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  In  like  manner, 
what  is  said  in  the  prophecy  of  the  scattering  and  the  gathering 
again  of  the  people  of  Egypt,  is  another  point  in  Israel's  history 
— one,  as  a  chastisement,  entirely  similar  in  nature  to  that  of  the 
sojourn  in  the  wilderness — which  was  also  to  have  its  parallel  in 
the  treatment  of  Egypt ;  and  the  very  circumstance  of  the  two 
being  coupled  together — the  scattering  among  the  nations  being 
represented  as  coinciding  with  the  forty  years'  wilderness  condi 
tion — is  itself  a  clear  indication  that  this  as  well  as  the  other 
must  be  understood  as  an  ideal  representation.  It  was  not 
the  few  captives  that  were  carried  away  by  the  Chaldeans  to 
Babylon  of  which  the  prophet  spake,  that  was  nothing  more 
than  the  external  sign  of  the  far  worse  calamity  which  his  words 
properly  express ;  they  intimated  that  the  same  shattering  was 
ready  to  befall  the  power  of  Egypt,  which  was  accomplished 
on  Israel  by  their  dispersion  among  the  Gentiles ;  that  though 
still,  perhaps,  resident  within  the  boundaries  of  the  land,  their 


332  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

independence  was  to  be  as  much  broken,  and  their  forces  as 
scattered,  as  if  they  were  literally  driven  into  exile.  In  short, 
Egypt  in  her  approaching  calamities  was  to  become  a  sort  of 
shadow  of  Israel — the  judgments  which  befell  the  one  were 
in  substance  to  have  their  echo  in  the  other;  and  hence  the 
unspeakable  folly  (for  to  this  grand  lesson  the  whole  points)  of 
Israel  going  to  lean  on  a  power  which  was  utterly  impotent  to 
help  itself,  which  was  destined  to  travel  through  the  same  sore 
visitations  of  disaster  and  trouble  that  brought  Israel  to  the  dust. 
Nay,  there  was  a  difference  in  the  cases,  as  well  as  an  agree 
ment,  which  still  more  strongly  marked  the  folly  of  such  behaviour 
on  the  part  of  Israel.  For  Egypt,  the  prophet  intimates,  though 
not  to  be  entirely  destroyed,  was  yet  never  to  regain  her  former 
position  ;  she  was  to  recover  from  the  extreme  depression  await 
ing  her,  but  still  only  to  be  in  a  low  condition — lower  than  the 
other  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  that  is,  than  its  larger  monarchies. 
In  the  evil  only  was  it  to  stand  parallel  with  Israel,  but  not  in 
the  good.  For  in  Israel,  by  reason  of  the  covenant,  there  was 
a  germ  of  strength  and  glory  which  belonged  peculiarly  to  her 
self,  and  which  the  very  downfall  of  Egypt  and  such  temporal 
monarchies  would  only  serve  to  develope.  Therefore  it  is  said  at 
the  close,  "  in  that  day  I  shall  make  a  horn  to  bud  forth  to  the 
house  of  Israel" — in  the  very  time  of  Egypt's  humiliation,  and  in 
consequence  of  it,  shall  the  Divine  power  inherent  in  the  cove 
nant-people  spring  up  into  new  vigour.  As  the  false  worldly 
element  goes  down,  of  which  Egypt  was  the  representative, 
the  true  spiritual  element  shall  rise  up  afresh.  A  truth  for  all 
times  !  May  the  Spirit  write  it  in  our  hearts  !  It  is  only  as  the 
rod  of  the  flesh  and  the  world  is  broken,  that  the  Divine  king 
dom  of  Jesus  flourishes  in  the  soul  or  in  the  world.  The  more 
always  that  the  Egypt  falls  in  us,  the  more  will  the  horn  of  Israel 
bud  forth  ;  so  that  we  also,  like  the  prophet,  shall  get  the  opening 
of  the  mouth,  to  speak  of  the  Lord's  doings  and  to  show  forth 
his  praise  among  men.  And  co-eval  with  the  putting  down  of 
all  power  and  authority  and  dominion  that  is  of  man,  shall 
be  the  triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  the  complete 
establishment  of  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  explanation  now  given  of  this  prophecy,  proceeding 
on  the  characteristic  style  of  Ezekiel  as  exemplified  in  other 
portions  of  his  writings,  will  be  seen  to  be  very  different  from 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EGYPT.  333 

the  view  of  those  who  would  resolve  the  peculiar  language 
employed  into  mere  hyperbole.1  As  for  the  opposite  class,  who 
will  hear  of  nothing  but  literalisms — whose  key-note  here  as 
elsewhere  is,  it  is  a  literal  Egypt  that  was  to  be  desolated,  and 
a  literal  Nebuchadnezzar  that  was  to  desolate  it,  and  why  not 
also  a  literal  forty  years  and  a  literal  dispersion  ?  It  is  enough 
to  say  that  the  method  of  Ezekiel  in  other  places  shows  how 
he  is  to  be  understood  here,  and  that  for  many  wise  and 
important  reasons  God  has  not  chosen  to  make  his  prophetic 
communications  always  run  in  a.  style  the  meaning  of  which 
lies  on  the  surface ;  indeed,  has  seldom  done  so.  And  let  such 
literalists  themselves  show  how  the  infidel  is  to  be  answered, 
when  he  tells  them  that  the  literality  they  contend  for  pal 
pably  wants  its  requisite  verification  in  the  facts  of  history. 
With  their  style  of  interpretation  we  should  feel  constrained 
to  abandon  the  veracity  of  the  prediction. 

We  shall  only  advert,  in  conclusion,  to  the  loose  application 
sometimes  made  in  popular  works  on  prophecy  of  the  language 
employed  in  this  prediction  regarding  the  desolation  of  Egypt, 
to  its  circumstances  in  the  present  day.  It  ought  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  this  is  not  strictly  warranted  by  the  language  itself, 
which  speaks  only  of  what  was  to  be  done  to  humble  the  power 
of  Egypt,  and  to  reduce  it  from  the  proud  elevation  of  a  world 
monarchy — a  rival  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  a  temptation  to 
his  people  to  depart  from  him.  When  Egypt  finally  ceased  to 
occupy,  or  to  be  in  circumstances  to  aspire  after  that  condition, 
the  prophecy  might  be  said  to  have  taken  full  effect — the  desola 
tions  were  accomplished.  Now  that  the  relations  are  so  com 
pletely  changed,  and  Egypt  might  be  anything  so  far  as  the 

1  This  view  was  adopted  by  the  late  Dr.  Arnold,  who  says  on  the  prophecy 
before  us,  "  This  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  hyperbolical  language  of  the 
prophecies,  as  far  as  regards  the  historical  sense  of  them.  The  prophecy 
says,  '  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  utterly  waste,'  etc.  It  is  perfectly  evi 
dent  that  we  are  to  seek  for  no  literal  fulfilment  of  this.  But  I  think,  also, 
that  the  expression  l  forty  years '  is  no  more  to  be  taken  literally  than  the 
other  expressions  ;  and  indeed  it  is  inconsistent  to  seek  chronological  exact 
ness  where  there  is  evidently  no  historical  exactness  intended"  (Sermons  on 
Prophecy,  p.  48).  The  prophets,  however,  no  more  than  other  writers,  must 
play  at  random  with  definite  periods  and  strong  descriptions  ;  and  if  they  did 
not  mean  by  these  historical  exactness,  we  may  be  sure  there  was  exactness 
of  some  other  kind,  which  warranted  them  to  write  as  they  did." 


334  EZEKIEL  XXIX. 

cause  of  God  generally  is  concerned,  the  territory  is  in  a  manner 
gone  on  which  the  prophecy  moved ;  and  if  Egypt  were  to  become 
ever  so  prosperous,  it  would  not  in  the  least  affect  the  truth  of 
what  is  here  written  concerning  it.  The  contrary  and,  as  I 
think,  mistaken  view  naturally  leads  those  who  adopt  it  to 
present  exaggerated  accounts  of  the  difference  between  ancient 
and  modern  Egypt  in  population  and  resources — to  represent 
the  latter  as  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  former.  There  is 
undoubtedly  a  considerable  inferiority,  yet  by  no  means  such  as 
to  justify  us  in  regarding  the  one  as  a  desolation  compared  with 
the  other.  Late  investigations  have  satisfactorily  proved  that  the 
available  ground  for  cultivation  in  modern  Egypt  is  not  smaller, 
but  probably  somewhat  larger  than  it  was  in  ancient  times.1  Yet 
the  entire  area  of  the  country  is  only  about  11,000  square  miles, 
not  quite  a  fifth  of  England  and  Wales,  and  the  arable  portion 
scarcely  exceeds  2300,  while  in  England  and  Wales  there  are 
upwards  of  40,000  of  arable  and  meadow  land.  Small  as  the 
area  of  Egypt  is,  it  is  understood  to  have  contained,  till  within  a 
recent  period,  not  far  from  3,000,000  inhabitants — a  population 
fully  equal  to  that  of  Great  Britain  in  proportion  to  extent  of 
surface,  and  at  least  three  times  as  great  in  proportion  to  the 
extent  of  arable  ground.  But  ancient  writers  (Diodorus  and 
Josephus)  speak  of  it  as  having  had  a  population  of  more  than 
twice  as  much — of  7,000,000 — at  a  period  shortly  before  the 
Christian  era — a  most  incredible  number,  unless,  as  Wilkinson 
suggests,  we  should  include  in  the  reckoning  some  of  the  neigh 
bouring  provinces  belonging  to  Egypt.  And  they  speak  also 
of  30,000  towns  and  villages  in  it,  which,  even  taking  the  popu 
lation  at  7,000,000  for  the  whole  country,  would  yield  the  round 
sum  of  330  to  each.  Notable  towns  and  villages  indeed !  or 
as  Herodotus  calls  them,  "  populous  cities ! "  It  is  manifest 
that  the  statements  of  ancient  writers  on  this  head  are  of  the  most 
random  and  exaggerated  character ;  and  it  may  well  be  doubted 
if  the  population  of  Egypt  proper  ever  exceeded  four  or  five 
millions.  Its  arable  ground,  if  all  cultivated,  is  thought  equal, 
at  least  in  good  years,  to  the  support  of  seven  or  eight  millions  ; 
but  the  produce  is  far  from  being  uniform,  and  Egypt  from  the 
earliest  times  was  always  an  exporting  country  in  grain.  She 

1  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  216,  and  Encyclopaedia  Britan- 
nica,  art.  Egypt. 


CONTINUATION  OF  EGYPT'S  JUDGMENT.  335 

had  to  a  considerable  extent  to  supply  surrounding  countries — a 
circumstance  overlooked  by  Mr.  Lane  in  his  Modern  Egyptians, 
when  he  accredits  the  ancient  statements  respecting  the  popu- 
lousness  of  the  country  under  the  Pharaohs.  We  throw  out 
these  remarks  merely  to  show  how  unwise  it  is  to  point  to  the 
existing  condition  of  Egypt  in  connection  with  the  prophecy 
under  consideration ;  and  to  recall  attention  to  what  was  its 
real  object — the  downfall  of  Egypt  as  one  of  the  great  ancient 
monarchies,  and  its  reduction  to  a  comparatively  inferior  place 
— a  place  in  which  it  could  have  no  power  to  withstand  the 
advancement  of  God's  kingdom,  or  withdraw  the  allegiance  of 
its  members  from  the  covenant  of  God.  This,  which  we  hold 
to  be  the  real  import  of  the  prediction,  has  beyond  all  question 
been  most  completely  verified. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

CONTINUATION   OF  EGYPT'S   JUDGMENT. 

THIS  chapter  is  composed  of  two  distinct  messages,  the  first 
of  which  reaches  to  the  close  of  ver.  10,  and  is  merely,  as  to  its 
substance,  a  repetition  of  what  had  already  been  announced  in 
chap.  xxix.  1-16,  only  carried  out  into  much  greater  fulness  of 
detail.  It  is  another  proof  how  congenial  it  was  to  the  peculiar 
temperament  of  Ezekiel  to  have  the  prophetic  outline  filled  up 
by  a  great  variety  of  particulars,  so  as  to  give  a  lifelike  distinct 
ness  and  body  to  the  picture.  His  spirit  was  not  satisfied  till 
the  representation  had  been  clothed,  as  it  were,  with  flesh  and 
blood,  and  it  was  seen  in  all  its  variety  of  parts.  This  is  the 
more  striking  here,  as  the  vision  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
given  till  long  after  that  of  which  it  forms  the  detailed  sequel. 
The  date  at  chap.  xxix.  17  is  most  naturally  regarded  as  extending 
to  this  portion ;  as  also  the  commencement  of  the  message,  by 
declaring  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  be  near  for  Egypt,  suits  better 
to  the  time  when  Nebuchadnezzar,  having  finished  his  operations 
at  Tyre,  was  on  the  eve  of  marching  against  Egypt. 

The  other  vision  in  the  chapter  was  of  a  much  earlier  date, 
having  been  communicated  on  the  seventh  of  the  first  month  of 


336  EZEKIEL  XXX. 

the  eleventh  year ;  not  quite  a  year  after  the  first  date  in  chap, 
xxix.,  and  about  three  months  before  the  taking  of  Jerusalem  by 
the  Chaldeans.  It  relates  directly  to  Pharaoh,  and,  from  some 
reverses  already  experienced  by  him,  proceeds  to  announce  the 
entire  overthrow  of  his  kingdom.  The  general  subject  being  the 
same  in  both  parts  as  in  the  immediately  preceding  chapter,  we 
shall  do  little  more  than  give  a  translation  of  the  original,  with 
some  explanatory  notes  where  such  are  required. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Alas  !  for  the  day.  3.  For 
the  day  is  near,  and  the  day  of  Jehovah  is  near,  a  day  of  clouds,  the  time  of 
the  heathen  shall  it  be.1  4.  And  the  sword  comes  upon  Egypt,  and  there 
shall  be  terror  in  Ethiopia,  because  of  the  falling  of  the  pierced-through  in 
Egypt,  and  they  shall  take  away  her  store,  and  shall  destroy  her  foundations. 
5.  Ethiopia,  and  Phut,  and  Lud,  and  all  the  mixed  multitude,  and  Chub,2 
and  the  children  of  the  land  of  the  covenant,  with  them  that  fall  by  the 
sword.3  6.  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  And  the  supporters  of  Egypt  shall  fall,  and 


1  The  commencement  is  almost  precisely  in  the  words  of  Joel,  i.  15  ;  ii.  1,  2. 
The  peculiar  expression  also,  "  the  day  of  the  heathen,"  indicates  briefly 
what  is  described  more  at  large  in  the  last  chapter  of  Joel ;  it  reveals  the 
world- wide  import  of  the  judgment  to  be  inflicted  on  Egypt,  which  was  like 
the  beginning  of  revenges  on  the  heathen.     We  find  the  same  representation 
given  by  Obadiah  (ver.  15)  with  respect  to  Edom. 

2  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  with  certainity  all  the  countries  and  people 
here  named.     The  people  of  Phut  and  Lud  were  formerly  mentioned  as 
among  the  hired  soldiers  of  Tyre  (chap,  xxvii.  10)  ;  and  as  it  is  known  Egypt 
relied  very  much  on  her  mercenary  troops  at  the  time  before  us,  it  is  likely 
that  they  are  mentioned  here  in  the  same  character.     Indeed,  in  Jer.  xlvi. 
9,  21,  they  are  expressly  named  the  hired  warriors  of  Egypt ;  and  are  ren 
dered  by  our  translators,  Lybians  and  Lydians.     This  is  a  very  ancient 
opinion,  and  in  regard  to  both  countries  is  concurred  in  by  Gesenius.     See 
Thes.,  at  the  words.     The  people  named  must  have  been  some  warlike  races 
of  Asia  or  Africa,  who  hired  themselves  out  to  other  countries  for  military 
service.     And  this  holds  of  both  the  Lybians  and  the  Lydians.     The  Chub 
(or,  with  a  different  pointing,  Kuf)  are  wholly  unknown.     Havernick  would 
identify  them  with  a  people  named  Kufa  on  the  monuments,  and  by  Wilkin 
son  (vol.  i.  p.  379)  considered  to  be  a  people  situated  considerably  to  the 
north  of  Palestine.     But  this  also  is  mere  conjecture.     The  LXX.  omit  the 
name,  as  if  they  did  not  know  what  to  put  for  it.     The  mixed  multitude  are 
the  people  from  various  countries  in  the  pay  of  Egypt. 

3  Who  are  to  be  understood  here  by  "the  children  of  the  land  of  the 
covenant,"  or  the  covenant-land,  is  also  a  matter  of  dispute.    Havernick  takes 
the  expression  generally  :  persons  in  covenant,  allies.     But  the  expression, 
as  Hitzig  notices,  is  too  definite  for  that;  and  the  covenant-land  can  hardly  be 
taken  for  anything  but  the  land  of  Canaan.     So  the  LXX.  took  it,  and  to 


CONTINUATION  OF  EGYPT'S  JUDGMENT.  337 

the  pride  of  her  strength  shall  go  down  ;  from  Migdol  to  Syene  they  shall  fall 
by  the  sword  in  it,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  7.  And  they  shall  be  desolate 
in  the  midst  of  the  lands  that  are  desolate.  8.  And  they  shall  know  that  I 
am  Jehovah,  when  I  have  set  fire  in  Egypt,  and  all  her  helpers  are  broken. 
9.  In  that  day  shall  messengers  go  forth  from  before  me  in  ships,  to  alarm 
Ethiopia  in  her  security,  and  terror  shall  be  among  them,  as  the  day  of  Egypt, 
for  behold  it  comes.1  10.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  will  make  the 
fulness  of  Egypt  to  cease  by  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon. 
11.  He  and  his  people  with  him,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  are  a-coming 
to  destroy  the  land ;  and  they  will  draw  their  swords  against  Egypt,  and 
fill  the  land  with  the  pierced-through.  12.  And  I  will  make  the  rivers  dry, 
and  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked  ;  and  I  will  make  the  land  and 
its  fulness  desolate  by  the  hand  of  strangers  ;  I  Jehovah  have  spoken  it.  13. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  will  destroy  idols,  and  make  images  to 
cease  from  Noph,2  and  a  prince  of  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  no  more  be  ;  and  I 
will  put  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  14.  And  I  will  make  Pathros  desolate, 
and  put  afire  in  Zoan,  and  execute  judgments  in  No.3  15.  And  I  will  pour 
out  my  fury  upon  Sin,  the  strength  of  Egypt,4  and  will  cut  off  the  multitude  of 
No.  16.  And  I  will  make  fire  in  Egypt ;  and  Sin  shall  have  great  pain  ;  and 
No  shall  be  for  tearing  asunder,  and  Noph  distresses  perpetually.5  17.  The 


make  the  matter  plain,  put  "  my  covenant."  So  also  Jerome  and  Theodoret 
understood  it  of  the  Jews  who  migrated  to  Egypt,  as  mentioned  in  Jer. 
xlii.-xliv. 

1  The  sending  of  messengers  to  Ethiopia,  to  rouse  it  out  of  its  security,  is 
probably  mentioned  with  reference  to  Isa.  xviii.  2.     It  merely  denotes  that 
the  tidings  of  evil  would  quickly  travel  from  the  one  country  to  the  other  ; 
Egyptians  fleeing  from  before  the  Lord,  in  his  executions  of  judgment,  would 
hasten  in  their  vessels  to  their  neighbours  in  Ethiopia,  and  would  do  the  part 
of  special  messengers.     "  As  the  day  of  Egypt "  may  either  mean  that  the 
time  of  sore  visitation  would  come  on  them  as  it  had  just  come  on  Egypt,  or 
as  it  had  been  at  some  former  time  in  Egypt,  the  day  peculiarly  of  Egypt's 
judgment  at  the  smiting  of  the  first-born.     Havernick  would  refer  the  ex 
pression  to  the  latter  event.     But  this  seems  unnatural.     The  connection 
of  the  passage  is  best  sustained  by  understanding  day  of  the  present  time 
— Egypt's  day  would  shortly  be  Ethiopia's. 

2  Noph  is  Memphis,  the  residence  of  the  kings  of  Egypt,  and  the  chief 
seat  of  its  idolatrous  worship  ;  hence  in  connection  with  it  both  idol-gods 
and  princes  are  named  as  going  to  be  cut  off. 

8  Pathros  denotes  Upper  Egypt,  of  which  No,  or  No-Ammon,-was  one  of 
the  chief  cities ;  but  it  is  coupled  with  Zoan,  or  Tanis,  a  principal  city  in 
Lower  Egypt. 

4  Sin  is  the  same  with  Pelusium,  which,  on  account  of  its  position  as  a 
barrier-town,  might  justly  be  called  the  strength  of  Egypt.  Suidas  names  it 
the  Key  of  Egypt,  because  the  possession  of  it  opened  the  way  to  the  whole. 

6  That  a  difficulty  was  early  felt  in  rendering  this  last  clause  of  ver.  16,  is 
evident  from  the  obviously  conjectural  meaning  given  by  the  LXX.,  "  and 
waters  shall  be  poured  out."  "HV  is  either  enemies,  or  the  distresses,  troubles 
occasioned  by  them.  So  also  EJ^I  is  either  ly  day,  of  tlie  day,  or  daily, 
perpetually ;  in  which  last  sense,  though  rare,  it  occurs  also  in  Ps.  xiii.  3. 

Y 


338  EZEKIEL  XXX. 

young  men  of  Aven  and  of  Pi-beseth  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  these  (i.e,^ 
the  cities  themselves — their  inhabitants  bodily)  shall  go  into  captivity.1 
18.  And  at  Tehaphnehes  the  day  is  darkened,  because  I  break  there  the 
yokes  of  Egypt ;  and  the  pride  of  her  strength  ceases  in  her  ;  she — a  cloud 
shall  cover  her,  and  her  daughters  shall  go  into  captivity.2  19.  And  I  will 
execute  judgments  in  Egypt,  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

20.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  first  month,  in  the 
seventh  day  of  the  month,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying, 


Hence  there  are  two  literal  renderings :  Noph's  enemies  shall  be  in  the  day, 
that  is,  fill  her  streets  in  broad  daylight ;  or,  Noph  shall  be  distresses  per 
petually.  I  prefer  the  latter,  as  yielding  a  better  sense,  and  more  in  accord 
ance  with  the  immediately  preceding  clause,  in  which  No  is  said  to  be  for 
tearing  asunder — given  up,  as  it  were,  to  that.  So  here  Noph  is  to  be  made  the 
subject  of  perpetual  distress.  Havernick  adopts  from  the  Aramaic  the  sense 
of  splitting  or  division,  and  thus  gives  to  the  last  clause  respecting  Noph 
much  the  same  meaning  as  the  preceding  bears  respecting  No :  Noph  shall 
be  for  perpetual  splitting.  I  don't  think  the  meaning  would  be  improved  by 
this  change,  even  if  it  could  be  established  ;  but  the  entire  absence  of  any 
countenance  to  it  in  the  Hebrew  is  enough  to  set  it  aside,  considering  that 
the  word  is  one  in  such  common  use. 

1  The  Aven  in  this  17th  verse  is  undoubtedly  the  same  as  what  is  else 
where  read  On,  Heliopolis,  a  strong  and  well-fortified  city  in  Lower  Egypt, 
and  one  of  the  great  seats  of  Egyptian  idolatry.     On  this  account,  probably, 
the  prophet,  by  a  slight  alteration  in  the  name,  marks  it  as  the  place  of 
iniquity — the  Aven.     Pi-beseth   is  rendered  Bubastos  in  the  LXX.   and 
Vulgate ;  and  doubtless  Bubastos,  or  Bubastis,  was  a  mere  corruption  of 
Pi-bast.     The  place,  situated  in  lower  Egypt  near  the  Pelusiac  branch  of 
the  Nile,  was  celebrated  for  the  worship  of  the  goddess  Bubastis  (Copt. 
Pasht),  regarded  as  the  same  with  Diana  of  the  Greeks.     A  beautiful  and 
much-frequented  temple  stood  there  in  honour  of  her  (Herod,  ii.  137,  138). 
The  Persians  destroyed  the  walls  of  the  city,  though  it  continued  to  be  a 
place  of  some  note  long  afterwards. 

2  Tehaphnehes,  or  Tapannes,  rendered  by  the  LXX.  Taphnae,  is  the  city 
Daphne,  not  far  from  Pelusium,  on  the  confines  of  Lower  Egypt,  a  place  of 
considerable  strength  ;  hence  with  its  capture  the  pride  or  glory  of  Egypt's 
strength  is  said  to  cease.     Jeremiah  speaks  of  Pharaoh  having  a  house  there 
(chap,  xliii.  9),  which  implies  that  it  had  been  occasionally  at  least  a  royal 
residence.     By  "  breaking  the  yokes  of  Egypt "  there,  appears  to  be  meant 
her  dominion  or  supremacy  which  she  exercised  over  many  other  people  in 
and  around  her.    I  see  no  need  for  any  other  view  than  this  simple  one.    The 
LXX.  (and  after  them,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  others)  render  as  if  rntSE  were  in 
the  text:  "the  sceptres  of  Egypt."     As  if  Egypt  was  made  up  of  several 
states  or  kingdoms  !     The  present  text  gives  a  better  meaning.     The  idea  of 
Havernick,    hat  by  the  yokes  of  Egypt  reference  is  made  to  the  Jews  who, 
according  to  Jer.  xliv.  and  xlvi.,  went  and  settled  there,  is  quite  unnatural. 
In  going  there,  they  acted  of  their  own  accord,  and  there  was  no  yoke  or 
bondage  of  Egypt  on  them. 


CONTINUATION  OF  EGYPT'S  JUDGMENT.  339 

21.  Son  of  man,  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt;  and  lo ! 
it  shall  not  be  bound  up  to  be  healed,  to  put  a  bandage  for  binding,  that  it 
may  be  strengthened,-  that  it  may  lay  hold  of  the  sword.  22.  Therefore, 
thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt, 
and  I  break  his  arms,  both  the  strong  and  that  which  is  broken,  and  I  make 
the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his  hand.  23.  And  I  disperse  the  Egyptians  among 
the  nations,  and  scatter  them  among  the  countries.  24.  And  I  strengthen 
the  arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  put  my  sword  in  his  hand ;  and  I  break 
the  arms  of  Pharaoh,  and  he  utters  the  moanings  of  the  pierced-through 
before  him.  25.  And  I  strengthen  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  the 
arms  of  Pharaoh  shall  fall  down ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah, 
when  I  give  my  sword  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  he  stretches 
it  forth  against  the  land  of  Egypt.  26.  And  I  will  disperse  the  Egyptians 
among  the  nations,  and  scatter  them  among  the  countries,  and  they  shall 
know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 


This  word  against  Pharaoh  appears  to  have  been  occasioned 
by  some  reverse  he  had  experienced,  which  was  like  the  break 
ing  of  one  of  his  arms,  and  which  the  prophet  regarded  as  the 
si<m  of  his  comino-  downfall.  What  the  reverse  was  we  can  have 

o  o 

little  doubt  when  we  refer  to  Jer.  xxxvii.,  and  find  that  the 
army  of  Pharaoh  had  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  deliver  Jeru 
salem  from  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans.  On  the  appearance  of 
the  Egyptian  army  the  Chaldeans  raised  the  siege  for  a  time, 
and  inarched  against  the  Egyptians,  who,  however,  durst  not  give 
battle,  but  retired  again  to  their  own  country,  leaving  the  Jews 
to  the  mercy  of  their  adversaries.  This  pusillanimous  or  prudent 
retreat  the  prophet  here  regards  as  tantamount  to  a  discomfiture 
of  the  Egyptians  by  Nebuchadnezzar ;  it  was  like  the  breaking 
of  one  of  his  arms,  which  was  not  again  to  be  healed,  but  only 
broken  anew,  and  the  other  also  with  it,  by  the  conquests  of  the 
Chaldeans.  It  is,  of  coarse,  the  breaking  of  the  power  of  the 
king  of  Egypt,  and  the  subjection  of  his  kingdom  to  a  foreign 
yoke,  that  is  meant  by  the  prophet,  and  not  any  injuries  that 
might  be  done  to  his  person.  And  it  is  no  more  necessary  here, 
than  in  the  similar  language  used  of  the  king  of  Judah  in  chap. 
xxi.  25,  to  suppose  that  Pharaoh  must  have  been  corporeally 
wounded  and  pierced  by  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  and 
fallen  before  him  in  the  agonies  of  death.  As  king  of  Egypt,  he 
was  smitten  to  death,  and  his  empire  scattered  and  destroyed, 
when  his  forces  were  vanquished  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  he 
and  all  his  kingdom  lay  at  the  feet  of  the  conqueror.  And  in 
the  same  relative  sense  must  be  understood  the  ceasing  of  a  prince 
from  Memphis  in  the  former  part  (ver.  13);  it  indicates,  not  the 


340  EZEKIEL  XXXI. 

absolute  non-existence  of  any  one  of  princely  rank,  but  the  com 
parative  failure  of  such — no  prince  now  as  had  been  formerly, 
no  strictly  independent  monarch. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

THE  CERTAINTY  OF  PHARAOH'S   DOOM  CONFIRMED  BY  A  PARABOLI 
CAL  RELATION  OF  ASSYRIA'S  GREATNESS  AND  DESTRUCTION. 

THE  discourse  in  this  chapter,  which  is  dated  two  months  later 
than  the  concluding  portion  of  the  immediately  preceding  one, 
is  formally  an  address  to  Pharaoh ;  but  in  its  great  object  and 
design  it  is  a  confirmation  of  the  doom  already  pronounced 
upon  Pharaoh  and  his  kingdom,  by  a  reference  to  what  had 
befallen  the  once  magnificent  king  and  empire  of  Assyria.  To 
the  eye  of  reason  it  seemed  a  very  bold  and  scarcely  credible 
announcement  that  such  a  kingdom  as  Egypt,  so  ancient  in  its 
origin,  so  strong  in  its  foundations,  so  extensive  in  its  dominion 
and  resources,  was  destined  to  fall  from  its  proud  ascendancy, 
and  become,  compared  with  what  it  had  been,  a  desolation  and 
a  ruin.  Therefore  the  prophet  seeks  to  establish  the  faith  of 
God's  people  in  what  had  been  spoken  respecting  Egypt,  by 
directing  their  attention  to  the  parallel  case  of  Assyria,  which 
within  a  comparatively  recent  period  had  been  a  vast  and 
flourishing  empire,  while  now  its  place  was  no  more  found  in 
the  earth.  And  having  thus  told  the  story  of  Assyria's  past 
greatness  arid  present  desolation,  he  concludes  with  declaring 
that  what  had  been  Assyria's  fate  shall  now  be  Egypt's  ;  the 
same  mournful  reverse,  and  the  same  instrument  too  in  accom 
plishing  it.  It  was  the  Chaldean  sword  which  had  given  the 
fatal  blow  to  the  Assyrian  monarchy,  and  the  same  sword  was 
to  prostrate  the  power  and  glory  of  Pharaoh.  Thus  the  past 
contributed  to  establish  the  certainty  of  the  future. 

It  will  easily  be  understood  that  it  is  only  in  the  general  that 
the  resemblance  between  the  two  monarchies  is  here  traced. 
The  Assyrian  empire  was  entirely  supplanted  by  the  Babylonian, 
and  not  a  fragment,  we  may  say,  remained  of  its  existence  as 


PHARAOH'S  DOOM  CONFIRMED.  341 

an  empire.  But  in  respect  to  Egypt,  the  prophet  had  already 
declared  that  the  desolation  was  not  to  be  by  any  means  so 
complete ;  that  it  was  not  to  cease  altogether  to  be  a  kingdom, 
but  was  to  lose  for  ever  its  ascendancy  in  the  affairs  of  the 
world,  and  to  sink  into  a  low  and  enfeebled  condition.  So  far 
as  its  grand  ambition  was  concerned — of  ruling  the  destinies 
of  the  world — it  was  to  vanish  even  as  Assyria  had  done  ;  its 
Pharaohs  were  no  longer  to  bear  sway  as  great  masters  of 
empire.  But  the  kingdom  within  its  own  narrow  limits  was 
still  to  be  prolonged,  and  depression,  not  annihilation,  was  to 
be  the  portion  of  its  cup.  The  comparison,  therefore,  must  be 
understood  with  this  obvious  difference. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  the  whole  of  the  present 
chapter,  with  the  exception  of  the  last  verse,  has  immediate 
respect  only  to  Assyria.  There  have  not  been  wanting  commen 
tators  who  have  understood  the  prophet  as  speaking  throughout 
of  Egypt,  under  the  image  of  an  Assyrian,  or  some  particular 
kind  of  cedar.  But  this  is  so  palpably  against  the  sense  and 
connection  of  the  passage,  that  it  has  never  received  any  general 
concurrence.1  The  cedar  is  unquestionably  the  king  of  Assyria; 
and  the  parabolical  representation  under  this  image  is  one  of  the 
most  striking  and  beautiful  in  Ezekiel,  though  not  without  the 
occasional  intermixtures  of  the  real  with  the  figurative,  which 
usually  occur  in  the  parabolical  delineations  of  our  prophet. 
Bishop  Lowth  says  of  it,  that,  "  if  we  consider  the  image  itself, 
none  can  be  found  more  appropriate  or  graceful ;  if  the  features 
and  colouring,  none  more  elegant  or  more  polished ;  though  the 
prophet  has  introduced  some  literalities  into  the  figure  (vers. 
11,  14-16),  whether  from  the  nature  of  this  sort  of  parable 
admitting  it,  or  from  his  own  fervent  disposition  leading  him 
to  disregard  perfect  accuracy  of  style,  I  can  scarcely  take  upon 
me  to  say"  (Prselec.  x.). 

Ver.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  third  month,  in 

1  The  author  of  this  opinion  seems  to  have  been  one  Meimbomius. 
Horsely  speaks  of  Bishop  Lowth  as  agreeing  with  it ;  if  he  ever  did,  it  must 
have  been  in  the  first  edition  of  his  Preelections,  for  in  the  second,  Michaelis' 
edition,  he  expressly  refers  the  cedar  to  the  king  of  Assyria.  Havernick  also 
quotes  Michaelis  as  supporting  the  same  view.  But  he  renounces  it  in  his 
note  on  the  passage  in  Lowth's  Tenth  Prselec. ;  he  adheres,  he  there  says, 
to  the  common  view,  Meibomianam  deserens. 


3-12  EZEKIEL  XXXI. 

the  first  day  of  the  month,  that  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying, 
2.  Son  of  man,  say  to  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  and  to  his  multitude,  To 
whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  greatness?  8.  Behold  the  Assyrian  was  a  cedar 
in  Lebanon,  beautiful  in  branches,  and  with  an  overshadowing  thicket,  and 
of  an  high  stature,  and  his  topmost  shoot  was  among  the  clouds.1  4.  The 
waters  nourished  him ;  the  deep  raised  him  aloft  with  its  streams  going 
round  about  its  plantation  (viz.  that  which  belonged  to  the  deep),  and  its 
channels  sending  forth  to  all  the  trees  of  the  fields.  5.  Therefore  his  height 
was  increased  above  all  the  trees  of  the  field,  and  his  boughs  were  enlarged 
and  his  foliage  extended,  because  of  the  many  waters  in  his  shooting  forth 
(/.e.,  the  many  waters  that  accompanied  him  wherever  he  shot  forth).  6. 
In  his  boughs  nestled  all  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  under  his  foliage  all  the 
beasts  of  the  field  brought  forth,  and  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great 
nations.  7.  And  he  was  beautiful  in  his  greatness,  in  the  length  of  his 
branches,  for  his  root  was  beside  great  waters.  8.  The  cedars  obscured  him 
not — (those  that  are)  in  the  garden  of  God — the  fir-trees  did  not  equal  his 
boughs,  and  the  planes  were  not  like  his  foliage  ;  no  tree  in  the  garden  of 
God  was  equal  to  him  in  beauty.  9.  I  made  him  comely  by  the  multitude 
of  his  branches,  and  all  the  trees  of  Eden,  which  are  in  the  garden  of  God, 
envied  him.  10.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  thou  art 
exalted,in  height,  yea,  he  sent  up  his  topmost  shoot  among  the  clouds,  and 
his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  his  greatness.  11.  So  I  delivered  him  into  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  (the  El,  the  mighty  prince  or  leader)2  of  the  nations;  he  did 
what  he  would  with  him  :  I  have  driven  him  away  for  his  wickedness.  12. 
And  strangers,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  have  cut  him  off,  and  left  him  ; 
by  the  hills  and  upon  all  heights  have  his  branches  fallen  ;  and  his  leafy 
twigs  are  broken  beside  all  the  rivers  of  the  land  ;  and  all  the  people  of  the 
land  have  gone  from  his  shade,  and  have  left  him.  18.  Upon  his  ruins  abide 
all  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  upon  his  foliage  are  all  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
14.  To  the  end  that  none  of  the  trees  of  the  waters  (those,  namely,  which 
have  plentiful  supplies  of  water)  may  magnify  themselves  for  their  height, 
nor  send  forth  their  topmost  shoot  among  the  clouds,  and  that  no  drinkers 
of  water  may  stand  upon  their  own  greatness  ;3  for  they  are  all  delivered 
to  death,  to  the  lower  regions  of  the  earth,  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of 
men,  with  those  that  go  down  to  the  pit.  15.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
In  the  day  that  he  went  down  to  Sheol  I  made  to  mourn,  I  covered  against 
him  the  deep,4  arid  I  restrained  its  floods,  and  the  great  waters  were  stayed ; 


1  See  on  chap.  xix.  11. 

2  The  ^s  here  has  by  some  been  thought  too  strong,  and  they  would  sub 
stitute  ^K  a  ram,  then  a  powerful  person,  a  leader  or  prince  ;  so  also  some 
MSS.     But  perhaps  the  El  might  rather  be  chosen  to  denote  the  kind  of 
divine-like  power  of  judgment  given  to  Nebuchadnezzar. 

8  Literally :  may  stand  for,  or  on  themselves,  because  of  their  greatness. 
For  I  agree  with  Hitzig  and  some  others,  that  the  QiT^X  of  the  text  should 
be  pointed  thus,  DrT9K,  so  as  to  make  the  preposition  with  the  pron.  suffix, 
and  not:  their  terebinths,  or  trees  (taking  it  generally).  The  latter  makes 
a  very  awkward  and  unnatural  sense.  The  meaning  is,  that  the  trees  were 
to  be  taught  not  to  stand  as  by  themselves,  upon  their  own  greatness,  as  if 
this,  with  their  plentiful  supply  of  water,  could  do  all  for  them. 

4  The  most  literal  rendering  is  here  the  best.  Ewald  and,  after  him, 
Ha'v.  have  missed  the  precise  shade  of  meaning  by  throwing  the  two  verbs 


PHARAOH'S  DOOM  CONFIRMED.         343 

and  I  made  Lebanon  mourn  for  him,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  faint  for 
him.  16.  At  the  sound  of  his  fall  I  made  the  nations  shake,  when  I  made 
him  go  down  to  Sheol  with  those  that  go  down  to  the  pit ;  and  these  were 
comforted  in  the  lower  regions  of  the  earth,  all  the  trees  of  Eden,  the  choice 
and  good  of  Lebanon,  all  that  drink  water.  17.  They  also  went  down  to 
Sheol  with  him,  to  the  pierced-through  with  the  sword,  and,  his  arm,  they 
dwelt  under  his  shadow  in  the  midst  of  the  nations.1  18.  To  whom  art 
thou  so  exactly  like  in  glory  and  in  greatness  among  the  trees  of  Eden? 
and  art  to  be  brought  down  with  the  trees  of  Eden  to  the  lower  regions  of 
the  earth  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised  thou  shalt  lie  with  the  pierced- 
through  with  the  sword.  This  is  Pharaoh  and  all  his  multitude,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah. 


This  parabolical  representation,  it  will  be  observed,  is  marked 
by  the  same  peculiarity  which  we  had  occasion  to  notice  in  the 
ideal  delineation  of  the  king  of  Tyre  ;  it  combines  the  historical 
with  the  figurative.  While  the  cedar  that  represents  the  king  of 
Assyria  is  called  a  cedar  in  Lebanon, — Lebanon  being  by  way  of 
eminence  the  region  of  cedars, — it  is  presently  transferred  in  the 
prophet's  imagination  to  the  land  of  primeval  beauty  and  perfec 
tion,  the  Eden  in  which  was  the  garden  that  God  had  planted. 
There  this  cedar  is  described  as  flourishing,  and  growing  till  it 
overtopt  in  magnificence  and  beauty  all  the  trees  of  the  field 
around  it;  because  fed  in  a  manner  quite  peculiar  with  the 
waters  of  that  deep  flood  which,  rising  somewhere  in  Eden, 
divided  itself  into  four  branches  and  watered  the  whole  garden. 
Thus  happily  circumstanced,  the  exuberance  and  glory  of  para 
dise  appeared  to  revive  in  this  singular  tree,  and  none  even  there 

together,  and  rendering  as  if  it  were  :  and  I  covered  with  mourning  over  him 
the  deep.  The  prophet  rather  personifies  the  deep  ;  God  causes  it  to  wrap 
itself  in  mourning,  to  cover  up  its  fulness  against  him  who  had  abused  its 
treasures,  and  to  withhold  the  streams  which  it  had  hitherto  poured  forth 
with  joyfulness  ;  for  it  is  of  the  nature  of  grief  to  contract  and  seal  up  the 
flowing  streams  of  plenty. 

1  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  latter  clause  of  this  17th  verse  is  very 
peculiar  in  its  construction  and  obscure  in  its  import.  Various  emendations 
have  been  proposed  in  the  text,  but,  as  usual,  with  no  satisfactory  result  ; 
so  that  the  last  emendator,  Hitzig,  has  still  his  own  to  propose,  and,  we 
have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  with  no  better  success  than  his  predecessors. 
Many,  after  the  LXX.,  with  a  slight  difference  in  the  punctuation,  read  Aw 
seed,  for  his  arm;  but  the  king  of  Assyria,  as  here  considered,  had  no  seed ; 
he  was  the  last  of  his  race.  I  take :  and,  his  arm,  they  dwelt,  for :  even 
they  who  as  his  arm  had  dwelt,  or :  though  being  his  arm  (the  instru 
ments  of  his  power  and  glory)  they  had  dwelt.  Their  connection  with  him 
was  such  that  they  could  not  but  share  his  fate. 


344  EZEKIEL  XXXI. 

could  be  compared  with  it.  But  it  was  only  that  it  might  afford 
another  specimen  of  that  instability  and  transitoriness  -which 
belongs  to  all  on  earth,  when  the  good  bestowed  by  Heaven  is 
abused  to  purposes  of  selfishness,  and  the  creature  begins  to  thrust 
himself  into  the  place  of  his  Creator.  Thus  the  incomparable 
cedar,  forgetting  as  it  were  its  own  place,  is  given  to  destruction, 
and  its  place  is  no  more  found. 

Transferred  to  the  king  of  Assyria,  whom  the  cedar  repre 
sented,  this  parabolical  history  tells  us,  in  the  first  instance,  of 
his  unparalleled  greatness  ;  he  was  the  head  and  centre  of  a 
vast  monarchy,  which  was  fed  by  the  tributary  streams  of 
surrounding  nation?,  and  gathered  within  its  ample  bosom  the 
resources  of  the  civilised  world.  But  its  peerless  grandeur 
proved  the  occasion  of  its  overthrow;  for  it  only  served  to 
nurse  into  fatal  maturity  that  "pride  which  goeth  before  a 
fall."  How  thoroughly  the  loftiness  of  spirit  in  the  head  of 
that  monarchy  kept  pace  with  the  growth  and  magnitude  of  his 
dominion,  may  be  seen  from  the  heaven-daring  language  of 
Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  when  before  the  gates  of  Jerusalem 
his  servants  openly  blasphemed  and  defied  the  God  of  Israel. 
Most  truly  was  his  heart  lifted  up  in  his  greatness;  and  the 
hand  of  a  righteous  God  must  cast  him  down.  When  God's 
purpose  is  formed,  the  proper  instrument  is  sure  to  be  forth 
coming  at  the  appointed  time  ;  and  in  an  amazingly  brief  period 
the  mighty  fabric  of  Assyrian  glory  fell,  an  irrecoverable  ruin. 
It  was  a  lesson  on  a  gigantic  scale  to  the  world  that  then  was, 
how  God  in  his  providence  abases  the  proud,  and  scatters  the 
mighty  from  their  seats;  how  all  power  and  glory  that  is  of 
the  world  is  destined  to  vanish  away  as  a  dream  of  the  night ! 
And  connected,  as  it  here  is,  with  the  guilt  and  the  doom  of 
Pharaoh,  it  was  to  him,  and  to  those  who  knew  the  will  of  God 
concerning  him,  an  instructive  warning  and  example  of  that 
which  certainly  awaited  him  ;  for  in  the  government  of  an 
unchangeable  God,  that  which  has  been  is  the  sure  index  to 
what  in  like  circumstances  shall  again  be. 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  FALL  OF  PHARAOH.       345 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

SONGS    OF   LAMENTATION   OVER   THE  FALL   OF   I'll  AE  A  OH   AND 
HIS   KINGDOM. 

THIS  chapter  is  composed  of  two  closely  related  parts,  though 
the  visions  contained  in  them  were  given  at  two  different  periods 
— the  one  on  the  first,  the  other  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 
twelfth  month  of  the  twelfth  year.  They  are  both  elegies,  or 
songs  of  lamentation  over  the  coming  fall  of  Pharaoh  and  his 
kingdom  ;  not  entirely,  however,  in  the  same  strain,  but  with 
certain  marked  differences  in  the  one  as  compared  with  the 
other,  which  will  appear  as  we  proceed.  They  afford  striking 
examples  of  that  feature  in  the  prophet's  mental  constitution, 
which  delighted  in  amplifying  his  subject,  and  following  it  out 
to  all,  even  the  most  minute  and  varied  particulars.  He  would 
leave  nothing  to  be  supplied  by  the  reader's  own  fancy,  but 
would  place  every  circumstance  and  result  distinctly  before  his 
view. 

The  first  vision  reaches  to  the  close  of  ver.  16,  and  is  as 
follows : — 

Yer.  1.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth  year,  in  the  twelfth  month,  in 
the  first  day  of  the  month,  that  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying, 
2.  Son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  and  say 
unto  him,  A  lion  of  the  nations  thou  art  like,  and  thou  art  the  crocodile 
in  the  waters,  and  dost  break  forth  in  thy  rivers,  and  dost  trouble  the 
waters  with  thy  feet,  and  makest  foul  their  rivers.1  3.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  And  I  will  spread  upon  thee  my  net,  in  the  assembly  of 
many  peoples  (that  is,  with  such  for  spectators,  vers.  9,  10),  and  they  make 


1  There  is  a  crowding  of  thought  here,  and  in  connection  with  that  a 
mixture  also  of  images.  Pharaoh  is  like  a  lion  on  dry  land  among  the 
nations,  and  a  monster,  a  crocodile,  in  the  rivers.  The  idea,  however,  is  still 
the  same :  Pharaoh  was  an  object  of  terror,  by  reason  of  his  great  power  and 
dominion.  And  his  breaking  forth — for  such  is  undoubtedly  the  usual,  and 
here  quite  appropriate,  meaning  of  ns2 ;  and  there  is  no  need  for  repairing, 
with  Havernick  and  Hitzig,  to  the  cognate  languages  for  some  other — his 
breaking  forth  in  the  waters,  like  an  impetuous  and  self-willed  monster  of 
the  deep,  and  disturbing  them  with  the  commotion  he  raised,  is  merely  added 
to  strengthen  the  idea  of  his  formidable  character. 


346  EZEKIEL  XXXII. 

thee  to  come  up  with  my  drag.  4.  And  I  leave  thee  on  the  land,  on  the 
face  of  the  field  I  cast  thee,  and  I  make  to  nestle  on  thee  all  the  fowl  of  the 
heavens,  and  I  will  satiate  with  thee  the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth.  5.  And 
I  lay  thy  flesh  upon  the  hills,  and  fill  the  valleys  with  thy  hugeness.1  6.  And 
I  water  the  earth  with  what  flows  from  thee,  from  thy  blood  (reaching)  to 
the  hills,  and  the  valleys  are  full  of  thee.2  7.  And  I  cover  the  heavens  when 
I  extinguish  thee  (literally,  with  thy  extinguishing),  and  darken  their  stars  ; 
I  will  cover  the  sun  with  clouds,  and  the  moon  shall  not  shine  in  brightness. 
8.  All  the  shining  lights  of  heaven  I  will  bedim  for  thee,  and  I  give  darkness 
upon  thy  land,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.3  9.  And  I  will  grieve  the  heart  of 
many  peoples,  when  I  bring  thy  ruins  among  the  nations,4  to  lands  which 
thou  hast  not  known.  10.  And  I  make  many  peoples  astonied  at  thee,  and 
their  kings  shall  be  filled  with  horror  because  of  thee,  when  I  brandish  my 
sword  in  their  faces;  and  they  tremble  every  moment  each  for  his  life  in  the 
clay  of  thy  fall.  11.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  The  sword  of  the  king 
of  Babylon  shall  come  on  thee.  12.  By  the  swords  of  the  mighty  I  will  cause 
thy  multitude  to  fall,  the  terrible  of  the  nations,  all  of  them;  and  they  shall 
spoil  the  pride  of  Egypt,  and  all  her  multitude  shall  perish.  1«>.  And  I  will 
destroy  all  her  cattle  from  beside  the  great  waters,  and  the  foot  of  man 
shall  not  trouble  them  any  more,  nor  shall  the  hoofs  of  beasts  trouble  them. 
14.  Then  will  I  cause  their  waters  to  subside,  aud  will  make  their  rivers  flow 
like  oil,  saith  tho  Lord  Jehovah;5  15.  When  I  make  the  land  of  Egypt 


1  With  thy  hugeness,  TjrnEn.     The  verb  Q}~i  commonly  signifying,  to  be 
high,  lifted  up,  greatened;  and  the  participle,  lofty,  great  of  stature;  it  is  a 
very  natural  meaning  for  the  noun  to  bear  here,  hugeness, — such  an  elevation 
or  magnitude  as  to  fill  up  the  valleys  of  the  land.     It  might  be  put  more 
literally:  thy  prominences,  thy  projecting  heights  (referring,  perhaps,  to  the 
scaly  protuberances  of  the  crocodile) — these  filling  up  the  valleys,  as  the 
flesh  was  to  be  spread  over  the  hills.     Havernick's  corrupting  corpse,  and 
Hitzig's  Mood,  are  quite  fanciful,  and  are  without  the  least  shadow  of  support 
in  Hebrew. 

2  The  first  part  of  ver.  6 :  And  I  water  the  earth  with,  or  make  the  earth 
to  drink,  what  flows  from  thee,  is  evidently  the  correct  rendering,  and  is  now 
generally  adopted;  though  De  Wette  still  has,  "where  thou  swimmest." 
But,  as  Havernick  remarks,  the  verb  P]^',  from  which  ns^'  comes,  never  signi 
fies  exactly  to  swim,  but  rather  to  flow,  or  stream  out ;  hence  the  word  here, 
which  is  properly  a  participle,  the  discharging  or  streaming  of  blood  that 
flowed  out  from  the  slain  creature. 

3  Pharaoh  is  represented  in  these  two  verses  as  himself  a  great  light  of 
heaven,  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  at  the  fall  of  which  the  whole  heavenly 
host  are  put  into  disorder,  and  veiled  in  darkness.    A  poetical  representation, 
of  course;  to  show  the  terrible  sensation  that  would  naturally  be  caused 
in  the  political  heavens  by  the  fall  of  so  great  a  monarchy:  trouble  and 
confusion  would  seize  many  a  heart. 

4  "Thy  ruins,"  TpUKN  literally,  thy  breakage  or  fracture,  a  strong  expres 
sion  for  the  broken  and  ruined  people  themselves.    Shattered  and  dispersed, 
they  would  appear  among  the  nations  as  one  great  fracture — the  ruins  of 
what  they  had  been. 

5  Our  translators  give  the  first  part  of  this  verse:  Then  I  will  make  their 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  FALL  OF  PHARAOH.       347 

desolate,  and  the  land  is  destitute  of  that  of  which  it  was  full;  when  I  smite 
all  the  inhabitants  in  it;  then  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  16.  This 
is  a  lamentation,  and  they  lament  her ;  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall 
lament  her  ;  upon  Egypt  and  upon  all  her  multitude  they  shall  lament  her, 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

In  this  first  song  of  lamentation  there  is  a  gradual  transi 
tion  from  the  strictly  figurative  to  the  more  literal.  It  begins 
with  parabolical  representations  of  the  coming  destruction  of 
Pharaoh's  greatness :  the  huge  monster,  that  had  moved  at  will 

O  O  7 

and  troubled  all  around  him,  becomes  himself  a  helpless  prey 
in  the  hands  of  the  mighty;  and  his  mortal  remains  are  spread 
forth  over  hill  and  dale,  so  that  they  everywhere  meet  the  eyes  of 
men,  and  cover  with  the  monuments  of  his  fall  the  whole  extent 
of  his  kingdom.  This  is  the  main  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed 
by  the  details  of  this  part  of  the  description.  It  was  not  to  be 
as  if  the  proud  monarch,  after  being  slain,  were  buried  out  of 
sight,  and  no  more  seen  or  thought  of  among  men.  The  circum 
stances  connected  with  his  overthrow  should  be  ordered  so  as  to 
keep  fully  before  them  his  fallen  greatness,  that  they  might 
neither  forget  him  nor  the  sad  change  that  had  taken  place  in 
his  condition.  And  the  idea  is  still  further  expanded  by  the 
introduction  of  a  new7  image — the  extinguishing  of  the  light  of 
that  portion  of  the  world,  so  as  to  make  it,  instead  of  a  bright 
and  illuminated  region,  a  land  of  darkness,  striking  horror  into 
the  minds  of  those  who  should  behold  it.  Then  becoming  more 
literal  in  his  delineations,  the  prophet  exhibits  the  kingdom  of 
Egypt  as  a  general  wreck ;  its  people  scattered  in  fragments 
among  the  nations ;  its  riches  given  up  as  a  spoil  to  the  hands 
of  enemies ;  its  waters  no  more  frequented  by  man  or  beast, 
and  themselves  shrivelled  into  smaller  dimensions,  and  running 
smooth  and  calm  in  their  channels,  as  if  they  were  no  longer 
able  to  overflow  their  banks  and  saturate  the  fields  with  the 
means  of  fruitfulness  and  plenty. 

We  see  thus  a  gradual  change  from   the  more  to  the  less 

waters  deep.  The  verb  is,  properly,  to  sink;  but  this,  as  applied  to  a  river, 
may  be  variously  understood,  according  to  the  circumstances.  When  the 
discourse  here  is  of  a  diminishing  of  the  resources  of  Egypt,  the  most  natural 
sense  is,  certainly,  the  subsiding  of  her  waters — make  them  sink  or  decrease, 
so  that  they  should  not  overflow,  but  keep  easily  in  their  proper  channel. 
To  deepen,  in  the  sense  of  increasing,  or  to  make  them  clear,  are  both  un 
suitable. 


348  EZEKIEL  XXXII. 

figurative^ from  the  ideal  to  the  real.  And  yet,  to  the  very  last, 
the  representation  is  of  an  ideal  character ;  and  like  many 
other  portions  of  this  book,  is  utterly  at  variance  with  that  bald 
and  meagre  species  of  interpretation  which  insists  upon  reading 
prophecy  as  literally  as  it  does  history.  To  apply  such  a 
principle  here,  would  manifestly  be  to  take  this  passage  out  of 
the  category  alike  of  prophecy  and  history.  For  there  certainly 
never  has  been,  and,  so  long  as  the  general  course  of  nature 
stands  as  it  is,  there  never  will  be,  a  period  in  the  history  of 
Egypt  when  the  settled  drought  upon  its  waters  and  the  still 
quiet  and  desolation  throughout  its  borders,  spoken  of  by  the 
prophet,  may  be  found  according  to  the  letter  of  the  description. 
And  this  very  circumstance,  that  when  Egypt  is  viewed  in  a 
merely  natural  light  its  fertility  and  abundance  must  ever 
continue,  because  the  waters  of  its  river  will  still  overflow 
and  supply  the  land  with  productive  moisture, — this  might 
alone  satisfy  us  that  the  prophet  could  not  intend  under 
such  language  to  speak  of  any  merely  natural  revolutions,  but 
that  through  the  image  of  the  natural  he  sought  to  shadow 
forth  the  moral.  It  is  of  what  Egypt  was  to  be  as  an  empire, 
as  the  seat  of  a  monarchy  that  had  once  extensively  ruled,  and 
still  wished  to  rule  in  the  affairs  of  men,  that  the  description 
must  be  understood.  And  in  this  respect  he  tells  us  that  the 
result  would  be  as  if  the  land  were  to  be  enveloped  in  darkness 
and  desolation,  the  springs  of  its  fertility  dried  up,  and  its 
people  scattered  to  the  wrinds.  So  it  happened.  The  political 
ascendancy  of  Egypt  began  with  the  Chaldean  conquest  finally 
to  decline;  the  arm  of  its  power  was  for  ever  broken;  its  monarch 
could  no  more  move  about  as  he  pleased,  and  trouble  the  nations; 
he  was  henceforth  to  reside  in  comparatively  still  and  peaceful 
waters,  himself  on  every  hand  restrained  and  hemmed  in  by 
superior  force,  and  all  his  pride  and  glory,  as  the  head  of  the 
empire,  reduced  to  perpetual  desolation.  It  is  in  this  higher 
point  of  view  that  the  whole  prophecy  contemplates  Egypt  and 
its  monarch — this  alone  ;  and  so  the  entire  forsaking  of  its 
waters,  here  mentioned,  by  man  and  beast,  and  other  symptoms 
of  outward  destruction,  are  perfectly  compatible  with  what  was 
said  in  a  previous  chapter,  of  its  always  continuing  to  be  a 
kingdom,  though  in  a  depressed  condition.  In  truth,  when 
rightly  understood,  the  one  means  no  more  than  the  other ;  for 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  FALL  OF  PHARAOH.       349 

it  is  Egypt's  doom  as  a  kingdom,  not  the  mere  condition  of  its 
soil  and  surface,  that  the  prophet  throughout  has  in  view.  And 
if  \ve  keep  our  eve  distinctly  upon  that,  we  shall  easily  find  our 
way  both  to  the  import  of  the  prediction  and  the  reality  of  its 
fulfilment. 

That  the  representation  is  to  be  understood  in  the  manner 
now  described — as  having  respect  chiefly  to  the  position  of 
Egypt  in  its  political  power  and  relations,  to  Egypt  as  a 
kingdom,  and  not  simply  as  a  natural  region  of  the  earth — 
is  still  further  evident  from  the  next  vision,  which  fills  up  the 
remainder  of  the  chapter,  and  closes  the  whole  of  this  series  of 
Divine  judgments.  There  the  prophet  utters  another  lamenta 
tion  over  the  fallen  power,  and  sings,  as  it  were,  its  funeral  song, 
accompanying  the  departed  into  the  world  of  spirits,  and  sur 
rounding  him  there  with  other  prostrate  monuments  of  human 
greatness.  Manifestly  the  inditing  of  such  a  funeral  song  pro 
ceeds  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  a  great  worldly  power  that  is 
meant,  personified  in  its  political  head,  and  ideally  represented 
as  undergoing  the  changes  to  which  humanity  itself  is  subject. 
The  introduction  of  Egypt,  in  the  person  of  its  destroyed  head 
and  people,  into  the  shadowy  mansions  of  the  nether  world,  is 
easily  understood  if  viewed  simply  as  a  mode  of  presenting 
distinctly  before  our  view  the  irrecoverable  prostration  of  the 
great  monarchy;  for  it  shows  us  its  natural  representative  as  now 
become  a  tenant  of  that  region,  where  the  temporary  distinctions 
of  this  life  are  unknown,  and  where,  as  regards  power  and 
influence  among  men,  the  small  and  the  great  are  reduced  to 
one  sad  level.  To  represent  Egypt  with  her  king  and  her  mighty 
forces  as  transferred  thither,  was  all  one  with  saying  that  their 
sway  on  earth  was  finished ;  it  was  numbered  for  ever  with  the 
things  that  are  past  and  gone.  But  let  this  be  kept  steadily  in 
view  as  the  one  grand  object  of  the  representation,  in  the  other 
parts  of  the  prophecy  as  well  as  here.  We  cannot  otherwise 
give  a  consistent  interpretation  to  what  is  written,  but  must  find 
our  path  checked  by  inextricable  difficulties.  Read  from  the 
right  point  of  view,  the  vision  is  plain  in  its  meaning,  and  in  all 
its  forebodings  is  again  re-echoed  by  the  facts  of  history;  but 
if  placed  in  a  wrong  position,  and  contemplated  in  a  false  light, 
it  ceases  to  give  the  sure  and  unerring  instruction  we  expect  to 
find  in  a  word  of  God. 


350  EZEKIEL  XXXII. 

Ver.  17.  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth  year,  in  the  fifteenth  day  of 
the  month,1  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,  18.  Son  of 
man,  wail  over  the  multitude  of  Egypt,  and  cast  them  down — her  and  the 
daughters  of  glorious  nations — to  the  nether  world,  with  those  that  go  down 
to  the  pit.2  19.  Than  whom  art  thou  more  dear?  Go  down  and  dwell  with 
the  uncircumcised.3  20.  In  the  midst  of  the  pierced- through  with  the  sword 
they  fall;  to  the  sword  she  is  surrendered;  draw  her  and  all  her  multitude.4 
21.  The  princes  of  the  mighty  speak  to  him  with  his  helpers  from  the  midst 
of  Sheol  (that  is,  they  give  him  welcome  there  as  now  one  with  them 
selves)  ;  they  go  down,  they  lie  there,  the  uncircumcised,  pierced  through 
with  the  sword.  22.  There  is  Asshur  and  all  her  company,  his  graves  round 
about  him,  all  of  them  pierced  through,  fallen  by  the  sword.  23.  "\Vhose 
graves  are  appointed  in  the  extremities  of  the  pit,  and  her  company  is  round 
about  her  grave,  all  pierced  through,  fallen  by  the  sword,  who  did  spread 
terror  in  the  land  of  the  living.5  24.  There  is  Elam  and  all  her  multitude 


1  The  number  of  the  month  is  here  omitted,  and  only  the  year  and  the 
day  announced.    But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  twelfth  month  is  to  be 
supplied  from  the  preceding  vision,  so  that  this  is  separated  from  the  former 
by  an  interval  of  fourteen  days. 

2  There  is  a  certain  degree  of  abruptness  in  the  manner  in  which  the 
lamentation  commences:  all  at  once  Egypt  is  coupled  with  others,  in  com 
pany  with  whom  she  is  sent  down  to  the  pit,  while  it  is  only  afterwards  we 
are  told  who  these  others  are;  and  both  between  her  and  them,  and  in  the 
use  of  the  person,  rapid  interchanges  are  made.     The  daughters  of  glorious 
nations,  coupled  with  Egypt,  are  undoubtedly  those  afterwards  mentioned  by 
name ;  not  the  tributaries  of  Egypt,  but  those  who,  like  her,  had  risen  to 
eminence  in  the  world,  and  grasped  at  dominion.    Their  destiny  was  bound 
up  with  hers.    And  the  prophet  is  commanded  to  bring  them  down  ;  because 
his  word  was  the  expression  of  God's  will,  and  carried  with  it  the  execution 
of  his  pleasure. 

3  Egypt  was  uncircumcised,  that  is,  polluted  and  corrupt;  hence  it  must 
share  the  fate  of  all  such  ;  they  are  all  doomed  to  perdition,  and  Egypt  can 
have  no  exemption  from  the  common  lot :  she  has  no  ground  of  endearment 
above  the  rest. 

4  This  20th  verse  describes  the  common  lot  of  Egypt,  and  the  other 
nations  similarly  circumstanced.     They  are  alike  destined  to  fall  by  the 
sword ;  but  she,  as  the  more  immediate  object  of  the  Divine  word,  has  a 
place  of  pre-eminence  assigned  her  ;  she  is  given  up  to  the  sword  ;  and  as 
such,  the  command  is  issued  to  draw  her  forth  as  peculiarly  devoted  to 
destruction. 

5  In  these  two  verses,  22  and  23,  which  relate  to  Assyria  (and  the  same  is 
partly  found  in  some  of  the  other  cases),  there  is  a  singular  rapidity  of  alter 
nations  in  the  gender  of  the  pronouns  :  her  company,  his  graves,  then  again 
her  graves  and  her  company.    It  can  only  be  explained  by  the  circumstance 
of  the  party  named  being,  in  the  prophet's  eye,  partly  as  a  kingdom,  partly 
as  a  monarch  with  his  people;  so  that  sometimes  the  one,  sometimes  the 
other,  seemed  fittest  to  be  specially  thought,  of.     The  general  character 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  FALL  OF  PHARAOH.       351 

round  about  her  grave,  all  pierced  through,  fallen  by  the  sword,  who  are 
gone  down  uncircumcised  into  the  nether  world,  who  did  spread  their  terror 
in  the  land  of  the  living;  and  they  bear  their  shame  with  such  as  go  down  to 
the  pit.1  25.  They  have  set  a  couch  for  her  in  the  midst  of  the  pierced-through 
with  all  her  multitude;  her  graves  are  round  about  him;  all  uncircumcised, 
pierced  through  with  the  sword  ;  for  they  did  spread  their  terror  in  the  land 
of  the  living,2  and  they  bear  their  shame  with  such  as  go  down  to  the  pit; 
in  the  midst  of  the  pierced-through  he  is  set.  26.  There  is  Mesech,  Tubal, 
and  all  her  multitude;  her  graves  are  round  about  him;  all  of  them  uncir 
cumcised,  pierced  through  with  the  sword,  for  they  did  spread  their  terror  in 
the  land  of  the  living.3  27.  And  shall  they  not  lie  writh  the  fallen  heroes  of 
the  uncircumcised,  who  went  down  to  Sheol  with  their  weapons  of  war;  and 
have  their  swords  laid  under  their  heads,  and  their  iniquities  are  upon  their 
bones;  for  they  were  the  terror  of  heroes  in  the  land  of  the  living?4  28.  And 


of  the  representation  is  clear  :  Assyria  and  her  people  not  only  have  gone 
down  to  the  pit,  but  as  deepest  in  guilt,  they  have  their  graves  appointed 
in  its  farthest  extremities,  they  occupy  its  lowest  depths,  and  their  graves 
stand  open  around  them;  like  profane  wretches,  they  have  been  denied 
the  rites  of  burial;  the  .horror  they  had  inspired  in  others  now  rests  on 
themselves. 

1  Elam  is  joined  immediately  with  Assyria,  probably  as  having  been  con 
nected  with  it  in  the  way  of  conquest.    The  territory  of  Elam  lay  in  Persia, 
though  the  boundaries  of  it  are  not  distinctly  known.     Originally  it  was  an 
independent  kingdom,  and  existed  as  early  as  the  time  of  Abraham  (Gen. 
xiv.).     Its  people  were  much  addicted  to  war,  and  were  famous  for  the  use 
of  the  bow.    At  the  time  of  Ezekiel  they  had  become  amalgamated  with  the 
Chaldean  empire,  as  they  afterwards  were  with  the  Median.    The  shame  they 
were  to  bear  with  others  among  the  dead,  is  the  punishment  of  their  pride 
and  lawless  doings  among  men. 

2  The  13  here,  and  in  the  other  passages  that  follow,  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
usual  meaning  of  for,  and  not  though,  as  in  our  version.     It  assigns  the 
reason  of  the  doom  to  the  pit :  the  power  given  by  God  for  good  had  been 
abused  to  spread  terror  through  its  violent  proceedings  in  the  world. 

3  The  Mesech  and  Tubal  here  mentioned  as  one  people  were  also  named 
together  in  chap,  xxvii.  13.    Some,  and  among  these  Ewald,  have  been  dis 
posed  to  identify  them  with  the  Scythians.    They  were  certainly  very  closely 
connected  with  the  Scythian  tribes,  but  were  themselves  properly  the  Moschi 
and  Tibareni,  whose  territory  lay  between  the  Black  and  Caspian  Seas,  and 
among  the  Caucasian  Mountains.     They  appear  here  as  a  subdued  people, 
and  they  are  known  to  have  paid  tribute  to  Darius  Hyst.     (Herod,  iii.  94.) 

4  I  read  this  verse  with  Hav.  as  an  interrogative.     I  see  no  other  way  of 
understanding  the  existing  text,  so  as  to  make  sense.    It  is  expressly  said 
of  the  people  in  question  that  they  were  to  dwell  with  the  uncircumcised 
and  slain,  and  the  negative,  therefore,  at  the  beginning  must  be  understood 
interrogatively.    Shalt  thou  not  do  so?  thou  who  hast  been  among  the  most 
violent — a  terror  even  to  heroes,  thou  must  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them.    The 
going  down  with  weapons  of  war  refers  to  the  ancient  practice  of  burning, 


352  EZEKIEL  XXXII. 

thou  shalt  be  broken  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised,  and  shalt  dwell  with 
the  pierced-through  by  the  sword.  29.  There  is  Edotn,  her  kings  and  all 
her  princes,  who  in  their  might  are  put  with  them  that  are  pierced  through 
by  the  sword;  they  shall  lie  with  the  uncircumcised,  and  with  such  as  go 
down  to  the  pit.  30.  There  are  the  princes  of  the  north,  all  of  them,  and 
all  the  Zidonians,  who  are  gone  down  with  the  pierced-through;  because  of 
their  terror  from  their  might  they  are  ashamed ;  and  they  lie  uncircumcised 
with  the  pierced-through  by  the  sword;  and  they  bear  their  shame  with  such 
as  go  down  to  the  pit.  31.  Pharaoh  shall  see  them,  and  be  comforted  upon 
all  her  multitude  of  the  pierced-through  with  the  sword — Pharaoh  and  all 
his  force,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  32.  For  I  have  put  his  terror  on  the  land 
of  the  living;  and  he  shall  be  laid  with  the  uncircumcised,  with  the  pierced- 
through  by  the  sword — Pharaoh  and  all  her  multitude,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah.1 

Thus  closes  the  Divine  word  against  Pharaoh  and  his  kingdom ; 
they  go  down  to  the  land  of  forgetfulness,  in  common  with  all 
the  surrounding  heathen  who  stood  in  a  position  of  rivalry  or 
antagonism  to  Israel.  Throughout  the  whole  series  of  the  pre 
dictions  we  find  the  one  grand  point  of  difference  between  the 
two  parties  kept  steadily  in  view ;  the  judgment  that  lights  on 
Israel  is  only  partial  and  temporary,  the  power  and  dominion 
again  return  to  him  and  settle  in  everlasting  possession  ;  while 
the  neighbouring  kingdoms,  that  in  turn  aspired  to  the  supre 
macy,  fall  to  rise  no  more.  Viewred  in  respect  to  its  substance, 
the  series  is  merely  an  expansion,  with  a  fuller  application  to 
particular  cases,  of  what  was  uttered  at  the  commencement  of 
the  national  history  of  Israel  by  Balaam  ;  u  I  see  him,  but  not 
now;  I  behold  him,  but  not  nigh;  there  comes  forth  a  star 
out  of  Jacob,  and  a  sceptre  rises  out  of  Israel,  and  shatters  the 

or  burying  the  bodies  of  warriors  with  their  armour.  It  seems  also  to  be 
these,  the  instruments  of  their  iniquitous  courses,  which  are  meant  by  their 
"iniquity  on  their  bones ; "  the  instrument  of  iniquity  being  put,  by  metonymy, 
for  the  iniquity  itself.  It  is  certainly,  however,  a  peculiar  expression;  and 
one  cannot  speak  with  confidence  of  its  meaning. 

1  In  these  two  last  verses,  Pharaoh's  case  again  comes  up  as  the  conclusion 
of  the  whole  matter — the  beginning  and  the  ending  of  the  lamentation.  The 
Ins  and  her  here  also  exchange  with  each  other,  in  what  appears  to  us 
extraordinary  confusion  and  disorder.  Some  of  the  MSS.,  to  avoid  this, 
retain  only  the  masculine  suffix,  liis.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
more  difficult  text  is  the  correct  one,  arid  that  the  variation  was  made  in 
order  to  remove  the  apparent  anomaly.  I  have  rendered  it  as  it  stands, 
believing  that  the  alternations  arise  from  the  double  reference  to  Egypt  as 
a  kingly  power,  and  as  a  kingdom.  The  comfort  to  be  got  by  Pharaoh  is 
spoken  ironically ;  as  much  as  to  say,  This  is  the  only  comfort  he  is  to  have, 
that  he  is  not  without  companions  in  his  ruin. 


LAMENTATION  OVER  THE  FALL  OF  PHARAOH.       353 

territory  of  Moab,  and  destroys  all  the  children  of  tumult. 
And  Edom  is  possessed,  and  Seir,  his  enemy,  is  possessed;  and 
Israel  gains  strength.  And  out  of  Jacob  comes  the  ruler,  and 
he  destroys  what  is  left  from  the  city"  (Num.  xxiv.  17-19). 
Thus  early  was  the  issue  of  the  contest  indicated ;  it  was 
announced  that  the  supremacy  must  belong  to  Israel,  because 
with  him  was  the  covenant  of  blessing,  and  out  of  him  was  to  be 
the  one  in  whom,  as  the  messenger  and  head  of  the  covenant,  all 
power,  blessing,  and  glory  were  to  reside.  The  question  virtually 
discussed  in  all  such  predictions  is  this:  Who  shall  give  law  to 
the  world  ?  Israel,  or  the  rival  nations  of  heathendom  ?  And 
the  answer  returned,  though  with  manifold  variety  of  form,  is 
perpetually  the  same:  All  other  dominions  are  destined  to  pass 
away ;  that  alone  of  Israel  becomes  permanent  and  universal. 

We  see  both  sides  of  the  representation  attaining  to  a  certain 
measure  of  realization,  even  before  the  old  relations  altogether 
ceased  to  exist.  The  antipathies  of  the  surrounding  nations 
failed  to  extirpate  Israel ;  and  their  struggles  for  dominion  in 
every  case  issued  in  natural  decay  or  ruin.  Not  one  of  them 
succeeded  in  making  good  its  ambitious  designs,  or  could  even 
preserve  its  own  natural  independence  and  authority;  and  before 
Israel  was  finally  dispersed  among  the  nations,  all  his  ancient 
rivals  had  fallen  from  their  former  greatness  and  lost  their 
national  personality  :  Israel  stood  his  ground  much  better  than 
any  of  them.  But  that  relative  prosperity  was  rather  the  earnest 
of  the  great  distinction  pointed  to  in  the  prophecies,  than  its 
ultimate  and  proper  development.  This  is  to  be  sought  only  in 
Christ,  in  whom  all  that  peculiarly  belonged  to  Israel  concentrates 
itself  and  rises  to  its  proper  perfection.  In  him,  therefore,  it  is 
that  the  pre-eminence  destined  for  Israel  has  its  accomplishment ; 
and  all  the  external  victories  gained  over  the  surrounding  heathen, 
or  the  advantages  granted  to  Israel  in  preference  to  them,  were 
but  the  sign  and  prelude  of  that  glorious  ascendancy  over  the 
whole  earth,  which  in  right  is  already  Christ's,  and  in  due  time 
shall  also  be  his  in  actual  possession.  Such  is  the  unrivalled 
honour  of  Israel  among  the  nations  ;  hers  alone  is  the  glory  that 
abides ;  and  from  her  must  spring  all  that  the  world  is  to  have, 
that  is  permanently  great  and  good !  It  is  she  who  in  Christ 
has  become  the  new  life  of  humanity  ;  she  also  who  has  acquired 
the  right  to  reign  over  all  the  tribes  of  men  and  all  the  regions 

z 


354  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

of  the  earth  ;  and  however  long  may  be  the  struggle,  however 
severe  the  conflict,  the  result  is  certain,  that  the  kingdoms  of 
this  world  must  one  and  all  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  his  Christ. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

KENEWAL   OF   EZEKIEL'S    COMMISSION — HIS    OFFICE   AS 
WATCHMAN. 


Yer.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  '2.  Son  of  man, 
speak  to  the  children  of  thy  people,  and  say  to  them,  When  I  bring  upon  a 
land  the  sword,  and  the  people  of  the  land  take  a  man  from  their  borders, 
and  set  him  for  their  watchman ;  o.  And  he  sees  the  sword  coming  upon  the 
land,  and  blows  the  trumpet,  and  warns  the  people  ;  4.  Then  whosoever 
hears  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  does  not  take  warning,  and  the  sword 
comes  and  takes  him  away,  his  blood  shall  be  upon  his  own  head.  5.  He 
heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  did  not  take  warning ;  his  blood  shall 
be  upon  him;  but  he  that  takes  warning  shall  deliver  his  soul.  6.  And  when 
the  watchman  sees  the  sword  coming,  and  does  not  blow  the  trumpet,  and 
the  people  are  not  warned,  and  the  sword  does  come,  and  takes  a  person  from 
among  them,  that  person  is  taken  away  in  his  iniquity,  and  his  blood  will  I 
require  at  the  watchman's  hand.  7.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  I  have  set  thee 
a  watchman  to  the  house  of  Israel,  and  thon  shalt  hear  the  word  from  my 
mouth,  and  shalt  give  them  warning  from  me.  8.  When  I  say  to  the  wicked, 

0  wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely  die,  and  thou  dost  not  speak  to  warn  the 
wicked  from  his  way,  that  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  and  his 
blood  I  will  require  at  thy  hand.     9.  And  when  thou  dost  warn  the  wicked 
from  his  way,  that  he  should  turn  from  it,  and  he  does  not  turn  from  his 
way,  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  and  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul.    10.  And 
thou,  son  of  man,  say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  ye  speak,  saying,  "For 
our  transgressions  and  our  sins  are  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them  ;  how 
then  should  we  live  ?  "     11.  Say  to  them,  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 

1  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn 
from  his  way  and  live  :  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways ;  and  why  will 
ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel?     12.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  say  to  the  children 
of  thy  people,  The  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  not  deliver  him  in  the 
day  of  his  transgression,  nor  by  the  wicknedness  of  the  wicked  shall  he  fall 
in  the  day  that  he  turns  from  his  wickedness ;  and  the  righteous  shall  not 
be  able  to  live  by  it  (viz.  his  righteousness)  in  the  day  of  his  transgression. 

13.  When  I  say  to  the  righteous,  He  shall  surely  live  ;  and  he  trusts  in  his 
righteousness,  and  commits  iniquity,  none  of  his  righteousness  shall  be  re 
membered,  and  in  his  iniquity  that  he  has  committed,  in  that  shall  he  die. 

14.  And  when  I  say  to  the  wicked,  Thou  shalt  surely  die,  and  he  turns  from 
his  iniquity,  and  does  judgment  and  righteousness;    15.  The  wicked  restores 
the  pledge,  compensates  for  his  robbery,  walks  in  the  statutes  of  life  without 
committing  iniquity  ;  he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die.     16.  None  of 
his  sins  that  he  has  committed  shall  be  remembered  against  him ;  he  does 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION.        355 

what  is  just  and  right ;  he  shall  surely  live.  17.  Yet  the  children  of  thy 
people  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal:  but  for  them,  their  way  is  not 
equal.  18.  When  the  righteous  turns  from  his  righteousness,  and  commits 
iniquity,  then  he  dies  in  them  (viz.  his  iniquities).  19.  And  when  the 
wicked  turns  from  his  wickedness,  and  does  what  is  just  and  right,  on  account 
of  these  he  shall  live.  20.  Yet  ye  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal : 
every  man  according  to  his  way  will  I  judge  you,  0  house  of  Israel. 

21.  And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  our  captivity,  in  the  fifth 
of  the  tenth  month,  the  escaped  from  Jerusalem  came  to  me,  saying,  The 
city  is  taken.  22.  And  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was  upon  me  in  the  evening 
before  that  the  escaped  came  ;  and  had  opened  my  mouth  until  he  (the 
escaped)  came  in  the  morning ;  and  my  mouth  was  opened,  and  I  was  no 
more  dumb.  23.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  24.  Son 
of  man,  the  inhabitants  of  those  wastes  upon  the  territory  of  Israel  speak, 
saying,  ' '  Abraham  was  but  one,  and  he  inherited  the  land ;  while  we  are  many, 
to  us  is  the  land  given  for  an  inheritance."  25.  Therefore  say  to  them,  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Ye  eat  with  the  blood,1  and  lift  up  your  eyes  to  your 
idols,  and  shed  blood  ;  and  shall  ye  inherit  the  laud?  26.  Ye  stand  upon 
your  SAvords  (i.e.,  look  to  these  as  the  ground  of  your  security  and  strength), 
ye  work  abomination,  and  defile  every  one  his  neighbour's  wife ;  and  shall 
ye  inherit  the  land  ?  27.  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  As  I  live,  surely  they  that  are  in  the  wastes  shall  fall  by  the  sword, 
and  he  who  is  in  the  open  field  I  give  him  to  the  wild  beast  for  food,  and 
such  as  are  in  the  forts  and  caves  shall  die  of  the  pestilence.  28.  And  I  give 
the  land  to  be  waste  and  desolate,  and  ceased  is  the  pomp  of  its  strength ; 
and  the  mountains  of  Israel  are  desolate ;  so  that  there  is  none  passing 
through.  29.  And  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  in  that  I  make  the 
land  waste  and  desolate,  because  of  all  their  abominations  which  they  have 
committed.  30.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  the  children  of  the  people,  who 
speak  against  thee  beside  the  walls  and  at  the  doors  of  their  houses,  and 


1  Spencer  (Do  Leg.  Heb.  ii.  11)  has  laboured  to  prove  that  the  expression 
here  ^DXfl  D^rrbiJ  literally  upon  or  over  the  blood  ye  eat,  differs  materially 
from  that  which  merely  prohibits  the  eating  of  blood  :  Ye  shall  not  eat  the 
blood.  He  understands  the  reference  here  to  be  to  Lev.  xix.  26,  where  the 
same  form  of  expression  is  used ;  and  that  in  both  passages  what  is  forbidden 
is  the  practice  of  eating  over  or  near  the  blood  of  animals  sacrificed  in  the 
celebration  of  magical  rites,  particularly  the  rites  of  evocation.  And  Horsley 
speaks  of  Spencer's  exposition  being  clearly  and  incontrovertibly  proved. 
To  me  it  seems  to  fail  in  the  very  point  to  be  proved— -viz.  that  the  connection 
between  the  eating  near  the  blood  of  slain  victims  and  practising  the  rites 
of  magic  was  of  so  close  and  peculiar  a  kind,  that  the  one  might  be  sufficient 
to  indicate  the  other.  It  was  palpably  the  reverse  :  there  was  no  sacrifice 
at  all  when  the  witch  of  Endor  evoked  Samuel,  and  while  with  Balaam's 
enchantments  there  were  sacrifices  employed,  yet,  these  being  holocausts, 
there  was  no  eating  connected  with  them.  Besides,  in  I  Sam.  xiv.  32-34, 
where  the  army  of  Saul  are  spoken  of  as  eating  with  the  blood,  and  where 
there  was  no  room  for  enchantments  or  magical  rites  of  any  sort,  it  is  precisely 
the  expression  before  us  that  is  used.  Hence  all  recent  commentators  justly 
regard  the  sin  here  charged  upon  the  people  as  simply  a  disregard  of  the 
Divine  prohibition  against  eating  the  blood  with  the  flesh. 


356  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

talk  one  to  another,  each  man  to  his  neighbour,  saying,  "  Come,  now,  and 
let  us  hear  what  the  word  is  that  proceedeth  from  the  Lord."  31.  And  they 
come  to  thee  like  a  gathering  of  the  people  (literally,  according  to  the  coming 
of  a  people  —  like  a  streaming  multitude,  as  in  a  solemn  public  meeting), 
and  they  sit  before  thee  as  my  people,  and  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do 
them  not  ;  for  with  their  mouths  they  act  the  part  of  lovers  (literally,  they 
do  or  act  lovers),1  after  their  gain  their  heart  goes.  32.  And  lo!  thou 
art  to  them  like  a  lover's  song,  with  a  pleasant  voice,  and  playing  well 
on  an  instrument;  and  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them  not.  33. 
And  when  it  comes—  behold,  it  is  come  ;  and  they  know  that  a  prophet  is 
among  them. 

AN  entirely  new  department  of  Ezekiel's  labours  begins  here. 
After  a  period  of  suspended  animation,  the  prophetic  Spirit 
again  returns  to  breathe  in  his  soul,  and  prompts  him  to  a  new 
discharge  of  his  prophetical  function.  Hitherto  it  has  been 
chiefly  the  comminatory  part  that  he  has  fulfilled,  now  it  is  to 
be  the  consolatory.  He  has  laboured  in  vain  to  avert  the  stroke 
of  Jerusalem's  overthrow,  and  the  utter  prostration  of  the  taber 
nacle  of  David.  The  calamity,  so  often  foretold  and  warned 
against,  has  come  ;  and  he  must  now  address  himself  to  the  more 
agreeable  task  of  reviving  the  hopes  of  the  fallen,  by  disclosing 
to  them  the  prospect  of  a  glorious  future.  For  judgment  cannot 
rest  for  ever  on  the  house  of  God.  The  nio-lit  of  sorrow  must 

o 

give  way  to  the  morning  of  joy  ;  and  when  the  period  of  lowest 
depression  has  been  reached,  the  moment  has  assuredly  come  for 
the  commencement  of  a  new  and  better  position. 

It  was  not  till  the  evil  had  got  to  its  worst  stage  of  judicial 
destruction,  that  the  prophet  was  permitted  to  enter  on  this 
more  cheering  strain  of  announcements.  At  the  close  of  chap. 


1  The  word  D'OJJJ  as  a  noim?  only  occurs  in  Jer.  iv.  30,  besides  the  double 
use  of  it  in  the  present  passage,  and  there  it  is  plainly  used  in  the  sense  of 
lovers.  But  in  another  passage  (chap,  xxiii.  5)  the  verb  is  used  by  Ezekiel 
in  much  the  same  sense,  "  She  doted  upon  her  lovers,"  or  went  after  them 
with  fond  affection.  So  that  simply  lovers  or  admirers,  not  much  love,  as 
our  version,  nor  jokes,  as  Ewald,  nor  lovely,  as  Hitzig,  must  be  taken  as  the 
proper  meaning  of  the  word  here.  Havernick  says  it  is  always  used  by 
Ezekiel  in  the  sense  of  impure  love,  gallantry  (buhkrei),  and  that  he  is  par 
ticularly  fond  of  it.  But  this  fondness  shows  itself  no  more  than  three 
times,  and  then  only  as  indicative  of  a  strong,  though  not  necessarily  a 
wrong  affection.  His  common  word  for  lovers  in  a  bad  sense  in  not  this,  but 
D^ruXDj  as  it  is  also  of  the  other  prophets.  If  any  subordinate  meaning 
therefore  were  to  be  added  to  the  meaning  lovers^  it  should  simply  be  that 
of  fond  or  doting  affection. 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION.  357 

xxiv.  he  was  instructed  to  remain  silent  till  the  catastrophe  had 
occurred ;  for  till  then  neither  should  God  be  disposed  to  give, 
nor  the  people  be  prepared  to  receive,  the  word  of  comfort  and 
encouragement.  He  was  not  to  open  his  mouth  to  Israel  again 
till  the  escaped  from  Jerusalem's  desolations  came  to  him,  as  a 
witness  that  the  work  of  judgment  was  completed,  that  the  false 
foundations  were  thoroughly  swept  away  (chap.  xxiv.  26,  27). 
And  in  vers.  21  and  22  of  this  chapter  he  states  the  fact  of  such 
having  actually  come,  with  the  additional  intelligence  that 
already  on  the  evening  previous  the  hand  of  God  had  begun  to 
operate  on  his  soul,  and  had  reopened  his  closed  lips. 

It  Avas  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah's  reign,  or  Ezekiel's 
captivity,  the  fourth  month,  that  Jerusalem  was  taken  by  the 
Chaldeans,  and  on  the  following  month  was  reduced  to  ashes. 
It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  a  whole  year  and  five  monftis  had 
elapsed  before  this  appearance  of  the  escaped  before  Ezekiel— 
too  long,  Hitzig  thinks,  for  the  communication  of  so  important  a 
piece  of  intelligence  to  the  captivity  at  Chebar,  and  therefore  he 
would  substitute  the  eleventh  for  the  twelfth  year ;  as  Ewald 
also  does,  though  without  assigning  any  reason.  Not  too  long, 
however,  Havernick  judges,  considering  the  turmoil  and  con 
fusion  which  must  necessarily  have  ensued  on  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  existing  state  of  things  in  Judea.  If  it  were 
simply,  indeed,  the  communication  of  the  tidings  of  what  had 
taken  place  that  was  meant,  seventeen  months  would  certainly 
be  a  very  long  period  for  the  conveyance  of  such  intelligence 
over  a  distance  so  comparatively  short.  But  there  is  no  need 
for  supposing  that.  The  expression  "  he  that  has  escaped,"  or 
u  the  escaped,"  is  very  often  used  in  a  collective  sense,  to  denote 
generally  the  remnant  that  survived  any  great  catastrophe.1 
And  it  is  the  more  probable  that  such  should  be  the  meaning  of 
the  term  here,  as  the  reopening  of  the  prophet's  mouth,  and 
that  for  the  special  purpose  of  speaking  the  word  of  consolation 
and  hope,  would  most  naturally  be  deferred  till  the  last  deporta 
tion  had  taken  place,  and  the  number  of  the  captives  was 
complete.  But  in  that  case  we  can  easily  suppose  the  period 

1  See,  for  example,  Isa.  xv.  9,  "the  escaped  of  Moab ; "  also  Isa.  xxxvii. 
31,  32  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  19,  " he  that  is  escaped ; "  Amos ix.  1,  "he  that  escapeth 
of  them ;  "  1  Kings  xix.  17  ;  in  all  which  passages  the  singular  is  used  col 
lectively  for  the  whole  company. 


3-38  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

of  seventeen  months  to  have  elapsed,  as  all  the  arrangements 
connected  with  the  settlement  of  affairs  in  Judea,  and  the 
transportation  of  a  considerable  band  of  captives  to  Chebar, 
must  necessarily  have  occupied  much  time. 

Such,  then,  being  the  case, — the  time  having  arrived  when,  by 
the  appearance  of  an  escaped  remnant  from  Jerusalem,  the  pro 
phet  was  again  to  open  his  mouth  in  new  and  more  encouraging 
strains  to  his  countrymen, — the  prophetic  spirit  began  to  prepare 
him  for  the  work  by  descending  on  him  the  night  before;  thus 
graciously  anticipating  the  circumstances.,  and  giving  practical 
proof  of  his  readiness  to  meet  them  by  suitable  communications 
from  above.  Wliat  the  Spirit  actually  communicated  to  the 
prophet  on  that  preceding  night,  with  what  tidings  his  mind  was 
filled  or  what  words  his  mouth  \vas  opened  to  speak,  we  are  not 
expresfly  told.  But  the  natural  supposition  is,  that  the  message 
contained  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  chapter  (vers.  1-20)  forms  the 
substance  of  his  first  communication  ;  while  that  contained  in  the 
latter  part  (vers.  23-33),  which  is  very  much  like  a  resumption 
and  practical  application  of  the  former,  constitutes  what  the 
prophet  delivered  after  the  escaped  had  actually  come.  We  thus 
most  naturally  account  for  the  first  part  standing  without  any 
intimation  of  the  time  or  occasion  prefixed — this  was  more  fitly 
reserved  for  the  arrival  of  the  escaped  on  the  following  day. 
And  it  also  affords  an  easy  explanation  of  the  close  connec 
tion  as  to  substance  between  the  two  divisions  of  the  chapter, 
the  one  being  indeed  properly  the  continuation  of  the  other, 
with  a  more  special  reference  to  the  existing  circumstances  of 
the  people. 

1.  In  regard  to  the  first  part  of  the  communication — that 
which  we  suppose  to  have  been  made  to  the  prophet  on  the 
preceding  night — there  is  no  need  to  dwell  at  any  length,  as  it 
consists  of  representations  which  have  already  in  substance 
passed  under  our  notice.  The  first  nine  verses  exhibit  anew  the 
prophet's  calling  and  office,  under  the  same  character  in  which 
it  was'presented  at  the  outset,  in  chap.  iii.  16-21,  as  that  of  a 
spiritual  watchman  ;  only  here  the  description  commences  with 
a  detailed  account  of  the  responsibilities  and  duties  of  such  an 
office,  when  it  has  respect  merely  to  common  evils,  and  when  the 
person  exercising  it  is  the  delegate  simply  of  his  fellow-men. 
This  distinct  reference  to  human  affairs,  and  minute  delineation 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION.  359 

of  a  watchman's  calling,  is  doubtless  introduced  for  the  purpose 
of  impressing  upon  those  with  whom  Ezekiel  had  to  do  the 
paramount  importance  of  faithfulness  in  the  discharge  of  his 
ministerial  function.  For  who  does  not  know  that  faithfulness 
is  the  one  grand  prerequisite  in  him  who  is  chosen  to  do  the  part 
of  a  watchman  in  times  of  peril  or  alarm?  He  must  have  his 
eye  intent  simply  on  the  realities  of  things,  whether  these  may 
be  agreeable  or  not  to  men's  feelings;  nay,  all  the  more  intent 
on  these  the  more  they  are  fraught  with  danger  and  distress ; 
that  those  for  whom  he  watches  may  learn  from  him  the  true 
position  of  affairs,  and  know  how  to  provide  against  the  coming 
evil.  For  such  an  one  to  slumber  at  his  post,  or  to  conceal  the 
danger  he  descries,  is  to  incur  the  highest  guilt;  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  for  them  to  neglect  and  slight  the  faithful  warning, 
is  to  exhibit  the  most  reckless  folly.  Now  the  people  had  only 
to  transfer  such  reflections  from  the  earthly  to  the  spiritual 
region,  in  order  to  acquit  Ezekiel  in  the  judgment  of  their  own 
minds,  and  condemn  themselves.  He  had  received,  not  from 
man,  but  from  God,  the  charge  to  do  the  part  of  a  watchman  to 
his  countrymen  ;  so  that  faithfulness  was  pre-eminently  required 
of  him.  Nor  had  it  been  wanting.  He  had  most  zealously  and 
devotedly  done  his  part.  Pie  had  sounded  the  trumpet  of  alarm 
over  every  cause  of  disquietude,  and  at  every  appearance  of 
danger ;  but  it  was  only  to  deaf  ears  and  incredulous  hearts. 
The  dreaded  calamities  had  come,  sending  multitudes  to  destruc- 

7  O 

tion,  and  involving  all  in  the  deep  waters  of  affliction  and  sorrow. 
The  blood  of  souls  to  a  fearful  extent  has  been  incurred — but 
not  on  the  part  of  the  prophet ;  his  hands  are  clean ;  it  rests 
upon  the  head  of  the  people  themselves. 

But  now  that  the  worst  has  come,  is  there  nothing  more  to  be 
done  ?  Has  the  office  of  Heaven's  watchman  ceased  when  the 
cloud  of  Heaven's  vengeance  has  burst  on  the  guilty?  Has  he 
no  commission  to  speak  to  those  who  are  sinking  under  the 
stroke  of  judgment — the  miserable  remnant  that  have  escaped 
absolute  destruction,  but  are  still  shivering  on  the  brink  of  ruin? 
Yes ;  and  it  is  here  that  a  new  sphere  of  labour  presents  itself 
to  the  prophet,  and  that  a  new  call  comes  to  him  to  enter  on  it. 
"  Therefore,  O  thou  son  of  man,"  or  rather,  as  it  literally  is, 
"  And  thou,  son  of  man," — since  by  thy  past  watchings  and 
warnings  thou  hast  but  delivered  thy  own  soul,  and  the  children 


360  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

of  thy  people  are  involved  in  the  just  desert  of  their  sins, — "sny 
to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  ye  speak,  saying,  '  For  our  trans 
gressions  and  our  sins  are  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them  ; 
and  how  should  we  live  ?  '  Say  to  them,  As  I  live,  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked, 
but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live  :  turn  ye, 
turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways ;  and  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of 
Israel?"  (vers.  10,  11.) 

A  yearning  tenderness  here  manifests  itself,  still  seeking,  not 
withstanding  all  that  has  taken  place,  the  return  of  those  who 
survived  to  the  way  of  peace.  But  with  that  tenderness,  what 
a  stern  and  unflinching  holiness  !  There  can  be  no  relaxation 
or  abatement  mentioned  in  respect  to  this,  not  even  amid  the 
meanings  of  pain  and  cries  of  distress  which  arose  from  the 
people, — no  return  to  life  possible  but  through  a  return  to 
righteousness.  God  is  anxious,  as  a  kind  and  affectionate  parent, 
to  see  them  restored  to  a  happy  and  prosperous  condition ;  he 
would  not  have  them  ignorant  of  that.  But  they  must  also  know 
that  in  God's  sight  there  was  a  higher  thing  still,  which  he  could 
on  no  account  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  the  other ;  he  must  main 
tain  in  his  dealings  with  them  the  honour  of  his  authority  and 
the  rectitude  of  his  government;  and  only  if  they  turn  from 
their  wicked  ways,  can  he  turn  from  his  fierce  displeasure.  Here, 
therefore,  stands  the  one  door-way  of  escape ;  and  the  prophet, 
in  entering  upon  the  second  department  of  his  ministerial  calling, 
must  begin  by  reiterating  the  message  with  which  he  entered  on 
the  first  (chap.  iii.  18-21),  and  which  he  had  also  subsequently 
repeated  and  enlarged  upon  (chap,  xviii.) — the  message,  namely, 
that  each  should  be  dealt  with  according  to  his  ways.  The  right 
eousness  of  the  righteous  should  not  deliver  him  if  he  turned  aside 
to  transgression;  but  neither  wrould  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked 
prove  his  destruction,  if  he  sincerely  repented  of  his  sins  and 
laid  hold  of  the  covenant  of  God.  These  are  God's  terms  now, 
as  they  have  been  all  along;  the  Lord's  servant  has  no  other  to 
offer;  and  if  they  are  not  concurred  in,  recovery  is  impossible. 

There  was  something  too,  especially  since  matters  had  come 
to  the  worst,  in  the  individual  and  personal  character  of  God's 
communication  to  the  prophet.  It  not  only  disclosed  the  right 
eous  nature  in  general  of  the  Divine  administration,  but  the  close 
adaptation  of  its  righteousness  to  each  particular  case;  the  right- 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION.  361 

eous,  the  wicked — the  righteous  lapsed  into  a  transgressor,  the 
wicked  reclaimed  from  the  paths  of  transgression — each  according 
to  their  state  and  conduct  were  to  receive  at  the  hands  of  God. 
The  people,  therefore,  must  be  done  with  the  imagination  that 
outward  political  changes  were  to  avail  them  much  ;  that  their 
fortunes  were  to  be  determined,  as  it  were,  in  the  lump;  and  that 
it  should  matter  little  what  they  might  be  in  their  single  and 
separate  conditions.  But  on  the  other  hand,  every  encourage 
ment  was  held  out  to  the  penitent  and  believing;  as  it  was  God's 
settled  purpose  to  distinguish  in  his  dealings  between  the  right 
eous  and  the  wicked,  and  so  to  do  it  that  such  as  were  inclined 
to  submit  to  the  righteousness  of  God  might  be  sure  it  would  go 
well  with  them  whether  in  Chaldea  or  in  Canaan — they  at  least 
should  be  made  to  experience  the  loving-kindness  of  God. 

2.  So  much,  then,  for  the  first  communication,  received 
immediately  before  the  arrival  of  the  escaped  from  Jerusalem. 
And  that  which  came  immediately  afterwards,  and  fills  up  the 
concluding  part  of  the  chapter,  is  so  far  an  application  of  the 
former,  as  it  shows,  in  the  case  of  two  distinct  portions  of  the 
people,  how  opposed  they  still  generally  were  to  the  righteous 
ness  of  God,  and  consequently  how  far  from  salvation. 

The  first  portion  are  those  who  remained  in  Judea,  the 
miserable  fraction  who  dwelt  among  its  desolations,  and  who, 
notwithstanding  all  they  had  seen  and  suffered  of  the  righteous 
judgments  of  God,  were  still  wedded  to  their  sinful  ways  and 
cherishing  the  most  groundless  hopes.  They  are  represented  as 
continuing  much  in  the  same  condition,  and  practising  the  same 
enormities  as  those  which  had  brought  down  the  judgments  of 
God  upon  the  land.  The  particular  sins  specified — eating  with 
blood,  lawless  murder,  adultery,  and  continued  adherence  to 
the  practices  of  idolatry — are  evidently  given  as  individualizing 
examples  of  the  corruption  prevalent  among  the  remnant  in 
Judea:  not  only  was  sin  unrepented  of,  but  sins  of  the  worst  kind 
— crying  enormities — were  still  openly  practised.  And  that  this 
was  but  too  faithful  a  description  of  the  state  of  matters  in  desolate 
Judea,  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  historical  notices  in 
Jeremiah  (chap,  xl.-xliii.},  which  exhibit  a  degree  of  spiritual 
blindness,  resolute  opposition  to  the  will  of  God,  reckless  disregard 
of  consequences,  and  inveterate  attachment  to  the  soul-destroying 
errors  of  idolatry,  which,  considering  the  circumstances,  have  few 


362  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

parallels  in  the  records  of  human  guilt.  Yet,  with  such  apparent 
contempt  for  everything  sacred,  the  people  still  seemed  anxious 
to  keep  up  a  hypocritical  show  of  piety.  They  sought  advice  of 
Jeremiah,  though,  when  obtained,  they  refused  to  follow  it  in 
anything  that  crossed  their  own  inclinations;  and  here  they  are 
represented  as  appealing  in  the  most  confident  manner  to  their 
connection  with  Abraham,  and  on  that  ground  assuring  them 
selves  of  their  right  to  possess  the  land  of  Canaan.  He,  though 
but  one,  got  the  land  for  an  inheritance;  and  we  his  descendants, 
who,  however  reduced  in  numbers,  are  still  a  greatly  larger 
company  than  he  could  boast  of,  may  not  we  justly  expect  to 
be  kept  in  possession  of  it?  Strange  infatuation!  that  when 
the  signs  of  God's  displeasure  had  been  so  strikingly  displayed 
against  them  for  their  sins,  scattering  all  their  vain  confidences 
to  the  wind,  they  should  still,  without  abandoning  those  sins, 
hope  for  the  peculiar  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour  !  Yet  in  a 
more  subtle  and  refined  form  we  find  the  same  flagrant  incon- 
sistence  practised  by  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time,  who  in  like 
manner  reckoned  with  confidence  on  their  being  children  of 
Abraham,  as  if  that  alone  were  enough  to  secure  them  in  all 
covenant  blessings,  while  he  charged  them  with  being  in  spirit 
children  of  the  devil,  and  consequently  entitled  only  to  look  for 
the  portion  of  the  lost  (John  viii.  33-44).  Indeed  the  folly,  in 
one  form  or  another,  is  common  to  all  ao;es — though  the  carnal 

'  O  O 

Jews  were  more  peculiarly  in  danger  of  falling  into  it,  as  their 
external  connection  with  Abraham  formed  a  stong  temptation  in 
that  particular  direction.  In  their  case  the  title  to  blessing  was 
held  by  a  double  tie,  a  natural  and  a  spiritual  one — the  spiritual, 
however,  being  of  necessity  the  one  of  chiefest  and  most  essential 
moment  in  the  estimation  and  reckoning  of  God — that  without 
which  the  other  was  in  a  manner  nothing.  Oneness  with  Abra 
ham  in  faith  and  obedience  could  alone  in  his  account  carry  any 
title  to  Abraham's  heritage  of  blessing.  But  on  the  other  hand, 
with  the  carnal  portion  of  his  posterity  the  tendency  always  was, 
in  proportion  as  they  receded  from  the  right  spiritual  position,  to 
cling  to  the  mere  outward  tie  of  a  corporeal  descent,  and  to  rest 
their  views  and  prospects  on  simply  natural  considerations.  And 
it  is  not  a  disadvantage  as  compared  with  them,  but  a  great  and 
important  boon,  a  freedom  from  one  of  the  most  insidious  and 
powerful  temptations  to  which  human  nature  can  be  exposed, 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION.        363 

that  the  believer's  title  to  blessing  under  the  gospel  rests  so 
exclusively  on  spiritual  grounds,  and  that  no  assurance  of  the 
Divine  favour  can  be  found  apart  from  continuance  in  faith 
and  holiness  before  God.  Could  men  know,  as  they  would 
often  fain  do,  their  election  of  God  in  an  absolute  manner,' — 
were  it  to  be  held  by  them  as  a  simple  piece  of  information, 
derived  from  supernatural  insight  into  the  purposes  of  Deity, — it 
would  be  their  misfortune  rather  than  a  privilege,  for  it  would 
immensely  increase  the  danger  of  their  falling  into  spiritual 
inactivity  or  presumption.  That  assurance  only  can  be  safe 
which  is  the  fruit  of  a  living  faith  and  a  righteous  behaviour. 

The  small  remnant  in  Judea  being  so  far  from  righteousness, 
the  prophet  could  only  speak  to  them  as  a  minister  of  con 
demnation  :  they  had  not  turned  from  their  evil  ways,  and  they 
could  not  live.  What  they  had  to  expect  was  only  judgment 
still  more  severe  and  exterminating  than  what  yet  had  been 
appointed.  For  them  the  desolations  of  the  land  must  become 
still  more  desolate,  and  new  horrors  be  inflicted  by  the  sword, 
the  pestilence,  and  the  wild  beast.  All  must  be  reduced  to  the 
condition  of  a  howling  wilderness,  as  it  really  was,  that  the 
new  hope  for  Israel  might  spring  from  another  and  better  root, 
and  that  the  people  might  know  how  impossible  it  was  to  attain 
to  blessing  from  God  without  first  separating  from  sin. 

But  unfortunately  these  were  not  the  only  persons  who  still 
stood  in  irreconcilable  opposition  to  the  righteousness  of  God  ; 
there  were  others,  close  beside  the  prophet, — apparently,  indeed, 
the  great  mass  of  the  exiles  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar, — who, 
though  less  flagrantly  at  variance  with  the  mind  of  God  in  out 
ward  conduct,  were  actuated  at  heart  by  the  same  wayward  and 
refractory  spirit.  Referring  now  to  this  class,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  says  to  the  prophet :  "  And  thou,  son  of  man,  the  children 
of  thy  people,  who  speak  against  thee  beside  the  walls  and  at 
the  doors  of  their  houses,  and  talk  one  to  another,  each  man  to 
his  neighbour,  saying,  'Come  now,  and  let  us  hear  what  the  word 
is  that  proceedeth  from  the  Lord.'  And  they  come  to  thee  like 
a  gathering  of  the  people,  and  they  sit  before  thee  as  my  people, 
and  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them  not ;  for  with  their 
mouths  they  act  the  part  of  lovers,  after  their  gain  their  heart  goes. 
And  lo !  thou  art  to  them  like  a  lover's  song,  with  a  pleasant 
voice,  and  playing  well  on  an  instrument ;  and  they  hear  thy 


364  EZEKIEL  XXXIII. 

words,  and  do  them  not :  And  when  it  comes — lo !  it  is  come  : 
and  they  know  that  a  prophet  is  among  them"  (vers.  30-33). 

The  description  forms  a  continuous  and  incomplete  sentence. 
The  Lord  does  not  say  what  the  prophet  was  to  do,  though  he 
begins  with  the  address  to  him,  "And  thou,  son  of  man."'  But 
there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  is  meant.  He  is  furnished 
with  a  delineation  of  the  people,  as  to  their  real  state  and  con 
duct,  and  especially  of  the  false  and  hypocritical  manner  in  which 
they  had  acted  toward  him  as  the  Lord's  messenger  ;  ending 
with  the  conclusion,  that  now,  at  least, — now  that  the  great 
catastrophe  had  come,  and  that  they  had  living  evidence  before 
them  of  the  fact  in  the  presence  of  the  escaped  from  Jerusalem, 
— they  could  no  longer  treat  his  communications  with  the  dis 
belief,  nor  speak  of  himself  with  the  disrespect,  they  had  done. 
They  must  at  length  be  convinced  in  their  minds  that  a  true 
prophet  is  among  them.  And  this  conviction,  of  course,  would 
'be  for  him  like  a  higher  vantage-ground  from  which  to  address 
them  in  his  future  ministrations. 

It  will  be  understood  that  the  description  here  given  of  the 
people  properly  applies  to  the  past.  During  the  period  of  the 
prophet's  former  ministrations  their  bearing  had  been  that  of 
those  who,  with  a  certain  degree  of  deference  to  the  prophet's 
character,  continued  to  retain  and  manifest  the  most  settled 
antipathy  to  the  spiritual  object  he  had  in  view.  His  high 
vocation  as  an  ambassador  of  Heaven  they  durst  not  altogether 
disavow  ;  the  manner  in  which  he  fulfilled  it  bore  on  it  too 
distinctly  the  impress  of  Heaven's  majesty  and  earnestness ;  and 
they  even  professed  to  seek  with  desire  after  the  communications 
he  had  been  receiving  from  above.  In  respect  to  these  they  had 
done,  as  it  were,  a  lover's  part  with  their  mouths,  exciting  one 
another  to  go  and  learn  what  might  be  the  mind  of  the  Lord. 
Various  occasions  of  this  kind  are  recorded  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  Book,  on  which  they  appeared  before  the  prophet  as  avowed 
inquirers  respecting  the  will  or  purposes  of  Heaven.  Not  only 
so,  but  even  while  receiving  the  prophet's  message,  there  was 
nothing  irreverent  or  unbecoming  in  their  manner ;  they  listened 
to  his  communications  as  if  they  felt  really  interested  in  the 
matter — hearing  it  with  lovers'  ears,  as  with  lovers'  lips  they  had 
prompted  one  another  to  go  where  it  might  be  heard.  But  still 
it  was  only  as  persons  floating  on  the  surface  of  things — dealing 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  PROPHET'S  COMMISSION".  365 

as  with  a  lover's  song  pleasantly  chanted,  and  set  off  with  fit 
accompaniments  of  music.  Their  hearts  remained  impenetrably 
shut  against  the  substance  of  the  tidings  brought  to  them, 
because  inveterately  attached  to  their  own  fond  imaginations  and 
foolish  conceits.  And,  as  a  natural  consequence,  they  talked 
among  themselves  against  the  prophet,  both  more  privately  at 
the  doors  of  their  houses,  and  also  in  their  more  public  haunts 
around  the  walls  of  the  city.  They  noticed  in  a  hostile  spirit 
everything  that  was  peculiar  in  his  manner,  or  enigmatical  in 
the  style  of  his  communications,  with  the  view  of  excusing 
themselves  from  giving  an  implicit  reception  to  his  testimony, 
or  yielding  a  hearty  obedience  to  his  commands.  Precisely  as 
in  another  a£e  their  descendants  took  refuge  in  the  distinctive 
characteristics  of  our  Lord  and  his  forerunner  :  alleging,  in 
excuse  of  their  impenitence,  that  the  one  was  a  wine-bibber, 
and  that  the  other  had  a  devil. 

In  all  such  cases,  which  are  unfortunately  confined  to  no  age 
or  country,  the  make-shift  can  only  last  for  a  time;  sooner  or 
later  the  spell  of  delusion  must  be  broken — God's  word  proves 
to  be  true,  and  every  man  that  sets  at  naught  its  counsel  a  liar. 
So  now  it  fared  with  those  exiles  on  the  Chebar :  the  gain  they 
were  each  looking  for,  by  a  speedy  return  to  Juclea,  perished ; 
the  often  reiterated,  but  as  often  discredited,  announcement  of 
Jerusalem's  fall  and  desolation,  took  effect.  With  all  the 
prophet's  peculiarities,  and  notwithstanding  everthing  they  could 
say  against  him,  the  seal  of  Heaven  is  at  length  given  to  his 
testimony,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  put  all  doubt  and  disbelief  to 
silence, — wisdom  is  justified  in  him  as  one  of  her  true  witnesses 
and  most  faithful  children.  So  that  here  again  the  lesson  comes 
forth  with  loud  and  impressive  warnings  for  all  times,  that  '•  the 
word  of  the  Lord  is  pure,  like  silver  purified  seven  times:' 
Whatever  exceptions  men  may  be  able  to  take  against  the 
casket  in  which  it  is  presented,  or  the  characteristic  properties 
of  the  instrument  that  wields  it,  the  truth  it  contains  is  great, 
and  must  prevail :  "  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever, 
the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  generations ; "  while  "  he  brings 
the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought,  he  makes  the  devices  of 
the  people  of  none  effect."  In  making  use  of  human  agents  to 
reveal  his  will  to  men,  the  Lord  teaches  us  to  look  for  no 
external  perfection.  There  may  be  found  all  the  diversities  of 


366  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

manner,  and  nearly,  too,  all  the  imperfections  which  distinguish 
ordinary  speakers  among  men,  in 'his  most  special  instruments 
of  working;  for  the  Spirit,  even  in  his  highest  operations,  must 
still  leave  free  play  to  native  peculiarities  of  thought  and 
utterance.  But  in  regard  to  its  substance,  God's  word  is 
perfect,  and  stands  nobly  apart  from  all  that  is  of  man.  Let  it 
ever  be  ours,  therefore,  to  hear  it  with  reverence,  and  bowr  to 
its  requirements  with  child-like  submission.  It  is  we  that  must 
fall  in  with  its  terms,  not  it  that  must  accommodate  itself  to 
ours.  And  whatever  is  opposed  to  it,  either  in  the  imaginations 
of  the  heart  or  in  the  course  of  life  outwardly  pursued,  must 
sooner  or  later  be  brought  to  nought.  They  only  find  the  true 
wisdom  who  have  learned  to  prove  what  is  the  holy  and 
acceptable  will  of  God  ;  for  theirs  is  the  "  way  everlasting." 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

THE  PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD,  AFTER  THE  FALSE 
SHEPHERDS  HAVE  BEEN  PUNISHED  AND  REMOVED. 

IN  the  preceding  chapter  the  prophet  has  announced  the  first 
condition  of  an  improved  state  of  things,  in  reiterating  the  call 
to  a  hearty  submission  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  the  demands 
of  God's  righteousness.  So  long  as  this  was  postponed,  nothing 
could  be  looked  for  of  good.  But  that  position  being  laid  down 
as  the  first  preliminary  to  a  better  future,  the  way  now  opened 
itself  for  the  promise  of  another — the  appointment  of  a  good 
shepherd,  one  wrho  should  be  emphatically  the  good  shepherd, 
to  rule  over  and  feed  them,  in  the  room  of  the  false  ones,  who 
had  but  sought  their  own  interests  and  oppressed  and  ruined  the 
flock.  The  chapter  falls  naturally  into  two  parts  ;  in  the  first  of 
which  the  misrule  of  the  false  shepherds  is  described,  with  the 
fatal  results  to  which  it  had  led ;  and  in  the  second,  the  gracious 
interposition  of  God,  to  undo  the  evils  that  had  arisen  from  the 
presidency  under  which  the  people  had  been  placed,  and  set  over 
them  one  whose  benign  and  careful  superintendence  would 
ensure  the  best  and  most  lasting  good. 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  3G7 

Yer.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying,  2.  Son  of  man, 
prophesy  against  the  shepherds  of  Israel,  prophesy  and  say  to  them,  the 
shepherds,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Woe  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel, 
who  feed  themselves!  should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flocks?  3.  Ye 
eat  the  fat,  and  clothe  yourselves  with  the  wool  ;  that  which  is  fed  ye  kill  ; 
the  flock  ye  do  not  feed.  4.  The  weak  ye  have  not  strengthened,  and  the 
sick  ye  have  not  healed,1  and  that  which  is  broken  ye  have  not  bound  up, 
and  the  driven  away  ye  have  not  brought  back,  and  the  lost  ye  have  not 
sought  ;  but  with  force  ye  rule  over  them,  and  with  cruelty.2  5.  And  they 
are  scattered  from  their  being  no  shepherd  (that  is,  none  worth  the 
name),  and  they  are  food  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  and  they  are 
scattered.  6.  My  flock  wander  upon  all  the  mountains,  and  upon  every 
hill,  and  upon  the  whole  face  of  the  earth  my  flock  is  scattered,  and  none 
inquires  and  makes  search.3  7.  Therefore,  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word  of 
Jehovah  :  8.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  truly  because  my  flock  is 
become  a  prey,  and  my  flock  is  for  food  to  all  the  beasts  of  the  field,  on 
account  of  there  being  no  shepherd,  and  the  shepherds  have  not  sought  after 
my  flock,  and  the  shepherds  feed  themselves,  and  the  flock  they  do  not  feed  ; 
9.  Therefore,  ye  shepherds,  hear  the  word  of  Jehovah  ;  10.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  the  shepherds,  and  I  require  my  flock 
at  their  hand,  and  I  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the  flock  ;  and  the 
shepherds  do  not  any  more  feed  themselves  ;  and  I  deliver  my  flock  from 
their  mouth,  and  they  shall  not  be  any  more  for  food  to  them. 

This  passage  evidently  points,  both  as  to  its  subject  and  the 
language  it  employs,  to  a  quite  similar  and  earlier  prophecy  of 
Jeremiah  (chap,  xxiii.  1-6),  where  in  like  manner  the  false 
shepherds  are  denounced  and  judged,  that  the  way  might  be 
opened  up  for  the  appearance  of  the  Lord's  true  shepherd.  In 
both  prophecies  alike,  what  is  meant  by  the  shepherds  is  mani 
festly  not  priests  or  prophets,  but  kings  and  rulers  —  the  supreme 


1  The  two  epithets  here,  ni^na  and  i"6in    can  only  have  their  distinc 
tive  import  determined  by  the  verbs  respectively  connected  with  them  • 
strengthening  being  used  with  the  first,  the  evil  affection  referred  to  must 
have  been  feebleness  or  impotence,  the  effect  of  sickness  ;  and  healing  being 
the  other  verb,  sickness  itself  must  have  been  the  disorder  there  to  be 
remedied.     That  n^H3  should  have  been  put  in  the  plural,  probably  arose 
from  a  desire  to  prevent  its  being  mistaken  for  ii^rn   the  inheritance. 

2  In  this  charge  of  ruling  with  force  and  with  cruelty,  Spaa   there  is  a 
reference  to  Lev.  xxv.  43,  where  this  word  is  used  in  the  instruction  given 
to  the  judges,  as  to  the  way  they  were  not  to  rule  over  the  people.     They 
had  done  the  very  thing  which  Moses  in  the  law  had  charged  them  not  to  do. 

3  Our  translators  have  missed  the  precise  import  of  the  two  verbs  here, 
and  indeed  have  rather  transposed  them  :  ^TH  signifying  to  be  concerned 
about  anything,  and  make  inquiry  after  it  in  a  general  way  ;  somewhat  like 
the  Latin  petere  ;  while  sy'j?a  means  more  definitely  to  make  search  for, 
nearly  corresponding  to  qussrere.     There  was  no  inquisition  and  no  search 
made  for  the  lost  portion  of  the  flock. 


363  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

head  of  the  commonwealth,  in  the  first  instance,  though  not 
without  respect  also  to  the  subordinate  rulers  of  the  kingdom. 
This  admits  of  no  reasonable  doubt,  even  from  what  is  said  of 
the  false  shepherds  themselves — violent,  selfish,  and  oppressive 
dealing  toward  the  flock  being  the  crimes  charged  against  them. 
They  were  rulers  who  acted  towards  their  subjects  with  senseless 
rigour  and  cruelty.  And  it  is  rendered  perfectly  certain  by  the 
promise  in  the  second  part  of  the  prophecy,  where  the  special 
counteractive  to  the  past  evil  is  declared  to  be  the  raising  up  of 
David  as  the  shepherd  that  was  henceforth  to  feed  them.  Such 
also  is  the  usual  meaning  of  shepherd  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scripture.  It  has  plainly  this  meaning  in  the  23d  chapter  of 
Jeremiah.  And  in  an  earlier  chapter  of  that  prophet,  the 
shepherds  are  distinguished  alike  from  priests  and  prophets, 
leaving  no  other  class  of  persons  to  be  embraced  in  the  desig 
nation  but  rulers  :  "The  priests  said  not,  Where  is  the  Lord? 
And  they  that  handle  the  law  knew  me  not;  and  the  shepherds 
transgressed  against  me,  and  the  prophets  prophesied  by  Baal" 
(chap.  ii.  8).  This  mode  of  representation  originated  in  the 
case  of  David,  and  had  respect  partly  to  the  natural  employment 
from  which  he  was  taken,  and  partly  also  to  the  essentially 
pastoral  character,  when  rightly  understood,  of  the  higher 
employment  to  which  he  was  called.  Thus  we  find  the  leaders 
of  the  people,  who  came  to  David  at  Hebron  to  invite  him  to 
assume  the  undivided  sovereignty  of  the  kingdom,  knew  perfectly 
how  to  connect  the  lower  with  the  higher  in  his  history:  "Also 
in  time  past,  when  Saul  was  king  over  us,  thou  wast  he  who 
leddest  out  and  broughtest  in  Israel ;  and  the  Lord  said  to  thee, 
Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  and  thou  shall  be  a  captain 
over  Israel"  (2  Sam.  v.  2).  And  still  more  expressly  is  the 
double  reference  brought  into  notice  in  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  70,  71 : 

O  7 

"  And  he  chose  David  his  servant,  and  took  him  from  the  sheep- 
folds,  from  following  the  ewes  great  with  young :  he  brought 
him  to  feed  Jacob  his  people,  and  Israel  his  inheritance." 

The  connection  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  here 
was  certainly  not  accidental — no  more  than  in  the  case  of  our 
Lord's  first  disciples,  who,  from  being  fishers  on  the  lake  of 
Galilee,  were  called  to  be  fishers  of  men.  It  was  intended  to 
be  to  David  himself,  and  afterwards  to  his  successors  in  office,  a 
perpetual  monitor,  reminding  them  of  the  kind,  watchful,  and 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  369 

paternal  character  of  the  administration  which  they  were  called 
to  exercise  in  Israel.     For  the  earthly  kingdom  set  up  there 
was  not  to  be  after  the  pattern  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world, 
in  which  everything  is  too  often  managed  for  the  gratification 
of  a  single  man's  ambition,  and  the  purposes  of  his  own  selfish 
aggrandizement.     Samuel  had  foretold  it  would  in  all  probability 
grow  into  this,  but  at  the  same  time  protested  against  such  an 
abuse,  as  an  entire  frustration  of  the  purposes  for  which  the 
Lord  allowed  it  to  be  established.    The  king  in  Israel  was  to  be 
the  deputy  of  Jehovah,  "ruling  in  the  fear  of  God,"  nay,  occu 
pying  the  throne  "in  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God ;"  with  the 
law  of  God  before  him  as  his  only  statute-book  (Deut.  xvii.  18, 
19),  and  the  promotion  of  a  general  conformity  to  its  require 
ments  among  the  people  as  the  great  object  of  his  administration. 
The  office  of  such  a  king  must  therefore  have  materially  differed 
from  that  of  the  merely  civil  ruler  of  an  earthly  kingdom.     Pie 
was  the  head  of  a  theocracy  which,  from  its  very  nature,  was 
predominantly  spiritual  in  its  aim,  and  sought  nothing  in  com 
parison  of  the  moral  and  religious  interests  of  the  people.     He 
was  consequently  bound  to  act  in  all  things,  not  as  the  organ 
and  representative  of    the  popular  will,  but  as  peculiarly  the 
servant  of  God ;   as  the  land  over  which  he  presided  was  the 
Lord's  heritage,  and  the  people  he  governed  were  the  flock  of 
the  Lord's  pasture.      How  much  David  understood  this  to  be 
his  high   calling  is  manifest,  not  only  from  his  last  words'  in 
Samuel  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  1-6),  but  also  from  the  conflict  he  main 
tained  through  life  with  the  sons  of  Belial,  the  efforts  he  made 
to  revive  the  cause  and  regulate  the  worship  of  God,  and  the 
beautiful  identification  of  himself,  in  all  his  sorrows  and  his  joys, 
his  struggles  and  his  prospects,  with  the  truth  and  the  Church 
of  God.     In  these  respects  he  showed  himself,  above  all  others, 
to  be  the  man  after  God's  own  heart — the  man  who  made  the 
cause  of  Heaven  so  much  his  own,  that  he  might  be  said  to  live 
and  reign  for  it ;  and  who  has  left  in  the  recorded  experience 
of  his  spiritual  desires  and  earnest  contendings  for  the  truth  one 
of  the  richest  legacies  ever  bequeathed  to  the  household  of  faith. 
Some  of  his  successors  copied  after  his  example,  but  none  of 
them  came  near  to  him  as  the  representative  of  God's  heart  and 
mind,  in  this  intense  zeal  for  the  interests  of  righteousness  and 
supreme  regard  for  the  good  of  Zion. 

2  A 


370  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  as  to  the  end  for  which  the  Lord 
appointed  an  earthly  head  over  Israel,  we  have  a  sufficient 
explanation  of  what  seems  at  first  sight  a  peculiarity  in  the 
passage  before  us — its  charging  upon  the  kings  all  the  evils  that 
had  befallen  the  heritage  of  the  Lord.  It  was  they  who,  by 
their  selfish,  cruel,  and  unrighteous  administration,  had  caused 
the  people  to  become  a  prey  to  the  ills  of  life,  and  to  be  scattered 
abroad  as  the  refuse  of  the  earth.  We  are  not  to  understand 
from  the  representation  that  the  people  themselves  had  done 
nothing  to  incur  these  calamities;  that  had  been  to  belie  a  large 
proportion  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  Book,  and  even  to  contradict 
the  leading  purport  of  the  message  contained  in  the  chapter 
immediately  preceding.  The  people  had  been  smitten  with  the 
rod  of  chastisement,  because  their  continued  guilt  and  impeni 
tence  had  provoked  the  Lord's  anger  against  them.  But  the 
persons  who  should  have  set  themselves  against  this  wayward 
ness  of  the  people,  who,  by  a  vigilant  oversight  and  a  faithful 
discipline,  should  have  ever  checked  the  evil,  and  laboured  for 
the  establishment  of  truth  and  righteousness, — those  who  should 
thus  have  done  the  part  of  real  shepherds  of  the  people, — were 
the  very  persons  who  had  been  most  influential  in  speeding 
forward  the  progress  of  iniquity.  Instead  of  acting  as  the 
guardians  and  regenerators  of  society,  they  had,  by  their  selfish 
indifference  and  shameful  profligacy,  fed  and  nourished  its 
corruptions.  So  that  comparing  what  they  should  have  done, 
as  exemplified  in  the  case  of  David,  with  what  they  had  actually 
done,  the  prophet  might  justly  lay  at  their  door,  in  the  first 
instance,  the  guilt  of  all  the  disorders  and  desolations  that  had 
taken  place.  If  such  rulers  as  David  had  always  occupied  the 
throne  of  justice,  such  calamities  as  they  had  now  to  bewail 
would  never  have  happened. 

The  judgment  of  such  bad  shepherds,  therefore,  must  lie  at 
the  foundation  of  all  reasonable  expectation  of  a  better  future. 
And  so  the  prospect  which  God  begins  here  to  open  up  of  such 
a  future,  starts  with  the  punishment  of  the  shepherds  (vers. 
7-10).  Mercy  to  the  flock  imperatively  required  the  execution 
of  judgment  upon  those  who  had  betrayed  and  injured  them. 
And  this  being  done,  as  it  was  in  great  part  at  least  by  the 
terrible  things  in  righteousness  in  which  God  had  manifested 
himself  toward  them,  the  way  was  now  prepared  for  the  gracious 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  371 

interposition  of  God  to  restore  and  rectify  all :   which  forms  the 
second  and  main  part  of  the  prophecy. 

Ver.  11.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  come  (I,  the  pro 
prietor  of  the  sheep,  now  appear  on  the  field  in  their  behalf),  and  seek  after 
my  flock,  and  search  them  out.  12.  Like  a  shepherd's  searching  of  his 
flock,  in  the  day  that  he  is  in  the  midst  of  his  flock  that  has  been  scattered, 
so  will  I  search  out  my  sheep,  and  deliver  them  from  all  the  places  whither 
they  have  been  scattered  in  the  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness.  13.  And 
I  lead  them  forth  from  the  peoples,  and  gather  them  from  the  countries, 
and  bring  them  to  their  own  land,  and  feed  them  upon  the  mountains  of 
Israel,  beside  the  streams  and  all  the  habitable  portions  of  the  land.  14. 
With  good  pasture  I  will  feed  them,  and  upon  the  mountains  of  the  height 
of  Israel 1  shall  their  lair  be  ;  there  shall  they  lie  down  in  a  good  lair,  and 
in  a  fat  pasture  shall  they  feed  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel.  15.  I  will 
feed  my  flock,  and  I  will  make  them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 
16.  That  which  is  lost  I  will  search  out,  and  that  which  is  driven  away  I 
will  bring  back,  and  will  bind  up  that  which  is  broken,  and  will  strengthen 
that  which  is  weak ;  but  the  fat  and  the  strong  I  will  destroy,  I  will  tend 
them  with  judgment.  17.  And  for  you,  my  flock,  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  judge  between  sheep  and  sheep,  rams  and  he-goats.2 
18.  Is  it  too  little  for  you  that  ye  eat  up  the  good  pasture,  but  that  ye 


1  On  two  former  occasions  (chap.  xvii.  23,  xx.  40)  the  prophet  had  used 
the  expression,  "the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel,"  or  its  high  mountain  ; 
but  here  we  have  the  plural,  "  the  mountains  of  the  height."     The  reason 
of  the  difference  is  evident :  there  the  prophet  spoke  of  the  centre  of  the 
kingdom,  where  the  king  was  to  have  his  seat,  and  the  people  were  to  meet 
for  the  worship  of  Jehovah — Mount  Zion  ;  but  here  he  speaks  of  the  king 
dom  at  large — the  entire  region  occupied  by  the  flock.     The  mountains  oil 
which  they  roam  are  still,  however,  the  mountains  of  the  height  of  Israel, 
because  everything  in  Israel  has  a  moral  elevation — a  height,  not  as  per 
ceived  by  the  eye  of  flesh,  but  well  known  and  discerned  by  the  eye  of 
faith ;  for  to  it  the  high  places  of  the  earth  are  always  those  where  God's 
kingdom  is. 

2  The  parties  meant  here  by  the  rams  and  the  he-goats  are  evidently  the 
same  as  in  ver.  16,  and  are  called  "  the  fat  and  the  strong,"  as  contradis 
tinguished  from  the  lean,  the  weak,  and  the  sick.     The  Lord  would  judge 
between  sheep  and  sheep,  the  rams  and  he-goats;  that  is,  between  the 
sheep  generally,  and  this  particular  class  of  them,  the  more  robust  and 
headstrong  part ;  for  the  nK^  is  in  apposition  with  the  two  expressions 
that  follow, — the  rams  and  he-goats  ;  these  form  the  evil-doers  that  are  to 
be  distinguished  from  the  nb>?  the  flock  generally.     Many  have  erred  in 
supposing  that  by  this  fat  and  robust  class  are  represented  the  rulers  of  the 
people,  identifying  them  with  the  shepherds  in  the  earlier  portion  ;  against 
the  connection,  for  these  have  already  been  judged  and  disposed  of  (vers.  10, 
11),  and  also  against  the  natural  import  of  the  figure,  which  treats  here  of 
one  part  of  the  flock  as  compared  with  another.     The  misconduct  of  the 
rulers  had  been,  imitated  by  the  stronger  and  more  ungodly  portion  of  the 


372  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

tread  down  the  residue  of  your  pastures  with  your  feet  ?  and  that  ye  drink 
of  the  deeper  waters  (i.e.,  the  clearer  and  cooler),  but  that  ye  trouble  the 
residue  of  them  with  your  feet?  19.  And  my  flock!  they  feed  on  what 
has  been  trodden  by  your  feet ;  and  drink  of  what  has  been  troubled  by 
your  feet.  20.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  to  you,  Behold,  I 
come  and  judge  between  the  fat  sheep  and  the  lean  sheep.  21.  Because 
with  side  and  with  shoulder  ye  have  pushed,  and  with  your  horns  have 
thrust  at  all  the  weak,  till  ye  have  scattered  them  abroad  ;  22.-  And  I  deliver 
my  flock,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  for  a  prey,  and  I  judge  between  sheep 
and  sheep.  23.  And  I  will  raise  up  over  them  one  shepherd,1  and  he  will 
feed  them,  my  servant  David,  he  will  feed  them,  and  he  will  be  their 
shepherd.  24.  And  I  Jehovah  will  be  their  God,  and  my  servant  David  a 
prince  among  them  ;  I  Jehovah  have  spoken.  25.  And  I  establish  for  them 
a  covenant  of  peace,  and  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the  land,  and 
they  dwell  in  the  wilderness  securely,  and  sleep  in  the  woods.  26.  And  I 
will  make  them  and  the  environs  of  my  hill  a  blessing  ;  and  I  will  cause  the 
rain  to  come  clown  in  its  season  ;  there  shall  be  showers  of  blessing.2  27. 


people,  who  had  dealt  unkindly  with  their  poorer  brethren,  and  acted  as  if  it 
would  even  be  an  enhancement  of  their  own  comforts  to  oppress  and  trample 
on  the  rights  of  others.  The  description  given  is  of  a  haughty,  insolent, 
and  selfish  disposition, — the  very  reverse  of  that  required  in  the  kingdom 
of  God ;  and  hence  one  that  must  be  judged  and  punished  by  him. 

1  The  emphasis  is  here  on  the  singleness  of  the  shepherd,  inx  iljn    a 
shepherd,  one  :  qualified  to  exercise  an  undivided  superintendence  over  the 
covenant-people,  as  opposed  to  the  old  division,  fraught  with  such  unhappy 
results,  into  the  two  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel.     It  implies,  of  course, 
the  possession  of  singular  qualities  in  the  one  who  should  be  appointed  to 
hold  such  a  place;  he  must  be  in  the  fullest  sense  a  shepherd  after  God's 
own  heart,  capable  of  healing  far  worse  divisions,  and  rectifying  far  worse 
disorders,  than  those  which  prevailed  when  David  came  to  the  throne.     In 
this  oneness,   therefore,   of  the  promised  shepherd,  an  intimation  of  his 
pre-eminent  excellence  lies  concealed  ;  as  is  also  presently  expressed,  in  his 
being  called  umy  servant  David" — my  servant,  not  pursuing  a  self-chosen 
and  arbitrary  course,  as  so  many  of  the  kings  had  done,  but  acting  as  the 
faithful  administrator  of  the  will  of  God.    In  an  immense  number  of  passages 
this  appellation  is  given  to  David,  to  indicate  his  peculiar  fitness  for  the 
office  of  ruling  in  the  name  of  God. 

2  What   is  meant  by  my  hill  in  the  first   clause   of  this  verse  is  un 
doubtedly  Zion,  for  this  was  God's  hill  by  way  of  eminence.     But  the  idea 
of  Hengstenberg,  that  this  hill  here  designates  Israel  as  the  people  of  God, 
and  that  the  environs  are  the  heathen  who  join  themselves  to  Israel,  is 
quite  unnatural.    The  discourse  here  is  simply  of  Israel,  and  of  the  blessings 
to  be  conferred  on  them.     They  are  represented  as  dwellers  on  God's  hill  of 
Zion,  where,  as  in  the  seat  and  centre  of  all  good,  they  are  richly  blessed ; 
but  not  they  alone,  the  blessing  streams  forth,  and  all  the  environs  of  the 
hill  partake  in  the  beneficence  of  Heaven.     All  the  suburbs,  the  pasture 
grounds  (for  the  allusion  is  plainly  to  that),  are  refreshed  from  the  Lord's 
presence,  as  well  as  the  people  themselves.     And  so  the  idea  indicated  is 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  373 

And  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  its  fruit,  and  the  land  shall  give  forth 
its  increase,  and  they  shall  be  on  their  land  in  security,  and  they  shall  know 
that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I  break  their  yoke,  and  deliver  them  from  the 
hand  of  those  who  made  slaves  of  them.  28.  And  they  shall  no  more  be 
for  a  prey  to  the  heathen,  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  not  devour 
them  ;  and  they  shall  dwell  securely,  and  there  is  nothing  that  shall  make 
them  afraid.  29.  And  I  raise  up  to  them  a  plantation  for  a  name,  and  no 
more  shall  they  be  taken  away  by  hunger  in  the  land,  and  no  more  shall 
they  bear  the  reproach  of  the  heathen.1  30.  And  they  shall  know  that  I 
Jehovah,  their  God,  am  with  them,  and  they  are  my  people,  the  house  of 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  31.  And  ye  my  flock,  my  pasture-flock, 
men  are  ye,  I  am  your  God — saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.2 

A  succession  of  blessings  is  promised  to  the  covenant-people 
in  this  glowing  delineation.  First,  the  evils  were  to  be  rectified 
that  bad  sprung  from  the  former  misrule  and  corruption — the 
scattered  flock  gathered  again  from  its  dispersions,  and  restored 
to  the  good  pasturage  of  the  mountains  of  Israel.  Then  the 
internal  disorders  that  had  been  allowed  to  exist  and  grow,  like 
festering  sores,  among  the  flock  themselves, — the  selfishness  and 
fraud  and  violence  which  had  so  greatly  marred  the  mutual 
flow  and  interchange  of  good,  and  aggravated  every  evil, — these 

presently  expressed  more  fully  by  the  promise  of  rain  in  plentiful  abundance, 
to  produce  a  rich  pasturage.  In  this  promise,  as  well  as  in  the  promise  of 
peace  and  security,  allusion  is  made  to  Lev.  xxvi.  2-6,  where  these  blessings 
are  specially  connected  with  the  covenant  of  God. 

1  By  "the  plantation  for  a  name,"  or  renown,  that  the  Lord  promises 
in  the  earlier  part  of  this  verse  to  raise  up,  is  not  to  be  understood  Israel 
itself,  but  something  for  Israel's  benefit,  something  that  would  give  them  a 
name  of  honour  among  the  nations,  and  take  away  for  ever  the  reproach  of 
poverty  and  want.     It  simply  means  that  the  Lord  would  secure  for  them 
a  flourishing  and  prosperous  condition,  under  the  image  of  "a  place  well 
planted  with  fruitful  trees,  rising  aloft  and  growing  through  the  goodness 
of  God,   so  that  the  Israelites  should  be  replenished  with  the  means  of 
nourishment,  and  be  no  more  impoverished  with  want "  (Gussetius  Lex.). 
An  allusion  appears  to  be  made,  as  Ilengstenberg  and  Havernick  suggest, 
to  Gen.  ii.  8-11,  where  the  garden  of  Eden  is  described  with  its  trees  of  all 
kinds  good  for  food  and  pleasant  to  the  sight :  the  land  of  Israel  would 
become  such  a  glorious  plantation — a  second  Eden. 

2  Dathe,  Ewald,  and  others,  would  understand  the  declaration  jn  this 
closing  verse  as  a  mere  explanation  of  the  parable — that  the  flock  are  the 
men  of  Israel,  and  the  shepherd  is  God.     But  there  is  evidently  an  emphasis 
on  the  men :   men  are  ye ;    remember  your  place,  you  are  but  men ;  but 
remember  at  the   same  time  that  I  am  your  God ;    so  that  without  me 
nothing,  but  with  me  all.     Hitzig  prefers  the  miserable  tautology  of  the 
LXX. :  "  ye  are  my  sheep  and  the  sheep  of  my  flock,  and  I  am,"  etc.,  and 
calls  it  an  excellent  sense ! ! 


374  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

were  now  to  be  rooted  out ;  for  the  persons  indulging  in  sucli 
unrighteous  dispositions  were  to  be  judged  by  God,  and  hence 
forth  denied  a  place  in  his  kingdom.  Then  again,  in  lieu  of 
the  false  shepherds  who  had  formerly  wasted  and  devoured  the 
flock,  there  was  to  be  raised  up  one,  the  pre-eminently  good 
shepherd,  the  Lord's  servant  David,  who  by  his  wise  and 
faithful  administration  should  prevent  such  disorders  and  mis 
rule  from  again  arising,  and  should  establish  throughout  the 
,vhole  land,  even  to  its  wildernesses  and  forests,  perfect  security 
md  peace.  Finally,  in  fit  correspondence  with  this  happy  state 
of  internal  order  and  settled  righteousness,  all  was  to  be  smiling 
and  prosperous  outwardly — refreshing  showers  of  rain  to  fertilize 
the  ground,  fruitful  fields,  cultivated  by  a  free  and  joyous  people, 
crops  everywhere  yielding  their  produce,  and  trees  their  fruit 
in  due  season — all  exhibiting  the  delightful  spectacle  of  a  flock 
pastured  by  God  himself,  or  a  people  enjoying  the  noble  dis 
tinction  of  having  him  for  their  God,  and  sharing  in  the  richest 
manifestations  of  his  goodness. 

In  principle,  it  will  be  observed,  this  promise  of  future  good 
is  precisely  similar  to  what  has  already  so  frequently  appeared 
in  the  threatenings  of  judgment.  It  takes  the  form  of  a 
renewal  of  the  old,  with  such  modifications  and  changes  as 

O 

might  adapt  it  to  the  altered  circumstances  of  the  time  to  come. 
When  judgment  was  the  prophet's  theme,  the  Spirit  led  him  to 
predict  the  return  of  the  years  of  former  troubles  and  desolations, 
not  only  of  the  more  general  calamities  often  experienced, 
;f  famine  and  sword  and  pestilence,  but  even  of  the  more 
^eculiar  afflictions  of  the  Egypt-state  of  bondage  and  oppres 
sion,  and  the  dreary  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  So  germane  to 
the  prophet's  cast  of  mind  is  this  mode  of  representation,  that 
even  when  he  passes  out  of  the  territory  of  Israel,  and  speaks  of 
what  was  to  befall  the  nations  of  the  earth — there,  too,  when 
the  delineation  is  of  a  lengthened  and  minute  description  (as  in 
the  cases  of  Tyre  and  Egypt),  it  is  as  a  recurrence  of  the  past 
that  he  delights  to  present  the  evil  to  our  view  :  the  history  of 
Tyre's  head  and  representative  is  a  kind  of  rehearsal  of  the  best 
and  the  worst  in  the  general  history  of  man  ;  and  Egypt  is 
spoken  of  as  passing  through  Israel's  peculiar  experiences  of 
evil — her  bondage,  her  dispersion,  and  even  her  forty  years' 
sojourn  in  the  wilderness;  Not  that  in  any  of  these  cases  of 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  375 

threatened  judgment  there  was  to  be  the  exact  reproduction  of 
the  old,  but  only  a  renewal  of  its  general  character  and  design — 
a  repetition  of  it  in  its  essential  moral  features.  And  in  each 
case  peculiar  traits,  we  found,  were  introduced  into  the  delinea 
tion,  as  if  on  purpose  to  indicate  that  not  the  literal  recurrence 
of  the  past  was  intended,  but  only  what  chiefly  characterised  it 
as  a  dispensation  of  God.  Now  the  correspondence  in  form 
between  those  threatenings  of  evil  and  this  promise  of  good, 
warrants  us  in  applying  to  it  the  same  principle  of  interpretation  ; 
and  indeed  the  earlier  here,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  must  be  taken 
as  the  key  to  the  latter.  The  uniformity  that  we  expect  to 
characterise  the  productions  of  the  same  hand  demand  that  it  be 
so  taken.  Nor  can  we  fail  to  perceive  here  also  the  introduction 
of  such  an  ideal  trait  as  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the  past  only 
in  character,  not  in  the  precise  forms  and  outward  conditions  of 
being  was  to  be  expected.  For  while  we  are  told  of  a  recovered 
possession  of  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and  a  secure  habitation 
there  as  in  the  best  periods  of  the  past,  and  a  fruitful  inheritance 
and  a  united  people  dwelling  under  the  peculiar  favour  and 
blessing  of  Jehovah,  we  are  at  the  same  time  told  of  David  being 
the  shepherd  under  whose  invigorating  influence  and  paternal 
oversight  the  Lord's  flock  were  to  rise  to  such  a  height  of  peace 
and  prosperity.  But  David  has  long  ago  slept  with  his  fathers, 
having  "served  his  own  generation  according  to  the  will  of 
God ; "  and  not  the  literal  David  restored  to  life  again,  but 
a  distinguished  scion  of  David's  house,  as  our  prophet  had 
himself  already  announced  (chap.  xvii.  22,  xxi.  27),  was  to  be 
the  future  head  and  leader  of  the  Lord's  people.  Shall  we 
therefore  consider  the  name  of  the  father  here  put  for  the  name 
of  the  son  ?  shall  we  merely  substitute  the  Messiah  for  David, 
and  hold  that  with  this  exception  the  whole  description  must  be 
understood  according  to  the  letter?  This  is  what  is  commonly 
done,  but  it  is  manifestly  quite  arbitrary ;  and  we  can  see  no 
reason  in  the  nature  of  things  why  the  literal  and  the  non-literal 
should  be  thus  made  to  alternate  and  be  confounded  with  each 
other. 

The  proper  view  rather  is,  not  that  this  individual  trait  merely, 
but  that  the  description  throughout  is  of  an  ideal  kind :  the 
prophet  foretells  simply  the  nature  of  the  coming  future  under 
the  form  of  the  old  landmarks  and  well-known  relations.  The 


376  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

best  of  the  past  shall  revive  again  ;  more  than  revive,  it  shall 
appear  free  from  the  defects  that  formerly  intermingled  with  it, 
clothed  with  a  perfection  and  a  completeness  hitherto  unknown. 
J$ut  while  the  substance  should  thus  coincide  in  the  new  and  the 
old,  it  is  not  obscurely  intimated  that  the  shell  would  materially 
differ ;  for  certainly  the  literal  David  should  not  be  the  prince 
in  whom  the  promise  was  to  stand,  but  one  unspeakably  greater 
than  he.  And  if  the  other  things  in  the  description  should 
receive  a  corresponding  elevation,  ought  it  to  have  been  a  matter 
of  surprise  to  any  ?  would  the  terms  of  the  prediction  have 
been  thereby  contravened?  would  there  not  rather  have  been 
given  to  them  a  wider  ran  ore  of  meanino-  and  a  nobler  realization? 

t^  O  O 

Unquestionably,  up  to  the  time  that  the  new  David  came  to 
accomplish  the  predicted  good,  believers  were  bound  to  look  for 
a  fulfilment  in  the  nearest  possible  accordance  with  the  letter  of 
the  description.  They  would  thus  get  the  highest  idea  of  the 
expected  good  they  were  then  capable  of  entertaining.  But 
when  the  personal  manifestation  of  the  promised  shepherd  gave 
a  new  turn  and  aspect  to  affairs — when  he  proved  to  be  as  much 
superior  to  David  as  the  builder  of  the  house  is  to  the  house 
itself — when  he  was  found  to  be  the  glorious  and  mighty  Lord 
to  whom,  as  David  in  the  Spirit  foresaw,  the  heritage,  not  of 
Canaan,  but  of  all  lands  and  all  nations  belonged — when  the 
flock  of  the  Lord's  pasture  thus  saw  how  sublime  a  turn  was 
given  to  what  may  be  called  the  key-note  of  the  prediction, — then 
it  behoved  them  to  conclude  that  all  the  rest  must  receive  a 
corresponding  enlargement:  the  region,  the  people,  the  inherit 
ance  of  blessing,  must  severally  be  what  the  old  but  represented 
and  typified;  therefore  no  longer  confined  to  the  ancient  land 
marks  and  conditions,  but  found  wherever  Christ  himself  is,  and 
reaching  as  far  and  as  high  as  the  blessings  of  his  great  redemp 
tion  extend.  And  what  Canaan  would  have  been  with  its  David 
restored  again,  and  all  its  covenant  blessings  enjoyed  in  richest 
profusion,  such,  in  the  new  and  higher  sphere  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom,  shall  the  whole  domain  be  over  which  he  is  Lord, 
when  this  promise  of  good  things  to  come  attains  to  its  full 
and  final  accomplishment.  Nothing  shall  be  left  in  it  that 
can  hurt  or  offend ;  it  shall  be  the  inheritance  of  the  saints 
in  light. 

Such,  it   seems   manifest,   is   the   only  consistent    mode  of 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TEUE  SHEPHERD.  377 

handling  a  prophecy  like  the  one  before  us — the  only  style  of 
interpretation  that  brings  it  into  harmonious  agreement  with 
other  predictions  that  resemble  it  in  form,  and  binds  together 
its  several  parts  by  a  common  principle  of  union.  But  if  still 
it  should  seem  strange  to  any  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  have 
led  his  servant  to  give  forth  a  prediction  of  corning  good  so 
deeply  encased  in  the  literalities  of  the  old  land  and  people  of 
the  covenant,  while  not  these  precisely,  but  things  far  higher 
and  greater,  were  to  constitute  the  proper  fulfilment,  let  them 
seriously  consider  and  resolve  the  question  whether  it  could 
have  been  otherwise.  It  is  easy  for  persons  now — since  the 
realities  of  the  Messiah's  dispensation  have  come — to  say,  that 
if  these  had  been  chiefly  meant  in  the  promise,  they  would  have 
been  more  plainly  described,  the  promise  would  not  have  run 
so  exclusively  in  the  form  of  blessings  announced  to  the  land 
and  people  of  Israel.  But  the  question  to  be  fairly  met  and 
determined  is,  Could  the  promise  of  the  Messiah,  and  of  the 
affairs  connected  with  his  work  and  kingdom,  have  been  unfolded 
to  tbe  Church  beforehand,  with  any  degree  of  detail,  excepting 
under  the  form  and  shadow  of  Old  Testament  relations  ?  We 
unhesitatingly  answer,  No ;  not  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  had 
violently  controlled  the  minds  of  the  prophets,  and  superseded 
the  free  exercise  of  their  faculties ;  Which,  again,  would  have 
interfered  with  the  essential  principles  of  his  working  in  inspira 
tion,  as  well  as  in  the  commoner  operations  of  grace. 

In  conceiving  of  the  higher,  and  anticipating  the  future 
things  of  God's  kingdom,  the  mind  must  always  serve  itself  of 
the  objects  and  relations  of  the  present ;  these  are  the  ladders 
by  which  it  must  rise,  the  leading-strings  by  which  it  must  feel 
its  way  to  what  is  above  and  beyond.  Man  is  the  highest  form 
of  intelligent  and  animated  being  with  which  we  are  conversant 
on  earth ;  and  it  is  solely  by  means  of  his  powers  and  organs — 
indefinitely  expanded,  indeed,  in  the  idea,  but  still  by  means 
of  these  as  the  forms  and  elements  of  thought — that  we  are 
enabled  to  think  of  the  higher  creatures  of  God's  universe,  and 
even  of  God  himself.  We  can  ascribe  no  perfection  to  God;  we 
cannot,  even  in  imagination,  conceive  of  any  belonging  to  him 
but  what  in  an  infinitely  smaller  degree  wre  ourselves  possess. 
And  so  also  in  regard  to  the  concerns  of  God's  kingdom,  the 
future  must  always  take  shape  in  our  minds  from  the  present  or 


378  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

the  past,  the  unknown  from  the  known.  We  are  scarcely 
sensible  how  much  this  is  the  case,  so  long  as  we  confine  our 
selves  to  a  few  vague  and  general  ideas;  but  whenever  we 
attempt  to  go  into  detail,  our  impotence  presently  betrays  itself. 
Let  the  purest  and  loftiest  mind  under  the  present  dispensation 
begin  to  particularize  in  its  thoughts  and  words  respecting  the 
coming  dispensation  of  glory,  and  what  can  it  do  but  tell  of  the 
removal  of  existing  evils,  or  the  accumulation  and  enhancement 
of  present  blessings?  It  imagines  to  itself  a  state  in  which  there 
are  no  longer  to  be  found  sin  and  corruption,  sorrow  and  sighing, 
bodily  diseases,  mental  infirmities,  the  numberless  evils  and  dis 
orders  of  life,  or  the  wide-wasting  desolation  of  death,  now  so 
universally  experienced;  but  instead  of  these,  undecaying  health 
and  beauty,  purity  unalloyed,  the  splendours  of  an  eternal  day, 
rivers  of  pleasure,  feasts  of  joy,  pavements  of  gold,  sceptres, 
crowns,  thrones  of  glory; — what  can  we  say  more?  and  when 
we  have  said  them,  what  are  they  but  the  best  and  greatest 
things  that  the  world,  as  it  now  is,  presents  to  our  view?  And 
yet  we  know,  that  as  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  that  world 
of  incorruption,  so  there  shall  be  no  place  there  for  such  carnal 
elements  of  grandeur  and  delight.  But  we  have  no  other  means 
to  help  out  our  apprehensions  of  what  is  to  be  hereafter,  no  other 
forms  and  conditions  of  being  under  which  to  shape  and  fashion 
our  ideas  respecting  it;  and  inspired  teachers,  as  well  as  others, 
have  no  alternative  but  to  resort  to  them.  The  things  that 
cannot  be  exhibited  thus  are  things  for  the  present  unutterable 
(2  Cor.  xii.  4). 

But  the  position  which  we  now  occupy  in  regard  to  the  more 
glorious  future  is  precisely  that  which  God's  servants  of  old 
occupied  in  regard  to  our  present.  And  nearly  all  the  difficulty 
that  is  experienced,  as  also  nearly  all  the  misapprehensions  that 
have  arisen,  in  reading  the  descriptions  they  have  penned  of 
what  was  to  take  place  in  Messianic  times,  springs  from  the 
necessity  of  realizing  their  exact  position  (which  requires  some 
effort  of  mind),  and  surveying  the  prospects  they  delineated  from 
their ,  and  not  from  our,  point  of  observation.  To  get  a  correct 
understanding  of  what  they  wrote,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  all  was  conceived  and  uttered  by  them  under  the  bond  of 
the  old  shadows  and  relations,  the  impress  of  whose  imperfect 
image  and  superscription  necessarily  appears  in  what  they  wrote. 


PROMISE  OF  THE  TRUE  SHEPHERD.  379 

It  might,  no  doubt,  have  been  possible  for  them,  without  any 
marked  reference  to  these  older  forms  of  things,  to  have  given 
forth  a  few  vague,  and  general  statements  respecting  the  future 
dispensation  of  the  Gospel — such  as,  that  a  great  Saviour  was 
to  appear,  or  a  glorious  work  was  to  be  achieved  for  the  good  of 
the  Church,  or  a  general  diffusion  was  to  take  place  of  peace  and 
blessing  throughout  the  world.  But  such  announcements  could 
not  of  themselves  have  served  the  great  ends  of  prophecy  ;  they 
could  not  have  met  the  emergencies  that  arose  in  the  Church's 
history,  nor  provided  for  a  weak  and  dim-eyed  faith  what  it 
required  for  support  and  nourishment.  Particular  and  even 
lengthened  descriptions  were  indispensable.  But  these  could 
only  be  presented  under  the  existing  forms  of  tilings,  by  telling, 
as  is  done  here,  how  the  present  evils  should  be  abolished,  or 
the  past  good  restored  ;  by  filling  up  the  picture  with  pleasing 
views  of  Canaan,  Jerusalem,  Zion,  hills  of  holiness,  sacrifices  of 
righteousness,  a  seed  of  blessing,  a  king  and  a  commonwealth 
every  way  worthy  of  the  goodness  and  majesty  of  Heaven ;  by 
employing,  in  short,  and  at  the  same  time  expanding  and  im 
proving  upon  the  old  forms  and  relations,  so  as  to  make  out  of 
them  the  picture  of  a  glorious  future — a  picture  perfectly  true 
when  viewed  in  respect  to  its  substance,  but  necessarily  imper 
fect  when  considered  as  to  its  external  conditions.  One  of  two 
things  was  inevitable  :  either  there  must  have  been  no  detailed 
predictions  extending  into  Gospel  times,  or  those  given  must 
have  been  cast  into  the  mould  and  pattern  of  what  existed  in  the 
times  going  before.  And  for  any  one  to  insist  now  on  having 
a  fulfilment,  which  shall  preserve  entire  the  very  forms  of  the 
prophetical  representations,  is  just  to  repeat  on  the  field  of 
prophecy  the  error  of  those  in  apostolic  times  who,  in  respect  to 
the  things  of  salvation  themselves,  sought  to  retain  the  shadow 
along  with  the  substance — who  clung  with  childish  fondness  to 
the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  of  typical  ordinances,  after  the 
Divine  reality  had  come  and  burst  the  narrow  shell,  because  it 
then  required  a  larger  room  and  a  nobler  elevation. 

Does  any  enlightened  Christian  doubt  that  the  prophecy  of 
the  sacrificial  types  has  been  really  fulfilled  in  Christ,  though 
he  formally  offered  himself  on  no  external  altar,  and  sprinkled 
no  actual  mercy-seat  with  his  blood?  Does  he  not  readily 
understand,  that  however  necessary  it  might  be  to  present  the 


380  EZEKIEL  XXXIV. 

corning  redemption  under  such  aspects  before,  yet,  when  the 
redemption  itself  came,  it  was  too  grand  to  be  wrapt  up  in  these 
little  swaddling-bands?  And  why  should  we  judge  otherwise 
of  a  prophecy  like  the  one  before  us — a  prophecy  in  detail,  and 
as  such,  necessarily  written  out  in  the  language  of  Old  Testament 
times  ?  In  that  language  it  made  promise  of  a  glorious  future 
under  Heaven's  anointed  Kino-.  It  told  the  heart  of  faith,  even 

O  ' 

in  the  darkest  season,  not  to  despair;  for  the  evils  then  prevail 
ing  should  be  abolished.  The  kingdom  of  God  should  rise  from 
its  depression,  and  the  territory  of  the  kingdom  yet  become,  to 
its  utmost  bounds,  a  region  of  righteousness  and  peace  and 
blessing.  We  see  the  word  beginning  to  take  effect,  even  before 
Messiah  came,  in  the  partial  re-establishment  of  the  Divine 
kingdom  within  the  ancient  bounds,  and,  as  far  as  was  needed, 
for  the  higher  purposes  of  the  kingdom.  We  see  it  advancing 
afterwards  toward  its  riper  fulfilment,  when  the  great  object 
of  the  prediction  came  and  did  the  part  of  the  Good  Shepherd, 
by  avenging  for  ever  the  cause  of  his  elect,  and  laying  the  sure 
foundation  of  his  everlasting  inheritance.  And  we  see  it  still 
travelling  on  to  its  full  and  destined  realization,  in  every  victim 
that  is  won  from  the  power  of  Satan  and  every  conquest  that  is 
made  by  the  truth  of  God  over  the  darkness  and  corruption  of 
the  world. 

Thus  understood,  the  prophecy  is  consistent  with  itself,  and 
in  accordance  with  others  of  a  like  kind  in  the  earlier  portions 
of  the  Book;  while  in  the  form  it  assumes  it  bears  the  natural 
impress  of  the  time  to  which  it  belonged.  But  if  any,  deter 
mined  to  hear  of  nothing  but  the  letter,  will  still  hold  by  the 
watchword  of  literality, — will  maintain  that  as  it  is  a  literal 
Israel  that  is  the  subject  of  promise,  a  literal  Canaan,  a  literal 
dispersion,  and  a  literal  return  from  it,  such  too  must  be  all  that 
is  to  come, — then,  we  say,  let  them  carry  it  out,  and  the  shepherd 
by  whom  the  good  is  to  be  accomplished  must  be  the  literal 
David,  for  David  alone  is  expressly  named  in  the  promise ;  and 
so  the  Messiah  altogether  vanishes  from  the  word  of  which  he 
is  the  very  heart  and  centre,  and  there  must  be  no  advance  in  the 
Divine  dispensations,  nothing  but  the  formal  reproduction  of  the 
past.  Such  is  the  result  of  a  slavish  adherence  to  the  letter;  it 
ends  in  shutting  up  the  new  wine  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom  in 
the  old  bottles  of  a  transitory  and  provisional  economy.  It  was 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM.  381 

necessary  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy  should  serve  itself  of  such 
old  things,  so  long  as  the  old  lasted;  but  it  is  otherwise  now, 
since  the  greater  and  better  things  have  come — things  so  great 
and  good,  that  "eye  hath  not  seen  them,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  had 
they  entered  into  the  mind  of  man."  And  we  do  no  more  than 
make  due  allowance  for  the  change  that  the  introduction  of  these 
has  brought  into  the  Divine  kingdom,  when  we  say,  that  as  the 
new  David  in  the  prophecy  before  us  was  to  be  one  to  whom 
the  heritage,  not  of  Canaan,  but  of  the  whole  earth  belonged,  so 
the  flock  which  he  presides  over  and  blesses  must  be  the  saints 
of  God,  gathered  from  every  region  by  his  grace,  and  feeding 
in  security  on  his  good  pasturage;  and  that  the  full  realization 
of  the  word  of  promise  shall  be  found  only  when  these  saints 
with  him  shall  possess  the  kingdom,  and  the  ends  of  the  earth 
shall  be  blessed  in  Christ. 


CHAPTER    XXXV. 

THE   JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM. 

SUPERFICIAL  readers  will  be  disposed  to  ask,  What  has  Edom  to 
do  here  ?  The  Lord's  judgment  has  already  been  pronounced 
against  Edom  (chap.  xxv.  12-14),  among  the  enemies  of  the 
covenant-people;  and  this  fresh  denunciation  against  it  is  inserted 
among  predictions  which,  both  before  and  after,  have  immediate 
respect  to  the  covenant-people  themselves.  It  is,  however,  in  its 
proper  place  ;  and  brings  out  another  element  in  the  prosperity 
which  the  Lord  promises  to  his  Church  and  people.  It  gives 
body  and  prominence  to  the  thought  expressed  in  ver.  28  of  the 
preceding  chapter,  that  "  they  should  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the 
heathen."  So  far  from  it,  the  prophet  now  declares  that  the 
worst  and  bitterest  of  all  the  heathen  shall  be  utterly  destroyed 
and  made  desolate,  and  that  those  who  were  then  rejoicing  over 
Israel's  calamities  must  themselves  become  a  spoil,  without  any 
prospect  of  recovery. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying,     2.  Son  of  man, 
set  thy  face  against  Mount  Seir,  and  prophesy  against  it ;     3.  And  say  to  it, 


332  EZEKIEL  XXXV. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  come  to  thee,  Mount  Seir,  and  I  stretch  out 
my  hand  upon  thee,  and  I  make  thee  utterly  desolate.  4.  Thy  cities  will  I 
render  a  desert,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  wilderness,  and  shalt  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah.  5.  Because  thou  hast  had  enmity  for  ever,  and  hast  delivered 
up  the  children  of  Israel  to  the  hands  of  the  sword,1  in  the  time  of  their 
calamity,  in  the  time  of  the  consummation  of  iniquity.  6.  Therefore,  as 
I  live,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  yea  for  blood  will  I  make  thee,  and  blood 
shall  pursue  thee;  surely  thou  dost  hate  blood,  and  blood  shall  pursue  thee.2 


1  The  more  literal  rendering  here  is:  and  hast  poured  out  the  children  of 
Israel  upon  the  hands  of  the  sword.     It  is  a  strong  personification  both  ways 
— the  children  of  Israel  being  likened  to  water  which  the  Edomites  poured 
out,  and  the  sword  upon  which  they  were  poured  being  thought  of  as  a 
person,  a  devourer,  whose  hands  were  instruments  of  destruction.     When 
the  figure  is  understood,  there  is  no  need  for  supplying  blood  as  the  object 
of  the  pouring  out,  as  our  translators  have  done.     The  same  expression  is 
used  in  Jer.  xviii.  21,  and  Ps.  Ixiii.  11;  a  very  closely-related  one  also 
by  our  prophet  at  chap.  xxi.   17.     There,   too,   at  ver.  30,  the  peculiar 
phrase  of  ^p  jiy^  the  end,  or  consummation  of  iniquity,  occurs. 

2  The  whole  cast  of  expression  in  this  verse  will  appear  strange,  unless  it 
is  understood  that  there  is  a  play  upon  the  name  of  Edom,  which  is  very  like 
the  Hebrew  word  for  blood.    Ql  j<  (Edom)  was  to  be  made  for  Q'q  (dam) ,  blood ; 
the  former  also  signifying  red,  which  rendered  the  transition  to  blood  more 
natural  and  easy.     Qis  also  has  the  signification  of  blood  in  the  cognate 
dialects.     The  most  peculiar  part  of  the  verse,  however,  is  the  clause  j-6'DX 
njO^  DT    which  not  only  our  version,  but  also  nearly  all  commentators, 
render  "since  thou  hast  not  hated  blood."    But  no  examples  can  be  produced 
to  justify  such  a  rendering ;  and  the  remark  of  Hitzig,  that  as  the  words  stand 
they  must  be  regarded  by  every  reader  as  an  affirmative  protestation,  is  quite 
correct.    Because  the  clause  therefore  ascribes  to  Edom  the  hating  of  blood, 
he  rejects  it  as  a  gloss — a  most  unlikely  clause  to  be  a  gloss — and  supports 
himself  by  the  omission  of  it  in  the  LXX.     I  cannot  concur  with  Theodoret, 
Jerome,  Michaelis,  and  others,  that  Dl  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  relation 
ship,  and  refers  to  the  near  affinity  between  Esau  and  Jacob,  as  being  both 
sprung  from  one  father;  so  that  the  hating  of  the  Israelites  on  the  part  of 
Edom  was  like  a  hating  of  their  own  blood.    There  is  no  authority  for  ascrib 
ing  to  the  word  such  a  meaning.     But  taking  blood  in  the  usual  sense,  I 
do  not  see  why,  in  a  passage  so  strongly  epigrammatic  and  alliteral  as 
this,  the  hatred  of  it  might  not  be  affirmed  of  Edom ;  for  the  grand  point 
on  which  the  desires  of  the  Edomites  were  centred  was  life,  life  in  them 
selves,  as  opposed  to  the  bloody  extermination  they  sought  for  Israel :  the 
shedding  of  their  blood  was  what  they  would  on  no  account  think  of.     I 
take  the  meaning  to  be,  therefore:    The  preservation  of  thy  life  is  what 
thou  art  intent  on  securing;  the  thought  of  blood  being  shed  among  thee 
is  what  thou  art  putting  far  from  thee  as  the  object  of  aversion  ;  but  God's 
purposes  are  contrary  to  thine,  and  what  thou  hatest  he  will  send — blood 
shall  pursue  thee. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM.  383 

7.  And  I  make  Mount  Seir  a  waste  and  a  desolation,  and  I  cut  off  from  it 
him  that  passes  and  returns.  8.  And  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  slain ; 
thy  hills  and  thy  valleys,  and  all  watered  plains — the  pierced-through  with 
the  sword  shall  fall  in  thee.  9.  Perpetual  desolations  I  will  make  thee,  and 
thy  cities  shall  not  return,  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  10.  Be 
cause  thou  hast  said,  These  two  nations  and  these  two  lands  shall  be  mine, 
and  we  inherit  it ;  and  Jehovah  was  there  I1  11.  Therefore,  as  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord  Jehovah,  so  I  act  according  to  thy  anger,  and  according  to  thy 
envy  which  thou  hast  shown  out  of  thy  hatred  toward  them  ;  and  I  make 
myself  known  among  them  (namely,  the  Israelites),  when  I  shall  execute 
judgment  on  thee.  12.  And  thou  shalt  know  that  I  Jehovah  have  heard  all 
thy  scornful  speeches  which  thou  hast  uttered  against  the  mountains  of 
Israel,  saying,  A  desolation  !  to  us  they  are  given  for  food.  13.  And  ye 
have  magnified  yourselves  against  me  with  your  mouth,  and  have  swelled 
your  words  against  me  :  I  have  heard.  14.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
According  to  the  joy  of  the  whole  land,  I  will  make  you  a  desolation.2  15. 
According  to  thy  rejoicing  for  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of  Israel,  because 
it  is  desolate,  so  will  I  do  to  thee;  a  desolation  shalt  thou  be,  Mount  Seir, 
and  all  Edom,  all  of.it ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

The  leading  object  of  this  severe  and  unsparing  denunciation 
against  Edom,  is  plainly  to  exhibit  in  sharp  contrast  the  things 
that  concerned  them  with  those  which  belonged  to  the  covenant- 
people.  There  was  an  apparent  superiority  on  the  side  of  Edom 
at  the  time  Ezekiel  wrote,  but  the  real  advantage  was  with 
Israel.  In  the  latter,  amid  all  their  desolations,  there  still  was  a 
seed  of  blessing,  the  Divine  germ  of  a  glorious  future ;  but  in 
the  other  no  such  germ  existed — nothing  wrought  there  but 
enmity  to  God  and  holiness,  and  nothing  was  to  be  expected  but 

1  The  construction  in  this  10th  verse  is  peculiar,  as  in  broken  sentences  it 
expresses  the  excited  feelings  which  were  called  forth.     It  is  on  this  principle 
we  are  to  account  for  the  DN  at  the  beginning  of  the  words  put  into  the 
mouth  of  the  Edomites ;  it  marks  the  object  uppermost  in  their  thought : 
these  two  nations  and  these  two  lands.     Then  they  think  of  the  two  as  one 
whole,  a  region  to  be  possessed  :  And  we  inherit  it.     And  the  last  clause, 
And  Jehovah  was  there !  is  thrown  in  by  the  prophet  as  an  interjection,  a 
sudden  flash  of  light  revealing  the  folly  and  impiety  of  their  imaginations. 
They  were  calculating  on  doing  what  they  pleased  with  a  land  with  which 
Jehovah  was  peculiarly  connected,  and  which  he  claimed  as  specially  his 
own  :  how  vain  and  presumptuous  ! 

2  I  quite  agree  with  Hav.,  that  p^rr^S   must  here  be  taken  in  the 
restricted  sense  of  all  the  land,  viz.  of  Edom.     For  it  could  scarcely  be 
meant  that  Edom  was  to  be  desolate,  while  all  the  earth  rejoiced,  since  in 
the  next  chapter  the  other  heathen  nations  are  expressly  coupled  with 
Edom  in  her  desolations.     The  meaning  is,  that  as  the  whole  country  had 
rejoiced  in  Israel's  fall,  so  it  would  all  be  made  desolate  in  turn  ;  according 
to  the  joy,  so  the  desolation,  as  is  explained  in  next  verse. 


381  EZEKIEL  XXXV. 

unrelieved  desolation.  In  the  earlier  prediction  (chap,  xxv.), 
while  the  Edomites  were  declared  to  be  the  objects  of  the  Lord's 
vengeance,  it  was  also  said  that  "his  people  Israel"  were  to  be 
the  instruments  of  executing  it.  Here,  however,  nothing  is 
mentioned  as  to  the  way  by  which  the  work  of  desolation  was 
to  be  accomplished :  the  thoughts  chiefly  pressed  are,  that 
Eclom's  own  destructive  policy  was  to  be  meted  back  to  her  in 
full  measure,  and  that  the  destruction  in  her  case  was  to  be 
singularly  complete.  So  far  from  being  allowed,  as  the  children 
of  Edom  themselves  thought,  to  step  into  the  room  of  Israel  and 
occupy  what  they  had  lost,  they  should  not  be  able  to  retain 
their  own  :  their  prospects  for  the  future  looked  out  upon  blank 
and  dreary  desolation. 

It  is  necessary,  however,  to  understand  this,  not  absolutely  of 
the  Edomites  as  men,  but  only  in  their  character  as  the  heredi 
tary  and  s\vorn  enemies  of  the  covenant-people — the  people 
whom  the  Lord  had  chosen  and  blessed.  For  it  is  in  this 
character  that  they  are  here  introduced ;  and  only  when  under 
stood  as  applying  to  them  thus,  is  the  word  found  to  consist 
either  with  the  facts  of  history  or  with  the  prophecy  of  Amos 
(chap.  ix.  12),  which  makes  mention  of  a  remnant  of  Edom 
over  whom,  as  well  as  other  heathen,  God's  name  should  be 
called.  But  as  a  nation  set  with  relentless  hatred  against  the 
truth  and  people  of  God,  the  Edomites  were  doomed  to  utter 
destruction,  and,  as  we  said  before,  they  actually  experienced  it. 
While  Israel  rose  in  Christ  to  the  supremacy  of  the  world,  Edom 
vanished  from  the  face  of  history — their  memorial  perished,  their 
envy  and  cruel  hatred  were  for  ever  buried  among  the  ruins  of 
the  nations. 

But  why  in  this  connection  should  Edom  have  alone  been 
singled  out  for  destruction  by  the  prophet?  Not  as  if  her  people 
only  were  appointed  to  suffer  vengeance  at  the  hand  of  God ; 
but  because  in  the  bitterness  of  their  spite,  and  the  intensity  of 
their  hatred  to  the  cause  and  people  of  God,  they  stood  pre 
eminent  among  the  nations;  and  so  were  fitly  chosen  as  the 
representatives  of  the  whole.  It  is  precisely  what  was  done  also 
by  Isaiah  in  his  sixty-third  chapter,  and  still  more  strikingly  in 
the  thirty- fourth,  when  speaking  of  the  Lord's  controversy  with 
the  heathen,  and  the  fury  that  he  was  to  pour  forth  on  the 
nations,  it  is  all  represented  as  concentrating  itself  on  Edom, 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EDOM.  385 

and  taking  end  there  in  one  fearful  outburst  of  overwhelming 
vengeance.  The  region  where  the  greatest  enmity  reigned  is 
the  ideal  territory  where  the  final  recompenses  of  judgment 
take  place.  And  that  it  is  on  the  same  account  such  peculiar 
prominence  is  here  also  given  to  Edom,  is  clear,  not  only  from 
the  connection  and  character  of  the  prophecy  itself,  but  also 
from  what  is  written  in  ver.  5  of  the  next  chapter,  where  it  is 
said,  that  "  the  Lord  had  spoken  in  the  fire  of  his  jealousy 
against  the  remnant  of  the  heathen,  and  against  all  Edom." 
Whilst  speaking  against  Edom,  he  had  in  reality  spoken  against 
all  the  heathen ;  for  it  was  simply  as  heathen  of  the  worst  and 
most  inveterate  stamp,  that  he  had  spoken  as  he  did  against 
Edom.  So  that  wherever  the  same  elements  of  evil  might  be 
found,  the  same  judgment  from  the  Lord  might  be  expected. 

This  also,  it  will  be  seen,  confirms  the  view  we  took  of  the 
promise  to  Israel  in  the  preceding  chapter.  The  coming  good 
and  evil  are  alike  pictured  forth  under  the  old  relations,  as  if 
these  were  always,  and  these  only,  to  exist ;  while  yet  the  word 
is  pregnant  with  meaning  for  all  nations  and  all  times.  The 
heathen  at  large  are  represented  in  Edom  ;  and  hence,  by  parity 
of  reason,  the  whole  elect  family  of  God  in  Israel.  Edom's 
doom  as  here  delineated  is  the  fate  of  heathendom ;  and  Israel's 
promised  blessedness  and  glory  under  the  good  shepherd  carries 
in  its  bosom  the  high  and  happy  destiny  of  the  Church  of  the 
living  God.  As  formerly  in  the  case  of  Isaac  and  Ishmael 
(Gal.  iv.  22-31),  so  here  in  Israel  and  Edom,  the  whole  human 
family  have  their  representation — in  the  one  all  that  are  of  the 
Spirit,  in  the  other  all  that  are  of  the  flesh.  The  old  relations 
in  both  cases  alike  have  passed,  and  can  never  be  recalled 
again ;  but  the  truth  couched  under  them  eternally  abides. 
And  in  that  truth,  as  set  forth  in  the  prophecy  before  us.  there 
is  embodied  the  solemn  testimony,  that  the  Edomite  spirit,  the 
carnal,  unbelieving,  rebellious  spirit,  is  most  surely  doomed  to 
perdition  :  enmity  to  the  cause  and  kingdom  of  Christ  is 
marked  out  in  the  councils  of  Heaven  for  irretrievable  ruin. 
They  who  are  of  it  cannot  overthrow  the  Church,  but  must 
themselves  be  overthrown  and  fall  under  the  stroke  of  ven 
geance. 


2-B 


386  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

ISRAEL    REVENGED   AND    COMFORTED — THE   NEW   HEART   AND 
THE   BLISSFUL   HERITAGE, 

IN  this  chapter  we  have  a  continuation  of  the  present  great 
theme  of  the  prophet :  Israel's  prospective  revival  and  pros 
perity  as  the  Lord's  covenant-people.  Bat  it  treats  of  this 
under  different  aspects.  In  the  first  section  (vers.  1-15)  the 
prophet  unfolds  the  essential  distinction  between  Israel  and 
Edom  with  the  other  nations  of  heathendom,  in  that  the  former 
had,  what  the  others  had  not,  an  interest  in  the  power  and 
faithfulness  of  God,  in  consequence  of  which  Israel's  heritage 
must  revive  and  nourish,  and  the  hopes  of  the  heathen  concern 
ing  it  must  be  disappointed.  In  the  next  section  (vers,  16-21) 
the  reason  is  given  why  the  Lord  had  for  a  time  acted  toward 
his  land  and  people  as  if  their  connection  with  him  was  an  evil 
rather  than  a  blessing;  it  is  traced  up  to  the  incorrigible 
wickedness  of  the  people,  and  the  necessity  of  God's  vindicating 
the  cause  of  his  holiness  by  exercising  upon  them  the  severity 
of  his  displeasure.  Then  in  another  section  (vers.  22-33)  the 
purpose  of  the  Lord  for  their  future  good  is  unfolded — his 
purpose  for  his  own  name's  sake  to  revive  his  cause  among  his 
people,  and  that  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  by  first  renew 
ing  their  hearts  to  holiness,  and  then  by  restoring  them  to  a 
flourishing  condition  outwardly.  And  in  a  short  concluding 
section  (vers.  34-38)  the  general  result  is  summed  up,  and  the 
impressions  noticed  which  the  whole  \vas  fitted  to  produce 
upon  the  minds  of  others.  We  shall  take  up  the  chapter  in 
these  successive  portions. 

Yer.  1.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  prophesy  to  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and 
say,  Mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  Jehovah.  2.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Because  the  enemy  says  over  you,  "  Aha!  and  the  everlast 
ing  heights  have  become  an  inheritance  for  us : "  *  3.  Therefore  prophesy  and 

1  The  prophecy  takes  the  form  of  an  address  to  the  mountains  of  Israel, 
partly  in  allusion  to  the  "  Mount  Seir "  of  the  preceding  prophecy,  and 
partly  also  with  reference  to  the  original  prophecy  in  Gen.  xlix.  26,  where 
the  peculiar  blessings  of  the  covenant  are  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the 


ISRAEL  REVENGED  AND  COMFORTED.          387 

say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because,  because  of  their  breathing  and 
snuffing  after  you  round  about,1  in  order  that  you  might  be  an  inheritance 
to  the  remnant  of  the  heathen,  and  ye  have  been  taken  up  (literally,  and 
are  gone  up)  in  the  lips  of  talkers,2  and  are  an  infamy  of  the  people  ; 
4.  Therefore,  mountains  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  thus 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  to  the  mountains,  and  the  hills,  to  the  watered 
plains,  and  the  valleys,  and  to  the  desolate  wastes,  and  to  the  cities  that 
are  forsaken,  which  are  for  a  prey  and  for  a  derision  to  the  remnant  of  the 
heathen  that  are  round  about ;  5.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Surely  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  I  speak  against  the  remnant  of  the 
heathen,  and  against  Edom,  all  of  it,3  who  have  appointed  my  land  for  an 
inheritance  to  themselves  with  the  joy  of  the  whole  heart,  with  contempt  of 
soul,  in  order  that  they  may  plunder  its  pasturage.4  6.  Therefore  prophesy 

"  everlasting  hills."  The  reference  to  this  passage  is  especially  manifest  in 
the  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  adversaries,  claiming  the  everlasting 
heights  for  their  inheritance ;  as  much  as  to  say,  We  have  seen  an  end  of 
the  blessings  to  Israel — the  heights  with  which  these  blessings  were  con 
nected,  and  which  stood  as  fixed  natural  memorials  of  them,  have  become 
ours.  Here,  too,  the  adversaries  are  personified  as  one — n^^n,  the  enemy  ; 
for,  as  was  mentioned  under  last  chapter,  they  were  all  represented  in  the 
Edomite — the  name  Edom  comprehends  the  whole. 

1  In  regard  to  the  second  of  the  two  verbs  in  this  clause,  C|X$,  there  is  not 
much  diversity  of  opinion  now.     It  does  not  properly  signify  to  swallow 
up,  but  to  snuff  up,  in  the  manner  of  a  wild  beast,  which  with  a  keen  and 
ravenous  appetite  smells  after  its  prey,  in  order  to  seize  and  devour  it.     In 
this  sense  it  is  used  by  the  Psalmist  (in  Ps.  Ivi.  1,  2)  of  his  cruel  enemies  : 
"  Be  gracious  to  me,  0  God,  for  there  snuffs  after  me  man,"  etc.     The 
other  verb,  rriB$,  is  generally  derived  from  Dtt&S  whose  proper  signification 
is,  to  be  made  desolate,  although  here  it  has  sometimes — still  also  by  Ewald 
and  Havernick — been  rendered  by,  to  make  desolate,  to  lay  waste.    But  this 
would  more  appropriately  have  been  ascribed  to  the  Chaldeans,  not  to  the 
neighbouring  enemies,  who  are  regarded  here  as  hunting  after  the  land  of 
Israel  as  an  object  of  desire.     I  think  therefore,  with  Hitzig,  that  the  pass 
age  is  to  be  explained  from  Isa.  xlii.  14,  where  the  same  two  verbs  are  used 
together,  and  the  Qb>K  must  be  taken  from  the  root  Q^'j,  to  breathe,  of 
which  notW,  breath,  is  a  derivative  in  very  frequent  use.     Viewed  thus,  the 
surrounding  enemies  are  strikingly  and  quite  appropriately  represented  as 
breathing  and  snuffing  like  wild  beasts  after  Canaan  as  their  prey. 

2  The  expression  here  is  best  understood  as  an  elliptical  one  :  the  lip  of 
the  tongue,  for,  the  lip  of  a  man  of  tongue,  pj^i?  ^ys,  a  talker,  or  speakers 
generally. 

3  The  tf^3  is  the  Chaldaic  form,  for  which  many  codices  have  substituted 
the  more  regular  pfe.     Such  a  Chaldaic  termination,  however,  was  not 
unnatural. 

4  The  common  rendering  of  this  latter  clause  is,  "that  it  may  be  cast 
forth  as  a  prey."     But  this  is  a  very  unnatural  expression  to  be  used  of  a 
land.     Therefore  taking  rJBhjo,  not  as  an  Aramaic  inf.,  but  as  the  substan- 


388  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

upon  the  land  of  Israel,  and  say  to  the  mountains  and  the  hills,  to  the 
watered  plains  and  valleys,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Lo !  I  come,  in 
my  jealousy  and  in  my  fury  I  speak,  because  ye  bear  the  reproach  of  the 
heathen.  7.  Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  I  lift  up  my  hand 
(i.e.,  I  swear),  surely  the  heathen  that  are  round  about  you,  they  shall  bear 
their  shame.  8.  And  ye  mountains  of  Israel  shall  put  forth  your  branches, 
and  bear  your  fruit  to  my  people  Israel ;  for  they  are  near  to  come. 

9.  For,  lo  !  I  come  to  you,  and  turn  toward  you,  and  ye  are  tilled  and  sown  : 

10.  And  I  multiply  upon  you  men, — the  whole  house  of  Israel,  all  of  it ; 
and  the  cities  shall  be  inhabited  and  the  ruins  built :    11.  And  I  multiply 
upon  you  man  and  beast,  and  they  shall  increase,  and  be  fruitful ;  and  I  will 
settle  you  as  in  your  olden  times,  and  do  good  to  you  above  your  former 
state  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  :    12.  And  I  will  make  men  to 
walk  upon  you,  even  my  people  Israel,  and  they  shall  possess  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  be  to  them  for  an  inheritance,  and  thou  shalt  not  again  bereave  them. 
13.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Because  they  say,  "A  devourer  of  men 
thou  art,  and  a  bereaver  of  thy  nation,"     14.  Therefore  thou  shalt  not 
devour  men  any  more,  and  thy  nation  thou  shalt  not  make  to  stumble 
any  more,1  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.     15.  And  I  shall  make  the  slander  of 
the  heathen  to  be  no  more  heard  in  thee,  nor  the  reproach  of  the  peoples 
shalt  thou  bear  any  more ;  and  thy  nation  shalt  thou  not  make  to  stumble 
any  more,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

This  first  section  is  mainly  intended  to  exhibit  the  contrast 
that  still  existed,  notwithstanding  all  appearances  to  the  contrary, 

tive,  and  changing  thus  the  pointing  of  fh?,  so  as  to  make  it  the  inf.  instead 
of  the  noun,  we  have  the  sense  :  in  order  to  plunder  its  pasturage  ;  a  quite 
suitable  meaning.  In  chap.  xxi.  20,  we  have  also  jy?pi>  coupled  with  *?  of  the 
infinitive.  In  this,  again,  I  follow  Hitzig. 

1  There  is  here  a  play  of  words  in  the  original  which  is  necessarily  lost 
in  the  translation.  The  prophet  had  mentioned  the  reproach  against  the 
laud  as  being  only  the  grave  of  its  people,  devouring  and  bereaving  them, 
like  a  cruel  unnatural  mother.  But  now  in  predicting  the  better  future, 
while  he  says  it  should  not  devour  any  more,  he  suddenly  changes  the 
other  verb,  and  instead  of  saying,  ^SEfrl  tib,  tnou  shalt  not  bereave,  he 
says,  ^$3n  N^,  thou  shalt  not  make  to  stumble  or  fall.  The  Kri  reading 
substitutes  the  former,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of  affording  an  easy  ex 
planation,  and  the  ancient  versions  also  express  it.  Most  modern  commen 
tators  adopt  the  Kri,  so  still  Ewald  and  Hitzig ;  but  Havernick  properly 
adheres  to  the  text.  For  the  repetition  of  "6cbri  &  in  the  next  verse  is  a 
proof  that  here  a  change  of  meaning  is  introduced,  and  a  change  that  also 
very  suitably  prepares  the  way  for  the  truths  to  be  declared  in  the 
next  section  (ver.  16,  etc.),  which  unfolds  the  moral  cause  of  the  past 
destructions,  the  sins  and  defections  of  the  people.  Canaan  must  not  only 
cease  to  devour  and  swallow  up  its  people,  but  even  to  prove  an  occasion  of 
stumbling  to  them.  By  being  this  in  time  past,  it  had  necessarily  proved 
a  destroyer ;  but  henceforth  both  cause  and  effect  should  be  taken  away. 
Throughout,  the  land  is  personified,  and  represented  as  doing  that  which 
was  done  on  it. 


ISRAEL  REVENGED  AND  COMFORTED.          389 

between  Israel  and  the  surrounding  heathen.  As  matters  now 
stood,  it  seemed  to  the  eye  of  flesh  that  the  dominion  and  the 
power  were  connected  with  heathenism,  as  if  the  conquering 
and  predominating  element  were  there,  not  with  Israel.  For 
at  present  the  most  depressed  and  desolate  region  in  all  that 
neighbourhood  was  the  land  of  Israel ;  what  should  have  been 
pre-eminently  the  land  of  blessing  had  now  become  emphati 
cally  the  land  of  emptiness  and  desolation  ;  instead  of  cherish 
ing  and  supporting,  it  had,  as  it  were,  ejected  its  inhabitants,  as 
if  weary  of  their  presence,  or  opened  its  bosom  to  become  their 
common  sepulchre.  It  lay  now  like  a  defenceless  prey  before 
the  Edomite  and  other  heathen  adversaries,  who  had  so  long 
waited  and  longed  for  the  day  of  evil,  and  who  therefore 
rejoiced  over  the  fall  of  Israel  as  their  greatest  triumph.  But 
this  triumph,  the  Lord  here  declares  by  his  servant,  would  be 
short ;  nay,  it  was  the  very  reason  why  he  must  soon  bring  on  a 
change,  and  reverse  the  present  aspect  and  condition  of  things. 
Because  the  name  of  Jehovah  was  associated  with  Israel,  he 
cannot  allow  this  appearance  of  impotence  in  Israel,  and  power 
in  the  adversaries,  to  continue ;  he  cannot  give  up  his  people 
to  the  scorn  of  the  wicked,  or  his  land  to  be  divided  by  them 
at  pleasure  as  their  proper  inheritance ;  he  must  restore  every 
thing  again  to  its  appropriate  place,  and  settle  in  due  order  the 
relations  of  things.  And  he  will  presently  do  it.  Israel  shall 
again  return  and  possess  the  land,  whose  prosperity  and  fulness 
shall  be  restored  as  at  first,  even  more  than  restored, — for  a  higher 
state  of  felicity  awaited  them  in  the  future  than  had  been  expe 
rienced  in  the  past ;  and  the  reproach  would  be  for  ever  taken 
away  of  the  land  proving  the  death-region  of  its  inhabitants. 

It  is  clear,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  this  prophecy,  that  the 
good  it  contemplates  and  promises  for  Israel  must  have  begun 
at  an  early  period  to  be  realized  ;  for  not  only  is  it  expressly 
said  that  it  was  near  to  come,  or  nigh  at  hand,  but  the  Edomites 
and  other  heathen  neighbours  are  represented  as  still  occu 
pying  the  same  relations  towards  Israel  as  they  had  done — 
only  henceforth  themselves  bearing  the  reproach  which  they 
were  then  casting  upon  Israel,  and  incapable  of  any  longer 
speaking  scornfully  of  the  covenant  land  and  people.  I  should 
hold  it  to  be  a  dishonest  shift,  first  to  take  the  terms  of  the  pro 
phecy  in  their  literal  import,  and  then  say  there  has  as  yet 


390  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

been  no  fulfilment  in  the  past,  but  there  shall  be  one  in  the 
future — a  literal  Israel  shall  yet  find  the  literal  Canaan  all  that 
is  here  predicted.  For  if  there  has  been  no  fulfilment  in  the 
past  of  a  literal  kind,  neither  can  there  be  in  the  future  ;  there 
shall  certainly  want  two  most  essential  elements  of  literality  : 
first,  the  nearness  of  accomplishment  spoken  of  by  the  prophet ; 
and  the  existence  of  the  Edomites  and  other  heathen  neighbours, 
who  for  the  present  rejoiced  in  Canaan  as  lying  at  their  feet, 
but  were  again  to  find  its  reproach  and  humiliation  become  their 
own,  while  it  and  Israel  were  exalted.  These  ancient  adversaries 
are  for  ever  gone  ;  the  external  relations  of  that  olden  time  have 
entirely  ceased  ;  and  if  Israel  were  restored  to-morrow,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  take  this  part  of  the  prophecy  in  another  than 
the  literal  sense. 

But  do  we,  on  the  other  hand,  hold  by  nothing  literal  in  the 
interpretation,  and  look  for  nothing  literal  in  the  fulfilment  ? 
By  no  means.  We  regard  the  passage  as  a  prophecy  of  the  full 
return  of  prosperity  and  blessing  to  the  Lord's  covenant-people, 
and  even  the  perpetual  enjoyment  of  this — exhibited  under  the 
form  of  the  Old  Testament  relations,  the  only  ones  lying  within 
the  ken  of  the  prophet.  As  soon  as  the  prophecy  was  uttered,  it 
was  the  duty  of  the  Lord's  people  to  deal  with  him  respecting  the 
fulfilment  of  the  word,  and  to  look  for  the  fulfilment  in  the  most 
exact  and  literal  manner.  There  can  be  no  question  that  some 
amongst  them  did  this  ;  and,  within  a  period  that  might  justly  be 
called  near,  the  Lord  showed,  by  a  marvellous  turn  in  providence, 
how  ready  he  was  on  his  part  to  accomplish  what  was  promised, 
and  how  he  laid  open  to  them  the  way  of  a  speedy  return  to 
national  greatness  and  prosperity.  The  opportunity  was  not 
embraced  as  it  should  have  been  by  the  children  of  the  disper 
sion  :  only  a  comparatively  small  number  of  them  actually 
returned  to  the  land  of  their  fathers  when  the  opening  was  pre 
sented  to  them ;  and  of  those  who  did,  many  still  wanted  the 
spirit  of  piety,  which  alone  God  promised  to  bless.  Still,  with 
all  the  shortcomings  and  imperfections  that  existed,  a  certain 
fulfilment  of  the  most  literal  kind  began  at  an  early  period  to 
be  given  to  the  prophecy.  People  of  the  stock  of  Israel  did 
again  possess  the  land  of  their  fathers  ;  by  them  the  mountains 
of  Israel  were  again  cultivated,  and  for  them  the  land  yielded 
its  fruit ;  there  again,  as  of  old,  the  seed  of  man  and  of  beast 


ISRAEL  REVENGED  AND  COMFORTED.  391 

did  greatly  increase  and  multiply,  so  that  the  region  was  known 
for  ages  as  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  prosperous  in  Asia  ; 
and  that  too  while  the  old  and  hereditary  enemies  of  Israel 
in  the  neighbourhood  sank  into  comparative  insignificance,  and 
lost  their  original  place  in  the  scale  of  nations.  Had  Israel 
but  seen  in  all  this  the  hand  of  God,  and  viewed  the  whole 
in  connection  with  his  unchangeable  righteousness,  there 
should  certainly  have  been  nothing  wanting  to  complete  the 
correspondence  between  the  description  of  the  prophet  and  the 
facts  of  history  ;  the  fulfilment  would  have  been,  not  partial  and 
temporary,  but  full  and  permanent,  while  the  old  relations 
lasted  ;  and  even  when  they  changed,  the  good  for  the  natural 
Israel,  so  far  from  ceasing,  would  only  have  risen  to  a  higher 
sphere,  and  passed  into  a  nobler  realization. 

So  long,  therefore,  as  the  relations  of  the  prophet's  time 
existed — that  is,  so  long  as  the  kingdom  of  God  was  connected 
with  the  people  of  Israel  as  a  distinct  nation,  with  the  land  of 
Canaan  as  their  proper  inheritance,  and  heathen  rivals  and 
enemies  for  their  neighbours — so  long  as  this  was  the  case,  we 
hold  that  as  nothing  but  a  literal  fulfilment  should  have  been 
looked  for,  so  a  very  considerable  fulfilment  of  this  nature, 
and  one  that  sufficiently  marked  the  hand  of  God,  did  take 
place.  Still  all  was  then  marred  with  imperfection.  The 
religion  itself  of  the  covenant-people  was  such,  it  could  make 
nothing  perfect ;  and  we  can  only  look  for  the  promised  good 
being  realized  in  any  degree  of  completeness  when  the  better 
things  of  the  new  dispensation  come  in.  But  then,  at  the 
same  time,  the  old  relations  of  necessity  give  way  :  the  outward 
Israel  are  no  longer  distinctively  the  covenant-people ;  all  the 
children  of  faith  of  every  land  become  the  seed  of  blessing, 
and  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  And  while  it  is  only 
under  the  Gospel  dispensation  that  we  can  expect  the  perfect 
realization  of  the  promised  good,  we  must  now  no  longer 
expect  it  after  the  old  form,  or  according  to  the  simply  literal 
interpretation.  The  good  is  too  great  and  expansive  to  be  now 
shut  up  within  such  narrow  limits ;  for  since  wherever  there 
is  a  royal  priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  services  to  God, 
there  the  incense  and  offerings  of  the  temple  are  perpetuated 
(Mai.  i.  11  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5)  ;  so  wherever  there  are  members  of 
Christ,  there  also  are  the  mountains  of  Canaan,  there  are  the 


392  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

people  who  have  the  promise  of  all  things  for  their  portion, 
on  whom  descends  the  blessing — life  for  evermore.  Nor  can 
the  old  evils  properly  return  again ;  for  the  good  is  avowedly 
connected  with  nothing  but  a  spiritual  qualification,  and  is 
entirely  dissevered  from  a  merely  ancestral  relationship  or  a 
political  existence  in  the  world. 

We  can  see  nothing  fanciful  or  arbitrary  in  this  mode  of 
interpretation,  and  are  persuaded  that  it  rests  upon  an  indis 
pensable  necessity,  partly  in  the  nature  of  things,  and  partly  in 
the  operations  of  the  human  mind.  For  the  grounds  of  this  we 
refer  to  the  remarks  on  the  preceding  chapter,  and  proceed  to 
the  next  section  of  the  prophecy. 

Ver.  16.  And  the  wor$  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  17.  Son  of 
man,  the  house  of  Israel,  those  that  dwelt  upon  their  land,  and  they  denied 
it  by  their  ways  and  their  doings,  their  way  before  me  was  as  the  defilement 
of  a  removed  woman.  18.  And  I  poured  out  (the  future  in  the  original,  to 
denote  continued  action)  my  fury  upon  them,  because  of  the  blood  which 
they  shed  upon  the  land,  and  because  they  defiled  it  with  their  idols ;  19. 
And  I  scattered  them  among  the  nations,  and  dispersed  them  in  the  lands ; 
according  to  their  way  and  according  to  their  doings  I  judged  them.  20. 
And  when  they  came  to  the  heathen,  whither  they  went,  they  profaned  my 
holy  name,  since  it  was  said  of  them,  "  Jehovah's  people  are  these,  and  from 
his  land  have  they  gone  forth."  21.  And  I  felt  pity  for  my  holy  name,  which 
the  house  of  Israel  profaned  among  the  heathen,  whither  they  went.1 

The  passage,  it  will  be  observed,  is  of  an  unfinished  and 
incomplete  nature,  being  chiefly  intended  to  form  a  sort  of 
preamble  to  the  great  promise  contained  in  the  next  section. 
It  assigns  the  reason  of  all  the  severities  which  had  been  exer 
cised  by  God  upon  the  covenant-people  ;  which  it  traces  to  their 
own  sinful  ways,  viewed  in  connection  with  the  holiness  of  God. 
Because  of  this  he  had  banished  them  from  his  presence,  and 
driven  them  as  exiles  into  foreign  lands.  And  even  then  so 
inveterate  was  their  attachment  to  sin,  they  still  continued  to 
follow  their  forbidden  practices  ;  and  by  so  doing,  as  also  by 
the  abject  condition  in  which  they  appeared,  they  still  further 

1  The  only  peculiar  expression  in  the  passage  is  that  in  the  first  clause  of 
this  last  verse  :  "I  felt  pity  for  my  holy  name."  This  is  undoubtedly  the 
proper  rendering  ;  as  the  ^y  after  p^n  denotes  the  object  in  behalf  of  which 
the  pity  is  exercised.  The  LXX.,  whom  Havernick  follows,  refer  it  to  the 
people  :  I  spared  them  for  my  holy  name.  Undoubtedly  the  people  were 
spared  because  of  the  affection  indicated  here ;  but  the  affection  itself  was 
one  of  tender  regard,  or  pitying  concern  for  the  Lord's  own  abused  and 
dishonoured  name. 


THE  NEW  HEART  AND  BLISSFUL  HERITAGE. 

brought  reproach  upon  the  holy  name  of  God.  Had  he  therefore 
sought  merely  in  them  the  reason  of  his  procedure,  nothing  could 
have  been  expected  but  a  continuance  of  the  severity  until  they 
were  utterly  consumed.  But  a  higher  reason  presented  itself 
to  the  mind  of  God  in  regard  to  his  own  name,  which  he  must 
vindicate  from  the  dishonour  thus  brought  upon  it ;  and  which, 
situated  as  matters  were,  he  could  only  effectually  do  by  accom 
plishing  a  change  to  the  better  in  their  condition.  But  this 
change  must  be  no  superficial  one.  The  evil  had  its  seat  in  the 
opposition  between  them  and  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  the 
first  grand  step  to  an  effectual  and  permanent  recovery  must 
consist  in  their  thorough  renewal  of  heart  to  the  Divine  image. 
This  is  what  is  promised  in  the  verses  that  follow7. 

Ver.  22.  Therefore  say  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  it,  0  house  of  Israel,  but  on  account  of  my  holy 
name,  which  ye  have  profaned  among  the  heathen,  whither  ye  have  gone. 
23.  And  I  sanctify  my  name,  the  great,  the  profaned  among  the  heathen, 
which  ye  have  profaned  in  your  midst ;  and  the  heathen  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  when  I  sanctify  myself  in  you  before  your 
eyes.  24.  And  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen,  and  gather  you 
from  all  the  countries,  and  bring  you  into  your  land.1  25.  And  I  will  sprinkle 
upon  you  clean  water,  and  ye  shall  be  clean  ;  from  all  your  defilements  and 
from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you.  26.  And  I  will  give  you  a  new  heart, 
and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you  ;  and  I  will  take  away  the  heart  of 
stone  out  of  your  flesh,  and  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh.  27.  And  my  Spirit  will 
I  put  within  you,  and  cause  that  ye  walk  in  my  statutes  ;  and  my  judgments 
ye  shall  keep  and  do  them.  28.  And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  gave 
to  your  fathers,  and  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  people,  and  I  will  be  to  you  a  God. 
29.  And  I  will  deliver  you  from  all  your  defilements,  and  will  call  to  the 
corn  and  increase  it,  and  will  not  send  famine  upon  you.  30.  And  I  will 
increase  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and  the  produce  of  the  field,  that  the  reproach 
of  hunger  may  no  more  light  upon  you  among  the  heathen.  31.  And  ye 
shall  remember  your  ways  that  are  evil,  and  your  doings  that  are  not  good, 
and  abhor  yourselves  on  account  of  your  iniquities,  and  on  account  of  your 
abominations.  32.  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  it,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  be 
it  known  to  you :  be  ashamed  and  confounded  because  of  your  ways,  O 
house  of  Israel. 

In  this  rich  and  encouraging  promise  of  good  things  to  come 
there  is,  first,  a  very  strong  asseveration  as  to  the  ground  on 
which  God's  contemplated  interference  for  Israel's  behoof  was 
to  proceed  ;  negatively,  not  on  their  own  account, — positively,  on 

1  It  should  be  noted  that  this  part  of  the  promise  very  clearly  implied  the 
breaking  of  the  yoke  of  Babylon,  and  the  precipitation  of  that  power  in 
some  way  from  its  present  ascendancy.  No  one  could  mistake  this  to-  be 
implied  in  such  predictions  ;  but  it  is  only  by  this  sort  of  implication  that 
the  doom  of  Babylon  is  referred  to  in  Ezekiel. 


EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

account  of  his  own  name,  which  they  had  profaned.     Looking 
simply  to  their  state  and  conduct,  the  Lord,  it  is  declared,  could 
find  occasion  only  for  continued  severity  of  dealing,  and  they 
themselves   for  profound  humiliation  and  silent  shame.     The 
axe  was  here,  therefore,  laid  at  the  root  of  all  self-righteous 
boasting  and  fleshly  confidences.     Just  as  at  first,  when  Moses 
said  to  their   fathers,   "Not  for  thy  righteousness  or  for  the 
uprightness  of  thy  heart  dost  thou  go  to  possess  this  land,  for 
thou  art  a  stiff-necked  people "  (Deut.  ix.  5,  6)  ;  so  here  the 
prophet  disclosed  the  utter  absence  of  any  personal  claim  on  the 
Divine  goodness,  and  showed  that  whatever  might  henceforth 
be  experienced,  it  must  proceed  from  the  upper  spring  of  God's 
own  grace  and  righteousness.     In  himself  alone  could  the  Lord 
find  the  motive  of  benevolent  action.     And  while  this  laid  all 
human  merit  in  the  dust,  it  furnished  at  the  same  time  a  rich 
ground  of  consolation  and  hope,  such  as  could  not  be  found  in 
any  inferior  consideration  or  fleshly  confidence.     For  it  carried 
the  humble  heart  of  faith  above  the  very  sins  and  backslidings 
which  had  caused  the  judgments  of  Heaven  to  alight,  and  pre 
sented  to  it  a  source  of  life  and  blessing  which  even  these  could 
not  stanch.     And  need  we  say,  that  as  this  was  then  the  only 
hope  of  Israel,  so  now  it  is  the  one  fountain-head  of  all  the 
salvation  that  is  experienced  by  the  Christian  ?     "  Not  by  works 
of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  by  his  mercy,  he  saved 
us,"  is  the  truth  which  is  written  on  the  threshold  of  faith,  and 
which  must  pass  into  the  experience  of  every  sinner  as  he  enters 
therein.      No  real  life  is  attainable  but  such  as  carries  in  its 
bosom  the  death  of  all  self-trust,  and  the  renunciation  of  every 
personal  claim  on  the  goodness  of  God.     And  mortifying  as  this 
is  to  human  pride,  it  yet  provides  the  only  solid  and  abiding  peace 
for  those  who  have  come  rightly  to  know  the  evil  of  sin  ;  for  it 
draws  the  soul  up  to  God,  and  teaches  it  to  form  its  expectations 
of  good,  not  by  any  merit  or  demerit  of  its  own,  but  by  the  large 
measures  of  God's  own  free  and  spontaneous  beneficence,  and 
the  eternal  principles  of  his  high  administration.     The  creature 
thus  exchanges  the  vanity  of  a  human  ground  for  the  infinite 
sufficiency  of  a  Divine  one,  and  the  feebleness  of  an  arm  of 
flesh  for  the  all-prevailing  might  of  omnipotence. 

But  in  regard  to  the  promise  before  us,  it  is  to  be  considered 
not  only  that  God  finds  the  ground  of  action  solely  in  himself, 


THE  NEW  HEART  AND  BLISSFUL  HERITAGE.  395 

but  in  himself  with  respect  to  his  own  glory,  or  the  vindication 
of  his  name  before  the  world.  By  what  has  happened  in  Israel, 
and  what  is  still  proceeding  among  them,  this  name  is  blas 
phemed  ;  for  it  seems  as  if  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel,  were 
unable  to  stand  before  the  might  of  heathenism,  and  proter  and 
bless  his  people.  Such  thoughts,  however  naturally  arising  in 
the  circumstances,  proceeded  on  a  partial  and  mistaken  view  of 
the  character  of  Jehovah,  and  especially  from  an  ignorance  of 
his  essential  righteousness.  The  heathen  judged  of  Jehovah 
from  their  own  idol-gods,  and  hence  had  no  way  of  accounting 
for  the  desolations  that  had  befallen  the  land  and  people  of 
Canaan  but  the  comparative  impotence  of  Him  in  whom  they 
trusted.  Therefore,  in  wiping  away  this  foul  reproach,  the 
Lord  must  act  in  such  a  manner  as  would  serve  to  bring  clearly 
out  in  the  light  of  day  the  righteousness  which  forms  the  most 
distinguishing  element  of  his  character,  and  which  required  only 
to  be  understood,  both  to  explain  what  had  taken  place  of  evil, 
and  secure  the  introduction  of  the  contrary  good.  But  how 
could  such  a  manifestation  of  the  Divine  righteousness  be  given  1 
It  must  plainly  begin  where  the  evil  had  its  rise — in  the  hearts 
of  the  people  with  whom  God's  name  was  associated.  The  love 
of  sin  there  was  the  polluted  fountain-head  from  which  the 
whole  succession  of  troubles  and  disasters  had  sprung;  and 
nothing  could  effectually  reach  the  evil  which  did  not  provide 
for  the  re-establishment  of  holiness  in  their  hearts.  Therefore 
Israel  must  first  of  all  be  made  a  holy  people, — their  pollutions 
must  be  done  away,  their  hearts  subdued  and  wrought  into  a 
conformity  to  God's  holiness, — that  they  might  be  known  to  be 
his  chosen  ones  from  the  bright  reflection  seen  in  them  of  his 
own  pure  and  righteous  character.  Then,  understanding  from 
the  regenerated  state  and  exemplary  lives  of  his  people  what 
sort  of  being  Jehovah  is,  the  heathen  would  find  a  ready  explana 
tion  of  all  the  tribulations  that  he  had  brought  upon  Israel  in 
the  past ;  they  would  perceive  these  to  be  only  the  necessary 
vindications  of  Jehovah's  righteousness  on  a  people  who  refused 
to  yield  themselves  to  his  authority  and  comply  with  his  will. 
At  the  same  time,  also,  the  way  would  be  opened  for  the  intro 
duction  of  a  more  blessed  and  glorious  future ;  for  the  people 
now  entering  with  their  very  hearts  into  the  righteousness  of 
God,  became  capable  of  the  highest  outward  good  from  his 


396  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

hand;  and  all  the  peculiar  blessings  of  the  covenant  in  a  land 
replenished  with  the  bountifulness  of  heaven  would  once  more 
become  their  portion.  Thus  God  would  vindicate  the  glory  of 
his  name  by  first  forming  his  people  to  the  possession  of  his  own 
hohnessj  and  then  by  treating  them,  as  thus  renewed  and  sancti 
fied,  to  tue  richest  outward  tokens  of  his  favour  and  goodness.1 
Keeping  in  view  the  distinctive  character  of  the  prophecy 
as  now  explained,  no  difficulty  can  be  found  in  regard  to  its  par 
ticular  expressions.  Thus  the  expression  in  ver.  23,  "I  sanctify 
my  name,"  is  at  once  seen  to  refer,  not  to  what  this  name  is  in 
itself,  but  to  the  reflection  given  of  it  in  his  people.  It  had 
been  profaned  by  their  wickedness  and  misery,  it  must  again  be 
sanctified  by  their  returning  to  holiness  and  blessing  ;  for  God 
is  sanctified  when  what  he  is  in  himself  becomes  apparent  in  the 
world,  especially  in  those  who  stand  nearest  to  him.  So  also 
the  expression  at  the  close  of  the  same  verse,  "  when  I  sanctify 
myself  in  you  before  your  eyes ; "  for  which  many  critical 
authorities,  both  ancient  and  modern,  would  substitute,  "  before 
their  eyes,"  namely,  those  of  the  heathen.  This  expression  creates 
no  difficulty  to  a  person  who  enters  thoroughly  into  the  import 
of  the  passage,  for  it  points  to  the  fact  that  Israel  as  well  as 
the  heathen  needed  the  manifestation  in  question  of  Jehovah's 
righteousness.  It  must  be  done  first  before  the  eyes  of  the 
people,  who  by  their  depravity  had  lost  sight  of  God's  real 
character ;  and  then  what  was  seen  by  them  experimentally 
would  also  be  seen  reflectively  by  the  heathen  who  dwelt  around. 
This  twofold  perception  of  God's  character  is  also  brought  out 
in  other  passages  of  our  prophet ;  as  in  chap.  xx.  41,  42  :  "  And 
I  will  be  sanctified  in  you  before  the  eyes  of  the  heathen,  and 
ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah."  Finally,  the  mention,  in 

1  Such  appears  to  be  the  leading  design  and  purport  of  this  prophecy. 
Hengstenberg,  in  his  Christology,  on  the  passage,  has  viewed  the  matter  as 
if  it  was  God's  faithfulness  to  his  covenant  that  was  at  stake,  which  required 
that  a  seed  oi  blessing  should  still  be  found  among  the  people  of  the  cove 
nant,  notwithstanding  all  their  sins  and  defections.  That  certainly  is  true, 
but,  as  Havernick  justly  remarks,  not  the  truth  under  consideration  here. 
The  heathen  did  not  reproach  God  for  want  of  fidelity  to  his  own  covenant ; 
for  in  truth  they  did  not  know  what  that  covenant  really  was  or  required. 
This  was  precisely  the  thing  to  be  made  plain ;  God  must  let  them  know 
that  here  holiness  was  everything,  and  that  by  the  possession  or  the  want 
of  it  all  his  outward  dealings  must  be  regulated. 


THE  NEW  HEART  AND  BLISSFUL  HERITAGE.  397 

ver.  25,  of  clean  water  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  people  as  the 
means  of  purification  can  only  be  understood  symbolically ;  it 
does  not  refer  to  any  mere  external  rite,  or  to  any  specific  ordi 
nance  of  the  old  covenant,  such  as  the  lustration  ceremony  with 
water  and  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer  (Rosenmuller,  Hengs.),  or 
to  the  ablutions  connected  with  the  consecration  of  the  Levites 
(Havernick)  ;  it  is  rather  to  be  viewed  in  reference  to  the  purifi 
cations  by  water  collectively,  which  were  all,  in  one  respect  or 
another,  symbolical  of  the  removal  of  impurity,  and  the  establish 
ment  of  the  worshipper  in  a  sound  and  acceptable  condition.  This 
was  no  more  of  a  merely  formal  and  outward  character  in  Old 
Testament  times  than  it  is  now,  as  we  may  learn  from  the  whole 
tenor  of  this  prophecy.  It  was  by  their  moral  pollutions  most  of 
all  that  the  people  of  Israel  had  profaned  God's  name  and  drawn 
down  his  displeasure ;  and  the  purification,  which  was  to  undo 
the  evil  and  again  to  sanctify  the  name  of  God,  could  be  nothing 
short  of  a  conformity  to  God's  own  righteousness,  which  through 
out  all  ages  is  the  same.  The  whole  of  the  water-lustrations  of 
the  Jews  were  symbolical  of  this  purity  of  heart  and  conduct ; 
and  in  referring  to  them  here  the  prophet  simply  expresses  in 
symbolical  language  a  great  spiritual  promise — the  Lord  would 
make  Israel  in  reality  what  under  the  law  was  outwardly  denoted 
by  a  sprinkling  with  clean  water.  He  gives  himself,  indeed, 
the  interpretation  in  the  verses  that  follow,  where  the  change  is 
described  by  the  Lord's  imparting  to  them  a  new  heart,  and 
putting  his  own  Spirit  within  them.  In  short,  the  peculiar 
blessing  promised  for  the  future  was  their  being  raised  to  the 
participation  of  God's  holiness,  precisely  as  in  the  past  the  great 
evil  was  their  having  become  morally  so  unlike  him. 

The  last  section,  as  was  noticed  before,  is  merely  a  gathering 
up  of  the  general  result,  with  some  reference  to  the  impressions 
it  was  fitted  to  produce  upon  the  minds  of  others. 

Ver.  33.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  In  the  day  that  I  cleanse  you  from 
all  your  iniquities,  I  shall  also  make  you  to  dwell  in  the  cities,  and  the  ruins 
are  built.  34.  And  the  land  that  is  desolate  shall  be  tilled,  whereas  it  was 
desolate  in  the  eyes  of  all  that  pass  by.  35.  And  they  say,  "  This  laud 
that  was  waste  is  become  as  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  the  cities,  ruined  and 
deserted  and  destroyed,  sit  fortified."  36.  And  the  heathen  that  are  left 
round  about  you  shall  know  that  I  Jehovah  build  the  destroyed,  plant  the 
deserted;  I  Jehovah  speak  and  do.  37.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Yet  for  this  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do  it  for  them  ; 
I  will  multiply  them  as  a  flock  of  men.  38.  As  the  holy  flock,  as  the  flock 


398  EZEKIEL  XXXVI. 

of  Jerusalem  in  her  solemn  feasts,  so  shall  the  ruined  cities  be  full  of  flocks 
of  men  ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 

The  general  meaning  is,  that  the  purpose  of  God  was  to 
accomplish  an  entire  change  in  the  outward  as  well  as  the 
inward  condition  of  his  people.  They  would  be  as  remarkably 
distinguished  for  prosperity  and  blessing  as  they  had  been  for 
distress  and  desolation,  so  that  even  the  passing  stranger  could 
not  fail  to  notice  the  happy  revolution  that  had  taken  place 
in  their  circumstances ;  but  still  not  as  a  matter  of  fixed  and 
inevitable  necessity,  nor  in  any  way  that  might  supersede  the 
obligation  resting  on  themselves  personally  to  seek  and  serve  the 
Lord.  Hence  the  intimation  is  made  at  ver.  37,  that  for  this 
the  Lord  would  "yet  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do 
it  for  them."  On  former  occasions  he  had  refused  to  be  inquired 
of  by  them  (chap.  xiv.  3,  xx.  3),  that  i^,  sought  after  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  be  found  ready  to  perform  what  was  expected, 
because  the  inquirers  were  not  in  a  condition  to  receive  any 
token  of  his  favour  and  blessing.  Only,  therefore,  in  so  far  as 
they  attained  to  a  better  condition,  and  stood  morally  on  right 
terms  with  God,  were  they  warranted  to  look  for  the  happy 
and  flourishing  state  described  in  the  promise.  And  the  higher 
always  they  rose  in  the  one  respect,  the  higher  also  might  they 
expect  God  to  raise  them  in  the  other. 

Such  promises  as  those  contained  in  this  chapter  cannot 
therefore  be  taken  in  an  absolute  sense ;  they  must  be  under 
stood  to  some  extent  conditionally.  They  reveal  the  kind  pro- 
pensions  of  God  towards  his  people — what  he  is  disposed  and 
ready  to  do  toward  them — rather  than  what  he  will  for  certain 
accomplish  at  any  one  stage  or  period  of  their  history.  So  far 
the  word  contains  an  absolute  element,  as  God  certainly  pledges 
himself  to  make  provision  for  securing,  in  a  larger  measure  than 
formerly,  a  proper  regeneration  of  heart  and  conduct  in  his 
people,  and  also  for  giving  palpable  proof  of  this  in  their  more 
flourishing  and  prosperous  condition  generally.  The  goodness 
of  God  was  certainly  to  manifest  itself  for  these  ends ;  but  it 
would  do  so  to  the  full  extent  represented,  only  if  they  continued 
in  his  goodness.  In  the  case  of  God's  threatenings,  even  when 
most  particular  and  express,,  it  was  always  possible  by  a  change 
of  mind  to  the  better  to  escape  the  evil ;  according  to  the  word 
in  Jeremiah  :  "  At  what  instant  I  speak  concerning  a  kingdom 


THE  NEW  HEART  AND  BLISSFUL  HERITAGE.  399 

to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  destroy ;  if  that  nation 
against  whom  I  have  pronounced  turn  from  their  evil,  I  will 
repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to  do  unto  them  "  (chap,  xviii. 
7).  And  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  expect  the  same 
rule  to  hold  in  respect  to  the  promises.  Here  also  there  would 
be  but  a  partial  realization  of  what  was  announced,  if  the 
spiritual  condition  on  which  it  proceeded  was  not  complied  with, 
and  those  to  whom  the  promise  was  given  set  themselves  to 
resist  the  grace  of  God,  The  possibility  of  their  doing  this  is 
plainly  implied  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  being  so 
specially  connected  with  their  inquiring  of  God  concerning  it ; 
and  it  was  still  more  distinctly  indicated  in  another  passage, 
where  they  are  commanded  to  do  for  themselves  what  the  Lord 
here  promised  to  do  for  them, — "make  you  a  new  heart  and  a 
new  spirit"  (chap,  xviii.  31), — as  much  as  to  say,  Do  not  expect 
the  good  as  an  absolute  and  inalienable  heritage  of  blessing ; 
like  all  spiritual  blessing,  it  stands  inseparably  connected  with 
your  own  earnestness  of  purpose  and  diligence  in  working. 

The  question,  no  doubt,  may  still  be  asked,  Since  God  himself 
undertakes  to  give  to  Israel  as  a  people  the  new  heart  and  the 
right  spirit,  on  which  all  depends,  how  could  there  be  any  failure 
of  what  was  promised  without  unfaithfulness  in  God?  The 
question,  however,  touches  on  the  secret  things,  which  belong 
not  to  us,  but  to  God  himself.  For  it  may  as  well  be  asked, 
Why  is  there  only  a  partial  renewal  in  the  case  of  any  individual 
Christian,  seeing  he  has  the  Omnipotent  Spirit  dwelling  in  him? 
or,  Why,  since  the  Lord  promised  the  Spirit  to  convince  the 
world  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment,  is  the  world  still  so 
imperfectly  convinced  ?  Had  the  Spirit  continued  to  work 
universally,  as  he  did  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  with  sinners 
individually,  as  he  did  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  world 
would  long  ere  now  have  been  converted  to  the  truth  of  Christ. 
But  somehow  there  are  elements  at  work,  and  ends  higher  even 
than  salvation,  though  closely  connected  with  it,  which  still 
limit,  though  they  cannot  altogether  prevent,  the  realization  of 
the  good  unfolded  in  the  promises.  Were  we  to  look  simply  to 
the  good  exhibited  in  these,  we  might  have  expected  to  see  in 
Israel  before  the  coming  of  Messiah  a  people  all  righteous,  and 
a  land  replenished  through  all  its  bounds  with  fruitfulness  and 
blessing ;  as  after  his  coming  we  might  equally  have  expected 


400  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

to  find  a  Church  instinct  in  every  part  with  the  Spirit  of  life 
and  holiness,  and  ordinances  of  grace  operating  with  resistless 
might  to  the  diffusion  of  light  and  blessing  in  the  world.  But 
in  both  respects  alike  the  good  promised  on  the  part  of  God  is 
qualified  by  the  evil  that  works  in  the  world  ;  and  though  the 
good  must  ultimately  triumph  because  it  has  Omnipotence  on 
its  side,  yet  till  the  last  issues  of  Providence  are  brought  in, 
we  may  still  expect  it  to  be  to  some  extent  countervailed  by 
the  intermingling  evil.  So  far,  then,  the  matter  admits  of  an 
explanation,  and  that  of  a  kind  fitted  to  abase  and  silence  man, 
as  it  charges  on  his  own  culpable  negligence  and  waywardness 
whatever  shortcoming  may  appear  in  the  good  that  is  realized, 
as  compared  with  the  larger  good  that  is  promised.  But  when 
we  rise  to  the  higher  region  of  Divine  grace,  sovereignty,  and 
power,  and  begin  to  inquire  why  these  operate  no  farther,  or  not 
otherwise  than  they  do,  we  soon  reach  an  insurmountable 
barrier  ;  for  with  our  present  imperfect  powers  of  discernment 
we  have  no  way  of  explaining  how  the  good  that  is  in  God,  the 
good  even  that  is  expressed  in  his  promises  of  blessing,  should 
not  prevail  more  effectually  than  it  does  over  the  evil  that  is  in 
man.  In  this  respect  God  gives  no  account  of  his  matters  ; 
and  remembering  that  we  now  see  but  in  part,  it  becomes  us  to 
be  silent,  or  to  say  only  with  our  blessed  Lord:  "Even  so, 
Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in  thy  sight." 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

THE    VISION    OF    THE    DRY    BONES    RESTORED    TO    LIFE    AGAIN,   AS 
SYMBOLICAL    OF   ISRAEL'S   DEATH   AND    RESURRECTION. 

THE  preceding  prophecies  have  unfolded,  in  all  essential  par 
ticulars,  the  future  salvation  of  Israel  as  God's  covenant-people — 
on  what  conditions  it  was  to  proceed,  and  in  what  respects  it  was 
to  develope  itself.  "  The  prophet's  eye,"  however — to  use  the 
words  of  Ewald — "  still  dwells  upon  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
to  unfold  itself,  and  beholds  with  rapture  how  it  arises,  how  it 
grows,  how  it  becomes  insuperably  great.  Three  stages  here 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  401 

present  themselves  in  vivid  colours  to  the  vision  of  the  prophet  : 
1.  The  new  awakening  of  the  people,  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  (chap,  xxxvii.  1-14)  ;  2.  Then  the  reunion  of  the  formerly 
hostile  members  of  the  community,  through  whose  contentions 
the  whole  had  suffered  (chap,  xxxvii.  15-28)  ;  Finally,  3.  The 
strength  of  the  community  thus  again  restored,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  meet  the  formidable  danger  which  was  to  come  from  the 
hostile  assault  of  Gog  with  all  the  inimical  heathen  forces  of 
the  earth"  (chapters  xxxviii.  xxxix.).  This  is  a  brief  outline 
of  the  leading  subjects  now  immediately  before  us,  and  of  the 
relations  in  which  they  stand  to  each  other. 

Ver.  1.  The  hand  of  Jehovah  was  upon  me,  and  carried  me  forth  in  the 
spirit  of  Jehovah  (therefore,  not  a  corporeal,  but  a  spiritual  transaction  — 
a  thing  done  in  the  visions  of  God),  and  set  me  down  in  the  midst  of  a 
valley,1  and  it  was  full  of  bones.  2.  And  he  made  me  pass  by  them  all 
around,  and,  lo,  there  were  very  many  on  the  face  of  the  valley,  and,  lo, 
they  were  very  dry.  3.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  shall  these  bones 
live  ?  And  I  said,  0  Lord  Jehovah,  thou  knowest.  4.  And  he  said  to  me, 
Prophesy  upon  these  bones,  and  say  to  them,  Ye  dry  bones,  hear  the  word  of 
Jehovah.  5.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  to  these  bones,  Behold,  I  bring 
spirit  into  you,  and  ye  shall  live.  6.  And  I  lay  sinews  on  you,  and  I  make 
flesh  to  come  up  on  you,  and  I  cover  you  with  skin,  and  I  put  in  you  spirit, 
and  ye  shall  live,  and  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  7.  And  I  prophesied  as 
I  was  commanded,  and,  as  I  prophesied,  there  was  a  noise,  and  lo  !  a  shaking, 
and  the  bones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone.  8.  And  I  looked,  and  lo  ! 
sinews  and  flesh  came  up  on  them,  and  skin  covered  them  from  above,  yet  no 
spirit  in  them.  9.  And  he  said  to  me,  Prophesy  to  the  Spirit  ;  prophesy,  son 
of  man,  and  say  to  the  Spirit,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  From  the  four 
winds  let  the  Spirit  come  and  breathe  in  these  slain,  that  they  may  live.2  10. 
And  I  prophesied  as  he  commanded  me,  and  the  Spirit  came  into  them,  and 
they  lived  ;  and  they  stood  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding  great  force.3  11. 


1  It  is  literally  the  valley,  nypSH,  which  was  also  used  at  chap.  hi.  22. 
But  as  no  particular  valley  was  mentioned,  we  must  use  the  indefinite 
article,  for  the  Hebrews  sometimes  prefixed  their  definite  article  to  nouns 
by  way  of  emphasis,  when  these,  though  neither  previously  nor  subsequently 
described,  were  viewed  as  definite  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.     (Nordheimer, 
Gr.  ii.  §  720.) 

2  This  passage  plainly  shows  that  the  spirit,  nvi,  here  and  throughout 
the  section,  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  ivind,  for  the  thing  wanted  was 
to  be  called  from  the  four  winds.     It  is  the  life-breath,  the  spirit  of  life, 
immediate  eflux  of  God,  as  the  source  of  animated  life  in  the  creature. 

3  Ewald  renders  here,  "with  very,  very  great  power."     But  there  is  no 
preposition  answering  to  the  with,  so  that  the  clause  is  most  naturally  regarded 
as  in  apposition  with  what  precedes.     At  the  same  time  the  idea  of  power  is 
certainly  indicated  in  the  original,  and  the  "great  army"  of  our  common 
version  does  not  convey  the  exact  meaning.    Our  word  force,  however,  pre- 

2  C 


402  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  these  bones  are.  the  whole  house  of  Israel ; 
lo !  they  say,  "  Our  bones  are  dried  up,  and  our  hope  is  perished ;  we  are 
undone."1  12.  Therefore  prophesy,  and  say  to  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Behold  I  open  your  graves,  and  I  make  you  come  up  out  of  your 
graves,  my  people,  and  bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel.  13.  And  ye  know 
that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I  open  your  graves,  and  when  I  make  you  to  come 
up  out  of  your  graves,  my  people.  14.  And  I  put  my  Spirit  within  you, 
and  ye  shall  live,  and  I  will  make  you  to  rest  upon  your  land  ;  and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  Jehovah  speak  and  do,  saith  Jehovah. 

There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the  leading  scope  and 
purpose  of  this  remarkable  vision.  It  is  intended  to  counteract 
the  feeling  of  despair  which  had  now  succeeded  to  the  opposite 
one  of  carnal  security  and  presumptuous  confidence  which,  at 
an  earlier  period,  had  wrought  so  disastrously  among  the  people. 
Now  that  they  were  reduced  to  so  hapless  and  shattered  a  con 
dition,  the  glowing  delineations  the  prophet  had  been  drawing 
of  a  happy  future  seemed  as  visionary  to  their  minds  as  formerly 
had  appeared  his  dark  forebodings  of  impending  distress  and 
ruin.  They  felt  as  if  they  had  become  like  bones  dried  and 
scattered  at  the  grave's  mouth,  and  destitute  of  everything  on 
which  they  could  build  any  reasonable  prospect  of  restored  feli 
city.  The  prophet  therefore  meets  them  on  their  own  ground. 
He  admits  that,  as  compared  with  the  elevated  prospects  he  had 
been  unfolding,  they  were  in  themselves  no  better  than  lifeless 
skeletons;  but  'at  the  same  time  shows  that  even  this  could 
raise  no  barrier  against  the  realization  of  the  better  future,  since 
they  had  to  do  with  the  word  of  him  who  is  equally  able  to 
make  alive  as  to  kill.  Carried  in  spirit  into  a  valley  of  destruc 
tion,  he  there  sees  the  whole  ground  covered  with  bones,  the 
skeletons  of  slaughtered  men,  so  thoroughly  bleached  and  dried 
by  long  exposure  to  the  atmosphere  that  all  apparent  capability 
of  life  had  left  them ;  and  when  asked  whether  such  bones 
should  live,  he  could  only  refer  the  matter  to  God,  as  one  that 
exclusively  belonged  to  his  grace  and  power.  But  presently, 

cisely  corresponds  to  the  Heb.  >*n,  and  equally  with  it  is  used  in  the  double 
sense  of  power,  as  connected  either  with  numbers  or  with  personal  resources 
and  energy.  Both  references  are  intended  here ;  the  now  living  skeletons 
presented  the  appearance  of  a  vast  multitude  in  full  strength  and  vigour. 

1  The  last  clause  is  literally,  "  we  are  cut  off  to  ourselves,"  y(>  yjfjj,  that 
is,  cut  off  from  the  source  of  power  and  influence,  and  abandoned  to  our 
selves.  The  "  cut  off  for  our  parts  "  in  the  Authorized  Version  is  scarcely 
intelligible. 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  403 

on  being  commanded  to  prophesy  to  them,  or  to  proclaim  God's 
purpose  to  endow  them  anew  with  the  powers  and  properties  of 
life,  the  word  is  no  sooner  uttered  than  it  begins  to  take  effect. 
The  rushing  sound  of  God's  mighty  working  is  heard, — bone  is 
seen  starting  up  and  joining  itself  to  its  fellow  ;  immediately 
they  are  clothed  upon  with  sinews,  and  flesh,  and  skin ;  and 
then,  in  obedience  to  another  word  of  God,  the  breath  of  life 
from  his  creative  Spirit  penetrates  the  whole  mass,  and  trans 
forms  them  into  a  host  of  valiant  men,  instinct  with  the  anima 
tion  and  braced  with  the  healthful  freshness  and  energy  of  life. 
Such  was  the  wonderful  scene  that  took  place  in  vision  before 
the  eyes  of  the  prophet ;  and  in  the  application  that  is  made  of 
it,  he  is  told  that  these  bones  are  (i.e.,  represent)  the  whole  house 
of  Israel,  who  were  then  indeed,  as  to  all  that  could  be  called 
life  according  to  the  covenant  of  God,  in  a  lost  condition — in 
a  manner  dead  and  buried ;  but  he  is  assured  they  should  be 
again  resuscitated  by  the  word  of  God,  brought  up  from  their 
present  temporary  graves,  and  resettled  in  their  own  land  to 
enjoy  once  more  the 'blessings  of  the  covenant. 

Considered  in  this  natural  manner,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the 
passage.  It  is  merely  intended,  in  the  most  lively  and  effectual 
way,  to  remove  the  despondency  that  hung  over  the  minds  of  the 
people,  by  exhibiting  before  them  an  exercise  of  Divine  power, 
similar  to  that  which  was  needed  to  retrieve  their  ruined  for 
tunes,  and  put  them  in  a  condition  to  inherit  all  the  good  of 
which  Ezekiel  had  spoken.  In  the  visions  of  God — the  proper 
region  of  the  prophet's  activity — he  shows  them  an  effect  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  adequate  to  the  full  wants  and  necessities  of  their 
state;  so  that  they  might  the  more  readily  reassure  their  hearts, 
and  encourage  themselves  in  God  as  to  the  issue.  If  we  keep 
this  one  definite  object  of  the  vision  in  view,  we  are  in  little 
danger  of  misapprehending  the  particulars  or  doing  violence  to 
the  representation.  It  was  certainly  doing  a  kind  of  violence  to 
it  when  the  Fathers,  almost  with  one  consent,  appealed  to  it  as 
furnishing  in  itself  a  direct  and  explicit  proof  of  the  resurrec 
tion  (for  example,  Tertul.  de  Resur.  Car.  c.  30 ;  Jerome,  in  loco  ; 
Augustine,  de  Genes,  ad  lit*  x.  8),  in  which  they  have  been 
followed  by  many  distinguished  modern  divines.  The  greater 
part  indeed  hold,  after  the  manner  of  Jerome,  that  the 
resurrection  here  is  introduced  only,  by  way  of  similitude, 


4(H  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

as  an   image  of  Israel's  restoration,  which  it  could  not  have 
been  unless   the   resurrection  itself  had  been  considered  cer 
tain.1     Calov,  however ,  maintains  that,  down   to  the   close  of 
ver.  10,  the  passage  treats  distinctly  of  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead  in  the  literal  sense,  and  that  what  follows  is  entirely 
another  discourse,  in  which  God's  promised  goodness  to  Israel 
is   presented    under  the    analogy  of  that   literal  resurrection. 
This  last  view  is  manifestly  untenable,  as  it  breaks  into  two 
separate  parts  what  is  obviously  but  one  discourse,  and  regards 
as  an  independent  action  what  was  done  only  with  a  view  to 
its  intended  application.     Even  the  other  and   more  common 
view  is  not  strictly  tenable.     For  it  is  not  properly  a  similitude 
that  Ezekiel  uses  in  the  vision,  as  if  from  the  certain  fact  of  a 
general  future  resurrection  he  would  fortify  Israel  in  the  belief 
and  expectation  of  their  own  political  resuscitation  ;  but  it  is  this 
resuscitation  itself  exhibited  now  in  vision,  that  they  might  be 
prepared  to  look  for  it  afterwards  in  the  reality.     The  mere  cir 
cumstance  of  such  a  resurrection- scene  being  thus  employed  by 
the  prophet  for  such  a  specific  purpose,  could  not  of  itself  prove 
the  doctrine  of  a  future  general  resurrection  of  the  dead, — no 
more  than  his  employing  the  machinery  of  cherubim  and  wheels 
of  peculiar  structure  in  his  opening  vision  is   a  proof  of  the 
actual  existence  of  such  objects,  either  in  the  past  or  the  future, 
in  heaven  or  on  earth.     In  both  cases  alike,  what  was  exhibited 
in  the  vision  was  a  representation  in  symbol  of  something  cor 
responding  that  might  be  expected  in  the  transactions  of  life 
and  the  events  of  providence;  but  whether  that  symbol  might 
have  any  separate  and  substantial  existence  of  its  own  was  not 
determined  by  such  an  employment  of  it,  and,  in  fact,  was  quite 
immaterial  as  regarded  the  end  in  view.     The  resurrection-scene 
here  is  simply  a  prophecy  in  action,  to  render  more  palpable  to 
the  view  and  more  credible  to  the  apprehension  of  the  people 
the  corresponding   prophecy  in   word,   and  stands  parallel  to 
the  prophetic  actions  of  the  sealing  vision  in  chap,  ix.,  or  the 
prophet's  going  into  exile  in  chap.  xii. 

At  the  same  time,  while  the  mere  employment  of  such  a  scene 
in  a  symbolical  vision  cannot  justly  be  regarded  as  of  itself 

1  "  Nunquam  enim  poneretur  similitude  resurrectionis  ad  restitutionem 
Israelitici  populi  signiticandam,  nisi  staret  ipsa  resurrectio,  et  futura  crede- 
retur  ;  quia  nemo  de  rebus  non  extantibus  incerta  confirmat." — Jerome. 


VISION  OF  THE  DKY  BONES.  405 

establishing  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  it  should  un 
doubtedly  have  a  place  assigned  it  among  the  collateral  proofs 
of  the  doctrine.  Its  introduction  in  such  a  free  and  familiar 
manner  clearly  bespoke  it  to  be  one  of  the  loftier  anticipations 
with  which  the  servants  of  God  sought  to  accustom  the  minds 
of  the  people  ;  which  they  would  have  them  take,  in  a  manner, 
for  granted,  as  things  destined  one  day  to  be  actually  realized. 
It  may  justly  be  classed  with  such  brief  and  familiar  allusions 
as  those  in  Isaiah  xxv.  8,  u  He  will  swallow  up  death  in 
victory;"  and  chap.  xxvi.  19,  "Thy  dead  men  shall  live, 
together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise :  awake  and  sing, 
ye  that  dwell  in  dust;"  also  Dan.  xii.  2,  "And  many  of  them 
that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake."  And  then  the 
principle  on  which,  as  its  very  basis,  the  whole  vision  rests,  is 
one  that  carries  in  its  bosom  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  to  all 
the  family  of  God.  For  it  is  the  relation  of  the  people,  whom 
those  bones  represented,  to  God  himself,  securing  for  them 
an  interest  in  the  vital  energy  and  omnipotent  working  of  his 
hand,  on  which  everything  is  made  to  hang.  The  resuscitation 
must  take  place,  because  the  living  God  cannot  let  death  work 
in  those  who  are  related  to  him  as  his  own — those  in  regard 
to  whom  he  can  say,  my  people.  But  this,  of  course,  holds 
good  of  the  literal  resurrection  from  the  dead,  not  less  than  of 
any  temporary  revival  out  of  death-like  bondage  and  degrada 
tion  ;  and  is,  in  truth,  the  very  kernel  of  the  argument  used  by 
our  Lord  against  the  Sadducees,  when,  from  the  declaration  of 
God  to  Moses  at  the  bush,  "I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob,"  he  showed  that  the  dead  are  raised,  because 
"  God  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ;  for  all  live 
unto  him."  An  argument  not  so  subtle  and  profound  as  many 
would  represent  it,  but  level  to  the  apprehension  even  of  the 
commonest  believers  !  It  is  simply  this:  that  God  having  owned 
himself  the  God  of  those  patriarchs,  their  bodies  cannot  be  lost, 
they  must  live  again ;  because,  by  taking  to  himself  the  name  of 
their  God,  he  undertook  to  do  for  them  whatever  Omnipotence 
itself  could  perform.  Just  as  if  one  were  to  adopt  a  helpless 
orphan  into  his  family,  and  promise  to  be  a  father  to  it,  should 
he  not  warrant  the  child  to  expect  everything  that  paternal  love 
or  fidelity  could  do  for  it?  So  when  God  said  to  Abraham,  "I 
am  thy  God,"  lie  virtually  said,  Whatever  a  God  can  do  for 


406  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

thee,  that  thou  mayest  look  for  at  my  hands.  But  cannot  God — 
he  who  at  first  formed  Abraham  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
afterwards  breathed  life  into  his  dead  souf — cannot  he  also 
breathe  the  life  of  immortality  into  Abraham's  mouldering  body? 
Doubtless  he  can,  and  because  he  can  he  will — he  must.  He 
is  the  ever-living  God,  and  life  must  be  the  property  of  all  that 
are  his.  He  who  would  have  been  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
God  if  he  had  not  provided  for  them  a  city,  would  much  more 
have  been  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God  if  their  very  body, 
an  essential  part  of  their  nature,  were  to  be  for  ever  left  rotting 
in  the  dust.  This  would  not  have  been  to  do  to  them  the  part 
of  their  God. 

It  is  precisely  this  relation  to  God,  so  pregnant  with  blessing 
to  those  who  possess  it,  on  which  the  promise  of  good  in  the 
word  before  us  is  founded.  And  it  must  have  been  impossible 
for  any  thoughtful  and  pious  Israelite  to  enter  into  the  applica 
tion  made  of  it,  to  the  temporal  resuscitation  of  Israel's  prostrate 
condition,  without  perceiving  how  it  also  involved,  for  all  true 
believers,  the  future  resurrection  of  their  bodies  from  the  power 
of  death.1  But  along  with  this  higher  instruction  enwrapped 
in  the  prophecy,  let  us  not  overlook  the  honour  ascribed  in  it 
to  the  Divine  word,  at  whose  proclamation  from  the  lips  of  a 
man  of  God  the  dead  hear,  the  scattered  bones  move  into  their 
proper  places,  the  spirit  of  life  breathes  and  quickens.  How  does 
the  Lord  here  show  that  lie  magnifies  that  word  above  all  his 
name  !  It  is  his  peculiar  and  chosen  instrument  of  working. 
Where  it  alights,  there  darkness  becomes  light — death  itself  is 
again  turned  into  life.  "For  the  word  of  God  is  quick  and 

1  "We  might  have  added,  though  this  is  not  properly  the  place  to  discuss 
the  subject,  that  many  other  portions,  even  the  earlier  portions  of  Old 
Testament  Scripture,  equally  imply  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection ;  and  so 
far  from  thinking  with  Hitzig,  and  Havernick  also,  that  the  belief  of  that 
doctrine  was  not  generally  diffused  among  the  older  Jewish  people,  we  are 
convinced  it  was  always  held  by  believers — inseparable  from  a  living  faith 
in  the  Divine  word.  The  first  promise  involved  it ;  the  earliest  religion 
could  have  imparted  no  consolation,  and  inspired  no  hope,  without  pre 
supposing  it ;  all  the  leading  promises  and  dispensations  of  God  contained 
it,  as  the  vital  germ,  with  the  unfolding  of  which  their  own  final  perfection 
was  to  be  reached;  so  that  the  hope  of  the  resurrection,  rather  than  the 
simple  belief  of  immortality,  was  the  form  which  the  ulterior  expectations 
of  God's  earlier  worshippers  took.  See  this  investigated  at  some  length  in 
the  Typology  of  Scripture,  vol.  i.,  pp.  173  and  425. 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  407 

powerful,  and  sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword."      When  he 
really  "  speaks,  it  is  done ;  when  he  commands,  it  stands  fast." 

We  turn  now  to  the  second  part  of  the  prophecy,  which 
occupies  the  remaining  verses  of  the  chapter,  and  points 
especially  to  the  reunion  of  the  formerly  hostile  members  of 
the  community. 

Ver.  15.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me  saying,  16.  And  thou, 
son  of  man,  take  to  thee  one  rod  (literally,  one  wood,  but  a  rod  or  staff 
is  evidently  meant,  with  allusion  to  Num.  xvii.  2),  and  write  upon  it, 
"For  Judah,  and  for  the  children  of  Israel  his  associates"  (not  simply 
Benjamin,  for  considerable  numbers  also  out  of  the  other  tribes  adhered 
to  Judah)  ;  and  take  another  rod,  and  write  upon  it,  u  For  Joseph — 
the  rod  of  Joseph,  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  his  associates."  17.  And 
join  them  one  to  another  for  one  rod  to  thee,  and  they  shall  become  one 
in  thy  hand.  18.  And  when  the  children  of  thy  people  speak  to  thee,  say 
ing,  "Wilt  thou  not  tell  us  what  thou  dost  with  these?  "  19.  Say  unto  them, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  take  the  rod  of  Joseph,  which  is  in 
the  hand  of  Ephraim  and  the  tribes  of  Israel  his  associates,  and  I  put  them 
with  it,  even  with  the  rod  of  Judah,  and  I  make  them  one  rod,  and  they 
become  one  in  my  hand.1  20.  So  the  rods,  on  which  thou  writest,  are  in 
thy  hand  before  thine  eyes.  21.  And  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  take  the  children  of  Israel  from  among  the  heathen, 
whither  they  have  gone,  and  gather  them  on  every  side,  and  I  bring  them 
into  their  own  land  :  22.  And  I  make  them  to  be  one  people  in  the  land  on 
the  mountains  of  Israel,  and  one  king  shall  be  to  them  all  a  king;  and  they 
shall  no  more  be  two  peoples,  and  shall  never  again  be  divided  into  two  king 
doms  :  23.  And  they  will  no  more  pollute  themselves  with  their  foul  idols, 
and  with  their  detestable  things,  and  with  all  their  transgressions ;  and  I 
will  redeem  them  from  all  their  dwelling-places,  wherein  they  have  sinned, 
and  purify  them  ;  and  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God.  24. 
And  my  servant  David  shall  be  king  over  them,  and  one  shepherd  shall  be 
to  them  all ;  and  they  shall  walk  in  my  judgments,  and  keep  my  statutes  and 
do  them.  25.  And  they  shall  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  gave  to  my  servant 
Jacob,  wherein  their  fathers  dwelt,  and  they  shall  dwell  in  it,  they  and  their 
sons,  and  their  sons'  sons  for  ever  ;  and  David  my  servant  shall  be  prince  to 
them  for  ever.  26.  And  I  will  conclude  with  them  a  covenant  of  peace,  an 

1  There  are  two  peculiarities  in  this  verse.  The  first  is  the  apparent 
anomaly  of  the  rod  of  Joseph,  which  had  been  spoken  of  as  being,  along 
with  the  other,  in  the  hand  of  the  prophet,  being  said  to  be  in  the  hand  of 
Ephraim — of  which  some  far-fetched  explanations  have  been  given.  The 
proper  explanation  evidently  is,  that  the  prophet  here  passes  to  the  meaning 
of  what  had  been  said  previously :  the  staff  was  the  symbol  of  authority  and 
rule ;  and  this,  in  the  case  of  Joseph,  had  been  seized  and  exercised  by 
Ephraim,  but  now  was  to  be  withdrawn  from  his  hand,  and  united  with 
the  other  staff  into  one  in  God's  hand.  The  two  met  in  God.  The  other 
peculiarity  is  the  use  of  the  plural  in  the  second  clause :  and  I  put  them 
with  it,  though,  properly,  the  rod  of  Joseph  is  the  object  referred  to.  It  is 
a  construction  according  to  the  sense — the  rod  being  identified  in  the 
prophet's  mind  with  the  ten  tribes,  who  owned  its  authority. 


408  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

everlasting  covenant  shall  be  with  them;  and  I  will  set  them,1  and  multiply 
them,  and  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them  for  ever.  27.  And 
my  dwelling  shall  be  over  them,2  and  I  shall  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they 
shall  be  to  me  a  people.  28.  And  the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  Jehovah 
sanctify  Israel,  by  my  sanctuary  being  in  the  midst  of  them  for  ever. 

Here,  precisely  as  in  the  resurrection-scene  of  the  earlier  part, 
the  action  with  the  rods,  first  writing  on  them  the  names  of  the 

'  O 

two  ancient  divisions  of  the  covenant-people,  and  then  pressing 
them  together  into  one,  is  employed  merely  as  a  symbol  of  what 
was  to  take  place  with  the  people  themselves — a  prophecy  in 
action,  to  give  distinctness  and  credibility  to  the  immediately 
following  prophecy  in  word.  And  for  the  direct  import  of 
the  communication,  the  close  and  brotherly  union  among  the 
members  of  the  covenant  that  forms  the  substance  of  it,  is  here 
presented  to  our  view  as  an  immediate  and  certain  effect  of  the 
manifestation  of  God's  power  to  revive  and  bless  them,  and  as  the 
necessary  condition  to  their  complete  and  final  establishment. 
The  whole  people  of  Israel  had  been  represented  as  participating 
in  the  regenerating  efficacy  of  the  spirit  of  life,  which  was  to  be 
given  from  above ;  and  as  the  direct  result  of  this  was  to  unite 
them  to  God,  so  its  secondary  operation  could  not  fail  to  be  to 
unite  them  in  brotherly  concord  with  each  other.  For  the  true 
covenant-people  must  form  but  one  body,  as  they  can  only  have 
one  Head  ;  and  hence,  as  the  necessary  shell  for  preserving  this 
great  truth,  it  was  so  strictly  enjoined  of  old  that  they  should 
have  but  one  temple,  one  high  priest,  one  king,  and  one  com 
mon-wealth.  The  breaking  up  of  this  united  brotherhood  by 

1  The  expression  here  is  certainly  peculiar,  though  I  see  no  need,  with 
many,  for  either  omitting  the  clause  or  emending  the  text.     Hengstenberg 
follows  Venema,  who  throws  this  and  the  following  verb  together,  and 
renders :  dabo  eos  multiplicatos,  I  will  give  them  multiplied,  and  supposes 
there  is  a  reference  to  the  promise  to  Abraham,  "  I  give  thee  for  nations." 
But  for  this  reference  the  expression  is  greatly  too  abbreviated.     I  rather 
incline  to  take  the  verb  JH3  in  the  sense  of  appointing  or  setting,  which  it 
certainly  often  possesses ;  and  understand  it  as  importing  that  now  God 
himself  orders  and  determines  everything  concerning  them — sets  them  in 
opposition  to  their  former  fluctuating,  because  self-ordered,  condition. 

2  The  expression  may  possibly  have  some  respect  to  the  elevated  position 
of  the  temple-mount,  which  seemed  as  if  it  overlooked  the  land  generally  ; 
but  if  so,  only  to  this  as  an  emblem  of  God's  watchful  and  gracious  over 
sight.    His  sanctuary  was  to  be  in  their  midst,  but  his  dwelling  all  over  them, 
for  protection  and  blessing. 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  409 

the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  under  Jeroboam,  however  needful  at 
the  time  as  a  salutary  chastisement  to  the  house  of  David,  is 
constantly  represented  as  a  sad  dismemberment  of  the  household 
of  God,  and  the  source,  to  a  large  extent,  of  the  more  over 
whelming  tide  of  evils  which  thenceforth  set  in  upon  the  land, 
and  at  last  laid  it  desolate.  As  'soon,  therefore,  as  there  might 
be  produced  a  revived  and  healthful  condition  among  the  cove 
nant-people,  there  must  be  a  return  to  brotherly  union,  and 
that  in  connection  with  the  house  of  David  ;  for  to  this  house 
had  been  committed,  by  an  irrevocable  decree,  the  right  to  rule 
over  the  heritage  of  God  ;  and  to  abide  in  separation  from  it  was 
to  continue  in  rebellion  against  Heaven.  Nay,  not  only  must 
the  brotherly  union  find  its  centre  in  the  house  of  David,  but 
David  himself  must  again  preside  over  the  united  brotherhood  ; 
since  he  is  pre-eminently  that  servant  of  God  whose  grand  end 
in  ruling  was  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  promote  the  ends  of  his 
righteous  government.  This  God-honouring  king  must  reign 
for  ever  ;  his  rule  shall  be  perpetuated  through  all  generations  ; 
that  the  covenant  of  peace  also  may  be  perpetual,  and  that  God's 
sanctuary  may  constantly  abide  among  the  people,  and  his  name 
be  magnified  through  their  pure  and  prosperous  condition. 
Thus,  the  order  of  God  being  re-established  and  made  sure, 
there  should  be  nothing  any  more  to  interrupt  the  flow  of  the 
Divine  blessing;  God  would  be  most  really  present  with  his 
people  ;  and  the  inheritance  of  good  promised  in  the  covenant, 
hitherto  found  only  in  part,  be  fully  and  for  ever  realized. 

There  is  nothing  absolutely  new  in  the  prophecy.  It  is  sub 
stantially  a  fresh  exhibition  of  the  prospect  already  unfolded  in 
chapters  xxxiv.  and  xxxvi. ;  but  rendering  prominent  what  was 
there  implied  rather  than  broadly  asserted,  the  formal  union  of 
the  covenant-people,  along  with  their  sanctification  and  blessed 
ness,  under  the  presidency  of  David.  That  there  has  been  no 
adequate  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  in  what  may  be  called  the 
literal  sense  of  its  terms,  is  too  plain  to  require  any  lengthened 
proof.  Some  advances  were  of  old  made  towards  it — that  is  all 
that  can  be  said.  There  was  a  return  to  some  extent  of  the 
covenant-people,  chiefly  indeed  of  the  house  of  Judah,  though 
not  without  representatives  from  the  other  tribes ;  a  visible 
display  of  union  among  such  as  did  return  ;  a  partial  repossession 
of  the  land  of  the  covenant ;  and  an  external  reconstruction  of 


410  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

the  temple  and  its  worship, — enough  to  show  that  God  had  not 
forgotten  his  word,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  bless  to  the  full,  if 
his  people  had  been  willing  to  seek  to  him  for  the  blessing. 
But  still  all,  not  excepting  even  the  things  connected  with  the 
temple  (see  on  chap.  xxi.  26),  were  found  in  a  very  imperfect 
and  mutilated  condition — not  after  the  bright  pattern  furnished 
here  by  the  hand  of  the  prophet  And  the  most  characteristic 
part  of  the  description — the  cementing,  strengthening,  benignant 
rule  of  David — had  not  even  the  appearance  of  a  literal  fulfil 
ment  in  the  post-Babylonish  history  of  Israel.  The  prophecy, 
therefore,  has  not  been  accomplished  according  to  the  letter  in 
the  past ;  and  with  so  strong  and  prominent  a  feature  of  an 
ideal  sort  as  the  eternal  presidency  of  David,  it  seems  amazing 
that  any  one  should  expect  it  to  be  realized  after  that  manner  in 
the  ages  to  come.  For  to  that  end  it  were  indispensable  that 
the  literal  David  should  be  raised  from  the  dead,  and  again  set 
over  the  heritage  of  God,  vested  there  even  with  perpetual 
sovereignty ;  notwithstanding  that  Christ  has  expressly  received, 
by  Divine  appointment,  the  throne  of  his  father  David.  The 
prophecy  is  a  detailed  picture  of  coming  good,  drawn,  as  such  a 
picture  must  have  been,  under  the  form  of  the  old  covenant 
relations.  It  exhibits  the  prospective  good,  as  a  revival  of 
Israel's  best  periods,  freed  from  their  still  remaining  defects 
and  oft-intermingling  judgments ;  and  a  picture  that  could  be 
realized  only  in  part  while  the  old  covenant  stood,  both  from 
its  own  inherent  imperfections  and  from  the  wilful  neglect  and 
obstinacy  of  its  people.  Not  till  the  new  covenant  enters  does 
the  comparatively  perfect  begin  to  develope  itself.  For  with 
the  coming  of  Messiah,  the  head  and  centre  of  the  new,  as  David 
was  of  the  old,  everthmg  connected  with  God's  kingdom  takes 
a  loftier  flight  and  a  wider  range:  the  shadows  vanish  away, 
being  supplanted  by  the  substance ;  and  that  which  before  was 
partial  and  restricted  presents  now  the  aspect  of  an  expansive 
freedom  and  a  universal  adaptation.  The  whole  earth  is  as 
'  much  Christ's  rightful  heritage  as  the  territory  and  people  of 
Canaan  were  David's  ;  and  only  when  it  becomes  his  actual 
possession  can  the  prophecy  respecting  him  as  the  New  Testa 
ment  David  reach  its  destined  accomplishment.  So  that  to 
speak  now  of  the  prophecy  still  requiring  for  its  fulfilment 
a  literal  Israel,  a  literal  Canaan,  a  literal  tabernacle,  with  the 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  411 

many  outward  and  fleshly  conditions  therewith  connected,  and 
that  too  in  the  face  of  the  palpable  incongruity  in  the  heart  of 
the  prophecy  of  a  non-literal  David,  is  as  if  one  were  to  reduce 
the  lofty  tree  again  to  the  puny  dimensions  of  the  plant,  or 
send  the  man  of  full-grown  stature  back  to  his  cradle — as  if,  in 
short,  against  all  the  experience  of  the  past,  which  is  ever 
moving  on  to  something  higher  and  better,  we  should  expect 
the  chariot-wheels  of  God's  providence  to  return  to  their  former 
courses,  and  keep  within  the  ancient  landmarks. 

It  was  the  peerless  glory  of  Israel  as  a  nation  to  give  to  the 
world  the  new  David,  who  was  to  be  for  humanity  the  one  child 
of  hope,  and  to  furnish  to  his  hand  the  first  builders  of  that 
spiritual  house  which  was  to  be  formed  of  renewed  souls,  and 
reared  on  the  foundation  of  his  perfected  redemption.  But 
there  their  distinctive  honour  ceases — not  as  if  their  real  privi 
leges  and  blessings  were  lost,  but  because  these  must  henceforth 
be  shared  in  common  by  the  household  of  faith.  The  very  mother 
that  bore  Jesus,  and  his  nearest  kindred,  could  attain  to  no 
peculiar  place  in  his  kingdom  by  reason  of  their  earthly  connec 
tion  with  him  :  not  these,  he  said,  but  every  one  that  heareth  the 
word,  and  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  in  heaven,  is  my  mother 
and  sister  and  brother.  Thus  the  fleshly  bond  was  broken  at 
the  centre,  and  it  must  vanish  to  the  farthest  circumference ; 
everything  founded  on  natural  relationships  and  genealogical 
descent  was,  with  the  handwriting  of  ordinances,  nailed  to  the 

7  O  7 

cross  of  Christ  and  buried  in  his  grave,  as  a  part  of  that  bond 
age  to  the  elements  of  the  world  from  which  the  Church  had  at 
length  escaped,  and  which  should  never  more  be  heard  of  in  her 
borders.  The  one  relationship  to  be  accounted  of  is  union  to 
Christ,  which  renders  all  who  possess  it  children  of  Abraham, 
and  heirs  according  to  the  promise — heirs,  that  is,  of  all  that 
was  given  to  Abraham  in  promise ;  more  even,  if  more  could 
be,  for  they  are  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  him 
self.  Therefore  it  is  folly  to  speak  of  robbing  the  Jew  by 
putting  him  on  a  level  with  the  believer  in  Christ ;  for  to  put 
him  there  is  to  raise  him  to  the  highest  standing  that  a  child  of 
humanity  can  enjoy,  and  give  him  a  share  in  that  which,  being 
large  enough  for  all,  is  not  diminished,  but  rather  enhanced  by 
the  numbers  who  partake  in  it.  And  for  the  Church  herself, 
seeing  that  her  exalted  Head  is  now  at  the  right  hand  of  the 


412  EZEKIEL  XXXVII. 

Majesty  on  high,  with  power  and  authority  to  make  the  whole 
earth  his  possession,  instead  of  seeking  to  revive  the  old  distinc 
tions,  which  have  served  their  day,  or  hanging  her  hopes  on 
'effete  outward  arrangements,  it  is  alike  her  wisdom  and  her 
duty  to  press  forward  the  spiritual  conquest  of  the  world — 
plying  with  unwearied  diligence  the  means  of  its  regeneration, 
and  withal  waiting  and  praying  for  the  time  when,  nature  itself 
being  regenerated,  the  earth  shall  become  the  fit  abode  of 
manifested  Deity,  and  all  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge,  and 
resplendent  with  the  glory,  of  the  Lord.  Then  in  the  fullest 
sense  shall  the  vision  of  our  prophet  be  realized ;  for  then  the 
entire  territory  of  the  new  covenant  shall  be  reclaimed  for 
righteousness,  and  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  most  truly  be 
with  men. 

In  closing  this  section,  we  present  a  brief  outline  of  the  view 
that  has  been  taken  of  the  prophecies  contained  in  the  three 
closely  related  chapters,  xxxiv.  xxxvi.  xxxvii. ;  and  which  in 
substance  applies  equally  to  many  other  portions  of  the  propheti 
cal  Scriptures.  1.  They  were  originally  given  to  revive  and 
animate  the  hearts  of  God's  covenant-people,  by  holding  out  to 
them  the  assured  prospect  of  a  reversion  from  the  present  evil, 
and  their  still  certain  destination  in  God's  purpose  to  the  highest 
and  most  honourable  place  on  the  earth.  2.  It  was  the  duty  of 
those  to  whom  such  prophecies  were  delivered,  at  once  to  believe 
the  word  spoken  to  them,  and  apply  themselves  in  earnest  to  do 
what  was  needed  to  secure  its  accomplishment ;  and  had  they 
only  done  this,  a  far  larger  measure  of  the  promised  good  would 
have  been  reaped  than  they  actually  experienced  :  this  later  pro 
spect  of  blessing,  like  the  earlier,  given  before  entering  Canaan, 
greatly  failed  through  their  own  sinful  unbelief.  3.  But  there 
being  manifestly  ideal  features  introduced  into  the  delineation, 
especially  the  good  spoken  of  being  so  peculiarly  connected  with 
the  rule  and  presidency  of  David,  clearly  betokens  a  kind  and 
degree  of  blessing  which  could  not  have  been  completely  fulfilled 
under  the  old  covenant,  nor  intended  to  be  altogether  fulfilled 
any  time  according  to  the  letter.  It  shows  the  prophecies  in 
question  to  be,  like  several  of  an  earlier  kind  in  Ezekiel,  descrip 
tions  of  the  future  under  the  form  and  image  of  the  past — not 
as  if  the  past  were  actually  to  return  again,  but  that  its  general 
spirit  and  character  were  to  revive.  4.  The  new  things  thus  to 


VISION  OF  THE  DRY  BONES.  413 

be  looked  for  in  the  future  could  only  meet  with  their  full  and 
adequate  accomplishment  in  Christ,  who  is  certainly  the  David 
of  the  promise.  They  are  consequently  of  a  higher  and  more 
comprehensive  nature  than  any  that  could  be  enjoyed  under  the 
old  covenant,  when  the  kingdom  of  God  was  so  straitened  in  its 
dimensions  and  so  outward  and  earthly  in  its  visible  constitution. 
But  still,  they  were  of  necessity  described  under  the  hue  and 
aspect  of  the  things  belonging  to  the  old  covenant — as  if  it  were 
these  only  returning  again,  or  these  with  certain  alterations  and 
improvements,  such  as  might  give  the  future  a  pre-eminence  in 
glory  over  the  past.  For  only  by  means  of  what  belonged  to 
existing  or  previous  dispensations  of  God  could  the  prophet  have 
given  any  detailed  exhibition  of  what  might  be  expected  under 
another  and  higher  dispensation.  The  details  of  the  future  must 
have  been  cast  into  the  mould  of  things  already  perceived  or 
known.  5.  Therefore  in.  forming  one's  conceptions  now  of  the 
real  import  of  such  prophecies,  now  that  the  transition  has  been 
made  into  the  new  and  higher  dispensation,  we  must  throw 
ourselves  back  upon  the  narrower  and  more  imperfect  relations 
amid  which  they  were  written,  and  thence  judge  of  what  is  still 
to  come.  Thus,  as  the  David  of  the  promise  is  Christ,  so  the 
covenant-people  are  no  longer  the  Jews  distinctively,  but  the 
faithful  in  Christ;  and  the  territory  of  blessing  no  longer  Canaan, 
but  the  region  of  which  Christ  is  king  and  lord.  What  was 
spoken  immediately  of  the  one  class  of  personages  and  relations, 
may  most  fully  be  applied  to  the  other  ;  and  by  such  a  method  of 
interpretation  alone  do  we  get  a  uniform  and  consistent  principle 
to  carry  us  through  the  whole.  While  those,  on  the  other  hand, 
who  would  find  a  literal  Israel  and  a  non-literal  David,  or  a 
literal  restoration  in  Christian  times  and  a  non-literal  taber 
nacle  and  ritual  of  worship,  arbitrarily  confound  together  things 
dissimilar  and  incongruous,  and  render  certainty  of  interpre 
tation  absolutely  impossible.  6.  Sixthly,  the  view  thus  given 
is  confirmed  by  the  reproduction  of  some  of  these  prophecies 
in  the  field  of  the  New  Testament  Church,  set  free,  as  was  to  be 
expected,  from  the  outward  distinctions  and  limits  of  the  Old. 
Thus,  in  particular,  the  resurrection-scene  of  this  37th  chapter 
substantially  recurs  in  the  20th  chapter  of  Revelation,  and  is  fol 
lowed  precisely  as  here  by  the  attack  from  the  embattled  forces  of 
Gog  and  Magog;  while  not  a  word  is. said  which  would  confine. 


414  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII. 

the  things  spoken  to  the  land  of  Canaan  or  the  literal  Israel :  it 
is  the  Church  and  people  of  Christ  at  large  that  are  discoursed 
of.  We  say  nothing  respecting  the  probable  time  and  nature  of 
the  events  there  referred  to,  but  simply  point  to  the  identity  in 
character  of  what  is  written  with  the  prophecies  before  us.  In 
those  visions  of  the  Apocalypse  the  inspired  Evangelist  stretches 
out  the  hand  to  Ezekiel,  and  shows  how  the  word  spoken  so  long 
before  by  that  servant  of  God,  freed  from  the  peculiarities  of  its 
Jewish  form,  is  to  find  its  application  to  the  Christian  Church. 
The  shell  has  gone,  but  the  substance  remains.  7.  We  may 
add,  lastly,  that  the  common  interpretation,  which  understands 
Christ  by  David,  and  takes  all  the  rest  literally,  must  inevitably 
tend  to  justify  the  Jew  in  his  unbelief.  For  he  naturally  says, 
Your  Messiah  has  not  done  the  thing  you  yourselves  hold  must 
be  done,  to  fulfil  the  prophecy :  he  has  not  set  up  his  throne  in 
Canaan,  and  gathered  Israel  there,  and  re-established  the  old 
worship  in  its  purity  ;  this  was  the  very  purpose  for  which  he 
was  to  appear,  and  we  must  wait  till  he  comes  to  do  it.  On 
the  basis  of  the  literal  interpretation,  there  seems  no  satisfactory 
answer  to  this ;  and  it  is  well-known  that  since  it  has  become 
prevalent,  many  Jews  believe  that  Christians  are  coming  over  to 
their  view  of  the  matter.  We  are  not  surprised  to  hear,  as  we 
have  heard,  of  converted  Jews  declaring  that  such  a  mode  of 
interpretation  would  carry  them  back  to  Judaism. 


CHAPTERS  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

THE   ASSAULT    OF   GOG,   AND    HIS    DESTRUCTION. 

THE  last  portion  of  the  prophecy,  which  began  at  chap,  xxxvii., 
stretches  through  these  two  next  chapters,  which  properly  form 
but  one  piece.  It  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  predictions  in 
the  book  of  Ezekiel ;  and  before  offering  any  remarks  on  its 
general  purport  and  design,  we  shall  present  an  exact  translation 
of  the  whole,  with  such  explanatory  notes  as  may  be  needed  to 
elucidate  the  meaning,  that  the  subject  in  its  entire  compass 
may  be  distinctly  in  view. 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  415 

Chap,  xxxviii.  Ver.  1.  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  me,  saying, 
2.  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog,  of  the  land  of  Magog,1  prince 
of  Kosh  (or  Rhos),2  Meshech,  and  Tubal;  and  prophesy  upon  him;  3. 
And  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  Gog, 
prince  of  Bosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal :  4.  And  I  make  thee  turn  back,3  and 


1  The  name  Magog  occurs  only  once  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament,  at 
Gen.  x.  2,  among  the  sons  of  Japheth  ;  and  according  to  the  principles  on 
which  the  genealogical  tables  are  there  constructed,  it  must  be  regarded  as 
the  name  of  a  land  and  people,  belonging  to  a  branch  of  Japheth's  posterity. 
The  syllable  Ma,  which  in  Coptic  bears  the  meaning  of  place  (in  the  Sanscrit, 
also,  Maha  signifies  earth  or  land),  was  probably  regarded  as  having  respect 
to  the  territory  ;  so  that  Gog  would  naturally  denote  the  people,  or  the 
head  who  represented  both  land  and  people.     Gog  is  clearly  a  name  formed 
by  the  prophet  from  Magog — a  representative  name,  intended  to  designate 
the  political  head  of  the  region.     With  a  like  freedom,  Gog  and  Magog  are 
in  Rev.  xx.  used  as  the  names  of  two  separate  people. 

2  The  two  words  w$r\  fcObO  are,  with  various  ancient  and  some  modern 
authorities,  connected  together  in  our  common  version,  and  rendered  chief 
prince.    Ewald  adheres  to  this  view,  on  the  ground  that  no  people  are  known 
in  the  Bible  by  the  name  of  Rosh;  so  also  does  Hengstenberg  on  Rev.  xx.  7 
— he  regards  Gog  as  having  Magog  for  his  original  kingdom,  though  he  had 
also  acquired  the  mastery  over  Meshech  and  Tubal,  and  so  might  be  called 
their  "chief  prince."     It  is  certainly  possible.     But  Hitzig  justly  objects, 
on  the  other  side,  that  an  epithet  formed  by  the  junction  of  these  two 
words  is  nowhere  else  known  in  the  Bible  ;  and  that  the  full  title,  if  it  were 
simply  a  compound  title,  should  be  so  formally  repeated  three  several  times 
(ver.  2,  3,  xxxix.  1)  is  rather  improbable.     Besides,  traces   have  been 
found  of  a  northern  people  anciently  bearing  such  a  name.     The  passage 
especially  of  Tzetzes,  in  Gallseus  ad  Orac.  Sibyl,  p.  391,  quoted  by  Haver- 
nick,  in  which  the  Tauri  are  expressly  called  Ros  (ebfauaa,  Tavpovg  TOV;  Pu; 
xoiteladoii},  is  a  strong  proof.     Bochart,  also  (Paleg.  iii.  13),  has  shown  that 
the  Araxes  had  the  name  of  Rhos,  rendering  it  probable  that  the  people  in 
the  neighbourhood  were  called  by  the  same  name.     There  is  hence  great 
probability  in  the  opinion,  that  the  people  referred  to  were  the  Russi,  from 
whom  the  modern  Russians  derive  their  name.     The  other  two  names 
connected  with  them,  Meshech  and  Tubal,  are  the  Moschi  and  Tibareni, 
inhabitants  of  the  regions  about   Caucasus.     The  Moschi  seem  to  have 
formed  the  chief  population  in  Cappadocia  down  to  classical  times,  and 
gave  it  much  of  its  well-known  rough  and  semi -barbarous  character.     The 
Tibareni  were  their  neighbours,  and  in  profane  history  also  are  often  joined 
with   them ;  but  thier  territory  is  not  well  ascertained  (see  Rawlin son's 
Herod,  iv.  p.  222-24).     So  that  the  people  mentioned  are  northern  tribes  ; 
and  Jerome  gives  it  as  the  opinion  of  the  Jews  in  his  day,  that  Magog  was 
a  general  name  for  the  numberless  Scythian  tribes. 

3  The  usual  meaning  of  the  verb  suits  well  enough  here,  if  only  it  is 
understood  that  the  aspect  under  which  Gog  is  contemplated  by  the  prophet 


416  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII. 

put  hooks  into  thy  jaws,  and  lead  thee  forth,  and  all  thy  host,  horses  and 
horsemen,  clothed  in  complete  armour  all  of  them,  a  great  multitude,  with 
buckler  and  shield,  all  of  them  handling  swords  :  5.  Persia,  Ethiopia, 
and  Phut,  with  them — all  with  shield  and  helmet :  6.  Gomer,  and  all  his 
hordes ;  the  house  of  Togarmah  in  the  extreme  north,  and  all  his  hordes ; 
many  nations  with  thee.1  7.  Be  prepared  and  hold  thyself  ready,  thou 
and  all  thy  multitude  that  are  gathered  around  thee,  and  be  thou  a  guard 
(or  commander)  to  them.  8.  After  many  days  thou  gettest  the  command ; 
at  the  end  of  the  years  thou  dost  come  to  a  laud  withdrawn  from  the  sword 
(a  people),  gathered  out  of  many  nations,  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel 
which  were  perpetually  desolate ;  and  they  were  brought  forth  from  the 
heathen,  and  dwelt  all  securely.2  9.  And  thou  dost  go  up,  as  a  tempest  wilt 
thou  come,  as  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land  shalt  thou  be,  thou  and  all  thy 
hordes,  and  many  people  with  thee.  10.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  words  come  up  into  thy  heart, 
and  thou  dost  imagine  an  evil  device  :  11.  And  thou  shalt  say,  "  I  will  go 
up  into  the  land  of  villages  ;  I  will  come  upon  the  people  at  rest,  who  are 
dwelling  securely,  who  dwell  without  walls,  and  have  neither  bars  nor 
gates.  "  12.  To  make  booty,  and  to  carry  off  prey,  to  turn  thine  hand  upon 
the  now  inhabited  ruins,  and  on  a  people  gathered  from  the  nations,  that 


is  that  of  an  untamed,  fractious  wild  beast,  which  thought  only  of  taking  its 
own  .way  and  pursuing  its  lawless  career  at  pleasure,  while  God  was  going 
to  direct  events  into  such  a  channel  as  would  draw  it  where  destruction 
was  sure  to  overtake  it.  He  would  turn  it  back,  bend  its  lawless  and 
ferocious  energies  into  this  one  course,  in  which  it  must  inevitably  perish. 
In  the  parallel  passage  (Rev.  xx.)  the  directing  impulse  is  ascribed  to  the 
deceptive  power  of  Satan,  but  to  him,  of  course,  as  the  mere  instrumental 
agent:  precisely  as  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  where  the  temptation  is  ascribed  to 
Satan,  which  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1  is  represented  as  coming  from  God  in  the 
exercise  of  his  just  displeasure. 

1  We  must  note  respecting  the  nations  that  are  mentioned  as  in  league 
writh  Gog,  and  under  his  influence,  their  great  distance  from  each  other,  as 
well  as  from  Canaan.     Not  only  have  we  the  Scythian  hordes,  but  the  Per 
sians  also  ;  the  Ethiopians  and  Libyans  of  Africa;  Gomer,  or  the  Cimmerians 
of  Crim  Tartary  ;  Togarmah,  or  the  Armenians,  and  the  multitudes  beyond 
them  that  peopled  the  regions  of  the  far  north. 

2  The  first  clause  in  this  verse  has  been  very  differently  understood  ; 
most  commonly,  as  in  our  version,  made  to  express  the  destiny  of  Gog  to 
punishment :  thou  art  visited  or  chastised.     But  to  make  this  sense  the  pre 
position  ^>y   with  the  person,  would  have  been  necessary :  to  visit  upon  one, 
to  punish.     Havernick  supposes  a  reference  to  Isa.  xxiv.  22,  and  renders : 
for  a  long  time  thou  art  missed  ;  that  is,  regarded  as  a  lost  people,  not  heard 
of — a  very  unnatural  idea,  and  founded  on  a  very  unusual  sense.     I  greatly 
prefer  the  rendering  of  De  Wette,  Rosen.,  Hitzig  :  after  a  long  time  thou  art 
made  leader,  or  gettest  the  command.     The  verb  certainly  has  this  sense 
in  Jer.  xv.  3,  Neh.  vii.  1,  xii.  44.     It  was  not  to  be  immediately;  a  long 
period  was  to  elapse  before  the  assault,  headed  by  Gog,  was  to  take  place  ; 
but  when  the  time  came,  he  should  have  the  leadership,  and  everything 
would  seem  favourable — the  land  against  which  they  came  apparently  an 


ASSAULT  OF  GOO,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  4 1 7 

have  gotten  cattle  and  goods,  who  dwell  in  the  heart  (literally,  navel)  of 
the  earth.1  13.  Sheba,  and  Dedan,  and  the  merchants  of  Tarshish,  and  all 
her  young  lions,  shall  say  to  thee,  u  Art  thou  come  to  take  spoil?  to  carry 
off  booty  hast  thou  gathered  thy  multitude  ?  to  bear  away  silver  and  gold  V 
to  take  cattle  and  goods ?  to  seize  great  spoil?  "2 

Ver.  14.  Therefore  prophesy,  son  of  man,  and  say  to  Gog,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Shalt  thou  not  know  in  that  day  when  my  people  Israel  dwell 
securely  ?  15.  And  thou  comest  out  of  thy  place  from  the  extreme  north, 
thou  and  many  nations  with  thee,  all  of  them  riding  upon  horses,  a  great 
assemblage,  and  a  mighty  force  :  16.  And  thou  comest  up  upon  my  people 
Israel  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land  :  in  the  latter  days  shall  it  be  ;  and  I 
bring  thee  upon  my  land,  that  the  nations  may  know  me,  when  I  sanctify 
myself  on  thee,  Gog,  before  their  eyes.  17.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah, 
Art  thou  he  of  whom  I  have  spoken  in  the  days  of  old,  by  the  hand  of  my 
servants  the  prophets  of  Israel,  that  prophesied  in  those  days — years,  to 
bring  thee  upon  them?3  18.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  in  the 
day  that  Gog  comes  upon  the  land  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  mine 
anger  shall  rise  up  in  my  nose;  19.  And  in  my  zeal,  in  the  tire  of  my 


easy  prey  to  their  combined  and  numerous  forces,  unfortified,  and  its  people 
dwelling  in  outward  security,  without  any  thought  of  the  sword.  The  eye 
of  flesh  looked  only  to  the  want  of  visible  defences,  and  perceived  not  the 
grand  security — the  invisible  shield  of  Jehovah. 

1  The  peculiar  expression,  "the  navel  of  the  earth,"  is  very  much  the 
same  in  meaning  as  that  used  in  chap.  v.  5,  where  Israel  was  said  to  have 
been  set  in  the  midst  of  the  nations.     It  does  not  denote,  as  was  shown  there, 
that  Jerusalem,  or  Judea  generally,  was  placed  physically  in  the  centre  of 
the  world ;  but  that  it  occupied  morally  a  central  position,  and  one  also 
in  every  respect  advantageously  situated  for  exerting  a  happy  influence  on 
the  world.     The  expression  here  may  include  the  two  points — of  a  promi 
nent  position,  and  of  great  fulness  of  blessing ;  on  both  accounts  fitted  to 
awaken  the  envy  of  others.     It  is  the  same  idea,  though  differently  ex 
pressed,  in  Rev.  xx.  9,  where  the  combined  forces  are  said  to  "  compass  the 
camp  of  the  saints  about,  and  the  beloved  city  " — the  city  which  was  the 
object  of  special  favour,  and  held  the  pre-eminent  place. 

2  The  people  here  represented  as  speaking  thus  to  Gog  and  his  company, 
were  on  his  side  rather  than  with  the  covenant-people.     They  are  repre 
sentatives  of  that  portion  of  the  world  who,  though  they  are  not  disposed 
to  take  any  active  part  against  the  cause  of  God,  are  well  pleased  to  see 
others  do  it.     Their  worldly  feeling  makes  them  disrelish  the  truth ;  and 
they  are  ready  to  cheer  on  those  who  would  make  a  spoil  of  its  defenders. 

3  Gog  and  his  warlike  force  are  here  identified  with  the  enemies  of  whom 
former  prophets  have  spoken,  when  they  spake  of  the  conflicts  and  troubles 
of  the  last  days.     Thinking  of  those  prophecies — prophecies  uttered  long 
ago,  and  spread  over  many  years — such,  for  example,  as  those  recorded  in 
Num.  xxiv.  17-24,  Isa.  xiv.  28-32,  xviii.,  etc.,  Joel  iii.,  Dan.  ii.  44,  45, 
etc., — and  seeing  now  in  vision  this  last  grand  gathering  of  the  powers  of 
evil  under  Gog,  the  prophet  asks  whether  it  was  not  the  same  that  had 
already  so  often  been  announced.     It  appeared  now  only  in  a  new  form, 
but  the  thing  itself  had  been  many  times  described  by  God's  servants. 

2  D 


418  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

wrath  I  will  speak.  Surely  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  great  earthquake 
over  the  land  of  Israel.1  20.  So  that  before  me  the  fishes  of  the  sea  quake, 
and  the  fowl  of  heaven,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  every  creeping 
thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground,  and  all  men  that  are  upon  the  face  of 
the  ground ;  and  the  mountains  are  thrown  down,  and  the  craggy  rocks 
fall,  and  every  wall  tumbles  to  the  ground.  21.  And  I  call  for  a  sword 
against  him  to  all  my  mountains,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  one  sword  shall 
be  against  another.2  22.  And  I  will  judge  him  through  pestilence  and 
blood ;  and  a  torrent  of  rain,  and  hailstones,  fire,  and  brimstone,  will  I 
pour  down  on  him  and  on  his  hordes,  and  on  the  many  peoples  that  are  with 
him.  23.  And  I  will  magnify  myself ,  and  sanctify  myself,  and  make  myself 
to  be  known  before  many  nations  ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah. 
Chap,  xxxix.  1.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  Gog,  and  say, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  Gog,  prince  of 
Rosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal :  2.  And  I  turn  thee  back,  and  guide  thee,8  and 
lead  thee  up  from  the  extreme  north,  and  bring  thee  upon  the  mountains  of 
Israel :  3.  And  I  will  dash  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand,  and  make  thine 
arrows  fall  from  thy  right  hand.  4.  Upon  the  mountains  of  Israel  shalt 
thou  fall,  thou  and  all  thy  hordes,  and  the  nations  that  are  with  thee  ;  to 
birds  of  prey  of  every  kind,  and  beasts  of  the  field  I  give  thee  for  food.  5. 
Upon  the  open  field  shalt  thou  fall,  for  I  have  spoken,  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah.  6.  And  I  send  fire  upon  Magog,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
sea-coasts  in  their  security  ;  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.4  7. 
And  my  holy  name  I  will  manifest  in  the  midst  of  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  not  profane  my  holy  name  any  more  ;  and  the  heathen  shall  know  that 
I  Jehovah  am  the  holy  one  in  Israel.  8.  Behold,  it  comes  and  is  done, 


1  We  find  mention  made  of  the  earthquake  also,  though  more  briefly, 
m  the  parallel  prophecy  of  Joel  iii.  16  ;  also  Isa.  xxix.  6.     In  Rev.  xx.  9, 
the  external  form  differs ;  there  is  no  earthquake,  but  fire  is  said  to  come 
down  from  heaven  to  consume  the  adversaries,  as  here  also  in  ver.  22. 

2  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  proper  rendering  of  the  original 
in  this  clause  ;  and  the  translation  in  the  Authorized  Version — every  man's 
sword  shall  be  against  his  brother — suggests  a  wrong  idea,  as  if  the  enemies 
were  to  turn  and  fight  against  each  other.     The  meaning  simply  is,  that 
God  would  meet  sword  with  sword ;   for  the  sword  of  the  adversary  he 
would  provide  a  brother  sword,  a  fellow,  in  the  hand  of  his  people. 

3  In  this  rendering  of  "rpDNt^',  we  have  the  substantial  agreement  of 
the  ancient  translators,  who  concur  in  ascribing  to  it  the  sense  of  leading  or 
guiding  in  some  respect ;  occasionally  of  leading  wrong,  decoying.     The 
connection  plainly  requires  some  such  meaning,  and  though  there  is  no 
direct  confirmation,  there  are  not  wanting  analogies  to  support  it,   as 
Havernick  has  shown.     The  rendering,  "  I  will  leave  but  the  sixth  part  of 
thee,"  and  some  others  of  a  like  nature,  are  justly  exploded. 

4  From  the  mention  of  Magog  here,  we  are  not  to  identify  it  with  Gog ; 
it  refers,  as  before,  to  the  Scythian  territory,  including  the  people  who 
occupy  it.    The  anger  of  God  first  flames  out  against  the  Scythian  host,  who 
came  against  the  covenant-people  ;  but  it  does  not  stop  there,  it  goes  forth 
in  judgment  against  all  belonging  to  them,  and  consumes  the  adversaries 
out  of  the  earth,  wherever  they  may  be  found :  the  Scythians  at  home,  and 
all  of  like  mind  and  temper  with  them. 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  419 

saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  ;  this  is  the  day  of  which  I  have  spoken.  9.  And 
the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  of  Israel  shall  go  forth  and  kindle  a  flame,  and 
make  a  fire  with  the  armour,  both  the  shields  and  the  bucklers,  bows  and 
arrows,  handstaves  and  spears,  and  keep  a  fire  burning  with  them  seven 
years.1  10.  And  they  shall  take  no  wood  from  the  field,  nor  cut  it  in 
the  forests ;  for  with  armour  they  will  make  the  fire  burn,  and  spoil  their 
spoilers,  and  plunder  their  plunderers,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  11.  And 
it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  I  will  give  to  Gog  a  place  there  for 
a  grave  in  Israel, — the  valley  of  the  passers-through  eastward  of  the  sea,2 
— and  it  shall  stop  the  passers-through  ;  and  they  shall  bury  there  Gog  and 
all  his  multitude,  and  they  shall  call  it  the  Valley  of  Hamon-gog  (Gog's 
multitude).  12.  And  the  house  of  Israel  will  be  burying  them  seven 
months,  that  the  land  may  be  purified.  13.  And  all  the  people  of  the  land 
shall  bury,  and  it  shall  be  to  them  for  a  renown,  at  the  time  I  glorify  my 
self,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  14.  And  they  shall  choose  out  set  men, 
journeyers  through  the  land,  who  may  bury  the  passers-through,  those 
that  were  left  upon  the  face  of  the  land,  to  purify  it ;  at  the  end  of  seven 
weeks  they  shall  make  search.  15.  When  the  journeyers  through  the  land 
pass  on,  and  see  a  man's  skeleton,  then  one  shall  set  up  a  mark  beside  it, 


1  The  burning  of  the  armour  here  mentioned  has  nothing  to  do  with  any 
ancient  custom,  but  was  evidently  introduced  for  the  purpose  of  conveying 
the  idea  that  no  remnant  should  be  left  of  the  great  conflict  to  pollute  the 
land ;  the  very  weapons  of  the  enemy  should  be  utterly  consumed.     The 
seven  years  points  to  the  sacredness  and  completeness  of  the  number  seven. 
It  was  a  great  work  getting  the  land  thoroughly  cleansed  from  all  the  im 
plements  of  heathenism,  and  the  people  would  not  rest  till  the  whole  was 
accomplished.    How  different  from  the  ancient  Israelites,  who,  because  they 
were  themselves  so  imperfectly  purified,  were  content  to  let,  not  the  imple 
ments  merely,  but  the  persons  of  the  heathen  remain  among  them !     The 
action  here,  therefore,  is  a  sign  of  the  people's  zeal  for  purity. 

2  The  idea  of  Ilitzig  respecting  this  valley  scarcely  deserves  being  men 
tioned,  except  as  a  specimen  of  the  ridiculous.     He  thinks  it  should  be 
understood  to  be  the  valley  of  the  opposite  heights,  and  supposes  it  to  refer  to 
the  valley  in  Zech.  xiv.  4,  formed  by  the  cleaving  asunder  of  Mount  Olivet, 
for  which  Ezekiel,  thinking  there  must  be  some  use,  fell  on  the  happy  idea  of 
a  burying-ground  for  Gog's  army  !     That  the  prophet  thought  of  a  valley 
for  such  a  purpose,  arose,  we  should  fancy,  from  the  vast  numbers  it  was  to 
receive ;  nothing  but  a  deep  valley  would  be  sufficient  to  contain  such  a 
mass  of  dead  bodies.    He  lays  it  to  the  east  of  the  sea,  by  which  we  naturally 
understand  the  Dead  Sea,  the  memorial  of  one  of  God's  earliest  and  greatest 
judgments ;  so  that  the  final  resting-place  of  those  last  sinners  would  be  close 
beside  that  of  their  ancient  prototypes,  the  guilty  inhabitants  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah.     And  he  calls  it  first,  more  generally,  the  valley  of  the  passers - 
through,  ironically,  because  the  persons  buried  in  it  had  only  intended  to 
pass  through  the  land  and  return  again  after  they  had  made  all  their  own, 
though  here  they  found  an  effectual  stop  put  to  their  proceedings; 'and  then, 
more  definitely,  the  valley  of  Hamon-gog.     The  stopping  is  to  be  taken  in 
reference,  not  to  the  noses,  but  to  the  persons  of  the  enemies.    So  Cocceius, 
in  his  Lex. :  Et  ea  (detimi)fr%nat  transeuntes ;  habenam  injicit  transeuntibus. 


420  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

until  the  buriers  bury  it  in  the  valley  of  Hamon-gog.1    16.  And  also  there 
shall  be  the  name  of  a  city,  Hamonah,2  and  they  shall  purify  the  land. 

17.  And  thou,  son  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Say  to  birds  of 
every  kind,  and  to  all  the  beasts  of  the  field,  Assemble  yourselves  and  come, 
gather  yourselves  from  every  side  for  my  sacrifice,  which  I  sacrifice  for  you, 
a  great  sacrifice  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel ;  and  ye  shall  eat  flesh  and 
drink  blood.  18.  The  flesh  of  heroes  shall  ye  eat,  and  the  blood  of  princes 
of  the  earth  ye  shall  drink,  of  rams,  lambs,  and  he-goats,  bullocks,  all  of 
them  failings  of  Bashan.  19.  And  ye  shall  eat  fat  to  the  full,  and  drink 
blood  till  ye  are  drunken  of  my  sacrifice  which  I  sacrifice  to  you.3  20. 
And  ye  shall  be  filled  at  my  table  with  horses  and  riders,4  with  heroes  and 
all  men  of  war,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  21.  And  I  will  set  my  glory 
among  the  heathen,  and  all  the  heathen  shall  see  my  judgment  which  I 
execute,  and  my  hand  which  I  lay  on  them.  22.  And  the  house  of  Israel 
shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  their  God  from  that  day  and  henceforth. 
23.  And  the  heathen  shall  know  that  the  house  of  Israel  were  carried 
captive  for  their  iniquities,  because  they  transgressed  against  me,  and  I  hid 
my  face  from  them,  and  gave  them  up  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  and 
they  all  fell  by  the  sword.  24.  According  to  their  impurities  and  their 
transgressions  I  did  to  them,  and  hid  my  face  from  them.  25.  Therefore, 
thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Now  will  I  turn  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob, 


1  The  process  described  in  vers.  12-15,  is  the  following  : — The  whole  people 
of  the  land  are  engaged  burying  the  corpses  in  the  grave-valley  for  seven 
months  (the  seven,  as  before,  the  symbol  of  sacredness  and  completeness)  ; 
then,  at  the  end  of  the  seven  months,  persons  are  selected  to  the  special  and 
regular  work  (for  such  is  the  force  of  TED  "^iO  of  going  through  the  land 
to  search  everywhere  for  the  skeletons  of  those  who  might  still  have  been 
left — the   stragglers  of   the  great  host.     Arid  when  they  found  any  such 
skeletons,  they  were  to  set  up  a  mark,  that  the  buriers  might  go  and  fetch 
them  to  the  proper  burying-ground.     The  whole  denotes  the  minute  care 
and  business-like  alacrity  with  which  the  work  of  purification  should  be 
gone  about,  that  every  remnant  of  heathenish  impurity  might  be  extirpated. 

2  The  thought  here  is,  that  an  additional  memorial  of  the  transaction  was 
to  be  found  in  the  erection  of  a  city  near,  called  Hamonah  (multitude). 
Pointing  Q^,  and  so  rendering:  "And  also  there  is  a  city  Hamonah," 
makes  fully  a  better  sentence,  but  leaves  the  meaning  essentially  the  same. 

3  The  representation  of  a  great  sacrifice  of  slain  victims  lying  exposed  on 
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  ready  to  afford  a  repast  for  the  beasts  of  the  field 
and  birds  of  prey,  is  found  also  elsewhere  :  in  Isa.  xviii.  6  (in  chap,  xxxiv.  6, 
there  is  the  representation  of  a  great  sacrifice  in  Idumea,  though  nothing  is 
said  of  an  invitation  to  the  wild  beasts  and  birds  of  prey),  Zeph.  i.  7,  Rev. 
xix.  17,  18.     Here  it  occupies  only  a  secondary  place,  and  hence  it  is  men 
tioned  last,  though  in  point  of  order  it  rather  belonged  to  the  immediate 
results  of  the  battle. 

4  The  ordinary  sense  of  331  will  manifestly  not  suit  here,  as  chariots  are 
entirely  out  of  place  in  a  feast.     But  the  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  horse 
men,  or  cavalry,  in  Isa.  xxi.  7,  also  in  2  Kings  ix.  17,  though  the  Masorites 
have  there  used  a  different  pointing.    E  wald  accordingly  translates :  riders  ; 
as  did  also  the  Sept.,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  Capellus,  etc. 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  421 

and  have  mercy  on  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  and  am  zealous  for  my  holy 
name.  26.  And  they  shall  forget  their  shame,1  and  all  their  transgressions 
wherein  they  transgressed  against  me,  when  they  dwell  upon  their  land 
securely,  and  there  is  none  to  make  them  afraid.  27.  When  I  bring  them 
back  from  the  peoples,  and  gather  them  from  the  lands  of  their  enemies, 
and  am  sanctified  in  them  before  many  nations.  28.  And  they  shall  know 
that  I  am  Jehovah  their  God,  in  that  I  banished  them  to  the  heathen,  and 
gather  them  to  their  own  land,  and  no  longer  desert  them  there.  29.  And 
I  shall  not  hide  my  face  any  more  from  them,  I  who  have  poured  out  my 
Spirit  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

Now,  with  this  remarkable  prophecy  fully  hefore  us,  let  us 
ask  how  it  is  as  a  whole  to  be  explained  and  understood.  Are 
we  to  regard  it  as  simply  an  anticipated  history  of  transactions 
that  were  to  take  place  precisely  in  the  form  and  manner  here 
described  ;  or  rather  as  an  ideal  delineation  of  what,  as  to  the 
substance,  might  certainly  be  expected  to  happen,  though  pos 
sibly  under  aspects  and  relations  widely  different  from  those 
to  be  found  in  the  prophet's  description  ?  For  a  satisfactory 
answer  to  this  question  we  must  look  especially  to  the  leading 
features  of  the  description  itself. 

1.  And  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  there  is  the  name  given 
to  the  leader  of  the  hostile  party  —  Gog.  From  the  very  mode 
of  its  formation  this  discovers  itself  at  once  as  an  ideal  name  ;  it 
is  simply  the  root  of  Magog,  the  only  related  name  known  to 
history.  And  this  Magog  is  itself  the  name  of  a  very  indefinite 
territory  and  people,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  want  of  any 
express  landmarks  connected  with  them  here  or  elsewhere,  but 
also  from  the  parties  most  closely  associated  with  Gog,  as  his 
natural  and  proper  subjects.  Of  the  land  of  Magog,  he  is  also 
the  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal  —  tribes  that  seem  to  have 
been  contiguous  in  territory,  as  they  were  probably  also  related 
in  their  origin,  but  which  were  never,  that  we  know  of,  actually 


SrnK  1&J,  but  pointing  VJO,  so  as  to  obtain  the  sense  of  forgetting. 
The  expression  of  bearing  one's  iniquity  is  always  used  (as  was  shown  on 
chap,  iv.),  of  suffering  the  punishment  due  to  it.  But  that  is  quite  out  of 
place  here,  where  the  people  are  expressly  said  to  have  escaped  from  all  the 
consequences  of  their  sins.  Nor  will  it  do,  with  Ewald  and  Havernick,  to 
point  to  such  passages  as  chap.  xx.  43,  xxxvi.  31,  where,  after  their  conver 
sion,  the  people  are  said  to  remember  their  iniquities.  These  passages  refer 
to  the  nearer  results  of  their  conversion  ;  this  here  to  the  more  remote. 
They  would  at  first  be  deeply  conscious  of  their  sins,  and  bear  the  shame  of 
them  ;  but  this  could  with  no  propriety  be  said  after  they  were  fully  settled 
in  the  Divine  favour  and  blessing. 


422  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

united  into  one  kingdom,  and  have  long  since  disappeared  as 
distinct  races.  When,  therefore,  we  find  the  prophet  giving  to 
the  head  of  the  great  movement  an  ideal  name,  derived  from 
a  sort  of  indefinite,  obscurely  known  territory,  it  is  scarcely  pos 
sible  to  avoid  the  impression  at  the  outset,  that  the  description 
is  intended  to  possess  an  ideal,  not  a  real  character.  2.  Another 
thing  that  presently  comes  into  consideration  is  the  singular 
combination  of  the  party  which  this  Gog  is  represented  as  head 
ing.  The  nations  mentioned  are  all  selected  from  the  distance 
—remote,  in  the  first  instance,  from  the  land  of  Israel,  in  the 
extremities  of  the  earth,  and  also  many  of  them  far  apart  from 
one  another,  and  consequently  the  most  unlike  naturally  to 
act  in  concert  for  any  particular  purpose.  Beside  the  Scythian 
tribes,  with  whom  the  head  of  the  movement  was  more  imme 
diately  connected,  there  are  the  Persians,  Armenians,  the  other 
inhabitants  of  the  far  north  in  Asia  and  Europe  ;  and  then,  pass 
ing  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  overleaping  all  the  intermediate 
regions,  he  names  the  Ethiopians  and  Libyans  of  Africa, — the 
people,  in  short,  occupying  the  most  distant  and  remote  terri 
tories  of  the  then  known  world.  The  principle  of  assortment  and 
union  is  evidently  the  very  reverse  of  the  natural  one — not  near 
ness,  but  remoteness  of  position,  as  well  to  the  land  of  Israel  as 
to  the  associated  parties  themselves.  But  this  entire  omission  of 
the  near,  and  conjunction  only  of  the  remote  and  distant,  is  so 
very  peculiar  a  characteristic,  and  so  contrary  to  all  real  com 
binations,  that  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  thinking  that  here  also 
we  have  but  the  clothing  of  an  idea — not  a  literal  reality,  but  the 
pictorial  delineation  of  one.  3.  Then  the  huge  numbers  of  this 
combined  party  are  to  be  taken  into  account,  in  connection  with 
the  object  for  which  it  was  avowedly  formed.  According  to  the 
description,  it  was  to  be  a  marauding  host,  breaking  in  like  a 
mighty  inundation  upon  the  land  of  Israel,  and  again  departing 
after  it  had  enriched  itself  with  the  spoil  and  booty  there  obtained 
(chap,  xxxviii.  12,  13).  That  is,  myriads  of  people  were  to  be 
gathered  from  the  most  distant  regions  of  the  earth,  combining 
and  acting  together  against  all  the  known  principles  of  human 
nature :  and  for  what  ?  To  spoil  and  plunder  a  land  which 
could  not,  had  they  got  all  it  contained,  have  been  a  handful 
to  a  tithe  of  their  number — could  not  have  served  to  maintain 
the  invaders  for  a  single  day  !  One  would  think  it  is  impossible 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  423 

in  such  a  case  for  the  most  aerial  fancy  to  dream  of  literality  ; 
and  when  the  prophet  is  spoken  of  as  furnishing  here  a  plain 
historical  description,  one  is  tempted  to  ask  whether  he  is  sup 
posed  to  have  written  for  the  amusement  of  children  or  for  the 
belief  and  instruction  of  persons  of  mature  understanding  ?  4. 
This  impression  is  still  further  increased  when  we  look  to  the 
fruits  of  the  victory.  The  wood  of  the  adversaries'  weapons  was 
to  serve  for  fuel  to  all  Israel  for  seven  years !  and  all  Israel 
were  to  be  employed  for  seven  months  in  burying  the  dead  !  It 
would  be  but  a  very  moderate  allowance,  on  the  literal  supposi 
tion,  to  say  that  a  million  of  men  would  thus  be  engaged,  and 
that  on  an  average  each  would  consign  two  corpses  to  the  tomb 
in  one  day ;  which,  for  the  180  working  days  of  the  seven  months, 
would  make  an  aggregate  of  360,000,000  of  corpses  !  Then  the 
putrefaction,  the  pestilential  vapours  arising  from  such  masses  of 
slain  victims  before  they  were  all  buried !  Who  could  live  at 
such  a  time  ?  It  bids  defiance  to  all  the  laws  of  nature,  as  well 
as  the  known  principles  of  human  action ;  and  to  insist  on  such 
a  description  being  understood  according  to  the  letter,  is  to  make 
it  take  rank  with  the  most  extravagant  tales  of  romance,  or 
the  most  absurd  legends  of  Popery.  5.  Further,  on  the  ground 
of  a  literal  description,  there  is  the  collateral  consideration  of  its 
becoming  utterly  impossible  to  make  out  a  prophetical  harmony; 
the  prophets  in  that  case  do  not  mutually  confirm,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  oppose  and  contradict  each  other.  Here  the  great  con 
troversy,  which  finally  adjudges  the  cause  of  heathendom,  is 
represented  as  taking  issue  on  the  mountains  of  Israel,  and 
covering  the  whole  land  with  the  slain.  In  Isaiah  xxxiv.  we 
have,  to  all  appearance,  the  same  controversy — the  controversy 
of  the  Lord's  judgment  upon  Zion's  adversaries,  when  his  indig 
nation  was  to  be  "  upon  all  nations,  and  his  fury  upon  all  their 
armies" — determined  upon  the  mountains  of  Edom.  In  Joel, 
again,  it  takes  place  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  or  the  valley 
of  decision  (chap.  iii.  12,  14)  ;  and  in  Zechariah  (chap,  xiv.)  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  as  also  in  the  Apoca 
lypse  (chap.  20)  around  the  camp  of  the  saints  and  the  beloved 
city.  Thus  we  have  three  or  four  distinct  localities,  each  repre 
sented  as  the  scene  of  a  last  conflict,  ending  in  a  final  triumph 
to  the  cause  of  God  over  the  leagued  hostility  of  the  world.  If 
held  to  be  literal  descriptions,  they  of  course  mutually  destroy 


424  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

one  another ;  for  the  localities  being  different  (as  also  many  of 
the  accompanying  circumstances),  they  must  either  be  ideal  de 
lineations  under  various  aspects  of  what  was  to  happen,  or  they 
are  literal  and  contradictory  descriptions.  6.  Finally,  pointing, 
as  all  these  prophetical  descriptions  do,  and  the  one  before  us  in 
particular,  to  the  latter  ages  of  the  world — to  the  times  of  the 
Messiah — the  gross  carnality  of  the  representation  in  respect  to 
God's  dealing  with  the  adversaries  demands  a  non-literal  inter 
pretation.  Under  the  old  covenant,  when  the  Church  was  still  in 
its  childhood,  it  was  necessary  to  employ  to  a  large  extent  the 
outward  and  material ;  carnal  elements  had  a  prominent  place 
in  the  immediate  service  of  God,  and  they  could  not  fail  to  be 
much  resorted  to  in  the  administration  of  the  kingdom,  so  long 
as  it  had  a  political  existence  in  the  world.  His  people  had  then 
often  to  defend  themselves  with  a  carnal  sword,  and  often  in 
the  successful  exercise  of  this  did  God's  power  and  goodness 
appear  to  his  people.  But  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ  introduced  an  entire  change  in  this  respect. 
The  spiritual  element  in  the  Divine  character  came  thereby 
into  fuller  manifestation,  and,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  every 
thing  carnal  fell  into  the  background.  Not  that  the  Lord's 
people  must  therefore  cease  to  operate  upon  the  outward  and 
material  things  around  them,  but  that  in  doing  so  they  must 
bring  more  into  exercise  the  higher  elements  of  power,  and  no 
longer  lean  upon  the  more  gross  and  imperfect  instruments  of 
working.  The  carnal  sword,  in  particular,  must  henceforth  be 
sheathed,  and  weapons  of  violence  for  ever  put  aside.  The 
glorious  Head  of  the  Church  showed  himself  strong  only  in  the 
truth  of  God,  and  conquered  by  suffering  in  its  behalf.  It  was 
thus  that  he  gained  unspeakably  the  noblest  victory  recorded  in 
the  annals  of  time.  And  never  would  he  permit  his  followers 
to  entertain  the  thought  of  winning  any  triumphs  over  the 
ignorance  and  malice  of  the  world,  otherwise  than  by  their 
standing  like  him  in  the  truth  of  God,  and  holding  it  fast,  even 
unto  death.  How,  then,  would  such  conflicts  and  victories  as 
those  described  here,  if  literally  understood,  comport  with  this 
new  and  more  elevated  posture  of  affairs?  Precisely  as  the 
imperfections  of  childhood  with  the  higher  developments  of 
mature  age.  They  would  exhibit  a  Church  again  in  bondage  to 
the  elements  of  the  world,  wielding  the  artillery  of  brute  force 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  425 

instead  of  the  nobler  weapons  of  her  spiritual  armour,  and  so 
losing  infinitely  more  than  she  would  gain  by  such  a  method  of 
achieving  her  conquests.  The  spirit  of  prophecy  never  could 
intend  by  such  delineations  of  the  far-distant  future  to  indi 
cate  so  humiliating  a  result,  or  give  birth  to  anticipations  so 
directly  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  Christ ;  the  less  so,  as  it  was 
Christ's  Spirit  that  guided  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament 
in  their  prospective  delineations  (1  Pet.  i.  11).  And  therefore, 
in  addition  to  all  the  other  impossibilities  standing  in  the  way 
of  the  literal  interpretation  of  this  vision,  there  is  that  which 
arises  from  the  false  and  degrading  position  in  which  it  would 
put  the  Church,  sending  her  back,  after  she  has  attained  to  the 
spiritual  light  and  privileges  of  the  Gospel,  to  her  old  fleshly 
weapons  and  worldly  entanglements. 

Persons  who  in  the  face  of  all  these  considerations  can  still 
cling  to  the  literal  view  of  this  prophecy,  must  be  left  to  them 
selves  ;  they  must  have  principles  of  interpretation  or  grounds 
of  conviction  with  which  it  is  impossible  to  deal  in  the  way  of 
argument.  Their  views,  also,  respecting  the  position  and  calling 
of  the  Old  Testament  prophets,  as  to  the  revelation  of  the  future, 
must  be  altogether  erroneous.  They  must  suppose  that  the 
object  of  these  was  to  delineate  beforehand,  with  historical  exact 
ness,  the  coming  events  of  Providence;  whereas  it  often  consisted 
much  more  in  disclosing  how  the  great  truths  and  principles  of 
the  Divine  government  should  appear  in  the  administration  of 
the  affairs  of  men.  In  doing  this  it  was  necessary  for  them  to 
throw  their  delineations,  even  wrhen  referring  to  the  last  periods 
of  time,  into  the  form  of  existing  relations  and  known  circum 
stances — for  such  alone  it  was  competent  to  them  to  use ;  but 
they  could,  and  they  did,  sometimes  use  these  in  such  strange 
assortments  and  grotesque  combinations,  as  might  in  a  sense 
compel  thoughtful  minds  to  look  beyond  the  surface,  and  feel 
that  in  the  things  written  they  had  but  the  form  and  drapery  of 
what  should  be  ;  that  the  reality  itself  lay  deeper,  and  could 
meanwhile  be  but  dimly  apprehended.  Such,  certainly,  is  the 
manner  in  which  the  description  of  the  prophet  here  ought  from 
the  first  to  have  been  understood.  He  was  going,  through  the 
Spirit,  to  present  a  picture  of  what  might  be  expected  in  the  last 
scenes  of  the  world's  history;  and  according  to  the  native  bent 
and  constitution  of  his  mind,  the  picture  must  be  lifelike.  Not 


426  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

only  must  it  be  formed  of  the  materials  of  existing  relations,  but 
it  must  also  be  formed  into  a  perspective  with  manifold  and 
intricate  details;  yet  so  constructed  and  arranged,  that  while 
nothing  but  the  most  superficial  eye  could  look  for  a  literal  real 
ization,  the  great  truths  and  prospects  embodied  in  it  should  be 
patent  to  the  view  of  all.  What,  then,  are  these?  Let  it  be  re 
membered  at  what  point  it  is  in  Ezekiel's  prospective  exhibitions 
that  this  prophecy  is  brought  in.  He  has  already  represented  the 
covenant-people  as  recovered  from  all  their  existing  troubles,  and 
made  victorious  over  all  their  surrounding  enemies.  The  best  in 
the  past  has  again  revived  in  their  experience,  freed  even  from 
its  former  imperfections,  and  secured  against  its  ever-recurring 
evils.  For  the  new  David,  the  all-perfect  and  continually-abiding 
Shepherd,  presides  over  them,  and  at  once  prevents  the  outbreak 
ing  of  internal  disorders,  and  shields  them  from  the  attacks  of 
hostile  neighbours.  All  around,  therefore,  is  peace  and  quiet 
ness;  the  old  enemies  vanish  from  the  field;  Israel  dwells  securely 
in  his  habitation.  But  let  it  not  be  supposed  that  the  conflict  is 
over,  and  that  the  victory  is  finally  won  ;  it  is  a  world-wide 
dominion  which  this  David  is  destined  to  wield,  and  the  kingdom 
of  righteousness  and  peace  established  at  the  centre  must  expand 
and  grow  till  it  embrace  the  entire  circumference  of  the  globe. 
But  will  Satan  yield  his  empire  without  a  struggle?  Will  he  not 
rather,  when  he  sees  the  kingdom  of  God  taking  firmer  root  and 

/  tD  CD 

rising  to  a  higher  elevation,  seek  to  effect  its  dismemberment  or 
its  downfall,  by  stirring  up  in  hostile  array  against  it  the  multi 
tudinous  and  gigantic  forces  that  lie  scattered  in  the  extremities 
of  the  earth?  Assuredly  he  will  do  so;  and  God  also  will  direct 
events  into  this  channel,  in  order  to  break  effectually  the  power 
of  the  adversary,  and  secure  the  diffusion  of  Jehovah's  truth  and 
the  glory  of  his  name  to  the  remotest  regions.  A  conflict,  there 
fore,  must  ensue  between  the  embattled  forces  of  heathenism, 
gathered  out  of  their  far-distant  territories,  and  the  nation  that 
holds  the  truth  of  God.  But  the  issue  is  certain.  For  God's 
people  being  now  holiness  to  him,  he  cannot  but  fight  with  them 
and  give  success  to  their  endeavours.  So  that  the  arm  of  heathen 
ism  shall  be  completely  broken.  Its  mightiest  efforts  only  end 
in  the  more  signal  display  of  its  own  weakness,  as  compared  with 
the  truth  and  cause  of  God;  and  the  name  of  God  as  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  is  magnified  and  feared  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  earth. 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.  427 

Such  is  the  general  course  and  issue  of  things  as  marked  out 
in  this  prophecy,  under  the  form  and  aspect  of  what  belonged  to 
the  old  covenant,  and  its  relation  to  the  world  as  then  existing. 
But,  stripping  the  vision  of  this  merely  temporary  and  imperfect 
exterior,  since  now  the  higher  objects  and  relations  of  the  new 
covenant  have  come,  we  find  in  the  prophecy  the  following  series 
of  important  and  salutary  truths.  1.  In  the  first  place,  while 
the  appearance  of  the  new  David  to  take  the  rule  and  pre 
sidency  over  God's  heritage  would  have  the  effect  of  setting  his 
people  free  from  the  old  troubles  and  dangers  which  had 
hitherto  assailed  them,  and  laying  sure  and  broad  the  founda 
tions  of  their  peace,  it  should  be  very  far  from  securing  them 
against  all  future  conflicts  with  evil  ;  it  would  rather  tend  to 
call  up  other  adversaries,  and  enlarge  the  field  of  conflict,  so  as 
to  make  it  embrace  the  most  distant  and  barbarous  regions  of 
the  earth.  For  the  whole  earth  is  Christ's  heritage,  and  sooner 
or  later  it  must  come  to  an  issue  between  the  adherents  of  his 
cause  and  the  children  of  error  and  corruption.  Though  the 
latter  might  have  no  thought  of  interfering  with  the  affairs  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  and  would  rather  wish  to  pursue  their  own 
courses  undisturbed  (see  on  xxxviii.  4),  yet  the  Lord  will  not 
permit  them  to  do  so.  He  must  bring  the  light  of  heaven  into 
contact  with  their  darkness ;  so  as  to  necessitate  a  trial  of 
strength  between  the  powers  of  evil  working  in  them,  and  the 
truth  and  grace  of  God  as  displayed  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
2.  From  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  this  trial  would  fall  to  be 
made  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  with  most  gigantic  resources ; 
for  the  battlefield  now  is  the  world  to  its  farthest  extremities ; 
and  the  question  to  be  practically  determined  is,  whether  God's 
truth  or  man's  sin  is  to  have  possession  of  the  field  ?  So  that  all 
preceding  contests  should  appear  small,  and  vanish  out  of  sight, 
in  comparison  of  this  last  great  struggle,  in  which  the  world's 
destiny  was  to  be  decided  for  good  or  evil.  Hence  it  seemed 
in  the  distance  as  if  not  thousands,  as  formerly,  but  myriads 
upon  myriads,  numbers  without  number,  were  to  stand  here  in 
battle  array.  3.  Though  the  odds  in  this  conflict  could  not 
but  appear  beforehand  very  great  against  the  people  and  cause 
of  Christ,  yet  the  result  should  be  entirely  on  their  side  ;  and 
simply  because  with  them  is  the  truth  and  the  might  of  Jehovah. 
Had  it  been  only  carnal. resources  that  were  to  be  brought  into 


428  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

play  on  either  side,  victory  must  inevitably  have  been  with  those 
whose  numbers  were  so  overwhelmingly  great.  But  these  being 
only  flesh,  and  not  spirit,  they  must  fall  before  the  omnipotent 
energy  of  the  living  God,  who  can  make  his  people  more  than 
conquerors  over  all  that  is  against  them.  And  so  in  this  mighty 
conflict,  in  which  all  that  the  powers  of  darkness  could  muster 
from  the  world  was  to  stand,  as  it  were,  front  to  front  with  the 
people  of  God,  there  were  to  be  found  remaining  only,  on  the 
part  of  the  adversaries,  the  signs  of  defeat  and  ruin.  4.  Lastly, 
as  all  originated  in  the  claim  of  Messiah  and  his  truth  to  the 
entire  possession  of  the  world,  so  the  whole  is  represented  as 
ending  in  the  complete  establishment  of  the  claim.  The  king 
dom  through  every  region  of  the  earth  becomes  the  Lord's. 
He  is  now  universally  known  and  sanctified  as  the  God  of  truth 
and  holiness.  It  is  understood  at  last  that  it  was  his  zeal  for 
the  interests  of  righteousness  which  led  him  to  chastise  in 
former  times  his  own  professing  people ;  and  that  the  same  now 
has  induced  him  to  render  them  triumphant  over  every  form 
and  agency  of  evil.  And  now,  all  counter  rule  and  authority 
being  put  down,  all  disturbing  elements  finally  hushed  to  rest, 
the  prospect  stretches  out  before  the  Church  of  eternal  peace 
and  blessedness,  in  what  have  at  length  become  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness. 

It  may  still,  perhaps,  seem  strange  to  some,  if  this  be  the  real 
meaning  and  import  of  the  vision,  that  the  prophet  should  have 
presented  it  under  the  aspect  of  a  single  individual,  gathering 
immense  forces  from  particular  regions,  and  at  the  head  of  these 
fighting  in  single  conflict,  and  falling  on  the  land  of  Israel. 
They  may  feel  it  difficult  to  believe  that  a  form  so  concrete  and 
fully  developed  should  have  been  adopted,  if  nothing  more  local 
and  specific  had  been  intended.  But  let  such  persons  look  back 
to  other  portions  of  this  Book,  especially  to  what  is  written  of 
the  king  of  Tyre  in  chap,  xxviii.  (which  in  form,  perhaps,  most 
nearly  resembles  the  prophecy  before  us),  and  judge  from  the 
shape  and  aspect  there  given  to  the  past,  whether  it  is  not 
in  perfect  accordance  with  the  ascertained  characteristics  of 
Ezekiel's  style,  to  find  him  giving  here  such  a  detailed  and  fleshly 
appearance  to  the  future.  There  Tyre  is  not  only  viewed  as 
personified  in  her  political  head,  but  that  head  is  represented  as 
passing  through  all  the  experiences  of  the  best  and  highest  of 


ASSAULT  OF  GOG,  AND  HIS  DESTRUCTION.        429 

humanity.  It  is,  as  we  showed,  a  historical  parable,  in  which 
every  feature  is  admirably  chosen  and  pregnant  with  meaning, 
but  all  of  an  ideal  and  not  a  literal  or  prosaic  kind.  And  what 
is  the  present  vision,  as  now  explained,  but  &  prophetical  parable, 
in  which,  again,  every  trait  in  the  delineation  is  full  of  important 
meaning,  only  couched  in  the  language  of  a  symbolical  represen 
tation?  Surely  we  must  concede  to  the  prophet  what  we  would 
never  think  of  withholding  from  a  mere  literary  author,  that  he 
lias  a  right  to  employ  his  own  method;  and  that  the  surest  way 
of  ascertaining  this  is  to  compare  one  part  of  his  writings  with 
another,  so  as  to  make  the  better  known  reflect  light  upon  the 
less  known — the  delineations  of  the  past  upon  the  visions  of 
the  future. 

At  the  same  time  let  us  not  be  understood  as  declaring  for 
certain,  that  the  delineation  in  this  prophecy  must  have  nothing 
to  do  with  any  particular  crisis,  or  decisive  moment,  in  the 
Church's  history.  It  is  perfectly  possible  that  in  this  case,  as 
in  most  others,  there  may  be  a  culminating  point,  at  which  the 
spiritual  controversy  is  to  rise  to  a  gigantic  magnitude,  and 
virtually  range  on  either  side  all  that  is  good  and  all  that  is 
evil  in  the  world.  It  may  be  so ;  I  see  nothing  against  such  a 
supposition  in  the  nature  of  the  prophecy,  but,  I  must  add,  I 
see  nothing  conclusively  for  it.  For  when  we  look  back  to  the 
other  prophecy  just  referred  to,  we  find  the  wyork  of  judgment 
represented  as  taking  effect  upon  Tyre,  precisely  as  if  it  were 
one  individual  that  was  concerned,  and  one  brief  period  of  his 
history ;  while  still  we  know  blow  after  blow  was  required,  and 
even  age  after  age,  to  carry  forward  and  consummate  the  process. 
Perfectly  similar,  too,  was  the  case  of  Babylon,  as  described  in 
the  13th  and  14th  chapters  of  Isaiah  ;  it  seems  as  if  almost  one 
act  were  to  do  the  whole,  yet  how  many  instruments  had  a  hand 
in  it  I  and  over  how  many  centuries  was  the  work  of  destruction 
spread  !  We  see  no  necessity  in  the  form  of  the  representation, 
or  in  the  nature  of  things,  why  it  should  be  otherwise  here ; 
none  at  least  why  a  different  mode  of  reaching  the  result 
should  be  expected  as  certain.  We  believe  that  as  the  judgment 
of  Tyre  began  when  the  first  breach  was  made  in  the  walls  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  as  the  judgment  of  Babylon  began  when 
'the  Medes  and  Persians  entered  her  two-leaved  gates,  so  the 
controversy  with  Gog  and  his  heathenish  forces  has  been  pro- 


430  EZEKIEL  XXXVIII.  XXXIX. 

ceeding  since  Christ,  the  new  David,  came  to  lay  the  everlast 
ing  foundations  of  his  kingdom,  and  asserted  his  claim  to  the 
dominion  of  the  earth  as  his  purchased  possession.  Every  stroke 
that  has  been  dealt  since  against  the  idolatry  and  corruption  of 
the  world,  is  a  part  of  that  great  conflict  which  the  prophet  in 
vision  saw  collected  as  into  a  single  locality  and  accomplished 
in  a  moment  of  time.  He  would  thus  more  clearly  assure  us 
of  the  certainty  of  the  result.  And  though,  from  the  vast 
extent  of  the  field  and  the  many  imperfections  that  still  cleave 
to  the  Church,  there  may  be  much  delay  and  many  partial 
reverses  experienced  in  the  process, — though  there  may,  too,  at 
particular  times  be  more  desperate  struggles  than  usual  between 
the  powers  of  evil  in  the  world  and  the  confessors  of  the  truth, 
when  the  controversy  assumes  a  gigantic  aspect, — yet  the  prophecy 
is  at  all  times  proceeding  onwards  in  its  accomplishment.  Let 
the  Church,  therefore,  do  her  part,  and  be  faithful  to  her  calling ; 
let  her  grasp  with  a  firm  hand  the  banner  of  truth,  and  in  all 
lands  display  it  in  the  name  of  her  risen  Lord.  And  whichever 
way  he  may  choose  to  finish  and  consummate  the  process, — 
whether  by  giving  fresh  impulses  to  the  hearts  of  his  people, 
and  more  signally  blessing  the  work  of  their  hands,  or  by 
shining  forth  in  visible  manifestations  of  his  power  and  glory, 
such  as  may  at  once  and  for  ever  shame  into  confusion  the 
adversaries  of  his  cause  and  kingdom, — leaving  this  to  himself, 
to  whom  it  properly  belongs,  let  the  blessed  hope  of  a  triumphant 
issue  animate  every  Christian  bosom  and  nerve  every  Christian 
arm  to  maintain  the  conflict,  and  do  all  that  zeal  and  love  can 
accomplish  to  hasten  forward  the  final  result. 

In  the  preceding  remarks  we  have  deemed  it  unnecessary 
to  take  any  special  notice  of  such  interpretations  as  seek  the 
accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  in  particular  and  partial  occur 
rences  of  the  past :  for  example,  the  conflicts  of  the  Maccabees 
with  Antiochus  (Grotius,  Dathe,  Jahn),  the  invasion  and  over 
throw  of  the  Chaldeans  (Ewald),  the  temporary  successes  and 
destined  overthrow  of  the  Turks  (Luther).  All  such  interpreta 
tions  are  obviously  unsatisfactory  and  inadequate.  And  we 
simply  add,  further,  in  case  of  misapprehension,  that  while  we 
have  no  hesitation  in  regarding  the  vision  respecting  Gog  and 
Magog  in  the  Apocalypse  to  be  in  substance  a  re-announcement 
of  the  prophecy  before  us,  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  431 

prophecy  in  the  Apocalypse  has  exactly  the  same  compass  as  in 
Ezekiel.  It  plainly,  indeed,  has  not.  Ezekiel  contemplates  the 
great  conflict  in  a  more  general  light,  as  what  was  certainly  to 
be  connected  with  the  times  of  Messiah,  and  should  come  then 
to  its  last  decisive  issues.  John,  on  the  other  hand,  writing 
from  the  commencement  of  the  Messiah's  times,  breaks  up  these 
into  distinct  portions  (how  far  successive  or  contemporaneous, 
we  pretend  not  to  say),  and  giving  the  vision  respecting  Gog 
and  his  forces  the  same  relative  place  that  it  had  in  the  visions 
of  Ezekiel,  he  describes  under  it  the  last  strangles  and  victories 

s  c'O 

of  the  cause  of  Christ.  In  each  case  alike  the  vision  is  appro 
priated  to  describe  the  final  workings  of  the  world's  evil,  and 
its  results  in  connection  with  the  kingdom  of  God :  only,  the 
starting-point  is  placed  farther  in  advance  in  the  one  case  than 
in  the  other.  Therefore,  as  found  in  Ezekiel,  it  can  throw  no 
light  on  the  chronological  arrangement  of  the  Apocalypse. 


CHAPTER  XL.— XL VIII. 

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS  ON  THE  VISION  IN  CHAP.  XL.-XLVIIL, 
WITH  RESPECT  TO  THE  PRINCIPLES  ON  WHICH  IT  OUGHT  TO 
BE  INTERPRETED. 

WE  have  now,  with  God's  help,  reached  the  closing  vision  of 
Ezekiel's  prophecies;  but  so  far  from  seeing  all  difficulties 
behind  us,  we  find  ourselves  in  front  of  the  darkest,  and  in 
several  respects  the  most  singular  and  characteristic  vision  of 
the  whole  book.  For  all  that  is  most  peculiar,  and  much  also 
that  is  most  difficult  in  the  manner  of  our  prophet,  concentrates 
itself  here ;  and  whatever  need  there  may  have  been  of  the 
Spirit's  aid  to  guide  our  steps  through  the  earlier  visions,  the 
same  need  exists,  in  yet  greater  force,  with  respect  to  this  con 
cluding  revelation.  May  the  aid  so  required  not  be  withheld  ! 
May  the  Spirit  of  Truth  himself  direct  our  inquiries,  and  shine 
for  our  instruction  on  his  own  handwriting  !  May  no  blinding 
prejudice,  or  narrow  purpose  of  our  own,  prevent  us  from  follow- 


432  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

ing  the  path  of  enlightened  research  and  honest  interpretation  : 
so  that  the  views  to  be  propounded  may,  at  least  in  all  that  is 
essential,  bear  the  impress  of  soberness  and  truth ! 

Leaving  out  of  view  some  minor  shades  of  opinion,  which  are 
too  unimportant  to  deserve  any  special  notice,  the  views  that 
have  been  entertained  upon  the  vision  generally,  and  in  parti 
cular  the  description  contained  in  it  respecting  the  temple,  may 
be  ranged  under  four  classes. 

1.  The  first  is  what  may  be  called  the  historico-literal ;  which 
takes  all  as  a  prosaic  description  of  what  had  existed  in  the 
times  immediately  before  the  captivity,  in  connection  with  that 
temple  which  is  usually  called    Solomon's.      Ezekiel  just    de 
lineated,  it  is  thought  by  those  who  hold  this  view,  what  he  had 
himself  seen  at  Jerusalem,  that  the  remembrance  of  the  former 
state  of  things  might  be  preserved,  and  that  the  people  on  their 
return  might  restore  it  as  nearly  as  they  could.     Such  is  the 
opinion  sought  by  a  huge  apparatus  of  learning  to  be  maintained 
by  Villalpandus ;  and  lie  is  substantially  followed  by  Grotius, 
Calmet,  Seeker,  in  part  also  by  the  elder  Lowth,  Adam  Clarke,1 
Bottcher,  Thenius,  etc.     Those,  however,  who  adopt  this  view 
find  it  necessary,  against  the  natural  order  and  connection,  to 
separate  between  what  is  written  respecting  the  construction  of 
the  temple,  and  the  distribution  of  the  land,  as  well  as  some 
other  things  which  are  known  to  have  been  quite  different  in 
the  times  before  the  exile.     And  even  in  regard  to  the  temple 
itself,  and  the  things  immediately  connected  with  it,  making  due 
allowance  for  any  changes  that  may  have  been  introduced,  there 
are  many,  and  some  of  them  most  palpable  contrarieties  between 
what  is  known  to  have  existed  in  the  times  before  the  exile,  and 
the  scheme  of  things  delineated  by  the  prophet.     These  will 
fall  to  be  noticed  in  the  sequel. 

2.  The  straining  required  to  maintain  this  view,  and  its  utterly 

1  It  was,  perhaps,  unnecessary  to  mention  the  commentary  of  Dr.  Clarke 
in  this  connection,  as  all  his  notes  (so  we  are  told  in  his  Memoirs)  on  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel,  were  written  in  about  six  weeks.  He  gives  a  speci 
men  of  the  extreme  haste  with  which  he  wrote,  at  the  commencement  of 
this  40th  chapter,  when  he  states,  in  respect  to  the  view  under  considera 
tion,  that  "  every  biblical  critic  is  of  the  same  opinion  ;  "  and  tells  us  that 
u  the  Jesuits,  Prada  and  Villalpandus,  have  given  three  folio  vols.  on  this 
temple,"  etc.,  though  five  minutes'  inspection  would  have  shown  him  that 
of  the  three  one  entire  vol.  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  temple. 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  433 

unsatisfactory  nature,  gave  rise  to  another,  which  may  be  called 
the  historico-ideal.  According  to  it,  the  pattern  exhibited  to 
Ezekiel  differed  materially  from  anything  that  previously  existed, 
and  presented  for  the  first  time  what  should  have  been  after  the 
return  from  the  captivity,  though,  from  the  remissness  and  cor 
ruption  of  the  people,  it  never  was  properly  realized.  "  The 
temple  described  by  Ezekiel  should  have  been  built,  by  the  new 
colonists ;  the  customs  and  usages  which  he  orders  should  have 
been  observed  by  them ;  the  division  of  the  country  should  have 
been  followed  by  them.  That  the  temple  did  not  arise  out  of 
its  ruins  according  to  his  model,  and  that  his  orders  were  in  no 
manner  obeyed,  was  the  fault  of  Israel.  How  far  were  they 
behind  the  orders  of  their  first  lawgiver,  Moses  !  What  wonder, 
therefore,  that  they  as  little  regarded  their  second  lawgiver, 
Ezekiel?"  So  wrote  Eichhorn,  and  of  the  same  mind  were 
Dathe  and  Herder.  But  it  is  a  view  entirely  at  variance  with 
the  dimensions  assigned  to  the  temple,  the  mode  of  the  distribu 
tion  of  the  land  and  the  description  of  the  river,  all  of  which 
were  connected  with  physical  impossibilities  to  the  new  colonists. 
Some,  therefore,  who  hold  substantially  the  same  general  view, 
so  far  modify  it  as  to  admit  that  there  were  things  in  the 
prophet's  delineation  which  could  never  have  been  intended  to 
receive  a  literal  accomplishment,  yet  conceive  that  the  prophet 
did  not  the  less  design  to  present  in  it  a  perfect  draught  of  what 
it  was  desirable  and  proper  for  the  people  to  aim  at.  In  so  far 
as  the  actual  state  of  things  fell  short  of  this,  there  was  a  failure 
— but  only  in  the  realization,  not  in  the  idea ;  and  it  was  simply 
this  last,  not  the  other,  which  was  properly  any  concern  of  the 
prophet's.  So  various  of  the  older  rationalists  (among  others, 
Doederlein),  and  in  the  present  day,  Hitzig.  The  view  mani 
festly  proceeds  on  an  abandonment  of  the  strictly  prophetical 
character  of  the  vision,  and  reduces -its  announcements  to  a  sort 
of  vague  and  well-meaning  anticipation  of  some  future  good, 
such  as  a  strong  faith  and  lively  hope  might  cherish,  and 
thrown  into  any  form  the  writer's  own  fancy  might  suggest. 
It  cannot  therefore  be  concurred  in  by  any  one  who  believes 
that  the  prophet  spake  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  uttered  what,  according  to  its  genuine  import,  must  be 
strictly  fulfilled. 

3.  The  Jewish-carnal  view  is  the  one  we  shall  next  advert  to  ; 

9    TT. 


434  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

in  its  main  character  the  opposite  extreme  of  the  last  mentioned. 
It  is  the  opinion  of  some  Jewish  writers  that  the  description  of 
Ezekiel  was  actually  followed  by  the  children  of  the  captivity  as 
far  as  their  circumstances  would  allow,  and  that  Herod  also,  when 
lie  renovated  and  enlarged  it,  copied  after  the  same  pattern. 
(Lightfoot,  Desc.  Templi,  c.  x.).  But  they  further  hold,  that  as 
this  was  necessarily  done  in  a  very  imperfect  manner,  it  waits 
to  he  properly  accomplished  by  the  Messiah,  who,  when  he 
appears,  shall  cause  the  temple  to  be  reared  precisely  as  here 
described,  and  carry  out  all  the  other  subordinate  arrangements. 
A  considerable  party  has  of  late  years  been  springing  up  in  the 
Christian  Church,  especially  in  England,  who  entirely  concur 
in  these  Jewish  anticipations^  with  no  further  difference  than 
that,  believing  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah,  they  expect  the  vision 
to  receive  a  complete  and  literal  fulfilment  at  the  period  of  his 
second  coming.  The  whole  seed  of  Israel,  they  believe,  shall 
then  be  restored  to  possess  anew  the  land  of  Canaan,  where  they 
shall  become,  with  Christ  at  their  head,  the  centre  of  the  light 
and  glory  of  the  world  ;  the  temple  shall  be  rebuilt  after  the 
magnificent  pattern  shown  to  Ezekiel,  the  rites  and  ordinances  of 
worship  set  up,  and  the  land  apportioned  to  the  tribes  of  Israel, 
— all  as  described  in  the  closing  chapters  of  this  book.1  This 
opinion  has  also  found  its  advocates  on  the  Continent ;  Hofmann, 
for  example,2  and  Hess  in  his  letters  on  the  Apocalypse,  who 
says :  "  So  then  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  our  Lord,  who  once 
was  rejected  and  crucified  by  his  own  countrymen,  shall  by  the 
same  be  publicly  and  formally  acknowledged,  and  in  the  restored 
temple  shall  be  honoured ;  and  that  as  Israel  of  old  was  often 
made  to  do  service  to  the  nations  for  the  rejection  of  his  God 
and  Messiah,  so  now  the  nations  shall  be  subjected  to  him  when 
acknowledging  his  Messiah  and  confiding  in  his  God."3 

4.  The  last  view  is  the.  Christian-spiritual,  or  typical  one, 
according  to  which  the  whole  representation  was  not  intended  to 

1  See  Fry  on  the  Unfulfilled  Prophecies,  as  one  of  many. 

2  Weissagung  und  Erf.  i.  p.  359,  where,  however,  it  is  only  briefly  indi 
cated.    Baumgarten  also  seems  to  incline  to  the  same  view  in  his  Comm.  on 
Pent. 

3  Quoted  by  Delitzsch  in  his  Biblisch-prophetische  Theologie,  p.  94,  but 
without  giving  assent  to  it ;  and,  at  p.  308,  he  seems  to  mark  the  opinion 
as  a  false  extreme  in  a  few  remarks  on  some  passages  of  Baumgar ten's. 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  435 

find  either  in  Jewish  or  Christian  times  an  express  and  formal 
realization,  but  was  a  grand,  complicated  symbol  of  the  good 
God  had  in  reserve  for  his  Church,  especially  under  the  coming 
dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  From  the  Fathers  downwards  this 
has  been  the  prevailing  view  in  the  Christian  Church.  The 
greater  part  have  held  it  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other ;  in 
particular,  among  the  Reformers,  and  their  successors,  Luther, 
Calvin,  Capellus,  Cocceius,  Pfeiffer,  followed  by  the  majority  of 
evangelical  divines  of  our  own  country.  But  not  a  few  also  have 
combined  it  with  one  or  more  of  the  other  opinions  specified. 
Thus  Diodati,  joining  it  with  the  first,  says :  "  Now  the  Lord 
showeth  the  prophet  the  frame  of  Solomon's  temple,  which  had 
been  destroyed  by  the  Chaldeans,  that  the  memory  of  its  incom 
parable  magnificence  might  be  preserved  in  the  Church,  for  a 
figure  and  assistance  of  her  spiritual  temple  in  this  world,  but 
especially  in  the  celestial  glory."  To  the  same  effect  Lowth, 
in  his  Commentary — and  Lightfoot  only  differs  in  so  far  as  he 
rather  couples  the  second  view  with  the  last — regards  the  vision 
as  intended  to  a  encourage  the  Jews  with  the  prospect  of  having 
a  temple  again,"  though  the  temple  and  its  ordinances  were 
neither  formed  after  Solomon's  nor  designed  to  be  actually  set 
up,  but  prefigured  "  the  enlargement,  spiritual  beauty,  and  glory 
of  the  Church  under  the  Gospel."  This  is  also  the  view  adopted 
by  Greenhill  in  his  work  on  Ezekiel,  who  supposes,  indeed,  that 
the  vision  "  represented  the  restitution  of  the  Jewish  Church, 
their  temple,  city,  and  worship,  after  the  captivity  ;  yet  not 
simply,  but  as  they  were  types  of  the  Church  under  the  Gospel ; 
for  as  we  must  not  exclude  these,  so  we  must  know  this  is  not 
the  principal  thing  intended ;  that  which  the  vision  doth  chiefly 
hold  out  to  us  is  the  building  of  the  Christian  temple,  with  the 
worship  thereof,  under  Jewish  expressions,  which  began  to  be 
accomplished  in  the  apostles'  days"  (Acts  xv.  16). 

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  this  last  writer,  as  generally  the 
writers  of  the  class  and  period  to  which  he  belonged,  failed  in 
a  correct  appreciation  of  the  nature  of  the  vision,  and  of  the 
distinctive  principles  which  ought  to  be  kept  in  view  in  its  inter 
pretation.  Consequently  much  of  an  arbitrary  and  fanciful 
kind  entered  into  the  explanations  they  gave  of  particular  parts. 
The  basis  must  first  be  laid  of  the  proper  line  to  be  pursued,  by 
distinguishing  correctly  the  character  of  this  species  of  cornpo- 


436  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIIT. 

sition,  and  the  relation  in  which  the  vision  stands  to  other  por 
tions  of  Ezekiel's  writings.  Let  us  now  endeavour  to  prepare 
the  way  by  a  careful  consideration  of  what  bears  on  these  points. 
1.  First  of  all.  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  description 
purports  to  be  a  vision — a  scheme  of  things  exhibited  to  the 
mental  eye  of  the  prophet  u  in  the  visions  of  God."  This  alone 
marks  it  to  be  of  an  ideal  character,  as  contradistinguished  from 
anything  that  ever  had  been,  or  ever  was  to  be  found  in  actual 
existence,  after  the  precise  form  given  to  it  in  the  description. 
Such  we  have  uniformly  seen  to  be  the  character  of  the  earlier 
visions  imparted  to  the  prophet.  The  things  described  in  chap 
ters  i.-iii.  and  viii.-xi.,  which  were  seen  by  him  "  in  the  visions  of 
God,"  were  all  of  this  nature.  They  presented  a  vivid  picture  of 
what  either  then  actually  existed  or  was  soon  to  take  place,  but 
in  a  form  quite  different  from  the  external  reality.  Not  the  very 
image  or  the  formal  appearance  of  things  was  given,  but  rather 
a  compressed  delineation  of  their  inward  being  and  substance. 
And  such,  too,  was  found  to  be  the  case  with  other  portions, 
which  are  of  an  entirely  similar  nature,  though  not  expressly 
designated  visions;  such,  for  example,  as  chapters  iv.  xii.  xxi., 
all  containing  delineations  and  precepts,  as  if  speaking  of  what 
was  to  be  done  and  transacted  in  real  life;  and  yet  it  is  neces 
sary  to  understand  them  as  ideal  representations,  exhibiting  the 
character,  but  not  the  precise  form  and  lineaments  of  the  coming 
transactions.  Had  this  ideal  nature  of  the  description  been 
rightly  understood,  it  would  have  afforded  for  the  vision  before 
us  an  easy  solution  of  what  Dathe  has  thought  inexplicable  on 
any  supposition  but  that  of  the  literal  character  of  the  descrip 
tion,  viz.  the  preceptive  cast  into  which  it  is  thrown.  "He 
appears  not  to  promise,  but  to  command  ;  not  to  show  what  sort 
of  structure  would  be  raised,  and  what  arrangement  made  in 
connection  with  it,  but  to  order  what  should  be  done."  This  is 
precisely  what  appears  also  in  the  earlier  visions  referred  to ; 
and  it  is  what  might  have  been  expected  in  the  present  vision, 
on  the  supposition  of  its  being  an  ideal  representation  of  things 
belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  God, — but  not  otherwise.  Rightly 
understood,  the  preceptive  form  of  the  revelation  is  an  evidence 
of  the  non-realistic  character  of  what  was  communicated,  espe 
cially  when  viewed  in  connection  with  the  variations  it  presents 
to  the  handwriting  of  Moses.  Never  at  any  period  of  his  Church 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  437 

has  God  given  laws  and  ordinances  to  it  simply  by  vision ;  and 
when  Moses  was  commissioned  to  give  such  in  the  wilderness, 
his  authority  to  do  so  was  formally  based  on  the  ground  of  his 
office  being  different  from  the  ordinarily  prophetical,  and  of 
his  instructions  being  communicated  otherwise  than  by  vision 
(Num.  xii.  6).  So  that  to  speak  by  way  of  vision,  and  at  the 
same  time  in  the  form  of  precept,  as  if  enjoining  laws  and  ordi 
nances  materially  differing  from  those  of  Moses,  was  itself  a 
palpable  and  incontrovertible  proof  of  the  ideal  character  of  the 
revelation.  It  was  a  distinct  testimony  that  Ezekiel  was  no  new 
lawgiver  coming  to  modify  or  supplant  what  had  been  written  by 
him  with  whom  God  spake  face  to  face  upon  the  mount. 

2.  What  has  been  said  respecting  the  form  of  the  prophet's 
communication,  is  confirmed  by  the  substance  of  it ;  as  there  is 
much  in  this  that  seems  obviously  designed  to  force  on  us  the 
conviction  of  its  ideal  character.  There  are  things  in  the  descrip 
tion  which,  taken  literally,  are  in  the  highest  degree  improbable, 
and  even  involve  natural  impossibilties.  This  was  long  ago 
marked  by  Lightfoot,  in  regard  to  the  dimensions  of  the  temple 
and  city:  a And  now,  if  any  one  will  take  up  the  full  circuit 
of  the  wall  that  encompassed  the  holy  ground,  according  to  our 
English  measure,  it  will  amount  to  half  a  mile  and  about  16(> 
yards.  And  whosoever  likewise  will  measure  the  square  of 
Ezek.  xlii.  20,  he  will  find  it  six  times  as  large  as  this,  the  whole 
amounting  to  three  miles  and  a  half  and  about  140  yards — a 
compass  incomparably  greater  than  Mount  Moriah  divers  times 
over.  And  by  this  very  thing  is  showed  that  that  is  spiritually 
and  mystically  to  be  understood.  ...  As  for  a  literal  respon- 
dency  of  that  city  and  temple  (viz.  those  which  were  to  be 
built  after  the  return  from  Babylon)  to  all  the  particulars  of 
this  description,  it  is  so  far  from  it,  that  Ezekiel's  temple  is 
delineated  larger  than  all  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  and  his  Jeru 
salem  larger  than  all  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  thereby  the 
scope  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  ichnography  is  clearly  held  out 
to  be,  to  signify  the  great  enlarging  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem 
and  temple,  the  Church  under  the  Gospel,  the  spiritual  beauty 
and  glory  of  it, — as  well  as  to  certify  captived  Israel  of  hopes  of 
an  earthly  city  and  temple  to  be  rebuilt ;  which  came  to  pass 
upon  the  return  under  Cyrus."1 

1  Description  of  Temple,  pp.  5,  6.     Ed.  1650. 


438  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

What  in  this  passage  is  called  the  city,  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind,  includes  the  oblation  of  holy  ground  set  apart  for  the 
prince,  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  whose  residence  was  to  be 
in  immediate  connection  with  the  city.  Taken  thus,  the  state 
ment  of  Lightfoot  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  Referring  to  the 
notes  on  the  particular  verses  for  the  proof  of  what  we  say,  we 
simply  announce  at  present  the  general  result;  which  is  that, 
according  to  the  most  exact  modes  of  computation,  the  prophet's 
measurements  give  for  the  outer  wall  of  the  temple  a  square  of 
an  English  mile,  and  about  a  seventh  on  each  side,  and  for  the 
whole  city  a  space  of  between  three  and  four  thousand  square 
miles.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  boundaries  of  the 
ancient  city  exceeded  two  miles  and  a  half  in  circumference 
(see  Robinson's  Researches,  vol.  i.)  ;  while  here  the  circumfer 
ence  of  the  wall  of  the  temple  is  nearly  twice  as  much.  So  that 
the  first  part  of  Lightf  oot's  statement,  that  the  bounds  of  Ezekiel's 
temple  exceed  those  of  the  whole  city,  is  perfectly  correct ;  but 
in  regard  to  the  other  part,  in  which  he  asserts  the  bounds  of 
the  city  to  be  greater  than  those  of  the  whole  land  of  Canaan, 
some  exception  must  be  taken,  if  by  Canaan  be  meant  the  whole 
that  Israel  ever  possessed  on  both  sides  of  Jordan,  which  is  com 
puted  at  fully  double  of  Ezekiel's  square — somewhere  between 
ten  and  eleven  thousand  square  miles.  If  understood  of  Canaan 
Proper,  the  land  lying  between  Jordan  and  the  Mediterranean 
Sea,  the  portion  here  allotted  for  the  city  might  in  that  case  equal 
the  whole  land.  But  taking  the  land  at  the  largest,  the  allot 
ment  of  a  portion  nearly  equal  to  one-half  of  the  whole  for  the 
prince,  the  priests,  and  Levites,  is  a  manifest  proof  of  the  ideal 
character  of  the  representation ;  the  more  especially  when  we 
consider  that  that  sacred  portion  is  laid  off  in  a  regular  square, 
with  the  temple  on  Mount  Zion  in  the  centre.  For  then  the 
one-half  of  it,  extending  to  nearly  thirty  miles  in  length,  and 
lying  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem,  must  have  covered  nearly  the 
whole  southern  territory,  which  only  reached  as  far  as  the  Dead 
Sea  (chap,  xlvii.  19)  ;  while  yet  by  another  provision  five  of  the 
twelve  tribes  were  to  have  their  inheritance  on  that  side  of 
Jerusalem  beyond  the  sacred  portion  (chap,  xlviii.  23-28).  Such 
manifest  incongruities  on  the  literal  understanding  of  the  passage 
liave  led  to  alterations  in  the  text ;  some  transcribers  and  ancient 
translators,  as  well  as  modern  commentators,  putting  so  many 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  439 

cubits  instead  of  reeds  for  the  boundaries  of  the  temple  and  the 
city.  But  there  is  no  foundation  for  the  change  ;  it  is  the  easy, 
arbitrarily  way  of  getting  rid  of  a  difficulty  by  removing  the  oc 
casion  of  it ;  we  might  as  well  adjust  other  parts  to  suit  our  own 
fancies,  or  expunge  the  vision  altogether.  The  measurements 
of  the  prophet  were  made  to  involve  a  literal  incongruity,  as  did 
also  the  literal  extravagances  of  the  vision  in  chapters  xxxviii. 
xxxix.,  that  men  might  be  forced  to  look  for  something  else  than 
a  literal  accomplishment.  And  in  utter  misapprehension  of  the 
prophet's  design,  the  proposed  alterations  are  resorted  to  for  the 
purpose  of  bringing  the  plan  within  the  bounds  of  probability, 
as  a  scheme  of  things  that  might  one  day  be  actually  realized.1 
3.  Some,  perhaps,  may  be  disposed  to  imagine  that,  as  they 
expect  certain  physical  changes  to  be  effected  upon  the  land 
before  the  prophecy  can  be  carried  into  fulfilment,  these  may  be 
adjusted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of  the  prophet's  measure 
ments  being  literally  applied.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to 
admit  such  a  supposition.  For  the  boundaries  of  the  land  itself 
are  given,  not  new  boundaries  of  the  prophet's  own,  but  those 
originally  laid  down  by  Moses.  And  as  the  measurements  of 
the  temple  and  city  are  out  of  all  proportion  to  these,  no  altera 
tions  can  be  made  on  the  physical  condition  of  the  country  that 
could  bring  the  one  into  proper  agreement  with  the  other.  Then 
there  are  other  things  in  the  description  which,  if  they  could  not 
of  themselves  so  conclusively  prove  the  impossibility  of  a  literal 
sense  as  the  consideration  arising  from  the  measurements,  lend 
great  force  to  this  consideration,  and  on  any  other  supposition 
than  their  being  parts  of  an  ideal  representation,  must  wear  an 
improbable  and  fanciful  aspect.  Of  this  kind  is  the  distribution 
of  the  remainder  of  the  land  in  equal  portions  among  the  twelve 
tribes  in  parallel  sections,  running  straight  across  from  east  to 
west,  without  any  respect  to  the  particular  circumstances  of 
each,  or  their  relative  numbers ;  more  especially  the  assign 
ment  of  five  of  these  parallel  sections  to  the  south  of  the  city, 

1  The  same  effect  as  here  is  aimed  at  in  the  measurements  and  proportions 
of  St.  John's  city,  Rev.  xxi. — the  numbers  employed  being  all  symbolical  of 
perfection  and  of  immense  greatness.  The  walls  are  represented  as  being 
a  perfect  square,  and  on  each  side  12,000  stadia,  or  1200  ordinary  miles. 
This  as  far  surpasses  the  dimensions  of  Ezekiel's  city,  as  his  did  those  of 
ancient  Jerusalem. 


440  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

which,  after  making  allowance  for  the  sacred  portion,  would 
leave  at  the  farthest  a  breadth  of  only  three  or  four  miles  a  piece  ! 
Of  the  same  kind  also  is  the  supposed  separate  existence  of  the 
twelve  tribes,  which  now,  at  least,  can  scarcely  be  regarded  other 
wise  than  a  natural  impossibility,  since  it  is  an  ascertained  fact 
that  such  separate  tribeships  no  longer  exist ;  the  course  of  pro 
vidence  has  been  ordered  so  as  to  destroy  them,  and  once 
destroyed,  they  cannot  possibly  be  reproduced.  If  a  man  is 
dead,  he  may  be  brought  to  life  again  ;  but  if  the  once  separate 
lines  of  his  posterity  have  come  to  be  fused  together,  no  power 
in  nature  can  resolve  them  again  into  their  primary  elements. 
Of  the  same  kind,  further,  is  "the  very  high  mountain"  on  which 
the  vision  of  the  temple  was  presented  to  the  eye  of  the  prophet ; 
for  as  this  unquestionably  refers  to  the  old  site  of  the  temple, 
the  little  eminence  on  which  it  stood  could  only  be  designated 
thus  in  a  moral  or  ideal  and  not  in  a  literal  sense.1  Finally, 
of  the  same  kind  is  the  account  given  of  the  stream  issuing  from 
the  eastern  threshold  of  the  temple  and  flowing  into  the  Dead 
Sea,  which,  both  for  the  rapidity  of  its  increase  and  for  the 
quality  of  its  waters,  is  unlike  anything  that  ever  was  known  in 
Judea  or  in  any  other  region  of  the  wrorld.  Putting  all  to 
gether,  it  seems  as  if  the  prophet  had  taken  every  possible 
precaution,  by  the  general  character  of  the  delineation,  to  debar 
the  expectation  of  a  literal  fulfilment;  and  I  should  despair  of 
being  able  in  any  case  to  draw  the  line  of  demarcation  between 
the  ideal  and  the  literal,  if  the  circumstances  now  mentioned  did 
not  warrant  us  in  looking  for  something  else  than  a  fulfilment 
according  to  the  letter  of  the  vision. 

4.  Yet  there  is  the  further  consideration  to  be  mentioned — • 
which,  however  some  minds  of  peculiar  temperament  or  sophis 
tical  tendencies  may  contrive  to  evade  it,  will  surely  prevail  with 
the  great  mass  of  Bible  Christians — that  the  vision  of  the 

1 1  am  aware  some  say  that  the  hill  of  Zion  is  to  be  raised  in  the  latter 
days  to  an  enormous  height,  and  so  to  become  literally  above  the  hills. 
But  this  is  a  groundless  assertion ;  and  we  appeal  in  proof  to  chap.  xvii.  22, 
23,  where  the  same  Mount  Zion  is  designated  as  the  peculiarly  high  and 
eminent  mountain ;  and  that  in  a  prophecy  which  must  refer  to  the  first 
appearing  of  Christ.  For  it  speaks  of  him,  not  as  the  great  and  mighty 
king,  but  as  the  little  slender  twig,  which  was  to  be  planted  there  by  God  ; 
it  speaks  of  him  in  his  humiliation,  not  in  his  glory ;  and  yet  the  place  where 
he  began  to  take  root  is  called  "  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel." 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  441 

prophet,  as  it  must,  if  understood  literally,  imply  the  ultimate 
restoration  of  the  ceremonials  of  Judaism,  so  it  inevitably  places 
the  prophet  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  writers  of  the  New- 
Testament.  The  entire  and  total  cessation  of  the  peculiarities  of 
Jewish  worship  is  as  plainly  taught  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles 
as  lano-uao-e  could  do  it,  and  on  grounds  which  are  not  of 

JT>       o  7  o 

temporary,  but  of  permanent  validity  and  force.  The  word  of 
Christ  to  the  woman  of  Samaria — "  Woman,  believe  me,  the 
hour  cometh  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at 
Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father'7 — is  alone  conclusive  of  the 
matter;  for  if  it  means  anything  worthy  of  so  solemn  an  asse 
veration,  it  indicates  that  Jerusalem  was  presently  to  lose  its 
distinctive  character,  and  a  mode  of  worship  to  be  introduced 
capable  of  being  celebrated  in  any  other  place  as  well  as  there. 
But  when  we  find  the  apostles  afterwards  contending  for  the 
cessation  of  the  Jewish  ritual,  because  suited  only  to  a  Church 
"  in  bondage  to  the  elements  of  the  world,"  and  consisting  of 
what  were  comparatively  but  "weak and  beggarly  elements,'' — 
and  when  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we  also  find  the  dis 
annulling  of  the  old  covenant  with  its  Aaronic  priesthood  and 
carnal  ordinances  argued  at  length,  and  especially  "because  of  the 
weakness  and  unprofitableness  thereof/*  that  is,  its  own  inherent 
imperfections, — we  must  certainly  hold  either  that  the  shadowy 
services  of  Judaism  are  finally  and  for  ever  gone,  or  that  these 
sacred  writers  very  much  misrepresented  their  Master's  mind 
regarding  them.  No  intelligent  and  sincere  Christian  can  adopt 
the  latter  alternative;  he  ought  therefore  to  rest  in  the  former. 
And  he  will  do  so  in  the  rational  persuasion,  that  as  in  the  wise 
administration  of  God  there  must  ever  be  a  conformity  in  the 
condition  of  men  to  the  laws  and  ordinances  under  which  they 
are  placed,  so  the  earnal  institutions,  which  were  adapted  to  the 
Church's  pupilage,  can  never,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  in 
proper  correspondence  with  her  state  of  manhood,  perfection, 
and  millennial  glory.  To  regard  the  prophet  here  as  exhibit 
ing  a  prospect  founded  on  such  an  unnatural  conjunction,  is  to 
ascribe  to  him  the  foolish  part  of  seeking  to  have  the  new  wine 
of  the  kingdom  put  back  into  the  old  bottles  again  ;  and  while 
occupying  himself  with  the  highest  hopes  of  the  Church,  treat 
ing  her  only  to  a  showy  spectacle  of  carnal  superficialities.  We 
have  far  too  high  ideas  of  the  spiritual  insight  and  calling  of 


442  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

an  Old  Testament  prophet,  to  believe  that  it  was  possible  for 
him  to  act  so  unseemly  a  part,  or  contemplate  a  state  of  things 
so  utterly  anomalous.  And  we  are  perfectly  justified  by  the 
explicit  statement  of  Scripture  in  saying,  that  "  a  temple  with 
sacrifices  now  would  be  the  most  daring  denial  of  the  all-suffi- 

o 

ciency  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  of  the  efficacy  of  the  blood 
of  his  atonement.  He  who  sacrificed  before,  confessed  the 
Messiah  ;  he  who  should  sacrifice  now,  would  most  solemnly 
and  sacrilegiously  deny  him."1 

5.  Holding  the  description,  then,  in  this  last  vision  to  be 
conclusively  of  an  ideal  character,  we  advance  a  step  farther, 
and  affirm  that  the  idealism  here  is  precisely  of  the  same  kind 
as  that  which  appeared  in  some  of  the  earlier  visions — visions 
that  must  necessarily  have  already  passed  into  fulfilment,  and 
which  therefore  may  justly  be  regarded  as  furnishing  a  key  to 
the  right  understanding  of  the  one  before  us.  The  leading 
characteristic  of  those  earlier  visions,  which  coincide  in  nature 
with  this,  we  have  found  to  be  the  historical  cast  of  their 
idealism.  The  representation  of  things  to  come  is  thrown  into 
the  mould  of  something  similar  in  the  past,  and  presented  as 
simply  a  reproduction  of  the  old,  or  a  returning  back  again  of 
what  is  past,  only  with  such  diversities  as  might  be  necessary  to 
adapt  it  to  the  altered  circumstances  contemplated  ;  while  still 
the  thing  meant  was,  not  that  the  outward  form,  but  that  the 
essential  nature  of  the  past  should  revive.  Thus,  in  the  vision 
of  the  iniquity-bearing  in  chap,  iv.,  the  judgments  described  as 
alighting  or  destined  to  alight  on  the  houses  of  Israel  and 

O  O  O 

Judah,  are  represented  under  a  return  of  the  periods  of  time 
'spent  of  old  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness  ;  yet  as  certain  things 
in  the  description  not  doubtfully  indicated,  and  as  the  event 
itself  clearly  proved,  it  was  the  return,  not  of  those  precise 
periods  of  time,  but  of  similar  afflictive  and  disciplinary  methods 
of  dealing  that  were  there  predicted.  So  again  in  the  descrip 
tion  of  chap,  xx.,  quite  similar  in  its  announcement  of  coming 
evils  to  the  prediction  just  noticed,  the  prophet  speaks  of  a 
repetition  of  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  with  its  severe  and 
humbling  dispensations,  but  calls  it  now  "  the  wilderness  of  the 
peoples,"  to  distinguish  it  from  f  the  wilderness  of  Egypt," 
thereby  intimating  that  something  different  from  a  literal  re- 
1  Douglas's  Structure  of  Prophecy,  p.  71. 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  443 

enacting  of  the  old  scenes  was  intended.  There  was  the  same 
method  of  treatment  to  be  pursued,  the  same  and  even  higher 
spiritual  results  to  be  aimed  at,  but  amid  circumstances  out 
wardly  dissimilar.  Again,  in  the  ideal  representation  given  of 
the  king  of  Tyre  (chap,  xxviii.  11—19),  first  as  to  his  pre-eminent 
greatness,  and  then  his  appointed  downfall,  the  whole  is  made 
to  assume  a  historical  aspect ;  as  if  it  were  humanity  itself,  first 
enjoying  a  paradisiacal  honour  arid  glory,  then  received  into  the 
inmost  sanctuary  of  Jehovah's  presence,  but  only  to  be  cast 
down  as  a  polluted  creature  to  shame  and  contempt  and  ruin  ; 
so  that  the  Tyrian  monarch's  history  was  to  be  like  a  renewal  of 
man's  in  its  best  and  its  worst  experiences.  Once  more,  in  the 
prediction  of  Egypt's  humiliation  (chap.  xxix.  1-16),  a  humilia 
tion  that  was  to  take  its  beginning  from  the  hand  of  Nebuchad 
nezzar,  the  doom  is  represented  as  a  passing  over  of  the  most 
afflictive  and  humbling  part  of  Israel's  experience  upon  Egypt : 
she  who  had  presumed  to  do  the  part  of  Israel's  God  must  have 
trial  of  Israel's  forty  years'  wilderness  sojourn,  and  scattering 
among  the  nations ;  in  short,  as  to  judgment  and  depression,  she 
must  become  a  second  Israel  herself. 

Now  in  all  these  cases  of  an  apparent,  we  should  entirely  err 
if  we  looked  for  an  actual,  repetition  of  the  past.  It  is  the 
nature  of  the  transactions  and  events^  not  their  precise  form 
or  external  conditions,  that  is  unfolded  to  our  view.  The 
representation  is  of  an  ideal  kind,  and  the  history  of  the  past 
merely  supplies  the  mould  into  which  it  is  cast.  The  spiritual 
eye  of  the  prophet  discerned  the  old,  as  to  its  real  character, 
becoming  alive  again  in  the  new.  He  saw  substantially  the 
same  procedure  followed  again,  and  the  unchangeable  Jehovah 
must  display  the  uniformity  of  his  character  and  dealings  by 
visiting  it  with  substantially  the  same  treatment. 

If  now  we  bring  the  light  furnished  by  those  earlier  revela 
tions  of  the  prophet,  in  respect  to  which  we  can  compare  the 
prediction  with  the  fulfilment,  so  as  to  read  by  its  help  and 
according  to  its  instruction  the  vision  before  us,  we  shall 
only  be  giving  the  prophet  the  benefit  of  the  common  rule,  of 
interpreting  a  writer  by  a  special  respect  to  his  own  peculiar 
method,  and  explaining  the  more  obscure  by  the  more  intelligible 
parts  of  his  writings.  In  all  the  other  cases  referred  to,  where 
his  representation  takes  the  form  of  a  revival  of  the  past,  we 


444  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

see  it  is  the  spirit  and  not  the  letter  of  the  representation  that 
is  mainly  to  be  regarded ;  and  why  should  we  expect  it  to  be 
otherwise  here  ?  In  this  remarkable  vision  we  have  the  old 
produced  again,  in  respect  to  what  was  most  excellent  and 
glorious  in  Israel's  past  condition — its  temple,  with  every 
necessary  accompaniment  of  sacredness  and  attraction — the 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  within — the  ministrations  and 
ordinances  proceeding  in  due  order  without — the  prince  and 
the  priesthood  :  everything,  in  short,  required  to  constitute  the 
beau-ideal  of  a  sacred  commonwealth  according  to  the  ancient 
patterns  of  things.  But  at  the  same  time  there  are  such 
changes  and  alterations  superinduced  upon  the  old,  as  sufficiently 
indicate  that  something  far  greater  and  better  than  the  past 
was  concealed  under  this  antiquated  form.  Not  the  coming 
realities,  in  their  exact  nature  and  glorious  fulness — not  even 
the  very  image  of  these  things — could  the  prophet  as  yet 
distinctly  unfold.  While  the  old  dispensation  lasted,  they  must 
be  thrown  into  the  narrow  and  imperfect  shell  of  its  earthly 
relations.  But  those  who  lived  under  that  dispensation  might 
get  the  liveliest  idea  they  were  able  to  obtain  of  the  brighter 
future,  by  simply  letting  their  minds  rest  on  the  past,  as  here 
modified  and  shaped  anew  by  the  prophet,  just  as  now  the 
highest  notions  we  can  form  to  ourselves  of  the  state  of  ejorv,  is 

O  O  t     ' 

by  conceiving  the  best  of  the  Church's  present  condition  refined 
and  elevated  to  heavenly  perfection.  Exhibited  at  the  time  the 
vision  was,  and  constructed  as  it  is,  one  should  no  more  expect 
to  see  a  visible  temple  realizing  the  conditions,  and  a  reoccupied 
Canaan  after  the  regular  squares  and  parallelograms,  of  the 
prophet,  than  in  the  case  of  Tyre  to  find  her  monarch  literally 
dwelling  in  Eden  and  as  a  cherub  occupying  the  immediate 
presence  of  God,  or  to  behold  Israel  sent  back  again  to  make 
trial  of  Egyptian  bondage  and  the  troubles  of  the  desert. 
Whatever  might  be  granted  in  providence  of  an  outward 
conformity  to  the  plan  of  the  vision,  it  should  only  be  regarded 
as  a  pledge  of  the  far  greater  good  really  contemplated,  and  a 
help  to  faith  in  waiting  for  its  proper  accomplishment. 

6.  But  still,  looking  to  the  manifold  and  minute  particulars 
given  in  the  description,  some  may  be  disposed  to  think  it 
highly  improbable  that  anything  short  of  an  exact  and  literal 
fulfilment  should  have  been  intended.  Had  it  been  only  a 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  445 

general  sketch  of  a  city  and  temple,  as  in  the  60th  chapter  of 
Isaiah,  and  other  portions  of  prophecy,  they  could  more  easily 
enter  into  the  ideal  character  of  the  description,  and  understand 
how  it  might  chiefly  point  to  the  better  things  of  the  Gospel 
dispensation.  But  with  so  many  exact  measurements  before 
them,  and  such  an  infinite  variety  of  particulars  of  all  sorts, 
they  cannot  conceive  how  there  can  be  a  proper  fulfilment 
without  corresponding  objective  realities.  It  is  precisely  here, 
however,  that  we  are  met  by  another  very  marked  characteristic 
of  our  prophet.  Above  all  the  prophetical  writers  he  is  dis 
tinguished,  as  we  have  seen,  for  his  numberless  particularisms. 
What  Isaiah  depicts  in  a  few  bold  and  graphic  strokes,  as  in 
the  case  of  Tyre  for  example,  Ezekiel  spreads  over  a  series  of 
chapters,  filling  up  the  picture  with  all  manner  of  details ;  not 
only  telling  us  of  her  singular  greatness,  but  also  of  every 
element,  far  and  near,  that  contributed  to  produce  it ;  and  not 
only  predicting  her  downfall,  but  coupling  with  it  every  conceiv 
able  circumstance  that  might  add  to  its  mortification  and 
completeness.  We  have  seen  the  same  features  strikingly 
exhibited  in  the  prophecy  on  Egypt,  in  the  description  of 
Jerusalem's  condition  and  punishment  under  the  images  of  the 
boiling  caldron  (chap,  xxiv.),  and  the  exposed  infant  (chap,  xvi.), 
in  the  vision  of  the  iniquity-bearing  (chap,  iv.),  in  the  typical 
representation  of  going  into  exile  (chap,  xiii.),  and  indeed  in 
all  the  more  important  delineations  of  the  prophet,  which,  even 
when  descriptive  of  ideal  scenes,  are  characterised  by  such 
minute  and  varied  details,  as  to  give  them  the  appearance  of  a 
most  definitely  shaped  and  lifelike  reality. 

Let  this,  then,  be  borne  in  mind  respecting  the  distinctive 
character  of  our  prophet's  delineations  generally,  and  there  will 
be  no  difficulty  felt  in  regard  to  the  number  and  variety  of 
particulars  in  this  concluding  vision.  Considering  his  peculiar 
manner,  it  was  no  more  than  might  have  been  expected,  that, 
when  going  to  present  a  grand  outline  of  the  good  in  store  for 
God's  Church  and  people,  the  picture  should  be  drawn  with  the 
fullest  detail.  If  he  has  done  so  on  similar  but  less  important 
occasions,  he  could  not  fail  to  do  it  here,  when  rising  to  the  very 
top  and  climax  of  all  his  revelations.  For  it  is  pre-eminently 
by  means  of  the  minuteness  and  completeness  of  his  descriptions 
that  he  seeks  to  impress  our  minds  with  a  feeling  of  the  Divine 


446  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVHT. 

certainty  of  the  truth  disclosed  in  them,  and  to  give,  as  it  were, 
weight  and  body  to  our  apprehensions. 

7.  In  further  support  of  the  view  we  have  given,  it  may  also 
be  asked,  whether  the  feeling  against  a  spiritual  understanding 
of  the  vision,  and  a  demand  for  outward  scenes  and  objects 
literally  corresponding  to  it,  does  not  spring  to  a  large  extent 
from  false  notions  regarding  the  ancient  temple,  and  its  minis 
trations  and  ordinances  of  worship,  as  if  these  possessed  an 
independent  value  apart  from  the  spiritual  truths  they  symboli 
cally  expressed?  On  the  contrary,  the  temple,  with  all  that 
belonged  to  it,  was  an  embodied  representation  of  Divine  reali 
ties.  It  presented  to  the  eye  of  the  worshippers  a  manifold 
and  varied  instruction  respecting  the  things  of  God's  kingdom. 
And  it  was  by  what  they  saw  embodied  in  those  visible  forms 
and  external  transactions,  that  the  people  were  to  learn  how 
they  should  think  of  God,  and  act  toward  him  in  the  different 
relations  and  scenes  of  life — when  they  were  absent  from  the 
temple,  as  well  as  when  they  were  near  and  around  it.  It  was 
an  image  and  emblem  of  the  kingdom  of  God  itself,  whether 
viewed  in  respect  to  the  temporary  dispensation  then  present, 
or  to  the  grander  development  everything  was  to  receive  at  the 
advent  of  Christ.  And  it  was  one  of  the  capital  errors  of  the 
Jews,  in  all  periods  of  their  history,  to  pay  too  exclusive  a  regard 
to  the  mere  externals  of  the  temple  and  its  worship,  without 
discerning  the  spiritual  truths  and  principles  that  lay  concealed 
under  them. 

But  such  being  the  case,  the  necessity  for  an  outward  and 
literal  realization  of  Ezekiel's  plan  obviously  falls  to  the  ground. 
For  if  all  connected  with  it  was  ordered  and  arranged  chiefly 
for  its  symbolical  value  at  any  rate,  why  might  not  the  descrip 
tion  itself  be  given  forth  for  the  edification  and  comfort  of  the 
Church  on  account  of  what  it  contained  of  symbolical  instruc 
tion  ?  Even  if  the  plan  had  been  fitted  and  designed  for  being 
actually  reduced  to  practice,  it  would  still  have  been  principally 
with  a  view  to  its  being  a  mirror,  in  which  to  see  reflected 
the  mind  and  purposes  of  God.  But  if  so,  why  might  not  the 
delineation  itself  be  made  to  serve  for  such  a  mirror?  in  other 
words,  why  might  not  God  have  spoken  to  his  Church  of  good 
things  to  come  by  the  wise  adjustment  of  a  symbolical  plan  ? 
And  when  commentators  like  Hitzig,  or  writers  of  a  more 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  447 

spiritual  cast,  incredulously  ask  what  is  the  symbolical  meaning 
of  this  small  particular  or  that,  we  might  reply  by  putting  the 
like  question  regarding  the  temple  of  Solomon  or  the  tabernacle 
of  Moses;  while  yet  nothing  can  be  better  established  on 
grounds  of  Scripture,  than  that  these  sacred  fabrics  were  con 
structed  so  as  to  embody  and  represent  the  leading  truths  of 
God's  character  and  kingdom.  This,  of  course,  does  not  pre 
clude — when  rightly  considered,  it  rather  requires  that  the 
several  parts  should  be  viewed  in  subordination  to  the  general 
design,  and  that  many  things  must  enter  into  the  scheme,  which, 
taken  by  themselves,  could  have  no  independent  or  satisfactory 
meaning.  But  let  the  same  rules  be  applied  to  the  interpreta 
tion  of  Ezekiel's  visionary  temple  which  on  the  express  warrant 
of  Scripture  we  apply  to  Solomon's  literal  one,  and  it  will  be 
impossible  to  show  why,  so  far  as  the  ends  of  instruction  are 
concerned,,  the  same  great  purposes  might  not  be  served  by  the 
simple  delineation  of  the  one,  as  by  the  actual  construction  of 
the  other.1 

It  is  also  not  to  be  overlooked,  in  support  of  this  line  of 
reflection,  that  in  other  and  earlier  communications  Ezekiel 
makes  much  account  of  the  symbolical  character  of  the  temple, 
and  the  things  belonging  to  it.  It  is  as  a  priest,  he  gives  us  to 
understand  at  the  outset,  and  for  the  purpose  of  doing  priest- 
like  service  for  the  covenant-people,  that  he  received  his  pro 
phetical  calling,  and  had  visions  of  God  disclosed  to  him  (see 
on  chap.  i.  1-3).  In  the  series  of  visions  contained  in  chapters 
vh'u-xi.,  the  guilt  of  the  people  was  represented  as  concentrating 
itself  there,  and  determining  God's  procedure  in  regard  to  it.  By 
the  Divine  glory  being  seen  to  leave  the  temple,  was  symbolized 
the  withdrawing  of  God's  gracious  presence  from  Jerusalem ; 
and  by  his  promising  to  become  for  a  little  a  sanctuary  to  the 
pious  remnant  in  Chaldea,  it  was  virtually  said  that  the  temple, 
as  to  its  spiritual  reality,,  was  going  to  be  transferred  thither. 
This  closing  vision  comes  now  as  the  happy  counterpart  of  those 
earlier  ones,  giving  promise  of  a  complete  rectification  of  preced 
ing  evils  and  disorders.  It  assured  the  Church  that  all  should 
yet  be  set  right  again ;  nay,  that  greater  and  better  things 

1  See  the  Typology  of  Scripture,  vol.  i.,  chapters  i.  and  ii.,  for  the  establish 
ment  of  the  principles  referred  to  regarding  the  tabernacle,  and  vol.  ii.,  part 
iii.,  for  the  application  of  them  to  particular  parts. 


44S  EZEKIEL  XL.-XLVIII. 

should  be  found  in  the  future  than  had  ever  been  known  in  the 
past ;  things  too  great  and  good  to  be  presented  merely  under 
the  old  symbolical  forms, — these  must  be  modelled  and  adjusted 
anew  to  adapt  them  to  the  higher  objects  in  prospect. 

Nor  is  Ezekiel  at  all  singular  in  this.  The  other  prophets 
represent  the  coming  future  with  a  reference  to  the  symbolical 
places  and  ordinances  of  the  past,  adjusting  and  modifying  these 
to  suit  their  immediate  design.  Thus  Jeremiah  says,  in  chap. 
KXK.i.  38-40 ;  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the 
city  shall  be  built  to  the  Lord  from  the  gate  of  Hananeel  to  the 
c-orner  gate.  And  the  measuring  line  shall  go  forth  opposite  to 
it  still  farther  over  the  hill  Gareb  (the  hill  of  the  leprous),  and 
shall  compass  about  to  Goah  (the  place  of  execution).  And 
the  whole  valley  of  the  dead  bodies,  and  of  the  ashes,  and  all  the 
fields  to  the  brook  Kedron,  unto  the  corner  of  the  horse-gate 
toward  the  east,  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord."  That  is,  there 
shall  be  a  rebuilt  Jerusalem  in  token  of  the  revival  of  God's 
cause,  in  consequence  of  which  even  the  places  formerly  unclean 
shall  become  holiness  to  the  Lord:  not  only  shall  the  loss  by 
recovered,  but  also  the  evil  inherent  in  the  past  purged  out,  and 
and  the  cause  of  righteousness  made  completely  triumphant. 
The  sublime  passage  in  Isaiah  Ix.  is  entirely  parallel  as  to  its 
general  import.  And  in  the  two  last  chapters  of  Revelation  we 
have  a  quite  similar  vision  to  the  one  before  us,  employed  to  set 
forth  the  ultimate  condition  of  the  redeemed  Church.  There  are 
differences  in  the  one  as  compared  with  the  other,  precisely  as 
in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel  there  are  differences  as  compared  with 
anything  that  existed  under  the  old  covenant.  In  particular, 
while  the  temple  forms  the  very  heart  and  centre  of  Ezekiel's 
plan,  in  John's  no  temple  whatever  was  to  be  seen.  But  in  the 
two  descriptions  the  same  truth  is  symbolized,  though  in  the  last 
it  appears  in  a  state  of  more  perfect  development  than  in  the 
other.  The  temple  in  Ezekiel,  with  God's  glory  returned  to  it, 
bespoke  God's  presence  among  his  people  to  sanctify  and  bless 
them ;  the  no-temple  in  John  indicated  that  such  a  select  spot 
was  no  longer  needed,  that  the  gracious  presence  of  God  was 
everywhere  seen  and  felt.  It  is  the  same  truth  in  both,  only  in 
the  latter  represented,  in  accordance  with  the  genius  of  the  new 
dispensation,  as  less  connected  with  the  circumstantials  of  place 
and  form. 


PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  449 

8.  It  only  remains  to  be  stated  that  in  the  interpretation  of 
the  vision  we  must  keep  carefully  in  mind  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  was  given ,  and  look  at  it,  not  as  from  a  New,  but  as 
from  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view  ;   we  must  throw  ourselves 
back  as  far  as  possible  into  the  position  of.  the  prophet  himself; 
we  must  think  of  him  as  having  just  seen  the  Divine  fabric 
which  had  been  reared  in  the  sacred   and  civil  constitution  of 
Israel  dashed  in  pieces,  and  apparently  become  a  hopeless  wreck. 
But  in  strong  faith  on  Jehovah's  word,  and  with  Divine  insight 
into  his  future  purposes,  he  sees  that  that  never  can  perish 
which  carries  in  its  bosom  the  element  of  God's  unchangeable- 
ness  ;  that  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  will  assuredly  be  applied  to 
raise  up  the  old  anew ;   and  not  only  that,  but  also  that  it  shall 
be  inspired  with  fresh  life  and  vigour,  enabling  it  to  burst  the 
former  limits,   and  rise   into   a   greatness  and  perfection  and 
majesty  never  known  or  conceived  of  in  the  past.     He  speaks, 
therefore,  chiefly  of  Gospel  times,  but  as  one  still  dwelling  under 
the  veil  and  uttering  the  language  of  legal  times.     And  of  the 
substance  of  his  communication,  both  as  to  its  general  corre 
spondence  with  the  past  and  its  difference  in  particular  parts,  we 
submit  the  following  summary  as  given  by  Hiivernick  : — "  1.  In 
the  Gospel  times  there  is  to  be  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  a  solemn 
occupation  anew  of  his  sanctuary,  in  which  the  entire  fulness 
of  the  Divine  glory  shall  dwell  and  manifest  itself.     At  the  last 
there  is  to  rise  a  new  temple,  diverse  from   the  old,  to  be  made 
every  way  suitable  to  that  grand  and  lofty  intention,  and  worthy 
of  it;   in  particular,  of  vast  compass  for  the  new  community, 
and  with  a  holiness  stretching  over  the  entire   extent  of  the 
temple,  so  that  in  this  respect  there  should  no  longer  be  any 
distinction  between  the  different  parts.    Throughout  everything 
is   subjected   to  the  most  exact  and  particular  appointments ; 
individual  parts,  and  especially  such  as  had  formerly  remained 
indeterminate,  obtain  now   an  immediate  Divine  sanction;  so 
that  every  idea  of  any  kind  of  arbitrariness  must  be  altogether 
excluded  from  this  temple.      Accordingly  this  sanctuary  is  the 
thoroughly  sufficient,  perfect  manifestation  of  God  for  the  salva 
tion  of  his  people  (chapters  xl.-xliii.  12).    2.  From  this  sanctuary, 
as  from  the  new  centre  of  all  religious  life,  there  gushes  forth 
an  unbounded  fulness  of  blessings  upon  the  people,  who  in  con 
sequence  attain  to  a  new  condition.     There  come  also  into  being 

2  F 


450  EZEK1EL  XL. 

a  new  glorious  worship,  a  truly  acceptable  priesthood  and  theo- 
cratical  ruler ;  and  equity  and  righteousness  reign  among  the 
entire  community,  who,  being  purified  from  all  stains,  rise  indeed 
to  possess  the  life  that  is  in  God  (chap,  xliii.  13,  xlvii.  12). 
3.  To  the  people  who  have  become  renewed  by  such  blessings, 
the  Lord  gives  the  land  of  promise  ;  Canaan  is  a  second  time 
divided  among  them,  where,  in  perfect  harmony  and  blessed 
fellowship,  they  serve  the  living  God,  who  abides  and  manifests 
himself  among  them"  (chap,  xlvii.  13,  xlviii.).1 


CHAPTER   XL. 

THE  POSITION,  WALLS,  GATES,  AND  COURTS  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

IT  is  not  our  purpose  to  go  into  greater  length  on  the  details  of 
this  closing  vision,  than  is  absolutely  necessary  to  convey  a  pretty 
distinct  idea  of  the  revelation  contained  in  it.  And  as  the  readiest 
and  most  satisfactory  way  of  handling  it,  we  shall  take  it  in 
convenient  successive  portions  ;  first  giving  a  translation,  with 
explanatory  notes  where  such  may  be  required,  and  on  each 
section  presenting  a  brief  view  of  the  general  import. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  five-and- twentieth,  year  of  our  captivity,  in  the  beginning  of 
the  year,2  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month,  in  the  fourteenth  year  after  that 
the  city  was  smitten ;  in  the  self-same  day  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon 

1  Havernick,  Comm.  p.  623. 

2  It  is  a  much  debated  point,  and  not  yet  settled,  what  is  to  be  understood 
by  the  beginning  of  the  year — whether  the  first  month  of  the  ecclesiastical 
year  (Nisan),  or  the  first  of  what  was  called  the  civil  year  (Tisri),  or  the  first 
of  the  year  of  jubilee,  which  began  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month. 
We  need  not  spend  either  our  own  time  or  that  of  our  readers  by  recounting 
all  the  arguments  that  have  been  alleged  for  either  of  these  opinions,  and 
against  the  others  ;  but  deem  it  enough  to  state  that  no  satisfactory  reasons 
have  ever  been  produced  to  show  that  the  Hebrew  people  generally,  before 
the  captivity,  or  the  prophets  in  particular,  were  wont  to  take  account  in 
their  dates  of  any  year  but  that  usually  called  the  ecclesiastical  one.     All 
except  this  may  be  said  to  be  mere  conjecture.     The  beginning  of  the  year, 
in  this  sense,  memorable  for  its  connection  with  the  first  beginnings  of  the 
people  as  a  nation,  was  surely  a  fit  period  for  the  Spirit  imparting  the  vision 
of  new  and  better  things  to  come. 


THE  POSITION,  ETC.  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  451 

me,  and  he  brought  me  thither.1  2.  In  the  visions  of  God  he  brought  me 
to  the  land  of  Israel,  and  set  me  down  by  a  very  high  mountain,  and  upon  it 
a  city-like  building  to  the  south.2  3.  And  he  brought  me  there,  and  lo,  a 
man,  whose  appearance  was  as  the  appearance  of  brass,  with  a  line  of  linen 
in  his  hand,  and  a  measuring- rod,  and  he  stood  in  the  gate.  4.  And  the  man 
said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  look  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears,  and 
apply  thine  heart  to  all  that  I  show  thee ;  for  in  order  that  thou  mayest  be  shown 
them  art  thou  brought  hither:  declare  all  that  thou  seest  to  the  house  of  Israel. 

These  verses  form  the  introduction  to  the  whole  concluding 
section,  and  call  for  little  in  the  way  of  general  remark.     We 

1  The  expression  in  this  clause  is  striking :  brought  me  thither — where  ? 
— namely,  to  that  place  whither  his  thoughts  and  feelings  were  ever  tending 
as  their  centre,  and  which  needed  not  to  be  more  particularly  described.     It 
indicates  how  much  the  heart  of  the  prophet  felt  itself  at  home  in  that 
beloved  region. 

2  We  can  have  no  doubt  what  is  to  be  understood  by  the  very  high  mountain 
on  which  the  prophet  was  set  down  in  the  visions  of  God.     The  expression 
refers  back  to  chap.  xvii.  22,  xx.  40,  where  a  similar  designation  is  given  to 
that  mount,  which  formed  the  seat  and  centre  of  God's  earthly  kingdom. 
That  Mount  Zion  was  thus  named  chiefly  in  a  moral  respect,  on  account  of 
its  being  the  chosen  theatre  of  God's  peculiar  manifestations  to  his  Church 
and  people,  has  been  already  stated  on  the  former  of  these  passages,  and  again 
noticed  in  the  introduction  to  this  chapter.     And  now  especially,  when  the 
prophet  was  in  the  ideal  region  of  God's  visions,  where  all  was  to  be  seen  and 
considered  in  a  spiritual  respect,  it  was  most  fitly  presented  to  his  view  as  a 
place  of  high  elevation.    The  last  clause  is  attended  with  some  difficulty,  but 
the  most  natural  rendering  seems  to  be  that  given  above.     The  upon  it  must 
necessarily  point  to  the  mountain  itself  on  which  the  prophet  stood;  and  this, 
as  he  immediately  proceeds  to  tell  us,  was  the  site,  not  of  a  city  in  the  proper 
sense,  but  of  the  temple  buildings.     For  what  he  sees  upon  the  hill  is  what 
he  proceeds  to  describe ;  and  it  is  in  regard  to  the  framework  he  saw  that 
he  says,  at  the  beginning  of  ver.  3,  "and  he  brought  me  thither."     It  seems 
plain,  therefore,  that  the  TjrnjllDS  must  be  a  compound  phrase,  descriptive 
of  the  temple  buildings  which  he  saw  in  vision  on  the  mount.     And  so  I 
understand  it :  like  the  framework  of  a  city,  or  a  city-like  building — an 
erection  so  vast  and  varied  that  it  bore  the  aspect  of  a  city  rather  than  of 
a  single  structure.     We  need  not  wonder  at  this,  when  we  consider  that  the 
space  they  occupied  was  much  larger  than  the  entire  site  of  ancient  Jerusalem. 
Then  in  regard  to  the  remaining  word,  "to  the  south,"  I  see  no  proper  diffi 
culty  about  it,  or  any  necessity  for  adopting  the  change  suggested  by  the 
LXX.,  and  followed  by  many  commentators,  and  reading  133  ID  over-against. 
The  prophet  was  first  brought  to  the  mountain,  and  somewhere  about  it,  or 
on  it,  was  set  down  (he  uses  the  rather  indefinite  preposition  ^tf  at,  or  by) ; 
there  he  descries  the  city-like  framework  a  little  to  the  south  of  him,  and 
then  God  "brings  him  thither,"  i.e.,  close  up  to  it,  that  he  might  see  what 
it  was. 


452  EZEKIEL  XL. 

observe  in  them  so  far  a  resemblance  between  the  commencement 
and  the  close  of  the  book,  that  in  each  alike  the  prophet  is  borne 
away  by  a  Divine  hand,  and  placed  amid  the  visions  of  God. 
There  are,  however,  two  characteristic  differences  between  the 
earlier  and  the  later.  First,  in  respect  to  the  region  where  these 
ideal  manifestations  of  Divine  truth  and  glory  were  given — 
formerly  on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  as  if  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
had  forsaken  its  old  haunts,  and  now  on  what  was  emphatically 
the  mount  of  God,  as  if  he  were  again  returned  thither,  and  had 
even  already  raised  it  to  a  far  nobler  elevation.  The  substance 
of  the  visions,  too,  very  strikingly  differed;  for  while  that  on  the 
Chebar  was  fitted  chiefly  to  awaken  thoughts  of  terror  and  solemn 
awe  in  the  bosom,  this,  on  the  other  hand,  was  calculated  to 
produce  feelings  of  the  liveliest  confidence  and  the  most  exalted 
hopes.  The  heavens  seemed  now,  in  a  sense,  cleared  of  all  their 
stormier  elements,  and  were  radiant  with  the  sunshine  of  the 
Divine  favour.  The  man  with  the  appearance  of  brass  (bright, 
furbished  brass  is  to  be  understood)  must,  of  course,  be  con 
sidered  a  representative  of  the  higher  world,  a  special  messenger 
of  God  ;  and  the  two  instruments  in  his  hand,  the  linen  tape  and 
the  measuring  rod,  were  for  taking  the  dimensions — the  first  the 

O  '  O 

larger,  the  second  the  less.  It  is  also  quite  in  unison  with  the 
prophet's  strongly  ideal  and  realistic  cast  of  mind,  that  he  should 
not  simply  have  given  the  pattern  and  dimensions,  but  should 
have  presented  the  Divine  messenger  in  the  attitude  of  going  to 
take  all  the  measurements  before  his  eyes. 

Ver.  5.  And  behold  a  wall  outside  the  house  (viz.  the  house  of  God) 
round  about,  and  in  the  man's  hand  a  measuring  rod  of  six  cubits,  by  the 
cubit  and  an  handbreadth  ; l  and  he  measured  the  breadth  of  the  building 
(the  boundary-wall)  one  rod,  and  the  height  one  rod.  6.  And  he  came 
to  the  gate  which  looks  toward  the  east,  and  went  up  on  its  (seven)  steps, 
and  measured  the  threshold  (more  exactly,  sill)  of  the  gate,  one  rod  broad  ; 


1  The  exact  proportions  of  the  Hebrew  measures  of  length  cannot  be 
ascertained  with  absolute  correctness,  as  they  were  derived  from  parts  of  the 
human  body,  which  necessarily  vary.  But  the  most  careful  inquiries  have 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ordinary  Hebrew  cubit  was  to  a  nearness  21 
inches  ;  and  consequently  the  one  employed  here  being  an  handbreadth  or 
3£  inches  more,  will  make  the  cubit  somewhere  about  2  feet  of  our  reckoning, 
and  the  rod  about  12  feet.  This  must  have  been  very  near  the  length  of  each. 
(See  Winer's  Real- Wort.,  art.  Elle,  and  Kitto's  Bib.  Cyclop.,  art.  Cubit.) 


THE  POSITION,  ETC.  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  453 

even  the  one  threshold,  one  rod  broad.1  7.  And  the  chamber,  one  rod 
long,  and  one  rod  broad ;  and  between  the  chambers,  five  cubits  ;  and  the 
threshold  of  the  gate  beside  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  one  rod.  8.  And 
he  measured  the  porch  of  the  gate  within,  one  rod.  9.  And  he  measured 
the  porch  of  the  gate,  eight  cubits ;  and  its  pillars,  two  cubits ;  and  the 
porch  of  the  gate  within.  10.  And  the  chambers  of  the  gate  toward  the 
east  were  three  on  the  one  side,  and  three  on  the  other ;  all  three  of  one 
measure;  and  the  pillars  had  one  measure  on  both  sides.  11.  And  he 
measured  the  breadth  of  the  gate  entry,  ten  cubits ;  the  length  of  the  gate 
was  thirteen  cubits.  12.  And  a  boundary-mark  was  before  the  chambers, 
one  cubit ;  and  on  the  other  side  a  boundary-mark  of  one  cubit ;  and  the 
chambers,  six  cubits  on  this  side,  and  six  cubits  on  that.  13.  And  he 
measured  the  gate  from  the  roof  of  one  chamber  to  the  roof  of  another,  the 
breadth  five-and-twenty  cubits,  door  against  door.  14.  And  he  made 
pillars  of  sixty  cubits,  even  unto  the  pillar  of  the  court  of  the  gate,  round 
and  round.  15.  And  from  the  front  of  the  outer  gate  to  the  front  of  the 
inner  gate  porch  were  fifty  cubits.  16.  And  there  were  closed  (or  fixed) 
windows  to  the  chambers  and  their  pillars  within  the  gate  round  and  round ; 
and  also  to  the  porches ;  and  windows  were  all  round  about  inward ;  and 
upon  each  pillar  palm-trees.2 


1  It  is  impossible  to  make  sense  of  our  English  version  here,  which  renders, 
"and  the  other  threshold  of  the  gate,  which  was  one  reed  broad."    What 
other  threshold?     There  could  be  but  one  sill  or  threshold  to  each  gate. 
Ewald  arbitrarily  substitutes  inx  for  "intf  and  renders,  "the  back  threshold 
was  one  rod  broad,"  as  if  their  could  properly  be  two  thresholds,  or  the 
dimensions  behind  were  to  be  different  from  those  in  front.     The  true 
meaning  is  undoubtedly  that  adopted  by  Bottcher,  and  followed  by  Hiiv., 
that  the  prophet  in  this  clause  calls  attention  to  the  ample  dimensions  of 
the  threshold  of  the  gate,  the  breadth  (one  rod,  or  12  feet,  the  height  of 
the  wall)  being  sufficient  to  let  numbers  pass  and  repass  at  once.     There 
was  no  break  or  division;  even  the  one  gate  had  its  threshold  a  rod-breadth. 

2  The  whole  of  these  verses  (vers.  7-16)  are  taken  up  with  a  description 
of  the  east  gate,  and  the  buildings  connected  with  it;  but  from  certain 
obscurities  in  the  terms,  and  the  vagueness  in  some  parts  of  the  description 
itself,  it  is  not  possible  to  speak  definitely  and  minutely  of  the  plan — not 
at  least  without  taking  great  liberties  with  the  text.     Some  parts  of  the 
description  are  intelligible  enough — as  that  there  was  a  porch  with  pillars, 
or  some  sort  of  ornamental  work,  to  the  gate ;  that  on  each  side  there  were 
three  chambers  (by  which  are  plainly  to  be  understood  guard -chambers,  such 
as  also  belonged  to  the  old  temple  buildings,  1  Chron.  ix.  26,  27,  xxvi.  12  ; 
2  Kings  xxii.  4)  ;  that  these  chambers  were  each  a  rod  or  six  cubits  long  by 
as  much  in  breadth,  separated  from  each  other  by  a  wall  of  five  cubits,  and 
having  windows  somehow  fixed  in  them.     These  are  the  more  prominent 
points.     But  when  we  ask,  how  the  chambers  stood  precisely  to  the  gate — 
whether  longitudinally  or  transversely,  projecting  altogether  outwards  from 
the  wall,  or  altogether  inwards,  or  partly  both  ;  how  the  threshold  could 
be  found  in  ver.  7  one  rod  or  six  cubits  broad,  and  in  ver.  9  could  be  said 
to  be  eight  cubits ;  what  precisely  were  the  D^tf   translated  pillars,  though 


454  EZEKIEL  XL. 

In  this  description,  as  stated  in  the  note  below,  there  are 
obscurities  in  regard  to  several  of  the  particulars  mentioned 
which  we  have  not  the  means  of  satisfactorily  clearing  up.  But 
we  may  not  the  less  apprehend  the  general  import  of  this  part 
of  the  description.  It  marks  a  very  decided  superiority  in  the 
new  pattern  presented  to  the  eye  of  Ezekiel  over  that  which  had 
previously  existed ;  the  imperfections  of  the  one  should  have  no 
place  in  the  other.  And  this,  first,  in  regard  to  the  wall  that 
enclosed  the  sacred  edifice.  It  is  probable  that  the  temple  of 
Solomon  was  surrounded  by  such  a  boundary  wall,  as  something 
of  this  kind  was  customary  in  ancient  temples ;  but  there  is  no 
appearance  of  that  having  formed  part  of  the  Divine  plan,  or 
possessing  strictly  a  sacred  character.  Hence  various  alterations 
were  made  from  time  to  time  in  that  respect,  and  new  gates 
opened  (2  Kings  xv.  35 ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  10),  for  the  purpose,  no 
doubt,  of  suiting  more  fully  the  convenience  of  the  worshippers. 
Something  of  an  irregular,  adventitious,  of  a  common  or  profane 
character  was  thus  brought  into  close  contact  with  the  affairs  of 

o 

the  temple;  and  on  this  account  no  scruple  was  made  of  turning 
apartments  in  the  buildings  raised  on  these  sacred  precincts  to 
the  commonest  uses.  It  was  in  one  of  these  that  Jeremiah 
was  detained  as  in  a  prison  (chap.  xx.  2,  xxix.  26).  But  now, 
according  to  the  new  and  better  state  of  things  seen  in  vision  by 
the  prophet,  this  imperfection  and  arbitrariness  were  to  be  done 
away.  The  whole  summit  of  the  temple  mount  was  to  be  set 

they  are  themselves  said  to  have  posts  (ver.  49),  or  how  they,  as  well  as  the 
guard-chambers,  could  have  had  windows,  in  ver.  16;  what  could  be  the 
use  of  windows,  especially  to  the  porches;  how  the  measurement  of  the 
chambers  from  roof  to  roof  could  have  been  managed  so  as  to  make  twenty- 
five  cubits ;  and  how  the  pillars  of  sixty  cubits  are  to  be  understood,  whether 
as  rising  aloft  to  this  enormous  height  or  placed  horizontally  :  these,  and 
several  other  points,  are  involved  in  hopeless  obscurity,  partly  from  the 
terms  not  being  sufficiently  understood,  and  partly  from  the  relative  positions 
of  the  objects  not  being  distinctly  enough  marked.  Ewald  and  Hitzig 
endeavour  to  make  something  of  it  by  occasionally  altering  the  text,  support 
ing  themselves  to  some  extent  by  the  LXX. ;  but  I  prefer  saying,  I  don't 
find  the  text  such  as  I  can  fully  explain,  to  making  a  text  which  needs  little 
or  no  explanation.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  original  would  have  been 
more  precise  and  definite  if  this  had  been  necessary  to  our  getting  the 
instruction  it  was  intended  to  convey.  I  deem  it,  therefore,  quite  unneces 
sary  to  enter  into  the  minutiae,  of  the  different  terms,  which  can  lead  to  no 
satisfactory  result. 


THE  POSITION,  ETC.  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  455 

off  as  an  holy  place  to  the  Lord ;  and  the  wall  enclosing  it, 
and  the  gates  and  erections  connected  with  it,  were  all,  equally 
with  the  temple  itself,  to  bear  on  them  the  stamp  of  Divine 
perfection. 

The  wall,  as  described  by  the  prophet,  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  planned  with  any  other  view  than  to  convey  this  impression 
of  sacredness.  As  usual  in  Divine  measurements  (for  example, 
the  most  holy  place  in  the  sanctuary,  and  the  city  in  Rev. 
xxi.  16),  it  bears  the  square  form,  as  broad  as  it  is  high  ;  but 
this  being  only  twelve  feet  at  the  utmost,  it  was  manifestly  not 
designed  to  present  by  its  altitude  an  imposing  aspect,  or  by  its 
strength  to  constitute  a  bulwark  of  safety.  In  these  respects  it 
could  not  for  a  moment  be  compared  with  many  of  the  mural 
erections  which  existed  in  antiquity.  But  as  the  boundary  line 
between  the  sacred  and  the  profane,  which,  being  drawn  by  the 
hand  of  God,  must  therefore  remain  free  from  all  interference 
on  the  part  of  man,  it  is  precisely  such  as  might  have  been 
expected.  Something  more,  however,  needed  to  be  expressed 
in  the  construction  of  the  gates.  These  being  the  channels  of 
intercourse  with  what  was  within — the  door-ways  out  and  in  to 
what  might  be  called  emphatically  the  city  of  the  living  God — 
they  must  be  formed  so  as  adequately  to  provide  for  the  due 
preservation  of  the  sacred  character  of  the  house.  This  is  the 
point  chiefly  brought  out  in  the  plans  and  measurements  con 
nected  with  them.  There  are  not  wanting  in  the  description 
signs  of  beauty  and  magnificence — porticoes,  pillars,  turrets, 
carved  and  ornamented,  so  as  to  convey  the  impression  that  the 
way  through  them  conducted  to  the  palace  of  the  great  King. 
But  furnished  as  they  were  so  amply  with  guard-chambers  for 
those  who  should  be  charged  with  maintaining  the  sanctity  of 
the  house  (chap.  xliv.  11,  14),  they  were  formed  more  especially 
with  a  view  to  the  holiness,  which  must  be  the  all-pervading 
characteristic  of  the  place.  It  was  imprinting  on  the  architec 
ture  of  this  portion  of  the  buildings  the  solemn  truth  "  that 
there  shall  in  nowise  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,  neither 
worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie"  (Rev.  xxi.  27) — a  truth 
which  in  past  times,  partly  from  defective  arrangements,  partly 
from  the  wilful  disregard  of  such  as  existed,  had  been  most 
grievously  suffered  to  fall  into  abeyance.  But  henceforth  it 
must  be  made  known  to  all  that  holiness  becometh  God's  house, 


456  EZEKIEL  XL. 

and  that  they  only  who  possess  this  shall  be  allowed  to  come 
and  minister  before  him. 

While  this  character  attaches  substantially  to  each  of  the  four 
gates,  it  is  brought  out  most  especially  and  distinctly  in  connec 
tion  with  the  eastern  gate,  because  this  was  the  one  that  looked 
straight  to  the  door  of  the  temple,  and  to  it,  therefore,  belonged 
a  place  of  pre-eminence.  It  was  through  that  gate  that  the 
prophet  in  a  former  vision  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord  de 
parting  (chap.  xi.  23),  and  through  this  also  it  was  to  return  ; 
whence  the  access  through  it  was  to  be  reserved  for  special 
occasions  (chap.  xliv.  2,  3).  The  more  intimate  connection 
between  this  and  the  peculiar  manifestations  of  Deity  imparted 
to  it  a  character  of  deeper  sacredness. 

Ver.  17.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  outer  court,  and  lo,  there  were  rooms 
and  a  pavement  made  for  the  court  round  about ;  thirty  rooms  for  the  pave 
ment.  18.  And  the  pavement  was  by  the  side  of  the  gates,  corresponding 
to  the  length  of  the  gates  ;  this  is  the  lower  pavement.  19.  And  he  measured 
the  breadth  from  the  front  of  the  lower  gate  to  the  outer  part  of  the  inner 
court,  an  hundred  cubits  eastward  and  northward. 

In  this  brief  description  of  the  outer  court  there  is  properly 
no  difficulty  in  the  terms,  or  any  of  the  particular  parts,  but  still 
there  is  an  indefiniteness  which  would  leave  us  at  sea  if  we 
were  going  to  draw  out  the  plan.  For  what  was  the  position  of 
the  thirty  rooms  or  cells  spoken  of  in  this  space?  Did  they 
appear  immediately  in  front  when  one  entered  the  east  gate  (as 
Havernick  contends),  or  were  they  placed  at  a  side  (as  Bottcher 
and  Ilitzig  affirm)  ?  Did  the  measurement  of  an  hundred  cubits 
apply  merely  to  the  buildings,  or  to  the  court  itself  I  Here, 
again,  is  room  for  difference  of  opinion.  It  is  foolish  for  us  to 
fix  and  determine  what  the  prophet  has  left  indeterminate.  I 
think  the  natural  impression  is,  that  the  prophet  means  to  repre 
sent  the  whole  outer  court  as  laid  with  a  smooth  and  polished 
pavement  round  and  round  as  far  as  this  court  reached  ;  that  on 
the  pavement,  but  to  the  north  or  right,  as  one  entered,  there  was 
a  large  building  of  thirty  rooms  covering  the  whole  width  of  the 
court  in  that  direction  (for  why  otherwise  should  he  have  given 
the  measurement  on  the  east  and  north  merely,  and  yet  have 
made  it  reach  from  the  lower  gate  to  the  outer  part  of  the  inner 
court  ?)  ;  so  that  the  measurement  given  indicated  at  once  the 
extent  of  the  buildings  and  the  width  of  the  court.  (Havernick 


THE  POSITION,  ETC.  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  457 

disputes  this,  but  without  any  just  reason  ;  he  would  make  the 
court  larger.)  Such  is  the  impression  I  take  up  from  the  de 
scription,  but  there  can  be  no  absolute  certainty  in  regard  to  the 
relative  positions  and  adjustments — itself  a  proof  that  nothing 
depends  on  them.  The  determinate  things  in  the  description 
are,  that  the  compass  of  the  outer  court  was  exactly  defined,  an 
hundred  cubits ;  that  it  was  finely  paved,  as  a  place  which  should 
be  trodden  only  by  clean  feet  (emblem  of  internal  purity)  ;  and 
that  the  erections  belonging  to  it  were  to  be  a  square  of  an 
hundred  cubits,  and  consisting  of  thirty  apartments.  So  that 
here  also  nothing  was  left  to  men's  caprice  or  corrupt  fancies,  as 
had  been  the  case  of  old.  While  from  the  first  there  appears  to 
have  been  an  outer  court  connected  with  Solomon's  temple,  it 
seems  to  have  been  left  to  a  certain  extent  open  to  alterations,  as 
well  as  the  intrusion  of  idolatrous  inventions  ;  hence  we  read  in 
2  Chron.  xx.  5  of  aa  new  court,"  and  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  11,  12 
of  the  profanation  of  the  place  by  some  of  the  worst  things  of 
heathenish  idolatry  being  set  up  there,  for  which,  no  doubt,  the 
innovators  would  plead  the  absence  of  any  express  statutes  deter 
mining  what  should  or  should  not  belong  to  it.  Now,  however, 
there  should  be.no  room  for  such  displays  of  human  arbitrariness 
and  corruption  ;  a  more  perfect  state  of  things  was  to  be  brought 
in,  and  even  all  in  the  outer  court  was  to  be  regulated  by  God's 
hand,  and  bear  the  impress  of  his  holiness.  This  too  must  be 
hallowed  ground,  fashioned  and  ruled  in  all  its  parts  after  the 
perfect  measures  of  the  Divine  mind  and  the  just  requirements 
of  his  service ;  therefore — such  was  evidently  the  practical  result 
aimed  at — let  not  the  ungodly  and  profane  any  longer  presume 
to  tread  such  courts  (Isa.  i.  12),  or  desecrate  them  by  the  intro 
duction  of  their  own  unwarranted  inventions.  Let  all  feel  that 
in  coming  here  they  have  to  do  with  a  God  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  iniquity. 

Now  follows  a  brief  description  of  the  north  and  south  gates : 

Ver.  20.  And  the  gate  of  the  outer  court  which  looks  toward  the  north  he 
measured  in  its  length  and  its  breadth.  21.  And  its  three  chambers  were 
on  the  one  side,  and  three  on  the  other  ;  and  its  pillars  and  its  porches  were 
after  the  measure  of  the  first  gate :  the  length  of  it  fifty  cubits,  and  the 
breadth  of  it  twenty-five  cubits.  22.  And  its  windows,  and  its  porches,  and 
its  palm-trees,  were  after  the  measure  of  the  gate  which  looks  toward  the 
east ;  and  by  seven  steps  they  go  up  to  it,  and  its  porch  before  them.  23. 
And  the  gate  of  the  inner  court  was  over  against  the  gate  northward,  and 
eastward  (that  is,  apparently,  the  gate  of  the  inner  court  here  stood  right 


458  EZEKIEL  XL. 

opposite  the  outer  gate,  just  as  it  had  done  on  the  east :  so  that  the  "  and 
eastward"  must  be  taken  elliptically  for :  and  as  it  was  with  the  eastward  ; 
compare  ver.  27,  where  the  eastward  is  left  out).  24.  And  he  brought  me 
toward  the  south,  and  lo,  a  gate  toward  the  south ;  and  he  measured  its 
pillars  and  its  porches  according  to  these  measures.  25.  And  there  were 
windows  to  it  and  to  its  porches  entirely  round  about,  according  to  those 
windows :  fifty  cubits  long,  and  five-and-twenty  cubits  broad.  26.  And 
its  ascent  is  by  seven  steps,  and  its  porch  before  them ;  and  it  had  palm- 
trees,  one  on  this  side,  and  one  on  that  side,  upon  its  pillars.  27.  And 
there  was  a  gate  for  the  inner  court  toward  the  south ;  and  he  measured 
from  gate  to  gate  an  hundred  cubits. 

These  directions  regarding  the  north  and  south  divisions 
merely  intimate  a  correspondence  in  the  plan  between  the 
different  approaches,  excepting  that  in  the  case  of  these  two 
other  gates  no  mention  is  made  of  the  building  with  its  thirty 
chambers,  which  was  found  on  the  eastern  side.  Probably 
because  only  one  was  needed,  and  it  was  assigned  to  the  eastern 
quarter,  as  being  the  more  peculiarly  sacred  ;  and  being  intended 
for  the  officiating  priests,  it  might  be  most  conveniently  situated 
there.  Having  thus  finished  the  boundary  wall  and  the  outer 
court,  he  comes  to  the  inner  court : 

Ver.  28.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  court,  by  the  south  gate ;  and 
he  measured  the  gate  beyond  the  south  according  to  these  measures  (the 
measures,  namely,  of  the  outer  gate — the  inner  were  of  the  same  dimensions 
and  general  structure).  29.  And  its  chambers,  and  its  pillars,  and  its  porch 
were  according  to  these  measures ;  and  it  had  windows  for  it  and  for  its 
porch  round  about:  fifty  cubits  long,  and  twenty-five  cubits  broad.  30.  And 
the  porch  round  about  was  twenty-five  cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad.1 
«)1.  And  its  porch  was  toward  the  outer  court ;  and  palm-trees  were  on  its 
pillars :  and  its  ascent  was  by  eight  steps  (the  outer  gate  had  only  seven). 
32.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  court  toward  the  east,  and  measured 
the  gate  according  to  these  measures.  33.  And  its  chambers,  and  its  pillars, 
and  its  porch  were  according  to  these  measures  ;  and  it  had  windows  for  it 
and  for  its  porch  round  about:  the  length  fifty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  five- 
and- twenty  cubits.  34.  And  its  porch  was  toward  the  outer  court ;  and 
palm  trees  were  on  its  pillars  on  both  sides :  and  its  ascent  was  by  eight 
steps.  35.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  north  gate,  and  measured  according 
to  these  measures.  36.  Its  chambers,  its  pillars,  and  its  porch,  and  its 
windows  round  about :  the  length  fifty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  twenty-five 
cubits.  37.  And  its  pillars  were  toward  the  outer  court  (it  seems  rather 
odd  that  these  merely  ornamental  parts  should  be  mentioned  here  ;  we  would 
rather  have  expected  the  porch  itself,  as  in  the  other  two  cases ;  but  so  the 

1  This  seerns  to  contradict  what  has  just  been  said,  that  the  porch  of  this 
inner  gate  was  of  the  same  dimensions  with  the  outer  one  ;  it  is  now  made 
immensely  larger.  Michaelis,  Bottcher,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  etc.,  consequently 
reject  the  text  in  its  present  form  ;  Havernick  understands  what  is  said  of 
another  porch,  one  looking  inwards  towards  the  temple.  It  may  be  so,  but 
there  is  nothing  in  the  text  to  determine  such  to  be  the  meaning. 


THE  POSITION,  ETC.  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  459 

text  stands) ;  and  palm-trees  were  on  the  pillars  on  each  side :  and  the  ascent 
\vas  by  eight  steps. 

Ver.  38.  And  there  were  chambers  and  doors  (literally,  a  chamber  or 
dwelling,  arid  its  doors — but  it  must  be  understood  collectively  as  chamber 
at  ver.  7  and  elsewhere)  by  the  pillars  of  the  gates  (that  is  immediately 
adjoining  to  these)  ;  there  they  washed  the  burnt-offering.  39.  And  in  the 
porch  of  the  gate  were  two  tables  on  the  one  side,  and  two  tables  on  the 
other,  to  slay  on  them  the  burnt-offering,  and  sin-offering,  and  trespass- 
offering.  40.  And  on  the  side  without,  where  the  ascent  is  to  the  gate- 
entrance  northwards,  were  two  tables ;  and  on  the  other  side,  which  was 
at  the  porch  of  the  gate,  two  tables.  41.  Four  tables  were  on  this  side, 
and  four  tables  on  that,  by  the  side  of  the  gate  ;  eight  tables  whereon  they 
killed.  42.  And  the  four  tables  for  the  burnt-offering  were  of  hewn  stone, 
a  cubit  and  a  half  long,  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  broad,  and  one  cubit  high  ; 
and  on  them  they  placed  the  instruments  with  which  they  killed  the  burnt- 
offering  and  the  sacrifice.  43.  And  the  boundaries  (meaning  probably  the 
borders  of  the  tables  ;  this  is  the  only  ascertained  meaning  of  the  word  :  see 
Hengstenberg  on  Ps.  Ixviii.  14)  were  one  handbreadth,  set  inwards  round 
about ;  and  on  the  tables  was  the  flesh  of  the  offering. 

The  provision  here  made  for  killing  and  washing  the  sacrifice 
appears  evidently  to  have  been  connected  with  only  one  of  the 
gates ;  and  yet  the  passage  at  the  commencement  speaks  of  "the 
pillars  of  the  gates,"  as  if  it  were  something  in  common  to  them 
all.  But  by  the  original  direction  (Lev.  i.  11),  the  sacrifices 
were  all  to  be  killed  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar ;  and  there  is 
no  reason  to  think  that  that  regulation  was  generally  departed 
from  in  the  ministrations  of  the  old  temple.  It  seems  to  have 
been  with  respect  to  that  custom  that  Ezekiel  himself  (chap, 
viii.  5)  calls  the  north  gate  "  the  gate  of  the  altar,"  that  gate 
being  on  the  account  of  the  sacrifices  specially  connected  with 
the  altar.  Hence  here  it  is  in  immediate  connection  with  the 
north  gate  that  the  description  is  introduced  about  the  prepara 
tion  of  the  sacrifices  ;  and  the  particular  mention  of  the  "  north" 
in  ver.  40  seems  still  more  decisively  to  point  out  the  north 
gate  as  the  quarter  to  which  these  arrangements  belonged.  It 
appears  quite  arbitrary,  therefore,  to  substitute  (as  Ewald  and 
Hitzig  here  do)  the  east  for  the  north  gate ;  the  more  especially 
as  the  east  gate  was  to  be  shut  to  the  mass  of  worshippers,  and 
must  consequently  have  been  the  most  unsuitable  for  such  a 
purpose.  The  description  itself,  as  to  its  general  import,  is  of  the 
same  nature  as  the  preceding.  Everything  connected  even  with 
the  killing  and  preparing  of  victims  must  now  be  regulated  by 
the  word  of  God.  Even  there  all  is  to  have  an  impress  of  sacred- 
ness,  such  as  has  not  hitherto  been  found,  in  consequence  of  the 
higher  elevation  to  which  the  Divine  kingdom  was  to  attain. 


460  EZEKIEL  XL.  48,  49,  XLI. 

Ver.  44.  And  outside  the  inner  gate  were  apartments  for  the  singers  in 
the  inner  court,  which  were  alongside  the  north  gate,  and  looking  toward 
the  south  ;  and  one  alongside  the  east  gate,  looking  toward  the  north.  45. 
And  he  said  to  me,  This  apartment  which  looks  towards  the  south,  is  for 
the  priests  who  keep  the  charge  of  the  house.  46.  And  the  apartment  that 
looks  toward  the  north,  is  for  the  priests  who  keep  the  charge  of  the  altar  ; 
these  are  the  sons  of  Zadok,  who  draw  near  of  the  children  of  Levi  to 
minister  to  the  Lord.  47.  And  he  measured  the  court,  an  hundred  cubits 
long,  and  an  hundred  cubits  broad,  a  square ;  and  the  altar  was  before  the 
house. 

The  two  remaining  verses  properly  belong  to  the  next  chapter, 
which  treats  of  the  temple  itself ;  with  which,  therefore,  we  shall 
couple  them.  The  court  mentioned  In  the  last  verse,  which 
measured  an  hundred  cubits  square,  must  not  be  confounded 
with  what  in  the  preceding  verses  is  called  the  inner  court. 
The  inner  court  was  the  court  of  Israel,  which  was  open  to  all 
who  had  sacrifices  and  offerings  to  bring ;  and  it  went  round 
the  three  sides  of  the  sacred  territory,  of  the  breadth  of  an  hun 
dred  cubits,  or  two  hundred  feet.  But  this  court  was  precisely 
an  hundred  cubits  square,  and  had  the  altar  standing  in  it,  in 
front  of  the  temple.  It  was  the  court  of  the  priests  ;  and  hence 
is  mentioned  in  connection  with  those  who  had  charge  of  the 
house,  the  altar,  and  the  sacred  music.  The  description  here 
is  more  brief,  as-  the  things  connected  with  this  portion  had  from 
the  first  been  made  matter  of  Divine  regulation. 


CHAPTER  XL.  48,  49,  XLI. 

THE   TEMPLE   ITSELF. 


Chap.  xl.  48.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  porch  of  the  house,  and  he 
measured  for  the  porch  five  cubits  on  the  one  side,  and  five  cubits  on  the 
other ;  and  the  breadth  of  the  gate  three  cubits  on  the  one  side,  and  three 
cubits  on  the  other.  49.  The  length  of  the  porch  twenty  cubits,  and  the 
breadth  eleven  cubits ;  and  by  the  steps  which  they  go  up  to  it ;  and  posts 
beside  the  pillar-work,  one  on  this  side,  and  another  on  that.1  x!i.  1. 

1  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  there  are  some  peculiarities  in  this  last  verse, 
which  look  very  like  corruptions  of  the  text.  Thus  the  eleven  cubits  assigned 
for  the  breadth  of  the  porch  gate,  which  do  not  bear  any  exact  proportion  to 
the  length,  and  which  also  differ  from  the  dimensions  given  in  1  Kings 


THE  TEMPLE  ITSELF.  461 

And  he  brought  me  to  the  temple,  and  he  measured  the  pillars  (or  pillar- 
work),  six  cubits  broad  on  the  one  side,  and  six  cubits  broad  on  the  other 
side ;  the  breadth  of  the  tabernacle.1  2.  And  the  breadth  of  the  entrance 
was  ten  cubits,  and  the  sides  of  the  entrance  ten  cubits,  and  the  sides  of  the 
entrance  five  cubits  on  the  one  side,  and  five  cubits  on  the  other  side  ;  and 
he  measured  its  length  (viz.  of  the  holy  place)  forty  cubits,  and  its  breadth 
twenty  cubits.  3.  And  he  went  inward  (toward  the  most  holy  place),  and 
measured  the  post  of  the  entrance,  two  cubits  ;  and  the  entrance,  six  cubits  ; 
and  the  breadth  of  the  entrance,  seven  cubits.  4.  And  he  measured  its 
length  twenty  cubits,  and  its  breadth  twenty  cubits,  before  the  temple ; 2  and 
lie  said  to  me,  This  is  the  holy  of  holies.  5.  And  he  measured  the  wall  of 
the  house,  six  cubits ;  and  the  breadth  of  the  side-chambers  (rib-like  struc 
tures  on  the  wall — the  singular  again  used  collectively),  four  cubits,  round 
about  the  house  on  every  side.  6.  And  the  side-chambers  were  three-storeyed 
(literally,  chamber  on  chamber  three),  and  thirty  in  succession ;  and  joinings 
were  to  the  wall  of  the  house  for  the  side-chambers  round  about ;  that  they 

vi.  3,  of  Solomon's  temple,  while  the  length  agrees.  Some  would  therefore 
altogether  omit  the  two,  and  read  ten  ;  and  others,  with  the  LXX.  (changing 
ift&y  into  TIE?),  would  make  the  number  twelve.  Again  in  the  clause  about 
the  steps,  which  certainly  reads  awkwardly  as  it  stands,  many  substitute  li^y 
for  -IK>K,  and  render :  and  by  ten  steps  they  go  up  to  it.  If  the  present  text 
is  retained,  we  must  supply,  "And  he  measured,"  or  something  like  it :  (he 
measured)  by  the  steps  which  they  go  up  to  it — the  course  merely  being 
noticed,  but  not  the  exact  measurement,  as  the  description  here  is  very  brief. 
It  seems  intended  to  show  that  the  porch  was  much  the  same  as  in  the  old 
temple  of  Solomon. 

1  The  introducing  of  the  tabernacle  has  certainly  a  peculiar  appearance 
in  this  connection ;  hence  some  would  regard  ~>nj<  as  used  in  an  unusual 
sense  for  temple,  while  the  greater  part  suppose  a  corruption  of  the  text,  and 
render  "porch,"  or  "projection- work."    Hiiv.,  however,  defends  the  existing 
text,  and  conceives  that  the  prophet,  as  in  the  dimensions  of  the  outer  porch 
he  had  pointed  to  Solomon's  temple,  so  here  in  the  temple  proper  he  points 
to  the  old  tabernacle,  which  being  composed  in  its  breadth  of  eight  boards, 
each  one  and  a  half  cubit  broad,  would  make  in  all  twelve  cubits,  as  here. 
This  was  the  breadth  externally  of  the  tabernacle,  though  the  interior  was 
only  ten  cubits.     The  prophet  would  thus  connect  together  the  two  most 
sacred  erections  of  former  times.     Such  was  probably  the  reason,  though  the 
mention  of  the  tabernacle  even  in  such  a  way  looks  somewhat  artificial. 

2  This  expression,  "before  (or  in  front  of)  the  temple,"  is  used  on  account 
of  the  peculiar  sacredness  of  the  most  holy  place,  which  stood  in  a  sense  by 
itself  and  into  which  the  prophet  did  not  enter  with  the  angel.     Hence  he 
had  said,  not  that  the  angel  brought  him  in  thither,  but  that  the  angel  went 
in  himself,  and  measured  it ;  so  that  the  most  holy  place  appeared  like  a 
separate  apartment  in  front  of  the  portion  of  the  temple  which  alone  was 
accessible  to  him  (comp.  1  Kings  vi.  3,  where  temple  is  used  in  the  same 
restricted  sense).     The  dimensions  of  the  two  apartments  are  precisely  those 
of  Solomon's  temple,  which  having  been  fixed  of  old  by  Divine  direction,  are 
to  be  regarded  as  already  finally  determined. 


462  EZEKIEL  XLI. 

might  be  holden,  yet  were  they  not  holden  in  the  wall  of  the  house.1  7.  And 
there  was  an  enlarging  and  a  winding  still  upwards  to  the  chambers ;  for 
the  house  had  a  winding  stair  still  upwards  round  about  for  the  house  ; 
therefore  there  was  an  enlarging  of  the  house  upwards,  and  so  one  ascended 
from  the  lower  to  the  higher,  through  the  middle.  8.  And  I  saw  the 
house's  height  round  about ;  the  foundations  of  the  chambers  were  a  full 
rod,  six  cubits  to  the  joining  (or  corner).2  9.  The  thickness  of  the  wall, 
which  belonged  to  the  chambers  outside,  was  five  cubits  ;  and  there  was 
an  unoccupied  place  (literally,  what  remained  free)  within  chambers  that 
belonged  to  the  house.  10.  And  between  the  apartments  (i.e.,  of  the 
priests  in  the  court,  between  these  and  the  side -chambers)  was  the  width  of 
twenty  cubits  round  about  the  house  on  every  side.  11.  And  the  entrance 
to  the  chambers  was  toward  the  unoccupied  place ;  one  entrance  toward 
the  north,  and  one  entrance  toward  the  south  :  and  the  breadth  of  the 
unoccupied  place  was  five  cubits  round  about. 

THERE  is  considerable  minuteness  in  the  description  of  these 
side-chambers,  as  compared,  at  least,  with  the  original  descrip 
tion  in  1  Kings  vi.,  where  the  whole  that  is  said  of  them  is  corn- 
prised  in  two  verses.  And  yet  with  the  advantage  of  the  greater 
minuteness  here,  it  would  be  impossible  to  construct  an  architec 
tural  plan  without  taking  a  good  deal  for  granted  that  has  no 
place  in  the  prophet's  delineation.  One  can  easily  understand 
how  there  might  be  a  winding  stair  within,  leading  up  through 
the  several  storeys,  but  how  should  this  have  been  accompanied 
with  an  enlarging  or  widening  of  the  house  itself?  What  is 
meant  by  the  foundations  being  a  full  rod  of  six  cubits, — some 
underground  buildings  on  which  they  rested,  or  the  ground 
itself  on  which  they  were  raised?  (Both  have  their  advocates.) 
What  was  the  object  of  the  unoccupied  place  of  five  cubits?  and 
how  did  it  differ  from  the  space  of  twenty  cubits  lying  between 
the  side-chambers  and  the  halls  of  the  priests  ?  Very  different 
answers  might  be  and  have  been  given  to  these  questions,  and 
the  greatest  liberties  taken  with  the  text  to  lighten  the  diffi 
culties  connected  with  the  account.  But  we  deem  it  needless  to 
enter  into  these,  or  to  attempt  fixing  what  the  prophet  himself 

1  The  meaning  of  this  rather  obscure  description,  as  we  learn  by  turning 
to  1  Kings  vi.  6,  is  that  there  were  rests  made  in  the  walls  of  the  temple  for 
supports  to  the  side -chambers  ;  but  the  temple  walls  did  not  thereby  become 
part  of  this  side  building,  they  stood  separate  from  it. 

2  The  ^S5?tf  here  must  be  regarded  as  an  architectural  term,  denoting  some 
thing  about  the  foundations ;  and  as  it  is  used  elsewhere  in  the  sense  of 
joints,  the  natural  supposition  is  that  it  indicates  the  point  where  the 
foundation  of  one  chamber  ceased  and  another  began.    Yet,  it  must  be  con 
fessed,  there  is  no  certainty. 


THE  TEMPLE  ITSELF.  463 

lias  left  vague  and  obscure.  He  never  intended  that  a  structure 
should  be  reared  precisely  according  to  the  plan  and  measure 
ments  he  furnishes ;  otherwise  he  would  have  been  still  more 
minute  in  his  delineations.  He  has  given  enough,  however,  for 
his  great  object,  which  was  chiefly  to  show  that  in  the  Divine 
purpose  respecting  the  future  there  was  to  be  a  full  and  every 
way  complete  reconstruction  of  the  house  of  God — if  not  in  the 
outward  and  material  sense,  yet  in  the  higher  things,  which  that 
represented  and  symbolized  ;  and  with  the  effect  of  securing  a 
far  purer  and  more  elevated  condition  for  the  covenant-people. 
It  is  this  last  point  which  throughout  he  seeks  to  render  pro 
minent  by  the  nature  of  his  descriptions.  Hence,  in  marked 
contrast  to  the  earlier  delineations  respecting  the  tabernacle  and 
Solomon's  temple,  he  passes  rapidly  over  the  things  that  more 
immediately  respected  God,  and  dwells  upon  those  which  bore  on 
the  state  and  condition  of  the  people.  The  temple  itself,  in  its 
two  important  divisions,  is  hastily  sketched,  and  nothing  scarcely 
said  of  its  sacred  furniture,  not  even  the  slightest  notice  taken 
of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  heart  and  centre  of  the  whole  in 
former  times ;  while  the  most  lengthened  details  are  given  of  all 
that  concerned  the  chambers  of  the  priests,  and  the  courts  which 
•were  to  be  frequented  by  the  worshippers.  The  prophet  would 
thus  teach  that  there  was  to  be  in  the  future  a  conformity  to 
the  Divine  idea,  where  there  had  been  but  little  before  ;  that 
while  Jehovah  should  remain  the  same  in  all  his  essential  attri 
butes  and  manifestations  as  formerly,  he  should  be  otherwise 
known  and  glorified  by  his  people ;  their  dwellings  should  all 

become  true  sanctuaries,  and  their  services  fra  errant  with  the 

& 

odour  of  living  piety.  In  the  excellent  words  of  Havernick, 
"  Jehovah  will  dwell  among  a  new  people ;  and  accordingly  he 
must  do  so  in  a  new  manner,  though  one  still  analogous  to  the 
old.  The  most  essential  and  indispensable  condition  of  this  new 
indwelling  of  Jehovah  among  his  people  is  the  due  elevation  of 
the  Divine  community ;  hence  the  importance  and  high  signifi 
cance  attached  by  the  prophet  to  the  otherwise  much  inferior 
and  outward  parts  of  the  temple  buildings.  The  description  now 
advances  to  the  preparation  of  the  proper  centre  of  those  external 
forms.  No  longer,  as  in  the  old  sanctuary,  will  Jehovah  mani 
fest  himself  in  an  imperfect  manner,  but  in  the  full  spendour 
of  his  glory,  as  at  chap,  xliii.  1-12.  The  interior  of  the  temple 


464  EZEKIEL  XLI. 

there  stands  empty,  waiting  for  the  entrance  of  the  Lord,  that 
he  may  come  and  fill  it  with  his  glory.  It  is  the  same  temple, 
but  the  courts  of  it  have  become  different,  in  order  to  accommo 
date  a  far  more  numerous  people  ;  and  all  the  provisions  and 
arrangements  here  bespeak  the  sincerity  and  the  zeal  with  which 
they  now  seek  and  serve  the  Lord.  The  entire  compass  of  the 
temple-mount  has  become  a  holy  of  holies  (chap.  xlii.  12)  ; 
consequently  every  thing  now  rises  to  a  higher,  to  its  true  dignity 
and  importance.  On  this  account  the  ark  of  the  covenant  had 
no  place  in  this  temple  ;  the  full  display  of  the  Divine  Shechinah 
has  come  into  its  room.  And  so  Ezekiel  treads  very  closely  in 
the  footsteps  of  his  predecessor  Jeremiah  —  who,  under  the  dark 
foreboding  of  the  near  loss  of  the  sacred  ark,  consoles  the  people 
wTith  the  glorious  promise,  that  what  might  seem  in  a  natural 
point  of  view  to  be  an  irreparable  loss,  was  going  to  be  compen 
sated  by  an  unparalleled  manifestation  of  the  immediate  glory  of 
Jehovah  :  l  In  those  days  they  shall  say  no  more,  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord,  and  it  shall  not  come  to  mind  ;  neither 
shall  it  be  missed  ;  and  another  shall  not  be  made.  At  that 
time  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  the  Lord  '  (Jer.  iii. 
16,  17).  This  thought  is  merely  carried  out  by  Ezekiel  after  his 
own  manner." 

Ver.  12.  And  the  building  which  was  in  front  of  the  separate  place  on  the 
west  end  was  seventy  cubits  broad  ;  and  the  wall  of  the  building  five  cubits 
broad  round  about,  and  its  length  ninety  cubits,  lo.  And  he  measured 
the  house  an  hundred  cubits  long,  and  the  separate  place,  and  the  build 
ing  and  its  walls,  an  hundred  cubits  long.  14.  And  the  breadth  of  the 
front  of  the  house,  and  of  the  separate  place  on  the  east,  an  hundred  cubits. 
15.  And  he  measured  the  length  of  the  building  in  front  of  the  separate  place, 
which  was  upon  its  back  part,  and  its  galleries  upon  the  one  side  and  the 
other  side,  an  hundred  cubits  51  and  (he  measured)  the  inner  temple  in  the 


1  By  the  D^pinx,  galleries,  are  supposed  to  be  meant  some  sort  of  terrace 
building,  but  the  word,  being  only  found  in  this  description  of  Ezekiel,  cannot 
be  defined  exactly.  Indeed  in  the  account  contained  in  these  four  verses 
there  is  considerable  obscurity,  so  that  some  have  even  held,  and  Bottcher  still 
holds,  that  it  is  only  the  temple  that  is  spoken  of.  But  I  think  this  impos 
sible.  The  prophet  seems  plainly  to  mean,  that  on  the  west,  or  to  the  back 
of  the  temple,  there  was  a  separate  place  occupied  as  to  its  greater  part  by 
buildings,  which  were  much  about  the  same  external  dimensions  with  the 
temple  ;  both  being  in  their  entire  compass  an  hundred  cubits  square.  But 
in  neither  case  is  the  description  so  full  as  to  enable  us  to  make  up  the 
different  items  with  anything  like  certainty. 


THE  TEMPLE  ITSELF.  465 

porches  of  the  court,  1C.  The  thresholds,  and  the  fixed  windows,  and  the 
galleries  roundabout,  with  their  three  (storeys)  over  against  the  threshold ;  of 
fine  wood  (or  wainscoated  with  wood)  round  about,  and  from  the  ground  up 
to  the  carved  windows  (probably  the  highest,  and  as  such  covered  from  the 
view  below,  though  the  expression  is  still  peculiar)  ;  17.  Above  the  entrance, 
even  to  the  interior  of  the  house,  and  the  outside,  and  to  all  the  wall  round 
about,  within  and  without ;  measurements  (were  taken).  18.  And  there 
were  made  cherubim  and  palm-trees ;  and  a  palm-tree  was  between  each 
cherub;  and  the  cherub  had  two  faces.  19.  And  the  face  of  a  man  was 
toward  the  palm-tree  on  the  one  side,  and  the  face  of  a  lion  toward  the 
palm-tree  on  the  other ;  they  were  made  over  all  the  house  round  about. 
20.  From  the  ground  to  above  the  entrance  were  the  cherubim  and  palm- 
trees  made,  and  the  wall  of  the  temple.  21.  The  door-posts  of  the  temple 
were  squared,  and  the  face  of  the  sanctuary  was  of  the  well-known  appear 
ance  (literally,  of  the  appearance  according  to  the  appearance,  the  appearance 
it  was  wont  to  present).  22.  The  altar  of  wood  was  three  cubits  high, 
and  its  length  two  cubits,  and  its  corners,  and  its  length,  and  its  walls 
were  of  wood  ;  and  he  said  to  me,  "This  is  the  table  which  is  before  the 
Lord."  23.  And  there  were  two  doors  to  the  temple  and  the  sanctuary. 
24.  And  the  two  doors  had  two  leaves,  turning-leaves  ;  two  leaves  for  one 
door,  and  two  for  the  other.  25.  And  there  were  made  for  them,  for 
the  doors  of  the  temple,  cherubim  and  palm-trees,  like  those  made  on  the 
walls  ;  and  a  wooden  sill-piece  (or  plank)  upon  the  front  of  the  porch  from 
without.  26.  And  there  were  fixed  windows,  and  palm-trees  on  each  hand 
on  the  sides  of  the  porch,  and  the  side-chambers  of  the  house,  and  the  sill- 
pieces  (or  planks). 

The  latter  part  of  the  description  has  reference  chiefly  to  the 
ornamental  work  which  was  done  upon  the  walls  of  the  temple, 
and  which  is  also  mentioned  in  1  Kings  vi.  The  account  here  is 
fuller,  though  it  makes  no  mention  of  the  flowers  and  the  over 
laying  with  gold,  which  are  found  there.  What  is  meant  by  the 
ny  in  ver.  25  and  26  is  quite  uncertain,  but  has  been  conjec- 
turally  understood  to  be  some  sort  of  sill-piece  or  plank  about  the 
threshold.  Some  later  writers  (Ewald,  Ilitzig)  incline  rather  to 
understand  it  of  some  peculiar  kind  of  carved  work,  or  settings  in 
the  outer  porch  ;  but  opinions  may  vary  as  much  as  the  fancies  of 
men.  It  will  be  observed,  too,  that  the  only  article  of  sacred  fur 
niture  mentioned,  the  altar  of  incense,  is  called  the  Lord's  table  ; 
and  it  is  again  also,  at  chap.  xliv.  16,  referred  to  under  this  name  : 
"  They  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary,  and  they  shall  come  near 
to  my  table,  to  minister  unto  me."  It  was  at  the  incense  altar, 
and  not  at  the  table  of  show-bread,  that  the  daily  and  regular 
ministrations  of  the  priesthood  in  the  sanctuary  proceeded  ;  and 
it  was  of  this  also,  which  stood  in  immediate  front  of  the  veil, 
that  it  could  with  special  propriety  be  said  that  it  was  "  before 
the  Lord."  Its  being  called  a  table  probably  referred  to  the 
satisfaction  and  delight  with  which  the  Lord  was  to  regard  the 

2  G 


4 GO  EZEKIEL  XL1I. 

services,  \vhicli  were  henceforth  to  be  offered  to  him  by  his  re 
newed  people.  And  possibly  on  this  account,  too,  the  dimensions 
are  given  larger  than  of  old — three  cubits  in  height  and  two  in 
breadth,  instead  of  two  and  one.  But  the  most  peculiar  part  of 
the  description  is  what  relates  to  the  buildings  connected  with 
the  separate  place,  so  closely  adjoining  to  the  temple,  in  the 
unoccupied  ground  on  the  west,  and  so  much  resembling  it  in 
size.  Nothing  is  said  of  their  exact  intention,  nor  is  there  even 
any  particular  description  of  the  internal  construction.  The 
account  as  to  details  is  remarkably  general  and  obscure  ;  and 
why  then  given  at  all  ?  To  show,  as  it  would  seem,  that  there 
was  now  to  be  no  place  left,  as  of  old,  which  might  not  be  held 
to  be  sacred  ground.  It  appears  to  have  been  there  that  in 
Manasseh's  time  the  horses  were  kept  which  were  consecrated  to 
the  sun  (2  Kings  xxiii.  11),  called  "the  suburbs  of  the  temple." 
But  all  excuse  was  henceforth  to  be  taken  away  for  such  abomi 
nations  ;  the  Lord  laid  claim  to  all  for  his  peculiar  service,  and 
had  this  also  filled  up  with  sacred  erections. 


CHAPTER  XLIL 

CHAMBERS  OF  THE  TEMPLE  AND  ITS  BOUNDARY  WALLS. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  outer  court,  the  way  toward 
the  north,  and  he  brought  me  to  the  chamber  which  is  over  against  the 
separate  place,  and  which  is  over  against  the  building  toward  the  north. 
2.  Before  the  length  of  the  hundred  cubits  (those,  namely,  of  the  separate 
place,  mentioned  in  chap.  xli.  13)  was  the  north  door,  and  the  breadth 
fifty  cubits  (occupying  half  the  space).  3.  Over  against  the  twenty  (i.e. 
probably  the  twenty  cubits  spoken  of  in  chap.  xli.  10)  which  belonged 
to  the  inner  court,  and  over  against  the  pavement  which  belonged  to  the 
outer  court,  was  gallery  on  gallery  threefold.  4.  And  before  the  chamber 
was  a  walk  ten  cubits  broad  ;  into  the  interior  (namely,  of  the  chamber)  a 
way  of  one  cubit :  and  their  doors  toward  the  north.  5.  And  the  upper 
chambers  were  shorter  ;  for  the  galleries  took  away  (room)  from  them, 
above  the  lower  and  the  middle  parts  of  the  building.  6.  For  they  were 
threefold,  but  they  had  not  pillars  as  the  pillars  of  the  courts ;  therefore 
was  it  straitened  more  than  the  lowermost  and  the  middle  part  from  the 
ground.  7.  And  the  wall  which  was  without  over  against  the  chambers, 
toward  the  outer  court,  in  front  of  the  chambers,  its  length  was  fifty 
cubits.  8.  For  the  length  of  the  chambers  which  belonged  to  the  inner 
court  was  fifty  cubits  ;  and  lo,  before  the  temple  were  an  hundred  cubits. 
9.  And  from  below  these  chambers  was  the  entrance  on  the  east,  when  one 


CHAMBERS  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  ETC.  467 

goes  to  them  from  the  outer  court.  10.  The  chambers  were  of  the  thick 
ness  of  the  wall  of  the  court  toward  the  east,  over  against  the  separate 
place  and  over  against  the  building.  11.  And  the  way  (or  direction)  before 
them  was  like  the  appearance  of  the  chambers  which  were  on  the  north 
side,  as  long  as  they,  as  broad  as  they  ;  and  all  their  outgoings,  and  according 
to  their  plans,  and  according  to  their  doors  (was  all  made).  12.  And  accord 
ing  to  the  doors  of  the  chambers,  which  were  toward  the  south,  there  was  a 
door  by  the  head  of  the  way,  the  way  directly  before  the  wall  toward  the 
east,  where  one  enters  in.  13.  And  he  said  to  me,  The  apartments  on  the 
north  and  the  apartments  on  the  south,  which  are  before  the  separate  place, 
these  are  the  sacred  dwellings,  wherein  the  priests,  that  draw  near  to  the 
Lord,  shall  eat  the  most  holy  things  ;  there  shall  they  lay  the  most  holy- 
things,  and  the  meat -offering,  and  the  sin-offering,  and  the  trespass-offer 
ing  ;  for  the  place  is  holy.  14.  When  the  priests  enter  in,  then  they  shall 
not  go  out  from  the  holy  place  into  the  outer  court ;  and  there  shall  they 
lay  their  garments  wherein  they  minister,  for  they  are  holy  ;  they  shall  put 
on  other  garments,  and  shall  approach  to  what  is  of  the  people. 

THIS  part  of  chap.  xlii.  is  taken  up  with  describing  the  apart 
ments,  or  chambers,  which  were  reserved  for  the  officiating 
priests.  That  this  was  their  particular  destination,  is  expressly 
stated  in  the  two  last  verses.  The  aim  and  object  of  the  build 
ings,  therefore,  is  quite  accurately  denned;  they  were  for  the 
priests,  that  these  might  be  able  in  their  ministrations  to  treat 
with  due  solemnity  the  sacred  things  of  the  Lord,  and  keep  broad 
the  distinction  between  the  holy  and  the  corrupt,  the  Divine 
and  the  human  ;  so  that  the  particularizing  here  is  in  perfect 
accordance  with  the  great  design  of  the  prophet,  in  exhibiting  a 
restored  community  and  worship  purified  from  the  corruptions 
which  had  hitherto  cleaved  to  them.  And  as  he  had  before 
(chap.  xl.  44-46)  spoken  of  apartments  on  the  north  and  south 
gates  of  the  inner  court  for  the  officiating  priests,  it  seems  quite 
necessary  to  understand  what  is  said  here  of  the  same  ;  the 
prophet  merely  returns,  after  having  seen  and  described  what 
belonged  to  the  temple,  to  take  a  second  and  more  exact  view  of 
these  sacerdgtal  chambers.  But  why  they  should  be  said  to 
stand  over  against  the  separate  place  and  the  building  belonging 
to  it  rather  than  the  temple  itself  (vers.  1-10),  does  not  appear. 
Nor  is  the  description  generally  of  such  a  kind  that  we  could 
hope  to  make  it  more  intelligible  to  an  English  reader  by  any 
lengthened  observations.  It  seems  impossible  to  ascertain  dis 
tinctly  the  pattern,  without  either  making  considerable  altera 
tions  in  the  text  or  filling  up  many  blanks  from  imagination. 
It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  the  prophet  saw  in  vision  all 
the  subordinate  provisions  made  which  were  necessary  to  the 


468  EZEKIEL  XLII. 

full  and  efficient  discharge  of  the  duties  of  the  priesthood.  He 
thus  obtained  for  the  Church  the  assurance  that  the  service 
of  God  would  yet  be  performed  so  as  to  meet  God's  perfect 
approval.  We  therefore  pass  on  to  the  closing  verses,  which 
give  the  dimensions  of  the  boundary  wall. 

Yer.  15.  And  he  finished  the  measurements  of  the  house  inwards,  and  he 
brought  me  forth  by  the  gate  which  looks  toward  the  east,  and  he  measured 
it  round  about.  16.  He  measured  the  east  side  (literally,  wind)  with  the 
measuring  rod,  500  rods,  with  the  measuring  rod  round  about.  17.  He 
measured  the  north  side,  500  rods,  with  the  measuring  rod  round  about. 
18.  He  measured  the  south  side,  500  rods,  with  the  measuring  rod.  19. 
He  turned  about  to  the  west  side,  and  measured  500  rods  with  the  measur 
ing  rod.  20.  By  the  four  sides  he  measured  it ;  it  had  a  wall  round  about, 
500  long,  and  500  broad,  to  make  a  separation  between  the  holy  and  the 
profane. 

We  cannot  but  note  the  particularity  with  which  these 
measurements  are  given, — the  rod  as  the  measuring  instrument, 
and  the  number  of  lengths  on  each  side,  being  successively 
stated  in  regard  to  each.  This  plainly  shows  the  importance 
which  the  prophet  attached  to  the  external  dimensions,  while 
the  frequent  occurrence  also  of  the  terms  employed  more  fully 
certifies  us  of  their  exact  amount.  Yet  from  an  early  period  a 
disposition  has  been  shown  to  tamper  with  the  numbers.  The 
Septuagint  substitutes  cubits  for  rods,  and  the  great  mass  of 
modern  commentators  (still  also  Ewald,  Ilitzig,  Bottcher,  The- 
nius,  the  latter  in  his  Anhang  to  the  Com.  on  Kings)  have 
thought  it  necessary  to  adopt  the  same  alteration.  The  chief 
reasons  for  this  are,  first,  the  apparently  extravagant  compass 
assigned  to  the  sacred  buildings — a  square  of  500  rods,  or  3000 
cubits,  and  these  cubits  about  two  feet  each  (chap.  xl.  5),  making 
in  all  a  square  of  fully  Ij-  of  a  mile.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  this  exceeded  the  limits  of  all  ancient  Jerusalem ;  and  so, 
it  is  thought,  the  prophet  could  never  intend  to  give  such  enor 
mous  bounds  to  his  new  temple ;  he  must  have  meant  cubits 
only,  and  not  rods.  Then  it  is  also  alleged  that  the  particular 
measurements  in  the  preceding  portion  do  not  require  a  space 
larger  than  a  square  of  500  cubits,  and  that  the  adoption  of 
rods  here  instead  of  cubits  would  necessarily  leave  an  immense 
space  of  unappropriated  ground.  Havernick  has  tried  to  evade 
this  argument  by  denying  that  the  100  cubits  mentioned  in 
connection  with  the  outer  and  inner  courts  (chap.  xl.  23,  27) 


CHAMBERS  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  ETC.  469 

are  given  as  the  measures  of  the  whole  breadth  of  these,  and 
contending  that  they  apply  only  to  the  distance  between  one 
gate  and  another  in  the  same  court.  I  cannot  concur  in  this, 
for  I  think  the  natural  supposition  is,  that  the  gates  between 
which  the  distances  in  question  lay  were  simply  those  of  the 
two  courts  respectively.  But  if  by  rejecting  that  method  of 
relief  we  seem  to  have  far  too  much  space  on  hand,  by  adopting 
the  smaller  measures  of  cubits  instead  of  rods  we  should  have 
decidedly  top  little.  I  think  this  might  be  proved  by  reckoning 
up  the  different  items  of  the  several  measures  connected  with 
the  temple  itself  and  the  separate  place.  But  as  we  should 
thus  inevitably  get  into  intricacies  where  few  would  follow,  we 
prefer  establishing  our  position  by  a  simpler  process.  In  the 
central  part  to  the  east  of  the  temple  there  was  a  square  of  100 
cubits,  the  court  of  the  priests.  But  if  on  three  sides  of  an 
entire  square  of  500  cubits  you  take  off  first  100  cubits  for  the 
outer  court,  then  100  for  the  inner,  with  nothing  intervening, 
there  would  be  left  precisely  this  square  of  100  more  for  the 
court  of  the  priests.  But  where,  then,  was  the  space  to  be 
found  for  the  broad  outermost  wall,  outside  of  which  the  measure 
ment  of  500  was  made — six  cubits  all  round  ?  Where,  again, 
for  the  seven  steps  leading  up  to  the  gate  of  the  inner  court, 
and  the  breadth  of  the  wall  dividing  it  from  the  outer?  And 

Jn 

where,  once  again,  space  for  the  eight  steps  leading  up  to  the  court 
of  the  priests,  and  the  buildings  of  many  chambers  for  them  ? 
There  is  evidently  no  room  for  these  on  the  cubit  hypothesis, 
which  would  require  the  different  courts  to  be  enclosed,  and 
separated  from  each  other  by  strictly  mathematical  lines ;  so 
that  the  objection  of  too  much  ground  by  the  measurements  of 
the  text  may  fairly  be  met  by  the  too  little  of  the  hypothesis. 

In  truth,  we  have  here  another  of  those  traits  which  render 
manifest,  and,  I  believe,  were  intended  to  render  manifest  and 
palpable,  the  ideal  character  of  the  whole  description.  It  is  of 
a  nature  throughout  which  defies  all  attempts  to  bring  it  within 
the  bounds  of  the  real.  Those  who  have  endeavoured  so  to  deal 
with  it  have  always  been  obliged  to  resort  to  numberless  arbitrary 
suppositions  and  violent  adjustments.  And,  in  particular,  the 
vast  compass  the  prophet  so  explicitly  and  distinctly  assigns  to 
the  whole  area,  involving  a  sort  of  natural  incongruity,  like  the 
promise  of  the  new  David  in  the  prophecies  of  the  restoration, 


470  EZEKIEL  XLIII. 

must  ever  be  regarded  as  an  inseparable  obstacle  to  their  super 
ficial  literalism.  It  is  an  incontrovertible  evidence  that  the 
prophet  had  something  else  in  his  eye  than  the  masonry  of 
stone  and  lime  erections,  and  was  labouring  with  conceptions 
which  could  only  find  their  embodiment  in  the  high  realities  of 
God's  everlasting  kingdom. 

We  abide,  then,  by  the  Hebrew  text  as  the  true  handwriting 
of  the  prophet,  the  very  difficulties  of  which  are  a  proof  of  their 
correctness ;  and  we  regard  the  immense  extent  of  the  sacred 
area  as  a  symbol  of  the  vast  enlargement  that  was  to  be  given 
to  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  times  of  Messiah.  It  was  im 
measurably  to  surpass  the  old  in  the  extent  of  its  territory,  and 
in  the  number  of  its  adherents,  as  well  as  in  the  purity  of  its 
worship.  The  wall  that  surrounded  the  sacred  buildings  is 
expressly  said,  in  ver.  20,  to  have  been  for  separating  between 
the  holy  and  profane  ;  not,  therefore,  as  in  Rev.  xxi.  12,  and 
very  commonly  elsewhere,  for  defence  and  safety,  as  indeed 
its  comparative  w^ant  of  elevation  might  seem  to  render  it  unfit 
for  such  a  purpose.  But  its  square  form,  and  the  square 
appearance  of  the  entire  buildings  (as  in  John's  city,  Rev.  xxi. 
16),  betokened  the  strength  and  solidity  of  the  whole,  along 
with  a  vast  increase  in  extent  and  number.  A  perfect  cube,  it 
was  the  emblem  of  a  kingdom  that  could  not  be  shaken  or 
removed.  And  thus  every  wray  it  exhibited  to  the  eye  of  faith 
the  true  ideal  of  that  pure  and  glorious  temple  which,  resting 
on  the  foundation  of  the  eternal  Son,  and  girt  round  by  all  the 
perfections  of  Godhead,  shall  shine  forth  the  best  and  noblest 
workmanship  of  Heaven. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

THE  LORD'S  KETURX  TO  THE  TEMPLE. 

IN  the  preceding  part  of  the  vision,  the  external  things  belong 
ing  to  the  Lord's  house  have  been  exhibited  in  their  vast  pro 
portions  and  manifold  arrangements.  Everything  has  become 


THE  LORD'S  RETURN  TO  THE  TEMPLE.          471 

ready  for  the  Lord  himself  taking  formal  possession  of  it,  by 
the  visible  manifestations  of  his  glory.  This  was  now,  as  of 
old,  to  constitute  the  peculiar  distinction  of  the  place ;  and  was 
to  belong  to  this  temple  in  a  degree  so  much  higher  than 
formerly,  as  the  general  plan  transcended  what  had  existed  in 
the  past.  The  prophet  had  seen  in  vision  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  depart  from  the  old  temple  (chap,  xi.),  by  the  way  of  the 
east,  and  rest  over  the  Mount  of  Olives,  as  it  were  to  watch 
upon  the  destruction  which  must  thenceforth  alight  on  the 
devoted  city.  And  now,  again,  when  the  work  of  judgment 
has  run  its  course,  and  due  preparation  has  been  made  for  the 
return  of  Jehovah  to  bless  his  people,  a  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory  appears  to  the  prophet  similar  to  what  he  had  seen 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  and  also  in  the  old  temple  courts 
(vers.  1-3)  ;  and  by  the  very  same  approach  through  which  it 
had  departed  it  comes  back,  and  fills  the  whole  house.  The 
prophet  is  then  caught  up  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  placed 
in  the  inner  court,  where  as  a  priest  his  proper  position  was ; 
and  he  heard  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  him  from  within, 
while  the  interpreting  angel  beside  him  gives  utterance  to  the 
message  meant  to  be  conveyed. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  brought  me  to  the  gate  that  looks  towards  the  east. 
2.  And,  behold,  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  east ; 
and  its  noise l  was  as  the  sound  of  many  waters  ;  and  the  earth  shone 
from  his  glory.  3.  And  according  to  appearance,  the  appearance  that 
I  saw  was  like  the  appearance  which  I  saw  when  I  came  to  destroy  the 
city ; 2  and  the  vision  like  the  vision  which  I  saw  by  the  river  Chebar ; 
and  I  fell  upon  my  face.  4.  And  the  glory  of  Jehovah  came  into  the 
house,  by  the  way  of  the  gate  whose  prospect  is  toward  the  east.  5.  And 
the  Spirit  lifted  me  up,  and  brought  me  into  the  inner  court ;  and,  behold, 
the  glory  of  Jehovah  filled  the  whole  house.  6.  And  I  heard  him  speaking 
to  me  from  the  house  ;  and  the  man  (viz.  he  who  had  been  measuring  the 
buildings)  was  standing  beside  me.  7.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man, 


1  What  is  meant  is  not  the  voice  of  God,  but  the  sound  or  noise  of  the 
manifested  glory  of  God,  as  formerly  described,  chap.  i.  24.     It  is  better, 
therefore,  to  render  "its  noise"  than  "his  voice,"  as  the  latter  seems  to 
point  to  what  is  not  here  intended — a  personal  speaking  oa  the  part  of 
God. 

2  A  striking  example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  prophets  identified 
themselves  with  him  in  whose  name  they  spake,  and  whose  word  they 
uttered.     Ezekiel  came  to  destroy  when  he  came  to  utter  God's  destroying 
word*     Comp.  Gen.  xlviii.  22 ;  Hos.  vi.  5,  etc. 


472  EZEKIEL  XLI1L 

the  place  of  my  throne,1  and  the  place  of  the  soles  of  my  feet,  where  I  will 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever ;  and  not  any  more 
shall  the  children  of  Israel  defile  my  holy  name,  they  and  their  kings,  by 
their  whoredoms,  and  by  the  carcases  of  their  kings — their  high  places.2 
8.  In  that  they  have  set  their  threshold  by  my  threshold,  and  their  posts 
beside  my  posts,  and  there  was  (but)  a  wall  between  me  and  them ;  and 
they  defiled  my  holy  name  by  their  abominations  which  they  have  done, 
and  I  consumed  them  in  mine  anger.  9.  Now  they  shall  put  far  away 
their  whoredom,  and  the  carcases  of  their  kings,  from  me  ;  and  I  will 
dwell  among  them  for  ever.  10.  Thou  son  of  man,  show  the  house  to  the 
house  of  Israel,  and  let  them  be  ashamed  for  their  iniquities,  and  measure 
the  pattern.  11.  And  if  they  are  ashamed  for  all  that  they  have  done, 
.show  them  the  form  of  the  house,  and  the  pattern  of  it,  and  the  entrances 
out  and  in  to  it,  and  all  its  forms,  and  all  its  ordinances,  even  all  its 
forms,  and  all  its  statutes ;  and  write  it  before  them,  that  they  may 
observe  all  its  forms,  and  all  its  statutes,  and  do  them.  12.  this  is 
the  law  of  the  house :  Upon  the  top  of  the  mountain  its  whole  boundary 
round  about  is  most  holy  (a  holy  of  holies).  Behold,  this  is  the  law  of  the 
house. 


1  The  construction  is  here  quite  similar  to  that  of  chap.  xxxv.  10,  where, 
to  render  the  object  uppermost  in  the  thoughts  particularly  prominent,  the 
speech  begins  with  it,  preceded  by  an  fits'.     It  is  as  much  as  to  say,  Thi.s 
is  it — this  that  you  have  seen,  with  which  your  mind  has  been  so  long 
occupied,  is  my  throne. 

2  By  mentioning  the  "carcases  of  their  kings,"  the  prophet  has  been 
very  commonly  thought  to  refer  to  the  burying-place  of  the  kings  being 
improperly  situated  within  the  temple  mount,  and,  perhaps,  to  some  connec 
tion  between  this  and  the  abominations  of  idolatry.    But  there  is  no  evidence 
of  such  a  thing  in  the  historical  or  prophetical  books.     No  charge  of  cor 
ruption  on  this  score  is  even  so  much  as  mooted  against  the  people ;  while 
it  is  clear,  from  the  manner  it  is  noticed  here,  that  not  only  a  corruption, 
but  a  most  flagrant  and  crying  abomination,  is  referred  to.     I  think,  there 
fore,  that  we  must  understand  by  the  expression,  the  pollutions  of  idolatry. 
These  are  characterised  by  a  strong,  yet  in  the  circumstances  not  unnatural, 
epithet  of  contempt  and  abhorrence.     Not  unnatural ;  for  God  is  here  pre 
senting  himself  as  the  glorious  head  and  monarch  of  his  people — so  near  to 
them  that  the  earthly  head,  the  David,  has  only  the  name  of  the  prince 
(chapters  xliv.  xxxvi.).     God  himself  occupies  the  throne ;  and  in  what  light, 
then,  appeared  their  old  idols  ?     Kings  indeed — 'Other  kings,  but  dead  and 
not  living ;  only  carcases  of  kings.     And  to  make  it  more  plain  that  such 
are  really  meant,  the  high  places  are  immediately  mentioned,  and  placed  in 
apposition  with  these  carcases  of  kings,  as  but  another  name  for  the  same 
thing ;    for  it  was  with  the   high  places  that  the  idol  worship  was  more 
especially  connected,  insomuch  that  God  gave  the  name  of  Bamah,  high 
place,  to  all  their  worship  (see  on  chap.  xx.  29).     These  rival  monarchs, 
therefore,  whose  throne  was  as  it  were  on  the  high  places,  but  whose  foul 
services  had  also  been  brought  into  the  courts  of  God's  house,  these  must 
now  be  put  away — must,  like  carcases,  be  buried  out  of  sight. 


THE  LOKD'S  RETURN  TO  THE  TEMPLE.          473 

In  tiiis  striking  passage  we  are  first  of  all  to  note  the  character 
in  which  the  Lord  now  appears  to  dwell  and  manifest  himself 
among  his  people.     It  is  as  their  Divine  king,  occupying  that 
house  as  the  throne  of  his  kingdom.     God  had  always  claimed 
this  position,  and  had  at  first  resisted  their  desires  to  have  an 
earthly  sovereign,  because  this  virtually  implied  a  rejection  of 
him  as  the  proper  head  of  the  state.     Even  when  he  consented 
to  their  request,  it  was  with  a  solemn  and  earnest  protest  against 
the  person  chosen  ruling  in  his  own  name,  and  for  selfish  pur 
poses,  or  in  any  other  way  than  as  the  Lord's  vicegerent.     The 
protest,  however,  was  soon  forgotten.     The  king  looked  upon 
himself,  and  the  people  also  looked  upon  him,  as  possessing  an 
absolute  title  to  the  throne,  and  the  earthly  head  came  very  much 
to  occupy  in  men's  eyes  the  place  of  the  true  and  proper  king. 
But  in  the  new  and  more  perfect  order  of  things  now  unfolded 
in  vision  to  the  prophet,  this  flagrant  perversion  of  the  past  must 
be  rectified ;  God  must  be  known  and  honoured  as  alone  pro 
perly  "king  in  Jeshurun."     And  hence,  not  only  here  does  he 
declare  that  he  had  come  to  occupy  his  throne  in  the  house, 
but,  as  mentioned  in  the  note  on  ver.  7,  the  earthly  head,  when 
spoken  of  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  is  simply  called  "the  prince." 
The  supremacy  and  glory  of  Jehovah  were  henceforth  to  appear 
in  their  full  splendour.     We  have  further  to  notice  in  the  pre 
ceding  passage  the  essentially  moral  character  of  all  that  was 
here  displayed  in  vision  respecting  the  future  things  of  God's 
kingdom.     It  was  not  a  pattern  which  God  was  going  to  carry 
out  anyhow,  and  accomplish  as  by  a  simple  fiat  of  Omnipotence. 
It  depended  upon  the  condition  of  the  people ;  and  only  if  they 
agreed  to  put  away  sin  from  among  them,  and  give  God  the 
supreme  place  in  their  hearts,  could  he  manifest  himself  toward 
them  in  the  manner  described.     And,  finally,  while  the  whole 
scheme  was  fraught  with  lessons  of  instruction,  and  inlaid  with 
principles  of  holiness,  the  grand  and  distinguishing  peculiarity 
of  this  pattern  of  the  future  as  compared  with  the  past,  we  are 
expressly   informed,   was  to  be   a   general    and    all-pervading 
sanctity.     The  law  of  the  house — what  was  pre-eminently  en 
titled  to  be  called  the  law — consisted  in  the  whole  region  of  the 
temple    mount  being  most  holy.      Not,   as  hitherto,  was  this 
characteristic  to  be  confined  to  a  single  apartment  of  the  temple  ; 
it  was  to  embrace  the  entire  circumference  occupied  by  the 


474  EZEKIEL  XLI1I. 

symbolical  institutions  of  the  kingdom, — the  chambers  allotted 
to  the  priest,  and  even  the  courts  trodden  by  the  people,  as  well 
as  the  immediate  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah.  All  were  to  have 
one  character  of  sacredness,  because  all  connected  with  them 
were  to  occupy  a  like  position  of  felt  nearness  to  God,  and 
equally  to  enjoy  the  privilege  of  access  to  him.  So  that  the 
pattern  delineated  is  that  of  a  true  theocracy,  having  God  him 
self  for  king,  with  the  community  in  all  its  members  for  true 
denizens  of  the  kingdom,  and  acceptable  ministers  of  righteous 
ness  before  the  Lord. 

The  remaining  verses  of  this  chapter  (vers.  13-27),  which 
contain  a  description  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  of  the 
necessary  rites  of  consecration  connected  with  it,  seem  at  first 
view  somewhat  out  of  place.  But  there  is  an  historical  reason 
for  such  a  description  being  given  here.  Now  that  the  Lord 
has  taken  possession  of  the  house,  the  prophet  goes  on  to  show 
how  the  work  of  fellowship  and  communion  with  him  is  to  pro 
ceed  on  the  part  of  the  people.  It  must,  as  it  were,  commence 
anew;  and  of  course  be  conducted  after  the  old  manner,  for  no 
other  could  here  come  into  contemplation.  But  in  ancient  times 
the  grand  medium  of  Divine  intercourse  was  the  altar,  at  which 
all  gifts  and  sacrifices  were  to  be  presented  for  the  Divine  favour 
and  blessing.  And  therefore  the  prophet  here,  to  show  that  the 
way  was  open,  and  that  the  people  might  have  free  access  to  the 
fellowship  of  God,  after  having  briefly  sketched  the  dimensions 
of  the  altar,  gives  instructions  for  its  consecration  and  the  con 
secration  of  the  priesthood,  which  was  all  that  was  needed  to 
complete  the  arrangements.  There  is  no  need  for  going  into 
the  particulars  either  of  the  dimensions  of  the  altar  or  of  the 
prescribed  services,  as  nothing  peculiar  seems  to  belong  to  them. 
The  dimensions  named  have  usually  been  thought  to  differ 
materially  from  those  of  the  altar  made  by  Solomon,  which  was 
ten  cubits  high,  and  twenty  in  length  and  breadth  ;  but  the  pro 
bability  is  that  they  are  the  same,  though  it  is  scarcely  possible 
to  show  the  agreement  without  a  diagram.  The  curious  may 
see  it  done  in  Thenius  (Biicher,  der  Konige,  Anhang,  p.  42). 
The  seven  days'  purification  services  for  the  altar  have  respect 
to  the  original  directions  of  Moses  for  the  same  purpose,  in  Ex. 
xxix.  37  ;  and  are  simply  a  preparation  for  the  great  end  aimed 
at — that  God  might  accept  the  sacrifices  of  the  people,  and  be 


THE  LORD'S  RETURN  TO  THE  TEMPLE.          475 

gracious  to  them  (ver.  27).  This  indispensably  required  that 
there  should  first  be  a  consecrated  way  of  access — a  holy  altar, 
and  a  holy  priesthood  to  minister  at  it. 

Ver.  13.  And  these  are  the  measures  of  the  altar  by  cubits ;  the  cubit  is 
the  cubit  and  an  handbreadth  :  And  the  bottom  is  a  cubit,  and  a  cubit  in 
breadth  (i.e.  on  each  side  a  cubit)  ;  and  its  border  to  its  edge  round  about, 
a  span ;  and  this  is  the  rim  (or  surface)  of  the  altar.  14.  And  from  the 
bottom  on  the  ground  to  the  lower  ledge,  two  cubits,  and  the  breadth  one 
cubit ;  and  from  the  lower  ledge  to  the  greater  ledge,  four  cubits,  and  the 
breadth  a  cubit.  15.  And  the  Harel,  four  cubits  ;  and  from  the  Arie.il  and 
upwards,  four  horns.1  16.  And  the  Arieil,  twelve  cubits  long,  by  twelve 
broad,  square  on  the  four  sides  of  its  squares.  17.  And  the  ledge,  fourteen 
in  length  by  fourteen  in  breadth,  on  the  four  squares  of  it ;  and  the  border 
about  it,  half  a  cubit ;  and  the  bottom  of  it,  a  cubit  round  about ;  and  its 
steps  looking  toward  the  east.  18.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  thus 
tsaith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  These  are  the  ordinances  of  the  altar  in  the  day  when 
they  shall  make  it,  to  offer  burnt-offerings  on  it,  and  to  sprinkle  blood  on  it. 
19.  And  thou  shalt  give  to  the  priests  the  Levites,  those  that  are  of  the  seed 
of  Zadok,  who  draw  near  to  me,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  to  minister  to  me, 
a  young  bullock  for  a  sin-offering.  20.  And  thou  shalt  take  of  its  blood  and 
put  it  on  the  four  horns  thereof,  and  on  the  four  corners  of  the  ledge,  and 
on  the  border  round  about ;  and  thou  shalt  cleanse  it  (literally,  bear  its 
blame,  or  make  expiation  for  it),  and  shalt  purify  it.  21.  And  thou  shalt 
take  the  bullock  of  the  sin-offering,  and  it  shall  be  burnt  in  the  appointed 
place  of  the  house,  without  the  sanctuary.  22.  And  on  the  second  day  thou 
shalt  offer  a  kid  of  the  goats  without  blemish  for  a  sin-offering;  and  the  altar 
shall  be  cleansed  according  as  it  was  cleansed  with  the  bullock.  23.  When 
thou  hast  made  an  end  of  cleansing,  thou  shalt  offer  a  young  bullock  without 
blemish,  and  a  ram  out  of  the  flock  without  blemish.  24.  And  thou  shalt 
offer  them  before  the  Lord,  and  the  priests  shall  cast  salt  upon  them,  and 
shall  offer  them  up  for  a  burnt- offering  to  the  Lord.  25.  Seven  days  shalt 
thou  prepare  a  goat  for  a  sin-offering  daily ;  and  a  bullock  from  the  herd, 
and  a  ram  from  the  flock,  without  blemish,  shall  they  prepare.  26.  Seven 
days  shall  they  purge  the  altar  and  purify  it,  and  consecrate  themselves 
(literally,  fill  their  hands,  cornp.  Ex.  xxix.  24).  27.  And  when  these  days 
are  expired,  on  the  eighth  day,  and  thenceforth,  it  shall  be  that  the  priests 
shall  present  your  burnt-offerings  upon  the  altar,  and  your  peace-offerings  ; 
and  I  will  accept  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 


1  This  is  the  most  singular  part  of  the  description  respecting  the  altar, 
and  we  simply  give  in  the  original  form  the  two  terms  which  cause  the  chief 
difficulty.  Many,  including  Havernick,  regard  these  as  significant  terms 
applied  to  the  altar,  to  denote  the  high  security  and  strength  which  it  was 
to  be  the  means  of  imparting  to  the  new  community  :  "  And  the  mount  of 
God  is  four  cubits,  and  from  the  lion  of  God,"  etc.  One  can  scarcely  avoid 
feeling  that  such  epithets,  introduced  thus  in  the  middle  of  dry  measure 
ments,  have  a  very  fanciful  and  unnatural  appearance.  Besides  the  second 
of  the  two,  T'fcOK,  is  not  exactly  the  same  with  the  ^"IN  of  Isa.  xxix.  1. 
I  am  therefore  inclined  to  follow  Gesenius,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Thenius,  and  to 
regard  the  words  as  properly  but  one,  and  to  take  it  as  a  term  for  the  hearth 
or  fire-place  of  the  altar. 


47G  EZEKIEL  XLIV. 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  PRIESTHOOD. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  brought  me  again  by  the  way  of  the  outer  gate  of  the 
sanctuary,  that  looks  toward  the  east,  and  it  was  shut.  2.  And  Jehovah 
said  to  me,  This  gate  shall  be  shut,  it  shall  not  be  opened,  and  no  man  shall 
enter  in  by  it ;  for  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel  entered  by  it,  and  it  shall  be 
shut.  3.  For  the  prince — he,  the  prince,  shall  sit  in  it,  to  eat  bread  before 
the  Lord ;  he  shall  enter  through  the  porch  of  the  gate,  and  by  that  way 
also  go  out.  4.  And  he  brought  me  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate  to  the 
front  of  the  house;  and  I  looked,  and,  behold,  the  glory  of  Jehovah  filled  the 
house,  and  I  fell  upon  my  face.  5.  And  Jehovah  said  to  me,  Son  of  man, 
set  thine  heart,  and  see  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears,  all  that  I 
am  going  to  speak  to  thee,  concerning  all  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  concerning  all  its  laws  ;  and  direct  thy  heart  to  the  entrance  of 
the  house,  in  every  approach  to  the  sanctuary.  6.  And  thou  shalt  say  to  the 
rebellious,  to  the  house  of  Israel,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Let  it  suffice 
you  of  all  your  abominations,  O  house  of  Israel ;  7.  In  that  you  brought 
strangers,  uncircumcised  in  heart,  and  uncircumcised  in  flesh,  to  be  in  my 
sanctuary,  to  pollute  it,  my  house ;  in  that  you  made  them  offer  my  bread, 
the  fat  and  the  blood  :  and  they  broke  my  covenant  to  (i.e.  in  addition  to) 
all  your  abominations.  8.  And  ye  did  not  keep  my  holy  charge,  and  ye 
set  for  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my  sanctuary  for  yourselves  (i.e.  such  as  you 
yourselves  thought  good,  persons  after  your  mind  and  ways,  not  mine).  9. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  No  stranger,  uncircumcised  in  heart,  and  un 
circumcised  in  flesh,  shall  come  into  my  sanctuary,  of  any  stranger  that  is 
in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel.  10.  But  only  the  Levites  that  have 
gone  away  far  from  me,  when  Israel  went  astray,  who  went  astray  from  me 
after  their  idols,  and  (for  so  doing)  they  bear  their  iniquity.  11.  And  they 
shall  be  ministers  in  my  sanctuary,  officers  at  the  gates  of  the  house,  and 
ministers  to  the  house  :  they  shall  slay  the  burnt-offering  and  the  sacrifice 
for  the  people,  and  they  shall  stand  before  them  to  minister  to  them.  12. 
Because  they  ministered  for  them  before  their  idols,  and  were  for  a  stumbling- 
block  of  iniquity  to  the  house  of  Israel ;  therefore  have  I  lifted  up  my  hand 
against  them,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and  they  bear  their  iniquity,  lo.  And 
they  shall  not  draw  near  to  me  to  do  the  priest's  office  to  me,  and  come  near 
to  any  of  my  holy  things,  to  the  most  holy  place ;  and  they  shall  bear  their 
shame,  and  their  abominations  which  they  have  committed.  14.  But  I 
appoint  them  keepers  of  the  charge  of  the  house,  for  all  its  service,  and  for 
all  that  is  done  in  it.  15.  And  the  priests,  the  Levites,  the  sons  of  Zadok, 
who  kept  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary  when  the  children  of  Israel  went  astray 
from  me,  they  shall  draw  near  to  me  to  minister  to  me  ;  and  they  shall  stand 
before  me  to  offer  to  me  the  fat,  and  the  blood,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  16. 
They  shall  enter  into  my  sanctuary,  and  they  shall  draw  near  to  my  table, 
to  minister  to  me,  and  they  shall  keep  my  charge.  17.  And  it  shall  be,  that 
when  they  enter  into  the  gates  of  the  inner  court,  they  shall  be  clothed  with 
linen  garments  ;  and  no  wool  shall  come  upon  them,  while  they  minister  in 
the  gates  of  the  inner  court,  and  within.  18.  Linen  turbans  shall  they  have 
upon  their  heads,  and  linen  breeches  upon  their  loins ;  they  shall  not  gird 
themselves  in  sweat.  19.  And  when  they  go  forth  into  the  outer  court,  into 


ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  PRIESTHOOD.         477 

the  outer  court  to  the  people,  they  shall  put  off  their  garments  in  which 
they  ministered,  and  shall  lay  them  in  the  holy  chambers,  arid  shall  put 
on  other  garments :  and  they  shall  not  sanctify  the  people  in  their  garments 
(those — viz.  in  which  they  ministered  in  the  sanctuary — their  more  peculiar 
priestly  attire.  20.  And  they  shall  not  shave  their  heads,  nor  let  the  hair 
grow  long  ;  they  shall  only  poll  their  heads.  21.  And  no  priest  shall  drink 
wine,  when  he  enters  into  the  inner  court.  22.  And  they  shall  not  take  to 
wife  a  widow,  or  her  that  has  been  put  away,  but  only  virgins  of  the  seed 
of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  a  widow  that  may  be  the  widow  of  a  priest  shall 
they  take.  28.  And  they  shall  teach  my  people  between  holy  and  profane, 
and  cause  them  to  discern  between  impure  and  clean.  24.  And  in  contro 
versy  they  shall  stand  to  judge  according  to  my  judgments ;  and  they  shall 
give  judgment ;  and  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  my  statutes  in  all  mine 
assemblies  ;  and  they  shall  hallow  my  sabbaths.  25.  And  they  shall  come 
at  no  dead  person  to  defile  themselves ;  but  they  may  be  defiled  for  father 
and  for  mother,  and  for  son  and  for  daughter,  for  brother  and  for  sister  who 
has  not  had  an  husband.  26.  And  after  he  is  cleansed,  they  shall  reckon 
to  him  seven  days.  27.  And  on  the  day  of  his  going  into  the  sanctuary,  into 
the  inner  court,  to  minister  in  the  sanctuary,  he  shall  bring  his  sin-offering, 
saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  28.  And  it  shall  be  to  them  for  an  inheritance  ;  I 
am  their  inheritance,  and  ye  shall  give  them  no  possession  in  Israel,  I  am 
their  possession.  29.  The  meat-offering,  and  the  sin-offering,  and  the  tres 
pass-offering  shall  they  eat ;  and  every  devoted  thing  in  Israel  shall  be 
theirs.  30.  And  the  first  of  all  the  first  fruits  wholly,  and  all  the  oblations 
wholly,  of  all  your  oblations,  shall  belong  to  the  priests ;  and  the  first  of 
your  dough  shall  ye  give  to  the  priest,  that  the  blessing  may  be  made  to  rest 
in  your  house.  31.  Of  no  carcase,  or  what  is  torn,  whether  of  fowl  or  of 
beast,  shall  the  priests  eat. 

As  the  preceding  chapter  had  disclosed  the  purpose  of  God  to 
re-occupy,  and  that  for  ever,  this  new  temple,  and  had  described 
the  necessary  means  and  rites  of  consecration  in  order  to  its 
being  a  source  of  blessing  to  his  people,  so  the  present  chapter 
lays  down  regulations  for  preventing  any  new  desecration  of 
the  house,  such  as  might  again  compel  God  to  withdraw  his 
gracious  presence.  These  regulations  refer  successively  to  the 
prince  and  the  priesthood — the  two  classes  through  whom  directly 
the  former  pollutions  had  been  introduced  into  the  house  of  God. 
In  regard  to  the  former,  who  is  simply  called  the  prince  (for 
the  reason  stated  under  last  chapter),  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
think  of  any  one  but  the  royal  head,  as  he  is  throughout  spoken 
of  as  an  individual,  and  in  the  next  chapter  is  directed  "  to  pre 
pare  for  himself,  and  for  all  the  people  of  the  land,"  a  sin-offering 
(chap.  xlv.  22).  So  that  the  idea  of  Havernick,  that  the  word  is 
used  collectively  for  the  rulers  and  presidents  generally  of  the 
people,  is  quite  untenable.  And  not  less  so  is  the  opinion,  that 
by  the  expression  is  simply  to  be  understood  the  Messiah ;  for 
this  is  utterly  irreconcileable  with  all  the  prescriptions  given,  and 


478  EZEKIEL  XLIV. 

in  particular  with  those  requiring  the  presentation  of  sacrifices 
and  sin-offerings  for  the  prince.  It  is  to  be  explained  precisely 
as  the  whole  delineation  here  and  in  the  preceding  visions 
(chapters  xxxiv.— xxxix),  by  viewing  it  as  a  part  of  an  ideal 
description  of  coming  realities  under  the  form  and  aspect  of 
the  old  relations.  And  no  more  than  we  expect  other  parts  of 
the  vision  to  find  their  accomplishment  under  the  Gospel  by  a 
restoration  of  the  carnal  sacrifices  and  institutions  of  Judaism, 
should  we  look  here  for  an  actual  prince  to  follow  the  regula 
tions  prescribed.  Standing  on  the  position  he  did,  the  prophet 
must  speak  of  the  future  under  the  image  of  the  past ;  and  as 
it  was  by  means  of  the  earthly  head  of  the  Jewish  state  that 
many  of  the  former  corruptions  had  been  introduced,  he  now 
shows  how  a  repetition  of  such  evils  is  to  be  guarded  against  in 
the  future.  Whether  the  kingly  power  should  ever  again  be 
concentrated  in  one  person,  or  should  be  shared  by  many,  is  of 
no  moment  as  regards  the  substance  of  the  truth  here  unfolded. 

What  is  said  in  the  present  chapter  on  this  subject  is  verv 
little,  and  relates  to  but  one  point,  the  connection  between  the 
prince  and  the  east  gate  (vers.  1-3).  Because  the  Lord  had 
appeared  in  the  vision  returning  by  this  gate,  a  peculiar  stamp 
of  sacredness  was  put  upon  it.  It  was  therefore  not  to  be  open 
for  ordinary  worshippers,  but  only  for  the  prince  ;  he  was  to  enter 
by  it,  and  sit  there  and  eat  bread  before  the  Lord.  What  could 
this  import,  but  that  the  prince  should  feel  he  now  occupied  a 
place  of  peculiar  nearness  to  God?  As  God's  vicegerent  and 
deputy  among  the  people,  it  became  him  to  be  the  most  distin 
guished  representative  in  public  life  of  God's  holiness, — to  tread 
the  higher  walks  of  spiritual  communion  and  fellowship  with 
Heaven,  and  stand  pre-eminent  in  his  zeal  for  the  interests  of 
truth  and  righteousness.  Far  now  from  usurping  the  authority 
that  belonged  to  God,  and  abusing  to  selfish  ends  and  pur 
poses  the  power  which  was  given  by  him  for  higher  ends, 
all  authority  and  power  in  Israel  should  be  exercised — if  this 
Divine  ideal  were  reduced  to  practice — in  a  solemn  feeling  of 
subordination  to  God's  majesty,  and  with  an  unfeigned  desire 
for  his  glory. 

2.  The  prophet  dwells  at  much  greater  length  on  the  priest 
hood,  as  this  class  had  more  immediately  to  do  with  God's  sanc 
tuary,  and  in  their  condition  and  behaviour  were  reflected  those 


ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  PRIESTHOOD.        479 

generally  of  the  covenant-people.  It  is  on  account  of  this  close 
connection,  first  between  the  priesthood  and  the  sanctuary,  and 
then  between  the  priesthood  and  those  whom  they  represented 
in  Israel,  that  the  prophet  appears  at  the  commencement  of  the 
passage  to  identify  the  apostacy  of  the  nation  at  large  with  the 
desecrations  of  God's  house  by  the  priesthood.  He  says  (ver. 
6,  etc.)  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Let  it  suffice  you  of 
all  your  abominations,  O  house  of  Israel ;  in  that  you  brought 
strangers  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  uncircumcised  in  flesh  to 
be  in  my  sanctuary,  to  pollute  it,  my  house ;  in  that  ye  made 
them  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  blood  :  and  they  broke  my 
covenant  to  (in  addition  to)  all  our  abominations.  And  ye 
did  not  keep  my  holy  charge,  but  set  for  keepers  of  my  charge 
in  my  sanctuary  for  yourselves."  The  children  of  Israel  are 
spoken  of  as  doing  all  this  because  the  corrupt  priesthood  was 
inseparably  connected  with  the  sins  of  the  people — the  one  con 
tinually  acting  and  re-acting  on  the  other.  And  the  corruption 
.in  the  priesthood,  it  will  be  observed,  is  expressed  as  if  persons 
had  been  put  into  the  office  who  were  not  of  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
or  even  of  the  seed  of  Israel,  but  uncircumcised  heathen.  Not 
that  literally  persons  of  this  description  had  been  admitted  into 
the  priestly  office ;  that  did  not  take  place,  not  even  in  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  where  still  the  Israelites  were  employed, 
though  not  of  the  family  of  Aaron.  But  the  prophet  is  view 
ing  all  in  a  spiritual  light,  he  is  reading  forth  the  import  of 
the  outward  transactions  as  they  appeared  to  the  eye  of  God ; 
and  as  in  that  respect  the  officiating  priesthood  had  been  no 
better  than  uncircumcised  strangers,  so  he  speaks  of  them  as 
having  actually  been  such.  And  if  thus  in  regard  to  the  past 
the  prophet  expresses  the  reality  in  the  language  of  symbol,  and 
must  be  understood  according  to  the  spiritual  import,  not  the 
mere  letter,  of  the  description,  it  cannot  certainly  be  otherwise 
when  he  points  to  the  future.  In  reference  to  this  he  says  :  Not 
any  of  these  uncircumcised  strangers  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
not  any  of  the  Levites  who  took  part  in  the  idolatrous  services 
which  had  formerly  been  practised  in  the  house  of  God — not 
these,  but  only  the  sons  of  Zadok,  who  had  stood  faithful,  and 
kept  the  charge  of  the  Lord  when  others  fell  into  impurities, 
were  henceforth  to  minister  in  the  Lord's  house ;  the  rest  were 
at  the  most  to  be  employed  about  the  subordinate  ministrations 


480  EZEKIEL  XLIV. 

of  the  temple  courts.  The  instruction  points  back  to  1  Sam. 
ii.  32,  35,  where  the  priesthood  of  the  line  of  Ithamar  was  dis 
charged  from  the  office  of  ministering  in  the  Lord's  house,  on 
account  of  its  corruption,  in  order  that  another  line  might  be 
chosen,  who  should  perform  the  work  after  the  Lord's  mind 
and  heart.  This  new  line  was  found  in  Zadok  and  his  house 
(1  Kings  ii.  35,  1  Chron.  xxiv.  3),  whose  name  also  (the 
righteous)  was  significant  of  what  was  expected  at  their  hand. 
In  later  times  they  lost  the  distinction  implied  in  this  name,  and 
took  part  in  the  general  apostacy ;  but  the  prophet  keeps  his 
eye  upon  their  original  state,  and  speaks  of  them  as  they 
appeared  when  first  chosen  to  the  office.  The  promise,  there 
fore,  of  a  priesthood  of  the  house  of  Zadok,  entirely  corre 
sponded  to  the  promise  of  a  shepherd  with  the  name  of  David. 
It  simply  indicated  a  race  of  faithful  and  devoted  servants,  in 
whom  the  outward  and  the  inward,  the  name  and  the  idea, 
should  properly  coincide — a  priesthood  serving  God  in  newness 
of  spirit,  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter ;  as  the  people  whom 
they  represented  should  also  have  become  true  Israelites,  them 
selves  a  royal  priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  sacrifices  to  the 
Lord.  In  truth,  it  is  the  raising  up  of  a  people  who  should  be 
such  a  priesthood  that  is  meant  by  the  description,  and  the  sons 
of  Zadok  came  into  notice  only  because  in  connection  with 
them  there  was  an  historical  ground  for  taking  them  as  repre 
sentatives  of  a  right-hearted  spiritual  community.  So  that  it  is 
the  same  truth,  only  under  a  different  outward  clothing,  which 
is  exhibited  by  Isaiah,  when  he  speaks  of  the  Lord's  people 
generally  in  the  more  glorious  future  being  taken  to  be  priests 
and  Levites  (Isa.  Ixi.  6,  Ixvi.  21).  All  was  to  rise  into  a  new 
and  higher  sphere ;  first  the  kingdom  of  God  itself,  and  then 
the  people  who  enjoyed  its  distinctive  privileges  and  experienced 
its  blessings. 

Having  given  promise  of  such  a  true  spiritual  priesthood, 
under  the  old  names  and  historical  relations,  the  prophet  pro 
ceeds  to  describe,  after  the  same  manner,  how  the  sanctity  of 
the  priesthood  wras  to  be  preserved  and  manifested.  The  true 
import  of  the  symbolical  regulations  in  the  lavy  was  now  to  be 
reached  ;  and  he  therefore  describes  what  was  to  be  done  under 
the  observance  of  these  regulations :  They  should  wear  only 
linen  garments  (emblems  of  cleanliness  and  purity),  they  should 


•  THE  SACRED  ALLOTMENTS  IN  LAND  AND  GIFTS.  481 

neither  shave  their  heads  (as  mourners  did),  nor  let  their  hair 
grow  uncut  (as  persons  unfit  for  active  service),  nor  drink  wine 
when  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  lest  they  should 
be  unfit  for  the  spiritual  actions  required  of  them  ;  nor,  in  short, 
do  any  of  the  things  which  under  the  outward  restrictions  of  a 
symbolical  ritual  betokened  a  want  of  inward  purity.  Holiness 
to  the  Lord  should  be  expressed  in  their  whole  state  and  pro 
cedure,  as  well  as  in  the  ministrations  of  their  public  service  ; 
and  one  pervading  characteristic  be  found  in  God's  house,  and 
the  servants  who  belonged  to  it. 


CHAPTER  XLY. 


THE  SACRED  ALLOTMENTS  IX  LAND  AND  GIFTS. 

Ver.  1.  And  when  ye  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot,  ye  shall  offer  an  oblation 
to  the  Lord;  an  holy  portion  of  the  land,  in  length  five  and  twenty  thousand 
long,  and  ten  thousand  broad  :  it  shall  be  holy  in  all  its  borders  round  about. 
2.  Of  this  there  shall  be  for  the  sanctuary  five  hundred  by  five  hundred 
(i.e.  in  length  and  breadth  so  many),  square  round  about ;  and  fifty  cubits 
round  about  for  its  suburbs  round  about.  3.  And  of  this  measure  thou 
shalt  measure  the  length  of  five  and  twenty  thousand,  and  a  breadth  often 
thousand,  and  in  it  shall  be  the  sanctuary  and  the  most  holy  place.  4.  The 
holy  portion  of  the  land  shall  be  for  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  sanc 
tuary,  who  shall  come  near  to  minister  to  the  Lord  ;  and  it  shall  be  a  place 
for  their  houses,  and  an  holy  place  for  the  sanctuary.  5.  And  the  five  and 
twenty  thousand  in  length,  and  ten  thousand  in  breadth,  shall  be  for  the 
Levites,  the  ministers  of  the  house,  as  a  possession  for  twenty  chambers.  6. 
And  ye  shall  appoint  the  possession  of  the  city  five  thousand  broad,  and 
five  and  twenty  thousand  in  length,  over  against  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
portion ;  it  shall  be  for  the  whole  house  of  Israel.  7.  And  for  the  prince 
there  shall  be  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other  side  (a  portion)  of  the  holy 
oblation,  and  of  the  possession  of  the  city,  in  front  of  the  holy  oblation 
and  in  front  of  the  possession  of  the  city,  on  the  west  side  westward  and 
on  the  east  side  eastward ;  and  the  length  over  against  one  of  the  portions 
from  the  west  border  to  the  east  border.  8.  For  land  it  shall  be  to  him 
a  possession  in  Israel ;  and  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  people ; 
and  they  shall  give  the  land  to  the  house  of  Israel  by  their  tribes. 

9.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  Let  it  suffice  you,  0  princes  of  Israel ; 
remove  violence  and  spoil,  and  execute  judgment  and  justice;  withdraw  your 
spoliations  from  off  my  people,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  10.  Ye  shall  have 
just  balances,  and  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just  bath.  11.  The  ephah  and  the 
bath  shall  be  of  one  measure,  that  the  bath  may  contain  the  tenth  part  of 
an  homer,  and  the  ephah  the  tenth  part  of  a  homer ;  after  the  homer  shall 
be  its  measure.  12.  And  the  shekel  shall  be  twenty  gerahs ;  twenty  shekels, 

2  II 


482  EZEKIEL  XLV. 

five  and  twenty  shekels,  fifteen  shekels,  shall  be  your  maneh.1  l.'J.  This  is 
the  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer :  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of 
wheat,  and  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of  barley  ;  14.  And  the 
ordinance  of  the  oil,  the  bath  of  oil,  (ye  shaH'offer)  the  tenth  of  the  bath  out 
of  the  cor — an  homer  of  ten  baths,  for  ten  baths  are  an  homer  ;  15.  And 
one  lamb  out  of  the  flock,  out  of  two  hundred,  from  the  fat  pastures  of  Israel, 
for  a  meat-offering,  and  for  a  burnt-offering,  and  for  peace-offerings,  to  make 
reconciliation  for  them,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.2  16.  All  the  people  in  the 
land  shall  give  (literally,  shall  be  for)  this  oblation  to  the  prince  in  Israel. 
17.  And  there  shall  be  upon  the  prince  the  burnt- offerings,  and  the  meat 
offerings,  and  the  drink-offerings  in  the  feasts,  and  in  the  new  moons,  and 
in  the  Sabbaths,  in  all  the  feasts  of  the  house  of  Israel  :  he  shall  prepare  the 
sin-offering,  and  the  meat-offering,  and  the  burnt-offering,  and  the  peace- 
offerings,  to  make  atonement  for  the  house  of  Israel.  18.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  In  the  first  of  the  first  month,  thoushalt  take  a  young  bullock 
without  blemish,  and  cleanse  the  sanctuary.  19.  And  the  priest  shall  take 
of  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering,  and  shall  put  it  upon  the  posts  of  the  house, 
and  upon  the  four  corners  of  the  ledge  of  the  altar,  and  upon  the  posts  of  the 
gate  of  the  inner  court.  20.  And  so  shalt  thou  do  on  the  seventh  of  the 
month  for  any  one  that  errs  and  for  the  foolish,  and  ye  shall  make  atonement 
for  the  house.  21.  On  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month,  ye  shall  have 
the  passover,  a  feast  of  seven  days;  unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten.  22. 
And  upon  that  day  the  prince  shall  prepare  for  himself  and  for  all  the  people 
of  the  land  a  bullock  as  a  sin-offering.  2;5.  And  during  the  seven  days  of 
the  feast  he  shall  prepare  a  burnt -offering  for  the  Lord,  seven  bullocks  and 
seven  rams  without  blemish  daily  for  the  seven  days ;  and  a  kid  of  the 
goats  for  a  sin-offering  daily.  24.  And  he  shall  prepare  a  meat-offering  of 
an  ephah  of  barley  for  the  bullock,  and  an  ephah  for  the  ram  shall  he 
prepare,  and  an  hin  of  oil  for  the  ephah.  25.  On  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 
seventh  month,  he  shall  do  the  like  at  the  feast  of  seven  days,  according  to 
the  sin- offering,  according  to  the  burnt-offering,  and  according  to  the  meat 
offering,  and  according  to  the  oil. 

THE  prophet  passes  here  to  what  may  be  called  the  outer  terri- 
to'ry,  and  presents  a  pattern  of  things  in  beautiful  accordance 
with  the  inner  and  more  sacred.  There  must  be  a  new  distri 
bution  of  the  land,  and  a  new  adjustment  as  to  giving  and 

1  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  make  any  intelligible  sense  of  this  verse  as  it 
stands.    The  greater  part  of  commentators  suppose  a  corruption  of  the  text 
here,  not  excepting  Hav.,  who  adopts  the  meaning  given  by  the  Sept.  : 
"And  the  five  shekels  shall  be  five,  and  the  ten  shekels  shall  be  ten,  and 
fifty  shekels   shall  be  your  maneh."     It  is,  of  course,  quite  conjectural. 
Hitzig  prefers  understanding  the  three  numbers  of  the  different  metals  :  20 
shekels  for  the  gold  maneh,  25  for  the  silver,  and  15  for  the  brass  or  copper. 
Also  quite  conjectural ;  the  more  so  as,  by  comparing  1  Kings  x.  17  with  2 
Chron.  ix.  16,  the  man  eh  of  gold  seems  to  have  been  100  shekels. 

2  In  these  oblations,  from  the  different  kinds  of  property,  there  is  an 
evident  progression  as  to  the  relation  between  the  kind  and  the  quantity. 
Of  the  corn  there  was  to  be  the  sixth  of  a  tenth — that  is,  a  60th  part  of  the 
quantity  specified  ;  of  the  oil,  the  tenth  of  a  tenth — that  is,  an  100th  part ; 
and  of  the  flock,  one  from  every  200. 


THE  SACRED  ALLOTMENTS  IX  LAND  AND  GIFTS. 

receiving  between  prince  and  people,  in  order  that  the  old  heats 
and  discords  might  be  avoided,  and  no  pretext  any  longer  found 
for  arbitrary  appointments  and  oppressive  exactions.  In  regard 
to  the  new  distribution  of  the  land,  what  is  mentioned  here  (vers. 
1-7)  has  respect  merely  to  the  central  portion,  which  was  to  be 
set  apart  for  the  temple,  the  priesthood,  the  prince,  and  the 
city  (the  remainder  is  treated  of  in  chap,  xlvii.).  And  this 
altogether  was  to  form  a  square  of  25,000 — it  is  not  said  of 
what;  and  hence  many  insert  cubits,  as  at  chap.  xlii.  16  they 
substituted  cubits  for  rods.  We  showed  the  proposed  change 
there  to  be  unwarranted  and  arbitrary ;  and  as  the  present 
passage  is  merely  a  continuation  of  the  other,  the  same  reasons 
which  obliged  us  to  abide  by  rods  there  render  it  necessary  for 
us  to  understand  these  also  here.  Besides,  the  express  mention 
of  so  many  cubits  for  the  suburbs  of  the  sanctuary  (ver.  2) 
clearly  implies,  that  in  all  the  other  measures,  not  cubits,  but 
rods  are  intended ;  for  why  should  cubits  have  been  named 
only  there,  unless  it  was  because  there  alone  such  were  to  be 
understood  ?  It  might  also  be  shown,  were  it  necessary,  that, 
on  the  supposition  of  cubits  being  meant,  the  portion  of  land 
would  be  immensely  too  small  for  the  purpose  indicated  (only 
about  eight  miles  square), — a  space  of  ground  in  that  case  not 
nearly  so  large  as  is  possessed  by  many  a  modern  nobleman 
being  assigned  for  the  support  of  the  whole  priesthood,  the  prince 
and  his  household,  and  the  people  of  the  city.  Holding  it,  then, 
to  be  rods  by  which  the  dimensions  are  given,  and  taking  each 
rod,  as  before,  at  about  twelve  feet,  the  entire  area  of  the  central 
portion  of  land  would  be  a  square  of  somewhere  about  sixty 
miles  on  each  side.  Of  this  area  a  large  part  was  to  be  of  a 
•sacred  character,  and  is  hence  called  "  an  holy  portion,  offered 
to  the  Lord"  (ver.  1).  It  embraced  the  whole  length,  but  only 
two-fifths  of  the  breadth;  and  was  to  be  appropriated  thus: — 
500  rods  square  for  the  temple,  with  50  cubits  outside  additional 
(that  other  buildings  might  not  come  too  close  upon  those  of  so 
sacred  a  character),  and  all  that  remained  of  the  10,000  in 
breadth  by  25,000  in  length  was  to  be  for  a  possession  to  the 
priesthood,  allowing,  however,  as  much  as  might  be  needed  for 
the  erection  of  twenty  apartments  to  the  Levites  who  for  the  time 
being  happened  to  minister  at  the  temple.  It  is  plainly  of  such 
sort  of  chambers  that  mention  is  made  in  ver.  5,  and  not  ordinary 


484  EZEKIEL   XLV. 

dwellings  ;  they  were  to  be  for  the  ministering  Levites  what  the 
chambers  within  the  temple  grounds  were  for  the  officiating 
priests.  The  other  part  of  the  central  portion  was  to  be  assigned 
for  the  city  and  the  prince, — 5000  in  breadth  for  the  city  itself, 
and  the  remaining  10,000  for  a  possession  to  the  people  of  the 
city  and  to  the  prince  to  supply  them  with  food,  but  in  what  rela 
tive  proportions  is  not  stated,  either  here  or  in  chap,  xlviii.  It 
is  merely  said  respecting  the  prince,  that  his  possession  was  to  be 
taken  out  of  this  civic  portion,  and  was  to  consist  of  two  halves, 
— the  one  on  the  west  and  the  other  on  the  east  side  of  the 
sacred  territory.  For  thus  again  the  prophet  would  set  forth 
the  close  relation  in  which  the  prince,  as  head  of  so  holy  a  com 
munity,  should  stand  to  the  sanctuary.  His  possession  must  on 
each  side  adjoin  that  which  was  to  be  peculiarly  the  Lord's. 

That  the  whole  ground  for  the  priesthood,  the  prince,  and  the 
people  of  the  city  was  to  form  together  a  square,  betokened  the 
perfect  harmony  and  agreement  which  should  subsist  between 
these  different  classes,  as  well  as  the  settled  order  and  stability 
that  should  distinguish  the  sacred  commonwealth,  in  which  they 
held  the  highest  place.  That  the  priesthood  were  to  occupy 
what  was  emphatically  holy  ground,  was  a  symbol  of  the  singular 
degree  of  holiness  which  should  characterize  those  who  stood,  in 
their  official  position,  the  nearest  to  the  Lord.  And  that  the 
prince  was  to  have  a  separate  possession  assigned  him,  was  to 
cut  off  all  occasion  for  his  lawlessly  interfering  with  the  posses 
sions  of  the  people,  and  to  exhibit  the  friendly  bearing  and  up 
right  administration  which  was  to  be  expected  of  him.  Hence, 
in  immediate  connection  with  the  assignment  of  such  a  portion, 
it  is  said  (ver.  8) :  "  And  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  mv 
people,  and  the  land  shall  they  give  to  the  house  of  Israel 
according  to  their  tribes."  And  not  only  must  he  personally 
abstain  from  all  oppressive  behaviour,  but,  as  the  divinely  con 
stituted  head  of  a  righteous  commonwealth,  he  must  take  effec 
tive  measures  for  establishing  judgment  and  justice  throughout 
the  whole.  Particular  examples  are  given  of  this  in  regard  to 
the  using  of  just  weights  and  measures  in  the  transactions  of 
business  (vers.  9-12). 

Then  follow  directions  respecting  the  contributions  to  be 
made  by  the  people  to  the  prince  (vers.  13-17), — the  sixtieth  part 
of  their  wheat,  the  hundredth  of  their  oil,  and  of  the  young  of 


THE  SACRED  ALLOTMENTS  IN  LAND  AND  GIFTS.  485 

their  flocks  the  two  hundredth  part.  These  were  to  be  regularly 
given  to  the  prince  as  the  representative  of  the  people,  that  he 
might  provide  out  of  them  the  suitable  offerings  to  be  presented 
to  the  Lord  for  the  community,  especially  at  the  stated  solem 
nities.  They  would  therefore  be  perpetual  remembrancers  to 
the  prince  of  the  sacred  character  he  maintained  as  the  head  of 
such  a  people,  and  would  supply  him,  by  Divine  enactment, 
with  what  was  needed  to  fulfil  this  part  of  his  office,  without 
needing  to  have  resort  to  any  arbitrary  and  oppressive  measures. 
Expressed  more  generally,  it  was  a  symbol  of  the  perfect  harmony 
and  mutual  co-operation  which  should  exist  in  such  a  holy 
community  in  regard  to  the  public  service  and  glory  of  God ; 
without  constraint  or  any  sort  of  jarring,  the  several  classes 
would  freely  and  faithfully  do  their  parts. 

As  it  was  more  especially  in  connection  with  the  stated  and 
yearly  festivals  that  the  prince  had  to  represent  the  people  in 
the  public  service  of  God,  so  the  prophet  takes  a  rapid  glance 
of  these,  and  refers  particularly  to  the  first  and  the  last.  But 
he  first  mentions  a  consecration  service,  with  which  the  year  was 
always  to  begin,  and  of  which  no  mention  whatever  was  made 
in  the  law  (vers.  18-20).  On  the  first,  and  again  on  the  seventh 
day  of  the  first  month,  the  sanctuary  was  always  to  be  cleansed, 
that  the  year  might  be  commenced  in  sacredness,  and  that  all 
might  be  in  preparation  for  the  Feast  of  the  Passover  on  the 
fourteenth  day  of  the  month.  As  the  prophet  has  introduced 
a  new  solemnity  before  the  Passover,  so  for  the  Passover  itself 
he  appoints  quite  different  sacrifices  from  those  named  by  Moses; 
instead  of  one  ram  and  seven  lambs  for  the  daily  burnt-offering, 
he  has  seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams ;  and  the  meat-offerings 
also  vary.  And  while  there  were  quite  peculiar  offerings  pre 
scribed  in  the  law  for  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  constantly 
diminishing  as  the  days  of  the  feast  proceeded,  here,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  prophet  appoints  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Passover.  This  shows  how  free  a  use  was  made  by  the  prophet 
of  the  Old  Testament  ritual,  and  how  he  only  employed  it  as  a 
cover  for  the  great  spiritual  truths  he  sought  to  unfold.  They 
were  not  permanently  fixed  and  immutable  things,  he  virtually 
said,  those  external  services  of  Judaism,  as  if  they  had  an 
absolute  and  independent  value  of  their  own,  so  that  precisely 
those  and  no  other  should  be  thought  of ;  they  were  all  sym- 


486  EZEKJEL   XL VI. 

bolical  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal  truths  of  God's  kingdom,  and 
may  be  variously  adjusted,  as  is  now  done,  in  order  to  make 
them  more  distinctly  expressive  of  the  greater  degree  of  holiness 
and  purity  that  is  in  future  times  to  distinguish  the  people  and 
service  of  God  over  all  that  has  been  in  the  past. 


CHAPTER  XL VI. 

ADDITIONAL    ORDINANCES   FOE    THE   PRINCE   AND    PEOPLE. 


Ver.  1.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  that 
looks  toward  the  east  shall  be  shut  the  six  working  days  ;  and  it  shall  be 
opened  ou  the  Sabbath-day,  and  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon  it  shall  be 
opened.  2.  And  the  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch  from  with 
out,  and  shall  stand  beside  the  post  of  the  gate  ;  and  the  priests  shall  offer 
his  burnt-offering  and  his  peace-offerings ;  and  he  shall  worship  at  the 
threshold  of  the  gate,  and  shall  go  forth  ;  and  the  gate  shall  not  be  shut  till 
the  evening.  3.  And  the  people  of  the  land  shall  worship  at  the  entrance 
of  that  gate  before  the  Lord,  on  Sabbaths  and  in  the  new  moons.  4.  And 
the  burnt-offering  which  the  prince  shall  offer  to  Jehovah  on  the  Sabbath- 
day  shall  be  six  lambs  without  blemish,  and  a  ram  without  blemish.  5. 
And  the  meat-offering  shall  be  an  ephah  for  a  ram,  and  the  meat-offering 
for  the  lambs  what  his  hand  may  give,  and  an  hin  of  oil  to  an  ephah.  6. 
And  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  a  young  bullock  without  blemish,  and  six 
lambs  and  a  ram  ;  without  blemish  shall  they  be.  7.  And  he  shall  prepare 
a  meat-offering,  an  ephah  for  the  bullock,  and  an  ephah  for  the  ram,  and 
for  the  lambs  according  as  his  hand  may  reach  to  ;  and  an  hin  of  oil  for  the 
ephah.  8.  And  when  the  prince  enters,  he  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the 
porch  of  the  gate,  and  by  its  way  shall  he  go  out.  9.  And  when  the  people 
of  the  land  shall  come  before  Jehovah,  in  the  solemn  feasts,  he  that  enters 
by  the  way  of  the  north  gate  to  worship  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the 
south  gate,  and  he  that  enters  by  the  way  of  the  south  gate  shall  go  out  by 
the  way  of  the  north  gate ;  he  shall  not  return  by  the  way  of  the  gate  through 
which  he  entered,  but  shall  go  forth  over  against  it.  10.  And  the  prince 
in  the  midst  of  them,  when  they  go  in,  shall  go  in  ;  and  when  they  go  forth, 
shall  go  forth.  11.  And  in  the  feasts,  and  in  the  solemn  assemblies,  the 
meat-offerings  shall  be  an  ephah  for  a  bullock,  and  an  ephah  for  a  ram,  and 
for  lambs  a  gift  of  his  hand,  and  of  oil  an  hin  to  the  ephah.  12.  And  when 
the  prince  shall  prepare  a  voluntary  burnt-offering,  or  voluntary  peace-offer 
ings,  to  Jehovah,  then  there  shall  be  opened  for  him  the  gate  that  looks  toward 
the  east,  and  he  shall  perform  his  burnt-offering,  and  his  peace-offerings, 
according  as  he  did  on  the  Sabbath-day ;  then  he  shall  go  forth,  and  when 
he  goes  forth,  shall  shut  the  gate  after  him.  13.  And  a  lamb  of  two  years  old, 
without  blemish,  shalt  thou  prepare  for  a  burnt-offering  to  Jehovah  ;  morning 
by  morning  shalt  thou  prepare  it.  14.  And  thou  shalt  prepare  a  meat-offer 
ing  for  it  every  morning,  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah,  and  the  third  part  of  an 
hin  of  oil,  to  moisten  the  fine  flour — a  meat-offering  to  Jehovah  by  a  per- 


ADDITIONAL  ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  PRINCE  AND  PEOPLE.      487 

petual  ordinance  continually.  15.  Thus  shall  they  prepare  the  lamb,  and  the 
meat-offering,  and  the  oil,  every  morning,  for  a  continual  burnt- offering. 

Yer.  16.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  If  the  prince  give  a  gift  to  any  of 
his  sons,  the  inheritance  of  that  shall  be  to  his  sons ;  it  is  their  possession 
by  inheritance.  17.  But  if  he  give  a  gift  from  his  inheritance  to  one  of  his 
servants,  then  it  shall  be  his  till  the  year  of  liberty,  and  it  shall  return  to 
the  prince ;  his  inheritance  shall  altogether  belong  to  his  sons.  18.  And 
the  prince  shall  not  take  of  the  people's  inheritance  by  oppression,  to  dis 
possess  them  ;  of  his  own  possession  shall  he  give  an  inheritance  to  his  sons, 
that  my  people  may  not  be  scattered  every  man  from  his  possession.  19. 
And  he  brought  me  through  the  entrance,  that  is  by  the  side  of  the  gate, 
into  the  holy  chambers  for  the  priests  that  look  toward  the  north  ;  and 
behold  there  was  a  place  by  the  two  sides  westward.  '20.  And  he  said  to 
me,  This  is  the  place  where  the  priests  shall  boil  the  trespass-offering,  and 
the  sin-offering,  where  they  shall  bake  the  meat-offering ;  that  they  may 
not  go  forth  to  the  outer  court  to  sanctify  the  people.  "21.  And  he  brought; 
me  into  the  outer  court,  and  caused  me  to  pass  by  the  four  corners  of  the 
court;  and,  behold,  a  court  at  every  corner  of  the  court.  '2'2.  In  the  four 
corners  of  the  court  there  were  courts  joined  (probably  roofed  or  vaulted), 
forty  long,  and  thirty  broad ;  there  was  one  measure  to  the  four-cornered 
places.  23.  And  there  was  a  row  round  about  in  them,  round  about  for  the 
four ;  and  it  was  made  with  boiling-places  under  the  rows  round  about. 
"24.  And  he  said  to  me,  These  are  the  places  of  them  that  boil,  where  the 
ministers  of  the  house  shall  boil  the  sacrifices  of  the  people. 

THE  instructions  contained  in  this  chapter  are  merely  a  follow 
ing  out  into  some  subordinate  details  of  the  subject  handled  in 
the  chapter  immediately  preceding.  The  first  section  (vers.  1-8) 
refers  more  immediately  to  the  prince  in  his  worship,  To  him, 
it  was  already  said,  belonged  the  distinction  of  entering  for 
worship  by  the  east  gate.  But  this  gate,  to  mark  more  distinctly 
its  peculiar  sacredness,  was  to  be  shut  during  the  six  days  of  the 
week,  and  opened  only  on  Sabbath-days  and  those  of  the  new 
moon.  On  these  occasions  the  prince  was  to  go  through  this 
gate  to  the  porch  of  the  inner  court  (for  such  is  undoubtedly 
meant  by  the  gate  in  ver.  2),  but  no  farther ;  he  had  no  right  to 
advance  into  the  court  of  the  priests.  There,  as  the  head  and 
representative  of  the  people,  and  as  such  in  a  state  of  peculiar 
nearness  to  God,  he  should  present  his  offerings  to  the  Lord ; 
while  at  a  greater  distance,  at  the  outer  gate  of  the  same 
entrance,  the  people  were  to  stand  worshipping  without.  The 
offerings  he  is  here  appointed  to  bring  on  Sabbaths  and  on  new 
moons  are  considerably  larger  than  those  mentioned  in  the  law 
of  Moses ;  and  hence  serve  to  show  that  the  worship  of  God  in 
the  future  was  to  be  conducted  in  a  more  complete  and  glorious 
manner  than  formerly,  and  that  as  both  prince  and  people  were 
to  rise  to  a  higher  place  in  connection  with  the  kingdom  of  God, 


4S8  EZEKIEL  XL VI. 

so  they  would  express  this  in  more  liberal  and  generous  mani 
festations  of  pious  feeling. 

The  next  section  (vers.  9-15)  exhibits  the  order  that  should 
be  observed  in  the  great  festivals.  On  those  occasions  the 
prince  was  to  depart  from  the  state  of  isolation  which  it  was 
proper  for  him  to  observe  at  other  times,  and,  at  the  head  of  the 
people,  join  in  the  great  throng  of  worshippers  that  were  to  pass 
through  the  temple  courts  from  one  side  to  another.  It  reminds 
us  of  David,  who  in  this  was  doubtless  the  exemplar  in  the  eye 
of  the  prophet :  "  I  had  gone  with  the  multitude,  I  went  with 
them  to  the  house  of  God,  with  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  with 
u  multitude  that  kept  holiday."  A  beautiful  picture  of  a  religi 
ous  people, — the  highest  in  rank  freely  mingling  with  the  mass 
of  worshippers,  and  inspiriting  their  devotions  by  the  elevating 
influence  of  his  presence  and  example.  But  to  show  that  his 
worship  was  not  merely  to  be  of  a  public  and  official  nature,  that 
it  should  spring  from  a  heart  truly  alive  to  Divine  things,  and 
itself  delighting  in  fellowship  with  God,  the  prophet  passes  from 
those  holiday  services  to  the  voluntary  offerings  and  the  daily 
morning  sacrifice,  which  the  prince  was  also  to  present  to  the 
Lord.  In  a  word,  the  proper  head  of  a  religious  people,  he  was 
to  surpass  them  all,  and  be  an  example  to  them  all  in  the  multi 
tude  and  variety  of  his  acts  of  homage  and  adoration. 

A  short  section  follows  (vers.  16— 18),  respecting  the  inalienable 
nature  of  the  prince's  possession,  and  the  sacred  regard  he  must 
pay  to  the  people's.  He  might  give  his  own  sons  an  inheritance 
with  himself,  but  if  he  should  give  a  grant  of  any  portion  of  it 
to  a  servant,  it  must  revert  to  the  royal  house  at  the  year  of 
jubilee  ;  in  order  that  no  temptation  might  exist  to  spoil  the 
people  of  their  proper  inheritances,  as  had  been  too  often  done 
in  the  days  that  were  past.  It  is  the  exhibition,  by  an  individual 
trait,  of  the  pure  righteousness  and  settled  order  which  should 
pervade  the  kingdom  of  God  when  set  up  in  its  new  and  more 
perfect  form.  Everything  should  now  be  ruled  by  the  principles 
of  eternal  rectitude,  and  no  licence  given,  no  occasion  even,  or 
pretext  afforded,  for  the  usurpations  of  tyrannical  violence. 

The  closing  verses  (vers.  19-24)  refer  to  a  matter  which  is  cer 
tainly  not  immediately  connected  with  what  precedes,  but  which 
the  prophet  adds  as  necessary  to  complete  the  picture  he  has 
been  drawing  of  a  well-ordered,  sacred  community.  It  respects 


VISION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  WATERS.  483 

the  preparation  made  in  the  temple  building  for  the  officiating 
priests  eating,  with  due  regard  to  the  sanctity  of  the  food,  the 
portion  that  fell  to  them  of  the  sacred  offerings.  For  this 
purpose  there  were  provided,  in  connection  with  the  chambers 
of  the  priests,  cooking  apartments  at  the  several  corners,  where 
the  flesh  of  the  sacrifices  should  be  boiled,  and  the  meat-offering 
prepared,  so  that  they  might  eat  them  before  again  mingling 
with  the  people.  A  distinction  is  even  made  in  regard  to  one 
portion  of  the  sacred  food  and  another.  For  the  sin  and  tres 
pass-offerings  being  of  a  higher  class  than  the  peace-offerings 
(in  the  participation  of  which  latter,  the  people  according  to  the 
law  shared  with  the  priesthood),  therefore  two  sets  of  chambers 
were  to  be  provided  for  cooking,' — one  at  the  corners  of  the  inner 
court,  reserved  for  the  flesh  of  the  sin  and  trespass-offerings, 
which  was  "  a  holy  of  holies,"  to  be  eaten  only  by  the  priests 
(Lev.  vi.  25,  vii.  7)  ;  and  another  at  the  corners  of  the  outer 
court,  where  the  flesh  of  the  peace-offerings  was  to  be  prepared. 
The  arrangement  indicates,  as  by  an  additional  stroke,  the 
peculiar  sacredness  that  should  now  attach  in  men's  feelings 
to  everything  that  bore  on  it  the  impress  of  the  Lord's  name. 
No  longer  confounding  together  the  common  and  unclean,  the 
Divine  and  human,  they  should  in  all  things  give  to  God  the 
pre-eminent  glory  which  is  due,  and  the  nearer  they  stood  to 
him,  be  always  the  more  jealous  of  his  honour.  A  truly  royal 
priesthood !  following  even  to  the  minutest  particulars  the  rule 
of  the  apostle :  u  Whether  they  might  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever 
they  might  do,  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 


CHAPTER    XL  VI  I.    1-12. 

VISION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  WATERS. 

IT  is  necessary  to  take  the  first  part  of  this  chapter  apart  from 
the  second,  which  relates  to  a  different  subject, — the  new  division 
of  the  land, — and  which  ought  to  have  formed  part  of  chap,  xlviii. 
The  vision  contained  in  the  first  twelve  verses  of  this  chapter 
is  a  thing  by  itself,  although  it  stands  in  close  connection  with 


490  EZEKIEL  XLVII.  1-12. 

what  precedes,  and  springs  naturally  oat  of  it.  The  prophet 
has  been  exhibiting,  by  means  of  a  variety  of  detailed  represen 
tations,  the  blessed  results  to  the  Lord's  people  of  his  re-occupy 
ing  his  temple.  The  way  now  stands  open  to  them  for  a  free 
and  elevating  communion  with  the  Lord,  and  the  work  proceeds 
on  their  part  by  the  regular  employment  of  all  spiritual  privi 
leges  and  the  faithful  discharge  of  holy  ministrations ;  God  is 
duly  glorified  in  his  people,  and  his  people  are  blessed  in  the 
enjoyment  of  his  gracious  presence  and  the  benefit  of  his  fatherly 
administration.  But  what  is  to  be  the  nature  of  the  kingdom 
in  tliis  new  form,  in  respect  to  the  world  without?  Is  it  to  be 
of  a  restrictive  or  expansive  character?  Is  the  good  it  discloses 
and  provides  for  a  regenerated  people  to  be  confined,  as  of  old, 
to  a  select  spot,  or  is  it  to  spread  forth  and  communicate  itself 
abroad  for  the  salvation  of  the  world  at  large?  In  an  earlier 
prophecy  (chap,  xvii.),  when  speaking  of  the  future  head  of  the 
Divine  kingdom,  under  the  image  of  a  little  twig,  plucked  from 
the  top  of  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  and  planted  upon  a  lofty  moun 
tain  in  Israel,  the  prophet  had  represented  this  not  only  as 
growing  and  taking  root  there,  but  as  winning  the  regard  of  all 
the  trees  of  the  field,  and  gathering  under  its  ample  foliage 
beasts  of  every  kind  and  birds  of  every  wing.  The  kingdom  of 
God,  as  thus  exhibited,  seemed  to  carry  a  benign  and  diffusive 
aspect  toward  the  entire  world.  And  should  it  be  otherwise 
now,  when  presented  under  the  different  but  more  detailed  and 
variegated  form  of  a  spiritual  house,  with  the  living  God  him 
self  for  the  glorious  inhabitant,  and  a  royal  priesthood  for  its 
ministering  servants?  No;  it  is  for  humanity,  mankind  as  a 
whole,  that  God  was  thus  seen  dwelling  with  men;  and  though 
everything  presents  itself,  according  to  the  relations  then  exist 
ing,  as  connected  with  a  local  habitation  and  circumscribed 
bounds,  yet  the  good  in  store  was  to  be  confined  within  no 
such  narrow  limits ;  it  was  to  flow  forth  with  healthful  and 
restorative  energy,  even  upon  the  waste  and  dead  places  of  the 
earth,  and  invest  them  with  the  freshness  of  life  and  beauty. 

This  fine  idea  is  presented  by  the  prophet  under  a  pleasing 
natural  image.  He  is  brought  back  by  the  angel  from  the  outer 
court,  where  he  was  standing,  to  the  door  of  the  temple  on  the 
east ;  and  there  he  sees  a  stream  of  water  gushing  from  beneath 
the  threshold,  and  running  in  the  direction  of  south-east,  so  as 


VISION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  WATERS.  491 

to  pass  the  altar  on  the  south.  Pie  is  then  brought  outside  by 
the  north  gate,  and  carried  round  to  where  the  waters  appeared 
beyond  the  temple  grounds,  that  he  might  witness  the  measure 
ments  that  were  to  be  made  of  them,  and  the  genial  effects  they 
produced.  But  let  us  take  his  own  account  of  it. 

Ver.  1.  And  he  brought  me  back  to  the  door  of  the  house  ;  and,  behold, 
waters  issued  forth  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  house  eastward  :  for  the 
front  of  the  house  is  to  the  east ;  and  the  waters  descended  from  below,  from 
the  right  side  of  the  house,  on  the  south  of  the  altar.  2.  And  he  brought 
me  forth  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate,  and  led  me  round  by  the  way  with 
out  to  the  outer  gate,  by  the  way  that  looks  eastward  ;  and,  behold,  waters 
were  pouring  forth  on  the  right  side.  3.  And  when  the  man  that  had  the 
line  in  his  hand  went  forth  eastward,  he  measured  a  thousand  cubits ;  and 
he  made  me  pass  through  the  waters — waters  to  the  ankles.  4.  Again  he 
measured  a  thousand,  and  made  me  pass  through  the  waters— waters  to  the 
knees.  Again'he  measured  a  thousand,  and  brought  me  through  waters  to 
the  loins.  5.  Again  he  measured  a  thousand,  it  was  a  river  which  I  could 
not  pass  ;  for  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  for  swimming,  a  river  that  could 
not  be  passed  over.  0.  And  he  said  to  me,  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  it  V 
And  he  led  me  and  brought  me  back  to  the  brink  of  the  river.  7.  And 
when  I  came  back,  behold,  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  very  many  trees  on  the 
one  side  and  the  other.  8.  And  lie  said  to  me,  These  waters  issue  toward 
the  eastern  boundary,  and  descend  upon  the  plain,1  and  go  toward  the  sea; 
hi  the  sea  are  their  out-goings,  and  the  waters  are  healed.  9.  And  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  every  living  creature  which  creeps  whithersoever  the  streams 
go,2  lives ;  and  there  is  a  great  multitude  of  fish,  because  these  waters  go 
thither ;  and  they  shall  be  healed,  and  everything  lives  whithersoever 
the  river  goes.  10.  And  it  comes  to  pass,  that  fishers  shall  stand  upon  it 
from  Engedi  even  unto  En-eglaini ;  3  a  spreading-place  of  nets  shall  they 


1  Perhaps  the  word  should  be  untranslated,  for  the  Arabah  (plain)  is  the 
name  given  at  this  day  to  the  valley  that  lies  around,  and  to  the  south  of 
the  Dead  Sea  (Robinson's  Researches,  ii.  p.  595).     We  can  therefore  have 
no  doubt  that  by  the  sea  is  meant  the  Dead  Sea,  which  also  lies  in  the 
direction  of  the  stream  toward  the  east. 

2  The  dual  here,  Ds^rO   double-stream,  is  peculiar  ;  but  there  is  no  reason 
for  supposing,  with  some,  that  it  is  used  with  reference  to  any  division  in 
the  current  into  two  or  more  branches  ;  for  no  mention  is  made  of  that,  and 
the  word  is  presently,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse,  and  again  in  ver.  1 2, 
used  in  the  singular.     It  is  rather  to  be  understood  of  the  copiousness  of  the 
stream  ;  increasing  at  such  a  rapid  rate,  it  becomes  like  rivers,  though  still 
really  but  one. 

3  The  former  of  these  two  names,  Eugedi,  was  applied  to  the  wilderness 
lying  to  the  west  and  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  where  David  sought  a  place  of 
refuge  from  Saul.     A  fountain,  and  the  remains  of  a  town,  still  exist  under 
that  name,  and  have  been  identified  by  Robinson  (Researches,  ii.  p.  214). 
The  other  place,  En-eglaim,  no  doubt  lay  somewhere  at  a  considerable  dis 
tance  on  the  shores  of  the  same  sea.     The  two  places  appear  to  be  used  as 
boundaries,  comprising  between  them  the  whole  extent  of  the  Dead  Sea. 


492  EZEKIEL  XLVII.  1-12. 

be  ;  their  fish  shall  be  after  their  kind  (i.e.  of  many  sorts),  like  the  fish  of 
the  great  sea  (the  Mediterranean),  very  many.  11.  Its  marshes  and  its 
pits,  which  are  not  healed,  are  given  for  salt.1  12.  And  by  the  river  on 
each  bank  there  shall  come  up  all  trees  for  food,  whose  leaf  shall  not  fade, 
nor  shall  their  fruit  fail ;  every  month  they  bring  forth  afresh  (literally, 
produce  firstlings — in  such  undecaying  vigour  that  they  are  still,  as  it  were, 
yielding  their  first-fruit)  ;  for  their  waters  proceed  from  the  sanctuary 
itself,  and  their  fruit  is  for  food  and  their  leaves  for  healing. 

That  the  description  given  of  this  stream  and  its  effects  must 
be  understood  in  an  ideal  manner,  not  of  any  actual  river,  but, 
like  all  the  rest  of  the  vision,  of  spiritual  things  shadowed  forth 
under  it,  is  so  evident  as  scarcely  to  require  any  proof.  The 
source  of  it  alone  (the  summit  of  an  elevated  mountain),  and 
the  manner  of  its  increase,  should  put  this  beyond  a  doubt  with 
all  who  would  not  convert  the  Bible  into  a  nursery  of  extra 
vagance  and  credulity.  For  a  natural  river  like  this  \vould  of 
necessity  be  in  contravention  of  the  established  laws  of  nature, 
and  could  only  exist  as  a  perpetual  miracle.  Supposing  that 
by  some  new  adjustment  of  the  land  a  stream  might  be  made 
to  rise  on  the  top  of  Mount  Zion,  yet  a  stream  feeding  itself  as 
described  in  the  vision,  and  growing  with  such  rapid  strides,  is 
utterly  at  variance  with  the  known  laws  of  the  material  world. 
For,  it  is  to  be  observed,  the  increase  here  comes  from  no  ex 
traneous  and  incidental  sources  ;  it  is  all  along  the  temple  waters 
that  form  the  river,  and  at  last  empty  themselves  into  the  sea ; 

1  This  verse  tells  us  that  the  sea  had  certain  parts  or  places  about  it  which 
did  not  participate  in  the  general  change,  and  which  were  given  or  appointed 
for  salt.  But  both  the  things  themselves,  and  the  nature  of  the  destination, 
have  been  variously  understood  ;  and  as  usual  in  cases  of  difficulty,  altera 
tions  in  the  text  have  also  been  proposed.  We  must  keep  in  view  the  general 
nature  and  design  of  the  representation.  This  stream  of  life,  flowing  from 
the  dwelling-place  of  God,  images  the  regenerating  efficacy  of  his  grace  and 
word  upon  a  dead  world,  represented  by  the  barren  region  through  which  the 
stream  flows,  and  the  salt  wraters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  into  which  it  empties  itself. 
The  general  result  is  such,  that  the  barren  soil  becomes  in  the  highest  degree 
fertile,  and  even  the  salt  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  are  sweetened  and  made 
capable  of  sustaining  the  greatest  abundance  of  fish.  But  certain  parts  in 
the  neighbourhood — pits  and  marshes,  such  as  the  region  is  known  to  possess, 
and  which  it  is  to  be  understood  the  stream  from  the  temple  does  not  reach — 
remain  still  unhealed,  and  are  therefore  given  to  salt,  the  image  of  what  is 
waste,  bitter,  and  unproductive  in  nature  (Deut.  xxix.  23  ;  Ps.  cvii.  34  ; 
Zeph.  ii.  9).  So  that  the  meaning  is,  in  so  far  as  there  might  be  any  places 
in  the  desert  world  which  should  not  participate  in  the  beneficent  influence, 
these,  if  any,  would  remain  in  their  originally  bad  state — unhealed. 


VISION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  WATERS.  493 

and  yet,  from  being  at  first  but  a  small  streamlet,  these  grow, 
by  self-production,  in  the  space  of  little  more  than  a  mile,  into 
an  unfordable  river  !  To  expect  such  a  prodigy  as  this  on  the 
outward  territory  of  nature  is  plainly  to  identify  the  natural 
with  the  miraculous,  and  confound  the  hopes  of  faith  with  the 
dreams  of  superstition.  The  Bible  does  teach  us  to  look  for 
things  above  nature,  but  never  for  merely  natural  things  against 
the  ascertained  laws  of  nature. 

Issuing  as  this  stream  does  from  the  threshold  of  the  temple, 
from  the  very  foot  of  the  throne  of  God  (comp.  Rev.  xxii.  1),  it 
must  be,  like  all  the  special  manifestations  of  God  to  his  Church, 
itself  of  a  spiritual  nature,  and  only  in  its  effects  productive  of 
outward  material  good.  It  is  just  the  efflux  of  that  infinite 
fulness  of  life  and  blessing  which  is  treasured  up  in  his  spiritual 
temple,  and  continually  pours  itself  forth  as  the  operations  of 
his  grace  proceed  among  men.  It  is  emphatically  a  river  of 
life.  Wherever  it  is  experienced,  the  barren  soil  of  nature  fruc 
tifies,  the  dead  live  again,  the  soul  is  replenished  with  joy  and 
gladness.  And  instead  of  spending,  like  the  streams  of  nature, 
as  it  advances  through  the  moral  deserts  of  the  world,  it  still 
multiplies  and  grows  :  for  it  diffuses  itself  from  heart  to  heart, 
from  family  to  family.  Every  true  recipient  of  grace  becomes  a 
channel  and  instrument  of  grace  to  those  around  him  ;  so  that 
the  more  who  partake  of  the  blessing,  the  more  always  does  the 
region  expand  over  which  the  kingdom  developes  its  resources. 
And  in  proportion  as  these  are  developed,  everything  around 
wears  a  smiling  and  joyous  aspect ;  the  evils  and  disorders  of 
nature  are  rectified  ;  peace  and  order  reign  where  before  were 
the  favourite  haunts  of  wretchedness  and  crime ;  the  very  field 
of  judgment  becomes  a  region  of  life  and  blessing;  until  at  last 
corruption  itself  is  changed  into  incorruption,  mortality  is  swal 
lowed  up  in  life,  and  the  earth,  which  God  had  cursed  for  men's 
sin,  is  transformed  into  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 

Such,  we  have  no  doubt,  is  the  general  import  of  the  vision 
before  us ;  and  to  this  we  must  confine  ourselves.  It  must  be 
contemplated  as  a  whole,  and  not  broken  up  into  fragments  ;  as  if 
we  should  inquire  what  is  to  be  understood  specially  by  the  fish, 
what  by  the  fishers,  what  by  the  trees,  and  so  on.  A  life-giving 
and  ever-increasing  stream  of  heavenly  influence,  proceeding 
from  the  centre  of  the  Divine  kingdom,  and  diffusing  itself  far 


401  EZEKIEL  XLVII.  1-12. 

and  wide  among  men,  is  what  the  prophet  intends  to  exhibit  to 
our  mind;  and  to  give  this  idea  form  and  shape  to  our  apprehen 
sions,  he  must  fill  up  the  picture  with  the  appropriate  signs  and 
manifestations  of  life.  But  to  take  these  up  one  by  one,  and 
adapt  them  to  particular  things  in  the  present  or  future  dispen 
sations  of  God,  can  only  be  an  exercise  of  fancy,  as  likely  to 
mislead  as  to  conduct  to  sound  and  legitimate  conclusions.  Let 
us  rest  in  the  great  reality ;  let  us  rejoice  in  the  thought  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  should  have  coupled,  with  all  the  other 
exhibitions  of  the  Divine  kingdom  given  to  the  prophet,  so 
encouraging  a  prospect  of  its  vivifying,  restorative,  and  expand 
ing  energies;  and  let  it  deepen  the  blessed  conviction  in  our 
bosom,  that  the  purpose  of  God  in  grace  is  fixed  ;  and  that 
mighty  as  the  obstacles  are  which  everywhere  present  them 
selves  to  withstand  its  progress,  it  shall  certainly  not  fail  to 
make  good  its  triumph  over  all  the  disorders  and  corruption  of 
the  world. 

We  simply  add,  in  regard  to  the  relation  of  this  prophecv  to 
others  in  Scripture,  that  there  is  undoubtedly  a  reference  in 
the  whole  passage  to  the  description  in  Gen.  ii.  of  the  garden 
of  Eden  ;  although  it  seems  rather  pushing  the  allusion  too  far, 
when  Hengstenberg,  on  Rev.  xxii.  2,  maintains  the  trees  here 
mentioned  to  be  simply  the  tree  of  life.  The  mention  of  every 
kind  of  tree  for  food  in  ver.  12,  and  the  prominence  given  also 
to  the  abundance  of  fish  in  the  waters,  show  that  there  is  no 
servile  copying  of  the  description  in  Genesis  ;  while  still  it  is 
impossible  not  to  see  that  a  kind  of  new  paradise  was  evidently 
intended  to  be  described  by  the  prophet.  Then  as  he  has,  after 
his  own  manner,  enlarged  and  amplified  the  thought  which  is 
contained  in  such  passages  as  Joel  iii.  18,  Zech.  xiv.  8,  so  his 
delineation  is  again  taken  up  by  the  Evangelist  John,  and  in  his 
peculiar  manner  accommodated  to  express  the  last  grand  issues 
of  God's  kingdom  towards  man:  "And  he  showed  me  a  pure 
river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the 
throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it, 
and  on  either  side  of  the  river,  was  there  the  tree  of  life,  which 
bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  yielded  her  fruit  every  month 
(for  which  Ezekiel  has  all  manner  of  fruit  trees,  bearing 
monthly)  ;  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  are  for  the  healing  of  the 

•/   /    *  O 

nations.     And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse  (corresponding  in 


THE  BOUNDARIES  AND  RE-DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  LAND.         495 

Ezekiel  to  the  beneficent  change  wrought  on  the  doomed 
region  of  the  Dead  Sea)  ;  but  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb  shall  be  in  it,  and  his  servants  shall  serve  him  "  (Kev. 
xxii.  1-3). 


CHAPTER  XL VII.  13-23,  XL VIII. 

THE   BOUNDARIES    AND    RE-DISTRIBUTION    OF   THE    LAND. 

As  the  whole  of  the  representations  contained  in  the  preceding 
parts  of  the  vision  proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  old  covenant,  the 
series   naturally   closes    with    a    re-occupation   of    the   land    of 
Canaan,  which  formed  the  great  objective  promise  of  the  cove 
nant.     A  people  settled  in  the  inheritance  of  their  God  is  the 
proper  result  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  covenant,  and  the 
renewal   of    their    souls    after   its   principles   of    righteousness. 
There   is,    of  course,   no   more   reason    for   understanding   this 
portion  according  to  the  letter  than  those  which  went  before. 
The  whole  vision  is  of  a  piece, — a  pictorial  representation  of  the 
future  things  of  God's  kingdom  under  the  image  of  the  past,  yet 
so  altered  and  adjusted  as  to  indicate  the  vast  superiority  of 
what  was  to  come  compared  with  what  hitherto  had  been.     To 
say,  as  many  in  effect  do,  that  the  part  of  the  vision  which  refers 
to  the  temple  and  its  worship  is  figurative,  while  this,  which 
makes  mention  of  a  re-occupation  of  the  land  by  the  tribes  of 
Israel,    must    be    understood    literally,    is    to    bring    complete 
arbitrariness    and    confusion    into    the    interpretation    of    the 
prophecy.     There  is  the  very  same  reason  for  holding  that  the 
Old  Testament  ritual  of  worship,  with  all  its  carnal  ordinances, 
and  more  than  its  carnal  display  of  outward  pomp,  shall  again 
be  set  up,  as  for  holding  that  the  natural  Israel  shall  again  be 
restored  to  the  possession  of  Canaan,  so  as  to  form  a  peculiar 
commonwealth  of  believers.     And  if  to  maintain  the  one  be  to 
place  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  in  palpable  contrariety 
to  the  apostles  of  the  New,  to  maintain  the  other  by  itself  is  not 
less  evidently  to  mutilate  the  prophetic  record,  and  place  one 
part  of  the  prophetic  testimony  in  virtual  opposition  to  another. 


40  6  EZEK1EL  XLVII.  13-23,  XLVIII. 

Ver.  13.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  This1  shall  be  the  boundary  as  to 
how  ye  shall  inherit  the  land  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel:  Joseph 
two  portions.  14.  And  ye  shall  inherit  it,  one  as  well  as  another,  since  I 
lifted  up  my  hand  to  give  it  to  your  fathers,  and  this  land  has  fallen  to  you 
for  an  inheritance.  15.  And  this  shall  be  the  boundary  of  the  land  on  the 
north  side,  from  the  great  sea  by  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as  one  goes  to  Zedad : 
16.  Hamath,  Berothah,  Sibraim,  which  is  between  the  border  of  Damascus 
and  the  border  of  Hamath  ;  Hazar-hatticon,  which  is  by  the  border  of 
Hauran.  17.  And  from  the  sea  the  boundary  shall  be  Hazar-enan,  the 
border  of  Damascus,  and  the  north  northward,  and  the  border  of  Hamath. 
And  this  is  the  north  side.  18.  And  the  east  side  ye  shall  measure  from 
between  Hauran  and  Damascus,  and  from  between  Gilead  and  the  land  of 
Israel,  the  Jordan,  from  the  boundary  even  to  the  cast  sea.  And  this  is  the 
east  side.  19.  And  the  south  side  southward,  from  Tamar  to  the  waters  of 
Meribah  Kadesh,  to  the  river  on  the  great  sea.  And  this  is  the  south  side 
southward.  20.  And  the  west  side,  the  great  sea,  from  the  boundary  till 
one  comes  over  against  Hamath.  This  is  the  west  side.  21.  And  ye  shall 
divide  this  land  to  you  according  to  the  tribes  of  Israel.  22.  And  it  shall 
be  that  ye  divide  it  by  lot  for  an  inheritance  to  you,  and  to  the  strangers 
that  sojourn  among  you  who  beget  children  among  you  :  and  they  shall  be 
to  you  as  natives  among  the  children  of  Israel ;  they  shall  have  inheritance 
with  you  in  the  midst  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  23.  And  it  shall  be,  that 
in  whatsoever  tribe  the  stranger  sojourns,  there  shall  ye  give  him  his 
inheritance,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

Chap,  xlviii.  ver.  1.  And  these  are  the  names  of  the  tribes.  From  the 
north  end  by  the  way  of  Hethlon,  as  one  goes  to  Hamath,  Hazar-enan,  the 
border  of  Damascus  northward,  to  the  boundary  of  Hamath ;  and  it  is  for 
him  the  east  and  the  west  side :  Dan  one  (viz.  one  portion).  2.  And  on 
Dan's  boundary,  from  the  east  side  to  the  west  side,  As'her  one.  3.  And  by 
the  boundary  of  Asher,  from  the  east  to  the  west  side,  Naphtali  one.  4. 
And  by  the  boundary  of  Naphtali,  from  the  east  to  the  west  side,  Manasseh 
one.  5.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Manasseh,  from  the  east  to  the  west  side, 
Ephraim  one.  G.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Ephraim,  from  the  east  to  the 
west  side,  Reuben  one.  7.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Reuben,  from  the  east 
to  the  west  side,  Judah  one.  8.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Judah,  from  the 
east  to  the  west  side,  shall  be  the  offering,  which  ye  shall  offer  of  five  and 
twenty  thousand  (rods)  in  breadth,  and  in  length  as  one  of  the  portions,  from 
the  east  side  to  the  west  side:  and' the  sanctuary  shall  lie  in  the  midst  of  it. 
9.  The  oblation  that  ye  shall  offer  to  Jehovah,  of  five  and  twenty  thousand 
in  length,  and  of  ten  thousand  in  breadth.  10.  And  for  these  shall  be  the 
holy  oblation :  for  the  priests,  on  the  north  25,000,  toward  the  west  10,000 
broad,  and  toward  the  east  10,000  broad,  and  toward  the  south  25,000  long; 
and  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  it.  11.  For  the  priests 
that  are  sanctified,  of  the  sons  of  Zadok,  who  have  kept  my  charge,  who  have 
not  gone  astray  when  the  children  of  Israel  went  astray,  as  the  Levites  went 
astray.  12.  And  the  oblation  of  the  land  that  is  offered  shall  be  to  them  a 
holy  of  holies  by  the  boundary  of  the  Levites.  13.  And  over  against  the 
boundary  of  the  priests,  the  Levites  (shall  have)  25,000  in  length,  and  10,000 
in  breadth;  the  whole  length  25,000,  and  the  breadth  10,000.  14.  And 
they  shall  not  sell  of  it,  nor  exchange,  nor  alienate  the  first-fruits  of  the  land ; 


1  The  H3  here  we  take,  with  our  translators,  and  the  greater  part  of 
commentators,  to  be  a  corruption  for  nf ;  so  also  the  Septuagint,  Vulgate, 
and  Chaldee. 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  WATERS.  49  7 

for  it  is  holy  to  Jehovah.  15.  And  the  5000  that  are  left  in  breadth  over 
against  the  25,000  shall  be  a  profane  place  for  the  city,  for  dwelling,  and  for 
suburbs ;  and  the  city  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  it.  16.  And  these  shall  be  its 
measures :  the  north  side  4500,  and  the  south  side  4500,  and  on  the  east 
side  4500,  and  the  west  side  4500.  17.  And  the  suburbs  of  the  city  shall  be 
toward  the  north  250,  and  toward  the  south  250,  and  toward  the  east  250, 
and  toward  the  west  250.  18.  And  what  is  left  in  length  over  against  the 
holy  oblation,  10,000  eastward,  and  10,000  westward :  and  it  shall  be  over 
against  the  holy  oblation,  and  its  produce  shall  be  for  food  to  the  servants  of 
the  city.  19.  And  for  the  service  of  the  city,  they  shall  serve  it  out  of  all 
the  tribes  of  Israel.  20.  The  whole  oblation  shall  be  25,000  by  25,000  ;  ye 
shall  offer  the  holy  oblation  four-square,  together  with  the  possession  of  the 
city.  21.  And  the  residue  shall  belong  to  the  prince,  on  the  one  side  and  on 
the  other  of  theJioly  oblation,  and  of  the  possession  of  the  city;  over  against 
the  25,000  of  the  oblation  toward  the  east  border;  and  westward  over  against 
the  25,000  toward  the  west  border,  over  against  the  portions  for  the  prince  ; 
and  it  shall  be  the  holy  oblation,  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  house  in  the  midst 
of  it.  22.  And  from  the  possession  of  the  Levites,  from  the  possession  of 
the  city,  in  the. midst  of  what  is  the  prince's,  between  the  boundary  of  Judah 
and  the  boundary  of  Benjamin — to  the  prince  shall  it  belong.  23.  And  for 
the  rest  of  the  tribes,  from  the  east  side  to  the  west  side,  Benjamin  one. 
24.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Benjamin,  from  the  east  side  to  the  west  side, 
Simeon  one.  25.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Simeon,  from  the  east  side  to  the 
west  side,  Issachar  one.  26.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Issachar,  from  the  east 
side  to  the  west  side,  Zebulun  one.  27.  And  by  the  boundary  of  Zebulun, 
from  the  east  side  to  the  west  side,  Gad  one.  28.  And  by  the  boundary  of 
Gad,  at  the  south  side  southward,  the  boundary  shall  be — from  Tamar,  the 
waters  of  Meribah  Kadesh,  to  the  river  upon  the  great  sea.  29.  This  is  the 
land  which  ye  shall  divide  by  lot  to  the  tribes  of  Israel  for  an  inheritance ; 
and  these  are  their  portions,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah.  30.  And  these  are  the 
goings  out  of  the  city  on  the  north  side,  4500  measures.  31.  And  the  gates 
of  the  city  shall  be  after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel:  three  gates  north 
ward;  the  gate  of  Reuben,  one;  the  gate  of  Judah,  one;  the  gate  of  Levi,  one. 
32.  And  at  the  east  side  4500  measures  :  and  three  gates ;  the  gate  of  Joseph, 
one ;  the  gate  of  Benjamin,  one ;  the  gate  of  Dan,  one.  33.  And  at  the^ 
south  side  4500  measures :  and  three  gates ;  the  gate  of  Simeon,  one  ;  the 
gate  of  Issachar,  one  ;  the  gate  of  Zebulun,  one.  34.  At  the  west  side,  4500 
(measures)  :  their  three  gates ;  the  gate  of  Gad,  one ;  the  gate  of  Asher, 
one ;  the  gate  of  Naphtali,  one.  35.  The  circumference  18,000 ;  and  the 
name  of  the  city  thenceforth  Jehovah-shammah  (Jehovah  thither).1 

The  concluding  portion  of  chap,  xlvii.  is  nearly  all  occupied 
with  the  boundaries  of  the  land,  which  seem  to  be  substantially 
the  same  with  those  originally  given  by  Moses  in  Num.  xxxiv., 
though  the  names  mentioned  to  some  extent  differ.  It  is  to  be 
noted,  however,  that  in  the  fair  and  natural  construction  of  the 
words,  it  is  only  Canaan  proper,  exclusive  of  what  was  given 
to  the  two  tribes  and  a  half  beyond  Jordan,  which  forms 

1  Not  precisely  "  Jehovah  there; "  for  the  n —  cannot  be  sunk,  as  Heng- 
stenberg  has  remarked  on  Hos.  iii.  17.  The  exact  import  is  thither,  or 
thereupon. 

2  I 


41)3  EZEK1EL  XLVII.  13-23. 

here  the  inheritance  to  be  divided.  For  the  eastern  boundary 
runs  (ver.  18)  "  from  between  Hauran  and  Damascus,  and 
from  between  Gilead  and  the  land  of  Israel,  the  Jordan,  from 
the  border  unto  the  east  sea."  We  can  make  no  intelligible 
sense  of  this,  unless  it  means  that  the  boundary-line  on  the 
east  was  to  be  cut  off  by  Hauran  and  Gilead,  and  go  straight 
down  to  the  Dead  Sea  by  the  valley  of  Jordan.  And  this  is 
confirmed  by  comparing  Num.  xxxiv.  11,  12,  where  the  border 
is  also  said  to  go  down  by  Jordan  and  the  Salt  Sea ;  while 
immediately  afterwards  (ver.  13),  it  is  stated  that  ihe  land  thus 
bounded  is  what  was  to  be  allotted  to  the  nine  tribes  and  a  half. 
What  the  prophet  here,  therefore,  describes  as  the  land,  is  strictly 
and  properly  Canaan  within  Jordan,  which  was  the  original 
inheritance  promised.  We  did  not  urge  this  point  in  our  pre 
liminary  remarks  on  this  last  vision,  lest  we  should  seem  to  press 
the  matter  too  far,  but  allowed  that  the  prophet  might  include 
all  that  Israel  ever  occupied.  There  is  really,  however,  no  ground 
for  supposing  this ;  and  if  we  abide  by  what  seems  the  plain 
boundary-line  of  the  prophet,  the  statement  of  Lightfoot  becomes 
in  both  parts  quite  correct, — that  the  site  of  the  prophet's  temple 
is  larger  than  all  ancient  Jerusalem,  and  his  central  portion  for 
the  city,  prince,  and  priesthood  larger  than  all  the  land  of 
Canaan  as  described  by  himself. 

The  territory  to  be  divided  being  thus  obviously  viewed  in  an 
ideal  light,  the  division  itself  is  conducted  in  the  same  manner, 
— not  as  it  ever  could  have  taken  place  in  the  r.eality,  but  after 
rule  and  measure,  in  exact  and  regular  portions  running  along 
side  of  each  other  the  whole  breadth  from  west  to  east,  and 
standing  in  a  common  relation  to  the  temple  in  the  centre. 
Seven  of  the  tribes  have  their  portions  on  the  north,  on  account 
of  the  greater  stretch  of  the  land  in  that  direction  with  respect 
to  the  actual  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  following  order: — Dan,  Asher, 
Naphtali,  Manasseh,  Ephraim,  Reuben,  Judah ;  the  latter  having 
its  place  close  by  the  central  portion  on  the  north,  as  Benjamin 
had  on  its  south.  This  honour  appears  to  have  been  given  to 
these  two  tribes  in  consideration  of  their  relative  historical  supe 
riority,  having  so  long  adhered  to  the  temple  and  ordinances  of 
God,  when  the  others  deserted  them.  Dan,  on  the  contrary,  was 
placed  at  the  extreme  north,  on  account  of  the  low  religious 
character  of  the  tribe,  precisely  as  John,  in  representing  the  whole 


THE  BOUNDARIES  AND  RE-DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  LAND.         499 

elect  Church  by  twelve  thousand  from  the  several  tribes  of  Israel, 
leaves  Dan  out  altogether  (Rev.  vii.).  As  there  were  actually 
thirteen  tribes,  he  finds  his  12  times  12  by  omitting  Dan,  whose 
idolatrous  and  semi-heathen  character  made  it  border  morally,  as 
it  did  locally,  on  the  Gentiles.  Here  the  two  tribes  of  Joseph 
are  thrown  into  one,  to  admit  of  Dan's  having  a  place,  but  it  is 
still  the  lowest  place  in  the  ideal  territory  of  a  blessed  world. 
With  these  exceptions,  we  can  discern  no  specific  grounds  for 
the  particular  places  assigned  to  the  tribes  respectively.  The 
order  on  the  south  side  was,  Benjamin,  Simeon,  Issachar, 
Zebulon,  Gad.  But  the  city,  the  temple,  the  prince,  and  priest 
hood,  with  their  respective  portions,  being  situated  precisely  in 
the  middle,  and  not  within  the  boundaries  of  any  of  the  tribes, 
was  intended  to  intimate  that  all  were  now  to  be  regarded  as 

O 

having  a  common  interest  in  them,  and  that  the  miserable  and 
mischievous  jealousies  which  had  of  old  exercised  so  disastrous 
an  influence,  especially  between  Judah  and  Ephraim,  should 
finally  and  for  ever  cease.  All  now  should  stand  related  as  a 
united  and  compact  brotherhood  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord, 
from  which,  as  a  central  fountairihead  of  life  and  blessing,  there 
should  continually  stream  forth  manifestations  of  grace  to  all 
the  people.1 

The  desire  of  giving  due  prominence  to  the  sacred  portions 
in  the  centre  leads  the  prophet  again  to  enter  into  some  state 
ments  regarding  the  Terumah,  or  oblation,  and  its  subdivisions. 
Nothing  of  importance  is  added  to  what  was  said  before,  except 
that  the  5000  rods  apportioned  out  of  the  25,000  square  to  the 

1  In  chap,  xlvii.  22,  23,  provision  is  also  made  for  the  strangers  who 
should  come  and  join  themselves  to  the  Lord:  these,  it  was  ordered,  should  be 
treated  as  Israelites,  and  have  an  inheritance  like  the  rest.  It  is  merely  a 
trait  thrown  in  to  show  how  the  spiritual  community  of  the  Lord  would  now 
form  a  point  of  attraction  to  others,  and  how  also,  instead  of  repelling  these, 
they  were  to  give  them  free  access  to  the  highest  privileges,  as  the  provision 
to  be  made  was  to  be  large  enough  for  all,  and  none  need  envy  another. 
Easily  understood  on  the  spiritual  interpretation,  but  quite  inexplicable  on 
the  literal;  for,  as  within  the  bounds  mentioned  it  is  impossible  to  under 
stand  how  even  the  members  of  the  different  tribes  could  be  accommodated, 
what  room  could  be  found  for  an  influx  of  strangers  ?  The  notice  is 
intelligible  only  if  understood  as  intimating  that  the  distinction  of  Jew  and 
Gentile  should  be  abolished,  and  that  the  whole  believing  world  should  be 
one,  and  their  name  one. 


500  EZEKIEL  XLVII.  13-23,  XLVIII. 

city  is  here  laid  off  in  a  square  of  4500,  with  the  250  all  round 
for  suburbs.  This  space  for  the  city  was  not  strictly  holy  ground, 
in  the  sense  that  the  sacerdotal  portions  were,  and  hence  it  is 
called  profane  or  common.  But  being  thus  immediately  con 
nected  with  the  sacred  portions,  and  standing  apart  from  the 
individual  tribes,  the  city  built  on  it  formed  a  fit  and  proper 
centre  to  the  whole  land, — in  its  position  and  its  structure  the 
beau-ideal  of  a  theocratic  capital,  encompassed  by  the  most  hal 
lowed  influences,  and  fitted  to  exert  a  uniting  and  healthful  effect 
upon  the  entire  community.  Hence  the  prophet  closes  the  de 
scription  by  the  mention  of  some  things  regarding  the  city  which 
might  serve  more  deeply  to  impress  the  feeling  of  its  being  the 
suitable  representative  and  common  centre  of  the  community. 
Itself  occupying  a  central  position,  and  immediately  in  front  of 
the  house  of  God,  it  was  also  to  have  twelve  gates,  bearing  the 
names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel,  in  token  that 
all  the  family  of  faith  had  their  representation  in  it,  and,  as  if 
they  were  actually  resident  in  it,  stood  before  the  Lord  for  the 
enjoyment  of  his  favour  and  blessing.  He  specifies,  again,  the 
entire  circumference  of  the  city,  18, 000  rods  (between  twenty  and 
thirty  miles),  as  a  symbol  of  the  immense  numbers  of  the  covenant- 
people  under  the  new  and  better  dispensation  of  the  future, 
immeasurably  transcending  what  had  existed  under  the  old.  And 
to  exhibit  the  character  of  the  city  itself,  as  representative  of  the 
community  at  large  and  indicative  of  its  own  relative  position, 
it  was  to  bear  from  that  day,  namely,  from  the  period  of  the 
beginning  of  this  new  and  better  order  of  things,  the  honourable 
name  of  u  Jehovah-Shammah" — not,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
Jehovah- there,  but  Jehovah-thither,  or  thereupon ;  for  it  was 
in  the  temple,  rather  than  in  the  city,  that  the  Lord  was  repre 
sented  as  having  his  peculiar  dwelling-place.  But  his  eyes  were 
to  be  ever  from  the  temple  toward  the  city,  and  again  from  the 
city  toward  the  whole  land.  The  manifestations  of  his  love  and 
goodness  were  to  radiate  from  the  chosen  seat  of  the  kingdom 
through  all  its  borders :  he  in  all,  and  all  united  and  blessed  in 
him.  So  that  the  consummation  of  this  vision  substantially  cor 
responds  with  the  object  prayed  for  by  our  Lord  when  he  sought 
respecting  his  people  that  they  might  be  where  he  was,  and  that 
they  might  be  all  one,  as  he  and  the  Father  are  one, — he  in 
them  and  they  in  him,  that  they  might  be  made  perfect  in  one. 


CONCLUSION.  501 

Thus  ends  the  marvellous  vision  of  the  prophet, — alike  mar 
vellous  whether  we  look  to  the  lofty  pattern  (true  in  the  spirit, 
though  unavoidably  wearing  the  garb  of  imperfect  forms  and 
shadowy  relations)  which  it  embodied  of  better  things  to  come 
in  God's  kingdom,  or  to  the  time  chosen  for  presenting  this  to 
the  Church  of  God.  The  cause  of  Heaven  was  then  at  its  lowest 
ebb.  The  temple  that  had  been,  together  with  the  kingdom  it 
symbolized  and  represented,  were  laid  in  ruins ;  they  were  to  be 
seen  only  in  broken  fragments  and  mournful  dilapidations,  as 
if  smitten  with  the  powerful  curse  of  an  irrecoverable  perdition. 
Yet  from  the  midst  of  these  howling  desolations,  as  from  the  very 
"suburbs  of  hell,"  the  prophet  ascends,  with  assured  step,  the 
mount  of  vision,  and  has  there  exhibited  to  his  view,  not,  indeed, 
the  very  image  of  better  things  to  come,  but  the  ideal  pattern 
after  which  the  blessed  and  glorious  future  was  to  be  fashioned. 
He  even  sees  it  as  already  present ;  and,  with  such  imperfect 
materials  of  thought  and  utterance  as  then  stood  at  his  com 
mand,  he  gives  it  forth  to  the  Church  and  the  world  as  a 
thing  which  his  own  eyes  had  beheld,  showing  how  God  would 
certainly  dwell  with  his  people  in  a  manner  he  had  never  done 
before, — how  he  would  at  once  immeasurably  extend  the  sphere 
of  his  kingdom  and  greatly  elevate  the  condition  of  those  who 
belonged  to  it, — and  how,  through  the  copious  effusions  of  his 
life-giving  Spirit,  the  former  imperfections  should  be  done  away, 
the  most  remote  regions  of  the  Divine  territory  hallowed  and 
blessed,  and  even  the  peculiar  haunts  of  cursing  and  desolation 
made  to  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  rose. 

"  0  scenes  surpassing  fable,  and  yet  true ! 
Scenes  of  accomplished  bliss!  which  who  can  see, 
Though  but  in  distant  prospect,  and  not  feel 
His  soul  refreshed  with  foretaste  of  the  joy  ? '' 

That  such  scenes  should  have  been  described  with  such  assured 
confidence,  and  at  a  time  so  deeply  overspread  with  gloom,  was 
indeed  an  ennobling  triumph  of  faith  over  sight.  It  gave  a 
most  illustrious  proof  of  the  height  in  spiritual  discernment  and 
far-reaching  insight  into  the  purposes  of  Heaven  which  is  some 
times  imparted  in  the  hour  of  greatest  need,  especially  to  the 
more  select  instruments  of  .the  Spirit's  working.  And  surely 
the  children  of  the  kingdom  now  must  be  chargeable  with 
neglecting  an  important  privilege,  if  they  fail  to  profit  by  so 


CONCLUSION. 

inspiriting  an  example.  Here  the  heart  of  faith  is  taught 
never  to  despair, — not  even  in  the  darkest  seasons.  And  when 
it  is  seen  how  much  of  the  scheme  delineated  in  the  prophetic 
vision  has  already  been  accomplished,  should  not  believers  feel 
encouraged  to  look  and  strive  for  its  complete  realization,  assured 
that  God  is  ready  to  hear  their  cry,  and  to  second  with  the  aid 
of  his  Spirit  the  efforts  that  are  made  to  dispossess  and  drive 
out  the  hostile  powers  that  continue  to  linger  in  his  kingdom. 
It  is  theirs,  if  they  feel  thus,  not  only  to  contend  in  the  best 
of  causes,  but  also  with  the  surest  prospect  of  success  ;  for  the 
Lord  himself  is  upon  their  side,  and  his  wrord  of  promise  must 
be  established. 

"Thus  heavenward  all  things  tend.     For  all  were  once 
Perfect,  and  all  must  be  at  length  restored. 
So  God  has  greatly  purposed;  who  would  else 
In  his  dishonoured  works  himself  endure 
Dishonour,  and  be  wronged  without  redress! 
— Come,  then,  and,  added  to  thy  many  crowns, 
Receive  yet  one  as  radiant  as  the  rest, 
Due  to  thy  last  and  most  effectual  work, 
Thy  word  fulfilled,  the  conquest  of  a  world." 


INDEX 


TO  SOME  OF  THE  MORE  LEADING  TOPICS  DISCUSSED  IN  THE 
VOLUME. 


Adonis,  his  worship  introduced 
into  Judea,  ...  89 

Aholah  and  Aholibah,  why  used 
as  designations  of  Israel  and 
Judah, 254 

Amrnon,  its  guilt  and  doom,          .   272 

Amorites,  sometimes  put  for  in 
habitants  of  Canaan  generally,  .  163 

Angels  of  the  Lord,  the  peculiar 
office  of,  .  .  .  .  .96 

Assyria,  its  greatness  and  fall,       .    340 

Assyrians,  their  fondness  for  co 
loured  and  gay  attire,  .  .  252 

Canaan  proper,  only  what  lay  with 
in  the  Jordan,  ....  498 

Canaan,  in  what  sense  in  the  mid 
dle  of  the  nations,  .  .  68,  417 

Canaan  under  David,  typical  of  the 
earth  generally  under  Christ,  .  410 

Ohasmal,  what  meant  by,      .          .      26 

Cherubim,  their  appearance  arid 
office,  .  .  .-  .  30,32 

Creeping  tilings,  as  objects  of  wor 
ship,  introduced  from  Egypt,  .  87 

Daniel,  his  proper  work  and  calling,     18 

Daniel,  his  high  and  early  reputa 
tion,  151 

David,  why  so  emphatically  called 
God's  servant,  ....  372 

David,  his  reign,  in  what  sense 
perpetual,  .  .  .  .409 

Divination  by  liver  and  arrows,     .   288 

Edom,  its  guilt  and  doom,  .  .  276 
Egypt,  its  pride  and  judgment,  .  321 
Egypt,  its  forty  years'  desolation, 

how  to  be  understood,        .         .   326 
Egypt,    its  ancient    as   compared 

with  its  modern  resources,  .  334 
Egpyt,  its  downfall  to  be  under 
stood  of  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  348 
Egyptians,  why  called  great  of  flesh,  159 
Escaped,  what  meant  by,  .  .357 
Ezekiel,  his  call  to  the  prophetic 

office, 18 

Ezekiel,  his  priestly  prophetic, 
work,  .  .  .  .  8,  25 


Ezekiel,  his  active  energy, 
Ezekiel,  his  style  and  diction, 


PAUK 

4 
10 


Faith,  the  peculiar  dangers  to  whi«:h 

it  is  exposed  in  the  latter  days,     124 
Fire,  a  symbol  of  divine  wrath,    32,  84 
Future  things  in  God's  kingdom 
necessarily  predicted  under  the 
form  and  image  of  the  past,        .   374 

Gog,  the  name  how  formed,  .  .  421 
Gog,  his  place,  and  the  nature  of 

his  assault,  .  .  .421,  426 
Goat-worship  practised  in  Egypt, 

and  adopted  by  Israelites  there,  214 
Grace  of  God,  its  expansive  and 

growing  nature,          .          .          .    49-5 


Heathen,  the  connection  between 
their  judgment  and  that  of  the 
Church, 270 

Hittites,  sometimes  taken  as  re 
presentatives  of  all  the  Canaan- 
ites, 16:5 

Iniquity-bearing,  vision  of    .         .     45 

Iniquity -bearing,  what  meant  by 
the  term,  ....  50 

Inspiration  allows  free  play  to  the 
human  faculties,  .  .  5,  186 

Inspiration,  the  objective  in,  the 
foundation  of  all,  .  .  .  13o 

Israel,  their  high  spiritual  calling 
in  Canaan,  .  .  .  .69 

Israel,  their  blessing  in  Canaan 
dependent  on  spiritual  rather 
than  on  outward  things,  .  .167 

Israel,  their  peculiar  glory,  as  re 
gards  Christian  times,  .  .411 

Jealousy,  image  of,  what,      .         .84 
Jews,  their  dispersion  among  the 
Gentiles  preparatory  for  Chris 
tianity,     113 

Magog,  what  region  meant  by,      .   415 

Meseeh, 415 

Moab,  its  guilt  and  doom,     .         .275 


504 


INDEX. 


Mourning,  IIOAV  usually  expressed 
in  Israel, 264 

Pharaoh,  his  power  first  broken  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  .  .  .  339 

Philistines,  their  guilt  and  doom,    279 

Predictions  of  the  future,  often 
thrown  into  the  form  of  the 
past,  .  .  58,  176,  375,  390 

Priestly  and  royal  dignities  des 
tined  to  a  long  abasement  in 
Israel, 244 

Promises  sometimes  conditional,    .   398 

Prophecy,  the  distinction  between 
false  and  true,  .  .  .  .131 

Prophecy,  false,  among  God's  in 
struments  of  chastisement,  .  147 

Prophets,  the  existence  of  the  false 
as  well  as  the  true  in  Judea,  .  126 

Prophets,  necessity  of  personal 
holiness  for  the  true,  .  .135 

Prophetesses,  false,        .         .         .137 

Punishment  of  children  for  fathers, 
how  to  be  understood,  .  .192 

Rainbow,  its  symbolical  import,    .     33 

Responsibility  of  individuals  for 
themselves,  the  doctrine  of  both 
Testaments,  .  .  .  .191 

Resurrection,  the  prevalence  and 
antiquity  of  the  belief  of,  in 
Israel, 404 

Righteous,  their  security  in  times 
of  judgment,  .  .  .  .97 

Righteousness,  its  retributive  cha 
racter,  .  .  ...  .190 

Righteousness  of  God,  its  inflexi 
bility,  360 

Roll,  what  meant  by  being  eaten,      37 

Sabbath,  its  importance  for  Israel, 
and  for  all  times,  .  .  .217 


Sanctuary,  in  what  sense  God 
became  such  to  the  exiles,  .  114 

Sealing,  its  symbolical  import,      .     97 

Shepherds,  who  meant  by,  in 
ancient  Israel,  ....  368 

Sidon,  her  judgment,    .         .         .   316 

Sin,  how  sometimes  made  the 
punishment  of  sin,  .  .  147,221 

Skirt,  to  spread  it  over  one,  a  figur 
ative  expression  for  marriage,  .  158 

Sodom,  what  meant  by  the  return 
ing  of  her  captivity,  .  .  .175 

Square  form  of  the  temple-build 
ings,  its  symbolical  import,  .  470 

Superstition,  its  close  affinity  with 
unbelief, 92 

Teraphim,  instruments  of  idolatry,  238 

Trees,  green  and  dry,  symbolical 
of  righteous  and  wicked,  .  .  231 

Turning  again  the  captive,  a  pro 
verbial  expression,  .  .  .162 

Tyre,  its  guilt  and  doom,      .         .  281 

Tyre,  the  part  taken  by  Nebuchad 
nezzar  in  its  downfall,  .  .  288 

Tyre,  the  former  extent  and  great 
ness  of  her  commerce,  .  .  299 

Tyre,  the  king  of,  personified  as 
ideal  humanity  in  its  best  and 
worst, 305 


Usury,  why  and  how  far  condemned 
in  Scripture,      .         .         .         .195 


Watchman,  why  the  prophet  Ezekiel 
so  designated,  .  .  .  .41 

Watchman,  his  office  as  such  more 
fully  described,  .  .  .354 

Wilderness,  what  meant  l>y  Israel 
being  sent  back  thither,  .  .  226 


THE  END. 


T.  and  T.  Claries  Publications. 


Stevenson  (Mrs.) — THE   SYMBOLIC  PARABLES  ;   or,  The  Church,  the 

World,  and  the  Antichrist :  Being  the  Separate  Predictions  of  the  Apocalypse 
viewed  in  their  relation  to  the  General  Truths  of  Scripture.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Steward  (Rev.  G.) — MEDIATORIAL  SOVEREIGNTY  :  The  Mystery  of  Christ 
and  the  Revelation  of  the  Old  and  K"e\v  Testaments.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  ARGUMENT  OF   THE  EPISTLE   TO   THE    HEBREWS.     A 

Posthumous  Work.     Svo,  10s.  Od. 

Stewart  (Dugald) — THE  COLLECTED  WORKS  OF.     Edited  by  Sir  "War. 

HAMILTON,  Bart.     Eleven  vols.  Svo,  12s.  each. 

Stier  (Dr.  Rudolph)— ON  THE  WORDS  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS.     Eight 

vols.  Svo,  £4,  4s.     Separate  volumes  may  "be  had,  price  10s.  6d. 

In  order  to  briny  this  rnJuable  Work  more  within  the  reach  of  all  Classes,  both 
Clerrjy  and  Laity,  Messrs.  Clark  continue  to  supply  the  E'ujht-volmnc  Edition  bound 
in  Foun  at  the  Original  Subscription  price  of  £2,  2#. 

THE  WORDS  OF  THE  RISEN  SAVIOUR,  AND  COMMENTARY  ON 


TUP:  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JAMES.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

-  THE  WORDS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  EXPOUNDED.     Svo,  10s.  Cd. 


Thiersch  (Dr.  H.  W.  J.) — ON  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH.   Svo,  7s.  Gd. 
Tholuck  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN. 

Svo,  9s. 

EXPOSITION  OF  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.   Two  vols. 

fcap.  Svo,  Ss. 

LIGHT   FROM   THE  CROSS  :    Sermons  on  the  Passion  of  Our 

Lord.     Third  Edition,  crown  Svo,  5s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT.    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Ullinann  (Dr.  Carl) — REFORMERS  BEFORE  THE  REFORMATION,  princi 
pally  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands.  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  SINLESSNESS  OF  JESUS  :    An  Evidence  for  Christianity. 

Third  Edition,  crown  Svo,  6s. 

Urwick   (W.,   M.A.) — THE  SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH  :   A  Commentary, 

Grammatical   and  Critical,  upon  Isaiah  Hi.   13-liii.  12  ;    with  Dissertations 
upon  the  Authorship  of  Isaiah  xl.-lxvi.     Svo,  6s. 

Vinet  (Professor) — STUDIES  ON  BLAISE  PASCAL.     Crown  Svo,  os. 
—  PASTORAL  THEOLOGY.     Second  Edition,  post  Svo,  3s.  Gd. 

HOMILETICS;  The  Theory  of  Preaching.    Second  Edit.,  Svo,  9s. 

White  (Rev.  M.)— THE  SYMBOLICAL  NUMBERS  OF  SCRIPTURE.    Crown 

Sv     4s, 

Winer  (Dr.  G.  B.).— A  TREATISE  ON  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  NEW  TESTA 
MENT  GREEK,  regarded  as  the  Basis  of  New  Testament  Exegesis.  Second 
Edition,  edited  by  W.  F.  MOULTON,  D.D.  Eighth  English  Edition,  Svo,  15s. 

A  COMPARATIVE  VIEW  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  AND  CONFESSIONS 

OF  THE  VARIOUS  COMMUNITIES  OF  CHRISTENDOM,  with  Illustrations  from 
their  Original  Standards.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Wuttke  (Professor) — CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  12s.  6d. 


io  T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 

NEW   SERIES 

OF   THE 

FOREIGN    THEOLOGICAL   LIBRARY, 


The  Issue  for  1880  comprises — 

GODET'S  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS.    Vol.  I. 
HAGENBACH'S  HISTORY  OF  DOCTRINES.    Vols.  I.  and  II. 
DORNER'S  SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINES.     VoL  I. 

77/6'  First  Issue  for  iSSi,  to  be  published  shortly^  will  comprise — 

GODET'S   COMMENTARY   ON    THE   EPISTLE   OF   ST.    PAUL  TO  THE  ROMANS. 

Vol.  II. 

DORNER'S  SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINES.     Vcl.  II.     Or, 
HAGENBACH'S  HISTORY  OF  DOCTRINES.     Vcl.  III. 


The  FOREIGN  THEOLOGICAL  LIBRARY  was  commenced  in  1846,  and 
from  that  time  to  this  Four  Volumes  yearly  (or  136  in  all)  have  appeared 
with  the  utmost  regularity. 

The  Publishers  have  decided  to  begin  a  NEW  SERIES  with  1880,  and 
so  give  an  opportunity  to  many  to  subscribe  who  are  possibly  deterred 
by  the  extent  of  the  former  Series. 

With  this  view,  Messrs.  CLARK  beg  to  announce  as  in  preparation 

BISHOP  MARTENSEN'S  CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     (Special  Ethics.) 
KKEIBIG'S  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  ON  THE  FOUNDATION  OF 

CHRISTIAN  CONSCIOUSNESS. 
DR.  KEIL'S  HANDBOOK  OF  BIBLICAL  ARCHEOLOGY. 

From  time  to  time  other  works  will  be  added  to  this  list ;  but  the 
Publishers  are  sanguine  enough  to  believe  that  a  Series  containing  the 
works  of  writers  so  eminent,  upon  the  most  important  subjects,  cannot 
fail  to  secure  support. 

The  Binding  of  the  Series  is  modernized,  so  as  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  former  Series. 

The  Subscription  Price  will  remain  as  formerly,  2 is.  annually  for 
Four  Volumes,  payable  in  advance. 

The  following  Volumes  formed  Issue  for  1879,  being  completing  year 
of  former  Series : — 

Philippi's  Commentary  on  the  Romans.    Vol.  II. 

Hagenbach's  History  of  the  Reformation.    Vol.  II. 

Steinmeyer's  History  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord.    One  Volume. 

Haupt's  Commentary  on  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John.    One  Volume. 

A  Selection  of  20  Volumes  may  be  had  at  the  Subscription  Price  of 
Five  Guineas,  from  the  works  issued  in  former  Series  (previous  to  1877). 

[See  next  page. 


FOREIGN    THEOLOGICAL    LIBRARY, 

ANNUAL  SUBSCRIPTION  :   One  Guinea  for  Four  Volumes,  Demy  8vo. 

N.B.  —  Any  two  Years  in  this  Series  can  be  had  at  Subscription  Price.  A  single  Year's 
Books  (except  in  the  case  of  the  current  Year)  cannot,  be  supplied  separately.  Non- 
subscribers,  price  Ids.  6d.  each  volume,  with  exceptions  marked. 


186  4—  kaKge  on   the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     Two  Volumes. 

Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  the  Pentateuch.     Vols.   I.  and  II. 
186   5—  Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  the  Pentateuch.     Vol.  III. 

Hengstenberg  on  the  Gospel  of  John.     Two  Volumes. 

Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  Joshua,  Judges,  and  Ruth.     One  Volume. 
186   6  —  Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  Samuel.     One  Volume. 

Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  Job.     Two  Volumes. 

Martensen's  System  of  Christian  Doctrine.     One  Volume. 
1867  —  Delitzsch  on  Isaiah.     Two  Volumes. 

Delitzsch  on  Biblical  Psychology,     (lls.}     One  Volume. 

Auberlen   on   Divine   Revelation.     One  Volume. 

186  8  —  Keil'  s  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.     Two  Volumes. 

Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Vol.   I. 
Harless'   System  of  Christian  Ethics.     One  Volume. 
1869  —  Hengstenberg  on  Ezekiel.     One   Volume. 

Stier  on  the  Words  of  the  Apostles.  One  Volume. 
Keil'  s  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.  Vol.  I. 
Bleek's  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament.  Vol.  I. 

187  0  —  Keil's  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.     Vol.   II. 

Bleek's  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament.     Vol.   II. 
Schmid's  New  Testament  Theology.     One  Volume. 
Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Vol.  II. 
•J371  —  Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.     Three  Volumes. 

Hengstenberg'  s  Kingdom  of  God  under  the  Old  Testament.     Vol.  I. 
1    3  7   2  —  Keil'  s  Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Kings.     One  Volume. 
Keil's  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel.     One  Volume. 
Keil's  Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Chronicles.     One  Volume. 
Hengsteuberg's  History  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.     Vol.  II. 

•J87   3  —  Keil's  Commentary  on  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther.     One  Volume. 
Winer's  Collection  of  the  Confessions  of  Christendom.     One  Volume. 
Keil's  Commentary  on  Jeremiah.     Vol.  I. 
Martensen  on  Christian  Ethics. 

1    8  7  4  —  Christlieb's  Modern  Doubt  and  Christian  Belief.     One  Vol. 
Keil's  Commentary  on  Jeremiah.     Vol.  II. 
Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  Proverbs.     Vol.  I. 
Oehler's  Biblical  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.     Vol.  I. 
1    Q  7   5  —  Godet's  Commentary  on  St.  Luke's  Gospel.     Two  Volumes. 
Oehler's  Biblical  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.     Vol.  II. 
Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  Proverbs.     Vol.  II. 
1876  —  Keil's  Commentary  on  Ezekiel.     Two  Volumes. 

Luthardt's  Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.     Vol.  I. 
Godet's  Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.     Vol.  I. 

1    8  7  7  —  Delitzsch's  Commentary  on  Song  of  Solomon  and  Ecclesiastes. 
Godet's  Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.    Vols.  II.  and  III. 
Luthardt's  Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.     Vol.  II. 
1878  —  Gebhardt's  Doctrine  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Luthardt's  Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.     Vol.  III. 
Philippi's  Commentary  on  the  Romans.     Vol.  I. 
Hagenbach's  History  of  the  Reformation.     Vol.  I. 
1Q7  Q  —  Philippi's  Commentary  on  the  Romans.     Vol.  II. 
Hagenbach's  History  of  the  Reformation.     Vol.  II. 
Steimneyer's  History  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord. 
Haupt's  Commentary  on  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John.     One  Volume. 
*»*  For  New  Series  comme-ncinfj  wifh  1880,  see  previous  page. 


12  T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


MESSES.  CLARK  .allow  a  SELECTION  of   TWENTY  VOLUMES  (or  more  at  the  same 
ratio")  from  the  various  Series  previous  to  the  Volumes  issued  in  1877  (see  bdow}, 

At  the  Subscription  Price  of  Five  Guineas. 

NOX-SUBSCRIPTIOX  PRICES  AVITIIIX  BRACKETS. 


Dr.  Hengstenberg. — Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  By  E.  W.  HEXGSTEXBERG,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Theology  in  Berlin.  In  Three  Vols.  8vo.  (33s.) 

Dr.  Gieseler. — Compendium  of  Ecclesiastical  History.  By  J.  C.  L.  GIESELER, 
D.D.,  Professor  of  Theology  in  Gottingen.  Five  Vols.  8vo.  (£2,  12s.  6d.) 

Dr.  Clshausen. — Biblical  Commentary  on  the  Gospels  and  Acts.  Adapted  especially 
for  Preachers  and  Students.  By  HERMANN  OLSHAUSEX,  D.D.,  Professor  of 
Theology  in  the  University  of  Erlangen.  In  Four  Yols.  Svo.  (£2,  2s.) — Com 
mentary  on  the  Eomans.  In  One  Vol.  Svo.  (10s.  6 d.)— Commentary  on  St. 
Paul's  First  and  Second  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  In  One  Vol.  Svo.  (9s.) 
— Commentary  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Galatians,  Ephesians,  Colossians, 
and  Thessalonians.  One  Vol.  Svo.  (10s.  6il.) — Commentary  on  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  to  the  Philippians,  to  Titus,  and  the  First  to  Timothy.  In  con 
tinuation  of  the  "Work  of  Olshausen.  By  Lie.  AUGUST  AYiESiXGER.  In 
One  Vol.  Svo.  (10s.  6d.) 

Dr.  Neander.— General  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and  Church.  By 
AUGUSTUS  NEANDER,  D.D.  Translated  from  the  Second  and  Improved  Edition". 
Nine  Vols.  Svo.  (£3,  7s.  6d.) 

This  is  the  only  Edition  in  a  Library  size. 

Prof.  H.  A.  Ch.  Havernick. — General  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.  By 
Professor  HAVERNICK.  One  Vol.  Svo.  (1  Os.  6d.) 

Dr.  Muller. — The  Christian  Doctrine  of  Sin.  By  Dr.  JULIUS  MULLER.  Two 
Vols.  8vo.  (21s.)  New  Edition. 

Dr.  Hengstenberg. — Christology  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  a  Commentary  on  the 
Messianic  Predictions.  By  E.  W.  HENGSTENBERG,  D.D.  Four  Vols.  (£2,  2s.) 

Dr.  M.  Baumgarten.— The  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  or,  The  History  of  the  Church 
in  the  Apostolic  Age.  By  M.  BAUMGARTEX,  Ph.D.  Three  Vols.  (£1,  7s.) 

Dr.  Stier.— The  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  By  RUDOLPH  STIER,  D.D.,  Chief 
Pastor  and  Superintendent  of  Schkeuditz.  In  Eight  Vols.  Svo.  (£4,  4s.) 

Dr.  Carl  Ullmann. — Reformers  before  the  Reformation,  principally  in  Germany 
and  the  Netherlands.  Two  Vols.  Svo.  (£1,  Is.) 

Professor  Kurtz. — History  of  the  Old  Covenant ;  or,  Old  Testament  Dispensation. 
By  Professor  KURTZ  of  Dorpat.  In  Three  Vols.  (£1,  11s.  6d.) 

Dr.  Stier. — The  Words  of  the  Risen  Saviour,  and  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  of 
St.  James.  By  RUDOLPH  STIER,  D.D.  One  Vol.  (10s.  6d.) 

Professor  Tholuck. — Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.     One  Vol.     (9s.) 

Professor  Tholuck. — Commentary  on  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  One  Vol.  (10s.  6d. ) 

Dr.  Hengstenberg — On  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  To  which  are  appended:  Treatises 
on  the  Song  of  Solomon  ;  the  Book  of  Job  ;  the  Prophet  Isaiah ;  the  Sacrifices  of  Holy 
Scripture  ;  and  on  the  Jews  and  the  Christian  Church.  In  One  Vol.  Svo.  (9s.) 

Dr.  Ebrard. — Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  John.  By  Dr.  JOHX  H.  A. 
EHRARD,  Professor  of  Theology.  In  One  Vol.  (10s.  6d.) 

Dr.  Lange. — Theological  and  Homiletical  Commentary  en  the  Gospels  of  St. 
Matthew  and  Mark.  ByJ.  P.  LANGE,  D.D.  Three  Vols.  (10s.  6d.  each.) 

Dr.  Dorner. — History  of  the  Development  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ. 
By  Dr.  J.  A.  DORNER,  Professor  of  Theology  in  the  University  of  Berlin. 
Five  Vols.  (£2,  12s.  6d.) 

Lange  and  Dr.  J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee. — Theological  and  Homiletical  Commentary  on 
the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.  Two  Vols.  (18s.) 

Dr.  Ebrard, — The  Gospel  History:  A  Compendium  of  Critical  Investigations  in 
support  of  the  Historical  Character  of  the  Four  Gospels.  One  Vol.  (10s.  6d. 

[See  next  page.} 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  1 3 

CLARK'S   FOKEIGN   THEOLOGICAL   LIBRARY—  Continued. 

Lange,  Lechler,   and  Gerok. — Theological  and  Homiletical  Commentary  on  the 

Acts  of  the  Apostles.     Edited  by  Dr.  LANGE.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Dr.  Hengstenberg. — Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 
Professor  Keil. — Biblical  Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch.     Three  Vols.     (31s.  6d.) 
Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  Joshua,  Judges,  and  Euth.     One  Vol.     (10s.  6d.) 
Professor  Delitzsch.— A  System  of  Biblical  Psychology.     One  Vol.     (12s.) 
Dr.  C.  A.  Auberlen. — The  Divine  Kevelation.     Svo.     (10s.  6d.) 
Professor  Delitzsch. — Commentary  on  the  Prophecies  of  Isaiah.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Samuel.     One  Vol.     (10s.  6d.) 
Professor  Delitzsch. — Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Job.      Two  Vols.      (21s.) 
Bishop  Martensen. — Christian  Dogmatics.     A    Compendium  of  the  Doctrines  of 

Christianity.     One  Vol.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Dr.  J.  P.  Lange. — Theological  and  Homiletical  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St. 

John.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 

Professor  Keil.— Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Professor  Delitzsch. — Commentary  on  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Dr.  Harless. — A  System  of  Christian  Ethics.     One  Vol.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Dr.  Hengstenberg. — Commentary  on  Ezekiel.     One  Vol.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Dr.  Stier. — The  Words  of  the  Apostles  Expounded.     One  Arol.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Professor  Keil.— Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Professor  Bleek. — Introduction  to  the  New  Testament.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 
Professor  Schmid.—  New  Testament  Theology.     One  Vol.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Professor  Delitzsch. — Commentary  on  the  Psalms.     Three  Vols.     (31s.  Gd.) 
Dr.  Hengstenberg. — History  of  the   Kingdom  cf  God  under  the  Old   Covenant. 

Two  Vols.     (21s.) 

Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Kings.  One  Volume.  (10s.  Gd.) 
Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel.  One  Volume.  (lO.s.  Gd.) 
Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Chronicles.  One  Volume.  (10s.  Gd.) 

Professor  Keil. Commentary  on  Ezra,  iNehemiah,  and  Esther.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Professor  Keil. — Commentary  on  Jeremiah.     TAVO  Vols.     (21s.) 

Winer  (Dr.  G.  B.) — Collection  of  the  Confessions  of  Christendom.  One  Vol.  (10s.  Gd. ) 

Bishop  Martensen. — Christian  Ethics.     One  Volume.     (10s.  Gd.) 

Professor  Delitzsch. — Commentary  on  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 

Professor  Oehler.— Biblical  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 

Professor  Christlieb. — Modern  Doubt  and  Christian  Belief.     One  Vol.     (10s.  Gd.) 

Professor  Godet. — Commentary  on  St.  Luke's  Gospel.     Two  Vols.     (21s.) 

And,  in  connection  with  the  Series — 

Murphy's  Commentary  on  the  Book' of  Psalms.     To  count  as  Two  Volumes.    (12s.) 
Alexander's  Commentary  on  Isaiah.     Two  Volumes.     (17s.) 
Putter's  (Carl)  Comparative  Geography  of  Palestine.     Four  Volumes.     (32s.) 
Shedd's  History  of  Christian  Doctrine.     Two  Volumes.     (21s.) 
Macdonald's  Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch.     Two  Volumes.     (21s.) 
Gerlach's  Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch.     Svo.     (10s.  Gd.) 
Dr.  Hengstenberg. — Dissertations  on  the  Genuineness  of  Daniel,  etc.    One  Vol.    (12s.) 
The  series,  in  148  Volumes  (including  1879),  price  £38,  17s.,  forms  an  Apparatus  without 
which  it  may  be  truly  said  no  Theological  Library  can  be  complete;  and  the  Publishers 
take  the   liberty  of  suggesting  that  no  more  appropriate   gift  could  be  presented  to  a 
Clergyman  than  the  Series,  in  whole  or  in  part. 

*„*  No  DUPLICATES  can  be  included  in  the  Selection  of  Twenty  Volumes ;  and  it  will  save 
trouble  and  correspondence  if  it  be  distinctly  understood  that  NO  LESS  number 
than  Twenty  can  be  supplied,  unless  at  non-subscription  price. 

Subscribers'  Names  received  by  all  Retail  Booksellers. 

LONDON  :   (For  Works  at  Non-subscription  price  only)  HAMILTON,  ADAMS,  &  Co. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


LANGE'S    COMMENTARIES. 

(Subscription price,  nctty,  15s.  each. 

THEOLOGICAL  AND  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 

ON   THE    OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS. 

Specially  designed  and  adapted  for  the  use  of  Ministers  and  Students.  By 
Prof.  JOHN  PETER  LAXGE,  D.D.,  in  connection  with  a  number  of  eminent 
European  Divines.  Translated,  enlarged,  and  revised  under  the  general 
editorship  of  Rev.  Dr.  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  assisted  by  leading  Divines  of  the  various 
Evangelical  Denominations. 

OLD    TESTAMENT-U    VOLUMES. 

IX.  THE  PSALMS.  By  CAUT,  BERNHARPT 
MOLL,  D.D.  With  a  new  Metricwl  Version 
of  th<-  Psalms.  ;md  Philological  Notes,  by  T. 
J.  CONANT,  D.D. 


I.  GENESIS.    With  a  General  Introduc 

tion  to  the  Old  Testament.  By  Prof.  J.  P. 
LANGE,  D.D.  Translated  from  the  German, 
with  Additions,  by  Prof.  TAYLER  LEWIS, 
LL.D.,  and  A.  GOSMAN,  D.D. 

II.  EXODUS.      By    J.    P.    LAXGE.    D.D. 
LEVITICUS.     By  J.  P.  LANOK,  D.I).     With 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION   by  Rev.    Dr. 

O.SGOOD. 

III.  NUMBERS     AND     DEUTERON03VIY. 
NUMBERS.     By  Prof.   J.    I'.   LANOK,    D.D. 
DEUTERONOMY.      By  W.  J.  SCHKOKDER. 

IV.  JOSHUA.  By  Eev.  F.  E.  FAY.   JUDGES 
and  RUTH.     By  Prof.  PAULUS  CASSELL,  D.D. 

V.  SAMUEL,    I.   and   II.      By   Professor 
ERDMANN,  D.D. 

VI.  KINGS.     By  KARL  CUR.  W.  F.  BAHK, 
D.D. 

VII.  CHRONICLES,  I.  and  II.     By  OTTO 
ZOCKLER.      EZRA.      By   FR.   W.   SCHULTZ. 
NEHEMIAH.     By   Rev.   HOWARD   CROSBY, 
D.D.,LL.D.    ESTHER.    By  FR.  W.  SCHULTZ. 

VIII.  JOB.    With  an  Introduction  and 
Annotations  by  Prof.  TAYLER  LEWIS,  LL.D. 
A  Commentary  by  Dr.  OTTO  ZOCKLER,  to 
gether  with  an  Introductory  Essay  on  Heb 
rew  Poetry  by  Prof.  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 


X.  PROVERBS.     By  1'rof.  OTTO  ZOCKLER, 
D.D.    ECCLESIASTES.     By  Prof .  0.  ZOCK- 

LEK,  D.D.  With  Additions,  and  a  new 
Metrical  Version,  by  Prof.  TAYLER  LEWIS, 
D.I).  TH3  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  By 
Prof.  0.  ZOCKLER,  D.D. 

XL  ISAIAH.     By  C.  AY.  E.  XAEGKLSBACH. 

XII.  JEREMIAH.     By  0.  W.  E.  XAEGELS- 
iiACii,  D.D.     LAMENTATIONS.     By  C.  W. 
E.  NAEGELSBACH,  D.D. 

XIII.  EZEKIEL.      By  F.   W.    SCHRODER, 
D.D.      DANIEL.    By    Professor    ZOCKLER, 
D.D. 

XIV.  THE  MINOR  PROPHETS.     HOSEA, 
JOEL,  and   AMOS.     By  OTTO  SCHMOLLKR, 
Ph.D.     OBADIAH   and   MICAH.     By  Rev. 
PAUL      KI.KINKRT.        JONAH,      NAHUM, 
HABAKKUK,  and  ZEPHANIAH.    By  Rev. 
PAUL  KLEINERT.     HAGGAI.    ByRev.JAMFa 
E.   M'CuRDY.      ZECHARIAH.      By  T.   W. 
CHAMBERS,  D.D.    MALACHI.     By  JOSEPH 
PACKARD,  D.D. 


THE  APOCRYPHA.     (J wt published.)    tty  E.  C.  BISSELL,  D.D.     One  Volume. 

NEW    TESTAMENT-JO    VOLUMES. 


I.  MATTHEW.     With  a   General  Intro 

duction  to  the  New  Testament.  By  J.  P. 
LANGE,  D.D.  Translated,  with  Additions,  by 
PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D. 

II.  MARK    By  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D.    LUKE. 
By  J.  J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE. 

III.  JOHN.    By  J.  P.  LAXGE,  D.D. 

IV.  ACTS.     By  G.  V.  LECHLEE,  D.D.,  and 

Rev.  CHARLES  GEROK. 

V.  ROMANS.    By  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D.,  and 

Rev.  F.  R.  FAT. 

VI.  CORINTHIANS.       By    CHRISTIAN    F. 
KLING. 


VII.  GALATIANS.     By  OTTO  SCTTMOLLKR, 
Ph.D.     EPHESIANS    and    COLOSSIANS. 
By   KARL   BRACNE,  D.D.     PHILIPPIANS. 
By  KARL  BRAUNE,  D.D. 

VIII.  THESSALONIANS.    By  Drs.  AUBER- 
LIN  and  RIGGENBACH.     TIMOTHY.     By  J. 
J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  D.D.    TITUS.    By  J.  J. 
VAN  OOSTERZEF,,  D.D.    PHILEMON.    ByJ. 
J.  VAN  OOSTERZEE,  D.D.     HEBREWS.    By 
KARL  B.  MOLL,  D.D. 

IX.  JABIES.     By  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D.,  and 
J.  J.  VAN   OOSTERZKE,  D.D.    PETER  and 
JUDE.      By  G.  F.  C.   FRONM'CLLER,  Ph.D. 
JOHN.     By  KARL  BRAUNE,  D.D. 

X.  THE    REVELATION    OF     JOHN.      By 
Dr.  J.   P.   LANGE.      Together  with  double 
Alphabetical  Index  to  all  the  Ten  Volumes 
on  the  New  Testament,  by  JOHN  H.  WOODS. 


Zl  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  i  5 

MEYER'S 

Commentary  on  the  New  Testament. 

'  Meyer  has  been  long  and  well  knovni  to  scholars  as  one  of  the  very  ablest  of  the  German 
expositors  of  the  New  Testament.  We  are  not  sure  whether  we  ought  not  to  say  that  he  is 
unrivalled  as  an  interpreter  of  the  grammatical  and  historical  meaning  of  the  sacred 
writers.  The  Publishers  have  now  rendered  another  seasonable  and  important  service  to 
English  students  in  producing  this  translation.'— Guardian. 


The  Subscription  is  21s.  for  Four  Volumes,  Demy  8vo,  payable  in  advance. 
Each  Volume  will  be  sold  separately  at  (on  an  average)  10s.  Gd.  to  Non-Subscribers. 

CRITICAL  AND    EXEGETICAL 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

By     Dr.      H.     A.     W.     MEYER, 

OBERCONSISTORIALRATH,  HANNOVER. 

In  order  to  secure  perfect  accuracy,  the  Publishers  have  placed  the  whole 
•work  under  the  editorial  care  of  Rev.  Dr.  DICKSON,  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the 
University  of  Glasgow;  Rev.  Dr.  CHOMBIE,  Professor  of  Biblical  Criticism,  St. 
Mary's  College,  St.  Andrews;  and  Rev.  Dr.  STEWART,  Professor  of  Biblical 
Criticism,  University  of  Glasgow. 

The  following  are  now  ready  : — 

1st  Year — Romans,  Two  Volumes. 

Galatians,  One  Volume. 

St.  John's  Gospel,  Vol.  I. 
2d  Year— St.  John's  Gospel,  Vol.  II. 

Philippians  and  Colossians,  One  Volume. 

Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Vol.  I. 

Corinthians,  Vol.  I. 
3d  Year— Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Vol.  II. 

St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  Two  Volumes. 

Corinthians,  Vol.  II. 
4th  Year — Mark  and  Luke,  Two  Volumes. 

Ephesians  and  Philemon,  One  Volume. 

Thessalonians.     (Dr.  Liinemann.} 

The  series,  as  written  by  Meyer  himself,  is  completed  by  the  publication  of  Ephesians 
with  Philemon  in  one  volume.  But  to  this  the  Publishers  have  added  Thessalonians,  by 
Dr.  Liinemann,  in  one  volume,  which  completes  four  years'  Subscriptions,  or  16  volumes. 

They  purpose,  at  the  request  of  very  many  of  their  Subscribers,  to  continue  the 
'  Meyer '  Series  by  completing  the  New  Testament  with  the  exception  (probably)  of  the 
Revelation.  This  will  include  Huthcr  on  the  Pastoral  and  Catholic  Epistles,  and 
Liinemann  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  These  will  be  completed  in  four  volumes  of  the 
English  Translation,  and  are  in  preparation. 


1 1  need  hardly  add  that  the  last  edition  of  the  accurate,  perspicuous,  and  learned  com 
mentary  of  Dr.  Meyer  has  been  most  carefully  consulted  throughout ;  and  I  must  again, 
as  in  the  preface  to  the  Galatians,  avow  my  great  obligations  to  the  acumen  and  scholar 
ship  of  the  learned  editor.' — BISHOP  ELLICOTT  in  Preface  to  his  '  Commentary  on  Ephesians.1 

'  The  ablest  grammatical  exegete  of  the  age.' — PHILIP  SOHAFF,  D.D. 

'In  accuracy  of  scholarship  and  freedom  from  prejudice,  he  is  equalled  by  few.' — 
Literary  Churchman. 

'We  have  only  to  repeat  that  it  remains,  of  its  own  kind,  the  very  best  Commentary 
of  the  New  Testament  which  we  possess.' — Church  Bells. 

'  No  exegetical  work  is  on  the  whole  more  valuable,  or  stands  in  higher  public  esteem. 
As  a  critic  he  is  candid  and  cautious;  exact  to  minuteness  in  philology ;  a  master  of  the 
grammatical  and  historical  method  of  interpretation.' — Princeton  Review. 


i6 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  Twenty-four  Handsome  Svo  Volumes,  Subscription  Price  £6,  6s.  od.y 


A    COLLECTION    OF    ALL    THE    WORKS    OF    THE    FATHERS    OF    THE 
CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  PRIOR  TO  THE  COUNCIL  OF  NIOZEA. 

EDITED   13 Y   THE 

REV.  ALEXANDER  ROBERTS,  D.D.,  AND  JAMES  DONALDSON,  LL.D. 


MESSRS.  CLARK  arc  now  happy  to  announce  the  completion  of  this  Series. 
It  has  been  received  with  marked  approval  by  all  sections  of  the 
Christian  Church  in  this  country  and  in  the  United  States,  as  supplying  what 
has  long  been  felt  to  be  a  want,  and  also  on  account  of  the  impartiality,  learn 
ing,  and  care  with  which  Editors  and  Translators  have  executed  a  very  difficult 
task. 

The  Publishers  do  not  bind  themselves  to  continue  to  supply  the  Series  at  the 
Subscription  price. 

The  Works  are  arranged  as  follow  : — 


FIRST    YEAR. 

APOSTOLIC  FATHERS,  comprising 
Clement's  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians; 
Polycarp  to  the  Ephesians;  Martyr 
dom  of  Polycarp ;  Epistle  of  Barnabas ; 
Epistles  of  Ignatius  (longer  and  shorter, 
and  also  the  Syriac  version);  Martyr 
dom  of  Ignatius ;  Epistle  to  Diognetus  ; 
Pastor  of  Hernias;  Papias  ;  Spurious 
Epistles  of  Ignatius.  In  One  Volume. 

JUSTIN  MARTYR;  ATHENAGORAS. 
In  One  Volume. 

TATIAN;  THEOPHILUS;  THE  CLE- 
mentine  Recognitions.  In  One  Volume. 

CLEMENT  OF  ALEXANDRIA,  Volume 
First,  comprising  Exhortation  to  Hea 
then  ;  The  Instructor;  and  a  portion 
of  the  Miscellanies. 

SECOND    YEAR. 

HIPPOLYTUS,  Volume  First;  Refutation 
of  all  Heresies,  and  Fragments  from 
his  Commentaries. 

IREN^EUS,  Volume  First. 

TERTULLIAN  AGAINST  MARCION. 

CYPRIAN,  Volume  First;  the  Epistles, 
and  some  of  the  Treatises. 

THIRD    YEAR. 

IREN^US  (completion);  HIPPOLYTUS 
(completion);  Fragments  of  Third 
Century.  In  One  Volume. 

ORIGEN:  De  Principiis;  Letters;  and 
portion  of  Treatise  against  Celsus. 


CLEMENT  OF  ALEXANDRIA,  Volume 
Second;  Completion  of  Miscellanies. 

TERTULLIAN,  Volume  First;  To  the 
Martyrs;  Apology;  To  the  Nations, 
etc. 

FOURTH    YEAR. 
CYPRIAN,  Volume  Second  (completion)  ; 

Novatian;  Minucius  Felix;  Fragments. 
METHODIUS;    ALEXANDER  OF  LY- 

copolis;  Peter  of  Alexandria;  Anato- 

lius;     Clement     on     Virginity;     and 

Fragments. 

TERTULLIAN,  Volume  Second. 
APOCRYPHAL  GOSPELS,  ACTS,  AND 

Revelations  ;  comprising  all  the  very 

curious  Apocryphal  Writings  of    the 

first  three  Centuries. 

FIFTH    YEAR. 

TERTULLIAN,  Volume  Third  (comple 
tion). 

CLEMENTINE  HOMILIES ;  APOSTO- 
lical  Constitutions.  In  One  Volume. 

ARNOBIUS. 

DIONYSIUS  ;  GREGORY  THAUMA- 
turgus ;  Syrian  Fragments.  In  One 
Volume. 

SIXTH    YEAR. 

LACTANTIUS;  Two  Volumes. 

ORIGEN,  Volume  Second  (completion). 
12s.  to  Non-Subscribers. 

EARLY  LITURGIES  AND  REMAIN- 
ing  Fragments.  9s.  to  Non-Subscri 
bers. 


Single  Years  cannot  be  had  separately,  unless  to  complete  sets ;  but  any  Volume 
may  be  had  separately,  price  10s.  6d., — with  the  exception  of  OKIGEN,  Vol.  II.,  12s. ; 
and  the  EARLY  LITURGIES,  9s. 


7\  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  i  7 


In  Fifteen  Volumes,  demy  Svo,  Subscription  Price  £3,  19s. 
(Yearly  issues  of  Four  Volumes,  21,s\) 

SBtofts 

EDITED   BY  MARCUS  DODS,   D.D. 

SU  BSCRIPTION: 

Four  Volumes  for  a  Guinea,  payable  in  advance  (2-is.  when  not  paid 
in  advance). 

FIRST     YEAR.  THIRD     YEAR. 

THE  'CITY  OF  GOD.'     Two  Volumes.  COMMENTARY    ON   JOHN.      Two 

WRITINGS  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  ,           Volumes. 

Volum°e?atiSt   CoUtrOVersy'      In   °ne  ON    CHRISTIAN    D  0  C  T  RI  NE,    Ex- 

THE    ANTI-PELAGIAN    WORKS    OF 
St.  Augustine.     Vol.  I. 

THE    ANTI-PELAGIAN   WORKS    OF 

St.  Augustine.     Vol.  II. 
SECOND     YEAR. 
'LETTERS.'    Vol.1.  FOURTH     YEAR. 

TREATISES   AGAINST    FAUST  US  'LETTERS.'    Vol.11. 

the  Mauicha3an.     One  Volume. 

THE     HARMONY     OF     THE    EVAN-  '  CONFESSIONS.'    With  Copious   Notes 

gelists,  and  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  °$         '             riLKlsGTON. 

One  Volume.  ANTI-PELAGIAN    WRITINGS.      Vol. 

ON  THE  TRINITY.     One  Volume.  ILL 

Messrs.  CLARK  believe  this  will  prove  not  the  least  valuable  of  their  various 
Series.  Every  care  has  been  taken  to  secure  not  only  accuracy,  but  elegance. 

It  is  understood  that  Subscribers  are  bound  to  take  at  least  the  issues  for 
two  years.  Each  volume  is  sold  separately  at  (on  an  average)  10s.  Gd. 

'For  the  reproduction  of  the  "City  of  God"  in  an  admirable  English  garb  we  are 
greatly  indebted  to  the  well-directed  enterpi'ise  and  energy  of  Messrs.  Clark,  and  to  the 
accuracy  and  scholarship  of  those  who  have  undertaken  the  laborious  task  of  translation.' 
— Christian  Observer. 

'  The  present  translation  reads  smoothly  and  pleasantly,  and  wo  have  every  reason  to 
be  satisfied  both  with  the  erudition  and  the  fair  and  sound  judgment  displayed  by  the 
translators  and  the  editor.' — John  Ball. 


SELECTION     FROM 

ANTE-NICENE     LIBRARY 

AND 

ST.   AUGUSTINE'S   WORKS. 


WHE  Ante-Nicene  Library  being  now  completed  in  24  volumes,  and  the 
-L  St.  Augustine  Series  being  also  complete  (ivitli  the  exception  of  the  '  LIFE  ') 
in  15  volumes,  Messrs.  CLARK  will,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Foreign  Theological 
Library,  give  a  Selection  of  20  Volumes  from  both  of  those  series  at  the  Sub 
scription  Price  of  FIVE  GUINEAS  (or  a  larger  number  at  same  proportion). 


1 8  T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 

CHEAP    RE-ISSUE     OF 

STIER'S  WORDS  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS. 

To  meet  a  very  general  desire  that  this  now  well-known  Work  should  be 
brought  more  within  the  reach  of  all  classes,  both  Clergy  and  Laity,  Messrs. 
CLARK  are  now  issuing,  for  a  limited  period,  the  Eight  Volumes,  handsomely 
bound  in  Four,  at  the  Subscription  Price  of 

TWO    GUINEAS. 

As  the  allowance  to  the  Trade  must  necessarily  be  small,  orders  sent  either 
direct  or  through  Booksellers  must  in  every  case  be  accompanied  with  a  Post 
Office  Order  for  the  above  amount. 

'  The  whole  work  is  a  treasury  of  thoughtful  exposition.  Its  measure  of  practical  and 
spiritual  application,  with  exegetical  criticism,  commends  it  to  the  use  of  those  whose  duty 
it  is  to  preach  as  well  as  to  understand  the  Gospel  of  Christ.' — Guardian. 

New  and  Cheap  Edition,  in  Four  Yols.,  demy  Svo,  Subscription  Price  28s., 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS   CHRIST: 

A  Complete  Critical  Examination  of  the  Origin,  Contents,  and  Connection  of 
the  Gospels.  Translated  from  the  German  of  J.  P.  LANGE,  D.D.,  Professor 
of  Divinity  in  the  University  of  Bonn.  Edited,  with  additional  Notes,  by 
MARCUS  DODS,  D.D. 

'"We  have  arrived  at  a  most  favotirable  conclusion  regarding  the  importance  and  ability 
of  this  work — the  former  depending  upon  the  present  condition  of  theological  criticism, 
the  latter  on  the  wide  range  of  the  work  itself ;  the  singularly  dispassionate  judgment 
of  the  Author,  as  well  as  his  pious,  reverential,  and  erudite  treatment  of  a  subject  inex 
pressibly  holy.  .  .  .  We  have  great  pleasure  in  recommending  this  work  to  our  readers. 
We  are  convinced  of  its  value  and  enormous  range.' — Irish  Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 


BENGEL'S    GNOMON— CHEAP    EDITION. 

GNOMON   OF  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 

By  JOHN  ALBERT  BENGEL.  Now  first  translated  into  English.  With 
Original  Notes,  Explanatory  and  Illustrative.  Edited  by  the  Rev. 
ANDREW  R.  FAUSSET,  M.A.  The  Original  Translation  was  in  Five  Large 
Volumes,  demy  Svo,  averaging  more  than  550  pages  each,  and  the  very 
great  demand  for  this  Edition  has  induced  the  Publishers  to  issue  the 
Five  Volumes  bound  in  Three,  at  the  Subscription  Price  of 

TWENTY-FOUR    SHILLINGS. 
They  trust  by  this  still  further  to  increase  its  usefulness. 

'It  is  a  work  which  manifests  the  most  intimate  and  profound  knowledge  of  Scripture, 
and  which,  if  we  examine  it  with  care,  will  often  be  found  to  condense  more  matter  into 
a  line  than  can  be  extracted  from  many  pages  of  other  writers.'— Archdeacon  HARE. 

'  In  respect  both  of  its  contents  and  its  tone,  Bengel's  Gnomon  stands  alone.  Even 
among  laymen  there  has  arisen  a  healthy  and  vigorous  desire  for  scriptural  knowledge, 
and  Bengel  has  done  more  than  any  other  man  to  aid  such  inquirers.  There  is  perhaps 
no  book  every  word  of  which  has  been  so  well  weighed,  or  in  which  a  single  technical 
term  contains  so  often  far-reaching  and  suggestive  views.  .  .  .  The  theoretical  and 
practical  are  as  intimately  connected  as  light  and  heat  in  the  sun's  ray.' — Life  of  Perthes. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications.  19 

Just  published,  in  demy  4to,  TJurd  Edition,  price  25s., 

BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL  LEXICON  OF  NEW 
TESTAMENT  GREEK.      . 

By    HERMANN     CREMER,    D.D., 

PROFESSOR   OF   THEOLOGY    IN   TIIK    UXIVKUS1TY    OF    GRKIFSAVALD. 

TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    THE    SECOND    EDITION 

(WITH  ADDITIONAL  MATTER  AND  CORRECTIONS  BY  THE  AUTHOR) 

By    WILLIAM     URWICK,    M.A. 

'Dr.  Cremer's  work  is  highly  and  deservedly  esteemed  in  Germany.  It  gives  with 
care  and  thoroughness  a  complete  history,  as  far  as  it  goes,  of  each  word  and  phraso 
that  it  deals  with.  .  .  .  Dr.  Cremer's  explanations  are  most  lucidly  set  out.' — Guardian. 

'It  is  hardly  possible  to  exaggerate  the  value  of  this  work  to  the  student  of  the  Greek 
Testament.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  accurate  and  idiomatic,  and  the  additions  to  the 
later  edition  are  considerable  and  important.' — Church  Bells. 

'  A  valuable  addition  to  the  stores  of  any  theological  library.  ...  It  is  what  it  claims 
to  be,  a  Lexicon,  both  biblical  and  theological,  and  treats  not  only  of  words,  but  of  the 
doctrines  inculcated  by  those  words.' — John  Bull. 

'  We  very  heartily  commend  this  goodly  volume  to  students  of  biblical  literature.' — 
Evangelical  Magazine. 

'We  cannot  find  an  important  word  in  our  Greek  New  Testament  which  is  not 
discussed  with  a  fulness  and  discrimination  which  leaves  nothing  to  bo  desired.' — 
Nonconformist. 

'  Cremer's  Lexicon  is,  and  is  long  likely  to  be,  indispensable  to  students  whether  of 
theology  or  of  the  Bible,  and  must  always  bear  witness  to  his  scholarship,  erudition,  and 
diligence.' — Expositor. 

'  A  work  of  immense  erudition.' — Freeman. 

'This  noble  edition  in  quarto  of  Cremer's  Biblico-Theological  Lexicon  quite  super 
sedes  the  translation  of  the  first  edition  of  the  work.  Many  of  the  most  important 
articles  have  been  re- written  and  re-arranged.  .  .  .  We  heartily  congratulate  Mr.  Urwick 
on  the  admirable  manner  in  which  he  has  executed  his  task,  revealing  on  his  part 
adequate  scholarship,  thorough  sympathy,  and  a  fine  choice  of  English  equivalents  and 
definitions.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'  As  an  aid  in  our  search,  we  warmly  commend  the  honest  and  laborious  New 
Testament  Lexicon  of  Dr.  Cremer.' — London  Quarterly  Review. 

'The  judiciousness  and  importance  of  Dr.  Cremer's  design  must  be  obvious  to  all 
students  of  the  New  Testament;  and  the  execution  of  that  design,  in  our  judgment,  fully 
establishes  and  justifies  the  translator's  encomiums.' — Watchman. 

'A  majestic  volume,  admirably  printed  and  faultlessly  edited,  and  will  win  gratitude 
as  well  as  renown  for  its  learned  and  Christian  Author,  and  prove  a  precious  boon  to 
students  and  preachers  who  covet  exact  and  exhaustive  acquaintance  with  the  literal 
and  theological  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,1— Dickinson's  Theological  Quarterly. 


2o  T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  One  Volume,  8fo,  price  12s., 

FINAL    CAUSES. 

BY  rATJL  JANET.  Member  of  the  Institute,  Paris. 
Cranslatrtf   from   t!)c  dTrnuIj   bn  OTtlltam  8ffl«fc,   33.23. 

CONTENTS.— PRELIMINARY  CHAPTKR— The  Problem.  BOOK  I.— The  Law  of 
Finality.  BOOK  II. — The  First  Cause  of  Finality.  APPENDIX. 

'  This  very  learned,  accurate,  and,  within  its  prescribed  limits,  exhaustive  work.  .  .  . 
The  book  as  a  whole  abounds  in  matter  of  the  highest  interest,  and  is  a  model  of  learn 
ing  and  judicious  treatment.' — Guardian. 

'Illustrated  and  defended  with  an  ability  and  learning  which  must  command  the 
reader's  admiration.' — Dublin  Review. 

'  A  great  contribution  to  the  literature  of  this  subject.  M.  Janet  has  mastered  the 
conditions  of  the  problem,  is  at  home  in  the  literature  of  science  and  philosophy,  and  has 
that  faculty  of  felicitous  expression  which  makes  French  books  of  the  highest  class  such 
delightful  reading;  ...  in  clearness,  vigour,  and  depth  it  has  been  seldom  equalled,  and 
more  seldom  excelled,  in  philosophical  literature.' — Spectator. 

1  A  wealth  of  scientific  knowledge  and  a  logical  acumen  which  will  win  the  admiration 
of  every  reader.' — Church  Quarterly  Review. 


Just  published^  in  demy  Sz'o,  price  los.  6n7., 

THE    BIBLE    DOCTRINE    OF    MAN 

(Scrjcntlj  Scries  of  (Eutminrjfjam  3Lcctur.cs.) 
BY  JOHN  LAIDLAW,  D.D. 


'An  important  and  valuable  contribution  to  the  discussion  of  the  anthropology  of  the 
sacred  writings,  perhaps  the  most  considerable  that  has  appeared  in  our  own  language.' 
— Literary  Churchman. 

'The  work  is  a  thoughtful  contribution  to  a  subject  which  must  always  have  deep 
interest  for  the  devout  student  of  the  Bible.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'Dr.  Laidlaw's  work  is  scholarly,  able,  interesting,  and  valuable.  .  .  .  Thoughtful 
and  devout  minds  will  find  much  to  stimulate,  and  not  a  little  to  assist,  their  meditations 
in  this  learned  and,  let  us  add,  charmingly  printed  volume.'— Record. 

'  On  the  whole,  we  take  this  to  be  the  most  sensible  and  reasonable  statement  of  the 
Biblical  psychology  of  man  wo  have  met.' — Expositor. 

'  The  book  will  give  ample  material  for  thought  to  the  reflective  reader;  and  it  holds 
a  position,  as  far  as  we  know,  which  is  unique.' — Church  Bells. 

'The  Notes  to  the  Lectures,  which  occupy  not  less  than  1"0  pages,  are  exceedingly 
valuable.  The  style  of  the  lecturer  is  clear  and  animated;  the  critical  and  analytical 
judgment  predominates.' — English  Independent. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications.  2  i 


In  Tico  Volumes,  demij  8ro,  price  21x., 

COMMENTARY  ON   ST.   PAUL'S   EPISTLE 
TO   THE   ROMANS. 

BY  FRIEDKICH  ADOLPH  PHILIPPI. 
Translated  from  the  Third  Improved  and  Enlarged  Edition. 
'A  serviceable  addition  to  the  Foreign  Theological  Library.'  —  A 


'  A  commentary  not  only  ample  for  its  critical  stores,  but  also  valuable  for  its  sober 
exegesis.'  —  John  Bull. 

'Phih'ppi  brings  to  the  ieterpretation  of  the  Greek  text  a  penetrating  analytical  power, 
which  hiys  bare  every  separate  element,  in  the  Apostle's  thought,  and  traces  it  to  its  very 
root.  His  synthesis  is  equally  admirable.'  —  Baptist. 

'If  the  writer  is  inferior  to  Meyer  in  critical  acumen,  he  is  at  least  equal  to  him  in 
theological  learning  and  religious  insight;  and  his  Commentary  has  independent  worth  — 
it  is  no  mere  repetition  of  other  men's  labours.'  —  Church  Bel/.". 


In  Two  Volumes,  demy  Sro,  price  2 !,<?., 

HISTORY    OF    THE    REFORMATION 

IN 

GERMANY  AND   SWITZERLAND   CHIEFLY. 

BY  Dii.  K  R  HAGENBACH. 

Translated  from  the  Fourth  Revised  Edition  of  the  German. 

'We  highly  appreciate  for  the  most  part  the  skill  and  the  proportion,  the  vivid 
portraiture  and  fine  discrimination,  and  the  careful  philosophic  development  of  ideas  by 
which  this  most  readable  and  instructive  work  is  characterized.'— Ecangdicnl  Magazine. 

'  Dr.  Hagenbach  has  produced  the  best  history  of  the  Reformat  ion  hitherto  written.' — 
British  Quarterly  Remeic. 

'The  work  before  us  will  have  a  distinct  sphere  of  usefulness  open  to  it,  and  be 
welcome  to  English  readers.' — Church  Quarterly  Review. 


Just  published,  in  demy  Sco,  price  9x., 

THE    TRUTH    OF    SCRIPTURE, 

IN   CONNECTION   WITH 

ScUfolation,  Inspiration,  antJ  tljc  Canon, 
BY  RET.  PROFESSOR  GIVEN,  MAGEE  COLLEGE. 

'  This  the  latest  work  upon  the  subject,  is  eminently  fitted  to  prove  of  service  to 
inquirers.  The  statements  of  truth  are  clear  and  well  defined.  —Daily  K&new. 

'A  really  able  treatise  on  the  much  assailed,  but  fundamental  themes  of  human  inquiry 
mentioned  in  the  title.  The^  discussion  is  searching,  thorough,  and  completely  up  t. 
date.' — General  Baptist  Magazine. 


22  T.  and  T.  dark's  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  demy  8t'0,  price  8s.  Qd., 

SYNTAX  OF  THE  HEBREW  LANGUAGE 
OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

By     HEINRICH     EWALD. 

{Cranslateti  from  tfye  (Sirjfyt})   (Errrmatx  (^tution 
BY  JAMES  KENNEDY,  B.D. 

'The  work  stands  unique  as  regards  a  patient,  investigation  of  fac's,  written  with  a 
profound  analysis  of  the  laws  of  thought,  of  which  language  is  the  reflection.  Another 
striking  feature  of  the  work  is  the  regularly  progressive  order  which  pervades  the 
whole.  The  Author  proceeds  by  a  natural  gradation  from  the  simplest  elements  to  the 
most  complex  forms.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'  To  more  advanced  students  of  Hebrew  the  translation  of  Ewald's  Syntax  will  be  a 
great  boon.  .  .  .  We  hope  the  translation  will  do  much  to  advance  the  higher,  more 
thorough  study  of  Hebrew.' —  Watchman. 

'It  is  well  known  that  Evvald  was  the  first  to  exhibit  the  Hebrew  Syntax  in  a 
philosophical  form,  and  his  Grammar  is  the  most  important  of  his  numerous  works.' — 
Athenxum. 

'The  book  is  the  product  of  genuine  work,  and  will  fill  a  gap  in  our  theological 
literature.' — Daily  Review. 

Recently  published,  in  demy  8vo,  Fourth  Edition,  price  Is.  Gd., 

AN    INTRODUCTORY   HEBREW   GRAMMAR; 

OTttf)  ;l3ro(rrr££ibc  CrrrrctecS  in  33 ratling  antJ  KHvtttntj* 

BY  A.  B.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.,  LL.D., 

Professor  of  Hebrew,  etc.,  in  the  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

In  One  large  8ro  Volume,  Eigltth  English  Edition,  price  15s., 

A  TREATISE   ON   THE 

GRAMMAR  OF    NEW  TESTAMENT   GREEK, 

IJLcgarirttr  as  tire  ^Basis  at  fWu  (Ctslaiiuni  (Bmjtsis. 

Translated  from  the  German  of  Dr.  G.  B.  WINER. 

With  large  additions  and  full  Indices.     Second  Edition.     Edited  by  Rev.  "W. 
F.  MOULTON,  D.D.,  one  of  the  New  Testament  Translation  Revisers. 


'This  series  is  one  of  great  importance  to  the  biblical  scholar;  and,  as  regards  its 
general  execution,  it  leaves  little  or  nothing  to  be  desired.' — Edinburgh  Review. 


KEIL  AND  DELITZSCH'S 

INTRODUCTION    TO    AND    COMMENTARIES 
ON    THE    OLD    TESTAMENT. 

In  27  Volumes,  demy  Svo. 

MESSRS.  CLARK  have  resolved  to  offer  complete  sets  of  this  work  at  the  Original 
Subscription  Price  of  £7,  2s.  Od.     Single  volumes  may  be  had,  price  10s.  6d. 


and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  crown  Svo,  price  4s.  Gd., 

THE    WORLD    OF    PRAYER; 

in   xdztian  ia 


By    Bishop     MONRAD. 

from  tfjs  jFouttfj  ©crman  SS 

'English  readers  are  greatly  indebted  to  Mr.  Banks  for  his  translation  of  tliis  work: 
he  has  rendered  available  to  them  a  book  of  devotional  reading  which  admirably  com 
bines  the  truest  Christian  mysticism  with  the  soundest  and  healthiest  practical  teaching.' 
—  London  Quarterly  Review. 

'  One  of  the  richest  devotional  books  that  we  have  read.'  —  Primitive.  Methodist  Magazine. 

'An  excellent  manual  on  prayer  in  its  relation  to  spiritual  life  and  character.'—  .#nYis/i 
and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

Just  published,  in  demy  Svo,  price  10s.  Gd., 

HISTORY  OF  THE 
PASSION  AND  RESURRECTION  OF  OUR  LORD, 

C0nsifrcrcb  in  tbc  lP$f)i  .of  ffloirn'tr  Criticism, 

By  Dr.  F.  L.   STEINMEYER, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,  BERLIN. 

'Our  readers  will  find  this  work  a  most  valuable  and  suggestive  help  for  their  thoughts 
and  teaching  during  Passion-tide  and  Easter.'  —  English  Churchman. 

'Dr.  Steinmeyer's  work  will  well  repay  earnest  study.'  —  Weekly  Review. 

Just  published,  in  demy  Svo,  price  10s.  Gd., 

THE     FIRST    EPISTLE     OF    ST.    JOHN. 

10 


By    ERICH     HAUPT. 

'  The  Author  has  rendered  the  Church  a  good  service  by  his  work.  Whoever  accom 
panies  him  on  the  path  of  his  well-grounded  researches,  will  find  he  has  made  good 
speed  in  the  understanding  of  the  apostolic  epistles.'  —  Evangelische  Kirchen-Zeitung. 

'  We  recommend  it  especially  to  the  use  of  ministers,  and  are  sure  tbat  they  will  find  in 
it  such  scientific  penetration,  and  far  deeper  and  more  suggestive  preparation  for  sermons 
and  Bible  lectures,  than  in  the  expositions  which  are  written  specially  for  ministers  for 
homiletical  use.'  —  Neue  Evangelische  Kirclien-Zeitung. 

In  crown  Svo,  price  5s., 

MESSIANIC    PROPHECY: 

Jffs  ©rigm,  Historical  ©{rarafcr,  anir  gelation  to 
llefo  SJjesfamenf  Jpulfilnient 

Translated  from  the  German  (with  the  Approbation  of  the  Author)  of 
DR.   EDWARD    RIEIIM. 

'  Undoubtedly  original  and  suggestive,  and  deserving  careful  consideration.'  —  Literary 
Churchman. 

'  Its  intrinsic  excellence  makes  it  a  valuable  contribution  to  our  biblical  literature.'  — 
British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 


24  T.  and  T.  Clark 's  Pitblications. 


In  Ttco  Volumes,  demy  8vo,  price  21.v., 

GROWTH  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  CHRISTIANITY,  j 

FEOM  THE  FIRST  CENTURY  TO  THE  DAWN  OF 
THE  LUTHERAN  ERA. 

BY  THE 

REV.  GEORGE  MATHESON,  M.A.,  B.D., 

AUTHOU  OK  •  AIDS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  GERMAN  THHOLOGY.' 

'Fresh,  vigovcms,  learned,  and  eminently  thoughtful.' — Contemporary  Review. 
'  This  -work  is  a  contribution  of  real  value  to  the  popular  study  of  Church  History.' — 
Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

'  The  work  of  a  very  able  and  pious  and  cultured  thinker.' — Church  Quarterly  Review. 

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
///  crown  Svo,   Tliird  Edition,  price  4.s\  G<L, 

AIDS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  GERMAN  THEOLOGY. 

'  A  work  of  much  labour  and  learning,  giving  in  a  small  compass  an  intelligent  review 
of  a  very  large  subject.' — Spectator. 


Just  published^  in  Two  Volumes,  demy  Sco,  price  l~2x.  each, 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COUNCILS  OF  THE  CHURCH 

TO  A.D.   429. 

t!je    ©n'jji'nal    Soctniunts. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN  OF 

0.  J.  HEFELE,  D.D.,  BISHOP  OF  EOTTENBUEG. 

'  This  careful  translation  of  Hefale's  Councils.'  —  Dr.  PU.SKY. 

'  A  thorough  and  fair  compendium,  put  iii  the  most  accessible  and  intelligent  form.'  — 
Guardian. 

'  A  work  of  profound  erudition,  and  written  in  a  most  candid  spirit.  The  book  will  be 
a  standard  work  on  the  subject.'  —  Spectator. 

'  The  most  learned  historian  of  the  Councils.'  —  Fere  GRATRY. 

'We  cordially  commend  Hefele's  Councils  to  the  English  student.'  —  John  Bull. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo,  price  12s., 

THE  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE, 

Inducting  Inquiries  into  the  Origin  of  Sacrifice,  the  Jewish  Ritual,  the 
Atonement,  and  the  Lord's  Supper. 

BY  ALFEED  CAVE,  B.A. 

'  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  its  clearness,  its  method,  its  thoroughness,  and  its 
tolerance.  We  most  warmly  commend  Mr.  Cave's  book  to  the  study  of  the  clergy,  who 
will  find  it  full  of  suprgestiveness  and  instruction.'  —  English  Churchman. 

'  A  thoroughly  able  and  erudite  book,  from  almost  every  page  of  which  something 
may  be  learned.  The  Author's  method  is  exact  and  logical,  the  style  perspicuous  and 
forcible  —  sometimes,  indeed,  almost  epigrammatic;  and,  as  a  careful  attempt  to  ascertain 
the  teaching  of  the  Scripture  on  an  important  subject,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting 
even  to  those  whom  it  does  not  convince.'—  Watchman. 


- 


