& 
* 


. 
ty 


Centimeter 
De coe ere 


1 
Inches 


f 


NN 
Sy 


me 4 


SS 


N 


y Association for Information and Image Management 


XG é 
1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1100 SS ‘ & Fes 
Silver Spring, Maryland 20910: 2 / ¢ & 


301/587-8202 


4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 12 13° 14 15 mm - 


2 Ls 3 5. 4 3 5 - 
moe 2S 
Wee Su gas 
va lanes 
; Fue [ize 


Li® 2 

A | ||| a 

qT waS=~—~— I. 

ie a es SS : $ 
g : ee 

8 RAS 
1. = —— — oF 
t Lae 

ne - : 


E 


® 


Car 


i e. 


» 


7 


MANUFACTURED TO ATIM STANDARDS 
"BY APPLIED IMAGE, -INC. 


91 


The collar bolts connect ‘he brackets between the tran- 
soms and-trail, their collars keeping it rigid. 

The trail piece lies between the brackets at the point, 
and rivets. pass through the whole. This piece ends in an 
eye, to go on to the litnber soi and is steeled to prevent 
wearing. 

A bearing piece of steel is bolted under the end, and-a 
plate is bolted above to preven cena if the linber is i 
driven over it. 

The axle-tree bed is of wrought iron; and forms, with 
the axle, a beam of box-girder gectjon. 

The axle-tiee forms: the bottom/of the box, a*piece of 
angle iron riveted*along each side of the ‘body -the sides, 
_ while the top is formed ‘by a plate riveted along the upper 
sides of the angle iron pieees. The whole is fixed into 
recesses in the brackets, where it is secured by being rivet- 
ed, to the frames of the latter, by angle iron stay s riveted 
to jteelf in rear and to the ifraines: and by tensile stays, 
from the shoulders of the axle-tree, to the same. 

A strengthening plate is. riveted on the inside of each 
bracket, extending from the bed to the rear transom. 

The carriage is fitted w ith capsquares and keys, metal 
sockets to receive the trunnions of the elev ating gear, a hand- 
spike r ing, trail handles, range plate, and a lot of other small 
ones. 

The elevating screw, which is known as the Whitworthy 
pattern, Plate VIII, is attached to the gun in the usual 
way by a bolt and is worked by a metal‘nut through which 
it passes. Bevel teeth are cut upon the-lower part of the 
nut, into which a bevel wheel upon a horizontal spindle 
gears. The nut and bevel wheel are contained in a w Fought- 
iron box, having a trunnion upon each side, by which it is 


supported and can oscillate between the brackets. The lid — 


of the box is secured to the bottom by four long screws and 
| has a lubricating hole in it’ for oiling the bevel wheels 
through, which -hole is filled by a metal screw to keep dust 
and grit out; a drip hole is made in the bottom and the 


. 


Sel y ee 299.667 


Sep’r 26 1910 //. 


‘ 
a ea 

interior is coated with red léad, The spindle of the bevel 
wheel passes through a metal bearing or bouch in the right 
trunnion of the box and upon its extremity outside the | 
u | right bracket of the carriage lias a metal hand wheel by | 
as which it is worked. To remove the box from tlie carriage 
the lid has to be taken off, the pin holding the spindle 
pulled out, and the spindle withdrawn, The second tran- 
som of the carriage has then to be removed, after which 
the bolts of the sockets being taken out, the box with the 
sockets can be moved to the front, nnd: the former treed 
from the latter. 


_ * The axle-tree boxes are arranged to carry two rounds of 1% 
case and small stores. The lid serves as a seat when re- } ie 
quired. The boxes form seats, with back and foot rests. 


I 
rae The limber is also chiefly of iron. It is formed of three — Limber f 
futchells, a splinter bar with two stays, a platform board, a Mark II. 7 | 
| slat, an axle-tree bed with’ limber hook, axle-tree and 
wheels, | 
The splinter bar is of plate iron, bolted to the futchells, ' 
\ wi and strengthened by a stay of round iron from the extrem- 
ities to the axle-tree bed. ; . tt 
The axle-tree bed is deeper, but of lighter construction ee 
| than that for the gun. The futchells of tee iron are let e 
into the bed, below the top plate. ae 
“ | The limber hook has three long arms, by which it is rivet- 7 gy 
ed to and also held at the pr oper dlistance from ne rear pf } 
the bed. It is stceled. 
| The platform board of ash, and foot board of elm, are 
| placed on top, and fastened to ’the futchells. The slat is ; eee: 
placed in front, between the splinter bar and foot board. rh Pe : 
The shafts are the ficld shafts off and near, of ash. The . 
off shaft has the part between"splinter bar and axle-tree, of 3 
iron, to give room for the wheel to work, it being fastened 
_ for ordinar y dranght outside the wheel. 


| The limber is fitted for either single, double, treble or 
| bullock draught. 


res 


S 


sl 
oa | 


' 


- FACTS AND THEORIES 


AS TO A 


FUTURE STATE: 


= 


TILE SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE CONSIDERED, eee; 


BCURRENT DENIALS OF ETERNAL PUNISHMENT, 


~ REFERENCE 


rs el 


g 
By F. W. GRANT. ~ 


| 


‘© And this is love, that we w aik after Tis commandments. . This is the com- 


mandment, that, as ye have heard from the bevinning, ye should walk in it.” 
2 JoHN.6, 


eee eee 


} NEW YORE : 
: M. CATHCART, 20 FOURTH AVENUE. 


TORONTO. CANADA: 


S. W. HALLOWS, 308 YONGE STREET. 


# 


7 Hop 9b) - me 


5 ’ 
27 wf ote 
oO 
Payxk PROTHERS., 
SOTYPERS AND STEREOTYPERS, 
spe ELECTROTY PERS AND S | 
PRINTERS, KIL. a4 
ST PARK ROW. NEW YORK. 
i ; 
ey: eos 
r —teep wit flan : 
= -; 
s e 
e 4 
xX 


- as 
. ° 
CONTENTS, 
i : PAGE 


ei 
PPREE NG Hes en ee a SS te ee eee 
INTRODUCTION.— Forms oF DENIAL of ETERNAL 

= PUNISHMENT... < ie 
PART I.—MAN AS HE Is. 


5 


CHAPTER, 
L—Is tuk Bopy ALLY... 2... ue Pe Ae yeas 
HL—MAN a TRIUNE BEING... | Pr aREDs! 
HLT Spreir or Gop. Ae pie tan shh) 
IN. Tue Sere’ OF MIAN 34- Se. ene. ce std 
V--PFirk Son. Rie Se 
VIO -FtuNnerioNs ~ANbD RELATIONSHIPS OF SOUL 
INS PLCEL Oates eee ae ts 
VIT-—Soubn AND SELF. 0.00000 .. ! Pere 72 
VEST ane Faby 2. Seay 
IN.—Mas’s RELATIONSHIP TO Gob. . 


PART IL—DEATILT AND THE INTERMEDIATE 

| STATE. | 
X.—DEATI . 
XI.—CoNSCIOUSNESS AFTER Disti.—tl..... 5. 99 
XII. ---Cossciousn Ess APTER DEATIV—2..cc.. Pee a BL 
XNII.--Opsccrions prom roe OLp- TESTAMENT, . 124 
XTV.—sitrkon, IADES AND PARADISE. .3¢ 

zs EMS, 

PART IN. THE ETERNAL “ISSUES.:* 
XV. Tur Avriortry axp Use oF Sertprure. , 158, 
XVE--[uMorranity : Tsar Conpiriovan? .... #162 
AVIT.--ETERNAL LIFE: Witar is ir?. ....: ».. 169 
XVIIU.—Tue Fessv Sentiexce os oe. oc... ae ae 180 
XINX.—Destrucrion, AND ITS KINDRED TERMS.— 

. Tue Op Testawenti os So 187 


XX.—THe New Tesrawentr TerMs.......... 192 


Om 


4 x x 
° i : o>. ] 
lv CONTENTS. 
& 
CHAPTER. 7 VAGE 
XXiL—A F URTHEK § SURVEY OF TILE SCRIPTURE | 
‘ PERMG corer Or ee ee Sie Sete 


XXIL—THuE Provistos ALE HARAGTER OF DE ATH 215 


XXII.—Tie Mesastry “‘orekay, CB ete QR on 
XXIV.—Tue PURIFIC ATION AND ‘Biesstsu OF ae 


ae 
THE i ANCE Fk eee ia renee! cues se: ra: * 
XXV.—OLb’ TEST AME NT SUADOWS” pene oe ee age 
XXVI.—THE 4 AGERE. ETERNITY. pur Ques. Ge 


| TION STAPED: aa 
XXVIL—Tue New, Tura sin ar TION OF THE 

QUESTION. Sate ak Seeker ee 
XXVITL—Tuk New TESTAME ST NC Hea TURES (8 TO 

THE JUDGMENT OF TILE | iW ORLD.... 276 


: XXIX.—Tut ResurrectTrox, OF Jv pu E _ 283 
XXX.—Jupement: WHE € NN Dp W Wa aa) 
XXXL. —THE mage gr s SATAN eae Bon -igts,.. B00 

Dp XXXII. pees Fy ean htc evans 5 Drea Se Bi) 


XXXIIT-—Tuik ae ALYPTIC. ix IStoNs. iy Lie oe Bl 


XxX IV.—Tire Apoc vey PTie ats toN Se! z 33° 
XXXV.—THE ApocaLy PTLC Vv IStONS Bie ~ 890 


XXXVI— Everbasting PU NISH MENT aN Marv. 
nS oe penis en ae. B80 
“NXXVID—* THE GospEL OF Nove ere Mee Dae ee 368 
XXXVITE—A® SOLE isT-RESTORATION ISM2— MR. 
DUNN'S THEORY 2 ee es 3X1 
XXNXIX.—" THe RESTITUTION GF ALL, THINGS. — 
Mr. 5 CAGE Soke cue rne n Ge ma leronee Pmne 397 
XL.—" THe RESTITUTION OF AL i THINGS. one 
CUCN NUTRI ern n oer Se nae $d 
XLL—Mu. Birks’ VIEW... ee eee Aare 
XLIL—Tuk. Eriicar, QUESTION So eee 451 


XLII.—BLast W ORDS Wirt ANNIHILITIONISTS, . 480 
NLIV.—-Lasr Worps Witt RESTORATION ISts. 4X8 


oh ae A ii 
= 


‘ees 
- Ir 


* some 


only : 
less _le 
variet 
exami 
has b 
nothi 
satisfy 
who n 
Fo 
inatio 
will b 
i8 SO ‘ 
hend 
a. fulle 
trath: 
the wv 
abilit: 
meet 
Ser 
Divin 


“# nal w 


a 
J 


VAGE 
AR 
PALS | 
TH 21h 
Ov --- 


-, 260 


, TO 
276 
83 
291 
... B00 
2 805 
ag 819° 
338° 
= 300 


397 


415 

ee Hd 
. £51 
STs, . 480 
rs... 4X8 


; SR ae se ae ° 
iy ee 


ay 


; 
A 
{ 


5 
4 
$ 
; 
2 
i 
i 


22 
re fr we 


jaan Us. Bye te een ia tiene PIE 


Gk PREEFAC KH. 


a We, 4 ae 

THE present w onl. bs the dev clofimenis. of one published 
some years ago, and now étt of print, but which took: tp 
only a portion of the subject here’ considered, and at: much’ 
less length. ‘Te rapid spread of the views in question, ‘their 
variety and their importance, render a rrbtonged and patient 
examination of them absolutely necessary. Phe question 
has become one of the leading questions of the. “day, and 
nothing short of an extended appeal to Scripture _ will 
satisfy the uced of those entangled by the error, or of those 
who may bein danger of becoming entangled. 

For others also, quite outside of these, thie careful exam- 
ination of Scripture upon a subject. of such deep interest 
will be found very far from unprofitable. Fpth as A whole 
is so connected in its various parts, that we cannot appre- 


hend any one of these more fully, without this leading us to 


a.fuller apprehension of many other points in whiclr kindred 


traths touch this. While the perfection and profundity of 


the word of God will more and more be_ realized .as_ its 


ability is proved jto satisfy the real need of the soul and 


meet the natural thoughts ‘and questions of the mind. @ 


Scripture thus proved will be its own best evidence as a 


Divine revelation. No doubt there is abundance of exter- 


nal witness to its truth; 


but. the surest of all is its own 


a e 
+ 


rm 


a 


& 


6 PREFACE. 

an enigma which his own wit cannot explain : 

y? he knows not from whence he came or w “hither he is going .. 
he knows neither himself nor God. With Scripture, “light 
is come into the world;” and what makes all things mani- 


fest needs not, although it everywhere finds, a testimony 
Truth speaks for itself-—‘ commends itself 
sight of God’ ‘—although 


Scripture he is 


outside itself, 
to every man’s conscience in the 


the true it is who alone will hear it. 


In the following pages, then, the doctrine of Scripture is es 

what is first examined, not. merely negatively an answer i IN 

ae sought to certain views. “The statement of the truth is the | | desir 

only proper answer to the error. This the writer has sought tes 

F everywhere to keep in mind, while yet endeavoring to meet ofan 
whatever has’ been advanced on the other side as fully as  ° tiona 

possible. Especial attention has naturally been given to 4 salva 

’ certain writers who are- -most prominently identitied with ‘ modi 

the theory of annihilation on the one hand, or of universal + they 

salvation in "ts various modifications upon the other; and nee 

ott they are allowed to speak for the, most part in their own” Ar 
3 | words, and at sufficient length to ensure that there shall gprea 
} | be no doubt or mistake as to the v iews they hold. Among - in 80 
t | these, Mr. Constable has challenged criticism of his argu- | dress 
Ef ments, and to him I have naturally sought the more fullyto | cae 
4 to th 


To-the arguments of Mr. Roberts also, the present 


reply. MM 
@ Mr. | 

leader of the Christadelphian body, who. has printed an 
5 Adve 
extended examination of my original volume, “ Lite and | very 
. Immortality,” I have necessarily devoted considerable space. q Trini 
: May the Lord in His pity and love to souls, forwhom He =| mate! 
has died, be pleased to use these pages for the blessing of 4 well: 
‘many, and to His own glory ! to les 
; form, 


| prehe 


t explain : 
is going . 
re, “light 
ngs mani- 
testimony 
nds itself 
-although 


sripture is 
in answer 
uth is the 
has sought 
i to meet 
as fully as 
1 given to 
itied with 
* universal 
ther; and 
their own 
here shall 

Among 
his argu- 
ore fully to 
he present 
printed an 
“ Life 
able space. 


and 


‘whom He 
blessing of 


- 


aS Sadism tear gin 


INTRODUCTION. 


FORMS OF THE DENIAL OF ETERN AB PUNISHMENT. 


IN entering upon a subject like the present, it will be 
desirable in the first place to get as clear a view as possible 
of what is involved, the questions it is proposed to answer. 
The denial of eternal punishment has two main forms, that 
of annihilationism, or, as some prefer to call it now, “condi- 
tional immortality,” and that of the final restoration and 
salvation of all men. Of£ these two there are again several 
modifications, and even (contradictory of one another as 


they may seem) amalgamations. Each of these we must 
briefly notice. 


I. 


Annihilationism is at the present moment. very widely 
spread, and there are perhaps few Christians who have not 
in some shape or other already met with it. It is a dish 
dressed up by skilful hands to suit very different tastes. 
From Dr. Leask and the various writers in the “ Rainbow ” 
to the editor and contributors to the Christadelphian ; from 
Mr. Morris, late of Philadelphia, to Miles Grant and the 
Adventists of various grades, it is found in association with 
very distinct and very opposite systems of doctrine, from 
Trinitarianism down to the lowest depths of Socinian and 
materialistic infidelity. But, on this very account, it will be~ 


@ well to look at it, not only in itself but in its associatio 8, 


to lead the minds of those who, meeting it in more decent. 
form, may be in danger from its plausible sophistries; to ap? 


prehend what it naturally connects itself with and—preps 


es. 


o 
y é A + 


& zs INTRODUCTION. 


the way for; and, moreover, to arouse the minds of Christians 

in general to a sense of the practical bearing an@ results of 

an evil which is spreading rap and lifting up its head in 
_unlooked for places. 

This may be my justification, if I should lead my readers 
into the examination of points w hich. for the Christian may 
be deemed unnecessary, and speak too of things which 
rightly shock his sensibilities as such: Moreover, I do it 
because upon any. point whatever, where Scripture is 

appealed to, it is due to those. whose minds might be injuri- 
ously affected by the mere secueiny toglecline such an appeal. 
My desire is, God helping me, to meet the hones: need of 
minds unexercised in: the subtleties presented to them, too 
often with a skill which, alas, shows in whose -hands. these 
poor annihilationists areNunw itting instruments. And if, 
in so doing, the very foundations of our faith should have to 

_be examined (and they can sustain no harm by it), it may at 
least (I repeat) serve’ to convince my readers of what is 
brought in question by a false system, which is helping 
to ripen fast the predicted eyil of the later days. 

To come now to the point in hand. We, have a number 
of steps to take before we reach the lowest level of so- 
called Christadelphianism. Materialism is indeed its inev- 
itable tendency; yet a large number of those now holding it 
are by np means matcrialistsyas Edw. White, Heard, Maude, 
Morris, Dobney, ete. On the other hand, Mr. Constable is 
the leader of'a very pronounced materialistic section of this 
school (which we may ¢all the Trinitarian, school of annihi- 
lationism), and with whom, though differing in many ways, 
General Goodwyn fitids his place. The * Adventist ” school, 


on the other hand, with some exceptions, are not only ma.’ 


terialistic but anti-Trinitarian also : to these belong Hudson, 
Hastings* and Miles Grant. Christadelphianism is all this 


and more, a system in which no clement of real Christianity . 


* Messrs, Hudson and Hastings are to some extent exceptions, 


IG Bi OP GI pte BEER 


ER Ge ee ee RR ee 


® whicl 
¢ tainir 
only. 


> 


ty 


“Christians 
results of 
its head in 


ry readers 
istian, may 
ngs which 
er, I do it 
ripture is 
be injuri- 
an appeal. 
: need of 
them, too 
nds. these 

“And if, 
ld have to 
it may at 
f what is 
is helping 


a number 
vel of so- 
| its inev- 
holding it 
1, Maude, 
stable is 
mn of this 
of annihi- 
ny ways, 
” school, 
only ma.’ 
‘Hudson, 
s all this 
ristianity . 


ptions, 


A Cap iss eae Tad 


2 Sapa aaa cet at al ap eon ceunbnet ie 


‘ INTRODUCTION. _ 9g 
\ 


remains behind. They have rightly, therefore, given up the 
name of Christian. — , t 

The psychological question is that upon which these 
writers differ most among themselves. “ Some believe in a 
true trichotomy of body, soul and spirit, as Mr. Heard : 
some are dichotomists, believing the spirit to be superadded 
in the case of the regenerate, as Morris of Philadelphia; 
most are, as already said, materialists wholly. I shall notice 
brietly the main distinctions on these points. : 

1. And first as to the spirit of man. Mr. Heard in his 
“Tripartite Nature of Man” maintains its substantive exist: 
ence in all men, as that which implies. “ God-consciousness,” | 
which the brute has not. | In the unconverted it is deadened 
and inert, but quickened by the’Spirit of God when we are 
born again. With him, as to the latter part: of this, Mr. 

* White agrees, although he can speak of “ the royal qualities 
of spirit, whatever they may be” (*) du a queen-bee, “ which 
incite or enable her to take the lead in migrations or swarm: 
ings,” (!!) so that for him if can scarcely imply what it does, 
for Mr. Heard, and its possession or not by man would seem 
to be of very small account.* He allows it to be, however, 
in him “of a superior order, as ‘the candle of the Lord; ’ 
he has rnore wisdom than, the beasts of the field; neverthe. 
less he shares spirit with all animated natures.” t 

Mr. Morris, othe other hand, believes that the new na_ 
ture communicated in regeneration is alone “ spirit”? in the 
proper sense. The word is used as to the unregenerate only 


© for the “ motions and emotions of the soul.” In Eeel. xii. 7 
) he thinks rwach should rather be “ breath,” or if not; “ it may , 
‘| be used to signify the motion of the soul in passing away 
{ and passing into the custody of God!" . 


Passing downwards towards the naked materialism in 


& which this doctrine ends, we find General Goodwyn algo main- ¥ 
« taining the addition of the spirit to man in regeneration 


% onlv.§ : = a 
Ee ee oa 


* Life in Christ, p_18. : + Ploy. 


10 INTRODUCTION. 


Mr. Constable’s doctrine, gravitating evidently towards 
‘Christadelphianism,” is that the “ spirit ” (rach or nesha- 
nah) in man is the Spirit of God, yet it is identified by 
aim also with the “breath of life;’’ the cause of animation 
to the. body.* God withdraws this at death, and the 
man bréaks up and dissolves away. This view Mr. Warleigh 

(whom Mr. White styles “an able and resolute thinker ”) 
hag adopted, differing ‘only in this—that in the case of 
Christian believers, the Spirit, which he describes as the 
Spirit of God, becomes according to him a distinct. individ- 
ual spirit of the man separable from the soul; and he thinks 


that this “Spirit,” with all the attributes of an individual 
‘mind, survives in paradise till the resurrection, when it 


aoe soul and body at the Lord’s coming.t 

." Not many degrees below this comes the materialism of a 
certain class of Adventists, who may be fitly represented by 
the editor of the World’s Crisis,” Miles Grant, of Boston, 
Mass. He denies that the spirit is other than the breath in 


man, and that it is “the thinking accountable part, or that. 


it ever did or ever will think.”t And this leads him to the 
denial of the personality of the Spirit of God also.- He 
says :§ “2. The word spirit*is used to denote an influence 
proceeding from a being. Hence we read of the Comforter 
or Holy Spirit, that ‘it proceedeth from the Father.” In 
mesmeric operations there is a spirit proceeding from the. 
operator to his subject, by means of which he controls him. 
All men and animals exert this influence more or less.” 

All Adventist annihilationists are not as. gross. as this. 
Messrs. Hudson and Hastings, for instance, are not material- 
ists to this extent evidently, although in the same boat with 
those that are. Messrs. Ellis and Read, in a book which has 
gone through at least six editions, on the other hand, are as 
out-spoken as Miles Grant. They lay down these propo- 
sitions :| | 


* In his treatise gn Uh Hades,” 
Tuoted from “ Life in| Christ,” p.298,n. Spirit in Man, pp. 31,32 


the s 
view! 
taker 
is re 
« Unite 
“4 origit 
4 : title | 
* Birm: 
j to th 


pid. p. tf Bibte r4_ Tradition, pp. 13, 84-87, : 


2 | 


tly towards 
ch or nesha- 
lentified by 
yf animation 
h, and the 
ir. Warleigh 
e thinker ”) 
he. case of 
bes as the 
net. individ- 
id he thinks 
. individual 
on, when it 


rialism of a 
resented by 
of Boston, 
¢ breath in 


art, or that - 


him to the 
_also.- He 
n influence 
Comforter 
‘ather.” In 
; from the. 
ntrols him, 

‘ less.” 

ss. as this. 

t material- 

boat with 

- which has 

and, are as 

xe propo- 


n, pp. 31, 32 


—@ the deity of the Son, the personality of the 


 focalization of His will power, 


=) 
INTRODUCTION. "Yl 


‘* First, we shall prove from the Bible the corporeal 
mortality of the soul, and the nature of the spirit of 
| spirit, not being a living entity, is neither mortal nor immortal. 

“* Ruach (spirit) is derived from ruah, ‘to blow,’ and nesme,* hs 
‘to breathe’(!) primarily signifies ‘wind, air, breath’; but it is, 
| sometimes used to signify a principle, ‘having some relation to: 
electricity, diffused through universal space, a principle that 
stimulates the organs of men and animals into activity, and which 
is used by the animals themselves to control their voluntary 
motions. . . . This principle, being the principle of life in all 
! creatures, is in the hands of God and controlled by Him, hence in 
} Him we live and move and have our being ; and God is the God 
| of the spirits of all flesh ; when God taketh away His Spirit and © 
4 His breath—i. e., God's Spirit and God’s breath—then man 
4 returneth to his earth and his thoughts perish.” 


From this it is scarcely a step down to Christadelphianism, 
the system of the late Dr. Thomas and his followers: Their 
} views have been little, if at all, noticed by any who have - 

taken in hand to reply to annihilationist doctrine ;t yet there 
4 i8 reason to believe they are spreading, not only in the © 
4 United States, but also in Britain, where indeed, their first 


4 ystem is acknowledged in the 


-being and 


| originator had birth. _The’s 
+ title page of a book that lies before me, by Mr. Roberts of 
« Birmingham, England, their present leader, to be “ opposed 
4 to the doctrines of all the names and denominations of 
') Christendom.” They adopt professedly an Old Testament 
| basis, and deny almost all that is distinctive in the New: 
q Spirit, a personal 
y portion of the saints. To quote from 
@ Mr. Roberts’ book,t they believe that « the Father is — 
) eternal and underived, the Son has his origin in the creative 
‘fiat of the Almighty as Adam had; the Holy Ghost is the 
& by means of His ‘ free Spirit,’ 
* There is evidently a Japse here. 
p, as they put it. 


= ft Mr. Clemance has 
emi-Universalism, 


@ devil, and the heaven! 


They mean neshamah is from 


‘put forth a reply, but from the standpoint of 


| $ Twelve Lectures, pp. 180, 140, 144, 


man, which _ , 


SE RGN actu ads esl 


i SRS Re OR iA oma 


wren HEY 


12. 7 


INTRODUCTION, 


which fills heaven and earth.” ‘Nhey believe in ‘a Lamb 
of God, guileless from his paternity and yet inheriting the 
human sin-nature of his mother.” But, being free from ac- 
tual sin, “THe could meet all the claims of ‘God's law upon 
that nature, and yet triumph over its opération by a resur- 
rection from the dead.” God “raised Him from the dead 
to a glorious existence, even to equality with Himself.” 
“ And now life is deposited in Him for our Acceptance, on 
condition of our allying ourselves to Him, yea, on condition 
of our ent¥y into Him.” * Baptism. in water is the cere- 
mony by which Delieving men and women are united with 
Christ, and constituted heirs of ihe life everlasting, which 
He, as one of us, has purchasec.” : i 
In this, its suited home, annihilation flourishes, Spirit ” 
is, according to Dr. Thomas, an clement of the atmosphere, 
existing ordinarily combined with nitrogen and ‘oxygen. 
These three together, the nitrogen, oxygen, and.electricity, 


" constitute the breath and fpirit of lives of all Gow's living 


souls.’"* 

Mr. Roberts asks :— | 

‘What is that whieh is not matter 2 It. will not) do to say 
‘spirit,’ if we aré to take our notions of spirit from the Bible, 
for the Spirit came upon the apostles on the day of Pentecost like 


a mighty rushing wind. and made the place shake, showing jtt | 


to be capable of * mechanien] momentum, #nd_ therefore as much 
on the list of material forees as light, heat and clectricity. Com- 
ing upon Samson, it energized his muscles to the, snapping of 
ropes like thread ; and, inhaled hy the nostrils of man and beast, 


it gives physical life. ”! 


4 
on 


The questions as to the spirit are, therefore, its being or 
not an actual living entity in man: its functions ; and, con- 
nected with this, the personality of the Spirit of God. 

2. As to the soul there is still considerable variety of 
doctrine. Messrs. White. Heard, Morris, Maude and ‘others 
believe very much according to common orthodoxy of the 


——.-. 


* Elpis Israel, p. 30, 


Sala Nicaea lac oo Me 


1 nin se at Ne Aha todas icici 


Seetces pane eed 


¥ 


REESE Be 5 UA ORE fet RAE ite tain 
: z 


FOr the place 9 + Paves ecto, 1 aT. 


1 ‘‘a Lamb 
eriting the 
e from ac- 
$s law upon 
by a resur- 
1 the dead 

Himself.” 
ptance, on 
condition 

the cere- 


nited with 


ing, which 


“ Spirit ” 


mosphere, ' 


oxygen. 
lectricity, 
Ws living 


do to say 
the Bible, 


tecost like . 
owing itt 


> as much 
y. Com- 
ipping of 
ind beast, 


being or 
and, con- 
dl. 

riety of 
d ‘others 
y of the 


. s 


INTRODUCTION, | 13 


soul, and of its survival too. Mr. HTudson also* admits its 
immatcriality, although he supposes it to be “ dependent on. 
embodiment for the purposes of active existence.” Mr. 
Dobney recognizes the probability of the soul being in 
nature distinct trom the body, but denies “a purely disem- 
bodied condition.” t - d . 
Ordinarily, for common materialism, the soul is the animal 
“life,” as with Mr. Constablet down to Miles Grant.§ It is 
“a view which has the merit of simplicity at least, and a par- 
tial foundation in Scripture also; but in this application, as 
in So many others, a mere partial truth may be an absolute 
falsehood. oa 
General Goodwyn differs from this, and his view seems. 
peculiarly his own. The soul for him ig “ that combination 
of parts of the diner man, which is the seat of the mind and 
affections, and, having the breath of lite, gives action to the 
outer members of the body.”| That is, the soul is appar- 
ently the lungs and héart and their connections ! 
A: fourth and a final view (very near akin to Goodwyn’s) 
is common to Messrs. Ellis and Read, and the Christadel- 
phians alike. With these soul and body are one. “A living 
soul”’ with Dr. Thomas j§ “a living, natural or animal 
body.""1_ “ The word soul,” says Roberts, “ simply means 
a breathing creature.” **That which it describes ig spoken 
of'as capable. of hunger (Prov. xix. 15); of being satisfied with 
food (Lam. i. 11-19); of touching a material object (Lev. v. 
2); of going into the grave (Job xxviii. 22-28); of coming 
out of it (Psa, xxx. 3), ete. It is never spoken of as an im- 
material,’ immortal, thinking entity. . . It is not only repre- 


x 


sented as capable of death, but as naturally liable to it,” ete.** 


The questions as to the soul are sufficiently plain in these 
quotations. ; 


* Debt and Grace, p. 250. < : < 
+ Scripture Doctrine of Future Punishment, pp. 93, 141. 
¢ Hades. § The Soul, * Truth and Tradition {_Elpis Israel, p. 21. 


STW St, 


A Tyelye Fectires, Pp. 30, 0, a 


14 


_ 
INTRODUCTION, 


3. As to the future state of the wicked, these writers have 
the merit of almost complete harmony. The wicked are to 
_be “ burnt up,” to be “ extinct,” “ destroyed utterly ” in this 
sense of it, “ blotted out of existence,” ete. The whole 
8 vocabulary of Scripture terms they appeal to as affirming 
this. “Eternal life’ is eternal existence, and this alone the 
righteous have. “ Immortality "18 conditional to those that 
seek for it by patient continuance in well-doing. The rest, 
with the devil (for those that believe in one) will finally—it 
may be after protracted torment in the lake of fire—perish 
and come to an end. Evil will be extinguished, and suffer- a 
ing be over forever; the whole universe left free from 


its incubus, and the restitution of all things he at length 


effected. ‘ 
These writers ditter as to certain points, however. Some 
affirm the resurrection of aj] men; some even deny it as to 


any of the wicked: but these: must be excepted of course 
from the number of those just spoken of. This denial of any — 
real retribution seems spreading, and from a writer 
annihilationists themselves has come forth a Look against it. 
The followers of Thomas helieve in a partial resurrection 
from which infants, idiots, and the heathen are excluded; 
and new birth for them is entry into the resurrection state. y 
Other differences scarcely require to be put forth inan * | 
introduction. We must now turn to the opposite views of 
those who believe in or hope for universal salvation, 


II. 
The Restorationist views are 
require a much briefer notice here. ‘Those who hold them 
are divided into two main schools of thought. The first is 
that of the large Universalist denomination, almost identified 
with the Unitarian denial of Christ and of atonemeft. With 
these we shall have little to. do as far as the Scriptural a 
quiry is concerned, as they have virtually given up Scrip. 

ture, wherever it would interfere at least with entire freedom 


among 


Bese ACh eC sayon neers eee ae alicia leis ana ly es iotinimneas 


more uniform, and will 


tori 
and 
the 

in 0 


of thought. The ethieal-qtestion-isthe question of main 


a 


II; 


vriters have 
eked are to 
‘ly ” in this 
[The whole 
8 affirming 
s alone the 
those that 

The rest, 
finally—it 
re——perish 
and suffer- 


free from 


at length 


r. Some 
y it as to 
of course 
ial of any — 
r among 
gainst it. 
irrection 
xcluded ; 
n state. 
th in an 
views of 


nd will 
Id them 
first is 
lentified 
With 
ural A. 
Scrip- , 
reedom 


iii lla ails cis ola ie ead aap 


- of “ Eternal Hope,” have put them be 


INTRODUCTION. : 15 


interest-and concern with them, and there 


we may have to 
do with them. 


The second schvol is mainly a German importation, where 
it. can boast the names of Bengel and Neander, of Tholuck 
and Olshausen. Through Maurice and others it has grown 
into notoriety in England, and Dr. Farrar’s well-known ser- 
mons in Westminster Abbey, now published under the title 
tore the masses in a way 
to attract almost universal attention. His book has little in it 
that is original, however. being in large part a reproduction. 
of one by Mr. Cox, of Nottingham, in which the three words 
“damnation,” “hell” and « everlasting ” are challenged as 
mistranslations in the same Wiiy as they are by Canon Farrar. 
A third book, ftom which Mr. Cox himself contessedly got 
much, is that of Mr. Jukes, more broadly heterodox than 
either, even to denying ‘in -the Swedenborgian manner the 
resurrection of the dead.? | Atonement. is iso set-aside by 


-his work on restitution ; an unsaved man in Gehenna be- 


comes his vinn sin-offering,+ and rises up to God, while as to- 


every one saved, he is saved by present. death and judg: 


ment,} not Christ’s bearing these for him. 


These statements 
Messrs. Cox and Farrar 


do not indeed reproduce, but the 
thought of atonement is not in their books,§ and it is fair to 
infer that it is not in their minds, Saintly souls for Dr, F- 
their saintliness secures; but for sinners, nay the poor in 
spirit, praying, striving, onizing to gct nearer to the light, 
there may be no remedy but xonian fire.|| True, it is the fire 
of God's love, though in Gehenna, but Christ did not die 
that they might have that. 7 7 

* Mr. White js my authority for this (Life in Christ, p. 330), 
+ Restitutio‘ leat Things, p. 127, + See pp. 72-74. 

, 9 Comp. Salvator Mundi, pp. 156-158. Ana again, 169: “ The his- 
torical cross of Christ js simply a disclosure within the bounds of time 
and space of the eternal passion of the unchangeable God; it is simply 


the supreme manifestation of that redeeming love which always suffers - 


f’ main 


in our 5 work for our salvation from them,” 
| See “ Eternal Hope,” p.-86, ete, 


Q 


16 INTRODUCTION. 


z ' 
These three books, “ Eternal Hope,” “ Salvator Mundi,”* is 

“The Restitution of All Things,” may be fairly taken as Fs 

representative of thig rising school. Of these Canon Farrar fo 


will not allow himself to be classed ag a Universalist.t Two a 6*# 

or three difticult passages stand in\his way, although these 

may only “ represént the ignorance of a dark age,” so that 

“he may still indulge a « hope” for all. It ig a4 hope that 

may make ashamed, no doubt; but he can at least indulge 

' it. When Scripture is so elastic, the 
cannot. 


The principal texts urged by writers of this school have 


re are few hopes we 


cys ii Stati diab sare 
S — mt 
o a ~ 


"grey 
to do with the doctrine of the « restitufion of all things,” = 
which is a Seripture phrase, clippedt to look broader, and i cei 
represent a theory of the restitution of the universe. They ist 
urge God’s being the Saviour of all, and His will that all oe 
men should be saved. Eternal fire is not really eternal, and i mo 
is purgatorial, not penal nor simply retributive. The phrases 4 eva 
for eternity are mostly reduplicative, expressions, as “ages,” 4 for 
or “‘ ages of ages,” and which speak of periods however long, / 4 sug 
yet finite, and in which, according to Messrs. Jukes and Cox, ' alre 
redemptive processes are continually going. on. tor 

They all unite of course in opposing the doctrine of a 
fixed state after death,*and find in the everlasting mercy of 
God a hope, if not quite definite, of all receiving mercy, ‘ h 
Soe!) eae 4 whi 
Therd..is a third school of opinion upor these points, 4 ter. 
which is in its main thought a reviya] of the views of certain 4 redu 
rabbins, and which unites the ideas of annihilation and “| expc 
restoration. The founder isa Mr. Henry Dunn,.and he is... = To-< 
finding followers among former leaders of pure annihilation- i their 
*I have quoted little directly from Mr. Cox’s book, its arguments 4 TI 
being really met in Meeting those of Mr, J ukes, his master, or of Canon = raise 
Farrar, his disciple, both better known. i patie 
tT Mr. Ctemance also refuses the term, | a the s 
f In Acts iii, 21, it is literally « a] things of which God hath spoken a final}: 
by the mouth of all His holy prophets.” This is not_theuniverse at a 
all. _See ehapter-Xxv_ of this hook, gat has 


~ 


itor Mundi,”* 
irly taken as 
Vanon Farrar 
salist.t Two 
though these 
ize,” so that 
a hope that 
east indulge 
w hopes we 


school have 
all things,” 
roader, and 
erse. They 
vill that all 
eternal, and 
Che phrases 
as “ ages,” 
vever long, 
s and Cox, 


otrine of a 
‘mercy of 
mercy, 


se points, 
of certain 
ation and 
and he is.. 
nihilation- 
‘arguments 
or of Canon 


ath spoken 


Se Se a i a tet ali i in 


INTRODUCTION, 17 


ism. Mr. Blain, at eighty years of age, has recalled his 
“ Death not Life,” to replace it by another entitled “ 
for our Race,” in which he advocates’ Mr. Dunn’s theory. 
From it I learn that Mr. Dobney has also given in his ad- 
hesion, and that Mr. Hudson accepted these views before 
his death. Mr. Storrs also, writer of the “Six Sermons,” is | 
4 «at present advocating them in a paper entitled “The Bible 
Examiner.” 


Hope 


Mr. Dunn advocates (quite rightly) the pre-millennial 
coming of the Lord, but Wrongly connects this with a 
general resurrection; after which Christ will be again 
presented to the wicked by the elect church, and then re- 
ceived by almost all. For those remaining obstinate there 
is the lake of fire and annihilation, . 

A recent tract, now being circulated in the United States, 
modifies this statement by confining the number of those ; 
evangelized to those who had not heard the gospel in their- 
former life on earth, and adds the conjecture (startlingly 
suggestive in view of Matt. xxiv. 26) that Christ may 
already be upon earth now, and only be waiting the moment 
to manifest Himself to His people, 


% 
¢ 


IV. 


5 In conclusion I need only allude to Mr. Birks’ view, 


which I have examined at some length in a Separate chap- 
ter. He does not deny eternal punishment, but he does 
reduce it to the minimum; and his views have found an 
expositor and popular poct in the author of “ Yesterday, 
To-day, and Forever,” as the Restorationists have found 
theirs in the present poet laureate. . | 

Thus serious, and thus multiform, are the questions 
raised. They cannot be for many really met without 
patient, protracted examination of the whole subject from. 
the stand-point of Scripture; which, if it_be God’s word, is 


miverse at 


“4 at sea and in darkness, without rudder 


itative; if it be something less than this we are’ 
and without 88 


~ 


nflicting state- 
omfort. of our 
ow of the doc- 


“Meant or not. “Tf so,’ 
a 02 opt ee ae 


he y 


tae dee Set ee eae ee 
x 


“whole man. It may need breath or “ spirit ” ( 
ite sense) to make it capable of fulfilling it 


“J.gravely adduces Rom. viii. 6, where 
Puna rns Gapu 's the “ thinking of the 


‘terms the fleshy tablet of the heart.” 
ce now as evidencing how thoroughly with them the body 


paca 


saa 


r 


q FACTS AND THEORIES 
i AS TO A. RUTT RE. STAGES : 


= 


° 


PART L—\MAN AS HE IS, , 


v7 


y 
Vy 


CHAPTER I, 
: TS THE. BOY ALL ? 


IN the language of absolute materialisin thé body is the _ . 
in the Thomas- ae 
s furictions, but 

in materialistic language, thought, reasony mind; are proper- 

ties pertaining to “brain in human form.” Dr. Thomas ‘ 

he translates r6 ppd- ‘ 


flesh,” as an Hrefrag- > 
ble proof that the “flesh is the thinking substance,” i. €., 


he brain; which, in another place, he adds, the apostle 


(!)* Tvorily quote 


is allt The man, they say, was such hefore the breath ot j 
eu Elpis Israel,”’ p. 80. : 
t Roberts objects that iu ix uot 


‘ , 
detined whether living body is 
\he says, “ we admit the charge of holding that. 
| , : 


man, and are wondering what objection - 
: . 4 . . . Pik, es . . 

r. Grant himself. can have to this view; for, even with his immortal 

ouk theory, he cannot ay regarding the living body as the whore 


~ § 


4 


RT 8 MLE ENT SOT TRIM WRN NURTETN 


in., fo 
the B 


nel 
cating 
anyth 
and g 
Th 
layer 
gin ; 
tube, 
tube 
little 
force 
bears 
‘of th 
the | 
prev 
W 
muz 
wrol 
thre 
7. 


and 


rmly howe. 6 = ° 

The A tube is now tested under hydraulic pressure to 
f cup'fits and that there is no leakage, 

bimech end is now turned. over to the length of 32 
in., for tie B thbe (in these guns the breech coil is culled 
the DB tuit,). previously made of two coils, and a gas chan- 
nel jy in. wide is cut epirally round the A tube, communi- 
cating by star grooves at the end, with the gas escape, If 
anything gives way about the breech end, the or as 
and gives warning. : 

The tube is nade double at this part, so that iGeMe 
layer gives way. the gas may escape without buféting the 
gin; and also it enables, by the shrinking on of the B 
tube, greater strength to be given to this part. The whole 
tube ia tifen fine turned to ptoper dimensions, allowing a 
little play between it and the casing, 80 that it can be easily 
foreed in, Great care is taken that the breech end of tube 
bears fairly against the bottom ofthe bore. The curved part 


‘of the end of the barrel is made with a longer radius than 


the corresponding curve in the cast iron, the spa¢e between 
preventing a wedge-like action, tending to split the casing. 
When the tube is adjusted, the collar is screwed in at the 
muzzle, and the hole bored ‘under the trunnions; and a 
wrought iron pin screwed in, The bore is then rifled, with 
three small gugoves. 
‘ The old vent is closed by a wrought iron screw plug, 
and the new vent drilled a little from, the breech end. A 


e 7 eee 


B tube, 


ed 


Vent. 


bee! 


w : 
20 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


life was breathed into him. “Dust. thou art” expresses 
what he is. in his whole being. Says Mr. Constable, “God 
formed man of the dust of the ground. Mere we have the 


figure as it lay lifeless and thoughtless ; and yet this figure - 


was man. We cannot dispute this, for God tells us_ 80 
Himself. It was man, before he could’ think, or feel, or 
breathe.”* To this being of course the inspiration of the 
breath of life gives life. “Soul” with Mr. Constable, as 


with most of similar views, is “life”; with Dr. Thomas and ; 
his party it is sometimes that, sometimes. the breathing: 


Jrame ;° i. ¢., of course the body. Spirit is either the breath 


za Of life itself, or a principle contained init, a kind of vital: 


izing energy. The man himself is the body-—the dust 
that lies‘ in the grave. Spirit and soul “way again abe 
disassociated trom man; man may return to his old con: 
dition ere he had them at all, and the dead body they have 
left is then the man, the person, the self."+ |“ Where,” is 
Mr. Blain’s emphatic challenge, “ where does the book of 
nature or the book of God tell what, soul or man is ‘made of, 
except in the earth-wide and heaven-broad declaration, 
‘Dust thou art’? tT % 

Confidence so assured ought to be well founded, The 
answer is easy, that they are only quoting one side of 
Scripture, with their eyes shut to all that. is inconsistent 
with their theory. Mr. Constable. tor instance, thus repre- 


sents and characterizes “the current opinion of Christendom.” 


“Man is with them a soul, which may or may not inhabit 


the body, but which, whether inhabiting the body or not 
inhabiting it, is the true and proper man. 


Rt 


This opinion we 


a nn ae ee 


man, since the living body contains (‘) that which; his theory teaches 

him to regard as the principal part of man.” / 
So that, if the house contains the man, the man and the house are 

all one with Mr. Roberts! Even this is hot quite the full statement, 

as witness Mr. Constable’s language further on. But Mr,’ R. may put 

in “living” if he please: a living body is. still n 

soul. 


* Hades, p. 2. + Ib., p. 5. t Death not Lite, tr) ed. p, 42. 


ot the spirit nor the 


a ibis ie i 2s 


STATE, 


it” expresses 
stable, “God 
‘e we have the 


yet this figure | 


d tells us so 
ik, or feel, or 
iration of the 
Constable, as 


- Fhomas and , 
he breathing. 


er the breath 
<ind of’ vital- 
ly—the dust 
AY again be 
his old) con: 
ly they have 
“Were,” is 
the book of 
nis made of, 
declaration, 


nded. ~The 
one side of 
inconsistent 
thus repre- 
ristendom.” 
hot inhabit 
ody or not 
opinion we 


leory teaches 


1e house are 
I] Statement, 
'R. may put 
rit nor the 


OS, tia Ea nc gaa 
t 


. order to make it suit them, is 


IS THE BODY ALL? 


believe to be the very foundation 
amount of false doctrine. 
human nature has tainted the theology of centuries,”* 

Now, how is it possible that Mr. Constable has never 
seen that this “ current opinion of Christendom,” which he 
is opposing, is the statement of Scripture, no less than is his 

own ? that, if there are on the one side passages such as 
those he quotes, which seem to make the body all, there 
many oh the other side that would equally seem to make 
the body nothing ? Thus we read: « The life that. I now 
live tn the flesh” (Gal. ii, 20); “IFT live in the flesh ” (Phil. 
1. 22); “Whilst we are dt home in the body” (2 Cor. vy. 
6); “ Willing rather to-be absent from the body ” (ver. 8);. 
“Whether in the body or ot of the body, I cannot tell ” 
(xii. 3); “As being yourselves also in the 
3)» “In my flesh shall I see God ” 
ing that I must put off this my tabernacle ” (2 Pet. i. 14), 

Now I ask Mr. Constable, is not here the very language 
he objects to, the foundation stone (as being Scripture) not 


are 


(Job xix. 26): “ Know. 


of error but of truth eS | accept his view that such expres- .. 
. sions are indeed the fundamental opposite of his 
On the materialistic suppositign the language used in these | 


Opinions, 


passages never could haye arisen, It is not 4 question of 
the interpretation of any special text, but of the use of 
words which contradict at the outset the whole materialistic 
philosophy. Men have soucht to evade it by interpreting 
the phrase “in the body ” to mean “in this body,” as if it 
were in contrast with the glorious body of the resurrection. 
But the fact that they have to change the expression, in 
a clear evidence that it does 
For in the resurrection man will 
though it be raised glorious as it 
; and in point of fact, it is to the resurrection body that 

Job refers: “Th my flesh shall I 
They may perhaps quote agains. this, that “flesh 


not suit them as it is. 


~—, 


ad) 


body” (Heb. xiii.- 


| ) | 
ptee™ f 
stone of an mmaang 
This false philosophy regardin i‘ 


he: 


7 & 


edn, 42. 


e ue 


* Tades, p. 4, 


22° ~—« FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God ;” but it will 
not avail them; for the Lord’s own expression as to His 
own body in resurrection is, that He had “ flesh and bones,”* 
though not “ flesh and blood,” and it is the combination of 
the two of which the text: cited speaks.t And the Lord 
was raised from the dead, the “ first fruits” and pattern of 
our resurrection from the beginning, not raised and changed 
afterwards, even as they thi Mrleep in Him are “raised t 
in glory.” There is no esd {fom the plain speaking of the 


: tart. Hee ee : ; 
passage ‘in Job, that to that’ which is ‘raised in glory ” he 


refers. And this alone is positive proof that “in the flesh” 
or “in the body” does not, as a phrase, speak of a present 
corruptible body in contrast with an incorruptible one. 

. And there are other texts which would still stand in the 
way of their establishment of this position, if the passage in 
Job were gone. For when the apostle says of his vision gf 
the third heaven, that he could not tell whether he was “in 
the body or out of the body,” no words are needed to 
assure us that here there was no question of the resurrec- 
tion body. For it was not when he was up in the third 
heaven, that he did not know if he were “out of the body ; * 
had it been so, there might have been some kind of doubt 


as to whether he might not: have fancied, in the entrance- - 


ment of the vision, that the resurrection had alread y come. 


But his words are precise and prohibit absolutely such a 


supposition. He could not, wi the time he wrote, question 
whether he had been clothed with the resurrection body,” 
and again lost it on his return to carth. Yet here « in the 
body ” and “out of the body“ are just as much in contrast 
as “at home in the body” and “absent from the body ” in 
2 Cor. v. 6-8. And as “out of the body” cannot in this 
case mean “in the resurrection state,” so “in the body ” 
cannot mean, as they would make it, “in this corruptible 
state.”§ 
* Luke xxiv. 89. +1 Cor, xv.60. 41 Con, xv. 43. 
§ To all this Mr. Roherts demurs upon the warrant, as he represents 


of Hi 


Ghd 1 
alr 
in 
Pai 
not 
the 
Op} 
the 
WOl 

E 
wer 
(see 
Chr 
lang 


- doe 


A 
witl 
the 
resu 
deli 
soul 
may 

"As 
at a 
“my 
Thin 
sowe 
with 
vict j 

He 
he ta 
the “ 
an ex 
“ Abs 
bility 
Way ¢ 


Ho 
stylin 


it, of Rom. vii, 12 Cor, i & ane atist-of passages of the class 


wm 


“ 


why “ 


ATE. 
but it will 
as to His 


nd dones,”* 
ination of 


v 


the Lord in the first passage to mean“ my body,” and argues thereupon that 
pattern of , Paul calls his “ flesh” himself, and moreover attributes sin toit, and 
; « not to his soul! He does not see that in ver. 25 the apostle opposes 
d changed [> the “mind” to the« flesh,” and identifies himself with the former in 
> “raised t {opposition to the latter. If, as with Mr. Roberts, the“ mind ” is only 
cing of the ‘the working of the flesh, nd such distinction is possible. The apostle’s - 
glory "he words are thus conclusively against him, : 
the flesh ” Hopeless indeed would be man’s condition if the flesh and the body 
: were but one, an! “they that are in the body could not please God” 
pr erent (see Rom. viii. 8), and strange enough what the apostle affirns of 
one Christians, that they are “not in the flesh.” The whole use ‘of the 
nd in the language here is foreign to materialistic speech. As to the Scripture 
assage in - doctrine of the flesh we shall have to, speak of it hgreafter. ae 
vision gf As to 2 Cor. i. 8, we may easily admit that Paul identifies himself a 
> was “in with the body there, without in the least invalidating the testimony of 
the texts which use an opposite style, Nor does Paul “ look here to 
ceded to resurrection for hope,” but to the God of rdsurrection, and gets present 
resurrec- deliverance. On the other hand, the belief in the immortality of the 
the third soul does not in the least set aside the hope of resurrection. As we 
p body ; B may by and by see, it secures it, ; i 
of doubt As to Mr. R.’s list of texts, no Christian has any difficulty with them : 
pritrance: > all. But think of quoting “my pEcEAsE” (2 Pet. i, 15), literally, | 
“my exodus” or “departure,” to support a materialistic purpose! 
q y come. Think of supposing “Z was unknown by face,’ or “ whatever a man 
y such a s soweth, that shall HE reap,” or “avenged the blood of His SERVANTS,” 
question {with all the emphasis that italics arid small capitals can give, will con- 
on body, a vict immortal soulists by their bare citation! 
. “in the 3 He then comes*to the passages which he has to meet. In Gal. ii. 20, 
“he takes the apostle as expressing present existence in contrast with - 
contrast ‘ the “ life that is to come.” But that is not the question. Why such 
ody ” in a im expression as “in the flesh” at all,if he were nought but fleshg 
| in this 4 “ Absence trom the body,” again, cannot be resurrection by any possi- - 
. body Me = bility whatever. So as to Job, how else could Job see God, in Mr. R.’s 
ruptible a way of thinking, except indeed, as he says in another case, he dreamed 
<=; of Him? And that will scarce do here. 
oaeietaccmenac How decisive these passages really are against him Mr. R. shows by 
styling them “ the inevitable ‘ rrcrions’ of mortal speech.” But why 
fabs inevitable? Cou'd not. materialism indeed dispense with the? And 
ec 


IS .THE BODY ALL? 23 


Roberts suggests that “without the body ” means that 
“ the things were seen as ina dream.” But how is even a 


already adduced by Messrs. Constable and Blain. He takes “ my flesh ™ 


\ 


why “ fictions,” if after all they convey his meaning ? 


6 


+ FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 
dream “without the body,” as he phrases it? The apostle | nof 
puts it still more forcibly, “ ove vf the body.” Nor has he 4. the 
any \loubt of being actuall y caught away to Paradise, a place = gcic 


that \for Mr. Ro grts has “no present existence; it is the of 
ed earth, in‘ his belief}. Did Mr. Roberts ever (with = 
his theory of thinking flesh, moreover) even dream with- « ing 
out the\ body, and then awake, and be ignorant ever after,’ Pat 


whether\or not he had been carried bodily to a place which a If i 
he knew had no existence ? & whi 
The terns then abide in all their simplicity, full of the § 
meaning which from their simplicity they possess. Nay, 4 be § 
if the comments of: Annihilationists were just, their force ’ Anr 
would be littl affected. For, be it in contrast with a regur- 4 Scri 
rection body ok not (as certainly in these last places itis’ ~ @oq 
not), still the ware himself’ is looked at as “1x the body; ” » “der 
not the soul is in\it, or the spirit is in it merely, but the _ his t 
MAN. That which\lies in the body (and that is the force are | 
of the expression in \2 Cor, y. 6)* is the man. So much go } ident 
that the body is looked at as the « tabernacle” (2 Pet. j. 14), = spirit 
which the man “puts ofK” _ from 
We have not yet inquited who or what the inhabitant of | upon 
the body is. Be it spirit ‘er soul, or both together, the © authe 
phraseology of Seripture in these texts asserts that the body | Mr. ( 
has such an inhabitant. And this language it is that Mr. “nor s 
Constable accuses (under anothe Jame, no doubt) as being” © % body 
“the very foundation stone” of the doctrine he opposes. 2 may | 
Scripture, then, he is witness to himself, lays thus the foun- = of the 
dation of the immortality of the soul. Paul sees visions, and i catior 
has so little thought that the body is all, that he does 4 gener 
; ee as | the u 
*The word ysed js EVONUER, “to live atoor in a place” (Liddell 4 ane 
and Scott)... Mr. Roberts’ commuent is: “ All that-constitutes our indi- ae * Mr 
viduality” [what is this according to him 1] “dwells in the body of our a no ver} 
humiliation but the destiny of the saint is to have this corruptible = lief of 
clothed upon with a subduing energy, that will change it from flesh. a could r 
and blood nature into spirit nature.” In no place is it said that we are ~~ * lieve tl 
clothed with an « energy; but Mr. R. wanted something to clothe, ‘ae Then 
and he could hardly clotne one body. with anether body. » the bod 


STATE, 


The apostle 

Nor has he 
adise, a place 
ce; it is the 
is ever (with 
dream with- 
t ever after, 
place which 


> 


full of the 
sess. Nay, 
their force 
ith a resur- 
places it is’ 
the body; ” 
ly, but the 
3 the force 
© much s0 
/Pet.i. 14), 


abitant of 
ether, the 
t the body 


that Mr. be 


) as being 
2 Opposes. 

the foun- 
isions, and 
; he does 


2” (Liddell 
es our indi- 
ody of our 
corruptible 
from flesh. 


to clothe, 


spike ae 


SHES ESA Sea p na a pes 


18 THE BODY ALL? 25 


not know whether he was in it or not, at the time he saw. 
them. Plainly, therefore, he supposes he might be a con- 

; scious, intelligent witness of unutterable things while “out 
of the body.” 

We are prepared, then, to answer! Mr. Blain’s confident 
inquiry, if at least we may take for granted that that which 
Paul thought might be “out of the body” is not “dust.” 
If it be, it is at any rate dust which is not the body, and 
which can exist consciously in separation from it. ‘\. 

_ The question is thus a long way toward settlement. If it 
be still asked, What about the texts which, on their side, 
' Annihilationists lay stress upon? Is not “ dust thou art” 
4 Scripture? And is it not equally written that “the Lord 
* God formed man of the dust of the ground”? and that 
~ “devout men carried Stephen ”—not his body merely—“ to 
his burial” ? . a 
I answer, it is just as plain that in these texts man is 
+ identified with his body, as he is in the former ones with his 
' spirit or his soul. It would. be Wrong to argue. exclusively 
_ from either class of passages: as wrong to say man is all soul, 
_ upon the authority of one, as to say he is all body, upon the 
authority of the other. This last is the Vitiating error of 
| Mr. Constable's whole argument. Neither body, nor soul; 


eC ee eNO ET TY toe Se 


stitial 


Ne oS NS 


“nor spirit, isthe man exclusively, but “spirit and soul and 


» body” (1 Thess. y. 23) make up the man; insomuch that he 
3 may be, and is, identified with either, according to the line 
of thought which is in the mind of the speaker; his identifi- 
cation with the body, which man sees and touches, being in 
general the language of sense, while faith identifies him with 
the unseen “spirit.* Our poor Annihilationists see and 
Sree ee en Se Se eee 

* Mr. Roberts’ attempts to answer. this are strange enough, and need 
no very long examination. Te asserts that faith is nothing but “ be- 
lief of promise,” and has to do only with the future! 


Se er ——— 


So that one 


ge could not “ by faith understand that the worlds were Made,” or « be-. 
hat we are «8 


> lieve that God is’! 


Then he will have it that, the spirit js reeognized by 378?, a8 much as 


» the body, because « spirit” is sometimes used for « anger” in Scripture, 


aia SA ig. he a SAE Kn. 


nah ys 


~yrterergma 


eect nase 


26°) FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 
confess what sense recognizes, and are blind to the other. 
It isa sad evidence of their condition. . 

Of the Lord Jesus Himeelf, I read in the account: of His 
burial, “ there laid they Jesus,” and that J oseph “took Him 
down, and wrapped JZim in the linen, and laid Him in the 


sepulchre ” (John xix. 42; Mark xv. 46). Is this, therefore, 


conclusive: that the Lord was “all body,” as similar words 


about Stephen would seem to be to some, that he was ? 
Take some of Mr. Constable’s emphatic statements, which 
he does not hesitate to apply* to the Lord Himself. He con- 
tends that the common opinion leads to “the absurdity, of 
supposing that death has converted one person into two. In 
life there was but one Abraham, in death there are two! . 


Lnlife therewas but one Christ during the three duys of His 
death there were two! . 


- . One Christ was in Joseph’s tomb ; 
another Christ was preaching to spirits in prison, or other- 
wise busily occupied ” ! Which of’ these Christs is the true 
one for him he does not leave doubtful. The “ Bible per- 
sists in calling the body ‘when dead the man. It says that 
Abraham and Jacob and David . . : ‘are in the grave, and it 
never says that they are in heaven, or anywhere else but in 
the grave.” Of necessity, then, this must be the conclusion : 
If spirit is but the impersonal breath of life, and soul but the 
life resultant, then, when these had departed, there was 
nothing of Christ but what was laid in the grave. It 
may be said, of course, that the words apply only to the 
humanity of the Lord, and not to His divinity. This 
| ‘argument for Mr. Constable wil] not hold. The Lord, 


St, 


ee 


and it does not require faiih to note that a man is angry ! 


ectricity, it is rather a wonder-he did no 
insulate a person, and demonstrate his « spirit” stif’more 

Then he thinks that « faith cometh by [the sense of] hearing ”” helps 
his.case ; but-how, he does not make clear, as it is no question of how 
it comes at all. Mr. R. surely must.allow that the human spirit (in our 
lew of it at least) is a thing unseen, and faith is the « evidence of 


things unsten..” This is the ground of the statement he objects to, 
ww” * Hades, p. 7, 


As the spirit 
t prépose to 
satisfactorily, 


iis Site fae ahaa Oe Ra iaa agai = 
— 
mo) 


=) 


| STATE, 


to the other. 


ccount of His 
yh “took Him 
1 Him in the 
his, therefore, 
similar words 
that he was ? 
ments, which 
self. He con- 
absurdity, of 
into two. In 
re two!l... 
days of His 
seph’s tomb ; 
on, or other- 
3 is the true 
‘‘ Bible per- 
It says that 
vrave, and it 
> else but in 
conclusion : 
soul but the 
there was 
grave. It 
ynly to the 
nity. This 
The Lord, 


As the spirit 
t prépose to 
satisfactorily. 
aring ” helps 
stion of how 
spirit (in our 
evidence of 
jects to, 


We acres 


| not divide the one Person into two! 


ih AR a esi 


» so, “the Lord,” in the whole force 


e 


I8 THE BODY ALL ?, 27 


divine and human, was in life but one person. Death could 
The PrErson, Mr. 
Constable says, is the body that lay in the tomb: Deity, 
soul and spirit go for nothing. The Lord was in the grave 
and nowhere else! Dare Mr. Constable abide by his own 
conclusions 

All have not formulated the doctrine as completely. His 
logical consistency has carried him where, we may hope, 
many will hesitate to follow. But as to the consistency 
there can be no question. Just as simply and as surely as 
“David” or “Stephen ” is said to denote the whole person- 
ality of David or of Stephen, so (after the same mode of 
interpretation) must “ Christ” and “the Lord” denote the 
whole erin of Christ. Now, let me ask, was there a 
true dnd personal Christ who survived death, or not? If 


of that expression, did 


* not lie in Joseph’s tomb; the words are only an example of 


the language of sense which applies to the material part 
/ 


which we see and touch, and we are manifestly precluded 
. frpty carrying them further. . Now, if the Lord lay in the 


ae 
A See 


4 they are strangers to. 
-# horrible thoughts were 


Afrave, and yet the higher part did not lie there, so (plainly) 


» might. David, or Stephen, or Moses, lie in the grave, and yet 


have another and higher part of 
there. is 

Thomasism, with its fearless self-conyistency in error, and 
shameless denial of the glory of His Person, does not 
shrink from the extreme result. The One who, walking on 
earth, could yet say, “The Son of man who is in heaven,” | 
But I would ask even them, if their ° 
true, how He who had « power to 


them which did not, lie 


4 lay down His life,” had (after having laid it down) ‘“ power. _ 
3 


to take it again.” Ifthe dead are nothing, and know noth: 

ing, as they teach, how could a dead body have power te 

take its life back? (John x. 18).* How could He say 
en Se oS Ae ne ee ETN! 


— 


* Roberts contends that 


here—“the word translated ‘power’ is 
he idea of ag power 


outa, which carries with it not so much t 


Leas Lae aati ting esas Bias 


AaBeiv must he & take ” 


28 - FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE ST 


ATE, 


“Destroy this temple, and in three days Z will raise it up ? 
He spake of the temple of His body,’* 
possible even to equivocate. For it was one. who spake of 
His own body, who said //e would raise it ‘up. They can- 
not say it was the Father-speaking of “ His own body,” and 
therefore their constant manceuvre fails them here, If Jesus, 
then, raised up His own body, there must have been One not 
buried in that tomb of Joseph, One' surviving death, to raise 
it up. Death is not, then, extinction,. for Jesus truly 
“died.” That “the Lord lay” in Joseph’s tomb is truth, 
but not the whole truth. Insisted on ag such, it becomes 
fatal and soul-destroying error, 
The language of Scripture, then (as Mr. Constable is wit- 
ness), lays the foundation stone of the soul’s immortality in 
its assertion that the man dwells in the body, and this is not 
denied by its speaking elsewhere 23 if the body were the 


man. From its own point of view, each of these things is 
true. ‘ 


a 


Ilere it is scarcely 


as power in“the sense of authority, ” 
instead of “take,” 5 


~ = 


Aafziv he translates receive ” 


It is true éz0vere is « power delegated, authority.” It adds to the 
thought of power that of right. It is the word used in Matt.x.1; Mark 
11.10: iii, 15: vi. 7; Luke iy. a pea a Et ccs oh pa John xix. 10, ete., mh 
all which it is quite impossible to exclude the idea of competency te 
perform whatever there was authority for. You eould not clothe a 
mere corpse with © authority,” 


Tt would be mockery, And, therefore, 
. and not receive.” 
* Jobin ii, Iyeee, 


© Ve Ga etited 


that 


- many) 
It is 
“AS 8a 
“to tal 


4 Th 


wery 


“aquest 
“Tema 
4 . 


1 STATE, 


ll raise it up ? 
bit is scarcely 
who spake of 
» ‘They can- 
nm body,” and 
re. If Jesus, 
been One not 
leath, to raise 
Jesus truly 
mb is truth, 
1, it becomes 


stable is wit- 
mortality in 
id this is not 
ly’ were the 


se things is 


a 


ites “receive ”’ 


It adds to the 
tt.x.1; Mark 
x. 10, ete., th 
ompetency te 
not clothe a 
nd, therefore, 


- “to take it asa settled thing: 
¥ f O 
ee {apparent] y) of how little they are themsely 


ofPerhays it m 
“Bhe whole 


MAN A TRIUNE BEING, 


sn. 3 Gn a tenetaees Zr cite SP gin 


; CHAPTER IT. 


MAN A TRIUNE BEING. 


1? 


| WE are now prepared for the question, Wh 
_ of man which dwells in the body ? 
‘cal constitution of man as defined by 
| The answer from 1 Thess. y. 
soul and body”: “ And the ver 
wholly; and I pray God that 
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.” The prayer is, manifestly, for the sanc. 
tification of the whole man to God, and to emphasize it, as it 
were, it is, that man is divided into his three constituent 
¥ Perts, and the sanctification of the whole man is interpreted 


to be the preservation blameless before God of « spirit, soul 
and body.” 3 


Of course this is denied 


the Scriptures ? 

23, is, that he is “ spirit and 
y God of peace sanctify you 
your whole spirit, and soul, 


° on the part of those who hold 
that the body is the whole man; but it is also denied by 


_ many others who are far enough from holding their: views. 
It is a point, therefore, which must be seriously weighed, and 
“as satisfactorily as possible decided, before we are entitled 


The abjections of Anpi 


4 ilationists need not detain us 
‘very long, 3s few indeed 


Seem to have looked at the text in 


question. The comment of Ellis and Read upon it is a 
emarkable specimen of thelr style of. reaso 


2 ning,. as well as 
: es convinced by 
! an,” they say, “ that m4n has tine ghosts. 
ay mean your disposition, and life, and person, 
compound nature of man, for spirit sometimes 


N 


“This cannot me 


29 


at is this part 
Or, What is the physi- 


sg 


“freans_person,”* __should_think 


as-they have evidently 
- -* Bible rx. Tradition, p. 7 eae 


+ 1 


epee ee a a 


enn 


30 * FACTS AND THEORIES AS-TO A FUTURE STATE, 


translated “spirit” as “ disposition ” already, that according 
to their interpretation, buy ought to mean “ person,” and 
also, that. it would be in far better accordance with their 
But they can scarcely expect others to be satisfied 
40. satisfy themselves, for they add, 
in defiance of all criticagyy : “And 1 Thess. v. 23 may also 
have been a little amendeg bi some officious copyist™ ! (p. 21) 
But even so, they are not "yet satisfied, and, having in the 
meanwhile forgotten that “ spirit” means per 
ther add: “ And the spiritual ature 
docs,not naturally belong to man, but is guperinduced as a 
subsequent aud peculiar development in the cases of those 
fitted themselves to Christ.” (p. 22). | 
Mr. Roberts, disavowing “the uncertain 
statements ” of Ellis and Read, tries to i 
words in the text by tbody,” “life” and“ mind.” In this 
statement of his, “ lite” and “mind!” 
soul and spirit. But that they are| not equivalents, accord- 
Ws have but too lately been 
listening to his theories of thinkin flesh, to he able to accept 
his identification of the mind with the spirit. 1 
may be identified, his views do not identity them. His own 
words in this connection are; “ Thought is a power devel- 
oped by brain organization, and consists: of impressions 
made upon that delicate organ through the medium of the 
senses, and afterwards classified and arranged by « function 
pertaining in different degrees to brain in hima 
Plainly, then, with him ain i 
power inherent in the flesh, though spirit be needed to give 
vitality to the brain, just as‘it would be for the muscles. It 
as’ he quotes with approbation 


with what evidently fail 


rson, they fur- 
, be it remembered, 


who have sul 
iin‘| contradictory | 
gpaphrase the three 
answer, respectively, to 


ing to his view, is evident. 


‘ruly, as these 


known as reason.” 


ies: 


is “the flesh that’ thinks,” 


So, also, is “life” with him not the equivalent of “ soul.” 
Of course he often has to interpret it \80, but he is. inconsis- 
tent with himself in doing this. -‘ Soul,” again, is for Dr. 
Thomas and himself but_“ body”; 


. then, 
~ blam 
ducer 
apost 
Wi 


© Morri 


here « 


oe Th: 


- soul a 


new a 


2 is bort 
4 body.’ 


the life of the body. Sov is the body’s life. and, therefore. 


ATE, 
t according 
erson,” and 
with their 
be satisfied 
r they add, 
5 may also 
t ! (p. 21). 
ying in the 
2, they fur- 
membered, 
luced as a 
1s of those 


J). 


tradictory | 


v the three 
”’ Tn this 
sctively, to 
its, accord- 
ately been 
» to accept 
ly, as these 

His own 
ver devel- 
npressions 
um of the 
1 function 
ute form, 
tig only a 
ed to give 
uscles. It 
probation 


of “ soul.” 
, Inconsis- 
s for Dr. 


ees Boat 


MAN A TRLUNE BEING. 31 


in a secondary sense, is used for it in Scripture. In Dr. 
Thomas’ theory, no basis is left for the secondary meaning. 
The life is with him simply the result of the ruach or breath 
of life upon the body. It isnot a third constituent that could 
be set side by side with the body and the spirit. 
4 There is then no “combination of bédy, soul and Spirit 
_ as constituting the whole man” in 
anxious as he is to be apostolic in doctrine, and have it 
appear so. Combination of body and spirit for him make 
the living soul, and the combination of these two cannot 
become a third principle along with these. There is no 
third constituent this way, and even one of these is only “an 
| element of the atmosphere.”* These are the three things, 
' then, that the apostle prays may be sanctified or preserved 
blameless, the body, the breath of life, and the vitality pro- 
duced by it!t It is plain then that Thomasism and the 
apostolic statement do not agree. 

With the last sentence quoted trom #llis and Read Mr. 
Morris is in near agreement. He also interprets * spirit * 
here of s new and spiritual nature. Of John iii. 6 he says, 
“«That which is born. of the flesh’ is a child, constituted of 
soul and body; but ‘that which is born of the Spirit ’ is a 
new and spiritual constituent of personal being. He who 
is born of the Spirit is constituted of a‘ spirit and soul and 
body.’ , 

I shall be obliged to reserve to another chapter the con- 
sideration of what “ spirit ” is, and whether his proposition, 
that it is never applied to mar as such “in a substantive 
sense,” is warranted by Scripture usage. | That the new 
nature of the children of God is “ spirit,” according to our 


Mr. Roberts’ system, 


nee Sifiaa’ " 
NST a RES Nae 3 a mit 


* 


s Elpis Israel, p. 30. 


“2° +“ In this sense,” says Mr. R., “ we stand as stoutly as Mr. Grant by 


® ¥ Thess, v, 23. ;”” and awhile. afigewards adds, “ Mr. Grant is guilty of 
® treating as a sryntite analysis of human nature the Jervent HYPERBOL-* 


cannot_be 
therefore. 


J) 18M of an apostolic benediction ”! Why stand stoutly by a mere ex. 
'% aggerated expression ? 
t What is Man, p. 57, 


. e 


o . e 


82 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


Lord’s words, is what none can with ap vearance of truth 
: PI 


vs 


+ In the margin.‘ minding,” ppdr nua. 


\ 


it 
deny ; but. upon the face of what he says himself, his explan- 4 i 
ation of the text in this way is thoroughly inconsistent and f ne 
untrue. For the “ flesh;” he says, in the words of the Lord, 4 be 
John iii. 6, is “the whole natural man, and the entire off. . (Bees 
spring of the natural man, soul and body” (p. 37). The j a 
apostle then puts down this soul and hody, of which nothing = YO" 
good can come, side by side with the new and Spiritual =~ ae 
nature, which (still according to Mr. Morris’ citation of Gal, 7” a 
v. 17, 22-25) it lusts against, and is contrary to,—praying i Se 
that they may be sanctified together! If this be his delib. — “t# 
erate. doctrine I cannpt tell. It ‘is the doctrine of his. ea 
« follower, Mr. Graff,* who has only carried out his views to sees 
their necessary conclusion, Whether or no, L would refer | snes 
him to Rom. viii. 6-8 for his answer, that “the mind of the anise 
flesht is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law shee 
_ of God, neither indeed GAN BE,” and that is why “they ee 
that are in the flesh cannot please God.” Kverr the one who Cee 
in the seventh chapter could say, “with the ménd I myself Bu 
serve the law of God,” had to add, “ but with the Jesh the © at pr 
law of sin,” and if soul and body have this character, poor spirit 
_hope would there be of their being “ preserved blameless» I ans: 
to the coming of' our Lord Jesus Christ ! ” S that 1 
_ The grossness of. this mistake lies in its materialism, be proof 
Even Mr. Morris, little as he would like to be identified with g Seript 
this, cannot see in the “ flesh” anything less material thanthe ofthe 
body, although perhaps in connection with the soul, which } Gaimm 
he allows to be in it. Allis referred to man’s physical con-- 4 BECAT 
stitution, but with this glaring inconsistency with Scripture, 7 hero u 
' that, aheke the word of ‘&6éd_ condemns the flesh, with its ~~ 9 [ go » 
“—tter-evil,to-hopeless destruction, Mr. Morris’ doctrine puts the an 
the old nature along side of the new, to be sanctitied. S ier us 
Now, in the text as to which I have been speaking, § 4 Woliey. 
1 Thess. v. 23, it is. plain by the terms “soul” and “ body,”” 3 
* In“ Graybeard’s Lay Sermons.” ' 


TATE. 


ie of truth 
, his explan- 
nsistent and 
f the Lord, 
» entire off. 
. 37). The 
ich nothing 
il spiritual 
tion of Gal. 
0,—praying 
¢ his delib- 


rine of his: © 


1is views to 
vould refer 
nind of the 
to the law 
why ‘they 
he one who 
dt myself. 
he flesh the 
acter, poor 
. blameless : 


1aterialism. 
tified with 
ial than the 
oul, which 
ysical con- 
Scripture, 


sh, with its 


ctrine puts 

ied. 
speaking, 

d “ody,” ° 


TE 


( 
gals ate 
Sa a a AS, 


na 


¥ + here upon ground not familiar to many a Christian; nor-can 
_, [do more than touch upon it either. I would only say that 


" ul 
— 


33 


vs 


MAN A 'TRLUNE BELNG, 
au 


which are used, that the phys7éal constitution of man is spoken ' 
of; and it must be equally plain that « sp-rit,” therefore, also 
refers to his physical constitution.  'Che very pains which 
Ellis and Read have taken in their interpretation to blot out | 
ul thought of the body in the passage, is a proof of it: It 
* would have been an incongruous jumble, indeed, to have 
said “ disposition, and lite, and body ;” and they felt it. Body 
in Scripture in such a sentence requires “soul” as its natural 
antithesis. “ Body and Ife” make no sense, for the sanctifi- 
cation of the body and its vitakity (which life here must 
mean) is searcely such. And_if, according to,Dr.'Thomas, it 
is the “flesh that thinks,’ and the brain is the fleshy tablet 
of the heart, let the body be sanctified, and all is done. - And 
— it will not avail to say that the body needs spirit and soul to 
make it capable of sanctification, for that still leaves it true 
that the body is the only part that can be sanctified, and> 
_ there would bano sense in talking of the sanctification of the 
mere agency in giving it life. ; 

But still—and this’is the only question we need further ask 
at present—may not the “ spirit ” here refer to the new and 
sp.ritual nature, which, confessedly, the child of God has? 
I answer that, as far as this passage is concerned, the fact 


ee eee 


eat ae 


* 


hema | WEES om 


_ that the apostle prays for the sanctification of the spirit, is 


_ proof positive that the new nature is not meant.* For the 
4 Scripture doctrine js that, inasmuch as “that which is born 
* of the Spirit is spirit,” “whosoever is born of God doth not 

commit sin, forshis seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, 


BECAUSE he is born of God.” I am well aware ‘that I touch 


cocare 


Cees 


se 


a 


| the one born of God is herelooked at simply in his charac- 


© ter us so born. The flesh is net seen, being, indeed, in the 
i believer, but a3 a foreign thing: “Sin that dwelleth in me”? 


(Rom. ‘Vii. 17), in that sense, mor myself. The now nature 


4 


< A . e Uns 


“3 * The new nature is « spirit,” but never.called “ the spirit,” 


a ee 


-ts born of God the believer: 


and is fitted with | 
Compressor bars, Front buffer, 
Tripper. Rear stops, with buffer, 
Loops for tackle. Bollard, 
Axle-tree bands. Fook planks, 
Eye-plate for limber, 


The platforms provided with ural byffers have no 
compressor bars. Those for guns of LO\in, and over are of 
the built-up (fish-belly) girder pattern. | The dwarf and 
casemate are of the game construction, but the former has 
higher trucks and a loading stage hinged to the front. All 

platforms for guns of 9 in. and gver are to be provided 
with traversing gear, which gives greater facility and ra- 
pidity in training than tackle and ring bolts, The racer is 
generally smooth, a rack racer being objectionable for land 
service; the rear trucks have toothed wheels fixed to them, 
so that they can be driven by the gearing. SS 


MANUFACTURE OF ORDNANCE, 
METALS. 


It is purposed in the following pages.tv go briefly into 
the manutacture of the service ordnance, both 8. bore and 
rifled] and also a few of the more important stores connect- 
ed with the various pieces, as far as is possible, without 
being able actually to see the different operations performed. 

Before touc hing on the matter of actual manufacture of 
ordnance, it is well to have some idea of the properties of 
the various metals used in their construction. If we then 
consider the conditions that the material a gun ought to 
fulfil, we can then havea goo idea as to What metal, or 
combination of metals, will best suit our purpose. 

We will first discuss briefly those physicial properties of 

; ; , Physical 
metals that bear more directly, on our subject. These are: properties of 
Malleability, ductility, hardness, and its converse softness, _ Metals. 
toughness, elasticity, und tensile strength. 
ane ‘ 


% 
« 


c) 


84 FACTS AND THEURIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


does not sin—cannot. - The new nature thus, as proceeding 
‘from God, is altogether according to God. He could not 
-communicate a half-evil thing : “that which is born of the 
spirit is spirit ””—partakes, i. é., of the nature of Him trom 
whom it came. Mr. Morris himself Says of it most truly : 
“All the moral qualities of it answer to the moral pertection: 
of God.”. If so, sin cannot come from it, because it is of 
God; and, as born of God, we cannot. sin. Therefore: you 
cannot talk of sanctifying it. It is of God: therefore 
already wholly good. ae 
And “spirit” is not here the “motion” of the soul, as Mr. 
Morris elsewhere strangely defines it, for the soul is men- 
_tioned apart, and there would be no sense in speaking of the 
sanctifying of the soul and of its motions. Sanctify 7, and 
its motions will be sanctified. 


We return then with confidence to our first conclusion : | 


“Spirit and soul and body” are the man. The ample con- 
firmation of this by every part of Scripture will come out 
as we now take up in detail these constituent parts. 


h., 


ee Se es Dec eee ee CE eae 


. 
me 
‘ma 
Bot 
and 
whe 
this 
is n 
betv 
whe 


“Th 


| -soun 


whit 
Here 
contr 
them 
guage 
name 
more 
shoul: 


= activi 


Spirit. 


* The 


7 or caus 
really t 


siderati: 
place to 
Tt In ¢ 


well-kno 


i. a 
‘ATE. THE SPIRIT OF Gop. . 


proceeding 
e could not | 
born of the 
’ Him trom 
most truly : 
perfection: 
ise it is of 
erefore: you 


a 


CHAPTER TIT. 
; 


THE SPIRIT OF GO), 


TTR Ph ALS sili iaabienee 


THE word which stands for “ spirit” in the Old Testa-- 


therefore ~~ ment is AM (ruach), in. the New Testament, zveina (pneu-: 


“; ma). They are words precisely of the same significance. 


ou as Mr. Both are derived from words which mean ‘‘to breathe.’* 


oul is men- and in their primary sense therefore signify “ breath,” or 
king ofthe | —s what is a kindred thought, air in motion, “ wind.” From 
tify 7, and ’ this as the type of vieuless activity, its meaning of “ spirit” | 
, is most evidently and easily derived.’ The comparison 
onclusion : _ ; between the two is what the Lord makes in John iii. 8, 
ample con- . where the same word pneuma is both “ wind ” and “ spirit ” ; 
| come out = “ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the 
ts. 8 ‘Sound thereof, but canst not. tel] whence it cometh or. 


_ whither it goeth, 80 is every one that is born of the Spirit.” 
~» - « -4% Here manifestly the thought is of invisible activity beyond 
a control ; the effects are-manifest, the power which produces 
them unseen and uncontrollable. In the formation of lan- 


s 


» Originally breath or wind, 
should give its name to. the power that 
activity, acts unseen and uncontrolled 
Spirit,’+ and the third Person of. the 


nt, except in the Hiphil 
form it signifies « tosmell.” How this is 

a really the same as to “ cause to breathe ” js plain on a mothent’s con- 
sideration. wvéa) occurs seven times in the New Testament, in every 
place to represent the blowing of wind. ? 
t In the “ Personal Recollections ” 
well-known and touching illustration o 


of Charlotte Elizabeth occurs a 
f the connection of thoucht A 


* 


fs 


= poor damb-boy-in-whon; 


ht. 
she was interested, and whom she had be. 


en 


36 FACTS AND THEORIES AS ‘TO. A KUTURE STATE. 


ture represents as the immediate mover, both in creation 

and in new creation, is pre‘minently the “ Spirit of God.” 
To all this, indeed, on behalf of materialism, Mr. Roberts 

has made sundry objections, the answer to which need not 


detain us long. He tells us: “ A substantive derived from a ° 


verb draws its meaning trom the act expressed by the ¥erb. 
Ruach is rnach, because it is the thing raache 7, so to speak, 
and not because tic act of ruaching is inyisible.” But that 
has to do with the primary meaning of words only, and not 
with the secondary, of which alone we are. speaking. 
‘‘ Breath ” is the thing, breathed, no doubt, but if I speak of 
“a breath of air,” Ido not speak of anything breathed. I 
apply the word “breath” in a secondary sense, to something 


which in some way it resembles. This secondary sense has - 


nothing to do with the deriration of the word ai al, as a 
‘ breath of air” is not a thing breathed forth, but only com- 
pared to that which is. John iii. 8 shows us, for prennet, 
the real ground of comparison between its primary and sec- 
ondary meanings: an illustration which Mr. Roberts silently 
passes by, in order that he may be able to speak of this view 
of the matter as an ‘ opinion having no cents foundatio# 
than the ingenuity of those, who have given birth to the spec- 
ulation.” 

Meanwhile, he himself puts forth what i is. really that, that 


“the power which’ gives life was itsalf in the first instance’ 


spirited (breathed forth) from the Eternal Source of life and 
light.” To this, moreover, we answer by bringing forward 
‘the he passagd “which Mr. “R. rightly foresees” will be against 


ats SS cee 


seeking to impress With the fret of the beiag of G Jv, tut her that ie 
had been looking everywhere for God, but could not find Him. “ There 
was ‘God, yo‘! She took up a pair of bellows, and blew a puff at his 
hand, which was red with cold on a winter's d: iy. He showed signs of 
displeasure, told: her it made his hands cold, while she, looking at the 
pipe of the bellosvs; told him she could see nothing, “ there w as ‘wind, 
no’!" “ He opened his eyes very wide, stared at me, and panted, a 
deep crimson suffused his whole face, and a soul, a real soul, shone in 
his strangely altered POUMED INE: while he triumphantly repeated, 


“Got hike wind! Y God like wind: 


> electri 
4 lectur 
‘ of ele 
imme 


ATE. 


in creation 
of God.” 

Ir. Roberts 
1 need not 


ved from a ° 


y the ¥erb. 
0 to speak, 

But that 
ly, and not 
. speaking. 
I speak of 
eathed. I 


something . 
- sense has .— 


nt al, as a 
only com- 
r preund, 
"y and sec- 
rts silently 
f this view 
foundatio# 
» the spec- 


that, that 
t instance’ 
of life and 
¢ forward 
be against 
her that he 
m. “There 
i puff at his 
ed signs of 
king at the 
was ‘ wind, 
d panted, a 
ul, shone in 
" repeated, 


eo 


-him—“ God is a Spirit.’* 
Spirit which God is ? 
something else? 


“S ciation with subsequent manifestation, to stand in its New 


Testament use as the synonym of the Divine nature; but this 


? 
a 
2 by assgciution merely, and not by philological derivation.” 
: But how, then, is he so sure that there is “ philological deri- 
vation” in the former case? This ig evidently a second 
* conjecture, to upheld the previous one, and as baseless as the 
© former. For, with so-calléd Christadelphianism, as is well 
known, the theory is, that while “ spirit ” is a thing “ Spirited 
/ forth” from God, out of’ this spirit all things were made. 
« How strange and contradictory to take, then,. what’is, so’ to 
speak, the ram material of all creation, and to confound 
with that God’s very nature—creation and Creator being so 
identificd as one! | 
© Mater‘alism has thus not shrunk from assailing, along with 
the Godhead of the Son, the Personality of the Holy Ghost. 
‘And this is not confined even to the followers of Dr. Thomas. 
The interpretation of “spirit” alopted by Ellis and Read, 
borrowed, it would seem, by 
rectly the same way. Miles Grant, as we have seen, makes 
it a mere influence. But Dr. Thomas it is who has formu. — 
lated the doctrine, as before secn, According to him, the 
Spirit of God is electricity, or, combined with nitrogen and 
oxygen, the atmosphere, which Job calls the « breath of 
God.” According to Mr. Roberts, his follower, it is proved 
by the shaking of the house on the day of Pentecost, and 
the energizing of Samson's muscles, when it came on him, to 
be “as much on the list of material forces as light, heat or - 
, electricity’! The doctrine is developed in full in his fifth 
lecture, that God is a material being, surrounded by a kind 
of electrical atmosphere, so dazzling and consuming in Hs 
immediate presence, as to be called “light unapproachable, * 


THE SPIRIT OF GOD. 37 


Who breathed forth, then, this 
Was God Himself an emanation from 
Mr.R. anticipates this objection, and trias. 
to provide for it by telling us that “spirit” “comes by asso- 


or from the former, tends di- ° 


es > 


a4 * John iv. 24. 


ich, atte nuated~by deprees, is the material out of° : 


truth, and, once astray 


2 


«2% 


38 = FACTS“AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


which He creates all things, and by which He becomes cog- 
nizant of everything, and executes His’ purpose in the whole 
domain of the universe. This is the ruach, the principle.of 


life in the nostrils of all flesh, which the foolish animals “ use : 


all up” in the mere process of existence, but’ which wiser man 
can use to move tables, read unopened letters, and even 
(when. in a high state of nervous susceptibility) to perceive 


_ distant facts and occurrences! “ When concentrated under 


the Almighty’s will,” it “becomes holy spiri*, as distinct 
from spirit in its free, spontaneous form;” in which way 


apostles received it, but “it is given to none in the. present 


day.” In “ evolving a new man ” in people, “ the Spirit has 
no participation except in the shape of the written word. 


TI : * Ae 
The present ‘days are barren days, as regards the Spirits | 
. direct operations.”* Rd ee a Spee 


All this is but the legitiniate fruit of materialistic teach- 
e Ad - ee . e = z e 
ing. It is essential to its selt-consistency that the Personality 


of the Spirit.of God be denied., Once get rid of Him as ae 
Person, put Him upon the list of material forces—let, it be" 
electricity or anything else you please—and plainly you ‘have ° 
at once reduced the spirit of man also to something just as 


unintelligent, and as well suited to the purpose they desire to 


accomplish. The statement Lhave given from Mr. Roberts’ 
‘book may not seem'to need reply, nor anything but its simple |. 


utterance, to condemn it «sufficiently. Nevertheless I shall 


answer it; for in these days of wide-spread infidelity, God. 


alone knows in what unlooked-for places the answer may be 
needed. Nor does the gross folly which marks‘it all’ hinder 
its reception. Man has no wisdom apart from the word of 
nce from that, the apostolic declaration. is 
fulfilled, “ professing to be wise, they became fools.” How 


like, ‘too, to what is’ now oceupy,ng us, that which he ° 
" goes on.to say !—“and changed the glory of the incotruptible . 
LIKE TO CORRUPTIBLE MAN!” 


God into aN IMAGE MADE 


(Rom, i, 22, 23), _ . 
Z ie e , 


a Aine * 


' 
Pg = 


* Twelve Lectures, pp. 110-125, es 


ae, 
1 uy 


‘“« a * : 
® b é 


> 


a, 


Sad Soaceatees 


a 
a 
ene ta 


Rcd 


ae eT ee 
SO SG hema rn Te Ne Meee 


are ju: 
not a 


TATE. 


ecomes cog- 
in the whole 
principle.of 
nimals “ use 
h wiser man > 
s, and even 
to perceive 
rated under 
as distinct 
-which way 
the present. 
e Spirit has 
‘itten word. 
the Spiritis — 


listic teach- 
Personality 


f Himasa 


s—let.it be” 
ly you have | 
1ing just as ' 
ey desire to 


ir. Roberts’ 
it its simple 


less I shall 
lelity, God. 
ver may be 
t all hinder 
e word of 
claration. is 
ols.” How 


which he ' 


corruptible . 
LE MAN!” 


7 89" 


7 THE SPIRIT OF Gop.’ 

4 Scripture disowns this System in all its parts. In Scrip. 
| ture the Spiritiof God is a Person, divine and intelligent in 
= the things of God’ Just as, “ what man knoweth 


the things 
of a man, save the spirit of man which ig in him, even so the 
things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God * 
(1 Cor. ii. 11). : ee 
This is as different from Mr. Grant’s “ influence ” or Mr 
Roberts’ “ medium,” through which the Deity receives im- 
pressions (much _ ag the -human ear sound through the 
atmosphere), but itself as. unconscious as the atmosphere—of ; 
which, indeed, according to Thomas, it forms part—as can 
- well be conceived. “The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
"deep things of God” (ver. 10). Not..God searches by the 
_- Spirit, as Mr. R. would have it, but the Spirit itself searches 
and knows. Moreover, again, ,“‘ Te *who searcheth the 
hearts,” 7. ¢;, God, “ knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit,” 
7 which, living and active, “ITSEBF maketh intercession for, — 
. us” “according to God ? (Rom: viii. 26, 27), . 


If this is not the announcement of an intelli 
_ words cannot convey the idea of one. Yet Mr. Roberts will 
|. have it that it is all what he is fond of calling “the inevitable 
fictions of human speech.” Of the passages from Corinthians 
* Mr. Roberts objects against this :—« There is a parallel : 1. Man, and 
the spirit of man; 2, God, and the Spirit of God. Now, does Mr. Grant a 
m mean to contenil that the spirit of man is one perSon, knowing the things 4 ee 
of man, another person? Surely not. Yet this is what his‘view would 3 
require, if he is right in maintaining that the Spirit of God is one person, — ss 
knowing the things of God, another person.” = 
Mr. Grant’s view requires nothing of the sort, The “ thing¢ of man” ae 
are just human things, as “the things of God” are divine things, It is . 
not a question of another person in either case: But if the Spirit of 
% God knows divine things, then He iy conscious and intelligent ; and so is 
the spirit of man in human things, x 


And I know not what arg 
intelligence. “Doés Mr. Ro 


~ 


Sut nadine trata 


int 


Nt ae ora 
a ba cass OE 


gent Pergon,-: 


, 


essence of personality in-mar isin 
F Very important point, which will come up again ii 


28 


nN 
» 
* 


x 


40. FACTS AND. THEORBES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


he says: “This describes the apostolic experience of the e 
Spirit,” which, “ to THEN: SENSATIONS, a8 we may say, was 


separately from themselves an Enlightener,’ Penetrator, 


Comforter, Witness, and therefore 
that-reads as if these functions were pc 


from the Father.’* 


So then it ors read.as if 
The truth is, after all, too strong for tlre theory. But then 
this is merely a description, according to the ‘human sensa- - 
Is it true, then, tHat to their human sensations thé 
od was not only separate from themselves, but 


rsonally separate 
4 : oe 


Aa 


the Spirit of ¢ ;od were a person ! 


tion! 
Spirit of G 
¥rom the Father also? 
from what it would ‘have been had the 
from this? Could they not help describing it by misléadin ; 
words? Mr. Roberts himself can ‘and does deseribe it 
differently. Why not the apostles 7 “The words do read ax 
‘if the Spirit ,of God were a Person, our adversaries,:them. 
and they ‘speak not merely of. inspired 


selves bejng judges; a 
knowledge, but of the eo tuey of the Spfait to,.reveal. 


Father spoken apa! 


- And then is further added (ver. 12), “Now we have received 
“ y A 


the Spirit “—this Spirit so competent in knowledge—* that 
Thi ir knowledge is distinguished from 


we might know.” 
and the doctrine is compTete that 


the Spirit’s knowledge ; 
theirs proceeds from t 
Ilis own power to impart ‘His to them.. 

The argument that the Spirit of God is in the nostrils, and 
so a mere principle of lite init living, because Job xxvib. 3, 
in the Commion version, speaks so, T can only 
men who, when they choose, can quote Gréck and Hebrew, 
abundantly, but who are pleased to-ignore in this case‘ the 
fact that oné of the commonest renderings of ruach is 


breath ; and that ..the expression refers .to Gen: iL, 7,t where | 


the word for “ breath of life” is a word which is never ap- 
y % ' 
the Spirit of God at all. And, moreover, so far is 


plied to 


described in language - 


heir reception of One, who had it in 
: /~ 


say is worthy of » 


liow dil the “sensation” differ _ -, 


* Man Mortal p-24— 


. . . . ' . 
+ Roberts allows this, and yet thinks it “Jooks as much like a mancu. 

a 
vre as possible,” and spends a full page in proving (what no one will 


rf 


<= 


i 
e of the t : 
“say, was 
netrator, 
language | 
separate 


a person: 9° | 


But then 

an sensa- - 
ations thd 
elves, but 

mn” differ +, 
ken ape 
nisigadin ~ 
escribe it 
du read as 
ries, them. 

f inspired 
‘to,reveal. 

e received 
|ce—* that 
shed. from 
prete that 
» had it in 


ostrils, and 
yb XXVib 9, 
worthy of 
id Hebrew, 
is case‘ the 
f ruach is 
. 7,t where » 
$ never ap- 
r, so far is 


“irradiated energy brea 


F | THE SPIRIT OF @oOD. ' 44 


Scripture from asserting that the Spirit of God is.in all men 
that it speaks of Christians expressly as those “who have 

“received the Spirit. which is of God.” 
‘ The proof is indeed abundant and decisive as to this, which 


is’ alone (spite of Mr _ Roberts’ protest) subversive of their 


deny) that the wuaeh Lloah of Job, and the »ishmath chayim of Genesis 
are ‘“doctrinally identical.” How is it he does not see that this is the 
avery thing Which’ Mr. Grant (as he thinks, so Mogmatically) asserts ? 
The real question is, can the “breath of God in the nostrils,” which Job 
xpeaks of, be the same as that Spirit of God, who (0 quote the sanie 
book) made man (XXXiii. 4)? To assert this becanse 
ruach in each case, is equivalent’to asserting that in John iii. 8, because 
the same word prcuina is used for “ wind” and « spirit,” therefore to . 
be born of the Spirit is to be born of theavindss 5 > fe 
He goes on: “But Mr. Grant is mistaken if he supposes that this 
verse in Job is the only Support to the doctriné that the Spirit of God 
ig the means of universal life. The statements quoted four or five sen- 
tencgs back (Pea, xxxvi. 25. Acts xvii. 255. Job’ xii. 19) indirectly (and’~ 
not so very indirectly) show the same thing. In addition, we have to, 
consider such passages as these: ‘Whither shall 1 go from thy, 
Spirit ? Whither shali I flee from thy. presence?’ (Psa. ¢xxxix, 7? 
What conclusion can we come to from this, but that the universal pres- 
ence of God, whe personally dwells in heaven, is the universal Spirit, 
“invisible power or energy radiated from the ‘Father, and therefore 
Called Spirit, or that Which is breathed 2 Again, ‘the Spirit of God 
hath made me: the breath of the Almighty hath given me life’ 
(Job. xxxiii, 4). aAsain, § Thou sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are 
created’ (Psa. cir. 30). Henee, «in If{im (by the Spirit) we live, and 
move, and> have our being (Acts XVii 28). Ilence, «jf He gather to 
Himself Hts Sprrir (ruaehy (ntshanath) aur FLESH shal] 
' perish together, and man shall turn again to his dust, (Job xxxiy, 14).”” 
Here we have the strength of Mr Roberts’ doe 
his, and that he goes. to Scripture, as so many do, just to find « sup- 


port” to it!’ What an inference, that if one cannot go from the Spirit, 
nor fleé from the presence of God, t 


hag, therefore “Spirit” 
ence” must be just the sama thin 


it-is the same word 


and His breath 


trine; Tow plain it is 


and “ pres- 
3! and, moreover, this must be an 
thed from the Father"! Tile trouble with Mr. 
absolute a materialist, that with him even God 
ul, and there must either be 


: 


Roberts is, that he is-so 
Himself must. be materi; 


or non! To others than himself, jt will appear that-Mr--R-had better 


ike wu mancu- 
at no one will 


a 


give us the grounds of such a conclusion from i 


assume them. Similarly we all believe that the Spirit of Goa has made 


‘ 
7 * 


> 


42 PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


whole theory. Fér itis no work of the Spirit that is in 
question, as he would make it, but the reception of the Spirit 
Himself, Nor was (as he affirms) the ¢ aching of the Spirit. 
ever called the Spirit. The Lord’s words indeed were “ spirit,” 


but not the Spirit of God; and “ the Spirit is truth” surely, | 


characteristically, just as is the Lord. Jesus (John. xiv. 6); 
but in neither case does that destroy, personality. Al] the 
-way through Scripture we find language which defies accom- 


modation to this lowest depth of materialism. If I begin . 


with Genesis (xli. 38) I find Joseph spoken of as a “man in 
whom [distinctively] the Spirit of God is.” In Jude 19, 
some, even of professing Christians are described as “ sen- 
sual, having wot the Spz.rit.” So I find in Gal. iv. 6, that 
“<pecause ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His 
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father!” [Was, this 
merely “truth” that God sent into their hearts? and ‘were 
they sons before they had received it?] And again, ‘Ye 
are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit 
of God dwell in you;” and then it is added, “ Now if any 
man have not the Spirit af Christ, he is xone of His” (Rom. 
viii. 9). Solemn utterance, indeed, for men who have to 
confess that they have no “ Holy Spirit”: for only by the 
Holy Ghost given to us is “ the love of God shed abroad in 


us, and the breath of the Almighty given us life. Does that prove that 


the Spirit of God is only breath? And if so, how ?- 


_ Again, in what way does God send forth Mis Spirit when He creates, 
* according to Mr. R.? To us it looks very mueh like the doetrine of a 
living, personal agent, in which we believe. | : 

So as to Acts xvii. 28, the niaterialism is all his own. 

In the last passage, allowing his reading of it (which some accept), 
God’s Spirit need not surely be impersonal, because the maintainer of 
life in all created existences, nor is it identified. with the spirit of man. 

This is, then, the total result of the appeal to Scripture as to this so 


weighty a point to be established, and ‘in face of Scriptures, which (it is. 


owned) do read as if the Spirit of God,were a distinct person in the God- 
head... With Mr. Roberts the Spirit is the material of creation; in 


$ 


: a 
PRE ger a re Ae Beg de ip let Dg CaN 


Scripture the Creator, as indeed he owns: thoughts which are contra- 
dictory of each other, as lung as Creator and creature are‘ distinct in 
more than name. 


ewe 8 tere oe 


THE SPIRIT OF GOD. 48 


our hearts’’ (Rom. v. 5); and “the kingdom of»God is not 
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in 
the Holy Spirit ” (ch. xiv. 17). If that be withdrawn, there 


‘is ne more “ communion of the Holy Ghost” (2 Cor. xiii. 


14) ;,'no.more “ sealing” to the day of redemption (Eph. iv. 


30); no more “renewing of the Holy Ghost” (Titus iii. 5). 


Sad work indeed, if this be true! and barren days indeed ! 


- But. what an account. for men to give of themselves, that 
' they have no communion, no renewing, no sealing, no peace, 
.no joy, no love of God in their hearts! They have pro- 


nounced their condemnation with their own lips, when they 
say that the only Spirit of God they know is one subject ‘to 
men’s wills, ‘and “used up” by animals “in the mere 
process of existence.” | 4 

Yet Mr. Roberts allows that this (impersonal !) Spirit 
‘‘was a teacher, more paticularly in the apostolic era, when 


- it was bestowed on all who believed the word, enabling... 


them to work miracles, speak ‘with tongues, understand 


_ mysteries, according as the Spirit WILLED”! How strange 


an impersonality is this! creating, teaching, searching, 
willing, hearing, knowing, and yet not a person! ~Of course 
this language must be understood as mere, strangely con- © 
tradictory, human speech. Scripture seems to say this. We 
must believe it to mean something that it never even 
seems to say ! 


my : 


4 


44 FACTS AND THEOKIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


CHAPTER IV. 


THE sPier1y OF MAN. 


THE second sonicsten of the word “spirit” is to angelic ; 
beings, and that whether * holy “ or “ unclean.” . 
The application of the word in this. way is again denied. 4 
by Thomasism as to the latter class, but this is sc -arcely the 
place to examine what they say on this head. It will sane, 
for our present purpose that there are spirits whose exist- 
ence as separate personalities cannot be denicd. And if), ‘ 
‘this be so, there is.no reason, at least beforchand, why man’s ie ? 
spirit also should not be an individuality, a real and living 
entity, though in him un:ted to a body whic ‘h is of dust.* 
And this is the third application of the word to which we 
must ‘now devote particular attention. - 
© A cloud of dust is here encdcavored to be raised by the. 
assertion of the wonderful varicty of meanings given to the 
word. Yet, if we tak: the Janguage of our eomimon English 
version as a guide, and rcter to the passaves in which it 
- relates to man, we fi: vbas the trans ‘lation of the Old Testa- 


q 


* Roberts asserts ae theoan ap are" Cuil: mlorious, incorrupt- 
thle, corporeal, beings,’ man’s spirit: being -the opposite of all this. 
But— ’ 

_ 1.) The simple question is as to the existence of individual “ spirits,” at ; 
‘vhich is acknowledged. Difference of condition can in nowise alter 


the argument frum this. oP 
(2.) The visibility of the human spirit seems much on up ir With that 
\ of angels. Neither ‘is ordinarily seen (compare 2 Kings vil 17). Both " 
have been. | , ; Be : 
(8.) How man’s spirit is‘ decaying,’ Mr, R. must explain. ; eo. 
‘i @ 


(4.) Corporeality is not proved for angels by examples iu which God 
(as in Gen. xviii. and 3 xxxii.)./or angel aupesres as men. This is dot ° f. 
ation ofan abies hy et ep a Pap be 


° ? 3 + 


these. > There may be mystery in this, no doubt, We soon touch the 
ie bounds of our knowledge, that is all. oo ie 


v 


THE SPIRIT OF MAN. / MB 


ment Hebrew word, but jive words used: “ breath,” 
“sp.nit,” “anger,” “courage,” “mind.” And of the New 
Testamcnt Greck word corresponding to it nothing but 
“ghost” or “spirit” (which everybody knows to be in- 
tended for the sane thing) and oiece © Lite,” wrongly. in Rev. 
xiii. 15, where it ought to be rather “bréath.”  ThisJooks 
morc like uniformity in the matter, and a ‘common idea run- 
ning throughout, than some would wish to have us suppose. 
Of course I do not mean to deny that there are various 


secondary applications of the word | “spirit” i itself. This © 


concerns us the less because there is no doubt of the 
primary meaning of. the Enzlish word. But surely the 
greater the varicty of meanns, the more needful to look for 
the Key (which must be somewhere), the possession of 
which will enable us to find harmony in these various uses, 
of the word instead of discord. : . 

The fact is, that the only key to this hidden harmony is 
in an aprlication of the word which these writers almost to 
a man reject, viz.,¢o a real intelligent entity* in the com- 
pouhd nature of man, of «7 men as such, “the spirit of man, 
which is in him,” placed’ at the head of, as well as in con- 
nection with,. his sth consfzituent parts: by the apostle, 
where he speaks to the Thefsalonians of the sanctification 
of their “ ‘whole spir.t and soul Land body.” Let us take up 


* Mr. Roberts. ies to: show thi is s cannot be the key by ‘inserting 
“Intelligent entity.” in place of “ spirit.” in such passages ac'l Kings x. 5» 
“There was no more intenigcnt entity in her,” etc. This may. do to 
raise a Jaugh, but it is in fact/mere childish absurdity. There would 
Ye no secondary meanings at all, if the primary one could he ivserted 
instead of them. © : 


How the key above mentioned docs: * fit t loick all round,’ will be © 


seen afterward, hap. vi. ‘ That Mr. Roberts’ key does not may be easily 
seenby the meanings assigned to “ sntrit” 
hithself and his leader, Dr. the In p. 23 of Man Mortal,” he 
defines it‘ as “mind > p..80, “breath of Efe”; p. 54, “ abstract 


energy’; p. 66, “fe”; p. 67, ‘conscience’; while Dr. Thomas says 


in various connections by. 


that © apir.?s in prison” (1 Peter iii.) means “ bodics.” 
* Qn the other hand, the body is thus, for De, Thomas, body, and sont, 


‘and spirit. 


‘ 


ROLES NENT REDS ARIAT ABOARD EM Ie RR ay 


46 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the proofs of this, examining them carefully as the impor- 
tance of the subject demands, and submit the separate points 
to be examined, one by one, to the test which Annihilation- 
ists themselves appeal to—the judgment of the inspired 
word. | . a 
Now it is but quoting Scripture to speak of the “ spirit of 
man which is in him” (1 Cor. ii. 11), and of the “ spirits of 
men” (Heb. xii. 23). And observe, before we pass on, one 
tact-here. Scripture says ‘the spirit of man.” It does not 
say \“ the spirit” but “the spirits of men.” Annihilationists 
tell us (or many of them) that “ spirit” is a universal 
principle of life, le 
’ beast, but forming no real part of himself, like the air he 
breathes, and in which Dr. Thomas says it is contained. 
Now. if this be so, we might as well talk about the bri aths 
of men as/of their «pirits. Yet every one would perceive 
the incongruity of the former expression. We say “the 
breath of men,” just because it is one common breath they 
all breath¢, but it is. NOT one common spirit they all have, 
and therefore we speak of their “ spirits,” because each has 
his own, And it is a separate entity in each one.* 
Mr. Constable's identification of it with the “breath of 
life ” is therefore not possibie. His view is only in point of 
fact. Thomasism on @ somewhat higher plane, as he makes 


* This is with Mr. Roberts another of those “ inevitable fictions © in 
which he so largely deals. The ‘spirits of men are with him not 
separate entities, but only “ inevitably conceived ” of as such. “Justas 
there is primarily but one life, the self-existing life of the Eternal 
Father, and. yet we talk of the Jives of the creatures He has. brought 
ito being’! Is it then only “jnevitably conceived " that the lives 
of His creatures are separate from His own ? Are they not actually 
separate existences ? ag 

Again he says, “ As reasonable would it be for Mr. Grant to say that 
because we have separate ‘fleshes,’ therefore it is not one common 
flesh we al] have.” Does not Mr. R. confound flesh and body some- 


nt to man indeed in common with the’ 


hiceninaeemeilanintie. me 


what? lavewe separate “fleshes ”? The argument and the English 
are alike new. Separate bodies we have, and not one common body. 
One common flesh we have, and therefore not separate fleshes. 


hiceninanemriylnatintie weenie 


THE SPIRIT OF MAN. 7 47 


the breath of life and the Spirit of God sis identical, qiot- 
ing the very same passages for it as we have already con- 


- sidered with reference to Mr. Roberts.. He adduces also 


Bishop Horsley’s opinion, that no one “ who compares Gen. 
ii. 7 and Keel. xii. 7, can doubt that the ‘breath of lite 
which God ‘breathes into the nostrils’ of man in the Book 
of Genesis is the very same thing with the ‘spirit which God 
gave’ in the Book of’ Ecclesiastes,” To which it is enough 
to answer that we doubt. Neither Horsley nor himself give 
any proof of this from the passages in question, and the sub- 
ject will come up hereafter. But in the next place Mr. 
Constable avails himself of ‘“ Hebrew parallelism ” to the 
fill extent that Mr. Roberts does. “All the while my 


breath is in me, and the Spirit of God is in my nostrils,”* ° 


he thinks conclusive. It may be doubtless for those who 
know no personal Spirit of God; and it seems as if Mr. 
Constable had got as low as this. The answer has been 
alrealy given, and to it we need only now refer.. Similarly 


Job xxxiv. 14 has been considered; but how he can quote. 


“his spirit and his breath” to show that the two are one is 


hard to understand. ‘The contrary would seem self-evident. - 


Hebrew parallelism is again made to do-duty in interpret- 
ing Isaiah xlii. 5, Ivii. 16. My. Constable would have it that 
parallelism consists in merely usitg synonymous expressions 
in the “ parallel ” sentences. This is a false and unworthy 
conception of it, which would reduce it to mere tautology. 


It’ is not so, as every verse in which it is used bears witness. 
“How unworthy a repetition would it be to make Isaiah say, 
as Mr. C. would: “Ie that giveth breath to the people 
upon it, and breath (spirit) to them that walk therein.” ., 


Yet these are proofs, he considers, that. establish the aueoHy 
of the breath of life with the Spirit. 

Now Scripture speaks of the spirit of man being not only, 
as we have seen, & separate pO in each individual, which 


g 


Se ee ee Name aN 


Ca, UE US a Ne 


in 


"SL Se AIEEE SRE RR 


* Job xxvii. 3. 
‘f I reserve the quotation of Isaiah Ivii. 16; until we come to eoneiges 


the word found -thefe—neshama. 


$ 


Rg <TR FG CD APPL NUNES Wms 


Pope 


114 


‘sats. And, moreover, a. wrought i iron gun, except nies 

extraordinary circumstances, would not give way explo- 
sively, the stretching of thé metal giving warning. 

It is possible, however, that repeated firing might alter 
the formation of the iron, and it might in time lose its 
fibrous construction. Cases of wreught iron railway 
bridges have,been' known where the continuous jarring of 
passing trains has so altered the for:n of the iron. 

In our service no heavy guns are entirely made of 
wrought iron, the inner tubes being made of toughened - 
steel, on accoupt of the comparative softness of wrought iron 
and of the difficulty of forming a surface free from flaws. 

At first we used it, and the B.L.R. guns have wrought 
iron barrels. . We still use it in the palliser converted cast 
iron guns, in order to givé sufficient safety to guns made of 
such weak metal as cast-iron. The palliser converted gun 
is R very safe gun for its detachnient, for before the inner 
tube of wrought i iron burst, it would stretch to such an ex- 
tent as to eplit the cast iron casing. 

Wrought iron does capitally for the exterior portions of’ 
guns, as it is not only cheap but easily worked, and from ite 
ductility gives a large margin of safety. 

In the Royal gun factories all iron used is carefully test- 
ed, both as to the distance to which it will draw out before 
breaking, and as to the weight required to break it; forthe 
former shews its ductility and the latter its tenacity., Its 
fracture is also examined. A good tough weonght | iron 
ought to present a fracture of irregular silky appearance, 
light grey in colour, and of well defined pre 


Testing Iron. 


SPEEL. 


Steel has, till lately, been defined according to its sup- 
posed chemical constitution as a for m of iron containing from 
3 to 2 per cent: of carbon. . Acc cording to this definition, 
when the carbon is present i in certain propor tions—-the® 
limits of which cannot be strictly defined—we have the 
various kinds of steel, which are highly elastic, malleable, 


Pa 


48 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the breath of life is not, but (as the breath of life clearly is 
not) a thing formed within him (Zech. xii. 1) : “The burden 
of the word cf the Lord for Israel, saith the Lord, which 
stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth. the foundation of 
the earth, and formeth the spirit, of man within him.” 
Thus, along with the formation of the heavens and the earth, 
as of equal innportance with these (the body being moreover 
passed over in the matter) there is put by the inspired 
writer'this formation-of the spirit-of man. And this is the 
complete upsetting of the materialistic theory. The spirit 
of manis furme/ within him. It is a separate entity then 
in each individua! man, not (like the breath of life) a eommon 
principle shared by all.” 

Moreover the possession of a spirit by the beast is not 
asserted in Scripture, except in one passage hy the writer 
of Ecclesiastes (ch. iii. 19-21): “For. that which befalleth 
the sons of men befalleth beasts: even one thing befalleth 
them; as. the one dieth so dicth the other; yéa, they have 
all one breath (ch); so that aman hath no pre¢minence 
over a beast, for all is vanity. All go unto one place: all 
are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. Who hknoweth 
the spirit of man that goeth upward, anl the spirit of the 
beast that goeth downward to the earth: ~ 

This: passage has been seized upon by ‘materialists of 
course, and is constantly put forth as the stronzhoht of their 
doctrine. They quote verse 19 triumphantéy. “Words 
cannot be stronger than this,” says Mr. Constable. ‘The 


i » Robartandmite aideed here “a common spirit distributed according 
to the will of the Creator, and formed (nto the spirits of men.” But 
he has rendered this impossible in his view of things, by telling us 
that the very eristener of separate spirits is only “inevitably coneetired,” 
but not areal thing. Dues he mean to tell us that God © formed "the 
“ eommon, spirit” he speaks of into the “inevitetio conception” of a 
distinct thing ? 

This constant use of Jangnage which is merely fictitious marks his 


argument throughout. What is it byt the deception of one by whom. 


he is himself, alas, duped, and in whose hands he is the unhappy instru- 


° 


4 r) 


ment in deceiving others ? 


/ THE SPIRIT OF MAN. . 49 


preacher tells us not only that man and beast both have 
spirit, but that the spirit of both is one and the same. He 
is here evidently comparing them in what they had of the 
highest kind, and nothing could be higher than the posses- 
sion of that. spirit which the Psalms and other Scriptures tell 
us was indeed nothing less than the Spirit of God Himself. 
Yet in this he tells, us that ‘man hath no preéminence above 
a beast.’ ’* cy a 
This is bold enough indeed: Mr. Constable has the merit 
“of speaking out his thoughts. In his very highest attribute, 
it seems then, man has No precminence above a beast. 
Mind, conscience, responsibility, moral qualities, either he has 
not, or the beast has, or clse these are, after all, inferior, 
things, “not of the highest kind.” « Man being in honor 
and wuderstunding not, is like the beasis that perish,” says - 
the Psalmist Mr. Constable adds that he has 70 preémi- 
nenc¢e over them anyhow, and as‘for “ beasts that perish,” 
why, one and all perish alike - when the breath leaves:‘them 
they bat lie down in the dust, being alike Jat dust. 3 
The argument proves too much, and so proves nothing. 
Iv Mr. Constable had but weighed the verse before, which 
he omits, he micht have found‘ reason to question hisecon- 
clusion. The whole passage is what, Solomon tells us, he 
“said in kis heart” at a certain time (ver. 18). It is not, 
divine revelation, but human doubt: the questioning of 
man’s mind when speculating upon the mystery of existence: 
“acho knoweth the spirit of man” ? ete. . tis the language of 
aman who had “ given his heart to search out by wisdom eon- 
cerning all things that are done under heaven: who had 
“said in his heart” (vh. if. 1), “Go to now, will prove thee 
with mirth.” and who had “sought in his heart to give himselt 
to wine,” and “to Jay hold on fod/y; that he might see what 
was that’ good “fh the sons of men, which they should do 
under heaven all the days of their life” (ver. 8). This is no 
Spirit-taught man. In no stich path does the'Spirit of God 


a a = 


* Taos a 


x 
tet 


Wa 


v7 
& 


4 


e 


a 


50: FACTS anvifivonses AS TO'A FUTURE STATE. 


lead ; and the result is that, searching out by human wisdom, 
the grave into which all go is an impenetrable mystery : men 
die as the beast dies, they have one breath, one ruach, they evid 


go to the dust alike; as to what is beyond, no mere human. whic 
knowledge can penetrate it : who knoweth the rvuch of man _ Dav 
that goeth upward, or the ruach of the beast that goeth © A mani 
downward to the earth? That word, rvach, with its various that 
‘meaning of breath or spirit, suits well the doubtful ques- of S 
*tioning of the passage. But this iy the uncertainty of mere Eccl 
human knowledge. The Spirit of God could not doubt or Spiri 
question. It is by the Spirit, surely, that we are given this who 
history of human searching after wisdom and after good; + whic 
‘but: the lesson is, that by human searching he could attain Ne 
neither the one nor the other. Listen to Solomon’s’ own: » astes, 
exposition of this as he comes out into the light : ‘‘ As thou of a 
KNOWEST NOT what isthe way of the spirit, nor how the Cons: 
‘bones do grow in the womb of her that, is with child, even T+ Gen. 
so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all” 7 show. 
(ch. xi. 5). But he has something to say now about his — f+ if rea 
former thoughts: for he says finally and conclusively, that so in 
the spirit of man does not “go downward to the earth” g 1 0°~Ssothey : 
“ Then shalt the dust return to the earth as it was, but the _ tates 
spirit shall return to God who gave it.” \ both > 
' The objection is zaised as to this by Mr. Roberts, that it. * God f 
ignores the fact of Solomon’s God-given wisdom. But itis . of life 
just the. point of Ecclesiastes to show how the wisdom of the a —-— 
-wisest failed here, as in the book of Job the perfection of : moet 
human: goodness. The perfect man has to own his vileness & ene 
before God, and the wisest men the incompetence ‘of mere Scat it 
human wisdom. yf on nontyils. 
For Solomon’s wisdom was self-evidently of that kind | marked 
‘which fitted him for the kingly office which he filled, and * f= in the p 
for which he sought it (2 Chron. i. 9,10). It is compared ~ the bree 
with that of other kings, and with the wisdom of the East, ; ooae) 
: . | .4@g. in} 
and of Egypt, though it surpassed all these.. He was the _ should t 
naturalist_of his day; his proverbs a storehouse of practical . the eart 
~~~ flesh cor 


wisdom for the path on eurth. But he is not the sweet 


Lt 
e 


THE SPIRIT OF MAN. oa 51 
Oak en _ Psalmist of Israel, and his numerous songs are mostly fbr- 
ice amen (ae gotten. The Song of Songs is an allégory, and he was 
| evidently in it the unconscious singer of spiritual things of 
“ aa which he knew but little. Who could compare him with 
= _ David for spiritual insight ? And who but mustdament his 
th OA ¢manifest departure from the path in which his father walked ? | a 
=P 4. that departure which, if it be admitted (as it must be) spite 
ae mo] of Solomon's wisdom, so simply accounts for the book -of 
iss ae A Ecclesitstes being not the record of a path in which the 
or mm Spirit of God Len, however much He might make the one 
is Gar “~~ who walked there the preacher of the vanity of a world 
1 . “9 ~~ which he had ransacked in vain for satisfacti on. 
in © | Now, beside this manifestly exceptio = pi ssage in Ecclesi- 
fm | astes, there are none that assert or imply "twe beast’s possession 
ati of a spirit. The passages quoted from ‘elsewhere by Mr. * 
hé ol Constable are plainly inadequate. The “breath of life” in i 
on J > Gen. vi. 17 is not the spirit, as a comparison with vii. 22 may 
1” a show. Nor is it in Psa. civ.29. He contends, indeed, that 
lis sss Ss if retach in verse 29is translated “breath” it must be equally 
at so in verse 30: “Thou sendest forth Thy, breath (ruach) ; 
” 9 } —=«ithey are created.” But here the “ sending forth” necessi- 
he . tates the other rendering. Were it breath, however, in 
both places, how would it prove Mr. Constable's po.nt ? 
it, - God forms the spirit in man’: He does not form the breath 
is. of life in him.* - 
he a * Gen. vii. 22 (marg. ), quoted by Annihilationists as proving “spirit ” 
of a to belong to beasts, isa mere mistake. The same phrase is found in- 
PSB 2 Sam. xxii. 16, and is there translated “The blast-of the breath,” where 
ore ‘again it is referred to the nostrils: “the blast of the breath of his 
Face nostrils.” It isthe action of the breath upon the nostrils, so strongly 
nd VE marked in-states of excitement and fear, which is strikingly referred to 
; in the passage in Genesis: “ All in whose nostrils was the breathing of 
ues the breath of life . . . died.” 
ed ' As for Numb. xvi. 22, it refers, from the context, to man simply: as 
ist, 4. g. in Matt. xxiv. 22, « Except those days should be shortened no flesh 
the . Should be saved”; (Gen. vi. 12), “ All flesh had corrupted his way upon 
cal the earth”; (Psa, Ixv. 2), “ Thou that hearest prayer, to Thee shall-_all 
eet “~~ flesh come,” etc. - 


tee | 


Sea NEN Serer een ; - asicree 


SSE RRA ONE RE CRINeENET exzome ga 


ET a ST SAY SE eawnemanoe 


ARRAN REPS 


, 
a Fanaa Serene NAS Tears sears 
cass 


PRAT LLE 


ae 


Oe, 
“xX a 


4 


dad 


 §2 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO 


A FUTURE STATE. 
~ Tyreturn, then, wifh* confidence to. my former position: 


:. ‘that, so far from the spirit of: man. being a principle, of. life 
held in common with the beast,.t 


he he Spirit of God NEVER 
asserts the beast’s possession of it. © There 1s complete and 
absolute silence as to such a thing.< And the. silence of 
Scripture is authoritative avanst:the materialistic assum'p- 
‘tions For their whole theory as to this they are indebted 
to the endeavor to “ search out by wisdom ” (apart from the is 
‘Spirit, which they deny) the works of Gad. sine 
- And I. need ‘hardly say, that before’ these. few Scripture 
facts, Mr. Morris’ theory of the spirit in man, that it is the 
few nature in ‘the believer, or the ©. motions and: emotiony 
- of the soul” in men at large—-equally breaks down. Zcch. 
xii. 1 will’ not® bend to either supposition. 7h speaks: dt! - 
finitely of the spirit, of man, not of the believer, and says. 
"> God formed it, not’ surely the motions or emotions of the . 
coul! Beside which, to this “spirit.of man, whigh is i 
him,” the apostlé-(in 1 Cor. ii. TY refers all human snow- 
ledge: “ Wilat man knoweth the things of a man, save the 
spirit of man. whieh isin him”: “Could .we say,, the | 
“motions” or : emotions - oe 


5 of the sont knaw ? 

° According te Vr. Constable the beast must know the 

things of a man * sind be wiser than main, Who ‘does not 
know the things of & beas’): for he’ has the same, spirit, and fore, 
NO preéminence over a beast as to that! > pe os tant Res neg 
My object, co far, has heen but to establish the doctrine go derix 
“of the Jistinet existence of the spirit as a separate entity iny idea 
man. ‘The various uses of the word, and the relationship of tells 
the spirit to the soul, will come up more ‘naturally-after we with 
have examined ina cimilar manner the Scripttire. doctrine of upon 
the sou) itself. s me a . : fa ee Ne 
eens : ' breat 


Nore —A‘cjaim js sometimes sev up for siamah as being the rep- then 

resentative of the spirit of man proper rather than rvath. It is the © 
_word used in Gen, ii- 7 for “breath. ot life,” also in Gen. vil. 22 and meto. 
. tis really, as there im_ for th 
frame 


98am xxii. 16, referred to in the last note.. Lt 
never thg'stPqt gquuvatent motia 


Ané 


. equi 
. signi 


“ 
fail 


a | 


plied, the prchareaetion, and way bein that way, referred to ruach in 
either sense of © breath ° or" spirit.” [tis 


to 


: . 4 
2 ' . THE SOUL. 3 


af ; is . : . 
of ruach ; certainly never. of Z higher charaates. The e Spirit of God is 


life : 7 ‘ mever. n ‘Raina, , it is rather the“ breathine.2 ‘ inspiration,” “ blast,” 
a ma : i as in Gen. ii. 7; 2'Sam. xxii. 16 ;sJob j iv. 9; SXNii. 8; xxxiii.4; XXXvii. - 
ne aes 10; Psa. xviii.15; Isa. XXX.33.- Ast ‘man, it ts: pexpressive of his being 
and are (et a breathing creature, as in Deut: xx. 10; Josh. x.ONSi. 11, 14; 1 Kings 
of ‘ ‘xv. 29; Psa. cl. 6; and should be , translated Similarly, aod not by 
mip- whe “souls” in a Pasuace referred to by Mr. Constable, ‘sa. lik 16; -It 


ted. '.* s Should be « breathing ” or “ breath ” in Gen. ‘Vii. 22; 1 Kings XViEMI7; 


the:. : _ Job xxvi. 4; XXViIL3; xxxiv. 14; Isa. ii, 2 22;. xii. 3; ‘Dan. v. 23; xT, 
° Oy ‘There is but ¢ One passage beside. these i in Scripturd> ‘and this skews the 
» Only undoubted - ‘reference’ ‘to the action of the higher ruach, or real: 

jure ‘ ie spirit of man: here. our Jersion transjates it “spirit,” ¥et that itis ex- 
the : pressive of the action, ‘rather than the: Being of the spirit, we may s see 
iong | in the passage itself, Proy. xX? Dies a 
ech. 7 cle: fe 
"del. 


says. 
the 
s il 
now- r EN chee oe a ote ; 
the [i i oe ia OEE Ce 2 
. the ee ee ‘Tux - Hebrew, . word. for “soul” S WED (nephesh:, the 
ek ‘equivalent of. whieh in Greek is an ny (pouch). A fict 
; the 7 ‘significant enotsh in view of what has 2 ready ‘come be- * 


. CHAPTER ‘Y, 


5 not 


:- < 3 fore. us. When speaking of the word tor spirit. is that ‘both, | 
ans 8 . neppeshi and psuche: are, equally with yritach and DiLEN 
* = “ derived from words Ww hick signify’ “to dr éathe?* The came 

‘trine | : 


idea of viewless activity: enters into.them. Even Dr, Thomas 
tells ‘us that nephesh is from the ° verb to breathe. alt hough 
With the characteristic dishonesty which marks al] that he says 
upon the sut hject, he gives its piven Ymeaning as * creature.” 
">< Nephesh,”’ he says, “ shonifies creature 0, dso life, soul, or 
"breathing. frame, from the verb ¢&: breathe.” + Te return 
je rep then to the philology of sour: subject, I remai rk that by a 
is the © metonomy, or figare-of speech whereby the container is’ ut 
22 and for the thing contained, 2: EO vErsap nephesh, breathing 


eee frame, is ‘put for meshernet | reach chagin. which, when_in 
Uae , 
" Hejee Nephesh signifies life, 


ivalent MOLTO oe frame Pespires 
7 ; ta 


ity iny 
lip of 
er we 
ine of 


ae | 


o 
e 


o 


ne , | | : 
_* 64 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. | ~ 


salso breath and goul.”* One w 


-acceptation of t 
meaning, and the ot 


e e 
such an expression as 


— 


of virtue’; 50, 
to say,‘ and my life 


4 gift,” I can therefore talk of a'gift giving ; 
ing a thought, I can equally speak of a tl 


ould think, ffom the admitted 

derivation of the word from the verb to breathe, that the ab 
metonomy; if such there be, would be all the other way, the 
and that the priniary meaning would be “ breath,” and so acl 
life or soul. In point of fact, nephesh is only once suggested PR 
as breath in the margin of J ob xi. 20, and without necessity, po 
and for “life” only as the nels or source of life—a an 
meaning easily derived from the soul: being strictly that Th 
source of life to the body. So that “soul” (in the common . ral 
he word) is properly-the primary Scriptural bars 
her meanings are derived from he : 
Dr. Thomas, on the other hand, stoutly contends that soul ' oe 
and body are one. “Now if it be asked, what do the Scrip- . 
tures define a living soul to be ?—the answer is, a living _T 
natural, or animal body.”t But I would ask Dr. Thomas: get 
or any other who takes the position, ifhe could understand - . | not 

“everything wherein there was a 4 by 
living body ?” You find in Gen.:i. 30, “every thing ee pro: 
there was a living soul.” Now if the soul. be # the! ody, rath 
‘t cannot be the body, and the fact that: it is called a. thes 
“living” soul precludes the possibility of translating it trat 
& ]ife,” as materialists love to do. A “living life” -would ’ state 
make no sense;{ a “ living breath” would be no better; wha 
and the passage shuts us up to the necessity of allowing decl 
that something is alive wéthin the “ breathing-frame ” which aster 
Dr. Thomas speaks of, so that the soul and it are distinct *~ the 
from each other. * oe Y of tl 
Dr. Thomas thinks he has Scripture for his identification .‘ : N 
of soul and body. Let him speak for himself. “Writing — os 
f Elpis Israel, pp. 27-29. T Ibid., p. 2%. \ in 
$ Miles Grant dues not see the difference between “ living @ life ” and as 
a “life living.” ‘‘ We often hear the expression, ‘ We should live a life . hte | 
in the passages under consitleration, it would be correct en 
shall live’” (The Soul, p. 13). This isa notable living 

specimen of discernment or the-want ofgit. If I can talk. of “‘ giving a ce 
and if T can speak of think-. He 

iought thinking ! 
may. 


. one and the samé*thing. 


_ prove that Adam had @ natural body ? 


_ these heads of the human race; naturall 
_trates the ‘difference between the natural and the spiritual 


cee as ee 
¥ Now, note that it is even of “the beast of the earth,” and 


‘them to soul will account for it: livin 


S é 


THF SOUL. . : m3) 


about. body the apostle says, ‘There is-a’ natural body and 
there isa spiritual ‘body.*/ But he does not content him- 
self with b:mply declaring/ this truth; he goes further, and 
proves it by quoting the words of Moses, saying, ‘ For it is 

t written, the first man Adam was made into a living soul,’ 
and then adds, ‘the last Adam into a spirit giving life’ . . 
The proof of the apostle’s proposition, that there is a natu- 
ral body,as distinct from a spiritual body lies in the testi- 
mony that Adam was m J 802 


ade into a lining sou!, showing that 
4 - | oe f=) 


he considered. a natural or animal body and a living soul as 


: | , If he did not, then there’ wasno 
proof in the quotation of what he had affirmed.” 


; Dr. Thomas\had here to misquote Scripture in order to 


get his argument, such as it is even then. ‘Phe apostle does _ 


not say “for,” but “ and.” He is not proving his statement 
by the passage produced. Why shonld he undertake to 

He is showing, 
rather, how the difference between the first and last Adams, 


y or spiritually, iilus- 


states, and confirms there being such a difference betw 
what: we are now and what we shall be. 
declaration of Moses,” says Mr 
istence of the natural body” ! 
the spirit of man is very ‘easil 
of the existence of the body /+ » 


een 
“ Paul quotes the 
oberts, “to prave the ex- 


Seen; now he wants proof’ 


Loe _ — 


* 1 Cor. xv. 44. t Elpis Israel; p..28," 
$ His treatment of all this in “ Man Mortal ” 
to illustrate the hopeless difficulty 6f his position. 
metonomy to: account for Gen. i. 80, but wisel 
it to the case in hand. I have alread 


He invekes Dr. T.’s . 
y refrains from ‘applying 
y shown that no méaning given by 
g body, ‘living creature, living life, 


living breath—none of them will do here. The metonomy ‘cannot sus- 


tain so great a burden. ° 


‘his writer has told us that. - 


~ 


needs little notiée, savé - = - 


y 


a 


PPT RT RE ES 


ERIE: EN gD aI Ns 


RS INNES en 


on se RR 


may call the red heat of a fire “ something alive 


He admits that there may be “something alive”’ in the body, as you 


Ca within the coal! 
& \ 


e 
4 , 
aad 


ees 


MP RIOMELTA FMT} 


LSE Te REA SEP eenemeeeereee es 


SS ELA PETE 


56 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Be s 
from that down to every creeping thing of which this is said. 
It is not said that the beast has a spirit; it is said that it has 

asoul. So much @, that all, the lower animals are called 
—@ gouls,” just as mutch as men are, This is to be observed,’ 
for it is in itself an answer to the materialisiic theories of * 
organization of the most complete kind. It cuts off at once 
all those arguments as té the faculties of the brutes, their 
display of attachment, ete., which men eround so much 
upon. Scripture lends.us to account for these, not by reason 
of their oreanization. but their possession ofA ‘“Viving soul,” 
as even im man, whiie it refers the understand.ng of ail 
human things (1 Cor. ii, 11) to the spirit which only man 
culties,” appetites, nay, his affections, 


Possess: s—his sensual fa 
“}ting ‘soul “—a soul so distinct 


etc., are ascribed to the 
from the life of the body, that they that “ kill the body” 
cannot “kill the soul” (Matt. x. DX), 


’ 


Mr. Constable will perecive, therefore, that we are one, - 


with him as to the faci that man and beast are alike pos- 
ye do not diggu.se ihe trutli as to 


sessed of living souls, W 
. ‘ SP eee vy < ; \ 
this, but contend fog it. When she proceeds from this to 


fnfer that “ the simple and preper- meaning of .the Hebrew 
word wephesh, when. applied to the lower creatures, is. d/ fe. 
gnimal life, the goes beyond the record. Gen. i. 50 applies~ 
how can .we say, 
itn? 2 > The only 
gpplied to man, Is 


expressly to the lower creatures, and 
“everything wherein there is a living 
ether meaning he ascribes to it, when 
“ ‘person ”: (p- 36), and * ‘wherein there isa living person” 
_will scarcely do either, : : 


This is his “ine vitalile fiction.” of course again, and it lors, indeeck, 


with him seem y inevitable.” 

To all his blunders «s to my, meanin 
book itself fora reply. Mr.-Re often seems Co lave written his com- 
ments beforé he was fairly possessed of the meaning-of what he writes 

-*about. +. ay 


*For a very good aceon 
between man art teste, [oweull refer to Mivart’s « Lessons from 


ao, Timust rever my Feaders to my 


6 


int from the side of science of the difference 


< «the 
f WO 


- bad 
cle, 
But 

AY 
becs 
forn 
nost 

Nov 

som 
crea 

.man 
the | 

_snpy 
"meat 
brea 
unto 
why 
o“No 
point 


Nature,” chap. vii. (Appieton SCO) : ee 
+ Hades,-p. 34. : 


t 
cy 


. 


\ THE SOUL. . 


Gen. Goodwyn has still another detinition : “ The soul, as 
distinguished from the mere body oP soul-tabernacle, may 
be considered as that combination of parts df the ier man, 
which is the seat of the mind ahd affections, and having the 
breath of life gives action ‘to. the outer members of the 
body,.. Wjicn the syirit, ‘the animating, »rinciple, is with- 
drawn, the maa, souland, body, ceases to exist, dies.” His « . 

. Seripture for this. seems to be Gen, ii. 7, © where Adam is 
said to have become # liviny soul. His inner organs received - 
life, or breath of existence atl actiogg’* eee 

Thus the nner organs of the Be, aaa with him to be 

- the soul, the outer only, the soul-tabernacle or body. It’- 
would be well to kttempt something in the way. of’ proof of 
so starting a proposiiion as that the Jungs and other parts 

‘not defined are not the body! = In the body,” “out of the 

- bady,” “absent from the body,” “ putting off. the taberna-'~ 


o 


she cle,” would certainly ‘have a new significance in this way... 
Pos But I think it scarcely needful to pursue this further. E 
sae Man has, then, a living soul; nay, he és one. How, he 
aoe became so Gen. ii. 7 informs us: “And the Lord God 
ne formed man pf the dust! the ground, nd breathed into his 
lifes nostrils the breath of fife, and mab became 2 living: soul.” 
plies ~ Now, upon the most cursory glance. at this, it is evident that 
Bars something more took place in man’s ercation than in the 
only creation of the brute. .It is’ plain that~Gol breathed: into 
in, e man’s nostrils the breath of life, and that He did not into 
on 


the brute’s. Roberts, indewl, contends that Psa, civ. 25-30 
i supplies what is omitted in Genesis. He obtains this by 
deed, means of the old confusion between GoW's Spirit and the 


e 
; breath of life. Nor does any one, deny that “God giveth |. 
eons unto all lite and breath and all things.” The question is, 
com- ae ae Che ene . : 
oie _ why was the gift given in this especial way to man_ alone ? 
“No matter,” says Mr. R., “Gf'they all have it.” But the. 
rence point is, did God come in in this special way to give mcrely 


_ from , the same_gift_after ail +—Fhetanguage is phenomenal, as Old 


a a a ee 


4 & 


@ 2% : ae 
* Truth and Tradition, «y 


~ 


£8- FACTS AND THEORIES Xs TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Testament language largely is, and that makes one only the ~ 
. more to ask, is this breathing of Godnot a form of expres- 
sion pointing to. the communication of something from 
Himself, and more akin to Himself, than is implied in water 
or earth simply producing ? 
Surely it‘is so. For although what is communicated may 
not be yet fully shown—and it is quite the character of an 
initial revelation, that it should not’be—it is plain that man 
has a link here with God IFimself' which the beast has not. 
And this is not by a higher bodily. organization. His — 
. body has been before perfected. It is by the way he receives” 
life. Now, if the breath of life alone were communicated. 
(and every beast has it as much), there is no real difference 
answering to this difference of communication: the phe-— 
nomenal language has no corresponding meaning. But thus 
‘t is that man—only dust before—becomes a living soul. 
And that. purports that he is now characterized, as we have 
seen before in th¢ beast, by something now living within that 
man who was just now but-dust. He is 4 living soul; not 
by. the completion of his bodily organization, but by the 
addition of a new constituent of being. He is now not a 
mere body, nor a body instinct even with the breath ‘of life : 
he is become a “ living soul.”* a : 
Still, why is.man called a living: soul, a title which is: his 
in common with all the animate creation, rather than a 
“living xpirit,” which woufd distinguish him from them * 
The answer would seem to be that the point of contrast is 
not with the lower animals, but with the class of God’s 
creatures to which as a mordl being man belongs. The 
angels are spirits, never souls, The distinction between Py 
them and man, “ made a little lower than the angels,” is thus . 


—— 


¢ 


“* Mr. Morris’ gloss that nepheah chayah means a “' vigorous soul x 
will be repudiated by any gcholar.. Ina secondary ‘sense nn (chayah) 


is used for revival and recovery, but _its simple ordinary established 


meaning is “living.” It is in contrast with Mn (hayah), “ to be,” as 


the being of a stone, for instance, is distinct from the life of an animal. 


7 + 


THE SOUL. 59 


that man isa soul. That which links him with the inferior 
freatures, is that which distinguishes him from pure “ spirits,” 
such as angels are.* 

The fact here manifest, that the soul is thus put for the 
wholé man himself, as what characterizes him, or gives him 
his place among God’s rational creatures, serves to explain 
many passages which would otherwise present difficulty. 
We have in our ordinary language ‘similar uses of the 
word “soul,” which certainly have not grown up from a 
materialistic idea of it. Thus we talk of “so many sors on 
board a ship,” *‘every soul was lost,” and no one is deceived 
by it. There are, however, other renderings of the word 
nephesh, and other uses of soul, which we shall look at in 
their place. As usual, the deniers of the Scripture doctrine 
make a great display of various meanings given to the word. 
Says Miles Grant,t “ Vephesh,; the word rendered soul, is 
translated in forty-four different ways in the common English 
Bible. We now propose to give «il these variations, and 
~ quote the texts that contain them.” ae 

Now I would say that nothing is more common than 
various renderings of the’same word in our ordinary trans- 
lation. Good as it is, and in most cases giving the sense 
with sufficient accuracy, it often varies from literal exact- 
ness. With all this variation there is far less difference than 
would at first sight’ appear. Mr. Grant himself reduces 
these meanings essentially to four, “ creature, person, life and 
desirg,” Soul,” of course, disappears out of this catalogue, 
although it is. the translation of nephesh 475 times out of 
7526. And we are, therefore, to translate Gen. i. 30, “every- 
thing that creepeth upon the earth wherein there is a living 


* Because he has this in common with the beasts, Mr. R. must not 
conclude that it is inferred that man’s soul is just what the beast’s is. 
If “all flesh is not the same flesh” even, why need all souls be the 
same 3 


And if God speaks of His “soul,” condescending as He does to our 
familiar human speech, He is never called a soul as He is a spirit. 
+ The Soul, what is it? p.20, ; 


j 


60 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ere is a living person,” or * wherein 
“ wherein there is a living dsire. 
ler, so that you give no currency i 


creature,” or “ wherein th 
there is a living /iw,’ OF 
Choose which you will, rear 
to the supposition of an immaterial soul in man! 
Mr. Grant has very ingeniously given im his book all the ‘lif 
variations from the ordinary meaning: of the word nephesh, — ° peas 
but he has only given select speeimens of passages which 7 ; ait 
retain that meaning. 1 will supply the deficiency, and pre-. — o = “Hexe) 
sent him and my readers with a few of those: omitted ~ — ings 
spassages : 4 ae a Oe aninl 
Gen, xiii. 21): When we Siw (he anguish of his soul. M 
Numb. xxi. #: ‘The soul of the people was much discouraged oA posi 
Deut, xi. 18: Ye shall lay up these wy words a your soul. “1s 

1 Sam. xviii. 1: The soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul he 1 


of. David. ee : cake 
xxx. 6; The soul of all the people was grteved. ee 
little 


2 Sam. v. 8: The blind that are hated of David's soul. 
29+ The soul within him sltll mourn. not 1 
Hi 


Joh xiv. 
xsi. 13: What his sor desireth, even that he doeth. 
. destt 
what 


9 - How long shall I take couns hin my soul. 
shine 


Psa. xin. 2 
evi. 15: He sent leanness into their soul. 

of: Their sonl is melted beenuse of trouble. 

2) + My soul breaketh for the longing it hath. : Or m. 

from the soul even to the flesh. Th 


lili. 11: The travail of his soul. Lord 
Mic. vi. 7: The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul, body 
soul is distinguished from body 
it hates, it loves. of th 


evil. 
XIX. 
Isa. x. 18: And shall consume 


Now, in these examples, the 
poth body and flesh. It longs, it gricves, 
It is indeed a living thing, as Gren. i. 39 declares. much 
Take, again, the New Testament equivalent of nephesh— no: #1 
| Eee other 
man ¢ 


can k 


psuche ts 
Matt. x. 


able to kill the souk. . 
xi. 29: Ye shall find rest. unte your souls. es : 
x : ! that ] 


xii_ 18 : In whom my conl is well pleased. ghoul 
xxvi. 38: My soul is exeecding sorrowful. an ee 
Ike i. 46 : My soul doth magnify the Lord. : nor i 
John xii. 27 : Now is my aoul troubled. , a ee 
a a oe. : Ul 


98 + Fear not them. which kill the body but are not 


se meeps soning ier neater rem 


ee | 


‘ 


THE SOUL. 


Eperson” in these passages ; og 
| ¥ Thomas and his follower 
organs”, bit Hoodwyn ; or “creature, pe@@@n, life or de- 
Sgire” With"Miles Grant! Take, tor instance,.the very. first 
Example, and try upon it-any or all of these various render- 
ings. Isit not plain that nat one of them will make even the 
smallest sense ? : 

Mr. Constable has indeed done his best. to defend his 
position, but he owns that he takes the expression in its 
“less obvious sense,” and one to which he is compelled, as 
he thinks, by ‘the génerai doctrine [of Scripture] upon this 
subject.” - The latter. assertion “is surely incorrect, and a 
little examination will show us that the sense he gives it is 
not merely the “less obyigus:” but impossible. 

He ailows that if soul Meee be lite, “man can and does 
destroy” it. But he argucs “it Js 4, momentary death: 
what he has for the time extinguished is reserved by God to 
shine through all eternity: it. is not therefore, in God's “eye 
or mind, lost, destroyed or perished.” a 

This will not answer, however. For it. is plain that the 


Lord contrasts killing the body here with destruction of. 


body and sow/ in hell. Now man can only kill even the 
body for a seasén: he cannot. prevent the resurrection even 
of that. What he ean d6 as tothe hody he can do just as 
much (or as little) to the life, and therefore there would be 
no ground for the distinction between the one and the 


other which the passage manifestly makes. ° The. Lord says, 


man can kill the body, not the soul... Mr. Constable says he 


can kill ‘the soul (or ‘life) also, but only for awhile; and - 


that is’ equally true ‘of the boily. According to Mr. ©. it 


should have heen “Fear not them which _ kill neither body 


nor life.” This is not a « less obvious,” but an impossi- 
ble sense. : CREO eiabs i s 
But again, how could one even talk of “ killing the /ife” # 


bs ; : } 


Sie ay ee Ee eT ee 
SR ETE, ~ CREE ti eEMEA IT I RIT 


ee 
: 
<4 
: 
2 
H 
- 


 feneme: 


120 


| fivery large forging is made_in the same way, viz.: ~ Solid forging. 
“Slabs” of iron are successively erat together upon gang, 
the end of a “ porter bar,” or carrying bar, which -acts as 
a lever and tongs in manipulating the w 
Slabs are formed by hammering togeth 
of scrap iron. ! 
To form a trunnion ri ing, tlie porter bar is heated, and) Trannion 
slabs are welded on it, two at a time, till a mass of the re- ae | 
quired size is formed. Doi : of 
This“is roughly. hammered. int shape, the porter’ bar te a 
being in the continuation of one of the trunnions, — This eee in 
bleck is éonverted into a ving by punching a h . 
centre (in the case of large guns, two holes.) 
then, enlarged by driving oval. Shaped amandrels tl 
increasing in sizé till the hole is Jargé enough, . 
The trunnion ring has to be heated betsveen each punch- Shaping 
ing, and the trunnions are then roughly shaped, |: i hentia na 
It will be seen that in this case the fibre will rin. along “a 
the trunnions, and round the ring as described. 
Scrap from. turnings is used, a8 it gives a good, fibrous 
‘Iron of good quality. es ' 
When we want a solid cylinder of i iron, cro af binding Forging 
slabs should be welded ‘along the ‘sides of: the i welded ‘ * Riad 
to tlie. porter bar, as in the case of the forging for a large 


several blooms © 


cascabel, e ‘k : . RS 
The heavy bars for the bréech. coils ‘of aa goa ‘are Bars for he 
made by. welding successive slabs to the end of © porter heavy coils. M i 
bar'till sufficient: length i is obtained. By this means we get ie 45g 
a denser and stronger material. for the breech coil, where ee ran 
great strength is required. Se 


SSeS 


NE SERRE reece 


When an inner barrel i is scared, several eats ratiat be cane two i 
welded together. | ° oer. ae ; q 4 

The B tube, or chase, of heavy guns, is also ‘Soni peenl of : a t Ss 
two united coils, as well as the breech coil, in some cases, 0 eee 

To begin with, the coils are turned smoot! at ends,and . , wes i ‘ 4 


reciprocally 


and a 8 corresponding re recess is is formed on the end of the other. 


62. FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


~~ much more of “killing the body and the life”? What 18 


"killing the body but destroying its life? I must plead 
ignorance as to killing the body avd the life being different 
things -at..all. Nay, further, since “killing” is already 


“taking life,” I must confess I fail to see how you can taik 
of taking the life ‘of life or “ killing life.” 3 


Thus, then, without the need of considering the passages 


with which he has sought to prop up his argument (passages 
which wiil be examined, however, in another place). we may 
_ safely. assure ourselves that the Lord speaks of atrue soul 
in man which man cannot kill even for a moment. _ They 
‘can, for a moment, the body, but God will raise it up. Not 
even for @ moment can they kill the soul. ~ . 4 
The dilemma has been attempted to be avoided in another 
way: Says Miles Grant: “ We think it does not mean 
this present soul or life, for the reason that the destruction 


threatened is not in this life, but in the world to come. 
Man can and does take this life.” { 
Therefore’ “ soul” bas to be rendered the “ life to come.” 
But this it never means: the life to come, or life eternal, is 
coe, never psuché: So much so that Goodwyn says : “ Wher- 


ever the word ‘psuche is found it is in direct contrast with 


zoe, and used to express the natural life or ‘soul capable of 
being destroyed, put to death, or perishing.” “This is, of 
course, as ta the latter part of it;.merely his own view, and 
in flat denial of, the passage before us; for how, if it be 
the natural life, merely, can man, who kills the body, 70¢ 
killit ? But the “ life to come”’ it is not. Psuche, in a sec- 
ondary sense, is “ life,” because the soul és (in effect) life to 


the body. »This natural life man does'and can take ; so that - 


psuche here must be (spite ofthe bigest of materialism) that 
which lies back of the life itself—th veritable soul, which is 
out of man’s reach altogether. 4, 
Roberts attempts an argument, however, from John xii. 
25: “The man losing his life in this world for Christ’s sake, 
1s -said_to save it. When? When the Son of man comes 


FU 


Ww 
see 2 
as to 

‘anotl 
abun 
and 


spirit 


natur 
are t 


‘this 5 


(Matt. xvi. 25-27). If he is to save his psuche then, surely 


« 


| soe AND SPIRIT.. ae 4, 63, 

| : it is now a psuche or life to come.” N ow the Lord’s words 
ene ea are that “he that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that 
ead hateth his life in this worldgshal keep it unto life eternal.” 
ae -How could a.man keep his life to come unto life to come ! 


a f It is his present life he in some way* keeps, not. merely for. | 


by we shall look more 
and shall then find it; is 


ever, but to life eternal. By and 

; closely into what “life eternal ” is, 
cious : not meré eternal existence, but far more. Hig human life 
sca | will enter this new condition. Bui that shows the distinc- 
eee . tion between the two, and that it is this human life the Lord © 
oe = = speaks of in the passage. As I have said, Scripture expresses 
ea these two things by different terms: it ja always eternal zoe, 
: never psuche ; and Mr. Roberts cannot deny it. 
4 But to give up here is to give up all as to the soul’s: 
ther ' immortality, and it is n@ wonder, therefore, they hesitate. 
war - . The doctrine they denounce finds in this Yerse as literal ex- 
aa . pression as need be. If it be Platonic, Scripture is then 
areas ‘ , Platonic; or rather, Plato is thus far Scriptural. 
me.” . 
al, is 
y her- 
hs aa VI. 
le o 
is, of 


L AND SPIRIT. 
, and 


FUNCTIONS AND RELATIONSHIPS OF sou 


it be _ WITH these facts before us, the wa 


, not see a new and beautiful harmony in the Scripture teaching 
2 BCC: as to soul and spirit. That these are quite distinct from one 
fe to f ‘another, though so nearly related, the word of God bears 
»that- [| abundant witness. ‘“ Your whole spirit and soul and body,” 
) that and “ piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and 
ich is spirit,” are passages sufficiently plain. But the, question 

: naturally arises, How, then, are they distinguished, and what 
are their relationships to one another? In the answer to. 
, sake, ‘this which the inspired writings furnish, we find also the 
comes : 


*In what way will be better considered further on,~ 
surely 


y‘is prepared for us to 


mn Xi. 


7 


a * 


64. FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


fullest confirmation of the fact of the existence of these two 
separate* entities in the compound nature of man. 

* Spirit and soul and body, > which I have taken as the key 
to the discovery of .man’s nature, gives Us, I believe, very 
elearly. the order ot relationship. The soul is here the con- 
necting link between the spirit and the body. . The spirit is 
the higher part. flence, although it be true that ** the body 
without the spirit is dead” (James ii, 26), yet the spirit is 
never looked at as the life ot the body. The word for 
life,? as we have seen, is psuche or w phesh,in its secondary 
or derived meaning. . eae 

And to soul or spirit, uot nitgely the moral qualities, but 
also the senses, and the emotional and intellectual faculties 
are ascribed. Striking ict ge Anaterialists, the brain (to 
which they ascribe everything} not so much as once men- 
tioned from Genesis to Revelation. Nor has the head,® 
which contains the brain, airy mental or moral faculties 
ascribed to it. * Visions of the head ~ ure mentioned (Dan, 
iv. 10, ete.), plainly because the eyes ave in it. But no’ 
mental or moral qualities, 10 faculties beside, are ever attri- 

- buted to it. | 
“Sado ‘not say this as doubting the result of men’s researches > 
Sn. this respect. But, as fully allowing that the Drain is the 
instrument of the intellect, it makes only tne more strik.ng the 
way in Which the Spirit of Gos goes back of the mere tleshy , 
orgap to that of which it és merely the organ. Still more so» 
because feelings and tacuities are attributed figuratively to 
the heart) the belly, the bowels, the kidneys. (reins), the 
womb, and the flesh in gencral, but never to the head. Leok ° 
at the gemarks of Robertst betore cited, and sce bow the 
* Noi separate or separable in Mr. Rwberts’ sense, os if ever disjoined 
from one another. Oe ie 
4+ He reminds me that the eye sees, and the ear hears, aud the flesh is 
- pained, which dwes not perceptibly affec: the argument. That he should 
further appeal to 1 Chron. xii. 32, Jolexxxii. 8,and Prov. xxx. 2,.as at 
tributing “unde standing, to the whole mechanism of man as made of 
dust,” is hopeleys y uninteltizibte, excepts heat hope that .no.one 
wonld read for pimself the texts in question, 


ties 
(to 
1en- 
cad, © 
ties 
Jan, 
, no” 
ttri- 


‘ches- 
s the 
# the 
leshy p 
re SO) 
ly to 
, the 
Look 
w the 
joined 
flesh is 
should 
2, as at 
jade of 


ono one 


a 


SOUL AND SPIRIT. 


wisdom. of God meets the ingane folly of would-be philoso- 
phers. IIc who forekgew all these self-sufficient speculations, 


has “poured contempt upon them by utter silence; while, 
p I P y ; ’ 


except, the figurative: language alluded to, all the faculties 
of man aré attributed to what their science of course cannot 
detect, the unseen soul or . spirit. They may correct the 
Word indéed, and tfley are bold enough to do'so, by their 
mére perfect knowledge; but there stands the fact, let them 
mgep,it how they can. s . : 
But moreover in proclaiming these attributes or functions 
of the, spirit and the soul, there is no looseness of language, 
much fess confusion. The mental faculties, emotions, $cn- 
sual appetites, etc., are ascribed to soul or to spirit with the 
utmost exactness and the most unvarying’ harmony. It is 
to this point that I would cal] rfiost carnest, and special at- 
tention. We ghall find in every case that intelligence and 
judgment belong to the spirit; the affections, desires, 
appetites, ctc.,*to the soul. I place before my read isthe 
passages, or alf the varieties of them, upon which Hg guide 
ment may be formes, are | a a 
And first, with regard to spirit (ruach or pueuma) . 
Gen. xii, 8’: (Pharaoh’s), spirit was troubled. : 
Judges viii. 3. Their spirit was abated towards him.’ f 
Psa. evi. 33: They provoked his Spirit, so that he spake unad- 
» visedly. ( - hae ; 
Prov. xiv. 29 : ‘He that is hasty of-spirit exalteth folly. 
Isa. xxix. 24: They that erred in spirit shall come to under- 
standing, A 


Ezek. 1. 21: The spirit of the Jiving creature was in the wheels, | 


Mark. viii. 12 : He sighed deeply in his spirit. 
_ Acts xvii. 16 : His spirit was stirred within‘him. oe 
1 Cor. ii. 11: What man knoweth the things of a man, save the 


spirit of man.whj¢h is in him. 
_ Rendered in our version, “ mind” : 
Prov, xxix. 11 :°A fool uttereth al his ymind.: rr 


Ezek. xi. 5: I know the things thatecome into your mind, 


xx. 32: That which cometh into your mind. — 


Dan. v. 20: His mind herdeted in pride, 


AERA TRI Iet Ae ~ 


66 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


ro 


‘ Understanding”: Isa. xi. 4. : 

“ Courage”: Josh. ii. 11.« ees a a 
Now here ‘it will require no lengthened examination to 
see that the spirit is presented in Seripture as the seat of the 
mind or understanding, 28 we have just seen it to be some- 
times even translated. The, passage from 1 Cor. ii. 11, is 
indeed the mbsti,positive assertion of it that can well be * 

« What man knoweth the things‘ of a man, save the spirit of 

man which is in}him?” Here the spirit of man i the man 

is that par€ of him to which all intelligence is referred. 

Hence we may know what to think of the knowledge or _ .., 

honesty displayed in such a statement as the following from 

one of Miles Grant’s writings: “ In all the 400 passages in. 

the Old, and the 385 in the New 'Réstament, where these: 

words occur, we do ‘not find one that teaches that when 

this spirit or breath is in ian, it is the thinking, accountable 

part, or that it ever did or ever will think. Why is the 

Bible wholly silent on thig point ? Why are we not taught. 

somewhere that. the ruach or pneuma is the real man Arce 
Mr. Grant of course adopts the usual confusion of the breath - 
of life with the spirit of man, and T do not ‘mean to assert 
by any means, that the breath of Hfe is the “ real man.” 
But to his latter question P do most positiyely and distinctly 
answer that the Bible does teach that the spirit of man is- 
the conscious thinking part, and that his not secing it isonly | 
due to his own blindness, not to its not being there. “It says 
most definitely and distinctly,that the “man” which knows 
the “things of a man” is “the “spirit of man, which 1s N° 
him.”. 'Fhere is no escape from its .plain speaking, It 
speaks so plainly indeed that Mr, Grant has seen it best to” 

- ignore its testimony in his pamphlet just referred to; hnd it 

is his silence that: is to be remarked, and not the silence of 
the Scriptures. : Oe - 

This “spirit of man,” then, cannot be with Mr. Grant 

either an “ influence” or “a state of feeling,” or the “atmos: 
phere or Breath of life.” Ttocanmotbe Mie Morris’ eure 


* Spirttin Man, pp. 81, 32. 


o + 
’ 


OWS 
EEN 
It 
t to” 
nd it 
e of 


‘rant 


Mos- . 


ry 


67.4 


SOUL AND SPIRIT, 


nature (or else’ ‘ill ; unconverted men are. born idiots), or 
“motions iind emogions: of the, soul.” No, it is simply what 
the words declare,a cénscious intelligent existence ‘in the 
man,.and: that to which all his intelligence of ;sfuman things 
is due. “What man knoweth the things of a man, save the 

SPIRIT OF MAN which is 1 him ?” - ; Bae . 
Passages which also identify. the spirit as the seat of the 

mind or understanding, I have already quoted. It needs not 

to examine them here, exeept to show how other uses of the 
word are derived from this one. Thus, in Joshua ii. 11, and 

v.d, it is used for “ courage,” the connection of. which with 

“presence ofyind” is familiar to all. And.in Judges viii. 3, 
itis used for anger,” which is again the judgment of the 
mind, true or false, upon what presents itself to it as evil. 

Another use of the word, which also we have in English, for 

the prevailing temper_or disposition, as “a meck and .quietw” 

spirit,” a © spirit of pride,” ete., seems derived from the fact 
of the-spirit being in man the higher part, and ‘the ‘rightful 
governor of the man—whaf, in shat, characterizes him. Pages 
Now let. us gather, in a simila VEY, Some passages as to 
the sqyly and the difference will beat once “apparent. 
Thus it is the seat of the affections: + | os 
-Gen, xxxit?’g : The soul of my son loxgethi forg'your daughter, 
1 Sad. xviii. OB The ‘soul. of Jonatlian was knit to the soul of 
‘David. | Bo ee em 
sty Psa. xiii. 1:"So pantith my soul after thee,” O OF. 
1 Ixiii, 1: O God, my soul thirsteth for Thee. 2 
Ixxxiv. 2: M y soul longeth for the courts of the 

exix, 20: My soul brceaketh for the longing it hath. 

* Cant..i. 7: O Thou whom my soul loveth.  . Ca aa 
Isaiah xxvi, 9: With my soul have I desired thee in the night, 
Luke ii. 35: A sword shall pierce through thine own soul. 

- Heb. x. 38: My soul shall havo no pleasure in him. 

As it, loves, so it hates: « ~aghhe’ a 

_ Ley. xxvi. 15: If your soul abhor my judgments, , 

2 Sam.’v. 8: The blind, that are hated of David’s. souh 


° 


Lech.-xi-8--My-souHoathed than, Wears. 
‘It compassionates : | Ss 


4 


eae Px ee ‘a3 


Y wicked Doastet! 1 “of! re 3 soul’s desire. 
Tesh, lusts which or" against, the soul, 


; nook to relive the pai u 
7 Soul. . take,thine.« eng ce ok, ‘and ve merry, 


Sot tts: ; aakeoe foeanings ares. 0 
. “Appetite "s Prov. xxiii. 2, Feel. vi. 7. i ° 
“ Pleasura’ ? Deut. xxiii. 24, Psa, ‘ev, #2, oe xxiv. 16. 
Desire” : Jor. xliv. 14, Mic. vii. a ‘Hab. ii. 
“Mind,” in'the sense of will or ete not of the under- 
; /_ standing : 1 Sam. ii. 35, 2 Kings ix: | ie 
ae 8 slight examination of. these! passages will serve to 
demonstrate the truth of my fornier assertion as to the soul’s 
place and functions. Tt is héte seen plainly as the link be- 
tween the spirit) and the Dody: thatywhich is indeed t the life 
« of the latte# THe sense of “life often given to it,in 
re is pluinly a meaning <M ‘I from this very fact. 
is the difference bet wwe meer ond spirit is preserved 
om Peet thorough me 
mainfained everywhere throw 
Still objection | has’ been %& “this statement. © “Mr. 
Roberts has even ventured tha : Hoe that, on ue con-. * 
trary,“ spirit” and “soul arc’ “aire 
most indiscriminate manner.” fie instances Like i i. 6: AT: 
“My soul doth magnify the Lord, and m y gpirit hath: rejoiced - 
in God my Saviour” But he does not tell us how this shows 
their indiscriminate use. “ -WRy 3% ul doth magnify ” ” may well 


op, 


express how: filly. its longing Fpatisti ed; ‘while ‘ “my Laika 


SOUL AND SPIRIT, 69 


hath rejoiced ” only shows that there is a joy of the mind 
as well. And so there is: and: both heart and mind ‘thus 
testify the complete way in which the knowledge of a 
Saviour-God meets both, and unites man’s whole being in. 
praise. There is so little opposition here to the view above . 
given, that it alone gives fulness and definitenéss to what 
in Mr. Roberts’ hands. becomes & poor and unmeaning ‘ 
tautology. ee 
He goes on: ~ . 


‘* But the fact can be-shown from the very passages which Mr. 
‘Grant has-qnoted : for instance, out of nine quoted to show that _ 
the spirit is the seat of the mind or understanding as contrasted 
with the soul as the scat of hate, love, lust, appetite, ete., six have 
- to do with emotion, such as anger, fear,” ete. . 2.“ A not very | 
* close examination show at the spirit, in‘addition 

ble, anger, provocation 


-agntity of Mr. Grant’s 
“Of reason.” 


But Mr. Roberts plainly does not apprehend the theory, 

He shows jt by inferring from it “two surviving person- 

alities, when ,the body ‘has mouldered to dust.” Spirit, soul 

- ., and pa Wy are during life but one “personality,” and certain- 

: elit on d vsnot make more than one. At death the body 
ro. drop fi JF the time being, out of this tri-unity. Spirit and 
5 ul, gn | oe Rand, are! never sundered. In life or in 
eath the mystéfious Kaksvef@onnection are preserved, and 
. * if (in Mr. Iv.'s' wording of it), the spirit is the thinker, and 
the soul t g ificler gi these are “not independent of each 
.  other,—two personalities, but one: ® The knowledge of the 


\ Piioeg tod 
A 
a 3 ¢ 


. spirit becomes th€ portidi of . the.soul ; the affec tions of the 


the Be soul the ‘possession “of thats rit,” "Fpi8~.interdependence 
anes aie Pray find illustration fn one JFthe texts quoted above, and 
iced : hich Mr. R.-lays hoff’ of'as.against the yiew :—“ He sighed 
ows deeply ‘in “his spirit,” Now-“sig ing” is a bodily, not a 
well a& ~ mental phengmenon at all. The language does not more 


pirite” — Bey “wonfound soul and spirit than. it. does body and spirit, if 


ya 
Ree ‘ . : : ' \ { 
RRS ad See Comet ; 
? Os ey Mee \ 


“eases, suppose the spir 


discerns the things of aman is r 


70 FACTS AND TITEORIE 


a 


s AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


aturally) construed. But it was mental 
trouble that produced the sigh, Ilis spirit discerning the 
moral character of the, expressed desire to see a sign from 
heaven. Pharaoh's spirit was in like manner troubled : in 
his case because he could not interpret his dream. In these 
it was mind, why could we not speak 
ach case, the mind or spirit which 
ightly. named asthe seat of 
the trouble. The ‘soul in Pharaoh’s case, soul and body in 
the Lord's, might be involved, but the expressions are per- 
fectly appropriate, and the distinction between soul and spirit 


gives them a real significance, which tor materialism does 
pele 
r ; & 


rigidly (and unn 


of trouble of mind? ‘Ine 


o 


not exist. : 
So I have shown above how the spirit: Is connected with 


“anger ” (as in Judges vill. 3). Psa. evi. 33, and Prov. xiv. 


29 are really to be classed’ with this, asqeevident; and Acts 


xvii., Gis nearly related and ec 
— But let me ask Mr. Roberts, ius he found © hate, love, 
‘in Scripture aseribed tothe spirit 7 Tt is plain 
should have heard of it. Does not this - 
vy had some toundatton in fact ? 

ts that the quotations— | 


asily inteHigible. 
. 5 


lust, appetite, 
he has not, or we 
look then, as if the * theor 
As to the soul, Mr. R. asser 
“ show as a whole, that the ‘soul’ of the bible has as much to do 
with higher actions of the mind as the spirit : 'Fhus Psa. xhii. 1, 
Ixiii. 1, Ixxxiv. 2 ; in all these, which are the. first three quotations, 
it is David’s soul that aspires after divine thifmizs, and therefore that 
apprehends knowledge. But this point is’ nuge Obvious in some 
passages which of eourse he has not ¢ jnotete , Thus Prov. xix, 2, 
‘that the soul be without knowledge is neg nid: Desa. exits. 
14, ‘That my sou KNOWETIL right well ; "Prov. ii, 10, ‘when 
knowledye is pleasant to thy sovn’; Prov. xxiv. 14, ‘So shall the 
krviledge of wisdom be to thy soul.’ 
That is Mr. Wobert’s disproof of the whole argument: 
ain that it isillusive and imaginary, 


OG 


j 
| 
} 
7 


It is easy to show here ag: 
and that the view in question gives alone real distinctnc gy 
of meaning to the texts. oe 


For, as to the first three quotations how impossible would 


a i: 


v pent: SOUL sAND SPIRIT. ee ie 


it be to say, “So panteth my mind after Thee,” “ 
thirsteth,” “my inind longeth.” Certainly it has never been 


; _ ’ contended that the soul has not to do with divine thirkys, 


- any more than we could assert this of the heurt, which we 


may take as in some sort. its figurative synonym. .On the £ 

él contrapy, it is the importance of their getting into the Sas 

| heart, and not being in the mind only, that is the key to the 

| ther texts so obscure to Mr. Roberts. he knowledge of © 

‘Wisdom snust be thus sweet to the soul, in order.to profit. If 

ce the wind acquire it, yet the heart enjoys it; and this isthe «= @ 
explanation of the. last tivo quotation So we can well 


. _ Understand how: “ tH&t the soul be without: ledge is not 
. good”: for the affections must,be guided wees by 
the understanding, Finally, that ,the soul (or heart) should 

appreciate. God's marvellous * works,” is thus not out of 
keeping: it ‘is rightly, not merely my mind knoweth, but - 

my fAcart does. The viay of the soul above given is not 
inconsistent with such" texts as’ these, but on the contrary - 

- brings out their beauty. Mr. Roberts’ objections are not 
“merely superticial and powerless, but hj wipOns are easily ’ 
turned against himself. ee : 3 
“Nor only this, but he is er 
‘statements. For whe 
and soul and body,” he paraphrases it, as we have seen (p.30 rs 

by “body, life and mind,” 

« the soul, he identifies the “s 


my mind 


j 
| 
} 
7 


a 


ossly inconsistent with his own 


n he interprets‘ the: apostle’s spirit. 


Here, in ecpress contrast with 
pirit” with the « mind,” TI be. - 
lieve, indeed, it is inconsistent With his system, and- have 
said so, but that? does not alter the fact that here he is in 
manifest contradiction to hithself. « , oY 

_ LT repeat, then, without fo 


dr of successful Opposition, that , . al 

mind, the “gamer 
rong, of. love, 

ppetités of the body. : 


~ 


‘ 


‘72 FACTS AND THE 33 AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 
oe 


¥ 


+ vs » 


e 
& 


CHAPTER VII. 


Es SOUL. AND SELF. .- e 


4 


_ % WE may now proceed still further in proof of the distinct 
‘ymeaning and harmopious use of these words in Sevipture; 
i added harmony discovered being i Ae new pl 
of the reality of man’s ‘spiritual being, and of tite comple 
Scriptural recognition of the fact. a) 
z Wre have seen the intimate alliance of soul. and body, the | 
very.appetites (as we speak) of the body being ascribed volt 
” _ the soul. A it little wonder that ‘soul’? and j 
= “Fife” should be &e far identified as to be expressed even by 
the me rd. “WWhategronnd have we from Scripture, 
indee@*for speaking of any “ vital principle” apart from the 
< soul? - seems plain that there ds no‘such thing; and that 
i _ “life’ t the perpitedtion ofthe. bagy ivith the soul. The 
} soul, 1s the life while it abides in congection with the body. 
The life 'is-(so to spqgi “the PHENOMESAL soul. It is no 
wonder, then, iiese two neanings should easily in Scrip- 7 
: «ture ryn into d Bher, and be, both covered by the same So 
‘ = a Greek’ or Hebrek wom. oo , . 
aa That they do'so is seen in a passage which Mr. Constable 
‘+ thas very strangely himself brought forward to show the in- 
fluence of “ Platonism ” in moulding the common translation 
of our Bible. He would have the word: psuche, which 
- “stands for soul gad life in Luke xii, 19-23, un:formly rendered 
“2 “Jife” all ees Tognost readers this will-surcly appear 
impossible and absurd. Fancy a man represented as apos- 
- trophizing his’ dife thus ¢ “Lé/?, thou hast much goods, etc., 
‘ . .. take thine ease, eat, drink, and: be merry”! . Yet, on 


% 


wy 


“a, 


the other hand, who can avoid the connection with the moral 
of this very story, “Take no thought for your life”? Instead, 
then, of manifesting the Llatoniere of the translators, it does 


(A 


i] 


show how near akin in Ser 
confounded, soul and life are. 

_ Nor only this. The word for “ 
we now inhabit—is a word taken fr 


adject: 


as related in a speci 
is contrasted w 


Mr. Const 
the soul. 


» psuchic) 


English, but whicl 


able, of ourse 
We speak ot 


S0UL AND SELF. 


» one for which we hay 
speaks of the body i 
al. way to soul rathe 
ith the “spiritual » 
(1 Cor, xv. 4475 --- . 


73 
ipture, although impossible to be 


natural body "—the body 
om this word psuche (its 
e no equivalemt in 
n its present state, 
r than spirit, for it 
body of the resurrection 


the soul, it is evide 


word “soul” 


glanced at, but which 
As pervading and 
nt, eonnects itself 
e live in the flesh in a special 


in Scripture, 
it will be of 


an’s distinctive title, as com- 
beings, is that. he isa “soul.” 


used for the “person,” the 


ship, nay, of these “go 
how impossible for’ those who beliey 


to speak of souls perishing in the 
impossible to justify such | 


*“ Person "js the trans] 
_ Of these, three are bit wi 
would ‘be better given so, 


“My s@iy 


Ra'al is ysed 


ern Picea 
_perishing,in t 


feral places, 


body. It is, indeed, the only true 
word in Hebrew for either,* vehi 


psuche is used corres 
the emphatic I or he 
of a person is but the p 
Even in our own langu 

- alism which has induced 
“souls” in a manne 


ive in the New Testament 
pondingly ’ in, 


It is thus 


we1S but myself: the soul - 
erson himself. : 
age, where, certain] 
sucha mode of g 
r which should convict us, wi 
Ives disbelieving 
"so man 
ais" 


y, itis not materi. _ 
peech, we speak of 


th such as 


the immortalit? of 
y “souls” being on board a 
he waters, Think 


e in an immortal soul, 


waters! It is, perhaps, 
ansuage to Mr. Constable, and 
ation of six other words in our 
rds for “man” ( 


version, but 


"Adam, ish, "enosh), and 


x 


Panim, only in the phrase « 
» again but -once. 
— “ basag,” Eccl. ii.-8, . 


accepting persons,” lit, 
- For “ self” 


but—once {Pro 


“' faces,” 
We find, beside nephesh, only once 


Vv. xxiv, 8), 
Methim 


a 


74 ‘FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A “PUTURE STATE. 


yet we do believe in the immortality of the soul in spite of 
that. Somehow te us, as to the writers of Scripture, the 
man who dwells in this “natural” body, is preéminently a 
“goul.” “Soul” .characterizes him, white in the “flesh at 
least, in some sense beyond spirit or body. The body he 
possesses is a soul-body; the life. he lives a soul-life; the 
man himself is a “living soul.” > i 


Can we explain this identification, while yet the body is : 

it ‘what is most evident t6 the senses, and the spirit the higher : 

| and intellectual part, and which really separates Mian, from a 

i the beast? I believe we can very intelligibly explain it. 8 

| For, as to the body, what is it apart from. that which ani- f 

[ mates and connects it with the sctny around, nay, which h 

it --- holds even together its véry component, parts in one orginic t 

mi whole? It is the soul with which we hate. practically to y 
foes do; our intercourse is of soul with soul; when the soul is , 

i i gone, the body is but the relic of what we once knew. ° 0. 

i And even as to the spirit, its connection with ‘the outer fare . 

| i world is also by the soul. The apertare of, knowledge is by 5 

1} | : ‘the senses. - The:word we have before secn, in 1-Cor. xv., to : oe 

| ib | : be translated “ natural,” is twice elsewhere, translated “sen- , iE 

tiki | ee sual” (James iii. 15, Jude 19), and is really ‘ psychic,” ‘from ti 

| iy i ; _psuche, soul. The ‘soul is thus really the Vife here, the man an 

|| | himsc// as part of this creation. , Soul, lite, self, are so near ison <ar 

| | » + akin to one another as almost to. mergé in one; but the key | - be 

i to the harmony is in no wise the materialistic conception, —. ° : (E 

_' . but the reverse. PE tO ag Si Hoe Ee ee 

oe - And this is confirmed in a remarkable way by. the’ use of ; : ' fle 

Scripture, which, when “speaking of the disembodied. state, ” ogee 

; identifies min with his spirit rather than with his soul. Not ae his 

; that what kills the. body kills the soul. | This, as we have. : 09 

-geen, the Word-emphatically denies. But yet-if the present’ ae 

life be emphatically the soul-life—the living man the living Beene tial 

soul—death is the end‘of this form of existence. . The soul, he oe 

F ~ though not extinct in death, may well. be-said, actording te- Ok 

- the true. pliliiise- in yew. xxiv. 17,.18, to be “ smitten” by it. me 

: to. 


And, while in death the “soul departs” from’ the body. 


o ‘4 
Pe See 
‘ 


+ 


e;* : ; 
t 


im : A 
: k 


SOUL AND SELF. | 75 


(Gen. xxxv. 18), and in the case of one-'raised. from death 
“comes into” it again (1 Kings xvii. 21), man in the dis- 
embodied state simply is constantly and consistently a spirit, 
not a soul, with two exceptions only which limit this in a 
way which ‘serves to show only more convincingly the 
Paneer the distinction we are making. i oe 

The two exceptions are Acts ii, 27 (which is only the 
quotation of Psa. xvi. 10), and Rey. vi. 9. Both of these 
evidently refer to. death and the conneetion with the body. 

. Phe souls under the altar are the “souls of tham that were 
slain for the word of Cod,” —“smitten” soul: which cry _ 
for vengeance. While “Thou wilt not. leave | y soul in. _ 
hell” (or hades) no. less is connected with the t ought of 
the partner-body from which it had been sunde 
which is not allowed to sec “corruption ” in the tomb, hee 

Ordinarily, the-common language of the day, which speaks 
of ‘departed spirits, and of Ghosts (which is but the Saxon 
equivalent of the same word), is based upon: the older and ge 

‘ Seriptural usage. “A “spirit,” as in Acts XNiii. 8,9, was the ~~” 

common term for* one passed into the unseen state. The — 

' Pharisees confessed their bolicf in “spirits,” carefully: dis. ~ 
tinguished from “angels,” and in opposition to Sadducean 
‘infidelity. So the disciples thought the risen Lord a ¢ spirit,’ *. 

4) derd answers them, “ 9 spirit ath not” flesh and 
OnpBX 80. the departed saints are‘ spirits of just'men” 

(Heb. xii: ‘23),-while the unrighteous on the. other hand ee 

fe are “spirits. in prison” (L Pet hie 19); So. x the spirit. ae 

"  #eparts to God that. gave it” (Keel. sii. 7) and’ the Lord. 

commends H is spirit to the Father (Luke sxiii. 46), Stephen oo 
his to. Him who has the keys of death and: hades (Acts vii. - 


os 


Again, the © spiritual” body of the resurrection argues thes 


New condition upon which the sai 


int enters then. “OH teh an‘l 
blood —the twy combined—+ cannot inherit the Kingdom 
a We are anticipating here what. may secin rather to belong. 
toa future stage of onr inquiry, but. it i seemed. needtil ‘in ee 


* ” 


A 
EES a 


Th 
solid” 
the p 
To 

it ali 
has te 

Th 
‘coils, 
insid 

_. + to co 
ae other 
tt: 

the r 


o 


reces 
ew i 
by tk 
is ret 
bore 


The A tube is prepared ag preyionely described, fiom a acnnnae 
“solid ingot. It is heated, when turned and rough bored, to poly des 
, the proper heat, and is plunged into a bath of rape oil. ar 


Toughening strengthens the steel very much, but it warps _ Effidys of 
ita little, and frequently causes the surface to crack, so it 
has to be turned and bored true after the operation. . aa 


‘ The B tube'is composed of two single and slightly taper The B. tube, 
coils,’ united as before described. It is then turned ; the 
inside is then gauged so that. the steg#tube'may be finished 
- to correct size, allowing ‘003% ins. at tnuzzle, and 002 at 

> other énd, for shrinkage. : : 


Tt is easie! ta turn to gauge > than bore to gauge, hence - 
e 
the reason the inside of a coil i is carefully measured. 
The “coiled breech piéce consists of two united coils. gpjled breech 
The breech end has a serew, cut for the cascable. piece. 


© coil consists of a breech coil, trunnion ring and muzzle. Coil. 
coil, united as before described. : : 


Sy 


N.B. —Double and treble coils are not now. ruse the bars : 
being made of much Jarger section. 


The coiled "breech Bice i is first shrunk on to ie A bs Putting 


A shoulder i is formed on its gnuzzle end to receivé a similar ‘gether. 


~ * recess, cut in the B tube, whiglgyis then shrinkon. °° .# 


The cascable is now screwed in, so that pe compressed 
iby the C coil, which is now ehrank off over and the gun. 
is ready for (1) gas escape being made, engraving, , finishing 
bore and rifling, venting and (2) sighting, marking, &c.. 

The gas escape i is cut through the threads of the cascable. 


~ The. other operations” ‘cannot be, with _advantage, de: 
scribed; we not being able to see the actual operations, ~ 

The gun‘is supplied with two tangent sights, a centre . 
hind sight and three trunnion sights. * “id 


_ Larger: natures of gins are made on similar principles, -. harger 
The cast patterns of the 18 ton and larger guns, have natures. 
‘ muzzle” coil shrunk on séparate from the jacket, to. which 


Se a ee 


toughening.’ 


76 PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“order that we might have a full view of the Scripture teach- 
. Ing as to what man is. / There is surely a consistency in all _. 
~, this, which is the consistency ‘of truth itself.’ We shall 
pursue this further in-the next chapter. In the meanwhile 
“we may take up the objections of Mr. Constable to that 
view of ‘soul’ which we have been magitaining here. Loe 
_. Thus he complains: of the various translation which in our * if 
common version is givch to the word. He argues that the 
_ translators, é despite their Platonic’ ‘views, are compelled to 
‘give ‘ animal life,’ as a true and. proper sense for that word. 
\ Which they. ‘generally translate’ by a term. which they suppose ee Us 
— *\ to mean something i infinitely higher i in mediing than ¢ anjpral. =. | 
ife.’ Just’; as: if'a word: ‘can have: “forts pind yp se8e: tye cee rage 
eanings: wholly different from ‘each othdr 130" RAM 
Where our. translators have given: this rendering’ of antinal 48 
e I. cannot: find. Mr. Constable s objdet pintrodkoing 
a Pe abl ” into itis plain, however er. ‘Tt is to let Reka at 
| ae soutlife: (if: a= ‘may use the expression) is com’ 
i ms dower: egies along with man, ‘and to: le Us 7 


oa 


ee 


ay pranepareas? : Phetétoré | the. A aidoant WW hen hopped: 7) ra 
‘ the ‘responsibility to be. assumed. ‘by: the. translators, while 


Het Mr. Constable is its author ! eae a nh ON os ve & ww. 
oe" J have shown ‘also that. “soul? j & ponll ye ‘the pubs nary Ah 
-  ® meaning of both the Greek and HH shisie Ww ards in a Soriptins Sai thi 
my EOE and sae how closely connected L hte: e. vaye 
~- “life "is. ” The te are: ‘certainly int wi 
ta ‘owever little it is possible *, ee 
Mr. @, may urge, indeed, that, thee . Le 

after them, v vary: the translation’ * please, ip order to* eee 

s escape frém the “difficulties attenil K. ens “an hionest, ne “sin 

S struction of,it. He, jfoes ad luce Matt xii | 5426, het and Lake ‘ae | Vi 


ie 


q 
o a 


ee '. SOUL AND SELF. 6 . 
Se fe ‘ Kit 19-23, as examples where psuche oStands for life. and 
eee sae soul, and where he claims it must at least bé uniformly rén- 
1 tay dered. — ne — A 
: But we have already scén that‘as tothe latter passage it is 
t : clearly impossible, Did any one cver address such ain fim per- 4 
L . Sonality as his “ life,” and bid it “take its"ease,” etc. ? Yet a 
ae el, this is the rendering Mr. Constable deniands '» The same 
A tie (ae _ uniformity of rendering woutd in other plazes give’'still more 
: manifest absurdity, as in Jobn iii. 8, already nbticed, where 
| fs : “wind” and « Spirit” are the same word. The rule he 
a ‘ "" would apply,is in short not without many 2n exception, these- 
l exceptions being determined by the conngction in. which the 
y f _. word is found. In Matt. xvi. 2), 26; 


, Alford and others, who: 
are sufficiently orthodox, render the last .verse as Mr. C. 
would do, without the least idea of its being * forbidden by’ 


thelr theory.” My own view is that which the parallel pas- 
sage in Luke ix. 2: 


ong, that “soul ” is here, as so, often in the ‘Qld Testament, 
a the Synonym of self. “His soul” 
“preted by the passage in Luke to 
»trine the Lord propouflds is that 
“of this world or the next. He must be as a man of the 
‘ world lost here, or lost -hereafter ; but I do not see how it. 
could be better expressed in English than it ‘is in the way 
_ that Mr. Constable demurs to, albeit it requires the ,double 


rendering of psuche by life and soul,.a rendcring which would 
be only inadmissible, 


if it required a‘meaning for the word 
.®° which was.not 


Mr. Constab!c 


thoroughly .cstablished elsewhere. - ° 
: . ) has, produced Some passages: to show that 
ome ee ice othe soul is. mortal, and although it may 
es i. 2 Yebas the subject has been alread 


be “bimself.” The. doc.” 
& man must take his.choice 


\ 


§cem anticipating, 
y somewhat before us, it 


will be woll.to consider “t! ont here. - awe 
ee -..\ And first as to the Old Testament, he brings forward 
Pin oft a i ae Lev..xxiy. 17, 18, « literally translated :"—“he that kidleth 
m3 welled Kee “the soul “ofa man » ... the sou? of @ beast” expressions 
fig! eg 


“9 simfiar to which abound, he says, iz 


1 the Hebrew Scriptures, 
i With these he joins Joshua’s destriiction of “all the souls” 


* 


3 seems evidently to show to be the true . 


in Matt. xVi. 26 ig inter- 


vires 


x 


by 
if’ 


\ 


rs 


78 FACTS AND’ THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


in: the cities of Canaan (!) and the phrases “my soul shall 


live ” (Gen. xii. 13), and “let my soul die” (Numb. xxiii. 10). 
He. urges also Job's ‘soul ¢ ‘hoosing death (vii. 15), and Elihu's S 
words (xxxiii. 22): “his soul dr paweth near to the grave.’ 
Also that “‘in the 38rd psalm, we are expressly told. that the 
souls even of God's peaple are exposed to death; ise 
another psalm, (xxviii. 50), that the soul is not “ ee eow 
_ death ” while the final end of the Wieked i in hell... . is: de- 
<Botibed | as the death of the sinful soul (Eze ‘ke. xviii. Bp. . 
‘Again as to the New Testament, he contends that Mark 
ili. 4 “Pould read, * ap save a soul or. to kill it” and so Luke 
iX.: 54-6, Aets XV; 6, Rom. xi. 3. ° He urges Rev. xvi. 3, 
“every. living soul died i in the sea; ~ and adds; “Once more 
John tells us that all, souls, whether of the righteous: or. the 


e wicked, after death continue without dite until the resurree- 


“we gather of the former that they had) been 


tion. In Rev xy. 4, he tells-us that in the prophetic vision. 
of the fature with which ‘he was favored, he saw ‘the souls 
of them” that were Heheaded | in alining stale, He goes on - 


ini-verse 3 to speak ¢ if Other soils. Me tells us athat these 
latter did not live aeain till after a certain. haunts ‘Hence 
to life, 
till the 


“fet, “had pean without life, in a condition of del 
resurrection.’ 


Mr. Constable’ S gwneeanon of interpretation rs simple , 


enough, “that the,word psuche has evidently, when ‘spoken 
of as a Goustitaent part, of human nature, ove wuiform 
meaning. This, he sity, is “life.” So that, jn the last quo- 


tation the apostle John tells ys, “TD saw thé dies of them that 
were beheaded.” ote. “and they.” the lives, * live dd,’ He saw:*: 
these lives, touse Mr, C. language, * in a living state.” So 


in Rev: xvi. 3. “every? fining litt, “—the .word “living” 
makes things still plainer, Mr..0. thinks—* diced j in the. sea.’ 
So Job spoke ot his lite choosing death. Elihu of its going 
tq, the grav e, Abraham of his Tife living, and Balaam of its 


dying ; while he that killec life of aman was to be put. : 


to death, ete. This’ is all ordinary and quite inte ‘Higible: ,. 


English tox Mr. Constable. and which ought, to commend: 


Sk hae FE SOUL AD: SELF, i 4 cee: |, 
all ie : itself to his readers Ww ithout 


even the necessity of a word to 
y}. ~ make jt. plain ! 


Us so. (* How js it that he does not see tha, im possibility of su¢h 
se “~~ renderings, and on the other hand that there is a legitimate 
he. , ~~ -yse of soul in English, which explains in good measure the ; 
aoe a difficulty he seems to have ? Why shoatd he havé more ~ : 
m 1 difficulty, for instance, in understanding Joshua’s destroying 
le- i “all, the souls "in Canaan, dr eve ry “living soul” dying in 
~ the sea, than'if it had been a ne Ww spaper paragraph as toa r 

tk shipwreck, and « ngt a soul saved”? Would this suggest 
ke | * +. to-him, as similar: Tanguage in Seripturé 5 seems to do, how 
Sc ~~ Wrong our thoughts are ‘abank the “salvation” of “souls” ? 
ree a There § is _a childish. simplicity in such remarks, whieh would 
ne : proyoke a smile if fhe subject were not too grave. In Mark 
ie: 7 = ate “s, Mr. Constable, would even: force the translation into- 
gh. “. “aavee€ soul ‘or to. kill’ it, * actually introducing the “it” |’ 
ils : -. where there j is none, tf bring i in the killing of a soul in the 
Bh i most striking way !9-W hy it should not be “life”? there, he . 
se .._ ¢an‘énly argue upon fis Pr ciple of uniformity of meaning, 
ce i “which we have already jaamictic ally tested and found wanting. 
fe, ean ‘The « souls of yfts “beheaded”; in’ Rey. XX., presents 
hee ' but little. mpre Aiftéult ty; for the reviving of these souls is 

expressly, *t atl sq a“ resurreetion.” Tt is ther ‘eforé but an in- 
le. stance ogth iy uge of Sul gf 2 man for the man himself, which 
en ' T have al vaily. referred to. This" Sonate the list of New 
a9 Téstament passages. 
0- ' The first fro ‘the Old Bostdineni (Lev. xxiv. 17 3) I 
at ; : have already referred to. The exprepsion here and ee 
Wwe i where, as Gen. xxxvii. 21, Deut. xix. 6, 11, xxii. 26; Jer 
so 14, is invariably “ smitiagthe soul,” “and we have seen-its 
ee force. The verb is not thé true word for killing, nor would 
EA : ‘ there be sense in spéaking of. killing the life of a person, be- 
1g , ,.eause “killing” by itself means ‘ tilling life.” and taking the 
ts pee. life oy ithe life would be ‘ah insufferable expression. 
UG : ‘Tt is scarcely. needful again to speak of Joshua, « My 
les. soul shall live,” “Jet my soul die,” «to deliver their soul 
id” frony death,” “Tle paged not their 


if soul from death,” “ the 


a a 
‘ . 


qs 


80 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. | 


soul that sinneth, it Shall die,” are all similar expressions — 
to those we haye noticed in Revelation.* Nor does Ezek. : 
xviii. 27 speak of punishment in hell, although commonly Lc 
taken in that way, but of Divine government in the world. 
Again, Job’s soul choosing death presents no difficulty : 
how it should show that é/ dies, much more becomes ‘extinct, — ! . 
Mr. Constable should explain. In Job xxxiii. 22, were the. 
common rendering correct, the vivid poetry would svarcely 
require so narrow an interpretation. sut shachath’is not 
the “grave”: it is the “ pit,” as in vers. 18, 25, 28, 30, thé 
abyss, darker andl more dread than the geave. ' + . 
This then is his whole argument. At the very best super- 
‘ficial, it. is in mary cases inconsistent and. self-destructive in, 
the extreme. Ilis failure is not from want of will nor of te 
mental ability: it is the failure of errog to overthrow truth, 
and, thank God, whitey er the ddvocate, fail it must. 


* < 
( 
Sa tees ( 
I 
' 1 
CHAPTER VIII. : 
a 
THE FALL. ‘ 
) ( 

THERE vothain yet sor ne “things to point out before the 
harmony of Scripture doctrine’ as to spirit and soul is prop- t. 
erly before us. Types indee A of the difference and relation- fi 
ship between these’ two essential parts of man’s being are to d 
be found, I. doubt not, in the human race at large. Man .) 
and woman, in their characteristic differences; scem ‘to n 
present: very much the, peculiar features of spirit’ and soul : o 
the one predominant i in mental activity, the other in. emo- He 
tional ; the woman formed for the man, and each the om; yr 
ad Brabistes will be fin hd Without any i Hie ality in the, Oud Tentament. x 


Bee for instance Lev.x). 43; Josh: xxili. 11, sth: iv, Oi BL Tow xvii, 
4, xxKii. 2). Psa. eve 28, IM y. 14) xb, \2 » Jer. iii. ‘, ac gets 


t.Or corruption,” not ind essaniiy of the Body. bata ar ; but.“ pit’? is 
more wage, and the ‘trig: Hiewning here, E ay re) 


THE FA‘LI,. 81 


giouiiaet of the other, made’ for mutual support and re- 
Jationship. 

The analocy ‘may be traced further than this, however, 
and grows\n significance as we contemplate it. The man was 
, Seduced through tho woman, his judgment not astray, but 
led captive by his affections. “Adam was not deceived,” 
says the apostle, (1 Tim. il. 14), “but the woman. being 
deceived . was. in\ the transgression.” ‘The serpent: be- 
guiled me,” says the woman. “The woman gave me of 
‘the tree” (not beguiled me), says Adam. Thus, as the man: 
was led by the woman and fell by her, so was he, it is plain, 
led by the affections of the sow/, and with the soul the spirit 
fell. ?\ 

It.is always. so. ie use the language of the do, though 
not of Seripiime- ite head is seduced by the heart. “How 
can ye-believe,” asks the Lokd Himself. “, who receive honor 
one of another, and seek. not ithe honor Whiéh cometh from 
God only?” And again—“ t]h ut they all might be damned, 
which believed not the’ truth, hut” [mark the reason] “ had 
pleasure’ in unrighteousness” (2. Thess. ii. 12). And so. 
again, when poe is real turnint to God, “ with the heart,” 
not the head, “man. believ th unto |, righteousness % 
(Rom.x 10). 2 eee i 

Thus, though the spirit be as ynlich. astray as the Boul, it is 
through the soul, as,well-as w ith 
fallen. And the word of. God, jin ts own  pefeet and - Wo ie 
'derful way, ever keeps in mind the 
the fact. that in: ‘fallen: man: the spire 
mary § to the soul, and tha : the nat, 


Panag ere aon 


Rh PO oS coe Ye ERE 


° 


o 


‘ ey A zh cs : 


: Se . ey 
‘82 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURBESTATE. 


; t Be & 
times “ will” in our common version (Psa. xxvii. By Mie, 


Ezek. xvi. 27). . “ Let her go whither, she will,” is (in Deut. 
xxi. 14) ‘let her go to her’ soul.” “Aha, so would we have 
it” (Psa, xxxv. 25), is “aha, or; soul?” And the. expres- 
.. Sion, “ binding the. pin with Wl bond,” *?: Gy With a vow, 

- repeated ten times:in Numb. xxx., show He intimately will 
and soul are connected together. Thiet ‘is even so that 
“the lust of thd: ‘flesh, and the Lies! ifthe eyex, and the pride 


‘of life” characterize the world for ¢ God, and « “man, alas ! is 


but the creature of fleshly itn paalsc- — denen,” if “not having 


ae « 


‘the Spirit ” + Jute I 1%). ie EO 

On the otlier hand, thatthe spirit ‘dhoutd have supremacy, 
_and go give. the will (I say. not, in independence of the-soul, 
but as enlightening and cuiding it), is ‘evident from tlie chief, 
ae it gets. Indewd the oh: n: ifure has its ‘synonym of. 
“ flesh,” from the op posite, tende ney of being guided: by. the 
soul, which is Yo neatly: connected with, the body. : ‘But into: 
this it is het. my province now to enter. * : 

Still Iwould point out how, iti perfect accordance w ith all 


" this, as. thus. sin is ie-xpec ial senso. © the sin, of the soul’ - 


(Mic. vi. 7), so atone ment is said to bem: ade, in: the same 


way, “for the soul.” "The expression is three” times found 


2 
2 


(Exod. xxx. 15, Lev. xvii. ee Naunb, xxxi. 50). And: I. 
Speak of it to shot ‘the blessed harmony ot Se ripture on 
‘this as. on, every other point. Moreover. as for ‘the soul 
atonement Is néeded, so hy it atehoment was made. ge i et. 
it pleased: the’ Lord to bruise him; -he hath. put hiss 20 
grief; wher! thon shalt m; ake his soul an offering for sin, he 
“shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the ple: AsuPE 
of the Lord’shall prosper: in his hand. . He. shall sce ef’ the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied ” (Isa. iii, 10; 12), 
“So complete;, so uniform, js the: tenlitniony of the Word, 


I BAe ERO II SRT Ye IMEI It oo 


MAN’S RELATIONSHIP To GOD.. 


; : oy 4 $ te t 
6 ” 


' 2, : e : a e 
ut, 5 e & s 

ve . ‘ . peat eee 

es- on a CHAPTER IX. » ‘ Ti 


MAN'S RELATIONSHIP TO GOD. 


ONE last consideration betore we close this section. It is a 
‘very piain that, as distinguishe ‘d from the beasts; man is in 


Scripture recognized as ina place of relationship with God ; 


and this by creation; not redemption merely, Adam, as the 


4 
work of God s hands, is in’ some soért, as the genealogy in : 


Luke bears witness, She son of God,” 
firms. it hy quoting from the Haein 
His offspring ’ ‘f (Acts. xvii. 28). Now; 
far destroyed the meaning ofthis asto make it-an unav ailing — 3 
plea. i in the lips of carnal and ungodly meh, yet the hieke 
rot relationship. Xists: Spite et the. tall, as yee l other 
= ae, ‘words assure us. 3 And thisis a rel ationship whiéh plainly no 
¥ beast could ‘Rave. . Its very nature denies it ; 
™ \ distinction of the very: greatest importance 
~ Man is fitted for. acquaintance and intercourse with God: 
“and in’ this shows “himse. Tf, aml in this. ] may say alone, a 
moral and accountable being. -He may“ 
and so. he ms: uy become liky the 


“The apostle con- | 
poet, “we are also 
though sin has so 


' 


v 


and this: ?s a 
ev idently. 


not understand,” 


beasts that pe rish. but. he is 


hot ome, In? is. tRanifest, degradation. even he is a witness 


of his nobler origin, for a beast cannot dégrade itself. - And 
with all this perilous capiicity for evil, nity, 


With all the ac- 
tnality of evil itself hechas the witness in hin 


iself of relation: 


¥e Pale die BRS where itis futile 16 object; 
- is not inthe original. That 
being equally left owt all th 
merely to ‘avoid répetition. 


aS sou do, that * fhedin | 
it must be canderstood 78 plain trom its 
eugh ‘atrer the fitst. time, and: ews dently 
I's Gécitrrence in, thie first instance (ver- 

ABBY is. a perfect guide to. the eff ape nd orwards, and people tnight-as 
“Lwell: ‘question: Seth * heimg the“ Gthe:son)-of Adam,” as“ Adam“ hes 
as ite Were (thesbn) of God | 
ea whet Mr: Mictig would iminslate« 


® 


His-product,” a xense the word 


ORAS tic AAACN OLE SE ATS 


Sr ae 


i 
oy 
ay 


« 
ra 


4 
.84 FACTS AND THEORIES As TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ship to the Infinite and Eternal, which, spite of himself, 
warns him of his responsibility, and links him by his hopes 
or by his fears, or both, with that life beyond death, in which, 
notwithstanding the sceming protest of all his senses, he 
almost universally belicves. 

In thus asserting with the inspired historian, and with the 
apostle, man’s distinct place in nature as a “con of God,” 
I do not at all forget the Lord's words to those: who made 
this very thing their plea. When they had pat. forth their 
claim, “ We be not-born of fornication’ we have one Father 
even God,” I perfectly remember that His answer is, “Tf 


God were your. Father, ye, would love me, .. . ye are ot 
your father the devil” (John vill. #2, 44).— But this language 


‘s in no wise contradictory of the other, as of course it could 
not be. For the Lord says the same as to their being Abra- 
ham’s.children, and that certainly they were by natural gen- 
eration however little morally such. Ut is of their moral 
condition then He is speaking. The devil was not their 
father physically of course. The Lord's words then do not 
touch the question of, their bein. physically God’s offspring, 
as the apostle asserts. : 

But we are not only said to be the offspring of God, it is 
precisely pointed out that He is the Fathér ‘in contrast with 
the flesh) of oumspirits. ~ Furthermore we have had fathers 
of our flesh, who corrected us, und we gave them reverence ; 
shall we not much rather be-in sibjection to the Father of 
spirits, and live 7" (Heb, xii. J.) . 

Who can deny with any appearance of success: that we 
have here the development, by an inspiced writer, of what 
the ercation of man, as given in Gen. ji., implies ¢ We have 
seen the bodily frame formed of the dust of the ground, and 
though God wrought in a special way to fashion it, as He 
did not with the beast, yet He does not claim to be. the 


Father of our flesh.. But we have scen also that man be. 


came a “living soul,” not in that way, nor as brought forth 


of the earth at all, hut by the inbreathing of God into him. @ 
This is not said of the beast: and, phenamenal as the lan- 


? 


’ 


MAN’S RELATIONSHIP TO GOD. . 85 


guage is, it is only therefore the more, instead of the less, 
significant. If God did not-want to convey to us an idea 
of what would be literally expressed by it, He must have 
intended to convey the thought of some eorneaponding spir- . 
itual reality. 

And what can ‘this be, but that the spiritual part which 
animates and controls the bodily organism is something 
from Himself and akin to Himself in a way that the body is 
not ? 

Here then the apostle develops this thought. Hedis not 
the Futher, though the Creator, of our flesh. It is not the 


‘bare fact of our credturehood that constitutes us His chil- 
‘dren. The beasts aré, His creatuyes also, but are not this. 


< 
as 


He is tha Fathér of our spirits, not our flesh ; nay, not . 


merely of wo spirits, but of seo all this class of 
beings Creatures thggch these are, they are yet in a rela- 
tionship to Him we lower ¢ neues can be. Thus we 
see why the anyels fife “sons of Goll” (Job i. 65 xxxviii. 
7), as ey and man too, ee. is a ‘spirit’ and a 
‘*gon.” : 

Note too how cargtul the language is. Man has a living 
soul and is one: and,'this too by the inbreathing of God. 
Yet is God not said % be the Father of his soul but of his 
spirit. How this. harmonizes with the spirit being the dis- 
tinct speciality of may alone in all this lower w orld! . Had 
it said, ‘ « Fathek | of oe or had the. beast, as men contend 

a spirit, God would havé‘been represented as Father of the 
heasts of the field. But the language is precise, as all 
Scripture is, anes in harmony with Scripture and with nature 


too. 
‘But this is 2 be whole of what the Word states. As, 
. He is the Father, os He “the God of the spirits of all- 
flesh? (Numb. x¥j. Z@yxxvii. 16); ‘all flesh ” being of course 


only his lowest part. So we find 
(Gen. vi. 12) that before tke flood: all i sh had corrupted his 
way upon the earth,” and in Luke Ti. 6, “sal flesh shall see 


vt 


_. bere what i is ingym ith her places.‘ all men,” but charac- . 


ern ta cscann ia Tro cil eames emai 


@ q 


| . 86°. «FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 

the salvation of God:” of course in either case all mankind, 
and only these. eos 

In this expression then, “the God of the spirits of all 
flesh.” we see again God in relationship with the spirit. of 
man. The beast has no God that can be called his God; 
P and man, forgetting God, and living to himself, becomes a 
beast. Phe outward presentation of this you may find in 
Nebuchadnezzar tinding his portion with the beasts (Dan. 
| iv.): the moralot' it is in Psa. xlix..'” Man being in honor and 
q 


¥ shing «is the fruit. of there being no- proper ‘link with 
such as man has. . ‘ 
Fhus then we have in a very striking way, and sas Gon- 
. ipming all that has gone betore, man’s link with God to be 
+ ~* his spirit, —relationship, moral character, responsibility, and 
- even his perpetuity of being, all bound up with this, 


subject we have been examining :— 
. 1. The hody is not the whole man, for he is often said to 
be in it or absent trom it, clothed with it) or unclothed. 
> Thus for faith The body is the clothing of the man, and his 


“tabernacle.” which supposes jaa inhabitant. Paul has a 


vision of unutterable things, and) does not know whether 
yo 4 he was in the body or out of the body at the time he saw 
them. . ‘ 
2.-In the language of sense man is identitied with the 
body; for faith. with what dwells‘in it. The Lord lay in 
‘Joseph's tomh. yet contessed]y His divine nature did not lte 
there. | i. ae . 
3. Man is spirit and soul and body. ; 
te, Spirit is not an universal principle floating in the at. 


inderstanding not is like the beasts hat perish.” Their — 


Let ns now gather up the Scripture statements upon the. 


i 


nein i et haat 


yiisl 
calle 
spiri 
tion 
6. 
tifies 
thin: 
eral 
ri 
and 
its 
lust, 
8. 
® hea: 
of §) 
in ¢ 
Pin a 


cor 


1 
i} 1 mosphere, but a separate entity in eu spirit 
Bie et of man,” “spirits of men.” It was tormed within him by the 
| Lord, and all his: knowledge is ascribed to it. This spirit 
th} : the beast has not, = Sai 
i 5. The soul is not the body, but in the body. Beasts | 
i have and are living souls, ant man is called a soul to distin- 
° 


fer. 


rao Scie tint aaa. Smale 


‘ 


SesHip TO GOD. S87 


Migent creatures, who are 
called ‘ spirits.” Mis the link also between the 
spirit and the body, fe of the latter while in connec- 
a9 with it; the seat Of affection, nay, of appetite, lusts, ete. 
. It thins “ahacac terizes the man himself, so as to be iden- © 
sea with him, soul and person being used as. the same: 
thing, while in the inte srmediate disddahodied state the gen- | 
eral term for hir@ is that be is a spirit. 
7. Again the soul is that through which man was seduced 
ad tell, and which charac terives the natural man as led by 
\It_is thus specially connected in. Ser ipture with will and 
ask: With sin vivl with atonement. 

8. By the possession of a spirit listinguishing him from 
®east-man is in relationship with God, the. Father and God 
of spirits, and i is amoral, responsible being, “made for eternity 
in contrast with the“ beasts that perish.” - : 
To the law and t> the testimony ; if they speak not gl 
cording to o thig. word, it is because heres is no light in them 


yiish him from 


131 


The closér tlie annularsrings are together the better asa, 
rule will the timber be. ae ® 
Planks cut from a log will always warp away fron, the Warpnte, 
centre of the original tren. * e 
The plank cut exactly through the: centre will shrink - 
‘ but not warp., Tate 
-The chief British woods used in the R. C. D., are‘oak, ash, British * 
"elm and-beech. ; ‘ 4 Viscose 
Oak is the strotigest, toughest anid most lasting. “It, how-" gar? | 
_ ever, contains gp acid, which corrodes iron in contact with é 
"it. - 
“Ash is tough and remarkably elastic. It is used for ‘* Ash. 
shafts, handspikes, felloes, &c. «It does not stand weather 


~ well, and is very liable to suffer from worm. , ‘¥ 
Elm. 


Elm is a very cross-grained fough wood, therefore if does 
— . ‘not splinter. If is AE very aayable under constant wet. 
Beech is a hard, wifong wood, bat. does not. stand ex-. Beech. 
bosure. ° oe oe 
_ The following foreign woods are, used : : > Moeeign 


Woods. 
~ African oak, is stronger; heavier and darker than Eng- African -Oak.: 


lish oak, for which it is ‘used as a substitute. 
Sabicu, is exceedingly. strong , heavy and durable. : “It is “Sabieu. 
_ used for parts where rubbing action may be expeeted and 
weight.is no object, such as the blocks in a rear chock carri- 
age, bollards, &c. It is grown in the West Indies. 
_o Teak, an Kast | Indian ‘ond African timber. It possésses . Teak. 
great strength, toughness and durability, but Beant 
readily. ‘ cS) 
_ it contains an essential vil that keeps off insects. 
" Ibis used for work for foreign stations, =, Pe te 
© Lagtiicn,an is of two kinds, “ Tlonduras, » from Centr: i Mahogany. 
erica, and “ “Spanish,” Y froth Cuba and other West: iy 
adlian Islands. ae OF. 
* Tt is strong in all “ftvaotions, snahceeps its shape under 
gine ing civftmistances, as to heat and moisture. 
Honduras i is lighter and inferior to Spanish. 
Pine i is soft, light and, omene, and is of several kinds. 


2 


Ko eer 


182. 


Pine proper, from the Scotch fir etown in ‘Norway, 


Sweden and North Ameriéa. “It is red, yellow or white 
Yellow alone is used for the interior fittings of waggons. | 
“Deal” is either white or yellow. It. is the produce of > Deal. aes 
the Seoteh'fir, and i is used for ammunition boxes and the 
_ boarding of waggons., ‘ .* 
: Larch, a strong, and durable but knotty timber. It is  Lareb 
ees. only used “ uphers,” or small trees for ladders, &c. 
Deal, sawn up, is classed as. “ ee “ deals,” and 
<". “battens,” according to width, viz. : 9 and 7 in. 
The contents, of ‘a log are cous "if of oak, elm, or Measurement 
foreign wood, by square measure ; if of ash or beech, by 
round measure; because in’ these. the outer layers are 


sounder and better than. the inner... i 
3 : mean rth: in, feet. 
om Round measure is thus taken wa —= 1 x 


length i in feet = + contents in éwbic feet. a 
ae Square measure.” Mean width x meth depth x length, 


- (in feet in each case) = contents in cubig tage 
9 Seasoning timber is expelling, asyfar'ag may be, , the 
~ natural moisture in, its ‘pores, tliis is: ‘done ‘either naturally 
or artificially. aarere ae St dhe 
In natural seasoning. the @vo8d: 18 cnfyinte planks and ex- 
posed to the air, sheltered from rain and high wind. The 
time reqnired in England is one’ year ir each ‘ineh in 
thickness. F 
* Artificial se asoning is done by subjecting the timber 
a chamber to a current of hot-air or steam, < 
“This i isa much quicker process but if? makes the wood 
more brittle and less durable than if naturally seasoned, 


M ETAES. 


Seasoning. 


% 


“Iron i is received By: - Witradt, in the form of girder 2, 
Shee T; angle L, round, square, ‘flat, and plate iron, It is 
ae tested i in various ways, as to its, power of | being bent, into 
" vxvarious shapes, both when hotignd when cold. gy 
se Round, square and. flat is bar iron of that section. 


we 


/Iron. 


Plate 
tain an 
with o1 

Plat 
120° w 

» Both 
fibre ot 
- (Englis 

Mall 
‘tain in 
a sort’ ¢ 

Stee 
tested 


the tin 
and 
meltes 


The 
‘eheini 
the ec 
cal ta 

We 
Lei 
- chealy 
pty 


: , 133 } 
Plate iron has tostand bending when cold, through cer- 
tain angles, according: to its thickriess and whether: it is bent 
with or across the grain, \ 7 
Plate of any thigkness must stand bending, when hot, 
120° with grain, and 90° across it.’ : 
» Both Dar 1 and plate iron must stand a strain with the 
— fibre of 22 tons (English) pér square inch, and aff 18 tons 
-- (English) against the fibre. 
Malleable cast iron is a term applied to daasinngs of cer- 
= tain iran, which, by an after process of annealing, become 
‘ asort’of steel, Itis very tough, and refiises to weld. 
Steel is received as. “‘ blister, 19 46 shear,” or cast steel, and 
tested practically as to its qualities. * 
There aré three principal alloys made use of, all \pechiis* 
-eally known as metal. ; 
“Copper, 86.8 ) For pipe boxes. and slieaves of blocks. 


(1) Tin, . 12.4 This is the hasnt, as it contains most 


Zine, \8 o> “tin. 

Copper, 86.5 fe Fe 
@) Tin, 10.83 } For rollers. 

Zinc, 2.68 

Copper, 84.2 2.) 


(3) 7 Tin, (7.9 For bearings and nuts of elevating” 


Zine, “5.94 screws, ” &e. 
Lead, 2.62 J oe 
~The usual method of’ preparing ‘the alloy 3 is to eaalt alk 
the tin, gine and lead, with a small. proportion of’ copper, 
and cast this. into ingots. These ingots are broken ae ase 
‘melted, and the rest, of fe gorpe added. j | 


The leather sail ‘is 
chemicals. ‘To prove this, eu 
the edge; a plack mark down éer 
éal fanning; + a btown colours 

Well fanned lenijier itis He 

Leather snueb Ue perio sully a 


; deanad. ff, im sh Cl pies moat 
De twa youre,» nope 2 i 


Malleable 
cast iron. 


Steel. 


Metal. 


Dubl 
4 quart 
-most us 


The 


oxen 01 
bellows 
backs,” 
skin, fi 


A rc 
“ber of 
_. Ropet 


~~ - eordin 


Be Sag 
Pyp gy! 


Ee eh Ts RAE EU ata Sk WONT SRG AEN Oo Ea RE ae the cir 
Lan | ".. tons it 
circu 


Rog 
Hamb 


(tarrec 
Gov 


] 


be 134 


Dubbing consists of, train oil, one quart ; neatsfoot oil, 


..4 quarts; olive. oil, 2 quarts ; tallow, 13 Ibs. This is a 
-most useful receipt. - 


The chief desctiptions of 4cather are: “ Hides,” from 


oxen or cows; “strapback,” for strapping ; “ bellows,” for - 


bellows of forges (these are dressed in oil-;) “ mill band 
backs,” for bands of machinery. - Also “ basils,” from sheep 
skin, fur the inside strapping of boxes. 


Ropr. 


A rope is formed of three strands, each strand of a num-: 


“ber of yarns, and each yarn of a number of fibres of hemp. 
_ Rope is either white or tarred, and of different sizes, ac- 
-cording to the number of yarns. The size is expressed by 


the circumference in inches. 

The strength of rope when new, 4. ¢., the number of 
tons it will bear, is found approximately by squaring: the 
circumference and dividing by 6. 

~Rope is issued in coils of 113 fathoms, marline and 
Hambro’ line (lighter natures). in skeihs,.and spun yarn 
(tarred yarn) in Ibs. i 

Government rope has a coloured thread running through 
it. ; : 

The following are the principal ropes and their uses : 
12 inch, white, slings of sheers. 


ee “straps of sheers. | 
ae “ main tackle of sheers, guys and slings. 
aie “ gun falls (heavy.) . 


rs 
o 
~~ 
Ss 
~ 


light gun falls. - 
7 -heavy gun tackles and drag ropes. 
24 es : oe light: 66 6c 
44 “ tarred, guys of derricks, slings. 
So eg © > M” Harbudkle ropes, lashings... 
Sig | ne Pas 
24 


OO 
ex 
~ 
-~ 
© 


ee) re 
24 uff-lacklés Jashings. Saat 

ae eh a oe w ae 

#. Jever ropes, lashings." , . ..° 


ANY * mess " sg 
, \ 
N _ e n hen oy ace fh ny 
: ¢ ICG 

ony 


Dubbing. 


Rope. 


Strength. 


.Lead 
body t 
For 
in field 
All: 
Iron 
Har 
mixing 
gill of 
Putt 
with 2 
Var 
varnis| 
nance, 


Ord 


litharg 
To } 
lb. wh 


Paint... 


.Lead paint | ig used for woodwork, as it gives a better | 


body than zine. 

For iro carriages Pulford’s black is used, painted over 
in field carriages with lead. 

All new articles receive three coats. 

Iron must be cleaned before painting. 

Hard stopping is used to stop “shakes”; is made by 
mixing dry white lead with gold size, 11b. of former to 1 
gill of ‘latter. It is better than putty for large ‘cracks. 

Putty for cracks is made of 1 ewt. of common whitening 
with 24 gals. raw linseed oil. 

Varnish, made of equal parts of boiled oil and copal 
varnish ; ; is used. for the heads of side . for rifled ord- 
nance, «ec. ; 


Hard stop- 
ping. 


Putty. 


Varnish. 


Water proof 


- 
Ordinary composition is made of lamp-black 24 Ibs., composition. 


litharge 13 0z., boiled linseed oil 744 lbs., beeswax 11 oz. 
To preserve “bright 3 iron work, mix ‘3 Ibs. tallow and 1 
lb. white zine, and it will preserve br ight i ‘iron from rust. 


, 


To preserve 
bright iron 
work, 


12 13 14 15mm ~ 


10 1 
STANDARDS 


. BY APPLIED IMAGE. INC. 


9 


ind image Management ; 


8 
14 


——— 

—— 

—-— 

— 
‘ ‘ 


ae & 


6 


= 
S 


ap 


MANUFACTURED TO AIIM 


7s 


a & 


yeas 


| 
i 


Y a 3 


a Bee 


Centimeter 


$8  PACIS AND THEORIES AS ZO A FUTURE STATE. 


PART AL—DEATH AND THE INTERMEDIATE STATE. 
fae 8 


CHAPTER X. 


DEATH. 
; od 


WE have already got a long way towards the settlement * 


of the question as to what death is according to Scripture. 
I say according to Scripturc,-for it is remarkable how little 
the class of writers we are speaking of make it really.a ques- 
tion to be settled by Scripture ‘at all. They generally 
assume that we know all about it, that the word speaks for 
itself, and that our experience of it should settle the matter. 
So Mr. Roberts speaks :—“ The popular theory will not 
allow that a dead man is really dead. . . It is incorrect in 
orthodox language'to say that the man is dead. . . In real- 
ity, therefore, the word ‘death,’ as popularly used, has lost 
- its original meaning.’ 

And thus he defines for us what death is. ‘In order to 

understand death, we must have a definite conception, ‘of... 


life.. Of this we do know something, since it is a matter df oe 


positive experience. All awe have to dots to bring our know 


ledge to bear, but this is what the majority of people have 


great difficulty in doing. Their minds are so occupied with 
established theories, that. they are blind to facts under their 
immediate cognizance. Throwing metaphysics aside, what 
is life as known capcrimentally 2? It is the aggregate result 
of certain organic processes. Respiration, circulation of the 
blood, digestion etc. combine to generate and sustain vital- 


ity, and to impart activity to the various faculties of which 


5 
* 


1g 


DEATH. | 89. 
a rw» N 


we are fomposed. (!) Apart from this busy organism life 


_is unmanifested, whether as regards man or beast.”* 


The “experience” itsclf is more than questionable. eres 
people would imagine that instead of ‘‘organic processes ” 
yenerating lite, life itself was necessary in order to the 
organic processes. Mr. Roberts has somewhat misread 
the facts here, and his definition of life consequently fails. 
Physiologists do not believe it to be quite so simple a matter. 


No rigid definition of life appears to be at, present possi- 


ble,” says a late writer; but again, —* we are compelled to 
come to the conclusion that life is truly the cause and not 


the consequence of organization.” Afoeh: less then is it-the ~ 


consequence of “ organic processes.’ 
But our business is not with ph ae sy but with Scripture. 
Mr. Roberts plainly has no need of it in this matter. Only 


take for granted that the body is the whole man, and you . 


need no revelation to tell you what death is. As regards 
the body death is plainly the cessation of all practical exist- 
ence. And if the body ve the whole man, the dust that lies 
in the tomb, death is for him of course the extingion of 


; 2 
being. “ Apart. from this busy organism life\ ié* unmani- 


fested”: that is all we need say. Revelation there is no 
need of: we have only to apply the, knowledge we already 
have. 3 

Mr. Constable’s argument as to death: is mainly founded 
upon the views of human nature which we have aircady ex- 


* amined, and upon those of Hades, which we hope shortly to 


examine. But he has a chapter upon dcath itself, of whi¢gh 
it only needs to give a brief outline, as explanatory of the 
final argument with which he closes it. 

His propositions are—that “death, which God inflicted 
upon the human race for Adam’s sin, was a great calamity 
for.all who: should endure it,” that this déath has passed 
upon all men without one exception, and “not part of it, 


* Twelve Lectures. , . 
+ Manual of Zoology, by Prof. Nicholson, pp. 4, 5. 2d ed. (Amer.), 
1872. i ; 


wa 


: 
i 
he 


Tea NM te 


2 career tit: neces: 


90 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


but all of it” upon every one alike (if it did not, God’s 
word would fail, and we have no security for anything) ; 
that nothing was said about the duration of the death 
threatened, that being left open tor God to show IIis grace: 
“death might continue in some or in all, for a short time, or 
a longer time, or forever: ” that death began for Adam from 
the very day he Acoley ed and reigns over believers and un- 
believers alike till the day of resurrection. His argument 
closes thus: = 
“Tf death reigns until the porid of resurrection, and if death 
during this period is exactly the same thing to the just and to 
the unjust, it Slows beyond any question that both just and un- 
just are then wholly and‘altogether dead. For, yo one contends 
that during this period the just aré in a condition, of misery. ; 


> neither does any one contend that the unjust are in a condition 


of bliss: but that ¢ondition which is neither ore of . Digs or of 
misery must be a condition of death or non-existeng is is 
the one condition that can be common to the redeom#é 
lost.’’* ; ‘ PA : 

Mr. Constable's logic and his memory have surely failed 
him here. Think of the rashness and fligypancy of assertion 
which would pledge the whole truth of God upon the posi- 
tion that all men must die, and have died, exactly according 
to the threatening to Adam, in the very face of the fact 
that neither Enoch yor Elijah died, and that.those alive at 


‘Christ’s coming never will! “We shall aot all sleep,” says 


the apostle. So God’s truthfulness is gone for Mr. Con- 
stable ! 

I need not.answer this, [am sure. ‘That not eyen atone- 
ment could righteously set aside the exaction of the penalty 
from even one of those subject to it, shows how little thera 
is meaning in atonement tor his soul. But his argument 
fails signally and entirely upon quite another ground than 
this. | 

For why should non-ecistence be “the one condition” 
upon which death should be the same to Just and unjust ? 


eee ee ee jo hese ae: ne a ee ee ee en 


* Hades, Dp: 79. 


ee 


ee 


litetime subject to bondage 


DEATH. - ye Ce. CQL 


> 


Granted they are dead alike. No one, denies it. On the 
supposition that death is the stinde ring of the Jink between 
soul and body (and so it is), Why cannot’ just and unjust 
alike be in this condition without the, question of happiness 


—or misery being raised by it at all? 


His argument is laborious .non- entity: To state it is to 
expose it. | Yet it furnishes Mr. Constable with all the jus- 
tification he ‘hag for the triumph over orthodoxy which fills 
the next chapter. [ do not purpose following him in it, 
because we have to. do with Scripvure simply here. T would 


say, however, that. while every expression of those he quotes 


from cannot be justified, yet after all they are more in the 
spirit of Christianity than‘are his own: For with them 
“ Christ. has ebolished @eath.”—tor him, it would seem, not. 
For just and unjust alike, alike for Jew or Christian, under 
law or under gospel, as to what death is itself there is no 
difference. There is no “ willing rather -to. be absent from 
the body and present with tle Lord” ; no “desire to depart 
and be with Christ w hich, is tur. better.” Of course such 
texts are owned to be in Scripture, whatever explanation 
they may be susceptible of, but the spirit of them is not in 


-his heart. For him death is still an enemy, 2 curse, & pen- 


alty which no atonement has effaced or lessened. “ Death 
is after all the king'of terrors,” says Mr. Constable : has he 
never read of One who came that “ ¢hrowyh death He might 
destroy -him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, 
and deliver them who through fear of death were all their 
” ” 

We have already seen reason to, believe that death i is not 
extinction; that the living soul in man is not extinct, when 
it ceases to be any longer life to the body. We cannot 
therefore argue from the effect of death upon the body, as 
to what it is upon the spirit.or the soul. We have seen 
that the word of God does on the one side use the popular 
language, the language of sense, and identify man with his 


body. This is seen in the class of texts of which Annihila- 


tionists are so fond.” The man is the flesh and blood we see 


SRS Teme RD BI ae ty 


v 


seen yee ae oe eee pete ee et ei nent tones peti mae 


; 


\-4'@ 


Pa * 
92 FACTS: AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


and touch. A dead Bor) y isa dead man We all speak’ 80, 
unconscious wholly of being exposed to the charge of-mate- 
‘ rialism for doing so. Our daily speech in this way might 


convict us in the profounder wisdom of another generation, 


of disbelieving equally with Annjhilationists themselves, in” 
the existence of an immortal soul. Yet we really do believe 


it in spite of that, and even the attacks of Annihilationists 
have not, as yet at any rate, made usa whit more cautious. 
We quote even “ Dust thou art,” and believe it, and yet do 
not believe that we are «// dust. And we find on the other 
side, and use as freely, a nnmber of texts which Annihilation- 
ism cannot teach us how to use, which speak of man being 

‘in the body,” “ iv the flesh,” “at home in the body,” ‘ ab- 


ei from the body,” “ out of” it, and yet believe that the 


body is the man too, in spite of that. = ‘ 

Let us now fairly put the question apart from any partial 
answer it may have gotten in this way: Is the peep ure 
‘ teaching of death oxtnctan: ?—is it,“ ceasing to exist,” or, 
as they delight to quote from Job x. 19, to “be as though 
me had not been” ? 

You put seed into the ground, and, in the Scripture lan- 
guage, “it is not quickened execpt it die” (1 Cor. xv. io 
Does the living germ, become extinet in order to bring fort 
the harvest ? Are the * organic pr ocediges’ ' extinguished inf? ? 
Where would the harvest: be if they ‘were ? Yet this is in 
Seripture twice over spoken of as “death.” And, if you 
reflect a little, the analogy to the death of man is nearer 
than it seems. There is that of the seed which is cast off 
as refuse, and decays. The germ within “puts off its 
tabernacle,” but, so far from becoming extinguished in the 
process, springs up into the plant thereon. Is there no 


lesson in that ?’no type? no analogy commending the use. 


of the strong word “death” in this case? Would it ever 
have occurred to. Mr. Roberts or to any of his brethren, 
that “except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and DIE, 
it abideth alone, but if it DIE, it bringeth forth much 


fruit”? Does-the-grain-of_-wheat_heeome-extinet-in-order 


Si 


* 


DEATH. . * 98 
to bring forth fruit? They have never (at least, that I can 
find) attemptéd to illustrate their doctrine by it, that 
death is the cessation of existence, the extinction of organic 
processes.* 

The death of. man is spoken of, moreover, in language 
which is not doufitfil. I have “fully admitted already, and 
without hesitation, that there are a large class of passages 
which (identifying nian with his body) speak in the ordinary 
popular phraseology about it. Passages too there are, 
which will be examined in the sequel, which may present 
difffeulty in harmonizing them with the language of other 
parts. But, on the other hand, the clear full light of the 
New Testament affords us, in many simple and intelligible 
statements, abundant satisfaction as to. what death is, 
Some of these I shall now proceed to examine, together 
-with the arguments of the class of writers to whom. Is am. 
replying. 

1. As we have seen, the apostle Peter styles’ degth the 
“ putting off of his tabernacle” (2 Pet i.14). The language 
of Paul is simflar, and if comment be needed, may supply 
it: “if the earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved 
(2 Cor. v. 1). : 

The language of Annibilationists upon these expressions 
shows their per plexity. Mr. IIam says on the latter passage, 

“Man, the one compound being, is compared to an ‘earthly 
house’ or ‘ tabernacle,’ which will be dissolved.” Similarly 
Mr. Constable, “We doubt. very much if he speaks here 


* Mr. Rolens his triad to answer this. He asks, “ Where is the iy 
ing germ, when the harvest is brought forth? Can Mr. Grant find it?” 
Most certainly; for the stalk of corn is bat the development of that 
very germ. 

His arceune of the. aes is curious enough. With him “ the vegeta- 


ting process” is an. “invasion” of the vitality of ‘the grain, which 
destroys it: a parasitic life, in short, fromfwhich the sprouting comes! 


, And in this way he finds it, a “distinct and striking illustration of” 


death béing extinction. Upon his view of it no doubt it is so. But 
then it is rather a new theory, that the living germ is killed by the 


vegetating process! 


94 FACTS AND THFORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


only of the body, We think he speaks of our cutire present 
being, which is not body only, but body animated Dy soul. 
Of this entire being death is the dissolution.” 


This is plainly incorrect. The apostle distitiguishes 


between the tabernacle and the one who dwells in it: “for 
we which are IN this tabernacle,” he says a little further on. 
The tabernacle was to be dissolved, not the inhabitant; and 
the man is identified with the latter rather than the for- 
mer. : 
2. Another expression for death in the same passage (2 
Cor. v. 4) is “being unclothed”: “not that we would. be 
unclothed.” \ : 
Even Dr. Field, materialist as he is} speaks here of “a dis- 
embodied state.” Mr. Dobney on the contrary maintains 
that “Scripture recognizes no perfectly disembodied state.” 
I ask, if there be not something to be disembodied: how 
can you use the expression at all? Can one talk of “ disem- 
bodied breath”? or “disembodied Be? ” 
The putting off of clothing, if that is a figure of dixent 
bodiment, as it is, is simplesenough, but only when we 
recognize a part, and that the higher part, of man, to be 
somethingsthat is not the body, but is éx it, as the living 
‘soul is. Vr. Roberts indeed talks, as is common with hin 
when in a difficulty, of the “inevitable fictions of spéech.” 
“The exigencies of mortal speech,” he says, “require us to 
speak of the person as an entity separate from all that com- 
poses him, and when figure is added, as in this cuse, the 
effect is greatly heightened, Oe a. theory ee Mr, Grant's 
rece (VES apparent count nance. 
_ Would it not have been wisdom to have inquired why the 

use of the figure should so ereatly hei ighten the effect, as he 
admits it ges and whether the countenance it gives is not 
more than mercly “apparent”?’ Surely the use of' a figure 
for a mere abstract jersonality, and a figure which makes 


the abstraction decidedly the higher. thing r—nay, which 


: goes so far as to speak of the abstraction” as “ putting off” 


ions 


that which is the reality, or being “unclothed ” with it,— 


+ 


¢ 


—, 


DEATH. 2. 95 


is somewhat overbold. But what difficulty wil not the wit 


and will of man combined surmotnt ?- eid a 
Mr. Constable, in lis comment on the ‘Passage, simply 
refers this expression to the “hades state.”” With this we 


are content, and shall soon inquire what is that state. — But 
plainly here death is not cessation of existence, whatéver 
(which for the present I leave open) becomes of soul or 
‘Spirit afterwards. 

3. In the text in 2 Peter (i. 15) betore referred to, death 
is called “ decease,” literally exodus, “ depar ture”: “ After 
my departure.” | 

Now here the man departs; where, is not the question 


yet. The man departs. Ife leaves the earthly house of 


this tabernacle. Say, if you please, and if you ean gather it 


from the Bible, that after dying he becomes extinct or un-. 


conscious. That you must prove, if you can, from elsgwhere. 
Death is not it: does not infer or imply it. " 
~par ture.” 2 

4+. And to this agrees the expr On used again in 2 Cor. 

v. (verse 8), “absent from the body.” 

People contend, © know (and it is their only hope), that 


this does not refer to death at. all. Mr. Dobney mau 


attempts to paraphrase it by “absent from = ¢his body,” 
“this gross corporeal investiture” (investiture of what ’). 
Mr. Ham‘ with absence “from our natural body,” “our 
present mortal and corruptible nature.” Ellis and Read 
speak in the-same way of the “ body ” here denoting a 


“state of corruption and mortality,” “this corruptible body 


or nature.” Roberts says; “What absence from the body | 


was it that Paul desired? Not disembodiment, for he says 
in verse £ of the same chapter, ‘ Not that we would: be un- 
clothed?” Mr. Constable seems on thé other hand to allow 
‘that “absence from the hody ” applies to the death state 
while he will not allow that. “presence with the Lord” 
similarly applies to it, but to resurrection, the two being 


= 


brought in this way tovcther because between it and. dying 


there is nothing but a blank, © This” _ [the resurrection 


% * paCTS AND THLORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


state], he says, “ we have no doubt, is the ‘presence with the 

Lord’ which Paul here speaks of, and not the intermediate 

state, as Calvin and others dream. For Paul had just ex- 

pressed himself that this unclothed condition was /oé- his . 
desire or wish. He could not, with any consistency with 

his just uttered declaration, say that he should view it with 

2 good satisfaction.” , 

Yet the “willing rather” west, according to Mr. Con- 
siable’s own view of it, include the intermediate state, if 
only: as the way to the’ other, “ willing vather to be absent 
from the body and to he present with the Lord.” Is not 
that “desire” for the unclothed state ! And that these two 
things he desires are not successive, but contemporancous 
cgnditions, is manifest also. For, when hecsays, “hilst we 
are at home in the body we are jbsent from the Lord,” these 
states, he must admit, go together: how then can it be 
doubted that‘the two things he desires, being the opposite 
of these conditions, go tozethef also i | 

“Mr. Roberts and others therefore with better judgment 
concede this; but then they hawe the quite.as hopeless task 
to achieve, of making “absent from the body” also mean 
resurrection. They all coincide in opposing the apostle’s 
“not that we would be unclothed” to the simple and nat- 
ural interpretation of his desire to be absent from the body, 
aa if the two were contradictory. But this is by no means 
the case. He does say that what he growed for was, not 
to be unclothed, but clothed upon. He groaned for resur- 
rection, true, and the unclothed state was not in itself what 


he or any man desired. * Still, knowing that to be absent | 
from the body was to be present with the Lord, he was after . 


all ‘willing rather ” to be absent. Death had no terror for 
him, but the reverse. To make‘‘absent from the body ” 


apply just to the time when the body will have its fulness 


of bliss, is only to make incompreliensible what is very sim- 
ple.*.. “ In the body ” never has the meaning they attribute 


* raheti s “ani body ”’ for _“ body” in the’ above 


ee 


~entence, and then with great naivet@ remarks, that Mr. Grant him- 


DEATH. 4 Q7 


to it, and that they have to add words to make it suit. their 


thoughts, is a plain proof that their thoughts are foreign to. 
Scripture. 


And when the apostle, speaking of his yffion of the third 
heavens, says he cannot tell whether at that: time he was 
“in the body or out. of the body,” we have the exact expres- 
sion in a way which no wonder they shrink from as they do. 
~ Paul could not imagine he had possibly had his glorious 
body when cayzht up theré, and lost it afterwards. ‘Yet 
he supposes he might have been conseious of unutterable 
things when “out of the body.” If so, why may not one 
(as this ch; apter teachés) be © absent from the body and yet — 
present with the Lord” 
I shall have again to speak of this, when we come to con- 
sider the question of consciousness in the disembodied state. 
It. is sufficient for us here that such : a state exists, if words 
have meaning. Death is that disembodiment, the putting 


off the tabernacle of thegdhody, Deing unclothed, Se, 
and being absent from 


a Du Xtoreoy ‘er, we have already seen that Matt. x. 28 asserts . 
"that the death of the body is not the death of the soul. 
Our Lord, bids us “fear not them which’ kill the body, but 
are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear Him who is 
able to destroy both soul and ody i in hell.” 
Mr. Hudson allows that this texches that death is not f tha 
extinction of the soul, nor involves it. Mr. Dobney follows 
on the same side. Mr. Ham‘wavers, admitting that. it is im- 
plied “that the soul is distinct from the body,” but at the 
same time suggesting that “soul” here may be- merely 
“life.” Ellis and Read interpret it to mean that “ wicked men 
can only destroy the present being of the righteous, and that 
God could raise them ‘up again.” Miles Grant interprets 
“killing the soul” to mean “taking the life to come.” Sim- 
ilarly Roberts makes “soul” to be “a life in relation: to 


eye sn would 1 not acknow ledge the sentence, thus depriv ed: of its piquancy : 


l yot_thisis the-form-vhich—embodies the facts-So that the language | 


used by the apostle does vot, as he adinits, ‘ ‘embody (Ais) facts.” 


98 “FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO ‘A FUTURE STATE, 


those who are Christ’s, which cannot be touched by mortal 
man, however they nay treat the body, and the poor mortal 
life belonging to it.“ While others say, that ‘the dead in, 
Adam are not destroyed,” because “in consequence of the 
provision made in Christ for the resurrection of every human 
being trom the Adamic death, those who can kill the 
body (take this lifey, only suspend our being till the resur- 
, rection.’ 

But the text betore us will not bend to ahy of these criti- 
‘cisms. If soul be life merely, those who kill the body 
destroy it. Such a phr ase moreover as “ killing //fe” does 
not, and could not, exist at all, as I have before aid: be- 
cause “ killing ” is in itself “taking /é7e,” and you could met 
speak of taking the life of the ‘Vise. ‘Life to come,” 
the believer's lite, psuche does ot mean; another ue) 
zoe, is invariably used for it. And the contrast between 
suspension of life for the Recent and utter destruction of it 


is not what the passage makes, but between a killing which 


affects the body only, and the destruction which will over- 
take both body and sow! in héf. Tam only repeating here 
what I have said hefore, and what Mr. Hudson, destruc- 
tionist. as he is, has said before me. Proof ig conclusive, 
that when man dies his soul is not touched by it. If it. is 
conscious is another thing, and presently to be examined. 
And what destruction of body and soul in hell is, I do not 


‘inquire yet. Suffice it just now, that when we oe a off the ° 


body at death, the soul still lives. ' 


> He now states that psuche here means “ the abstract power of 
life, which is in the hands of God,” but there is nothing at all about 


this in the passage. He further brings in Matt. xvi 25, “ He that Joses - 


his life for my sake”. to show that psuche there cannot be immortal 
goul, in which we agree. _T have before considered the passage. 

+ Mr. Edw. White, in his “ Life in Christ ” &p. 96), while agreeing with 
this, considers it the result of redemption only, and quotes. in proof 
1 Cor. xv. 17-19: ‘Tf Christ: be not raised... they also which have 
fallen asleep in Christ have gone to nothing” eahored: ; for thus le 


: at 


a. . a ae) P J 


| CONSULUWSNESS ARTE DEATH, 99 
s = 
: us 
rtal € * 
rtal enol ee 
a | ~  AGCHAPYER XL |g 
the Fam 
man oak 4 GONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 2... 1, 
the | ne 
sur- ' ’ THE question of consciousness may now. be taken upa> ees 
Of course every proof of it is proof also of existence. But 
riti- ; many. who allow that the souf er/s/s after death, will not 
ody allow that it is conscious. Thus Mr. Hudson regards “ the 
inex . soul as an entity not destroyed by the death of the body, 
"be- however dependent it may~%e upon embodiment for the 
| not ; purposes of active existence.” So with others,~whom 1 
” or , need not here quote. The thing contended for is what is 
rord, unknown to, (while professedly based on) Scripture—* the: 
veen Tha 26 of the souk” F 
of it ut you never tind in Scripture the sou sleeping. The 
hich : man sleeps, but always as identified with the body. It is 
ver- 7 a mode of speceh found in later Greek, outside the New 
here. Testament; It is never the soul that is in question. So | , 
truc- Matt. xxyii. 52, “many bodies of the saints which slept 
sive, | arose.” /Again John xi. 11, “our friepd Lazarus sleepeth; —_—- 
it is but I go that I may awake him out of sleep,”—i. e. by 
ined. e raising the dead. So Stephen fell asleep, and devout men 
one a carried him to burial,—i. e., his body: So “David fell 
fF the :. | asleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and sam corruption.” 
je “Again in 1 Cor. vii. 39, “if her husband be dead (asleep) she 
Ae _ is at liberty to be married to whom she will.” There it. is 
no questién of soul or spirit. Again, ch. xi. 30, “many 
ie ; sleep”; he is thinking of it as chastening, not the.joy of 
t loses explains the term in the following verse: ‘ If in this life only We have. * 
mortal -hope in Christ, we are of all men -most miserable.’ ” - ‘ 
, I deny that wa@Aorro means “ gone to nothing.” “ Aré perished ” 
g with , a8 in the Auth. vers., is the proper rendering, and does not refer to ma- 
proof == terial destruction, any more than“ if in this life only” does. To die 
1 have aa with a false hdpe is to perish, but not in the annihilation sense. For 
hus he \ the meaning of xaJAlvut,see ehaps—xx.—_ xxi. : : 
| | : ’ : , a = 


. 
O) 
LS] 
lg 
, 
& 
. 
a 
. AE ss 
wy 
» 
ac) 
2 ww 
Tr 
, : 
} 
a 
% 
% 
\ WwW hg 
’ 
“a 
’ 
t 
~ ms 
6 
° 
1 
— 6 
@ ts ; 
~ «eat 
: whet 
~=~ 
. 
° 
° 
A bad 


100 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


presence with the Lord, which the soul had. Again, ch. xv. 

6, “some are fale asleep.’—fallen out of the rank of wit- 

nesses. Ch. xv. [8, “then, they also that are fallen asleep 

in Chriat are perished.” Ver. A Christ is risen from 

the dead and become -the first-fruits of them that slept.” 
* There again the resurrection of the body is in question. 

So always, if death be looked at as chastening, sorrowed 
over as we do over the breathless corpse, if it be simple’ 
history of the outward fact, or if resurrection be in question, 
it is here that we find the phrase which people have blun- 

Hi * , dered over, perfectly simple, intelligible and beautiful, as 
| we gaze upon the inanimate form, and brush away our 
| a tears at the thought, “ our brother shall rise again.” _ 
E Mr. Constable, as usual with him, contends for the iden- 
| tification of man with his body, and absolutely ignores the 
* Seriptures which identify man with his soul or spirit. THe 
‘ean therefore from his point of view say: ‘If people will 
say, it is only the body that sleeps, then they must allow 
that the body by itself, is man. If they say that man has 
both body and soul, and that these united constitute man, 
“then they must allow that both body and soul sleep.” On 
the same principle we must affirm that when Paul was 
. caught up to the third heavens, inasmuch as it was the man, 
-” Paul, who was caught up, and man is body, soul and spirit, - 
* 2 “therefore that about whith he was ignorant was whether he, 
- ~. dbddy, soul and spirit, had been “ out of the body” or not. 
Mr. Constable chooses to ignore, it seems, this whole class 
of texts. No wonder, then, if he lose his balance and fall 
as into-error, It is not only his, it is common to materialists 
—, of every class. We have before considered this, however, 
and need not repeat again what has been said in our very 
first chapter. © - ~~ Sf : 
(Mr. Constable’s argument as to 1 Thess. iv. 15 goes beyond 
.-the question of the application of the figure. He argues 
that the apostle here virtually denies the commonly held 
doctrine of the intermediate state. \_ 
‘Tf those he wrote to mourned for separation, if Panl comfort: 


. 


den- 
, the 
He 
will 
illow 
1 has 
man, 
On 
was 
man, 


pirit, - 


ar he, 
not. 
class 
1 fall 
alists 
rever, 
very 


»yond 


gues 
y held 


ymfort- 


o 


CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 101 


ed them with the prospect of reunion, if he pointed tu the resur- 
rection as the consoling prospect whew their longed-for reunion. 
would be accomplished, then by every fair inference he did not* 
believe or teach that there would he uny reunion before the resur- 
rection.” 

If the premises were true the inference might be a fair 
one. But the grief of the Thessalonians was xo¢ the mere 
personal grief of separation, and the apostle’s comfort for 
them is vt the mere prospegf-of reunion. It is, that “ we 
which are alive’ sig remain coe coming of the Lord shall 
not prevent (or: preceile) them which are asleep; ‘for. 
the dead in Christ shall rise jist.” The thought of the 
Thessalonian saints was this, that if Christ were to come, 
as they believed He soon might, the dead in Christ would 


be shut out of thie joy of welcoming and being ‘with Him 


then by the fact of their death. The apostle assures them 


_ the living would have no precedence over the dead in this® 


respect : “the dead in Christ-would be raised even before the. 
change of the living, and together they would be caught up. 
to meet the Lord and be with Him. Thus the intermediate 
state was not at all in question. JZow could it be for those 
ALIVE till the coming of the Lord?’ How could living peo- 
ple be united with dead ones in an intermediate state ? 

Abundance of inspired testimony there is that death is 
not, for the soul, a state of unconsciousness. ‘The passages 
are well known, and need only to be cleared from the 
objections which have been raised to their apparently very 
simple meaning. 

The conceptions of the Pharisees upon this point are 
acknowledged on all hands, and the familiar story of Laza- 
rus and the rich man in the 16th of Luke is confessedly in 
full accordance with them; yet they would forbid us to be- 
lieve this to be anything more than accommodation to the 
superstitions of those whom the Lord addressed. Mr. 
Roberts indeed very naturally suggests that “it may be 
‘gaked, Why did Christ parabolically employ a belief that 

was fictitious,and thus give it His appatent sanction?” ‘To 


Ae 


102 | FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. , 


which Ihe answers, that LHe.‘ was not using it with any reter- 
ence to itself (!) but fur the purpose of introducing a dead 
man’s testimony. - - - This did not involve bis sanction of 
the theory, any more than he. approved of slavery by intro- 

able of the ungrateful debtor. - - It 


ducing it into his par 

may be urged that it was unlike Christ to perpetuate delu- 
sion, and withhold the truth on such an important question 
as that involved in the parable used. To this the reply will 
be/ found in the following (Matt. xiii, 10, 1). That is, 
that “to, them it was not given to know the mysteries of 
kingdom otf heaven,” and that therefore He spoke in para- 
bles, because ‘* secing they saw not, and hearing they did not 


oS ene ote 


understand.” af , 
But Mr. Roberts will permit me to say, that he has en- 
tirely failed to justify the thing he pleads for. For the 
ee Jast given is a reason for the Lord speaking im pard- 
bie indeed, but not for His making parables (as he admits) 
© perpetuate delusiuu.? The introducing slavery into a par- 
able was only introducing what, under certain restrictions, 

) if it had not been so, the 


they Mosaic law permitted ; and 

bare introduction of a custom that obtained was not sane- 

oduction of what had no existence, 

aye as supgpstition, would tend, as he owns, to “ perpetuate forsee 

it. This isa difference which upsets all his conclusions. ie 
But then, he asks, “ Are we to makea parable paramount, |/ ¢ 

and throw away plain testimony » Are we to twist and, : 

violate what ‘s clear to makw it agree with what we think is 

meant by what is admittedly obscure 2” / 
Indeed this is the common retuze of writers of this class. . 


Mr. Dobney, it #8 crue, seems to admit all we claim about it. 
Sehipture recog 4 


He cannot really, since he contends that “5 
nizes no perfectly disembodied state.” He probal ly applies 
it therefore to the final state. But his words are: “Our, 
Lord shows an ungodly man ina state of wretchedness after 
death. How long it would last is not intimated. It is true 3 
“there was no hope tor him. He could pot buoy himself up, 
- with the prospect of restoration, to enjoyment. But whether — % 


aa al 


tioning it, while the intr 


N 


\ 


° 


co. ‘ CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 103 


os 4 that torment should endure forever, or would ultimately de- 
‘ f 4 \\ stroy him, the parable does not intimate. It teaches a 
oO 4 


‘terrible and hopeless state for the wicked after death, and 
ro- a s 5) . 
that, is all.” 3 : ‘ 


alt in Burnham algo sevms to admit the doctrine of con- 
aes scious existence after death. Speaking of eternal punish- 
ce ment he says, “So far as this question is concerned, man 
will . may be conscidas or unconscious in death until the final 
ee | judgment. Therefore the parabic of the rich man and Laz- 
of arus proves nothing to the point of eternal torment, for-that : 
a parable refers to come. transaction BEFORE the judgment.” 
HOE But then he adds, & The same may be said of all those 
i Scriptures which to some spEM to teach that the dead are in 
ee y 2 conscious state.” . ; 
oe : For the rest, all seem to agree with Mr. Hastings: “ Of 
ree 


its) course the parable of ‘the rich man and Lazarus is not reck- 
ni 5 3 . . 2 . o,¢ 0 ° 
5 oned as teaching the doctrine; for alf laws of criticism 


Bay forbid that parables be made use of to teach doctrines.” 
LOM, Untortunatcly for those, however, who speak thus, they 

, the themselves are forced to admit that, parable or not, it is 
ADU: . 3 “founded upon” what Mr. Roberts calls a theoretic fact,” 
Cue 4 ie, the belief of the Pharisees. —‘Fhat_the object of it, 
Inte OS moreover, is really to lift the veil from thé other world will . 
re e 4 be plain if we consider the connection with the rest of the” 
ount, fo FS chapter. For the Lord had been speaking in the first part 

2 and, ; of it of,man as an uniitithtul steward under sentence of dis- 
ink is missal, but with the goods of his Divine Master yet in - his 

a hand. He had thereupon exhorted them: “ Make to your- 

class. ~ selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when 
onus 3 je fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.” 
Soe. 4 Thereupon the Pharisees, who were covetous, derided Him, : 
ip Dee . and to them He preaches this (parable, if$ you please) to | 
‘Our ; show how what wis.bighly esteemed among men was abom- 
. after ination in the sight of Gong, ‘The point is. here: “'Thou in 
is true ‘ thy lifetime reorivedst thy good things,” and now. “thou art — 
self up, | i tormented.” No crime is charged but. this, his failure as to 
vhether ze the unrighteous ‘mammon. He could not serve God and 


f 


104 FACTS AND THEORIES AS ‘TO A FUTURE STATE. 


e had served mammon and not God. And, 
while the beggar he had neglected was borne from his gate 
into Abraham's bosom, he was tormented. Tlow this acl- 
dressed itself to covetous Pharisees is easily seen. And the 
state described is of a man immediately after death, in tor- 
ment, before the resurrection and the judgment, with | 
prethrerf still on earth to be preached to. , : 
You may call it: parable, if you will. 
dead is the very thing it is designed to enforce ; and this 
representation of it is acknowledged to be based on Phari- 


mammon. H 


saic sentiments. a: 
It is singular, however, how the terms used by our Lord ~ 
are quarrelled with. If literally construed, Mr... Roberts 
urges,*, “ it upsets the belief it is quoted to prove, and su'-- 
stitutes the tradition of the Pharisees, which Jesus was p:°- 
abolically using. * If ‘a literal narrative, it clashes with the 
popular theory of the! death state in, the following particu- 
lars. We read, ver.\21, that the beggar died, and WAS 
CARRIED—not his immiaterial soul, but he, his bodily self— 
by the. angels into Albraham’s bosom; the rich man also 
lied, and was buried ; and in hell, where he had been buried 
(hell, hades and grave being synonymous) he litted up tis 
eyes,” etc. He also tells us that “immaterial souls” could 
the great gulf fixed; and that if the 


easily have got over 
; : Pett nd ae 
,aspirit might have been sent 


popular view were correct 
to the five brethren without one needing to rise from the 
dead. 

This is, no doubt, said in serious earncst, although it may 
not seem so. But it is a specimen of the blinding delusion 
under which these men lie. Think-of a man telling us, that 
it was the tradition of the I *harisees, that men were carried 
bodily after death into Abraham’s bosom; that hades or 
hell and the grave were synonymous! and that men were 
tormented in the yrave!. If this-parable teaches literally 
the traditions of the Pharisees, this is what he says it 


_ teaches. 
* Twelve Leetures. . ; a 


ono te eepeie f e 


{ 
| 


j 


The state of the 9%! 


CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. ——.. 105 7 
And, 


: ~ But I pursue this no further than to ask where the parable 
gate 


states ‘that the beggar’s “bodily self” was carried into ~ 
Bole og - Abraham’s bosom? Of course, if there is no other self 


we 
cp a ene 


Mane than a bodily one, all is plain. But that is as little the doc- 
pone [ ~trine of the Bible as it was of the Pharisees. As to hades, 
eh “ and what; it is, we may see shortly: But would it not be as 
e rather foolish, even in a parable, to put it that “in the grave 
: the oe f. he lifted up his eyes, being in torment”? To such straits 
oe oONG are men: reduced who refuse the Scripture doctrine of the 
fee soul’s consciousness after death. We may well thank God 
Bee for making it so plain. | 
ae Figurative, no doubt, the language is. ‘“ Abraham’s 
pee bosom ” is not literal, any more than the gulf’ over which 
i souls cannot pass. Nor do we contend for souls absent 
aL from the body having eyes or tongues or fingers. Mr. Rob- 
h ine erts asks in view of this; how, if we “feel at liberty to. 
aes admit the non-actuality of these things spoken of as apparent- 
ee oF ly real,” ean we de “so sure about the reality of the other 
he | parts tHat apparently favor (our) theory of the death state ?” 
: He eo kee I apswer: first, because it is addressed to Pharisees, ani 
purier 


founded (as: Mr. R. himself acknowledges) on their belief, 
ty? ie which.the Lord thus takes up and adopts without a word of 
could rotest, without one hint of its being the gross and heathen- 


if the ‘ish delusion Mr. R. would have it. 

n sent Secondly, because figures, as it would seem, must neces- 
att the sarily be used, in speaking of astate so far removed from any- 
: thing of which we have experience. That is, words, phrases, 
it aay and ideas, borrowed from things around us must be taken 
elusion and adapted to these unseen things. 

AS, that Thirdly, if the object were only to represent a final award 
carried in resurrection no reason can be given for not picturing that 
des or Z award directly, as is done elsewhere, instead.of representing 
De a -it under the figure of a fabulous death state.- The perfect- 
iterally ness of the representation would surely suffer by so unnatu- 
eye it ral a proceeding. : 


Acre : The figures are not difficult at least to read intelligently, 
3 for one who is as to this point of doctrine a Pharisee, aa we 


t 


a 


106 


FACTS AND TH ELORIES AS TO. A FUTURE STATE. 


é . : 

shall see Paul the apostle was, and as we may confess our: 
selves without shame to be. And thus are conveyed to us 
thoughts that it seems inno other way could we have. so 
vividly presented. The meaning is only so clear, that those 
who oppose it are driven to the wildest expedients to escape 
‘ from its plain speaking. 

i at Thus Dr. Leask transcends even Mr. Roberts in grotesque 
| effrontery. He says* as to Lazarus’ being carried into 
Abraham’s bosom: “ Fact it cannot be. Otherwise you 
have the extraordinary thought of angels carrying a dead 
man, a lvuihsvime corpse, to the bosom of Abraham” !! 
Shall we add the still more extraordinary thought of this 
“Joathsvine corpse” being “ comforted” in this strange 
1 || resting place ! and of the rich man‘wanting to send it to his 


equalled for the vividness of its imagery ”! And he adds, 
after the usual fashion: ‘The word translated ‘hell’ here is 
ig pee hades, the eis equivalent of the Hebrew sheol and of the 
ube . English gre,” etc... Vivid imagery indeed ! 3 

Boog Again, “Surely Seite and serious thought must convince 
i any one, that the conversation between the rich man’ and 
Abraham must be parabolic, for Abraham himself was 


* glive, our Lord’s argument to convinee the Saddicées of 
resurrection loses its point. God is not the God of the dead 
but of the living: ¢herefore these honored saints als rise 
from the dead some day; that is the argument, and it: is 
irresistible.” 

‘Dr. Leask has scarcely read the passage attentively 
enough, or he would have seen that if God said at the bush, 
“T am the God of Abr ‘aham,” snd‘ Le is ot the God of the 
dead, Abraham must have been in some sense living then; 
or it would have been “Toes Abraham's God, while he 
lived, and I wi? be, when he lives s-again.”’ | 
There is one other argument the doctor iy es, which has 


five brethren, ete. But, says Dr. L,, “ this parable igs un-_ 


dead. (!) If Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ‘are consciously 


SEGA aS 


* The Rich Man and Lazarus. 


‘ 


: CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 107 


our: ments are given till after judgment,” which Mr. Constable 
(O US has énlarged somewhat more upon, and therefore I leave it 
@ SO to look at it with him. These then are Dr. Leask’s reasons a 
hose for turning aside the application of this parable from the =~ 
cape death state altogether, and applying it to the setting aside of 
Israel and the bringing in of the Gentiles by the gospel. 
sque This, to convict “covetous”’ Pharisees of their liability to 
into be excluded from “everlasting habitations”! + 
you | General Goodwyn* attempts to show, that the Tord in 
dead his parabolic teachings did “adopt some of the prevalent 
nT! [false] conceptions, and proved by the unerring wisdom of 
” this His mod¢ of treatment) their fictitious origin and constitu- 
range tion.” He adduces the first four parables of the kingdom 
to his of heaven in Matt. xiii, in proof of this position. But he 
S Un: | 4 . neither does, nor can, show that the Lord incorporated aay 
adds, prevalent errors with His teaching there or anywhere elge. 
ere is | The Lord gives us on the contrary what is simple and recog- 
of the 3 nizable truth as to the form the kingdom should assume in 
By the period of His absence. For the kingdom exists now, and 
VINCE 3 the’ condition of it of which He speaks exists also. The “ pop- 
ny and a : ular ideas” Gen. Goodwyn seems to refer to are but misap- 
Fo was - 4 prehensions of these very parables, and not errors He adopts 
iously_ . ‘ in anywise. Let him put his finger if he can upon one 
des of : error the Lord teaches there or elsewhere. 
> dead Now here, if the consciousness of the dead is error, the 
I rise : Lord ‘does teach it, and without the least warning of its 
| it) is Ps being such. Thetwo inconsistencies the General thinks to be 
_,in the parable are not there: viz., either the “ final condi- 
tively : ‘tion of punishment ” being “ before the day of judgment,” or | 
> bush, » 4 dead people being *‘in the body.” Very strangely does he 
of the : add: “Thus were these traditional and palpably erroneous 
then; ‘ views woven into the Divine discourse, serving the purpose 
ile he : of exposing the conceit of mere human theology”! Were 
aoe _., + *these things “traditional”? Certainly not, at least, the 
ch has = thought of being in the body after death; or can he produce 
yunish. & the tradition ? “Granting _they were ‘‘ traditional,” and also 


S : 4 *Trath: and Tradition, 


¢ 


108 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“palpably erroneous,” if their error were not palpable.in the 
tradition themselves, how could the Lord's adopting them 
make them-become so? Surely the reasoning is as pitiable 
as much of what we have elsewhere hid upon the same 


side. 


But he still goes on: 


‘This parable of the rich man and Lazarus is a supplement 


to that at the beginning of the chapter, of the rich man and his 


steward, both being designed to enforce the piercing truth, that 
‘that which is highly esteemed among men is an ahomination in 
the sight of God,’ ver. 15, thie connecting link between the two. 
In regard to the first parable, human craft had instituted the 


‘idea that a welcome to the ‘everlasting habitations’ was to be 


secured by means of the friendship of ‘unrighteous mammon,’ 
or worldly riches ; palpably in opposition to the principle of ver. 
15; but by mentioning the incident of the unjust steward, the 
Lord showed that, though man might commend his act, it is 


divinely deemed unrighteous still.” 


And this is exposition of Scripture! * He. placed the rich 
man in the flame, and the beggar in Abraham’s bosom, 


thereby proving that a position in the kingdom of heaven 
could not he purchased by ‘unrighteous mammon.’’ 


> 


Doubtless it could not ; but was it not just his not having 
made himself friends of the unrighteous mammon that 
placed the rich’man in the flame? Who can deny or doubt 
it? And who can suppose that solemn exhortation, ‘‘T say 
unto you, make to yourselves friends of the mammon of un- 
righteousness,” with the questions following : “Tf, there- 


fore, ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, * 
who will commit to your trust the true riches,” etc., to be the 


adoption of error? If General Goodwyn cannot reconcile 
this with the gospel, he is ignorant of the blessed fact. that 


the gospel in no wise sets aside the eternal principles of 


right and wrong, but reaffirms them all. True, riches will 
not purchase heaven, nor could aught save the Redeemer’s 


blessed work. True, eternal life is God's gift, not man’s 


snide ni RS 


2 yup De teeter 


purchase or his work. 


come forth unto the resurrection of life, and they that have 


Yet shall © they that have done good 


ee ete 


Sub 


CONSCLOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 109 


done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.” That “we 
are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works,” is the connecting truth that puts all in its place and 
explains all. 

T need not then repeat. what F have said already as to the 
scope of these parables, nor follow the argument. further 
with General Goodwyn. We shall only finally examine 
Mr. Constable’s treatment, of this subject in his volume on 
Hades, already so largely quoted. 

He, too, asserts that, ‘in the words of Christ, hades. is 
identified with the grave, and the dead in hades are repre- 
sented as alive and speaking.” This we reserve for future 
consideration. He begins the argument with a . significant 
statement that, if this. parable “could be truly shown to 
teach their [the non-extinction] views, the only effect would: 


he that of establishing a contradiction between one part of | 


Scripture and another, or of affording reason. to think that 


this parable of Lazarus, despite the authority of Platserioeel 


formed no part: of the original Gospel of St. Luke.” (') 
He begins by asserting, what I shall not question at all, 


‘that this story is a parable. He contends that on this 


account “the entire ve may be fictitious.” But, while 
talking as usual fr eely Sf Platonism, he ignores the fact so 
fully allowed by othérs, and so impossible to be denied, that 
it adopts (and, the argument is, sanctions) the belief of the 
Pharisees. This plainly puts it on ground different alto- 
gether from those Mr. C. appeals to, wherein “the trees 
engage in political discourse,” ete. Even this sort of 
representation we never find the Lord using in His parables, 
that Iam aware. But ce ly He never lopted the su- 
perstitiong He condemned, nor made the traditions of men 
the basis of His pwn authoritative teaching. This plain dis- 
tinction Mr. Constable seems never to have thought of, and 
of course has not noticed it. In reality it takes the ground 
from underneath his feet. Not only is the argument quite 


unanswerable, that the Lord conid-net have employed false- 


hood as, the vehicle of truth (and without even a hint as to 


® 


q 
i 
i 
| 
} 
' 
} 
| 


110 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


its being false), but that also the very moral of the tale is 
this, “ And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of 
the mammon of unrighteousness: that when ye fail, they 
may receive you into everlasting habitations.’ This is the 


rich man’s condemnation : his riches were his accusers now, 


and not his friends. He had received his good things, taken 
his portion ina wor ld that passeth away. Now he was tor- 
mented. And observe how prec isely the language accords 
with this: it is “ when ye fail "—that is, of course, die; not 
when you are raised as Mr. Constable must, read it; no, but 
that “WHEN YF FAIL, they may receive you ‘ate ever- 
lasting habitations.” The precise doctrine is there, given in 
plain words and not parable at all, and illust rating and con- 
firming the parable. 

We might leave Mr. Constable's argurient here, but there 
is one other point, insisted on already both by Leask and 
Goodwyn, to which we must reply before we close. Mr. 
Constable supposes— 


‘that Christ. for the purpose of his parable, antedates it. What 


will really ‘happen to such men as Dives and Lazarus when they 
are raised up at the resurrection, He Prposes to happen to them 
in Hades before the resurrection ; and He consequently supposes 


‘them to be alive in cpiiiat state, and capable of, feeling, 


speech, ete. . . In His explanation of parable upon arable He 
has Himself explained that itis not until the ‘ time of the harvest,’ 
until ‘ the end of the world’ or age, that His people are gathered 
into His barn and shine as the sun, -vhile the wicked are sent as 
tares to the burning. Over.and over He has told us that Gehenna, 
and not Hades, is the place of torment. . , . We are therefore not 
merely justified, ‘but absolutely required by Scripture to hold 
that our Lord in this parable antedates it in time, a liberty which 


the nature and ‘character of parabolical discourse fully entitled 


Him to do.” 

Now the passage we have just quoted from. the chapter 
before us, and manifestly connected with tke parable in 
question, affirms thé Spposite of this: ‘‘that when ye fail, 


sas ticnattins ths beta Steen in ne TOES 


sn fea Sen 


they may receive you into everlasting habitations.” This 
shows that # death we are received, and that there is no 
Pr 


le is 
s of 
they 
; the 
now, 
aken 
s tor- 
ords 
» ot 
, but 
2ver- 
an in 
con- 


here 
and 
Mr. 


What 
they 
them 
poses 
sling, 
e He 
vest, 
1ered 
nt as 
enna, 
re not 
hold 
vhich 
titled 


apter 
le in 
fail, 
This 


sain ti or beta octet le a 


iu sasbeita ai 


x CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 111 


antedating. Doubtless it is after the judgment of works, 
and therefore after resurrection, that the exact recompense 
is given, the exact measure of punishment. is meted out. 
Butt in the meanwhile the spirits of the ‘lost are “ spirits in 
prison” (1 Pet. tii 19), with no uncertainty as to their 
being lost, any more than he who, “absent from the body,” 
is “‘ present with the Lord,” Is uncertain of his own salva- 
tion. Even now are we privileged to know the latter if 
really ours (1 John v. 18). And “the angels who sinned ” 
referred to by the apostle Peter, though ‘‘reserved unto 
judgment” are yet “ delivered into chains of darkness,” 
while waiting for it (2 Peter ti, 4). Similarly the “host of 
the high ones” and ‘the kings of the earth” “ shall be 
gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and 
shall be shut up in the prison,” after a whole millennium 
“to be visited” and judged. | (See Isa. xxiv. 21-23, and 
compare Rev. xix. 19-xx: 3, ete.) 

Then it is a false application Mr. Constable makes of the 
parables of the tares andywheat. For these “‘ tares”” are men 
alive, “in the field,” the world, when the Lord comes, and not 
dead men.at all. So exactly with the “ wheat.” The Lord 
is speaking of the clearing of the field in the day of harvest, 
and not at all of resurrection even. Nay more, the very 
parable itself’ is decisive against his whole argument. For 
the tares gathered and cast in the fire are so dealt with when 
the Lord appears, before the millennium, and therefore a 
thousand years before the resurrection and judgment of the 
wicked at the great white throne. Let any one compare | 
Rev. xix., xx., and see if it be not so. ; 

Again the Lord does say that, there is torment in Gehenna ; 


put he does not say, that in Hades there is none. The 


Scripture Mr. Constable refers to is conclusively against 
him. The plain.and simple impression which any one would 
receive from the first hearing of the parable, becomes only — 
the more indisputably correct, the more we examine it. 
There is the harmony and consistency of truth init, and 


is no 


this the arguments of its opposers only the more bring out. . 


NX 


W200 PACTS AND THEORIES AX TO A FUTURE STATE, 


. 


CHAPTER XII. 


CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH... 2. 


WE have seen then the Lord attirming the doctrine of the 
Pharisees as to conscious existence ip happiness or misery 
in the intermediate state. We shall. now pass on toa passage 
which shows how far the disciplegHthe Lord had imbibed 
the Pharisaic, or let us rather sé, the Scripture doctrine, 
with which the Pharisaic was slenticat For we read that 
when, after His resurrection, they were gathered together, 
“ Jesus Himself stood ‘in the midst of them, and saith unto 
them, Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and 


affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spurt. And | 


He si” unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do 
thoughts arise in your hearts’ Behold my hands cups 
feet, that it is I myself: handle a and see; for Sa 
hath not flesh ‘and bones, as ye sed’ me have” (Lig 

36-30). 


- none ot the apneprane es ip me do we find 
lta, make them think otherwise it was a 


gardener. ;,to eiaisate just before had 
taken Min Moreover, they had just. 
come among ‘the other disciples, and .found them “ saying, 
The- Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon.” 
Then, while they were giving their own account, “Jesus 


Himself stood in the midst.” It was, this: sudden appear- 


ance, the door being shut, that. staggered them. They did | 
not doubt whv it w as, nor, had they doubted, would handling 
Him have‘given them that knowledge. The Lord does ‘not 


ithe, apa pte aan om. 5 CG 


‘need to name Himself, nor do it. He-does not say, “Hist 


SFesus,” but “it is T, myself?” using that common language 


3 
4 


CONSCLOUSNESS AFRTER DEATH, 13 


which Dhave spoken of, the language of: sense, which iden- 
‘ffes man with his body: “IT\NpLE Mb and sce: “for a 
‘spirit hath not flesh&and bones, as ye see me have.” Thus, 
© i was not a question of its being Jesus or another, but as to 
ia ie its being Jesus in the body or asa spirit only. This the 
/ Lord's answer shows, | 

The objections of Ham and Storrs are thus clearly set 
the ; aside, for they make the question one of (to use the lang 


ery: ' of the former) “ the existence of other beings, who are called 
age r spiyits.” But this is not the question, but whether it was 
bed i He Himself in bodily presence, or as a spirit. The whole 
ine, , circumstances and the Lord's words assure us of this. 

hat es Upon the authority of “some ancient MSS.’ of Luke,” 


her, neh Roberts would substitute “plawtasma” tor prema in ver, 
37, and then, without any authority, make pneena mean 
phantasma in the 39th verse. Having thus converted: 
“ spirit.” into ‘ phantom,” he would make the whole a ques- 
tion of “reality or of spectral illusion.” d 
But Mr. R..can find no such meaning for “pneuma” in 
ae whe New Testament or in the Greek language anywhere, 
Lal as “phantom” or ‘“gpectral 1 illusion,” and he must know he. 
cannot. Ilence his anxiety to avert “ phantasma” into 


the es ver. 37, a reading unanimously rejected by every editor of 
ind the Greek that. I am acquainted with, and disproved ‘by the 
ae eer ‘ fact of its being unquestionally pneuma in the 39th: for if 
the their thonght had been | that it was a mere illusion that they 
had saw, the Lord would ‘Yiot have answered it. by saying, “a 
just spirit,” ete. 
ngé - It was not with them then a question of illusion or reality, 
mn.” Ait but of bodily or spiritual presence. Mr. R. objects that the 
SUS i Lord says, “It is I myself,’ and that His spirit, according 
ar- ; ‘ to the common belief, would have been JZimself: But all 
did - pr depends upon the point of view. ‘To those who had had Him 
ing 4) as the-livi ing man among them, the mere visit of His depart- 
not ° _ ed spirit would not. have been “ Ilimself,” for it is no question © 
ist . ; of.metaphysical_aceuracy, but_of-heart,to—which_theLord, 
sec a | responds. They saw Him, did not believe that it could be 
| ae a ee age eee a 

= ‘4 ‘* « 


114 FACTS AND THEORIES ASTO A FUTURE STATE, 


a living man come among them in_ that mysterious way, 
therefore thought they saw a spirit; to which He answers 
by bidding them prove that He had flesh and bones. Thus 
it was not what would have been the evidence of the tri- 
urhph af death over Him, but what their hearts would call 
Himself. Sen . . 

But“bere then it is very plain that, the disciples of the 
Lord were as to this point Pharisees, or Platonists, if you 
will. And:.it -is as ‘plain that, instead of checking their 
thoughts ‘as superstitions fancies, He appeals instead to 
the bodiléssness of a “spirit,” and His dwn flesh and bones. 
Nor-is there * parable” to justify (as they say elsewhere) the 

—empléyment of fictitious speech. The favorite. arguments, 
fall here like broken arrows from the panoply of truth. | 
How common a use of the word “ spirit” this is, we may 

sée by the inspired statement of the Jewish views in Acts 
xxiii. 8: * For the Sadducees say that. there is no resurrec- 
tion, neither angel nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess 
both.’ There again the word “spirit * is taken as ordi- 
narily applying (as our word “ ghost,” which is equivalent, 
does now) to the spirits of men apart from the body. 
Angels are given as another elass. And the context con- 
firms this: for Pal being enlled in question about the 
resurrection of Jesus, had declared himself a Pharisee, a 
believer in resurrection; and hereupon the council was 
divided, “and there arose a great cry; and the scribes that 
were of the Pharisees’ part arose and strove, saying, We 
find no evil in this man, but if a spirit or an angel hath 
spoken tohim, let us not fight agyinst God.” ‘Against this 
sf passage Mr. Storrs’ criticism on Luke xxiv. 39 falls pointless. 

“ Angels are spirits,” says he, “ but, have not a hody of flesh 
\ . and bones.” ~ But in these two last quoted passages, and as 
We + ddentified with the Pharisees’ belief (the nature of which all 
admit), angels ure named as a separate class of beings from 


« 


Oe ne ° 
Pharisee’s mouth even-our opponents allow the meaning of 


thesejspirits spoken of,—‘‘if a spirit ov an angel.” In a 


ala aaah eich, a MBS EL Zeer 
, 


he 


-sueh-words,—And with their belief Paul links himself. For 


, CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 115 


way, having declared himself a Pharisee, and called in question 
ver as to one point of a Pharisee’s belief, the resurrection of the 
Thus dead, it is added as showing the points in which their faith 
Se coincided with the Christian’s: “ for the Sadducees say that 
call there is no resurrection, neither angel NOK SPIRIT; but the 
oon Pharisees confess both.” The language of the. inspired 
the 4 writer here shows his own consent with this doctrine :-“ the 
you 4 Pharisees cov /ess (or acknowledge) both. When I speak of 
their 4 ‘“‘acknowledging ” a thing, I plainly suppose it true, what is . 
d to cq acknowledged. And thus in these matters the. Pharisaic 
pnee i - and the Christian faith are one.* 
p)the ' fI take the light this gives me, how plain and simple it ; 
nents: i makes such. passages as the Lord's words to the dying thief, 
ce  €& for instancee : ‘‘ To-day; shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” 
aay, Or Stephen’s prayer‘in the midst of the stones of his ene- 
Acts -mies: “Lord Jesus, receive my spir it.’ d Or “the spirit 
rrec- ; PON re Ree Anat kaw Pen Pees eke 
ynfess * Roberts says, ‘““ We prefer to let Mr. Grant’ tiie the full benefit of | 
cardi: ee _ this. His inference that Luke endorses their opinion is too unsubstantial 
: to call for serious argumentation.” Be it so, but many will judge 
alent, : z : ee aie pe 
; differently, and of the motive also for declining argument. Paul’s “ 1 
body. am a Pharisee,” he passes over-entirely. 
[| con- . caw + Would it be believed that in the “ Bible os Tradition ” it is asserted 
it’ the a the “grammar of the text charges the saying, Lord Jesus receive my 
see, a : spirit, upon the wicked Jews, and afterwards: records what Stephen 
l aeas said and did” (2d ed., p. 98). This is from people who appeal Rot 
only to Greek and Hebrew, but to Syriac, and what not; and yet they 
3 that assert what any sc nootboy in Greek could contradict. For the words 
We translated “ calling: ‘ipon and saying ” are in the singular number, and 
/ hath i could not possivly apply to the Jews, or to any but Stephen himself. 
st this i * Z. Campbell (“Age of Gospel Light,” p. 44) concurs with this: 
ntleas. i “Now it seems it was the same they that ran upon him, and calling 
es 4 upon God. . . . But it may bo asked, why the Jews should say, Lord 
f flesh ‘ Jesus, receive my spirit? Only by mocking the confidence of Stephen 
and as 4 in the Saviour.” 
‘ich. all + Tn the 6th ed. of Ellis ancl ead’ « book just referred to (“Bible rs. 
8 from , 4 Tradition,” p. 99), they give anothe*version of the passage, equally re- 
In a a markable for learning: speaking of the word translated “ receive,” they 
ing of. nn ay say, “ Dexia means the right, cheir, hand, being understood ; meta 
© For ». Be phorically it means assistance, aid, strength, courage, and. is equal to 


the expression, Gord Jesus, strengthen my spirit, or_nerve me up to 


“ 


zy 


” 


ee a ee 


SCIP ERSTE RE DS secre Turan 
ry 


116. FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


shall return to God that gave it.” Or yet again, the pas- 


sage that speaks (Heb. xii. 
mad3 perfect,” as chap. xi. +0 shows, by resurrection, which 


we all get together. The Lord's saying to the thief will 


come up in another connection.* Meanwhile 1 turn to some 


other passages. 
In Phil. i. 21-24 occurs a statement which has naturally 


had an important plan in the controversy upen this subject. 
It reads as follows in our version, which is sufficiently cor- 
rect :-—‘‘ For to me to live is Christ and to dieis gain. But if 
I live in the flesh, this is the rit ot my labor [an idiomatic 


‘Here a common Creek word, derat, rightly translated 


aken for the adjective dexia, “ right (hand).” 
folly of this, or the folly the 


these are Annihilationist 


endurance.” 
receive (a verb), is mist 

Whether the wickedness surpasses the 
wickedness, I leave others to decide. But 


leaders. . - 
* Roberts’ comment upon the answer to the thief is therefore reserved 
to this. His remarks as to Stephen need but little notice. He thinks 
that Stephen's prayer means that “if God did not, so to speak, treasure 
his spirit or life for him, his death would be final as the beasts that per- 


ish.” Here it is more convenient for him to say “ life,” than “ breath 
of life,” and to add one more new interpretation of “spirit” to those 
s told us elsewhere, is an 


that have goue before. This “spirit,” he he 
“ abstract’ “energy, which is the basis of our life’ (p. 54). And God 
is to treasure up this abstract energy for Stephen! : 
« Spirits of just men, on the other-hand, means neither ‘ 
“energy, but “ conscienees. (Mr. Roberts takes credit to himself 
that Ais meaning of spirit isa kev that “fits the lock all round.”) So 
‘we are come to. . . the consciences of just men made. perfect," —no- 
tice the connection,‘ to Mount Zion, and to the heavenly city, the New 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general 
assembly and church of the first-born, and to God the judge of all, and 
to the consciences of just men mnade perfect : ” The whole speaks to us 
of that future, which is yet so immediate for faith, in which both the 
church of the first-born finds its completeness, and the “just men ™ of 
old obtain their long looked-for “ promises.” * They without us shall 
not be made perfect.” For us and for them this shall be attained in 
the resurrection day ; and there is no anomaly according to our view (a 
‘view Mr. R. so poorly understands) in a human spirit being “ perfected ” 


‘life’ nor 


23) of the “ spirits of just men , 


soaps anal aS 


; 
ed 
ae 


by getting back again the hady, for partnership with which it was of 


old created and ordained, 


‘CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. _ - 117 
pas- pay expression meaning ‘worth my while’], yet what I shall 
ment se choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having 
shich a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better ; 
* will nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.” 
aie The passage is simple eno¢h, and would scarcely seem to 

need any explanation. But for the sake of distinctly review- 
urally ‘ing the objections made, I shall divide it into its parts, and 
bject. look at each part separatély. 
y cor- - (1.) In the first place, to the apostle, the object of his life 
But if was Christ, and to die was gain. This is the plain meaning. 
ymatic Nevertheless it is denied. ‘Do you ask,’ say Ellis and 
a Read, “how then it would be gain to Paul to die? Paul 
inslated ; does not say it would be gain to him. Fill up the ellipsis 
ee ae | : according to grammatical laws: ‘For me to live will be 
fetroniat : gain to the cause of Christ, for Christ will at allevents be = “= 
magnified in my body, whether by my life or by my death. 
reserved And for me to die is gain to the cause of Christ, for Christ 
e thinks will be magnified in my body, whether I die or live.” If } 
you insist that it would be gain to Paul to die, we reply, 
eee es : He does not say so, and if it. would be gain to him person- 
hate { ally, then he would not.be in pérplexity which to chdose.”* 
re, is an % Mr. Hudson speaks similarly, though more cautiously. So 
And God ; also Dr. Field. 

: i But the interpretation is not admissible. For the é:0: 
life.” ae _ yap (for to me) standing at the commencement of the sen- 
od . i tence is necessarily related to both clauses of it: “to me to 
aoe he - live is Christ, and (to me) to die is gain.”” Nor does he say, 
, the New | 3 “to me to live is gain to the cause of Christ” at. all, but to 


ie general 


me to live is Christ, Christ is the object of my life. And 
of all, and 


when he comes to speak of death being gain, he never says, 


ecotiee “to the cause of Christ” at. all, but “(to me) to die is 
ae ape “. gain.” Ineed not comment upon the remark that “if it 
at us shall _ would be gain.to him personally, he would not be in per- 
sttained in _. . plexity which to choose.” Of that people must judge for. 
our view (a ' 5 themselves, and of the knowledge of Christian spirit’ which 
sale ‘it shows. The apostle goes on to say : 

11 = eee tase eae : a 


* Bible vs. Tradition, pp. 139, 140, 
~ 4 


y 


nena aiaeammmnaammammaes 


. strait betwixt two- 


118 FACTS AND THRORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


(2.) “ Yet what I shall choose I wot not, for lam in 8 


~7) 

it was in spite of death being gain to 
trait betwixt choosing death or life: 
ead say, ‘‘ they were equally in- 


« ‘different to him,”—that would be a strange way of being in 
a strait betwixt two equally indifferent things—but because 
it was a question of choosing his own interest or that of the 
saints, as he goes on to tell us, But the authors quoted 
have another version of it. “But there was, a third thing 

/ that Paul possessed an earnest: desire for; put this third: 
thing was obviously not either of the former two indifferent 
ones, and therefore must be distinct from dying and going 

immediately to Christ; for dying or death was one of the 
things that he did not deem so ereatly preferable to life as 
to decide his choice. But again, this third thing was (far 
better. Better than what? Better than life, better than: 


death; therefore death could not be the thing desired.” 
This is remarkable reasoning certainly. The apostle says, 
“T am in a strait betwixt, two”: that means, say these 

writers, “ they were equally, indifferent to im?) fam > 

a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,” says the 

“Which is a third thing,” says Messrs. Ellis and’ 

he former two” | Never- 

will perceive that 


Is it not plain that 
him, that he was inas 
not because, as Ellis and h 


9 


apostle. 
Read, “as he was: indifferent to t 
theless I am persuaded any candid mind 
the apostle is only revealing the cause of his perplexity 
between the two, when he says, “having @ desire to depart 
and be with Christ, which is far better ; nenertheless > — 
here is the perplexity—" to abide in the flesh is more n¢ec- 
ful for yous So that although death would be his gain, and 
he knew it, the strait was between his oun gain and other 
people’s gain. And he was not indifferent to either, but 


desiring this and desiring that, a0 


choose. 


There was no third thing at all His having @ desire to 


it on the oue 


A did not know which to 


2) Saale anes panies sche agagaeaanniee 


he with Christ was just his 


depart and 
abiding in the “flesh being more ne 


side, and his 


edful for 


4 


nin 3 


ain to 
r life: 
lly in- 
ing in 
ecause 
of the 
quoted 
Zl thing 
s third 
jifferent 
1 going 
2 of the 
o life as 
was ‘far 
ter than. 
d.” 
stle says, 
AY these 
yf amin ~ 
says the 
Ellis and’ 
| Never- 
ceive that 
perplexity 
to depart 
theless °— 
more need- 
is gain, and 
and other 
either, but 
w which to 


Q, 


a desire to 
on the one 


Be a eaeaalial 


“them, was just his difficulty on the other. 
parting and being with Christ ” 
just as his “ abiding in the Hesh ~ 

(3.) But here a great tumult is raised, and much knowledge 
of Greek is endeavored to be shown in letting us know that 


CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 119 


And thus “ de- 
is fixed to mean his dying ; 
is fixed to mean his lévény. 


re evedvoar, does not,zmean “ to depart” at all. So Messrs, 
Hudson, Roberts, Ellis and Read, would all have it, “ having 
a desire for ‘THE RETURNING and being with Christ,” suyr 

posing it to refer to Christ’s returning. The latter writers 
go on even to suppose that it was better for the Philippians 
that Christ shonld not come, and that so Paul should abide 
in the flesh. Uowever, it is at least a little unfortunate for 
their theory, that the substantive “ anulusis” (avaddvois) 
derived from the verb * analud ” (avadr@) is used by Paul 
in 2 Tim. iv. 6, undoubtedly for his death: “T am now ready 
to be offered, and the time of my DEPARTURE is at hand. 
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,” ete. 
If it be departure there, and death, why cannot. it. be so 
where, as we have seen, the context fixes it down to apply 
to death 2 Angl it is true that it sometimes means ‘‘ return,” 
hut not so oftenas “ depart,” so that an Annihilationist alone 
could tell us» why it should be so translated here. The - 
reason being only in the exigencies of a theory, which must 
bend Scripture to its need, or be zconvacted of open oppo- 
sition to it. 

Mr. Roberts is now willing, however, to accept the ordi- 
nary rendering. He says, “This understanding-of Paul's 
worils would not be affected by the acteptance of the 
common version... for to die and -be with Christ are in- 
stantly consequential incidents to the consciousness of the 
man who dies.” But that is not quite all we have to con- 
sider. Is it just the same to the consciousness of the man 
that dives? Would a fiction of this kind render attractive 


in the eyes of such a one as Paul, does Mr. Roberts think, 
what in reality would be “to depart into forgetfulness, and 
be with Christ when he woke up” ’ The “ gain 


” of death 


needful for 


would. be forgetfuiness - 


“better by far” than present 


reports of that 


> 


4 


120 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


fellowship with Christ, aid joy in God, and magnifying 


Christ by service such as his! oe 
Mr. Constable is ot. ane mind with Roberts in this last 


v 


: “&. ' 
view of the passage. ““ To depart,” he says, “ means doubt- 


less to die, and to -be with Christ means doubtless the 


glorified state at resurrection. They are spoken of here as 


closely connected, as in fact synchronal, from that doctrine of 


the sleep of the intermediate ‘state ‘which Paul so often 


ht. [?] To depart frem life and die would be, he knew, to 


tau 
pe bllowed at once-by the trumpet calling him to, arise and 


be with his Lord; for time would in the actual interval, how- 
ever long, between dying and rising, be annibilated for him 
who slept... How strangely it sounds to hear the‘different 
land of forgetfulness, which these’ writers 
give us at different times. Who would think that this was 
Job’s place of darkness and disorder which his soul contem- 
plated with so little desirele Yet Job too Knew that his 
Redeemer lived, and expected to see Hirn stand in the latter 
day upon the earth. If the quiet oblivion of sleep alene was 
between him and that day, why not more ot Paul’s spirit as 
to it? The light had somehow: shone into that place ‘of 


loom for Paul. -Worentts merely would have been the same 
4 ] cf * a& 
ess, but nonentity! Mr. 


for each, and not light nor darkn 
Constable has not the solution of this enigma plainly. How- 


ever, I have answered him before and independently. 


But he-adds— 
that the opinion that during the stite of death believers are 
‘with Christ’ in-w state of life, involves a contradiction to one 
of the fundamental ddctrines of Scripture. If they are then with 
Christ, and see Him as He now is, St. John tells us expressly that 
such a sight would change them into the likeness of Christ. It 
would hence follow that they would now possess tlie fullest glory 
that they could.ever look for and obtaiy. ‘The popular view that 
’ believers during the state of death are with Christ and see Him, 
- involves in fact the demial of the regyerection as taught by Paul, 

or teaches what ie condemned as heresy, that the resurrection ia, 


past already.” 


ying 


last 
ubt- 

the 
re as 
1e of — 
»ften 
w, to 
. and 
how- 
> him 
erent 
riters 
3 was 
item- 
it his 
latter 
e was 
irit as 
ve of 
Y same 

Mr. 
How- 


ers are 
‘to one 
on with 
sly that 
ist. It 
st glory 
ew that 


.e Him, 


y Paul, 
ction ia 


ugar es Sie mre eanaeneaean mimninaaecaillaal 


, CONSCIOUSNESS AFTER DEATH, 121 


Now, without raising any debate as to the interpretation 
of 1 John ili. 2, it is plain Mr. Constable confounds two 
different things in this, véz., moral and physical likeness. 
Does he really mean to say that seeing Christ in the inter- 
mediate state would bring the body out of the grave and 
glorify it? So it would seem. We however believe that 
resurrection waits for the word of Christ to effect, and 
that there can be no “perfection” for the saint, short of 
pody, soul and spirit being united in blessing, Nay, it may 


well be, that we must put on this “image of the heavenly” . 


in order even in the full sense to see Christ as He is. All 


this consists perfectly with the thought of being with Christ 


in the meanwhile in such a way as to awaken the desire of 
the living saint in the fullest way. On the other hand non- 
entity for the saint can call forth no such desire, save on the 
supposition of an utter wretchedness in the present life such 
as Paul knew nothing of, it is-clear. Mr. Constable shows 
this fully in what he has written elsewhere. “To one ca- 
pable of the vast grasping thought of immortality death is 
indeed a thing of’ terror. . . death is after all the king of 


terrors.” And he is speaking of Christians here. Yet 


when he comes to argue about Paul's words, this king of 
terrors becomes more attractive even than companionship 
with Christ on earth. Noneptity is a sweet forgetfulness 
which only hastens the day of glory! Which is the true 


‘statement I must leave Mr. Constable to say. Where 
speaks the man, and where the controversialist, I will not — 


try to decide. But he is certainly self-contradicted,—hope- 
lessly so. 

[shall not again do more than refer to 2 Cor. v. Its “at 
home in the body” and “absent from the Lord ”—its 


- “absent from.the body and present with the Lord ”—speak 
manifestly the same language as that we. have just been con- 


sidering. Those who tell us that in the resurrection state 
we shall not be “at home in the body,” and that we are 
“absent from the body ” when it has been raised in glory 


pase 


“or changed into the tikeness of Christ's glorious bedy, may 


FF PALS IT IE EL IE Fi ENT IS 


122 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 

well be left as hopeless of conviction. Mr. Constable's ar- 

the same as those we have already reviewed. ‘ 
I pass on to just one more Scripture in this connection, 

which gives Us in full reality the thing of which we have 

been in search, —notl in parable but in the historical fact,—a 
man absent from the body,—a spirit conscious of unut terabic 
things.—a bright transient gleam from the unseen,—MLoses 


on the Mount of Transfiguration with the Lord. 
in sleep Vyehold it not, 


It is no dream, for eyes, that closed 

awakencid to behold it. (Luke ix. 32): ° But Peter and 
they that were with Him were heavy with sleep: and when 
they were wrake they saw His glory, and the two men that 
stood with him.” This proves also that, 

vision, even waking. The thing was there besore they 
beheld it: * Moses and Elias talking with Jesus.” Thus it 
from all spectators.* And how sim- 


guments are 


it’ was 720 mere 


was 2 real thing,, apart 
ply described, “two mv which were Moses and Elias.” 


One of these @ man caught up in glory centurics ‘before, and 
one still longer ~ departed,” and his body buried, yet still 
asleep, but. i activity of 


a “man,” neither extinet nor 

thought and of enjoyment. Not raised from the dead 
either, as some would have it, because Jesus was Himself 
the “ first-fruits.” and the “first-begotten of the dead.” 

For it is no question. here of simple restoration to the 

earthly life just quitted, as with Lazarus and others, whom 
the Lord had so restored. It is a man in the blessediess 
of another sphere, to enjoy which he must have heen- raised 
(if, raised vat. all) ‘spiritual and incorruptible. But of this 
résurreetion the Lord Himself was the beginning, as Scrip- 
ture asserts. Moses could not have been thus the first-born. 
then. Apart from the body therefore he was, yet associate 


with one who had never 
SY 


a 


2 


* Roberts, in his comment 
asserting that what is relied on to prove 


. | a ss o 
upon this, falsifies the whole argument, 
no mere vision is simply 
nd of course evading 


passed through death, and though 


> 


rhe fact-of their being awake when they saw it; a 
the real point. 


3 ar- 
wed. 
tion, 
have 
a 
rabic 
Loses 


t not, 
> and 
when 
n that 
meer € 
they 
hus. it 
vy sim- 
Elias.” 
re, and , 
et still 
rity of 
» dead 
[imself 
dead.” 
to the 
, whom 
;sediress 
n-raised 
of this 
as Scrip- 
irst-born. 
associate 


argument, 
n is simply 
se evading 


| though 


CONSCLOUSNESS AFTER DEATH. 123 


not in the likeness of Christ's glorious body,* yet appearing 
“in glory” (& 60éy), let men make of it what they will; en 
tering mureover into the “ bright cloud ” ‘(as Peter calls it 
afterwards, “ the excellent glory’), the Shechinah of the 
Divine’ Presence.t 

I contess | du not understand how it can be plainer that 
we are here: permitted to gaze upon one departed, and to 
realize us tar as we can how a departed Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob still * live unto Him,” who, as the Lord tells us, “is 
not the God of the dead but of the living.” We thus see 
how to Hira they live who tu men are dead. We learn to 
distinguish between the language of sense and the language 
of faith. We learn how really there is a departing and being 
with Christ which is, compared with life on earth, far’better. 
No arguinent that Annihilationists can bring against this 
passaye will avail for a moment. Their arguments have in 
fact, been already disposed of, as they either suppose on the 
of hand that Moses was raised trom the dead, which Serip- 


i > ea ee | 
ture elsewhere confutes (Co. # 1%, 1 Cor. xv. 23, Rev. i, 9), 7 


or that it was only a © vision” or appe: ‘ance, Which the 
passage itself contutes.} I may leave here then the question 
(though there be other texts) of the censciousness of the 
separate state, with the full conviction of its complete, man- 


ifest and divine answer. ae 


2 


* This is strangely Jaken by Mr. Roberts to be said of Klias, and here 
again he argues upon a mere misconception, | 

The “first-begotten of the dead,” applied to the Lord Jesus, will not 
allow his interpretation of the first-fruits. It distinetfy asserts that 
He was the first raised in the full meaning cpyesurrection, Enoch and 
Elias were not begotten from the dead at all. 

+“ They (the disciples) feared, as those” (éxervovs)—Mosey and 
Elias—“ entered into the cloud.” ee 

t “Tell the cision to no man” is somewhat urged, but opaya is 
merely something seen, and raises no question of reality. 


(ate Saino ts [LES 


oes 


~ 


< 


<8 


sprites: PS. bee 


es 


124 FACTS AND THEOKLES AS TO A FU 


ana gianna 


TURKS STATS. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

d to consider the objections which are made 
to the views I have expressed, grounded upon the supposed 
plain teaching of many passages of Scripture. It, is:a point 
worthy of attention, however, at the outset, that these pas- 
sages are, with few.and slight exceptions, all fouipf’in- the 
Old Testament, and especially in three books which lié near 
together in the middle of: it (united really, I doubt not, in 
Job, Psalms, and Ecclesiastes. pie 
I mention from Mr. Roberts’ book all the 
texts upon which he relies to maintain his views ot death 
and the intermediate state. From pp. 40-50 of his “ Twelve 
Lectures ” (4th edit.) I find- thus quoted Job xxxiii. 22-28 ; 
Psa. xxx. 33 XXil. 29: Ixxxix. 48; Ixxviil. 50; Ezek. xviii. 
4; Jas. iv. 14; Psa. exliv. 3, 45 cil. 14, 16; Gen. ii. 7; iii. 
19; xviii. 27; Rom. vii. 18; Jas. i. 10; Job. xiv. 12; Eccl. 
iii, 18-20; Gen. xxv. 3; XXXV. 29. xlix. 33; 1 26; Deut. 
xxxiv. 5, 6; Josh, xxiv. 29; 1 Sam. xxv. 1; 1 Kingsii. 1, 2, 
10; Acts ii. 29. 34; 1 Kings xi. 45; Heb. xi. 13; John vi. 
11, 14; 1 Thess. iv. 13; Eccl. ix. 10; Job iii. 13-19; x. 18; 
xxxix. 5, 12, 13; exlvi. 2. 
Isa. xxxviii. 18, 19. 
ommonly urged 


I NoW procee 


many respects) 
To show this 


Psa. Ixxxviii. 5, 10, 125 exv. 7; 
Keel. ix. 9, 6; Psa. exlvi. 3, 4; Vi. 35 

He then progeeds to cite the passages ¢ 
against his views as follows: 
Acts vii. 99; 2 Cor. v. 8: Phil. i. 23; Matt. xvii. 33 xxii. 


32: xviii. 10; Prov. xii. 28: Matt. x, 28.. 


Thus, for* Ais own views, out of over fifty passages pro- 
Testament and forty-seven 


to the Old. While out’ of the passages which he thinks 


duced, nine belong to the New 


Luke xxiii. 43; xvi. 19-31; . 


might be adduced as. agaist his views (though-scanty_in 


number), mie out of few are from the New Testament. 


. OBJECTIONS FROM, THE OLD TESTAMENT, | 12h 


But the disproportion is greater even than this, when the 

Sige oe real value to the writer of the texts quoted is kept in view. 
Thus even Mr. Roberts can make but little of Jas. i. 9, 10: 

“As the flower of the grass he shall pass away ;” or of 

chap. iv. 14: “What is your life’ it is even a vapor.” 
The other passages are, that in Paul (4. ¢., a his flesh) dwelt 
‘uo good thing; as to David, that he was dead and buried, 
and not ascended into the heavens; that, Abraham and 
others died in taith, not having received the promises; that 
Lazarus was sleeping, or in plain language, dead; and 
fipally, that those that sleep in Jesus. shall God bring with 
Him. = 


Really does it not seem a question Between the Old Tes- 
inment and the New ? : 
ait is not that; but still there isa tale that these quota- 
. tions tell, the moral of which will be found in 2 Tim. i, 10; 
where the apostle tells us, that Christ “has abolished death, 
and brought lifeand incorruption (not immortality) to light 
by the GOSPEL.” ; 

That means that these writers are groping for light amid 
the shadows of a dispensation where was yet upon this subject 
© ~ comparative darkness. They I6ok at death as it existed be- 
‘ fore Christ had for the believer abolished it. - They look at 
: life there where as yet it had not been “ brought to light.” 
Y No wonder if they stumble in the darkness they have 
4 ‘chosen. in 
H Roberts fenroneni the “logic” of the application of this 
passage to-this question to be: “Life and incorruptibility are — 
oa brought to light by’ the gospel ; theretore don’t go to’ the 
Old ‘Testament for light on death and corruptibility.” : 

It is very strange that he should think he needs light on 
the latter point, for that * death is déath?” seems to him an 
axiom that settles all. Nay, “life” also, and what it is, 


18 pro- te tenon ear? : 
eer is “a matter of positive ceperience” It is the “gegregate 
thinks result of certain organic processes,? he tells us. He only 
ar te voes to Seripture to confirm this, which after all we should 
’ have known without, 
t. . 
= ; ‘ 
® ° . 
% 
4 


a4 ; a une ey ‘ a a \ 


126 «FACTS AND THBKORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


But the abolition of death is clearly connected with the 
bringing life to light by the gospel, and it is clear that the 
Old-Testament statements must in some way correspond to 
this. Mr. Roberts indeed would have it that the gospel 
simply makes known. “ the way of life.” But Scripture is 
more accurate than he supposes it to be, and less plastic 
than it really seems as if he would like to have it. If “life” 
is brought to light by the gospel, as in any and every sense 
it is, how could death even be known fully in the Old Testa- 
ment? Take Paul and Job, as 1 have before said, and com- 
pare their utterances as te death;—is there no difference ? 
is there no light: come for Pau) into that land of gloor and 
darkness which Job contemplates? Surely there is. nd 
this is the story Mr. Roberts’ citations tell. 

_ Another passage furnishes us with a further point about — 
that old economy he ngéds to know: that by the hanging . 
of the veil before the holy places, “the IJoly Ghost this 
signified, that the way into the holiest was not yet manifest- 
ed, while, the first tabernacle was yet standing” (Heb. ix. 8). 
Mr. Roherts wants to know why the annihilationists should 
have their attention drawn to this. “It is the very thing,” 
he asserts, “that proves their case. Mr. Grant contends 


that Abraham, Moses, and thousands beside thein went, 


into the holiest (that is, the heavenly state) as soon us they. 
flied, ‘WHILE THE FIRST TABERNACLE WAS YET STANDING.’ 
The ‘poor annihilationists,, on the contrary, accept the 
declaration’ that the way was not yet manitested) while the 
old economy existed, and that, as Jesus said, ‘ No man had 
ascended into heaven.” But ‘tiie fact of Abraham and other 
saints going to heaven «/ter death, does not imply that the 
way there was made manifest: in the Old Testament, i. ¢., of 
course to. men before they died. Nor do the Lord’s words 
which he quotes (John iii. 13) at all imply even that Enoch 
and Elias had not “ascended into heaven.” Plainly they 
had, and therefore Mr. R.’s interpretation of.them is convicted 


of tntruth. But the Lord is speaking, as the context de- 
cisively shows, of available witnesses of “heavenly things.” 


ith the 
iat the 
ond to 
gospel 
ture is ’ 
plastic 
“life ” 
y sense 
Testa- 
id com- 
rence ? 
on and 
nd 


1t about 


langing. . 


St this 
anifest- 
», ix. 8). 
should 
thing,” 
gntends 


n went 
us they. 


NDING.’ 
ppt. the 
hile the 
nan. had 
id other 
hat’ the 
i.e, of 
s words 
, Enoch 


nly they 


ynvicted 


‘ 


OBS ECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 127. 


It was no question of Enoch and Elias, who were not there 
to tell what they might know, still less of the condition of 
the departed dead, but of there being no other accessible 
witness of heavenly things, except IIimself, the Son of 
Man, and yet(é av iv ra ovpav@) “subsisting in heaven.” 
“If Thave told you of earthly things, and ye believe not, 
how shall ye believe if I tell. you of heavenly things ? . And 
no man [evidently, none here to give Witness] hath ascended 
up to heaven, save he who came down from heaven, even 
the Son of’ Man who is in heaven.” To make this clash 
with Enoch and Elias:having gone ,there is surely a mere 
straining of the words, and just as much so to infer from it 
the condition of the righteous dead. 

Doubtless Mr. Roberts would reinforce this, untenable 
position by a quotation which those. with him often dwell 
upon, to the effect that “David gs. not ascended into the 
heavens.” 


darkness, lay between, certainly for him that was not, heaven. 

Nor can Mr. Roberts tind. such a thought’ He does not 
Papen te Na aU ease eso = a) eS at Saas i ebb ete pase 
“Kets io 


text de- 
things.” 


‘ay 
t-The Old: Testament word for odes, the unseen world, See next 
vhapter,’ 


w 


3 ii 
a.) 
Py 

4 
f. 5 

ve 

o 
. 
“ 
e ’ 
® 


ov 


ca) 


ee einen 


vs 


128 FACTS AND THEURLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 
? : . 


‘indeed look for it; I well know. “The “heavenly promises ” 


are for him promises merely of a “ heavenly state,” as he 
might say, on earth. This is again the darkness of the 
former dispensation imported into, the full light of the Chris- © 
tian one.” I cannot discuss it here, nor, happily, need I for 
tle mass of those who may read this. ’ 
*But such then as Job’s was the Old Testament hope.* 
Outside the present scene there was little light, death a deep, 
dark “shadow,” well-nigh impenetrahie, resurrection ancl 
restoration to a scene of earthly blessedness the tangible, 


plain thing. Scattered hints there were, indeed, of other 


things. | Enoch had of old gone to God, and not seen death. 
Elijah in a later day had followed him. <A little gleam of 
light had broken in there. But, still that was not the reve- 
lation of the heavenly places anc a portion there for those 


- who believed. Nor was death abolished, or life and incor- 


ruption brought to light. : 
Still they were not annihilationists, as Pharisaism, which 


the people followed, shows. Something they did know: 


and with all their darkness were wiser than those who have a 


- now turned from the light which has come, back into it. 


This even necromancy witnessed. Heatherlish as of course 
it was, yet its practice testifies to the belief which lay at 
the foundation of it. And the bringing up of Samuelf is an 
Old Testament confirmation of that belief too strong for any 
cavils of questioners to set aside. : 

True, indeed, the departed spirit pf a saint was not at the 
‘mercy of a witch to, summon into présence. And the ap- 
pearance of the prophet threw the woman herself into 
astonishment ; but so God permitted Saul to get his answer 


* Some difficulty will be found perhaps in reconciling Heb, xi. 13-16 
with this. T fully admit that this passage shows that individuals had 
hope beyond the proper Old Testament revelation. How they got this | 
we hope yet to inquire. But that certainly no revelation of ‘it is given 
in the Old Testament itself, Lean only ence again very simply affirm. 


~ Let my readers search and see. 


FT Sam. xxviii 


oe 
2 


ymises ” 
” as he 
sof the 
ie Chris- © 
od I for 


t hope.* 
1a deep, 
ion wand 
tangible, 
of other 
n death. 
leam ‘of 
the reve- 
or those 
1d incor- 


m, which 
d know: 


vho have _ 


nto it. 

of course 
ich lay at. 
uelf is an 
1¢ for any 


not at the 
d the ap- 
rself into 
is answer 


b, xi. 13-16 
viduals had 
hey got this | 
’-it is given 
mply affirm. 


© 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 129 


ie of doom. The language of the historian should be plain to 


any one who believes in the full inspiration of ‘Scripture, 
that the woman saw Samuel, and that Samael spoke to Saul. 
Mr. Roberts may raise questions which our inability to an- — 
swer would not show were valid as arguments against *the | 
inspired words. But. if, as he suggests, the nature of the 
apparition was that it was “ the - spectral impression of 
Samuel in the woman’s brain reflected from that of Saul,” 
how did this “spectral impression” speak to::Saul 2 Mr. 
Roberts would answer evidently “ through the woman”; 
but not so says Scripture. It is his own invention, as. the 
spectral impression is. Moreover his difficulty as to Samuel - 
appearing in his clothes, as that of others, that he is seen as 
an old man, we may answer by saying that we know too 
little of spiritual appearances even to apprehend them as 
difficulties. Nor does it seem one that Saul himself should not 
have seen the spirit of Samucl, any more: than that Elisha’s 
servant did not see the horses and chariots of fire around 
Dothan (2 Kings vi. 17). How many similar questions — 
might Mr. R. ask about these, and find, or give, as little 
answer ! : ‘ aa 
Then as to the “ bringing wp,’ which Mr.-R. considers 

should be, according to our views, rather “ bringing down,” 
this is his mistake, and we shall look at it in the next chap- 
ter. While “to-morrow shalt. thou and thy sons be with 
me,” means merely in the déath state, or in -sheol, as a 
Hebrew might have expressed it. ° 


I only dwell upon this to show that all was not dark, 


~ even here, as to immortality. People may talk, as some do, 


of resurrection, but there is none, and the- thought of it 

would only complicate the difficulties of the case. : 
“Without further preface I turn to the passages which 

they adduce as decisive of the point we are‘upon, ‘that the 


- dead are non-existent, or at. least. unconscious till the resur- 


rection. 
We naturally begin with Genesis, but here the passages 


ore detente rma g 


130 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


8; xxxv. 29; xlix. 33; 1. 26. The reader may refer to 
these (except the first) for himself, as they are the mere 
chronicle of the deaths of the patriarchs, “ sober and literal,” 
as we quite believe, and as is the fashion of Scripture gener- 
ally, and with “no heaven-going rhapsody,” as Mr. Roberts 
tells us. There could hardly be, as I have already shown. 
Deut. xxxiv. 5,6; Josh. xxiv. 29; 1 Sam. xxv. 1; 1 Kings 
ii. 1, 2, 10@and xi. 43, all come ‘under the same category. 
It is sufficient.for Mr. R. that he finds a text in which it is 
said such a person “ died,” to find a proof text'in it for ex- 


_tinction; and. if it should add, that he was “buried,” then 


all dispute about the matter should be ended forever. For 
it seems none but materialists ever speak of people dy- 
ing or being buried, or if so Mr. Roberts has not heard 
Obits a | 
Abraham’s lowly confession, “who am but dust and 


ashes” (Gen. xviii. 27), which he takes to imply the lowest 
‘materialism, may perhaps be left to speak for itself. Of 


course that spirit of man, which sometimes Mr. Roberts 


‘reckons’ part of him, sometimes the highest part, is here none 


whatever, or else it too is “dust.” He joins with this Paul’s 


“in me, that is in my flesh,” equally to imply that Pauigwas < 


nothing but. flesh. the further expression in the same 


- chapter, “with the mad, I myself serve the law of God, 


but with the flesh the law of sin,” he does not comment. 

~ Outside of Job. and its kindred books two. passages 
remain. One is Ezek. xviii. 4: “the,soul. that sinneth it 
shall die.” - Here, as I have before noticed, the soul is put 


«for the personality of man. “The soul that sins shall die.” 


Not a son. for a. father’s sins, or a father for a son’s, but 


every one for his own. This use of the word does not, as 


Mr. R. imagines, conflict with its proper force when used, 
as it has been proved Scripture does use it, for the immortal 


part of man. The other uses are all secondary to and 


founded on this, of which I have at large spoken. 
The other passage~is Isa. xxxviii. 18,19. It introduces 


we 


us to that class of texts to which belong the quotations 


wv 


rE. 


refer to 
the mere 
d literal,”’ 
ire gener- 
. Roberts 
ly shown. 
- 1 Kings 
category. 
hich it is 
it for ex- 
ied,” then 
ver. For 
eople dy- 
n0t heard 


dust and 
the lowest 
self. Of 
. Roberts 
here none 
his Paul’s 
Paulwas ° 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT, 


from Job, Psalms and Ecclesiastes, 
look at it with these. . 
These three books be 
ment very distinct in its’ characte 
the historical books ar¢ 
divine historian, and. the books of the 
more directly the words wf Jehovah E 
through the: prophet to the 
Scripture which comprises Job, Psalms, 
siastes and the Song of Solomon, ig emine 
Of course I do not mean that the 
that account. Every word, I doubt not, i 
by the Holy Ghost Himself, 
what is profitable and® needed 
for instance we do find, even Satan Speaking, we 
the more adopt his sayings as 
They are carefully registered for us with a divi 
“But wedo not say “itis written ” 
His hand and touch all th 
His face. 


r trom all the rest. 


ne purpose. 
of Job, that if God put forth 
at he hath, he will curse Him to 
Thgt was what Satan said, although it és written. 
So in like manner, when the Lord says to Job's friends,“ Ye 
have not spoken of’ ‘me the thing that is right, like my ser- 


nnot indiscriminately adopt their 
And when we come to 


e e . ' e 
Sayings, spite of the Commendation so far ex- 
find that he, too, in 


| his words, had “ justified 
God ” (ch. xxxii, 2). So that neither 
ation Ais words either. 

something equivalent as to the 
here we have the experience of 
the world in vain for happiness, and 
hile he was pursuing that 
what was Solomons career 


131 
and we may therefore 


long to a portion of the Old Testa- 
While 
¢, aS a whole, the language of the 
prophets are still 
Timself, addressed 
people, that section of the 
Proverbs, Eccle- 
ntly ancan’s voice. 
y are less fully inspired on 
S penned for ug - 
80 that we have nothing but 
- Still, if we find, as in Job 
do not any 
the expression of divine truth. 


? 


anity of the world 


vant Job,” it is plain we ea 

thes eae ‘sayings, as divine truth either, 
cof Gos, | Job’s Own 
men: | pressed, we 

Lagan \ “himself rather than 

ee on oF can we adopt without resery 

- a Nae Nes I have noticed elsewhere 
aie but ‘book. of Ecclesiastes, Ww 

e8 not, as matyWho had ransacked 

rhen used, the things he “ 

. immortal vain and weary course. W'e know 
ivy to and 

introduces God, now: become the “pr oe 
quotations he so well knew. 


~ Wouldsit yet be beliey 


ed, that this man’s 


A - 


132 | FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Kol sayings,” penned by himself for our instruction. in the word 
_of God, have been taken by materialists as the sayings of » 
divine truth, to settle it that men are “ beasts,” that “ man 
yhas No preéminence above a beast”? ~ 
The Psalms indeed are of'a ditferent-character. ‘They are 
~ much more really prophetic in character,"nay, in one sense, 
_ .fully’so. Still their’ prophecy has ‘the peculiarity, in which 
~ they resemble the. others, of its being the projection of hu- 
man thoughts and feelings upon the page, which, under the 
control of the Spirit of God, bécome the foreshadows of 
another day and scene. Thus David muses upon his own 
_ sufferings until his thoughts find vent in words, which guided 
. of God become. full of a deeper meaning than any application 
” to David could exhaust—prophetie utterances of Another, 
‘more than royal, Sufferer. But that is very different from 
direct:revelation. It leaves the utterer to speak of things as 
from his-own point of view he sees them, even while giving 
them this deeper’significance. 2 
__ Mf. Roberts has surely somewhat mistaken what is said 
_ on this’ head, when he asserts that it makes these books “ in 
« ‘fact ‘of no greater value than a newpaper report.” On the 
contrary it makes them of the very greatest value. ’ 


Is it not this, that all the difficult problems as to the world | 


- and himself also, problems which man’s heart ponders only 
thoroughly to lose. its way in, should be allowed once for 
all to find expression in the presence of God, where alone 


they can find their perfect answer? Man’s voice permitted . 


to utter itself thus,—its questions, doubts, objections, rea- 


sonings—before One ot uninterested, who condescends to 


take the place of l®tener, and does not decide a case before 
he hears it: is not this worthy of God to give us? is this of 
:no more value than 4 newspaper report? I speak for myself 


only when I say, that,to me ‘it is of the profoundest interest, : 


and of the’ deepest: value. ~ fe ees 
This applies of course mainly to the books before us, Job, 


Ecclesiastes, and (in much smaller measure) to the Psalms. 
Now, as to the facts allegeil by Mr. R. against it. The quo- 


a 


hha 


a init etna enh nd one cre i 


y 


, OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 133 
iy tation of J ob v. 13, with seven other ‘allusions ” to the book, 
word - imthe New Testament, he gives in proof of ‘Job:as'a whole 
° et eo bao ‘being God's voice. Let us look at these latter first. ° . They 
uoue ae are as follows: a - Poe | 
y EWA --* Jobi. 21, referred to in 1 Tim. vi. 7, (?) . : 
sa ~- U, 21, 22: xiii. 1-7, referred to in Jas. v. 11. 
ae f . xii: 14, referred to in Rev. iii, 7 (?.) ites - 
yhich ; "  xxxiv. 19, referred to in Rom. ii. 11 ; Eph. vi. 9 ; Col: iii, 25, 
aes | xli, 11, referred t6 in Rom. xi. 35, ee 
r the i Of these references it will be seen that Jas. v. 11 merely. 
vs of ee speaks of Job’s patience and the end ofthe Lord.. 1 Tim. vi. 
oie Sty and Rey. iii. 7 are very doubtful as allusions at all - Rom. ee 
aided ee | xi. 35 refers to God's answer to Job, which of course no one 
ation en Ome questions as Hisoice; while the three passages in Rom. ii, 
other, F 11, Eph. vi. 9 and Col. iii. 25 may allude to what Elihu says 
from ’ of God’s not accepting persons, but. are the expression of so 
oe eee . simple a truth, that it scarcely needs to consider them even 
riVINg 7 wf an allusion. 7. on a : 
oe gs But Elihu himself moreover is not one of the three friends 
eva | convicted of’ falsehood by J ehovah, but one who is used to 


Aa give Job his answer, after they anf he both have left. off 
n ue : * speaking. It remains then that in all the 

| need there is‘one more or less doubtful reference to Job’s own 
world wotds, and this. one quotation of the words of Eliphaz, in 
| oe Be 1 Cor. iii, 19: « He-taketh the wise in their own craftiness.”’ 
ce 


New Testament 


* Of this Mr. Roberts says: “The speaker is Eliphaz, whose 

alone interpretation of God’s dealings with Job was condemned. 
nitted . His abstract principles’ were right; though his application 
8) POA: of them in Job’s. case was wrong.” But this is not true. 
ids es ae -God’s own*words make the express distinction between; Job 
before . . and his three fricnds, that; whereas Job had spoken oF HIM 
ree the thing@that’ was, right, . they. had not done so.” All of 
ny 


ae _ them, Job included, had e 
Se "dealings, if that were. all 


rred in the interpretation of God’s 
; and on that'account, first. Elihu 
fa ~ becomes ‘interpreter for Him, and then God Himself speaks. 
3, JOD, : 7 


Te But—Job-had spoken ‘Tightly of God; and ‘his friends had 
salms. ees : 3 ; 
' not; : : 


. e + i , + 
le qud- : 


" Yet Eliphaz for all that could say many 3 true thing, trath 


- from Him; and one such saying the i 
~ certified through the mouth uf Paul. T 


the less man’s song or man’s sorrow, 


184 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A.FUTURE STATE. +. « 


t of God, and could utter as 
oly Ghost gives us 
bis could not certify 
spoken which were 


that doubtless he had learn 


the things which the same Eliphaz had 


not right. 
® there is not the same direct 


Even Mr. Roberts allows- 
recognition of Ecclesiastes.” He thinks that “a remark of 
<a 2) 


Paul’s in 1 Tim. vi. 7 Tooks like a quotation of Keel. vy. 15.’ 
It muy refer to it, but it is one of those self-evident,.how- 
ever solemn, truths, that néed no inspired authority to assure 
us of them. The passage has alteady been made tosserve 
as a reférence to Job, and in Bagster’s 
though doubtingly, to Psa. xlix. 17. Roberts adds, “ Never-_ 
theless the book stands on its own foundation, as the product 
of a man to whom God gave wisdom,” etc. The inspiration 
of the book is not at all in question, but its character and: pur- 
pose. The matter of Solomon’s wisdom has been: already _/ 
discussed. * : ee oa 
As to the Psalms, they are tindoubtedly divine, but that 
While inspired fully, their utterance, 
the rest, that the point of view 
is that of a man upon carth, the horizon earthly, the thoughts 
and feelings in accordance ‘with this.. Granted, fully grant- 


ed, that the divine is in the human everywhere, it is none 
human utterance out 


is not the question. 

x ie . ez 

as already said, is so far like 
x \ 


of a human heart, with only exceptional direct sayings of © 
God. ° | ; 

_ Proverbs again-is most evidently human, however perfect 
and ‘divine in its authority, as it surely is. Mr. Roberts 
“quotes Heb. xii. 5 against this, halving the passage cited 
from Prov.ii. 11, 12, by leaving out ver.6. He’ can thus 
apply the passage as if the apostle meant by merely quoting, 
_ My son, despise not,” to show that God in that exhortation | 
is ing_unto_us_as unto children,” and therefore that 


list is again referred, 


on ee ee iy, CES 


Proverbs was directly God’s voice. The very form of the 
exhortation should 


1ave taught him better, for it is not “my 


aA aaa 4 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT, 135 


son, despise not my chastegjing,” but the “ chastening of ¢he 
“Lord” ; and the apostle's-proof that’ Scripture in that ex- 4 
hortation speaks to us as-unto sons is that “whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He 
reeviveth.”* The real argument is coneealed in the verse 
which he, for whatever reason, pleases to ignore. 
All the weight of what Job Says ts found in the following. 
_ €xpressions: that, had he died. from. the womb, he would ~ 
_then have been lying still and quiet, he would have slept 
"and been at rest, as an hidden untimely birth, there ‘where 
the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are.at rest 
(ch. iii. 13-17) ; that he would have been as though he had > 
not been, in a land of darkness and the shadow of death, 
a land of darkness, as darkness\ itself; and of the shadow of 
death without any order, and a the light is as darkness. 
(ch. x, 18-22); and that in déath man lieth down and riseth ~ | 
not; till the heavens be no more they shall not awake nor be * - 
raised out of their sleep (ch. xiv, 12), ¢ os a 
N ow, as I have said, I am not concerned to prove the 
harmony of all Job’s uttetances with the actual revelations 
of Scripture as,to the intermediate state. He might have 
‘been, mistaken, and that in no way touch the question before 
us, or the perfect, inspiration of the recérd in which his, 
words are found. They are given .as Job’s wordk, that is 
all. As thé utterance ofa saint of those old days, they con- 
tain, no doubt, the assurance of the dimness and uncertainty 
which then prevailed. Contrasted with Paul’s language 
they show ‘us death not yet abolished, “ darkness” not yet 
dispelled by light. . Yet the words cannot be fairly pressed © 
into the service of materialism. ‘Take the very strongest 
expression, “I should have been as though I had not been,” 
with relation to the world and its sorrows, of which he was 
speaking, it was simple truth. So as to oppression : “there 
the servant is free from his master.” ” He might have died 


ne ee 


. *In Proverbs, “even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.” 
The quotation in Hebrews is from the Septuagint, 


7 ' a? 


559 
“fi pings ~<a tc aha oon a ted 


* 


136 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


under the lash, but dying, death set him free. “There the 
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.” 

But, you say, although that may be as regards earthly 
troubles, yet if there were misery of another kind awaiting 
man after death, could he talk so complacently of the “ weary 
being at rest ? dg aes fe 

Well, but to all that’ made Job weary, the grave would 
be rest. And for aught else, Job was 4 saint of God after 
all, and had confidence in God. Ile was not meditating 
upon the portion of the wicked, but what. his own would be; - 
and though in death a “land of darkness ” stretched before 
him into which his eye could little penetrate, he had some- 
thing of the Psalmist’s confidence in One who would be with 
him there. The sorrows of the wicked are not at all 
before him, but for himself the end of all present sorrows. 

“Mr. Roberts may say, “There (in the grave) the weary 
are at rest,” but Job does not say “in the grave”; and he 
may think it “obvious” that he means “righteous and 
wicked without distinction.” I can only say to myself it is 
very far from obvious. He was'surely thinking of his own 
sorrows, and as to the “ wicked,” what he says is, they“ cease 
from troubling.’ 
alike rest in nonentity in the grave. But és this “rest ee 
Whe rests? Cana thing that is not, rest ? I think not, if 


words have meaning. 


Moreover, ch. x.’ 21, and xvi. 22 prove positively that it « 


‘s in the track indicated Job’s thoughts. are running. If 


otherwise, then when he says that in dying he “ goes whence - 


he shall not return,” he simply denies all resurrection. ‘But 


he is thinking of a return to the scene before him. It is not~ 


an abstract statement, but one very simply referring to the 


scene of mingled joy 
then was. And so Scripture often speaks.“ Enoeh zas 


- not” Is that extinction? No, “he was translated, that he 


» Mr. R. would give righteous and wicked * 


and sorrow, in the midst. of which he 


should not see death. As to the world “he-was nets” but 
as to God he was, for “ God took him.* Just as with Abra- 
“* Gen. v. 24; Heb. xi. 5. «Infants that never saw light,” spite of 


» 


y Unseen world ;. but. “ rest” 


fill up the ellipsis. We need h 
it is substantially our own. » Enoch 
“was not”; therefore, of course was not Sound ; yet even in theapos/” 
tle’s words you must mentally supply “on earth,’ 

that he was found, I suppose, in heaven. 
the objectionable limitation, which Mr, 
language only confirms us in it the more, 


I have any being,” and ‘before I 
and explain them ‘by the exactly 
not, that Mr, R. should tells us, “ The 
pointed out,” when he has ‘ 


 * 
4 


6 LS i @ \ ~ 
2. MBIECTIONS PROM THE OLD TESTAMENT, 137 


ham, Tsaac.and J acob, who really died::'To men they died; to 
God they lived: “For-He is net the God of the dead but 
of the living, for all liye unto'Him” (Luke xx. 38), People 
may say, that that means “ in the purpose of: God,’ but then if 
they had ceased to be, He could Nor be their God, the rela- 
tionship between God and His creature’ must. end with the 
being of the creature. That is simply and ‘evidently the 
Lord’s meaning. If,to Him they are dead, they are no longer 
His creatures, nor He their God. The relationship” is 
broken. . 
Job’s words, ther, are no contr 
seen elsewhere to be the reveale 
To weariness such as his: a pl 


adiction of what we have 


lutely contradictory thoughts. ‘ ; 


+ 


1. XXXill, 22-28) have been already 


= = sg he 7 3 ae 
Mr. R.’s protest, are beings that have begun to live 


, and his argument 
trom Job’s reference to these has no fouhdation. Besides, that is not 
& z: . 


the point. It is nonentity as to the present scene, not absolute non- 
entity, he speaks of. 


The statement that Enoch “ was not.” he 
ellipsis : a rather vague but scholarly looking expression to cover ‘a 
difficulty with. Will Mr. R. define and illustrate it? But Paul. has 
told us that Enoch “ was not Sound,” and he thinks that w 


supposes to be a Hebrew 


ill explain and 
ave no objection to the explanation, as 
From the human point of view 


"as we must conclude 
That is, we must still keep 
Rt. refuses, and ;the apostle’s 
e j 
It is strange, therefore, that when we to David’s words, “ while 
go hence, and be no more,”’ 
parallel expression, Enoch ° 


fallacy of this we have already 


SI as Rta I aN 


if ‘Enoch was not” 
not the psalmist’s 
a a 


the truth of it. For 

means, he'was not found on earth, why should 

“be no more” mean similarly “no more found on 
: Bice "i 


* 


a 


138 ‘FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


‘explained, and to them I need not return. I turn now to 
Kcclesiastes. 

And here all that they urge has been already virtually, 
and, except one passage, actually answered. That one pas- 
sage is found, ch. ix. 5, 6: “ For the living know that 
they shall die; but the dead know not anything, neither 
have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is 
forgotten ; also their love and their hatred and‘ their envy 

_ 4s now perished; neither have they any more a portion for- 
_ ever in anything that is done under the sun.” 

Further on (ver. 10) in continuation: “ Whatsoever thy 
hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there igs no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave | 
(sheol) whither thou goest.” : 

Now this is a very plain example of that way of speaking, 
looking at things from a mere hyman stand-point, which I 
have before.remarked-upon. The writer's point of view is 

‘most evident. Nor was he capable, at the time he had these 
thoughts, of any other: As to the dead actually, he “ knew 
not anything,” fo¥ he knew not whether the spirit of man 
went upward or not. This we have seen. He was not, there- 
fore, capable of looking at anything, save from his stand- 
point ‘in the world. Otherwise clearly he could not have 
said, “ Neither have they any more a reward.” That would 
deny all resurrection and life to come, if taken absolutely. 
But he was looking at the scene around, out of which men 
departed, and left no sign behind to indicate that they had 
been; their memory was forgotten ; their love, hatred, envy, 
which had once made them conspicuous actors in the scene, - 
had vanished ; and, in relation to it they knew nothing, their 
wisdom and knowledge had departed ‘too.’ This does. not 
mean, as Roberts suggests, that they “lost their memories,” 
or tnat they became fools ; but they knew nothing of things 
taxing place after their departure,* nor could their wisdom 
or snowledge appear in itvany more. The closing sentence 
snows_clearly to what the former part applies: “ Neither * 

—  * Comp. Job. xiv. 21. 


ca 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 189 


have they any more a portion forever in anything that is 
done under the sun.” e: 

Therefore the moral is, Be\husy now; work ceases in the 
grave; wisdom for this busy svtene there is none there; no 
heart that deviseth; no planning head. All true in its way. 
But this was man’s musings, not divine revelation of the 
state of the dead at all, nor given as such. Had you asked 
this man what he knew of that, he would have said, as he 
did say, Who knows ?* “Who knoweth the spirit of man 

.that goeth 4pward ?” He saw the dust laid in the tomb, 
and that was all he knew. ° The rest was conjecture, nothing 
more. a 

But that; was only part of the preacher’s utterances; the 
musings of his heart while vainly seekirig to “ search out by 
wisdom all things that are done under heaven ” (ch. i. 18). 
But the time came when he had to own his inability to do _ 
so. To quote once more his lowly confession (ch. xi. 5) : 
“ As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit,t nor 
how the bones do grow in the womb of ‘her that is with 
child ; even so thou knowest not the works of God. who . 
maketh all.” ; : Poe ace 

Simple, but most important confession! onthe durk side 
of which all the passages are found upon which materialists 
rely; while on the other‘one pregnant sentence at Jeast is 
read, which, to do justice to the Old Testament preacher, we 
should look at a little closer than we have done :— 


* “ This,” says’ Mr. Roberts,“ is one of Mr. Grant’s (we Will not say 
deliberate, but) staring [? startling] perversions of fact. Solomon. did 
not say, who knows, in reference to the state.of. the dead, but in refer- 
ence to the spirit of man in its ving operation.” 

This, it must be confessed, is “ startling. ” Let my readers look at: 
the whole passage, ch. iii. 18-22, fd decide.® | ; 

+ Here the connection: of the way of the spirit” with the growth 
of the. bones-in the womb, confirms the application of the former ex- 
pression Zo the human spirit. It is the double mystery of generation 
that is vAferred to, still as ever unfathomable to man’s science. We 
know not how the spirit nor even_the_ffésh_of man—comes into-being. 


~ 


' And death ig necessarily a mystery, as life is, ’ 


oe ar 


Pos 


2am ce ne nena 


1 7 

i | ee 

ids (asl ba ae ea eee 
See oeancen ne c 


140 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“Then shall the dust return to the earth as it: was; and 
the spirit shall return to God who gave it.” 

_ As we have seen, men seek to explain the “spirit ” here 
to be merely the “ breath,” as they do that which the Lord : 
upon the cross commended to His Father, and Stephen to 
the Lord Himself. Few simple minds will accept. that con- 
clusion. They will searcely see the sense of the return of 


- the breath to God, whereas, if it be indeed the spirit, such a 


statement becomes of the greatest possible importance. ° It 
is what lifts the veil from the life of “ vanity,” and interprets 
its true significance. —It is the answer to the doubtful ques- 
tioning of the former chapter. Having come to the end of 
human wisdom in the matter, “the way of the spirit” is 
here revealed. It “returns to God who Baye it.” And thus 
there is complete harmony with that “ eonelusion of the 
whole matter,” which the closing verses invite us to “ hear.” 

“Fear God and keep His commandments, for this is thee 


whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into 


judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or 
whether it be evil.” 

- Now if that be the conelasion of the whole matter, does 
it look as if the matter from which he drew the conclusion 
ended merely with the blank and silence of the grave ? 
Rather, does it not. conclusively sow. that that. return of 
the dust to the earth “as it was,” is only what brings the 


_ Spirit,—not “as it was,” but with the character acquired. in 
_its earthly tabernacle,—into the presence of the God who 


gaye it! > 
» Nor does this involve, as Mr. a thinks, that. the 
“judgment of every work is going on every day as fast as 
people die.” But we have-seen that, while the judgment of 
every work does not come before Tesurrection, yet. it is 
when we “ fail,” that either we are “ received into everlast: 
ing habitations,’ "or €9 the prison-honse in which already the 
soul has the premonition of its doom, as the rich man his in 


hades...’ Ecclesiastes has no word of resurrection. | Death, 


Aan iia copra tain inlining 


4 


oi 


the BtamIp of,v ary tipon everything, i is what is dealt with, 


4 


is; and 


t’’ here 


ie Lord , 


phen to 
lat con- 
turn of 
such a 
ce. It 
erprets 
ul ques- 
end of 
rit” is 
id thus 
of the 
hear.” 

is thee 
‘k into 


ood, or ° 


r, does 
clusion 
grave ? 
urn. of 
gs tho 
red in 
d who 
at the 
fast as 
lent of 
tit is 
erlast- 
dy the 
his in 
Death, 


-Spective of what comes after death, 


OBJECTIONS FROM THE ‘OLD TESTAMENT. 141 


and that which all men’s reasoning can so little avail to 
penetrate or understand, faith makes known in its true 
character 4s the recall of the spirit into His presence, with- 
out which it is but a valueless cipher, and with which it 
becomes almost infinite in value, 
I-now pass on to consider the testimony of the Psalms. 
Some passages adduced by Mr. Roberts I may be content 
with quoting. That “ man is like to vanity; his days as a 
shadow that passeth away ” (Psa. exliv. 4), and that « as for 
man, his days are as grass” (Psa. ciii. 15). Statements like 
these, which depict the brevity of man’s life on earth, are 
not quite new or unknown ta believers in the soul’s immor- 
tality. And that it is a salemn and unnatural thing for 
God’s creatures to B® thus « subject to vanity,” quite irre- 
, is a thing for such as 
Mr. R. to consider Le thinks that, if man’s existence be 
forever, such words as these lose force. But it is far from 
being really so. For the point. is, the wreck and ruin of the 
first. creation by death coming in at all. This is what gives 
solemnity to the brevity of his earthly history. 7 
The other passages are mostly of similar character to 
those that we have already looked at. That is, they speak. 
of man as connected with the world through which he 
passes. Thus, “ while I live, will ] praise the Lord; I will 
sing praises unto my God while T have any being” (Psa; 
exlvi. 2); “ before I go hence, and be no more” (Psa. xxxix. 
13) are expressions ny stronger thin we have seen to be 
used of one who was translated that he should not.see death. 
Enoch “was not,” yet even annihilationism has not ‘yet 
taught that he ‘literally ceased to be. 
they should do s0. 
Or again, take Psa, exlvi: 3, 4: 


To be consistent, 


“Put not your trust in 


princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help: 
' for his breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth, and in 
plain here, that, 
rs peri are the 


that very day his thoughts perish.” Ts it not 
80 far as the context leads, his “thonahte”” 


with, 


fa} ~~ 
plans and purposes in which he who was to 


he henefited by 


s 


142° FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. — ” 


them had been made to hope, and. which the death of his ma (ie _ Wit 
patron might in a momént frustrate and cut off? ao Yo 
_ Again, there is a somewhat different class of passages, a8 | the 
- Psa. vi. 5: * Fer in death there is no remembrance ot Thee ; | cul 
. in the grave (sheol) who shall give thanks? ” Andagain, - ~° | De 
(Psa. cxv. 17), “The dead praise not the Lord, neither any - j Hi 
that go down into silence.” Or again, that passage in alc 
Isaiah (xxxviii. 18, 19): “For the grave (sheol) cannot 
praise Thee, death cannot celebrate Thee, they that go | 
down into the pit cannot hope for Thy tftuth ; the living, as 
the living, he shall praise Thee as I do this day : the father to . A 
the children-shall make known Thy truth.” i sa 
fe may take a little deeper looking into: but only be- | Ww 
‘ <Se¢atise we are So little accustomed to realize the point of : st 
view from which the pious Israelite beheld these things. fe 
That “congregation of the righteous ” in which sinners 
should not ‘stand, which the first psalm gives us, was what <0 o> eral 
he looked for. A day, a8 we say, millenaial,—a scene in . - tk 
which righteousness shall reign, and the earth be filled with : it 
the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea, this e 
is what his faith anticipated ; what ours does; but his, much* . c 
more exclusively, for his knowledge of heavenly things was b 


very dim.*."' To swell that great haliclijah-chorus, such as 
. the last five psalms give it us, and in a scene such'as-they 
propbétically anticipate, that were a godly Israelite’s am- 
bition. To cclebrate His praises upon earth, to train up: 


8 
¢ 
‘dren for the service of His sanctuary, to § UP to that o | I 
"¢ 
( 


‘temple where the glory of Jehovah visibly dwelt, this was 


ae According to Mr. Grant's thesis,” says Roberts, “‘ the knowledge 

fr ~ “of the Spirit of God is ‘very dim.’” This is neither truth nor candor. 

_ Any ‘one can see that it is not a question of the knowledge of the 

~ Bpirit of God at all, but of that of those through whom He was pleased -, 
speak. Plainly the full revelation of Christianity had not come. 

Death. had not been abolished, nor life and incorruption brought to 

light. Such knowledge must have been “ dim.” Still, if dim, there is 

nothing untrue in their language ; nor do we “treat the Psalms as the 

private breathings of a pious Israelite,” or “ refuse David as a prophet,” 

or “deny his testimony.” : 


{ 


| | ByaCTIONS FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT. 143 mm | 


_with him connected with every thought of Jehovah's praise. 

ep You see it in that last quotation front Isaiah : “ the father to 
| the children shall make known Thy truth.” Death would 

cut short that declaration, and make those praises cease. 


E Death could not in that sense celebrate. “Who should give oe. 
j Him thanks in the grave?” Nay, the living, the living, | 


alone could do it. mt 
Beside which, inasmuch as length of days was one of the 
blessings of the law, to be cut off in the midst of one’s days, 
as Hezekiah was threatened, argued with a Jew divine wrath. 
And this manifestly adds its gloom to the first and last pas- 
sages. While the 115th psalm is prophetic of a future day 
| when the earth will be purified by a judgment which will de- 
: stroy sinners out of it, and these, I have little doubt, are re- 
ferred to in them. . 
But the Old Testament contains brighter and more assur-. 
ing passages than these, and with one of these we may close - 
_ this chapter: “ The righteous perisheth and no man layeth 
it to heart; and-merciful men are taken away, none consid: —- 
ering that th® righteous are taken away from the evil to 
ee come. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their 
beds, each one walking in his uy rightness” (Isa. lvii. 1, 2). 
Now as nonentity is “ vest It may be “peace,” too, to 
CRO re, Mae Mr. Roberts. For we have seen the “king of tertors” ‘ 
aes sometimes putting on very attractiveforms. But those who ;° 
cannot quite give up Scripture language as unmeaning, nor 
. o | put bitter for sweet or darkness for light, will be unable to 
| ‘accept such a conclusion. As well might the “second 
death ” itself be everlasting peace. . = ee 


8 


‘ representative of the word in th 
- Paradise” is found in the Lord’s reply to the dying thief, 


e 


. 


144 PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO Ly tae STATE. 


(C 


CHAPTER XIV. ~ 
SHEOL, HADES AND PARADISE. 


“WE are now to consider what is indeed but a secondary 
point, put one which will help to give completeness to this. 
sketch of thé Scripture doctrine of the soul’s immortality.” 
The word “hades” (ell, Auth. vers.) is- found, as we have 


already seen, in the story of Lazarus and the rich man. The 
e Old Testament is sheol. 


and‘ in 2 Cor. xii., where Paul tells us he knew a man in 
Christ caught up into Paradise. - 


The interpretation of these words by the materialistic - 


section of annihilationiaf. writers is pretty uniform. Hades, 
they say (and of course'sheol), is the grave.* Paradise, for 
most, the place of blessing on the restored earth ; necessa- 
rily, therefore, having nothing to do with an intermediate 
state, nor existing at present, for a man to be caught up into. 
Mr. Constable and others, no doubt, dissent from this in 
favor of its being a place in heaven, in this more Scriptural 
than those they hail as co-workers in this cause. 

To begin with sheol. It: is-a word” apparently derived 
frorn shaal, “to ask,” and is generally supposed.to derive 
its meaning from the insatiate way in which death continu- 
ally “demands” its victims. Some have, however, ‘sug- 


gested, what s 


rather from the «“ questioning ” as to the dead, as in Job 


xiv. 10: “man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?” 
Sheol is acknowledged to be the equivalent of hades, and 


its significance seems, from the only probable derivation, to” 


be the “ unseen,”—the invisible ‘world,.as people sometimes 


' for him has to do with the body, as we shall see, 


= Mr. Constahig does not-contend-for-this-absolutely, but-still hailes we 


cems at least as probable, that it is derived 


say. 
regi 
Pha: 


_ ‘bear 
' Bibl 


boso 
only 
mar 


~ also 


this 


~ gaist 


othe 
orth 


anni 


om 
is ne 
But 
tive 
Tha 
ima, 
It j 
wal 
com 
this 
up 1 
ally 
uns 
tati 


erty tee = 
ry 
’ 
a 
1 ° é 


SHEOL, HADES AND PARADISE: 145 
say. It applics undoubtedly in ordinary Greek to the 
region of departed spirits, an application with which the 
Pharisaic use coincides, as the treatise ascribed to Josephus 

_‘bears witness, whether .it be his or not: and to this the 
Biblical use in Luke -xvi. (even to the term ‘“ Abraham’s 
bosom ”) exactly corresponds. ow we have seen that not 

only was it impossible for the Lord to adopt without re- 

mark a mere superstitious and pagan notion, but that Pauly - 
also professed himself a Pharisee on kindred points. From 

this pershasion no denunééation of heathenism or of Phari-— 
ry force to turn us. Neither the one nor .the | eee 
is ‘untrue, and Pharisaism was ‘at least’ more a 
orthodox than, the Sadduceism to which in ‘many points thee =. - 
annihilationist ‘belief conforms. — ¥ , 

‘ That “hades” should have a wider application than‘ 
is no wonder from what we have seen to be its meaning. a 
But although it might be -used in other connections figura-_ 
tively, in relation to man it has one very uniform sense. sl 
That sense is never the grave, as they allege, although the aes 
imagery of the’ grave may very naturally. be applied tqyit. 


e 


Re 
s 


: It jg. nevertheless demonstrably distinct and stands in the 

: me relation to the soul as the grave to the body. The’ 

, common coupling together of “ death and hades ”’ illustrates 

1 this, for'in such a conjunction as “ death and hades delivered 

2 up the dead that.were in them” (Rev. xx. 13), death natur- > 

a ally stands connected with the lifeless corpse, as hades (the . 

“ unseen) does with the soul or spirit. So similarly the quo- 

- tation as to the ord in Acts ii. 27, ‘“‘ Thou wilt not leave ) 

5 my soul in hades,” refers to the soul, as “ neither wilt Thou ee 

d . - suffer Thy Holy One to set corruption” does to the body: : 

b ‘and the apostle Peter distinguishes them accordingly in his | 
interpretation: “his soul was not left in hades, neither Ris 

d y ji :sh. did see corruption.” 

0 : This accounts for eight out of the eleven passages in which 

BS ; hades i is found. i in the’ New Testament. That in Matt. xvi. 

¥ : . 18 ean ' present no difficulty. It is borrowed very likely 


from Isa. xxxviu. 10, where the “gates of the grave” should 
: B e 


+ 


. 146 fiers. AND eazontes AS TO-A yore staive. 


be’ " rather “the gates. of ‘gheol.” | ‘The two remaining pas- 
sages are really one: ne Thou, Capernaum, shall be brought. 
down to hades.” Here the word.is used tropically. 

The, usd. of sheol, though similar, is somewhat more ob- 


*  scure. This regults ‘from ‘the character: of the Qld Testa- 


ment;. which has been noted and accounted for. Its quite 
_natural.that materialists should use it for their.pur poses, as 
they do, ‘although after. all’ with very poor success.’ Psa. 
xvi. 10 we have’ seen quoted and applied by the ‘apostle. 
_Jagob: speaks of going down ‘to sheol to his son Jdseph ; Pa 
and this has singularly little force, if.a going down to non-, 
entity. If we ¢ompare David’s words of his child senile 
“J ghall go to‘him, but he shall nit return to me,"t this is” 
greatly strengthened. ~ 

- Then ‘we have such expressions as the « “depths of skool He 
(Prov. i ix. 18), “the lowest. sheol” (Psa. Ixxxvi. 13, Deut. 
: xxxiif 22),—in tha last" passage God's wrath being ae to 

burn‘ to it,—' though they dig into sheol” Tee ix. 2),. 
‘which show that the grave cannot be the whole matter there. ~ 
So even in sheol (Psa. cxxxix. 8) there is no escape from the 
presence of God: “if I make my bed in sheol, behold, Thou 
art there!” Can.that be nonentity? 

Surely we may be excused then from ‘following very 
closely the dissertations of those’ wha have, learnedly endeav: 
ored to prove that sheol is the’ gbode of dead sheep, of - 
men’s bones, and of weapons of war!. For the first ‘state- 
ment there is one passage produced, Psa. xlix. 14: “ Like © 
sheep they are laid in sheal;” as Delitzsch expresses it, 
‘they are. made to-lie down'in sheol, like sheep in a fold.” 
This one comparison of the wicked lying down in sheol like 
a ‘flock of sheep, Mr. Constable thinks sufficient to show, 

‘ “to the astonishment and disgust of our Platonic divines. 
and.thinkers, that beasts 4 go on leath to hades” ! 

'. In the same way, Psa. exli. 7, “ Our bones are scattered at 
the mouth of sheol,” is made to assure us that “the bones 


*Gen, xxxvil. 35.3, _f 2 Sam. xit- 23. 


° 
‘ 


- _SHEOL, HADES AND PARADISE, _ 47 


ught ist plainly says they are outside.* .  * 
| ie By others the im 


ano), eM ofthe dani ope consigyed in death to hades!” ‘The psalm. , 


» Ob: oe . . Show that people g 
‘esta- a 

quite 

e8, as 

‘Psa. 

ostle. — 

“ph * 

non-, 

larly, a 
hié is, , + they would draw from it. 


“eal ved 

Deut. 

id to | 

Coe 

here. ~ 
nthe . o the nature, 
Thou | ‘ 


very . ff . _ believe that the consciousn the interm 
deav- - =f been fully ‘and. independently established by 
p, of ~ eee hav@ examined:. And while, if’ squid is bod 
state. - °— | course be some equivalent of the g 


the texts we - 
: hades’ must of 
rave, and if’ it be mere. 


Like ~*~ ‘animal life,” hades may be extinétion, if on the other hand ae? 
es it, the soul bea living entity separate from the mere bodily 
fold.” _. Organisth; there can be'no ¢ 


© question that it is not. the /” 


Llike  . ff . . first; there: need be none, that it is now the other. But 
show,  wehave yet an argument or-two of Mr. nstable’s to con- 
vines P< ‘sider. ( oe coca See Ape 

. ; Thus. he complains that’ we make hades “a land of life” 
edat °° f by making it the receptacle of men’s souls after death: I) 


bones can only say, we do not ordinarily judge it to be sg In v- 


this sense I mean, that_although it be tae—that the: spirits 
_* “ Their souls below, their bones above,” as Delitzsch well says, 
; : : ‘ae : + ?) Rees 


y 


e 


148 FACTS AND THEORIES AS'TO A-FUTURE STATE. 


of the dead are living, they are nevertheless the spirits of. 4 
the Mad; and #e necessarily and rightly speak of hades as | ness 
the abode of the dead. To us they are the dead: though ° —. deres 
not extinct ; and to God they live. It isnot a fact that we, | ent 1 
Pl ad difficulty in a use of language which perplexes Mr. equi 
Constable. It is writers of his class who.having invente e _ of si 
new language for us would fain pérsuade us it is what'we ~ 4 passa 
have been ignorantly using all along. | Wy 
The only thing that-might be judged a real difficulty as *~__ clusic 
to hades we shall consider after we have briefly looked at ca _§ ° . stran 
the third term, “ Paradise.” — | a ee after 
The greatest importance that the word has in this conne¢- ‘the s! 
tion is from our Lord’s use of: it in His. reply tothedying ff.  pired 
__ thief: “Verily I say unto thee, to-day thou shalt” be, with fot 4 
"Me in Paradise.” ae ae Ms ee ne 
The common method of dealing with this text is by alter- Seniors 
ing the punctuation. They would have us read the words, ; —- 
“Verily I say unto thee ¢o-dey: thou-shalt be with mein — Sone 
Paradise.” ‘That is, “to-day, this day of my humiliation, I ga at the 
say to thee.” But the order of the words in the sentence is \, apa 
: d yo : De eee ie and tk 
4 all against them. With the.emphasis they give it, 67“epov hein 
“to-day ” should precede. the verb, As compare in the _” day.” 
Greek, Matt. xvi. 3; Mark xiv. 30; Luke xix. 5,9; Acts ° - > Dr 
‘xiii 33; Heb. iii. 7, 15. But, beside this, the Lord is an- : a8 a pr 
swering a prayer in which a ¢¢ wherein the thief sought to By. the 
be remembered was expressed. He had said, “ Lord, re-’ pete 
member the when Thou ‘comest in Thy kingdom.” The | ee 
Lord says virtually, “You shall not wait for that: to-day harder 
‘ youshall be with Me.” This is the simple, intelligible reason comme 
for the specification of time: ‘‘ To-day,” not when I come ;  ; ‘Exho 
merely, “shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” ; ae 


, Seeing this, others would render Onuepov “in that day,” — ae . 
or (as for instance Mr. Constable) more exactly, “‘ this day,” cue’ 
but meaning, “the day of which you have spoken.” 9  - “Pe in Chri 

Mr. Constable believes we cannot dispute his right to after 8 

, translate it thus, and he quotes Parkhurst and Schieusner to pp. 54, 


thatieffect. We have no quarrel with the ‘lexicographers on 


\ _ |. SHEOL, HADES AND PARADISE. | 149 
this point,* but must contend nevertheless that their wit- © 
ness is insufficient.. For while the. word may well be ren: 
dered “this day,” it cannot be as ‘referring toa day not pres- 
ent when the word is spoken. In this way it is the exact 
equivalent of our word “to-day,” ’ which we know is incapable 
. Of such use. - ‘Lét Mr. AGnstable produce, if he at: the 
passage which would bear this construction.t oe 

Mr. C, seems evidently not. easy himself. about this con- 
clusion: He vacillates. between this construction, and his 
strange idea of “ synchronism.” He thinks it may well be 
after all shat * “to-day ’’ might really mean so, because “to 
‘the sleeper in death’s arms there is no time,” and having ex-. 
pired before the end of that Jéwi h day, “ the last. half. hour 
[of it] the penitent thief will spend with his King in‘ His 
_ kingdom, for it is ‘there he takes up the thread of time once 
more.” . . ‘ \ 


ee , a 

* Although Liddell and Scott, as high authorities, demur to the 6 oft id 
. at the beginning of the word having anything to ‘do with the article 
” and for a: very satisfactory reasom, that. “the word’ is Homeric, 
and therefore prior to the usage of the article.” , They only ‘give . 
the meaning “ to- ays to’ which Dawson’s’ Lexicon adds, “this very 
" day.” 9 Rie a 

t Dr. Thomas’ feading i is perhaps the rraneeen and I mention it pale 
as a proof of the perplexity into which writers of this class thrown 
by, the passage. -“ ‘To-day’ is a Scripture term, and’ ¥ be ex- 
plained by the Scripture. use of it.” In the Sacred: Writings, then, the 
. term is: used to express a period of over 2,000 years. ‘This use of it 
occurs in David, as it is written, ‘ To-day, if’ ye will heat’ , His voice, 
harden not your hearts, lest’ ye enter not into my rest.’ The apostle, 
commenting.on this passage about 1,000 years after it was written, says, 
‘ Exhort one another while it-is called to-day.’ . Thus it was called. 
to-day when David wrote, and to-day when Paul commented on it. 
This to-day is however limited both to Jew and Gentile; and in defining 
this limitation Paul tells us, that to-day means ‘after so long @ time.’ 

. If then we substitute the apostle’s definition for the word « to-day’ 

in ‘Christ’s reply to the thief, it will read thus : < Verily'I say to“thee, | 
after so long a time thou shalt be with me in Haradize a AE lpis {srael, 


pp. 54, 55). ; 
But he is evidently afraid that will not answer, and so is careful to. 


150 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A.FUTURE STATE. . 


a es bent 


That is, “to-day” may mean two thousand years hente 


or so, if only you can get the “sleeper in death's arms ” to. 


sleep quietly enough to be unconscious of the interval ! 


Mr. Roberts agrees with the former of these two" asser- ° 
tions, that “to-day ” means “ this day "—the day of Christ’s 


coming. And he is one of @ class of writers who urge that 
Paradise is in the new earth, and therefore not yet in exis- 
tence, which of course would dispose of* the passage effec- 
tually as far as applies to any teaching concerning an inter- 


_ mediate state. Mr. Constable too a that we falsify the -- 
Scripture teaching as to Paradise. I shall therefore briefly 


state vhat it furnishes about it. = pao es 
“ Paradise ” is an Eastern word for a “ par ” ors Bleasure- 
grounds.” The Hebrew, pardes (D5) is only used, Neh. 


~ ii. 8; Eccl. ii. 5; Sol. Song iv. 18. It is there translated 
once! “forest,” ice “orchard.” It is not used for the gar- 


den of Eden in ‘Hebrew, but there it is the ordinary word, 
gan (23),' for “ garden.” The Septuagint translation, how- 


. éver, gives here zapades6os (paradise), which is uniformly 


the word ‘it uses for the Garden of Eden, or of God, except 


in one place where the usual word for garden (x05) is used. 


From thé Septuagint use of the word: the New ‘Testament 


_ use is doubtless derived. It'does not follow, however, that 
it will have exactly the same application. Rather, we shall - 

‘find, the Old Testament word becomes in it, as commonly 

. such words do, transfigured into a higher meaning. The 


Old Testament type becomes the New Testament antitype: 


the “ shadow of good things to come” emerges into the sub- — 
. Stantive reality. It is uséd but threé times:— | 


Luke xxiii. 48.—‘‘ To-day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.” 
2 Cor. xii. 4.--“ How that he'was caught up into Paradise.” 


Rev. ii. 7.—“ The tree of life which i is in the.midst of the Para- 


dise of God.” 


In the last of these passayes the mention of the treeof ; 


be Ones ech aye ~after—account-of_the 


give other interpretations of the passage, even sponeh contradictory of of . 
~ this. : 


SHHOL, HADES AND PARADISE. | .151 
i ‘ 


heavenly J erusalem; which is therefore at least not the new 
earth, however related to it’ it may: be. Nor. does this in’ 
the least deny the earthly promises produced by Roberts, 
Each have their place, but those he quotes. are distinctly 
‘those belonging to Israel nationally, as the apostle of the 
Gentiles tells us (Rom. ix. 3). Our blessings are “im heav-: 
erty places in Christ Jess” (Eph. i. 3);'and of these the 
earthly ones are but the shadow. Mr. Robérts calls this 

an. unproyed assertion. It is, however, as definitely certain 
as can pe, and without understanding it there can be no 
proper understanding of the promises at all. “We geil de- - 
vote a chapter to this point. hereafter, and therefore may 
leaye“it now., core 

The second passage ‘speaks. of naradilee as, s existing now, 
for Paul was caught away into‘it,—I have no wish to retain i 
the up ” if Mr. Roberts objects,—and whether in the body 
or ott of tt he could not tell, even at:the time he wrote. 
Manifestly, if he supposed he could be caught away bodily 
into it, he supposed | it to be an existing place, and the plea 
that it was a vision will not answer. ' The “ visions ”’ doubt- . 

_ less refer to what he saw there. 

To this Roberts answersthat Paul Ment have supposed * 
Paradise “made actually existent for the occasion of his in- ~ 
spection.” The restored earth actually existent for Paul to’ 
sec! It is a trite remark that faith is never: 80 eredulons as. 
unbelief. : 

Mr. Constable insists that this Paradise could be* no part 

of hades, and that people are forced thus to suppose that 
there are two Parddises! [agree with him that it-is one and 
the same Paradise throughout, And the: difficulty: which. 
_* he supposes is only the fruit of people studying rabbinical 
theology more than Reriptize. Hades, as is acknowledged, 
is but‘the “ unseen,” and never defines precise ‘locality. It’ 
is the attempt to make it definite which has contiused peo- ' 
ple’ S minds, that is all. es : 

But hades is,in the “ heart of the earth, ” says Mr. Consta- 

ble.’ How.does he know? Why, the earth swallowed, up 


Pie 


152 =FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Korah and his company, and they “ went down alive into 
sheol.” That: is his proof. May we not equally say that 
hades is the belly-of a whale, because Jonah says that he 
cried “ out of the belly of sheol”’? .Thus it is not so easy 
perhaps to decide the question of locality. The necessarily 
vague thought of the “unseen” refuses such limitation. 

. True, its imagery was naturally borrowed, before the fuller 
revelation had been given, from that grave with which it 
necessarily was associated in the mind, and thus you have it 
pictured as “ beneath,” souls going down to it or coming ce 
from it. There is moreover a real truth in this conception, 
in its being.a descent from man’s position, a degradation from 
his natural place on earth. The New Testament removes _ 
for the saint the veil of the unseen. He departs to be with 
Christ, and Christ is not in the heart of the earth. The very 
‘name of hades for the‘believer almost disappears, and thus 
it is most beautifully at the Cross of Christ that the veil 
begins to lift decidedly: “ With me in Paradise ” may well 
be in contrast with Old Testament utterances. Alas, 
that men should refuse the consolation, the brightness of 
the new zeveaony and seek to retain the darkness, for faith 
passed away. ss 

In a kindred way is to be explained the saying of the 

Lord after His resurrection, that He was “ not yet ascended 
to His Father.” Mr. Constable with others holds that that 
is incongistent with the thought.of His having been in Para- 
dise in the intermediate state. But “ascension” is another 
thing from the departure of. the spirit to God. It is con- | 
nected with the victory over death, not the submission to 
it. David is not ascended, while his body remains in the 
grave. And for the Lord how easy to.see the unspeakable 
difference! The departure of the spirit was the witness all 
had been stooped to, death in its full reality’ undergone ; 
ascension was the witness of that work accepted, and man 
as man brought into tne new place with God. 


i 
| tie 
| 6 
aii 
ai ie 
iat i 
aid 
| ie 
eit 


» into 
y that 
at he 
) easy 
sarily 
ation. 
fuller 
ich it’ 
ave it 
ng y— 
ption, 
: from 
noves _ 
> with 
B very 
l thus 
e veil 
y well 
Alas, 
288 of 
r faith 


of the 
ended 
tt that 
Para- | 
nother 
3 con- | 
ion to 
in the 
akable 
ess all 
‘gone ; 
1 man 


g . « 
THE AUTHORITY AND USE OF SCRIPTURE. 153 


~ 


S 


PART III.—THE ETERNAL ISSUES. 


CHAPTER XV. 


THE AUTHORITY AND USE OF SCRIPTURE. : 


' HITHERTO we have been considering the arguments of 
only a section, although a large and important section, of 
those whose views we are examining. We are now to look 
at the final issues of life or death eternal. And here there 
are two classes of objectors to the common views: those 
commonly called “annihilationists” on the one side, but who 


_ prefer for their views the designation of “ conditional immor- 
tality”; and those who on the other side advocate the doc- 


trine of the possible or actual salvation of all men, after 
whatever ages it may be of purificatory suffering. oe 
Of necessity our examination of these opposing statements 


will lead _us in very different directions: they unite only in 


maintaining the doctrine to which is generally given the 
Scripture title of the “ restitution of all things,” and in cer- 


tain ethical arguments against the ordinary views. The - 


stronghold of the first class of writers they believe to be — 


in the texts which speak of immortality, and of eternal life 


#s the portion of the saved, and of death and destruction in 
various forms of, expression as that of the wsaved. The 
stronghold of thThter, so far as they take Scripture as their 
gfund of argument, is found, as they believe, in the texts 
which speak of the reconciliation of all things, and in the ex- 
pressions for “eternal.” being not really equivalent to “ ever. 
lasting.” . As, however, we desire to take up not merely the 


arguments of those who differ from us, but to show the 
Scriptural view from Scripture itself, and as the full bearing 
of its statements needs to be considered, and not-mere 


io4 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


selected and isolated texts, the consideration of these will 
" tecessarily render it the only satisfactory course to meet the 


various arguments from whatever source as incidental to the’ 


examination of the Scripture’ doctrine itself This only I 
P y 


believe will suffice him for whom Scripture has its due place . 


and authority, as what alone can decide in a matter of this 


kind. The truth will thus be continually before us, and our 


souls. be kept in the presence of Him who- has given it, 


rather than in the presence of human thoughts and question- _ 


ings, which can be but this after all. 
’ I downot shrink from the ethical inquiry. But for this we 
must have first of all the distinct statement of the doctrine 


before us, and then also Scripture itself must test the ethics 


as all else. 


‘It will be worth while then in the first place to consider 
the authority of Scripture in this subject of so immense im- | 
portance to us, and which involves not only our views of the’ 


eternal destiny of men, but of the character of God Himself. 
And the question of its authority embraces another, of what 
is authoritative : is it the text, the “ letter” of the word, if 
you will, or is it what some call the “Scriptures of God in 
their broad outlines” in contrast to this’ To which of 
these is the appeal to be? Are we after all only likely more 


to lose our way by any minute examination’ of the words of - 


Revelation? Is the danger in too close a scrutiny or too 
little ? Sn 


Fcr it has been asserted by a recent, but very well-known 


_ writer* that, because “we are in the dispensation of the 
Holy Spirit "—“ our guide is. the Scriptures of God in their 
broad outlines; the revelation of God in its ‘glorious. uni- 
‘ ty;—the books of God in their eternal simplicity, read by 
the illumination of that Spirit of Christ which dwelleth in 


us, except we be reprobates. Our guide is not, and never ° 
é gu ’ 


shall be, what the Scriptures call ‘the letter that killeth -’— 


’ the tyrannous realism of ambiguous metaphors, the asserted 
infallibility of isolated words.” It is true he tells us he is 


| neg deg —- 


_ .™ Canon Farrar: Sefmons on “ Eternal Hope,” Serm. 8._ ae 


THE AUTHORITY AND USE OF SCRIPTURE. 155 


“quite content that texts should decide” this question; but 
then it is only “ if, except as an anachronism, we méan noth- 
ing when we say, ‘I believe in the Holy Ghost’ ; if we 
prefer our sleepy shibbele! elethsjgnd dead traditions to the liv- 
ing promise ‘I will af fait in ‘@bem and walk in them,’” so 
that’ at that rate we Stall gbyoult them at manifest singh 


we 


advantage, and with litt Meh c ads should seem of any sati 
factory result. a 

_ There is some little difficulty in meeting objections which’ 
from their nature tend to deprive us of a bibs! au- 

thority by which’ alone we can decide them. For if we 
‘should remind Canon Farrar that the apostle tells us that 

the things he spoke were not in “the words which man’s 

wisdom teacheth, but. which the Holy Ghost teacheth,” and. 
that it seems strange to make the Holy Ghost to be in 

conflict with His. own “words,”—he might answer us that 

we were doing now the very thing he objected to, and set- 
tling the matter by an appeal to isolated‘ texts.” 


The only encouragement. to such an ae seems to be in 
f 


this, that he himself so appeals. He hi believes in the 
promise, “TI ‘will dwell in them, and walk in them,” and - 
cannot include this among the “sleepy sltibboleths and dead — 
traditions” of which he “speaks. Moreover he believes at . 
least that “the -letter killeth.” Therefore, it should seem 
_ that we might examine his own proof texts, and see how 
far, if indeed he base it upon these, they justify his position. 
Now it is the same apostle who. vouches for his very 
“words” being taught him by the Holy. Ghost, who tells'us 
that “the letter kill¢th” ; and if we would not have.that in 
the worst sense an jsolated text, a phrase wrenched from its —_ 
context and applied hap-hazard as we: please, we ‘must. 
inquire a little what its context is.. We shall find the words — 
then in his second epistle to the church at Corinth (iii. 6); 
and with the veyse preceding it runs thus :— 
* Not that wé are sufficient-of ourselves to thinleanythiag : 
as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God, who also hath ” 
male us able ministers of the New Testament ; ; not of the 


t 


as 
see: 
f. 


156 “ FACTS:AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


letter, but of the spirit; or the letter killeth, but the spirit — - 
giveth life.” ian 

' If we look back to\the verses going before, we shall find 
that he hay been contrasting the writing on “ tables of stone” 
with the writing of the Spirit of the living’ God “in fleshy 
tables of tlie heart.” If we go on to the verses following, 
we shall find him speaking of the former as “the ministra-# 
tion of death, written and engraven in stones,” given to the 
children of Israel by Moses, and of the latter again, in con- 
trast, as “the ministration of \the Spirit.” And in the next 
verse again he styles the one“ the ministration of condemna-- 

‘tion the other “the ministratton of righteousness.’’ We 
need not follow him further. , : ae 

Upon the face of this then, the ‘apostle in “the letter” 

that “ illeth” is speaking of the “ministration of death,” 
and that as what was written upon the “tables of stone,” 
the lawn and nothing else. It is this that he.is contrasting 
with the “new testament,” or gospel, as “the ministration 
of rightcousness” and life by the Spirit. The law, the 
letter, killed: was designed by its manifestation of what 
God required from man to give him the sentence of death in 
himself. “When the commandment came,” says the apostle, 
speaking of its proved effect, “sin revived, and I died” 
(Rom. vii. 9). The gospel on the other hand « ministered 
righteousness "—provided, not. required it, and so was life 
to souls, not death. In the one “the letter” of a mere ° 

commandment “killed.” In the ‘other the power of the 
Spirit wrought, giving life. _ Paul was a minister of the 
“New Testament,” not the Old, “not of letter, but of 

~ Spirit.” oe 

But then, I fear me, Canon Farrar cannot be acquitted 

of the grossest violation of liis own precept. He ig in real- 
ity using “isolated words,” words isolated from the con- 
text and applied to establish principles with which they have 
not the remotest connection. He uses them to putin oppo- ° 

_ Sition the words which the Holy Ghost taught and the Holy 


Ghost who taught them; and to substitute for adherence to — 


“GUE AUTHORITY AND USE OF SORIPTURE. 157 . 


spirit e the inspired text a sort of mystic, living raidance) which Tea, 
nounces the Scriptures as having any mere verbal accuracy - 
1 find " to be adhered’ to—* the asserted infallibility of isolated « 
tone” _ words”—and replaces this with “the Scriptgres of God in 
fleshy their broad outlines,”.not to be too narrowly, defined ; “‘ the 
wing, revelation of God in its glorious unity,” untroubled by the 
istra-# discordance of “isolated texts” ; practically; anything that 


0 the : we may please to call the teaching. of the Spirit and the 
1 con- word, not to be critically tested even by. that werd by 
whioh the Spirit teaches. 

On the other hand, we have been taught that “ « hereby 
know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error,” not: by 
any assurance of our own hearts, as having the fulfilment of 
the promise, ‘“‘I will dwell in them and walk in them,”— 
true and blessed as that promise is,—but as “ hearing” or 

°“ not hearing ” the men inspired of God to give us Scripture 
(1 John, iv. 6). We have learnt by ‘the conduct of the 
Bereans to “search the Scriptures daily” whether ‘thege | 
things are so. And from the apostle of the Gentiles that 
the “very words” he. gives us, isolated or not, are words 
taught of the Holy Ghost Himself. 

Canon Farrar does indeed allow us to “decide by texts 
alone,” but it is only if we prefer “ sleepy shibboleths and 
dead traditions” to the living guidance "i Spirit Him- 
self. Is the word of God a “dead t®@@ition”? I will . 
gladly believe rather that he cannot mean this. But then 
his words do wrong to his, meaning, and’ we have no guide 
.to the latter. I quote from. the appendix to his book an- 
other statement of his views, possibly more calm and delib- 
erate ‘than that from the sermon in the body of it: 

“‘T care but little in any controversy for the stress laid upon 
one or two isolated and dubious texts out of the sacred literature 
of fifteen hundred years. They may be torn from their context ; 
they may be distorted ; they may be misinterpreted ; they may 
be irrelevant ; they may be misunderstood ; they may—as the 
prophets, and the apostles, and our blessed Lord Himself dis- ., 
tinctly intimated—they may reflect the ignorance of a dark age, or 


lf 
‘| 
| fi 
| ti 
if 
at i 


. perience, which proved to the Jews of Jeremiale 


158 pacts AND, THEORIES AS To A FUTURE CATR. 
the fragment of a imperfect revelation :. they may be a bare con- 


cession to imperfection or a low stepping-stone to, progress. ‘What 


__ the Bible teaches as a whole ; what the «Bibles. also teach as a 
whole—for History and Conscience, and Nature and ‘Experience, 
_these too are sacred books, that, and. that only, is the immutable - 


law of God.” 


the “infallibility of isolated words.” , For him there are 
many Bibles, all fallible alike, and he himself is of these 


fallible Bibles the only apparently infallible interpreter. His- | 
tory is such a Bible, written where and how, out of all the. 

contradictory tomes to which every day is giving fresh - 
birth, he does not gay. Conscience is another, though it — 


¢ : 


teach'men.to bow down to stocks or stones, or snakes and 


crocodiles ; conscience, which made Saul. kill Gott ; 
do Him service. .Vature is still another, with, pw chance, 


+ . 


a Huxley or a Darwin as its chronicler, and expounder. Zix- 
ra a 


while they burnt incense to the queen of heaven, - 


' plenty of victuals, and were well,” and saw no 


these are Bibles, upon whose imperfect and contradictory 
utterarices the mind of man is to sit in judgment—to decide 
what it can receive and what reject; and the blessed word 
of God is to take its. place among these, and man is to say 
which of its utterances is the “reflection of the ignorance 


of a dark age,” and which “a bare concession to imperfec- | 


tion,” and which “a low stepping-stone to progress.” 
We may thank Dr. Farrar for his candor. It is certainly 


-well to know what Scripture is for him, and how far 


“texts” are likely to decige the matter in question. Where 
he finds that prophets and apostles, ray, the Lord Him- 
self, sanction his view of thé matter, it would be hard to 
say. There is certainly abundance of proof of-the very 
opposite, and ,in the mouth#of oné who professes such un- 
bounded confidence in the “illumination, of the Spirit of 
Christ,” it seems a strange assertion that“thus the Spirit of 
truth must have taught error, or, at léast have used such 


it is very plain what Dr. Farrar. means by refusing 


light 


~~. feebl 
+. Hec 
- refus 
~. Serip 
- spira 
-~ fore 
of G 
: work 


revel 
not f 


Serip 


~ ignot 
" gures 


doct 
Dr 
meta 


’ ig an 


ever) 
in th 


ambi 


inatic 
large 
this 

79 Suj 
agree 
urati 


‘THE ‘AUTHORITY AND ‘USE OF SCRIPTURE. * 159 — 


: feeble ‘and imperfect means of communieating. truth, that 
_ He could not prevent its being mixed up with error. We 
. refuse this teaching altogether. We on the authority of 
-. Scripture itself believe that ‘ al/ Scripture is given by in- 
- spiration of God, and is, profitable. for dogtrine, for reproof,. 
_ for correction, for instruétion in righteousness, that the man 
_ of God may. be perfect throughly furnished unto all good 
- works.”.(2 Tim. iii. 16,17), We believe in a-really divine. . 
revelation given to us by One who cannot lie, and who does 
not for bread give us a stone, nor put datkness for light, or 
_ light’ fot darkness. We would obediently “search ” these . 
. Scriptures, conscioussitdeed of our own weakness and 
: ignorance in doing. 50, but sincerely: trusting Him, who as- 
" gures us that, “ he that wi] do God's will shall know of the : 
doctrine whether it be o God: » (John vii. 17). 
Dr. Farrar speaks of “the-tyrannous realism of ambiguous ; 
metaphors,” of course, the metaphors of Scripture. ‘And it 
is an objection which we have met before, and shalltmeet at: 
every ‘step as we now proceed, thgt ‘the texts that are used 
in this controversy are largely of ‘thig‘ nature. Now the 
ambiguity of the metaphors can only be tested by the exam- 
ination of: the passages in. questioft : the fact. of their being _ 
largely metaphorical ai ailmits of‘no' dou ot. Mr. Minton puts * 
this triumpHantly in’ his published" «Way Everlasting.” 
“Suppose,” says he to the person he is: addressing, “we, 
agreed to wave everything on either sid, of a purely fig- 
urative character, - whether parables, metaphors or visions, 
together With ] passages admitted to be of; ;doubtful meaning 
on. other ground than that connected with the issue between 
us, and to abide by the plain prose statements that: form the 
staple of Scripture testim@ny on ,the subject—where would 
you be? Simply nowhere. You would be out of court.” 
Mr. Minton’s triumph is hardly so well assured; yet & 
doubtless he has some apparent reason for what: he says. 
‘The pictorial representations, if I,may so say, of the eternal 
state are those naturally in which we find the most vivid 
images of eternal judgment; and these are preciself the pas, 
ve 


: Oo |. 


160 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. no 


sages which he and such as he have most difficulty in récon- 
ciling with their various theories. - The book of Revelation . 
especially, the prophetic panorama of things to come, gives 
them especial trouble. The eternal torment spoken of there_ 
Mr. Minton candidly confesses his inability to explain in.any 
way quite satisfactory to ‘his own'mind.* But the “highly 
figurative” character of these visions is the constant plea, 
and they can refuse upon this ground what: they cannot ex- 
plain. To maintain the authority of texts fike these, is just 
to assert that © tyrannous realism of ambiguous metaphors” 
" against which Canon Farrar utters his protest. Yet the 
‘book has, as few have, its inspired title, and that title is {‘ the 
Revelation of Jesus Christ.” It is as if the complaints of 
obscurity and ambiguity had already reached thes Divine 
ears from out the unborn future, and Hehad: provided for 
. them with the assurance of its being a revelation, a true un- 
folding of “things to come to pass.” I would ask them to 
mark this, that it is here they find their greatest difficulty, 
in what Christ calls /Zis “ Revelation."t 2: - 
athe figurative character is confessed, but it is only what 
is found wherever eternal things are pictured to us. There- 
~ geems no other way of their being set before’us indeed, than 
by figures taken from the things around; and we may be 
sure that He who speaks to us in them. has taken not the 
most obscure and doubtful way to show them to us.. “We 
see through a glass, darkly,” says: the apostle. The last 
phrase is literally “in an enigma” (1 Cor. xiii, 12, Uli.) 
Thus it is the Scripture way to use. enigmas to ‘describe 
what otherwise it may well be impossible for a man to utter 
(2 Cor. xii. 4). : | Pe ss 
Yet though it was of old the complaint as to the prophets . 
that they “ spake parables” / Ezek. xx. 49), it is nevertheless 
* Way Everlasting, 4th ed..p. 60. , ee 
+ For Mr. Dobney these are the “hieroglyphs of Patmds.” Mr. Cox 
would exclude from: the decision of this question not only ‘ Revela- 


tion, but the parabipsofthe-Lord,and all the Old Testament (Salvar 
tor Mundi, ch. ii.). pan era 


é 


. 


re - . i ‘ Ss Sa 4 
e- ’ 


. THE AUTHORITY AND -Ust’ oF SQRIPTURE. | 161° 


« 


" - expected of disciples at least, that: they should understand 
*% them. “Know ye not this parable?” asked the Lord once 
"of the twelve, “and -how then will -ye know all patties Vat 

(Mark iv. 13). Surely our shame it is to be akin to those. ¢ 

who seeing do net perceive, and hearing do not wadorstandl 

The Lord: does not trifle with us, does not itivite us to see 

what He forbids us to understand.* - And ‘there we. must 

pause for the present. ‘The visions themselves will come. > 
+. before ‘us’ at another time, “es a 


~ 


sh tet mig 


“* As to thé doubtfulnesg of the interpretation of the parables, Mr. 

Cox asks of Matt. xiii. 83, and Luke xv. 4: « Would it not be quite easy 
‘Lo interpret these weighty and emphatic phrases as signifying that the 
whole: mass of mankind is.t® be leavened and quickened by. the: truth. 
of Cheibiganil that the great Bishop of our souls will never cease from 
his quest-of any poor lost sinner until he fiid him and restore him to 
the fold?” No doubt ‘it is « easy,” if we assume the meaning of “‘kym-— 

_ bols as we please, and this has been largely done; but the‘ three meas- 
ures of.. meal ”’ refer to the meat-offefing with which no Teaven was to 
beantxed (Lev. fi, 11), and camiot mean “ the whole mass of mankind,® 
any more than the “ leaven * can evet be interpreted as good according - 

_ to Scripture usage (Comp. Matt. xvi. 6, 11, 12; Magk viii. 15 ; 1 Cor. 
“6-8; Gal.v.9). 8 8 aoe Semen ame 

_ Agaigp the “los sheep is. the “sinner that repenteth;” and Christ 
does find all such. As to the prodigal figuring the return of a soul from 
hell (the far country), it igvanworthy trifling, which ‘stampé the charac- 
ter of the man who uses itagPhink of a‘sinher-gding away fror - God 
to enjoy:himself in hell ! rs _ ee 


80 rae eo ae 


} Pe ir, our ex xumination i 
Dae Va, 
ae at the’: “mez Unig cid 


: sat rook at’ “thie Sire uth ‘ 
wu ‘gr cas _tnaty” “be. needed to connect; and 2 apply the 
+ tanious pastiges ; next, we shall try and fill in “thig! scheme 


SS 


} the passages which bear upon the successive vents s 
i ’ 

ichtit. ‘mar ks out sand finally, give some attention to the' 

tal questions. i ERB el eats eee 


Ve shall bégin with tyadrtaliiy and * elernal: lite; two. . 
. questions, Which for annihipitionists are only one; ; and, how- 
“ Paver, discordant up to this” tinte, may have been their state- 
~ ‘atest we’: shall find ony in’ Almost perfect‘ agreement - 


iv 


3 a ‘Mr Mortis: am Aisi s 
= ale “The Son of God,came to give life, evenseternal ‘Vite’; > and if it 
Hy Nps “lie asked}, “Who will live forever ?’ othe angwer of ther PT 
te Giver of lifes Who is also the Braad of life, i is in these wal 
CW, bs, _'° that ‘eateth. of this bread shall live foréver.’”” And# 
ey ey ; itreyerent and evil forg man to say, that i in el . 

a oe the ae of God thew life ’ does not mean lif mthat the .~ 

' words ‘eternal life’ t. mean “eternal life, an@ee ne words : 

» ‘shall live forever do. not mean shall live forevé Malyet,in  ** 
1. °°” their ecMipsiasticul teaching, certain men ‘are hut 3 
ob kind of irreverence and evil by.reason of thei havg 
the falserdoctrine of the innate and essential inkinorta ror S 
earthly ’ race.”*. . a tee 


i . an 


And at the ee) end of aynihilationism, the follower of. « 
° “Dr. ures Mr. Roberts of Birmingham, “i 
es 


& am Sea ee =-- ie ek Ap aee, SPs ane STS 


a a * “What is Man?” p. 43 


° ‘ 6 


CO BR & Ww OO RB Ow SS 


ae 
: ths 


a 


ry 


a IMMORTALITY : IS If CONDITIONAL? _ 163 


rious passages which speak of eternal life, writes (Twelve 


. , Lectures, p. 82): . ° 


“Now, if immortality be the natural attribute of every son of 
Adam from the very moment he breathes,-what can be the mean- 
ing of testimonies like these, which, one and all, speak of immor- 
tality as a future contingency, a thing to be sought for, a reward, 
a thing to be given, a thing brought to light through the gospel 
ete.? There isan utter incongruity in such language, if immortal- 
ity bea natural and present possession. How can you promise a 
man that which is already his own? The divine promise is, 
that God will award eternal life to those who seek for glory, honor 
and immortality ; and this is the strongest proof that human na- 
ture is utterly destitute of it at present.” 


Immortality and eternal life are “here confounded. And 
it does not make it better that Mr: Roberts quotes apparent 
Scripture to justify the confusion. He may shelter himself 
under the fact that he is not alone in it.* He is not; but. 
that. will not make him less responsible for deception, even 


» « UNwittinglyspractised.t 


: bs ; aes AX, re 
co TRe adjective; im 


+ twice tranglated in our. 


The true Scriptural statement is this :— : 
In the New Testament the true word for immortality 
‘ (abaracia) occurs but. three times: 1 Cor. xv. 53, 54, “ this 
mortal must: put on #nmortality ;” “when. . . «this mortal - 


‘ ro) 
shall. haye puten Hwnortality ;” and once of God it is as- 
\ ali tg ite Mae 
sq@epev i 


% Tia that, He. ‘only hath immortality.” — 
fifo! al”’ does not, even occur. i 
Theres iy. indeed, nothgy Word, wphtharsiu (aX phapoia) 

Vv rsion* immtPtality,’” and that is 
the word Mr. Roberts with others has caught-at as showing 


‘man’s sceking it; but, its: propa, meaning is™ ingorruptten,” 


and so itis mostly translated. _l cite all the passages:— 


is han ae a 
~ Rom. ii. 7 :—“ glory, honor-and immortality, ; ~e te 
£1. 42 © it is rais@l i Rooreu BELO. BY Pa aw 
ae Bone Ge “4-5 2 oes 


RE bney? Hastings; Haim, ,Monerielf, Z. Campbell, Minton, 
¥ Constable, allagree with him. No doubt, others’ also. 


* He takes ‘no notice ‘of. it dven in his’ review of| my book, after its 
being’) lainly pointed out to, him. But this is ‘no'unaccustomed thing 
Mo Rg Ned : - | a 
i ; ad v i +4 5 , * ‘ ie 3 \ t be 


i 
‘ Pk She 


) 


164. FACTS AND THKORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


*10Cor. xv. 50 :-—‘‘ neither doth corruption inherit incorrmption,” 
53 :—‘* must put on incorruption.” 
54 :—“ shall have put on jncorruption.” 
Eph. vi. 24 :—“love our Lord Jesus,Christ in sincerity.” 


2 Tim. i. 10 :—‘‘brought life and immortality to light by the | 


gospel.” 


Tit. ii. 7 :—‘‘ incorruptness, gravity, sinc arity.” 

Its adjective, aphthartos (%qAapros) “ incorruptible,” 
used seven times, and applied to God (Rom. i. 23, 1 Tien i. 
17); the crown of the righteous (1 Cor. ix. 20)4 our ip- 
heritance (1 Pet. i. 4); ‘the word of God (1 Pet. i. 23); and 
once figuratively, “that which is ndt corruptible” (1 Pet. 
iii. 4). It is only once in’ our version (1 Tim. i,. 17) rendered 
“immortal,” but with no more reason than in “other places. 


Furthermore its opposite (pSapros) “ corruptible,” is six _ 


times found, and always 80 rendered: Rom. i. 2°: 1 Cor. ix. 
25; xv. 53, 54; 1 Pet. i. 18, 23. a 
The difference between ese words comes out in lL Cor. 


xv., in which they are all to -be found. Speaking of the’ 


dead body of the saint (ver. 42-50) the apostle uses the 


word “ corruptible ” and ‘‘ corruption.” ¢ was not mortal, | 


but dead. Then, speaking of the resurrection of those “ that 
are Christ’s at His coming ” (ver. 23), he brings in also the 
change of the living saints which would accompany it; “ We 


shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed; ” “the dead | 


shall be raised incorruptible, and we (the ivi ing) shall be 
changed; for this corruptible (applying to the dead Haints) 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal (applying + to: the 

living) must put on immortality.” | Meas 
Thus there is evident distinction in the use of thescSPords 
in Scripture; and when it is said (Rom. ii. 7) that God will 
render “to them who by patient continuance inwell-doing 
seek for glory and honor and incorruption, eternal life,” it 
is nat at all the: same as seeking for immortality, but the 
or—the 


&. 
—. 


“ chan ge ”? will put the saints at the coming of Christ. And 


ies only to the saints, as the whole, description in — 


the | 


” 


dency to death will in their case be of course removed. 


to! ad. bodies * raised.” In’ ea therefore, the word ‘ incor- 


. a 
' * : 
ud ad Se 


IMMORTALITY:: 1S IT CONDITIONAL ? » 165 
1 Cor. xv. 42-50 does. The wicked are not those of when 
itis said, ‘‘ It is sown jn corruption, it is raised in incorrup- 
tion; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised | in glory; it is sown 
in weakness, it is raised in power.” Such words are appli-. 


cable aloné to the bloom and beauty of the “ resurrection of 
di ife. ” 


“Quite true that the saints, alive but mortal when Christ, 
comes, will then get “immortality.” The liability and ten-- f 


But that word is the expression of a different fact from that 
which is pointed out in the case of. those who -ha re died. 
All will alike of course possess’ incorruption, p ing on 


-alike the image of the heavenly * but the fact iioticed: i“ 


the living is that they shall not sleep at. all, “ mortelit 

their case being “swallowed up of life.” | oages 
For of course mortality is our condition down here.. “ Tmi- ae 

mortality ” is noé “ our natural and present condition.” Im- 


oe 


-mortality is deathlessness, and. who among the people Mr. 


Roberts: is opposing asserts that we do not die? It isa 
poor quibble that. The soul does not die; nor the spirit; 
but man does surely. The: question is as to what, death is, 
not whether men are subject to it. Of course ‘R. 
it is cessation of existence, but then that is not what we - 


, mean by death: We mean the dust returning td the earth 


as it was, while the spirit returns to God who gave it. . 
Under the same word we gre in reality apeaking of different 
thiaki : 


2 


ral Goodwyn has indeed another application of the ese 


* . words in this chapter : es 


is ‘Ver. 50 ‘applies the word ‘ corruption’ to flesh and blood, the 
enfige natural man ; ver. 52 applies the/ word ‘incorruptible ’ - 


ruption ’ ev identlywapplies a 
mortality ’ to the soul, but o 
soul are reunited. “The apegl 


B body: and conbeqacntly im-- 


= of the children of God with’ 


ech seed, 
re, remains that the... ge 


says 4 he former are ‘born 
but orruptible.’ 


| 


‘ 


166 KAGrS AND THEOBIRS AS ‘10 A FUTURE STATE. 


latter are born of ‘ ‘corruptible ill. © spestle*Paul gives 
further force to this expression when he says, ‘We that are 


in thig fabernacle do groan,.being burdened, not that we would 
is lothed ’—uncovered with a body—"but clothed ‘pon, 


that ‘forrarrry might be swallowed up of urer.’ Here isa dis- . 


ti rtion that the personality—apart or not from the ri Sap 
inf Wort’ ” (2xGor. v. 4).’” 

'f boldness would carry the day the field were won. he 
it, is we areznot convinced. We dispute the fact of “flesh 
and blood” belig the “ entire ngtural man.”; we agree that 
“ incorruption ” everywhere applies to the body. eny 
the “consequence” that mortality or immortality refers to 


7 ee Te refers to the bodies-of the diving when Christ © 
0 


mes, as* corription and incorruption to the bodies of the 
dead. Let anyone epmpare 1 Thess. iv. 15-17; where. the 


same event i8| spoken \pf, or the dead in Christ, dnd 


“we” who are alive aqd remain are similarly contrasted. 
The “we shall hanged ” is @ontrasteéd in 1 Cor. xv. 52, 
' with the déad| beift& “raised incorruptible,” and so similarly 
in the next. verse, Pe corruptible”’ appli e& ‘to the dead, 
“ this mortal ? to iving : boll, ome ns to-the body, 
ibe ‘mortal eh’ z @ Cor. iv. 11). cal 
* Again, in the passage: from | paaft'as, the 4 ingoptible 
“hol "is. the “word of: Godyiiiich by the gospel is preached 
. unto you.” What, has that" d@ewith the physical consti- 
piston of. man ? And’ if wé_are born, asI have no wish to 
eny; of. “ corruptible seed,” how does. ‘that show that such 


“<j aterm applies to the physical constitution of the sou! or 


. spirit ? Nay, he has himself j just now applied “corruptible ” 


to'the condition of the body, and “ mortal ‘in contrast with 
this to the state of the soul. etihetRariianticn can bear the 


™. ~least. examination. ° 


The quotation from 2 Cor. v.'4 is, howd¥er, still more 


: recklessly misapplied. Where is. the ‘assertion that the. , 
personility, ‘apart from the body, is mortal”? It 13 Gen-. 


ee 


Qoodwyn’s own, not the’ apostle’s. He has distinctly stated: 
that he groaned, not to be unclothed, but clothed upon. . 


Gert e 


IMMORTALITY: IS 1T CONDITIONAL ? 167 


Now this is the very change of the living we have before been 
looking at. Paul, the living but mortal man, longed not to 
be unclothed—to be apart from the body—dJu, in opposi-— 
tion to that, to be clothed upon, that mortality, his present 


condition, might belfwallowed up of life. 


How could the “ personality,” apart from the. Koil. be ac-’ 
cording to Gen. Goodwyn, “mortal” any more? Would 
he call a dead body mortal? And for him, apart from the 
body, the soul is as strictly dead as is the body itself. 

Mr, Roberts makes. an effort to show that immortality and — 
imeortuption are interchangeable terms ;. and we will allow — 
him to state how in his own words: 


“ The first («0avacia) tells us that the life cf the age is death- 


_ ipss. Tp entering it we are’ told that this mortal shall put on 


iortality. By this we know the truth declared by Christ, that 
ney who are accounted worthy of the age. . . cannot die any, 


: more’ (Luke xx. 36). But how is it that life is thus made endless 


to thoso that were before but mortal? The second word 
(a plapoia) answers it : ‘This corruptible must put on incorrup- 
tion’ (1-Cor. xv. 53).’ Men are mortal—liable ath—because 
their natures are corruptible ; they decay. ke them in- 
corruptible, and endlessness of life is the necaiigéigy’ consequence. 

Hence to seek for incorruption is equivalent to seeking for death- 


~gssness or immortality.” 


Sy 


™ Mr. Roberts’ physiological knowledge is as defective as - 
hi knowledge of Scripture. I have already pointed out 
that his theory of life being the result of organization is the 
very. reverse at least of what the acutest physiologists of the 
day assert. Prof. Huxley, well known to be ag stout a ma- 
terialist as he is undeniably an unbeliever, admits over and 
over again that life is the cause of organization, and. not 
organization the cause of life. (Introd. to Classification of 
Animals). I have before quoted from:another of the same 
school. It is almost the universally accepted doctrine now. 


Geter ae 


Mr.-R.’s present-assertion-is but the logical outgrowth of 


t=) 
his former one. If life be the result of organization, doubt- 


less taaitortality_ wi will be that of ingen RON, But as the 


A 


168 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


former statement needs to be reversed, so will ‘the latter 
require to be. Incorruption will be based rather upon im- 
mortality, but even so is not (as it would appear) its necessary - 
esult. We must bear in mind that we are speaking ‘Here 
of what is almost outside: the sphere of mere human know- 
ledge, and where a verse or two of Seripture is al the 
Biblical material to draw from either. But all that we do 
know /is against the view Mr.-Roberts advocates. 

That * immortality ” as a term is applied in Se ripture only 
to the righteous is not of striking force when we remember 
that t 4 is only applied to them in two consecutive verses 
(1 Cor. xv. 53, 54),,one of which is but, really the repetition | 
of the other. a 

But, say these writers (qnoting 4 1 Tim. vi. 16), ° God ony 
hath immortality.” What then? Why, it is argued, “the 
‘ soul can’t have it.” Let them go a little further, and the 
result will be apparent. The angels’ then cannot either, 
Does death then reign throughout the ranks of created, sin- 
less beings ? That will not: of course be contended for; 
but it. is. involved necessarily in the argument; and must 
follow, or the argument be given up. No, says Mr. Roberts, 
for the angels “ce God to us, for they are of His nature, 
and come otily. on, His. errands * “they are of the divine 
nature ; they are ‘spirit.’ And so is man's spirit “spirit,” 
and we have seen that, if angels be “sons of God” on that 
account, just, so are men also “ lis offspring.” “Whatever 
therefore this proves as to angels, it proves also for the spirit | 
of man. That the angels represent God to us, as coming oh 
His errands, proves nothing nor disproves. : 


The Scripture sense of the passage does. indeed make it 


apply ‘to angels, and to all created ‘beings. It. is the essen- 
tial difference between the Creator and all Ilis works, that He 
alone by Himself subsists. “ By im,” on the other hand, » 
“all things Bpbslnee «Te upholdeth all things by the word 


of His power.” Thus we by no means maintain what’Mr. 
Morris calls, and - : “the false doctrine of the 
innate and essential im 


, > : : . oy es 
rtality of the carthly race.” So- 


'. ETERNAL LIFE; WHAT IS IT?) | 169 


tter a far from that. we contend that the- race is mortal, and that 
im- __ dmmortality innate and essential belongs to no creature, 

sury ~~ 3 fallen or unfallen. It. is the assurance of this.that this pas- 

here : sage in Timothy gives. In that sense, as possessing it in 

1OW- Himseff, God alone hath it, and in Him “ we live, and: move, 
the on and have our being.” “ By Him all things subsist.” 

» do But this no more proves that the soul dies, than that 


angels die. Dependent, derived immortality it may have 


Witt chi ew 


only equally with them, and in ¢hat sense its, immortality is F 
aber affirmed ; for they that kill the body cannot kill the soul. os 
rses Eternal life, which they confound | with’ , immortality, i is | 
ition - a wholly different thing; and this we shall now proceed to 

show. 
ON J x pies Sees oS a 
‘the : . 
the : a Nee 
ther, oe ; CHAPTER XVI. ee 
sin- : 
for: 4 oe ETERNAL LIFES WHAT 18 ? | 
net Ir will be ramembeted that the word used in the New : AN 
ah 2 \ f Testament for the life-that the righteous enter upon as their te fe 
hati i eternal condition i is always: the same word. It is not panache aa 
es a oa but zoe... * ” 
ne | ~~ Tt ought nog fh bgAreedful to insist upon this again. | Gen: 
ae feo Gbodwyn, as We Mive.seen, fully admits. it, and tries tomake - 
Se | "capital of it in his own peculiar way. As however Mr. 
pirit, Roberts -has made, in his review of. my former book, one. 
gan eh ee. inal effort. to overthrow this ‘position, we shall age listen, a, 
eae to his own words about it. He says :— ee Shy) eee a 
= : * Just as we speak of the presdit life. under different» words, a aD Ace 
eae ae .. such as life, existence, being, so: the future> life. is variously © 
¢Het *Mesignate “according to the relation i in which it is considered. It” 
and, + = is either bvyr,, soul (Matt. .xvi- 25) ; San, life (Mark x. 80) ; or a x 
vord. 0. _Heeis,ewe, [! 1].(1 Thess, iv. 17), as the line of thonght dems nds-; 
Mr : “bat the. hope. in-all-cases is absolutely one and the. same. : “The 
‘the 5 saving of: the uy (Heb. x. 39), is the obtaining of eternal se. 


So: = ; Oat: xix, 29), chy the “us"of Panl’s ‘Psecdine: “Os Cor iv. Ha). 


8 Perry 


eo 


ok “9 


0 ravrs AND THFURIES .‘s ‘Lo A FUTURE STATE. 


1 feel ‘as’ if apology were. due to my readers for quoting 
fais or: answering. Still as I suppose it seems satisfactory 4 a 
fo: himsclf, there may be others also whe need the answer. ee ee “ 
- “{t may be'a short one, when the “ we’ ’ who obtaiti eternal ae 
/ ° Sife are stated to be the life that‘ we” obtain. But ateast, ; 
you may say, “ the saving of the uv:vz1 is the obtaining of eter- 
val $7,” is it not ? I should suppose that proved that they 
were- different. For certainly it¢would not consist with 
‘cripture to speak of “the saving: of. the ¢é7'” or of. the 
“obtaining cf eternal duz7.” . In Scripture phrase, a saved. La ue 
_anan « keeps his. psuche unto everlgsting ze," and these ae | 
“things -are“ néver confounded or reversed. Eternal Mie cis es ene 
1” ;" 
never psuche. Mr. Roberts would gladly. produc thie pas- ae a 
rage to prove it, if it could bé found. . ~ ay * rae | 
mae: Let it be remembered: then that we are speaking of tlie’ Jae emi es 
* one word zoe. whén we inquire into the meaning of. Severe 6" Ps 
% lasting life.” me ; poem ae ae: eae is 
Ping “And first, what then is “life” ¢ What do we ordinarily © je. 
mean ‘by it* Mr. Constable raises the same question, and 
answers it: and he now shall tell w hat he believes it means 
He says (Duration and Nat: of Fut. Punishment) : — ). ene ae 
~ “Tf we were only is ask what was its primary sense, we Moni “a 
a have no difficulty, All allow existence to be its primary “‘significa- ee 
tion, We will hereafter show that the primary s sense of this term os 
= ‘ is the, only one admissible ; ‘but here wé will not furthe y insist = 
- onit, We will here only ask if there was on? “universal sense at- 
tached to this terni ; so that while there might be toa greater or é 64 
#0 Vesa extent a caricty of senses attached to it in one place ar. Oe ee. 
‘another, still as accepted by all mankind speaking the Grecian *@ +f j 
sm _ tongue had. only one sense which was every Where accepted ae 
sos > tee sense, and by some accepted as the, only sense, 
_ Here, too, we are able to come to a certain co nely sion, oe Ph aa 
| sense of ‘existence,’ W hich is hdoubtedly the pling APIISey. a 
° as undoubtedly u sense accepted. by every Grek alter as P : 
ieee true sense; and by very many Grecian, speaker pted asi its + bed 


i. 


‘ . only sense. Our opponents themsely es cannot an ) not attempt’, 
= todeny.this. > ‘The unenlightened heathen,’ sax } Matt on, : mules . 6 
stood the terms life and death as eae pune ia aristenve’ or. nous te ae ba 
___ existence.’ ” ; OK: ; ee ae Be r ee & 
~ 17 2 * 


“aR 


us 


%, 


_ ETERNAL LIFE: _ WHAT. 18. i? a 11. 


inate ; : oe Mr. Constable argues herettee that so it mast have | - = 
story . been understood, and-meant to be understood, by the & 
wer. to'whom the gospel was addressed, or if “tft, the different 
ermal te  gense attached to it would have secre to: be explained to. | 
east. He them; and.) ak tee tes - 
ee : “ of such’ explanation we do not. ‘find a pace . Where’ wo » do’ « is 

a find an inspired. writer defining the meaning of ‘life he defines &>; 
with y . be SS eae exactly as 2. heathen would'do ;- ‘What is your. life ? ?’ saith the 
; the v4 Acree © ‘apostle. James. ‘It is even,’ he replfes, ‘ i vapor, that appeareth | ie 
aved f.06. ds for’ a: little time, and then vanisheth away.’ Life, with St. im a, , oy 
hese “i 0 > ‘himself a°Jew, meant. ‘pnt what it meant with a Siena exist- 2 wong 
fects eB ence pede 
pas- ao eas Mr. : Constable is one es beyond. most: of his ‘Bhool, fom e 

: e ae oe claims for himself critical and precise accuracy, and he chal- ae 
sthis’ ae. lenges answer to his arguments. /1 have therefore so often’ . 
SLi mere oe | chosen him’ as thé exponent of the views of his own’class of 
) gg writers. But we have had already’ many a proot af his in-" 
arily . Nhe ae competency as a rgasoner. -It may be the result: of the ~ 
and..." i - unhappy system he'has taken up, which seems to cloud the 
eans intellect,‘as. it certainly enfeebles. spiritual perception. ‘Let ae 
, F us examine his statement however.» . - "ed 
ould And here in the first place, it.is a little disappoiriting ‘to ag 
ifica- _» turn to the table which he-gives us further on in his book, 
term” ~ of ot of the meanings of the Greek words which bear ‘upon this _. af 
anes nes Nate) question, and to look in vain for this universal meaning at- 
is ae : taghing orate ' : aw 
i i y+. His vocabulary.ijs from Liddell and Scott, allqwed tobe ~ tl 
ian 8 antithority. of the highest. order,” as he truly Says. . ane at [ 
pted + moreover, he says, he appends to the words.“ every meaning” rae 
pnse, . -- .. (the italics are his own) attached to them in the ordinary , | 
That - *..-* Greek language.” After giving it, he says, “we will thank eo ee 
sft. is - "our readers to look carefully at the forggoing’ table.” “We ° - 
ae ¢ the i nage done So, and find as, the result :— ee . 3 : 
ompt é, i ‘‘ Zan (zoe), L a living or property, 2. life as opposed to death. 
agers: Zaw (zao), 1.- fo. live (Spoken gf animal life) ; 2. to be in full | 
Logs life and stre ngth.”’ 

oP oO @ "Phis is certainly remarkable, Mr. Consisitte’s jirimacy,* 


a ; ‘ 
~ ® a 


172. FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


universal sense of zoe is not found in a table furnished by 


~ himself, and certified to contain “ every meaning attached to 


it in the ordinary Greek language.” 
. But this is not all. Nor can we acquit Mr. Constable of 


the gravest charge that can be brought against a contro- 


versial writer, a lending himself to deception of the, worst 


kind. The primary meaning he gives might indeed awaken | 


suspicion by its strange appearance. Xot anfy: is “life, as 
opposed to death,”. the secondary meaning, NOT the primary. 
in his: ‘own table; but that penoary meaning looks strangely: 


also; “ ‘a living onproperty.” es kind of property: ? and: 
‘why “living ” instead of.“ life ” 
I turn to Liddell and Scott ie explanation, and I find aS 


follows: — « wis 
tt Zoar), a diving, i. e., mesns of life, Beads: property ; 2. Att. 
lifes g p. to death.” : 


living, i. €.. MEANS OF life, goods, property ”: that is’, 


the primary meaping. Secondarily, and in the Aitic dialect. 
one of the FIVE dialects of. Greek, it means “life, asopposed 


ee 


to. death.” i 2 


How different is the whole statement ot the case tro ' 
that which he ‘has given us. And here Lain: arguing nothing ‘i 


myself; I am but giving his own authority. 
Where is “ existence” as the universal meaning oF Z0€ * 


It is not found as a meaning at all, even in his own vocabu- - 
lary! ? And even the meaning of //7/ as opposed to death is 


neither the’ primary meaning, nor the universal, but, only-i ‘in 
the Attic dialect, ‘one division, of the Greck tongue ont of 


five. To use no language unnecessarily harsh in the matter, © 


Mr. Constable has mis- stated a very sMnple matter of fact. 
But it is the New Testament use of* the term with whiie A 


__ we are concerned, and we do. not purpose carrying the ex. 


amination further; For my own part, in the case of a com- 


mon New Testament word, I am coun that’ a Greek» 


concordance (that is, the examination of Te word itself as 


“it occurs int Scripture) is of more Value to the Bible student 


oo) 


L 


/ a Seas 


than the best dictionary that. ever was. The word zoe, 


1 by 
2d to 


le of 


vorst 
aken . 
fe, as | 
wry. 
igely: 
and: 


rd as 
Att. 
at ig’ 
leet. : 
osecd we 


tro : 
hing 
. 


LOe ” Va wy 
abu- - 
th is 
ly-in 
tof 
tter,: 
ct. 
Hii 
SOX: 
om 
reek* 
if as 
lent 
ZO’, 


FOS. * al 


+ 


o 


ETERNAL LIFE: WHAT I8 IT?’ c 


-occurs 134 times’in the New Testament. Tt is in one pl 


rendered “lifetime” (Luke xvi. 25); in every other case it 
is rendered, as it only could be rendéred, “life.” 

- And Mr. Constable may rajse the question, if he please, 
are not-existence and life-but the same thing? 1 an&wer, the’ 
question ‘Occupying so intently the minds of many in the 
present day, would have no meaning if it were so. We have 
already quoted Prof. Nicholson to the effect. tHfat “no rigid 
definition of Iffe appears to be at present possible.” I be- 
lieve from the Scripture point of view indeed something 
approaching a definition may be possible, but certainly not 


in the crude way which annihilationists press with the most 


extraordinary,confidence. ‘“ Eternal life,” says Mr. Roberts, 
“ig in the first place life in its primary sense of being.” Ls 
that the. primary sense? Can nothing ‘“be,”’ but what 
“lives”? ‘It isnot even the sense at all, any more than is 
existence. "Goodwyn contradicts both; he says:—-“I am ’ 
now prepared to add that life ‘does not in Scripture, nga 
anywhere else, invaridbly moti sie existence ; but is in-. 
separablé from -a condition or'¢ pie developed by the | 
action of the mind.” If life is exist. Be inseparable ” from 


“a certain “character,” then it can ‘qeever be “meré exis- © 


tence”; and so far atleast ‘the’ definition is correct. Let . 
us examine it a little, ftwthér. : ae 


ral i ° ° oat : 
Life manifests itself; by actfén:wit is the energy that 


. works.the whole’ machinery, so ta. speak; of the being in 


which it.dwells. ~-But, we may also, and in fact do more fre- 
quently speak of it as. the motion ‘of the machinery itself. 
The latter is life phenomenal, what it is as subject to our 


inspection, a matter of actual ‘observation and knowledge. © 


The former is life potential, the aed behind thé’ movement. 
and unseen. Sap SR Se ea 

But then we'also speak of life in a: still larger way as. 
comprehending ; the curse of this active existence; life as 


| furnishing. the’ individual’ history. ‘And as connected with 


this, although distinct, we speak of: life as differentiated hy 


° . ae o yaa * Bee, Ga a AB ‘oe 
its surroundings : English life, American life, and‘even with- 


“ 


ve 


174 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


out an adjective at all, of a young ,man entering upon life, 
: life in the pregnant sense, implying its full tale of hopes and 
“joys, and cares and sorrows. 
In the sphere of merely natural things of which alone we 
are as yet :peaking, the life potential, according to Scrip- 
ue is the sow, or psuche. 
2..The phenomenal, physical, animal life induced by the 
presence of the soul in the body, is also psuche. 


3. The historical life is on the other hand always zoe.* 


And— 

4. Zoe, too, is life in the pregnant senKe, implying all 
that it introduces to. 

The first two meanines are ‘connected: together aid 
covered by the one word, psuche, as the last two are on the 
other hand connected, and covered 'by the one word, zoe. 

Of psuche enough has, heer said Already. “Goe used with 
reference to the natural li ef occurs but thirteen times in 
the New Testament. I give all these occurrences that we 
may have the subject: as fully as possible before. us. 

1. Life in the historical sense ‘—- 


Luke i. 75: ‘all the days of onr life.” 

Xvi. 25: ‘thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things.” 

Acts viii. 33: ‘‘his life is taken from the earth.’ 

; xvii. 25: ‘‘he'giveth to ail life and bre: ath and all things," 

Rom. viii. 38: ‘neither deuth nor life shall separate us,” 

1 Cor. iii} 22: “all things are yours, whether life or death.” 
xv. 19%: “afin this life only we have hope in Christ.” 

Phil. i: 20 : ** whether by life or déath.”, 

1 Tim. AF Best hee promise of the fe that. now-is.” 


idalgentcceghs- wide eet Sn ae 


*T leave out of of cohsieration Aros, which, althoug: it figures largely 
in ordinary Greek, occurs but fite times inthe New. Testament in the 
sense of “life,” and here always.as a synonym of zve in, the historical. 


sense, Its use lies outside " our Prestit - inquiry. The five: pagsages. , 
John j if, 16.- 


are Luke vili..14; 1 Tim.ii\ 2352 Tim. ij. 4,1 Pat..iv. ‘ 
« tis. strange that Goodsein should: Say a ruth: and Tredidan, Pp. 18): 
“In every instance w here Z0€, iS used tt is applied to the eternity o 
God, of the Lord Jesus’ and of believers in: Him” This is ‘bal one of 


the many careless statements to! he (i “AU these writers, 


dp ayer heen cee 


LEKRNAL LIFE? WHAT IS we? 


a 


life, Heb, vii. 8: ‘« neither beginning of days, nor end of life.” 
and James:iv. 14; ‘for what is your life ¢ ? it is-even'a vapor.” 
2. In the pregnant sense; only twice, but distinet :-— 
we Luke A"'EDS 2 “a naam’s lie Lousisteth not in the abundance 
i | of things.” | ao 
. , ‘1 Pet. in. 102% he that: will love life, and see good days.” 
the ys So far then we have been speaking of natural life only. 
ke - I have been thus particular in speaking} of it, beeause the 
DO" ew natural sense is of course the primary, and furnishes the 
; 4 asis of the spiritual sense. We. ‘hail find, if I mistake 
all ea hes by carrying these definitions; with us “ie they will 


er on assist us greatly im the apprehensipn of what Scripture calls 


and ea “eternal life,’ which’ as a term is/used in a precisely similar 


the | > way, a way W hich the er ude conggption éf Messrs. Constable ? 
f 4 and Roberts ear in no“wise harmonize, much less explain. 
ith e | Tf life then is not mere “ existence,” * eternal life” ‘is still 
= Te less, if possible, merely « eternal existence.” It is a lite 
bias ; . - begun here and now in those who are nevertheless as ‘mortal, : 
ag ever, a | consideration Ww hich at once sets such an explana- * ‘ 
J “tion of t entirely asi de. ‘The wicked who have it not 
‘ - ‘exist ” et as much as those who-have it, while they do not 
, : an this sense “live”’ atvall. ‘ Let! us examine this closely, for 
it is the key of the whole position: . eet ee 
atte ; a“ Eternal life in Seripture K always, as before ‘spi; Z0e, 


never -psuche. [t is Pepscnted howev er in the same four : fey 
aspects as the natty: life: -Here the potential life) the seul 
of this spiritual existenc e, is Christ ‘Himself. The phenom- 
al life, the result of His relationshjp: to us, is that which > °. 
eae historical life. ie aa 


en 
begins with our new ‘and sao hirthy. 


Qh 
og 


F % Pies on : ES Ne 
eee {76 Pacts AND THEOREES AS 'TO A FUTURE STATE. a 


is fall. of it; but it will suffice to quote but a few passages. 
Thus the apostle speaks of Him'who in the beginning was 
with God, and was ‘God, that. “in Him was life, and the life 
was the light of men "(John i, 4). In his first epistle simi- eee ae 
larly, that “the life was manifested; and We’ have seen. it,’ 4 
and bear witness, and show mito you that eternal kfe- which 
if.” was with the Father, and was manifested unto ys wel J ohn. 
a “. i:2), So the record is, “that God hath given unto us 


\, SYP +-etersial life, and this life is in TTis Son; he fiat hath the Son 
hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not. life ” 
i os (eh wd, 12) 82 ee ae 
ae ” Now here tobegin with, let: me ask, is it eternal ecistence 
‘ that was manifested in Christ, and was the light of men?” 
But again, and furthermore, aes 
‘2. Not only has “ he that hath the Son of God” got life, 
but he ‘has got it as a present possession and an abiding one. 
. He has: no mere pledge ‘and promise of it. It is. as 
_.* possessing it that he.is in the spiritual sense a child of God 
:,. and“born of God. 


_ He*that believeth on the Son Auth everlasting life”. 


i Rage “ov (Folin iii.- 36). - « Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 
heareth my words, and believeth on Him that sent me HATH 
everlasting lite, and shall not come into.condemnation, but 
IS passed from death unto life ” (ch. v. 24). ‘ 

_» Is this only “the promige and the pledge ’*? . Nay; for— 

‘ Except ‘ye:eat the fleshwof the Son of man and drink His 

. blood, ye have no’ life “IN: you ; whoso eateth my flesh, and 
 drinketh my blood wari eternal life” (ch. vi.-53, 54). 
And again, “ We ‘know ‘that: we have passed, from déath 

unto. life, Decause we loye the bretiren, He that loveth not. 

~ «his bréther abideth indeath. Whosoever hatethhis brother 
cer vis amurdé¥er; ind ‘ye‘know that’ no murderer. hath eternal 

SN fe ABIDING Ty UL” 4 John if, 14, dB} e ce aoe Sa 

EEO S Thos eternal life is “in,” and:“-abideth- in” the “believer 
ak “he has ‘no‘mere pledge and promise of it; itis begun’in him” 
a “jp already. Listen, andthe Lord Hitnself will fine: it yet. 


sf eae Ad ecm - 


£ 


. 
ov. a eae 
Pree K fe oe cy = Hg 
: yok ay . ha Opin a ne, sea a 
ry 2 ; ate aates & ee Oo ngs: Egy ere on 08, ithe a : 0 cory 
” . ‘ be z LS * ae " nls 7 ae 
° A 


‘ 
aed , 


a 


AGES. 
5 Was 
e life 
simi- 
pn, it,‘ 
vhich 
John |. 
oO us 
» Son 
life ” 


tEnNCE © 
ren? 


life, 
one. 
Sas 


God | 


life”. 
that 
ATH 
but 
ah 
His 
and 
D4). 
ath 
not: 
her 
neal 


so ata Aa een 


“this head, which might not be fairly challenged. : 


expressions; in no Wise. inter 


“ 


ETERNAL LIFE}, WHAT BS IT? 177 


“THis Is life eternal, that they might know,” or better, 
“that they know,’*—‘ Thee the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ whom Thou hast sent ”: (John xvii. 3). 

Here it is characterized for us, and we know (if we know 
anything) the life it speaks of. It began in us when faith 
begam’ It began with our new birth. It is not then eter- 


nal existerice, for still we die. It is not existence; but a new 


and blessed energy of good ; an activity of holy affections 


of which Christ now known as Saviour is the spring and . 


soul. This is eternal life, if Scripture is to be believed. 
The definitions of annihilationists fail hopelessly, therefore, 
here. “Eternal life is not immortality ; it is not’eternal ex- 
istence, as they allege. It is the«life which we have as 7 
spiritually quickened from the dead. 

3. The outward historical life necessarily blends with the 
outward natural life’sé'that they cannot be really separated. 
The life of the suiné and the life of the man are here but 
one, For this reason no. Scripture can be produced under 


4. But the pregnant sense is, as we might expect, in fullest 


use of all; for our life points ever forward to the time when . 


we shall have it in all that it implies. And even as we have. 
said, the young mam “enters upon Jife,” when he enters 
{upon its full activities, free from the necessary restraints of 
‘immaturity, so we too shall “ enter into life,” albeit we have 
‘+ now'within us. And who that feels the workings of the 
lifé within most fully, but must look forward, too, most 
simply to that future, and say to himself, without a thought 
-of denying what he has already, that his life is there ? 


Thus “ yé have your fruit unto holiness, and the end ever- 


lasting life ” (Rom. vi. 22); “ itt the world to come eternal 
life?” (Mark x. 30); ‘in hope of eternal life” (Tit. i 2) ; 
“shall inherit everlasting life” (Matt. xix. 29), and. similar 


ai plainly, if not as fretyzently, that we have eternal life abid- 


fere with.the fact asserted quite 


& Por it isa’ yell knowngpe uiliarity of John’s gospel to, use iv«x for 
hat.” for @the Ag ria ; 7 


op: 


=e 


178 FAUAd AND THEORLES AS ‘LUA FUTURE SLATE. 1 


ing in us now. These are only the various modes of Bpeech 

which as we have seen we use with regard to the natural 

life itself. ; : } 

- Yet these expressions are all that the writers who hold 

what they call the doctrine of “ conditional immortality ” can 

urge against the view that life eternal is what is begun in 
us in new birth already. ‘Mr. Constable calls this sense of 
life the “figurative” sense. But it is no more figurative 
than is the necessary result of using words pertaining to 
what is natural and applying them to what is spiritual. 
: And this we have.always to do if we speak of the spiritual 
atall. Eternal life belongs not to the sphere of the natural. 
It is what was manifested in Christ down here, and is. ours 
now in present possession—spiritual not natural life. 
Hence we use the term as it must be used; and Mr. Con- 
stable cannot use it in his fashion without falsifving Scripture 
to do so. ; @ 

He does thus falsify it, when he says, “Scripture ‘repre- 
sents eternal life asa gift’ not yet enjoyed by the children 
of God.” He falsifies it when he says that, “while there 
are no doubt many Scriptures, which describe the believer 
4s now having everlasting life, we are EXPRESSLY TOLD 
elsewhere that this consists in having God's pledge and pro- 
mise of that everlasting life; but not its actual possession 
and enjoyment.” ‘This is botd mis-statement. Where is it 
“expressly told”? Mr. Constable cannot find it. He can 
find that we are promised it and go into it. He can find 
that we have itmow. He cannor tind that the latter only 
means the former. 

Hence, his premises being unsound, his conelusions must 
be. Eternal life is not eternal existence simply, but some- 
thing far beyond it, an? the wicked, not possessing eternal 
life, are not thereby proved to lose existence. 

There is only one clause of this arpument remaining to 
detain us fora moment. The words of the apostle (Col iii. 
3) are quoted in his own hehalf by Mr. Roberts: “ Your 


fe-is-hid-with Christ in God-”—And so General Goodwyn : 


peech 
atural 


hold 
Se» ean 
un in 
se of 
‘ative 
1g to 
itual. 
ritual 
tural. 
ours 
life. 
Con- 


Jture 


epre- 
dren 
here 
ever 
OLD” 
pro- 
sion 
is it 
can 
find 
only 


ust 
me- 
mal 


to 
iii. 


our 


ETERNAL LIFE: WHAT 18 rr? 179 


& Biernity of living dates from the resurrection (J ohn vi. 40, 
58, 54) and is at present ‘hid with Christ in God.’ Never- 
‘theless the child of God ‘hath’ it now, howbeit it is in safe 
custody,” etc. This is the way in which these men read 
Scripture! Where is it said that “ eternity oF living” is hid 
with Christ in God? It is said “your life is.”. And where 
is there a word About its being in “in safe custody”? It 
is William Cowper, I-Welieve, who sings, , 

* Your life is tid with Christ in God, 

Beyond the reach of harm.” 


a 
zane 


But, then that is not Scripture. The Scripture use and 
purport of tiie text which Mr. Goodwyn quotes is far other- 
wise. “Yo'are dead,” says the apostle, “and your life is hid 


_ with Christ in God; when. Christ, our life shall appear, then 
shall ye also appecr with Him ineglory.”. The passage be- 


longs to the first class of texts pomg d out, in which our Life 
is identified with its origin. Chris*is this life. Heis hid 
in God, and the world sees Him not until the day of His 
appearing. Our life then is in character a hidden one, we 


shall not appear till we appear with Him. A life which 


draws its character from Him wkg is the soul of it cannot 
be known by a world which has rejected the Son of God and 


‘ found no glory in the Lord of glory. With Him then we 


are dead. Our life is a hidden. one, fer Christ is hidden. 
But it is hidden in God, apd so yt waits for the time in 
which it will shine fully out. -Chrigt.is to appear ; and then 
we shall. This has nothing to do with the question of 
security, or with eternity of living. ~ It is Christ who is hid- 
den, and: who is our life. £ 
Him. But that is‘no dertagmmY its being in us here, but 
implies the very contrary. | feig,our possession of it that 
gives us this character, and Chris being the soul of it, “the 
world knoweth us = ‘poonye toa ae olin not 1 John 
iii. 1). : 


Eternal life i is not then mere etellR 


ty. of ae nor does 


r life, therefore, is hid with 


} 


yu: 


| + date only from the resurrection: 


180 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FULURE STATE. 


that quickening by the Spirit which every child of God has 

known; and manifests itself, though the world (and_alas, 

others) shave no eyes for it, in every throb and movement’ of 

the soul Godward ; while we wait yet to enjoy its ful- a 

ness— : ‘ i ay , 
“In the world to vome, eternal life,” 


4 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


THE FIRST BE NCP Ne 


As I have said: I do not refuse to consider the oes 
aspects of the present question. But just now we are occu- 
pied with what must necessarily precede all such considera- 
tions. The facts must be before us: béfore there can be 
any proper appreciation of them. We are searching for 
the facts of the case, and’ any preliminary moral reasoning 
would be out of place—Wwould hinder and not help our 
investigation. ; “ea.” 

The question of penalty stirs: ali the fociitizs of our heart, 
and there are two things, often forgotten, which should lead 
us to question how far we can safely allow their influence. 
‘The first is, that we are judging in our own cause. The 

second, that the sin which has entailed the penalty has en- 
feebled necessarily the power of true judgment. The heart 

of ‘man is not only “ desperately: wicked”: it is deceitful 
es too. Will it be apy more likely to Judge righteous judg. . 
| ment because the cause it pronounces upon is its own? | 
itself? Is the sidfner’ ’s estimate of sin and its desert so \ikely. ¢ 
to be right? Is there no self- interest. in the way? no pride 
that wpuld forbid to stoop. So low. as to the truth ? Abou 
the heart of man! that question of the All-seeing is thee 
of its Euston snes) Who can know it ¥” 


tod has 
nd_ alas, 
ment of 
its ful- 


, moral - 
e occu- 
isidera- 
can be 
ing for 
soning 
lp our 


- heart, 
Id lead 
luence. 
The 
1as en- 
e heart. 
ceitful 


judg- Chen 


pagal F = 


a 181 
‘Him? and has 


ily know what 
ht stir my poor 


Yet there is One who kno 
He spoken in such a way tha 
He has said? He-has. I ¢ 
human feelings, no doubt, and mak@ furmur at the judg-_ 
ment He has given:—I am quite | apable of that. But I 
look at the Cross,'where for man His own Son hung, and I 
cannot persuade myself I have a more tender heart than He. 
No: His judgment is not an enemy’s, nor the impassive 
estimate of One indifferent. 9 Heghas 5 giver’ His Son. And 
though His judgments. may. be a great deep, and I may be 
little able to follow out His’ governmental ways, I have what 


is better, for I know Himself. 


Thus you and I, reader, are to listen to His words; not 
with hearts callous to human suffering, but subject to Him. 
The deep, dark shadow of the Cross, whereon for us the 
Son of God hung and died, prepares us for a view of sin and 
its results deep and dark enough in shadow. But we know 
the heart we @Hng to through the gloom; and the sheep, here 
as ever, know the Shepherd’s voice. 

We are now to, look at the solemn question of one 
Mr. Constable does but follow in the track of others, when 


he takes us back to the sentence upon Adam to find in it 


the key to the whole matter. We shall examine what he 
says attentively. 
‘‘Death,” he remarks, ‘‘was the penalty which God originally 
pronounced against human sin. All that God purposed to inflict 
upon Adam and his posterity in case of transgression is included . 
in that word ‘death.’ ‘In the day* that thou eatest, thou shalt’ 
die.’ It is of the utmost eonsequence then that. we should under- 
stand what God‘ meant by. death; nor’ is there the smallest 
difficulty in doing so if we will only attend to what reason and 
justice require, and what Scripture expressly declares. Its mean- 
ing then we contend to be, when it is thus attached to sin as its 


a 


* Edw. White maintains (Life in Christ, p. 118) that the execution 
of this was not carried out, but the sentence was delayed by mercy. 
This is a mistake. “In ‘the. day ” does not require so rigid a construc- 


tion.—_Comp—2 Sanr—xit Be Psa—xev8,_Keel_xhi-3_Isa. siv 8, eRe — 
26, Jer. vii, 22, Ezek. xx. 5, and especially Ezek, xxxiii. 12. 


x 


-he might answer us that 
i¢ he objected to, and set- 
solated ‘‘ texts.” 


h an “eae seems to be in 
He himself believes in the 


, and walk in them,” and - 
leepy sltibboleths and dead © 
Moreover he believes at . 
Therefore, it should seém 
proof texts, and see how 
ie, they justify his position. 
who vouches for his very 
e Holy. Ghost, who tells us 
we would not have. that in 
‘ phrase wrenched from its _ 
1 as we please, we ‘must . 
.. We shall find the words — 
church at Corinth (iii. 6); — 
uns thus:— 
ourselves 'to think anything 
 y is of God, who also hath ° 
‘ew Testament ; not of the 


9 10 4. 12 «#13. 14 15 mm 
 «& 


is i 
a 
22 
Nate 


Centimeter 


| ¢ aaaa 
[oe] BY a a4 
_s o ‘Pad daagaa ai 
nw 2 
4 oll 
< =i =i. 
—— 


14 


125 


1.6 
=— 
E— > 

ie 2 
“ Re 


MANUSACTURED TO AIIM STANDARDS 
BY APPLIED IMAGE. INC. 


SELLE LOPE TT TT Be BS orp a am i a : 
2 


- 


182 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


penalty, the loss of life or existence. ‘ One of the first principles of | 


justice requires that parties threatenéd’ with a penalty for trans- F 


gression should have the fullest opportunity of ultderstanding 


what the penalty is. God accordingly speaks to Adam of death - 


88 a thing whose nature Adam knew. Now Adam knew very well 


_- what death was in one sense, and in ong sense-only. He knew it 


to be'the law of the lowér creatures, and £0 consist in the loss of 
their being and ecistence. He knew nothing of any other senses 
of death, such as ‘death in sin’ or ‘death to sin,’ for in his inno- 
cence he did not know what sin was at all. Still less did. he 
understand by death an eternal existence in agony. He had one 
clear, well understood sense for. death, the loss of life and being.” 

Again he says:— a 

‘* As soon as Adam transgressed God came to him, and repeat- 
ed to him in other words the penalty he had just incurred. It 
was ‘dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return.’ God's defini- 
tion of the death inflicted for the first transgression is frequently 
repeatéd in the later Scriptures. Paul tells us that itis the death 
which all men actually undergo, whether they are among the 
saved or the lost ; and therefore an eternal existence in pain can 
be no part of its meaning (Rom. v. 12, 14, 17; 1 Cor. xv. 22). 
Such too was -the death which Christ endured for human sin—- 
the very same penalty to its full extent to which man was ex-», 
: posed ; and therefore spiritual death or an eternal life in misery, © 


I have thus quoted Mr. Constable in full in order to bring 
the subject properly before us. If it had only been for the 
sake of answering him much less would have sufficed. But 
we are seeking to bring out the Scripture doctrine and not 
merely to refute certain errors; and this is an important 
point to be clear upon in order to a full. and satisfactory ’ 
view of the great subject before us. Yet in aiming to be 
thus clear we must enter into a field of many controversies, 
not yet ‘by any means extinct, and are almost sure to awaken 
feelings, which may prejudice the point. of main concern, for 


icc i i Rt pa aS ae ie a RN pr sia ie EEN on ooh SUE, 
PET tes lin 


I 


E. 


ciples of 
for trans- | 


‘standing 


of death z : 


very well 
> knew it 
he loss of 
er senses 
his inno- 
3 did he 
had one 
| being.” 


1 repeat- 
red. It 
s defini- 
quently 
he death 
ong the 
ain can 
Xv. 22). 
in sin—- 
WAS €X-». 
misery, : 
od said 
1er this 
was He 
3 life to 
ned.” 
ee 
for the 
But 
nd not 
ortant 
actory ’ 
to be 
ersies, 
waken 
'n, for 


in ia Si NG Ea a ae 


. PH FIRST, SENTENCE. 188 

A 
many minds. Still we must not shrink from what seems 
néedful, and Scripture is no more uncertain here than else- 


“where. 


As to Mr. Constable’s main point, it is not hard to see 
that he makes immense assumptions, and that upon these his 
argument in its entirety rests. Let us grant for the mean- 


while, at any rate, that it is of. ordinary death the prohibi- 


tion speaks. How can he prove what Adam knew about’ 
it? Suppose it true he must have known what the penalty 


was, how can he show that. Adam learned it: from seeing 


‘death around” how can he show that there’had been any 


death to seein Eden? If death had been there, how can 


‘he harmonize this with the “ creature being made subject 
4 A) 


to vanity,” as Rom. viii. 19-23 shows, through man’s: sin, 
and waiting man’s deliverance as its own? . 
_ Supposing it true that Eden before the fall had been pro- 


: faned by death and corraption, how does he know that 


Adam would have argued thgt death would be to him as 
absolute nonentity ? Ev erywhere through: the world we 
find that man has nursed an instinct of gontrary sort in 
the facé of such death ‘ever before his eyes: ‘Why should 
he think that he who had had wisdom given him to name all 
the beasts and distinguish-them from himself should have 
been less wise? Or haply does he think this 4 mark of 
degradation ? or what else ? : : 

Again, if man were to have instruction about death, why 
should not God instruct him? If we must needs assume, 
what other assumption has more probability ? 

In the face of all this. Mr. Constable’s argument for ex- 
tinction loses all probability. When contrasted with the 


reality of what death is, according to the Scriptures we 


have examine(, it is manifestly entirely inadmissible. 

But it will be profitable to inquire more fully just what 
was the punishment of death denounced on Adam, and how 
far it has-affected. his posterity. And the simplest method 
we can take in doing so seems to be, without any doubtful 


argument as to the words of the prohibition, to ask our- 


Mee 


‘ was tainted in her whole course, that/"th 


184 PACTS AND THEORIES AS ‘FO A FUTURE STATE, 


selves, what Scripture elsewhere states as to the consequen- 
ces of the first sin. ee, 

Now evidently the fullest statement we hive as to ‘its 
effect on Adam’s posterity 48;that whichis. given us by the 
apostle Paul in the fifth chapter: of his‘epistle to tle saints 

sat Rome (vers. 12-21). And here there are three things 
of which he speaks :— ; 

First, “sin entered into the world,” and “ m.ny became 
sinners ”: this is the deprayation of nature, which is the sad 
heirloom of succeeding generations. 

Secondly, “death Wy sin, and so death passed. upon all”: 


_ this,is corporeal death, the death he could point to as unde- 


niably “ reigning from Adam to Moses” even, the time 
before the law. “ 

Thirdly, “judgment was by one to: condemnation,’— 
“upon al men to condemnation.” 'Thiggédimrhat death; fol- 
owing upon sin, proclaimed. ‘“It was -¥ that nature 
God who had 
made man, and could not otherwise repent, now “ turned him 
to destruction.” ae bee 

Of these threé things the fifst clearly is the cause of the 
judgment pronounced, and not the judgment itself. Of the. 
two latter, the first is the infliction, and. the second is in- 


‘volved in it, and shows its character. Death is the infliction, 


but not as of arbitrary thing proceeding from the mere will 
of the Creator, but the mark of changed relationship to Him © 
which the fall had produced.’ Death then (what we ordi- 
narily call that) was the sentence, and that alone; but it 

involved necessarily’ a change in moral rélationship between 

the Creator and the creature, distance between man and 

God, which His love and pity might yet find mean’ of bridg- 

ing over,—which was not yet jiral therefore, but which was 

there. 


Now, I apprehend, the difficulty found in reading aright 


‘the sentence, “Thou shalt surely. die,” proceeds from the 


seeking a final sentence in what was not intended yet as 
final. God had of course His plan of merey alrea ly in His 


é 


TE. ¢ 


onseqalen- 


as to its 
us by the 


tLe saints ~ 


e things 


y became 
8 the sad 


on all’’: 
as unde- 


the time 


ation,”"— 
eathy fol- 
tt nature 
who had 
rned him 


se of the 

Of the. 
1d is in- 
ntliction, 
1ere will 


»to Him | 


we ordi- 
; but it 
between. 
nan ani 
of bridg- 
hich was 


g aright 


rom the 
yet. as 
ein Tis 


a 
Sr 


is not the close, but the beginning of our history; and we 


‘ direct announcement of.the second death at all. Ina word, 


THE FIRST SENTENCE. 185 


mind, andy was not yet giving an eternal sentence. Had He 
left man to himself indeed, no self-recovery on man’s part 
being ‘possible, it would have been, no doubt, practically 
eternal. But He had no design of leaving him to himself. 
As we know, this sentence, under which the w hole race lies, 


shall keep, I believe, most closely within the limits of revela- 
tion, by interpreting the sentence following the sin of Adam 
as. in no way involving the eternal issues, but as strictly 
provisiqnat with a view to the intended mercy. This relieves 
at once’ from the difficulty as to the penalty involved. It 
makes all clear and consistent; and is in the highest 
degree important in reading ar ight the eternal penalty itself. 

This in no: way interferes with the first death being the 
‘type and shadvw of the second, while it harmonizes with the 
fact that when the sécond death comes the first death will 
entirely pass away. It harmonizes also with the statement 
of Scripture ev erywliete, that that second death will be con- 
sequent upon a future judgment, in. which men will be 
judged, not at all for Adam’s sin, but “according to their 
works.” It harmonizes also with what we shall find to be- 
the fact hereafter, that the Old Testament revelation has no- 


it will be found to clear the way for the after-question 
in many and most important respects, while it ig a view of 
the matter, which. from Sctpelne itself it seems impossible 
to contravene. 

It must be admitted, however, to lie athwart two of Mr. 
Constable’s assumptions very directly. The first of these 
is, that “ ALL that God purposed to inflict upon Adam and 
posterity in case of transgression is included in that word 

‘death’” in the original sentence. The original sentence 
may be a shadow of the final one; as I have said, but that is 
all, and not enough for his argument. His statement itself 
is 2 mere assumption, wate it is sufficient therefore to 
deny. | 
The second is, “ that parties threatened with a ronal for 


albantineye inmate ne x5 : 2 . ae 
i . 


_ that the death spoken of is death in sin, or death to sin, or 


ro 


186 FACTS rp THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


trangression should have the fullest opportunity of under- 
standing what the penalty is.” Now the penalty here is for 


cating of the tree. Did that define to Adam’s posterit y, who 


never sinned this way at all, nor could do so,,what the pen- 
alty of thir sin would be? Plainly, as to legal enactment, 
‘from Adam to Moses” there was none. And thus not 
one of them could be punished; certainly not raised up 
to endure the agony of the lake of fire, of which no expe- 


‘rience, no instinet, no revelation, could give them the merest 


hint ! : 
But Mr. Constable's assumption will not endure the 


moral test, any more\than it will the test of Scripture. Is. 
sin a thing in itself worthy of punishment, or only when 
. ° ; * ’ . \ ve ¥ ‘ y ° 
committed in full view of' its consequences? We must of 


course grant that that full view involves heavier responsi- 
bility. But do T only sin when I know exactly: what I shall 
lose by it? That is an immoral argument, which infers go. 

Nor is it consistent with what even nature itself teaches. 
For he who sins against the laws of naturé so-called (which 
are after all divine laws), ns 4 gencral:thing knows little of 
the consequences of what he does; yet’ disease and death 
follow none the less surely. . 

Thus easily are Mr. Constable's theories refuted. And 


the words will not without strain admit, while we do not, we 
trust, add one iota to the” “whole libraries of’. confused 


jargon and hopeless nonsense,” which he tells us have been 
written upon this subject—while we deny as much as he 


while we do not force mt first semtence anything that 


even eternal torment,—we maintain none the less, that 
while certainly deatlivis death, it is not extinction. - 

It would be the most attrattive course, perhaps, from this 
point to follow out the Old Testament revelation as to the 
future state; but before we can do this, we must look still 
further at the lexicography of \the subject that we may un- 


derstand the meaning of the |terms which are used with 


reference ta it. hefore we look at it as a whole. 


4 
‘ 


ae 
“] 


* 


TF. ga ; DESTRUCTION, AND 11s KINDEED TERMS. 187 


of under- 
here is for 2 ; : 
arity, who : C eae 
t_ the pen- | : Coe XIX. : 
nactment, DESTRUCTION, AND ITS KINDRED TERMS.—THE OLD TESTA. 
thus not MENT. 
raised up 
no expe- WE shall still mainly tollow Mr. Constable, because he is 
he merest the one appealed to by his colleagues as the principal au- 
thority on the subject, and because he certainly claims to 
dure ‘the give very distinctly the whole vochbulary of words relating 
oture. Is to it. Indeed, I may say the main. part of his argument de- 
ilcowhen pends upon this. But his strength and his weakness lie very 
Puen “pear together, as we may shortly see 
responsi- He gives us first the Old Testament phrases, and foremost | 
at I shall of these the passages which speak of death, as Psa. vii. 13; 
infers s0. , Proy. vii. 35; xi. 4; Ezek. iii. 18; xviii. 4; xxxiii. 8. I do 
f teaches. not ag yet take up their application: this will come after- 
il (which . . wards; we are only at the Bae: now. He adds to 
ittleof these two (Ezek. iii. 18; xiii. which give loss of life as 
nd death the equivalent of death. No one raul deny this, of course ; 
the question is, is death extinction? We have seén over 
od. And /and over again that it is not, and Mr. Constable admits that 
ting that / if this were proved it would “ militate gravely ” against its q 
O-hit, We /, being so when applied to future punishment. These are his 
eontased / words (Hades, ch. vii. 17) :— 
ave been / ~  * And here we would particularly warn thie upholders of the: . q 
ch as he , scriptural trath of life and immortality only in Christ, to beware : ; 
fo sin, or od : how by explaining away the natural force of the many Scriptures, : 
ess, that ; which teach that the soul Jies in the first death, they greatly : 
weaken their own argument when they come to insist that the ae 
: : second death means the true and real extinction of the entire eae 
tom this man. Scripture speaks of it simply as deuth, If the first death’ 
as to the is eonacane with man’s in fact not dying, but continuing to.live 
look still in regard to his most importaimt part, whose survival again may 8 
may un- be supposed toimply the restoration-of the body to life, it seems. - ~ ce 


ed with plain that the common idea of the first death mmurraTEs GRAVELY 
“against our view of what is intended by the second.” 


188 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


This witness is true, and it is all IT need say here. The 
meaning of the passages we shall examine by and by. : 

He next crowds together a number of passages of very 
different applications which he makes to describe the ‘.end 
of the ungodly” :—* The destruction of the transgressors 
and sinners shall be together” (Isa. i. 28)—which applies 
to the purification of Zion in the last days; “ prepare them 
for the day of slaughter” (Jer. xii. 3)—which is also judg- 
ment in the land; “the slain ofthe Lord shall be many, 
and “ they shall go forth and look upon the carcuses of* the 
men that have sinned” (Isa. Ixvi. 16, 24)—God’s destrue- 
tion of Israel’s enemies and others; “God shall destroy 
them” (Psa. xxviii. 5); © they shall be consumed ” (XXXvii. 
20); “they shall be cut off” (xxxvii. 38); “they shall be 
rooted out of the land of the living ” (Psa. lii. -)—misquoted, 
and referring to “ Docg, the Edomite ” ; © blotted out of 
the book of life ” (Psa. Ixix. 28) ; and “they are not” (Jb 
“xxvii, 19) :—not one of these can be shown to apply to the 
final judgment of the wicked. Let Mr. Cone prove 
this if he can. é i 

But “for the sake of greater plainnesg he takes up the 
separate Hebrew words; and here the fullsamount of. his 
concession as to death becomes apparent. .A/2 these words 
are applied to death. Tf death therefore does not mean ex- 
tinction, plainly its synonyms need not. Thus, then, the 
foundation being removed, Mr. Constable's edifice falls to 
the ground. ls 

Thus. we have first, «had (13%) to perish: and here 
presents itself from Isa. lvii., a text already spoken of. “The 
righteous perisheth,” anil yet “enters into peace”; “the 
good man is perished out of the earth.” It is the word also 


applied. to a “lost” sheep (Psa. cxix. 176; Jer. 1.6; Ezek. 


xxxiv. 4, 16). 
But we can little trust Mr. Constable’s statements: the 
next word, havas (D123), he says, is “another word in 


Jrequent use for future punishment.” There is one pussayé 


. ’ 


7 


: sAhas 


which he may 


re. The 
by. 
8 of) very 
the “.ena 
SYTessors 
h applies 
are them 
Iso judg: 
eo many, 
ex of the 
destrue- 
destroy 
(XXXxvii. 
shall be 
isquoted, 
1 out. “of 
at” (36) 
ly to the 
le prove 
sup the 
nt of his 
se words 
mean ex- 
hen, the 
falls to 


nd here 
é ss The 
9. 66 ; 

> “the 
ord also 
»: Ezek. 


nts: the 
vord in 
pissage 


extinct at all (Deut. xxviii. 61, 62). In the'3 


DESTRUCTION, AND ITS KINDRED TERMS. 189 


no necessary reference to another state at all, and-that is 
Psa. xxviii. 4: ** Because they regard not the works of the 


Lord, neither the operation of His hands, He shall destroy 


‘Lor overthrow] them, and not build them up.” 


The third word tzamath (n¥), is the word used in Psa. 


~ exix. 139, “my zeal hath consumed me”; and in P¥xxviii. 


16, “thy terrors have cut me off.” It would be impossible 
to show it to refer to final judgment at all. 

The fourth, shamad (7%), Mr. Constable says, “ is sig- 
nificant of «fer extinction,” so that it must be the most 
forcible of all these terms. Yet,we’ find it used to predict 
the curse upon Israel under the penalty of which as a nation 
they still are, and which is not “utter extinction,” as the 

very passage shows. *‘Also every sickness and every 
plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them 
will the Lord bring upon thee, till thou be,,DESTROYED. 
And ye shall be left Jiw in nronber,” ete., Ps utterly 
chapter: it 

is added further, © And it shall come to pass when all these 
things are come upon thee, the blessing AND the cyrse, 
which I have set before thee, and thou shall call them to 
mind. . . and shalt return unto the Lord thy God . ... that 


ms ~ then the Lord thy, God w ‘ilk turn thy captivity,” etc. (ch: XXx. 


1-3). Tere is national repentance and restoration predicted, 
after what Mr. Constable calls “utter extinction.” Here is 
in fact the place in all Scripture where the word is used 
most constantly. It is found in xxviii. 20, 24, 45, 48, 51, 61, 
translate “destroy ” and in 63 “bring to nought”: and 
yet the very prophecy shows that there is no “ utter extine- 
tion” at all in the matter. 

, It is also used repeatedly of “death,” which is not that. 

The fifth word is kurath (N13) in Niphal, which Job 
(xiv. 7) uses to say, in the face of Mr. Constable, that “there * 
is hope of a tree, if it be ext down,” i. e., of course, “ hope of 
a tree after it is extinct,” as we saw of Terai before. 

It is used also (Dan. ix. 26) of Messiah being cut of: and 


tet Mr: Constable siy what this-means. 


- \ oli t . 
1yu FAUIS ANDYWHEOKIES AS ‘TU \ FOLTUKE STALK. bs 
e 2 
a It is,used of death continually, and this is indeed the : 


almost constant use, although -it does not always, as we 

See, mean as much as that; for advad tree never sprouts. * 
Finally, the sixth word, nathutz (iN2), is used once in the 
psalm which according to its title, speaks of Docyg (Iii. 5) : 
® * God shall likewise dvstroy thee forever: he shall take thee 
‘sway, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling-place (dit. tent), 
und root thee out of the land of the living.” It is death by 
the julgment of God that is indicated, and the meaning is 

better given. in the margin, “ beat thee down.” 

[ have grave complaint to make of the way Mr. Consta 
ble uses all these words. Ie is content to say loosely of 
them that they are “applied to future punishment.” — He 

_ brings forward no proof, he supposes you will take his 
, _ word for it of course. He never attempts to show that they 
apply to the judgment after death at all. Temporal judg- 
ments are mixed up with eternal. No exceptional uses of 
the words are taken notice of at all, no contrary arguments 
that might be alleged, or anything of the kind. The conse- 
Yuence is that, while claiming precise accuracy, he is as loose Be oat 
and inaccurate as well may be. - a , 

Let Mr. Constable point out, few or many, the passages 
he relies upon to prove his point. : Let him. bring forward 
the convincing arguments which assure hira that it is indeed 
‘eternal judgment,” that they speak of. Let. him meet the 
arguments upon the other side... Let him show that the 
words which speak of the destruction of material things 
apply in the same sense to #mmaterial things. Let him do 
this, and he will at least have brought his argument into of} 
some tangible shape, and one which the gravity of the sub- 
ject demands. Until he does s0_ we shall have cause to 
suspect an argument which requires the assumption of mate- 
rialism for-its support, and which treats the overthrow of a 
man and of a wal, as if it was undeniable there was no, 
difference between the two. 

We shall give Mr. Constable's summing up of the Old - 
Testament testimony\as he understands it. We have given 


th. 


indeed the 
YS, aS we 
routs, ' 

nee in the 
y (lit. 5) : 
take tiee 
dit. tent), 
death by 


eaning is 


. Consta 
p0sely of 
nt.” He 
take his 
that they 
ral judg- 
uses of 
‘guments 
he conse- 
as loose 


passages 
forward 
is indeed 
meet the 
that the 
| things 
him do 
ent into 
the sub- 
‘ause to 
of mate- 
ow of a 
was no, 


the Old - 


’ 
DESTRUCTION, AND ITS KINDRED TERMS. 191. 


his whole reasoning, and therefore may safely appeal to our 
readers if he has taken the first step towards showing what 
he asserts. | 

‘‘ By every unambiguous tenn,” he says, ‘it has pointed out 
the punishment of the wicked as consisting, not in life, but in the 
loss of life; not in their continuance in that organized form 
which constitutes man, but in its dissolution ; its resolution into 
its original parts, its becoming as though it had never been called 
into existence. While the redeemed are to know a life which 
knows no end, the lost are to be reduced to a death which knows 
of no awaking forever and ever. Such is the testimony of God 
in the Old Testuyent. If Christian divines refuse to accept it 
hecause Plato, antl before lim Egyptian priests, taught a doctrine 
of the soul's essential immortality, let them see to it. We prefer 
the word of God to the logic of Plato and of Egypt.” 


_ And so do we. Nor have we appealed to either, or to 
aught but the word of God all through. And moreover 
we have 4aithfully and minutely examined Mr. Constable’s 


arguments throughout, and tested them by that word, and — 
have found them @MMting. The keystone of his whole argu- 


2o__—ment, as we have said, is its materialism, and -+he has himself 
. virtually admitted it. If death is not extinction, as it is 
not,—if the soul is immortal (thotgh not independently, but 
by the will of its Creator), as it is,—then Mr. Constable’s 
argument is wholly, irretrievably, hopelessly gone forever. 
But we must follow him into the New Testament. 


ve given 


rou 


ca 


\ 


’ 4 
192 FACTS AND THEORL bs A3 TU A EUTU.E STATE. 


CHAPTER XX. 
THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS. 


He begins of course with the word xo decisive, one way 
or other, to his cause—with “ death.” 

He quotes a number of the passages in whic ‘h this is Ap 
plied to the punishment of the wicked,* “w od the small- 
est effort to show-that its terms “death ’ r ‘to die’ have 
any new sense placed on them.” 

Now if this be so, and-we bear with us she remeanbrance 
of what death (in the ordinary sense of it) is, and that, it 


‘never means nor implies the extinction of being, we shall 


have to consider all-the texts he ¢an bring forward of this 
kind as ayainst, and not fv, his view of the extinction of. 
the wicked. No more than, the seed ig extinct, when, sown 
in the ground, it is preparing the: hafvé&t—no more than 
man is extinct when the spirit refttrns tao who gave, 
‘it—no more, if I am to accept, the necessary tone ‘Jusion from 
such use of words, no. more will the wicked’ become extinct 
when eternal death becomes their awful portion. I grant, 
of course, the body might become extinct upon this view of | 
the matter, but xo¢ the spirit or the squl. Even so, ther@ is 
no escape from God into the blank of nonentity. — Alas for 


- him wko thinks that there is such! 


But we cannot avail ourselves of this argument ; for iis 
-reason, that there is an express statement, that death as 
applied to the final punishment of the w icked is not. mere 
ordinary death. In Rev. xx. 14, the “second death” is ex- 
esas to be “the lake of fire.” The editors of ne, Greek 
Testament, without exception, read the passage: “ This is 
* the second death, the lake of fire.” And: to ae the . first 


oe eng eer - a eee 


* John vi. 50; vill. 61; xi. 26; Rom. vi. 2123 viii. 13; 2 Cor. ii. 


16; James i, 15; v. 0; Rey. xx. 14. 


TE. 


one way 


this is ap- 
the small- 
die’ have 


nesnbrance 
nd that it 
, we shall 
urd of this 
tinction of , 
yhen,- sown 
more than 
who gave. 
lusion from 


r 
. 


me extinct 
. I grant, 
his view of | 
so, ther¢ ‘Is 
. Alas for 


it ; for ‘this 
t death as 
s not: mere 
ath” is ex- 
* the Greek 
> Phis is 
is the . first 


13; 2 Cor. ii. 


are not the same. 


\ 
oe 
’ 
° 


< 


\ 
& é : 
THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS. 193 


death delivers up: its prisoners. This is at the end of all, 
when the heavens and earth flee away before the face of Him 
who sits upon the throne of judgment (yer. 11). It is when 
finally, all enemies being put under Iis feet, the Son shall 
deliver up the kingdom to the Father; and then “ death, 
the last efremy, shall bg destroyed."* But so far fro the 
second death being then destroyed, it is then that its reign 
begins, to endure (whatever that may mean) “for the ages 
of ages.” . a BO eis =a 

The first death, then, gives place to the second. They 
The “second death” is the lake of fire. 
Will even Mr. Constable assert that this is only extinction ? 
Second extinction it cannot be, for theré has been none 


before, and moreover extinction would be deliverance Sots. 
. ~ \. eo; . ’ ’ . - Pte ese 
it. Extinction by it would’ be as rapid, according to thé” 


usual argttments, as by any other process whatever. How 
long would it take for life to be extinct, or flesh and blood 


to be consumed by a literal fire of brimstone ? Would: it’s 


consist with “torment for ‘the ages of ages”? Yet tha 
must at least be the distinctive feature of the la 

What then does this “second death ” imply? It 
torment AND extinction? But these are cont eee 
terms. “ Life or death,” says a writer, “is the theme ofthe 
Bible, not life or torment.” Yet here torment, and that “for 
ages of ages, must be *admitted io-be the distinguishing 
feature of the second death! “Thas death must in this case 
mean torment ; at least that must be purt of what it means ; 
for the lake of fire undeniably means torment. It cannot 


mean irresistible power of extinction, for any ordinary ee 


would make quicker work; flesh and blood ‘evan can resist 
it for ages, and so (as all natural comparison is oyt of qties. 
tion) why not forever? No; it means protracted Yorment, 
extraordinary, «unnaturally, supernaturally protracted tor- 
ment; if it can mean this and extinction too, then ex- 


pee ——- + eee wee ee 


ee ee 


er . i . mre hc 
PT 


Ty Pre 


eres 


rat 0 Savaros. 


a 
, 


0d For thus it seems one should read “Roxaros éx8p0s narapy si 


* 
NR eR NO aM em 


194 FACTS AND THEORIES AS 'TO A. FUTURE STATE, 


tinction itself may mean protracted existence and its end 
alike. | : 
Thus at least “death” here, as applied to the future 
punishment of the wicked, is not, cannot be, and is expressly 
stated not to be, used in its ordinary sense. I shall not 
pursue the matter further here because the fitting place to 
inquire its precise meaning will be found when we come ‘to 
look at the intensely solemn and important passages referred 


to. This we hope to do in the fullest way hereafter, and do 


not wish to anticipate it here. 

Mr. Constable goes on to the passages. which speak of 
“eternal life” as the portion of the righteous alone. This 
we fully believe, and have looked at alread y. IlIis quotation 
of Matt. x. 29 has also been met, and. needs only to be re- 
ferred to briefly again. It runs: “he that findeth his life 
shall lose it, but he that loseth his life for my sake shall fin 


it.” Psuche is the word used here in both cases, ant as I. 


have before said, the parallel place in Luke ix. 25 shows 


that “his soul” is just the equivalent of “himself” And ~ 


this we have seen to be very common phraseology in Scrip- 
ture. The finding and losing (the same word as elsewhere 


‘ given “ destroying”) the soul in the present world are re- 


versed in the world to come. The finding becomes losing, 
the losing finding there. He who makes himself the object 
of his life, loses ‘himself and is cast away. He who sacrifices 
self and its interests for Christ’s sake is really presery ing 
all for the world to come. The idiomatic expression is im- 
possible perhaps to put into English without a periphrasis; 


: but the meaning is intelligible enough, And the actual 


laying down of. life in martyrdom i is not necéssary at all to 


the application. Can none but those who actually die a: 
‘martyr’s death live eternally? The making it a question of 


literal death or life would affirm so. It is not “ life” then, 
that properly translates or interprets the verse. 

Mr. Constable now turns aside for a moment to Moses’ 
wish to be“ blotted out of God’s book ” (Exod. xxxii. 32). 
He thinks that “we cannot suppose that he could even for 


Pa asic, 


bn. "a 


ATE, 


ud its end 


the future 
3 expressly 
| shall not 
4 place to 
‘ee come to 
es referred 
ter, and do 


. speak of 
one. This 
s quotation 
y to be re- 
eth his life 
e shall fins 


, and, as T[. 


95 shows 


] pr? And | 


ry in Scrip- 
elsewhere 


rld are re- 


mes losing, 
the object 
o sacrifices 
preserving 
‘sion is im- 
eriphrasis; 
the actual 
y at all to 


nally die a: 


juestion of 
lite” then, 


to Moses’ 
XXXL. 32). 
d even for 


THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS. 195 


& moment have wished throughout eternity for a life of 
pain and moral corruption,” and so we must infer he wanted 
“the utter cessation of life” instead. But. it is a little too 
much to decide a question of this moment by our supposition 
one way or another of what Moses »s/ have wished for at. 
4 moment of intense and excited feeling. Granted he did 
not wish for “mioral corruption” at all, much less for 
eternity, he might have agcepted the thought of punishment 
instead of the peagtt out a question of this. To force 
his words into perf Ht and. calm consistency—to reason out 
the feclings of a moment when intense emotion had over- 
mastered reason—is‘o pervert and not to interpret. 

We have heard Mr. Minton’s complaint, of the use of 


" figurative Schiptures, by which certainly God means ‘us » 


nevertheless to learn something on the subject, whatever it an 
may be. Yet here Mr. Constable would take Moses’ wish 
at 2 moment of unreasoning excitement, follow it out to all 


" its, necessary consequences, and decide the question-in his , 


own favor by a simple suggestion that he could not have 
meant to accept these consequences! To which we need 
only answer, suppose he could. not, what then? Is it. so 
strange a thing in times of much less intensity of feeling for 
consequences the most obvious to be wholly forgotten and 
ignored ? ; 

We pass on to consider other terms used for eternal pun- 
ishment. ; . 

The first of these is apoleia (aawAeza), “ destruction.” 
Mr. Constable says, “ There is not in the Greek language a 
word more ‘strongly significant of the utter loss of existence. 
‘Its proper meaning,’ says Schleusner in his lexicon, ‘is 
the destruction of anything so that it ceases to exist,” 


2 ee 


- He then quotes Peter’s words to Simon Magus, ‘‘‘Thy money 
perish with thee,” literally, “thy money go with thyself to 
destruction,” and adds, “Here we see Peter’s sense of  de- 
struction. It had the same meaning when applied to a man 
as it had when applied to metal: disorganization and wast- | 
ing away until it should disappear, was the idea which Peter 


> 


sor neta ae acerca ae tet he og ee eae ane ORE OE ee er ee ee es 


6ST EI OEE ne epee i ary Seeder a ge ee: 


196 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE: STATE, 
attached to it in both cases alike.” His next argument 
is still more extraordinary. Quoting Acts xxv. 16, he 
rem: irks: : 

‘Festus here tells Agrippa that it was not the manner of the 
Se to deliver any man to death (literally, to’ destruction) 
before the accused had an opportunity of de fending himself. 
Festus here calls the destruction of man his death ;’’—Mr. Con- 
stable means, of course, that he calls‘a man’s sibith his destrue- 
tion, —‘‘ and as Festus, pouUBTLESS, with almost every man of his 
station at that time, sidiculed the rery idea of any future life after 


this, he eould only have intended by the destruction of a man 


the putting him out of allexistence. LUKE RY USING ACCEPTS THE 
TERM IN THE SENSE OF Festus, and we have thus in the usage of 
two of the inspired writers. of the New Testament, Peter and 
Luke, the sense of destruction established as putting out of ex- 
istence.”’ 

If this argument were in the first edition of Mr. Consta- 
ble’s book, it is rather extraordinary that the book has sur- 
vived to a fourth. Such reasoning would seem only possi- 
ble to such mental hallucination as would preclude all serious 
controversy. Out of the simple fact that Luke chronicles 
Festus’ words in which he uses for “death”? the word’ 
“ destruction,’ Mr. Constable draws the amazing conclu- 
sions :— 

First, that because Festus was a Roman governor, he 
‘ doubtless ” shared the scepticism of his day. 

Secondly, that. in using the word “destruction” in this 
case, Festus’ (suppose|) views gave the word a peculiar sig- 
nificance. ark A 

Thirdly, that Luke must have known the scepticism that 
was in Festus’ mind. And— ; 

Fourthly, that by recording his words Luke meant to 
signify his adhesion to this scepticism which was behind 
them. 

I can only say, that this is logical insanity, and that upon 
these principles all reasoning becomes ,impossible. This 


_- very Luke elsewhere, as’ we have seen, in stating the well- 


known Pharisaic views as to “angel and spirit,” tells us that 


* 


a a 


E. 


irgument 
. 16, he 


er of the 
struction ) 
r himself. 
-Mr. Con- 


5 destruc- 


iain of his 
: life after 
of a man 
CEPTS THE 
usage of 
Peter and 
mt of ex- 


. Consta- 
< has sur- 
ily possi- 
11 serious 
hronicles 


he word’ 


¥ conclu- 


ernor, he , 


” in this 
uliar sig- 


sism that 
meant to 
is behind 


hat upon 
le. This 
the well- 
Is us that 


THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS, 197 


they “confess” both. “Confess” is his own word and 
surely. implies that he believed that to be the truth which 
they were contessing. Yet Mr. Roberts considers that even 
too worthless an argument to reply to. What would he 
say to Mr. Constable’s ’ And here is Luke against Luke! 


_ Rather here is Mr. Constable’s censure of the unhappy race 


of historians, who it seems are condemned to endorse every 
falsehood that they tell us another utters ! 

On the other hand it is not to be wondered at if from our 
point of view we’ should consider this application of “ de- 
struction” to death, as the overthrow of the very thing it is 


sought to establish by it. . Not ‘alone do we find it in the . 


lips ot Festus. The verb upollumi (anvAdvns) i is used in this 
way over and over" again (Matt. ii, 13; viii. 25; xii. 14; 
xxi, 41; xxii. 7; xxvi. 52; xxvii. 20; Mark iii. 6; ix. 22. 
xi. 18; uke xi. 51; xiii. 33: xv. 17; xvii. 27, 29; xix. 47: 
John x. 10; xviii. 14; 1 Gor x. 9), and translated by the 
words “ destroy ” and “perish.” ‘In all these cases utter 
extinction is not its meaning. : 
In his interpretation of the apostle’s words to Simon 


_Magus, Mr. Constable again manifests his incompetence as 


a reasoner. How “thy money be to destruction with thee” 

shows that the destruction of the piece of metal must be 
just of the same sort as the destruction of the man, it would 
be hard for him to show, while it is very easy to assert it. 
If the man were only a piece of metal like the money the 
reasoning might hold good, and something like this is really 
the .basis of his argument. He is a consistent materialist 
all through, and a material destruction for man is all he 


_can according to his principles believe in. 


But even as to_material things the férce of the word is 
not by any ce) what Mr. Constable would make out. 
When the new Wine barsts the skins and the bottles are 
marred (Mark ii. 82) the same word is used to express this. 
Now the bursting of a skin- -bottle is by no means its “ dis- 
organization and wasting away till it should disappear,” as 
he tries to make out must b be as to thecoin. J¢ is not even 


PEMA tr nae NK MINTS SPL TS Wa oT Re 


MTS NP NOLS RIALS 


aeigreeetnre cans 


ope 


~ NE HE 
nea 
22 | Seer: 


eres 


. subject of the first « 


198 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the first step to such wasting aoay. This would equally go 
on were the bottles whole. Mr. Roberts urges that the 
bottles are destroyed as bottles; but that is my argument, 


The bottles are destroyed for, the purpose to which 
destined, and so is man whether’ as the 


leath or of the second. In either case 
he is set aside from the place for which he was originally 
created, in the first death temporarily, in the second eters 
nally. But the bottles exist, though “ destroyed”: they dd - 
not cease to be; and so neither does man. ‘This is the 
Biblical force of destruetion. ; 

But again, apollumi is used in the sense of “ losing * (Luke 
xv. 4, ete.). The “lost” sheep of the house of Israel (Matt. 
xv. 24), the “lost ” sheep, “lost” piece of money, “ lost” 
son, of Luke xv. are all examples of this use of the word. — 
Also Matt.,x. 6; xviii. 11; Luke xix. 10; 2 Cor. iv. 3. 
Mr. Roberts here contends. that “in the case of an article 
lost, POSSESSION is destroyed for the time being.” These 


not his. 
they were originally 


gentlemen are sometimes wonderfully easily satisfied. So 


a man in prison for a week may be said to ke destroyed; 
because, as R. remarks, ‘‘ SOMETHING is destroyed,” and it 


is no matter whether it’ be the man himself or anything 


else,—his liberty, for instance 1! But upon this ground it 


would be hard to maintain the doctrine he so zealously ad- 


vocates. - ° - | 
Mr. Constable;winds up his discussion of these two words 


with a characteristic challenge, and a re-affirmation of the 
words of Dr. Weymouth, whom he calls “ one of the best 
Greek scholars of the day,” and who says, “ My mind fails. 
to ‘conceive a grosser misinterpretation of language than 
when the five or six strongest words which the Greek tongue 
possesses, signifying ‘ destroy’ or ‘destruction, are ex- 
plained to mean maintaining an everlasting but wretched 
existence. 7 translate bluck as white is nothing to this.” 
But it is Dr. Weymouth who in this misinterprets, and 
* does not take first-rate scholarship to see it. For where 
does he find any one who interprets the words in question 


' 
a 


ally go 
hat the 
yument, 
towhich 
‘as the 
rer case 
iginally 
ud‘ eters 


they dd » 


3 is the 


" (Luke 
1 (Matt. 


“lost” 


e word. - 


. iv. 3. 
n article 

These 
ed. So 
stroyed, 
* and it 
nything 
‘ound. it 
usly ad- 


‘o words 
n of the 
the best 


ind fails. 


ge than 
< tongue 
are ex- 
rretched 
this.” 

‘ets, and 
r where 
question 


THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS, 4 199 


by anything else than “ destroy ” and “ destruction ” ? I nevér 
saw or heard of one who violated language in the way he 
complains of. The words are found just as he would have 
them in the common version of the Bible which is in all our 
hands,—a version made too by people of the very views 
which he assails, Let him tell us who the people are who 
propose to change them. 

‘Fhe fact is, this is not what Dr. Weymouth means, and 
the parade of Greek scholarship is thrownaway. Dr. Wey- 
mouth must mean that. we take the English words,—which, 
thank God, brings the question into a shape intelligible to 
very many more than can claim to be scholars,—that we 
take the Luylish words“ destroy” and “destruction” (for 
it must be allowed we leave them in our Bibles) as mean- 
ing “ maintaining an everlasting but wretched existence.” 

_ Even in this he is exceedingly inaccurate. I can answer 
at least for myself, I never understood these words in any 
such sense. When just now we were speaking of the 
bottles being “destroyed,” surely no one understood that 
their “destruction” meant their “ maintaining existence” at 
all. They wight exist: true; but their destruction was not 
their existence, nor ever understood to be so. It was their 
being ‘set aside as useless for the purpose of their existence ; 
and ina simildr way, only remembering the unspeakable 
ditference between an inanimate thing, and a morally ac- 
countable being such as man, do we understand the destruc- 
tion of the wicked. 


Mr. Constable adds: “ Even the leading modern advocate 


of the Augustinian view, who all but closed his literary . 


labors:in-the defence of this wretched cause, looking in blank 
dismay at these words of: doom, can only-say-of them, ‘They 


do not. (nvariably mean annihilation.’ *We on the contrary 


assert that such is in the New Testament, as wsed of the 
wicked, their invariable sense; they are there ever connected 
With death.” . 


% 


And that proves precisely the opposite, while it proves | 
also how Mr, Constable's annihilationism and his materialism 


i 


LLORES TN EIT 


ITS ENE AT 


200 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


stand or fall together. I make no pretension to more than 
ordinary scholarship, but I dare maintain against all or any, 
that the words in question NEVER 7” themae/ves mean annihi- 
lation at all. Let the proof be only trom Scripture, and 
let any that will prove it. We must pass on now to other 
words. 

The next he takes up is aphanizo (epaviiw). It is once 
used as applied to unbelievers (Acts xiii. 41), ‘‘ Behold, ye 
despisers ! and wonder, and perish,” and once to the “ van- 
ishing away ” of life (James iv. 14). The latter is its true 
signification in both places, although it has other meanings. 
Mr. Constable quotes from Josephus two passages, in which 
the werd is used, once for the annihilation of the sluggish 
and ‘cowardly at death: “a subterranean night dissolves 
them to nothing”; and once in describing the doctrines of 
' the Sadducees, “ that souls perish with their bodies”; and 
he adds: “That which the Sadducees taught would happen 
- to all men at the first death the apostle tells us will be to 

unbelievers the sad result of the second death: they will 
rise from their graves and see what they have rejected, will 
marvel at. their folly and will vanish out of existence.” 

But almost all this latter is pure invention: there is noth- 
ing in the text about the second death, about rising from. the 
graves, or even of passing out of existence in his sense of it. 
And this is quite unquestionable, because it is'a simple adop- 
tion of the language of the Septuagint translation of Hab. i 
5, where Mr. Constable’s idea of it suits neither text nor 
context. It is there added as an appendage to ‘ wonder 
marvellously ”* as if to complete the sense, “ wonder mar- 
vellously and vanish.” The apostle puts it, “wonder and 
vanish,” thus still more plainly making the last words give 
emphasis to the former by the substitution for ‘‘marvel- 
lously ” of “ vanish.” 
We have next four words, pay. united together ‘ 


- - -—— a beers ates 


x The LXX. read’ ‘ISere vi MAT AaPPOVIHE AL [rex beni fide pare, im Hal 
- Savuabare [Savuucoia] nai apaviosnre. The apostle leaves out 
what is enclosed between brackets, 


ore than - 


l or any, 
n annihi- 
ure, and 
to other 


is once 
hold, ye 
he “ van- 
its true 
\eanings. 
in which 
sluggish 
dissolves 
rines of 
Ss fe and 
: happen 
ill be to 
hey will 
ted, will 
e.” 

Is noth- 
from. the 
nse of it. 
le adop- 
f Hab. i. 
text. nor 
- wonder 
ler mar- 
der and 
rds give 
‘marvel- 


ogether, 
vreé,] wai 
leaves out 


THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS, 201 


~< 


phtheiro, phthora, diaphtheiro and kataphtheiro (gheipw 
Pupx, Siipheipwa, xnarapbeipw).’ In the New ‘Testament 
the first and second are uniformly translated “corrupt.” and 
“ corruption,” except 1 Cor. iii. 17, where we find, coryectly 
enough, “ detile” and “ destroy,” and 2 Peter ii. 12, “ ntade 


to be taken and destroyed.” The third is found six times: 


Luke. xii. 23, “where no moth corrupteth”; 1 Tim. vi. 5, 
“men of corrupt minds”; 2 Cor. iv. 16, “though our out- 
ward man perish”; Rev. viii. 9, “ the ships were (lestroyed ” ; 
and xi, 18, “shouldst destroy them which destroy the earth.” 
The fourth is only found, 2 Tim.’ iii. 8, “men of corrupt 
minds,” and 2 Peter ii. 12. “ shall utterly perish in their own 
corruption.” 

The meanings are sufticiently well given in these passages. 
Of the third of these words Mr. Constable says, “ The sense 


‘of the word as signifying wasting away to utter destruction, 


is constantly found in the New Testament.” Now the word 
is found altogether six times in five passages, as we have 
seen, and Mr. Constable is able to bring forward two not 
very clear or certain instances of this “constant” use : the 
first, “no moth corrupteth” ; the second, “ though our out- 
ward man perish,” * 

But it is upon 2 Peter ii. 12 that. he naturally lays most 
emphasis: “Speaking of the ungodly, Peter says, ‘These, 
as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, shall 
utterly perish in their own corruption.’ Here the same 
Greek word is used of the end of beasts, and the end of the 


ungodly. We know what is the-end of beasts taken -and 


destroyed : even such, Peter declares, will be the end of the 
ungodly in the future lite: they shall perish there. as beasts 
perish here” + — cs 

This argument has more appearance of truth in it, than 
any we have yet had from Mr. Constable. I¢ is however 
merely fallacious. The true comparison necessitates no such 
inference. For the point is really just what we have before 
glanced at, man’s loss of the place for which he was origin- 
ally created and for which his natural constitution fitted 


o 


)peream.orenesnseenenasseee oneness ee 
mise BSUS ener ae os ae = 


a Tae 


Se a eee 


innit een 


Sr TA TR RR a a oe sncaaiptinsan : wi 


SSIS Le. 


A RAEN 


3 


202 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


him. From this place he perishes, utterly perishes, and is 
destroyed: he “ loses himself and is cast away.” This is the 
natural thing for a“ brute beast, made to be taken and de- 
stroyed,’—to -fill a place ,temporarily, not perpetually. 
Man, made for eternal occupation of the position assigned to 
him, perishes dike the beast when he forfeits forever and 
loses this. The comparison with the beast is here sufficiently 
obvious without its involving the physical extinction 
which Mr. Constable's materialism would alone suggest. 

Two: other words,—ewrolothreno and olethros (éoA of pet ca, 
oAehpos)——are “properly and primarily significant,” says 
Mr. Constable, “ of utter extermination by death. They are 
applied in the New Testament to the punishmeht of sinners 
hereafter: ‘Every soul which will not hear that prophet 
shall be destroyed from among the people’; the ‘ wicked 
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord’ (1 Thess. v. 8; 2 Thess. i. 9; 1 Tim. 
vi. 9).” 

The first of these words occurs but once (Acts iii. 23) ; 
the second is four times used,—three times applied to the 
destruction of the ungodly. colothreno is given by Lid- 
dell and Scott as “ to destroy utterly.” Olethros is given as 
“puin, destruction, death.” 

A last word, not given by Mr. Constable, is Aataryeo, . 
(xarapyéw), to make void, of no effect, to nullify. It is the 
word translated “destroy” in 1 Cor. vi. 13; xv. 26; 2 Thess. 
ii. 8; Heb. ii. 14; “come to nought” in 1 Cor. ii. 6; “ abol- 
ish ” in 2 Tim. i. 10. Bs 

The effect of this inquiry as to Greek is to bring us back 


to the English, better satisfied than ever to abide by its 


decision. We have found no cause to quarrel with Dr. 
Weymouth when he tells us that4¢he Greek words in ques- 
tion mean “destroy ” and ‘‘ destruction.” As this is how 
they are translated in our common version, we may have 
confidence in it. The question is after all one of simple un- 
derstanding of some common English words. It takes no 
uncommon education to arrive at a satisfactory settlement 


,and is 
is is the 
and de- 
etually. 
oned to 
ver and 
ficiently 
tinction 
yest. 

Lob pet Gi, 
t,” says 
‘hey are 
sinners 
prophet 
wicked 


om the > 


1 Tim. 


iii. 23) ; 
to the 
by Lid- 
yiven as 


ALAN YEO, 


[t is the 
2 Thess. 
“ abol- 


us back 
» by its 
‘ith Dr. 
in ques- 
is how 
ay have 
nple un- 
akes no 
ttlement 


THE NEW TESTAMENT TERMS. 203 


of the question raised. It is worth while to have gone 
throngh the Greek to have discovered this. Our readers 
will go with us with the more assurance and intelligence, 
that we may adhere in this to our common English version. 

Meanwhile, we shall close this chapter with a remark or 
two on Paul's wish that he were “accursed from Christ. for 
his brethren “—which Mr. Constable brings forward as “an 
exact parallel to the prayer of Moses already reterred to.” 
Not questioning this, our remarks as to that prayer of 
eG apply here with equal force. I also agree with him 
that “an eternal life of blasphemy and mor: al corruption ” 
was not in Paul's thought, nor implied in the word used, 
“anathema.” It is peaishment he was wishing to bear, not 
* blasphemy and moral corruption.” Nor does Paul say, “I 
cod wish,” as if it were a deliberate thing, but “I was 
wishing ’”’—an impetuous wish at a certain time when. brood- 
ing over Isracl's terrible condition. To frame a doctrine 
out of, or support one by, the expression of a nidment’s 
fervid emotion is to strain Scripture, not interpret it.’ s 

But Mr. Constable thinks that his is the only view con- 
sistent with “the use of the term ‘accursed’ among the 
Grecks, by whom it was applied. to any animal devoted to 
death, and removed out of the sight of man, in order to 
avert canny, ” SIt is granted fully it is “devoted to’ de- 
struction,” and occurs thus in a passage much more to Mr. 
C.’s purpose, though quite inadequate for it: “if any man 
love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema” 
(1 Cor. xvi. 22). But this inno wise shows what the destruc- 
tion is, of which the animal sacrifice might be a figure. 
The argument goes tog far, for those same animal sacrifices 
among the Hebrews s of Christ, ash were equally “ de- 
vote to death, and’ removed out of th sight of man.” 
Did the Loyd sutter what’ ae Constable would imply by 
“utter death ” ? 


20-4 FACIS AND THEUOKLES AS TU A FUTURE STATE, 


CHAPTER XXI. 
; 4 
A FURTHER SURVEY OF THE SCRIPTURE TERMS. 


Deate# and destruction are clearly Scripture phrases for 
the end of the wicked. But the first is never extinction as 
we have seen, and all this class of texts are clearly against 
the views they are quoted for. Destruction again is the 
‘ruin of the thing or being of which it is predic ated, but by 
no means its passing out of being. The importance of the 
point is such, however, that we shall again review the mat- 
ter in company with others of Mr. Constable's school of 
thought, allowing them to state it to us in their own way, 
and to bring forward the arguments by which they believe 
their own view triumphantly sustained. “3 

. 

of the Wicked ° in a small tract bearing that title, and con- 

sisting of Scripture texts arranged under ten different heads. 
o these Mr. Jacob BlainUhas added others in his book, 

“ Death not. Life.” ‘ These* wo will furnish us with divisions 

under which we may arrange the material furnished by sev- 

eral other Renee 

Mr. Blain has indeed recalled his Keak since the change 
of views already mentioned, and he owns “that. purt of the 
texts quoted to prove endless loss of life” he now sees.“ by 
further research only to refer to temporal death or earthly 

jadgments.” Still, as many yet hold his former views, we 
may use his headings as above said, as convenient enough tor 
the purpose of our “intended review. 

To begin with Mr. Hastings’ headings as to the destiny 
of the wicked 

“1. They sh chati not live forever.” To which we may 
add— og 

«2, They shall die.” ares = Ke 


é 


q 


Mr. Hastings has given us a summary as to ‘The Destiny 


ue 


4 
{S. 


rases for 
iction as 
against 
n is the 
, but by 
e of the 
the mat- 
chool of 
wn way, 
believe 


) 


Destiny 


ind con- 
t heads. 
is book, 
livisions 
by sev- 
4 
change 
t of the 
ees.“ by 
earthly 
eWs, we 
mgh tor 


destiny 


ye may 


et 


A FURTHER SURVEY OF THE SCRIPTURE TERMS. 205 


“The texts quoted under the first we have already con. 
sidered ; for they are those which speak of eternal life, that 
which with God is really life. Take as an example: “ He 
that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not life” (1_John v. 12). Or again, John vi. 
53: “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink 
His blood, ye have no life in you.” How is it that Mr. 
Hastings does. not see that, according to the passages he 
quotes, taken as he would take them, not only the wicked 
will have no future existence, but have none now ? That 
is what his proof texts show, if his system is correct. 
- But what his texts do prove is, that eternal life is not 
merely existence or ‘immortality, and that in the Scripture 
language one may be (to use Paul’s expression of the woman 
that lives in pleasure), 1 Tim. v. 6: ‘‘dead while living.” 
Now, if there be such a living death even now, as we are 
thus assured there is, why not for eternity? And if the be- 
liever, having now (as we have seen) eternal life, yet: enters 
into it as his general state hereafter, why may not the un- 
believer, dead now gs alas he is, and alienated from the life 


. of God, yet go into death as his final adjudged condition, 


by the sentence of the Judge hereafter ?_ 

Mr. Roberts, apparently following Mr. Edw. White,* con- 
tends against this application of 1 Tim. v. 6. He asks of 
the person in question whether she was “actually dead, or 
in a state relating to death as a consummation? Is it not 
the sense actually expressed in the words of Christ, ‘ Let 
the dead bury their dead’? (Luke ix. 60): the living said 
to be dead, because destined to share the fate of the corpses 


_in question? This,” he says finally, “cannot be gainsaid.” 


But.one would think it could. For very plainly, if that 
be all, the man whom the Lord addressed was as dead as 
anybody else, and the language would be quite unmeaning. 
Nor can Mr. Roberts talk about the second death. “The 


* dead” who were to be buried could not mean dead of that 


death. 


* Life in Christ, p. 281, 


a ee er 


TE ELIE LI SN cen oy 


etic Ge ~ 


oR SR REtEEEEEEEeeres 


Soe erence eR ee 


there i 


206 ' FACTS AND THEOQLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Morvover, we have a similar phraseology sufficiently else- 
where to determine its meaning very precisely. For in-: 


stance, where the Lord (in John v. 24, 25) speaks of the »” 
dead hearing His voice and living, He is plainly not spealging 


of those subject to the first death, for the life must of cain 


be in contrast to the death. If therefore those subject to 
physical death are “ passed from death to life,” they cannot 
jhysically die, which we know is not the truth. The 
“dead” must then be considered as subjects of; or sentenced 
to, the second death, according to Mr. Roberts; but this 
will not hold either. Under the power of the second death 
they are not yet, and needgot in that sense deliverance, for 
the second death is the Ge ot fire. And again if we Muy 
x ntenced to the second deathly, deliverance from’ this sentence 
would not be quickening, Butas such our Lord represents 
it, the impartation of a true life here and now, a lite which 
is morally characterized by the knowledge of the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ whom He has sent. The death in. 


ay -contrast with this can only be what we rightly call spiritual 


ve 


«leath, “ alienation from the life of God through the ignorance 
that is in men, because of. the blindness eatts ” 
(Eph..iv. 18). Where thisifife is not, deat 


iprinly by“ 
“ dead while living.™ Nor can. Mr. Roberts prove that Serip- 
Liny Where intends by the dead the fiction he conceives, 
hdying of the. first death Are never in Scripture called, 
High -are qo; and he is merely evading the force 


of} 4B Plainly peainst him as they stand. T ask again 
y arg) eo ‘ “wom ols . . ; 
thé gre be sila living death now, as it is- proved 


8, why not for eternity ? : 

Again let us remind ourselves also that the second death “ 
is the lake of fire, beginning when death (as it is ordinarily 
understood) ends and is no more, and certainly not therefore 
its continuance or repetition. “In no way can the threaten- 
ing of “ death” imply extinction. 

‘All Mr. Constable’s arguments as to the primary sense of 
words and the necessity of their: being kept to their literal 


i ad 


4 
i 


ntly else- 

For in-' 
ks of the 
spealging 


° 4? A 
of clin gli 


ihject to 
y cannot 
th. The 
entenced 
but this 
id death 
ince, for 
r we say 
sentence 
presents 
’ which 
nly true 


leath in: 


piritual 
norance 


t Scrip- 


neelves, 
> called 
ie force 
k again 
proved 


| death 
inarily 


eretore 


+ 


reaten- _ 


nse of 
literal 


a 


—- ie \ 


® A FURTHER SURVEY OP THE SCRIPTURE TERMS. 207 


aning, which so yany beside himself insist upon, com- 


pletely break down tn the face of the facts: of Scriptare. i * 


is in vain to urge a use of terms such as Macaulay and Hume 
in their character as historians of the present would necessa- 
rily require to make, when the things in question belong to 
that future where we see ¢v aivcyuari, ina riddle, God has 
not mocked us indeed, nor used words in an tnreal or un- 
truthful sense. His solemn statements are not unfitted 
surely to convey a meaning which the general @onsent of 
Christendom unequivocally attaches to them. | Amd writers 
such as Mr. Constable show plainly that they are not, by 
the way they constantly pervert that meaning in order to 
forte it into contradiction with the Bible terms, Thus 
Goodwyn says: “If death does mean ceaseless suffering in 
life, theres can be no confidence in expression by words”; 
and so Constable, “death is made to mean: its direct oppo- 
site—life ’; and so Dobney asks, “ How was Adam to un- 
derstand that death meant life—endleps life—endless life in 
tornient ?” 

But who asserts such’ a meaning? The second death_is 
the lake of fire, and therefore torment cannot be excluded 
from the ide& of it, as we have seen. But death i dself 


does .not “mean” torment even here. It means anything 


“life.” It means separation from the Blessed Source 
of life: that “alienation from the life of God” on man’s 
side, which is spiritual death, meeting its end in God’s final 
withdrawal on the other. And as God’s withdrawal canmiot , 
mean indifference, and as He cannot cease to be the Moral 


Governor of His creatures, it implies the manifestation ..... 


of that eternal displeasure, which the lake of fire is. 

This may suffice to answer Mr. Minton’s question as to 
what life the wicked can lose in the: day of judgment, and 
which he settles by a process of exhaustion can be only 
physiéal life. We might answer that, if that be the judg- 
ment, surely it would be reléase to many, and scarcely, in 
comparison of preceding anguish, judgment at atl. But, his 


question is founded upon a misapprehension. We have seen 


~~ 


NE aE Ae 


- rr arr aera 
nee 


emai 
SRSA aN EIS Seeaaa wean oe CRBS as : mire Fakes 
pic ieigs ees a Rell RPS 3 a on Care ee 


Sn ec ann 


. _ . , . , A - . E ve i i) . - -. 
: - rae eee, . : ans : eee pe ; << a 
: ; re: . : - . : = mas oom 
ic ; eee a —————— SP raat street pa aa oe & 
2 = we ote eter ees S Ria ee eS 
SS ee commen = : ; aise Sate gon Se 7 
° 


- 


208 FACTS AND THEORIES AS ‘To A FUTURE STATE, 


that the. righteous “enter into life” in the world to come, 
and yet that that does not imply that they have not got it 
here; and similarly the wicked enter into death, find it in 
all its awful reality, in that judyment day. It is their whole 
condition, unrelieved and unmitigated as before it might be, 
aye, even for the rich man or for Cain. The resurrection 
for. just or unjust alone can give them their full capacity 
for enjoyment or for suffering. The resurrection of the 
wicked precedes their judgment to the second death. 
We-may pass on to consider: Mr. Hastings’ third* head, 


with which we may take as merely synonymous with it: in ° 


the original, his fifth. These are— 

‘3. They shall perish.” > 

‘‘5. They shall be destroyed.” 

Mr. Hastings depends mainly it’ not entirely here upon 
what he considers the simple force of the words “ destroy,” 
ete. Says Mr. Jacob Blain: “If destroy is sometimes ap- 
plied to calamities on earth, it still means the endiny of a 
thing, as of prosperity, liberty, country, character, etc.; so 
to say it does not mean the ending of the thing to which it 
refers is false.” Fh 

So it seems a question of some simple English words, 
which strangely enough, we do not understand. Our trans-. 
lators used however both destroy and perish for ruin where 
the thing remained in ruins, and did not come to an end. 
The bottles burst by the new wine are thus said to be “ per- 
ished,” as we have seen. They were ruined, looking at the 
original purpose for which they were destined. And 80, 


‘though the righteous “ perished,” he entered into peace. 


So again we ‘have, “the land perisheth,” “the valley also 
shall perish;” so over and over again is it said that 
Israel was to be “ destroyed,’ and after this had come upon 
her her captivity was to be turned (Deut. xxviii. xxx.). The 
constant reference to death agrees entirely with this. In 
none of these cases is there an end of the thing destroyed. | 
Mr. Roberts, in order to find an end somewhere, must say 


that if “the land perishes,” the state of prosperity does, and 


Biss he Res oss re ee Oe : 


ao ee 
PIE BP 


ny 


‘TE, 


to come, 
not got it 
find it. in 
heir whole 
might be, 
surrection 
I capacity 
on of the 
th. 

ird* head, 


vith it in ° 


ere upon 
estroy,” 
times ap- 
liny of a 
ete.; so 
which it 


1 words, 
ur trans-. 
n where 
an end. 
de “ per- 
x at the 
And so, 
> peace. 
ley also 
iid. that 
21€ upon 
). The 
iis. In 
troyed. 
ust say 


A FURTHER SURVEY OF THB SCRIPTURE TERMS. 209 


this is what is meant by “ the land”! “In the case of an ar- 


ticle Zost”-——the same werd in the original,—“ possession is de 
stroyed *! and so on. The case is very plain that destrue- 
tion does not mean “annihilation” in cy of these examples. 

But there is one text which we must specially look at in 
this connection, and a very important one it is. Mr. Minton 
has given it the fullest examination that I have ‘seen, and 
therefore we may best follow his argument as to it. It is in 


his “Way Everlasting ” (pp. 27-33), and follows what he 


ealls the “settlement” by “ exhaustion” of what life the 
wicked have yet to lose in the day of judgment. This 
we have seen he decides must be natural life, and he goes 
on :— % 


“ Add is not that just the life which our Lord Himself precisely. 


detines to be what.20/l/ be taken away from them.? ‘Fear not 
them which kill the body and are not able to kill the soul ; but 
rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in 
hell’ (Matt. x. 28). Now I put it to your conscience whether you 
can find a more distinct and positive utterance than that upon 
any subject whatever in the whole Bible. Would it be possible 
for any human being who read that text with an unprejudiced 
mind, to have the smallest doubt as to its meaning ? Does it not 
distinetly threaten that God will do to both body and soul that 
which man can do to the body, Dut. is ‘not able’ to do to the 


soul—‘ Ail’ them ? ”’ 2 tri 


No,:Mr. Minton, it does not. 


not said any where moreover inSeripture. The soul is never 
“killed.” Let Mr. Minton say, what would be the result 


if it were said :-— 


“And what is killing ? Why, depriving, of life. While. the 
body retains one spark of life of any sort or ‘dese ‘ription, it is not 
killed ; and while the soul retains one spark of life of any Sort or 


description, it is not killed.” 


_ I quite agree with him. And. how then can he account 
for the fact, that hav ring used this decisive word in the first 
clause of the sentence, the Lord refuses it for the second 


ae ST FE 


Be A GET I AE ME SERN oP MT eI SE 


The word is expressly « 
altered to avoid saying so. And what is not said here is 


es, and 


parts Certainly-not—withont some reason for it, He tums 


210 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO-A FUTURE STATE. 


aside from saying what would seem the most natural thing 
for Him to say, Be pee of using again the word “ kill,” 
which he had just used, He substitutes « destroy ”. for 
rT kill.” ‘ 

Nor only so. Mr. Minton cannot find this word kill ap- 
plied anywhere fo the soul or to fature punishment. It is 


rejected as unfit both here and everywhere. And T ask, 


» . ' “WWD Oe one ay if 
phatically what “ killing ” is, and how decisive of the contro? ss. 


rn | 
versy in his favor, that he has the boldness to reply, “CUn- 


same thing, but expressed by a stronger word—in, fact. the 
strongest word that can be used”! 

Now the word “kill” is only employed for taking Jife, 
and scarcely ever in any figurative sense at all. Mr. Minton 
appeals to Liddell and Scott as his authority. We will 
accept the appeal, and contrast the words. The latter word 
in the verse, apolluani («zolAvuz) is indeed given as “to de- 
Stroy utterly, kill, slay, murder,” but it is added that it 
means “ very frequently in all sorts of relations, to destroy, 
ruin, spoil, waste, squander,” and in the middle form, 
not only “to perish, die, fall,” {but “also simply, to full 
into ruin, be undone,” and even “ to be wretched or mis- 
erable.” 

Now compare the other word apoktceino (oxrétv@), and 
we find the only meanings given to be “to kill, slay, smite 
to dleath, to put to death, to Weary. to death, torment ’— 
but this last metaphorical use a.very rare one, and in Serip- 


doubtedly to increase the foree of the threatening. It is the 


ture never employed. Now I ask: Mr. Minton,—I ask any 


honest man,—if our Lord had designed to use a word which . 
should unequivocally set forth the annihilation of the soul, 
which would haye been the fitter for his purpose, the one 
whith in Scripture language has no other sense than that of 


taking life, or the one which is very frequently used in 


other senses ? 


yee) 


salle. 


a i¢ 


why?) Why does the Lord substitute “destroy” for “kill ” ee 
Would it be believed, after Mr. Minton telling us so eine? 


a 
w 
iy 
& 
2 
4 
2 
4 
= 
, 


And even this, decisive—asit ought tobe, does not put 


rE. 


ral thing 
rl “kill,” 
roy”. tor 


d kill ap- 
it. It is 


wl Task, x 7 


3 


ly, “Gp 
It is the. 
fact the 


ing life, 
. Minton 
Ve will 
er word 
“to de- 
that it 
lestroy, 
» form, 
to full 


Or neés- 


w),and 
r, Smite 
ent "— 
| Scrip- 
isk any 
which . 
e soul, 
he one 
hat of 
sed in 


conte? 
? contro: 
ae 


3" 


4 


< 
M4 


oe 


it ational aa a 


A FURTHER SURVEY OF THE SCRIPTURE TERMS. 21] 


the argument in its strongest form. For if we will be at. a 
little pains to go beyond the ‘lexicon, and inquire for our- 
selves the force of the terms in Scripture, we shall find—and 
I do not doubt the same to’ be true elsewhere than in Serip- 
ture—that apolhuni is NEVER the word used simply to ex- 
press the taking of lifas That may be (often is, no douht) 
necessarily tmplied ; but that is quite another thing. It is 
never once translated “kill” in our version, only once (in 
the middle) “ die,” where “perish” would be better (John 
xviii, 14), and is actually put alongside of kill in the same 
sentence to convey a different thought (John x. 10)... The 
more any, one will study the Scripture use of the words, the 
more he: will be convinced that the very opposite of Mr. 
Miniton’s lassertion is the truth, and that the decisive word 
to convey the annihilationist meaning. is the very word that 
the Lord rejects, and deliberately rejects, after having used it 
in the beginning of the very sentence from which He rejects 
it at the end. . 

I close in Mr. Minton’s own words that “it would really / 
seem as if the force of demonstration could no further go.” 

We may pass on then to Mr. Hastings’ next class of 
texts: - ie 

- “4. They shall be cut off.” ” 

All that he quotes In this way is from the Old Testament, 
and refers, as the quotations themselves prove, to the extir- 
pation of the wicked out of the earth simply, without. in- 
timating their after-condition. Thus Psa. xxxvii., speaking 
of millennial days: “for evil doers shall _be cut off; but those 
that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth.” 
Again, Nahum i. 15: “O Judah... the wicked shall no 
more pwtss through thee: he is utterly cut off.’ Or again, 
Proy. ii. 22: “But the wicked shall be cut off from the 
earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.” 

There are few more frequent causes of mistake with that 
class of annihilationists to which Hastings, Miles Grant, 
Blain, and Roberts, among others, belong, than this: con- 


SRP RCAIME LETTS 


It put 


4. founding of the destruetion-of the-wicked-out of the earth 


. 


212 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


in order to the great predicted blessing for it with the eter- 
nal judgment when the carth and heavens flee away. They 
believe.in no heavenly portion of the saints, nothing more 
than a sort of “heavenly condition” upon earth. For them 
consequently destruction out, of the earth is apparently in- 
distinguishable from final judgment. We shall have to 
consider the difference hereafter, but the passages quoted 
speak for themselves. 

The same remarks apply to his sixth class :— 

“6. They shall be consumed.” 

Take Zeph. i. 2, 3, for example: “T will utterly consume 
all things. from. off the land, saith the Lord. Twill consume 
man and beast ; I will consume the fowls of heaven, and the 


fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks. with the wicked, | 


and I will eut off man trom off the land, saith the Lord.” 
‘ So Psa. civ. 35: * Let the sinners be consumed out. of the 


earth, and let the wicked be no more.” These are some of — 


Mr. Hastings’ own texts adduced for the annihilation of the 
wicked! The cause must he weak that requires such argu- 
ments. ae 
Mr. Hastings’ next three heads I must leave for after con- 
sideration. They are these :— : 

Oli The agent of punishment shall be fire and«brimstone. 

“&. ‘They shall be burned up root and branch. 

“9. Their punishment shall take place, not at death, but 
at the coming of Christ.” i 

To the tenth again the same remarks apply. It is all the 
earthly judgment which precedes millennial blessing.. And 
upon the principle of interpretation which must be adopted 
in order to make texts such as these apply to the final ex- 
tinction of the wicked, I could not only prove that Enoch 
was annihilated (because he “was not”) but could find the 
doctrine of annihilation in most books that were ever writ- 
ten. According to Mr. H.. if T but find Israel assured that 
“they that war against thee shall he as NOTHING, and as a 
THING OF NOUGHT,” or “that they shall diligently consider 


the place [of the v1 tit SHALE NOT, -1am- en 


ATE. 


‘h the eter- 
ay. They 
hing more 

For them 
arently in- 


| have to — 


res quoted 


7 consume 
| consume 
n, and the 
e wicked, | 
he Lord.” 
ut. of the 


‘some of — 


on of the 
uch argu- 


after con- 
‘Imstone. 
eath, but 


is all the - 
g.. And 
adopted 
final ex- 
t Enoch 
find the 
rer writ- 
red that, 
and as a 
consider 


A FURTHER SURVEY OF THE SCRIPTURE TERMS. 213 


titled to put these expressions in small capitals, and consider 
them conclusive proof that the wicked are annihilated! 


Once more I ask, what can I think of such arguments as — 


these, or of the cause that needs them ? 
Mr. Blain adds to these quotations :— 
11. “Slay, slain, kill.” All his texts as usual applying to 


sain 


earthly judgments > 
12. “Blot out.” Here he quotes Psa, Ixix. 28, which is 


earthly judgment, and Rev. ili. 5, which has reterence to the 
peculiar case of those in Sardis who had “a name to live” 
on earth, showing“that it applies to the profess/on of eternal 


life. Man had, as it were, written these names in the book — 
.of life. Christ would blot them out, where it was only 


that. What eternal life is we have already seen. 

13. “Hewn down.” Here he quotes Matt. iii, 10; vii. 
19. But compare as to the force of the expression Dan. iv. 
14: it does not at all imply even the taking away of natural 
life. His argument about the fire we may see the force of 
by and by; but certainly if “hewn down” itself signifies 
the extinction of natural life, there would he little canse to 
dread the “dire” afterwards. 7 

14. “Lose life.” These texts have been’ already con. 
sidered. cay 

“End.” Mr. B. remarks, “If the wicked are immortal, 
they have vo end, and this language is absurd.” -But of 
what then, or of whom, is “ everlasting life ” (according to 
Rom. vi. 22) “the end”? If everlasting life be an end in 
any way, whether of a saint or of his works, then “ end’ is not 
necessarily cessation of existence. 
his end, and the end of the wicked és “ destruction ' but 
annihilation it is not. ee 


As to Psa. vii. 9,“ O let the wickedness. of the wicked | 
“it is the groan of a soul feeling the strong -y 
hand of oppression, and has no refipence fo eternal jude- 


come to’an.end !:* 


ment. 
Mr. Blain’s following dexta (except one) have all reterence 


A man’s final estate is > 


a 


apse 


Sse Fa av Sel on ere Nanay oe 


se eg geal 


amr en 


to that clearing out of evil from the earth, which he every- 


boik i a atone ce 9 CA aaa emp et ss Oe AUD ara ie APP alae DRE TNS eh 


° 


f 

i 

' 
hes: 
| 


oe . tz s 
214 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


where seems to overlook. Yet it is a most real thing, and 
figures largely in the word of prophecy, as what is to take 
place at the coming of the Lord, before the earth shall have 
its blessing under the dominion of the Prince of peace. 

As to thewway these texts are quoted I have the same 
protest to make in general, as I had’ with regard to Mr. 
Constable's quotations before. The citations are loose, ran- 
dom and careless." They are, heaped upon one another, as 
if to make impression by their numbers, and overwhelm the 
judgment, rather than invite inspection. Words and 
phrases are taken from their context, and assorted in the 
fashion of a concord gnce, with no discrimination of the texts 
in which they are found. The examination: of them leaves 


_. the impfession of unmistakable carelessness in the use of 
_Seripture, and a most thorough ell to push K the utmost 


every expression that in the least may seem to favor their 
doctrine, Against it I appeal to the very texts they have 
cited. They need but'a little patient gxamination, with sin- 
gleness of purpose and waiting upon God, to give true ‘and 
unambiguous testimony as ‘the word of the blesséd God 
who cannot lie, cannot fail the soul that looks in faith-to 


Him. ‘2 


Note.—Messrs. Constable and White both press an argument here trom 
certain passages in Plato's Phiedo in which some of the New Testament 


‘ words are used by hin to give the idea of the literal destruction or “ ez- 


tinction of the soul.” But Plato's use of the words cannot avail to set 
aside a use of them, proved as we have proved it from the New Testa- 
ment itself. Spite of their protest, it is well known that mhany words 
attain a moral or spiritual significance in- Seripture, which will be 


vainly sought for in classical Greek. They will hardly deny this, as it 


can so easily be proved. That Plato should use some of these words 
therefore, in a physical sense, while Scripture uses them ina spiritual, 
is nowreat cause of wonderment, Let them meet frankly the argument 
from Scripture, and fot settle the question by appeal to the terms of 
Greek philosophy, j 

: V 


Oo. 


. 


a 


4 
j 


x 


ah SEER eras cot eins aE 


» 
e3 . 


a ee ee ee eee ee ee ee 


. TE. 


thing, and 
is to take 
shall have 
pace. 

the same 


d to Mr. 


oose, ran- 


nother, as: 


vhelm the 
yrds and 
ed in the 
‘the texts 
m leaves 
’ ouse of 
le utmost 
vor their 
hey have 
with sin-- 
true ‘and 
sed God 
faith-to 
here from 
Tesfament 
Onoor “ eye 
Vail to set 
ew Testa- 
ny words 
h will be 
this, as it 
ese words 
spiritual, 
argument 
terms of 


I tS le tale al a 


THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF DEATH. 215 


CHAPTER XXII. 
THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF DEATH. 


WE now come to look at a point of great importance in 
many respects, and which has been indeed already spoken 


: of, but not fully proved or dwelt upon as it deserves. I 


mean the provisional and temporary character of the first 
death. | " 


We have already argu-d that the penalty attaching to the ° 


eating of the forbidden tree was simply this, and did not at 
all (as so many beside’ Mr. Constable assume) include in it 
“all that God purposed to inflict upon Adam and his pos- 
terity in case of transgression”! Where is the least warrant 


for this? The actual result to us of that primal sin we 


have had the apostle state to us, and that is (so far as in- 
fliction from God is concerned) physical death as His stamp 
upon a fallen condition, His judgment of a race corrupted 
from its beginning. ; 
Herein lay of course the possibility, nay, probability, of a 
final sentence. But God is in no haste with judgment ; and 
this was the beginning of the world’s history, not the close 
of it. Who, save for the need of making a. system, could 
imagine the beneficent Creator of man, at once, and for the 


| personsil offence of-our first parents, adjudging all their de- 


scendants to eternal death ? Scripture at any rate has naught 
of it, and we are seeking to follow Scripture in its simplest 


4 facts and statements. 


It may. be urged, however, that death followed as one of 


~ these facts and that that shows that Adam’s posterity shared 


in Adam’s judgment: 
But that is a very different thing, asa little consideration 
will assure us. Death was indeed God’s judgment upon the 


SEED eS 


race as Vitiated and corrupt, but—inasmu¢h as it was cor- 
rupted by another’s sin and not its own,—a judgment which 


Cee) Loa - eer ppm aren pn 
Sele edl Coeea oe Be Lemecnnts nk ee eis er ea a 


SRE 


S 


Foe I SARS ASE MRE LET ITS URE TIERS RIT EL a ATE LOD TORE BE KS 
nr a 


wees 


RSENS NESBSTEST Nn 


Sie Sept imaneeaguny 


sae | 


es 


eee Nani 


Se es ee ae ee 


SESE, 


if we left it there, there would be manif 


216 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


was a mercifui discipline for it, a witness to the fallen crea- 
ture of its own condition, an appeal to it by its own frailty 
and helplessness to look higher than itself. for help, an ad- 
mouition so to number its days that its heart might. be 
applied to wisdom. What should we do without the thorns 
and thistles which grow out of the ground cursed for man’s 
sake’ What should we do without the need of the sweat 
of the brow? What, without the ministry of death itself? 
Surely a blessing is in this curse; it is'an evil which is good ; 
the discipline of the Father of spirits for our profit, chasten- 
ing of a holy hand that we may be partakers of His holiness, 
and in its own nature contrasted with that final sentence 
which is “ Depart from me, ye cursed.” The first death and 
the second death are contrasts and not the-same. 

Such is its nature, if we consider it as the fruit simply of 
A-lam’s sin, its legacy to his descendants. It was the wise 
and tender foresight of Him who saw the floodyates of evil 
pierced, and the awful outburst of iniquity before it came, 
and ordained this as its corrective, as One who did not 
intend to give up His creatures to it, to perish through help- 
lessness alone. If by one man sin was entering into the 
world, then “death by sin” wwas the Divine ordinance. 
And right and good every prodigal proclaims it whom the 
pressure of hunger causes to: think of a,Father’s house :— 
every psalmist that ever was, with Israel’s sweet Psalmist 
when he owns, “ Before I was. afflicted I went astray, but 
now I have kefit Thy words.” ° e 

This is death as an appendage to a fallen condition; but 
est incongruity with 
much of Scripture and of fact as well. In order to have the 


‘(whole statement and the full harmonious,‘truth, we must 


look further. We must distinguish between death as we 
should rightly consider it, as introduced into the world 
through anothér’s sin, and, on the other hand, as brought © 


upon us through our own personal transgressions, The 
Old_ Testament is full_of this nll hjent, aehick te ford 


also in the New. At Corinth, where they were profaning 


4. - 


TE. 


allen crea- 
wn frailty 
lp, an ad- 
might. be 
the thorns 
for man’s 
the sweat 
ith itself ? 
Lis good ; 
, chasten- 
holiness, 

sentence. 
leath and 


imply of 
the wise 
Ss of evil 
it came, 
did not 
igh help- 
into the 
dinance. 
10m the 
ouse :— 
?salmist. 
ray, but 


on; but 
ity with 
ave the 
¢ must 
1as we 
- world 
rought - 
. The 


EPS eae 


THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF DEATH. 217 


the Lord’s supper, many were weak and sickly among them, 
and many slept (1 Cor. xi. 30). And the apostle John tells 
us of a.“ sin unto death” for which hé does not say that one 
should. pray (1 John v. 16). 

But the Old Testament-it is that insists ever upon death 
as the penalty of personal transzvression, and this is just 


' what. the text means on all sides so little understood, “ the 


soul that sinneth it shall die.”” Even this is not. the second 
death, which the Old Testament knows.nothing of. It isa 
sinner dying in his sins and under judgment, and which 
leaves its boding shadow upon the future beyond death. 
But we must reserve this subject for another chapter. 

Death is then a proyisional, not a final, sentence. It is a 
corrective discipline from the Father of spirits in view of 
the entrance of sin into the world. It is in its own nature 
temporary and to pass away, as Scripture declares it will. 
_As the separation of soul and body, it is a necessary hin- 
drance to the full blessing of the righteous, and a hindrance 


also to the full judgment ot the wicked. For the righteous 


and for the wicked alike, although with opposite effect, it is 
at. the resurrection finally done away. 

. Let us look at some Scriptures which i in this way get their 
proper significancg, and in this way only. |: 

First, the Lord’s answer to the Sadduceés touching the 
resurrection (Luke xx. 27-38). These Sadducees were con- 
sistent in their unbelief, and, as they denied resurrection, 
they denied the, existence also of the spirit in the separate 
state; and it is this last that the Lord takes up and proves, 
in order by it to prove the resurrettion. 

God says at the bush, “I am the God of Abrahan, and 
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Bit, if e were 
then in that relationship to them, they must be existent for 


Him to be.so. He could not--be the God of the dead (in 


the Sadducee sense of death, the non-existent), they must be 


in some sense alive, alive ¢o /Zim, and so they dre. 


1 Rf ee co ar et i 


DRT I 


found 


yfaning 


But then “This apparently proves but a separate existence — 
of the spirit in death, and that has ever been the difficulty 


« : $f 


‘ 


218 ~=FACTS AND THEORIES AS 10 A FUTURE STATE. : 


about it. How does proving “the existenee‘of Abraham 
Isaac and Jacob in the separate state. prove resurreétion ? 
Very simply after all. For what is death upon this. view 
- of it? Mahifestly the infringement of God's creative plan. 
He had not made man aspirit. merely, but a spirit cgbodied. 
A spirit disembodied could not be God’s intenti wi {or His 
gifts and calling are without repentance. The body ‘there- 
Sore must rise again. eae 
And this is no forced argument. I doubt not it was: one 
well understood in that day, when men’ were accustomed 


to a sort of reasoning which the clear light of the New Teg- | 


tament (wherein ‘ife and incorruption ive been brought 
to light) has set aside as unnecessary to-those who have it. 
But that this is no forced argument we have the best possi- 
ble evidence; for it is Mr. Constable’s own conclusion (per- 
fect Sadducee as he is as to the separate staté)-48 to what 
the separate existence of the spirit might imply. We have 
quoted his words already, but. will cite them again to show 
how he considers this linked by implication with resurrection 
of the dead. “If the first death,” he says, “is consistent 
with man’s in fact not dying, but continuing to live in regard 
to his most important part, whose survival may again be 
supposed to imply the restoration of the body to lifé,” ete. 
That is what it really does, and we may well bore it no 
forced or unnatural conclusion, when we find from such a 
quarter so decided a testimony as to its naturalne 8. 

Take an illustration from a fact before our kyes. The 
preservation of the Jews as a nation after near eighteen 
hundred years of dispersion into all lands is one of the 
standing miracles whereby God rebukes the unbelief of Hlis” 
prophetit word. But what does it argue to those who be: 
lieve in His hand as guiding surely and not doubtfully, all 
things according to IlTis resistless' counsels ?_ If we must 
say, this is the finger of God, to zohat does it point ? Surely, 
to that national resurrection from. the dead, which yet in 


iy 
iy 


i 


His—own—time—te-will accomplish. This is the simple? + 
prompt conclusion of faith. It may serve to illustrate the 


ATE, ° 


Abraham, 
urreétion ? 
1 this. view 
pative plan. 

agpbodied. 

for His 
badly ashe 


it was: one 
ecustomed _ 
New Teg- | 
n brought 
ho have it. 
est. possi- 
‘ston. (per- 
$to what 
We have 
n to show 
surrection 
consistent 
‘in regard 
again be 
life,” ete. 
ieve it no 
such a 
S. 
es. The 
eighteen 
e of the 
ef of IIis’ 
who be: 
tfully, all 
we must 
Surely, 
h yet in 


 )} 


a 


THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF DEATH. 219 


connection of thought between the belief in the separate 
spirit and the resurrection of the body. 

And we may note that the inspired historian seems. in 
some way to connect them, when, Paul having proclaimed 
himself in the council a Pharisee and the son of a Pharisee, 
he adds in explanation: “ for the Sadducees say that there is 
no resurrection, neither angel, nor J BUUE but the Pharisees 
confess both.” 

But we must not forget that there is another way in which 
the words of our Lord are attempted to be explained. In- 
deed, we‘have already heard Mr. Roberts upon the subject. 
Let us now listen to M?.. Dobney-. He has taken particular 
pains to establish the sense in which the passage is to be 
understood. He says of the explanation of it in the way we 
have given: “With us it would be a striking and satisfac- 
tory proof of a continuance of conscious existerice after 
death—but 20 proof whatever of a resurrection ; and yet it 
is to prove this last exclusively that our Lord, who could 
not have reasoned inaccurately or sophistically, adduces it.” 
He paraphrases therefore the Lord’s argument thus :— 

“God is not the God of the dead [utterly and | eternally 
perished, which was the sense in which the Sadducees used it, 
with whom He was disputing] but of the living. 

‘But he calls himself the God of the Patriarchs. 

“Therefore these still live—or will live again [which is the 
same thipg with Him to whom the future is the present, and who 
calls the lthings that are not, but shall be, as though they already 
were]. 


‘¢ But then, as already intimated, since it was a resurrection ovr’ 


Lord undertook to establish, which He establishes only by prov- 
ing a life after death, the life which carries with it a proof oi 
resurrection must ether be itself identical therewith, or else de- 
pendent thereupon.’ : 
The patriarchs “live” then in the purpose of God as to 
‘them, not actually, but God calling that which is not a: 


though it were—that is how Mr. Dobney understands it. 


Jaime maul 


3 simple? } 
rate the — 


Bat then, when God says, “I a, the God of Abranun,’ 
the present actually y is everything. If otherwise, then as 


X 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO | FUTURE STATE, 


the past is the present also to Divine Omniseience, no less 
than the future, dTe might be Abraham’s God in that HEISE, 
and no resurreetion be involved at all, : 

But it is not true that, in the way Mr, Dobney under- 
“stands it, God “lls the things that are not as though they 
were. In the passage he quotes: God does indeed speak 
of the “many nations” of which He had made Abraham 
father, with divine certainty, as being, although they were 
not yet\ But He does not speak of their present existence, 
While they do not exist: So He could not assert; ‘Tam 
the God of Abraham” as a matter of present relationship, 

~when none existed. To say so is to speak deceitfully for 
~ Him. “Tam the God of Abrahany” to hunan eary neces- 
sarily inferred what God Was then at the time He Spoke. 
Nor was there here praphecy at all; no announcement, of 
the future, nothing that, could ‘involve the thought of the 
“future. God could no more say He was the God of Abra- 
ham while there was no Abraham to be God to, than He could 
say Tam raising the dedd, a thousand years before the resur- 
rection... “The Lord which is, and which was, and which is 
‘to come,” (lixtinguishes between the present and the future, 
Which Mr. Dobney would contound. But God says, “T will 
be” as well as “I am, and in this distinguishes, that we © 
may understand Him: binding Himself to the fotms of hué,, 
man speech which He adopts; speaking like one of our- — 
Z3clves, however little He be that, instead of hiding Himself 
trom usin His own pertections, ~ ; 
“Ten the God of Abraham” then involved the fact-of 
Abrahim’s existence when He spoke. He could not be the 
‘rod of one who had no existence, could not be in relation- 
ship to a nonentity, could not be (in the Sadducees’ thought 
of what the dead were) “the God of the dead.” ‘The sur- 
Vival thus of Abraham in his most important. part: implied 


(a3 Mr. Coustable allows) “ the restoration of the body to 
life.” \ 


Death; is then in its own nature temporary. As the de- 


rangement of God’s thought of man in his creation, it must 


nr = Th == ee = - Mm 


tf ——_ 


7. weed ce le ee me Ce OCU 


\ TE. 


ce, no less 
that sense, 
~ 


ney under- 
ough they 
eed speak 
Abraham 
they were 
existence, 


rt; ‘I am . 


ationship, 
(fully for 
ik neces- 
Le spoke. 
‘ment. of 
ht of the 
of Abra- 
He could 
he resur- 
which is 
e future, 
“I will 
that we © 


8 of hué& — 


of our- 
Timself 


fact-of 
_ be the 
elation- 
hought 
he sur- 
mplied 
ody to 


THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER OF DEATH. 221 


of necessity be set aside. It is the provisional appendage 
of a scene into which sin has entered, but where God's 
merey also abounds. In its natere it could not be final. 
In fact it is to be done away. - 

Death does not enter then into the fil judgment. 7'hat 


_ is expressly stated to be “AFTER death.” “It is appointed 


unto men ONCE to die, but arrer this the judgment.” 
There are men we wot of who say it is appointed unto men 
vice to die,—that the second death is of the same nature as 
the first,—and that death thus 7s the judgment. Let us ex- 
amine carefully then this text also. ' 

There is-one ftrpitful cause of misapprehension of it on all 
sides. The sentence produced is not understood to be, what 
upon the tace of it it is, part of a larger sentence in which 
the portion of the saved is distinguished froni the general 
lot of men: ‘“Now once in the end_of the world hath He 
[Christ] appeared, to put away sinyby the sacrifice of Him- 
self. And As itis appointed unto men once to die, but after 
this the judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the 
sins of many; and unto them that look for Him shall He ap- 
pear the second time without sin unto salvation is (Heb. ix. 
26-28), 

There is a manifest contrast here—a Aone one. The 
express object of the passage is to display the efticacy of the 
work of Christ. He had : appear ed to put away sin ‘by His 
sacrifice. Sin’ had brought in death, had created a neces- 
sity of judgment. How. then did Christ’s work meet these 
effects of sin for those who believed’ Were death and 


judgment their common portion still? Alas, the general 


answer has been in the aftirmative, and thus the meaning 
has been almost taken away from this-pregnant and wonder- 
ful statement. Men say still, with the woman of'/Tekoa of 
old, “We must needs die,” and as for judgment, to deny 
that a saint shall be judged would be by the mass considered 


gh tage pha te meta 


t must 


surance of understanding” as to this. 
First, as to death, is ita “ must needs” that the believer 


heresy, if it were not hinacy. Let us-seek to get “full as= 


& 


vm 


A 


‘222 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


die? Did Enoch die? did Elijah? Will the saints that 
are “alive and remain unto .the coming of the Lord” ?. 
“We shall not all sleep,” says the apostle, “ but we shall all 
be changed.” Thus death, with the apostle, is no necessity 
for the belieyer. We may die, tiot aust, We may meet 
it as the provideritial dispensation of an infinitely wise _ 
_ 0d,—not as wrath, not as penalty, nor necessarily even as 
Judgment, in that sense in which the Father judgeth His own 
children.* It is “to depart and be‘ with Christ, which is 
far better,”—to be “absent from the body and present with 
the Lord.” Thus has Christ “abolished death, and brought 
life and incorruption to light by the gospel.” 3H 
This, let me trust, is simple, though only to the one who 
refuses the unbelief of the Sadducees a3.to death. If it be 
honentity, the blotting out of existence, no fair words about 
it will ever make it other than it is confessedly to Mr. Consta- 
ble. But we have not now to do with him. In Scripture 
and for faith (but oh how little ‘alas, faith is with us) death 
is no more the portion of the saint. It is abolished. * And, 
if alive and remaining to that coming of the Lord for which 
we are taught daily to wait, shall never even “ sleep” at. 
all. ; oo 
And now as to judgment after death. The plain unequiv- 
, Ocal statement of our Lord has been obscured to us by an 
unhappy translation; but there is no question as to the 
simple fact, that in John v. 24-29 the word used both for 
“condemnation” and “damnation ” is the simple word for 
“judgment.” Alford’s and the Bible Union revisions both 
* give “he that heareth my voice, and bajieveth on Him that 
sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into jrudy- 
ment”; and again, “they that have done evil unto the res- 
urrection of judgment.” 


ame into judg- 


™* For of course I do not speak of such cases as those of the Corinth- 


ians, or of a“ sin wate death” 


? 


'E. 


aints that 


Lord ” ? 


> shall all 
necessity 
nay meet 


ely wise | 


y even as 


His own 


which is 
ent with 
br ought 


one who 
If it be 
Is about. 
Consta- 
cripture 
s) death 
_* And, 


rwhich -,«,. 


ep is 


nequiv- 
3 by an 
to the 
ith for 
ord for 
is both 
m that 
D judy- 
he res- 


e into 
Scrip- 
) judg- 


‘orinth- 


ment, we could not but be condemned. Hear the Psalmist 
express it when as a servant of the Lord he yet pleads: 


- “Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, O Lord; for 
- <~in Thy sight shall No FLESH LIVING be justified” (Psa. 


exliii. 2): 
And that this is the fact Scripture everywhere bears wit- 
ness. The solemn final scene, as Rev. xx. pictures it, before 


the gréat white throne, we shall look at in detail at a future 


time. But the second chapter of Romans is: sufficiently 
plain as to the issue of judgment, for those who come into: 
it. Let us look briefly at the apostle’s words. 

Mark then, in the first place, it is “the day when God 
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ” (ver. 16). 
The principle, too, of the jadgment is clearly stated. God 


“ will render to every man according to his deeds; to them* 


who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and 
honor and immortality (incorruption) eternal life: but unto 
them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but 
obey unrighteousness, indignation-and wrath, tribulation and 
anguish, upon every. soul of man that doecth evil, of the Jew 


- first and also of the Gentile ; but glory, honor and peace to 
~ every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also 


to the Gentile: for there is no respect of persons with God.” 

These are the principles of judgment; what is the actual 
result?) Who of all the sons of men can advance his claim 
to eternal life upon this: ground, before a holy and heart- 
searching God? . The issue is this :— 

“For as many as have sinned without. law’ ‘and those 
are the least guilty and the least responsible—‘ shall also 
PERISH without law; and as many as have sinned in the law 
shall be JUDGED BY THE LAW.” Does any one think he can 
escape, when judged by the law? The apostle’s words 


elsewhere exclude absolutely so vain a hope. ‘“ For as many - 


as,are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is 
written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things 
written in the book of the law to do them” (Gal. iii. 10). 


THE PROVISIONAL CHARACTER ys DEATH. 223 © 


“eee ppehamate 


224 0 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


tinuance in well doing which the law requires. Judged — 
then by this rule, w ne can escape? Not one, assuredly, 
As it is written again: “ Whatsoever the law saith, it saith 
to them that are under the law: that every mouth may 
be stopped, and ALL THE Wor. become guilty before 
God”? (Rom, iii. 19), 

If then God enters into judgment with a saint and servant 
of His own, he cannot be justified. The Qld Testament 
and the New unite in this assurance. And God's way of 
deliverance from condemnation is by deliverance from the 
Judgment that would involve it. The believer does not 
“come into judgment”: the “ resurrection of Cements “ 
‘the portion of the wicked alone. 

Let any one consider, with the fifteenth rit apter of the 
first epistle to the Corinthians, and the fourth of the first of 
Thessalonians, before his eyes, the order and connection of 
what is detailed there, and he will see how cle: irly and sat- 
isfactorily Seripture deals, with this question. When the 
Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,” not 
yet visible to met, as we shall see directly. first the dead in 
Christ shall rise.” They rise “in power,’ “ in incorruption,” — 

“in glory,” “in the image of the Heavy enly }_of Christ». 
Himself, Could there be a question of trying for theiglife 
these perfected and. glorious saints’ — T hey have Deen 
already, for a longer ae shorter time, every one of thein . 
absent from the body. aml present. with the Lord. Can it 
_ be now a question of whether they had title to the blessed 
place they havé’been in? -Assuredly it can never be: the 
case has been nabundantly settled before this. And can it be 
other for those who, remaining alive, without dying change 
their mortality for immort ality, and are caught up with the 
risen’ saints s in one glorious company, “to mect the Lord. in 
the air,” and “ be-forever with the Lord”? ? 

It is after this that the Lord appears to judgment, for we 
are assured that “ when Christ (who is our, life) shall appear, 
then shall we also appear with Him in elory ” (Col. iii. 3), 


And not til -after_thisisthere jet gment; perso jadement. 


Judged © 
issuredly, 
1, it saith 
uth may 
y before 


1 servant 
estament 
s way of 
from the 
does not 
nent ”’ is 


roof the 
first of . 
ction of 
and sat- 

pn ‘the 
ut,” not 
deadin . | 
uption,” 
: Christ ‘a A 
heigh life 
e heen 
f thei. 
Can it 
blessed 
be :. the 
in it be 
change 
ith the 
ord. in 


for we 
ippear, 


iii. 3). 


Vv 


A 


THE PROVISIONAL CILARACTER OF DEATIL. - 225 


«He shall judge the quick and the dead at His appearing 


and His kingdom.’ 

Details ag to the judgment will come afterwards. It is 
very evident there, is here no putting upon trial to see who 
they are, and whether worthy or ngt to enter into life. 
Christ’s call, which, makes no mistake, summons forth His 
saints to meet Him. Not one is forgotten; not one un- 
known. Blessed be His name! it could not be. And thus 


the whole matter is definitelg settled, and can never come 


up again. ae | 
That we should give account of ourselves to God, is 

another matter, and should not be confounded with this. As 
‘a question of reward, we shall receive for the deeds done in 
the body, and “suffer loss” or find gracious recompense ac- 
cordingly. That is not denied but affirmed. But we are 
not judged. according to our works: we do not come into 
judgment, if our works do. There is a very manifest dis- 
tinction between these things. as 

. Having seen then the Scripture testimony as to death and 
judgment, let us return to look at these as the portion of 
men, from which Christ's work delivers His own. ‘It és 
appointed umto men once to die, but after this the judg- 
ment.” For the saint on the other hand, “ Christ was once 
offered, to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look 
for Him shall He appear without sin,”—or rather “apart 
from sin,’ as having no. more io settle that question— 
“apart from sin unto salvation.” 

“ Onev death,” then, and “after this, judgment ” is the 
lot of the unsaved. How clear this makes the distinction be- 
tween the two! .Death temporary and to yive place to judg- 
ment, which is not i death but afterwards. Thus Scripture. 
How feeble then again all Mr. Constable’s.arguments as to 
the rear eure of words, and that death and nothing but _ 
death in its primary sense is the final judgment!  Troice 
death, in effect, is his argument : once before, and then again 
in the judgment. .Once death, says Scripture, but after this 

Aaa en 


rment, 


‘hes 


226 FACTS.AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


But therefore: the sec 
first:it is cancelled forever when the 


! rhe judgment of the secon 
death begins. . Is it soill-named ‘a death that never dies” ? 


t also never die ? How . 


a death in which they who suffer j 
vain to dispute the unspeakably solemn fact ! é 


. ‘CHAPTER XXIIL 
aN yo. MINISTRY OF DEATH. 


¢ 


IF death has then the place which we h 
is no longer a strange thing to hear of: a “ minis 
death”; nay, it is rather just what we should h 
_to expect, that God would take up the fact of it, 
condemnation of man w 
upon the hearts and consciences of men in some distinct and 
positive way. ‘We.should expect from His goodness, that 
He Would not be content in letting the fact speak for itself 


but would give it a Voice and utterance which should be jn — 


_ itself—however-much men: might shut their e 
unmistakable one. é ees 
Noy this is precisely what the apostle says-he has done. 
The character of the law,—of the Old Testament therefore— 
is that it was a “a ministration of death,”—a « ministration 
of.condemnation.” . i i 
“Death was therein taken up as a moral, yea, spiritual 
teacher. of a lesson most humbling to man’s pride indeed, 
and therefore most difficult to learn; 
learnt, of the very greate:t value. ‘It was madé a teacher 
of the inadequacy of,all human righteousness, the impotence 
of human power, the ‘impossibility of a corrupt and fallen 
creature standing inthe presence of.a holy God: all this.we 


shall find in the Jewish system when once we understand 


that the death it speaks of“ the soul that, sinneth it shall 


ave seen it has, it 
tration of, 

a ¢ 
ave reason °- 


and ‘of the | 
hich jit involves, and press it home 


ars to it—an © 


eu : 


“but a lesson,-when » 


es 

et 
Th, 
“7 


ah 
we 


4 


die ”—is not-the Fetrmreve 


aled second death, but “death © E 


THE MINISTRY OF DEATH. = 997" 


in-its ordinary seuse. This once established satisfactorily, 


of th f 
rane 4 id ~ we shall find the Old Testament, in a new light, and the - 
dies” ?  w perfect self-consistency of truth everywhere in its utter- 
How | | ances, J : ‘ 
, ; 4 : . And this will be established, as soon it is seen, what should 
4 ‘ , be manifest as to the holy law of the unchangeable God, 
>. oe that the obedience it required was absolute, perfect obedi- 
~~ ence, and nothing: short. This the New Testament, no less” 
~ than the Old, abundautly declares. "We have already had nee 
the apostle’s statement as to this, which shows, that'Chris-  . 
tianity- itself also had not modified the law’s requirements. 
It is the great apostle of the Gentiles, the man who, if any 
has, it” 4 did, understood God's grace in the gospel, who, assures us 
mn of, 4g that “‘as many as are of the works of the law are under the | 
eason - E curse; for, it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth | 
the HS not in all things that are written in the. book of ‘the law to 
home a Jo them” (Gal. iii. 10). It is again the-apostle who is con- ” 
t and 4 a - . sidered by many (however improperly) the apostle of law, 
that 7) Whee 2 who unites with Paul in this testimony, that “ whosoever 4 
teelf- |. | shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one poiit, he is 
ein guiltyof all” (James ii. 10). Unswerving, pertect obedi- | @. - 
—an =" ence was therefore’ that required by the law. ; ie 
an : '. To this, however, may be thought opposed £he whole sy6- 
one. : “tem of, appointed sacrifices and the forgiveness that in ‘this 
re— _ way the véry law itself’ proclaimed. But the objection 
tion would apply in that case to the apostles’ teaching, who cer- 
: tainly were not ignorant of so plain a fact. We must take =< 
tual ; it up, however, 4 little particularly, and try to show the 
eed, : consistency of these two things. vd 
hen _ There were, as all will- easily remember, ¢oo givings of 
her. 3 the law: The first time (which we shall find as history in 
nce : a Exodus xix.-xxiv.) it was pure law; with no whispered word 
len even of mercy ,—no. provision for failure or for sin. : Moses 
we _.48 then called up into the Mount to receive from God's" 


a ae hand the tables of stone “ written with the finger of God.” 
all | ise ey: There, in'the Mount, he does indeed sée the pattern of 
| aie S other and of heaventy things; for God-would show-us that. 


. 
. 
5 ; a 


| XXxXii.). 


ps 


228 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


L 


mervy is already in His heart, as it surely is. But no’word - 
' of this is yet spoken to the people, and:as actual ‘institution 


finds no place till the @ovenant of the law as'first given’ is 
trans¥ressed and set. aside. As far as the peeple (is con- 
cerned, it is all as yet law pure and simple. Under this 


they fail utterly, turning their deliverér-God, “ their glory, ~ 


into the similitude ‘ot an ox that. eateth grass.” The tables. 
of the coyenant are broken» judgment is executed on the 
guilty pebnlet and all, on this ground, is over forever (ch. 


But the blessed God has still resources in Himself, and 
again He takes up the people. Again the law is given, word 
for word the same, and not a jot abated; for the holiness 


of God’s nature can know. no change... But. there ‘is this. ; 
difference, and it {s characteristic: it is now written by the 


hand of thé mediator (xxxiy. 28), and not by God Himself’ 
The law: is ‘in the hands of the mediator, and now we hear 


. the new glad tones of long-suffering goodness and mercy.: 
Jehovah declares Himself? as He did not before. His _/ 


glory shines out as not yet it had. He is “the Lord, the 
Lord God,'merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abun- 
dant. in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, 
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.” This is new 
ground; and yet not altogether new, nor grace unmixed. 
He is still.the Lawgiver, still in a covenant of works with 


His people :—“ and’ that will by no means clear the guilty.” 


This is the new basis upon which everything is now to rest. ' 
It is law, but it isnot pure law. It is law in a mediator’s 
hand, ministered in mercy, yet not lessening its requirement : 
an apparent contradiction, and in-reality two principles 


united which cannot unite really*in the justification of man. 


God says so: He cannot clear—cannot justify ; and it is of 


ie the law thus given, the second time and. not’ the first, that 
_ the apostle speaks when he calls the law “written and en. 


graven in: stones,” “the ministration of death” and “the - 


saa aes GHG se SARA NA Saas od 


“ 2 ' a 


Ministfation—of—conde , ior (2. Cor. iil. ZZ 9). It is of 
this law in the hand of the mediator, that he says again, 
a 4 ; : 


i ; 
» . 


asi Me GAG acd Rea a aL aia 


see - short of the clory of God. Death, not life condemnation, ve 


+ ve 


THE MINISTRY OF DEATH.’ ’, 229 


« Ag many as are of the works of the law are under the 
curse.” ” : : 
ff we look a ‘the scene described in the book of Exodus 
* (xxxiii., xxxiv.), We shalt@ind that God really gave witness at 
the very time. He gave it, af its true character, although in 
that typical way, the well-known characteristic of Old Tes: 
tament revelation. — When ‘Moses the mediator, and_ thus 
‘. the representative of the people, prays, “ I beseech Thee, 
show me Thy glory,” God answers: “I will make all my 
- goodness pass before thee, and will proclaim the name ofthe ... 
Lord before thee, and will bée gracious to whom I will be | 
gracious, and will show mercy-on whom I will show mercy.” . 
But He adds,—and the words are the key-note of the Old 3 
~. Testament dispensation,—" HOU CANST NOT SEE MY FACE; Eee 
for there shall no man see me, ani. live. And He said, 
There is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock ; 
and it shall come to pasty while my glory passeth by, that 
I will put thee in a cleft, df the rock, and cover thee with 
my hand while my glory passeth by; and I will take away, 
my hand, and thou shalt see ay back parts ; ‘put my FACE — . 
. shall not be seen.” ans ee 
And thus, as at the, first time of the giving of the law, the 
flame of fire upon the quaking mount, hid,’ not revealed, the 
. Divine Goodness ; so even now, while goodness covered the 
human eyes not yet able to behold face to face the One in 
whose presence he stood, stall IT covERED THEM ; and what 
Moses actually saw, as the mediator of taat. disperisation, 
was: Gop WITH His FACE TURNED AWAY. 
And that: rema’ned the feature of that old economy... It: 
was what the veil before the holiest declared: the way. into 
the holiest was not yet. manifested. «None could stand in 
His presenct..: All had” sinned, and having sinned, came 
not righteousness, was the ministration of the law. 
God might: forgive iniquity, transgression and 
He could by no means clear the guilty. He could make 


sin. «But : 


* 
/ 


/ 


known His long-suffering, and say, ~ When—the wicked 


e 
« 


Neen neem eneennneenernnnsset 


230 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“man turneth from his wickedness, and doeth that which is 
lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive” (Ezek. xviii. 
27). But who ever did what was lawful, as measured by a 
law, to break one commandment of which was to be “ guilty 
ofall”? Who ever broke off his sins so as to be fit for - 
the presence of a “holy, holy, holy” God» Never one: 

'notone, “There is none righteous, no, not. one’’ was the 
law’s verdict; “there is none that doeth good, no, not one.” 
And the veil hung before God’s presence’ unlifted, save as 

_ once a year the typical blood was pyt upon the mercy-seat ; 
and then it dropped again, impenetrable as ever, for “the 
blood of bulls and goats could not take away sin.” 

Thus, through all the old economy : until one day, marked ° 
out from other days by a darkness such as never was: And 

‘ when that passed, the darkness in which God dwelt had 
also passed. “The veil’ of. the temple was rent in the 
midst.” | : Re 

God was no more “in the’ darkness ”: He was “in the 
light ” (1 Kings viii. 12; 1 John a fp Ps 

The way into God’s presence was no more barred up: 
Christ was “the Way” (John xiv. 6). 

And instead of, as heretofore, One who ‘eould not clear 
the guilty, there was revealed the glory of divine grace, 
justifying the ungodly (Rom. iv. 5). paeeee 

One would gladly enlarge upon this unspeakable loving- 
kindness ;—would gladly apply this healing assurance to any 
soul conscious of the double character of evil attaching to’ 
man. He is “ ungodly ”; true, but he is more, much more, 
than that: he is “ without strength” also. Christ died for 
him as having that character (Rom. v. 6). As having it, he 
is welcome at once to the blood which cleanses from sin, 
and the grace which strengthens and enables for holiness. 
But our subject is now the character of the law rather: let 
us turn back to consider what this involves as to the Old 
Testament. | ‘ 


God was, then, by a dispensation of law, shutting man up 


_tomercy. He was ruming the plough-share into the soil 


‘ich is | ae . THE MINISTRY OF? DEATH. - ° 231 
xviii. 40 prepare it. for the seed of the. gospel. He was not oy ’ 
bya '  gavisfgs: He was convicting and ‘condemning. The New 

guilty Testament constantly asserts this'as the object of the law. 

it for. The apostle speaks of it as what all Christians were well 
one: aware of: ‘ We know that what things soever the law saith, 

is the a it saith to them that are under the law, that every mouth 

one.” might be stopped, and all the world become guilty before 

We as 4 God.” “ By the lawsis the knowledge of sin.” “ The law 

seat; worketh wrath.” ‘The law entered thatithe offence might 

“the q abound.” “If there had been a law given which could have - 

: : . given life, verily righteousness should-have been by the law. 
irked But the Scripture hath concluded. (shut up together) all 
And Ae under sin, that’ the promise by faith of Jesus Christ ‘might 
had oe . be given to them that believe.’ I need not quote more 
| the oo a than this. | ’ 

Bo UNG But now, if such was the scope and object of the law,—if 
n the ; _ God by it was secking to produce conviction of a sinful and 
7 a helpless condition, and to cast men thus upon His mercy,— 
UP es how simple that He should take up in it the solemn reality 
me of that death which had entered in by sin, and which was 

clear constantly appealing to man in every possible way,—the - 
race, {_ broad seal of condemnation—wide as humanity-——upon the 

ie fallen creature ! Ilow irresistible the conviction of what * 

ving- man was, and where he’was, in the eye of a holy God, ifHe “ 
LOY eee should come in and say to him, meaning just what it would 

1g to mean when heard in connection with the first threatening of 
LOTe, : death so literally carried out, “the man that docth these 

| for things shall /ive in them,” “the soul that sinneth, it shall 

t, he : die.” ‘ , 

sin, — The strangeness of this interpretation to many !s just its 
BES: ; | perfect consistency with the whole design and meaning of 
pete the law. If no one under it ever escaped death (with one 
Old exception evidently on anggher ground) people think it im- 

: possible that death (in the ordinary sense) could have been ~ 

wel meant.__They forget that no one ever did falfil itathat there 
Soil | was zone righteous, no, not even one. How coult they then 


escape it? Andif God in the law were not judging for eter- 


a 


o)ro)D 


Oa 


, FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


nity, but as a present thing, to cast men in the conviction of 
their lost condition upon His mercy, how consistent with 
this plan that He should make the judgment. upon that con- 
dition a thing apparent to every one under it, instead of 
nomething yet unseen, and which eternity alone should too 
late reveal ! ! 

Had God said, as we have aanae Him gay, “ the soul ‘hat 
sinneth shall die the second death,” they might have com- 
torted themselves with the assurance that no one could know 


~ much about that, and written placid lies upon the grave- 


stones, and lost the whole reality of the ruin they were in. 
Doubtless many did do so in spite of all, for light never yet. 
opened eyes closed to it, but’ still God had borne witness,, 
none the less, if they rejected it as men still reject, that they 
were fallen creatures, and who had. confirmed by their own 
act and deed the original sentepce under which they lay. 
Every white hair in a man’s head, every wrinkle in his brow, 
was thus God's witness ina double way, a solemn appeal 


which one would think irresistible. Death was not that for 


which man was cPeated ; no, it was God “turning man to 
destruction.” ‘Thou hast’ set our iniquities before Thee, 
our secret sins in the light of Thy countenance. For all 
our days are passed away in Thy wrath; we spend our years 
as a tale that is told: . . So te: ach us. to number our days, 
that. we may apply our hearts, unto wisdom ” (Psa. xe, ..8, 
9,12). ° 3 

But not only.in this way was man’s. lost condition mani- 
fest, but the judgment of the law still left God free to the 
grace which was under the veil, while yet the veil was not 
removed. Had God said, “The soul that sinneth, it shall 
die’ the second death,” none could contest w ith Him the 
justice of that sentence ; but,surely it would seem to bind 
Him to eternal judgment, to universal justice, but divorced 
from grace. As it was He. did not bind Himself so that. to 


the broken and_contrite He“could not_showmerey_onteide 


dove ete ta ches tela 


of law and jts penalty altogether. It could do its work as 


convicting man of sin, and on the ground of human effort and _ 


eee 


~ first and not the” second 


¢ 


THE MINISTRY OF DEATH. 233 


: 
human’ righteousness § 
him to hopeless self-despair, 


but him up in condemnation, bring 
and yet leave him in that world 


beyond the grave into which the full light yet had not and 
could not come, to a mer¢ey which tLe could be free to exer- 
cise, Where man’s hope wis in His mercy. It could in short 
tie man’s hands, as to all working out of claim upon God. 
It could not tie God’s hands as to mercy shown to man. 

As to the fact itself, that the law does really speak of the ; 
death (and there is no death be- © 
tween)ais a thing which, when we examine it, seems impossi- 
ble to X estion. That. he that honored father and mother 
should “tive long i” the land” of Canaan, is imbeslded in 
the heart of the ten commansments. And in Deut. iv. 40, 
where Moses is urging the people’ to keep these very com- 
; what does he put betore them asthe result of 
t™ that it may go well with. thee, and 
er thee, and that thou mayest prolong 
‘th which the Lord thy God giveth _ 


mandment s, 
their being kept, bu 
with thy children aft 
thy days «pon the ea 
thee. forever.” 
Let any one wl 
entire Pentateuch, if he will, 


10 doubts read on and on through the 
and let him find if he can any 
penalty pronounced, or any reward promised, of which he 
has. got the least proof that it refers to future state at all. . 
Doubtless death asthe result of Him who had/created man 
‘turning Him to destruction cast its shadow ¢ver the state 
beyond, which as certainly the people of the old dispensa- 
tion had knowledge of. That I have affirmed. It. is the’. 
every thing which gives significance to it uch as I am speak- 
ing of. But everywhere the legal promise ‘is a life of bless- 
‘ing in the lanl, and everywhere the legal curse is the per- 
' ishing from the earth. | ee pio Sy ope 
- Pasg on to the New/Festament, and look at that which is 
the very central fee tare in the whole scene, and what.is the 
- Seurse of thé law which the Lord of glory bore 2 « Christ 
fath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made # 


curse for us, as it is written, Cursed-is-every_one that_hang- 
‘eth oc atree”” The hanging on a tree was only the outward 


/ 234 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


expression surely of the curse, and not the whole thing ; and 
so, as T have urged, is death. This is death in its most 
shameful form; but it is vof the second death, nor does the 
law speak of that. 

Mr. Constable has endeavored to show that. the Old Tes- 
tament announces death as the punishment of the wicked in 
the future state. -It is not to be supposed that he has 
‘brought forward the worst passages to prove this position. 
Let us then see what he produces. He says :— 

“There [in the Old Testament] the word must be taken in the 
sense God hus stariped upon it, and left unehanged. It is there 
over and over again described as the end, in the future age, of 
obstinate transgressors. For such ‘God declares He-has ‘ pro- 
vided the instruments of death’; of such as hate divine Wisdom 
that Wisdom says, ‘they that hate me love death’ ; to the wicked 
God saith, ‘thou shalt surely dic,’ ‘ the soul that sinneth it: shall 

die,’” 

He adds: 
_ ‘No one, we stppose, will apply the death pronounced in 
the above passages upon wnrepented and unpardoned. sin to 
that death which all men alike, whether saved or lost, undergo 
us children of Adam. They ean only apply it to future punish- 
ment. , Death, then, is, xeeording to the Old Testament, to be 
after jndgment the result of sin, as life i is the result of righteous- 
ness.” 

I have shown how directly this. doctrine i is opposed to 
Seripture. Death after judgment is Mr. Constable's version ; 

“after death the judgment” is that of Scripture. And of 
course all he says upon this is his own conjecture. What 
proof has he that this death is after judgment ? None. 
What proof that it is in the future state? “None really. 
He has only. a very weak argument that all men alike, saved 
or 1ost, undergo the first death ‘But does he mean to say 
that it never cones upon men therefore as direct judgment 
lor sii? If so, he is at direct issue with fact and Scripture 
auke. : 


What would he say; for instance, to these statements of 
Miihu? “He shall break in pieces mighty men without 


THE MINISTRY OF DEATH. 235 


sand 
most numbcr, and set others in their stead. Therefore Ie know- 
43 the eth their works, and He overturneth them in the night, so 
f that they are destroyed. He striketh them as wicked men 
| Tes- in the open sight of others, because they turned back from 
ed in Him, and would not consider any of His ways” (Job 
e has " xxxiv. 24-27) 
sition. ia Or again: “ And if they be bound in fetters, and be 
| holden in cords of affliction; then He sheweth them their 
in the work,..and their transgressions. that they have exceeded. 
there % ——— He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that 
ze, of @ they return from iniquity. If they obey and serve Him 
* pro- ’ they shall spend their days in prosperity and their years in 
isdom oy pleasures; but if they. @hey not, they shall perish by the 
ae Peer sword, and they sh@ll die without knowledge. But the 
a oe hypocrites in’ heart heap up wrath; they ery not when He 
: pindeth them: they die in youth, and their life is among 
: the unclean ”(x*xvi. 8-14; comp. also Xx xiii. 18-30). ; 
a a ‘ S| This is indeed the great lesson of all this part of Job. 
Jergo | The thorough and complete exemplification of the’principle 
inl: we shall shortly have occasion to consider, in that great day, 
to be the day of the Lord upon the earth, when itshall be cleared 
eous- by judgment that the meek may inherit it (Psa. xxxvii). 

; Of this the Old Testament is full, and the principle is, as we 
to | ° have seen, the principle of the law; to substitute for it the 
sion; z= New Testament complete revelation is to lose the under- 
ul of | standing of the old dispensation. . 
Vhat of |3 » ‘Strange as it may seem, and inconsistent too with tne 
one, known belief of the ‘Jews before our Lord’s time, there is * 
sally. not really one passage in the Old Testament in which either | 
aved — heaven is spoken of as.the abode of the righteous, or hell (in : 
) Say our present sense of it) as the abode of.the lost. The word 
ment “hell” is always in it that word ‘sheol”’ which we have . 
ture * already looked at, and. which is the equivalent of ‘hades, - 

“the unseen,” and applied always and only toghe death state. 
ts of _ This abundantly confirms the—belief—that-the & 2a threat- 
hout ened, even to impenitence and unbelief, was death in our or- 


ay) | - dinary understanding of it, but death as the judgment of God; 


236 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUT#RE STATE, _ 


and throwing its awful shadow. over the eternity beyond. » 
With this Mr. Constable’s texts completely harmonize. Nor 
does he indeed attempt to show that the death they speak of. 
is judgment ina future state, It would be impossible for him — 
to prove this, for it is not true. - | 
The legal dispensation was intended as a means of reach- 
ing on a broad scale: (and with a still broader after-purpose) 
the consciences of men. It was part of a method of grace 
‘to prepare for the coming Christ by wonvicting-men of 
guilt and of helplessness, shutting them up to the grace 
_\ which was then to be revealed. And thus it was that there 
was a “due time” for Christ to come, as the apostle de- 
-clares; and that when this purpose of thé law shouid be ac- 
‘complished. Thus “ when we were yet without strength ¢ 
a due time Christ died for the ungodly ” (Rom. v. 6). In the 
meanwhile ‘for individual need was. provided a way of 
‘cleansing and forgiveness (typical largely, of necessity) in 


which broken and contrite souls found hope of mercy. But »1 
3 the system was, as a whole, a ministration of death and 1 
- condemnation. ee oe a 


‘And for this purpose the death which was the bread seal of 

condemnation upon universal man was taken up and-used in 

ft the penal code of the divine government in Israel : man thus 

os ’ having under his eyes a temporal retribution which would 

witness to the most carnal God's wrath upon sin, ane his own 
condition as a sinner under it. 

But that was not all the light shed upon the future, and 
we must look:at what yet remains in some little detail: 
first, the prophetic landscape of the Old Testament, which. 
is important many .ways with regard to our present subject, 

—and then the meaning: and character of its typical teaching. 


x e 


OR gh ae it A ‘his 


+ 


+ 


ee 


PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE BARTH, 237 


yond. 'p es . e 
Nor : . ; 
ak of . : 
yr him CHAPTER XXIV.. 
reach- THE PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE EARTH. 
ae LET us now seek to arrive at some definite conclusion as ‘ 
eae to the prophetic future portrayed , in the Old. Testament. 
grace : It is quite necessary to do so in order properly to under- 
these / ~ stand the predictions of coming. judgment which are scat- 
Bei ane tered through its pages. | 
tee, ’ First then, the horizon is earthly, and extends neither to 
th in : heaven nor to hell. It is recognized that the souls of the 
ihe. co departed exist sndeed in sheol, but that it is as yet a land | 
ot : of darkness, unexplored and little known to living men. It 
y) ee ig recognized, too, that there will bea resurrection, and the 
But oe Redeomer will stand in the latter day upon the earth, and 
antl vi Job in his figsh will ‘see hira. But there is no dwelling in - 
ef heaven openly revealed, and no hell, in the true sense. © I do 
ealot | i not say: there were no beliefs upon these points, but we shall 
ee eet ; consider these hereafter. & 
ihe a. A text or two here will give us the Old Testament range. 
enidde ‘ First, what the psalmist says ._The heaven, even the 
Soa cee heavens, Are the Lord’s;, but the earth has He given to the 
° § children of men” (cXxv. 16). There is no other statement 


ond * anywhere than that, save that as a matter of fact, Enoch 
Cee 5 had not died, but the Lord had taken him ; and Elijah, too, 


cae had gone up ina chariot of fire to heaven. But there is 
biect, no statement anywhere that heaven is to be man’s dwelling- 
na o. _ place. God dwells there, but into his ‘‘hill” the righteous _ 

i ascend, and in His “ holy place” ov earth they stand (Psa. * 


xxiv. 3, comp. ver. 1). Zion is where Jehovah rests forever i 

(oxxxii. 13, 14). , eh a) 
Then as to judgment or reward :—‘“ For evil-Acers ‘shall 

be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall in- 

herit the-earth- For _yet_a little while, and the wicked shall 


ay 


i i 


» 


238 FACES AND THEORIES AS TO'A ae STATE. 


not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consid his place, and it 
shall not be. But the meck shall inherit the earth, and de- 


- light themselves in the abundance of peace ” (Psa. xxxvii. 


9-11). . : 
Again: “The righteous shall be ‘recompensed in the 

earth; much more the wicked and the sinner ” (Prov. 

xi. 31). ; : | sos 
This is the universal strain: .The God of judgment is 


going by judgment to purify the earth, and make it the 


abode of righteousness and peace. Transgressors are to 


‘ be rooted out of it. ‘The whole earth. is to be full of the 
“glory of the Lord.as the waters cover the sea. 


These are the promises. But whose? Mark well, there © 
is not one word yet of the Father’s house or of the heavenly 
places. The inheritance is of earth only. The prospect is 


: what we are accustomed to call millennial. Whose then 
‘* *. are these Old Testament promises? ‘If I take the Old Tes: , 


tament itself, they are Israel’s. “Jsrael shall bud and bles- 
som, and fill the face of the earth with fruit.” “ But. in the 
last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house 
of the Lord shall be established in the toy. vf the mountains, 
and it shall be exalted above. the hills, and people shall flow 


_untoit. And many nations shall come and say, Come, and let 
US go Up unto the mountain of the Lord, and to the house - 


of the God of Jacob; and He'will teach us of His ways, and 


‘we will walk in His paths; for the law shall go forth of 
“Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And He 


shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong. nations 
afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, 
and their spears ipto praning-hooks : nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. | 


_ Bat they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his 


fig tree : and none shall make-them afraid: for the mouth | 
of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it” (Isa. xxvii. 6; Mie. 
iv. 1-4). : 


Thus sedled. withJehovah’s_seal_is_Israel’s—claim—to—the 


~ Old Testament promises. If still we doubt, let the apostle 


PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE EARTH. 289 


of the Gentiles assure us whether we are to read the name 


it 
de- typically or literally here. “For I was wishing,” says he, 
vii. «that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my 
 hinsmen according to the flesh ; who are Israelites, to whom 
the pertaineth the adoption and the glory and the covenant, and 
OV. the giving of the law, and the~service of God, AND ‘THE 
pROMISES” (Rom. ix. 3,4). If we have no doubt then, as 
is 4 to who were Paul’s kinsmen according to the flesh, we can 
he 1 have ngne as to whose are these Old Testament «“ promises.” 
to 3 They xe Jiterally Israel’s, spite of her present flispersion 
he ee and . For this she must of course be gathered 
and erted ; and so she’shall be, but it is interesting and « 
re important to ask when this national restoration and conver; - 
ly ] _- . sion shall. be. . , ot 
is “Scripture leaves us in no doubt either upon this Sint. 
en The same apostle intimates to us, what seems so strang 2 and 
S- hard to. be received now, that it will not be by the going 
IS- | forth of the gospel as at present, that the partial blindness © 
he 4a of Israel will not cease, and “ all Israel the nation as a 
se whole—will not be saved, “ until the fulness of the Gentiles 
iS, come in.” ‘“ As concerning the yospel,” he adds, “ they 
Ww are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the election, 
et : they.are beloved for the fathers’ sakes: for the-gifts and 
eo calling of God are without repentance ” (Rom. xi. 25-29). 
d . Thus the divine purpose holds, announced in the ancient 
f Scriptures. God has not disinherited the people of His 
e choice. Yet for the present blindness in part is theirs, and 
1S they ‘are enemies (God is holding them as such) with regard 
s, to the gospel. Not till the full number of the Gentiles is, 
Pp brought in by it will “all Israel » be saved. 
oy And then, how, if not by the gospel? Scripture answers . 
8 _ (Zech. xii. 10-xiii. 1): “ They shall look upon me;whom., 
h - “  Ahey have pierced, and they shall mourn for Him as one 
.. mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for Him, 
as one that is in bitterness for his first-born: in that day 
c=, there shall be a great: mourning. in J erusalem, . . and the 
le . oe aR a 


oy oN 


ie ; % 4 fap 3 : wt, 


8S s 
- ¢ 


240 sae Be THEORIES AS, $70. A RUTURE STATE. 


land shall mourn, every family apart. . . In that ay thera 
shall be a fountain opened to the. house i David, and fo the. 
inhabitants‘.of Jetusalem for sin and for une sleanness.” : 
When, shall they Ree ‘Christ thus, and how ? With, the 
mental eye only, or actually ? That too is answered : —. 
“Behold, Hf: cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see 
“Hin, aid. they also. WHO pieRcED Him, and all kindreds of 
the earth ’—or “tribes -of the land,” as the eek ae 
"read—“ shell weteil because of Hini™* 


Here then is Israel's national repentance, and ee it is 


produced. It is then, when the Lerd Jesus comes, their 
eyes shall.see Him, ‘and thus Isragl’s bféssing, and that of 
the earth, follows, not precedes; that for which we as Chris- 
tians ‘wait, to‘receive the fulfilment of-heaveyly, and not ° 
‘earthly; promises. We thus see how it is that the gospel)’ 
as now goirfg forth, will have to come to an end, and pes 
-falness of" the Gentites be come in. All is consistent. he e, 

for it is true; and the present gospe] dispensation is thus 
' seen to- be an interval in Israel's . prophetic history, a time 
of the suspension of her promises, only suspended, to find, - 
as soon as this has run. out, their full-accomplishment.. 

And this is the uniform tenor df Scripture. The last. 
chapter of Zechariah proves convincihgly that the Lord God 
“and His holy ones will have come, and His feet have stood 
on the Mount of Olives, before’ He is “King over all the. 
earth,” and “in, that day shall there be one Lord, and His , 
Name one.’ 

The second psalm ‘also: ane with ‘perfeot ainnces of 
the heathen being given to Christ for His inheritance, and’ 
the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession ; but 
often and rightly ‘as that is quoted as a millennial prophecy, 
> 


* Koporrat én’ avrov ma6ay ant pvaai TUS vs (Rev. i.7). Iti is 
well known that in Greek, as in some other languages, there is one word 
which stands for “earth” and “land.” Ido not insist on the latter, 
for it is quite according to the character of the New Testament to be of 


= 
. 


greater breadth than.the Old. But the reference to Zech. xii. 10 can- 
tiot pe doubted. f 8 wy 


ore as 


ye 
°.* # 


® P NN o ¢ a 7 


‘ 


"PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE-BARTH. 241 


there | . it is not always.as clearly segn that, to take possession, He 
fothe . - must “ break them with a rod ‘of iron, and ‘dash them Tieroew an 
: . ae ae ‘pieces like-a potter's vessel.” And Rovelation adds distinct- a 
h the Ay. the: promise td him that overcometh, that he shall share , 
— © ~~ with the Lord this.rod of iron (ch. ii. 25-27). Ae, Tea 
2 e Thus, again, therefore, when in the visions of Ahe latter ~~ 
ads of a part of the book, the Lord is seen coming forth from heaven” , 
might j to the judgment of. the earth (Rev. xix.), it is after the mar- 
See 4 “ Yiage of the Lamb has taken place in heaven ; arid the armies, 
ate of heaven that. follow tlie white-horsed rider are clad with the. 
their 1 ~” eovering of the bride herself—that fine . linen which is the . 
hat of ‘ ‘ bel eee ighteousness~ of saints.” Then follows’ that. _millénnial ©’ 
Chris- Cae Ge picture ‘with which,we must, become more “familiar. at a 
d not >" @- a future time. ee 2 PaO oe ekg oa 
ospel; All this is impossible to pniarge ‘on, now- But it needs, 
dthe $$ 4° ° to be seen in order to get rightly hold vf tavo very. dittrent.. 
here, 7 epochs of p judgment’ which, if Sonfotinded, confuse the whole ae 
s thus ) iran subject of thé prophetic: future: “'There*is'a judgment of the ~~ 
,time 4 | - | quick, and a judgment of tye dead.; and thes¢ are quite dis- 
) find,- J - tinct from. one another. . "Fhe, judgment of the living: is at 
er ‘the doming of, the Lord, and before the milfennium. The ~ 
e last. 1. judgment of the dead is u/ter-it, not when the ‘Lord comes 
1God *~ 4° “° . to the earth, but when ‘the edrth and the heavens flee away 
stood aes (Reviaxix., xx,)... The judgment of the living is the purifica-° 
I the. © fj tty tion of the earth in order to:its blessing, and that the meek ° 
d His, - | may’ inherit it, as’ we have partly seen. The judgment ‘of the 
: dead is the final award at’ the close ofall, when the object; 
ssof + {° "jg finally to give every one not a sharer inthe “first resur- 
,and Pe rection ”? his discriminate award. ; ‘ ie 
; but +s This of the judgment of the living that ¢he Old Testament 
yhecy, . ft. J ‘passages speak, which predict in so a ayi the destruc- 
ae eck ‘tion of the wicked. As we ‘have seen, its predicted future : 
» wore ae is of earthly blessing, which sich a judgment is needed to 
latter, = produce. While the obstinately wicked perish out of it 
o be of : God’s judgments cause the inhabitantgegf the world to learn. 
Ocan- righteousness—(Isa—xxvi,-9).— Then our ‘Melchizedek be- | 


“1 '\ ’ ~~ comes the Prince of. peace; put still the character of mil- 


242° FACTS AND THEORIES“A&S 10 “ FUTURE STATE. 


~ lennial sais is righteous authoritative ruil, in which (if wee 
are to take Scripture simply) the saints of the first resurrec 
tion reign with Him,* who is the manifest King of icing 
and Lord of lords. B : 
There is one glimpse beyond, this millennial condition in. 
Old Testament prophecyy'but it is only a glimpse. The © 
Lord (in Isa. Ixy. 17, lxvi. 22) announces* “Behold, I create 
new heavens and a new earth ; and the former ‘shall not be 
remembered, nor come into mind.” The next verses, return 
evidently to the millennial condition, before sin and death 
_ are finally done away. Again, He identifies the new earth 
with Israel’s promises: ‘For, as the new heavens and the 
“new earth which I will make, shall remain before me, ‘saith 
the Lord, so shall your seed and your nam@ reniain.” But 
this verse, too, is parenthetical, and the néxt again returns 
to the millennium. It is plainly, however, to these passages 
that the apostle Peter refers, when he says, “ We, according" 
to His promise, look for new-heavenst and a new aca 
wherein dwelleth righteousness ” (2 Pet. iii. 13)... The only 
expansion of this is in Rev. xxi, 1-5. We cannot. dwell — 
upon it now. It is only adduced as giving us tye full range’ 
of Old Testament prophecy. 
As I naKe said, it is to o the PuLicatory judginent of the 


i Rev. iii. 21 may help some to distinguish hevween a throne! inw hich 
Christ now sits, and which, being the throne of absolute Godhead, 
the Father’s throne, mere man can never share, and a throne which as 
Son of man He calls His own (comp. ch. i. 18), and which He promises 
to share with the overcomers here. * 

The future millennial kingdom is thus clearly distinguished from the . 
kingdom of Christ as Son of God (Col. i. 18) in which we now are. 
That future oneis when He takes*His great pow er and reigns in order 
to bring everything into subjection to God ; aud, having accomplished . 
this, He,delivers it up to the Father (1 Cor. xv. 24). ‘ 

One other caution. The reigu of the saints with Christ over the earth 
does not imply areturn toa *Meshly condition, the gross Chiliasin’of 
many of the ancients. The heavenly and earthly spheres are always 


separate, whatever the links of connection in that time when the new 


Jerusdlem comes:down out of heaven. 
t Only the atmospheric heavens, which are dissolved with the earth, 


* 


(if we 


surrec:” 


kings, 


2 


ion in) “= 
The - 
create 


ot be 
return 
death 
- earth 
id the 
, saith 
But 
eturns 
ssages 
ording" 
earth, 
2 only 
dwell 
range’ 


of the 

which 
dhead, 
hich as 
omises 


m the . 
W are, 
. order 
lished . 


earth 
sinof 
ways 
& new. 


" put out their, name forever and ever. . 


x 
a 


_ PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE EARTH. 243 
f : 


‘ 


earth, which introduces the millennial blessing, that a mass of 
passages relate, which are brought forward to prove the ex-. 
tinction of the wicked. ' When only gne “ day of judgment” 
is thought of, and that the judgnrent of the dead after their 
resurrection, such passages do indeed seem to have force jn 
this way. But it,is gone as soon as we perceive their true 
application. - And this ig as true of some New Testament 
passages, as it is universally of the Old. It is only of the 
Old we are speaking now. Let us consider some of these 


“texts, and they will illustrate. the truth of the statements we - 


have been advancing. mae oe. ‘ 
1. The Psalms abound in reference tothis time. Passing | 


over the second and eighth, which connected give us the —~ 


prophetic outline, let us look at.sogne more detailed state- 


ments in the ninth :—*- . , . ; 
“For .Thou hast maintained my’ right’;and my cause; ° 
thou satest*in the throne judging right. Thou hast rebuked 
‘the heathen, Thou: hast destroyed the wicked; Thou hast 
| But ‘the Lord shall 
endure forever : He hath prepared His throne for judgment : 
and He shall judge the world in* righteousness, He shall 
minister judgment to the people in uprightness. . . Sing 
praises to.the Lord; which dwelleth’ in Zion ; declare among 
‘the people His doings. . . The wicked ‘shall. be turn lt into 
sheol : all the nations that-forget God.” : : 


a a 


et 


ese eee 


a 


“+ The second psalm has been already referred to; the eighth is ap- 


plied by the apostle (Heb. ii, 5-87 to Christ’s reign in the’ world to. 


i ° * i ° «Be 
come.” . That this term appliest;to earth, not heaven, this eighth psalm 
witnesses, a8 dves the expression’ of. the apostle, ’77/v olHovMLEVvHAY 


ryV pélAoviar, “ the. habitable (earth) to come,” the expression, 
° , \ 


translated “ world’ in Lukeiii. 1, — - A a 
+ Goodwyn’s attempt at an argument, from /this word is a specimen 


of the kind of criticism we meet with jin such writers :— 


«David says by the Holy Ghost, ‘The wicked shall be turned: back 


(shoov) into (sh’ol) the grave; and. all the nations that. forget/.God.’ 
Having been raised from sh’ol to appear before the great white throne,. © 


arth, 


death relaxes not his claim upon them,-but-in_the eternal embrace of. 


. 


the second, supplements his temporary hold at the first 


This is pure imagination. There is nothing about the resurrection 


99 
. 


244 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


These words need no interpreter, if we will only read »- 
them literally as they stand, and not supplement them with - 
other statements which have to do with a very different _ 
subject. = oe 

The thirty-seventh psalm has been more than once referred © 
to. It should be carefully read in connection with our 
present theme. But pass on to the fifty-eighth, and listen to 
language which people quote of eternal Pen neAe it. is 
again judgment upon living enemies :— : 

“ Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth ; Wieak out the 
teeth of the young lions, O Lord. Let them melt away as 
waters which run continually ; when he bendeth his bow to 
shoot his arrow, let. them be as cwt th pieces. ‘As a a spail 
which melteth, let every one of them pass away ; like the 

* untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun. 
Before: your pots can feel the thorns, He shall take them 
away, both living, and in His wrath. | The righteous shall 
rejoice when‘ he seeth the vengeance ; he. shall. wash his 
coin in the blood of the wicked. So that a man shall 
_say, Verily thére is a reward for the righteous: ver ily, He is. 
-a God that judgeth IN THE EARTH.” =~ : 

In a similar Way speak ‘the 83rd psalm, ches 101st, the 
118th, the 144th; but there is no,.use quoting testimony of 

b.. the same kind repeatedly. But. we-must look a little at the 


“aoe = i i [saialr’ describes in his first chapters ce he day of the Lord 
Df hosts ” upon the pride of man, and here-again we find 
‘ similar expressions :— 

“ Therefore. saith 'the Tard "the Lord of hosts, the Mighty 

One.of Israel, Ah, I will ease mé of mine adversaries, and 

avenge me-of mineyenemies;. ; .'. Zion shall be redeemed 

_ with judgment, and her converts with righteousness ; and 


ia. a) _ 


a —»——-— 


of.the dead in the passage, but the Rie uction of living oe a 
nothing about the great white throne, but God dwelling in Zion ; lwhile 

the “ turned back” reters to the ard verse, where the same word is used : 
“ when mine enemies are turned back,” i. e., from their assault upon the 

people of God, ’ re 


- 


ily read 


m with 
lifferent — 


referred | 


ith our 
listen to 
it; it. is 


out the 
Lway as 
bow to 
a spail 
like the 
the sun. 
ce them 
us shall 
rash his 
an shall 


y, He is. 


Ist, the 


1i0ony of 
e at the 


he Lord 
we find 


Mighty 


ies, and - 


deemed 
ss; and 


enemies ;- _ 


n ; iwhile 
lis used :. 


4 
vs 


‘, 
®- * 


é 


PURIFICATION AND BLESSING OF THE EARTH. 245 


the destruction of the transgressors and ‘of the sinners shall’ ; | 


be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be ¢on- 
sumed.” "ae eee, ee sou eee 
_ Again (ch. xi.) -— a ag “f 

-« And there shall: come forth a rod out of the; stem of 
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out’ of his ‘roots, and the 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest ypon Him,... - with righteous: 


ness shall He judge ,the poor, and reprove with equity for 


the meek of the earth; and He shall smite the earth with 
the rod of Jlis mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall 
slay the wieked,” pans ee i eee Cee 
Then follows a well-known picture of. millenniake@peace 
and ofthe regathering and reunion of Ephraim dnd Judah. 
~: Ezekiel- gives’ us the principle Uf these judgments, and 
applies them to God’s dealings with Israel ; see especially, - 
ch. xxxiii.. But ‘even.to refer to the passages which treat 
of the judgments themselves would! fill up our space unduly: 
The themé is that of the prophets generally, but as a. neces- 
sary step towards that blessing’ of Istaet and’ the earth which 


fills everywhere the landscape of the future. One last tes; 
e closing prophecy of ‘the Old ‘Testament. is ~. 


often quoted of eternal judgment, Almay wvith that We many . = . 


timony from ‘th 


leave the subject :— e ee 
“ For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven , 
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall. be 
stubble; and the day, that cometh shall burn them “ap, saith - 
the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither roof nor 
branch. But. unto you'that fear my namegshall the Sun of 
' righteousness arise with healing in His‘wings; and’ ye shall 
go forth and grow up'as calves of the stall. And ye shall 


. tread down the wicked ;' for thiey ‘shall. be ashes under the © 


soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the 
Lord of hosts”, (Mal. iv. 1-3). Bt rae at oe poe 

“Now this 1s, a8 stated, the time. of the earth’s day-dawn:: 
the-time—-when the sun rises.’ It is now “ night,” althougli a 


! 


’ 
a 


upon the 


. night “ far spent.” This harmonizes the passage (which has - 
| difficulty) with all ‘the other prophecies of | 


no exceptiona 
? “ 


~\ 


2146 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TOA ae STATE. 


the same time. - It is, earth’s judgment in order to carth’s 
blessing. | 

We have still to look at the bearing of the typical sys- 
tem of the Old Testament upon our present subject. 


CHAPTER XXv. 


OLD TESTAMENT STIADOWS. 


» 


WE have mentioned it as an apparent. contradiction to: 
our view of ‘the limited range of the Old Testament future, 
that the belief of the people plainly went beyond it. Not 
. bnly does the epistle to the Hebrews tell] us that Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob confessed themselves pilgrims upon earth, 
and looked for a « heavenly countty ”; but also the very 
word used by our Lord for hell—Gehenna—seems to have — 
been in use among the people before our Lord’s time in that 

very way.* This implies a knowledge apparently in oppa- 

sition to the statements of the last chapters. But any one 
. need only read carefully the first half of the book of Genesis, 
to be quite clear at least as to Abraham that there is no 
promise at all of heaven to him recorded there. “How then 
did he obtain the assurance of there heing in store for him 
“a heavenly country ae . pains 
One of two things, could alone be supposed. — There wag 
either an unrecorded promise ; or else he must have been 
given to see very plainly the typical character of things 
which we know were types of’ the very traths which the 
New Testament shows us he had received. Abraham’s-cal]: 
to Canaan was the perfect symbol of. our « heavenly calling,” , 


* It is used ifthe Targum of. Jonathan, and_in the Mishna,—as— 
well-as commonly by the Jewish doctors since. It is not used in the’ — 


Septuagint, save once yaievva@ in Josh. xviii. 16, for the literal « valley 
of Hinnom.” cae a : 


STATE. 


ler to carth’s 


° typical sys- 
bject. 


» 


radiction to 
ment future, 
nd it. Not 
t Abraham, 
upon earth, 
io the very 


ms to have - 


time in that 
ly in oppo: 
ut any one 
of Genesis, 
here is no 
How then 
re for him 


There was 
have been 
of things 
which the 
ham’s call 
y calling,” 


OLD TESTAMENT SHADOWS. 247 


but how he could’ have undérstood it so, we may be at ; 


Joss to comprehend, Yet some things there were that might 


have aided: greatty in this. | 
Man had been shut out of Paradise two thousand years 
‘pefore; and Revelation ends with the picture of another 
Patadise, heavenly; not earthly, into which those that haye 
« washed their robes” in the blood of the Lamb shall be 
mitted. No one doubts, save an infidel, that here ag in , 
the first garden of God was a type of the other. Had the 
secret then been shut up those two thousand years,—al 80- 
lutely shut up—-that there was in it some such meaning 
Our suppositions in such a matter may not possess nmyuch 
value; but we are secking to account in this way for a fact 
at least not to be denied, of Abraham's having a knowl 
of that which certainly does not appear upon the face of the 
inspired reeord. And, our attention being turned to/ this, 
we cannot but notice how much the divine way was in |those — 
early flays to teach by type and figure. Did Abel know 
nothing of the signifieance of that “ more excellent sacrifice ™ 
which by faith he offered? And if the * seed of the 
woman ” spoke, a3 we know it did speak, oft a deliverer to 
~ eome, it spoke still in’ the language of type of the bruis- 
ing of the serpent’s head. In Abraham’s vision it was a 
figure spoke, though with some. interpretation (Gen. xv.). 
So-Jacob’s ladder; and still more the mysterious night- 
{Joseph's 
ng: and 


wrestling, with its consequence ofa halting thigh. 
dreams still exemplify this way of the divine teach 
so the dreams which he interprets. In these and similar in- 
stances we find not merely the use of type and figure, but 
of these as things Ghose significance was known to the peo- 
ple tn whose time they happened. They show us that these 
were ine language of the day, certainly not wholly unintel- 
ligible when first uttered, however much- the full mystery 
waited for revelation, when the appointed. time should be 


Mishna, ae— 


ased in the’ — 
ral “ valley 


: _come. 


Still more would this be so as the word of -God-grew 


' _ gradually to its full proportion, and the meaning of the law” 


v 


248 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A PUTURE STATE. 


came to be unfolded by the prophets, partial though the 
qafolding were. And though the people were indeed blind 
and carnal, even this would not. hinder the attainment of a 
certain body of truth as orthodoxy, while the ‘point and 
power of it as bearing practically upon themselves might be 
denied. Such exactly was the later Pharisaism whieh 
earried with it the’mass of the people. And such, in 
the history of the Christian church, was the Ni icene ortho- 
doxy. ' 


We may thus account then for a knowledge ‘in Totes *. 


lbeyond the apparent measure of the revelation that had been 
made to them. We have only to suppose - (what is other- 


_Wise indicated also) that the great system of types which » _ 
their law embodied was not wholly unknown to them; and ~ ° 
while the ministry of death and condemnation was allowed ra 
to have its full effect, and the consistency of purpose w as 


‘maintained throughout, the light was allowed in another 
way to shine, even if dimly, through the wonderful imagery 
in the midst of which they moved. 

This was surely divine wisdom. But let us seek to realize 
a little how far beyond the usual thought of it, this typical 
character of the Old Testament books extends. 

All must of course admit (who are not‘infidels) the figur- 
ative nature of the tabernacle and temple service. Priest, 
altar, sacrifice and sanctuary we must allow to have their 
inher meaning, for the: New Testament so reads them all. 
But the New Testament finds such also in far other things: 
in the details of Israel's history, their Passover and Red Sea 


(leliverance, the manna, the water from the rock. “ All these . 


- things,” says the apostle, “happened unto them for ensam- 
‘ples (literally, types)*and are written for our admonition, 
upon whom the ends of. the world (or ages). are come” 
(1 Cor. x. 11). But this typical teaching is not even con- 
fined to Israel’s history: we have similar explanations as to 


of Is 


of co 
> Gu 
wher 
as his 
as th 
throt 
reme 
are { 
this 
doet 
coul 
Jose 
ratic 
It 

- the 
pre: 
new 


Adam and his wife (Rom. v., Eph. v.), the food and the ark - 
(1 Pet. iii.), Melchizedek ( Heb. vii.), Abraham’s wives and 
sons (Gal iv.), witn more than a hint as to the offering up’ 


th the 
| blind 
t of a 
it and 
rht be 
whieh 
ich, in 
ortho- 


Israel 


1 been 
other- 


which , | 
3 and *. 
lowed 
ie was - 


10ther 
agery 


ealize 
ypical 


figur- 
riest, 
their 
m. all. 
lings : 
d Sea 
these . 
nsam- 
1ition, 
ome ”’ 
1 con- 
} as to 


OLD TESSAMENT SHADOWS. 249 


of Isaac (Gal. iii. 16, 17). Thus the history itself (while 
of course true and divine) is typical and prophetic also. 
* Guided , thus far by the word of God, are we to stop 
where the actual explanation’ sh wus, and view the rest of it 
as history simply ; or are we OF ake %his explanation rather 
as the establishment of a pitt pTG WMpich. is applicable a‘! 
through the historical books ? %Or'te dne hand, we must 
remember that many of the’ ables given us by our Lord 
are given without interpretation, and that weare left to find 
this in the figurative meaning of words elsewhere, and the 
octrine of Scripture generally. On the other hand, who 
could ignore a deeper meaning in such a story 48 that of 
Joseph, for which meaning yet no express warrant of inspi- - 
ration can be produéed ? 4 ) 

It seems plain then that we are to: apply the principle to 


“the history in general. And. here what a field of research 


presents itself, and how marvellously light breaks out in 
‘new and unlooked for places in the Old Testament ! 


own Para: 


From the first Eden, over now six thousan ea we look 
oat 


on to another, brighter and more blessed, 
disc ; where the tree of life, in new luxuriance and beauty, 
hangs its glorious fruitage over the perpetual stream that 
flows fromthe throne ef God itself, Who can miss the 


- comparison, albeit no doubt there is contrast also, between 


these two? Who can fail to see that the one is designed 
to be the shadow. of the other ; and that the contrast is but 
to remind us that the first is only the shadow, and cannot 
be the very image of that before whose transcendent beauty, . 
all pictures and forecasts fail? The first scene is the carth- 
ly and the fleeting; the second heavenly.and eternal. Earth ° 

is made the mirror of heaven, as indeed to. mortal eyes (it 
“would seem) must be; to. convey to us what “eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard,” but which “God. hath (nevertheless) . 

: J 


revealed to us by His Spirit.” 


1e ark - 
s and 
ig up 


‘When .we took -further-at—the New Testament vision of 


the New Jerusalem, we find a new. and most interesting 
link with the Old Testament. Let any one compare that 
¢ F Ql > * Ls : « . 


ty 


250) FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


picture of future blessedness with which Ezekiel closes, with 


respondence between the two can possibly be wndesigned. 

The waters flowing from the house of the Lord; in Ezekiel, 

bring life even into the salt sea; “and by the river upon the 

bank thereof on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees 

. for meat, whose leaf shall not fi nde, neither shall the fruit 
thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according 

' ', to his months, because their wéters«they issued out of the 
sanctuary, and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the 

leaf ther€of for medicine” (ch. xlv#<12). Who can refuse 

ae - the connection with the account in Revelation: “And he 
_ showed me a pure river of water of” life, clear as crystal, 
©  . proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In 
~~". the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, 
was there the tree “of life, which bare twelve manner of 


ae tree were for the. healing of the nations ” (Rev. xxii. 


1, 2). : 


In the one-case there are limits to: the blessing which we ' 
do not find in the othe r,. as , for instance, the, marshy’ 
places are yet given to call, (Ezek. xlvii. 11); and the one is 
connected with an earthly city and a ‘temple, while’in the 
“heavenly Jerusalem ” no temple is seen (Rev. ‘xxi. 22 
Thus here ‘again we find the true chatacters of OlkTesta- 
ment types. The earthly is the pattern of the heavenly. 
.» The law has a shadow of good things to come, but not the 
very image (IIeb. x. 1). ° 
| ' But then this shows us that not only thé past Hlatory bit 
the prophetic future also contains its types. And that the 
niillennial age, which the prophecy in Ezckiel speaks of, i¢in 
part at least a picture for carth’s inhabitants of things. out: ° 


are A Sg ee one 


them face to face as it were with et torival reglities : 


* So, ey vi. 5, miracles are cay ie powers of the: 


iL ; @ - this closing seche of our last Apocalypse, and say if the cor- _ 


fruits, and yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of | 


Yet there are contrasts alo between the two descriptions. 4 


side of earth... Visible signs of divine wert will Being, Rae Ne 
Po 


a 


Re ey ee es a — os PR et Be 


“vas 


to come.”’ 


8, With 


he cor- | 


signed. 
zekiel, 
on the 
ll trees 
e fruit 
ording 
of the 
1d the 
refuse 
nd he 
rystal, 


b. In . 


. river, 
ner of 
ves of | 
» XXil. 


ptions. « 
ch we: 
arshy” 
one is 


Cd) 


Aas 


OLD TESTAMENT SHADOWS. * 951 


‘nshort, in a very important way, a final dispensation of sight, 
as those preceding it have been of faith. Introduced. by 
the appearing of Christ, and the manifestation of the risen ~ 
and perfected sons of God, the reign of righteousness will be 


maintained by as manifest a display of divin authority. 


And as on the one band*we have-seen in Ezekiel pictured 
che blessings which reflect the heavenly and eternal ones, 8O- 


on the’ other hand does Isaiah show us the shadow of its : 


awful opposite, by whiclr men will be brought as “it were 
tace to face with “ eternal judgment ” :— : 

« And it shall come to pass that from one new moon to 
another, and from one. Sabbath to another, ‘shall all flesh 
come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall 
go forth and look upon the carcasps of the men that have 
transgressed against me ; for their worm shall not die, neither 
shail their fire be quenched ; and they shall be an abhorring 
unto all flesh ” (Isa. Ixvi- 23, 24). +: 

_ Now these are words in part quoted’ by our Lord in 
reference to another judgment, of which the scene in Isaiah - 
is only the earthly type. We shall shortly consider the 
difference between His words and those of the Old Testa-— 
ment prophet: for there is here (as before in the blessing) a 
contrast between the Old Testament and the New. But in 
Isaiah it is evidently an earthly scene; and a literal one :—* 
no mere figure, as Mr. Dobney with others.@pposes, of “ the 
complete triumph of the cause of true religion.” The sol- 
emn words will not.admit of being explained in this way. 
It would not give them meaning but evacuate it. And. yet 
what is surely a reality is also 4 symbol too. It is the de- 


~ signed. contrast, openly manifested to th¢ eyes of all in that 


3 . day, with the living water flowing from. Jerusalem. There 


* was the -symhol of eternal life, and here the shadow of 


the second death. “Each with its tale to tell in the ears of 


2 ‘the millennial. nations,—this warning; that: inviting: God’s 


ee last appeal to,man this side of eternity. ) 
cee This then ‘finally gives us’ the Old Testament with some 
ee completeness, and in‘ full harmony with itself, and with that 


# ey vy 
~& 
> 


252 ° FACTS ros THEORIES ‘AS TOA FUTURE STATE, 


later revelation which supplements, it, in ‘which’ both life and 
spon aes are fully brought to light, and also the second: 


deathis seen to be what the first shadows, as it is that to. 
wh) finally also it gives place. We must not even here, 
hoy expect to have done with figure8, for still we see 


in. part ind we prophesy in part, and the things with which 
we have to do are still seen but “through a glass, darkly ”— 
in ariddle or enigma. —, 


But whatever is given by inspiration of God is given for 


our instruction, and we must patiently and humbly take 
God’s, word as He has written it, and see if it-deals in “ am- 


biguous metaphors,” and whether perhaps we may notvfind: 


there the truth of which we are in 1 search. e° 


‘CHAPTER XXVI. 
THE AGES OF ETERNITY :—THE QUESTION STATED. 


WE are again stopped, upon the threshold of the New 
Testament. ‘Stoppeil, by the need of considering 4 question 


of the utmost importiange . to our present subject. It is | 


gravely asked whether we have any proper word ‘for eter- 


\ nity in Scripture, in the sense, that is, in which we ordinarily 
understand the word “eternity.” For even this the eccen- 


tricity of. a 1ew learned men would take from us by an 
etymological sleight of band which is scarcely creditable to 
them. “Eternal ” is “ eviternat?’—age-lasting. So .aionios, 
Dr. Far¥ar tells us, is “ translated rightly and fr equently by 
‘eternal,’ and wrongly and uniecessarily by “ everlasting.’ ie 
But again “ey erlasting.”’ is in abe: same dilemma, for of 
course it only means “lasting ever,” and fh evergreen is not 
a tree green to all eternity, but a a tree continously green 
duri ing its life.’’t . 


ed 
wel! 


— i? 
al Eternal. Hope,” Preface, xxxiv. 


ch ereoentantnd te mates sthiem mee 


" 
onivnartamesemtr spotless voneranarenineheasnenanelaein tates 
2 ; 


“ Hist. Doctrine Script. Retribution,” p; 128. 


* 
a of ow P 


e 


life and 
second: 
that. to. 


en here, 
we see 
h which 
rkly ”"— 


ven for 
ly take 
in“ am- 
not:find | 


ne 


ED. 


e New 
juestion 


It is» 


yr eter- 
linarily 
y eccen- 
_ by an 
able to 
tionios,, 
ntly by 
ing.’ ”* 
for of 
nis not 
y green 


eda 
net 


‘- THE AGES OF ETERNITY. 253 


So that we are in some. doubt as to our English even. 


The word “endless” is getting to displace “eternal,” but as 
no word of exactly that meaning is found in the New Tes- 


: eae pata cc. te 
~¢ament in any connection™of interest to us here, we are 


practically left without any trye word in it for what. for want 


- ofa better term I must still call “ eternity,” at all’ 


Authorities also diffe~ Mr. Oxerliam thinks that the 


“¢ word aidzos might be expected from its Poot aéi to mean” 


‘everlasting’ i the strictest sense »* while Dr. Beecher 
assures us that “in the New Testament aei is never used in 
the sense of eternity.”"f ren ale 
We must inquire, therefgre, for ourselves ; although we 
shall not refuse the help that those more learned than we 
can pretend to be can give us in the matter. te, 
The words with which we have to do are in the Greek 

but two,; aion and aionios (div; dzavi0s). They have been 
Anglicised into zon and seonial, apd these terms, although . 


_ not naturalized in our language, we may find it convenient 


for our,present purpose to retain. “The phrases “ forever ” 
and ‘forever and ever ” in our common Bibles are liter- 
ally “for the won,” “ for the eons,” “ forthe wons, of zons,”’ 
and akin to terms in the Old Testament where the Hebrew 


word “olam:” takes the placé of zon. ,, “ Btefnal” and | 


“ everlasting ” are both renderings gf the word “ xonial.” 

It is upan the ground of this phraseology that the argu- 
ment is built, that’ zonial cannot be in thecstrict sense “ eter- 
nal.” “For the gon” cannot be “ fot eternity,” because tlfere 


are sons, and éeons of ons ; ‘and you cannot 80 reduplicate . 


eternity. /onial, “ belonging to the son,” consequently 
cannot imply a longer time than the “on” to which it be- 
longs. oh, moreover, in Scripture itself’ is translated by 
«“ world” between thirty and forty times, and twice in the 
plural by “ages,” and this last. word seems to afford the 


most _consistent.rendering all through. |‘ Eternal life,” in — 
that case would be “ the’ life of the age” or © the fife of the 
world to come,” and “ eternal punishment,” of,course, must 

5 + a : ' ast 8 ay 5 


t 


t 


ee Letter,” p. 1%. tee Tlist. Retribution,” p. 128. 


~ -be harmonized with this: 


254 PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATS. ,.” 
punishment. 
Mr. Jukes, in his “ Restitution of All Things,” gocsa Hood. 


way further. He contends that these ages of which Scrip- 
ture speaks, and of which the -heathen writers understood. 


¢ 
nothing, refer to “ Christ’s mediatorial kingdom, which is _ 


toy) 
‘for the ages of ages,’ and must yet be ‘deliv oud up to the 


Father, that God may be all-in all.’ ” 


“The Cages,’ therefore (hé says), are periods in which God 


works, because there is’ evil and His rest is broken by it, but. ° 
which have a¥f'end and pass away, when the work appointed to 


be done in them has been accomplished. The * ages,’ like the 


‘days’ of creation, speak of a prior fall: they are the ‘ times’ in 


which God works, because He cannot rest in sin and misery. 


- Tlis perfeet rest is not in thé ‘ages,’ but beyond them, when the 


mediatorial kingdom, which is * for the ages of ages,’ is delivered 
up, an@ Christ, by whom all things are wrought in the ages, goes 


_ back to the glory which He had ‘ before the age-times ’ (2 Tim. i. 9, 
Tit. i. 2), that God may be all in all. The words ‘Jesus’ Christ 


(that is, Anointed Saviour), the same yesterday, to-day and for the 
ages,’ imply that- through these ages a Saviour is needed, and 


“Will be found, as much us to-day and yesterday. It will, I think, 


too, be found, that the adjective founded on this word, whether 
applied to ‘life,’ ‘punishment,’ ‘redemption,’ ‘ covenant,’ ‘ times,’ 
or even God Himself, is always connected with, remedial labor, 


und with the idea of ‘ages’ as ae in which God. is working 


to meet and correct some awful fall. . Nor does this affect the 
true eternity of bliss of God’s elect, or of the redeemed who are 
brought back to live in God, and to be partakers.of Christ's ‘ end- 


less life’ (Heb. vii. 16), of whom it is said, ‘ Neither ‘can they die — 


any more, for they are equal unto the angels, and are the children 


of God, being the children of the'resurrection ;’ for this depends . 


upon « participation in the divine nature, and upon that power 
which can change these vile bodies, that they may he fashioned 


like unto Christ’s glorious body, according to the working where- ~.. 


by He is able to subdue even all things unto Himself a ’ (Rest., 
pp. 61-68.) 


This has the advantage of being very definite doetritte 


x x a 
it cannot or need not be an endless 


and as such it cari Reece ee ge with Scrip- 


TE. 


eo. 


a a 
an endless 


ocsa good, 
ich Scrip- 
nderstood. 


, which is — 


up to the 


Which God 
1 by it, but — 
ypointed to 
s,’ like the 
‘times’ in ' 
ad misery. 
, when the 
s delivered 
» ages, goes 
2 Tim. i. 9, 
ssus’ Christ 
and for the 
eeded, and 
il, I think, 
d, whether 
it,’ ‘times,’ 
dial labor, 
is working 
s affect the 
2d who are 
rist’s ‘end- 
in they die | 
he children 
is depends . 
that power 
fashioned 


cing where- -... 


lf” “(Rest., 


‘doctririe, 


ith -Serip- 


ant 


Ze HE AGES OF ETERNITY. ....° 255 


ture. This we hope to doin detail. presently... ‘But first, it 
seems, we have to look at these words outside of: Scripture, 
* and in their roots and beginnings if ordinary Greek. 
“Dr. Beecher has taken up this subject ina rather elaborate 
‘way, following ‘out the suggestions of Dr. Tayler Lewis, 
which may be read in the “ Genesis and “ Keclesiastes ”” ot 7 
Lange’s Commeniary.* We may sum up Dr. Beccher’s 
statements in a much briefer way without detriment. (we 
think) either'to their‘clearness or their force. ae 
He first of'all examines the proof of.aion meaning eternity 
from Aristotle’s ‘derivation of it, from ed on (aés wv) 
“always existing.” ‘Two “questions arise from this: is, this 
“ etymology ie and if so, is it decisive of the matter ?. 
On the first poin 'e concedes it to be correct for the sake 
of argument, ‘althqueh sufficient reasons could be given for 
rejecting it, and Plato and Aristotle were very poor ety- 
mologists. As to the second he objects that-“uei does not 
always, or even commonly, denote or imply eternity, and in 
this passage it manifestly does not, and to give it that sense 
“volves Aristotle in inconsistency and absurdity, and in 
a war with notorious facts, in thie history of the Greé®@an-— 
“puage.” * kien teen aie 
">. This last is by itself decisive, and we need’ not look further + 
at, the question of ‘derivation, The constant meaning of aion 
in Homer is by all admitted to be 
_ one’s aion” was to die. oe: ‘ A 
ef From this abstra fet idea of ‘life? it- passed to a concrete 
form to denote a living spirit, an air, OF zon.” This mean- 
ing occurs, not in Homer, but in Euripides, and is found at 
a”later petiod in Epictetus, who declares that he is not an 
\bon (a spirit) but a man.. ' ‘The element of time in any 


oe. 


Pg. 


Dr. Beecher.} \ * : Nr eas - 


oe et ee 
* Special ftroduction to the First Chapter of Genesis, Part. 3; and» 


fife”: to “breathe out ~ 
1 : 4 ES Ms ay 


form is not included in these original uses of the word,” says: 


his excursus on“ Olamic or Monian Words in Scripture,” Ecclesiastes, / 


° 
* 


4 


s 
a ce 


~ pp. 44-51. : ae 
, tHe would not deny it, I suppose, that by Arrian’s time, the meaning 


6 


reat poets, Mit 
@aind “ as.ou : 


ense Ol, 

Ves ree int et entre as Honea Fesiod, the 
phic Hi munists, Sophocles, Euripides, Pindar, ' ; rodotus, 
fetjoption’and Thucyd des; but we do not yet . to the. 
Hea of" eternity”) Soe i 
i ut “Dr: Beecher admits ‘that her gardal we do find the 

dea. The original idea! of life was (at length). subordi- 
pated and! djsappeared, 4 and ideas of time alone’ took posses- 

* sion of, the'whole ground, afid aion, instead, of: denoting life, 

| ypame to: dengte time.” Thus it, passed | into thé.*sense , of: 
Sey for time, ; i ‘when. it is qualified, by: duljeetives de- 
noting: ‘totality, acquires the sense of eternity. (At first this / 
“eh ‘qualifying: adjective was expressed ; dut by ‘degrees came to / 
be pometimes implied and uyderstoosl, and “aion, eoith this/ 
understandio. th was used, for eternity.” os } 


\ «Thus the’ exprgggion eis ton aiona vame somg 
bes all time, tlral forever, and to eters 
Cremer says thatSe heans ‘for the future, ; 
to come. ‘ But this same form that may thus 
os also@lenote, for an age, or for’ a dispensatio 
; stances. 
, . «There is still another, use of aion, intrddluced os St, yl t de- 
note ‘a kind* of philosophical | ctermity, from which pu present 
scolis Daisies canes” samen ee ea € ‘ a 
even of éternity has anterat into this application of the word. “Tis 


words are :—T am not am Eon, Yuta man, a E of alt things, as an 
hour of thé: uny ] must subsist as:an hour, mY a way as an hour,’ 


° 


ata 


he Mosaie 
t with the 


e do find the 
eth) ,subordi- 
e took posses- 
“denoting life, 
 thé*sense of” 
adjectives de- “/] 
* At first this / 
sgrees came to i 
dom with this 


ist, ‘present, 
. teeaee. J 
of the word. “His | 


ce 


we 


ned.’ 


che matter seems} 
XThg to object, nor (at least, at pres 
“The next step.carries us 


THE AGES OF ETERNITY. 


257 


future tinie ‘are eliminated, and absolute . being only is re- 


I have thus far followed Dr. Beecher, as his account of 
to be on the whole correct. I have noth- 
ent) anything to add. 
into Scripture, and there we getdpqn + 


more satisfactory as well as more familiar ground. 


In the Septuagint t 
equivalent of olam (ndiy), and it is 
ning of it therefore at the’ time this translation was 
- Olam is not the life of a man, and ‘the Homeric sig- 
Olam is undoubtedly more 

‘en used for a limited time than for eternity. We have ° 
een indeed that the Old Testament in ge 
the shadows of what are eternal things. And the shadows 


‘are necessarily transient and to pass away. Yet to these 


/ the term is constantly applied. The covenant with Noah 


is a covenant of olan ; 


‘nificance of dion is not found. 


and ordinances, althay 


a.¢ 


So also even the “‘men o 


he word «ion is used as the constant 
easy to ascertain the 


neral gives us only 


and not less so the Mosaic statutes 


ih these plainly were to pass away. 
f.old” are “men of olam’; “the 


ancient landmark” is the “landmark of lam”; Israel's 
‘yoke had’ been “broken from olam,” and so repeatedly.* 


Now, in none 0 
itations which the 
on the term age 3 


“:fiongee elsé 


yhiere. 


i yd 
y 


pature of ghing 


f these cases do we find a parallel to the lim- 
3 in all languages imposes 
A” ABMWhich yet leave it its full signi- 


"At acid imdmark is not a landmark 


which itl been there as long as ip the nature of things it 


could ; and_.so as to.the rest.’ -A 


= 3 ‘ ., o . 
gas. By no process of fair: dealing 
. “its use in'the Septuagint) be said nec 
But.again, it. is used in the 


ura 


nl afich exathples age nunier- : 


= 


then cai’ oliim (or*@ionin 


essarily@to mean eternity. < 7 
1, wliere we can scarcely * 


translate it-otherwise than’ by “ age@”.: ‘Psaglxxvii.-5, “ the, 


“of old” or.“ in ‘oF 


) 


"in Deut. xXxii. 7 5- 


ph ee 


imes ’’ ate,“ the yearsenf agesy? “Tra. li. 9, 
alee eS ae ae aD Be 


jae * ee 1 eat $8 oer pers ee hay} a x a8 ae 
ii. 28 Jer. ii. 20. - Tt Js rendered “ old” or 

8p Bae a anh ces 
Josh, xxiv. 2;\Job.-xxil. 


st alt things, as-an 
laway as an hour,” 


15; Prov. xxilijyd 


ae 


ae ae 


0; Beet: 7. 10; Isa. xtvi-9 


% 


? 


a 
cf. hy, 


- 


\ 


258  FACTS.AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“the generations of old” are the “generations of ages.” 


Here the same remarks as before, and not less forcibly, ap- 


ply. ; : 
Moreover, there is in the Old Testament a way of ex- 


pressing absolute eternity, which seems fully to recognize. 


the inadequacy of vlam definitely to express it by itself. 
This is by the addition to it of a word which may be taken 
as “and yet”: “for the olam andl yt, * showing that be- 
yond the olam there is a conception of time. possible and 
actual. This phrase oceurs some fourteen times in the Qld 
Testament, and in one instance only it may have a more 
limited meaning, Psa. civ. 5, and here really limited-by the 
nature of that to which it is applied.t a eee nc 
This then gives ‘us the sense (so far as the Septuagint 


goes) of both :eon and reonial: for “:onial” is the word 


guid be © 


‘found the noun olwn with a governing prepositfon... A 


they use in such cases as those where in Hebrew 


“govenant of olam” becomes thus an “ seonial: covenant,” 
and the “dandmark ‘of olam,” the ‘ eonial landmark.” No 
one can avoid the conclusion, as it would seem, that olam 
and zon in the Septuagint, may very properly .be taken to 
mean “age,” and that :eonial in the same way means “ be- 


longing to the age, or ages.” a 


* Dr. Tayler Lewis speaks of it thus in Lange’s Ecclesiastes :\ Ad “is 
transition to, arrival, and going beyond—a passing beyond ‘still fur- 
ther, on and‘oh. Thus it becomes a name for eternity, agin those 
remarkable expressions, Isa. ix. 5, abi ad, poorly rendered ‘ everlasting 
Father,’ and shuchen ad, ‘inhabiting eternity, Isa. Ivii. 10; wighwhich 


compare Hab. iii. 6, Gen. xlix, 26, and Isa. xlv. 17, where we'shave the’ 


same word as noun and preposition—the mountains of ad, the"progeni- 
tors of ad—to the ages of ad: to the ages ty which other agesare to be 
added indefinitely. Tence, the preposition sense to, nfking it signifi- 
cantly, as well as etymologically, « quivalent to the Latin ad ct, the Greek 
rr, Saxon atand fo, in all which there is this sense of arrival and transi- 
tion, The idea becomes most vivid and impressive in this Hebrev 


eS ae Re Ree er eae, ays ry | 


A eat ee NS ek ee 


e 


» TY pdiyd, * forever and yet.” 
Sie ce T : 
ppe other. passages are -—_Exod. xv. 18, Psa. x. 16, xxi. 4, xlv. 6 
Miviii. 14, ii. -B, exix. ff exly. 1, 2. 21, Dan. xii. 8, Mic. iv 4, Ba 
‘ nae 


LATE. 


ns of ages.” 
forcibly, ap- 


a way of ex- 


to recognize - . 


it by itself. 
nay be taken 
ing that. be- 


possible and — 


es in the Qld 
vave a more 
mited-by the 


e Septuagint 
is the word 


ew wauld be © 


»positfon..- A 
al: covenant,” 
Imark.” No 
m, that olam 
‘be taken to 
y means “ be- 


aie! 


siastes :\ Ad “is 


peyond ‘still fur- 


nity, afin those 
red ‘ everlasting 
e : 


15; withavhich 
ere we'havé the’ 


ad, the *progeni- 
er ages are to be 
afking it signifi- 
rad et, the Greek 
rival and transi- 
in this Hebrev 


+ ayoidably produce an impression by the’partial investigation 


~ “as concerns the meaning of the words “ eternal ” punishment, 


4 


THE AGES OF ETERNITY. 


woN ; : 
‘ Here Dr: Beecher stops short in ‘his ‘inquiry, and doesnot 
follow it into the New Testament. Nor does he sufficiently 
recognize the fact that after all there are passages in which 
olam can scarcely stand for lexs than cternity, dnd that 
aidy is therefore already used in the Septuagint in this 
way.* His examinatibn is imperfect, and his statement par- 
tial. The former hic+d6es not carry far cnough to decide 
the question, and yet leaves the full foree of what he has 
brought forward to bear upon the decision of the meaning 
of the word as used by the Lord as to the condemnation :of _ 
the wicked hereafter. This is scarcely candid.. It is true 
he warns us at the beginning that he does not: propose ‘to ° 
discuss this, question of eternal retribution, hut he does un- 


he has made. Nay, he. would actually settle the: point aa far " 


and “everlasting” fire. We may: fairly demand of ‘him, 
why he has omitted what is absolutely necessary. to the , 
mere philological inquiry even? and why the qhestion of 
these words should be’ more difficult to’ settle in the New’ 
Testament than it is in the Old? :Nor,only so, but, as he 
- has shown us that the word aion did get to mean “eternity,” 3 
_and was used for it by Plato and others before the time of SS t 
‘our Lord, it was surely above all necessary to seé whether | 
the New Testament might not use the word in some similar 
sway.” cae ee 3 | 
Dr. Beecher, hawever, has, not done this, and from this 
point we ms without him. We have'presented the 
aggiments and# conclusions to which «he and others have 
a fully; and (we think) impartially.. We shal] seek the. 
final solution now where only we can find it, and prhere:he 
has not ventufft : ; 


enc i cin 


eee aca RIN See “ 


qT. 


eo OT. 
gil 11 


* The very first ‘use ‘of both sli@ws this : “Ge 


22; -and see Deut. 
xxxii. 40; Psa. ix, 7; xxxiii: ‘11; xc. 2; xcii. 8 
, i 


cxv. 13 fetc. 


16, xxi. 4, xlv. 6 
Mie. iv 5, 


5 a3 
. u 
« 


js 


a: , 


i 


260 FACTS AND THEORIES ‘AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


CHAPTER XXVIL. 
| eEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 


Iy‘the ‘New “estament we find aion over ‘and over again 
translated “world,” and not. badly, if we only taink of 
worlds in. tim@instead of worlds i in space, but more intelli- 
gible to us if, yendered. “age.” The “end of the world? in 
ate xiii, xxiv., XXV aa 20 is thus in all these places 

pistion of’ phe age.” In Heb. ix. 26, it is “the drat: 

the qges.".,,50 we have “ this world” and “‘the world 

a come,” ‘ the children of this World,” “the princes -of this 
world,” and similar ex ressions frequently. So again «we 


_have “ages to come,” al we je ages cppipleted, and can 


look back to a ti befor : hesé cage began.” 
* . Thus Scripture ry Were r gnizes the fact of dine 


successive ages, sarély not purposeless divisions of gene a 
eachea step in the aggéngp lishment 9 f. stipaggouels. 
have in fact the very: expression,\ md to it ‘we ti bse 


az in. to return, “the purpose of the aces »-(E] 
: purp i 8) 
riods, 


The ages, then, are dispensatj al Pe -whose existence 
and. character are not unimpt lings * for the student of 
the Ways*of Him whose “ gor have been from of old, 


m everlasting.” tis to the “ King of (these) ages” that 


aq the apostle therefore ascribes “ glory unto the ages of 


Tages » (1 Tim. i 17). Him they all serve in various har- 
mony of the one everlasting anthem wherewith all His works 
praise Him their Maker. St: 


5. Eternity in Scripture we| need not wonder to find ex-, 
pressed i in terms of these divinely: constituted ‘ ages.”. This . 


is done in a number of different ways, hidden very ‘much in 


our version by vague and dissimilar phraseology, which has® e; 


little of the beauty and “appropriateriess of the inspired orig orig— 


ee 


* Matt. xii. 32, Luke xviii. 30, xx. 34, 1 Cor. ii. 6, Eph} ii. 7, Col. i. 
26, 1 Cor. ii. 7 (before the ages). @ 


¢ i 


ESTION. 


d over again 


ly think of 


more intelli- 


ie world”? in ~ 
places She . 
‘the comple-: 


1‘‘the world 
inces of this 
So again wwe 


ted, and can 


fact of these 
s of time, but 
unsels. . We 


se nities 
e student of 
i from of old, 
e) ages” that 
the ages of 
various har- 
all His works 


r to find ex- 
‘ages.”. This . 


very much in 


ry, which has'~ . 


e shall have 
Epi ii iy). 


261 


NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 


inal. The word «ion is used nearly eighty times in this way 
in the New Testament, and above seventy times the word 
Yyionios. We have thus nearly a hundred and fifty occurrences 
to test the Scripture use of these expressions. Surely we 
should be able to arrive at somggsatisfactory result.. 
’ Let us first look at the ee Of course from our 
poi, of view in time we can look at eternity as behind or 
betore us. It is but one and the same eternity, of course ; 
*. .for there cannot in the nature of things be two: but to our. 
"| gonception there is a past and a future one. Let us gather 
“ithe expressiong, of the former first. | 
» find then that there are “ages” in the “ends” of 
e ares: for we read that “all these things happened 
em for types, and are written for’ our admonition 
upon whomijthe ends of the world (literally, the ages) are- 
come ” | x11). We may surely connect that with 
the passage beforé cited from Hebrews (ix. 26), that “ once 
at the completion of the ages hath (Christ) appeared, to put 
away sin by(the sacrifice ot Himself.” These ages were the 
preparatory times of which we have been already thigh ir 
when God by the ministry of condemnation and. ip, of 
ways was shutting man up to the grace which Chris ret 
show. Thus “when we were yet without strength in- due 
time Christedied for the ungodly.” This grace lay under 
the veil thropghout these ages—there, but lacking full ex- 
pression. The “ends of the ages” having come, that ex- 
pression has been found; and thus the “types” of Israel’s 
history, as well as the shadows of the law in a stricter sense, 
cive to us their full weight of “ admonition.” 
-" In Col. i. 26 again, we hear of a mystery hidden “from 
ages and from generations,” and in Eph. iii.~9 find a similar 
expression. There need be no doubt that here we have thé 
- , selfsame ages as before. Nor again, when Paul speaks of 
hidden wisdom “ordained before the ages, to our glory” 


te 


phy ii. 7, Col. F- 


(I Cor. ii. 7). = 
,. These ages thgn are plainly finite, and so is the whole 
course of them; but wayhave two other expressions which 


e 


a 


262 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


are different from these. In them aion is used in the sin- 
gular, and in one passage at least eternity must be meant. 
“Known unto God are all His works from aion ” (Acts xv. 
18)y where we cannot say “from the age.” In the other 
passages the expression may seem less decisive: God has 
“spoken by the mouth of His holy prophets, which have 


‘been from aion” ; and similarly, “by the mouth of His holy 


prophets from aion” (Luke i. 70; Acts iii. 21); but in 
neither case would “the age ” do at all. What age? “ From 
the beginning of the world” might suit the context, but 
would be no translation: and outside that beginning of the 
world is what ? Surely, eternity. In this sense then “from 
eternity ” would suit, and all the occurrences would be in 
harmony. 


Once more a similar phrase occurs in the words of the , 


man to whom the Lord gave sight (John ix. 82): “ Mrom 
the aion was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of 


~ the blind,” and here again the meaning. is simply “it sever 
was heard.” Thus wherever aion is used in these expres- 
sions it. cannot be spoken of a particular age or dispensation, 


but seems invariably to imply eternity. 

This is ‘all we have relating to the past. As regards the 
future we have more and various phrases, which we may 
here again classify accordingly as aion is used jf the singu- 
lar or in the plural.. The plural form we shall look at first 
as being the most simple. We have. here three expres- 
sions :— ; 


1, Simplest of all, in Jude 25, glory:i is ascribed to ‘God. 
“both now and to all the ages.” There is plainiyep no oes 
~ to limit this. ~ Bee 

2. More ‘often, we have, and less fully, cons the aires.” 35 
This occurs eight times.. Six times in aseriptions, of praise: = 
to God or to Christ (Matt. vi. 13 "Rom. i. 253 ix. 53.xi 
36; xvi. 27; 2 Cor. xi. 31); once there is the statement ‘Mr. 


J akes foltos on, and as to the. force of which we shall ] pres: ee 
, the sgme_ yesterday, to-day, 


ently inquire,—“ Jesus Chr 
and to the ages ” (Heh, xiii. 8 


a and ¢ once it. is said af POnrist, 


TE. 


n the sin- 
be meant. 
(Acts xv. 
the other 
God has 
hich have 
f His holy 
}; but in 
? “From 
ntext, but. 
ing of the 
ren “from 
uld be in 


rds of the , 


: “& From 
he eyes of 
“it never 
se EXpres- 
spensation, 


ards the 
h we may 
the singu- 
ok at first 
ee expres- 


d to God. 
‘no reason..." » 


Vas : 


the ajes.” 
scot praise 
fixe 5h 


ement Mr. 


~ from the very birth-place of the Septuagint, although of 2 


y 
4 


ad 


' 


NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 263 


chat He shall reign over the house of Jacob unto the ages ” 
Luke i. 33). In none of these passages is there reason to 
question that a proper eternity is intended. : 

% ‘The third expression is a reduplicative form which 
plainly conveys ,a much greater impression of immensity: 
“to the ages of ages, And this is five times applied to the 
life of God Himself: Ze “ liveth unto the ages of ages” 


“Rev. iv. 9,10; v.14; x. 6: xv. 7); once'to the resurrec- 


tion-life of Christ (Rev. i. 18); once to the kingdom of “our. 


- ord and His Christ” (Bev. xi. 15); once to the reign of 


the saints (ch. xxii. 5); ten times in ascriptions of glory to. 
God (Gal. i.5; Phil. iv. 20; 1 Tim. i 17; 2 Tim, iv. 18; | 
Heb. xiii. 21; 1 Pet. iv. 11; v. 11; Rev.i. 6; v. 13; vii. 
12); twice to the torment of the wicked (Rev. xiv. 11; XX, 
10); and onee to the smoke of Babylon rising up forever 
(ch. xix. 3). These last. passages we shall have again before 
s, but if the duration of these ages is the measure of the 

risen life of Christ, yea of God Himself, surely its force can-: 


not be questioned. 


, f‘<tife aion o 
is the duration of the reign’ fithe Son of God: “ Thy.throne, ~ 
O God, is for the aton of the “anion” (Heb. i-8), where we | 


have the Septuagint rendering of the expression before noted 


‘as the Hebrew ong for. proper eternity (1) poiy, olin 
---yaed), Here then it does scem that 'aion must, even in the 
Plato. | 


bas it; it-is owned ; and Philo also ran ‘Alexandrian Jew, . 


‘Septuagint; have this later but acknowledged sense. 


* 


somewhat later date: ”. Here the expression is used for eter:. 


Wien mt ae ai SES, Sa Rraaes ate ° a + ni yWekna Crikey an 
“nity, and we can’ only translate “for the age (or perhaps, 


shall pres- A 
lay, to-day, 
1 of Christ, =~ 


~ course”). of eternity.” -*W echaves 


“owarld eo. 


for the past (Acts xv. 18)." ee a ; Fee 
“.- %* Aion is/thus,used in Eph. ti. 2,“ according to the. course of this... 
es 3 re oe oF aes, ut? 2 , iat e. vat oe af * . 


? 


§ 264° FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE 


2. Again; ¥ we have an ascription of glory to Christ,. “for 
the day of eternity ” (aion) (2 Pet. iii. 18). Here onee‘more 
a limited meaning can scarce be contended for... 

3. Again, in Eph, iii. 21, we find, “ Unto Him be glory. i in 
an church by. a ist docs unto all the generations of te 
cage of the ages.” Here no one, I suppose, would qgoubt , : 
« eternity to be meant. - It muy define what “age” is meant 
eon when aion is used alone: it isthe ‘‘agé” of the x vases the age 
ibe eT 2 in Which al ayes: are summed UD. oe 
ii 4. But the most commen expression of all is that for which 
e _. no more suited rendering can be found. than “ forever’ 
Res ae ' for the nion, ' It is used twenty-eight times; and not ina = fj 
single instance can it be proved to have a limited . senite. 

It too is lised. for the duration of' the life of Christ (Jolifa xii. 

34); of thé abiding of the Spirit of Godw ithNHis people — 
"(xiv 16); of Christ’s ‘priesthood ‘Heb. vii.) ;. the enduring 
a ae ++ of the word of God (1 Pet. i+ 23), amd: of ,the doer of His 
a, ; will. (1 John’ ii. 17); and of the believer's righteousness 
| (2 Cor. ix.9). It is used too for the duration of “the portion. 
Hoek ae of the ungodly, “ blackness , of: darkness forever” (Jude 13. \E 
“Hy So oe ae Pet. ‘i. 17). Nee 
qe JS « Amid all this varied phraseology not one passage gan be 
Pes ea shown where our common translation gives some equivalent 
a ook of‘ “forever,” in which less than eternity can be prov ed to he. 
oy, + teant. «Mr. Clemance has indeed said: “ An gon may have 
Saas an end. ., ons of eons may have anend. Only that which. 
| oe dasts through all the wons.is without an end, and Scripture, 
a _ affirms'this orily of the kingdom of God, and of the glory of 

foe a God in thegghurch.”* ‘Canon Farrar quotes this with appro- 
Slee Oe Nation: pit@he has’ not attempted to produce agingle 2 ‘New § 
a > Testament passage that.I can figd, to prove the giargaite of oe 
: my assertion here. Instead of this, he goes to Ae 

- * *. tament for his proof, and of course quotes olin 
mio: . This amounts toa confession that’ the N& 
as ! will not serve his purpose. Would he not hat 
j its testimony, if he could i Ag eer 


3 


estament © y 
groduced. a 


% ‘ ieee ee aS Pome ae 


«* Puinre Punishment, p. 86, quoted i in’ hie prefac ce to Riernal Hope. |. 
geek 


ATE. * 
Yhrist,.“ for 


 onee more 


be glory. in 
ions of the 


ul goubt., , 


"is meant 
ges, the age 


it for which 
forever oe 


vd hot ina 


ited .sentte. 
t (J ola xii. 


His people — 


1e enduring 
loer of His 
shtéousness | 
the portion 
” (Jude 13, 
Ne 
age can be 
- equivalent 
roved to be. 
n may have 
that which 


1 Scrigture 


he glory of 
with appro- 


ingle ‘New . 


vlpasite of 
all Tes: 


i ’ ¢ Hoaljould « come to the end of ,all that Scripture eontem- 


@) 


te «2 ane he 
NEW TESTAM ENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 265 


Dr. Beecher, too, as we have seen, avoids the New Testa- 
ment. - Mr. Oxenham in’ his letter has nothing to say -@.., 
concerning these expressions. | Mr. Jukes, however,*comes — * 
boldly forward, as we have seen, with a distinct,;statenfent 
as to the nature and duration of tied ages to come. .Lohis * 
views, ther efore,. we must direct our attention. © 

The substance of therii we have given before in his own. . gp 
words. ‘The ages, he believes, are periods in which God is . 
working in grace to meet and correct the “effect of the fall. © 
His rest is Beyond them,.not-in them, when the mediatorial 
kingdom ‘of Christ, which is for the,ages of ages, is given up, soe 
= -e‘and Christ, the Worker of the divine. purpose in them, goes 
back to the glory which He had before the age-times, that 

~ God may be all in all. Throughout these ages Christ is 

AS a Saviour needed and found, as muuch as ‘ yesterday” and 
as ‘ to-day.” a ‘ : = 

. Now we liave seen that over and over again it is Neal 

aot God, that He “liveth for ithe aves’ of, the ages,” and sd, . 

», of Christ as risen from the dead: Will Mr. Jukes Rave ce 

t His “ behold;*I am alive for the ages of ages” is not 

‘meant, to convey the thought of the Englisi version, “I am 

alive dof uae ? or that “ God, sho liveth for tli ages 

of ages” rheans “ eee wee liveth for the time anya yo é 

He is showing: grace ’ 

Again, ¢ glory is over ‘aad over again ascribed to Goa for 
the ages offages or the age of ages, and not once (according ae 
to, this view | of the matter) for a proper eternity at. all! 

How. beyond ” ‘measire strange that there should be,no | a“ 

glimpse beyond these ages; during which, the smoke of, tor- 

ment,never ccases! How Rites that just when that long, 

lingering purgation shali have come to an end,—when praise . 

should be most rapturous; and joy complete, —that just then: * 


‘plates df joy or praise, or the very life of God Himself, ‘and 
ha a note be heard, not, a ray of glory | shine out of the a 


* and, Mr, abe ae “Salvator? Mundi,” ch. v.,.vi. 7 = 


966 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


_impenctrable eternity beyond! Who can believe. this ? 
Who can seriously claim it as a thing to be believed ? 
But we are told ine Scripture itself thus speaks of the 
ul _ “purpose of the ages.’* The phrase oceurs, Eph. iii. ah as 
the Greek of what 1 in our, version is“ eternal purpose.” But 
eee _ what is this purpose, as Scripture, not the Restitutionist, de-’ 
clares it? Is it not, so far as given in'the passage produced, 
“the intent that now unto the principalities and powers, in 
aa ; - heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold . 
4 oe ae _ wisdom .of God; raccorging ng to the purpose of the ages’”’? 
“There i is no inention hee of other beings than the angels and 
the church; the time «for the wisdom of God to be thus 
made ne is “now.” Can Mr.-Jukes show how this: , 
speaks of the recovery to God of those in gn after-time + 
east into hell ? * If he can, at least he has not done it. 
But thgn “ Christ’s mediatorial kingdom is for the ages 
of ages, a afterthese are finished, "He delivers it op avet : 
'. us see what is the truth of this. Le 
Now Sitting upop, the Fathers throne as Son of (rod, and 
having “all, authority in heaven and earth,” Fle comes as 
Son of #aucee in glory to take is own throne as such” It_. 
ds plainly this kingdom which He delivers up to the Father — 
(acvording to 1 Cor. xv. 24-28),. having accomplished the 
purpose for jwhich He took it... He reigns, says the apostle— * | 
until when? “Till He Hath pat all enemics under His feet. mee 
Is that coiversjon ?~ If it is, words have no meaning. No; 
it is the subjecting by pow er those who could not be. > 
subdued ‘by grace. Death is among these enemies, and ( 
Laer “death, the last enemy, shall be destroyed.’ Wher? ze 
Fe When death and hell ( hades), having delivered up their dead, a | 


ae 


« 


* So also Cox (Salv. Mun., p: 107): Iv his epistle to the’ Ephesians 


he both expressly name, “God’s determination to save men by Christ 1] 

tall hen 7] ‘ the purgose of the ages, “the end that was to be wrought f 
u f Mit through all the successions . of ‘time; and ly asserts that 4 
wha i this redeeming work will take ages for its sewpiapiahmsnn Ages to 
c 3 


. come? Where? Pa. : 
‘ Comp. Rev. iii, 21, Dan! vii. 18; Matt, xxv. 31, etc. 


TE. 


ieve . this ? 

ed ? 

iks of the 

. lii. 11, as 

ose.” But 

tionist, de- 
produced, 

powers, in 

e manifold. 
1¢. ages”’? 

angels and 

0 be thus 


- how this - 
atter-time < 


ets. 
r the ages 


» " Let 


f (fod, and 
. comes as 
such.™* It. 
the Father — 
nlished’ the 
e apostle— 
» His feet.” 


ling. No; 


ld not be: | 


emies, and 


When? 


their dead, 


he Ephesians 
en by Christ 
» be wrought 
asserts that 


nt.” Ages to - 


pu 


« 


Veob 
mo 


a 


Ee 


* reign in which Christ by power puts do 
_ with the everlasting reign of Christ as Sor 7 
throne, which neyer can be given tp. For faith Hé reigns . 


C) 


As , NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION oF aah QUESTION. 267 


‘shall Ba ‘cast into the lake of fire. When Gehenna shall 
swallow up. hades, and the second death put an end to 
the first (see Rev. xx. 13, 14). * Then will the last enemy 
- be. destroyed, and all. be under the feet, of Christ. Then, 


therefore, will be: the time when Christ’ ‘will deliver up the * 


kingdoin to the Father.” | 

But the ages of: AGES soreteh: c on beyond this: for the tor- 
ment for the ages of ages in the lake’ of fire ‘begins even for 
the devil himself but at the close of the millennial reign 
(Rev. xx: 10). 
down. will enemies will be over. Death, the last enemy, will 
be destroyed. But the ages ‘of ages roll on their unbroken 
courses and Christ’s “reign for the ages of ages ” will of 


ot course go on also. 


‘It is,a very common “mistake Mr. J ukes has made, but it 


becomeg-a very serious one when rnade the foundation of a. 


doctrine such as his. ». He has confounded tg bret inillennial 
n His enemies 


pon 


now before that kingdom is come. . Al: ‘affMority is His” 
in he aven and éarth. It.will not-dease fojbe His when tliat 
coming ’ *kingdom shall be delivered: Up to the Father, that 
God: may be all in all, - ee pe r 

And that coming’ rule,- will’ it Dhnifest is M¥. Jukesjvould 
intimate, a grace beyond the. present —ait least more prevail- 
ing grace than now? On the contrary, it-is the. rule of “ THE 
ROb OF IRON,’* and the effect ‘as to His enemies, not their 
being won by the grace of the gospel, but “ dashed i in age 
tk a potter’s vessel.” 

- Now in’ Rev. xi. 15;to which Mr. J ukgs 
aia “The world- -kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ has 
-gome,” and this does of coufse refer to the setting up of what 
is catted the millennial. Kingdom ; bnt it islooked at,(in: a very 
intelligible way) as the:se ting up of an authority which will 
never cease, a divine kingdom, “the kingdom of our. Lord, and 


pe sae Da ii. g, rir Rev. ii. “96, 2 


The kingdom which Christ takes to put’ 


the Father’s . 


refars, it eindeod. 


268 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


of His Christ,” and do, when it: is added, ‘‘ and He shall reign | 
for the ages of ages,” this does not affect the truth that: the , 
mére. hunvan for m of the kingdom will be given up. “He ~ 
shal feign forever aud ever.” Though Te leave a human 
. throne to sit upon the divine, still ‘He shall reign.’ Oh 
‘the everlasting pean rightly then begun. : 
Certain it is‘that if as man He reign till ail enemies: be he 
under His feet, and then deliver up the kingdom*to the .,: 
Father, and if death be the last enemy destroy ed yothen ‘the : 5 
ages of ages of torment begin for most from this. point,” ‘in: a 
utead of ending here. And Christ's reign for the ages. of i 
ages cannot end here either. 2 is! 
7 Thus Mr. Jukes’ foundation is swept away. Aether text: 
upon which he relies, there is not even.so plausible an excuse 
for misinterpreting. For when the apostle speaks of ‘ ‘Jesus 
if | Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and for the ages” ig (Heb. 
' xiii, 8), he is certainly connecting this either with the faith * 
of the Christian leaders,* of which he has spoken*in the — 
verse before, or with the “ divers and strange doctrines” of 
the verse after, or with both. He is either showing the un- 
changeableness of Christ, as answering the confidence of i 
His disciples’ fajth, or else that He is ever the same, to 
rebuke the divers and strange doctrines. In either case, 
there is no question of His being the Saviour of those who 
‘have rejected His salvation; and to trans/a/e the name. by 
which His people know Him. in: order to insist upon’ His 
heing an Anointed Saviour to those who on the contrary re- 
fuse and reject. His salyation,—is nothing less than bold per- 
version of a blessed truth. 

Mr. Jukes’ views on, this point need. not then detain us 
longer. But we have yet to coneitier the word Monto 
¢seonial,” or eternal. : : 

Ani it.is here that we find.the. full shat of appoeition 

ec eeueee to the commonly accepted meaning of the terms. Canon 
Farrat and Mr. Oxenham here make their stand, not per. 
praca) that the battle i is already gone against them Irregov: 


i‘ PY OVMED OF auides,” F 


e * s : rh 
NEW: TESTAM ENIE|SOLUTION OF THE QU ESTION. 7 ‘ies 


E. 
all reign» eit. ‘Messrs. Minton, Roberts, and -others, their oppo- 
that: the , ot enents in” “doctrine, Coineide: with them. But an answer to _ 
ae He © ome! will be. at" tie same: time an answer to all the rest: 
pe oil ve wd ionios, ‘as derived from: dionsof course gets its meaning 
“It eee , from! “this also. We have seen that: Gion: has two. meanings 
ea fi " in the New: Testament; one, that of “age” or dispensation, 
emies be»)... . th “other, of eternity! in the ‘commonly: ‘understood: sense. 
"40 the 8 Me “We may expert then that aionios will ,reflect . this) double - 
“then ‘the hi i ~sgense. | Anil we shall find our anticipations verified ‘by the 


fact * Let’ us first listen, however, to Dr. Farrar. 


Pa ‘ a ute ‘J now come,” he says, in the preface: to his book, is + Fternél 
‘Hope, ” “to aie 1105, translated. ‘rightly and frequently by: eter- 


voint,” ins. a MI 


ther text 


Sead “nal,” and wrongly and unnecessarily by‘ everlasting.’ I say 
nt oa wrongly on grounds which cannot be impeached, If in numbers — 
f ‘ Jesus © of. passages this word does not and cannot-mean endless,’ —a, fact 

iad (Heb. ) which none but the’ \grossest and most helpless ignorance can dis- 
the faith - pute,—it cannot be yight to réad_ that meaning into the word, 
1:in the” because of any a priori bias, in other passages. All scholars 
ines” of alike ¢ ‘admit that in many places arwy can only mean ‘age,’ and | i 
+ the un- . aidvios only ‘agé-long,’ or (in the classic sense of the word) 
‘nnd of ce ‘geeular, which is often equivalent to ‘indefinite.’ - Many scholars 

ee a who have a good right to be heard, deny that it, ever peccenaely 


mn’, t0 means endless ’ though iit is predicted of endless things.”"*" + 


Aer cas 
rue - In a note he. gives as, his authority, so far as the Néw Tes: . ° 


a es ‘tament is concerned, as to aiairy,f no refetnee,, and as tO.* ict i ] 
port His ALD VLOS three (Roni. XVI. 25; 2 Tim. 4. D5 Tite 1 2) He a 
ask th adds, “He who said dtwyiy xp (gernal” fire) used the. | .. 
, word a few hours after -in a sense that had nothing” to. do’ fees. 
bold per- ; Ouran ae 
with time (J. XPMCOy jo ee ni ee 
a ae ‘This sense he mentions in his sermon. on oll as aig age 
Seat oP cometieng! aor kcal ta above and k Sees. 
BONE, Aa 
oh Ss y * Doctors differ. 
pposition = Kas ane of fits)” see SOS NO ONE. 
Canon Pusey’s Sermon. ae : 
viot ner’ t By-a Ajétiem env a aie me ‘and ities 10 sl ati pikes ane ee 
AS | note, ‘ ; ce me 
rae Ret } Doctors, differ here: ast Me G0x: whose se es Pattar 


mainly , “yet speaks « oy the’ othet hand of 1 


by . gg 


270 


/ 
/ 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURS/STATE. 


—as when the knowledge ‘of God is said) to be eternal » 
life,” He proceeds :—“So that whert with /your futile bill- 
Beats i Yyou- foist into. this word the fiction jof endless time, 
rou, do. but give, the lic to the mighty oath of that great 
ft, who set one foot.u.pon the sea and one upon the land, 
‘ "with hand uplifted to heaven, swore/by Him that liveth 
: Béfgrover -and ever, that time shoul be no more.”* | ig ver 
an eee ae excursus.upon the word, at the end of the book, he 
Soe us that— = Py ut ove 
“sit is not worth ‘while once, more to discuss its meaning, 
when it has been so ably proved by so yhany writers that there is 
“no aythor ity w hatever for rendering it ‘ everlusting,’ and when even 
those who like Dr. Pusey are such caynest defenders of the doc- 
' trine of an cndless hell, yet admit that the word only means 
\ ‘endless within the sphere of its own existence,’ so that on their 
Reece own showing the word does not Pye their point,” : 
oe — And he adds :— 
S ; Ks 1%) may be worth while, however, once more to point out to 
‘Tess educdted readers, that’ aiav, aiwrvros, and their Hebrew 
equivalents in all combinations, are repeatedly used of things 
1 whieh ave come and: shall come to an end. Even Augustine 
nh. admits (what indeed no one can deny) that in Scripture azar, 
aéayv2es must in many instances mean ‘ having an end,’ and St. 
‘Gregory of Nyssa, who:at least knew Greek, uses a2wvtoS as the 
epithet of an interval.” * : 

“ That, the adjective atw y108 1s D oopeed to some things which 
are ‘endless’ does not, . of course prove that the word itself 
‘ meant cidless ; and to introduee this.meaning into many passages 
would be" utterly impossible and eos . : .. Our translators 
~ have naturally shrink from such a phrase as ‘the endless God.’ 


at 


ee 


oe words ahi -as 1 believe I gan ‘show you, 60 far fram denoting. that 
Dane which . is above time, or that witich: will otjtlast time, are saturated 
as! » through. and through, with the tngaght and: olgerens of time’ i, (Salvator 


hee: “* Dr: Farrar shows’ iow, tio ean reas with" Scripture by. ailinittlag in 
. anpte that -possibly. this may mean; —as it mést certainly: does mean" : 

a aha & “et hiit’ no further delay“showa inge vene: eee anee: be" dven: . ‘ possi- ~~ 
re .% :* bility of this; why ria ie Bho. Ko com what is“ pssibly! hot, what 
ab itaw ie: He quotes ?- 5 ne wasp te 


«Mapai, Pp. 100). ae: meee ; : ae : 


TE. 


ye eternal - 


futile bill- 
less time, 
that great 
: the land, 
that liv, 


a 


Waa 


v% 
- meaning, 
hat there is 
when even 
of the doc- 
nly means 
at on their 


e 


oint out to 
ir Hebrew 
of things 
Augustine 
ture azar, 
d,’ and St. 
vtos as the 


ings which 
vord itself 
1y passages 
translators 
dless God.’ 


noting that 
‘a saturated 


>” (Salvator 


“ wit 
4dmitting in 


vena possi-> -i.- 


eth 


We et 0 


y) hob what. 


2 the same verses 


a ; me 
NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 271 


ee ane . 
* he utter dearth of metaphysical knowledge renders most people 


incapable of realizing a condition which is independent of time— 
a condition whicli erushes eternity into an hour, and extends an 
hour into eternity. But the philosophic Jews and the greatest 
Christian Fathers were quite familiar with it.“ Avon,’ says Philo, 
‘is the life of God, and is not time, but the archetype of time, 
and in it there is neither past, present, nor future.’ ” 

This is Dr. Farrar’s whole argwnent. Tt is not all he 
says, of course ; but it presents fully his thoughts. We may 
now compare his thoughts with Scripture. | ‘ 

And it is remarkable how little his appeal is to the New 
Testament. He refers largely to the Old, that is, to the 
Septuagint version, but.as to the New, three passdges of an 
exceptional character, in each of which occurs the phrase 
“gonial times” constitute really his whole appeal! We 
have seen, tog, that as to the phrases in the New Testament 


for “forever,” etc., he does not venture one single appeal ! 


This is the final result after so much erudite research, out’ 
of near one hundred and fifty passages to be consulted, gre 
phrase recurring in three of them is produced ! 

Dr. Farrar’s will to produce more, if he could, need not 
be doubted, His learning is not for me to question. His 
mind is enlarged enough to apprehend that metaphysical eter- 
nity of which we shall have more to\say by and by, but which 
the unmetaphysical part of mankind can so little realize, and 
which Dr. Beecher calls, somewhat otherwise interpreting the 
facts, “to common sense minds, nonsense.” ~ Yet after all, 


. ‘this is the résult, after weighing (as we must give him credit 


for doing) one hundred and fitty passages, one phrase in 
oD 2 Oo ’ . 
three passages where aionios cannot mean “ endless.” 


And let me put the force of that @ little plainer; for it is 


a kind” of argument we have before encountered in the 
mouth of some with whom Dr. Farrar would not perhaps 


first clause of John iii. 
rit.’-in the last part of — 


‘ 


SEN oe 


ya FACTS AND THEORIES AS 10 A FUTURE STATE. 


Psuche is over and. over again used for “ life,” where to 
translate it “soul” would be an impassibility. Therefore 


you cannot insist upon its being “soul” where the Lord 


speaks of man as being unable to kill it. 
Let us put the parallel :— 


Atonios camot mean “ endless ” ina passage where it would ° 


read “ endless ¢ées.” Therefore it cannot mean this when 
God is spoken of as the ‘‘ eternal God.” 

I can quite understand that Dr. Farrar will not own his 
argument in that shape, but its only shame with him is the 
shame of its nakedness. He has clothed it with fair words, 
which after all cannot prevent its halting badly. 


Why does he not show us that aionios cannot mean “ end- 


less” in some of the passages in which we affirm it does, 
instead of taking up those in which we are.as clear as he is 


that it does not? W hy does he avoid the real , issue, to 


create a false one? Dr. Farrar’s animus ev idently” obscures _ 
his judgment, fatally to the argumént he maintains. “ Even 
Augustine,” he tells us, “admits (what, indeed, no one can 
deny) that in Scripture, ai@v, arwrvz10s must in many instan- 
ces MEAN ‘having an end.’”” I do not believe myself the 
only one, by some thousands at least, who would deny it. 


Nay, I must believe that it is merely careless writing when 
Dr. F. affirms this. Aionios neveg meant “ having an end” 


yet, and none should know it better than himself It 1s 
affirmed of things which have an end, and in those cases of 
course cannot mean “endless.” No one will deny that: and 
that is all (I suppose) that he means to affirm. 

A moment yet as to the Septuagint. 

Dr. Farrar ignores the necessary change of meaning in 


words in lapse of time, and which Dr. Beecher’s history of . 


it (certainly from no point of view hostile to Dr. F.’s theory) 
so plainly shows as to the word.in question. Even the Septu- 
agint does not refuse the later meaning of aion by any means 
altogether, while the New Testament, shows this later mean- 
ing almost superseding the earlier, as the time-sense in the 
Septuagint itself has superseded the earlier Homeric. It is 


a | 


where to 
‘herefore 
he Lord 


it would ° 


his when 


, own his 
im is the 
ir words, 


an “* end- 

it does, 
ras he is 
issue, to 


obscures 


“ Kven 
one can 
y instan- 
yself the 
deny it. 


ng when 


an end” 


f Jt 1s 
cases of 
hat: and 


aning in 


istory of . 


s theory) 
1e Septu- 


1y means 
er mean- 
se in the 
ic. Itis 


NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. 276 


well-nigh as vain to bring up the Septuagint to settle the 
case for the New Testament, as to bring up Homer to settle 
it for the Septuagint. : 

And, comparing the Old ‘Testament with the New, where 
have you che leolam vaed* of the Hebrew reproduoed | in the - 
Greek ? That expression which does indeed imply a “ be- 
yond ” to the oluwm is never “used for the New ‘Testament 
aion. Save only a word twice used (and. where in one pas- 
sage out of the two, people deny for it also that it means 
_ everlasting +). there is no other expression for this but— 
aionios; no other for eternity but some phrase compounded 
of aion. The quéstion is one of blotting or not every phrase 
for eternity out of zig ure. s 

I beg Dr, Farrar’s forgiveness, I must modify that state- 
ment. - He will allow us to say * eternal ” if only by that 
we do not mean “everlasting.” — But doesgapt he’know that 
we of the less le ined see no differenee B&ween the two ? 
Of course I do not dispute his right to @& “back to deriva- 
tions and to speak cf weune or of-vetus, as he will. The 


derivation of a word is one thing; its acéttcl use is another. 


“Do we use eternal in any other sense than everlasting really ? 


As I have said, it really comes to this, that the expression 
(in the sense we have received) must didkppear out of the 
English language—for aught I know, out of every other 
too,—as well as out of Scripture. Dr. Begeher will not let 
us have “everlasting ” any mare thdn’ Dr. Rerar will “ eter- 
nal,” and with just as good reason. So serious is the ques- 
tion. And we can aly conclude that if learning : and sense 
are so opposed as they seem to be, \ we may as well retain 
the latter and dismiss the former. ¥ 
We might then perhaps as well 2 


oe eee pee? ae ee ee eee Ser = 

i] 
* Dr. Farrar takes even this term as not ifgpl ho a tr ue eternity ; but 
the one exception is merely a limitatjon frggp 1h ure of the thing 
spoken of, which in no wise shoivs a limitation ety e: If we speak 


even the. everlasting hills so often urged, dggp that make. Dr. 
Farral@doubt what we mean by “ everlasting ” ? . 


+ Avz05, Rom. i. 20; Jude 6 


we enter 


Sather aE aR whch 


ornate 


a 


974 FACTS AND. THKOBIE® AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


English, but we must not copy the example of those whom 
we have taxed with neglect of ascertaining the New Testa- 
ment.use of the word. We must seck ourselves to ascertain 
it; and out of 68 passages remaining to, us, omitting the 
three produced by Dr. Farrar, we may surely discover the 
ordinary sense attaching to it. 

_ But first,,what of these three passages? what does the 
; expression mean—‘ seonial tics” ? Does “ gonial ”. there 

speak of limited duration ? I think we may very fairly argue . 
that it does not there speak of duration at all. “Times” is 
the word which thexe,implies duration, and limited dura- 
tion too, Of cour Mhy then should another word be 
added.to expreg ne thing ?” 

That textwal Cees deprecated so much by Dr. Farrar 
will help us here. W have before heard of a mystery “ hid- 
den from ages and generations,” and now made manifest to 
the saints (Col. i. 26), and we have seen that the ages here 
are those of’ preparation for Christ’s coming, and closed by 
His death; so that now upon us the ends of the ages are 
_¢ome, and we have the full admonition of what happened 
unto them as types. A reference tg: Rom. xvi. 26 will show 
that to these “:vonial” or “age: ‘times " the apostle refers: 
times which had the are of “ages” or of disperisations. 
This is what “eonial ” here signifies : not the limited dura- 
tion of the times, which as “times” are necessarily limited, 
but their being special, divinely constituted, times. C 

onial here then strictly means “ belonging to the ages” 
it gets its meaning from the first sense of aion. But inas- 
much as aion has the sense of eternity as well, we may ex- 
pect to find u also signifying “eternal,” “ belonging to the 
age of ages.” Let us see how far we can prove this mean-, 
ing to be in aionios, pind how far general in the New 
Testament this meaning is. - 

Now, one very pian’ ‘passage, one would think, to show 
that it means /‘ eternal,” is that in which it is contrasted with 
, what is temp ral: “the things which are seen are temporal, 
‘put the things which are not seen are eternal” (2 Cor. iv. - 


T 


i 


cd 


; 
ue 


se whom 
ww Testa- 
ascertain 
ting the 
over the 


does the 
1”. there 


rly argue | 


‘imes.” is 
ed dura- 
word be 


r. Farrar 
ary “ hid- 
nifest to 
iges here 
losed by 
ages are 
1appened 
vill show 
e refers: 
tigations. 
ted dura- 
, limited, 
ie ages”: 
But inas- 
may ex- 
ig to the 
his mean-, 
he New 


to show 
sted with 
temporal, 


2 Cor. iv. 


- heritance,” “ habitations,” “ salvation,” ‘‘ redemption” ? And 


dearth of metapbysical-knowledge ” which renders us “in- 


NEW TESTAMENT SOLUTION OM 


18): Here limitless duration must bé 
limited. . 
With this the “ cternal weight of glory 
ceding must be connéeted; and also “ the 
the heavens” of the following one. 
So again in Philem. 15 the aposile writes: “ For perhaps 
he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldst receive 
him forever (drwviov adrév dxéxys) , ,. a brother beloved ;” 
and here the limited duration expressed in aionios is again 
contrasted ‘with the litnited “ for a season.” . 

Thus simply is it proved to have the sense “eternal.” 
And why then should its force be doubted when wé have it 
applied to God, to His “power” and “glory,” to the 
“ Spirit,” to the kingglom of Christ, to the saings’ “life,” “ in- 


> cternal in 


this covers all the occurrences in the New Testament save 
those relating to an judgment, and two others : 
pérhaps somewhat less decisive. Of these the “ everlasting - 
covenant” we need not doubt to be'strictly such, only refer- 
ring to the past, in our human way of speaking, the “ covenant 
from everlasting ” ; while “ the everlasting gospel” gives us 
a case of necessary limitation by the subject to which the 
term is applied, and which our English words, while incon- 
testable as to their meaning, equally admit. 7 

I do not see how the New Testament could give us much 
more assurance of “ gwonial” being (save where ‘necessarily 
limited by the subject) “eternal” in the fullest sense. 

But Dr. Farrar believes this is only because of “ the utter 


capable of realizing a condition which crushes eternity into 
an hour, and ¢xtends an hour into eternity.” We oubt 
sincerely if Dr. Farrar can realize it. “ Eternity crushed into 
an hour,” /and that when time is eliminated from the 
thought, , we believe to be simply a very gross absurdity. 
How can what is not time at all be “crushed into an hour” ? 

And how.can‘an hour which is “time,” be extended into an i 
eternity which is not ? Perhaps we should get'on no better ee 


" 


* 
. 
® 
Ay 
, 
e ; 
é 
"4 


e, Suite 1100 


y' f 
<S Silver Spring; Maryland 20910 


301/587-8202 


1100 Wayne Avenu: 


‘Association for Information and image Management 
- A : A R > 


Centimeter 


‘9 10 #1) #12 #13 .14 «2~+15 mm 


2 ‘ 


ml 


o N 
ee N 
f = = 


|. laches 


sl ada 


3 344343333 


‘ 


Olll!| oo 
Ni — 
——— SS 


ie 
sat x 5 
i eee 


: ll 


_ 


125 


— 
— 
—=— 
———— 
ry . 


MANUFACTURED TO AIIM STANDARDS 


> BY APPLIED IMAGE. INC. 


tear 


go" steve. 
a ae: 


_ 276 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


with Philo and the Christian “fathers.” We do think 
there is more of Plato than of Scripture in-their thoughts as 
to this, and gerhaps it is this at bottem which wpakes Dr. 
_Farrar Ste New Testament “ages of ages” as being 
“the true expression of eternity) for here, i in pity to our 
human faculties it may be; but still the Doma of time is _ 
not eliminated from the den of eternity ; eternity is just 
illimitable time. And we may thank God He does not 
write merely for metaphysicians, but for “ babes.” 

But then again we read that aionios “is in its second sense 
something spiritual ‘_something above and beyond time,— 
as when the knowledge of God is said'to be eternal life.” 
Does Ir. Farrar really mean that ‘eternal ” here signifies 
“spiritual”? Or does he mean to refer it to that metaphys- . 
ical eternity which may be crushed into an hour and be 
eternity all the same? If it be the latter I have said all 


that is needful ; if the former, I scarcely need reply. Why 


should not aionios be “something ” holy, betause “ eternal 
life” is that; or anything else almost by the substitution, of 
which the obnoxious sense of eternity may be most thor- 
oughly blotted out ? ; 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


THE NEW TESTAMENT SCRIPTURES AS TO THE JUDGMENT OF 
THE WORLD. 


WE are now free to enter upon the New Testament, un- 
embarrassed by the questions which would otherwise divert 
us too far from the study of the special texts which we shall 
now have to consider. And i in order to pursue our study of 
the subject with more clearness, we shall first seek to separate 
from the texts which speak of final judgment those which 
speak of the judgment of the living when the Lord appears. 

We have already looked at this from the side of the Old 
Testament, as it is‘indeed a point of main concern through- 


\TE. 


do think 
noughts as 
pakes Dr. 
’ as being 
ity to our 


of time 18 i 


ity is just 
does not 


cond sense 
nd time,— 
‘rnal life.” 
e siguifies 


metaphys- . 


ur and be 
re said all 
ly. Why 
> “eternal 
itution, of 
nost thor- 


GMENT OF 


ament, un- 
vise divert 
+h we shall 
ir study of 
Lo separate 
198e which 
‘d appears. 
of the Old 
n through- 


a4 


‘ 


THE JUDGMENT OF THE WORLD. 


out it. But the New Testament, while going beyond the 
Old as far as the literal sense extends, does not by any 


means lose‘sight of the coming judgment at the appearing 


of the Lord. The millennial blessing as to the earthly part 
of it is indeed very briefly touched on, and the blessings ‘in 
heavenly places are substituted for this, Christian promises 
instead of Jewish ones. And in accordance with this the 
judgment coming on the,earth is more a solemn warning to 
the impenitent and unbelieving, than as connec ted with the 
hope of the saints themselves. . ~ 

The Jewish promises being earthly, necessarily, for those 
who are to inherit them, the earth must be delivered from 
what defiles and destroys ‘i. Israel’s foes must bé put down 
with the strong hand of power, that they may be nation- 
ally saved, and inherit the earth. Christians, on the other 
hand, rightly expect to be with the Lord in heaven in’ the 
Father's house according to His promise (John xiv. 1-3). 


Their part in the millennial kingdom is to reign over the 


earth with Christ, but. this is not to be confounded with liv- 
ing on it. 
Tt i is not, of course, possible here to dwell upon the points 


in controversy between so- called pre-millennialists, and the . e 


advocates of a merely spiritual reign. Still it will be found 


that the connection of truth is everywhere so ‘intimate in’ 
' Scripture that a wrong view as to the miiiennium may con- 


fuse many an otherwise clear passage of the gravest impor- 
tance as to the present question. As already said, the putting 


; off the Lord’s coming to the end of the millennium confounds 


together two wholly different, epochs of judgment. But 
what has been already urged as to this. must suffice us now. 
The texts which apply to the judgment of the living in the 
New Testament in géneral present no special difficulty. 

(1.) First, in the Baptist’s words we have Israel, I doubt 


not, purged by judgment at the coming of the Lord. “He | 


will thoroughly purge His floor, and gather His wheat into 
the garner, but He will burn-up the chaff with unquench- 


able fire.” It isa figure of judgment wholly inconsistent’ 


. 


@ : 
278 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


with hope for those condemned as “ chaff.” Annihilationists. 
would naturally claim it as a figure of utter destruction, andy~~ - 
so itis. But then a figure and what it figures are as differ- 
ent things as here the “chaff” is from the-men compared to 
them. This is what these writers’constantly ignore. They 
argue from the literal effect of material fire .as if the fire, 

~ the thing subject to it, and the effect itself were not all in 
some respects as Pact contrasted as compared. Material 
destruction is 20¢ a FIGURE of material destruction. It must 
Jig“™ure something else. - 

Not of course its spiritual Sposa: lana here it is that 
universalism of all grades so.completely fails. Material <e- 
‘struction cannot - figure spiritual restoration. It is wholly | 
and absolutely opposed: to this. But it figures spiritual de- 
_estruction on the other hand, and. not material ; and here 
annihilationism of all grades fails as completely. ; 

When God’s wrath is the fire and man its object’; who cam 
argue that.the necessary effect. will be his material destruc” 
tion? Certainly it must be argued at least on some other 
ground than this. And this has been attempted according- 
ly, Isa. lvii. 16 being quoted in the random and caféless way, 
I must say not. unusual with them, to show that “ the. spirit 
would fail before ” His constant anger, “and the souls that 
He had made.” ‘/But this is said, in the style of the Old 
Testament which we, have beffre insisted.‘on at length, of — 
death as the effect upon mortal man here, and has no refer- 
ence to that judgment which is beyond deatly itself. The 
argument is therefore inadmissible. 

I have shown before what man’s uttér destruction is. 
It is his perishing from the place for which he was naturally 
made and fitted, and ‘this by the wrath of God because of 
sin: this solemn judgment it is that may find its figure in 
the chaff burned in the fire. No material destruction can 

_ be argued from it. 
- Here the perishing even from the earth may be intended, 
for a similar figure is often used in the Old Testament when 
God’s wrath takes away living men. And to the judgment 


‘ 


eo 


’ 


TATE. 


rihilationists 
truction, and¢~"->-: 


are as differ- 
compared to 
nore. They 
s if the fire, 
re not all in 
d. Material 
on.’ It must 


ere it is that 
Material de- 


It is wholly © 


spiritual de- 


UB and here « 


ect, who cz 


arial destruc.” 


1 some’ other 
d according- 
catéless way, 
t “ the. spirit 
1e souls that 


1 of the Old 


it, length, of 
has no refer- 
itself. The 


struction is. 
vas naturally 
_ because of 
its figure in 
struction can 


be intended, 
tament when 
he judgment 


\ 


THE JUDGMENT OF THE WORLD. 279 


of the living the words here apply. Yetyin this case eternal 
judgment is so closely connected with it, that I see no use 
in separating between them. 

~ (2.) In Matt. xxii. 13 we are again warned of the judgment 
at the Lord’s coming. The time is when the king comes in 
to see the guests invited and presenting themselves at the 
marriage-feast. The scene is earthly : no guest will find his 
way into heaven and be turned out. But “here there is no 
figure even of destruction. The judgment is, “ Bind him 
haiid and foot, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall 
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” Ineed only refer to a 
similar picture in ch. viii. 12. | 

Here |“ darkness” is not annihilation, even in figure. 
There can be none as punishmentgwhere there is no eye to 
behold dight if it wére there. In ch. xxv. 30 the unprofitable 
servant is adjudged tb the same thing; and in Jude 13, we 
shall find it again in stronger language used for an eternal 
doom. ‘ye : 

(3.) 1 pass over the separation of the sheep from the goats, 


because although it is really the judgment of living people » 


when Christ comes, the terms of it connect it plainly with 
the final judement.. We shall examtine it therefore in an- 
other place.’ Luke xix. 27 again refers to the Lord’s coming, 
and presents no difficulty. 5 

(4.) Luke xx. 18 is again one of those pictures in which 
material destruction figures another thing. I need scarcely 
pelea what I have just now said about a par allel case. 

(5.) We may pass on now to 2 Thess. i. 7-9, upon ‘which 
we shall dwell somewhat longer. It manifestly speaks of 
a time “when the ord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven 
with His mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ : who shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory 
of His power, when He shall | come to be glorified in His 

saints,” etc. 


gh 


Mr. Dobney has the most se of all writers that I know. 


ae so ET 


Se eee ee ee ee a 


A. 


280) = FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. : 


examined this passage in behalf of annihilationism. I shall - 
therefore follow his argument as to it. He brings Whitby 
and Macknight, forward to show that the “literal sense ” ‘ip- 
peared so maajfestly the true\gne to.these expositors that 
even they “had to adopt it to the fullest extent their mental 
philosophy would allow,” and admit that: the “utter de- 
struction of the bodies [of the wicked] without any hepe of. 
their regaining new bodies” is involved in, the passage. 


- And Mr. D. presses that “ beyond dispute, the sinner in his 
_entireness can be destroyed literally; and if the word has 


. > eo 4 . : ° ° fo 
any literal force at all inthis passage, it comes in all its 


of being as opposed to it as it is well known he Was;-he 
would have understood the absolute impossibility of “ ever- 
lasting destruction” being what he would make it. For the 
passage says plainly that this takes place at Christ’s appear- 
ing,—beforé the millennium therefore, and more than a 
thousand years before the resurrection of the wicked. In 
this last wld the dead not, raised at the first resurrection are 
to rise.. It is impossible then that these could, have been (in «, 
that sense) eternally destroyed, and so never to rise, a thou- 


-sand years before. To any one who holds therefore to a true <« 


millennium, and Christ’s coming ‘before it, this text alone | 
should be decisive that “ everlasting destruction ” is not an- 
nihilation. ‘Thus error is linked with error, and truth with 
truth. - : c 
I need not follow Mr, Dobney in his further remarks upon 
the expression “from the presence of the Lord and from the 
glory of His power,” as I do not take this to mean “ away 
from.” . I am quite content to accept Mr. Hudson’s reference 
to “the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord” 
as a parallel instance of the use of that phrase. In either 
* Seript ure Doct. of Fut, Punishment, pp. 216, 217, 7 ae 


am 


‘ATE. 


sm. I shall . 


igs Whitby 
I sense ” ap- 
ositors that 
their mental 
“utter de- 
iny hepe of. 
1e passage. 
inner in his 
e word has 
s in all its 
not. merely 


knowledge 
esent order 
ist instead 
he Was,-he 
y of “ ever- 
it. For the 
st’s appear- 
ore than a 


vicked.. In 


rection are 
ie been (in 
‘ise, a thou- 


re toa true < 
text alone | 


” is not an- 
truth with 


marks upon 
id from the 
ean “ away 
's reference 
the Lord” 
In either 
17. 


———$—$——_ 


THE JUDGMENT. OF TILE WORLD, 281. 


i 


case the “ presence of the Lord” is what nee Whether'the — 


_ judgment or the blessing. But I cannot allow so easily his 


remarks upon “everlasting.” I believe with his Eclectic 
reviewer that “the apostle in‘speaking of everlasting de- 
struction, means to describe something which has continu- 
ance as a state of suffering, and not extinction of being.” 

But I must be permitted to state my own réason for this, 
which is outside all Mr. Dobney’'s argument. For, suppos- 
ing this awful penalty to be inflicted after resurrection, 
“ destruction ’’ alone would be sufficient, (if a material de- 


_ struction) to convey, the whole thought, and the addition of 


“ everlasting ” would be redundant. “Annihilation would be, 
after rghtirrection; necessarily everlasting, fore there is no 
repetition of resurrection, and “ey erlasting annihilation” 

has no proper sense. ‘If before resurrection, ‘then, as I have 
said, the resurrection afterwards would sufficiently show it 


was not “everlasting.” 


I have shown besides that “ destruction ” is potas Mr. 
D. and his associates. mean by it. 

(6.) In the next chapter we have another judgment which » 
takes place at the same time, but. the special destruction of 
the “ wicked one.’ Without entering too much into par- 
ticulars, which would divert us too from our Pee aim, it 
is evident that we have in this “wicked one” a person 
exalting himself above God, and. claiming to be God Him- 
self, and whom “the Lord Jesis shall consume with the 
breath (zvevua) of His mouth, and cnnrl (xarapyjoer) with — 
the manifestation (or appearing) of Elis presence (¢x1pavére ° 


Hs mapovdias), The words are a partial quotation from 


Isa. i.: “and there shall come forth a rod out of thes 
Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots; 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him; .. . . with right- . 
eousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove with equity 
for the meek of the carth; and IIe shall smite the earth w ith 
the rod of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall 


‘He slay the wicked (one).” If any ne doubt who or what 
is in qiession here, let. him follow on this quotation, and 


’ 


282 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


«a 


he will find a familiar picture of millennial days when “the 

wolf shall dwell with the lamb,” and also Israel and Judah 

be brought from the four corners of the earth and finally 
_ united together. 

Thus we have, both in Isaiah and Thessdlonians, a pre- 

millennial judgment of this “wicked one.” «In the latter we 

- are distinctly told it is at the appearing of Christ’s presence. 
Words could hardly more’ emphatically declare a personal, | 
not a merely spiritual, coming. The wicked one is then to — 
‘be “ consumed” and “annulled,” in the day when the rod_ 
of iron shall smite (and yet to heal) the earth. ~ 

Now, if we turn for a moment to Rev. xix., we shall find 

_ there (as I have: before briefly argued) Christ’ 8 coming to 
the earth. It follows the marriage of the Lamb in Hens en; 
and upon the white-horsed warriors who follow their Tlead 
and Lord we see the same white linen which before clothed 
the bride, and which is interpreted for us as the “ righteous- 
ness of saints” (ver. 8). Itisa figure of course, but a very 
intelligible figure, of Christ’s appearing with ITis saints; 
and, as the read out of His mouth to smite the mAtiona 
answers on the one hand to Isaiah’s “rod of Ilis mauth,” so 
among the objects of the judgment we have two leaders, one 
of which (it does not matter for our purpose which) is gen- 
erally allowed to be “the wicked one.” Indeed, it seems 
hardly possible for one who believes’ in any harmonious 
interpretation of the word of God to doubt this. The his- 
tory of the beast and false prophet is given in the 13th and 
17th chapters of the book, in close correspondence with what 
is said in Thessalonians, and there could hardly be a third 
person at the same time on earth, who could take the place 
that these do. \ 

But what then is the “ consumption,” or “ annulling,” 
even “slaying” (putting to death) of this wicked one? 
“These both were cast «alive into a lake of fire burning with . 
brimstone,” and there they are found still alive a thonsand 
years afterwards! . 

We shail have to return to this again. But here at, least 


aoe 


| 


} 
} 
i ‘ 
mk ' 
F 
i 
] i 
| 
HP 
au 
eh 
yale i 
{ 
1h 
aii { 
ue } 
i 
; 
i 
f 


ieee “oo ~ 


ay 


TATE. 


S a the 
l and Judah 
. and finally 


nians, @ pre- 
‘he latter we 
t's presence. 


P 2 personal, | 


1e.is then to 


hen the rod_ 


ve shall find 
s coming to 
b in heaven; 
their Tead 
fore clothed 
“ righteous- 
2, but a very 
IIis saints ; 
the nations 
s mdiuth,” so 
leaders, one 
hich) is gen- 
ed, it Seems 
harmonious 
s. The his- 
he 13th and 
ce with what 
y be a third 
ke the place 


nulling,” 
vicked one? 


burning with. . 


e a thousand 


here at, least 


THE RESURRECTION OF JUDGMENT. - 983 


how fully evident that to be “consumed,” “annulled,” and 
“put to death,” even, when applied to the final judgment of 
the wicked, do 20¢ mean material destruetion or annihilation 
at all. Let Mr, Constable and others, instead of indulging 
in a prigri reasoning as to the force of the words, only ex- 
amine the interpretation of them by the facts of Scripture, 
and they will soon have indisputable proof that the general 
sense of Christendom has not been so far astray as to these 
common words of not very recondite meaning. Nor are 
they badly suited to convey just what they have conveyed 
to generations of at least ordinary inteiligence as to the 
every day speech they used. 

I do not know of any other passages referring to the 
ena of the living which can cause any difficulty, save 
one which has been reserved for fature consideration. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 0 
THE RESURRECTION OF JUDGMENT. 


‘Tue Lord, in ile Sth chapter of the gospel of J ohn, de. 
clares as distinct the “ resurrection of life” and “ the resur- 
rection of judgment.” T have before noticed that the word 
“damnation” in this place (as in ver. 24, the word “ con- 
demnation”) is the ordinary word for “ judgment.” 

Dr. Farrar, it is well known, has raised the question as to 
whether the former word and its cognates really occur at all 
in the New Testament. I should agree with him entirely 
in. discarding them in favor of a consistent peng ering: of the ~ 
Scripture words all through.* But. he méans that this 
should go a good deal further, and evidently to expunge, if 
possible, the thought of hak we now mean by “ damnation ” 


* In such passages as 1 Cor. Xi.- 29, 1 Tin. v. 12, Rom. xiv. 93, the 
ordinary rendering is impossible and misleading, as he rightly urges. 


ay 


ie 


< 
984 . FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


trom Scriptuse along with the word. But “damnation ” is 
only eternal judgment, in the true (not his) sense of “eter 
naly? and “eternal judgment.” és asserted in the fullest: way. 
And when he tells us that the “judgment of Gehenna” is 
“something utterly different ” from the “ damnation of hell,” 
we must entirely differ from him: but this will come up 
anon. The fact is that the uriutterably solemn meaning now 
attaching to damnation has only grown out of the impres- 
ty siow which that eternal judgment has made upon'those who 
Ht believed the Scripture statements.* ; 
EEN But in some places “damnation ” is even inferior in force 
“to that word “judgment,” apparently so much less strong. 
In that before us for instance its use has obscured the solemn 
Weality that none can ome personally into judgment betore 
| . » God, except to be condemned. This is everywhere what 
ie Scripture asserts, and here with a force perhaps little less 
than that Sf any. For it is only“ they that have done evil” 
who come forth to a ‘resurrection of judgment.” at all. 
How bey this should tell us that the saints cannot be 


+ 


* Mr. Cox objects, that if any * “ take the ‘ mlunene of ee equiv: 

. alent to ‘damnation,’ that. can only be because they conceive of the. 
‘} divine judgmerts as though they were confined to the future life, 
a whereas the Scriptures constantly affirm that God judges all men, good 
| and bad, every day and all day long ; and because they wholly misap- 
j prehend the character of the divine Judge and Father ” (Salv, Mun., p. 
51, Amer. edit.), 

It is Mr. Cox who does not apprehend the difference between the 
judgment of. the Father, now for our pfofit, and the judgment of the 
. _ day in which “the Father judgeth no man.” The two are contrasted 
Ke. by the apostle: “The time is come that judgment must begin at, the 
ul house of God: and, if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them 

that obey not the gospel of God ? And, if the righteous scarcely be ° 
ee where shall the sinner and the ungodly appear 2?” (1 Pet. iv. 
Iv, 185 compare ch. i. 17,18; John v. 22-24; 1 Cor. xi. 81, 32). 
me God’s judgment has with Mr. Cox no such meaning as would 
bring terror to an ungodly soul. Of a sensualist living prosperously in 
_ the world he asks, “ Where is the judgment \pf God? Where.is it? 


Why, there tn the man himself, and in his base content with a lot so 


rs 


base” J (8. M., p. 92). 


Sm, 
TE. 


nation ” is 
sof “eter 
ullest: way. 
‘henna’? is 
on of hell,” 
1 come up 
-aning now 
he impres- 
‘these who 


ior im force 
ess strong. 
the solemn. 
1ent before 
vhere what 
; little less 
done evil” 
nt” at all. 
cannot be 


rod as equiv 
ceive of the. 
2 future life, 
Hl men, good 
holly: misap- 
alv, Mun., p. 


ye 


between the 
ment of the | 
‘e contrasted 
begin at, the 
1 be of them 


_searcely be ° 


(1 Pet. iv. 
1, 82). 

ng as would 
ysperously in 
Where.is it? 


a 


s 


HE RESURRECTION OF JUDGMENT. 285 


numbered amony those spoken of as raised for judgment 
according to their works befure ythe © great white throne” 
(Rev. xx. I-15). 

Yet this very passage in the gospel has been assumed to 
prove a yeneral resurrection Of saints and fipners together, 
because it is said the how cometh in whith all that are in 
the graves shall hear His voice and shall come forth,” ete.; 
while a simple comparison of three verses before this would 
demonstrate that the “ hour” in which the Son of God has 
been quickening dead souls has lasted: now cighteen hundred 
years from the time He spoke. fhe Lorsl merely asserts 
here the general fact that all shall hear His voice, while He 
contrasts in the most absolute way the character of the two 
resurrections to which [fe summons them. 

People imagine that but one obscure passage (which is 
not obscure however) in a book of visions is the only one 
which can be brought forward for a‘ first resurrection ” of 
the righteous, whereas in fact alm Bb-cvery passage that 


speaks of eit infers it in sor p'shape. , There is even 
a speciat phrase for it, “ the resurrection out prom the dead ” 


_(¢% vexpev), as to which the disciples (who knew yell the 


general truth of resurrection) inquired “what the rising 
from the dead should mean” (Mark ix. 10). It was of this 
special resurrection the Lord spoke, when in answer to the 
_ Sadducees He said that “they which shall be counted worthy 
to obtain that world ”—the world to come,—* and the res- 
urrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in mar- 
riage, neither ®an they die any more: for they are equal 
unto the angels: and are the children of God, dcing the: 
children of the resurrection” {Luke xx. 34-36). How could 
people be “counted worthy” to obtain a general resurrec- 
tion which no one can lose? or be the children of God as 
being the children of a general resurrection ? 

Then again, where the apostle is expressly speaking of 
the order of the resurrection, he gives it as, “Christ the 
first fruits; afterward, they that are Christ’s at His coming.” 


pith: a tot 30 


What more misleading, if all were to rise at the same time? 
: ae 


286 


Once more, in 1 Thess. iv. 16, when the ‘Lord Himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, we are told, “the 
dead in Christ: shall rise first,” then the living saints be 
changed, and all caught up together to meet the Lord in 
the air; and- -this before He appears to the world at all: for 
‘©when Christ who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with Him in glory” (Col. iii. 4). 

The passage in Revelation moreover is not obscure. 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


We have a vision; then the interpretation of the vision. 


“T saw thrones, and they gat upon them, and judgment was 
given unto.them; and T° saw the souls* of them that had 
been beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for the-word 
of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, nether 


‘his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, 


nor in their hands. and they lived and reigned with Christ 
a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again 
till the thousand years were finished.” This is the vision: 
and so simple in character that the interpretation repeats 
much of it over again, “This is the. first resurrection. 
Blessed and holy is ‘he that hath part f th the first. resurree- 
tion: upon such the second death hath no power, but, they 


shall be priests of eon and of Christ, and shall reign with - 


Him a thousand years.’ 
, Thus the millenniam i is literally such, and tHe resurrection 


is\ literal, for these are given in the interpre tation of the 


vision, not the vision itself And, after the thousand years 


_are\ over accordingly, we see the.rest of the dead rise, and 


herg plainly is the “resurrection of judgment,” in which by 
thit'v ery fact the saints can have no part. All is thus con- 
sistent, clear, and intelligible. For all is true. ~ 

There is little said as to the resurrection of the unjust in 
Scripture. The, fact is affirmed. The nature of it is 


nowhere spoken of. It would seem therefore the only pos- 
\ = . 6 4 ‘ . — 


* Dr. Carson, in a violent attack, more suv, on pre-millennialism, has 
urged against literal resurrection, that we cannot say, “the souls of” 
people, without meaning literal souls. But it is an entire mistake, as 


f 


we have seen longago Tt is a very common Trebraisin. 


oe 


ATE. 


1 Himself 
told, “the 
saints be 
¢ Lord in 
at all: for 


iall ye also 


, obseure. 
he vision. 
iment. was 
n that had 
- the -word 
Ast, nejther 
‘foreheads, 
vith Christ 
1 not again 
the vision : 
on repeats 
surrection. 


‘t resurrec- — 


T, but, they 


reign with - 


esurrection 
ion of the 
sani years 
iL rise, and 
n which by 
is thus con- 


1e unjust in 
e of it is 
ie only pos- 


ennialism, has 
the souls of ” 
re mistake, as 


THE RESURRI@TION OF JUDGMENT. 287 


sible thing to say nothing about it. But as Mr. Constable 
proclaims it a point “of prime consequence” to know the 
unrevealed, and has written rather along chapter upon Te 
in his work so often cited,* we must needs follow him into 
the darkness. fis argumetits apply so little really to the 
view of tings which we have taken, that we need dwell 
comparatively on very few of them. ° : 

He first of all professes his firm.belief in the resurrection 
of the wieked, but holds that. they are raised to die again. 
Here he is opposed to Seripture as we have seen. In Serip- 
ture resurrection is the final end of death, for “ it is appoint- 
ed unto men once to die, and after thisthe judgment.” — Ife, 
on the contrary, holds that the bodies of the wicked are 
raised, “still natural bodies as they were sewn, resuming 
with their Oak their old mortality, as such subject to 
pain, and as such sure to yield to that of which all pain.is 
the symptom and precursor, physical death and dissolution.”: 
Ile rests this conclusion “mainly on the spposition that 
ny change passes upon them at their resurrection. . . if no“ 
change passés upon them they must needs yield to the 
bitter pains which accompany the second death.” 

He urges that the “ Augustinian theorists ” admit this, 
and so have to aflirm immortality and incorruption of the 
wicked as raised. They therefore have, to apply the lan- 
guave of 1 Cor. xv., where the corruptible puts on incorrup- 
tion and the mortal immortality, to the resurrection of the 


“ whgodly ; and when asked upon what grounds they do so, 
e 


they answer that there cannot be a resurrection without a 
change. This he disproves by referring to Lazarus and 
others. and as to | Cor. xv. insists that it applies only to the 


resurrection of the just. 


He then tarns aside fgr a short time to show that the 
resurrection of the just! is the only one which is 4 fruit of 
redemption; and if Christ says, “I am the resurrection and 
tlie life,” He thus proclaims Himself the source of: the “res- 


surrection of life” alone. “Mr. Constable identifies then (as 


% .- : 4 . . 
. * Nature and Duration of Future Punishment, ch. viil. 


a 


Seeweasrnre 


. ’ 
A 
3 
‘ 
oe 
ah 
Het 
4 h 
ok 
Fe 
“¥ 
# 
£ 
m, 
{ 
“§ 
i 
i 
‘§ 
4 
; 
be 
4 
' 


pt, se 


CS mee 


SERS RAE 


288 FACTS AND THBORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


we have done) the resurrection from the dead with this, and 


further states that the quickening ofthe mortal body is ex- 
clusively confined in Scripture to the just, especially reter- : 
ring in proof to the “if” of Rom. ‘viii. 11: “ Z/f the Spirit of | 


Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, Tle 


that raised up Christ from the dead Shall also quicken your 
mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you.” Thus 
“the resurrection of the just is the fruit of redemption: the 


: resurrection of the unjust has nothing to say to it. . . Christ 


came to givéno al gift which should force everlasting 
existencégspon. myriads who asked not for it, and would 
foun it with all theig. hearts.” : | 
- Thus the resurrection of the wicked being no part of re- 
-demption, Paul could not, in 1 Cor. xv., include it at all. 
This he proceeds to prove at length, but, as we fully believe 
it, there is no heed to follow him in his proof. He con- 
cludes that the change to igcorruption' in the case of the 
wicked is essential to the theory of everlasting misery ; and, 
since there are no grounds for holding, this change, the 
theory which requires it falls to the ground. 

Thus an immense argument is built up upon the two props 
of ignorance and supposition. Mr. Constable occupies a 
number: of pages with what we have reduced to perhaps 


: gn Bae ¥ ° \ 
* three times the number of lines, for reasons already stated, 
‘but we havé¢ given the substance. There are two or three 


considerations which hinder our acceptance of his argument. 
. We grant fully that the resurrection of the just is distinct 
in character fromthe resurrection of the unjust ; and that it 


_ is the former alone which is the fruit of Christ’s redemptive 
work. W, shall have more to say of this when we examine, 
- “as we hope to do, Mr. Birks’ ‘view. We fully believe also 
‘that the resurrection described in 1 Cor. xv., does not include 
~ in any way that of the wicked. “Tt is raised in power,” mat 


is raised in glory,” “it is raised a spiritual body,” could not 
apply to any but “the just.” ‘Mr. Constable is wrong, how- 


__ ever, upon one point: for the “change” the apostle speaks 


‘of is not said of the risen-saints, but of those who are alive 


ATE. 


th this, and 
body is @X- 


cially refer-— 
he Spirit of — 


in you, ILe 
nicken your 
ou.” Thus. 
nption: the 

. Christ 
everlasting 
and, would 


» part of re- 


le it at all. 
ully believe 
f. He con- 
case of the 
lisery; and, 
change, the 


ie two props 
- occupies a 

to perhaps 
eady stated, 
wo or three 
is argument. 
st is distinct 
and that it 
redemptive 
we examine, 
believe also 
snot include 
power, HT 

* could not 


wrong, how- 
ostle speaks 
ho are alive 


‘THE RESURRECTION OF JUDGMENT. 289 


and remaining when Christ comes. “ The dead shall be 
raised incorruptible, and ee ”—the living—“ shall be changed: 


“For this corruptible (applying to the dead) shall put on. in- 


corruption; and this mortal (referring to the living) shall 
put on immortality.” Mortality cannot be affirmed of the 
dead, and here certainly, as in 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17, the two 
classes are recognized. The “ change : appa to the living 
alone. ; 

We dissent from Mr. Constable’s' view of the ater in 
the first place, because his argument pyoves too.much. If 
the wicked are to be raised in a condition of mortality, it is 
of course impossible that they could exist-forever, that. is, 
in the body. But it is: equally impossible that they could 
exist for “the ages of ages,” as to which certainly Scripture 
affirms their torment. He must reduce these indeed toa 
minimum im order to harmonize them with his theory. 
Nay, more, a resurrection which is a mere restoration to a 


- present condition involves certain things of which we must 


all be fully aware. It involves the being sustained by food 
to repair’ the continual waste of a cor ruptible body: and © 
thus he might have forcibly urged that hell would be soon 


cleared by starvation, except upon the supposition of such 


a supply as we are ey in no wise justified in making, 
In any way “ages of ages” must be a myth, a dream, an im- 
possibility in the nature of things, as great as that of eternity - 


_ itself. 


_ But. again, Mr. Gonstatle’ 8 view ignores the true nature. 


2 of death, as I have shown it, a necessarily temporary pro- 


vision in view of sin’s entrance into the world, and to be 
finally done away, when “ death and hades are cast into the 
lake of fire;” and also that “after death” is “the judg- | 
ment.” If death be this exceptional temporary thing, it is 

plainly a false view that the resurrection of the wicked even 
will be to acondition of mortality; or that, if not, it must be - 
the fruit of redemption, and a work of grace inconsistent. 
with eternal judgment. On the contrary, “a resurrection 
of judgment.” it is expressly stated to be, and not grace, but 


divided, as the proper effect and token of the Redemption ? And 


290 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the pursuance of the original creative plan, only suspended 


. for a time and for-a purpose. 


This in no wise, hinders the “resurrection of life” being 
due to Him who is “the resurrection and the life,” for the 
“image of the heavenly,” the likeness of Christ in which the 
saints are raised, is something immeasurably beyond what 
man naturally, if sinless, would have attained. 

That there should be difficulties in connection with a sub- 
ject of which Scripture says so little as it does about the 
resurrection of the unjust need not surprise us, and will not 
those who consider but the mysteries which surround our 
present life. It may be true that “incorruption ” is not the 
state of the resurrection of judgment, and this not involve 
at all what annihilationists insist upon. We know too little 
to say much; but to bring our ignorance to bear against 
what is clearly revealed is at least wholly unjustifiable ; and 
this is what Mr. Constable is doing in this case. - 

Mr. Hudson has somewhat upon this subject which while 
we are upon it we may briefly glance at. He says of the 
unjust :-— 

“It is hard to belies that they are raised up ‘by a miracle 
which ends in their destruction, or that accomplishes nothing but 
a judgment, which in this view must appear simply vindictive. 
If they have no immortality, why are their slumbers disturbed ? 
But if their resurrection is connected with the redemption, by a 
law that-finds illustration in analogous facts, this difficulty may 
be removed. Damaged seeds that are sown often exhaust therh- 
selves in germination. And we have noted the fact, thaf of in- 


sects which pass through the chrysalis state to that of the psyche 


or butterfly, many, from injuries suffered in their original form, 
utterly perish in the transition. Now the Glad Tidings of 
the Redemption, quickening and invigorating the soul - with 


new life, may so far repair the injury done it in the fall, that 


even the unbelieving, who derive many benefits therefrom in this 
life, may not altogether perish in the bodily death. ._. May not 
such truths, as food to the souls-even of those who do not cleave 
to Him who is the Truth and the Life, cause death itself to be 


TATE. 


ly suspended 


life” being 
life,” for the 
in which the 
beyond what 


n with a sub- 
es about the 
and will not 
surround our 
n” is not the 
3 not involve 
10w too little 
bear against 
tifiable ; and 


, which while 
says of the 


» by a miracle 
eg nothing but 
ply vindictive. 
ers disturbed ? 
emption, by a 
difficulty may 
exhaust therh- 
ict, thaf of in- 
of the psyche 
original form, 
d Tidings of 
the soul : with 


. the fall, that 


srefrom in this 
1. ..- May not 
» do not cleave 
h itself to be 
mption ? And 


JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT? —_Q91 


for judgment, it is as if the unjust; hearing the voice of God in 
the last call to life, should be putting on a glorious incorruption, 


~ and should perish in the act.”"* é 


_ This is a step beyond Mr. Constable, and it seems hard 
to understand how in this way the wicked rise at all. Cer- 
tainly judgment upon these abortions would be scarcely 
possible. Nor is the resurrection of the wicked either an 


effect of redemption or a blighted natural process, but an* 


act of divine power alone. It is “God who quickeneth the 
dead.” Nor again does it appear on this ground how the 
heathen could ever rise. But it is useless taking up seriously 
what must, be the idlest of speculations %in the absence ot 


revelation. ‘They that have done evil will come forth to 


the resurrection of judgment. hat‘is revealed ; and that, 
death will be over and ended when judgment begins: and: 
this alone completely negatives the conclusion of annihila- 
tionism. © | | 


CHAPTER XXX. 


JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT ? 


WE must now. proceed to what comes after death. And 
here, before we can come to details, there are some miscon- 
ceptions as to the very idea of judgment which we must 
examine by the light of Scripture, and seek to remove. _ 

In Mr. Constable’s volume upon hades, so often referred 
to in the earlier stages of our eee has two chapters 
of considerable importance to his argument which we have 
as yet scarcely glanced at.t Their subjects ate respectively, 
“The Time of Judgment” and “The Time of Retribution.”. 
The general object of these is to show that neither judg- 
ment nor retribution can take place until the resurrection,‘ 


—~3-- + _ ne 


* Debt and Grace, pp. 263, 264. 


t Chap, xiii., xiv. 


of 


292 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“0 
and we shall quote some passages that we may have a clear 
. view of the issues before us. 
' His first arguments, grounded upon his peculiar views of 
death and of the nature of man, I may pass over. He next 
brings before us what the Lord says of Sodom and Gomorrah, 
Tyre and Sidon, as to a future day of judgment (Matt. x. 15; 
xi. 22; Mark vi. 11), and “ what He affirmed of these hea- . 
» then Ie also affirmed of the Jews living in His own days. 
Both are to be tried im this coming judgment day. And 
what He says of the J ewish cities of His own time, we sup- 
pose to be equally true of the Jews of all previous time. 
We are thus told that for four thousand years there was no 
such thing as judyiny men when they were dead.” 

This judgment of, the great.day, Mr. C. argues, our Lord | 
tells us-“ is when He returns from that right hand. of God 
where He now'is. Ife fells us this in His parable of the 
talents. It is ‘after along time the ‘lord of those servants 
cometh and reckoneth with them.’ + Zhere is no a sien y 
with good or with wicked. servants witil the Lord comes.’ 

Mr. Constable goes on to show us how—- 


‘our Platonic theology has virtually nullified this great truth of 
Scripture. It has not denied in words the great day of future 
judgmént of which Christ and His apostles , speak, but it has 
robbed it of all its significance and meaning: by telling us that 
there is another judyment before’ it which ee Sor evel "'y man sep- 
arately what the final judgment has to do.” He quotes in proof of 
this the Roman Catholic ‘‘ Key of Paradise ” and Poole’s Com- 
mentary, the latter of which ‘tells us that ‘after souls by death 

# are separated from their bodies, they. come to judgment, and thus 
every particular one is handed over by death to the bar of God 
the great Judge, and so is dispatched by His sentence to its par- 
ticylar state and place with its respective people. At the great 
-and general assize, the day of judgment, shall the general and 
universal one take place, when all sinners in their entire persons, 
bodies and souls united, shall be adjudged to their nual unalter- 
able and eternal sthte.’ ” 


Further, as to retribution, Mr. Constable quotes 2 Cor. v. 
10 as— t 


» 
» 


Py 


TATE. 


have a clear 


iar views of 
r. Henext 
1 Gomorrah, 
Matt. x. 15; 
f these hea- 
is own days. 
_day. And 
ime, we sup- 
ous time. . . 


here was 70 
rn) 


es, our Lord . 
and. of God 


rable of the 
ose servants 
10 reqkoning 
dd comes.” 


yreat truth of 
day of future 
ik, but it has 
elling us that 
very Mun sep- 
es in proof of 
-Poole’s Com- 
souls by death 
nent, and thus 
e bar of God 
nce to its par- 

At the great 
e general and 
ntiré persons, 
final unalter- 


ytes 2 Cor. v. 


Py 


) 


. other side is as plain. 


$e. 


JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT? . 


* decisive that no retribution whatsoever, be it reward or punish- 


293 


ment, takes place before the resurrection and the judgment. 
There can be no question that ‘made known or manifest’ should 


lation in the next. 


~ be the translation of the Greek verb in this verse, as it is its trans- 
Bengel expresses its sense when he says that 


it means not merely that we should appear in the body, but that 
we, should be made known, together with all our seeret deeds, 


up whSn He comes and‘raises up the dead. 


only following the teaching of his Master. 


The judgment seat of Christ is that judgment seat which He sets 


. not until then will 
retribution take place ; not until then will ihe sinner be punished, . 


- and the saint. receive his reward ; i. e., it is in the body, and not 
out of the body that retribution takes place... Paul was here 


Nowhere in the’ teach- 


ing of Christ are His disciples taught*to expect their reward, or 


any part.of it, when they are dead. 


The very idea of dead men 


recompensed is enough to excite scorn against the school of 
thought which has taught it, until, from the perpetual repetition 
of the nonsense, we cotld not sce its folly. But not to the state 
of death, but to the resurrection from that state of death, does | 
‘When thou makest 
a feast,’ He says, ‘ call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, 
and thou shalt be blessed ; for they cannot recompense thee’; for 
thou. shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. . 

But are there, according to our Platonic theologians, any passages 
of Scripture-which do directly state that before resurrection retri- 
‘bution of any kind, reward or punishment, takes place? Yes, 


our blessed Lord teach His people to look. 


they say, ther. is one. 


Where isit 2? In Luke xvi. 23.. ‘What 


do these words form part of ? -A parable’! What are the words ? 
‘In hades he lifted up his eyes, being’ in torments, and: seeth 


Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his boscm. 


999 


IIe then has the usual objections to employing a parable - 
to teach doctrine: all which we have already looked at. 

Now there is truth in Mr. Constable’s objections to the 
The statements he’ 
objects to are not clear—do not distinguish between things © 
Especially the Ro- 
manist quotation (which I have not given, and which applies 
2 Cor. v. 10 to the intermediate state) does clash entirely 


common doctrine here, as we shall sce. 


which it is important not to confound. 


with Scripture But then Mr. 


Constable’s error on the 
ITe meets a false issue with a partial 


294 FACTS AND THEORIES AS To A FUTURE STATE. 


truth, and is certainly no less superficial than those he is 
opposing. The full statement harmonizes all Scripture, 
parable and all else, instead of arraying one text against 
another. 

The very chapter last quoted from, as we have seen, bears 
witness, not in the last parable but in the lesson which our 
Lord deduces from the first, that when the righteous “ FAIL” 
(that is, at death therefore, not resurrection) they are “‘re- 
ceived into everlasting habitations” (Luke xvi. 9). And 
this the last parable shows, in whatever. figurative language, 
with regard to Lazarus. And it is in express contrast to 
this that the rich man in hades is tormented, as /e is “ com- 
forted.” Thus there is no. room to doubt the meaning of 
the solemn words, The rich man is certainly pictured (and - 
even Mr. Constable cannot deny that) as receiving retribu- 
tion in hades, before the resurrection and the final judgment, 


‘and if the Lord did not mean that, He: would not have used 


words which every one must admit give that impression, 
without one word of warning. It is useless to talk of trees 
speaking, etc., in the same breath with this. By the one no 
one could be deceived. In the other the Lord would be 
coming in with what men represent as false and heathenish 
ideas actually in the very. minds of ITis hearers: for He 
spoke to Pharisees. And we are forbidden therefore by 
our reverence for Him, who was never anything less than 
Incarnate Truth itself, to allow that He could so trifle with 
falsehood, and help to confirm in error the souls of those 
He came to rescve out of it. 

Thus far‘as to the parable. But as to the righteous at 
death being received into everlasting habitations, we cannot 
so ignore the direct teaching both of our’Lord and His 
apostles, as to allow Mr. Constable unchecked to assure us 
that. we have no other Scripture than that just looked at to 
establish such a doctrine, //e may believe that when our 
Lord’ said to the thief by His side, “To-day thou shalt be 
with me in Paradise,” He meant only that he should fall ° 
asleep sf perhaps two thousand years, so that it would be 


' 


ATE. 


hose he is 
Scripture, 
xt ayainst 


seen, bears 
' which our 
pus “ FAIL” 
ey are ‘re- 
. 9). And 
eb language, 
contrast to 
he is “ com- 
neaning of 


clured (and - 


ing retribu- 
| judgment, 
t have used 
impression, 
alk of trees 
the one no 
would be 
ispecies 

: for He 
sults by 
g less than 
) trifle with 
ls of those 


‘ighteous at 
, We cannot 
rd and His 
O assure us 
ooked at to 
t when our 
ou shalt be 


should fall © 


t would be 


- those disobedient in Noah’s days, as. now “ spirits in prison.” 


- JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT ? 295 


no matter to Aine whether that promise was kept or no! 
>What matter to im indeed, if he did not wake up for- 
ever? That quiet “sleep,” in which the sleeper vanishes 
altogether, would not know one uneasy dream in conse- 
quence!) And so he may please to interpret Paul’s desire 


to depart and be with Christ, and similar things. All this 
we have before examined. But then we must believe that 
we have some Scripture for a truth like this. , 


Mr. Constable may say, perhaps, “T am stating you have 


~ only one Scripture for refribution in the death state.” Well, 
but the one involves the other. The righteous dic, and the 


wicked. If death be extinction, the righteous could not be 
“comforted” in it, any more than the wicked “tormented.” 
Mr. C. himself quite rightly puts both upon the very same 
footing. We should at least want proof of a difference, if 


- difference indeed there were. We should need proof -that 


the wicked were not tormented, if we were assured that 
the righteous were comforted. 

“Thus every text for the one is an argument for the other 
also; and. wher the language even of a parable comes in to 
sustain the prior conviction, we must be permitted to think 
that. it neither stands alone, nor gives an uncertain sound 


either. We do not expect that it should be much dwelt 
upon. We have just been considering how little even the: 
resurrection of the wicked is. Enough is given to establish © 


the doctrine. Warnings and promises alike may be expect- 


ed to be connected rather with a final and everlasting state, 


than with one necessarily to pass away. Yet we do not 
accept Mr. Constable’s statement as’ to there being only one 
text. There-are others, as Isa. xxiv. 21, 22 
20, the first of which Sale of the “kings ot the earth ” 
whom Revelation (xix.,19, 21) shows us “slain with the 
sword” at Christ's coming in glory, while Isaiah speaks of 
them as prisoners shut up in the pit, to be visited after 
many days; i. ¢., at the judgment of the dead, after the 
millennium. -While the latter speaks correspondingly of 


: 1 Pet. iii. 19, 


296 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


Both texts assure us of retribution in ‘the intermediate 
state. oe : 

But Mr. Constable would allege doubtless, as he has 
against the views of others, that “retribution before judg- 
ment is contrary to all the principles of the divine and 
human law.” L allow it fully. What he fails to see is that, 
as far as the settlement of personal guilt and condemnation 
is concerned, man—the world—is ALREADY judged—already 
condemned: a thing which, if it be not plain to him, as it 
would seem it is not, is none the less abundantly plain in 
Scripture. ee | | 

We have already seen that God by the ministry of death 
and condemnation was for centuries pressing home upon 
man his lost’condition, and that the apostle could speak for 
Christians in saying, “ we kxow that what things soever the 
Jaw saith, it saith to them that are under the law, that every 
mouth may be stopped, and ALL THE WoRLD become guilty 
before God.” Is that, or is it not, a sentence of God ? .and 
is it to be passed, or passed already ? Certainly, it is long 
since passed, and this sentence of the law was, as we have 
seen, only itself the affirming and confirming of a prior sen- 
tence, of which every grey hair in man was witness. 

It is true, man might, alas, prophesy smooth things to. 
himself, and dream of being able to face God about his sins, 
and on the other hand it is blessedly true that, wherever 
there was real bowing to the sentence, the mercy of God was 
ready to manifest itself: real “repentance ” is always ‘‘ unto 
life.” But it needed no judgment-seat. for Him to manifest 
such mercy, wherever He knew a soul had bowed to own 
its guilt; while with all others judgment had not to be pro; 
nounced, but had been. This is wi at makes so solemn and | 
so blessed that great truth of Ecclesiastes, the settlement of 
the question of the book: “the spirit shall return to God 
that gave it.” Not yet indeed the judgment-seat, where He 
would “bring every WoRK into judgment,” ba the assur- 
ance at least then, if never before, of PERSONAL acceptance, 
or of personal rejection. 


‘ATE. 


ntermediate 


, as he has 
vefore judg- 
divine and 
» see is that, 
ndemnation 
ed—already 
o him, as it 
tly plain in 


try of death 
home upon 
d speak for 
3 soever the 
r, that every 
come yuilty 
f God ? .and 
y, it is long 
as we have 
a prior sen- 
1e8s. 


h things to_ 


out his sins, 
ut, wherever 
y of God was 
ways ‘unto 
1 to manifest 
wed to own 
t to be pro 


solemn and | 


ettlement of 
turn to God 
at, where He 
dt the assur- 
. acceptance, 


JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT ? 297 


Mr. Constable does not, see,-—as many do not,—the difter- 
ence between these two things. We must look at them, 
theretore, more in detail, and the Scriptures which affirm and 
illustrate them. . 

Personal acceptance with God is NEVER on the ground 
of our works. “By the works of the law "—in which all 
good works are summed up,—“ shall no flesh living be justi- 


fied.” So the word of God decisively says. On the one 


hand not the most perfect upon earth (as Job was in his 


day) but must, with Job, put his hand upon his mouth in the 


presence of God, or open it but. to say,“I am vile:” “[ 
abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.” ; 
On the other hand, let any soul but take this latter ground, |. 

and “if we confess -our sins, God is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteots- 
ness.” | . sae ; 

_ The future day of judgment (whether we speak of saint | 
or sinner) is, therefore, never in Scripture for the settlement 
of personal acceptance or the reverse. We have already 
‘seen that personal judgment for a sinful creature before a 
holy God can only be condemnation. The saved are saved 
here and now, and do not “come into judgment.” The 
doom of the unsaved is determined’in the present life also, 
and if men ignore it here, the spirit returning to God cannot 
remain ignorant. It is a “spirit in prison,” already with the 
consciousness of wrath upon it, if not received into “ ever- 
lasting habitations.” This is the rich man’s portion, where | 
the wrath of God is the consuming fire by which he is tor- 
mented, and yet resurrection plainly has not come. 

Does this set aside the reality of the ighesns to coma? 
By no means. It onlyattirms the reality"Of the indent 
pronounced. The judgment. fo come is the judgment of 
works, and there is what answers to this even for the saint. 
But he comes to it in resurrection glory, and in the image of 
his Lord. Can he be put upon trial to decide the fu- , 
ture of one already glorified? Clearly not. But he does 
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, and receives for 


| 


i 


298% FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the things done in the body, as a question of reward obtained 
or lost. Eternal life is not a reWard, but the free gift of 
God in Christ, and justification is by His blood - alone 
Sonship, membership of the body of Christ, a home in the 
Father’s house, are all fruits of the same blessed work, His - 
and not ours. And these can never be brought in question: 
judgment never is brought in to settle these. 

Similarly then as to the lost. The judgment to come 
does not settle that they are lost. If they come forth to a 
resurrection of judgment, it is not a judgment which is to, 
decide if they can stand before God or not; but ¢hey are, as’ 
the saint is not, “judged,” themselves personally, “ accord- 
ing to their works” (Rev. xx.#13).. Fhey get a measured 
recompense, as the saint does, but a rovemupenke of judgment 
and nothing else: “few” or “many stripes,” as the case 
may be; an absolutely righteous apportionment for the sins 
committed 1 in the body. This is the judgment of works, as 
distinct from the settlement of whether lost or saved as is 
the reward of works for the righteous. 

What has helped to confuse the minds of many has been 
a question of prophetic interpretation ; and { helps to show 
how little there can be a thorough ‘settlerfent of the ques- 
tion of eternal judgment without a previous settlement of 
‘what many judge so lightly as “ the mi illennarian questio 
Failing to see the Lord’s coming as antecedent to the ay 
lennium, and the purification of the earth by judgment in 
order to the blessing, the separation of the sheep from the 
goats, in Matt. XXV., has been looked at as the same thing 
with the judgment of the dead more than a thousand years 
later. It wag inev itable in this way that the latter should . 
' be supposed (yet in opposition to, the plainest passages 
eisewhere) one in which righteous and wicked would stand 
togéther, and the former Ee aac uminated from the latter by 


tmeiworks. 

a uld be plain, howeyer, that. in Matt. XXV. 31-46, we 
nave a judgment of living nations when the Lord comes to 
earth and sets up His throne there, and not.a judgment of 


AT BE. 


rd obtained 
ree gift of 
lood . alone 
ome in the 


d work, His - 


in question : 

nt to come 

e forth to a 
which is to. 
they are, as 
ly, “ accord- 
a measured 
of judgment 
as the case 
; for the sins. 
of works, as 
saved as is 


iny has been 
elps to show 
of the ques- 
ttlement of 
n question.” 
, to the nil 
judgment in 
ep from the 

same thing 
yusand years 


latter should . 


est. passages 
would ‘stand 
the latter by 


v. 31-46, we 
rd comes to 
judgment of 


JUDGMENT: WHEN AND WHAT? 299 


the dead, when’ the earth and the heavens are fled away ; 
and also that the. account of the taking up of the saints to 
meet the Lord in. the air in 1 Thess. iv., before He appears 
to the world at all (Col. iii. 4), is quite_inconsistent with 
such an interpretation. There is no hint of resurrection in 
our Lord’s prophecy at all. And the nature of the investi- 
gation differs much from that in. Revelation. The truth i is, 
that “the nations” in the former Scripture are those who, 
after the taking away of the saints of the present dispensa- 
tion, and during an interval which takes place between that 
and His appearing with them, have reccived a final call hy 


the preaching of the coming kingdom. It would be too 


_lengthy a matter to enter upon here. But the broad char- 
acteristic differences between this and the Apacalyptic 
vision, should be sufficient at least to prevent their being 
confounded. 

» Into judgment he who now believes in Christ can never 
come. So He declares.’ ‘48 it is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after this the judgment, so Christ was once 


' ’ offered to bear the sins of many, and to them that look for 


Him shall He appear the second time, apart from sin, unto 


' salvation.” If “ God has appointed a day in which He will 


judge the world by that Man whom He hath ordained, ” the 
saints whom He declares to be even now “ not of the world ° 
even as He is not of the world,” shall (not be judged with 
it, but)’ “ judge the 4vorld”” with Him (1 Cor. vi. 2). They 
are thus seen upon the throne-in Rev. xx. 4-6 as having part 
in the first resurrection ; and not till a thousand years after- 
wards does the judgment of the dead take place. God has 


- taken care to separate thus widely between His people’s 


portion and that of those who hate Him. 

The truth is what alone makes all harmonious. Present 
judgment has been passed upon the world. The very cross 
itself, as His portion at men’s hands, has only confirmed 
finally that, sentence, to be executed when:He comes.* Out. 
ff it God in His grace is calling men and saving them. His 


_ a * John xii. 31-38; xvi. 8-11. 


r 


Ne 


300 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A-BMTURE STATE, 


saved are upon the ground of Christ and ‘His work, not their 
own. The unsaved are still under the universal sentence 
already judged; the judgment of works, the full measure: 
ment of each man’s due, being still to come. This is not a 
question. of personal acceptance or rejection, which is on 
other ground, but is the solemn and exact-award of deeds 
done in the body, as Scripture says. The doer and the 
deeds are questions, however connected, still distinct. 


git? 


CHAPTER XXXT. 
THE DOOM OF SATAN. 


THE-very personality of Satan is, as everybody is aware, 
denied in mapy quarters in the present day. The only peo- 
ple with wh awe hav e to do just now, however, who deny 
this, are the followers of Dr. Thomas. With these men, 
self-consistently enough, the devil is simplyga personification 


of sin, which, howevei, may be represented" pparently ly qaiiied 


variety of dealin agents, Lin oeder to get rid of the distastefu 
ersonality and yet meet the texts in which 
anifest to‘he denied. 
bout, being thought to wander too 
Pod TC. CO logk briefly at this point. 
Ae Th fs hookgat Job who, when “the 
sons of ‘Go cam Misent. the es betore the Lord,” 
“ came also among them.” He ise xpressly catled Satan, and 
isa true “devil”: according to the meantug of that word, 
“a false accuser.” > 
These “sons of God” are spoken ot by Fehovah in the 
_ same book as present. when He laid the foundations of the 
_ earth (xxxviii. 7), and therefore are certainly not men but, 
angels.. Among ‘these angels then the accuser comes,as one 
of them: surely not a man among angels, and hardly a per: 
sonification of sin. 


TATE, 


rk, not their 
sal sentence 
ill measure- 
‘his is not a 
which is on 
ird of deeds 
oer and the 
stinct. 


dy is aware, 
he only peo- 
r, Who deny 


these men, 4. 


rsonification 


arently by gig 


ev distastefu 
xts in which 


wander too 
this point. 

, When “the 
‘the Lord,” 
d Satan, ane 
f that word, 
ovah in the 
tions of the 


ot men but, 


omes,as one 


ardly a ‘per- 


n€ of the Lord he ¢ goes forth to exercise — 


luman power against Job within divinely or- 
limits. He is here clearly an angelic, yet a fallen 
evil heirig. 

In the béok of Revelation we have a being figured as a 
“dragon,” and explained to be “ that old serpent, which is 
the devil and Satan” (xx. 2). ‘‘That old serpent ” of course 
réfets to Eden, and tells us who was the real tempter hid 
under the form of the irrational creature. Here too the 
werds of the Lord apply: “He was a murderer from the 
beginning, antl abode not in the truth, because there is no 
truth in him. When he speaketh a lig he speaketh of his 
own ; for he is a liar, and the father of it ” (John viii. 44). 

As a tempter we accordingly again find him assailing the 
Lord in the wilderness, Oné in whom there was no indwell- 
ing sin to seduce or personify ; and there too he is called 
the devil and Satan, ‘and appears as one who claims the 
kingdoms of the world as his. And he departing. from Him 
for a season, the Lord’ speaks of his return in a w: gy which 


suits this, aim of hia: “the prince of this wend poset 


agi at hy nothing inme;” and of His own ‘croxs as that 
which was his judgment and ‘would ensure his casting out 
(John xiv. 30, xvi, 11, xii. 31). In all which we travel hack 


once more to Eden, ai find fulfilling the words to the old fe a | 


serpent, He shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt gaits mit 
heel.” 

We find hjs being and powersso recognized among ‘tlie’, 
Jews that the Pharisees impute the Lord’s casting out of 
devils to Beelzcbub the prince of the devils; and the Lord 


rebukes them by asking, “ Can Satan cast out Natia?”? and, 
recognizing the fact of his having a kingdom, asks in that\’ 


case how it shall. stand? The devils He casts out, know’ 
Him in turn, call Him the Holy One of God and Son ot 
God, and&jbeseech” Him not to torment. them before the 
time. . 
Everywhere-fh the Gospels the acre of Satan isa thing 


as manifest as malionant. A wo sanot: Tifton hepself 


° 


302 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


eighteen years, and it is Satan that has bound her. He puts 
into Judas’ heart to betray the Lord; and in the apparent 
zeal for Himself of another disciple Christ discerns. Satan 
also. Hesows the tares in the parable, and these springing 
up are the children of the wicked one. Among the signs 
that. follow those who believe is this, that they cast out 
devils, | 

In the Acts the yottiigs or the same malignant spirit 
are as manifest. Satan ‘fills Ananias’ heart to lie to the 
‘Holy Ghost, and keep back part of the price of his land. 
Cases of possession are still noticed, and as a common thing. 

Paul speaks of being sent to turn men “ from the power of 
‘Satan unto God.”’ In the Epistles he is the constant adver- 
sary of the: people of God, whether openly as a roaring lion, 
or transformed into an angel of light. He is the spirit, that 
works in the children of disobedienee; the god of this 
world who. blinds the minds of those that believe not. If 
resisted: he flees, but the shield of faith is that by which 
alone the fiery darts of the wicked one are quenched. 
s Shortly,” we are reminded, according to the first promise, 

“ God will bruise Satan under your feat. aaa 
All this is but part of the testimony of the word of God as ete 
the reality and power of man’s old enemy. If words mean 
anything they assure us of his true personality, with that of 
numberless evil spirits, ‘his angels,” possessed of superhu- 
man power, which is used to obtain dominion over men’s 
souls and even bodies, and from which nothing but divine | 
power can deliver. I need not pursue this further now. 
But we shall have to consider some common mistakes as to 
.. Satan which it is of great importance to rectify, in order to” 
ve clearly before us the Scripture view! 

Satan has been considered commonly (as one finds in the 
Paradise Lost of a great. poet) to be here as a prisoner 
broken lopse from hell, into which he had been cast immedi- 
ately upon his fall, a hell in which even now he is supposed 


. to reign, and to reign there eternally over fallen spirits and. 


lost.men, the divinely appointed \tormenter of those whom 


TATE. 


or. He puts 
che apparent 
cerns. Satan 
se springing 
ig the signs 
rey cast out 


enant spirit 
o lie to the 
of his land. 
nmon thing. 
he power of 
stant adver- 
roaring lion, 
e spirit, that 
sod of this 
ve not. If 
at. by which 
> quenched. 


rst promise, 


of God as to 
words mean 
vith that of 
of superhu- 

over men’s 


but divine - 


urther now. 
stakes as to 


in order to 


finds in the 


a prisoner 


ast immedi- 
is supposed 


spirits and. 


chose whom 


THE DOOM OF SATAN. 808 


he has made his prey. For no part of this is Scripture re- 
sponsible, and its grotesque horror has been the reproach of 
orthodox theology. What would be thought of a govern- 
ment which allowed its prisoners so to break their bounds, 
and which employed the chief criminal to torture the lesser 
ones ? 


hell,* or of Satan Seementung any bpay there, He will be 
there, doubtlegg, the lowest and most miserable of all, but 
he is not yet i hell at all. Strange and startling as it seems - 
to many, instead of being in hell,-he.is in“ heavenly places,” 
and instead of reigning in hell, reigns Acre, the prince and the 
god of this world. 

Thus we are exhorted to “put. on the whole armor of 
God, whereby ye may be able to’stand against the. wiles of 
devil; for we wrestle not against. flesh and blood, but 
soainet principalities, against powers, against the rulers of | 
the darkness of this world, against the spiritual hostst of 
wickedness in the heavenly places” (Eph. vi. 11, 12). Our 
translators have shown how foreign the thought was to 
their minds by putting “high” into the text instead of 
“heavenly.” But here the devil and his angels are looked 
at as the antitype of the hosts of Canaan with which Joshua 
and Israel wrestled. We have long lost the type in losing 
the antitype. . 

But in Job we have already seen Satan among the’ sons 


_ of God; and the “heavenly places” were surely his original _ 


dwelling- place. And if his casting down to hell has not 
yet taken place, he will be still natur rally there where he be- 
longed by creation. Now his casting into hell belongs to a 
time plainly yet future (Rev. xx. 10), and everywhere in the 


_ Gospels, ‘we find the devils anticipating their coming doom, 


but knowing it was not yet come. “Art thou come to tor- 


ee ee an EEE 


*It may ‘have arisen from a misconception of Rev. ix. 11. 
“ bottomless pit,” or ‘abyss ” is not even hell at all. 
t Alford. “ Hosts” is not expressed in the Greek : 


But the 


it is “ spirituals.” 


304 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE. STATE. 


ment us before the time?” they ask, It is plain then that ; 
hell cannot be their present portion.” 

The binding of Satan precedes necessarily the millennial 
blessing. How could there be righteousness or peace in a 
world in which he was still as acfive as ever ? Immediately, 
therefore, after the appearing of the Lord, among the other 
foes that are dealt with, Satan and his hosts are not forgot-— 
ten. The fate of the beast and the kings of the earth is first 

" shown us at the end of Rev. xix., and then Satan is bound 
and shut up in the abyss a thousand years. The account 
may be given in figurative language, and is, no doubt, but 
yet with perfect simplicity, and Isaiah, eight hundred years : 
before, gives us the same things with almost equal plainness, 
and in perfect harmony with the obvious meaning. For “it 
shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish 
the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of 
the earth upon the earth’’—the two classes of which Reve- 
lation speaks; “and they shall be gathered together as 
prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the 
prison, and after many days (plainly, the millennium) shall 
they be visited. Then, the moon shall be confounded, and 
the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts sHall reign in 
Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His ancients glori- 
ously ” (Isa. xxiv. 21-23). : 

‘““When the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be 
loosed out of his prison.” And this post-millennial loosing 
seems again to stumble many. It is evident that the object 
‘is to distinguish between the true subjects and the concealed 
enemies of the Lord, still such in the face of the long reign 
of blessing and of peace. That there are these is plain from ~ 
such intimations as that in Psa. xviii. 44, 45. And the effect 
of Satan being free is'soon apparent. “ He shall go out, to 
‘deceive the natigns which are in the four quarters of the 
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, 
the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they 
went up upon the breadth of the earth and compassed 


the camp of the. saints about, and the beloved city; and 


STATE. 


ain then that — 


he millennial 
yr peace in a 
Immediately, 
mg the other 


‘e not forgot-— 


earth is first 
tan is bound 


The account: 


o doubt, but 
indred years 
ual plainness, 
ng. For “it 
shall punish 
the kings of 
which Reve- 
together as 
hut up in the 
nnium). shall 
founded, and 
Hall reign in 
acients glori- 


tan shall be 
anial loosing 
at the object 
he concealed 
e long reign 


is plain from ~ 


nd the effect 
all go out,'to 
ters ‘of the 
er to battle, 

And they 
| _compassed 


bee GENENNA. 305 


fire came dowa from God out of heaven, and devoured 
them.” (come 

Then comes Satan's s final judgment. “ And th devil that 
deceived them was cast into the lake of fire’ and brimstone, 
where the beast and the false prophet NG and sj be tor- 
mented day and night forever and ever.’ 
eerning the nature of this pnishment we are NOW 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


GEHENNA. 


GEHENNA is twelve times rendered “ hell” in the common 
version, and is essentially* the only other word so rendered, 
beside “ hades” already looked at. The renderi ing has, it is - 
well known, been the object of special attack by Canon 
Farrar in his Westminster Abbey Sermons, as one of the 
three words (the others being “ damnation” and “ everlast- 
ing”) which in his opinion ought to be expunged out of our | 
English Bibles.t 7 

Gehenna, says Dr. Farrar, “ means primarily the valley-of 
Hinnom outside Jerusalem, in which, after it had been pol 
luted by Moloch-worship, corpses were-flung, and fires were 
lit; and is used, secondarily, as a metaphor, not for fruitless 
and hopeless, but—for all at any rate but a small and des- 
perate minority—of that purifying and corrective punish» 
ment, which, as all of us alike believe, does await impenitents 
both here and .beyond the grave. 

‘But, be if solemnly observed (he continues) the Jews to 
whom and in whose metaphorical sense the word was used by our — 
blessed Lord, never did, either then or at any other period; nor- 


* Once, referring to a class of fallen angels, the word TAPTAPWOAS 
is used (2 Pet. ii. 4), and translated “ cast them down to hell,” literally 


od city; and 


“to Partarus.?—\—— 
+ ‘‘ Eternal Hope,” Serm. 3. 


806 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


mally attach to the word Gehenna that meaning of endless 
torment. which we attach to ‘hell.’ To them, and in their style 
of speech—and therefore on the lips of our blessed Saviour who 
addressed it to them, and spake in terms which they would un- 
derstand—it meant not a material and everlasting fire, but an 
intermediate, a remedial, a metaphorical, a terminable ake 
bution.” 

To this is appended a note in which the Jews as a church 
are “stated never to have held either (1) the finality of the 
doom passed, or (2) the doctrine of torment, endless, if 
once incurred. For this he quotes various authorities, 
among others as ‘the most distinct utterance of the Talmud, 
one in which it is said ‘‘that the just shall rise to bliss; ordi- 
nary sinners shall’be ultimately redeemed; the hopelessly 
bad shall be punished for a year, and then annihilated.” 
In another place, “Gehenna is nothing but a day in which 
the ungodly shall be burned. 3 

‘ In his fifth excursus at the end of the book he adds other - 
testimonies, among which is another from the Talmud, to 
the effect that “after the last judgment Geéhenna exists no 
longer.” His testimony of the Rabbins concerns us very 
little. He does not notice the views of either Pharisees or 
Essenes, who both held eternal punishment, as Josephus ex- 
plicitly affirms. 

Mr. Hudson has made a similar apredl to the Talmud, 
naturally, laying the stress upon the annihilationism con- 
tained in it, that Dr. Farrar lays upon the restorationism. 
Both allow that there are some passages which may be 
pleaded against these, although they believe not really 
against them. I do not lay any stress upon it, nor propose 
at all to take up this line of argument. I leave it to those 
more competent to do so, and shall confine myself entirely 
to Scripture. 

It is of Gehenna that the Lord speaks wien He asserts 
God’s ability to “destroy both body and soul in hell.” 
We have seen how little the text can be made to mean 

seem to be no less decisive agai 


Dr. Farrar’s view. deed he gives it up explicitly, if to 


STATE, 


ing of endless 
lin their style 
ed Saviour who 
they would un- 
ng fire, but an 
rminable retri- 


ws as a church 
finality of the 
nt, endless, if 
is authorities, 
f the Talmud, 
to bliss; ordi- 


she hopelessly © 


- annihilated.” 
day in which 


he adds other - 


ie Talmud, to 
nna exists no 
cerns us very 
r Pharisees or 


; Josephus ex- 


» the Talmud, 
lationism con- 
-estorationism. 
which may be 
ve not really 
t, nor propose 
ive it to those 
nyself entirely 


en. He asserts 
soul in hell.’ 
nade to mean 


GEHENNA. _ - 307 


be taken as jmplying that God will put forth this power 
that He claims. The passage, he says,* “ merely attributes 
to God a power which we know the Omnipotent’ must pos- 
sess. He can destroy the soul, but it ‘Says not that He 
will. If any think that this is implied, it seems to me that 
no logical choice is open to them, but to embrace the theory 
of conditional immortality:” % Shes 

But surely the Lord holds out no vain warning here. In 
a parallel passage in the same way He says, “Fear Him who 
after He hath killed, hath power to cast into hell; and we 
certainly know that threat will be fulfilled. If He never 
wills to do this, men need no more fear it than if He had not 
power, And how strange a thing for the Lord thus to 
claim for Him a power none can deny, and which notwith- 
standing He will never exert! We do not at all on that 
account believe in the logical necessity of annihilation, but 
we do believe that God will fulfil the awful warning, and 
destroy both body and soul in hell. 

Mr. Jukes indeed thinks even this to be for eventual sal- 


_ vation: he asks, : 


‘‘Is mot the ‘losing ’ or ‘ destruction’ of our fallen life the only 


.way to a better one ? Does not our Lord Himself say more than 


once, that the way to ‘save our life’ or ‘soul’ is ‘to lose it,’ or 
‘have it destroyed,’ in its fallen form, that it may be rosofeated ? 
These last words,” he answers, ‘should of themselves settle the 
question, for in one place they occur in immediate ‘connection 
with those other well-known words as to ‘ fearing Him who can 
destroy both body and soul in hell.’. . . And yet, in the very 
closest connection with those words, our Lord repeats this self- 
same word ‘destroy ’ to express that death and dissolution. of the 
soul, which, so far from bringing it to non-existence is the ap- 
pointed way to save it.””} ad eee ce 


But Mr. Jukes can scarcely make so much out of the texts 
he cites. The destruction in them is not the destroying of 
the body of sin, or. of the oid man, with whick®Mr. Jukes 
evidently confounds it. For he goes on to say, “Christ | 


ee oainst 


xplicitly, if to 


* “Eternal Hope,” Pref., p. xl. + “ Restitution,” Appendix, p. 172. 


e 


Smeaton 


er 


ee 9 a a 


308 2FACTs AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


saves it, as we, have seen, by death; for being fallen into 
sin, what - is nepded is, that. the ‘ body of sin should be de- 
sy hd, that henceforth we should not serve sin.’ This 
is not, I say, the destruction spoken of in Matt. x. 39; but 
the Lord is speaking of our tiking up the cross—ov cross— . 
in face of the opposition of the world. Is this the destruc- 
ion of our old man, or what really,in the spiritual sense, 
saves us ? The Lord is not then here speaking of “ Tosing, our 
life, or having it destroyed in its fallen-form, that it may be 
re-created,” ‘There. is nothing about either destruction or 
eereation: in that sense; Le does not speak of “ that death 
or dissolution of the soul, which ts the appointed way to 
savers oo ae 4 
_ Nor does Scripture anywhere speak of such a thing either, 
Dissolution of the soul is nowhere mentioned, nor its death 
as a way to save it. Similarly as to destruction: can Mr. 
Jukes point out one instance in which the destruction of the 
soul is the method of its salvation? _ Ile canngt ; dnd his’. 

words are mere delusion. “ Christ saves the soul by death,” 
he. tells us, “for the body of sin must be destroyed,” but 
that is not the sue/. Te says again, “The elect, that is the 


- first-fruits, are the living proof ofthis. . A ‘new man? is 

- created in them;.and the ‘old man’ dies and is destroyed 
Se yet hein whom all this is done remains the same per- ” 
SO 


” ” But if the new man is created in people, he is not de- 
_stroyed first, to be created ; and if the “old man ” dies and 
is destroyed, Ae is not re-created at. all; nor is the persou 
destroyed in whom this takes place either. Mr. Jukes adds : » 
‘it is only the riddle of the cross, that by death God de- 
stroys him that has the power of death.” ° Sut then is /e that 
has the power of death destroyed also in order to his salva- 
tion? Certainly there is not sich a thought in the passage. 
It is in vain then for hiin to seek to escape from the force 
of the words, What: folly,indeed, to supfose the Lord 
saying, “Fear Him who is able to ee both seul and 


hody, in order to save them.” No; _it is npossible to read 
the thought of salvation into its very opposite, the awful de- 


» 


TATE. 


x fallen into 
1ould be de- 
sin.” This 
x. 89; but 
-Ovwr CrOsSs— 
the destruc- 
iritual sense, . 
f “ Tosing, our 
at it may be 
struction or 
“that death 
nted way .to 
“ 
thing either! 
nor its death’ 
on: can Mr. 
uction of the 


igt; dnd his ’ 


ul by death,” 
troyed,” but 
t, that is the 
ew man’ is 
s destroyed 


ne same per- —° 


he is not de- 
n’”’ dies and 
s the person 
Jukes adds : 
uth God de- 
hen is /e that 
to his salva- 
the passage. 
om the force 
e the Lord 
th soul and 
sible to read 


establish his position as to Gehenna. 


> GEHENNA, 309 


struction hopeless of deliverance; just because it is God who 
sb a i 

destroys,” and destroys not to save, but as the alternative 
of salvation. Annihilationism and restorationism fail alike 
and fail utterly here. | 

But then Gehenna is the place of this utter destruction, | 
and though the terms used may be more or less “ metaphori- 

p ” e Wa . 
eal,” a “remediable ” and “terminable ” retribution they do 
‘yot-teach. — . . 

Nor does Dr. Farrar attempt to produce Scripture to 
It is the Talmud and 
the Jewish doctors that are to détine for us what the Serip- 
ture means, and Dr. F. even brings in the thought. of “the 
pleasant valley of Hinnom,™* as if! to bear its part in trans- 
muting darkness into light, and making tolerable the wrath 
of God itself. 

‘In the: Old Testament. it is merely the pleasant. valley of. 

iy ne & 6 { , is 
Hinnom (re Hinnom), subsequently deseerated by idolatry, and 
‘specially Dy y Moloch worship, and defiled by Josiah on this 
account. sed, according to Jewish tradition, as the common 
sewer of the\vity, the corpses of the worst criminals were fling 
a . 2 es . : . oe ; es 
into it unburidd, and fires were lit to purify the contaminated air 


‘Tt then became\a word which secondarily implied (i.) the severest 
judgment which 


Jewish court could pass Upon a criminal-—the 
casting forth of his unburied corpse amid the fires and worms of 
this polluted valloy\, and (ii) a punishment which—to the Jews 
as a body—xerer meant. an endless punishment beyond. the 
grave. ” 

As to this we have seen, howeyer, what. the Lord affirms 
of it, ina threat according to Dr. Farrar never to be exe- 
cuted. The destruction of\body and soul can hardly‘be this 


side of the gravé,and cannot consist, with restoration. Dr 


Bar Ps ede te . ; vat 
Farrar’s words, too, are contr: licted explicitly by Josephus 
“) 


as is well known, both with regard to the Pharisces and the 
NY LS : 

Essenes : a testimony he never even alludes to, and which as 
strangely, Mr. Hudson sets aside as unreliable. But let le 


ieir 


he awful de- 


— x 


now whence the Jews. drew (or micht have drawn) th 


* Preface, xxnii, a oak | 


310 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE: 


views of Gehenna. We have the Old Testament as they had, 
and from it alone all right views, such as the Lord could 
Himself adopt, must surely be taken. Revelation alone 
could be a light beyond the grave. 

To one of these Old Testament passages (Isa. Ixvi. 24) we 
have aiready referred, in which we find both the fire and 
the worm attributed to the valley of Hinnom, and which 
more certainly are the basis of the well-known warning of 
our Lord which we must almost immediately consider now. 
As millennial -and not final, it may be concluded to have 
given risen to thoughts of the temporary nature of Gehenna, 
which Dr. Farrar’s extracts have so much of, as well as also. 
to have furnished argument for the annihilation doctrines 
of the day, in behalf of which also we find them quoting 
Mal. iv. 1, quite as do the present annihilationists. —_ 

The main passage beside is also in Isaiah, and here 
Tophet, the valley of Hinnom, is expressly named as the’ 

_ place of judgment for the Assyrian, where the breath of the 
Lord like a stream of brimstone kindles the pile (xxx. $3). 
Here, while the literal Tophet might furnish the terms of 
the prophecy, the language points to something deeper, 

' which the fuller revelation could alone perhaps make plain. 

We must now look at the well-known passage in the Gos- 
pel of Mark (ix. 43-50), which I quote in full : ; 

‘And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off ; it is better for thee 
to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell 
[Gehenna], into the fire that never shall'.be quenched [or rather, 
the fire unquenchable], where their worm dieth not, and the fire 
s not quenched. And if thy, foot offend thee, cnt it off; it is / 

pete for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to 

“be cast intd hell [Gehenna], into the unquenchable fire ; where 
their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched. And if thine 
eye offend thee, pluck it out, ; it is better for thee to enter into life 
with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna 

| of fire ; where their worm dieth not and the:fire is not qttenched. 

For every one shall be saltéd with fire, and every sgrifice shall 
be salted with salt. Salt_is good, but—if the tost-its 


saltness, wherewith will ye season it ? Have salt. in yourselves,* 
and have peace with one another.” 


» 


STATE. 


; as they had, 
. Lord could 
lation alone 


Ixvi. 24) we 
the fire and 
, and which 
warning of 
onsider now. 
led to have 
of Gehenna, 


well as also. 


m doctrines 
em quoting 
ig 4 

1, and here 


med as the’ 


reath of the 
le (xxx. $8). 
he terms of 
‘ing deeper, 
make plain. 
in the Gos- 


tter for thee 
go into hell 
d [or rather, 
and. the fire 


it off; it is / 
two feet to 


fire ; where 
And if thine 
nter into life 
he Gehenna 
rt. qttenched. 

rifice shall 


GEHENNA. 811 


It was to be expected that annihilationists should have 
stumbled over this passage as they have. The admitted 
‘borrowing of phraseology from Isa. Ixvi. 24, and the word 
Gehenna, with thé associations which we have just been 
looking at, are taken to show that the terms used in these 
verses imply the “ utter. destruction ” (in the new sense) of 
the ungodly: 

_ Mr. Constable, appealing to the passage-in Isaiah, sgys: 
‘A moment’s glance shows us that both the worm and the 
fire are alike external to and distinct from the. subject on 
which they prey; and also, that what both prey upon are 
not the living but the dead . . These most solemn words 
of the prophet, so solemnly eildoreed by Christ, assert a 
state of eternal death and destruction, not one of eternal 
life in hell, as the destiny. of transgressors in the world to 
come.”* : 

Mr. Minton thinks it— 


* difficult to conceive of any two images the® otfr Lord could have 
put together, more hopelessly irreconcilable with the idea of 
never-ending misery, than the worm and the fire.” And he adds, 
‘Tt is contended that the worm not dying and the fire not, being 
quenched, implies the continuance of being of that on which ‘ 
they prey. . . If the worm could dié, or the fire be quenched, « - 
before they ‘had done their work upon the body, it might possi- © - 
bly be rescued or left half consumed. But if neither the ravages 
of the worm, nor the burning of* the fire, can be checked, then 
nothing can save the body which is exposed to them from com- 
plete extinction of being. If it be.asked, what becomes of the 
worm and the fire after the body is consumed ? it is gxough to | 
yp. Yeply, that we have nothing whatever to do with that. . . And 
' «I will venture to say, that no one would ever imagine the idea 
of an eternul worm to be contained in this passage, if they did 
not bring to it the assumption that it is an eternal being who 
is preyed upon by it. Without that assumption the image is as 
_ plain and simple as possible. With it you have the monstrous : 
| incongruity of an eternal worm, and of a human body which is 


tost—its 


| yourselves,* 


spain dal ere ait Rares 


and entire as if the worm had never touched it. . . Itisno re- 


* Eternal Punishment, p. 195. 


313 FACTS “AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


ply to say*that the punishment represented is not merely a of 
the body but of the soul also, or even, us some would now say, of 
the soul only. For*the figure used to represent. it is the: con- 
sumption of a body by worm and by fire ; and that figure does 
represent destruction, but does not represent eternal existence,” 
He further refers to Jer. xvii. 27: “I will kindle a fire in 
the gates thereof; and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusa- 
salem, and tt shull not be quenched,” which, he adds, “ can 


hardly mean. that Jerusalem will continue in flames te all, 


eternity,””* 
Mr. Hudson again says, ‘It is not the immortality. ifathe 
individual soul, but the multitude of those who firially jRish, 


that challenges the unquenched fire and the - ~ unfailing: 


worm.’’t 


Other writers speak very similarly, but it is not necessary , 


to repeat more of what they say just now. The first thing 
to be noted in answer to Mr. Constable is that he makes no 
difference between type and antitype ; yet it is scarcely the 
literal valley of Hinnom of ween the Lord is speaking, and 
as for Isaiah, “the carcases” which he sees a prey to the 
worm and fire are surely not those of all the wicked, who 
are only raised from the dead at the time the earth and the 
heavens flee away. ‘“Gehenna,” as we have seen, was in 
point of fact used by the Jews in our Lord’s day in this fig- 
urative way, as the Talmud has at any rate shown us. The 
typical character of millennial things also I have already 
pointed out. Consequently the carcases, fire, and worm are 
all the figures of deeper things. Does Mr. Constable even 
himself suppose that all the Lord threatens men with is 
that fire and worm should consume their carcases ? This 
would be infinitely less than extinction itself, and instead of 
‘aging the picture even of destruction, would be a picture 
merely of what would happen after they had ceased to suffer, 

ang had been in fact destroyed ! 
ut then, Mr. Minton argues, we must take the words at 


any rate as a figure or destruction, not of eternal existence. 


* Way Everlasting. pp. 50, al; 53. t Debt and Grace p. 199, 


STATE. 


& 
merely that, of 
ld now say, of 

it is the con- 
at figure does 
al existence.” 
indle a fire in 
es of Jerusa- 
e adds, “ can 


flames te all. 


rtality @f.the 
firially peish, 


he - unfailitig: 


1ot necessary , 


ve first thing 
he makes no 
scarcely the 
peaking, and 
prey to the 
wicked, who 
arth and the 
seen, was in 
iy in this fig- 
wn us. The 
iave already 
id worm are 
nstable even 
men with is 
ases ? This 
id instead of 
be a picture 
sed to suffer, 


he words at 


“existence of body and soul. 
~ and man’s body the prey, according to its present consti- 
~ tutio._the body would come to an end. 


GEHENNA. 813 


* Surely nobody contends that it is a figure of the latter. 


‘, he question is, is it consistent with eternal existence ? and 
t.at is a different thing. Now material destruction, if a 


’ fi; ure, should be a figure of something else, and not of itself. 
-, Te material should figure the spiritual : and spiritual de- 


sti tction may be, nay, is, entirely consistent with continued 
{ 
If the fire were material fire, 


If the fire be a 
figure of dive judgment, however, this will not be 80 per- 
fectly clear; and as a figure fire docs “surely speak of this. 
I have already so fully shown that the destruction of the 
sinner is in fact not annihilation, that I may be excused from 


_, going afresh.gto the proofs of this. 


The- wrquenchable fire may have been, as to the mere 
force of the phrase, unduly pressed by those against whom 
Mr. Minton contends; and I concede fully that the fire in 
the gates of Jerusalem could not be “ everlasting.” He 
must be aware, however, that “ everlasting fire” ix spoken 
of by our Lord elsewhere: if (that. is) the New Testament 
has any word for everlasting. But if he will look even at 
the passage in Isaiah once again, I think he will find reason 
to own that unquenched fire does there imply at least per- 
petuity. If “from one new moon to another, and from one’ 
Sabbath to another,” all, flesh, as they come up to worship 
before Jehovah, “go ot and look upon the carcases of 
those that have transgressed against” Him, this implies a 
perpetuity of the awful spectacle surely. And the words 
following give the reason for this: “for their worm shall 
not die, neither shall their fire be. quenched, and they shall be 
an abhorring unto all flesh.” The fire being unquenchable 
is not then given, as Mr. Minton argues, as a reason for the 
utter consumption of what it preys.upon, but on fhe other 
hand for its abiding before the eyes of all flesh Sabbath after 


Sabbath -amtimonthatter month. In the seene which Isaiah 


il existence. 


race p. 199, 


pictures it would matter little for the careases themselves, 
whether the worm died or not, or the fire were quenched or 
: XX 


Ro : 


814 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


not. Their being “ carcases”’ doomed them to destruction, 
apart from all question of worm and fire; and these are 
surely added, no¢ to bring them tu any more speedy or cer.. 
tain end, but to intensify the solemn picture of judgment, 
and their being “an abhorring unto all flesh.” 

Thas eyen as to the passage in Isaiah, Mr. Minton’s argu- 
ments are only plausible when the words he comments on 
are divorced frdm their context, and looked at as mere 
isolated expressions. Take the whole passage, and they Ve. 

- come worse than unmeaning. For worm and fire make no 
more certain the destruction of a carcase already secured by 
simple natural law ; and instead of being given as hastening 
the destruction, the undying worm,‘and unquenched fire 
give ‘assurance of the perpetuity of an awful spectacle, which 
abides indefinitely’ before the eyes of men month after 


month. ~ . 
Still more do the arguments fail when we compare them 


with the passage in the gospel: fox here the Lord is ‘plainly 
not speaking of a spectacle before the eyes of others, but .‘ 
warning those who might suffer from it themselves. In 

‘Isaiah it is “they shall yo forth and look,” from one new * 
moon and one Sabbath to another, for the fire shall not. be 
quenched. In the other case it. is in effect: /eur it,* for the 

_ fire shall not be quenched. And as~these words in Isaiah ‘ 
announce the perpetuity of the judgment, so must they do 
when trafsferred to the passage in Mark.‘ _ 

On the other hand who could call that “severest judg- 
ment which a Jewish court (even) could pass upon a crimi- 
‘nal,”—as Dr. Farrar puts it,—“ the casting forth of his un- 
buried corpse amid the fires and worms of the polluted 


r 


* Mr. Tipple, quoted approvingly by Mr. Cox, says, ‘ The flame of 
the valley of Hinnom cannot be made to represent the awful suffering . 
in store for sin ; it can only fitly represent the certain consumption of sin 
to be effected by the surpuess of the fire” (Kehacs of Spoken Words). 
They were to find the certain consumption of sin, without suffering! 

A is\ because ‘ex of Gehenna were not_lishte Satoh saint 


_ anguish! The same might be said of the burning up of chaff and all 
other figures! Cannot a figure figure anything but just itself 2 


» STATE. 


to destruction, 
and these are 
speedy or cer. 
2 of judgment; 
” 

Minton’s argu- 
e comments on 
el] at as mere 
e, and they Be. 
1 fire make no 
uly secured by 
nas hastening 
nquenched fire 
pectacle, which 
1 month after 


compare them 
ord is‘plainly 


of others, but. . 


emselves. In 
from one new * 
e shall not. be 
car it,* for the 
ords in Isaiah ° 
must they do 


severest judg- 
-upon a crimi- 
rth of his un- 
the polluted 


«The flame of 


awful suffering . 


nsumption of sin 
Spoken. Words). 
thout suffering! 


+ 


GEHENNA. 815 


> valley,” a “ purifying and corrective,” or “remedial ” retri- 


bution? None, I think, who were not under hopeless bias, 
with which reasoning becomes impossible. Nor, as far as 
the Jewish court was concerned, was it “terminable” either. 
Of course it could not hinder the resurrection of those whom 
it adjudged to this; and in.this way no human sentence 
could be eternal or irreversible; but it could represent this 
notwithstanding : for 2 final sentence, irreversible and not 
terminable by any after human one, would be the proper 
figure of irreversible and eternal judgment if divine. And 
only of such divine judgment would it be the proper figure. 
Dr. Farrar’s facts are hopelessly against his inferences. 

But the 49th verse in the passage of Mark adds some- 
thing more; and Mr. Jukes has made what use he could of 


‘it for his purpose: “Take ‘the ordinary interpretation,” he 


says, “and there is no connection between never-ending 
punishment and the law here quoted respecting salt. in sac-. 
rifice. But as spoken by our Lord the fact or law respect- 
ing the meat-offering is the reason and explanation of what 
is said respecting hell-fire——‘ for every one must be salted 
with fire, and every sacrifice must be salted with salt.’ ” 
Then after explaining the meat offering as shadowing the 
fulfilment of man’s duty towards his neighbor,* he goes on— 
‘‘The passage which we are considering begins with this, 
man’s duty to his neighbor, and the peril of offending a little ° 
one. ‘Then .comes the exhortation to sacrifice hand or foot or 
eye, lest we come into the worsé judgment, which must be known 
by those who will not judge themselves. “‘ For,’ says our Lord, 
thus giving the reason for self-judgment, ‘every man,’ whether 


he likes it or not, if he is ever to change his present form and 


rise to God, ‘must be salted with fire.’ ‘This. may be done asa 
sweet savor to God ; though even here ‘every sacrifice is salted. 
with salt,’—for even in willing sacrifice and service there is some- 
thing sharp and piercing as salt, namely, the ‘correction which 
truth brings with it to those who will: receive it, But if this be 


of chaff and all 
t itself ? 


not accepted, the purgation must yet be wrought, not as a sweet 


~* The meat-offering applies (like all other: offerings) in the first place 


’ to Christ, the Bread of Life. Is this what it signifies as to im? ~ 


\ 


e 
ny 
i) 
é i 
v. 9 
om 
y 
pa 
o 
‘ 
t 
uy) cy 
o 
. 
& g 
e 
0 
s or 
. 
e 
* e e 
’ ‘ 
x eo 


ro e 


a aS nN 


— a 


_ not in ev er ‘y sense contrasts ? 


B16 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


savor, but as a sin- sa flere, where the bodies are burnt as un- 
clean without the camp ; ‘ where their worl dieth not,.and the 
fire is not quenched’. (thg ‘worm’ alluding to the consumption 
of those parts which weré not burnt with fire) ; ‘for,’ in some 
way, ‘every one must be salted withrfire,’ even if he be not a 
sweet-savor ‘sacrifice,’ which is ‘ salted with salt.’ - But ail this, 


so far from teaching never-ending punishment, only points us 


back to the law (of sacrifice, and the means which must be used. 
to destroy sin in| the flesh, and to make us ascend ina new onde 
more spiritual form as offerings to Jehovah.” 

This is decidedly a new interpretation. Mr. Jukes throws 


~Gehenna and the passage in Isaiah of course aside, or. 


else applies them as types parallel to’ t : sin- 
offer ing !. But, here he can find no “ worm,”. ‘$0 he énvents 
one, to consume what the fire ought wholly to have burnt ! 
But we must look at this further. 

The Lord certainly says “ Gehenna.” Is this in‘any way 
connected with such a type as the sin-offering, or are ey 
- The sin®ffering was a thing “most, “holy.” -It was an. 
offering fur sin, and therefore “ without blemish,” to be a 
fit type of such an one as alone could make atonement.. 
The fat, upon the inwards was. put. upon the altar of burnt- 
offering, and thus linked with those sweet-savor offerings of 
which Mr. Jukes speaks. The blood on the lay of atone- 
ment went into the holiest, and at ordinary times was 
sprinkled before the veil, and anointed the horns of the 
golden’ altar of incense. That blood made plovement for 
the soul... 

‘Dare Mr. Jukes apply all this.to'the abhorred Gehenna 
judgment of the unholy and unclean? Dare he inciude 
under one figure the One who bare judgment suffering for 
others only, and those upon whom, because of what they 
are peronas God’s-wrath abides? Dare he connect the 
“worm” of corruption: with the type of God’s Holy One,. 
who therefore could (even as to His body) know none’ 
Will _he say that the sin-offering figures-a_ corrective judg- 


ment purifying. the victim offered ? - “Will he make the blood 


2 a 
ry 


TATE. 


burnt as un- 
not, and the 
consumption 
for,’ in some 
he be not a 
But ail this, 
ily points us 


nust be used. 
a new and 


ukes throws 


se aside or. 


sin- 
) he énvents 
have burnt ! 


} in‘any way 
or are they 


-It was an.. 


sh,” to be a 


atonement... 
ar of burnt- — 


offerings. of 


ay of atone- | 


times was 
orns of the 
peutene for 


‘ed Gehenna 


he include ~ 


suffering for 
what they 
connect the 


3 Holy One,. 


now none? 


of the’ sinner an atonement for his sins? Carry his view of 


GEHENNA. 


the matter out, and he must do all this. He may say (and 
I trust would) he has no thought of carrying it so far. But 
then the whole is one consistent type, and a type expressly 
of the putting away of sin: that is its proper force—its usc. 
If Mr. Jukesis but applying language used of the sin-offering 
to something wholly ditferent, let him say so, and then take 
scrupulous care how he does apply it. But what he saysis 
very different trom this. He says distinctly that if man will ~ 
not judge himself about sin, “the purygation must yet be — 

wrought asa sin-offering.” Now this is what in the very 
nature of it he could not be. A blemished beast could not be 
offered. And here, if I take his words in their simple force, 
the sinner becomes his own offering, his own Saviour! The 
worm and the fire point us back fo “the law of sacrifice, 
and the means which .must be used to destroy sin in the 
flesh, and to make us ascend in a new and . more aoe 
form as offerings to Jehovah!” 

“Sip in the-flesh” is just, what the | sin- offering did not, 


and could not, typify, but thé very opposite, a Holy One 


bearing sin not His own. “And therefore, while the’ fire 
had its place, for the wrath:of God Christ bore for us; the 


“worm,” bred of corruption, could not possibly enter into 


such a figure. In Gehenna there are both: the torment of 


God’s wrath upon sin, but the torment also bred of the cor- 


ruption within. The two things are essentially and wholly 
distinct. Even as to the body God’s Holy One could not 
see corruption: and these are types, whose significance and 
power become more and more realized the more we consider 
them. - Gehenna judgment and the sin-offering are in their 
nature opposed. 

“Every one must be salted with fire,’* the Lord says. 


ES ee se A peers ee a! ete 2 nate 


* Morris and Codwy prefer another rendering: “ But the word 
‘pas’ in the Greek may mean every one person or every one thing, and 
the word for fire is in the dative, pur7¢ ; and the real force of the pas- 


ke the blood 


sage is this: ‘For every one shall be salted To or For the fire (that is, 


iy 


318 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. | 


Mr. Jukes adds, “if he is ever to change his present form and 
rise to God,” and thus assumes his whole ground. There 
is nothing of this expressed or implied in the passige. 
“Every one must be salted with fire; and every sacrifice 
must be salted with salt.” Here aaine with fire and with 
salt are distinguished. Salting is the figure of preservation. 
_“Salt,” which, as the Lord says, “ is good, ” and always has 
a good meaning in Scripture, is the figure of that energy of 
holiness which preserves for God by keeping out corruption. 
But salting with fire is a widely different thing from salting - 
with salt, fire being as always the figure of divine judgment. 
Now everyone (it is quite unlimited) shall be salted with 

jire—even the saint, for he needs the discipline of it, and it 
is for his preservation as such, and salvation (comp. 1 Pet. 
iv. 17, 18). But the ungodly will have it after another sort. 
To them it will be “ unquenchable” fire, because of evil ever 
needing to be kept downi repression by judgment, where 
judgment alone will avail. The Lord adds, “And every 
sacrifice shall be salted with salt.” There is the point of 
transition, at which he begins to speak of the saint alone. 

‘ Mr. Roberts finally has still another sense : he says: 

‘‘The meaning of Christ’s words is made perfectly plain by 

Paul when he says (1 Cor. iii. 13415), ‘The fire shall try every. 
man’s work of what sort it is, and iXgny man’s work be burnt hé 
shall suffer loss ; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.’ 
Through this fire of judgijent every man and all his works will 
pass, and this fact gives the strongest point to Christ’s exhorta- 


tion ; but the action of the judgment-fire is only preservative on © 


certain kinds of men and work. The judgment justifies and 
- makes such incorruptible ; the others are destroyed.” 


of the altar), even every sacrifits shall be salted, with salt "(What is 
Man ? p. 98). ‘ ny ie 
There is no ground for this: 7a, standing dione as here, can only 
mean “every person,” and the word “salt” is just as much in the 
dative (Ai) as “ fire” is, so that. there is as much ground for saying 
“salted ro or For the salt.” Put without article as here, wvpz and aAi © 


mrtg frerof etree amc setae with-fire~ 
“ salted with salt.” 


‘ATE. » 

mt form and 
ind. There 
he passage. 
ery sacrifice 
ire and with 
preservation. 
| always has 
it. energy of 
, corruption. 


from salting -- 


ie judgment. 
. salted with 
of it, and it 


comp. 1 Pet. - 


ynother sort. 
> of evil ever 
ment, where 
‘And every 
he point of 
int alone. 

@ Says: 

ctly plain by 
iall try every. 
k be burnt hé 
so as by fire.’ 


his works will © 


rist’s exhorta- 


reservative on 


justifies and 


me) 
° 


salt (What is 


here, can only 
s much in the 
und for saying 
,wupi and adi © 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. _ 319 


Thisis fatal false doctrine. Mr. Roberts does not yet see 
that if a man comes into judgment, judgment can never justify 
him: “Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, 
for in Thy sight shall no flesh living be justified.” How 
could a man, if judged according to his works, have his work | 
burnt up and yet himself be saved, as the text he quotes 
says? Plainly he could not. The man ig saved because 
building on the foundation,—on Christ,—and not because 
of what he builds, which is burnt up; he is saved not “ by 
fire,” but “ through the fire,” and in spite of it. But, this 
question of judgment we have already sufficiently examined. 

We must pass on now to other testimony of the word as 
to the final judgment. 


CHAPTER XXXII 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS.—1 : 
‘ Nc 


AT the very mention of *Revelation there is a well-nigh 
unanimous exclamation. The cause is believed almost con- 
fessedty hopeless that appeals to this book of symbols for its 
support. It is principally, of course, with reference to it 
that Canon Farrar enters his vigorous protest against “ the 
tyrannous realism of ambiguous metaphors,” and he is only 
giving fresh utterance to protests that have been again and 
again put forth by writers and speakers of every grade of 
orthodoxy or its opposite, in every case perhaps in which it 
ever was appealed to. In this regard the minds of many, 
who otherwise listen with reverence to the word of God, are 
under a cloud of unbelief which forbids their seeing some 
of the very plainest things that were. ever written. While 
we look then particularly at these Apocalyptic visions, let us 
remember for our encouragement, that the title of the book 
is “the Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave to Him 


Hted-with fire,” 


to show unto His servants things which must shortly come 


320 FACTS AND’ THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. - 


to pass;” and that He has- added, “ Blessed is he that read- 
eth and they that hear the words of the book of this 
prophecy, and keep the things that are written therein.” 
- | Plainly we have nowhere else in Scripture the full and : 
orderly detail of “ last things ” which we ‘have in this one. 
- book of New Testament prophecy, -the priceless gift of a 
__ _ love so, little. realized, for which we have-been g0_ little 
- thankful’ Nowhere. are eternal things so vividly pictured 
to us, “the city which’ hath foundations.” on the one side, 
the awful solemnity of the “lake of fire” upon the other. 
Glad would Satan be to withdraw from us the joys which 
beckon us forward in it, the judgments which warn men to 
accept the grace that. now beseeches.. ‘Has God written it 
“- go badly-as to be unintelligible? Are the metaphors am- 
biguous ? , Shall we not at least look into it earnestly and - 
reverently, before we thus dishonor the blessed Master and 


Bas 


\ Lord who calls it His “ Revelation” ? 


ae . : : 
e have already traced the outline of the 19th: chapter, - 
and hay¢ seen how, after the marriage of the Lamb in heaven, 
the arm es there, clothed in the fine linen, clean and’ white, 
which is the righteousness: of saints, follow the white-horsed * 
Leader to the judgment of the earth- The beast, the false 
prophet, and the kings of the earth with their armies, are the _ 
objects of the Judgment. The’ mass are slain with the 
~. swofd, two being exempted from this to share a special 
doom, being “cast alive intoa lake of fire burning with brim- 
“stone.” ‘ ete: 
The ‘next chapter shows us Satan bound and shut up in 
-the bottomless pit a thousayd years, while for the same time 
Christ and his saints réign toxether, the wicked dead not yet 
being raised. Shee ee y, Oa ae 
At the end of the thousand years Satan is loosed out of 
his prison, and after having deceived the nations, and thé 
| judgment of God overtaking his follqweys, he is again taken, 
amd-this time-east-inte the lake of find. Theré we are told 


: ‘ EN © ; ar 
expressly, a. thousand’ and more years after they have been 


s » ve . 
B at ets ’ fee 


TATE.” 


he that read- 
book of this 
therein.” 


the full and ~ 
> in this one. 


ess gift of a 
een 80 _ little 
idly pictured 
he one side, 
n the other. 
e joys which 
warn men to 
od written it 
etaphors am- 


earnestly and - 


| Master and 


19th: chapt er, * 


mb in heaven, 
in and’ white, 


white-horsed ° 


ast,.the false 


rmies, are the _ 


ain with the 
are a special 
ng with brim- 


nd shut: up in 


he same time 


dead not yet 


oosed out of 
ions, and thé 
s again taken, 
8 we are told 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 821 


cast in, “ the beast and the false prophet are,” and it is added 
of them,'‘and they shall be tormented day and night unto 


the ages of ages” (ver. 10)! 


Now, if the lake of fire be extinction, how is it that two 
men remain in it a thousand years unannihilated, and that . 


~ then we.are told they are to be further tormented for eter- 
nity? The expression is “unto the ages of ages,” one of. 


the strongest expressions ever used for eternity, as we have 
seen; and, if it were not so, as far as annihilationism is ¢on- 
cerned, the use of such language would at all events pre- . 


‘elude the possibility of reasoning, as this class of writers love 
' todo, from the nature of fire, and the present constitution of 
human bodies, that it must imply the total consumption of 


those condemned to it. For if a man could live there a 


‘thousand years, why not ever so many thousand ? if’ for 


ages of ages, why not for a proper eternity ? 
Details we are not now attempting, but only seeking to 


- get hold in the.first plaee of the general outline of what. is 
here presented, and presented with abundant plainness. It 


is not from any peculiar: difficulty in these chapters indeed,. 


that. people stumble at them, but ‘simply because they do 


not harmonize with the views they have elsewhere learned. 


But the plainest reading of these Scriptures is what. is in 


most real harmony with all others. We have assured our- . 
selves of this in part already. We. may yet find equal as- 
surance as to all here presented. 

Man, ungaved man, then, here sharés-the destiny appointed 
for the devil and his ‘angels. That destiny 1 is “ everlasting. 
punishment ” in “ everlasting fire.” Quite’true, we have not 


_. ag yet seen all the unsaved. sharing it. But shat this twen- 


——— ot ae ies 


4 ae ae ” ig not in the original, but enaly implied | there. The 


word they ” is also oniitted i in the common version from the next part 
of the verse, which runs, “ and shall be tormented.”. The difference . 


. between this and. what I have given is, that the or dinary translation . 
seems to confine the torment to the beast and false prophet, inl mine 


includes the devil in it. The Greek is capable of either, | but thé siss 


ey have been’ 


nection calls for the sense-given. . ve 


322 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE’ STATE. 


tieth chapter gives: “ And whosoever was not found written 
in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire. ” This is 
‘spoken of the dead, standing i in ‘mass before, the great white 
throne. wd a 
Into this lake of fire “death and hell,” or hades, are also 
said to be cast; and people claim in this case (and many un- 
thinkingly, too, concede) that this must at least as to them - 
mean thei’ coming to an end.” It does not do this‘at all, as ~ 
we may sec, on looking more closely at the words. “ And 
the sea-gave up the dead which were in it, and death and “ 
hell (hades) delivered up the dead which were in them, and 
they were judged every man according to ae works.” 
Thus death and‘ hell were emptied {it is ““ hades ”’ as weshave 
‘seen) and emptied of inhabitants, who, standing before God — 
to be judged on the ground of their natural responsibility, 
“according to their works;” come forth only to hopeless 
Sondenmation Long. before have the saints ceased to. be 
tenants in hades. Nor does Scripture seem to speak of 
death for the saints living during the’niillennium:* The 
result would be that, as none but the “ blessed” have part 
in the first resurrection, so none but the wicked have part in 
the second. It is the resurrection of judgment. And it is 
thus, as figuratively presenting their inhabitants, that death 
and hades are cast into. the lake of fire.t It is immediately 7 
added, as if to show that the people are intended, “ This is 
the second death :” of course, not of death or of hell, but - 
ieee represented by them. And I press it again, that ’ 
e second death: is the lake of fire; not. extinction, for if | 
ae has been no first extinction, there CAN be no second, | 
Yet so the first death (death,.as we ordinarily call it) comes 
.to an end. The last enemy is destroyed. The second 
death is deathless, and yet the “ages for ages” for most 
lave but just. begun. ‘ 
us ~* Comp. Isa. Ixv. 20: Pee as ee 
{ See Isa. xiv. 9 for a similar putting of “hell ” (sheel) for.its inhab- . 
itants.’ It is the constant thing when speaking of Cities : “0 Jerusalem, 


that killest the prophets,” et 


” 


r. 
v . 


STATE. :: 


mee Ne m. 
found written 


fire.” This is 

le great white 
> 

ades, are also 

(and many un- 


ast as to them - 
this ‘at all, as ~ 


rords, 


“ And 


ind death and. 


e in them, and 
their works.” 
s’”’ as weshave 


ig before God 


responsibility, 
y to hopeless 


; ceased to. be’ 


a to speak of 


mnium:* The = 


2d” have part 
d have part in 
nt. And it is 
its, that death 


is immediately - 


ided, “ This \is 


or of hell, but © 
it again, that © 


‘inction, for if 
if 


be no second. . 


call it) comes 
The second 
res” for most 


ws an ee 


SS clna i 
201) for.its inhab- . 


: “ O Jerusalem, 


‘which thé beast and the Aalse prophet w 


‘~where he is evidently not. sure/of his ground.. The 
- of Satan. he admits-to.be torment forever and ever, an 


‘ THE: APOCALYPTIC sVISIONS. | 323. 


, ne) eee 
It ‘would seem that all tifis was clear, simple and conclu- 
sive. The metaphors are not ambigepus, and_ their “ tyran- 
nous. realism” amounts only to this; ‘that they'are in’ fact 
very positive in what they represent, because go clear. We 
shall have, however, to consi | 
commensurate with their importance, the ¢ mments of those 


who read ‘them differently, and in so doing |we shall learn 


the force of them still better, and find what ambiguity there 


is in them, if any. 4 : 

As they have usually preceded, we may give precedence 
still to the advocates of’ « conditional’ immortality,” and» 
then listen to Dr. Farrar and the restor tionist school. 

We may begin with Mr. Dobney. He says on Rev. xx. 
9, 10:— a 

“On the present text I submit—(i, 
affirms that the devil shall bo tormented forey 
whatever be the legitimate meaning concér 
not inquire) no one disputes, [I] At dlt ev 
to embarrass my present subject 


r and ever; which’ 
ing which we need 
ents, Iam not disposed — 
ith any/inquiry into the fate 


-. of fallen angels. . What I have u dertaken is sufficient. And sO 
is text says nothing at all about 


T simply remind my reader that 1 
sinners of the human race. ./. (ii.) Whatever this lake of fire | 
may really symbolize, it isebefore the great ‘day of judgment that / 
the devil is represented as Cast into it, /It is moreover that into, 

ere previously-cgst, long 
before the final close of human history; 


prophet are not individual and historical persons really." They 
are symbolic persons. 


Many expositors. tell usthat they symbolize 
a system, which is to come to an utter end, rather than partic lar 
individuals.” Jf so, the idea of torment is not to be ete 
derstood But this I wai va galtogether,”* pee ated 


Mr. Dobney is careful not to.commit himself too much, 


oom 
| dogs 
the doctrine of annihilation by 


not want to “embarrass ” 
considering it. 


“destroyed,” and if that, may 
SS See are 


der, with a care in some degree , 


of the writer simply — 


Now the beast and false , _ 


ogee 


i 


No wonder, because Satan himself jis to be. | 


= ee cr es eg ee ; 
* Script. Doctrine, pp.'229, 230, | 


9 


394 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


it woul “ embarrass ” an annihilationist. “ But then man is 
to share Satan’s doom: how can Mr. Dobney refuse to con- 
sider this then ? 

” Again, (ii.) no men are,concerned jn this judgment. The 
beast/and false prophet are personifications and not persons. .. 
At least “many expositors” tell us so, and Mr. Dobney 
will/ accept their judgment upon a point so immaterial as. 
thig! Why, Mr. Dobney, not “ many” but the mass of ex- 
pogitors tell us that eternal torment is the portion of men 
algo. Are you satisfied to abide by this ? Surely not, if I 
can believe your book. Why are you more credulous 
here ? | 

It seems to be immaterial whether or'not two men are 
here said to be tormented with the devil forever and ever! 
But Mr. Dobney prefers to believe that the personal devil 
shares the lake of fire with two symbols, and is literally ‘tor- 
mented, while they are figuratively tormented in the selt- 
same fire! Surely Mr. Dobney cannot blame us if we read 

the facts the other way. We should argue that, if the 
devil be a real person, and thé torment real for him, his 
associates must be as real persons and as real sufferers. 
But he does not tell us what these “symbols” mean, and . 
we must wait till another does, before we examine this. 

He dwells more at large upon ver. 11-15 :— 


‘‘ Orthodoxy. ingeniously connects this 15th verse with the one 
we have just considered, and pronounces thus :—‘ The lake of | 
fire is the symbol of the torment the devil shall*undergo. . This - 
‘torment is to be day and night forever and ever. Into this - 
lake the wicked are to be cast. Therefore they also are to be 
tormented forever and ever therein.’ ” 


To this he objects:— 


- (i,) The inference is not a necessary one. Because in. the 
lake of fire the devil shall be tormented forever, it does not neces- 
sarily follow that quite another race of intelligences, cast into the 
__same luke, must therefore exist as long as he does, and endure 


: the same torment. If the orthodox use it, it proves too much: . 
for them. . . they musé affirm that all men, even the least.guilty, 


TATE. 


then man is 
fuse to con- 


ment. The 


not persons. 


{r. Dobney 


amaterial as. 


mass of ex- 
tion of men 
ely not, if I 
e credulous 


WO men are 
or and ever! 
rsonal devil 
literally ‘tor- 
in the selt- 
is if we read 
that, if the 
for him, his 
al sufferers. 


” mean, and . 


ine this. 


with the one 


‘The lake of . 
dergo.. This - 
r. Into this - 


iso are to be 


cause in. the 
oes not neces- 
, cast into the 
s, and endure 


: mE, APOCALYPTIC VISIONS, 825 


will endure precisely, the same tornient as the devil’ himself, see- 
ing that the least: guilty of the lost are cast into- precisely tho 


sume fire us the devil. If they shrink from this. . . they surren- 


der the entire case. If it may produce different offcts, it may 
torment the one and destroy the other.” ° 

This is somewhat more like eee But to it I an- 
swer :— - ¥ 

Mr. Dobney is not ae all the faots of the case. {We 
have seen that death is forever gone when the lake of fire 
(for most) begins; and that “the second death is the lake 
of fire.” If we are to learn in any way therefore what the 
lake of fire is, we look back pf course to the prior account. 
We find two men—we must take them as such, till they 


‘show us otherwise—a thousand years in it alive, and then 


‘the devil sentenced with these to eternal torment in it. We 
argue, necessarily, this is no repetition of the first death; nor 
could it be,:for the first death is over, and not existing still 
under another game. If the second death is the lake of 
fire, extinction of being the ‘lake of fire is not. Can any one 
show us the fallacy of such a conclusion? | 

But, says Mr. Dobney, every one must suffer 4hen “ pre- 
cisely the same torment as the devil himself.” There is not 


- the least reason for that; for if the lake of fire mean tor- 


ment forever and ever, all may suffer that, and yet in almost 
infinitely different degrees. ‘They were judged every 


_ man according to their works.” 


Mr. Dobney is thinking and arguing really about material 
fire. In a material fire for eternity it would be natural to 
say ‘all would suffer alike—the degrees could not at least be 
very far removed. But then how could the devil suffer in 


material fire? Doubtless it is a figure and to be explained 


by the use of such a figure elsewhere. It ig indeed the true 
ignis sapiens, the discriminative wrath of®od which must 


be the portion of all the impenitent, yet not alike to each.2.~ 


The Lord has Himself taught us to speak of stripes, few or 


ves too much: . 


e least guilty, 


many, of judgment greater or less. 
As to even material fire and its effect, it ia not conceded 


d 


326 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


that the devil is in swch sense of “ quite another race of in- 
telligences,” as to be less susceptible to its action than the 
spirit of man: while‘as to his resurrection body, we can 
argue nothing, for we know nothing about it. But material 
fire we may be sure is not meant, as these very consider- 
ations show. \ 
Mr. Dobney’s second objection is :— 
_ ,“ (ii.) The inference is not a fair one. . . What does the being 


‘east into the lake of fire mean, in v. 14? It. denotes the utter 


ceasing to be of death and hades. There isto be no more death. 
And this plain fact is poetically set forth by the striking image 
of death cast into a lake of fire; fire being the acknowledged 
symbel of the prophets for destruction. So ‘ death, the last 
enemy, is to be destroyed.’ Thisis the undisputed sense of v. 14. 
When then, in the very next verse, sinners are represented as 
cast into the lake of fire, is it not obvious and legitimate to re- 
tain the sense necessarily ‘attached to the symbol of fire in the 
verse before, -rather than to overlook the near and go back to the 
remote passage?” — . an : 
This objection has*been already met. It is strange how 


little Mr. Dobney can see the fallacy of. an argument which 


asserts death to be destroyed ‘when cast into the lake of 


ee fire, and yet that death is to reign still in that very place! 


M 


It is quite true that: death is in fuct destroyed in that very 
way. Not as if the fire destroyed it, but its prisoners being 
given up finally, and cast into the lake of fire, death - exists 
no more; but that is not what casting into the fire asa 
symbol means. | . 

Mr. Dobney reinforces his argument by reference to the 


book of life, and the threat of being blotted out of it. This, 


too, we have looked at, and need not return to it. 
Mr..-Hudson’s main argumept* also turns upon death 

and hades being cast into the lake of fire, and he says that 

if Satan, the beast, and the false prophet are immortal in 


it, by parity of reasoning death and hades ought to,be. 


“Death and “hades, symbolicat personages, are supposed to 


a oe 


* Debt and Grace, p. 213. 


ATE. 


race of in- 
yn than the 
ly, we can 
ut material 
ry consider- 


yes the being 
tes the utter 
more death. 
riking image 
cknowledged 
ath, the last 
nse of v. 14. 
presented as 
itimate to re- 
of fire in the 
» back to the 


strange how 
ment which 
the lake of 
very. place ! 
in that very 
soners being 
death - exists 
the fire as a 


rence to the 


it. 
upon death 
he says that 
immortal in 


of it. This,* 


” 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 827 


cease from being; while their subjects,‘ the dead’... . are 
supposed to be immortal! Who does not see (he asks) that 
hades and -thanatos are only other names for the dead ?” , 
That is what I believe and contend for, and that the pas- 
sage docs not represent their ceasing to exist at all. It is © 
quite true they do so, but that is inference only, although a 
sound one; for if all who make them up are gone from 
them, they are, of course, gone too. But if death be gone 
atthe beginning of those ages of ages for which the tor- 
ment of the lake of fire lasts, how can its subjects ever 
“die”? ve 

Mr. Hudson also regards the beast and false, prophet as 


symbols of systems, and that they must come to an end e 


with those who are their worshipperspbut this again “is not 
proved but taken for granted. If they are systems, come 
to an end for lack of supporters, how are they tormented 
for the ages of ages? “This might be said,” he answers, 
“of the beast and the false prophet as impersonations, 
henceforth without power or “worshippers.” Death might 


- indeed symbolize that, but it is the very thing they dv not- 
“suffer. They are cast “alive” into the lake of fire, ae 
Oo 


main alive a thousand years, and ‘still to be tormented 

forever and ever. How can there be Jie in systems with- 
out power or worshippers forever? Mr. Hudson does not 
even himself believe it, for he adds, “ But we think the lan- 


- guage describes their utter and irrevocable destruction in a 


dramatic form,” and he compares ‘it to Isa. xiv. 9-12: that 
is, the welcome given by the dead to the dead: king of 
Babylon! : | eS woes 

As he gives no reason further than this, we have not 
much to answer. As to, Satan himself Ae answ&s the ques- 
tion, “Is he mortal?” by saying, “tHe prophecies all look 


_ that way.” He produces but two, however: one, “ that; the 


seed of the Womag shall crush the head ‘of the serpent; ” the 


4 


‘. 


other, Dan, vii, 19! His proofs-are perfectly conclusive 
as to the untenableness of his position. 


328 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


As to the second death,” Mr. Hudson quotes various 
rabbinical statements to show that for the rabbis the phrase 
meant. annihilation. If so, it would only show that Scrip- 
ture in the most decisive way reverses their judgment. 

We will now look at Mr. Morris’ view, and shall give it 
in his own words :f° 


‘A two-fold destiny awaits the devil—the one, political, and 
the other, personal . . . the dramatic representation of the per- 
sonal policy and Scheme of Satan is that of ‘a great red dragon’ 
(Rev. xii. 1-8). In the doom of his policy, his person and the 
persons of his host are involved. But it is the personal policy of 
Satan that the ‘ great red dragon’ more’ especially represents. 
And it is the great red dragon that is caught, and chained, and 
cast into the abyss, and is imprisoned there a thousand years, 
and is then let lodse, and is afterwards cast into the lake of. fire. 
The policy of Satan as we have just remarked, involves his person ; 
and go the doom. of his policy involves his personal doom: But 
it is the political doom of the devil, or the devil as politieally con- 
sidered, that is intended, and is dramatically described when it.is 
said, ‘And the devil that deccived them (the nations) was cast 
into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false 
prophet are, and ‘THEY shall be tormented day and night forever 
and ever.’ The passive verb in the original, basanistheesontai, is 
a plural verb, and so requires to be read, ‘and Tuey shall -be tor- 
mented,’ Or, as divested of the dramatic dress,’ ‘ and they shall be 
PUT. TO ‘THE PROOF unto the ages of the ages.’ That trinity of, 
evil, called the dragon and the beast and the false prophet, shall... 
be together involved in the same final doom.” 

In a note he adds, 

_ «The dramatic force and design of this plural verb, basanis- 

‘theesontai, is not—they shall be tortured, as some men count tor- 
ture. As we have noticed before : That the the verb basanizo, _ 
and the. ‘noun basanismos, are derived from basanos, the name — 
of a stone found in Lydia, i in Asia Minor, by which gold was tried 
—a touch-stone. From the literal meaning of basanos came the 
metaphorical use of basanismos—that which tests or puts to the 
sitor—both ancient and 


modern—both secular and ecclesiastical—this word and its verbs 
* Debt and Grace, p. 178. + What is Man, p. 120, ete. 


ATE. 


tes various 
} the phrase 
that Scrip- 
ment. 

hall give it 


jolitical, and 
of the per- 
red dragon’ 
son and the 
mal policy of 
7 represents. 
chained, and 
usand years, 
lake of fire. 
s his person ; 
doom, But 
litieally con- 
ed when it. is 
ms) was cast 
and the false 
right forever 
stheesontai, is 
shall -be tor- 
they shall be 
at trinity of; 


rophet, shall... 


yerb, basanis- 
en count tor- 
erb basanizo, 


10s, the name 


zold was tried 
wos came the 
or puts to the 
. ancient and 


THE APOUALYPTIC VISIONS. 829 


- cane to mean forture, and torturing to elicit evidence, to extort a 
confession. But even in this thero was an end proposed to be 
_ obtained by means of the torture, and so an end to the torture 
» itself. The torment inflicted was, professedly at least, 2 means to 
/ an end, and not for the mere sake of tormenting. . . ». In 
{ common discourse, the word basanismos and its verbs came to 
‘~-repmiesent the ideas of painful toil and great bodily affection . . . 
aud.the infliction of torture. But busanismos and its verbs always 
retain their radical meaning when used in relation to 
prudence and penal administration of God. The fe 
called ‘Babylon the great,’ and the masculine symbols called 
‘the beast’ and ‘the false prophet,’ are said to be tormented ; 
that is, the systems of ecclesiastical ‘amd of Secular and moral 
polity and power, which these symijols represent, shall be tested 
and put to thé proof.” | 


Thus far Mr. Morris. 


@ 


the juris- 
minine symbol 


We have all these words in the 
: New Testament. Bacavos three times, Matt. iv. 24; Luke ‘ 
’ xvi, 23, 28, always given as “ torment ;” Bacavi6yos simi-~ 
larly “torment” five times, Rev. ix. 5; xiv. 11; xviii. 7, 
10, 15; Basariorys once, Matt. xviii. 34, “ tormentors ; ” 
Bacar2Ec, once rendered “ tossed,” Matt. xiv. 24; once “ toil- 
ing,” Mark vi. 48; once“ vexed,” 2 Pet. ii. 8;-once “ pained,” 
Rev. xii. 2; and the other eight times “ torment,” Matt. viii. 
6,29; Mark v. 7: Luke viii. 28; Rev. ix. 5; xi. 10; xiy, 
10; xx. 10. | : era er 
Mr. Morris’ canon of interpretation is a very simple ‘otie; © 
These words, so uniformly rendered,hy some word expres- 
sive of suffering and pain, may bé' allowed to retain that 
meaning in every case where the ‘penal ‘administration ‘of 
God is not in question, that. is, wherever the, theories of 
annihilationists do. not require it otherwise, hut sthere we 
must absolutely exclude the- idea of torment! ‘it’ must be 


“put to the proo ” in-all such cases. * : ‘ oe : 
In vain we ask, is there another instatice/which Fa quires 
or would allow this rendering in the New Téstament 2. Mr. 


Y 


and its verbs 
120, ete. 


suOttis is sufficient authority evidently in tHe matter, for he 
cendescends to give no other; nor even to reason about it. 
- But he is somewhat unfortunate nevertheless, For in the 


830 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


very text in question the canon strangely fails. “ Divested 
of the: dramatic dress,” he says, the passage reads: “and — 
they shall be PUT TO THE PROOF unto the ages of the ages.” 
“That trinity of evil,” is his own comment upon it, “called 
- the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet, shall be together 
"involved in the same final doom.” = 

That is, these three, two of them symbols, are “ doomed” 
to be put to the proof (without torture) in a lake of fire om 
brimstone forever. The end of the “putting” to proof” m° 
never to come! Fo his putting to the proof, is to “ elicit 
. evidence”! The sige trial is to go on forever, and come 
ono result! _ 

But this is not what Mr. “Morris. means. Possibly not. 
It is only what he says. They are tested forever. The -fité- 5 
and brimstone, tod, are of course “dramatic,” and itis only 
the devil’s political doom, as personally he is to be destroy, yed ! 
_zPerhaps.that- makes it plainer. If not, it is pretty certain 
to bewilder, which is apparently the next best thing. 

But Mr. Morris comes at last to the question for which 
we have been waiting, “who or what are the beast and the 
false prophet?” And'he answers: “They are symbol of 
governmental and of moral polity and power.” “The beast 
is a composite symbol of thésecular polity and power of the 
Roman world in the last Stage of its history.” ‘‘ He ascend- 
eth out of the abyss, and*he ‘ goeth into perdition,—cis apo- 
leian, that is, unto destruction—final and eternal destruc- 

tion; but he is first to be put to the proof, Z 
ee ‘The false prophet,’ ” he goes on, ‘‘ is in the first instance, 
, called ‘another beast,’ which is represented as coming up out of 

the earth.” He ‘‘is the symbol of the moral polity and power 
- of the Roman world in the last stage of its ‘history. It will be 
accredited of Satan, who will display in it most marvellous powers 
_—miraculous powers, in imitation of the powers of the Holy 
’ Ghost... . This second beast is first called the ‘false prophet’ in 
Rev. xvi. 13, and he is 80 called because the moral ‘polity which 


is thus described will claim to be the mature result of manly 
wisdom. 


‘In Dan..vii. 11, the destiny of the Roman beast is spoken of 


‘. 


‘ATE. 


at Divested 


eads: “and ~ 


f the ages.” 
n it, “ called 
be together 


_“ doomed” 
e of fire and 
to proof” is 
is to “‘ elicit 
r, and come 


Possibly pot. 
r. The -fite- 


nd it is only” 6 


e destroyed ! 
retty certain 
hing. 
yn for which 
east and the 
» symbols of 
“The beast 
power of the 
‘< Te ascend- 
yn, —els apo- 
mal destruc- 


frst instance, 
ing up out of 
ty and power 
y. It will be 
vellous powers 
} of the Holy 
@ prophet, in 
“polity which 
ult of manly 


Bane’ 


ar 


= : : * 
ik : 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. _/ 331 


_ thus: ‘TI beheld till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, 


and given to the burning flame.’. . . But here in Rev. xix. 20, an 
additional truth is supplied. . . John saw the beast and the false 
prophet cast alive into the lake of fire, and they are represented 
as being still there and alive at the end of the thousand years, 
when Satan is let loose out of his prison. And this is intended 


to teach. . . that during and throughout the thousand years, it ~ . 


shall be left as an open question, as to whether those' same sys- 
tems of secular and moral power will ever be able to rise up again . 


_and be re-established upon the earth. . and so the beast and 


false prophet are represented as alive in an open pool, or lake of 
fire burning with brinistone upon the surface of the earth and in 
view of all. And when Satan is let loose the great experiment is 
tried. . . . Instead of an escape and a re-establishment on the 
part of the beast and false ptophet, by the assistance of the devil, 
he himself is cast into the same lake of fire with them, and to 
share their doom: and it shall not any longer be an open ques- 
‘ion a8 to whether moral evil will reappear and become ram- 
pant on the earth, or in any department of the universe of 
God.” 9 sige 

The great question which concerns us here, and on ac- 
count of which I have quoted so much from wr. Morris, is, 
are the beast and false prophet men, or are they simply 
systems or politics as he represents it ? I shall attempt no 
interpretation of the prophecy, save so far as it is needed for 
the purpose of definitely settling this; and it may be defi- 
nitely settled, for God’s metaphors are not ambiguous, and 
scarcely so hard‘to read as Mr. Morris’ interpretations. 

The. book of Daniel conclusively settles that the seven- 
headed, ten-horned “beast”. of Revelation is the Roman . 
empire, as Mr. Morris states it, although in a somewhat 


“at 


different form. In Rev. xvii. 11, however, there is.a feature 


of the case which seems to have escaped him, for there the 
beast is identified with his own eighth head. Now “the 
seven heads are seven Kings.” The imperial beast of Reve- 
lation is thus stated to be the Just king, for in his day it 
“ goes into perdition.” | 

In Daniel, at_ the commencement of the i i 


+ is spoken of 


‘. 


of which Rome is the last, we find a statement very similar to 


that in Revelation. 


fs as . 
] ’ 


/ b y gy - 
332 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A sie rice. 


tn Nebuchadnezzar’s dream the head of 
the image is of fine gold, and typifies the Babylonian power : 
but Daniel applies jit personally to Nebuchadnezzar himself: 
“ Thou art this head of gold.” This double identification of 
the golden head may help us to understand that as in the days 


- of Babylon one’ man represented in fact the ‘empire, 80 it 


will be in the time of the fulfilment,of Rev. xvii. 11. One 
man will. eae the empire for God; and of this as to the 
last beast intimation at .least is given in the book of 
Daniel also!) © 2323 = S , 

x T beheld then,” says the prophet, ‘“ because of the voice 
‘of the great words which the horn spake, beheld even till — 
the beast was slain.” The beast. is judged for the words of 
the horh: beast and horn are one as to responsibility before 


* God. /Now a “horn” too is a“ king” (Rev. xvii. 12); and 
e « 5 : ? 


here even in Daniel is. one morally so identified with the 
beast as fo draw’ down the judgment of God upon.it. 
More than this, when we look at. the picture in the Old 
Téstament we find this horn to be an eleventh horn, feeble 
: its beginnings, but rising to superiority over the rest at 
ast. In Revelation this eleventh horn, so all important in 
‘Daniel, does not appear at all; but thera is an eighth head 
/ of the beast in Revelation, which on the other hand dit not 
appear in Daniel, and which is in its place identified with the 
. east. Who can resist the conviction that these two (both 
kings”) are really one ? ; uae 
| But the great words of the horn bring down judgment. 
(, upon the beas: : and.this assures us still more of the horn’s 
personality. For a~ polity” is not a responsible agent, for 
that we must have a living being. Nor could we think of 
- ten polities, of which an eleventh subdued three, as is said 
of the “horn; ” whereas, if a real king be intended, nothing 
is more natural. Now, a king is the. interpretation both of 
“horn” and “ head,”and this onght to he simple enough not 
to need ahother igterpretation to explain it to us. The 


simplest is the best. 
The a “worshipped ” too by all that dwell on earth, 


BI) 
e 


head of 
) power; 
himself: 
‘ation of 
the days 
ire, so it 
11. One 
as to the 
book of 


the voice 


even till — 


words of 
ity before 
12); and 
with the 
Ate. 
1 the Old 
rn, feeble 
ie. rest at 
ortant in 
ghth head 
id dict not 
with the 
two (both 


judgment 
the horn’s 
agent, for 
> think of 
as is said 
d, nothing 
m hoth of 
enon gh not. 


» us. The 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 333. 


and the number of the beast is the dumber of a man. He 
is found, when. Christ comes, with the kings of the earth, 
(literal kings, as Isa. xxiv. 21, assures us), heading their oppo- 


‘sition, and receives signal, awful judgment as the head of it. 


. That judgment we shall look at directly ; but first as to the 
“false prophet.” Apart from all interpretation he is mani- 


festly the same as the second beast of the 13th chapter, as 


again Mr. Morris truly says. His character and time and © 
end couple him unmistakably also with the “ man of sin” in : 
Thessalonians, anggemo, however much he too may repre- — 
sent a “ polity,” hae iy yet (or should be so) a man. 

A “false prophet ” hardly even can represent: a polity; 
save as it represents one who may be identified with it. 
His miracles are Elias-like : he makes fire come down from -~ 
heaven in the sight of men;,he exercises all the power of 
the first beast in his presence; he gives breath to an image 


of the beast; he causes all to receive the latter’s mark. 


Why and upon what warrant we should believe that this is 


‘not @ personal ‘agent, who can tell us? And when we find 


such an one waited with the beast.and kings of the earth in 
opposition toWhe Lord and cast alive with the beast into 
the lake of fire into which first Satan and afterward all the 
wicked are cast, and suffering torment there for ages and 
ages, why should we allow the dreams of men, who ‘seem 
only to know how to darken daylight itself, turn us from or 
make us hesitate in the assured belief, that these two are 
men, and nothing but men ? 

But Mr. Morris’ interpretation of the judgment must de- 


tain us a little, wild and incongruous:as it .surely is. Exam- 


ination can only deepen the conviction of the reality of what 


-we have to do with here, and of its simplicity also, a. sim- 


plicity worthy of the Divine Author. It is not without 
profit ever té be occupied ie one’s heart be in it) with the 
word. 


ot »Does ‘taken and cast alive into a lake of fire” mean 


judgment? Surely one would think so. But rio; they are 


Il on earth, 


systems it seems, still alive in men’s minds, it rematning an 


«. ; ; 
6 ) 
834° FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE: 


open question whether “they will « come up agains in power 


upon earth or not. After the loosing of Sdtan and his i 


failure, and being cast irito the lake af’ fire also, it isnot an — 
. ppen question any moré, he says, but strangely enough they’ 
of fire! gf | 3 | 

“And that lake of. ‘fire Teceives oilers dled Men. are 

; judged, and after judgment cast in, to be tested of course , 
“farther still. =; : 
The take of fire is on éarth, too. But the earth, and the 
heavens flee away frorn the face of Him that siggeth on the 
- throne, and still the lake of fire abides as before. 
‘t= I might, perhaps,, conclude with Mr. Morris here ; but ‘he, 
“ tbo-sees in the crushing of the serpent’s head. the ‘personal 
annihilation of the, devil, and (again: with } Mr. Hudson) his 
‘personal destiny. involved ;in the destruction of ‘the Roman 
” beast in Dan. vii. 11.. As for the first, the annihilation of 


are, “still tested on and on for ages and ages in the same lake 


the serpent.as such is allowed ta be complete jwher Satan is “ 


cast into the lake of fire, but his personal: annihilation is by 
no means implied. ‘As for the last, , they must show us. how 
they argue it before we can treat ‘it as other than i imaging: 
‘tion. ) 


‘We will now listen to Mr. Constabld, aad ‘it ted not be : 


for any. jones of as, for he fairly vives the*matter up. 
He says:* 


* 


.** The sense we would put upon the passages in Revelation is, — 


that they convey in highly; wrought figures suitable to the char- 
acter of the entire book, only the old idea which we have already 
gathered: from thé rest of Scripture, viz., that the punishment of 


all consigned to hell will be of an eternal nature, and that its - 
fearful effect—the plunging: of its subjects into death and de- - 


- struction—will ever remain visible to the redeemed and angelic. 

” ‘worlds. - We-will not try to establish this sense by examining’ the 
Farce of each word. Wedeny that language so highly figurative is 
‘capable of any such dialectical analysis, or that such is the manner 
in which we ordinaril, ly euOUTE language of ‘the-kind. ” 


. Ye 


* Nat, and Dar. of bia: Punishm., p- 199, 


in power | 
and his ~ 
snot an - 


ugh they 


ame lake 


Men are 


f course , 


‘and the 
h on the 


; but‘he, 
personal 
dson) his 
» Roman 
lation of 


Satan is 


ion is by 
w us: how 
imagina- 


.d not be | 


latter up. 


elation is, © 


the char- 
ve already 
ishment of 


id that its - 
hand de- . 
nd angelic 


mining the 
gurative is 


the manner 
€ 


aS 
=e 


THE Krocagrrnio VISIONS. - 
ae : 
fe prefers to go to other passages to show the uge of 


iar language. Of these, he produces tayo: Isa, xxxiv. 


« 


a 


i. ve 


a yaa J aide a ire to Sodom. Isaiah sey of Edom, 
3 it shall not 


to Tduimea, Wa should see people eee pain from some an 
subsequent to \spiah’s- prophecy to the present’ time ? . . The 
* present condition of Edom i is the explanation of the Posh ‘figure : 

its cities have fallen into ruin: the whole land isa: 


sert. ' The . 


. 


“burning pitcly, tha unquenchable fire, the smoké ascending for- Soe : : 


ever, is réduced to'this sober hue in the danguage of prose.” ae 


‘This-i_only ° saying that the language is ‘that of poetic ex- 
aggeration. We utterly and absolutely deny it. The ‘present: 
‘eoniition of Edom. ‘iy not what Isaigh prephesies of. He ~ 


| ‘speaks of a yet future time, as ver. 2-8 distirictly show, and | 


ca \ et 


then this terrible judg 


gent’ wilt be fiped. Af. Scriptute. 
language were so deceptive, who ‘could, trust it? But - 
Isaiah says, nothing,” abot “ endless: life: in pain’ not: 
word. It is Mr-Constable\who has foisted the. thought, upon * 
him. Nor ‘is the Old "Testament. x Pers ” the “ uges of 
the ages” of the New. . \" ° ‘ | 

Next as to J ude. 7, wher it, is aid. that «Sodom ‘and 
Gomotrah, and the cities about them -in like manner, giving’ 
themselves over to fornication, nd going after strange flesh, 
are set forth for an example, suff ring the vengeance of eter- 
nal’ fire,’—-Mr. Constable says his cannot refer td any 
"suffering «i in hades, for ‘their condityon there is never-allyded 
to in Scripture, ‘and is therefore. nk “example”; tha’ 
is a fature thing for all, and. Jude speaks of sémething , 
“which had long been a plain and palpable warning to- the 
ungodly of this earth.” He concludes therefore it can only 
refer to “their overthrow in the day of ‘Lot, anc their. 
abiding condition ever since.” “They a ad their wo 


-_bugnt_up; and this ruined, lifeless, hopdless condition has_ 


oN 


ell * 


‘were . 


~ 


Bai 


eat b 
a a 
whe 7 
ni 
< ’ 


ine 
Pas: 


r 


“remained ‘to the present time. 


¥ 


"The who transaction con- 


2 
RD ee aS a Sil a NAN ote, on, 


@ 


. og ; ‘ an ‘ 
336 PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. ’ 


veys the ideof consciéus pain for a time, followed by ruin 


and death forever. This: is, according to Scripture, to Y 


‘ suffer the vengeance of eternal fire?” 


This is, rather, the way in which men venture to interpret 
the word of God, until it becomes the bye-word 4nd 
scorn of infidelity. The cities are burnt up and not to be 
. found, and the land lies desolate, and this is the vengeance 
of eternal fire! Words may mean anything in this way ; 
-they are made not to express sense, but to hide it. But 
it is not very hard to see that Jude in speaking of these 
“ities” speaks of the people in them. The people had 


. sinned, and upon the people the judgment fell, the “fire and. * , 


brimstone” from heaven being the type or pattern of that 
“eternal. fire” in which they suffer still. The temporary — 
fire by which they perished from the earth was not the eter- 


nal one, nor js it stated to be such. But the wrath of God¢ 


manifested upon them is a sample or specimen (Setyua) of 
what could not be temporary, that wrath against sin which 


is the “eternal fire.” Mr. Constable confounds the people « 
with the mere material cities, and thinks of a present con- | 


dition of palpable judgment, of which not a word is said. . 


The fire which destroyed them was “eternal fire,” if you 
look, not at the material fire which was at once its instru- 
ment and symbol, but at the divine wrath so manifested. 
There is then no difficulty in the matter. 


Nor need we discuss therefore the principle which Mr. © 
Constable obtains from this passage, “that ‘the judgments _ 


of God upon individuals or nations, in destroying them here 
for sin, is. the pattern and example‘of that destruction which 
He will :inflict on them hereafter for sin;” although -he. 


s | : Y \ 
"presses to,the same end also our Lord’s words in regard. to 


the Galileans, ‘Unless ye repent ye shall all likezoise perish,” 
and even Paul’s statement that the things that happened to 
Israel in the wilderness “happened to them for ensamples,” 
: in reads “types.” We have been ourselves 


o 


largely reading such types, and it is not to be supposed that 
we are afraid of the latter principle., But when we are told 


i 
| ‘ 


dd by ruin 


ipture, to |. 


. interpret 
vord dnd 
not to be 
vengeance 
this way ;' 
2 it. But 
- of these 
ecople had 


“fire and ©. 


rn of ‘that 


femporary — 


t the eter- 


th of Gods 


ely) of 
sin which 


the people - 
esent con- . 


rd is said. 


”? aft you 
its instru- 
nanifested. 


which Mr: 


judgments 


them here 
tion which 


though .he 


regard. to 
ise perish,” 
appened to 
nsamples,” 


n ourselves¥ 


o 


iS THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 337 
that “ the sige of the Galileans by Pilate sascrtially re- 
sembles the death of the wicked in hell,” we may be allowed 
to ask for some Bee proof than his saying so can afford 
us. ‘; * ) 

Thus neither J aae nor, Isainh are in the least sympathy 
with Mr. Constable in his endeavor to give a sense to Scrip- 


‘ture which he “ will not try to establish by examining the force 


of each word.” «It, is a very real, sh Labgs little, ingenuous 
a confession, thatthe words, if sifted,\are against him. He 


_ does, however, try to do somewhat even here, and with ref- 


erence to facarifa,~™ to torment,” he points outy that ‘it is 


as applicable to things without life as to living things,” be- 


cause it is applied once’ (metaphorically) adwe have seen, 


to the tossing of a boat! .So he thinks the devil:might be 


“tossed” in a lake of fire and brimstone forever! . If that 


will not do, Schleugher, it seems, has said that it is used, Het 
‘only for actual pain, but ‘‘fordeath produced by such-pain,” 

- andgiig#this sense (he thinks) it is peculiarly applicable to 
\ futare punishment.”’ No doubt; so the devil'is to be killed ae 


by torment day and night forever and ever !. 


We may leave Mr. Constable then, to look at somie fresh 
arguments with Mr. Minton. -It.is strange: how fresh the” 
arguments are, and how little one writer, accepts those of ' . 


another; cach seems satisfied only 1 with his own. aa Ws 


must be as brief asthe case will allow. | 


» 
> 


“ 


yposed that 
we are told 


we must first inquire what would happen to that which 


ps 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TOA FUTURE STATE. ' 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
‘THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS.—2. 


“Ip we are to learn anything with regard to what will 
happen to the persons here represented,” says Mr. Minion,* 


represents them, as the consequence of being cast into a lake 


of fire. *. Now it so happens that in every one of the five 


or six cases here. specified, the result would be utter de- 
struction. ‘They are all living things, and not one of them 
could possibly exist in a lake of fire. A wild beast; a false 


_" prophet; ‘the devil, v evidently under the form of the 


‘dragon, seen first ‘in ch. xii., and again in xxii/ 2: « death 


| ni hell’:(hades); as ev idently under the form already seen 


oo Vi. 8) of a ridér or riders ‘on horseback ;: -and ‘ whoso- 


- ever’.of the dead, small and great, that stood” before God, 


Pi 


‘was not found written in the book of lite.” If these things * 


be intended to predict thé final doom'of wicked men and 
ed spirits, then their doom is ‘set forth under images 
Bp :point, to nothing less than extinction of being.” 

= how' utterly at fault as to these figures is 

fectilation Mr. Minton recommends. How long would 


a wild beast live in & lake of fire? . Certainly, if - we follow 


our thoughts, an exceedingly short. space of time. How 
long if we, take Scripture? A thousand years as first seen, 
and then the ages of ages,y Similarly as'to to the false pro- 


.phet.. So as to the dévil from the time he is cast in. 


How worse than vain to speculate ! how entirely Scripture 


- contradicts Mr. Minton’s. suggestions. , 


But this Mr. aeaton: is candid enough to own, and he 


ey ee ea 


oS oe ee we ee tee 


.) 


says: : 


* War Everlasting , p. 58, ete. 


what ‘will 
. Minton,* 


that which, 


into a lake 
of the five 
. utter de- 


ne of them. 


st; a false 
m. of ' the 
2:; ‘death 
ready seen 
1d. ‘ whoso- 
fore God, 


1ese things — 


1 men and 
ler images 
ng.” 
figures is 
ong would 
‘we follow 
me. How 
s first seen, 
false pro- 
is cast in. 
y Scripture 


wn, and he 


fe) ee 


.wrong (!). 


‘comes upon them 


“dl 


- 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. - 


\ 


. A wild beast could no more live in such a’ eondi- 


tion for a day than for an age.” What then? ‘This inclines 


~.me-to think. that the ages’ of ages indicate, not th’ period of’ 


mademned, but. the eternal: destruction that 
’,What then, you will “ask again, do 1 un- 
derstand by ‘ arcana ’? I understand by it—destruction (!) 


suffering to the ¢ 


- And to all objections that torment and destruction are two differ. — 
~ent’ things, I reply that, ythe. Spirit of God Himself, has most, 
pointedly applied the ord torment tadestxuction in one of those - 


very passages. Read the account in chap. xviii, of Babylon's de- 


mourning and famine’; and then the city, itself is ‘utterly burned’ 


with fire.’ Nowin the-long description of the burning which fol- ’ 
lows, there is not a ‘word of any living persons or things béing 
left in the city, to suffer torture from the fire that consumes it. 
The city is, of ceurse, destroyed for the sin of its inhabitants ; 
but their destruction is distinguished 4 in, ver. 8 from its destruc: 
tion. Yet they who gaze upon that burning mass ‘stand far off 


for the fear of her torment.’ What can the. word mean ineee but os : 


destruction ? ”’ i 


Thus must words be perverted by ma’s will, 27 tor. a 


. ment mean what torment never meant, and the sanction of 


thing, beside Scripture. 


, dest?uction of the inhabitants from that of the city ! 
yer. 8 he is citing for all this: ‘of course he must,have read 


the Spirit of God be claimed for an unnatural and impossible 
use of language, such as never could be imputed to any- 


notable absurdity ” Babylon’s inhabitants perish “in one 
day,” says Mr. Minton, by “ death and mourning and famin’,” 
but the city as distinguished: from these is burned with fire, 
no living inhabitant being in it; and ver. 8 distingnishes the 
It is 


it, but this is what it, says :—‘ Therefore shall her plagues 


“COME in one day, death and’ mourning and famine ; and she 


shall be. utterly burned with fire; for strong is the Lord 


And what is the ground for this © 


839 
“‘T at once admit my inability to explain this in ary way tl 


~ is quite satisfactory to my own mind. . But I do not admit tl m 
the view which it seems té Oppose must therefore be radically 


<i 


'- struction. The ene perish ‘in one day’ ee and es 


e 


God that judgeth her!” Where is it said, Mr. Minton, that 
the inhabitants all’ perish in one day? Nowhere: ‘her 


¢ 


v 


340 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO -A FUTURE STATE. x. 


plagues come in one day, not are over! Where is the city 
distinguished from the inhabitants, so as to imply that these 
- do not suffer in the burning ‘of the former? Again, no- 
’ where! it is bold perversion of the language : and all to give 
to the word torment in the subsequent verse an impossible 
meaning, which would scarcely have been attempted to be 
fastened upon any other book than co etae as I have 
already said. : 
We can well believe that his i earpratahion is- not satis-. 
.factory to Mr. Minton. It is the only encouraging thing © 
about it, that it is not. | . 
But yet he has not done with Babylon. If she perishes 
So as not to be “ found any ‘more ‘at ‘all °"—“ what then,” he 
asks, “is thé “meaning of her smoke rising up forever and 
ever? What, but that her guilt and her destruction will 
never be forgotten; that she will be precminently an object 
of everlasting contempt ? Swch destruction I-believe to be 
the ‘torment’ of all impenitent sinners, and such an eternal — 
memory of sin and its destruction to be the smoke of that 
torment ascending up forever and ever.’”* 
So that we must read, instead of “ torment,” “ destruction 
- day and night for the ages of ages” 
I do not believe that Babylon’s smoke ascending up for- 


= 


ws 


* Mr. Roberts, who in his “ Man Mortal” does nothing but repeat 
Mr. Minton’s arguments, and to whom no separate reply is needed 
therefore, quotes, however, “‘her smoke rose up forever and ever,” to. 
remark: “ If,the sense. here were the popular notion of absolutely end- 
less tuturity, how absurd to destribe it in the pass tense— rose up ’— 
as a thing having happened! How can a thing have happened ‘ for- 
ever’ in the English sense ?"’ Aye, or in the Greek either? Mr. BR... 
has forgotten his Greek here, although he ances it in the very pee : 
words. The Greek is avafaiver, “goeth up.” . : 

The only additional thing to be noticed as to him is, that he qiakes 

‘the casting “ alive ” of the systems into the lake of fire td intimate that 
they will not die of themselves, but be destroyed by the Lord at His 
coming *t Do the “kings of the earth * die_of themselves, because 
they die! -And how is it the systems are still “ alive ” after a thousand 
years, if they are destroyed (in his sense) by the Lord at His coming q 


ATE. x 


is the city 
y that these 
Again, no- 
1 all to give 
‘impossible 
pted to be 
as I have 


8-.not satis-. 
wing thing 


he perishes 
tt then,” he 
orever and 
‘uction will 
y an object 


lieve to be -; 


1 an eternal 
oke of that 


destruction 


ling up for- 


g but repeat 
nly is needed 


and ever,’’ to 


solutely end- 
—‘rose up ’— 
ippened ‘ for- 


her? Mr. R..0¢ 
the very next ° 


that he makes 


intimate. that 
. Lord at His 


THE APOCALYP7IC VISIONS. 341 
~ ; 


\ 
ever and ever means that the memory of it will be forever.* 
The memory of all that has. ever been will endure forever 
and this is more than the assertion of .such 2 common-place 
thouglit. ~The key to the expression is that identification of 
the city and people which Mr. Minton so vainly contends 
against. The expression is, of course, figurative, but iden- 
tical with that in ch. xiv. 11, yet to be looked at. Babylon’ 
suffers forever, of course in those to whom her guilt really 
8. 

But Mr. Minton goes on :— 

‘But it is urged that the wild beast and false prophet, who 
were cast into the lake of fire before the millennium, are spoken 
of at its close asif still there. Thisis, however, a mistake, the word 
‘are’ not being in the original. When a word has to be supplied, 
it should be supplied from what has preceded, and not made to ~ 
assert an independent fact. ‘The devil that deceived them was 

cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the 
false" prophet ’—what ? Surely ‘were cast.’ To stipply ‘ are’ is 
just to beg the question, and assert. a fact which is not stated in 
the record. The words which follow, ‘and (they-—sthe verb being 
plural) shall be tormented day and night forever and ever 
merely contain a declaration that the destruction of the beast and 


: the false prophet and the dragon would be final and irremediable ; . 


none of them would ever appear again. The two former are in- 
cluded -in ‘this subsequent declaration, because’ nothing of the 
kind had been sail when they were first cast into the lake of 
fire.” 

That is, again, we must transform torment into destruc: 
tion, and say’ they shall be destroyed day and night for 
ever and ever”! And even so,we must believe that “they 
shall be destroyed” means that two of theth have been 
already, and onfy the third “shall be”! These are some- 
what large demands upon our faith—the sceptical would say 
“eredulity”; but where man’s will is at work there is still 
credulity enough for this and more. Yet Mr. Minton finds 
it himself not, quite satisfactory, it would seem. _ He cannot 


elves, because 
er a thousand 
His coming ? 


blame us if we sympathize with him. : 


*Ina ‘for mer work I did accept this, but oh more mature considers 
ation must withdraw that acceptance. * 


2 


‘7 
} 
842 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


But <he* still a resource, if his explanation of these 
texts fails tg be “ wholly satisfactory,” as he admits it may, 
he can still/question ours! If he can make nothing else ont 
of them, will not accept what they plainly say :— 

** Now, /waiving the qumeon which a Universalist would raise, 
“as to the! ages of ages””—If the doubt is not Mr. Minton’s own, 
why dods he affect. to raise it 2—‘ y our argument manifestly de- 
pends: upon the assumption that the ‘torment’ spoken of in 
these yisions represents torment in the future realities which are 

in predicted. Butshow can you prove that ? You can pro- 
string of texts to show the precise meanipg of basanos 

(torment) ; and so can I produce a string of texts ‘to show 
the precise meaning of therion (a wild beast). Does the beast in 
the/ vision represent a beast in the. reality ? -Then why should 

ent in the vision represent torment in the reality ?” 
efore we answer this, let us hear Mr. Minton’ 8 summing 
up of conclusions against this :— 

“1.The word ‘torment’ is applied to the burning of the 
ity Babylon, when its inhabitants had already perished.” 
his has been disproved. 

- “2, Its smoke is said to rise up forever and ever, after 
it has been so completely destroyed that it cannot be 
found.” This is also a mere confusion ariting out: «of the 
first mistake. ; 

“3. While the beast and the false prophet are cast. into 
the lake of fire, all their adherents are _‘slain with the 
sword’; which, on your principle of interpretation, would 
show, that some of the wicked will be punished with eternal 
‘torment, others with death.” 

Quite true, as to the time of the Lord’s coming; but the 
latter are raised among “the rest of the dead,” and then cast 
into the lake of fire also. How, if the beast and the false . 
prophet are “phases of evil,” as Mr. M. suggests, and not 

persons, they should be cast into the lake of fire into which 
Satan and all the wicked afterwards are cast, is a difficulty 


upon his side he can never éxplain.. J/ their. adherents had 
been at the same time cast in, it sight have been contended 
that they shared the fate of their adberents, or if all had 


\ 


ATE. 


n of these 
its it may, 
ng else ont 
oe 

would raise, 
inton’s own, 
inifestiy de- 
oken of in 
23 which are 
You can pro- 
rof hasanos 
xts ‘to show 
the beast in 
why should 


faite 


’s summing 


ning of the 
perished.” 


ever, after 
cannot be 
out-of the 


‘e cast. into 
1 with the 
tion, would 
vith eternal 


i; but the 


id then cast 


d the false . 


sts, and not 
into which 
.a difficulty 


% 
THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 


been slain this might have been said. But that “phases 
of évil” should be cast into a place of. S aioe is inexpli- 
cable inrthe way the verses stand. iF 
His fourth objection applies only tq d 
be reserved. e 
His fifth is the old mistake as to ag 3 
east in.: dai 
His sixth is, that torment is not mentioned with regard to 


the dead in ver. 15. But the lake of fire is not (as he as-~ 


serts) “ the very embodiment of destruction,” in his sense of 
it, as we have scen, and death being destroyed at the begin- 
ning of the ages makes it impossible thereafter that. men 


» should die. He asks :— 


“7, But does the lake of fire itself goon burning forever ? Is 
it ‘everlasting’ or ‘unquenchable’ in that. sense ? What are the 


- yery next words? ‘And I saw a new lieaven and a new eartli ; 


for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away.’ sabes 
then has become of the lake of fire-which St. John saw o 
firstearth ? Why, of course, it has passed away with the 4 

of which it formed pare Is there any lake of fire on the new 
earth ?” 

I think it useful to quote exact words, or padple might 
really believe there was some strange parversign. on my part, 
or misconception at least of an adversary’s arguments. Mr. 
Minton proceeds with a full page more of. reasonings upon 
this foundation, in which it is, of course, quite useless to 
follow him, for the foundation itself is lacking. Where does 


the passage speak of the lake of fire being on earth at all ?. 
He would seem to be reading from another Bible than that 
which is in all our hands. Why, the devil is only cast © 


into this lake of fire at the close of the millennium, there to' 
be tormented day and night for the ages of ages. What- 
ever that means, a long lapse. of time is surely indicated. 


- But in the very next words we read of the great white throne — 


set up, and the earth and the heavens fleeing away. Are the 


1erents had 
1 contended 


r if all had 


ages of ages all expired in the meantime, .and before the 


final judgment 4 


But again, the throne i is set, the. earth and the pasduar flee 


“ae. 


344 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


away ; but the dead sufnmoned trom their graves are cast into 
the lake of fire, which, of course, has ceased to exist with 
that earth which has fléd away ! : 

We will now answer Mr. Minton’s question as to why 
“torment” in the vision should represent torment in the 
reality. And we answer :— 

1, Because it is impossible to say what it aes represent 
figuratively. No one has given us,—no one (it seems) cax 
give us, any meaning in the least degree satisfactory. 

- 2. Because the language throughout the tyyentieth chapter 
becomes more and more literal continually. “The “ devil,” 
when cast in, is distinguished by the title given him in the 
interpretation of the previous vision, not by “the dragon,” 
as in the vision itself.* ‘The interpretation in verse 6 of the 
“ first resurrection” shows us the exceeding simplicity: of 
the vision it interprets, Souls (persons) slain are seen to live 
again, and that signifies literal: resurrection. The “ thou- 
sand year s,” the reign as kings and priests, are the same in 
the vision and the interpretation alike. . And as the solemn | 
subject of judgment is approached, the-plainest words seem 
studied by which to set it forth. How simple and decisive” 
they are we can realize the betters after their survival of the 
treatment which we have seen thém endure. 

3. Because literal death in the lake of fire we haven seen 
to be impossible, and fire which does not Se must ._ 
apparently torment. is 

4. Because the devils in the gospel speak of torment as » 

-tHeir future doom, and here, therefore, the word is guar- 
anteed as literal. 

We ask Mr. Minton’s attention seriously to these reasons 
as well as to the examination of his own views which has 
been given. He cannot complain of misrepresentation ‘or 
of partial representation, nor do we think we have dealt 


* The “ beast ” is indeed still that, but I see not how else he eaulil 
-be spoken of without revealing the mystery which is left to the “ mind 


a ~, —_— ———e > 1 


which hath understanding.” The second “beast” has become “the «. 
false prophet.” oe 


\ 


STATE, 


83 are Cast into 
to exist with 


on as to why 
rment in the 
loes represent 
it seems) can 
ctory. 
itieth chapter 
The “ devil,” 
n him in the 
‘the dragon,” 
erse 6 of the 
simplicity: of 
e seen to live 
The “ thou- 
e the same in > 


is the solemn | 


Lt words seem 


and deéisive’” 


urvival of the 


we have, seen 


nihilate must . 
: ip 


f torment as @ 


vord is guar- 


these reasons” 
vs which has 
esentation or 
e have dealt 


v else he could 
ft to the “ mind 
s become “the. 


ee 


THE APOVALYPTIG VISIONS. 345 


with them more severely than he would himself desire if 
God give him another mind ‘upon this subject every way so 
important to souls. 

There is but one more argument, adduced by Blain, anf 
repeated by Goodwyn,* that “day and night are character- 
istic elements of this dispensation,” but in that case, for the 
purpose of his argument, “this dispensatioi must last “ for 
the ages of the ages.” That “ night ” is not found in the 
New Jerusalem (xxii. 5) or the new carth is nothing to the © 
purpose self-evidently. I grant the language may be 
figurative, but its obvious use is to convey the “thought of 


what is continuous or ceaseless, which in addition to the 
’ phrase “ forever and ever” shows even by itself that annihila- 


tion cannot be meant. What would be the force of “ anni- 
hilation day ¢hd night forever and. ever” ? 

The arguments on the side of “ conditional immiortalfty ” 
close then here. But we have still to glance at those of the 
restorationist school. - Z 

Dr. Farrar is “quite content that texts should decide” 
this question. That would give us hope that in telling us 
“what hell is not,” he would have shown us at least what 
this connected prophecy of Revelation on the very sale 
does ot mean. But although he has spent pages upon.) 
rabbis, T cannot find ten lines upon this main text througi# : 
his book. Indeed the only thing at all to the purpose that 
I can find is one note of two fines quoted | from Dr. Chaun- 
cey, that “If all thing's ‘without exception be subjected to 
Christ, then death, the second death, as well as the first 
death, will be finally swallowed up in yiétory.”"+ This be- 
longs. properly to ancther branch of’ our subject, but a word © 
or two is amply sufficient’ in answer. For the “second 
death” is ahoays subject to Christ, and never opposed, 
never needs to be subjected. Are the prisons to which a 
king commits his prisoners not subject, to the king who 


* Death not Life, Truth and Tradition, p. 82. 


+ Eternal Hope, Excursus 5, p. 222. 


3 ; i ae Gectiiitieg: 
: * 
> p 


346 FACTS AND THEORIES AS'TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ar 


commits them there? Dr. Farrar’s reasoning is scarcely 
equal to his powers in other respects, ifhe believes this. 
iN. Oxenham ig his “letter” to Mr. Gladstone, 
el pages upon two lines of Keble, afd not a linc 
upon the Scripture so all important in this matter. 

‘We must depend then upon Mr. Jukes mainly to repre- 
sent the restorationist view here, apart. of course from the 
general reasoning upon-the expressions for eternity which 
we have already examined. And we shall allow him as 
~ usual to speak for himselfs Hgways:—* | 

‘**T cannot. even attempt here to trace the. stages or “processes cen 
of the future judgment of. those who are raised up to condefiiu- 
‘tion. ... but whgt has here been gathered from the word of God — 
as to the course and method of His salvation, throws grea! 
upon that: ‘ resurrection of judgment’ which our Lord speakk of} 

How the method of God’s salvation should throw great 
' light upon the process of final judgment, it is very hatd to 
say. Mr. J ukes’ of course assumes that: that judgment is 
itself'a procéss. ‘of salvation... In that case of.course it would 
throw light. “But on the contrary, Scripture contrasts these 
as two incompatible things. He that believes in Christ 
“has everlasting life, and, shall not come into judgment, hy 
while « he that . believeth” “not the Son shall not see life.” 
“He that believeth and is baptized shall be saned, and he 
‘that believeth not shall be condemned.” “To them an evi- 
dent token of perdition, but to you of salvation.” \ “ There 
is one Lawgiver who is able togsave and to destroy.” “ An 

«if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the pede 
and the sinner appear?”’t This {% the uniform tenor of . 
Scripture, i ina great variety of expressions which assure us. 
that the judgment, of the wicke@ is the very oppasite of | 
being a method of salvation: it is a method of ;destruction. 

a 
But we will let Mr. Jukes proceed. 


“ Awful gs it is, who can doubt the endyand purpose of this 


— ee el ——— + — tc 


* * Restitution of ‘All Ghings, pp. 88-95. ie 
+ John _v. 24; iii. 865° Mark xvi. 16; Phil. i, 28; James iv. 12. 
1 Pet. iv. 18, ‘ 


TATE. 


is scarcely 
ves this. 

. Gladstone, 
id not a line 
er. 

ly to repre. 
‘se from the 
srnity which 
low him as 


or “processes 
to condelia- 


-word of God _- 


throw great 
ery hard to 
judgment. is 
irse it would 
itrasts these 
1s in Christ 


judgment,” 


ot see life.” 
wed, and he 
them an evi- 
2.” “ There 
oy.” An 
the ungodly 


rm tenor of . 
ch assure us.’ 


opposite of 
destruction. 


rpose of this 


THE APOCALYPTIC VISIONS.°- | BAT 
judgment ? for ‘ God, the judge of all, ’ ‘changes not,’ and ‘ Jesus 1 
Christ ’ is still ‘ the same yesterday, to-day, and for the a ses,’ Me 

Which assures us of His unreperting performance of all 
that He has threatencd, as of all that Te has promised. 

‘And the very context of the passage which deger ibe’ the cast- 
ing of the wicked into the lake of fire, seems to ‘show that this 

- yesurrection and the second death are both parts of thée%ame re- | 

‘deeming plan, which. necessarily invdlves judgment on those who - 

. will not judge themselves, and have not accepted the loving judg- - a 
ments and sufferings which in this tite prepare the first-born for 
the first resurrectién.. So we read,—‘ And Hé-that sat npon the 

_ throne said, Behold, I-make all thingwi! mew. ... He that over- 

- cometh shall inherit all things; and I willbe His God; and he» 
shall bemy son.’ But the fearful and unbelieving, ind the abom- = 

_ inable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and . 

» jdolators, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which ®. 
burneth with firé*and brimstone; which is the, second death.’ 

What does He say here but that ‘all things shall be made new,’ 
though in the way to this the fearful and .unbeljeving must pass 
_the lake of fire ?’> Reet ms 


He says the very. opposite. For instead - of “passing ” 
the lake of fire, He says they “ have their ‘ part.” fi it, as the 
saints have theirs in the first resurrection. And those (ors 
among these) are they whoshave their “ part” taken“out of 
the book of life (xxii. 19) of whom Mr. Jukés teaches ee 
have their part there really still. : ts 

Morever it is only as to the condition of the Hieaeed ‘ee ee 
God says, “Behold, I make all things new,” as the context 

_ proves. “Te that overcometh, I wi! be his God, and he 
. shall be my son; but”—but what? ‘He that overcometh 
not shall be also in the end my son?’ No, surely,“ but the , 
fearful and unbelieving, etc., shall have ¢heir part in the lake 
of fire.” Mr. Jukes’ explanation is a destruction of the sense, 
. & sense which is as plain as can be. _ But agdin he says :— 
‘The ‘second death’ thefefore, so far from being, as some , # 


think, the hopeless shutting up of man forever in the curse of ey 
disobedience, will, if I err not, be God’s way to-free those who 


in-no-other way than by such a death can be delivered out of the 


348 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


dark world whose life they live in... . To get out of this World’ 
there is but one way, death; not the first, for that is passed, but 
the second death. Even if we have not light to sce this, ought 
not the present to teach us something of ‘God’s future ways ; for. 
is He not the. same yesterday, to-day, and forever ?’” 

So it is “fofcver” now, instead of “to the. ages”! but | 
‘now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of falva- 
tion.” Is the day of judgment and of wrath stifl the same ° 
If God is:(as of course He must be) essentially always the 

same, does that make grace and wrath the same ? or judg. - 
ment and salvation? Does it not rather assure us that Hee 
who has threatened will make good ? “And that the word 
will fully be sustained, “he that. believeth not the Son 
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him ” ? 
Is it no perversion of the truth of His unchangeableness, to’ 
say that His Wrath abideth not, and all shall finally “see 
life”? He goes on :— : 

** We know that in inflicting present death, His pregent pur- 
pose is to destroy him that has the power of death, that is, the 

. devil. age” : 

We know nothing of the kind; it is Christ’s death, not 
ours, which does this. Has Mr. Jukes read the next words 
in the text he quotes ? 

‘* How can we conclude from this, that in inflicting the second 
death, the unchanging God will act on a principle entirely differ- 
ent from that which now actuates Him ?” < 

That is, again, why should a day of salvation and aday - 
of judgment differ in character 2 But. as to death itself the 
principle is not different; for as the first death is the judg- 
sent upon the natural world, so the second death is upon 
the world beyond the grave for those who endure it. And* 
as the first is final-as to this present scene, the second will '- 

“De as to that. aa ms coe ee 
.. _ And why should it be thought a thing incredible that\God 
“ should raisé the dead, who fér their sin suffer the penalty of the |. 


-second death? Does thig death exceed the power_of Christ-te 
overcome it? Or shall the greater foe still triumph, while the 


a 


nels 


TATE. 


of this World’ 
is passed, but 
2¢ this, ought 


9, 


ages” but — 


lay of falva- 
Nl the same ? 
always the 
e? or judg. 


us that Hee a 


at the word 
ot the Son 
1 on him” 
ableness, to 
finally “see 


pregent pur- 
, that is, the 


s death, not 
next words 


g the second 
tirely differ- 


- and a-day 
h itself the 
is the judg- 
uth is upon 
eit. And- 


second will ‘~ 


le that God 


nalty of the : 


of Christ to 


Ire ways ; for~.. 


lin Pea 
eo ’ 

« Ae 

. at ose 
*. 


349 


less, the fist deafly; is. surely overcome? Who -has “taught ‘us 

. _ thus\to limit the meaning of the words, ‘Death‘is swallowed up in 
victory’ ?*’ . F ee 
answer to the last question, God Himself; if 1 Cor. xv. 
be inspired of Him. For the apostlé there tells tis that it is 
fulfilled at the resurrection of the body, and that is no ques- 
tion of the seeond death at all. .Nor is the second death: 
Christ’s foe, as the first death is. For the first death does 

_ .(while it lasts) prevent the fulfilment of the eternal purpose 


Se THE “APOCALYPTIC. VISIONS. 
4 i e me 


- fully, Whether with saint or sinner. The second death does: 


not, and. is ‘not an enemy, as I have before replied to Dr. 
Chauncey. * AS to: what is “credible,” all is that God 
reveals. This Tle has’ not{ revealed, but the yery opposite. 

‘* Ts God’s ‘ Will to saye all Men’ limited to fourscore years,.or 
changed by that event which we call death, but which we are 
distinetly told is His appointed means for our'deliverance ?” 

We are not told this as-to physical death. Are the saints 

“who do not die, but aré changed at the Lord's coming, not 
delivered? God would indeed have all-men to be saved, 
but this is not purpose or counsel, which, is always another | 
word,” but dvsire. “How, often weyald I,” says our Lord 
as to Jerusalem, “and ye would not.” And “now is‘ the 
accepted time” applies only to living mené- But all this will 
come up again.clsewhere, and the rest of Bj Jukes’ argu 
based upon the text before Use, es : 

Thus then we have: examined every’ objection which has 
been raised to that simple reading of this important Scrip- 
ture with which we first began. We. have surely seen that 


ments will then be considered more fittingly. They are nite 2 


’ the metaplfors are not ambiguous, bat written in the speech ~ 


of Him who cannot lie, nor call by the name of “ revelation” 
an exaggerated, or at least “« mysterious and highly-wrought ” 
account, which, when reduced to the “ sober hue.” of truth, | 
becomes the total opposite of what is on ‘the face of it. 


* Bovdouar, Povry : bs Matt. xi. 27;,Luke.xxii, 42; Acts ii. 23; 


4 


bax) 


a 


h, while the 


iv 28; xxvii42" Eph-#}44-Heb-vi-t7-ete- But we shalt have to 
recur to this again. aes 
‘ a % > : ‘ 4 Nie er i 


mi ity of our. Aa passage wilt: not detdiin iy 
5 the. ar jument, “with, ‘regard to'it is necessarily a 
Awimilar, nature to awhat’ ‘has. been, already advanced, 
lé:: 'Tt-is, howeyer, al separate: and independént* 
if the distiny of the eo ‘and. as such wo must 


aides 


1 .) 


Mae aA angel roliow thank aliios with a loud vole i 


it 


_ EXgnyin it worship. the’ beast and his’ image, and receive. his mark 
in his. foreliead or. jn his: hand, the same shall drink ofthe wine? ig 
ot ‘the wv; th of. ‘God, which is poured out’ without mixture into |! 
the ‘cup Yofy is indignation ; ; andthe shall be tormented with fire 

and br, aston inthe presence of the holy angels, and in the | 
» Preser of | the Lamb 3 and’ the smoke of their torment ascendeth _ 
, UP forever and | ever (for ages of ages) ; andithey have no rest:d 
a ‘nor wight, v ‘ho worship . the beast and Ms image, ‘anit whosoe} 
i _zeceiveth, al aoe of his name i (Rev. xiv. 9- ee 
si 
Mr. Morris’ putting to t as 
could scarcely much. darken it. | Ks 
However, an o@jects to its teaching the ‘commonly rec 
doctriné on these grounds :— : 

1. It is the\penalty of a specific crime, and ree ey cane 
“not be the doom of those who have not committed that 
crime. Therefore, if it teach endless woe for some, that - 

Be ies eae Saher & 


“But Mr. Mo ris is acain at Pinte a ll- fire g may: me 


i 2 —- pee ih ii OE Rie ee) =" 
erent . — : Bikers ~ 


THE _ APOCALYPTIC VISIONS. 


d penalty of sinners, and yet men be solemnly warned, oe 
that once let them commit the sin in question and 
ell would be’ their. portion. What is intended very 
iy is that for such persons there would be no escape 
jection. ig thérefore vain. — \ 
2. Mr. Morris says, that, whatever may be the “ dramatic 
foreg ” of what is said, “it is evident that it transpires on 
earth, and before the coming of the Lord.” 
But he gives no evidence “for this at all, unless “it is evi-~ 
-dent ” be considered such. I should think myself that “ the 


i ‘ presence of the holy angels and of the Lamb,” would rather a 
a me ‘. - make the opposite evident. — 
ae an _ 8, He appeals to the “smoke of Babylon rising up for- 
iy adeno .ever” (ch. xix. 3), as showing that such words do not imply 


qd donet™ the necessary existence of the sufferers, as Babylon had been 
independant” “utterly burned with fire.” _ But this we have looked at in. 
ach wd must | nei Suet, ae ae 
ee ae _ our reply to Mr. Minton on the previous text. - 
ape _ |The comments of the rest of annihilationist writers are no 
better than this. Mr. Botittéy’s | main argument is that 
.“ the advocates of any tenct—no matter what—must be hard ' 
‘driven, ifthey are glad to take their stand among the hiero- 
glyphs | that attract us to the isle of Patmos.” If-he had 
been one of. those “foolish Galatians ” whom the apostle 
“ rebukes -with the statgapen tha { Arahan had two sons,” 
“ete, he would, of: con Be, have: similar argument 
against ‘théapos le. Yet. he will € fescend to notice the : 
“hieroglyphs ;” + ie the sécdnd aipunent. ) preduce’ 5 rece ee 
«that “ their torment is in ver. xe! represented, as syndpronots” >: wer 
_ with? thei worship : ‘they who worship the beast bere | Be ers ( 
west.” The. scholarship of: which , is 1at” “profound :° ag Tt *. rere 
suppose oi TpooKuy odvres simply to mean “ the xorship ers, WI eae 
without any distinction g af whether, the worshy were m t ew. é 
present or the past, Gag pover ‘if “have no.rest “pre 
. the worship and the ‘W “be. synchronous, then sha 
be tormented ” must sho. rvhé reverse as to the torment. .\. ' 
ee ) ta from the omission OL ey 
vale» with the: ‘f angels us ‘the A 


a loud voice, i 
eive.his mark 

< of’ the wine? 
mixture into |! 
ited with fire 

, and in the | 
nt agcendeth 


mitted ‘that 
some, that < 


352: 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATIN’ 


Lamb” “ that the vengeance denounced is inflicted here on 
earth, and i in the time state,” which must last, therefore, as 
the torment lasts, for the ages of ages! And again; “ that 
- in subsequent chapters we have the fulfilment of these very 
threatenings cE ied ; which fulfilment indisputably takes 
place here and now.” Certainly the fulfilment is found in 
ch. xx., and we have been looking at it already, but he who 
can believe that the torment of individuals here and now 
can be “ for ages of ages” must. be very anxious to believe - 
it. We need scarcely follow him there. ’ 
Nevertheless, Mr. Hudson also agrees that the passage 
* refers properly to the scenes of time, and not to the final 
judgment ; ” his first argument being that there is “ no, allu- 
sion to the resurrection or 2 the opening of the books”! . 
“ And the very expression ‘ who worship the beast and. his 
image, seems (!) to refer to the earthly conduct and condition , 
of idolatrous people. The passage proves an earthly im. #° 
mortality, if it proves any I need not waste timo upon 
. these arguments. — f 
Mr. Constable’s .remarks ae not call for much attention 
either. ‘ Elliot,” he tells us, ‘‘ has no hesitation in referring 
Rev. xiv. 10, 11, together with the kindred passage in. 
xix. 8, fo a temporal judgment, viz., the swallowing up by 
_voleanic fire of the territory of Rome in Italy.” AB | 
to which our readers are, we think, in a position to judge for 
themselves. But Mr. Constable does not himself insist upon . 
this; he will take the- passages in their usual application, {M. . 
but only insist on their being images of “death and destruc- > : 
tion,” for which we have had his arguments under the -previ- °.5] 
ous texts. F . 
Mr. Minton too unites this with the passages in Rev. xx., 
there being only one argument exclusively relating to it, aad 
that is its inconsistency (understood in the orthodox way) 
with 2 Thess, i. 9. “'The torment is said to take place ‘in the 
presence of the Lamb.’ But in 2 Thess. i. 9, those who are 


p> pete 


found in opposition to Christ at His coming, are * punished 
fting destruction from (away from) the presence 


a 


ATEN 


ed here on 
herefore, as 
gain; “ that 
these very 
tably takes 
is found in 
but he who 
e and now 
to believe - 
che passage 
tothe final 
is “no, allu- 
ooks ”! . 
ast and. his 
d condition 


earthly im, 4 , 


time upon 


>. 
ro 


h attention- 
in referring 
passage in. 
wing up by 
taly.” A 
0 judge for 
insist upon 
application, 
nd destruc- 
r the previ- 


in Rev. xx. 
ig to it, and 
nodox way) — 
lace ‘in the 
ose who are 


\ 
\ 
\ 


fe 
4 


/~ arevitk fact commensurate with the pouring out of the vials - 


e nee not further say, and it is hard to understand; for 


from.” 


‘the. Jinal judgment of the wicked, nor has it-an y reference ta 


. Paul’s words about “ ation and WRATH upon every 


“Tt is,on the contrary,” he adds, “ identified here with the 
" seven vials that will be pour ed out ‘pon the earth,’ previous 


3S 
THE APOC ALYPTIU VISIONS. < 


353 


of the Lord.’ They are ‘gathered out of His kingdom’ and: 
cast into outer darkness, away on the manifested presence 
of Christ during the millennial age.” 

But the. “ from ” in Thessglonians does not. mean “ away | 
We have already examined the passage, which Mr. 
Hudson rightly compares with Acts iti. 19 to prove this. - 
If it did, it by no means foll6ws bee the torment, is always eet 
in the presence of the Lamb or of the holy angels, but that - : 
the judgment will be executed under their eye. They will 
be witnesses, but it does not say e¢crial witnesses, 

Gen. Goodwyn is also one of those who believe that the- 
ages of ages expire before even the millennium, thet they 


in the 16th chapter! ““The wrath of God,” he says, “the : 
cause of their torment, is never spoken of in connection with ~ ~ 


hell and its Jie.” Tt seems he has never read the aposile > 


soul of man that doeth evil .-.". in the day when God shall 
judge the secrets of men by Teas Christ ” (Rom. ii. 8,16). 


to the ailvent of the Lord in glory (2 Thess. i. 9) which are — t 
called ‘ the vials of the wrath of God.” Ilow identified he 


“previous to the adveptmof t’ is Lord” seems as muich , 
opposed to “in the ra of. the Lamb,” as do “the ages” . 
of ages” t¢ the very sho# period comparatively ‘of the pour- ; 
ing out ofthe vials. The’ series of mistakes founded upon . 
these fundamental ones, we scarcely need examine. ff 
Finally Mr. Revert his “ Man. Mortal, ” objegts to the . 


orthodox view, in a‘verfsimilar way ; = ae the 
“1. [Theor thodox] ‘wrath of God.’ is a wrath aivespci 


> “punished 
he presence 


in hell from gencration to gener: ation, whtreas the. 
Apocalypse iy wrath: Oat comes.’ at_a : wticulf 


affairs on earth, when the d e raised.” ; oe 2 ee 
-- Qn the contrary, nl jueigment, of hat the iat 


354 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A PUTY LE 


sense,—of Gehenna, has not yet come for dny ope; an tite. 
coming at a particular juncture is not in dpposition to its 


«2, [Tho “ortfOdox] sufferers of hell-fire are immortal souls, 
while the ay sf ptic drinkers of the wine of the wrath of God 
are ‘men,’ ‘forehdgds ’ and ¢ liands.’ ” 

This is wtferly false, as Mr. Roberts must know, for we 
all believe .that Godavill “ destroy both body and soul in 
hell,” and in point ae fact it is only a in the body that 

,gointo it. ~ _. 

_ 3. [The orthodox]. ell-fire ig endured in hell, in banishment 
from the p ce of Ch ist and ‘the angels, while the apocalyptic 
topment in fire and brimsthe i is inflicted in the presence of the : 
holy angels, and in the presence af the Lamb.” 

This is the old confusion be wegp 1 éir being witnesses 
and eternal witnesses, Which we ave be @ remaiied upon. 

“* 4, [The orthodox] hell Res y eaith, in oY distant 

: transpatial region without sdlid standing ground, whereas the 
scenegf Rev. xiv. is enactéd in the presence of the Lamb, ‘after 
the Lamb hagyeome to Mount ete. mo; Be ¢ ere 

“# The passage in Rev. xiy, says net ofte Word*about thas 

; locality Of hell at all, bus merely thre sight rorehipper a 
ofthe beast. that they shall endure ity said to be | 


on earth... < c. pice 
This cloas, “the arguménts as tom thes passages, élis 
strengt er which i is only th® more brought out .by-all such 
_ effortsto evade thei force. The simplest interpretation 
still, approves itself the only consistent one, after repeated 
examinations’ and criticism by those who lack-neithtr will 
_ nor mental capacity, But who fail here utterly and hopelessly, 
. becatte i in conflict with the word of One who gannot lie nor 
- qhange, nor mock with needless mystery the souls of the. 
lest among ; ae who “ read or’ héar the wards of the 
a3 of this prophecy,” and whom IIe pronounces : blessed, 3 


,) 


if they thee the_things achich-are_-aetiiterdbhot ota? Et is- 
' learned men who have un wittingly devised entanglements 
for the fect of these simole ones, until they have. learned to. 


e 


a” 
ope; and 
osition to its 


1mortal. souls, 
wrath of God 


now, for we 
and soul in 


ie body that 


n banishment 
1e apocalyptic 


esence of the - 


1g. witnesses 
1arked upon. 
Sonib. distant 
; whereas the 
2 Lamb, “after” 


+ 
ry * Dap 


dabout thas 


worshippers 


er,said to be ‘ 


assaves, the 
; -by-all such 
terpretation 
fer repeated 
neithtr will 
1 hopelessly, 
innot lie nor 


souls of the, 


rqrds of the 
s “ blessed,” 


“py, 
Its 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT” IN MATT. XXV. 355 


stand in doubt of that which they own to be God’s word, 
becauge of the interpretations which have been put upon it. 
If iy of Man coming in the clouds of heaven 
His holy angels with im may mean ¥ taking of a Jewish 
city, no wonder that they need a learfed man to tell them 
so. And¢f-this is the Scripture mode of speech, no wonder 
. if it shouldbe thought “highly wrought and mysterious ”— 
inflated and exaggerated rather: and if this be its common 
mode, who would seek out (as expecting to make aught of 


and. all 


them) tg,“ hieroglyphs of Patmos ” ? 
CY Tt-wille a matter of the greatest. thankfulness to me, if. 
«apart. froHthe subject of ‘special interest to us now) any 
shall: learn B& the long discussion which we have gone 
through, he ueyand trustworthy.is the word of God; 


how, little it “refld@iithe ignorance of a dark age’; how 

is ¢ e-f@arning which would ‘belittle it. 

_ “Weaven andearth shall pass away ”"—and the voice is that 

of the Lord an Makes of heaven and earth—“ but my words. 
shall not pass away.’ , 

We must now-return to look at a text: designedly left to 

' ethe present, although its fitter place might seem to be long 


before, inasmuch as it is the judgment of the nations at the 


coming of the Lord. 
. aaa 


Z 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


ie 


& 2) 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT ” TN MATT. XXV. | 


IT is not needfal, to our present. purpose: to establish. the 

- particular application of ‘what has. been strangely ealled by 
some the “parable” of the sheep “and. the goats. It is in- 
deed No«parable, but a very simple statement of the sepsra- . 
tion of the living upon the carth when the Lord comes to it 


“ 
ve 


wo. . 
tanglements 


: learned to _ 


stron there, which separation is compared 
Separating, fs sheep from the goats. It is 
a part of that pre-millennifl Jjudement of the quick 


to a shepherd 
therefore 


d 


356 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A PUTURE STATE. 


already spoken of, and which precedes by more than a 
thousand years the judgment. of the dead before the great 
white thrgne. With this it has been identified in the popu- 
lar view, simply because the Lord’s coming having been 
considcred to be at the end of the world,* distinction be- 
tween the two was not possible. 
But the result.has been a disastrous one. For the judg- 
"ment in the one case being evidently a discriminative one 
it. was, of course, considered that the risen s: aints were to be 
-picked out from sinners by the trial of their works; and 
then the natural suggestion followed, that all must wait till 
‘the day of judgment, to know what was to be their everlast- 

ing condition. Ido not need again to enter into this, but I 
shall briefly state the distinction which the passages them-. 
_ Selves show as obtaining. between them. 

-1. The judgment in Matthew is evidently (and stated to 
be) when the Lord comes, a coming connected with various 
features of the previous part of the prophecy, which make 
indisputable its character. That in Rey. xx. 11-15 takes 
place when, instead of His coming to earth the earth and 
- the heavens flee away. 

2. In Matthew there-is no resurrection, and the judgment 
is of the living “nations,” nut of the dead i while the con- 
trary is true of that in Revelation. ; 

3. In Matthew: they are judged according to ‘iil 
behavior to's6me whom the King styles is “brethren” 

. in Revelation judged in general “according to their w oa” 

"These are distinetions which are simple enough and broad 
enough between. the two scen¢s to prevent their being con: 
founded. There is, however, wpoint of resemblance, "and it 
is on this account that Vhave left the passage in: Matthew to 
the present,time, that, instead of being slain by the sword as 
those are who Pllow thé. beast, they on-the left hand receive 
a_judicial sentence, and are adjudged to the lake ot’ fire: as 


ae Se Orpen eT ee 


are those in the Apocalyptic vi “¢ as it would seem 


1 
* The expression in Matt. xiii. arid XXiv before noticed, is not this, 
but i is“ the completion ” (ors consummation *) “ of the ave,” 


ATE. 


mre than a 
» the great 
n the popu- 
aving’ been 
tinction be- 


> the judg- 
native one 
were to be 
vorks; and 


ist wait till — 


ir everlast- 
this, but I 


ages them-. 


1 stated to 
ith various 
hich make 
1-15 takes 
earth and 


, judgment 
le the. con- 
+ to their 
brethren”: 
eir works.” 


and broad | 


being con- 
nee, and it 
[atthew to 
e sword as 
nd receive 


is given by Liddell and Scott as meanjn; 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT” IN MATT. XXV. 357 


before the millennium, as the beast and the false prophet are. 
I do not say positively that they go directly into it, but so 
it would seem, It is certain that they are appointed to “ ever- 
lasting punishment” in “ everlasting tire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels.” : 

Men have come in with their explanations again here, and 
to these we must turn. They have to do chiefly, as our 
argument has, with the expressions “ everlasting punishment,” 
and “ everlasting fire.” et a 

With regard to ‘everlasting punishment,” the objections 
to the ordinary sense are various, some based upon the word 
for everlasting, some upon that for punishment, some upon 
considerations apart from the meaning of either word, while 
some combine several of these objections together. We 
must first, in the natural order, look at the word “ punish- 
ment,’ for which several other renderings are suggested— 
“cutting off’ “restraint,” but especially “correction,” the 
word, as it is stated by Mr. J ukes for example, being “ always 


used for a corrective discipline, which is for the improvement 
of him who suffers it.’* = 


The word for “ punishment” here ig xéAacss (Aolasis), and’ 
(ts a pruning a hence” - 
ryection, punishment.” _ 


w 


a checking, punishing, chastisem' 


The verb.xvAadfw, from which ittis Ve tyed, means.“ strictly. 


to curtail, dock, prune, but usually to keep within bounds, » 


hold in check, bridle, check, then to chastise, correct, pun- 


ish.” The words derived frém this show a similar meaning. | 


Thus we find xodd 6a, “‘chastisement, punishment es 
: 3 | i 


:  HokMCTY,.1or, “a place of chastisement, prison,” or. 2, “an in- 
- strument of correction or torture” ; nodasrys, “a chastiser, 


punisher.”” Kolxl@ is the word. used for punish, Acts iv. 


« 


21, “ finding nothing how they might. punish them,” and... -~ 
again.2 Pet. ii. 9, “to reserve the unjust to the day of judg- 


ment to be punished.’ Ke Din 


f- 


rould- seem > 


d, is not this, 


oo 
. 


All is against the rendering of “cutting off,” which is _ 


ta 


oon 8a Restitution, p. 129, 


+. eae 


. : sis onty found in the piseage 
before us, and in 1 John iy. 18: « fear hath torment.” 


aw 


358 FACTS AND ‘THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. | 


~ adopted by Ellis anil ‘Read,* Blain,t Storrs,t Hastings, - 
Morris, and even on the orthodox side by Lana | Blain 
adopts Ellis and Read’s rendering, “And these will go to 
the cutting off that takes place at the age,” ! ‘Morris says that 
it refers to the “cutting off” of false Christians from’ the - 
iflock of Christ, and from ev ery pretence to the kingdom. 
And even as to 1 John iv. 18, he says that its» ‘being repre- 
sented by “torment” “is not justifiable; for. the word ° 
“relates to the children of God, who are not yet ‘ ‘made /per- 
fect.’ in an experimental inowledes of the love of God. ahey 
. are not tormented; but they are cut off.from. much expat 
“mental Dblesseiiness, which properly pertains to them,” Bit” 
this is poor and foolish reasoning. The words are “‘ fear— 2 
i. e.,dread-of God—hath torment,” and so it has whethenin. 
saint or sinner. “Cutting off” (ashe would have ‘it here. 


also) it never is, being never simply that, as the dictionaries , 
_ show, and as even Mr. Hudson, who has no prejudice cer- - 


elke Against the word, admits. . He says, “This. (meaning 
of ‘excision —cutting off) seems to be supported by ae 
cognate xolofdw, and by the original sense. of ‘ pruning.’ 
’ But in pronihg ; the tree is not ‘cut off’—only the branches. 
And _thgugh, ‘by the laws of language, the word might easily” 
have acquired. this sense, we find no proof’ that it Aas. done 
so,”** . This argument is thus fairly given up. 

. The rendering by “ restraint,” Mr. Hudson says; is fa. 


vored by the use of the present tense in 2 Pet. ii. 9° 


(odazouEvous, comp. ver. 4; Jude 6; and. perhaps Acts: 
iv. 21), and by 4 remark of Behlenener: It is favored by the 
_. tenor egyvarigus pasfages which represents the wicked ‘as the 
* troublers ofthe ‘righteous, to be effectually restrained ‘by 


* Bible. versus Tradition, + Death hot Life, p. 79. 

“ Six Sermons, p. 59. te § Pauline Theology, p. 59, 
|| Immogality. of the Soul, p. 480. T What i is Man? pp. 400, | 
** Debt and Grace, pp. 189,190.” .. 


lehp He gives the following texts: Psa. xxxvii.; Ixxiii.; eal Isa. Ixvi.” 


‘24; Dan. xij. 2,3; Matt. xiii. aia ‘2 Thess. i, G0; 2 Pet. ii. 4-12 > 


Jude 5 5-7, 13. 


Ca 


\d 


God's final judgments. ee But,’ 22 he _adds, ‘this idea is nit “ia bg 7 


TATE, — 


| Hastings,§ . ° 


dis.|| Blain 
e will go to 
Tis says that 


18 from’ the - 


kingdom.% 
being repre- 


. the. word Me 


‘made per- 


God. They 


1uch. expegi-: 


hem.” ,But 


are ‘* fear— . 


-wheth enin ‘ 
ave ‘it here 


dictionaries , 
ajudice cer- - 


is. (meaning 
rted by the 
’ “pruning.” 
ie branches. 


night easily °™ ys 


it -Aas- done 


@ 


Sint oye . 
ays, “is fa- 


Pet. ii, 9° 


rhaps Acts : 
ored by the 
icked ‘as the 
strained By 


cii.; Isa. Ixvi.” 5. 
Pet. it. 4-12 "° oe 


serious 


: ——— 


or) 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT” IN MATT. XXV.359__ 


4 ‘ Su rchy) _ Y . | oe . : an beers bs : 
“~~ prominent. in ‘Matt. xxv., and such -a rendcring would “We _ - 


hardly tenable.” ee Saye ee ie 
The word certainly would not serve the cause of annihilas 
tionism, nor even of restorationism, if the “ restraint.” is to 
be “everlasting.” This meaning, however, connects with 
that which restorationists would give, according to the pas- 


= sage Which M r. Hudson quotes from Eustathius “ Ko'raors 


is properly ‘a certain kind. of ‘punishment; that is, a certain 


' chastising and restraining of the. disposition, dé not vindic- 
* eo : , 


tive punishment.” °° + ~ 


0% 


: ay ve roe ‘it na 
It?is on the ground that the word expresses, not vindictive. 


but corrective suffering, that Mr. Jukes and Dr. Farrar take 0 


their. stand. The latter affirms that “ xclwors ig a word. 


whieh: in its: sud proper meaning ‘has feference to’ the cdr: = 
rection and bettering of. him that endures it.’ "* : Mr..J ukeg: 


adds, that “those‘who hold the cemmon view are. obliged o 
to” confess this,” and supports: this by. an appeal’ to Arch. 


Prench’s “ Synonyms of the New ‘Téstament,” who | 


 distingy ishing between the two wordsoAddrs andgripwpia, 


says, “In rin apr, according to its classical use, the vindic-. 
tive character of the punishment is'the prominent thought; 


. < ear F e . a an ge ; s 
it is the Latin ‘ ultio’; punishment-as satisfying the inflictér’s 4 


_ Sense of outraged justice, as defending his own honor and *’ 


that of the violated law . ./ in xdAaois, on the other hand, 
is more the notiorf of punishment as it: has reference to:the 


Dae correction and betteging of ‘him “that. endures it.” As to 


wlfich lic refers to Philo, Plato, and Clement of Alexandria, 
and adds, “ And ‘this is Aristotle's’ distinction.” © oe 
It is true that the Archbishop resists. the restotationist 
application of this. He says: “Tt. would ‘be.a very scrigus - 
error however to attempt. to refér this “distinction in its en-’ 


4 tire sat words as employed in thé Néw Testament,” 


Mr. Juke’ comment upon this is, “that is,4t would be a 


For to. givethe word its proper sertse.” “Why 


Sa aaah Ok eee aoe is Ps ae ae . 
"should if’ be a serigns error,”’.asks Dr. Farrar, ‘to refrain: 
iM yg ae esara . fae es ie ae 0 f eoke ee : ‘ 

: from readintiy Into a word:a serise which it does not possess.? ” 
: a - : es z . : ‘. 


Ho age cn 
oe * Eternal Iope, p- 200, 
ad 4 : & . 


et Sy te ee 


e 3 4 : . i 
n ‘ y s ; sis : : : Re 
@ : antarctic eee init om te ips tie Se SS 
Peet ace pe ene npn map re ste poerproeee ne beer Paetnhigea aan Saapoainnainy Saas 2 


ed FACTS AND THEORIE 8 AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


- Archbishop Trench has, however, produced witnesses for 
is latter : assertion,* which those who take him thus to task 
oPeer to disregard. Indeed it cannot be shown that what 
'Dr. F arrar considers ‘‘ the sole proper a ’ of the word 
is.ever the meaning ‘of it, either in the Septuagint or ‘the 
Apocryphal w Titings, in w hich we have certainly better 
authority for the meaning of words in the New Testament . 
_-‘than can possibly be found in Plato or Aristotle. ‘ 

It oceurs six times in the Septuagint of Ezekiel : twénty- 
one times in thé Apocryphal poks. “So iniquity shall not 
be your ruin” (Ezek. xviii, 30).is translated “ your pravish- ¢ 
ment.” In a passage in 1 Esdras, we find the: disobedient 
enjoined to be punished whether by death or other in fliction, 

“ penalty of mdney, or, imprisonment”: where for ‘ infiic- 

tion” the word is actually the very word said to be opposed 

80 entirely i in: mé&ning to xvAa6is,—* punished by rzucpia”! 

and where death, the alternative of fine and imprisonment, . 

is éertainly not a “correctiv Sd discipline.” In the book of . 

_ Wisdom the word i is applied to the punishment of the Egyp- 
tians, and in the 2 ‘Wf&ce. also to death.t - 

Dr. Farrar can scarcely.be acquitted then, cither of super- 
ficjal acquaintance with the subject upon which he speaks, 
or of wilfully shutting his eyes to the facts before him, some 
of which are cited in Dr. Trench’s book..- Even in the New 

- ‘e 3- > = : 

* “In proof that HOAaALS had acquired: in Hellenistic Greek thig 
severe sense, and was used simply as punishment or torment, with.no’ 
necessary underthought of the bettering through it of him who endured 
it, we ne only to refer to such passages as the following: Josephus, 
Ant. xv. 2. 2; Philo,-De Agricul. 9; Mart. Polyear., ; @ Mace. iv. 

38 ; Wisd. of Sol. xix. 4"(Syn. of New Test. Gvii.). ry 

‘+ Prof. Bartlett, in his Life and Death Fternal, has a long note on the, 

‘meaning of.x0A a@61¢,” in which he- brings forward a number of other 
instances, citing among the rest Plutarch, the (spurious) second epistle - 
of Clement, and the Martyrium Rolyearpé. = The list of passaggs from the 
Septuagint and Apocrypha’ is as follows : Ezek. xiv. 3, eae 30; 
xliii. 12; xliv. 12; 1 Esdras viii, 245 Wisd. iii. 4; xi, 9, 14,17; Xin 

15; 27; .x xiv. 10; xvi. 1, 2, 9; 24; xviii. 11,22; xix.4; 1 Mace, vii. 7; 
2 Macc. iv. 88; vi. 14; 3 Macc.i. 3; vi. 8. eS 


priya 


v 


STATE. 


witnesses for 
n thus to task 
vn that what 
’ of the word 
uagint or ‘the 
tainly better 


w Testamens . 


e. 
ciel: twenty- 
lity shall not 


your parish. ? 


Nets 


disobedient 


her dn fliction, - 
» for “infiic- 
o be opposed 
YY Truc@pla ™ 


nprisonment, . 
the book of . 


of the Egyp- 


her of super- 
h he speaks, 
re him, some 
1 in the New 


tic Greek thig 


rment, with no’ 


1 who endured 

ng: Josephus, 

2; @ Macc. iv. 
ie 

ng note on the, 


umber of other 


second epistle - 


‘Sagas from the 

aes XVI 30 ; 

0,14,17; Xi. 
Mace. vii. 7 ; 


ee 


a 


’ to give up all. 


¢ their expositor. .’ he 


ble, is plain enough, 


é 


261 


+ “BVERLASTING 


PUNISHMENT” IN. MATT. xxv, 


- ‘Testament, where out of four passages one is that. itt dispute, 
the evidence is certainty against him. “Fear hath xédaeiv,” 
can hardly refet to “ corrective discipline ” ; ‘and the “ pun-. 
ighment” of the wicked in the day of judgment which Peter 
‘idike of, we have, as we believe, more right. to claim 
than he. * sn <— 


The. word means then practically in the Hellenistic Greek. 


vof the New Testament, “ punishment ” simply, arid the mode 
of punishment it does hot .express, Fine, imprisonment, 
death may ¢ome under the.term ; ‘in the epistle of John (as 
well as in other passages outside of Scripture) it can scarcely 


_ imply othepthan suffering iti some form. 
lasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,” and that: 


we have seen, is torment : . they shall be tormented day and - 


night forever and ever”. , pions 
But arguments pursue us. still; for to yield here Would be 
These turn mainly upop the ternpfor “ ever- 


_, lasting,” and they are of, so very similar naturé; that; we: 


oe be : 


‘think we shall omit nothing if we allow Mr. Ming 


s os Yin : yiaee se iT 
“ele objects that “ everlasting punishment 


AS in expression taken out of ‘a most Hig parable, and which 
Pars nowhere else in the whole Bible. ¢ Che moral q y the para- 
ever on the question. It is only in its prophetical aspect that we 
are how concerned with it, and. in that aspect it is beset with 
difficulties. ** nee 7 
This is the ery Habitually raised. But why should pro- 
phetical questions bea difficulty, when in point of fact people 
ofall kinds'ofprophetical belief see none, and agrge perfect- 
lyin their intérpretation 2? Ag to: being a “ parable,” one 
verse arid a half introduces and distisses all that is in it of — 
this character. There ig a’ simple. comparison of the separa-: 


tion the Lord makes in that day ‘hetween the righteous and ? 


the wicked’ to a shepherd dividing his sheep from the goats. * 
Then immediately the righteous are called -« sheep,” -and 


ST ee Aes cao gsees 
"Way Everlasting,"p. 41, ete, _ Sie 
‘ , 


- 


i 
li fad 
Ai 


iM 


Here itis “ eyer-- 


But in that aspect it has no beating what-: ~ 


a 


Wf 


e: 


302 FACTS AND TITEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the wicked “ goats’’; after which, instead of the. figure being 
kept up, it’isximmediately dismissed, and this language never - 
retufned to; and the details are quite inconsistent with the 
figure being kept up. 

Mr. Minton goes on :— 

‘Whether the event it refers to will take place at the begin- 
ning, or at the end, of the millennium ; whether the sheep and 
the goats represent ‘nations’ or- individuals, and in either exse 
what nations or individuals,—whether Jew or Gentile, Christian | 
or heathen, true and false professors in the chureh ; and lastly, 
who are Christ’s ‘ brethren,’ apparently distinguished both from 
the sheep and the goats ; all these questions are hotly disputed.” 

No doubt; but, as I have said, it has little to do with the 
matter. The parabolic nature of’ the passage has been most 
unwarrantably: pressed, and as a consequence a veil of mys- 
tery has been thrown over what is very simple'in character. 
What may fairly be questioned, as for instance who the 
“ brethren ” of the King may be, need raise no question touch- 
ing our present subject. The everlasting punishment into 
which the wicked are sent away is defined as plainly as can 
be to be “everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his 
angels.” It may be doubtful who ate those punished, and 
when they are; the punishment itself is not doubtful.*: 


° 


‘And “yet it is out of ‘such a parable as this, that a term is 
chosen to be unquestionably the miin pillar of so stupendous an 
edifice as the theory of endless misery, and to be the name by 
which it is universally known.” a 


The name may well express the doctrine, and thus have 


* I do not mean that to myself these questions of who or when are 
doubtful. _I have no question that they are the « nations.” evangelized 
by the “everlasting gospel ” (Rev. \xiv. 6,7) during the ‘interval that: 
elapses between the taking away of the saints to heaven, and their ap. 

- pearingdn glory with the Lord. The interval is of seven years at least,’ ° 
the last week of Daniel's seventy, and. the time of preparation of the ©, 
-earth for its bleSsing, as the present period is that of the gathering for 
heaven. The. brethren” are, I believe, the publishers ofthis gospak,,. 
and. Jews. But all this it would take many’ pages tovestablish from. 


Scripture, and is quite unnecessary to the argument; 
f a 


M 


STATE. 


*-figure being 


nguage never - 


tent with the 


° 


at the begin- 


he sheep and 


in either exse 


tile, Christian | 
1; and lastly, 


ed both from 
tly disputed.” 
do with the 
is been most 
veil of mys- 
in character. 
we who the 
estion touch- 
ishment into 
lainly as can 
eVil and his 
inished, and 
bt ful.* ° 

at aterm is 
swpendous an 
the name by 


d thus have 
0 or avhenare 
” evangelized 
interval that: 
and their ap, 


years at least,” 
ration of" the 


‘gathering for 


f-this gospak,. 


‘stablish from. 


' claim’ that they hold eternal punishment as 


‘ 


~ come into common. use for it; without offence to those who 
uch as we do. 
If the term is itself so offensive, it surely must be because felt 
to be-in opposition really to ‘their views. Why urge the 
“ difficulties”. of ‘the passage, if not so? But because it 
gives a name to the doctrine, it is not, therefore, necess y 
to the doctrine, which has been already abundant! y proved, 
apart from this. , “aN 

~ Mr. Minton next comes to the argument as to ‘“ éverlast- 
ing,” which, although in fact already met, we shall allow 
him to state in his own way :-— 


‘There is gt-once the first crack in your infallible proof. 

_ ¢ Everlasting’ ”—-he adduces “the everlasting hills,” an@ Aaron’s 
‘‘everlasting ” priesthood—« ‘ everlasting’ does not necessarily 
mean ‘endless.’ Why are you so sure that it does so in the pas- 
sage before us? Your answer is ready : because.the same word, 
though rendered differently in our ‘translation, is in the ‘same 
verse applicd'to the life of the righteous, which we know to be 
endless. This is without doubt -the Sebastopol of .your position, 
Thousands of persons who are wholly unable to follow anything 


- like an argument, can feel the full force of this fact, When they 


once know that the word is the same in each clause of the_sen- 


tence, they are perfectly confident that it must bear the same 
meaning in each, ° . ‘ 


‘* But why are you so sure that it means endless in either case ? . ’ 


That eternal life means endless life él 
We know that the expression is used 
senses, hamely, as a present possession, 
. . + Why may there not be some third 
life’ can he presented, differin 

with, the other two?” - 


“eternal life,” i 
igs, whetlier’s 
there js no war 


a 


a 


4 


y 
v 
t 


is , o 
“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT” IN MATT. XXv. “363.” 


TY to ascertain Me precise meat. Ga 


a 


A op M 
\ $30 


‘ A a ye Se 
a parce ‘ We AL ae 
ji . } 0. itm ¢ 
4 va ¥ 
# a 
\ 
> 


Y 


364 FACTS ‘AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ing of ‘the word aionios, rendered ‘eternal’ or ‘everlasting.’ 
Silythere is no difficulty éither: in its etymology or its 

S BY simply t e adjective of the word wion, an age_.or ~ 

Tt jeans, therefore, neers to, or lasting HER Gites a 


Ne - 
Here My" Minton ignores the later use af aion for et} 
nity, which, we have s en,. some of: the st nitest advocate: of 
limited periods have tt ‘admit, and makes) the matter meee - 
by denying’ all that ‘does not’ corisist with his: theory. 
Aionios is mever in he New Testameht, when used in a> 
time sense, ‘less than ‘ everlasting.” It may be limited by . 
the nature of ‘what it} qualifies, as ‘everlasting ” itself is ; 
sut—that does not make the meaning more doubtful in. the: 


e. ‘e 


“one ease ‘than in theo her: | ao 


Jans Sometimomit i is left quite indéfinite,as i in* theev: verlasking hills.’ 
Sometimes it’is aga ably precise, as in ‘everlasting consola- 
tion and ¢ good hope ;” ow ere the assurance is, that the consolation | 

d will ‘never’ fail jus, but will last throughout the whole 
sie ee of our earthly life, that is, as long as we require it.” 

Which pee would show that instead of being ‘“‘ unmistak- 
ably precise” according to Mr. Minton, its: meaning has in 
_this case to be determihied by colfater a evidence, and is not 
precise at all. The truth is, howeve ey, It ¢s precise, and 
instead of being: bounded by a lifetimes he consoling thing, 
the consolation, lasts forever in thé»strictest sense. If the 
future state’ did” not’ ‘ual it}, ‘it’ would be rey. bounded 
by a lifetime, but. that would ‘make it only the hypocrite’s 
-hope that’ perishes, oA kd. 80 in the. next eam et he pro- 
duces, eee AS ae 

“So also St. Paul s: Aye; : J will ent no flesh ue hile thew orld 
c _stanileth, ditetally’ ‘to “the age,’ elsewhere, translated: “forever.” . 
‘The aion thére is the per od of. his‘own. Tife,. ‘and, if ‘the saying © 
. was to becrendered idiot patically,, ft Eahania haye ‘héen- ‘fngalited,, 
“As long. as'T live.” ">" ory arte 2 a ae 


Us J shoul). think if. Faul.: ake ‘heat ‘for: ‘the period: of. ad 


“his. ile: ‘he he-wonld at's i 1¢, literally fotien'y aid the: argu ; A 7 


ATE, 


everlasting.’ 
ology or its 

» an age..or - 
thronghiott? 
ied instance, 


the context,” . mm 8 


n for etgr- 
ivocates’ of “# — 
itter simple | >> 
his’ theory. 
| used in a. 

limited by 

* itself is ; 
btful in the: 


lasting hills.’ 
ing consola- 
+ consolation - 
tthe whole 
ive it.’ 

“unmistak- 
ning has in 
, and is not 
‘recise, and 
oling thing, 
se. If the 
y' bounded 
hypocrite’s 
iple he pro- 


ile the. world 
di: “forever. 
2 ‘the: saying - 
n- translated, m 


“periéd: ‘of. 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT ” IN MATT. XXV.: 865 


Be 


ment is but a plausible deception. If the apostle were going 
to cat meat in eternity, it would have force. ‘Perhaps Mr. 
Miaton thinks he is, but he should show us why he thinks so. 


CLUNT. question therefore stands thus: Is there any aion, ex- 
cept an endless one, to: which the eternal life in Matt. xxv. 46, 

_ car refer 2 Andif so, is thero any reason to believe that it docs re- 
- fertosueh dion there ? Turn to Luke xx. 35, ‘They which shall be 
‘*aecounteil wortlry to obtain that world (aion) and the resurrection 
‘from the dead.” -¥ owand T belicve that. the age there spoken of 

is the millennial igo. . » then why might not the obtaining of 
the blessedness. counee tet with that age, by resurrection in the 


‘case of the dead, or hy: change in the case’ of the living, be called 


© sonial life,’ whic h- we vender ‘eternal Jife,’ deriving our word 
‘eternal’ from! the Latin «tas, or age ? And would there not be 


a peculiar. propricty in this, if, at the same time that those who 
are counted worthy enter. into the life of that age, the members 
of that visik le. eh: arch: then living on-the earth, who are‘counted 
unworthy, incur destruction from the presence of the Lord, and 
aré gathered in bundles to.he burnt:$ ee : 


Let Mr: -Miriton pr oduce. a passage in’ " which “ gonial ” 
means «“ millennial” plainly, and he will ‘be entitled to be 
‘listened 46. This he cannot do, and. if he ‘could ‘he would, 
we may be snre. Even then, how could “gonial life ” 
mean sometimes * “ everlasting,” “sometimes “ millennial ” 
life? Again, what is the meaning’ of. “millennial # life ? 
It eannot be life simply entered into at the millennium, but 
life ‘belonging to it. - Does the believer's. life belong to the 
millennium ° It is not the “life of 
that age ” into which believers enter; Whatever spécial reign 
they may have during that time, their life belongs to eter- 
nity in the strictest sense. “ 
L agree with,Mr. Minton that the judgment here spoken 
of precedes the millerinium; aid bhAt it is a jadgment of in- 
- dividuals.” 


Tn no-sense whatever. 


Eh argument, he. founds: « OF this: if none the less, worthless. 


But. he. comes now to the quegion in aliawer to the post- . 


To me these are both ds clear as need be, and © 
ee therefore: J. need, not bring forward . his proofs. for them. 


L the: 2 at 


—— 


_millenbialist, Le hat thiniks will hipt: be fyowed ey his pro- 


2 
solics ieee ae ee 


pat omen sree yun ee 


eenenesiaeeatincsneeeemtenie 


366 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


phetic expositions. He will allow “eternal ” to mean end- 
less, for the sake of argument. 

‘* And suppose it does, how much nearer would the passage be 
to proving the doctrine of endless misery ? “Not a particle.” 

But why then so much pains to prove that it means “ mil- 
lennial” ? Why, the protest against a term for the doctrine 
taken from so “difficult a parable”? Is Mr. Minton fight- 
ing for the sake of fighting, to show us his power as a com- 
batant, or for the truth’ Why contest points which as 
far as the doctrine: in question is concer ned, have “not a 
particle ” ot importance 


“In order to make it prove that, they would have to prove 
that the word ‘eternal’ cannot be applied to anything which is 
accomplished onee tor all, but the effects of which are eternal ; 
that for anything ‘to be eternal, it must be in eternal process of 
accomplishment. This is your‘assumption throughout. Others 
have asserted it more confidently. But what then are we to make 
of ‘eternal judgment’? Will God be eternally judging the 
_ wicked, as well as eternally punishing them? Will not the judg- 
ment take pla¢e once forall ? In what sense can it be called eter- 
nal, except that its effects are eternal—that is, if the word be 
used in its most extended meaning—in other words, that it will 
be final and irreversible ?. And what are we to make of the eter- 
nal redemption,’ which Christ is spoken of : as ‘having wrought out 
for us’? It is distinctly declared to have been accomplished 
once for all: if will not: be a continual process lasting through 
eternity. It iscalled eternal, because its effects will be eternal: 
And why should not punishment be called eternal on the same 
principle ? If eternal judgment is not eternal judging, nor eter- 
nal redemption eternal redeeming, why should eternal punish- 
ment be eternal punishing” ? 

Now the words are, “ these shall’ go away into everlasting 
punishment,” and this is explained to be “ everlasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his angels.” It is singular how 
the force of these expressions is felt; almost admitted, 
_ and then denied. First, the complaint is, that a phrase is 
taken out of a most difficult parable ; then everlasting is not 
everlasting but millennial; then if it is everlasting it is per- 


° 


TATE. 


(O mean end- 


he passage be 
particle.” 

means “ mil- 
the doctrine 
Minton fight- 
er aS a com- 
ts which as 
have “not a 


ave to prove 
hing which is 
are eternal ; 
al process of 
out. Others 
‘e we to make 
judging the 
not the judg- 
ye called eter- 
the word be 
s, that it will 
of the ‘ eter- 
gq wrought out 
iccomplished 
ting. through 
1 be eternal: 
on the same 
ng, nor eter- 
rnal punish- 


everlasting 
lasting fire, 
ngular how 

admitted, 
_ a phrase is 
sting is not 
ng it is per- 


’ 


“EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT” IN MATT. XXV. . 367° 


fectly correct, annihilation doctrine : the effect of the pun- 
ishment is eternal, and punishment is not “ punishing.” 
Now even as to the’ last it is really the literal force of the 
word,* which, moreover, always implies suffering in some 
form. Fine, imprisonment, death are that, and the passage 
in the first epistle of John, already quoted, cannot be ren- 
dered otherwise than by some word near akin to. “torment.” 
It is not a word that will possibly allow the thought of the 
sufferer passing away from under it, while yet. it endures. 
The punishment cannot continue when there is no longer a 


~ person to be punished. ' Annihilation cannot be eternal pan- 


ishment. This & why Mr,Minton is so anxious to have it 
“ millennial,” as we haveseen. He is uneasy under the very 
idea of its being eternal. Why will we ‘call it So, quoting 
the words of a very difficult parable? Then he taiips round 
and says, let it be eternal, it is all right, and we fi believe 
in it alike. It must be seriously doubted if we.d6: 

But “eternal redemption” is not an eternal process, and 


“eternal judgment ” is not; why should eternal punishmerit 


be? As for eternal judgment, of course “sentence ” 
(xpiua) is not always being passed; but the person is 
always under it, or it would not be eternal. An® similarly 
as to redemption, the person is always’ enjoying it. If the 
punishment then be inflicted suffering (and that is ‘the very 
idea of punishment), the person cannot cedse to Be And the 


‘suffering go on. Let Mr: Minton find-the’ passage ifwhich 


xdhaors does not imply:suffering of some sort, and then be. 
will have some argument; ‘but then it will be easy to prove 
that every beast that dies (and multitudegpiing 

pain) suffers eternal punishment as éri/y a3 ila 
cannot deny it. A beasp’s Joss may be, of COMED 
less than a man’s as a man is ‘more than a best.“ 
nal punishment is as real in. the one casa as ingghé% 
~ It will not do then to talk,as’ Mr. Minton d3eay 
offect bee ae The effect and what produces th® effect, 


are very diff€rent things. In “ eternal redemption” the 


) 


* KoA : , 


“ag 


368 = FACTS AND THEQRIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 
; Ed] 


redeemed are not merely. cternally enjoying the Wlessedness 
into whieh they are brought as the effect of redemption, Gas 
the redemption also itself: And this is; if you Tike to say se, 
one of the. effects ; but the redemption itself’ is possessed and 
enjoyed forever. It is in vain to plead that the punishment 
is endured forever, when there is no longer any: being to ene 
dure it. ae 

As to the “ everlasting fire,” Mr. Minton ag usual refers 
to Sodom and Gomorrah, but adds nothing fresh to the 
argument. : . : : 

We have aden why “everlasting fire” is, and what 
its effect. It woul Map the mere lengthening unneces- 

racted argument to take this up 

again. We have still t6” consider some things connected 
with this doctrine in Scripture, and it is time to turn to 
these. 


‘ 


ry 
o 


CHAPTER XXXVit. 


“THE GOSPEL OF HOPE.” 


8 


Our accounts, with annihilationism are well-nigh closed. 
But there remain still some from. the opposite side of 
restorationism which require to be looked at, and among 
the advocates of this, spite of his protest, we must reckon 
_ Dr. Farrar. He is not indeed an assured Universalist ; but 
it is not wronging him to say that he is one in hope. _ILis 
bodk is styled “ Eternal Hope,” and his own views are evi- 
dently identical with what h@) calls, “the gospel of hope’: 
where by “ hope,” he does not mean certainty, not a “hope 
which maketh not qshamed,” but at leasta hope that ‘away. 
His utterances are faturally somewhat inconsistent and con- 
tradictory in consequence. But we will .credit him with 
the womewhat independent ground he takes, and reserying 


the do i sc, the “restitution of all 


STATE, 


1e Whessedness 


demption, but 


like. to say se, 
possessed and 
@ punishment 


Ge . 
y being to en? 


; usual refers 
fresh to the 


‘is, and what 
ning unneces- 
take this up 
ss connected 
ic to turn to 


‘nigh closed. 
site side of 
. and among 
must reckon 
ersalist ; but 
| hope. ITIis 
eWs are evi- 
lof hope’: 
not a “hope 
e that wee. 
ent and con- 
it him with 
nd reserving 


“THE GOSPEL OF OPE.” ~ 


things,” as stated in ‘Scripture, tor future con id 
will now look at his position, which ave will state 
‘words. 


\ 
Pown 


“On such a question as this,” he suys,* “TI caro but little 
for individual authority, but this mueh at least. is proved by the 
many differing theories of wise and holy men—that God has 
given us no clear and decisive revelation on th@ final condition 
of those who have died in sin. — It is révealed to us that ‘God is 
love’; and that ‘Him to know is life eternal, ; and that ‘it, is 


die, even so in Christ shall all be ‘made alive *; but how long, 
even after death, man may continue to resist His will ;—how 
long he may continue in. that gpiritual death, which is alienation 
from God ;—that is one of the sceret things which God hath not 
revealed. But this much at any rate, that the fate of man is not 
-finally and. irreversibly ‘sealed at: death, you yourselves, —unwit- 
tingly perhaps, but: none the hes certuinly, admit and declate 
and confess, every time you repeat. in the Apgstles’ Greed, that 
Christ. descended into hell. For the sole passage which proves 
that article of the creed is the passage in St. Peter which tells us 
'. that ‘He went and: preached to the spirits in prison, which some- 
time were disobedient.’ St. Peter in my text tells you in somany 
words, that ‘the gospel was preached to them that were dead,’ 
and if, as the chureh in every age has held, the fate of those dead 
sinners was not irrevocably fixed by déath, then it must be clear 
and obvious to the meanest understanding tliat neither of neces- 
sity is ours, oo : 
“There then is the sole answer which I can give to your ques- 
tion, ‘what about the lost ?’ My belief is fixed upon that 


answer is with Thomas Erskine of Linlathen, that ‘we are lost 
here as much as there, and that Christ came to. seek and save the 
lost ;’ and my hope is that the vast majority at any rate of the 
lost may at length be found. If any hardened sinner, shamefully 
loving his sin, and despising the long-suffering of his Saviour, 
“rifle with that doctrine, it is _at his own just and awful. peril. 
fe if on. the other hand, there be some among. you,—as are 
|, there not ?—souls sinful indeed but not hard in sin ;—souls, fail- 


not His will that any should perish’; and that ‘asin Adam all: 


‘living God,’ who, we are told, is ‘the Saviour of all men.’” My . 
ving 5) A 


pation of all 


ing indeed, yct even amid their failing, who long, and pray, and 
: oe Eternal Hope, p. 86, ete. 


at an, 


a 


~ 2 he 
é 7 
, ¥ é 
a Yr . 
’ } ‘ 
o 2 x 
~ | : 
© o ” 
" 0 
- f ; 
( . ¢ 
¢ a 
’ 
i ; 
’ é 2 
* a 
2 
” s 
be a U . ; 
‘ ‘ 
ik 
4 » j : 
> 
. 
is , 
° 
ate 
‘ 
~ 
q 
: 
Bs 
ae 3 
He 
a 
Ld ) 
dp ~ 
“= 
‘ . 
\ 
‘) 
\ 
a : 
: | | } . Wt 
#, y 
ie 
(oer | 
oe ‘” : 
- So 
‘ 
w 
By 
‘ 
| t 
i é 
‘ : 
t 


eee Inches” 


Centimeter 7 


1 


e 


SoA eo AO) 37. 


s 
PST PES 
—=> 
: — 
2 e 
Lie es 
bh 4 i 
bd pereres ' ‘ : 
—<—— ; 
—_ ‘ o, iS i 
22 t - * ms f 
~ L254 6 | ( 
‘ . ‘ kK 
Va 
i ry 


ee U., W 


Yk 
1100 wayne Avenue Suite pion y AN & 
ilver Spring, Maryland 20910' : « 
3 Ke Go 


“8° 9 10 WW 12. 13° 14) 15 mm 


3 eS 5 e 
bis 28 25 - 
oe 

us 132 22 

ob om 

= me [Zo € 


foe) 


— 
oO 


& 
ae ea j\ @ 4 
- MANUFACTURED TO AIIM STANDARDS AN AS 
BY APPLIED IMAGE, INC. ae: a oS 


+ 


@ 
y 
e | 3 
Ny 
- 
n 
re) 
Se a 
a . =o 
Pepe 
if 
- 
E 
i 
a a 
t a 
&; 


870 = FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


love, and agonize, and strive to creep ever nearer to the light ;— 
then I say, have faith in God. There is hope for you ;-~ghope, 
even if death overtake you before the final victory is won ;—- 

“hope for the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven ; 
hope for the mourners, for they,shall be comforted—though you 
too may pave to be purified in in that Gehenna of reopian fire beyond 
the grave.” - 

“We are wretched ; therefore—not surely in this short world 
only, but forever—God will pity us. Punish us? Yes, punish 
us, because He pities. But ‘God judges that He may teach, He 
never teaches that He may judge.’ His ‘eonian fire is the fire 
of love ; it 18. to purify, not to torture ; it is to melt, and not to 
burn.””* 

This is Dr. Farrar’s “ pape! And if it were Feonfined to 
himself, one might. afford to pass it by, but it is a hope that. 

_suits men well, and that they are dr inking in,—a hope that 
is not the true hope for those “ poor in spirit” whom he 
addresses, and for whom God. has far sweeter comfort ; but 
a hope that just those triflers with a Saviour’s mercy of 
whom he speaks will take to hang themselves over that 
awful abyss of hell, till they prove it, not the fire of love, but 
the awful and eternal fire of wrath, which answers to the un- 
dying worm within. 

First then, as to these “poor in spirit ””—souls longing, 
praying, agonizing, striving ever to creep nearer to the 
light—is God’s answer to your longing this, that after all 
the fire of Gehenna may he needed to purify you? No, it 
is the news of a better purification: “the blood of Jes 
Christ His Son cleanseth from all sin.” What saved a 
dying thief at the last hour, can-save still without the need 
of “ wonian fire.” Dr. Farrar’s “ gospel of hope” mis-states 
the whole case: as to man’s condition, but worse, it slights 
Christ’s blessed work, and substitutes penal fire for atone- 
ment,—wrath for grace. 

Is man willing to have God’s salvation, and God lacking 
in will or in power to save him? Never, surely.t “ Who- 


a 
a 
! 
yf 
| 
4h 


ao 


* Eternal Hope, p. 97 
tI take this opportunity of noticing briefly Mr. Cox's argument in 


LTE. 


he light ;— 
OU j-~ghope, 
is won ;—- 
heaven ; 
though you 
tire beyond 


hort world 
Yes, punish 
y teach, He 
is the fire 
and not to 


onfined to 
hope that. 
hope that 
whom he 
nfort ; but 
mercy of 
over that 
»f love, but 
to the un- 


Is longing, 
er to the 
it. after all 
1? No, it 
1 of Jesys 
it saved a 
| the need 
mis-states 
’, it slights 
for atone- 


od. lacking 
t “Who- 


arcument in 


“THE GOSPEL QF HOPE.” 371 


soever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” 


~ Is salvation a doubtful, laborious process, arrived at by long 


es 


ee 


effort, by prayers, by strivings, which may have to be eked 


pot ec 


this connection, which is the starting-point of his book. He asks, if Tyre 


and Sidon would have repented in view of Christ's mighty works, why ¢ 


. . < . 
were they not permitted to witness them? “Can we blame them, will 
God condemn them, and condemn them to an eternal death, or an eternal 


misery, because they did not see what they could not see?” “It 


seems hard and unjust.that a man’s salvation, a man’s life, should hang 


2 gate 


“on the age into which he is born.” “And et who dare say of an 
g y yo y 


class of men, in any age, that nothing but their own will prevented their 
salvation? . ..No; to say,* Doubtless God gave these poor men all 
that was necessary to life and virtue. . is simply to offer Him that in- 


sincere flattery, to show Him that respect of persons, which even Job . 


could see He Himself would be the first to rebuke.” Thus Mr. Cox 
can “see no way out of the difficulty, so long as we assume what the 
Bible does not teach, that there is no probation beyond the. grave.” 
He has no doubt that the men of Sodom and Tyre have heard Christ’s 
words long ere this, and that the words, “it shall be more tolerable for 
them in the day of judgment imply this”! (Salvator Mundi, ch. i.). 

Now we are among the people of “ brain so narrow” as £@Delieve 
the Lord’s words imply the very opposite of this, They cerfftin ly show 
that_the issue of the day of judgment depends upon. the present, 
Sees, by man to God, and not upon a supposed future one; 
for if it depended upon the future, it could-not be decided nov that it 


would be “more tolerable” ; especially as nobody has a fair chance.’ 
now! But then, if man’s will-is no¢ the obstacle, what are we to think * 


of our Lord’s, “ how often would I, and ye would not,” or “ ye will not 


ccme unto me,” etc. 


Doubtless Tyre and Sidon will not be condemned for not seeing what 
they could noi see: no one believes théy will. But they are responsi- 
ble for the light they bad, and there zs a “ more tolerable ” judgment,— 
“ few stripes ” instead of “ many.” i 

Again,“ Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonas,’’ an illustration 
of what the Lord means in this very connection. Was that “ repentance 
unto life’? The city remajned in consequence, was not- overthrown : 
Capernaum, not repenting, was. The comparison shows that the Lord 
does not affirm that Tyre and Sidon could have been so brought to God 
and saved, but that at least they would have been affected and humbled, 
like Nineveh, by a visitation which the cities of Israel were callous 
and indifferent to. With this sense there is no “ difficulty ” to get out. 
of by an unwarrantable and unscriptural supposition. 


372 FACTS AND THEORI&s AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


out after death by some supplementary process? Nay, but 

being “ justified by fuith, we have peace with God through 

our Lord Jesus Christ,” “justified through the faith of 

Christ, and not by the works of the law.” Is hell-fire God's 

process of salvation for those who look to Ilim, or God’s: 
wrath upon those who reject Ilis salvation? It is the latter, 
and not thd former. Did Christ tell the “ poor in spirit” 

that theirs was the lake of fire or “the kingdom of heaven” ? 

Did He tell the mourners they should be ‘‘ comforted” or 

tormented ? ry ps . 

Dr. Farrar’s gospel is really infidelity as to fundamental _ 
truth—as to- Christ and grace. It makes. their hearts sad 
whom God has not made sad, while those only could ‘find 
encouragement in it who are as ignorant of grace as he is, or 
else those wha want comfort to go on in sin as long as they . 
can. The apostle asks, “‘ how shall we escapaiye neglect ? | 
so great salvation?” Dr, Farrar answers, W Guay escape, 
even out of hell itself, and most will, perhapgall. The Lord 
bids, “ Fear Him who is able to destroy both body and soul 
in hell.” Of course He is ab/e, but.fle never will, says Dr. 
Farrar. It is not an exceptional thing that the question 
of God’s love and the denial of His trath should go together. 

e have not forgotten the texts, however. One article 
‘of the apostle’s greed, it seems, rests upon a most “ isolated 
/ text,” “the sole passage ” iri Scripture for it. According to 
‘his own words elsewhere, we might suppose he would not 
care to lay stress upon this. But we should be mistaken. 
He thinks this isolated text sufficient to bear the entire | 
weight almost. of the whole doctrine that the fate of men 
is not fixed by death, but that. they may be saved after it. 
| We could not upoh our own principles, however, object 
to the production of even one passage if really ¢lear. But 
Dr. Farrar takes no, pains to show that it is so. While 
speaking as he does about texts torn from their context, he 
self presents us with the middle of a sentence from 
Scripture with both ends cut off; and while believing, on 
another subject, that the “differing theories of wise and holy 


TATE, 


2? Nay, but 
x0d through 
the faith of 
ell-fire God's 
im, or God's: 


is the latter, 


or in spirit” 
of heaven” % 
mforted”’ or 


fundamental ; 


ir hearts sad 
ly could find 
‘e as he is, or 
long as they 


we neglect °° 


ay escape, 
. The Lord 
ody and soul 
vill, says Dr. 
the question 
go together. 

One article 
ost “ isolated 
According to 
e would not 
be mistaken. 


ir the entire | 


fate of men 
ed after it. 
vever, object 
y¢clear. But 
; so. While 
ir context, he 
ntence from 
believing, on 
wise and holy 


ea? 


« 


“THE GOSPEL OF HOPE.” 373 


men” prove as to it that “ God has given no clear and de-/ 
cisive revelation,” quotes this as if entire unanimity prevailed 
about it, ‘as what “the church in every age has held,” when 
he means “some in the church,” more or less as it may be. 


Perhaps we must not expect over-much consistency ; but if” 


the Canon’of Westminster apprehended aright the zreattess 
of the issue he is raising, and if- he believed in S¢ripture as 
what alone could settle it, he would not be content to deal 
in this light and flippant way with the authorities he adduces. 


One cannot but feel that after all Scripture is very little that 


for him, and that his main reliance is elsewhere. For haply it 


his own text went against him he would. protest against 


“this ignorant tyranny of isolated texts," as he has done. | 


already, and vaunt the fre his “ Christian liberty ” to adopt 

his own independent thoughts. Oe Meee 
But we, who claim no such. liberty, nor desire it, are 

bound therefore, nevertheless, to accept his appeal to Scrip- 


ture as if it were a loyal one. Let us first read the ey 


then, as it stands, in our version, which is sufficiently cor. 
rect :— : 3 


| 


| 

‘For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the Just for the 
unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also [He went and 
preached to the spirits in prison, which* sometime were ‘disobe- 
dient] when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of 


Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight — 


souls, were saved by water” (1 Pet. iii. 18-20). . 
I have bracketed the part that Canon Farrar quotes, and 
emphasized the immediate context which he omits. It ought\ 


to speak for itself as to the suitability of the passage for his \ 


purpose. . 

First, it was by the Spirit that Christ went and preached— 
not personally, as the words separated from their context 
might be thought to mean. It has been sought to make | 


Sa a a nn re te ee te ee 


* Edw. White, who takes a similar view of this passage with Dr. 
Farrar, reads “though they once had been disobedient ’—but this is 
interpretation, not translation (Life in Christ, p- 320). 


: 


\ 


: 

374 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 
“the Spirit” signify Christ’s human spirit; with this neces. 
sary cffect, that if Ile were ‘“quickened in’ His human 
spirit,"* that human spirit nrust have itse/f" died, in order to 
be quickened. On this. aceount it has been attempted to 
substitute, “ quick,” or “alive,” or “preserved alive,” for 
“quickene\l”: meanings-which tue word cannot possibly 
bear. ‘‘Made alive by the Spirit ’t can. only refer to resur- 
rection, and\thus it is not Christ as a disembodied spirit that 
is spoken of at. all. Rel 

‘ But people urge that “Ie went and preached” shows a 
personal going. It has heen answered that in the same way 
He “came and preached peace,” in Eph. ii. 17, must be 
(what confessedly it is not) a personal coming.  “ By the | 
Spirit He went” excludes the thought entirely. 

Then further gs to the “ spirits in prison.” * They are in 
prison vor (that is the force of it) as having been once dis. 
obedient in the days of Noah. But disobedient to what “ 
Why, to the Spirit’s preaching. It was of these that of old 
God had said, “ My Spirit shall not always strive with man.” 
Plainly it was in that time of old that Christ had preached 
to them, and what should make it certain, without. any nice 
questions of translation, is that the limit of God’s striving 
‘with these antediluvians is:plainly set:—“My Spirit shall 
not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: but jis 
days shall bean hundred and twenty years.” Tt is ‘strange 
that some should think that a limit put to human life, which. 
was then, and for gencrations afterwards, far longer. It is 
the limit of the Spirit’s striving with that generation, at the 
end of which the flood came. With them the end of the 
Spirit’s striving and of their life came together. And it is 
just these whom Dr. Farrar and others will have it that 
Christ specially singled out to preach to more than two thou- 
sand years afterward, in direct contradiction of the divine 
assertion that His Spirit. would not strive. 


Sk 
* The words afe quoted thus in “ Yesterday, To-day, and Forever.” 
t Strictly év rvevpuari, ‘ in (the power of) the Spirit.’ The 7@ should 

be-omitted, 


« 


STATE, 


ith this neces. 
1 Tis human 
¢, iri order to 
attempted to 
ed alive,” for 
nnot possibly 
refer to resur- 
ied spirit that 


ied” shows a 
the same way 
17, must be 


ng.“ By the | 


‘They are in 
een once dis- 
ient to what % 
se that of old 
ve with man.” 
had preached 
hout any nice 
x0d’s striving 
y Spirit shall 
flesh: but his 
It is strange 
an life, which. 
longer. It is 
ration, at the 
1c end of the 
r. And it is 
have it that 
han two thou- 
of the divine 


and Forever.” 
The 7@ should 


‘tion is. 


“THE GOSPEL OF HOPE.” 1, 375 


t 
ig 


The text is an unfortunate one for Dr. Farrar. It is un- 
fortunate that the very examples to which he appeals of 
probation protracted beyond the grave, should be the very 
examples given us by the word of God itself of the precise 
opposite! And we may take his reasoning to reverse: his 
conclusions, and say that, “ if the fate of these dead sinners 
was itrevocably fixed by death, then it must be clear and 
obvious that «we have no good reason to suppose that ours 
is not as much as thei. Nay,‘it is scarcely reasonable to 
imagine that they are an exception to, instead of an illustra- 
tion of; the universal rule. 

Canon Farrar has a similar text, however, in the next 
chapter of the first epistle of Peter. Let us take it, too, in 
whole and not in part, and see if it will lead us to any other 
conclusion. . — oe 

. “For for this cause [was the gospel preached also to they 
that are dead] that they might be judgec, according to Pegi 
in the flesh, It live according to God in the Spirit” 


“(1 Pet. iv. 6). r y 
Here Dr. F. has substituted “that were dead” for “ that 


are dead” without comment, evidently that we may infer 
that the people were dead when preached to. But the pas- 
sage reads literally““to the dead”; and we must gather 
the rest from the context which he omits. And heré it is 
not hard to see that his inference is as Wrong as his transla- 

. The apostle has been speaking of the altered conduct of 
those converted from heathenism, and of how the Gentiles 
around mis-judged them. “ Wherein they think it strange 
that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking 
evil of you; who shall give account to Him that is ready to 
judge the quick and the dead.” Thus sinners were judging in 
their fleshly way the spiritual life that approved itself to God 


as such. Christians were judged afte®the manner of men in 


a fleshly way, but lived according to God ina spiritual one. 
And for this—to separate them from the ranks of these mis- 


judging ones, themselves the objects—of—Godsri¢hteons 


Ss 


376 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE gf ATE. 


Jadgment,—had the gospel been preached to them. — So far 
call is plain; but why ‘‘to the dead”? Surely because the. 
apostle would bring in the very thought Dr. Farrar rejects, 
that death fixed the condition in which it found men. These 
righteous ones had got the good of that preached gospel, 
which had made them anticipate the coming doom of sinners, 
and accept the judgment of men in the ‘flesh, rather than 
God's final and etctntif”one. But could they poasibly be 

“dead” betore they were preached to? Not certainly if 
the end was to be their being judged according to men in 
the flesh for their changed lives! The context is conélusiy ely. 

-fizainst the restorationist interpretation.* 
~The other texts cited will come in- more fittingly else- 
where. Meanwhile we must look at one er two Scriptures 
more in this connection, which, although glanced at by Dr. 
“arrar, are more strqngly put by Mr. Jukes. 
He thus speaks of — 


‘Sthe passage respecting the sin [* blasphem yy” it sem be] 
against the Holy Ghost, which our Lord declares ‘ shall not 
forgiven, neither in this “world, not in that which is to come.’} 
Por this it is concluded that the punishment for this sin must be 
nefer-ending. But does the text say so? The whole passage is 
as follows :—‘ Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and 
‘blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy 
against the Spirit shall not be forgiven unto men. And whoso- 
ever speaketh a word against the Son of Man it shall be forgiven 
him ; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall 
not be forgiven him, feither in this age, nor the coming one.’ 


Edw. White (Life i in Curict Dp. », B21) s says: “They had the gospel 
ee to them in hades,in order that they might be judged by 
Jesus Christ, and judged like men in the flesh, by the same rule as 
others who have had the gospel on earth, that is, by the gospel message 
itself; so that they should not necessarily perish under the law, but 

‘may live (enter into life) according.to God in the Spirit’ ” Te ‘does 
not see that. they who receive the gospel are nor “ judged,” and if they 
were, could not escape condemnation. For men are judged not “ by 
the gospel,” which is a deam of his own, but “according to their 

ete ‘ 


+ Matt. xii. 32. 


STATE. 


them. — So far 


ly because the. 


Marrar rejects, 
dimen. These 
ached gospel. 
om of sinners, 
h, rather than 
y poasibly be 
ot certainly if 
ing to men in 


is conclusivel y. 


fittingly else- 
Wo Scriptures 


ced at by Dr. 


it sa be 
8 ‘shall not be 
h is to come.’} 
his sin must be 
hole passage is 
ner of sin and 
the blasphemy 

And _ whioso- 
ill be forgiven 
Ghost, it shall 
e€ coming one.’ 


had the gospel 
t be judged by 
1e same rule ‘as 
2 gospel message 
ler the law, but 
init” Te does 
zed,” and if they 
judged not “ by 


cording to their 


“THE GOSPEL OF HOPE.” 


377 


These words, so far from proving the generally received doc- 
trine, that sin not forgiven here can never be forgiven, distinctly 
assert—first, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be for- 
given unto men,—secondly, that some sins, those namely against 
the Son of Man, can be forgiven, apparently in’ this age,-—and 
thirdly, that other sins, against the Holy Ghost, cannot be for- 
given either here or in the coming age ; which last: words surely 
imply that some sins not here forgiven may be forgiven in the 
coming age, the sin or blasphemy aguinst the Holy Ghost not | 
being of that number. This is what the text asserts ; and it ex- 
plains why God has so Jong withheld the generaf out-pouring of 
His promised Spirit ; for man cannot reject or speak against the 
Spirit, until the Spirit comes to act upon him: God has two 
ways of teaching men ; first, by His word, the letter or human 
form of truth, that is, the Son of Man, in whieh ease a man may } 
reject God’s call without knowing that he is really doing s6 ; the . 
ether, in and by the Spirit, which convinces the heart, y Raich 
therefore cannot be opposed without leavitig men cons@& 

. guilty of rejecting God. To reject this last cuts man off f 
the light and life of the coming world. This sin therefore is not meh | 
forgiven ; neither in this age, nor in’the coming one. But the _. - es | 

| 


text says nothing of those ‘ages to come,’ elsewhere revealed to 
us ; much less does it assert that the punishment | of sin not here 
forgiven is never-ending. ’’* 


Dr. Farrar does not go quite so far; he says :—t ; 


“If a¢wy be rightly rendered, as, in nearly every passage 

* where it occurs, it may be rightly rendered, by ‘age,’ out Lord 
only says that thereis one particular sin—and what sin this 
is no one has ever known—which is so heinous as not. to be par- 
donable either in this (the Jewish) or the coming (the Christian) 
dispensation. Nothing therefore is of necessity implied respect- 
ing the world beyond the grave. But if it be, how oferwhelming 
is the argument with which Iam supplied! Every sin and blus- 
phemy shall be forgiven, our Lord says,—without further limita- 
tion, and with no shadow of a hint that He refers to this life 
only—a gloss which indeed His words directly exclude ; every 3 i 
sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven here or hereafter, except i 
one! ‘If one sin only is es Aron forgiveness in a ut coming 


mA t ternal Hope, Pref, pp. xl, a 


* Restitution, pp. 120, 121. 


| 
ss 
| 


~ 
v7T8 PACTS AND THEORLLS AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


‘age, other sins cannot stund on the same level, and the dimness 
behind the veil is lit up with at least a gleam of hope.’ ”’ 


Mr. Oxenham has still another view :*— 


“Nowon this verse Lobserve, first, that our Lord says nothing. 
about hell; and secondly, that what He does say bears on exum. 
ination no resemblance to an assertion of the popular doctrine of ” 
endless misery, _ Our Lord declares that there is a sin against the 
Holy Ghost for which there is no @@eors either here or he reafter, 
He uses the words emeors and ape, the root-meaning of which 
is ‘sending away,’ ‘vetting rid of.) He declares of this sin that 
it can néver be got rid of : i. e., something of the sin, its charac. 
ter, its consequences, Will last’ on always—-this is what He really - 
says ; uncbis it beyond the reach even of our present unlerstanding 

— to conceive that the. penal consequenees of wilful sin against. the 
Holy Spirit, viz., ¢. ¢., loss of capacity to know and to love the 
truth, and Him who is truth, miy well be irremediable cither 
here or hereafter ?. How great such a pe muty would be, or in 
what manner it would be felt or received, we have no means of 
knowing ; but we feel at once that this pe nalty is something 
wholly differeit from wh: uf is commonly meant by eternal pun- 
ishment ; it is compatible with existence in heaven.” 


SAAT REM MT aT 


2 RARE NR Mc NE RR OSEAN I RINT ST WH a 


The three views heing so dissimilar, it wilt he no great 
marvel if Scripture be again dissimilar from them all. We 
shall take them in retrograde order, Mr. Oxenham first. 

His view is that “something of the sin, its character, its 
consequences,” he does not know exactly what, will last. on 
forever, But surely that is loose and uns: itisfactory enough, 

‘Ipinca_and eects are the only words for “remit” and 
“ remission,” the latter alsothe only word for *‘ forgiveness.” 
The phrases used are, ‘‘it shall not be forgiven him,” and 
~*hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of (or subject to) 
eternal jrlyanent” (Mark iii. 29). That defines it plainly 
enough. “ ITath-never ‘sending away ’” would be insuffer- 
able, not mercly in-sound but in sense; and if one subject 
to eternal judgnient can be in heaven, heaven can seare ely 
be what Scripture represents it. Tt would be no better for 


Mr. ‘Oxenham if’ we Head with Canon. Farrar and ¢ ers, 


* Letiér IIT. (a). ° 


KE STATE, 


and the dimness . 
f hope.’ ”’ 


e 
Lord says nothing. 
ty bears on exium. 
ypular doctrine of ” 
Sib sin against the 
here or hereafter, 
meaning of which 
's Of this sin that 
he sin, its charae- 


is What He reully-- 


nt wmlerstanding 
ul sin against. the 
yand to love the 
remediable cither 
r would be, or in 
weve HO Means of 
uty is something 
by eternal pun- 


bo 


ven, 

vili be no great 
them all. We 
enham first. 

ts character, its 
hat, will last on 
factory enough. 
r “remit “ and 
forgiveness.” 
riven him,” and 
(or subject to) 
fines it plainly 
uld_ be insuffer- 
| if one subject 
en can scarcely 
e no better for 


2 ARIE a a CRT ENE RE EINE IO IN: Kit it AP ZEA A ut HH 


‘STE GOSPEL OF HOPE.” 379 


instead of eternal judgment, “eternal sin.” I cannot accept 
che reading, but it is immatgrial to the present question. 

Dr. Farrar’s own reasoning turns upon the rendering of 
“this world” and “the world to came.” Whether we read 
is hot in Scripture 
heaven or hell or hades. It is undoubtedly what the Jews 
understood well and looked tor, the world under Messiah, 
which Christians unhappily less know under that title than 
as the millennium. It is even called (in Heb, ii. 5) the 
“ habitable (earth) to come,’ the word used for “the wort a 
under Ceesar’s rule, which he decreed should be taxed 
(Luke ii. 1). If not (as Dr. F. thinks it may be) the Chris- 
tian dispensation, it is yet a dispensation affecting men in 
the body, not “spirits in prison” nor the resurrection of 


it * ave” or not, the “ world to come” 
i ade ’ 


judgment. 

Consequently when it is said, whosoever shall plaspheme, 
it shall not be forgiven him either in this world or that 
which is to come, it does n@gefer to for giveness beyond the 


r mean the same rerion inthis world and the world 
: gave; Ty 1 


to come, but that the sin would not*be remitted to any one 
who committed it in either a,se. ear 

Even Mr. Jukes falls into the same error, but he is 
bolder, and adds various suppositions of his own to it. He 
supposes that the sin against thé Son of Man Would be for- 
given only in this age»-Ie supposes that some sins not 
forgiven here may be forgiven in the coming age. And the 
ages beyond being quite unnoticed, there may yet. be for- 
giveness there. Bat in truth the reason for not going 
beyond the “age to come ”’ is an opposite one: It is because 


beyond the millemnial age is the judgment and eternity, and - 


all is fixed forever. We have already examined Mr. Jukes’ 
theory of these ages of eternity, on which, of course, his 

“view of this text is based; and need not, and shall not, 
return to it again. 


But aword: we must oe say a3 to another Seripture, where | 


the-“great_gulf fixed” 


death state at least, of any passing from the unit of torment 


- 


x 


380 PACTS AND TITEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


On the one side to the comfort in Abraham’s bosom on the 
other. Mr. Jukes, of course, objects that it is a parable, but 
that we have considered. No doubt the expressions here 
are figurative; yet they express very plainly what they tig 


~ 


ey ure. He also tells us that this great gulf fixed, ‘thouch 


utterly impassable for man, is not so for ‘Iim who hath the 
key of David, who opencth and no man shutteth, and shut. 
teth and no man opencth,’ who ‘hath the keys of death and 
hell’; and who, as*He has Himself broken the bars of death 
for men, can yet ‘say to the prisoner, Go forth; to them 
that are in darkness, Show yourselves.’ ”’* 5 

There is more of the same kind, always confounding a 
day of grace with a day of wrath and judgment, and assur. 
ing that “judgment without mercy + shall be mercy still. 
The great gulf fixed is not impassable to Christ, he says. 
But Christ is the very One who has fixed it. He has 
ordained that none shall pass it, and that settles it for the 
death state at least that none shall.. After this, eternal 
Judgment allows no escape. 

Yet Dr. Farrar will have it that the parable shows us 
“haw rapidly in that condition [in which the rich man is 
seen. in hadés] a moral renovation has been wrought in a 
sinful and selfish soul.”{ He has not told us how it shows 
this, but I suppose by the concern he manifests for his 
vrethren. But the motives for this the parable does not 
show, so that it would be difficult. to assign its true moral 
sicnificance® The fact remains of a.“ great gulf fixed” 
already in the intermediate state between the two classes of 
just and unjust—a gulf which cannot be traversed upon 


cither side. “ After death, the judgment,” and the nature: 


and duration ‘of that final award we have been for some time 


_ considering. 
= 


But all Scripture assures us of the momentous fact that 
the significance of the present life is just this, that here and 
now is decided man’s eternal destiny. He is called to repent 


fp NES SC CN A ER AT NN NEARER aa 


* Restitution, p. 137.¢ + James ii, 13, 
ft Eternal Hone, Pref. xxxi., note, 


‘ 


FE STATE, 


's bosom on the 


isa parable, but - 


xpressions here 
y what they tiv 
fixed, ‘‘thouch 
m who hath the 
tteth, and shut. 
ys of death and 
1¢ bars of death 
forth; to them 


confounding 4 
ent, and assur. 
be mercy still. 
Christ, he says. - 
d it. He has 
ttles it for the 
ir this, eternal 


‘able shows us 
1e rich man is 
wrought in a 
how it shows 
nifests for his 
able does not 
its true moral 
t gulf fixed” 
two classes of 
raversed upon 
nd the nature : 
for some time 


ea, 


tous fact that 
that here and 


pom 


& NITLLIST—-KESTORATIONISM. 381 


TO-DAY, lest. God swear ‘he shall not enter into His rest’ . 
(Heb. iy. 7, 11). And who shall Bay that briet’ #s indeed ft 
is, the present life may not as fully test the individual man,” ¢ 
as indefinite ayes ‘of probation or eternity itself? T he judy- 
ment after leah it must be allowed is ac cording to deeds done =. 
in the body and no other, If these did not after all character- 
ize the man, that judgment would be partial, and therefore | 
i 
, 


false. It is in vain then to plead for the extension of a day 
of grace beyond the present, which brings with it no exten- 
sion of responsibility such as the day of judgment would = 
take notice of; as vain as to plead that the Gehennayudg- 
ment of one whose corpse was cast out-amid the worm and 
flame of the polluted valley is the type of a remediable, or | 
a texminable retribution. » 


CHAPTER XXXVIIL 


AN NIMWILIST-RESTORATIONISM.—MR. DUNN'S THEORY. 


Ir is né6 wonder that—considering the moral argumenta ; il 
that have been put forth to sustain it—annihilationism should 
have failed to satisfy the minds of many of its advocates. 
It is well to note, in looking brictly at the views now to 
come before us, that they are the product of a mind influ- 4 
enced by speculative considerations, anxiously seeking a i 
way of escape from what in the first instance was believed’ 
to be the teaching of Seripture. I mean, it was not Serjp- : i 
ture itself that raised question in the mind, nor led him who | 
puts, them forth away from what passes current as orthodoxy *: 

as to these points, but certain feelings of his own which rose. i 
up against it, and under which he sought and at last found, . i 


. as he believes, a way of escape. “It is precisely in the same 


led to repent 
3, 


way that infidelity rejects Scripture altogether, and-we-shall— 
have to consider it more fully at another-time. I am not by’. 0 
this pronouncing upon the result at which he has arrived, 


a 


t 


382 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATR. 


I am only stating that (true or false) this is how : he got 
upon the path which led. him to it. : 
, Mr. Dunn's theory is a compound of two apparently very. 
a dissimilar things, annihilationism and restorationism. — If di- 
minishes the former to the least possible degree, reser ving it 
for some obstinate transgressors only. In this respeet jit re- 
sembles the doctrine (or one of the doctrines) of the Talmud 
already noticed, which in asimilar way combines the theories, 
In other respects Mr. Dunn's system is quite different, how- 
ever, for those finally saved with him never come into 
Gehenna. 
For convenience, and brevity we may take Mr. Blain’s 
representation of the views, of which he ‘has become the i 
zealous advocate. IIe has incorporated in the book* with 
~ + * which he has replaced his former one,a letter by Mr. Dunn 
himself, so that we shall have. the doctrine also in the words 
of its first teacher, The main points moreover are all that 
we have space to deal with. 
Mr. Blain first: gives the chief points in Mr. Dunn’s — 
“ theory ” (as Mr. B. himself calls it), as follows. Wee shall 
look at them as they are stated :— ; 
“1. God, in all the dispensations previous to the second per- 
, _ Sonakcoming of Christ; has been and is still calling out. and pre- 
¢ | “paring a select people, called in both Testaments: ‘the chureli,’ 
“athe ‘elect,’ ‘the bride, the. Lamb’s wife,’ ‘the first-frnits,’ ‘ first-* 
born,’ ‘a chosen generation,’ and also ‘kings and priests,’ toin- 
dicate that they are to be rulers and teachers in a dispensation 
et to come. It was this elect people that Christ meant, when 


ee - "He said He ‘ prayed not for the aw orld,’ and whom He ¢alled the 
- a. ‘little flock who should possess the kingdom,’ or to whom ‘the 

' Father would give the kingdom,’ meaning by the kingdom the 

Pe ‘government in the world to come. . . Te be one of Christ’s 


bride we must find the ‘narrow ray,’ the ‘strait gate,’ which 
comparatively few find ‘in these dispensations, Thus, if. this 
_ view be sustained, these texts and others like them, dre no proof 
++ of only ja few being finally saved. Others will be saved as 
subjects.” 


* * Tape fi our ehaee (Buttalo, N. ae 2nd ed., 1873). 


‘ 


STATE. 
3 how ‘he got 
parently very. 


It di- 


Cy, reserving it 


onism. 


respect jt re- 


of the Talmud 
s the theories. 
litferent, how- 


‘Yr’ come into —. 


» Mr. Blain’s 
; become the 
ie book* with 
by Mr. Dunn 
in the words 
ar are all that 


Mr. Dunn’s 
‘'s. We shall 


le second per- 
x out and pre- 
‘the chureh,’ 


-fruits,’ ‘ first-~ 
priests,’ to in- 


a dispensation 
/ meant, when 
He ealled the 
to whom ‘the 
_kingdom the 
1¢ of Christ’s 
i gate,’ which 


Thus, if. this . 


, ire no proof 
be saved as 


° 


AN NIHILIST—~RESTO RATIONISM., 


Dunn. 


It is w0¢ true that this meakgphat there will be salvation 
for. those who die unsaved now ; nor is “election” what 


Mr. Blain states. But that is not our subject 


2. The Jewish nation was called out to be t 


priests, an holy nation.’ 


he the bride of Christ, 
31... Micah vy. 3 tells us how long they [‘the re 
ure 
Wi 


unto he children of Israel.” Read from ver. 1-4 


3 with Rom. xi. 25-27, and we see this given up remnant areto........... 
The church now travails and will, until the ‘ fulness 
of the Gentiles is brought in,’ then the < broken off remnant’ is 


be saved. 


383 

The first part of this statement is in the main true, that 
those called out before the coming of the Lord are to reign 
with Him during the dispensation that follows His coming. 
This we have before considered. It is no “ theory ” but a 
Scripture statement, and tecentd by many long before Mr. 


here. 
he headship of 


nations (s/c) or to be what is meant by the elect church,.as the 
~ prophecies show plainly. See Exod. xix. 5: 
..\ + ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people ; 

forall the earth is mine, and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of-' oa 
But this’ promise was conditional, and ,. 
as they were not obedient, and finally rejected Christ as a os 
nation, they became the broken off branches of -Rom. xi. 17, and « 
only the ‘election’ named by Paul, or the really righteous among 
them, of every age, together With the called of the Gentiles, are 
finally to constitute this ‘kingdom of priests and kings’ (?)—to * 
This is the people meant in Psa. xxii. 30, 


‘if ye will obey 


st,’ Rom. xi. 7] 


to be blinded, and that they are to be restored : ‘ Therefore, 
ye give them up, until the time that she which travaileth has 
br ught forth ; then the remnant of his brethren shall return — 


and comp. ver. 


to be restored to those Paul says ‘are of Israel,’ meaning the 


‘elect.’ ”’ 


Mr. Blain reads Scripture, I am compelled to say, very 


carelessly indeed. There is some truth here, 


error, as will be apparent in a moment. 


even conditionally, the promises which are 
Christ, nor that believers now inherit the pr 


but more 


It is not true-in 
the first place that to Israel as a nation were ever given, 


now ours in 
omises which 


were once theirs. Rom. ix. 4 should keep any one from con- 
founding these, as it shows. that the “ promises ” given to 


op 


” 


ay 


a 


384 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the nation still were theirs (although for a time in abey- 
ance) after they had rejected Christ. The passage in Exod. 


xix. shows that these promises had to do with an carthly, as 


ous with a heavenly inheritance. It’ is quite true that the 
two correspond more or less in their different spheres, the 


earthly being the type of the heavenly, as the Jerusalem of 


the future corresponds (with some essential differences) to 
the New Jerusalem of the Apocalypse.* But the earthly 
and heavenly are easily recognizable and abundantly dis. 
tinct. Scripture never confounds them, if interpreters have 

done so; and it is not responsible for their mistakes. 

But the last. statements of Mr. Blain are qually careless 
at the least. Where does Mic. v. speak of fhe restoration 
of the blinded Jews? It does speak of the rejection of 
Messiah, and that for that the nation woul be given up 


until the time that she which travailed had ‘brought forth. 
(I do not take that last expression as referring to the Chris- 


tian church, but neéd not contest it here: the result is much 
the same.) Then \‘the remnant of J/is brethren ”__the 
brethren of the “ Judge of Israel” whom they had smitten 
on the cheek—“ shall return unto the children of Isracl.” 
Mr. Blain makes “the remnant” thé unbelievers—“ the 
brokegsoff remnant” he calls them, while the apostle shows 
us the remnant as the\“election of grace” and not broken 
off. The remnant of His brethren (remembering the Lord's 

words to the Jewish people, Matt. xii. 49, 50) are plainly 
this believing remnant, “those who do the will of His Father 
in heaven” whom alone Te accounts such; while “the chil- 
dren of Israel” should he quite evidently the nation at 


-large. So that it is the believers who return to the nation - 


of Israel, not the unbeliever ‘who. return to the believers. 
Mr. Blain may have difficulty in understanding the sen- 
tence read in that way, but the reason is, not that it is really 
difficult, but that his views are exactly opposed to the true 
meaning. This is often the apparent obscurity of Scripture, 
that if does not fit with our\4theories ” of what it should 


* See ante, ‘s Old Test nent Shadows.” 


ha a a a ces cea Ha RT 


a 


5 STATE. 


time in abey- 
ssage in Exod. 


yan carthly, as 


true that the 
it spheres, the 


Jerusalem of 


differences) to 
it the earthly 
yundantly dis. 
rpreters have 
istakes. 
jually careless 
he restoration 
» rejection of 
be given up 


yrought forth. 
- to the Chris- 


result is much 
ethren ’—the 
y had smitten 
2 of Isracl.” 
lievers—‘ the 
apostle shows 
d not broken 
ng the Lord's 
)) are plainly 
of His Father 
rile “ the chil- 
he nation at 


‘o the nation — 


> believers. 

ling the sen- 
at it is really 
1 to the true 
of Scripture, 
hat it should 


the time indicated. Mr. Blain 


; 
— ANNIUILIST-RESTORATION IS MS B8h 


say. Its Tate very simply this: during the present 
unbelief of Israel, \believers among them are necessarily by 
their very faith separated from the nation. In Christ there 
is “neither Jew nor\Greek.” But when the time shall have 
come for God to fulfil His ancient unforgotten promises to 
the nation'as such, when Israel, in travail with her hopes of a 
progeny shall ‘have b ought forth,* then believers among 
them will, of course, find . their place again in connection 
with the nation. This will not be, as we have seen,f till 
“they look upon Hin whom they have pierced” and mourn 
for having pierced Him, when “ Ile cometh with cloudg, and 
every eye shall see Ilim’ too, * 

That is, when Christ has taken up His people of: the 
present and the past, and when He is. preparing blessings 
(though through judgment) for the earth, then the time of 
His giving Israel up will De over, and with His return to 
them, His brethren Avnceforth (not the individuals gone to 
heaven before it) will become identified with the nation as 
of old. : | 

This explains how according to Rom. xi., the “fulness of _ 
the Gentiles ” will be come in, and so “all Israel” saved : 
i. e., not the former unbelievers, but the nation as such at 
nfounds these in a manner 
not very creditable to his intelligence, and certainly entirely 
unauthorized by the texts he has produced. a 


“3. Wher Christ comes perscual y, which he thinks will be 
soon,—the church, the tricd and purified, will’ be raised first, 
‘Christ thé first-fruits ; afterwards they that are Christ’s, at His 
coming.” They will be raised immort . Will be associated 
with Christ in judging the world : ‘the saints shall judge the 
world,’”’ : y, > hata — 

As to this we have already: looked at Scripture; nor do I 


question its truth. . The next, poi brings out fully the dis- 
tinct feature of the system, and its essential error :-— 


“4, At Christ’s coming, and after the resurrection of the 


* Comp. Isa. Ixvi. 7-12, and many other places in the prophets, 
+ See ante, ch’ x., “ The Purification and Blessing of the Earth.” 


o 


“N 


386 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A EUTURE STATE. 
a 


4 
elect church (how soon not told), all who have dicd impenitent ’ 


will be raised, and in due time Christ ‘will be made known to 
them by the elect church ; or by Christ appearing to them as 
He did to Saul; and the offer of life be made to all who hayc 
not ‘blasphemed against the Holy Ghost’ or ‘sinned wi fully 
‘after having « knowledge of the truth,’ in former dispensations, 
In this coming dispensation, and,in due time, light being give ny 
the mass will repent and uceept Christ, and so be saved ; But 


with what he ealls the’ legser salvation, —will not reign with ~ 7 


Christ, or be of the bride,'but be ‘ the nations’ outside of the 
New Jerusalem, as told of in Rev. xxi. 22-26. Like many others, 
Rer. ar, seems dark to him—says but little about it ; but decides 
there will be a dispensation, called that of ‘the fulness of times,’ 

before Christ gives up the kingdom. . . As to the time this dis- 
pensation is to last, heis indefinite, not being guided by the one 
thousand yeary of Rev. xx.” 


It is no wonder. that “not being guided ” by God’s ex. 


ress “revelation”? upon the subject, Mr. Dunn should be: 
Pp p Ject, | 


in the dark. Had he been so. guided, he would have seen 
that the thousand years he can mgke nothing of, are the 
whole duration (or nearly so) of that reign of righteousness 
which precedes the eternal state, and that the resurrection 
does not take place till after this, when the heavens and 
. earth flee away. 


But the whole idea Ae a "resurrection of the wicked, which 


is not to judément, is the flat contradiction of Scripture, not 
interpretation at all. The Lord has expressly divided « all 
that arein the graves” into these two classes raised to Oppo- 
site destinies: “they that have done good unto the resur Tec: 
tion of life, and they that,have done evil unto the resurrection 
of judgment.” Mr. Blain tells us “the sorrow, shame, and 
self-reproach felt by Saul (of Tarsus) and the three thou- 
sand at the day of Pentecost” will be “the main, if not the 
only, wailing and bitterness which the impenitent risen 
dead wilt experience,” and that “only as they will lose the 

‘crown, or ‘birth-right’ blessing.” A man that can make 
out that to be the resurrection of Judement, such as it is de- 


bo Fl 


K STATE. 


4 
dicd impenitent — 
made known to 
wing to them as 
. to all who have 
‘sinned wilfully 
er dispensations, 
ght being given, ‘ 


: rn! 
oO be saved ; But o : 


not reign with. ~ 
;’ outside of the 
Like many others, 
it ; but decides 
ulness of times,’ 
he time this dis- 
uided by the one 


” by God’s ex: 
Yunn should be: 
ould have secn 
ing of, are the 
if righteousness 
he resurrection 
e heavens and 


wicked, which 
f Scripture, not 
ly divided “ all 
raised to oppo- 
to the resurree- 
he resurrection 
»w, shame, and 
he three thou- 
main, if not the 
penitent risen 
y will lose the 
that. can make 
uch as it is de- 


“> 


“ shas even the semblance of sustaining it. 


_ ble, the writer of two books which we have bee 


on 


ANNIIILIST-~RESTORATIONISM. 


387 


ge considered, it seems 


scribed in the passages we have at lar 
really uscless to argue with. 


This whole idea of a resurrection of impenitent men at 
the Lord’s coming, and of Christ afterwards made known 
to them by the church, or by IIis appearing to them, 20 
- Noris there one that 


even one,tvxt is addueed for here 
Mr. Dunn’s texts 


are evidently the ordinary ones pleaded by Universalism, 
from which he just saves himself, as Mr. Blain tells us, 

_ by taking “all,” “every” and “the whole ” 
often the mass, or great majority. 

“The term ‘the kingdom of God,’ ”” Mr. 
comes an important word in this theory. 
the New Testament the same us ‘life’ or 
“with this idea, the saying of Christ, 
leadeth unto life’ is easily ecplauined,” 

No doubt it is. Few difficulties could be 
survive such a process of manipulation. 
spare the lexicographers themselves, 

Mr. Dunn’s letter is addressed to the Rey. 


as meaning 


B. also tells us, ‘be- 
It Srequently means in 
‘eternal life.” And 
‘narrow is the way that 


expected’ to 
It would scarcely 


Henry Consta- 


n already 
examining, and details at length how he was led into the- 


views he has adopted. We have only space however for 
what bears directly upon our present subject. 

Mr. Dunn became first an annihilationist, and gives some 
of the usual arguments, but he found annihilation fail to 
give him full satisfaction. His first trouble was that still the 
creation of man seemed to be a failure. 


‘Christ, in such a case, seems rot to have destroyed the works 
of the devil, since that is accomplished, according to this view; 
by mere power, and by the fiat of the Eternal Father, Satan, 
instead of seeing his schemes baffled, his work undone, his malig- 
nity utterly defeated, becomes in a, certain sense conqueror, in- 
asmuch as he succeeds in preventing man’s restoration to the 


image of his Maker, and drags with himself into eternal perdition, 
not thousands or tens of th 


ousands merely, but the whole human 
Tace, with the exception 


of the comparatively few who here re- 
ceive the truth, and obey. it to the saving of their souls,” 


Ve 
ws 
od 7 ! 


888 = FACTS AND TITEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


Now the-ruin of man is nof merely the devil's work—it is 
man’s own, We have all heard how at a certain place the 
Lord cast out a legion of devils with a word, and how the 
people of the place, instead of welcoming the Deliverer, 
prayed Him to depart. So it is ever wherever a soul is. 
» finally lost. It will not do to say it is the devil’s triumph: 
if it were that, Mr. Dunn's scheme would be no more satis- 
factory than what he gave up, for the question of how many 
times God has suffered deteat is a very minor thing com- 
* pared with the question, how could Ie suptcr defeat at all? 
If a hundred souls lost were Satan’s victory, in these God 
would be a hundred times defeated! If that be possible, a 
million or a billion such might be, 

We do not believe in Satan’s triumph in even one single 
instance. He has been permitted to gain a temporary ai- 
vantage, and by it a worse and utter defeat at last. Tell i: 
not his work,” but his judgment, and he does not “ overcome 
when he is judged.” : 

But I agree with Mr. Dunn that the settlement of the 
question of tlic existence of evil by mere physical annihila- 
tion would be a mere riddance by power of what ‘might be 


well thought could not be got rid of in any other way. 


But he continucs :— 

‘**Purther—and this seems equally impossible—tthe schem: 
represents God as allowing hundreds of millions to come into ex- 
istence every thirty years, under conditions that all but compel 
their utter misery and et: rnal ruin after a brief, painful, and appa- 
rently unmeaning earthly existence,” , 

But neither can this be atrue representation of the matter. 
We are as sure as Mr. Dunn is, that God would never pun- 
ish for eternity what was the fruit more of ignorance and 
weakness amid the pressure of circumstances too great to 
be resisted by human strength. If that is the true state of 
the case, men, or a mass of them, would be more the objects 
of pity than of blame. And He who is infinite in pity, and 

is slow to judgment, because He delighteth in mercy, could 
not overlook the essential difference. God will not_damn 


gees Soe ee 


et ee 


! 
S STATE, 


I's work—it is 
‘tain place the 
» and how the 
the Deliverer, 


ever a soul is- 


vil’s triumph : 
no more satis- 
of how many 
or thing com- 
defeat at all 2 
,in these Gou 
be possible, a 


yen one single 
emporary ail- 


last. fell ;:: 


ot “ overcome 


‘lement of the 
sical annihila- 
vhat ‘might be 


ny other way. 


e—the schem: 
9 come into ex- 
all but compel 
nful, and appa- 


of the matter. 
ld never pun- 
gnorance and 
too great to 
true state of 
re the objects 
ein pity, and 
mercy, could 
vill not_damn 


Co rn RENEE IO 


AN NIHILIST-RESTORATIONISM. . 389 
| 7 


for ignorance, for weakness, for inability to resist when cir- 
cumstances were too strong, but for wilfulness and obstinacy 
in wickedness aldne. .So Scripture represents it. | It repre- 
sents men perishing, not as destroyed of Satan, or of adverse 
overpowering fotee of any kind, but as self-destroyed; and’ 
‘whatever be the mystery of this, and no one can pretend a 
competence to explain the depths of God’s providential 
government of the world, we may safely leave it to Him, 
who will in the end vindicate the wisdom and goodness of 
His ways; and “overcome when He is judged,” not by 
superior power but by truth and right. 

But by these speculations Mr. Dunn was influenced in 


his pursuit of some fresh light that was to clear up the 


mystery. Tle says ;— 


“TI felt that I -ha not yet reached the whole truth... I. 
could not feel satisfied that I had so far rid myself of hereditary 
prejudice, and asinful} fear of consequences, as to have established 
anything in harmony With the revealed doctrine that Christ was 
the Saviour ‘of the w rld,’ the'Seeond Adam, and as such the 
Redeemer of the race that had fallen in the first.” 


Universalism had already, that is, got hold of him, but # 


his difficulty was to make Scripture agree with it. He was 
already steering his ¢ourse towards a definite point, bent 
pon finding what hel had decided must be there before he 
found it, and already jwas so far under the delusion of.-it as 
to be confounding the potential and the actual, what the 
will of God is for every man, with the result in which man’s 
contrary will meets His: “How often would Ihave gath- 
cred thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her 
chickens under her ‘wi g, and ye would not. Behold, your 
house is left unto_you desolate!” 

So Mr. Dunn went on “ for many long years,” struggling 
to have things as he tl ought they ought to be. 

“IT now turned,” says he, “to examine the words of the 


- prophets, and began, for the first time, to listen with purged 


ear to the whisperings »—the emphasis upon the word is 
his own— 


¢ 


ROTO Ae Bl ft en 


ee 


390 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


“the whisperings, so to speak, of ‘ holy men of old who spake as 
they were moved by the Holy Ghost,’ und who so often uncon- 
sciously addressed themselves to those on whom the latter days 
of the world should come. I fgund in them much more than 
I had expected which seemed to bear on the ultimate purposes 
of God, in relation not to the Jew only, but also to the Gentile ; 
much that spoke of restoration in connection with resurrection. 
The first passage I noticed as apparently throwing light upon 


. repeated declarations that a period shall come when truth and 


righteousness will be universal, was that remarkable portion of 
Isaiah (xxv. 7, 8) in which the prophet declares that the ro- 
moval of the ‘veil which is spread over all nations’ will take 
place at the time when God shall ‘swallow up death in victory,’ 
and when He shall ‘wipe away tears from all faces ’—a passac 


which is distinctly applied by the apostle Paul to the resurrection, 


and partially by John to the happiness of the redeemed.” 

These are what Mr. Dunn calls ‘‘ whispers,” so that I 
suppose we are not to expect in them very distinet utter. 
ances of what he contends for. It is certain they are not 
very distinct. For on the face of what Paul says, he is 
speaking of the resurrection of ‘those that are Christ's, at 
His coming,” and of no others. If otherwise, then when he’ 
speaks of their being raised “in incorruption,” “in power.” 
“in glory ’—the wicked too are raised in this w: ay, and of ® 
course the question is eternally settled for all of them, apart 
from all question of Christ being offered to them after. 
wards, ” 

We have always believed too that the “veil spread cover 
all nations” had to do only with the nations alive on earth 
when Christ came, and had nothing to do with their resur- 
rection; and that ‘“‘God wiping away all tears from their 
eyes” might be applied to the happiness of the redeemed 
without showing that the wicked dead are among the re- 
deemed. Mr. D. goes on— 


‘‘A second, found in the same prophecy, was expressed in. 


these words: ‘In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt 
and Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land ; whom the 
Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed_be Egypt my people, 


and Assyria, the work of my hands, and Isracl mine inheritance,’ . 


A. 


ee ee 


| STATE, 


ld who spake as 
30 Often uncon- 
the latter days 
uch more than 
timate purposes 
to the Gentile ; 
sh resurrection. 
ing light upon 
vhen truth and 
able portion of 
es that the re- 
tions’ will take 
ath in victory,” 
"0S ’*—2 passage 
he resurrection, 
Pemed.”’ 
rs,” so that I 
distinet utter- 
a they are not 
ul says, he is 
re Christ's, at 
then when he 
” “in power.” 
8 way, and of ® 
of them, apart 
o them after- 


1 spread over 
alive on earth 
th their resur- 
rs from their 
he redeemed 
mong the re- 


$ expressed in . 
rd with Egypt 
1d ; whom the 
rpt my people, 
e inheritance.’ . 


ANNIHILIST-RESTORATION ISM. 391 


A third appeared in Ezekiel, where tho prophet speaks of Sodom . 
and her daughters as returning ‘to their former estate,’ and says 
to Israel, ‘ I will give them to thee for daughters, but not by thy 
covenant (Ezek. xvi. 55-61). A fourth was found in Jeremiah, 
‘I will bring again the captivity of Moab in tho latter days,’ and 
further, ‘I will bring again the captivity of tho children of 
Ammon, saith the Lord’ (Jer. xviii. 47 ; xlix, 6). There aro 
many other kindred texts, but these, referring to the heathen 
nations of antiquity, steeped as they were in the grossest sin, 
will suffice for the present. No one pretends that they have yet 
found a fulfilment, or that they can do so under the present dis- 
pensation. Regarding apostate Israel similar declarations wbound. 
Take only one by. Hosea (xiii, 9-14): ‘O Isracl, thou hast de- 
stroyed thyself, but in me is thy help, J wilt ransom them from 
the power of the grave ; Twill redeem them from deatli ; 0 death, 
I will be thy plagues, O grave, I will be thy destruction ; repent-:__ 
ance shall be hid from min eyes,’ i. @., the promise shall bo’ 
made good. To me it seemed utterly impossible to attach any * 
rational meaning to predictions like these, whether relating tol!’ 
Gentile or to Jew, which did not directly contradict the suppo- 
sition that the persons spoken of were to be annihilated. The 
ussertion made by Matthew-Henry and others, that in such pas- 
sages denunciations are upplied to the natural Israel, and promises 
to the spiritual Israel, appeared to me, and still appears, nothing 
less than a complete changtng of the prophecy.” 

And to me also. Nevertheless Mr. Dunn has himself 
missed the meaning. The above passages are evidently the 


whole strength of his position, as apart from ordinary resto- | 


-Tationism. Tis mistake is throughout identical, and it is one 


he would not surely have made, had he not been under the 
power of preconception, as he has already frankly owned to. 
us. .He confounds, as do a la umber of sge@palled “ Ad-- 
ventists,” nagional with individttl resonate national 
with sndtinibeat resyrrection. ee 


Yet in that diligent examinat ion of the prophets which 
he had for so long a time been 


= 


carrying on, he must have 


come across passages which should haye corrected. his mis- 


take. Take for instance the well-known passage in Ezekiel, 
(ch. xxxvii.) where the resurrection of dry bones is expressly 


‘ 


892 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


interpreted in this way. “Then he said unto me, Son of 
man, these bones are the whole house of Isracl. Behold, 
they say, our bones are dried, and our hope is lost; we are 
cut off for our parts. Therefore prophesy, arid say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my people, Avil! 
open your graves,-and. ¢ause you to come up out of your 
graves, and. bring’ you into the land of Israel. And ye shall 
know that Iam the Lord, when I’ have opened your graves, 
O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, and 
shall put «my Spirit in you, and ye shall live; and I shall 
place you in your own land.” 
If Mr, Dunn wanted a passage to express his views, he 
could scarcely find one more suitable every way than this. 
One might have imagined it the very one which had fu: 
nished him with his idea. Tere is resurrection, and conver- 
sion after resurrection, quite according to histhought. Yet 
he has not ventured to produce this passage in evidence,and 
it is clearly inapplicable as evidence. It isa figures of 
wational revival simply, such an one as the chosen people 
are yet to know. People literally dead as individuals would 
not) be represented as saying, “Our bones are dricd,” ete; 
while they might well bewajj their national deatlt so. This 
way of speaking is not uncommon in the prophets, and 1 
have no doubt that an example of it is found even in Dan. 
xii. 2, where literal resurrection is more gdgnerall y believed 
to be in question, but where the contradiction to any view 
of literal resurrection is absolutely prohibitory to the 
thought. It is not a general resurrection (a thing moreover 
* found nowhere else in Scripture), for it would not in that 
case be “.Wany of them that sleep in the dust of the earth.” 
"NHowever numerous the “ many,” they cannot be all the dead. 
Again, it’ is not the first. resurrection, for some awake “to 
shame and everlasting contempt.” Nor issit the resurrec- 
tion of judgmenk, for the reason that others awake “to ever-, 
‘lasting life.” And the rendering some would propose, 
“these (who awake) to everlasting life; but those (who Cc 
continue asleep) are for shame and everlasting contempt,” 
; 4 


He 
zi 
‘ij 


c 


) STATE. 


ito me, Son of 
racl. Behold, 
8 lost; we are 
and say unto 

y people, Avil 
ip out of your 
Aud ye shall 

d your graves, 
ur graves, and 
+; and I shall 


3 his views, he 
way than this. 
hich had fu: 
yn, and conver: 
hought. Yet 


-evidence,and 


isa figure- of 
chosen peopic 
viduals would 
e dried,” eta; 
eatle so. This 
ophets, and I 
even in Dan. 
rally believed 
n to any view 
jitory to the 
ing moreover 
1 not in that 
of the earth.” 
2 all the dead. 
ne awake “to 
the resurree- 
ake “to ever 
uld propose, 


t those (who -- 
¢ contempt,” 


ANNIII ILIST-RESTORATIONISM, 393 


is an inadmissible rendering to yet over a suppositious 
difficulty. For “those whe vontinue asleep” do not come 
igo the text atall, as is evadent. Interpreted in accordance 
With the passage in Ezekiel,-there is ny difticulty, fur in the 
national revival of Israel there Will be that double issue, 
It will not be blessing to all, but sifting and discernment 
between the righteous and the wicked, in many places 
asserted as to Isracl in the strongest terms, 

Again in Isa. xx yi, 15-19, we have a similar figure: “Thou 
hast increased the nation, O Lord, Thou hast increased the 
nation: Thou art glorifiek; Thou hadst remove 
all the ends of the earth. Lord, in trouble they have visited 
Thee, they poured outa prayer when Thy chastening was 
upon them. . . Thy dead shall live, my dead body, they 
shall arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust ; for thy 
dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out her. 
dead.” Ilere. the misapplication. to 


d it far unto 


literal resurrection has 
led toa very unwarrantable translation. In our version it 
is put “ loyether with my dead body, they shall arise,” as if 
the prophet expected his own resurre 


ction among these, 
whereas it is Jehovah answering the er 
- 


y of the people, and 
claiming them, dead ag they were, as Ilis: ‘Vy dead body, 
they shall arise.” 

Again in Ios. vi. 1,2, the prophet exhorts them to re- 
pentance,in the assurance of mercy : “Come, and let ug 
return unto the Lord; for He hath torn, and He will heal 
us: Ife hath smitten, and {7¢ Will bind us up. After two 
days Ie will revive us; in the third day He will raise ug 
up, and we shall live in ILis sight.” 

This is symbolism, very suitable, 
to understand; whereas if lite-ally taken, as Mr. Dunn takes 
it, it clashes with many Scriptures. And the same remark 
applies to the restoration and revival of other nations, 
where ‘the image of resurrection is not however used. 
Moab and Ammon, Assyria and Egypt, are undoubtedly. to 


or 
complish it, just ag He, 


e 


and by no means hard 


revive, whether by the recovery ot the identical races 
not, Ife knows who can and will ac 


a 


i 
yy 
' 
: 
. 
HT 
{ 
| 


5 


304 PACTS AND TYFORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


~~ 


will bring torth in His own time the tribes of Ephraim, 
now so vainly being searched for. On the other hand 
Kdom and Babylon lie under irreversible doom, In all mm 
there is no difficulty with God; and even as to Sodom, wo 
have no proof of the race being utterly extinguished when 
judgment fell upon the guilty city. Thus there is no im- 
possibility in restoration, without bringing up from the grave 
the people destroyed then. In supposing the latter, Mr, 
Dann has been listening to the reasonings of his own mind, 
and not to the * whisperings ” of the prophets. 

Ilis further texts are Pa those appealed to hy Uni- 
versalists of every class. Its. being “more tolgrable for 
Sodom in the day of judgment” than for Capernaum, he 
found it difficult to reconcile with the annihilation of either, 
IIe quotes the Lord’s words, “I, if I be litted up from the 
earth, will draw ad/ wen unto me,” which will be quite trac 

« of that future condition of thg earth, when the “prince of 
Feprhis world shall” (according to what Ile says in immediate 
connéction with this) “be cast out” (John Xik JL, 32), but 
' has no reference to those dying in their sins 
what Christ also says, whet" He bids the heir 
¢ heavenly Kather in forgiving their enemies, time 
only, but from the heart, and therefore forever; not for 
' in ‘offences s only, but ie call; not ‘seven fines "merely, 
beg i: pty times seven’ :” w ords which he misquotes sand 
plaingtor according to such a principle | there . 
Rlay of ulgment ” at all for any.*-. 
| 8 also I's words: ‘As by one man’s dis- 
obedience the many were made sinners, 80 by the obedience 
of one shall the may be made righteous,” where he accu- 
‘rately enough puts “ ¢ie many”’ instead 0% “ many’; but in- 
accurately retains ‘‘ one” instead of “ the one.” Tt is. plain 
that that indeed spoils the argument he would draw from 
this: for if “ the many,” in that definite way, must mean the 
same people in each case, then “the one,” by the same rule, 
must mean the same particular one, which we know it dves 
not. 


e 


CY 


*« 
. 


‘ erat EK. e 


sof Ephraim, 
@ sear! 
mi. Tn all th 
to Sodom, avo 
nguished when 
here is no im- 
from the grave 
he latter, Mr. 
his own mind, 
. a 
led to by Uni- 
tolgrable for 
Capernaum, he 
ition of cither, 
d up from the 
be quite true 
he “prince of 
sin immediate 
diy OL, 32), but 


‘time 
not for 


ever ; 
Limes ’ merely, 
misquotes and 
principle there 


ns 


ee 
an 


ne man’s dis- 
the obedience 
‘here he accu- 
any”; but in- 
” It is plain 
id draw from 
nust mean the 
the same rule, 
know it does 


rh 


e 


# Wack to the only source of light and trufhyasking with 


“e 


ANNIHILIST-RESTORATION ISM, 895 


He ¢ites next: “The creature itself (all creation) Shall be 
livered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious 
» diberty of the children of God,” which is “creation” as we 
* *ordinarily: apply the word—the lower creatures, They 
could not be brouvht into the liberty of grace, but sh@ll be 
into “ the liberty of the fory” (which is the CX@Ot expres. 
sion) when the sons of God are manifested in glory (Rom. 
viii. 19-28), In the same Way and in the 
is not “ in relation to man generally” that the Apostle “tells 
us, “he is a captive not by any choice of his own ” (for he ; 
is, alas, a willing captive) : if is still the lower creatures who 
have fallen with man, not of their-own will, but as connected 
with him who was ordained the head of creation, “not 


willingly, but by reason of Him who hath subjected the 
same tn hope.” 


After telling us that 


SAaMC passage, it 


. = 

he had studied also most carefull 
y 
“every text that appeared to have another bearing ” with 


out finding reason to reverse the conclusion at which he had 
arrived, he goes on to say : “So again and yet again I went as 
deep - 
eatnestness, ‘ What I8 written inthe New Testament regard- 
ing the future lot of the masses of mankind 2?’ The passage 
that struck me as affording a kind of key-note to the inquiry 
was found in St. Paul's first cpistle to Timothy, ‘This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all aceeptation. . . . We trust 7 
in the living Ged, who +s the Saviour of all men, especially a 
of them that believe. These things command and teach.’ 
Here was ‘the missing link,’ and one certainly that could 
not be set aside by the pretence that ‘Saviour’ meant tem- 
poral preserver in one clause of the sentence, and spiritual 
Redeemer in the other.” — on 
_ [suppose few would affirm that, and that it is rather be- 
jeved that owrnp ig here in both clauses « preserver,” 

d not “Saviour.” Mr. Dunn can. hardly dispute that it 
may mean that, and therefore that. he has no proof here of . 
his position, especially as everywhere in Scripture “the day 
of salvation ” ig stated to be “ new,” in the present time, and - 


396 . FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


not beyond the grave. Indeed if Christ be now “the 
Saviour of all men,” as in a sense He is, it does not follow: 
that He will be that finally for such as now reject Him, and 
it is often threatened that He will not be. But then Mr. 
Dunn’s proof is nowhere. 

He goes on to connect this with what he presently found © 
as to the kingdom of God, and here (as we have noticed) 
he presents much that. is really Scriptural. But. even here 
he is, as natural, too much engrossed with one aspect of 
future blessedness in:-which every other is merged. I may 
not pause to point: out where he fails, however. It if “quite: 
true on the other hand that. the saints saved now are “to 
‘Sit on thrones’; to ‘judge others’; to ‘ reign on the earth’: 
to be ‘ priests’ as well as ‘kings’; to rule some ‘with arod 
of iron.’” No part of this is new to believers in the Lord's 
pre-millennial advent: It seems to have been new to: Mr. 
Dunn, and so to have encouraged him to believe that here. 
he had found what he wanted for the perfecting of his idea: 
“May it not then,” this’ kingdom, he asks himself‘ be the 

“appointed agency for bringing about the final triumph of 
the Redeemer by placing the myriads who here live and dic 
without light, without training, I might almost say without 
probation, under perfect. government and infallible teach. 
ing?” He notices then that there are “nations” represented 
as outside the New Jerngalem, “who are said to he in pro- 
cess of healing by the leaves of a mystic tree, growing by 
the pure ‘river of water of life’ that ‘proceeds ‘ out of the 
throne of God and of the Lamb;’” and these “nations ” 
he assumes to include, of course, those of whom his thoughts 
are full, the unsaved dead of all’ages and generations. 

This closes the argument. of his letter, in which it is in- 
teresting and sad to trace how the prepossession with one 
fixed thought led an intelligent man to find in Scripture just 
that thought which prepossessed him. It is touching too, 
and a matter of hopefulness, to note how doubtfully he has 
yet to speak. “That much is not said regarding this possi- 
ble, or rather probable, field of future usefulness,” for the 


| STATE. 


be now “the 
oes not follow: 
eject Him, and 
But then Mr. 


resently found ° 


have noticed) 
But- even here 
one aspect of 
rged. I may 


r. It if quite 


now are “to 
on the earth’; 
ne with arod 
} in the Lord’s 
n new to Mr. 
ieve that here: 
ig of his idea: 
nsel fief be the 
il triumph of 
e live and die 
t say without 
fallible teach- 
” represented 
to he in pro- 
2, growing by 
s‘out of the 
se “nations ” 
his thoughts 
‘ations. 

vhich it is in- 
ion with one 
Scripture just 
ouching too, 


tfully he has’ 


ng this possi- 
ess,” for the 


-ishment, and owns as to them, “ Words could no 


Oinsien, 


eae o 
+ “SHE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 397 


heirs of this kingdom, he says, “ need not excite our wonder.” 
The things he speaks of are, at the most, “probable.” Whag - 
if they are not true? There ig no « full assurance of faith,” 
or “of understanding” here, With Mr. Blain, too, it ig 
“Mr. Dunn’s theory.” And thus after years and years of 
study, a hope that may make ashamed is the sole result. 
The false principle of this interpretation of Scripture has 
I believe been sufficiently shown, and there is no need of 
following Mr: Blain’s book further. It is not hard to trace 
the workings of it all throuch the subsequent pages; but it 
would swell these pages to too great a number to follow 
them out. With its foundation the whole building falls; 


vx : 
{ei ee 
6, 


a: Oe 


L3 


CHAPTER XXXIxX. 


‘THE RESTITUTION OF ALI, THINGS.’ —MR. JUKES, 

Tx1s Scriptural expression is the title Mr. J ukes has 
adopted for his well-known book, which in its fourth edition 
lies before me. I Propose now to take up and pursue with - 
Scripture the thread: of its argument. Much we have 
already looked at, and of course need not look at again; but 
there is much ‘needed yet to complete our survey. . 

We may pass over-his preliminary observations upon the 
nature of Scripture and begin with his seeond section upon 
its “testimony,” This, he tells us, “appears at first sight 
contradictory. Not only is there on the one hand law, con- 
demning all, while on the other hand there is the gospel, . 
with its good news for every one; but further, there are 
direct statements as to the results of these, which at- first 
sight are apparently irreconcilable.” THe adduces first of 


all the texts, orsome of these, which speak of eternal pun. 


t_wel 
8tronger,” but he adds-— = ai 


Se 


SNe ae 


“ reconciled,” “ redeemed,” “ 


398 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


“The difficulty is a this is but one side of Scripture, 
which in other places séems to teach a very different doctrine, - 
For instance, there are first tho words of God Himself, repeated 
again and again by those same apostles whom I have just quoted, 
that ‘in Abraham’s #ced all the kindreds of the earth shall be 
blessed ;’ words which St. Peter expounds to mean that there 
shall be a ‘ restitution of all things,’ adding that ‘God hath spoken | 
of this by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world 
began.’ ”’ . 

Let us look a moment at these texts ere we pass on, and 
ask ourselves how far they conflict even seemingly with 
eternal punishment. Few would imagine perhaps that the 
blessing in Abraham's seed to all kindreds of the earth did / 
that. And by the very fact. that all the prophets have 
spoken of the “restitution of all. things,” it is plainly not 
what Mr. Jukes would imply. Moreover this “restitution ” 
is of things, not persons, and (according to what we have 

Seen to be the scope of that Old Testament ‘to which, of 

course, the apostle refers), it is upon earth,—and nowhere 

else. “Restitution of all (the) things of which the prophets 

have spoken” is the trae force of the word,* and not a 

restitution of the universe, as Mr. Jukes seems to imagine. | 

“St. Paul further declares,”’ he oe tosay, “ this wondrous 

‘mystery of God's will, that He hath purposed in Himself. 

according to His good pleasure, to 


rehead and reconcile unto _ 
Himself, in and by Christ, all things, whether they be things in 


heaven,’ that is, the spirit world, where the conflict with Satan — 

yet is, ‘or things on earth,’ that is, this outward ‘world, where 

death now reigns, and where even God’s elect. are by nature 

children of wrath; even as other men.” : 
But this goes no further than heaven and earth, and does 

not say one word about fallemangels or lost men; they will 

be outside the scene here ‘spoken of. Heavenly things as 

well ag earthly are said in Scripture to be “ purchased,” 


purified,”—sin having been in 
* aronaTAra CEas mavrav av &laAnoer 6 Oscs (Acts iii, 
21). Mr. Jukes, a8 will be seen, has actually broken the sentence in 


‘wo, as if to get rid of this wr, and interpreted_as-if-it-were 7s, 


STATE. 


» of Scripture, 


erent doctrine, . 


mself, repeated 
ve just quoted, 
earth shall be 
ean that there 


od hath spoken 


ince the world 


pass on, and 
emingly with 
laps that the 


the earth did / 
rophets have: 


8 plainly not 
‘restitution ” 
hat we have 
to which, of 
ind nowhere 
the prophets 


»* and not a 


0 imagine. 
his wondrous 


in Himself . 


concile unto 
be things in 


t with Satan — 


world, where 
re by nature 


h, and does 
1; they will 
y things as 
purchased,” 
ing been in 


oS (Acts iii, 
e sentence in 


~ 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” ° 399 - 


heaven as well as earth. 


A comparison of the passages will 
show that they cannot apply to those to whom Mr. Jukes 
would apply them. In Heb. Ix. 21-24 the ‘tabernacle and 
the vessels of the sanctuar sprinkled with the blood, and 
which the apostle interpre of the purifying of the heavenly 
things with better sacrifices, cannot possibly refer to these. 
In Eph. i. 14, it is “our inheritance” that is the purchased 
possession to be redeemed. And in Col. i. 19, 20, in the same 
way, hiimys are spoken of, not persons, the persons. recon- 
“ ciled being named apart in the following verse: « by Him 
to reconcile all things unto Himself; by Him, I say, whether 
_ they be ‘things on earth or things in heaven. And ”—in ad- 
dition ‘to this—« you hath He reconciled.” In none of 
these passages is hell named or by any possibility included. 
ee Further,” he Says, “St. Paul asserts that ‘all creation, which 
now groans, shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the children of God.’ ” 
But this we have sven to be the lower creatures, and not 
* even man; and the deliverance takes place at the time of 
“the redemption of the body,” at the first resurrection, a 
thousard years before the judgment, which therefore could 
not tuke place at allif Mr. Jukes’ view were the true one. 
It is a mere strain of the “all creation,” impossible if we 
read it with the context. 


Again— 
‘In another place he declares that God w 
ing the world’‘unto Himself - 


True, but they refused and rejected it, and are now refus- 
ing the “ ministry of reconciliation ” by which Christ's mis- 
sion, in His absence, has been perpetuated. 

‘And that Christ ‘took our flesh 
destroy* [or nullify ’] him that had 
the devil ;’?”»_ as “ 


But to what end ? “and deliver those who through fear : 
Of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.” It ig 
the first death Christ has “ abolished” (or « nullified "—the 


as in Christ reconcil- 


and blood, through death to 
the power of death, that is, 


1 


ee 


CS: 


*Katapy yen, © nullify’ (Web, i. 14), 


. 


400 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


same word as before) “ and brought life and incorruption to 

-light through the gospel” (2 Tim. i. 10). For whom» 
For those who do not reeeiye the gospel? And has Satan, 
or had he ever, the power of © the sceoud death,” which ig 
his own doom? But again— 


“* That, if by the offence of one many be dead, much more the 
grace of God, and the gift by er. 


ace, hath abounded unto many ’ : 

that ‘therefore as by the offence of one (or by one offence) judg- 
ment came on all to condemnation, even so by the righteousness 
of one (or by one righteousness), the free gift should come on all 
unto the. justification of life’ ; “while ‘they which receive the 
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign 
in life by one, Jesus Christ ;’ that ‘as sin hath reigned unto 
death, ‘so grace might reign unto eternal life,’ yea, that ‘where 
sin abounded, grace did much more abound.’ ”* . 

Surely; but there are “those who 
grace and of the gift of righteousness,” and by implication, 
as certainly, those who do not. The mistake commonly 

Made as to these connected passages is to make the “ over- 
bounding” of grace a matter of breadth, instead of height. 
But, from the:nature of the case, if it were a question of the 
number reached, there could be no over-abounding af grace: 
Certainly, more could not be reached through Christ than 
fell with Adam, and that is how it must apply if in this way 
at.all. But the real matter is one of depth and height, and 
not of breadth, as I have said. One offence brings condem- 
nation; the free gift is of many ottences to justification. By 
the one offence death reigned; by one righteousness not. life 
reigns, but they reign in life. As to number, it is on each 
side “the one” and “the many”: the first Adam and the 

many connected with him, the “ last Adam ” and the many 
connected with him, with a difference only in the 18th verse, 
where the tendency « towards all men” is in contrast with 
the actual issue in the 19th, 
* Rom. v. Toe eseeer ees : 
t The 18th verse reads literally-, 
all men to condemnation 


receive abundance of 


“ Therefore as by one offence towards 
» 80 by one righteousness towards’ all men to 


justifieation-of tite.” 


. STATE, 


incorruption to 

For whom? 
And has Satan, 
cath,” which is 


much more the 
d unto many’: 
e offence) judg- 
le righteousness 
tld come on all 


ich receive the 


1ess, shall reign 
1 reigned unto 
ea, that ‘where 


abundance of 
y implication, 
ke commonly 
ke the “ over- 
ead of height. 
uestion of the 
ling af grace: 
h Christ. than 
if in this way 
d height, and 
‘ings condem- 


fication. By . 


isness not. li fe 
it is on each 
dam and the 
nd the many 
e 18th verse, 
ontrast with 


offence towards 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 401 


Mr. Jukes goes on:— 
To another church he states the same doctrine, that ‘as in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive’ 3 and 
that ‘the end’ shall not come “till all are subject to Him,’ that 
‘God may be’ not allin some but ‘all in all ; for He must reign 
till He hath put all enenries under His fect ; the last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is death,’ ’* erent 


; “This, save the first passage, we have already had before 


us. Throughout the chapter the resurrection spoken of is 
the “ resurrection of the Just,” and it is only that, or these, 
that are “in Christ.” As‘all these die in Adam, they all are 
made alive in Christ : the “all” are defined by the connee- 
tion with the previous verses to be’all “those that s/eep,” and 
of whom Christ “ is the first-fruits.” They are the Just only. 
It is detined by the connection with the verses following, to 
be all “those that are Christ's”: « Christ the first-fruits ; 
afterward they that are Christ's at Hlis coming.” Nor does 
the apostle say one word about the wicked at all. 

Again, Christ reigns till He puts all enemies under His 
feet. Changing tliem to friends is the very opposite to this. 
When this is accomplished He gives up the kingdom, and 
there are still enemies, though “under His fect.” God can- 


a 


not be all in all then, in the sense Mr. Jukes would assume. 


The connection in the. text, moreover, does not give his 
thought at all. For if Christ's enemies had become friends 
before He gave up the kingdom, Mis giving it up would not 
make God all in their hearis any more than before. But it 
is the gining up of the Kingdom that makes God “all in all.” 
Evidently then. the sense is that He will be in recognized 
and tmmediute supremacy everywhere. 
But he goes on :— 


“So he says again, ‘Blessed be the God and Father of our 


_ Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessad us with all spiritual blessings 


in heavenly places in Christ... . that in the dispensation of the 


fulness of times He might gather together in one all things in 
Serine pe 


Sa ae rs eee eee 


rds’ all_ men to 


* 1 Cor, xv, 29-98, 


a 


402 Facts AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth, even 
in Him.’ ”’* - : 


Phis is a text Mr. Jukes has already once given, when he 
translates “ gather together in one” as “rehead.” He cer- 
tainly puts it in’ a new connection, by dropping six verses 
of the original, to bring the third and tenth together. ‘This 
he does not however justify or explain. at 


“To the same purpose he writes in-anothér epistle, ‘ that at 
(or in) the name of Jesus (that is, Saviour) every knee shall bow 
of thingst in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the 
earth ; and that every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of Ged the Father ;’ ‘for to this end Christ 
both died and rose and revived, that He might beLord both of 
the dead and living.’ »} . ou . 


; These texts have already received their meaning. For 
Christ’s enemies being put under His feet implies that they 


own Him Lord; and that they find Him, or look to Hin, as - 


4 


Saviour, is only said by Mr. Jukes. : 


“He further declares that for this sake he suffers reproach, 
because he hopes in the living God, .who is the Saviour of all 
men, specially of them |that believe "; that this God ‘will havo 
all men to be saved, an to come to the knowledge of the truth ee 
that therefore, thanks vings as well as prayers should be made 

for all, because there is a ‘ ransom for all, to be testified in dye | 


time *> and lastly, that ‘God hath concluded all in unbelief, that 


_ He might have mercy upon all.’ "3 


These texts, except the last, we have also looked at. 
Mr. Jukes unites them together after his own fashion, omit- 
ting or supplementing as suits his argument. Thus in the 
first passage. he omits, “ For ‘therefore we both labor” from 

before “and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living 
God,” ete., words which show us the connection with God . 
‘ * Epb. i. 3-10, : 


-+ “Things” is not. expressed here in the Greek. It reads “ 


enly, earthly, and. infernal [beings].” In Col. i. 20-on the contrary it 
ista zmdvra, - 


¢ Phil, ii. 10,11; Rom. xiv.9. 


of heav- 


§ 1 Tim-iv. 10: if. 1-6: Rom—x}-9e. 


RE STATE, 


Te on earth, even 


given, when he 
nead.”” He cer. 
ping six verses 
together. This 


‘ 
¢ 


epistle, ‘ that at 

knee shall’ bow 

hings under the 

‘Jesus Christ is 

» this end Christ 

Lord both of 
ij 


meaning. For 
plies that they 


00k to Him, as - ; 


iffers reproach, 
Saviour of all 


God ‘will have. 


of the truth ’* 
nould be made 


estified in dye | 


. unbelief, that 


0 looked at. 
fashion, omit- 
Thus in the 
. Labor” from 
in the living 
Mm with God . 


eads “ of heay- 
the contrary it 


le 


‘THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS,” 403 


as the Preserver. . 
in the face of persecution, etc., he could jabor. Again he 
quotes, “ ‘ thanksgivings, as well as prayers should be made 
for all’ because there is 49 ransom for all, to be testified in 
due time.j” Here he joins words five verses apart, and in 
a very different manner from’ the apostle, who writes, “] 
exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, 
intercessipns, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for 
kings and for all that are in authority, that we may lead ua 
quiet and peaceable ie in all godliness and honesty ; for this 
is good ahd acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, who 
will have/all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge 
of the truth. For there is one God, and one Mediator be- 
tween Gad and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Him- 
self a ransom for all to be testified in. due time.” This is 
the whol passage. Mr. Jukes unfairly. mutilates it, espe- 
‘cially by epresenting the ransom for all as if to be testified 
of in a due time yet to come ; whereas the apostle’s ‘words, 
which are literally “ who gave Himself a ransom for all, 
the testimony for its own time,”* by no means convey 
this, but in the sentence that follows the very oppasite : 
“ whereunto I am ordained a preacher,” ete. 
As for the last text quoted, it is an entirely different, one 
in 3 different connection, and refers to Israel. . It reads with 


now not bel\eved in your mercy ”—in mercy to Gentiles 
“that they also may be objects of mercy.t For God hath 
concluded (ok shut. up together) all in unbelief, that He 
might have mercy upon all.” The Jews refusing a mercy 
whichtook up Gentiles, lost all claim upon God, and be- 
came as much as the Gentiles themselves objects of mere 
mercy. But thus God could show mercy to them, when it 
was demonstrated to be merely that. 
shown in a fast coming day, and ail Israel saved, i. e., the 
Fe ee eee) Se aeE. 


— 


the previous verse literally thus: “Even go have these on 


a mr ar 


* TO “aprupuior naipors 8x01. ‘ 


- especially of those who believe, so that | 


This mercy is to be 


ve 


+Oure-nxatoUrol ver nnenoay ra Umerépw edéer tra naj 
avtot elenhcen. / ‘ 


Sw 


404 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TU A FUTURE STATE. 


nation as such. The words have nothing to do with univer. 
sal restoration. : 

Mr. Jukes turns now from Paul's testimony to John’s :— 

“The beloved apostle St. John, repeats tho same doctrine, 
that ‘the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world’ : 
‘ for God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world, 
but that the world through Him might be saved.’.” 

But why not go onto the next verse, which assures us 
of how alone this could be realized = “« he that believeth on 
Him is not condemned ; but he that believeth not is con- 
demnetl already because he hath not believed on the name of 
the only begotten Son of God."* sie 

“ Further he teaches that the only begotten _ Son ‘is the pro. 
pitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole 
world’ ; that He ‘is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin 
of the world,’ and ‘was revealed for this very purpose, that He 
might destroy the works of the devil’; and that, as a result, 
‘there shall be no more death, nor scrrow, nor pain, because all 
things are made new, and the former things arg passed away.’ "+ 

Here again various and disconnected texts are brought 
together. No one. I’should trust, that believes in Christ, 
doubts His being the world’s Saviour, but what is more than 
doubted is His being the actual salvation of those who refuse 
Him. And if His being a ‘pronitiation fort the whole 

world,’ means that all will he saved by it, how is this tobe 
reconciled with the fact that for some there “ remaineth no 

more sacrifice for sins”?  Acain Christ’s taking away the 

“sin of the world will yet he displayed, as Mr. Jukes rightly 

7 foresees, when in the new earth it and all its consequences, 
death, sorrow and pain, are passed away forever. But Ahat 
fis strietly in the new heavens anil earth, wherein dwelleth : 

: righteousness, and Mr. Jukes cannot make that language 

apply to hell. nes 

While as to the devil’s works, as I have before; said, they 


* John iii. 17, 18. 


+1 John ii, 2; Jokn i. 29. 1 Sonu tig’ Rev. xxi. 4,5; and see 
Rey. v. 13. 


! 


¢ “ The sins of,” showtl he omitted, as is well known. 


KE STATE. 


» do with univer. 


ny to John’s :— 
* same doctrine, 
iv of the world’ . 
1demn the world, 
hich assures us 
hat believeth on 
eth not is con- 
on the name of 


Son ‘is the pro. 
1s of the whole 
eth away the sin 
urpose, that He 
1ub, as a result, 
pain, because all 
assed away.’ + 
's are brought 
eves in Christ, 
at is more than 
ose who refuse 
ort the whole 
w is this tobe 
*remaineth no 
cing away the 
Jukes rightly 
consequences, 
er. But jhat 
rein dwelleth : 
hat language 


brejanid, hey 


4,5; and see 


F 


: 4 ; 
“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” = 4.08 


may be undone, and man even loosed . from his bondage in 
this respect, and yet share through his own will the devil's 
portion. The lake of fire is not the devil's work: it is his 
punishment. f =a 

Finally Mr. Jukes adduces :— 

“For ‘the Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things 
into His hand’: and the Son Himself declares, « All that the 
Father giveth me shall come to me, and himthat cometh to me 
I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from heaven, not to 
do mine own will, but the will of Him that sent me. And this 
is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which He hath 
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at 
the last day.’ And again He says, ‘And I, if I be lifted up from 
the earth, will draw all men unto me,’ ”’* 

Here again it should be no difficult matter to see that all 
things being given into Christ’s hand isa different thing from 
people being given to Him as His own. And in that sixth 
chapter of John’s gospel fyone which Mr. Jukes quotes, the 
limitation is so clear and precise, and so close to the very 
place he quotes, that it seems impossible it should have 
escaped him. The neat verse to his lastgbut one runs thus : 
“And this is the will of Him that sent me, that every one 
which seeth the Son, 4nd believeth on Him, may .have ever- 
lasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.” Does 
that apply to all ? . Will they who do not believe have ever- 
lasting life alike? Is that what these texts point out ? 

The last I have before spoken of, and need not return 
to it. s 

Mr. Jukes finds therefore an “ apparent contradiction ” in 
these sayings of Scripture which the « eee of 
Christendom ” still leaves an unsolved mystery. In eed ‘it 
must be confessed his version of it does leave much unsolved, 
but having given my own, I need not follow it. ; 

“The truth whith solves the riddle, lies,” he says, ‘‘in the 
mystery of the will of our ever blessed God as to the process and 
stages of redemption :—— 


m 


ze ete SRC yeaa ee ee 
* John iii. 85; vj. 37-39; xii. 32. 


406 FACTS AND THEORIES AS BOA FUTURE STATE. 


° “(1.) First, His will by some 
, first-born seed, ‘ the first-born fr 
the latey-born :— 
4 (.) His will therefore to work out the redemption of ‘tie 
by successive ages or dispensations, or, to use the laigy! me 
St. Paul, ‘according to the purpose of the ages’; and—a' "+". 
‘*(3.) Lastly, His will (thus meeting 


the nuture of our Tall) to 
make death, judgment, and destruction, the means and way to’ 


life, acquittal, and salvation ; in other words, through death to 
destroy him that has the power of de 


_ death, that is, the devil, and 
to deliver them who through fear of - death were all their lifetim 
subject to bondage.” ry Sah 


The second and third of these statemerité Werhave pretty 
well considéred. We have seen that the “purpose of the 
‘ages” has not in Scripture the meaning Mr. J ukes alleges, 
We have seen, too, that. the death of the soul or des estruc- 
tion is never the appointed way of its salvation: the terms 
are opposed. As when James Says: ‘‘ there is one lawgiver 
who is able to save and to destroy,” who would suppose that 
these were convertible terms after all? And when the 
apostle speaks of Ghrist by death destroying him that had 
“the power of death,—it is by His own death He does it, and 
not by the death of those whom He sets free. 

It is mainly then his first proposition we h 
now : “ God’s purpose by the first-fruits o 
the later-born.” And here at first 
seem to be confused. What has the first-fruits to do with 

“producing the harvest? It is the pledge and assurance of 
it; but that is quite a different thought. However, we will 
let Mr. Jukes state his argument. 


“* This,” he\says, ‘ which is in fact the substance of 


to bless and save others : ‘by a 
om the dead,” to save and bless 


Oy . 


ave to consider 
r first-born to save 
sight two dissimilar ideas 


the gospel, 
like all God’s secrets, comes out by degrees, Scarcely to be dis- 
cerned, though contained. in the first promise of the Woman’ 


be distinct from, and blessed_prior to; those nations to-whem-ac- 


cording to God’s purpose in due time it becomes 


a blessing.” 


‘URE STATE, 


| save others ; ‘by a 
to save and bless 


lemption of ‘je 


s’; and—# +". 
ture of our Tall) to 


means and way to‘ 


_ through death to 
1s, the devil, and 
e all their lifetim 
* we-have pretty 
“purpose of the 
r. Jukes alleges, 
or dts destruc. 
tion: the terms 
is one lawgiver 
Id suppose that 
And when the 
¢ him that had 
He does it, and 


uve to consider 
st-born to save 
lissimilar idexs 
its to do with 
| assurance of 
vever, we will 


» of the gospel, 
rcely to be dis- 
' the Woman’s 
vith Abraham - 
» blessed’ ; for 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS,” 407 


It may be we are blind, but Wwe confess we cannot see 
‘this. Is it the fact that Christ was born as Abraham's seed 
before any of those blest through Him as such, were born ? 
Was not the blessing through Him retleeted back as well as 
forward? Tt should seem so. And then Mr. Jukes’ argu- 
ment is void. Why does he apply the blessing of all 
kindreds of the earth only to what was future when Christ 
lied ? -Moreover, the “Seed” in whom all kindreds of the 
carth are to be blessed, is expressly asserted by the apostle 


*(Gal. iii, 16) to be Christ glone, and not true of others: “ he 


saith not, And to seeds, as of many, but as. of' one, and to 
thy seed, Which is) Christ.” Argument, of course, is easy, 
“f we may assume the basis of’ it at our will. But, we are 
old :— . 


“This purpose is then revealed with fuller detail in the law of 
the first-frnits and the first-born, though here the veil of type 
and shadow hides from most the face of Moses. But in Christ 
the purpose is unveiled forever, and the mystery by the first-born 
to save others is by the Holy Ghost made fully munifest, ‘Christ, 
says the apostle, is the promised Seri, the First-born, and in and 
‘through Him endless blessing shall flow down on the later-born. 

‘Now Christ, as Paul shows, is first-born in a double sense, 
He is first-born from above, first out of life, for He is the only* 
begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all worlds ; 
‘for by Him were all things created, which are in heaven, and 
which are ee visible and invisible, whether they be thrones 


or dominion§ or principalities or powers, all things were created 


by Him and for Him, and He is before all things, and by Him 
ul things consist.’ But: He is move than this, for He is also, 
‘ first-born from the dead,’ first out of death, ‘that in all things 


first-fruits of the creature. All things are indeed of God ; but it 
is ho less true that all things are by man st as it isWritten, 


Deere res Ere ee eon ee ee er 
blessed, must * Mr. Jukes sees no difference between “and * only.” How 
sto whem aC- can an “‘ only begotten ” be a first ? or 

blessing.” 


Xx 


Aue 4 weit 
See Se 


ny 


408 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


of the dead.’ Therefore as by one first-born death came into thie, 
mone so by another first-born shall it be forever overthrown.” 
* But if this be the New Testament doctrine of the first- 
‘born, as he holds it, Mr. Jukes allows it does not prove his 
_case. Very remarkable it is, after his having told us just 
before, that “in Christ the purpose is unveiled forever, and 
the myxtery by the first-born to saye others is by the IIoly | 
Ghost niade fully manifest,” he now tells us that neverthe, 
less it is not in the clear revelations of the New Testament 
that we are to find the unveiling of this purpose, but we must, 
_ yo back to the law to find it! “The lay of Moses js most 
instructive here; for while & is true that the letter My hi 
law cannot be explained but by the gospel, it is no les’true 
that the gospel in its breadth: and depth cannot be set forth 
“ but by the figures of the law, each jot of which covers some 
blessed mystery ” ! 

‘We have usually theught that the letter of the law was 
plain enough, and that the fiyures were what the New Tes- 
-tament explained. On the contrary, Mr. Jukes asserts the 
‘figures of the Old Testament alone fully set forth the gos- 
pel of the New! 

He confesses then that his fall gospel cannot be found in 
what we style, by way of eminence, the “gospel”! Let us 
still go on with him, however :— 

“What then does the law teach us of the First-born from the 
dead ?. . . According to the law, the first-born had the right, 
though it might be lost, of being priest and king, that is, of inter- 
ceding for, and ruling over their younger brethren ; on- him de- 
volved the duty of Goel or Redeemer, to redeem a brother who 
had waxen poor, and sold himself unto a stranger ; to avenge 
his blood, to raise up seed to the dead, and to redeem the inher- 
itance, if it were at any time lost or alienated. To sustain these 
duties God gave him a double portion. Need I point out how 
Christ fulfils these particulars ? how, as first out of the grave, 
that ‘barren womb that cries, Give, give,’ He is the First-born 
> blessi ? i no Chris- 


ee ae ae” a ee (er ee. a er 


through whom the blessing reaches us ? In this sense 
tian doubts that God’s purpose is by the First-born from the dead 
to save and bless the later-born.” 


TE. 


ne into the. 
‘hrown.” 

the first- 
prove his 
ld us just 
rever, and 


the Holy | 


neverthe. 
Testament 


it we must 


es iS most 
er Wy eh 
o lesStrue 


2 set forth 
vers some 


e law was 
New Tes- 
sserts the 
h the gos- 


e found in 


'! Let us 


n from thi 

the right, 
is, of inter- 
on: him de- 
rother who 
; to avenge 
1 the inher- 
istain these 
rt out how 

the grave, 

First-born 
ie no Chris- 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 409) 
The first-born under the law were never priests. It is 
well known there was one special family. The nearest of 
kin redeemed the inheritance, etc., not necessarily the first. 
porn, And Christ’s doing this does not yet present Mr. 
Jukes’ gospel, but he must dig deeper down to find it. 


“But the truth goes further still, for there are others beside 
the Lord who are both ‘first-born’ and ‘ Abraham’s seed,’ who 
must therefore in their measure ‘share this same honor with 
and under Christ, and in whom, as ‘joint-heirs with Him,’ the 
promise must be fulfilled, that in them ‘all the kindreds of the 
earth shall be blessed.’ This glorious truth, though of the very 
essence of the gospek, which‘ announces salvation to the world 
through the promised ‘seed of Abraham,’ is even yet so little 
seen by many of Abraham’s seed, that not a few of the children 
of promise speak and act, as if Christ and His body only should 
be saved, instead of rejoicing that they are also the appointed 
means of saving others. Even of the elect, “few see that they arc 
elect to the birthright, not to be blessed anty,: but to be a blessing ; 
as first-born with Christ to share the glory of kingship and priest- 
hood with Him, not only to rule and intereede for their younger 
and later-born brethren, but to avenge their blood, to raise up ° 

seed to the dead, and in and shroagn Christ, their Life and Head, 
to redeem their lost inheritance.” 


This then i is how the Old Testament figures set ah the 


_ gospel of the New! But the blessing of all nations is 


through the “one seed, ” Christ, alone, as we have scen. 
In what “measure ” then can others share in it? And what 
has being “joint-heirs with Christ,” to do with “saving 
others”? What does avenging the blood of those who have 
died for their sins and in them mean? and how arc these 


the “later-born”? That the risen, safmts are priests and 
~ kings with Him who is Priest and- ‘King: is of course true, 


and: rule and intercession for others are implied in these 
terms. But-over whom and for. whom are these offices ?° 
“Their younger and later-born brethren,” says Mr. Jukes. 
Then these, should ‘be, and will be, doubtless, millennial 


om the dead 


saints. They can he rdly be the -w 7 Ww : 
the later birth (iew: birth, of course) of these. Mr. Tabes 


va 


red e 


Amy, 


4 ~ 
410% PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


at present hag: at least given us no evidence at all of 
this. | ; 

IIe now passes on to the “ first- fruits,” rightly referring 
the Passover first-fruits to Christ, the Pentecostal leavened 
cakes to the saints: “ ‘Christ, the First-fruits,’ and ‘ we, a 
kind of first-fruits’: Christ ‘the First-born, and we ‘the 

chureh of ‘the first-born’; words which carry with them,” 
he says, “ blessings unspeakable, ‘ for if the first-fruit be holy, 
the lump is also holy,’ the offering of the first-fruits to God 
being accepted as the sanctification and consecration of the 
whole coming harvest.” 

Does Mr. Jukes mean, of the “tares” as well as of the 
‘wheat, or of the wheat alone? If the latter, it will not be. 
questioned ; but neither will it serve his turn. He seeks to 

apply it thus :-— 

‘First, the Jew is Abraham’s seed,—the people that dwell 
ulone, and are not reckoned among the nations, and although 
‘all are not Isracl, who are of Israel,’ Scripture will indeed be 
-broken, if Israel is not again grafted in; ' when, if the casting 
away of them has been the riches of the world, the receiving of 
them, as St. Paul says, shall be life from the dead. ‘ Israel is 

“my son, my first-born, saith the Lord.’ All mations therefore, 
shall yet be blessed in them.” 


Here again is the constant twist, the many seeds substi- 
tuted for the one. And while Israel will be fruitful in the 
‘earth, this is not the fulfilment of the Pentecostal first-fruits. 
The other application more concerns us now. 


“The church is also Abraham’s seed); for, as St. Paul says, 
“if ye be Christ’s ye are Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to 
-the promise.’ To the church, therefore, belongs the same pro- 
mise, as first-fruits with Christ, not to be blessed only, but to be 
‘ a blessing, in its own heavenly and spiritual sphere. For if the 
Jew on earth shall be a ‘kingdom of priests,’ what is our hope 
but to be also heavenly ‘kings and’ priests’? As kings, for the 
Lord shall say, ‘ Be thou over five cities,’ to rule and order in the 
coming age what requires order ; not only with Christ to ‘judge 
the world,’ but to be ‘equal unto the angels,’ und to ‘judge the 


2}, 
+ 
ts 


KE. 


t all of 


referring 
leavened 
d ‘we,a 
we ‘the 


h them,” - 


b be holy, 
s to God 
on of the 


as of the 


Il not be. 


seeks to 


hat dwell 
although 
indeed be 
he casting 
ceiving of 
*Tsrael is 
therefore, 


ds substi- 
ul in the 
rst-fruits, 


aul says, 
cording to 
same pro- 
but to be 
‘or if the 
3 our hope 


ys, for the | 


der in the 
to ‘judge 
judge the 


© 


“TITE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” - All 


angels’ ;* as priests, for a priest is ‘ for those out of the way,’ to 
minister to those who are yet out of the way... . Christ 
barely entered on His priestly work till He had passed through 
death and judgment ;+ so with those who are Christ’s, their death 


‘ and resurrection shall only introduce them to fuller and wider 


service to lost ones, over whom the Lord Shall set them as His 
priests and kings, until all things are restored and reconciled ynto 
Him.’ . 

Priesthood is not for “lost ones.” Christ as a priest, in con- 
trast with the Jewish priests, is “separate from sinners.” 
Even they ministered only within the limits of the chosen 
people, and our priesthood must conform to this. Here Mr. 
Jukes’ interpretation ends. The shadows of the law, that 
were to preach the perfect gospel unpreached by the gospel, 
are utterly silent as to the “ wider hope.” After this long 
argument the only result is a ‘question, and. an wnranswered 
question, as far as Mr. Jukes is concerned. 

“Ty whom, I ask, shall the church after death be priests ? 
Shall it be to that great mass of our fellowmen, who have departed 
hence in’ ignorance ? Shall it be to ‘spirits in prison,’ such as 
those to whom after His death Christ preached ?, Shall not’ His 
saints, made like Him, do the same works, stiH following Him, 
and with Him being priests to God ? Will not their glory be to 
rule and feed and enlighten and clothe those who are committed 
to them, even as Christ has fed and clothed them?”.... 

And THAT is the argument, I have given it really at 
superfluous length, but it was well to see the whole, if only 
for the satisfaction of seeing how simply impossible it is to 
make Scripture contradict Scripture. Mr. Jukes calls it 
reconciling, of course; but there was nothing to reconcile. | 
And a reconciliation which can only be accomplished by 
sinking Great Babylon into the water of li fe, as he does a 
little further on,t most people will after all think exem- . 


* Judgment is with Mr. Jukes a mode of salvation, and we afe to 
save the fallen angels so! — 

+ Ile did not enter on it at all till then: “ for if He were on earth He 
should not be a priest.” (Heb. viii. 4). 

¢P. 41. : 


412 PACTS AND TIEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


" plifies one of his own principles in a rather startling way. 
But none who know what Scripture is will thank him for a 
slvution of it wrought by its destruction. Ag they do not 
believe in the process, so neither will they aceept the result, 

Mr. Jukes urges in another part of his book that— 
‘*the precepts which God has given are in their way as strong a 
witness as His direct promises, Hear the law respecting bond- 
men, and strangers, and: debtors, and widows, and orphans, and 
the punishment of the wicked, which may not exceed forty 
stripes, ‘lest, if it exceed, then thy brother should seem vile unto 
thee ;’ yea, even the liw respecting ‘asses fallen into a pit : hear 

“the prophets exhorting to ‘break every yoke,’ to ‘let the op- 
pressed go free,’ and to ‘undo the heavy burdens’ : hear the 
still clearer witness of the gospel, not to ‘let the sun go down 
upon our wrath,’ to ‘forgive not until seven times, but unto 
seventy times seven,’ ‘not to be overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good’; to ‘walk in love as Christ has loved us,’ and to 
‘be imitators of ‘God as dear children ’ :—see the judgment of 

. those who neglect the poor, and the naked, and the hungry, and 

the stranger, and the prisoner ; and then say, Shall God do that 
which He abhors? Shall He eommand that bondmen and 
debtors be freed, and yet Himself keep those who are in worse 
bondage and under .a greater debt in endless imprisonM@pnt ? ° 
Shall He eare for widows and orphans, and Himself forget this 
widowed nature, wields lost its Head and Lord, and those 
poor orphan souls, which cannot cry, ‘Abba, Father’? Shall 
He limit punishment to forty stripes, ‘lest thy brother seem vile,’ 


and Himself i&ict far more upon those who though fallen are re 
still His children ? -Is not Christ the faithful Tsraelite, who ful-. oe 
fils the law, and shall He break it in any one of these particulars ? : 


Shall He say, ‘Forgive, till seventy times seven,’ and Himself _ 
‘not forgive except in this short life ? Shall He command us to 
. overcome evil with good, and Himself, the Almighty, be overcome 
of evil? Shall He judge those who leave the captives unvisited, 
und Himself leave captives in a worse prison, forever unvisitud ? 
Does ‘He not again and again appeal:to our own natural feelings 
of mercy, as witnessing ‘how much ore’ we may expect a 
larger mercy from our Father which is in heaven ? If it were 
otherwise, might not the-adversary reproach, and say, Thou that 


sachest ond judgest another, teachest thou not thyself? Not 


w 


STATE, 


tartling way. 
nk him for g 
they do not 
ot the result, 
thit— ~ 
y as strong a 
pecting bond- 
orphans, and 
exceed forty 
eem vile unto 
oa pit: hear 
‘let the op- 
s’ : hear the 
sun go down 
1es, but unto 
out Overcome 
dus,’ and to 
judgment of 
hungry, and 
God do that 
ondmen and 
are in worse 
prison: 
f forget this 
d, and those 
rer’? Shall 
r.seem vile,’ 


gh fallen ‘are... 
lite, who ful- He 
particulars ? ; 
ind: Himself. 7 


amand us to 
be overcome 
es unvisited, 
r unvisited ? 
ural feelings 
lay expect a 


nt? 


~.ig in the highest degree essentigl to the argument. 


THINGS.” 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALi 413 


He shall 


thus will God besjistified. But, blessed be His Name, 


inal be justified.”* 


In that assurance we shall all, 1 believe, unite. But Mr. 
Jukes can scareely thus turn the questions that he puts into 
the affirmations that he fain would make of them. He con- 
founds things widely different. He forgets or nite what 
Who 
would suppose that according to him the law had any 
heavier penalty than the “forty stripes” referred to? Dr. 
Farrar can make the execution of a criminal, and the casting 
forth of his unburied corpse amid the flames and worms of 
the valley of Hinnom the figure of corrective and remedial 
punishment. Mr. J ukes seems to forzet that the penalty of 
death ever existed for mafefactors under the law. For if. it 
did exist, he could hardly say that God enjoined for all 
offenders either continual forgiveness, or temporary punish- 
ment, merely. Is death the figure of cither? If not, of 
what is it a figure? Surely, as I have before argued, a 
punishment inflicted by man which, as far as he is concer ned, 
has no end and gannot, be reversed, must be the figure of 
that which if divine has not forever end or reversion. I 
know Mr. Jukes says that dvath is the way to life, and de- 
struction but a process of salvation; but no criminal exe- 
cuted by a government ever believed that these were one 
and the same thing to him, or intended as such by those 
who sentenced him. 

\ Again, what would mercy to an finrepenting .criminal in: 
volve? Has Mr. Jukes forgotten that of some even in this 
life it is said, “it is impossible to renew them unto repent- 
ance” ? Does he not understand thet the mercy which with 


us as individuals may be right and good, may be the reverse 


of both if practised wholesale by ‘a government ? IIe con- 
founds these thing as if he-did not understand it... Nay, he 
speaks of God's remission of i imperative judgment as “ letting 


Tet oe are the oppressed go frge ” ! 
7, Thou that ~| But: a do not think it needful to argue further. We have 
yself? Not pias at spp, 93,94. f- — 


| 
| 


a. | 
| 
t * ¥ 
ie) 
i) 
} 
‘ 
| 
iit. 


: 
‘i 
rt 


it conféased by Mr. ‘cre himself that “the gospel in its 
‘breadth and depthecannot be set forth but by the figures 


414 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE “STATE. 


of the law.” When these figures are appealed to, we. find 
not the slenderest evidence to show that the “ later-born 
brethren” to whom ‘God’s “ first-born ” sons are to, be kings 
and priests are those in hell. The ages of torment, instead 
of-being limited and temporary with an eternity of universal 


blessedness beyond, are limited only by the life of God 


Himself. And lastly, the destruction which he would have | 
to be a method of salvation, is everywhere in Scripture de- 
‘fined as its opposite. These are the fundamental principles 


‘of his interpretation, and with these it necessarily falls; 


while if our examination of the Scriptures proof upon proof zs 
~has been given of the contrary view. Mr. Jukes himéelf. 
_confesses that, from his stand- -point of universal salv ation, 
“taken in the letter, text clashes with text, on this sub- 
ject."* But that gives up the whole question, except letter 
and figure are at issue. If they are, who shall decide be- 
tween ‘them 3 ? Nay, how shall the figure’be interpreted. if 


«not by that letter, which it seems is ‘discordant with it? - 


. [deave then Mr. Jukes in the self-contradiction in which 


- he has involved himself. Our account with him is Virtually 
: closed, although. statements of his may. yet’ come up for 


examination. We must turn to other advocates of universal 
restoration. — ee ' 


enue) a WS 


TATE. 


yospel in its 
; the figures 
| to, we. find 
. “ later-born 
» to. be kings 
nent, instead 
of universal 


life of God 


would have . 


Scripture de- 


tal principles 


ssarily falls ; 


f-upon proof ._ 


ikes himéelf. 
sal saly ation, 
on this sub- 
except letter 


1 decide be- , - 


terpreted if 
with it ? - 

ion in which 
n is Virtually 
come up for 
s Of universal 


we 


f 


es * ; 
“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 


CHAPTER XL. 
“THE RESTIUTION OF ALL THINGS.’’—CANON FARRAR. 


Canon Farrar often names the doctrine of “ final resti- 
tution” (in the universalist sense, of course), and .his last 
“excursus” in_the appendix to his book is entitled “The 
Voice of Scripture respecting Eternal Hope.” There is little, | 
however, beside a list of texts, which we shall presently con- 
sider. ‘The first two pages are taken up with that protest 
against isolated texts, which we ‘have already looked at. 
Then it is urged, that “ if the doctrine of endless torment be 
true, it is incredible that. there should be no trace of it in 
the-entire Old Testament, except by putting on the Hebrew 
~ phrase ‘forever ’.a sense which it doés not and cannot bear.” 
We have gone so fully into the question of the Old Testa- 
ment doctrine, that this also we may pass by here. 

His third section is devoted to the consideration of. the 
_ Jewish rabbinical, teachings upon the subject. I have added 
“the few texts they appeal to to Dr. F sown list. Otherwise 
their views are of the very smallest -value.* Of course, 
Josephus and the Pharisees and Essenes do not appear in 
the consideration of J ewish doctrine. 

His fourth section is occupied mainly with advice to 
s honest, serious, ane competent, readers” of his book, as to 


* As” an Saale we may give the following in Dr. Farrar’s own 
words: “In a magnificent passage of Othoth ‘(attributed to R: Akiba) 
‘it is said that God has a key of Gehenna, and that He'will preach to al] 
the righteous ; ; that Zerubbabel shall say the Kaddish, and an Amen ! 
shall sound forth from Gehenna; and that Gabriel and Michael will open 
the 40,000 gates of Gehenna and set free the damned. . Akiba founds 
this on Isa. wrot. 2, reading shomer.. reese, ‘observing the Amen, 
* for shomer emunim, ‘ keeping, the truth’! , 


Of-eowrse, according tothis, Gehernd must be “in the ind 


—~—+ ene ee a Lh 


_ Judah,” and the righteous nation are the lost in Gehenna ! 


416 


-transcenyy 


FACTS AND THEORLES AS TOA FU UTURE STATE, 


the spirit and manner in hich he would have’ hen weigh | 
the texts he addaces, As it includes a brief review of fie 
subject, and some things not said elsew here, we shall briefly 
glance at this. He asks : — 

“Now will honest, serions and competent: cise weigh ie 
plain, liter. i myaning of the oxts which follow—the number of. 
which might eitsily begtrebled,-—and in wi ighing them with an 
earnest and prayerful desire to get rid of traditional bias and «t- 
tain to truth, will they also do as follows ?— 

“i, Examine their own: conscience avid reason as. to all that 
they know, agd all that the Bible teaches, respecting the love of ° 
God and redemption through Jesus Christ.” — i 

Only remémbering that* what they know of either cannot 
he teaching of that Bible. The ‘love of God is 
lly known w here, and so far as, Scripture is known. 


only r 


‘And reason and conscience are not other Bibles—are not 


authoritative . standards,—but only make us capable of re- 
sponsibility, tl actually responsible, ‘to the authority. of 
God. : ens. : 


“il. See how very little, which is in the least degree decisive, - 


‘they can produce on the ‘other side ; and how for every word of: , 


that very little an explanation is onfered: demonstrably tenable, 
and. far moro. in accord: wee with history than that which they _ 
adopt. o oe ra: 


Whieh if true settles ihe matter: _ For if universalism be 


as demon gapably tenable” its opposite caynot be, save upon a 


principle which destroys the authority” of Scripture ene 
getler.- But this may safely be left, alter all that we have 


‘had merece us. 


Oe 


. Conside ‘r-the tremendous weight of evidence which must 


-be ee against their private interpretation from‘the fact that 


neither’ the Jewish nor the Christian elmreh have ever been able 
dogmatically to sanction it.” ee 4 : 


ry 


The word of God no more needs the ehureh’ s 6 sanction ” 


‘to make it true, than God Himself the permission of His 


creature to exist.. But Dr. Farrar cannot mean to imply 


that the church has ever pronounced it a doubtful opinion, 


PATE. 
bees = 
them weigh 
eview of the 
shall briefly 


rs weigh the 
e number of. 
them with an 
ll bias and «at- 


as to all that : 


Teg the love of ° 


ither cannot 
ve of God is 
ire is known. 
hles—are not 
ipable of re- 
authority. of 


seree decisive, | 
every word of: , 


‘rably tenable, . 


at which they 


iversalism be 
», SAVE UpON a 
cripture palto- 
that ae, ie 


ice Which must 
m‘the fact that 
ever been able 


’s “sanction ”” 


lission of THis. 
ean to imply 


\ 


_ not been in favor of thegjloctrine he rejects. 


pH RESTIPUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 417 


orathat the ov¢rwhelming weight of human testimony has 
To me that 
- does not make it one iota more authoritative or more trust- 


worthy, because all true faith is in God’s word, not man’s; 


but the facts as to the general ecclesiastical , belief are 


. scarcely decisive. against the view still prevalent. 


‘ «iy, Remember that in the extreme form in which they hold it, 


which excludes anything resembling purgatory, it is directly op- 


posed to a large body of primitive teaching, hae to the views of. 
the entire Roman church.” 


- How the question of “ a purgatorial fire where the souls 


of the righteous are purified by punishment,” as Dr. Farrar _ 


himself states this doctrine* from the Catechism of the 
- Council of Trent, can mitigate the terror of eternal punish- 
ment for the unrighteous, itis hard to say. As for primi- 
tive teaching, it is too large ae to take tp here, and 
“honest, serious, and competent_readers ” will hardly assume ' 
what has not been proved: But if Dr. Farrar identifies it, 
as we must suppose, with that ‘ alinost necessary belief” 
‘which he speaks of in his preface,t then it is hard. to say how 
its exclusion from an evangelical creed, should make that 
ereed hardeg and less merciful, He states it there as “the 
‘wide-spread, ancient, reasonable, and, I had. almost said, ne- 
cessary, belief jn some condition in which what- means 


we know not, whether by the pvrna sensus or only the pana 


damni—imperfect souls who dic in a state unfit. for heaven 


_. may yet have perfected i in them until the day of Christ,‘that 
~ good work of God which has been in this world begun.” ~ 
That is only what we have before heard Canon Farrar inti- 


mate that some whom he styles the “ poor in spirit” may 
have to pass to the kingdom of heaven through the flames 
of-Gehenna. , Right or wrong, the evangelical creed, is not. 
less merciful ‘surely, when it teaches that. the blood of Christ \. 
and the Spirit of God can make a dying thief fit for matailioe | 
the same day. ‘It is scarcely less mercifi, however little 


ihtful opinion, 


e 


* -Pref., Ps ‘xvii, 


he may esteem it. possible, to substitute paradise for thé mild- 


at Bais. 


eS 


418 FAGTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


est fotm of purgatory. Nor does this touch the question of 
the unsaved. 

‘‘ y, Give due weight to the fact that many who have devoted 
ycars of earnest»labor to the inquiry—ripe : scholars and good men, 
orthodox fathers, eminent theologians, profound thinkers, holy 
and reverent inquirers—have come to the deliberate conclusion * 
that there is not a single text i in all Scripture wet necessitates 
_ a belief in endless torment.’ 

But how many who have ‘as patiently and laboriously 
come to the opposite conclusion? The eftect of which upon 
a really reverent soul will be to make him see that God will 
not allow that to be settled by mere human authority, which 
must be ascertained in the presence of God alone, and from 
His word. Good mer may, alas, suffer themselves in many 
ways to be drawn aside from truth; but still the word 
stands—tor, “Scripture sannot be Srokan’ “Tf any man 
will do (willeth to do) His walk he SHALL KNOW of the 
doctrine, whether it be of God.’ 

‘‘ vi, Bear specially in mind that it rests, almost if not quite 
exclusively, on the meanings which they attach to two words, 
‘Gehenna’ and ‘ onian,’ of which the first, interpreted by the 
only possible means of interpretation open to us, cannot bear the 
sense which they attribute to it; and the other is over and over 

-again applied in Scripture to indefinite but limited time, or to 
that which transcends all conception of time.” 

So far from its being merely a question of either ‘word, 
there are-a number of passages which would be Aecisive 
without ae “very passage which speaks of final “ de- 
struction” or “the second death,” such statements as “he 
shall not see ° ite, ” “cannot:enter into the kingdom of God”; 
that “zow is the accepted time,” and “now is the day of 
salvation”; all the passages, the most solemn and full in all 
Scripture, of the book of Revelation ; all these, among other 
testimonies, refute Dr. Farrar’s first assertion. . 

Then as to Gehenna, if the students of the rabbins are 


alone competent-te-saywhat it me z rs Compa 
tively, however ‘honest and serious,” can be pronounced 
yi 


TATE. 


e question of 


have devoted 
nd good men, 
hinkers, holy 
te conclusion * 
h necessitates 


1 laboriously 
f which upon 
hat God will 
hority, which 
ne, and from 
ves in many 
ill the word 
‘If any man 


Now of the 


st if not. quite 
0 two words, 
rpreted by the 
annot bear the 
over and over 
fed time, or to 


either ‘word, 


1 be decisive 

of final “ de- 
ments. as “he 
lom of God”; 
is the day of 
and full in all 
, among other 


e rabbins are 


419 


“THE RESTITUTION QF ALL THINGS.” 


| “contpetent.” But “why should contradictory and hyper- 


bolical-rabbins be more trustworthy than the testimony of 
‘Scripture itself? Why on its authority may we not say 
that “ Gehenna ” is a place,Where “ sonland body ” are “ de. 
stroyed”; as well ds on that of the Jewish doctors, that 
“the judgment of Gehenna is for twelve. months,” or that 
“Gehenna is pothing. but a day in whtch ‘the impious shall _ 
be burnt,” or that “after the last judgment \Gehenna exists 
no longer "—that last judgment in which men ‘are adjudged 


.¢o Gehenna! All these statements are given by. Dr. Farrar 


himself from his own chief authority, the Talmud. 

Again, as to “teonian,” we have seen that while in other 
writings we can trace a growing use of “ aion” for eternity, 
when used in the sense of duration at all, wonial is never 
less than “everlasting.” And though we may speak of 
“everlasting hills” this does not make the proper force-of 
‘the word doubtful. =~ : ae ; 

Dy. Farrar would have his readers begin their Scripture 
‘search with the matter already almost settled for them out- 
side of Scripture. " 

His next piece of advice is characteristic enough :— 

“ vil. Be shamed into a little humility—a little doubt as to their 
own absolute infallibility on ail religious subjects —a little sense 
of their possible ignorance or invincible prejudice—a little absti- 
nencefrom cheap .anathemas and contemptible calumnies~a little 


avoidance of such base weapons of controversy as the assertion ~~ 


that those who hold such views as I-here have advocated are re- 


peating the devil’s whisper, ‘‘ Thou shalt not surely ee 
To all this I may be excused from replying; but—hote 
what follows :— - 


‘* By not losing sight of the fact that (1) these views have been 
held in substance, not only (as I hgve said) by great teachers and 
holy saints, but also by whole ches ; and (2) that. they are 


involved in practices so universal and so primitive as prayer for 


the dead. The Kaddish, or prayer for the dead, in the Se ish 


e pronounced 


liturgies, is probably as old as the time of onr Lord, and if so was 
by Him unreproved, though it was befieved to be efficacious for the 
relief of souls.in Gehenna.” 


sick x 
CEES OOS AE 


\ 


420 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Dr. Farrar does not refuse very dubious texts, as we sce, 
from that other Bible of history in which he believes; but 
it is a ponderous argument to base upor an if” The next 
text is not less dubious, though from Scripture. 

‘¢ Eminent commentators, comparing 2 Tim. i. 16 and 19 (18 ?), 
and iv. 19 have believed that St. Paul’s prayer for Onesiphorus is 
n prayer for one who was dead; and he does not..reprove the 
principle of even 80 superstitious a practice as baptism for the 
dead.” | . - 
The first of these is again a large conclusion from scant 
premises. Paul salutes the house of Onesiphorus, no mention 
made ..of Onesiphorus himself. He prays for mercy to his 
house, and ‘that he may find the mercy of the Lord ‘in that 
day,” and as Onesiphorus does not appear in all this, it must 
be inferred it was a prayer for the dead! In an opposite 


- interest, how would Canon Farrar treat such a conjecture ? 


Yet the ‘second argument is worse. Where does the 


, apostle” speak of the principle of the practice of ‘baptism 


for the dead”? Nowhere. “He argues, if anything, for the 
practice itself,“ Else what shall they do who are baptized 
for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then 
baptized for the dead? And why stand we in jeopardy 
every hour?. I protest. . . I die daily” (1 Cor. xv. 29-31). 
If this is not approving the practice,.I know not what. is. 
Fancy the apostle urging in his argument for resurréction, 
“ Else what shall they do who are (so superstitiously !) bap- 
tized for the dead.” As for the principle, he says nothing 
about it. What was the principle? What was the practice — 
even? Dr. Farrar-evidently refers to a suppositious cer- 
emony “never adopted except by some obscure sects of 
Gnostics, who seem to have founded. their custom on this 
very passage,’* the ‘practice of submitting to baptism for 


<a : 


* Conybeare and Howson : Life and Epistles of St. Paul. ‘In their 


fa ie OF, PCRS Ape ts 


pc 2 
ae ee 
a RSE 


CSE ee goes - 
CY CL LLY a 
5 


ote upon tie text they -speak-ofitas the only meaning the Greek seems 


to admit; “ yet,” they: say, “this explanation is liable to very great 
difficulties.” The first difficulty they mention is “ that St. Paul should 
vefer_ to such a superstition without rebuking it.” The second, the 


TATE. 


8, as we #ce, 
clieves; but 
» The next 


and 19 (18 ?), 
nesiphorus is 
t-.reprove the 
ptism for the 


n from scant 
s, no mention 
mercy to his 
Lord in that 
1 this, it must 
an opposite 
, conjecture ? 
ere does the 
» of ‘‘ baptism 
thing, for the 
) are baptized 
are they then 
e in jeopardy 
or. xv. 29-31). 
y not what is. 
r resurrection, 
itiously !) bap- 
e says nothing 


yas the practice — 


ppositious cer- 
scure sects of 
sustom on this 
to baptism for 


t. Paul. ‘In their 
1¢ the Greek seems 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS. 421 


some person who had diéq unbaptized. Dr. Farrar owns 
it as a“ superstitious custom”; yet thinks the apostle does 
not reprove the principle of it,—a principle which must 
have implied thé need of baptism to free from the penalties 
of sin, and the possibility of the living making up the de- 
ficiencies of the dead! a thing too gross to be accepted by 
the ritualistic Christianity which so soon succeeded the - 
apostolic 

Yet in Yhe light of the eontext the difficulties of the pas- . 
sage are not insuperable. Why cannot the ordinary rite be 
styled—tor it is evident there was no special one—“ baptism 
in place of the dead,”* simply because those freshly receiving 
it were filling up the ranks in what was then indeed “ the 
noble army of martyrs "of inen “ appointed unto death.”t 
The verses following show. that-in this track the apostle's 
thoughts were running. “I protest T die daily. Vf after 
the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, 


‘what advantageth it me, if the dead. rise not?” “Why ° 


should it be so very strange an expression for him to use, | 
“baptism in plac of the dead,” under such circumstances 
and in such a connection? Especially ee the ¢hoice is . 
between this and the apostle’s sanction of “so superstitious a 


practice ” as Dr. Farrar owns thé other to have been—a 


practice which there is no evidence ever existed ? 
The antiquity of the practice of prayers for the dead ‘we 
may concede to Dr. Farrar, as of many anothey, error which 


Scripture shows us coming in.already in apostolic days. 
‘ 9 


Superstition is not the more venerable for its grey hairs. 
'« viii, Let them weigh- the fact that what Christ did, once 


namely, preach to the lost, gud open gor them the prison doors 


: ee aie a amen e : Grea TT GSS 
discontinuance of sith a prattice “in the period which followed, when 
. > : (Aa . . 
a magical efficacy was more and more ascribed to the material act. of. 


: bana They conclude that “the passage must. be considered. to 


adiwd of no satisfactory explanation.” go 
*dnén taiv vexnwv. ‘Yep is undoubtedly used in this sense 


able to very great 
at St. Paul should 
The second, the 


in 2 Cor. v. 20 and Philem. 18, though -it is not-a frequent use in the 
New Testament. ; 


+Ch. iv. 9. - 


SS Re 


Ses ae eee 


422 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


He may do again and ever. The text on which I preached 
‘throws blessed light on one of the darkest enigmas of Divine 
justice—the cases in which the final doom seems infinitely out of 
proportion to the lapse which has incurred it.’ [Was thatthe 
ease with the Corinthians ?] This was the interpretation of the 
early fathers.” a 

Which does not save it, nevertheless, from being error." 
Long before this, in view of what was coming in, the 
Apostle Paul commended the Ephesian Christians * to God 
and the word of ITis grace” ; and we have certainly no less 
need of the injunction at, the present day. . Scripture is con- 
clusive in this case against the interpretation of the fathers, 
however early or many. | : 

We may now turn to the passages, the principal of which» 
have been already examined.t The first is Gen. iii. 15, the 
prediction of the serpent’s head being bruised by the wo- 


- man’s seed, which only reeds to be referred to again, on 


‘aécount of a quotation from Dr. Chauncey. “ How could 
this be so, if Satan triumphed by gaining millions to be his 
slaves? In this case eould it be said, as in Isa. Hit: 13, * He 
shall see of the travail of his soul and be satisfied, for he 
shall bear their iniquities’ ?” ; . 

The answer to the first. question is, that Satan will never 
gain a single slave. His reign in hell is a mere dream andl 
a delusion. To the second, the answer will be found very 
simply by quoting the whole passage : ‘‘ Ile shall see of the 
fruit of the travail of his soul and be satisfied: by his knowl t 


edye shall my righteous Servant just! fy MANY, for he shall 


bear their iniquities.” zs aie 
(2.) Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7, is appealed to by Chief Rabbi 
; Re Be ee i —— el 


*] would commend Isaac Taylor's * Ancient Christianity” to those 
who wish to see what patristic teaching had developed into already in 
Nicene times. ee ; 

+ Passages adduced, which need no further notice, nothing fresh 


4 


being said-of them, are Gen. xii. 3; (xxii. 18; Gal. iii. 8; Acts iii. 25). 


“John i. 29; iii. 17, 85; xii, 825 1 Jolin ii. 2; Acts iii. 21; Eph. i. 10: 
Rom. viii. 19, 24; v- 15, 17, 18. 20, 21; <& 32; xiv. 9; 1 Cor. xv. 
92, 24-28; 1 Tim. ii. 4,6; iv,10; Heb. ii, 14; Rev. xx. 14; xxi. 4,9" 
xxii, 3 s : ss 


' 


TE. 


| preached 
of Divine 
tely out of 
us that the 
tion of the 


ing error.* 
ng in, the 
s‘*to God 
nly no less 
ure is con- 
he fathers, 


lof which - 
it. 15, the 
by the wo- 
) again, on 
How could 
s to be his 
liii. 13, ‘ He 
fied, for he 


1 will never 
dream and 
found very 


Il see of the 


| his knowl: 


for he shall | 


Chief Rabbi 
a ae 
nity” to those 
into already in 


nothing fresh 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 423 


Weill, who naturally quotes down to, “ and will by no means 
clear the guilty,” which he omits. * 
(3.) Psa. xxx. 5 he also appeals to: “ His wrath endureth 


‘but the twinkling of an eye, but Llis favor a lifetime”; but 


those words are part of an exhortation to the Lord’s maine 
to sing to Him, and are illustrated by the deliverance which 
the Psalmist has experienced from his enemies. They apply 
to the discipline of the righteous, and not to the Senet 
of the wicked. 

(4.) Psa. xii. 14* is one of the texts (with Mic. vii. 18- 
20, ete.), upon which Rabbi Albo founds the remission of 
eternal punishment fom all except the worst. Nothing-is 


said about it, howeWer, in the psalm, but “two things "+ are 


ascribed to God, power and mercy, and these will be shown 
in rendering to every man according to his work. All the 
rest is speculation, And the passage in Micah speaks of. 
(tod’s mercy in Israel's restoration in the latter day. 

(5.) Psa. ciii. 9: “Te will not always be chiding, neither 


-keepeth He His anger foreyer,”’ is one of Dr. eee a's own 


texts, but the application throughout the psalm is again 
quite obvious, as especially the 17th and 18th verses, where 
“the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting on 
them that fear ITim, . . . to such as-keep His covenant, and 
to those that remember IIis commandments to do them.” 

(6.) Psa. exxxix. 8: “If I make my bed. in hell, behold, 
Thou art there ” :—a yery strange quotation ou Dr. Farrar’s 


‘part, made still. more strange by the poetry in his note.} 


*V.13 must be meant. according to the Hebrew numbering, 12 in 
the English, x “ : : 
+ Delitzsch translates; “One thing hath Elohim spoken, these two 


have I heard,” ete. 


$ * What. hell may be I know:not : this I knoy, 
I cannot lose the presenee of the Lord : : 
One arm—Humility —takes hold upon j 
His dear humanity ; the other, Love, 


Si aT Te a 


SE ne EL AL ET TL ORAL I OMELET a 


1; Eph. i. 1; 


9; 1 Cor, xv. 


14; xxi. 4.9 


Clasps His divinity, so where;fgo, 
He goes ; and better fire-walled hell with Him, 
Than golden- gated paradise without.” 


elena ecarennannen fon onereeaneene Seen neat ee 


424 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


Strange—because the word for “hell’’-is (as of coume he 
knows) sheol ; one of the words he speaks of elsewhere as 
denoting ‘‘a place both for the bad and the good,” and which 
«means an intermediate state of the soul previous to judg- 
‘ment,’ and not, therefore, “ hell” in the ordinary sense at 
all. Made stranger by the poetry he quotes :. for that would 
make it appear that hell was a receptacle for those who cling 
in humility and love to Christ. - « eee . 

_ (4), Isa. lvii. 162“ For I will not contend forever, neither 
will Kbe always wroth : for the spirit should fail before me, 
and t souls, which I have made.” This has been already 
urged by Mr. Constable in behalf of annihilation, as by 
Canon Farrar for restoration. In truth i has nothing to do 
with either, being simply the reason why the Lord will not 
‘pursue Israel to extremity, as having purposes of. mercy 
‘toward her. This is what the context positively proves. 

(8.) Isa. xlix. 9: “That thou mayest say to the prisoners, 
Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Show yourselves.” 
This is quoted by Mr. Jukes, as well as Dr. Farrar, It is 
an address of Jehovah prophetically to Megsiah, and applies 
expressly to the carth and not to hell at all: “I will ‘also 
give Thee for a light to the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be my , 
salvation unto the end of the earth,. . .. to establish the 
earth, to cause to inherit the ‘desolate heritages; that Thou 
mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth,” ete. Similar dan- 
guage is used in familiar passages, where none would dream 
of carrying it further.t Dr. Farrar must assume that it ap- 
plies to hell. ‘Will he say why ? 

(9.) Hos, vi. 1: “ Come, ond let us return to the Lord: 
‘for He hath torn, and He will heal us: He hath smitten, 

and He will bind us up.” How this, which does speak of 
the Lord’s mercy’to the penitent, bears upon the question 
of the judgment of the impenitent, itis again difficult to say. 
(10.) Hos. xiv. 4: “T will heal their backsliding, I will 
love them freely ; for mine anger is turnéd away from him.” 


—Ffere-also-a word of explanation would have been accept- 


- ea ee --—— = - — 
_ * Pref., p. xxxi. + As, e.g. Isa. Ixii. 7, 1xi. 1, Luke iv. 18-21. 


N 


* 
urse -he 


here as 
d which 
0 judg- 
sense at 
it would 
‘ho cling 


neither 
fore me, 
. already 
n, as by 
ng to do 
will not 
of, mercy 
‘OVEeS. 
yrisoners, 
irselves.” 
ar, It is 
d applies 
will ‘also 
est be my, 
blish the 
hat Thou 
nilar Jan- 
ld «dream 
hat it ap- 


he Lord: 
h smitten, 
speak of 
» question 
ult to say. 
ing, I will 


rom him.” 


en accept: 


aye 
e 


“@HE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 425 


able. How.does this show that‘God’s anger will be turned 
away from those under “ eternal judgment ” ? 

(11.) Luke ix. 56, I give without comment: “For the 
Son of Man is not come to Shae! men’s lives, but to save 
them ” ! 

(12.) Lukegxii. 47, 48: “« He that knew not his*Lord’s will 


_and did commit ching worthy of stripes shall be beaten with 


jew stripes.” That I surely believe; but a man must be 
born again to go to heaven. * 

(18, 14.) Phil. ii. 16, 11; Col. i.19,20 :—These have been 
looked at before. I only mention thera _here to allow place — 
to Mr. Minton’s observations, of course from a different 


- point of view to Dr. Farrar. 


Mr. Minton contendst that “all things,” i in the latter pas- ° 
sage, means “the whole universe,” as being what is spoken 
of in ver..16 as “created by Christ; for precisely the same. 
language is used with regard to both. If Gehenna be a 
locality, it is part of the earth as ponresented to St. John by 
the lake of fire. And when we are told that even on our 
view ‘hell has to be excepted ’ from the universal reconcilia- 
tion, we reply, that when that reconciliation is completed, 
hell will have done its work, and passed away with the first 
earth on which it was seen. . In each case the universe 
is regarded as a whole... There is nothing in existence 
which Christ did not originally create, and there shall at. 


a A ca pe er ee oe ee ge ee ann ee _- 


* Mr. Cox (Salv.. -Mun., p. 186) adduces. Rom. xiv, 9-11, to urge ites” 
“as ‘no man can confess that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost,’ 
the dead who are to bow to Him, as well as.the living, must be open to 
the renewing ministry of the Divine Spirit: open to it! yes, and merci- 
fully condemned (*) and exposed to it until every one, even the most 
stubborn, be compelled to yield it.”(!) Now “no man can say that 
(not ‘ confess ’) Jesus Christ is Lord but by the Holy Ghost” is a ques- 
tion of power, not life. Many will say in that day “ Lord, Lord,” and be 


condemned (Matt. vii. 22). But condemned, says. Mr. Cox, to the 


renewing ministry of the: Holy Ghost. “ The heart of fools proclaimeth 
foolishness.” 


iv. , 18-21, 


+ Way Everlasting, pp. 28, 24, note. 


426. FACTS AND THEORIES A 


last he nothing in existence that He h 
fe 


God.” 


Now the passing 
a dream of Mr. Minton’s, 
into it till after the earth 
And hell dnd those in it are neve 


ino A, FUTURE STATE. 


as not reconciled to . 


away of hell with the first earth is simply 


inasmuch as the dead are not cast 
and the heavens are fled away. 
r mentioned, as to be “ re- 


conciled ”’at all. They are given as a third class in the pas- 


sage in Philfppians, 
is. spoken of: “ That at 
bow, of heavenly beings, 
Plainly heavenly and earthly di 
- class of infernal beings, 
‘and in earth do not, if 
it surely is. This is demonstration t 
of the expression meaning str 


rect. 


But he is not willing to give it up, 


and, th 


where subjection and not reconciliation 
the name of Jesus every knee should 
of’ earthly, and of infernal.” 
o not here include this other 
erefore, all things in heaven 
Scripture is consistent with itself, as 
hat Mr. Minton’s thought 
ictly “ the universe ” is incor- 


nevertheless, and he 


urges that in the passage in Philippians in the original,— 


‘¢¢qt? is ‘in the, name of Jesus, 
* the Philippians precisely what he taug 
in different language. 


verse shall ultimately ‘ bow’ to 


God ‘in the name of Jesus.’ ‘ J. X 
‘under the earth’ means Gehenna. 
into Gehenna yet; and it appears to St. 


He declares that 


> and that St. Paul is teaching 
ht the Colossians, though 
all the intelligent uni- 


‘God the Father,’ that is, worship . 


. C.’ appears to think that 
But no one has been cast 
John as on the surface 


of theearth. If he will once more refer to the original, he will 


see that the word is one common 
When speaking of the ‘all things, 
hing belonging toi 
g—not of all ‘things,’ as erroneously 
but—of all intelligent creatures, he divides 
whichis subject to death into the living 
to convey an assurance of resurrection 


this pkmet, with everyt 
creation. When speakin 
translated in Phil. ii., 
that portion’ of’ creation 
‘and the dead, probably 


"from the dead. .. 


one single knee which doe 
name ef Jesus. It is ‘subjection’ no do 


ly used in Greek for the dead. 
St. Paul divides them into. 


t, and all the rest of f 


_ ‘Phere will not be left in the whole universe 


~gubjection of the—heart; nota ‘paralysis 


ae of power.” 


- 


s not bow to God the Father in the 
ubt ; but it is the willitg 


> or an enforeed ‘ har- 


x 


ATE. 


conciled to . 


th is simply 
are not cast 
p fled away. 
3to be “ re- 
3 in the pas- 
»conciliation 
knee should 
f infernal.” 
le this other 
's in heaven 
vith itself, as 
on’s thought 


3@7 is incor- 


aless, and he 
priginal,— 

il is teaching 
ssians, though 
itelligent uni- 


hat is, worship . 


sto think that 
has been -cast 
m the surface 
iginal, he will 
- for the dead. 
des them into. 


all the rest of : 


as erroneously 
ires, he divides 
into the living 
of resurrection 
whole universe 
Father in the 
it is the williig 

enforeed ‘ har- 


“THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” — 


Now here again we ‘must first set aside the extr aordinary 


., view Mr. Minton has as to Gehenna. Where does it appear 


to the apostle as on the surface of the earth? Certainly 
‘not in‘the book of Revelation; net’ anywhere else so far as 
Iam aware. Then the dead, ie tells us, are not in Gehenna 
“ yet.” Quite trie, if we speak as to the present. ‘Bat | 
suppose it is not “ yet ” that every knee bows. If it be the 
dead that. are to bow in willing subjection of heart, to God 
before re yet in Gehenna, then it is hardly possible that. 
they ‘ever go there, and universalism, not annihila- 
tion; won id be true. But it would scarcely agree with. 


Scripture to blot out Gehenna altogether. We myst, con, 
~ clude then, that the “dead” do not bow before « mg) 
and 


But then after Gehenna there are no dead to bow 


even according to Mr. Minton, those that die the seoand: 


death will not,.and there are no other dead at all. | 
Perhaps he will say, that is not yet what he means. Well, 
thert he must mean that of those ow dead, every knee shall 
in the fature “bow”; but that, in Ais sense of bowing, 1 is 
urggersalism again. Mr. Minton cannot give any meaning 
to the words he quotes, consistent with annihilation; if the 
subjection be subjection of heart. For if it be living and 
dead before judgment and every knee shall bow before then, 
the wicked dead will be converted and saved bef€fe they 
are in hell at all; and if those now dead are to bow after 
judgment, they will still be converted before they are anni- 
hilated,‘and God will annihilate converted souls; or if 
finally it be those dead after the judgment, then as none will 
die in any sense then but the wicked, still the same result 


follows. Willing subjection of heart in all the living and ° 


the dead is either universalism-or mere absurdity. 

But is it willing subjection of heart that the passage 
shows? Certainly every knee bowing does not of itself 
mean that. Nor does it say,as Mr. Minton puts it, that 
they bow to God the Father at all. The apostle is expressly 
of the name of Jesus, and it is 


427 


v 


Ss 


at that Name ny as the context absolutely-requires) that they 


a 


7 


° 


_ passes unto them; and h 


€ * . 
“4 i , : 
FS : . ; pa) = 


428 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


bow, though it be to God the Father's glory that the Son 
is thus honored. Mr. Minton (with Jukes and others) ren-_ 
ders “in the name,” but there is no need from, the.Greek at 
all, and the context is decisive against it: “He has given 
_Him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus 


~ every knee should bow ”-is the only consistent reading, and 


eo 4 


subjection, not reconciliation, and that to Christ, Himself, - 


t 


the only possible sense.” . pe ‘ oe 
Then as.to those “under the earth” being used for the, 
dead, it is allowed that the Greek wordt often means this ; 


exactly literal, although he may not agree that ‘this term 


“should have its modern meaning. - But if beings in heaven,’ - 
:. on earth, and under thé earth are characterized in this way 


at, the time they bow to Christy and that bowing itself cor- 


responds (as. elearly it must) to all ‘things being p&t under , 


: His-feet, there are then no “dead ”-to be covered ‘by this 


term, and “infernal” must. mean lost. men and spirits in 


Gehenna, and no others. oe 
Thus‘ also, infernal being .a third class to heavenly and 


earthly, it does.not come into the passages in Colossians —, 


and. Ephesians, and must be omitted from the thought of the 


- universe which\is found in them. § Neither annihilationism ~ 
‘nor uniyersalism can make good their view from texts like . 


these. - ae . . 
Let us now return to Dr. Farrar. 


*é 


(15.) 2 Cor. v. 19: “To wit, that God was in Christ, rg- 


conciling the world unto Himself, not imputing their tres- 
ath committed unto us the word of 
isbn wise 2 SP be mini ea 


* That év Te ovouan must. be “ i the name ” is a strange asser- 
tion'to be made for any one who knows. the ‘flexibilit¥ qf Greek pre- 

» pgsitions. It would beim yossible for a scholar save under influences 
which had destroyed his mental capacity, to assert it. The text is an 


example of v.denoting “ the occasion,” of which Winer gives an ex. . 


ample which is quite parallel to this; Acts vii. 29: Egvyev év te 
Adyw@ rovrm, “ then fled Moses ‘at this saying.” To, which may be 


6 


but:Mr. M. wil probably allow “that. “ infernal” is more”, . 


if _added Luke i. 21, “ marvelled, that he tarried,” or “ af his tarrying.” 
oe on naraxbovior. | era ; 


TATE. 


hat’ the Son 
others) ren- 
he.Greek at 
e has given 
me of Jesus 
reading, and 
ist. Himself, 
used for the, 
means this ; 


al” is more ™ 


1t this termi 


zs in heaven,’ 


| in this way 
ng i elf cor- 


ig pdt under , 


ered ‘by this 


+ 


1d spirits in 


1eavenly and 


n Colossians _ , 


r1ought of the 


nihilationism * 
om texts like .— 


in Christ, re- 


ng their tres- 
s the word of 


a strange asser- 
$ of Greek pre- 
under influences 

The text is an 


ner gives an ex. . 


ipvyev ev TH 
’o, which may ,be 


is AE "5 ve 


L oo Ly ‘a 
. ~ x rs 


‘ ley THE jpesTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” . Fano 


“< imen treated the Recongiler, or. how: they treat the re recon 
~. ciling wosd. 


(16.) Tits ii. 11, 12: 


” result but aspect... “Saving to all” is the grace which “has: 


s 


warning of the.same apostle, “that ye receive not the grace 


that, “ he that ‘believeth 


wherein this grace is offered, a 


* consistent with such be conde 
+ . of it. 


‘under His‘ feet. For i 
(winder: Him, He left nothing ; that is not: put under, Him. But 
. now we see not yet, all things. put under Him. | But we 

gee Jesus, who wa 
- for the. suffering’ 


f death, erowned, with glory and, honor; 


ee eath.” 
fiyst ‘place; 1 no -editor of whom I have any know- 


Shoulc 
In: t 
ledge a enticates Dr. Farrar’s ‘reading. 


fathers, but no one prefers it or-admits a question as to it. 


' ‘djed/for angels, which is the very: thing” SAerodicted in ‘the 
verse ofthe same chapter, the true-v@Sion of which is 


therefore, not even of all men.. Dr. Farrar’s geading: is ille- 


quotation there need be no dispute. 


4 i 


ee cee ee Leer 
~ 


- not ghall be condemned.” Salv tion, as-we haye seen, is not 
ation 2 but ne very eppoate 


made :a little’ lower than ‘the angels. 


ject of the reading ‘is ‘of, course to: show that Christ. 


reconciliation,” ‘This says nothing of result’; - nothing of how ae 


“Not as in the English version, but 
“For the grace of God hath appeared, which is is s¢ving to” 
- all men (y Gawrrgtos maCLV dviparors). e This ‘aghin i is not 


appeared, that is its character, but_it does not set aside the. - 


of God in vain ”;* nor the fact that the.gospel is that alone a 


a 


(17) Heb. ii. 8,9: “Th fa hast pat alt beni in. sahiesuiee a 
that He. put: cally ins -subjection ° 


that He by the grace of God ‘(or rather, yopis Sead, ‘for: 
“every ‘rational bein ay Or for eber) ything gee : except God ’) 


It As. mentioned 
(as by Alford) as found i in‘ some ancient, copies, versions ‘and ” 


i ‘the margin : “ For verily He taketh not hald of angels; 
but of the seed of Abraham he taketh hold,” i.e, as result, 


gitimate from every point of view. Re to. oahe rest, of" the 


“his tarrying.” 


Pe * 2 Gor. vi. 1. 


n 


7 
430 : PACTS AND THEORIES AS T) A FUTURE STATE. 


18.) Rev. w. 13: “ And every creature which is in heav- 
en, and: onthe earth, and tinder the earth (daroxa’ rad.r7HS y75), 
and such ag are in the séa, and all that is in them, heard I 
saying, Blessing and hopary and glory and: power be unto 
Him that sltterh upon thé throne, and to the‘Lamb forever 
and ever.” .Heré those “ under the earth” are a different 
class from those in Philippians, as the expression itself and 
the context shows. “On the earth.” and “ under'the earth ” 
and “in the sea” are evidently so many parts of the world 
itself, in which every created thing i is now vocal with praise. 
Similarly — 

-(19.) Rev. xxi. 4, 5 is limited to the new earth; while— 

(20.) Rev. xxii. 3 does not neossearily extend beyond the 
New Jerusalem. | . 

This completes. Canon Farrar’ s list of passages to be con- 
sidered, and our review of his hook.. I apprehend that’ the 
“honest, serious, and. competent reader” to whom he ad- 
dresses himself will be the last to believe that’ he has made 
out his. case. 4 

Before summing up the deculis of our. inquiry | as to the 
two main forms of the denial of eternal punishment, it will 
be well yet to consider the ethics of the doctrine, and as a’ 
preliminary to this we must give attention to a view of eter-: 


nal punishment itself which has been propounded by one, | 


who can by no means be classed with any of the writers we 
beve hitherto been occupied with. 


{ 


a 


‘Ee. 


in heav- 
IHS ¥15), 
, heard I 
be unto. 
b forever 
_ different 
itself and 
he earth ” 
the world 
ith praise. 


while— 
yond the 


xe) he con- 
| that’ the 
n he ad- 
has made 


ay 
aN 


as to the 
mt, it will 
and as a’ 
w of eter-: 


d by one, | 


vriters we 


ii 


pCO UES e lusively refer in my sae attempt. at an ‘exam. , 


-far as Mr. Birks deals directly with this that 
- him im this chapter. Passing, over all the re 
ment, therefore, we. will confine’ ourselves now;to his Prgpo- 


_. CHAPTER XII. Lay, 


\ MaR/ BIRKS’ VLEW. 


Mn. Brrs’ view Of we doctrine of eternal’ punishment . 
was’first published/about twelve years since, ina work ‘en- 
titled, “The Victory of Divine Goodness,” and> has . since 


been republish ina revised: fornfin. the second edition of 
his “Difficulties of Belief,” in which. it ‘occupies ‘the last * 


-It is to thidl exposition of it I. shall, of 


three chapfers. 


nothmg to dor ‘Tt is occupied with a statement of the case 
as against the doctrines of annihilation and-of 1 universal sal- 
ydtion, with every line of which I can most fully and heartily 
foncur. His second chapter opens with a’ view of the com- * 
mon ethical objections tothe orthodex. doctrine, to the con- 
sideration of which we have not yet arrived. . ‘We are still 


occupied with the Scripture ¢ doctrine itself, and is only Xe) 
pi follow 


of his argu-, 


‘sitions as to eternal judgment, ‘itself. a, 


‘And:as to the first of these we find ourselves again in en- 


tire agreement with him, thatt— oe 


\ 


‘1, First, the: second death ‘is not the reign of Satan in aking- 


dom of ‘his own, in which he reigns over those whom he has. - 


deceived, : and actively torments them forever.” | 
We agree with himthat— is, 


‘there is the widest contrast between the pressnt time of Satan’s : 
permitted activity and reign, and the future season of his punish- 


Fe 


ment, when all his power to tempt and accuse the brethren, or to 
-Teign over evil. men, will have ceased forever. It is not strange, 


e 
4 


al 
“. 
i 


482 PACTS J AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


a 


but natara and certain, that sinners should have ious freedom for 
active wickedness under the fiery anger of God than in the time 
of His forbearance and long-sufferi@y. Nothing: can. be-more , 
monstrous than the notion that, under the holy eye and right- 

eous hand of the Supreme Judge, they ca and will rebel. moré.: 
freely and fiercely than ever before. Such, a prison, in which’ ¥ 
criminals should be allowed to cultivate their own wicked habits y 
and practices to the uttermost, would be a foul reproach to any 
earthly government. _ How great, then, must be the evil of bring- 

ing this ‘charge, without - the least grain of Deripture evidence,” * * 
nay, in the teeth of its express statements, ‘hgainst the govern- 

ment of the Righteous and ‘Eternal King !” . 


Mr. Birks’ second proposition isthat— | < 


WF Again, the. last judgment and the second death are one 
5 main part. in a wise, holy, and perfect work of the God of love. 
. » Thie issues of judgment, however solemn, must be such that 
the All-wise, whose understanding is unsearchable, the All-good, 
_ whose tender mercies are over all his works; can not only acqui- 
- egce in them,-but even rejoice,in them with a deep complacency 
. of divitie love. . . Now this revealed perfection of the whole 
oS work of God, when we reflect on it calmly, must throw a steady 
: light on this. mysterious and solemn subject of the second death. 
The first death is God’s ‘last and greatest enemy. It may be 
. borne with. for a time, but its continuance would be a fatal bar- 
rier to the dominion and glory of the Most High. ‘God is not 
‘the God of the dead but of the living.’ And hence that indignant 
sentence—‘ O death, I will be thy plagues ; O grave, I. will be- 
thy destruction.’ But the second death proceeds directly from 
the appointment of the Supreme Judge who is perfect both in. 
wisdom and, goodness. However terrible and. solemn, it is his 
‘ divine remedy for all that is most fearful and appalling in the ac- 
_ tual or possible evil of a fallen and rebellidus universe. . . The 
attempt to deeped its' terrors by heaping up all kinds of moral 
a _ and spiritual horrors, the unchecked ravings of fiendish malice, 
H ee the blasphemous utterances of raging despair, and to see in it the 
ai . stereotyped continuation of-rebellion, hatred and blasphemy for- 
Hs ‘ever, is to reverse and deny the revealed object and aim of the 
__work of Christ.‘ For’ this purpose was the Son of God_mani- 


4 


fested, that he might destroy the works of the deyil.’ The grand 
purpose of the judgment which he will execute can never be to 


~ 


2, » 


TE. 


we 


reedom: for 
in the time 


1. be- more , 


and right- 


rebel: moré. ° 
, in which 


ked habits 
ach to any 
il of bring- 


» evidence, * 
he govern- 


< 


th are one 


od of love. 
e such that 
2 All-good, 
only acqui- 
mplacency 
the. whole 
wa steady 
ond death, 
It may be 
a fatal bar- 
God is not 
t indignant 


, I will be © 


rectly from 
ect both in, 
n, it is his 
¥ in the ac- 


e... The 


s of moral 
lish malice, 
ee in it the 
phemy for- 
aim of the 


« 


° MR. BIRKS’ VIEW. 433 °. 


Hureorene and otarnize active rehéltion seaines God, but to. abol- 
-ish it for evermore, = 
Now here : again there is much of truth’ ‘that needs to be 
remembered. Mt. Birks’ system, however, begins to appear 
in th exaggeration of the contrast between. the ‘first. and. 
the Moond death. ‘- ‘That they are contrasted has been. | 
already insisted on. “Type and_antitype, which is the rela- vs 
tion in which they stand to one another, are always more of ay 
less contfasts: That the first death, moreover, yould.in its. 7. : 
continuance be fatal to the fulfilment of the divine purgpse, aa 
whether for saint or sinner, is simple and sure enough. _ As / 5 
the infriygement of the creative plan, it can but fulfil a tem 
porary purpose find must evéntuall) pass alway ; and the - 
second death cannot be, therefore, the repetition. of” it. °’ 
The resurrection which introduces the latter is the clos¢ of 
. the former; and eg is the last enemy, i in this way » to be it i 
" destro Fe en ara | Lyd 
But if the last enemy, is it “the greatest a4 ? Ig there any 
warrant for opposing it In moral character and design to the ee 
final judgment’? Surely none: in fact the.yery opposite. 
It is, just as the second is, “ theappointntt of thes Supreme : 
Judge ‘who is perfect both i in wisdom and goodness.” - Nay, 
the Lord’s parable of the rich man jn hades givesusaview | - 
of the first death which (as related to thé lost) resembles's0 | 
closely the second, that many have conf dunded them. There . 
is not the least warrant for giv ing Ao the first death the g } 
character of soral evil which we shd | find MY Birks attach- es oe 
ing to it still more plainly in the ‘s¢équel. ‘ a 
Again, does he not go too far in deciding that the second | 
death will work any moral chayge in those who are subject - We 
to it? That it will-not “sterg otype and eternize {active re- 
bellion against.God-” is no déubt true. That it.will change 
“hatred” into “aught else/ must be proved rather than |: 
asserted. The subjection of “ infernal beings ig clearly. 


The grand 
ever be to 


taught. Every knee sha/ bow to Christ, and évery tongue ; 


confess that he is Lord; that is true, for Scripture affirms ;: 
it...“ The works of the devil ” shall be destroyed, but not’ 


‘ 


+ 


ae tie ene er 


434 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A pUTORE STATE. 


his character changed. Were it so, it would naturally seem 
that ‘universalism must be the true view; for if the heérts 
of .all were subject, eternal punishment ‘would be a mon 
strosity; for it is not’based upon the infinite guilt already 
contracted, but upon. the- persistenc 'y of moral character. 
“He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is 
filthy, let him be filthy still."* Apart from all questions of 
exact demerit, could the God whom Scripture reveals pur- 


sue with everlasting rigor those who had been brought into 


heartfelt subjection to His will ? 

Mr. Birks’ third proposition is— as 

“3, The doom: of the-lost, wo are further taught, will be the ob- 
ject of acquiescence and holy contemplation on the’ part of all the 
unfallen and redeemed. . . . That doom, however solemn, can 
- hardly be one of pndealed horror und darkness, much less of 
unbounding and eternal blasphemy, which is the objeet. of com- 
placency and holy adoration to saints and angels, free from all 
taint of mere selfishness, and moulded into the fall and perfect 
resemblance of the divine love.” 

The question could coal be seriously raised as to 
whether the acts of Him whose ways are perfect will be the 
object of complacency to creatures brought into His moral ’ 
likeness. “Their happiness is not,” indeed, “made to de- 
pend either on their ignorance or their forgetfulness of the 
doom of the lost.” Nor need we suppose that doom to be 
“euminigled horror ‘and darkness,” if by that is meant a: 
doom which would itself be an evil, rather than one. designed. , 
for the repression of evil. “Io the very lost themselves, it 
is not inconceivable, that that. repression in itself should be 
a good—the only one, it mney, be, which remains a possibility 
in their case. ; 

‘4, Fourthly, on the day of- judgment the honor due even to 
the wicked as God’s creatures, and gifted by Him with high and 
noble powers, will, in some way or other, be still recognized by 
the righteous Judge.” 


Mr. Birks applies. here the pone wes of. Gen. ix. 6 and 


oo een einem 2a 


* Rey, xxii. 11. 


TATE, 


sturally seem 
if the hetrts 
| be a mon 
guilt already 
we character. 
d he that is 
questions of 
reveals pur- 


brought into-- 


» 


will be the ob- 
part of all the 
x solemn, can 
, much less of 
bjeet. of com- 
‘free from all 
ull and perfect 


raised as to 
et will be the 


to His moral ’ 


made to de- 
fulness of the 
t doom to be 


t is meant a: 
one.designed. ‘ 


shemselves, it 
alf should be 
3a possibility 


or due even to 
with high and 


recognized by | 


MR, BIRKS’ VIEW. 435 


~ 


Deut. xxv. 2, 3, and seems to intimate that Christ as Judge 


will respéct the divine image in man and the brotherhood -’ 
" of all huntanity by some “measurement” or even “ mitiga- 
» tion” of what might be the exact due. 


He does not. posi- 
tively say this, however; and we must not say it for him. 
“They were judged every man according to their works” 
is what Scripture says. We can say nothing else. 


‘5. Once more, the last judgment is the work of God’s mercy as 
well as of His judicial righteousness. ‘This is plainly taught us 
in those striking and impressive words of the Psalmist—‘ Also 
unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy ; for thou renderest. to 
every man according to his works.’ In the judgment of the right- 
eous it is easy to see and feel the truth of this whispered message 
of God. . . Can it be true, even of the souls that perish, that 
there is mercy in that sentence which dooms them to the laké of 


_ fire? The deep thought which Plato dimly apprehended by the 


light of nature, seems here to receivé a direct sanction from the 
Spirit of God. Punishment is set before ns in the light of a 


divine medicine for the diseases of the soul. Compared with that 
most awful of curses, that evil should he left to work out fully its 


own terrible issues in the darkness of utter banishment from the 
divine presence, even the justice of God, however severe, is medi- 
cinal to guilty sinners. Their dom is awful, but a world aban- 


_doned to the reign of unrestrained and triumphant wickedness 


would be still more awful. The abyss, a bottomless pit, bound- 
less in its breadth and depth and insatiable in its craving, is to 


be destroyed and abolished by the power of the Redeemer: The. 


revealed scene of judgment is not a sea, an ocean or abyss, but 
simply a lake of fire. It is merey to the wicked to deny them the 
fatal power of uddingsin tosin. It is mercy to keep them from the 


power of tormenting Oy other, by the free indulgence of their | 


own sipful and hateful passions. It is mercy to force them back, 
even though captive and in chains, to the presence of that infi- 


_ nite goodness, from which their own rebellious hearts would lead 


» 
themselves 


them farther and farther away, till they should loge 
deeper and deeper in delusion and darkness forever,” 


I have not quoted all this for the saka/of: opposing it. 


en. ix. 6 and 


There is much in it suggestive, much t 
at least probably true. Whether it be th 


* would seem as 


POs ee i *b fe 
: % a 


ekeal meaning of — 


486 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


"the psalm is another question ; and if we read it in connec. 
tion we shall perhaps hardly agree that the thought of mercy 
to the wicked shown in jiuigment itself is what it speaks 
of.* Yet the principle need not ‘On that account be untrué} 
and be it mercy to the lost or not, it is assuredly mercy to 
the unfallen and redeemed, that evil should be repressed. 
But Mr. Birks’ texts ¢an hardly therefore prove what he 
quotes them for. The radical error in his view is exhibited 


in his next. proposition, | Es 


“6, Again the second death is a seguel of a resurrection, but a, 
resurrection ‘to shame and everlasting contempt’ (Dun. xii. 2), 
It thus involves in its very nature contrasted elements. For 
resurrection is a work of redemption, a triumph over death, | ; 
a fruit of the atoning work of the world’s Redeemer. But a Te: 
surrection to, shatpe and contempt must also, be. perpetual mani- 
festation of the creature’s moral emptiness,. in. contrast to the. 
immutable and eats perfection of Him who isthe Only Wise, 
and the Only Good.” | 

I have already questioned the ican of this passage 
in Daniel to literal resurrection ; but that concerns. us very 
: little here, since evidently ie yesurfection of «judgment 
_ would answer the purpose of Mr. Birks’ argument equally 

well with that in Daniel. But the resurrection of judgment 
‘cannot be shown to be a work of redemption or a fruit of 

atonement. It is Christ’s work doubtless, but not ab -re- 

deeming; nor are the finally lost ever the redeemed. For 

the saints and for no others is resurrection “ the adoption, 

the redemption of the body.”t For no others isit “a ¢ri- 
umph over death.”{ The purpose of God ‘as to man indi- 

-eated in creation, coutd not be intended per manently. to be 
set aside by death, and the preservation of the spirit in death 
implies the resurrection of the body from the grave. The 
resurrection of which Christ was first- fruits is a regurrec- 
tion from among the dead.” This is a “ redemption,” and. 


this alone. £ 


* I have before’given very. briefly my own thought. 
+ Rom. viii, 23. $1 Cor. xv, 54-57, 


ATE, MR. BIRKS’ VIEW. 437 


, in connec: There are no “contrasted elements” therefore in the re- 
ht of mérey surrection of judgment. That it is on the other hand a 
at it speaks “perpetual manifestation;ef tits, creature’s moral emptiness,” 

be untrue; ’ and a needed one, there Alioul:d Ye no doubt: The apostle 
ly mercy to suggests at least, that ira it yy illing to show His wrath, 
e repressed, and make His power kndyizi Tavidh/ regard to ‘the vessels Pi 
ve what he ‘of wrath fitted to destractt si and He who delighteth in * ; 
is exhibited “mercy must have recognized a governmental tecessity for 

. ee this. And thus we may believe with Mr. Birks, that “their 


ection, but a, 
(Dun. xii. 2), 
sments. © For 
or death, and . 
r Bita ‘Te. 


solemn doom, though no result of the choice of the Most 
High, whose love has displayed itself to the utmost in sol- 3 
$ ‘ enin warnings to deter sinners from the path of. helt may yet 
be the object of His deep and holy acquiescence”; whether 
or not we are able to believe with him that the reason is 


‘ 


- 


rpetual mani- : bacer ; 
ntrast Sarthe | ‘‘because in this way alone a ransomed universe can be up- 
e Only Wise, held forever in a blessedness based on perfect humility, and 
capable on that very account of enlarging | and untolding eae 
this passage itself, without risk of fresh apostasy, for ev{§impre.” . | 
This closes Mr. Birks’ second chapter, afi®"what he ‘con- 


erns. us very 
of - judgment 
nent equally 
of jud graent 


siders the “ direct ‘and open lessons” of the Bible on this 
subject. These direct. teachings have certainly carried us | 
no further than this, that the final doom of the wicked in- / 
volves their enforced subjection to God. That it cannot | 
consist with active rebellion is quite true and important 
also. That there is an absolute need for it, looked at from / 
the side. of mercy as well as: righteousness, is still tr ue / 
_ And that in some sense it may be mercy even; to the log 
themselves we have conceded likewise. So far we can go-+ 
no further. What we believe Mr. Birks has not. shown, and 
camot show, is that punishment, of this kind is in any sepse 
a redemptive or restorative process,—the only proper result. 
of which would surely be an end of the punishment it elf. 
“This he does not believe in, although. a mitigation o the 
punishment he does seem..to” suppose. I. cannot. see, that , 
Seripture-gives-even—a hint of either Certainly | texts xy 
we have thus far looked at do not. 


ae ee ee 


* Rom. ix. 22. - 


It. not .a&-re- f 
a2emed. For 
he adoption, 
sis it ‘a cr. 
to man indi- 
nently. to be 
pirit in death 
grave. The 
a resurrec- 
mption,” and. | 


—_—- 


438 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


But Mr.‘Birks believes that “ the New Testament throws 
further and perhaps still clearer light on this.solemn truth 
of eternal punishment, when we look below the surface, and 
strive to combine the indirect with the direct and open 
lessons which its sacred messages convey.” And here— 


“1, Every created being may be viewed in two different 
aspects, personal and federal, or what it is of itself, and its char- 
acter as part of a greater whole. This warp and woof runs — 
through the whole of Scripture, and occasions a frequent an- 

- tithgsis in its statements of divine truth. Thus ‘in Adam all die,’ 

. and still ‘the sdul that sinneth, it-shall die.’ In Christ ‘ all shall 
‘be made alive,’-and still it is to those who by patient continuance 
in well doing seek for glory, honor, and immortality, that God . 
will render eternal ‘life. The charge to the Galatians, ‘ Bear ye j 
one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ,’ is followed 
at once by an opposite statement, as the attendant moral caution, 
‘For every one shall bear his own burden.’ . . The same contrast, 
wherever selfishness is not complete, is found by experience in the 
elements which constitute human happiness and misery, joy and 

-gorrow.. In part they are purely and simply personal, but in part 
they arise from sympathy with the joys or sorrows of others,or 
from the contemplation of truths not personal, but objective and 
universal ° Nalgene, ody Rito ane 

‘“‘Now all the statements of ‘Scripture with respect to the future 

‘doom in judgment of the righteous and the wicked; have direct 
reference to personal conduct and personal -retribution. ‘The 
federal aspect, in these passages, does not appear. . »,°. But this” 
truth, however solemn, and, however inwrought into the doctrine 
of man’s personal responsibility, cannot excludé a fugther truth, 
namely, the federal relation of all mankind to the Creator of the 
universe, and to Christ, the Head of every man, the Saviour of 
the world, who gave Himself 2 ransom for all men. One of these 
truths is no less deeply inwrought into the texture of God’s word 
than the other. It must reveal its reality and its) power, fin some 
way or other, amidst all the solemn and tremendous realities of 


the coming judgment.” — ) 
* 4 

Mr. Birks must surely feel that that assertion is vague 

Y enough at least. The difficulty in dealing with it is pre- 


cisely its vagueness, _And_yet is it_after all too defiflite in’ 


\TE. 

nt throws 
emn truth 
irface, and 
and open 
here— 


o different 
nd its char- 


‘woof runs : 


equent an- 
lam all die,’ 
st ‘all shall 
‘continuance 


, that God . 


3, ‘Bear ye | 


is followed: 


ral caution, 
ne contrast, 
ience in the 
Ty, joy and 
‘but in part 
f others,or 
pjective and 
o the future 
have direct 
ition. ‘The 


.. But this” 


the doctrine 
sther truth, 
eator of the 
Saviour of 
Ine of ‘these 
God’s word 

tin some 
s realities of 


fe 
} 


n is vague 
1 it is pre- 


defiflite in . 


s 


J 


- does not appear in the passages which speak 


MR. BIRKS’ VIEW, — 439 


supplying what,Scripture, as it should seem for some good. 
reagon, entirely ignores. He owns that the federal aspect 
future judg- 


ment. He must own-that whereas, for instance, the “ bear 


_ye one. another’s burdens” (which he calls that), applies to 


the present life, the assurance as to the future is strictly 
personal: “every one .shall bear his own burden.” Is it 
allowable to say that a certain “truth” must reveal its 
reality gnd power in regard to that from which Scripture 
seems to exclude it altogether ? Doubtless: the Creator of” 
the universe w:ll not forget even in judgment that men are 


_ the creatures of [is hand; and Christ the Head of all men, 
to whom all judgment is committed because He is the Son 
~ gt Man,* will not forget His own humanity. But it is vain 


to bring this in to modify i in any way the pasitive statements 
of the word. It is not as Saviour of the World, that He 


- takes His place upon the throne of judgment; nor can ‘the 


“ransom for aN” avail any more for those adjudged to 
Gehenna. 
yet it is hard to say why he brings in thoughts that are in- 
congruous to his subject. For the judged, through their 
own wilfulness, the ransom has not availed. Had it done 
so, they had not been judged. Salvation aggjcondemnation 
ure opposed in terms, and. to argue as if thdse condemned 
were still in some fractional measure saved, is at least to 
suppose that Scripture has -aeen deficient in ace saying 80 
and to assume 4 competency to make up the deficiency. 

“66 QO Secondly, “the second death i is a work of the God of truth, 


by which.-pride and falschood are to be abolished ont of the moral - 


universe. . . The fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, must 
be the destr uetion of guilty pride; when it has become in a man- 
ner consubstantiate with the spirit, and can be overcome in no 
ventler way than by the ever-enduring strokes of divine judg- 
ment. ‘Therh that walk in pride he is able to abase.’” 

Only it is,hard to. say how far pride is “abolished ” out 
of the heart, when it needs such “ ev er- enduring strokes ” to 

: “* John v.27 


‘Mr. Birks does not, I suppose, think that it can; 


4 


440 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


keep it down. For my part I can accept the former state- 
“gynent, when interpreted by the latter. | 
~ 6 36'"Thirdly, the second death is iv work of the God of love, 
wherein He displays His holy anger against every sinner whose 
heart and life have been marked by utter selfishness, and the en- 
tire absence of genuine love to: God and men.” 


I can have nothing to object to this. - 


“64, Fourthly, the resurrection to judgment, like the resurrec- 
tion of life, -is*on@spart of the redeeming work of Christ.” 


° 


PO ae ee asl — Sey ee ~~ eld ~~ 


This is a former statement, and the main one of the whole. 
It is here, however, more fully argued ot ‘and we shall 
. again look at it. Hesays— | 
‘The two main issues of judgment, howev@regr : 
trast, have one featufe common to both, — Th follow a resur- ° 
‘rection. Hence the apostle unites them in one common. state- 
ment, before he marks the contrast between ‘them that are 
Christ’s,’,and all others. ‘ For since by man came death, by man 
came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, 
even so-in Christ shall all be made alive.” The first death in 
every case has-come through the sin of Adam. ° The life-restoring 
resurrection isto come in every case through the power and work 
of the second Adatn, the Lord from heaven. “The judgment of 
the lost. is based on a present work of the Redeemer, in which 
they share with the saved, and on a victory over death, wrought 
by Christ, and depending on the power of His atoning sacrifice 
and resurrection from the dead. Their bodies are restored from 
the earlier dominioh of the grave, and the dominion of death, so 
far, is wholly abolished : 


a 


But Mr. Birks makes no sufficient distinction between the 
‘ resurrection of judgment and the resurrection of life, of the 
_ latter of which the chapter from which he quotes through- , 
out speaks. Had he begun his qyptation a little earlier he 
3 would have scen that the apostle, instead of beginning with | 
a general statement. of resurrection which would in 
both glasses of the dead, first of all speaks: of th 
“sleep” in Jesus, of whom (and of whom 
frst-fruits.” “* But now is Christtisen 
_« become the first-fruits of them that sleep.” These sleepers 


E. 


ner state- 


lof love, 
iner whose 
nd the en- 


° 


e resurrec- 
st.” 

the whole. 
| we shall 


their con- : 
yw a resur- | 


mon, state- 
m that are 
ith, by man 
lam all die, 
‘st death in 
fe-restoring 
er and work 
idgment of 
sr, in which 
th, wrought 
ng sacrifice 
stored from 
of death, so 


etween the 
‘life, of. the 


es through- , 


earlier he 


inning with — 


MR. BIRKS’ VIEW. 441 


are notall the dead. They are those for whom death has been 
annulled, and change'] into a refreshmegt and rest only from 


~ cares and conflicts of this life in atiticipation of the endless 


morning. Of their resitrrection is Christ. the first-fruits, for 


they alone are raised in“ the image of the heavenly "—the . 


Lord from heaven; and “ if the first-fryt be holy, the lump is 
also boly,”* It is impossible to make Christ’ in any sense 
the “first-fruits ” of the lost. ae ; 
But then this precedes what Mx, Birks calls the ‘‘common 
statement,” which is appended to ‘it: “for since by man 
came death, by man chine ‘also the resurrection of the dead; 
for as in: Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive.”’. Pi alee _ ee 
Now are all men “in Ghrist” to be thus quickened or 


Ps 


made alive by Him? Let any one compare Setfpture, and , 


see if there be a doubt.t Na# Mr. Constable has long ‘ago 


been reminding us that the very word used here for “ made. 


alive” is- expressly the word, used by the same apostle, 
where he confines it to the saints: “77° the Spirit of Him 
that raised up Jesus from the deg! dwell in you, He that 
raised up Christ from tlie dead, shall also quicken your 


aor 


mortal: bodice by (or rather, becansey. Of ) His Spirit that 


dwelleth in you.” Thus although the wicked will surely rise, 
the apostle will not call that “ quickening ” or “life-giving,” 
which is not the resurrection of li fes® And we are doubly 
told that “all in Christ” are not all men universally.” ; 


Even where he says,‘‘in Adam all die,” although that is’ ’ 


true abstractedly of alk mankind, the whole context at least 
(if not the construction also) would seem to necessitate the: 
limiting it ‘to those of whom the apostle has just been speak- 
ing. “Now is Christ, risen from the dead, and become the 
first-fruits of them, that sleep »'for since by man came death,” 


and thus. they: are, dead, “ by man came also the resurrec- 


tion of the dead,” and they shall live; “ for®as in Adam 


ee ee oe ee Dene ee te ae fe 


a ae 


_ * Rom. xi. 16. . , ~ o- © 


eee earn 


+ Rom: viii. 1; xii. 5; xvi. 7; 2 Cor. i. 2,30; xv. 18; 2Cor. i. 21; 
v. 17; xii. 2; Gal.i. 22, ete. 


» 


eR eS 


they all die, even 80 i 
alive.” 


a rom the presence of Him who i 
the dead are raised by the power of Christ, this correspondence 


4423 ¥ACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. oy 


n Christ shall they all be made 
There is not the least ground then far the assertion that. 
the lost share with the saved in what is the fruittof atone- 
ment, or are made alive in Christ as raised from the dead. 
They are brought forth by His power to judgment. Judg- 


ment, and not grace, claims their rgsurrection. It may dis- 


play Zfis victory over death, but is, in nowise theirs. It is 
not a ffe-resurrection but a judgment-resurrection. oe 
Mr. Birks reads the lesson of that judgment-resurrection 

— : Le i e & 


thus :— ve 
«Tn the first death the dissolution of the body, and its corrup- 
tion, was only the type, -sign, and parable of the deeper curse 


ne on the spirit, when 1 
s Light and Love. And when 


cannot wholly cease: When death and hell are cast into the lake 
of fire, the souls, even of the lost, can yemain no longer under 
the curse of utter vanity. They will glorify their Maker, even 
amidst the fires of penal judgment. To glorify God is the great 
end for which every creature was made. If the dealings of God 
with any creature were such as to justify a charge of unnatural 
cruelty or excessive and needless severity, God could. not possi- 


_ bly be glorified thereby, but rather the divine glory would be ob- 
r blotted out and wholly destroyed. - To: - 


scured, deeply clouded, o 
glorify God through shame and punishment, compared with the 
bliss of the redeemed and holy, must be an infinite and irrepara- 
ble loss. But to glorify Him in any way, lroweve¥ solemn and 


mournful, when contrasted with the reign of that death, which is 


God’s enemy, and the curse of eternal vanity, darkness, and cor- - 


ruption, may be, even to the souls of the losf, a real, and per- 
haps even in some respects, an infinite gain.” ci ee 
‘Thus in Mr. Birks’ view, the judgment which comes after 
death, is really, and perl 
death which precedes jt! 


curse, judgment the blessing! The proof will: need ‘to be 


t had wandered or was driven away’ © 


1aps. infinitely, ‘better than the | 
The usual comparative estimate 
of the two is here reversed. Death is comparativcly the . 


eo ae 2 € 


convincing that will bring many to believe this. ‘What-is 
Mr. Birks’ proof? It is here— Se J 


Ne ce MR. BIRKS’ VIEW. ce 
de oe Se ane CRC ee: ae 
a es _ «fhe dissolution of the body,, arid its eorruption, was only the . 
_. 4 — type, sign, and parable of the deeper cumse resting on the spirit, ” 
. that. Py, when it had wandered or was driven away frdm the presence of — 
atone" -Him who is Light and Teve. And when the dead are raised by Sy 
dead. the powet,of Christ, this correspondence cannot wholly cease.” ee 
Judg- , That is, ‘when the type is gone, the thing typified. must. 
ay dis- _ be gone with it. But to what'state then does “ where their 
tis ‘worm dieth not” apply ? There is the very figure of death 
ae and‘ corruption. It should apply, according; to Mr. Birks, to 
ous -. the intermediate state alone.*, Yet I-think he will hardly 
oa _. deny that it applies to the final—Gehenna being,expressly 
corrup- [ named.” That is, the figures drawn from death are applied _ 
a eee ~ expressly wht te according to him they should not and could ; 
d She 
yndence 


\ 


x 


notbe. <= 
‘And ‘is the soul of the lost more away from the presence - 


ae - of God in death than in hell? What iethe flame in which 


panies the rich man is tormented ? What is the place of which the 

er, even Psalmist says, “ If I make thy bed in sheol, behold, Thou art °° 
he great there”? What is it which the Preacher ‘anngunces when 

of God he says, “The spirit shall return to God who a Sa Is 
nnatural ; distance frotaé God sittipte locality, or moral conditi rather ? 

ot possi-  * If the‘latter be at least the essential ‘part, will resurrection. 

& be ob- ; bring the lost soul in any measure back to God, as it should, , 
Gea if type and antitype are to cdfréspond synchronically “ - 
with the ind eos oar es sahakiies welina tigi: dee Duh Cae 
: Again, are those. “no longer , under t rse of. utter. «sap. 
ure wanity,? who ‘ate “destroyed bod and soul in hell > Tho ee 
Se ae vanity,” who stroyed body~and soul in hell“: no Wy 
which is longer under “ darkness,” to whom is reserved “ the mist of : >, 
and cor- . darkness ” andthe “ blackness of darkness forever”? : 
and per- m . Oris“ the day of wrath and revelation Of the righteous 

ae - judgment of ‘God ”therday in which 'the lighter judgment 
nes after of personal offences shall replace the far heavier one which ° 
han the comes upon us through the offence of another.? i 
estimate. - os ‘To find, however, the root of Mr. Birks’ view we yyoet turn 
ivcly the | _ to his ‘chapter on Atonement in the same book, where he is- 
elito be ° answering the question, “what, apart from the atonement, Spy e 
What-is—4-——_the_state_of mankind before God? What is their, legal Ass. 

; ’ standing, and the nature of the curse and sentence under & 


ey 


rie 7 the Body. 


Vand who: will: gite' Thee thanks we 
‘death is. ascribed 8 an 
re 
ut fiilead: Death of 
5, on the: contrary, named ‘togethi #¢ where body ° | an 
W istinetly i in vidw, as we have ‘seer _ Mr. Birks’ th 
| eath is that is A physical conditién, tbody, and — is 
spiritual condité soul as well: But, this is incongru- _ te 
sand unjustifiable "* Dying is the separatio ef soul and 
. body--dissolution, doc sa, departure, The. death stdte is 80 
| * he state of / | séparatiqn,,the Tesult : of the dying. ‘A dead of 
Mirek ey man’ may be a Gorpse or a spirit.’ But as death’ affects the . of 
ak “bodily organisin it in a fway, | i. cannot. the spirit, '¥ we can speak . at 
yb ofa dead bod, y and cannot speak of a dead spirit. ‘Thus Mr. A 
he Nong ‘Birks? : representation of death i is not only without Scripture, tk 
a * ins but contrary to ity And this destroys: the’ yery joundnsn od 
Ne of his argument. But he goeson:—. | =P 
a Me The iyorah er ‘and ca often applied. to death, 
ss tend rather to mislead, than’ to exp Jain the trugsgatgire of this 0! 
Unga era ‘contrast. | The first death? ‘temporal, Because its ieee wal 
at ¢ Boe reves lé( promgjge ; but in ‘its Own ‘nature, apa i a 
Ye ‘demption, it 3 be everlasting. NGM tl 
. the ere: yture, D nature of sin, nor th 6 

a * itany limit or bound. It is due toa migh\ v 
eee a4 alge, dhiit it is swallowed up‘in eternal vict® t 
: ‘As to victory over death, every Christiagg it 
Mr. Birks. For the rest he has produced 0 
=) On the other hand I have sought to.show that.the first death ¢ 

e is ‘in its own nature. provisional and temporary. . In speaking 
Sao of. anihilation he Bir ks has truly ¢ and fg retbly said ;- poke FS y 


fiscal conscious cue thot. eee is rae 
: : 

i] 

| 


| . . \ - 


i 


hee thanks 
is.ascribed 
ch.a thing 
id; Death 
‘here body 
Mr. Birks’ 
body, and 
) incongru- 


2 


f soul and 


ith stdte is 
‘A dead 


affects the ° 


can speak 

‘Thus Mr. 
; Scripture, 
foundation 


! to death, 


: e ‘abolition 
pm Christ’s 
faculties wef 


God, assign ¢@ . 


e of this - 


MR. BIRKS’ VIEW. . 445 


fitted in’ ifself to endure forever, has been given, and should 


y-- afterwards be withdrawn, this would seem to reverse & great law 


of God's nioral yvovernment ;” 


“And we may extend this argument further. "For man 


- was made no mere spirit, but a living soul, which implies, as 


we have seen, a bodily organism. Could the body finally 


-» and forever cease to be, and yet? God’s gift be without 


repentance ?. That death came in through man’s sin, while 
of course truc; does not more touch that, than it does the 


annihilation question; for it, too, would have come in . 


through sin. The argument plainly requires that what man 
_ is by creation, he ‘must continue to be ever, although a 
temporary discipline of’death would not be excluded. 

-And with this Seripture per fectly harmonizes. It. does 
go in the fact that) death reigns everywhere through one 
offence: over those who have, not sinned after the similitude 
of Adam, and over the youngest babe who has never sinned 


~ at.all. Did God gor this one offence condemn forever all 


the word. Could the’ penalty for Adam’s sin upon all: his 
descendants be worse |than that of their own, as Mr.’ Birks 
. puts it? ne 

Soriptire arg 


Adain’s unborn Lie ? Theology may Bay 80 ; but not 


b fee tt soy existance of the person after 


egleath, is, as we ‘ths fe soit, i is the Lord’s argument with 
the: adducees,,and. col firmed & one ‘who, holds poy 
their riews to-day: ‘ 


| oe 
And again, the judgment fie the deots done int’the body. 


seanption waits‘as of necessity for the’ “pody-to Pise again....To say 

that the resurrection of the Wicked rults from atonement, a 
agree with | is to say that, “aye fe jadgatant whieh: requiges it: is ‘the. fruit- : 
\eripture. " andl that dae ie Ake ated for. ‘men, . ena” 
first, death Bre ~ 
In speaking a 
aid ; — well as indiser 
ntance.” Tf. ce nows A ie ee ownt a te ae xb = st 


organs, and 


te a 


«’ 


446 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A‘FUTURE STATE, 


We shall now be able to see without much argument 
the vitiating error in Mr. Birks’ further statement :— 

“his death, the sentence of the law, extends to tlie whole 
man, both soul and body. To see ‘its nuture us respects. the soul, 
we must reflect on its work with reference to the body. One is the 
invisible sign and sacrament of the other. The body is then 
parted from the soul, its life; and being thus parted, becomes 
the prey of inward corruptions\So also death is the separation 
of the soul from God, the true source of life ; and/all the conft 
sion, chaos, and moral corruption and dissolution which follows 
that awful separation. Without, there is banishment from ‘the 
presence of God, and from all the light of His favor and blessi 
Within, there will follow the unrestrained working of moral fcor- 


ruption, degrading, perverting, desecrating all the faculties/ and.’ 


powers of the imnrortal spirit. Sin would thus become, wnder 


the name of death, a ‘finished’ evil, its own ever-growing tor-.~- 


ment, and the soul sink deeper and deeper in an abgas of hope- 
less misery.” : fe 

It is evident at once that Mr. Birks does not on .this 
view from Scripture, but from his own hypothesis hat the 
effects of death"upon the body are typical of its effects upon 
the soul. And in carrying this thought out, he takes what 
are separately true and Biblical jdeas—and which we are ac- 
customed to speak of as death physical, and eath spiritual, 
—and joins them together in indissolubl union. But 
surcly Mr. Birks can scarcely have followed this: out to its 
legitimate result. Can he mean, for instance, that’ there ‘is 


no such thing as being “ dead while living ” ? that, spiritual 


death never takes place before corporeal ? of tBet it does 
necessarily when this does ? To the latter ques yon’he may 
perhaps easily answer that the saints are savec from this 


part of the penalty. But if so, why are they/not saved from 
the whole, if the penalty be ore? if-it be but one and the . 


game death, how is it they die atiall?, 3 
If there are those now “ dead ” spiritually, while living, 
_do these die again spiritually, when their bodies die ? 


ae: She Sey: 


ke By 


X a Sdeaths > 


Or what is the difference between these two spiritual 


TE. 


argument 


. 
— 
&3 


_ the whole 
cls. the soul, 

One is the 
ody is then 
1d, becomes 
» separation 


ne .this 
sis that the 
ffects upon 
takes what 
1 we are ac- 
th spiritual, 
nion. But 
sot to its 
at there ‘is 


tht spiritual 


‘Bat it does 
n’he may 
¢ from. this 


, saved from 
one and the . 


vhile living, 
die ? 


- hag too | 


Ee MR. BIRKS’ VLBW. - — 4aT 


Pee su; 
I can scarcely persuade myself, while I ask these ques- 
tions, (imperatively called for, as they seem, by Mr. Birks’ 
position)—that I am not doing him some unconscious in- | 


. justice in imputing to him thoughts’ which involve conser 


quences so’ strange, and which it would not be hard to.carry 
a good deal further. I should be happy could I conceive 
the possibility of having mistaken his meaning. His words © 
will at any rate speak for themselves. | ; 

Mr. Birks having got so far really without Scripture, at 
last makes an, appeal to it :— oe 
"On this view we may see the force of the contrasted figures 7 
by which the first and second death are pdgtrayed, * One is ‘ thot 
jako of fire,’ solemn indeed and most awful, yet bounded in its . 
range, shut i, by firm land on every side. ‘Fhe othex is ‘the - 
leep,’ ‘the abyss,’ ‘the bottomless pit,’ evil reigning, rioting, 


' growing, deepening without limit and without end, in its fatal - 


descent; farther and. farther from light,: happiness, and heaven. 


% 


By the sentenee of the law, fulfilled without atonement or redemp- 
tion, mankind once fallen would be shut out from’God’s presence, 
and sink, and sifik; and sink forever in this abyss of hopeless and 
endless ruin. There would have been, through ages without-end, 


the awful reality of a God-dishonoring, God-hating, Fe ee : 


pheming, self-tormenting, God-abandoned universe. Such deat 


the wages of sin, its.due desért, and the issue to which it naturally . 
tends, It is the fatal harvest from the seeds of moral corruption - 


* harbored inthe soul. ‘Sin, ‘when it is finished, bringeth forth 


déath.’””_ ; eae aes 
All Cae of the solitary word “abyss”! "Mr. Birks 
gly poetical an imagination to have always a . 
sober judgment. He does not even give us data on which a — 
judgment may be formed. ‘“ Abyss” means “bottomless ”: 
Birks days, by which’ 


wo Spiritual-— 


. om, 


A 
* 


~ 


. 


* Mr. Birks has derived his idea; and ‘yet it is one most inap- 


ae 


A we 8 
Ms 


448 “FACTS AND TIIEORIES AS TOA FUTURE STATE. 


tié“ beast” ascends ; and'Tinatly. that inf Whiok Satan is shut 
p for the millennium. These are ‘all the occurrences inv 
yipture save one, in which the apostle asks, ‘ Who shall 
end, into the deep ? that is, to bring up Christ again 


‘fram thd dead.”* | oe 
4” Now k’seems as if it must , be from’the last passage that 


propridfe for his purpose. Whatever else it were, eertainly | 
the abyss could not be to d/rc Lord what he has pictured 


 Gt:t could not be én that sense ah “ abyss.” here he 
’ ’ £ ‘ : 


finds it..picture the death, state of the lost it is hatd to*im, 


ie Fagine. * ‘he'devils have no death state. Satan is not ,shiut 


up a’ thougind years in death. The « locusts ” are not a 
symbol of the dgad; yor Apollyon the king of the dead. 
The beast, it is \trug,isigaid to come .up out of th@ abyss, 


and before that, $4 “ was, and is ‘*not.’—so that here the 
death state  ight« 


figur@d ; bit it could scarcely furnish 
forth Mr. Birks’ picture. And here“is the whole array of 


2 4 


Scripture! 4 oo oe 
®  Ttcan scardllghced to follw ‘out iPlength a mere poetic 


fancy, for such it is.: I slfall addbut two thoughts: 1k: that 
in this way the stntenge ditherlaw (as he @éneeives it) 
would involve a “ Gogg joring and God-Abandoned uni- 
verse "—God, would 3 Been tied by it to His own dis- 
Shonor! the Governor ofthe Universe bound not to interfere 

- with the de¥elopment of evil under dis own eyes! 
2. I* would again refer to the Lord’s parable of the rich 


*Luke vii. 31 pRev. ix. 1,2, 11; xi. 73 xvii. 8; xx.1, 8; Rom. x.7.. 


_t He. does in point of fact make the Lord endure there, rather than 
“on the tree,” the“ extreme of separation from His heavenly Father.” 
Thts is thoroughly a RES, Ih displaces the cross, it eyacuates 
the Lord’s ery, “ It is finished, > and mays the threefold witness of the 


‘Support, save in a fanciful interpretation of such passages as Psa. 
J joecass erat 
lxxxviii. 4-7; Ixix. 15; xviii. 5-1b; qnd.is against the. plain sense ot 


* ll the water, and the blood. It is a view which has absolutely neo, 
I 


every parssag ine efficacy té6 the blood of the cross : 
Rom.-yv. 9; vi,6; Gal. iii, 13 ; 
14; 1 Pet. ii. 24, etc, 


ry 


@: paretiey : 


Eph. i. 7; i 18216; Col. f 21, 22; ii, 


ATE, 


atan is shut 
urrences ins 
Wiho shall 
lirist again 


passage that 
> most inap- 
re, eurtainly | 
as pictured: 


here< he * 
hard aon 
‘is not shiut ~- 


” are nob a 
of the dead. 
f thé abyss, 
at here the 
‘cely furnish 
ole array of 


mere poetic 
thts: Ie that 
finceives it) 
andoned uni- 
is own dis- 
t to interfere 
yes ! 

e of the rich 


8; Rom. x.7.. 


ere, rather than 
avenly Father.” 
ss, it eyacuates 
L witness of the 


s absolutely ne. 


issages as Psa, 
- + 

. plain sense ot 

od of the cross : 


fe 
‘ and unscriptural, reversing the proportions of death and 


KLRKS! LV LEW. 


MK. 449 


man in hades. Ilere, if anywhere, we should have the awful 
abyss of Mr. Birks’ imagination. , Instead of which we find 
a soul in God’s hand, enduring I lis wrath ; but certainly not 
the “reigning, rioting, gr@wing, deepening evil,” which, we 
are told, is the character @f the first death. . 

The whole view is (I am compelled to say) incongruous : 


judgment, of the result of another’s sin and of men’s own. - 
It is lacking in moral harmony as in Scriptural cohesion. ~ _ 
There are two more arguments we inust eee aie: ate 


é | Mr. Bigks’ fifth p proposition is, that as—“ 


ht, that passeth knowledge,” its infinite depth must be mhani- 


rs <the Teve of Christ has a length and breadth, and. aat and 
ye 


be in the perpetual yearnings of a deep and true ompas- 
sion is; xe thinks, ‘‘ may pierce through their conscietice, and 
rvade their whole being, even amid their still ab: 
ciousness of deepest loss and eternal shame. . . The. ‘truth of 
d sebms to give a most solemh assurance thaé th . 
tente shall never be reversed, ‘he depth of x love 
knowledge gives an equal assurance that their dog 
be, however terrible and mournful, one of unmitige a i 
but such that even here the glory of. the divine goodness, and 
ieipties der mercies of God which are over all His works, shall 
he rev aled for evermore.” 


, ci in the guilty and condemned, towards whom it may 


ce We believes too, accords with God’s title as Saviour 
ot all men; and though unbelievers are not saved from judg- 
ment, the second death, and the fire that is not quenched, 
they will be saved from temporal death and corrtiption, 


_ from the curse of hopeless vanity, from the “ abyss ”— will 


they not be saved from that utter, unmingled, hopeless mis- 
ery, in which no ray of comfort or relief of any kind breaks 
in upon a dreary solitude of everlasting despair? Will they 
not be saved, in some strange and mysterious but real sense, 
when their irremovable sorrow finds beneath it a. still 


ol. af ah ’ ya iL, 


viding con- | a 


tower depth,of divine compassion, and the sinfu! creature 
in its most an egtate, and in its utter shame, encounters 


Ye 


e 


450 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


the amazing -vision of ‘tender, condescending and, infinite 
love” ? = se wie | 

Of this Mr. Birks’ last argument seems little more than 
arepetition. If is that aJl men stand in relationship to God 
under three distinct characters as Creator, Moral Governor 
of the world, and Redeemer. ee 

“The contrast between the obedient and disobedient, the 
faithful and unbelieving, in their relation to God-us the righteous 
Judge; cannot set aside ‘their common relution to Him as the . 
bountiful Creator of all men, and the God of grace towurds all 


_ who are sunk jp guilt or misery... - Siriners, to whom-the Son 


of God was given; for whom He bore the cross, and dicd aecursed, ’ 
over wham He wept tears of pity, and towards whom there bave 
been patient yearnings of God’s infinite compassion, and of His 
divine long-suffering, not willing that any should perish, bat 
that all should come to repentance, can surely hever ceuse, “even 
under the strokes of judgment, and in their depth of utter shame, 
to be encircled evermore by the infinite compassions of that holy 
and perfect Being, whose very name and nature is Love.” 

To such arguments the answer has already been given, 
inasmuch as they are based upon the view~ previously ad- 
vanced, that the strokes of judgment will not only effec- 
tively put an end to active opposition, but remove the . 
enmity of the heart itself, and furcc—to use an expression 
which sufficiently refutes the view that it expresses,—a will- 
ing subjection. to God. Grant. once the heart. so changed, 
who could refuse the thought of the infinite pity and love 
of God coming in with abundant and ready help! . The 
difficulty in this case would not be to go as far as Mr. Birks 
-in this, but how not to go much farther. Just as all that 
have known God’s grace have experienced in their own 


~ case, whatever the natural impotence for good, it could not: 


be an insurmountable obstacle to recovery were the will” 


once with that divine will which has call competence in | 


oe 


iteelf. But if of ‘some on earth it ‘could be said, as having 
in the face of light -age knowledge rejected Christ, that it: 


was “impossible to renew them again unto repentance,” 
how much more must that be said of those whom even the 


KE. 
id, infinite 
nore than 


ip to God 
Governor 


dient, the 
e righteous 


fim as the . 


owards all 
m-the Son 
1 aecursed, ’ 
there bave 


and of His ' 


verish, but 
1eUESe, ‘even 
iter shame, 
f that holy 
ae 
een given, 
iously ad- 
only effec- 


move the. 


expression 
$—a will- 
> changed, 
rand love 
elp! . The 
Mr. Birks 


as all that — 


their own 
could not 


e the will — 
petence in 


as having 


. ' 
~ ‘ 4 


ae THE ETHICAL QUESTION. | «451 


infinite goodness of God has to give up to “eternal judg. 
ment”! It is not, God forbid, that His compassions fail! 
They are necessarily held hack by the obduracy of the evil. 
That “amazing vision of tender, condescending, and infinite 
love” of which Mr. Birks speaks, could not be beheld by 
those for whom nothing less than-the-ever-enduring strokes ; 
of judgment wilt suffice. We dissent’ from his, view, not 
because we think less of the mercy of thé Redeemer, but 
because we are assured that if it could at any time through- 
out the ages of eternity win the heart to God, no arbitrary. 
limit of probation'passed could avail to shut out from it a 
mercy more effective than he pleads for. Ag. because 
we are assured that what is impossible, for mercy to effect 
is not more possible to be the work of judgment. 
We are now to look at. the ethical question, } - - 


9G 


_ Ir is the judgment of “thany that the ethical question 
should precede the exegetical, which séems as much as to 
say, that. we mast: first decide what Scripture ought to say, 
before we attempt. to ascertajn, what it docs. We should 
certainly treat no other writings’ after such a fashion; and 
the claim of these to bé divine does not afféct their claim to. 
be intelligible also. - If God has spoken; He is as well able. - 
to make Himseif understood as another, and is as ready. too |” 
to assume the responsibility of His utterances. “Tf it be 
God, we need not fear lest His word shauld be immoral, or: 


ist, that it. 


pentance,” 


ney en the 


that if will not-approve itself to the consciences of men, His 
creatures. Judge Him. too they will, no doubt : but. He as 
will be justified in His sayings. and clear when He is judged... 


ipncieas gence 


| ah ‘ + 


2 Ae : : ‘ . 
452... RACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. . 


_ There is little doubt that the attempt to decide, on moral 
grounds what Scripture. veust, have said upon the ‘subject, 
‘before us, has destroyed with many all certainty of wihiat: it 
_does.say. Almost everywhere among wniversali#t writers 
of every grade the doubtfiiness of its testimony, isa thing 
considered beyond dispute by reasonable men. ‘We may . 
affirm positively what conscience of the “ moral reason.” says. 
We may not affirni: positively what God's word: has said. | 
Strangely enough it is thought prestimption to progounce as 
- oto the latter, none in the former case. Yet it is hardly'to be 


supposed God could not make Himself" intelligiblé if He — 


pledsed ; and none can deny He has spoken on the Bubject, if. 

Scripture be His word. Ts it to be supposed IIe meant to give 

no definite statement? But why should He have kept:back , 
. what: the “ moral: reason’” by ifself can prottounce upon ? > 


netent to decide! Is.it then so competent? Why then are 
we all in such a fog to-day, except, indeed,’ Scripture, itself 
be\responsible for the fog, and have thrown the, moral sense 
into confusion. And this is a conclusion some would seem 
to have arrived at. ee : hee an - 
«But even so, it can scarcely be a. perfectly safe and. relia- 
ble guide, if liable to. this perturbation ; especially as we 
cannot logically assume that Scripture is:-the only possible 
‘perturbing: cause. Confessedly for centuries the moral sense’ 
has/aecepted the truth of eternal punishment for many, and 
¢’the addition (Canon Farrar’s mor 1 sense’ says, the 


with 
. softening addition) of a {purgatory for a arie ‘ In, the 


¥ 


e 
& 


majority of cases within the limits of Chrisign fom; it has. 

medias been fut at. gy 
ive shaken off. 
te French reyo- | 


not yet been able to free itself from whi 

- Jeast as a yoke which many, would’ fi 
Nay, having shaken it off, ‘as inemorably ACA F 
lution, it has bowed its neck again ‘and 
accepted a creediwWherein God is blasphemously represented 
‘as assigning men‘ their place in heaven or hell with utter 


la 


‘Perchance because He would not interfere with the province ts 
of reason in a matter as to which it is so abundantly .com-.:~ 


| Paine “euler 
Outside of Christendom artiong the millions of Yslam‘it ‘has 


ae 
: 
en 


- 


yn moral 

» pubject _ 

what: it 
L writers 
3a thing 
We may, 

n” says. 
has said. _ 
younce as" 
‘dly'to be 
ble if He 
gubject, if. 
mt to give 


kept: back ; 
ce upon? > 
e province Ye: | 
intly com-.: 


y then are 
ure, itself 
oral sense 
euld seem 
and. relia- 
ally as we 


possible 
roral sense’ 
many, and 
e says, the 
Hl. In, the 
tom; it has . 
een falt. at: 
shaken off. 
rench. reyo- = 
ne “gubject: 
[slam it vhas ae 
represented 
| with ‘utter 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 


and ‘equal indifference.* Among Brahmans and Buddhists 
alike it accepts the loss of personal identity,” the ahgorption 
into Brahma, or the attainment of Nirvana, as the goal and 
highest-aim of man. While in Mr. ;Frederi¢ Harrison’ and ,., 
-the Positivists it has come nearly round to this again, man’s ” 
_ only worthy future being maintained to be a future of ‘* Pos: : 
‘ thumons activity ”:t a possibly eternal,influence upon indefi- ; 
nite generations. of ephemera, or at least until the gradual 
* | cooling of the sun brings.them to the end so very generally 
contemplated. ook ae 
The moral sense can, hardly then be eouaidered: a satisface’ 
tory guide. Nor indeed do those who follow its guidance 
dare to speak of the attainment. of any certainty thereby. 
Thus Principal Tulloch commenting on Canon Farrar’s - 
< volumey: While admitting that men do “érave _to. penetrate 
‘behind the veil,’ and to lay hold on something definite on 
which to rest thei? hopes or. fears,” Asserts that: ‘at. the same * 
~ time ‘all'sober minds will feel how really impenetrable the. 


¢ 


yond that sphere of. time and space which now conditions 
\ all ouy/ powers of knowing.” “ Probability is all that we 
can attain to,” adds Prof. Je ellett, another critic on the*same 

+ side. While Mr. W,'R. Greg propounds it as’one of his 
roe Enigmas of Life,” that while all the good, which he owns 
*. ‘may ‘Bevin a man’s religion, lies in the certainty it communi: | 
e ‘ates, a certainty that’ “alone “sends him to the battle-field, 
or sustains a at thes stake, or enables’ him to bear up: 


a 


news 


EA ee er SRasnee oa 
* Mr. ‘Paleray e gives us as characteristic of Mohammedanism, a tra- 
dition, “ a repetition of which,” he’ says, “1 have endured times out of 
“number from admiring and approving Wahhabees i in N ejed,’s ‘that when 
God “ resolved to create the human race, he took into his hand a mass * 
: earth, the same whence. all mankind were to be formed, and in‘which 
~* thieg after a manner, pre- -existed ; and having then divided the clod into 
“ -two equal portions, he aA the one haf into hell, saying,‘ These to y 
o eternal fire, and I care not’ and projected the other half into heaven, 
|. @ addirg, Sgnd these vo Paradise, and I care not’” (A cen s Journey 
fis D igonett Central and Eastern Arabia), 


r See oA Modern"&y smposium ” in the “ Ninteenth Century.” 
p y: 


~~ veil is, and that no light of real knowledge can be carried be-  : . 


ES 
NEL LL TNT LT Le TS SL PR RR cone N RS Hem, «reir teoneron 


454 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


through the long and weary mart yrdom of life,”—yet “it is 


’ precisely this certainty (to which all religions pretend, and 


which is essential to the influence of: them all) which never- 
theless thoughtful aid sincere minds know to be the one 
clement of falsehood, the one untrue dogma common to 


. them all.’* . Fs 


Thus the-moral reason is not constructive, but destructive 
only ; and destructive of (alas) the very power which Would 


“sustain a man trough life, or at the'stake if need be. 


* Strangely enough, the thoughtful and sincere are they who 


must pay the penalty of renouncing what Mr. Greg. calls. 
“this strengthening and ennobling grace.” That is one of 
_the “Enigmas of Lite,” as he understands life: an enigma 
one might have thought essentially atheistic, but which is 
onfy’ “ Agnostic,” appertaining, that is, to a philosophy 


which without venturing to say, There is no God, simply 


affirms that [fe cannot make Himself known to His erea- 


tures,}—thatthey know enough about Tim to know that! . + 
The certainty of wzcertainty: as to al:it most imports to 
- ktow is..what the -painful toil of centuries of research 

‘at last achieved. : re 


a 


.God is the “ Unknowable.” But if He is, how. then cave 


we know that? ,Does not :that, imply some knowledge at>” 


least? Can reason reSt assured that that is an ultimate 


-- fact’? “Is it impossible He could, communi¢ate some know-” 
ledge of Hiniself? some certainty as to a future life"even 


Tlas science decreed that He shall be dumb, or helpless, or 
indifferent, or what? Is the science perchance not ‘too dear, 


must think so; as if these scientific altitudes would “be too 
coll and barren for human dwelling-places. Certainly if 
reason ca bé satisfied with that w 


Saar ore <= --—-»- fete rent A 
*« Enigmas of Life,” Peete 
'- + And finally, we philosophers, and met 


conviction at least as positive as that of any of -these believers, that 


they are all wrong; that no such dicth have ever been ‘delivered, and 
that no such knowledge about the Unknowable can ever-be reached” 
! ; Sou te 


(p. 943)... =F eee pes 4 


lich takes all meaning ». 


of- science know, with a 


~ that makes all science valueless ?, It would seem as if meny ° 


eae Sa 


yet ‘it is 
tend, and 
ch never- 
_ the one 
mmon to 


estructive 
ich Would 
need. be. 
they who 
xreg. calls. 
,is one of 
in enigma 
; which is 
philosophy 
od, simply 
Ilis crea: 
snow thatt 
imports to - 
search 


v. then cay 


ywledge at- 
in ultimate 
ome know-" 
_lifeseven > 
helpless, or 
ot too dear, 


nas if meng ° 


yuld “be too 
Certainly if 


ul meaning . 


know, with a 
believers, that 
delivered, and 
ype reached” 


AY 


» 


rY 


ms _ THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 405 


out of human life and history ; if the moral sense can satisfy 
itself with what levels & man with the: beasts that perjsh; 
no thoughtful man can value Jeither’s guidance, ho . sincere 
man.can feel such life as other than a lie. 

“And what pbout'sin2 Is there such a thing ? Is it true 
that “out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, férnications, thefts, false’ witness, blas- | 
phemies” ? What says the moral sense azain ? Are, these 
things inconveniences merely,“or do they “ detile the man” ? 
Are they results of wrong dict, political blunders, accident, 
or’ are they innate in every child of man ‘ ’ Ifthe latter, and 
f evil, is man as God made him, or is thie Christian doctrine 
of the fall perchance a verity? ‘One or other must be. 
If'truth, if purity, if: virtue be: any mxore than a ‘mere name, 


; what is ‘the world, and ‘what are we ? If -we' ourselves are 


exceptions, wliat ‘et deust are our neighbors ? Tf God made 
such a world, He were not @od. Kither there is ss no God ‘or 
we are fallen creatures. 

Allow me once there is such a thing vs gs ind the shadow 
issgone trom off. the face of: Ged. B gay rest on man, and 
on nature, but faith in. God: is “possil’ e ance more., Death 
and judgment are realities piyat: God lives, and God isgood. 
"The very laws of nature Wear? Him w Bessy as the expression 
of a nature opposed to ‘evil, ‘visiting franseression with 
penalty. The shadow is the frown of God. and if upon ’ 
evil, then because He is: opposed ‘to evil. Granted there 
“may: be: difficulties and perplexities, the general’ bearing of 
“the facts is evident; and the human laws without which 
~men could not live: are but the copy and outcome of. the 
Divine. =, ie m 

But grant onee again that man is a sinner; grant that 
he has a will that perverts his” judgment, lusts that seduce 
his intellect; grant thet Sin: iidulged dulls the. conscience 
‘and! Hen ces ‘still further the heart (and these. are: legsons 
,-of every day oxperience) ; grant that an offender is not an 
+ /ubprejudiced judge: in his gwn cause x and you haye abun- 
* dant, over: abundant reason for Aistrilsting the mere "rational 


456 FACTS AND THEORIES-AS TQ.A FUTURE STATE. 


“estimate of man’s possible future. That he has a conscience 
capable of being arouse by God’s word, and of responding 
to His appeal, is of coursé true. That God challenges 
man’s understanding and his moral sense, dnd makes them 
‘His witnesses is also true. He will be justified in Ilis say- 
ings, and clear when He is judged: But that those who 
have never léarnt to measure themselves in His’ presence 
should arraign His justice: because Ilis estimate of sin is 
different from’ others, is the height of irrationality, as it is 
of pride. 

Yet we are told that “every day sees an increase in the 
number of those who will‘not. consent to receive a doctrine 
on external evidence only, without examination of its moral. 
character: Many would give to the moral faculty the abso- 
lute right to reject as untrue any doctrine appearing to it 
immoral, whatever amount. of (apparent). Scriptural evidence 
may be adduced in its\favor.”* This principle leads to a 
different issue in different people; some giving up the doc- 
trine only, while they retain the Scripture: some giving up 
the Scripture on account ofthe doctrine. Thus Dr. Bellows 

- in behalf of Unitarianism applies the principle: 
“Tf weare to continue to claim the name of Christians, we must 
continue to believe that the testimony of the reeords of our faith 
is not contradictory of the evidence of the moral reason, Tf it 
were proved such, we should, be compelled to abandon Christian- 
ity, so far as it claims to be fourided on the New Testament, We 
believe the general testimony of the New Testament to be in-full 
accord with the testimony of man’s moral nature, in regard to 
the issues of the divine government. Jf is not to Ye dénied that 

pictorial phrases, parables, and Special texts; are to be found there, 
which, taken by themselves, seem to favor not only. the doctrine 
of endless punishment in the pdpular sense, but; gust us plainly,’ 
the existence of a material hell, and a personal devil. But as the ” 
literal force of these statements obliges us to accept the conchi- 
sion that this earth is the seat of the final (?) judgment, and that 
Yhrist is coming in person to judge the nations, we must leave it 
to those who are willing to accept the r esponsibility of maintain- 


$$$. e. — ed 


+ “Prof, Jellett u pon ( non Farrar, 


TATE. 


a conscience 
f responding 
i challenges 
makes them 
1 in Ilis say- 
t those who 
Lis presence 
ate of sin is 
lity, as it is 


crease in the 
ve a doctrine 

of its moral 
Ity the abso- 


pearing to it 


ural evidence 
le leads to a 
x up' the doc- 
me giving up 


; Dr. Bellows 


tins, we must 
1s of oursfaith 
reason, ff it 
lon Christian- 
staument. We 
it to be in-full 
, in regard to 
be denied that 
6 found there, 
y. the doctrine 


ust s plainly,’ 
i; But as the 


pt the conchi- 
ment, and that 
ec must heave it 
y of maintain- 


.,@very one approves of a divine govern 
“which is but a divine sanction put u 


holders of thie 
retain. Scripture, wh 


THE BIMUCAL QUESTION, 457 


ing these now generally disearded notions, to’ complain of our 
departure from. tlie letter, in putting only a spiritual meaning 
ttpon any portion of these pictorial passages.”*  - i 
The requirements of the. moral sense being thus various, : 
the * spiritual ¥ interpretation assumes any needed shape in 
order to accommodate itself'to it. In some of the less sen- 
sitive, the moral. sense will only require that the personal ° 
coming of Christ and the earthly judgment be banished, and 
will allow hell-and the dévil to be retained. A more fastid- 
ious: taste will require these latter also to be blotted out. 
Seripture is thus adapted to the most diverse habits of mind, : 
and no one is offended. Each one sees his face. in the glass, 
and imagining it is another he iy fleeting, is easily per- 
suaded to worship his own image, “ Thoughtful sinners,’t 
as well as saints of all descriptions are accommodated, and 
' ment in which each 
himself, and of «9 revelation 
pon’ his own imaginings, 
singular species of legerdemain the up- 
supremacy of the méral’ sense “mapage to React 
ile they cast’ overboard reason and the. « 
moral sense in order to do so. Sette & 
And those who seom most. to contend for the letter of Gare 
‘Scripture, as do the ad vocates of “ conditional immortality,” 
betray here the quiet unde : 


them: Mr.. Constable's ch 
may be cited'in prooft ‘It 

“Tt was to a World of unbe 
God of justice, as swell 


is allowed to : adjudicate for 


Thus after’ all by a 


th 


Tithe God ‘of 'th, 


1 


to convert thy 


‘ Share aA oo Host the oe res 
answer of thie heathen Sto’ ‘© gatnot, >. ee 
ee PL. g _ al — A ‘ 

o* No Amer, Reviey, Marc ‘ 


t Tylrini’s Review ‘of Beew’ ier yD, Oo A gM sh eel (-. 


f Mur, and Nat. d Kit. Pisa RE of REI A Cp RS Bag 


‘” 2 \ 


‘ a 


¥ 


_@¢ 


8 FACTS AND THEORIES ‘AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


| 


und | will not, believe in a God of whom you nf Yirm such out- 
rageous wrong.’ . - We ask the huynin heart for its. verdict. 


"We say that swdgoe ie Juiman judgment, and that the judgment 


of blievers and unbelieve rs alike, the punishmebt which the the- 
ory of Augustine supposes that God will inflict’ is infinitely too 
great, and wé are therefore.to reject it as untrue, bécause w holly 
unw arthy, not merely of a3 veiful Father, but a just . 

" Naw we are going to look atthe doctrine, not of iene 
tine but of Scripture, and to see how far jf approves itself 
to the conseience of men. «That it does ind mutt, where the 
conscicnee is alive, is eee as I have already said. The ex- 
tracts that follow in Mr, Gonstable’s book I am no way con-, 
cemed to justify ; yet even they tell in my wars a very: 
different story to what they séem to dé in his.” They tell 
me how little this vaunted moral sense—how little this poor 
heart of man has really to say in. the matter. From the 


Romahists who accept and approve the horrors. of Pina- 
monti or Father -Furniss to the Protestant hearers of 


Jénathar Edwards or of | Mr. Spurgeon, how many con- 
‘demned as incredible the things -portrayed to” them? You 
would expect from the statements of those who laud the 
moral’sénse so highly, that. their auditors would have risen 
up with on> over: powering outburst of indignation and have 
driven. tliem from..the pulpit, instead of saying Amen and 
girculating their books by hundreds 6r by thousands. DPos- 
‘sibly the “intelligent an@ educated Ilindoo merchants anc 
magistrates” of whom ‘Dr. Leask has told us,* had the ad- 
vantage in’ these respects of their Christian brethrer. But 
if it requires intelligence and ee of a certain order to 
-detegt, these errors, perhaps after’ all the virtue is in the 
“-mildness of the Bralinanism under” which they had grown 


se » Up rather than the moral sense which ‘eould, vive in. the one 


. case Fr ‘decision’ so just; in the other so unhappy. ae 
Ww @ happén: to know, ‘however, that. where the gospel has 


made, its Targest’ and ‘most. permandéut conquests, the. doé- ”': 
,, brine of eter mal: ‘punishment has: ‘been: heta: and put forth, hed 


ti Re ttiey oe is nike ry 


os wistntne es 


om Teport of-a Confetonas.on Ganga Iminortality, ae ® : a vs 


ATE. 


m such out- 
its. verdict. 
he judgment 
nich the the- 
infinitely too 


‘ause wholly 
a0 F 
t cf Augus- 
‘oves itself 
t, where the 
|. The ex- 
1. Way Con-, 
cars & very: 
“They tell 
le this poor 
From the 
rs.of Pina- 
hearers of 
many con- 
em’? You 
o laud .the 
have risen 
yn and have 
Amen and 
ands. Pos- 
rchants anc 
nad the ad- 
threr. But 
ain Order to 
ie is in the 
had grown 
>in. the one 


> gospel has - 
ts, the doo. . 
| put forth, 


ei eae Aor 
ree ) fay et 
MPa 


/2 putting the righteousness of Ged, in t] 
- upon tle same side with His lave. | 
Bit. that fansotn - proclaims, noc) ss in its transcendant 
greatness the divine ¥stimate 6f hin as. equally. beyond our 


a ' oe ) 
\ THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 459 


Nay, in Christendom itself it must, according to Mr. Con- 
stable, have conquered the whole ground, and that in the 
teeth of the moral sense, where this had certainly no self. 
interest to seduce it from the so much milder truth which 
had first possession of the fleld. How Strange a reflection 
that what the heathen have moral sense to reject, Christen- 
dom should have almost universally accepted! But the gos- 
pel can scarcely be shown to have Won its way by the 
aid of annihilation doctrine, or its history will have to be 
rewritten. ome 
If Scripture be the word of God,—if even the consciences 
of men not. the worst in life have given’ a true verdict,— 
man is a fallen being; and‘his estimates of sin and its de- 
sert are alike faulty. Viewed in this way by the light of 
reason only, we might well predict that the divine estimate 
of either would far transcend our own, _ Consequently that 
that judgment of it which did transcend our own, and was 
opposed therefore (in the way Mr. Constable and others 
speak) to the moral sense, worded be. previsely the Judgment 
most rational to receive as Gods. ae ‘reakon and sense 
are in apparent opposition, an epposition which the word of 
God accounts for, if it does: not. remove. How false then 
must be the assertion that the gospel jhas. cee way by 
winning men’s admiration of God inj the character of a 
Judge! Do the judgments which now come on the world 
from the Governor of it always, approve themselves to men 
similarly as free from undue severity ?/ No, the gospel has 
won its own way by being GOSPEL: by/exhibiting God-as a 
Saviour, not a Judge; by proffering a fway of escape, Rot a 
mild sentence; and by the ransom given proclaiming the 
value put upon men’s souls by Him jwho made them, and 
which gives real Satisfaction to the aw kened conscience by 


> matter of salvation, 


4 sos Ne ONS . ey eo ~ 4 et ee ae 3 é “ e . 
= Owns. Nor is it the estimate. ofanre temy, or of one indiffer- 


2 


pee 


460 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ent, but. of Him who at His own cost has provided the pro- 
pitiation. Who that believes+on the one can refuse his 
credence to the other also, when all that he has to object is 
but the testimony of a conscience dulled and enfeebled by 
the very sin which it is called to, judge, 4 heart ‘“ deceitful 
above all things” as well as “‘ desperately) wicked ” ?- 

We do not believe then that God appeals to man’s heart, 
in thé way Mr. Constable avers, to decide whether His 
judgment be such as he can accept. Ie appeals to it by a 
love which would save him from it altogether, and presents 
His word, attested in every possible way as His, to enlighten 
and purify his conscience, not be judged by it. 

Not one of those who lay this stress upon the judgment 
of the moral sense believe in any practical way in the fall, or 
in sin as defiling the conscience and enfeebling the intellect. 
One can hardly 1 imagine that they receive what i is the truth 
nevertheless, that the Light of the world, when come into it, 
shone upon a darkness which x corapreles: aS it not,” and 
that the cross was man’s verdict as to (Christ Himself. 
And yet here was not even judgment at all, but “God in 
Christ, reconciling the world unto Himsel f, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them’”* In this form,|indeed (to use 
Mr. Constable’s language), “ God’s character and conduct 
were placed before it, ¢o wy: its faith and love.” The suc- 
cess was not what he would apparently imagine. “The 
carnal mind*” was “enmity to God.” . And still it is so. 
By no mere moral appeal cofild that enmity be changed to 
leve. Man must be born again. I do not say Mr. Consta- 
ble does not believe this, but then it vitiates his entire 
argument. 

God has taken care, therefore; to make His appeal. to man 
in another way than Mr. Constable suggests. Instead of 
putting before him as a philosopher a picture of rectitude 
with which he would be charmed, or expecting \a criminal to-. 
fall in love with his sentence, He has treated him as a sinful 


but a miserable being, a creature fallen and lost. He puts 
eee > ecm ipniemeeenee +: Se 


* 2 Cor. v. 19, 


z % 

TE. 

‘d the pro- 

refuse his 

9 object is 

eebled by 

“ deceitful 

ieee 

in’s heart, 
ether His 
to it by a 
d presents 

> enlighten 


judgment 
the fall, or 
e intellect. 
‘the truth 
me into it, 
not,” and 
t Himsel. 
t God in 
imputing 
ad (to use 
dl conduct 
The suc- 
ie. “The 
ll it is 80. 
hanged to 
[r. Consta- 
‘his entire 


eal. to man 
Instead of 
f rectitude 
criminal to: 
as a sinful 
He puts 


_ how on every side:being urged. Th 
Hcomp. John vii. 37-41, 


’ 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 461 


before this prodigal ina far-off country. the bread in Ilis 
Father’s house—He appeals to the self-love vf an essentially 
selfish being. Ile calls to Iimself the thirsty, the weary, 
the heavy-laden, the lost; and the disinterestedness of a love 
which has come so far to seck, and gives so freely, without 
any gain but what love alone could count such, is all needed 
evidence of the truth ‘of the message to the soul that thus 
finds itself searched out and besought.* 

Beside this God’s word has its abundant witness, so much 
the more evident because by no means of a mere moral kind. 
Thus prophecy invokes the ‘facts of history, and even the 
current events before one’s eyes; While in the/ present day 
the‘stones of Rgypt. and the bricks of Assyria are crying out 
a ears however unwilling. Thus, not only conscience is 
“ppealed to; and where it is, it is Rot put; inte the critic’s 
chair, but into the felon’s dock nie judge, but to hear 
jadgment. If man be a fallen, deprayed creature, it must 
needs be so. If he be not, his exisfence; his condition, and 
his end, are alike an insoluble, impenetrable mystery. 

Yet it is quite true that to.a conscience quickened and 
calightened by the word, God’s.ways approve themselves, 
the light brought in manifests itself. a8 such by revealing to 
the opened eye the beauty and the deformity of things not 
efore apparent. It “is conscious knowledge: “one thing 
we know ; whereas we were blind, nog qve see.” Still the 
horizon is limited, and if the truce light now shines, the dark- 
ness is yet pussing only; and not passed. f IIe that sees 
jarthest sees most the limit. He that judges himself most 
truly will own most fully God's judgmefts to be a great, 
deep. _ It is not credulity to doe Piet the most clear-sighted 
wisdom. Reason and faith ar Pai war. The apparent 
discords are“but the evolution of § Mugre perfect harmony. 

In this spirit then we shall seek tog@emine the objections 
t» the Scripture. doctrine, of fut@e’ Hment, objections 


! hea h of the doctrine 


é 


+ So should ‘we read 1 John ii 8: 7) Oxoria rapedy erat. 


462 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


remains, cstablished from Scripture itself, apart from all 
question of our skill in meeting the objeqbions. 
(1.) And first, briefly as to one point, which, though it be 
“not a primary one perhaps, or actually a part of the doctrine 
of eternal punishment itself, is still naturally enough connect- 
ed with it’in men’s minds, and tends to give it additional 
harshness,—I mean the comparative fgwness of the saved. 
The Lord's words affirm, as to Ifis people, that they are 
comparatively a “little flock,” although, when gathered 
finally together, they may ‘be also “a multitude which no 
man can numbe The gate is strait, and the way narrow 
that Yeadeth y ,and few there be that find it. Tere 
‘Satan is rc g ed therefore to have triumphed, and 
Christ's, WoRMehave failel: as Dr. Littledale puts it,* 
citing the arguifteht of Messrs. Jukes and White,—‘‘if the 
popular theology be true, then Christ has been completely 
defeated by Satan in the contest for the souls of men, since 
incomparably the larger spoils of battle rest with the latter ; 
and the incarnation has not affected the ultimate nature and 
destinies of mankind in general.” ie 
But this last is an uncomfogtable’ argument in the hands 
of any save an out and out Universalist, such ag Dr;-L. hardly 
claims to be. Tor it. is awkward to have to think it satis- 
factory for God only not to be defeated. in so MANY CUSCS, 
and that, He would be content to share with Satan, supposing 
only de got “the larger spoils”! Dr. L. blames Cafon 
Farrar for having only “distantly glanced at [these] two 
cogent pleas”; but in truth he cannot himself have looked 
at them very closely, or else the defect is in his own percep- » 


‘tion. If Satan “ triumphs." when a soul is lost, how futile 


to contend as to whether he triumphs somewhat less, or 
more! In either cas God is not God. Dr. Littledale does 
not believe with the wise man of old, that “if thou aie 
thou alone (shall bear: it.t’. Ile avill make God also “ bear 
it,” for the/shame of “ cternal judgment ” would be His! 
* In his C tique upon Canon Farrar in the Contempurary Review, 
t Prov, ixf 12, : ’ 


'E. 


from all 


zh it be 
doctrine 
connect- 
dditional 
e saved, 
they are 
gathered 
Which no 
narrow 
t. Ilere 
ed, and 
puts it,* 
—“if the 
mpletely 
en, since 
e latter ; 
ture and 


1c hands 
. hardly 
it satis- 
1 CUSCS, 
pposing 

Cahon 
sc] two 
looked 


percep- - 


v futile 
less. or 
ile does 
Tea 
> “ bear 
lis! 


plew, 


mA 


® it militates 
Pyuent possi- 
ty”! Is this 
®: If man’s, would 
it in ten million men be any more His shame or His defeat 
than even in one? Does Scripture represent. men perishing | 
through Satan’s power or craft, apart from this “volition ” ? 
If not, how is it Satan's triumph ¥, And as far as he has any 
part in man’s ruin, will .he not have cause to own that ap- 
parent: victory has been defeat? his success, according to 
the sure and immutable law of divine government, his degra- 
dation :-—“ dust the serpent’s meat’ Is it not always so 
that success in evil is the degradation of the evil-doer ? If 
Dr. Littledale wll think upon it, he may-yet discover in 
this the secret of that. apparent change in the rich man in 
hades, which Mr. Cox and Canon Farrar -would take as 
moral bettering from. purgatorial flame. Ie who in life 
would lave been the tempter of his five brethren, in ‘death 


THE ETMICAL, 


463 


‘Yet he rightly objects to Univ 
against the existence of free-will,: 
bility of a volition of evil throug 


volition of evil then God’s shame or ma 


would have them warned so as hot to come into that place 
of torment. ' 


Man’s damnation is from himself, ‘Ye would not,” is 
the complaint in sorrow of the One who came to save. 
Will Dr. Littledale taunt Him with defeat ? The legion 


did not cast kim out of 4 radara, but. the men for whom He . 


had broken Satan’s power refused deliverance. Did Satan 
defeat Him there ? If it be mitn's contrary: will that is his 
ruin, what purpose of God does that defeat 2 _ Did He pur- 
pose to,save all, spite of’ man’s will? That He would have 
all men to be saved is the vindication of. His heart; there ‘is 
no declaration of a purpose: to save all perforce, no defeat 


of His purpose if it is not done. 


But— . 

(2.) It is objected to us the shortness of probation. if 
limited to the present life, and that many have in fact none 
at-all. Canow Farrar has many a vivid illustration of the 


~ injustice, as he considers it, of this; but I preter to quote 


the calmer statements of others, not less forcible -— 


= . 


tine 


a v d Association for information and image Management 
5 Sales VF ~ 1100 Wayne Avenua, Suite 1100 


Centimeter 
1. 2° 3. 4-5 6. 7 8 9 WY WW 12 13. 14° 15 mm 


ee 3 4 5 


2 
Inches lO. we 23 
en (One 
one . ‘ - — aR as == 
! oo 4 .- 
yu i & 


MK bk 


*y 


eS 

| a AA “a 
MANUFACTURED TO AIIM STANDARDS a AS 
BY APPLIED IMAGE. INC.  _—_ rity a 


“pl 


VA 


Sp ate an 2 ‘ ; a . AN go 


464 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, - 


‘**As yet I um compelled to believe,” says Canon Plumptre, * 
‘that, where there has been no adequate prebation, or none it 
all, there must be some extension of the possibility of develop- 
ment or change beyonst the limits of this present life: Take the 
case of unbaptized clijdren.¢ Shall we close the gates of Paradise 

against them, apd satisfy ourselves with the lerissimea damnatio, 
which gained for Augustine the repute of the durus pater infun- 
tum? And ifwe are forced in such a ease to admit the law of 
progress, is it not legitimate to infer that it extends beyond 
them to those whose state is more or less analogous ?” He adds 
further on, ‘‘ The theory I am now defending gives a significance 
to the final judgment of which the popular belief, in great meas- 
ure, deprives it. Protestants and Catholics alike, for the most 
‘part, think of that judgment as passed, irrevocably passed, at the 
moment of death. -The soul knows ts eternal doom then, passes 
to heaven or hell or purgatory, has no real scrutiny to expect 
when the Judge shall sit upon the throne ; while, on this view, 
the righteous award will then be bestowed on each according to 
the tenor of his life during the whole period of his existence, and 
. not only during the short years or months or days of his carthly 
being. \This gives, I venture to think, not a less, but a more, 
worthy conception of that to Which we look foe as the great 
completion of God’s dealings with our race.” 


Dr. Bellows, on behalf of Unitarianism, goes yet further ;t 
he says:— | 
‘‘ What we have hitherto objected toin the treed of orthodoxy, 
on the subject of eternal punishment, was the alleged finality of 
human fate, as determined by the state of the soul at the 
-moment of death. . . This life has been considered to be mainly 
a state of prabations and the only state. Unitarians reject both 
-. ideas. With them life is not, here or anywhert, mainly a state 
of probation, but a state of educatipn and discipline ; and still 
more, a state of being for its own sake. -We can conceive no state - 
of human existence, that is, of finitesspiritual existence, which 
shall be different in these respects from the present. . . We can- 
not, with our reverence for the freedom of the will nnd the free 


* Contemporary Review. / 

+ It should in fairness be stated that Dr. P. is 8 arguing with a Boman 
Catholic. 

¢ NM. Amer. Review. 


&é 


tire, * 
© at 
elop- 
o the 
dis 
nation, 
fan 
v of 
youd 
adds 
awncee 
nens- 
most 
t the 
ASSCS 
kpeet 
view, 
iz to 
and 
rthly 
nore,’ 
preat 


ler ;{ 


loxy, 


ty of 
; the 
ainly 
both 
state 

still 


State ~ 


yhich 
-can- 
free 


‘ 


TLE ETHICAL QUESTION, - 465 


play of spiritual laws, be among those who think moral evil, with 

its suii sines and its penalties, will be forcibly terminated by a 
tint of divine bencvelenee at my fitmre date. We objeet to the 
old orthodox view of the finality of human probation at death, as 


_. lacking probehility, ius disregarding our present experience of 


God's goverment and the eoustitution of man’s spirit. Moreover, 
while it seems awfully threatening to those who are inclined to — 
evil and are lil -ly to be lost, it séems relaxing of moral and 

spiritual obligations toward those who expect to be saved. I is 


_ & doctrine too cruel for the worst, too flattering for the best.” 


With which Dr. Littledalo. futly agrees. He objects* to 
the popular view of “this life ‘being a state: of ‘probation, 
a solitary chance, failure in which involves destruction, 
Just as with us gun-barrels which cannot pass the test in 
the proof-house are invariably condemned, broken up, and 
cast into the fire,—but only ‘to be forged anew.” 

“There is no warrant: in Scripture (he says) -for this current 
opinion, which in truth necessitates a denial of God’s foreknow- 
ledge az not being able to trust His own work, nor to predict how 
it will turn out till He has tested it, He does indeed try and 
prove, but it is in the way of educatiag, and purgation, not of 
inquiry. ‘When He hath ¢ried me,,@° Shall. cothe, forth as gold’ 
(Jub xxiii. 10). * Behold, I will melt them and try them’ (Jer. 
ix.-7), Once grasp the notion that we have only one life given. 
us to live, and that death ig-a mere episode in it, so that this - 
world is but a lower class in God’s school, and another stage of 
education in our unbroken personality and life beyond the grave 
awaits us in the intermediate state, whether’that stage be down- 
ward or upwards, according as we have used our opportunities 
here, and the whole scheme of redemption shows clearer,”’ 

_ And even President Porter suggestst that— 


“Then, when. the future life begins, every man will see Christ 
as He is, and the sight of Him may of itself bring a finality to his 
character and destiny, as it discovers each man. fully to himself. . 
They that pierced Him shall mourn, but not if when ‘they see - 
Him, they mourn that they picreed Him. The next life may 
be another probation, in that, by its first revelations, it shall 
make everything clear which was dark,.and bring out in vivid 
a In the Contemp. Rer. te Ip'the N. Amer. Rev, 


466 FACTS AND THEORLES AS To A FUTURE STATE, 


lines that moral and spiritual truth which the soul shall accept 
with sympathizing joy, or reject with sinful perversencss ; and 
as it accepts or rejects, shall know itsown character and its just 
award. . . . The opening scenes of thenext life may be at once 
the soul’s second probation, and its final judgment.” 

All this is anti-seriptural merely, and if unsound, then of 
necessity dangerous to the last degree. To teach men that 
they may put off into the future that which mnust be decided 
here and now is nothing less. than enticing\them to sell- 
destruction. I have no desire to retain the w rd ‘* proha- 
tion”; but that Scripture ‘insists upon it that sal\ation is a 

Aly for those who find it in this life, we have 
The denial of it is reckless ignorance r un- 
death as death, 
nthe brevity 


possibility 0 
already seen. 
belief. It destroys the whole meaning of 
the solemnity of the appeal to man founded upo 
_ of his life here; that the Son of Man hath power on earth 
_ to forgive sins, and that now is th accepted time, and now 
the day of salvation ; “that “he, oveth his life shall lose 
it, and he that hateth his life ine -qorld shall keep it unto 
life eternal.”* It. denies the ‘fact that already in -hades is 
there a “great gulf fixed,” dividing the evil and the good, 
and that it is when nitn fuil (or die) they ate received into 
everlasting habitations.t It.is contradicted by the affirma- 
tion—the very. opposite of Canon Plumptre’s idea—that. the 
sentence in the day of judyment wiil be for deeds done “in 
tle body,” and not at all- for conduct in the ‘intermediate 
state.t Finally, that the spirits of the unsayed departed are 
« spirits in prison,” and with whom (if His dealings be the 
game with all, and we may argue from the, case of those 


‘before the flood) God’s Spirit will no more strive.} 


With regard to Canon Plumptre’s “‘ unbaptized ‘infants,’ 
I suppose as far as inadequate probation or want of develop- 
ment is concerned, they are scarcely worse off than those 
baptized;, And while with all such the taint of a vitiated 
nature needs to be removed, those who know how absolutely 


* Matt. ix. 6; 2Cor. vi. 2; John xii. 25.“ 
+ Luke xvi. 9 { 2Cor. v. 10, 61 Pet. iii. 19; Gen. vi. 3. 


we 
‘hav 
sho 
ffic 
all; 
be a 
affir 
_ dor 
. they 
Lor 
alwa 
for t 
And 
that, 
As 
prob 
sense 
matt 


_ it sho 


“throu 
plain. 
the 's; 
can b 
forty 
thee, . 
keep | 
think 
it igo 
to acc 

In t 

« Go d. 


accept 

; and 
ts just 
4 once 


en of 
n that 
ecided 
o selt- 
proha- 
on is a 
e have 


er un: 


n earth 
‘a now 
ill lose 
it unto 
ades is 
» good, 
ed into 
affirma- 
hat. the 
one “in 
mediate 
‘ted are 
be the 
f those 


nfants,’ ; 
levelop- 
n those 
vitiated 
solutely 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION, | 467 


we are debtors to Divine graee for this ee case will 
‘have no difficulty in this respect. That God cannot h C 
show mercy, where no human wiil can yet b supposed of » 
efficacy to resist the known divine will for the salvation of 
all; or that what people call probation in this respect should 
be a necessity in “very case—this he must prove who would 
affirm. Those of this class can hardly be judged for deeds 
done in the body, nor condemned finally for a nature which 
.they have without any act of their own will. Of this the 
Lord gives us full assurance - ‘in heaven their angels do 
always beholl the, face of my Father which is in heaven ; 
for the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost.” 
And “it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, 
that one of these little ones, should perish.’”* : 
As ta Dr. Littledale’s ‘objections to the whole theory of 
probation: I Fuppose no one would contend for it in the 
sense he assumes, a3 if it were God's proving what was a 
matter of uncertainty to Himself apart from the proof. Why 


\. It should be incansistent for Lim to allow man after all to e 
through the trial , because He foresees the issue, is not. made . 


plain. Dr. Ta can scarcely believe in the Edenic trial for 

the same reason; nor that Moses’ account of the wildernegs. 

can be\the true one, that “the Lord thy God led thee these © 

forty years in the wilderness to. humble thee and to prove 
thee, lo knw whut was in thine heart, whether thou wou 
keep his comunndments or not This hetwill natur 

think a denial ot divine omniscience, and repudiate, whereas 

it ig: only God re using to act. upon His foreknowledge, or 

been the probation of: man: 

’ are again Moses’ words.+ 

| » andl the verdict has been long since 

given: “tHere is none righteous, no, not one; there is none 

that. doeth good, no, not one.\. And « we know that what 

things soever the law saith, it saith to them that are under 


——— a eee ents —— a 


¢ Exod. xx, 20, . 


* Matt, Xviii. 10, 11, 14. | + Deut, viii, 
‘ ? 
SS 


468 PACTS AND THEORI ES AS TO A FUTURE. STATE. 
- . p 
the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all. the world 


become guilty before God.’* : 

In this respect probation és passed for all. Isracl’s con- 
demnation is not merely a piece of past history; it is of 
present and universal force by reason of our complete essen-' 
tial identity : ‘as in water face answereth to face, so the 
heart of man ‘to man.” But in another respect also, and 
still more solemnly, is probation passed, inasmuch as when 
« Je was in the world, and. the world. was made by [im, 
the world knew Him not. Ile came unto His own, and Iis 
own received Him not;” so that those who did receive Him, 
(and who do) are man fested by the very fact to be “born, 

-not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God.” ¢ | * : 

Thus the’ eross of Christ was “the judgment of the 
world”’;} and man ‘ts convicted, not only of having failed 
to attain legal righteousness, but of having refused the One 
who came to save him from the law’s penalty also. This is 
why I.cannot. contend for the term “ probation,” as applying 
to God’s present dealings with men; while yet it is true 


that God will not finally treat men as in the lump con.- 


demned, but each man for his own personal rejection of 
Himself: his reprobation of (od will be necessarily Ais own 
reprobation. — ; 

The time réqnired for this, and the circumstances I have 
not calculated, nor ‘do I presume to have wisdom for the 


calculation. If others have, they should produce their argu- 
3 


ments. They Who believe that God has given His Son for 


men: can rest in the conclusion ‘that not only will He be 


“clear when He is judged,” but-that His long-suffering ~ 
mercy, and His will that none should perish, will be abund-. 


antly revealed in the fast-hastening day of manifestation. 
This they will not venture to anticipate ; nor can they be- 


lieve that the world would be one whit better governed if 
the secrets of that government were made fully known. 


a re ———— —- 


* Rom iii. 10,12,19. -  t John i. 10-15. + John xii. 81. 


equ 
-to 2 
mol 


He. 


muc 
fron 
coul 


. Voc 
' OVE! 


of e 
divi: 
may 
Nay 
it. 
repe 
Him 


vorld 


con- 
is of 
assen-" 
o the 
9, and 
when 
lim, 
1d ITLis 
> Tim, 
‘born, 
rill of 


of the 
failed 
ne One 
Thig ‘is 
plying 
is true 
ip con- ” 
tion of 
his own 


IT have 
for the 
ir argu- 


Son for. 


He be 


suffering © 
> abund-. 


estation. 
they be- 
erned if 


- known. 


xii. 31. 


ne 


FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 469 


The existence of evil is the gone real and only difficulty ; but 
it exists: and God has answered the question as to Himself 
_Taised by it, not by a logical explanation of-the difficulty, 
> which it may perhaps be doubted if we should have ability — 
to understand, but by unveiling Himself in Christ. I sce in 
-the cross His holiness, I sce Ilis goodness, I see His love; 
and, if the darkness be only passing and not passed, I can 
walk amid it without stumbling with a Father’s hand close 
clasping mine. The darkness that remains is but the neces- 
sary school for faith; but a ‘faith which has the surest ground 
under its feet. “We know” but “in part”; still we Ano, 
The imperfection will: pass, but the truth now known will 
abide forever. es 
(3.) For the continuance of evil God cannot be held re- 
“sponsible, save by an argument which throws upon Him 
equally the responsibility of its present exisience. It is easy 
~to assume that God could will it out of existence at any 
moment if IIe pleased, but then we must needs assume that 
He willed it into existence. Mr. Birks has well shawn how - 
much of the darkness which involves the subject proceeds 
from crude thoughts of omnipotence in this way. That He 
could annihilate, on the principle men are now zealously ad- 


. vocating, the sinful being is, of course, as a matter of power 
over His creatures, to be allowed. But the necessary limit 


of even Almighty power is determined by the circle of the 
divine perfections. That infinite Wisdom could do so we 
may not assume, except by assuming our own to be infinjte. 
Nay, even reason may argue some things apparently against 
it. For His gifts and calling would searcely be without. 
repentance, did He destroy a being naturally deachless which 
Himself had given; dnd such is at least. man’s spirit. Mr. 


Constable has abundant cause to argue that the only true 


basis for annihilation is materialism. But such a mechan- 
ical destruction of evil might well seem to be its triumph in 
another form,—a cofifession of his being defeated by it in 
the creature thus destroyed. If men turn round and ask 
why at least create the being that He knew would fall, the 


et 


tal 
e 


470  ¥ACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


practical answer is, He has reated.. ‘‘ Who art thou, O 
man, who repliest against God ?” 

This line of argument Scripture itself suggests to be the 
true one. The conflict with evil is ever represented in it as 
a real thing, and:a necessary, not to be dispensed with by 
the mere fiat even of Omnipotence: and that because Om- 
nipotence in God means necessarily Omnipotent Wisdom,* 
as it does Omnipotent Love. Thus He “ willeth not the 
death of a sinner,” yet they die. Who will say. Je wills 
their sins ? and yet they sin, And when we are told ‘of some 
that “it is IMPOSSIBLE to renew them again unto repent- 
ance,”t if we are to take such words in their full and appar- 

_ ent sense, must we not believe that Omnipotence had in their 
case ‘found its limit? or can we say God would not still 
have renewed them, if He could ? In the face of Tis own 
repeated protestations, can we believe that through J/is 

_ pleasure sinners, however much sinners, could not be re- 
newed ? .. 

If we touch mysteries on all sides here (and so we do), all 
the more must we keep to the simple, plain assurances which 
are the silver thread guiding us through the apparently, and 
to us really, inextricable labyrinth. God is God, because 
God is good: and to this His word holds us fast. 

On the other hand it does not represent Him as baffled by 
the evil, and having to undo His own handiwork, as if man’s 
will were thus triumphant above His. The reality of the 
conflict with evil gives the only basis for the reality of vic- 
tory over it; and that victory is assured. “The Lord hath 

' made all things for Himself; yea, even the wicked for the 

day of evil;”{ not their wickedness surely, but themselves. 


Praise Him therefore they shall, as “all His works”$ do., 


The “vessels of wrath” and “to dishonor,”|| are still “ ves- 


coseismic terse poe TOE AA A Ee 


* It seems to me that herein Mr. Birks’ argument as to the limitation 
of Omnipotence in measure fails, that he does not insist enough that the 
limit is only that imposed by the Divine Perfections. 

+ Heb. vi. 4-6. ¢ Prov. xvi. 4, § Psa. cxlv. 10, 

| Rom, ix, 22; 2 Tim. ii, 20. 


sel 
Go 
nec 
ish 
reg 
Hi 
less 
He 
and 
us: 
due 
reas 
mer 
by : 
selv 
alth 
of e 
it’ is 
has 
sent 
full 
were 
M 

in w 
That 
only 
acce} 
gives 
“ sins 
tude, 
out e 
the 1 
Mr. ( 
of the 
him, - 


* Er 


hath 
> the 
ves. 


§ do., 


* ves- 


tation 


at the 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 471 


sels,” and have their use. Who shall say that “to show 
God's wrath, and make Tis power known,” is not such a 
necessity in divine government as in any other ? 

The eternity of sin is the real basis of'the eternity of pun- 
ishment. _ If in this life God-has with any spent all available 
resources in vain for their deliverance, so that He should 
Himeelf have to say “it is impossible to renew them,” what 
less than “ eternal fire” can be the award of those ‘of whom 
He has had to say, “he that is unjust, let him be unjust still ; 
and he that is filthy, let him*be filthy still” » Mr. Greg tells» 
us:* “No subtlety of logic, no weight of authority, will in- 
duce rightly constituted minds, which allow themselves to 
reason at all, to admit that the sins or tailings of time can 
merit the retribution of eternity,—that finite natures can, 
by any guilt. of which they are capable, draw upon them- 
selves torments infinite either in esseyme or duration.” But, 
although we must allow that that: is pe way the doctrine 
of eternal punishment has been often sought to be justified, 
it is not the scriptural ground of it. Nay, it is one which 
has obscured the subject it was meant to clear tor it repre- 
sents God in judgment as merely at the best exacting the 
full extent of penalty, even supposing it proved that that 
were the extent. ee 

Mr. Constable represents the view I am advocating as one 
in which the “ Augustinian theorists” are taking new ground. 
That is of little moment, that it should be new to them, if 
only it be a return to Scripture. At the same time I cannot 
accept Prof. Mansel as the exponent of it, if Mr. Constable 
gives justly his exposition.} Scripture gives no hint of 
“sins throughout eternity increasing in number, in magni- 
tude, and in guilt! Condemnation and punishment through- 
out eternity gathering force and falling more terribly upon 
the wretched sufferers”! We may agree perfectly with 
Mr. C. that “ Scripture, from first to last, says not one word 
of the sins of hell.” And with Mr. Girdlestone, as he quotes 
him, that “as the saved will be raised above the possibility 


bs Enigmas of Life, p. 271. +Nat. and Dur. of Fu ~ Pum, p. 153. 


472 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


of sinning; so the lost will be sunk below it.” But while strc 
sin in act will be thus restrained by punishment, he that is of ¢ 
“unjust will not be less unjust, nor he that is filthy less filthy. tia 
Restraint’ is not reformation. The cternal state is one fixed thos 
absolutely and bounded on all sides, as Mr. Birks suggests disti 
with probable truth a “dake of fire” may intimate. On « 
We do not accept then the teaching that the punishment who 
of hell is inflicted for the sins of hell. On the other hand furtl 
we cannot concede that the measure of eternal judgment alas 
being the measure of the sins of this life, as it surely is, mili- ae 
54 : y™ side 
tates in the least against the doctrine that the eternity ot tect] 
punishment is based upon this eternity of a sinful state. that 
Mr. Constable seems never to have considered indeed this peas 
view of it. Hle must distinguish between sin and a sintul . the | 
stae. The everlasting fire is correlative to the undying the | 
worm. And here, if we consider a little, there is no oppo- reasc 
sition between the eternity of the punishment being linked aBaCr 
with the abiding of the sinful condition, and the measure stepa 
of the suffering being apportioned to the actually committed +) It 
sins. ; : favo} 
For the works and the words according to which men tanti 
will be judged are of course the manifestation of the sinner pet a 
himself. And such is the actual phrase used in Scripture. "wher 
“ We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ ”* notic 
is more literally “ we shall all be manifested.” Our ‘works Mr. | 
will bring out our characters,—will exhibit us. If it wero twee 
not so, such a judgment would be necessarily partial. Inas- can a 
much‘then as men’s works exhibit their character, and that & 9 
a character which abides forever, they are judged according; 
to their works, and yet with “eternal judgment.” . 
' (4.) Thus the punishment is not indiscriminate, becaus« 
in each case eternal. ‘“ Few stripes,” as compared with 
“many,” may have (and will have) their counterpart in the 
wrath inflicted, and yet that wrath “abide” on each who 
has chosen it for his future portion. Mr. -Gregt urges 
ee ea ee a a apne 


— -—_—_ -— —_—— -- sr 


* 2 Cor. v, 10. + Enigmas of Life, }s. 274. 


while 
at is 
thy. 
fixed 


gests 


ment 
hand 
rment 
, mili- 
ity ot 
state. 
1 this 
sintul 
dying 
oppo- 
linked 
easure 


nitted ey 


1.men 

sinner 

ipture. 

rist ”* 

works 

t wero 
Inas- 

d that & 


ordin:; 


ecausa 
L with 
in the 
h who 


) 


yp 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 473 


strongly the objection indeed of any such “ broad, bold line 
of demareation,” as this infers, 


“separating, through all future ages, and by boundless distances, 
those whose measure of sin or virtue while on earth was scarcely 


distinguishable by the finest and most delicate moral electrometer, | 


On one side is endless happiness, tho sight of God. . . for those 
whom one frailty more, one added woaknoss, one hair's breadth 
further transgression, would have justly condemned to dwell for- 
eyer ‘ with the devil and his angels,’ an outcast from hope, chained 
to his iniquity forever, alone with the irreparable |! @n the other 
side is hell, the scene of torture, of weeping and gnashing of 
teeth ; of the ceaseltss flame and the undying worm ; where ‘he 
that is filthy must be filthy still’; torment, not for a period, but 
FOREVER ; for Him for whom one effort more, One ounce of guilt 
the less, might bave turned the trembling balance, and opened 
the gates of an eternal paradise ! Human feeling and human 


reason CaNNor believe this, though they may admit it with lip 


assent ; and the Catholic church accordingly, here as elsewhero, 
steps in to ee them with the via media which is needed.” 


It is curi§vs and instructive to sce with what comparative 
favor the infidel looks upon Popery as compared with Protes- 
tantism. The two are united in this at any rate, that they alike 


‘set aside the word of God. Opposition to this is what is every- 


where working in the unrenewed heart of man. It is more 
noticeable even, because purgatory is no such via media as 
Mr. Greg believes it. It decides nothing as to the line be- 
tween the lost: and: saved, to which alone his own language 
can apply. It *therely rejects the full value of the blood of 
Christ to cleanse from sin, and the power of the Spirit to 
renew and fit for heaven, apart from purgatorial suffering. 
This partial infidelity Mr. Greg naturally accepts as a step 
in the right direction. But purgatory settles nothing as to 
eternity. 

Mr. Greg’s own statement does not by any means present. 
more truly the Bible doctrine. He would represent. the 


May of judgment as ranging men in their gradations of sin 


or of holiness, and then breaking the line asunder at a cer- 
tain point, and sending one part to hell, the other to heaven, 


StS 


\ 
, 
a rence ache an sadiataas ee ee ee ee 
a a ar ae 


see spe nat oeauatieepee) 


ec ee 


er 


aeneeens 


— 


=> 


474 FACTS AND THEORLES AS TU A FUTURE STATE, 


It is the old heathen mythology, often, indeed, attempted to 
be Christianized, whereby a man’s future lot would be de- 
cided according as his bad deeds or his good should over- 
balance the other. Scripture does not allow that in this 
way asingle sinner could be saved. Instead of any going 
to heaven in this ray, all would be alike lost and cons 
demned. The law as the rule of judgment pronounces, 
“there is none righteous, no, not one,” which Christianity 
does not set aside, but reaffirms. Hell is the award, not of 
a certain overplus Of sin, but of the rejection of Him in whom 
alone is help. Heaven is the fruit, not of a little more than 
xemi-righteousness, but of Another's atoning work availing 
for the contessedly unrighteous. Mr. Greg’s picture is not 


even the caricature of Christianity: it is its fundamental - 


ypposite. : 

(5.) Mr. Greg again objects to a doctrine which represents 
the sufferings of a future world— 
‘as penal,. not purgutorial, —retributive,’ not reformatory. It is 
not easy (he thinks) to conceive any object to be answered, any 
part in the great plan of Providence to be fulfilled, by the inflic- 
tion of torments, whether temporary or perpetual, which ure 
neither to serve for the purificrtion of those who endure them, nor 
needed for the warning of those who behold them, since ‘the in- 
habitants of earth do not sce them, and the translated denizens 
of heaven do not: require them. . They are simply aimless and 
retrospective. It is true that, in the Conception of the philosopher, 
they are YNENITABLE ; that future suffering is the natural offspring 
afid necessary consequence of present sin : but this is not the view 
of the doctrine we are considering, nor is the character of the 
sufferings it depicts such as would logically flow out of the sins 
for which they are supposed to be a chastisement.” 


_ ‘Again Mr. Greg praises the comparative wisdom of the 
“ Catholic ” invention of’ purgatory, and adds :— 


‘But to believe, as Pretestants are required to do, that all those 


fiercer torments will be inflicted whén no conceivable purpose 
is to be answered by their infliction, when the suffering, so far as 
human imagination can fathom the case, is simply gratuitous, is 
assuredly a far harder strain upon our fuith,—a strain, top, which 


o 


is h 
noti 
VIO» 
1 
are 
18 tl 
nal 
lise 
beli 
enot 
have 
have 
conc 
pthe 
Cvits 
of p 
of tl 
laws 
there 
dom 
these 
losoy 
—ha 
us tl 
held 
We « 
In 
impo 
form 
shall 
lieve. 
an ex 
to pre 
the si 
soul.” 
He 


é," : 
° ; 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 475 | 

its is hardest on those whose feelings are the most human, and whose | ! | 

\ notions of the Deity are worthiest ; on those, that is, who havo * : | 
de- is uiost fulky imbibed Christ's sentimA@its and views, ’’* " 
pe These then at least are they Whose “ notions of the Deity H 
jing aro Worthiest ; ” and yet it has often been ae tly and it- ; 
ae is true, that some of the most solemn denunci orts of eter 
con nal Judgment to be found: in the whole Bible are in the ; 
nity discourses of our Lord Himself. Mr. Greg will perhaps { 
oe believe this inconsistency i for he is himself inconsistent : 4 
hpi cnough to suppose that the worthiest notions of: the Deity 
Kon have come down to us from One, who on his showing must i 
ling have been after all An impostor. But} beside this, in the : i 
oe conception of the philosopher even,—a wisdom by which all ; i 
atal > pther wisdom may pe fairly judged,—future suffering is in- : | 


Sr ; F 
evitable as the natural offspring and nec if 
of present sin. This’ we may believe, therefore, the action « 


<e 


essary consequence 


ents of those natural laws to philosophers so dear. But natural 

It ib laws are blind and aimless things. We must not believe in 

any there being wisdom in them it seems, Or purpose; ‘for Wis-. 
sflic- dom implies one who has it, and purpose a Controller, and 

ure these thoughts in this connection are foreign to a true phi- 
, nor losophy. Laws,—self-acting laws,—perchance self-made also oe 
» in- —have decreed future suffering for present sin. That saves of 
Zens us thinking about purpose. The sentence of tao may be 
and i held as a different thing from the Judgment of a judge. 
Dher, We can accept the inevitable, just as that. , | ' 
pets In point of fact, however, Mr. Greg tells us, “it is not “ej a 
ae impossible to imagine a future world of retribution in such 
ie form and coloring as shall be easy and. natural to realize, ‘as 
shall be not only possible to believe, but inpossible to dishe- 
h lieve.” And he represents that “if the soul be destined for © 
athe an existence after death, then (unless a miracle be worked 
a to prevent it) that existence MusT be one of retribution to 

those the sinful, and purgatorial suffering to the frail and feeble 
ee soul.” | i. 
‘ He believes then in the probability of retribution as dis- 
vhich, 


els, oh 


* Enigmas of Life, pp. 272, 278. 


< 


i) 


476 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


tinct from purificatory suffering. He does not wait to ask 
whether there are to be any to behold it-for whose warning 
it may be needed. He does not. inquire whether “ gratui- 
tous ” or not. “He speaks of “retribution,” é. e., “ repayment, 
recompense.’” Perhaps he does not believe that.“ retribu- 
tion” coull ever be “ gratuitous,” so that he need not con- 
sider it. Derhaps he is right.. 

But then that is also the Scripture view. The judgment 
of sin is, of course, ‘recompense, retribution. Is there, or-is 
there not, implied in this, righteousness in exercise? If 
God bea Moral Governor of ‘thie creatures, can He at His 
option dispense with this punitive exercise of righteousness ? 
Can He blot out penalties out of His statute book, and yet 
leave intact the laws which the penalties accompany? Not 
certainly, if Scripture be true; or where would be the mean- 
ing of its doctrine of: sacrifice ? “As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so MUST the Son of Man be 
lifted up.” “It became Him for whom are all things, and by 
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to 
make the Captain of their salvation perfect through suffer 
ing.”* If retribution be not needful, if the mere benevo- 
lence of God could have dispensed with it, Christ plainly 
need not have died at all. 

This to Mr. Greg may be nothing ; yet ie sees iad can 
assure us of the necessity of reribution from the nature of 
‘ things. And who gave things their nature? Is it not at 
least evident that the God of nature and of revelation are 
thus far one ? \ Apart from all purpose it may serve, can sin 
exist-and God ignore it? Can He be indifferent ? Can He 
.let_it go on and not exhibit Himself -i ‘in opposition to it ? 
not show His anger? And that is is essentially the fire of 
hell. 

- God is “willing to show His wrath, and make Ilis power 
known.” There is, and must be, therefore, governmental 
_necessity. In the only world of which we have experience 
retribution, is a Manifest law of His government. On the 


* John ii iii. i 14; Heb, ii. 10. 


induc 
unive 
from 
Birks 
tural * 
ure e\ 
6.) 
the t 
‘maje: 
capab! 
by orc 


exclus 


“yet th 


of the 


his‘ A 


says M 
sufferii 
ie 
perple: 
the pic 
tional « 
paper « 
“* the ve 
punishr 
the rest 


intenses 


_ unreaso 


text. . . 
those of 
Taylor, 
sermons 


ard, If 


ask 
ling 
tui- 


ent, 
ibu- 
0n- 


ent 
r.is 

If 
His 
B3 ? 
yet 
N ot 
-an- 
the 
. be 
by 
, to 
fer 
V 0- 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 477 


inductive principle what other can we conclude to be the 
universal law ? And even with regard to those who suffer 
from it, why should it not be,—nay, will it not be,—as Mr. 
Birks has rightly argued (although he has gone to unscrip- 
tural lengths in carrying out the principle) ,“mercy in meas- 
ure even to them, that judgment-i8 recompensed ? Ss 

(6.) "Last of theg® pbjections I shall notice that relating to 
the tortures of-*helt: being corporeal. “Instead of the 
‘majestic pains’ adapted to man’s complete nature, and 
capable of such impressive delineation; the torments assigned 
by ordinary Christianity to the future life are peculiarly and 
exclusively those ‘appropriate to this; they are all bodily; 


“yet the, body is laid dow1| at death ”; and “the doctrine 


of the resurrection of the body has been shown by, Bush.in 


his ‘ Anastasis’ to ‘be neither tenable nor scriptural.” So 


says Mr. Greg once more.* But the thought of the bodily 
sufferings of the lost has been one of great perplexity to 
many who fully believe in the doctrine of resurrection ; a 
perplexity which has been transformed into incredulity by 
the pictures that have been drawn of them by vivid and sensa- 
tional oratory. But, as Mr. Birks has well remarked in his 
paper on Canon Farrar’s book, 


‘the vehement dislike of any element of sensible pain in future 
punishment, when the doctrine itself is received, and also that of 
the resurrection both of the just and. unjust, has no warrant either 
of Scripture or reason. To believe that in the life to come some 
will suffer intense mental anguish and agony, through former sin, 
and that they will so suffer in the body after they have been 
raised/from the dead, and still to conceive that a,painless and unsuf- 
fering body will be the clothing or vessel of a spirit enduring 
intensest anguish and mental torment, is an opinion ‘as plainly 


_ unreasonable as it is opposed to the natural meaning of the sacred 
text. . . With regard to frightful pictures of future misery, like | 


those of Tertullian in the preface, of Henry Smith, and Jeremy 
Taylor, I would remind the-Canon of his own picture in thesé 


sermons of the horrors of delirium tremens to the unhappy-drunk- : 
ard. If one drunkard more can be reclaimed by such dark color- 


* Enigmas of Life, pp. 268, 269 a 


~ 


« 


a 


478 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


ing, there may -be a full warrant for the preacher. But the 

principle in both eases is the same. I fear that in both the indul- 

gence in drawing pictures of intense horror is more likely to revolt 

some and deaden the feelings of others than effectually to reclaim. 

The Scriptures at least give us no pattern of such ‘ ghastly ’ modes 
of impressing their warnings deeper on the consciences of men. 

Their warnings, those of Christ Himself, are the more impressive 

because the words are few and simple, severe in their calm gran- 
deur of earnestcaution : outer darkness, weeping, mourning, and 

gnashing of teeth.” 


As Scripture is evidently, however, what has furnished the 


basis of these descriptions, it will be well to ask just what | 


it conveys. Are these expressions, “ undying worm,” “ un- 
quenchable fire,” literal or symbolic; and what Brook have 
we, if we have any, as to this ? 

In the first placé the apostle’s language ‘bofate quoted, 
that “now we see through a glass: in an enigma,” seems 
clearly to indicate their. symbolic character. The descrip- 
tions of heaven which are given us, few have any difficulty 
in admitting to be symbolic. We have none that seem of 
any other kind. And this argues forcibly that the same 
thing should hold as to the pictures ‘of hell. 

Further, if the valley of Hinnom be taken (as must surely 
be done), as furnishing the HME Es Ww Hee DY. the Gehenna 
of the future is pictured to us,—* worm” and “fire,” which 
were literal in the first, are manifestly symbols as applied to 
the second, and scarcely their own symbols. 

Again, if Sitan be ¢ast into the lake of fire to be tor- 
mented there, it would seem that the fire must be other 
than natural which should torment Ai. And the ‘same 
must be said as to the rich man in hades. 

Finally, taken as figuros, these expressions have a signi- 
ficance and power which fail altogether when taken literally. 
The undying worm has indeed been commonly held to be 
the type of remorse of conscience, and this as bred of cor- 
ruption it would very naturaily represent. But then the 
fire unquenchable would almost of necessity be figurative 


also, and stand for the wrath of Him who is a “ consuming 


al 


“the 
finall 
and t 
to th 
the s 
This 
a cor] 
“ dest 
struct 
harms 
diftier 
Thi 
porea 


“and al 


which 
of mat 
But 
word 
with t 
tion. 
thougl 
many « 
Abrah. 
kingdo 
spoken 
Thes 
eternal 
of His 
hopeles 
hereaft 
picture 
Nay, th 
fact, un 
pears te 
need pu 


ott a ee 


; the 


rdul- 
evolt 
2am, 
odes 
men. 
ssive 
ran’ 
and 


| the 


vhat- > 


‘un- 
have 


ted, 
ems 
“rip- 
ulty 
n of: 
ame 


rely 
anna 
hich 
d to 


tor- 
ther 
ame 


igni- 
ally. 
o be 
cor- 

the 
itive 
ning 


ao 


fire.” With this would agree the title given to Gehenna of | 


“the second death,” as being complete spirjtual separation, 
finally by divine judgment, from God the source of life; 
and this again would give full and terrible typical significance 


to that millennial judgment with which Isaiah closes, where 


the subjects of the worm and fire are ‘‘carcases ”—the dead. 

This explains also wh y the fire can torment a spirit, and why 

: a corporeal being may exist in it unconsumed; or why the 
“destruction ” brought about by it need be no material de- 
struction. Everything, in short, in this way ‘is consistent and 
harmonious, as much upon the literal hypothesis seem 

difficult and contradictory. / ‘ 

This does not indeed do away with the thought of: cor-, 

poreal suffering, but it leaves the manrer of it unrevealed, 

_ and allows room for the difference of few and many stripes 


which the Lord clearly teaches, and which the conception . 


of material fire for all seems at least to obscure. 

~ But this is not ail the picture of the future woe which the 
word of God presents. “Outer darkness,” as in contrast 
with the light of’ heaven, is again clearly a spiritual concep- 
tion. “Weeping and gnashing ,of teeth,” is a different 
thought from that of. active and rebellious evil, which so 
many connect with the idea of hell. The anguish of seeing 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the 
kingdom of God, while being themselyes thrust out, is also 
spoken cf.* i 

These are the descriptions given to us in the Scripture of 

eternal judgment. Separation from God and good, the sense 
of His wrath and the infliction of it, remorse of conscience, 
hopelessness: these are the main el ments in that solemn 
hereafter. If.Mr. Greg will ponde them, he will find the 
picture he drawn anticipated in its essential features. 
Nay, there can be Kittle doubt but. that Scripture has, in 
fact, unconsciously to himself, furnished him, with'what ap- 
pears to him the product of his. natural thoughts. But I 
need pursue this no further. ‘The day fast hastens, in which 


* Luke xiii. 28, 


X 


THE ETHICAL QUESTION. 479 


480 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE, 


(to use his own words) “ everything which clouded the per- 
ceptions, which dulled the vision, which drugged the con- 
science, while on earth, will be cleared off like a morning | 
mist. We shall see all things as they really are,—our- 
selves and our sins among the number.” Yes, but too late, 
forever too late, for those who have refused to, face now the 
_ reality of what we are, and what things are, as seen by the 
light in mercy now held out to us. “The long-suffering of 
the Lord is salvation.” God warns, that He may not’ strike. 
Meanwhile man may. arraign His judgments and refuse His 
mercy. They cannot avert the one. They cannot, when 
once it is passed, recall the other. . , 


CHAPTER XLIIL 


LAST WORDS WITH ANNIHILATIONISTS. 


THE end of my examination is then reached. It remains 
_ to say afew words as to the general tendency and connections 
of the doctrines‘we have been reviewing. Many, who by no 
means hold them, are yet blind to the evil they involve. 
And in this way they gain toleration at the hands of num- 
bers; who learn to look on at their steadily increasing accept- 
ance with-an indifference which produces lamentable results. 
Quietly the leaven works. And Mr. Blain can say, with 
perfect truth, “a large number in the different churches be- 
lieve the doctrine, who say but little about it, except to its 
open advocates.” Nor.does the profession of a very large 
amount of truth hinder its reception, as humerous instances 

bear painful witness. : tet 
I wish to point out, therefore, very briefly, some things 
that are connected with it, and some fruits which grow upon 
this root of evil. The tree is known by its fruit, and the 

" fruit is here abundant and evident enough. 


t 


¥ 


hands 
No, tl 
in the 
feelin, 
bolts, 
Tf t 
not q 
in ace 
hundr 
tural J 
he aft 
he say 


views 


the Se 
Mr. 


mate ¢ 


- amid r 


“Te 
wisdom 


this pre 


ee. In the present chapter I shall confine myself to the -doc- . 
is trme of annihilation; and in the next take up the restoration 
ing : theory. ne : 
ee In the first place, the undermining of Scripture is very 
ies evident in many. We must distinguish somewhat, and give 
the due credit to the fact that a more respectable class of writers 
ie in this respect. have come to the front of late, especially in 
of England. Yet even among these the tendency is to be 
ae found. In the lower classes the tone of scepticism is un- 
ia oe mistakable. We are told that no Vindication: of eternal 
on punishment can be made. 
“Prop it up by popular opinion, or disguise and conceal it as . 
we may, it must ever appear to all rational creatures the ver 
essence of folly, injustice, and cruelty. Can we believe that the 
doctrine is taught in the < precious Bible, book divine ’ ? And is 
it so? Must our sense of justice and goodness in Him, in whose 
hands we are, float on a tempestuous and shorelegs ocean forever ? 
No, the effort to lock up reason and common sense much longer 
in the narrow dark cell of mystery will be vain. J ust, impulsive 
feelings, both of: saints and thoughtful sinners must burst the 
bolts, and emerge into light and relief,”* 
ains If this were a solitary statement, or of one writer, I should 
ons not quote it, but similar language is used by many. Quite 
rno in accordance with it, Mr. Ifudson gives us a volume of four 
lve. hundred and sixty-eight pages upon the subject, the « Scrip- 
um- tural Argument ” occupying sixty-seven. This single chapter 
ept- he afterwards. enlarges into a smaller volume,f “ designed,” 
ilts. he says, “to meet the convenience of those who rely for their 
vith _ views of future life upon the reading and interpretation of 
be- the Scriptures.”? : | 7 | 
» its Mr. Edw. White is still more frank in telling us his esti- 
ge mate of the word of God. In his “ Life in Christ ” (p. 393), 
nces _ amid much similar language, he uses this :-— 

“I cannot conceal my. conviction that the path of duty and of 
ings wisdom in dealing with such documents as the gospels demands: 
pon ~ this practical conclusion :—If they offer to us any statements of 

the 


* Blain’s Review of Beecher, p, 33. T “ Christ our Life,” — 


{\ ~ 
a5 


| , SO tee 
LAST WORDS WITH ANNIHILATIONISTS) 481 


482 ~ PACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. | 


Christ’s doctrine, by excess or defect conspicugysly disagreetng | 


with the facts, or with the plain sense of His teachirig as recorded 
by the same or other historians, resolutely to refuse to allow such 
exceptional misreports or omissions to interfere with the truth which 
has been learned by a wider survey of the evidence.” 


With many who are not as open as this the secret under-, 
current is yet manifest. ,It suggests to Mr. Blain that “ the 
book of Revelation can settle no doctrine,” and whether this 
one text “looks strong enough to vanish (? vanquish) the two 


hundred and ten opposing ones.” It suggests to the authors. 


of “ The Bible vs. Tradition,” that, of this Bible, such a passage 
“may have been amended by some officious copyist.” It 
_ makes Mr. Dobney deride the seeking to ‘the hieroglyphs 
of the isle of Patmos.” It reasons in Mr. Constable that if 
ithe. parable of Luke xvi. “ could be truly shown to teach 
[non-extinction] views, the only effect would be that of es. 
tablishing a contradiction between one part of Scripture and 
another, of of affording reason to think that this parable of 
Lazarus, despite the authority of manuscripts, formed no 
part of the original gospel of St. Luke.” ‘Thus the authority 
of the word is undermined,—that word which asserts for 
itself that “ali Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and 
is profitable for doctrine.” To seek to get the sacred text 
as perfect as possible, free from the real mistakes of copyists, 
is another thing; but to invent conjectural criticisms of this 
kind is but'the poor, vain refuge of unbelief, too timid openly 
to avow itself as such. Mr. Hastings’ own words, used as to 
one class of these, the deniers of the resurrection of the 
wicked, apply but too well to very many mote: ‘these pas- 
sages still stand, after all the attempts to evade them, to 
‘convert them into mere figures of speech, or to retranslate 
them in [such] a manner that they shall flatly contradict 
their originals !’* — 

This last mode of evacuating Scripture is with the lowest 
class of annihilationists (who are not the least popular) the 


one perhaps the most frequently adopted. “The Bible’ 


* Retribution, p. 74: 


(Death 
lics mo 
writer « 
to use ; 
urative 


(Death not Life, 


LAST WORDS WITH ANNIHILATIONISTS, 483 


- vs. Tradition” is crammed with new translations, specimens 
of which have been already given. But at-the other end of 
‘the scale, Morris’ “ What is Man ?” a book of tho most ex- 
travagant pretentiousness, is perhaps as full. Ellis ard Read, 
when Greek and Hebrew fail, bring in Syriac to their aid, 
yet do not know the difference between the singular and 
plural of a Greek participle, or between the verb é¢Za: 
(dexai) and the adjective de&ca (dexja). Thusthe minds of 
the simple are. thrown off their balance, and doubts insinu- 


ated even as to the honesty of the common translation, cal-_ 


culated to destroy all faith in that which alone, to ordinary 
readers, represents the authoritative word of God.* 

(2.) But there is another thing most evident and most dis- 
astrous in results. Mr. Hudson admits and laments the 
prevalence of' materialism among the upholders of the views 
he advocates; and he notices one consequenice, that the 
difficulty which results from thus conceiving of the wicked 
as’“ wholly dying” twice, and the penalty being thus twice: 
exacted, “has led many to deny that the ‘resurrection of 
the unjust ” signifies their being made alive.” This view is 
spreading among them. That, at the worst, “ death is an 
eternal sleep,” and there is no day of recompense or retri-- 
bution. What that leads to is plain enough. 

Mr. Hudson disclaims this materialism. Mr. Constable, 
however, with more reason, asserts its legitimate connection 
with annihilation. For if the cardinal terms of the contro- 


Versy are (as is constantly asserted) life and death, then it 


must be for annihilation ‘a point of first necessity that death 
should be extinction. If the first death be not that, why 
should the second death be? And moreover the words for 
destruction in both Greek and Hebrew are themselves in 


a ae 


* Mr. Blain says, “‘ The translators designedly covered up the truth ” 


p. 54): One of his subsections is headed, “ The Catho- 
lics more honest in their translation than the Protestants.” The same 
writer observes (p. 104), “The 19th century has regulated brains so as 
to use steam and lightning, and it will yet regulate them to use the fig-_ 
urative language of the Bible aright,” aoe 


o 
‘ 


joibsses heb seaomcuieas a. 


Se ee ererenscnaenan tare oe 


santos a ane 


484 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


most cases used for death, and can scarcely be pressed as 
meaning more than this. Mr. Constable has rightly, there- 
fore, urged that in consistency this meaning of death must 
be maintained. 8 

(3.) But this, as we have seen, cuts yet more deep}y : and 
Mr. C.’s logical mind carries it out further than many. 
Christ truly died. Nay, if He was one person before death, 
death could not make Him two; and this ove person lay in 
Joseph’s tomb. We must not think of any person else- 
where—'n paradise, for instance,—says Mr. Constable. But 
if that be true, what about the divine nature? Did that 
become inipersonal, or did it lie in Joseph’s tomb ? It isa 
noticeable fact, how much annihilationismi links itself with 
the denial of Christ’s Deity. With this also the Deity of 
the Holy Ghost comes into question.* If there be no spirit 
of man, is there any. Spirit of God? The passage already 
noticed in 1 Cor. ii. 11, links the two doctrines close enough. 
together to make any tampering with the one bode ominously 
the downfall of the other. Hence far and wide this view is 
also spreading. The 19th century may “regulate brains” 
(alas, what about /earts ?), but not the Holy Ghost. Itisa 
mesmeric influence, or something akin to electricity, if not 
rather even electricity itself. > 

(4.) There is another thing which naturally connects with 
,these, but is found much more widely. Sin is softened 
down in all cases. You must not ask man to believe in a 
greater penalty attaching to it than his natural conscience, 


* Mr. Edw. White, himself an annihilationist, shows forcibly that the 
materialistic argument may be carried on to atheism: “If man has no 
reason to believe that he posesses a ‘spirit’ in himself, he has no rea- 
son for concluding that the mind revealed in nature inheres in an Eternal 
‘Spirit’. . , . If thought is a function of matter, it is right to conclude 
either, pantheistically, that there is some governing thought which is a . 
function of the matter of the universe, or, atheistically, that there is no 
mind in nature, notwithstanding appearances. Mr. Constable will re- 
sist the conclusion. But Prof. Clifford, a more consistent materialist, 
stoutly affirms it (Fortnightly Review, No. 189, 1875).” (Life in Christ, 
p. 296, note). 


LAST WORDS WITH ANNIHILATIONISTS. 


dull as that may be,. approves. “The doctrine of eternal 
anguish,” Mr. Hastings argues, “how can it be received by 
the unbelieving ?” May we not ask that of a good deal 
more ? This Christ crucified—these “ things of the Spirit 
of God ”—how can the “natural man” receive them? 
Scripture vouches that he cannot: “ they are foolishness 
unto him.” By parity of reasoning we should alike discard 
them all. A 
_ Necessarily then the judgment of sin is lowered. Youn‘ 
are to accommodate the penalty to the conscience of the im- 
penitent. The harder the conscience, the less you can press 
upon it penalty at all. It may be doubted if they will accept 
annihilation even: nay, rather, it is positively certain that 
they will not. The argument is not’ without; danger there- 
fore to the theory it supports. And if “man. has No pre- 
eminence above a beast,” even in the highest thing he has, 
as Mr. Constable puts it, what is a beast’s conscience ? and 
what is the measure of a beast’s responsibility:? what  be- 
comes of the fall? Serious questions these, if we are to 
have anything left of Christianity beside the name.| The 
actual fact is, that this reasoning is being followed out to 
its legitimate result. As we have already seen, the resur- 
rection of the wicked is being denied by many. A beast’s 
end is thus simply and wholly a man’s end. And that 
means, there “is absolutely no divine judgment ai all. The 
wages of sin is death ; 7. ¢., simply what a beast suffers. Or 
if it be the suffering in view of death, then death alone is 
not its wages, and the most hardened suffers least. 
All have not landed there yet: in many ears “ after death 
the judgment” lingers still; but they have started on the 
voyage, and the y outstrip thm pilots. Another who | 
- ¢as had practical experience of the working of these views \ 
has written of it: “The effect in destroying responsibility — 
was fearful; and, in people of grosser habits, rejection of all 
truth, and immorality. The tree was bad, had a bad sap, 
and so was cut down, and there was &n end of it.” “And 
one of the chief teachers in the United States declares in his. 


486 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


book, that the deep distress of conscience and terror about 
sin committed was a base, servile fear and wrong. To one 
who had found he had lost the atonement, and the sense of 
responsibility out of his mind, and who asked him what he 
made of responsibility, he replied, it was impossible to re- 
concile it with his system, but he saw it in Scripture, and so 
did not deny it.’ | 
(5.) The writer just quoted has added elsewhere as to the 
effect upon atonement: “If sin means eternal exclusion 
from God’s presence, it is dreadful enmity against God now, - 
exclusion from God then. If death is the only wages of 
sin, Christ had no more to suffer for me. , Nay, if I ama 
‘Christian, He had nothing to suffer, if I die before the Lord 
comes. & have paid the wages myself. If it -be only some 
temporary punishment I had incurred, He had only that to 
' bear. ‘My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?’ 
has lost its force. It is in vain to say, He gives us life. _ 
He can, in itself, quicken without dying. If He died, He — 
died for my sins, and bore them. If death [simply] be the 
wages of sin, millions of saints have paid them. And if a 
partial punishment -be all I had to bear, it is all Christ had to 
bear. . The sense of sin I have, and its desert, is not being 
forsaken of God, shu® put from Him when I oe, what it 
is, but a temporary punishment, a quantum of offence, which 
is all I haveto dl hink of, and all ae had to bear, if any- 
thing.”t 
Let me say that, perhaps, none rise higher than this, viz, 7 
the substitutional sacrifice of life for life, the death of the cross 
no more than a martyr’s death, to which the Deity of the 
Sufferer gave all its oes aes mass go lower far, as, for 


ee en ee Tee a a a —. 


, ™ The Eternity of Punishment and the Immortality of the Soul, pp. 

135, 189. 

+ Ibid., p. 128. o 

t“ And\it is a truth never to be forgotten, that the infinite value 
which pertains to the one sacrifice of Jesus, arises, not from any inherent 
dignity .om value in man, as the subject’of redemption, nor from the 
nature or extent of the penalty due to sinners, but... . from/His own: 


- 


_ is the mechanical stamping out of a life desi 


LAST WORDS WITH ANNIHILATION IST, 487 
instance among 
and Mr. Ham. 
But the death of the cross w. 
It was that surely: the Prince 


down His lite in testimony to the truth that He had 
from heaven to declare. 


that, and much more than t 
for life. ~“ He who knew n 


‘was made a curse for us.” And that solemn 22 
which, as we know, 


self, declares to us a 


those not absolute materialists, Mr. Hudson 


nd psalm, 
the Lord on the cross applies to Him- 


; but in what that vicariousness involved. 
of life—no pain of’ death—no bitterness 
of persecutiori—could have wrung that awful ory from the 
Lord of life and glory, “ My God, my God, why hast Thou 
forsaken me?” That was the cup He dreaded. That was 
what the sacrifice involved. Not, as has been said, a quan- 
tum of sufferi g- But isolation from the presence and: com- 
munion of Ode who had been from His mother’s womb His 
trust and joy. It was the blood of One‘who had thus been 
laden with our burden of iniquities, 
His own body on the tree, that alone 
cleanse. The blood of a sin-offering, burned upon the ground 
outside the holy place, aad outside t 
“brought into the 
Even so Jesus suffered, the Holy 
of wrath and di 


and borne our sins in 


e vitals of Christianity ; 
blem of the existence of 


while instead of resolving the pro 
évil, it is a giving up of it rather as hopelessly insoluble. It 


gned for eter- 


laid down His life in 
Father, God” (What is Man ? 


a arenes a 


essential Deity, and from the fact of His having 
obedience to the commandment of His 
p..61).. +> 

* Heb. xiii 


48 no mere martyr’s death. : 
of witnesses did there lay 


Not merely in its being vicarious ; that. 


488 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE ‘STATE.: 


nity, given of God but resumed: by Him, as if defented in, the go” i 
object for which life was given. By that very fact ig. is iar 
triumph of evil rather than its defeat. “ 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


LAST WORDS WITH RESTORATIONISTS. 


Moca of what hffbeen said as to the doctrine of condi- 
tional immortality is true of the other forth of the denial of 
eternal punishment. Especially the quarrel with Scripture mal 
is even more plain, and its authority as a consequence more 3 beir 
directly attacked. There are those, as in the former case, ‘ plin 
who must be admitted as exceptions, whose arguments, how- and 
ever illogical, seek at least to preserve its authority. Yet _ crea 


‘ even Mr. Jukes maintains, as we have seen, that “taken in may 
; ) 
ay S ture 


dish 


already referred’ to, his av verment “ ay yo wath ress . blam 

-. has been laid on the cardinal fact ‘ that the Scriptures of the = perh 
-‘:: New. Testament contain two parallel and often seemingly no p 
 wpntradictory statements 4s to the last things, one of which, = vine) 
; afer being jealously sifted by hostile criticisms, DOES — anew 

Te ypular theology, and another which more than tatio: 

eS TATED Wtoration, and the final victory of good over sin, 2 
evil?” Still others speak thus of “irreconcilable antino- ment 
mies” in Scripture. Canon Farrar more openly and baldly Th 
alleges that the “isolated texts” which seem adverse to his loose 
view may be “‘a ponocenion to igriorance” or “ reflect. the affirm 
ignorance of a dark age:” Prof. Jellett urges, “ Even. if it about 

_ be conceded: that according to the most probable interpreta- the d 
tion of the texta which are supposed to contain the doctrine | some 

of endless punishment, they do. contain this doctrine, it may up all 
still be wee tes this decide the question ? There is no ri princi 


' ofr 


' of necessity, though in another way from annihilationism, to 


answer. .Man’s igrforance, his feebleness, his manifold temp- 


LAST WORDS WITH ‘RESTORATIONISTS. 489 


infallibility attached to the process of interpretation. The . 
reasoning by which the inspiration of Scripture itself is ‘ 
ascertained is not infallible. Probabilit yis all we can attaim \ 


to.” 


These testimonies might be indefinitely multiplied. They 
demonstrate not more the tendencies of Wiiversalism to a 
denial of the authority of the word, than they do the fact 
of that word being almost confessedly against. it. They 

' would not need to depreciate a testimony whiich was in their. 


own favor. The counsel for a case does not brow-beat his 
- own witnesses. 


(2.) The doctrine of-universalism, in whatever form, tends 


‘make light of sin. It represents it as a thing capable of 
being reached and done away by a course of salutary, disci- q 
‘ pline, and that in cases where all the riches of @od’s love 
and grace have been expended in vain. © Sin is thus made the ! 
creature of circumstances, by a wise ordering of which it | 
may be extinguished, and God as the Governor of His crea- Hl 
tures becomes responsible for its continuance. It +> His aan 
dishonor if evil continue, and He must at least sare the | 
blame of*it with man. He is responsible to save, Man is thie 
perhaps as much sinned against as sinning. lis life here is- 
no proper probation. “ What could have ‘been done to my ° 
vineyard, that I have not done in it?” admits of a plain 


tations, welNnigh balance his account with ‘his Maker; and 
sin, as a matter of human responsibility or of divine judg- 
ment, becomes evidently diminished to an indefinite extent. 
That full-blown universalism should be associated with 
loose morals is not, therefore, to be wondered at. . Dr. Rigg 
affirms: ‘The same universalists who speak great words: 
about the universal fatherhood of God not seldom also hold :' 
the doctrines of free love. It has been my lot to meet with 
some of these. . . who, in extraordinary rhapsodies, mixed 
up all these things, and whose practice corresponded to their 
principles.” But the practical result of the belief is not to 


v 
° 
~~ ‘ ° 


‘ 
at atin ncaa 


ines ish edna in titolo 


1 OS AEN Saas ame FR 


Seeseterneheweneraicanenete te ee 


ot ET ry ‘ N\ 
5 he : ¥ ; . 
. ee F Lo 


= 


< 


_ 490 ACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


’ be measured by the mere openadherents. There are masses 

‘ who readily take the license without caring to adhere at all. 

- The theory, if true, renders adherence to it or to anything 
else of very little importance in the eyes of many who would 
accept the consequences very gladly. And it need not be 
doubted that the circle of influence which such views exert 
reaches very far beyond the number of its professed advo- 
cates. Just here, indeed, its ripest fruits will be found ; 
man’s will set free from the restraint of divine authority, 
openly lawless, and completely reprobate. ! 

But those who cannot go the whole length of universalism, | 
as, for instance, Canon Farrar, but who either attach no limit 
to probation, or at least prolong it beyond the present life, 
cannot be acquitted of ministering to the same unhappy end. 
The meaning of a “day. of salvation” now, proclaimed is 

- lost, or at least:the point of it. If it be said that only now | 

: is preached complete escape from the need of purifying fire, 

- that to the mass of men is a very different thing, of almost 
infinitely less. urgency ; while souls praying, striving, ago-. 
nizing to draw nearer to the light, may be quite unable at any 
rate (as they teach) to escape that. How many will think 
it worth while to pray and strive and agonize to so little 
purpose? Haw many will<rather wait with closed ears to 
every warning for the fire that is at any Tate to do its work, 
and which is but the eonian fire of God’s love! For such 
souls, Canon Farrar, and such as he, spite of his protest, 
must be content to be responsible - and if the “eternal 
hope” they would fain persuade themselves of, be (as it 
surely is) a mere delusion, then are they responsible for the 
damnation of those who listen to and approve their teach- 
Ings. | a : 

(3.) And where is atonement ? where the value of Christ's 
blood-shedding ? It is well known that universalism in its 
complete development denies atonement altogether ; and to 
this denial all forms of it, however modified, necessarily tend. 
Mr. Jukes has no gospel; Dr. Farrarnone. The “ poor in 

spirit,” the strivers after the light go down helpless to 


sses 
all. 


1ing 
yuld 
, be 
xert 
lvo- 
nd ; 
rity, 


ism, 
imit 
life, 
end. 
d is 
now | 
fire, 
nost 
ATO-. 
any 
hink 
ittle 
s to 
ork, 
such 
test, 
rnal 
As it 
the 
ach- 


rist’s 
n its 
d to 
end. 
or in | 
s to 


and where is atonement gone? The den 


‘some may be involved in it 


LAST WORDS WITH RESTORATIONISTS, 491 


onian fire, because, if there be an eye to pity, there is no 
hand tosave. And there men become their own sin-offering, 
for the worm and fire of Gehenna speak of that. . They are 
saved by their own suffering, not by Christ's; and there will 
be souls in heaven by and by who can never join in the song 
of the blood-washed ones; if indeed there be any such song 
at all. For the many striving ever to get nearer to the light 
would no doubt gladly have washed their robes, but either 
it could not, or did not avail. onian fire was their sharp 
and only remedy ! : 2 } 
It is Scripturally certain that for those who count the 
blood of the covenant an unholy thing, and do despite unto 
the Spirit of grace, “there remajneth no more sacrifice for 
_j8ins."* And as salvation is the fruit of this sacrifice, and 
“ @onian firé'the alternative of salvation, and its opposite, its 
contrast,—those who go into it must find (if salvation at 
all) another than by Christ's work. This Mr. Jukes virtu- 
“ally admits. .The sinner becomes his own sin-offering ; and 
although under the law a spotless and unblemished offering 
was needed,~he has discovered that in the antitype God will 
not require that. Nor is vicariousness to be insisted on. 
A sinner suffering for his own sins is purified sufficiently by 
the process. For him, therefore, there can be no such thing 
as that “the Son of Man, must be lifted up. 
is for him unneeded. __ 

Thus, as God is justified in doing, and certain to do, all 
that can be done for His creature, a purgatory is quite capa- 
ble of taking the Place of Christ and His work. And at 
any rate the mass will go to purgatory. Carry that out, 
ial of “eternal 
judgment ” is thus the denial of the very “word of the be- 
ginning of Christ,”t and is essentially antichristian. That 
who are very far from. meaning ~ 
but the doctrine is Satan’s lie to 
; and wherever it ig fully devel. 
Witness the constant connection . 


this is no doubt quite true, 
destroy the truth of Christ 
oped it effectually does so. 


- * Heb. x. 27-29, + John iii 14. 


*t Atonement ; ; 


A92 FACTS AND THEORIES AS TO A FUTURE STATE. 


with unitarianism in the body that has adopted the name 
bl Universalisty a as its distinctive title. 

Here let us close: it is useless to proceed further. 
Beloved reader, vicarious sacrifice is God’s only means of 
‘blessing ag surely as Scripture is true and “cannot be 
broken.” ‘The faith of a saved man is a faith which can 
say with the apore “Himself bare our sins in His own 
body on the tree.” “ The Lord hath laid upon Hirsg 
iniquity of us all.” Jesus is now risen from the ded; a 
in testimony of the full acceptance of that work accobiplisied 
is gone into the presence and glory of God. The sins'then 
that were laid upon Him are gone. Whose are they? 
Are they yours? Beloved, they: are those of all, who in the 
consciousness of sin and helplessness, “have put their trust 
‘in Him” for their eternal salvation. Their peace is made. 
' Their sins, borne by Him, are gone. And the coming of 
Jesus will put them, without question or challenge, into the 
blessedness of His Father's house, which He went to prepare 
as their abiding home. It is your to choose, reader, whether 
you will have your “part” in the lake of fire with the 
devil and his angels, or with the “blessed and holy” of the 
first resurrection in the only really “ Eternal City.” 

-It may suit you, alas, tl soften down the terrors of the 
day of wrath, but what if you should find God just in in- 
flicting severer punishment than now your conseicnce, or 
your want of it, can allow as righteous ? O, ponder .those 
words of the very One who came to save! “Everlasting 
fire,” “undying worm,” are after all realities. They abide, 
the solemh figures of judgment to come. On the other 
hand, God’s grace invites you—whoso comes to Christ, 
He will in no wise cast out. 

Reader, if you be one of His redeemed, trifle not with 


that which undermines the reality of His blessed work, and - 


with that the reality of sin, and of its judgment. 
« A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.” 


THE END. 


Let 


Gen. 


Exo 


Judyes 
I-Sam, 
ae Sam 
XX 

jl King: 

x. 


v 


wv PAGE 


Gen. i. BO veecseccsccccece SiSiesencar 5A, 5 


SS A OR mate as 422 


Caieie sec ielce'e occ e cere ee tee 137 
Oot ee tee crew ene oeseee 466 
e@ercee eeee eeetrees ‘@e 51 

te teee ceeeeee Ol, 52 


x. 6... sa '¢ eieie.s'e. 06 eesie'cis were «2 434 
my ii 


Dihnseie esis Seed cece ce soecces 130 | 
cond | BATT Rea eg a ater aia 
XNXID 06. 7.910 /0:0.0 Beis’ Siaisro s'eerccaroe 44 
ENKV TW Sie cic ection eres coven coe, G5 
ee Wieinevaeduehic cone tees 146 


2 SIDR ace cao coees 42 
Exod, igs 5 Tes ous tets thet s chs 383 

La BESOIN AR iar eae nly 227 

XE as sisi ede oie ewes stare eerste 467 

NEN UDB levine alone oe 194, 228 
NANI cece dececesesoecie co 229 


XNNIV. OU, 7 occas Suse elareaigie v's latocs 
: Seve sstteteeeceeseee cere BEB 
Levsaisttce% cook we ceccreccseces: IO] 
NE tao sea es oho Siete leet at -317 


[XXiv. 19,-18..0., Sie e'e's wise Seleies cir v4 
Num, i lal ae See Nene Rae: 


39, BB. 6... Se baceceseoewee 147 

i XXvii. 16 Vee eeccccecc. ceececces BOD 
Deut. iv. v- Coote emcee cere coescee IR 

F viii. oe rtececeerseneecezeuces. 467 
MMe rib insisins ge ecie cee ice Sutin 435 
XXVGi. 61-63 0.0. ees eee eee 189 |. 


r XXN. hae eee ae 
XEN cues shee eran one dh 

Josh. ii, 11.2... o dnbieeees ee wee ee On 

Judyes viii, 3 Oe eee e eens cocceee 7, 10 

N I-Sam, XXViii... 2. eleisis a siesta bees 128, 129 


25am Xii. WS... eieislOatek nelemmeaecvns 146 
| RNA ee Biesiefavewleftte-vetes 51 
jl Kings Vile s Parsee Ses one RRO 


} evils ‘ TD 


ne 
= 
7s 
SS 
L 
2S. 
ga 
2 
x 
i 
: 
; 
: 
: 
c 
7 
: 
° 
Pt 
é 
: 
: 
: 
: 
mR 
& 
= 


1c hron, cite oe ees . OF 


f 2Chroi. £01 Sent 
PAdOD sem cenis eater opi cius 


iii. 13- Ces vabais cs Wa uea'e sd TSS 
* | x. 19.. oe 


NIV ees eee Sareea reared ooo ucI RG } 
DOiceresacec s 


se edccccccee oe TIN 


xix. 26 


en rere | 


RRM SIO Coors es oe ee ene AOS 
XXiV. 1-32... ete ecceenne ences MAL 


INDEX OF TEXTS: 


| Job xxvil. 3. 


Fe ectececcccceccccrces 40, 47 
sevens rietteeeeeeeeeereees IBM 


_Xxxii. Beeviveereses eieieislove eisieave 


18-30, one eseccccass 


tse 
vest enieeecsesses HBR, 134 
vi. 5 grit t ites ceteereeeees 


see edeoes eoesee 


a ee pee 


oD. Cee ee cere ca voeeres ee 


seve cccoeress 188, 189° 
Mel eer 423 


: alt 5 ee 


re ie 


Niecce Ce ecccccccccrcn 


Xe. 8, 9, eae ek 


ee cece ere Ce ee ey 


ciii. Di resooes 


civ. BW. BO. cca e 


siete ss cossroccees De 


te cereesecenvee dl, bl 


tree erecercaccccecccccecs es ae 


OXY. ee Ae rte, 


oe ey Nirah at Maia Rest ERE ee 
CXXXii. 13, 14. 
xxix. v Three ee teee tees eeeees 


ry eoreore 


Hes eccecee “237 


¢ Nill. Sree 


Dasten andes acta ted 
secee -seccecces. It 


Ree ecw see 


Mer Te lists Bhp passages not otherwise refe ‘ried to are no 


t viven in this indies. 


INDEX OF TEXTS. ” 


“ee aa he gata Ne Ae e 188 


xxxiv. 9, 10. 
xxxviii. 10 . 


18, 19 .. seecesecees 1202180, 142 


ececcscccrcee AF 


ce sere ee 65, 278, Brie 
se On fees saeco Seeibeieis welesieis 
Ixvi. is sere Sie, dveeeec ose eit eee eee 188 


6.9.9) Re (eee Creare Reed: i 
eXXxiii. 8.. ; 
Xxxvii. 1-14 


AMOS 1X. Die sepsis case oc ecw seevccece 
mica ive 1=4353..5.25256 eevee 235 
ae Se Seereestrosersce - 383-385 
vil. NB 20 eisicccebccs divecctccs 
Nah. i. lS.iccvscececces: covcccccccecorall 


2-433 


39 2.307, 308 
“xi. 21-24a.. ence ceceaes cccreeccos- Bil 
22 oc csccccoeesee  QUR 
xii. re Corea ececese coccces ee 


"33 
XVLOIBi oo eicceccwccscreess 
Pea cerecesrcccccccs 62, 7 7 


25-27... 
xr ie on eco 


as 


“31 AG. 
rarer es aviecsisiesec evens cree seco dus 
‘i ls78 


Po resenetenetarssaseess soi iege 
vin, We iveicaces seis weeeeee 
ix. 1 10 . “Cs rseeceesecetedeteooces 


: 285 
43-50 oc ccccccrcccvcccceee S10, dg 


X. BO...0.08 J ecccecccceccce 


. Perc ccccccccccccccscces 
~ 
vee ecencnvccccercccoece ans 
+ se cececmecerces 


ee eececccregcrscccrcccs wee 


PB=BG ss oscvbsecsc Sep e'es's aoe 123 
DO eaaeiscisscccecsocivs Cosi Seta — 
xii. 19-23... Soe nev eities 92 
23... 201 
47, AB een a ee eed ean 
XU]. WS ecscccccsvccccsce oocsee weds D 
EVE esceciccdocs seccseuceseescewlOl 
xvi. beicebeessciscieeles 101-111 
9.. se cercccccccccccccesces Oot, 466 
QUisSereesseeetescsece ss 00000. 300 
KIXSWivcvecscswcccscececestesces ety 
xx. 18 ge eccce scccccce coc evade 
27-38 eceoeereeerseaoereanrseons 217-220 
BA-36.. waco ccccces ren 
"BF, BB. cc ccccccccscs o 
XXL 43 ccc cence. seceee LIS, 118, 294 
Crewe receccacccsescccccce ee 95 
xxiv. SOMO. cicccesy zeus nitd 
Susie Wale'eelbe 016 s6.ecc cesses econ 


' John i. Sy de etecusecer esse ube ees 0000176 


eoeeeeccccoceccccce 


29.. 
fi. 19-22 .... 
iil. 6 .....05 


B.ccccceccce 


. 81, 32 


eacodegdectccecs &5 


--161 . 


-404 
«028 
1, 32 
- 5 


c PAGE 
John iii. a eee PE vesicles heen oe eivcee She - Xiv. 17, Sse e oe 
= ae ; 


36 

iv. 24.. 
v. 11, 12 oe oe 
24. ee eloteas x 
24-20. oie Wa wisiclaieie cece aces a re SP O8Oe Cees sees vcccvcnc ees 40 


: teeceee eee BI 
oe ede er emerenesces Ge ii. weiss sees 


POD C0 06 8000 8 de Cece eee se eee x 
vo eet e se tee ecowecccecses LOY | 
Ly 


ese eevee 


- 13, saSicensweuveses sue Mia 


ee cceeccese coe 248, x61 


\ 
POC e rede cece cccs coe. * 
ee eee 


tee Cece e ec cceceses ces QF 
icles 196 6 G'eie's cp’ sear ee i 


. tee cece cece eee. 160, 458 


“oe P80 e eee eenccccces eee. see. 


. 287 
A reverses ; Re orc c eens 00 440, ph 


Baer reat Be ae cee oe 

Se Scena seldeweseeee sna lin Phe sosawessdbssSeeedsosscue, rd 
i O Oe War gits tee vue eee eae ag 24-28... seile des sale since ses aut 
ee ii. Oi verted seesige ose oct 0043, 145 : 


1 oes eccccccccscccs oc cee. 193, B02 
ns [pe 20.31 va: Nec'ae’e coon sense cee: aos: 420 
x 36. 222,018 :8 PCP ec cees coe coos 92 


Or ececee coeccee. 163-165 
+. 22 


i 

! wane 
I. 59.0.0... Weiegesieeecccwcne 75, 115 | 42-50.. 
Vili. 20......... ee hcceas 0195, 197 | 


b 6 
eeecccae +e ec5oe 


2 “5 
| a ee Seren aca ESS ve dace 108, yeh 


sigrelersiele pisisinigveieeiocts ooetd, 114 Xvi 22...... Sie dis'beleiee eels eg oie 1S oe 

XXV. 16..... CR OoAee eee cooeeee196 | 2Cor.i.8...... fee seracc owen... 22, B 

Rom. LU Sy ei Oa 4 ceccccecge. 38 5 UT | peer 8 Oo rece rcccccccccce cons 155 

ii. 5-16... W100 siaic.bie 6 wieis psc bbe eck he AA! eee ere cesccc cece wee. 228 
Aveisetyauds eeccoet oaln »-.163, 164 iv. 11.0... ages Gd Sea aU ead ek a 

8-46, .. er eveneeasee neers eens ar 


Ory 


A Cee eee eeercccccoee «94 ee 

pao wt etetereeeceen ene B30 | i 24, 95 

O08 Ege are ae 

ee Aga to Chests scecee cs: ORO VD seeee ee seeseensveeee es sBOQ, 498 
19-91... Se eran ee 184, 400 7 os ae 


ses 466 
s desesheevertesces seeeee 21, 100 

Devers vores 22! in eg ott teteteeeeeesedB], 160 
tae cecccvccecoccesccce Pere xiii. 14. 


fe ere S teen aera ie HI case, Ste ee eee eceessees ces 204 
WEL 8,50 cance ce, Seeds eteeonescs JD IOI 28 
me PS BB eeeeee ie eeseseccens BB Geese ceelnsee scdaytin nice +407 


1 Bisse seeceeesssonececece IBI, “aie 
RAs ne Gn ecpneral 10 00. seeseeeseecnnee. 808, 402 
ae *@eerece ee60e . 39 


ee ee occ ewe rccerees 151 


am) 
ee ecrveecce ch 
1 


Rea es wooed. 000.487, 470 | - i bees 


3 
eee escwece Phil’ i. zt 
402 | 


AG cs ee ceccee 


24. Tee eS P C06 ee 


xiv. Be ccsseaseeaaes Abaateeees 402 ii. 10, ii. eieiee eee cores 


] on 
MOOS 0 l8Ce Reece Cee Z Cee " ; 


+ 


INDEX OF TEXTS. 


Se RE es Ota ieee wpa | 2-Peter li. 17........- 


QW. ccereccrccrsccccee sdI9, hii. an sees 
402 ; : 


14. eoeeeeeereaeraaesee e@reeer eee 


AV. 10 cc cccdiocccssccccsccceccssee4e 
v. 6.. oceeeesee eee s Qe | 
Wis Diiecedevccccescoesen'e | 


9. ecccccccccs Mie: 


16, .-ocscccccecce 


: + Tim. J. Diccccccceccccccccees » 2 269, 274 » 25-27. 
10.....- sceevccccseeel Qo, 202, 400 Ld. Bisbee cs cinqecccccecsccencveccenl: 
ceee "420 e tebecccecbos seecsenscooccves 242 


cocecccosccousecese 11470 


Titus i. 2. BCE OCOC 
ff, 21, J2... cee 

\ 411. 5 

Pailemon 15.. 


PVs SOIREE 
KVL. Liseeeecsegeceeeeeaecees cee 6 B03 


399 | XVIii. Bee eeeesseoceces seeee 
2-28.20 Sosie Sede cdeieee ss ‘221, 25 XIX., XX-vee cee rl pa, "282, 319- 340) 
x: Vee viseccnes Perret Sree ee 250 © xix.3. eccee eocce 340 
27-29. . seeere ee SOG a FOSSeHGerecees 491 i 
xi, 13-16. ove ccepercccscocssccsocclan 
~xih 9 cooee $6000 C80 Cede wee tice eec ’® 84 4 wemeceeeeeesesers sree eae rsebes 
: erocees ccccccccces -2 6-46, %5, ae i : 8 ecocoe @ececeeres eoeeceservoces 
11 25 sss esse See8 €.22.0ic.050 
~ James i. 9, 10.,..-- ocvcccmssecccseseeley 
ii. 25 2. eos sveseosee ecccvccece 


o . : : XXL. 1-5 croc seceseereweces 
1 Pet. iii, 18-20. 45, 75, 111, 296, 873-5, 4 on 4, Biccocsencsecccccs sae e404, 480 
IV. 6. -ceeeste coereees Pree oe ; 
17, 18... 
2 Peteri 14...... Sie cgeeeieseee 
15 


Bae ie aie eaaie ae naan 


a 


Amy, 


