Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 





^^TH^^^^^^^^^H 


^^R^^^^^^^^H 







I \ 



T ■ 



• I 







FEATHERS FOR ARROWS, 



i 



FEATHERS FOR ARROWS; 



0X> 



ILLUSTRATIONS FOR PREACHERS AND 



TEACHERS. 



FROM MY NOTE BOOL 









/I 













BY 



C. H. SPURGEON. 



LONDON: 
PASSMORE 8c ALABASTER, i8, PATERNOSTER ROW. 



1870. 



K 




i 



PREFACE. . 




)H£R£ is no necessity in these times to advocate tht 
free use of similitudes in public teaching. Far more 
needful is it to assist our brethren to find a supply 
of these indispensable aids to understanding. To some it is 
difficult to create a comparison, although they know how to 
use it with effect when it is once suggested to them ; and the 
most fertile minds are frequently stimulated to further pro- 
duction by reading the thoughts of others. It is not, therefore, 
I hope, an impertinence on my part to present to the Christian 
public a bundle of illustrations original and collected. My aim 
has not been to amuse the reader, but to furnish Feathers 
FOR Arrows for the servants of Christ Jesus. 

Whenever I have been permitted sufficient respite from 
my ministerial duties to enjoy a leng^ened tour, or even a 
short excursion, I have been in the habit of carrying with 
me a small No/e Book, in which I have jotted down any 
illustrations which have occurred to me by the way. My 
recreations have been all the more pleasant because I have 
made them subservient to my life-work. The Note Book 
has been useful in my travels as a mental purse. If not 
fixed upon paper, ideas are apt to vanish with the occasion 
which suggested them. A word or two will suffice to bring 
an incident or train of thought to remembrance ; and there- 
fore, it would be inexcusable in a minister, who needs so 
much, not to preserve all that comes in his way. 



VI. PREFACE. 

From the pencil-marks of the pocket-book my notes have 
been enlarged into more permanent manuscript, and have been 
of great service to me. Out of hundreds of metaphors and 
anecdotes thus collected, I have used the main body in my 
constant sermonisings ; but as enough remained unused to 
make me feel competently rich in illustrations, I determined 
to offer a portion of my hoard to my fellow workers, feeling 
the less difficulty in so doing. because the ingatherings of 
continual observation more than replace the material expended 
in this distribution. Moreover, indebted as every preacher 
must be to the illustrations of others, it is but just, that, if he 
be able, he should make some return : in that spirit my 
contribution is hereby offered. 

To the nucleus formed by cuUings from my Note Book, my 
readings, in an attempt to expound the Psalms,* have enabled 
me to add many quaint comparisons and ancient stories, 
which from their very age are probably newer than the latest 
novelties to modem readers. A few clippings from favourite 
writers, such as James Hamilton and William Amot have 
been thrown in almost of necessity, for one feels a sort of 
obligation, by the exhibition of golden nuggets, to give note 
to others of the mines where treasure lies piled up in 
glittering heaps. To make the gathering still more varied, 
scraps from newspapers and magazines are interspersed, 
— fragments preserved in such odd times and circum- 
stances, that out of what basket they first fell I cannot say, 
whether they are new or old I know not ; I can only say that 
they were new to me. The whole collection is now presented 
to teachers and preachers as a sincere offering of hearty 
" brother-help." If there be here a single illustration which 
shall assist one of my Master's servants in his efforts to 
impart truth, I shall be greatly gratified. Desiring to do this 
and every other word and deed, " in the name of the Lord 

•« The Treasury of David." By C H. Spurcbon. Vol. i. Psalm I. to XXVI. 
Passmore and Alabaster, i8, Paternoster Row. Price 8s. 



MH^. ... j^j 



PREFACE. 



Vll. 



Jesus, gfiving thanks unto God and the Father by him/' 
I prepared these figures and metaphors, that they may serve 
as feathers for arrows — arrows of gospel truth which I pray 
may be made sharp in the hearts of the King's enemies. 

According to D' Israeli's canon, "a preface being the 
entrance to a book, should invite by its beauty," but he might 
have equally well remarked that a preface being merely a 
porch, no one ought to be long detained in it. Believing in 
this last rule, and begging the reader's lenient criticism, I 
invite him to such entertainment as this little volume may 
afford : being myself, 

His willing servant, 



Clapham, 

February^ 1870. 





MY NOTE BOOKr 



ABASEKENT— To bo rojoiood in. 

When Latimer resigned his bishopric, Foxe tells us that 
as he put off his rochet from his shoulders he gave a skip on 
the floor for joy, " feeling his shoulders so light at being dis- 
charged of such a burden." To be relieved of our wealth or 
high position is to be unloaded of weighty responsibilities, 
and should not cause us to fret, but rather to rejoice as those 
who are hghtened of a great load. If we cease from office in 
the church, or from public honours, or from power of any sort, 
we may be consoled by the thought that there is just so much 
the less for us to answer for at the great audit, when we must 
give an account of our stewardship. 

ABSENCE FBOH WEEK-HIOHT SEBVICE8. 

"Prayer-meeting and lecture as usual on Wednesday 
evening, in the lecture-room. Dear brethren, I urge you all 
to attend the weekly meetings. * Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together.' " Some of the " dear brethren " de- 
ported themselves in this way : Brother A. thought it looked 
like raiUf and concluded that his family, including himself of 
course, had better remain at home. On Thursday evening it 
was raining very hard, and the same brother hired a carriage^ 



2 MY NOTE BOOK. 

and took his whole family to the Academy of Music, to hear 
M. Agassiz lecture on the "Intelligence of the Lobster/' 
Brother B. thought he was too tired to gOy so he stayed at 
home and worked at the sledge he had promised to make for 
Billy. Sister C. thought the pavements were too slippery. It 
would be very dangerous for her to venture out. I saw her 
next morning, going down street to get her old bonnet 
"done up." She had an old pair of stockings drawn over 
her shoes. Three-fourths of the members stayed at home. 
God was at the prayer-meeting. The pastor was there, and 
God blessed them. The persons who stayed at home were 
each represented by a vacant seat. God don't bless empty 
seats. — United Presbyterian, 

ACCESS. 

There are many locks in my house and all with different 
keys, but I have one master-key which opens all. So the 
Lord has many treasuries and secrets all shut up from carnal 
minds with locks which they cannot open ; but he who walks 
in fellowship with Jesus possesses the master-key which will 
admit him to all the blessings of the covenant ; yea, to the very 
heart of God. Through the Wellbeloved we have access to 
God, to heaven, to every secret of the Lord. 

ACnVITT— a Help to Courage. 

Courage maintains itself by its ardent action, as some 
birds rest on the wing. There is an energy about agility that 
will often give a man a fortitude which otherwise he might 
not have possessed. We can picture the gallant regiment at 
Balaclava riding into the valley of death at a dashing gallop, 
but we could scarcely imagine their marching slowly up to the 
guns, coolly calculating all the deadly odds of the adventiu-e. 
There is much in our obeying as our Lord did, " straightway." 
When the Lord gives his servants grace to follow out their con- 
victions as soon as they feel them, then they act courageously. 



MY NOTE BOOK. - 3 

First thoughts are best in the service of God, they are 
like Gideon's men that lapped. Second thoughts come up 
timorously and limpingly, and incite us to make provision for 
the flesh, they are like those men whom Gideon discarded 
because they went down on their knees to drink, they took 
things too leisurely to be fit for the Lord's battles. 

ABVESTT— Looking for the. 

I WAS told of a poor peasant on the Welsji mountains who, 
month after month, yekr after year, through a long period of 
declining life, was used every morning, as soon as he awoke, 
to open his casement window, towards the east, and look out 
to see if Jesus Christ was coming. He was no calculator, or 
he need not have looked so long ; he was no student of 
prophecy, or he need not have looked at all ; he was ready, 
or he would not have been in so much haste ; he was willing, or 
he would rather have looked another way ; he loved, or it would 
not have been the first thought of the morning. His Master 
did not come, but a messenger did, to fetch the ready one 
home. The same preparation sufficed for both, the longing 
soul was satisfied with either. Often when, in the morning, 
the child of God awakes, weary and encumbered with the 
flesh, perhaps from troubled dreams, perhaps with troubled 
thoughts, his Father's secret comes presently across him, he 
looks up, if not out, to feel, if not to see, the glories of that 
last morning when the trumpet shall sound, and the dead 
shall arise indestructible ; no weary limbs to bear the spirit 
down ; no feverish dreams to haunt the vision ; no dark 
forecasting of the day's events, or returning memory of the 
griefs of yesterday. — Fry, 

AFFLICTION— Attendant npon Hononr. 

In the ancient times, a box on the ear given by a master to 
a slave meant liberty, little would the freedman care how hard 
was the blow. By a stroke from the sword the warrior was 



I 



4 MY NOTE BOOK. 

knighted by his monarch, small matter was it to the new-made 
knight if the royal hand was heavy. When the Lord intends 
to lift his servants into a higher stage of spiritual life, he 
frequently sends them a severe trial ; he makes his Jacobs to 
be prevailing princes, but he confers the honour after a night 
of wrestling, and accompanies it with a shrunken sinew. Be 
it so, who among us would wish to be deprived of the trials 
if they are the necessary attendants of spiritual advancement? 

AFFLIGTIOK— Awakening Gratitiide. 

Afflictions when sanctified make us grateful for mercies 
which aforetime we treated with indifference. We sat for 
half-an-hour in a calf's shed the other day, quite grateful 
for the shelter from the driving rain, yet at no other time 
would we have entered such a hovel. Discontented persons 
need a course of the bread of adversity and the water of 
affliction, to cure them of the wretched habit of murmuring. 
Even things which we loathed before, we shall learn to prize 
when in troublous circumstances. We are no lovers of 
lizards, and yet at Pont St. Martin, in the Val D'Aosta, where 
the mosquitoes, flies, and insects of all sorts drove us nearly 
>to distraction, we prized the little green fellows, and felt quite 
an attachment to them as they darted out their tongues and 
devoured our worrying enemies. Sweet are the uses of 
adversity, and this among them— that it brings into proper 
estimation mercies aforetime lightly esteemed. 

A7FLICTI0H— Endears the Promises. 

We never prize the precious words of promise till we are 
placed in conditions in which their suitability and sweetness 
are manifested. We all of us value those golden words, " IV/ten 
thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burned^ neithef 
shall the flame kindle upon thee^^ but few if any of us have 
read them with the delight of the martyr Bilney, to whom this 
passage was a stay, while he was in prison awaiting his 



MY NOTE BOOK. 5 

execution at the stake. His Bible, still preserved in the 
library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, has the passage 
marked with a pen in the margin. Perhaps, if all were known, 
every promise in the Bible has borne a special message to 
some one saint, and so the whole volume might be scored in 
the margin with mementoes of Christian experience, every 
one appropriate to the very letter. 

ATFLICnOK— EfBMtf of, in diHiBirent People. 

" How different are summer storms from winter ones ! In 
winter they rush over the earth with their violence ; and if 
any poor remnants of foliage or flowers have lingered behind, 
these are swept along at one gust. Nothing is left but 
desolation; and long after the rain has ceased, pools of 
water and mud bear tokens of what has been. But when the 
clouds have poured out their torrents in sunmier, when the 
winds have spent their fury, and the sun breaks forth again 
in glory, all things seem to rise with renewed loveliness from 
their refreshing bath. The flowers, glistening with rainbows, 
smell sweeter than before ; the grass seems to have gained 
another brighter shade of green ; and the young plants which 
had hardly come into sight, have taken their place among 
their fellows in the borders, so quickly have they sprung 
among the showers. The air, too, which may previously have 
been oppressive, is become clear, and soft, and fresh. Such, 
too, is the difference when the storms of affliction fall on 
hearts unrenewed by Christian faith, and on those who abide 
in Christ. In the former they bring out the dreariness and 
desc^ation which may before have been unapparent. The 
gloom is not relieved by the prospect of any cheering ray to 
follow it; of any flowers or fruits to show its beneficence. 
But in the true Christian soul, ' though weeping may endure 
for a night, joy cometh in the morning.' A sweet smile of 
hope and love follows every tear; and tribulation itself is 
turned into the chief of blessings." 



i 



6 MY NOTE BOOK. 

AmiCnOK— an InoontiYe to Zeal. 

There is an old story in the Greek annals of a soldier under 
Antigonus who had a disease about him, an extremely painful 
one, likely to bring him soon to the grave. Always first in the 
charge was this soldier, rushing into the hottest part of the 
fray, as the bravest of the brave. His pain prompted him to 
fight, that he might forget it ; and he feared not death, because 
he knew that in any case he had not long to live. Antigonus, 
who greatly admired the valour of his soldier, discovering his 
malady, had him cured by one of the most eminent physicians 
of the day ; but, alas ! from that moment the warrior was 
absent from the front of the battle. He now sought his ease ; 
for, as he remarked to his companions, he had something 
worth living for — ^health, home, family, and other comforts, 
and he would not risk his life now as aforetime. So, when our 
troubles are many we are often by grace made courageous in 
serving our God ; we feel that we have nothing to live for in 
this world, and we are driven, by hope of the world to come, 
to exhibit zeal, self-denial, and industry. But how often is it 
otherwise in better times ! for then the joys and pleasures of 
this world make it hard for us to remember the world to come, 
and we sink into inglorious ease. 

AFFLICTION— Increased with our Strength. 

" I HAD," said Latimer, describing the way in which his 
father trained him as a yeoman's son, " my bows bought me 
according to my age and strength; as I increased in them so my 
bows were made bigger and bigger." Thus boys grew into cross- 
bowmen, and by a similar incr^kse in the force of their trials. 
Christians become veterans in the Lord's host. The afiliction 
which is suitable for a babe in grace would little serve the 
young man, and even the well-developed man needs severer 
trials as his strength increases. God, like a wise father, trains 
us wisely, and as we are able to bear it he makes our service 
and our suffering more arduous. As boys rejoice to be treated 




MY NOTE BOOK. 7 

like men, so will we rejoice in our greater tribulations, for 
here is man's work for us, and by God's help we will not 
fiinch from doing it. 

AFFLICTION— Making ns long for HeaYon. 

We had traversed the Great Aletsch Glacier,. and were very 
hungry when we reached the mountain tarn half-way between 
the Bel Alp and the hotel at the foot of the -^ggischom ; there 
a peasant undertook to descend the mountain, and bring us 
bread and milk. It was a very Marah to us when he brought 
us back milk too sour for us to drink, and bread black as a 
coal, too hard to bite, and sour as the curds. What then.? 
Why, we longed the more eagerly to reach the hotel towards 
which we were travelling. We mounted our horses, and 
made no more halts till we reached the hospitable table 
where our hunger was abundantly satisfied. Thus our 
disappointments on the road to heaven whet our appetites 
for the better country, and quicken the pace of our pilgrimage 
to the celestial city. 

AFFUCTIOV— Koble Piety nonrislied amid. 

" The pine, placed nearly always among scenes disordered 
and desolate, brings into them all possible elements of order 
and precision. Lowland trees may lean to this side and that, 
though it is but a meadow breeze that bends them, or a bank 
of cowslips from which their trunks lean aslope. But let 
storm and avalanche do their worst, and let the pine find only 
a ledge of vertical precipice to cling to, it will nevertheless 
grow straight. Thrust a rod from its last shoot down the 
stem, it shall point to the centre of the earth as long as the 
tree lives." Amid the sternest trials the most upright 
Christians are usually reared. The divine life within them so 
triumphs over every difficulty as to render the men, above all 
others, true and exact. What a noble spectacle is a man 
whom nothing can warp, a firm, decided servant of God^ 
defying hurricanes of temptat\otv.\ 



8 MY NOTE BOOK. 

AVFLICnOVH)T«miled te promote Joj. 

Our afHictions are like weights, and have a tendency to bow 
us to the dust, but there is a way of arranging weights by 
means of wheels and pulleys, so that they wiU even lift us 
up. Grace, by its matchless art, has often turned the heaviest 
of our trials into occasions for heavenly joy. " We glory in 
tribulations also." We gather honey out of the rock, and oil 
out of the flinty rock. 

AFFLICnOK— Beroaling Christiani. 

When the green leaves bedeck the trees and all is fair, one 
cannot readily find the birds' nests, but when the winter lays 
bare the trees, anyone, with half-an-eye, may see them. Thus 
amid the press of business and prosperity the Christian may 
scarcely be discerned, his hidden life is concealed amid the 
thick and throng of the things of earth ; but let affliction come, 
a general sickness, or severe losses in the family, and you shall 
see the Christian man plainly enough in the gracious patience 
by which he rises superior to trial. The sick bed reveals 
the man ; the burning house, the sinking ship, the panic on 
the exchange, all these make manifest the hidden ones. In 
many a true believer, true piety is like a drum which nobody 
hears of imless it be beaten. 

AFFLICnOK-Bight View of. 

Our crosses are not made of iron, though painted some- 
times with iron colours ; they are formed of nothing heavier 
than wood. Yet they are not made of pasteboard, and will 
never be light in themselves, though our Lord can lighten 
them by his presence. The Papists foolishly worship pieces 
of wood supposed to be parts of the true cross ; but he who 
has borne the really true cross, and known its sanctifying 
power, will value every sliver of it, counting his trials to be 
his treasures, his afflictions argosies of wealth, and his losses 
his best gains. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 9 

AVniCnOVS— TokAiii of Diyine Eogard. 

Lawns which we would keep in the best condition are 
very frequently mown; the grass has scarcely any respite 
from the scythe. Out in the meadows there is no such 
repeated cutting, they are mown but once or twice in the 
year. Even -thus the nearer we are to God, and the more 
regard he has for us, the more frequent will be our adversities. 
To be very dear to God, involves no small degree of chastise- 
ment. 

ARLICnOVS— Winning the Heart for CKkI . 

Payson thus beautifully writes : — " I have been all my life 
like a child whose father wishes to fix his undivided attention. 
At first the child runs about the room, but his father ties up 
his feet ; he then plays with his hands until they likewise are tied. 
Thus he continues to do, till he is completely tied up. Then, 
when he can do nothing else, he will attend to his father. 
Just so has God been dealing with me, to induce me to place 
my happiness in him alone. But I blindly continued to look 
for it here, and God has kept cutting off one source of enjoy- 
ment after another, till I find that I can do without them 
all, and yet enjoy more happiness than ever in my life before.'* 

AGS— Ko Care for Sin. 

According to JEsop, an old woman found an empty jar 
which had lately been full of prime old wine, and which still 
retained the fragrant smell of its former contents. She 
greedily placed it several times to her nose, and drawing it 
backwards and forwards said, " Oh, most delicious ! How nice 
must the wine itself have been, when it leaves behind in the 
very vessel which contained it so sweet a perfume \" 

Men often hug their vices when their power to enjoy them 
is gone. The memories of revelling and wantonness appear to 
be sweet to the ungodly in their old age. They sniff the etxv(^^^ 
bottles of their follies, and only msYi ^^-e^ c<i>a5ki^ "a.s|?cisv Xsfc 



10 MY NOTE BOOK. 

drunken with them. Age cures not the evil heart, but exhibits 
in a ridiculous but deeply painful light the indelible perversity 
of human nature. 

AMBinOV. 

Ambition is like the sea which swallows all the rivers and 
is none the fuller ; or like the grave whose insatiable maw for 
ever craves for the bodies of men. It is not like an amphora, 
which being full receives no more, but its fulness swells it till 
a still greater vacuum is formed. In all probability. Napoleon 
never longed for a sceptre till he had gained the bi-ton, nor 
dreamed of being emperor of Europe till he had gained the 
crown of France. Caligula, with the world at his feet, was 
mad with a longing for the moon, and could he have gained 
it the imperial lunatic would have coveted the sun. It is in vain 
to feed a fire which grows the more voracious the more it is sup- 
plied with fuel ; he who lives to satisfy his ambition has before 
him the labour of Sisyphus, who rolled up hill an ever-rebound- 
ing stone, and the task of .the daughters of Danaus, who are 
condemned for ever to attempt to fill a bottomless vessel with 
buckets full of holes. Could we know the secret heart-breaks 
and wearinesses of ambitious men, we should need no 
Wolsey's voice crying, " I charge thee, fling away ambition,*' 
but we should flee from it as from the most accursed blood- 
sucking vampire which ever uprose from the caverns of hell. 

APOSTATES. 

In the long hne of portraits of the Doges, in the palace at 
Venice, one space is empty, and the semblance of a black 
curtain remains as a melancholy record of glory forfeited. 
Found guilty of treason against the state, Marino Falieri was 
beheaded, and his image as far as possible blotted from 
remembrance. As we regarded the singular memorial we 
thought of Judas and Demas, and then, as we heard in spirit 
the Master's warning word, " One of you shall betray me," we 



MV NOTE BOOK. 11 

asked within our soul the solemn question, " Lord, is it I ?" 
Every one's eye rests longer upon the one dark vacancy than 
upon any one of the many fine portraits of the inerchant 
monarchs ; and so the apostates of the church are far more 
frequently the theme of the world's talk than the thousands of 
good men and true who adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour 
In all things. Hence the more need of care on the part of 
those of us whose portraits are publicly exhibited as saints, 
lest we should one day be painted out of the church's gallery, 
and our persons only remembered as having been detestable 
hypocrites. 

APPEABAKCE— We must Hot Judge by. 

Whatever truth there may be in phrenology, or in 
Lavater's kindred science of physiognomy, we shall do well 
scrupulously to avoid forming an opinion against a man from his 
personal appearance. If we so judge we shall often commit the 
greatest injustice, which may, if we should ever live to be dis- 
figured by sickness or marred by age, be returned into our 
own bosom to our bitter sorrow. Plato compared Socrates 
to the galhpots of the Athenian apothecaries, on the outside 
of which were painted grotesque figures of apes and owls, but 
they contained within precious balsams. All the beauty of a 
Cleopatra cannot save her name from being infamous ; per- 
sonal attractions have adorned some of the grossest monsters 
that ever cursed humanity. Judge theh no man or woman 
after their outward fashion, but with purified eye behold the 
hidden beauty of the heart and life. 

ASSXTBAHCE— Ezoellenoe of. 

Believe me, the life of grace is no dead level, it is not a 
fen country, a vast flat. There are mountains, and there are 
valleys. There are tribes of Christians who live in the low- 
lands, like the poor Swiss of the Valais, who live between the 
lofty ranges of mountains in the midaX oi \\\& xcC\a.'5»\s\a.^^^NKt^ 



12 MY NOTE BOOK. 

the air is stagnant and fever has its lair, and the human frame 
grows languid and enfeebled. Such dwellers in the lowlands 
of unbelief are for ever doubting, fearing, troubled about 
their interest in Christ, and tossed to and fro ; but there are 
other believers, who, by God's grace, have climbed the 
mountain of full assurance and near communion, their 
place is with the eagle in his eyrie, high aloft ; they are 
like the strong mountaineer, who has trodden the virgin 
snow, who has breathed the fresh, free air of the Alpine 
regions, and therefore his sinews are braced, and his limbs 
are vigorous ; these are they who do great exploits, being 
mighty men, men of renown. 

ATTEVBAHCS AT PUBUC WOSSHIF-IiLvitations to. 

In Edinburgh a Sabbath-school teacher was once visiting 
in a close, and in one of the top flats of a stair, found a poor 
family living in a small but clean room. From conversation 
with the father and mother, she soon discovered that it was 
one of those cases where, from the long illness of the father, 
the family had fallen from comparative comfort to poverty. 
He was now, however, better, and had been able for somg 
timh to work a little, so as to keep his family from destitution, 
but by no means to enable them to live in comfort. Having 
learned so much of their worldly concerns, their visitor next 
began to speak of their souls' interests. She asked them if 
they went to any church. " No," said the father, " We used 
to go long ago, before I took ill ; but we went no more after 
that.'* " But," said she, " you have been better for a good 
while." " Oh," said the father, " nobody ever asked us to 
come!" "Well," said the visitor, "111 ask you now," and 
she directed him to a church where he would hear the glad 
tidings from a faithful minister. Next Sabbath several of the 
children were at her Sabbath-school, and told her that that 
day their family had been at church. Since that day they 
have been hearers of the Word. H ow many souls are perishing 



i 



MY NOTE BOOK. IS 

in Edinburgh and other towns, "because, though all things are 
now ready, NOBODY ever asked them to come!" Will 
not the blood of their souls be required at the hand of those 
who profess to have tasted a Saviour's love, and yet make 
not one effort to pluck brands out of the fire? — Scottish 
Sunday School Teacher's Magassine. 

ATTBHDAHCE AT PUBLIC W0B8HIP— Tonng ihould be Trained. 

The question is often asked how shall we get our working- 
classes to attend public worship. The answer may be 
supplied by an incident of my boyhood. On the mantel- 
shelf of my grandmother's best parlour, among other marvels 
was an apple in a phial. It quite filled up the body of the 
bottle, and my wondering enquiry was, " How could it have 
been got into its place ?" By stesdth I climbed a chair to see 
if the bottom would unscrew, or if there had been a join in 
the glass throughout the length of the phial. I was satisfied 
by careful observation that neither of these theories could be 
supported, and the apple remained to me an enigma and 
a mystery. But as it was said of that other wonder, the 
source of the Nil( 



"Nature well known no mystery remains," — 

so was it here. Walking in the garden I saw a phial placed 
on a tree bearing within it a tiny apple, which was growing 
within the crystal ; now I saw it all ; the apple was put into 
the bottle while it was little, and it grew there. Just so must 
we catch the little men and women who swarm our streets — 
we call them boys and girls — and introduce them within the 
influence of the church, for alas ! it is hard indeed to reach 
them when they have ripened in carelessness and sin. 

ATTSHTIOK— Difficiiltj of Winning. 

BucHSELL, in his " Ministerial Experiences," says^" ^ ^"^s* 
surprised to observe thatior som^ SMiv!^"a:^^ ^.T\3&NaK.^^«^<2s«v V 



16 MY NOTE BOOK. 

thrusts its lips asunder ; and if the nectar be peculiar or re- 
condite, he explores all about till he discovers it, and then 
having ascertained the knack of it, joyful as one who has 
found great spoil, he sings his way down into its luscious 
recesses. His rival, of the painted velvet wing, has no 
patience for such dull and long-winded details. But what is 
the end? Why, the one died last October along with the 
flowers ; the other is warm in his hive to-night, amidst the 
fragrant stores which he gathered beneath the bright beams 
of sqnmier. 

Reader, to which do you belong? — ^the butterflies or bees? 
Do you search the Scriptures, or do you only skim them? 
Do you dwell on a passage till you bring out some meaning, 
or till you can carry away some memorable truth or immediate 
lesson? or do you flit along on heedless wing, only on the 
look-out for novelty, and too frivolous to explore or ponder 
the Scriptures? Does the Word of God dwell in you so 
richly, that in the vigils of a restless night, or in the bookless 
solitude of a sick room, or in the winter of old age or exclusion 
from ordinances, its treasured truths would perpetuate 
summer round you, and give you meat to eat which the world 
knows not of? — James Hamilton, D.D, 

BIBLK-Jadged by its Tmiti. 

A Roman Catholic priest in Belgium rebuked a young 
woman and her brother for reading that ^^bad book^ 
pointing to the Bible. " Mr. Priest," she replied, " a little 
while ago my brother was an idler, a g^ambler, a drunkard, 
and made such a noise in the house that no one could stay 
in it. Since he began to read the Bible, he works with 
industry, goes no longer to the tavern, no longer touches 
cards, brings home money to his poor old mother, and our 
life at home is quiet and delightful. How comes it, Mr. Priest, 
that a bad book produces such good fruits V* 



MY NOTE BOOK. 17 

BIBLE— Power of its Authority. 

The mother of a family was married to an infidel who 
made jest of religion in the presence of his own children ; yet 
she succeeded in bringing them all up in the fear of the Lord. 
I asked her one day how she preserved them from the influ- 
ence of a father whose sentiments were so opposed to her own. 
This was her answer : " Because to the authority of a father 
I do not oppose the authority of a mother y but that of God. From 
their earliest years my children have always seen the Bible 
upon my table. This holy book has constituted the whole of 
their religious instruction. I was silent that I might allow it 
to speak. Did they propose a question, did they commit a 
fault, did they perform a good action, I opened the Bible, and the 
Bible answered, reproved, or encouraged them. The constant 
reading of the Scriptures has wrought the prodigy which sur- 
prises you. — Adolphe Monod, 

BIBLE-To be Bead with Delight. 

When Mr. Hone, who wrote the " E very-day Book,** and 
was of sceptical views, was travelling through Wales, he 
stopped at a cottage to ask for a drink of water, and a little 
girl answered him, " Oh, yes ! sir, I have no doubt mother will 
give you some milk. Come in." He went in and sat down. 
The little girl was reading her Bible. Mr. Hone said, 
*' Well, my little girl, you are getting your task?" " No, sir, 
I am not," she replied, " I am reading the Bible." " Yes," 
said he, " you are getting your task out of the Bible?" " Oh, 
no," she replied, " it is no task to read the Bible ; I love the 
Bible." " And why do you love the Bible ?" said he. Her 
simple, child-like answer was, " I thought everybody loved 
the Bible." Her own love to the precious volume had made 
her innocently believe that everybody else was equally de- 
lighted to read God's Word. Mr. Hone was so touched with 
the sincerity of that expression, that he read the Bible himself^ 

2 



18 MY NOTE BOOK. 

and instead of being an opponent to the things of God, came 
to be a friend of divine truth. 

BIBLE— The Spirit more tlum the Letter. 

It is easy enough to be learned in the letter of the Word, 
and yet to miss the spirit. If no other instance were before 
us, the Jewish people would furnish us with a most convincing 
one, for they have wholly missed the meaning of the Scriptures, 
and yet, Lightfoot tells us, " They have summed up all the 
letters in the Bible to show that one hair of that sacred head 
is not perished. Eight hundred and forty-eight marginal notes 
are observed and preserved, for the more facility of the text : 
the middle verse of every book noted ; the number of the 



BIBL£-Why Priests Withhold it 

The true reason why the Papists forbid the Scriptures to 
be read is not to keep men from errors and heresies, but to 
keep them from discovering those which they themselves im- 
pose upon them. Such trash as they trade in would never g^o 
off their hands if they did not keep their shops thus dark ; 
which made one of their shavelings so bitterly complain of 
Luther for spoiling their market, saying that but for him 
they might have persuaded the people of Germany to eat 
hay. Anything, indeed, will go down a blind man's throat. — 
Gurnal, 

BIGOTBY. 

Some men magnify the importance of their own little clique 
of believers by denying the godliness of all who differ from 
them. They remind one of Bishop Racket's story. "At 
Wimbledon," says he, " not far from me, a warrener promised 
Thomas, Earl of Exeter, that he should have a burrow of 
rabbits, all of them of what colour he pleased. * Let them be 



^ 



verses in every book reckoned : and not a vowel that misseth ^ 
ordinary grammes which is not marked." 



^ 



MY NOTE BOOK. 19 

all white/ said that good Earl. Whereupon the warrener 
killed tip all the rest but the white rabbits, and sold 
them away, and left not enough to serve the earl's table." 

A sorry few would be left to serve the Lord, and preserve the 
name of Christ upon earth, if some men's judgments could be 
final. Blessed be God, the Judge of saints is not the rabbi 
of any of the rival synagogues. 

BODY AND SOUL. 

"Two things a master commits to his servants* care," 
saith one, "the child and the child's clothes." It will be 
a poor excuse for the servant to say, at his master's 
return, "Sir, here are all the child's clothes, neat and 
clean, but the child is lost ! " Much so with . the account 
that many will give to God of their souls and bodies at the 
great day. " Lord, here is my body ; I was very grateful for 
it ; I neglected nothing that belonged to its content and 
welfare ; but as for my soul, that is lost and cast away for 
ever. I took little care and thought about it ! " — FlaveL 

BOOKS— How to make them Intelligible. 

John Keble, the author of " The Christian Year," in a 
letter to Mr. (afterwards Sir) J. T. Coleridge, thus writes : — 
" Have you read a little publication of Miller's, which I sent 
to James Coleridge, and if you have, how do you like it? 
Lest you should think his style in this new book too obscure 
for the * Plain People,' I must tell you that he made Moliere's 
experiment, for he gave the sermons to his servant, quite a 
rustic lad, to read before he printed them, and the man said 
he understood them all except the fifth, which accordingly M. 
made plainer, till the youth professed himself satisfied with 
it. And his father, the clerk of the parish, had given the 
greatest proof of his understanding even of this the obscurest 
part, for he said to Miller, ' Oh, yes ! sir, I see what you mean, 
you mean such-and-such people (naming them) by the one 



20 MY NOTE BOOK. 

of your two classes, and such-and-such by the other.' I call 
this a very satisfactory experiment, quite as much so as most 
of Sir Humphrey Dav/s.'* In a letter to another friend on 
the same subject, Keble further adds : — " I wonder whether 
people that write tracts for the poor, generally take this 
method ; it seems mere common sense for them to do so, 
and yet one can hardly think they do." 

BOOKS— Tried by Time and Posterity. 

Call it by what name you please — dream, vision, or 
revery — we found ourselves in a large room, the walls of 
which were concealed by well-packed shelves of books, from 
the ponderous folio to the minute thirty- two-mo, and in all 
the variety of dress which a skilful handicraft could devise. 
While cursorily gazing on these intellectual stores, our 
attention was arrested by the entrance of two personages 
of mild and venerable aspect, who very courteously 
introduced themselves, and stated the object of their 
visit. They bore the significant names of Time and 
Posterity, and intimated that they had come to pay their 
semi-centennial visit, to weigh the merits of authors, and 
determine their destiny. The task seemed to us an herculean 
one, where the volumes were numbered by thousands ; and 
we were curious to know by what process they were to 
ascertain the character of so many candidates for fame. We 
might, however, have spared our surprise, had we reflected 
that Time was a gentlemen who had seen much of the world, 
and professed great experience, and Posterity was no less 
distinguished for the solidity of his judgment. They were 
well prepared for an expeditious performance of their work, 
and, in truth, we felt no small degree of horror in witnessing 
the results of their essay. By the way, we should have 
mentioned that they were provided with a capacious crucible, 
under which was burning a large and steady flame. Into it 
volume after volume was thrown, and the ordeal through 



MY NOTE BOOK. 21 

which they had to pass wa'S one of fire. " Goodly volumes, 
these," said Time, taking up a brace of octavos on meta- 
{)hysics, " let us test their quality." Placed in the crucible, 
they were instantly converted into cinders. "Dust and 
ashes," said Posterity. This was the doom of many an 
ostentatious volume, whose promising title availed as little as 
its interior embellishments. Time rather soliloquised than 
addressed Posterity, while subjecting volume after volume. 
He would remark, " Deadbom this ; its claims for perpetuity 
died amidst the types." "An old heresy under the slight 
disguise of a new dress." " Nonsense, fustian, bombast." 
A whole row of poets succeeded each other in their descent 
into the heated crucible, with no more sympathy on the part 
of the executioner than a contemptuous exclamation. What 
is called light literature could scarcely be kept in the 
crucible long enough to be converted into thin smoke. Whole 
tons of periodicals and reviews shared the same fate. Oc- 
casionally we observed an unscorched leaf or two remained 
in the crucible, which Posterity carefully gathered and 
deposited in his portefeuille. At intervals^ a whole volume 
would escape — this, however, was very rare; for in the 
instances in which they preserved their original shape, large 
portions of these fortunate volumes were burned out. For 
the most part, the large books fared worse than the smaller 
ones, from which we were led to infer, that facility in writing 
was quite a different thing from ability, and that a lumbering 
ship may be dashed on the rocks, over which a small boat 
may safely ride. Whole piles of periodicals (our own did not 
entirely escape) were soon converted into ashes. " Fabrica- 
tions," said Time, as he hurled volume after volume of history 
into the crucible. Some leaves, however, of most of them 
escaped, out of which Posterity remarked, he would make 
up a small volume of true history worthy of preservation. 
Many books of religious controversy, and many more of 
worldly controversies on all subjects went in with the 



22 MY NOTE BOOK. 

ominously expressed doom, " Dust and ashes," and so they 
came out. We perceived a most offensive effluvium arise, as 
certain " Philosophical Disquisitions,'' and " Light of Reason " 
were submitted to the fiery test. Thus went forward the 
process, the further details of which might be tedious to 
enumerate, and in a very brief time the g^at library had so 
far disappeared that Posterity carried off what was left in 
a small but beautiful cabinet, made of enduring materials. 
We were left to wonder how human brains and iron presses 
worked to so little effect in this world of ours. — Presbyterian, 

BOLDITESS (holy)— Congrnous with fhe Goipel. 

Holy boldness honours the gospel. In the olden times, 
when Oriental despots had things pretty much their own 
way, they expected all ambassadors from the West to lay 
their mouths in the dust if permitted to appear before his 
Celestial Brightness, the Brother of the Sun and the Cousin 
of the Nioon. Certain money-loving traders agreed to all 
this, and ate dust as readily as reptiles ; but, when England 
sent her ambassadors abroad, the daring islanders stood 
bolt-upright. They were told that they could not be indulged 
with a vision of the Brother of the Sun and Cousin of the 
Moon, without going down on their hands and knees. " Very 
well," said the Englishmen, " we will dispense with the luxury ; 
but tell his Celestial Splendour, that it is very likely that his 
Serenity will hear our cannon at his palace gates before long, 
and that their booming is not quite so harmless as the cooing 
of his Sublimity's doves." When it was seen that ambassadors 
of the British Crown were no cringing petitioners, our empire 
rose in the respect of Oriental nations. It must be just so 
with the cross of Christ. Our cowardice has subjected the 
gospel to contempt. Jesus was humble, and his servants 
must not be proud ; but Jesus was never mean or cowardly, 
nor must his servants be. There was no braver man than 
Christ upon earth. He could stoop to save a soul, but he 



MY NOTE BOOK. 23 

would stoop to nothing by which his character might be 
compromised, or truth and righteousness insuhed. To preach 
the gospel boldly is to deliver it as such a message ought to 
be delivered. Blush to preach of a dying Saviour? Apologise 
for talking of the So^ of God condescending to be made 
man, that he might redeem us from all iniquity? Never ! 
Oh ! by the grace of God let us purpose, with Paul, " to be 
yet more bold," that the gospel may be yet more fully preached 
throughout all ranks of mankind. 

** I'll preach thy Word though kings should hear, 
Nor yield to sinful shame." 

BBEVITT. 

Dr. Cotton Mather wrote over his study-door in large 
letters, BE SHORT. Callers upon ministers will please 
make a note of this ; as also brethren who are lengthy at the 
prayer-meeting ; Sunday-school teachers, in all their devo- 
tional exercises and addresses ; speakers at public meetings, 
who have nothing to say ; and ministers who are given to 
prosiness. 

CABNAL SECITRITT. 

A NUMBER of men are upstairs in a house, amusing them- 
selves with a game of cards. What is that ? The window is 
red ! What is that cry in the streets ? " The house is on fire ! " 
says one. " Oh," answers another, " shuffle the cards again, 
let us finish the game ; we have plenty of time." " Fire / 
Fire / Fire /" The cry rises more sharply from the -streets, 
but the gamblers continue their game. One of them 
swaggeringly boasts, " It's all right, my brave boys, yon door 
leads to the roof, and we can get out at the last minute. I 
know the way over the leads— it's all right, go ahead with 
the game." Presently one of them nervously enquires, " Are 
you sure that we can get through that door ? " and Vv^ ^g^Rs* 
to try, but finds it locked, "l^evet tsvytAJ' \^ ^^ •aKfii«'et% 



24 MY NOTE BOOK. 

"I have the key." "But are you sure you have the key?" 
"Oh, 'yes ! I am sure I have, here it is ; try it for yourself, 
and do not be such a coward, man ; try it." The man tries 
the key. " It will not turn," says he. " Let me try," says his 
friend. He puts it in the lock, but lo, it will not turn ! " O 
God/*' he shrieks, *^ifs the wrong key P* Now, sirs, will ye 
go back to your game again ? No, now they will strain 
every nerve, and labour with might and main to open the door, 
only to find that it is all too late for them to escape. 

So many of our hearers are saying, " Oh, yes ! what the 
preacher says is well enough, but you know we can repent 
whenever we like ; we have power to obtain the grace of 
God whenever we please ; we know the way ; have we not 
been told over and over again simply to trust Christ? — 
and we can do that whenever we please — we are safe 
enough." Ah^ but suppose you cannot believe whenever you 
please f Suppose the day shall come when you shall call 
upon the Lord, and he will not answer ; when you 
shall stretch out your hand, but no man shall regard ! Sup- 
pose you should one day cry, " Lord, Lord, open to us," and the 
answer should be, " I never knew you, depart, ye cursed ! " 
O procrastinator, if you think that you can repent now, why 
do you not repent now f You believe that you have full power 
to do so ! Oh, do it, do it, and do not trifle with that power, 
lest when the power is gone, you find, too late, that in one sense 
you never possessed it I 

OEKSOBIOirSKESS-'Who moit Guilty o£ 

Pedley, who was a well-known natural simpleton, was 
wont to say, " God help the fool." None are more ready to 
pity the folly of others than those who have a small share of 
wit themselves. " There is no love among Christians," cries 
the man who is destitute of true charity. " Zeal has vanished," 
exclaims the idle talker. " O for more consistency," groans 
out the hypocrite. " We want more vital godliness," protests 



MY NOTE BOOK. 25 

the false pretender. As in the old legend, the wolf preached 
against sheep-stealing, so very many hunt down those sins in 
others which they gladly shelter in themselves. 

CHANOE— Love ot 

It will be found that they are the weakest-minded and the 
hardest-hearted men that most love variety and change; for the 
weakest-minded are those who both wonder most at things new, 
and digest worst things old ; in so far that everything they 
have lies rusty, and loses lustre from want of use. Neither 
do they make any stir among their possessions, nor look 
over them to see what may be made of them, nor keep any 
great store, nor are householders with storehouses of things 
new and old ; but they catch at the new-fashioned garments, 
and let the moth and thief look after the rest ; and the 
hardest-hearted men are those that least feel the endearing 
and binding power of custom, and hold on by no cords of 
affection to any shore, but drive with the waves that cast up 
mire and dirt. — J^oAn Ruskin, 

GEABITTHSpies out the Good Points in all. 

Mr. Jameson says, "The following beautiful epilogue 
had a powerful effect on my mind:" — "Jesus," says the 
story, " arrived one evening at the gates of a certain city, 
and he sent his disciples forward to prepare supper while he 
himself, intent on doing good, walked through the streets into 
the market-place. And he saw, at the comer of the market, 
some people gathered together looking at some object on the 
ground ; and he drew near to see what it might be. It was a 
dead dog with a halter round his neck, by which he appeared 
to have been dragged through the dirt ; and a viler, a more 
abject, a more unclean thing never met the eyes of man. And 
those who stood by looked on with abhorrence. ' Faugh !' 
said one, stopping his nose, ' it pollutes the air !' ' How lo^SL^ 
said another, ' shall this foul beast otten"^ omx ^v^dX."^ *- Va<^«^ 



26 MY NOTE BOOK. 

at his torn hide/ said a third, ' one could not even cut a shoe 
out of it.' ' And his ears/ said a fourth, ' all draggled and 
bleeding.' ' No doubt/ said a fifth, * he has been hanged for 
thieving.' And Jesus heard them, and looking down com- 
passionately on the dead creature, he said, * Pearls are not 
equal to the whiteness of his teeth.' Then the people turned 
to him with amazement, and said among themselves, 
* Who is this ? This must be Jesus of Nazareth, for only he 
could find something to pity and approve even in a dead 
dog.' And, being ashamed, they bowed their heads before 
him, and went each on his way." 

"I can recall at this hour the vivid, yet softening and 
pathetic, impression left on my fancy by this old Eastern 
story. It gave me pain in my conscience, for it seemed 
thenceforward so easy and so vulgar to say satirical things, 
and so much nobler to be benign and merciful ; and I took 
the lesson so home that I was in great danger of falling into 
the opposite extreme — of seeking the beautiful even in the 
midst of the corrupt and the repulsive." 

OHHiDSEN— Perieyeranoe Heeded in Teaching. 

In dibbling beans the old practice was to put three in each 
hole: one for the worm, one for the crow, and one to live and 
produce the crop. In teaching children, we must give line 
upon line, and precept upon precept, repeating the truth 
which we would inculcate, till it becomes impossible for 
the child to forget it. We may well give the lesson once 
expecting the child's frail memory to lose it ; twice, reckoning 
that the devil, like an ill bird, will steal it ; thrice, hoping that 
it will take root downward, and bring forth fruit upward to 
the glory of God. 

OmLDBEN-their Future. 

In the early French revolution, the schoolboys of Bourges, 
from twelve to seventeen years of age, formed themselves into 



MY NOTE BOOK. 27 

a Band of Hope. They wore a uniform, and were taught drill. 
On their holidays, their flag was unfurled, displaying in shining 
letters the sentence — "Tremblez, Tyrans, Nous grand- 
irons!" {Tremble, Tyrants, we shall grow up!). Without 
any charge of spurious enthusiasm, we may, in imagination, 
hear the shouts of confidence and courage, uttered by the 
young Christians of the future, as they say, "Tremble, O 
enemy, we are growing up for God !" — Mr, S. R, Pattison^s 
Address at the Meeting of the Baptist Union, 1869. 

CfEBIST— his Eye our StiqiiiltLS. 

There is a touching fact related in a history of a Highland 
chief, of the noble house of McGregor, who fell wounded by 
two balls, at the battle of Prestonpans. Seeing their chief 
fall, the clan wavered, and gave the enemy an advantage. 
The old chieftain, beholding the effect of his disaster, raised 
himself up on his elbow, while the blood gushed in streams 
from his wounds, and cried aloud, " I am not dead, my 
children ; I am looking at you to see you do your duty." 
Thes*^ words revived the sinking courage of his brave High- 
landers. There was a charm in the fact that they still fought 
under the eye of their chief. It roused them to put forth 
their mightiest energies, and they did all that human strength 
could do to turn and stem the dreadful tide of battle. 

And is there not a charm to thee, O believer, in the fact that 
you contend in the battle-field of life under the eye of your 
Saviour ? Wherever you are, however you are oppressed by 
foes, however exhausted by the stern strife with evil, the eye 
of Christ is fixed most lovingly upon thee. Nor is Jesus the 
only observer of your conduct. You are also " a spectacle 
unto angels.^ You are " compassed about by a cloud of wit- 
nesses." Human and angelic minds, animated, the good by 
love, and the evil by hate, are the spectators of your deeds. 
Thus is the theatre of your life made sublime ; and ^ovsl ^cs^- 
tend for salvation under circumstatic^s svx^cvetyjO^ 'gt-asv^^'^^.^ 



20 MY NOTE BOOK. 

with results before you sufficiently awful, to arouse your most 
latent powers, and to stimulate you to strive bravely, vigor- 
ously, and perseveringly even unto victory. — D, Wise, 

CHBIST— To be Followed above all. 

In a letter of Abelard to Eloisa, the following paragraph 
occurs : — " I will be no philosopher, if so be I must needs 
fight against St. Paul ; I will be no Aristotle, if so be I be 
separated from Christ." If all students were thus resolved to 
hold with the great Teacher at all hazards, we should not see 
such frequent victims of "philosophy, falsely so called." 
Unlettered ignorance is a great evil, but learned ignorance is 
worse, and such is all learning which decoys the heart from 
Jesus. 

CHRIST— Love of, Proved. 

In the French revolution, a young man was condemned to 
the guillotine, and shut up in one of the prisons. He was 
greatly loved by many, but there was one who loved him more 
than all put together. How know we this ? It was his own 
father, and the love he bore his son was proved in this way : 
when the lists were called, the father, whose name was exactly 
the same as the son's, answered to the name, and the father 
rode in the gloomy tumbril out to the place of execution, and 
his head rolled beneath the axe instead of his son's, a victim 
to mighty love. See here an image of the love of Christ to 
sinners ; for thus Jesus died for the ungodly. 

CHBI8T— the Sonl'i only Defence. 

There is an ancient parable which says that the dove 
once made a piteous complaint to her fellow birds, that 
the hawk was a most cruel tyrant, and was thirsting for 
her blood. One counselled her to keep below — ^but the 
hawk can stoop for its prey ;' another advised her to soar aloft — 



MY NOTE BOOK. 29 

but the hawk can mount as high as she. A third bade her 
hide herself in the woods, but alas ! these are the hawk's own 
estates, where he holds his court. A fourth recommended 
her to keep in the town, but there man hunted her, and she 
feared that her eyes would be put out by the cruel falconer to 
make sport for the hawk. At last one told her to rest herself 
in the clefts of the rock, there she would be safe, violence 
itself could not surprise her there. 

The meaning is easy ; reader, do not fail to catch it, 
and to act upon it. The dove is thy poor defenceless 
soul. Satan is thy cruel foe ; wouldst thou not escape 
from him ? Thy poverty cannot protect thee, for sin can 
stoop to the poor man's level and devour him in the 
cottage, and drag him to hell from a hovel. Thy riches are 
no security, for Satan can make these a snare to thee, and if 
thou shouldst mount ever so high, the bird of prey can follow 
thee and rend thee in pieces ! The busy world with all its 
cares cannot shelter thee, for here it is that the great enemy 
is most at home ; he is the prince of this world, and seizes 
men who find their joys therein as easily as a kite lays hold 
upon a sparrow. Nor can retirement secure you, for there 
are sins peculiar to quietude, and hell's dread vulture soars 
over lonely solitudes to find defenceless souls, and rend them 
in pieces. There is but one defence. O may you and I fly 
to it at once ! Jesus was wounded for sin ; faith in him saves 
at once and for ever. 

CHRIST JESUS— the Harrow of Theology. 

The late venerable and godly Dr. Archibald Alexander, of 
Princeton, United States, had been a preacher of Christ for 
sixty years, and a professor of divinity for forty. He died on 
the 22nd October, 1851. On his death-bed, he was heard to 
say to a friend, "All my theology is reduced to this nar- 
row compass — Jestis Christ came into the world to save 
sinners!* 



80 MY NOTE BOOK. 

OHBIST— our only Hope. 

On a huge cross by the side of an Italian highway hung a 
hideous caricature of the Beloved of our souls, who poured 
out his life for our redemption. Out of reverence to the 
living Christ we turned aside, disgusted from the revolting 
image, but not until we had espied the words Spes unica, 
in capitals over its head. Here was truth emblazoned on an 
idol. Yes, indeed, Jesus, our now exalted, but once crucified 
Lord is the sole and only hope of man. Assuredly, O Lord 
Jesus, thou art spes unica to our soul. 

" Other refuge have we none, 
Hangs our helpless soul on thee." 

We found this diamond in the mire of superstition : does it 
sparkle any the less ? 

iSBXUSl—wx oxdy Beit. 

My heart can have no rest, unless it leans on Jesus Christ 
wholly^ and then it feels his peace. But I am apt to leave 
my resting-place, and when I ramble from it, my heart will 
quickly brew up mischief. Some evil temper now begins to 
boil, or some care would fain perplex me, or some idol wants 
to please me, or some deadness or some lightness creeps upon 
my spirit, and communion with my Saviour is withdrawn. 
When these thorns stick in my flesh, I do not try, as hereto- 
fore, to pick them out with my own needle, but carry all 
complaints to Jesus, casting every care upon him. His office 
is to save, and mine to look for help. — John Berridge, 

CfHBIST— Biohei of Ms Grace. 

Sir Richard Whittington entertained King Henry V. at 
the Guildhall with unparalleled magnificence. The braziers 
in the hall were supplied with logs of rare, sweet-scented 
wood for fuel ; but they burned with a far more delicious 
fragrance when the noble citizen bringing forth the king's 



MY NOTE BOOK. 31 

bonds for the repayment of the large sum of ;^6o,ooo (equal 
to £goofioo now), thrust them into the blazing fire, saying, that 
he was too happy thus to discharge the king's obligations. 
When the handwriting which was against us is put away, we 
receive a choice mercy indeed. That blessed fire of Christ's 
most fragrant sufferings hath consumed all his people's sins ; 
this is royal bounty with an emphasis. 

CHBI8T— Sympathy with hii People. 

" If," says Augustine, " a man should come up to embrace 
thee, to kiss and honour thee upward, and beneath with a 
pair of shoes beaten full of nails, tread upon thy bare foot ; 
the head shall despise the honour done unto it, and for the 
foot that smarteth, say. Why treadest thou upon me ? So 
when feigned gospellers honour Christ our Head, sitting in 
heaven, and oppress his members on earth, the Head shall 
speak for the feet that smart, and say. Why treadest thou on 
me ?" Paul had a zeal toward God, but he did tread upon 
Christ's feet on earth, for whom the Head crieth forth of 
heaven, " Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ?" Although 
Christ sitteth on the right hand of his Father, yet lieth he on 
earth ; he suffereth all calamities here on earth, he is many 
times evil entreated here on earth. — Bernard Gilpin, 

CHBI8T— fhe Preaoher^i Theme. 

The pulpit is intended to be a pedestal for the cross, 
though, alas ! even the cross itself, it is to be feared, is some- 
times used as a mere pedestal for the preacher's fame. We 
may roll the thunders of eloquence, we may dart the corusca- 
tions of genius, we may scatter the flowers of poetry, we may 
diffuse the light of science, we may enforce the precepts of 
morality, from the pulpit ; but if we do not make Christ the 
great subject of our preaching, we have forgotten our errand, 
and shall do no good. Satan trembles at nothing but the 
cross : at this he does tremble ; and if we wovsld^'^^Xx's^^iNs* 



82 MY NOTE BOOK. 

power, and extend that holy and benevolent kingdom, which 
is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, it must be 
by means of the CROSS. — 7* A, James, 

CHBIST— the Preaoher'g great Theme. 

The best sermon is that which is fullest of Christ A 
Welsh minister, when preaching at the chapel of my dear 
brother Jonathan George, was saying that Christ was the 
sum and substance of the gospel, and he broke out into the 
following story : — A young man had been preaching in the 
presence of a venerable divine, and after he had done, he 
foolishly went to the old minister and enquired, " What do you 
think of my sermon, sir ? " "A very poor sermon indeed/' 
said he. " A poor sermon !" said the young man, " it took me 
a long time to study it." " Ay, no doubt of it." " Why, then, 
do you say it was poor ; did you not think my explanation oif 
the text to be accurate ? " " Oh, yes," said the old preacher, 
*' very correct indeed." " Well, then, why do you say it is a 
poor sermon ? Didn't you think the metaphors were appro- 
priate, and the arguments conclusive?" "Yes, they were 
very good, as far as that goes, but still it was a very poor 
sermon." "Will you tell me why you think it a poor 
sermon ? " " Because," said he, ** there was no Christ in it." 
" Well," said the young man, " Christ was not in the 
text ; we are not to be preaching Christ always, we must 
preach what is in the text." So the old man said, " Don't 
you know, young man, that from every town, and every 
village, and every little hamlet in England, wherever it may 
be, there is a road to London ? " " Yes," said the young man. 
" Ah ! " said the old divine, " and so from every text in Scrip- 
ture there is a road to the metropolis of the Scriptures, that is 
Christ. And, my dear brother, your business is, when you 
gpt to a text, to say, * Now, what is the road to Christ V and then 
preach a sermon, running along the road towards the great 
metropolis — Christ. And," said he, " I have never yet found 



MY NOTE BOOK. 83 

It text that had not a plain and direct road to Christ in it ; 
and if ever I should find on« that has no such road, I will 
make a road, I would go over hedge and ditch but I would 
get at my Master, for a sermon is neither fit for the land nor 
yet for the dunghill, unless there is a savour of Christ in it/' 

CHBI8T— Tropliies of hit Power. 

Before many a Popish shrine on the Continent one sees 
exhibited a great variety of crutches, together with wax 
models of arms, legs, and other limbs. These are supposed 
to represent the cures wrought by devotion at that altar ; the 
memorials of the healing power of the saint. Poor miserable 
superstition all of it, and yet what a reminder to the believer 
in Jesus as to his duty and his privilege] Having pleaded at 
the feet of Jesus, we have found salvation; have we remembered 
to record this wonder of his hand ? If we hu;ig up memorials 
of all his matchless grace, what crutches, and bandages, and 
trophies of every sort should we pile together ! Temper 
subdued, pride humbled, unbelief slain, sin cast down, sloth 
ashamed, carelessness rebuked. The cross has healed all 
manner of diseases, and its honours should be proclaimed 
with every rising and setting sun, 

OHRIST— Welcoming Sinners. 

We are told that in stormy weather it is not unusual for 
small birds to be blown out of sight of land on to the sea. 
They are often seen by voyagers out of their reckoning and 
far from the coast, hovering over the masts on weary wings 
as if they wanted to alight and rest themselves, but fearing 
to do so. A traveller tells us that on one occasion, a little 
lark, which followed the ship for a considerable distance, was 
at last compelled through sheer weariness to alight. He was 
so worn out as to be easily caught. The warmth of the hand 
was so agreeable to him that he sat down on. vt^V>^ix^^s^^^^^ 
little cold feet in his feathers, and looVm^ ^te>o>aX ^\^ ^"v^ 



34 MY NOTE BOOK. 

bright eye not in the least afraid, and as if feeling assured 
that he had been cast amongst good kind people whom he 
had no occasion to be so backward in trusting. A touching 
picture of the soul who is aroused by the Spirit of God and 
blown out of its own reckoning by the winds of conviction ; 
and the warm reception which the weary little bird received 
at the hands of the passengers conveys but a faint idea of 
that welcome which will greet the worn-out, sin-sick souls 
who will commit themselves into the hands of the only Saviour. 

CHBIST-With m in TriaL 

One thing which contributed to make Caesar's soldiers 
invincible was their seeing him always take his share in 
danger, and never desire any exemption from labour and 
fatigue. We have a far higher incentive in the war for truth 
and goodness when we consider him who endured such con- 
tradiction of sinners against himself. 

CHEIBTIAir-lCanifest by his liHs. 

Longfellow in his Hiawatha sings of— 

" The pleasant watercourses, 
You could trace them through the valley. 
By the rushing in the Spring-time, 
By the alders in the Summer, 
By the white fog in the Autumn, 
By the black line in the Winter." 

So traceable are the lives of really gracious men and 
women. They are not solicitous to be observed, but the 
jgracious "signs following" are sure to reveal them. Like 
their Master they cannot be hid. 

CHRISTIAIT— Profef lor cannot be ITeutral. 

It appears that Themistocles, when a boy, was full of 
spirit and flre^ quick of apprehension, naturally inclined to 



MY, NOTE BOOK. 35 

bold attempts, and likely to make a great statesman. His 
hours of leisure and vacation he spent not, like other boys, in 
idleness and play, but he was always inventing and composing 
declamations, the subjects of which v/ere either impeachments 
or defences of some of his schoolfellows ; so that his master 
would often say, " Boy, you will be nothing common or in- 
different, you will either be a blessing or a curse to the 
community." So remember, you who profess to be followers 
of the Lord Jesus, that to you indifference is impossible ; you 
must bless the church and the world by your holiness, or you 
will curse them both by your hypocrisy and inconsistency. 
In the visible church it is most true that " no man liveth unto 
himself, and no man dieth unto himself." 

CHSISnAK— a Boyal Personage. 

A POOR but pious woman called upon two elegant young 
ladies, who, regardless of her poverty, invited her to sit down 
with them in the drawing-room, and entered into conversation 
with her upon religious subjects. .While thus employed, their 
brother, a dashing youth, by chance entered, and appeared 
astonished to see his sisters thus engaged. One of them 
instantly exclaimed, " Brother, don't be surprised ; this is a 
king's daughter, though she has not yet put on her fine 
clothes." — Pioneer, 

CHBIBTIAK— What he ihonld be. 

A CHILD of God should be a visible Beatitude^ for joy and 
happiness, and a living Doxology, for gratitude and adoration. 

CEBISTIAH'B LITE-The Power of. 

There is a spot on the Lago Lugano, where the song of 
the nightingale swells sweetly from the thickets on the shore 
in matchless rysh of music, so that the oar lies motionless 
and the listener is hushed into silent entra3\c^xs\R.xsX \^^^^^^ 
not see a single bird, the 6rc\iestra7?as^%\i\'^'^'ei^^a^'^^'^'^^^^ 



36 MY NOTE BOOK. 

were clear. Such is a virtuous life, and such the influence of 
modest holiness ; the voice of excellence is heard when the 
excellent themselves are not seen. 

CHTJBCH— her Glory in TribnUtloA. 

Looking from the little wooden bridge which passes over 
the brow of the beautiful waterfall of Handeck, on the Grimsel^ 
one will at a certain hour of a bright day be surprised to see 
a rainbow making an entire circle, surrounding the fall like a 
coronet of gems, or a ring set with all the brilliants of the 
jeweller. Every hue is there 

" In fair proportion, running from the red 
To where the violet fades into the sky." 

We saw two such bows, one within the other, and we fancied 
that we discovered traces of a third. We had looked upon such 
a sight but once before, and were greatly delighted with "that 
arch of light, bom of the spray, and coloured by the sun." It 
was a fair vision to gaze upon, and reminded us of the mystic 
rainbow, which the seer of Patmos beheld, which was round 
about the throne, for it strikes us that it was seen by John as 
a complete circle^ of which we see but the half on earth ; the 
upper arch of manifest glory we rejoice to gaze upon, but the 
lower and foundation arch of the eternal purpose, upon which 
the visible display of grace is founded, is reserved for our 
contemplation in another world. When we read in the first 
verse of the tenth chapter of Revelation, "I saw another 
niighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud : 
and a rainbow was upon his head," it greatly assists the im- 
^nation to conceive of a many-coloured circlet, rather than 
a semicircle. 

We lingered long watching the flashing crystal, dashed 
and broken upon a hundred craggy rocks, and tossed into 
the air in sheets of foam, to fall in wreaths of spray ; we 



MY NOTE BOOK, 37 

should not have tired for hours if we could have tarried to 
admire the harmonious hues of that wheel within a wheel, 

" Of colours changing from the splendid rose, 
To the pale violet's dejected hue ;" 

but we were on a journey, and were summoned to advance. 
As we mounted our mule and rode silently down the pass, 
amid the pine forests and the over-hanging mountains, we 
compared the little stream to the church of God, which in 
peaceful times flows on like a village brook, quiet and obscure, 
blessed and blessing others, but yet little known or considered 
by the sons of men. Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, 
are greater than all the waters of Israel, and the proud ones 
of the earth despise that brook which flows "hard by the 
oracle of God," because her waters go softly and in solitary 
places ; but when the church advances over the steeps of 
opposition, and is dashed adown the crags of persecution, 
then, in her hour of sorrow, her glory is revealed. Then she 
lifts up her voice, like the sea, and roars as a boiling torrent, 
quickening her pace till that mighty river, the river Kishon, 
sweeps not with such vehemence of power. Her sons and ' 
daughters are led to the slaughter, and her blood is cast 
abroad, like the foam of the waters, but onward she dashes 
with irresistible energy, fearing no leap of peril ; and then it is 
that the eternal God glorifies her with the rainbow of his 
everlasting grace, makes the beauty of her holiness to shine 
forth, and, in the patience of the saints, reveals a heavenly 
radiance, which all men behold with astonishment. The 
golden age of true religion is the martyr period ; war breeds 
heroes, and suffering unto blood in striving against sin draws 
forth men of whom the world is not worthy. So far from 
enduring loss by opposition, it is then that the cause of God 
receives its coronation. The rainbow of the divine presence 
in the fulness of majesty encircles the chosen peoi^le ^Vssecv 
tribulation, affliction, and distress bx^ak \)^"ew\^ ^^ xiaft. ^xx^-ass^. 



38 MY NOTE BOCK. 

is broken by the precipitous rocks adown which it boldly 
casts itself, that its current may advance in its predestined 
channel. When, at any time, our forebodings foretell the 
coming of evil times for the church, let us remember that be- 
fore the Spirit revealed to the beloved disciple the terrible 
beasts, the thundering trumpets, the falling stars, and the 
dreadful vials, he bade him mark with attention that the 
covenant rainbow was round about the throne. All is well, for 
God is true. 

CHTTfiCH— To be Purged. 

When Oliver Cromwell was about to turn the Members of 
Parliament out of their chamber, he pointed to the mace, and 
cried, "Take away that bauble ! " When HE shall come, who 
will effectually purge the church, he will say much the same 
of many ecclesiastical ornaments, now held in high repute. 
Gowns, and altars, and banners, and painted windows, will 
all go at one sweep with " take away those baubles." Nor 
will the rhetorical embellishments and philosophies of modem 
pulpits be any more tenderly dealt with. " Take away this 
bauble " will be the signal for turning many a treasured folly 
into perpetual contempt 

CntCflTHSTAirGES. 

Horace Smith truly and wittily remarks, " If a letter were 

^o be addressed to that most influential word, circumstances y 

concluding thus — 'I am, sir, your very obedient humble 

servant,' the greater part of the world might subscribe it 

^thout deviating from the strictest veracity." 

^OjOHO TO CHBlST-aa a Sinner. 

to ^^^AT monarch was accustomed on certain set occasions 
\xi^^^^'^^^ all the beggars of the city. Around him were placed 
^he ^^"'■'^ers, all clothed in rich apparel ; the beggars sat at 
hat^^^^ table in their rags of poverty. Now it came to pass, 
^^ a certain day, one of the courtiers had spoiled his 



MY NOTE BOOK. 89 

silken apparel, so that he dared not put it on, and he felt, " I 
cannot go to the king's feast to-day, for my robe is foul/' He 
sat weeping till the thought struck him, " To-morrow when 
the king holds his feast, some will come as courtiers happily 
decked in their beautiful array, but. others will come and be 
made quite as welcome who will be dressed in rags. Well, 
well," said he, "so long as I may see the king's face, and sit at 
the royal table, I will enter among the beggars." So without 
mourning because he had lost his silken habit, he put on the 
rags of a beggar, and he saw the king's face as well as if he 
had worn his scarlet and fine linen. My soul has done this 
full many a time, when her evidences of salvation have been 
dim ; and I bid you do the same when you are in like case : 
if you cannot come to Jesus as a saint, come as a sinner ; 
only do come with simple faith to him, and you shall receive 
joy and peace. 

COHnrO TO CHBIST— as a Sinner. 

In one of the coal-pits of the north, while a considerable 
number of the miners were down below, the top of the pit fell 
in, and the shaft was completely blocked up. Those who 
were in the mine, gathered to a spot where the last remains of 
air could be breathed. There they sat and sang and prayed 
after the lights had gone out because the air was unable to 
support the flame. They were in total darkness, but a gleam 
of hope cheered them when one of them said he had heard 
that there was a connection between that pit and an old pit 
which had been worked years ago. He said it was a long 
passage through which a man might get by crawling all 
the way, lying flat upon the ground ; he would go and 
see if it were passable. The passage was very long, 
but they crept through it, and at last they came out 
to light at the bottom of the other shaft, and their 
lives were saved. 

If my present way of access to Chnsl ^s ^. ^"iYoX V5»\\'^^^^ 



40 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Up by doubts and fears, if I cannot go straight up the shaft 
and see the light of my Father's face, there is an old working, 
the old-fashioned way by which sinners have gone of old, 
by which poor thieves go, by which harlots go. I will creep 
along it, lowly and humbly; I will go flat upon the ground. 
I will humble myself till I see my Lord, and cry, " Father, I am 
not worthy to be called thy son, meake me as one of thy hh'ed 
servants, so long as I may but dwell in thy house." In our 
very worst case of despondency we may still come to Jesus as 
sinners. " Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners/* 
Call this to mind, and you may have hope. 

COnUNION WITH CHRIST-its Inffaenofr on our Views. 

When you have been sitting in a well-lighted room and 
are suddenly called into the outer darkness, how black it 
seems ; and thus when a man has dwelt in communion with 
God, sin becomes exceeding sinful, and the darkness in 
which the world lieth appears like tenfold night 

COMMXnnOH with CHBIST~Jo7 of. 

No sooner do you pass the brow of the St. Gothard pass, 
on your way to Italy, than you perceive that, beyond all 
question, you are on the sunny side of the Alps. The snow 
lying there is nothing in comparison to the vast accumulation 
upon the Swiss side of the summit, the wind ceases to be 
sharp and cutting, and a very few minutes' ride brings you into 
a balmy air which makes you forget that you are so greatly 
elevated above the sea level. There is a very manifest difference 
between the southern side and the bleak northern aspect. . 

He who climbs above the cares of the world, and turns his 
face to his God, has found the sunny side of life. The world's 
side of the hill is chill and freezing to a spiritual mind, but the 
Lord's presence gives a warmth of joy which turns winter 
into summer. Some pilgrims to heaven appear never to 
have passed the summit c^ religious difficulty ; they are still 



MY NOTE BOOK. 41 

toiling over the Devil's Bridge, or loitering at Andermatt, or 
plunging into the deep snowdrifts of their own personal un- 
worthiness, ever learning, but never coming to a full know- 
ledge of the truth ; they have not attained to a comfortable 
perception of the glory, preciousness, and all-sufficiency of 
the Lord Jesus, and therefore abide amid the winter of 
their doubts and fears. If they had but faith to surmount 
their spiritual impediments, how changed would everything 
become ! It is fair travelling with a sunny land smiling 
before your eyes, especially when you retain a grateful remem- 
brance of the bleak and wintry road which you have traversed ; 
but it is sorry work to be always stopping on the Swiss side 
of the mountain. How is it that so many do this ? 

COKWrinON with eOD-Power of. 

In driving piles, a machine is used by which a huge weight 
is lifted up and then made to fall upon the head of the pile. Of 
course the higher the weight is lifted the more powerful is the 
blow which it gives when it descends. Now, if we would tell 
upon our age and come down upon society with ponderous 
blows, we must see to it that we are uplifted as near to God as 
possible. All our power will depend upon the elevation of our 
spirits. Prayer, meditation, devotion, communion, are like 
a windlass to wind us up aloft ; it is not lost time which 
we spend in such sacred exercises, for we are thus accumulating 
force, so that when we come down to our actual labour for 
God, we shall descend with an energy unknown to those 
to whom communion is unknown. 

connrHioir of sadtts. 

Communion is strength, solitude is weakness. Alone, the 
fine old beech yields to the blast, and lies prone upon the 
sward : in the forest, supporting each other, the trees laugh 
at the hurricane. The sheep of Jesus flock together ; the 
social element is the genius of ChristiamtY. 



42 MY NOTE BOOK. 

coKMinnoN OF sAnrrs. 

What the circulation of the blood is to the human body, 
that the Holy Spirit is to the body of Christ which is the 
church. Now, by virtue of the one life-flood, every limb of 
the body holds fellowship with every other, and as long as 
life lasts that fellowship is inevitable. I f the hand be unwashed 
the eye cannot refuse communion with it on that account ; if 
the finger be diseased the hand cannot, by binding a cord 
around it, prevent the life-current from flowing. Nothing but 
death can break up the fellowship, you must tear away the 
member, or it must of necessity commune with the rest of the 
body. It is even thus in the body of Christ ; no laws can 
prevent one living member of Christ from fellowship with 
every other, the pulse of living fellowship sends a wave through 
the whole mystical frame ; where there is but one life, fellow- 
ship is an inevitable consequence. Yet some talk of restricted 
communion, and imagine that they can practise it. If they be 
alive unto God they may in mistaken conscientiousness deny 
their fellow Christians the outward sign of conununion, but 
communion itself falls not under any rule or regulation of 
theirs. Tie a red tape round your thumb and let it decree 
that the whole body is out of fellowship with it ; the thumb's 
decree is either ridiculously inoperative, or else it proves 
injurious to itself. God has made us one, one Spirit quickens 
us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with 
his Son Jesus ; to deny fellowship with any believer in Jesus 
is to refuse what you must of necessity give, and to deny in 
symbol what you must inevitably render in reality. 

OOirSCIEHGE—Hardening. 

It is a very terrible thing to let conscience begin to grow 
hard, for it soon chills into northern iron and steel. It 
is like the freezing of a pond. The first film of ice is scarcely 
perceptible ; keep the water stirring and you will prevent the 
frost from hardening it ; but once let it fUm over and remain 



MY NOTE BOOK. 43 

quiet, the glaze thickens over the surface, and it thickens 
still, and at last it is so firm that a waggon might be drawn 
over the solid ice. So with conscience, it films over gradually, 
until at last it becomes hard and unfeeling, and is not crushed 
even with ponderous loads of iniquity. 

coirsscEATioir. 

Travellers have said that they have discovered gardens 
of Solomon, which were of old enclosed as private places 
wherein the king walked in solitude; and they have also found 
wells of a most deliciously cold water, dexterously covered, 
so that no person unacquainted with the stone in the wall, 
which either revolved or slid away with a touch, could have 
found the entrance to the spring. At the foot of some lofty 
range of mountains a reservoir received the cooling streams 
which flowed from melted snows ; this reservoir was carefully 
guarded and shut out from all common entrance, in order that 
the king alone might enter there, and might refresh himsetf 
during the scorching heats. Such is the Christian's heart. 
It is a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, a garden reserved 
for Jesus only. O come. Great King, and enjoy thy posses- 
sions. 

COirSISTEKGT. 

Milton excuses Oliver Cromwell's want of bookish appli- 
cation in his youth thus : — " It did not become that hand to 
wax. soft in literary ease which was to be inured to the use of 
arms and hardened with asperity ; that right arm to be softly 
wrapped up among the birds of Athens, by which thunderbolts 
were soon afterwardis to be hurled among the eagles which 
emulate the sun." 

Carnal ease and worldly wisdom are not becoming in the 
soldier of Jesus Christ. He has to wrestle against principalities 
and powers, and has need of sterner qualities than those 
which sparkle in the eyes of fashion or adorn the neck of 
elegance. 




44 MY NOTE BOOK. 

GONSISTEKCT. 

"I SHALL not attend Sabbath-school any more," said a 
young girl to one of her class. " Why not ?" asked her friend. 
" Because my mother is going to send me to the dancing- 
school, and I think it very inconsistent to attend both at the 
same time." Children are sure to reason, if their parents do 
not. " Lead us not into temptation," let children pray; for are 
they not often led there ? 

COKTENTMEHT. 

Making a day's excursion from Botzen in the Tyrol, we 
went along the very narrowest of roads, mere alleys, to which 
our country lanes would be turnpike roads. Well, you may 
be sure that we did not engage an ordinary broad carriage, 
for that would have found the passage as difficult as the 
needle's eye to the camel ; but our landlord had a very narrow 
chaise for us, just the very thing for threading those four- 
feet passages. Now, I must make you hear the moral of it, 
you fretful little gentlemen. When you have a small estate, 
you must have small wants, and by contentment suit your 
carriage to your road. " Not so easy," say you ? " Very 
necessary to a Christian," say I. 

COKYEBSATION. 

In Andrew Fuller's diary is the following entry : — 
" Jan. 3, 1 782. This afternoon being on a visit, as I stepped 
aside from the company, I overheard one of them saying, *I 
love Mr. Fuller's company, it is so diverting, 'This expression 
moved me much. Oh, wretch that I am ! Is this to have my 
speech seasoned with grace } O Lord, forgive me ! Some 
humbling thoughts for the above in prayer." 

" 4. Tender this morning in remembering the above cir- 
cumstance. Lord, make me more spiritual in time to come." 

CONYEBSATIOir-Edifyixig. 

.The Spaniards in Chili believed that no water was so 



MY NOTE BOOK. 45 

wholesome or of so delicate a flavour as that which flowed 
through veins of gold ; certainly no conversation is so edifying 
to the hearers as that which pours forth from a heart stored 
with sacred knowledge, sanctified experience, devout contem- 
plations, and such Uke precious treasures. 

00HVSR8I0ir-« Bftdieal Change. 

I PASSED by a piece of conmion Which some lord of the 
manor or other had been enclosing, as those rascals always 
will if they can, to rob the poor of their rights, and filch every 
morsel of green grass upon which we may freely plant our 
feet ; but I noticed that the enclosers had only railed it round, 
but had not dug it up, nor ploughed it, nor planted it ; and 
though they had cut down the gorse, it was coming up again; 
of course it would, for it was a conmion still, and a bit of 
fence or rail could not alter it ; the furze would come peeping 
up, and ere long the enclosure would be as wild as the heath 
outside. But this is not God's way of working. When God 
encloseth a heart that has laid common with sin, does he cut 
down the thorns and the briers and then plant fir trees? 
(Isaiah Iv. 13.) No, no ; but he so changeth the soil, that 
from the ground itself, from its own vitality, there spon- 
taneously starts up the fir tree and the myrtle. This is a 
most wonderful result. You take a man and leave him at 
heart the same godless man. You mend his habits ; you 
make him go to church, or to the meeting-house ; you clothe 
him ; you break his wine bottle ; you rinse his mouth out, so 
that he does not talk so filthily; and altogether you say, 
" He's now a respectable man." Ah ! but if these outward 
respectabilities and rightnesses are only skin deep, you 
have done nothing. At least, what you have done is no great 
wonder ; there is nothing in it to be proud of But suppose 
this man can be so changed, that just as freely as he was 
wont to curse he now delights to pray, and just as heartily as 
he hated religion he now finds pleasure vx vl^-axv^ *\^^ "aSk 



46 MY NOTE BOOK. 

earnestly as he sinned he now delights to be obedient to the 
Lord ; ah ! then, this is a wonder, a miracle which man 
cannot accomplish, a marvel which only the grace of God can 
work, and which gives to God his highest glory. 

COHYEBSION— a Complete Sorrender. 

When Henry VIII. had determined to make himself head 
of the English Church, he insisted upon it that convocation 
should accept his headship without limiting and modifying 
clauses. He refused to entertain any compromises, and vowed 
that " he would have no tantums,'* as he called them. Thus 
when a sinner parleys with his Saviour he would fain have a 
little of the honour of his salvation, he would save alive some 
favourite sin, he would fain amend the humbling terms of 
grace — ^but there is no help for it, Jesus will be all in all, and 
the sinner must be nothing at all. The surrender must be 
complete, there must be no tantums^ but the heart must 
without reserve submit to the sovereignty of the Redeemer. 

COKVEl^SIOirS (Siidden)~not all Genuine. 

Fish sometimes leap out of the water with great energy, 
but it would be foolish to conclude that they have left Ae 
liquid element for ever, in a moment they are swinmiing 
again as if they had never forsaken the stream ; indeed, it was 
but a fly that tempted them aloft, or a sudden freak, the water is 
still their home, sweet home. When we see long-accustomed 
sinners making a sudden leap at religion, we may not make 
too sure that they are converts ; perhaps some gain allures 
them, or sudden excitement stirs them, and if so they will be 
back again at their old sins. Let us hope well, but let us not 
commend too soon. 

OOJHVICTIOir-~of Sin. 

There is something to be learned from the conduct of the 
Papists to our sires. If any poor wretch recanted and so 



MY-HOTE BOOK. 47 

escaped the fire, they were accustomed to make him carry a 
fagot at the next burning, as if to let him see what he had 
escaped, and make him confess what he had deserved. 
Depend upon it, conviction of sin is much like this carrying 
of the fagot. Well do I remember when I felt the sentence 
of death within me, and trembled lest it should be executed : 
my conscience was a minor hell, a fagot of the pile of Tophet. 
But, blessed be God, we are thus judged and sentenced in 
ourselves that we may not be condemned with the world. 
We bear the fagot that we may not be burned with it 

OOBBUPTIOirS-Hard to IKe. 

A CAT once sprang at my lips while I was talking, and bit 
me savagely. My friend in whose house it occurred, decreed 
that the poor creature should die. The sentence he executed 
personally, to the best of his ability, and threw the carcase away. 
To his surprise, the cat walked into the house the next day. 

Often and often have I vowed death to some evil pro- 
pensity, and have fondly dreamed that the sentence was 
fulfilled, but alas ! in weaker moments I have had sad cause 
to know that the sinful tendency still survived. 

OOBBirFnoir&-Hatod by the Saints. 

When Venice was in the hands of the Austrians, those 
alien tyrants swarmed in every quarter ; but the Venetians 
hated them to the last degree, and showed their enmity upon 
all occasions. When the* Austrian officers sat down at any 
of the tables in the square of St. Mark, where the Venetians 
delight on summer evenings to eat their ices and drink their 
coffee, the company would immediately rise and retire, 
showing by their withdrawal that they abhorred their oppres- 
sors. After •this fashion will every true Christian treat his 
inbred sins ; he will not be happy under their power, nor 
tolerate their dominion, nor show them favour. If he cannot 
expel them, he will not indulge lYvem, 




48 MY NOTE B^K. 

COBBTTFnON8— Indnlgeaee o£ 

The man of the world in the olden time bowed to the 
fallen statue of Jupiter, by way of bespeaking the favour of 
the god in the event of his being again lifted on his pedestaL 
What are those provisions for the flesh, which too many 
Christians so readily make, but a kind of homage to the old 
man^hom they profess to have renounced ? 

COBBTJPTIOirS— Orereome by Oraee. 

My gardeners were removing a large tree which grew near 
a wall, and as it would weaken the wall to stub up the roots, 
it was agreed that the stiunp should remain in the ground. 
But how were we to prevent the stump from sprouting, and so 
disarranging the gravel-walk. The gardener's prescription 
was, to cover it with a layer of salt I mused awhile, and 
thought that the readiest way to keep down my ever-sprouting 
corruptions in future would be to sow them well with the salt 
of grace. O Lord, help me so to do. 

COBBUPnOlTS— Orereome Gradually. 

When Sir Christopher Wren was engaged in demolishing 
the ruins of old St. Paul's in order to make room for his new 
cathedral, he used a battering-ram with which thirty men 
continued to beat upon a part of the wall for a whole day. 
The workmen, not discerning any immediate effect, thought 
this a waste of time ; but Wren, who knew that the internal 
motion thus conmiunicated must* be operating, encouraged 
them to persevere. On the second day, the wall began to 
tremble at the top, and fell in a few hours. If our prayers 
and repentances do not appear to overcome our corruptions, 
we must continue still to use these gracious battering-rams, 
for in due time by faith in Jesus Christ the power of evil shall 
be overthrown. Lord, enable me to give hearty blows by the 
power of thy Holy Spirit until the gates of hell in my soul 
shall be made to totter and fall. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 49 

COBBUPTIONBHItreBgthened by Habit. 

In preparing places for planting new trees, the diggers 
found it needful in certain spots to lay aside the spade and 
use the pick-axe. In those positions there had been a well- 
gravelled carriage road, and hence it was hard to deal with it. 
How often, when we are under sanctifying influences, do we 
find certain hard points of our character which are not 
touched by ordinary influences ; these are most probably sins 
in which we have become hardened, tracks worn by habitual 
transgression. We must not wonder if the severest processes 
of affliction should be tried upon us, if the pick^axe is used 
instead of the spade, that our stony places may yet yield soil 
for the plants of grace and holiness, 

OOBBUPnOlTft-Been even in Solitude. 

George Shadford wrote : — " One day a friend took me 
to see a hermit in the woods. After some difficulty we found 
his hermitage, which was a little place like a hog-sty, built of 
several pieces of wood, covered with bark of trees, and his 
bed consisted of dry leaves. There was a narrow beaten path 
about twenty or thirty yards in length by the side of it, where 
he frequently walked to meditate." 

" If one offered him food, he would take it, but if money 
was offered him, he would be angry. If anything was spoken 
which he did not like, he broke out into a violent passion. 
He had lived in this cell seven cold winters, and after all his 
prayers, counting his beads, and separating from the rest of 
mankind, still corrupt nature was all alive within him." 

Alas ! alas ! what will it avail us whether we are in England 
or Ireland, Scotland or America ; whether we live amongst 
mankind, or retire into a hermitage, if we still carry with us 
our own hell, our corrupt evil tempers? Without a new 
heart and a right spirit, no condition can deliver a man from 
the thraldom of his sins. Neither publicity nor solitude 
avails anything until grace prevails m\!!a. m^, T'Vifc ^^^ ^"^sv 



50 MY NOTE BOOK. 

tempt in the wilderness as well as in the crowd: We want 
not hermitages but heavenly-mindedness. 

COEEUPTIOKS-VitaUty of. 

The yew tree appears to renew itself out of its own decay ; 
the decayed wood at the centre of an old yew is gradually 
formed into rich vegetable mould, and fresh verdure springs 
from it. How like is this to our inward corruptions, which 
have a marvellous vitality, so that one sin feeds upon the 
death of another. If we are cured of some one fault, we grow 
proud of the amendment ; or if we perceive ourselves to be in 
the wrong and strive against the evil, we are too apt to despond 
and become unbelieving. So pride and unbelief, two master 
evils, grow out of the decay of other sins. 

COUBAGE— Strengthened by past Deliverances. 

Sir Francis Drake, being in a dangerous storm in the 
Thames, was heard to say, " Must I who have escaped the 
rage of the ocean, be drowned in a ditch!" Will you, 
experienced saints, who have passed through a world of 
tribulation lie down and die of despair, or give up your 
profession because you are at the present moment passing 
through some light affliction? Let your past preservation 
inspire you with courage and constrain you to brave all storms 
for Jesus' sake. 

COVETOTJSNXSS. 

Covetous men must be the sport of Satan, for their grasp- 
ing avarice neither lets them enjoy life nor escape from the 
second death. They are held by their own greed as surely as 
beasts with cords, or fish with nets, or men with chains. 
They may be likened to those fooUsh apes which in some 
countries are caught by narrow-necked vessels ; into these 
corn is placed, the creatures thrust in their hands, and when 
^^ey have filled them they cannot draw out their fists unless 



MY NOTE BOOK. 51 

they let go the grain ; sooner than do this they submit to be 
captured. Are covetous men then so like to beasts ? Let them 
ponder and be ashamed. 

COYETOXrSNESS— its Insidionsness. 

Beware of growing covetousness, for of all sins this is one 
of the most insidious. It is like the silting up of a river. As the 
stream comes down from the land, it brings with it sand and 
earth, and deposits all these at its mouth, so that by degrees, 
unless the conservators watch it carefully, it will block itself 
up, and leave no channel for ships of great burden. By daily 
deposit it imperceptibly creates a bar which is dangerous to 
navigation. Many a man when he begins to accumulate 
wealth commences at the same moment to ruin his soul, and 
the more he acquires, the more closely he blocks up his liberality, 
which is, so to speak, the very mouth of spiritual life. Instead 
of doing more for God he does less ; the more he saves the 
more he wants, and the more he wants of this world the less he 
cares for the world to come. 

CUTTLE-FISH— Persons who Resemble a. 

It was an old Pythagorean maxim, "Sepiam ne edito," 
" never eat the cuttle-fish.^^ The cuttle-fish has the power of 
emitting a black liquid which dyes the water and enables it 
to conceal itself. Have nothing to do with those who darken all 
around them that they themselves may be unseen ; honest men 
love light, and only the evil find darkness to be congenial. 
When an author is too obscure to be understood, leave him 
till he knows how to write ; when a preacher is mystical, 
high-flown, sophistical, shun him, for it is most likely he 
labours to conceal some latent heresy ; when a man's policy 
is deep and artful, flee from him, for he means no good. No 
deceiver or double-tongued man must be admitted within the 
circle of your confidence. Remember the advice^ ne^utr eat c- 
cuttle-fish. 



52 MY NOTE BOOK. 

DAHCIHO. 

When I hear of a dancing party I feel an uneasy sensation 
about the throat, remembering that a far gjreater preacher had 
his head danced off in the days of our Lord. However pleasing 
the polkas of Herodias might be to Herod, they were death 
to John the Baptist. The caperings and wantonings of the 
ball-room are death to the solemn influences of our ministry, 
and many an ill-ended life first received its bent for evil amid 
the flippancies of gay assemblies met to trip away the hours. 

DAHOEB— of the Chriitiaii. 

When the instructed Christian sees his surroundings, he 
finds himself to be like a defenceless dove flying to her nest^ 
while against her tens of thousands of arrows are levelled. 
The Christian life is like that dove's anxious flight, as it 
threads its way between the death-bearing shafts of the 
enemy, and by constant miracle escapes imhurt. The en- 
lightened Christian sees himself to be like a traveller, standing 
on the narrow summit of a lofty ridge ; on the right hand and 
on the left are gulfs unfathomable, yawning for his destruction ; 
if it were not that by divine grace his feet are like hinds' feet, 
so that he is able to stand upon his high places, he would 
long ere this have fallen to his eternal destruction. 

DAT BT DAT. 

A CELEBRATED modem writer says, " Take care of the 
minutes, and the hours will take care of themselves." This 
is an admirable remark, and might be very seasonably 
recollected when we begin to be " weary in well-doing," from 
the thought of having much to do. The present moment is 
all we have to do with in any sense ; the past is irrecoverable ; 
the future is uncertain ; nor is it fair to burthen one moment 
with the weight of the next. Sufficient imto the moment is 
the trouble thereof. If we had to walk a hundred miles, we 
should still have to set but one step at a time, and this process 



MY NOTE BOOK. 53 

continued would infallibly bring us to our journey's end. 
Fatigue generally begins, and is always increased, by calcu- 
lating in a minute the exertion of hours. Thus, in looking 
forward to future life, let us recollect that we have not to sus- 
tain all its toil, to endure all its sufferings, or encounter all 
its crosses at once. One moment comes laden with its own 
little burthens, then flies, and is succeeded by another no 
heavier than the last ; if one could be borne, so could another, 
and another. Even in looking forward to a single day, the 
spirit may sometimes faint from an anticipation of the duties, 
the labours, the trials to temper and patience, that may be 
expected. Now, this is unjustly laying the burthen of many 
thousand moments yr^onone, — Youth! s Magazine for Novem- 
bery 1819. 

DAT BT DAT. 

A PERSON says, " I cannot understand how I am to get 
along when I leave my father's house." Why should you see 
it till that time comes ? What if a person going on a journey 
of five years should undertake to carry provisions, and clothes, 
and gold enough to last him during the whole time, lugging 
them as he travelled, like a veritable Englishman, with all 
creation at his back ! If he is wise he will supply himself at 
the different points where he stops. When he gets to London, 
let him buy what he needs there ; when he gets to Paris, let 
him buy what he needs there ; when he gets to Rome, let him 
buy what he needs there ; and when he gets to Vienna, 
Dresden, Munich, St. Petersburg, and Canton, let him buy 
what he needs at these places ! He will find at each of them, 
and all the other cities which he visits, whatever things he 
requires. Why, then, should he undertake to carry them 
around the globe with him ? It would be the greatest folly 
imaginable. And as to gold, why should he load down his 
pockets with that ? Let him take a circular letter of credit, 
which is good, yet not usable till he arrives aX ^^ T^Jsa.^^'s* 



MY NOTE BOOK. 55 

DEATH— of a Believer. 

Old Mr. Lyford being desired, a little before his death, 
to let his friends know in what condition his soul was, and 
what his thoughts were about that eternity to which he seemed 
very near, he answered with a cheerfulness suitable to a 
believer and a minister, " / will let you know how it is with 
mef and then, stretching out a hand that was withered and 
consumed with age and sickness — *^Here is" said he ^Hhe grave, 
the wrath of God, and devouring fiames^ the just punishment 
of sin, on the one side; and here am /, a poor sinful soul, on 
the other side; but this is my comfort, the covenant of grace 
which is established on so many sure promises, has saved m4. 
from all. There is an act of oblivion passed in heaven, I 
will forgive their iniquities, and their sins will I remember no 
m^re. This is the blessed privilege of all within the covenant, 
among whom I am oneP — From T. Rogers, on " Trouble of 
MindP 

DEATH— Desired by few. 

BURCKHARDT States, that although the Arabs are strict 
predestinarians, yet when the plague visited Medina, many of 
the townsmen fled to the desert, alleging as an excuse that 
although the distemper was a messenger from heaven sent to 
call them to a better world, yet being conscious of their own 
unworthiness, and that they did not merit this special mark of 
grace, they thought it more advisable to decline it for the 
present, and make their escape from the town. If it really 
came to the point with those of us who talk of longing for 
death as a great deliverance, should we not cling to life ? It 
is a question perhaps more easily asked than answered. 

DEATH— Differently Viewed by different Characters. 

It is a blessed thing to know the Saviour, and to feel that 
your soul is safe. You have been, in a.^\vv^ >N\^<^Tv\^.^^^xex^^'Cs^R. 



(j3 my note book. 

harbour, and you have noticed the different looks of the 
passengers as they turned their eyes ashore. There was 
one who, that he might not lose a moment's time, had got 
everything ready for landing long ago ; and now he smiles 
and heckons to yonder party on the pier, who in their turn, 
are so eager to meet him, that they almost press over the 
margin of the quay ; and no sooner is the gangway thrown 
across, than he has hold of the arm of one, and another is 
triumphant on his shoulder, and all the rest are leaping 
before and after him on their homeward way. But there is 
another, who showed no alacrity. He gazed with pensive eye 
on the nearer coast and seemed to g^rudge that the trip was 
over. He was a stranger going amongst strangers, and though 
sometimes during the voyage he ha4 a momentary hope that 
something unexpected might occur, and that some friendly 
face might recognise him in regions where he was going an 
alien and an adventurer, no such welcoming face is there, and 
with reluctant steps he quits the vessel, and commits himself 
to the unknown country. And now that everyone else has 
disembarked, who is this unhappy man whom they have 
brought on deck, and whom, groaning in his heavy chains, they 
are conducting to the dreaded shore ? Alas ! he is a felon and 
a runaway, whom they are bringing back to take his trial there ; 
and no wonder he is loath to land. 

Now, dear brethren, our ship is sailing fast. We shall 
soon hear the rasping of the shallows, and the commotion 
overhead, which bespeak the port in riew. When it comes 
to that, how shall you feel ? Are you a stranger, or a convict, 
or are you going home ? Can you say, " I know whom I have 
believed " ? Have you a Friend within the veil ? And how- 
ever much you may enjoy the voyage, and however much you 
niay like your fellow passengers, does your heart sometimes 
leap up at the prospect of seeing Jesus as he is, and so being 
^ver with the Lord?— yam^s Hamilton, D.D. 



MY NOTE COOK. 57 

DEATH— Peaee in. 

The late Mr. Young of Jedburgh, was once visiting the 
death-bed of an aged member of his congregation, who was 
hourly looking for his last change. " Well, my friend,** said 
the minister, "how do you feel yourself to-day ?*' "Very 
weel, sir," was the calm and solemn answer, " Very weel, but 
just a wee confused wi' the flittin'." — Childrer^s Missionary 
Record for 1857. 

DEATH— Bealisad. 

When Bernard Gilpin was privately informed that his 
enemies had caused thirty-two articles to be drawn up 
against him in the strongest manner, and presented to 
Bonner, bishop of London, he said to his favourite domestic, 
'At length they have prevailed against me. I am accused 
to the bishop of London, from whom there will be no escaping. 
God forgive their malice, and grant me strength to undergo 
the trial." He then ordered his servant to provide a long 
garment for him, in which he might go decently to the stake, 
and desired it might be got ready with all expedition. " For 
I know not," says he, " how soon I may have occasion for it." 
As soon as this garment was provided, it is said, he used to 
put it on every day, till the bishop's messengers apprehended 
him. It were well if we all thus realised to ourselves the 
hour of our departure. We ought by anticipation to sleep in 
our shrouds, and go to bed in our sepulchres. To put on our 
cerements now is wisdom. 

DEATH— its Bevealing Power. 

To-day the world is Hke a masquerade. High carnival is 
being held, and men wear their masks and dominoes, and 
strut about, and we think that man a king, and this a mighty 
Oriental prince, and this a haughty Indian chief. But the 
time is over for the masque ; daylight dawns ; strip off your 
gamishings ; every one of you put on your ox^x^ax^ 'jg^-ov'^s^'s^ 



58 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Who goes out to the unrobing-room with greatest confidence? 
Why, the man who feels that his next dress will be a far more 
glorious vestment. Who shall go to that disrobing-room with 
the greatest tremor ? Why, those who feel that the splendid 
character they once wore will give place to beggary and 
meanness ; when for robes they shall have rags ; for riches, 
poverty ; for honour, shame ; and for regal splendour, hissing 
and reproach. If any of our readers seem to be what 
they are not, let them be wise enough to think of the spade, 
the shroud, and the silent dust ; let every one among us now 
put his soul into the crucible, and as we shall test ourselves in 
the silence of the dying hour, so let us judge ourselves now. 

DECISION FOB CHBIST. 

After the disgraceful defeat of the Romans, at the battle of 
AUia, Rome was sacked, and it seemed as if, at any moment, 
the Gauls might take the Capitol. Among the garrison was a 
young man of the Fabian family, and on a certain day the 
anniversary of a sacrifice returned, when his family had 
always offered sacrifice upon the Quirinal Hill. This hill 
was in the possession of the Gauls; but when the morning 
dawned, the young man took the sacred utensils of his god, 
went down from the Capitol, passed through the Gallic sen- 
tries, through the main body, up the hill, offered sacrifice, and 
came back unharmed. It was always told as a wonder 
among Roman legends. This is just how the Christian 
should act when decision for Christ is called for. Though he 
be a solitary man in the midst of a thousand opponents, let 
him, at the precise moment when duty calls, fearless of all 
danger, go straight to the appointed spot, do his duty, and 
remember that consequences belong to God, and not to us. 
I pray God that after this style we may witness for Christ 

DEEP THINGS— XTiiderstood by Ezperienoed Men. 

The outlay in opening a mine is usually so great that the 
iards say^ that to prepare a mine one must spend another 




MY NOTE BOOK. 59* 

mine. To open up the hidden preciousness of the promises, 
we need a mine of experience, and to gain this last a man 
needs an inexhaustible mine of grace. 

DESPOITDENCT. 

COLTON declares that in moments of despondency Shake- 
speare thought himself no poet ; and Raphael doubted his 
right to be called a painter. We call such self-suspicions 
morbid, and ascribe them to a hypochondriacal fit ; in what 
other way can we speak of those doubts as to their saintship, 
which occasionally afflict the most eminently holy of the 
Lord's people ! 

D£SPOin)£NCT— iti qniok Eye for Evili. 

My friend Smith told me, that once on a time he had 
Mr. Jones to preach in his church. Smith's church holds 
fifteen hundred people, and is perfectly filled by its congre- 
gation, of this circumstance Smith is pardonably proud. 
When Mr. Jones preached, the church was quite crowded, ^ 
save that three seats (not pews, seats for a single person each) 
were vacant in a front gallery. But so keen was Mr. Jones's 
eye for darks, to the oblivion of lights, that after service he 
merely said to Smith that he had remarked three seats empty 
in the gallery. Not one thought or word had he for the 
fourteen hundred and ninety-seven seats that were filled. 
Smith was a little mortified. But by-and-by he remembered 
that the peculiar disposition of Mr. Jones was one that would 
inflict condign punishment upon itself. Then he was sorry 
rather than angry. Yes, my friend, let us be glad if we have 
an eye for the lights of life, rather than for its darks ! — Autumn 
Holidays of a Country Parson, 

DESTITXTTION— of London. 

We have no reason to congratulate ourselves on what we 
are doing, if we fvniv think of tte ^x^'aX. vio^ ^\iN.Ojv ^JC>^ 



60 MY NOTE BOOK. 

remains undone. The reclaiming of men in this city is like 
digging out those noble monuments of the past so long 
buried amid the ruins of Nineveh. In excavating this vast 
population you have as it were laid bare the head of a huge 
winged bull, until you can observe that it has a human coun- 
tenance and will well repay you for your toils. Are you 
going to congratulate yourselves that you have succeeded 
thus far ? Why, there are the colossal feet, and the mighty 
wings, and all the rest of the body ; all these are to be un- 
covered from the ruins, and the whole mass uplifted from the 
depth in which it lies imbedded. But, because you have done 
a little to bless London, and have brought a thousand, three 
thousand, ten thousand to hear the word of God, are you to 
sit down and say, " It is done." What is to be done with the 
rest of the three millions? Where are the other tens of 
thousands who are not hearing the word? Where is the 
great outlying mass of our leviathan city ? 

DlOimr OF CHSISTIAN CHABACTEB-to be Maintained. 

Antisthenes, the founder of the sect of the Cynics, when 
he was told that Ismenias played excellently upon the flute, 
answered properly enough, "Then he is good for nothing 
else, otherwise he would not have played so well." Such also 
was Philip's saying to his son, when, at a certain entertain- 
ment, he sang in a very agreeable and skilful manner, " Are 
you not ashamed to sing so well ?" Even so, when one who 
professes to be of the seed royal of heaven, is able to 
rival the ungodly in their cunning, worldliness, merriment, 
scheming, or extravagance, may they not blush to possess 
such dangerous capacities ? Heirs of heaven have some- 
thing better to do than to emulate the children of darkness. 

DILIGEKCB. 

Select a large box and place in it as many cannon-balls 
^ it will hold, it is after a fashion full, but it will hold more if 



MY NOTE BOOK. 61 

smaller matters be found. Bring a quantity of marbles, very- 
many of these may be packed in the spaces between the 
larger globes ; the box is full now, but only full in a sense, 
it will contain more yet. There are interstices in abundance, 
into which you may shake a considerable quantity of small 
shot, and now the chest is filled beyond all question, but yet 
there is room. You cannot put in another shot or marble, 
much less another cannon-ball, but you will find that several 
pounds of sand will slide down between the larger materials, 
and even then between the gjranules of sand, if you empty 
yonder jug there will be space for all the water, and for the 
same quantity several times repeated. When there is no 
space for the great, there may be room for the little ; where 
the little cannot enter, the less can make its way ; and where 
the less is shut out, the least of all may find ample room and 
verge enough. Now, the diligent preacher may not be able 
to preach more sermons, his engagement book is crowded. 
He may not be able to offer more public prayers, or to 
search the word of God more constantly ; there is as much 
time occupied with these things as could well be given to 
them. Still there must be stray moments, occasional inter- 
vals and snatches, which might hold a vast amount of little 
usefulnesses in the course of months and years. What a 
wealth of minor good, as we may think it to be, might be 
shaken down into the interstices of ten years' work, which 
might prove to be as precious in result, by the grace of God, 
as the greater works of the same period. Little fishes are 
sweet, and these little works might possess in blessing what 
they lacked in bulk. 

• 

DISCONTENT— Chronio with some, 

" Some people are never content with their lot, let what will 
happen. Clouds and darkness are over their heads, alike 
whether it rain or shine. To them every incident is an accident, 
and every accident a calamity. Eveiv -wtew. >i5cL^\»aN^'^^sct 



62 MY NOTE BOOK. 

own way, they like it no better than your way, and, indeed, con- 
sider their most voluntary acts as matters of compulsion. 
We saw a striking illustration the other day of the infirmity 
we speak of in the conduct of a child, about three years old. 
He was crying because his mother had shut the parlour 
door. " Poor thing," said a neighbour, compassionately, " you 
have shut the child out,^^ " It's all the same to him," said the 
mother; " he would cry if I called him in and then shut the 
door. It is a peculiarity of that boy, that if he is left rather 
suddenly on either side of a daor, he considers himself shut 
out, and rebels accordingly." There are older children who 
take the same view of things." 

DISFOSmON-Distorting. 

How terribly bad looking-glasses distort the countenance; 
the man who looks into one of them sees his hair dishevelled, 
his forehead smutty, his nose blotched, his eyes out of line, 
and a dozen other imaginary mischiefs. How like to those 
morbid, melancholy dispositions which pervert everything 
into gloom, and compel the most lovely characters to write 
bitter things against themselves! They may also be likened 
to depraved judgments, which lead men to impute deformity to 
perfection, and to censure even innocence itself. It were well 
if all these good-for-nothing mirrors could be smashed to 
atoms, and the truth-reflecting glass of the word of God hung 
up in their places. 

DIVINE OOODlTESS-TriieeaBing. 

It is by no means pleasant when reading an interesting 
article in your magazine to find yourself pulled up short with 
the ominous words, " to be continued^ Yet they are words 
of good cheer if applied to other matters. What a comfort 
to remember that the Lord's mercy and lovingkindness is U 
be continued! Much as we have experienced in the long 
years of our pilgrimage, we have by no means outlived 



MY NOTE BOOK. G3 

eternal love. Providential goodness is an endless chain, a 
stream which follows the pilgrim, a wheel perpetually re- 
volving, a star for ever shining, and leading us to the place 
where he is who was once a babe in Bethlehem. All the 
volumes which record the doings of divine grace are but part 
of a series to be continued, 

DOGTBINES— not for Controversy. 

" A HUGE fragment of rock from an adjacent cliff fell upon 
a horizontal part of the hill below, which was occupied by 
the gardens and vineyards of two peasants. It covered part 
of the property of each, nor could it be easily decided to 
whom the unexpected visitor belonged : but the honest rustics 
instead of troubling the gentlemen of the long robe with their 
dispute, wisely resolved to end it by each party excavating the 
half of the rock on his own grounds, and converting the whole 
into two useful cottages, with comfortable rooms, and cellars 
for their little stock of wine, and there they now reside with 
their families. After such a sort will wise men deal with the 
great doctrines of the gospel ; they will not make them the 
themes of angry controversy, but of profitable use. To fight 
over a doctrine is sorry waste of time, but to live in the quiet 
enjoyment of it is the truest wisdom." 

DOGTRINES—Dnplicate Nature of. 

First to the right, then to the left, the road was ever 
ascending but always twisting, and thus, by easy marches, 
we were able to reach the summit of the pass ; a straight line 
would have been shorter for the eagle's wing, but no human 
foot could have followed it. Nobody called us inconsistent 
for thus facing about ; we kept the road, and no one could 
complain. 

If we honestly desire to gain the heights of divine truth, 
we shall find many zigzags in the road : here our ^^<l^ 



64 MY NOTE BOOK. 

will front divine sovereignty with all its lofty gfrandeur, and 
anon we shall turn in the opposite direction, towards the 
frowning peaks of human responsibility. What matters it if 
we appear to be inconsistent, so long as we keep to the high- 
way of Scripture, which is our only safe road to knowledge ! 
Angels may, perhaps, be systematic divines ; for men it 
should be enough to follow the word of God, let its teachings 
wind as they may. 

DOCTBINES— False. 

In "Babbage's Economy of Manufactures," we are told 
that " some years since, a mode of preparing old clover and 
trefoil seeds, by a process called 'doctoring,' became so 
prevalent as to attract the attention of the House of Com- 
mons. By this process old and worthless seed was rendered 
in appearance equal to the best. One witness tried some 
doctored seed, and found that not above one grain in a hun- 
dred grew." 

Is it not to be feared that a doctored gospel is becoming 
very common among us, and if so it is no wonder that con- 
versions are but few. Only pure truth is living seed. 

DOCTBHTES— Falie, 

There are no greater foes to sheep than wild dogs. In 
^ome regions, sheep were no longer to be found, because 
these fierce creatures utterly devoured the flocks. The church 
has never had worse enemies than false teachers; infidels 
and persecutors do but mild injury to her, but her heretical 
preachers have been as evening wolves. 

DOCTSIHES OF OSACE. 

Our forefathers were very fond of clipping their plants and 
training their flowers into quaint and grotesque forms ; so 
that we read of great guns wrought in rosemary and sweet 
briers. He would have been very foolish who would have 



MY NOTE BOOK. 65 

trembled at cannons which only shot forth flowers and darted 
perfume. Let the poor trembler who is sincerely seeking 
Jesus, rest assured that the seemingly dreadful doctrines of 
election and predestination are not one whit more terrible, 
and are far more sweetly fragrant. 

DOCTBnrES (My8terioiL8)~to be Believed. 

Those huge boulders which lie along the valley of Storo in 
the Tyrol, are of a granite unknown in the neighbourhood ; they 
must have come from a great distance. Now it might be hard to 
explain the method by which they arrived in the valley, but it 
would be absurd to deny that they are there. Most unaccount- 
able is the fact, but a very strong and stubborn fact it is, for 
there they lie, huge as houses, and yet perfectly alien to the 
country. There are truths in Scripture which puzzle us, we 
cannot understand their relation to other portions of revela- 
tion, they are mysteries, apparently alien to the spirit of other 
passages. What then ? Suppose we cannot account for them, 
that does not alter the fact that there they are, and it would 
be extreme folly to deny their existence because they puzzle 
us. Rather let us find room for adoring faith where reason is 
lost in wonder. 

m 

DOCTBINES— Xntra-Calviiiistio. 

Griffiths says that travellers in Turkey carry with them 
lozenges of opium, on which is stamped " mash Al/aA" the 
gift of God. Too many sermons are just such lozenges. 
Grace is preached but duty denied. Divine predestination is 
cried up but human responsibility is rejected. Such teaching 
ought to be shunned as poisonous, but those who by reason 
of use have grown accustomed to the sedative, condemn all 
other preaching, and cry up their opium lozenges of high 
doctrine as ^Ae truths the precious gift of God. It is to be 
feared that this poppy-juice doctrine has sent many souls to 
sleep who will wake up in hell. 



G6 MY NOTE BOOK. 

BOnrO GO0B~a Blessing to Ourselves. 

If we view this microcosm, the human body, we shall find 
that the heart does not receive the blood to store it up, but 
while it pumps it in at one valve, it sends it forth at another. 
The blood is always circulating everywhere, and is stagnant 
nowhere ; the same is true of all the fluids in a healthy 
body, they are in a constant state of expenditure. If one cell 
stores for a few moments its peculiar secretion, it only retains 
it till it is perfectly fitted for its appointed use in the body ; 
for if any cell in the body should begin to store up its secre- 
tion, its store would soon become the cause of inveterate 
disease ; nay, the organ would soon lose the power to secrete 
at all, if it did not give forth its products. The whole of 
the human system lives by giving. The eye cannot say to 
the foot, I have no need of thee, and will not guide thee ; for 
if it does not perform its watchful office, the whole man will 
be in the ditch, and the eye will be covered with mire. If the 
members refuse to contribute to the general stock, the whole 
body will become poverty-stricken, and be given up to the 
bankruptcy of death. Let us learn, then, from the analogy 
of nature, the great lesson, that to get, we must give ; that to 
accumulate, we must scatter ; that to make ourselves happy, 
we must make others happy ; and that to get good and 
become spiritually vigorous, we must do good, and seek the 
spiritual good of others. 

DOTTBTS-Foolish. 

A Christian once, in doubt and discouragement, con- 
sidered the darkness that overspread her soul as a proof that 
she was finally cast away. She stumbled over mole-hills 
when she should have been removing mountains. To an old 
minister who was trying to comfort her, with impassioned 
emphasis she said, " Oh ! Tm dead, dead, twice dead, and 
plucked up by the roots ! " After a pause, he replied, " Well, 
sitting in my study the other day, I heard a sudden scream — 



MY NOTE BOOK. 67 

'John's in the well ! John's fallen into the well !' Before I 
could reach the spot, I heard the sad and mournful cry, 
'John's dead — poor little Johnny's dead ! ' Bending over the 
curb, I called out, ' John, are you dead ? ' ' Yes, grandfather,' 
replied John, * I'm dead.' I was glad to hear it from his own 
mouth." 

Many doubts are so absurd that the only way to combat 
them is by gentle ridicule. 

BOTTBLE-HINDEDNESS. 

Faraday notes that whilst at breakfast at Llangollen, he 
heard a Welsh harper playing in very excellent style, and he 
adds, " wishing to gratify myself with a sight of the interest- 
ing bard^ I went to the door and beheld — the boots / I must 
confess I was sadly disappointed and extremely baulked." It 
is no small stumbling-block to souls when they observe that 
professors who preach and talk like men inspired, live as 
meanly as worldlings themselves. 

BWABFS-Spiritual. 

There was once in London a club of small men, whose 
qualification for membership lay in their not exceeding five 
feet in height ; these dwarfs held, or pretended to hold, the 
opinion that they were nearer the perfection of manhood than 
others, for they argued that primeval men had been far more 
gigantic than the present race, and consequently that the way 
of progress was to grow less and less, and that the human 
race as it perfected itself would become as diminutive as 
themselves. Such a club of Christians might be established 
in most cities, and without any difficulty might attain to an 
enormously numerous membership ; for the notion is common 
that our dwarfish Christianity is, after all, the standard, and 
many even imagine that nobler Christians are enthusiasts, 
fanatical and hot-blooded, while they themselves are cool 
because they are wise, and indiffei^xiX. \i^c^j\'5»^ ^^ "^sx^ 
intelligent. 



68 MY NOTE BOOK. 

EABKEST OF THE 8FIBIT— the Pledge of Heaven. 

In the early times when land was sold, the owner cut a turf 
from the greensward and cast it into the cap of the purchaser 
as a token that it was his ; or he tore off the branch of a tree 
and put it into the new owner's hand to show that he was en- 
titled to all the products of the soil ; and when the purchaser 
of a house received seizin or possession, the key of the door, 
or a bundle of thatch plucked from the roof, signified that the 
building was yielded up to him. The God of all grace has 
given to his people all the perfections of heaven to be their 
heritage for ever, and the earnest of his Spirit is to them the 
blessed token that all things are theirs. The Spirit's work of 
comfort and sanctification is a part of heaven's covenant 
blessings, a turf from the soil of Canaan, a twig from the tree 
of life, the key to mansions in the skies. Possessing the 
earnest of the Spirit we have received seizin of heaven. 

EDIFICATION— the Aim of Cliristlan Speech. 

When Handel's oratorio of the " Messiah " had won the 
admiration of many of the great, Lord Kinnoul took occasion 
to pay him some compliments on the noble entertainment 
which he had lately given the town. " My lord," said Handel, 
" I should be sorry if I only entertained them ; I wish to 
make them better." It is to be feared that many speech- 
makers at public meetings could not say as much ; and yet 
how dare any of us waste the time of our fellow immortals in 
mere amusing talk ! If we have nothing to speak to edifica- 
tion, how much better to hold our tongue ! 

ELECTION. 

Andrew Fuller remarks, in a letter to two relatives : — " I 
used to think that the doctrine of election was a reason why 
we need not pray, and I fear there are many who split upon 
this rock, who think it is to no purpose to pray, as things will 
be as they will be. But I now see that the doctrine of election 




MY NOTE BOOK. 69 

is the greatest encouragement instead of a discouragement to 
prayer. He that decreed that any one should be finally saved, 
decreed that it should be in the way of prayer ; as much as he 
that has decreed what we shall possess of the things of this 
life, has decreed that it shall be in the way of industry ; and 
as we never think of being idle in common business, because 
God has decreed what we shall possess of this world's good, 
so neither should we be slothful in the business of our souls, 
because our final state is decreed." 

EKQTintEBS— not to be Biscouraged. 

At the Synod of Moscow, held by King Goutran, a.d. 585, 
bishops were forbidden to keep dogs in their houses, or birds 
of prey, lest the poor should be bit by these animals instead of 
being fed. Should not all ministers be equally concerned 
to chase away all morose habits, angry tempers and repulsive 
manners, which might discourage the approach of enquiring 
souls who desire to know of us the way of salvation.'^ Sunday- 
school teachers may also take the hint. 

ETEBHAL THINGS AlTD FLEETING. 

Afar off one can hardly tell which is mountain and which 
is cloud. The clouds rise with peaks and summits, all ap- 
parently as solid, and certainly as ghstening, as the snow-clad 
Alps, so that the clearest eye might readily be deceived. Yet 
the mountain is unsubstantial as the cloud, and the cloud is 
never permanent as the mountain. So do the things of time 
appear to be all-important, far-reaching and enduring, and 
eternal things are not always of equal weight to the soul 
with those nearer at hand. Yet, despite all our instinctive 
judgments may suggest to the contrary, nothing earthly can 
ever be lasting, nothing in time can be worth considering 
compared with eternity. The cloudy philosophies of men 
may assume the shape of eternal tiMXix^ XsvaX ^^ ^\s^ ^^t.s^ 



70 MY NOTE BOOK. 

scatter them, while the great mountains of the divine word 
shall stand fast for ever and ever. 

EYIDEKGE— Experimental. 

I HAVE been hiformed that not long ago a certain infidel 
lecturer gave an opportunity to persons to reply to him after his 
oration, and he was of course expecting that one or two rashly 
zealous young men would rise to advance the common argu- 
ments for Christianity, which he was quite prepared, by hook 
or crook, to battle with or laugh down. Instead of reasoners,an 
old lady, carrying a basket, wearing an ancient bonnet, and 
altogether dressed in an antique fashion, which marked both 
her age and her poverty, came upon the platform. Putting 
down her basket and umbrella, she began and said, " I paid 
threepence to hear of something better than Jesus Christ, and 
I have not heard it. Now, let me tell you what religion has 
done for me, and then tell me something better, or else youVe 
cheated me out of the threepence which I paid to come in. 
Now," she said, " I have been a widow thirty years, and I was 
left with ten children, and I trusted in the Lord Jesus Christ in 
the depth of poverty, and he appeared for me and comforted 
me, and helped me to bring up my children so that they have 
grown up and turned out respectable. None of you can tell 
what the troubles of a poor lone woman are, but the Lord 
has made his grace all-sufficient. I was often very sore 
pressed, but my prayers were heard by my Father in heaven, 
and I was always delivered. Now, you are going to tell me 
something better than that — better for a poor woman like me ! 
I have been to the Lord sometimes when IVe been very low 
indeed, and there's been scarcely anything for us to eat, and 
I've always found his providence has been good and kind to 
i^e. And when I lay very sick, I thought I was dying, and 
^y heart was ready to break at leaving my poor fatherless boys 
and girls, and there was nothing kept me up but the thought 
^^ Jesus and his faithful love to my poor soul ; and you tell 



MY NOTE BOOK. 71 

me that it was all nonsense. Those who are young and foolish 
may believe you, but after what I have gone through I know 
there is a reality in religion and it is no fancy. Tell me 
something better than what God has done for me, or else, I 
tell you, you have cheated me out of my threepence. Tell me 
something better." The lecturer was a good hand at an argu- 
ment, but such a mode of controversy was novel, and therefore 
he gave up the contest, and merely said, " Really, the dear 
old woman was so happy in her delusion he should not like to 
undeceive her." " No," she said, " that won't do. Truth is 
truth, and your laughing can't alter it. Jesus Christ has been 
all this to me, and I could not sit down in the hall and hear 
you talk against him without speaking up for him, and asking 
you whether you could tell me something better than what 
he has done for me. IVe tried and proved him, and that's 
more than you have." 

Herein is power, logic invincible, reasoning not to be 
gainsayed. The testing, and proving of God; getting his 
love really shed abroad in the heart, this is the great internal 
evidence of the gospel 

EVILS (little}— Making Way fbr Greater. 

The carpenter's gimblet makes but a small hole, but it 
enables him to drive a great nail. May we not here see a 
representation of those minor departures from the truth which 
prepare the minds of men for grievous errors, and of those 
thoughts of sin which open a way for the worst of crimes ! 
Beware, then, of Satan's gimblet. 

EXAGOEBATION. 

Ii^ certain ancient Italian frescoes Mary Magdalene is 
drawn as a woman completely enveloped in her own hair, 
which reaches to her feet and entirely wraps up her body as 
in a seamless garment. These queer draughtsmen taust ^^^<is» 
exaggerate ; granted that tTie woxcvaxv V-aA Vi\N% Vixt^ "^^^ 



72 - MY NOTE BOOK. 

must enfold her in it like a silkworm in its own silk. The 
practice survives among the tribe of talkers, everything with 
them is on the enlarged scale ; a man with ordinary abilities 
is a prodigy, another with very pardonable faults is a monster, 
a third with a few failings is a disgrace to humanity. Truth 
is as comely and beautiful as a woman with flowing hair, 
but exaggeration is as grotesque and ugly as the Magdalene, 
all hair from head to foot 

EXCUSES. 

Bishop W , we are told, was one day rebuking one of 

of his clergy for fox-hunting. " My lord," was the clergyman's 
answer, "every man must have some relaxation. I assure 
you I never go to balls." " Oh," said the bishop, " I perceive 

you allude to -my having been to the Duchess of S 's 

party, but I give you my word that I was never in the same 
room with the dancers ! " " My lord," responded the clergy- 
man, " my horse and I are getting old, and we are never in 
the same field with the houndsP Thus each had satisfied 
his conscience, because of some point beyond which he had 
not gone. What he had done was to be overlooked on 
account of what he had not done. The habit of making 
precisely similar excuses is all but universal ; though we see 
the absurdity of it in others we continue to practise it 
purselves. 

EZFEBIEKGE. 

A Christian's experience is like a rainbow, made up of 
drops of the grief of earth, and beams of the bliss of heaven. 

EXPEBIENCE— Boasting of its Bepth. 

In my house there is a well of extraordinary depth which 
reminds me of something better than the boasted deep experi- 
ence of certain censorious professors, who teach that to feel 
sin within is the main thing, but to be delivered from it of 



MY NOTE BOOK. ^ 73 

small consequence. When this well was commenced, the 
owner of the place resolved to have water, cost what it might. 
The well-sinkers dug through mud, and clay, and stone, but 
found no water ; here was the deep experience of the corrup- 
tionist, all earth and no living spring, the filth revealed but 
not removed, the leper discovered but not healed. Another 
hundred feet of hard digging deep in the dark, but no water — 
still deeper experience. Then a third hundred feet, and still 
dirt, but no crystal — the very finest grade of your deeply ex- 
perimental professor, who ridicules the joys of faith, as being 
of the flesh and presumptuous. Still on, on, on went the 
workers, till one day leaving their tools to go to dinner, upon 
their return they found that the water was rising fast, and 
their tools were drowned. Be this last my experience — to go 
so deep as to reach the springs of everlasting love, and find 
all my poor doings and efforts totally submerged, because the 
blessed fountains of grace have broken in upon me, covering 
all the mire, and rock, and esirth of my poor, naturally evil 
heart. 

* 

EXPEBDSNGE— Necessary to a Minister. 

BucHSEL says : — ^* Orthodoxy can be learnt from others ; 

living faith must be a matter of personal experience. The 

Lord sent out his disciples, saying, * Ye shall testify of me, 

because ye have been with me from the beginning.' He only 

is a witness who speaks of what he has seen with his own 

eyes, heard with his own ears, and handled with his own 

hands. Orthodoxy is merely another form of rationalism, if . 

it be learnt from without." 

• 
EXPEBIEKCE— Teaching the Valne of Grace. 

In the olden time when the government of England had 
resolved to build a wooden bridge over the Thames at West- 
minster, after they had driven a hundred and forty piles into 
the river, there occurred one of the laost. ^^n^^^ Sx^'sns* >sv 



74 MY NOTE BOOK. 

the memory of man, by means of which the piles were torn 
away from their strong fastenings, and many of them snapped 
in two. The apparent evil in this case was a great good ; it 
led the commissioners to reconsider their purpose, and a sub- 
stantial bridge of stone was erected. 

How well it is when the fleshly reformations of unre- 
generate men are broken to pieces, if thus they are led to fly 
to the Lord Jesus, and in the strength of his Spirit are brought 
to build soHdly for eternity. Lord, if thou suflerest my 
resolves and hopes to be carried away by temptations and the 
force of my corruptions, grant that this blessed calamity may 
drive me to depend wholly on thy grace, which cannot fail me. 

EZPEBESNCE— Variety of. 

RUSKIN, that most accurate observer, says : — " Break off 
an elm-bough three feet long, in full leaf, and lay it 
on the table before you, and try to draw it, leaf for leaf. 
It is ten to one if in the whole bough (provided you do not 
twist it about as you work) you find one form of a leaf exactly 
like another ; perhaps you will not even have one complete. 
Every leaf will be oblique, or foreshortened, or curled, or crossed 
by another, or shaded by another, or have something or other 
the matter with it ; and though the whole bough will look 
graceful and symmetrical, you will scarcely be able to tell how 
or why it does so, since there is not one line of it like another." 

If such infinite variety prevails in creation, we may reason- 
ably expect to find the same in the experience of the saints. 
Uniformity is no rule of spiritual life. Let us not judge 
others because their feelings have not been precisely similar 
to ours. All the saints are led in a right way, but no two of 
them precisely in the same way. Far be it from us to set up 
a standard and expect all to be conformed to it ; if we reject 
all believers who labour under infirmities, or are marred with 
faults, our fellowship will be scant indeed. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 75 

FAITH. 

The stupendous Falls of Niagara have been spoken of 
in every part of the world ; but while they are marvellous 
to hear of, and wonderful as a spectacle, they have been 
very destructive to human life, when by accident any have 
been carried down the cataract. Some years ago, two 
men, a bargeman and a collier, were in a boat and 
found themselves unable to manage it, it being carried so 
swiftly down the current that they must both inevitably be 
borne down and dashed to pieces. At last, however, one 
man was saved by floating^ a rope to him, which he 
grasped. The same instant that the rope came into his hand, 
a log floated by the other man. The thoughtless and con- 
fused bargeman, instead of seizing the rope, laid hold on the 
log. It was a fatal mistake, they were both in imminent 
peril, but the one was drawn to shore because he had a con- 
nection with the people on the land, whilst the other, clinging 
to the loose, floating log, was borne irresistibly along, and 
never heard of afterwards. Faith has a saving connection 
with Christ. Christ is on the shore, so to speak, holding the 
rope, and as we lay hold of it with the hand of oui* confi- 
dence, he pulls us to shore ; but our good works having no 
connection with Christ are drifted along down to the gulf of 
fell despair. Grapple our virtues as tightly as we may, even 
with hooks of steel, they cannot avail us in the least degree ; 
they are the disconnected log which has no holdfast on the 
heavenly shore. 

FAITH. 

The Emperor Napoleon I. was reviewing some troops 
upon the Place du Carrousel, in Paris ; and, in giving an 
order, he thoughtlessly dropped the bridle upon his horse's 
neck, which instantly set off on a gallop. The emperor was 
obliged to cling to the saddle. At this moment a common 
soldier of the line sprang before the horse^ seiiad \!a& X^xsSSs;^ 



76 MY NOTE BOOK. 

and handed it respectfully to the emperor. " Much obliged 
to you, captain/' said the chief, by this one word making the 
soldier a captain. The man believed the emperor, and, 
saluting him, asked, " Of what regiment, sire.^" Napoleon, 
charmed with his faith, replied, "Of my guards!" and galloped 
off. 

Now, what will the soldier do ? If he imitates those who 
before believing wish to see and feel, and like the apostle 
Thomas wait for palpable proof before relying upon testi- 
mony, he will say, " a captain of the guard always wears a 
captain's uniform, and mine is only that of a common soldier. 
I cannot, therefore, believe myself a captain;'' and the soldier 
would return to the ranks. But if, on the contrary, he believes 
fully and implicitly the emperor's word, and that his rank 
as captain of the guard depends not upon the uniform he 
wears, but that the uniform must be the consequence and 
evidence of his rank (and this will be his thought if he honours 
the emperor), he will not hesitate because of his dress, nor 
will he return to the line. And such, indeed, was the conduct 
of the man. As soon as the emperor left, the soldier laid 
down his gun, saying, " He may take it who will," and instead 
of returning to his comrades, he approached the group of 
staff officers. On seeing him, one of the generals scornfully 
said, "What does this fellow want here?" "This fellow," 
replied the soldier proudly, " is a captain of the guard." " You ? 
my poor friend! You are mad to say so!" "He said it," 
replied the soldier, pointing to the emperor, who was still in 
sight. " I ask your pardon, sir," said the general respectfully 
" I was not aware of it." 

Here, then, was exhibited a manifold faith. Since first 
the soldier believed the emperor, upon his word, because he 
heard him (as the Samaritans said of the Saviour), and after- 
wards, on the soldier's word, the general believed the emperor. 

You now see how a person may be sure that God gives 
peace : it is by believing his testimony, just as this soldier 



MY NOTE BOOK. 77 

believed that of his emperor. That is to say, as he believed 
himself to be a captain before wearing his uniform ; so on the 
word and promise of God, one believes himself to be a child 
of Jesus, before beihg sanctified by his Spirit." — Ccssar 
Malan^ D.D. 

FAITH— Appropriating. 

I ONCE heard a father tell, that when he removed his 
family to a new residence, where the accommodation was 
much more ample, and the substance much more rich and 
varied than that to which they had previously been accustomed, 
his youngest son, yet a lisping infant, ran round every room, 
and scanned every article with ecstacy, calling out, in childish 
wonder at every new sight, "Is this ours, father.^ and is this 
ours ?" The child did not say "yours," and I observed that 
the father while he told the story was not offended with the 
freedom. You could read in his glistening eye that the 
infant's confidence in appropriating as his own all that his 
father had, was an important element in his satisfaction. 

Such, I suppose, will be the surprise, and joy, and appro- 
priating confidence, with which the child of our Father's 
family will count all his own, when he is removed from the 
comparatively mean condition of things present, and enters 
the infinite of things to come. When the glories of heaven 
burst upon his view, he does not stand at a distance, like a 
stranger, saying, " O God, these are thine." He bounds for- 
ward to touch and taste every provision which those blessed 
mansions contain, exclaiming, as he looks in the Father's 
face, " Father, this and this is ours." The dear child is glad 
of all the Father's riches, and the Father is gladder of his 
dear child. — W, Arnot, 

FAITH— a Beath Grip. 

A SEA captain related at a prayer-meeting in Boston a 
short time ago a thrilling incident in his own eYL^^'Tc^ssK.^. 



78 MY NOTE BOOK. 

" A few years ago," said he, " I was sailing by the island of 
Cuba, when the cry ran through the ship, ' Man overboard !' 
It was impossible to put up the helm of the ship, but I 
instantly seized a rope and threw it over the ship^s stem, 
crying out to the man to seize it as for his life. The sailor 
caught the rope just as the ship was passing. I immediately 
took another rope, and making a slip noose of it, attached it 
to the other, and slid it down to the struggling sailor, and 
directed him to pass it over his shoulders and under his arms, 
and he would be drawn on board. He was rescued ; but he 
had grasped that rope with such firmness, with such a death- 
grip, that it took hours before his hold relaxed, and his hand 
could be separated from it. With such eagerness, indeed, 
had he clutched the object that was to save him, that the 
strands of the rope became imbedded in the flesh of his 
hands ! " . 

Reader, has not God let down from heaven a rope to 
every sinner on the earth, is not every strand a precious 
promise, and ought we not to lay hold on it as for our very 
life? — The Family Treasury for 1859. 

FAHH—Ood*! Begard for it. 

A SWALLOW having built its nest upon the tent of Charles V., 
the emperor generously commanded that the tent should 
not be taken down when the camp removed, but should remain 
until the young birds were ready to fly. Was there such 
gentleness in the heart of a soldier towards a poor bird which 
was not of his making, and shall the Lord deal hardly with 
his creatures when they venture to put their trust in him ! Be 
assured he hath a great love to those trembling souls that fly 
for shelter to his royal courts. He that buildeth his nest 
upon a divine promise shall find it abide and remain until 
he shall fly away to the land where promises are lost in 
fulfilments. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 79 

FAITH— God's Trial of. 

At the battle of Crescy, where Edward the Black Prince, 
then a youth of eighteen years of age, led the van, the 
king, his father, drew up a strong party on a rising ground, 
and there beheld the conflict in readiness to send relief where 
it should be wanted. The young prince being sharply charged, 
and in some danger, sent to his father for succour ; and as 
the king delayed to send it, another messenger was sent to 
crave immediate assistance. To him the king replied, " Go, 
tell my son that I am not so inexperienced a commander as 
not to know when succour is wanted, nor so careless a father 
as not to send it." He intended the honour of the day should 
be his son's, and therefore let him with courage stand to 
it, assured that help should be had when it might con- 
duce most to his renown. God draws forth his servants to 
fight in the spiritual warfare, where they are engaged, not 
only against the strongholds of carnal reason, and the exalted 
imaginations of their own hearts, but also in the pitched field 
against Satan and his wicked instruments. But they, poor 
hearts, when the charge is sharp, are ready to despond, and 
cry with Peter, " Save, Lord, we perish ;" but God is too 
watchful to overlook their exigencies, and too much a Father 
to neglect their succour. If help, however, be delayed, it is 
that the victory may be more glorious by the difficulty of 
overcoming. 

FAITH— Overcoming Temptation. 

When a traveller was asked whether he did not admire the 
admirable structure of some stately building, " No^^ said he, 
^^for Pve been at Rome^ where better are to be seen every dayS 
O believer, if the world tempt thee with its rare sights and 
curious prospects, thou mayst well scorn them, having been, ^ 
by contemplation, in heaven, and being able, by faith, to see 
infinitely better delights every hour of the day. " This is the 
victory which overcometh the world, even our faith." 



80 MY NOTE BOOK. 

FAITH— Stixnnlatixig Endeavour. 

See the spider casting out her film to the gale, she feels 
persuaded that somewhere or other it will adhere and form 
the commencement of her web. She commits the slender 
filament to the breeze believing that there is a place provided 
for it to fix itself. In this fashion should we believingly cast forth 
our endeavours in this life, confident that God will find a place 
for us. He who bids us pray and work will aid our efforts and 
guide us in his Providence in a right way. Sit not still in 
despair, O son of toil, but again cast out the floating thread 
of hopeful endeavour, and the wind of love will bear it to 
its resting place. 

FAIT&— the Summary of Virtue. 

The Jews in the Talmud have the saying, "The whole law 
was given to Moses at Sinai, in six hundred and thirteen 
precepts." David, in the fifteenth Psalm, brings them all 
within the compass of eleven. Isaiah brings them to six, 
Isaiah xxxiii. 15 ; Micah to three, Micah vi. 8 ; Isaiah, again, 
to two, Isaiah Ivi. ; Habakkuk to this one, "The just shall 
live by faith.*' Habakkuk ii. 4. — Lightfoot, 

FAITH— Triumph ol 

During an earthquake that occurred a few years since, 
the inhabitants of a small village were generally very much 
alarmed, but they were at the same time surprised at the 
calmness and apparent joy of an old lady whom they all knew. 
At length one of them, addressing the old lady, said : " Mother, 
are you not afraid?" "No," said the mother in Israel; "I 
rejoice to know that / have a God that can shake the world!* 

FAITH— and Worki. 

'TwAS an unhappy d|vision that has been made between 
faith and works. Though in my intellect I. may divide them, 
just as in the candle I know there is both light and heat, but 



MY NOTE BOOK. 81 

yet put out the candle, and they are both gone ; one remains 
not without the other : so it is betwixt faith and works. Nay, 
in a right conception, fides est opus .• if I beHeve a thing 
because I am commanded, that is opus, — The Table Talk of 
John Selden, 

7AL8E COKFIDEKCES. 

Some years ago, there was a bridge at Bath in so crazy a 
condition, that cautious persons chose rather to make a long 
circuit than run the risk of crossing it. One day, however, 
a very nervous lady, hurrying home to dress for the evening, 
came suddenly upon the spot without, till that moment, re- 
membering the danger. The sight of the bridge reminded 
her of its ruinous state, just as she was about to set her foot 
upon it. But what was she to do ? If she went on, the frail arch 
might give way under her ; to go round would be fatiguing 
and attended with much loss of time. She stood for some 
minutes trembling in anxious hesitation ; but at last a lucky 
thought occurred to her, she called for a sedan-chair, and was 
carried over in that conveyance ! You may laugh, perhaps, 
at this good lady's odd expedient for escaping danger 
by shutting out the view of it. But is not something 
of the same kind happening around you every day ? Those 
people who are alarmed and perplexed at the danger 
of having to judge for themselv^ in religious matters, think 
to escape that danger by choosing to take some guide as an 
infallible one, and believe or disbelieve as he bids them. 
What is this but crossing the crazy bridge in a sedan-chair ? 
In determining to believe whatever their guide affirms, they 
are in reality choosing to make every single exercise of faith 
which follows that original determination ; and they are 
choosing to believe he is infallible into the bargain. There 
are at least as many chances of error as before against every 
single article of faith in the creea which they adopt upon 
their guide's authority ; and there are also add\\i^TL2i^ Ociasss:.^^ 



82 MY NOTE BOOK. 

against that authority itself. Thus, in order to get over more 
safely, they put not only their own weight, but that of the 
sedan-chair also, upon the tottering arch. — Excelsior, 

FALSE HOPES— Danger o£ 

A SAILOR while clinging with others to a waterlogged 
vessel, observed great swarms of sharks and other ferocious 
fish swimming on all sides, as if waiting for their prey. If 
men had eyes might they not clearly see evil spirits gathering 
around the sinking hulks of Romanism and self-righteousness, 
watching for their expected victims ? 

FEAE OF 8IK. 

The old naturalist, Ulysses Androvaldus, tells us that a 
dove is so afraid of a hawk, that she will be frightened at the 
sight of one of its feathers. Whether it be so or not, I 
cannot tell ; but this I know, that when a man has had a 
thorough shaking over the jaws of hell, he will be so afraid of 
sin,' that even one of its feathers — any one sin — will alarm 
and send a thrill of fear through his souL This is a part of 
the way by which the Lord turns us when we are turned 
indeed. 

FOO-ft Figure of our Partial Xnowledge. 

Being once surrounded by a dense mist on the Styhead 
Pass in the Lake District, we felt ourselves to be transported 
into a world of mystery where everything was swollen to a 
size and appearance more vast, more terrible, than is usual on 
this sober planet. A little mountain tarn, scarcely larger than 
a farmer's horse-pond, expanded into a great lake whose 
distant shores were leagues beyond the reach of our poor 
optics ; and as we descended into the valley of Wastwater, 
the rocks on one side like the battlements of heaven, and the 
descent on the other hand, looked like the dreadful lips of a 
yawning abyss ; and yet when one looked back again in the 



I 



MY NOTE BOOK. 83 

morning's clear light there was nothing very dangerous in *he 
pathway, or terrible in the rocks. The road was a safe 
though sharp descent, devoid of terrors to ordinary mountain 
climbers. In the distance through the fog the shepherd 
" stalks gigantic," and his sheep are full-grown lions. 

Into such blunders do we fall in our life-pilgrimage ; a 
little trouble in the distance is, through our mistiness, 
magnified into a crushing adversity. We see a lion in the 
way, although it is written that no ravenous beast shall go 
up thereon. A puny foe is swollen into a Goliath, and the 
river of death widens into a shoreless sea. 

Come, heavenly wind, and blow the mist away, and then 
the foe will be despised, and the bright shores on the other 
side the river will stand out clear in the light of feith ! 

rOBEBODnraS-Faliified. 

John Condor, afterwards D.D., was bom at Wimple in 
Cambridgeshire, June 3, 1714. His grandfather, Richard 
Condor, kissed him, and, with tears in his eyes, said, " Who 
knows what sad days these little eyes are likely to see?" 
things wearing at that time a threatening aspect, relative to 
Dissenters. Dr. Condor remarked upon mentioning the above 
circumstance, " These eyes have, for more than sixty years, 
seen nothing but goodness and mercy follow me and the 
churches of Christ, even to this day.'' 

Thus many a desponding prophecy is falsified by events 
most blessed. We write bitter things, and God blots them 
out and writes gracious things in lieu thereof. Many a 
gloomy vaticinator might save himself his depression of spirit 
if he would remember that " the Lord reigneth," and " he will 
speak peace unto his people." 

FOBMALISX-Trieks of. 

In Mrs. Grant's "Letters from the Mountains" (1806), is 
the following anecdote of the then Duchess of Gordoxv, "'^V'^ 



84 BiY NOTE BOOK. 

duchess said that on Sunday she never saw company, nor 
played cards, nor went out : in England, indeed, she did so, 
because every one else did the same, but she would not intro- 
duce those manners into this country (Scotland). I stared at 
these gradations of piety growing warmer as it came north- 
ward, but was wise enough to stare silently." 

The tricks of formalism and hypocrisy are evermore the 
same. Man is regarded more than God. What Mrs. Grundy 
may say has far more influence with many than what the 
Lord may say. This is miserable meanness and rank impiety. 

FOSXALrrr-HaUti of; WortUeM. 

That honoured servant of Christ, Richard Knill, notes in 
his journal the following amusing incident of the force of 
habit, as exemplified in his horse. " Mr. and Mrs. Loveless 
would have me live with them, but they charged me very little 
for my board, whereby I was enabled, with my salary, to 
support seven native schools. These were so situated that I 
could visit them all in one day. My horse and gig were seen 
constantly on the rounds ; and my horse at last knew where 
to stop as well as I did. This nearly cost a Bengal officer his 
life. Captain Page, a godly man, who was staying with us 
until a ship was ready to take him to the Cape, one morning 
requested me to lend him my horse and gig to take him to 
the city. The -captain was driving officer-like, when the horse 
stopped suddenly, and nearly threw him out. He inquired, 
*What place is this? The answer was, 'It's the Sailors' 
Hospital.' They started again, and soon the horse stopped 
suddenly, and the captain was nearly out as before. * What's 
this ?' — ' A school, sir,' was the reply. At last he finished his 
business, and resolved to return another way. By doing this 
he came near my schools, and again and again the horse 
stopped. When he got home, he said, ' I am glad that I have 
returned without broken bones, but never will I drive a 
religious horse again.'" 



MY NOTE BCX)K. 85 

Persons who go to places of worship from mere habit and 
without entering into the devotions of the service, may here 
see that their religion is only such as a horse may possess, and 
a horse's religion will never save a man. 

FRIENDSHIP OF THE WOBLD— Vanity. 

The vanity of all friendship which is not founded in true 
principle, was never more plainly expressed than in an 
honest, but heartless, sentence of one of Horace Walpole's 
letters. " If one of my friends happens to die, I drive down 
to St. James's Coffee-house, and bring home a new one." 
The name of " friend " is desecrated in a worldling's mouth — 
but there is a friend, 

TSIVOIiITIES— Sender Xen Calloni to the Ooipel. 

"When Bonaparte put the Duke d'Enghien to death, all 
Paris felt so much horror at the event that the throne of the 
tyrant trembled under him. A counter-revolution was ex- 
pected, and woidd most probably have taken place, had not 
Bonaparte ordered a new ballet to be brought out, with the 
utmost splendour, at the Opera. The subject he pitched on 
was " OssiaHy or the Bards" It is still recollected in Paris, 
as perhaps the grandest spectacle th^t had ever been exhibited 
there. The consequence was that the murder of the Duke 
d'Enghien was totally forgotten, and nothing but the new ballet 
was talked of." 

After this fashion Satan takes off men's thoughts from their 
sins, and drowns the din of their consciences. Lest they 
should rise in revolt against him, he gives them the lusts of 
the flesh, the vanities of pride, the cares of this world, or the 
merriment of fools, to lead away their thoughts. Poor silly 
men are ready enough for these misleading gaieties, and for 
the sake of them the solemnities of death and eternity ac^ 
forgotten. 



86 MY NOTE BOOK. 



7BIV0LITT OF MUn). 



If over that little heap of dust you hold a good magnet, 
should there be present a nail, or a needle, or a few iron 
filings, they will at once spring up and cling to the attracting 
bar. And were there only a magnet strong enough, it might 
soon become the monopolist of that metal, which, after all, 
is more precious than silver or gold. 

If now, on your coat-sleeve, or on the woollen table-cover 
you rub a stick of wax or amber, you impart to this substance 
also an attractive power. But it is a magnet of a very 
different sort. Hold it ever so near that knife or needle, and 
there is no movement. Hold it near the carpet, or, better 
still, insinuate it into some unswept comer, and every loose 
particle, the- thread-clippings and paper-shavings, the stray 
feathers, and silky fibres, will instantly leap up to it, and 
qonvert its bald apex into a little mass of rubbish. 

Some minds have a powerful affinity for what is sterling 
and useful. Themselves strong like the loadstone, they are 
constantly acquiring facts, and principles, and maxims of 
wisdom. They gain the respect of others. They become 
master-spirits, moving and controlling their fellows. If in 
business, they turn out successful merchants ; if students, 
they step forth the chiefs of their profession ; if thrown into 
public life, they graduate into the highest ranks of states- 
manship, and become the moulders of an age, the disposers 
of an empire, the movers of mankind. 

But some minds have an attraction quite as intense for 
what is frivolous. In early life they do not " take to " tasks 
and lessons ; and all throughout they retain the intellectual 
langour, which deprecates instruction and refuses to apply. 
Their theory of life is perpetual recreation, and ignoring the 
commandment which says, ^ Six days shalt thou labour, and 
do all thy work," they never know the sweetness of a true 
Sabbatic repose. Unused to self-denial, and seldom roused to 



MY NOTE BOOK. 87 

exertion, if they enter business you soon hear that they have 
" stopped ;" and in a learned profession, if they do not " stop," 
it is only because they never could get on. — Excelsior, 

OENESOUS FEELING— toward! Brethren. 

** One incident gives high proof of the native generosity 
of Turner's nature. He was one of the hanging committee, as 
the phrase goes, of the Royal Academy. The walls were full 
when Turner's attention was attracted by a picture sent in by 
an unknown provincial artist by the name of Bird. * A good 
picture,' he exclaimed. * It must be hung up and exhibited.' 

* Impossible ! ' responded the committee of academicians. 

* The arrangement cannot be disturbed. Quite impossible I ' 
*A good picture,' iterated Turner, *it must be hung up;' 
and, finding his colleagues to be as obstinate as himself, he 
hitched down one of his own pictures, and hung up Bird's in 
its place." Would to God*that in far more instances the 
like spirit ruled among servants of the Lord Jesus. The 
desire to honour others and to give others a fair opportunity 
to rise should lead ministers of distinction to give place to 
less eminent men to whom it may be of essential service to 
become better known. We are not to look every man on his 
own things, but every man also on the things of others. 

0IVIN0. 

A WOMAN who was known to be very poor, came to a 
missionary meeting in Wakefield, and offered to subscribe a 
penny a-week to the mission fund. "Surely," said one, 
"you are too poor to afford this?" She replied, "I spin so 
many hanks of yam a-week for my living, and /'// spin one 
hank more, and that will be a penny a-week for the society." 

GOB— Acting as a Father. 

A KING is sitting with his council deliberating on high 
affairs of state involving the destiny of nations, when 



88 MY NOTE BOOK. 

suddenly he hears the sorrowful cry of his Uttle child who has 
fallen down, or been frightened by a wasp ; he rises and runs 
to his relief, assuages his sorrows and relieves his fears. 
Is there anything unkingly here? Is it not most natural? 
Does it not even elevate the monarch in your esteem ? Why 
then do we think it dishonourable to the King of kings, our 
heavenly Father, to consider the small matters of his children? 
It is infinitely condescending, but is it not also superlatively 
natural that being a Father he should act as such ? 

OOD— hii Benevolence in Creation. 

The benevolence of our great Creator is chanted even by 
things unpleasant to the ear. " The nuptial song of reptiles," 
says Kirby, " is not, like that of birds, the dehght of every 
heart ; but it is rather calculated to disturb and horrify than 
to still the sold. The hiss of serpents, the croaking of frog^ 
and toads, the moaning of turtles, the bellowing of crocodiles 
and alligators, form their gamut of discords.'' Here, also, we 
may read beneficent design. Birds are the companions of 
man in the lawn and forest, in his solitary walks, amidst his 
rural labours, and around the home of his domestic enjoy- 
ments. They are, therefore, framed beautiful to the eye, and 
pleasing to the ear ; but of the reptile tribes, some are his 
formidable enemies, and none were ever intended to be his 
associates. They shun cultivation, and inhabit unfrequented 
marshes or gloomy wilds. Their harsh notes and ungainly 
or disgusting forms, serve therefore to warn him of danger, or 
to turn his steps. to places more fit for his habitation. — H» 
Duncat^s Sacred Philosophy of the Seasons, 

OOD-is Light. 

Suppose the case of a cripple who had spent his life in a 
room where the sun was never seen. He has heard of its 
existence, he believes in it, and indeed, has seen enough of its 
light to give him high ideas of its glory. Wishing to see the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 89 

sun^ he is taken out at night into the streets of an illuminated 
city. At first he is delighted, dazzled ; but after he has had 
time to reflect, he finds darkness spread amid the lights, and 
he asks, '^ Is this the sun ? '' He is taken out under the 
starry sky, and is enraptured ; but, on reflection, finds that 
night covers the earth, and again asks, "Is this the sun?" 
He is carried out some bright day at noontide, and no 
sooner does his eye open on the sky than all question is at an 
end. There is but one sun. His eye is content : it has seen 
its highest object, and feels that there is nothing brighter. 

So with the soul : it enjoys all lights, yet amid those of art 
and nature, is still enquiring for something greater. But 
when it is led by the reconciling Christ into the presence of 
the Father, and he Ufts up upon it the light of his countenance, 
all thought of anything greater disappears. As there is but 
one sun, so there is but one God. The soul which once 
discerns and knows him, feels that greater or brighter there 
is none, and that the only possibility of ever beholding more 
glory is by drawing nearer. — Rev, W, Arthur. 

GOB— LOYO o£ 

All things that are on earth shall wholly pass away. 
Except the love of God, which shall live and last for aye. 
The forms of men shall be as they had never been ; 
The blasted groves shall lose their fresh and tender green ; 
The birds of the thicket shall end their pleasant song, 
And the nightingale shall cease to chant the evening long ; 
The kine of the pasture shall feel the dart that kills. 
And all the fair white flocks shall perish from the hills ; 
The goat and antlered stag, the wolf and the fox. 
The wild boar of the wood, and the chamois of the rocks. 
And the strong and fearless bear, in the trodden dust shall lie ; 
And the dolphin of the sea, and the mighty whale shall die. 
And realms shall be dissolved, and empires be no more ; 
And they shall bow to death, who ruled from shot^ I'Ci ^<5Pt^ \ 



90 MY NOTE BOOK. 

And the great globe itself (so the holy writings tell), 
With the rolling firmament, where the starry armies dwell. 
Shall melt with fervent heat — they shall all pass away. 
Except the love of God, which shall hve and last for aye. 

William Cullen Bryant. 

GOB— Vague Conoeptioiui of. 

" One day, in conversation with the Jungo-kritu, head 
pundit of the College of Fort WiUiam, on the subject of God, 
this man, who is truly learned in his own shastrus, gave me 
from ohe of their books, this parable : — ' In a certain country 
there existed a village of blind men. These men had heard 
that there was an amazing animal called the elephant, but 
they knew not how to form an idea of his shape. One day 
an elephant happened to pass through the place: the villagers 
crowded to the spot where this animal was standing. One 
of them got hold of his trunk, another seized his ear, another 
his tail; another one of his legs, etc. After thus trying to 
gratify their curiosity they returned into the village, and 
sitting down together they began to give their ideas on what 
the elephant was like : the man who had seized his trunk said 
he thought the elephant was like the body of the plantain 
tree ; the man who had felt his ear said he thought he was 
like the fan with which the Hindoos clean the rice ; the man 
who had felt his tail said he thought he must be hke a snake, 
and the man who had seized his leg, thought he must be like 
a pillar. An old blind man of some judgment was present, 
who was greatly perplexed how to reconcile these jarring 
notions, respecting the form of the elephant ; but he at 
length said, " You have all been to examine this animal, it is 
true, and what you report cannot be false : I suppose, there- 
fore, that th^t which was like the plaintain tree must be his 
trunk ; that which was like a fan must be his ear ; that which 
was like a snake must be his tail, and that which was Uke a 
pillar must be his body.'' In this way, the old man united all 



MY NOTE BOOK. 91 

their notions, and made out something of the form of the 
elephant. Respecting God/ added the pundit, 'we are all 
blind; none of us has seen him; those who wrote the 
shastrus, like the old blind man, have collected all the 
reasonings and conjectures of mankind togethei:, and have 
endeavoured to form some idea of the nature of the Divine 
Being.''' 

The pundit's parable may be appropriately applied to the 
science of theology. Some Christians see one truth and some 
another, and each one is quite sure that he has beheld the 
whole. Where is the master-mind who shall gather up the ^ 
truth out of each creed, and see the theology of the Bible in 
its completeness? — a sublimer sight than the believers in the 
isms have yet been able to imagine. 

GODLINESS— Ko Burden to True Saints. 

The Princess Elizabeth carried the crown for her sister in 
the procession at Mary's coronation, and complained to 
Noailles of its great weight. " Be patient," was the adroit 
answer, " it will seem lighter when on your own head." The 
outward forms of godliness are as burdensome to an unre- 
generate man as was the crown to the princess ; but let him 
be bom again and so made a possessor of the good things of 
divine grace, and they wiU sit easily enough upon his head, 
as his glory and delight. 

GOLD— Flaoei of iti Alnmdanee TJndeiiraUe. 

Did the eye ever rest upon a more utter desolation than 
that which surrounds the gold mines near Goldau in the 
Hartz mountains ? It is worse than a howling wilderness, it 
is a desert with its bowels torn out, and scattered in horrid 
confusion. More or less this is true of all gold mining regions, 
and Humboldt, when writing of the Pearl Coast, says that it 
presents the same aspect of misery as the countries of gold 
and diamonds. Is it so then? Ar^ ivcYikfta ^^ \5ksa5. i5iKsv\a 



92 MY NOTE BOOK. 

horror ? Lord, let me set my .affections on better things^ and 
seek for less dangerous wealth. 

OOSFEL— Duty of Spreading it 

HUBER, the great naturalist, tells us, that if a single wasp 
discovers a deposit of honey or other food, he will return to 
his nest, and impart the good news to his companions, who 
will sally forth in great numbers to partake of the fare which 
has been discovered for them. Shall we who have found 
honey in the rock Christ Jesus, be less considerate of our 
fellow men than wasps are of their fellow insects? Ought we 
not rather hke the Samaritan woman to hasten to tell the 
good news ? Common humanity shoidd prevent one of us 
from concealing the great discovery which grace has enabled 
us to make. 

OOSFEL-Jeint the Snin o£ 

In a village church in one of the Tyrolese valleys, we saw 
upon the pulpit an outstretched arm, carved in wood, the 
hand of which held forth a cross. We noted the emblem as 
full of instruction as to. what all true ministry should be, and 
must be — a holding forth of the cross of Christ to the multi- 
tude as the only trust of sinners. Jesus Christ must be set 
forth evidently crucified among them. Lord, make this the 
aim and habit of all our ministers. 

OOSFEL-needi no Xeretrioiooi AdonuntBti. 

When Dionysius, the tyrant, sent Lysander some rich 
Sicilian garments for his daughters, he refused them, alleging 
that " He was afraid these fine clothes would make them look 
more homely." The truth of God is so comely in itself that the 
trappings of oratory are far more likely to lessen its glory 
than to increase it. Paul saith that he preached the gospel 
"not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should Ijc 
made of none effect." 



MY NOTE BOOK. 93 

OOSPXL-ueeds Spiritual Ears to Appraeiate it 

Alphonse Karr heard a gardener ask his master per- 
mission to sleep for the future in the stable ; " for,** said he, 
"there is no possibility of sleeping in the chamber behind the 
greenhouse, sir; there are nightingales there which do nothing 
but guggle, and keep up a noise all the night.** The sweetest 
sounds are but an annoyance to those who have no musical 
ear ; doubtless the music of heaven would have no charms to 
carnal minds, certainly the joyful sound of the gospel is un- 
appreciated so long as men's ears remain uncircumciscd. 

eOSPEIr-irotliing elie will Satiffy. 

Take away a toy from a child, and give him another, and 
he is satisfied ; but if he be hungry no toy will do. As new- 
bom babes, true believers desire the sincere milk of the Word ; 
and the desire of grace in this way is grace. — John Newton, 

OOSFEL-shoTLld bo PrMched Conitaatly. 

When Le Toumeau preached the Lent sermon at St. 
Benoit, at Paris, Louis XIV. enquired of Boileau, " if he knew 
anything of a preacher called Le Toumeau, whom every- 
body was running after?" "Sire," replied the poet, "your 
Majesty knows that people always run after novelties ; this 
man preaches the gospel." Boileau's remark as to the novelty 
of preaching the gospel in his time, brings to mind the candid 
confession of a Flemish preacher, who, in a sermon delivered 
before an audience wholly of his own order, said, " We are 
worse than Judas ; he sold and delivered his Master, we sell 
him too, but deliver him not." 

OOSFEL-to iM Praaohed Simply. 

Of the works of a famous alchymist of the thirteenth 
century, it is said that, " whoever would reacf his book to find 
out the secret would employ all his labour in vain." All the 
gold makers who have written upon their favourite \ss^'^«xvi 



94 MY NOTE BOOK. 

are in the like predicament, no one can comprehend what 
the secret is which they pretend to divulge. May we not 
shrewdly guess that if they had any secret to tell they woidd 
put it in intelligible language, and that their pompous and 
involved sentences are only a screen for their utter ignorance 
of the matter? When we hear preachers talking of divine 
things in a style savouring more of metaphysical subtlety 
than of gospel plainness ; when the seeking sinner cannot 
find out the way of salvation because of their philosophical 
jargon, may we not with justice suspect that the preacher 
does not know the gospel, and conceals his culpable ignorance 
behind the veil of rhetorical magniloquence ? Surely if the 
man understood a matter so important to all his hearers as 
the way of salvation, he would feel constrainedvto tell it out 
in words which all might comprehend. 

GOSPEL (Simple)— the Keed of the Wisest 

During an illness, that illustrious scholar Bengel sent for 
a student in the Theological Institution, and requested him 
to impart a word of consolation. The youth replied, " Sir, I 
am but a pupil, a mere learner ; I don't know what to say 
to a teacher like ^^«." "What!*' said Bengel, "a divinity 
student, and not able to communicate a word of scriptural 
comfort !'' The student, abashed, contrived to utter the text, 
" The blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanseth us from 
all sin." " That is the very word I want," said Bengel, " it is 
quite enough," and taking him affectionately by the hand 
dismissed him. 

OEAGS. 

Payson, when, dying, expressed himself with great earnest- 
ness respecting the grace of God as exercised in saving lost 
men, and seemed particidarly affected that it should be 
bestowed on one so ill-deserving as himself. " Oh, how 
sovereign ! Oh, how sovereign 1 Grace is the only thing that 



MY NOTE BOOK. ^5 

can make us like God. I might be dragged through heaven, 
earth, and hell, and I should be still the same sinful, polluted 
wretch, unless God himself shoidd renew and cleanse me." 

GBAGE—Equal tQ our Day. 

Whenever the Lord sets his servants to do extraordinary 
work he always gives them extraordinary strength ; or if 
he puts them to unusual suffering he gives them unusual 
patience. When we enter upon war with some petty New 
Zealand chief, our troops expect to have their charges defrayed, 
and accordingly we pay them gold by thousands, as their 
expenses may require ; but when an army marches against a 
grim monarch, in an unknown country, who has insulted the 
British flag, we pay, as we know to our cost, not by thousands but 
by millions. And thus, if God calls us to common and ordinary 
trials, he will defray the charges of our warfare by thousands, 
but if he commands us to an unusual struggle with some tre- 
mendous foe, he will discharge the liabilities of our war by 
miUions, according to the riches of his grace in which he has 
abounded towards us through Christ Jesus. 

GSACS-lCatiirity in. 

Maturity in grace makes us willing to part with worldly 
goods ; the green apple needs a sharp twist to separate it 
from the bough ; but the ripe fruit parts readily from the 
wood. Maturity in grace makes it easier to part with life 
itself; the unripe pear is scarcely beaten down with much 
labour, while its mellow companion drops readily into the 
hand with the slightest shake. Rest assured that love to the 
things of this life, and cleaving to this present state, are sure 
indications of immaturity in the divine life. 

GBACSS— should be Seasonable. 

It is said in praise of the tree planted by the rivers of 
water, that it bringeth forth its fruit in its season; good men 



96 MY NOTE BOOK. 

should aim to have seasonable virtues. For instance, a for- 
griving spirit is golden if it display itself in the moment when 
an injury is received ; it is but silver if it show itself upon 
speedy reflection, and it is mere lead if it be manifested after 
a long time for cooling. The whole matter reminds us of the 
Warwickshire estimate of swarms of bees. 

** A swarm of "bees in May 
Is worth a load of hay ; 
A swarm of bees in June 
Is worth a silver spune {spoon) ; 
A swarm of bees in July 
Is not worth a fly." 

OEA.CS— Triumphaxit over TriaL 

"In one place near the Hospice of St. Bernard, I met with 
a curious natural conservatory. The under surface of the 
snow having been melted by the warmth of the soil, which in 
Alpine regions is always markedly higher than that of the 
air, was not in contact with it. A snowy vault was thus 
formed, glazed on the top with thin plates of transparent ice ; 
and here grew a most lovely cushion of the Aretia HelvetkOy 
covered with hundreds of its delicate rosy flowers, like a 
miniature hydrangea blossom. The dark colour of the soil 
favoured the absorption of heat ; and, prisoned in its crystal 
cave, this little fairy grew and blossomed securely from the 
very heart of winter, the unfavourable circumstances around 
all seeming so many ministers of good, increasing its strength, ' 
and enhancing its loveliness.** 

This delightful little sketch of natiu% by Mr. Hugh 
Macmillan may be paralleled in the kingdom of grace ; for in 
the cold shade of poverty, protected from a thousand tempta- 
tions by that very scant, and in the centre of sinful society, 
stimulated to a bolder confession by the surrounding op- 
position, we have met with the rarest specimens of grace. 



MY NOTE BOOK, 97 

Where every influence appeared to be deadly, the most 
vigorous spiritual life has been produced. 

OSATITUDE. 

There is a very touching little story told of a poor woman 
with two children, who had not a bed for them to lie upon, 
and scarcely any clothes to cover them. In the depth of 
winter they were nearly frozen, and the mother took the door 
of a cellar off the hinges, and set it up before the corner 
where they crouched down to sleep, that some of the draught 
and cold might be kept from them. One of the children 
whispered to her, when she complained of how badly off they 
were, "Mother, what do those dear little children do who 
have no cellar door to put up in front of them ?" Even thqre, 
you see, the little heart found cause for thankfulness. 

OBOWTH nr GBACE. 

We have the likenesses of our bOys taken on every birth- 
day, and twelve of the annual portraits are now framed in 
one picture, so that we see them at a glance from their baby- 
hood to their youth. Suppose such photographic memorials 
of our own spiritual life had been taken and preserved, would 
there be a' regular advance, as in these boys, or should we 
still have been exhibited in the perambulator? Have not 
some grown awhile, and then suddenly dwarfed ? Have not 
others gone back to babyhood? Here is a wide field for 
reflection. 

OBOWTH IN GBACE. 

Lettuces, radishes, and such like garden crops, are soon 
out of the ground and ready for the table, a month almost 
suffices to perfect them ; but an oak requires long centuries 
to come to the fulness of its growth. Those graces which are 
most precious and durable will cost us longest to produce ; 
those good things which spring up hastily xxs2^ \nsn^ 'SsKsvskS:. 

1 



98 MY NOTE BOOK. 

transient worth about them, but we cannot look for perman- 
ence and value in them. There is no need to deplore the 
slowness of our spiritual growth, if that which comes of it be 
of a solid character. 

OBOWTH nr OEACE. 

The vendors of flowers in the streets of London, are wont 
to commend them to customers by crying, " All a blowing 
and a growing." It would be no small praise to Christians if 
we could say as much for them, but, alas ! of too many 
professors the cry would truthfully be, " All a stunting and 
a withering." 

GBTTMBLEBS. 

A HEAVY waggon was being dragged along a country lane 
by a team of oxen. The axle-trees groaned and creaked 
terribly, when the oxen turning round, thus addressed the 
wheels : — " Halloa, there ! why do you make so much noise ? 
we bear all the labour, and we, not you, ought to cry out ! " 
Those complain first in our churches who have least to do. 
The gift of grumbling is largely dispensed among those who 
have no other talents, or who keep what they have wrapped 
up in a napkin. 

HABITS-^Sestmetive Power ot 

The surgeon of a regiment in India relates the following 
incident :— " A soldier rushed into the tent, to inform me 
that one of his comrades was drowning in a pond close 
by, and nobody could attempt to save him in consequence of 
the dense weeds which covered the surface. On repairing to 
the spot, we found the poor fellow in his last struggle, man- 
fully attempting to extricate himself from the meshes of rope- 
like grass that encircled his body ; but, to all appearance, the 
more h§ laboured to escape, the more firmly they became 



MY NOTE BOOK. 99 

coiled round his limbs. At last he sank, and the floating 
plants closed in, and left not a trace of the disaster. After 
some delay, a raft was made, and we put off to the spot, and 
sinking a pole some twelve feet, a native dived, holding on by 
the stake, and brought the body to the surface. I shall never 
forget the expression of the dead man's face — the clenched 
teeth, and fearful distortion of the countenance, while coils of 
long trailing weeds clung round his body and limbs, the 
muscles of which stood out stiff and rigid, whilst his hands 
grasped thick masses, showing how bravely he had struggled 
for life." 

This heart-rending picture is a terribly accurate represen- 
tation of a man with a conscience alarmed by remorse, 
struggling with his sinful habits, but finding them too strong 
for him. Divine grace can save the wretch from his unhappy 
condition, but if he be destitute of that, his remorseful 
agonies will but make him more hopelessly the slave of his 
passions. Laocoon, in vain endeavouring to tear off the 
serpents' coils from himself and children, aptly portrays the 
long-enslaved sinner contending with sin in his own strength. 
"Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his 
spots?" 

HAPPINESS OP BELIXVEBS. 

One of my hearers had seven children, who had come in 
rapid succession ; he was hard-working and well spoken of. 
His children were all asleep when I went in, ind as I expressed 
the pleasure the sight of their peacefid little faces gave me, 
the father said, " Ay, these are fine times for them ; they need 
not to fake any thought for themselves." On the Sunday the 
man was in church. I dwelt much upon the happy state of 
children, exempt from care as they were, and went on to say 
that believers were the children of God, that the Lord had 
commanded them to be careful for nothing, and promised 
that he would care for them. The man imderstood \xs&^'ass&. 



100 MY NOTE BOOK. 

it evidently pleased him to hear his expression repeated from 
the pulpit. — BuchseL 

HEAD— Christ 

Every one knows that it would be far better to lose our feet 
than our head. Adam had feet to stand with, but we haye 
lost them by his disobedience ; yet glory be to God, we have 
found a Head, in whom we abide eternally secure, a Head 
which we shall never lose. 

HEABEBS. 

Jedediah Buxton, the famous peasant, who could multiply 
nine figures by nine in his head, was once taken to see Garrick 
act. When he went back to his own village, he was asked 
what he thought of the great actor and his doings. " Oh ! " 
he said, " he did not know, he had only seen a little man 
strut about the stage, and repeat 7,956 words." Here was 
a want of the ability to appreciate what he saw, and the ex- 
ercise of the reigning faculty to the exclusion of every other. 
Similarly our hearers, if destitute of the spiritual powers by 
which the gospel is discerned, fix their thoughts on our words> 
tones, gestures, or countenance, and make remarks upon us 
which from a spiritual point of view are utterly absurd. How 
futile are our endeavours without the iHoly Spirit I 

HEABora. 

" I have an ear for other preachers," Sir John Cheke used 
to say, " but I have a heart for Latimer." Here is a very 
clear and main distinction. Too often men hear the Word 
sounding its drums and trumpets outside their walls, and they 
are filled with admiration of the martial music, but their city 
gates are fast closed and vigilantly guarded, so that the 
truth has no admittance, but only the sound of it. Would to 
God we knew how to reach men's affections, for the heart is 
the target we aim at, and unless we hit it we miss altogether. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 101 

HEABHrCh-Oarelesflly. 

We crossed and recrossed the river several times by 
the ferry-boat at Basle. We had no object in the world 
but merely amusement and curiosity, to watch the simple 
machinery by which the same current is made to drift 
the boat in opposite directions from side to side. To 
other passengers it was a business, to us a sport. Our 
hearers use our ministry in much the same manner when 
they come to it out of the idlest curiosity, and listen to us as 
a means of spending a pleasant hour. That which should 
ferry them across to a better state of soul, they use as a mere 
pleasure-boat, to sail up and down in, making no progress 
after years of hearing. Alas ! it may be sport to them, but 
it is death to us, because we know it will ere long be death 
to them. 

HEARTITg— tor Others. 

The negro preachers are often marked by great shrewd- 
ness and mother wit ; and will not only point the truth, but 
barb it, so that if once in it will stick fast. One of these was 
once descanting with much earnestness on different ways in 
which men lose their souls. Under one head of remark, he 
said that men often lose their souls through excessive 
generosity. " What ! " he exclaimed, " you tell me you never 
heard of that before ? You say, ministers often tell us we 
lose our souls for our stinginess, and for being covetous — 
but who ever heard of a man that hurt hiniself by going too 
far t'other way ? I tell you how they do it. They sit down 
under the sermon, and when the preacher touch upon this sin 
or that sin, they no take it to themselves, but give this part of 
the sermon to one brother, an<J that part to another brother. 
And so they give away the whole sermon, and it do them no 
good. And that's the way they lose their souls by being too 
generous." 

There is great truth in this rematk, TVv'^ ^N-asjX ^\ "^ ^'^&>- 



102 MY NOTE BOOK. 

applying conscience causes much of the best of preaching to 
fall like rain upon a rock, from which it soon runs off ; or if 
a little is caught in a hollow, it only stagnates, and then dries 
away, leaving no blessing behind. A sermon, however true 
and forcible, thus disposed of, does no good to those among 
whom it is so silently distributed, while it leaves him who 
squanders its treasures to perish at last in the poverty and 
emptiness of his soul. 

HEABINGh-HBeless Alone. 

What a mistake to imagine that, by hearing first one 
preacher and then another, we can derive benefit to our 
souls ! More is wanted than such hearing. A raven may 
fly from cage to cage, but it is not thereby changed into a 
dove. Go from room to room of the royal feast, and the 
sight of the tables will never stay thy hunger. Reader^ the 
main thing is to have and hold the truth personally and 
inwardly ; if this be not seen to, thou wilt die in thy sins, 
though ten thousand voices should direct thee to the way of 
salvation. Pity indeed is it that the bulk of hearers are 
hearers only, and are no more likely to go to heaven than the 
seats they sit on in the assembly of the saints. 

HEABT— its Aberrations.^ 

The compass on board an iron vessel is very subject to 
aberrations ; yet, for all that, its evident desire is to be true to 
the pole. True hearts in this wicked world, and in this 
fleshly body, are all too apt to swerve, but they still show their 
inward and persistent tendency to point towards heaven and 
God. On board iron vessels it is a common thing to see a 
compass placed aloft, to be as much away from the cause of 
aberration as possible : a wise hint to us to elevate our affec- 
tions and desires ; the nearer to God the less swayed by worldly 
influences. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 103 

EEABT (Broken)— its Frevalenoe with Ood. 

What man among you can stand against his children's 
tears ? When King Henry II., in the ages gone by, was pro- 
voked to take up arms against his ungrateful and rebellious 
son, he besieged him in one of the French towns, and the 
son being near to death, desired to see his father, and con- 
fess his wrong-doing ; but the stem old sire refused to look 
the rebel in the face. The young man being sorely troubled 
in his conscience, said to those about him, " I am dying, take 
me from my bed, and let me lie in sackcloth and ashes, in 
token of my sorrow for my ingratitude to my father." Thus 
he died, and when the tidings came to the old man outside 
the walls, that his boy had died in ashes, repentant for his 
rebellion, he threw himself upon the earth, like another David, 
and said, " Would God I had died for him." The thought of 
his boy's broken heart touched the heart of the father. If ye, 
being evil, are overcome by your children's tears, how much 
more shall your Father who is in heaven find in your bemoan- 
ings and confessions an argument for the display of his 
pardoning love through Christ Jesus our Lord ? This is the 
eloquence which God delights in, the broken heart and the 
contrite spirit. 

HEABT— HardnesB of. 

LiGHTFOOT says :— ^' I have heard it more than once and 
again, from the sheriffs who took all the gunpowder plotters, 
and brought them up to London, that every night when they 
came to their lodging by the way, they had their music and 
dancing a good part of the night. One would think it strange 
that men in their case should be so merry." More marvellous 
still is it that those between whom and death there is but a 
step, should sport away their time as if they should live on 
for ages. Though the place of torment is within a short 
march of all unregenerate men, yet see how they make mirth, 
grinning and jesting between the jaws of hell] 



104 MY NOTE BOOK. 

HEABT— mnst be Benewed. 

A MAN may beat down the bitter fruit froih an evil tree 
until he is weary; whilst the root abides in strength and 
vigour, the beating down of the present fruit will not hinder 
it from bringing forth more. This is the folly of some men ; 
they set themselves with all earnestness and diligence against 
the appearing eruption of lust, but leaving the principle and 
root untouched, perhaps unsearched out, they make but little 
or no progress in this work of mortification. — John Owen, 

H£ABT— Seat of Spiritual Disease. 

Some malady which you do not understand troubles and 
alarms you. The physician is called. Thinking that the 
iUness proceeds from a certain inflammatory process on a 
portion of your skin, you anxiously direct his attention to the 
spot. Silently, but sympathisingly, he looks at the place 
where you have bidden him look, and because you have 
bidden him look tttere, but soon he turns away. He is busy 
with an instrument on another part of your body. He presses 
his trumpet tube gently to your breast, and listens for the 
pulsations which faintly but distinctly pass through. He 
looks and listens there, and saddens as he looks. You again 
direct his attention to the cutaneous eruption which annoys 
you. He sighs and sits silent. When you reiterate your 
request that something should be done for the external 
eruption, he gently shakes his head, and answers not a word. 
I«'rom this silence you would learn the truth at last, you 
would not miss its meaning long.. 

O miss not the meaning of the Lord when he points to 
the seat of the soul's disease : ^' Ye will not come." These, 
his enemies, dwell in your heart. — W. ArnoL 

HEAVEN. 

** Who,'' saith an old divine, " chides a serVant for taking 
away the first course at a feast when the second consists of 



MY NOTE BOOR. 105 

far greater delicacies ? ^ Who then can feel regret that this 
present world passeth away, when he sees that an eternal 
world of joy is coming? The first course is grace, but the 
second is glory, and that is as much better as the fruit is 
better than the blossom. 

HEAVEN— Onr Future Condition in. 

You will very often perceive in your rain-water certain ugly 
little things, which swim and twist about in it, always trying 
if they can to reach the surface, and breathe through one 
end of their bodies. What makes these little things so lively, 
these innumerable little things like very small tadpoles, why 
are they so energetic ? Possibly they have an idea of what they 
are going to be. The day will come when all of a sudden 
there will emerge from the case of the creature which now 
navigates your bason, a long-legged thing with two bright 
gauze-like wings, which will mount into the air, and on a 
summer's evening will dance in the sunlight. It is nothing 
more nor less than a gnat in one of its earliest stages. Mark 
in that creature an image of your present self; you are an 
undeveloped being ; you have not your wings as yet, and are 
earthbound, and yet sometimes in your activity for Christ, 
when the strong desires for soi^ething better are upon you, 
you leap in foretaste of the bliss to come. 

HEAVEN— an Ineentire toSilisrenoe. 

Julius C/esar coming towards Rome with his army, and 
hearing that the senate and people ha:d fled from it, said, 
" They that will not fight for this city, what city will they 
fight for ? " If we will not take pains for the kingdom of 
heaven, what kingdom will we take pains for? 

HEAVEN— None Admitted but those Like Jegus. 

At heaven's gate there stands an angel with charge to 
admit none but those who in their countetvaxvc^'s* V^-ax ^^^ 



106 MY NOTE BOOK. 

same features as the Lord of the place. Here comes a 
monarch with a crown upon his head. The angel pays him 
no respect, but reminds him that the diadems of earth have 
no value in heaven. A company of eminent men advance 
dressed in robes of state, and others adorned with the 
gowns of learning, but to these no deference is rendered, 
for their faces are very unlike the Crucified. A maiden 
comes forward, fair and comely, but the celestial watcher 
sees not in that sparkling eye and ruddy cheek the 
beauty for which he is looking. A man of renown 
Cometh up heralded by fame, and preceded by the admir- 
ing clamour of mankind; but the angel saith, "Such 
applause may please the sons of men, but thou hast no 
right to enter here." But free admittance is always given to 
those who in holiness are made like their Lord. Poor they 
may have been ; illiterate they may have been ; but the angel 
as he looks at them smiles a welcome as he says, "It is 
Christ again ; a transcript of the holy child Jesus. Come in, 
come in; eternal glory thou shalt win. Thou shalt sit in 
heaven with Christ, for thou art like him." 

HEAVEN— to be Shut Oat of at Last 

Several years ago we heard an old minister relate the 
following incident : — " He had preached the Word for many 
a year in a wood hard by a beautiful village in the Inverness- 
shire Highlands, and it was his invariable custom, on dis- 
missing his own congregation, to repair to the Baptist Chapel 
in this village to partake of the Lord's Supper with his 
people assembled there. It was then usual to shut the gates 
during this service, in order that communicants might not 
be exposed to any disturbance through persons going out or 
coming in. On one occasion the burden of the Lord pressed 
upon his servant with more than ordinary severity, and 
anxious to deliver it and clear his soul, he detained his 
hearers a little beyond the time, and consequently had to 



MY NOTE BOOK. 107 

hurry to the chapel. As he drew near he noticed the door- 
keeper retire from the outer gate, after having shut it. He 
called to him, quickening his pace at the same time, but his 
cry was not heard, the attendant retreated inside and the 
minister came up *just in time' to see the door put to, and 
hear it fastened from within. He walked roimd the chapel 
looking up at the windows, but could gain no admittance ; 
there was only one door, and that door was shut. He listened 
and heard the singing, and thought how happy God's people 
were inside, while he himself was shut out. The circumstance 
made an impression upon him at the time which he could 
never afterwards forget, and he was led to ask himself the 
question, * Shall it be so at the last? Shall I come up to the 
gate of heaven only in time to be too late, to find the last 
ransomed one-admitted, and the door everlastingly shut?'" 

HEAVEN— a Snstaining Frospeet 

One Palmer, of Reading, being condemned to die, in 
Queen Mary's time, was much persuaded to recant, and 
among other things a friend said to him, " Take pity on thy 
golden year^ and pleasant flowers of youth, before it be too 
late." His reply was as beautiful as it was conclusive — " Sir, 
I long for those springing flowers which shall never fade 
away." When he was in- the midst of the flames he exhorted 
his companions to constancy, saying, " We shall not end our 
lives in the fire, but make a change for a better life ; yea, for 
coals we shall receive pearls." Thus do we clearly see, that 
although " if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are 
of all men most miserable," yet the prospect of a better and 
enduring substance enables us to meet all the trials and 
temptations of this present life with holy boldness and joy. 

HEAVEN— its Variety. 

We cannot st-ay to read the catalogue now, but heavenly 
joys shall be like the tree of life in the New ^o.tvx^'ak^ssv^^^^sNs^ 



108 MY NOTE BOOK. 

brings forth twelve manner of fruits, and yields her fruit eveiy 
month. Robert Hall used to cry, " O for the everlasting 
rest!" but Wilberforce would sigh to dwell in unbroken love. 
Hall was a man who suffered — he longed for rest ; Wilber- 
force was a man of amiable spirit, loving society and fellow- 
ship — he looked for love. Hall shall have his rest, and 
Wilberforce shall have his love. There are joys at God's 
right hand, suitable for the spiritual tastes of all those who 
shall come thither. The heavenly manna tastes to every 
man's pecuUar hking. 

HEAYEHWABB. 

My horse invariably comes home in less time than he makes 
the journey out. He pulls the carriage with a hearty good 
will when his face is towards home. Should not I also both 
suffer and labour the more joyously because my way lies 
towards heaven, and I am on pilgrimage to my Father's 
house, my souTs dear home and resting place? 

HOLT WATEB. 

Holy water, indeed! a vile mixture, neither fit for man 
nor beast. You see this liquid virtue at the doors of all the 
churches ready for the brows of the faithful, but what is far 
more curious, you observe it in little pots placed for use in the 
cemeteries ; and that the passer-by may give the dead a 
showery benediction, there are little sprinkling brushes in the 
pots with which to scatter the precious mixture. A mother's 
tears over her dead babe are far more in place than such 
foolery. Holy water ! bah ! See how the rain pours down 
from yonder black cloud which has passed over the rugged 
crags of Pilatus; that sort of holy water is infinitely more 
likely to moisten the clay of the defunct, and bring plenteous 
blessing to the living, than all the hogsheads of aqueous fluid 
that priests ever mumbled over. Holy water, indeed ! If 
there be such a thing, it trickles from the eye of penitence. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 109 

bedews the cheek of gratitude, and falls upon the page of 
holy Scripture when the word is applied with power. Standi;^ 
where, when the rain is over, one can see the fair Lake of 
Lucerne brimming with crystal, and the clouds among the 
Alpine peaks all charged with moisture, rendered golden by 
the sun's clear shining, one feels indignant at the idea that 
the little driblets of nastiness in yonder pots and shells should 
be venerated, and all nature's reservoirs accounted common 
or unclean. It needs no small measure of prudence to restrain 
a man from tumbling pots and pans and holy liquids head- 
long to the ground. Human folly, how far wilt thou not go 
when priests lead thee by the nose ! 

HOPE. 

Once on a time, certain strong labourers were sent 
forth by the great King to level a primeval forest, to plough 
it, to sow it, and to bring to him the harvest. They were 
stout-hearted and strong, and willing enough for labour, and 
much they needed all their strength and more. One Stewart 
labourer was named Industry — consecrated work was his. 
His brother Patience, with thews of steel, went with him, and 
tired not in the longest days under the heaviest labours. To 
help them they had Zeal, clothed with ardent and indomitable 
energy. Side by side there stood his kinsman Self-denial, and 
his friend Importunity. These went forth to their labour^ 
and they took with them, to cheer their toils, their well-beloved 
sister Hope ; and well it was they did, for they needed the 
music of her consolation ere the work was done, for the forest 
trees were huge, and demanded many sturdy blows of the axe 
ere they would fall prone upon the ground. One by one the 
giant forest kings were overthrown, but the labour was 
immense and incessant. At night when they went to their 
rest, the day's work always seemed so light, for as they crossed 
the threshold. Patience, wiping the sweat from his brow, 
would be encouraged, and Self-denial would be strengthened 



110 MY NOTE BOOK. 

by hearing the sweet voice of Hope within singing, "God 
%ill bless us, God, even our own God, will bless us.*' They 
felled the lofty- trees to the music of that strain ; they cleared 
the acres one by one, they tore from their sockets the huge 
roots, they delved the soil, they sowed the com, and waited 
for the harvest, often much discouraged, but still held to their 
work as by silver chains and golden fetters by the sweet 
sound of the voice which chanted so constantly, " God, even 
our own God, will bless us." They never could refrain from 
service, for Hope never could refrain from song. They were 
ashamed to be discouraged, they were shocked to be despair- 
ing, for still the voice rang clearly out at noon and eventide, 
" God will bless us, God, even our own God, will bless us." 
You know the parable, you recognise the voice; may you 
hear it in your souls to-day ! 

HOPE. 

It is reported that in the Tamul language there is no word 
for hope. Alas! poor men, if we were all as destitute of the 
blessed comfort itself as these Tamul speakers are of the 
word! What must be the misery of souls in hell where they 
remember the word, but can never know hope itself! 

HUMILITT. 

Wise men know their own ignorance and are ever ready to 
learn. Humility is the child of knowledge. Michael Angelo 
was found by the Cardinal Famese walking in solitude amid 
the ruins of the Coliseum, and when he expressed his 
surprise, the great artist answered, " I go yet to school that I 
may continue to learn." Who among us can after this talk 
of finishing our education? We have need to learn of all 
around us. He must be very foolish who cannot tell us 
something ; or more likely we must be more foolish not to be 
able to learn of him. 



MY NOTE BOOK, IIX 

HTTMILITT. 

The whole Roman language, even with all the improve^ 
ments of the Augustan age, does not aflford so much as a 
name for humility (the word from whence we borrow this, as 
is well known, bearing in Latin a quite different meaning), no, 
nor was one found in all the copious language of the Greeks, 
till it was made by the great Apostle. — John Wesley, 

HUMniTT. 

" Of all trees, I observe, God hath chosen the vine, a low 
plant that creeps upon the helpful wall ; of all beasts, the soft 
and patient lamb ; of all fowls, the mild and guileless dove. 
Christ is the rose of the field, and the lily of the valley. 
When God appeared to Moses, it was not in the lofty cedar, 
nor the sturdy oak, nor the spreading plane ; but in a bush, 
a humble, slender, abject shrub ; as if he would, by these 
elections, check the conceited arrogance of man." — Owen 
Feltham, 

HUHILITT AND CHEERFULNESS. 

"Observe the peculiar characters of the grass which adapt 
it especially for the service of man, are its apparent humility 
and cheerfulness. Its humility, in that it seems created only 
for lowest service, appointed to be trodden on, and fed upon. 
Its cheerfulness, in that it seems to exult tmder all kinds of 
violence and suflfering. You roll it, and it is the stronger 
the next day ; you mow it, and it multiplies its shoots, as if it 
were grateful ; you tread upon it, and it only sends up richer 
perfume. Spring comes, and it rejoices with all the earth, 
glowing with variegated flame of flowers, waving in soft 
depth of fruitful strength. Wintercomes, and though it will 
not mock its fellow plants by growing then, it will not pine 
and mourn, and turn colourless or leafless as they. It is 
always green, and is only the brighter and gayer for the hoar^ 
frost." 



112 MY NOTE BOOK. 

So Ruskin poetically writes of the grass ; should it not be 
thus with believers? Their flesh is like to grass for perishing, 
it were well if their spirits were like to grass for humility and 
cheerfulness in service. 

ETPOGBIST. 

In the olden times even the best rooms were usually of 
bare brick or stone, damp, and mouldy, but over these in 
great houses when the family was resident, were hung up 
arras or hangings of rich materials, between which and the 
wall persons might conceal themselves, so that literally walls 
had ears. It is to be feared that many a brave show of 
godliness is but an arras to conceal rank h)rp.ocrisy ; and this 
accounts for some men's religion being but occasional, since 
it is folded up or exposed to view as need may demand. Is 
there no room for conscience to pry between thy feigned 
profession and thy real ungodliness, and bear witness against 
thee? Remember, if conscience do it not, certainly "the 
watcher and the Holy One" will make a thorough search 
within thee. 

HTFOGSIST. 

In the pursuit of pastoral duty, I stood a little while ago in 
a cheesemonger's shop, and being in a fidgety humour, and 
having a stick in my hand, I did what most Englishmen are 
sure to do, I was not content with seeing, but must needs 
touch as well. My stick came gently upon a fine cheese in 
the window, and to my surprise a most metallic sound 
emanated from jt. The sound was rather hollow, or one 
might have surmised that all the tasteholes had been filled 
up with sovereigns, and thus the cheese had been greatly 
enriched, and the merchant had been his own banker. There 
was, however, a sort of crockery jingle in the sound, like the 
ring of a huge bread or milk'pan, such as our country friends 
use so abundantly ; and I came to the very correct conclusion 



MY NOTE BOOK. 113 

that I had found a very well got-up hypocrite in the shop 
window. Mark, from this time, when I pass by, I mentally 
whisper, " Pottery ; " and the shams may even be exchanged 
for realities, but I shall be long in believing it. In my mind 
the large stock has dissolved into potsherds, and the fine 
show in the window only suggests the potter's vessel. The 
homely illustration is simply introduced because we find 
people of this sort in our churches, looking extremely like 
what they should be, yet having no substance in them, so 
that if, accidentally, one happens to tap them somewhere or 
other with sudden temptation or stem duty, the baked earth 
gives forth its own ring, and the pretender is esteemed no 
longer. 

HTP0CBI8T. 

The shops in the square of San Marco were all religiously 
closed, for the day was a high festival : we were much 
disappointed, for it was our last day, and we desired to take 
away with us some souvenirs of lovely Venice ; . but our 
regret soon vanished, for on looking at the shop we meant 
to patronise, we readily discovered signs of traffic within. 
We stepped to the side door, and found when one or two 
other customers had been served, that we might purchase to 
our heart's content, saint or no saint. After this fashion too 
many keep the laws of God to the eye, but violate them m the 
heart. The shutters are up as if the man no more dealt with 
sin and Satan ; but a brisk commerce is going on behind the 
scenes. From such deceit may the Spirit of truth preserve us. 

HTPOCBISY— Easy, but Dangeroni. 

The counterfeit will always have some admirers, from its 
cheapness in the market. One must dig deep in dark mines 
for gold and silver ; the precious treasure must be brought 
from far across the seas ; it must be melted down, it must 
pass through many assays, and the dies must be voTV&'i.^«>J^ 



Il4 MY NOTE BOOK. 

ponderous engines before the coin can be produced ; all this 
to the sluggish many is a heavy disadvantage. Hush ! 
hearken ! steal silently upstairs ; the spirit of deceit invites 
you to her chamber ; a little plaster of Paris, a fire, a crucible, 
molten lead, the mould, and there is your money, sir, without 
troubling Peru, Potosi, California, or the Mint. Slink out and 
change your fine new shillings, and your fortune's made 
without the ignoble waste of sweat and labour. But be quiet, 
for a detective may be near, a coarse-minded minion of 
unpoetic law, who may cruelly block up your road, or even 
lead you into prison. Short cuts to wealth have brought 
many to the hulks ; and, let me add, there are short cuts to 
godliness which have brought many to perdition ! 

ETPOCBIST— a Fall Fatal. 

/' The meteor, if it once fall, cannot be rekindled.*' When 
those who once flashed before the eyes of the religious public 
with the blaze of a vain profession, fall into open and scan- 
dalous sin, it is impossible to renew their glory. Once break 
the egg of hypocrisy, and who can repair the damage ? 

ETPOCBIST—Preflent Age Suitable to. 

There was an age of chivalry, when no craven courted 
knighthood, for it involved the hard blows, the dangerous 
wounds, the rough unhorsings, and the ungentle perils of the 
tournament ; nay, these were but child's play : there were 
distant eastern fields, where Paynim warriors must be slain 
by valiant hands, and blood must flow in rivers from the 
Red-cross knights. Then men who lacked valour preferred 
their hawks and their jesters, and left heroes to court death 
and glory on the battle-field. This genial time of peace breeds 
carpet knights, who flourish their untried weapons, and bear 
the insignia of valour, without incurring its inconvenient 
toils. Many are crowding to the seats of the heroes, since 



MY NOTE BOOK. 115 

prowess and patience are no more required. The war is 
over, and every man is willing to enlist. When Rome com- 
menced her long career of victory, it was no pleasant thing to 
be a soldier in the Roman legions. The power which smote 
the nations like a rod of iron abroad, was a yoke of iron at 
home. There were long forced marches, with hunger and 
cold and weariness ; heavy armour was the usual load when 
the legionary marched at ease ; but " ease " was a word he 
seldom used. Rivers were forded ; mountains were scaled ; 
barbarians were attacked ; proud nations were assailed ; 
kingdoms were subdued. No toil too stem for the scarred 
veteran, no odds too heavy, no onslaught too ferocious, no 
arms too terrible. Scarcely were his wounds healed, ere 
he was called to new fields ; his life was battle ; his home 
the tent ; his repast was plunder ; his bed the battle-field; 
while the eagle's bloody talons removed all need of sepulchre 
for his slaughtered body. But afterwards when Rome was 
mistress of the world, and the Praetorian cohorts could sell 
the imperial purple to the highest bidder, many would follow 
the legions to share their spoils. It is not otherwise to-day. 
Into the triumphs of martyrs and confessors few are un- 
willing to enter ; in a national respect to religion, which is 
the result of their holiness, even ungodly men are willing 
to share. They have gone before us with true hearts valiant 
for truth, and false traitors are willing to divide their 
spoils. 

ETP0CBI8T— of no Sendee. . 

Coals of fire cannot be concealed beneath the most sump- 
tuous apparel, they will betray themselves 'with smoke and 
fiame ; nor can darling sins be long hidden beneath the most 
ostentatious profession, they will sooner or later discover 
themselves, and bum sad holes in the man's reputation. Sin 
needs quenching in the Saviour's blood, not concealing under 
the garb of religion. 



116 MY NOTE BOOK. 

HYP0CBITE8— DiMOTered on nwxtt InipeetioiL 

How many are like that famous painting of the olden time, 
in which the artist depicted what seemed at a distance a holy 
friar with a book before him, and his hands crossed in devo- 
tion, looking like a saint indeed, but when you came close to 
the venerable impostor^ you found that his hands, though 
clasped, enclosed a lemon, and instead of a book there was a 
punch-bowl into which he was squeezing the juice. To seem 
to be, answers men's purposes so well, that it is little marvel 
if pretenders swarm like the flies in Egypt's plague ; yet if 
they would remember the last gfreat day, men would abhor 
hypocrisy. 

ETPOGBITESHIeaiOB fbr. 

After a refreshing shower which has made all the flowers 
to smile till the teardrops of joy stand in their eyes, you will see 
your garden-paths spotted over with slugs and snails. These 
creatures lay concealed till the genial rain called them forth 
to make their slimy way towards whatsoever they might 
devour. After this fashion revivals, of necessity, develop 
hypocrites, yet who would deplore the shower because of the 
snails, and who would rail at " times of refreshing " because 
mere pretenders are excited to make a base profession of a 
grace to which they are strangers? 

HTFOCSITES-Seeking their own AdTantage. 

God is in the hypocrite's mouth, but the world is in his 
heart, which he expects to gain through his good reputation. 
I have read of one that offered his prince a great sum of 
money to have leave once or twice a-day to come into his 
presence, and only say, ''God save your Majesty P* The 
prince wondering at this large dffer for so small a favour, 
asked him, " What advantage would this afford him ? " " O 
sire," saith he, " this, though I have nothing else at your 
hands^ will get me a name in the country for one who is a 



MY NOTE BOOK. 117 

great favourite at court, and such an opinion will help me to 
more at the year's end, than it costs me for the purchase." 

Thus some, by the name they get for great saints, advance 
their worldly interests, which lie at the bottom of all their 
profession. — GurnalL 

HTFOCBHES— their Siniiter Xotiyei. 

See yonder eagle, how it mounts ! Does it care for the 
ethereal blue, or aspire to commune with the stars of heaven ! 
Not a whit ; such airy considerations have no weight with the 
ravenous bird ; and yet you will not wonder that it soars aloft 
when you remember that it thus obtains a broader range of 
vision, and so becomes the more able to provide for its nest. The 
bird mounts towards heaven, but it keeps its eye evermore upon 
the outlook for its prey. No celestial impulse is needed, its 
love of blood suffices to bear it aloft. It soars only that it 
may flash downwards with fell swoop upon the object of its 
desires. Wonder not that men with the hearts of devils yet 
mount like angels : there is a reason which explains it all. 

HTFOCBITIGAL GONFESSIOKS. 

You have heard, no doubt, of beggars who tie a leg up 
when they go a-begging, and then make a hideous lamentation 
of their lameness. Why, this is just your case, sir, when you 
go to church a-praying, which is begging, you tie your 
righteous heart up, and then make woeful outcry for mercy 
on us miserable sinners. O sir, these tricks may pass 
a while unnoticed, but Jesus Christ will apprehend such 
cheats at last, and give them their desert. — John Berridge, 

IGKOSAHGE. 

Payson well says, " Oh ! when we meet in heaven, we shall 
see how little we knew about it on earth." 

IGKOSAKGE— of One'i Otm Heart 

" After all, I do not hate God. No, sir ; you willtv<^l\ssai«-^ 



118 MY NOTE BOOK. 

me believe that. I am a sinner, I know, and do many wicked 
things ; but after all, I have a good heart — I don't hate God." 
Such was the language of a prosperous worldling. He was 
sincere, but sadly deceived. A few months afterwards, that 
God who had given him so many good things, crossed his 
path in an unexpected manner. A fearful torrent swept down 
the valley, and threatened destruction to this man's large 
flour mill. A crowd were watching it, in momentary ex- 
pectation of seeing it fall, while the owner, standing in the 
midst of them, was cursing God to his face, and pouring out 
the most horrid oaths. 

He no longer doubted or denied that he hated God. But 
nothing in that hour of trial came out of his mouth which was 
not previously in his heart. God's account of the unrenewed 
heart is true : it is " deceitful above all things," as well as 
"desperately wicked." He who is wise will believe God's 
account of the state of his heart by nature, rather than the 
deceitful heart's account of itself. 

IGKOSANGE— Poisible in Moit Conitant Heareni . 

Samuel Wesley visited one of his parishioners as he was 
upon his dying bed — a. man who had never missed going to 
church in forty years. " Thomas, where do you think your 
soul will go ?" " Soul ! soul !" said Thomas. " Yes, sir," 
said Mr. Wesley, " do you not know what your soul is ?" 
" Ay, surely," said Thomas ; " why, it is a little bone in the 
back that lives longer than the body." "So much," says 
John Wesley, who related it on the authority of Dr. Lupton, 
who had it from his father, "had Thomas learned from hear- 
ing sermons, and exceedingly good sermons, for forty years."— r 
Anecdotes of the Wesley s. By the Rev, % B, Wake ley, 

imTATIOir— of Good Men, iti Limit- 

Plutarch says that among the Persians those persons 
were considered most beautiful who were hawk-nosed, for no 



MY NOTE BOOK. 119 

Other reason than that Cyrus had such a nose. In Richard 
the Third's court humps upon the back were the height of 
fashion. According as the various potentates who have 
condescended to rule mankind have lisped, or stuttered, or 
limped, or squinted, or spoken through their noses, these 
infirmities have been elevated into graces and commanded 
the admiration of silly mortals. But is there not more than 
a possibility that what we ridicule in the kingdoms of earth 
may have its counterpart in the church ? Is there not a 
tendency among Christians to imitate the spiritual infirmities 
of their religious leaders, or oftener still of departed saints ? 
We may follow holy men so far as they follow Christ ; the 
mischief is that we do not readily stop where we should, but 
rather where we should not. Bunyan, Whitfield, Wesley, 
Calvin, Luther, yes, by all means imitate them — ^but not 
indiscriminately, not slavishly, or you will do so ridiculously. 
One is your Master, to copy him in every jot and tittle will be 
safe enough. 

OrSIGNIFIGANT SUBJECTS-lTot Fit for the Polpit. 

Carlyle in narrating an instance of the preservation of 
etiquette at the court of Louis XVI., while the mob were 
demanding entrance into his private apartments, and the 
empire was going to pieces, compares it to the house-cricket 
still chirping amid the pealing of the trump of doom. When 
trivi^ subjects are descanted upon from the pulpit, while 
souls are perishing for lack of knowledge, the same com- 
parison may be used ; as for instance, wheiua congregation 
is collected, and the preacher talks about the drying up of 
the Euphrates, or ventilates his pet theory for reconciling 
Moses and geology. Why cannot these things be kept for 
other assemblies ? What can the man be at ? Nero fiddling 
over burning Rome is nothing to it ! Even the women 
knitting in front of the guillotine were not more coolly cruel. 
We tolerate the cricket for his incong^ous chirp ; but go to^ 



120 MY NOTE BOOK. 

thou silly trifler at the sacred desk, we cannot frame excuse 
for thee, or have patience with thee. 

mUTABILITT 07 OOD. 

There be many Christians most like unto young sailors, 
who think the shore and the whole land doth move when they 
ship, and they themselves are moved. Just so not a few 
do imagine that God moveth, and saileth, and changeth 
places, because their giddy souls are under sail, and subject 
to alteration, to ebbing and flowing. But the foundation of 
the Lord abideth sure. — Samuel Rutherford, 

niAOTlVlTY— The Evili o£ 

What a mournful sight the observer may see in some of 
the outskirts of our huge city ; row after row of houses all 
untenanted and forlorn. The owners had far better let them 
at the lowest rent than suffer them to remain empty, for the 
boys make targets of the windows, enterprising purveyors for the 
marine store shops rend off all the lead, thieves purloin every 
movable fitting, damp swells the window frames and doors, 
and mustiness makes the whole place wretched to all the 
senses ; into the bargain the district gets a bad name which 
it probably never loses. Better a poor tenant than a house 
running to ruin unused. The similitude may well suggest 
the desirableness of an object and a service to those Christians 
whose time is wasted in slothful ease. All sorts of mischief 
happen to unoccupied professors of religion ; there is no evil 
from which the^ are secure ; better would it be for them to 
accept the lowest occupation for the Lord Jesus, than remain 
the victims of inaction. 

IKCOirSISTEirCIES. 

The orthodox Greek churchman is scandalised at the image- 
worship of the Romanist ; it is flat idolatry, and he denounces 
it vehemently. But what are those pictures in the Russian 



MY NOTE BOOK. 121 

churches, many of them made to stand out in relief with 
solid plates of gold and silver ? Why, these are pictures of 
the Virgin or of her Son, as the case may be, and your anti- 
idolatrous Greek bows before these with voluntary humility. 
He hates image-worship, you see, but stands up for 
picture-worship. Behold how sinners disagree in name 
and unite in spirit ! Put Greek and Roman in a sack 
together, and let the greatest idolater out first: the 
wisest solution would be to keep them both in the sack, for 
Solomon himself would be puzzled to select the most guilty. Are 
there not such inconsistencies among ourselves ? Do we not 
condemn in one" form what we allow in another ? Do we 
not censure in our neighbours what we allow in ourselves ? 
This query need not be answered in a hurry ; the reply will 
be the more extensive for a Uttle waiting. 

nrcoirsisTENCY. 

Mark Antony once yoked two lions together, and drove 
them through the streets of Rome, but no human skill can 
ever yoke together the Lion of the Tribe of Judah and the 
Lion of the Pit. I did see a man once trying to walk on both 
sides of the street at one time, but he was undoubtedly drunk ; 
and when we see a man labouring day by day to walk on both 
sides of the street, morally — in the shady side of sin and the 
sunny side of holiness, or reeling in the evening, at one time 
towards the bright lights of virtue, and anon staggering back 
to sin in dark places, where no lamp is shining — we say of 
him, "He is morally intoxicated," and wisdom adds, "He 
is mad, and if the Great Physician heal him not, his madness 
will bring him to destruction." 

IirCOirSISTEKCT-GloMed Oyer. 

" Silk is interdicted by Mussulman law as being an excre- 
ment. They elude this prohibition by mixing a very little 
cotton with it." After the same manner it is growing t<y^ 



122 MY NOTE BOOK. 

common at what are called Penny Readings, to indulge in 
the idlest jesting and absurdity, and then to pass off the 
whole entertainment respectably by singing the doxology, or 
pronouncing the benediction ; the religion being to the 
foolery, in the proportion of the bread to the sack in Fal- 
staffs reckoning. Do men imagine that Christ's laws are to 
be as easily evaded as Mahomet's? Do they dream that 
the " very little cotton " will sanctify all the forbidden fabric ? 
The illustration may be applied in many other ways besides 
that which we have here indicated. 

IHBOLEHCE— a Shameful Siekneii. 

There once lived in Ghent a beggar, who was accustomed 
to collect alms upon the pretence that he had a secret disease 
lying in his bones and weakening his whole body, and that 
he dared not for shame mention the name of it. This appeal 
was exceedingly successful, until a person in authority more 
curious than the rest, insisted upon following him, and ex- 
amining him at home. At last the beggar confessed as 
follows : — " That which pains me you see not ; but I have a 
shameful disease in my bones, so that I cannot work ; some 
call it sloth, and others term it idleness." Alas ! that so 
many in our churches should be so far gone with THIS SAME 

SICKNESS. 

INFIBMITIES-Vse of. 

" Some of the arable land along the shore on the south- 
east coast of Sutherland, is almost covered with shore stones, 
from the size of a turkey's egg to eight pounds weight. 
Several experiments have been made to collect these off the 
land, expecting a better crop ; but in every case the land 
proved less productive by removing them ; and on some small 
spots of land it was found so evident, that they were spread 
on the land again, to ensure their usual crop of oats or 
pease." We would fain be rid of all our infirmities which, 



MY NOTE BOOK. 123 

to our superficial conceptions, appear to be great hindrances 
to our usefulness, and yet it is most questionable if we should 
bring forth any fruit unto God without them. Much rather, 
therefore, will I glory in infirmities that the power of Christ 
may rest upon me. 

nnxTJEircE. 

Lord Peterborough speaking on one occasion of the 
celebrated Fenelon, observed : — " He is a delicious creature ; 
I was forced to get away from him as fast as I possibly 
could, else he would have made me pious." Would to God 
that all of us had such an influence over godless men. 

nrGBATrCUDE-to God. 

The Staubach is a fall of remarkable magnificence, seem- 
ing to leap from heaven ; its glorious stream reminds one of 
the abounding mercy which in a mighty torrent descends 
from above. In the winter, when the cold is severe, the 
water freezes at the foot of the fall, and rises up in huge 
icicles like stalagmites, until it reaches the fall itself, as though 
it sought to bind it in the same icy fetters. How like is this 
to the common conduct of men ! Divine favours frozen by 
human ingratitude, are proudly lifted in rebellion against the 
God who gave them. 

HrXEBEST-in Holy Work to be Xaintained. 

It is of the utmost importance to keep up our interest in 
the holy work in which we are engaged, for the moment our 
interest flags the work will become wearisome. Humboldt 
says that the copper-coloured native of central America, far 
more accustomed than the European traveller to the burning 
heat of the climate, yet complains more when upon a journey, 
because he is stimulated by no interest. The same Indian 
who would complain, when in botanising he was loaded with 
a box full of plants, would row his canoe fourteen or fifteea 



124 MY NOTE BOOK. 

hours together against the current without a murmur, because 
he wished to return to his family. Labours of iove'are light. 
Routine is a hard master. Love much, and you can do 
much. Impossibilities disappear when zeal is fervent. 

IlTTITATIOirS 07 THE 60SPEL—the Sinner*! Warrant 

In the courts of law if a man be called as a witness, no 
sooner is his name mentioned, though he may be at the end 
of the court, than he begins to force his way up to the witness 
box. Nobody says, " Why is this man pushing here ?" or, if 
they should say, "Who are you?" it would be a sufficient 
answer to say, " My name was called." " But you are not 
rich, you have no gold ring upon your finger ! " " No, but 
that is not my right of way, but I was called." " Sir, you are 
not a man of repute, or rank, or character ! " " It matters not, 
I was called. Make way." So make way, ye doubts and 
fears, make way, ye devils of the infernal lake, Christ calls 
the sinner. Sinner, come, for though thou hast nought to 
recommend thee, yet it is written, " Him that cometh unto 
me I will in no wise cast out." 

ISASGIBLE PESSON£KKot to 1>e ProToked. 

In the Jardin des Plantes we saw a hooded snake in a 
most unamiable condition of temper. There was a thick 
glass and a stout wire between us, and we did nothing but 
look at him, yet he persisted in darting at us with the utmost 
vehemence of malice, until the keeper requested us to move 
away, with the advice that it was not well to irritate such 
creatures. When one meets with an irascible person, on the 
look out to pick a quarrel, ill conditioned, and out of elbows 
with the whole world, it is best to move on, and let him 
alone. Even if he can do you no harm, and if his irritation 
be utterly unreasonable, it is best to remove all exciting causes 
of provocation, for it is never wise to irritate vipers. You 
do not on purpose walk heavily across the floor to teach a 



MY NOTE BOOK. 125 

gouty man that you have no respect for his tender feelings 
since he ought not to be so susceptible ; neither should you 
vex those afflicted with a bad temper, and then plead that 
they have no right to be so excitable. If our neighbours' 
tempers are gunpowder, let us not play with fire. 

JESUITS. 

The cat having a long time preyed upon the mice, the poor 
creatures at last, for their safety, contained themselves within 
their holes ; but the cat finding his prey to cease, as being 
known to the mice that he was indeed their enemy and a cat, 
deviseth this course following, namely, changeth his hue, 
getting on a religious habit, shaveth his crown, walks gravely 
by their holes ; and yet perceiving that the mice kept their 
holes, and looking out, suspected the worst, he formally, and 
father-like, said unto them, ^^ Quod fueram non sum, fraUr, 
caput aspice tonsum — O brother, I am not as you take me for ; 
I am no more a cat ; see my habit and shaven crown." Here- 
upon some of the more credulous and bold among them were 
again, by this deceit, snatched up ; and therefore when after- 
wards he came, as before, to entice them forth, they would 
come out no more, but answered, " Talk what you can, we 
will never believe you ; you bear stiU a cat's heart within 
yoti." And so here the Jesuits, yea, and priests too, for they 
are all joined in the tails, like Samson's foxes : Ephraim 
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both 
against Judah. — Sir E, Coke. 

JOY-at Finding Salvation. 

We are told of some Turks, who have, upon the sight of 
Mahomet's tomb, put out their eyes, that they might not 
defile them, forsooth, with any common object, after they had 
been blessed with seeing one so sacred. I am sure many 
gracious souls there have been, who, oy a prospect of 
heaven's glory set before the eye of their faith, have beexv 'SRk 



126 MY NOTE BOOK. 

ravished by the sight, that they desired God even to seal up 
their eyes by death, with Simeon, who would not by his 
good-will have lived a day after that blessed hour in which 
his eyes had beheld the salvation of God. — W. Gurnall. 

JOT OF OUB BELIOION— as an Evidenoe of its Truth. 

How I long for my bed ! Not that I may sleep— I lie 
awake often and long! but to hold sweet communion with 
my God. What shall I render unto him for all his revelations 
and gifts to me ? Were there no historical evidence of the 
truth of Christianity, were there no well-established miracles, 
still I should believe that the religion propagated by the 
fishermen of Galilee is divine. The holy joys it brings to me 
must be from heaven. Do I write this boastingly, brother ? 
Nay, it is with tears of humble gratitude that I tell of the 
goodness of the Lord." — Extract from a Private Letter from 
Bapa Padmanjiy ofie of the Native Converts in India, 

JUDGMENT— Comparable to Balanoos. 

Our judgment may be compared to the scales and weights 
of the merchant It should be correct, but it seldom is quite 
accurate; even ordinary wear and tear in this world will 
suffice to put. it out of gear. We had need call in the 
Rectifier full*often, and entreat him to search out our secret 
shortcomings, lest we deviate from equity and know it not. 
It would be well if the scales of conscience would turn even 
at the finest dust, but how rarely is this the case ! False 
weights and balances are an abomination unto the Lord, yet 
many use them, they weigh their neighbours so as to under- 
estimate them, and they use balances far too favourable to 
themselves ; they g^ve the Lord a portion sadly too small, 
and to their own pleasures a dowry much too great. Trades- 
men who have one set of weights to buy with and others to 
sell with^ are evidently rogues, and we may convict ourselves 



MY NOTE BOOK. 127 

of injustice at once if we find ourselves severe to other men 
and lenient to ourselves. Fraudulent shopkeepers will use a 
movable piece of metal, by removing which they can lighten 
the weight or the scale, and we too may have a convenient 
indignation which we may restrain or indulge according as 
the person whose fault we judge may be the object of our 
goodwill or our displeasure. Some of the marine-store 
dealers, and buyers of kitchen-stuff at the back door, pretend 
to judge of weight by the feeling of their hand, and herein 
they are no worse than those who settle everything by 
prejudice and will not wait for reason. A railway traveller 
assured me that he had been weighed a dozen times at 
different stations, and only twice did the machines give the 
same report, his opinion of their correctness was not very 
high ; for the same reason, of how little worth are the 
opinions of the many as to the preachers of the gospel, for 
scarcely two in a score are of the same mind ! There is a 
great weighing time coming, for which it will be well to be 
prepared, for woe unto the man whom the infallible balances 
shall find wanting. 

JUDGMENT-DAT— Forgotten. 

Is it not foolish to be living in this world without a thought 
of what you will do at last ? A man goes into an inn, and as 
soon as he sits down he begins to order his wine, his dinner, 
his bed ; there is no delicacy in season which he forgets to 
bespeak. He stops at the inn for some time. By-and-by 
the bill is forthcoming, and it takes him by surprise. " I 
never thought of that— I never thought of that 1 " " Why," 
says the landlord, " here is a man who is either a bom fool 
or else a knave. What ! never thought of the reckoning — 
never thought of settling with me ! " After this fashion too 
many live. They eat, and drink, and sin, but they forget 
the inevitable hereafter, when for all the deeds done in the 
body, the Lord will bring us into judgment. 



128 MY NOTE BOOK. 

JUBOMEHT-Parrartad. 

When a traveller is newly among the Alps, he is constantly 
deceived in his reckoning. One Englishman declared that 
he could climb the Righi in half-an-hour, but after several 
panting hours the summit was still a-head of him ; yet when 
he made the boast, some of us who stood by were much of 
his mind — the ascent seemed so easy. This partly accounts 
for the mistakes men make in estimating eternal things : they 
have been too much used to molehills to be at home with 
mountains. Only familiarity with the sublimities of revela- 
tion can educate us to a comprehension of their heights and 
depths. 

JUDOKEirTS— EflBMti q£ 

In the province of Quito, after the tremendous earthquake 
of I797> a number of marriages were contracted between 
persons who had neglected for many years to sanction their 
union by the sacerdotal benediction. Children found parents 
by whom they had never till then been acknowledged ; 
restitutions were promised by persons who had never been 
accused of fraud ; and families whcT had long been at enmity 
were drawn together by the tie of common calamity. But if 
this feeling seemed to calm the passions of some, and open 
the heart to pity, it had a contrary effect on others, rendering 
them more rigorous and inhuman. — Alexander Von Humboldt, 

KIK6B0M OF CHBIST-itB Glories. 

The palace of Versailles with its countless representations 
of battles, sieges, stormings, surprises, and all other forms of 
wholesale and retail murder, is dedicated, according to an 
inscription on its front, " To all the glories of France." Bah! 
As well consecrate a shambles to all the glories of a butcher. 
But what a glorious spiritual palace is the church, and how 
truly is it dedicated to all the glories of the Lord Jesus! 
Within its walls hang the memorials of battles far more 



MY NOTE BOOK. 129 

worthy of the historian's quill than those of Austerlitz or 
Wagram ; victories are there commemorated which put to 
the blush all the achievements of Charlemagnes or Napoleon; 
for the contests are with evil principles, and the conquests are 
triumphs over iniquity and rebellion ; there are no garments 
rolled in blood ; fire and vapour of smoke are not there, but 
the efficacy of atonement, the energy of grace, the Omni- 
potence of the Holy Ghost, the puissance of eternal love, all 
these are there, and happy are the eyes that see them. May 
the life of each one of us contribute a new work of celestial 
art to those which already represent to angels and heavenly 
intelligences, " the glories of Christ" 

XKOWLEDOE— LloB not in Here Words. 

I HEARD two persons on the Wengem Alp talking by the 
hour together of the names of ferns ; not a word about their 
characteristics, uses, or habits, but a medley of crack-jaw 
titles, and nothing more. They evidently felt that they were 
ventilating their botany, and kept each other in countenance 
by alternate volleys of nonsense. Well, friend, they were 
about as sensible as those doctrinalists who for ever talk over 
the technicalities of religion, but know nothing by experience 
of its spirit and power. Are we not all too apt to amuse 
ourselves after the same fashion? He who knows mere 
Linnaean names, but has never seen a flower, is as reliable in 
botany, as he is in theology who can descant upon supra- 
lapsarianism, but has never known the love of Christ in his 
heart. 

** True religion's more than doctrine, 
Something must be known and felt." 

LETHABGT OP SOTTL. 

Two of my hearers perished by a fire in their own house. 
They were not consumed by the flames, but they were suffo- 
cated by the smoke. No blaze was ever visible^ nor co^vsUA. 

'Si 



130 MY NOTE BOOK. 

any remarkable sign of fire be seen from the street, yet they 
died as readily as if they had been burned to ashes by raging 
flames. In this way sin also is deadly. Comparatively few 
of our hearers are destroyed by outrageous and flaming vices, 
such as blasphemy, theft, drunkenness, or uncleanness ; but 
crowds of them are perishing by that deadly smoke of 
indifference which casts its stifling clouds of carelessness 
around them, and sends them asleep into everlasting destruc- 
tion. O that they could be saved from the smoke as well as 
from the flame ! 

LIFE. 

John Mackintosh thus writes to his biographer, Norman 
Macleod : — " May it not be said that the movement of our 
age is towards life f I sometimes fg,ncy that I can discern 
three epochs in the Reformed Churches, corresponding in the 
main to those three weighty epithets — via, Veritas^ vita. 
The Reformers themselves, no doubt, laid the stress chiefly 
upon the first (via). It was on this Popery had gone most 
astray, obscuring the doctrine of justification by faith alone. 
The epoch following was essentially dogmatic (veritas), when 
the doctors drew up ^systems* of the truth. It was now, 
indeed, Christ as Veritas / but the dogma taken alone led to 
coldness, dogmatism, sectarianism, and formality. Happy 
will it be for the church, if, not forgetting the other two, she 
shall now be found moving on to the third development of 
Christ as vita — the lifgy which will regulate the two former 
aspects, while it consummates and informs them. This life 
must develop the individual, and on individuals the church 
depends ; for in God's sight it is no abstraction." 

LIFE OF THE BELIEVEB— Interesting. 

I HEARD a gentleman assert that he could walk almost 
any number of miles when the scenery was good ; but, he 
added, " When it is flat and uninteresting, how one tires V 



MY NOTE BOOK. 131 

What scenery enchants the Christian pilgrim ; the towering 
mountains of predestination, the great sea of providence, the 
rocks of sure promise, the green fields of revelation, the river 
that makes glad the city of God, all these compose the 
scenery which surrounds the Christian, and at every step 
fresh sublimities meet his view. 

LIFE— Explains Beligion. 

One of our party greatly needed some elder-flower water 
for her face upon which the sun was working great mischief. 
It was in the Italian town of Varallo, and not a word of 
Italian did I know. I entered a chemist's shop and surveyed 
his drawers and bottles, but the result was nil. Bright 
thought, I would go down by the river, and walk until I 
could gather a bunch of elder-flowers, for the tree was then 
in bloom. Happily the search was successful : the flowers 
were exhibited to the druggist, the extract was procured. 
When you cannot tell in so many words what true rehgion is, 
exhibit it by your actions. Show by your life what grace can 
do. There is no language in the world so eloquent as a holy 
life. Men may doubt what you say, but they will believe 
what you do. 

LIFE— the Need of the Sinner. 

We visited two palaces in Venice, and realised the contrast 
of life and death. The first was tenanted by a noble family, 
who delighted to maintain it in good repair, to adorn it with 
fresh beauties, and to furnish it in the most sumptuous 
manner. Everything was fresh, fair, bright, and charming. 
From the paving of mosaics in the hall one looked up to 
ceilings glowing with the creations of the artist's pencil, and 
in every chamber paintings, statues, ormolu, tapestry, and 
all things else of the richest kind surrounded you. The 
other was a palace, too, with marble pillars, and carved work, 
but the stones were loosening, and the columns shifting, grass 



132 MY NOTE BOOK. 

grew in the halls, and the roofs let in the rain, decay was 
there and desolation, and yet the palace was as noble in its 
architecture as the first. Thus when God dwells in a man, 
all his powers and faculties are bright with a sacred light, 
and joy and peace and beauty adorn his entire manhood ; 
but if the Holy Spirit depart, the heart being empty and void 
becomes a ruin, everywhere decaying, and alas ! too often 
haunted by the demons of vice and iniquity. 

UFE— the Power of an Eameit. 

The upper galleries at Versailles are filled with portraits, 
many of them extremely valuable and ancient. These are the 
likenesses of the greatest men of all lands and ages, drawn by 
the ablest artists. Yet most visitors wander through the 
rooms with little or no interest ; in fact, after noticing one or 
two of the more prominent pictures, they hasten through the 
suite of chambers and descend to the other floors. Notice the 
change when the sight-seers come to fine paintings like those 
of Horace Vemet, where the men and women are not inactive 
portraits but are actively engaged. There the warrior who 
was passed by without notice upstairs, is seen hewing his 
way to glory over heaps of slain, or the statesman is observed 
delivering himself of weighty words before an assembly of 
princes and peers. Not the men but their actions engross 
attention. Portraits have no charm when scenes of stirring 
interest are set in rivalry with them. After all, then, let us be 
who or what we may, we must bestir ourselves or be mere 
nobodies, chips in the porridge, forgotten shells of the shore. 
If we would impress we must act. The dignity of standing 
still will never win the prize, we must run for it. Our influ- 
ence over our times will arise mainly from our doing and 
suffering the will of God, not from our office or person. Life, 
life in earnest, life for God, this will tell on the age ; but 
mere orderliness and propriety, inactive and passionless, will 
be utterly inoperative. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 133 

LIFE— The Hidden. 

Standing by the telegraphic wires one may often hear the 
mystic wailing and sighing of the winds among them, like the 
strains of an JEolian harp, but one knows nothing of the 
message which is flashing along them. Joyous may \>e the 
inner language of those wires, swift as the lightning, far- 
reaching and full of meaning, but a stranger intermeddles not 
therewith. Fit emblem of the believer's inner life ; men hear 
our notes of outward sorrow wrung from us by external 
circumstances, but the message of celestial peace, the divine 
communings with a better land, the swift heart-throbs of 
heaven-bom desire, they cannot perceive : the carnal see but 
the outer manhood, but the life hidden with Christ in God, 
flesh and blood cannot discern. 

LIFE— Power of the Inner. 

On a winter's day I have noticed a row of cottages, with a 
deep load of snow on their several roofs ; but as the day 
wore on, large fragments began to tumble from the eaves of 
this one and that other, till, by-and-by, there was a simul- 
taneous avalanche, and the whole heap slid over in powdery 
ruin on the pavement, and before the sun went down you saw 
each roof as clear and dry as on a summer's eve. But here 
and there you would observe one with its snow-mantle un- 
broken, and a rufl" of stiff" icicles around it. What made the 
difference ? The difference was to be found within. Some 
of these huts were empty, or the lonely inhabitant cowered 
over a scanty fire ; whilst the peopled hearth and the high- 
blazing fagots of the rest created such an inward warmth that 
grim winter melted and relaxed his gripe, and the loosened 
mass folded off and tumbled over on the trampled street. It 
is possible by some outside process to push the main volume 
of snow from the frosty roof, or chip off" the icicles one by 
one. But they will form again, and it needs an inward heat 
to create a total thaw. And so, by sundry processes, you max 



134 MY NOTE BOOK. 

clear off from a man's conduct the dead weight of conspicuous 
sins ; but it needs a hidden heat, a vital warmth within, to 
produce such a separation between the soul and its besetting 
iniquities, that the whole wintry incubus, the entire body of 
sin, will come spontaneously away. That vital warmth is the 
love of God abundantly shed abroad — ^the kindly glow which 
the Comforter diffuses in the soul which he makes his home. 
His genial inhabitation thaws that soul and its favourite sins 
asunder, and makes the indolence and self-indulgence and 
indevotion fall off from their old resting-place on that dissolv- 
ing heart. The easiest form of self-mortification is a fervent 
spirit. — yames Hamilton^ D,D, 

UPE— Beyiewed. 

Here is a good searching question for a man to ask him- 
self as he reviews his past life: — Have I written in the snoiv f 
Will my life-work endure the lapse of years and the fret of 
change 1 Has there been anything immortal in it, which will 
survive the speedy wreck of all sublunary things ? The boys 
inscribe their names in capitals in the snow, and in the 
morning's thaw the writing disappears ; will it be so with my 
work, or will the characters which I have carved outlast the 
brazen tablets of history ? Have I written in the snow? 

UFE-Spiritnal. 

How like to a Christian a man may be and yet possess no 
vital godliness ! Walk through the British Museum, and you 
will see all the orders of animals standing in their various 
places, and exhibiting themselves with the utmost possible 
propriety. The rhinoceros demurely retains the position in 
which he was set at first, the eagle soars not through the 
window, the wolf howls not at night ; every creature, whether 
bird, beast, or fish, remains in the particular glass case 
allotted to it ; but we all know that these are not the creatures, 
but only the outward semblances of them. Yet in what do 



MY NOTE BOOK. 135 

they diflfer? Certainly in nothing which you could readily 
see, for the well-stuffed animal is precisely like what the 
living animal would have been ; and that eye of glass even 
appears to have more of brightness in it than the natural eye 
of the creature itself; there is a secret inward something 
lacking, which, when it has once departed, you cannot 
restore. So in the churches of Christ, many professors are 
not living believers, but stuffed Christians. They possess all 
the externals of religion, and every outward morality that you 
could desire ; they behave with great propriety, they keep 
their places, and there is no outward difference between 
them and the true believer, except upon the vital point, the 
life which no power on earth can possibly confer. There is 
this essential distinction, spiritual life is absent. 

UFE— TTncdrtainty of. 

" It fareth with most men's lives, as with the sand in a 
deceptive hour-glass ; look but upon it in outward appearance, 
and it seemeth far more than it is, because it riseth up upon 
the sides, whilst the sand is empty and hollow in the midst 
thereof, so that when it sinks down in an instant, a quarter of 
an hour is gone in a moment. Thus many men are mistaken 
in their own account, reckoning upon threescore and ten 
years, the age of a man, because their bodies appear strong 
and lusty. Alas ! their health may be hollow, there may be 
some inward infirmity and imperfection unknown to them, so 
that death may surprise them on a sudden, and they be cut 
down like the grass." 

LIFE— TTnoertain Tennre of. 

There is a talk of giving y?jr//y of tenure in Ireland ; can 
they find it in England, or for the matter of that, in all the 
world? No, we are all tenants, liable to be ejected without 
an hour's notice. How death must laugh at our leases and 



x 



136 MY NOTE BOOK. 

our bonds ! Cobwebs are not more frail A bubble has as 
sure a tenure as a man. 

** What boots your houses and your lands ? 
In spite of close-drawn deed and fence, 
Like water, 'twixt your cheated hands. 
They slip into the graveyard's sands, 
And mock your ownership's pretence." 

£IFE— to be Viewed in Beference to its End. 

The way is good, says Chrysostom, if it be to a feast, though 
through a dark and miry lane ; if to an execution not good, 
though through the fairest street of the city. Non qua sed 
quo. Not the way but the end is to be mainly considered. 

XI6HT— Detested \ij the Wicked. 

A SLUTTISH housemaid when scolded for the imtidiness of . 
the chambers exclaimed, " Pm sure the rooms would be clean 
enough if it were not for the nasty sun which is always showing 
the dirty corners." Thus do men revile the gospel because it 
reveals their own sin. Thus all agitations for reforms in 
Church and State are opposed, and all manner of mischief 
attributed to them as if they created the evils which they 
bring to light. The lover of the right courts anything which 
may manifest the wrong, but those who love evil have never 
a good word for those disturbing beams of truth which show 
up the filthy comers of their hearts and lives. 

LITTLE THINGS— Wherennto they may Grow. 

When the air balloon was first discovered, a matter-of- 
fact gentleman contemptuously asked Dr. Franklin what was 
the use of it. The doctor answered this question by asking 
another.: — " What is the use of a new-bom infant f It may 
become a man^^ This anticipation of great things springing 
from small beginnings should induce us to put into practice 
those holy promptings which at certain seasons move our 



MY NOTE BOOK. 137 

souls. What if we ourselves and our work should be little in 
Zion ; cannot the Lord cause the grandest issues to proceed 
from insignificant beginnings ? Who hath despised the day 
of small things ? 

LIVES— Wreeked. 

Sailing dbwn the Thames one occasionally sees a green 
flag in tatters, inscribed with the word wreck, floating in the 
breeze over a piece of a mast, or the funnel off a steamer which 
is just visible above the water. Alas ! how many lives might 
thus be marked, and how needful that they should be so 
labelled, lest they prove ruinous to others ! The debauched, 
the self-righteous, the spendthrift, the miserly, the apostate, 
the drunken, how wisely might the flag, be placed over them, 
for they each are a wreck ! 

LONOIKGS-of the Soul often PainfU. 

Have you never seen a caged eagle with its breast or wing 
bleeding from blows received by dashing against the wire of 
its cage ? The poor creature dreamed of the forest and the 
craggy rock, and, filled with aspirations for sublimest flight, 
it stretched its wings and flew upward, only to bring itself 
into sharp contact with its prison. Even thus the new-bom 
nature, stirred in its inmost depths with longings suitable to 
its celestial origin, aspires after the joys of heaven, stretching 
all its wings to soar towards perfection ; but alas ! we who are 
in this body do groan, we find the flesh to be a prison, and 
so the more we long the more we pine, and pining we sigh 
and cry, and wound our hearts with insatiable desires and 
bleeding discontents. The pangs of strong desire for the 
presence of the Lord in glory, who among believers has not 
felt them ? Who among us has not found our flight upward 
brought to a painful pause by the stem facts of flesh and 
blood, and earth and sin ? 



138 MY NOTE BOOK- 

LOVE OF GOB— Shed Abroad hj the H0I7 Ohoit 

Frequently at the great Roman games, the emperors, in 
order to gratify the citizens of Rome, would cause sweet 
perfumes to be rained down upon them through the awning 
which covered the amphitheatre. Behold the vases, the 
huge vessels of perfume ! Yes, but there is nought here to 
delight you so long as the jars are sealed ; but let the vases 
be opened, and the vessels be poured out, and let the drops 
of perfumed rain begin to descend, and every one is refreshed 
and gratified thereby. Such is the love of God. There is a 
richness and a fulness in it, but it is not perceived till the 
Spirit of God pours it out like the rain of fragrance over the 
heads and hearts of all the living children of God. See, 
then, the need of having the love of God shed abroad in the 
heart by the Holy Ghost ! 

LTTST. 

Our lusts are cords. Fiery trials are sent to bum and 
consume them. Who fears the flame which will bring him 
liberty from bonds intolerable ? 

HAN-PaUeiL 

We saw at Hanover the unfinished palace of the deposed 
monarch : we were shown his state and private carriages and 
his stables of cream-coloured horses. A saddening sight to 
see all the emblems of sovereignty and no king ; the insignia 
of royalty and the monarch for ever exiled. How like to 
human nature, which has so much about it prepared for the 
service of the King of kings, so much of faculty for heavenly 
occupation, but the king has departed and the house is left 
desolate, and all the furnishing thereof perverted to alien 
uses. Thought, imagination, judgment, memory, all fit to be 
yoked to celestial chariots, become the very hacks of the 
devil, and the body once a palace now a haunt of thieves. 
Alas, alas ! poor manhood ! 



MY NOTE BOOK. 139 

MAN (THE GOOD)— Beneficial Inflnence of. 

Alexander Von Humboldt thus writes of the cow- 
tree : — " On the barren flank of a rock grows a tree with 
coriaceous and dry leaves. Its large woody roots can scarcely 
penetrate into the stone. For several months of the year not 
a single shower moistens its foliage. Its branches appear 
dead and dried ; but when the trunk is pierced there flows 
from it a sweet and nourishing milk. It is at the rising of 
the sun that this vegetable fountain is most abundant. The 
negroes and natives are then seen hastening from all quarters, 
furnished with large bowls to receive the milk, which grows 
yellow, and thickens at its surface. Some empty their bowls 
under the tree itself, others carry the juice home to their 
children." 

May not the earnest Christian ministering good on all 
sides be imaged in this marvellous tree? He is in his own 
esteem full often a withered and dead tree, but there is within 
him a living sap, which wells up with blessing to all around. 
His surroundings are all against him, the soil in which he 
grows is hostile to grace, yet he not only lives on, but 
luxuriates. He derives nothing from earth, his fountain is 
from above, but he enriches the sons of earth with untold 
blessings, and though they often wound him they experi- 
mentally know his value. To him full many of the poor and 
needy look up as to a friend in need, he is full of the milk of 
human kindness ; where he cannot give in golden coin he 
distributes comfort in sympathy and words of cheer. 

HAN (THE GOOD)— Beneficial Inflaence of. 

In a hot summer's-day, some years ago, I was sailing with 
a friend in a tiny boat, on a miniature lake, enclosed like a 
cup within a circle of steep, bare Scottish hills. On the 
shoulder of the brown sun-burnt mountain, and full in sight, 
was a well with a crystal stream trickling over its lip, and 
making its way down towards the lake. Around the welTs 



140 MY NOTE BOOK. 

mouth and along the course of the rivulet, a belt of green 
stood out in strong contrast with the iron surface of the rocks 
all around. We soon agreed as to what should be made of it. 
There it was, a legend clearly printed by the finger of God 
on the side of these silent hills, teaching the passer-by how 
needful a good man is, and how useful he may be in a desert 
world. — IV. Arnot, 

HAN— Katand State o£ 

A MUSICAL amateur of eminence, who had often observed 
Mr. Cadogan's inattention to his performances, said to him 
one day, "Come, I am determined to make you feel the 
power of music, pay particular attention to this piece." It 
was played. " Well, what do you say now?*' "Just what I 
said before." " What ! can you hear this and not be charmed? 
I am surprised at your insensibility ! Where are your ears ?*' 
" Bear with me, my lord," replied Mr. Cadogan, " since I too 
have had my surprise ; I have from the pulpit set before you 
the most striking and affecting truths ; I have found notes 
that might have awaked the dead ; I have said, Surely he will 
feel now ; but you never seemed charmed with my music, 
though infinitely more interesting than yours. I too might 
have said — ' Where are his ears ?* " 

Man, until sovereign grace opens his ears, is deaf to the 
heavenly harmonies of the love of God in Christ Jesus, 
although these are the ravishment of angels and the wonder 
of eternity. 

HAN— Perversion of his Faculties. 

According to the fable, the tail of the snake obtained pre- 
cedence of the head and led the way in the creature's 
journeying. Being altogether blind the new guide dashed 
against a stone at one moment, and the next came violently 
against a tree, and at last drowned both itself and the head 
in the river of death. Here may be seen the unhappy con- 
dition of men in whom their baser nature is dominant, the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 141 

animal controlling the intellectual. They invert the order of 
nature, they rebel against common sense ; their course cannot 
but be imwise and dangerous, and their end must be fatal. 
God made man upright, and placed his thoughtful faculties 
aloft in the place of sovereignty, but man in his folly permits 
the appetites which he holds in conmion with the brute 
creation to reign supreme, while the mind, which ought to 
rule, is degraded to meanest servitude. 

MAN— a Stain on the TTniverse. 

RUSKIN says : — " The Savoyard's cottage, standing in the 
midst of an inconceivable, inexpressible beauty, set on some 
sloping bank of golden sward, with clear fountains flowing 
beside it, and wild flowers, and noble trees, and goodly rocks, 
gathered round into a perfection as of Paradise, is itself a 
dark and plague-like stain in the midst of the gentle land- 
scape. Within a certain distance of its threshold the groimd 
is foul and cattle-trampled ; its timbers are black with smoke, 
its garden choked with weeds and nameless refuse, its cham- 
bers empty and joyless, the light and wind gleaming and 
filtering through the crannies of their stones." 

Alas ! too fit an illustration of unregenerate manhood in 
the midst of divine mercies, surrounded with displays of 
boundless goodness. 

** Every prospect pleases, 
And only man is vile." 

MEANS OF GRACS— their Disuse a Sad Loss. 

My ^olian harp is not sounding and yet a fine fresh wind 
is blowing in at the window. Why hear I not its soft mystic 
strains ? I remember, it was put away in the lumber room 
and some of its strings are broken. There is a gracious revival 
in the church, and believers are greatly refreshed by the visi- 
tations of God's Spirit, but I am in a sadly worldly unbelieving 
condition. May it not be because I neglect private prayer, 
and have not been regular at the prayer-meeting ; my faxxNiX^i 



142 MY NOTE BOOK. 

concerns and business cares have kept my heart in the lumber 
room, and my soul has lost her first love ? Yes, these are the 
reasons. Lord, tune my heart, and I will again seek the places 
where the heavenly wind of thy Spirit blows graciously and 
refreshingly. How can I bear to be silent when thy daily 
mercies are all around me singing of thy love ? 

XEDITATIOH-to be PraetiBed. 

Those who would be in health do not sit still in their 
houses to breathe such air as may come to them, but they 
walk abroad and seek out rural* and elevated spots that they 
tnay inhale the invigorating breezes; and thus those godly 
souls who would be in a vigorous spiritual state, do not 
merely think upon such holy doctrines as may come into their 
minds in the ordinary course of thought, but they give time 
to meditation, they walk abroad in the fields of truth, and 
endeavour to climb the heights of gospel promises. It is said 
that Enoch walked with God : here is not an idle but an 
active communion. The road to bodily health is said to be a 
footpath, and the way to spiritual health is to exercise one's 
self in holy contemplation. 

XERCIES (TEKPOBAD-an Argument. 

If the Lord has enriched you in temporals, though you 
have not feared him, have you not every reason to expect 
that he will do as well for you in spirituals, if you ask him to 
do so .? You call at a friend's house on horseback ; he takes 
your horse into the stable, and is remarkably attentive to it ; 
the creature is well groomed, well housed, well fed ; you are 
not at all afraid that you will be shut out, there is surely a 
warm place in the parlour for the rider, where the horse is so 
well accommodated in the stable. Now, your body, which we 
may liken to the horse, has enjoyed temporal prosperity in 
abundance, and surely the Lord will take care of your soul if 
you seek his face ! Let your prayer be, " My God, my Father, 



' MY NOTE BOOK. 143 

be my guide. Since thou hast dealt so well with me in these 
external matters, give me true riches, give me to love thy 
Son and trust in him, and so be henceforth thy child." 

KEBGY— Abuse of. 

A CERTAIN member of that parliament wherein a statute 
for the relief of the poor was passed, was an ardent pro- 
moter of that Act. He asked his steward when he returned 
to the country, what the people said of that statute. The 
steward answered, that he heard a labouring man say, that 
whereas formerly he worked six days in the week, now he 
would work but four ; which abuse of that good provision so 
affected the pious statesman that he could not refrain from 
weeping. Lord, thou hast made many provisions in thy 
Word for my support and comfort, and hast promised in my 
necessities thy supply and protection ; but let not my pre- 
sumption of help from thee cause my neglect of any of those 
means for my spiritual and temporal preservation which thou 
hast enjoined. 

XEBCT— €k>ntiiiaal. 

A BENEVOLENT person gave Mr. Rowland Hill a hundred 
pounds to dispense to a poor minister, and thinking it was too 
much to send him all at once, Mr. Hill forwarded five pounds 
in a letter, with simply these words within the envelope, " More 
to follow." In a few days' time, the good man received another 
letter by the post — and letters by the post were rarities in those 
days ; this second messenger contained another five pounds, 
with the same motto, " And more to follow." A day or two 
after came a third and a fourth, and still the same promise, 
"And more to follow." Till the whole sum had been re- 
ceived the astonished minister was made familiar with the 
cheering words, " And more to follow." 

Every blessing that comes from God is sent with the self- 
same message, " And more to follow." " I forgive you \qus: 



144 MY NOTE BOOK. 

sins, but there's more to follow." "I justify you in the 
righteousness of Christ, but there's more to follow." " I 
adopt you into my liaunily, but there's more to follow." " I 
educate you for heaven, but there's more to follow." **I 
give you grace upon grace, but there's more to follow." " I 
have helped you even to old age, but there's still more to 
follow." ^ I will uphold you in the hour of death, and as you 
are passing into the world of spirits, my mercy shall still 
continue with you, and when you land in the world to come 
there shall still be MORE TO FOLLOW.* 

MSSCT— SiMolfM thA Heart 

You may have heard of some persons condemned to 
execution, who at the scaffold have been so obdurate and 
stitt-necked that not a cry or a tear came from them ; yet, 
just as they have been going to lay their necks upon the 
block, when a pardon has come, and they were at once 
discharged from guilt, imprisonment, and death, they that 
could not weep a tear before, no sooner saw the pardon sealed, 
and themselves acquitted, than they dissolved into tears of joy, 
thankfulness, and surprise. So it is with believers. The 
more they see Christ in the pardon of sin, and the love of 
God in Christ to receive and embrace them^ the more they 
melt. — Tobias Crisp, 

MSSCT-its SfBMt (a the SovL 

A MAN convicted of high treason and condemned to die 
is not only pardoned, but taken into the favour of his 
sovereign. He is riding in the royal carriage, and on the 
road he sees some of his fellow traitors pinioned and manacled, 
led forth in the midst of officers to die for the offence in which 
he had as deep a hand as they. What think you, will he not 
entreat the gracious monarch to extend his clemency to his 
fellow rebels ? Will not the tears stand in his eyes as he 
admires the difference which his sovereign's free mercy has 



MY NOTE BOOK. 145 

made ? Will he not be moved with emotions impossible to 
describe, of mingled joy and grief, pity and gratitude, 
wonder and compassion? Christian, see your likeness here 
drawn to the life, you must surely feel ready to fall down on your 
knees, and cry, " Lord, why dost thou reveal thy mercy to me 
and not to these ? Save them also, O Lord, for thy name's 
sake." 

KEBGY— Exoellenoe of 

I REMEMBER well being taken one day to see a gorgeous 
palace at Venice, where every piece of furniture was made 
with most exquisite taste, and of the richest material, where 
statues and pictures of enormous price abounded on all hands, 
and the floor of each room was paved with mosaics of mar- 
vellous art, and extraordinary value. As I was shown from 
room to room, and allowed to roam amid the treasures by its 
courteous owner, I felt a considerable timidity, I was afraid 
to sit anywhere, nor did I hardly dare to put down my foot, 
or rest my hand to lean. Everything seemed to be too good 
for ordinary mortals like myself ; but when one is introduced 
into the gorgeous palace of infinite goodness, costlier and 
fairer far, one gazes wonderingly with reverential awe at the 
matchless vision. " How excellent is thy lovingkindness, O 
God !" " I am not worthy of the least of all thy benefits. Oh ! 
the depths of the love and goodness of the Lord." 

ICEBCT— Seen in our Idves. 

What a rugged, precipitous, ungainly pass is that Col 
EXObbia ! It was shrewd common sense, and true humanity 
which suggested the erection of that poor little hospice at the 
summit. Never was a shelter more opportune, a refuge more 
welcome. One could not have expected to find a retreat in 
so desolate a region, but there it was, and we were received 
into it with cordiality. The great Lord of pilgrims has taken 
care that in the hardest parts of our road to the Celestial 



146 MY NOTE BOOK. 

City there shoakl be blessed resting places, where beneath the 
shade of promises, weary ones may repose within the shelter 
of love. God's hospice may be confidendy looked for when- 
ever the way is more than mUnarily difficult 



A SHIP on her way to Anstralia met with a very terrible 
storm, and sprung a leak. As evils seldom come alone, a little 
idiile after another tempest assailed her. There li2q>peBed 
to be a gendeman on board, of the most nervous tempera- 
ment, whose garrulous tongue and important air w e re 
calculated to alarm all the passengers. AVhen the storm 
came on, the captain, who knew what mischief may be done by 
a suspicious and talkative individual, managed to get near him 
with a view to rendering him quieL The gendemen addressing 
the captain, said in a tone of alarm, ^ What an awful storm ; 
1 am afraid we shall go to the bottom, for I hear the leak is 
very bad.* ** WeU,** said the captain, ** as you seem to know 
it, and perhaps the others do not, you had better not mention 
it to any one, lest you should frighten the passengers or 
dispirit my men. Perhaps as it is a very bad case, you 
would lend us your valuable help, and then we may possibly 
get through it. Would you have the goodness to stand here 
and hold hard on this rope ; pray do not leave it, but pull as 
hard as ever you can till I tell you to let it go." So our 
friend clenched his teeth, and put his feet firmly down, and 
kept on holding this rope with all his might, till he earnestly 
wished for a substitute. The stofm abated; the ship was 
safe, and our friend was released from his rope-holding. 
He expected a deputation would bring him the thanks of all 
the passengers, but they were evidently unconscious of his 
merits ; for it is too Often the case that we forget our greatest 
benefactors. Even the captain did not seem very grateful ; 
so our hero ventured, in a roundabout style to hint, that 
such valuable services as his, having saved the vessel, ot^ht 



MY NOTE BOOK. 147 

to be rewarded at least with some few words of acknowledg- 
ment ; when he was shocked to hear the captain say, " What, 
sir, do you think you saved the vessel? Why, I gave you that 
rope to hold to keep you engaged, that you might not be in * 
such a feverish state of alarm." 

The self-righteous may here see how much men con- 
tribute to their own salvation apart from Christ. They think 
they can certainly save themselves, and there they stand 
holding the rope with their clenched teeth and their feet 
tightly fixed, while they are really doing no more than our 
officious friend, who was thus befooled. If ever you get to 
heaven, you will find that everything you did towards your 
own salvation, apart from the Lord Jesus, was about as useful 
as holding the rope ; that in fact, the safety of the soul lies . 
somewhere else, and not in you ; and that what is wanted 
with you is just to get out of the way, and let Christ come in 
and magnify his grace. 

XIHISTEB. ' 

The sharp shrill cry of " Acqua ! Acqua !" constantly pierces 
the ear of the wanderer in Venice and other towns of sultry 
Italy. There is the man who thus invites your attention. 
Look at him. On his back he bears a burden of water, and 
in his hand a rack of bottles containing essences to flavour 
the draught if needed, and glasses to hold the cooling liquid. 
In the streets of London he would find but little patronage, 
but where fountains are few and the days are hot as an oven, 
he earns a livelihood and supplies a pubhc need. The present 
specimen of water-dealers is a poor old man bent sideways, 
by the weight of his daily burden. He is worn out in all but 
his voice, which is truly startling in its sharpness and distinct- 
ness. At our call he stops immediately, glad to drop his 
burden jon the ground, and smiling in prospect of a 
customer. He washes out a glass for us, fills it with spark- 
ling water, offers us the tincture which we abhor, puts it back M 



148 MY NOTE BOOK. 

into the rack again when we shake our head, receives half-a- 
dozen soldi with manifest g^titude, and trudges away across 
the square, crying still, " Acqua ! Acqua !" That cry, shrill as 
it is, has sounded sweedy in the ears of many a thirsty soul, 
and will for ages yet to come, if throats and thirst survive so 
long. How forcibly it calls to our mind the Saviour's 
favourite imagery, in which he compares the grace which 
he bestows on all who diligently seek it, to " hving water f 
and how much that old man is like the faithful preacher of 
the word, who, having filled his vessel at the well, wears him- 
self out by continually bearing the burden of the Lord, and 
crying, " Water ! water ! " amid crowds of sinners, who must 
drink or die. Instead of the poor Italian water-bearer, we 
see before us the man of God, whose voice is heard in the 
chief places of concourse, proclaiming the divine invitation, 
" Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters ! " until 
he grows grey in the service, and men say, " Surely those 
aged limbs have need of rest ;" yet rest he courts not, but 
pursues his task of mercy ; never laying down his charge till 
he lays down his body, and never ceasing to work until he 
ceases to live. 

At the door of Saint Mark's Cathedral, we bought a glass 
of what should have been the pure element, but when we 
began to drink, a pungent flavour of something which had 
previously been in the cup, made us leave the rest of our pur- 
chase, thirsty though we were. The water was good enough, but 
the vessel which held it imparted an evil taste to it ; the Uke 
has often happened in the ministry, the gospel preached has 
been true and divine, but the unhallowed savour of an incon- 
sistent life, or a bitter disposition, has marred the sweetness 
of the Word. May all of us by whom the Lord hands out the 
water of life, see that we are clean and pure in conversation, 
vessels fit for the Master's use. Men who are very thirsty will 
drink out of any cup, however dirty ; but no conceivable advan- 
tage can arise from filth, and hundreds will turn away from the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 149 

water because of it, and thus a very faulty ministry may be 
useful because of the truth contained in it, but its sinful- 
ness can do no good, and may serve as an excuse to the 
ungodly for refusing the gospel of Christ. 

In the square of the Doge's palace are two wells, from 
which the sellers of water obtain their stock-in-trade, but we 
can hardly compare either of them with the overflowing 
spring from which the preacher of righteousness draws his 
supplies. One of the wells is filled artificially and is not much 
used for drinking, since the coldness and freshness of water 
springing naturally from earth's deep fountains is lacking. It 
is to be feared that n^iny preachers depend for their matter 
upon theological systems, books, and mere learning, and hence 
their teaching is devoid of the living power and refreshing 
influence which is found in conmiunion with " the spring of 
all our joys." The other well yields most delicious water, 
but its flow is scanty. In the morning it is full, but a crowd 
of eager persons drain it to the bottom, and during the day 
as it rises by driblets, every drop is contended for and borne 
away, long before there is enough below to fill a bucket. In 
its excellence, continuance and naturalness, this well might 
be a fair picture of the grace of our Lord Jesus, but it fails to 
set him forth from its poverty of supply. He has a redundance, 
an overflow, an infinite fulness, and there is no possibility of 
his being exhausted by the draughts made upon him, even 
though ten thousand times ten thousand should come with a 
thirst as deep as the abyss. We could not help saying, 
" Spring up, O well," as we looked over the margin covered 
with copper, into which strings and ropes — continually used 
by the waiting many — had worn deep channels. . Very Httle 
of the coveted liquid was brought up each time, but the 
people were patient, and their tin vessels went up and down 
as fast as there was a cupful to be had. O that men were 
half as diligent in securing the precious gifts of the Spirit, 
which are priceless beyond compare ! Alas ! how few have 



150 MY NOTE BOOK. 

David's thirst for the well of Bethlehem. The cans sent 
down had very broad sides, so that they dropped down flat 
upon the bottom of the well, and were drawn up less than 
half full ; larger vessels would have been useless, and so, 
indeed, would small ones if they had not been made to lie 
quite down upon their sides, along what we must call the 
floor of the well, and had they have been erect they would 
not have received a drop. Humility is alwajrs a profitable 
grace; pride is always as useless as it is foolish. Only by 
bowing our minds to the utmost before the Lord, can we expect 
to receive his mercy, for he promises grace unto the humble in 
that same verse which foretells his resistance of the proud. If 
there be grace anywhere, contrite hearts will get it. The 
lower we can fall, the sooner will the springing water of grace 
reach us, and the more completely shall we be filled with it. 

It would be a great misfortune for those who buy their 
water in the streets, if the itinerant vendors should begin to 
fill their casks and bottles from muddy streams. At Botzen, 
in the Tyrol, we saw many fountains running with a liquid of 
a very brown colour, and a seller of such stuff might cry 
" AcQUA !" very long and very loudly before we should partake 
of his dainties. Sundry divines in our age have become weary 
of the old-fashioned well of which our fathers drank, and 
would fain have us go to their Abana and Pharpar, but we 
are still firm in the belief that the water from the rock has 
no rival, and we shall not, we hope, forsake it for any other. 
May the Lord send to our happy land more simple gospel, 
more Christ-exalting doctrine, more free-grace teaching, more 
distinct testimony to atoning blood and eternal love. In most 
of the Swiss villages there are streaming fountains by the dozen, 
and the pure liquid is to be had at every corner ; may we yet 
see the Word of God as abundantly distributed in every town, 
village, and hamlet in England. Meanwhile, having recorded 
the prayer, we resolve, by divine grace, to cry more loudly 
than ever, " Acqua ! Acqua ! " 



MY NOTE BOOK. 151 



lOHISTEB. 



However learned, godly, and eloquent a minister may be, 
he is nothing without the Holy Spirit. The bell in the 
steeple may be well hung, fairly fashioned, and of soundest 
metal, but it is dumb until the ringer makes it speak ; and in 
like manner the preacher has no voice of quickening for the 
dead in sin, or of comfort for living saints until the divine 
Spirit gives him a gracious pull, and bids him speak with 
power. Hence the need of prayer from both preacher and 
hearers. 

XIHISTEB— Heed of Personal Tenderness. 

Speaking of the tempet- requisite to the right discharge of 
ministerial duty, Payson said, " I never was fit to say a word 
to a sinner, except when I had a broken heart myself*; when 
I was subdued and melted into penitency, and felt as though 
I had just received pardon to my own soul, and when my 
heart was full of tenderness and pity. No anger, no anger." 

XnriSTEB-Self-dissatisfootion of. 

" Swift of foot was Hiawatha, 
He could shoot an arrow from him, 
And run forward with such fleetness. 
That the arrow fell behind him ! " 

The fable is even less than truth with the fervent preacher : 
he darts arrows of fire in flaming speech, but his eagerness 
to win souls far outruns his words. He projects himself far 
beyond his language. His heart outstrips his utterance. He 
embraces souls in his love, while his words as yet are but on 
the wing. Often and often will he weep when his sermon is 
over, because his words " fell behind him ; " yet has he cause 
for joy, that he should have received so divine a spirit from 
his Master's hand : his very dissatisfaction proves his zeal. 



152 MY NOTE BOOK. 

XIHISTEB— Should be a Honing Father. 

In a church in Verona stands, or rather sits, a wooden 
image of St. Zeno, an ancient bishop, with knees so ludicrously 
short that there is no lap on which a babe could be dandled. 
He was not the first nor the last ecclesiastic who has been 
utterly incapable of being a nursing father to the church. 
It were well if all ministers had a heavenly instinct for the 
nourishing and bringing up of the Lord's little ones. Is there 
not much lack in this ? 

XIHISTBY— Best Xen Heeded for it. 

" Amongst the Jesuits they have a rule, that they who are 
unapt for greater studies, sh^ study cases of conscience." Is 
this to be adopted among Protestants, and when a man is too 
brainless to succeed in any common calling, is he therefore 
to argue that he is called to the ministry ? This mischievous 
notion fills pulpits, but it empties pews. The fact is, the very 
pick of our Christian men are wanted for a work 

** Which well might fill an angel's heart. 
Did fill a Saviour's hands." 

XISTAEES— Onr Aptness to Xake. 

We were riding along in the afternoon of a lovely but 
blazing day from Varallo to Riva, and to quench our thirst 
on the road we carried with us some bottles of an excellent 
lemonade. The empty bottles were of no use to us, and one 
of them was given to a friend on the box seat of the carriage 
to throw away. He happened to be the essence of gentleness 
and liberality, and seeing two very poor peasant women 
trudging along with huge empty baskets strapped on their 
backs, he thought it would delight them if he dropped the 
bottle into one of their receptacles ; a bottle being far more 
a godsend there than in England. Alas, for our friend's 
happiness during the whole of the next twenty-four hours ! 
The motion of the carriage made him miss his aim, and the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 153 

bottle fell on the head of the woman instead of into her 
basket. There was a shrill cry, and a good deal of blood and 
speedy faintness. Of course, we were all in an instant binding 
up the wound with silver, and T)ur friend we feel sure used 
golden ointment, so that the poor old creature would have 
cheerfully had her head broken ten times to receive such a 
sum as she obtained by way of solatium; but still the accident 
saddened us all, and especially our dear tended-hearted friend 
from whose hand the missile was dropped. How often has 
his case been ours ! We meant to cheer a troubled conscience 
and instead thereof we wounded it yet more. We intended 
nothing but love, but our words gave pain ; we had miscalcu- 
lated, and missed our aim. This has both astonished us and 
caused us the deepest regret. Yet such a blunder has made 
us the more careful, and has humbled us under a sense of 
our readiness to err, and moreover it has led us to be still 
more liberal in the use of that precious treasure of the gospel, 
which easily recompenses for all our blundering. Loving 
reader, be careful with your kindnesses, but be not too much 
depressed should they fail to comfort. The Lord knows your 
intentions. 

XOKEY-MAEIKa-Hofhing but Play. 

Mr. Ruskin, in his lecture on "Work,'"* says : — '^What- 
ever we do to please ourselves, and only for the sake of the 
pleasure, not for an ultimate object, is ' play,' the ' pleasing 

thing,' not the useful thing The first of all English 

games is making money. That is an all-absorbing game ; 
and we knock each other down oftener in playing at that than 
at foot-ball, or any other rougher sport ; and it is absolutely 
without purpose ; no one who engages heartily in that game 
ever knows why. Ask a great money-maker what he wants 

* In "The Crown of Wild Olive, Three Lectures on Work, 
Traffic, and War." By John Ruskin, M.A., 1866. 



154 MY NOTE BOOK. 

to do with his money — he never knows. He doesn't make it 
to do anything with it. He gets it only that he may get it. 
*What will you make of what you have got?' you ask. 
'Well, ril get more/ he says. Just as at cricket, you get 
more runs. There's no use in the runs, but to get more of 
them than other people is the game. And there's no use in 
the money, but to have more of it than other people is the 
game. So all that great foul city of London there — ^rattling, 
growling, smoking, stinking — a ghastly heap of fermenting 
brickwork, pouring out poison at every pore — you fancy it is 
a city of work ? Not a street of it ! It is a great city of 
play ; very nasty play, and very hard play, but still play. 
It is only Lord's Cricket Ground without the turf — a huge 
billiard-table without the cloth, and with pockets as deep as 
the bottomless pit, but mainly a billiard table after all." 

MONEY 1CAKIK0—KO Time for. 

A GENTLEMAN of Boston (U. S.), an intimate friend of 
Professor Agassiz, once expressed his wonder that a man of 
such abilities as he (Agassiz) possessed should remain con- 
tented with such a moderate income. " I have enough," was 
Agassiz's reply. " I have not time to make money. Life is 
not sufficiently long to enable a man to get rich, and do his 
. duty to his fellow men at the same time.^' Christian, have 
you time to serve your God and yet to give your whole soul 
to gaining wealth? The question is left for conscience to 
answer. 

XOEALIST. 

The dahlia would surely be a very empress among flowers 
if it had but perfume equal to its beauty ; even the rose 
might need to look to her sovereignty. Florists have tried 
all their arts to scent this lovely child of autumn but in vain, 
no fragrance can be developed or produced ; God has denied 
the boon, and human skill cannot impart it. The reflecting 



MY NOTE BOOK. 155 . 

mind will be reminded of those admirable characters which' 
are occasionally met with, in which everything of good 
repute and comely aspect may be seen, but true religion, that 
sweet ethereal perfume of grace, is wanting ; if they had but 
love to God, what lovely beings they would be, the best of the 
saints would not excel them, and yet that fragrant grace they 
do not seek, and after every effort we may make for their 
conversion, they remain content without the one thing which is 
needful for their perfection. O that the Lord would impart 
to them the mystic sweetness of his grace by the Holy Spirit ! 

xonvEs. 

There are overshot water-whpels and undershot. In the 
one case the motive power falls from above, in the other the 
water turns the wheel from below ; the first is the more 
powerful. Men, like wheels, are turned by forces from various 
sources, and too many move by the undercurrent — mercenary 
desires and selfish aims drive them ; but the good man's 
driving force falls from above ; let him endeavour to prove to 
all men that this is the most mighty force in existence. 

XOTIVES. 

Standing near the remarkable spring at Ewell, in Surrey, 
and watching the uprising of the waters, one sees at the 
bottom of the pool innumerable circles with smaller circles 
within them, from which extremely fine sand is continually 
being upheaved by the force of the rising water. Tiny 
geysers upheave their little founts, and from a myriad openings 
bubble up with the clear crystal. The perpetual motion of 
the water, and the leaping of the sand are most interesting. 
It is not like the spring-head in the field, where the cooling 
liquid pours forth perpetually from a spout, all unseen, till it 
plunges into its channel ; nor like the river-head where the 
stream weeps from a mass of mossy rock ; but here are the 
fountains of earth's hidden deeps all unveiled and laid bare, 
the very veins of nature opened to the public gaze. How 



1 




153 MY NOTE BOOK. 

would it amaze us if we could in this fashion peer into the 
springs of human character and see whence words and 
actions flow ! What man would wish to have his designs 
and aims exposed to every onlooker ? But why this aversion 
to being known and read of all men? The Christian's 
motives and springs of action should be so honest and pure 
that he might safely defy inspection. He who has nothing 
to be ashamed of has nothing to- conceal. Sincerity can 
afford, hke our first parents in Paradise, to be naked and not 
ashamed. 

If other men cannot read our motives, we ought at least to 
examine them carefully for ourselves. Day by day with 
extreme rigour must we search into our hearts. Motive is 
vital to the goodness of an action. He who should give his 
body to be burned might yet lose his soul if his ruling passion 
were obstinacy, and not desire for God's glory. Self may be 
sought under many disguises, and the man may be utterly 
unaware that thus he is losing all acceptance with God. We 
must not impute ill motives to others, but we must be equally 
clear of another more fascinating habit, namely, that of im- 
puting good motives to ourselves. Severity in estimating our 
own personal character very seldom becomes excessive ; our 
partialit)' is usually more or less blinding to our judgment. We 
will not suspect ourselves if we can help it ; evidence must be 
very powerful before it can convince us of being governed by 
sordid aims. The stream of generosity does not always 
spring from gratitude to God. Zeal is not at all times the 
offspring of deep-seated faith. Even devotional habits may 
be fostered by other than holy affections. The highest wisdom 
suggests that we spend much patient and impartial considera- 
tion upon a matter so fundamental as the heart's intent in the 
actions which it directs. " If thine eye be single, thine whole 
body shall be full of light." Dear reader, stand by thine inner 
springs and watch, and make faithful notes of what thou 
seest, lest thou be deceived. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 157 

VATVSE— Heed of Benewal. 

A VICIOUS horse is none the better tempered because the 
kicking straps prevent his dashing the carriage to atoms ; 
and so a man is none the better really because the restraints 
of custom and providence may pre vent his following that course 
of life which he would prefer. Poor fallen human nature be- 
hind the bars of laws, and in the cage of fear of punishment, is 
none the less a sad creature ; should its Master unlock the door 
we should soon see what it would be and do. A young 
leopard which had been domesticated, and treated as a pet, 
licked its master's hand while he slept, and it so happened 
that it drew blood from a recent wound ; the first taste of 
blood transformed the gentle creature into a raging wild beast ; 
yet it wrought no real change, it only awakened the natural 
ferocity which had always been there. A change of nature is 
required for our salvation — mere restraints are of small 
value. 

VATUSES— the Two in a ChriBtian. 

A Christian lives in two worlds at one and the same 
time — the world of flesh and the world of spirit. It is 
possible to do both. There are certain dangerous gases, 
which from their weight fall to the lower part of the place 
where they are, making it destructive for a dog to enter, but 
safe for a man who holds his head erect. A Christian, as 
living in the world of flesh, is constantly passing through 
thefe. Let him keep his head erect in the spiritual world, 
and he is safe. He does this so long as the Son of God is the 
fountain whence he draws his inspiration, his motives, en- 
couragement, and strength. — George Philip, 

VOVELTT— Influence ot 

Yes, the people gathered in crowds around the statue, and 
looked at it again and again. It was not the finest work of 



158 MY NOTE BOOK. 

art in the city, nor the most intrinsically attractive. Why, 
then, did the citizens of Verona stand in such clusters around 
the effigy of Dante on that summer's evening ? Do you g^ess 
the reason? It was a fSte in honour of the poet? No, 
you are mistaken ; it was but an ordinary evening, and there 
was nothing peculiar in the date or the events of the day. 
You shall not be kept in suspense, the reason was very simple, 
the statue was new, it had, in fact, only been unveiled the day 
before. Every one passes Dante now, having other things to 
think of ; the citizens are well used to his solemn visage, and 
scarcely care that he stands among them. Is not this the 
way of men ? I am sure it is their way with us ministers. 
New brooms sweep clean. What crowds follow a new man ! 
how they tread upon one another to hear him, not because he 
is so very wise or eloquent, much less because he is eminently 
holy, but he is a new man, and curiosity must gratify itself ! 
In a few short months, the idol of the hour is stale, flat, and 
unprofitable ; he is a mediocrity ; there are scores as good as 
he ; indeed, another new man, at the end of the town, is far 
better. Away go the wonder-hunters ! Folly brought them, 
folly removes them : babies must have new toys. 

OBEBIEHCE. 

"Sir,'' said the Duke of Wellington to an officer of 
engineers, who urged the impossibility of executing the 
directions he had received, " I did not ask your opinion, I 
gave you my orders, and I expect them to be obeyed." Such 
should be the obedience of every follower of Jesus. The 
words which he has spoken are our law, not our judgments 
or fancies. Even if death were in the way it is — 

** Not ours to reason why — 
Ours, but to dare and die ;" 

and, at our Master's bidding, advance through flood or 
flame. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 159 

OBimrG GOD-with Beliglit. 

" I WISH I could mind God as my little dog minds me," 
said a little boy, looking thoughtfully on his shaggy friend ; 
" he always looks so pleased to mind, and I don't." What a 
painful truth did this child speak ! Shall the poor little dog 
thus readily obey his master, and we rebel against God, who 
is our Creator, our Preserver, our Father, our Saviour, and the 
bountiful Giver of everything we lov€ ? — Christian Treasury » 

OMNISCIEKGE. 

A PLATE of sweet cakes was brought in and laid upon the 
table. Two children played upon the hearthrug before the 
fire. " Oh, I want one of these cakes ! " cried the little boy, 
jumping up as soon as his mother went out, and going on 
tiptoe towards the table. "No, no," said his sister, pulling 
him back ; " no, no ; you must not touch." " Mother won't 
know it ; she did not count them," he cried, shaking her off, 
and stretching out his hand. " If she didn't, perhaps God 
counted," answered the other. The little boy's hand was 
stayed. Yes, children, be sure that God counts / — Children's 
Missionary Record for 1852. 

OSDEB nr DUTT— its Beauty. 

LiNNiEUS, the great Swedish botanist, observing the beau- 
tiful order which reigns among flowers, proposed the use of 
a floral clock, to be composed of plants which open and 
close their blossoms at particular hours ; as for instance the 
dandelion which opens its petals at six in the morning, the 
hawkweed at seven, the succory at eight, the celandine at 
nine, and so on ; the closing of the flowers being marked 
with an equal regularity so as to indicate the progress of the 
afternoon and the evening. 

" Thus has each hour its own rich hue, 
"And its graceful cup or bell. 
In whose coloured vase may sleep the dew, 
Like a pearl in an ocean shell " 



ICO MY NOTE BOOK. 

Would it not be a lovely thing if thus with flowers of grace 
and blossoms of virtue we bedecked every passing hour ; 
fulfilling all the duties of each season and honouring him 
who maketh the outgoings of the morning and the evening to 
rejoice! Thus with undeviating regularity to obey the 
influence of the Sun of Righteousness, and give each following 
moment its due, were to begin the life of heaven beneath the 
stars. 

OSD£S--of Oraeions Operations. 

" A DISCUSSION arose between some members of a Bible 
class, in reference to the first Christian exercise of the con- 
verted soul. One contended that it was penitence or sorroivj 
another that it was fear^ another love^ another hopey another 
faithy for how could one fear or repent without belief ? Elder 

G y overhearing the discussion, relieved the minds of the 

disputants with this remark : — 'Can you tell which spoke of 
the wheel moves first } You may be looking at one spoke, 
and think that it moves fiist, but they all start together. Thus, 
when the Spirit of God operates upon the human heart, all the 
graces begin to affect the penitent soul, though the individual 
may be more conscious of one than another.' * 

PEACE— of a Belieyer. 

The believer's peace is like a river for continuance. Look 
at it, rising as a little brook among the mosses of the lone green 
hill ; by-and-by it leaps as a rugged cataract ; anon it flows 
along that fair valley where the red deer wanders, and the 
child loves to play. With hum of pleasant music the brook 
turns the village mill. Hearken to its changeful tune as it 
ripples over its pebbly bed, or leaps adown the wheel, or 
sports in eddies where the trees bend down their branches to 
kiss the current. Anon the streamlet has become a river, 
and bears upon its flood full many a craft. Then its bosom 
swells, bridges with noble arches span it, and, g^own vaster 



MY NOTE BOOK. 161 

Still, it becomes an estuary, broad enough to be an arm of 
old Father Ocean, pouring its water-floods into the mighty 
main. The river abides the lapse of ages, it is no evanescent 
morning cloud, or transient rain-flood, but in all its stages it 
is permanent. 

** Men may come, and men may go, 
But I flow on for ever."' 

Evermore, throughout all generations, the river speedeth to its 
destined place. Such is the peace of the Christian. He has 
always reason for comfort. He has not a consolation like a 
swollen torrent which is dried up under the hot sun of adversity, 
but peace is his rightful possession at all times. Do you enquire 
for the Thames ? You shall find it flowing in its own bed in 
the thick black night, as well as in the clear bright day. You 
shall discover the noble river when it mirrors the stars or sends 
back the sheen of the moon, as well as when multitudes of 
eyes gaze upon the pompous pageantry of civic procession 
at midday. You may see its waves in the hour of tempest 
by the lightning's flash, as well as in the day of calm when 
the sun shineth brightly on them. Ever is the river in its 
place. And even thus, come night, come day, come sickness, 
come health, come what will, the peace of God which passeth 
all understanding will keep the Christian's heart and mind, 
through Jesus Christ 

Nor must we exclude the idea oi progress. You can leap the 
Thames at Cricklade, for the tiny brook is spanned by a narrow 
plank across which laughing village girls are tripping; but who 
thinks of laying down a plank at Southend, or at Grays ? No, 
the river has grown — ^how deep ! At die mouth of it, compar- 
able to the sea — ^how broad! There go the ships, and even 
leviathan might play therein. Such is the Christian's peace. 
At the first, little temptations avail to mar it, and the troubles 
of life threaten to evaporate it. Be not dismayed, but quietly 
wait When the Christian is somewhat grown, and has 



102 MY XOTE BOOK. 

w-andered for awhile alon^ the tortnons comse of a gra- 
cious experience^ his peace will gather force like a flowing 
stream. Wsut twenty or thirty years, tiH he has traversed 
yonder rich lowlands of fellowship with Christ in his safler- 
ings, and conformit>' to his death, and yon shall mark that the 
believer^s rest will be like a river deep and broad, for he shall 
know the peace which was our Master's precious l^^acy ; and 
he will cast all his care upon God, who careth for him. 
True peace will increase till it meks into the eternal rest of 
the b^ific vision, where 

" Not a wave of trouble rolls 
Across the peacefol breast** 

FEACE—7alM. 

Your peace, sinner, is that terribly prophetic cahn which 
the traveller occasionally perceives upon the higher Alps. 
Everything is stilL The birds suspend their notes, fly low, 
and cower down with fear. The hum of bees among the 
flowers is hushed* A horrible stillness rules the hour, as if 
death had silenced all things by stretching over them his 
awful sceptre. Perceive ye not what is surely at hand ? The 
tempest is preparing ; the lightning will soon cast abroad its 
flames of fire. Earth will rock with thunder-blasts ; granite 
peaks will be dissolved ; all nature will tremble beneath the 
fury of the stonn. Yours is that solemn calm to-day, sinner. 
Rejoice not in it, for the hurricane of wrath is coming, the 
whirlwind and the tribulation which shall sweep you away and 
utterly destroy you. 

PSAOE OF PABDOV— Hot a Here Forgetfdlneif. 

I HAVE spilled the ink over a bill and so have blotted it 
till it can hardly be read, but this is quite another thing from 
having the debt blotted out, for that cannot be till payment 
is made. So a man may blot his sins from his memory, and 
quiet his mind with false hopes, but the peace which this will 



MY NOTE BOOK. 163 

bring him is widely different from that which arises from 
God's forgiveness of sin through the satisfaction which Jesus 
made in his atonement. Our blotting is one thing, God's 
blotting out is something far higher. 

FEBFECnOir— Marred by the World. 

The bloom of the hawthorn or White May looks like snow 
in Richmond Park, but nearer London or by the road side 
its virgin whiteness is sadly stained. Too often contact with 
the world has just such an effect upon our piety ; we must 
away to the far off garden of Paradise to see holiness in its 
unsullied purity, and meanwhile we must be much alone with 
God if we would maintain a gracious life below. 

FEBSEGTJTIOK. 

The cold water of persecution is often thrown on the 
church's face to fetch her to herself when she is in a swoon of 
indolence or pride. 

FEBSEGUnOV-Vot to be Feared. 

Do not fear the frown of the world. When a blind man 
comes against you in the street you are not angry -at him, you 
say. He is Wind, poor man, or he would not have hurt me. 
So you may say of the poor worldlings when they speak evil 
of Christians — they are blind. — APCheyne. 

FEBSEVEBANCE. 

"A POOR woman had a supply of coal laid at her door by a 
charitable neighbour. A very little girl came out with a small 
fire-shovel, and began to take up a shovelful at a time, and 
carry it to a sort of bin in the cellar. I said to the child, 
* Do you expect to get all that coal in with that little shovel?' 
She was quite confused at my question, but her answer was 
very striking, ' Yes, sir, if I work long enough!^^ 

Humble worker, make up for your want pf ability by 



164 MY NOTE BOOK. 

abundant continuance in well-doing, and your life-work will not 
be trivial. The repetition of small efforts will effect more than 
the occasional use of great talents. 

PEBSEVERAHCE— in Doing Good. 

An old man in Watton, whom Mr. Thornton had in vain 
urged to come to churchy was taken ill and confined to his 
bed. Mr. Thornton went to the cottage, and asked to see 
him. The old man, hearing his voice below, answered, in no 
very courteous tone, " I don't want you here, you may go 
away." The following day the curate was again at the foot 
of the stairs. " Well, my friend, may I come up to-day, and 
sit beside you?" Again he received the same reply, " I don't 
want j/^« here." Twenty-one days successively Mr. T. paid his 
visit to the cottage, and on the twenty-second his perseverance 
was rewarded. He was permitted to enter the room of the 
aged sufferer, to read the Bible, and pray by his bedside. 
The poor man recovered, and became one of the most regular 
attendants at the house of God. — Memoirs of Rev, Spencer 
Thornton, 

FESSEYESAKCE— Keeessity o£ 

In the heathery turf you will often find a plant chiefly 
remarkable for its peculiar roots ; from the main stem down 
to the minutest fibre, you will find them all abruptly terminate, 
as if shorn or bitten off, and the quaint superstition of the 
country people alleges, that once on a time it was a plant of 
singular potency for healing all sorts of maladies, and there- 
fore the great enemy of man in his malignity bit off the roots, 
in which its virtues resided. The plant with this odd 
history, is a very good emblem of many well-meaning but 
little-effecting people. They might be defined as radicibus 
prcBtnorsis^ or rather incefitis succisis. The efficacy of every 
good work lies in its completion, and all their good works 
terminate abruptly, and are left off unfinished. The devil 



MY NOTE BOOK. 1C5 

frustrates their efficacy by cutting off their ends ; their un* 
profitable history is made up of plans and projects, schemes 
of usefulness that were never gone about, and magnificent 
undertakings that were never carried forward ; societies that 
were set agoing, then left to shift for themselves, and forlorn 
beings who for a time were taken up and instructed, and just 
when they were beginning to show symptoms of improvement 
were cast on the world again. — James Hamilton^ D.D, 

PERSONAL EFFOBT— Needed for Snooess. 

According to Christ's law, every Christian is to be 
active in spreading the faith, which was delivered, not to 
the ministers, but to the saints, to every one of them, that 
they might maintain it, and spread it according to the 
gift which the Spirit has^ven them. Shall I venture a 
parable ? A certain band of warlike knights had been ex- 
ceedingly victorious in all their conflicts. They were men of 
valour and of indomitable courage ; they had carried everything 
before them, and subdued province after province for their 
king. But on a sudden they said in the council-chamber, 
" We have at our head a most valiant warrior, one whose arm 
is stout enough to smite down fifty of his adversaries ; would it 
not be better if, leaving a few such as he to go out to the fight, 
the mere men-at-arms, who make up the ordinary ranks, were 
to rest at home ? We should be much more at our ease ; our 
horses would not so often be covered with foam, nor our 
armour be bruised, the many would enjoy abundant leisure, and 
great things would be done by the valiant few," Now, the fore- 
most champions, with fear and trembling, undertook the task 
and went to the conflict, and they fought well, as the rolls of 
fame can testify ; to the best of their ability they unhorsed 
their foes and performed great exploits. But still, from the 
very hour in which that scheme was planned and carried out 
ho city was taken, no province was conquered. Then the 
knights met together, and said, " How is this } Our former 



166 MY NOTE BOOK. 

prestige is departed, our ranks are broken, our pennons are 
trailed in the dust, what is the cause of it?" When out- 
spoke the champion, and said, " Doubtless it is so, and for a 
reason clear and plain. How did you think that a slender 
band could do the work of all the thousands ? When you all 
went to the fight, and every man took his share, we dashed 
upon the foe like an avalanche, and crushed him beneath our 
tramp ; but now that you stay at home, and put us, who are but 
a handful, to fight every battle, how can you expect that great 
things should be done?" So each man resolved to put on 
his helmet and his armour once again, and hasten to the 
battle, and lo, the angel of victory returned. 

If we are to subdue the earth, every one of us must join in 
{he fight. We must not exempt a single soldier of the cross, 
neither man nor woman, rich nor poor ; but each must fight 
for the Lord Jesus according to his ability, that his kingdom 
fnay come, and that his will may be done in earth even as it 
is in heaven. We shall see great things when all agree to this 
and put it in practice. 

FEBSOKAL WQBK. 

I ONCE heard a story of an American, who declared he 
could fight the whole British army, and when he was asked 
how he could draw so long a bow as that, he said, " Why, 
this is what I would do : I know I am the best swordsman in 
the world, so I would go and challenge one Britisher, and kill 
him ; then take another, and kiU him. Thus," said he, " I 
only want time enough and I would kill the whole British 
army." It was a ridiculous boast, but there is something, in 
it which I could not bring out so well in any other way. If 
we want to conquer the world for the Lord Jesus Christ, rest 
assured we must do it in the Yankee's fashion ; we must take 
men one by one, and these ones must be brought to Christ, 
or otherwise the great mass must remain untouched. Do not 
imagine for a moment that you are going to convert a nation 



^ , MY NOTE BOOK. 167 

at once ; you are to convert the men of that nation, one by 
one, through the power of God's Holy Spirit. It is not for 
you to suit your machinery, and arrange your plans for the 
moving of a mass as such, you niust look to the salvation of 
the units. 

FOOB— as Hearers. 

John Wesley always preferred the middling and lower 
classes to the wealthy. He said, " If I might choose, I should 
still, as I have done hitherto, preach the gospel to the poor P 
Preaching in Monktown church, a large old, ruinous building, 
he says, " I suppose it has scarce had such a congregation 
during this century. Many of them were gay, genteel people, 
so I spoke on the first elements of the gospel, but I was still 
out of their depth. Oh, how hard it is to be shallow enough 
for a polite audience P' — Anecdotes of the Wesley s» 

FOFEBT. 

LiGHTFOOT observes : — " Yoke-fellows, indeed, ar* the 
Jew and Romanist above all people of the world, in a de- 
luded fancying their own bravery and privilege above all the 
world besides. He that comes to read the Jewish writings, 
especially those that are of the nature of sermons, will find 
this to be the main stuffing of them, almost in every leaf and 
page. * How choice a people is Israel! how dearly God is in 
love with Israel ! what a happy thing it is to be of the seed 
of Abraham ! how blessed the nation of the Jews above all 
nations!' And such stuff as this all along. And is not the 
style of the Romanists the very same tune ? * How holy the 
Church of Rome ! whit superiority and pre-eminence hath 
the church above all churches, and all the men in the world 
are heretics, and apostates, and cast-aways, if they be not 
Romanists.' Whereas if both these people would but im- 
partially look upon themselves, they would see that there are 
such brands upon them as are upon no nation under heaven 
now extant." 



168 MY NOTE BOOK. 

FOSinOK— Ko Barrier to Grace. 

Grace makes itself equally at home in the palace and the 
cottage. No condition necessitates its absence, no position 
precludes its flourishing. One may compare it in its power 
to live and blossom in all places to the beautiful blue-bell of 
Scotland, of which the poetess sings : — 



*( 



No rock is too high, no vale too low. 
For its fragile and tremulous form to grow : 
It erowns the mountain 

With azure bells. 
And decks the fountain 
In forest dells. 
It wreathes the ruin with clusters grey, 
Bowing and smiling the livelong day." 

PRACTICE— Kecessary to Perfection. 

A NEIGHBOUR near my study persists in practising upon 
the flute. He bores my ears as with an auger, and renders 
it almost an impossibility to think. Up and down his scale 
he runs remorselessly, until even the calamity of temporary 
deafness would almost be welcome to me. Yet he teaches 
me that I must practise if I would be perfect ; must exercise 
myself unto godliness if I would be skilful ; must, in fact, 
make myself familiar with the word of God, with holy living, 
and saintly dying. Such practice, moreover, will be as charm- 
ing as my neighbour's flute is intolerable. 

PSAY£B--and Activity. 

"A SCHOLAR at a boarding-school near London was remarked 
for repeating her lessons weU. A school companion, who was 
idly inclined, said to her one day, * How is it that you always 
say your lessons so perfectly ?' She replied, * I always pray 
that I may say my lessons well.' *Do you?' replied the 
other, * then Til pray too.' But, alas ! next morning she could 
not repeat one word of her lesson. Very much confounded. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 169 

she ran to her friend. 'I prayed,' said she, 'but I could 
not repeat a word of my lesson.' 'Perhaps,' rejoined the 
other, ' you took no pains to learn it.' ' Learn it ! learn 
it ! ' answered the first, ' I did not learn it at all. I didn't 
know I needed to learn it, when I prayed that I might say 
it' She loved her idleness, poor girl ; and her praying was 
but a mockery." 

FSATEB— Believing. 

Is it not a sad thing that we should think it wonderful for 
God to hear prayer ? Much better faith was that of a little 
boy in one of the schools in Edinburgh, who had attended a 
prayer-meeting, and at last said to his teacher who ccMiducted 
it, " Teacher, I wish my sister could be got to read the Bible; 
she never reads it." " Why, Johnny, should your sister read 
the Bible i*" " Because if she should once read it, I am sure 
it would do her good, and she would be converted and be 
saved." " Do you think so, Johnny ? " " Yes, I do, sir, and 
I wish the next time there's a prayer-meeting, you would ask 
the people to pray for my sister that she may begin to read 
the Bible." " Well, well, it shaU be done, John." 

So the teacher gave out that a little boy was very anxious 
that prayer should be offered that his sister might begin to 
read the Bible. John was observed to get up and go out. 
The teacher thought it very rude of the boy to disturb the 
people in a crowded room, and so the next day when the lad 
came, he said, " John, I thought it was very rude of you to 
get up in the prayer-meeting and go out. You ought not to 
have done so." " Oh, sir," said the boy, " I did not mean to 
be rude ; but I thought I should just like to go home and see 
my sister reading her Bible for the first time." 

Thus we ought to believe, and watch with expectation for 
answers to our prayer. Do not say, " Lord, turn my darkness 
into light," and then go out with your candle as though you 



170 MY NOTE BOOK. 

expected to find it dark. After asking the Lord to appear for 
you, expect him to do so, for according to your faith so be it 
unto you. 

PBATEB-for Help to Pray, 

In Dr. Ry land's memoir of Andrew Fuller is the following 
anecdote. At a conference at Soham, a friend of slender 
abilities being asked to pray, knelt down, and Mr. Fuller and 
the company with him, when he found himself so embarrassed, 
that, whispering to Mr. Fuller, he said, " I do not know how 
to go on." Mr. F. replied in a whisper, " Tell the Lord so." The 
rest of the company did not hear what passed between them, 
but the man taking Mr. Fuller's advice began to confess his 
not knowing how to pray as he ought to pray, begging to 
be taught to pray, and so proceeded in prayer to the satisfac- 
tion of all the company. 

PSATEB-Helpfnl to Study. 

In Payson's diary is the following entry : " Sept 23. — ^Was 
quite dull and lifeless in prayer, and in consequence had no 
success in study." 

PSATEB-lts Power Agftinst Satan. 

There is a huge rock upon the Swiss side of the St. 
Gothard road, about which an old legend is told by the 
natives of the neighbouring village. The devil was whisking 
this enormous stone along very merrily at early dawn of day, 
when he was met by a devout old woman, who being some- 
what alarmed, uttered a prayer at the sight of the unexpected 
traveller. Such was the power of her prayer, that the demon 
dropped his burden at once, and there it lies, an indisputable 
proof that the devil is no match for old ladies who know how 
to invoke the aid of heaven. Mother Church has sanctioned 
many a worse legend than this, for a truthful moral lies upon 
the surface. Let interceding believers make the fiend tremble 

i 



MY NOTE BOOK. _ 171 

always, by praying without ceasing. The weakest saint upon 
his knees is victorious over all the powers of hell. 

FEATEB— its Power to Soften Asperities. . 

" Two neighbours, a cooper and a farmer, were spending 
the evening together. Both were professors of religion, but of 
different communions. Their conversation was first upon 
topics relating to practical religion, but after a time it diverged 
to the points of difference between the two denominations to 
which they belonged. It first became a discussion, and then a 
dispute. The cooper was the first to perceive its unprofitable 
and injurious tendency, and remarked, *We are springing 
apart from each other, let us put on another hoop — ^let us 
pray.' They kneeled down and prayed together, after which 
they spent the remainder of the evening lovingly together, con- 
versing on the things of the kingdom in which they both felt an 
equal interest. The suggestion of the cooper was an excellent 
one, and it were well if it were acted on more frequently by 
those who, Uke him, are members of the household of Christ." 

PEATEB— Sweet Uses of. 

On the first of May in the olden times, according to annual 
custom, many inhabitants of London went into the fields to 
bathe their' faces with the early dew upon the grass under the 
idea that it would render them beautiful. Some writers call 
the custom superstitious ; it may have been so, but this we 
know, that to bathe one's face every morning in the dew of 
heaven by prayer and communion, is the sure way to obtain 
true beauty of Ufe and character. 

PEATEB-^Simile of. 

Prayer pulls the rope below and the great bell rings above 
in the ears of God. Some scarcely stir the bell, for they pray 
so languidly; others give but an occasional pluck at the rope; 
but he who wins with heaven is the man who grasps the rope 
boldly and pulls continuously, with all his might. 



UY NOTE BOOK. 




These lads to gain the fruit must shaJce the tree. 
Good reader, mark the lesson writ for thee! 
If from the tree of promis'd mercy thou 
Wouldst win the good which loadeth every bough. 
Then ui^e the promise well with pleading cries. 
Move heaven itself with vehemence of sighs ; 
Soon shall celestial fruit thy toil repay — 
'Tis ripe, and waits for him who loves to pray. 
What if thou fail at first, yet give not o'er, 
Bestir thyself to labour more and more ; 
Enlist a brother's sympathetic knee, 
The tree will drop its fruit when two agree : 
Entreat the Holy Ghost to give thee power, 
Then shall the fruit descend in joyful shower. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 173 

PBATEBS— of a Father. 

Philip James Spener had a son of eminent talents, but 
perverse and extremely vicious. All means of love and per- 
suasion were without success. The father could only pray^ 
which he continued to do, that the Lord might yet be pleased 
to save his son at any time and in any way. The son fell 
sick ; and while lying on his bed in great distress of mind, 
nearly past the power of speech or motion, he suddenly started 
up, clasped his hands, and exclaimed : ^^ My father's prayers , 
like mountains^ surround meP^ Soon after his anxiety ceased 
a sweet peace spread over his face, his malady came to a 
crisis, and the son was saved in body and soul. He became 
another man. Spener lived to see his son a respectable man, 
in public office, and happily married. Such was the change 
of his life after his conversion. — N, E, Puritan, 

FSEAGHEB— Learns by Communion with God. 

It is related that one of his hearers once asked, " How is 
it that Mr. Bramwell always has something that is new to tell 
us when he preaches F'' ** Why,'' said the person interrogated, 
" you see Brother Bramwell lives so near the gates of heaven 
that he hears a great many things that we don't get near 
enough to hear anjrthing about." 

FBEACHEB— Most Feed the People. 

From the deck of an Austrian gunboat we threw into the 
Lago Garda a succession of little pieces of bread, and pre- 
sently small fishes came in shoals, till there seemed to be, as 
the old proverb puts it, more fish than water. They came to 
feed, and needed no music. Let the preacher give his people 
food, and they will flock around him, even if the sounding 
brass of rhetoric, and the tinkling cymbals of oratory are silent, 

FBEACHEB— Must Feed the People. 

Everybody- knows that large flocks of pigeons assemble at 
the stroke of the great clock in the square of St. Mark : believe 



174 MY NOTE BOOK. 

me, it is not the music of the bell which attracts them, they 
can hear that every hour. They come, Mr. Preacher, for 
food, and no mere sound will long collect them. This is a hint 
for filling your meeting-house ; it must be done not merely by 
that fine, bell-like voice of yours, but by all the neighbour- 
hood's being assured that spiritual food is to be had when 
you open your mouth. Barley for pigeons, good sir; and the 
gospel for men and women. Try it in earnest and you can- 
not fail ; you will soon be saying, "Who are these that fl> as a 
cloud, and as doves to their windows?" 

FBEACHEB— to Avoid a lofty Style. 

In the town of Goslar, in the Hartz mountains, there is in 
the principal square a fountain evidently of mediaeval date, 
but the peculiarity of its construction is that no one can reach 
the water so as to fill a bucket or even get a drink to quench 
his thirst. Both the jets, and the basin into which they fall, 
are above the reach of any man of ordinary stature ; yet the 
fountain was intended to supply the public with water, and it 
fulfils its design by a method which we never saw in use 
before ; every person brings a spout or trough with him long 
enough to reach the top of the fountain and bring the water 
down into his pitcher. We are afraid that all our reverence 
for antiquity did not prevent the full exercise of our risible 
faculties ; sixpennyworth of mason's work with a chisel would 
have made the crystal stream available to all ; but no, every 
one must bring a trough or go away unsupplied. 

When preachers of the gospel talk in so lofty a style that 
each hearer needs to bring a dictionary, they remind us of 
the absurd fountain of Goslar. The use of six-syllabled jaw- 
breaking words is simply a most ludicrous vanity. A little 
labour on the part of such pedants would save a world of 
profitless toil to their hearers, and enable those uneducated 
persons who have no means of reaching the preacher's alti- 
tude to derive some measure of instruction from his ministry. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 175 

FBE\CHEB~Shoiiia be FAifhM Tinto Death. 

The minister of Christ should feel like the old keeper of 
Eddystone lighthouse. Life was failing fast, but summoning 
all his strength, he crept round once more to trim the lights 
before he died. May the Holy Ghost enable his servants 
to keep the beacon fire blazing, to warn sinners of the rocks, 
shoals, and quicksands which surround them. 

PSEAGHEBS— to be Acquainted with Human Kature. 

Michael Angelo, when painting an altar-piece in the 
conventual church, in Florence, in order that the figures might 
be as death-like as possible, obtained permission of the prior 
to have the coffins of the newly-buried opened and placed 
beside him during the night ; — an appalling expedient, but suc- 
cessful in enabling him to reproduce with terrible effect, not 
the mortal pallor only, but the very anatomy of death. If we 
would preach well to the souls of men we must acquaint our- 
selves with their ruined state, must have their case always on 
our hearts both by night and day, must know the terrors of 
the Lord and the value of the soul, and feel a sacred sympathy 
with perishing sinners. There is no masterly, prevailing 
preaching without this, 

PBEACHESS— Different 

Those that are all in exhortation, no whit in doctrine, are 
like to them that snuff the lamp, but pour not in oil. Again, 
those that are all in doctrine, nothing in exhortation, drown 
the wick in oil, but light it not ; making it fit for use if it had 
fire put to it, but as it is, rather capable of good than profit- 
able for the present. Doctrine without exhortation makes 
men all brain, no heart ; exhortation without doctrine makes 
the heart full, leaves the brain empty. Both together make a 
man. One makes a wise man, the other good ; one serves 
that we may know our duty, the other that we may perform 
it. I will labour in both, but I know not in whether more. 



176 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Men cannot practise unless they know ; and they know in 
vain if they practise not. — Bishop HalL 

FBSAGHXBS— How thij Osim P«npicnitj. 

Mr. Warburton, one of the inspectors of schools, men- 
dons in his report for 1863, that he has nowhere heard 
such good reading as in a girls' school in Berkshire, than 
which none in his district bears a better character for instruc- 
tion in what are called die higher subjects. The clergyman, 
who is also the acting manager, is rather dea^ and the giils, 
who are frequendy heard by him without book, are obliged to 
read with unusual clearness and distinctness of tone and 
articulation, in order that he may not lose a word. The 
inspector considers the pleasure with which he listened to the 
girls' reading to be in great measure attributable to the fact 
of their ordinarily having to make what diey read intelligible 
to one who cannot hear so well as many persons do. 

The best of teachers are those who have laboured to be under- 
stood by the dullest capacities. Preachers who all along have 
aimed to suit die educated never become so simple or efficient 
as those who have made a point of explaining even the 
elements of faith to the ignorant. 

FBEACHEB8— Too Learned fior Beal Service. 

The great bell of Moscow is too large to be hung, the 
question arises, what was the use of making it ? Some 
preachers are so learned that they cannot make themselves 
understood, or else cannot bring their minds to preach plain 
gospel sermons; here, too, the same question might be 
asked. 

PSEACHEB8— Hot to Preach Themeelvei. 

We ascended the Sacro Monte at Orta, expecting to find 
that its holy hill was like that at Varallo, consecrated to 
representations of the life of Christ To our disappointment 



MY NOTE BOOK. 177 

we found that everything was to the honour and glory of St. 
Francis of Assisi, who nevertheless was represented as saying, 
" God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ/' Too often when the preacher should think 
only of his Master, and labour only to set forth the Redeemer's 
glories, he is occupied with his own style and oratory, and so 
honours himself at the expense of his Lord. 

PSEACHEBS— Speak After Deafk. 

There are strange legends extant of churches which have 
been swallowed by earthquakes, or buried beneath fallen 
mountains. The rustics declare that they have heard the 
bells still ringing, far down in the bowels of the earth, just as 
they did when they hung aloft in the tower. Take the bells 
to be preachers and the legend is true, for being dead they yet 
speak, and from their graves they sound forth lessons not less 
powerful than those with which they made their pulpits 
resound while they were yet with us. 

FBEACHIKO— Best Hanner o£ 

The celebrated actor Garrick having been requested by 
Dr. Stonehouse to favour him with his opinion as to the 
manner in which a sermon ought to be delivered, sent him 
the following judicious answer : — 

" My dear pupil, — ^You know how you would feel and speak 
in a parlour concerning a friend who was in inmiinent danger 
of his life, and with what energetic pathos of diction and 
countenance you would enforce the observance of that which 
you really thought would be for his preservation. You could 
not think of playing the orator, of studying your emphases, 
cadences, and gestures, you would be yourself, and the inter- 
esting nature of your subject, impressing your heart, would 
furnish you with the most natural tone of voice, the most 
proper language, the most engaging features, and the most 
suitable and graceful gestures. What you would thus be in 



178 MY NOTE BOOK. 

the parlour, be in the pulpit, and you will not fail to please« 
to affect, and to profit. Adieu, my dear friend." 

FBEACHnrCh-Frnit and Flowers. 

At Hampton Court Palace every one regards with wonder 
the enormous vine loaded with so vast a multitude of huge 
clusters : just outside the vine-house is as fine a specimen of 
the wistaria, and when it is in full bloom, the cluster-like 
masses of bloom, cause you to think it a flower-bearing vine, 
as the other is a fruit-bearing vine. Fit emblems these two 
famous trees of two ministries, both admired, but not equally 
to be prized ; the ministry of oratory, luxuriant in metaphor 
suid poetry, and the ministry of grace, abounding in sound 
teaching and soul saving-energy. Gay as are the flower- 
clusters of the wistaria, no one mistakes them for the luscious 
bimches of the grape ; yet, there are many simpletons in 
spiritual things who mistake sound for sense, and seem to 
satisfy their hunger not on solid meat, but on the jingle of a 
musical dinner bell. 

FBEACHINCh- iti Force the Main Ckmdderation. 

I HAD tried to drive certain long brass-headed nails into a 
wall, but had never succeeded except in turning up their 
points, and rendering them useless. When a tradesman 
came who understood his work, I noticed that he filed off all 
the points of the nails, the very points upon whose sharpness 
I had relied ; and when he had quite blimted them, he drove 
them in as far as he pleased. With some consciences our 
fine points in preaching are worse than useless. Our keen 
distinctions and nice discriminations are thrown away on 
many; they need to be encountered with sheer force and 
blunt honesty. The truth must be hanmiered into them by 
main strength, and we know from whom to seek the needed 
power. 1^ 



MY NOTE BOOK. 179 

PBEACHnrCHKeed of Prayer and Unction. 

In a Romish book by Father Faber of the Oratory, we find 
the following : — " Do you remember the story of that religious, 
a Jesuit I think, who was a famous preacher, and whose 
sermons converted men by scores? It was revealed to him 
that not one of the conversions was owing to his talents or 
eloquence, but all to the prayers of an illiterate lay-brother 
who sat on the pulpit steps praying all the time for the success 
of the sermon. There is another story, a very strange one. 
I will not vouch for its being true, but I will quote it for the 
sake of the wise teaching it contains. A certain religious, 
a very popular preacher, was expected one day in a convent 
of his order, where he was a stranger. In the afternoon he 
arrived, or rather an evil spirit who personated him, arrived, 
to see what mischief he could do. It so happened that there 
was to be a sermon on hell preached that day by one of the 
monks, but he was ill and unable to preach. So they asked 
this devil to preach on hell, which he did ; and, as may be 
supposed from his experience, a most wonderful sermon it 
was. However, on the arrival of the real preacher, the evil 
one was discovered, and was obliged to disclose himself, and 
his malicious designs. Among other things he was asked 
how it was not against his interests .to preach such a frighten- 
ing sermon about hell, as it would keep people from sin. 
* Not at all,' he replied, * there was no unction with it, so 
it could do no harm!"' 

FBEACHHTGh-Penional. 

Two Chinese jugglers have been making a public exhibi- 
tion of their skill. One of them is set up as a target, and the 
other shows his dexterity by hurling knives which stick into the 
board at his comrade's back, close to the man's body. These 
deadly weapons fix themselves between his arms and legs, and 
between each of his fingers, they fly past his ears, and over his 
head, and on each side of his neck. The art is not to hit 



180 MY NOTE BOOK. 

hiiri. Are there not to be found preachers who are remarkably 
proficient in the same art in the mental and spiritual depart- 
ments ? 

PBEDE8TIKATI0V. 

They that talk of nothing but predestination, and will not 
proceed in the way of heaven till they be satisfied on that 
point, do as a man that would not come to London, unless at 
his first step he might set his foot upon the top of St. Paul's. — 
The Table Talk of John Selden, 

FBESXTKFnON-Sebuked by Trial. 

" The Brahmins say that Benares is not a part of this sinful 
earth ; but that it is on the outside of the world. An earths- 
quake, however, which was lately felt there, has rather 
nonplussed them, as it proves that what shakes the earth, 
shakes Benares too." It is easy enough for those who have 
been long at ease to imagine themselves protected from the 
common lot of men, but a shaking trial in their estates or 
persons soon convinces them that they are as other men are. 
Spiritual presimiption leads many professors to imagine that 
they are beyond the power of temptation, and are no longer 
such frail beings as their fellow Christians ; let but the Lord 
conceal his face, or Satan assail them, and in their sore 
trouble they will discover that they are men of like passions 
with the rest. 

FBIDE. 

When men refuse to hear the gospel from the lips of a 
gracious but uneducated preacher, they remind us of the 
Spaniard in South America, who suffered severely from the 
gout, but refused to be cured by an Indian. " I know,'* said 
he, " that he is a famous man, and would certainly cure me, 
but he is an Indian, and would expect to be treated with 
attentions which I cannot pay to a man of colour, and there- 
fore I prefer remaining as I am." 



MY NOTE BOOK. 181 

PSIDE— in Biotating to God. 

The petty sovereigfn of an insignificant tribe in North 
America every morning stalks out of his hovel, bids the sun 
good-morrow, and points out to him with his finger the 
course he is to take for the day. Is this arrogance more 
contemptible than ours when we would dictate to God the 
course of his providence, and summon him to our bar for his 
dealings with us ? How ridiculous does man appear when he 
attempts to argue with his God! 

FBIESTS— Snperstitioiui Severenoe of. 

A WRITER on the manners and customs of India, says : — 
" I was informed that vast numbers of Shoodras drink the 
water in which a Brahmin has dipped his foot, and abstain from 
food in the morning till this ceremony be over. Some persons 
do this every day, and others vow to attend to it for such 
a time, in order to obtain the removal of disease. Persons 
may be seen carrying a small quantity of water in a cup, and 
intreating the first Brahmin they see to put his toe in it. 
This person then drinks the water, and bows or prostrates to 
the Brahmin, who gives him a blessing. Some persons keep 
water thus sanctified in their houses." 

How few steps would land Tractarians in the same 
degradation ! Their priests are the channels of grace to 
them, from them they receive regeneration and absolution, 
and from their hands they receive the god of bread whom 
they adore and eat. Believing all this of their sacerdotal 
fathers, to drink the water in which they wash their feet would 
be no humiliation ; their minds have stooped to drink far 
fouler puddle, they may well put their bodies on the same level 

PBOCEASTDTATIOSr. 

It is a snowy day, and some boys have put a few bricks 
together, making a sort of square box of them ; they have set 
up one on edge on a piece of stick, and have scattered under 



182 MY NOTE BOOK. 

it a few crumbs. Here comes a robin, and he picks up a 
crumb or two, and while he is feeding, down comes the brick! 
" / did not wait longl^ says the robin, " but I am caught / / 
did not wait longy but I cannot get out / / did not wait long, 
but I have lost my liberty ! I did not wait long^ but it may 
be I shall lose my life P^ Ah! Httle robin, thou shalt be a 
preacher to some here. They have gone a little into sin, and 
they are inclined to-night to wait a httle while. Take care 
that this is not your dolorous note one of these days, " / did 
not wait long, but the devil caught me in his trap! I did 
not wait long, but I waited too long I I did not wait long^ 
but I lost my soul for everP^ God grant that this may not 
be your lot 

FBOCSASTnrATIOK. 

In Nebuchadnezzar's image, the lower the members, the 
coarser the metal : the farther off the time, the more unfit. 
To-day is the golden opportunity, to-morrow will be the silver 
season, next day but the brazen one, and so on, till at last I 
shall come to the toes of clay, and be turned to dust. — 
Thomas Fuller, 

PBOCSASTIKATION. 

Be not like the foolish drunkard who, staggering home one 
night, saw his candle lit for him. "Two candles !" said he, 
for his drunkenness made him see double, " I will blow out 
one," and as he blew it out, in a moment he was in the dark. 
Many a man sees double through the drunkenness of sin ; he 
has one life to sow his wild oats in, and then he half expects 
another in which to turn to God ; so, like a fool, he blows out the 
only candle that he has, and in the dark he will have to lie 
down for ever. Haste thee, traveller, thou hast but one sun, 
and after that sets, thou wilt never reach thy home. God 
help thee to make haste now ! 



MY NOTE BOOK. 183 



FBOGEASTINATIOV. 



" A Swiss traveller," says a writer in the Edinburgh RevieWy 
"describes a village, situated on the slope of a great mountain, 
of which the strata shelve in the direction of the place. 
Huge crags, directly overhanging the village, and massy 
enough to sweep the whole of it into the torrent below, have 
become separated from the main body of the mountain in the 
course of ages by great fissures, and now scarce adhere to it. 
When they g^ve way, the village must perish ; it is only a 
question of time, and the catastrophe may happen any day. 
For years past engineers have been sent to measure the width 
of the fissures, and report them constantly increasing. The 
villagers, for more than one generation, have been aware 
of their danger; subscriptions have been once or twice 
opened to enable them to remove ; yet they live on in their 
doomed dwellings, from year to year, fortified against the 
ultimate certainty and daily probablility of destruction by 
the common sentiment, 'Things may last their time and 
longer.' " 

Like the dwellers in this doomed village, the world's inhabi- 
tants have grown careless and secure in sin. The scoffers of 
the last days are around us, saying, " Where is the promise of 
his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning of the creation." But 
in saying this, they are too confident. Nothing is permanent 
that has sin about it, nothing secure that has wrath above it, 
and fiames of fire beneath it. Sin has once deluged the world 
with water, it shall deluge it again with waves of fire. Sodom 
and Gomorrah are the types that foreshadow the doom of 
those that live ungodly in these latter times, and he who can 
walk this reeling world unmoved by all the tokens of its fiery 
doom, must either have a rock of refuge where his soul may 
rest secure, or else must have fallen into a strange careless- 
ness, and a sad forgetfulness of God. 



i 



\Hi MY NOTE BOOK. 

nOClABTZVATIOV-Dtpmatod. 

Do any of you remember the loss of the vessel called 
the " Central America " ? She was in a bad state^ had spmng 
a leak and was going down, and she therefore hoisted a signal 
of distress. A ship came close to her, the ^•ap^a^w of which 
asked, through the trumpet, ''What is amiss 2^ ''We aze in 
bad repair, and arc going down : lie by till morning^* was the 
answer. Hut the captain on board the rescue-ship said, ** Let 
me take your passengers on board now.** " Lie by till 
morning," was the message which came back. Once again 
the captain cried, " You had better let me take your passen- 
gers on Ujard now." " Lie by till morning," was the reply 
which sounded through the trumpet About an hour-and-a- 
half after, the lights were missing, and though no sound was 
heard, she and cill on board had gone down to the fathomless 
abyss. () unconverted friends, for God's sake, do not say, 
" Lie by till morning." To-day, even to-day, hear ye the voice 
of God. 

?B0FE8BiaV-Tht Vanity of Mtre. 

KoRCJK'i" not that the pretence of religion without the power 
of it is one of the most comfortless things in the world. It 
is like a man who should call his servant, and say to him, '' Is 
the larder well stored ?" " There is nothing, sir, not even a 
mouldy crust." " Let the cloth be laid," saith he ; and it is 
laid, and all the appurtenances thereof. " And now," he says, 
" 1 will sit down to my meal, and you shall wait upon me." The 
empty dishes arc brought in proper course ; from invisible 
joints he cuts imperceptible slices, and from the empty plates 
he lifts upon his fork mouthfuls of nothingness and dainty 
morsels of vacuum. There, the cloth can be removed, the 
feaster has finished the atmospheric banquet, and rises from 
^e table free from any charge of immoderate eating. Now, 
bis may be a very pleasant operation for once, although its 



f 



MY NOTE BOOK. 185 

charms require a very poetic and imaginative mind to appre- 
ciate them ; but if continued several days, this unsubstantial 
festival would, I conceive, become somewhat undesirable, and 
cheerless, and in the end the guest might perish amid his 
empty platters. Yet such must be the life of the man who 
professes to feed on the bread of heaven and knows not its 
sustaining virtues, who boasts of drinking the water of life and 
has never sipped that heavenly stream. ^ 

PB0FESS0B8 (HEBE)— have no Changes. 

Artificial piety, like flowers in wax, droops not in the hour 
of drought, but the fair lily of true grace hangs its head if the 
rain of heaven be denied. True faith, like fire, has its atten- 
dant smoke of unbelief, but presumption like a painted flame 
is all brightness. Like ships at sea, true Christians have their 
storms ; but mere professors, like pictured galleys on the canvas, 
ride on an unruffled ocean. Life has its changes ; 'tis death 
that abideth the same. Life has muscle, sinew, brain, spirit, 
and these vary in physical condition ; but the petrified limbs 
of death lie still until the worm has devoured the carcase. 
Life weeps as .well as smiles, but the ghastly grin of death 
relaxes not with anxiety or fear. Moab hath no changes ; he 
is " settled upon his lees : he has not been emptied from 
vessel to vessel." " They are not in trouble as other men, 
neither are they plagued like other men." As no weather can 
give ague to marble, as no variation of temperature can bring 
fever to iron, so to some men the events of fife, the tempta- 
tions of prosperity, or the trials of adversity ,bring little change. 
Yet were it better to ebb and flow for ever like the sea, than rot 
in endless stagnation of false peace. Better to be hunted by 
the hounds of hell, and so driven to the shelter of the cross, 
than to dwell at ease and be fattening for the devil's shambles. 

FBOFESSOBS— Too Often Deoeptive. 
"In the sweet valley between Chamouni and the Valais, at J 



186 MY NOTE BOOK. 

every turn of the pleasant pathway, where the scent of the 
thyme lies richest upon its rocks, we shall see a little cross 
and shrine set under one of them, and go up to it, hoping to 
receive some happy thought of the Redeemer, by whom all 
these lovely things were made, and still consist. But when 
we come near, behold, beneath the cross a rude picture of 
souls tormented in red tongues of hell fire, and pierced by 
demons." — Ruskin,- 

Too often the house of a fair professor turns out to be 
much the same ; the beauty at a distance changes into hideous 
deformity when near. Oh, to be found, when closest watched, 
better than observers would at first sight have conceived us 
to be! 

FBOGBESS— Measure o£ 

Sailors would be loath to sail without using their log to 
test their pace, and show their progress. The wonder is that 
so many Christian professors navigate the sea of life, and are 
utterly careless whether they are making headway or drifting 
from th^ir course. Should we not all cast overboard our log ? 
There are various ways by which with readiness we may 
measure our progress : our prayers, our labours, our patience, 
our faith, our communion with God, our humility, may all 
serve as logs by which to measure our sailing pace. 

PBOMISES. 

Good old Spurstow says that some of the promises are 
like the almond tree — they blossom hastily in the very earliest 
spring; but, saith he, there are others which resemble the 
mulberry tree — they are very slow in putting forth their leaves. 
Then what is a man to do, if he has a mulberry tree promise 
which is late in blossoming ? Why, he is to wait till it does. 
If the vision tarry, wait for it till it come, and the appointed 
time shall surely bring it. 



MY NOTE BOOK. * 187 

PBOMPTlTESS-in Doing Good. 

Quick must be the hand if an impression is to be made 
upon the melted wax. Once let the wax cool and you will press 
the seal in vain. Cold and hard it will be in a few moments^ 
therefore let the work be quickly done. When men's hearts 
are melted under the preaching of the Word, or by sickness, 
or the loss of friends, believers should be very eager to stamp 
the truth upon th/e prepared mind. Such opportunities are to 
be seized with holy eagerness. Reader, do you know of 
such ? If you be a lover of the Lord Jesus, hasten with the 
seal before the wax is cool. 

PSOPHECY— Too Often Interpreted by Imagination. 

All along the Oker Thai, in the Hartz, there are huge 
rocks towering up among the fir-clad hills, to which the 
peasants have appended names according as they fancy them 
to bear resemblance to chairs, horses, cobblers, or cocked 
hats. The likeness in most cases is such as only fancy can 
make out when she is in her most vigorous mood, nevertheless 
this rock must needs be called a man, and that a church, and 
there has no doubt been many a quarrel between rival 
observers who have discovered each a different image in the 
one pile of rock ; yet the stones are not churches, chairs, or 
cobblers, and the whole business is childish and nonsensical. 
Interpreters 6f prophecy during the last few centuries have 
been most of them in the same position ; one of them sees in 
the sublimities of the Revelation the form of Louis Napoleon 
where two or three hundred years ago half Christendom saw 
the Pope, and the other half Martin Luther. The other day 
one of the seers saw Sebastopol in the prophecies, and now 
another detects the Suez Canal, and we feel pretty sure that 
the Council at Rome will soon be spied out in Daniel or 
Ezekiel. The fact is, when fancy .is their guide men wander 
as in a maze. Spiritualistic interpreters see, like children 



188 MY NOTE BOOK. 

gazing into the fire, not what is really before them, but what 
is in their own heads. Great truths are in the Prophets and 
in the precious book of Revelation, but your fanciful theolo- 
gians turn these sublimities of truth into the toys of children, 
when they give their imaginatibn license to act as an 
expositor. 

PBOSFERITT-ETils of. 

Too long a period of fair weather in the Italian valleys creates 
such a superabundance of dust that the traveller sighs for a 
shower. He is smothered, his clothes-are white, his eyes smart, 
the grit even grates between his teeth and finds its way down 
his throat; welcome are the rain clouds, as they promise to abate 
the nuisance. Prosperity long continued breeds a plague of dust 
even more injurious, for it almost blinds the spirit and insinuates 
itself into the soul ; a shower or two of grief proves a mighty 
blessing, for it deprives the things of earth of somewhat of 
their smothering power. A Christian making money fast is 
just a man in a cloud of dust, it will fill his eyes if he be not 
careful. A Christian full of worldly care is in the same con- 
dition, and had need look to it lest he be choked with earth. 
Afflictions might almost be prayed for if we never had them, 
even as in long stretches of fair weather men beg for rain to 
lay the dust. 

FBOVIBEirCE. 

An old authority assures us that " the Jews fancy, con- 
cerning the cloud that conducted Israel through the wilder- 
ness, that it did not only show them the way, but also plane 
it ; that it did not only lead them in the way which they must 
go, but also fit the way for them to go upon it ; that it cleared 
all the mountains and smoothed all the rocks ; that it cleared 
all the bushes and removed all the rubs." 

What is probably a mere legend as to the type is 
abundantly true of the providence of God, which it so 



MY NOTE BOOK. 189 

accurately represents. Our gracious God not only leads us 
in the way of mercy, but he prepares our path before us, 
providing for all our wants even before they occur, 

PBOVIBEHCE— the Guardian of our Weakness. 

That image in LowelFs poem of " The Changeling" fas- 
cinates me. It is so much what I am and ever wish to be- 

** I feel as weak as a violet 
Alone 'neath the awful sky." 

Unable to defend myself and apparently undefended, yet 
guarded by omnipotent love, I would fain pour out a perfume 
of praise to the Great Invisible who watches over me, and 
would feel that under the care of Providence I may claim the 
sweetness of the poet's next stanza. 

"As weak, yet as trustful also ; 

For the whole year long I see 
All the wonders of faithful nature 

Still worked for the love of me. 
Winds wander and dews drip earthward, 

Rains fall, suns rise and set, 
Earth whirls, and all but to prosper 

A poor little violet" 

PBOvidjsaCE— Bightly Flaees ns. 

Suppose the mole should cry, "How I could have honoured 
tiie Creator had I been allowed to fly!" it would be very 
foolish, for a mole flying would be a most ridiculous object ; 
while a mole fashioning its tunnels and casting up its castles, 
is viewed with admiring wonder by the naturalist, who perceives 
its remarkable suitability to its sphere. The fish of the sea 
might say, " How could I display the wisdom of God if I 
could sing, or mount a tree, like a bird ;" but a dolphin in a tree 
would be a very grotesque affair, and there would be no wisdom 



i 



190 MY NOTE BOOK. 

of God to admire in trouts singing in the groves ; but when 
the fish cuts the wave with agile fin, all who have observed it 
say how wonderfully it is adapted to its habitat, how exactly 
its every bone is fitted for its mode of life. Brother, it is just 
so with you. If you begin to say, " I cannot glorify God 
where I am, and as I am," I answer, neither could you any- 
where if not where you are. Providence, which arranged 
your surroundings, appointed them so that, all things being 
considered, you are in the position in which you can best 
display the wisdom and the grace of God. 

PBUDEKCE (FALSE)-itf XifeMef. 

James the First once said of armour, that '* it was an ex- 
cellent invention, for it not only saved the life of the wearer, 
but it hindered him from doing harm to anybody else." 
Equally destructive to all usefulness is that excessive prudence 
upon which some professors pride themselves ; not only, do 
they escape all persecution, but they are never able to strike 
a blow, much less fight a battle for the Lord Jesus. 

PXrFFEBT-Spiritual. 

When we read the exaggerated accounts which are so 
frequently issued, lauding to the skies the successful labours 
of certain evangelists of doubtful vocation, we are reminded 
of the battle of Aliwal, of which an officer wrote, " Aliwal was 
the battle of the despatch^ for none of us knew we had fought 
a battle until the particulars appeared in a document which 
did more than justice to every one concerned." Is there not 
quite enough religious fiction abroad without filling comers 
of newspapers and magazines therewith ? We know who 
they were of old who sounded a trumpet before them. God's 
real works of grace are too sublime to need the arts of puffery 
to publish them. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 191 

PTTLPrr. 

Clemens Brentano, a literary acquaintance of Dr. 
Krummacher, and a Catholic, once said to the doctor, " Till 
you Protestants pull down the chatter-box,*' ("Plapperkasten,**) 
he meant the pulpit, " or, at least, throw it into the comer, 
where it ought to be, there is no hope of you." I could only 
reply to him, "It is true indeed, that our * Plapperkasten ' 
stands greatly in the way of you Catholics." 

The pulpit is the Thermopylae of Protestantism, the tower 
of the flock, the Palladium of the church of God. Well 
might Paul magnify his office, for not only Glasgow but the 
city of our God " flourishes by the preaching of the word." 

PVBFOSE-ITnity of. 

It is said of Thomas Pett, the miser, that his pulse rose 
and fell with the funds. He never lay down or rose that he 
did not bless the inventor of compound interest. His one 
gloomy apartment was never brightened with coal, candle, 
or the countenance of a visitor, and he never ate a morsel at 
his own expense. Of course he made money, for he 
gave himself wholly to it ; and we ought not to forget that 
the same single-mindedness and self-denial would make 
Christians rich towards God. What is wanted in the service 
of Christ, is the same unity of purpose which has ruled all 
men who have won the object for which they lived. He who 
makes God's glory the one only aim before which all other 
things bow themselves, is the man to bring honour to his 
Lord. 

PUEPOSE-ITnity of. 

When Audubon the celebrated American ornithologist was 
in Paris he grew quite weary of it, and his diary does not 
contain a cheerful word about that gay city until he writes. 

The stock-pigeon roosts in the trees of the garden of the 



(( 



192 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Tuileries in great numbers ; blackbirds also do the same, and 
are extremely noisy before dark; some few rooks and magpies 
are seen there also. In the Jardin, or walks of the Palais 
Royal, common sparrows are prodigiously plentifuL The 
mountain finch passes in scattered numbers over Paris at this 
season, going northerly.** So also when in London the great 
naturalist was quite out of his element, and only seemed 
pleased when a flight of wildfowl passed over the city. Here 
was the secret of his success — ^his complete absorption in his 
one study — ^birds alone had charms for hinL We who would 
attain to eminence in the service of Christ must let the love 
of souls, in an equal way, master and engross us. When 
writing a paper for the Natural History Society upon the 
habits of the wild pigeon, Audubon says, " So * absorbed 
was my whole soul and spirit in the work, that I felt as if I 
were in the woods of America, among the pigeons, and xny 
ears were filled with the sound of their rustling wings." We 
should all write, speak, and preach for our Lord Jesus far more 
powerfully if our love to the Lord were a passion so dominant 
as to make the great realities of eternity vividly real and 
supremely commanding in our minds. 

QTTABBEI8. 

In most quarrels there is a fault on both sides. A quarrel 
may be compared to a spark, which cannot be produced 
without a flint as well as a steel ; either of them may hammer 
on wood for ever, no fire will follow. — South, 

QUESTIOirS-Foolish TheologieaL 

The follies of the schoolmen should be a warning to all 
those who would mingle metaphysical speculations or pro- 
phetical theories with the simple doctrines of the Bible. 
There was among those learned men such a rage for Aris- 
totle, that his ethics were frequently read to the people 
instead of the gospel, and the teachers themselves were 



MY NOTE BOOK. 193 

employed either in wresting the words of Scripture to support 
the most monstrous opinions, or in discussing the most trivial 
questions. Think of men gravely debating whether the angel 
Gabriel appeared to the Virgin Mary in the shape of a ser- 
pent, of a dove, of a man, or of a woman ? Did he seem to 
be young or old ? In what dress was he ? Was his garment 
white or of two colours ? Was his linen clean or foul ? Did 
he appear in the morning, noon, or evening ? What was the 
colour of the Virgin's hair ? &c. Think of all this nonsense 
veiled in learned terms and obscure phrases ! While human 
minds were engaged in weaving ^\ich cobwebs as these, no 
progress was made in real "knowledge, and the gloom of the 
dark ages deepened into tenfold night. We are much in 
danger of the same evil from another quarter. The reign of 
obscure nonsense and dogmatic trifling may yet return. An 
ultra-spiritual sect has arisen whose theological language is a 
jargon, whose interpretations are mystical, whose prophetical 
hypotheses are ridiculous, and whose arrogance is superla- 
tive. To leave the consideration of well-known and soul- 
saving truths to fight over unimportant subtleties, is to turn 
our com fields into poppy gardens. To imagine that the 
writers of unintelligible mysticism are men of great depth, is 
to find wisdom in the hootings of owls. True spirituality 
shuns the obscure and the dilettanti^ and delights in the plain 
and practical ; but there is much to fascinate in the superfine 
shams of the hour. Quintilian justly observes that the 
obscurity of an author is generally in proportion to his in- 
capacity ; and we might add, that the ferocity of a bigot is 
frequently in proportion to the absurdity of his belief. Some 
are zealots for a certain theory of 666, and the two witnesses, 
and the little horn, who would be far better employed in 
training up their children in the fear of God, or listening for 
their instruction to a sober preacher of the word of God. It 
is a most fitting thing to be looking for the coming of the 
Lord, but a most miserable waste of time to be spinmxij^ 



194 MY NOTE BOOK. 

theories about it, and allowing the millions around us to 
perish in their sins. Ragged-schools, orphanages, street- 
preaching, tract distributing, almsgiving, these are the present 
and pressing questions for the Christian church ; whether 
the stream of the Euphrates is likely to diminish, or the Dead 
Sea to flow into the Mediterranean, may be settled in less 
needy times. 

BEASOH AND FAHH. 

An old writer says : — Faith and Reason may be compared 
to two travellers : Faith is like a man in full health, who can 
walk his twenty or thirty miles at a time without suffering ; 
Reason is like a little child, who can only, with difficulty, 
accomplish three or foiu* miles. " Well," says this old writer, 
" on a given day Reason says to Faith, * O good Faith, let me 
walk with thee;' Faith replies, *0 Reason, thou canst never 
walk with me !' However, to try their paces, they set out 
together, but they soon find it hard to keep company. When 
they come to a deep river, Reason says, ' I can never ford 
this,' but Faith wades through it singing. When they reach 
a lofty mountain, there is the same exclamation of despair ; 
and in such cases. Faith, in order not to leave Reason behind, 
is obliged to carry him on his back ; and," adds the writer, 
"oh! what a luggage is Reason to Faith!" 

BEGENESATIOH— Need of. 

A RAW countryman having brought his gun to the gun- 
smith for repairs, the latter is reported to have examined it, 
and finding it to be almost too far gone for repairing, said, 
" Your gun is in a very worn-out, ruinous, good-for-nothing 
condition, what sort of repairing do you want for it ?" " Well," 
said the countryman, " I don't see as I can do with anything 
short of a new stock, lock, and barrel ; that ought to set it 
up again." " Why," said the smith, " you had better have a 
new gun altogether." "Ah I" was the reply, " I never thought 



MY NOTE BOOK. 195 

of that ; and it strikes me that's just what I do want. A 
new stock, lock, and barrel ; why thaf s about equal to a new 
gun altogether, and that's what I'll have." 

Just the sort of repairing that man's nature requires. The 
old nature cast aside as a complete wreck and good for nothing, 
and a new one imparted* 

BEUOIOir— Must be Personal 

" A LITTLE girl, whom we will call Ellen, was some time ago 
helping to nurse a sick gentleman, whom she loved very 
dearly. One day he said to her, * Ellen, it is time for me to 
take my medicine, I think. Will you pour it out for me? 
You must measure just a table-spoonful, and then put it in 
that wine-glass close by.' Ellen quickly did so, and brought 
it to his bedside ; but, instead of taking it in his own hand, 
he quietly said, * Now, dear, will you drink it for me ? ' Me 
drink it ! What do you mean ? I am sure I would, in a 
minute, if it would cure you all the same ; but you know it 
won't do you any good, unless you take it yourself.' ' Won't 
it, really ? No, I suppose it will not. But, Ellen, if you can't 
take my medicine for me, I can't take your salvation for you. 
You must go to Jesus, and believe in him for yourself.' In 
this way he tried to teach her that each human being must 
seek salvation for himself, and repent, and believe, and obey, 
for himself P 

SELIGIOH-Taken upon Tniet. 

It is a preposterous thing that men can venture their souls 
where they will not venture their money ; for they will take 
their religion upon trust, but would not trust a synod about 
the goodness of half-a-crown.— William Penn, 

BELIGIOirS LIFE-Not mere Imitation. 

" At one of the late grand reviews in Eastern Prussia, says 
a German paper, a brigade of artilleiy was ordft.x^'i.xa'^'^kss.-ax 



196 MY NOTE BOOK. 

full gallop over a piece of uneven ground, intersected by a 
ditch full of water. One of the guns, from the horses not 
making a sufficient spring, got stuck in the ditch. The first 
gunner, a man of great strength, jumped down into the water 
and, setting his shoulders to one of the wheels, lifted it out of 
the mud, and, resuming his seat, the gun crossed the ditch. 
Prince Augustus, of Prussia, who came up at the moment, 
cried, * Bravo, my lad,' and tearing off a strip from his sash, 
gave it to the artilleryman, telling him to fasten it to his 
sword-belt in remembrance. In the evening, the soldier, when 
in his barracks, was surprised by receiving a gratuity of 150 
golden crowns. A short time afterwards, another artilleryman 
having heard this anecdote, wished in his tmn to display his 
strength. Prince Augustus, when one day at the arsenal of 
Berlin, ordered a 24-poimder to be mounted on its carriage. 
The man in question immediately raised the piece from the 
ground, and, unassisted, put it on its carriage. The prince, 
however, said, * This man is a fool : he has risked his limbs, 
and wasted his strength without any necessity. Let him be 
under arrest for three days.'" 

Thus, Galignanis Messenger furnishes us with a warning 
against being mere copyists. An action may from the tim e 
and circumstances be noble and praiseworthy in one man, 
but another would render himself ridiculous who, forgetting the 
surrounding circumstances, should merely repeat the action 
itself. True grace, like a truly soldierly spirit, guides its pos- 
sessor as emergencies arise, but that mimicry of religion which 
only follows precedents is to be despised. 

BEMEMBEAKCE— How to be Had in. 

Sir Bernard Burke thus touchingly writes in his Vicis- 

situdes of Families : — " In 1850 a pedigree research caused 

me to pay a visit to the village of Fyndem, about five miles 

south-west of Derby. I sought for the ancient hall. Not a 

stone remained to tell where it had stood ! I entered the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 197 

church. Not a single record of a Findeme was there ! I 
accosted a villager, hoping to glean some stray traditions of 
the Findemes. ' Findemes !' said he, * we have no Findernes 
here, but we have something that once belonged them : we 
have Finderne^ flowers,* * Show them me,' I replied, and the 
old man led me into a field which still retained faint traces of 
terraces and foundations. * There,' said he, pointing to a bank 
of 'garden flowers grown wild,' 'there are the Findernes' 
flowers, brought by Sir Geoffrey from the Holy Land, 
and do what we will, they will never die!'" 

So be it with each of us. Should our names perish, may 
the truths we taught, the virtues we cultivated, the good works 
we initiated, live on and blossom with undying energy, 

** When time his withering hand hath laid 
On battlement and tower." 

BEPEHTAKCE-MuBt be Beal. 

The gondoliers at Venice, when we were sojourning in that 
queen of the Adriatic, frequently quarrelled with each other, 
and used such high words and ferocious gestures that we were 
afraid murder would come of it ; yet they never came to 
blows, it was only their rough way of disputing. Often and 
often have we heard men upbraiding themselves for their sins, 
and crying out against the evil which their follies have wrought 
them, yet these very people have continued in their trans- 
gressions, and have even gone from bad to worse. They 
barked too much at sin to fall to and destroy it. Their 
enmity to evil was mere feigning; like the sword-play of 
the stage, which looks like earnest fight, but no wounds are 
given or received. Let those who play at repentance remember ^ 
that they who repent in mimicry shall go to hell in reality. 

BEPEirTAKCE— (Tlioroag]i)H9earehe8 Ont Sin. 

When a wound in a soldier's foot refuses to heal, the 
surgeon examines it very minutely, and manipulates every 



198 MY NOTE BOOK. 

part. Each bone is there, and in its place; there is no 
apparent cause for the inflammation^ but yet the wound re- 
fuses to heal. The surgeon probes and probes again, until 
his lancet comes into contact with a hard foreigpi substance. 
" Here it is," saith he, " a bullet is lodged here ; this must 
come out, or the wound will never close." Thus may some 
concealed sin work long disquiet in a seeking souL May the 
Lord search us and try us, and see if there be any evil way 
in us, and lead us in the way everlasting. 

BEPSOOFS-to be Given in Love. 

Preaching on John xiii. 14 — the duty of disciples to wash 
one another's feet — Mr. Finlayson, of Helmsdale, observed, 
" One way in which disciples wash one another's feet is by- 
reproving one another. But the reproof must not be couched 
in angry words, so as to destroy the effect ; nor in tame, so as 
to fail of effect. Just as in washing a brother's feet, you must 
not use boiling water to scald, nor frozen water to freeze 
them." 

BESIOITATIOH-SaBtained by Faitb. 

The habit of resignation is the root of peace. A godly 
child had a ring given him by his mother, and he greatly 
prized it, but on a sudden he unhappily lost his ring, and he 
cried bitterly. Recollecting himself, he stepped aside and 
prayed ; after which his sister laughingly said to him, " Brother, 
what is the good of praying about a ring — ^will praying brings 
back your ring ?" " No, sister," said he, " perhaps not, but 
praying has done this for me, it has made me quite willing to 
do without the ring, if it is God's will ; and is not that almost 
as good as having it ?" Thus faith quiets us by resignation, 
as a babe is hushed in his mother's bosom. Faith makes us 
quite willing to do without the mercy which once we prized ; 
and when the heart is content to be without the outward 
Messing, it is as happy as it would be with it ; for it is at rest. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 199 

SESIGNATIOK— Want of, Bebnked. 

A LADY who had lost a beloved child, was so oppressed 
with grief, that she even secluded herself from the society ot 
her own family, and kept herself locked in her chamber, but 
was at length prevailed on by her husband to come down 
stairs, and take a walk in the garden. While there, she 
stooped to pluck a flower ; but her husband appeared as 
though he would hinder her. She plaintively said, " What ! 
deny a flower ! " He replied, " You have denied God your 
flower, and surely you ought not to think it hard in me to 
deny you mine." The lady suitably felt the gentle reproof, 
and had reason to say, " A word spoken in season, how good 
is it!" 

BESOLTTTIOir— Overcoming Difficulties. 

Look at that bare perpendicular mountain side — why, it is 
worse than perpendicular, it overhangs the lake ; yet the bold 
Tyrolese have carried a road right along the bald face of 
the rock, by blasting out a gallery, or, as it looks from below, 
by chiselling out a groove. One would have readily written 
down that feat as in^ossible, and yet the road is made, and 
we have travelled it from Riva into the Tyrol, the Lago Garda 
lying far below our feet. Henceforth that road shall be to us 
a cheering memory when our task is more than usually 
difficult. If anything ought to be done it shall be done. With 
God in front, we shall soon leave difficulties in the rear, 
transformed into memorials of victory. 

BESPONSIBILITT. 

John Brown, of Haddington, said to a young minister, 
who complained of the smallness of his congregation, " It is 
as large a one as you will want to give account for in the day 
of judgment." The admonition is appropriate ; not to 
ministers alone, but to all teachers. 



K 



200 MY NOr£ BOOK. 

BESUSBECnOir. 

The doctrine of the resurrection is full of joy to the bereaved. 
It clothes the grave with flowers, and wreathes the tomb with 
unfading laurel. The sepulchre shines with a light brighter than 
the sun, and death grows fair, as we say, in full assurance of 
faith, " I know that my brother shall rise again." Rent from 
the ignoble shell the pearl is gone to deck the crown of the 
Prince of Peace ; buried beneath the sod the seed is pre- 
paring to bloom in the King's garden. Altering a word or 
two of Beattie's verse we may even now find ourselves 
singing : 

" *Tis night and the landscape is lovely no more : 

Yet ye beautiful woodlands I mourn not for you ; 
For mom is approaching your charms to restore. 

Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering with dew : 
Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn ; 

Kind nature the embryo blossom will save ; 
The spring shall yet visit the mouldering urn ; 

The day shall yet dawn on the night of the grave." 

BEVIVAL— Abienoe and Presence o£ ^ 

The decline of a revival is a great testing season. It 
discovers the true believers by chilling the false. A frosty 
night or two suffices to nip all the exotic plants of a garden; 
but the hardy shrubs, the true natives of the soil, live on 
even in the severest cold. Converts raised in the hot-bed of 
excitement soon droop and die if the spiritual temperature of 
the church falls below summer heat : what are these worth 
compared with the hardy children of divine grace, whose 
inward life will continue in enduring vigour when all around 
is dead ! Yet we do not desire to see the revival spirit droop 
aXnong us, for even the evergreens of our garden delight in a 
warmer season, for then they send forth their shoots and 
clothe themselves with new leaves ; and thus it will be seen 



MY NOTE BOOK. 201 

that the best of the saints are all the better for the holy glow 
of the "times of refreshing." 

BEWABD— of Benevolence Sometime« Immediate. 

Occasionally a benevolent action wrought in faith brings 
with it an instantaneous recompense in kind ; therein Provi- 
dence is seen as smiling upon the deed. The late John Andrew 
Jones, a poor Baptist minister, whilst walking in Cheapside, 
was appealed to by some one he knew for help. He had but 
a shilling in the world, and poised it in his mind, to give or not 
to give ? The greater distress of his acquaintance prevailed, 
and he gave his all, walking away with a sweet remembrance of 
the promise, " He that hath pity upon the poor, lendeth unto 
the Lord, and that which he hath given, will he pay him 
again." He had not gone a hundred yards further before he 
met a gentleman who said, " Ah, Mr. Jones, I am glad to see 
you. I have had this sovereign in my waistcoat pocket this 
week past for some poor minister, and you may as well have 
it." Mr. Jones was wont to add, when telling the story, " If I 
had not stopped to give relief I should have missed the gen- 
tleman and the sovereign too." 

BICH— Danger of the. 

A HOLY woman was wont to say of the rich — " They are 
hemmed round with no common misery ; they go down to 
hell without thinking of it, because their staircase thither is of 
gold and porphyry." 

BICHES— Danger of. 

Crossing the Col D'Obbia, the mule laden with our 
luggage sank in the snow, nor could it be recovered until its 
load was removed ; then, but not till then, it scrambled out 
of the hole it had made, and pursued its journey. It reminded 
us of mariners casting out the lading into the sea to save the 
vessel^ and we were led to meditate upon the dangers ot 



202 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Christians heavily laden with earthly possessions, and the wise 
way in which the gracious Father unloads them by their 
losses that they may be enabled to pursue their journey to 
heaven, and no longer sink in the snowof camal-mindedness. 

BICEES— Bnined by. 

Do not be over-anxious about riches. Get as much of 
true wisdom and goodness as you can ; but be satisfied with 
a very moderate portion of this world's good. Riches may 
prove a curse as well as a blessing. 

I was walking through an orchard, looking about me, when 
I saw a low tree laden more heavily with fruit than the rest. 
On a nearer examination, it appeared that the tree had been 
dragged to the very earth, and broken by the weight of its 
treasures. " Oh !" said I, gazing on the tree, " here lies one 
who has been ruined by his riches." 

In another part of my walk, I came up with a shepherd, 
who was lamenting the loss of a sheep that lay mangled and 
dead at his feet. On enquiry about the matter, he told me 
that a strange dog had attacked the flock, that the rest of 
the sheep had got away through a hole in the hedge, but that 
the ram now dead had more wool on his back than the rest, 
and the thorns of the hedge held him fast till the dog had 
worried him. "Here is another," said I, "ruined by his 
riches." 

At the close of my ramble, I met a man hobbling along on 
two wooden legs, leaning on two sticks. " Tell me," said I, 
" my poor fellow, how you came to lose your legs ?" " Why, 
sir," said he, " in my younger days I was a soldier. With a 
few comrades I attacked a party of the enemy, and overcame 
them, and we began to load ourselves with spoil. My com- 
rades were satisfied with little, but I burdened myself with as 
much as I could carry. We were pursued ; my companions 
escaped, but I was overtaken and so cruelly wounded, that I 
only saved my life afterwards by losing my legs. . It was s^ 



MY NOTE BOOK. 203 

bad affair, sir ; but it is too late to repent of it now.'' " Ah, 
friend," thought I, "like the fruit tree, and the mangled sheep, 
you may date your downfall to your possessions. It was your 
riches that ruined you." 

When I see so many rich people, as I do, caring so much 
for their bodies, and so little for their souls, I pity them from 
the bottom of my heart, and sometimes think there are as 
Inany ruined by riches as by poverty. " They that will be 
rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish 
and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and per- 
dition." I Tim. vi. 9. The prayer will suit you, perhaps, as 
well as it does me, " Give me neither poverty nor riches ; feed 
me with food convenient for me : lest I be full, and deny 
thee, and say. Who is the Lord ? or lest I be poor, and steal, 
and take the name of my God in vain." Prov. xxx. 8, 9. — 
Old Humphrey, 

BISING IN THE WOBLD -Ambition for. 

Ambition, a good enough thing within reasonable bounds, is 
avery ApoUyon among men, when it gets the mastery over them. 
Have you ever seen boys climbing a greasy pole to reach a 
hat or a handkerchief? If so, you will have noticed that the 
aspiring youths for the most part adopt plans and tricks 
quite as slimy as the pole ; one covers his hands with sand, 
another twists a knotted cord, and scarcely one climbs fairly, 
and he is the one boy whose chance is smallest. How plainly 
see we the politician's course in these young rascals ; the 
Right Honourable Member for the town of Corruption vies 
with the equally Right Honourable representative for the 
county of Bribery ; the most noble Conservative place-hunter 
will not be outdone by the Liberal office-lover ; a man must 
have done a world of planing and shaving, chopping and 
chiselling, before he can reach the Treasury Bench. Nor 
less so is it in the path of trade. Small dealers and great 
contractors eager to rise, are each in their measure to Satan 



204 MY NOTE BOOK. 

what a covey of partridges are to a sportsman, fair game if 
he can but reach them. The hasty desire to rise is the cause 
of many a fall. Those who see the glittering heaps of gold 
before them are frequently in so much haste to thrust their 
arms in up to the elbow among the treasure that they take 
short cuts, leave the beaten road of honest labour, break 
through hedges, and find themselves ere long in a ditch. It 
is hard to keep great riches without sin, and we have heard that 
it is harder still to get them. Walk warily, successful friend ! 
Growing wealth will prove no blessing to thee unless thou 
gettest growing grace. Prosperity destroys a fool and en- 
dangers a wise man ; be on thy guard, good friend, for 
whether thou be the one or the other, thy testing hour is come. 

SABBATH— Need to be Awakened for. 

At Harzburg, in the Hartz Mountains, we were awakened 
early in the morning, according to an ancient custom, by the 
sound of a trumpet, which made us pray that when the last 
trumpet sounds it may awaken us to an endless Sabbath. It 
were well if all hearts and minds heard at the dawn of the 
Lord's-day, " The sound as of a trumpet," so that every 
faculty might be aroused to the highest activity of holy service. 
Sleepy hearing, praying, and singing are terrible ; sleepy 
preaching and teaching are worse, yet how common they 
are, and how needful is the trumpet at the ear of many ! 

SABBATH— Views of Heaven then Enjoyed. 

When a gentleman was inspecting a house in Newcastle, 
with a view to hiring it as a residence, the landlord took him 
to the upper window, expatiated on the extensive prospect, 
and added, "You can see Durham Cathedral from this 
window on a Sunday." " Why on a Sunday above any other 
day.''" enquired our friend, with some degree of surprise. 
The reply was conclusive enough. " Because on that day 
there is no smoke from those tall chimneys." Blessed is the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 205 

Sabbath to us when the earth-smoke of care and turmoil no 
longer beclouds our view ; then can our souls full often behold 
the goodly land, and the city of the New Jerusalem. 

SAFETT OF BELIEVERS, 

A British subject may be safe although surrounded by 
enemies in a distant land — not that he hath strength to con- 
tend alone against armed thousands, but because he is a 
subject of our queen. A despot on his throne, a horde of 
savages in their desert, have permitted a helpless traveller to 
pass unharmed, like a lamb among lions — although like lions 
looking on a lamb, they thirsted for his blood — because they 
knew his sovereign's watchfulness, and feared his sovereign's 
power. The feeble stranger has a charmed life in the midst 
of his enemies, because a royal arm unseen encompasses.him 
as with a shield. The power thus wielded by an earthly 
throne may suggest and symbolise the perfect protection of 
Omnipotence. A British subject's confidence in his queen 
may rebuke the feeble faith of a Christian. " O thou of little 
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt ?" What though there be 
fears within and fightings without, he who bought his people 
with his own blood cannot lose his inheritance, and will not 
permit any enemy to wrest from his hand the satisfaction of 
his soul. The man with a deceitful heart and a darkened 
mind, a feeble frame and a slippery way, a fainting heart and 
a daring foe — the man would stumble and fall : but the 
member of Christ's body cannot drop off ; the portion of the 
Redeemer cannot be wrenched from his g^asp. " Ye are his." 
Christ is the safety of a Christian. — W, Amot 

SAFETT OF FEEBLE SADTTS. 

You can buy complete sets of all the flowers of the Alpine 
district at the hotel near the foot of the Rosenlaui glacier, 
very neatly pressed and enclosed in cases, SQtsNs. ^<. ^fe^- 



i 



206 MY NOTE BOOK. 

flowers are very common, but they must be included, or the 
flora would not be completely represented. The botanist is 
as careful to see that the common ones are there, as he is to 
note that the rarer specimens are not excluded. Our blessed 
Lord will be sure to make a perfect collection of all the 
flowers of his field, and even the ordinary beUever, the every- 
day worker, the common convert, will not be forgotten. To 
Jesus' eye, there is beauty in all his plants, and each one is 
needed to perfect the flora of Paradise. May I be found 
among his flowers, if only as one out of myriad daisies, whd 
with sweet simplicity shall look up and wonder at his love for 
ever. 

SADTTS— Preserye the World. 

We saw in Venice a picture of St. Mark and other holy 
champions delivering the fair city from the devil, who had 
resolved to raise a great stotm in the Adriatic, flood the 
lagunes, and drown the inhabitants of the " bride of the sea." 
All mere legend and lie, but for all that capable of mirroring 
the truth that the intercession of saints and God's peculiar 
regard for them have oftentimes dehvered the church. 

SAIKTS-thelr Beal Worth. 

A PIECE of plate may become battered and scratched, so 
that its beauty is hopelessly gone, but it loses not its real 
worth ; put it into the scale, and its weight and not its fashion 
shall be the estimate of its preciousness ; throw it into the 
melting-pot and its purity will show its actual value. So 
there are many outward circumstances which may spoil the 
public repute in which a Christian is held, but his essential 
preciousness remains unchanged. God values him at as 
high a rate as ever. His unerring balance and crucible are 
not guided by appearances. How content may we be to be 
vile in the sight of men if we are accepted of the Lewd 1 



MY NOTE BOOK, 207 

SAINTS— What they shonld be. 

In the Cathedral of St. Mark, in Venice— a marvellous 
building, lustrous with an Oriental splendour far beyond de- 
scription — there are pillars said to have been brought from 
Solomon's Temple ; these are of alabaster, a substance firm 
and durable as granite, and yet transparent, so that the light 
glows through them. Behold an emblem of what all true 
pillars of the church should be — firm in their faith, and 
transparent in their character ; men of simple mould, ignorant 
of tortuous and deceptive ways, and yet men of strong will, 
not readily to be led aside, or bent from their uprightness. 
A few such alabaster men we know ; may the great Master- 
builder place more of themi in his temple ! 

SALYATIOK-ixi Christ. 

We lately read in the papers an illustration of the way of 
salvation. A man had been condemned in a Spanish court- 
to be shot, but being an American citizen and also of English 
birth, the consuls of the two countries interposed, and de- 
clared that the Spanish authorities had no power to put him 
to death. What did they do to secure his Ufe, when their 
protest was not sufficient ? They wrapped him up in their 
flags, they covered him with the Stars and Stripes and the 
Union Jack, and defied the executioners. " Now fire a shot 
if you dare, for if you do so, you defy the nations represented 
by those flags, and you will bring the powers of those two great 
empires upon you." There stood the man, and before him the 
soldiery, and though a single shot might have ended his life, 
yet he was as invulnerable as though encased in triple steel. 
Even so Jesus Christ has taken my poor guilty soul ever since 
I believed in him, and has wrapped around me the blood-red 
flag of his atoning sacrifice, and before God can destroy me 
or any other soul that is wrapped in the atonement, he must 
insult his Son and dishonour his sacrifice, and that he will 
never do, blessed be his name. 



208 MY NOTE BOOK. 

BALVATIOK-Kear. 

It is said that some years ago a vessel sailing on the 
northern coast of the South American continent, was observed 
to make signals of distress. When hailed by another vessel, 
they reported themselves as " Djring for water !" " Dip it 
up then," was the response, " you are in the mouth of the 
Amazon river." There was fresh water 2dl around them, they 
had nothing to do but to dip it up, and yet they were dying of 
thirst, because they thought themselves to be surrounded by 
the salt sea. How often are men ignorant of their mercies ? 
How sad that they should perish for lack of knowledge ! 
Jesus is near the seeker even when he is tossed upon oceans of 
doubt. The sinner has but to stoop down and drink and 
live; and yet he is ready to perish, as if salvation were hard to 
find. 

SALVATIOir-Theme for Thought. 

I HAVE heard of a certain divine, that he used always to 
carry about with him a little book. This tiny volume had 
only three leaves in it ; and truth to tell, it contained not a 
single word. The first was a leaf of black paper, black as jet ; 
the next was a leaf of red-scarlet ; and the last was a leaf of 
white, without spot. Day by day he would look upon this 
singular book, and at last he told the secret of what it 
meant. He said, "Here is the black leaf, that is my sin, 
and the wrath of God which my sin deserves ; I look, and 
look, and think it is not black enough to represent my 
guilt, though it is as black as black can be. The red leaf 
reminds me of the atoning sacrifice, and the precious blood; 
and I delight to look at it, and weep, and look again. 
The white leaf represents my soul, as it is washed in Jesus' 
blood and made white as snow." The little book was fuller of 
meaning than many a learned folio. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 209 

SCEPTICS AKB COirTSOVEBSIAL BlVlNES. 

The old fable tells us of a boy who mounted a scavenger's 
cart with base intent to throw dirt at the moon; whereat 
another boy, with better intentions, but scarcely less folly, 
came running with a bason of water to wash the moon, and 
make its face clean again. Certain sceptics are for ever 
inventing new infidelities with which they endeavour to defile 
the fair face of the gospel, and many ministers forsake the 
preaching of Christ, and him crucified, to answer their end- 
less quibbles : to both of these the ancient fable may be 
instructive. 

SCHOOLS. 

By order of Government the roads ift Prussia are lined on 
each side with fruit trees. Riding once, early in September, 
from Berlin to Halle, an American traveller noticed that some 
of the trees had a wisp of straw attached to them. He 
enquired of the coachman what it meant. He replied that 
those trees bore choice fruits, and the straw was a notice to 
the public not to take fruit from those trees without special 
permission. " I fear," said the traveller, " that in my country 
such a notice would be but an invitation to roguish boys to 
attack those very trees." ^^Haben Sie keine Schulesf^ (" Have 
you no schools?") was his significant rejoinder. Rest assured, 
dear reader, that next to godliness, education is the mainstay- 
of order. 

SCHOOLS. 

Riding the other day over Westminster Bridge I observed 
a noble bull quietly walking along, although there was a per- 
fect hurly-burly of cabs, horses, carriages, whips and men all 
around him. I wondered to see the powerful beast walking 
so demurely, and only ceased to marvel when I noticed that 
a herdsman had his hand in a large ring which was inserted in 
the creature's nose. Here, thought I, is a parable. We ask full 
often, however it comes to pass that in this age of progress. 



£** ■ - r.,.* ^ >•* . 



- . • -. 












' •;'■ * ■■../. ■.■-- -.rii := —.-ifitrf. The rresrher 
' ' • ' . ; .. ■''.". :*.: ii'.'-.t: wi.rr. he ■a--.? reading-, 

•■ . ■-••.-.! "I v:'.-.:tr.ei by :he presence of 
/ ' :• •.;'••. V',-. .^f.-i'r" '.va'ked -D to him, and 
'• '/ •:/;/ '•:' i. Ml «/'i »;.« s-jojic^rr. s'iid, "Old fi.*llow, what 
• . ii.ii.i 1,1 li,' I ii,ji, :'.;■"■ ffc calmly pointed out of the 
'• "I M.l i.-l " lii, yi,ii v<- tliat beautiful landscape spread 
"II tM ..»j. Ii >j<iM I I'lvi liiH V4 lic.forc you?" "Yes." " It has 



I,' 
• I- 






MY NOTE BOOK. 211 

• 

a variety of flowers, plants, and shrubs, that are calculated to 
fill the beholder with delight." " Yes." " Well, if you were 
to send out a dove, he would pass over that scene and see in 
it all that was beautiful and lovely, and delight himself in 
gazing at and admiring it ; but if you were to send out a * 
buzzard over precisely the same scene, he would see in it 
nothing to fix his attention, unless he could find some rotten 
carcass that would be loathsome to all other animals, in which 
case he would alight and gloat upon it with exquisite pleasure.'* 
" Do you mean to compare me to a buzzard, sir," said the infidel, 
colouring very deeply. " I made no allusion to you, sir,* 
said the minister, very quietly. The infidel walked off in con- 
fusion, and went by the name of " The Buzzard " during tht 
remainder of the passage." 

8CBIPTITBES— and Men's Books. 

There is gold in the rocks which fringe the Pass of tht 
Splugen, gold even in the stones which mend the roads, but 
there is too little of it to be worth extracting. Alas, how lik« 
too many books and sermons ! Not so the Scriptures, they 
are much fine gold ; their very dust is precious. 

SCBIPTTTBES-Beading o£ 

Lord Bacon tells of a certain bishop who used to bathe 
regularly twice every day, and on being asked why he bathed 
thus often, replied, " Because I cannot conveniently do it 
three times." If those who love the Scriptures were asked 
why they read the Bible so often, they might honestly reply, 
" because we cannot find time to read it oftener." The appe- 
tite for the Word grows on that which it feeds on. We would 
say with Thomas ^ Kempis^ " I would be always in a nook 
with a book." 

SCBIPTTJBE-verinf STstem. 

The late William Jay, in his " Practical Illustrations of 
Character," says, "What a difference must a Clmstva».•»s^&.'5w 



212 MY NOTE BOOK. 

minister feel, between the trammels of some systems of 
divinity and the advantage of Scripture freedom, the glorious 
liberty of the sons of God. The one is the horse standing in 
the street in harness, feeding indeed, but on the contents of a 
bag tossed up and down; the other, the same animal in a 
large, fine meadow, where he lies down in green pastures, and 
feeds beside the still waters. 

SELF— WatoliftilneiB over. 

An old writer, speaking of men as stewards of God, urges 
upon them as wise traders and servants to look to themselves 
carefully, and take care of four houses which are under their 
charge, i. — Their warehouse^ or heart and memory, wherein 
they should store up precious things, holy affections, grateful 
remembrances, celestial preparations, etc. Without a good 
stock in the warehouse there can be no good trade. 2. — Their 
workhouse^ or their actions, wherein they retail to others 
for God's glory the grace entrusted to them ; teaching the 
ignorant, comforting the poor, visiting the sick, etc. We 
must be active, or we cannot be acceptable servants. 3. — 
Their clock-house^ meaning their speech, which must always, 
like a well-timed bell, speak the truth accurately ; and meaning 
also their observance of time, redeeming it by promptly 
doing the duties of every hour. We must use time well, or 
our spiritual gains will be small. 4. — Their counting-house^ 
or their conscience, which is to be scrupulously watched, 
and no false reckonings allowed, lest we deceive our own 
souls. The Master will call for our accounts, let us keep 
them honestly. 

SELF-CONCEIT-its Danger. 

QuiNCTiLiAN said of some in his time that they might have 

become excellent scholars had they not been so persuaded of 

their scholarship already. Grant, most gracious God, that I 

may never hold so high an opinion of my own spiritual health 

as to prevent my being in very deed full of thy grace and fear ! 



MY NOTE BOOK. 213 

SELF-DISSATISFACTION— a Spur. 

" During the nine years that I was his wife," says the 
widow of the great artist Opie, " I never saw him satisfied 
with one of his productions, and often, very often, have I 
seen him enter my sitting-room, and throwing himself in an 
agony of despondence on the sofa, exclaim, ' I never, never 
shall be a painter as long as I live !' " It was a noble despair, 
such as is never felt by the self-complacent daubers of sign- 
boards, and it bore the panting aspirant up to one of the 
highest niches in the artistic annals of his country. The 
selfsame dissatisfaction with present attainments is a potent 
force tp bear the Christian onward to the most eminent 
degree of spirituality and holiness. 

SELF-EXAMINATION-iti Bight Office. 

A Highlander who purchased a barometer under a mis- 
taken idea of its purpose, complained that he could not see 
that it had made any improvement in the weather ; and those 
who use signs and evidences for an intent which they will 
never answer, will be sure to complain that their faith is not 
increased, though they are always practising self-examination. 
Yet a barometer has its uses, and so have evidences of grace. 
To feel the pulse is an admirable thing ; the mistake is to put 
this in the place of strengthening food or tonic medicine. 

SELF-SXGHTEOirSNESS— Deitroyed by Conviotioii of Sin. 

The squirrel in his wire cage continually in motion but 
making no progress, reminds me of my own self-righteous 
efforts after salvation, but the little creature is never one half so 
wearied by his exertions as I was by mine. The poor 
chiffonier in Paris trying to earn a hving by picking dirty 
rags out of the kennel, succeeds far better than I did in my 
attempts to obtain comfort by my own works. Dickens's 
cab-horse, which was only able to stand because it was never i 



214 BfY NOTE BOOK. 

taken out of the shafts, was strength and beauty itself com- 
pared with my starveling hopes propped up with resolutions 
and regulations. Wretches condemned to the galleys in the 
days of the old French kings, whose only reward for incessant 
toils was the lash of the keeper, were in a more happy plight 
than I when under legal bondage. Slavery in mines where 
the sun never shines must be preferable to the miseries of a 
soul goaded by an awakened conscience to seek salvation 
by its own merits. Some of the martyrs were shut up in a 
dungeon called Little-ease ; the counterpart of that prison- 
house I well remember. Iron chains are painful enough, but 
what is the pain when the iron enters into the soul ! Tell us 
not of the writhings of the wounded and dying on thfi battle- 
field ; some of us, when our heart was riddled by the artillery 
of the law, would have counted wounds and death a happy 
exchange. O blessed Saviour, how blissful was the hour 
when all this horrid midnight of the soul was changed into 
the day-dawn of pardoning love ! 

SELF-BIGHTEOTrSirESS-Biiin of Kaay. 

"A GENTLEMAN in our late civil wars,*' says Cowley, 
" when his quarters were beaten up by the enemy, was taken 
prisoner, and lost his life afterwards, only by staying to put 
on a band, and adjust his periwig : he would escape like a 
person of quality, or not at all, and died the noble martyr of 
ceremony and gentility." Poor fool, and yet he is as bad 
who waits till he is dressed in the rags of his own fancied 
fitness before he will come to Jesus. He will die a martyr to 
pride and self-righteousness. 

SELF-BIGHTEOTTSNESS-Vanity of. 

When the lofty spire of Old St. Paul's was destroyed by 

lightning, there were many superstitious persons who were 

amazed beyond measure at the calamity, for in the cross 



MY NOTE BOOK. 215 

there had long been deposited relics of certain saints, which 
were counted ifully sufficient to avert all danger of tempests. 
With what amazement will ignorant, self-righteous sinners 
see their own destruction come upon them, notwithstanding 
all the refuges of lies in which they trusted. 

8ELF-SEEKIN0. 

A CERTAIN king had a minstrel whom he commanded to 
play before him. It was a day of high feasting ; the cups 
were flowing and many great guests were assembled. The 
minstrel laid his fingers among the strings of hii harp, and 
woke them all to the sweetest melody, but the hymn was to 
the glory of himself. It was a celebration of the exploits of 
song which the bard had himself performed, and told how he 
had excelled high-bom Hoel's harp, and emulated soft 
Llewellyn's lay. In high-sounding strains he sang himself and 
all his glories. When the feast was over; the harper said to 
the monarch, " O king, give me thy guerdon ; let the minstreFs 
mede be paid." Then the monarch replied, " Thou hast sung 
unto thyself, pay thyself ; thine own praises were thy theme ; 
be thys If the paymaster." The harper cried, " Did I not 
sing sweetly ? O king, give me thy gold P' But the king 
answered, **So much the worse for thy pride, that thou 
shouldst lavish such sweetness upon thyself. Get thee 
gone, thou shalt not serve in my train." 

If a man should grow grey-headed in the performance of 
good works, yet when at the last it is known that he has done 
them all for himself, that he may be honoured thereby, his 
Lord will say, " Thou hast done well enough in the eyes of 
man, but so much the worse, because thou didst it only to 
thyself, that thine own praises might be sung, and that thine 
own name might be extolled." 

8EBM0NS— Bad, Not to bo liftoned to. 

Some sermons are not to be listened to at all, just as -some 
meats are not to be eaten. Against the siren's song the only 



216 MY NOTE BOOK. 

safety was deaf ears. Only a gross simpleton would leap into 
a pit full of rattlesnakes to see if they would do him any 
harm ; a wise man is content to leave the experiment untried. 
Despite the usual fashion of this age, which runs greedily 
after cleverness even when associated with the most poisonous 
sentiments, we affirm that it is a participation in other men's 
sins to assist in furnishing an auditory for deceivers. Mere 
talent ought not to attract us ; carrion, well dressed and 
served upon Palissy ware, is still unfit for men. Who thrusts 
his arm into the fire because its fiame is brilliant ? Who 
knowingly drinks from a poisoned cup because the beaded 
bubbles on the brim reflect the colours of the rainbow? As 
we would not be fascinated by the azure hues of a serpent, 
so neither should we be thrown off our guard by the talents 
of an unsound theologian. To hear or read sufficiently to 
judge, is allowable to the man who, by reason of use, has had 
his senses exercised to discern, and whose business it is to 
warn others ; but where error is manifest upon the surface, to 
expose our minds to its pernicious influence is as great a 
madness as to test the strength of the fever by lying in its 
lair. Godly, scriptural teaching is surely not so rare that 
we need go down to Egypt for help ; there are streams 
enough in Israel without our drinking of the polluted water 
of Sihor. 

SERMOKS-Brilliant but TTseless. 

Sir Astley Cooper, on visiting Paris, was asked by the 
surgeon en chef of the empire how many times he had per- 
formed a certain wonderful feat of surgery. He replied that 
he had performed the operation thirteen times. " Ah, but, 
monsieur, I have done him one hundred and sixty time. How 
many times ^id you save his life?'' continued the curious 
Frenchman, after he had looked into the blank amazement of 
Sir Astley's face. " I," said the Englishman, " saved eleven out 
of the thirteen. How many did you save out of one hundred 



MY NOTE BOOK. 217 

and sixty ?*' " Ah, monsieur, I lose dem all ; but de operation 
was very brilliant!^ 

Of how many popular ministries might the same verdict be 
given ! Souls are not saved, but the preaching is very brilliant. 
Thousands are attracted and operated on by the rhetorician's 
art, but what if he should have to say of his admirers, " I 
lose them all, but the sermons were very brilliant ! " 

SEBMOKS-HiiBt be FtiU of Christ. 

"I HAVE had to interline your sermon all through and through 
with the name of Christ," was the criticism which an aged par- 
ishioner once passed upon the discourse of ayoung pastor. Said 
the lamented M'Cheyne, " Some speculate on doctrines about 
the gospel, rather than preach the gospel itself." " I s^e a man 
cannot be a faithful minister, until he preaches Christ for 
Christ's sake." — Christian Treasury, 

SEBMONS— HoBt have the GK>spel in them. 

A FRIEND called on the Rev. T. Charles, of Bala, on 
Sunday afternoon, September ii, 1814, after having been in 

church. "Well," said he, "how did you like Mr. M ? 

Was there enough of gospel in the sermon to save a sinner? 
If not, it was of little consequence what was preached. I 
hope Bala people will never take up with anything short of 
that." 

SEBVAITTS (eOD'S)-tlieir Baling Motive. 

You cannot serve two masters — you must serve one or 
other. If your work is first with you, and your fee second, 
work is your master, and the Lord of work, who is God. But 
if your fee is first with you, and your work second, fee is your 
master, and the lord of fee, who is the devil ; and not only 
the devil, but the lowest of devils — " the least erected fiend 
that fell." So there you have it in brief terms — work first, 
you are God's servants ; fee first, you are the fiend's. And it 



k 



218 MY NOTE BOOK. 

makes a difference, now and ever, believe me, whether you 
serve him who has on his vesture and thigh written, " King 
of kings," and whose service is perfect freedom ; or him on 
whose vesture and thigh the name is written, "Slave of 
slaves," and whose service is perfect slavery. — John Ruskin, 

SERYICE-^niriBtiaiL to be ever Seady for. 

Brutus visiting Ligarius found him ill, and said, " What, 
sick, Ligarius?" "No, Brutus," said he, "if thou hast any 
noble enterprise in hand, I am well." So should the believer 
say of Christ ; v/hat might excuse us from other labour shall 
never prevent our engaging in his service. 

SXBYICE— Preparations for. 

"Methought I looked and saw the Master standing, 
and at his feet lay an earthen vessel. It was not broken, 
not unfitted for service, yet there it lay, powerless and useless, 
until he took it up. He held it awhile, and I saw that he 
was filling it, and anon, I beheld him walking in his garden, 
whither he had ' gone down to gather lilies.' The earthen 
vessel was yet again in his hand, and with it he watered his 
beauteous plants, and caused their odours to be shed forth 
yet more abundantly. Then I said to myself, * Sorrowing 
Christian, hush ! hush! peace, be still! thou art this earthen 
vessel ; powerless, it is true, yet not broken, still fit for the 
Master's use. Sometimes thou mayst be laid aside alto- 
gether from active service, and the question may arise, what 
is the Master doing with me now ? Then may a voice speak 
to thine inmost heart, * he is filling the vessel, yes, only filling 
it ready for use.' Dost thou ask in what manner? Nay, be 
silent. Is it not all too great an honour for thee to be used 
by him at all? Be content, whether thou art employed in 
watering the lilies, or in washing the feet of the saints.' 
Truly, it is a matter of small moment. Enough, surely 
enough, for an earthen vessel to be in the Master's hands, 
and employed in the Master's service." 



MY NOTE BOOK. 219 

SEBYICE— the Boad to Honour. 

When the Spartan king advanced against the enemy, 
he had always with him some one that had been crowned in 
the public games of Greece. And they tell us, that a Lace- 
daemonian, when large sums were offered him on condition that 
he would not enter the Olympic lists, refused them. Having 
with much difficulty thrown his antagonists in wrestling, one 
put this question to him, " Spartan, what will you get by this 
victory ?'' He answered with a smile, "/ shall have the 
honour to fight foremost in the ranks of my prince T The 
honour which appertains to office in the church of God lies 
mainly in this — that the man who is set apart for such service 
has the privilege of being first in holiness of example, 
abundance of liberality, patience of longsuffering, zeal in 
effort, and self-sacrifice in service. Thou gracious King of 
kings, if thou hast made me a minister or deacon in thy 
church, enable me to be foremost in every good word and 
work, shunning no sacrifice, and shrinking from no suffering.- 

SEBVICE OF GOD— to be Conetant. 

Look at yon miller on the village hill. How does he grind 
his grist ? Does he bargain that he will only grind in the 
west wind, because its gales are so full of health ? No, but the 
east wind, which searches joints and marrow, makes the mill- 
stones revolve, and together with the north and the south it 
is yoked to his service. Even so should it be with you who 
are true workers for God ; all your ups and your downs, your 
successes and your defeats, should be turned to the glory of 
God. 

SEBYICE OF GOD— the Honour of. 

Of the old hero the minstrel sang — 

** With his Yemen sword for aid ; 

Ornament it carried none, 

But the notches on the blade.'' 



220 MY NOTE BOOK. 

What nobler decoration of honour can any godly man seek 
after than his scars of service, his losses for the cross, his 
reproaches for Chrisfs sake, his being worn out in his 
Master's service ! 

SERVING GOD— the Sure Seward of. 

When Calvin was banished from ungrateful Geneva, he 
said, " Most assuredly if I had merely served man, this would 
have been a poor recompense ; but it is my happiness that I 
have served him who never fails to reward his servants to 
the full extent of his promise." 

8HAHS. 

What multitudes of mahogany-handled drawers there are 
to be met with in daily life labelled in black on a gold 
ground, with swelling and mysterious names of precious 
healing drugs ; but, alas ! they are handles which do not pull 
out, or drawers that are full of nothing. What myriads of 
empty bottles make up yonder enormous stock in the Universal 
Emporium so largely advertised! What a noble army of 
canisters filled with air stand marshalled in shining ranks, as 
if they were fresh from China, and brimming with the fragrant 
leaf ! Now in mere business such things may answer well 
enough ; but bring them into your moral dealings, and you 
shall soon become contemptible. One smiles at the busy 
tradesman arranging the shams in his window, but we are 
indignant with men who exhibit unreal virtues and excel- 
lences ; he thinks that he makes a fair show in the flesh, but 
when we have found him out once, even what may be genuine 
in him is subjected to suspicion, and the man's honour is 
hopelessly gone. 

SIN. 

Those who give themselves up to the service of sin, enter 
the palace of pleasure by wide portals of marble, which 



MY NOTE BOOK. 221 

conceal the low wicket behind which leads into the fields, where 
they are in a short time sent to feed swine. — James D, Burns, 

SIK. 

One danger of secret sin is that a man cannot conmiit 
it without being by-and-by betrayed into a public sin. If 
a man commit one sin, it is like the melting of the lower 
glacier upon the Alps, the others must follow in time. As 
certainly as you heap one stone upon the cairn to-day, the 
next day you will cast another, until the heap reared stone by 
stone shall become a very pyramid. See the coral insect at 
work, you cannot decree . where it shall stay its pile. It will 
not build its rock as high as you please ; it will not stay until 
an island shall be created. Sin cannot be held in with bit 
and bridle, it must be mortified. 

SIK— Aronsed by the Law. 

A CONTENTED citizen of Milan, who had never passed 
beyond its walls during the course of sixty years, being ordered 
by the governor not to stir beyond its gates, became imme- 
diately miserable, and felt so powerful an inclination to do 
that which he had so. long contentedly neglected, that on his 
application for a release from this restraint being refused, he 
became quite melancholy, and at last died of grief. How well 
this illustrates the apostle's confession that he had not known 
lust, unless the law had said unto him, "Thou shalt not 
covet !" " Sin," saith he, " taking occasion by the command- 
ment, wrought in me all manner of concupisctnce.'' Evil 
often sleeps in the soul, until the holy command of God is 
discovered, and then the enmity of the carnal mind rouses 
itself to oppose in every way the will of God. " Without the 
law," says Paul, "sin was dead." How vain to hope for 
salvation from the law, when through the perversity of sin, it 
provokes our evil hearts to rebellion, and works in us neither 
repentance nor love. 



222 MY NOTE BOOK. 

sni— may be Committed by Proxy. 

According to an old writer, no Capuchin among the 
Papists may take or touch silver. This metal is as great an 
anathema to them as the wedge of gold to Achan, at the 
offer whereof they start back as Moses from the serpent ; yet 
the monk has a boy behind him who will receive and carry 
home any quantity, and neither complain of metal nor 
measure. Such are those who are great sticklers themselves 
for outward observance in religion, but at the same time 
compel their servants to sin on their account. They who sin 
by substitute shall be damned in person. 

sni— its Eneroaebing Katnre. 

When a sin is let in as a suppliant, it remains in as a 
tjrrant. The Arabs have a fable of a miller who one day was 
startled by a cameFs nose thrust in the window of the room 
where he was sleeping. " It is very cold outside," said the 
camel, " I only want to get my nose in." The nose waa let 
in, then the neck, and finally the whole body. Presently the 
miller began to be extremely inconvenienced at the ungainly 
companion he had obtained in a room certainly not big enough 
for both. "If you are inconvenienced you may leave," said 
the camel ; " as for myself, I shall stay where I am." There 
are many such camels knocking at the human heart. Take, 
for instance, compliance with a single worldly custom — dancing. 
First, the custom creeps humbly to the door of the heart, 
and says, " Let me in ; what am I but putting one foot 
before another ? certainly you do not object to music, and / 
would not for the world have a full band." So in comes the 
nose of the camel, and it is not long before the entire body 
follows. The Christian then finds his heart occupied in fiill 
figure by the very vice which a little while before peeped in 
so meekly. " Being up," it says to him, " all night at a ball, 
with the eyes dazzled by lights, and the ears stunned with a 



MY NOTE BOOK. 223 

full band, interferes, you say, with your private devotions. 
So it does. But your privj.te devotions will ha\^ to go, for I 
will not.'' — Episcopal Recorder, 

SIN— its Hardening Effects. 

Dr. Preston tells us of a professor who on one occasion 
was found drunk, and when much depressed on account of his 
folly, the devil said to him, by way of temptation, " Do it 
again, do it again ; for,- said he, " the grief you feel about it 
now you will never feel any more if you commit the sin 
again.'' Dr. Preston says that the man yielded to the tempt- 
ation, and from that time he never did feel the slightest 
regret at his drunkenness, and lived and died a confirmed 
sot, though formerly he had been a very high professor. 

SIK— How to Overcome. 

Sin is to be overcome, not so much by maintaining a 
direct opposition to it, as by cultivating opposite principles. 
Would you kill the weeds in your garden, plant it with good 
seed : if the ground be well occupied there will be less need 
of the labour of the hoe. If a man wished to quench fire, he 
might fight it with his hands till he was burnt to death ; the 
only way is to apply an opposite element. — Andrew Fuller, 

SIN— Insidions Nature o£ 

In the gardens of Hampton Court you will see many trees 
entirely vanquished and well nigh strangled by huge coils of 
ivy, which are wound about them like the snakes around the 
unhappy Laocoon : there is no untwisting the folds, they are 
too giant-like, and fast fixed, and every hour the rootlets of 
the climber are sucking the life out of the unhappy tree. Yet 
there was a day when the ivy was a tiny aspirant, only asking 
a little aid in climbing ; had it been denied then, the tree had 
never become its victim, but by degrees the humble weak- 
ling grew in strength and arrogance, and at last it assumed 



224 MY NOTE BOOK. 

the mastery, and the tall tree became the prey of the creeping, 
insinuating ^stroyer. The moral is too obvioas. Sorrow- 
fully do we remember many noUe characters which have been 
ruined little and little by insinuating habits. Drink has been 
the i\'>' in many cases. Reader, see to it, lest some slowly 
ad\'ancing sin overpower you : men who are murdered 
by slow poisoning die just as surely as those Ysho take 
arsenic 

. fOI— Lofttkad hj a ChiistiMi. 

An Arminian arguing with a Calvinist remarked, '^ If I be- 
lieved your doctrine, and were sure that I was a converted 
man, I would take my fill of sin." " How much sin," reptied 
the godly Calvinist, " do you think it would take to fill a true 
Christian to his own satisfaction?" Here he hit the nail on 
the head. " How can we that are dead to sin live any longer 
therein ?" A truly converted man hates sin with all his heart, 
and even if he could sin without sufiering for it, it would be 
misery enough to him to sin at alL 

fOI— Man's BeadineM to iBTOit Ezenie fsr. 

A TRAVELLER in Venezuela illustrates the readiness of men 
to lay their faults on the locality, or on anything rather than 
themselves, by the story of a hard drinker who came home 
one night in such a condition that he could not for some time 
find his hammock. When this feat was accomplished, he 
tried in vain to get off his big riding-boots. After many 
fruitless efforts he lay down in his hammock, and soliloquised 
aloud, " Well, I have travelled all the world over ; I lived five 
years in Cuba, four in Jamaica, five in Brazil, I have travelled 
through Spain and Portugal, and been in Africa, but I never 
yet was in such an abominable country as this, where a man is 
obliged to go to bed with his boots on." 

Conmionly enough are we told by evildoers in excuse for 
their sins that no man could do otherwise were he in their 



MY NOTE BOOK. 225 

position, that there is no living at their trade lK)nestly, that in 
such a street shops must be open on a Sunday, that their health 
required an excursion to Brighton on the Sabbath because 
their labours were so severe, that nobody could be religious 
in the house in which they were engaged, and so on, all to 
the same effect, and about as truthful as the soliloquy of the 
drunkard of Venezuela. 

SIN— One, the Soul's Buin. 

There was but one crack in the lanthorn, and the wind 
has found it out and blown out the candle. How great a 
mischief one unguarded point of character may cause us ! 
One spark blew up the magazine and shook the whole country 
for miles around. One leak sank the vessel and drowned all 
on board. One wound may kill the body ; one sin destroy 
the soul. 

SUf— One, the Soul's Buin. 

While I was walking in the garden one bright morning, a 
breeze came through and set all the flowers and leaves a 
fluttering. Now that is the way flowers talk, so I pricked up 
my ears and listened. 

Presently, an old elder tree said. Flowers, shake off your 
caterpillars V 

" Why ?* said a dozen altogether — for they were like some 
children, who always say " Why," when they are told to do 
anything — bad children those ! 

The elder said, "If you don't, tney'U eat you up alive." 

So the flowers set themselves a shaking till the caterpillars 
were shaken off. 

In one of the middle beds there was a beautiful rose, who 
shook off all but one, and she said to herself, " Oh, that's a 
beauty ! Ill keep that one." 

The elder overheard her, and called out, " One caterpillar 
is enough to spoil you." 



226 MY NOTE BOOK. 

" But," said the rose, " look at his brown and crimson fur, 
and his beautiful black eyes, and scores of little feet ; I want 
to keep hiyn; surely one won't hurt me." 

A few mornings after, I passed the rose again ; there was 
not a whole leaf on her ; her beauty was gone ; she was all 
but killed, and had only life enough to weep over her folly, 
while the tears stood like dew-drops on her tattered leaves. 
"Alas! I didn't think one caterpillar would ruin me." — C A, 
Davis, 

sni— Power over the TTnreg^nerate. 

So long as a man is dead in trespasses and sin, there is no 
iniquity which may not get the mastery of him. Where the 
body is, thither will the vultures of hell be gathered together. 
The devil finding him dead, calls up his hosts of temptations 
and his bands of evils to feed on him. The great destroyer, 
who at other times is as a lion, often plays the part of a 
jackal, whose cry, when it finds its prey, is said to sound 
exactly Hke the words — 

"Dead Hindoo, dead Hindoo 1 
WhSre, whSre, whSre, wh6re? 
Here, here, here, here !" 

Nothing but the new life can secure a man from the worst 
fiends in the Pandemonium of vice, for they gather like a 
scattered pack to a feast when they hear their master cry— 

Dead sinner, dead sinner ! 
Where, where, where, where t 
Here, here, here, here! 

Vices seldom come alone ; where there is room for one devil, 
seven other spirits more wicked than himself will find a 
lodging. We may say of sins as Longfellow of birds of prey, 
in his song of Hiawatha : — 

"Never stoops the soaring vulture 
On his quarry in the desert, 



MY NOTE BOOK. 227 

On the sick or wounded bison, 
But another vulture watching, 
From his high aerial look-out 
Sees the downward plunge and follows ; 
And a third pursues the second, 
Coming from the invisible ether, 
First a speck, and then a vulture 
Till the air is dark with pinions." 

SIN— PnnislLment of. 

What a diabolical invention was the " Virgin's kiss," once 
used by the fathers of the Inquisition ! 'The victim was 
pushed forward to kiss the image, when, lo, its arms enclosed 
him in a deadly embrace, piercing his body with a hundred 
hidden knives. The tempting pleasures of sin offer to the 
unwary just such a virgin's kiss. The sinful joys of the flesh 
lead, even in this world, to results most terrible, while in the 
world to come the daggers of remorse and despair will cut 
and wound beyond all remedy. 

SIN-the ToU of it. 

Henry Ward Beecher says, "There was a man in the 
town where I was born who used to steal all his firewood. 
He would get up on cold nights and go and take it from his 
neighbours' wood-piles. A computation was made, and it was 
ascertained that he spent more time and worked harder to 
get his fuel, than he would have been obliged to if he had 
earned it in an honest way, and at ordinary wages. And this 
thief is a type of thousands of men who work a great deal 
harder to please the devil than they would have to work to 
please God." 

SIN— its Wide Conseqneneei. 

Sages of old contended that no sin was ever committed 
whose consequences rested on the head of the siuivex -aiss^^ n 



< 



228 MY NOTE BOOK. 

that no man could do ill and his fellows not suffer. They 
illustrated it thus : — " A vessel sailing from Joppa, carried a 
passenger, who, beneath his berth, cut a hole through the 
ship's side. When the men of the watch expostulated with 
him, "What doest thou, O miserable man.?'' the offender 
calmly replied, " What matters it to you? The hole I have 
made lies under my own berth." 

This ancient parable is worthy of the utmost consideration. 
No man perishes alone in his iniquity ; no man can guess the 
full consequences of his transgressions. 

SINS— the moft Attractive, the most Deadly. 

It is notable that nearly all the poisonous fimg^ are 
scarlet or speckled, and the wholesome ones brown or grey, as 
if to show us that things rising out of darkness and decay are 
always most deadly when they are well dressed. — Ruskin, 

SINS— Home-bom, our Worst Foes. 

The old proverb hath it, "Here's talk of the Turk and 
the Pope, but 'tis my next neighbour that does me the most 
harm." It is neither popery nor infidelity that we have half 
so much cause to dread as our own besetting sins. We want 
more Protestants against sin, more Dissenters from carnal 
maxims, and more Nonconformists to the world. Our own 
besetting sins require far more of our watchfulness than State 
blunders or ecclesiastical abuses. 

SIHS— How Hen Treat them. 

What swarms of rabbits the traveller sees on the commons 
and fields near Leatherhead (in Surrey), and yet a few miles 
further on at Wootton one scarcely sees a single specimen of 
that prolific race. The creature is indigenous to both places, 
but at Leatherhead he is tolerated and therefore multiplies, 
while at the other places the gamekeepers diligently shoot 
down Sill \hty see. Sins are natural to all men, but it makes 



MY NOTE BOOK. 229 

all the difference whether they are fostered or kept under ; 
the carnal mind makes itself a warren for evil, but a gracious 
spirit wages constant war with every transgression. 

SINNERS— their Company to be Avoided. 

When a man is known to suffer from a sadly contagious 
disease, none of his friends will come near the house. There 
is little need to warn them off, they are all too alarmed to come 
near. Why is it men are not as much afraid of the contagion 
of vice? How dare they run risks for themselves and 
children by allowing evil companions to frequent their 
house? Sin is aS infectious and far more deadly than the 
small-pox or fever. Flee, then, from every one who might lead 
you into it. 

SINNESS— Xadnesg of. 

A RECENT traveller, relating the incidents of his voyage to 
India, writes : — " Flocks of greedy albatrosses, petrels, and 
Cape pigeons, crowded around the ship's stem. A hook was 
baited with fat, when upwards of a dozen albatrosses instantly 
rushed at it, and as one after another was being hauled on 
deck, the remainder, regardless of the struggles of the 
captured, and the vociferations of the crew, kept swimming 
about the stern. Not even did those birds which were in- 
differently hooked and made their escape, desist from seizing 
the bait a second time.'' Thus to the letter do ungodly men 
rush at the baits of Satan; they see others perish, but remain 
careless, and even when they are all but destroyed themselves 
they persist in their infatuation. 

SLANDER. 

We saw in the Museum at Venice an instrument with which 
one of the old Italian tyrants was accustomed to shoot 
poisoned needles at the objects of his wanton malignity : we 
thought of gossips, backbiters, and secret slanderers, and 



230 MY NOTE BOOK. 

wished that their mischievous devices might come to a speedy 
end. Their weapons of innuendo, shrug, and whisper, appear 
to be as insignificant as needles, but the venom which they 
instil is deadly to many a reputation. 

SL^KDEB— to be Despised. 

One of our ancient nobility had inscribed over his castle 
gate these words, which we commend to all persons who are 
thin-skinned in the matter of private gossip or public opinion. 

THEY SAY. 

WHAT DO THEY SAY? 

LET THEM SAY. 

SLAKDEB— How to Overcome it. 

Some person reported to the amiable poet Tasso that a 
malicious enemy spoke ill of him to all the world. " Let him 
persevere," said Tasso, " his rancour gives me no pain. How 
much better is it that he should speak ill of me to all the 
world, than that all the world should speak ill of me to him.'* 

• 

SLANDEB— Bebnked. 

The Rev. B. Jacobs, of Cambridgeport, could, when 
necessary, administer reproof very forcibly, though the gen- 
tleness of his character was always seen in the manner in 
which it was done. Some young ladies at his house were one 
day talking about one of their female friends. As he entered 
the room, he heard the epithets " odd,*' " singular," &c., 
applied. He asked and was told the name of the young lady 
in question, and then said, Very gravely, " Yes, she is an odd 
young lady ; she is a very odd young lady ; I consider her 
extremely singular." He then added very impressively, '* She 
w^s jiever heard to speak ill* of an absent friend." The 
rebuke was not forgotten by those who heard it. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 231 

SXOOTH PLACES-Peril of: 

After crossing the Grimsel, on the way down towards 
Handeck, the traveller traverses a road cut in red marble, so 
smoothly polished that, even when it is divested of its usual 
thin coating of snow, it is dangerous in the extreme. Not- 
withstanding that steps are hewn, and rough marks made 
across the granite, he would be foolhardy who should try to 
ride along the slippery way, which is called Helle Platte, or 
Hell Place, for reasons which glisten on its surface. " Dis- 
mount," is the word, and none are slow to Obey it. There 
are many such Hell Places on the road to the celestial city — 
smooth places of pleasure, ease, flattery, self-content, and the 
like ; and it will be the wisest course if any pilgrim has been 
fond of riding the high horse, for him to dismount at once 
and walk humbly with his God. That enchanted ground of 
which Bunyan tells us that the air naturally tended to make 
one drowsy, is just the spot to which we refer ; men had need 
be watchful whose path lies through that deceitful country. 

It has been said that in a calm sea every man is a pilot, 
but we take leave to doubt it ; calms have dangers quite un- 
known to storms, and rocks and quicksands are none the 
less perilous because the deceitful sea which covers them 
smiles softly on the mariner. Not to be tempted is a great 
temptation. Safety breeds carelessness, and carelessness is 
the mother of ruin. When Mansoul was at peace, Mr. 
Carnal- security invited her citizens to his fatal feasts, and the 
Prince I mmanuel withdrew himself; let the result warn us 
against a repetition of the evil. 

SO— "God 80 Loyed,'' etc. 

Pliny declares that Cicero once saw the Iliad of Homer 
written in so small a character that it could be contained in 
a nutshell. Peter Bales a celebrated caligrapher, in the days 
of Queen Elizabeth, wrote the whole Bible so that it was shut 



232 MY NOTE BOOK, 

Up in a common walnut as its casket. In these days of 
advanced mechanism even greater marvels in miniature have 
been achieved, but never has so much meaning been com- 
pressed into so small a space as in that famous little word 
" So," in the text which tells us that " God so loved the 
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

SOBBOW-Benefit o£ 

Two seeds lie before us — ^the one is warmed in the sun, the 
other falls from the sower's hand into the cold dark earth, and 
there it lies buried beneath the soil. That seed which suns 
itself in the noontide beam may rejoice in the light in which 
it basks, but it is liable to be devoured by the bird ; and 
certainly nought can come of it, however long it may linger 
above ground ; but the other seed, hidden beneath the clods 
in a damp, dark sepulchre, soon swells, germinates, bursts its 
sheath, upheaves the mould, springs up a green blade, buds, 
blossoms, becomes a flower, exhales perfume, and loads the 
wings of every wind. Better far for the seed to pass into the 
earth and die, than to lie in the sunshine and produce no 
fruit ; and even thus for thee the future in its sorrow shall be 
as a sowing in a fertile land ; tears shall moisten thee, grace 
shall increase within thee, and thou shalt grow up in the like- 
ness of thy Lord unto perfection of holiness, to be such a 
flower of God's own planting as even angels shall delight 
to gaze upon in the day of thy transplanting to celestial soil. 

SOBBOW— for Sin, Absorbixig. 

When that famous statesman Mirabeau died, all France 
bewailed his loss, and men for some hours could think or 
speak of little else. A waiter in one of the Restaurants of 
the Palais Royal, after the manner of his race, saluted a 
customer with the Xisual remark, " Fine weather. Monsieur," 



MY NOTE BOOK. 233 

" Yes, my friend," replied the other, " very fine; but Mirabeau 
is dead." 

If one absorbing thought can thus take precedence of every 
other in the affairs of hfe, is it so very wonderful that inen 
aroused to care for the life to come should be altogether 
swallowed up with grief at the dread discovery that they are 
by reason of sin condemned of God? Fine or foul may the 
weather be, but if the soul be under the wrath of God its 
woeful condition will make it careless of surroundings. If his 
former security be dead, and the fear of coming judgment be 
alive in the man's heart, it is little wonder if eating and drink- 
ing be forgotten, if sleep forsake his eyelids and even house- 
hold joys become insipid. Let but the one emotion be great 
enough, and it will push out every other. The bitterness of 
spiritual grief will destroy both the honey of earthly bliss and 
the quassia of bodily pain. 

SOBBOWS— Leading to Conversion. 

Augustine says that his God was " mercifully rigorous" 
to him, besprinkling with most bitter alloy all his unlawful 
pleasures, " that he might seek pleasures without alloy." 

SOUL— Needing Something to Cling to. 

The soul of man is a clasping, clinging soul, seeking to 
something over which it can spread itself, and by means of 
which it can support itself. And just as in a neglected garden 
you may see the poor creepers making shift to sustain them- 
selves as best they can ; one convolvulus twisting round 
another, and both draggling on the ground ; a clematis 
leaning on the door, which will by-and-by open and let the 
whole mass fall down ; a vine or a passion-flower wreathing 
round a prop which all the while chafes and cuts it ; so in 
this fallen world it is mournful to see the efforts which human 
souls are making to get some sufficient object to lean upon 
and twine around. — James Hamilton, D.D, 



234 MY NOTE BOOK, 



SOULS— Care for. 



In Switzerland, where land is very precious because rock 
abounds and the rugged soil is chary in its yieldings, you see 
the husbandman looking after a little tuft of grass growing on 
one of the edges of a lofty cliff. From the .valley he had 
caught a sight of it and thought of clambering up to where it 
grew, but the rock was all too steep. From a ledge nearer 
the top of the precipitous wall he looked down, but could see 
no pathway to the coveted morsel of green. That armful of 
grass would feed his goat, or help to fill the cottage loft with 
winter fodder for the cow. Every armful is an item, and he 
cannot forego that tempting clump. He looks, and looks, 
and looks again, but looks in vain. By-and-by, he fetches 
his bold boy who can follow wherever a chamois can climb, 
but the boy after a hard scramble comes back with the tidings, 
" Father, it cannot be done." Father's answer is, " Boy, it 
must be done." It is only an armful, and would not be 
worth a farthing to us, but to the poor mountaineer even a 
farthing or a farthing's worth is precious. The grass waves 
its flowers in the breeze and scorns the daring climbers from 
below ; but where there is a will, there is a way ; and what 
cannot be reached from below may be gained from above. 
With a rope slung round him, or firmly grasped in his accus- 
tomed hand, with a stout stake or tree to hold it up above, 
the Switzer is let down till he gets to the jutting crag, there 
he stands with his sickle, reaps the grass, ties it into a bundle, 
puts it under his arm, and climbing back again, joyfully 
returns with his little harvest. Poor pay, you think, for such 
dangerous toil ; but, fellow worker for Jesus, I wish we were 
as venturesome for souls, and as careful of them, as these 
poor peasants are concerning miserable bundles of grass. I 
wish that we sometimes looked up or down upon apparently 
inaccessible spots, and resolved to reach immortal souls who 
are to be found there, and pined to bring them to Christ. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 235 

SOULS— the CrisiB ot 

Often, when travelling among the Alps, one sees a small 
black cross planted upon a rock, or on the brink of a torrent, 
or on the verge of the highway, to mark the spot where men 
have met with sudden death by accident. Solemn reminders 
these of our mortality ! but they led our mind still further; for 
we said within us, if the places where men seal themselves 
for the second death could be thus manifestly indicated, what 
a scene would this world present ! Here the memorial of a 
soul undone by yielding to a foul temptation, there a con- 
science seared by the rejection of a final warning, and yonder 
a heart for ever turned into stone by resisting the last tender 
appeal of love. Our places of worship would scarce hold the 
sorrowful monuments which might be erected over spots 
where spirits were for ever lost — spirits that date their ruin 
from sinning against the gospel while under the sound of it. 

SOULS— Love of. 

Thomas Fuller, in his " Worthies," gives the following 
interesting account of one Gervase Scroop, Knight : — " He 
engaged with his majesty in Edgehill fight, where he received 
twenty-six wounds, and was left on the ground amongst the 
dead. Next day his son Adrian obtained leave from the 
king to find ind fetch off his father's corpse : and his hopes 
pretended no higher than to a decent interment thereof. 

Hearty seeking makes happy finding. Indeed, some more 
commended the affection than the judgment of the young 
gentleman, concerning such a search in vain amongst many 
naked bodies, with wounds disguised from themselves, and 
where pale death had confounded all complexions together. 

However, he having some general hint of the place where 
his father fell, did light upon his body, which had some heat 
left therein. This heat was, with rubbing, within a few minutes, 
improved into motion ; within some hours, into sense ;. that 



236 MY NOTE BOOK. 

sense, within a day, into speech ; that speech, within certain 
weeks, into a perfect recovery ; living more than ten years 
after, a monument of God*s mercy and his son's affection." 

True love to souls will seek them out with all the eagerness 
of this heroic son, and, finding them, will be as persevering in 
attempts to save. Not all at once shall we see all we could 
wish in the objects of our holy care, but no difficulties must 
daunt us ; we must continue by God's grace to agonise for 
their souls till we see them safe in Christ. The little awakened 
interest which cheers us must be nursed into anxiety, and 
through the Holy Spirit we must labour to see anxiety turned 
into hope, and hope to faith and salvation. None are too far 
gone for zeal and prayer. Love is ever hopeful and God is 
ever gracious. Let us renew our search, and the Lord send 
us good speed to-day. 

SPECTJLATIOKS-their Folly. 

While a minister of my acquaintance was riding in a rail- 
way carriage, he was saluted by a member of an exceedingly 
litigious and speculative sect. " Pray, sir," said the sectary, 
" what is your opinion of the seven trumpets ?" "I am not 
sure," said the preacher, " that I understand your question, 
but I hope you will comprehend mine : What think you of 
the fact that your seven children are growing up without God 
and without hope ? You have a Bible-reading in your house 
for your neighbours, but no family prayer for your children." 
The nail was fastened in a sure place, enough candour of 
mind reitiained in the professor to enable him to profit by 
the timely rebuke. It were greatly to be desired that 
Christians who are so much given to speculate upon the 
prophecies, would turn their thoughts and leisure to the 
perishing myriads by whom we are surrounded, and sow in 
the fields of evangelisation rather than in the cloudland of 
guess-work interpretation. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 237 

SPIBIT OF GOB— the Fire from Heayen. 

Suppose we saw an army sitting down before a granite 
fort, and they told us that they intended to batter it down, we 
might ask them, " How ! " They point to a cannon ball. 
Well, but there is no power in that ; it is heavy, but not more 
than half-a-hundred or perhaps a hundredweight ; if all the 
men in the army hurled it against the fort they would make 
no impression. They say, " No, but look at the cannon !" 
Well, but there is no power in that. A child may ride upon 
it ; a bird may perch in its mouth. It is a machine, and 
nothing more. " But look at the powder." Well, there is no 
power in that ; a child may spill it ; a sparrow may peck it. 
Yet this powerless powder and powerless ball are put in the 
powerless cannon : one spark of fire enters it, and then, in 
the twinkling of an eye, that powder is a flash of lightning, 
and that cannon ball is a thunderbolt which smites as if it 
had been sent from heaven. 

So is it with our church or school machinery of this day ; 
we have the instruments necessary for pulling down strong- 
holds, but O for the fire from heaven ! 

SPntlTXrAL WABMIS-How to Xaintain it. 

Philip Henry's advice to his daughter : " If you would 
keep warm in this cold season (January, 1692), take these 
four directions : i. Get into the sun ; under his blessed 
beams there are warmth and comfort. 2. Go near the fire. 
^ Is not my word like a fire ?' How many cheering passages 
are there ! 3. Keep in motion and action — stirring up the 
grace and gift of God that is in you. 4. Seek Christian 
conmiunion. ^ How can one be wanh alone ? ' " 

STEBNKE8S. 

It is said of that eminent saint and martyr. Bishop Hooper, 
that on one occasion a man in deep distress was allowed to 
go into his prison to tell his tale of conscience, but Bxsfcsjjs^ 



i 



238 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Hooper looked so sternly upon him, and addressed him so 
severely at first, that the poor soul ran away, and could not 
get comfort until he had sought out another minister of 
a gentler aspect. Hooper really was a gracious and loving 
soul, but the sternness of his manner kept the penitent off. 

SUBMISSION-to the Divine Win. 

Paysox was asked, when under great bodily affliction, if 
he could see any particular reason for this dispensation. 
" No," replied he, "but I am as well satisfied as if I could see 
ten thousand ; God's will is the very perfection of all reason." 

SUFFEBnra-Tnie Service. 

Old Betty was converted late in life, and though very 
poor, was very active. She visited the sick ; out of her own 
poverty she gave to those who were still poorer ; collected a 
little money from others when she could give none of her 
own, and told many a one of the love of the Saviour. At 
last she caught cold and rheumatism, and lay in bed month 
after month, pain-worn and helpless. A good minister went 
to see her, and asked, if after her active habits she did not 
find the change very hard to bear. "No, sir, not at all. 
When I was well, I used to hear the Lord say day by day, 
* Betty, go here ; Betty, go there ; Betty, do this ; Betty, do 
that ; ' and I used to do it as well as I could ; and now I hear 
him say every day, * Betty, he still and cough.' " — yames 
Hamilton, D,D, 

STMPATHT— Fmit of Ezperienoe. 

Hone in his "Year Book," has the following anecdote of 
Charles Pratt, Earl Camden, when Chief Justice of the 
Common Pleas. " Being on a visit to Lord Dacre, at Alveley, 
in Essex, he walked out with a gentleman, a very absent 
man, to a hill, at no great distance from the house, upon 
thQ top of which stood the stocks of the village. The Chief 



MY NOTE BOOK. 239 

Justice sat down upon them, and after awhile, having a mind 
to know what the punishment was, he asked his companion 
to open them and put him in. This being done, his friend 
took a book from his pocket, sauntered on, and so com- 
pletely forgot the judge and his situation that he returned to 
Lord Dacre's. In the meantime, the Chief Justice being tired 
of the stocks, tried in vain to release himself. Seeing a 
countryman pass by, he endeavoured to move him to let him 
out, but obtained nothing by his motion. 'No, no, old 
gentleman,' said the countryman, 'you was not set there 
for nothing,' and left him until he was released by a servant 
of the house despatched in quest of him. Some time after he 
presided at a trial in which a charge was brought against a 
magistrate for false imprisonment, and for setting in the 
stocks. The counsel for the magistrate in his reply, made 
light of the whole charge, and more especially setting in the 
stocks, which he said everybody knew was no punishment at 
all. The Chief Justice rose, arid, leaning over the bench, said, 
in a half-whisper, ' Brother, have you ever been in the stocks?' 
' Really, my lord, never.' ' Then I have,' said the judge, ' and 
I assure you, brother, it is no such trifle as you represent.' " 
A little experience of the real trials of life, as endured by the 
poor, the sick, and the desponding, would be of essential 
service to many professors, and especially to those religious 
teachers whose path in life has been smooth and prosperous. 
Nothing promotes true sympathy like a kindred experience. 

S7KPATH7— How Learned. 

The story goes that Harry the Eighth wandering one night 
in the streets of London in disguise, was met at the bridge- 
foot by some of the watch, and not giving a good account of 
himself was carried off to the Poultry Compter, and shut up 
for the night without fire or candle. On his liberation he 
made a grant of thirty chaldrons of coals and a quantity of 
bread for the solace of night prisoners in the Cotxvx^t<Kt. 



240 MY NOTE BOOK. 

Experience brings sympathy. Those who have felt sharp 
afflictions, terrible convictions, racking doubts and violent 
temptations, will be zealous in consoling those in a similar 
condition. It were well if the great Head of the church would 
put unsympathising pastors into the Compter of trouble for 
a season until they could weep with those that weep. 

TASTEHSpiritnal, Keedful for Heavenly Joys 

The unfitness of unrenewed souls for heaven, may be 
illustrated by the incapacity of certain uneducated and 
coarse-minded persons for elevated thoughts and intellectual 
pursuits. When a Httle child, I lived some years in my 
grandfather's house. In his garden there was a fine crtd 
hedge of yew of considerable length, which was clipped and 
trimmed till it made quite a wall of verdure. Behind it was 
a wide g^ass walk, which looked upon the fields, and afforded 
a quiet outlook. The grass was kept mown, so as to make 
pleasant walking. Here, ever since the old Puritanic chapel 
was built, godly divines had walked, and prayed, and medi- 
tated. My grandfather was wont to use it as his study. Up 
and down it he would walk when preparing his sermons, and 
always on Sabbath-days when it was fair, he had half-an- 
hour there before preaching. To me it seemed to be a 
perfect paradise, and being forbidden to stay there when 
grandfather was meditating, I viewed it with no small degree 
of awe. I love to think of the green and quiet walk at this 
moment, and could wish for just such a study. But I was 
once shocked and even horrified by hearing a farming man 
remark concerning this sanctum sanctorum, "It* ud grow 
a many 'taturs if it wor ploughed up." What cared he for 
holy memories? What were meditation and contemplation 
to him.? Is it not the chief end of man to grow potatoes and eat 
them ? Such, on a larger scale, would be an unconverted man's 
estimate of joys so elevated and refined as those of heaven, 
could he by any possibility be permitted to gaze upon them. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 241 

TEKFEB— Important. 

The Adige at Verona appears to be a river quite broad 
and deep enough for navigation, but its current is so rapid as 
to make it quite unserviceable. Many men are so rash, and 
impetuous, and at the same time so suddenly angry and 
excited, that their otherwise most valuable abilities are ren- 
dered useless for any good purpose. 

TEHFTATION. 

Many horses fall at the bottom of a hill because the driver 
thinks the danger past and the need to hold the reins with 
firm grip less pressing. So it is often with us when we are 
not specially tempted to overt sin, we are the more in danger 
through slothful ease. I think it was Ralph Erskine who 
said, " There is no devil so bad as no devil." The worst 
temptation that ever overtakes us, is, in some respects, pre- 
ferable to our becoming carnally secure and neglecting to 
watch and pray. 

More the treacherous calm I dread 
Than tempests rolling overhead." 

TEXPTATIONS. 

Notice the invention used by country people to catch 
wasps. They will put a little sweet liquor into a long and 
narrow-necked phial. The do-nothing wasp comes by, 
smells the sweet liquor, plunges in and is drowned. But the 
bee comes by, and if she does stop for a moment to smell, 
yet she enters not, because she has honey of her own to 
make ; she is too busy in the work of the commonwealth to 
indulge herself with the tempting sweets. Master Greenham, 
a Puritan divine, was once waited upon by a woman who was 
greatly tempted. Upon making enquiries into her way of 
life, he found she had little to do, and Greenham said, " That 
is the secret of your being so much tempted. Sister, if you 



kk 



242 MY NOTE BOOK. 

are very busy, Satan may tempt you, but he will not easily 
prevail, and he will soon give up the attempt." Idle Christians 
are not tempted of the devil so much as they tempt the 
devil to tempt them. 

TEMPTATIONS. 

One of the ancient fathers, we are told, had, before his 
conversion, lived with an ill woman, and some little time 
after, she accosted him as usual. Knowing how likely he 
was to fall into sin, he ran away with all his might, and she 
ran after him, crying, "Wherefore runnest thou away? It is 
I." He answered, " I run away because I am not I. I am a 
new man." 

TEMPTATIOKS— from Friends, to be watchfolly Besisted. 

The lady in Millais' famous picture would fain save her 
lover's life from the massacre of Bai:tholomew, by binding the 
popish badge around his arm ; he kisses her for her love, but 
firmly removes the badge. So when the dearest friends we 
have, out of mistaken tenderness would persuade us to avoid 
persecution by relinquishing principle, and doing as others 
do, we should thank them for their love, but with unbending 
decision refuse to be numbered with the world. Moses must 
have loved Pharaoh's daughter for her kindness, but he 
refused to be called her son. 

TEBBOB— of Convicted Consciences. 

In certain places on Alpine summits the way is peculiarly 
dangerous on account of the frequent falling of avalanches, 
and the traveller walks in dread of instant destruction. 
Samuel Rogers puts it thus : — 

" Then my guide 
Lowering his voice addressed me : * Through this gap 
On and say nothing ; lest a word, a breath, 
Bring down the winter's snow, enough to whelm 
An army." 



MY NOTE BOOK. 243 

Thus when alarmed by an awakened conscience men walk in 
fear from hour to hour, trembling lest a thought or word of 
sin should bring down upon them the impending wrath of 
God. Thrice happy is he who has traversed that awful gap 
of terror and now breathes freely because sin is pardoned, and 
therefore every apprehension is removed. 

TEXTS— Memorable. 

One looks with interest on that ancient stone at Kingston- 
upon-Thames, upon which so many Saxon kings were crowned, 
but far more reverent is the gaze we fix upon those texts of 
Scripture whereby (through God's grace) many have been 
made kings unto our God. We rail them off in a special 
enclosure and place them where the highways meet, that 
others may look on them and find their coronations at the 
selfsame spot. 

THEOLOOT— Ought Kot to be Petrified Soripture. 

Petrarch's works are said to have laid so long in the 
roof of St. Mark's, at Venice, that they became turned into 
stone ; by what process deponent sayeth not. To many men 
it might well seem that the Word of God had become petrified, 
for they receive it as a hard, lifeless creed, a stone upon which 
to sharpen the daggers of controversy, a stumbling-block for 
young beginners, a millstone with which to break opponents' 
heads, after the manner experienced by Abimelech at Thebe?. 
A man must have a stout digestion to feed upon some men's 
theology; no sap, no sweetness, no life, but all stern accuracy, 
and fieshless definition. Proclaimed without tenderness, and 
argued without affection, the gospel from such men rather 
resembles a missile from a catapult than bread from a Father's 
table. Teeth are needlessly broken over the grit of systematic 
theology, while souls are famishing. To turn stones into 
bread was a temptation of our Master, but how many of his 
servants yield readily to the far worse tem.^t^\.%ss^ \a njm:^ 



I 



244 MY NOTE BOCK. 

bread into stone ! Go thy way, metaphysical divine, to the 
stone-yard, and break granite for McAdam, but stand not in 
the way of loving spirits who would feed the family of God 
with living bread. The inspired Word is to us spirit and 
life, and we cannot afford to have it hardened into a huge 
monolith, or a spiritual Stonehenge — sublime, but cold, 
majestic, but lifeless ; far rather would we have it as our own 
household book, our bosom companion, the poor man's coun- 
sellor and friend. 

THREE WHAT8. 

"Never forget the three Whats. First, What from? 
Secondly, What by ? And, thirdly. What to ? What from ? 
Believers are redeemed from hell and destruction. What by? 
By the precious blood of Christ. What to ? To an inherit- 
ance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away." 

TITHES. 

'Tis ridiculous to say the tithes are God's part, and there- 
fore the clergy must have them; why, so they are if the 
layman has them. 'Tis as if one of my Lady Kent's maids 
should be sweeping this room, and another of them should 
come and take away the broom, and tell for a reason why she 
should part with it, 'tis my lady's broom ; as if it were not my 
lady's broom which of them soever had it. — Table-Talk of 
John Selden, 

TO-DAY. 

"It is not after the storm has arisen, or the telegraph has 
reported that his ship has struck, that the merchant runs to 
insure his goods. . He effects the insurance while the sun is 
shining and the air calm ; he effects the insurance before the 
ship has cleared from the dock, or at all events before the 
ship has left the river. Go and do likewise, living, but dying 
men I Now is the accepted \.\m^\ x^i-day, according to the 



MY NOTE BOOK. 245 

true testimony of his adversaries, ' This man receiveth 
sinners.' God with us is waiting ; still his terms are, 
' Whosoever will.' To-day you may enter into life ; to- 
morrow the door may be shut." 

TONaiTE-the. 

I SAW a terrible fire some time ago, or rather I saw the 
reflection of it in the sky, the heavens were crimsoned with 
it. It burned a large manufactory to the ground, and the 
firemen had hard work to save the buildings which surrounded 
it. They poured streams of water on it from fifteen engines, 
but it licked it up, and would have its course till the walls 
gave way. That terrible fire was kindled by a farthing rush- 
light ! Some years ago, I saw the black ashes of what the 
night before was a cheerful farm-yard, with its hay-ricks, 
corn-stacks, stables, and cow-sheds ; and lying about upon 
them were the carcases of a number of miserable horses and 
bullocks, which had perished in the flames. All that was 
done by a lucifer-match ! In Amerioa the Indians strike a 
spark from a flint and steel, and set fire to the dry grass, and 
the flames spread and spread until they sweep like a roaring 
torrent over prairies as large as England, and men and cattle 
have to flee for their lives. " Behold, how great a matter a 
little fire kindleth ! " And the tongue is a fire / A few rash 
words will set a family, a neighbourhood, a nation, by the 
ears ; they have often done so. Half the law-suits, and half the 
wars have been brought about by the tongue. — James Bolton, 

TEAHSF0BKATI0K8 OF GBACE. 

A SHORT time ago the manufacturers of lighting gas were 
puzzled to know how to dispose of the coal-tar left in the 
retorts. A more useless, nauseous substance was hardly 
known to exist. Chemistry came to the rescue, and to-day 
not less than thirty-six marketable articles are produced from - 
this black, vile, sticky slime — solvents, oils, salts, colours, | 



246 MY NOTE BOOR. 

flavours. You cat a bit of delicious confectionery, happily 
unconscious that the exquisite taste which you enjoy so 
keenly comes from coal-tar ; you buy at the druggist's a tiny 
phial of what is labelled " Otto of Roses," little dreaming that 
the delicious perfume is wafted, not from " the fields of Araby," 
but from the foul gas retort 

Christianity is a moral chemistry. Well weie it for nations 
if it held a higher place among their social economics* Tar- 
saving is all well enough, but soul-saving is better. Grace 
transforms a villain into an honest man, a hariot into a 
holy woman, a thief into a saint. Where foetid exhalations 
of vice alone ascended, prayer and praise are to be found ; 
where moral miasmata had their lair, righteousness and tem- 
perance pitch their tent. Every sort of good thing is produced 
by godliness, and that too in hearts once reeking with all 
manner of foulness. Should not this stay every persecuting 
hand, hush every railing tongue, and incite every sanctified 
spirit to continued and increa^ng energy* 

TBIALB— of Toung Believers. 

Duncan in his Sacred Philosophy of the Seasons, tells us, 
— There is an insect (musca pi^mz'/tonis), which is accustomed 
to deposit its eggs in the very core of the piumula, or primary 
shoot of wheat, so that this shoot is completely destroyed 
by the larvae. Did the plant possess no means within itself, 
no means of repairing this injury, the whole prpvious labour 
of the husbandman would, in this case, have been in vain. 
But this destruction occurring in the spring of the year, when 
the vegetable power of the plant is in its greatest vigour, an 
effect is produced somewhat analogous to that of heading^ 
down a fruit tree. Shoots immediately spring up from the 
knots, the plant becomes more firmly rooted, and produces 
probably a dozen stems and ears, when but for the temporary 
mischief it might have sent forth one only. Thus may it 
often occur that those early trials which appear almost to 



MY NOTE BOOK. 247 

destroy the faith of young believers are their best friends, 
since they never would have been so useful had they been 
left to flourish as their heart desired. 

TBnriTT— it8 Kyitery. 

It was reported of Alanus, when he promised his auditory 
to discourse the next Sunday more clearly of the Trinity, and 
to make plain that mystery, while he was studying the point 
by the sea-side, he spied a boy very busy with a little spoon 
trudging often between the sea and a small hole he had 
digged in the ground. Alanus asked him what he meant. The 
boy answers, " I intend to bring all the sea into this pit.*' 
Alanus replies, "Why dost thou attempt such impossibilities, 
and misspefid thy time ?' The boy answers, " So dost thou, 
Alanus : I shall as soon bring all the sea into this hole, as 
thou bring all the knowledge of the Trinity into thy head. 
All is equally possible ; we have begun together, we shall 
finish together; saving of the two, my labour hath more hope 
and possibility of taking effect." — Thomas Adams. 

TROUBLE— Needed. 

Speaking of a Norwegian summer, the Rev. H. Macmillan 
says : — "The long daylight is very favourable to the growth 
of vegetation, plants growing in the night as well as in the 
day in the short but ardent summer. But the stimulus of 
perpetual solar light is peculiarly trying to the nervous 
system of those who are not accustomed to it. It prevents 
proper repose and banishes sleep. I never felt before how 
needful darkness is for the welfare of our bodies and minds. 
I longed for night, but the farther north we went, the farther 
we were fleeing^ from it, until at last, when we reached the 
most northern point of our tour, the sun set for one hour and 
a half. Consequently, the heat of the day never cooled down, 
and accumulated until it became almost unendurable at last. 
Truly for a most wise and beneficent purpose did God make 
light and create darkness. * Light is sweet, and it is a^ i 



248 MY NOTE BOOK. 

pleasant thing to the eyes to behold the sun/ But darkness 
is also sweet, it is the nurse of nature's kind restorer, balmy 
sleep, and without the tender drawing round us of its curtains 
the weary eyelid will not close, and the jaded nerves will not 
be soothed to refreshing rest. Not till the everlasting day 
break, and the shadows flee away, and the Lord himself shall 
be our light, and our God our glory, can we do without the 
cloud in the sunshine, the shade of sorrow in the bright light 
of joy, and the curtain of night for the deepening of the sleep 
which God gives his beloved." — Rev, Hugh Macmillar^s 
''Holidays on High LandsP 

TRUTH. 

"He will guide you into all truth.'* John xvi. 13. .Truth 
may be compared to some cave or grotto, with wondrous 
stalactites hanging from the roof, and others starting from 
the floor ; a cavern glittering with spar and abounding in 
marvels. Before entering the cavern you enquire for a guide, 
who comes with his lighted flambeau. He conducts you 
down to a considerable depth, and you find yourself in the 
midst of the cave. He leads you through different chambers. 
Here he points you to a little stream rushing from amid the 
rocks, and indicates its rise and progress ; there he points 
to some peculiar rock and tells you its name, then takes you 
into a large natural hall, tells you how many persons once 
feasted in it, and so on. Truth is a grand series of caverns, it 
is our glory to have so great and wise a conductor as the 
Holy Spirit. Imagine that we are coming to the darkness of 
it. He is a light shining in the midst of us to guide us. And 
by the light he shows us wondrous things. He teaches us by 
suggestion, direction, and illumination. 

TBIJTHHiaalifloations for Learning. 
RUSKIN, in reference to painters, declares, that "A person 
false at heart may, when it suits bis purposes, seize a stray 



MY NOTE BOOK. 249 

truth here or there ; but the relations of truth, its perfectness, 
that which makes it wholesome truth, he can never perceive. 
As wholeness and wholesomeness go together, so also sight 
with sincerity ; it is only the constant desire of, and sub- 
missiveness to truth, which can measure its strange angles, 
and mark its infinite aspects, and fit them and knit them into 
the strength of sacred invention." 

The like remark, with keener edge, applies to those who 
would be disciples in Christ's school, or aspire to be teachers 
in his church. 

TET. 

No man is likely to accomplish much who moodily indulges 
a desponding view of his own capacities. By God's help the 
weakest of us may be strong, and it is the way to become so, 
to resolve never to give up a good work till we have tried our 
best to achieve it. To think nothing impossible is the privilege 
of faith. We deprecate the indolent cowardice of the man 
who always felt assured that every new enterprise would be 
too much for him, and therefore declined it ; but we admire 
the pluck of the ploughman who was asked on his cross- 
examination if he could read Greek, and replied he did not 
know, because he had never tried. Those Suffolk horses which 
will pull at a post till they drop are worth a thousand times 
as much as jibbing animals that run back as soon as ever the 
collar begins to press them. 

inrBELIEF— Wiokedne88 of. 

The late Dr. Heugh, of Glasgow, a short time before he 
breathed his last, said, " There is nothing I feel more than 
the criminality of not trusting Christ without doubt — without 
doubt. Oh, to think what Christ is, what he did, and whom 
he did it for, and then not to believe him, not to trust him 1 
There is no wickedness like the wickedness of unbelief !" 



2^ MY NOTE BCX)K. 

irVSEBSTAVDnrCK-Ko TiflM for. 

" How is it, my dear," inquired a schoolmistress of a little 
girl, " that you do not understand this simple thing ?* " I do 
not know, indeed," she answered, with a perplexed look; " but 
I sometimes think I have so many things to learn that I have 
not the time to understand." 

Alas I there may be much hearing, much reading, much 
attendance at public services, and very small result, and all 
because the word was not the subject of thought, and was 
never embraced by the understanding. What is not under- 
stood is Hke meat undigested, more likely to be injurious than 
nourishing. 

ITHGODLT MEV-Kaeh Alike. 

In the Aosta Valley we were tormented by the recklessness 
of a driver who was drunk. Glad enough were we to change 
him for a sober man — sober as we thought ; but, alas ! we 
had only seen him in the morning, and before the afternoon 
had much advanced his sobriety was gone, and we would 
willingly have taken back the discarded sot of yesterday. 
Ungodly men are very much alike when the time of tempta- 
tion has fully come. The difference between one sinner and 
another is rather created by outward than by inward causes. 
Put them in like circumstances, and they would be much the 
same. All swine are not in the mire, but they all love it 

ttSlOV TO CHSIST. 

Two friends are said to come into Vulcan's shop, and to 
beg a boon of him : it was granted. What was it ? that he 
would either beat them on his anvil, or melt them in hi§ fur- 
nace, both into one. But without fiction, here is a far greater 
love in Christ ; for he would be melted in the furnace of 
wrath, and beaten on the anvil of death, to be made one with 
us. And to declare the exceeding love, here were not both 



MY NOTE BOOK. 251 

to be beaten on the anvil, or melted in the furnace ; but with- 
out us, he alone would be beaten on the anvil, he alone 
melted that we might be spared. — Thomas Adams, 

UJsl IT Y— Among GhristiaxiB to be Desired. 

Melancthon mourned in his day the divisions among 
Protestants, and sought to bring the Protestants together by 
the parable of the war between the wolves and the dogs. The 
wolves were somewhat afraid, for the dogs were many and 
strong, and therefore they sent out a spy to observe them. 
On his return, the scout said, " It is true the dogs are many, 
but there are not many mastiffs among them. There are 
dogs of so many sorts one can hardly count them ; and as for 
the worst of them," said he, " they are little dogs, which bark 
loudly, but cannot bite. However, this did not cheer me so 
much," said the wolf, " as this, that as they came marching 
on, I observed they were all snapping right and left at one 
another, and I could see clearly that though they all hate the 
wolf, yet each dog hates every other dog with all his heart." 
I fear it is true still ; for there are many professors who snap 
right and left at their own brethren, when they had better 
save their teeth for the wolves. If our enemies are to be put 
to confusion, it must be by the united efforts of all the people 
of God : unity is strength. 

irKTBTTTH-in Beligious GHLving. 

Louis XI. made a donation to the Virgin Mary of the 
whole county oi Boulogne, retaining, however, for his own 
use, the revenues thereof I A solemn, deed was drawn up, 
signed, sealed, and delivered, and it bears date 1478. What 
a ridiculous farce ! The instrument gives away just nothing 
at all. But are there no such farces among us ? When men 
of mean and miserly dispositions sing certain of our hymns, 
are they not guilty of just such a pretence of generosity ? 



2^2 MY NOTE BOOK. 

With abundance of goods in their power, they fumble for a 
threepenny-piece in their pockets, singing, meanwhile, 

** Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were a present far too small ; 
Love so amazing, so divine 

Demands my soul, my life, my aU." 

USEFULITESS— Better than Kere Capaoity. 

A MONSTROUS vat, certainly, is the great tun of Heidel- 
berg. It might hold eight hundred hogsheads of wine at the 
least ; but what is the use of such wasted capacity, since, for 
nearly a hundred years, there has not been a drop of liquor 
in it ! Hollow and sounding, empty and void and waste ; 
vintages come and go, and find it perishing of dry rot. An 
empty cask is not so great a spectacle after all, let its size be 
what it may, though old travellers called this monster one of 
the wonders of the world. What a thousand pities it is that 
many men of genius and of learning are, in respect of useful- 
ness, no better than this huge but empty tun of Heidelberg ! 
Very capacious are their minds, but very unpractical. Better 
be a poor household kilderkin, and give forth one's little 
freely, than exist as a useless prodigy, capable of much and 
available for nothing. 

USEFITLKESS— the Least ChrietUn to Aim at. 

Many true saints are unable to render much service to the 
cause of God. See, then, the gardeners going down to the 
pond, and dipping in their watering-pots to carry the refresh- 
ing liquid to the flowers. A child comes into the garden and 
wishes to help, and yonder is a little watering-pot for him. 
Note well the little water-pot, though it does not hold so much, 
yet carries the same water to the plants ; and it does not 
make any difference to the flowers which receive that water, 
whether it came out of the big pot or the little pot, so long 



MY NOTE BOOK. 253 

as it is the same water, and they get it. You who are as 
little children in God's church, you who do not know much, 
but try to tell to others what little you know ; if it be the 
same gospel truth, and be blessed by the same Spirit, it will not 
matter to the souls who are blessed by you whether they were 
converted or comforted under a man of one or ten talents. 

USEFULNESS— Wisdom Keeded for. 

In order to reach their hearts on sacred and divine things, 
he strove to cultivate the art of conciliating even the careless 
and indifferent, by talking to them, in the first instance, on 
subjects in which they would be interested ; and in this 
taught a precious lesson, which all who are engaged in evan- 
gelistic labour would do well to learn and exemplify. When 
acting as a regular district visitor in Whitechapel, London, 
he happened to visit a currier, to whom he was unknown, and 
his knowledge of the various processes of tanning and the 
preparation of leather, elicited the remark, " Ah, I see you 
are in the trade yourself, sir." — From Dr, Duff's ^^ Life of 
Lord Haddo^ fifth Earl of Aberdeen^ 

WANTS. 

On a tradesman's table I noticed a book labelled WANT 
BOOK. What a practical suggestion for a man of prayer ! 
He should put down all his needs on the tablets of his heart, 
and then present his want book to his God. If we knew all 
our need, what a large want book we should require ! How 
comforting to know that Jesus has a supply book, which 
exactly meets our want book! Promises, providences, and 
divine visitations, combine to meet the necessities of Ml the 
faithful. 

WABEABE-Spiritiial. 

In the road from Bellinzona to Lugano, on the Monte 
Cenere, we met with a detachment of carbineers, who had a. 



2J4 MY NOTE COOK. 

Station in the forest upon the mountain ; we learned that 
they had been placed there by the Italian government 
because a party of bandits had been impudent enough to rob 
the mail. We felt all the safer from knowing that protectors 
were so near at hand. Soldiers are needed where brigands 
are abroad ; nobody advises the letting of freebooters alone. 
We are occasionally asked by lovers of quietude why v^e 
draw our swords so frequently against the Ritualists and 
other Romanisers : is it not a sufficient answer that we are 
soldiers of the King of kings, and that these traitorous thieves 
not only rob the King's subjects of the gospel, but the King 
himself of his glory? Our churches need just now a strong 
detachment of bold and qualified champions to occupy them- 
selves with hunting down the Popish brigands by faithful 
preaching, and hanging them up upon the gallows of scorn. 
Cursed is he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully in 
this matter at this momentous hour, when men's souls are 
destroyed, and Christ's name is dishonoured. Carbineers of 
the cross, take sure aim, and give good account of the foe. 

WASKnras. 

A VERY skilful bowman went to the mountains in search of 
game. All the beasts of the forest fled at his approach. The 
lion alone challenged him to combat. Th^ bowman im- 
mediately let fly an arrow, and said to the lion, " I send thee 
my messenger, that from him thou mayst learn what I my- 
self shall be when I assail thee." The lion thus wounded 
rushed away in great fear, and on a fox exhorting him to be 
of good courage, and not to run away at the first attack : 
"You counsel me in vain, for if he sends so fearful a 
messenger, how shall I abide the attack of the man him- 
self?" 

If the warning admonitions of God's ministers fill the 
conscience with terror, what must it be to face the Lord 
himself? If one bolt of judgment bring a man into a cold 



MY NOTE BOOK. 255 

sweat, what will it be to stand before an angry God in the 
last great day ? 

watghfulkess. 

While the Austrian general was staying at the Hotel de 
Ville, upon the Grand Canal, at Venice, we lodged at the 
same house, and so often as we passed his rooms, whether by 
day or night, we encountered two sentries on guard at the 
door. Our heart said to itself, whenever the King of kings 
deigns to make a chamber of our spirit, let us set holiness 
and devotion to be sentries at the entrance. When our 
Beloved visits us he must not be disturbed ; ill thoughts 
must be repulsed, and carnal desires kept at a distance. 
With drawn swords let watchfulness preserve the sanctity of 
ImmanuePs rest. " I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, 
by the roes and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, 
nor awake my love, till he please." 

WATCHFCJLKESS— when Special Keed of. 

When cast by providence among sinful persons who respect 
us, we ought to be peculiarly watchful. The hatred of the 
ungodly when poured upon Christians in the form of persecu- 
tion, is seldom harmful to their spiritual nature, but the 
friendship of the world is always to be suspected. When the 
servants of the high priest allowed Peter to warm his hands 
at the fire, had Peter been a wise man, he would have been 
afraid that evil would come of it. We are disarmed by 
•kindness, but it is never safe to be disarmed in an enemy's 
country. "Who," says the old proverb, " could live in Rome 
and yet be at war with the pope ?" Who can have much to 
do with sinners and not have something to do with their sins ? 
The smiling daughters of Moab did more mischief to Israel 
than all Balak's frowning warriors. All Philistia could not 
have blinded Samson if Delilah's charms had not deluded 



256 MY NOTE BOOK. 

him. Our worst foes will be found among our ungodly 
friends. Those who are false to God, are not likely to be 
true to us. Walk carefully, believer, if thy way lie by the 
sinner's door, and especially if that sinner hath acted a 
friendly part to thee. 

WEALTH— InYOlyei Danicer. 

It was as much as we could do to keep our feet upon the 
splendid mosaic floor of the Palace Giovanelli, at Venice : we 
found no such difficulty in the cottage of the poor glassblower 
in the rear. Is it one of the advantages of wealth to have 
one's abode polished till all comfort vanishes, and the very 
floor is as smooth and dangerous as a sheet of ice, or is this 
merely an accidental circumstance typical of the dangers of 
abundance ? Observation shows us that there is a fascination 
in wealth which renders it extremely difficult for the possessors 
of it to maintain their equilibrium ; and this is more especially 
the case where money is suddenly acquired ; then, unless 
grace prevent, pride, affectation, and other mean vices stupify 
the brain with their sickening fumes, and he who was respect- 
able in poverty, becomes despicable in prosperity. Pride may 
lurk under a threadbare cloak, but it prefers the comely 
broadcloth of the merchant's coat : moths will eat any of our 
garments, but they seem to fly first to the costly furs. It is 
so much the easier for men to fall when walking on wealth's 
sea of glass, because all men aid them to do so. Flatterers 
haunt not cottages ; the poor may hear an honest word from 
his neighbour, but etiquette -forbids that the rich man should 
enjoy the like privilege ; for is it not a maxim in Babylon, 
that rich men have no faults, or only such as their money, 
like charity, covereth with a mantle? What man can help 
slipping when every body is intent upon greasing his ways, so 
that the smallest chance of standing may be denied him ? 
The world's proverb is, " God help the poor, for the rich can 
help themselves f but to our mind, it is just the rich who 



MY NOTE BOOK. 257 

have most need of heaven's help. Dives in scarlet is worse 
off than Lazarus in rags, unless divine love shall uphold him. 

WILL— the Seat of Inability. 

Nelson could not see the signal for suspending battle 
because he placed the glass to his blind eye, and man cannot 
see the truth as it is in Jesus because he has no mind to do 
so. Ungodly men are, as the country people say, " like the 
hogs in a harvest field," who come not out for all your shout- 
ing ; they cannot hear because they have no will to hear. 
Want of will causes paralysis of every faculty. In spiritual 
things man is utterly unable because resolvedly unwilling, 

WILIr-Kot Violated by Grace. 

When we see a casket wrenched open, the hinges torn 
away, or the clasp destroyed, we mark at once the hand of 
the Spoilers but when we observe another casket deftly 
opened with a master-key, and the sparkling contents revealed, 
we note the hand of the Owner, Conversion is not, as some 
suppose, a violent opening of the heart by grace, in which 
will, reason, and judgment are all ignored or crushed. This 
is too barbarous a method for him who comes not as a 
plunderer to his prey, but as a possessor to his treasure. 
In conversion, the Lord who made the human heart deals 
with it according to its nature and constitution. His key 
insinuates itself into the wards; the will is not enslaved 
but enfranchised ; the reason is not blinded but enlightened, 
and the whole man is made to act with a glorious liberty 
it never knew till it fell under the restraints of grace. 

WILL OF MAN— Adverse to the Ooipel. 

When the dove was weary she recollected the ark, and 
flew into Noah's hand at once : there are weary souls who 
know the ark, but will not fly to it. When an Israelite had 
slain, inadvertently, his fellow, he knew the city of refuge^ he 

\1 



258 MY NOTE BOOK. 

feared the avenger of blood, and he fled along the road to the 
place of safety ; but multitudes know the refuge, and every 
Sabbath we set up the sign-posts along the road, but yet they 
come not to find salvation. The destitute waifs and strays 
of the streets of London find out the night refuge and ask for 
shelter ; they cluster round our workhouse doors like sparrows 
under the eaves of a building on a rainy day ; they piteously 
crave for lodging and a crust of bread ; yet crowds of poor 
benighted spirits, when the house of mercy is lighted up, and 
the invitation is plainly written in bold letters, " Whosoever 
will, let him turn in hither/' will not come, but prove the 
truth of Watts's verse — 

"Thousands make a wretched choice, 
And rather starve than come.^ 

Tis strange, 'tis passing strange, 'tis wonderful ! 

WISDOK-Onr, under Differing Ciroomitancei. 

It is a wise thing to exhibit prudence and hopefulness in 
their proper degrees and seasons. Some are so exultant at 
success as to become rash, and thereby secure for themselves 
a disaster, others are so depressed by a defeat as to be in- 
capable of future action. The old Latin distich is worth 
quoting. 

**Si modo victus eraSy ad crastina Bella parato ; 
' Si modo victor eras, ad crastina beUa^veto,^ 

"If conquer'd, for to-morrow's fight prepare ; 
If conqueror, of to-morrow's fight beware." 

When we are most unsuccessful in our Lord's work we should 
rally all our forces for new attempts, hoping that the tide will 
turn, and believing that to perseverance the crown is certain. 
On the other hand when the Lord favours us with the largest 
degree of blessing we must watch with holy anxiety lest by 
any negligence or sin we should grieve the Holy Spirit and 
so {oritii all hope of future triumph. . 



MY NOTE BOOK. S59 



WISDOM— To Win Sonli. 

We are not wide enough awake in doing good. Pardon 
the reference, for the sake of the lesson ; it shaJl be borrowed 
from Dr. Marigold's cart. When a Cheap-Jack has a little 
knot of people round his van, he eyes them all, and feels sure 
that the man who is standing over there is a butcher, and 
that yonder young lad has more money than brains, and that 
the girl near him is out with her sweetheart and is soon to 
be married ; now, mark, he will hold up the exact articles 
which are likely to attract these customers, and in his harangue, 
he will have jokes and telling sentences which will turn 
butcher, and lad, and lass into purchasers. He cares not a 
jot for elegance, but very much for force. He knows that his 
trade will be better pushed by homely remarks and cutting 
sentences than by the prosiest prettinesses which were ever 
delivered ; and he gains his end, which is more than those of 
you will do who talk to people about their souls with as much 
richness of diction as — 

" The girl who at each pretty phrase let drop 
A ruby comma, or pearl full-stop. 
Or an emerald semicolon. '' 

Dr. Marigold is sharp and shrewd, because self-interest 
makes him so, and his extemporary observations are so 
patly uttered and adroitly arranged, that he wins the attention 
of all, and the custom of many. Would to God that preachers 
and other workers for God had a tithe as much conrnion- 
sense as Cheap-Jack, and were half as earnest to bring men 
to Jesus Christ as Cheap-Jack is to bring them to buy that 
tea-tray and set of real china ! O that we were as wise to 
win the ear and heart of the particular case with which we 
have to deal, as he is in extorting a laugh and compelling the 
attention of the passer-by ! 



I 



260 MY NOTE BOOR. 

WOMSK— Preaehing. 

When Boswell told Johnson one day that he had heard a 
woman preach that morning at a Quaker's meeting, Johnson 
replied, " Sir, a woman preaching is like a dog's walking on 
his hind legs. It is not done well ; but you are surprised to 
find it done at alV* We will add that our surprise is all the 
greater when women of piety mount the pulpit, for they are 
acting in plain defiance of the command of the Holy Spirit, 
written by the pen of the apostle PauL 

WOSD-Wajf of Treating it 

There are two ways of treating the seed. The botanist 
splits it up, and discourses on its curious characteristics ; the 
simple husbandman eats and sows; sows and eats. Similarly 
there are two ways of treating the gospel. A critic dissects 
it, raises a mountain of debate about the structure of the 
whole, and relation of its parts ; and when he is done with 
his argument, he is done ; to him the letter is dead ; he 
neither lives on it himself, nor spreads it for the good of 
his neighbours ; he neither eats nor sows. The disciple of 
of Jesus, hungering for righteousness, takes the seed whole ; 
it is bread for to-day's hunger, and seed for to-morrow's 
supply. — IV. Arnot, 

WOBD OF OOB— Everliying. 

How wonderfully has the Lord provided for the con- 
tinuance of the vegetable world; he causes the plant to scatter 
broadcast a multitude of seeds, and bids the winds convey 
them far and wide. The fowls of the air are commissioned 
to bear berries and fruits to their proper soils, and even 
to bury them in the earth ; while scores of four-footed 
creatures, engaged in storing up food for themselves, become 
planters of trees, and propagators of plants. Seeds bear a 
channed life about them, they will germinate after being 



MY NOTE BOOK. 261 

buried for centuries ; they have been known to flourish when 
turned up from the borings of wells from the depth of 
hundreds of feet, and when ponds and lakes have been dried, 
the undrowned vegetable life has surprised the beholders by 
'blossoming with unknown flowers. Can we imagine that God 
has been thus careful of the life of the mere g^ass of the field, 
which is the very emblem of decay, and yet is negligent of 
his Word which liveth and abideth for ever ? It is not to be 
dreamed of. Truth, the incorruptible seed, is ever scattering 
itself, every wind is laden with it, every breath spreads it ; it 
lies dormant in a thousand memories, it preserves its life in 
the abodes of death. The Lord has but to give the word,, 
and a band of eloquent men shall publish the gospel, apostles 
and evangelists will rise in abundance, like the warriors who 
sprang from the fabled dragon's teeth ; converts will spring 
up like flowerets at the approach of spring, nations shall be 
bom in a day, and truth, and God the Lord of truth, shall 
reign for ever. 

W0BK8-and our Salvation. 

William Wickham being appointed by King Edward to 
build a stately church, wrote in the windows, " This work 
made William Wickham!^ When charged by the king for 
assuming the honour of that work to himself as the author, 
whereas he was only the overseer, he answered that he meant 
not that he made the work, but that the work made him, 
having before been very poor, and then in gfreat credit. 
Lord, when we read in thy Word that we must work out our 
own salvation, thy meaning is not that our salvation should 
be the effect of our work, but our work the evidence of our 
salvation. 

WOBLD-Deceptioa o£ 

iEsop's fable says : — " A pigeon oppressed by excessive 
thirst, saw a goblet of water painted on a sign-board. Not 



263 . MY NOTE BOOK. 

supposing it to be only a picture, she flew towards it with a 
loud whirr, and unwittingly dashed against the sign-board, 
and jarred herself terribly. Having broken her wings by the 
blow, she fell to the ground, and was killed by one of the by- 
standers." 

The mockeries of the world are many, and those who 
are deluded by them not pnly miss the joys they locked 
for, but in their eager pursuit of vanity bring ruin upon their 
souls. We call the dove silly to be deceived by a picture, 
however cleverly painted, but what epithet shall we apply to 
those who are duped by the transparently false allurements 
of the world ! 

WOBLD— a Huge Desert 

Living in the midst of the church of God is like sailing 
down the Nile in a boat. One is charmed with the luxuriance 
of either bank, and with much that is beautiful immediately 
around; but^ alas ! at a little distance on either side lies a vast 
uncultivated, we had almost said hopeless, desert. Some are 
at rest because they never look beyond the borders of the 
church, but those whose sympathies reach to all hiunanity 
will have to carry a life-long " burden of the Lord." 

WOBLD-its InitabiUty. 

Queen Elizabeth once said to a courtier, " They pass 
best over the world who trip over it quickly ; for it is but a 
bog : if we stop, we sink." 

WOBLD— Hot to Build too Confideatlj on it. 

In Chili where the ground is subject to frequent shocks of 
earthquake, the houses are built of lowly height and of unen- 
during structure ; it is of little use to dig deep foundations, 
and pile up high walls where the very earth is unstable ; it 
would be foolish to build as for ages when the whole edifice 
may be in ruins in a week. Herein we read a lesson as to 



MY NOTE BOOK. 263 

our worldly schemes and possessions : this poor fleeting 
world deserves not that we should build our hopes and joys 
upon it as though they could last us long. We must treat it 
as a treacherous soil, and build but lightly on it, and we shall 
be wise. 

WOSLI)— Vanity of Fwtnit ot 

My friends, do you remember that old Scythian custom, 
when the head of a house died ? How he was dressed in his 
finest dress, and set in his chariot, and carried about to his 
friends' houses ; and each of them placed him at his table's 
head, and all feasted in his presence ! Suppose it were 
offered to you, in plain words, as it is offered to you in dire 
facts, that you should gain this Scythian honour, gradually, 
while you yet thought yourself alive. Suppose the offer were 
this : You shall die slowly ; your blood shall daily gfrow cold, 
your flesh petrify, your heart beat at last only as a rusty 
group of iron valves. Your hfe shall fade from you, and sink 
through the earth into the ice of Caina ; but day by day your 
body shall be dressed more gaily, and set in higher chariots, 
and have more orders on its breast, crowns on its head, if 
you will. Men shall bow before it, stare and shout round it, 
crowd after it up and down the streets ; build palaces for it, 
feast with it at their tables' heads all the night long ; your 
soul shall stay enough within it to know what they do, and 
feel the weight of the golden dress on its shoulders, and the 
furrow of the crown edge on the skull ; no more. Would 
you take the offer, verbally made by the death angel ? Would 
the meanest among us take it, think you ? Yet practically 
and verily we grasp at it, every one of us, in a measure ; many 
of us grasp at it in its fulness of horror. Every man accepts 
it who desires to advance in hfe without knowing what Ufe is ; 
who means only that he is to get more horses, and more 
footmen, and more fortune, and more public honour, and — 
not more personal soul. He only is advancing in Ufe whose 



264 MY NOTE BOOK. 

heart is getting softer, whose blood wanner, whose brain 
quicker, whose spirit is entering into living peace. — yohn 
Ruskin, 

WOBLDLT MERBnCBHT. 

I THINK the men of this world like children in a dang^erous 
storm in the sea, that play and make sport with the white 
foam of the waves thereof coming in to sink and drown them; 
so are men making fool's sports with the white pleasures of a 
stormy world that will sink them. But, alas ! what have we 
to do with their sports which they make ? If Solomon said 
of laughter that it was madness, what may we say of this 
world's laughing and sporting themselves with gold and 
silver, and honours, and court, and broad large conquests,* 
but that they are poor souls, in the height and rage of a fever 
gone mad ? Then a straw, a fig, for all created sports and 
rejoicing out of Christ. — Samuel Rutherford. 

W0BLDLIHE88. 

There is a poor creature at Aosta who does not know the 
value of money, and only cares for eating, drinking, and 
sleeping. He is undoubtedly an idiot ; but what is he who 
does not know the value of his soul ? 

WOBLDLIirESS-its Blinding Influenee. 

Suppose I were shut up within a round tower, whose 
massive wall had in some time of trouble been pierced here 
and there for musketry ; suppose, further, that by choice or 
necessity, I am whirled rapidly and incessantly round its • 
inner circumference, will I appreciate the beauties of the 
surrounding landscape or recognise the features of the men 
who labour in the field below ? I will not ! Why ? Are there 

* Acquisitions. 



MY NOTE BOOK. 265 

not openings in the wall which I pass at every circuit ? Yes; 
but the eye, set for objects near, has not time to adjust itself 
to objects at a distance until it has passed the openings ; and 
so the result is, the same as if it were a dead wall all round. 
Behold the circle of human life ! of the earth, earthy it is, 
almost throughout its whole circumference. A dead wall, very 
near and very thick, obstructs the view. Here and there, 
on a Sabbath or other season of seriousness, a sUt is left open 
in its side. Heaven might be seen through these ; but, alas! 
the eye which i^ habitually set for the earthly cannot, during 
such momentary glimpses, adjust itself to higher things. 
Unless you pause and look steadfastly, you will see neither 
clouds nor sunshine through these openings, or the distant 
sky. So long has the soul looked upon the world, and so 
firmly is the world's picture fixed in its eye, that when it is 
turned for a moment heavenward, it feels only a quiver of 
inarticulate light, and retains no distinct impression of the 
things that are unseen and eternal. — IV, Artwt, 

WOBLDLnrOS— Brutiihnett of. 

Luther was told of a nobleman who, above all things, 
occupied himself with amassing money, and was so buried in 
darkness that he gave no heed to the word of God, and even 
said to one who pleaded with him, " Sir, the gospel pays no 
interest." "Have you no grains?" interposed Luther; and 
then he told this fable : — "A lion making a great feast, invited 
all the beasts, and with them some swine. When all manner 
of dainties were set before the guests, the swine asked, ' Have 
you no grains P Even so," continued Luther, "even so it is, 
in these days, with carnal men ; we preachers set before them 
the most dainty and costly dishes, such as everlasting salva- 
tion, the remission of sins, and God's grace ; but they, like 
swine, turn up their snouts, and ask for money. Offer a cow 
a nutmeg, and she will reject it for old hay." 



266 MY NOTE BOOK. 

TOUTEFVL PUTT— AdTUiUfe oL 

In an election the first votes recorded count all the day 
long, and so encourage the party all through the anxious 
hours of polling. When men g^ve in their names for Jesus 
and his cause in the morning of their lives, their whole 
existence influences their time, and their encouragement to 
the good cause is life-long. Yoimg people, remember this ! 

ZEAL. 

Humboldt, in his travels, observes, " It seems remarkable 
that in the hottest as well as the coldest climates, people 
display the same predilection for heat. On the introduction 
of Christianity into Iceland, the inhabitants would be bap- 
tised only in the hot springs of Hecla ; and in the torrid zone, 
in the plains as well as on the Cordilleras, the natives flock 
from gdl parts to the thermal waters." The fact is not less 
noteworthy that men love spiritual warmth. Cold truth, even 
cold gospel truth, is never attractive. Ministers must be 
fervent, their spirit earnest, and their style energetic, or the 
many will not resort to them. Religion is a dish to be served 
hot; when it once becomes lukewarm it is sickening. Our 
baptism must be with the Holy Ghost and with fire if we 
would win the masses to hear the gospel. 

ZEAL. 

When the Spartans marched into battle they advanced 
with cheerful songs, willing to fight ; but when the Per- 
sians entered the conflict, you could hear, as the regiments 
came on, the crack of whips by which the officers drove the 
cowards to the fray. You need not wonder that a few Spartans 
were more than a match for thousands of Persians, that in fact 
they were like lions in the midst of sheep. So let it be with 
the church ; never should she need to be forced to reluctant 
action, but full of irrepressible life, she should long for conflict 
against everything which is contrary to God. Were we 



MY NOTE BOOK. 267 

enthusiastic soldiers of the cross we should be like lions 
in the midst of herds of enemies, and through God's help 
nothing would be able to stand against us. 

ZXAIr-Caniiiig TTnity. 

There was a blacksmith once who had two pieces of iron 
which he wished to weld into one, and he took them just as 
they were, all cold and hard, and put them on the anvil, and 
began to h^pmier with all his might, but they were two 
pieces still, and would not unite. At last he remembered 
what he ought never to have forgotten ; he thrust both of them 
into the fire, took them out red-hot, laid the one upon the 
other, and by one or two blows of the hammei they very 
soon became one. 

ZEAL FOB SOULS. 

A TRAVELLER was joumeying in the darkness of night 
along a road that led to a deep and rapid river, which, swollen 
by sudden rains, was chafing and roaring within its pre- 
cipitous banks. The bridge that crossed the stream had been 
swept away by the torrent, but he knew it not. A man met 
him, and after enquiring whither he was bound, said to him 
in an indifferent way — "Are you aware that the bridge is 
gone ?' " No," was the answer. " Why do you think so ?*' 
" Oh, I heard such a report this afternoon, and though I am 
not certain about it, you had perhaps better not proceed." 

Deceived by the hesitating and undecided manner in which 
the information was given, the traveller pushed onward in the 
way of death. Soon another meeting him, cried out in conster- 
nation. " Sir, sir, the bridge is gone !" " Oh ! yes," replied the 
wayfarer, " some one told me that story a little distance back ; 
but from the careless tone with which he told it, I am sure it 
is an idle tale." " Oh, it is true,' it is true !" exclaimed the 
other. *' I know the bridge is gone, for I barely escaped 
being carried away with it myself. Danger is before you and 



368 IfY NOTE BOOK. 

you must not go on." And in the excitement of his feelings, 
he grasped him by the hands, by the arms, by the clothes, 
and besought him not to rush upon manifest destruction. 
Convinced by the earnest voice, the earnest eyes, the earnest 
gestures, the traveller turned back, and was saved. The in- 
telligence in both cases was the same ; but the manner of 
its conveyance in the one gave it an air of a fable, in the 
other an air of truth. 

So it is only through a burning zeal for the salvation of the 
lost — a zeal glowing in the heart, and flashing out in the look 
and action and utterance — that the confidence of imbelief can 
be overcome, and the heedless travellers of the broad way 
won to the path of life and happiness. Love is the most 
potent logic : interest and sympathy are the most subduing 
eloquence. — Christian Work, 




INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



The reader will please to note that this is not a complbtb index, hut, a* the 
illustrations are cuready arranged alphabeticaUy under distinct heads, this is a 
8UPPLBMENTABY index to muhs tfie work more useful. Persons seeking any 
subject should first look to the alphabet of the work, and failing there, the 
supplement may be helpful. 



Page 
Abasement, to be rejoiced in . . z 
Aberrations of the heart .. .. zoa 

Abuse of mercy 243 

Access • a 

Activity, a Help to Courage . . a 

■ and Prayer x68 

Advent, second 3 

Affliction (See Trials) . . . . 3—9 

Aeas^, Professor 154 

Alabaster, Saints like pillars of . . 207 

Ambition 203 

Anger, Provoke not those given to 224 

Ang^elo, Michael 175 

Antisthenes, Saying of 70 

Apes, Covetous men like . . . . 50 

Appropriating Faith 77 

Aptness to make mistakes, Our . . 252 
Arnot, W 77, 104, 305, 265 

Babba^e 64 

Babes in Grace 67 

Backsliders 10 

Beecher, Henry Ward • • , • • 54> 337 

Believers, Life of, interesting . . 230 

Safety of, (See Saints) .. .. 205 

Benevolence, reward of 202 

Berridge, John 30,227 

Besettmg sin 228 

Bible 222 

how to deal with difficulties of 25 

— — how to treatit 260 

and priests 28 

Book with three leaves 208 

Brethren, generous feeling towards 87 

Broken Heart 203 

Bryant, Poem of 89 

Buchsell, Dr., Anecdote of .. .. 23 

Calumny 229, 230 

Care cast upon God 99 

Cellar door 97 

Carlyle, T 229 

Carnal Security 232, 242 

Children, future of 26 

■ ■ to be taught with pa- 
tience a6 



Page 
Children should be trained to 

attend worship 13 

Chastisement, a token of Divine 

regard 9 

(See Affliction, Trials) 
Cheerfulness^ Humility and •• 221 
Christ, purging his church . . . . 38 

Coining to, as a sinner 33, 38 

^— — our views influenced by 

communion with 40 

^— — Joy of Communion with . 40 
^ Faith has saving connec- 
tion with . . 75 

— — — the Sum of the Gospel . • 92 
- Epilogue of Tesus . . . . 25 
■ his sympathy with his 

people . . - . . • 3x 

—— the Head xoo 

glory of his kingdom . . 228 

^— — Salvation in 207 

near 208 

— — to be preached 227 

■■ Union to 250 

; — Fulness of, for our wants 253 

Christian Character to be maintained 60 
Safety of, wherein it 

consists 53 

Two Natiires in . . . , 257 

■ Peace of 160 

Christians revealed by affliction . . 8 
— — — Neutrality impossible to 34 

Icings 35 

Church and world 96a 

Clover and trefoil seeds, process 

of "doctoring" 64 

Coal-pit, Anecdote of 39 

Coming of Christ (see Advent) . • 3 
Communion with Christ . . . • 40 

— ^— — with God 42 

— of saints . . . . 42, 4a 

helps a preacher . . 273 

— — (Watchfulness) .. 955 

Company^ Sinful, to be avoided. . 229 
Complaining chronic with some . . 6> 

(Grumblers) 98^ t<y^ 



270 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



Page 

Conceit .. .. axa 

Confidence, False 8x 

Congregation large enough . . 199 
Conquest of self, (pradual . . . . 48 

Consequences of sin •07 

Contemplation .. .. •. .. 143 
Contentment (Gratitude) .. .. 97 
Controversy, Doctrines not lor • • 63 
Conversion, by reading Bible . . x6 
— — — Sudden 46 

■ a complete surrender 46 

■ regeneration .. .. 194 

■ its bearing on sin 233, 224 

■ Trials leading to . . 233 

illustrated . . 243, 345, 357 

Conviction of sin, Self-righteous- 
ness destroyed bv 3x3 

" ' ', Terror of .. 34a 

Courage, how maintained . • . . a 

■ Decision for Christ re- 

q^uires 58 

(See Zeal) 366 

Creation, God's benevolence in . . 88 

Crisis of souls • . . 335 

Cromwell, Oliver 38 

■ Milton's remark 
concerning 43 

Cross of Christ 30, 31 

Crosses 8 

( See Afflictions, Chastisement, 

Trials, Jtc. ) 
Cuttle-fish, Persons who resemble 5x 

Dahlia, Moralists like the . . . . X54 

Dante, Statue of X57 

Day of judgment forgotten •• . . xa7 

Death, A martyr's X07 

"Debt of Nature" 54 

Deliverances strengthen courage . 50 

Difficulties overcome 199 

Diligence in doing good .. ..187 

Discord (see Quarrels) X93 

^ Melancthon on . . . . asx 
Doctrine and exhortation .. • • X75 

Doubts and fears 59, 66 

Drake, Sir Francis, Saying of . . 50 

Earthen vessel, The Christian 

worker an . . . . 3x8 

Ease, Peril of . . ^ 331, 24X 

— not for Christians .. .. 43 
Edifying conversation, Secret of 44 

Education (Schools) 309 

Effects of affliction, Various . • 5 

Effort, Personal X65, x66 

flection 65 

encourages to pray •• 68 
fPredesdnation) •• .. x8o 



Eloquence, Garrick on 177 

Eodeavotur stimulated by fiuth . . Ho 
Enemies of Christ, contending with 253 
Exag:^ration in religious news . . 190 

Examination, Self. 3x3 

Excuses illustrated 934 

Experience •• •• •• .. ya 74 

■ the best evidence . . 70 
■■ ■■ necessaryto a minister 73 

Eye of Christ our stimulus . . . . 27 

Faculties of man perverted . • . . 140 

Faith, in its d^(ree xx 

appropnating (Assurance). 77 

— — God's regard for .. .. 78 

— — Trial of • 79 

— Stimulates endeavour . • 80 

the sum of virtue •• «. 80 

•^— Triumph of • .. 80 

-^— and works •• • 80 

in prayer •• X69 

— and reason.. , X94 

— — sustains resignation . . • • 198 

— • (Salvation) so8 

False peace .. .. ^ x6a 

False prudence, Mischi^ of •• 190 

Fault-finding (Censoriousness) • • 34 

(Inconsistencies) xao 

Fellowship .. •• .. •• 41,4* 

F6n61on 133 

Fish, Some converts like . . • • 46 

Floral clock X59 

Folly of worldlings 363 

Forebodings falsified 83 

Formalism, Tricks of ... • . . 83 

Formality worthless 84 

Freezine an image of conscience- 
hardening 43 

Frivolities render men callous . • 85 

Frivolity 86 

Fuller, A., Extract from his diary 44 
-— ^^— — on election . . . . . • 68 

anecdote about prayer 170 

Fuller, Thomas xSa 

Generosity, false .. •• .. •. 95X 

Gentleness (Sternness) 937 

God, as a Father . . .- . . . . 87 

as hght .. ..^ .. ..^ .. 88 

Benevolence of, in Creation . 88 

— - Vague conceptions of . . . . 90 
— • Goodness of, unceasing . . 6a 

— Immutability of xao 

— — Love of 89, 331 

— - to be feared 954 

Godliness no burden to saints . . gx 
GK>spel, Boldness congruous with . 99 
■■ duty of Spreading it . . 99 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



271 



Page 

Gospel, eternity of a6o 

— — Jesus the Sum of . . . . 92 

' " needs no adornments . . 93 

■ needs spiritual ears . . 93 

■ nothing else will satisfy . 93 
to be preached constantly 

and simply . . '. . . . 93 
(Simple), the wisest need it 94 

■ mvitations of, the sinner's 

warrant 194 

Grace, Corruptions overcome by . 48 

■ Doctrines of . . _ . . • • 64 
— — does not violate will . . 257 

■ equal to our day . . . . 95 

evidenced by works . . a6i 

found in all places . . . . 168 

■ Growth in.. .. 97,98,186 

-' Maturity in 95 

Means of, neglected, a sad 

loss •• •• 14^ 

— — Payson on 94 

" Riches of Christ's . . . . 30 

triumphs over trial . . . . 95 

Graces, Seasonableness of . . 159, 958 
Gracious operations, order of . . x6o 
Gratitude, Christians should mani- 
fest their •*.•.■ • • 35 

■ awakened bv affliction . . 4 
Growth, measure of (see Grace) . . x86 
Gumall, William z8, 1x7 

Habit, Corruptions strengthened 

by .. 49 

Destructive power of smfixl 98 

Hamilton, Dr. James x6. 56, X34, 165 
Handel and Lord Kinnoul . . . . 69 

Hardness of Heart . . X03 

Hardening of Conscience . . . . 4a 
Hearers, Ignorance of constant . . xi8 

■ ■ The poor as 167 

Hearing the Gospel xoo 

' carelessly . . . . xox 
—————— for others . . • . loi 

■ useless alone • . xoa 
Heart, Aberrations of . . ' • • . . xoa 

— — ^ a broken X03 

a Christian's, what it is like 43 

■ ■ ■ dissolved by mercy . . . . 144 
— — enmity of, to the Gospel . . 257 

■ hardened by sin aa3 

Hardness of X03 

Ignorance of our . . . . 1x7 

— ^ — Image taken from the . . 66 

-^— Preacher to aim at the • . 100 

■ ■ ■ regeneration needed . • • • X04 
•^— seat of spiritual disease .. X04 
Truth in 848 



Page 
Heart won to God by trials . . 9 

Heaven .. .X04— xo8 

■■ " ' — made desirable by Afflictions 7 

and the Sabbath . . . . S04 • 

-^— not for the ungodly . . . . 340 
Heavenward .. ..-..- •« .. xo8 
Hermit, Description of a .. .. 49 
Highland chief, Anecdote of • • 27 
Holiness, Bible reading promotes x6 
Holy Spirit (see Spirit, Holy) 

Holy Water xoS 

Hone, William, " Every Day Book" X7 
Honour, Affliction attendant upon 3 

— of service of God .. .. 2x9 

Hope X09, xxo 

only in Christ 30 

Hopes, False 8a 

Human Ability, Effects of belief in 23 
Humboldt, Alexander Von .. xa8, X39 

Humility xxo, zxx 

Hyper-Calvinists, their teaching 6$ 
Hypocrisy ixa — XX7, aao 

Idleness, Spiritual .. •• .« •• zao 
■ shameful • • • • . . . . xaa 

Imitation, Limit of xx8 

Immutability of God ^ xao 

Inability lies in the will 257 

Inconsistency, Excuses for . . 72, X20 

Indolence 241, 249 

Infatuation of Sin aag 

Infidel silenced axo 

Infirmities, Use of ^»* xaa 

Influence of communion with 

Christ 40 

Influence of a Christian over the 

godless »3, 139 

Ingratitude, Man's, to God .. ,. xas 
Insensibility of the natural man . . 140 
Instability of worldly things . . 262 

iesuits • za5 
esus, (see Christ, Faith, Gospel) 
oy in Affliction 8 

of Hope .. ^ X09 . 

— - of our Religion, evidence of 

its truth . . ta6 

— at finding Salvation .. •• xas 
Judgment of our fellows .. .. xz 

comparable to balances xa6 

Day of, forgotten . . xa7 

pervertc* X2I 

Judgments, effects of xa8 

Jupiter, fallen statue of 48 

Keble, John, on Books 19 

Kindness spies g^ood points in all . . 25 
Knowledge, Partial^ Ukft,C»^ ^« va. 



ItaiEX OF SUBJECTS. 



Ksowlcdcc, Bot BWte mnU .- i 

ijiimti, hujh '. ' 

Lkw tJ the Word, Hie Spml 

Lib^Idi^, iMiii^erf ;; .. ■■ 

LiTa. OuMliiui known br Ui .. 
pow« of » Chriilim'i ■ - 

■ ij Believer intere>tiii( • ■ ■■ ' 

The Sinoet"! B«d of .. ■■ i 

Power rfuneanKB ■■ ■■ I 

~TheiBner,. '.'. '.'. '.'. .'. i 
wiiina in Uk now .. .. 

= 9S 



Whalietnie «63 

Light, delEited by ibe wicked .. ijfi 

Liillo Thing. ■- ■■ '3« 

Lnftr «yie, Pre»eher lo iTOia . . 174 

lyjnaon DeMinidooof M 

LongfelWi Hi.«M[i» M 

Longinri, The Soni'i .. -■ "37. 'S' 

l«rJt-dav Uld Inimpet "04 

Lawn (see AffliniaD, Chiidie- 
ment,Tri^otc.) 

LovenrCod ■» 

itaed abroad by Ilia Sp>nl .. i^ 

pTOmoied by prayer .. .. 17' 

Lyfacd.Mr.iDcaih-beduyiDEiof is 

MucmilUn, Hugh , 96, >4» 

Magdalene, lt»B»nfn!wo« of .. 7' 



— diuslvEt the haart.. 



t°W?S^° 



" HiniBeriiil EiperiaKC*," Dr. 

BikIikII'i 

MiniMen {tct pRuber, Scnuu) 



Novelty, tnfluentx of . 



:: 3 

:; U 



OppoTtunitieft to be made 
Fayson, E., Deaih^bed m 



ngi 04, !■ 
■ludy i; 



pMspieuiiy, how pmcheia n 
Pleasiirea ofBin .. .- -- ' 



::3! 



a Father'! 

for help to pray 

Meetings.. ■■ 

Preachers need 



J/euphyiio l"e Theolajpr) 
union, John, 00 Oliwt Craamt 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



273 



Preacher a nursing father . . 
■ Bad, not to be heard 



Page 
. X52 

• "S 

■ brilhant but iLseless . . ax6 

Christ the theme of the 31, 32 

Communion with God 

helps 173 

' ' like Italian water-dealer 147 

must aim at the heart . . 100 

needs Holy Spirit . . . . xoo 

— — needs tenderness . . . . isx 

— not to trifle .. .. ..119 

Self-dissati«faction of . . 151 

— — should be the best of men xs2 

• Simplicity of the . . 92, 93 

■ to avoid a lofty style . . 174 

• to join exhortation with 

doctrine 175 

— — — ^ Women should not be ... 260 
Preaching must be simple . . 92, 93 

Constant 93 

— — — Holy Spirit needed for., xoo 

Power of, with conscience 254 

^— Value of 191 

Predestination 65 

^ride x8o, x8x 

4P^riests, withhold the Bible . . . . x8 
— — — Superstitious reverence of i8x 

Procrastination 182 — X84 

"To-day" .. ..244 

and Carnal Security 23 

Profession, Graceless .. .. 1x5, X84 
Progress of evil .. ..221,223,228 

Promises x86 

Prophecy 187 

Providence, (Day-by-Day) 53, 188, X89 

Proxy, Sinning by 222 

Prudence (Wi^om) 258 

Questions, Foolish 192, 236 

Rainbow seen as a circle . . . . 36 

Readiness of service ax 8 

Reading the Bible 15 

■ ^_ with delight .. xj 

Rebukes to be wise X98 

Red tape 42 

Regeneration, Need of. . X04, X57, 194, 

242, 245 

Religion X95 

Repentance .. .. X97 

•— — sorrow for sin 232 

Resignation 198, X99, 238 

Resolution.. 249 

Responsibility . . ^ 199 

Rest only in Christ 30 

Resurrection ^ .. .. 200 

Revivals, develop hypocrites .. xx6 
Absence and presence of 200 



Page 

Reward of serving God 220 

Riches, undesirable 91 

^— — Danger of 256 

■ Evils of .. .. x88, 201, 20a 
" Gathering, nothing but 

play 153 

■ No tune for eetting^ . . 154 
River. Covetousness luce silting up ' 

of a 5x 

Ruskin, John, 25, 141, 153, x86, 2x8, 

228, 248, 264 
Rutherford, S xao 

Saints 205 — 207 

■ Communion of . . . . 41, 42 

(See Believer) 
Salvation 207, 208 

■ by Christ alone . . 28 

Joy at finding 125 

Satan overcome by prayer^ .. .. 170 
Schoolmen, Foolish questions of . 19a 
Seasonableness of grace 95, X59, 258 

Self .. .. 215 

Self-dissatisfaction, the minister's xsx 

aqpur .. .. 2x3 

Self-righteousness 2x3, 2x4 

— illustrated .. X46 

Sermons 2x5 — 2x7 

Christ should be thdr 

theme 3a 

(See Preacher, Preaching) . . 9 

Sin 220—229 

«— — age no cure for 9 

——blotted out i6a 

^— Convicticm of 46 

Fear of .. .. 8s 

Habits of, destructive . . 98 

seen to be sinful 40 

— • to be searched out . . . . 197 
Sincerity needful in repentance . . X97 
Sinner, Coming to Christ as a . . 38 
•^— the gospel his warrant to 

come to Christ xa4. 

-^— — needs life X31 

Fallen natiu« of . . X38, X40 

■ Insensibility of . . . . X40 

Acuities perverted . . . . 140 

(See Man) 141 

Sinners welcomed to Christ . . 33 

■ ■ Company of, to be avoided 229 

-^— hate light X30 

Slavery of sin . . .^ 227 

Snow, Life written in the . . . . 134 
Solitude, Corruptions seen even in 49 

Soul 233—235 

and Body x9 

— — Lethargy of -vas^ 



274 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 



Page 
Soul, honpngi of, painfiil . . . . 137 

Soul-winnmg 334, 235 

Speech, Aim of Christian . . . . 68 

Spirit, Holy, earnest of 68 

'—— Need of, in fMreaching 

(See Hearers) .. .. 100, 151 
— — — — Love of God shed abroad 

by 138 

guides into all truth . . 348 

Spiritual oisegise, its root in heart 104 

Spiritual life (see Life) X34 

Study, Prayer helpful to . . . • 170 

Substitution illustrated 38 

Sudden conversions 46 

Sympathy 338, 939 

— of Christ with his people 31 

System versus Scripture . . axx, 343 
Systematic divines 64 

Temptation 341, 343 

^— overcome by faith . . 79 

- develops character . . 350 
Tenderness, Preacher's need of 69, 151 

Texts, Memorable 343 

Theology, Jesus the marrow of . . 39 
Time, Books tried by posterity and 90 

— — Economy of 60 

— — Things of, fleeting . . '. . 69 

Tithes 344 

Tongue 345 

Trial of Faith 79 

Trials attendant upon honour . . 3 
^— awakening gratitude . . 4 

Benefit of . . 333 

^— Christ with us in . . • • 34 
— — Different effects of . . • • 5 

endear the promises . . • • 4 

- Fiery, consume lusts. • . . 138 

Grace triumphs over . . . . 96 

— — incite to zeal 6 

increased with our strength 6 

leading to converaon . . 333 

make us long for heaven • . 7 

-^ needful . . 947 

Noble piety nourished amid 7 

- of young believers . . . . 946 

— — promote joy 8 

' rebuke presumption .. •• x8o 
■ ' reveal Christians . . . . 8 
— — rightly viewed 8 

the church's glory . . . . 36 

«— tokens of divine regard . . 9 
— — win the heart for &)d . . 9 

(See Affliction, Chastisement) 



Page 

Trinity, Mystery of the . . , . 247 
Trophies of Chnst's pow«r . • . . 33 
Truth, Pure, is living seed . • . . 64 
-^-^ in the heart 248 

Unbeliefin contrast with assurance iz 
' Wickedness of . • . . 349 

Uncertainty of life 135 

Unity, Zeal promotes 267 

Unity of puipose 19X 

Usefulness 959, 353 

Variety of experience 74 

" Fia, veritan^ vita ** 130 

Violet, Providence illustrated^ the 189 
Virtue, Faith the summary of^ . . 80 

Warrant, the sinner^s, for faith . . 194 

Warmth, Spiritual . . 337 

Watchfiilness over self 3x3 

Wealth .... . . SOX, 303 

Week-night services z 

WesleysTj. and S zzi, tz8 

Whats, Three 344 

Whittington, Story of .. .. .. 30 

Wicked (See Sinners) m 

Winning souls, Wisdom in . . 353, 3^ 

y— Zeal needed in . • 367 

Wisdom in rebuking Z98 

Words, Knowledge not mere . . Z39 
Works, Faith and 80 

explain religion .. •• X3X 

— - and salvation 361 

World .. ..36x — 365 

blessed by the saints . • . . 306 

— — evil influence of . . . . Z63 

Friendship of, vanity • . . 85 

— — its power over Christians.. 355 

Worldliness 364 

Worship, Public, absence from . . x 
Invitations to at- 
tend .. .. .. X3 

-^— — — — Children should 
attend 13 

■ Neglect of, a sad 

loss 141 

Wrecks, Many lives are • • . . Z37 

Yew-tree, figure of our corruptions 50 
Young, Mr., and dying firiend . . 57 
Young Christians, Triab of . . 346 
Youthful piety 366 

Zeal • ••966,367 



INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 



•> 



GENESIS. 
Chap. & Verse Page 

... 334 

... X43 
... 159 
... X3 
... 306 
... 365 
63 

«73 



Hi. X3 

V. 34 

xvi. x3 
xviii. X9 ... 
xviii. 36 — 33 
XXV. 33 
xlii. ^o 
xlviii. x6 ... 



• • • • 



EXODUS. 



IV. tx ... 
xi. 7 ... 
XX. 5 ... 
XX. 9 ... 
XX. 10... 
xxxiv. 30 
xxxiv. 39 



1" 



NUMBERS 



XIV. 34 
xvi. 36 
xxi. 17 
XXV. x8 
xxxii. 33 ... 

DEUTERONOMY. 



.. 189 

.. 5 

.. 337 
.. 86 
.. 333 

.. 87 
.. 4X 



3x9 
339 

X49 
ass 
>X5 



Vlll. X3,J(4 .. 

xvi. x6 

xxxii. 13 .. 

xxxii. 38 .. 

xxxii. 35 .. 

xxxiii. 9 ., 

xxxiii. 35 .. 



..133, 356 

: 'I 

. 365 
. X83 
. 343 
..6»S». 95 



JOSHUA. 



XIV. X3 

xxiv. 15 



JUDGES. 



XV. x8, 19 ... 

JK in» • • • • • • 



XXO 

58 



SO 
ass 



I. SAMUEL. 
Chap. & Verse Page 
ii. 30 3x0 

111. Xo ... ... ... **• ^9^ 

vii. X3 
xvi. 7 



■ •• • •• 



• • • ••• 



. 33 
... xsSi ao6 



II. SAMUEL. 

X. X3 338 

XV. 36 338 

xxiii. S 55» S7 

I. KINGS. 



111. 7 

X* 7 ••• 

xvii. xo— x6 
xxi. so 
xxii. 14 



• •• ••• ••• ••• **0 

• •• ••■ ••• ••• • */ 

... 30I 

... 328 

... XX9 



■ a • • •• 



II. KINGS. 



vii. 3 ... 
vii. 8, 9 
xviii. 3X 



••• ■•• 



... X94 
... 93 

... 833 



II. CHRONICLES. 



XXXUj 3S ... 
xxxiii. X3 ... 



••• • • ■ 



X33 

. 233 



NEHEMIAH. 



u. so ... 



JOB. 



laX •■• ••• ••■ 

i«3I ••• •■• ••• 
11* 10 ••• ••■ ••« 
IV* \f ••• ••• ••• 

V. 17 
V. X9 
V. 23 ... 
viii. 14 
xi. 7—9 
XV. xz... 



• « • ••• 



• • • •• • 



■ • • • • • 



• • ■ ••• 
••• ••• 



... XXO 



... 307 
X, X98 
.. X99 

.. x8x 
.. 347 
.. so 
.. X89 
.. 8x 
.. 347 
.. Z4Z 



JOB. {Continued.) 
Chap. & Verse Page 



XV. 31... 
xix. 35 

XX. XX .. 

XX. 14, 33 
xxxiv. 33 
xxxvi. 36 
xxxvii. X9 



"4 

300 

... 330, 33X 
337 

... 6s. X97 

• •• ••• "47 

• •• ••• i/V 



PSALMS. 
Number & Verse 



• •• 

• •• 



• 

1*3 *** *** 
vi. x^^ 
X. 4 .. 
X. s .. 
X. X7 .. 

X V ■ ■ * • • ■ • 

xvi. 6 

xvii. 15 
xix. xo 
xix. X3 
xxi. xo 
xxiii. 6 

XXX. 3... ... 

XXX. 0... « ... 
XXX. 7, 8 ... 
xxxi. 3 
xxxi. 7 
xxxij xs 
xxxii. 3 
xxxii. 4 
xxxiv. x ... 
xxxiv. xo ... 
xxxvi. 7 ... 
xxxviii. X — 8 
xxxix. X3 ... 

xlii. 5 

xlv. 5 

xlvi. 3 

xlix. 7**. *** 
11. 3 ... ... 

11. 7 

11. X7 ... ... 

liiL 5 

Iv. 4—8 ... 



Page 

XS» all 

95 

313 

180 

365 

XIX 

80 

3XZ 

83 

337 

63, X43 
X70 

88, sa 

..^89 

*. 307 

3x3 

97 
853 
X4S 
313 

55 

63 

xoo 

80 

«95 

103 
34a 



376 



INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 



PSALMS. (CohA 
Number A Vene Page 

mW% O ••• ■•• ••• 



ML 8 ... 
Iriil 4, 5 
Ixii. lo 
Ixiv. 4 •• 
IxviL 6 
IxviiL i^ 
Ixix. 3 .. 
Ixix. 15 
IzxL 5... 
IxxiiL 5 
Ixxiii. 17 
IzxHL 18, 
Ixxiii. 25 

IxxviL 4 

Ixxix. 9 

IxxxL XX 

Ixxxv. 8 

Ixxxviii. 6, 7 ... 

xc X4"* ••* **■ 

xci* 4*** *** *** 

xci* 3 *** *** *** 

xciv. 17 

xcviL I 

cii. z — zo 

ClU. X ••• ••• ••• 

cXv* 33 ••• *•• 
crii. o, X3, 19, a8 

cni. 30 

ex. 3 **^ *** *** 

cxii. o. .. ••• ... 

cxiii. 5 

cxvi. 15 ••• ••• 

cxvi. 16 

cxviiu 34 

cxviii. 39 

cxix. 9 

cxix. 41, 43 

cxix. 60 

cxix. 67 

CXIX. 97 * 

cxix. 113 

cxix. 137 

cxxii. 3 

cxxv. 5 

cxxvi. 3 

cxxvii. 3 

cxxx. X — 3 

cxxxi. X, 3 

cxxxiii. X 

cxxxix. 33, 34 ... 

CXI* 3*** "** *** 

cxljv. 4 

CXliv. X3 

cxlv. g 

cxlvL 4 



.. aa9 
.. xzo 
.. »43 

•• "as 
.. 943 

.. a66 

.. 185 

.. X36 

19... 9x, X83, 931 

135 

343 

307 

aS7 

83 
343 

9 



»37 
304 

X4D 



.. 5a 
.. 53 

.. 83 
.. ax3 

.. 35 
.. 35 
.. 333 
.. X08 
.. 357 
.. X06 
.. 89 
.. 906 
.. X38 

.. 9Q4 
.. 89 
.. 34X 
.. 76 
3 
.. 946 

.. X7 
.. 44 

.. 9ZZ 

.. 41 

ZO 

.. 33 
.. 948 
.. 9x3 

.. XXX 

.. 35X 

.. X97 

.. 339 

.. X35 

8§ 
.. 135 



PSALMS. (Con.) 
Number A Verse Page 

cxlix. 4 306 

cxlix. 5 X36 

PROVERBS. 
Chap, ft Vene Page 

I* Xg ••• ••• ••• ••• •*V 

1« ^3 ••• ••• •»• ••• 303 

UL 9 • ZQ9 

iii. X, 4 366 

•▼• Z4*»* ••• •** *** 3^9 

IV. 2 J ••• ••• ••• ••• •13 

vL fr— XX ... X90 

vii« y ••• ••• ••• ••• 00 

viL aa 96x 

ix« Xy«»9 ••• ••• ••• aso 

x» 5 ••• ••• ••• ••• xaa 

Xl« 1« ••• ••• ••• ••• X3v 

XI* 3 ••• ••• ••• ••• •^^ 

xi* 35 ••• ••• ••• ••• ^J^ 

XI* 3^ *** *** *** *** ^53 

xiii. 4 X69 

xiv. xa 9Z4, 997 

xiv. x5 X95» 909 

xiv. Z7 94Z 

xir. 30 930 

XV. 3Z 80 

XVL Z ... ... ... ••• Z70 

xvi. z8 3Z4 

xvM. 3 z88 

xvii. x4 ... 7Z, 134, X03 

xviit 3^ 85 

XIX. 3 ... ... 909 

xix. XI 94X 

xix. 37 9x5 

xxi. o... ... ..» ... 903 

xxii. 6 Z3 

xxiiL 7 < ••• Z55 

xxiii. 36 4^ 

xxiv. 3Z 35 

xxv. Z3 ... X98 

xxvL 4 909 

xxTiL 90 xo 

xxviii. 5 964, 265 

XXX. 8, 9 903 

ECCLESIASTES. 

11. 9 ... ... ••« ••• 9l»^ 

IV. zz ... ... ... ••• 337 

V. 9 ... ... ... ••• 93 

V. X3 ••• •?• ••• ••• ^^^ 

vii. 9 — 4 947 

viL 99... ••• ••• ••• '3^ 

IX. zo • Z07 

X. Zo ... ..• .•• •.. Z30 

XI. o ... ..• ••• ••• 9x9 

XI. 7 ••• ••• ••• *'• '47 

Tn\. 11 ... X78 



CANTICLES. 
Number ft Verse Page 

••3 ••• ••• ••• ••• 3^ 

II* 7 ••• ••• ••• ••• a J J 

1 ▼ • xa«*« ••• ••• ■•• 43 

>vL a •• ••• ax8 

ISAIAH. 

Chape ft Verse Page 
i. x6| X7 333 

L. Zo ... >•• ... ... 90o 

lii. xo ... 00 

Vl« O ... ... ..I ... 3Zo 

viiL ao 3Z5 

XXVL 9 xaS 

xxvu. 5 • 7^ 

xxvui. Z3 96 

xxix. X3 aao 

xxix. X3 — 15 197 

xxix. Z9 xzx 

xxxu. 5 »5X 

xxxii. 90 z64t az9 

xxxiii. Z5 ... 80 

xxxiii. x6 38 

xxxvi.^ 6 333 

xxxviiL 9 — ao 55 

xi. .0 ... ... ... ... Z33 

XI. zx... ••• ... ... ^o^ 

xlii. 3*** *** *** *** 7^ 

xliii. a 4i 34 

xuiL 8 '4'^ 

xliv. 4 a6o 

xlii^. ao 333,364 

xliv. aa z63, Z44 

I. zz ... ..• ... ... 3x4 

II. Z ••( *.. ... ••• 30o 

liv. zo 89 

iiv. z7-«> • ••• '3*^ 

Iv, z ... ... ... ... x4** 

Iv. a 361 



IV. 3 ••. ••• ••• •*• 55 

Iv, O ... ... ... ••• X30 

Iv. zo, zz 360 

Iv. 13 45i 345 

I VI. ••• ••• ••• ••• 00 

Iviii. xo 66 

lix. X7 366 

iX« O ••• ••• ••■ ■•• T / ^ 

IxiiL 9 31, 33 

Ixv. 3o 9 

Ixvi. 13 z6o 

JEREMIAH. 



viL 4 ... 


• •• 


••• ••• x6^ 


ix. 3 ... 


• ■ ■ 


aax 


xiu a ... 


••• 


... XZ69 197 


xiii. 33 


• •• 


••; 49t 99 



INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 



277 



JEREMIAH. 

Chap. A Verse 

zv. z6 

xvii. 5 

xvii. 9 

zviL lo 
xvii. 13 
xvii. 16 
xxiii. 4 
xxiii. 39 
xlviij. 10 ... 
xlviii. XX ... 

M% X^ • •• • •• 



(Con.) 
Page 

.. 243 
.. 8x 
.. zx8 

.. 390 

.. 134 
.. 267 

.. 173 
.. 237 
.. aS4 

.. Z85 
.. 253 



LAMENTATIONS. 



i. xa, X3 

ui. I — 18 

• •• 

111* 22 ••• •■• •• 

1 ▼ • 2 ••• •■• «• 

w • 7 ••• ••• 



EZEKIEL. 

iii. x8, X9 

zvi. 49 

xviii. 36 

zxi. xo 

xxxiii. 8, 9... .. 
xxxiii. 3x 
xxxiii. 3X, 32 
xxxiiL 3a 

DANIEL. 



• • •• 



• • • •• 



• • ■ • • • 



1. X7 .. 

lU» ZOa«« ••• ••• 

HOSEA. 

\\% D ••■ ••• ■■• 

•V* O *•• ••• ••• 

▼ I* A ••• •■• ••• 

VU« X^««« ••• ••• 

X« A ••• ••• •■• 



. 24a 
. a4a 

• 97 
. ao6 

,. aa7 



.. 199 

.. 341 
xo 

.. X03 

.. X99 

.. 35Z 

.. xx6 

.. xoo 



... 348 
... 67 



..• 233 

... 309 

• •• 235 

... 300 

... XX7 

... 3X5 



JOEL. 
iiL x6 

OBADIAH. 

XX ••• ••• ••• 

MICAH. 

111* O ••• ••• ••• 

▼!• o ••• ••• ••• 

VU« ^ «•■ ••■ ••• 

NAHUM. 

I«W ••• ••• ••• 



HABAKKUK. 
Chap. & Verse Page 

. ... ... 93 

x8o 

. ... 80, 3X3 

■ • •• • •• 22y 



... 300 

... X30 



Uc 2 »•• • ■• 

• • 

ii« 3 *** *** 

11« A • •m « •• 

• • 

11* 13 ••* **■ 

• •• *^ 

Ills 2 • • • ••• 

IIL O 

••• 

UI* Xy ••• •■• ••• ••• 9 

ZEPHANIAH. 

!• Xo ••• ••• ••• ••• 302 I 

lU« X3a«« ••• ••• ••■ XXX • 

ZECHARIAH. 



•«• ••• ••• 



MATTHEW. (Con.) 

Chap. & Verse Page 
... 35 

... 9x 
... 7« 

... X18 
... 350 

85, 30Z 

66, 305 
X9 



» • • • • 



!••• ••• •■• 



■ • • ••• 



• • ••• 



|v. 6 ... 
iv. xo ... 
xii. xa 



• • •■• 



... Z5X 
... X36 

... X95 



>«• ••• 



•■• ••! 



>• ••• 



MALACHI. 

11« g ••• ••• ••• ••• X ^3 

iii. a, 3 38 j 

iiL x5 303 ' 

UL x6 ... ... 41 I 

iu. 17 305 ' 

MATTHEW. 



X09 



... 60 



... 367 
... 80 
... 85 



" 254 



• • • • • 



••• ••• 



UL ZZ 

iu. xa 

▼ « O • • • • • • 

▼ • X3 *** *** 

▼• z6 

V. 399 y> ... 

Tl. 4 * ** *** 

VI. X3 ... ••* 

VI. 33 ... *.. 

vi. 33 
vi. 34 ... 
vi. 35 

vi« 3^ * * * *** 

vll. X ... . • • 

vii. 3 — 5 ... 

VIL 9 • 

viL X5 

vii. x6 — 30... 

vii. 36 

viii. 35 

iXm y ••« .•• 
X. 3D ••• ■•• 

Xs 3^ * * * * * * 

Xs 3^ * * * * * * 
X* 39 *** *** 
XI* 5 *** *** 

Xl» Z3 «•• .«. 
Xl» X^ ••. ... 
xL 30 ••• ••• 



366 

3^ 

3XO 

306 

• •» ••. X23 

• ■• •■• 32^ 

3x9 

• •• ••• ^^ 

• • • • • • A 5" 

... axok 364 
... 44, X3X 

X9 

... 52, 53 

• • • • • . / ^ 

• • • • • • 2^ 

... 87, 843 
... ... ^*3 

... .•• 34 

83 

79 

3x8 

• ■• ••• **5 
338 

• a. ... 5** 

... .:. 363 

167 

... Z7X, 173 

• *. ••• X3 

••• ••• 33 



XL 39 

xi. 30... 
xiL 30... 
xii. 33 

XllL X5 

xiii. X9 

xiii. 33 

XI v. 3^ ... *.* 

xvi. 36 

XVII* 0.«a ••• a*. 

xviii. 14 ... . 
xix. 34 

XXL z6 
XXL 3Z 

xxiii; 5 

xxiij. 8, xo 

xxiii. 37 

xxiv. 38 

xxiv. 38, 39 
xxiv. 44 
XXV. xo 
xxvi. ax 

XXVL 39 

xxvi. 4z 

xxviii. 8 

MARK. 

vL XT — a8 

viiL 34 

viu. 30 

IX. 3^ ... ... .'* 

«. 43—47 

X. 3X ... 

X. 33 
X. 34 

xu. 42... • 

xiiL 37 

XIV. o ... ... ... 

XIV. 3'' ... ... 

xiv. 54 

LUKE. 



SI: 



••• *•• 

••• ••• 

*•• ••• 

• ••• 



• •• . • • 



■•• •• . 



••• ... 



• • • • . 



30 

X73 
ao5 

356 

366 

314 

:;i 

185, 36x 

23 

X03 

57 
X06 

xo 
238 
33Z 

7a 



... 5a 

... 8 
... 364 
... x8 
... 335 

8,154 
... X67 
aoz, 356 
... 87 
... 47 
... 359 
... 331 
... 355 



iL 39 ... 
lu. x6 ... 
vL 34 ... 
vi. 38 ... 
viu. x8 
ix. 33 ... 
ix. 38 ... 
xi. 3 ... 
XL XX ... 
xii. 30... 
xiL 40... 
XV. a „« 



... 95. m 

aox 

soz 

zoz 

8 

173 

52 

343 

5o» «35 
... 57 



278 



INDEX OF SCRIITURE TEXTS. 



LUKE. (Cbn.) 
Chap. & Verie Page 

,« ••• ••• •»* 

• • • • • • • ^^ 

, 359 

)• ••• ••• * • 

t« ••• ••• •V/ 

,. ... 41, 337 



XV. 15 .. 
xv. at... 
xvL8 ... 
xvi. 15 
xix. 41 
xxiv. 49 



JOHN. 



i. x6 ... 

L 36 ... 

L 41 ... 

L 47 ... 

U. 5 ... 

ii. 16 ... 

I". 3. 7 

UL 16 ... 

iiu 30 ... 

iii- 33 ••• 
iv. 39 ... 
iv. 47 ... 
V. 39 ... 
V. 40 ... 
T. 44 ... 
vi. 29 ... 
vi. 37 ... 
vi. 44 ... 
vi. 63 ... 
vii. 24 .. 
vii. 38... 
viii. 3a 
3C. 8 ... 
xi. 34 ... 
xii. 3a... 
xil 43... 
xiii. 14 
xiv. I ... 
xiv. 6 ... 
xiv. 17 
xiv. 19 
XV. 3 ... 
XV. 37... 
xvi. 13 
xvi. IS 
xvii. 33 
XX. 34... 
xxj- 15 
xxL x6 



• • ■ • •• 

• • • • • • 

••• ••• 

••• ••• 

••• ••• 

••• ••• 

••• ••• 

« • • • • • 

••• • •• 

••• ••• 

••• ••• 

••• • •• 

••• ••• 

• ■• ■ • • 

• « • • • • 

■ • • •■ • 

■ • • • • • 
• • • • •• 

• • • • • • 

• • • • •• 

• ■• • • • 

• ■• ••• 

• ■ • • • • 
••• ■ • ■ 

• • • • • • 
••« • •• 

• •• • • • 

••• ■ • ■ 

« • • • • • 

• •• • •• 

•• • • •• 

•• • • •• 

• •• • • ■ 



u. 37 ... 

lu. 19... 

iv. ja ... 

iv. xj ... 

iv,»3 ... 



• • • • « • 
• •• • •• 

• •• ■ • • 

ACTS. 

••• • • • 

•■• ••• 

• •• • •• 
••• #•• 
••• ••• 



... 353 

... 93 

... 9a 

... 307 

— 150 

38, 116 

XO4, 194 

... 331 

... 136 

... 70 

... 93 

... 173 

... 3ZX 

104. 357 

... x8o 

... 80 

... Z34 

... 357 

i5i» 243 

... XI 

... 149 

... 3X1 

... 315 

... 300 

... 3X7 

... 84 

... 198 

... 30 

... X30 

... 364 

... 205 

... 346 

... 73 

... 348 

... 77 

... 205 

... X 

... 153 

... 173 



ACTS. (Cb».) 
Chap. * Verse Page 

•• ••• ••• *5* 

•• ••• ••• * •'^ 

300 

• • ••• ••• *5 

•• *•• ••• 3 

• • ••• ••• *33 

• • ••■ ••• ow 



iv. 33 * *** *** 

V. x-^xo 

VI. xo ... 

viiL 30 

IX. 4 

IX. 9 ". * "* 

xvu 3® 

xvi. 3' ' 

xvii. 81 35, 

XVUl. o 

XX. 27* 3* 

XX. 39 

XX. 31 '5^1 

XXL 14 '* 

xxiv. 25 

xxviii. 27 

ROMANS. 



X57 
a66 

64 
267 

i 

«3 



14. X5 ••• 

XO ••• ••• 



... 100 
... 162 
... 30 

... 173 

... aio 



I. X 

[ i. 

! L 17 •<• ••. 

I a* 3X ••• ••« 

, 1« 30 ■•• • ■ • 

II. 3o 

' m. 13 

j ill* 30 • • • • • • 

! iiL ao, 38 ... 

iv. 6 ... ... 

iv. 3o ••• ... 

V. a ... ... 

V. 3 ... . • • 

V. 7 • • . ... 

V. 20 

VL Z •«« ••• 

VX. 2 ... ... 

Vi. Z2 ... ... 

VI. 17 ... ... 

VII. 5 

vii. 7, 8 

vii. 9, xo ... 

vii. 21 

vii. 23 

vii. 24 

viii. 5 

viiL 14 

viii. x8 ... 

viii. 26 

viii. 28 M. 

viii. 29 

IX. 20 ... ••• 

X. 3 ... *** 
X. 8, 9 *** 
X. 10 ... ... 

X. 12 ... ... 

x\. 3» 4 

\ 30. 90 ... ••< 



... ... 334 

23 

... ... 3X3 

364 

320 

... ... 84 

350 

... ... 213 

... ... 75 

... ... /3 

... ... *yT 

... a, 105 

o» 8 

38 

... 48. *68 

«•• ••• X43 

• • « • • • mm^ 

326 

... ... 245 

M. — 226 

... ... 22X 

... ••• 73 

X02 

... 49. 338 
47» ai3i 934 

■ • • • • • * 4^ 

• • • • • • 7^ 

... M. 107 

17** 

189 

XO6 

M. ... x8x 
... ••• 3x4 
308 

... M. 100 

x68 

• •• • • • O^ 

... Of^X, %!^1 



ROMANS. (Om.) 
Chap. & Verse Page 

... M. 90 

• ••« « • • 3^3 

••• ••• 4^ 

• • • • • • • ^5 



M. 33»34 
xii. 3 ... 
xii. 5 ... 

XXL O ... 

xii. 13 
xiL x6 ... 
xii. 18... 
xiii. XX 
xiiL 14 
xiv. 
xiv. 

xiv. 32 

XV. a . 
XV. 13. 
xvL 17 



I' 

o ... 



... 17a 
... Z9 
... xa4 
... x86 
48, 225 

• •• 35 
... 338 
... zao 
... 68 
... 40 

M. 63 



I. CORINTHIANS. 

X7 ••• ••• ••• 

ZO ••• ••■ •*• 



1. X 

I. 

t 23 .. 

I 3X . 

lU L 

it 2 

ii. 4 .. 

ii. 10 .. 

ii. IX .. 

iL 14 . 

ii. X5 .. 

ii. 16 .■ 

iii. X, 2 



93 

Z9Z 

3a, 92, az7 

• • * « . • 7^ 
... Z78, 3Z6 

s8 



4? 



•IS 



i 



ui. 4 
111. 12- 

iil 13 
iii 2X . 
iv. 9 

V..9 
vii. 29 

vu, 31 

ix. 22 

ix. 25 ... 

ix. 27 ... 

X. 10 ... 

xi. 32 ... 

xii. XX... 

xii. 13... 

xiii. 9 ... 

xiv. 20 

XV. 31... 

XV. 32 ... 

XV. 33... 

XV. 36... 

XV. 37... 

XV. 42 — 58 

XV. 44... 

XV. 58... 

xvi. 13 



• •• ••• ••* ^^Lg 

... 93, 240, a6s 

• • • ••• • • • X33 

••• •■• ••• 7 

>•• ••• ••• VF"# 

• •• *•• ••• X ^^s 

• •• ••• ••• 2^^ 

■ •• ••• ••• 5^ 

!•« ••• ••• 77 

• •• •«• ••• ^7 

• •• ••• ••• 22u 

• •• ••• ••• ji 03 

69, a69 

...234, 236,353 

ro5 

59, aaS 

• • • • • • ^9 OX 

■•• ••• •«• ^ 

• •• •■• ••• X O^B 

• •• «•• ••• 307 

• •■ ••• ••■ 02 

• •■ ••• ••« 2^J^2 

• «• ••■ ••• 57 

• •• ••■ ••• 137 

• •• ••• ••• 22^J 

33a 

... ..'. 105 

aoo 

... ... 5^ 

... ... o^# 

... •». 43 



INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 



279 



II. CORINTHIANS. 



• • • • • • 



• • • • • • 



• ■ • • • • 



• • • • • • 



• • • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• • • • • • 



Chap. & Verse 

I. 22 

• • 

II. 17 • 

••• 

III. 2 

iii. 2,3 
ui. 6 . 
m. 12 . 
iii. 17 . 
vr. I 
iv. 2 

jv. 5 
iv. z8 

V. 4 
V. n 
V. 12 

V. 14 

V. 17 
vi. 2 
vi. 17 ... 
vii. 4 ... 
viii. zi 
ix. 6 ... 

xi. 23—30 
xi. 30 
xii. 5 ... 
xii. 5» >o 
xii. 7 ... 
xii. 9 ... 
xiL 9f 10 
xiii. 5 ... 
xiii. zz 



• • • 

• • • 



• • • 
« • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 



• • • • •« 



• • • • • • 



•.J57> 

• • • • • ■ 

• • • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• ■• • • • 

• • • • • • 



> • • • • • 



• ■ • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• • • • • • 
« • • • • • 

• • • • • • 

• • • • ■ • 



Page 

46,.2Z3 
... 68 
... 64 
... X3Z 

• •• 34 
x8, 243 

92» »74 

... 2ZZ 

... X99 
... Z79 

... 2Z5 

... 69 

54.«37 
... Z7S 

Z12, 220 
... Z5S 

Z94, 242 

X82, 244 
... Z63 
... Z98 
... ?sz 
... 20Z 

... 2Z9 

6 
... 6 

... Z22 
... 247 

... 95 
... 96 

. a«3 
. 4« 



GALATIANS. 

1. 7 • • ^^ 

I. 8 s 

L z6 X58, 2x8 

ll« o ..« ••• ... •" 25* 

li. zo 2Z3 

II. 20 ... 9 

III. X ... «« 9^ 

!▼. Xo ... ... ... ••• *23 

!▼. 3X ... ." 213 

V. 7 46, »64 

▼• X^ ••• ••• ••• ••• *5 

▼!• ^ ••• ••• ••• ••• *3r5 

vL 8 220 

vi. 9 26, 48, X64 

▼1. xo 2x9 

vL x2 320 

▼I. X4 ••• ••• *** *** 3 

▼!• XS ••• ••• ••• ••• X57 

VL X7 • ••• 3x9 



EPHESIANS. 
Chap. & Verse Page 



>. 3i 4 ••• 
1. 6 ••• 
i. 7 

u. X ... 
ii. 7, 8... 
ii. 8 
ii. x8 
lu. 8 ... 
iiL Z2 ... 
iv. 2 ... 
iv. Z4 ... 
iv. 25 ... 
iv. 30 ... 
iv. 32 ... 
V. xz ... 
V. Z5 ... 
V. x6 ... 
V. 30 ... 
vi.8 
vi. xo ... 
vi. X2 ... 



• •• ■ • • 



• ■• • • • 



• •• ••• 



■ ff • ••• ••• 



••• • •• 



••• ••• 



••• ••• 



••• ••• 



••• ••• ••• ••• 



• •• • • • 



64 

94 

30 
X3X 

94 
75 

2 

2x7 

2 
X92 

97 

42 

25s 

337 
60 

... 3X2, 24X 
23, 60, 2X2 
... 42. 250 
220 

... 43 
43» 353 



PHILIPPIANS. 



u do ••• ••• 

!• 2X ••• ••• 

• 

L 23 ••• ••• 

!!• 3> 4 ••• ••• 

• • 

11« Z2 ••« ••• 
11* 22 ••• • • • 

iii. 3 

iii. X2, X3 ... 
111. X3 

• •• 

m. X4 

• •• 

ui. X9 

1 ▼ • O • • • • • • 

• 

1t« *3 * * * * * * 
iv. X9 



••• ••• 



• • • • • 



• • • « •• 



» • • • • • 



• •• • •• 



• • • • • ■ 



• •■ • • • 



ff •• ■ • • 



• ■• • • • 



• • • • • • 



3x9 
56, X9X 

X05 
... 87 
63, 26X 

2x5 

84 
... xxo 

... 264 
53 
349 

353 



COLOSSIANS. 



i. z8 

11.8 ... 

ii. Z4 ... 
ui. 3 

ui. 3 ... 

m. 5 ... 

UL ZZ ... 

iii. XS, Z3 
m. X3 ... 

III. 34 

!^| 

IV. 6 



• ■• ■ • • 



• • • •• • 



a • • • • • 



■ • • • •• 



• • • • • • 



• • • • • • 



• • • • •• 



• •• ••• 



t • • • • • 



.. zoo 
.. 93 
.. 30 
.. 363 

.. X33 
48,338 

.. 3x7 

.. 337 
.. X93 

... 3x7,320 
2x2 

44. 68, 3X3 



I. THESSALONIANS. 
Chap, ft Verse Page 



1*5 




X29 


il6 




190 


II 




... 69, X5X, 152 
266 


▼. 3 
V. 16 




... 23, X62, X83 
X26 


V. 17 




X72 


V. 22 




82 



▼ • 2^ ••• ••■ ••• ••• lyy 

II. THESSALONIANS. 



IL. X3 ... 

iii. xo, XX 



• • ■ • • • 



68 

• • • « • • • •^" 



I. TIMOTHY. 



u 6 

J-»3 
I. XS 
1. 19 
iL8 



II. XI, X2 

• •• 

UI. 3 

III. 6 
iv. 2 ... 
iv. 7 ... 
V. 6 

V. X3 ... 

vi. 5 ... 

vi. 6 ... 
vL 8, 9 

vi. xo ... 
vi. X2, 19 

vi. 17 ... 

vi. 20 ... 



• • • • • 



• • • • < 



• • * • • • 



• • • • • 
ff • • • • 

• • • • • 



• • • ■ • • 



• « • • • 

• • ■ • • 

• • • • • 

• • • • • 

• • • • • 

• • • • • 

• • • • • 

... 50, 

« • • • • 

• ■ • • • 

• • • • • 

• ■ • • • 



.. X87 
.. 63 
.. X63 

39» 38, 39 
... X37 
... X7X 
... 360 
... 2x7 

... XS3 

... 43 

X42, 168 

... 263 

X20, 24X 
... 229 

... 9X 
202, 262 

..( 9X 

... 77 
x88, 23X 

... 28 



II. TIMOTHY. 



u. 6 ... 
ii. 9, xo 
IL x6 .. 
il X9 ... 
ii. 23 ... 
ii. 24 ... 
111. 5 ... 
ui. 6 ... 
111. 7 ... 
111. Z3 ... 
iv. 6 ... 
iv. zo ... 



• • • 

• • ■ 

• • • 

• • • 

• •• 

• •• 

• « ■ 

• • • 

• • ■ 

• • ff 
■ • • 

• • • 



69 



73 

2Z9 

Z93 

Z20 
.. Z92, 236 
I, Z92, 237 
.. ZZ2, 220 
.. Z25 
.. 864 
.. 333 

.. 57 
.. 8Z7 



1. ZO 



TITUS. 



••• ••• ••• 



... 341 



280 



INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 



TITUS. (Om.) 

Chap. & Vcne Page 

3 
236 



u. 13 
m. 9 



1921 

HEBREWS. 



H-3 •• 
u, 14, 18 

H»- 7 
7—15 

12 ... 

13 •• 
18... 

7 •• 
9 ••• 



238 



130 



JAMES. (CbM.) 
Chap. & Vene Page 



s 



Ui. 

au. 

• • • 

Ul, 

• •• 

Ul, 

iv. 
iv. 



IT. 15 •• 

iv. z6 .. 
V. 2 
V. 14 

viii. 12 
ix. 26 .. 
X. 25 .. 
X. 31 .. 
X. 34 .. 

XL 26 .. 

xiL I .. 
xii. 3 .. 
xii. 4 .. 
xii. 6 .. 
xii. II.. 
xii. 16.. 
xiii. 5 .. 
xiii. X4- 
xiii. 17 



5 

6 



1. 12 
». IS 
i. 17 
I. 19 
1. 22 
i- 23, 
i. 25 



42 

222, 223, 244 

235 

••• a35» 244 

108 

•• 338, 2|9 

87 

... 238, 239 

59 

114 

• • • • • • 53 

30 

• • • • • • * 

• • • • • • s^^ 

95 

X05 

27 

• • • • • • ^^ 

• •• ••• «}/ 

9 

• • ■ • • • ^ 

, 265 

10, 44* 62 

. ... 7, 262 

199 



11. fo ... 

iL 16 ... 

iL 18 .., 

ii. 20 .., 

iti. 5 ... 

I' ••• ^ 

Ul. 5,6 
ir. 1—3 

J »▼• 5. 6 
! iv. 6 ... 
i iv. 7 ... 
' iv. tz ... 



72,225 
... 251 
... i!)i 



■£ 



... 71 
... 24s 
91,202 
... 102 

95.150 
46, 218 
... 230 



I. PETER. 



JAMES. 



24 



170 
169 

79 
227 

89 
241 

100 

X02 

zoz 



i. 2 ... . 


. a 




... 68 


i. 4 ... . 


• • 




»o7. 244 


i. 7 ... . 


• • 




... 79 


i. 8 ... . 


• • 




... 105 


I 18 ... . 


• • 




... 244 


i.23— 25 


• • 




... 260 


u. z ... . 


• • 




... 230 


ii. 2 ... . 


• • 




... 93 


ii. 3 ... , 


• • 




... 70 


ii. 9 ... . 


• • 




35,128 


ii. 12, IS . 


.. 




... 230 


ii. 24 ... 

• •• 


• « 




... 207 


111. I ... 


• • 




... X23 


iii. 8 ... . 


• • 




••• 237 


iv. 19 ... . 


m 
• ■ 




... 218 


V. 2 ... . 


■ • 




... 217 


v. 7 ... . 


« • 




... 30 


II. I 


'ETER. 


L 5 ... . 


• • 


• • • 


... 186 


u. 1—3 . 


• • 


... 


... 64 


U. 2 ... . 


• • 


• ■ • 


... X14 


ii. X4 ... . 


• • 


• • • 


... X17 


u. 18 ... . 


• • 




... 2x6 


ii. 22 ... . 


• • 


• • • 


... 46 


iii. 4 ... . 


, , 


• « • 


... X83 


iii. 16 ... . 


« • 


... 


... 65 



I. JOHN. 



J- 3 

L4 



42 
40 



I. JOHy. (CbwJ 



Chap, ft Verse 

h9 
u. X5 

iL 20 

iL 27 

Ul. 1 

••• 

Ul. 9 

V.4 

T. XO 

V. 14 
▼• Z9 



Page 

... 94 
• .. 103 
60, 256 

«79»24« 

... 195 

... X45 

... zos 

... 79 

... 249 

... 169 

... 2oa 



II. JOHN. 

w ••• ••• ■•• 

IO}4Z 



a4x 
aaq 



JUDE. 



3 

XO 

»3 



... 266 

... 2XO 

... ZX4 



REVELATION. 



L 6 
i. 7 

i. 10 ••• 
ii. 9 ••• 
ii. XO ... 
iL 19 ... 
ii. 83 ... 
iii. z ... 
iii. z6 ... 
iii. Z7 ... 
vi. x6 ... 
vii. 14 

X* X • • • 

xvii. 5 
xviL 14 
xix. z6 
zxL 8 ... 
xxiL 2 
xxiL 4 
xxii. zz 
xxiL Z7 



... 35 

... 127 

... 204 

... 220 

!•• 175 
... 2x9 

... 2ao 
«ia, 135 
... 266 
... 8x4 
... 254 
... ao8 

36 

• • • • • • 93 
... • • ax8 

• •• ••• 2X0 

249 

X07 

... ... 100 

• •• ••• 54 
... xa, 245 



••• ••• 





msm 



WORKS BY C. H. SPURGEON. 



PUBLISHED BY 



PASSMORE AND ALABASTER, 

18, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 



TREASURY OF DAVID: Containing an Original 

Exposition of the Book of Psalms ; a Collection of Illustrative Ex- 
tracts from the whole range of Literature ; a series of Homiletical 
Hints upon almost every verse ; and list of writers upon each Psalm. 
By 0. H. Spdrqeon. VoL I., Psalm I. to XXVI. Price 8s, 

" There is a surprising amount of learning of a certain kind in this volume. The 
author has a prohahly unsurpassed acquaintance with the Puritan literature of the 
seventeenth century, which has to so large an extent given character to his own 
mind, and he has drawn largelv upon it for illustrative extract, although the 
exposition is entirely his own."— Daily News. 

''The arrangement which Mr. Spurgeon has adopted, is as follows:— the text of 
the authorised version is accompanied by an exposition ; at the close of each Psalm 
explanatory notes and quaint saying are appended ^ these are succeeded by hints to 
the village preacher, and the discussion terminates with a list of separate publications 
on the Psalm under treatment. Like all that proceeds fix>m their author, the 
comments are both firesh and forcible ; rich in sound doctrine, and fhtgrant with 
saving truth. But one aim is manifestly before tiie writer — the lasting, everlasting 
be:iefit of the reader, and the glory of God thereby. And what object shortof this is 
worthy the x>en or the tongue of the Christian teacher T The wit, the unction, the 
imaginative play, the solemn earnestness of the Puritans he loves so well, all meet 
in our brother. Had he lived not in the days of steam-presses, but when ^owledge 
had to travel like the packhorses with small parcels, he would have been a maker of 

proverbs More than five hundred authors are summoned to assist 

in the great work he has in hand. Writers of all ages and from, all sections of the 
Christian Church are contributors to this brilliant museum of consecrated thought 
and burning words. The ' Hints to the Village Preacher ' are foil of valuable 
homiletical suggestions, which both in town and country will be helpful to humble, 
painstaking preachers of the Word. The list of writers on each Psalm gives com- 

Sleteness to the scheme. An additional chann in the volume is its cheapness ; nearlY 
ve hundred pages of large octavo, closely printed and ele^ntl^ \swsfflA. '-av ^«*Qa^ 
for eight shillmgs. Will not our deacons and t\ift -^r^YL-ott. TBKnJow» ^"i S?^'^^^^** 
gations give this ^odly volume to their pastoTO,mV\i «a SsjSosmsJoss^ ^«*»** ^'^ 
sucoeswrs shall follow in due time!" — Baptist Magaaine. 



WORKS PUBLISHED BT FASSMOKE * ALABASTEB, 



** Our ftutlior has in him richly the qoalifioations for a oommentator. These 
we take to be mainly imagination, oommon aenae, and homely wit. These qualities 
diflcover themaelves on every page of this Tolmne. ICr. Spurgeon has ransacked 
almost every available source of information, and yet he luis not overlaid his 
exposition with the resultfl of these investigations. He has rather woven them all 
together in a rich tapestry- work, and he has woven in his own name throughout as 
the name of the hero was worked into the shield of classic story. Every sentence 
boars the marks of the strong, terse, vigorous style of its author." — The Literary 
World. 

" Mr. Rpurgeon's original comments are marked by his own jMwer and practical- 
ness, and his book is one which will be widely useftil and of lasting value. May he 
be enabled to carry it out to a sucoessAil completion. While he makes no pretence 
to Hebrew scholarship, he has provided a repertory of the rich results of the scholar- 
Hhip, critical skill, and thought of others, and has set the whole in a manner which 
places both ministers and people iindcr much obligation." — Evangelical Magazine. 

" Mr. Spurpeon has commenced a work which deserves to live^ and we sincerely 
truiit he may be enabled to complete it, and that it may prove extensively use- 
fuL It should also be noticed that the price, 8s., is remarkably low for a volume 
of such large size. The publishers have done their work exceedingly well." — The 
Watchman. 

"This volume would have seemed a marvel even in Baxter's days^ when divines 
wrote more books than many students now read ; and when the chief business of 

ministers was to study and preach The plan of the volume is very 

simple and dear. We have first Mr. Spurgeon*8 own comments on each Psalm, 
verse by verse, fiill of radness and unction. Then follow extracts firom. various 
writers — nearly five hundred of them — largdy Puritanical, though by no means 
exclusively so. These extracts form a regular catena of comments ; and for Puritan 
writers the catena is very complete. After these comments come * Hints to the 
Village Preacher,' as Mr. Spurgeon calls them ; and lastly, appended to each Psalm 
ifl a list of works, exjwsitory and homilctical . . . Few things are more usefiil to original 
thinkers than the suggestion of instructive striking themes with appropriate texts. 
And these hints are unusually rich in this kind of suggestiveness. Thej are among 
the most welcome jwrtions of the volume .... The extracts will have neat 
value for all readers, espedally for those who have few books. It is impossible to 
look over a single page without finding something, and oftoi much, to suggest or 
to illustrate truth, and the very variety is stimulating: and healthfU. Mjr. Spurgeon' s 
own comments are worthy of their company, and give a degree of life and of present 
interest to the whole, which add very much to the value of the book. . . . If the 
present plan be carried through with equal thoroughness and skill, the result will be 
a work which, for evangelical sentiment, for devout experience, for variety of 
illustration, for practical usefulness, is imsurpassed.'* — Freeman. 

" The annotations are pithy, pertinent, and practical. Many x>a8.<iage8 have the 
ring of real eloquence. He who purchases this commentary is introduced to the 
best thoughts of the best minds on one of the most predous portions of the word of 
God." — General Baptist Magazine. 

'' It is the very book to help the devout mind to gain the spiritual light and impulse 

to be found in the Psalms In its evangelical tone, in its siriritual 

sentiment, in its faithful appeals to the heart and consdence, it is in every way 
worthy of its distinguished author, who must have expended considerable pains not 
only in the study of the Psalms themselves, but of the numerous writers who have 
treated of the whole or part of them." — The Nonconformist. 

" The vigorous style of the author appears to advantage in the original matter 
which is diffuse witheut being tedious ; though devoutly serious, lively withal * ftill 
ot crif icism, yet void of pedantry j charged with sound doctrine, but not in any 
degree one-sided of crotcnety in its interpretations ; furnishing the result of eloM 

18, P ATEKNOSTER "RQi^ , l.QraT>Q^ , ^a. 



tVORKS PUBLISHED BY PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 8 " 

study in such free racy language, that we may account the author's pen to be well 

nigh as fluent aa his ton^e The author has culled frx>m above 

four hundred and fifty different sources the wit and wisdom of ancestors and cotem- 
poraries — (we might almost say sacred and profane writers) — selecting them so 
variouslj and arranging them so tastefully, that we can hardly imagine more 
fasdnatmg pages than are to be found in these extracts. Commentaries, however 
scholarly, have been hitherto accounted far too dull and dry for reereat ve hours ; 
but they are metamorphosed by this popular evangelist into such sprightly disserta- 
tions, that they may presently circulate as light literature, not because they are 
frivolous, but because food for the mind is served up after a fashion that is as palatable 
as it is nutritious." — The Baptist Messenger. 

" The work, as a whole, is entitled to a distinguished place amongthe practical 
and devotional expositions of the Book of Psalms." — The Christian Witness, 

" Though it is true that '/Inis coronat opus^* yet we venture to aug^r that, when 
completed, * Spurokon on the Psalms ' will occupy, in exegetic literature, a place 
side by side with 'Leighton on Peter.' Higher praise cannot be awarded to the 
work of an uninspired man." — South Wales Press. 

MOBNINO BY MOBNINO ; or, Daily Beadings for the 

Family or the Closet. By C. H. Spuroeon. Price 8s. 6d. 35th Thousand. 

" Those who have learnt the value of morning devotion, will highly prize these 
help<9. All who love a full-orbed gospel, vigorous, varied thought, and a racy style, 
will appreciate this volume." Eev. J. AnguSy D.D.^ Regent's Park College. 

" Where the time for Bible reading is too limited to admit of close study, the 
Christian will find in some of these portions su^estions that will prove an 
invaluable help ; and even those who have both leisure and qualification for more 
searching investigation, will find openings here by which they may enter with greater 
facility into the green pastures and still waters where the Good Shepherd feeds his 
fiock."---Rcr. W. Landets. 

" "We have found the remarks of C. H. Spitrokon in the present volume characterised 
by his wonted earnestness and vivacity. In so large an aggregate of religious 
reflections, it is very probable that some sentiments maybe expressed in which readers 
could not altogether unite ; but, on the other hand, a very cursory perusal has 
disclosed to us many indeed worthy of all acceptation." — The Friend. 

" The merits of the book are unquestionable. Our blessed Lord is ever kept in 
view, and his great name is everywhere the first and the la.st with the author of tiiese 
meditations. We heartily recommend the volume." — Methodist Recorder . 

" We have careftiUy read this production, and we say advisedly that we know not 
where to look for another such store of rich experimental religion within the same 
compass. We wish it God-speed." — Freeman. 

"The matter is wide in its rans^e, with a dash of fteshness, the work being entirely 
original. There is nothing crud^ or doubtful in the sentiment or doctrine in either 
the readings or the hymns. They are the honest, heartfelt, outspoken heart- 
breathings of a devoted servant of God, desiring to help others on their journey 
heavenwards." — Wesley an Times. 

EVENING BT EVENING; or, Beadiners at Eventide for 

the Family or the Closet. By C. H. Spurokon. 3s. 6d. 20th Thousand. 

" Ever since I became acquainted with Mr. Spuro eon's * Morning by Morning,* 
I have reckoned it altogether priceless, not only myself using it every day with ^oy 
and profit, but sendino: it abroad to members of my family in distant lands, giving 
it as a present to friend after friend, and in other ways endeavouring to extend the 
knowledge and use of it on every side. On learning that * Evening by Evening » was 
published, how gladly I bade it welcome I And I can humbly commend it in no 
higher terms than by rimply sajring that it will be found a fit companion^ ever^ ^«.^% 
for its forerunner of the morning." — Charles J. ^rottm^D.D..^ BdvrAmrQ'K. 



IB, PATERNOSTEB lL0^,l/>TSCI>OTX,'2».O. 



' 4 WORKS FI7BLISIIED BY FA8S1C0RE ft ALABA8TEB, 

" We can mont cordially reoommend this latest prodnotioii of Rerr. C. H. Spvi- 
OKON, whone companion woi^ 'ICorningbv Morning/ is already IkTonrably known. 
Tt in chAroctoriiWHi by the term, pungent, naye-at-ye-all st^le of the author, and is 
eminently ciilfnilatiHl to aroune thought, and make an abiding impreesion npon the 
min*V— Sunday School Teacher. 

** Of * mornintr and evening portions,* of almost every conceivable quality, there 
in already no Ktint ; but there is abundant room for the nresh and earnest volume of 
the indcfiiticuble pastor of the Metropolitan Tabemade. It is a Joseph's sheaf^ to 
which is I'lder brethren in the field must needs make obeisance. In. his selection of 
the Scripture toxtn, on which the readings are reflections, Mr. Spxtkoson has kept 
otit of the common track, and has brought forward neglected subjects. Some of the 
U'xiA are moHt unusual, but, as those who have read ms sermons well know, he has 
the x)ower of wiving the mo«t suggestive things from, seemingly the most unsngges- 
tivi» wonl.-*. We undtmrtand that upwards of twenty thousand copies of Ifir. Sftk- 
okom's 'Morning bv Morning' have been sold, and there is lime doubt that its 
companion vohiine, ^ Evening by Evening,' will command as laxige a oirculatioin."— 
Literary If 'or Id, 

" What we said in noticing the first volume we repeat of the second : * We know 
not whoro to look for another like it.' There is a oeshness, an aroma, a vigour, 
ami a pointednoss about each meditation that will be sure to captivate and interert 
the reader ; while for devout breathings of soul, and gladsome ezpreasion of oonfi- 

dimoe in our heavenly Father, the work U unequalled We are not 

nciuaintod with a better book, more full of the right elements for fiunily devotion, 
than Mr. Spurokon's 'Readings,' and we wish for them a wide dreulation."— 
IWeman. 

C. H. SFXTBOEOIT'S SEBMOITS:— 

Vol. I. — Sftrmons proached during the year 1855... 

Vol. II. — Sermons preached during the year 1856... 

Vol. III. — *^rmon8 preached during the year 1857... 

Vol . I v.— Sermons preeiched during the year 1858 . . . 

Vol. V. — Sermons preached during the year 1859... 

Vol. Vr. — Sermons preached during the year 1860... 

Vol. VII. —Sermons preached during the year 1861 .. . 

Vol. VIII. — Sermons preached during the year 1862, Large Type,., 

Vol. IX. —Sermons preached during the year 1863, Large Type. . . 

Vol. X. — Sermons preached during the year 1864, Large Type .. 

Vol. XI. — Sermons preached during the year 1865, Large Type. . . 

Vol. XI I. — Sermons preached during the year 1866, Large Typ«. • . 

Vol- XIII. — Sermons preached during the year 1867, Large Type... 

Vol. XIV. — Sermons preached during the year 1868, Large Type... 

Vol. XV. — Sermons preached during the year 1869, Large Type. .. 

All post free at the above prices. 

The Sermons are published every Thursday at Id. ; Monthly Parts at 6d. each. 
Cases for binding Vols. I. to X., Is. ; XI. to XV., Is. 4d. each. 

" It is but simple justice to pronounce these sermons to be good 8i>eoimen8 of 
eff«>otive preaching. They abound in straightforward punjg;ent ai^^uments for a 
religious life. They are composed in a free easy style, sometimes rising to fervour 
— sometimes tender and pathetic — sometimes felicitous both in thought and expies- 
sion." — Scottish Congregational Magazine. 

" It is unnecessary for us to do more than to introduce these volumes to the notice 
of our readers who may not have possessed themselves of these unique and impressive 
diiCOuraea,^Baptiit Messenger. t 



Cloth. 


Half-caU: 


8. d. 




a. d. 


6 « 


• •• 


10 


6 6 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• «• 


10 


8 6 


• •• 


11 6 


7 


• • • 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 


7 D 


• •• 


10 


7 


• •• 


10 



18, PATERNOSTER RO^ , TjWS\>««, ^.^. 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY PASSMORE ft ALABASTER, 5 

" After hearing Mr. Spukobon preach, I am at no loss to understand why it is 
that he commands, and has so long commanded, not only the attendance, but the 
rapt attention of such an immense congregation. It is not, as some suppose and as 
I my^self before hearing him supposed, because he makes use of outrS expressions, 
or smgular illustrations, or ad captanaum language ; not so. He does occasionally 
use strange, and even startling expressions; but the real talisman which gives him 
his power is, that he preaches the pure gospel of Christ in ^lain, but correct^ even 
elegant, language — ^in language, that is to say, which is earaly understood without 
effort by youn^ and old, rich and poor. He avoids darkening counsel by a cloud of 
words ; he avoids wearisome repetition and embarrassing divergence from his main 
ai^n^iment, which is carried out, ever advancing by successive steps, naturally and 
simply, yet logically, to its conclusion, and so as to be not only easily understood at 
the time, but easily remembered afterwards." — Cosmopolite. 

%* The Publishers call attention to the remarkable fact that Ihey have now issued 
Mr. SpuKGBOK'b Sermons weekly for more than fifteen years, ana that all this time 
the circulation has not only been very large, but has steadily increased. This 
unparalleled fact, unprecedented in the pulpit of any a^e or church, speaks for itself, 
and is a higher eulogium than the most niendly reviewer could pronoimce. It is 
also noteworthy that an equally warm reception has been given to the American 
Edition, and that the Dut(ih, German, Swedish, and French translations have 
commanded an extensive sale ; and the Sermons have been acceptably received in 
Welsh, Banish, and Italian. 

OUE OWN HTMN BOOK By C. H. SPUEGEOIT. 

Royal 32mo. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; Ornamental Boards, gilt edges, 3s. ; Morocco, gilt, 5s. 
Large type for the pulpit; cloth, 6s.; roan, 7s.; morocco, 10s. 6d. Double 
columns for the pew; roan, 3s. 6d. ; morocco, Cs. Congregations can secure 
advantageous terms by application to the publishers direct. A cheap edition at 
Is. 4d. mh shortly be published. 

The features which distinguish this hymn-book are such as to justify its issue, at 
least in the mind of the compiler, ui>on whom it has involved immense labour— a 
labour which has been its own reward. These features are as follows — 

1. The hymns have been drawn from the origin^ works of the authors, and are 
given, as £Eir as practicable, lust as they were written. This is so imusual a practice 
as to be almost a novelty, while the mangling of hymns has grown into a system — a 
systCTi, however, to be most heartily deprecated. The very few alterations which 
we have personally made, are either grammatical corrections or emendations which 
seemed to be imperatively demanded by the interests of truth, or were necessary in 
order to change the metre into such as could be sung. 

2. Subjects frequently passed over, or pushed into a comer, are here made 
conspicuously the theme of song; such, for instance, as the great doctrines of 
sovereign grace, the ^rsonal advent of our Lord, and especially the sweetness of 
present communion with him. 

3. Hymns suitable for levivals, prayer-meetings, and earnest addresses to sinners, 
are given in larger numbers and greater variety than in any other selection known 
to me editor^ and several popular verses, whose poetic merit had not commended 
them to previous compilers, have been adopted in deference to the Great Spirit who 
has so frequently blessed the use of ^em both to saints and sinners. 

4. The Psalms of David are hare, by the aid of various writers, more especially 
Watts, the English and Scotch versions, Mr. Lyte and Hiss Auber, all presented, in 
whole or in part, in forms suitable for congregational singing, and our endeavour 
has been to preserve the devout spirit of that inspired book, even where the Jewish 
expressions have been necessarily changed for Christian language. 

This Hymn-book is the result of long and earnest labour, and the editor hopes it 
will prove^ a blessing to thousands. 

It 18 believed to be, all tMn^s considered, the largest, cheapest, and most accurate 
Hymn-book in the English language. The ministers who use it uniformly speak of 
^ it in the wannest terms of approval. 



W, PATEBW08rnSB.B.0^,lA«Sl>OTR,^.^. 



% W0BX8 PUBLISHED BT PASSMORB * ALABASTER; 

SPUEGEOIT'S 0£MS: being Brilliant PoMages Selected 

from the Disoounes of C. II. Spukoeoic. Large Tyi)e, 4s. 

The publishers wi.<h to state that the title is American, and the exiracts vere 
mainly selected by a celebrated divine in New York. A quotation from the 
American edition will show the character of the work. 

** The popularity of Mr. Spukokon's sermons in this country has been equalled only 
liy the popularity of the preacher himself in his own land. Hokr tham ▲ humored 

-IIIOUSANU VOLUMRS OP HIS WRITIM08 HATE BEEN ALRKADT CIRCULATED HERE, 

itnd the demand for them is constant, bhowing that they have taken a strong and 
abiding hold upon the public mind. Their useftilness, we have reason to believe, has 
l)con. in a great measure, c mmcnsurate with their popularity. 

" The call has been repeatedly made for a volume giving the characteristics of 
Mr. Spubukon's style, rcvc.iling the secret of hi8mighty]K>wer as a preadixer of truth, 
with the peculiarities of manner wh ch arrest the attention, roui»e the 8ymi»athiei«, 
oxcite the admiration, and impress the feelings of his vast audiences. This cannot be 
done by (tivin^ Kimply detached sentences from, his sermons. ICr Spvhoeon is not 
remarkable fur terseness, nor does he deal in laconic phrases. He is rhetorical, 
(leHcriptivc, flowing, and glowing. He blazes and bums along the pathway of his 
subject, rising in flights of imagination and carrying his hearers along wi^ him 
in camoht, overwhelming appealsi. He is pungent in his applications, strong in his 
doctrinal dpinions, and powerful in his exhibition of the divine Word. Such a 
preacher's forte is not to be present^ in single sentences. 'We have, therefore, 
gathoi'ed from scores of his sermons many of the most striking pa8sas:e8, and set them 
in these pages, without regard to the order of subject, or their relations to each other : 
a series of earnest thoughts and graphic pictures, all of them revealing the true 
greatness of the preacher's conceptions, his individuality and strength. No one cmu 
read the first page of this volume without feeling that the speaker is no common 
man. 

*• The publishers present this selection from the pages of Mr. Spuroeok, »= a 
bpecimen of his happiest thoughts, gems from his discourses, which will glow in Ihe 
mind of the reader, and quicken in him a desire to read and hear more of this 
r<<markablo youthful preacher of the unsearchable riches of Christ." — Frefaet 
American Edition. 

GLEANINGS AMONG THE SHEAVES. By C. H. 

Spurokon. Cloth Antique, Price Is. 6d. Fourth Edition. 

" A want long felt by multitudes of Mr. Spuro eon's admirers will be well 
supplied by this excellent little book. The variety is ample and pleading, and 
the nature of the Articles sach as will afford instruction to enquirers, comfort 
to mourners, and encouragement to all." — Wesleyan Times. 

"A pretty little volume containing many choice passages. "We have been 
improtiscd with the admirable use of metaphor in illastrating the deep things of 
dod.'*— Watchman. 

" Wo cordially recommend the volume to our readers." — County Chronicle. 

**We recommend this capital eighteenpenny book to all who love old-fashioned 
truth, and we have no doubt but tluit there will be a speedy demand for at least one 
hundred thousand copies **—(??a«^ou7 Examiner. 

" These extracts are quite Spurgeonic — racy, rich, and rare, both as to style and 
matter — full of exquisite consolation — faithflil advice— clear analogies — poetic 
touches — and glorious old gospel. We do not wonder though eight thousand 
copies were disposed of on the day of publication, and we trust eighty times eighty 
thousand will find their way to the religious public." — Weeky Review. 

' ' Full of poin t and beauty. There can be Uttie doubt of a hundred thousand bein g 
in speedy demand." — Chris'ian World. 

"It will bo interesting and profitable to all devout minds." — Sunday School 
Teacher's Magazine. 

•• Choice little gems of thought.'* — Earthen Vessel. 



18, PATEB^^OSTER. "RO"^ , TJ3^^0^ , ^.^. 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY PASSMORE & ALABASTER; 7 

JOHN PLOUGHMAN'S TALK; or, Plain Advice for 

Plain People: By C. H. SPURQEON. Price Is., cloth Is. 6d. 110th Thousand. 

"Racy and pungent; very plain, and to the purpose. No fear as to whether it 
will he read or not by those into whose hands it may fall. If Mr. Spvkgeom goes on 
at this rate in his multiform pubUcatibns, he will leave nothing racy unsaid." — 
Watchman. 

** Another proof of the untiring energy and the great mental resources of Hr. 
C. H. Spu&oeon. . . Written in a more homely fashion than is hiswont, and he has 
not hesitated to adopt a humorous style, believing, as he saj^s, that 'there is no par- 
ticular virtue in being seriously unreadable.' The book is directed chiefly to the 
inculcation of moi'al lessons, and the author has dealt in trenchant fashion with many 
of the evU habits which are extensively prevalent, and which militate against home 
happiness and industrial progress." — Methodist Recorder. 

" The language is homely, since the advice is intended for homely people. The 
style is humorous and satirical, and the papers abound with proverbs, many of 
which have become obsolete, and some of which are evidently derived from foreign 
sources. It is a capital book for working people, and we shsul be greatly surprised 
if it be not immensely popular with them." — Ireeman. 

" "We often wonder how Mr. Spvroeon gets through so much work. The great 
wonder, however, is not that he does so many thinp;s, but that he does them all 
so welL His published weekly sermons betray no signs of exhaustion, but rather 
displav increased power. Nor will his fame be lessened by the publication of this 
*taJk.* John Ploughman reminds us very much of *01d Richard,' which \»e 
might call * The Wit and WiSdom of Dr. Franklin.' Here we have both wit and 
wisdom, strong common sense and genial humour." — Literary World. 

"A racy volume of excellent and telling papers from the Sword and TroweJ, 
which cannot fail to have an immense circulation. Never were home-told practical 
truths more forcibly presented than in this admirable little book." — Morning Star. 

" Any single specimen will show, and will justify us in saying, that the entire 
collection is vivacious, but not vulj^r ) caustic, but not cynical ; witty, without any 
wantonness ; racy, yet never running into mere rattle; tldl of the best counsel, b'.it 
signally free frx)m any particle of cant." — The General Baptist Magazine, 

"We are not sure that, in some respects, this is not the best production of 
Mr. Spvroeon's pen. At all events, we are glad to have it in this lorm, and for so 
small a price as a shilling." — The Church. 

"Mr. Spv&geon, in this little volume, gives just what might be expected from 
him, when he undertakes to talk or write for plain people— a rich budget of humour 
and sound sense. The man or woman who cannot find here something worth studyin;; 
and putting into practice must be singularly obtuse, and those who mil to appreciate 
the happy vein that pervades the whole are to be pitied. John Ploughman should 
be brought into communication with all sorts of people throughout the length and 
breadth of the land, and we trust that this will be done. The subjects comment d 
upon, be it noted, are not controversial ones, nor are they what is generally known 
as 'religious' in their tendency. Home life, moral and social virtues, our every- 
day joys and sorrows, and our pleasures and discontents — ^these axe the mattei-s 
handled, and each and all are dealt with in a masterly style." — City Press, 

" We advise our readers to get ' John Ploughman's Talk,' by Spurgeon. It dis- 
courses of twenty-four every day topics in a simple, homely, semi-humorous way ; 
and, if shrewd practical sense were something to be imparted, we should say this bo<>k 
would nearly stock a needy reader with that article for a liie-time." — Calif orniun 
Spare Hour. 



n» PATERNOSTER R.0^» l^OTMiO^^'S^^ 



S irORKS FUBLISHZD BT PASSXOSK * AULBASTSB, 

FEATHESS POE ASEOWS ; OE, ILLirSTRATIOIS 

for Preachen and Teachers, from my Kote Book. By C. H. Spuboboit. Friot Sb. id. 

There is no necv'«sity in these times to adrocate the free use of famitit"**— in 
public teaching. Far more needful is it to assist oar brethren to find a Bapptf of 
thei«e indispen>abU> aidi» to understanding. To some it is difELcolt to create a eon* 
p^uiAon, althuu^rh they know huw to use it with effect when it is on e soffiested to 
them ; and the mo*it fertile minds are fi-equently stimulated to ftuther ^ro^uction by 
reading the thouirhts of uthers. It is not, therefore, I ho^, an impertinenee am mj 
part t> present to the Christian pubhc a bundle of illustrations original and ooUeeteo. 
II y aim ha;} not been to amuse the reader, but to famish Fbathxks vom Ammow* 
fur the servants of Christ Jesus. — Extract /torn Preface. 

THE SWOED AKD THE TEOWEL : A HoEiiaT 

Magazine, Price 3d. Yearly vols., 5s Cases for binding. Is. 4d. 

It commands a large circulation among almost all classes of Christians. Its in- 
fluence has for the lost four years been steadily increasing, and as a rehgious 
periodical, it now occupies a position second to none. It records the works of mith 
and labours of love which ai e the honour of the various se:.>tions of the church, and it 
contends mo-t vinsparingly against the carrent errors of ih& tunes. The cant of 
non.sectarianism, the iiidefinitcness ox modem timeserving, and the fooleries of 
ritualism, it wars against remorselessly, but all works of chanty and zeal command 
its appreciative sympathy. It has done good service to truth and humanity in many 
ways, and the aim of editor and contributors is to make it still more usemL It is 
an accurate record of the religious movements which emanate tcoro. the Metro- 

folitan Tabernacle^ but its advocacy is for fit)m being confined within that area. 
t numbers among its readers a luge number of ministers and influential men among 
Dissenters, and at the same time its popular character has obtained it a large eon- 
stituency among the general public. As an earnest defender of the ToluBtary 
principle, it strives to draw out the sympathies of the people, and to educate them 
to give freely to Christian enterprises ; so that as the system of endowments and 
State-grants g^dually passes away, the living power of sjwntaneous generosity may 
more than supply its place. No pains will be spared to render the Magazine grow- 
ingly worthy of the widest circulation. 

Editor 0. H. SPURGEON. 

[ The large circulation of this Magazine renders it a most eligible medium /or 
advertisers, who can apply to Mr. Hollings^ 64, Paternoster JSoir.] 

TWELVE SERMONS ON VAEIOTIS SUBJECTS. By 

C. H. Spurgeon, with a Portrait. Price Is. 

This cheap selection will afford opx>ortunity to new readers to form their first 
acquaintance with Mr. Spurgeon' s Sermons at a cheap rate. 

NEW PAEK STREET TRACTS. Four pages of large 

print, for gratuitous distribution. Edited by 0. H. Spvkgeon. Is. 4d. per 
hundred. 

POLAND. A Lecture, by C. H. SPURGEON. In a 

neat wrapper, 3d. Post ft^e, 4d. 

SWOED AND TEOWEL TEACTS. By C. H. SPVEr 

OEON. 6d. per hundred. Post free 8 stamps. Of these there are now 32 sorts, 
nearly all illustrated by a woodcut. Freeh tracts are issued as subjects st^gcst 
themselves. 



i«, PATEsesoerTKR -ao^ , \«s:ii«»,^». 



WOBKS PUBLISHED BY PASSMOBE & ALABASTER, 9 

TBACTS OF ENGOVBAOEMENT. By G. H. SPTTBGEOIT. 

For goneral distribution. Price 6d. per hundred. 

TRACTS OF TESTIMONY. By G. H. SPUBGEON. 

These treat upon the subject of Believers' Baptism and Pesdobaptism. Por general 
distribution. Price 6d. per hundred. 

A VISIT TO GALVABY. A Sermon on behalf of 

Bagged Schools, by C. H. Spukqson.— 2d. Post free, 3d. 

COME, YE GHILDBEN. A Sermon to Sunday School 

Teachers, by 0. H. Spukobon. — 2d. Post firee 3 stamps. 

AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOGTBINES OF OBAGE, 

Bt six ■ MiNisTBBS OF THE QospEL. Delivered in the Metropolitan Tabernacle, 
on the occasion of its opening. 4d. Post free. 5d. 

One Penny Each« In neat wrapper. By G. H. Spurgeon. 

Particularly adapted for gratuitous circulation. 



A SPUE FOR A FREE HORSE. 
BELLS FOR THE HORSES. 
THE WAR HORSE. 
OOD'S JEWELS. 
BAPTISMAL REGENERATION. 
CONFESSION OF SIN. 
APOSTOLIC EXHORTATION. 
THE WAY OF SALVATION. 



HOW TO RAISE THE DEAD. 
NONE BUT JESUS. 
THE SILVER TRUMPET. 
JESUS AND THE LAMBS. 
LOVING ADVICE FOR ANXIOUS 

SEEKERS. 
THE UPPER HAND. 
A CATECHISM WITH PROOFS. 



THE CHUBCH OF ENGLAND DEOBADED TO THE 

LEVEL OF THE SECTS. By C. H. Spuroeon. Price One Half-penny. 
A liberal allowance made by taking quantities on direct application to the Publishers. 

NEW PABK STBEET LIBBABT. EDITED BT C. H. 

Spuroson. No. I contains " Imputed Righteousness," in two Discourses, by the 
Rev. G. Whitfield. No. 2 contains " Christ— the Rock," by 0. H. Spubokon ; 
and " A Choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ," by the Rev. Thomas 
WiLOocKs. 6d. each. Post free. 



A Body of Divinity, contained in Sermons npon the 

Assembly's Catechism. By the Rev. Thomas Watson, Rector of St. Stephen's, 
Walbrook. A new and complete edition, revised and adapted to modem readers, 
by the Rev. Geoi^ Rogers, Csunberwell. With a Preface and AppencUz by 
Pastor 0. H. Spukoeon. Price 6s. 

Some time ago we issued this invaluable " Body of Divinity " in the hope that both 
among our ministry and our membership it would find a welcoma, «a.^ \»fc Nic'.'^ 
means of edification in sound doctrines. We i^\i\>Uft\xcidL V\. «X «A\'arw''»."^"«v«*k ■»* 



J«, PATEItNOSTEE BOW, X»OTSrDOS,^.^* 



\fi W0:;K3 published by PASSMORB ft ALABASTER, 

p<tssiblc; and for young men, who are atadents of the word, and for local 
proachen, we made arranRements to supply them with a single copy at wholesale 

?riro, on application to Mr. Keys, Secretary of the GoU^e, Tabernacle, Newington. 
f the Chrifltian public were aware of the ralue of this work they would soon clear 
out the whole edition. Every divine of Calvinistic views should read it, and everv 
private Christian also. We can heartily recommend it to all lovers of sound 
doctrine, among whom we hoiw for a large sale.— G. H. SpuaosoN. 

Thirty- 



on 



- ChriPtian Faith and Practice, with Scripture Proofs, adopted by the Ministers 
:i nd Mossencrers of the General Assembly, which met in London in 1689. PrefSEU)e 
hy C. H. SPvaoKOH. Paper covers, 4d. Post free, 5 stamps. 

BUKTAN'S WATEB OF LIFE. With Pre&ce by C. E. 

SPUROKON. Is. 

This is a tasteful IHtIo book, very suitable for a present, and likely to be made 
usftful wherever it may bo circulated. It is written in Bunyan's best style ; it 
is Himplc, forcible, pleasing, and taVL of illustration. 

THE FLEAS Airr CATECHISM CONCEBinNO CHBIST, 

with an introduction by C. H. Spuroeon. Price 2d. 

" A friend, whom we very highly esteem, has issued a little book, called * The 
Pleasant Catechism concerning Christ, with Pleasant Stories, Illusteitions, and 
Hymns;* and in the Preface he proposes a Plan of Pleasant Parties, which well . 
de.Horves to be universally adopted. It would be a noble extension of the Sunday-school 
system, and if it were taken up with spirit and conducted properly, in dependence 
upon the Spirit of Gbd, would confer unnumbered blessings upon the rising race. 
If it led to the regular teaching of a good sound catechism, so that in England our 
young people should be as well taught as the Scotch, it would be one of the surest 
means of driving false doctrine out of our land." — C. H. Spxjrobon. 

ELISHA COLES ON DI7IHE SOVEBEiaNTT. With 

Preface by C. H. Spurgeon. 2s. 6d. » 

We shall bo glad if all our friends will aid us to circulate this grand old treatise on 
the do' trines of grace. It is marrow and fatness throughout. With the hnprimatur 
of "William Romaine, Thomas Goodwin, and John Owen, it needs no praise flcom 
us. It is a class book with the men in the College at their entrance, and we have 
therefore reprinted it. 

Romaine says of this book : " The doctrines of grace, of which this book treats, 
are the truths of God : our author has defended them in a masterly manner. He 
has not only proved them to be plainly revealed in the Scriptures, but has also 
shown that thev are of such constant use to the children of God, that,_ without the 
steadfast belief of them, they cannot go on their way rejoicing. It is from these 
doctrines only that settled peace can rule in the conscience, the love of God be 
maintained in the heart, and a conversation kept up in our walk and war&re as 
beoomcth th'e gospel. It is from them that all good works proceed, and that all frttits 
of holiness abound, to the praise of the glory of the grace of God. In the practical 
viifW of these points, Elisha Coles is singularly ezcellekit." 



X8, PATEUlilOaT^B. ^O^, ^^ISUOS,^,^. 



W0EK8 PUBLISHED BY PASSHORE & AI^BASTBK, 11 



WORKS BY OTHER AUTHORS. 



feu. m, |. ialfern. 



GLIMPSES OF JESTTS; or, Christ Exalted in the 

Aifectioiis of his People. By W. P. Balfebjy. Fourth thousand. Fq>. Svo. 
Cloth, ia. Free by post. 

** I hailed with pleasure the advent of this precious volume. I sat down to read 
it, and toon discovered ite beaut;^; it was a feast of fat things, a season long to be 
remembered. I have read it again and again, and would desire to adore the Holy 
Spirit for that gracious unction which rested on me in its perusal. 

" Let not the reader erpect to find here a display oi learning, but let him look for 
savour. Let him not read it as a body of divinity, or a digest of doctrine ; but let 
him use it as an aid to holy communion with Jesus. 

* Here I behold my Saviour's face 
Almost in every page.' 

" I trace him all along the Via Dolorosa of his life, fix)m the manger, by the cross, 
to his crown. Nothing so sanctifies my soul, and elevates my spirit, as the con- 
templadan of my all-beauteous, ever-loving Lord. To all with whom my opinion 
i •> of Any weight, let me say, purchase this book, and read it, not once or twice, but 
often, till your soul becomes a column of love to Jesus, a consolidated mass of 
affection for the Bedeemer." — C. H. Spubgeoic . 

LESSONS F&OM JESUS ; or, the Teachings of Divine 

Love. By 'W. P. Balfebn. Cheap Edition. Ss. 6d. 

" This is a worthy sequel to * Glimpses of Jesus,* by the same author. Every book 
is valuable that fixes our attention upon. Jesus, and revives our perception of his 
beauty j and especially when it discovers new beauties, and brings his whole character 
more vividly before us. Such will be the effect of these * Lessons from the life of 
Jesus.' "— C. H. Spubobon, The Sword and the Trowel, 

**This is a very edifying and beautiful volume." — Baptist Magazine. 

*^ We would recommend our readers to become possessed of all of these goodly 
pearls.** — Baptist Messenger. 

" The spirit of the work is earnestly evangelical, and its style, simple, forcible, and 
often highly eloquent.'* — New York Evangelist. 

" We heartily welcome the republication of this exquisite little book in a cheap 
form. The h^h praise with which it was received on its first publication in this 
country, and its subsequent re-issue by thousands in America, render any detailed 
criticism of its contents unnecessary. Beautifiil thoughts, graceftilly expressed, will 
be found on every page ; and true poetic power, sanctified by deep Christian love, 
are united in giving a charm to this book x>ossessed by few others we have met with. 
We trust its re-issue in this cheaper form will enable it to find its way into many 
more Christian h mes, in addition to those it has already gladdened by its bold and 
^lear exhibition of gospel teaching.'*— TAe Independant. 



18, PATEBNOSTER HOW, \-OKI>QiS,1E..Q. 



12 W0BX8 rPBT.TRTTKT) BY FABSICOBS «: AUkBASTER, 



feu- %. Wtnntll 

iniRSEIX^S LECrniBES TO WORKDTO MEir. Delivered 

Week It at the Lambeth Baths, Westminster Bridge Eoad. Price One Penny each ; 
or, lOd. the series, post fre^. 



WHAT8 YOUR NAME? 
TRMPLE BAR. 
THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 
SUGAR-COATED PILLS. 



COLOURS OF THE RAINBOW. 
RIPPLES ON TIIE RIVER. 
FACES IN THE FIRE. 
CRIES FROM THE CRADLE. 
WASHED AWAY. 



^CD. (S* losers* 

FOB EVER AND EVEB. A College Lecture upon the 

Duration of Future Punishment. By Rev. Gsokob Roobks. Price 2d. 

FXTTUBE PTJNISHMEirr. A Lecture Delivered to the 

students of the Metropolitan Tabemade College, in reply to a series of letters 
in ** The Christian World," ftom the Rev. Edward White. By the Rev. Gxohob 
UooERs. Price Id. 



l«tJ- ^. ^. 1«5* 
A FRIENDLT LETTEB TO THE CHRISTIANS CALLED 

•' BRETHREN '* on the subject of Ministry. By Arthub Auovstvs Rbbs. One 
Penny. 

A SECOND LETTEB TO THE CHRISTIANS CALLED 

** BRETHREN" on the subject of Worship and Ministry, together with some 
friendly remarks on the Meetings in Freemasons' Hall. By Ajrtuvu Augustus 
Krks. Fouri)€nce. 



%tv. Wi. Jiarltcr. 



THE DTJBATION OF FUTirBE PUNISHHEirTS. Two 

Lectures to the Students at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, by Will,iam Barker, 
Itaptist Minister, Hastings, with a Preface by C. H. Spubobon. Price 6d. limp 
cloth, Is. 

Just Published^ price Ad. 

WHAT IS DEATH? An Attempted Beply to Letters 

by tho Rev. Edward White, inserted in the " Christian World,** February, 187i». 
l\y the Listener. 



Shortly toill be published. 

HENBY'S OUTLINES OF CHUBCH HISTORY; A Brief 

Sketch of the Christian Church fh>m the First Century. By Josbph Fbbkandrt;, 
LL.D. With Preface by C. H. fti?\jiLQ*o« . 



IS, PATEKSO^I^^ -RQ^, A/SSISQ^,"^.^. 



/ 



