.ru 


JU1 


!m 


THE  LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 


FIRST    HEALING 


AND    THEN    SERVICE 


AND    OTHER   SERMONS 


tn  1885 
BY    C    H.    SPURGEON 

OF    LONDON 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS. 
NEW  YORK:  LONDON: 

i3  &  20  ASTOR  PLACE.  44  FLEET  STREET. 


65  / 


s^s 

•CT     9  1953 


CONTENTS. 


I.  FIRST  HEALING  AND  THEN  SERVICE.     .     .       7 
II.  A  SWEEL  SILVER  BELL  RINGING  IN  EACH 

BELIEVER'S  HEART 31 

III.  FALLEN  ANGELS  A  LESSON  TO  FALLEN  MEN.     55 

IV.  CORDS  AND  CART-ROPES 79 

V.  CERTAIN     CURIOUS     CALCULATIONS     ABOUT 

LOAVES  AND  FISHES 102 

VI.  PETER'S  BLUNDER:  A  LESSON  TO  OURSELVES.   126 

VII.  THE  SINGULAR  ORIGIN  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  MAN.   150 

VI IF.  To  LOVERS  OF  JESUS:  AN    EXAMPLE      .     .   174 

IX.  A  GREAT  GOSPEL  FOR  GREAT  SINNERS     .  198 

X.  WHAT  is  THE  VERDICT  ? 222 

XI.  THE  HISTORY  OF  LITTLE-FAITH.     .     .     .  246 
XII.  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GROWING  FAITH      .     .   270 

XIII.  GOD  OUR  CONTINUAL  RESORT      ....  295 

XIV.  "BEHOLD,   HE  PRAYET-H." 320 

XV.   DEPARTED  SAINTS  YET  LIVING    ....  344 

XVI.  THE  NOBLEMAN'S  FAITH 368 

XVII.  JUBILATE    ,  .  393 


I. 

FIEST  HEALING  AND  THEN  SERVICE. 
April  19,  1885. 

"  And  when  Jesus  was  come  into  Peter's  house,  he  saw  his 
wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of  a  fever.  And  he  touched  her 
haud,  and  the  fever  left  her:  and  she  arose,  and  ministered  unto 
them. " — MATTHEW  viii.  14,  15. 

THIS  event  took  place  at  Capernaum,  but 
Peter's  residence  was  at  Bethsaida;  for  we 
read,  "  Philip  was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew 
and  Peter."  How  came  Peter  to  have  a  house  at 
Capernaum  ?  Poor  fishermen  do  not  often  have 
two  houses.  May  not  the  conjecture  be  highly 
probable  that,  finding  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was 
frequently  at  Capernaum,  Peter  thought  it  best  to 
have  a  dwelling  there,  that  he  might  always  be 
present  when  the  Master  was  preaching,  and  that 
he  might  do  his  best  to  entertain  him  between 
whiles?  I  like  to  think  that  the  servant  changed 
his  place  of  abode  for  his  Master's  sake.  Would  it 
not  be  well  if  many  Christian  people  had  some  lit 
tle  consideration  when  they  are  choosing  a  house 
as  to  whether  it  will  be  convenient  for  the  hear 
ing  of  the  word  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  a  great 
many  professors  look  chiefiy  for  every  other  kind 
of  advantage,  and,  when  they  have  virtually  made 
their  choice,  they  afterwards  inquire  into  the  very 
secondary  item  of  their  nearness  to  a  place  where 


8          FIRST    HEALING    AND    THEN    SERVICE 

they  may  worship  God,  enjoy  Christian  fellowship, 
and  be  useful  ?  There  are  some  in  this  congre 
gation  who  have  moved  to  this  part  of  the  town  to 
become  members  of  an  earnest,  prayerful  church. 
Such  believers  feel  that  the  first  consideration  in 
life  must  be  the  health  of  their  souls,  the  bene 
fiting  of  their  children,  and  their  usefulness  in 
promoting  the  cause  of  Christ.  When  they  have 
made  the  selection  of  a  house  in  that  way  and  for 
that  reason,  they  have  found  a  blessing  resting 
upon  them,  according  to  the  promise.  "Seek  ye 
first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness; 
and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you." 
Some  who  have  forgotten  this  rule,  and,  like  Lot, 
chosen  the  well-watered  plains  of  Sodom,  have 
lived  to  rue  their  choice.  Although  the  house 
may  be  commodious,  and  the  position  convenient, 
these  advantages  will  not  make  up  for  losing  the 
means  of  grace  and  missing  opportunities  of  holy 
service.  When  Mephibosheth  lived  at  Lo-debar, 
the  place  of  no  pasture,  David  fetched  him  up  to 
Jerusalem,  where  he  himself  delighted  to  dwrll. 
It  would  be  well  for  many  a  limping  brother  if  he 
made  a  like  change.  Thus,  before  we  actually 
cross  the  threshold  of  Peter's  house  we  learn  a 
lesson. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  been  having  a  heavy 
day:  he  had  been  to  the  synagogue,  and  he  had 
preached  and  had  wrought  miracles;  lie  had  moved 
in  the  midst  of  a  great  throng,  and  now  the  Sab 
bath  was  drawing  to  a  close  he  needed  refresh 
ment,  and  it  was  most  convenient  that  Peter  had 
a  house  into  which  the  Lord  could  go.  I  do  not 
suppose  it  was  a  stately  mansion,  probably  it  was 


FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE.         9 

little  better  than  a  hnt;  for  Peter  was  only  a 
fisherman:  but  the  Lord  Jesus  made  it  honorable 
enough  by  entering  it.  Where  the  king  is  there 
the  palace  is. 

Though  our  Lord  went  to  Peter's  house  to  rest, 
he  did  not  find  it  free  from  trouble.  It  was  a  hos 
pital  before  he  made  it  a  palace.  Peter's  wife's 
mother  was  on  her  bed  prostrate  with  "  a  great 
fever."  Typhus  of  the  worst  kind  was  burning  out 
her  life.  However  good  a  man  may  be,  he  will  not 
escape  trial  in  the  flesh.  You  may  have  a  house 
full  of  sanctity  and  full  of  sickness  at  the  same 
time.  We  find  it  true  while  we  are  here,  that 
"  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,  but  the  spirit  is 
life  because  of  righteousness."  The  regenerated 
spirit  has  risen  into  life,  but  the  body  lingers 
under  the  power  of  death,  and  its  attendant  pain 
and  weakness.  Certain  persons  attribute  all  sick 
ness  to  the  devil,  and  impute  special  sin  to  those 
who  are  grievously  afflicted.  This  teaching  is  as 
false  as  it  is  cruel.  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth."  I  can  bear  witness  that  some  of  the 
sairitliest  persons  I  have  ever  known  have  been, 
bedridden  for  years  together;  and  others,  in  whom 
the  very  image  of  Christ  was  conspicuous,  from 
whose  lips  all  the  country  around  gathered  up  the 
choicest  sentences  of  holy  experience,  have  been 
invalids  for  twenty  or  thirty  years  at  a  stretch. 
Our  sicknesses  are  of  the  Lord's  appointing  how 
ever  painful  they  may  be,  and  we  may  without 
doubt  say,  as  David  did,  "The  Lord  hath  chastened 
me  sore."  "  Lord,  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick,'  is 
still  a  truth.  Even  Peter's  house,  though  it  be  the 
abode  of  a  chosen  saint,  and  leading  apostle,  whose 


10       FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

very  shadow  would  one  day  heal  the  sick,  had  a 
terrible  fever  in  it  which  threatened  death.  Yet 
Jesus  came  where  the  fever  polluted  the  air.  If 
the  disease  had  come,  the  great  Physician  had 
come  also.  We  are  not  alarmed  at  the  Cross  if 
Christ  comes  with  it. 

Notice,  with  regard  to  our  Lord's  entering  the 
house  of  Peter,  that  he  came  there  with  his  three 
most  favored  disciples.  If  you  read  the  statement 
given  by  Mark  in  his  first  chapter  you  may  be 
somewhat  surprised  to  discover  Peter,  James,  and 
John  there.  We  read, — "  When  they  were  come 
out  of  the  synagogue,  they  entered  into  the  house 
of  Simon  and  Andrew,  with  James  and  John.'' 
Whether  Andrew  was  there  or  not  I  cannot  tell: 
he  was  joint  proprietor  of  the  house,  but  he  is 
not  mentioned  as  being  there.  Whenever  you  see 
Peter,  James,  and  John  present  together  with  the 
Lord,  you  may  look  for  special  wonders.  These 
were  the  men  who  beheld  the  Lord's  exceeding 
glory  on  the  Mount:  these  were  nearest  to  the 
agony  of  Gethsemane:  these  were  admitted  to 
behold  the  raising  from  the  dead  of  the  young 
maiden  when  the  Lord  put  forth  all  the  gathered 
company.  To  this  most  select  triumvirate  did  Je 
sus  display  himself  as  he  did  not  to  the  rest  of 
the  apostles,  and  much  less  to  the  world.  Did  not 
the  Saviour  thus  give  us  notice  that  the  healing  of 
Peter's  wife's  mother  was  a  choice  manifestation 
of  his  power  and  grace,  and  was  intended  to  con 
vey  a  lesson  to  the  choicer  spirits  among  his  fol 
lowers  ?  I  think  so,  and  therefore  I  shall  so  use 
the  incident.  To  you  who  love  Jesus  much,  and 
live  in  special  nearness  to  him,  there  is  a  voice 


FIRST  HEALING    AATD    THEM    SERVICE.       11 

from  the  bed  of  her  who  rose  from  the  fever  to 
minister  to  her  Lord.  You  also  are  called  from 
your  weakness  that  you  may  pay  personal  service 
to  him  who  heals  all  your  diseases. 

Yet  though  Jesus  and  Peter  and  James  and  John 
were  there,  nothing  is  before  you  but  a  family 
group,  a  scene  in  a  house.  True  religion  displays 
its  greatest  marvels  around  the  domestic  hearth. 
A  fisherman's  mother-in-law  becomes  an  historic 
personage  through  the  Lord's  touching  her.  What 
glory  Jesus  casts  upon  common  things!  With 
what  grandeur  he  invests  a  room  in  a  poor  man's 
house  !  A  fisherman's  hut  becomes  the  head-quar 
ters  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  He  heals  a 
woman  within  its  doors,  and  before  long  "  all  the 
city  was  gathered  together  at  the  door."  0  that  we 
may  see  the  like;  our  own  dear  ones  saved,  and 
then  the  whole  city  roused  to  seek  divine  healing  ! 

We  will  arrange  our  discourse  under  the  head 
ings  of  four  observations. 

I.     First,  let  us  observe  that  IT  MAY  BE  WE  HAVE 

SOME  IN  OUR  HOUSE  WHO  NEED  THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE    LORD 

JESUS.  One  in  Peter's  house  could  not  as  yet 
minister  to  Christ,  for  she  needed  that  Christ 
should  minister  to  her.  She  was  sick  of  a  great 
fever,  and  quite  prostrated  by  it,  so  as  to  be 
altogether  unable  to  rise.  Let  us  think  whether 
we  have  not  some  about  us  who  are  spiritually 
sick,  in  a  way  which  may  be  likened  to  a  great 
fever. 

What  would  the  fever  represent?  Those  who 
are  in  a  fever  represent  spiritually  those  who  are 
on  fire  ivith  sin.  The  original  word  for  "  fever" 
bears  a  close  relation  to  the  word  "fire."  The 


12       FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

world's  great  poet  speaks  of  "  the  fiery  fever." 
A  burning  heat  inflames  the  body,  quickens  the 
pnlse  to  an  unnatural  pace,  parches  the  mouth  and 
tongue,  and  dries  up  the  entire  system.  Those 
who  have  a  fever  in  their  souls  are  hot  after  sin, 
dried  up  with  ill  desires,  inflamed  with  evil  lusts. 
What  unhealthy  energy  many  even  show  in  the 
indulgence  of  their  passions,  or  in  the  pursuit  of 
their  ambitions:  they  are  so  inflamed  with  their 
desires  that  their  life  is  consumed.  Have  we  not 
seen  some  whom  we  dearly  loved  afflicted  with  this 
fierce  distemper?  Touch  upon  certain  points,  and 
we  discover  that  they  are  diseased  in  reference  to 
them;  they  are  in  an  inflamed  state  of  mind;  they 
cannot  be  made  to  think  coolly  or  judge  calmly, 
but  they  grow  excited  and  angry.  Their  touch  is 
that  of  a  fevered  hand;  their  whole  nature  is  burn 
ing  with  the  fire  of  sin.  Such  persons  are  not 
always  alike  inflamed;  they  are  frequently  gentle 
end  tractable;  so  much  so,  that  we  are  filled  with 
hope  concerning  them.  Often  fever  is  intermit 
tent;  the  patient  is  hot  at  one  time,  and  cold  at 
another;  and  in  many  sinners  the  fever  of  sin  is 
intermittent  in  its  symptoms.  They  are  not  always 
drinking;  sometimes  they  are  sober  for  a  long  pe 
riod,  and  express  themselves  as  deeply  penitent  for 
former  falls.  What  pleasant  company,  what  fine 
genial  spirits  they  are  at  such  times  !  The  fever 
returns,  and  nothing  can  restrain  them: the}7  drink 
even  to  delirium.  Alas,  the  misery  which  is  thus 
caused  !  Others  are  gentle,  and  loving  for  a  season ; 
and  then  they  suddenly  give  way  to  anger,  and  there 
is  no  knowing  what  they  will  say  or  do.  When 
once  the  fever  is  on  them  they  become  as  inflamed  as 


FIRST    HEALING    AND    THEN    SERVICE.       13 

ever.  We  know  pei'sons  from  whom  the  heat  of 
the  fever  is  so  long  gone  that  we  think  surely  they 
are  healed ;  but,  alas,  their  cool  times  are  only  a  pause 
between  the  attacks,  and  the  evil  returns  with  in 
creased  energy.  Their  goodness  is  as  the  morning 
cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew;  it  comes  hopefully, 
but  it  disappears  utterly.  We  have  mistaken  the 
period  between  the  fever  fits  for  the  calm  of  a  cure, 
but  it  has  not  turned  out  to  be  so;  they  have,  per 
haps,  been  even  worse  after  their  hopeful  times  than 
ever  they  were  before;  like  him  from  whom  the  evil 
spirit  went  out  of  his  own  accord,  only  to  return 
again,  and  bring  with  him  seven  other  spirits  more 
wicked  than  himself  to  enter  in  and  dwell  there. 

Have  you  not  such  cases  under  your  own  roofs, 
or  among  your  next  of  kin — poor  souls  inflamed 
with  the  terrible  heat  of  sin  ? 

These  fevered  people  are  frequently  very  restless. 
It  is  one  effect  of  the  fever  that  the  man  cannot 
lie  long  together  either  on  this  side  or  on  the 
other,  but  turns  to  and  fro.  Even  his  sleep  is 
broken;  neither  by  day  nor  by  night  can  he  find 
rest.  He  is  dried  up,  and  feels  as  weak  as  if  he 
were  brought  into  the  dust  of  death  and  utterly 
dissolved.  His  experience  is  not  so  much  pain  as 
something  worse  than  pain,  an  utter  absence  of 
rest.  Have  you  not  friends  who  in  this  sense  are 
feverish  ?  I  had  almost  said  I  hoped  they  are  so,  if 
they  are,  indeed,  under  the  power  of  sin.  There 
are  signs  of  life  where  unrest  abounds.  We  know 
young  men  with  happy  homes  who  cannot  be  con 
tent;  they  seem  resolved  to  break  their  mothers' 
hearts,  and  their  fathers  know  not  what  to  do  with 
them.  Nothing  pleases  them,  they  are  always 


14       FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

unsettled.  They  have  been  put  to  a  half  a  dozen 
businesses  already,  and  have  left  each  one  of  them: 
they  are  now  longing  for  a  foreign  country,  or  for 
enlistment  in  the  army,  or  for  anything  other  than 
their  present  calling.  We  have  known  them  goto 
the  colonies  and  come  back  again,  finding  nothing 
there;  a  sea  voyage  was  to  cure  them,  but,  alas,  a 
sinner  on  land  is  a  sinner  at  sea.  The  malady  is  in 
ward,  and  needs  change  of  self  rather  than  change 
of  place.  Under  the  influence  of  the  fever  of  sin 
men  wish,  and  do  not  know  what  they  wish ;  they  are 
likea  rolling  thing  before  the  whirlwind,  or  as  waves 
of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed :  no  part 
of  them  seems  to  be  at  rest,  a  sort  of  madness  pos 
sesses  them.  Above  all,  there  is  a  restlessness  about 
them  in  reference  to  sin:  they  sin,  but  they  are  not 
pleased;  arid  after  they  have  sinned  they  are  eaten 
up  by  remorse,  a  remorse,  however,  which  is  not  prac 
tically  operative;  for  they  go  back  to  sin  again; 
flying  like  the  moth  to  the  candle  wherein  they 
have  already  burned  their  wings.  Such  persons 
often  become  irritable  towards  their  friends  when 
checked  in  their  wrong  doing,  and  even  become 
at  last,  like  Pashur  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah,  a  ter 
ror  to  themselves  and  to  their  friends. 

1  may  be  treading  upon  tender  ground  in  all 
this.  I  believe  my  words  are  true  to  the  letter.  I 
shall  ask  Christian  people  who  have  not  this  heavy 
trouble  to  be  very  thankful,  and  to  pray  to  God 
for  those  who  have.  With  those  dear  friends  who 
have  to  endure  the  sore  affliction  of  having  such 
in  their  family  1  desire  to  sympathize,  and  to 
encourage  them  to  bring  these  feverish  spirits 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  prayer  and  faith,  that  in 


FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN    SERVICE.       15 

them  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  may  be  literally 
fulfilled. 

One  symptom  of  a  fever  is  that  a  man  loses  ap 
petite  for  that  which  ivould  be  good  for  him.  Some 
of  our  unconverted  friends  have  no  taste  for  the 
gospel;  we  cannot  easily  induce  them  to  come  to 
hear  it.  If  you  get  them  under  the  sound  of  the 
word,  you  would  sit  and  pray,  and  even  agonize 
for  them,  all  the  while  the  truth  was  being  preached ; 
but,  alas!  they  will  not  come  near;  they  have  no 
taste,  no  liking,  no  care  for  heavenly  things;  the 
thing  they  most  require  is  that  for  which  they  have 
the  least  desire.  Yet,  fear  not;  Jesus  can  give 
them  appetite,  and  everything  else  which  is  neces 
sary  to  a  perfect  cure. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  fevered  patient  often  feels 
a  great  thirst,  which  he  cannot  by  any  means  allay. 
He  longs  to  drink  and  drink  again,  and  with  all 
his  drinking  the  heat  is  not  abated.  Sometimes  the 
sick  man  has  an  appetite  for  what  he  must  not  taste, 
he  craves  after  the  most  injurious  and  even  unnatural 
things ;  foods  which  would  be  most  pernicious  he  pre 
fers.  So  is  it  with  unconverted  ones  when  under 
the  full  power  of  sin ;  they  are  eager  enough  to  hear 
a  godless  lecture,  or  to  listen  to  opinions  which  are 
the  opposite  of  truth ;  they  would  go  through  any 
hardship  to  indulge  their  passions,  and  sacrifice 
any  amount  to  be  allowed  their  desires.  As  the 
horse-leech  crieth,  "Give,  give,"  so  is  sin  insatiable. 
Sin  can  never  yield  satisfaction  to  the  soul  of  man: 
as  well  might  the  thirsty  hope  to  relieve  their  an 
guish  by  draughts  of  brine.  As  it  is  with  cups  of 
wine,  so  is  it  with  sin ;  one  makes  room  for  another. 
He  that  has  sinned  will  sin.  It  is  an  awful  part 


16       FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

of  the  punishment  of  sin  that  it  grows  into  a  habit 
and  increases  in  intensity  as  it  is  indulged.  I  may 
rightly  say  of  the  black  well  of  sin,  "  He  that  drink- 
eth  of  this  water  shall  thirst  again  and  thirst  more." 
Sin  is  a  thing  of  rapid  propagation,  and  never 
abides  alone.  You  cannot  retain  one  sin  in  the 
house  by  itself,  for  it  will  before  long  produce  a 
numerous  progeny,  a  generation  of  vipers,  many 
as  the  hairs  of  your  head.  What  a  dreadful  thing 
it  is  for  a  man  to  have  a  fever  upon  him  which 
makes  him  thirst  for  that  which  increases  his 
thirst. 

But  the  worst  point  in  the  case  of  the  sinner  is 
this,  that  this  fever  of  his  will  prove  fatal.  This 
son,  daughter,  husband,  or  wife  of  yours  will  per 
ish  through  the  fever  of  sin,  if  it  be  not  cured.  A 
great  fever  is  a  great  danger,  and  so  is  sin.  In 
our  Lord's  day  men  did  not  know  how  to  deal  with 
fever  so  well  as  now,  therefore  those  who  were 
taken  with  it  were  doomed.  This  poor  woman 
would  have  died  if  Jesus  had  not  interposed:  thus 
is  it  with  the  sinful  ones  whose  cases  we  deplore. 

I  have  thus  described  the  disease:  what  shall  we 
do  with  it  ?  Let  us  see  what  the  disciples  did. 

Mark  says,  "  Anon  they  tell  him  of  her."  I  would 
earnestly  persuade  you  to  do  the  same.  Take  the 
case  of  the  person  who  is  laid  upon  your  heart  and 
spread  it  before  the  Lord.  Go  over  the  matter  in 
detail;  not  for  his  information,  but  to  excite  your 
own  prayerfulness.  Look  the  matter  in  the  face, 
making  no  excuses  for  the  sinner,  and  in  all  truth 
fulness  tell  the  Lord  what  aileth  the  sinful  one. 
Pour  out  your  heart  before  the  Lord,  and  sorrow 
over  the  lost  one,  even  as  Samuel  mourned  over 


FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE.       17 

Saul,  only  with  better  hope  Tell  the  caso  to  Jesug 
just  as  you  would  mention  a  physical  case  to  a  doc 
tor.  He  is  ready  to  hear  it  all,  and  to  consider  it. 
Make  a  confidant  of  Jesus.  Do  not  go  and  com 
plain  all  over  the  neighborhood,  "My  boy  does 
this,"  or  "  My  husband  does  that,"  for  you  may  in 
crease  the  evil  in  that  way  by  incensing  the  per 
son  against  yourself  and  your  religion.  You  may 
tell  Jesus  all  about  it,  without  restraint.  No  harm 
can  come  of  such  a  relation.  It  will  be  a  relief  to 
your  own  mind,  and  it  will  be  the  most  proper  way 
of  engaging  your  Lord  to  help  you. 

Luke  tells  us  "they  besought  him  for  her."  After 
you  have  stated  the  case  to  your  Lord,  then  plead 
with  him,  plead  his  promises,  and  plead  his  nature, 
plead  the  need  of  the  case,  and  the  glory  which  a 
cure  will  bring.  Let  it  be  no  cold  prayer,  but  a 
warm,  hearty,  intense  entreaty. 

Do  not  wrangle  with  sinners  about  religion,  but 
wrestle  with  Christ  about  them.  Beseech  the  sin 
ners  for  Christ,  but  never  fail  to  beseech  Christ 
for  the  sinners.  When  little  can  be  done  with 
men  you  can  still  do  much  with  Jesus.  It  will 
be  of  very  little  use  to  be  always  worrying  them 
with,  "You  should  not  do  this,"  and,  "You  should 
not  do  that":  but  it  will  be  of  infinite  service  to 
go  and  say,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  these  poor 
souls  who  know  thee  riot."  Never  give  over  pray 
ing  for  your  prodigals  as  long  as  there  is  breath  in 
their  bodies;  no,  not  even  if  they  curse  you  for 
doing  so. 

We  find  also  that  when  they  had  thus  told  Jesus 
of  her,  and  had  besought  him,  then  they  brought 
him  into  the  chamber;  so  that  we  read  in  our  text, 


18       FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN    SEKl'ICE. 

"When  Jesus  was  corne  into  Peter's  house,  he  saw 
his  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of  a  fever.''  They 
seemed  to  say,  "  Lord,  this  is  all  we  can  do.  We 
would  have  thee  look  upon  the  dying  woman  and 
consider  her.  There  she  is."  Can  you  not  by  faith 
BO  realize  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  you  see  him  viewing  the  lost  estate  of  those 
for  whom  you  are  concerned  ?  Your  friend  is  fe 
vered  with  sin,  but  Jesus  sees  it.  Your  boy  is 
restless,  but  Jesus  watches  him.  Your  daughter 
is  like  to  perish,  but  Christ  looks  upon  her.  Every 
day  let  your  importunate  prayers  keep  them  under 
Christ's  eye.  Bring  unto  Jesus  all  your  sinful 
ones;  lay  them  at  his  feet;  leave  them  in  his  pres 
ence.  When  you  have  done  all  this:  when  you 
have  told  him  of  her,  and  besought  him  about  her, 
and  brought  him  to  the  house  to  look  upon  her, 
then  you  may  expect  his  healing  touch  and  sav 
ing  word. 

This  is  our  first  remark. 

II.  Secondly:  THE  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  MUST  PRE 
CEDE  THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  SAVED  ONES.  We  ariX- 

iously  desire  that  these  friends  of  ours  who  are  now 
sick  of  the  fever  of  sin  should  yet  become  the  ser 
vants  of  Christ,  and  should  minister  to  him.  I  can 
imagine  the  joy  of  that  anxious  mother  over  yonder 
if  she  could  ever  be  privileged  to  hear  her  boy 
preach  the  gospel — that  boy  who  has  even  been 
known  to  swear.  What  delight  would  fill  the  wife's 
bosom  if  she  could  hear  her  infidel  husband  engage 
publicly  in  prayer.  Some  of  you  ai*e  thinking  now 
of  certain  gifted  persons  who  are  using  all  their 
abilities  against  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  "  Oh," 
say  you,  "if  they  might  be  converted,  my  heart 


FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE.       1H 

would  dance  with  delight."  This  is  a  right  desire, 
but  do  not  indulge  it  unwisely.  Do  not  ask  them 
to  do  anything  for  Jesus  while  they  are  unregen- 
erate.  Healing  must  come  before  serving.  When 
a  person  is  "laid,  and  sick  of  a  fever,"  do  not  ask 
her  to  rise  and  wait  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
No;  his  ministry  to  Peter's  wife's  mother  preceded 
her  ministry  to  him.  She  was  "  laid,"  that  is,  pros 
trated  by  the  terrible  malady.  As  a  body  greatly 
weakened  seems  to  cling  to  the  bed,  and  almost 
sink  into  it,  so  was  she:  she  was  like  a  crushed 
thing,  or  a  sheep  cast  upon  its  back  in  a  trench, 
and  so  she  was  powerless  to  do  anything.  Thus  is 
it  with  a  sinner.  What  can  he  do  for  Christ  ? 
"  When  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time 
Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  There  is  no  strength 
in  an  ungodly  man  wherewith  to  serve  God.  He 
has  no  faith,  and  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God:  he  has  no  love,  and  even  if  a  deed 
were  done  rightly,  yet  if  there  was  no  love  as 
the  motive,  it  could  not  be  acceptable  with  God. 
The  sinner,  in  fact,  has  no  spiritual  life,  arid  if  he 
should  try  to  do  good  works  they  would  be  dead 
works,  and  could  not  please  the  living  God.  Out 
of  a  foul  spring  no  clean  waters  can  corne,  and  out 
of  a  corrupt  heart  no  acceptable  works  can  pro 
ceed.  Christ  must  give  us  strength,  and  cause  us 
both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasure, 
for  without  him  we  can  do  nothing. 

Moreover,  this  sick  woman  was  utterly  unfit  to 
do  anything  for  Jesus  and  his  disciples  with  a 
great  fever  upon  her.  Everywhere  she  went  she 
would  spread  the  contagion  of  her  malady.  Every 
thing  she  touched  would  be  infected;  any  food  she 


20       FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN    SERVICE. 

prepared  would  be  nauseous  even  to  think  upon 
Let  her  keep  her  bed,  by  all  means,  and  let  none 
go  near  her  unless  they  are  compelled  to  do  so;  for 
fever  soon  seizes  upon  fresh  victims.  So  you  that 
are  ungodly  cannot  serve  Christ,  for  everything 
you  do  is  defiled :  you  cannot  lay  your  hand  even 
upon  holy  things  without  polluting  them.  Your 
thoughts  are  feverish,  your  words  are  feverish, 
your  acts  are  feverish:  therefore  we  cannot  invite 
your  co-operation  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  You 
would  do  more  hurt  than  good,  if  as  sinful  men 
you  pretended  to  render  service  to  a  holy  God. 
Such  is  your  natural  depravity  that  you  would 
spread  infection  all  around,  even  if  you  attempted 
to  minister  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

What  is  more,  a  person  sick  of  a  fever,  if  in  her 
feverishness  she  were  to  arise  and  wait  upon 
guests  would  get  no  good,  but  run  terrible  risks. 
Persons  in  fever  must  not  be  exposed  to  draughts, 
or  be  driven  to  exert  themselves.  Every  doctor 
would  judge  it  to  be  most  injurious  to  a  person  in 
a  high  state  of  fever  to  attempt  to  work.  I 
solemnly  believe  that  unconverted  people  get  hurt 
when  they  attempt  religious  duties.  To  preach 
with  an  unrenewed  heart  must  be  to  pronounce 
one's  own  death-warrant.  If  unrenewed  men 
come  to  the  sacramental  table  they  eat  and  drink 
condemnation  to  themselves;  and  if  they  in  any 
way  make  a  profession  of  faith,  they  are  enacting 
a  falsehood  in  the  sight  of  high  heaven,  seeing 
they  have  no  such  faith.  "  Unto  the  wicked  God 
saith,  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  stat 
utes  ? "  No,  you  must  stand  back,  you  that  have 
never  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 


FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE.       21 

You  cannot  minister  to  Christ  while  the  red  fever 
is  on  your  brow.  He  who  has  seraphim  for  his 
servitors  wants  not  feverish  services  from  souls 
diseased  with  iniquity.  King  Jesus  wants  no 
slaves  to  swell  his  train;  you  must  be  freed  first 
from  the  yoke  of  sin,  and  then  you  shall  become 
the  servants  of  the  Lord. 

Listen  to  me,  any  fevered  ones  who  are  here, 
while  I  briefly  describe  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
ministered  to  this  woman. 

He  ministered  to  her  by  his  presence.  Hin  being 
in  the  room  with  her  meant  that  salvation  was 
come  to  her  house.  Beloved,  believe  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  here.  To  his  ministers  he  has  said,  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  I  want  you  to  know  that  he  is  not  shut 
up  within  the  heavenly  gates,  but  he  is  here,  and 
his  power  to  save  is  present  in  the  midst  of  this 
assembly,  and  will  be  present  in  your  room  when 
you  go  home  and  fall  upon  your  knees. 

The  next  thing  that  blessed  this  woman  was  Ins 
look.  "  Jesus  saw  her."  There  is  more  here  than 
appears  upon  the  surface.  You  know  what  a  phy 
sician  means  when  he  says,  "  I  will  come  and  see 
your  sick  child."  He  does  not  mean  that  he  will 
barely  look  at  it:  he  intends  to  search  into  the 
matter,  study  it,  and  see  what  can  be  done.  Will 
you  try  to  think  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sees 
you,  that  he  reads  your  heart,  knows  your  secret 
thoughts,  hears  your  secret  groanings,  and  notes 
your  inward  desires?  He  perceives  the  power 
which  sin  has  over  you,  the  difficulty  you  find  in 
coming  to  him; — he  sees  it  all,  and  knows  how  to 
deal  with  it.  Not  onlv  is  Jesus  near  at  hand,  bat 


22       FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

he  is  present  with  his  eyes  open,  observing  all  that 
ails  you.  Seeing  it  with  a  mind  which  is  deeply 
gytn pathetic,  and  a  heart  quick  to  relieve. 

The  next  thing  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  used  was, 
his  touch.  This  is  the  healing  point.  He  "  took  her 
by  the  hand,  and  lifted  her  up."  There  was  a  con 
tact  established.  Oh,  that  glorious  doctrine  of  the 
incarnation  of  Christ,  there  is  healing  in  it !  I  do 
not  mean  in  the  doctrine,  but  in  the  fact  itself, 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  took  our  flesh,  and  be 
came  man,  "  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our 
flesh."  Thus  he  touches  us,  and  heals  us.  Had 
he  not  been  man  he  could  not  have  died,  and  had 
he  not  died  we  must  have  died  forever.  God  in 
Christ  Jesns  is  very  near  to  thee,  poor  soul;  so 
near  to  thee  that  if  thou  dost  by  faith  touch  the 
hem  of  his  garment,  thou  art  saved.  Jf  thou  be- 
lievest  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  is  in  contact  with 
thee;  his  cool  hand  is  grasping  thy  fevered  hand; 
and  as  thy  fever  dissolves  into  him, — for  "  he  him 
self  bare  our  sickness" — his  health  flows  into  thee, 
so  that  thou  mayest  arise  and  minister  unto  him. 
Contact  by  faith  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  is  the 
ordained  means  of  salvation. 

And  there  was,  beside  this  contact,  another  form 
of  power;  our  Lord  spake  to  the  fever.  His  word 
is  a  word  of  might.  If  the  touch  of  our  Lord 
represents  incarnation,  his  word  represents  resur 
rection  ;  for  by  hearing  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God 
shall  all  the  dead  arise  from  their  graves.  His 
word  is  quickening;  and  where  it  falls  it  proves 
itself  to  be  a  living  and  incorruptible  seed.  By 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  even  by  the  gospel  of  Jesus, 
the  fever  of  sin  is  driven  out  of  men  and  women,. 


FIKST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE.       23 

Oh,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  may  now  speak  to  you  by 
these  lips  of  mine, — speak  with  power  almighty  to 
your  hearts!  Oh,  that  thou,  poor  sin-sick  sinner, 
may  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  with  thine  inner 
ears,  for  such  hearing  is  eternal  life !  God  help 
thee  so  to  hear. 

There  is  healing  for  thee;  and  I  warn  thee  again 
that  thou  must  have  this  healing  before  thou  canst 
work  for  Jesus.  Thy  Lord  must  begin  with  thee 
ere  thou  canst  begin  with  him.  Do  not  go  blun 
dering  out  of  the  Tabernacle  and  say,  "  I  will  take 
a  class  in  the  Sunday-School";  "I  will  try  to 
preach";  "I  will  give  my  money  to  the  Lord's 
cause."  No;  stand  back  till  thou  art  healed;  weep 
and  pray,  and  agonize  till  thou  art  healed.  Thou 
must  receive  from  Jesus  all  he  has  to  give  ere 
thou  canst  give  aught  to  him. 

This  may  sound  harsh  to  you  who  mean  well, 
but  God  forbid  that  I  should  bolster  you  up  in  a 
zeal  for  God  which  is  not  according  to  knowledge. 
Aliens  cannot  stand  in  the  Lord's  courts;  ye  must 
be  made  Israelites  before  ye  can  be  priests  unto 
God.  First,  salvation,  then  service. 

III.     Thirdly,  it  is  plainly  taught   in  the  text 

that  STRENGTH  TO  MINISTER  COMES  WITH  HEALING.        "  Im 

mediately  she  arose  and  ministered  to  them."  Fe~ 
ver  causes  extreme  weakness,  and  when  it  leaves 
the  patient,  he  is  for  a  considerable  time  greatly 
debilitated.  The  cures  of  nature  are  slow;  but 
when  Jesus  cures,  he  does  it  at  once.  Though  he 
uses  onjy  a  touch  and  a  word,  yet  he  cures  so  per 
fectly  that  no  weakness  remains.  The  woman  did 
not  lie  in  bed  a  week  or  two,  and  feed  upon  nour 
ishing  diet,  and  so  recover  her  strength ;  but  there 


24       FIXST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SEKV1CE. 

and  then  she  arose  from  her  bed,  girt  her  garments 
about  her,  and  went  about  the  duties  of  the  house 
hold.  Is  it  not  wonderful  to  see  her  haste  to  the 
kitchen,  to  prepare  the  evening  meal  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  his  friends  ?  With  gratitude 
beaming  from  her  face,  she  placed  each  dish  upon 
the  table,  and  brought  forth  water  with  which  her 
guests  might  wash  their  feet.  The  moment  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  saves  a  soul  he  gives  that  soul 
strength  for  its  appointed  service. 

I  want  to  call  your  attention  to  this,  that  her 
service  was  immediate  service,  rendered  on  the  spot, 
without  delay.  Some  of  you  have  been  converted 
during  our  late  special  services;  let  me  bid  you 
serve  the  Lord  at  once,  even  as  the  Lord  has  served 
you.  "  What,  get  to  work  directly  ?"  Yes,  imme 
diately;  for  there  is  something  very  beautiful  about 
that  which  is  done  by  new  converts,  Oh,  the 
beauty  of  that  first  look  of  love !  Oh,  the  sweet 
ness  of  those  first  notes  of  praise!  Oh,  the  power 
of  those  first  sentences  of  testimony!  I  do  not 
find  any  fault  with  our  dear  old  saints:  there  is  a 
richness  and  maturity  about  them;  but  still  my 
soul  desireth  the  first  ripe  fruits.  There  is  a  pun 
gency  of  flavor  about  the  first  berries  of  grace;  and 
even  a  kind  of  tartness  about  them,  which  makes 
their  taste  all  the  more  perceptible  to  those  who  are 
dull  and  careless.  Give  me  fruit  with  the  dew  of 
the  morning  upon  it.  New  blood  in  the  veins  of 
the  church  is  a  great  promoter  of  its  health  and 
vigor.  The  first  fruits  are  in  some  respects  the 
best  fruits.  I  would  not  have  a  converted  person 
wait  a  week  before  trying  to  do  something  for 
Jesus.  Kun  as  soon  as  you  find  your  feet 


FIRST  HEALING    AXD    THEN   SERVICE.       25 

But  notice  that  what  this  good  woman  did  was 
very  appropriate.  Peter's  wife's  mother  did  not  get 
out  of  bed  and  go  down  the  street  and  deliver  an 
address  to  an  assembled  multitude.  Women  are 
best  when  they  are  quiet.  I  share  the  apostle 
Paul's  feelings  when  he  bade  women  be  silent  in 
the  assembly.  Yet  there  is  work  for  holy  women, 
and  we  read  of  Peter's  wife's  mother  that  she  arose 
and  ministered  to  Christ.  She  did  what  she  could 
and  what  she  should.  She  arose  and  ministered 
to  him.  Some  people  can  do  nothing  that  they 
are  allowed  to  do,  but  waste  their  energies  in  la 
menting  that  they  are  not  called  to  do  other  peo 
ple's  work.  Blessed  are  they  who  do  what  they 
should  do.  It  is  better  to  be  a  good  housewife,  or 
nurse,  or  domestic  servant,  than  to  be  a  powerless 
preacher  or  a  graceless  talker.  She  did  not  arise 
and  prepare  a  lecture,  nor  preach  a  sermon,  but 
she  aro.se  cirid  prepared  a  supper,  and  that  was  what 
she  was  fitted  to  do.  Was  she  not  a  housewife  ?  As 
housewife  let  her  serve  the  Lord.  I  do  not  say  that 
if  you  were  converted  a  week  ago  you  are  at  once 
to  preach.  No:  but  you  are  to  minister  to  the 
Lord  in  the  way  for  which  you  are  best  qualified, 
and  that  may  happen  to  be  by  a  living  testimony 
to  his  grace  in  your  daily  calling.  We  greatly  err 
when  we  dream  that  only  a  preacher  can  minister 
to  the  Lord ;  for  Jesus  has  work  of  all  sorts  for  all 
sorts  of  followers.  Paul  speaks  of  women  who 
helped  him  much;  and,  assuredly,  as  there  is  no 
idle  angel  there  ought  to  be  no  idle  Christians. 
We  are  not  saved  for  our  own  sakes,  but  that  we 
may  be  of  service  to  the  Lord  and  to  his  people;  let 
us  not  miss  our  calling. 


26       FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

When  healed  of  her  fever  Peter's  wife's  mother 
had  strength  to  perform  a  suitable  ministry,  such 
as  the  peculiar  occasion  required.  She  did  for 
Jesns  and  the  three  companions  that  which  was 
needful  there  and  then.  Jesus  had  had  a  hard 
day's  preaching,  and  that  is  hungry  work:  he  had 
spent  a  heavy  day  in  healing,  and  that  is  exhaust- 
ins:  work;  and  now  he  wanted  somewhat  to  eat, 

O 

and  therefore  he  came  into  Peter's  house.  The 
principal  worker  there  was  laid  aside,  and  so  our 
Lord  did  not  ask  for  refreshment.  He  always 
thought  of  others  before  himself;  and  when  he  was 
fiii ut  and  hungry  he  put  hack  his  own  needs  till 
he  restored  health  to  the  fevered  woman.  This 
being  done,  the  next  necessary  tiling  was  that  the 
wearied  preacher  and  physician  should  be  re 
freshed,  and  this  the  grateful  woman  attended  to. 
When  our  Lord  sat  on  the  well  and  talked  with  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  he  was  faint  and  weary,  and 
asked  for  drink;  but  the  claims  of  nature  he  put 
aside  till  he  had  preached  the  gospel  to  her.  Then 
came  the  disciples  with  the  meat  they  had  bought. 
On  this  occasion  at  Peter's  house  the  refreshment 
was  ministered  by  her  who  had  just  quitted  her 
bed.  "  She  arose  and  ministered  to  them."  Now, 
dear  friends,  you  that  are  converted  may  minister 
to  Christ  in  a  way  which  is  as  necessary  as  the  ser 
vice  of  his  ablest  preachers  and  pastors.  There  is 
something  for  you  to  do  which  will  be  a  refresh 
ment  to  him  and  to  his  servants.  He  condescend 
ingly  permits  it  and  will  graciously  accept  it.  You 
can  personally  minister  to  a  personal  Christ.  You 
cannot  do  everything,  but  you  can  do  something 
that  will  be  acceptable  to  him.  You  may;  yuu 


FIRST  HEALING    AND    THEN  SERVICE.       27 

can;  and  you  ought.  Ministry  to  Jesus  is  prac 
ticable,  permissible,  acceptable,  and  obligatory. 
You  owe  your  very  life  to  him.  Come,  spend  that 
life  in  his  service.  Immediately,  this  very  day, 
minister  to  Jesus.  If  you  have  only  been  saved 
this  day  yet  there  is  a  somewhat  incumbent  for  the 
day;  and  in  its  place  it  is  as  necessary  to  the  glory 
of  God  as  the  ministry  of  cherubim  and  seraphim. 
Now  then,  do  it.  I  will  not  urge  you,  because  I 
can  see  in  my  last  head  something  that  will  move 
you  to  it. 

IV.       TlIE     DESIRE     TO     MINISTER    ALWAYS    ARISES    OUT 

OF  HEALING.  Here  was  a  woman,  a  poor  woman, 
an  old  woman,  a  widow  woman,  one  who  had  just 
been  sick,  and  she  desires  at  once  to  minister  to 
Christ,  and  she  can  do  it,  and  she  does  do  it. 
How  think  you,  was  she  moved  to  this  ?  Was  not 
it  that  strength  naturally  suggests  activity  as  soon 
as  ever  you  get  it  ?  When  you  are  very  prostrate 
you  do  not  want  to  do  anything.  You  feel  as  if  you 
must  lie  still;  there  is  no  power  in  you,  and  there 
is  no  industry  in  you;  but  persons  who  have  re 
covered  want  something  to  do.  Sometimes  they 
try  to  do  more  than  they  can,  such  is  the  sug 
gestion  of  revived  strength.  Now,  if  the  Lord  has 
given  you  spiritual  life,  that  life  will  want  to 
work;  if  he  has  given  you  light,  that  light  will 
shine.  "  Now,  candle,  do  not  shine."  Will  the 
candle  take  any  notice  of  you  ?  No.  it  cannot 
help  shining  if  it  has  been  lighted.  If  Christ  has 
given  you  his  grace,  and  it  is  in  you  as  a  well  of 
living  water,  it  must  flow  out  that  others  may 
drink.  It  is  no  use  saying,  "  Water,  do  not  flow; 
fountain,  cease."  The  fountain  cannot  help  it;  it 


28       FIRST   HEALING   AXD    THEN   SERVICE. 

must  send  forth  its  streams;  and  it  must  be  so 
with  you.  The  strength  God  has  given  you  in 
Christ  suggests  activity. 

And  then  the  gratitude  for  this  strength  impels  you 
to  activity.  How  can  a  man  be  still  when  Christ 
has  spoken  for  him  and  delivered  him?  We  read 
in  the  paper  some  time  ago  that  the  King  of  Italy, 
to  his  great  honor,  appeared  in  a  court  of  law  oti 
behalf  of  a  man  brought  under  charge  of  caus 
ing  a  death.  The  king  had  seen  the  accident, 
and  he  came  forward  an  a  common  witness  in  the 
court  to  say  that  the  horse  had  mastered  the  driver, 
and  the  man  was  not  to  be  blamed.  1  do  not 
know  the  name  of  the  man,  but  I  feel  pretty  sure 
that  Jacobi  or  Antonio,  whoever  he  may  be,  if  ever 
King  Humbert  wants  somebody  to  speak  up  for 
him,  he  will  find  a  friend  in  him:  lie  will  say, 
"My  King  came  into  court  and  spoke  for  me,  and  I 
will  as  long  as  ever  I  live  speak  up  for  him." 
Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  an  advocate  for  you, 
therefore  be  an  advocate  for  him.  Can  you  evt-r 
be  silent  for  Christ  now  that  the  Lord  Christ  has 
redeemed  you  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  the 
penalty  of  sin?  I  tell  you,  if  you  can  be  quiet 
and  do  nothing  for  Christ,  I  am  afraid  you  have 
never  tasted  of  his  love  and  grace. 

Once  more,  I  think  I  may  say  that  those  who 
are  healed  by  Christ  are  sure  to  do  something  for 
him  of  the  right  sort,  because  their  former  habitudes 
loill  assist  them.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  that  sinful 
activity  can  ever  help  us  into  holy  activity,  but  I 
do  mean  tins;  that  we  cnn  turn  our  old  habits  to 
account  for  Jesus.  I  believe  that  Peter's  wife's 
mother  was  a  particularly  uice  old  lady.  There  ia 


FIRST   HEALING    AND    THEN    SERVICE.       29 

r&.tber  a  prejudice  against  a  wife's  mother,  and  if 
Peter  found  it  the  proper  thing  to  have  her  living  in 
the  house,  I  am  sure  she  was  a  specially  good  woman. 
I  have  a  picture  of  her  in  my  mind's  eye, — a  dear  old 
soul,  always  busy  and  happy.  When  there  was  noth 
ing  else  to  do  she  would  mend  the  stockings,  or  do  any 
commonplace  work.  She  was  always  busy.  You 
never  had  to  ask  her  to  work,  she  did  it  of  her  own 
accord.  At  cooking  the  meals  and  preparing  every 
thing  for  the  house  she  was  perfectly  at  home, 
never  grumbling,  never  complaining,  never  setting 
the  husband  against  the  wife,  but  always  looking 
out  to  do  everything  that  possibly  could  be  done 
to  make  the  household  go  along  in  all  its  concerns 
with  oiled  wheels.  When  she  had  the  fever  siie 
did  not  like  to  be  laid  aside;  and  so  the  moment 
she  is  restored,  there  she  is  at  it.  The  ruling 
passion  is  strong  now  that  death  has  been  removed. 
She  begins  to  serve  Jesus,  for  she  had  always  been 
serving  somebody.  When  Jesus  came  into  the 
house  with  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  she  could 
not  bear  to  think  that  there  was  nothing  for  sup 
per;  but  the  moment  she  felt  well,  away  she  went 
to  the  kitchen,  with  all  the  utensils  of  her  cookery 
craft,  to  prepare  the  best  meal  in  her  power.  You 
people  who,  when  you  were  not  converted,  were  al 
ways  active,  ought  to  be  doubly  active  now.  In 
the  family  do  all  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Those 
commonplace  things, — sweeten  and  flavor  them 
with  love  for  him:  reverence  him  and  glorify  him 
in  all  that  you  do.  Is  not  there  something  you  can 
do  for  your  neighbor,  something  you  can  do  for 
your  children,  some  part  of  the  Lord's  work  you 
can  undertake  ? 


30        FIRST    PI  BALING    AND    THEN   SERVICE. 

As  for  yon,  young  men  who  have  been  so  restless, 
so  vigorous,  so  dashing  in  sin,  it  seems  to  me  that 
habitual  energy  ought  to  be  placed  under  conse 
cration  to  Christ.  A  horse  that  has  no  mettle  in 
it  is  easily  managed;  still,  a  horse  with  a  little 
mettle,  though  he  may  kick,  and  plunge,  and  do  a 
great  deal  of  mischief,  is  all  the  better  horse  when 
he  is  broken  in.  If  he  be  under  proper  manage 
ment,  if  he  answers  to  the  bit,  you  like  the  mettle. 
So  it  is  with  a  man  when  he  is  converted.  If  he 
had  mettle  in  him  that  led  him  to  kick  and  plunge 
when  he  served  the  devil,  if  he  did  so  much  mischief 
and  damage  against  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  he  is 
the  very  man  to  pull  well  in  Jesus  Christ's  chariot. 
I  pray  the  Master,  therefore,  that  he  will  come 
and  heal  the  young  man  of  his  feverishness  and 
make  his  blood  cool  within  him  this  day,  and  re 
store  him  by  his  grace.  Oh  that  the  Lord  would 
touch  all  sick  folk  and  make  them  healthy  !  Then 
when  all  are  healed  let  us  rise  to  serve  him  who 
has  served  us,  and  unto  him  be  glory  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen  and  amen. 


II. 


A  SWEET  SILVEK  BELL  RINGING  IN  EACH 
BELIEVER'S   HEART. 

Read  February  1,  1885. 
"My  God  will  hear  me." — MICAH  vii.  7. 

WHAT  a  charming  sentence!  Can  you  say 
it?  Only  five  words,  but  what  meaning! 
Huge  volumes  of  poetry  have  appeared  from  Chau 
cer  even  to  Tennyson;  but  it  seems  to  rne  that  the 
essence  of  poetry  lies  hid  in  a  marvelously  con 
densed  form  within  these  few  words.  It  shall  take 
you  many  an  hour  to  suck  out  all  their  sweetness. 
There  is  an  almost  inconceivable  depth  of  meaning 
in  them ;  and  of  richness  of  assured  experience 
and  of  sweet  conclusions  of  a  hallowed  faith  they 
are  full  to  the  brim. 

"My  God  will  hear  me."  There  is  more  elo 
quence  in  that  sentence  than  in  all  the  orations  of 
Demosthenes.  He  that  can  speak  thus  can  say 
more  than  if  he  were  able  to  declare  truthfully 
that  all  worlds  were  his  own;  for  he  grasps  God 
himself,  and  holds  the  present  and  the  future  in 
the  hollow  of  his  hand. 

"My  God  will  hear  me."  It  is  prophetic;  but 
the  prophet  has  taken  upon  himself  no  unusual 
power,  neither  does  he  intend  his  prophecy  to  be 
true  of  himself  alone.  He  puts  this  divine  sen 
tence  into  the  mouth  of  every  believer;  every 


32  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

child  of  God  may  diire  to  suy  that  his  God  will 
hear  him,  for  he  may  dare  to  say  the  truth.  I  feel 
as  if  1  could  not  preach  from  the  text,  and  did  not 
want  to  do  so.  It  needs  no  aid  of  wit  or  words; 
for  myself  1  would  be  well  content  to  exhibit  this 
diamond  with  many  facets  by  merely  holding  it  up 
and  letting  the  light  £ill  on  it,  and  (lash  back  from 
it  in  variety  of  brilliance. 

"  My  God  will  hear  rne."  It  is  a  choice  song  for 
a  lone  harp,  which  is  half  afraid  of  the  choir  of 
musicians,  and  loves  to  have  its  strings  touched  in 
solitude.  1  feel  as  I  repeat  it  that  I  want  to  sit 
down  and  quietly  enjoy  it.  As  I  see  the  cows  lie 
in  the  meadow  quietly  chewing  the  cud,  so  would 
I  ruminate  on  these  few  but  precious  words.  Let 
rne  hear  the  sounds  again  and  again,  till  my 
tongue,  learning  their  rhythmic  melody,  repeats  as 
matter  of  habitual  delight  the  assurance,  "My  God 
will  hear  me." 

A  charming  sentence,  as  I  have  said;  but  in 
what  a  queer  place  we  find  it!  Just  as  they  find 
gold  in  the  dark  mine,  and  as  we  see  stars  in  the 
black  night,  so  do  we  find  these  rich  words  in  the 
midst  of  floods  of  grief  and  woe.  The  man  of  God 
is  pricked  and  torn  by  the  briars  of  the  age  in 
which  he  travels;  he  is  vexed  and  wearied  with 
the  bribery  and  corruption  all  around  him;  he  can 
not  find  peace  either  at  home  or  abroad, — nay,  not 
even  in  the  bosom  of  her  whom  he  loves;  he  is 
everywhere  disquieted  and  driven  to  and  fro;  and 
yet  it  is  just  at  that  time  that  he  cries,  "  My  God 
will  hear  me."  From  this  I  gather — and  I  gather 
it  not  from  this  alone,  but  from  my  own  personal 
experience — that  it  is  generally  when  things  are 


RINGING    IN   EACH   BELIEVER'S   HEART.      33 

at  the  worst  that  we  know  most  about  the  best. 
When  we  are  disappointed  of  men,  then  become 
we  most  contented  with  our  God.  When  earth- 
born  pprings  are  dry,  then  the  eternal  fountain- 
heads  flow  more  freely  than  ever,  and  as  we  drink 
of  them  our  soul  is  more  satisfied  than  ever  it 
bad  been  before.  God  is  dearest  when  goods  are 
fewest.  Heaven  is  warmest  when  earth  is  coldest. 
It  is  a  great  blessing  for  you,  dear  friend,  that  you 
can  say,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  I  do  not  mind 
much  about  your  surroundings;  they  may  be 
grievous  and  trying;  but  if  they  have  helped  to 
bring  you  to  this  pass,  that  yon  have  a  solid  con 
fidence  that  God  will  hear  you,  T  congratulate  you 
upon  the  priceless  consequences,  even  though  I 
may  condole  with  you  for  the  sufferings  that  have 
brought  them  to  you.  We  do  not  weep  over  the 
rnud  which  bespatters  the  gold-digger  when  he 
rinds  his  nugget,  neither  will  we  fret  over  the 
affliction  which  makes  God  to  be  more  precious  to 
our  friend. 

Again,  come  back  to  the  short  and  sweet  sen 
tence  of  the  text,  and  may  it  be  inexpressibly  de 
lightful  to  our  hearts  while  we  meditate  upon  it 
for  a  while.  "My  God  will  hear  me." 

I.  The  first  thing  I  shall  note  at  this  time  is  THE 
TITLE.  This  is  the  bottom  of  the  whole  text  really, 
the  true  foundation  of  the  confidence  which  is  ex 
pressed  in  it.  The  title  is  "  my  God  ":  it  is  not  God 
alone,  but  God  in  covenant  with  me,  to  whom  I 
look  for  help.  I  shall  be  heard  by  "  my  God." 

I  arn  afraid  that  some  of  you  will  have  to  draw 
back  a  little  from  the  text  at  the  very  commence 
ment.  As  I  remarked  the  other  day,  to  Fay  there 


84  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

is  a  God  is  not  ranch.  It  is  the  same  as  to  say, 
there  is  a  bank;  but  there  may  be  a  bank,  and 
yon  may  be  miserably  poor.  There  certainly  is  a 
God,  but  that  God  may  be  no  source  of  comfort  to 
you.  The  joy  of  the  whole  thing  lies  in  that  word 
"  my."  "My  God  will  hear  me." 

Begin  then  with  the  inquiry,  pnt  to  your  own 
soul, — Can  I  truly  think  of  God,  and  call  him  "my 
God"?  If  so,  that  means  election  and  selection. 
There  were  many  gods  in  the  day  of  the  prophet 
Micah;  at  least,  men  spoke  as  if  there  were.  Men 
talked  of  this  god,  and  of  that,  and  each  nation 
had  its  own  peculiar  deity,  and  each  man  walked 
in  the  name  of  his  god,  and  gloried  in  it.  But  the 
prophet  in  effect  says  of  Jehovah,  the  one  living 
and  true  God,  the  God  that  made  heaven  and 
earth:  "This  God  is  my  God.  Others  may  wor 
ship  gods  of  wood,  or  of  stone,  or  of  silver,  or  of 
gold;  but  as  for  me,  my  heart  shall  only  worship 
the  great  Invisible,  whom  none  hath  seen,  to  whom 
none  can  approach.  The  eternal  Creator  alone 
will  I  adore." 

Now  every  man  at  this  present  time  has  a  god. 
Alas,  how  many  make  their  belly  their  god  !  The 
golden  calf  is  never  without  its  crowds  of  devoted 
worshippers.  Gods  to-day  are  as  numerous  in 
England  as  in  any  heathen  country:  let  me  then 
ask, — Have  you  taken  the  God  who  is  your  Maker, 
your  Preserver,  your  Redeemer  to  be  the  great 
object  of  your  life  ?  That  is  your  god  which  rules 
your  nature — that  which  is  your  motive  power — 
that  for  which  you  live.  Do  you  live  for  Jehovah 
as  your  God,  or  are  you  only  living  for  yourself  or 
for  some  temporary  end  and  purpose  V  Will  the 


RINGING    IN  EACH   BELIEVER'S    HEART.     35 

object  of  your  life  die  with  your  dying,  and  be 
buried  in  your  grave  ?  Or  can  you  say  unto  the 
living  God,  "  0  God,  thou  art  my  God;  early  will 
I  seek  thee.  Thou  art  my  God  for  ever  and  ever: 
thou  shalt  be  ray  guide  even  unto  death  !  "  If  so, 
it  supposes  your  election  of  this  God  beyond  every 
other;  and  I  put  it  to  you, — Is  this  election  made  ? 
and  made  once  for  all?  Can  you  cry  with  Joshua, 
"  As  for  me  and  my  house  we  will  serve  Jehovah  "  ? 
Is  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
your  God  for  all  time  ?  Be  it  so ;  you  shall  never 
regret  the  choice. 

"  My  God," — that  supposes  an  appropriation  by 
faith.  Have  you  taken  Jehovah  to  be  your  God  ? 
Have  you  made  bold  to  take  him  for  your  very 
own  ?  In  the  covenant  of  grace  God  gives  over 
to  his  people  himself,  and  all  that  he  is,  and  all 
that  he  has,  by  a  covenant  of  salt.  As  the  believer 
becomes  God's  portion,  so  the  Lord  becomes  the 
believer's  portion.  He  declares  himself  to  be  ours 
and  puts  himself  at  our  disposal,  exercising  a  bound 
less  condescension  of  love  in  so  doing.  Our  part 
in  it  is,  that  we  do  accept  this  covenant  gift,  and 
by  an  act  of  faith  say,  "  This  which  God  gives 
me,  I,  unworthy  though  I  be,  do  freely  accept. 
Though  I  deserve  it  not,  yet  as  he  has  given  him 
self  to  me,  I,  with  gladness,  receive  him,  to  be  my 
God,  my  portion,  world  without  end."  Well  do  I 
remember  the  joyous  day  when  first  my  heart  took 
this  possession  to  herself.  It  had  appeared  to  be 
like  aland  of  fire  and  terror,  and  I  desired  it  not; 
but  when  the  Spirit  of  God  had  instructed  and  re 
newed  me,  then  I  perceived  that  God  was  as  the 
laud  of  Goshen — ay,  as  the  land  of  Canaan,  that 


36  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

floweth  with  milk  and  honey;  ay,  as  the  land  of 
Beulah,  where  the  sun  goes  no  more  down  forever, 
where  all  is  joy,  and  peace,  and  love;  yea,  as 
heaven  itself,  for  God  is  the  very  soul,  and  center, 
and  source,  and  fullness  of  bliss.  My  heart  annexed 
this  blessed  territory  with  trembling  joy;  yea,  she 
seemed  to  have  no  other  possession  left  except  her 
God.  From  that  hour  she  grew  rich  and  remained 
so.  What  is  there  more  for  me  but  my  God  ? 
How  can  I  go  an  inch  beyond  "  My  God,  my 
heaven,  my  all  "  ?  Now,  beloved  hearer,  have  you 
thus  appropriated  the  Eternal  God  to  be  your  own? 
Can  you  say  to-day,  "  First  and  foremost  among 
my  possessions  is  my  God.  I  will  not  say  that  I 
have  this  and  that,  and  ever  so  many  other  things, 
but  I  will  sing,  'My  God,  thou  art  mine!'  Per 
haps  I  could  not  say  that  I  have  much  of  this 
world's  goods,  but  I  have  the  highest  Good.  11  I 
have  not  all,  yet  I  have  the  All-in-All,  who  is  more 
than  all,  and  he  is  everything  to  my  spirit"?  I 
trust  you  can  say  "  my  God,"  first,  by  your  choice 
of  him;  and,  secondly,  by  your  appropriation  of 
him  through  faith.  Wherever  this  is  the  case  it  is 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  he  must  have 
our  reverent  love  for  thus  enriching  us. 

"My  God," — this  signifies  knoioledcje  and  acquaint 
ance.  Does  it  not  ?  For  unless  the  words  are 
meaningless,  you  know  who  it  is  that  you  are  talk 
ing  of,  and  you  have  had  some  acquaintance  with 
him,  and  dealings  with  him.  If  I  say,  "  So-and-so 
is  my  friend,"  I  give  you  to  understand  that  I 
know  him;  and  if  I  say,  "Jehovah  is  my  God,"  I 
profess  that  I  know  him  and  have  fellowship  with 
him.  You  remember  the  inscription  which  Pau.1 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART.      37 

discovered  upon  an  altar  at  Athens,  "To  the  un 
known  God."  I  would  not  have  you  worship  there, 
my  brother;  but  I  would  have  you  understand  that 
word  of  the  Apostle,  "  After  that  ye  had  known 
God,  or  rather  were  known  of  God."  There  is  an 
intimate  knowledge  subsisting  between  God  and 
his  people.  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are 
his,"  and  all  his  people  know  him,  so  that  among 
them  no  one  has  need  to  say  to  his  brother,  Know 
the  Lord,  for  they  all  know  him,  from  the  least 
even  to  the  greatest. 

Now,  what  knowest  thou  of  God?  Hast  thou 
ever  spoken  with  him?  Has  he  spoken  to  thee? 
Hast  thou  told  him  thy  secrets  ?  Has  he  revealed 
himself  to  thee,  as  it  is  written,  "The  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show 
them  his  covenant"?  Now,  I  am  not  talking 
about  fancies.  If  any  of  you  deem  this  to  be 
fanciful,  it  is  because  you  are  strangers  to  the 
covenant  of  promise;  but  I  am  speaking  now  to  a 
people  who  know  more  than  I  can  tell  them  of 
what  this  means.  As  for  myself,  I  know  something 
of  nature,  and  of  the  works  of  God's  hands,  but 
my  soul  cares  little  for  that  knowledge  compared 
with  knowing  HIM.  Willingly  and  gladly  I  would 
forget  all  else  I  know  if  I  might  but  know  more  of 
him;  for  well  am  I  persuaded  that  when  old  age 
comes  on,  and  memory  fails  me,  that  which  my 
soul  shall  hold  as  with  a  death  grip,  will  not  be 
historical  remembrance,  classical  lore,  or  theologi 
cal  learning,  but  what  she  knows  by  inward  ex 
perience  of  the  Lord  her  God.  When  the  veil 
shall  drop  upon  all  mortal  shadows,  to  be  uplifted 
upon  eternal  realities,  then  my  heart  shall  care 


38  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

nothing  for  what  she  knew  of  things  terrestrial; 
but  she  shall  value  beyond  conception  what  she 
shall  then  know  of  the  Immortal,  the  Invisible,  the 
only  wise  God,  her  Saviour.  I  am  sure  that  I  atn 
speaking  to  many  of  you  who  can  use  the  expres 
sion,  "  My  God,"  and  mean  by  it  that  the  God  in 
whom  you  live  and  move  and  have  your  being  is 
your  friend,  and  your  Father;  that. he  dwells  in  you 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  in  him  you  dwell  as 
you  hide  yourselves  in  the  wounds  of  Christ.  Oh 
happy  men  and  women  that  can  with  knowledge 
and  affection  say,  "  My  God."  Unhappy  you  who 
have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.  Your 
sorrows  shall  be  multiplied  which  hasten  after 
another  god,  for  your  vanities  will  fail  you;  but  as 
for  you  that  know  the  Lord,  to  you  shall  joy  increase 
even  as  the  growing  light  of  the  rising  sun. 

If  you  have  come  as  far  as  this,  I  am  sure  that 
you  can  follow  me  farther  by  admitting  that  the 
title,  "  My  God,"  implies  an  embrace  of  love.  You 
know  God  as  you  know  your  child;  but  as  you 
look  at  your  boy,  you  cry,  "  My  child,  my  child," 
and  you  mean  a  great  deal  by  that,  because  your 
child  is  much  more  yours  on  account  of  the  affec 
tion  that  you  feel  for  him  than  any  other  possession 
that  you  have  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  You 
would  lose  everything  else  sooner  than  lose  the 
darling  of  your  bosom.  The  expression,  "  My 
God"  has  an  inexpressible  amount  of  sweet  affec 
tion  wrapped  up  in  it.  I  delight  in  that  line  of 
our  old  Psalm — 

"Yea,  mine  own  God  is  he." 

He  is  my  very  own.  My  God  belongs  to  me  as 
much  as  if  he  belonged  to  no  other.  My  heart  has 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER'S    HEART.      39 

twisted  her  tendrils  round  about  hiin  as  fast  and  firm 
as  if  no  other  tiny  plant  had  dared  to  grasp  the 
same  upholder.  The  divine  Father — oh,  what  joy 
lights  up  the  soul  when  we  think  of  that  splendid 
fatherhood,  that  infinite  relationship  of  the  divine 
One  to  us,  whom  he  has  "  begotten  again  unto  a 
lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead."  How  have  we  sometimes  sung 
with  David, 

"  Such  pity  as  a  father  hath 

Unto  his  children  dear, 
Like  pity  shows  the  Lord  to  such 
As  worship  him  in  fear." 

We  love  the  Father,  and  call  him  "My  God." 
And  as  for  Jesus,  the  second  person  in  the  Divine 
Unity,  Incarnate  God,  does  not  your  very  heart 
leap  at  the  sound  of  his  name  ?  Is  there  not  all 
music  condensed  into  two  syllables  in  that  name 
"Jesus"?  I  know  that  it  is  so  to  you.  He  is 
your  very  own  Christ,  your  Saviour,  for  ever  and 
ever.  And  the  blessed  Spirit — do  we  not  with 
equal  affection  lay  hold  upon  him,  the  Paraclete, 
the  Comforter,  the  Quickener,  the  Illuminator,  the 
best  of  friends,  bearing  with  our  ill  behavior  and 
still  abiding  in  us,  making  us  meet  for  the  eternal 
kingdom?  Yes,  beloved,  we  do  love  our  God. 
Do  not  our  hearts  say  in  our  prayers,  "  O  Lord,  do 
not  believe  our  actions,  for,  disobedient  as  we  are, 
we  do  love  thee.  Do  not  believe  our  forge  t- 
fulness,  do  not  believe  the  lukewarmness  which 
occasionally  creeps  over  us;  for  thou  knowest  all 
things,  thou  knowest  that  we  love  thee"?  Such 
affection  makes  us  cry,  "  My  God."  We  cannot 


40  A    SWEET    SILVER    BELL 

comprehend  him,  but  we  apprehend  him  with  the 
grip  of  hallowed  love.  We  feel  that  we  can 
never  give  him  up,  even  as  he  will  never  give  us 
up.  1  am  not  what  1  ought  to  be,  but  I  cannot 
give  up  my  God.  Hard  as  my  heart  feels,  yet  it 
melts  with  love  to  him  who  has  loved  me  from 
before  the  foundations  of  the  world.  Who  shall 
separate  me  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus,  my  Lord  ? 

What  a  deal  there  is  in  the  title  !  But  we  have 
not  exhausted  it  by  a  long  way;  let  us  have  an 
other  drink  from  the  well.  You  feel  that  now  the  obe 
dience  of  your  life,  is  rendered  to  Mm  most  cheerfuHi/, 
for  this  is  a  sure  outcome  of  the  heart's  crying,  "  He 
is  my  God."  A  man  cannot  call  God  his  God  in 
truth  unless  he  desires  to  obey  him;  for  God  is  a 
name  to  adore,  to  reverence,  to  worship.  He  who 
speaks  of  God  but  never  obeys  him  is  a  practical 
atheist;  he  has  no  God.  That  man  who  talks 
about  God  in  the  synagogue,  but  who  has  no  re 
gard  for  him  in  the  market,  makes  Jehovah  to  be 
no  better  a  deity  than  the  idols  of  the  heathen, 
who  are  only  gods  in  their  own  temples,  even  if 
there.  The  man  upon  whose  heart  and  hand  the 
Godhead  has  no  kind  of  influence — such  a  man  is 
a  liar  and  knows  not  God,  but  renders  to  him  lip 
service,  which  is  to  God's  dishonor,  and  not  to  his 
glory.  Yes,  beloved,  if  you  are  what  you  profess 
to  be,  you  can  declare,  "With  all  my  infirmities 
and  imperfections,  I  desire  that  my  whole  life 
should  be  obedient  to  the  divine  precept.  I  wish 
in  all  things  to  do  that  which  is  right  and  good, 
and  true  and  kind,  according  to  the  mind  of 
Christ,  in  which  1  see  the  mind  of  God  my  Fniher." 


RINGING    IN  EACH   BELIEVER'S    HEART.      41 

Concerning  these  things  let  there  be  great  search- 
ings  of  heart.  Gome  and  look  in  this  glass  and 
Bee  if  you  bear  the  features  of  "  imitators  of  God 
as  dear  children";  for  it  will  go  hard  with  you  if 
you  turn  out  to  be  pretenders. 

Let  me  only  add  that  this  expressive  phrase 
"My  God"  hints  at  a  joy  and  delight' in  him.  As 
men  would  say — "  my  love,"  "  my  choice,"  "  my 
treasure,"  "  my  delight,"  so  doth  the  prophet  say 
41  My  God."  The  very  name  wakes  all  the  music 
of  his  soul.  As  when  the  sleeping  flowers,  being 
touched  by  the  first  beam  of  the  rising  sun,  open 
their  bright  eyes  to  look  on  him  who  is  the  foster- 
father  of  all  their  beauty,  and  seem  each  one  to 
say  "  My  King,"  so  do  our  hearts  rejoice  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  our  quickened  spirits 
cry,  "  My  God." 

So  much  for  the  title.  May  it  be  written  on 
your  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  The  second  point  in  our  brief  text  is  THE 
4RGUMENT,  for  I  believe  the  title  contains  within  it- 
Belt' a  secret  logical  force.  '5My  God  ivill  hear  me." 
As  surely  as  he  is  my  God  he  will  hear  me.  Why  ? 

Well,  he  will  hear  me  first  because  lie  is  God,  be 
cause  he  is  the  living  and  true  God.  Those  gods 
of  stone  cannot  hear  me,  but  my  God  will  hear  me. 
The  gods  that  many  men  choose  will  not  hear 
them  in  the  day  of  trouble.  To  which  of  them 
will  they  call  in  the  hour  of  their  affliction  ?  But 
my  God  will  hear  me.  It  is  his  memorial  that  he 
hears  prayer.  The  oracles  of  the  heathen  were 
but  liars.  Those  who  sought  unto  the  false  gods 
did  but  dote  upon  falsehood ;  they  were  deceivers 
and  deceived.  But  my  God  will  hear  me.  As 


42  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

surely  as  he  is  God  he  will  answer  prayer.  If  he 
does  riot  answer  prayer,  then  he  is  no  more  a  God 
than  Jupiter,  or  Saturn,  or  Venus.  For  us  as 
Christian  people  and  worshippers  of  the  Most 
High,  it  a  truth  never  to  be  questioned,  that  Je 
hovah  is  the  living  and  true  God,  whose  memorial 
is  that  he  heareththe  prayers  of  his  people.  "  My 
God  will  hear  me." 

You  see  in  what  a  tone  of  confidence  this  prophet 
speaks;  and  why  should  not  every  child  of  God 
speak  with  the  some  confidence?  The  joy  of  reli 
gion  lies  in  a  hearty  faith  in  it.  Yon  begin  hand 
ling  it  with  dainty  fingers,  criticising  it  everlast 
ingly,  questioning  this  and  questioning  that  with 
anxious  debate  of  heart;  ;»nd  the  consequence  is 
that  you  miss  its  sweetness.  It  is  nothing  to  your 
comfort  till  it  is  everything  to  your  faith.  You 
must  believe  it,  and  the  more  thoroughly  you  be 
lieve  it  the  more  will  it  prove  itself  true  to  you. 
The  proof  of  the  gospel  lies  in  the  testing  of  it,  by 
which  1  mean  in  the  practical  proving  and  enjoy 
ing  of  it.  Suppose  you  try  to  pray,  and  do  not 
believe  in  prayer:  well,  you  do  not  pray.  You 
get  nothing  by  such  praying:  you  work  a  dry 
pump.  You  must  have  confidence  in  the  mercy 
seat,  if  the  mercy  is  to  be  a  place  of  refuge  for 
you.  "  He  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea 
driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed.  Let  not  that 
man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the 
Lord."  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that 
he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  dili 
gently  seek  him."  To  my  mind  it  seems  the  right 
thing  to  believe  in  the  living  God  right  up  to  the 
hilt — to  believe  in  his  promise  without  stint  or 


RINGING    LV   EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART.      43 

Hmit.  His  word  is  either  true  or  false.  If  it  is 
false,  I  will  never  preach  it:  if  it  is  true,  I  will 
never  doubt  it.  There  let  it  stand  like  a  column 
of  brass: — though  all  things  else  should  fail,  God  must 
hear  prayer.  He  may  do  this  and  he  may  do  that, 
but  he  must  hear  prayer.  My  God  will  hear  me  be 
cause  he  is  a  true  God,  and  no  liar;  and  he  has 
himself  declared,  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of 
trouble:  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  them  shalt  glorify 
me."  He  has  laid  it  down  as  unquestionable  fact, 
"  He  that  seeketh  findeth,  he  that  asketh  receiveth, 
and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be  opened." 
How  can  he  run  back  from  this?  Why  should  I 
imagine  that  he  will  lie  or  repent? 

But  why  am  I  so  sure,  as  a  matter  of  argument, 
that  God  will  hear  prayer  ?  The  answer  is  in  the 
title  again,  "  My  God."  Because  he  has  made  him 
self  my  God  he  will  hear  me.  0  you  that  are  fam 
iliar  with  your  God,  who  can  therefore  call  him  by 
the  dear  title  of  "  My  God,"  you  will  see  the  over 
whelming  conclusiveness  of  this  reasoning.  To 
hear  a  petitioner  is  a  small  thing  compared  to 
giving  yourself  over  to  him.  "  My  God  will  hear 
me,"  for  doubtless,  if  he  has  given  himself  to  be 
my  God,  he  will  hear  me.  He  has  done  the 
greater  thing,  he  will  surely  do  the  less.  If,  in 
infinite  condescension,  he  permits  me  to  call  him 
"  my  God,"  and  I  perceive  all  through  his  gospel 
that  he  invites  me  to  do  so,  then,  surely  he  will 
hear  me.  He  that  hath  said,  "They  shall  be  my 
people,  and  I  will  be  their  God,"  will  do  the  much 
smaller  thing:  he  will,  without  doubt,  hear  them 
when  they  call  upon  him.  "  Ye,  being  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children.  How 


44  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  them  that,  ask  him  ? "  "  He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for 
us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give 
us  all  things  ?  "  Is  not  that  clear  enough  ?  He 
has  given  us  himself,  and  his  Son;  how  can  he  shut 
out  our  cries?  After  what  he  is  done  for  us  in 
the  past,  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  will  hear  us. 
What,  give  us  cleansing  by  his  blood,  and  then 
not  hear  us?  What,  give  us  the  new  birth,  and 
then  not  hear  us?  Did  he  bless  us  when  we  did 
not  seek  him,  and  will  he  not  hear  us  when  we  do 
seek  him  ?  What,  look  after  us  when  we  were  like 
stray  sheep,  deaf  to  all  his  calls;  seek  after  us  till 
he  restored  us;  and  then  not  hear  us  when  we  be 
come  the  sheep  of  his  pasture  ?  Impossible  !  The 
argument  is  irresistible:  My  God  will  certainly 
hear  me. 

Moreover,  ray  God  has  Jteard  me  so  many  times; 
therefore,  be  it  far  from  me  to  doubt  his  present 
and  future  favor.  A  brother  in  prayer  reminded 
us  just  now  that  we  ought  to  have  greater  faith 
than  the  saints  of  the  olden  times,  because  we  have 
many  more  centuries  of  the  divine  faithfulness  to 
read  of  and  to  see.  It  is  so;  but  I  fear  that  obser 
vation  seldom  acts  upon  vis  so  forcibly  as  actual 
personal  experience.  What  shall  I  say  to  my 
beloved  brothers  and  sisters  here  who  are  getting 
old  ?  They  have  had  such  experience.  God  has 
heard  your  prayers  many  times,  my  aged  brethren, 
and  your  faith  is  thereby  confirmed.  When  we 
first,  began  to  pray,  we  were  staggered  if  objectors 
questioned  us.  "  You  talk  about  God  having 
heard  your  prayer."  "  Yes,"  we  said,  "  he  did 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART.      45 

hear  us,"  and  we  stated  our  case.  The  skeptic 
sneered,  and  said,  "That  was  merely  a  coincidence." 
When  we  heard  that  remark  for  the  first  time,  we 
were  somewhat  taken  aback.  We  admitted  that 
we  could  not  draw  an  inference  from  two  or  three 
facts,  for,  perhaps,  in  after  years  there  might  be 
thirty  facts  which  would  tell  the  other  way.  But, 
my  veteran  brethren,  we  are  not  in  that  condition 
to-night,  for  some  of  us  have  had  thirty  or  forty 
years'  experience  of  God's  hearing  prayer,  and  our 
facts  are  as  many  as  the  hairs  of  our  heads.  Do 
opponents  say  that  there  are  coincidences?  We 
do  not  care  to  answer  such  perverse  janglings.  If 
they  were  in  our  position,  they  would  not  wish  to 
answer  such  remarks.  They  would  laugh;  and 
that  is  all  that  they  would  find  in  their  hearts  to 
do.  A  man  puts  on  warm  clothing  and  is  not 
pinched  by  the  frost;  his  acquaintance  tells  him 
that  he  does  not  believe  in  flannel  and  broadcloth; 
he  shivers  in  his  unbelief,  and  tells  the  well-clad 
man  that  his  comfort  is  a  mere  coincidence.  Hu 
morous,  is  it  not  ?  But  if  the  objector  gets  frozen 
to  death,  the  wit  grows  rather  grim  !  When  we 
have  not  prayed,  and  have  not  received  a  blessing, 
and  have  been  ready  to  perish,  I  suppose  our  fail 
ure  has  been  a  coincidence  !  And  when  we  have 
betaken  ourselves  to  our  knees,  and  have  cried 
mightily  to  God,  and  pleaded  the  promises,  and 
God  has  answered  us  as  visibly  as  if  he  had  rent 
the  blue  heavens,  and  thrust  out  his  almighty  arm 
to  help  us,  that  has  been  a  coincidence !  I  call 
such  things  plain  answers  to  prayer,  but  those  who 
have  never  experienced  the  like  think  me  a  fanatic. 
I  will  therefore  let  them  use  their  own  terms.  We 


46  A    SWEET    SILVER    BELL 

will  not  wrangle  over  words, — "  A  rose  by  any 
other  name  would  smell  as  sweet."  As  to  the 
delivering  mercy  of  God — you  shall  call  it  a  coin 
cidence  if  you  like,  but  to  us  it  will  always  be  a 
blessed  proof  that  the  Lord  hears  prayer. 

Using  this  sweet  title,  containing  as  it  does 
within  itself  a  whole  century  of  logic,  we  say,  joy 
fully,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  What  bliss  it  is  to 
have  so  sweet  an  assurance  ever  at  hand  !  It  is  a 
versicle  of  heavenly  music, — '•  My  God  will  hear 
me."  The  Lord  has  entered  into  covenant  with  us 
that  he  will  not  turn  away  from  us  from  doing  us 
good,  and  in  that  covenant  his  hearing  prayer  is  in 
cluded.  He  could  not  be  our  friend  and  be  deaf  to 
our  appeals:  he  could  not  be  in  fellowship  with  us 
and  shut  out  our  .cries.  Listen,  however,  to  some 
of  his  own  covenant  words:  "  Call  upon  me  in  the 
day  of  trouble:  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shall 
glorify  me":  Psalm  1.  15.  "He  shall  call  upon 
me,  and  I  will  answer  him;  I  will  be  with  him 
in  trouble;  I  will  deliver  him,  and  honor  him": 
Psalm  xci.  15.  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  them 
that  call  upon  him,  to  all  that  call  upon  him  in 
truth.  He  will  fulfill  the  desire  of  them  that  fear 
him;  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  save 
them":  Psalm  cxlv.  18,  19.  "  And  it  shall  come  to 
pass,  that  before  they  call,  I  will  answer;  and  while 
they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear":  Isaiah  Ixv.  24. 
"  Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  show 
thee  great  and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest 
not":  Jeremiah  xxxiii.  3.  Do  you  need  more  than 
this?  The  Lord  hath  said  it,  and  he  will  make  it 
good.  He  has  never  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob, 
Seek  ye  me  in  vain. 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER' S    HEART.      47 

Were  not  the  Lord  to  hear  prayer,  and  bear  his 
people  through  their  troubles,  lie  would  himself  be  a 
great  loser.  He  would  lose  all  that  his  wisdom  has 
planned,  all  that  his  sovereignty  has  ordained,  all 
that  his  love  has  begun,  all  that  his  power  has 
wrought,  and  all  that  whereon  his  heart  is  set. 
Did  not  Jehovah  hear  prayer  it  were  to  him  as 
though  a  father  no  more  heard  the  voice  of  his 
child:  he  would  lose  that  which  charms  his  fa 
therly  mind,  and  miss  that  which  is  a  solace  to 
his  loving  heart.  If  God  doth  not  hear  me,  he  will 
lose  me;  and  this  I  feel  he  will  not  do,  for  he  hath 
graven  me  upon  the  palms  of  his  hands,  that  I 
may  never  be  forgotten  of  him.  0,  yes,  my  God 
will  hear  me;  his  truth  and  honor  cannot  be  im 
periled  by  a  refusal  to  hear  the  pleading  of  his 
own  child. 

III.  Bear  with  me  while  I  invite  you,  in  the 
third  place,  to  notice  the  FAVOR  ITSELF.  "My  God 
will  hear  me."  You  notice  that  in  Scripture  we  do 
not  often  find  the  expression,  "  My  God  will  an 
swer  me."  We  do  read  that  he  answers  prayer, 
but  more  frequently  God  is  said  to  be  the  God  that 
heareth  prayer.  It  is  better  for  us  to  have  a  prom 
ise  that  God  will  hear  us  than  a  promise  that  God 
will  always  answer  us.  In  fact,  if  it  were  a  matter 
of  absolute  fact  that  God  would  always  answer  the 
prayers  of  his  people  as  they  present  them,  it  would 
be  an  awful  truth.  I  should  shrink  from  ever  pray 
ing  again  if  I  were  absolutely  sure  that  the  Lord 
would  answer  my  prayer,  whatever  it  might  be. 
I  might  curse  myself  seven  times  deep  by  a  prayer 
within  the  next  seven  minutes,  if  there  were  no 
safeguards  and  limits  to  the  promise  of  prayer  be- 


48  A    SWEET   SILVER    BELL 

ing  answered.  It  is  neither  desirable  nor  possible, 
that  all  things  should  be  left  to  our  choice:  so  much 
do  I  feel  this,  that  if  my  Lord  should  say  to  me, 
"From  this  hour  I  will  always  answer  your  prayer 
just  as  you  pray  it,"  the  first  petition  I  would  offer 
would  be,  "  Lord,  do  nothing  of  the  sort."  Because 
that  would  be  putting  the  responsibility  of  my  life 
upon  myself,  instead  of  allowing  it  to  remain  upon 
God.  It  were,  in  fact,  to  make  me  the  master  of 
the  house,  and  to  make  me  my  own  shepherd:  the 
very  first  thing  I  should  wish  would  be  to  strip 
myself  of  such  a  power.  I  would  cry,  "Lord,  do 
as  thou  wilt  about  answering  me;  I  will  be  well 
content  if  thou  wilt  hear  me."  I  like  that  kind  of 
hearing  prayer  of  which  Ralph  Erskine  says: 

"I'm  heard  when  answered,  soon  or  late, 
Yea,  heard  when  I  no  answer  get: 
Most  kindly  answered  when  refused, 
And  treated  well  when  harshly  used." 

It  is  onough  for  a  praying  heart  that  it  has  a  hear 
ing  God. 

But  notice,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  It  means, 
first,  literally  that  he  will  hear  me  as  a  listener.  A 
good  brother  of  my  acquaintance,  a  minister  of  the 
gospel,  going  to  preach  from  the  text  that  God  will 
hear  prayer,  called  upon  one  of  his  poor  people,  who 
said  when  the  visit  was  over  that  she  had  greatly 
enjoyed  his  call.  He  thought  to  himself,  "  I  have 
scarcely  said  a  word,  and  yet  she  says  that  I  have 
done  her  good."  Turning  to  her,  he  inquired, 
"  Sister,  how  can  I  have  done  you  good,  for  I  have 
hardly  spoken  with  you  ?  "  "  Ah,  sir,"  she  replied, 
"  you  have  listened  so  kindly;  you  have  heard  all 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART,     49 

I  had  to  say,  and  there  are  very  few  who  will 
do  that."  Just  so.  People  in  deep  trouble  like 
somebody  to  hear  them  all  through:  even  little 
children  are  comforted  by  telling  mother  all  about 
it.  We  are  in  such  a  hurry  with  poor  troubled 
spirits  that  we  hasten  them  on  to  the  end  of  the 
sentence,  and  try  to  make  them  skip  the  dreary  de 
tails.  But  to  them  this  seems  unkind,  for  their 
story  is  sacred;  and  therefore,  they  go  slowly  on 
with  it,  till  we  are  quite  tired.  I  have  often  hur 
ried  on  a  poor  despondent  creature  till  I  have  seen 
the  uselessness  of  it:  it  is  always  best  to  let  them 
spin  on.  It  does  them  good.  To  tell  out  the  heart 
to  a  patient  listener  is  a  great  relief  to  a  burdened 
spirit,  and  the  heart  must  do  it  in  its  own  way. 
Here  is  a  sweet  assurance,  "  My  God  will  hear  me." 
I  may  be  very  bad,  and  what  I  say  may  be  very 
broken,  and  I  may  groan  a  good  deal,  and  I  may 
say  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again,  and  my 
whole  ditty  may  be  very  stupid;  but,  "My  God 
will  hear  me."  He  is  in  no  hurry:  he  is  the  God 
of  patience.  He  will  listen  to  my  dreary  talk,  and 
endure  each  gloomy  particular.  I  need  not  hold 
him  as  the  Ancient  Mariner  held  the  wedding 
guest  who  was  unwilling  to  hear  his  weary  rhyme 
of  the  sea:  my  God  will  willingly  listen  to  me  right 
through,  from  beginning  to  end,  groans  and  all. 
"  My  God  will  hear  me." 

And  then  the  Lord  will  hearken  as  a  friend  full 
of  sympathy.  Some  people  listen,  but  do  not  hear. 
You  tell  them  your  story,  but  it  does  not  help 
you  a  bit,  because  their  minds  are  no  more  moved 
by  your  case  than  if  they  were  far  away.  They 
are  just  saying  to  themselves,  "We  will  hear  this 


50  A    SWEET   SILVER    SELL 

poor  old  lady's  story;  it  will  please  her."  But  it 
does  not  please  her,  because  she  perceives  that  they 
have  no  sympathy,  no  fellow-feeling;  The  kind 
of  person  you  like  to  tell  your  story  to  is  one  who 
weeps  with  you — who  is  really  afflicted  with  your 
affliction.  It  is  greatly  comforting  to  have  a  per 
son  with  you  who  feels  just  as  you  feel,  who  when 
you  are  very  stupid,  seems  to  be  stupid  too,  who 
frets  as  you  fret,  and  groans  in  your  groaning. 
"  Mother,"  said  a  little  girl  once,  "  I  cannot  make 
it  out;  Mrs.  Smith  says  I  do  her  so  much  good. 
Poor  Mrs.  Smith  has  lost  her  husband,  mother,  and 
she  is  very  sad.  She  sits  and  cries,  and  I  get  up 
and  lay  my  cheek  on  her  cheek,  and  I  cry,  and  say 
that  I  love  her,  and  then  she  says  that  she  loves 
me,  and  that  I  comfort  her."  Just  so.  That  is  the 
truest  form  of  consolation:  is  it  not?  "Weep  with 
them  that  weep."  That  is  how  God,  my  God,  will 
hear  me,  feeling  with  me,  sympathizing  with  me. 
"  In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted,  and  the 
angel  of  his  presence  saved  them."  "I  am  with 
thee,  saith  the  Lord." 

"I  feel  at  my  heart  all  thy  sighs  and  thy  groans, 
For  thou  art  most  near  ms,  my  flesh  and  my  bones. 
In  all  thy  afflictions  my  head  feels  the  pain, 
They  all  are  most  needful,  not  one  is  in  vain." 

"My  God  will  hear  me;"  he  will  listen  to  me, 
and  he  will  sympathize  with  me. 

"  My  God  will  hear  me;"  that  is,  he  will  turn  it 
over  and  discriminate  in  his  own  mind,  and  he  will 
not  allow  me  to  be  condemned  by  the  hurried  judg 
ment  of  men.  He  will  hear  me  as  a  judge  patiently 
hears  a  case.  Others  will  come  iu  and  clamor 


RINGING    IN  EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART.      51 

against  me,  and  refuse  to  listen  to  a  word  of  ex 
planation;  but  my  God  will  hear  me.  That  was  a 
splendid  utterance  of  the  holy  patriarch  Job  !  He 
went  a  long  way  further  than  he  knew  he  went 
when  he  said  it, — "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  li  vet  h." 
His  unkind  friends  charged  him  very  terribly;  and 
Job  spoke  up  for  himself,  but  he  did  not  get  on  at  it. 
He  could  not  plead  his  own  cause  successfully,  and 
therefore,  in  his  desperation,  he  cried,  "  I  have  a  God 
that  will  yet  plead  my  cause,  and  if  he  does  not 
do  it  while  I  am  alive,  yet  I  know  that  he  Jiveth; 
and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  my  body; 
yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  behold  him,  and  I  shall  be 
cleared  from  this  misrepresentation;  and  I  shall  be 
delivered  from  this  suspicion.  I  know  I  shall.  My 
God  will  hear  me.  He  will  hear  my  suit  right 
through  and  do  me  justice,  and  I  shall  behold  him 
whom  my  eyes  shall  see  for  myself  and  not  another." 
Job  felt  assured  of  being  cleared  at  last.  Dear 
child  of  God,  you  may  do  the  same.  Your  charac 
ter  shall  not  be  injured  by  malicious  tongues.  They 
lie  against  you;  they  refuse  you  a  hearing;  they 
wrest  your  words;  they  empty  the  buckets  of  their 
contempt  upon  you;  but  your  God  will  hear  you. 

Then,  at  the  back  of  that,  of  course,  comes  the 
conclusion  of  every  loving  heart  that,  as  God  will 
hear  the  case  right  through,  so  he  will  certainly 
hear  as  a  Helper.  "  My  God  will  hear  me." 

Now,  child  of  God.  go  away  with  this  promise  in 
your  hand,  and  in  your  heart, — "  My  God  will  hear 
me";  and  then  use  it  like  a  magic  wand.  Turn  it 
whichever  way  you  will  and  it  will  clear  your  path. 
You  are  going  to  preach  the  gospel  in  a  distant 
country,  perhaps;  and  your  spirit  sinks  as  you 


52  A    SWEET    SILVER    BELL 

sigh,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  thing's?"  Lift 
up  your  heart  to  God,  and  his  grace  shall  be  suffi 
cient  for  you,  and  his  strength  shall  be  made  per 
fect  in  your  weakness,  for  your  God  will  hear  you. 
Or  you  have  to  go  home  to-night  to  a  sick  house, 
and  to  lose  one  that  is  dear  to  you.  You  shall  be 
sustained,  for  in  your  ear  is  this  word,  "  My  God 
will  hear  me."  Or,  perhaps,  you  yourself  have  to 
sicken  and  die.  Do  you  inquire — What  shall  I  do 
in  the  swellings  of  Jordan  ?  Here  is  your  happy 
answer,  "  My  God  will  hear  me."  I  shall  cry  to 
him,  and  he  will  answer  me.  He  will  have  a  desire 
to  the  work  of  his  hands.  Yea,  though  I  go  down 
into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  my  God  will 
hear  me;  and  when  I  lie  in  the  tomb  my  God  will 
remember  me,  and  he  will  call  me  up  with  sound 
of  trumpet,  and  my  body  shall  live  again.  My 
God  shall  hear  me  singing  his  praises  before  his 
throne.  My  God  shall  hear  me,  world  without 
end,  as  my  whole  being  shall  lift  up  her  joy-notes 
of  "  Hallelujah,  hallelujah,  hallelujah"  unto  him 
who  loved  me  out  of  the  pit,  and  lifted  me  up  to 
his  own  right  hand. 

IV.  My  only  sorrow  about  this  text  is  my  fear 
that  it  could  not  honestly  fall  from  some  of  your 
lips:  you  could  not  truthfully  say,  u  My  God  will 
hear  me."  So  I  close  by  noting  THE  PERSON  to  whom 
it  belongs, — "  My  God  will  hear  me."  Will  he  hear 
you  ?  Dear  heart,  are  you  cast  down  under  a 
sense  of  sin?  Do  you  seek  forgiveness?  He 
will  hear  you.  Are  you  burdened  because  you  can 
not  live  without  sin?  Would  you  be  free  from  all 
evil?  He  will  hear  you.  Are  you  persecuted 
for  righteousness'  sake?  Are  the  men  of  your 


RINGING    7-V   EACH  BELIEVER'S   HEART.      53 

household  turned  to  be  your  foes  ?  He  will  hear 
you,  and  cause  you  to  rejoice  in  being  counted 
worthy  to  suffer  for  Jesus'  sake.  Are  you  as 
sured  of  the  result  of  prayer?  You  shall  not  be 
disappointed;  your  God  will  hear  you.  Have  you 
been  praying?  Cease  not  from  importunity,  but 
solace  yourself  with  this  sure  belief — My  God  will 
hear  me.  Will  you  now  come  and  cast  yourselves 
into  the  arms  of  Jesus,  the  crucified  ?  Your  God 
has  heard  you.  Be  of  good  cheer. 

0,  my  dear  hearer,  have  you  a  God?  Strange 
question,  but  I  press  it  even  with  tears, — Have  yon 
a  God  ?  If  you  have  no  God,  of  course  you  have 
nobody  to  hear  you  when  the  great  water-floods 
prevail.  My  dear  hearer,  if  you  make  the  world 
your  God  it  cannot  hear  you  in  the  day  of  your 
trouble.  You  may  be  a  very  rich  man,  and  have 
large  estates,  but  I  would  sooner  occupy  the  place 
of  the  poorest  believing  pauper  in  the  workhouse 
than  take  your  position  without  a  God  and  without 
a  throne  of  grace.  How  do  people  live  that  have 
no  God  to  go  to  ?  If  a  man  were  to  say  to  me, 
"  I  never  get  a  morsel  of  bread  to  eat  at  all,"  I 
should  wonder  how  he  lived.  Eut  when  a  man 
says,  "I  never  pray,  and  God  never  hears  me,"  I 
am  in  equal  wonder.  How  can  the  poor  creature 
exist?  These  are  hard  times  with  a  great  many 
of  you.  You  have  not  many  worldly  comforts; 
indeed  some  of  you  cannot  even  find  work.  What 
can  you  do  without  a  God  to  fly  to  ?  I  suppose 
your  head  aches  sometimes,  like  mine;  I  suppose 
cares  and  troubles  eat  into  your  mind  as  they  do 
into  mine.  I  suppose  you  have  your  difficulties, 
and  your  knots  that  you  cannot  untie,  just  as  I  have 


54  A    SWLET   SILVER    BELL. 

mine.  How  do  you  keep  your  souls  alive  without 
a  God  ?  I  pray  God  that  I  may  never  live  a  day 
without  praj'er,  and  without  trusting-  my  God. 
However  do  you  bear  up,  some  of  you  ?  I  do  not 
wonder  that  you  go  and  get  drunk  to  drown  your 
thoughts.  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  want  frivoli 
ties  and  theatricals,  and  all  sorts  of  childish  toys  to 
put  your  cares  out  of  your  minds,  for  you  need 
something  or  other  to  help  you  to  forget  the  mis 
eries  which  are  coming  upon  you  thick  and  heavy. 
Yet  is  it  not  madness  to  drive  away  wise  thoughts? 
What  a  wretched  business  it  must  be  to  be  in  dread 
of  your  own  thoughts  !  You  dare  not  sit  alone  in 
3'our  chamber  for  half-an-hour  and  think,  because 
if  you  did  you  would  begin  to  think  of  dying,  and 
you  could  not  bear  to  think  of  that  without  a  God. 
You  might  even  be  driven  to  think  of  hell  and  of 
a  judgment  to  come,  and  that  you  could  not  endure. 
If  you  dare  not  think  of  them,  how  will  you  bear 
them  ?  Oh  poor  souls,  poor  souls,  you  are  in  a  sad 
state,  indeed  !  But  you  need  not  remain  so.  If  any 
man  wills  to  have  God  to  be  his  own  God,  grace  has 
given  him  that  will.  If  you  desire  Christ,  you  may 
have  him.  What  is  the  price?  Nothing  at  all. 
Receive  him  freely.  Believe  i»  Jesus  Christ;  that 
is,  trust  yourself  with  him;  and  God  is  your  God, 
and  you  may  go  on  your  way  full  of  joy  and  thank 
fulness.  God  bless  you  and  comfort  you,  for  Jesus' 
sake.  A  in  en. 


«r-p] 


III. 

FALLEN  ANGELS  A  LESSON  TO  FALLEN  MEN. 

"  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them  down 
to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains  of  darkness,  to  be  re 
served  unto  judgment."— II  PETER  ii.  4. 

«HESE  are  ancient  things."  Most  men  hun 
ger  after  the  latest  news;  let  us  on  this  occa 
sion  go  back  upon  the  earliest  records,  and  think  of 
the  hoar  past,  before  man  was  made.  It  does  us  good 
to  look  back  upon  the  past  of  God's  dealings  with 
his  creatures;  herein  lies  the  value  of  history.  Wo 
should  not  confine  our  attention  to  God's  dealings 
with  men,  but  we  should  observe  how  he  acts  to 
wards  another  order  of  beings — how  he  dealt  with 
angels  before  man  had  become  the  second  sinner. 
If  angels  transgress,  what  is  his  conduct  towards 
them  ?  This  study  will  enlarge  our  minds,  and 
show  us  great  principles  in  their  wider  sweep. 
We  shall  inevitably  make  mistakes  in  our  judg 
ment  as  to  God's  conduct  towards  men  if  we  do  not 
remember  sufficiently  how  he  has  dealt  with  beings 
who  are  in  certain  respects  much  superior  to  the 
human  race.  By  seeing  how  God  treated  the  re 
bellious  angels,  light  may  be  cast  upon  his  deal 
ings  with  us,  and  thereby  misapprehensions  maj 
be  removed. 

We  shall  go  to  our  subject  at  once,  asking  aid 
from  the  spirit  of  all  grace.  We  will  first  view 
the  mysterious  fact  of  the  fall  of  the  angels,  and 


56  FALLEN  ANGELS 

their  casting  away,  for  our  warning.  Then,  sec 
ondly  we  shall  regard  the  fact  of  the  hopeless  doom 
of  the  angels  that  sinned  as  it  stands  in  contrast  to 
the  amazing  mercy  of  the  Lord  towards  men. 
Thus  onr  second  head  will  lead  ns  to  view  the  text 
for  our  admiration :  I  hope  for  the  increase  of  our 
grateful  love  and  reverent  wonder. 

I.  First,  then,  let  ns  consider  onr  text  FOR  OUR 
WARNING.  "  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned, 
but  cast  them  down  to  hell."  Behold  here  a  won 
der  of  wickedness,  angels  sin;  a  wonder  of  justice, 
God  spared  them  not;  a  wonder  of  punishment, 
he  cast  them  down  to  hell;  a  wonder  of  ven 
geance,  for  they  are  reserved  unto  judgment ! 
Here  are  deep  themes,  and  terrible.  Black  as 
tempest  are  the  facts,  and  flashes  of  terrible  light 
ning  flame  forth  therefrom. 

Let  us  receive  a  warning,  first,  against  the  deceiv- 
aUeness  of  sin,  for  whoever  we  may  be,  we  may 
never  reckon  that,  on  account  of  our  position  or  condi 
tion,  we  shall  be.  free  from  the  assaults  of  sin,  or  even 
certain  of  not  being  overcome  by  it.  Notice  that 
these  who  sinned  were  angels  in  heaven,  so  that 
there  is  no  necessary  security  in  the  most  holy 
position.  We  know  that  the}"  were  in  heavenly 
places,  for  it  was  from  that  high  abode  that  they 
were  cast  down  to  hell,  by  the  terrible  right  hand 
of  the  Eternal  King.  These  angels,  that  kept  not 
their  first  estate,  but  sinned  against  God,  dwelt 
with  their  brethren  in  the  courts  of  the  Most  High; 
they  seemed  to  be,  as  if  it  were,  walled  round  with 
fire  to  keep  out  all  evil  from  them.  Their  com 
munications  were  only  with  perfect  spirits  like 
themselves;  but  yet,  as  they  were  undergoing  a 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  57 

probation,  they  were  made  capable  of  choosing 
evil  if  they  willed  so  to  do,  or  of  cleaving  to  good 
if  their  hearts  were  steadfast  with  their  God. 
There  wei-e  none  about  them  to  tempt  them  to  evil; 
they  were,  on  the  contrary,  surrounded  with  every 
good  and  holy  influence:  they  saw  God,  and  abode 
in  his  courts,  they  conversed  with  seraphim  and 
cherubim.  Their  daily  engagements  were  all  of  a 
holy  order;  worship  and  service  were  their  duty 
and  delight.  Their  company  was  select;  there 
were  no  lapsed  classes  among  them  to  render  the 
moral  atmosphere  impure.  They  were  not  only  in 
a  paradise,  but  in  the  central  abode  of  God  himself. 
Yet  evil  entered  into  the  breasts  of  angels — even 
envy,  ambition,  pride,  rebellion;  arid  they  fell,  fell 
never  to  rise  again, 

"  High  in  the  bright  and  happy  throng, 

Satan,  a.  tall  archangel  sat; 
Amongst  the  morning  stars  he  sung 
Till  sin  destroy'd  his  heavenly  state. 

"  'Twas  sin  that  hurled  him  from  his  throne. 

Groveling  in  fire  the  rebel  lies: 
'  How  art  thou  sunk  in  darkness  down, 
Son  of  the  Morning,  from  the  skies  ! '  " 

Beloved  hearer,  this  should  teach  us  not  to  pre 
sume  upon  anything  connected  with  our  position 
here  below.  You  may  be  the  child  of  godly  pai'- 
ents  who  watch  over  you  with  sedulous  care, 
and  yet  you  may  grow  up  to  be  a  man  of  Belial. 
You  may  never  enter  a  haunt  of  iniquity,  your  jour 
neys  may  be  only  to  and  from  the  house  of  God,  and 
yet  you  may  be  a  bond-slave  of  iniquity.  The 
house  in  which  you  live  may  be  none  other  than 
the  house  of  God  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven 


58  FALLEN  ANGELS 

through  your  father's  prayers,  and  yet  you  may 
yourself  live  to  blaspheme.  Your  reading  may  be 
bound  up  with  the  Bible;  your  companions  may 
be  of  the  choicest;  your  talk  may  concern  holy 
things;  you  may  be  as  if  you  were  in  the  garden 
of  the  Lord,  shut  in  to  everything  that  is  good, 
and  every  evil  shut  out  from  you;  and  yet  you  may 
have  no  part  nor  lot  with  the  people  of  God.  As 
there  were  a  Ham  and  an  ungodly  Canaan  even  in 
Noah's  Ark,  so  may  it  turn  out  that  you  may  be  such 
in  the  very  midst  of  all  that  should  make  you  gra 
cious  and  sanctified.  It  is  unhappy  indeed  to  read 
the  annals  of  human  Me,  and  to  meet  with  men 
that  have  gone  from  their  mother's  side — have  gone 
from  where  their  father  knelt  in  prayer — have 
gone  out  from  brothers  and  sisters  whose  piety 
was  not  only  unquestionable,  but  even  remark 
able, — -and  they  have  gone  to  be  leaders  in  every 
form  of  wickedness.  Many  of  the  enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ  have  been  so  trained  in  godliness 
that  we  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  they  can  in 
deed  be  so  vile;  an  apostle  must  declare  it  with  tears 
ere  he  is  believed.  The  sons  of  God  they  seemed 
to  be,  but  they  turned  out  to  be  sons  of  perdition 
after  all.  Let  no  man,  therefore,  arise  and  shake 
himself  as  though  no  sins  could  ever  bind  him,  be 
cause  he  feels  himself  to  be  a  very  Samson  through 
his  connections  and  surroundings.  Yes,  sir,  it  may 
be  that  you  shall  fall — fall  foully,  fall  desperately, 
unless  the  grace  of  God  be  in  you — fall  so  as  never 
to  come  to  God,  and  Christ,  and  find  eternal  life. 
It  was  so  with  these  angels.  The  best  natural 
thing  that  creation  can  work  is  not  sufficient  to 
preserve  the  fickle  creature  from  sin:  regeneration 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  59 

must  come  in — the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  yet 
higher  work  than  the  material  creating  power  of 
God,  or  else  you  may  put  the  creature  where  you 
please,  and  that  creature  may  be  perfect,  arid  yet 
sin  will  reach  and  destroy  him.  You  and  I  are  far 
from  perfect.  We  are  not  angels  unfallen:  we  are 
not  angels  at  all;  but  we  have  evil  hearts  within 
us;  therefore  let  us  not  imagine  for  a  moment  that 
the  most  select  position  can  screen  us  from  the 
worst  of  sin. 

The  next  thought  is  that  the  greatest  possible 
ability,  apparently  consecrated,  is  stitt  nothing  to  rely 
upon  as  a  reason  why  we  should  not  yet  fall  so  low 
as  to  prostitute  it  all  to  the  service  of  the  worst 
of  evils.  Angels  are  beings  of  remarkable  power. 
We  know  that  they  have  amazing  intelligence  and 
beauty.  We  read  of  one  whose  face  was  like  that 
of  an  angel  of  God.  When  a  thing  is  spoken  of 
as  being  exceedingly  good,  it  is  often  connected 
with  angels:  "men  did  eat  angels'  food."  It  is 
supposed  that  everything  with  regard  to  them  is 
of  superior  order  and  of  refined  quality.  I  sup 
pose  that  a  spirit  that  is  not  cumbered  with  flesh 
and  blood,  as  we  are,  must  be  delivered  from  much 
that  hampers  and  beclouds.  Oftentimes  a  clear 
judgment  is  dimmed  by  a  headache,  or  an  attack 
of  indigestion.  Anything  that  affects  the  body 
drags  down  the  mind;  but  these  angelic  beings 
are  delivered  from  such  weakness,  and  they  are 
clothed  with  a  glory  of  strength,  and  beauty,  and 
power. 

Hear  then  and  observe !  However  great  Lucifer 
was,  he  degenerated  into  Satan:  the  Son  of  the 
Morning  became  Apollyon  the  Destroyer.  However 


60  FALLEN  ANGELS 

excellent  the  fallen  angels  may  once  have  been, 
they  have  now  become  potent  only  for  mischief; 
their  wisdom  has  curdled  into  cunning,  and  their 
strength  has  soured  into  a  vicious  force;  so  that 
no  man  may  say  within  himself,  "  I  am  a  clear 
thinker,  therefore  I  shall  never  become  a  blas 
pheming  infidel ;"  or,  "  I  am  gifted  in  prayer,  there 
fore  I  shall  never  become  a  blasphemer."  You 
know  not  what  you  may  become.  There  is  a 
great  difference  between  gift  in  prayer  and  grace 
in  prayer:  gift  will  breed  pride,  and  pride  will 
insure  destruction;  it  is  only  grace  that  can  pre 
serve  unto  eternal  glory.  There  is  also  a  great 
difference  between  office  and  person ;  therefore,  a 
man  may  not  say,  "I  am  a  minister:  I  shall  be 
kept  faithful  in  the  church  of  God."  Ah  me !  But 
we  have  seen  leaders  turn  aside,  and  we  need  not 
marvel;  for  if  angels  fall,  what  man  may  think 
that  he  can  stand  ?  To  trust  our  office  as  a  secu 
rity  is  to  rest  upon  a  broken  reed.  The  grace  of 
God  can  keep  the  least  and  weakest  of  us;  but 
apart  from  that  heavenly  power  how  dare  any  man 
hope  to  be  preserved  to  the  end?  Self-confidence 
is  the  beginning  of  declension.  He  that  reckons 
that  he  is  past  temptation,  is  already  entangled  in 
its  net.  We  must  never  presume.  Angels  fell: 
why  should  not  men  ?  An  angel  occupies  a  high 
position  near  the  throne  of  God:  "  Are  they  not 
all  ministering  spirits?"  We  have  evidence  in 
Scripture  that  they  are  called  on  grand  occasions 
to  discharge  high  commissions  for  the  King  of 
kings.  And  yet  these  courtiers,  these  household 
messengers  of  the  palace  of  heaven,  these  domes 
tics  of  glory,  even  these  went  astray,  and  fell,  and 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN   MEN.  Gl 

turned  to  devils.  Let  no  man  dream  that  because 
he  occupies  an  office  in  the  church  his  salvation  is 
therefore  secure:  an  apostle  fell.  The  arrows  of 
the  prince  of  darkness  can  reach  the  highest  seats 
of  the  synagogue.  The  high  places  of  the  field 
of  service  are  not  free  from  danger;  nay,  they  are 
the  more  perilous  as  they  are  the  more  notable. 
The  powers  of  darkness  make  their  direst  onset 
upon  the  foremost  soldiers  of  the  cross,  hoping  to 
overthrow  the  standard-bearers,  and  create  con 
fusion  throughout  the  camp. 

Neither,  dear  friends — to  continue  my  warning — 
muxt  any  of  its  suppose  that  we  shall  be  kept  by  the  mere 
fact  that  we  are  engaged  in  the  snblimest  possible 
office.  Apart,  from  the  perpetual  miracle  of  God's 
grace,  nothing  can  keep  us  from  declension,  apos- 
tacy,  and  spiritual  death.  "Oh,  but  I  spend  my 
time,"  one  may  say — "  I  spend  my  time  wholly  in 
the  service  of  God  !  I  go  from  door  to  door  seek 
ing  the  lost  souls  of  men,  as  a  city  missionary  "; 
or,  '•  I  conduct  a  large  class  in  the  school,  and  I 
have  brought  many  to  the  Saviour."  All  this  is 
good;  but  if  thou  trustestin  it  for  thy  standing  be 
fore  God  it  will  certainly  fail  thee.  If  any  one  of 
us  were  to  say,  "  But  I  am  a  minister,  called  to 
offer  prayer,  and  to  preach  the  precious  word:  my 
engagements  are  so  sanctified,  they  bring  me  into 
such  hallowed  fellowship  with  holy  things,  that 
it  is  not  possible  that  I  should  fall," — this  would 
be  the  height  of  folly.  We  need  not  go  beyond 
the  pale  of  professed  ministers  of  Christ  to  find 
specimens  of  every  infamy  of  which  man  is  ca 
pable.  After  having  preached  to  others  there  is 
grave  cause  for  trembling  lest  we  be  castaways 


62  FALLEN  ANGELS 

ourselves.  No,  there  is  nothing  in  the  most  sacred 
office  in  the  Church  to  preserve  us  or  our  charac 
ters.  Office,  if  we  trust  in  it,  may  even  become, 
as  in  the  case  of  Judas,  a  Tarpeian  rock,  from 
which  we  may  be  cast  down  to  our  destruction; 
for  the  angelic  office  in  heaven  did  not  keep  the 
angels  from  being  hurled  over  the  battlements  of 
glory  when  once  they  dared  to  sin.  Let  not  the 
angels  of  the  churches- hope  to  be  kept  from  falling 
unless  he  that  beareth  the  seven  stars  in  his  right 
hand  shall  keep  them  even  to  the  end. 

1  want  you  to  notice,  as  a  great  warning,  that 
this  sin  of  the  angels  was  not  prevented  even  by  the 
fullest  happiness.  Oh,  what  a  change,  dear  friends, 
from  the  joy  they  once  knew,  when  they  were  the 
servants  of  God,  to  being  cast  down  to  hell  in 
chains  of  darkness,  as  they  now  are  !  The  devils 
go  about  the  world  tempting  men,  but  they  are 
never  released  from  their  darkness.  They  cannot 
escape  from  the  prison  which  they  make  for  them 
selves — the  blackness  and  horror  of  God's  judg 
ment  which  always  shuts  them  in,  be  they  where 
they  may.  What  a  difference  between  that  and 
the  throne  of  God,  and  the  vision  thereof,  which 
was  once  their  joy  !  The  service  of  God  was  once 
theirs,  but  now  the  slavery  of  evil  holds  them  in 
iron  bonds.  Once  they  took  delight  in  the  high 
praises  of  their  Creator,  and  now  they  curse  him 
in  their  heart  of  hearts.  Once,  on  high  days,  when 
the  servants  of  God  came  together,  they  sang  for 
joy  as  they  beheld  new  worlds  created  by  their 
great  Lord  and  King;  now,  everything  he  does  is 
as  gall  and  wormwood  to  them.  They  curse  him 
ami  themselves,  and  they  are  busily  occupied  always 


A    LESSOR    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  G3 

in  seeking  to  pull  down  his  kingdom,  and  to 
quench  his  light  among  the  sons  of  men.  Oh,  the 
misery  of  these  old  offenders  !  They  once  were 
supremely  happy;  but  this  happiness  of  theirs  did 
not  suffice  to  preserve  their  fidelity.  The  most 
golden  wages  will  not  keep  a  servant  loyal  to  the 
kindest  of  masters.  The  most  blessed  experience 
will  not  preserve  a  soul  from  sinning.  You  may 
come  here  and  be  greatly  blessed  under  a  sermon, 
and  sweetly  sing,  and  pray  with  intense  fervor, 
and  seem  carried  up  to  the  gates  of  heaven  by  it; 
but  do  remember  that  no  feelings  of  joy  or  happi 
ness  can  be  relied  upon  as  sufficient  holdfasts  to 
keep  us  near  the  Lord.  We  have  seen  men  drink 
of  the  cup  of  the  Lord  till  they  appeared  to  be  full 
of  love  to  him ;  and  yet  they  have  gone  back  to  be 
drunken  with  the  cup  of  devils.  We  have  known 
men  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  yet  afterwards  blas 
pheme  every  truth  of  revelation,  and  deny  the 
inspiration  of  the  book  of  God.  We  have  known 
them  appear  to  be  among  the  holiest  and  the  best, 
and  yet  they  have  come  at  last  to  be  common  fre 
quenters  of  the  most  evil  haunts  of  the  city,  and  to 
be  ringleaders  in  folly.  Is  not  this  a  dreadful 
thing,  and  should  it  not  be  a  warning  to  every  one 
of  us  ?  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take 
heed  lest  he  fall."  There  is  one  who  is  able  to  keep 
us  from  falling,  and  to  present  us  faultless  before 
his  presence  with  exceeding  great  joy ;  if  we  do  not 
trust  in  him,  and  abide  in  him,  we  shall  perish. 
If  we  dare  to  confide  in  our  position,  our  abil 
ity,  our  office,  our  service,  or  our  experience,  we 
shall,  sooner  or  later,  discover  that  we  are  prone 
to  sin,  and  that  when  we  sin  God  will  not  spare 


64  FALLEN  ANGELS 

us    any    more    than    he    spared    the   angels   that 
sinned. 

This  warning,  be  it  noted,  applies  itself  to  the  very 
foulest  of  sin.  The  angels  did  not  merely  sin  and  lose 
heaven,  but  they  passed  beyond  all  other  beings 
in  sin,  and  made  themselves  tit  denizens  for  hell. 
When  Christ  was  describing  the  most  wicked  of 
men,  he  said  that  he  was  a  devil.  "One  of  you  is 
a  devil,"  was  his  expression;  for  the  devil  is  the 
wickedest  form  of  existence.  Now,  is  it  not  singu 
lar  that  after  being  in  heaven  it  remained  possible 
for  an  angel  to  become  so  dreadful  a  being  as  a 
devil  in  hell  now  is?  If  any  of  us  come  very  near 
to  the  kingdom,  and  yet  the  life  of  God  is  not  in 
us;  if  we  are  joined  with  the  church  of  God,  and 
perform  holy  duties,  and  yet  we  depend  upon  our 
selves,  and  so  fall  into  sin,  we  may  fall  into  the 
foulest  of  sins.  I  do  not  think  that  Judas  could 
have  been  what  he  was  if  he  had  not  been  an 
apostle.  The  best  of  that  which  looks  like  good 
ness  must  be  used  as  the  raw  material  with  which 
to  make  a  traitor  who  will  sell  his  Master.  The 
devils  have  gone  into  open  war  with  God:  the 
same  beings  that  once  bowed  before  his  awful 
majesty  are  now  openly  and  defiantly  at  war  with 
the  God  that  made  them.  They  once  could  sing 
their  chorals  with  delight,  and  day  without  night 
circle  the  thi*one  of  God  rejoicingly;  but  now  they 
blaspheme,  and  rage,  and  rave  against  all  that  is 
good  in  earth  or  heaven.  They  go  about  like  roar 
ing  lions  seeking  whom  they  may  devour, — even 
they  who  once  would  have  been  ministering  spirits, 
eager  to  save  and  bless  They  were  ence  loyal 
subjects,  but  now  they  are  traitors,  rebels,  seducers 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  65 

They  try  to  lead  the  people  of  God  astray  ;  they 
do  their  utmost  to  stir  up  sin  in  every  human  bo 
som.  So  bad  have  they  become  that  their  leader 
actually  met  the  Son  of  God  himself,  and  tempted 
him  to  fall  down  and  worship  him.  Was  ever 
such  infamous,  such  infernal  impudence  as  for  the 
devil  himself  to  ask  the  eternal  Son  of  God  to  do 
him  homage?  O  base  proposal,  that  the  purity  of 
the  Most  High  should  bow  itself  before  the  impiety 
of  a  fallen  spirit !  Yet,  so  far  have  devils  proceeded 
that  in  them  evil  has  reached  its  ripeness  and 
maturity.  Let  this  be  a  lesson  to  us.  I  must  not 
for  a  moment  think  that  apart  from  the  keeping  of 
God's  Spirit  I  am  incapable  even  of  the  foulest  sin. 
Recall  the  story  of  Hazael.  When  the  prophet 
told  him  what  he  would  do,  he  exclaimed  in 
amazement,  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should 
do  this  thing?  "  He  was  not  only  dog  enough  to 
seek  the  Syrian  throne,  but  he  was  devil  enough 
to  suffocate  his  master  with  a  wet  cloth,  and  then 
to  carry  out  with  eagerness  all  those  terrible  deeds 
of  barbarity  which  the  prophet  had  foretold.  We 
may  yet  do  horrible  deeds  which  we  think  our 
selves  incapable  of  doing.  How  much  of  devil 
there  lies  within  the  Tinregenerate  heart  no  man 
can  tell.  0  my  unrenewed  hearer,  I  would  not 
slander  thee,  but  I  must  warn  thee:  there  are  all 
the  makings  of  a  hell  within  thy  heart!  It  only 
needs  that  the  restraining  hand  of  God  should  be 
removed,  and  thou  wouldst  come  out  in  thy  true 
colors,  and  those  are  the  colors  of  iniquity.  If  it 
were  not  for  the  restraints  of  society  and  provi 
dence,  there  would  be  eruptions  of  evil,  even  in 
the  most  moral,  sufficient  to  shake  society  to  its 


66  FALLEN  ANGELS 

foundations.  An  officer  in  India  had  tamed  a 
leopard.  From  the  time  when  it  was  quite  a  kit 
ten  he  had  brought  it  up,  till  it  went  about  the 
house  like  a  cat,  and  everybody  played  with  it; 
but  he  was  sitting  in  his  chair  one  day  asleep,  and 
the  leopard  licked  his  hand — licked  it  in  all  inno 
cence;  but  as  he  licked,  the  skin  was  broken,  and 
tin  taste  of  blood  came  to  the  leopard,  and  from 
that  moment  it  was  not  content  to  dwell  with 
men.  It  rushed  forth  to  kill,  and  was  no  more  at 
ease  till  it  reached  the  jungle.  That  leopard, 
though  tamed,  was  a  leopard  still.  So  a  man, 
sobered  by  moral  motives,  but  unchanged  in  heart, 
is  a  fallen  man  still,  and  the  taste  of  blood,  I  mean 
the  taste  of  sin,  will  soon  reveal  the  tiger  in  him. 
Wash  a  Russian,  and  you  find  a  Tartar;  tempt  a 
moralist,  and  you  discover  a  sinner  !  The  thin 
crust  of  goodness,  which  is  formed  by  education, 
soon  disappears  under  temptation.  You  may  be 
everything  that  looks  like  good,  but  except  you 
have  been  born  again  you  are  still  capable  of  the 
direst  evil.  It  does  seem  a  horrible  thing  to  me 
that  there  should  stream  from  a  man's  lips  the 
foulest  blasphemy,  and  yet  he  that  utters  it  was 
once  accustomed  to  sing  in  the  house  of  God,  and 
bow  his  knee  with  the  saints.  0  God,  that  ever 
a  creature  bidding  fair  to  serve  his  Master,  should 
sink  to  such  a  depth  !  Yet  such  horrors  abound  ! 
The  vessel  which  adorned  the  lordly  festival  is 
broken  and  thrown  on  the  dunghill,  and  even  so 
the  excellent  and  honorable  are  defiled  and  cast 
away.  I  know  what  some  are  whispering,  "  I 
never  should  become  an  open  reprobate  !  "  How 
know  you  that  ?  You  already  question  the  warn- 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  67 

ings  of  Scripture,  you  may  go  further  before  long. 
He  that  is  the  most  sure  is  the  most  insecure;  but 
he  that  cries,  "  Hold  thou  me,"  shall  be  made  to 
stand.  Be  this  our  confession,  "  0  Lord,  I  know 
that  I  shall  become  utterly  vile  except  thy  sove 
reign  grace  prevent!"  In  humility  let  us  oast 
ourselves  upon  the  mighty  grace  of  God,  and  we 
shall  be  kept.  In  fervent  earnestness  let  us  cry  to 
the  Strong  for  strength,  and  we  shall  not  be  over 
come  of  evil.  He  that  presumes  shall  fall;  he  that 
confides  shall  stand. 

The  text  may  lead  us  a  little  farther  before  we 
leave  it,  by  giving  us  a  looming  against  the  punish 
ment  of  sin  as  well  as  against  the  sin  itself.  Read 
this, — "  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but 
cast  them  down  to  hell."  They  were  very  great; 
they  were  very  powerful;  but  God  did  not  spare 
them  for  that.  If  sinners  are  kings,  princes, 
magistrates,  millionaires,  God  will  cast  them  into 
hell.  If  they  were  commanders  of  all  the  forces 
of  the  world,  he  that  is  a  just  and  righteous  judge 
would  not  spare  them  because  of  their  dignities 
and  powers.  "  God  spared  not  the  angels,"  why 
should  he  spare  you,  ye  great  ones  of  the  earth? 
They  were  very  numerous,  too.  I  do  not  know 
how  many  there  were,  but  we  read  of  legions  of 
devils  on  one  occasion.  But  God  did  not  spare 
angelic  sinners  because  there  were  so  many  of  them  : 
he  made  room  in  hell  for  them  all;  and  set  them  in 
darkness  and  in  bonds,  every  one  of  them.  God 
will  not  spare  sinful  men  because  of  their  millions: 
"  the  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the 
nations  that  forget  God."  Be  they  few  or  many, 
sinners  must  be  punished,  and  God  will  not  turn, 


68  FALLEN  ANGELS 

away  his  wrath  from  those  who  do  iniquity.  God 
did  not  spare  the  rebel  angels  because  of  their 
unity.  I  never  heard  of  devils  quarreling:  it  is 
very  wonderful  in  Scripture  to  notice  their  unani 
mity — their  concord  with  one  another;  but  "  though 
hand  join  in  hand,  yet  shall  not  the  wicked  go  un 
punished."  You  unbelievers  may  combine  together 
to  hate  and  oppose  the  gospel,  but  it  matters  not, 
God  will  deal  with  your  confederacies  and  break  up 
your  unities,  and  make  you  companions  in  hell 
even  as  you  have  been  comrades  in  sin.  "  God 
spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them 
down  to  hell." 

Neither  did  he  spare  them  because  of  their  craft. 
There  were  never  such  subtle  creatures  as  these 
are — so  wise,  so  deep,  so  crafty;  but  these  serpents 
and  all  the  brood  of  them  had  to  feel  the  power  of 
God's  vengeance,  notwithstanding  their  cunning. 
Men  often  escape  at  the  bar  of  their  country  because 
of  their  long-headed  ways  of  evading  the  law; 
they  keep  within  legal  bounds,  and  yet  are  great 
villains;  or  if  they  go  over  the  line  they  hire  a 
clever  tongue  to  plead  for  them,  be  they  as  guilty 
as  they  may,  and  through  crafty  pleading  they 
escape  from  a  righteous  sentence.  Thus  it  is  with 
men,  but  no  counselors  can  pervert  judgment 
with  the  Most  High.  He  will  deal  out  justice  even 
to  a  hair's  breath,  and  he  will  by  no  means  spare 
the  guilty.  "  God  spared  not  the  angels  that 
sinned:"  why  should  he  spare  any  guilty  son  of 
Adam  ?  Be  sure  that  he  will  not  spare  any  one  of 
us,  if  we  live  in  sin.  Unless  we  accept  the  way  of 
salvation  by  Jesus  Christ  our  sin  will  find  us  out, 
and  God  will  find  our  sin  out,  and  he  will  cast  us 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  69 

also  down  to  the  place  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels.  Let  the  flatterers  of  to-day  preach 
what  they  may,  the  Lord  will  punish  men  who 
live  and  die  in  their  sins.  He  spared  not  the 
angels  that  sinned;  certainly  he  will  not  spare  men 
if  they  sin.  Let  this  stand  as  a  warning  to  us. 

II.  But  now  I  want  to  carry  you  on  and  ask 
all  your  attention  to  this  second  point  of  OUR 

ADMIRATION. 

I  want  you  to  admire,  dear  friends,  the  fact  that 
though  angels  fell  the  saints  of  God  are  made  to  stand. 
The  angels  sinned  fatally;  but  the  saints  of  God 
"  cannot  sin,  for  they  are  born  of  God."  You 
know  the  sense  in  which  the  apostle  means  that; 
not  that  we  do  not  all  sin,  but  that  we  do  not  so 
sin  as  to  depart  from  the  living  God,  give  up  our 
allegiance  to  him,  and  cease  to  be  his  loving  chil 
dren.  No.  "  He  keepeth  himself,"  says  the  Scrip 
ture,  "  and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not." 
But  what  a  wonder  it  is  !  I  tell  you,  when  the 
tales  of  God's  people  shall  be  written,  and  the 
records  of  the  saints  shall  be  read  by  the  light  of 
glory,  we  shall  be  miracles  of  grace  to  ourselves 
and  to  one  another.  "  Oh,"  we  shall  say,  "  I  had 
almost  gone,  but  the  hand  of  grace  interposed,  and 
snatched  me  from  slipping  over  the  awful  precipice. 
My  mind  almost  consented  to  that  sin,  and  yet  1 
was  able  to  cry  out,  '  How  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness  and  sin  against  God?'  There  was 
great  stress  of  weather,  and  my  poor  bark  was 
almost  on  the  rocks;  but  still,  though  I  grazed  the 
bottom,  yet  I  did  not  make  shipwreck."  "  Oh,  if  I 
had  been  left  at  that  moment,"  one  will  say,  "  what 
would  have  become  of  me  ?  Though  I  had  tasted 


70  FALLEN  ANGELS 

of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  the  powers  of  the  world 
to  corne,  yet,  had  I  been  left  to  myself  at  that  hour, 
I  should  have  so  fallen  that  I  could  never  again 
have  been  brought  to  repentance.  But  I  was  kept; 
preserved  by  as  great  a  miracle  as  if  a  spark  should 
fall  into  the  sea  and  yet  burn  on,  or  a  straw  should 
be  blown  into  a  heated  furnace  and  should  not  be 
consumed,  or  a  moth  should  be  trodden  on  by  a 
giant  and  yet  remain  uncrushed." 

"Kept  alive  with  death  so  near, 
I  to  God  the  glory  give." 

To  think  that  men  should  stand  where  angels 
fall !  We  are  by  sovereign  grace  called  to  be  as 
near  to  God  as  the  angels  ever  were,  and  in  some 
respects  we  are  nearer  still.  We  are  the  body-guard 
of  Christ;  his  chosen  ones  with  whom  he  communes. 
We  are  the  table-companions  of  our  Lord;  we  eat 
of  his  bread,  and  drink  of  his  cup,  and  are  made 
partakers  with  him.  We  are  lifted  up  to  be  one 
with  him,  and  are  made  to  be  "  members  of  his 
body,  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  bones;"  yet  God's 
eternal  unbounded  power  keeps  us  in  the  day  of 
temptation,  and  leads  us  so  that  if  we  go  through 
the  rivers  we  are  not  drowned,  and  when  we  pass 
through  the  fires  we  are  not  burned.  O,  the 
splendor  of  triumphant  grace  !  Neither  the  glory 
of  our  calling,  nor  the  un  worthiness  of  our  original, 
shall  cause  us  to  be  traitors;  we  shall  neither 
perish  through  pride  nor  lust;  but  the  new  nature 
within  us  shall  overcome  all  sin,  and  abide  faithful 
to  the  end. 

"  Now,  unto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  us  from  fall 
ing,  unto  him  be  honor  and  glory,  and  dominion 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  71 

and  power  for  ever  and  ever."  I  cannot  look  back 
on  ray  past  life  without  feeling  the  tears  rush  into 
my  eyes  at  the  remembrance  of  how  1  have  been 
preserved  in  the  trial-hour.  We  could  not  pos 
sibly  tell,  nor  would  we  wish  to  tell  in  public,  of 
those  hours  of  weakness,  those  times  of  strong 
delusion,  those  moments  of  foot-slipping  and  of 
heart-fainting,  which  have  happened  to  us.  We 
grieve  as  we  remember  onr  worse  than  childish 
weaknesses.  And  yet  we  have  not  stained  our 
garments;  we  have  not  dishonored  the  holy  name 
by  which  we  are  named;  we  have  not  been  suffered 
to  turn  aside  from  the  straightness  of  our  path  so 
as  to  bring  grief  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  dishonor 
to  the  Church  of  God.  Verily  this  a  wonder.  Mr. 
Bunyan  tells  us  that  Christian  by  the  light  of  day 
looked  back  on  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death 
which  he  had  passed  through  in  the  night-time, 
and  saw  what  a  narrow  path  he  had  kept,  and 
what  a  quag  there  was  on  one  side,  and  what  a 
miry  place  on  the  other,  and  where  the  hobgoblins 
were,  and  all  the  fiends  of  hell.  When  he  looked 
back  on  it  he  was  lost  in  admiration  and  gratitude. 
So  it  must  be,  and  will  be  with  you  if  though  a 
dangerous  way  you  have  yet  held  on  in  your  plain 
course,  and  have  not  turned  from  your  integrity. 
We  shall  be  brimful  of  gratitude  and  love.  Grace 
shall  reign  unto  eternal  life.  Redeemed  men  shall 
stand  where  angels  fall,  for  God  shall  keep  them. 
He  is  able  to  hold  them  up,  and  he  will  do  it  even 
to  the  end. 

Now,  let  us  learn  another  lesson  full  of  admira 
tion,  and  that  is  that  God  should  deed  in  grace  with 
men  and  not  ivith  angels. 


72  FALLEN  ANGELS 

"  From  heaven  the  sinning  angels  fell, 

And  wrath  and  darknesb  chained  them  down; 
But  man,  vile  man,  forsook  his  bliss, 
And  mercy  lifts  him  to  a  crown. 

"  Amazing  work  of  sovereign  grace 

That  could  distinguish  rebels  so  ! 
Our  guilty  treasons  called  aloud 
For  everlasting  fetters  too." 

Now,  you  that  do  not  believe  in  the  doctrine  of 
election,  but  kick  at  it,  and  bite  your  lips  at  the 
mention  of  it,  listen  to  this !  God  gave  fallen 
angels  no  Saviour,  no  gospel,  no  space  tor  repent 
ance,  yet  he  gives  these  to  men :  why  is  this?  What 
reason  was  there?  Can  you  conceive  one?  Why 
did  God  pass  the  fallen  angels  by,  and  yet  look  in 
love  upon  the  sons  of  men  ?  u  Oh,"  says  one,  "  per 
haps  fallen  angels  were  the  greater  offenders  of  the 
two."  I  do  not  think  it;  certainly  many  men  go 
far  to  rival  devils  in  rebellion. 

"  Perhaps  men  were  tempted  and  angels  were 
not."  Stop,  let  us  be  clear  on  this  point.  Very 
likely  Satan,  the  first  angel  that  fell,  was  not 
tempted;  but  just  as  likely  all  the  others  were. 
Their  leader  tempted  them  as  much  as  Eve 
tempted  Adam,  or  the  serpent  temptod  Eve. 
The  mass  of  fallen  angelhood  may  have  been 
seduced  by  the  example  of  Satan,  the  prince  of 
devils.  I  do  not  therefore  see  any  great  difference 
as  to  that  matter.  This  I  do  know,  that  some 
men  are  greater  sinners  than  devils.  "No,"  say 
you,  "how  is  that?"  I  answer  that  the  devil 
never  yet  rejected  free  grace  and  dying  love;  the 
devil  never  yet  struggled  against  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  his  own  conscience;  the  devil  never  yet  refused 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN   MEN.  73 

the  mercy  of  God.  These  supreme  pinnacles 
of  wickedness  are  only  reached  by  you  who  are 
hearers  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  cast  its  precious 
message  behind  your  backs.  Singular  it  is  that 
God  should  deal  in  rnercy  with  men  who  act  so 
wickedly,  while  yet  he  never  discoursed  of  mercy 
to  the  fallen  angels,  nor  set  before  them  terms  of 
peace.  They  were  given  over  there  and  then  to  be 
bound  in  chains  of  darkness  until  the  judgment  of 
the  last  great  day. 

Notice  that  God  gave  the  angels  no  respite.  He 
did  not  wait  for  them  to  continue  in  sin  for  years; 
but  when  they  sinned,  they  fell.  The  punishment 
followed  hard  on  the  crime.  They  cast  God  out 
of  their  hearts,  and  he  cast  them  out  of  heaven. 
How  different  is  his  conduct  to  some  of  you ! 
You  have  sinned  through  a  series  of  years.  How 
old  are  you?  Twenty  years?  Thirty?  Forty? 
Fifty?  Sixty?  Seventy?  It  is  eighty  years  that 
you  have  lived  in  rebellion  against  God  ?  And 
yet  he  has  not  cut  you  down  !  Wonderful  patience ! 
The  angels  he  banished  from  his  presence  at  once. 
He  spared  not  the  angels,  but  he  has  spared  you. 
Why  is  this  ? 

The  Lord  never  entered  into  any  parley  with  the 
angels — never  invited  them  to  repentance  or  to 
mercy.  Oh,  but  what  parleys  God  has  had  with 
some  of  you !  I  am  not  the  only  one  who  has  en 
treated  and  persuaded  you,  but  yet  with  some  of 
you  I  have  pleaded  very  earnestly  that  you  would 
turn  from  the  error  of  your  ways  and  live — that 
you  would  believe  in  Christ  and  find  eternal  life. 
But  why  should  the  Lord  treat  concerning  peace 
with  men  and  not  with  fallen  angels  ? 


74  FALLEN  ANGELS 

For  the  angels  God  never  made  a  covenant  of 
grace,  "ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."  They  broke 
their  covenant  of  works,  and  they  fell  never  to 
rise  again.  For  the  angels  there  was  never  a 
sacrifice:  no  dying  Son  of  God  for  them:  no 
bloody  sweat  and  wounded  hands  and  feet  for 
them!  And  yet  a  great  atonement  is  prepared 
for  men.  What  sovereignty  of  God's  grace  is  here 
displayed  !  He  opens  the  golden  gates  of  love  for 
us,  and  shuts  the  iron  gates  on  beings  nobler  than 
we  are.  The  Spirit  of  God  strives  with  us,  but  he 
never  strives  with  fallen  angels.  Devils  are  left 
to  themselves;  but  concerning  man  the  Lord  cries, 
"  How  can  I  give  thee  up?"  How  justly  might 
God  have  left  us  alone,  for  we  have  been  given 
unto  idols,  and  yet  he  follows  us  with  the  admoni 
tions  of  his  mercy. 

For  the  devils  there  is  no  pardon,  no  hope,  no 
gate  of  heaven ;  and  yet  there  is  all  this  for  men. 
Oh,  dear  hearers,  do  not,  I  pray  you,  reject  these 
choice  gifts  of  almighty  love.  If  God  is  so  speci 
ally  gracious  to  the  race  of  men,  let  not  man  become 
singularly  ungrateful  to  his  God,  presumptuously 
wanton  in  his  sin.  Let  us  turn  unto  the  Lord,  with 
full  purpose  of  heart,  seeing  that  he  turns  to  us 
with  such  speciality  of  favor. 

I  am  sure  that  it  is  a  great  wonder  and  a  thing 
for  admiration  that  God  should  look  upon  us  and 
not  on  fallen  angels;  because,  as  I  have  already 
said,  angels  certainly  are  not  worse  sinners  than 
some  men  have  been.  Angels  are  not  more  wilful 
than  we  have  been,  for  we  have  sinned  against 
light  and  knowledge  with  deliberate  intent  and 
purpose. 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN  MEN.  75 

Angels  are  certainly  more  valuable:  if  God  had 
wanted  one  of  the  two  races  to  be  employed  as 
his  servants,  the  best  would  have  been  chosen, 
and  these  are  not  men,  but  angels.  Angels  can 
do  more  for  God  than  we  can ;  yet  he  has  chosen 
us.  Angels  must,  surely,  be  more  missed  than 
men;  their  downfall  made  a  great  gap  in  heaven. 
We  go  there  to  fill  the  space,  and  to  repair  the 
breach  which  was  made  when  they  were  cast  down 
from  glory.  But,  surely,  it  were  easier  to  restore 
the  angels  who  came  from  heaven  than  to  take  up 
inferior  creatures  who  had  never  been  there.  If 
we  make  a  distinction  between  men  in  the  distri 
bution  of  our  charity,  we  very  properly  say,  "  Let 
us  do  good  to  those  first  who  would  be  the  most 
miserable  without  it."  Now,  men  have  never  known 
heaven,  and  consequently  cannot  so  much  feel  the 
loss  of  it  as  those  who  have  been  there  and  have 
fallen  fVom  it.  We  are  like  people  that  have 
always  been  poor;  but  the  angels  have  been  in 
heaven,  and  are  therefore  like  wealthy  persons  who 
have  come  down  to  poverty.  What  a  hell  to  them 
to  be  out  of  heaven !  What  misery  to  those 
spirits  to  miss  the  eternal  glories  which  they  once 
enjoyed  !  One  would  have  thought,  therefore,  that 
God  would  have  restored  the  angels  before  he  up 
raised  the  human  race.  But  he  has  not;  he  has 
redeemed  us,  and  left  the  elder  race  of  rebels  un- 
restored.  No  man  knoweth  why,  and  in  our  amaze 
ment  we  cry, — How  is  this?  Whence  this  elec 
tion  of  grace  ? 

Tell  me,  ye  who  would  leave  God  no  choice,  but 
would  deify  the  will  of  man,  what  all  this  means  ? 
Where  is  your  proud  theory  that  God  is  bound  to 


76  FALLEN  ANGELS 

treat  all  alike,  as  if  we  had  a  claim  on  God?  I 
point  yon  to  the  fallen  angels,  and  what  can 
you  say  ? 

Sometimes  princes,  when  they  mean  to  give  par 
don  according  to  their  will,  say  to  themselves,  "  We 
will  pardon  the  man  who  will  be  most  dangerous 
if  we  leave  him  to  be  our  enemy."  Now,  bad  as 
men  are,  and  great  enemies  of  God  as  they  become, 
yet  the  devil  has  more  power  to  harm  God  than  a 
man  can  have;  and  yet  God  does  not  pardon  the 
devil.  He  lets  Satan  go  on  with  all  his  dreadful 
power  and  do  his  worst  in  reviling  his  Lord;  and 
yet  the  Lord's  mercy  comes  to  us  whose  powers 
are  within  so  narrow  a  range,  compared  with  the 
fallen  angels;  he  makes  choice  of  puny  man  to  re 
ceive  his  grace. 

One  would  think  that  to  restore  an  angel  was 
more  easy  and  more  agreeable  to  the  plan  of  the 
universe  than  to  exalt  fallen  man.  There  is  noth 
ing  to  do  but  to  put  an  angel  back  in  his  place; 
but  men  must  be  taken  into  a  new  existence. 
Christ  himself  must  come  and  be  a  man;  and,  to 
wash  away  the  sin  of  man,  Christ  must  die;  noth 
ing  more  could  have  been  needed  had  devils  been 
saved.  I  cannot  conceive  the  salvation  of  angels 
to  be  more  difficult  than  the  salvation  of  men;  I 
rather  conceive  it  to  have  been  the  easier  thing  of 
the  two  if  the  Lord  had  so  willed  it.  And  yet,  in 
volving  as  it  did  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God 
und  his  death  to  make  atonement,  the  infinitely 
gracious  Father  condescended  to  ordain  that  he 
would  take  up  men,  and  would  not  take  up  the  fallen 
angels.  It  is  a  marvel:  it  is  a  mystery.  I  put  it 
before  you  for  your  admiration.  Oh,  sirs,  do.  pot 


A    LESSON    TO    FALLEN   MEN.  77 

despise  it !  Let  not  such  amazing  sovereignty 
of  grace  be  treated  with  contempt  by  any  one  of 
us.  Talk  no  more  about  the  injustice  of  the  elec 
tion  of  certain  men,  fur  if  you  do  the  devils  will 
bear  witness  that  you  are  caviling  at  Ihe  royal 
prerogative  of  the  great  Lord  who  saith,  "  I  will 
have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,  and  I 
will  have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have 
compassion." 

Now,  I  think  that  I  see  in  this  a  great  argument  ivith 
God's  people.  Has  the  Lord  given  up  angels  and 
chosen  you?  It  reminds  me  of  that  famous  text, 
"  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  thou  hast 
been  honorable,  and  I  have  loved  thee.  Therefore 
will  I  give  men  for  thee,  and  people  for  thy  life.  I 
gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom;  Ethiopia  and  Seba  for 
thee."  See,  he  has  passed  angels  by,  and  he  has 
made  choice  of  us;  what  a  height  of  grace!  Be 
hold  how  he  loves  us !  What  shall  we  do  in  return  ? 
Let  us  do  angels'  work.  Come,  brothers  and  sisters, 
let  us  glow  with  such  a  fire  of  devotion  as  might 
have  burned  in  an  angel's  heart '  Let  us  be  as  in 
tensely  zealous  as  a  redeemed  angel  might  have 
been.  Let  us  glorify  God  as  angels  would  hare 
done  had  they  been  restored  and  made  again  to 
taste  divine  favor  and  infinite  love.  What  man 
ner  of  people  ought  we  to  be  ?  What  manner  of 
lives  ought  we  to  live  ?  What  manner  of  conse 
cration  ought  to  be  upon  us  ?  Should  not  our 
whole  being  live  unto  God? 

I  have  given  you  this  somewhat  in  the  rough, 
for  time  flies;  but  think  it  over,  and  profit  by  it. 
Think  it  over,  you  ungodly  ones,  and  not  cast  away 
mercy  like  this.  When  you  read,  "  He  took  not 


78  FALLEN   ANGELS. 

up  angels,  but  he  took  up  the  seed  of  Abraham," 
be  full  of  surprise,  and  fly  at  once  to  Jesus.  And, 
0  ye  sainta,  as  ye  read  it,  say  to  yourselves — 

"  For  more  love  than  seraphs  know 
We  will  like  seraphs  burn." 

God  bless  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


IV. 

COEDS  AND  CAET-EOPES. 
Read  February  8,  1885. 

"  Woe  unto  them  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords  of  vanity,  and 
sin  as  it  were  with  a  cart-rope." — ISAIAH  v.  18. 

T  I  M1E  text  begins  with  "Woe";  but  when  we 
-*-  get  a  woe  in  this  book  of  blessings  it  is  sent 
as  a  warning,  that  we  may  escape  from  woe.  God's 
woes  are  better  than  the  devil's  welcomes.  God 
always  means  man's  good,  and  only  sets  ill  before 
him  that  he  may  turn  from  the  dangers  of  a  mis 
taken  way,  and  so  may  escape  the  ill  which  lies  at 
the  end  of  it.  Think  me  not  unkind  at  this  time  be 
cause  my  message  sounds  harshly,  and  has  a  note 
in  it  of  sorrow  rather  than  of  joy.  It  may  be  most 
for  your  pleasure  for  ages  to  come,  dear  friends,  to 
be  for  a  while  displeased.  It  may  make  the  bells 
ring  in  your  ears  forever  if  to-night,  instead  of  the 
dulcet  sound  of  the  harp,  you  hear  the  shrill  clarion 
startling  you  to  thoughtfulriess.  Mayhap  "  Woe, 
woe,  woe,"  though  it  should  sound  with  a  dreadful 
din  in  your  ear,  may  be  the  means  of  leading  you 
to  seek  and  find  your  Saviour,  and  then  through 
out  eternity  no  woe  shall  ever  come  near  to  you. 
May  the  good  Spirit  of  all  grace  put  power  into 
my  warning,  that  you  may  profit  by  it. 

This  is  a  very  singular  text.      It  is  not  very  easy 
to  understand  it  at  first  sight.     Here  are  some  who 


80  CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES. 

are  said  to  draw  sin  with  cords  of  vanity,  which 
are  slender  enough,  and  yet  they  also  draw  it  aa 
with  a  cart-rope,  which  is  thick  enough.  They  are 
harnessed  to  sin,  and  the  traces  appear  to  be  fra 
gile,  insignificant,  and  soon  broken.  You  can 
hardly  touch  them,  for  they  are  a  mere  sham,  a 
fiction — vanity.  What  can  be  thinner  and  weaker 
than  cobweb-cords  of  vanity?  Yet  when  you  at 
tempt  to  break  or  remove  them  they  turn  out  to  be 
cart-ropes  or  wagon-traces,  fitted  to  bear  the  pull 
of  horse  or  bullock.  Motives  which  have  no  logi 
cal  force,  and  would  not  bind  a  reasonable  man  for 
a  moment,  are,  nevertheless,  quite  sufficient  to 
hold  the  most  of  men  in  bondage.  Such  a  slave  is 
man  to  iniquity,  that  unworthy  motives  and  inde 
fensible  reasons  which  appear  no  stronger  than 
little  cords  nevertheless  hold  him  as  with  bonds  of 
steel,  and  he  is  fastened  to  the  loaded  wagon  of  his 
iniquity  as  a  horse  is  fastened  by  a  cart-rope.  That 
is  our  subject  at  this  time,  and  may  God  make  it 
useful  to  many.  Beyond  all  things  1  would  have 
you  saved,  you  who  are  tugging  away  in  the  har 
ness  of  sin.  God  grant  it.  May  the  free  Spirit  set 
you  free. 

I  shall  first  of  all  explain  tlie  singular  description 
— explain  it  by  enlarging  upon  it,  and  quoting  in 
stances  from  daily  life.  Secondly,  I  shall  enlarge 
upon  the  woe,  that  is  certainly  connected,  with  being 
bound  to  sin;  and  then  thirdly,  as  God  shall  help 
me,  I  ivill  encourage  you  to  get  out  of  the  traces.  I 
pray  that  you  may  have  these  cart-ropes  cut,  that 
you  may  not  be  drawing  iniquity  and  sin  after 
you  any  longer.  Oh  that  this  might  be  salvation's 
hour  to  many  of  you,  in  which,  like  Samson,  you 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  81 

may  break  the  cords  and  ropes  with  which  you 
have  been  bound  ! 

I.  First,  let  us  EXPLAIN  THE  SINGULAR  DESCRIPTION. 
Here  are  persons  harnessed  to  the  wagon  of  sin — 
harnessed  to  it  by  many  cords,  all  light  as  vanity 
and  yet  strong  as  cart-ropes. 

Let  me  give  you  a  picture.  Here  is  a  man,  who, 
as  a  young  man,  heard  the  gospel  and  grew  up  un 
der  the  influence  of  it.  He  is  an  intelligent  man, 
a  Bible  reader,  and  somewhat  of  a  theologian.  He 
attended  a  Bible  class,  was  an  apt  pupil,  and  could 
explain  much  of  Scripture,  but  he  took  to  lightness 
and  frothiness.  He  made  an  amusement  of  religion 
and  a  sport  of  serious  things.  Sermons  he  fre 
quented  that  he  might  talk  of  them  and  say  that 
he  had  heard  the  preacher.  After  the  sermon, 
when  others  were  impressed,  he  was  merry.  He 
had  discovered  some  mistake  in  the  preacher,  in 
his  pronoun  elation,  in  the  grammatical  construc 
tion  of  a  sentence,  or  in  a  misquotation  from  a 
poet,  and  this  he  mentioned  with  gusto,  passing  by 
all  the  good  that  was  spoken.  That  was  only  his 
way:  he  did  not  mean  any  hurt  by  it;  at  least,  he 
would  have  said  so  had  any  one  seriously  reproved 
him. 

He  came  under  the  bond  of  this  religious  trifling, 
but  it  was  a  cord  of  vanity  small  as  a  packthread. 
Years  ago  he  began  to  be  bound  to  his  sin  by  this 
kind  of  trifling,  and  at  the  present  moment  I  am 
not  sure  that  he  ever  cares  to  go  and  hear  the  gos 
pel  or  to  read  the  word  of  God,  for  he  has  grown 
to  despise  that  which  he  sported  with.  The  wan 
ton  witling  has  degenerated  into  a  malicious  scof 
fer:  his  cord  has  become  a  cart-rope.  His  life  is 


82  CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES. 

all  trifling  now.  You  could  not  make  him  serious. 
He  spends  his  time  in  one  perpetual  giggle.  Every 
holy  thing  is  now  the  subject  of  comedy.  Like 
Belshazzer,  he  drinks  his  wine  out  of  the  sacred 
vessels  of  the  temple.  Earnestness  hath  a  pleas 
antry  of  its  own,  an-d  a  bold  spirit  yokes  mirth  and 
laughter  to  its  ear,  and  subdues  all  the  faculties  of 
the  mind  to  God,  not  even  excepting  humor;  but 
this  man  owns  no  Lord  within  his  heart,  but 
laughs  at  the  most  solemn  truths  and  does  not 
seem  capable  of  anything  higher  or  better.  His 
life  is  a  sneer.  He  would  pull  a  feather  out  of  an 
angel's  wing  and  wear  it  in  his  cap.  On  the  solemn 
day  of  Pentecost  he  would  have  drawn  a  picture  of 
the  cloven  tongues  upon  his  thumb  nail  that  he 
might  show  it  as  a  curiosity.  There  is  nothing 
sacred  to  him  now,  nor  will  there  be  till  he  is  in 
hell,  and  then  he  will  have  done  with  his  jibes 
and  flouts.  The  habit  of  being  contemptuous  has 
grown  to  be  a  cart-rope  with  him,  and  it  holds 
him  most  securely.  I  say,  young  men,  break  those 
wretched  cords  of  vanity  before  they  strengthen 
into  cart-ropes.  While  yet  there  is  but  a  slender 
thread  snap  it,  before  thread  gathers  to  thread,  and 
that  to  another,  and  that  to  another,  till  it  has 
come  to  be  a  cable,  which  even  a  giant  could  not 
pull  asunder.  There  are  many  lamentable  instances 
of  triflers  ripening  into  scoffers,  and  it  were  a  great 
pity  that  you  should  furnish  further  illustrations. 
Avoid  trifling  with  religion  as  you  would  avoid 
common  swearing  or  profanity,  for  in  its  essence  it 
is  irreverent  and  mischievous. 

I  have  seen  the  same  thing  take  another  shape, 
and  then  it  appeared  as  captious  questioning.     We 


CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES.  S3 

are  not  afraid  to  be  examined  upon  anything  in 
the  Word  of  God :  but  we  dread  a  caviling  spirit. 
I,  for  one,  believe  that  the  more  the  Word  of  God 
has  been  sifted  the  more  fully  has  it  been  con 
firmed.  The  result  lias  been  the  better  understand 
ing  of  its  teaching.  The  pure  gold  has  shone  the 
more  brightly  for  being  placed  in  the  crucible. 
But  there  is  a  habit  which  begins  thus — "  I  do  not 
see  tliis;  and  I  do  not  understand  thai;  and  I  do 
not  approve  of  this;  and  I  question  of  that."  It 
makes  life  into  a  tangle  of  thorns  and  briars 
where  ten  thousand  sharp  points  of  doubt  are  for 
ever  tearing  the  mind.  This  doubting  state  re 
minds  one  of  the  old  serpent's  "  Yea,  hath  God 
said?"  If  the  statement  made  had  been  the  oppo 
site,  the  gentleman  would  have  questioned  it;  for 
he  is  bound  to  doubt  even-thing.  He  is  one  who 
could  take  either  side  and  refute:  but  neither  side 
and  defend.  He  could  do  like  the  eminent  bar 
rister,  who  had  made  a  mistake  as  to  his  side  of  the 
case,  and  he  got  up  and  gave  all  the  arguments 
most  tellingly,  till  his  client's  lawyer  whispered  to 
him,  "  You  have  done  for  us,  3*011  have  used  all  the 
arguments  against  your  own  client."  The  bar 
rister  stopped  and  said,  "  My  lord,  I  have  thus  told 
you  all  that  can  be  urged  against  my  client  by 
those  upon  the  other  side,  and  I  will  now  show 
you  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  allegations;"  and 
with  equal  cleverness  he  went  on  to  disprove  what 
he  had  proved  before.  There  are  minds  con 
structed  in  such  a  way  that  they  can  act  in  every 
way  except  that  of  plain  up  and  down.  Their 
machinery  is  eccentric,  it  would  puzzle  the  ablest 
tongue  to  describe  it.  I  like  the  old-fashioned 


84  CORDS   AND    CAKT-ROf'ES. 

consciences  that  go  np  and  down,  yes  and  no, 
right  and  wrong,  true  and  false — the  kind  which 
are  simple  and  need  no  great  intellect  to  under 
stand  their  methods.  We  are  growing  so  cultured 
now  that  many  have  become  like  the  old  serpent, 
"  More  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field."  The 
new-fashioned  consciences  act  upon  ihe  principle 
of  compromise  and  policy,  which  is  no  principle  at 
all.  To  each  inquiry  they  answer,  "  Yes  and  no. 
What  is  the  time  of  day  ?  "  for  it  is  yes  or  no  ac 
cording  to  the  clock,  or  according  to  the  climate, 
or  more  generally  according  to  the  breeches' pocket, 
for  so  much  depends  upon  that.  Practically  many 
are  sajnng,  "Upon  which  side  of  the  bread  is  the 
butter?  Tell  us  this,  and  then  we  will  tell  you  what 
we  believe."  People  of  that  sort  begin  at  first  with 
an  inquiring  spirit,  then  go  on  to  an  objecting  spirit, 
then  to  a  conceited  spirit,  and  then  to  a  perpetually 
quibbling  spirit.  In  the  case  to  which  I  refer,  there 
is  nothing  earnest;  for  when  a  man  is  a  sincere 
questioner,  and  is  willing  to  receive  an  answer,  he 
is  on  the  high  road  to  truth;  but  when  he  merely 
questions  and  questions  and  questions,  and  never 
stops  for  an  answer,  and  is  nothing  but  a  heap  of 
cavils,  he  is  not  worth  clearing  away.  The  last 
thing  he  wants  is  an  answer,  and  the  thing  he 
dreads  beyond  everything  is  that  he  should  be 
compelled  to  believe  anything  at  all.  Such  a  man 
at  last  gets  bound  as  with  a  cart-rope:  he  becomes 
an  atheist  or  worse;  for  all  capacity  for  faith  de 
parts  from  him.  He  is  as  frivolous  as  Voltaire, 
whose  forte  seemed  to  lie  in  ridiculing  everything. 
You  cannot  save  him.  How  cau  faith  come  to 
him  ?  How  can  he  believe  who  must  have  every- 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROTES.  85 

thing  explained  ?  How  can  he  believe  in  Christ 
himself  when  he  requires  him,  first  of  all,  to  be  put 
through  a  catechism  and  to  be  made  to  answer 
cavils?  Oh,  take  heed  of  tying  up  your  soul  with 
cart-ropes  of  skepticism  ;  take  heed  of  a  truth-deny 
ing  spirit.  God  help  you  to  break  the  bonds. 
Inquire,  but  believe.  Ask,  but  do  accept  the 
truth :  and  be  in  earnest  in  your  resolve  that  if  you 
prove  all  things  you  will  also  hold  fast  that  which 
is  good.  To  be  always  using  the  sieve  but  never  to 
be  using  the  mill  is  starving  work:  to  be  always 
searching  after  adulterations,  but  never  to  drink  of 
the  genuine  milk,  is  a  foolish  habit.  Caviling  is  a 
curse,  and  carping  is  a  crime.  Escape  from  it 
while  yet  it  is  but  as  a  cord  of  vanity,  lest  it  come 
to  be  a  cart-rope  which  shall  bind  you  fast. 

I  hear  one  say,  "  This  does  not  touch  me.  I 
have  not  fallen  either  into  trifling  or  into  question 
ing."  No,  but  perhaps  you  may  be  a  prisoner 
bound  with  other  cords.  Some  have  a  natural  dis 
like  fo  religious  things  and  cannot  be  brought  to  at 
tend  to  them.  Let  me  qualify  the  statement  and 
explain  myself.  They  are  quite  prepared  to  attend 
a  place  of  worship  and  to  hear  sermons,  and  oc 
casionally  to  read  the  Scriptures,  and  to  give  their 
money  to  help  on  some  benevolent  cause;  but  this 
is  the  point  at  which  they  draw  the  line — they  do 
not  want  to  think,  to  pray,  to  repent,  to  believe,  or 
to  make  heart-work  of  the  matter.  Thinking,  you 
know,  s  awkward  work,  and  to  them  it  is  uncom 
fortable  work,  because  there  is  not  much  in  their 
lives  that  would  cheer  them  if  they  were  to  think 
of  it.  They  had  rather  not  see  the  nakedness  of 
the  land.  There  is  an  ugly  thing  which  they  do 


86  COXDS    AND    CART-ROPES. 

not  want  to  have  much  to  do  with — called  repen 
tance;  of  this  they  require  much,  but  they  are 
averse  to  it.  The  more  children  dislike  medicine 
the  more  they  want  it;  and  it  is  the  same  with  re 
pentance.  These  people  would  rather  shut  their 
eyes  and  go  on  to  destruction  than  stop  and  see 
their  danger  and  turn  back.  To  think  about  the 
past — why,  they  might  have  to  mourn  it,  and  who 
is  eager  after  sorrow  ?  Then  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  a  change  of  heart,  and  they  are  rather  shy  of 
that,  for  they  are  almost  heartless  and  do  not  like 
prying  deep.  If  there  were  something  to  be  done 
that  could  be  managed  in  a  day  or  two,  if  there 
were  some  pilgrimage  to  make,  some  penance  to 
endure,  some  dress  to  be  worn,  they  would  not 
mind  that;  but  thought,  repentance,  prayer,  and 
seeking  God — they  cannot  endure  such  spiritual 
exactions.  If  there  were  some  sacrifice  to  be  made 
they  would  do  that;  but  this  being  at  peace  with 
God,  this  seeking  to  be  renewed  in  the  spirit 
of  their  mind — well,  they  have  no  mind  to  it. 
The  world  is  in  their  hearts  and  they  have  no  wish 
to  get  it  out.  They  have  heard  some  people  say 
that  all  conversation  about  God,  the  soul,  and 
eternity  is  dull  Puritanic  talk,  so  they  have  picked 
up  an  expression  as  parrots  often  do,  and  they  say, 
"No,  we  do  not  want  to  be  Puritans.  We  do  not 
care  to  be  extra  precise  and  righteous  over  much." 
What  a  misery  it  is  that  there  should  be  persons 
who  are  bound  with  such  cords  of  vanity  as  those! 
These  are  unreasonable  feelings,  insane  aversions, 
unjustifiable  prejudices:  the  Lord  save  you  from 
them,  and  instead  thereof  give  you  a  mind  to  know 
him,  and  a  heart  to  seek  after  him.  Why,  as  a 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  87 

boy,  when  I  began  to  feel  a  sense  of  sin  within  me, 
I  resolved  that  if  there  was  such  a  thing  as  being 
born  again,  I  would  never  rest  until  I  knew  it. 
My  heart  seemed  set  upon  knowing  what  repen 
tance  meant  and  what  faith  meant,  and  getting 
to  be  thoroughly  saved :  but  now  I  find  that  large 
numbers  of  my  hearers  back  out  of  all  serious 
dealing  with  themselves  and  God:  they  act  as  if 
they  did  not  wish  to  be  made  happy  for  eternity. 
They  think  hardly  of  the  good  way.  You  see  it  is 
such  radical  work;  regeneration  cuts  so  deep,  and 
it  makes  a  man  so  thoughtful.  Who  knows  what 
may  have  to  be  given  up?  Who  knows  what  may 
have  to  be  done?  0,  my  hearer,  if  you  indulge  in 
such  demurs  and  delays  and  prejudices  in  the  first 
days  of  your  conviction,  the  time  may  come  when 
those  little  packthreads  will  be  so  intertwisted 
with  each  other  that  they  will  make  a  great  cart- 
rope,  and  you  will  become  an  opposer  of  every 
thing  that  is  good,  determined  to  abide  forever 
harnessed  to  the  great  Juggernaut  car  of  your 
iniquities,  and  so  to  perish.  God  save  you  from 
that. 

I  have  known  some  men  get  harnessed  to  that 
car  in  another  way,  and  that  is  by  deference  to  com 
panions.  The  young  man  liked  every  thing  that  was 
good  after  a  fashion,  but  he  could  not  bear  for  any 
body  to  say  on  Monday  morning,  "  So  you  were  at 
a  place  of  worship  on  Sunday."  He  did  not  like 
to  say  outright,  "Of  course  I  was;  where  were 
you?  "  But  the  rather  he  said, — Well,  he  did  look 
in  at  the  chapel,  or  he  did  go  to  St.  Paul's  or  the 
Abbey  to  hear  the  music.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  hear 
you  were  at  the  Tabernacle  the  other  day."  Yes, 


88  CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES. 

he  went  in  for  curiosity,  just  to  see  the  place  and 
the  crowd.  That  is  how  he  puts  it,  as  it  he  were 
ashamed  to  worship  his  Maker  and  to  be  found 
observing  the  Sabbath-day.  0,  poor  coward ! 
That  young  man  at  another  time  was  charged  with 
having  been  seen  in  the  inquiry  room,  or  weeping 
under  a  solemn  sermon.  He  said  it  was  rather 
affecting,  and  he  was  a  little  carried  away  and 
over-persuaded,  but  he  apologized  to  the  devil  arid 
begged  that  he  might  hear  no  more  of  it.  He  be 
gan  giving  way  to  his  ungodly  friends,  and  soon 
became  their  butt.  One  companion  pulled  his  ear 
that  way,  and  another  pulled  his  ear  another  way, 
and  in  this  manner  he  developed  very  long  ears 
indeed.  He  did  not  go  very  far  wrong  at  first; 
but  having  allowed  sinful  men  to  saddle  him,  they 
took  care  to  ride  him  harder  and  harder  as  the  days 
ran  on.  It  was  only  a  packthread  sort  of  business 
that  held  him  to  sin  by  a  kind  of  wicked  courtesy; 
but  after  a  while  he  became  obsequious  to  his 
equals,  and  fawned  upon  his  superiors,  doing  their 
bidding  even  though  it  cost  him  his  soul.  lie  was 
vastly  more  attentive  to  the  will  and  smile  of  some 
downright  vicious  comrade — far  more  thoughtful 
of  a  fool's  opinion — than  he  was  of  the  good  pleas 
ure  of  God.  It  is  a  shocking  thing;  but  there  is 
no  doubt  that  many  people  go  to  hell  for  the  love 
of  being  respectable.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that 
multitudes  pawn  their  souls,  and  lose  their  God 
and  heaven,  merely  for  the  sake  of  standing  well 
in  the  estimation  of  a  profligate.  Young  women 
have  lost  their  souls  for  very  vanity,  sinning  in 
the  hope  of  securing  the  love  of  a  brainless,  heart 
less  youth.  Young  men  have  flung  away  all  hope 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROTES.  89 

of  salvation  in  order  that  they  might  be  thought 
to  be  men  of  culture;  they  have  abjured  faith  in 
order  to  be  esteemed  "  free-thinkers "  by  those 
whose  opinions  were  not  worth  a  pin's  head.  I 
charge  you,  dear  friend,  if  you  are  beginning1  at 
all  to  be  a  slave  of  other  people,  break  these 
wretched  and  degrading  bonds.  I  scorn  that 
mental  slavery  in  which  many  glory.  What  mat 
ters  it  to  me  to-day  what  anybody  thinks  of  me  ? 
In  this  respect  I  am  the  freest  of  men.  Yet  do  I 
know  times  when,  had  I  yielded  to  the  packthread, 
I  should  soon  have  felt  the  cart-rop?.  He  who  sins 
to  please  his  friend  is  making  for  himself  a  slavery 
more  cruel  than  the  negro  ever  knew.  He  that 
would  be  free  forever  must  break  the  cords  ere  yet 
they  harden  into  chains. 

Some  men  are  getting  into  bondage  in  another 
way ;  they  are  forming  gradual  habits  of  evil.  How 
many  young  men  born  and  bred  amid  Christian 
associations  do  that !  It  is  a  little  sip,  and  such  a 
little.  "  I  do  not  take  above  half  a  glass."  Then 
why  run  such  great  risks  for  so  small  an  indul 
gence  ?  "  The  doctor  " — 0  you  doctors,  what  you 
have  got  to  answer  for ! — "  the  doctor  says  I  ought 
to  take  a  little,  and  so  I  do."  By  and  by  the  little 
thread  becomes  a  cart-rope:  the  tale  about  the 
doctor  ends  in  doing  what  no  doctor  would  jus 
tify.  Will  he  say,  u  The  doctor  says  I  ought," 
when  he  comes  rolling  home  at  night,  scarce  can 
rind  his  way  to  bed.  and  wakes  up  with  a  headache 
in  the  morning?  He  would  have  done  better  to 
ask  God  for  grace  to  escape  while  yet  he  had  small 
pleasure  in  the  fascinating  fire-water,  and  was  the 
master  of  his  appetite.  The  cart-rope  is  hard  to 


90  CORDS    AXD    CART-ROPES. 

break,  as  many  have  found,  though  I  would  en- 
courage  even  these  by  God's  grace  to  struggle  for 
liberty. 

"  Well,"  says  the  young  man,  "  that  is  not  my 
sin."  I  arn  glad  it  is  not;  but  any  other  sin  if  it 
be  persevered  in  will  destroy  you.  I  will  not  try 
to  describe  your  sin.  Describe  it  yourself,  and 
think  over  it;  but  will  you  please  recollect  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin — the  way  in  which  it  conies  to 
men,  as  the  frost  in  the  still  evening  in  the  wintry 
months  comes  to  the  lake  ?  The  pool  is  placid,  and 
tho  frost  only  asks  that  it  may  thinly  glaze  the 
surface.  The  coating  is  so  thin,  you  could  scarce 
call  it  ice;  but  having  once  filmed  the  pool,  the 
sheet  of  ice  has  commenced;  soon  it  is  an  inch 
thick,  and  in  a  few  hours  a  loaded  wagon  might 
pass  over  it  without  a  crash,  for  the  whole  pool 
seems  turned  to  marble.  So  men  give  way  to  one 
evil  passion  or  another — this  vice  or  that;  and  the 
habit  proceeds  from  bad  to  worse,  till  the  cords  of 
vanity  are  enlarged  into  cart-traces,  and  they 
cannot  escape  from  the  load  to  which  they  are 
harnessed. 

I  fear  that  not  a  few  are  under  the  delusive  notion 
that  they  are  safe  as  they  are.  Carnal  security  is 
made  up  of  cords  of  vanity.  How  can  a  sinner  be 
safe  while  his  sin  is  unforgiven  ?  How  can  he  be  at 
peace  while  he  is  a  slave  to  evil,  and  an  eneiny  to 
God  ?  Yet  many  fancy  that  they  are  as  good  as 
need  be,  and  far  better  than  their  neighbors. 
Surely  such  as  they  are  must  surely  be  secure,  since 
they  are  so  respectable,  so  well  inclined,  and  so  much 
thought  of.  A  man  may  accustom  himself  to 
danger  till  he  does  not  even  notice  it,  and  a  soul 


CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES.  91 

may  grow  used  to  its  condition  till  it  sees  no  peril 
in  impenitence  and  unbelief.  As  the  blacksmith's 
dog  will  lie  down  and  sleep  while  the  sparks  fly 
about  him,  so  will  a  gospel-hardened  sinner  sleep 
on  iinder  warnings  and  pleadings.  At  first  the 
hearer  had  to  do  violence  to  his  conscience  to  es 
cape  from  the  force  of  truth,  but  at  last  he  is  in 
cased  in  steel,  and  no  arrow  of  the  word  can  wound 
him.  0  ye  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion,  I  beseech  you 
listen  to  my  admonition  and  fly  from  carnal  secu 
rity.  0  Lord,  arouse  them  from  their  slumbering 
condition ! 

This  is  a  word  of  warning.  I  have  not  the  time 
to-night  to  go  into  all  the  details.  I  wish  I  had. 
Beware  of  the  eggs  of  the  cockatrice.  Bern  ember 
how  drops  wear  stones,  and  little  strokes  fell  great 
oaks.  Do  not  play  with  a  cobra,  even  if  it  be  but 
a  foot  long.  Keep  from  the  edge  of  the  precipice. 
Fly  from  the  lion  ere  he  springs  upon  you.  Do 
not  forge  for  yourself  a  net  of  iron,  nor  become  the 
builder  of  your  own  prison-house.  May  the  Holy 
Ghost  deliver  you.  May  you  touch  the  cross,  and 
find  in  it  the  power  which  will  loose  you  and  let 
you  go. 

II.  But,  oh,  how  I  wish  that  every  person  here 
who  has  not  yet  found  liberty,  but  is  harnessed  to 
his  sin,  could  escape  to-night,  for — and  this  is  my 
second  point — THERE  is  A  WOE  ABOUT  REMAINING  HAR 
NESSED  TO  THE  CART  OF  SIN,  and  that  woe  is  expressed 
in  our  text. 

It  has  been  liard  ivork  already  to  tug  at  sin's  load. 
If  I  am  addressing  any  here  that  have  fallen  into 
great  sin,  I  know  that  you  have  fallen  into  great 
sorrow.  I  am  sure  you  have.  Much  of  history  is 


92  CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES. 

happily  covered  with  a  veil  so  that  its  secret  griefs 
do  not  become  open  miseries,  else  were  the  world 
too  wretched  for  a  tender  heart  to  live  in  it.  Could 
we  lift  the  tops  of  the  houses,  could  we  exhibit  the 
skeletons  hidden  in  closets,  could  we  take  away 
the  curtains  from  human  breasts — what  sorrows  we 
should  see;  and  the  mass  of  those  sorrows — not 
the  whole  of  them,  but  the  mass — would  be  found 
to  come  from  sin.  When  the  young  man  turns  to 
paths  of  unchastity  or  of  dishonesty,  what  grief 
he  makes  for  himself:  what  woe,  what  misery! 
His  bodily  disease,  his  mental  anguish  we  have  no 
heart  to  describe.  Ah!  yes,  "The  way  of  trans 
gressors  is  hard."  They  put  on  a  smile;  they  even 
take  to  uproarious  laughter,  but  a  worm  is  gnawing 
at  their  hearts.  Alas,  poor  slaves!  They  make  u 
noise  as  they  try  to  drown  their  feelings;  but 
as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot  such  is 
the  mirth  of  the  wicked — hasty,  noisy,  momentary; 
gone,  and  nothing  but  ashes  left.  I  would  not 
have  you  proceed  in  the  path  of  sin  if  there  were 
nothing  in  it  worse  than  what  has  happened  to  you 
already.  Surely  the  time  past  may  suffice  for  folly: 
you  have  reaped  enough  of  the  fire-sheaves  with 
out  going  OH  with  the  harvest.  I  would  as  a 
brother  urge  you  to  escape  from  your  present 
bondage. 

But  remember,  if  you  remain  harnessed  to  this 
car  of  sin,  the  weight  increases.  You  are  like  a 
horse  that  has  to  go  a  journey  and  pick  up  parcels 
at  every  quarter  of  a  mile:  you  are  increasing  the 
heavy  luggage  and  baggage  that  you  have  to  drag 
behind  you.  A  man  starting  in  life  is  somewhat 
like  a  horse  with  but  a  slender  load  in  the  cart, 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  93 

but  as  he  goes  on  from  youth  to  manhood,  and 
from  manhood  to  his  riper  years,  he  has  been  loaded 
up  with  more  sin;  and  what  a  weight  there  is 
behind  him  now  !  Grinning  devils,  as  they  bring 
the  heavy  packages  and  heap  them  up  one  upon 
another,  must  wonder  that  men  are  such  fools  as  to 
continue  in  the  harness  and  drag  on  the  dreadful 
load  as  if  it  were  fine  sport.  Alas,  that  men  should 
sin  away  their  souls  so  lightly,  as  if  self-destruction 
were  some  merry  game  that  they  were  playing  at, 
whereas  it  is  a  heaping  up  unto  themselves  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the  perdition  of 
ungodly  men. 

Further,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  as  the  load 
grows  heavier,  so  the  road  becomes  worse,  the  ruts 
are  deeper,  the  hills  are  steeper,  and  the  sloughs 
are  more  full  of  mire.  In  the  heyday  of  youth 
man  finds  beaded  bubbles  about  the  brim  of  his 
cup  of  sin,  the  wine  raoveth  itself  aright,  it  giveth 
its  color  in  the  cup,  but  as  he  grows  older  and 
drinks  deeper  he  comes  nearer  to  the  dregs,  and 
those  dregs  are  as  gall  and  wormwood.  An  old 
man  with  his  bones  filled  with  the  sin  of  his  youth 
is  a  dreadful  sight  to  look  upon ;  he  is  a  curse  to 
others,  and  a  bu-rden  to  himself.  A  man  who  has 
fifty  years  of  sin  behind  him  is  like  a  traveler 
pursued  by  fifty  howling  wolves.  Do  you  hear 
their  deep  bay  as  they  pursue  the  wretch  ?  Do 
you  see  their  eyes  glaring  in  the  dark,  and  flaming 
like  coals  of  fire?  Such  a  man  is  to  be  pitied 
indeed :  whither  shall  he  flee,  or  how  shall  he  face 
his  pursuers?  He  who  goes  on  carelessly  when  he 
knows  that  such  a  fate  awaits  him  is  a  fool,  and 
deserves  small  pity  when  the  evil  day  comes.  0 


94  CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES. 

you  that  are  drawing  the  wagon  of  sin,  I  implore 
you  stop  before  you  reach  the  boggy  ways  of 
infirmity,  the  tremendous  swamps  of  old  age! 

Remember,  friends,  if  any  of  you  are  still 
harnessed  to  your  sins,  and  have  been  so  for  years, 
the  day  will  come  when  the  load  will  crush  the  horse. 
It  is  a  dreadful  thing  when  the  sins  which  were 
drawn  at  last  drive  the  drawer  before  them.  In 
the  town  where  I  was  brought  up  there  is  a  very 
steep  hill.  You  could  scarcely  get  out  of  the  town 
without  going  down  a  hill,  but  one  is  specially 
precipitous,  and  I  remember  once  hearing  a  cry  in 
the  streets,  for  a  huge  wagon  had  rolled  over  the 
horses  that  were  going  down  the  hill  with  it.  The 
load  had  crushed  the  creatures  that  were  supposed 
to  draw  it.  There  comes  a  time  with  a  man  when 
it  is  not  so  much  he  that  consumes  the  drink  as  the 
drink  that  consumes  him ;  he  is  drowned  in  his 
cups,  sucked  down  by  that  which  he  himself 
sucked  in.  A  man  was  voracious,  perhaps,  in 
food,  and  at  last  his  gluttony  swallowed  him;  at 
one  grim  morsel  he  went  down  the  throat  of  the 
old  dragon  of  selfish  greed.  Or  the  man  was 
lustful,  and  at  last  his  vice  devoured  him.  It  is  an 
awful  thing  when  it  is  not  the  man  that  follows 
the  devil,  but  the  devil  that  drives  the  man  before 
him  as  though  he  were  his  laden  ass.  The  man's 
worst  self,  that  had  been  kept  in  the  rear  and  put 
under  restraint,  at  last  gets  up  and  comes  to  the 
front,  and  the  better  self,  if  ever  he  had  such,  is 
dragged  on  an  unwilling  captive  at  the  chariot 
wheels  of  its  destroyer. 

I  am  sure  that  there  is  nobody  here  who  desires 
to  be  eternally  a  sinner:  let  him  then  beware,  for 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  95 

each  hour  of  sin  brings  its  hardness  and  its  difficulty 
of  change.  Nobody  here  wants  to  get  into  such  a 
condition  that  he  cannot  help  any  longer  sinning: 
let  him  not  be  so  unwise  as  to  play  with  sin.  When 
the  moral  brakes  are  taken  off,  and  the  engine  is 
on  the  down-grade,  and  must  run  on  at  a  perpet 
ually  quickening  rate  forever,  then  is  the  soul 
lost  indeed.  I  am  sure  there  is  not  a  man  here 
who  wants  to  commit  himself  to  an  eternity  of 
hate  of  God,  an  eternity  of  lust,  an  eternity  of 
wickedness  and  consequent  wretchedness.  Why 
then  do  you  continue  to  harden  your  hearts?  If 
you  do  not  wish  to  rush  down  the  decline,  put  on 
the  brake  to-night:  God  help  you  so  to  do;  or,  to 
come  back  to  the  text,  let  the  packthreads  be 
broken,  and  the  cords  of  vanity  be  thrown  aside, 
ere  yet  the  cart-rope  shall  have  fastened  you  for 
ever  to  the  Juggernaut  car  of  your  sin  and  your 
destruction. 

III.  Now  I  want  to  offer  some  ENCOURAGEMENT 
FOR  BREAKING  LOOSE.  It  is  time  I  did.  I  do  not  wish 
to  preach  a  sad  unhappy  sermon  to-night;  but  I  do 
long  to  see  everybody  here  saved  from  sin.  My 
heart  cries  to  God  that  as  long  as  I  am  able  to  preach, 
I  may  not  preach  in  vain.  God  knows  I  have  never 
shunned  to  speak  what  I  have  thought,  and  to  speak 
very  plainly  and  very  home  to  you.  I  never  come 
into  this  pulpit  with  the  notion  that  I  must  not  say  a 
sharp  thing,  or  somebody  will  be  offended,  and  I  must 
not  deal  with  common  sins,  for  somebody  will  say 
that  I  am  coarse.  I  care  not  the  snap  of  a  finger 
what  you  choose  to  say  about  me,  if  you  will  but 
forsake  sin  and  be  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of 
his  Son.  That  is  the  one  and  only  thing  my  heart 


96  CORDS    AND    CART-ROTES 

craves,  and  for  that  end  I  have  given  earnest  warn 
ings  at  this  time.  I  may  not  much  longer  be  spared 
to  speak  with  you,  and  therefore  I  am  the  more 
earnest  to  impress  you  while  I  may.  Help  me,  0 
Spirit  of  God ! 

Now  listen.  There  is  Ji ope  for  every  harnessed 
slave  of  Satan.  There  is  hope  for  those  who  are 
most  securely  bound.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "  I  am  afraid 
that  I  have  got  into  the  cart-rope  stage;  for  I  seem 
bound  to  perish  in  my  sin,  I  cannot  break  loose  from 
it."  Listen.  Jesus  Christ  has  come  into  the  world 
to  rescue  those  who  are  bound  with  chains.  That 
is  to  say,  God  himself  has  taken  upon  himself  hu 
man  nature,  with  this  design — that  he  may  save 
men  from  their  sins.  That  blessed,  perfect  babe, 
such  as  never  mother  before  had  ever  seen, — that 
virgin's  child — when  they  named  him,  it  was  said, 
"  Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins."  He  has  come  to  this 
world  in  our  nature  on  purpose  to  save  man  from 
their  sins.  He  can  cut  the  traces  which  bind  you 
to  Satan's  chariot.  He  can  take  you  out  of  the 
shafts.  He  can  set  you  free  to-night.  You  have 
been  dragging  on  for  years,  and  you  think  there  is 
no  chance  for  you;  but  there  is  more  than  a  chance, 
there  is  the  certainty  of  salvation  if  you  trust  in 
Jesus.  I  remember  reading  a  famous  writer's  de 
scription  of  a  wretched  cab-horse  which  was  old 
and  worn  out  and  yet  kept  on  its  regular  round  of 
toil.  They  never  took  him  out  of  harness  for  fear 
they  should  never  be  able  to  get  his  poor  old  car 
case  into  it  again.  He  had  been  in  the  shafts  for 
BO  many  years  that  they  feared  if  they  took  him  out 
of  them  he  would  fall  to  pieces,  and  so  they  let  him 


COKDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  97 

keep  where  he  was  accustomed  to  be.  Some  men 
are  just  like  that.  They  have  been  in  the  shafts  of 
sin  so  many  years  that  they  fancy  that  if  they  were 
once  to  alter  they  would  drop  to  pieces.  But  it  is 
not  so,  old  friend.  We  are  persuaded  better  thing 
of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  salvation.  The 
Lord  will  make  a  new  creature  of  you.  When  he 
cuts  the  traces  and  brings  you  out  from  between 
those  shafts  which  have  so  long  held  von,  you  will 

O  v  7    */ 

not  know  yourself.  When  old  things  have  passed 
away  you  will  be  a  wonder  unto  many.  Is  it  riot 
said  of  Augustine  that  after  his  conversion  he  was 
met  by  a  fallen  woman  who  had  known  him  in  his 
sin,  and  he  passed  her  by  ?  She  said,  "  Austin,  it  is 
I;  "  and  he  turned  and  said,  "But  I  am  not  Austin. 
I  am  riot  the  man  you  once  knew,  for  I  have  become 
a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus."  That  is  what  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  do  for  yon.  Do  you  not  be 
lieve  it?  It  is  true,  whether  you  believe  it  or  not. 
Oh  that  you  would  look  to  Jesus  and  begin  to  live ! 
It  is  time  a  change  was  made;  is  it  not?  Who  can 
change  you  but  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 

Let  me  tell  you  another  thing  that  ought  to  cheer 
you,  and  it  is  this.  You  are  bound  with  the  cords 
of  sin,  and  in  order  that  all  this  sin  of  yours  might 
effectually  be  put  away,  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Son  of  the 
Highest,  was  himself  bound.  They  took  him  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  and  bound  his  hands,  and 
led  him  off  to  Pilate  and  Herod.  They  brought  him 
bound  before  the  Roman  governor.  He  was  bound 
when  they  scourged  him.  He  was  bound  when 
they  brought  him  forth  bearing  his  cross.  He  waa 
fastened  hand  and  foot  as  they  drove  in  the  nails, 
and  thus  fixed  him  with  rivets  of  ii'on  to  his  cross. 


98  CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES. 

There  did  he  hang,  fastened  to  the  cruel  tree,  for 
sinners  such  as  you  are.  If  you  come  and  trust  him 
to-night  you  shall  find  that  for  you  he  endured  the 
wrath  of  God,  for  you  he  paid  the  penalty  of  death, 
that  he  might  set  you  free,  lie  bore  it  that  you  should 
not  bear  it:  he  died  for  you  that  you  might  not  die. 
His  substitution  shall  be  your  deliverance.  Oh, 
come,  all  bound  and  guilty  as  you  are,  and  look  to 
his  dear  cross,  and  trust  yourself  with  him;  and 
you  shall  be  set  free. 

God  grant  that  it  may  be  done  at  this  very 
moment. 

I  will  tell  thee  another  cheering  fact  to  help 
thee  to  overcome  thy  sin,  and  break  the  cart-ropes 
that  now  bind  thee, —  There  is  in  this  world,  a  mys 
terious  Being  whom  thou  knoivesf  not,  but  whom  some 
of  us  knoiv,  who  is  able  to  work  thy  liberty.  There 
dwells  upon  this  earth  a  mysterious  Being,  whose 
office  it  is  to  renew  the  fallen,  and  restore  the 
wandering.  We  cannot  see  him,  or  hear  him,  yet 
he  dwells  in  some  of  tis,  as  Lord  of  our  nature. 
His  chosen  residence  is  a  broken  heart  and  a  con 
trite  spirit.  That  most  powerful  Being  is  God,  the 
third  person  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  was  given  at  Pentecost  and  who  has  never  been 
recalled,  but  i-emains  on  earth  to  bless  the  people 
of  God.  He  is  here  still;  and  wherever  there  is 
a  soul  that  would  be  free  from  sin  this  free  Spirit 
waits  to  help  him.  Wherever  there  is  a  spirit  that 
loathes  it  own  unholiness,  this  Holy  Spirit  waits  to 
cleanse  him.  Wherever  there  is  a  groaning  one 
asking  to  be  made  pure,  this  pure  Spirit  is  ready 
to  come  and  dwell  in  him,  and  make  him  pure  as 
God  is  pure.  O,  rny  hearer,  he  waits  to  bless  you 


CORDS    AND    CART-ROPES.  99 

now:  he  is  blessing  you  while  I  speak.  I  feel  as 
if  his  divine  energy  went  forth  with  the  word 
and  entered  into  your  soul  as  you  are  listening. 
I  trust  I  am  not  mistaken.  If  thou  believest 
in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  believe  thou  also 
in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  thee  a 
new  creature,  and  cleanse  thee,  and  deliver  thee 
from  every  fetter,  and  make  thee  the  Lord's  free 
man. 

I  will  tell  thee  one  thing  more  and  I  will  have 
done.  Our  experience  should  be  a  great  encourage 
ment  to  you.  I  have  tried  to  preach  to  you  that 
are  in  the  traces;  poor  worn-out  cab-horses  to  the 
devil,  post-horses  of  Satan  that  seem  never  to  have 
a  holiday,  dragging  your  cart  of  sin  behind  you 
through  the  slush  of  the  foul  city  of  Vanity.  The 
mercy  is  that  you  are  not  horses,  but  men  born  for 
nobler  purposes.  You  may  be  free,  for  some  of  us 
are  free.  Oh,  what  a  load  I  had  behind  me  once: 
my  wagon  of  inbred  sin  was  a  huge  one  indeed. 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  grace  of  God  I  should  have 
perished  in  the  impossible  attempt  to  move  it.  I 
do  not  think  that  my  load  as  to  overt  sin  was  at 
all  like  that  which  some  of  you  are  dragging,  for 
I  was  but  a  child,  and  had  not  yet  plunged  into 
the  follies  of  the  world;  but  then  I  had  a  dogged 
will,  a  high  spirit,  an  intense  activity,  and  a  daring 
mind,  and  all  this  would  have  driven  me  headlong 
to  perdition  if  the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  wrought 
in  me  to  subdue  me  to  the  will  of  the  Lord.  I  felt 
within  my  spirit  the  boilings  up  of  that  secret 
cauldron  of  corruption  which  is  in  every  human 
bosom;  and  I  felt  that  I  was  ruined  before  God, 
and  that  there  was  no  hope  for  me.  My  burden 


Ji<0  CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES. 

of  inward  sin  at  fifteen  years  of  age  was  such  that 
I  knew  not  what  to  do.  We  have  seen  pictures 
of  the  Arabs  dragging  those  great  Nineveh  bulls 
for  Mr.  Leyard,  hundreds  of  them  tugging  away; 
and  I  have  imagined  how  Pharaoh  a  subjects,  the 
Egyptians,  must  have  sweated  and  smarted  when 
they  had  to  drag  some  of  the  immense  blocks  of 
which  his  obelisks  were  composed, — thousands  of 
men  dragging  one  block  of  masonry;  and  I  seemed 
to  have  just  such  a  load  as  that  behind  me,  and  it 
would  not  stir.  ]  prayed,  and  it  would  not  stir. 
I  took  to  reading  rny  Bible,  but  my  load  would  not 
stir.  Jt  seemed  stuck  in  the  mire,  and  no  strug 
gling  would  move  the  awful  weight.  Deep  ruta 
the  wheels  were  in.  My  load  would  not  be  moved, 
and  I  did  not  know  what  to  do.  I  cried  to  God  in 
rny  agony,  and  I  thought  I  must  die  if  I  did  not 
get  delivered  irom  my  monstroiis  cumber:  but  it 
would  not  stir.  I  have  no  drag  behind  me  now. 
Glory  be  to  God,  I  am  not  bound  with  a  cart-rope 
to  the  old  wagon.  I  have  no  hamper  behind  me, 
and  as  I  look  back  for  the  old  ruts  where  the  cart 
stopped  so  long  I  cannot  even  see  their  traces. 
The  enormous  weight  is  not  there!  It  is  clean 
gone  !  There  came  One  by  who  wore  a  crown  of 
thorns:  I  knew  him  by  the  marks  in  his  hands 
and  in  his  feet:  and  he  said,  "  Trust  me,  and  I  will 
set  thee  free."  I  trusted  him  and  the  enormous 
weight  behind  rne  was  gone.  It  disappeared.  As 
I  was  told,  it  sank  into  his  sepulchre,  and  it  lies 
buried  there,  never  to  come  out  again.  My  cart- 
rope  snapped,  my  cords  of  vanity  melted,  I 
was  out  of  harness.  Then  I  said,  "  The  snare  is 
broken,  and  my  soul  hath  escaped  as  a  bird 


CORDS   AND    CART-ROPES.  101 

out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler.  I  will  tell  the 
story  of  my  deliverance  as  long  as  I  live."  I  can 
say  to-night, 

"E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 

His  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  shall  be  till  I  die." 

Oh,  my  beloved  hearers,  believe  in  Christ  as  I 
did.  The  gospel  comes  to  each  sorrowing  sinner, 
and  it  says, — Trust  the  Saviour  and  there  is  joy 
for  thee.  There  is  but  a  veil  of  gauze  between  thee 
and  peace;  move  the  hand  of  faith,  and  that  veil  will 
be  torn  to  pieces.  There  is  but  a  step  between  thy 
misery  and  music  and  dancing  and  a  life  of  per 
petual  delights;  take  that  step  out  of  self  and  into 
Christ,  and  all  is  changed  forever.  Ask  Jesus  to 
break  thy  bonds,  and  "with  a  touch  of  his  pierced 
hand,  he  will  make  thee  free  as  the  swallow  on  the 
wing  which  no  cage  can  hold.  Thou  shalt  see 
him,  and  see  thy  sin  never  again  forever. 

God  bless  thee,  and  break  the  cart-ropes,  and  re 
move  the  cords  of  vanity,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 

"  Listen  now  !  the  Lord  hath  done  it ! 

For  he  loved  us  unto  death; 
It  is  finished  !    He  has  saved  us  ! 

Only  trust  to  what  he  saith. 
He  hath  done  it !    Come  and  bless  him. 
Spend  in  praise  your  ransomed  breath 
Evermore  and  evermore. 

"Oh,  believe  the  Lord  hath  done  it ! 

Wherefore  linger?     Wherefore  doubt? 
All  the  cloud  of  black  transgression 

He  himself  hath  blotted  out. 
He  hath  done  it !     Come  and  bless  him, 
Swell  the  grand  thanksgiving  shout, 
Evermore  and  evermore." 


V. 

CERTAIN  CURIOUS  CALCULATIONS  ABOUT  LOAVES 
AND  FISHES. 

Read  February  15,  1885. 

"  "When  I  brake  the  five  loaves  among  five  thousand,  how  many 
baskets  full  of  fragments  took  ye  up  ?  They  say  unto  him, 
Twelve.  And  when  the  seven  among  four  thousand,  how  many 
baskets  full  of  fragments  took  ye  up?  And  they  said,  Seven. 
And  he  said  unto  them,  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  ?" 
MAKE  viii.  19-21. 

rT~1HE  disciples  had  come  on  board  the  vessel, 
-*-  and  had  forgotten  to  bring  bread  with  them : 
good  men's  memories  sometimes  fail  them.  For 
that  reason  they  were  greatly  disturbed  in  mind, 
and  they  supposed  that  Jesus  was  disquieted  also, 
and  that  he  had  shaped  his  speech  so  as  to  give 
them  an  indirect  rebuke  when  he  mentioned  the 
leaven  of  the  Pharisees.  How  little  they  under 
stood  his  mind,  though  they  had  been  so  long 
time  with  him  !  His  thoughts  were  not  occupied 
about  bread  for  himself;  neither  was  there  any 
carking  care  in  his  heart  about  bread  for  them. 
His  mind  was  at  perfect  rest  about  all  secular 
things;  and  even  as  to  all  spiritual  things  he  was 
by  no  means  tossed  about.  Notwithstanding  all 
his  trials  and  his  sorrows,  I  suppose  that  there 
never  was  a  serener  mind  than  that  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  His  heart  was  great  as  an  ocean,  and 
though  visited  with  terrible  tempests,  yet  was  it 


ABOUT   LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  103 

the  Pacific  Ocean  still.  They  might  be  troubled 
about  bread,  but  he  was  resting  about  that  and  all 
things  else.  The  winds  which  tossed  the  lakelets 
of  their  little  minds  into  boiling  cauldrons  did  not 
suffice  to  create  a  ripple  upon  the  surface  of  his 
mighty  soul. 

Is  it  not  well  for  us  at  this  hour  that  it  is  so  ? 
We  are  fluttered  and  dismayed,  but  the  mind  of 
our  great  Lord  is  fearless  and  undisturbed.  "  He 
will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  The  child  cries 
because  the  ship  rolls,  but  his  father  at  the  helm 
smiles  at  the  storrn;  and  what  a  mercy  it  is  for  the 
child  that  father  can  smile,  for  if  the  captain  were 
weak  where  would  the  vessel  be  ?  If  the  father's 
heart  failed  him,  where  would  his  boy  look  for 
comfort?  Calm  face  of  Jesus,  we  look  up  to  thee, 
and  we  are  quieted  ! 

The  Master  wishing  to  comfort  his  servants  bade 
them  consider  what  they  already  knew,  and  review 
what  they  had  already  seen.  Usually  the  eyes  of 
the  Christian  should  be  directed  forward:  it  is 
foolish  to  try  to  live  on  past  experience:  it  is  a 
very  dangerous,  if  riot  a  fatal  habit,  to  judge  our 
selves  to  be  safe  because  of  something  that  we  felt 
or  did  twenty  years  ago.  Yet,  for  all  that,  we  may 
look  back,  to  gain  practical  lessons  for  times  of 
service,  and  comfortable  lessons  for  hours  of  trial. 
Like  the  archer,  we  may  draw  the  string  back 
that  it  may  shoot  the  arrow  onward  with  greater 
force. 

The  Master  asks  his  followers  whether  they  had 
used  their  eyes.  "Having  eyes,  see  ye  not?" 
They  had  seen  two  wonderful  miracles,  by  which 
thousands  of  persons  had  been  fed;  had  they  really 


104          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATION'S 

seen  them?  Had  they  been  satisfied  just  to  look 
at  the  bread  and  the  fish,  and  at  the  feasting  mul 
titude,  and  then  to  let  the  whole  scene  melt  away 
from  them?  Had  they  really  heard  the  voice  of 
what  the  Lord  had  done  ?  "  Having  ears,  hear  ye 
not?"  Had  they  missed  the  message  altogether? 
Then  he  adds  "  Perceive  ye  not  yet,  neither  un 
derstand  ? "  Do  you  not  know  what  my  action 
meant  when  I  multiplied  the  loaves?  Do  you  not 
see  how  it  reveals  my  all-sufficiency  ?  Have  you 
not  spelt  between  the  lines  this  word, — that  God 
feedeth  all  things — that  he  opeueth  his  hand,  and 
supplieth  the  want  of  every  living  thing?  Have 
you  not  yet  discovered  by  those  two  miracles  that 
there  is  nothing  impossible  with  your  Lord  ? 

May  we  not  also  have  missed  our  Lord's  mean 
ings  full  often  ?  May  we  not  have  walked  through 
a  palace  of  wonders  without  observing  the  gleams 
of  glory,  the  flashes  of  light  eternal?  Our  unbe 
lief  is  the  undeniable  evidence  that  we  have  not 
learned  all  that  we  ought  to  have  done,  for  the 
outcome  of  spiritually  seeing,  perceiving,  and  un 
derstanding  is  faith.  He  that  believeth  little  hath 
learned  little:  he  that  doubteth,  and  is  troubled,  is 
but  a  babe,  needing  still  to  learn  the  rudiments  of 
holy  scholarship. 

The  Lord  further  asks  them  that  tender  ques 
tion,  "And  do  ye  not  remember?"  Brethren,  we 
remember  much  that  we  ought  to  forget,  and  we 
forget  much  that  we  ought  to  remember.  Down 
the  stream  of  memory  floats  draff  from  the  city  of 
Sodom,  and  we  diligently  gather  it;  but  down  the 
same  stream  descends  costly  timber  from  Lebanon, 
and  we  suffer  it  to  drift  bv  us.  Our  seive  holds 


ABOUT   LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  105 

the  chaff,  and  rejects  tho  corn.  It  ought  not  so  to 
be.  Let  us  look  back  upon  the  whole  of  our  past 
lives  at  this  hour  with  a  careful,  leisurely  glance, 
and  see  whether  there  is  not  enough  in  our  diaries 
to  condemn  our  doubts  and  bury  our  cares,  or  at 
least  to  shut  up  our  anxieties  in  a  cage  made  of 
the  golden  bars  of  past  mercy,  and  fastened  in 
with  jeweled  bolts  of  gratitude.  "  The  Lord  hath 
been  mindful  of  us;  he  will  bless  us."  Let  us 
glory  in  what  the  Lord  is  going  to  do,  and  mag 
nify  his  name  for  his  mercy  which  is  yet  to  be  re 
vealed.  Let  each  one  of  us  sing  with  David,  u  I 
will  go  unto  the  altar  of  God,  unto  God  my  exceed 
ing  joy:  yea,  I  will  praise  thee,  0  God,  my  God." 
Then  has  memory  performed  her  part  aright  when 
from  the  altars  of  the  past  she  has  snatched  a  liv 
ing  coal  with  which  to  set  on  fire  the  incense  of 
to-day. 

Not  being  able  to  read  your  own  personal  diaries, 
for  these  are  only  known  to  yourselves,  I  shall  en 
deavor  to  take  you  back  to  the  records  of  the  dis 
ciples'  memories,  and  we  will  think  of  the  text  aa 
it  brings  befpre  us  the  two  great  miracles  of  feed 
ing  the  hungry.  May  we  learn  therefrom  what 
the  Spirit  designs  to  teach  us  by  them. 

I.  And  the  first  thing  I  shall  want  to  bring 
to  your  recollection  is  THE  DARING  PROJECT,  YET  UNA 
VOIDABLE.  This  was  the  daring  project — to  feed  five 
thousand  persons  in  the  wilderness  Two  hundred 
pennyworth  was  the  calculation  of  one  of  the 
ready-reckoners  of  the  hour.  Some  men  are 
always  very  ready  at  counting  the  pennies 
which  they  have  not  got.  Whenever  there  is  a 
holy  deed  to  be  done,  our  mathematical-minded 


100          CERTAIN    CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

unbelievers  are  prompt  with  their  estimates  of  cost, 
and  their  prudent  forecast  ings  of  grave  deficien 
cies.  We  are  great  at  calculations  when  we  are 
little  at  believing.  How  can  the  needful  amount 
be  raised?  It  is  so  much  a  head  among  so  many 
members.  Unfortunately  the  heads  do  not  yield 
the  poll-tax,  and  the  money  does  not  come,  and 
confidence  in  man  leaves  us  weeping  by  the  broken 
cistern.  This  is  the  way  in  which  a  large  part  of 
the  church's  thought  boils  up,  evaporates,  and  is 
wasted.  Alas,  for  those  calculations  about  penny 
worths!  Or  else  it  is,  "  From  whence  can  we  sat 
isfy  these  men  with  bread  here  in  the  wilderness?" 
"  From  whence  ? ''  as  if  there  could  be  any 
"  whence  "  but  one.  Whence  comes  everything 
by  which  man  lives  ?  Comes  it  not  from  God  ?  It 
goes  round  about  in  different  channels,  but  it 
knows  only  one  source.  When  any  of  the  chan 
nels  fail,  the  fountain  is  still  flowing;  and  he  that 
has  faith  to  go  to  it  directly  shall  not  want.  But 
it  did  seem  to  the  disciples  a  very  preposterous 
idea  that  with  nothing  but  sand,  and  stone,  and 
rock  round  about  them,  they  should  make  a  ban 
quet  for  five  thousand  men.  Is  it  not  much  more 
preposterous  that  the  Christian  church  should  have 
to  evangelize  such  a  city  as  London  ?  It  may  not 
seem  so  to  you ;  but  if  you  lived  in  the  midst  of 
the  extreme  poverty  of  the  East  End,  you  would 
think  it  the  problem  of  problems,  how  to  reach 
the  sunken  multitudes.  We  little  dream  on  what  a 
volcano  we  live.  The  pent-up  misery  and  the  seeth 
ing  sin  of  London  may  yet  produce  a  second  edi 
tion  of  the  French  Kevolution  unless  the  grace  of 
God  shall  interpose.  The  people  are  famishing 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FISHES.  107 

bodily,  mentally,  morally,  spiritually;  and  we  must 
feed  them.  I  marvel  not  if  in  the  presence  of 
these  dying  millions  you  cry— "From  whence?" 
But  then  London  is  only  one  out  of  many  cities. 
Our  whole  nation  is  a  small  fraction  of  the  myriads 
of  our  race.  China,  India,  Africa,  are  yet  to  be 
fed.  The  command  is,  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world, 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  The 
proposal  is  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall 
yet  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea. 
and  I  repeat  the  key-note  which  I  sounded  just 
now — it  is  a  daring  project:  startling  to  the 
thoughtful,  impossible  to  the  calculating,  hard 
even  to  the  believing. 

But  then,  you  see,  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  in 
the  wilderness  it  was  an  inevitable  project.  How 
ever  strange  the  proposition  might  seem,  it  pressed 
upon  them;  they  could  not  avoid  it,  for  the  people 
had  no  victuals  with  them  and  were  fainting. 
Many  of  them  had  come  from  far.  If  they  at 
tempted  to  seek  their  own  homes  without  refresh 
ment  they  would  die  by  the  way,  and  therefore  it 
would  not  do  to  send  the  multitude  away.  They 
must  be  fed.  "  How  is  it  to  be  done  ?  "  is  the 
question,  and  whether  they  can  answer  it  or  not, 
the  necessity  is  there  all  the  same. 

With  the  Saviour  it  was  an  unavoidable  necessity. 
It  would  break  his  heart  to  see  them  fainting  ar,d 
famishing.  He  could  not  endure  it.  At  the  very 
thought  of  their  destitute  condition  he  was  moved 
with  compassion.  His  whole  nature  was  stirred, 
convulsed,  and  filled  with  excitement  at  the  sight 
of  hunger,  pallor,  weariness,  and  faintness.  The 
great  Shepherd  miisi  feed  these  hungry  sheep.  It 


103          CERTAIN    CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

is  not  with  him,  "Can  it  be  done?"  or  "Can  it 
not  be  done  ?  "  but  it  must  be  done.  One  of  the 
imperial  necessities  which  sometimes  took  posses 
sion  of  the  royal  heart  of  Christ  had  entered  into 
his  soul,  and  "  he  must  needs "  do  its  bidding. 
Himself  took  their  infirmities  and  carried  their 
sorrows.  He  was  such  an  all-comprehending  man 
that  he  included  them  within  his  own  manhood. 
If  they  hungered,  he  hungered;  if  they  fainted, 
he  fainted;  if  they  died,  he  himself  seemed  to  die; 
and,  therefore,  by  the  intense  sympathy  of  his 
nature  he  was  driven  to  feel  that  the  multitude 
must  be  fed. 

Just  imagine  that  they  had  not  been  fed, — that 
they  had  begun  to  faint  and  die  of  hunger  all  over 
those  hills  to  which  they  had  followed  Jesus,  lioio 
it  ivould  have  marred  his  ministry!  Why,  surely, 
the  disciples  who  had  said  somewhat  cavalierly, 
"Send  the  multitude  away,"  would  have  been  op 
pressed  with  a  lifelong  sorrow  if  their  wish  had  been 
carried  out,  They  never  would  have  forgotten  that 
dreadful  dreary  day,  and  the  starvation,  and  the 
fainting,  and  the  death  which  followed  it.  Think 
of  what  mischief  it.  would  have  done  to  Christ's 
cause.  The  rumor  that  he  led  the  people  into 
solituiy  places,  and  that  there  they  died  of  hunger, 
would  have  been  greatly  derogatory  to  our  Lord; 
for  what  prophet  ever  did  this?  What  capital  the 
Pharisees  would  have  made  of  it !  How  exult- 
ingly  they  would  have  cried,  "  Is  this  man  after  all 
a  prophet  like  to  Moses,  who  fed  the  people  with 
manna  in  the  wilderness?"  The}'  would  have 
cried,  "  He  said  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God ;  he 
claimed  to  have  raised  the  dead ;  but  if  he  had 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FISHES.  109 

really  possessed  this  power  he  would  have  fed  the 
hungry  multitude  who  spent  their  strength  in 
following  him."  No,  the  Christ  cannot  have  it  so. 
He  has  come  to  save  men's  lives:  he  cannot  let 
them  die.  He  must  feed  the  crowd. 

Now,  imagine,  men  and  brethren,  that  we  never 
carry  out  the  commission  which  Christ  has  laid  upon 
us  to-day,  that  of  teaching  the  multitude, — imag 
ine  that  henceforth  we  never  labor  to  win  souls, — 
that  we  give  up  London  as  a  forlorn  case, — that 
we  abandon  the  heathen  world  as  assuredly  given 
over  to  destruction,  like  a  vessel  driven  by  a 
hurricane  upon  an  ironbound  coast, — imagine  it, 
I  say.  Can  you  endure  the  imagination  ?  I  can 
not  abandon  the  drifting  bark.  Let  us  man  the 
life-boat!  I  know  that  some  quiet  themselves  into 
a  kind  of  despair  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  Lord 
Jehovah  ever  being  King  over  this  whole  earth: 
will  you  try  the  wretched  experiment?  So  these 
people  must  be  left  to  die,  for  how  can  so  many  be 
fed?  But  the  project  of  love  filial!  be  executed: 
to  that  hope  we  cling,  and  to  that  end  would  we 
ppend  and  be  spent.  If  things  look  not  so,  and 
Christianity  occupies  as  yet  but  a  mere  corner  of 
the  world,  it  matters  not  to  our  faith;  we  believe 
still.  Faith  counts  no  odds.  One  man  with  God 
on  his  side  is  in  the  majority  if  never  another 
thinks  as  he  does;  therefore,  in  feebleness  of  num 
bers  we  are  yet  omnipotent  in  the  might  of  the 
Most  High. 

Had  not  the  multitude  been  fed,  our  Lrrd  would 
have  missed  a  grand  occasion  for  the  display  of  his 
grace.  Grace  is  sovereign,  but  it  is  abounding: 
wherever  it  finds  meet  occasion  it  displays  its 


110          CERTAIN    CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

power.  A  hungering,  fainting  crowd !  What 
space  for  compassion  !  What  vantage-ground  for 
benevolence  !  It  could  not  be  that  the  Lord  of 
love  should  let  such  an  opportunity  slip  by:  his 
love  was  too  eager  to  display  itself  to  lie  quiet 
at  such  an  hour.  But,  brethren,  what  an  occasion 
for  revealing  the  splendor  of  divine  grace  does 
the  present  age  present !  London  is  a  brave  canvas 
on  which  to  paint  a  master-picture  of  rnercy,  of 
power,  of  wisdom.  What  a  block  of  marble  the 
great  world  presents  for  the  Infinite  Sculptor! 
What  a  monument  of  grace  will  the  human  race 
become  when  it  shall  rejoice  in  God  the  Saviour  ! 
I  am  persuaded  that  the  Lord  has  permitted  the 
present  sorrow  that  he  may  produce  from  it  a 
greater  glory.  I  am  sure  in  my  own  soul  that  he 
suffers  the  multitudes  to  hunger  in  this  terrible 
wilderness  simply  arid  only  that  he  may  feed  them, 
and  thus  prove  to  all  the  universe  his  power  to 
bless. 

I  hope  1  have  brought  before  your  minds  very 
clearly  that  amazing  project,  which  seemed  most 
daring,  and  even  preposterous,  and  yet  was  need 
ful,  and  even  inevitable. 

II.  Brethren,  hoping  for  the  help  of  God's  good 
Spirit,  I  would  take  you,  secondly,  to  another  sight: 

THE  BAFFLED  DISCIPLES  AND  THEIR  SERENE  MASTER, 

The  Master  has  consulted  Philip  about  supplies, 
in  order  that  the  difficulty  of  the  case,  and  the 
insufficiency  of  mere  means,  might  be  seen  of  all. 
Philip  found  that  all  that  was  available  was  a  lad's 
breakfast  of  five  barley  cakes  and  a  few  small 
fishes;  and  he  anxiously  added,  "  What  are  they 
among  so  many?"  The  prudent  counselor  had 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FISHES.  Ill 

done  his  best,  but  it  did  not  come  to  much.  He  left 
this  problem  unsolved,  "  What  are  they  among  so 
many?"  As  for  the  rest  of  the  disciples,  they 
looked  in  Jesus's  face  with  astonishment  and  blank 
despair,  and  said,  "  Whence  should  we  have  so 
much  bread  in  the  wilderness  as  to  fill  so  great  a 
multitude?"  But  all  the  time  that  they  were  thus 
full  of  fidgets  and  worries,  there  stood  the  Master, 
calm  as  a  sweet  summer's  evening,  not  in  the  least 
disturbed  or  troubled.  What  a  difference  between 
the  feebleness  and  unbelief  of  the  disciples  and  the 
mighty  confidence  of  the  Lord  Jesus!  How  much 
need  that  we  be  changed  from  glory  to  glory  as 
by  the  image  of  the  Lord;  for  we  also  are  very 
far  as  yet  from  being  like  to  him  in  our  tone 
and  spirit!  We  have  not  yet  entered  fully 
into  his  rest,  nor  shall  we  till  we  learn  his  faith 
in  God. 

Why  was  Jesus  Christ,  our  master,  so  calm  ?  I 
have  upon  my  mind  the  savor  of  a  word  the  Lord 
once  gave  me  for  you  upon  that  text,  "  Jesus  knew 
what  he  would  do."  It  is  in  great  part  our  ignor 
ance  which  puts  us  into  such  a  quandary.  We  do 
not  know  what  is  going  to  be  done;  we  are  in  sus 
pense;  and  suspense  eats  into  the  soul  as  an  acid 
eats  into  metal.  "  From  whence?  How?  When 
Where  ?  " — all  these  questions  prick  us  like  so 
many  daggers,  and  each  prick  kills  a  joy.  "  Our 
thoughts  are  all  a  case  of  knives,"  as  George  Her 
bert  puts  it,  arid  every  knife  in  that  case  destroys 
a  hope.  But  the  Master  had  no  suspense:  he  knew 
what  he  would  do.  We  shall  get  peace,  brethren, 
wheu  we  also  know  what  we  shall  do.  "  Oh,"  say 
you  u  I  thought  you  were  going  to  say  when  we 


112          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

know  what  HE  will  do."  Oh,  no  ?  We  probably 
shall  not  know  that  till  he  docs  it.  It  is  enough 
for  us  to  know  what  we  shall  do.  "  But,"  says  one, 
"that  is  what  we  do  not  know."  I  answer, — that 
is  what  we  ought  to  know.  We  ought  to  know 
that  we  mean  to  leave  everything  with  our  Lord. 
If  we  once  settled  it  in  our  minds  that  we  would 
trust  and  not  be  afraid,  what  peace  we  should  enjoy! 
If  we  will  leave  God's  work  with  God,  and  simply 
trust,  we  shall  drink  into  the  peace  of  God. 

Besides  that,  our  Lord  was  thus  calm  because  he 
hud  faith,  while  they  had  nothing  fatter  than  mere 
sense.  Here  they  were,  as  I  have  said  before, 
counting  the  loaves  and  numbering  the  fishes, 
Hear  them  saying,  "  Here  are  only  five  loaves, 
and  they  are  of  barley;  and  the  fish  are  not  only 
few,  but  small."  They  took  care  to  record  that 
fact,  and  to  lay  stress  upon  it;  and  they  are 
equally  clear  as  to  the  greatness  of  the  hungry 
multitude,  and  the  barrenness  of  the  wilderness 
around  them.  They  are  all  going  on  in  that 
style,  judging  by  the  sight  of  the  eyes  and  the 
touch  of  the  hands;  but  the  Son  of  God  has  another 
and  better  sense,  he  trusts  his  Father.  Jesus  a 
man  like  themselves,  has  confidence  that  in  the 
hour  of  his  need  the  Godhead  will  not  fail  him, 
but  will  fulfill  his  needs.  We  have  no  Godhead 
in  unity  with  our  humanity;  but  yet  we  have  more 
than  Jesus  had.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "that  cannot 
be ! "  You  will  admit  my  statement  when  I  re 
mind  you  that  we  have  all  that  Christ  had,  and 
then  we  have  Christ  himself  in  addition.  He  has 
given  us  all  that  he  has;  so  we  have  that;  and  then 
he  has  given  us  himself,  so  we  possess  the  double 


ABOUT   LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  113 

We  ought  never  to  doubt,  but  to  rely  upon  the 
Godhead — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — in  every 
time  of  our  necessity.  "In  the  mount  it  shall  be 
seen  ";  Jehovah-jireh:  the  Lord  will  provide.  Oh, 
for  grace  to  cast  all  care  away;  to  be  baffled  arid 
worried  no  longer,  but  to  rest  and  be  still ! 

Moreover,  one  thing,  I  think,  which  made  Christ 
so  calm  was  that  he  really  acted  while  they  only  ques 
tioned.  He  said,  "  How  many  loaves  have  ye?  Bring 
them  hither  to  me."  He  came  at  once  to  practical 
action.  The  people  who  do  not  believe  in  conver 
sions  are  those  who  never  convert  anybody ;  but 
as  soon  as  ever  a  man  is  led  of  the  Spirit  to  turn 
men  from  darkness  to  light,  and  God  blesses  him 
in  his  work,  he  believes  in  it.  He  that  has  some 
thing  to  do  has  less  temptation  to  doubt  than  the 
man  who  has  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  doubt. 
Heresies  in  the  Christian  Church  come  never  from 
the  city  missionary,  never  from  the  faithful  pastor, 
never  from  the  intense  evangelist;  but  always  from 
gentlemen  at  ease,  who  take  no  actual  part  in  our 
holy  war.  Those  literary  fops  who  criticise  reli 
gion  in  reviews,  and  have  nothing  else  to  do  except 
to  put  their  hands  to  their  heads,  and  press  whim 
sies  out  of  their  brows,  these  are  the  men  that 
trouble  us.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gave  way  to  no 
sort  of  doubt,  for  he  speedily  took  the  bread  and 
the  fish  in  his  hands,  and  began  blessing  and 
breaking  them,  while  prompt  upon  his  own  action 
followed  the  divine  energy  which  multiplied  the 
little  store.  If  you  and  I  would  but  serve  the  Lord 
in  earnest,  we  might  end  our  calculations  as  to  how 
much  is  to  be  done  and  how  it  is  to  be  done,  and 
where  it  is  to  be  done,  and  all  that.  Get  to  your 


114          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

work,  my  brother,  and  your  doubts  shall  fly  like 
chuff  before  the  wind. 

The  baffled  disciples,  and  the  calm  and  quite 
Master,  made  up  an  instructive  picture:  we  shall 
have  profited  by  it  to  the  full  if  we  also  become 
calmly  reliant  upon  God,  and  are  no  more  carried 
away  with  unbelieving  amazement. 

III.  Thirdly,  and  briefly,  I  want  to  set  two  more 
matters  before  your  mind's  eye  for  your  comfort. 
In  the  miracles  whereby  we  see  the  multitudes  fed 
we  see  MEANS  USED.  BUT  CHRIST  CONSPICUOUS. 

You  perceive  that  our  Lord  says  of  the  loaves, 
"  Bring  them  to  me."  The  means  icere  used.  When 
he  has  multiplied  these  very  loaves  and  fishes,  he 
gives  them  to  the  men  that  are  round  about  him, 
and  of  these  the  multitudes  partake.  Whatever 
men  in  their  folly  may  talk  as  to  neglecting  the 
outward  means,  and  sitting  still,  and  doing  noth 
ing,  because  God  will  do  his  own  work,  we  hear 
nothing  of  the  kind  from  Jesus.  He  used  the 
loaves,  and  he  used  the  fishes,  and  he  used  the  men, 
though  he  could  well  enough  have  done  without 
them.  He  was  omnipotent,  and  did  not  want  them ; 
but  he  was  wise,  and  he  would  teach  us  the  lesson 
that  by  instrumentality  God's  great  work  is  to  be 
done.  Therefore,  despise  not  means,  and  at  the 
same  time  do  not  rest  in  them. 

But  observe  how  the  fish,  arid  the  loaves,  and 
the  men,  and  all  the  means  were  made  to  sink.  In 
that  picture  you  see  the  great  crowd:  I  do  not 
think  the  painter  needs  to  lay  his  colors  on  very 
vividly;  he  can  draw  the  people  as  a  kind  of  lum- 
inons  haze  if  he  likes.  The  one  figure  that  stands 
out  like  the  sun  at  noonday,  hiding  all  else  by  the 


ABOUT  LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  115 

brilliance  of  his  light,  is  the  Master  himself.  Jesus 
only  is  glorious  iu  that  out-of-doors  ban que ting- 
room.  Where  are  those  few  fishes  ?  u  Here,"  says 
one.  "  Here,"  cries  another.  "  Here,"  shouts  an 
other.  But  those  few  and  little  fishes  cannot  be  in 
the  hands  of  all  those  five  thousand.  Where  has 
the  bread  gone  to  ?  u  I  have  a  loaf,"  cries  one, 
"  I  have  a  loaf,"  says  another,  and  they  are  all 
feeding  as  voraciously  as  they  can.  What  has 
become  of  the  original  five  loaves'?  Bring  them 
hither,  brother:  at  least  go  and  make  a  diligent 
search  for  the  original  five  loaves,  and  those  little 
fishes,  that  we  may  preserve  one  of  them  as  a  relic. 
What,  can  you  not  find  one  of  them  ?  You  do  not 
know  where  they  are.  They  are  all  gone.  Of 
course  they  are.  Whenever  God  blesses  a  man 
very  greatly,  that  man  sinks  to  nothing  in  his  own 
esteem.  If  Peter's  boat  is  full,  Peter's  boat  sinks. 
If  we  are  plunged  in  blessings  up  to  the  hilt,  self  is 
hidden  under  the  weight  of  mercy.  A  little  bless 
ing  fancied  and  imagined  to  be  something  extra 
ordinary,  elevates  the  little  man;  but  a  great  all- 
swamping  blessing  comes  like  a  torrent,  and  bears 
the  man  and  his  littleness  away,  and  nothing  is 
Been  but  the  Lord  and  the  blessing.  I  am  sure  that 
it  is  so  when  the  Lord  uses  any  one  of  us  as  the 
means  of  doing  good  to  others;  we  are  humbled, 
and  he  is  exalted. 

And  after  the  miracle  is  over,  when  they  go  round 
to  gather  up  the  fragments  in  their  twelve  baskets 
or  seven  baskets,  Peter  has  a  quick  eye,  but  ask  him 
whether  he  can  find  one  of  those  original  loaves. 
He  may  go  from  basket  to  basket,  and  he  cannot  find 
one.  It  is  lost  in  the  creation  which  God  has  made 


116          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

out  of  it.  And  can  he  find  in  all  those  baskets 
the  original  fishes  ?  They  must  be  there,  for  it  is 
out  of  those  fish  that  all  the  meat  came  to  feed  the 
people;  but  you  cannot  discover  them.  So  it  shall 
be  if  God  will  bless  us,  my  brethren.  People  will 
gather  about  us,  and  say,  "  What  is  there  in  this 
man  ?  We  perceive  no  superlative  talent.  What 
is  there  in  this  woman  to  make  her  so  useful?  We 
see  nothing  special  about  her."  Never  you  mind. 
Let  them  pick  at  any  bit  offish  which  they  think 
they  can  see  in  your  native  talent  or  vigorous  char 
acter;  but  as  for  yourself,  you  know  that  if  any  of 
the  multitude  are  fed,  the  provision  came  from  the 
Master's  hand,  when  he  took  your  little,  and  blest 
and  break  and  multiplied  it  so  as  to  make  it  suffice 
for  the  occasion.  I  believe  that  means  are  honored 
by  Christ's  using  them,  but  I  am  quite  sure  that  ere 
he  has  done  with  them  the  means  will  sink  into  the 
uttermost  obscurity,  and  Jesus  Christ  will  be  all  in 
all;  and  that  not  because  the  means  are  unblest, 
but  because  they  are  blest  in  so  gracious  a  degree. 
IV.  Furthermore,  we  see  in  the  miracles  of  feed 
ing  WORK  ACCOMPLISHED  OF  A  MARVELOUS  KIND,  BUT 

POWER  UNEXHAUSTED.  See  those  five  thousand  men 
and  the  women  and  the  children  !  They  are  allfed. 
It  is  a  proverb  that  there  never  was  a  feast  yet, 
from  which  some  one  did  not  go  away  unsatisfied; 
but  there  is  no  rule  without  an  exception.  Here 
are  two  exceptions  to  that  proverb.  "They  did 
all  eat  and  were  filled,"  upon  two  occasions.  It  did 
not  matter  how  many  thousands  there  were,  not 
one  of  them  was  overlooked  by  the  ever-blessed 
Host.  It  did  not  matter  how  hungry  they  were, 
they  all  ate  till  they  were  full. 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FfSIfES.  117 

But  this  is  the  point  I  want  to  show  you  the 
power  that  multiplied  the  bread  and  fish,  and  fed  the 
thousands,  had  not  come  to  an  end.  Their  power  to 
eat  was  exhausted,  but  not  Christ's  power  to  feed; 
for  when  they  had  received  to  their  utmost  capacity, 
there  was  yet  more  to  follow.  The  people  were 
sharp  set  that  day,  the  mountain  air  made  their 
appetites  keen,  and  their  long  fasting  put  a  razor- 
edge  upon  them;  yet  when  they  had  all  eaten  to 
the  full,  great  baskets  were  brought,  and  these 
were  filled;  in  the  one  case  twelve,  and  in  the 
other  seven  of  them.  There  is  enough  for  each, 
enough  for  all,  and  still  enough  remaining  for 
future  needs.  The  infinite  Worker  reveals  his 
infinity  by  his  unstinted  bounty,  his  unmeasured 
liberality. 

1  cannot  understand  from  the  Greek  what  the 
size  of  these  baskets  may  have  been;  the  second 
set,  the  seven,  have  a  name  which  shows  that  they 
were  tolerably  large,  for  Paul  was  let  down  in  such 
a  basket  from  the  window  when  he  escaped  from 
his  enemies  in  Damascus.  The  first  sort  which  were 
used  when  there  were  twelve  of  them  appear  to  me 
to  have  been  larger  still.  They  give  you  an  idea  of 
a  coffin,  or  a  coffer.  They  were  large  baskets  of 
which  it  was  said  that  men  could  sleep  in  them. 
Yet  these  baskets,  whatever  their  size  may  have 
been,  were  filled — twelve  and  seven;  and  if  the 
Lord  had  willed  so  to  do,  he  could  have  filled 
twelve  thousand  baskets,  or  seventy  thousand  bas 
kets.  His  power  was  running  over;  it  could  not 
be  contained  in  earthly  vessels,  any  more  than  a 
river  can  be  held  in  a  flagon.  It  was  still  flowing 
in  a  copious  stream  when  every  mouth  and  every 


118          CERTAIN    CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

basket  had  been  filled.  Some  seem  to  fancy  that 
the  Lord  does  everything  by  the  inch  and  the 
ounce,  keeping  to  stint  and  quantity;  but  this  is 
rather  the  manner  of  men  than  the  fashion  of  the 
Lord.  We  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re 
deemed  his  elect  from  among  men;  hence,  some 
will  have  it  that  the  merit  of  his  atonement  must 
be  limited.  No  such  thing.  "He  gave  himself  for 
us,"  and  there  can  be  no  measure  to  the  value  of 
such  a  gift.  "He  died  for  our  sins,"  and  not  for 
our  sins  only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 
His  object  was  definite,  but  he  achieved  it  by  an 
agency  which  cannot  be  limited.  He  not  only  did 
that  which  he  mainly  aimed  at,  but  he  did  more; 
just  as  in  this  case  he  not  only  fed  the  thousands, 
but  filled  baskets  with  the  fragments.  The  power 
of  God,  and  the  merit  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  are 
among  the  infinite  things;  let  us  bow  before  the 
Lord,  and  rejoice  in  that  which  surpasses  measure. 
Moreover,  brothers  and  sisters,  whatever  the 
Lord  has  given  to  you,  he  lias  still  far  more  to 
bestow  upon  you.  Whatever  you  may  feast  upon 
in  this  public  service,  there  is  yet  a  portion  for  you 
to  take  home  with  you  in  the  basket,  and  lay  up 
in  the  store.  However  God  may  have  blessed  you 
in  your  work  for  him  in  the  past,  he  is  yet  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  you  ask  or 
even  think.  However  much  the  church  may  have 
been  increased  by  a  true  revival,  God  has  never  yet 
done  according  to  the  fullness  of  his  ability  in  the 
church  as  yet:  even  Pentecost  was  but  the  first- 
fruits.  I  hear  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  ''Thou 
shall  see  greater  things  than  these."  "  And  greater 
things  than  these  shall  ye  do,  because  I  go  unto  the 


ABOUT   LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  119 

Father."  We  have  been  far  from  reaching  the 
Ultima  Thule  of  sacred  possibility.  Still  "  the  arrow- 
is  beyond  thee."  We  have  never  seen  the  best  of 
our  God  as  yet.  We  may  go  forward  with  the  su 
preme  faith  that  Pentecost  has  yet  to  be  outdone, 
— that  all  the  mighty  preachings  of  the  fathers, 
when  they  turned  nations  to  Christ,  shall  yet  be 
exceeded  in  the  triumphs  of  the  cross  in  the  latter 
days.  We  are  approaching  nobler  ages,  and  God's 
great  acts  will  not  dwindle  into  trifles.  Remember, 
that  all  that  you  could  see,  and  all  that  you  could 
know,  would  be  but  a  minute  portion  of  his 
glorious  power.  All  that  you  could  apprehend 
would  only  be  a  manifestation  of  the  skirts  of  his 
garment.  What  omnipotence  is,  and  especially 
what  it  is  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  none  know- 
eth  saving  God  himself.  Let  us  not  limit  the 
Holy  One,  nor  bound  the  Infinite.  In  our  Fa 
ther's  house  there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare, 
even  after  millions  have  been  satisfied  from  his 
supplies. 

V.      I  am  going  to  finish  by  observing  that  THE 

DETAILS  OF    THESE    MIRACLES    WERE    DIFFERENT,    BUT    THEY 

WERE  EQUALLY  INSTRUCTIVE.  Kindly  listen  to  what  I 
am  now  saying,  not  as  to  anything  of  remarkable 
weight,  but  still  as  to  a  matter  of  interest  in  which 
there  may  be  more  instruction  than  at  first  sight 
appears. 

Concerning  our  Lord's  great  free  dinners  re 
mark,  first  that  Ike  remainder  after  the  feast  was 
greater  that  the  stock  rvhen  the  banquet  began.  They 
began  with  five  loaves  and  two  fishes,  they  began 
on  another  occasion  with  seven  loaves  and  a  few 
fishes;  but  they  left  off  with  twelve  baskets  full  in 


120          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

the  one  case,  and  with  seven  baskets  full  in  the 
other.  Never  was  this  done  at  any  of  your  tables, 
I  am  sure,  when  your  children  have  gathered  for 
their  meals.  They  did  all  eat  and  were  filled,  and 
yet  there  was  more  left  than  when  they  began. 
This  seems  impossible,  and  yet  it  is  the  rule  in  the 
kingdom  of  grace.  I  have  often  found  when  I 
have  come  with  a  very  small  stock  to  feed  you, 
brethren,  that  I  have  gone  away  with  more  than  I 
came  with.  You  have  been  refreshed,  and  I  have 
been  more  full  than  when  I  handed  out  your  por 
tions  to  you.  You  have  gone  to  the  class,  dear 
friend,  and  felt  that  you  were  scantily  supplied  for 
feeding  your  dear  ones;  but  3*011  have  given  them 
your  all,  and  under  the  divine  blessing  there  has 
been  enough  for  the  class,  and  a  double  portion  for 
you.  You  went  out  with  five  loaves,  and  you  came 
back  with  twelve  baskets  heaped  up.  Strange ! 
We  may  so  give  for  God  as  to  get  in  the  giving, 
so  spend  as  to  increase  in  the  spending,  so  die  for 
God  as  to  live  more  than  ever.  If  this  be  fact, 
what  a  wide  field  it  opens  to  our  hope;  and  how 
it  banishes  our  fear  !  It  shuts  the  door  of  the 
counting-house  where  we  calculate  according  to 
human  reason,  and  it  opens  the  doors  of  the  treas 
ury  whence  we  may  draw  ever-growing  supplies. 
Go,  brother,  and  scatter  your  handful  of  seed,  for 
you  shall  come  again  rejoicing,  bringing  sheaves 
with  you  !  Give  of  your  meal  and  oil  to  the  Lord's 
servant,  and  your  barrel  and  cruse  shall  be  replen 
ished  in  the  giving.  Remember  Bunyan's  rhyme 
is  true  spiritually  as  well  as  providentially. 

"There  was  a  man  and  some  did  count  him  mad, 
The  more  he  gave  away  the  more  he  had." 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FISHES.  121 

Next  learn  that  care  is  always  taken  In/  Christ  of 
all  the  broken  pieces.  The  Lord  All-sufficient  is  yet 
the  God  of  economy.  Since  Jesus  could  create  as 
much  food  as  ever  he  pleased,  you  might  have 
thought  that  it  was  hardly  worth  his  while  to 
gather  up  the  fragments;  and  yet  he  did  so.  Waste 
is  of  Satan,  not  of  God.  God  is  not  lavish  of 
creation,  nor  prodigal  of  miracles.  Though  the 
Lord  can  raise  up  in  this  place,  if  he  pleases,  fifty 
ministers  in  an  instant,  he  may  not  do  so;  but 
what  he  would  have  us  do  is  to  make  use  of  such 
powers  as  we  have.  If  we  are  only  fragments  our 
place  is  not  the  ground,  but  the  basket.  We  must 
not  allow  ourselves  to  be  thrown  away,  or  to  be 
consumed  by  an  animal  passion,  or  to  be  left  to 
decay;  but  we  must  be  in  the  Lord's  store,  ready 
to  be  used  when  the  time  comes.  We  shall  be  of 
some  use  one  of  these  days,  if  we  are  willing  to  be 
used.  If  you,  my  friend,  are  not  a  whole  loaf,  you 
are  a  crust,  and  no  crust  may  be  wasted.  If  you 
are  not  a  slice  of  bread  you  are  a  crumb,  and  even 
crumbs  are  dear  to  hungry  men.  If  you  are  not 
a  big  fish,  yet  you  may  be  a  little  fish,  and  you 
must  not  waste  yourself,  nor  must  the  church  of 
God  allow  you  to  be  wasted,  but,  use  must  be  found 
fur  you  somewhere.  But  what  a  wonderful  thing 
this  is — Omnipotence  picking  up  crumbs!  God 
All-sufficient,  to  whom  the  cattle  on  a  thousand 
hills  are  as  nothing — who  could  make  a  whole  sea 
of  fishes,  or  ten  thousand  worlds  of  bread,  by  his 
bare  will,  and  nothing  else;  and  yet  he  sets  his 
disciples  to  gather  up  broken  pieces  that  noth 
ing  may  be  lost!  Surely  it  ill  becomes  us  to 
waste  a  penny,  an  hour,  or  an  opportunity. 


122         CERTAIN    CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS. 

Let  us  be  severely  economical  for  the  Lord  our 
God. 

Notice  a  rather  curious  thing:  there  was  most  left 
when  there  icas  least  to  he<fin  with.  When  they  com 
menced  the  dinner  with  seven  loaves  they  gathered 
np  seven  baskets  full,  but  when  they  had  only  five 
loaves  they  filled  twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments 
I  suppose  the  baskets  to  have  been  of  the  same  size, 
for  I  do  not  discover  that  the  second  set  of  baskets 
were  any  larger  than  the  first.  However,  from  a 
stock  of  seven  loaves,  after  all  expenditure,  there 
came  seven  baskets  us  a  remainder;  but  when 
there  were  only  five  loaves,  and  a  greater  expendi 
ture,  there  were  twelve  baskets  full  left  for  the 
waiters.  This  is  singular.  The  more  they  begin 
with,  the  less  they  end  with;  and  the  less  they 
begin  with,  the  more  they  have  when  the  feast  is 
concluded.  Yet  I  have  often  noticed  that  this 
does  occur.  Have  not  you?  When  you  and  I 
have  begun  rather  grandly,  and  God  has  blessed 
us,  we  have  a  great  reason  to  thank  him;  but 
when  we  have  begun  very  feebly,  he  has  frequently 
blessed  us  far  more,  and  we  have  ended  by  praising 
him  upon  the  high-sounding  cymbals.  We  have 
gone  away  wondering, — "  Five  loaves  and  twelve 
baskets  !  Why,  the  other  day,  when  I  had  seven 
loaves,  I  had  only  seven  baskets!"  Yes,  let  the 
rich  rejoice  when  he  is  brought  low,  for  he,  like 
Job,  shall  be  richer  than  before.  Do  not  begin  to 
sink  in  spirit  because  you  seem  to  have  declined  in 
ability;  but  just  be  confident  in  God  that  in  your 
case  also  there  will  be  most  reward  at  the  end 
when  there  was  least  capital  to  work  with. 

Note  again,  that  there  ivas  less  visible  means  :chcn 


ABOUT  LOAVES   AND    FISHES.  123 

there  was  more  done.  There  were  only  five  loaves, 
but  they  fed  five  thousand:  when  there  were  seven 
loaves  they  fed  only  four  thousand.  The  most  was 
done  when  there  was  the  least  to  do  with.  And 
so  it  shall  happen  to  you,  0  worker  for  Jesus;  for 
the  more  God  blesses  you,  the  less  you  shall  see  of 
any  adequate  reason  in  yourself  why  you  should 
be  blest.  With  your  five  loaves  you  shall  feed 
your  five  thousand,  whilst  somebody  who  had 
seven  shall  do  less  than  you. 

Another  curious  thing  is  that  when  there  was 
most  eaten  there  ivas  most  left.  When  five  thousand 
besides  women  and  children  ate  as  much  as  ever 
they  could,  they  left  more  than  the  four  thousand 
did.  The  smaller  number  could  not  eat  so  much 
as  the  greater,  yet  their  residuum  of  food  uneaten 
was  less  than  when  five  thousand  filled  themselves 
to  the  full.  It  is  a  curious  inversion  of  all  our 
regulations.  We  suppose  the  larger  our  company, 
the  less  will  remain;  but  here  it  seems  that  when 
the  company  was  largest  then  that  which  was  left 
was  largest;  and  when  the  company  was  fewer 
then  less  was  left.  It  is  so  with  us:  the  more  we 
have  to  draw  from  us  spiritually  the  more  will  re 
main  for  our  own  portion.  We  shall  make  no  sav 
ing  by  reducing  the  number  of  those  whom  we 
serve,  but  the  reverse. 

One  other  thing  also  learn,  and  that  is  that  where 
Mere  is  the  most  work  for  Jesus  there  will  be  the  most 
remuneration,  It  is  not  so  elsewhere,  for  men  are 
often  paid  best  for  doing  least;  but  in  our  Lord's 
case  every  man's  reward  shall  be  according  to  his 
service.  Those  who  waited  on  the  vast  crowd  of 
people  could  not  get  much  to  eat  themselves 


124          CERTAIN   CURIOUS    CALCULATIONS 

during  the  meal,  for  they  were  fully  occupied  in 
handing  the  bread  to  others;  but  when  all  was  over 
the  Master  said  to  them,  "  So  you  have  had  a  great 
company  to-day,  there  were  five  thousand  at  the 
least.  You  must  need  refreshment  yourselves ;  yon 
der  are  twelve  baskets  full  of  that  which  remaineth 
over,  divide  them  among  yourselves."  Another 
day  their  work  was  hard,  but  not  quite  so  labori 
ous.  That  extra  thousand,  that  always  brings  iu 
the  excessive  labor  through  overcrowding,  had 
not  been  there,  and  they  had  supplied  four  thou 
sand  pretty  pleasantly.  Then  it  was  that  they  re 
ceived  only  seven  baskets  for  their  share:  a  liberal 
allowance,  but  still  not  so  large  as  on  the  former 
occasion.  If  you  will  work  for  Christ,  and  give 
for  Christ,  and  labor  for  Christ,  you  shall  have  a 
rich  return  of  present  joy  from  him;  and  this  shall 
have  a  proportion  in  it.  Many  people  wLl  always 
be  poor  because  they  never  give  to  the  cause  of 
God.  Poor  people  should  give  in  order  that  they 
may  not  be  poor  any  longer,  and  the  rich  should 
give  that  they  may  not  become  poor.  I  mean  not 
that  these  are  to  be  the  chief  motives,  but  they 
may  have  their  place.  You  that  have  little  ability 
should  work  hard  with  that  little  ability  that  you 
may  increase  it;  and  you  that  have  great  ability 
of  course  should  do  so,  because  you  have  so  many 
talents  entrusted  to  you.  The  Lord  will  allow  no 
service  to  remain  unrecompensed;  and  work  done 
for  the  poor  and  needy  shall  win  its  wage,  not  of 
debt,  but  of  grace.  Satan  said,  "  Doth  Job  serve 
God  for  nought?"  Suppose  he  had  done  so:  the 
devil  would  have  gone  his  way,  and  said  that  God 
was  a  hard  master,  whose  service  brought  no  sort 


ABOUT   LOAVES    AND    FISHES.  125 

of  reward  with.it.  Either  way,  Satan  would  have 
made  mischief,  and  as  we  have  no  wish  to  please 
him,  we  admit  that  we  do  not  serve  God  for 
nought,  but  that  in  keeping  his  commandments 
there  is  great  reward.  When  the  multitude  have 
done  feasting,  your  Master  will  let  you  sit  down 
to  meat,  and  you  shall  have  abundant  joy  with 
him. 

The  chief  point  for  all  of  us  is  to  get  at  the 
blessed  work.  In  the  name  of  the  ever-living  God, 
let  us  feed  each  one  his  man  that  is  nearest  to  him 
till  the  whole  company  shall  be  fed;  for  the  Christ 
is  behind  us,  the  Son  of  God  is  working  with  us; 
and  the  bread  is  not  our  bread  but  his  bread;  and 
the  feeding  of  the  multitude  is  not  our  work,  but 
his;  and  the  power  is  not  ours,  but  all  his  own, 
and  to  his  name  shall  be  all  the  glory.  Amen. 


VI. 

PETER'S  BLUNDER:  A  LESSON   TO   OURSELVES. 
Read  February  22,  1885. 

"But  Peter  said,  Not  so,  Lord;  for  I  have  never  eaten  any 
thing  that  is  common  or  unclean." — ACTS  x.  14. 

'"V  TOT  so,  Lord."  This  is  a  very  curious  expres- 
4-  ^  sion.  I  do  not  mind  how  you  turn  it  into 
English  from  the  original,  but  it  is  a  vt-ry  strange 
compound.  If  Peter  had  said,  "Not  so,"  there  would 
have  been  a  clear  consistency  in  his  language  and 
tone.  But  "  Not  so,  Lord"  is  an  odd  jumble  of 
self-will  and  reverence,  of  pride  and  humility,  of 
contradiction  and  devotion.  Surely,  when  you 
say,  "Not  so,"  it  ought  not  to  be  said  to  the  Lord; 
and  if  you  say,  "  Lord,"  you  ought  not  to  put  side  by 
side  with  such  an  ascription  the  expression,  "  Not 
so."  Peter  always  was  a  blunderer  in  his  early 
days,  and  he  had  not  grown  out  of  his  old  habits 
of  honest  impetuosity.  He  meant  well,  and  his  ex 
pression  was  not  intended  to  convey  all  that  we  might 
easily  make  of  it.  At  any  rate,  it  is  not  for  us  to 
condemn  him.  Who  are  we  that  we  should  sit  in 
judgment  on  a  saint  of  God?  Besides,  we  are 
not  without  fault  ourselves  in  the  matter  of  incor 
rect  speech.  You  and  I  have  said  some  very  curious 
compound  things  in  our  time.  We  have  uttered 
exclamations  that  have  been  so  good  that  the  Lord 
accepted  them :  but  they  have  been  so  bad  that 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  127 

he  could  not  have  accepted  them  if  it  had  not 
been  for  his  infinite  mercy.  In  our  utterances 
there  has  been  faith  mixed  with  unbelief,  love  de 
faced  with  a  want  of  submission,  gratitude  com 
bined  with  distrust,  humility  flavored  with  self-con 
ceit,  courage  undermined  with  cowardice,  fervor 
mingled  with  indifference.  We  are  as  strange 
beings  as  the  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  in 
his  dream;  and  our  speech  betrays  the  fact.  When 
we  were  fashioned  by  nature  first  of  all  we  were 
"fearfully  and  wonderfully  made";  but  when  we 
fell,  and  were  unmade  by  sin,  we  became  mon 
strosities,  combinations  of  contrarieties.  I  will  not 
dwell  upon  that  topic,  but  every  man  who  looks 
within,  if  the  candle  of  God  be  shining  within 
him,  must  often  cry  out,  "  Lord,  what  is  man,  that 
thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  and  the  son  of  man,  that 
thou  visitest  him  ? "  In  our  speech  this  mixed 
estate  of  ours  most  plainly  shows  itself.  We  often 
feel  as  if  we  could  eat  our  words,  or  at  the  least 
unsay  them.  Speeches  that  have  had  about  them 
real  sincerity  and  true  devotion  have  been  greatly 
marred  by  expressions  which  were  not  fit  for  the 
occasion.  Our  tongues  need  a  sevenfold  sancti- 
fication  if  we  are  always  to  speak  that  which  is 
good  and  acceptable;  and,  surely,  that  is  what  we 
desire. 

Now,  we  will  have  a  look  at  Peter,  and  see  what 
we  can  learn  from  this  singular  expression  of  his — 
this  strangely  compounded  exclamation,  "  Not  so, 
Lord." 

I.     The  first  truth  which  we  may  easily  learn  is 

that     THE     OLD     MAN     REMAINS    IN    THE     CHRISTIAN    MAN. 

Albeit  we  are  made  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus, 


128  PETER'S   BLUNDER: 

and  the  life  that  is  within  us,  the  dominant  life,  is 
new,  and  holy,  and  heavenly,  yet  the  old  nature 
still  survives.  Though  crucified,  it  is  long  in  dy 
ing,  and  struggles  hard.  Sin  dwelleth  in  us,  so 
that  we  painfully  discover  that,  though  we  are  new 
men,  we  are  yet  men;  and  though  the  grace  of 
God  reigns  within  us,  yet  there  is  a  struggle  for  the 
kingdom,  and  the  sin  that  dwells  in  us  strives 
after  the  mastery.  We  are  renewed  sinners,  but 
we  are  sinners  still.  Our  hearts  and  hands  are 
cleansed  by  divine  grace,  but  they  have  a  sad  ten 
dency  to  become  defiled. 

Peter  was  Peter  still.  Why,  dear  friends,  I  think 
that  if  I  had  never  before  seen  this  passage  in  the 
Acts,  but  had  read  Peter's  life  as  I  find  it  in  the 
writings  of  the  four  evangelists,  and  somebody  had 
newly  shown  me  the  present  text,  and  said,  "  I 
have  left  out  the  name  of  the  apostle,  but  one  of  them 
when  he  had  seen  a  vision  from  God,  and  knew 
that  God  spoke  to  him,  nevertheless  said,  '  Not  so, 
Lord,' — what  apostle  was  that  ?  "  I  should  not  have 
had  to  guess  twice,  I  am  sure.  I  should  have  been 
sure  that  it  was  Peter;  so  you  see  Peter  is  Peter 
after  the  grace  of  God  has  renewed  him.  I  think 
we  must  say  the  same  of  ourselves.  You,  Thomas, 
who  used  to  be  so  thoughtful  and  careful,  and 
somewhat  particular  and  nervous,  you  are  a  child 
of  God,  but  you  are  Thomas  still  ;  and  I  suspect 
that  you  will  be  wanting  to  put  your  finger  into 
the  print  of  the  nails,  and  to  thrust  your  hands 
into  his  side,  or  else  you  will  not  believe.  And 
you,  John — you  always  were  very  loving  and 
hearty,  and  at  the  same  time  hot  in  your  zeal;  and 
now  that  you  have  become  a  disciple  of  Christ,  I 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  129 

am  sure  that  you  will  be  more  loving  than 
ever;  but  1  should  not,  wonder  if  even  now 
you  should  be  heard  say,  "  Master,  send  fire 
upon  those  who  reject  thee,  and  destroy  them."  The 
man  is  still  the  same  man:  he  is  greatly  altered, 
but  he  has  not  lost  his  identity.  Whatever  change 
has  taken  place  in  him,  Peter  is  Peter,  and  I  should 
like  you  young  converts  to  recollect  that;  for  per 
haps  you  think  that  in  the  day  when  you  were 
converted  you  lost  your  old  selves  altogether.  I 
can  assure  you  that  you  did  not:  the  hasty  temper, 
the  sluggish  constitution,  theglooinly  tendency,  or 
the  fickle  humor  will  be  there  still,  to  be  struggled 
with  so  long  as  you  are  here  below.  You  received 
a  new  self,  and  a  better  self,  but  the  old  self  is  there 
still.  Your  mother  will  be  able  to  recognize  you, 
1  dare  say,  if  you  live  at  home  as  a  young  person; 
she  will  know  that  it  is  the  same  John,  or  the  same 
Mary,  for  your  foibles  and  weaknesses  will  crop  up, 
if  not  your  faults;  and,  therefore,  you  must  keep  a 
watch  upon  yourself.  You  are  greatly  changed; 
God  has  done  wonders  for  you;  he  has  put  a  new 
heart  within  you,  and  a  new  song  into  your  mouth 
but  the  inclination  to  evil  is  not  dead;  your  pas 
sions,  appetites,  desires  are  each  one  prone  to  over 
leap  the  boundary,  and  transgress.  The  best  of 
men  are  men  at  the  best.  And  Peter,  after  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  fallen  upon  him,  and  he  has 
preached  a  very  wonderful  soul-winning  sermon, 
is  nevertheless,  Peter,  and  you  can  tell  that  he  is 
the  selfsame  person:  the  accents  of  his  words  still 
bewrays  him. 

Note  that  Peter  here  shows  how  readily  he  fell,  not 
precisely  info  the  same  sin,  but  into  the  same  kind  of  sin. 


130  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

His  tendency  was  still  to  err  in  a  certain  direction. 
This  Peter  who  said,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  is  he  not  the 
same  man  who  in  his  impudence  rebuked  his 
Master,  and  said,  "That  be  far  from  thee,  Lord"? 
Impudence,  I  call  it.  It  was  a  piece  of  imperti 
nence  for  which  he  was  well  rebuked  when  the 
Master  said,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan."  Our 
Lord  detected  Satan  endeavoring  to  work  through 
the  zealous  enthusiasm  of  Peter,  to  tempt  him  to 
turn  aside  from  the  great  work  that  he  came  to  do. 
I  do  not  think  that  the  other  disciples  would  have 
gone  as  far  as  Peter  did:  they  had  faults  in  other 
directions,  but  it  remained  for  Peter  to  rebuke  his 
Master;  and  now  we  see  him  half  rebuking  his 
Lord  again  as  he  declines  to  kill  and  eat  the  crea 
tures  let  down  from  heaven.  Yes,  Peter  actually 
says,  "Not  so.  Lord."  May  we  never  be  found 
questioning  providence,  or  disputing  with  revela 
tion,  lest  we  be  taken  in  the  same  fault,  and  receive 
a  rebuke  for  rebuking  our  Lord  ! 

Is  not  this  the  same  man  who  at  supper-time 
refused  his  Master  ?  When  the  Lord  Jesus  took  a 
towel,  and  girded  himself,  and  was  about  to  wash 
the  disciples'  feet,  Peter  said  to  him,  "  Dost  thou 
wash  my  feet?  "  for  he  was  astounded  at  such  an 
example  of  humility.  When  the  Master  came 
with  the  basin  he  said,  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash 
my  feet":  and  then  you  recollect  what  a  turn  he 
made  when  his  Lord  said,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou 
hast  no  part  with  me."  Then  he  cried,  "  Lord,  not 
my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head." 
He  was  always  impulsive;  and  from  this  cause  he 
rebukes  his  Master,  and  he  refuses  his  Master 
He  acts  as  if  he  fancied  that,  he  knew  better  than 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  131 

his  Lord,  though  in  his  heart  of  hearts  he  had  no 
such  notion.  Yes,  this  is  the  same  Peter  who 
cried,  "Not  so,  Lord."  He  refuses  for  the  moment 
to  do  his  Lord's  bidding,  for  it  happens  to  be  con 
trary  to  his  ideas  of  propriety.  Oh,  that  we  may 
be  kept  clear  of  this  grave  fault ! 

And  this  is  he  viho  flatty  contradicted  his  Master 
on  another  occasion.  When  Jesus  said  to  his  dis 
ciples,  "  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me," 
then  Peter  said,  ''Though  all  men  shall  be  offended 
because  of  thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended." 
His  Lord  had  told  him  that  he  would  deny  him, 
and  yet  he  declared  he  should  not.  I  know  all  the 
excuses  that  we  make  for  Peter,  and  I  am  quite 
prepared  to  make  them;  but,  at  the  same  time, 
that  was  the  way  of  Peter;  that  is  the  part  in  which 
he  was  weak.  He  did  this  in  his  earlier  days,  but 
after  the  Hoi}*  Ghost  had  come  upon  him,  and  he 
had  been  baptized  into  his  power,  and  had  risen 
into  quite  a  superior  condition  from  that  in  which 
he  was  in  the  life  of  our  Lord  on  earth,  yet  lie  still 
tripped  in  the  same  place  where  he  used  to  fall; 
and  he  said,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  as  if  he  would  again 
rebuke,  refuse,  and  contradict  his  Lord. 

I  therefore  put  it  again.  What  were  your  faults 
before  conversion  ?  Guard  against  them  now. 
What  have  been  your  failures,  and  your  weaknesses, 
and  your  errors  since  you  have  been  converted  ? 
Watch  against  them  still;  for  if  you  have  now  be 
come  an  experienced  Christian,  and  your  graces 
have  been  greatly  developed,  and  you  have  become 
exceedingly  useful  in  the  church  of  God,  yet,  be 
loved  brother,  the  points  in  which  there  is  a  weak 
ness  in  your  natural  constitution,  and  in  which  you 


132  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

have  made  failures,  are  the  points  at  which  you 
must  set  a  double  guard;  watching  and  praying 
lest  you  be  led  into  temptation  by  those  special 
features  of  your  character.  Kindly  notice  tins 
earnest  advice,  which  my  loving  anxiety  leads  me 
to  press  upon  you.  I  have  seen  so  much  of  the 
fruits  of  presumption  that  1  entreat  you  not  to  give 
way  to  it.  If  anybody  tells  you  that  the  old  man  is 
quite  dead,  you  may  say,  "  Nobody  but  the  old 
devil  could  have  set  you  on  to  whisper  such  a  lie 
in  my  ear.  The  truth  is  not  in  you."  You  and  I 
know  that  the  inbred  sin  is  our  daily  plague,  a  fact 
past  all  question  with  our  souls.  We  have  not  to 
go  many  steps  on  our  journey  before  we  painfully 
feel  that  the  sins  which  we  thought  we  had  sub 
dued,  and  should  never  be  subject  to  any  more, 
suddenly  arouse  themselves  out  of  their  graves,  and 
fight  with  us  as  if  they  had  never  been  conquered 
before.  If  we  did  not  cry  to  God  with  tears  and 
agony  for  hourly  upholding,  we  should  find  our 
selves  falling  into  the  same  ditches  into  which  we 
fell  years  ago.  My  venerable  friend,  that  point 
in  which  you  feel  that  you  are  quite  safe  is  the 
place  where  you  lie  most  open  to  attack.  Mark 
my  words,  and  see  if  they  be  not  verified.  Where 
you  say  to  yourself,  "  I  am  past  danger  on  that 
account,"  there  the  enemy  will  get  an  advantage 
over  you.  "But  I  am  strong," say  you.  Nonsense, 
you  are  weak  as  water.  You  dream  of  perfection, 
but  you  are  a  mass  of  wants,  and  infirmities,  and 
conceits;  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  infinite  mercy 
of  God,  who  deals  tenderly  with  you,  you  would 
soon  have  most  painfully  to  know  it  to  your  own 
dishonor,  and  to  the  grief  of  your  brethren  round 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  133 

about  you.     Peter  is   Peter  still,   notwithstanding 
what  grace  has  done. 

You  notice  about  Peter  this  thing  still  remaining 
that  lie  blurts  out  what  he  feels.  Be  it  for  bad  or  good, 
prompt  deliverance  of  his  mind  is  still  the  charac 
teristic  of  Peter.  He  has  seen  the  vision,  and  he  has 
heard  the  voice  of  God  saying  to  him,  "  Rise,  Peter, 
kill  and  eat";  and  without  a  minute's  deliberation 
Peter  replies,  "Not  so,  Lord."  That  was  how  he 
did  before.  He  was  always  blundering  because  he 
was  in  such  a  hurry.  If  he  had  put  his  finger  to 
his  forehead  for  half  a  minute,  he  would  not  have 
said  many  things  which  he  did  say.  This  was  a 
man  whose  wisdom  always  lay  at  the  back  of  his 
head,  instead  of  at  the  front  of  it.  It  came  in  to 
tell  him  that  he  had  made  a  mistake,  but  it  never 
came  to  hand  soon  enough  to  prevent  the  error; 
and  Peter  after  Pentecost  had  not  lost  this  trait  of 
his  character.  I  may  be  addressing  young  folk 
here  who  are  very  impulsive,  and  speak  all  in  a 
hurry  things  which  they  afterwards  are  sorry  for.  I 
should  not  wonder  if  you  continue  to  be  impulsive, 
when  you  grow  older.  Perhaps  it  will  be  one  of 
your  snares  through  life.  Be  on  your  guard  against 
it.  It  is  a  strength  if  it  be  rightly  managed.  Give 
me  the  man  who  in  a  good  cause  does  not  think 
twice,  but  acts  upon  the  warm  impulses  of  a  ready 
mind.  Give  me  the  man  who  understands  that 
second  thoughts  are  not  always  the  best,  for  they 
are  apt  to  chill,  and  the  best  thought  is  that  which 
cornes  from  a  heart  fired  with  the  love  of  Christ. 
The  best  Christian  workers  to  lead  the  van,  to 
make  a  dash  with  a  forlorn  hope,  have  been  those 
brave,  impulsive,  Petor-like  spirits;  but  that  same 


134  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

characteristic,  if  not  kept  in  proper  order  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  may  lead  yon  into  a  world  of  mis 
chief.  You  say  your  say  so  quickly,  but  you  cannot 
unsay  it,  even  in  years  and  ages.  You  cannot  call 
back  the  words  which  now  cause  you  to  bite  your 
tongue  with  regret.  You  did  grow  very  angry.  It 
is  true  that  ten  minutes  calmed  you,  and  you  were 
as  sorry  as  possible  for  all  your  bitter  speeches;  but 
that  could  not  undo  the  injury,  nor  heal  the  cruel 
wound  that  you  had  given  to  your  faithful  friend. 
You  must  cry  to  God  that,  if  you  are  impulsive, 
the  impulses  may  always  corne  from  him;  and  you 
must  ask  him  daily  to  lead  and  guide  you  in  the 
way  of  understanding.  I  pray  that  you  may  not 
often  pull  out  your  sword,  and  cut  off  a  man's  ear, 
for  Jesus  is  not  here  to  work  miracles,  as  he  was 
at  hand  fortunately  with  Peter;  and  you  may  cut 
somebody's  ear  off,  and  not  be  able  to  put  it  on 
again.  Ask  him  to  keep  you  in  check,  that  you 
may  not  be  working  mischief  in  your  haste  which 
you  will  have  to  repent  of  in  your  leisure. 

But  Peter  is  Peter  still,  and  so  does  the  renewed 
man  betray  the  infirmities  which  were  with  him 
before  his  renewal.  Yet  Peter  as  Peter  still  has 
good  points,  for  he  owns  all  this.  Luke  could  not 
have  recorded  this  incident  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  unless  Peter  had  personally  told  him,  for 
none  else  knew  of  it;  and  in  the  next  chapter  we 
find  that,  when  Peter  was  brought  up  before  the 
other  apostles  for  what  he  had  done,  he  narrated 
the  whole  affair,  and  confessed,  "  But  I  said,  '  Not 
so,  Lord.'"  You  see  he  was  always  outspoken, 
honest,  and  clear  as  the  day.  There  was  a  trace 
of  dissimulation  in  him  once,  but  1  should  think 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  135 

that  it  was  strange  work  with  him.  As  a  general 
rule,  the  bluff  fisherman  spoke  what  first  came  to 
hand,  and  had  no  cunning  about  him.  In  this  let 
us  be  at  one  with  him.  It' you  carry  that  trait  ef 
character  with  you  into  the  things  of  grace,  so 
much  the  better,  for  there  is  no  Christian  that  is  so 
little  a  Christian  as  the  man  who  is  great  at  tricks, 
and  mighty  at  "prudence."  I  think  that  is  the 
name  folks  often  give  it.  "  Cunning,"  I  call  it. 
The  man  who  blurts  out  his  mind  so  that  you 
know  what  he  thinks  may  get  himself  into  lots  of 
trouble,  but  he  does  not  get  so  many  other  people 
into  trouble  as  the  double-minded  man  would  do; 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  it  often  happens  that  his 
directness,  sincerity,  and  truthfulness  work  to 
gether  to  effect  a  great  blessing  in  the  midst  of  his 
brethren.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  sanctify  our  pe 
culiarities,  that  they  may  make  us  specially  useful; 
but  save  us  from  our  constitutional  infirmities,  that 
we  may  not  by  them  be  led  into  sin ! 

There  is  the  first  head:  the  old  man  still  remains 
in  the  regenerate  man.  It  was  apparent  in  Peter, 
and  it  is  evident  enough  in  us. 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  THE  OLD  MAN  GENERALLY 
FIGHTS  AGAINST  GOSPEL  PRINCIPLES;  for  this  was  the 
point  upon  which  Peter  differed  from  his  Lord. 
This  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  applied  to  grand  gospel 
principles  which  had  been  put  before  him,  as  for 
instance,  the  abolition  of  the  ceremonial  law.  Peter 
was  to  know  that  those  ceremonial  laws,  which 
forbade  the  eating  of  this  and  that,  were  now  to 
be  abrogated.  By  Christ's  coming  here  on  earth, 
and  bearing  a  mortal  body  about  with  him,  he  has 
taken  away  the  ban  from  all  forbidden  meats,  so 


130  PETER'S    BLUNDER 

far  as  they  were  forbidden  upon  religions  grounds. 
God  has  cleansed  them,  and  what  God  has  cleansed 
Peter  was  not  to  call  common.  Peter  at  the  first 
revolted  from  this:  "  I  have  never  eaten  anything 
that  is  common  or  unclean.  Not  so,  Lord;  not  so. 
I  cannot  arise,  and  kill,  and  eat."  Many  to  this 
day  quarrel  with  God's  glorious  gospel  on  cere 
monial  grounds.  The  Scripture  saith  that  men 
are  to  be  saved  by  faith;  but  these  formalists  say, 
"Surely,  they  must  be  regenerated  in  baptism; 
they  must  be  further  fed  by  the  blessed  Eucharist." 
Persons  who  are  evangelical  in  their  hearts,  and 
who  unwittingly  preach  the  gospel,  nevertheless 
muddle  it  up  with  a  number  of  outward  ordin 
ances;  and  thus  they  *ay  practically,  "Not  so,  Lord." 
Ititualism  is  practically  battling  against  that  gos 
pel  which  Ires  in  faith  in  Christ,  and  not  in  cere 
monies;  which  demands  spiritual  life,  and  not  ex 
ternal  performances.  All  of  us  are  apt  to  err  in 
this  manner,  for  we  incline  to  attach  undue  im- 
portiijrice  to  matters  which  are  proper  and  useful 
in  their  places,  but  which  are  by  no  means  essen 
tial  t-o  sa'lvation.  One  person  thinks  a  great  deal 
of  confirmation,  which  is  purely  an  ordinance  of 
man;  another  thinks  «qually  much  of  attending 
class-meeting,  which  is  an  instructive  practice,  but 
not  a  subject  of  divine  command.  Where  Jesus 
has  made  no  rule  we  are  not  to  make  any.  We  are 
to  receive  all  whom  Christ  receives.  None  are  un- 
clea-n  whom  he  has  cleansed;  none  are  to  be  set 
aside  if  he  a  Units  them  to  his  love.  Yet  this  les- 
so-n  is  not  soon  learne  I  by  sticklers  for  p  opriety: 
they  question  any  man's  salvation  who  follows  not 
with  them,  and  when  bidden  to  commune  with 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  137 

them,  they  start  aside   with    Peter's    cry    in   their 
hearts,  if  not  on  their  lips,  "  Not  so,  Lord." 

The  same  battle  is  carried  on  by  certain  people 
who  have  never  eaten  anything  common  or  un 
clean,  in  the  sense  that  they  have  never  associated 
with  any  but  very  respectable  people.  Here  the 
fight  is  concerning  the  equality  of  men  before  the 
law,  and  under  the  gospel.  An  evangelist  brings 
into  the  congregation  all  the  poor  people  of  the  dis 
trict,  an.d  the  very  worst  of  characters  gather  to 
hear  him.  This  ought  to  be  a  great  joy,  but  in 
certain  cases  it  is  not.  Many  are  offended,  and  in 
effect  say,  "  '  Not  so,  Lord.'  Well,  really,  I — I — I 
do  not  like  sitting  next  to  one  who  is  dressed  so 
badly,  and  smells  so  vilely.  I  saw  a  woman  of 
loose  character  come  in,  and  I  felt  as  if  I  must 
leave  my  pew."  Oh,  you  very  respectable  people, 
you  know  that  you  gee  into  that  state  of  mind  ! 
You  do  not  say  much  about  it  when  we  hear  you, 
because  you  know  that  it  would  not  answer  your 
purpose;  yet  you  squeeze  up  against  the  corner 
of  the  pew  to  get  away  from  the  poor  and  needy. 
Do  you  not?  If  a  man  with  a  smock-frock,  or 
with  a  dirty  face,  comes  in  here,  you  would  just  as 
soon  that  he  should  sit  on  the  flaps  in  the  aisle  as 
Bit  in  your  seat,  and  a  great  deal  sooner,  I  dare 
say.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  that  kind  of  feeling 
about,  and  it  may  be  very  natural,  but  it  certainly 
betrays  feebleness  of  Christian  love.  Truly,  it  is 
an  instinct  of  cleanliness  to  shrink  from  the  un 
washed;  but  then  it  is  an  instinct  of  the  new  life 
to  rejoice  in  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  for  the  sake 
of  it  to  put  u.p  with  greater  discomforts  than  can 
arise  from  contact  with  the  fallen.  I  suppose  that 


138  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

in  the  days  of  James,  when  he  rebuked  those  who 
beckoned  the  rich  to  sit  near  them,  the  Roman  or 
the  Jewish  pauper  was  quite  as  ill-savored  as  any 
that  are  among  us  at  t'his  day,  yet  he  makes  no  al 
lowance  for  this.  Let  us  prize  the  common  and 
unclean  so  much  that  we  never  think  of  them  in 
thai  light.  Never  let  us  set  up  the  tyranny  of 
caste,  and  rebuild  the  middle  wall  of  partition 
which  our  Saviour  died  to  throw  down.  "God 
hath  made  ot  one  blood  all  nations  of  men"  :  we 
sprang  of  a  common  parent,  and  for  men  there  is 
but  one  Saviour.  Let  us  know  no  partialities,  but 
desire  with  equal  earnestness  the  salvation  of  peer 
and  pauper,  of  matron  and  harlot,  of  gentleman 
arid  vagabond.  To  hear  some  people  speak  of  their 
fellowrnen  is  sickening  to  me:  they  talk  of  them 
as  if  they  were  mere  offal  and  rubbish,  not  worthy 
of  their  genteel  notice.  I  bless  God  that  I  seldom 
hear  it,  for  it  rouses  my  wrath.  A  minister  in  a 
certain  neighborhood  used  solemnly  to  warn  his 
people  against  all  such  wicked  persons  as  Moody 
and  San  key,  and  the  like,  because  they  were  the 
means  of  saving  the  lower  orders.  He  said,  "  I  see 
people  in  this  district  professing  to  be  saved,  and 
yet  they  never  before  went  to  a  place  of  worship 
at  all.  Therefore,"  he  said,  "  I  do  not  believe  in 
their  salvation,  for  surely  i-f  God  were  about  to 
save  a  great  number,  he  would  first  of  all  save 
those  who  have  for  years  regularly  attended  our 
places  of  worship."  That  was  a  bit  of  Peter-like 
propriety  coming  up,  and  saying,  "Not  so,  Lord." 
Oh,  the  cruelty  of  respectability!  If  you  have 
anything  of  that  lei't  in  your  nature,  ask  God  to 
turn  it  out.  It  was  in  the  great  Father's  own 


A    LESSOR    TO    OURSELVES.  139 

house  that  there  lived  an  eliler  brother,  who  said, 
"  As  soon  as  this  thy  son  was  come,  which  hath 
devoured  thy  living  with  harlots,  thou  hast  killed 
for  him  the  fatted  calf."  Fie  was  angry,  and  would 
not  go  in.  He  was  a  very  excellent  man  indued, 
a  very  respectable  person ;  and  he  was  not  going 
in  with  such  tag-rag  as  this  prodigal  brother  of 
his.  He  did  not  like  so  much  fuss  made  over  a 
profligate.  My  friend,  that  proud  propriety  is  of 
the  old  man.  Whenever  that  disposition  comes 
up  in  you  it  is  your  baser  part,  the  part  that  ought 
to  die,  and  in  this  way  it  shows  its  enmity  to  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  I  love  to  believe  in 
the  perfect  equality  of  men  in  the  sight  of  God  as 
to  the  work  of  his  grace.  If  they  do  but  seek  the 
Lord,  and  put  their  trust  in  him,  there  is  no  differ 
ence;  and  this  we  must  all  maintain,  as  Christian 
men  and  women,  by  receiving  all  classes  with  joy. 
Otherwise,  we  shall  be  just  getting  where  Peter 
was  when  he  said,  "Not  so,  Lord,"  for  he  said  that 
he  had  not  eaten  anything  common  or  unclean ; 
and  we  say  that  we  have  not  associated  with  any 
person  living  in  a  back  slum. 

The  same  kind  of  battle  takes  place  when  our 
old  man  fights  against  the  gospel  in  its  great  prin 
ciple  of  free,  and  sovereign  grace.  You  war  against 
it  yourself  when  you  are  conscious  of  having  done 
wrong,  and  therefore  doubt  the  grace  of  God.  At 
once  the  old  man  says,  "  You  have  sinned,  and 
therefore  you  are  out  of  God's  favor:  he  will  cast 
you  away,  and  you  will  perish."  But  the  gospel 
principle  is — 

"  Whom  once  he  loves  he  never  leaves, 
But  loves  them  to  the  end." 


140  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

The  tendency  to  legalism,  which  is  natural  to  us, 
kicks  against  the  glorious  doctrine  of  free  grace 
and  unchanging  love,  and  sometimes  we  say,  "  I 
am  afraid  that  I  am  not  good  enough  to  pray,  or 
fit  to  participate  in  the  grace  of  God":  as  if  God 
wanted  some  good  in  us  before  he  would  bestow 
his  grace  upon  us.  A  diseased  man  is  fit  to  be 
healed,  a  poor  man  is  fit  for  alms,  a  drowning  man 
is  fit  to  be  rescued,  a  sinful  man  is  fit  to  be  for 
given.  God  would  have  us  come  to  him  all 
empty,  and  feeble,  and  sinful,  and  erring,  arid  just 
receive  of  his  free  favor  in  Christ  Jesus,  spon 
taneously  given  on  his  part,  without  anything  in  us 
that  can  merit  his  esteem.  Oh,  it  is  a  grand  thing 
to  be  able  to  spell  that  word  "  grace — grace — 
grace  " !  Somebody  said  the  other  day  that  to  say 
"free  grace  "  was  to  use  a  redundancy.  That  is  so; 
but  there  is  such  a  real  redundancy  in  grace  that  we 
do  not  mind  using  a  redundancy  of  expression  when 
we  are  talking  about  it.  "Free  grace"  we  mean 
still  to  say,  for,  as  some  people  will  not  believe 
that  grace  is  free,  it  is  still  necessary  to  make  it 
very  clear  that  it  is  so,  and  to  say  not  only  "  grace," 
but  "free  grace."  Christ  did  not  die  for  saints, 
but  for  sinners.  He  came  not  into  the  world  be 
cause  of  our  righteousness,  but  he  died  for  our 
sins.  The  work  of  God  is  not  to  save  men  deserv 
ing  salvation,  but  men  who  are  altogether  unde 
serving  of  it.  The  great  flood  of  divine  mercy 
overflows  and  drowns  all  our  sins,  rising,  and  yet 
rising,  fifty  cubits  upwards,  till  the  tops  of  the 
mountains  of  our  iniquity  are  all  covered,  never  to 
be  seen  again.  What  a  grand  article  of  the  creed 
is  that — "  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins " ! 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  141 

Why  arc  we  so  slow  to  believe  it?  Is  it  not  our 
old  tnan  rising,  even  as  it  did  in  Peter,  to  give 
battle  to  free  grace  with  its  "  Not  so,  Lord  >r? 

III.  Thirdly,  and  as  briefly  as  I  can,  I  would 
remind  you  that  THE  OLD  NATURE  SHOWS  ITSELF  IN 
MANY  WAYS,  always  fighting  against  God.  "Not 
so,  Lord,"  is  often  the  cry  of  our  unregenerate  part. 

It  ir?  so  against  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Some 
persons  do  not  believe  the  gospel  because  they  do 
nut  want  to  believe  it.  They  studiously  omit  to 
read  all  such  parts  of  Scripture  as  would  enlighten 
their  minds.  They  are  not  convincible  because 
they  have  already  persuaded  themselves  as  to  what 
truth  ought  to  be.  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  is  their  cry. 
Beloved,  never  get  into  that  state  of  mind.  Fol 
low  God's  Word  anywhere,  believing  what  the 
Spirit  says,  let  him  teach  you  what  he  may.  What 
ever  your  notions  may  have  been,  when  you  come 
across  a  clear  statement  in  the  Word  of  God,  bow 
your  every  thought  to  it,  and  accept  its  teaching, 
for  it  is  true,  whatever  your  thoughts  may  be.  It 
is  mine  to  believe  what  the  Bible  teaches;  it  is  not 
mine  to  object,  and  cry,  "Not  so,  Lord." 

This  old  nature  of  ours  sometimes  cries  out 
against  God  in  matters  of  duty.  We  can  do  any 
thing  except  the  special  duty  of  the  hour,  and  as 
to  that  one  thing,  we  say,  "  Not  so,  Lord."  Yon 
der  young  woman  knows  that  according  to  God's 
Word  she  must  not  marry  that  young  man,  for  she 
would  be  unequally  yoked  together  with  an  unbe 
liever.  Now,  she  was  quite  willing  to  be  baptized, 
and  she  is  heartily  willing  to  give  her  money  to 
the  Lord,  and  in  fact  to  do  anything  except  that 
one  act  of  self-denial,  which  would  require  her  to 


112  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

cease  from  a  fond  friendship.  Yet,  ray  friend, 
I  do  not  know  what  sorrow  you  will  make  for 
yourself  if  you  really  break  that  salutary  rule. 
I  have  seen  many  instances  of  mixed  marriages, 
but  I  have  had  to  mourn  over  nearly  all  of  them 
as  the  cause  of  untold  wretchedness.  Take  you 
the  precept,  and  knowing  that  it  is  God's  mind 
concerning  you,  never  dare  even  for  a  moment  to 
hesitate.  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it." 
Never  let  your  lips  say,  "  Not  so,  Lord";  for  it  is 
disobedience  to  demur  against  the  command  of  the 
Lord  your  God. 

As  it  is  with  your  practice,  so  let  it  be  with 
everything  else.  Our  corrupt  nature  will  dare  to 
cavil  at  processes  of  so  rectification.  We  are  anxious 
to  bear  fruit,  but  we  do  not  care  to  be  pruned;  we 
are  glad  to  be  delivered  from  dross,  but  not  by  the 
fire.  Rebukes  are  undervalued,  searching  truths 
are  avoided,  faithful  friends  are  shunned,  and 
awakening  Scriptures  are  neglected,  for  carnal 
ease  pleads  hard  for  indulgence,  and  the  flesh 
whines,  "  Not  so,  Lord." 

Even  in  the  dispensation  of  the  kingdom  self-will 
comes  in:  we  like  not  that  God  should  bless  men 
by  a  sect  to  which  we  do  not  belong:  we  are 
envious  for  our  own  Moses,  lest  the  irregular 
Eldads  and  Medads  should  eclipse  him.  I  have 
known  old  folks  object  to  the  Lord's  blessing  that 
rather  obtrusive  young  woman,  that  very  forward 
lad,  that  over-zealous  person.  Let  God  bless  us, 
certainly,  but  not  by  objectionable  people  !  Many 
would  prefer  apostles  from  Athens  rather  than 
from  Nazareth:  they  prefer  the  smell  of  study 
lamp-oil  to  that  of  the  fishing-boats  of  Galilee. 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  143 

We  pray  for  conversions,  yet  certain  persons 
would  not  believe  in  them  if  they  happened  out  of 
the  regular  way.  We  are  too  masterful  by  half, 
and  are  far  from  taking  up  our  proper  position  as 
servants.  Too  much  of  the  Peter  clings  to  us,  and 
our  tongue  is  much  too  ready  to  cry  out,  "  Not  so, 
Lord." 

Our  natural  corruption  is  apt  to  quarrel  with  the 
Lord  concerning  our  sufferings.  Against  this  also 
be  ever  watchful.  Whenever  you  are  called  to 
endure  trial,  do  not  complain  of  the  particular 
form  it  takes.  Perhaps  it  is  great  bodily  pain,  and 
you  say,  "  I  could  bear  anything  better  than  this." 
That  is  a  mistake.  God  knows  what  is  the  best 
for  his  child.  Do  not  cry,  "  Not  so."  "  Oh,  I 
could  bear  sickness,"  says  another.  "  but  I  have 
been  slandered  !  My  character  is  taken  away,  and 
I  cannot  bear  that."  Thus  our  will  asserts  its 
place,  and  we  pine  to  be  our  own  god  and  ruler. 
This  must  not  be.  You  must,  my  dear  friend, 
bear  that  which  the  Lord  appoints,  or  else  you 
will  make  the  matter  a  deal  worse.  If  you  want 
anything  done  well  do  it  yourself,  with  this 
exception — that,  if  you  want  your  character  de 
fended,  you  should  always  let  that  alone.  Some 
body  else  will  take  care  of  that  for  you,  and  if 
slander  be  the  rod  under  which  you  are  to  smart, 
many  of  us  have  felt  it  before  you,  and  you  need 
not  complain  so  bitterly,  as  if  a  strange  tiling  had 
happened  to  you.  Do  not  cry,  "Not  so,  Lord"; 
but  let  the  Lord  appoint  you  care  or  calumny, 
sickness  or  slander,  for  he  knows  best. 

"  But  I  am  afraid  that  I  shall  lose  my  wife,  01-  a 
favorite  child.  1  think  that  J  could  have  suffered 


144  PETER'S    BLUNDER. 

anything  but  that.."  Yes,  you  see,  a  rebellious 
spirit  contends  with  God  one  way  or  another;  it 
cannot  be  quiet.  I  was  greatly  struck  with  a  story 
a  dear  sister  told  me  yesterday.  She  was  very 
nearly  being  removed  from  the  church:  she  had 
quarreled  with  the  Lord  for  taking  away  her 
husband,  and  she  would  not  go  to  any  place  of 
worship,  she  felt  so  angry  about  her  loss.  But  her 
little  child  came  to  her  one  morning,  and  said, 
"  Mother,  do  you  think  Jonah  was  right  when  he 
said,  4I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death'?" 
She  replied,  "  0  child,  do  not  talk  to  me,"  and  put 
the  little  one  away,  but  she  felt  the  rebuke,  and  it 
brought  her  back  to  her  God,  and  back  to  her  church 
again,  humbly  rejoicing  in  him  who  had  used  this 
instrumentality  to  set  her  right  with  her  Lord.  O 
friends,  let  us  be  silent  before  the  Lord,  and  judge 
his  ways  no  longer,  for  in  this  judgment  there  is 
no  benefit  to  ourselves  or  others !  Do  not  say, 
"  Not  so,"  but  rather,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do 
what  seemeth  him  good."  When  Jacob  crossed 
his  aged  hands  to  bless  the  two  sons  of  Joseph, 
according  to  the  divine  will,  Joseph  said  "  Not  so, 
my  father;  "  but  he  could  riot  alter  his  father's  act. 
Jacob  guided  his  hands  wittingly,  and  the  blessing 
came  as  God  would  have  it.  Perhaps  a  great 
blessing  is  coming  on  you  in  a  cross-handed  man 
ner.  The  patriarch  had  experienced  many  a  cross- 
handed  blessing  himself,  and  therefore  he  knew 
what  he  was  at. 

"  Cross-handed  came  the  blessing  down 

On  Jacob's  hoary  head, 
When  Joseph's  bloo.ly  coat  was  shown 
As  numbered  with  the  dead." 


A    LESSON    TO    O UR SELVES.  145 

Many  a  wonderful  blessing  has  come  to  us  in 
that  cross-handed  way.  Bow  your  head,  therefore, 
and  silence  your  tongue,  and  have  done  forever 
with  arraigning  your  Maker  before  your  petty 
judgment-seat.  Shall  not  the  heavenly  Father  do 
that  which  is  right  and  good  ? 

Sometimes  our  corrupt  nature  quarrels  with  God 
about  our  service.  The  Lord  says,  "  Go  into  the 
Sunday-school."  "  1  should  have  liked  to  preach," 
says  the  young  man.  "Go into  the  Sunday-school," 
"Not  so,  Lord."  says  he,  and  he  will  not  go,  and 
thus  he  misses  his  life-work.  It  will  not  do  for 
us  to  choose  what  work  we  will  do.  Who  would 
employ  servants  who,  when  they  are  told  to  do  this 
or  go  there,  should  say,  "  No,  sir;  I  prefer  another 
engagement "  ?  They  will  get  their  money  on 
Saturday  night,  with  the  advice  to  find  a  new 
master.  We  may  well  pray, 

"  Dismiss  mo  not  thy  service,  Lord," 

if  we  have  been  pickers  and  choosers  of  our  work. 
Do  what  the  Lord  bids  you,  when  he  bids  yon, 
where  he  bids  you,  as  he  bids  you,  as  long  as  he 
bids  you,  and  do  it  at  once.  Never  say,  "  Not  so, 
Lord." 

"But,"  you  say,  "his  providence  is  very  strange 
to  me.  I  am  called  away  from  the  place  where 
my  heart  has  struck  its  roots.  God  deals  with  me 
in  a  terrible  manner."  Truly  his  way  is  in  the 
storm.  Yet,  never  say,  "  Not  so,  Lord."  It  is  not  a 
pretty  position  for  a  child  of  God  to  be  in  to  be 
trying  to  amend  the  arrangements  of  the  great 
Father.  The  Omniscient  knows  best.  You  think 
BO,  do  you  not  ?  Do  not  act  aa  if  you  thought  the 


146  PETER'S   BLUNDER: 

contrary.  Oh,  brothers  and  sisters,  an  obedient 
heart,  a  yielding  spirit,  a  submissive  mind,  and  an 
acquiescence  in  the  divine  will,  are  the  necessary 
elements  of  happiness;  but  the  spirit  of  "Not  so, 
Lord,''  is  the  mother  of  all  the  mists  and  fogs  that 
darken  our  pathway.  If  thou  wilt  walk  contrary 
to  God  he  will  walk  contrary  to  thee.  "Unto  the 
froward  he  will  show  himself  fro  ward  ";  but  to  the 
humble  and  contrite,  the  submissive  and  obedient, 
he  will  show  himself  exceeding  gracious.  If  thou 
wilt  stoop  thou  shait  conquer.  If  thou  wilt  yield 
thou  shalt  have  thy  desire.  If  thou  wilt  be  noth 
ing  God  will  make  much  of  thee.  If  thou  wilt  be 
lowly  God  will  exalt  thee.  But  if  thou  wilt  stand 
out  against  thy  Lord,  as  he  loves  thee,  he  will 
correct  thee,  and  he  will  teach  thee  better  manners 
ere  he  has  done  with  thee. 

IV.  Let  us  leave  that  point,  and  close  with  a 
fourth  observation: — IT  is  A  GREAT  PITY  WHEN  THIS 

KIND  OF  WILLFULNESS  STANDS  IN  THE  WAY    OF    USEFULNESS. 

It  would  have  been  so  with  Peter  if  the  Lord  had 
not  used  the  process  by  which  he  overcame  him. 
"Not  so,  Lord,"  said  Peter:  "  Not  so,  Lord;  for  I 
have  never  eaten  anything  that  is  common  or  un 
clean."  In  some  things  Peter  was  a  great  deal 
too  conservative.  He  says,  "  Not  so,  Lord,"  and 
eome  read  it,  "  Never,  Lord,  never  Lord,  for  I  have 
never;"  that  is,  "I  must  never  do  a  thing  I  have 
never  done."  Many  are  of  this  mind:  they  cannot 
advance  an  inch.  This  is  the  hymn  they  sing 
of  a  morning  before  breakfast,  "  As  it  was  in 
the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world 
without  end.  Amen."  And  any  time  until  they 
go  to  bed  at  night  it  is  the  tune  they  keep  ou 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  147 

singing,  "As  it  was  in  the  beginning:  as  it  was  in 
the  beginning." 

They  will  never  do  what  has  not  been  done,  nor 
learn  what  they  have  not  learned.  Many  will  only 
act  as  others  act;  they  must  keep  in  the  fashion. 
Xovv  this  is  a  rule  which  I  never  accepted;  for  it 
always  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  probably  to  do  what 
nobody  had  done  before  me;  for  was  I  not  in  some 
points  different  from  every  one  else?  One  likes  to 
look  about,  and  search  for  methods  of  usefulness 
which  have  not  been  tried,  for  a  novel  form  of 
labor  may  be  like  a  bit  of  virgin  soil  which  will  yield 
a  better  crop  than  our  own  arable  hands  which  have 
been  drained  so  long.  Do  you  not  think  that  Chris 
tian  men  are  apt  to  be  stereotyped  in  their  ways? 
You  must  always  sing  so  many  verses  and  no 
more;  you  must  pray  a  certain  time,  and  go  right 
around  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  before 
you  close  your  petitions.  Certain  people  must 
always  do  what  they  have  done,  even  though 
they  fall  asleep  in  the  doing  of  it.  This  kind 
of  routine  forbids  enlarged  usefulness,  prevents 
our  getting  at  out-of-the-way  people,  and  puts  a 
damper  upon  all  zeal.  Let  us  struggle  against  the 
spirit  which  would  bind  us  hand  and  foot:  where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty.  Let  us  not  say 
"  Never,  Lord,  for  I  have  never,"  but,  on  the  con 
trary, —  "Right  speedily  will  I  attempt  this  work 
of  usefulness,  because  I  have  forgotten  it  so  long;  I 
will  make  haste,  and  delay  no  longer  to  keep  thy 
commandments." 

Propriety  hinders  very  many :  decorum  is  their 
death.  I  do  not  know  the  precise  meaning  of  it, 
but  there  are  genteel  people  about  who  consider 


148  PETER'S    BLUNDER: 

that  the  finest  thing  on  earth  is  "propriety."  Mr. 
Rowland  Hill  was  said  to  have  ridden  on  the  back 
of  all  order  and  decorum.  "No,"  he  said,  "I  can 
not  ride  on  the  back  of  two  horses,  but  I  have  two 
horses  to  my  carriage,  and  I  have  called  one  of 
them  'Order,'  and  the  other  'Decorum,'  to  make 
the  report  come  as  nearly  right  as  possible."  Order 
and  decorum  were  never  put  to  a  better  use  than 
when  they  drew  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  from  town  to 
town  preaching  the  gospel;  and  I,  for  one,  am  glad 
that  he  never  took  those  horses  into  the  pulpit. 
He  was  just  as  disorderly  and  indecorous  as  a  Chris 
tian  man  ought  to  be — that  is  to  say,  he  was  per 
fectly  natural,  and  spoke  the  truth  from  his  heart, 
arid  men  that  heard  it  felt  the  power  of  it;  and  so 
he  became  a  blessing  to  this  part  of  London,  and 
indeed,  to  the  whole  world.  Shake  yourself  up  a 
little,  my  brother.  If  you  are  too  precise  may  the 
Lord  set  you  on  fire,  and  consume  your  bonds  of 
red  tape!  If  you  have  become  so  improperly  pro 
per  that  you  cannot  commit  a  proper  impropriety, 
then  pray  God  to  help  you  to  be  less  proper,  for 
there  are  many  who  will  never  be  saved  by  your 
instrumentality  while  you  study  propriety. 

Again,  I  doubt  not  that  some  are  hindered  in  their 
usefulness  by  their  great  dignity.  It  is  wonderful 
what  noble  creatures  men  can  grow  into,  if  they 
are  let  alone.  "  This  great  Babylon  that  I  have 
built,"  cries  Nebuchadnezzar.  This  is  the  same  gen 
tleman  who  afterwards  ate  grass  like  the  oxen,  and 
whose  nails  grew  like  birds'  claws.  We  have  seen 
very,  very,  very  great  little  people,  and  very,  very, 
very  little  great  people  who  have  given  themselves 
mighty  airs;  but  we  have  never  see  any  good  come 


A    LESSON    TO    OURSELVES.  149 

of  their  greatness.  Few  people  are  blessed  by  these 
gorgeous  individuals.  God  seldom  sends  his  Eli 
jahs  bread  and  meat  by  peacocks.  If  you  go  as 
visiting  ladies  into  the  houses  of  the  poor  very 
finely  dressed,  arid  you  "condescend"' to  them,  they 
will  not  want  to  see  you  any  more;  but  if  you  go 
in  and  set  at  their  side,  and  show  them  that  you  are 
their  true  friends,  you  get  at  their  hearts.  Love 
thyself  less  and  less,  and  love  thy  God  more. 
Love  the  soul  of  every  man  with  all  the  intensity 
of  thy  being.  Struggle  and  agonize  to  bring 
sinners  to  the  Saviour's  feet,  and  God  will  help  thee. 
But  if  thou  standest  on  thy  dignity,  and  sayest, 
"Lord,  not  so;  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything 
common  or  unclean,''  it  will  be  a  serious  injury  to 
thee.  I  said  to  one  of  our  classes,  "  Let  7  grow 
very  small,  and  let  J  grow  very  great,"  and  the 
brethren  did  not  need  an  explanation.  May  we  so 
love  our  Lord  Jesus  that  we  cease  to  care  for  dignity 
and  are  willing  to  be  nothing  for  his  sake  ! 

Are  there  any  here  who  have  not  yet  believed  in 
Jesus?  I  hope  they  will  trust  their  souls  with  him 
at  once,  and,  when  they  have  done  so,  let  them 
come  forward  without  delay,  arid  confess  his  name 
and  be  baptized  into  the  sacred  Three.  Then 
let  them  try  to  grow  downward  lower  and  lower, 
till  they  sink  into  nothing,  that  Christ  may  be  all 
in  all. 


VII. 

THE  SINGULAR  ORIGIN  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  MAN. 
Read  March  22,  1885. 

"  For  we  are  his  •workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto 
good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should 
walk  in  them."  —  EPHESIANS  ii.  10. 


text  is  written  by  the  apostle  as  a  reason 
why  salvation  cannot  be  a  thing  of  human 
merit:  "riot  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast, 
for  we  are  his  workmanship."  The  for  indicates 
an  argument.  It  is  a  conclusive  reason  why 
salvation  cannot  be  by  our  good  works,  because 
even  when  we  have  an  abundance  of  the  best  of 
works  they  are  far  more  due  to  God  than  to  our 
selves.  We  ourselves,  in  our  saved  condition,  are 
the  workmanship  of  God,  and  with  each  of  us  the 
argument  holds  good,  —  "  Not  of  works,  for  we 
are  his  workmanship." 

We  are  so  completely  the  Lord's  workmanship, 
that  we  are  also  styled  a  creation.  We  are  "  cre 
ated  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and  a  creation  cannot  possibly 
be  the  creature's  own  work;  such  a  supposition 
would  be  absurd  upon  the  face  of  it.  It  would  be 
a  misuse  of  language  to  speak  of  anything  as 
creating  itself.  Whatever,  therefore,  we  are  in 
Christ  Jesus  is  the  result  of  God's  work  upon  us, 
and  cannot  be  the  cause  of  that  work. 

Moreover,  our  good  works,   be  they  what  they 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  151 

may,  are  the  subjects  of  an  ordinance  of  God: — 
"  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should 
walk  in  them."  Truly  they  are  purposed  by  our 
selves,  and  our  will  and  heart  determine  them;  but 
far  at  the  back  of  all  this  lies  the  divine  purpose 
by  which  they  were  settled  from  of  old.  If  good 
works  are  ordained,  as  well  as  the  salvation  of 
which  they  are  the  evidence,  then  the  whole 
matter  is  of  divine  ordaining,  and  there  is  no 
space  left  to  impute  salvation  to  human  work. 
The  tree  is  not  created  by  its  fruit,  for  the  fruit  is 
created  with  the  tree,  and  is  one  purpose  for  which 
the  tree  was  created.  Good  works  are  not  the  cause 
of  salvation,  for  they  are  the  result  of  it,  and  were 
contemplated  as  a  result  by  God  when  he  saved 
us.  The  argument  deserves  to  be  worked  out  at 
greater  length,  but  we  have  not  space  for  it  now. 

I  want,  at  this  time,  to  call  your  attention  to 
four  things  in  the  text;  and  if  you  can  carry  in 
your  mind's  eye  the  first  creation,  and  the  making 
of  Adam,  and  what  he  was  made  for,  and  where 
he  was  put  when  he  was  made,  it  will  serve  as  a 
background  to  the  picture  of  the  second  creation, 
which  I  shall  attempt  to  paint.  I  would  dwell 
upon  man  as  God's  workmanship  in  a  still  higher 
sense  than  by  his  first  making.  I  would  set  him 
forth  as  created  anew  ''unto  good  works,  which 
God  hath  before  prepared," — for  that  is  the  word 
properly  used  in  the  new  translation — "  which  God 
hath  before  prepared  that  we  should  walk  in 
them." 

I.  To  begin,  then;  notice  first,  THE  SINGULAR 
ORIGI-N  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  MAN, — of  all  Christian  men, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles;  of  all  Christian  men, 


152  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

even  if  they  be  the  highest  Apostles,  like  Paul,  or 
the  least  of  all  the  family  of  love,  such  as  we  may 
be.  As  many  as  are  truly  saved,  and  brought 
into  union  with  Christ,  are  the  workmanship  of 
God. 

No  Christian  in  the  world  is  a  chance  production 
of  nature,  or  the  outcome  of  evolution,  or  the 
result  of  special  circumstances.  "By  the  grace  of 
God  I  am  what  f  am,"  may  be  said  by  every 
man  who  is  saved.  To  nothing  can  we  ascribe 
the  fact  that  we  are  in  Christ  except  this — that 
we  are  God's  workmanship.  Of  regeneration  we 
must  say  once  for  all,  "This  is  the  finger  of  God." 

The  spiritual  life  cannot  come  to  us  by  develop 
ment  from  our  old  nature.  I  have  heard  a  great 
deal  about  evolution  arid  development,  but  I  am 
afraid  that  if  any  one  of  us  were  to  be  developed 
to  our  utmost,  apart  from  the  grace  of  God,  we 
should  come  out  worse  than  before  the  develop 
ment  began.  Our  flesh  would  be  apt  to  produce 
by  evolution  something  exceeding  brutish  and 
devilish.  Mr.  Whitefield  once  raised  a  great  out 
cry  against  himself  by  saying  that  man  by  nature 
was  half  beast  and  half  devil:  I  have  never  seen 
any  reason  why  the  description  should  be  altered; 
but  I  have  sometimes  wondered  which  was  the 
worst  of  the  two — the  devil  in  the  man,  or  the 
beast  in  him. 

As  to  spiritual  life  coming  out  of  our  unrenewed 
nature,  it  is  impossible.  "Out  of  nothing  comes 
nothing."  There  is  no  spiritual  life  in  men  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins;  how  then  can  life  come  out 
of  them  ?  Out  of  death  truly  there  comes  a  some 
thing  congruous  thereto:  horrible  are  the  forms  of 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  153 

corruption  that  arise  from  the  body  in  which  death 
holds  sway;  but  this  is  dissolution  and  destruction, 
and  not  lite.  What  the  corruption  of  a  human  soul 
may  be,  I  cannot  attempt  to  say.  Terrible  as  hell 
must,  be,  there  is  nothing-  in  the  pit  more  awful  that 
those  who  are  in  it.  The  lost  themselves  are  more 
unutterably  dreadful  than  any  punishment  that 
justice  may  have  imposed  upon  them.  Developed 
manhood,  developed  without  any  restraining  in 
fluences,  if  it  be  shut  up  in  vast  numbers,  must 
be  a  fermenting  mass  of  hate,  envy,  malice,  lust, 
cruelty,  and  pride.  Speak  of  evolution, — here  it 
is, — "  When  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth 
sin:  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death."  Darkness  never  begets  light,  filth  never 
creates  purity,  hell  never  yields  heaven,  and 
depravity  never  produces  grace. 

But  the  point  is  that  we  are  God's  workmanship. 
We  are  his  workmanship  from  the  very  first.  The 
first  stroke  that  helps  to  fashion  us  into  Christians 
comes  from  the  Lord's  own  hand.  He  marks  the 
stone  while  yet  in  the  quarry,  cuts  it  from  its  nat 
ural  bed,  and  performs  the  first  hewing  and  squar 
ing,  even  as  it  is  he  who  afterwards  exercises  the 
sculptor's  skill  upon  it.  It  was  the  Lord  who  first 
taught  us  our  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  gave  us  our 
sense  of  sin,  and  our  early  tremblings,  and  our  ne\7 
desires.  The  faintest  breath  of  spiritual  life  that 
was  ever  breathed  by  any  one  of  us,  came  from  God 
himself.  We  might  almost  use  the  same  words 
concerning  our  new  nature  as  the  Psalmist  used 
when  he  spoke  of  his  body, — "Thine  eyes  did 
see  my  substance,  yet  being  un perfect;  and  in 
thy  book  all  my  members  were  written,  which  in 


Io4  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN. 

continuance  were  fashioned  when  as  yet  there  was 
none  of  them." 

We  shall  remain  the  Lord's  workmanship  to  the  very 
last.  The  picture  must  be  finished  by  that  same 
Master-hand  which  first  sketched  it.  If  any  other 
hand  should  lay  so  much  as  a  tint  or  color  there 
upon,  it  would  certainly  mar  it  all.  God  has  com 
menced  the  character  of  his  people  after  so  marvel 
ous  a  sort  that  no  human  mind  as  yet  fully  com 
prehends  the  full  design  of  infinite  love,  for  none 
know  perfectly  the  matchless  character  of  Jesus, 
our  Lord.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall 
be."  Since,  then,  we  do  not  even  know  what  we 
are  to  be,  we  cannot  intrude  into  the  work,  and 
take  the  pencil  from  the  hand  of  the  great  Artist, 
and  complete  his  design,  but  the  Author  must  be 
the  Finisher  of  what  he  has  begun. 

This  is  very  beautiful  to  remember,  and  it  should 
stir  up  all  that  is  within  us  to  magnify  the  Lord.  If 
it  be  so,  that  from  the  first  the  Lord  has  wrought 
all  our  works  in  us,  what  an  amount  of  patience, 
what  an  amount  of  power,  what  an  amount  of  skill, 
what  an  amount  of  love,  what  an  amount  of  grace, 
has  God  spent  upon  us  hitherto  !  I  was  surprised 
when  I  was  told,  the  other  day,  by  a  friend,  who 
was  a  maker  of  steel-plate  engravings,  how  much 
of  labor  had  to  be  put  into  a  finely-executed  en 
graving.  Think  of  the  power  that  has  cut  lines 
of  beauty  in  such  steel  as  we  are!  Think  of  the 
patience  that  lent  its  arm,  and  its  eye,  and  its 
heart,  and  its  infinite  mind,  to  the  carrying  on  of  the 
supreme  work  of  producing  the  image  of  Christ  in 
those  who  were  born  in  sin  !  Think  of  the  skill 
which  makes  heirs  of  God  out  of  heirs  of  wrath  1 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  155 

It  seemed  impossible  when  one  said  that  "  God  is 
able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abra 
ham,"  but  it  is  more  than  fulfilled  in  us.  Miracles 
of  grace  have  been  wrought  upon  us  as  many  as 
the  sands  on  the  sea-shore.  How  graciously  has 
the  Lord  endured  our  opposition  to  his  gracious 
operations;  never  violating  the  freedom  of  our  will, 
but  making  us  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power! 
This  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  marvels.  See 
how  he  has  continued  to  work  upon  us,  year  after 
year,  with  the  final  perseverance  of  unditninished 
love !  How  much  more  of  power  will  still  be 
needed,  and  how  much  more  of  long-suffering,  and 
how  much  more  of  careful  wisdom,  ere  we  shall  be 
perfect  and  complete  !  According  to  his  riches  in 
grace  will  he  deal  with  us;  and  if  that  should  not 
suffice,  he  will  take  a  higher  standard,  and  treat 
us  "  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ 
Jesus."  This  we  know,  that  we  shall  certainly 
receive  all  that  is  needed  for  completion,  for  he 
that  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  us  will  perform  it 
unto  the  day  of  Christ.  Happy  is  it  for  us  that 
"  we  are  his  workmanship  ! 

Now,  ought  we  not,  dear  friends,  as  far  as  the 
Lord  has  gone  with  us  already,  to  bless  and  praise 
his  holy  name?  Do  you  not  think  that  it  is 
becoming  in  all  of  us,  who  know  that  God  has 
been  at  work  with  us,  to  adoi-e  him  continually  for 
what  he  has  done  ?  I  know  you  sigh  because  a 
part  of  the  picture  still  looks  rough  and  incom 
plete.  Consider  that  the  Artist  has  not  ended  his 
labor  upon  that  portion  of  us.  Sanctification  in  its 
practical  issues  is  not  yet  ended.  But  do  not  sigh 
so  much  over  the  incomplete  part  as  to  fail  iu 


loG  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

rejoicing  over  that  which  is  accomplished.  Rejoice 
that  a  hand  has  been  laid  upon  the  canvass  which 
is  matchless  even  in  its  outlines  and  foundation- 
colors;  a  hand,  moreover,  which  was  never  yet 
know  to  throw  away  a  canvass  upon  which  it  had 
once  commenced  a  masterpiece.  Remember  that 
thou  magnify  his  work.  "  He  that  hath  wrought 
us  for  the  selfsame  thing  is  God,  who  also  hath 
given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit," 

One  thing  I  would  say  to  you  who  are  God's 
people:  if  we  are  his  workmanship,  never  let  us  be 
ashamed  to  let  men  see  God's  workmanship  in  us. 
"  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they 
may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Fa 
ther  which  is  in  heaven."  Let  us  be  very  much 
ashamed  to  let  them  see  the  remains  of  the  devil's 
workmanship  in  us;  hide  it  behind  a  veil  of  repen 
tant  grief.  Christ  has  come  to  destroy  it;  let  it  be 
destroyed.  Yet  let  your  simple  faith  be  known  and 
spoken  of,  even  though  it  be  ridiculed  by  the  wise 
men  of  the  age,  who  by  wisdom  know  not  God. 
Do  not  be  ashamed  of  your  confidence  in  your  God 
at  any  time,  even  though  men  burst  into  a  fit  of 
laughter  over  it  as  if  you  must  be  raving  mad;  for 
this  also  is  God's  workmanship.  Nothing  that  God 
has  wrought  is  unfit  to  be  seen.  Search  from  the 
summit  of  the  highest  Alp  to  the  bottom  of  the 
deepest  cavern,  and  there  is  neither  plant,  nor 
beast,  nor  insect,  nor  even  grain  of  dust  which  is 
not  beautiful  in  its  season.  I  have  heard  foolish 
people  half  scream  at  the  sight  of  some  poor  little 
insect,  or  frog,  or  lizard;  but  this  is  from  want  of 
knowing  more  of  the  beauty  of  the  creatures  which 
our  great  Father  has  formed.  If  these  are  quietly 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  157 

looked  at,  especially  if  they  are  examined  under 
the  microscope,  they  amaze  us  with  the  marvelous 
art  displayed  in  them.  Nothing1  that  God  has 
made  should  be  despised.  Assuredly  this  is  most 
true  in  the  spiritual  kingdom,  where  the  lowest 
form  of  grace  is  lovely  as  an  angel's  countenance. 
All  the  new  creatures  of  God  are  surpassingly  beau 
tiful;  and  so  far  as  yon,  my  brother,  are  God's 
workmanship,  so  far  you  are  comely  with  the  come 
liness  which  he  has  put  upon  you.  See  how  the 
Bridegroom  in  Solomon's  Song  extols  his  Bride, 
fair  metaphor  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord 
Jfsus  praises  his  church.  He  is  an  impartial 
Judge  of  all  that  is  excellent;  but  when  he  views 
his  people  as  God's  work,  he  is  full  of  admiration. 
That  which  is  your  own  work,  you  may  well  blush 
to  own ;  that  which  is  the  devil's  work,  you  are 
bound  to  detest;  but  that  which  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  you,  will  bear  inspection,  and  no 
guilty  fear  should  cause  you  to  conceal  it.  Let 
your  meekness,  your  kindness,  your  uprightness^ 
your  truth,  your  purity  appear  unto  all  men. 
Never  let  it  be  a  question  whether  you  are  a 
Christian.  Do  not  tremble  at  the  persecution 
which  the  enmity  of  the  ungodly  may  inflict  upon 
you  because  you  belong  to  Christ,  but  the  rather 
accept  it  as  an  honor,  esteeming  the  reproach  of 
Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  Egypt. 

As  to  any  of  you  who  hear  me  at  this  time,  and 
feel  forced  to  say,  "  Ah,  me !  I  do  not  see  how  I 
am  to  be  a  Christian":  let  rne  speak  with  you.  I 
am  thinking  of  the  matter  very  differently.  I  see 
very  plainly  how  you  can  become  Christians;  for 
all  of  us  who  are  believers  are  God's  workmanship, 


158  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

and  that  God  who  has  made  us  his  workmanship 
can  make  you  to  be  the  same.  "  Oh,  but  I  can 
not  do  anything  !  "  Who  said  you  could  ?  Who 
asked  you  to  do  any  part  of  God's  work  ?  We  are 
God's  workmanship.  There  is  in  your  fallen  nature 
no  power  or  will  towards  good,  and  if  the  question 
were  about  your  workmanship,  the  answer  wotild 
be  full  of  despair;  but  while  God  works  there  is 
hope. 

"  Oh,  but  I  have  a  withered  hand ! "  When 
Jesus  bids  you  stretch  it  out,  do  not  inquire  about 
your  own  power,  but  look  to  his  power  who  gives 
the  command.  Do  not  say,  "  I  cannot  save  my 
self.  I  cannot  make  myself  holy."  Look  you, 
then,  to  him  who  is  a  Saviour,  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  who  was  born  for  this  end,  that  he 
might  save  his  people  from  their  sins.  "  We  are 
Ids  workmanship,''  cry  all  the  saints:  do  you  want 
to  be  your  own  workmanship?  He  that  can  work 
upon  one  can  work  upon  another.  Oh,  that  you 
would  lie  at  his  feet!  Oh,  that  you  would  put  off 
ail  idea  of  what  you  can  do  for  yourself,  and  draw 
comfort  from  these  few  words  of  my  text:  "  We 
are  his  workmanship"!  What  is  there  that  God 
cannot  do  f-n*  you?  Rough  material  as  you  are, 
he  can  make  you  what  you  should  be;  he  can 
make  you  what  it  will  delight  you  to  be.  God 
grant  that  we  may  learn  to  look  to  the  Strong 
for  strength,  and  no  longer  waste  our  time  in 
inquiring"  for  it  where  there  is  nothing  but  per 
fect  weakness ! 

Here,  then,  is  the  origin  of  a  Christian  man:  he 
comes  out  of  the  workshop  of  God. 

II.  Secondly,    here    in    the    text    we    see    THE 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN   MAN.  159 

PECULIAR  MANNER  OF  THIS  ORIGIN.  "  We  are  his  work 
manship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Created  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Catch  that  thought.  Our  new  life 
is  a  creation.  This  goes  further  than  the  former 
expression;  for  workmanship  is  less  than  creation. 
A  man  may  produce  a  picture,  and  say,  "This  is 
my  workmanship":  a  piece  of  mosaic,  or  a  vessel 
fresh  from  the  wheel,  may  be  a  man's  workman 
ship,  but  it  is  not  his  creation.  The  artist  must 
procure  his  canvas  and  his  colors,  the  maker  of  a 
mosaic  must  find  his  marbles  or  his  wood,  the 
potter  must  drg  his  clay,  for  without  these  mate 
rials  he  can  do  nothing;  for  he  is  not  the  Creator. 
To  One  only  does  that  august  name  strictly  belong. 
None  other  could  create  a  gnat,  or  the  beam  of 
light  in  which  it  dances,  or  the  eye  with  which  it 
is  seen.  In  this  world  of  grace,  wherever  we  live, 
we  are  a  creation.  Our  new  life  is  as  truly  created 
out  of  nothing  as  were  the  first  heavens,  and  the  "first 
earth.  This  ought  to  be  particularly  noticed,  for 
there  are  some  who  think  that  the  grace  of  God 
improves  the  old  nature  into  the  new.  It  does 
nothing  of  the  sort.  That  which  we  possess  since 
the  fall  is  corrupt  and  dead,  and  has  to  be  buried, 
whereof  our  baptism  is  the  type  and  the  testimony. 
That  which  is  of  God  within  us  is  a  new  birth,  a 
divine  principle,  a  living  seed,  a  quickening  spirit: 
in  fact,  it  is  a  creation:  we  are  new  creatures  in 
Christ  Jesus.  What  a  sweeping  statement !  This 
goes  back  to  the  very  beginning  of  grace  within 
us.  As  we  read,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heaven  and  the  earth,"  so  may  we  say  of  every 
man  that  is  born  again  unto  God,  that  he  had  no 
true  beginning  till  God  created  him,  and  made  him 


160  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

spiritually  to  be.  Creation  is  the  calling  of  some 
thing  out  of  nothing,  of  light  out  of  darkness,  of 
life  out  of  death.  Is  not  this  a  fair  description  of 
the  new  birth  ?  Has  not  this  happened  to  us? 
When  we  were  nothing,  God,  in  the  greatness  of 
his  grace,  created  us  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Creation  was  effected  by  a  word.  "  By  the  word 
of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made."  "He  spake, 
and  it  was  done;  he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast." 
"God  said,  Let  there  be  light:  and  there  was 
light."  Is  that  not  again  an  accurate  description 
of  our  entrance  into  spiritual  light  and  life?  Do 
we  not  confess,  "Thy  word  hath  quickened  me"? 
"  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of 
incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God,  winch  liveth 
and  abideth  forever."  "  Which  were  born,  not  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 
of  man,  but  of  God."  The  Lord  breathed  upon  us 
by  his  Spirit,  and  we  lived;  he  spake,  and  we  were 
created  in  Christ  Jesus. 

In  creation  the  Lord  was  alone  and  unaided.  The 
prophet  asks,  "  Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,  or  being  his  counselor  hath  taught  him  ? 
With  whom  took  he  counsel,  and  who  instructed 
him,  and  taught  him  in  the  path  of  Judgment,  and 
taught  him  knowledge,  and  showed  to  him  the 
way  of  understanding?"  After  all  was  done,  the 
morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of 
God  shouted  for  joy;  but  the}'  did  not — could  not, 
aid  in  the  work.  Creation  is  the  prerogative  of 
Jehovah,  and  none  can  share  it  with  him.  So  it  is 
in  the  regeneration  of  a  soul;  instrumentality 
appears,  but  the  real  work  is  immediately  of  the 
Spirit  of  God. 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN   MAN.  161 

See,  then,  poor  sinners  Mho  may  hear  these 
words,  that  they  have  a  relation  to  you.  You  are 
saying,  "  How  can  we  become  Christians  ?  "  Why, 
you  can  become  Christians  by  being  created,  and 
there  is  no  other  way.  "  But  we  cannot  create 
ourselves,"  says  one.  It  is  even  so.  Stand  back, 
and  quit  all  pretence  of  being  creators;  and  the 
further  yon  retreat  from  self-conceit  the  better,  for 
it  is  God  who  must  create  you.  How  I  wish  that 
you  felt  this  !  "  It  would  drive  us  to  despair,"  say 
you.  It  might  drive  you  to  such  despair  as  would 
be  the  means  of  your  flying  to  Christ,  and  that  is 
precisely  what  I  desire.  It  would  be  greatly  to 
your  gain  if  you  never  again  indulged  a  shred  of 
hope  in  your  own  works,  and  were  forced  to  accept 
the  grace  of  God.  I  seek  not  to  excite  in  you  a 
proud  activity,  but  a  humble  reliance  in  the  mercy 
of  God,  and  a  submissive  acceptance  of  his  plan  of 
salvation  by  free  grace.  Oh,  that  this  might  be 
done!  The  gospel  does  not  call  upon  you  to  save 
yourselves;  but  its  voice  is  the  echo  of  that  of  the 
Lord,  in  Isaiah  xlv.  22,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth:  for  I  am  God,  and 
there  is  none  else."  The  Lord  does  not  even  ask 
your  help  in  your  own  salvation.  When  he  has 
wrought  in  you,  you  may  work  it  out,  but  that  is 
all.  Be  ready  to  be  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter,  plastic  to  the  touch  of  the  All-creating  God, 
and  you  shall  find  that  he  is  the  God  of  salvation, 
and  to  him  belong  the  issues  from  death.  Out  of 
black  sinners  he  can  make  bright  saints.  Hearts 
of  stone  he  can  take  away,  and  give  hearts  of  flesh. 
He  can  take  the  infidel,  and  create  in  him  a 
mighty  faith ;  the  harlot,  and  make  her  a  pattern 


162  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

of  purity:  the  lowest  of  the  low,  and  the  vilest  of 
the  vile,  and  put  them  among  the  princes — even 
the  princes  of  his  people.  Granted  that  a  Christian 
is  the  result  of  a  creation,  then  nothing  is  wanted 
to  begin  with,  and  no  help  is  required  in  the 
process;  the  Lord  can  work,  and  none  can  hinder 
him.  This  truth  lifts  the  whole  matter  out  of  the 
region  of  the  creature's  merit,  worth,  or  ability, 
and  puts  it  on  another  footing,  full  of  hope  to  man, 
and  of  glory  to  God.  I  would  be  glad  and  rejoice 
forever  in  that  which  God  creates:  it  fills  me  with 
comfort  for  my  fellowmen,  and  with  reverence 
for  my  God. 

But  the  text  speaks  of  this  creation  as  "in 
Christ  Jesus."  This  is  a  deeply  instructive  subject, 
which  at  this  present  cannot  fully  be  discussed, 
partly  from  want  of  time,  and  partly  from  want  of 
ability  on  my  part  fully  to  open  it  up.  It  would 
require  a  series  of  discourses,  such  as  Dr.  John 
Owen,  or  Stephen  Charnock  might  have  been  able 
to  deliver;  the  theologians  of  to-day,  if  there  be 
any,  cannot  come  near  it.  Herein  is  a  great  deep: 
— "  created  in  Christ  Jesus."  This  much,  how 
ever,  I  may  note,  for  it  rises  to  the  surface:  in  the 
first  creation  you  and  I  were  created  in  Adam. 
We  wear  the  image  of  the  earthly  Adam  by  our 
natural  descent,  and  as  such  we  are  the  creatures 
of  God.  It  is  of  our  natural  birth  that  the 
Psalmist  said,  "  Thy  hands  have  made  me  and 
fashioned  me."  Thus  we  received  our  being,  and 
that  is  a  blessing;  but  the  blessing  would  have 
soured  into  a  curse  had  not  Jesus  come  to  work 
our  well-being.  Creation  in  the  first  Adam  has 
brought  us  into  a  world  of  misery,  and  to  reach  a 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  163 

better  world  we  require  to  be  created  in  some  such 
fashion  that  we  come  into  union,  and  connection, 
and  relationship  with  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord 
from  heaven.  This  is  what  the  Lord  does  when 
he  new-creates  each  believer;  he  creates  him  in 
Christ  Jesus.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  his  federal  Head, 
and  his  Representative;  his  hope  is  hidden  in  him. 
We  are  thus  put  under  a  new  economy,  and  are 
dealt  with  under  a  new  system  and  order  of 
things.  I  could  tell  you  something  more  that  I 
do  believe,  namely,  that  when  the  glorious  Jeho 
vah  created  the  Christ,  as  the  Man  Christ  Jesus, 
and  when  the  Godhead  came  "into  union  with  this 
human  nature  of  our  blessed  Lord,  all  of  us  were 
viewed  as  in  him.  What  saith  the  Lord?  "In 
thy  book  all  my  members  were  written,  which  in 
contini!.ance  were  fashioned,  when  as  yet  there  was 
none  of  them."  That  God  saw  you,  and  me,  and 
all  the  redeemed  in  Christ  from  all  eternity,  is 
matter  of  faith  to  me;  and  we  were  in  Christ 
when  he  died,  in  him  when  he  rose,  and  we 
are  in  him  even  now  that  he  sitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  even  the  Father.  Who 
can  separate  the  Head  from  the  members,  or 
the  members  from  the  Head?  We  are  regarded 
as  one  in  the  thought  and  acts  of  Jehovah. 
Beloved,  there  is  a  mystic  unity  between  Christ 
and  the  twice-born,  into  which  I  will  not  further 
go.  I  point  to  a  casket  which  just  now  I  will 
not  unlock.  But  to  return  to  the  text,  here  is 
the  g'ory  of  it:  first,  we  are  God's  workmanship, 
and  the  peculiar  manner  in  which  we  have  been 
created  is  that  we  have  been  created  "  in  Christ 
Jesus." 


164  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

III.     We   come,   thirdly,    to    dwell    upon    TUB 

SPECIAL    OBJECT    OF  THIS  CREATION :   "  Unto    good    WOl'ks, 

which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should 
walk  in  them." 

When  Adam  was  created,  the  Lord  made  him 
for  his  own  glory.  'Phis  ever  was,  and  is,  and 
must  be  the  chief  end  of  man.  As  soon  as  he  waa 
created,  the  Lord  placed  Adam  in  the  garden,  and 
what  did  he  give  him  to  do?  "  He  had  only  to 
enjoy  himself,"  says  one.  I  do  not  read  such  a 
statement  in  the  Scriptures.  "  lie  put  him  there," 
says  another,  "  that  he  might  eat  of  every  fruit 
that  grew  in  the  garden."  Truly  he  did  permit 
him  freely  to  partake  of  all  that  nature  yielded,  but 
he  tells  us  himself  that  he  put  him  in  the  garden 
"  to  dress  it,  and  to  keep  it."  Occupation  was 
found  him  which  would  keep  him  always  busy.  A 
gardener's  business  is  healthful  and  interesting, 
but  it  offers  no  temptation  to  idleness,  for  every 
season  has  its  demands;  and  if  the  work  is  not 
kept  well  under,  it  is  hard  to  overtake  it  again. 
That  noble  man,  who  was  the  founder  of  our  race, 
trimmed  the  vine,  and  trained  the  tree,  uprooted 
the  weed,  and  planted  the  herb.  Paradise  itself 
required  to  make  it  perfect  that  a  man  should  have 
something  to  do.  Slavish  drudgery  involved  by 
unreasonable  hours  is  not  of  God,  but  of  the  cruel 
greed  of  man;  ill-remunerated  toil,  by  which  the 
worker  cannot  earn  his  daily  bread,  is  the  result  of 
human  tyranny,  not  of  divine  purpose;  but  a  fair 
share  of  healthy,  useful  labor  is  needful  for  us  all, 
and  if  ever  this  world  becomes  a  paradise  again,  we 
shall  have  each  one  of  us  to  pay  either  the  sweat  of 
our  brow  or  of  our  brain  as  the  price  of  our  bread. 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  1G5 

When  the  Lord  creates  us  the  second  time,  in 
the  second  Adam,  he  does  not  make  us  that  we 
may  be  merely  comfortable  and  happy.  We  may 
enjoy  all  that  God  has  given  us,  for  of  every  tree 
of  this  garden  you  may  freely  eat,  since  in  the 
paradise  into  which  Christ  has  introduced  you 
there  is  no  forbidden  fruit.  You  may  eat  and 
drink  abundantly  of  heavenly  food,  but  you  are 
not  created  anew  with  so  poor  a  purpose  as  your 
pleasure  only.  Around  you  is  the  garden  of  the 
Lord,  and  your  call  is  that  you  may  dress  it,  and 
keep  it.  Cultivate  it  within;  guard  it  from  foes 
without.  Holy  labors  await  you,  good  works  are 
expected  of  you,  and  you  were  created  in  Christ 
Jesus  on  purpose  that  you  might  be  zealous  for 
them.  To  you  the  great  Father  says,  "Son,  go 
work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  He  who  died  for 
you  calls  you  to  do  works  like  his  own.  The  Holy 
Spirit  within  you  prompts  you  to  consecration, 
urges  you  to  diligence. 

And  what  are  good  works?  In  that  question 
lies  another  large  subject.  Tell  me,  ye  who  talk 
so  much  of  good  works,  what  are  they?  I  should 
sa<r  that  they  are  works  such  as  God  commands 
— works  of  obedience.  When  we  heartily  keep  the 
divine  precepts,  we  must  be  right;  for  it  can  never 
be  evil  for  a  man  to  do  what  God  bids  him. 

Next,  I  should  say  that  they  are  ivorks  of  love; 
of  love  to  God,  and  love  to  man ;  works  done  out 
of  a  pure  affection  to  the  great  Father,  and  out  of 
unselfish  regard  to  men.  That  which  we  do  to 
display  our  own  liberality  is  done  unto  self,  and 
BO  is  spoiled;  but  where  there  is  a  single  eye  to 
God's  glory,  the  work  is  good.  Works  done  out 


1G6  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

of  love  to  Christ,  and  love  to  saints,  and  love  to 
the  poor,  and  love  to  lost  sinners,  are  good  works. 

Furthermore,  I  should  say  that  works  of  faith  are 
good  works;  works  done  in  confidence  in  God, 
undertaken  in  reliance  npon  his  help,  and  in  the 
firm  belief  that  he  will  accept  them  even  though 
men  might  censure  them.  The  proclamation  of 
his  gospel  with  faith  in  its  power,  the  pleading  of 
the  promise  with  expectation  of  its  fulfillment,  the 
sacrifice  of  personal  gain  for  the  service  of  truth, 
— works  such  as  these  are  good,  and  pleasing  to 
God;  for  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
him. 

I  am  bound  to  add  that  good  works  include  the 
necessary  acts  of  common  life  when  they  are  rightly 
performed.  We  are  to  produce  good  works,  in 
our  home,  in  our  shop,  in  our  work-room,  in  our 
travel  abroad,  or  on  our  sick-bed:  everywhere  we 
are  to  be  filled  with  good  works  to  God's  glory. 
All  our  works  should  be  good  works,  and  we  may 
make  them  so  ty  sanctifying  them  with  the  Word 
of  God  and  prayer,  according  to  that  precept, 
"  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do, 
do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 

Observe  that  God  has  not  created  us  that  we 
may  talk  about  our  good  works,  but  that  we  may 
walk  in  them.  Practical  doing  is  better  than  loud 
boasting.  God  has  not  created  us  that  we  may 
occasionally  perform  good  works,  but  that  we  may 
walk  in  them — that  they  may  be  so  habitual  to  us 
that  the  common  course  of  our  conversation  may 
be  full  of  them.  God  has  not  created  us  that  we 
may  execute  good  works  as  a  grand  performance, 
but  that  we  may  walk  in  them ;  not  that  we  may 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAAT.  167 

jump  up  to  them,  or  seem  to  be  walking  on  stilts, 
and  making  a  great  display  every  now  and  then; 
but  that  easily,  naturally,  out  of  a  fully  renewed 
heart,  our  new-created  spirit  may  display  itself  in 
good  works.  God  grant  that  his  holy  object  may 
be  carried  out  in  us  to  such  a  degree  that  our  path 
may  be  luminous  with  holiness,  that  we  may  leave 
behind  a  shining  track,  like  that  of  a  vessel  upon 
the  sea  !  Oh,  that  our  way  may  be  strewn  with 
gracious  acts,  as  when  a  cloud  passes  over  a  thirsty 
land,  and  blesses  it  with  silver  showers !  I  have 
known  in  a  certain  village  a  spot  called  "The 
Poet's  Walk,"  and  another  called  "The  Lovers' 
Walk."  Oh,  that  ours  may  be  "The  Christian's 
Walk"!  May  the  good  Lord  perfect  us  in  every 
good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  us  that  which 
is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight! 

IV.  And  now  I  close  with  this  last  head. 
Fourthly,  THE  REMARKABLE  PREPARATION  MADE  FOR  THAT 
OBJECT,  for  so  the  text  may  be  rendered,  "  which 
God  hath  prepared  that  we  should  walk  in  them." 

God  has  decreed  the  salvation  of  his  people;  but 
do  not  accept  that  statement  as  it  is  at  times 
delivered,  but  clearly  understand  what  it  means. 
The  Lord  has  decreed  everything,  and  he  has  as 
much  decreed  tJie  holy  lives  of  his  people  as  he  has 
decreed  their  ultimate  glorification  with  him  in 
heaven.  Concerning  good  works,  "  he  hath  before 
ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  If  God 
has  really  and  of  a  truth  met  with  you  in  a  way 
of  grace,  and  worked  upon  you  by  his  Spirit, 
and  new-created  you,  then  take  it  for  certain 
that  you  are  ordained  to  be  a  prayerful,  godly, 
upright,  sanctified  man.  The  purpose  is  one  and 


108  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

indivisible :  there  is  no  ordination  to  salvation  apart 
from  sanctification.  The  Lord  has  not  ordained 
any  man  to  eternal  life  with  the  proviso  that  he 
may  continue  in  sin.  Nay,  but  he  has  ordained 
him  that  he  shall  become  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  then  shall  forsake  his  evil  ways,  and 
walk  in  good  works  until  that  walk  shall  end  in 
perfection  befoi-e  the  eternal  throne.  Understand, 
then,  that  the  walk  of  a  Christian  man  is  predes 
tinated  of  God,  as  much  as  the  safety  of  a 
Christian;  and  so  we,  whom  he  has  predestinated, 
are  as  eager  to  fulfill  our  holy  destiny  here  as  to 
enjoy  our  heavenly  destiny  hereafter.  Foreordin- 
ation  to  holiness  is  indissolubly  joined  to  foreor- 
di nation  to  happiness.  Note  that.  Thus,  in  the 
eternal  purpose  due  provision  is  made  for  the  good 
works  of  believers. 

But,  next,  God  has  personally  prepared  every 
Christian  for  good  worlcs.  "  Oh,"  say  some,  "  I 
sometimes  feel  as  if  I  was  so  unfit  for  God's 
service."  You  are  not  unfit,  so  far  as  you  are  his 
workmanship,  created  in  Jesus  Christ  unto  good 
works.  When  God  creates  a  bird  to  fly,  it  is  the 
best  flying-machine  that  can  be  manufactured;  in 
deed,  none  can  equal  it.  If  God  creates  worms  to 
plow  the  soil,  and  bring  up  the  more  useful  in 
gredients  to  the  surface,  they  are  the  best  fertilizers 
under  heaven.  God's  purpose  is  subserved  by  that 
•which  he  makes,  else  were  he  an  unwise  worker. 
We  are  in  a  special  degree  God's  workmanship, 
created  to  this  end  that  we  may  produce  good 
works;  and  we  are  fitted  to  that  end  as  much  as  a 
bird  is  fitted  to  fly,  or  a  worm  is  fitted  for  its 
purpose  in  the  earth. 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  169 

"Oh,"  says  one,  "but  I  find  it  so  difficult  to 
walk  in  good  works."  Then  you  are  not  your  true 
and  real  self.  Pray  God  to  put  the  flesh  back,  and 
to  let  that  dead  and  carnal  part  of  you  be  gone; 
and  ask  that  the  new  life,  which  he  has  infused, 
may  have  good  scope  to  carry  out  its  own  natural 
instincts;  for  it  is  a  holy  thing  created  on  purpose 
to  walk  in  good  works,  and  it  will  do  so  if  it  be 
not  hindered.  Give  it  liberty.  Give  it  opportu 
nity.  Feed  it.  Bring  it  before  God  to  strengthen 
it;  and  it  must,  it  will,  as  certainly  produce  good 
works  as  a  good  tree  brings  forth  good  fruit. 
Spontaneous  holiness  comes  forth  from  sincere 
piety.  A  pure  fountain  yields  clear  streams,  it 
cannot  do  otherwise.  The  new  nature  cannot  sin, 
because  it  is  born  of  God.  He  that  hath  a  clean 
heart  will  necessarily  have  clean  hands.  An  im 
pure  sea  casts  up  mire  and  dirt,  but  the  river  of 
the  water  of  life,  when  it  overflows  its  banks,  de 
posits  no  mud,  but  leaves  sands  of  gold  behind  it. 

Once  more,  observe  with  content  that  everything 
around  you  is  arranged  for  the  production  of  good 
works  in  you,  "  I  do  not  see  that,"  says  one.  But 
listen.  When  God  made  Adam,  when  did  he  make 
him?  He  did  not  create  him  till  he  had  made  a 
place  for  him  to  live  in.  The  great  Father's  dear 
child  could  not  be  created  until  the  garden  had  its 
roses  blooming  and  its  fruit  ripening  for  him,  that 
he  might  be  delighted  therewith.  When  the  Lord 
God  created  you  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  you  believe  he 
did,  he  had  prepared  for  you  a  position  of  service 
and  usefulness,  exactly  fitted  for  your  capacity. 
That  place  for  the  present  is  the  position  which 
you  now  occupy.  "  No,"  says  one,  '•  but  I  am  in 


170  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

the  place  of  poverty."  That  is  it;  it  is  God's  de 
sign  that  you  may  in  that  place  produce  the  sweet 
fruits  of  contentment  and  patience. 

"Alas!"  cries  another,  "I  dwell  among  the 
ungodly."  It  is  intended  by  your  Lord  that  your 
light  may  shine  among  them,  and  that  you,  having 
your  graces  tried,  may  become  all  the  stronger 
and  the  better  man.  "Oh,"  says  one,  "I  am  a 
Christian,  but  I  believe  that  I  am  in  the  worst 
place  that  ever  was.  I  am  alone,  like  a  plant  in 
the  desert."  Is  it  not  written,  "The  wilderness 
and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them;  and 
the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom  as  the  rose"  ? 
Full  often  the  most  advantageous  place  for  our 
manhood  is  that  which  is  surrounded  with 
splendid  difficulties.  A  soldier  is  trained  by 
battles,  and  a  mariner  by  storms.  What  can  a 
man  do  when  he  has  everything  to  his  hand  ? 
Everything  is  possible  to  him,  but  so  it  is  to  every 
simpleton.  He  is  truly  a  man  who  has  nothing 
to  assist  him,  and  yet  is  aided  by  the  opposition 
which  confronts  him.  To  sail  against  wind  and 
tide  would  be  more  notable  than  to  drift  with  gale 
and  current.  Is  he  not  a  true  man  who  can  turn 
to  account  the  worst  possible  circumstances  so  as 
to  produce  the  best  possible  results  ?  He  has  an 
opportunity  for  distinguishing  himself  who  is 
placed  amid  temptations  and  perils.  In  your  life, 
good  works  are  provided  for, — "  God  hath  before 
prepared  that  we  should  walk  in  them." 

On  the  whole,  you  are  placed  in  the  best  posi 
tion  for  your  producing  good  works  to  the  glory 
of  God.  "  I  do  not  think  it,"  says  one.  Very 
well.  Then  you  will  worry  to  quit  your  position 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  171 

and  attain  another  footing;  mind  that  you  do  not 
plunge  into  a  worse.  The  wise  man  saith,  "As  a 
bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man 
that,  wandereth  from  his  place."  It  is  not  the  box 
that,  makes  the  jewel,  nor  the  place  that  makes  the 
man.  "Oh,  but  anywhere  rather  than  this!" 
Yes,  and  when  you  get  into  the  place  you  now 
covet,  you  will  pine  to  be  back  again.  A  barren 
tree  is  none  the  better  for  being  transplanted.  A 
blind  man  may  stand  at  many  windows  before  he 
will  improve  his  view.  If  it  is  difficult  to  produce 
good  works  where  you  are,  you  will  find  it  still 
difficult  where  you  wish  to  be.  He  who  said  that 
he  leaped  so  many  yards  at  Rhodes,  was  asked  to 
do  the  same  feat  at  home;  surely  the  place  could 
not  take  away  his  strength,  nor  give  it  to  him. 

Oh,  sirs,  the  real  difficulty  lies  not  without  you, 
but  within  you.  If  you  get  more  grace,  and  are 
more  fully  God's  workmanship,  you  can  glorify 
him  in  Babylon  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem.  Were 
you  placed  within  the  purlieus  of  perdition,  you 
would  glorify  God  if  God  has  sanctified  you.  If 
you  were  called  to  walk  through  Pandemonium, 
you  would  startle  it  with  a  message  from  the  Most 
High  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  truly  within  you. 
Your  present  possibilities  are  the  best  for  this 
present;  use  them  as  they  fly.  At  any  rate,  rest 
assured  that  divine  wisdom  has  not  only  prepared 
you  for  the  hour,  but  the  hour  for  you.  All  things 
are  in  a  divine  sense  your  friends;  "For  thou  shalt 
be  in  league  with  the  stones  of  the  field:  and  the 
beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with  thee." 

Moreover,  the  Lord  has  prepared  the  whole  system 
of  his  grace  to  this  end — that  you  should  abound  in 


172  THE    SINGULAR    ORIGIN 

good  works.  Every  part  and  portion  of  the  econ 
omy  of  grace  tends  toward  this  result,  that  thou 
mayest  be  perfect  even  as  thy  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  is  perfect.  I  long  to  be  holy;  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  given  to  be  my  Sanctifier.  I  desire  to  live 
near  to  God,  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  me,  and 
this  is  nearness  of  the  highest  order.  Did  I  hear 
you  sigh — "I  pine  to  know  more  of  God"?  This 
precious  book  is  in  your  hand,  and  its  Author  is 
among  us,  ready  to  expound  it  to  you.  "  Oh,  but 
I  agonize  to  conquer  sin  !  "  This  is  not  denied 
you,  for  it  is  written,  "This  is  the  victory  that 
overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  Another 
says,  "  I  yearn  to  be  more  like  Christ."  You  are 
taken  into  communion  with  Christ  on  purpose  that 
this  may  be.  Looking  at  him  you  are  changed 
into  his  image,  from  glory  unto  glory.  Everything 
needful  for  your  holiness  is  to  your  hand  in  the 
covenant  of  grace.  All  the  helps  that  you  need 
in  your  pilgrim  way  are  already  placed  along 
the  sacred  road.  The  Lord,  in  the  Scriptural  sense 
of  the  word,  "prevents"  you  with  the  blessings 
of  his  goodness.  All  events,  whether  terrible 
or  joyous,  shall  be  made  to  work  together  for  this 
highest  form  of  good,  namely,  your  sanctification. 
January's  snow,  February's  cold,  April's  showers, 
March  winds,  and  July  suns,  all  co-operate  to  pre 
pare  the  wheat  for  the  garner;  and  earthly  changes 
are  sent  of  God  to  ripen  us  for  the  eternal  future. 
Yes,  I  may  even  say  that  the  glories  of  heaven  call 
us  to  a  sublime  life  of  holiness,  and  the  thunders 
of  hell  urge  us  to  conquer  the  temptations  which 
are  in  the  world  through  lust.  The  crown  which 
Christ  holds  over  our  heads  inspires  us  with  ardor 


OF  A    CHRISTIAN  MAN.  173 

in  our  race;  while  the  cross  on  which  he  died  stirs 
us  to  a  fervent  enthusiasm  for  his  praise.  Nothing 
in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  or  in  hell,  rightly  used,  will 
excuse  us  in  lukewarmness,  but  everything  will 
impel  us  to  intense  zeal  for  holiness.  Even  the 
sin,  which  so  sadly  abounds  around  us,  should 
make  us  the  more  watchful  and  careful  in  life. 
When  dung  is  laid  to  the  roots  of  the  vine,  it  is 
not  thereby  defiled,  but  even  out  of  the  foul  decay 
it  finds  nutriment  wherewith  to  swell  its  delicious 
clusters;  thus,  even  the  wickedness  of  man,  by 
driving  us  nearer  to  our  God,  should  prove  a 
motive-power  for  producing  more  exemplary  lives 
in  the  midst  of  an  untoward  generation.  Oh,  sirs, 
if  God  calls  you  his  workmanship,  take  care  that 
none  can  justly  find  fault  with  the  Worker  !  If 
you  be  indeed  God's  creation  in  Jesus  Christ,  take 
care  that  none  despise  the  second  birth,  or  the 
second  Adam.  And  if  it  be  so,  that  the  Lord  has 
afore  prepared  all  things  that  we  may  walk  in 
good  works,  let  us  get  into  gear  with  creation;  let 
us  be  in  harmony  with  providence;  let  us  keep  step 
with  the  march  of  God's  purpose.  What  more 
shall  I  say?  I  will  only  breathe  a  wish.  Oh,  that 
you  who  have  not  yet  believed  in  my  Lord  Jesus 
would  do  so  now;  for  "to  as  many  as  received 
him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons 
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name  "1 
Amen. 


VIII. 

TO  LOVEKS  OF  JESUS:  AN  EXAMPLE. 

Read  April  12,  1885. 
"  She  had  wrought  a  good  work  on  me." — MAEK  xiv.  6. 

T  1  "'HIS  holy  woman  had  displeased  the  disciples. 
•*-  She  must  have  been  very  sorry  to  do  that. 
She  would  not  have  willfully  grieved  the  least  ser 
vant  of  her  Lord.  But  she  did  so  without  the 
slightest  blame  on  her  part:  it  was  the  unexpected 
consequences  of  a  most  blessed  action,  and  the 
fault  lay  with  those  who  complained  of  her  holy 
deed,  and  not  with  her.  I  do  not  know  whether 
all  the  disciples  felt  grieved,  but  we  are  told  by 
Matthew  that  "  they  had  indignation,"  and  he 
seems  to  speak  of  them  as  a  body;  from  which  I 
gather  that  those  who  love  Jesus  much  must  not 
measure  their  conduct  by  that  of  Christ's  ordinary 
disciples,  indeed  it  might  fare  ill  with  them  even 
if  apostles  became  their  judges.  They  must  not 
tone  down  the  fervor  of  their  zeal  to  the  luke- 
warmness  of  the  general  order  of  Christian  men: 
they  must  not  measure  the  consecration  of  their 
lives  by  the  little  which  many  professors  present 
upon  the  altar  to  God.  No,  my  brother,  or  sister, 
you  must  not  be  too  much  distressed  if  fhe  best  of 
the  household  misjudge  you,  for  it  has  happened 
<o  many  favored  ones  before  you.  Thou,  0  man, 
greatly  beloved,  canst  not  abide  to  be  lukewarm, 


AN  EXAMPLE.  175 

arid  be  not  them  surprised  if  the  lukewarm  cannot 
agree  with  thee !  Count  it  no  strange  thing  if,  in 
thy  ardor,  thou  shouldest  come  to  be  accused  of 
fanaticism,  want  of  prudence,  rashness,  forward 
ness.  Do  not  break  thy  heart  over  it,  if  they 
should  even  call  thee  mad,  or  suspect  that  thou 
hast  more  zeal  than  knowledge;  for  Mary,  whom 
we  would  be  glad  to  imitate,  came  under  this  kind 
of  censure;  and  David,  and  thy  Lord,  the  Son  of 
David,  were  each  thought  to  be  madmen. 

This  honored  woman  performed  a  notable  act, 
which  is  to  be  rehearsed  wherever  the  gospel  is 
preached,  and  yet  thereby  she  stirred  the  wrath  of 
the  brotherhood  of  the  disciples:  of  how  small  ac 
count  is  the  judgment  of  men  ! 

Chiefly  she  called  down  upon  her  head  the  censure  of 
Judas.  As  far  as  Judas  was  known  to  his  brethren 
he  was  reckoned  among  the  best  of  them.  They 
never  suspected  hirn  of  playing  the  traitor,  or  they 
would  have  caviled  at  his  being  their  treasurer: 
they  once  had  indignation  at  James  and  John,  but 
the  canny  Judas  had  their  respect.  I  should  think 
he  was  the  most  business-like  man  of  the  whole 
company — which  is  not  saying  much  for  busi 
ness,  is  it?  He  was  a  leading  spirit  among  that 
little  band.  He  was  one  who  would  be  selected 
because  of  his  prudence — and  that  is  not  say 
ing  much  for  prudence,  is  it?  Doubtless  Judas 
abounded  in  that  cool,  calculating  shrewdness  which 
makes  a  man  fit  to  deal  with  moneys  and  pur 
chases.  He  had  far  more  business  ability  than 
impetuous  Peter,  or  affectionate  John,  or  thought 
ful  Thomas.  He  was  the  right  man  in  the  right 
place,  if  he  had  but  happened  to  have  been  an 


176  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

honest  man.  Wonderful  it  was  that  he  could 
conceal  the  deep  meanness  of  his  spirit  from  all 
his  fellows  during  the  years  in  which  they  lived 
together;  but  he  had  done  so,  and  therefore  his 
opinion  carried  weight  with  it.  Among  the  apos 
tles  the  censure  of  Judas  meant  the  calm  condem 
nation  of  a  judicious  person.  His  judgment  was  not 
what  you  and  1  would  esteem  it  to  be,  for  we 
should  think  nothing  of  his  censure  now,  because 
we  know  that  he  betrayed  his  Lord;  but  the  dis 
ciples  could  not  foresee  this,  and  in  their  judg 
ment  that  which  Judas  would  condemn  must 
be  very  censurable;  at  least  it  must  be  unbusi 
nesslike;  it  must  lack  common  sense;  it  must 
be  imprudent  and  wasteful.  Was  not  Judas  the 
perfect  model  of  economy?  Was  he  not  the  sort 
of  man  who  in  these  days  many  a  father  would 
point  out  to  his  boy  as  an  example?  Hear  him 
say,  "  Boy,  if  you  want  to  get  on  in  the  world  imi 
tate  Judas  Iscariot;  he  is  the  model  man;  he  is  a 
Christian,  and  yet  he  has  a  keen  eye  for  his  own 
advantage,  and  is  a  sharp  man  of  business." 

It  was  a  hard  thing  for  a  timid  woman  to  bear 
such  a  censure  from  one  so  highly  respected  in  the 
college  of  apostles;  but  she  had  this  solace,  which 
I  warrant  you  put  quite  out  of  her  mind  all  care 
about  the  censure  of  disciples,  even  of  the  biggest 
of  them:  she  pleased  her  Master.  She  could  see  by 
the  very  look  of  him  that  he  accepted  what  his 
followers  condemned.  She  knew  in  her  conscience 
that  she  had  the  approbation  of  the  Lord,  even 
though  she  had  the  disapprobation  of  the  servants. 
And  oh,  brothers  and  sisters,  let  us  always  carry 
our  case  into  the  highest  court,  and  live  before 


AN  EXAMPLE.  177 

the  Lord,  and  not  as  the  slaves  of  men  !  If  we  are 
conscious  that  we  have  sincerely  done  what  we 
have  done  as  nnto  the  Lord,  and  if  we  feel  sure 
that  he  has  approved  our  service,  it  is  of  the  small 
est  consequence  possible  what  men  shall  say  of 
us.  Let  us  never  provoke  our  brethren  to  be  ill- 
tempered  to  us,  neither  let  us  do  anything  that  can 
be  rightly  censured;  but  if  we  have  gone  some 
what  beyond  common  custom  in  the  fervor  of  our 
spirit,  let  us  reply  with  young  David  to  his  en 
vious  brethren,  "  Is  there  not  a  cause  ? "  The 
opinions  of  other  men  are  no  rule  to  us:  we  have 
our  own  obligations  to  discharge,  and  as  our  debt 
of  Live  is  larger  than  usual,  let  us  take  liberty  to 
be  as  full  of  love  and  zeal  as  we  can  be;  only  re 
gretting  that  we  cannot  go  still  further  in  the  way 
of  sacred  service. 

"  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  do  those  who  love  Christ 
encounter  the  frowns  of  men  at  this  time?"  Oh, 
yes,  and  of  their  own  Christian  brethren  too  !  If 
you  consort  with  the  common  ruck  of  brethren, 
and  travel  on  the  road  to  heaven  so  slowly  that  it  is 
a  question  whether  you  are  going  there  at  all,  then 
you  will  escape  criticism:  if  you  keep  with  those 
who  practice  the  snail's  march  they  will  call  you  a 
good  easy  man,  a  right  respectable  person.  But  if 
you  run  for  it,  if  you  put  out  all  the  energy  of 
your  nature,  and  are  determined  to  live  at  a  high 
pitch  for  Christ,  you  will  get  the  cold  shoulder, 
even  from  many  of  his  disciples,  for  you  will  be 
practically  condemning  their  half-heartedness;  and 
who  are  you  to  be  such  a  troubler  in  Israel?  The 
more  prudent  among  your  brethren  will  say  that 
your  pride  and  the  naughtiness  of  your  heart  make 


178  TO   LOVERS    OF  JESUS: 

you  so  forward  and  presumptuous,  and  they  will 
try  to  put  you  down,  or  put  you  out.  You  cannot 
commit  a  greater  crime  against  some  people  than 
to  be  more  useful  than  they  are.  When  a  person 
reckons  himself  to  be  the  standard  of  holiness,  he 
looks  upon  one  who  excels  him  as  guilty  of  a  kind 
of  blasphemy.  If  you  outrun  others  do  not  reckon 
upon  smiles,  but  count  upon  black  looks.  You  will 
be  called  impudent  and  thought  impertinent.  Bear 
it  all  and  fret  not.  Go  thou  to  thy  Lord,  and  tell 
him  that  thou  hast  done  and  art  doing  all  thou 
canst  as  unto  him,  and  entreat  him  to  smile  upon 
thee.  Crave  his  acceptance  of  thy  poor  doings  and 
then  go  thou  about  thy  business,  occupying  till  he 
shall  come.  Sow  thou  the  seed  of  duty,  and  care 
not  whether  in  human  judgment  it  shines  or  rains. 
"  He  that  regardeth  the  clouds  shall  not  reap;"  if 
thou  regardest  not  the  clouds  at  all,  thou  wilt  do 
thy  sowing  and  thy  reaping  with  the  comfort  of  true 
faith,  and  God  will  bless  thee. 

I  am  going  to  talk  about  this  blessed  woman  at 
this  time  with  this  hopeful  desire — that  you  and  I 
may  imitate  her  ever-memorable  example.  I  shall 
have  nothing  to  say  but  to  open  up  the  meaning  of 
our  Lord,  as  far  as  I  know  it,  when  he  said,  "She 
hath  wrought  a  good  work  on  me,"  or  "in  me." 
The  passage  might  be  rendered — only  the  trans 
lators  do  not  like  to  use  the  term — "She  hath 
wrought  a  beautiful  work  on  me" — a  comely  work. 
"A  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  forever."  This  was  a 
thing  of  beauty,  which  is  a  joy  forever  to  the 
Church  of  God,  in  that  constant  memorial  of  her 
which  is  blended  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ;  for  as  long  as  the  gospel  is  proclaimed 


AN   EXAMPLE.  170 

this  Mary  of  Bethany  shall  have  a  memorial,  be 
cause  of  what  she  did. 

What  was  there  beautiful  about  her  work — the 
breaking  of  the  alabaster  vase,  and  the  pouring- 
out  of  the  liquid  nard  ?  What  was  there  beauti 
ful  about  that?  I  will  try  to  show  you. 

I.  There  are  seven  beauties  in  it,  and  the  first 
and  chief  beauty,  perhaps,  was  that  IT  WAS  ALTO 
GETHER  A  GLORIFYING  OF  JESUS.  Slie  meant  when  she 
poured  that  ointment  on  his  head  to  honor  him 
personally;  every  drop  of  it  was  for  himself,  out  of 
reverence  for  his  actual  personality. 

She  was  not  so  much  thinking  of  his  deeds  of 
love,  or  of  his  words  of  truth,  as  of  his  own 
unrivaled  and  most  precious  self.  She  had  seen  his 
deeds  of  love  when  Lazarus  was  raised,  she  had 
heard  his  words  of  truth  when  she  sat  at  his  feet: 
but  now  she  felt  an  adoring  reverence  or  his 
thrice  blessed  person,  and  she  brought  that  box  of 
precious  spikenard,  and  offered  it  to  him  as  her 
Teacher,  her  Friend,  her  Lord,  her  all.  Sug 
gestion  was  made  that  she  should  have  sold  it  and 
given  it  to  the  poor;  but  she  longed  to  present  one 
offering  to  him  direct,  and  not  by  any  roundabout 
method.  Doubtless  she  was  not  behindhand  in 
her  gifts  to  the  poor,  but  she  felt  that  when  she 
had  done  that  she  had  not  satisfied  the  cravings  of 
her  grateful  heart  towards  him  who  had  become 
poorest  of  the  poor  for  her  sake.  She  wanted  to 
give  something  to  him — something  suitable  for 
such  an  One  as  she  conceived  him  to  be — some 
thing  suitable  for  the  time  and  circumstances  then 
present  with  regard  to  him.  I  think  this  holy 
woman  knew  more  about  our  Lord  than  all  his 


180  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

apostles  put  together.  Her  eyes  had  peered  within 
the  veil.  You  remember  that  only  a  day  or  two 
after  this  he  rode  in  triumph  through  Jerusalem  a 
proclaimed  King.  Should  he  not  first  be  anointed  ? 
And  who  would  anoint  him  to  the  kingdom  visibly 
with  oil  but  this  consecrated  woman  ?  She  was 
come  to  give  him  a  royal  anoint  ing  preparatory 
to  his  proclamation  in  the  streets  of  his  capital 
city?  At  any  rate  her  spikenard  must  be  poured 
out  alone  for  Jtim.  She  forgot  the  poor  just  then 
as  she  quite  forgot  the  disciples.  Martha  was 
busy  at  the  table  waiting  upon  them  all,  disciples 
and  Master;  but  Mary  had  concentrated  all  her 
thoughts  on  Jesus.  She  "  saw  no  man  save  Jesus 
only."  Blessed  exclusiveness  of  vision  !  What  she 
did  must  not  be  for  Peter  and  James  and  John 
with  Jesus,  but  it  must  be  for  him  alone,  who 
indeed  is  alone,  above  and  beyond  all  others,  worthy 
of  a  homage  all  his  own.  Because  she  had  a  love 
for  him  beyond  all  others  that  she  had  ever  heard 
of,  her  heart  must  find  expression  in  a  deed  of  love 
which  must  be  entirely,  wholly,  only  towards 
himself. 

Now,  this  is  as  we  have  read  the  text — a  beau 
tiful  thing.  It  will  be  beautiful  on  your  part  and 
mine  if,  having  taken  care  of  the  poor  according 
to  our  ability,  having  discharged  the  claims  of  our 
relationships  to  our  fellowmen,  we  then  feel  that 
we  must  do  something  for  Jesus, — distinctly  for 
our  Lord.  Do  you  ask  me  what  you  shall  do 
for  him?  Nay,  but,  sistei1,  I  must  not  tell  you; 
your  own  heart  must  originate  the  thought,  as 
your  own  hand  must  carry  it  out.  "Oh,"  cries 
a  brother,  "  tell  me  what  I  could  do  for  Jesus ! " 


AN  EXAMPLE.  181 

Nay,  but,  brother,  I  must  not  tell  you.  The  better 
part  of  the  whole  matter  will  lie  in  the  hallowed 
ingenuity  of  your  spirit  in  inventing  something 
for  him  out  of  your  own  fervent  soul.  This  holy 
woman's  deed  had  been  somewhat  spoiled  if  there 
had  been  a  command  for  her  to  bring  the  alabas 
ter  box,  and  pour  the  ointment  on  his  head:  her 
love  commanded  her,  and  that  was  better  than  a 
formal  precept.  Her  deed  had  not  possessed  half 
its  worth  if  Simon  had  suggested  to  her,  "  I  have 
not  sufficient  spikenard  to  anoint  our  guests;  fetch 
you  a  box  from  home."  The  very  glory  of  it  lay 
in  the  spontaneous  suggestion  of  her  own  heart 
that  she  must  do  a  something  which  should  be  all 
for  Jesus. 

She  must  do  it  herself  personally,  and  not  by 
proxy;  and  she  must  do  it  unto  him  distinctly, 
directly,  openly.  Others  might  smell  the  spike 
nard.  That  she  did  not  wish  to  prevent;  but  still 
the  perfume  was  never  meant  for  them,  but  for 
him  exclusively.  She  poured  it  on  his  head;  she 
poured  it  on  his  feet;  she  would  anoint  him  from 
head  to  foot  with  this  token  of  her  intense  and 
reverent  gratitude,  and  her  boundless  love:  she 
felt  wrapped  up  in  J/im,  her  Lord  and  her  God; 
and  so  her  willing  offering  was  for  him,  and  for 
him  alone.  What  a  joy  to  be  permitted  to  do  any 
thing  for  him  whose  great  love  holds  us  fast  !  I 
feel  as  if  I  would  fain  at  once  retire  from  you  all 
to  indulge  my  heart  in  this  rare  luxury. 

Alas,  good  Lord,  how  little  hast  thou  of  this  de 
votion  in  these  calculating  days  !  Instead  of  "  all 
for  Jesus,"  how  seldom  we  do  anything  for  Jesus  ! 
Brethren,  when  you  sing  your  hymns,  do  you  "sing 


182  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

a  hymn  to  Jeans"?  When  yon  are  in  prayer,  do 
yon  pray  to  Jesus,  and/or  Jesus?  Is  it  not  written, 
"Prayer  also  shall  be  made  fur  him  continually,  and 
daily  shall  he  be  praised  "?  When  you  come  to  this 
communion  table,  I  pray  that  you  may  forget  all  that 
are  with  you  is  this  assembly,  and  cry,  "  I  will  remem 
ber  thee"  In  the  chief  place,  at  any  rate,  let  Jesus 
fill  your  thoughts.  Set  him  alone  upon  the  throne, 
and  think  only  of  eating  his  flesh  and  drinking  his 
blood,  and  receiving  him  into  your  very  self,  that 
there  may  be  a  vital  union  between  the  Christ  of 
God  and  your  own  souls.  To  my  mind  this  is  the 
beauty  of  our  fellowship  in  the  Holy  Supper,  that 
we  feed  on  Jesus  only.  Let  us  make  him  our  soul's 
sole  meat  and  drink;  and  then  let  us  live  for  him. 
my  heart  craves  now  to  know  what  I  shall  do  that 
I  may  imitate  her  who  gave  to  "  Jesus  only"  that 
box  of  spikenard,  very  costly.  Oh,  ye  lovers  of  my 
Lord  who  have  been  washed  in  his  precious  blood, 
who  owe  yo-ur  all  to  him,  think  of  his  matchless 
beauties  n.ow,  an-d  as  ye  look  up  into  that  face  where 
shines  your  heaven,  think  to  yourselves,  "What  can 
we  do  for  him — for  him  absolutely,  directly,  and 
personally?"  There  is  the  first  beauty  of  this 
woman's  act  of  homage:  it  was  for  Jesus,  for  Jesus 
only,  for  Jesus  wholly. 

II.  A  second  beauty  lay  in  this:  that  IT  WAS 
IN  ACT  OF  PURE  LOVE,  altogether  of  love  to  Jesus. 
The  other  woman — blessed  was  she  also  among 
women — I  refer  to  that  woman  who  was  a  sinner: 
she  also  came  and  brought  an  alabaster  box,  and 
did  much  the  same  thing  as  this  Mary  of  Bethany. 
But  she  did  what  Mary  did  not  do:  she  mingled 
weeping  with  her  ointment:  she  washed  his  feet 


AN  EXAMPLE.  183 

with  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the   hairs  of  her 
head.     That  was  a  beautiful  act  in  its  own  way, 
but  Mary's  deed  is  a  beautiful  thing  in  another  way. 
In  this  lies  the  distinction:  there  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  in  Mary's  act  any  remembrance  of  per 
sonal  sin,  though,    doubtless,  that  feeling  was  in 
her  heart,  and  had  brought  her  to  the  higher  stage 
of  adoration  of  her  pardoning  Lord.     Her  sin  was 
put  away  long  ago.     Mary  had  sat  at  Jesus'  feet, 
and  had  chosen  the  good  part,  and  the  matter  of 
pardon  for  sin  had  been   transacted  a  long  while 
before;   and  now,  although  in   her  heart  there  is 
deep  gratitude  for  it,  and  for  the  raising  of  her  dear 
brother  Lazarus,  yet  it  seems  to  be  quite  absorbed 
in  the  deeper  thought  of  her  soul,  for  she  had  at 
tained  to  an  all-consuming  love  of  himself.     She 
never  would  have  known  that  kind  of  love  if  she 
had  not  learned  to  sit  at  his  feet;    but   to   sit  long 
there    has   a   wonderful  operation   on  the   human 
mind:  it  causes  even  things  that  are  good  in  them 
selves  to   be  overshadowed  by   matters   that  are 
higher  and  less  in  relation  to  self.     It  is  a  blessed 
thing  to  love  Christ  because  we  escape  from  hell  by 
him;  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  love  Christ  because  he 
has  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers; 
but  it  is  a  still  higher  thing  to  forget  yourself,  and 
to  contemplate  with  delight  the  ineffable  perfections 
of  him  whom  heaven  and  earth  acknowledge  to  be 
chief  among  ten   thousand,  and  altogether  lovely. 
"  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us;"   here  we 
begin,  and  this  beginning  always  remains;   but  on 
it  we  pile  tier  after  tier  of  precious  stones  of  love, 
which  are  crowned  with  pinnacles  of  inexpressible 
affection  for  the  great  Lord  himself.     He  in  him- 


184  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

self  has  won  our  hearts,  and  carried  our  spirits  by 
storm,  and  now  we  must  do  something  which  shall 
express  our  love  to  him.  That  love  is  not  alone  a 
gratitude  for  benefits  received  from  him,  but  an 
intense  affection  for  his  glorious,  adorable  person. 

Come,  dear  friends,  do  you  feel  that  kind  of  emo 
tion  in  your  hearts  at  this  time  ?  Do  you  even  now 
feel  that  so  perfectly  has  Christ  won  the  verdict  of 
your  understanding,  so  completely  has  he  bound  iu 
sii-ken  fetters  every  movement  of  your  affections, 
that  you  want  to  be  doing  something  which  shall 
have  but  this  one  aim,  to  express  your  love  to  him 
who  has  made  you  what  you  are?  Indulge  the 
emotion,  crown  it  with  action,  continue  it  through 
life.  In  this  point  be  not  slow  to  be  imitators  of 
the  sister  of  Martha  and  Lazarus.  0  sweet  love 
of  Jesus,  come  and  fill  our  souls  to  the  brim,  and 
run  over  in  delicate  personal  service ! 

III.  The  third  beauty  of  the  action  was  that  IT 
WAS  DONE  WITH  CONSIDERABLE  SACRIFICE.  There  was  an 
expense  about  it,  and  that  of  no  trifling  character 
to  a  woman  who  was  neither  queen  nor  princess. 
I  shall  always  feel  obliged  to  Judas  for  figuring  up 
the  price  of  that  box  of  costly  nard.  lie  did  it  to 
blame  her,  but  we  will  let  his  figures  stand,  and 
think  the  more  of  her  the  more  he  put  down  to 
the  account  of  waste.  I  should  never  have  known 
what  it  cost,  nor  would  you  either,  if  Judas  had 
not  marked  down  in  his  pocket-book  that  it  "  might 
have  been  sold  for  much."  Mow  he  grudged  that 
"  much."  He  calculated  the  value  at  three  hundred 
pence.  He  did  well  to  put  it  in  pence,  for  his  sor 
did  soul  reveled  in  small  moneys  which  make  up 
the  pounds.  Pence,  indeed,  when  the  expense  is 


AN   EXAMPLE.  185 

for  him  to  whom  the  silver  and  the  gold  belong! 
Yet  I  like  his  calculation  in  pence,  for  it  is  sugges 
tive,  since  a  Roman  penny  was  a  day's  wages; 
and  take  a  day's  wages  now — say  4s. — and  you 
get  some  £00.  It  was  a  large  sum  of  money  for  a 
woman  in  her  state  of  life  in  Bethany.  It  was  £10 
of  their  money,  but  money  then  was  of  a  different 
value  from  what  it  is  now,  and  it  was  a  great 
sum  for  her  to  expend  in  one  single  deed  of  love. 
Her  gift  was  costly,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  deserved 
to  be  served  at  the  best  rate,  and  at  the  highest  cost. 
There  was  a  woman  who  served  the  Lord  at  a 
higher  rate  than  this:  she  only  spent  two  mites  in 
the  doing  of  it,  but  then  you  know  it  was  all  that 
she  had.  I  do  not  know  how  much  Mary  had,  but 
I  feel  persuaded  that  is  was  pretty  well  all  she  had, 
and  that  all  she  could  get  together  seemed  to  her 
to  be  far  too  little  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If 
his  head  was  to  be  anointed,  plenty  of  ordinary  oil 
might  have  been  procured  at  Bethany.  The  Mount 
of  Olives  was  hard  by.  But  she  would  have  scorned 
the  thought  of  pouring  common  olive  oil  on  him: 
she  must  find  an  imperial  unguent  such  as  Caesar 
might  have  accepted.  If  he  is  to  be  anointed,  there 
is  nard  to  be  bought  in  the  bazaars  at  Jerusalem 
at  a  very  reasonable  rate.  Why  must  yon,  Mary, 
seek  after  this  liquid  ointment  of  the  East,  this 
otto  distilled  from  myriads  of  roses,  of  which  it 
needs  leagues  of  gardens  to  make  a  drop?  Why 
must  you  buy  the  "  very  precious"  nard,  and  spend 
such  a,  deal  of  money  upon  that  which  will  only  last 
half  an  hour,  and  then  the  wind  will  have  carried 
it  away,  and  its  perfume  will  have  vanished  ? 
Ay,  but  the  glory  of  service  to  Christ  is  to  serve 


186  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

him  with  the  best  of  the  best!  He  deserves, 
if  we  serve  him  with  sermons,  that  we  preach 
the  best  discourses  mind  can  frame  or  tongue 
deliver-  or  if  we  serve  him  with  teaching  in  the 
class,  he  deserves  that  \ve  teach  in  the  tendeivst 
fashion,  and  feed  his  lambs  with  the  best  of  the 
grass;  or  if  we  serve  him  with  the  pen,  that  we  write 
not  a  line  that  may  need  to  be  erased;  or  it  we 
served  him  with  money,  that  we  giv7e  with  liberality 
of  the  best  we  have,  and  much  of  it.  We  must  see 
to  it  that  in  everything  we  do  not  serve  Christ  with 
the  lean  sheep  of  the  flock,  or  with  such  as  are 
wounded,  and  broken,  and  torn  by  beasts;  but  that 
he  hath  the  fat  of  our  offerings.  We  should  not  be 
content  if  we  are  rich  to  give  him  out  of  our  estate 
the  cheese-parings  and  candle-ends,  such  as  we  dare 
not  keep  back  for  very  shame.  Usual  donations 
have  little  beauty  in  them — those  moneys  dragged 
out  of  people  by  importunity — that  guinea  dribbled 
out  by  custom  because  it  is  a  respectable  amount. 
There  is  nothing  to  satisfy  love  in  the  slender  obla 
tions  which  come  forth  like  an  unwilling  taxation, 
which  a  miser  could  scarce  withhold.  But  oh,  to 
give  to  the  Lord  Jesus  freely,  richly,  whatever  it 
is  with  which  he  has  entrusted  us,  whether  it  be 
gold  or  genius,  time  or  words — whether  it  be  the 
minted  coinage  of  the  purse,  or  the  living  courage 
of  a  loving  heart,  or  the  labor  of  an  earnest  hand  ! 
Let  us  give  our  Well-beloved  the  best  we  have,  and 
he  will  call  it  beautiful.  Mary's  gift  was  all  for 
him,  and  all  for  love,  and  it  was  done  at  great  ex 
pense,  and  therefore  it  was  beautiful. 

IV.     Next,  remember,  that  part  of  the  beauty  of 
Mary's   action  lay  in  this,   that  IT  WAS  DONE  WITH 


AN  EXAMPLE.  187 

PREPARATION.  We  are  told  by  John  what  we  should 
not  else  have  known,  "  Against  the  day  of  my 
burying  hath  she  kept  this."  "Kept  this."  It  was 
not  that  seeing  Jesus  there  at  the  feast,  and  being 
seized  with  a  sudden  thought,  she  rushed  back  to 
her  stores,  and  fetched  out  the  little  vase  of  spike 
nard,  and  broke  it  in  a  passion  of  affection,  which 
in  cooler  moments  she  might  regret.  Far  from  it: 
she  was  now  consumm.'iting  the  long  thought  of 
weeks  and  months.  We  have  known  warm- 
spirited  brethren  and  sisters  both  say  and  do  and 
give  grandly,  under  a  certain  spur  and  impulse, 
what  they  never  thought  of  doing  when  they 
entered  into  the  assembly.  I  shall  not  blame 
them;  rather  do  I  commend  them  for  obeying  gra 
cious  impulses;  but  it  is  not  the  best  way  of  doing 
service  to  our  ever-blessed  Master.  Passion  seldom 
gives  so  acceptably  as  principle.  Mary  did  not 
perform  a  thoughtless  action  under  a  tempestuous 
force  of  unusual  zeal.  No,  she  had  ~kept  this.  She 
had  kept  this  choice  unguent  on  purpose  till  a  fit 
ting  time  should  come  for  putting  it  to  its  most 
appropriate  use.  My  own  belief  is  that  when  she 
sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  she  learned  much  more  than  any 
of  the  disciples  had  ever  gathered  from  his  public 
preaching.  She  had  heard  him  say  that  the  Son 
of  man  would  be  delivered  to  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  and  that  he  would  be  spat  upon  and 
scourged,  and  they  would  put  him  to  death,  and 
the  third  day  he  would  rise  again;  and  she  believed 
it.  She  thought  it  over,  and  she  studied  it,  and 
made  out  more  of  the  meaning  of  it  than  any  one 
of  the  apostles  had  done.  She  said  to  herself — He 
is  going  to  die  as  a  sacrifice  at  the  hands  of  wicked 


188  TO    LOVERS    OF    JF.SL'S. 

men,  and  I  will,  therefore,  render  him  special 
honor.  I  should  not  wonder  if  she  began  to  read 
the  Old  Testament  with  that  light,  "This  is  he 
whom  God  hath  sent,  upon  whom  he  hath  laid  the 
iniquities  of  us  all,  and  he  shall  be  given  up  to 
judgment,  and  he  shall  bear  the  sin  of  many." 
Then  she  thought  within  herself,  "  If  that  is  so,  I 
will  get  the  spikenard  ready  to  anoint  him  for  his 
burial."  Perhaps  she  intended  an  much  as  that, 
for  so  the  Lord  himself  interpreted  the  deed.  At 
any  rate,  she  thought,  "Alas,  for  my  Lord!  If 
he  dies  he  will  need  to  be  embalmed,  and  I  will 
be  ready  to  aid  in  his  burial."  Therefore  she  kept 
this. 

"Against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath  she  kept 
this."  Brethren,  there  is  great  beauty  in  an  action 
which  is  the  outcome  of  a  long  time  of  loving  care 
ful  consideration.  It  is  ill  to  delay  a  good  deed 
which  might  be  done  at  once;  but  if  a  deed  must 
be  delayed,  it  is  well  to  be  doing  it  at  once  by 
preparing  for  it.  When  a  person  feels,  "The  time 
is  not  yet,  but  1  will  be  prepared  when  it  does 
come,"  it  shows  that  the  heart  is  occupied  with  a 
love  of  a  very  engrossing  character.  We  sing — 

"  Oh  what  shall  I  do 
My  Saviour  to  praise  ?  " 

And  it  were  well  if  the  question  were  constantly 
in  our  minds.  Let  each  man  resolve  in  his  heart, — 
I  will  not  offer  my  Lord  the  hasty  fruit  of  impulse, 
or  that  which  shall  cost  me  nothing,  but  I  will 
consider  what  I  can  do  for  him.  Of  what  will 
there  be  a  need?  In  what  direction  can  I  do  him 
homage  where  else  he  might  lack  that  honor  ?  I 


AN  EXAMPLE.  IRQ 

will  turn  it  over,  and  meditate,  and  consider,  and 
then  I  will  perform.  This  last  the  preacher  would 
repeat  with  emphasis,  for  oh,  my  brothers,  it  is  a 
custom  with  many  of  us  to  get  a  grand  thought 
and  then  as  we  turn  it  over  to  let  it  evaporate 
without  its  leaving  even  a  drop  of  practical  result 
behind !  This  holy  woman  was  no  mere  planner 
and  purposer,  but  a  doer  of  holy  deeds.  She  could 
keep  her  alabaster  box  as  long  as  was  prudent,  and 
yet  she  did  not  arrive  at  the  tempting  conclusion 
to  keep  it  altogether.  She  allowed  her  heart  to 
weigh  the  project;  and  the  more  she  weighed  it, 
she  became  the  more  resolved  to  do  it — to  do  it 
when  the  due  time  came.  When  she  believed  that 
the  hour  had  come  she  did  not  delay  for  an  instant. 
She  was  as  prompt  as  she  had  been  thoughtful. 
The  passover  was  drawing  very  near;  it  was  with 
in  six  days,  and  so  she  brought  out  what  she  had 
held  in  reserve.  Blessed  are  the  punctualities  of 
service  which  are  the  result  of  earnest  endeavor 
to  honor  the  Lord  in  the  best  possible  way. 

There  is  something  beautiful  in  seeing,  as  we 
have  seen,  some  poor  woman  saving  her  littles, 
and  putting  them  by  for  years  till  she  could  ac 
complish  a  secret  purpose  by  which  Jesus  would 
be  glorified.  It  is  striking  to  see,  as  you  and  I  did 
see,  a  woman  of  moderate  wealth  discarding  all 
the  comforts  of  life  that  she  might  save  sufficient 
that  there  might  be  an  orphanage  in  which  chil 
dren  might  be  cared  for;  not,  as  she  said,  for  the 
children's  sake,  but  for  Christ's  sake,  that  he  might 
be  glorified.  The  Stockwell  Orphanage  is  the 
alabaster  box  which  a  devout  woman  presented  to 
her  Lord.  Her  memory  is  blessed.  Its  perfume 


190  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

is  recognized  in  all  parts  of  the  earth  at  this  mo 
ment,  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  she  loved.  Such 
a  thoughtful  deed  is  what  Jesus  would  call  a 
beautiful  tiling.  Let  us  abound  in  such  beautiful 
things.  For  a  man  to  say,  "  There  will  come  a 
crisis  when  I  shall  have  to  stand  out  for  God  and 
his  truth,  and  it  will  be  a  serious  loss  to  me,"  and 
then  so  to  ponder  it  as  to  be  almost  eager  for.  the 
occasion,  is  a  beautiful  thing.  To  feel  like  the 
Lord  Jesus,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with, 
and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished  !  " 
is  a  beautiful  thing.  Courageous,  self-sacrificing 
decision  for  the  truth  is  a  beautiful  thing,  when  its 
action  is  well  considered,  and  carried  out  with 
enthusiasm.  God  give  us  to  mix  thought  and 
impulse,  reason  and  affection,  and  thus  serve  him 
both  with  the  mind  and  the  heart  ! 

V.  There   is  a   fifth   point  of  beauty,   MARY  DID 

HER    GREAT    DEED    WITHOUT  A    WORD.        Deal1    sistei'S,  you 

will  pardon  me  for  commending  this  holy  woman 
for  her  wise  and  fitting  silence  all  through  her 
gracious  act.  She  did  not  talk  about  it  beforehand, 
she  said  not  a  word  while  she  did  it,  and  she  said 
nothing  afterwards.  Martha  was  the  worker,  and 
rather  the  talker  too;  but  I  think  that  all  you  will 
find  Mary  saying  is,  "Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here, 
my  brother  had  not  died;"  and  she  was  so  scant 
of  words  that  she  had  to  borrow  those  from  Martha. 
Martha  said  a  great  deal  more  than  that;  but 
Mary  was  quite  satisfied  to  be  as  brief  as  possible. 
She  was  a  great  thinker,  a  great  sitter  at  Jesus' 
feet,  and  a  great  learner,  but  not  a  great  talker. 
When  the  time  came  she  was  a  great  worker,  for 
it  is  very  curious,  though  Martha  bears  the  palm 


AN  EXAMPLE.  191 

for  work  in  our  ordinary  talk,  yet  Mary,  the  thinker, 
did  more  than  Martha,  the  worker.  "She,"  said 
Christ,  '•  hath  wrought  a  good  work  on  me,"  which 
he  never  said  of  Martha,  good  as  Martha  was.  He 
a  little  censured  the  elder  sister  for  being  cumbered 
with  much  serving;  but  Mary's  work  he  commended 
and  decreed  that  it  should  be  remembered  as  long 
as  the  world  stands.  Though  she  does  not  bear 
the  name  of  a  worker  in  the  vulgar  judgment,  yet 
is  she  the  queen  in  the  kingdom  of  good  works. 
Yet,  I  remind  you,  she  did  not  say  a  word.  There 
is  such  a  thing  at  spoiling  what  you  do  by  making 
so  great  a  fuss  before  you  do  it,  that  when  the 
mouse  is  born  people  are  only  astonished  that  such 
a  small  creature  should  be  the  only  fruit  of  the 
dreadful  throes  of  the  mountain.  Moreover,  there 
is  such  a  thing  as  talking  so  much  afterwards  of 
what  we  have  done  that  it  spoils  it  all.  It  seems 
as  if  we  must  let  all  the  world  know  something 
about  ourselves;  whereas  the  joy  and  bliss  of  it  all 
is  not  to  let  yourself  be  seen,  but  to  let  the  oil  go 
streaming  upon  the  Master  till  he  is  anointed  with 
perfume,  and  we  ourselves  sink  back  into  our 
natural  insignificance.  Silent  acts  of  love  have 
musical  voices  in  the  ear  of  Jesus.  Sound  no 
trumpet  before  thee,  or  Jesus  will  take  warning 
and  be  gone. 

If  we  could  all  do  more  and  talk  less  it  might  be 
a  blessing  to  ourselves  at  least,  perhaps  to  others. 
Let  us  labor  in  our  service  for  the  Lord  to  be  more 
and  more  hidden;  as  much  as  the  proud  desire  to 
catch  the  eye  of  man,  let  us  endeavor  to  avoid  it. 

"I  should  like  to  know,"  says  one,  "how  to  do 
holy  work."  Go  and  do  it,  and  consult  not  with 


102  TO    LOVERS    OF    JESUS: 

flesh  and  blood.  "  I  have  done  ray  work,  and  now 
I  should  dearly  like  to  hear  what  you  think  of  it." 
Ton  should  rise  above  such  idle  dependence  upon 
man's  opinion;  what  matters  it  to  you  what  your 
fellow-servant  thinks?  To  your  own  Master  you 
stand  or  fall.  If  you  have  done  a  good  thing  doit 
again.  You  know  the  story  of  the  man  who  comes 
riding  up  to  the  captain,  and  says,  "Sir,  we  have 
taken  a  gun  from  the  enemy."  "  Go  and  take  an 
other,"  said  the  matter-of-fact  officer.  That  is  the 
best  advice  which  I  can  render  to  a  friend  who  is 
elated  with  his  own  success.  So  much  remains  to 
be  accomplished  that  we  have  no  time  to  consider 
what  has  been  done.  If  we  have  done  holy  service, 
let  ns  do  it  a  second  time,  and  do  it  a  third  time, 
and  continue  to  do  it,  ever  praying  the  Lord  to 
accept  our  persevering  service.  In  any  case  let 
our  consecrated  life  be  for  our  Lord's  eye  alone,  a 
spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed.  Anything  like 
sounding  a  trumpet  before  us  is  hateful  r.o  the  lowly 
Lord ;  secrecy  has  a  charm  for  Jesus,  and  the  more 
carefully  we  preserve  it  the  better. 

VI.  Next,  and  sixthly,  there  was  this  beauty 
about  the  action  of  Mary — that  SHE  DID  IT  IN  REFER- 
JINCE  TO  OUR  LORD'S  DEATH.  The  disciples  shrank  from 
thinking  of  that  sad  subject.  Peter  said,  "  That 
be  far  from  thee,  Lord."  But  Mary,  bearing  her 
Master's  heart  very  near  her  own,  and  sympathiz 
ing  with  him  in  his  glorious  enterprise,  instead  of 
drawing  back  from  the  thought  of  that  death,  per 
formed  her  work  in  connection  with  it.  I  am  not 
certain  to  what  degree  she  was  conscious  that  it 
was  so,  but  there  is  the  fact, — the  anointing  had 
reference  to  the  burial  of  the  Lord.  It  seems  to 


AN  EXAMPLE.  193 

me  that  the  best  and  the  tenderest  duty  that 
Christians  do  for  their  Lord  Jesus  is  that  which 
is  touched  with  the  blood-mark — which  bears  the 
stamp  of  the  cross.  The  best  preaching  is,  "  We 
preach  Christ,  crucified."  The  best  living-  is,  "  We 
are  crucified  with  Christ."  The  best  man  is  a 
crucified  man.  The  best  style  is  a  crucified  style: 
may  we  drop  into  it !  The  more  we  live  beholding 
our  Lord's  unutterable  griefs,  and  understanding 
how  he  has  fully  put  away  our  sin,  the  more  holi 
ness  shall  we  produce.  The  more  we  dwell  where 
the  cries  of  Calvary  can  be  heard,  where  we  can 
view  heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell,  all  moved  by  his 
wondrous  passion — the  more  noble  will  our  lives 
become.  Nothing  puts  life  into  men  like  a  dying 
Saviour.  Get  you  close  to  Christ,  and  carry  the 
remembrance  of  him  about  you  from  day  to  day, 
and  you  will  do  right  royal  deeds.  Come  let  us 
slay  sin,  for  Christ  was  slain.  Corne,  let  us  bury 
all  our  pride,  for  Christ  was  buried.  Come,  let  us 
rise  to  newness  of  life,  for  Christ  has  risen.  Let 
us  be  united  with  our  crucified  Lord  in  his  one 
great  object;  let  us  live  and  die  with  him,  and  then 
every  action  of  our  lives  will  be  very  beautiful. 

VII.  The  seventh  beauty,  to  my  mind,  is  this: 
you  may  think  it  a  little  far  fetched,  but  I  cannot 
help  mentioning  it,  for  it  touches  my  heart.  I 
believe  that  MARY  HAD  IN  THIS  ANOINTING  OF  THE  SAVIOUR 

SOME  LITTLE  GLIMPSK  OF  HIS  RESURRECTION  FROM  THE  DEAD, 

and  of  his  after-existence.  For  I  would  ask  of 
you, — Why  do  nations  at  all  embalm  their  dead  ? 
Why  not  consume  them  in  the  fire  ?  A  mysterious 
something  makes  the  ordinary  Christian  man  shud 
der  at  the  thought  of  cremation.  That  must  surely 


194  TO    LOVERS    OF    JESUS: 

bean  acquired  taste:  unsophisticated  nature  does  not 
court  the  furnace,  or  covet  the  flame;  we  prefer  to  lie 
beneath  the  green  hillock  with  our  fathers.  Many 
nations  of  antiquity,  and  especially  the  Egyptians 
and  other  orientals,  took  great  care  to  anoint  the 
bodies  of  the  departed  with  precious  perfumes,  and 
to  lay  them  asleep  in  gums  and  fine  linen.  What 
for?  Because  there  darkly  shone  upon  their  minds 
some  thought  of  the  hereafter.  There  remained 
with  man,  long  after  the  fall,  a  glimmering,  unde 
fined  belief  in  immortality.  That  truth  was  so  uni 
versally  received  that  the  Old  Testament  takes  it 
for  granted.  The  existence  of  God  and  the  immor 
tality  of  the  soul  lie  at  the  basis  of  Old  Testament 
teaching.  The  after-life  of  the  body  was  accepted 
also  in  a  manner  more  or  less  clear.  Immortality 
was  not  brought  to  light,  but  there  it  was,  and 
they  who  reject  that  doctrine  go  back  into  a  dark 
ness  denser  than  that  in  which  the  heathens  them 
selves  dwelt.  Why  did  the  Egyptian  king  embalm 
his  father,  and  lay  him  in  spices,  but  that  he  thought 
that  somehow  or  other  there  was  another  life,  and 
he  would,  therefore,  take  care  of  the  body  ?  They 
would  not  have  wasted  precious  linen,  and  gems,  and 
spices,  if  they  had  thought  that  the  body  was  mere 
rottenness  for  worms  to  consume  forever.  Mary 
had  deeper  and  clearer  thoughts  than  that,  for  she 
expected  that  something  would  happen  to  that 
blessed  body  after  Christ  had  died;  and  she  must, 
therefore,  anoint  it,  and  bring  the  most  precious 
spices  that  she  could  procure  for  his  burial.  At 
any  rate,  let  your  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be 
the  service  of  a  risen  Christ.  Come  not  hither 
to  worship  one  who  died  years  ago — a  hero  of 


AN  EXAMPLE.  195 

the  past;  but  come  to  adore  the  ever-living 
Jesus. 

"  He  lives,  your  great  Kedeemer  lives." 

He  will  certainly  come  in  his  own  person  to 
reward  his  saints;  and  ere  he  comes  he  sees  what 
you  are  doing.  "  We  live,"  said  one,  "  in  the  great 
Taskmaster's  eye."  1  care  not  for  that  title.  I 
have  no  Taskmaster.  It  is  far  more  an  impulse 
to  my  life  that  I  live  within  the  sight  of  him 
whom,  having  not  seen,  I  love,  because  he  loved 
me  and  gave  himself  for  me.  If  this  does  not 
quicken  you,  what  will  ?  If  this  does  not  nerve 
you  to  tireless  diligence  in  holy  service,  what  can? 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lives.  Let  us  find  some 
way  of  anointing  his  dear  and  reverend  head — 
some  way  of  crowning  him  who  wore  the  crown 
of  thorns  for  our  sake.  Ours  it  is  to  know  that  he 
lives,  and  that  we  live  in  him.  On  him  would  we 
expend  the  full  force  of  our  being,  counting  it  all 
joy  to  spend  and  to  be  spent  for  his  sake. 

I  am  not  going  to  stir  you  up,  my  fellow 
Christians,  to  do  anything  for  Christ,  for  I  fear  to 
spoil  the  freeness  of  your  love's  life.  I  do  not 
want  to  be  pleading  with  you  to  enter  into  his 
service  more  fully;  for  the  work  of  pressed  men 
is  never  so  much  prized  as  that  of  happy  volunteers. 
Yet  as  I  love  you  I  would  have  you  love  your  Lord 
more  and  more.  It  is  so  sweet  to  belong  to  Christ, 
that  the  more  fully  we  can  belong  to  him  the  more 
free  we  are.  Like  that  of  Paul,  where  he  calls 
himself  the  doulos  of  Christ,  the  slave  of  Jesus. 
He  says  exultingly,  "  Let  no  man  trouble  me.  1 
bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  as  if 


196  TO    LOVERS    OF   JESUS: 

he  gloried  to  think  of  himself  as  the  branded  slave  of 
his  Lord.  He  had  been  beaten  and  scourged,  and 
he  retained  upon  his  back  the  marks  of  his  lash 
ings,  and  therefore  he  was  wont  to  say  to  himself, 
and  smile  all  the  while,  "  These  are  my  Master's; 
marks.  I  am  branded  with  his  name."  Oh,  sweet 
service,  in  which  if  it  could  be  slavery  it  would  be 
joy  !  I  would  not  have  a  hair  of  my  head  that  was 
not  my  Lord's  if  I  could  help  it,  nor  a  drop  of  my 
blood  that  did  not  flow  for  him  if  I  could  help  it. 
My  liberty — and  I  speak  for  you  all — my  liberty,  if 
I  might  choose  it,  would  be  liberty  never  to  sin 
again;  freedom  to  do  Christ's  bidding,  and  that 
alone.  I  would  fain  lose  my  free  will  in  his  sweet 
will,  and  find  it  again  as  I  never  found  it  before  in 
having  yielded  it  up  completely  to  his  command. 
I  will  not,  therefore,  so  much  intrude  upon  the 
sanctity  of  your  heart's  love  as  -to  suggest  what 
you  can  do  for  Jesus.  As  the  best  juice  flows  from 
the  cluster  with  the  least  pressure,  so  shall  the  best 
service  be  that  which  is  most  spontaneous.  Do 
not  let  me  push  you  on,  or  draw  you  on,  or  drag 
you  on ;  but  be  eager  on  your  own  account.  Say 
to  the  Lord  himself,  "Draw  me:  I  will  run  after 
thee."  Have  you  not  a  certain  private  reason  why 
you  should  love  your  Lord  better  than  any  other  of 
his  redeemed?  I  repeat  it,  I  will  not  pry  into  your 
sacred  secrets,  but  leave  you  to  commune  with 
your  own  heart,  and  with  your  Lord.  Only  let 
us  so  love  him  that  when  we  look  at  him  he 
shall  say,  "Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart,  my  sister, 
my  spouse ;  thou  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  one 
of  thine  eyes,  with  one  chain  of  thy  neck."  Then 
shall  we  know  what  to  do  for  our  Well-beloved, 


AN  EXAMPLE.  197 

and,  what  is  better,  we  shall  do  it  without  further 
exhortation. 

There  I  leave  it.     May  the  Holy  Ghost  bless  the 
word ! 

As  for  you  that  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  God 
be  merciful  to  you!  I  will  not  pronounce  upon 
you  an  Anathema  Maranatha,  but,  I  tremble  lest 
it  fall  upon  you.  I  am  sore  grieved  for  your  sakes. 
I  am,  moreover,  sore  vexed  for  Christ's  sake  that 
he  should  be  deprived  of  your  love  and  service. 
What  has  he  done  that  you  should  slight  him 
Oh,  blind  eyes  that  cannot  see  his  beauties,  and 
deaf  ears,  that  cannot  hear  the  charms  of  his 
voice!  God  be  merciful  to  you,  and  help  you  to 
trust  your  Saviour,  and  then  you  will  love  him  for 
his  salvation  !  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  saved  ones 
love  their  Lord:  it  is  a  marvel  that  they  do  not 
love  him  ten  thousand  times  more.  The  Lord  be 
with  you  for  Christ's  sake !  Amen. 


IX. 

A  GREAT  GOSPEL  FOE  GREAT  SINNERS. 
May  3,  1885. 

"This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acception,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom  I  aiu 
chief.  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first 
Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to 
them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting. 
Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wise 
God.  be  honor  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen." — I  TIM 
OTHY  i.  15-17. 

WHEN  Paul  wrote  this  ever-memorable  text, 
"This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners,"  he  placed  it  in  connection  with 
himself.  I  would  have  you  carefully  notice  the 
context.  Twelfth  verse: — "  I  thank  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord,  who  hath  enabled  me,  for  that  he 
counted  me  faithful,  putting  rne  into  the  ministry; 
who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor, 
and  injurious:  but  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did 
it  ignorantly  in  unbelief.  And  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  was  exceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  love 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  is  a  faithful  saying, 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  You  see, 
the  apostle  had  spoken  of  himself,  arid  then  it  was 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  put  it  into  his  mind  to  write 
of  the  glorious  salvation  of  which  he  was  so  not- 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  199 

able  a  subject.  Truly  it  was  a  seasonable  and 
suggestive  connection  in  which  to  place  this 
glorious  gospel  text.  What  he  preached  to  others 
was  to  be  seen  in  himself. 

When  I  read  to  you  the  story  of  Saul's  con 
version,  suppose  I  had  finished  it  by  making  the 
remark,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  you 
would  all  have  said,  "That  is  true,  and  it  is  a 
natural  inference  from  the  narrative."  Such  a 
remark  would  have  served  as  the  moral  of  the 
whole  story.  It  is  an  easy  and  a  simple  inference 
from  such  a  conversion,  that  Christ  Jesus  must 
have  come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  See, 
Ihen,  why  Paul  uttered  it  in  this  particular  place. 
He  could  not  help  bringing  his  own  case  forward; 
but  when  he  did  bring  it  forward  it  was  to  add 
3mphasis  to  this  declaration  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  It  is  rny  con 
viction  that  our  Lord  in  infinite  wisdom  intends 
that  his  ministers  should  themselves  be  proofs  of 
the  doctrines  which  they  teach.  If  a  young  man, 
a  very  young  man,  stands  up  to  tell  you  of  the 
experience  of  an  aged  Christian,  you  would  say  at 
once,  "That  may  be  very  true,  but  you  cannot  prove 
it,  for  you  are  not  an  aged  person  yourself."  If  one 
who  has  been  privileged  in  the  providence  of  God 
to  enjoy  the  comforts  of  life  stands  up  to  preach 
upon  the  consolations  of  the  Spirit  in  poverty,  you 
say,  "  Yes,  that  is  very  true,  but  you  cannot  speak 
from  experience  yourself."  Hence  the  Lord  likes 
his  servants  to  have  such  an  experience  that  their 
testimony  shall  have  a  man  at  the  back  of  it.  He 
would  have  their  lives  sustain  and  explain  their 


200  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

testimonies.  When  Paul  said  that  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  his  own  conversion, 
his  own  joy  in  the  Lord,  were  proof  positive  of  it. 
He  was  a  witness  who  had  tasted  and  handled  the 
good  Word  of  life  to  which  he  witnessed. 

Paul  went  to  heaven  years  ago,  but  his  evidence 
is  not  vitiated  by  that  fact;  for  a  truthful  state 
ment  is  not  affected  by  the  lapse  of  time.  If  a 
statement  was  made  yesterday,  it  is  jnst  as  truth 
ful  as  if  you  were  hearing  it  to-day;  and  if  it  were 
made,  as  this  was,  eighteen  hundred  years  ago, 
yet,  if  true  then  (arid  nobody  disputed  it  in  Paul's 
day),  it  is  true  now.  The  facts  recorded  in  the 
gospels  are  as  much  facts  now  as  ever,  and  they 
ought  to  have  the  same  influence  upon  our  minds 
as  they  had  upon  the  minds  of  the  apostles.  At 
this  moment  the  statement  that  Jesus  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners  has  Paul  still  at  the 
back  of  it.  "  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh."  Oh, 
you  who  are  burdened  with  your  sins,  I  want  you 
to  see  Saul  of  Tarsus  before  you  at  this  moment, 
and  to  hear  him  say,  with  a  penitent  voice,  in  your 
presence,  "The  Lord  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief."  Doubt  not  the 
statement,  for  the  man  is  the  evidence  of  it.  He 
who  saved  Paul  can  save  you:  yea,  he  is  willing 
now  to  display  his  power  upon  you.  Be  not  diso 
bedient  to  the  heavenly  message. 

But,  beloved,  if  we  have  not  Paul  in  our  midst 
to  bear  his  personal  witness,  we  have  still  many 
living  proofs:  we  have  indisputable  evidence  in 
those  that  are  still  about  us  that  it  "is  a  faithful 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  I 


FOX    GREAT    SINNERS.  201 

could  summon  to  this  pulpit  scores  who  were 
literally  the  blackest  of  transgressors,  but  they 
are  washed,  and  sanctified,  and  so  they  are  living 
arguments  of  the  Lord's  power  to  save.  Many 
also  are  now  present  who  could  not  be  numbered 
by  their  fellow-men  among  the  chief  of  sinners  in 
certain  aspects  of  the  case,  yet  they  most  willingly 
put  themselves  down  as  the  chief  of  sinners  under 
some  other  way  of  viewing  it,  and  they  bear  their 
testimony,  as  1  do  to-night,  that  Jesus  is  able  to 
save  unto  the  uttermost.  I,  who  now  stand  before 
you,  am  a  living  witness  that  Christ  Jesus  can 
save  sinners,  and  does  save  them  still.  The  Lord 
has  forgiven  and  justified  me,  and  I  have  found 
grace  in  his  sight.  In  my  case,  also,  it  is  proven 
that  it  "is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners;  of  whom  I  am  chief."  Oh,  how  I 
wish  that  my  hearers  would  believe  me  !  Many  of 
you  would  accept  any  statement  which  I  should 
make;  why  do  you  not  accept  this?  You  do  not 
think  me  a  liai', — why,  then,  do  you  not  believe 
my  testimony  concerning  Jesus  ?  He  is  as  ready 
to  save  to-day  as  he  was  of  old.  He  is  ready  to 
save  you  if  you  will  trust  him. 

The  run  of  thought  at  this  time  will  be,  first 
concerning  those  ivho  are  tJie  chief  of  sinners;  sep- 
ondly,  we  will  inquire  iclty  God  has  saved  them; 
and  thirdly,  what  they  say  when  they  are  saved. 

I.  First,  then,  WHO  ARE  THE  CHIEF  OP  SINNERS  ? 
Paul  says  that  he  was  the  chief.  I  think,  how 
ever,  that  he  was  only  one  of  the  regiment.  There 
are  different  classes  of  sinners,  and  some  are  greater 
and  some  less.  All  men  are  truly  sinners,  but  all 


202  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

men  are  not  equally  sinners.  They  are  all  in  the 
mire:  but  they  have  not  all  sunk  to  an  equal 
depth  in  it.  It  is  true  they  have  all  fallen  deep 
enough  to  perish  in  sin,  unless  the  grace  of  God 
prevent;  yet  there  are  differences  in  the  degrees  of 
guilt,  and  there  will  doubtless  be  differences  in  the 
degrees  of  punishment. 

Some  are  the  chief  of  sinners  in  the  same  way  as 
the  apostle  Paul,  for  they  have  persecuted  the  church 
of  God.  Paul  who  was  then  called  Saul,  had  given 
his  vote  against  Stephen ;  and  when  Stephen  was 
stoned,  he  kept  the  clothes  of  them  that  murdered 
him.  He  felt  that  blood  lying  upon  his  soul  long 
afterward,  and  he  bemoaned  it.  Would  not  you, 
if  you  had  been  a  helper  at  the  murder  of  some 
child  of  God,  feel  that  you  were  among  the  chief 
of  sinners?  If  you  had  been  willingly  and  willfully, 
maliciously,  and  eagerly,  a  helper  in  putting  a  man 
of  God  like  Stephen  to  death,  would  not  you  write 
yourself  down  as  a  sinner  of  crimson  dye?  Why, 
I  think  that  1  should  say,  "  God  may  forgive  me, 
but  I  will  never  forgive  myself."  It  would  seem 
such  a  horrid  crime  to  lie  upon  one's  soul.  Yet  this 
was  merely  a  beginning.  Saul  was  like  a  leopard, 
who,  having  once  tasted  blood,  must  always  have 
his  tongue  in  it.  His  very  breath  was  threatening, 
and  his  delight  was  slaughter.  He  harassed  the 
people  of  God;  he  made  great  havoc  of  the  saints: 
he  compelled  them,  he  says,  to  blaspheme:  he  had 
them  beaten  in  the  synagogues,  driven  from  city 
to  city,  and  even  put  to  death.  This  must  have  re 
mained  upon  his  heart  as  a  dark  memory,  even  after 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  fully  forgiven  him. 
When  he  knew,  as  Paul  did  know,  that  he  was  a 


FOR    GREAT    SINNERS.  •   203 

justified  man  through  the  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ,  yet  he  must  always  have  felt  a  smiting  at 
his  heart  to  think  that  these  innocent  larnbs  had 
been  worried  by  him ;  that  for  no  other  reason  but 
that  they  were  lovers  of  the  Crucified,  he  had 
panted  for  their  blood.  This  matter  of  deadly  per 
secution  placed  Saul  head  and  shoulders  above 
other  sinners.  This  was  the  top-stone  of  the  pyr 
amid  of  his  sin,  "Because  I  persecuted  the  church 
of  Christ,"  I  thank  God  that  there  is  no  man  here 
who  has  that  particular  form  of  sin  upon  his  con 
science  in  having  actually  put  to  death  or  joined  in 
the  slaughter  of  any  child  of  God.  The  laws  of  our 
country  have  happily  prevented  your  being  stained 
with  that  foul  offence,  and  I  bless  the  Lord  that 
it  is  so.  Yet  if  there  should  be  such  among  those 
who  are  hearing  these  words,  or  among  those  who 
shall  one  day  read  them,  I  must  confess  that 
they  are  indeed  numbered  among  the  chief  ot 
sinners,  and  I  pray  God  to  grant  that  they  may 
obtain  mercy  as  Saul  did. 

But  you  can  go  very  near  to  this;  in  all  proba 
bility  certain  of  you  have  done  so.  That  husband 
who  lias  threatened  his  wife  so  bitterly  if  she  obeys 
her  conscience,  that  man  who  has  discharged  his 
servant  for  no  other  reason  but  his  fidelity  to  Christ, 
that  landlord  who  has  turned  out  his  cottager  from 
his  home  because  he  held  a  religious  service  be 
neath  his  roof,  that  man  who  has  willfully  and  ma 
liciously  slandered  a  servant  of  God,  not  because 
he  did  him  any  harm,  but  because  he  cannot  bear 
to  hear  of  any  truly  following  after  Christ — these 
are  the  people  who  must  be  reckoned  among  the 
chief  of  sinners.  They  have  done  no  murder,  but 


204  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

they  have  gone  as  far  as  they  dare  to  go,  and  their 
heart  is  full  of  venom  against  the  people  of  God: 
this  is  a  grievous  crime.  Though  it  may  seem  a 
very  small  thing  to  grieve  a  pious  child,  or  to  vex  a 
poor,  godly  woman,  God  does  not  think  it  so.  He 
remembers  jests  and  scoffs  leveled  at  his  little  ones, 
and  he  bids  those  who  indulge  in  them  to  take 
heed.  You  had  better  offend  a  king  than  one  of 
the  Lord's  little  ones.  That  poor  man  in  the  work 
shop  who  has  so  hard  a  time  of  it  with  your  jests  and 
chaff,  has  a  Friend  in  the  heavens.  That  other 
man  who,  seeking  the  Lord,  has  found  the  cold  shoul 
der  in  society,  has  an  Advocate  on  high,  who  will 
not  see  him  despised  without  espousing  his  cause. 
It  may  appear  a  trifle  to  make  a  saint  the  target  of 
ridicule,  but  his  Father  in  heaven  does  not  think 
so.  I  know  this,  that  many  patient  men  will  bear 
a  great  deal,  but  if  you  strike  their  children, 
their  blood  is  up,  and  they  will  not  have  it.  A 
father  will  not  stand  by  to  see  his  child  abused, 
and  the  Great  Father  above  is  as  tender  and  fond 
as  any  other  father.  You  have  seen  among  birds 
and  beasts  that  they  will  put  forth  all  their  strength 
for  their  young:  a  hen,  naturally  very  timid,  Avill 
fight  for  her  little  chicks  with  all  the  courage  of  a 
lion.  Some  of  the  smallest  of  animals,  and  the 
least  powerful,  nevertheless,  become  perfectly  ter 
rible  when  they  are  taking  care  of  their  offspring; 
and  think  you  that  the  everlasting  God  will  bear 
to  see  his  children  maligned,  and  slandered,  and 
abused,  for  their  following  of  him?  Is  the  God 
of  nature  without  natural  affection  ?  I  trow  not. 
You  shall  rue  the  day,  sir,  in  which  you  took  up 
arms  against  the  people  of  God.  Humble  yourself 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  205 

before  God  on  account  of  it,  otherwise  you  will  be 
numbered  among  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  the  chief 
of  punishments  shall  be  meted  out  to  you. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  there  may  be  some  of  that 
kind  here;  and,  if  there  are,  I  can  only  pray  that 
the  story  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  may  be  repeated  in 
them  by  boundless  grace.  May  they  even  yet 
come  to  preach  the  gospel  which  now  they  despise. 
It  is  nc  new  thing  for  the  priest  to  be  converted  to 
Christ.  It  is  no  new  tiling  for  the  opposer  to  be 
come  the  advocate,  and  to  be  all  the  better  and 
more  powerful  a  pleader  because  of  the  mischief 
which  he  formerly  did.  0  that  the  Lord  would  turn 
his  foes  into  friends!  Godsend  it!  For  Christ's 
sake  may  he  send  it  now  ! 

Further,  among  the  chief  of  sinners  we  must  of 
course  reckon  those  who  are  guilty  of  the  coarser  and 
grosser  sins.  I  will  not  occupy  a  moment  in  men 
tioning  what  they  are,  Jbr  it  is  a  shame  even  to 
speak  of  them.  God  keep  us  from  unchastity  and 
dishonesty, — from  any  one  of  those  sins  which  are 
censurab  e  even  under  the  head  of  common  mor 
ality  ;  for  if  not — if  we  indulge  in  these — we  shall 
certainly  come  by  them  to  be  numbered  among  the 
chief  of  sinners.  I  must,  however,  mention  blas 
phemy  arid  lewd  speaking,  because  these  are  un 
happily  far  too  common.  Does  a  man  think  that 
he  can  go  on  damning  his  own  body  and  soul  in 
so  many  words,  and  never  provoke  the  Lord  to 
anger  ?  Does  he  dream  that  he  can  use  foul  and 
filthy  words,  and  wicked  oaths,  without  incurring 
sin  ?  I  believe  that  these  things  bring  the  black 
est  guilt  on  the  conscience;  for  God  has  expressly 
said  that  he  will  bv  no  means  hold  him  guiltless  that 


206  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

taketh  his  name  in  vain.  It  is  true  of  every  sin 
that  God  will  not  hold  a  man  guiltless  who  does  it; 
but  it  is  especially  said  about  this  sin,  because  men 
are  apt  to  fancy  that  words  are  of  no  great  impor 
tance,  or  that  God  takes  no  notice  thereof.  Even 
the  thoughtless  or  trifling  repetition  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord  involves  great  sin,  for  thus  a  man  taketh 
the  sacred  name  in  vain.  Yet  men  trifle  with 
that  name  in  common  conversation,  and  that  with 
fearful  frequency.  There  is  no  excuse  for  this  wan 
ton  wickedness,  because  it  brings  neither  profit  nor 
pleasure  to  the  person  who  so  offends.  What  prac 
tical  end  can  it  serve?  As  George  Herbert  said 
long  ago, 

"  Lust  and  wine  plead  a  pleasure,  avarice  gain: 
But  the  cheap  swearer  through  his  open  sluice 
Lets  his  soul  run  for  nought,  as  little  fearing. 
Were  I  an  Epicure,  I  could  bate  swearing. " 

I  am  unable  to  frame  an  excuse  for  profane  lan 
guage:  it  is  needless  willful  wickedness.  Men 
talk  so  as  to  horrify  us:  they  chill  our  blood  with 
fear  lest  God  should  take  them  at  their  word;  and 
all  for  nothing  at  all.  I  would  to  God  that  every 
blasphemer  here  (if  such  there  be,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  that  there  are),  would  abandon  that  vile,-  in 
excusable,  useless  habit,  which  lowers  men  in  so 
ciety,  defiles  them  before  God,  and  insures  their 
condemnation.  Filthy  speech  puts  those  who  are 
guilty  of  it  among  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  to  them 
will  certainly  be  meted  out  a  terrible  vengeance  in 
that  day  when  God  shall  solemnly  curse  those  who 
have  so  glibly  cursed  themselves.  It  will  be  an 
awful  thing  for  the  man  who  used  profane  impre 
cations  to  find  out  ;4t  last  that  his  prayers  were 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  207 

heard,  and  that  they  will  be  answered.  0  swearer, 
beware  lest  the  Lord  God  hear  thy  prayers  at  once 
to  thine  everlasting  confusion  !  Sit  down  at  this 
moment  in  deep  contrition,  and  weep  to  think 
of  the  many  times  in  which  thou  has  defied  the 
God  of  heaven,  and  uttered  words  of  provocation 
against  the  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is.  Not 
yet  has  he  cut  thee  down.  Oh,  wonder  of  mercy  ! 
Take  heed  to  thyself.  Above  all,  marvel  that  there 
should  be  mention  of  mercy  for  such  a  one  as 
thou  art. 

Now,  dear  friends,  there  are  other  chiefs  among 
sinners  who  do  not  go  in  for  these  grosser  sins  at 
all.  Let  me  mention  them,  for  in  this  line  I  shall 
have  to  place  myself  and  many  of  you.  Those  are 
among  the  chief  of  sinners  ivho  have  sinned  against 
great  light,  and  against  the  influences  of  holy  in 
struction,  and  gracious  example.  Children  of  godly 
parents,  who  have  been  brought  up  and  instructed 
in  the  fear  of  God  from  their  youth,  are  among  the 
chief  of  sinners  if  they  turn  aside  from  the  way  of 
life.  When  they  transgress,  there  is  a  heavy  weight 
about  their  fault,  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the 
common  sin  of  the  children  of  the  slums,  or  the  arabs 
of  the  gutter.  The  offspring  of  the  degraded  know 
no  better,  poor  souls,  and  hence,  their  transgres 
sions  are  sins  of  ignorance;  but  those  who  do  know 
better,  when  they  transgress,  transgress  with  an 
emphasis.  Their  sin  is  as  a  talent  of  lead;  and  it 
shall  hang  about  their  necks  like  a  millstone.  I 
remember  how  this  came  home  to  my  heart  when  I 
was  convinced  of  my  sin.  I  had  not  engaged  in 
any  of  the  grosser  vices,  but  then  I  had  not  been 
tempted  to  them,  but  had  been  carefully  guarded 


208  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

from  vicious  influences.  But  I  lamented  that  I 
had  been  disobedient  to  my  parents,  proud  in  spirit, 
forgetful  of  God's  commands:  I  knew  better — knew 
better  from  the  very  first,  and  this  put  rne  in  my 
own  estimation  among  the  chief  of  sinners.  It  had 
cost  me  much  to  do  evil,  for  I  had  sinned  against 
the  clearest  light.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when 
the  procession  of  knowledge  is  accompanied  by 
much  tenderness  of  conscience.  There  are  some  of 
you  unconverted  people,  who,  when  you  do  wrong 
feel  that  you  have  done  wrong,  and  feel  it  keenly 
too,  even  though  no  one  rebukes  you  for  it.  You 
cannot  be  unjust,  or  hasty  in  temper,  or  faulty  in 
speech,  or  break  the  Sabbath,  or  do  anything  that 
is  forbidden,  without  your  conscience  troubling  you. 
You  know  what  it  is  to  go  to  bed  and  lie  awake 
in  misery,  after  some  questionable  amusement,  or 
after  having  spoken  too  frivolously.  Yours  is  a 
tender  conscience;  do  not  violate  it,  or  you  will 
be  doubly  guilty.  When  God  puts  the  bit  into 
your  mouth,  if  you  try  to  get  it  between  your  teeth 
and  it  does  not  check  you  at  all,  you  must  mind 
what  you  are  at,  for  you  may  be  left  to  dash  onward 
to  destruction.  "  He,  that  being  often  reproved, 
hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed 
and  that  without  remedy."  It  puts  men  among 
the  chief  of  sinners  when  against  light  and  against 
conscience  they  deliberately  choose  the  way  of  evil, 
and  leave  the  commandments  of  the  Lord. 

Especially  is  it  a  grievous  offence  to  sin  against 
the  gentle  checking  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Have  you  not 
been  sad  offenders  upon  this  point !  You  felt  the 
other  Sunday  night  that  if  you  could  once  get  out 
of  the  chapel,  and  get  home,  you  would  bow  the  knee 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  209 

in  pvayer;  but  you  did  tiot  Yet  yon  have  felt  like 
that  many  times,  and  you  have  shaken  off  the  feel 
ing;  and  now  a  sermon  scarcely  moves  you:  it  had 
need  be  full  of  thunder  and  lightning  to  make  you 
turn  a  hair.  Truths  which  used  to  make  you  shake 
from  head  to  foot  scarcely  affect  you  now.  Take 
cai'e,  I  pray  you;  for  he  that  sins  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  may  find  himself  water-logged  by  sin,  so  as 
to  be  no  longer  able  to  move  his  vessel  towards  the 
shores  of  salvation.  Nothing  hardens  like  the 
gospel  when  it  is  long  trifled  with.  To  lie  asoak 
in  the  truths  without  receiving  it  into  the  heart  is 
sure  destruction.  To  die  on  holy  ground  is  to  die. 
indeed.  God  grant  that  it  may  not  be  so  with  any 
here  ! 

Yet  if  you  be  this  day  the  chief  of  sinners,  do  not 
despair,  nor  turn  away  in  sullen  anger;  for  we  are 
going  to  say  to  you,  at  this  hour,  in  the  name  of 
the  merciful  God,  that  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  has 
come  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  even  the  very 
chief. 

I  think  that  I  must  put  down  those  among  the 
chief  of  sinners  who  have  led  others  into  sin.  Ah, 
this  is  a  sad,  sad,  sad,  sad  subject !  If  you  have 
led  others  astray,  if  you  yourself  seek  the  Lord,  and 
are  saved,  yet  you  cannot  save  them.  If  it  be 
young  persons  whom  you  have  polluted  with  evil, 
you  cannot  take  the  wretched  stain  out  of  their 
minds.  You  can  leave  off  sowing  the  devil's  seed, 
but  you  cannot  gather  up  what  you  have  sown, 
nor  prevent  its  growing  and  ripening.  Fire  is 
easily  kindled,  but  not  so  soon  extinguished  when 
it  has  taken  hold  upon  the  fuel.  If  is  an  awful  fact 
that  there  may  be  souls  in  hell  whom  you  have 


210 


sent  there  !  It  was  a  wise  penitential  prayer  of  a 
converted  man  who  had  exercised  influence  for 
evil, — "  Lord,  forgive  me  my  other  men's  sins." 
When  you  lead  others  to  sin,  their  sins  are  to  a  large 
extent  your  sins.  They  do  not  cease  to  be  the  sins 
of'those  who  commit  them,  but  they  are  also  the 
sins  of  those  who  promoted  or  suggested  them  by 
precept  or  example.  A  bad  example,  a  lewd  ex 
pression,  an  unholy  life,  maybe  the  means  of  draw 
ing  others  down  to  perdition;  and  those  that  de 
stroy  others,  and  so  are  soul-murderers,  are  among 
the  chief  of  sinners.  He  who  uses  dagger  or  pistol  to 
the  body  is  abhorred ;  what  shall  we  say  of  those 
who  poison  human  minds,  and  stab  at  the  heart  of 
piety  ?  These  are  guiltiest  of  the  guilty.  Woe 
unto  them  ! 

Especially  must  I  rank  him  among  the  chief  of  sin 
ners  who  has  preached  falsehood, — who  has  denied 
the  deity  of  Christ — who  has  undermined  the  in 
spiration  of  Scripture — who  has  struggled  against 
the  faith,  fought  against  the  atonement,  and  done 
evil  even  as  he  could  in  the  scattering  of  skeptism. 
He  must  take  his  place  among  the  ringleaders  in  dia 
bolical  mischief:  he  is  a  master  destroyer,  a  chosen 
apostle  of  the  prince  of  darkness.  Oh,  that  he 
might  be  brought  by  sovereign  grace  to  be  among 
the  foremost  teachers  of  that  faith  which  hitherto 
he  has  destroyed!  I  think  that  we  should  do  well 
as  Christian  people  if  we  prayed  more  for  any  who 
make  themselves  notorious  by  their  infidelity.  If 
we  talked  less  bitterly  against  them,  and  prayed 
more  sweetly  for  them,  good  would  come  of  it.  Of 
political  argument  against  atheists  we  have  had 
enough,  let  us  carry  the  case  into  a  higher  court, 


FOR    GREAT    SINNERS.  211 

and  plead  with  God  about  them.  If  AVQ  use  the 
grand  artillery  of  heaven  by  importunate  prayer, 
we  should  be  using  much  better  weapons  than  are 
commonly  employed.  God  help  us  to  pray  for  all 
false  teachers  that  they  may  be  converted  to  God, 
and  so  display  the  omnipotence  of  his  love. 

I  shall  not  say  more  upon  this  mournful  matter, 
for,  indeed,  I  have  only  mentioned  these  examples 
in  the  hope  that  some  here  present  may  confess, 
"  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  preacher  means  me. 
Under  some  aspect  or  other  I  must  take  my  place 
among  the  chief  of  sinners." 

II.  Now,  secondly,  WHY  ARE  THE  CHIEF  OF  SINNERS 
so  OFTEN  SAVED  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  he 
went  into  heaven,  took  with  him  one  of  the  chief 
of  sinners  as  a  companion:  the  dying  thief  entered 
Paradise  the  self-same  day  as  our  Lord.  After 
our  Lord  Jesus  had  gone  to  heaven,  so  far  as  I 
know,  he  never  did  save  more  than  one  person  by 
his  own  immediate  instrumentality;  and  that  one 
person  was  this  very  apostle  Paul,  who  has  given  us 
our  text.  To  him  our  Lord  spake  personally  from 
heaven,  saying,  "Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou 
me?"  To  him  he  revealed  himself  by  the  way, 
and  called  him  to  be  his  apostle,  even  to  this  man 
who  truthfully  called  himself  the  chief  of  sinners. 
It  is  wonderful  to  think  that  it  should  be  so:  but 
grace  delights  in  dealing  with  great  and  glaring 
sin,  and  putting  away  the  crying  crimes  of  great 
offenders. 

The  Lord  Jesus  not  only  saved  the  chief  of  sin 
ners  but  he  was  related  to  some  of  them  by  blood. 
Look  through  the  long  line  of  our  Lord's  gene 
alogy.  You  know  that  doctrine,  the  last  invention 


212  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

of  Rome,  concerning  the  immaculate  conception 
of  the  Virgin  Mary.  I  am  going  to  tell  you  a 
doctrine  which  is  about  as  far  apart  from  that  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west.  In  the  genealogy  of  our 
blessed  Lord  we  find  the  names  of  certain  of  the 
chief  of  sinners.  Three  women  especially  hold  a 
position  in  it,  who  were  each  notorious  for  sin. 
Not  many  women  are  mentioned,  but  among  the 
first  is  Tamar,  guilty  of  incest.  The  next  is  Ruhab 
the  harlot,  and  a  third  is  Bathsheba  the  adulteress. 
This  is  a  crooked  pedigree,  an  ancestral  tree  whose 
branches  are  more  than  a  little  gnarled  and  twisted. 
Admire  the  condescension  of  our  Lord  in  coming 
of  such  a  stock.  He  came  of  sinners,  because  he 
came  for  sinners.  According  to  the  flesh  he  comes 
of  sinners  that  sinners  may  come  to  him.  There 
was  mixed  in  the  veins  through  which  flowed  his 
ancestry  the  blood  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  a  hea 
then,  brought  in  on  purpose  that  we  Gentiles  might 
see  how  truly  he  was  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh 
of  our  flesh.  I  say  not  that  there  was  any  defile 
ment  in  his  humanity,  God  forbid;  for  he  was  not 
born  after  the  manner  of  men,  so  as  to  be  polluted 
in  that  fashion;  but  still  I  say  that  his  genealogy 
includes  many  great  sinners  in  order  that  we  may 
see  how  closely  he  allied  himself  with  them,  how 
thoroughly  he  undertook  their  cause.  Read  the 
roll  of  his  ancestry,  and  you  will  see  that  David  is 
there,  who  cried.  "  Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I 
sinned;"  and  Solomon,  who  loved  strange  women; 
and  Rehoboam,  his  foolish  son;  and  Manasseh, 
"  who  shed  innocent  blood  very  much,"  and  worse 
men  than  they,  if  worse  could  be.  Such  sinners  as 
these  are  in  the  genealogy  of  the  Saviour  of  sinners. 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  213 

"He  was  numbered  with  the  trangressors."  He 
was  called  "The  friend  of  publicans  and  sin 
ners."  It  was  said  of  him,  "This  man  receiveth 
sinners,  and  eateth  with  them."  Still  he  delights 
to  save  great  sinners.  0  my  hearer,  it  will  de 
light  him  to  save  you  ! 

Why  does  he  do  it  ?  The  apostle  says,  in  the 
sixteenth  verse,  "  For  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy, 
that  in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all 
long-suffering."  What,  is  that  his  reason  for  saving 
a  sinner  ?  It  is  that  he  may  show  in  that  sinner  his 
long-suffering,  revealing  his  patience  and  forgive 
ness.  In  a  great  sinner  like  Paul  he  shows  all  his 
long-suffering,  not  little  grains  of  it,  nor  portions 
of  it,  but  all  his  long-suffering.  Is  Jesus  Christ 
willing  to  show  forth  all  his  long-suffering  ?  Does 
he  delight  to  unveil  all  his  love  ?  Yes;  for  remem 
ber  that  he  calls  his  mercy  his  riches:  "  he  is  rich 
in  mercy."  I  do  not  Hud  that  he  calls  his  power 
his  riches,  but  he  calls  his  grace  his  riches:  "in 
whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
grace."  Oh,  dear  friends,  the  Lord,  who  is  rich  in 
mercy,  seeks  a  treasury  in  which  to  put  his  riches; 
he  wants  a  casket  for  the  sacred  jewelry  of  his 
love;  and  these  atrocious  criminals,  these  great 
offenders,  these  who  think  themselves  black  as 
hell,  these  are  the  very  men  in  whom  there  is  space 
for  his  rare  jewels  of  goodness.  Where  sin  has 
abounded  there  is  elbow-room  for  the  infinite 
mercy  of  the  living  God.  Ought  you  not  to  be 
encouraged,  if  you  feel  yourself  greatly  guilty, 
that  God  delights  to  show  forth  all  his  patience  by 
saving  great  sinners  ?  Will  you  not  at  once  s«?ek 


214  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

that  all  long-suffering  may  be  shown  in  your  case? 
Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  it,  shall  be  so. 

And  what  does  Paul  say  next?  He  says  that 
the  Lord  saved  him  for  a  pattern  to  them  which 
should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting. 
For  a  pattern.  It  means  for  a  type  or  specimen. 
Paul  was  a  "proof  before  letters."  The  first  prints 
of  an  engraving  are  sharp  and  clear,  and  therefore 
they  are  very  valuable:  they  exhibit  the  productive 
power  of  the  plate  at  its  highest  point,  before  the 
surface  is  worn  down  in  the  least  degree.  Paul 
was  one  of  the  proof-engravings  taken  off  the  plate 
in  the  earliest  days,  and  under  the  most  favorable 
circumstances  for  bringing  out  every  line  of  grace. 
All  God's  long-suffering  was  seen  in  him  for  a 
pattern.  1  would  to  God  that  we  could  put,  some 
of  you  under  that  same  engraved  plate,  and  issue 
more  impressions  at  this  very  hour;  for  the  plate  is 
not  worn  out:  the  type  that  God  uses  is  as  new  as 
ever.  When  a  printer  sets  his  type,  he  sends  to 
the  author  a  sheet  to  let  him  see  what  the  type  is, 
and  he  calls  it  his  proof.  So  also  Paul  was  God's 
proof — one  of  the  first  taken  off  by  the  glorious 
machinery  of  grace  to  let  us  all  see  what  God  has 
to  say  to  us  concerning  long-suffering  love.  The 
printing-machine  is  at  work  at  this  very  moment: 
it  is  making  impressions  at  this  hour,  most  clear, 
sharp,  and  readable.  I  would  to  God  that  some 
great  sinner  here  would  be  like  the  paper  laid 
under  the  type  to  take  the  impression  of  almighty 
grace.  A  grand  edition  of  the  Work  of  Love  was 
issued  before  Paul  was  printed  off,  and  published; 
I  refer  to  the  time  when  Peter  preached  at  Pente 
cost.  Many  large  and  splendid  editions  have  been 


FOR    GREAT    SINNERS.  215 

issued  from  that  press  since.  I  see  before  me  a 
whole  library  that  God  has  printed  in  this  house — 
the  proofs  that  God  has  taken  of  late  years  from 
the  old  standing  type;  but  Paul  stands  at  the 
head  of  the  list  as  a  fine  first-proof  of  what 
God  can  do. 

Then  God  can  save  me.  I  came  to  that  conclu 
sion  a  year  ago,  and  putting  it  to  the  test,  I  found 
it  true.  Dear  fellow  sinners,  come  to  the  same 
conclusion  !  Who  are  you  ?  No,  I  do  not  ask  you 
to  tell  me.  I  do  not  want  to  know.  God  knows. 
But  I  want  you  to  come  to  this  conclusion, — "  If 
Paul  is  a  specimen  of  saved  ones,  then  why  should 
not  I  be  saved  ?  If  Paul  had  been  unique,  a  pro 
duction  quite  by  himself,  then  we  might  justly 
have  doubted  as  to  ourselves;  but  since  he  is  a 
pattern,  we  may  all  hope  to  see  the  Lord's  long-suf 
fering  repeated  in  ourselves."  Nowadays,  by  the 
Parcels'  Post,  people  are  sending  you  patterns  of 
all  sorts  of  things,  and  many  articles  are  bought 
according  to  sample.  When  you  buy  from  a  pat 
tern  you  expect  the  goods  to  be  like  the  pattern. 
So  God  sends  us  Paul  as  a  pattern  of  his  great 
mercy  to  great  sinners.  He  thus  says,  in  effect, — 
"  That  is  the  kind  of  thing  I  do.  I  take  this  rough, 
bad  material  of  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  I  renew  it, 
and  show  forth  all  my  mercy  in  it.  This  is  what  I 
am  prepared  to  do  with  you."  Poor  soul,  will  you 
not  accept  the  mercy  of  God  ?  Enter  into  this 
salvation  business  with  the  Lord,  that  you,  too, 
like  the  apostle,  being  a  sinner,  may  become  like 
him  in  obtaining  the  glorious  salvation  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin 
ners.  1  am  talking  very  plainly  and  simply  to 


21 G  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

you;  but  if  you  love  your  own  souls  you  will  be 
all  the  better  pleased  to  listen.  I  do  not  want  to 
amuse  you,  but  to  see  you  saved.  Do,  I  pray  you, 
bend  your  minds  to  this  subject,  and  learn  that 
there  is  good  hope  for  the  worst  of  you  if  you  will 
cry  unto  the  Lord. 

That  is  why  Jesus  saves  those  who  have  most 
grievously  erred,  that  he  may  display  them  as  spec 
imens  of  what  his  grace  can  do. 

"  But  1  belong  to  such  a  wicked  family,"  cries 
one.  Oh.  yes;  and  many  have  been  saved  who  be 
long  to  the  most  depraved  and  degraded  of  families- 
They  have  entered  into  relationship  with  Christ, 
and  their  own  base  condition  has  been  swallowed 
up  in  his  glory.  The  children  of  criminals  when 
converted  belong  to  the  family  of  God.  "To  as 
many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  his  name." 

"  Oh,  but  I  have  indulged  in  such  horrible  vices." 
This  is  a  sad  confession,  but  it  does  not  doom  you 
to  despair,  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  washes  away  the 
worst  of  filth.  Blasphemers,  adulterers,  drunkards, 
thieves — "Such,"  0  ye  saints — "such  were  some 
of  you,  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified"  ! 
and  why  should  not  others  of  like  character  be 
washed  and  sanctified  too? 

III.  I  must  close  by  dwelling  a  moment  on  the 
thii-d  head,  which  is  this — WHAT  THE  CHIEF  OF  SIN 
KERS  SAY  WHEN  THEY  ARE  SAVED.  What  they  say  is 
recorded  in  the  text.  1 1  reads  like  a  hymn : — "  Now 
unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only 
wise  God,  be  honor  and  glory  tor  ever  and  ever. 
Amen."  See,  the  first  word  is  "  Now"  As  soon  as 


FOR    GREAT    SIGNERS,  217 

ever  they  are  saved  they  begin  praising  the  Lord. 
The}  cannot  endure  to  put  off  glorifying  God. 
Some  one  might  whisper  to  them,  "  You  will  praise 
God  when  you  get  to  heaven."  "No,"  replies  the 
gracious  soul,  "  I  am  going  to  praise  him  now. 
Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  be 
glory  for  ever  and  ever."  Grateful  love  cannot  be 
restrained,  it  is  like  fire  in  the  bones.  Our  heart 
would  break  for  love  if  it  could  not  find  a  means 
of  expressing  itself  at  once. 

Does  another  person  whisper,  "  When  you  praise 
God,  do  not  be  too  long  about  it.  Leave  oft' as  soon 
as  you  h:ive  moderately  praised  and  adored.  Do 
not  be  forever  engaged  in  the  work  of  praise." 
"No,"  says  the  saved  man,  "I  cannot  have  done 
while  life  lasts, — 'To  him  be  honor  and  glory  for 
ever  and  ever."1  "  Not  only  forever:  that  might  seem 
to  be  long  enough;  but  u  for  ever  and  ever."  It  is 
a  redundant  expression,  such  as  enthusiasm  delights 
to  use:  it  indicates  a  sort  of  double  eternity.  The 
saved  sinner  can  never  have  enough  of  glori 
fying  the  Lord;  he  will  praise  him  throughout 
eternity.  As  soon  as  a  man  is  cleansed  from  sin, 
he  is  clothed  with  praise.  A  new  song  is  put  into 
his  mouth,  and  he  must  sing  it:  he  cannot  help 
doing  so.  There  is  no  stopping  him. 

Notice  what  titles  Paul  here  heaps  together. 
First  he  calls  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  a  King.  "  Now 
unto  the  King  eternal."  Or  apply  it  to  God  the 
Ever-Blessed,  in  his  sacred  unity,  if  you  will:  he 
callss  the  Lord  King,  for  he  would  give  him  the 
loftiest  name,  and  pay  him  the  lowliest  homage. 
He  calls  him  a  King,  for  he  had  found  him  so;  for 
it  is  a  king  that  distributes  life  and  death,  a  king 


218  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

that  pardons  rebels,  a  king  that  reigns  and  rules 
over  men.  Jesus  was  all  this  to  Paul,  and  much 
more,  and  so  he  must  needs  give  him  the  royal 
title:  he  cannot  speak  of  him  as  less  than  majestic. 
If  Jesus  is  not  King  to  all  the  world,  at  least  he 
is  King  to  the  man  whose  sins  have  been  forgiven 
him.  "  Now,"  says  he,  "  unto  the  King  eternal  be 
honor  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever." 

See  how  he  puts  it,  "the  King  eternal"  Not  a 
king  that  will  lose  his  kingdom ;  not  a  king  who 
will  cease  to  reign  or  abdicate,  or  die.  Oh,  dear 
brethren,  the  King  that  pardoned  Paul  is  a  King 
to-day,  equally  mighty  to  save.  Eighteen  hundred 
years  after  his  great  deed  of  grace  to  the  chief  of 
sinners  he  is  still  a  King. 

"  Jesus  sits  on  Zion's  hill: 
He  can  save  poor  sinners  still." 

He  sits  upon  the  throne  in  the  sovereignty  of  his 
grace,  in  the  splendor  of  his  love,  in  the  majesty 
of  his  power,  passing  by  iniquity,  transgression, 
and  sin.  Will  you  not  bow  before  him  ?  Here 
at  this  moment  J  pause  to  do  him  reverence, 
— Glory  be  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  he  is  the  King 
eternal  ! 

Then  he  calls  him  the  King  immortal.  He  is  the 
King  that  ever  lives  by  his  own  power,  and  is  there 
fore  able  to  give  life  to  dead  souls.  Blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Saviour  that  he  died  for  sinners,  but 
equally  blessed  be  his  name  that  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  sinners,  and  is  therefore  able 
to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto 
God  by  him.  The  quickened,  raised-up  spirit,  cries 
aloud,  "Glory  be  unto  the  King  immortal,  for  he 


FOR    GREAT   SINNERS.  219 

has  made  me  immortal  by  the  touch  of  his  life- 
giving  hand ! "  Because  he  lives,  we  shall  live 
also.  Our  life  is  hiddefi  in  him,  and  throughout 
eternity  we  shall  reign  with  him. 

Then  Paul  styles  him  the  King  invisible;  for  as 
yet  we  see  not  all  things  put  under  him,  and  his 
reign  is  perceived  rather  by  faith  than  by  sight. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  to  mortal  eyes  invisible,  and 
therefore  our  service  must  be  rendered  by  the  spirit 
rather  than  through  the  sense.  He  must  be  trusted 
if  we  are  to  draw  near  to  him,  and  we  must  say  of 
him,  "  whom  having  not  seen  we  love."  An  un 
seen  Lord,  who  can  only  be  known  to  our  faith,  has 
saved  us,  and  will  save  us,  world  without  end.  We 
have  not  a  king  that  we  have  seen  or  touched, 
or  whose  voice  we  have  audibly  heard;  but  ours  is 
a  King  who  is  invisible,  and  yet  moveth  to  and  fro 
among  us,  mighty  to  save.  Thanks  be  unto  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  giving  us  eyes  of  faith  to  see  him 
that  is  invisible,  and  hearts  to  trust  arid  to  rest 
upon  an  invisible  Lord! 

"  Now,  now,  now,  now,  now,  now,  now ! "  that  is 
the  word  for  every  saved  soul.  Now  unto  the  King 
eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  be  endless  glory.  Do 
not  you  respond  to  the  call  by  immediate  praise? 
Do  you  not  say,  "Awake  up,  my  glory!  Awake, 
psaltery  and  harp  "  ?  Oh,  for  a  seraph's  coal  to 
touch  these  stammering  lips  !  As  a  sinner  saved 
by  my  Lord  and  King,  I  would  fain  pour  out  my 
life  in  a  continual  stream  of  praise  to  my  redeem 
ing  Lord. 

Furthermore,  our  apostle  speaks  of  the  only  ivise 
God.  He  is  so  wise  that  he  saves  great  sinners  to 
make  them  patterns  of  his  mercy:  so  wise  that  he 


220  A    GREAT    GOSPEL 

takes  bigots  and  persecutors  to  make  them  into 
apostles;  so  wise  that  he  makes  the  wrath  of  man, 
to  praise  him,  and  the  very  wickedness  of  man  he 
uses  as  a  foil  to  set  forth  the  brightness  of  the  glory 
of  his  gvaee.  Unto  the  only  wise  God,  wise  enough 
to  turn  a  lion  into  a  lamb,  wise  enough  to  make  a 
sinner  a  saint,  a  persecutor  a  preacher,  an  enemy 
a  friend — to  him  be  glory.  Oh,  the  wisdom  of  God 
in  the  plan  of  redemption  !  It  is  a  deep  unfathom 
able.  Compared  with  it  there  is  no  wisdom  else 
where,  and  God  is  seen  to  be  "only  \vise.'' 

To  him  be  honor  cuid  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen.  Unto  him  be  glory  on  earth  and  glory  in 
heaven,  honor  from  all  of  us  poor  imperfect  be 
ings,  and  glory  from  us  when  we  shall  have  made 
us  perfectly  meet  to  behold  his  face.  Corne,  lift  up 
your  hearts,  ye  saved  ones!  Begin  at  once  the 
songs  which  shall  never  cease.  The  saints  shall 
never  have  done  singing,  for  they  remember  they 
were  sinners.  Come,  poor  sinner,  outof  the  depths 
extol  him  who  descended  into  the  depths  for  you  ! 
Chief  of  sinners,  adore  him  who  is  to  you  the  Chief 
among  ten  thousand,  and  the  Altogether  Lovely! 
You  black  sinners,  who  have  gone  to  the  very  brink 
of  damnation  by  your  abominable  sins,  rise  to  the 
utmost  heights  of  enthusiastic  joy  in  Jesus  your 
Lord!  Put  your  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  all  manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be 
forgiven  unto  you;  and  at  the  receipt  of  such  a  par 
don  you  shall  burst  out  into  new-made  doxologies 
to  God  your  Saviour.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  rea 
son  together,  saith  the  Lord:  though  your  sins  be 
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 


FOR    GREAT    SINNERS.  221 

0  ye  guiltiest  of  the  guilty,  the  apostle  Paul  speaks 
to  you,  and  stands  before  you  as  the  bearer  of  God's 
white  flag  of  mercy.  Surrender  to  the  King  eter 
nal,  and  there  is  a  pardon  for  you,  and  deliverance 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  Thirty-five  years  Paul 
lived  in  sin.  Twenty  years  after  that,  when  he  was 
older  than  I  am,  he  wrote  the  words,  "  This  is  a 
faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners; 
of  whom  I  am  chief."  Is  there  not  some  thirty- 
five-year-old  fellow  here  to-night  who  had  better 
turn  over  a  new  leaf?  Is  there  not  some  woman 
here  of  that  age  who  has  had  more  than  enough 
of  sin  ?  Is  it  not  time  that  you  turned  unto 
the  Lord  and  found  a  new  and  better  life  ?  Turn 
them,  Lord:  turn  them,  and  they  shall  be  turned  ! 
Make  them  live,  arid  they  shall  live  unto  thee, 
world,  without  end.  Amen  and  Amen. 


X. 

WHAT  IS  THE  VERDICT? 

August  16,  1885. 

"Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confi 
dence  toward  God." — 1  JOHN  iii.  21. 

CAREFULLY  observe  that  this  text  is  spoken 
to  the  people  of  God.  It  speaks  to  those  who 
are  called  "  beloved."  These  are  the  people  who 
are  specially  loved  of  God  and  of  his  people.  It  is 
a  very  sweet  and  endearing  title,  but  it  evidently 
in  this  case  belongs  only  to  those  who  are  of  the 
family  of  grace:  these  alone  can  remain  uucon- 
demned  of  their  hearts,  and  live  in  confidence 
towards  God.  I  want  you  to  observe  this,  because 
there  are  different  ways  of  addressing  diffei*ent 
people,  and  these  ways  are  instructive.  To  those 
who  are  not  yet  numbered  among  the  beloved,  we 
preach  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  a  gospel  intended  for  the  sinful,  and 
it  talks  to  them  of  pardon  bought  with  blood:  it 
is  a  gospel  intended  for  the  ungodly  and  it  speaks 
to  them  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whereby 
their  ungodly  hearts  rnay  be  renewed.  Its  tale  is 
altogether  of  grace  and  free  favor,  and  the  pass- 
ing-by  of  transgression,  iniquity,  and  sin  to  all 
those  who  cast  themselves  believingly  at  Jesus' 
feet.  That  is  the  voice  of  Scripture  to  those  who 
as  yet  are  not  beloved.  The  hope  is  that  the  Lord 


WHAT   IS    THE    VE EDICT?  2:23 

will  call  them  beloved  who  are  not  beloved,  and 
that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said,  "They  are  not 
my  people,"  they  shall  be  called  the  people  of  the 
living  God.  But  when  we  come  to  speak  to  those 
who  are  saved,  to  those  who  are  the  beloved  of 
God,  we  deal  not  with  the  pardon  of  criminals,  but 
with  the  conduct  of  children.  They  are  saved 
in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation ;  and 
therefore  we  do  not  so  much  urge  them  to  saving 
faith  as  to  the  higher  degree  of  boldness  which 
grows  out  of  faith,  to  that  confidence  towards  God 
which  is  the  right  and  privilege  of  the  heirs  of 
salvation.  We  want  them  not  only  to  know  that 
they  have  believed,  but  to  be  assured  of  it;  and  to 
enjoy  that  holy  familiarity  with  God.  that  blessed 
boldness  towards  God,  that  sweet  joy  and  restful- 
ness  of  spirit  which  are  their  privilege  as  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord.  These  enjoyments  may  be 
had  by  them  if  they  will  be  obedient  to  the  direc 
tions  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  are  laid  down  by 
the  beloved  apostle  in  this  epistle. 

As  soon  as  we  become  children  we  are  freed 
from  the  condemning  power  of  the  law;  we  are  not 
under  the  principle  and  motive  of  the  law  of 
works,  but  yet  we  are  not  without  law  unto  Christ. 
We  come  under  those  sacred  regulations  which 
rule  the  household  of  God.  We  are  dealt  with 
not  as  mere  subjects  are  ruled  by  a  king,  but 
as  children  are  governed  by  a  father.  We  come 
from  under  that  law  which  was  promulgated 
with  thunders  and  lightnings,  and  the  sound  of  a 
trumpet  waxing  exceeding  loud  and  long,  and  we 
listen  to  the  gentle  voice  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
We  come  from  under  that  law  which  did  not 


224  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

permit  even  a  beast  to  touch  the  mountain,  but 
kept  all  Israel  at  a  distance  by  bounds  set  about 
the  mount;  and  we  draw  near  with  glad  hearts 
unto  the  Lord.  We  come,  I  say,  from  under  the 
law,  and  we  feel  Ihe  sway  of  love.  ''Ye  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace,"  and,  therefore, 
sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you.  We  have 
come  into  the  family  of  God,  and  in  that  family 
there  is  a  rule  and  discipline  devised  by  love,  and 
carried  out  with  infinite  compassion.  Upon  our 
obedience  to  that  discipline  our  peace  and  pros 
perity  depend.  If  we  so  live  that  our  hearts  con 
demn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  towards 
God. 

It  appears  from  the  text  that  this  child-like 
confidence  towards  God  originally  arises  out  of  a 
certain  solemn  trial  of  our  case.  There  is  to  be  a 
trial  within  the  heart,  or  conscience,  a  trial  in 
which  every  power  of  the  inner  nature  is  to  take 
its  part  as  prosecutor,  witness,  jury,  or  judge. 
Out  of  this  trial  comes  the  non-condemnation 
which  gives  birth  to  "  confidence  toward  God." 
At  this  time  I  shall  bring  before  you,  first,  the  trial 
in  tlieimvard  court  of  the  heart;  secondly,  the  acquit 
tal  pronounced  In)  this  court:  "  If  our  heart  condemn 
us  not" ;  and  thirdly,  the  result,  the  confidence 
tvhich  comes  of  this  acquittal-  "  If  our  heart  condemn 
us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God." 
May  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  us  while  we  think  on 
these  things ! 

I.  I  want  you  to  think  of  THE  TRIAL  HELD  IN  THE 
INNER  COURT  OF  MAN'S  NATURE,  within  his  heart.  It  is 
a  sort  of  petty  sessions,  not  the  Great  Assize. 
Conscience  sits  within  us,  as  judges  sometimes  sit 


WHAT   IS    THE     VERDICT?  225 

in  chambers,  heaving  cases,  as  they  say,  in  camera. 
If  we  be  righteously  acquitted  in  this  first  court, 
then  the  matter  is  ended,  and  we  have  confidence 
toward  God;  but  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  if  in 
this  preliminary  trial  we  are  condemned,  it  is  an 
evil  omen;  for  the  probability  is  that  the  great 
all-knowing  Judge  will  more  than  confirm  the 
sentence.  Condemnation  by  our  own  conscience 
is  an  ill  sign,  though  even  yet  there  is  a  court  of 
appeal.  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater 
than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things. 

I  will  now  speak  upon  this  trial  under  the  heads 
of  certain  observations. 

This  trial  is  studiously  avoided  by  very  many. 
Many  professors  shun  anything  like  a  testing  of 
their  profession,  any  trying  of  their  religion  by 
examination.  Multitudes  of  persons  seldom  think ; 
they  live  the  life  of  butterflies,  flitting  from  flower 
to  flower  with  careless  wing;  there  is  no  real 
purpose  in  their  lives.  Many  others  think,  and 
think  deeply,  but  not  about  their  souls  or  their 
God.  They  consider  the  matter  of  their  relation 
ship  to  their  Creator  to  be  a  very  secondary 
matter,  which  can  be  taken  up  in  the  last  few 
minutes  of  their  lives,  when  the  death  sweat  is  on 
their  brow  and  they  are  quite  incapable  of  proper 
judgment.  They  leave,  I  say,  the  best  things  to 
the  worst  moments,  and  think  they  are  wise  in  so 
doing.  This  is  a  grave  folly,  and  ought  not  to 
rule  a  man  in  his  senses.  Certain  Christian  pro 
fessors,  too,  who  should  know  better,  seldom  ex 
amine  themselves  as  to  whether  they  are  in  the 
faith.  They  take  it  for  granted  that  all  is  well 
with  them.  They  made  a  profession  a  great  many 


226  WHAT  IS    THE    VERDICT? 

years  ago;  they  have  been  a  decent  sort  of  people 
ever  since;  in  fact,  they  have  been  respected 
among  their  fellow  Christians,  possibly  they  have 
even  taken  office  in  the  church.  Are  they  to 
question  their  foundation  ?  Is  it  necessary  that 
they  should  put  themselves  into  the  scales  and  be 
weighed  again  ?  It  is  a  very  ominous  sign  for  a 
man  when  he  is  afraid  of  discussing  his  spiritual 
state  in  the  chamber  of  his  own  heart.  I  arn  per 
suaded  that  many  Christians  are  the  subjects  of 
doubts  and  fears  about  their  own  condition,  simply 
because  they  have  never  had  the  matter  out.  It  is 
a  great  deal  better  to  sift  an  affair  to  the  bottom 
than  it  is  to  be  always  tormented  by  suspicion.  If 
I  must  go  to  sea,  and  I  suspect  the  soundness  of 
the  vessel,  I  shall  demand  that  the  ship  be  sur 
veyed,  and  that  I  know  whether  it  is  a  rotten  old 
coffin,  or  whether  it  is  a  good  substantial  ship.  I 
do  not  think  it  is  a  healthy  state  of  things  for  man 
to  be  always  singing — 

"  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know." 

Brother,  you  ought  to  know  whether  you  love  the 
Lord  or  no.  Your  love  must  be  very  cold  and 
feeble  if  it  be  a  matter  of  question.  Warmth  of 
love  proves  its  own  existence  in  many  ways. 
Friend,  you  should  be  anxious  to  the  last  degree  to 
take  stock  of  your  spiritual  estate.  Your  desire 
should  be  to  know  the  very  worst  of  your  case.  If 
your  condition  should  turn  out  to  be  horribly  bad, 
you  had  better  know  it;  certainly  your  knowing  it 
will  not  make  it  any  worse.  If  your  case  should 
turn  out  to  be  all  right,  then  you  will  have  the  con 
fidence  that  comes  to  this  knowledge — the  confi- 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  227 

dence  of  which  our  text  speaks.  If  our  hearts,  after 
due,  deliberate,  and  impartial  trial,  condemn  us  not, 
then  have  we  confidence  toward  God,  and  that  con 
fidence  sweetens  life.  He  that  gets  confidence 
through  honest  searching  of  heart  shall  be  filled 
with  delight  and  strength.  But,  I  repeat  it  sadly, 
many  avoid  the  inward  trial  of  the  heart;  they  will 
not  bring  their  case  into  the  spiritual  court,  even 
though  the  judgment-seat  be  set  up  in  the  privacy 
of  their  own  inward  nature.  Thus  they  walk  on 
blindfold  to  the  brink  of  the  precipice.  God  grant 
the  bandage  may  be  taken  off  before  they  have 
taken  the  final  and  fatal  step. 

But,  secondly,  let  us  note  that  genuine  Christians 
very  much  frequent  this  court  of  conscience.  They 
long  to  have  their  condition  put  to  a  thorough  test, 
lest  they  be  deceived.  I  have  known  some  Chris 
tians  even  keep  too  m,uch  in  this  court:  they  so 
often  test  themselves  that  it  looks  as  if  they  would 
spend  their  lives  in  making  trials  of  their  state. 
Looking  within  can  be  easily  overdone;  we  ought 
to  have  higher  work  than  that  of  continually  lay 
ing  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  works. 
When  a  ship  first  leaves  the  stocks  it  is  well  for  it  to 
go  a  trial  trip,  but  to  have  a  ship  always  being 
tried  would  be  very  absurd;  it  is  time  that  it  took 
voyages  in  real  earnest,  and  was  registered  in  the 
merchant  service;  there  will  then  be  trial  enough 
in  the  actual  execution  of  service.  Some  Christians, 
by  a  continual  introspection,  are  always  raising  the 
point,  ''Am  I  a  Christian  ?  "  Brother,  be  a  Chris 
tian.  "Am  I  a  child  of  God?"  Brother,  be  a 
child  of  God,  and  enjoy  it;  and  do  not  spend  a  life 
time  in  searching  for  the  family  register.  How- 


228  WHAT  IS    THE    VERDICT? 

ever,  it  is  certain  that  the  genuine  Christian  is  Tint 
averse  to  self-examination,  nor  to  any  form  of  te«1 
through  which  he  can  be  put.  If  you  are  right 
with  God  your  prayer  will  be,  "Search  me.  0  Go.i : 
and  know  my  heart:  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts. 
and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  tne,  and  lead 
me  in  the  way  everlasting."  k<  0  my  God,  I  do  not 
wish  to  be  deluded  with  '  Peace,  peace,'  when  there 
is  no  peace;  I  do  not  want  to  deceive  myself,  or  to 
be  lulled  into  soft  slumbers  upon  the  dainty  bed  of 
presumption.  No,  let  me  be  emptied  from  vessel  to 
vessel  rather  than  be  suffered  to  settle  upon  my  lees. 
Let  me  be  searched  with  candles  rather  than  harbor 
sin  within  me.  Let  me  even  be  thrust  into  the 
fire  rather  than  remain  base  metal,  the  counterfeit 
of  the  King's  money."  Make  sure  work  for  eternity. 
Be  certain,  by  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
within  you.  that  you  are  indeed  the  children  of  God. 
The  spirit  of  the  true  man  answers  to  this:  he  is 
always  willing  to  set  in  order  the  court  of  con 
science,  and  make  solemn  trial  of  his  heart  and  life. 
In  this  court,  dear  friends,  the  question  to  be 
decided  is  a  very  weighty  one.  What  is  that  question, 
do  you  think?  I  do  not  think  it  is  the  question, 
"Am  I  perfect?"  because  we  can  solve  that  with 
out  holding  a  formal  court.  The  question  is  not, 
"  Am  I  absolutely  free  from  sin  ?  "  for,  "  if  we  say 
that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  us."  The  question  is  this,  "  Am 
I  sincere  in  the  truth  ?  Is  my  religion  true,  and 
am  I  true  in  my  profession  of  it?"  Next,  "Does 
love  rule  in  my  nature?"  All  this  chapter  deals 
with  love,  and  teaches  us  that  the  possession  of 
love  is  the  supreme  test  of  our  state.  Note  the 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  229 

fourteenth  verse:  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  breth 
ren.  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother  abideth  in 
death."  The  inquiry  is, — "  Do  I  love  God  ?  Do 
I  love  my  brother  also  ?  Is  my  spirit  that  of  love; 
for,  if  not,  I  am  not  a  child  of  God  ?  "  Then  the 
next  question  is,  "  Do  I  believe  in  the  Lord  Jestis 
Christ?"  In  the  verse  which  succeeds  my  text 
this  is  put  as  a  great  test,  that  we  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Faith  is  the  main  question  for  conscience 
to  decide,  together  witli  the  following  one,  "Do  I 
also  keep  his  commandments?  Do  I  obey  God? 
Do  I  seek  to  be  as  holy  as  Jesus  is  holy  ?  Or  am  I 
living  in  known  siti,  and  tolerating  that  in  myself 
which  does  not  and  cannot  please  God  ? "  The 
verse  that  follows  my  text  puts  it,  "  We  keep  his 
commandments  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleas 
ing  in  his  sight;"  and  the  question  is,  "  Do  we  not 
only  try  to  keep  the  commandments,  but  do  we  do 
so  because  it  is  pleasing  to  God  ?  Is  it  my  master- 
motive  to  please  God?  Do  I  want  to  be  an  Enoch, 
who  had  this  testimony:  that  he  pleased  God?  Do 
I  keep  his  commandments,  and  labor  to  please 
him  ?  "  These  are  the  questions  to  be  tried  in  the 
court  of  conscience,  and  never  was  there  a  weigh 
tier  issue.  On  this  our  eternal  state  depends.  It 
is  not  your  estate  that  is  now  at  stake;  it  is  not 
your  health  that  is  now  in  question,  it  is  your 
living  unto  God,  your  being  now  a  child  of  God, 
and  so  being  prepared  to  face  the  mysterious 
solemnities  of  eternity.  0  sirs,  do  not  hesitate  to 
take  these  matters  to  the  court  of  conscience.  If 
you  have  avoided  that  court  before,  attend  it  now, 
arid  give  your  soul  a  solemn  hearing  ! 


230  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

This  court  is  guided  by  a  mass  of  evidence.  That 
evidence  has  not  to  be  sought  for,  it  is  there  already. 
If  the  case  were  to  be,  "Do  my  fellow-men  think 
me  a  child  of  God;  do  they  regard  me  as  being  a 
believer  in  whom  faith  works  by  love  ?"  that  would 
be  a  difficult  question,  because  we  should  have  to 
subpoena  so  many  to  give  their  opinion  of  our  pri 
vate  and  public  life.  But  in  this  case  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with  outsiders;  the  conscience  is  the 
\vitnessaswellasthejudgeandjury.  The  whole 
case  is  carried  on  within.  We  cannot  demur  to 
the  witnesses,  for  they  are  our  own  heart  and  con 
science.  We  must  believe  what  these  say.  Nor 
can  we  demur  to  the  judgment,  since  our  own  con 
science  is  judge,  and  we  are  not  at  all  likely  to  be 
unjust  towards  ourselves.  We  are  so  partial,  and 
there  is  so  much  of  flattering  deceit  and  self-love 
about  us,  that  we  could  not  wish  to  be  tried  by  a 
more  favoring  judge  than  our  own  conscience.  We 
cannot  decline  the  jurisdiction  under  any  pretence 
of  prejudice  against  us.  And,  oh,  what  a  mass  of 
evidence  our  heart  can  furnish,  evidence  even  more 
conclusive  than  that  of  outward  actions  !  Mem 
ory  rises  up  and  says,  "  I  remember  all  thou  hast 
done  since  thy  profession  of  conversion, — thy  short 
comings  and  breaches  of  covenant."  The  will  con 
fesses  to  offences  which  never  ripened  into  acts  for 
want  of  opportunity.  The  passions  own  to  out 
breaks  which  were  hidden  from  human  observation. 
The  imagination  is  made  to  bear  testimony;  and 
what  a  sinful  power  that  imagination  is,  and  how 
difficult  it  is  to  govern  it:  its  tale  is  sad  to  hear. 
Our  tempers  confess  to  evil  anger,  our  lusts  to  evil 
longings,  our  hearts  to  evil  covetousness,  pride, 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  231 

and  rebellion.  Hopeful  witness  there  is  also  of 
sin  conquered,  habits  broken,  and  desires  repressed: 
all  this  is  honestly  taken  in  evidence  and  duly 
weighed.  Everything  within  us  will  have  to  tell 
whether  it  has  been  renewed  or  not,  whether  it  has 
been  changed  from  darkness  to  light  and  come 
from  under  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan  into  the 
power  of  Christ.  Each  power  can  give  evidence 
of  grace  or  token  of  unregeneracy,  and  according 
to  the  weight  of  evidence  the  verdict  must  go. 
The  heart  possesses  a  mass  of  evidence  utterly  un 
known  anywhere  else,  for  the  heart  knows  its  own 
sinfulness  as  it  knows  its  own  bitterness,  and  the 
man's  heart  can  reveal  secrets  to  itself  which  it 
dare  not  whisper  into  the  ear  of  the  kindest  friend. 
The  trial  cannot  fail  from  want  of  evidence  bearing 
upon  the  point. 

While  the  trial  is  going  on,  Hie  deliberation  causes 
great  suspense.  As  long  as  I  have  to  ask  my  heart, 
"  Heart,  dost  thou  condemn  me,  or  dost  thou  acquit 
me?"  I  stand  trembling.  You  may  have  seen  a 
picture  entitled,  "Waiting  for  the  Verdict/'  The 
artist  has  put  into  the  countenance  of  the  waiters 
every  form  of  unrest,  for  the  suspense  is  terrible. 
Blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  called  upon  to  wait 
long  for  the  verdict  of  conscience.  We  ought  never 
to  let  the  question  remain  in  suspense  at  all:  we 
should  settle  it.  and  settle  it  in  the  light  of  God,  and 
then  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light.  I  con 
fess  I  cannot  understand  the  comfort  which  I  see  in 
some  people's  faces  when  they  own  that  they  do 
not  know  whether  they  are  the  people  of  God  or 
not.  If  you  are  not  saved,  or  are  not  sure  of  it,  how- 
dare  you  rest  ?  Are  you  in  danger  of  eternal  wrath  ? 


232  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

Then  give  no  sleep  to  your  eyes  till  you  know  that 
you  have  escaped  so  great  a  peril.  It  looks  to  me 
as  if  your  doubt  could  not  be  real  if  it  does  not  work 
in  your  heart  great  misery  and  agony  of  spirit.  A 
person  in  doubt  about  his  salvation,  and  unable  to 
rest,  I  can  perfectly  well  understand;  but  a  person 
in  doubt  in  any  measure  about  his  reconciliation 
to  God,  and  yet  happy,  is  a  mystery.  Flow  can 
the  grace  of  God  be  in  a  heart  which  is  not  sure 
of  pardon  and  yet  is  content?  It  is  an  exceed 
ingly  painful  thing  to  have  this  trial  going  on  in 
the  soul  and  to  be  waiting  for  the  verdict. 

One  thing  I  will  observe,  however,  before  I  leave 
this  matter:  it  is  not  the  supreme  court.  If  it  should 
BO  happen  that  the  verdict  of  the  court  should  be 
against  you,  if  your  heart  condemn  you,  remem 
ber  the  verdict  is  not  final ;  there  is  still  a  higher 
court.  I  love  the  way  in  which  Peter  put  it  once. 
He  had  denied  his  Master,  denied  him  repeatedly 
with  oaths,  but  he  had  bitterly  repented;  and  when 
his  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 
thou  me?"  his  heart  did  not  condemn  him  upon  the 
question  of  loving  his  Master;  but  his  heart  did 
condemn  him  sorely  for  having  denied  his  Lord; 
so,  after  pleading,  "  Lord,  I  do  love  thee,"  he  takes  his 
case  into  the  higher  court,  and  says,  "  Lord,  thou 
knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee." 
In  moments  of  soul-conflict  it  will  be  wise  for  you 
to  carry  this  question  beyond  yourself  up  to  the 
Omniscient  One.  The  translation  of  the  Revised 
Version,  though  I  do  not  like  it,  has  a  bearing 
on  this  point,  and  so  I  quote  it:  "  Hereby  shall  we 
know  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure 
our  heart  before  him,  whereinsoever  our  hearts 


WHAT    IS    THE    VERDICT?  233 

condemn  us;  because  God  is  greater  than  our  heart, 
and  knoweth  all  things." 

I  pray  you  all  to  recollect  this,  that  the  trial  by 
your  conscience  is  not,  after  all,  the  ultimate  and 
the  decisive  one ;  because  your  conscience  may  go 
to  sleep,  or  make  a  mistake  in  your  favor;  or  your 
conscience  may  become  morbid,  and  may  not  take 
under  its  consideration  all  the  facts  of  the  case, 
and  so  may  go  against  you.  Since  there  may  be 
an  error  of  judgment  you  should  make  your  ap 
peal  to  the  Most  High,  saying,  "Search  me,  0  God." 
Above  all,  if  your  conscience  should  now  condemn 
you,  still  remember  that  there  remaineth  the  free,  full 
gospel  even  for  the  chief  of  sinners.  If  you  stand 
before  God  condemned  in  heart  this  morning,  throw 
yourself  upon  your  face  with  that  sense  of  condem 
nation  upon  you,  and  cry,  "  God,  be  merciful  to  me, 
a  sinner."  Whichever  verdict  comes  from  an  en 
lightened  conscience,  it  will  be  exceedingly  service 
able  to  you  if  you  have  regard  to  it.  If  it  condemn 
you  not,  then  have  you  confidence  toward  God; 
and  if  it  condemn  you,  the  condemnation  may 
drive  you  at  once  to  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  that 
is  set  before  the  guilty  in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  thus  bless  you. 

II.  Allow  me,  secondly,  to  speak  to  you  upon  a 
pleasing  theme,  namely,  THE  ACQUITTAL  ASSURED  FROM 
THIS  COURT:  "  If  our  hearts  condemn  us  not."  Ob 
serve,  that  a  man  may  get  an  acquittal  from  the 
court  of  conscience;  for  the  question  laid  before  the 
heart  can  be  settled.  It  can  be  ascertained  whether 
I  sincerely  believe  in  Jesus  Christ;  it  can  be  ascer 
tained  whether  I  sincerely  love  God  and  love  his 
people,  it  can  be  ascertained  whether  rny  heart  is 


234  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

obedient  to  the  commands  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
These  are  not  hazy,  mysterious  problems,  which  can 
never  be  solved.  The  case  may  be  made  clear  one 
way  or  the  other.  The  court  has  no  difficulty  before 
it  beyond  its  faculty;  it  is  quite  competent  to  decide 
the  question  in  the  light  of  Scripture  by  the  help 
of  God. 

These  questions,  however,  must  be  debated  with 
great  discernment.  Suppose  a  person  to  be  greatly 
tempted,  to  be  tempted  morning,  noon,  and  night 
with  foul  temptations,  yet  conscience  must  not 
say,  "This  person  is  no  child  of  God,  because  he 
is  tempted."  There  is  no  sin  in  being  tempted, 
since  our  Lord  Jesus  was  tempted  of  the  devil, 
and  yet  in  him  was  no  sin.  Abundance,  aye,  su 
perabundance,  of  temptations  is  no  proof  against 
the  sincerity  of  our  faith  in  our  God;  on  the 
contrary,  it  may  sometimes  happen  that  the  more 
we  are  tempted  the  more  true  is  it  that  there  is 
something  in  us  to  tempt,  some  good  thing  which 
Satan  seeks  to  destroy. 

Again,  the  verdict  of  the  heart  must  be  given  with 
discrimination,  or  otherwise  we  may  judge  accord 
ing  to  outward  circumstances,  and  so  judge  amiss. 
It  will  never  do  to  say,  '•  I  am  greatly  afflicted  in 
estate,  in  family,  or  in  depression  of  spirits,  and 
therefore  I  cannot  be  a  child  of  God."  What !  are 
not  God's  children  chastened?  What  son  is  there 
whom  the  Father  chasteneth  not?  Some  of  the 
best  children  of  God  have  been  the  most  afflicted; 
aye,  and  let  me  say  it  pointedly,  some  of  the  purest 
Christians  that  have  ever  lived  have  had  the  most 
sickness  to  bear,  and  by  that  means  they  have  been 
made  more  meet  for  heaven,  even  as  the  sycamore 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  235 

fig  by  being  bruised  becomes  ripe.  When,  there 
fore,  it  is  suggested  that  you  are  not  a  child  of  God 
because  you  are  afflicted,  the  idea  is  not  to  be  toler 
ated,  since  we  are  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks 
fly  upward. 

Neither,  again,  do  our  imperfections  or  infirmi 
ties  decide  against  us.  An  enlightened  conscience 
saith,  "  It  is  true  this  man  hath  sinned,  but  it  was 
not.  of  intent,  but  by  inadvertence  or  surprise.  His 
soul  hates  the  sin  into  which  he  fell;  he  deeply 
repents  of  his  offence.''  The  occurrence  of  sin  in  the 
life  does  not  prove  a  man  to  be  out  of  grace.  The 
prevalence  of  sin,  the  toleration  of  sin,  the  love  of 
sin,  the  willful  continuance  in  sin,  would  do  so;  but 
the  fact  of  imperfection,  if  wept  over  and  repented 
of,  is  not  condemnatory  evidence.  The  fact  that 
my  child  is  little  and  feeble  is  no  proof  that  he  is 
not  my  son.  The  boy  may  be  like  his  father,  and 
yet  be  only  a  tiny  babe.  Weakness  and  even  fault- 
iness  may  be  confessed, and  yet  we  may  have  confi 
dence  towards  God.  So  the  verdict  has  to  be  given 
with  great  discrimination. 

And  the  verdict  has  to  be  given,  mark  you,  upon 
gospel  principles.  The  question  before  the  court  of 
conscience  is  not,  "  Have  I  perfectly  kept  the  law  ?  " 
The  answer  to  that  is  simple  enough:  ''There  is 
not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that  doeth  good,  and 
sinneth  not";  "By  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no 
flesh  living  be  justified."  The  question  is,  "Am  I 
a  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Am  I  rest 
ing  in  him  for  salvation,  and  do  I  prove  the  truth 
of  that  faith  by  loving  God,  and  loving  the  breth- 
.ren,  and  by  doing  those  things  which  are  pleasing 
to  God,  and  avoiding  those  things  which  are  dis- 


236  WHAT   7S    THE    VERDICT? 

pleasing  to  him  ?  "  The  question  is  not  concerning 
merit,  but  concerning  grace  and  the  fruit  of  grace. 
Salvation  is  of  grace,  and  of  grace  alone;  therefore 
my  inquiry  should  be, — "Am  I  a  partaker  of  that 
grace?  Unworthy  though  I  be,  am  I  washed  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus;  am  I  covered  with  his  righteous 
ness:  am  I  accepted  in  the  Beloved?"  That  is  the 
question,  and  if  ever  you  get  discussing  it  upon 
legal  principles  you  will  go  wrong,  We  are  not 
tried  in  the  court  of  the  heart  according  to  the  old 
covenant,  but  according  to  the  new  covenant;  an 
other  book  is  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life. 

Permit  me  to  say  here  that  this  question  in  the 
court  of  the  heart  must  never  be  settled  by  our  feelings. 
If  the  heart  be  at  all  right  in  its  judgments  it  will 
never  say,  "  I  am  a  child  of  God  because  I  am  so 
happy;  "  nor  will  it  exclaim,  on  the  other  hand,  "  I 
cannot  be  a  child  of  God  because  I  am  so  sad." 
Holy  feelings  may  be  brought  in  as  evidence,  but 
they  are  hard  to  estimate.  Feelings  are  variable 
as  the  wind;  feelings  depend  so  much  upon  the 
body  and  outward  surroundings,  so  much  even  upon 
the  condition  of  the  atmosphere.  I  protest  that  as 
to  feelings  I  go  up  and  down  very  much  according 
to  the  weather-glass.  Therefore  I  make  small 
account  of  my  feelings.  If  I  am  very  glad  I  say 
to  myself,  "  Keep  steady.  Be  not  intoxicated  with 
joy."  If  I  find  my  spirit  sink,  I  cry,  "Come,  heart, 
do  not  play  the  fool ;  you  have  nothing  to  be  down 
about:  rejoice  in  God  always,  and  have  no  confi 
dence  in  the  flesh."  Deal  thus  with  yourselves, 
for  the  question  in  hand  is  not,  "  Am  I  happy  ?  " 
but,  "  Am  I  a  sincere  believer,  and  does  my  faith 
prove  its  sincerity  by  the  effect  which  it  produces 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  237 

upon  my  life?"  Sinners  can  rejoice  as  well  as 
saints,  and  saints  can  mourn  as  well  as  sinners; 
the  point  is  not  what  we  feel,  but  what  we  believe 
and  do. 

The  question  of  our  state  ought  to  be  settled  speedily. 
As  I  have  already  said  to  you,  it  must  not  be 
allowed  to  hang  about.  We  know  "  the  law's 
delays,"  but  we  must  not  allow  any  delay  in  this 
court.  No,  we  must  press  for  summary  justice. 
Does  my  heart  condemn  rne.  or  does  not  my  heart 
condemn  me?  Get  a  clear  and  plain  answer  at 
once  to  this  issue.  If  your  heart  condemns  any 
of  you  here  this  morning,  if  you  say,  "Yes,  lama 
member  of  the  church,  but  I  ought  not  to  be,  I  do  not 
live  as  I  should  ";  if  you  are  not  believers  in  Christ; 
if  you  feel  that  you  have  no  love  to  the  brethren, 
then  take  the  verdict,  and  go  humbly  to  God  and  ask 
him  t  >  renew  your  hearts.  The  door  of  free  grace 
is  still  open  to  you.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if 
your  conscience  says,  "  Yes,  with  all  my  imper 
fections,  with  all  my  infirmities,  I  do  love  God  with 
all  my  heart;  I  do  trust  in  Christ,  for  I  have  noth 
ing  else  to  trust  to;  I  do  lean  my  whole  weight 
upon  his  finished  work;  I  hang  on  Christ  as  a 
vessel  hangs  on  the  nail ;  I  have  no  dependence  an}7- 
where  else.  I  know  there  is  a  change  in  me;  I 
know  that  the  things  I  once  loved  I  now  hate,  and 
the  things  I  once  hated  1  now  love;  I  desire  to  per 
fect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God";  then  you  are  in 
the  condition  of  which  the  apostle  says,  "  If  our 
heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence 
toward  God." 

Let  us  consider  that  happy  state  at  some  length, 
and  then  close  our  discourse.  May  you  all  have 


038  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

the  full  enjoyment  of  holy  boldness  before  God 
through  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  Let  us  consider  THE  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THIS  AC 
QUITTAL.  Here  is  the  man  who  has  had  his  acquittal 
in  the  court  of  conscience.  Your  conscience  has 
Baid,  "  He  is  a  sincere  man;  he  is  a  believing  man ; 
he  is  quickened  with  the  life  of  God;  he  is  an  obe 
dient  and  God-fearing  man";  and  now  you  have 
confidence  toward  God;  or  at  least  you  have  a 
right  to  such  confidence. 

What  does  that  confidence  or  boldness  mean  ? 
There  is  the  confidence  of  truthfulness.  When  you 
kneel  down  to  pray,  you  know  that  you  are 
praying,  and  not  mocking  God;  when  you  sing, 
you  are  making  melody  in  your  heart;  when  you 
preach,  you  are  preaching  that  which  your  soul 
believes.  If  I  spoke  to  you  to-day  about  things 
which  I  was  not  quite  sure  of,  it  would  be  wretched 
work;  but  I  usually  feel  a  great  deal  of  enjoyment 
when  I  am  preaching,  because  to  me  the  things 
which  I  teach  are  my  comfort  and  life.  If  you  do 
not  enjoy  the  sermon,  I  do.  Sometimes  I  say  to 
myself,  '"These  doctrines  are  exceedingly  sweet: 
I  feed  upon  them  myself,  and  therefore  the  people 
ought  to  be  fed;  and  if  they  are  not  it  is  their  own 
fault."  A  cook  may  not  even  get  a  taste  of  the 
joint;  but  it  is  not  often  so  with  me.  Because  I 
believe  for  myself  I  feel  a  confidence  in  preaching 
to  you.  Confidence  towards  God  is  a  truthfulness 
of  spirit  which  prevents  our  being  ashamed  in 
what  we  do  towards  him.  Can  you  say,  "  What 
ever  I  do,  I  do  it  honestly?  Though  I  am  not 
what  I  wish  to  be  in  all  things,  yet  that  which  I 
profess  before  God  is  true"?  Then  you  have  con- 


WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT?  2 HO 

fidence.  "One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was 
blind,  now  I  see."  I  do  not  put  spectacles  over 
blind  eyes,  and  make  people  believe  that  I  can  see, 
but  1  do  really  see.  I  know  I  do.  I  know  I  trust,  I 
know  I  love  God,  I  know  I  love  holiness!"  This 
deep  sincerity  breeds  in  a  roan  a  blessed  in 
difference  to  the  judgments  of  men.  Having  a 
conscience  void  of  offence,  he  feels  a  holy  freedom 
as  to  the  formalities  of  pretence.  Look  at  the 
hypocrite:  he  is  afraid  of  being  found  out.  He  has 
to  do  everything  most  primly  and  demurely,  lest 
he  should  be  suspected.  If  you  paint  your  face, 
you  must  take  care  neither  to  cry  nor  laugh,  lest 
you  crack  the  enamel.  If  you  wear  shoddy 
clothing,  you  must  not  run  or  jump,  for  your  gar 
ments  might  split.  Accidents  must  be  guarded 
against  when  you  deal  with  shams.  A  hypocrite 
will  censure  you  very  severely  for  having  smiled 
just  now;  and  he  will  condemn  me  outright  for 
being  so  wicked  as  to  make  you  smile  on  a  Sun 
day.  Poor  soul,  he  must  keep  up  his  propriety,  for 
it  is  all  he  has.  In  these  times  of  bad  trade  many 
who  are  ready  to  fail  are  afraid  to  lower  their  ex 
penditure  for  fear  their  poverty  should  be  suspected, 
and  so  they  keep  up  a  good  appearance  to  stave 
off  bankruptcy  as  long  as  they  may.  If  they  were 
solvent  they  would  not  be  so  fearful.  If  your  con 
science  condemn  you  not,  then  you  enjoy  a  blessed 
ease  of  spirit,  becaiise  the  truth  is  in  you. 

The  next  kind  of  confidence  is  confidence  to 
wards  God  as  to  one's  acceptance  with  him.  Tt 
my  heart  says,  "  Yes,  thou  dost  believe,"  then  I 
know  from  God's  word  that  1  have  eternal 
life.  The  word  saith,  "  He  that  believeth  on  me 


240  WHAT  IS    THE    VEKDICT ? 

hath  everlasting  life."  Conscience  says,  "  Yes, 
them  hast  faith":  and  the  heart  concludes,  There 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation.  Therefore, 
being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Believe  me,  the 
sweetest  stream  that  ever  waters  this  desert  world 
is  the  river  of  confident  acceptance  in  the  beloved. 
When  you  know  this,  your  life  is  gilded  with  the 
sunlight  of  the  corning  glory,  and  your  heart  rejoic- 
eth  exceedingly. 

This  produces,  and  perhaps  it  is  that  which  the 
apostle  most  intended,  a  boldness  of  converse.  The 
man  who  knows  that  he  is  truthful,  and  that  God 
has  accepted  him,  then  speaks  freely  with  God. 
He  feels  a  holy  awe  of  God,  and  never  wishes  to  lose 
it:  but  yet  he  exercises  a  sacred  boldness  towards 
him.  Is  it  not  wonderful  to  see  how  Abraham 
talked  with  God  ?  He  went  up  to  the  place  whei*e 
God  spake  with  him,  and  when  God  told  him  that 
he  was  about  to  destroy  Sodom,  how  exquisitely, 
and  yet  how  boldly  did  Abraham  put  it: — "Wilt 
thou  also  destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ? 
That  be  far  from  thee."  What !  Does  Abraham 
expostulate  with  God  !  Does  Abraham  dream  that 
God  will  do  an  unjust  thing?  Oh,  no;  but  he  ia 
bold,  and  that  is  the  most  forcible  plea  which  he 
can  think  of,  and  so  he  urges  it  again  and  again 
with  God.  How  he  pushes  his  case, — "  I  have 
taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord,  which  am 
but  dust  and  ashes:  perad venture  there  shall  lack 
five  of  the  fifty  righteous:  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the 
city  for  the  lack  of  five  ?  "  It  is  wonderful  pleading 
and  it  illustrates  the  words  "confidence  toward 
God."  Look  at  Job,  again.  There  was  a  man 


WHAT  IS    THE    VERDICT?  241 

whose  heart  did  not  condemn  him,  for  he  could  say, 
"  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  arn  not  wicked."  He  speaks 
with  God  very  boldly,  and  he  says,  "  Oh,  that  I 
knew  where  1  might  find  him:  I  would  come  even 
to  his  seat;  I  would  order  my  case  before  him,  and 
fill  my  mouth  with  arguments."  Though  the  ter 
rors  of  God  might  make  him  afraid,  yet,  secure 
in  the  quiet  of  his  conscience,  he  has  confidence 
towards  God.  Not  only  confidence  in  God,  mark 
you,  but  toward  God ;  so  as  to  speak  with  God  as  a 
man  speaketh  with  his  friend.  Do  you  understand 
this?  I  know  you  do  riot  if  you  have  any  doubt 
as  to  your  being  a  child  of  God.  Suspicion  makes 
you  a  coward;  for  when  your  heart  does  not  con 
demn  you,  and  you  know  that  you  are  right  be 
fore  the  Lord,  then  you  feel  liberty  of  converse. 

This  leads  to  great  confidence  in  prayer.  Look  at 
the  context.  "  We  have  confidence  toward  God. 
And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  because 
we  keep  his  commandments,  and  do  those  things 
that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight."  If  you  want  power 
in  prayer  you  must  have  purity  in  life.  There  is 
no  promise  in  the  Bible  made  to  every  one  of  you 
that  whatsoever  you  ask  God  will  give  you:  it  is 
made  to  persons  of  a  certain  character;  the  unlim 
ited  promise  is  to  the  man  of  God  who  is  so  sanctified 
that  he  will  not  ask,  and  does  not  think  of  asking, 
anything  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  God's  will. 
Remember  this  passage — "Delight  thyself  also  in 
the  Lord;  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine 
heart."  The  desire  of  the  man  who  delights  in  God 
isalwaysin  accordance  with  the  mind  of  God,  there 
fore  he  is  the  man  that  can  get  whatsoever  lie  wills. 
When  you  do  all  things  that  please  God,  and  your 


242  WHAT  IS    THE    VERDICT? 

life  is  sanctified  and  holy,  then  it  is  that  you  abide 
in  his  love.  Has  not  Jesus  said,  "  If  ye  abide  in 
me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what 
ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you  "  ?  Unsancti- 
fied  desires  will  be  graciously  refused;  but  the  will 
of  the  sincerely  obedient,  man  is  conformed  to  the 
will  of  God,  and  therefore  it  shall  be  fulfilled. 
"  This  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that 
if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he  hear- 
eth  us." 

Our  text  means  also  that  such  a  man  shall  have 
confidence  towards  God,  in  all  service  for  God. 
Look  at  the  man  of  God  who  has  confidence  towards 
God,  as  to  the  perils  encountered  in  faithfully  follow 
ing  his  Lord.  Take  Daniel,  for  instance.  Daniel 
does  not  question  about  what  he  has  to  do  when 
the  decree  is  signed  that  whosoever  shall  pray 
shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions;  he  throws  up 
his  window  as  he  was  accustomed  to  do;  he  looks 
towards  Jerusalem,  and  he  bows  his  knee  as  he  had 
done  afore  time;  and  he  prays  to  God  as  if  there 
were  no  edict.  His  confidence  toward  God  is  that 
he  is  safe  in  the  path  of  duty.  He  does  not  count 
the  cost;  neither  did  the  three  holy  children  wrhen 
the  fiery  furnace  was  before  them,  but  they  said, 
"  Our  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us 
from  the  burning  fiery  furnace,  and  he  will  deliver 
us  out  of  thine  hand,  0  king.  But  if  not,  be  it 
known  unto  thee,  0  king,  that  we  will  not  serve 
thy  gods,  nor  worship  the  golden  image  which 
thou  hast  set  up."  Is  not  that  a  blessed  confidence 
towards  God  which  a  man  obtains  when  his  heart 
does  not  condemn  him  ?  If  Daniel  had  said,  "  I 
shall  pray  down  in  the  cellar,  or  with  the  blinds 


WHAT   fS    THE    VERDICT?  243 

drawn  down,"  he  would  have  lost  all  confidence  to 
wards  God,  and  would  not  have  been  the  man  he 
was.  If  the  three  children  had  said,  "  We  will  bow 
the  knee,  but  we  will  make  in  our  minds  a  secret 
protest;  we  will  not  really  worship  the  idol,  but  we 
will  worship  God  while  we  bow  before  the  image," 
they  would  not  have  had  confidence  in  God.  Alas, 
what  foolish  tricks  men  play  with  what  they  call 
their  consciences  nowadays.  This  wonderful  nine 
teenth  century  is  altogether  incomprehensible  to  a 
simple,  honest  man.  Consciences  used  to  work  up 
and  down,  yes  or  no;  but  now  they  have  an  eccen 
tric  action,  altogether  indescribable.  A  man  serves 
the  devil  nowadays,  and  gets  the  devil's  pay,  and 
all  the  while  talks  of  serving  God.  May  you  have 
a  conscience  void  of  offence,  straight  and  clear  in 
everything,  and  so  have  confidence  towards  God. 
Moreover,  we  have  this  confidence  towards  God 
in  the  way  of  service,  so  that  we  are  sure  of  receiv 
ing  oil  iiecessary  help.  God  will  help  the  true  man, 
and  if  he  comes  to  a  pinch,  and  he  cannot  get  on 
by  himself,  he  may  boldly  summon  others  of  his 
Master's  servant  to  his  aid.  Look  at  Joshua  fight 
ing  with  the  Amalekites.  The  day  is  not  long 
enough,  and,  therefore,  he  lays  his  command  upon 
the  sun,  and  says  to  it,  "Sun,  stand  thou  still  upon 
Gibeon;  and  thou,  moon,  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon  !" 
He  had  need  of  longer  daylight,  and  he  dared  the 
sun  and  moon  to  move  an  inch  till  the  pursuit  of 
his  foes  was  over.  Thus  may  a  servant  of  God 
challenge  help  from  earth  and  heaven,  and  impress 
all  forces  into  the  service  of  his  Lord.  An  officer, 
if  he  finds  himself  in  straits,  impresses  anybody 
that  passes  by,  saying,  "  In  the  King's  name,  help 


2*44  WHAT   IS    THE    VERDICT? 

me."  Even  so,  if  you  do  your  Lord's  bidding,  and 
if  conscience  condemns  you  riot,  you  may  impress 
into  the  service  of  the  great  King  every  angel  in 
heaven,  and  every  force  of  nature,  as  need  requires. 

I  wish  I  had  time  to  tell  you  all  that  confidence 
towards  God  means.  It  means  rest,  perfect  rest. 
Look  at  your  Lord  when  the  tempest  was  on.  Loud 
roaring,  the  billows  come  near  to  overwhelming  the 
ship;  but  he  is  asleep.  Nobody  but  he  could  dare 
to  slumber,  because  nobody  else  had  such  confi 
dence  towards  God.  He  knew  the  vessel  was  safe; 
why  should  he  worry?  True,  he  was  Lord  High 
Admiral  of  the  seas,  and  had  responsibility  not  only 
for  his  own  flagship,  but  for  the  whole  fleet  of  little 
ships  that  sailed  with  him  that  day;  but  he  did 
not  give  way  to  sleeplessness  because  of  that;-  he 
cast  himself  on  God,  and  fell  asleep.  It  was  the 
best  thing  to  do.  You  and  I  may  do  the  same;  we 
need  not  be  frightened,  nor  worried,  nor  troubled; 
but  just  trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good,  so  shall  we 
dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  we  shall  be  fed.  This 
is  confidence  towards  God. 

This  confidence  often  mounts  up  into  joy  till  the 
Christian  man  overflows  with  delight  in  God;  he 
cannot  contain  his  happiness.  As  Solomon  says, 
he  eats  his  bread  with  joy,  for  God  hath  accepted 
his  works.  He  lives  with  the  wife  of  his  youth  in 
full  content  and  his  children  are  a  blessing  to  him. 
He  goes  to  his  toil  rejoicing  to  serve  God  in  his 
calling,  and  he  comes  home  at  night  to  repose 
himself  in  the  care  of  his  God  and  Father.  All 
is  well,  nnd  he  knows  it. 

Blessed  man,  that  hath  confidence  in  God.  Such 
a  man  goes  up  to  his  last  bed  when  the  message 


WHAT  IS    THE     VERDICT?  245 

comes  that  the  spirit  must  return  to  God  who  gave 
it;  he  goes  to  die  without  alarm:  his  conscience 
does  not  condemn  him,  and  therefore  he  lays  him 
self  down  in  patience,  and  waits  the  signal  to  be 
with  God.  Meanwhile  the  light  of  heaven  steals 
over  his  face,  and  they  that  come  to  cheer  and 
comfort  him  hear  strange  words,  like  notes  of  the 
birds  of  Paradise,  dropping  from  his  lips.  They 
see  that  he  is  in  pain,  but  they  also  mark  that  lie 
is  baptized  in  enjoyment.  They  think  that  he  is 
dying,  but  he  testifies  that  he  is  entering  into  life. 
The  pearly  gate  is  open  before  him,  the  glitter  of 
the  golden  street  is  meeting  his  failing  eye.  Hear 
him  sing,  as  best  his  failing  breath  permits — 

"  And  when  ye  see  my  eye-strings  break, 

How  sweet  my  minutes  roll; 
A  mortal  paleness  on  my  cheek, 
But  glory  in  my  soul." 

Now  he  is  gone,  gone  into  the  land  of  spirits.  He 
stands  before  his  God,  and  he  does  not  tremble. 
He  has  that  eagle-eye  which  can  bear  the  light  of 
the  eternal  sun.  His  heart  condemns  him  not,  and 
he  has  confidence  towards  God.  Amidst  the  su 
pernal  splendor  she  cries,  "  My  Father."  Angels 
are  crying,  "  Lord  and  God,"  but  lie  saith,  "  My 
Father,"  and  those  loyal  servants  make  room  for  a 
royal  child.  The  shining  ones  escort  the  happy 
spirit  to  the  blessed  Father's  feet.  There  we  leave 
him.  "Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then 
have  we  confidence  toward  God."  God  bless  you. 
Amen. 


XI. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  LITTLE  FAITH. 
August  23,  1885. 

"  And  immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand  and  caught 
him,  and  said  unto  him,  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst 
thou  doubt  ?  " — MATTHEW  xiv.  31. 

THERE  is  only  one  word  in  the  original  for 
the  phrase,  "  0  thou  of  little  faith."  The 
Lord  Jesus  virtually  addresses  Peter  by  the  name 
of  "  Little-faith,"  in  one  word.  I  do  not  suppose 
that  Peter  had  ever  before  dreamed  of  that  name 
as  applicable  to  himself.  Possibly  he  had  thought 
in  his  heart  that  his  faith  was  strong  even  to 
assurance.  When  so  lately  he  had  seen  his  Master 
feed  the  multitudes  with  a  few  loaves  and  fishes, 
and  had  helped  to  gather  up  twelve  baskets  of 
fragments,  he  felt  that  his  faith  was  equal  to  any 
thing.  He  who  could  feed  so  many  with  so  little, 
could  do  any  kind  of  wonder;  and  how  could  Peter, 
brave,  honest  Peter,  ever  think  of  doubting  his 
Lord  ?  0  brethren,  we  do  not  know  ourselves ! 
We  fancy  that  we  are  rich  and  increased  in 
goods,  and,  lo !  in  the  time  of  trial  we  dis 
cover  that  we  are  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable. 
Those  who  are  strong  in  faith  to  their  own  think 
ing,  may  soon  be  brought  into  circumstances  where 
their  coniidence  will  be  grievously  shaken.  All  is 
not  gold  that  glitters,  neither  is  all  faith  that  .speaks 


THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH.         247 

bravely.  Peter  is  strong  in  faith  on  board  the  ship, 
strong-  in  faith  even  as  lie  walks  the  waters;  but 
that  unexpected  gust  of  wind,  which  came  howling 
down  from  the  mountains,  took  him  aback,  stag 
gered  him,  and  caused  his  faith  to  reel.  Then  the 
waters  yielded  under  his  feet,  and  as  he  began  to 
sink  he  discovered  his  own  weakness,  and  had  his 
discovery  confirmed  by  the  verdict  of  his  Lord,  who 
himself  surnamed  him  Little-faith.  Let  no  man  think 
of  himself  beyond  his  own  experience.  Experience 
is  the  true  gauge;  and  he  who  boasts  of  an  untried 
faith  is  puifed  up  with  vain  glory.  Stretch  not 
your  arm  beyond  your  sleeve,  lest  it  be  frost-bitten. 
He  who  glories  in  himself  deceives  himself.  It  is 
not  an  easy  thing  to  endure  the  humiliation  which 
must  follow  upon  the  collapse  of  untried  confi 
dence.  Rest  assured,  brethren,  that  between  here 
and  heaven  we  shall  need  every  ounce  of  faith  that 
we  have;  and  that  whenever  we  feel  too  sure  of  our 
own  strength  we  are  making  sure  of  that  which  is 
frailty  itself.  Self-confidence  is  but  the  froth  on 
the  top  of  the  cup;  it  is  not  the  pure  juice  of 
the  vine  of  truth.  When  a  man  begins  to  be 
secure  in  himself  he  will  court  temptation,  he 
will  rashly  venture  upon  needless  experiments, 
and  in  the  end  will  need  to  cry  in  plaintive  accents 
"Lord,  save  me."  Learn,  then,  on  the  threshold 
of  the  text,  that  we  are  not  as  strong  as  we  think 
we  are,  and  that,  when  we  are  most  brave  and  dar 
ing,  we  may  not  be  quite  so  far  removed  from  fear 
and  trembling  as  we  imagine.  Alas !  that  unbelief 
should  mar  even  Peter's  faith.  Let  him  who  thinks 
that  he  can  walk  the  waves  take  heed  lest  he  sink 
beneath  them.. 


248          THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

In  Peter's  character  there  was  a  singular  mix 
ture  of  the  strong  and  the  weak:  he  rose  to  excel 
lence  and  sank  to  littleness.  Yet,  why  should  I 
speak  of  this  as  singular?  for  we  ourselves  are 
made  of  much  the  same  materials:  in  us  also  are 
mingled  the  iron  and  the  clay.  The  best  of  men 
are  men  at  the  best.  Since  the  old  nature  remains 
though  the  new  nature  is  born  in  us,  there  is  in 
our  soul  a  conflict  between  holiness  and  sin,  faith 
and  unbelief,  strength  and  weakness.  .We  walk 
the  waters  like  our  Lord,  and  anon  we  sink  like 
doubting  Peter.  The  Christian  man  is  full  often  a 
mystery  to  himself,  and  therefore,  it  is  no  wonder 
that  he  is  a  mystery  to  other  people.  Note  how 
Peter  speaks :  he  cries,  "  Lord,  if  it  be  thou  " ;  a 
speech  which,  if  it  be  not  censurable,  is  by  no 
means  praiseworthy,  after  his  Lord  had  said,  "It is 
I.''  Hear  him  again  :  "  Bid  me  come  unto  thee  on 
the  water."  Here  is  courage  almost  blazing  into 
rashness;  and  yet  there  is  a  measure  of  obedient 
deference,  for  he  will  not  attempt  to.  come  unless 
he  is  bidden  to  do  so.  He  will  risk  his  life  if  he 
has  but  his  Master's  permit.  What  diverse  quali 
ties  meet  in  the  same,  man!  He  proposes  a  rash 
venture,  and  yet  is  prudent  enough  to  ask  his 
Master's  permission. 

See  him  walking  the  waves,  and  admire  the 
strength  of  his  faith  !  Could  you  do  this?  Anon 
see  him  sinking  because  a  fierce  blast  has  blown  in 
his  face.  Do  you  marvel  at  his  unbelief?  Would 
you  have  done  better?  He  that  knows  himself 
knows  that  doubt  dogs  the  heels  of  confidence. 
The  Canaauite  of  distrust  is  still  in  the  land,  and 
shows  himself  ever  and  anon  at  unexpected  turns. 


THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          240 

Where  the  fairest  flowers  of  faith,  and  hope,  and 
joy  do  bloom,  the  deadliest  serpents  of  mistrust 
and  suspicion  may  yet  be  lurking-.  Abraham,  that 
father  of  believers,  yet  sinned  twice  by  distrust 
when  he  did  not  own  Sarah  to  be  his  wife. 

Peter's  mixture  of  unbelief  was  not  to  be 
justified,  nor  may  it  be  used  as  an  excuse  for 
ourselves.  We  shall  speak  of  it  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  but  not  as  an  example  for  it  was  an  im 
proper  and  unreasonable  thing.  Peter  could  not 
answer  the  Lord's  question,  "Wherefore  didst 
them  doubt?"  His  doubting1  was  without  ground 
or  reason.  If  he  believes  at  all,  why  does  he 
doubt?  The  unbelief  which  makes  faith  little,  is 
to  be  confessed  as  a  sin,  and  mourned  over  as  such; 
it  would  be  wrong  to  regard  it  as  a  mere  infirm 
ity,  and  invent  excuses  for  it.  The  truth  is  that 
the  Christian  has  no  cause  for  doubting  his  Lord. 
The  whole  course  of  the  Lord's  dealing  is  calcu 
lated  to  inspire  confidence.  He  has  done  noth 
ing  to  create  a  suspicion  of  his  love,  or  truth,  or 
power.  If  we  never  doubt  till  we  have  cause  for 
doubting,  our  life  will  be  rich  with  faith.  It  is 
concerning  little  faith,  and  its  faults  and  its  un 
reasonableness,  that  I  have  to  speak  at  this  time. 
May  God  grant  that  all  the  Little-faith  family  may 
be  helped  to  stronger  confidence.  May  the  Holy 
Ghost  bless  the  word,  and  enable  many  a  Ruth  to 
pick  up  tho^e  handi'uls  that  are  let  fall  on  purpose 
lor  the  feeble  folk  who  glean  in  these  fields. 

I.  Our  first  topic  will  be  LITTLE -FAITH'S  HISTORY. 
It  is  sketched  in.  the  story  of  Peter.  We  are  each 
one  apt  to  act  over  ajain  the  part  which  Peter 
played  in  this  narrative. 


250  THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

Little-faith  is  a  true  disciple,  though  a  faulty  one. 
Not  the  littleness  of  the  faith,  but  the  faith  itself  is 
the  gift  of  God.  None  but  God  could  make  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed:  none  but  God  can  give  even  the 
least  particle  of  living  faith.  Faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  however  feeble  it  may  be,  is  a  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  a  token  of  the  new  birth. 
I  may  say  of  Peter  on  (hit* occasion  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  said  of  him  at  another  time,  "Blessed  art 
thon,  Simon  Bar-jona:  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not 
revealed  it  unto  thoe,  but  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  Even  the  faith  which  can  get  no  further 
than  to  touch  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  is  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  even  that  faith  which 
cries,  "  Lord,  I  believe;  help  thou  mine  unbelief" 
is,  as  to  its  existence,  though  not  as  to  its  infirmity, 
the  creation  of  the  most  High.  Wherefore  let  U8 
note  that  Little-faith  is  born  in  the  new  Jerusalem, 
and  is  an  Israelite  indeed;  hence  it  lias  about  it  that 
immortal  life  of  which  our  risen  Lord  has  said, 
"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

Very  early  in  its  life  Little-faith  has  great  longings. 
See  it  in  Peter's  case.  He  is  on  board  ship  with  his 
brethren,  while  Jesus  is  yonder  upon  the  waters; 
and  Peter  is  so  earnest  to  come  at  his  Lord,  and 
be  with  him,  that  he  is  ready  to  plunge  into  the 
sea  to  reach  him.  Why  could  he  not  wait  as  the 
others  did  ?  His  immediate  duty  was  in  th3  ship 
with  his  brethren;  but  his  vehement  desires  car 
ried  him  above  common-place  toiling  and  rowing. 
Strong  faith  exhibits  patience  where  Little-faith  is 
in  a  hurry.  It  was  well  to  have  longings  for  Jesus; 
but  it  would  have  been  wiser  to  have  waited  while 
the  Lord  came  walking  over  the  sea  to  the  ship. 


THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          251 

The  quiet,  self-possessed  Christian  has  deep  long 
ings  for  his  Lord;  bnt  he  has  the  assured  conviction 
that  his  Lord  will  come  to  him  if  he  continues  faith 
ful  to  his  present  duty,  arid  therefore  he  waits  upon 
the  Lord.  Little-faith,  like  Martha,  runs  to  meet 
Jesus;  but  Strong-faith,  like  Mary,  sits  still  in 
the  house.  Little-faith  is  feverish  after  immediate 
joy.  Little-faith  wants  to  be  in  heaven  to-morrow. 
Little-faith  would  convert  the  world  before  the  sun 
went  down,  and  she  grows  faint  because  her  zeal 
has  not  fulfilled  her  wish.  Little-faith  must  pluck 
the  promises  while  they  are  green,  she  is  not  con 
tent  to  wait  till  they  become  ripe  and  mellow.  Yet 
I  love  her  longings,  and  I  would  to  God  that  all 
men  had  them  !  However  mistaken  pressing  de 
sires  for  spiritual  joy  may  be,  they  are  things  which 
some  of  you  feel,  which  make  you  cry,  "Oil  that 
I  knew  where  I  might  find  him!" — you  may  thank 
God  for  them.  Those  who  have  greater  faith  know 
that  they  have  found  their  Lord;  they  know  that 
he  is  as  the  sun  which  cannot  be  hidden ;  they 
feel  his  warmth,  and  rejoice  in  his  light;  yet  the 
keen  hunger  after  Christ  which  goes  with  Little- 
faith  is  an  admirable  thing,  and  the  Lord  himself 
hath  blessed  it.  I  rejoice  in  the  blossom  of  the 
apple-tree;  it  is  not  so  valuable  as  the  fruit,  but  it 
is  exceedingly  beautiful ;  and,  even  so,  the  eager 
longings  of  a  trembling  heart  after  the  Lord  Jesus 
are  full  of  loveliness  and  fragrance,  and  are  by  no 
means  to  be  despised.  It  is  the  nature  of  Little- 
faith  that  it  should  be  of  a  thirsty  and  eager  tem 
perament,  and  hasty  to  make  a  dash  for  present 
fellowship  with  Christ. 

Little-faith  was  daring.     Early  in  her  life  ehe  had 


252          THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH. 

intense  longings,  and  they  grew  so  that  Little-faith 
was  willing  to  venture  everything  to  have  her 
longings  fulfilled.  "  If  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come 
unto  thee  on  the  water" — thus  doth  Little-faith  cry 
to  her  Lord.  These  are  big  words,  but  they  come 
out  of  a  trembling  heart.  Men  often  venture  all 
the  more  because  their  capital  is  so  small.  Souls 
who  are  little  in  faith  are  often  put  upon  desperate 
measures  to  gain  hope.  0  beloved,  are  there  not 
some  of  you  who  would  give  your  eyes  and  ears, 
and  your  very  lives,  to  see  Christ,  and  to  taste  of 
his  love  ?  You  have  come  up  to  the  Tabernacle  this 
morning  feeling  that  if  Christ,  bade  you  plunge  into 
the  sea  to  find  him,  you  would  think  nothing  of  it. 
You  feel  like  Rutherford  when  he  said  he  could 
swim  through  seven  hells  to  get  at  Christ,  and 
think  them  nothing  it  he  might  but  lie  at  his  feet. 

Those  vehement  and  burning  desires  within  your 
spirit  after  your  Lord  and  Master  are  sharp  but  ex 
ceedingly  blessed  things:  you  need  not  repress  them 
even  though  they  urge  you  to  venture  everything 
for  Christ's  sake.  Love's  ventures  for  Christ  will 
end  in  great  profit.  What  shall  it  damage  a  man 
if  he  loses  the  whole  world  and  gain  his  Saviour  ? 
What  loss  could  there  be  to  a  man  though  he  him 
self  sank  in  the  sea,  so  long  as  his  Lord  stood  there 
to  stretch  forth  his  hand  and  snatch  him  from  de 
struction  ?  Little-faith  can  yet  be  a  true  hero  when 
the  Lord  saith  to  her,  "  Come."  It  is  not  the  sea 
she  fears:  her  concern  is  lest  the  Lord  should  frown 
upon  her. 

At  times  Little- faith  accomplishes  great  wonders. 
Peter,  when  his  Master  said,  "  Come,"  went  down 
upon  the  waters  and  walked  the  waves  with  ease. 


THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH.          253 

The  Lord  pnts  forth  his  strength  even  when  we 
reveal  our  own  weakness  of  faith.  Peter  took  one 
step,  and  then  another  upon  the  rolling  wave,  won 
dering  all  the  while  how  ever  it  could  be.  Has  not 
your  little  faith  done  this?  I  remember  the  first 
step  of  faith  I  took,  how  I  wondered  at  it,  and 
wondered  at  myself.  Have  not  you  also  been, 
amazed  at  yourselves?  Do  you  remember  when 
you  believed  that  God  had  saved  you,  seeing  you 
had  faith  in  Christ?  Then,  though  you  knew  it  to 
be  true,  you  could  hardly  tell  whether  you  should 
laugh  for  joy  or  cry  for  fear,  when  you  thought 
upon  the  possibility  of  your  being  saved  in  Christ 
Jesus.  You  dared  to  believe  that  you  were  adopted 
in  the  family  of  God,  and  started  back  as  your 
heart  said,  "  How  can  he  put  me  among  the  chil 
dren?"  Do  you  recollect  reading  the  doctrine  of 
election  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  that  last  saying 
"Surely,  I  am  one  of  the  chosen  :  the  Lord  hath  loved 
me  with  an  everlasting  love;  therefore  with  loving- 
kindness  hath  he  di'awn  me"  ?  Was  it  not  a  piece 
of  daring  to  you?  Walking  on  the  water  could 
not  have  been  more  venturesome.  You  stood 
upright  when  tempted;  you  held  on,  though  sore 
beset  by  the  enemy;  you  walked  towards  Jesus, 
though  the  way  seemed  to  be  on  a  sea;  a  high  ex 
hilaration  upraised  your  spirit,  you  rose  out  of  your 
self;  but  yet  down  deep  within  there  was  a  latent 
fear,  a  half-developed  apprehension  that  your  con 
fidence  was  too  good  to  last,  that  your  joy  was 
presumptuous.  In  your  very  heart  you  were  afraid 
of  sinking;  and  it  was  no  wonder  that  by  and  by 
your  fear  became  matter  of  fact. 

But  now  comes  in  another    bit   of  our  history: 


254          THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH. 

Little-faith  is  too  apt  to  look  away  from  the  Lord 
Peter,  as  he  walked  those  billows,  took  his  eye  off 
from  his  Master,  and  just  then  a  tremendous  hur 
ricane  rushed  boisterously  in  his  face,  and  poor 
Peter  was  alarmed.  He  had  thought  of  the  fickle 
ness  of  the  waves,  but  he  had  overlooked  the  fury 
of  the  wind.  When  he  spoke  to  the  Lord,  he  said, 
"If  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  unto  thee  on  the 
water";  and  so  his  faith  had  reckoned  with  the 
water,  but  it  had  not  reckoned  upon  the  force  of 
Hie  wind.  That  mysterious  and  subtle  agent  took 
him  by  surprise.  He  had  forgotten  that  he  had 
both  winds  and  waves  to  contend  with;  and  now 
the  wind  comes  upon  him  as  a  new  trial;  as  the 
blast  came  full  in  Peter's  face,  it  chilled  him  to  the 
marrow,  and  chilled  his  heart  too.  He  heard  the 
wind,  but  forgot  the  voice  which  said,  "  It  is  I;  be 
not  afraid."  This  is  the  danger  of  Little-faith. 
Little-faith  at  the  outset,  is  scarcely  comprehensive 
enough ;  it  does  not  take  a  full  view  of  all  the  possi 
ble  dangers  and  difficulties;  and  so,  when  that  which 
it  has  omitted  comes  to  the  front,  it  is  very  apt  to 
be  sorely  troubled.  Little-faith,  thy  hope  lies  in 
keeping  thy  little  self  wholly  dependent  upon  thy 
great  Lord.  If  thou  beghmest  to  measure  circum 
stances,  it  will  go  ill  will  thee,  poor  trembling  crea 
ture  that  thou  art !  What  have  you  and  I  to  do  with 
measuring?  There  is  One  that  measures  with  a 
span  the  whole  world,  and  weighs  the  mountains  in 
scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance.  With  unmeasured 
faith  let  us  leave  ourselves  in  the  hands  of  our  im 
measurable  God ;  so  shall  our  souJs  be  kept  ir.  perfect 
peao.e,  stajTed  on  him.  I  walk  the  waves;  yet  not  I, 
but  Jesus:  therefore  will  I  not  look  to  the  winds,  but 


THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          255 

to  Jesus;  neither  will  I  think  of  sinking,  but  see 
him  standing'  and  hope  in  him. 

Now,  the  moment  he  took  his  eye  off  his  Master 
and  thought  of  the  wind,  Little-faith  began  to  sink. 
You  see  him  going  down;  he  is  ready  to  perish; 
the  proud  waters  prevail  against  him ;  lie  has  no 
power  whatever  to  help  himself.  I  should  suppose 
that  Peter  being  a  fisherman,  could  swim.  Why 
did  he  not  strike  out  ?  Mark  this,  when  a  man 
begins  to  live  by  faith,  if  his  faith  fails  him,  even 
his  natural  ability  fails  with  his  faith.  He  that 
could  swim  with  no  faith  originally,  will  not  swim 
when  once  by  faith  he  has  begun  to  walk  the 
waters.  Should  he  fail  in  his  walking  he  cannot 
fall  back  on  his  swimming.  "  Beginning  to  sink  " 
is  a  terrible  condition.  Poor  Little-faith,  it  never 
reckoned  on  this !  Deep  experiences  are  all  the 
more  dreadful  because  unlocked  for.  When  Peter 
left  ship-board,  and  slid  down  the  side  of  the  bark 
and  touched  the  sea,  his  first  miraculous  footsteps 
so  elated  him  that  he  hardly  thought  it  possible 
that  he  would  before  long  be  on  the  verge  of  drown 
ing  ;  but  now  down  he  goes,  like  lead  in  the  mighty 
waters.  The  billows  open  wide  their  great  mouths 
to  swallow  up  poor  Little-faith,  and  down  he  goes. 
Is  that  the  condition  of  any  child  of  God  here  this 
morning  ?  I  must  confess  it  has  sometimes  been 
mine.  There  was  a  step,  and  scarce  a  step,  be 
tween  me  and  death.  That  which  bore  me  up 
appeared  to  give  way,  and  the  waters  came  in 
even  unto  my  soul. 

Let  me  not  finish  this  history  of  Little-faith 
without  saying  that  Little-faith  knew  how  to  pray, 
Though  Peter  did  not  know  how  to  come  to  Christ 


256  THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

on  the  waters,  he  knew  how  to  come  to  him  by 
prayer.  Though  his  faith  was  not  what  it  ought 
to  be,  it  was  ivhere  it  ought  to  be,  for  his  cry  was 
to  his  Lord  alone.  He  did  not  appeal  to  his  breth 
ren  in  the  vessel,  but  only  to  his  dear  Master  who 
stood  so  firmly  on  the  rolling  wave.  He  did  not 
cry,  "John,  save  me!"  but  "Lord,  save  me."  Jt 
was  a  short  prayer,  but  it  was  a  comprehensive 
one.  It  expressed  his  need  of  salvation;  it  proved 
his  faith  in  the  Lord's  will  to  save  him ;  it  owned 
Jesus  to  be  his  Lord,  and  it  tacitly  admitted  that 
the  Lord  could  save  him ;  and  none  else.  In  hia 
prayer  he  quits  all  other  hope,  and  looks  wholly  and 
solely  to  Jesus,  crying,  "  Lord,  save  me  !"  His  faith 
quotes  what  the  Lord  had  done  for  others  in  heal 
ing,  feeding,  and  saving  them,  and  now  he  cries, 
"Lord,  save  me!"  He  asks  Jesus  to  act  as  his 
name  implies  he  would  do:  he  practically  says, 
"Saviour,  save  me."  He  appeals  to  his  authority: 
"Thou  art  my  Lord,  and  thou  didst  bid  me  come; 
therefore  as  Lord  save  thine  own  servant.  Save 
rne."  His  short  cry  is  full  of  force.  Let  us  imitate 
both  its  shortness  and  its  fullness.  Whenever  faith 
is  weak  let  prayer  be  strong.  When  you  cannot  do 
anything  else  but  cry,  then  cry  with  might  and 
main.  If  it  is  less  the  cry  of  faith,  let  it  be  all 
the  more  the  cry  of  agony.  "Beginning  to  sink," 
he  cried,  "  Lord,  save  me."  Little  children  are 
good  at  crying,  if  at  nothing  else,  and  so  is 
Little-faith.  When  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid,  he 
became  bold  enough  to  wrestle  at  Jabbok.  Even 
Little-faith  has  prayer  for  its  vital  breath,  its 
native  air.  Where  there  is  life,  there  is  bieath; 
and  where  there  is  faith,  theio  is  prayer.  O 


THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH.          257 

soul,  art  thou  sinking  ?  Then  cry,  "  Lord,  save 
me!" 

Now  in  this  little  picture,  have  any  of  you  recog 
nized  yourselves?  Do  you  long  for  Christ?  Would 
you  venture  all  things  for  his  dear  sake  ?  Do  you 
trust  him?  Have  you  enjoyed  happy  moments 
when  by  faith  you  have  accomplished  things  im 
possible  to  mere  sense?  Have  you  sometimes  be 
lieved,  and  in  that  belief  found  an  upbearing  for 
your  spirit  that  made  you  more  than  conqueror? 
Then,  if  at  this  moment  there  should  be  a  collapse, 
and  your  faith  should  waver,  pray  unto  the  Lord. 
He  stands  fast  if  you  do  not.  It  is  your  wisdom  to 
cry  mightily  in  this  your  time  of  need;  and  as 
surely  as  the  Lord  liveth,  he  will  come  to  your  rescue. 
Among  all  the  carcases  that  should  be  washed  up 
on  the  Dead  Sea  shore  there  shall  never  be  found 
the  corpse  of  Little-faith.  Though  Little-faith  had 
often  said,  "  1  shall  one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  the 
enemy,"  no  weapon  has  yet  been  forged  that  can 
strike  its  heart,  or  break  its  bones.  He  that  be- 
lieveth  even  with  a  little  and  a  trembling  believing, 
is  safe  beneath  the  guardian  care  of  the  Eternal 
God.  "  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers,  and 
under  his  wings  shalt  thou  trust:  his  truth  shall  be 
thy  shield  and  buckler." 

At  the  end  Little-faith  will  grow  to  full  assur 
ance  and  will  come  up  into  the  vessel,  yea,  unto 
heaven  with  Christ.  Little-faith  shall  find  its  way 
across  the  Jordan,  and  stand  in  its  lot  in  the  end 
of  the  days;  and  perhaps  among  the  most  rap 
turous  songs  that  shall  ever  salute  the  Redeemer's 
ear  will  be  the  song  of  those  who  were  weak 
and  trembling  when  they  were  hero  below,  and 


258  THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH 

yet  were  kept  unto  the  end.  Wherefore,  have 
confidence  ! 

II.  I  come  now  to  the  second  head  of  my  dis 
course,  which  is  an  interesting  one — LITTLE-FAITH 
ACKNOWLEDGED  BY  THE  LOUD.  In  my  text  you  will  ob- 
serve  the  Saviour  did  not  say,  "0  thou  of  no 
faith,"  or,  "0  thou  of  pretended  faith,"  but"O 
thou  of  little  faith."  There  are  times  when  we 
would  give  all  that  we  have  if  we  could  only 
htve  our  Master's  assurance  that  we  have  even 
a  little  faith.  If  he  does  but  own  that  it  is  faith, 
then  the  root  of  the  matter  is  in  us.  I  would 
rather  have  great  faith  than  little  faith;  but  I 
would  rather  have  little  than  have  great  presump 
tion,  and  mistake  it  for  holy  confidence.  It  ought 
to  have  comforted  Peter,  even  as  it  did  rebuke  him, 
to  hear  his  Lord,  who  could  not  make  a  mistake, 
acknowledge  that  he  had  faith. 

In  following  up  this  subject,  note  that  little  faith 
is  faith,  and  little  faith  is  true  faith.  A  grain  of 
mustard  seed  has  life  in  it  as  surely  as  the  tree 
beneath  whose  spreading  boughs  the  birds  of  the 
air  find  shelter.  A  spark  is  as  truly  fire  as  the 
conflagi'ation  which  burned  down  a  city.  Little 
faith  is  not  such  powerful  faith  as  great  faith,  but 
it  is  quite  as  true  faith.  0  soul,  if  thou  hast  a 
ray  of  light,  it  came  from  the  sun;  if  thou  hast 
a  pulse  of  life,  it  comes  from  the  heart;  if  thou  hast 
any  measure  of  faith,  it  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  A  pearl  is  a  pearl,  though  it  be  no  bigger  than 
a  pin's  head.  God's  signature  is  as  valid  when  he 
writes  it  small  as  when  he  uses  capitals. 

In  Peter's  case  little  faith  wax  faith  loitli  a  very  solid 
reason  at  the  back  of  it.  0  child  of  God,  little  as  thy 


THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          259 

faith  maj7  be,  yet  if  them  believest  in  Christ  tbou 
hast  faith  most  proper  and  justifiable;  in  fact,  so 
strong  is  the  ground  of  thy  little  faith  that  the 
Saviour  even  asks  thee,  "  Wherefore  didst  thou 
doubt?"  As  much  as  to  say,  "  You  have  every 
reason  for  your  faith,  but  what  reason  have  you  for 
doubting?"  Oh,  dear  heart,  if  thou  dost  come  to 
Christ  and  cast  thyself  on  him,  thou  art  doing  the 
best  and  the  rightest  thing  that  thou  canst  do,  and 
none  can  question  thy  conduct.  Ay,  if  thou  dost 
even  swoon  away  upon  the  dear  bosom  of  the  eternal 
love,  none  shall  tear  thee  off,  none  shall  separate 
thee,  even  in  thy  feebleness,  from  Christ.  He  has 
said  that  him  that  cometh  to  him  he  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out;  who,  then,  can  dismiss  thee  from  his  pre 
sence?  Thou  art  not  presumptuous,  thou  art  not 
going  beyond  what  is  permitted  thee  when  thou 
dost,  trust  thyself  and  thine  all  on  Christ  thy  Lord. 
Do  it  again,  and  do  it  again  more  thoroughly,  and 
thou  shalt  never  be  ashamed  of  having  done  it; 
nay,  it  shall  be  thy  glory  that  thou  darest  to  trust 
thy  Lord.  His  promise  shall  never  be  outdone  by 
thy  faith.  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  he  will  fill  it. 
Ask  more  faith,  and  he  will  give  more  faith  and  ful 
fill  to  thee  greater  promise  ;  go  from  faith  to  faith, 
and  thou  shilt  receive  blessing  upon  blessing. 
There  is  no  limit  to  thy  Lord's  love;  make  free 
with  it;  there  is  no  reason  why  thou  shouldst  hesi 
tate.  Christ  owned  little  faith  to  be  faith  with  a 
solid  reason  at  its  back  when  he  said,  "  Wherefore 
didst  thou  doubt?  " 

Our  Lord  Jesus  owned  little  faith  because,  little 
as  it  was,  it  ventured  all  for  Mm.  Peter  had  thrown 
himself  into  the  sea  to  come  to  his  Master,  and  the 


260  THE    HISTORY   OF   LITTLE-FAITH. 

Lord  recognized  that  fact.  He  who  ventures  all 
for  Jesus  and  on  Jesus,  shall  not  find  it  to  be  a  los 
ing  speculation.  Though  you  dare  not  SUV  lhat 
you  have  strong  faith,  yet  you  give  np  the  world's 
pleasures,  and  its  sinful  gains,  and  its  pleasing 
smiles,  for  Christ;  you  would  not  deny  him  for  all 
the  treasures  ofEg^pt:  well,  then,  our  Lord  will 
acknowledge  you  as  his,  and  bear  your  harmless 
in  the  end.  That  little  faith,  which  is  real  faith, 
knows  nothing  of  the  timidity  which  haunts  the 
heart  of  the  hypocrite.  Little-faith  fears  lest  it 
should  not  be  accepted  at  the  last,  but  it  is  not 
afraid  of  being  persecuted  for  Christ's  sake.  No.  let 
me  but  know  that  I  am  his  and  he  is  mine;  I  will 
go  though  fire,  and  though  water,  to  be  with  him. 
Little  faith,  in  the  case  of  Peter,  was  coming  to 
Jesus  all  tie  while.  Peter,  when  he  left  the  ship, 
left  it  to  come  to  Jesus,  and  for  that  purpose  only. 
The  first  step  he  took  upon  the  sea  was  towards 
Jesus,  and  every  other  step  was  towards  Jesus; 
and  when  he  began  to  sink  he  sank  that  way, 
leaning  towards  his  Master,  and  crying  as  he 
went  down,  "  Lord,  save  me !  "  Now,  the  Lord 
Jesus  always  owns  a  faith  which  comes  towards 
him,  however  it  may  be.  If  thou  hast  a  faith  which 
looks  to  thyself,  a  curse  rests  upon  it.  If  thou  hast 
a  faith  which  looks  to  priests,  it  is  superstition.  If 
thou  hast  a  faith  which  looks  to  ceremonies,  creeds, 
prayers,  and  feelings,  it  will  fail  thee  when  most 
thou  needest  help.  But  if  thou  hast  a  faith  whose 
eyes  are  to  Jesus,  whose  longings  are  for  Jesus, 
whose  hopes  are  all  centered  in  Jesus,  whose  steps 
all  tend  to  Jesus,  then  thou  hast  a  faith  upon  which 
Jesus  sets  his  seal,  and  though  he  calls  it  "  little," 


THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          261 

yet  he  calls  it  "  faith."  Be  sure  that  which  the 
Lord  himself  owns  to  be  faith  is  faith,  even  though 
for  the  present  it  leaves  thee  damp  with  the  brine 
from  which  thou  art  newly  plucked. 

Once  more,  the  Master  acknowledges  this  faith; 
for,  before  long  Little-faith  came  to  walk  with  Jesus  on 
the  sea  I  tli'ink  I  have  seen  a  picture  of  Peter 
sinking  and  Christ  stooping  to  save  him;  but  I 
wish  that  some  eminent  artist  would  paint  the  two 
walking  together  in  peace,  Peter  and  his  Lord. 
What  joy  to  think  that  Little-faith,  once  drawn  from 
the  deep,  stands  on  those  foaming  waves  side  by 
side  with  the  great  saving  Lord  !  Now  is  Peter 
conformed  to  his  Lord.  Now  is  the  servant  clothed 
with  the  might  of  his  Master.  We  have  aforetime 
seen  the  Son  of  God  walking  in  the  tire  with  the 
three  holy  youths,  and  now  we  see  the  obverse  of 
the  medal — a  saint  walking  on  the  water  with  the 
Son  of  Man.  Is  it  not  a  splendid,  re-assuring  truth 
that  Little-faith  can  grow  to  act  like  Christ  ?  The 
day  shall  yet  come  when  the  Lord  shall  have  so 
strengthened  Little-faith  that  the  things  that  the 
Lord  doeth  shall  Little-faith  do  also,  and  the  word 
shull  be  fulfilled,  "  Greater  works  than  these  shall 
ye  do;  because  I  go  unto  my  Father."  You  tell  me 
that  you  cannot  rejoice  to-day;  but  Jesus  will  see 
you  again  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice.  You  can 
not  go  forth  to  Christian  service,  for  you  are  lame 
through  spiritual  weakness;  but  the  day  cometh 
when  the  lame  man  shall  leap  as  a  hart.  The 
Healer  of  his  people  will  lay  his  hand  upon  you, 
and  make  you  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  his  might."  You  have  a  greater  con 
sciousness  to-day  of  your  inability  in  yourself  than 


2G2  THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

you  have  of  your  ability  in  the  Lord;  but  it  shall 
not  always  be  so;  the  time  will  come  when  in  rapt 
fellowship  with  him,  by  the  strength  of  his  grace, 
you  shall  be  in  this  world  even  as  he  is,  and  that 
glorious  life  which  in  the  person  of  Christ  trod  on 
the  sea  as  though  it  were  a  sea  of  glass,  that  same 
life  shall  be  in  you,  so  that  you  shall  overcome  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 

I  feel  right  glad  to  have  even  a  little  faith.  I 
am  truly  sorry  that  it  is  so  little  when  I  know 
that  my  Lord  deserves  all  possible  confidence;  but 
yet  I  am  glad  that  it  is  given  me  to  believe  on  his 
name,  for  it  has  brought  me  near  him,  and  will 
bring  me  yet  nearer,  and  will  by  and  by  bring  me 
to  be  with  him  where  he  is,  and  to  behold  his 
glory.  Thus  I  have  shown  you  that  onr  Lord 
acknowledged  Little-faith.  He  did  not  break  the 
bruised  reed,  nor  disown  the  infant  faith ;  but  he 
called  it  faith,  answered  its  prayer,  and  made  it  to 
stand  with  him  in  fellowship  of  power. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  I  want  you  to  notice 
LITTLE-FAITH'S  DELIVERANCE.  Little-faith  began  to 
sink,  but  it  was  only  a  beginning.  The  sinking  did 
not  end  in  Peter's  drowning,  but  in  his  Lord's 
saving.  The  text  saith  "  beginning  to  sink";  and 
truly  that  is  the  whole  matter.  None  of  God's 
people  shall  go  beyond  "  beginning  to  sink."  We 
may  be  "  ready  to  perish,"  but  we  shall  not  actually 
perish.  Onr  steps  may  be  "almost  gone,"  but 
"  almost"  is  not  "  qnite."  A  man  i»ay  be  near 
death,  and  yet  live;  he  may  begin  to  sink,  and  yet 
be  saved.  Friend,  it  may  be  that  for  some  time 
you  have  been  "  beginning  to  sink";  but  you  have 
not  Bunk  yet,  Not  yet  are  you  consumed,  not  yet 


THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH.          203 

is  the  Lord's  mercy  clean  gone  forever;  not  yet 
hath  he  forgotten  to  be  gracious.  Oftentimes 
"  beginning  to  sink  "  with  us,  is  with  Christ  begin 
ning  to  stretch  out  his  hand.  The  beginning  of 
a  clear  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  is  often  the  be 
ginning  of  the  display  of  the  power  of  God. 

Little-faith  received  its  deliverance  wholly  from 
the  Lord.  As  1  have  already  said,  it  was  not 
Peter's  swimming  that  got  him  out  of  his  trouble, 
nor  was  it  any  revival  of  Peter's  faith  which  did 
it,  but  the  Lord  came  to  the  rescue,  and  proved  his 
power  to  help  at  a  dead  lift.  So  shall  it  be  with 
thee,  0  trembling  heart:  in  the  hour  of  thine  ex 
tremity  God  shall  appear  for  thee.  The  Lord  will 
provide.  Out  of  weakness  thou  shalt  be  made 
strong;  for  he  hath  said,  "  1  will  never  leave  thee 
nor  forsake  thee." 

It  was  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  it  was  immediate. 
Will  you  kindly  note  that  word  in  the  text,  ''and 
immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand."  Be 
fore  he  rebuked  him  for  his  little  faith,  he  delivered 
him  from  his  perils.  0  Little-faith,  thou  hast  but  to 
cry,  and  the  Lord  will  help  thee.  Do  not  thou  de 
lay  thy  crying,  and  he  will  not  delay  his  helping. 
The  Lord  may  let  the  matter  proceed  some  consider 
able  distance  till  we  think  it  is  all  over  with  us; 
but  in  the  nick  of  time  he  will  appear  for  our  de 
liverance.  At  that  dark  moment  when  we  read 
our  own  death-warrant  amid  the  roar  of  the  tempest, 
the  prompt  relief  of  the  Lord  of  love  will  arrive. 
No  wings  of  cherubim  can  be  more  swift  than  the 
Lord's  right  hand  when  he  means  to  draw  hie 
people  from  great  waters. 

It  is  added,   "  immediately   lie  stretched  f orfh   his 


264  THE    HISTORY   OF   LITTLE-FAITH. 

hand."  It  was  an  instructive  action  on  the  part 
of  Jesus,  that  stretching  forth  of  his  hand ;  as  if  he 
was  arousing  himself  to  the  utmost  energy,  and 
reaching  beyond  himself  to  rescue  his  servant.  A 
stretched-out  hand  denotes  the  exercise  of  all  the 
power  of  the  person  thus  acting.  In  the  case  of 
God's  people,  it  has  often  been  found  necessary  that 
he  should  bring  them  forth  with  a  high  hand  and 
with  an  outstretched  arm.  Peter  had  liis  exodus 
from  the  water  as  Israel  from  Egypt.  Who  is  TO 
know  the  might  of  God's  arm,  if  he  does  not  stretch 
it  out?  And  why  should  it  be  stretched  out  unless 
there  is  a  need  for  it?  So  that  our  perils  produce 
the  necessity  for  God  to  stretch  out  his  hand,  and 
thus  they  turn  out  to  be  comfortable  means  of  grace 
to  us.  Our  necessities  are  the  doors  through  which 
the  Lord's  great  bounty  comes  to  us.  If  Little-faith 
did  not  lift  up  its  cry  of  dismay,  the  Lord's  hand 
would  not  be  lifted  up  for  its  rescue. 

It  is  added,  he  "  caught  him.'"  Thus  the  Lord 
came  into  personal  contact  with  his  servant.  See, 
lie  holds  him  up.  The  whole  weight  of  Peter  is 
on  Christ.  If  Peter  sinks,  Jesus  must  sink  too;  for 
he  will  not  quit  his  hold.  For  the  time,  Peter  and 
Christ  are  joined;  they  have  only  one  standing,  and 
that  standing  is  all  in  Christ.  Oh,  Little-faith,  thou 
dost  feel  a  closer  union  to  Christ  in  thine  hour  of 
danger  than  ever  before.  It  comes  to  this,  that 
when  Jesus  interposes  to  save  Little-faith,  he  bends 
all  his  strength  to  the  deed,  and  takes  hold  of  the 
sinking  one  with  a  grip  so  fast  and  firm,  that  the 
two  must  sink  or  stand  together.  All  the  weight 
of  Peter  was  on  Jesus;  all  the  security  of  Jesus  was 
bestowed  on  Peter.  Little-faith  holds  Jesus  while 


THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH.          265 

Jesus  upholds  Little-faith.  A  half-hoping,  half- 
despairing  soul  lays  hold  on  Jesus  with  an  iron  grip, 
and  on  such  a  poor  feeble  one  the  hold  of  Jesus 
is  equally  tight  and  strong.  He  will  never  let 
the  sinking  sinner  die  when  once  that  prayer  has 
been  uttered,  "  Lord,  save  me."  I  hardly  know  of 
a  more  conscious  union  between  a  man  and  Christ 
than  that  which  is  effected  when  in  sinking  times 
the  grip  of  the  crucified  hand  is  felt  as  our  sole 
rescue  from  death.  "Hallelujah,  who  shall  part 
Christ's  own  Bride  from  Christ's  own  heart  ? " 
Who  is  he  that  shall  separate  the  most  timid  and 
trembling  of  all  the  believing  company  from  that 
eternal  hand  which  is  sworn  to  deliver  ?  "  I  give 
unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,"  saith  he,  "and  they 
shall  never  perish";  nor  shall  they,  though  the 
heavens  and  earth  shall  pass  away.  The  Lord  must 
and  will  stretch  out  his  hand  and  catch  the 
sinking  one,  and  grant  him  the  same  standing  as 
himself. 

IV.  I  close  with  LITTLE-FAITH  REBUKED.  That 
comes  last.  After  the  poor  soul  is  quite  rescued, 
and  set  on  a  sure  footing,  then  comes  the  loving 
chiding:  "0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst 
thou  doubt?  "  This  is  such  a  gentle  rebuking  that 
it  almost  seems  to  me  that  the  Master  might  say 
as  much  as  this  to  us  when  we  enter  Paradise 
with  him.  It  might  not  be  unkind  even  there  to 
say,  "  Wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?"  When  you 
and  I  have  come  up  from  our  dying  beds,  and  left 
all  pain,  and  poverty,  and  sorrow,  far  behind,  we 
shall  find  ourselves  in  the  golden-streeted  city,  and 
the  Well-beloved  with  us,  and  we  shall  look  back 
on  all  the  way  whereby  he  led  us ;  and  then  he  may 


2f,G          THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE-FAITH. 

lovingly  whisper  in  our  ear,  "  Wherefore  didst  thou 
doubt?"  Look  back  on  thy  pilgrim  way.  There 
is  the  Slough  of  Despond  dried  up;  there  is  Giant 
Despair's  head  on  a  pole;  there  is  Apollyon  bound 
with  chains;  there  is  the  river  whose  chill  streams 
so  often  affrighted  thee,  glittering  in  the  eternal 
light.  "Wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?"  You 
doubted  about  nothing.  You  made  mountains  out 
of  molehills.  Where  everything  was  working  for 
you,  you  said  with  trembling  Jacob,  "  All  these 
things  are  against  me."  Will  not  our  Lord  pro 
duce  a  rapture  within  our  spirit  while  he  brings 
to  mind  his  unchanging  love,  his  immutable 
truth,  his  immovable  faithfulness?  We  shall 
eternally  wonder  at  our  own  doubts.  What 
if  our  Lord  should  say,  "Didst  thou  not  come 
up  from  the  wilderness  leaning  upon  me  as 
thy  beloved  ?  Did  I  ever  i'ail  thee  ?  Did  I 
ever  give  thee  a  cross  word  ?  Say,  did  I  ever 
leave  thee  or  forsake  thee?  Wherefore  didst  thou 
doubt?"  Then  we  shall  sweetly  chide  ourselves  to 
think  we  ever  had  a  moment's  distrust  of  our  dear 
Lord,  the  Bridegroom  of  our  souls,  in  whom  our 
faith  ought  to  have  been  constant  as  the  day. 

Notice,  dear  friends,  with  regard  to  this  question, 
"Wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?  "  that  it  is  an  incon 
sistent  thing  for  a  believing  man  to  doubt  his  God, 
or  distrust  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  You  do 
believe,  and  if  you  believe,  why  doubt?  If  faith, 
why  little  faith?  If  you  doubt,  why  believe  ?  And 
if  you  believe,  why  doubt?  Oil  and  water  will 
not  mix.  Oh,  how  should  faith  and  unbelief  unite  ? 
Yet  they  are  often  found  together  in  deadly  war 
fare.  "  Oh,"  said  a  dear  sieter  in  Christ  to  me  the 


THE    HISTORY   OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

other  day,  "  I  cannot  doubt  my  God."  Yet  she 
also  expressed  a  fear  lest  she  should  be  wrong  at 
the  last.  Tliis  was  an  odd  mixture  in  one  who 
knew  so  well  the  glorious  gospel ;  but  then  we  are 
odd  in  some  way  or  other.  In  any  case  it  is  not 
meet  that  we  believe  and  yet  disbelieve.  Shall  a 
fountain  send  forth  both  sweet  water  and  bitter? 
Begone,  ye  doubts  !  Oh  that  they  would  go  at  my 
bidding  !  What  business  have  ye  here  at  the  fes 
tival  of  faith  ?  Begone,  ye  harpies,  that  devour  the 
bread  of  the  Lord's  table,  and  defile  o-ur  dainty 
things  !  What  right  have  ye  to  enter  the  holy 
abodes  of  faith  ? 

While  doubts  are  so  inconsistent,  are  they  not 
also  most  dis'ionoring  ?  Why  should  we  doubt  our 
Lord  ?  Shall  it  go  forth  to  the  world  that  we  can 
not  trust  Christ?  Shall  it  be  said  that  those  who 
are  saved  by  him,  nevertheless  say  it  is  hard  work  to 
believe  him  ?  Hard  to  believe  him  who  has  proven 
his  love  by  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat !  My 
Lord,  I  will  sooner  doubt  my  brother,  and  doubt 
my  father,  and  doubt  my  wife,  than  doubt  thee  ! 
My  Lord,  I  will  doubt  my  eyes,  and  doubt  my 
oars,  and  doubt  the  beating  of  my  heart,  sooner 
than  doubt  thee  !  I  will  doubt  the  laws  of  nature, 
I  wi.l  doubt  everything  which  seems  certain,  I 
will  doubt  the  conclusions  of  mathematics;  but 
thee,  oh  wherefore,  wherefore,  should  I  doubt 
thee  ?  Nay,  let  us  hold  on  to  the  love  of  Jesus 
and  cling  to  him  even  though  he  should  frown  and 
chasten.  Be  it  ours  to  trust  a  scourging  God! 
Yea,  say,  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust 
in  him." 

Once  again,    how   inexcusable   is   this   doubting 


208          THE    HISTORY    OF  LITTLE-FAITH. 

among  you  who  do  believe!  The  only  excuses 
worth  mentioning  .are  these.  Some  excuse  them 
selves  because  they  desire  to  be  humble.  "  I  dare 
not  think  that  these  good  things  are  true  to  me,  t 
know  that  I  am  altogether  unworthy  of  them,  and 
I  am  afraid  of  being  proud  if  I  take  them  to  my 
self."  Do  you  not  know,  dear  friend,  that  the  biggest 
pride  in  all  the  world  is  doubting  God  ?  and  it  is 
the  sweetest  humility  to  trust  in  God  as  a  child 
trusts  its  father.  It  is  the  lowliest  action  of  the 
heart  to  say,  "  These  things  are  good,  exceeding 
good,  and  I  am  most  unworthy;  but  then  the  Ltrd 
hath  said  that  he  gives  these  gracious  gifts  to  the 
unworthy;  and,  if  he  had  said  it,  God  forbid  that  I 
should  question  him."  Who  am  I  that  I  should  ven 
ture  to  raise  a  doubt  about  the  bona  fides  of  the  Lord 
Jehovah  ?  I  must,  I  will  cease  from  all  such  proud 
questionings  and  artful  doubtings  and  be  even  as  a 
new-born  babe,  drinking  in  the  unadulterated  milk 
of  the  word. 

I  am  persuaded  that  unbelief  is  sometimes  oc 
casioned  by  ignorance.  I  pray  you,  do  not  let  such 
ignorance  remain  in  you.  Be  diligent  in  searching 
Holy  Scripture.  If  you  do  not  know  the  Lord,  nor 
know  his  providence,  nor  know  the  doctrine  of 
the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  nor  know  the 
covenant  of  grace,  why,  then  you  may  be  stag 
gered;  but  learn  those  things  that  you  may  be 
established. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  unbelief  is  caused  not  only 
by  ignorance,  but  by  forgetful  ness.  We  forget 
the  Lord's  past  mercies.  If  the  Lord  has  plucked 
you  like  a  brand  out  of  the  fire,  cannot  he  pluck 
}  ou  out  of  the  sea  ?  He  that  delivered  you  from  the 


THE    HISTORY    OF   LITTLE- FAITH.          2G9 

deadly  power  of  sin,  cannot  he  deliver  you  from 
every  temptation  ?  In  fact,  the  Lord  has  done 
more  for  us  already  than  he  ever  will  have  to  do 
for  us  in  the  future;  for  he  will  never  have  to  die 
again  upon  the  bloody  tree,  and  he  will  never  have  to 
offer  himself  again  as  an  atonement  for  our  sin. 
Nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  parts  out  of  a 
thousand  are  ours  already.  We  have  only  to  shut 
our  eyes  and  open  them  in  heaven,  and  the  rest 
will  be  ours.  To-day  is  our  salvation  nearer  than 
when  we  believed.  We  are  almost  home  !  With 
in  sight  of  the  white  cliff's  of  the  better  land  !  Shall 
we  tremble  now  ?  Shall  we  not  begin  to  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable  ?  Does  not  little  faith  begin 
to  mount  into  assurance  ? 

You  that  have  not  believed  in  Jesus,  I  have  tried 
to  show  you  the  way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ 
You  that  have  believed  but  tremblingly,  I  have 
pointed  out  to  you  much  that  ought  to  comfort  you. 
And  to  you  who  can  believe  with  full  assurance,  I 
would  say,  Guard  that  full  assurance  with  great 
care;  it  is  heaven  below,  it  is  the  beginning  of 
heaven  above.  The  Lord,  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  with 
you  all,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


XII. 

THE  NECESSITY  OF  GROWING  FAITH. 
August  30,  1885, 

"We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  as  it 
is  meet,  because  that  your  i'aith  groweth  exceedingly,  and  the 
charity  of  every  one  of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth." — 
2  THESSALONIANS  i.  3. 

LAST  Lord's-day  I  tried  to  say  cheering  and 
encouraging  words  to  "Little-faith."  I  trust 
that  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  did  thereby 
strengthen  some  to  whom  the  Saviour  said,  "  0 
thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?" 
But  none  of  us  would  desire  to  remain  among  the 
Little-faiths;  we  long  to  press  forward  in  our 
march  to  the  better  land.  If  we  have  just  started 
in  the  heavenly  race,  it.  is  well;  there  are  grounds 
of  comfort  about  the  first  steps  in  the  right  way; 
but  we  are  not  going  to  stop  at  the  starting-point; 
our  desire  is  towards  the  winning-post  and  the 
crown.  My  prayer  at  the  commencement  of  this 
discourse  is,  that  we  may  each  of  us  rise  out  of  our 
little  faith  into  the  loftier  region  of  assurance,  so 
that  those  who  love  us  best  may  be  able  to  say, 
"  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you, 
brethren,  as  it  is  meet,  because  that  your  faith 
groweth  exceedingly." 

The  church  of  Jesus  Christ  at  Thessalonica  did 
not  commence  under  very  propitious  circumstances. 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  271 

Remember  that  oft-quoted  text  about  the  Bereans: 
"  These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessa- 
lonica,  in  that  they  searched  the  Scriptures  daily 
whether  those  things  were  so."  That  record  does 
not  relate  to  the  converts  in  Thessalonica,  but  to 
those  Jews  who  heard  Paul  preach  in  the  syna 
gogue,  and  refused  to  test  his  teaching  by  a  refer 
ence  to  the  Old  Testament.  They  were  not  a 
noble  sort  of  people,  and  yet  from  among  them 
there  were  taken  by  almighty  grace  a  certain  com 
pany  who  were  led  to  believe  in  the  true  Messiah. 
Thus  they  became  more  noble  than  even  the 
Bereans;  for  we  do  not  hear  of  a  church  in  Berea, 
neither  was  there  an  epistle  written  to  the  Bereans. 
Thessalonica  received  two  epistles,  bright  with 
hearty  commendation.  Paul  praised  the  Philippians, 
but  the  Thessalonians  he  praised  yet  more,  thank 
ing  God  at  every  remembrance  of  them,  and  glory 
ing  in  them  among  the  churches  of  God  for  their 
patience  and  faith. 

I  shall  ask  you,  with  your  Bibles  open,  to  see 
whether  we  cannot  account  in  some  measure  for 
this  remarkable  condition  of  things.  The  verse 
before  us  is  full  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the 
growth  of  the  Thessalonians  in  faith  and  in  love; 
and  to  my  mind  it  sounds  like  an  echo  of  the  First- 
Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  The  first  epistle  is  the 
key  and  the  cause  of  the  second.  Very  often  a  man's 
success  in  this  place,  or  in  that,  will  tally  with  his 
own  condition  of  heart  in  relation  to  that  place.  As 
we  sow  we  reap.  The  grace  of  God  enabled  Paul 
to  sow  toward  the  Thessalonians  with  great  hope 
fulness,  and  trust,  and  prayerfulness,  and  conse 
quently  he  reaped  plentifully. 


272  THE    NECESSITY 

Observe  how  (1  Thess.  i.  2,  3)  Paul  began  by 
distinctly  recognizing  the  existence  of  faith  and 
love  in  that  church.  "  We  give  thanks  to  God 
always  for  you  all,  making  mention  of  you  in  our 
prayers;  remembering  without  ceasing  your  work 
of  faith,  and  labor  of  love  and  patience  of  hope 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  sight  of  God  and 
our  Father."  Recognize  the  root,  and  then  look 
for  the  flower.  See  that  faith  is  in  the  soul,  smile 
upon  it  and  foster  it,  and  then  you  may  expect  that 
the  faith  will  steadily  increase.  In  our  text  Paul 
mentions  faith  as  gi-owing,  and  love  as  abounding, 
while  in  the  next  verse  he  mentions  patience, 
which  is  the  outgrowth  of  hope — "the  patience 
of  hope."  He  noticed  in  the  Thessalonians  the 
birth  of  those  three  divine  sisters — faith,  hope,  and 
chanty.  That  which  he  recognized  with  pleasure 
he  afterwards  saw  growing  exceedingly:  those 
who  cherish  the  seed  shall  rejoice  in  the  plant. 
Observe  in  the  children  under  your  care  the  first 
blossoms  of  any  good  thing,  and  you  shall  observe 
its  increase.  Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things, 
When  you  have  learned  to  recognize  faith  in  its 
buds,  you  shall  soon  see  faith  in  its  flower  and 
faith  in  its  fruits.  Do  not  overlook  feeble  grace, 
or  criticise  it  because  it  is  as  yet  imperfect;  but 
mark  its  beginnings  with  thankfulness,  and  you 
shall  behold  its  advance  with  delight. 

In  addition  to  recognizing  the  beginnings  of 
faith,  Paul  labored  hard  to  promote  it.  Look  in 
the  second  chapter,  and  read  verses  7,  8,  11,  12:—- 
"  But  we  wei'e  gentle  among  you,  even  as  a  nurse 
cherisheth  her  children:  so  being  affectionately 
desirous  of  you,  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted 


OF   GROWING    FAITH.  273 

onto  you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our 
own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto  us.  As  ye 
know  how  we  exhorted  and  comforted  and  charged 
every  one  of  you,  as  a  fa-ther  doth  his  children, 
that  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who  hath 
called  you  unto  his  kingdom  and  glory."  He 
threw  his  whole  strength  into  the  work  of  upbuild 
ing  that  church,  toiling  night  and  day  for  it;  and 
consequently  he  obtained  his  desire;  for  still  it  is 
true  in  the  husbandry  of  God,  that  those  who  sow, 
and  steep  their  seeds  in  the  tears  of  earnestness, 
shall  doubtless  come  again  rejoicing,  bringing 
their  sheaves  with  them. 

Paul  had  accompanied  his  public  labors  with 
his  private  prayers.  See  how  1  Thessalonians  iii. 
12,  tallies  with  our  text: — "And  the  Lord  make 
you  to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward 
another,  and  toward  all  men,  even  as  we  do  toward 
you."  This  was  his  prayer;  and  he  received 
exactly  what  he  prayed  for.  lie  saw  abounding 
love  in  each  one  towards  every  other.  The  Lord 
seemed  to  have  noted  the  wording  of  Paul's  prayer 
and  to  have  answered  him  according  to  the  letter 
of  his  request.  If  we  open  our  mouth  wide,  the 
Lord  will  till  it.  Brethren,  what  we  comfortably 
recognize  in  its  gracious  beginnings,  what  we 
labor  to  increase  and  what  we  earnestly  guard 
with  prayer,  shdll  in  due  time  be  granted  to  us! 

More  than  this:  Paul  had  gone  on  to  exhort  them 
to  abound  in  love  and  faith.  Look  at  chapter  iv. 
verse  9:  "As  touching  brotherly  love  ye  need 
not  that  I  write  unto  you:  for  ye  yourselves  are 
taught  of  God  to  love  one  another.  And  indeed 
ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all 


274  THE    NECESSITY 

Macedonia;  but  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  that 
ye  increase  more  and  more."  Paul  did  not  only 
quietly  pray  for  the  church,  but  he  added  his 
earnest  admonitions. 

He  bids  them  increase,  more  and  more:  and  in 
response  they  do  increase,  so  that  he  says,  "  Your 
faith  groweth  exceedingly."  When  a  man  says, 
"  more  and  more"  it  is  only  another  way  of  saying 
"exceedingly":  is  it  not  so?  There  was  a  big  heart 
in  Paul  towards  the  Thessalonians.  He  wanted 
them  to  grow  in  faith  and  love  "  more,"  and 
then  to  take  another  step,  and  add  another  "  more" 
to  it.  The  exhortation  being  given  out  of  a  full 
heart,  behold,  God  has  fulfilled  it  to  his  servant, 
and  the  people  have  willingly  followed  up  the 
apostolic  precept. 

But  Paul  had  added  faith  to  his  prayers  and  his 
exhortations.  Look  at  chapter  v.,  verses  23,  24, 
and  see  if  it  is  not  so.  "  And  the  very  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  wholly;  and  I  pray  God  your 
whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blame 
less  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it." 
When  we  are  sure  that  God  will  do  it,  it  will  surely 
be  done.  We  miss  many  a  blessing  because  we 
ask  without  faith.  The  apostle  believed  that  he 
had  the  petition  which  he  had  sought  of  the  Lord; 
and  he  received  according  to  his  faith.  He  who 
can  firmly  believe  shall  ere  long  fervently  pour  out 
thanksgiving.  The  church  at  Thessalonica,  the 
child  of  Paul's  prayers,  the  child  of  his  labors,  and 
at  last  the  child  of  his  faith,  obtained  a  remarkable 
degree  of  faith,  and  a  singular  warmth  of  love. 
The  Lord  give  to  us  who  are  workers  the  mind 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  275 

and  spirit  of  Paul,  and  lead  us  to  follow  him  in  our 
conduct  to  other,  and  then  I  do  not  doubt  that  our 
good  wishes  shall  be  realized.  If  we  are  I'ight  om%- 
selves,  we  shall  see  prosperity  in  the  churches,  or 
classes,  or  families  whose  good  we  seek;  and  as  we 
feel  bound  to  pray  about  them,  we  shall  also  feel 
bound  to  thank  God  concerning  them. 

Before  I  plunge  into  the  sermon,  I  should  like 
to  pause,  and  ask  whether  we  as  Christian  men 
and  woman  are  such  that  Paul  could  say  of  us, 
"  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you, 
brethren,  as  it  is  meet,  because  that  your  faith 
groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  charity  of  every  one 
of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth."  What 
think  you?  Could  your  pastor  bless  God  for  you  ? 
Could  your  nearest  and  dearest  Christian  friend 
feel  that  he  was  bound  to  thank  God  always  for 
you  ?  If  not,  why  not  ?  Oh  that  we  may  rise 
into  such  a  happy  state  that  we  shall  be  the  cause 
of  gratitude  in  others!  It  ought  to  be  so;  we 
ought  to  glorify  God,  causing  men  to  see  our 
good  works,  and  praise  our  Father  in  Heaven. 

One  more  question:  Do  you  think  we  are  in  such 
a  condition  that  it  would  be  safe  for  anybody  to 
praise  us?  Would  it  be  safe  to  ourselves  for  us  to 
be  thus  commended,  and  made  subjects  of  thankful 
ness?  It  takes  a  great  deal  of  grace  to  be  able  to 
bear  praise.  Censure  seldom  does  us  much  hurt.  A 
man  struggles  up  against  slander,  and  the  discour 
agement  which  comes  of  it  may  not  be  an  un 
mixed  evil ;  but  praise  soon  suggests  pride,  and  is 
therefore  not  an  unmixed  good.  "  As  the  fining- 
pot  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold;  so  is  a  man 
to  his  praise."  Would  it  be  safe  if  Paul  were  here 


276  THE    NECESSITY 

to  say  good  things  about  you  as  he  did  about  the 
Thessalonians  ?  Did  it  not  prove  that  the  breth 
ren  there  were  sober,  well-established  believers? 

Once  more,  do  you  ever  feel  it  in  your  heart  to 
talk  like  this  about  your  fellow-Christians?  Paul 
himself  was  in  a  fine  condition  when  he  could  thus 
extol  his  brethren.  Few  men  are  ready  with  hearty 
commendations  of  others.  We  are  greedy  in  re 
ceiving  praise,  and  niggardly  in  dispensing  it. 
We  seldom  speak  too  kindly  of  one  another.  Now 
and  then  you  will  hear  a  person  say,  "  There  is  no 
such  a  thing  as  love  in  the  church  at  all."  I  know 
that  gentleman  very  well,  and  I  never  saw  any 
excess  of  love  in  him.  I  heard  one  say,  "  Broth 
erly  love  is  all  a  mockery;  there  is  no  reality  in 
Christian  charity";  and  truly  he  measured  his 
own  corn  very  accurately.  Most  men  would  see 
others  better  if  their  own  eyes  were  clearer.  When 
a  man  honestly  feels  that  his  fellow-Christians  are 
for  the  most  part  much  better  than  himself,  and 
that  he  would  willingly  sit  at  the  feet  of  many  of 
them,  then  he  himself  is  in  a  healthy  state.  I 
admire  the  grace  of  God  in  many  around  me.  I  see 
their  imperfections  as  though  I  did  not  see  them. 
I  am  not  looking  for  the  thorns,  but  for  the  roses; 
and  I  see  so  many  of  them  that  my  heart  is  glad, 
and  in  spirit  I  bless  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

The  man  who  can  commend  the  work  of  the  Lord 
in  others  without  saying  a  word  about  himself,  has, 
by  that  fact,  given  himself  a  good  character;  his 
eyes  must  have  been  washed  in  the  fountains  of  love 
they  must  have  been  cleansedfrom  thedust  of  pride, 
envy,  and  self,  or  he  would  not  have  so  seen  or  so 
spoken.  I  love  the  text  because  it  is  an  instance 


OF   GROWING    FATTH.  277 

of  a  man  of  great  grace,  of  a  man  under  the  inspir 
ation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  yet  delighted  to 
speak  enthusiastically  of  a  church  which  certainly 
was  "far  from  perfect.  I  delight  in  that  eye  which 
can  be  a  little  blind  to  faults  while  it  exercises  a 
clear  vision  in  seeing  all  that  is  good  and  praise 
worthy  towards  God. 

So,  then,  we  come  to  our  text,  and  the  subject 
runs  thus;  for  us  to  grow  in  faith  is  a  subject  for 
devout  thanksgiving;  and  in  the  second  place,  it 
is  an  object  for  diligent  endeavor.  Thirdly,  if  we 
greatly  grow  in  faith  it  will  be  the  source  of  other 
groictlis;  for  as  faith  increases,  love,  patience,  and 
every  other  virtue,  will  flourish. 

I.    For   us    to  grow  and  increase  in   faith  is  A 

SUBJECT  FOR  DEVOUT  THANKSGIVING.        Paul  gives  a  COm- 

mendation  of  the  Thessalonian  church  which  is 
exceedingly  warm  and  hearty.  One  critic  says 
the  words  may  be  regarded  as  somewhat  extrava 
gant,  after  the  mode  of  the  apostle  when  he  wishes 
to  be  emphatic.  lie  writes  fervidly:  "  Your  faith 
groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  charity  of  every  one 
of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth."  It  is  an 
intense  and  unreserved  commendation.  As  I  have 
already  said,  this  church  was  not  absolutely  perfect; 
for,  because  of  the  love  of  every  one  towards 
another,  and  their  great  kindness  towards  the 
poor,  certain  unworthy  persons  encroached  upon 
their  liberality.  To  use  a  very  rough  word,  cadgers 
were  multiplied  among  them,  as  they  always  are 
where  generosity  abounds.  Shame  that  it  should 
be  so.  Kead  chapter  iii.,  verse  11:  "For  we  hear 
that  there  are  some  which  walk  among  you  dis 
orderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are  busybodios." 


278  THE    NECESSITY 

There  had  been  also  among  them  here  and  there 
a  person  of  loose  life  and  of  sharp  business  deal 
ings,  and  to  such  he  spoke  in  the  First  Epistle; 
but  these  flies  in  the  pot  of  ointment  did  not  de 
stroy  its  sweetness.  They  were  so  few  compara 
tively  that  Pan!  speaks  of  the  whole  body  with 
approbation.  When  our  faith  shall  grow  and  our 
love  abound,  it  may  be  proper  for  a  pastor  to  speak 
with  unrestricted  admiration  of  what  the  Lord  has 
done, 

The  blessing  of  increased  faith  is  of  unspeakable 
value,  and  therefore  praises  should  be  largely  ren 
dered  for  it.  Little  faith  will  save,  but  strong  faith 
is  that  which  builds  up  the  church,  which  overcomes 
the  world,  which  wins  sinners,  and  which  glorifies 
God.  Little-faith  is  slow  and  feeble,  and  to  suit 
his  pace  the  whole  flock  travel  softly.  Little-faith 
is  a  wounded  soldier,  and  has  to  be  carried  in  an 
ambulance  by  the  armies  of  the  Lord;  but  faith 
which  grows  exceedingly,  lifts  the  banner  aloft, 
leads  the  van,  meets  hand  to  hand  the  foes  of  our 
Prince,  and  puts  them  to  rout.  If  we  were  invok 
ing  blessings  upon  a  church  we  would  scarcely  ask 
for  a  larger  boon  than  that  all  the  brethren  might 
be  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God.  Strong- 
faith  ventures  into  large  endeavors  for  Christ, 
and  hence  missions  are  projected:  Strong-faith 
carries  out  the  projects  of  holy  zeal,  and  hence 
daring  ideals  are  turned  into  facts:  Strong-faith 
is  a  shield  against  the  darts  of  error,  and  hence 
she  is  the  object  of  the  contempt  and  hatred  of 
heresy.  Strong-faith  builds  the  walls  of  Zion,  and 
casts  down  the  walls  of  Jericho.  Strong-faith 
smites  the  Philistines  hip  and  thigh,  and  makes 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  279 

Israel  to  dwell  in  peace.  Oil  that  the  night  of 
Little-faith  were  over,  and  that  the  day  of  glorious 
faith  would  come!  Soon  would  our  young  men 
see  visions,  and  our  old  men  dream  dreams,  if  faith 
were  more  among  us.  When  the  Son  of  man 
cometh  shall  he  find  faith  in  the  earth  ?  At  the 
revival  of  faith  we  shall  see  another  Pentecost, 
with  its  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  its  tongues  of 
flame;  but  during  our  lack  of  faith  we  still  abide 
in  weakness,  and  the  enemy  will  exact  upon  us. 
0  God,  we  beseech  tliee,  make  thy  face  to  shine 
upon  us,  cause  our  faith  to  grow  exceedingly,  and 
our  love  to  abound  yet  more  and  more;  then  shall 
there  be  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord. 

Paul  thus  fervently  gave  thanks  to  God  because 
the  blessing  came  to  the  church  at  a  remarkably 
seasonable  time.  The  people  of  Thessalonica  had 
risen  against  the  church  and  persecuted  it;  thus, 
without  were  fightings,  but  within  there  were  no 
fears;  for  the  brethren  were  firm  in  faith  and  fer 
vent  in  love.  The  church  was  subject  to  constant 
tribulation;  but  its  faith  grew  exceedingly.  Has 
it  not  often  been  so  with  the  Lord's  people  ? 
Times  of  cloud  and  rain  have  been  growing  times. 
Pharaoh  dealt  hardly  with  Israel;  but  the  more  he 
oppressed  them,  the  more  they  multiplied.  The 
more  the  church  of  God  is  down-trodden,  the  more 
it  rises  into  power  and  influence.  The  bush  burns 
and  is  not  consumed;  nay,  rather,  it  flourishes 
in  the  flame.  I  say  not  that  this  increase  of 
faith  is  the  immediate  effect  of  persecution,  but 
it  is  singularly  the  attendant  upon  it.  God 
knew  that  when  his  poor  servants  were  hauled 


280  THE    NECESSITY 

to  prison,  when  they  were  brought  before  rulers 
and  kings  for  his  name's  sake,  and  when  they 
were  spoiled  of  their  goods,  they  wanted  in 
creased  strength,  and  therefore  he  gave  it  to 
them  by  growth  in  faith.  As  the  persecution 
rose  upon  them  like  the  deluge,  their  confidence 
in  God  rose  above  it,  like  Noah's  ark,  which 
rose  the  higher  the  deeper  the  waters  became. 
They  stood  fast  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  became  an 
example  to  all  other  churches,  whether  persecuted 
or  not;  and  this  because  their  faith  grew  exceed 
ingly.  Beloved,  I  pray  for  each  member  of  this 
church  that  your  confidence  in  God  may  rise  from 
ebb  to  flood.  We  need  it  much  just  now.  This 
is  a  time  of  depression  in  trade,  when  many  are 
suffering  want,  and  almost  all  find  their  means 
decreased.  We  need  to  be  rich  in  faith,  for  we 
are  growing  poor  in  pocket.  Many  children  of 
God  cannot  find  employment  wherewith  to  earn 
their  bread.  This  is,  moreover,  a  time  of  abound 
ing  vioe.  Perhaps  never  in  our  memories  were 
any  of  us  so  shocked  as  we  have  been  of  late  by 
the  discoveries  of  unspeakable  abominations.  We 
need  that  our  faith  should  grow  exceedingly,  for 
sin  runs  down  our  streets  in  torrents.  It  is  also  a 
period  of  grievous  departure  from  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  saints.  Looking  back  to  our 
younger  days,  we  are  amazed  at  the  progress  of 
error.  We  mourned  in  those  days  that  men  trifled 
with  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel;  but  what  shall 
we  now  say,  when  men  deride  those  doctrines,  and 
mock  at  them  as  antiquated  fables?  The  founda 
tions  of  the  earth  are  removed,  and  only  here  and 
there  will  you  find  a  man  who  beareth  up  the 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  281 

pillars  thereof;  therefore  do  we  need  that  our  faith 
should  be  exceeding  steadfast.  I  charge  you, 
brethren,  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  faith,  see 
ing  the  times  are  evil!  I  cannot  speak  emphati 
cally  enough  upon  the  abounding  dangers  of  the 
times:  they  demand  of  us  that  we  be  not  of  doubt 
ful  mind,  but  that  we  talce  firm  hold  of  infallible 
truth,  and  endure  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible. 
He  that  cannot  say,  "  I  believe  and  am  sure,"  is 
one  born  out  of  due  time. 

The  apostle's  commendation  was  meet  and  fit, 
since,  if  there  be  any  growth  in  faith,  it  is  the 
work  of  God's  Spirit.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God  in 
its  beginnings,  and  it  is  equally  the  gift  of  God 
in  its  increase.  If  thou  hast  faith  as  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed,  God  gavejit  thee;  and  if  thou  hast 
faith  as  a  spreading  tree,  God  has  give  the 
increase.  The  infancy  of  faith  is  of  God,  and  so  is 
its  perfect  manhood.  In  the  natural  world  we 
ought  as  much  to  admire  God's  hand  in  growth  as 
in  creation;  for,  indeed,  the  out  burs  ting  of  spring, 
the  advance  of  summer,  and  the  maturity  of 
autumn,  are  all  a  sort  of  creation,  seen  in  detail. 
Even  thus  the  progress  of  faith  reveals  the  same 
power  as  the  commencement  of  faith.  If  thou 
dost  not  look  to  God  for  more  faith,  thou  wilt 
never  have  more  faith:  great  faith  in  its  strong 
broad  current  flows  as  much  from  the  fountain- 
head  of  grace  as  in  its  first  trickling  streamlet  of 
hope  in  Christ.  Let  God  have  all  the  glory  of 
faith  from  its  Alpha  to  its  Omega.  If  thou  be  a 
strong  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  take  heed  that  tho'u  do 
not  sacrifice  to  thine  own  net.  nor  burn  incense  to 
thine  own  drag,  and  glorify  thine  own  experience 


282  THE    NECESSITY 

•is  if  thou  madest  thyself  strong  and  rich  in  trie 
things  of  God.  We  are  bound  to  render  all  the 
thanksgiving  unto  God:  it  is  meet  that  it  should 
be  so.  Look  how  the  apostle  puts  it:  "We  are 
bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you."  I  like  the 
modesty  of  that.  He  does  not  so  much  say  that 
he  did  thank  God,  though  he  did  do  so;  but  in 
deep  humility  he  admits  the  debt  which  he  could 
not  fully  pa}r.  lie  did  not  judge  his  thanksgiving 
to  be  sufficient,  but  owned  that  he  was  still  under 
bonds  to  render  more  praise.  1  rejoice  to  be 
bound  with  these  bonds,  to  be  bound  to  thank  God 
every  day,  and  all  the  day.  I  wear  these  golden 
fetters  and  count  them  my  best  ornaments. 
"  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  with  cords  to 
the  horns  of  the  altar."  I  would  be  bound  over, 
riot  to  keep  the  peace,  but  to  keep  praise  forever. 
Let  the  altar  of  incense  be  always  burning,  yea, 
flaming  higher  and  higher  with  the  sweet  spices 
of  love  and  gratitude.  Blessed  be  God  for  what  he 
is  doing  for  his  people,  when  he  causes  their  faith 
to  grow;  for  it  is  a  blessing  so  immense,  so 
incalculable,  that  our  praises  ought  to  rise  to  the 
height  and  glory  of  loud-sounding  hallelujahs. 
Brethren,  let  us  bless  God  for  every  good  man  we 
know  whose  faith  has  grown,  for  every  holy  woman 
whose  love  in  the  church  is  manifest  unto  all; 
and  when  we  have  done  so,  let  us  turn  our  eyes 
to  God,  and  say,  "  Lord,  make  me  such  a  one  that 
others  may  glorify  God  in  me  also;  I  am  as  yet 
sadly  weak  and  undeveloped;  make  me  to  grow 
till  -all  thy  image  shall  be  seen  in  me,  and  my 
fellow-Christians  shall  bless  God  concerning  me." 
Thus  have  I  set  growth  in  faith  before  you  as  a 


OF    GROWING    SAITIL  283 

subject  for  thanksgiving.  It  is  indeed  a  jewel 
worth  more  than  both  the  Indies. 

II.    In  the  second  place,  it  is  worthy  to  be  AN 

OBJECT    FOR    DILIGENT    ENDEAVOR.       If  JOU    have    it    not, 

labor  speedily  to  attain  it.  As  the  merchantman, 
seeketh  goodly  pearls,  so  seek  a  growing  faith. 
Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  and  the  noblest  grace. 
Never  be  self-satisfied,  but  cry  with  Jabez,  "  Oh 
that  the  Lord  would  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge 
my  coast !  " 

Why  ?  Because  the  proof  of  faith  lies  in  the 
growth  of  faith.  If  thou  hast  a  dead  faith,  it  will 
always  be  the  same;  but  if  thou  hast  the  faith  of 
God's  elect,  it  must  grow.  If  I  heard  of  a  child 
that  was  born  some  years  ago,  and  had  never  grown, 
I  should  begin  to  guess  that  my  friends  were  en 
trapping  me,  and  that  the  child  was  dead  from  the 
birth.  Life  in  its  earliest  stages  is  ever  attended 
with  growth.  Brother,  thou  must  have  more  faith 
or  we  shall  fear  that  thou  hast  no  faith;  thou  must 
have  more  love,  or  else  for  sure  thou  hast  no  love 
at  all.  That  which  does  not  grow  unto  God  does 
not  live  unto  God. 

We  ought  to  have  more  faith  because  God's 
truth  deserves  it.  It  ought  to  be  the  easiest 
thing  in  the  world  for  us  to  trust  God;  to  believe 
every  word  of  the  Lord  should  be  an  act  to  which 
we  need  not  to  be  exhorted;  it  should  be  as 
natural  as  for  the  lungs  to  heave,  or  the  heart  to 
beat.  We  ought,  as  children  of  God,  to  believe  our 
Father  by  instinct,  even  as  young  eaglets  hide 
under  the  mother's  wing.  We  ought  to  exercise 
faith  even  aa  the  eye  sees,  and  the  ear  hears,  be 
cause  thereunto  we  were  created  by  the  Holy 


284  THE    NECESSITY 

Spirit.  It  should  be  a  necessity  of  our  spiritual  ex 
istence,  that  we  must  and  will  trust  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  yet  more  and  more.  I  pray  that  it 
may  be  so;  for  unbelief  is  a  horrible  crime.  Have 
you  doubted  God  ?  Have  you  in  any  sense  mis 
trusted  him?  Have  you  limited  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  ?  Then  continue  not  the  slave  of  such  sin, 
but  give  unto  God  your  hearty  confidence  from 
this  time  hence  forth,  and  forever. 

Moreover,  we  ought  to  grow  in  faith,  because  it 
will  be  so  much  for  our  own  spiritual  health,  and 
strength,  and  joy.  Does  Little-faith  know  what  it 
might  be,  and  do,  and  enjoy  if  it  could  only  quit 
its  littleness?  There  are  many  ways  of  being  a 
Christian,  as  there  are  many  ways  of  being  an 
Englishman;  but  all  not  equally  desirable.  I  may 
be  an  Englishman  in  banishment,  or  in  the  work 
house,  or  in  prison,  but  I  prefer  to  be  an  lilnglish- 
man  at  home,  in  health  and  at  liberty.  So  you 
may  be  a  Christian,  and  be  weak,  timorous,  and 
sad;  but  this  is  not  desirable;  it  is  better  to  be  a 
happy,  holy,  vigorous,  useful  Christian.  As  your 
being  an  Englishman  does  not  depend  on  your 
health  or  wealth,  so  neither  does  your  salvation 
turn  upon  the  strength  or  joy  of  your  faith;  yet 
much  does  depend  on  it.  Why  not  glorify  God  on 
the  road  to  heaven  ?  Why  not  have  foretastes  of 
it  now  ?  It  is  not  my  desire  to  go  through  the 
world  in  miserable  style,  singing  always — 

"  Do  I  love  the  Lord  or  no  ? 
Ain  I  his,  or  am  I  not  ?  " 

Infinitely  do  I  prefer  so  to  trust  God  that  my  peace 
may  be  like  a  river,  and  my  righteousness  like 


OF    GROWING    FAlllI.  285 

the  waves  of  the  sea.  Look  at  the  difference  be 
twee u  Abraham,  the  Father  of  the  faithful,  and  his 
nephew  Lot.  Lot  was  righteous,  b\it  he  was  by  no 
means  so  strong  in  faith  as  Abraham,  neither  was 
he  so  great  or  so  happy.  Abraham  is  calm,  bold, 
royal;  Lot  is  greedy,  timid,  trembling.  Lot  in 
Sodom,  is  with  difficulty  made  to  run  for  his  life, 
while  Abraham  alone  with  God  is  interceding  for 
others.  Lot  escapes  from  a  burning  city  with  the 
loss  of  all  things,  while  Abraham  dwells  peacefully 
with  the  Lord  who  is  the  possessor  of  heaven  and 
earth.  Abraham's  faith  makes  him  rise  like  some 
lone  Alp  till  he  touches  the  very  heaven  of  God.  It 
is  well  to  be  Lot,  but  it  is  infinitely  better  to  be 
Abraham.  Do  seek  the  utmost  degree  of  faith;  for 
if  this  be  in  you  and  abound,  you  shall  not  be  barren 
or  unfruitful.  Heaven  lies  that  way.  More  faith, 
more  rest  of  heart.  To  grow  heavenly  we  must 
grow  more  believing. 

The  question  is,  How  is  this  to  be  done?  How  is 
my  faith  to  be  made  to  grow  exceedingly  ?  I  have 
already  told  you  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit:  but  still  he  uses  us  for  the  increase  of  our 
own  faith.  If  we  are  to  grow  in  faith,  certain  evils 
are  to  be  avoided  with  scrupulous  care.  Avoid 
continual  change  of  doctrine.  If  you  have  a  tree 
in  your  garden  and  you  transplant  it  often,  it  will 
yield  you  scanty  fruit.  Those  who  are  everything 
by  turns,  and  nothing  long,  are  "  ever  learning 
but  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth."  Unstable  as  water,  they  shall  not  excel. 
Those  brethren  who  believe  this  to-day,  and  that 
to-morrow,  arid  the  other  thing  the  next  day,  do 
not  believe  anything  in  downright  earnest  They 


28G  THE    NECESSITY 

cannot  grow;  they  are  not  rooted  and  grounded. 
Like  the  moon,  they  are  always  changing,  and 
what  light  they  have  is  cold  and  sickly.  Pie 
who  can  change  his  religion  has  none  to  change. 
Those  who  prefer  philosophy  to  Christ  never  knew 
him. 

Then,  again,  if  you  had  a  tree,  and  did  not  trans 
plant  it,  but  began  to  dig  away  the  earth  from  it, 
removing  the  ground  in  which  it  stood,  you  would 
impoverish  it,  and  prevent  its  fruitfulness.  I  know 
certain  professors  who  are  giving  up  the  ground 
which  their  souls  should  grow  in.  One  doctrine  after 
another  is  forsaken,  till  nothing  is  held  to  be  impor 
tant.  They  do  not  believe  much  now,  and  they  are 
on  the  line  to  believe  nothing  at  all.  The  ex 
periment  of  the  Frenchman  who  had  just  brought 
his  horse  to  live  on  a  straw  a  day  when  it  died,  is 
being  repeated  among  us,  faith  being  literally 
starved  to  death.  What  low  diet  do  some  men 
prescribe  for  their  souls  !  Marrow  and  fatness  they 
do  not  even  smell  at!  How  can  your  faith  grow 
when  vital  truths  are  abandoned,  or  held  with 
feeble  grasp  ?  Oh  for  a  band  of  Puritan  believers  I 
Oh  fora  troop  of  spiritual  Ironsides! 

Next,  a  tree  cannot  grow  if  it  is  shut  out  from 
sun,  and  rain,  and  dew.  Without  heavenly  influ 
ences  we  must  be  barren.  Plant  a  little  tree  right 
under  a  great  oak  so  that  it  is  always  in  the  shade, 
and  it  cannot  grow;  clear  the  big  tree  away,  or 
the  sapling  will  dwindle  to  death.  Some  men's 
faith  cannot  grow  because  it  is  overshadowed  by 
worldliness,  by  tolerated  sin,  by  love  of  riches,  by 
the  pride  of  life,  by  cares  of  lower  things.  The 
pursuit  of  Christ  crucified  must  be  all-absorbing, 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  287 

or  it  will  be  ineffectual.  To  know  what  you  be 
lieve,  and  to  abide  steadfast  in  it,  is  the  waj  to  be 
robust  in  faith.  Men  whose  hearts  are  not  in 
their  trades,  men  who  chop  and  change — these  are 
the  men  ".vhose  names  appear  in  the  Gazette;  are 
not  many  spiritual  bankruptcies  due  to  the  same 
cause  ? 

There  are  methods  which  the  spiritual  husband 
man  uses  to  cause  faith  to  grow.  First,  faith 
grows  by  an  increase  of  knoivledge.  Many  persons 
doubt  because  they  are  not  instructed.  Some 
doubt  whether  they  shall  hold  out  on  to  the  end; 
they  are  ignorant  of  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perse 
verance  of  the  saints.  Sotne  are  in  despair  be 
cause  they  find  evil  desires  arising  in  their  hearts; 
they  do  not  know  the  teaching  of  Scripture  as  to 
the  two  natures  and  the  warfare  between  flesh  and 
spirit.  Many  think  themselves  condemned  be 
cause  they  cannot  wholly  keep  the  law;  they  for 
get  that  they  are  justified  by  faith.  A  great  deal 
of  unbelief  vanishes  when  knowledge,  like  the 
morning  sun,  drives  away  the  mists.  Unbelief  is 
an  owl  of  the  night,  and  when  the  sun  arises  it 
hides  away  in  a  dark  corner.  Study  the  Word  of 
God:  give  your  heart  to  searching  it;  seek  to  get  at 
the  inner  teaching,  and  learn  the  analogy  of  faith; 
practice  deep  sea-fishery,  and  you  will  reach  those 
mysterious  truths  which  are  the  secret  riches  of 
the  soul.  These  truths  are  much  despised  now ;  but 
those  who  rejoice  in  them  will  find  their  faith 
growing  exceedingly. 

Better  still  than  mere  knowledge,  which  alone 
would  puff  you  up,  faith  grows  by  experience. 
When  a  mac  has  tried  and  proved  a  thing,  then 


288  THE    NECESSITY 

his  confidence  in  it  is  largely  increased.  Take 
a  promise  and  test  it,  and  then  you  will  say,  "  I 
know  that  is  so."  When  you  have  tested  it  again, 
and  again,  and  again,  nobody  will  be  able  to 
shake  you,  for  you  will  say,  "  I  have  tasted  and 
handled  of  this  good  word;  I  have  made  it  my 
own,  and  I  am  not  to  be  driven  from  it."  The  ex 
perienced  Christian  is  the  established  Christian. 
The  man  who  has  proved  all  things  is  the  man 
who  holds  fast  that  which  is  good.  God  give 
grace  to  increase  our  faith  by  knowledge  and  by 
experience ! 

Faith  also  grows  by  much  meditation  and  walk 
ing  with  God.  If  you  want  to  believe  in  a  man, 
you  must  know  him.  Half  the  disputes  between 
Christian  people  arise  from  their  not  knowing  one 
another.  There  is  a  hymn  of  Mr.  Sankey's  which  I 
venture  to  alter  thus: 

"  When  we  know  each  other  better, 
The  mists  will  roll  away." 

When  we  know  each  other,  our  suspicions,  pre 
judices,  and  dislikes  will  speedily  disappear.  I 
am  sure  it  is  so  with  our  God.  When  you  walk 
with  him,  when  your  communion  with  him  is 
close  and  constant,  your  faith  in  him  will  grow 
exceedingly.  Some  of  you,  I  am  afraid,  do  not 
give  five  minutes  in  the  day  to  meditation.  You 
are  in  too  great  a  hurry  for  that.  In  London  life 
men  get  up  in  a  hurry,  even  as  they  went  to  bed  in 
a  hurry  and  slept  in  a  hurry.  They  swallow  their 
breakfast  in  a  hurry;  (hey  have  no  time  to  digest 
it;  the  bell  is  ringing  at  the  station,  and  they  must 
hurry  to  catch  the  train ;  they  reach  business  in  a 


OF   GROWING    FAITH.  2S9 

hurry;  they  hurry  through  it,  and  they  hurry  to 
get  bad;:  from  it.  Men  c;mnot  think,  for  they 
have  barely  time  to  wink  their  eyes.  As  to  an 
hour's  meditation  and  reading  the  Scriptures,  and 
communion  with  God,  many  professors  nowadays 
would  think  they  committed  robbery  against  the 
god  of  this  world  if  they  took  half-an-hour  out  of 
his  service  to  give  it  to  fellowship  with  the  world 
to  come.  If  our  faith  is  to  grow  exceedingly,  we 
must  maintain  constant  intercourse  with  God. 

Another  way  of  increasing  faith  is  by  much 
prayer.  Pray  for  faith  and  pray  with  faith;  thus 
shall  thy  soul  become  firm  in  its  reliance  on  the 
promises.  It  is  while  we  wrestle  with  the  angel 
that  we  find  out  our  weakness,  as  the  sinew  of  our 
thigh  shrinks;  but  at  the  same  time  we  prove  our 
God  given  strength,  since  as  princes  we  wrestle 
with  God  and  prevail.  Power  from  prayer  as  well 
as  power  in  prayer  is  what  we  want.  On  our 
knees  we  gather  strength,  till  doubting  and  fear 
ing  disappear. 

We  must  be  careful  to  render  obedience  to  God. 
A  man  cannot  trust  God  while  he  lives  in  sin; 
every  act  of  disobedience  weakens  confidence  in 
God.  Faith  and  obedience  are  bound  up  in  the 
same  bundle.  He  that  obeys  God,  trnsts-God;  and 
he  that  trusts  God,  obeys  God.  He  that  is  with 
out  faith  is  without  works;  and  he  that  is  without 
works  is  without  faith.  Do  not  oppose  faith  and 
good  works  to  one  another,  for  there  is  a  blessed 
relationship  between  them;  and  if  yon  abound  in 
obedience  your  faith  shall  grow  exceedingly. 

Again,  faith  grows  by  exercise.  The  man  who 
uses  the  little  faith  he  has  will  get  more  faith; 


290  THE    A'ECESSITY 

but  he  that  says,  "T  have  not  enough  faith  for 
such  and  such  work,"  and  therefore  shrinks  back, 
shall  become  more  and  more  timid,  till  at  last,  like 
a  coward,  he  runs  away.  Go  forward  with  thy 
little  faith,  and  to  thy  surprise  it  shall  have  grown 
as  thou  hast  advanced.  Accomplish  much,  and 
then  endeavor  something  more,  and  something 
more.  I  have  often  used  an  illustration  taken 
from  a  person  who  teaches  the  art  of  growing 
taller.  I  do  not  believe  in  that  art:  we  shall  not 
add  a  cubit  to  our  stature  just  yet.  But  part  of 
this  professor's  exercise  is,  that  in  the  morning, 
when  you  get  up,  you  are  to  reach  as  high  as  ever 
you  can,  and  aim  a  little  higher  every  morning, 
though  it  be  only  the  hundreth  part  of  an  inch. 
By  that  means  you  are  to  grow.  This  is  so  with 
faith.  Do  all  you  can,  and  then  do  a  little  more: 
and  when  you  can  do  that,  then  do  a  little 
more  than  you  can.  Always  have  something  in 
hand  that  is  greater  than  your  present  capacity. 
Grow  up  to  it,  and  when  you  have  grown  up  to 
it,  grow  more.  By  many  little  additions  a  great 
house  is  built.  Brick  by  brick  up  rose  the  pyra 
mid.  Believe  and  yet  believe.  Trust  and  have 
further  trust.  Hope  shall  become  faith,  and  faith 
shall  ripen  to  full  assurance  and  perfect  confidence 
in  God  Most  High. 

This,  then,  brethren,  is  what  I  commend  to  you. 
May  God  the  Holy  Ghost  help  you  all  to  go  from 
faith  to  faith. 

III.     Finally,    this   growing   faith    becomes   THE 

CENTER     OF     OTHER     CHRISTIAN     GRACES.        "  Your     faith 

groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  charity  of  every  one 
of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth."  A  firm 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  291 

faith  in  gospel  verities  will  make  us  love  one  an- 
othei1,  for  each  doctrine  of  truth  is  an  argument  for 
love.  If  you  believe  in  God  as  having  chosen  his 
people,  you  will  love  his  elect;  if  you  believe  in 
Christ  as  having  made  atonement  for  his  people, 
you  will  love  his  redeemed,  and  seek  their  peace. 
If  you  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  regeneration, 
and  know  that  we  must  be  born  again,  you  will 
love  the  regenerate.  Whatever  doctrine  it  is  that 
is  true,  it  ministereth  toward  the  love  of  the 
heart.  I  am  sure  you  will  find  a  deep,  firm,  fer 
vent  unity  with  one  another  in  those  that  hold 
the  truth  in  the  love  of  it.  If  you  are  not  filled 
with  brotherly  love,  it  must  be  because  you  are  not 
firmly  believing  that  truth  which  worketh  toward 
love. 

Firmness  in  the  faith  ministers  toward  the  unity 
of  the  church.  The  church  at  Thessalonica  did 
not  have  a  secession,  or  a  split,  as  some  call  it: 
the  church  at  Thessalonica  did  not  divide  under  the 
pressure  of  persecution:  they  adhered  closely  to  one 
another,  and  the  more  they  were  hammered,  the 
more  they  were  consolidated.  They  were  welded 
into  one  solid  mass  by  the  hammer  of  persecution 
and  the  fire  of  love,  and  the  reason  was  because 
they  each  one  held  the  truth  with  all  firmness.  I 
am  always  afraid  of  a  church  that  is  made  up  of 
mixed  elements,  when  some  are  Calvinistic,  some 
Arminian,  some  Baptist,  and  some  Paedobaptist. 
When  the  minister  who  holds  them  together  dies, 
they  will  disintegrate.  When  certain  reasons  that 
now  make  them  cohere  cease  to  exist,  the  church 
will  divide  like  quicksilver,  each  little  bit  break 
ing  into  smaller  bits,  and  so  they  will  go  rolling 


292  OF   GROWING   FAITH. 

about  in  innumerable  factions.  But  given  a 
church  that  holds  the  truth  firmly,  with  deep 
and  strong  faith,  then  if  the  pastor  dies,  or  if 
twenty  pastors  die,  they  believe  in  a  Pastor 
who  lives  forever,  and  whoever  comes  or  does 
not  come,  the  truth  they  hold,  holds  them  in  liv 
ing  unity.  I  cannot  imagine  a  greater  blessing 
for  you  as  a  church  in  years  to  come,  than  for 
each  man  and  woman  to  be  intelligently  estab 
lished  in  the  truth  you  have  received.  Who 
shall  separate  the  men  who  are  one  in  Christ 
by  the  grip  of  mighty  faith?  I  commend  firm 
faith  to  you  with  all  my  heart,  as  the  source 
of  love  and  the  means  of  unity  in  years  to 
come. 

This  faith  breeds  patience  in  men,  and  patience 
assists  love.  Truth  to  tell,  God's  people  are,  some 
of  them,  a  singular  tribe.  A  countryman  was  accus 
tomed  to  say  that  if  God  had  not  chosen  his  people 
before  they  were  born,  he  would  never  have  done 
so  afterwards.  There  is  truth  in  that  saying. 
Therefore  if  a  man  loves  his  fellow-Christians  as 
an  act  of  mere  nature,  he  will  often  feel  himself 
baffled;  he  will  say,  ''They  acted  very  unkindly  to 
me.  Who  can  love  people  that  are  so  ill-mannered, 
so  ungrateful  ?  ''  But  when  faith  is  strong,  you  will 
say,  "What  is  that  to  me  ?  I  love  them  for  Christ's 
sake.  If  I  am  to  have  a  reward,  it  shall  come  from 
my  Lord  Christ.  As  for  God's  people,  I  love  them 
despite  their  faults;  over  the  head  of  the  mistaken 
judgments  they  form  of  me,  I  love  all  my  brethren." 
The  way  to  make  men  better  is  not  to  be  always 
censuring  them,  but  to  love  them  better.  The 
quickest  way  to  win  a  sinner,  is  to  love  him  to 


OF    GROWING    FAITH.  293 

Christ;  the  quickest  way  to  sanctify  a  believer  is  to 
love  him  into  purity  and  holiness.  Only  faith  can 
do  this.  May  faith,  therefore,  grow  exceedingly; 
for  faith  by  working  patience  helps  us  to  bear  with 
others.  If  there  be  anything  grand,  and  good,  and 
desirable,  anything  Christ-like,  anything  God-like, 
the  way  to  it  is  to  let  your  faith  grow  exceedingly. 
If  this  church  is  to  become  a  missionary  church 
more  and  more,  as  I  pray  God  it  may,  your  faith 
must  grow  exceedingly.  If  you  are  to  stand  fast 
as  a  breakwater  in  these  times  of  departure  from 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  your  faith 
must  grow  exceedingly.  If  you  are  to  be  made  a 
blessing  to  this  wicked  city,  and  shine  like  a  light 
house  over  this  sea  of  London,  your  faith  must 
grow  exceedingly.  If  God  has  brought  you  as  a 
church,  together  with  other  churches,  to  the  king 
dom  for  such  a  time  as  this;  if  you  are  to  achieve 
your  destiny,  and  work  for  God  and  glorify  his 
name;  your  faith  must  grow  exceedingly.  The 
man  who  is  timorous  arid  faint-hearted,  let  him  go 
home;  he  is  not  fit  for  the  day  of  battle.  The  age 
requires  heroes.  The  chicken-hearted  are  out  of 
their  place  in  this  perilous  century.  You  that 
know  what  you  know,  and  believe  what  you  be 
lieve,  whose  tramp  is  that  of  fearless  warriors,  you 
have  a  high  calling;  fulfill  it.  You  shall  see  what 
God  will  do  for  you  and  with  you;  and  it  shall  be 
written  in  the  pages  of  eternity  that  at  such  a 
time  the  church  grew  in  its  faith,  and  there 
fore  God  used  it  for  his  glory.  May  it  be  so.  May 
those  among  us  who  have  no  faith  be  led  to  Jesus. 
0  believers,  try  your  own  faith  by  speaking  to 
unbelievers  as  they  go  away  this  morning:  this 


294  THE    NECESSITY. 

afternoon  in  the  Sunday-school,  prove  your  faith 
by  winning  your  dear  children  for  Christ:  try  your 
faith  every  day  in  the  week  by  giving  sinners  no 
rest  until  they  come  to  Christ.  God  bless  you  each 
one  for  his  name's  sake.  Amen. 


XIII. 

GOD  DUE  CONTINUAL  RESORT. 

September  7,  1885. 

"Be  thou  my  strong  habitation,  whereunto  I  may  continually 
resort." — PSALM  Ixxi.  3. 

DAVID  in  his  younger  days  had  been  obliged 
to  hide  himself  away  with  his  followers  in 
the  great  caverns  and  rocks  of  his  native  land. 
In  the  cave  of  Adullam,  by  the  rocks  of  the  wild 
goats,  he  had  dwelt  amid  the  sternest  surround 
ings  of  nature.  No  doubt  he  had  climbed  aloft 
upon  the  mountain's  side,  and  then  had  pene 
trated  into  one  cave  after  another,  and  treated 
them  as  chambers  of  his  house  of  rock.  There 
he  had  spent  both  nights  and  days,  looking 
from  on  high  upon  the  plains  beneath,  often  see 
ing  his  cruel  pursuers  passing  by  in  eager  hunt 
for  him,  while  he  himself  was  secure  in  his  rocky 
fastness. 

.Nothing  leaves  a  clearer  impression  upon  the 
memory  than  a  residence  amidst  such  scenes. 
You  might  live  for  an  age  in  such  a  town  as 
this  and  forget  it  all.  What  is  there  to  remember 
in  this  labyrinth  of  bricks  and  mortar?  But  when 
you  get  into  the  clear  bracing  atmosphere  of  the 
hills,  when  you  tread  their  sublime  heights,  or 
descend  into  their  mysterious  hollows,  you  cannot 
forget  it.  A  day  of  leaping,  like  the  wild  goats, 


296  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

from  crag  to  crag,  ended  by  a  night  amid  the 
dread  seclusion  of  a  mountain  den,  makes  a  clear 
mark  on  the  surface  of  life  which  can  never  be 
erased:  a  man  will  carry  such  memories  with  him 
to  his  grave.  This  must  have  been  especially  the 
case  with  a  genius  so  poetic  as  that  of  David.  I 
would  not  hesitate  to  place  the  King  of  Israel 
among  the  first  masters  of  song.  If  you  take 
the  whole  company  of  the  poets  together  you 
cannot  find  one  who  did  more  for  devotional 
poesy  than  David.  All  the  altars  of  God  in  the 
world  have  been  set  alight  by  flame  from  David's 
lamp.  When  men  worship  God  in  any  language 
they  quote  one  or  other  of  the  Psalms.  What 
better  expressions  can  they  borrow  or  invent  ? 
With  such  a  soul  as  his,  and  such  an  eye,  and 
such  a  tongue,  and  such  a  harp,  it  was  no  wonder 
that,  in  his  riper  days,  when  he  had  known  the 
soft  luxury  of  palaces,  he  could  not  refrain  from 
rehearsing  the  sublime  memories  of  his  earlier 
and  more  adventurous  days,  and  drawing  inspira 
tion  from  the  wild  and  sublime  scenery  among 
which  he  had  been  reared.  The  man,  as  full  of 
grace  as  of  genius,  as  saturated  with  the  Spirit 
of  God  as  with  the  spirit  of  poetry,  could  not 
but  in  his  loftiest  songs  speak  of  his  God  in 
language  culled  from  the  cave:  "Be  thou  to  me 
a  rock  of  habitation,  whereunto  I  may  contin 
ually  resort;"  or  as  some  read  it,  "  Be  thou  to 
me  a  rock  of  repose."  The  deep  quiet  of  the 
enormous  recesses  in  the  lone  rocks  was  remem 
bered  by  the  Psalmist,  and  wrought  into  his 
prayer.  I  shall  want  you  to  carry  the  thought 
of  those  rocks  and  those  caves  with  you,  because 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  297 

it,  will  form  a  background  for  our  subject,  and 
help  us  to  illustrate  it. 

What  a  gracious  heart  David  must  have  had, 
to  speak  like  this  of  his  God  !  He  desired  to  be 
upon  the  most  intimate  terms  with  the  Lord 
his  God.  He  wished  to  dwell  not  merely  v)ith 
God,  but  in  God:  he  cries,  "Be  thou  my  strong 
habitation."  Not  merely  did  he  long  to  dwell 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  forever,  but  he  would 
have  the  Lord  to  be  his  house.  He  would  be 
surrounded  by  God,  and  that  not  as  with  a 
dungeon,  in  which  he  was  forced  to  be,  but  as 
the  habitation  of  his  choice,  for  his  pleasure  and 
rest.  He  would  not  merely  live  in  God's  world, 
but  within  God  himself.  He  would  realize  the 
meaning  of  Moses  when  he  said,  "  Lord,  thou 
hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations." 
What  a  man  of  God  he  must  have  been,  despite 
his  infirmities  and  sins !  None  but  a  mind  in 
harmony  with  God  as  to  the  great  principles  of 
truth  and  purity  would  ever  have  desired  such 
constant  intercourse  with  God  as  that  which  is 
implied  in  the  words,  "  Whereunto  I  may  con 
tinually  resort." 

The  wicked  say,  "No  God";  but  David  sighed 
for  none  but  God.  The  mere  pretender  would 
have  God  on  Sabbaths  and  high  days,  and  in 
times  of  trouble;  but  David  would  have  God  all 
the  day,  and  every  day.  The  formalist  is  satis 
fied  with  a  word  with  God  in  the  morning,  arid 
another  at  night;  when  he  is  either  hurried  or 
sleepy,  he  forces  from  himself  the  tax  of  a  minute 
or  two  in  prayer;  but  he  that  loves  the  Lord 
delights  to  walk  with  him  evermore,  yea,  to  make 


298  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

his  home  with  God,  and  to  abide  in  him.  Some 
would  like  a  Sabbath  once  in  the  month,  but 
David  would  make  all  his  days  holiness  unto  the 
Lord.  Many  would  like  to  speak  with  the  Lord 
from  a  distance,  but  David  would  live  and  move 
and  have  his  being  in  his  God.  By  this  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart  proved  that  his  own  heart 
was  after  God.  Judge  yourselves,  therefore,  at 
the  very  outset,  as  to  what  your  own  condition 
of  heart  must  be.  If  you  can  repeat  the  words  of 
David  from  your  very  soul,  bless  the  grace  of 
God  that  has  taught  you  to  do  so;  and  if  you 
cannot  so  pray,  breathe  a  silent  prayer  to  heaven 
saying — Lord,  teach  me  to  love  thee  and  long 
for  thee.  I  would  fain  acquaint  myself  with  thee, 
and  be  at  peace. 

Without  inventing  any  mechanical  divisions, 
I  would  remark  that  the  text  naturally  suggests 
three  things.  The  first  is,  that  God  was  to  David 
a  delightful  repose;  he  was  his  habitation  or  home. 
Secondly,  that  David  found  in  his  God  peaceful 
security — "  Be  thou  my  strong  habitation."  God 
was  his  fortress,  his  castle,  his  high  tower,  his 
rock  of  defence.  And  then,  thirdly,  David  had  to 
his  God  continual  access:  "  Whereunto  I  may  contin 
ually  resort."  Those  five  words  are  as  a  musical 
box,  set  to  the  most  charming  air:  they  discourse 
a  quiet  harmony  to  my  soul,  such  as  one  hears 
when  listening  to  the  brook  which  warbles  as  it 
flows — "  Whereunto  I  may  continually  resort." 

I.  Let  us  dwell  on  this  for  a  few  minutes.  David 
found  in  his  God  DELIGHTFUL  REPOSE.  "  Be  thou  my 
strong  habitation  " ;  that  is,  be  my  house  and  home. 
David  was  one  of  those  who  had  made  the  Most 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  299 

High  his  habitation,  and  therefore  did  God  con 
tinually  preserve  him.  He  was  one  of  the  favored 
ones  who  dwelt  in  the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacles 
of  the  Most  High,  abiding  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty. 

Observe  what  wonderful  condescension  he  had  ex 
perienced  from  the  Lord !  What  infinite  grace 
that  God  should  allow  his  servants  to  think  of  him 
as  their  house  !  My  God,  thou  art  the  glory  of 
heaven,  and  the  angels  veil  their  faces  in  thy  pre 
sence,  and  yet  I  dare  to  say,  "  Be  thou  my  habita 
tion."  My  God,  thou  art  terrible  in  righteousness, 
thou  art  a  consuming  fire;  all  things  perish  at  thy 
presence  when  once  thou  art  angry;  yet  thou  dost 
permit  me  to  dwell  in  thee,  and  to  find  in  tliee,  not 
destruction,  but  eternal  life.  Brethren,  we  aspire 
not  merely  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  nor  even  to 
draw  near  unto  him,  but  to  enter  into  him,  and  to 
hide  ourselves  beneath  him.  It  is  one  of  the  sub 
limities  of  Christian  experience  to  be  in  God  the 
Father,  and  in  Christ  Jesus.  Do  we  understand 
this?  We  have  never  reached  the  sum  of  our 
grace-given  privileges  till  we  are  more  at  home 
with  God  than  with  any  one  else  in  the  uni 
verse.  What  a  wonder  that  the  eternal  God  is 
our  refuge  !  What  condescension  that  the  infinite 
Jehovah  should  be  the  abode  of  his  saints  ! 

David  had  realized  in  his  God  peculiar  love.  In 
a  man's  own  home  he  expects  to  find  love.  Pity  on 
the  poor  wretch  who  is  disappointed  therein.  When 
we  are  abroad  in  the  world,  my  brethren,  we  reckon 
to  meet  with  rough  handling,  and  to  receive  scant 
consideration ;  but  within  our  own  doors  we  enter 
the  sanctuary  of  love.  If  we  leceive  and  return 


300  GOD    °UR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

love  anywhere,  it  is  within  the  walls  ofonrown 
habitation.  That  is  how  David  felt  towards  the 
Lord  his  God.  Abroad  he  had  enemies  many,  and 
faithless  friends  not  a  few,  but  they  were  all  out 
side  of  his  real  life;  when  he  came  to  his  true  life 
in  God  he  breathed  an  atmosphere  of  love;  he  dwelt 
in  one  who  loved  him  better  than  he  loved  him 
self.  Do  you  know  what  this  means,  dear  brother  ? 
Is  God  the  center  of  your  repose  because  in  him  is 
lore  ?  Are  your  affections  all  set  on  him  ?  and  do 
you  know  that  he  loves  you,  and  takes  a  divine 
delight  in  you  ?  "  He  shall  rest  in  his  love  "  ;  do 
you  rest  in  it  ?  Oh  that  your  heart  may  be  filled 
to  the  brim  with  a  sweet  consciousness  that  you 
are  the  object  of  infinite  affection  !  May  you  say 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  Who  loved  me,  and  gave  him 
self  for  me  ";  and  may  you  hear  the  Father  say,  "  I 
have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love:  there 
fore  with  loving-kindness  have  I  di'awn  thee."  He 
that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  for  God  is 
love.  Oh  blessed  experience,  to  dwell  in  God  as 
the  abode  of  love  ! 

Moreover,  home  is  the  place  of  special  rest.  At 
home  we  are  unloaded  of  the  world's  hnge  load; 
the  advocate  takes  off  his  gown,  and  says,  "  Lie 
there,  Mr.  Barrister,  and  let  the  father  come 
to  the  front.''  The  tradesman  takes  off  his  apron, 
the  warrior  his  harness,  the  bearer  his  yoke,  for 
he  is  at  home;  and  if  a  man  may  rest  anywhere  on 
earth,  it  must  surely  be  in  his  own  habitation.  Is 
not  our  God  our  rest  ?  0  beloved,  is  there  indeed 
beneath  the  sun  any  repose  for  a  poor  soul  except 
in  God  ?  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of 
God,  and  that  rest  is  God  himself.  "  Keturn  unto 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    KESOKT.  3Q1 

thy  rest,  0  my  soul;  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt,  boun 
tifully  with  thee."  When  we  know  Jehovah's 
truth,  his  faithfulness,  his  power,  his  wisdom,  his 
grace,  then  we  rest  in  him.  When  we  see  him 
glorified  in  the  majesty  of  his  love  in  the  person  of 
the  Well-beloved  Saviour,  who  hath  redeemed  us 
from  death,  and  hell,  then  we  who  have  believed  do 
enter  into  rest.  The  Lord  makes  us  partakers  of 
his  own  Sabbatic  rest:  the  peace  of  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding  keeps  our  hearts  and 
minds  by  Christ  Jesus.  Beloved,  have  you  not 
sweet  recollections  of  times  when  you  had  been 
tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted,  but  obtained 
access  to  God,  and  so  entered  into  a  deep  calm  ? 
When  wearied  and  bewildered,  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  has  brought  you  perfect  peace,  and  you  have 
felt  yourself  at  home.  Then  have  you  sung — 

"Let  cares  like  a  wild  deluge  come, 

And  storms  of  sorrow  fall, 
My  soul  hath  safely  reached  her  home 
Her  God,  her  heaven,  her  all." 

We  have  not,  yet  read  all  the  meaning  that  couch- 
eth  beneath  this  sweet  word  "  habitation,"  or  home. 
Our  habitation  is  the  place  of  joyful  freedom,  and 
hearty  naturalness.  One  is  not  stiff  and  starched 
at  home.  You  are  not  guarded  there  as  to  what 
you  say  or  do,  for  you  are  not  exposed  to  criticism 
and  misrepresentation.  Some  of  us  cannot  open 
our  mouths  without  seeing  a  reporter's  pencil 
twinkling  across  his  prepai-ed  paper.  Our  steps  are 
dogged  by  those  who  take  notes  and  print  them. 
We  live  under  the  microscope.  We  can  hardly 
think  without  being  published,  with  this  addition, 


302  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

that  what  we  do  not  think  is  often  imputed  to  us. 
Do  not  wonder  if  we  walk  somewhat  under  con 
straint.  But  at  home  a  man  feels,  "  Well,  these 
dear  children,  and  the  dear  wife  of  my  love,  and 
these  kind  friends — I  am  not  afraid  of  them:  they 
will  not  misjudge  me."  Did  you  ever  feel  that 
with  relation  to  God  ?  Are  you  yourself  when 
alone  with  him  ?  Are  you  at  ease  in  his  presence  ? 
Those  fine,  stately  prayers  we  sometimes  hear, 
majestic  and  cold;  we  find  no  fault  with  them  ex 
cept  that  there  is  nothing  in  them  to  suit  rapt  devo 
tion,  or  to  express  the  spirit  of  adoption.  Do  you 
pray  after  a  more  living,  loving  fashion  ?  God's 
children  dare  to  be  familiar  with  him.  God  so  knows 
our  hearts  that  it  is  of  no  use  to  be  reserved  before 
him;  therefore  let  us  unlock  our  hearts  and  talk 
with  him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  Are 
there  not  a  thousand  things  you  could  not  tell  to 
any  but  your  God  ?  Have  you  not  griefs,  ay  sins, 
which  it  were  wrong  to  reveal  to  any  but  to  him  ? 
Oour  God,  we  have  not  to  study  our  language  while 
with  thee !  Our  soul  speaks  to  thee  without  words. 
Her  thoughts  and  emotions  rise  to  thee  in  their 
pure  spirit,  without  the  encumbering  embodiment 
of  speech.  Our  heart  leaneth  against  thy  heart, 
and  thou  knowest  what  we  mean,  even  as  thou 
hast  made  us  to  know  what  thou  dost  mean ;  for 
"  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him; 
and  he  will* show  them  his  covenant." 

Religious  people  sometimes  start  back  from  the 
prayers  of  a  true  saint,  and  say,"  He  is  too  familiar." 
Of  course  a  child  is  too  familiar  for  the  imitation 
of  a  stranger;  but  h.ive  you  ever  blamed  a  child  for 
clambering  his  father's  knee  ?  And  yet  you  would 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  303 

not  think  of  copying  him.  Boy,  dost  thou  know 
what  thou  art  at  ?  Thou  art  playing  with  a  learned 
judge,  before  whom  prisoners  tremble,  and  courts 
are  hushed.  Even  wise  counselors  speak  to  him 
as  "  My  lord."  That  urchin  does  not  say  "  My 
lord."  Look!  He  is  plucking  him  by  the  beard; 
he  is  kissing  his  cheek.  What  presumption!  No! 
he  is  the  judge's  child;  he  who  is  judge  to  others 
is  "father"  to  him.  So  the  saints  of  God  say,  "  Our 
Father,  which  art  in  heaven,"  ever  reverentially, 
but  yet  with  sweet  familarity.  They  are  at  home 
with  him.  Beloved,  may  you  know  what  that 
means  by  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit  of  sonship; 
for  only  he  can  teach  us  the  blessed  freedom  of 
being  at  home  with  God. 

A  man's  habitation  is  also  the  place  of  his  inti 
mate  knowledge.  David  knew  the  Lord  even  as  he 
knew  the  caves  in  which  he  had  sheltered.  David 
could  have  served  as  guide  to  the  great  hollows  of 
Adullarn;  arid  these,  in  their  vastness  and  sublimity 
may  be  likened  to  the  mysteries  of  God.  There  is 
a  weird  charm  to  my  mind  about  caves:  I  like  to 
visit  all  that  are  in  rny  way.  One  is  pleased  to  pass 
from  one  subterranean  room  to  another,  and  mark 
the  secrets  which  are  revealed  by  the  glare  of  the 
torches.  Here  is  a  spring  of  water,  there  a  grand 
stalactite;  here  is  an  ascending  staircase  leading  to 
another  hollow,  and  there  you  must  go  down  by  a 
ladder  to  a  greater  depth.  This  is  a  fair  allegory  of 
the  way  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  us  into 
all  truth.  In  God,  even  in  Christ  Jesus,  are  hid  all 
the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  within 
these  hiding-places  we  find  our  habitations.  David 
was  so  much  at  home  with  God  that  he  entered  by 


304 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 


earnest  trust  into  one  attribute  after  another,  and 
delighted  in  them  all.  He  knew  the  Lord.  He 
could  say,  "My  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet: 
I  will  be  glad  in  the  Lord."  He  loved  to  dwell  in 
the  rocky  strongholds  of  eternal  love,  unchanging 
grace,  almighty  wisdom,  unspotted  holiness,  unerr 
ing  purpose,  and  infinite  power.  0  brethren,  seek 
to  have  the  same  clear  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as 
David  had,  till  you  can  say  that  you  are  at  home 
with  God,  who  is  yonr  habitation. 

Home  also  has  about  it  the  thought  of  tender 
care.  Where  are  we  so  lovingly  watched  over  as 
at  home  ?  Where  else  are  there  such  soft  pillows 
for  our  aching  heads,  such  gentle  words  for  our 
wounded  spirits  ?  "  Take  me  home."  said  the  sick 
child.  I  had  a  great  sorrow  yesterday  of  speaking 
to  a  dear  brother  whom  I  had  hoped  would  be 
spared  for  great  usefulness  in  a  distant  land;  but  he 
had  just  received  from  the  doctor's  examination 
the  solemn  information  that  he  was  hopelessly 
diseased.  We  proposed  that  he  should  go  to  the 
seaside;  but  I  saw  which  way  his  heart  went.  Pie 
thought  of  his  wife  and  his  habitation,  and  he  said, 
"  Let  me  go  home.  If  I  must  die,  let  it  be  in  my 
own  house."  He  spoke  as  I  should  have  done  in 
like  case.  At  home  one  might  not  have  all  the 
skill  of  the  hospital  at  command;  but  one  would  be 
sure  of  a  certain  priceless  tenderness  which  no 
nurse  can  rival.  Lord,  thou  hast  been  my  dwelling- 
place:  I  will  die  in  thy  arms.  When  I  am  sick 
and  weary  there  is  none  like  thee,  my  God  !  When 
my  heart  breaks  none  can  can  bind  it  up  but  thee, 
my  God  !  I  turn  to  thee:  when  in  my  moral  sick 
ness,  like  Hezekiah,  1  turn  my  face  to  the  wall — 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  305 

"  Into  thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  Yes,  my 
unrest  is  all  over  when  I  get  to  thee.  The  ship  is 
in  harbor.  The  bird  is  in  its  nest.  My  heart  has 
found  the  bosom  on  which  it  loves  to  recline.  I 
have  all  things,  my  Lord,  when  I  have  thee.  Thou 
sayest,  "  As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so 
will  I  comfort  yon." 

There  is  much  more  in  this  first  part  of  the  verse 
than  I  can  possibly  set  before  you.  I  have  only 
opened  the  windows,  and  I  now  invite  you  to  look 
out  upon  the  landscape  so  full  of  beauty. 

II.  Secondly,  David  had  realized  in  God  PEACE 
FUL  SECURITY.  "  Be  thou  my  strong  habitation" — 
"  rny  rock  of  habitation.'*  Now,  the  child  of  God 
when  he  enters  into  the  Lord  by  faith  feels  himself 
perfectly  safe.  Safe,  first,  from  all  risk  of  the 
Lord's  changing  or  failing.  God  himself  is  strong, 
his  love  is  immutable,  his  power  is  unfailing.  This 
is  the  solid  ground  of  our  security.  When  the 
winds  are  out  in  all  their  fury,  those  of  us  whose 
habitations  stand  on  the  top  of  a  hill  know  the 
value  of  stability.  There  are  periods  in  the  rage 
of  the  storm  when  our  habitation  shakes  like  a  ship 
which  trembles  from  stem  to  stern ;  and  though 
this  is  very  exciting  it  does  not  create  a  sense  of 
peaceful  security.  When  once  we  enter  into  God, 
we  do  not  shake,  or  know  a  fear.  Eise  winds, 
roar  waves,  blow  tempests,  howl  hurricanes,  there 
is  no  shaking  our  sure  abode  in  God.  David  in  the 
rock  had  often  defied  the  storm,  for  he  felt  that 
though  the  earth  should  be  removed,  and  the 
mountains  be  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  he 
would  not  fear.  Such  be  the  confidence  of  every 
child  of  God.  God  changeth  not;  God's  arm  is  not 


306  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

shortened;  God  is  not  vanquished;  no  purpose  of 
God  shall  be  defeated;  no  decree  of  his  shall  fail. 
Rocks  may  dissolve,  but  the  eternal  God  changeth 
not,  and  his  people  in  him  shall  have  a  sure  abode. 
But  David  felt  also  great  safety  from  his  enemies. 
When  he  climbed  the  rock,  and  crept  into  hia 
cavern,  he  knew  that  his  enemies  could  not  follow 
him.  Had  Saul  come  with  all  Israel  at  his  back, 
David's  band  could  have  kept  armies  at  bay.  He 
must  often  have  felt  like  the  eagle  when  it  has 
flashed  upward  to  its  nest  on  the  craggy  rock  and 
from  thence  looks  down  upon  the  hunters.  He  is 
almost  out  of  sight,  but  he  can  see  all  the  move 
ments  of  the  foe.  However  long  the  range  of  the 
rifle,  the  noble  bird  knows  no  fear,  for  he  is  beyond 
range.  I  think  I  see  him  sitting  there  quietly 
eying  the  enemy,  of  whom  he  knows  no  dread. 
Thus  may  a  child  of  God  defy  the  great  adversary. 
"  Let  us  sing,"  said  Luther,  "  the  forty-sixth  Psalm, 
and  defy  the  devil."  The  devil's  restless  nature  is 
fretted  by  the  serenity  of  the  firm  believer  in  God; 
and  let  him  be  fretted.  His  utmost  rage  is  insuffi 
cient  to  hurt  a  single  hair  of  the  head  of  a 
believer.  No  adversary  can  carry  by  storm  our 
impregnable  stronghold.  Tyre  stood  a  siege  of 
thirteen  years,  but  our  fortress  has  been  beleag 
uered  throughout  the  ages  and  never  captured. 
Security  itself  is  our  portion  for  time  and  for 
eternity,  when  we  trust  in  the  Lord.  I  love  to 
think  of  the  child  of  God  as  getting  into  God,  and 
resting  secure  beyond  the  evil  designs  of  the 
malicious  hand,  the  crafty  mind,  and  the  slanderous 
tongue.  No  stone  will  be  left  unturned  to  do  us  ill, 
and  yet  no  stone  of  our  rocky  habitation  shall  be 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  337 

dislodged.  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against 
thee  shall  prosper;  and  every  tongue  that  shall  rise 
against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  condemn."  The 
trials  of  life  shall  not  harm  us;  the  bereavements 
of  death  shall  not  cause  us  to  despair;  sickness  shall 
help  on  our  sanctification ;  poverty  shall  increase  our 
wealth  of  experience.  When  God  blesses,  nothing 
curses.  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 
Under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  we  are  out  of 
harm's  way.  In  God  we  dwell  on  high,  and  our 
place  of  defence  is  the  munitions  of  rocks.  What 
would  be  a  crushing  disaster  to  us  apart  from  God, 
now  turns  to  a  benediction  with  God  to  overrule  it. 
0  child  of  God,  trust  in  God,  for  he  is  worthy  of  all 
confidence.  In  him  you  are  secure  in  every  sense. 
He  that  keepeth  thee  doth  neither  slumber  nor 
sleep;  who,  then,  can  do  thee  ill  ?  Thou  art  secure 
from  the  penalty  of  sin,  for  Christ  hath  put  it  away 
from  you,  bearing  the  chastisement  of  your  peace. 
Hidden  beneath  his  atonement  you  are  secure  from 
the  wrath  of  God;  your  transgression  is  forgiven, 
your  sin  is  covered :  thus  the  sting  is  taken  from  every 
evil.  You  are  secure  against  final  overthrow  by 
your  own  natural  and  constitutional  weaknesses; 
for  the  Lord  will  cleanse  your  blood  which  he  has 
not  cleansed,  he  will  purge  you  thoroughly,  and 
cleanse  you  from  all  your  idols,  and  write  his  law 
upon  your  inward  parts,  so  that  you  shall  not  be 
parted  from  him.  You  are  secure  against  all  the 
trials  and  troubles  of  providence,  since  these  shal! 
work  together  for  your  good.  The  griefs  and 
pangs  of  death  you  need  not  fear,  since  God  is  with 
you,  and  will  raise  you  from  the  grave.  The  terrors 
of  eternity  are  not  for  you;  joys  immeasurable  are 


308  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

your  portion.     Once  safe  in  God,  what  is  there  to 
fear?     "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of 
God's  elect "?     Who  shall   "separate  us  from  the 
Jove  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  "  ? 

A  blessed  sense  of  perfect  security  ought  to  be 
enjoyed  by  every  believing  man  and  woman.  You 
ought  to  be  as  serene  as  the  glorified,  since  around 
you  there  is  a  wall  of  fire,  and  God  is  with  you  as 
a  glory  and  a  defence.  The  enemies  may  gather 
together,  but  they  only  gather  to  be  scattered. 
Those  that  love  God  and  are  the  called  according 
to  this  purpose  are  beloved  of  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
interpose  his  eternal  power  and  God-head  between, 
them  and  evil.  When  God  is  our  friend  the  whole 
universe  is  under  bond  to  keep  the  peace  towards 
us.  The  beasts  of  the  field  are  at  peace  with  us, 
and  the  stones  of  the  field  are  in  league  with  us; 
the  stars  are  our  lights,  the  heavens  are  our  cur 
tains,  angels  are  our  servitors,  the  elements  are  our 
providers;  time  is  our  rehearsal,  and  eternity  is  our 
anthem  of  joy.  Wherefore,  be  glad  and  rejoice  in 
God,  and  say  with  the  Psalmist,  "  Be  thou  my 
strong  habitation." 

III.  We  have  now  reached  our  iast  point,  upon 
which  we  may  be  somewhat  more  lengthy  than 
upon  the  others.  David's  God  was  to  him  a  place 
of  COXTIXUAL  RESORT.  "  Whereunto  I  may  continually 
resort,"  I  was  talking  the  other  day  with  a  man 
of  God  who  has  very  much  service  and  great  f-are 
upon  him,  and  as  we  communed  the  one  with  tire 
other,  he  said  to  me — "That  expression  of  the 
Psalmist  is  very  sweet  to  me,  'Whereunto  I  may 
continually  resort.'  It  rises  frequently  before  my 
thoughts."  Indeed,  I  did  not  wonder;  for  it  i?  an 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  309 

exceedingly  choice  expression.  Happy  are  we 
that  the  gate  of  communion  with  God  is  never 
locked !  In  our  pastoral  cares,  in  our  business 
trials,  in  our  family  afflictions,  in  our  personal  con 
flicts,  there  is  this  saving  proviso,  that  we  may  al 
ways  flee  unto  God  for  succour.  "  Whereunto  I  may 
continually  resort,"  said  David  while  the  veil  was 
yet  unrent:  may  we  not  say  the  same  with  emphasis 
to-day,  now  that  we  have  access  to  the  holiest  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus? 

There  is  joy  in  this  thing  in  itself.  Is  it  not  a 
great  bliss  to  have  the  entree,  of  Jehovah's  palace  day 
and  night  ?  Is  it  not  heaven  below  to  have  access 
without  ceasing  to  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost? 
How  blessed  to  en-ter  the  golden  gate  unchallenged, 
and  remain  unrebuked  in  the  pavilion  of  the  King 
of  kings !  0  believer,  you  may  come  when  3^011 
will  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  never  fear  a  repulse. 
You  may  come  iw)t  only  into  the  King's  palace,  but 
what  is  infinitely  more,  into  the  King  himself;  for 
he  is  your  habitation,  whereunto  you  may  contin 
ually  resort.  The  Persian  kings  forbade  any  one 
to  come  near  them;  and  if  any  ventured  into  the 
king's  court,  and  the  monarch  did  not  stretch  out 
the  silver  scepter,  the  guards  cut  them  down  at 
once.  Yet  there  were  certain  favored  courtiers 
who,  by  special  privilege,  had  the  right  to  approach 
the  king  at  all  times,  guard  or  no  guard.  These 
were  the  noblest  in  the  king's  dominions.  Such 
honor  have  all  the  saints.  No  cherub  with  flaming 
sword  guards  the  way  of  approach  to  God  against 
any  child  of  the  great  Father.  You  have  a  privi 
lege  that  is  much  greater  than  any  dignity  belong 
ing  to  the-  mightitist  rnonarchs  of  earth — the  privi- 


310  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

lege  of  perpetual  intercourse  with  God,  at  what 
soever  hour  you  will.  It  ought  to  make  your 
heart  leap  for  joy  to  think  of  it.  Come  in  the  dewy 
morning,  come  at  dusky  night,  come  in  the  mid 
night's  dreariest  hour,  the  Lord  is  ever  ready  to  re 
ceive  you,  and  you  may  speak  freely  with  him. 

This  is  his  word:  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given 
you;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  "  Delight  thyself  also 
in  the  Lord;  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of 
thine  heart."  Continual  access  to  the  God  of  all 
grace  is  a  perpetual  fountain  of  joy. 

There  is  a  great  comfort  in  if  as  an  outlook. 
"Whereun-to  I  may  continually  resort."  Through 
out  all  future  time  I  may  draw  nigh  unto  God. 
The  day  may  come  when  I  shall  be  sore  sick,  and 
be  compelled  to  keep  my  bed,  and  then  I  may  re 
sort  unto  God.  I  shall  not  be  able  to  go  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  but  still  I  may  resort  to  God, 
\vho  is  more  than  house  and  home.  No  form  of 
disease  shall  shut  me  out  from  my  heavenly  Father. 
I  may  lie  on  my  bed  and  sleep,  and  when. I  awake 
I  shall  still  be  with  him.  Old  age  steals  on  apace, 
and  perhaps  my  feet  will  not  be  able  to  bear  me  to 
the  place  of  the  assembly;  but  even  then  I  may 
resort  to  God.  When  my  ears  shall  grow  dull  of 
hearing,  and  1  shall  not  enjoy  the  preaching  of  the 
word,  even  then  I  shall  hear  the  still  small  voice 
of  the  Spirit  in  my  heart.  When  I  am  so  far  gone 
with  age  that  my  lone  bed  will  become  the  best 
place  for  me,  I  shall  still  enjoy  his  presence  and 
sing  his  praise.  0  brother,  fear  not  the  future,  for 
the  Lord  saith,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake 
thee." 

i4  Should  fate  command  you  to  the  utmost  verge 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  311 

of  the  green  earth,  rivers  unknown  to  song,"  yet 
may  you  continually  resort  to  God.  If  you  should  be 
a  castaway  upon  the  salt  sea,  the  Lord  sitteth  upon 
the  floods,  and  you  shall  resort  to  him  there.  If 
you  were  like  Alexander  Selkirk,  out  of  humanity's 
reach,  yet  you  would  not  be  out  of  reach  of  Divinity. 
Oh  no ;  even  in  the  dreariest  solitude  you  may  con 
tinually  resort  to  him,  whose  company  is  better 
than  that  of  all  mankind.  In  death  and  in  eter 
nity  this  is  the  perpetual  hope  of  every  believer  in 
Christ:  hernay  still  draw  nigh  unto  God. 

Now,  this  continual  resorting  to  God  is  not  only 
a  joy  in  itself  and  in  its  outlook,  but  tY  is  a  joy  which 
answers  so  many  blessed  purposes.  I  wish  you  would 
read  this  seventy-first  Psalm  quietly  at  home  in  the 
light  of  my  text,  and  then  you  will  see  that  David 
found  in  corning  to  God  everything  that  he  needed. 

First,  he  found  an  escape  from  present  ills — 
"  Deliver  me  in  thy  righteousness,  and  cause  me  to 
escape."  As  the  cony  doth  not  fight  its  foe,  but 
hides  itself  in  the  rock,  so  yoti  in  your  time  of 
trouble  need  not  go  forth  to  conflict,  but  may  re 
sort  continually  to  your  God.  Stop  up  the  rabbit's 
burrow,  and  you  might  soon  take  him;  keep  a  be 
liever  from  his  God,  and  you  would  soon  destroy 
him;  but  so  long  as  he  can  reach  his  hiding-place 
no  enemy  can  wreak  vengeance  on  him. 

David  also  looked  upon  God  as  the  place  of 
his  prayer,  for  he  says,  "  Incline  thine  ear  unto 
me  and  save  me."  We  may  always  pray,  and 
when  our  prayer  is  too  weak  to  rise  to  heaven, 
we  may  expect  the  Lord  to  bow  his  ear  to 
hear  our  groanings.  Prayer  is  never  out  of  sea 
son  ;  it  is  a  tree  which  yields  its  fruit  every  day 


312 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 


Whenever  a  trouble  drives  you  to  your  knees, 
the  Lord  waiteth  to  be  gracious.  There  are  cer 
tain  hours  during  which  it  is  difficult  to  send  a 
telegram  to  a  friend;  but  we  can  at  all  times  speak 
with  God  by  the  telephone  of  prayer.  No  grief  is 
too  little,  no  trial  too  heavy,  no  hour  too  early,  no 
moment  too  late  for  prayer.  "  Whereunto  I  may 
continually  resort."  The  mercy-seat  abides  in  its 
place,  the  veil  remains  rent,  and  whosoever  hath 
faith  in  God  may  come  to  the  throne  of  grace 
whensoever  he  pleases. 

David  by  resorting  to  the  Lord  received  uphold 
ing.  "  By  thee  have  I  been  holden  up  from  the 
womb.  ...  I  am  as  a  wonder  unto  many;  but 
thou  art  my  strong  refuge."  He  had  kept  his 
footing  in  slippery  places  by  keeping  close  to  God. 
He  hath  surprised  his  enemies  by  the  way  in  which 
he  avoided  their  snares.  When  he  was  tempted, 
he  overcame  the  temptation  by  resorting  to  God. 
When  he  did  not  resort  to  God  he  fell,  as  others 
have  done. 

David  also  resorted  to  God  for  strength.  "  Cast 
me  not  off  in  the  time  of  old  age;  forsake  me  not 
when  my  strength  faileth."  He  looked  beyond 
himself  to  the  unfailing  power  of  the  Almighty, 
and  expected  to  be  strengthened  when  infirmities 
crept  over  him.  Do  yon  want  more  power  for  ser 
vice,  more  patience  for  suffering?  Resort  to  God. 
They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strength.  Go  to  the  Strong  for  strength.  By 
prayer  and  faith  gird  yourself  with  omnipotence. 
When  you  need  renewing,  run  to  him  who  sustain- 
eth  all  things.  Go  and  draw  water  from  the  well 
of  strength.  Let  down  your  bucket;  drain  it  dry; 


COD    OUR    COXTIXUAL    RESORT.  313 

and  let  it  down  again ;  for  to  this  fountain  you  may 
"continually  resort."  If  you  lack  strength,  you 
are  not  straitened  in  him;  you  are  straitened  in 
your  own  bowels.  Believe  in  God,  and  be  strong 
according  to  your  faith. 

See  how  David  went  to  God  continually  in  holy 
praise.  Every  hour  is  canonical  for  a  man  who  is 
ready  to  praise  God.  "  Let  my  mouth,"  he  says, 
"be  filled  with  thy  praise,  and  with  thy  honor  all 
the  day."  We  may  sing  unto  the  Lord  even  when 
the  voice  is  cracked  and  the  lungs  have  failed;  we 
need  never  be  afraid  that  he  will  reject  our  praises 
on  account  of  age  or  infirmity.  We  may  sing  to 
him  in  any  place,  from  the  cellar  to  the  garret. 
We  may  sing  at  our  work,  and  sing  in  our  rest, 
yea,  sing  aloud  upon  our  beds. 

When  we  have  done  singing,  and  wish  for  mat 
ter  for  instructive  conversation,  we  shall  find  abun 
dance  of  it  in  the  Lord.  "My  mouth  shall  show 
forth  thy  righteousness  and  thy  salvation  all  the 
dav;  for  I  know  not  the  numbers  thereof."  We 
shall  always  find  fresh  matter  in  the  Lord.  No  fear, 
ye  preachers,  of  running  dry,  if  the  Lord  be  your 
subject.  Who  can  exhaust  the  Infinite?  Who 
can  come  to  a  standstill  for  want  of  themes  when 
the  Triune  God  is  the  object  of  his  continual  medi 
tation  ?  0  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  till  your  seed 
baskets  from  this  granary,  whereunto  you  may 
continually  resort. 

David  also  continually  resorted  to  God  for  quick 
ening.  Notice  how  he  puts  it  in  the  twentieth 
verse:  "Thou,  which  hast  showed  me  great  and 
sore  troubles,  shalt  quicken  me  again,  and  shalt 
bring  me  up  again  from  the  depths  of  the  earth." 


314  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

Have  any  of  you  got  down  there  ?  Do  you  want 
to  rise  out  of  them  ?  Those  depths  of  the  earth 
are  not  pretty  places,  but  we  stumble  into  them 
sometimes  by  careless  walking:  would  you  rise 
from  them  into  newness  of  life  ?  Then  resort  to 
God,  and  he  will  bring  you  up  from  the  lowest 
deeps.  He  will  raise  you  from  death  to  life,  more 
fitted  for  holy  service  than  ever. 

The  fact  is,  whatever  you  want  you  have  only  to 
go  to  God  for  it;  and  whenever  you  want  it,  you 
may  go.  Whatever  your  condition,  you  may  still 
resort  to  the  Lord.  If  you  cannot  corne  as  a  saint, 
you  may  come  as  a  sinner;  if  you  cannot  come 
boldly,  you  may  come  tremblingly.  When  you 
feel  most  unfit  to  resort  to  God,  you  may  still  go  to 
him,  for  he  is  your  fitness  and  your  physician. 
When  you  feel  that  you  dare  not  go,  you  may 
still  go  to  him:  "  W hereunto  I  may  continually 
resort." 

There  is  a  blessed  positiveness  about  my  text. 
"  I  may  continually  resort."  I  may,  I  am  sure  I 
may.  Just  now  in  the  courts  of  law  it  is  the  Long 
Vacation;  nothing  can  be  done  in  Chancery  this 
month,  for  the  poor  lawyers  must  rest;  but  there  is 
no  Long  Vacation  in  the  courts  of  King's  Bench 
above.  You  may  plead  your  suit  and  urge  your 
case  with  God  every  day  in  the  year.  The  Lord 
allows,  permits,  invites,  commands  you  to  plead 
with  him.  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble: 
I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me." 

I  may  continually  resort  to  God;  that  is  to  say, 
he  prompts  me  so  to  do:  his  spirit  helps  my  infirm 
ities;  he  teaches  me  how  to  pray.  Is  not  this 
sweet?  What  more  can  vou  desire  ?  You  know 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    XESOKT.  315 

the  way,  for  Christ  is  the  way;  that  way  is  always 
accessible,  for  Christ  is  ever  with  us  unto  the  end 
of  the  world.  Come,  tried  believer,  ring  the  night- 
bell,  and  call  up  the  great  Physician.  You  have 
only  to  call  upon  him,  and  he  will  be  with  you  in 
an  instant;  yea,  before  you  call  he  will  answer  you. 
Why,  then,  do  you  resort  to  man  so  often,  and  to 
God  so  seldom  ?  Why  drink  so  far  down  the  stream, 
where  it  is  muddy  and  polluted,  when  the  pure 
fountain-head  may  be  reached  by  you?  Men  will 
grow  weary  of  you,  but  you  cannot  weary  God, 
You  may  come  to  the  Lord  even  though  conscious 
of  sin  and  backsliding.  You  may  come  to  him 
though  your  soul  is  sick  and  faint.  He  will  restore 
you  while  you  are  yet  corning.  Or  ever  you  are 
aware,  he  can  fill  you  with  love  divine.  You  have 
but  to  turn  the  helm  towards  the  harbor  of  his 
love  and  the  wind  will  turn  too,  and  you  shall  be 
happy  in  the  Lord.  Come  then,  at  once  to  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  just  as  you  are.  In  all  your  backslid 
ing  and  coldness  of  heart  come  to  him  for  renewal, 
the  Lord  has  not  grown  indifferent,  nor  has  he 
shut  his  door  against  petitioners. 

You  may  continually  resort  to  God,  for  he  is 
never  like  Baal,  on  a  journey,  or  asleep;  he  waits 
to  be  gracious;  he  listens  for  his  people's  cry.  You 
may  continually  resort  to  him  with  confidence  that 
you  shall  not  seek  his  face  in  vain,  for  the  Lord  is 
never  unable  to  help  his  people.  Whatever  the 
form  of  their  trial  he  is  prompt  to  come  to  their 
rescue.  One  of  old  exclaimed,  "The  Lord  was 
ready  to  save  me."  All  the  day  long,  and  all  the 
night,  long,  and  all  the  year  long  in  every  case, 
and  in  every  place,  the  Lord  sitteth  at  receipt 


310  •        GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

of  supplication,  and  holdeth  himself  in  readiness  to 
commune  with  his  people. 

Listen  to  a  parable: — A  certain  young  man 
traded,  and  in  all  things  he  prospered  for  a  while. 
In  all  his  dealings  he  was  wise  and  prudent,  and 
none  were  able  to  overreach  him.  The  cause  of 
his  wisdom  was  that  he  had  a  father,  a  man  of  sin 
gular  knowledge,  of  great  experience,  of  large 
wealth,  and  great  influence.  His  son  never  entered 
upon  a  transaction  without  consulting  his  father. 
Whenever  he  felt  himself  at  all  in  difficulty,  he 
hastened  to  ask  counsel  of  his  father.  Whenever 
he  needed  money  to  meet,  a  sudden  demand,  he 
drew  upon  his  father.  Their  love  to  each  other 
was  more  and  more  manifest  as  the  one  trusted  and 
the  other  helped.  Does  anybody  wonder  that  the 
young  man  grew  rich?  But,  after  a  while  the  sou 
grew  cold  towards  his  father,  and  seldom  advised 
with  him.  There  was  no  quarrel,  but  the  young 
man  was  growing  independent-  of  his  father,  and 
preferred  to  act  upon  his  own  judgment.  He 
failed  to  ask  and  to  receive  substantial  help,  which 
would  have  been  freely  given ;  and  he  fell  into  great 
losses,  which  might  readily  have  been  avoided. 
The  young  man  became  weak  as  others;  he  was 
the  prey  of  deceivers;  he  spent  labor  and  thought 
and  substance  upon  matters  which  ended  in  failure; 
he  grew  poorer  and  poorer,  till  he  trembled  on  the 
verge  of  bankruptcy.  Do  you  wonder?  Do  you 
pity  him?  Do  you  see  in  him  your  own  portrait? 
If  so,  change  it  all,  and  say  of  your  heavenly  Father: 
He  is  my  friend  and  counselor,  and  to  him  I  do  con 
tinually  resort.  This  will  be  your  wisdom,  your 
strength,  your  happiness,  and  your  spiritual  wealth. 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  317 

Multiply  your  approaches  to  God.  Let  them 
become  incessant,  constant,  continual.  No  man 
ever  resorted  to  God  to  excess.  It  might  be  possi 
ble  to  spend  too  much  time  in  the  posture  of  devo 
tion,  but  you  can  be  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  and 
praise  all  the  day  long,  and  yet  never  run  to  ex 
travagance.  "Pray  without  ceasing"  is  the  com 
mand  of  our  infallible  Lord.  Towards  men  there 
is  a  limit  of  resort,  but  to  God  there  is  none.  By 
your  continual  coming  you  will  not  weary  the 
Lord;  through  your  importunity,  you  will  prevail 
with  him.  I  had  a  dear  friend  whose  company  I 
esteemed,  but  on  a  sudden  he  did  not  come  to  see 
me.  He  stayed  away;  and  as  I  knew  he  had  not 
ceased  to  love  me,  I  wondered  why.  At  last  I 
found  that  the  good  brother  had  taken  it  into  his 
head  that  he  might  outrun  his  welcome:  he  had 
read  those  words  of  Solomon,  "  Withdraw  thy  foot 
from  thy  neighbor's  house;  lest  lie  be  weary  of 
thee,  and  so  hate  thee."  I  admired  my  friend's 
prudence,  but  I  labored  hard  to  make  him  see 
that  Solomon  knew  nothing  of  me,  and  that  I  was 
more  wearied  when  he  stopped  away  than  when 
he  came.  I  hope  he  made  me  an  exception  to  a 
very  sensible  rule.  But  never  get  that  thought  into 
your  head  concerning  your  God.  Will  you  weary 
rny  God  also?  You  may  weary  him  by  restrain 
ing  prayer,  but  never  by  abounding  in  supplica 
tion.  Abide  with  your  God,  and  cry  to  him  day 
and  night,  arid  let  this  be  the  music  of  your  whole 
life,  "  \V hereunto  I  may  continually  resort." 

Our  immediate  practical  conclusion  is  this:  If 
we  may  continually  resort  to  God,  let  us  go  to  him 
at  once.  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with 


318  GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT. 

thanksgiving  and  prayer,  even  now.  Here  are 
several  thousands  of  us  who  profess  to  have  come 
hither  to  worship:  let  us  all  draw  nigh  unto  God 
this  morning.  Let  each  one  hasten  to  his  footstool 
for  himself  individually.  Forget  the  vast  congre 
gation;  forget  everything  but  that  which  is  holy 
and  spiritual,  and  come  unto  your  God,  who  at 
this  moment  calls  you  to  his  footstool.  "  Alas,  I 
have  been  so  worldly  all  the  week  "!  This  is  to  be 
confessed  and  repented  of,  but  it  must  not  keep 
you  from  God  now.  "But  I  feel  dull  and  dead." 
1  know  it,  and  the  Lord  knows  it  too;  but  yet  you 
may  approach  him.  You  remember  what  our  Lord 
Jesus  said  of  the  Laodicean  church — that  he  would 
spew  it  out  of  his  mouth;  but  what  does  he  say 
afterwards?  "Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock."  He  says  to  the  same  church,  "  If  any 
man  open  the  door,  I  will  enter  in " — enter  into 
the  same  church  which  had  so  disgusted  him — 
"and  will  sup  with  him" — snp  with  that  church  of 
which  just  now  he  was  so  sick.  Come,  then,  ye 
lukewarm  ones,  and  in  coming  to  Jesus  you  will 
cease  to  be  disgusting  to  him.  Com-e,  ye  whose 
spiritual  state  would  make  Jesus  himself  sick.  He 
stands  at  your  door  and  knocks.  Open  to  him, 
and  lie  will  enter  in,  and  he  will  have  no  distaste 
of  you,  but  he  will  delight  in  you.  You  have  re 
turned  from  your  health-resorts;  now  come  to  a 
still  healthier  resort.  Come,  see  how  graciously 
Jesus  can  restore  your  souls,  and  make  you  full 
of  his  life  and  joy.  He  will  forget  your  sins, 
and  instead  of  his  being  sick  of  you,  he  will 
make  you  glad  in  him,  until  you  shall  cry  out  with 
the  spouse  "  Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me 


GOD    OUR    CONTINUAL    RESORT.  319 

with  apples;  for  I  am  sick  of  love."     Blessed  love- 
sickness! 

If  you  never  have  come  to  Jesus  before,  come, 
ye  chief  of  sinners,  now.  Come,  ye  that  have  but 
little  spiritual  feeling;  come  just  as  you  are,  since 
Jesus  from  this  platform  says,  "Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest."  "  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come." 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely."  That  God  who  is  the  house  of  his  people, 
sets  wide  his  doors,  and  writes  over  them  in  letters 
of  light,  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  Jesus 
comes  to  the  door;  he  beckons  to  you,  and  per 
suades  you  to  enter,  saying,  "  Him  that  cometh  to 
me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  The  Lord  enable 
you  to  come  for  his  dear  mercy's  sake.  Amen. 


XIV. 

•BEHOLD,  HE  PBAYETH.* 

September  20,  1885. 

"Inquire   in  the  house   of  Judas   for  one   called   Saul,    of 
Tarsus:  for,  behold  he  prayeth. "— ACTS  ix.  11. 

r  I  ^HESE  words  are  the  hall-mark  of  genuine 
•*-  conversion.  "Behold,  he  prayeth"  is  a 
surer  witness  of  a  man's  conversion  than,  "  Behold, 
he  singeth,"  or,  "  Behold,  he  readeth  the  Scrip 
ture,"  or,  "  Behold,  he  preacheth."  These  tilings 
may  be  admirably  done  by  men  who  are  not 
regenerate;  but  if,  in  God's  sense  of  the  term,  a 
man  really  prays^  we  may  know  of  a  surety  that 
he  has  passed  from  death  unto  life.  True  prayer 
is  a  sure  evidence  of  spiritual  quickening:  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  put  spiritual  life  into  the  heart 
of  the  man  who  prays;  for  prayer  is  the  breath  of 
heavenly  life.  Prayer  is  the  outcome  of  that  sense 
of  need  which  arises  from  the  new  life:  a  man 
would  not  pray  to  God  if  he  did  not  feel  that  he 
had  urgent  need  of  blessings  which  only  the  Lord 
can  bestow.  While  expressing  his  sense  of  need, 
and  appealing  to  God  for  help,  the  praying  man 
gives  evidence  of  being  at  peace  with  his  Lord, 
and  cured  of  his  natural  alienation.  He  who  prays 
trusts,  and  thus  reveals  the  faith  which  saves. 
Some  forms  of  prayer  display  great  faith,  but  al' 
real  prayer  is  the  working  of  faith,  either  little  or 


"BEHOLD,    HE    FRAYETH."  321 

great.  Will  a  man  cry  to  God  for  mercy  if  he 
does  not  believe  in  him?  Will  he  plead  at  the 
mercy-seat  if  he  does  not  expect  to  obtain  his 
desire  ?  Thus,  dear  friends,  prayer  of  the  true 
kind  is  a  voucher  for  the  existence  of  spiritual  life 
in  its  consciousness  of  need,  in  its  turning  towards 
God,  and  in  its  faith  in  him.  Prayer  is  the  auto 
graph  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  renewed 
heart. 

Prayer  is  also  an  admirable  form  of  commu 
nion  with  God;  and  as  the  carnal  mind  can 
have  no  fellowship  with  God,  it  becomes  the  token 
of  regeneration,  the  evidence  of  adoption.  Pie 
that  prays  has  some  knowledge  of  God,  som-e 
acquaintance  with  the  great  Invisible.  The  habit 
of  private  prayer,  and  the  constant  practice  of 
heart-fellowship  with  the  Most  High,  are  the 
surest  indicators  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
upon  the  heart.  When  it  can  be  said  of  a  man, 
"Behold,  he  prayeth,"  the  seal  of  the  great  King  is 
upon  him,  he  bears  the  endorsement  of  the  Searcher 
of  hearts.  Hence  the  Lord  gave  to  Ananias  this 
sure  indication  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  con 
verted  man,  by  saying  to  him,  "  Behold  he 
prayeth." 

In  Saul's  case,  this  indication  was  very  specially 
remarkable:  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  "  had  a  peculiar 
meaning  in  relation  to  this  converted  Pharisee.  I 
slmll  have  to  show  you  this  at  length.  It  was 
thought  a  great  wonder  that  king  Saul,  of  the  Old 
Testament,  prophesied.  So  unexpected  and  singu 
lar  was  the  event  that  it  became  a  proverb:  "  Is 
Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  "  But  it  was  an 
equal  marvel  w-hen  this  more  modern  Saul  was 


322  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETII." 

seen  to  pray.  Is  Saul  of  Tarsus  among  those  who 
pray  to  Jesus  for  mercy  ?  The  Lord  from  heaven 
himself  mentions  it  as  a  prodigy,  he  points  to  it  as 
a  thing  to  be  beheld  and  wondered  at,  for  he  says 
to  his  servant  Ananias,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 

I.  We  will  begin  our  discourse  with  the  follow 
ing  observation :  this  expression  concerning  Saul 
of  Tarsus  is  remarkable,  for  IT  IMPLIES  THAT  HE  HAD 
NEVER  PRAYED  BEFORE.  "  Behold  he  prayeth  "  could 
hardly  be  spoken  of  one  who  had  been  accustomed 
to  pray  in  former  days. 

This  is  very  striking,  for  Saul  was  a  Pharisee, 
and  therefore  a  man  who  habitually  repeated 
prayers.  Pharisees  boasted  of  the  regularity, 
number,  and  length  of  their  prayers.  Perhaps 
there  had  never  been  a  day  in  Saul's  life  from  the 
time  in  which  he  was  conscious  in  which  he  had 
not  gone  through  his  prayers.  Many  devout  Jews 
spent  nine  hours  a  day  in  prayer;  for  they  occupied 
an  hour  in  actual  supplication,  and  sat  still  for  an 
hour  before  and  an  hour  after  prayer;  and  this 
was  done  three  times  a  day.  Pharisees  offered 
prayer,  not  only  in  the  temple  and  in  the  syna 
gogue,  but  even  at  the  corners  of  the  streets 
where  they  could  be  seen  of  men.  Whatever  the 
quality  of  their  praying  might  be,  there  was 
plenty  of  it  in  quantity.  If  any  fact  was  in  public 
evidence  so  that  nobody  could  deny  it,  it  was  that 
Saul  of  Tarsus  had  been  much  in  prayer:  and 
therefore  it  is  the  more  striking  that  the  Lord  him 
self  should  say  to  Ananias,  concerning  this  con 
stantly  devout  Pharisee,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 
Behold  how  the  Lord  revises  the  judgments  of  men. 
In  the  opinion  of  all  who  knew  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  323 

disciple  of  Gamaliel,  he  was  much  given  to  prayer; 
but  he  who  seurcheth  the  hearts,  and  knew  Saul 
well,  and  knew  truthfully  what  prayer  is,  here 
declares  that  now  at  length  he  begins  to  pray. 
Despite  all  his  former  superfluity  of  ostentatious 
devotion,  Saul  all  his  life  long  had  never  prayed  at 
all;  and  what  his  friends  wo-uld  have  put  down  as 
a  great  mass  of  prayer,  the  Lard  here  makes  noth 
ing  of.  Until  the  first  broken  hearted  confession 
of  sin  came  from  the  poor  blinded  persecutor  of 
Jesus,  the  Lord  considered  that  he  had  never 
prayed.  I  want,  to  push  this  fact  home  upon  some 
who  are  present  with  us  this  morning;  I  mean 
those  who  in  a  formal  manner  have  always  prayed 
and  yet  have  never  spirit  ually  prayed.  Your  mother 
taught  you  a  form  of  prayer;  this  form  you  repeated 
all  through  your  childhood  and  your  youth;  at  this 
moment  you  are  most  regular  in  bowing  the  knee, 
loth  morning  and  evening;  and  yet  no  single 
pruyer  may  ever  have  risen  from  your  heart  to 
the  heart  of  God.  You  go  constantly  to  your 
place  of  worship,  you  are  diligently  observant  of 
every  Christian  ordinance,  you  join  in  the  respon 
ses,  or  you  bow  yo-ur  head  and  listen  in  silence  to 
the  extemporary  utterance  of  your  minister,  and 
therefore  you  suppose  that  yo-u  pray;  and  yet  it 
may  be  a  vain  supposition.  If  anyone  were  to  say 
that  you  had  not  prayed,  you  would  be  very  angry; 
and  yet  it  is  possible  that  such  a  statement  would 
be  strictly  true.  How  much  I  long  that  to-day, 
for  the  first  time,  you  may  in  real  earnest  cry  unto 
the  Lord  God,  and  cause  him  to  bear  witness  that 
now  indeed  you  pray  !  You  will  then  think  little 
of  all  your  heartless  repetitions  of  prayers;  and  you 


324  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

will  cry  to  God  for  the  Holy  Spirit  who  helpeth  onr 
Infirmities,  since  we  know  now  not  what  we  should 
pray  for  as  we  ought. 

1  have  told  you  that  the  Pharisees  were  noted  for 
their  prayers,  and  therefore  it  seems  the  more  sin 
gular  that  the  Lord  should  announce  that  Saul  of 
Tarsus  had  now  begun  to  pray.  Yet  it  was  so:  he 
was  now  offering1  his  first  real  prayer.  That  prayer 
of  the  Pharisee  which  we  readjust  now  from  the 
eighteenth  chapter  of  Luke,  was  meant  for  prayer, 
but  there  is  not  a  particle  of  prayer  in  it.  He  did 
not  ask  for  anything;  he  did  not  confess  a  necessity, 
nor  plead  a  promise;  he  did  not  seek  mercy,  nor 
mention  propitiation.  His  formal  thanksgiving 
was  stained  with  proud  self-esteem,  and  it  was  more 
the  boast  of  vanity  than  the  request  of  humility. 
Much  of  what  is  called  prayer  is  the  husk,  and  not 
the  kernel,  of  prayer.  Suppose  you  take  the  best 
form  that  was  ever  written,  and  you  go  through  that 
in  the  most  orderly  style:  you  may  do  that,  and 
continue  to  do  it,  throughout  a  life  of  seventy  years, 
and  yet  you  may  never  have  sought  unto  God  in 
real  earnest.  If  you  prefer  to  compose  your  own 
prayers  you  may  do  so  throughout  life,  and  you 
may  make  prayers  which  shall  be  excellent  in  lan 
guage,  and  you  may  make  a  new  one  every  morning 
and  every  evening;  and  yet  there  may  not  have  been 
a  single  atom  of  tru-e  supplication  in  the  whole  round 
of  pious  effusions.  What  if  your  first  prayer  has 
yet  to  be  prayed  ?  What  a  solemn  suggestion  to 
you  who  have  been  nursed  in  the  lap  of  piety,  and 
wrapped  in  the  garments  of  religion  !  I  do  not 
wonder  that  it  cuts  you  to  the  quick.  This  heart- 
searching  inquiry  ought  not  to  be  thrust  aside  as 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  325 

if  it  did  not  concern  you.  Unless  your  heart  speaks 
to  God,  unless  your  soul  comes  into  spiritual  con 
tact  with  the  great  Father  of  Spirits,  your  form  of 
prayer,  whether  it  be  liturgical  or  extemporaneous 
is  little  worth.  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead, 
but  of  the  living;  and  this  applies  to  prayers  as 
well  as  men. 

"  God  abhors  the  sacrifice 
Where  not  the  heart  is  found." 

One  sentence  of  true  heart-pleading,  such  as,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  is  worth  volumes  of 
mere  lip-service. 

Real  prayer  must  be  spirituaJ;  and  Saul's  prayers 
had  not  been  such  before.  VVrords  are  but  the  body 
of  devotion:  the  confession  of  sin,  the  longing  for 
mercy,  the  groaning  for  grace — these  are  the  sou) 
and  spirit  of  prayer.  A  man  may  have  repeated  the 
choicest  words,  and  these  may  have  been  the  out 
ward  embodiment  of  true  prayer,  because  his  heart 
went  with  them;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  may 
have  used  equally  select  expressions,  and  may  not 
have  prayed  at  all;  for  there  may  have  been  in 
him  no  stirring  of  the  heart  towards  God.  A 
man  may  utter  no  word  whatever,  he  may  sit 
in  absolute  silence,  and  he  may  be  praying 
most  effectually.  Moses  cried  aloud  when  he  said 
not  a  word;  and  Hannah  was  heard  in  the  temple 
when  she  made  no  sound,  but  only  her  lips  moved. 
I  reckon  that  those  prayers  which  cannot  be 
expressed  in  language  are  often  the  most  deep 
and  fervent.  When  desires  are  so  weighty  that 
they  burden  our  words  and  even  crush  them 
down  then  are  they  most  prevalent  with  God. 


323  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

There  is  power  in  that  solemn  silence  which  is 
"  frost  of  the  mouth,  but  thaw  of  the  mind,"  when 
the  soul  flows  with  strong  current  in  a  deep  and 
hidden  bed  till  it  reaches  the  heart  of  God,  and  pre 
vails  with  him.  Anyhow,  that  prayer  which  is  riot 
spiritual  is  not  reckoned  of  the  Lord  to  be  prayer 
at  all;  for  "God  is  a  Spirit:  and  they  that  worship 
him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
You  may,  if  you  like,  praise  God  with  organs,  as 
the  English  do,  or  you  may  pray  to  God  with  wind 
mills,  as  the  Tartars  do — the  tilings  are  very  much 
alike,  as  I  believe — but  your  praising  and  your 
praying  will  not  be  measured  only  by  the  heaving 
of  the  billows,  nor  by  the  revolution  of  the  sails; 
they  will  be  measured  only  by  the  heart-work 
which  was  in  them.  If  the  spirit  does  not  com 
mune  with  God,  there  has  been  no  prayer; 
there  may  have  been  music  and  oratory,  but 
there  has  been  no  prayer  if  the  spiritual  nature 
has  not  spoken  with  the  Father  of  spirits.  Notice, 
then,  that  we  only  begin  to  pray  when  we  begin 
to  live  spiritual  lives. 

Next  to  this,  Saul  had  never  prayed  a  single 
right  prayer  of  the  kind  which  the  Lord  can  accept. 
Saul  hitherto  had  not  known  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
therefore  he  did  not  know  the  way  of  access  to  the 
Father  through  his  Son,  whom  he  has  appointed 
Mediator.  Saul  knew  the  letter  of  the  truth  accord 
ing  to  the  ceremonial  law;  but  he  did  not  know  the 
spirit  of  it  as  it  is  embodied  in  Jesus.  He  had  been 
going  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness,  but 
he  had  not  submitted  himself  to  the  righteousness 
of  Christ;  and  therefore  in  his  prayer  he  had  not 
been  traversing  the  road  which  led  to  the  heart  of 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  327 

God.  If  a  man  were  using  his  rifle  at  Wimbledon 
in  a  contest  for  a  prize,  if  he  were  told,  "  It  is  not 
that  target  on  the  right,  but  this  upon  the  left 
which  must  be  aimed  at,"  if  he  would  continue  to 
shoot  towards  the  right,  even  though  he  should 
make  a  center,  yet  he  would  not  have  scored;  inas 
much  as  that  was  not  the  target  appointed  in  the 
competition,  his  best  shots  would  count  for  nothing. 
When  a  man  does  not  pray  in  the  Lord's  appointed 
way,  nor  through  Jesus  Christ,  nor  in  dependence 
upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  does  not  pray  at  all.  How 
ever  fine  his  prayer,  it  is  only  a  splendid  sin.  If  you 
employ  a  servant  to  do  a  work,  and  he  obstinately 
persists  in  doing  another  thing,  he  will  not  earn  his 
wages.  However  industriously  he  works  at  what 
you  have  never  set  him  to  do,  he  will  receive  noth 
ing  at  your  hands.  So  if  you  pray  to  God  in  a  way 
which  God  has  never  ordained,  if  you  refuse  to  use 
the  name  which  he  has  appointed,  if  you  neglect 
the  cultivation  of  that  holy  and  humble  spirit  which 
the  Lord  will  alone  accept,  you  may  pray  till  your 
tongue  cleaves  to  the  roof  of  your  mouth;  but  in 
God's  judgment  you  have  not  prayed  at  all,  and 
you  will  not  receive  anything  of  the  Lord. 

It  is  certain,  too,  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  never 
made  mention  of  the  name  of  Jesus  in  his  prayers,  and 
therefore  God  reckons  that  he  had  not  prayed.  He 
had  heard  of  Jesus,  but  he  had  rejected  his  claims 
and  hated  his  people.  Our  heavenly  Father  never 
turns  a  deaf  ear  to  the  name  of  Jesus  when  it  is 
honestly  pleaded ;  but  he  will  not  hear  us  if  we  de 
spise  that  ever-blessed  name.  There  is  none  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we 
must  be  saved;  there  is  none  other  name  by  which 


328  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

we  can  hopefully  approach  the  mercy-seat.  Saul 
had  rejected  that  name,  and  had  come  in  his  own 
name,  and  therefore  he  had  riot  prayed  at  all. 
Suppose  a  king  should  make  a  rule  that  every  peti 
tion  that  was  presented  to  him  should  bear  a  cer 
tain  stamp,  which  his  representative  would  freely 
put  upon  it;  then  if  a  man  neglected  or  refused  to 
have  his  petition  thus  endorsed,  he  could  not  won 
der  if  his  petitions  were  treated  as  impertinences 
and  returned  unanswered.  Virtually,  such  a  man 
lias  sent  in  no  petition  whatever,  since  he  has  de 
clined  to  comply  with  the  regulation  without  which 
no  petition  can  be  received.  Friends,  let  us  see  to  it 
that  we  most  humbly  and  heartily  in  our  prayers 
plead  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ; 
for  the  force  of  prayer  lies  mainly  in  our  pleading 
the  name  and  work  of  the  well-beloved  Son  of  God. 
We  must  set  ourselves  on  one  side,  and  hide  our 
selves  behind  the  Lord  Jesus;  for  we  and  our 
prayers  can  only  be  accepted  in  the  Beloved, 
through  the  person,  the  merit,  the  sacrifice,  the 
ever  living  intercession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
If  we  have  not  prayed  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  we 
have  not  prayed  at  all. 

Furthermore,  I  should  like  you  to  notice  that 
real  prayer  cannot  come  from  men  whose  characters 
are  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God.  He  whose  char 
acter  contradicts  his  prayer  has  not  prayed;  his 
life  has  effectually  pleaded  against  his  lips.  Sa-ul 
of  Tarsus  was  opposed  to  the  Son  of  God ;  how 
could  he  be  in  favor  with  God  himself?  He  did 
not  believe  the  gospel,  though  the  seal  of  God  was 
on  it;  how,  then,  could  God  receive  his  prayer? 
How  shall  the  Lord  listen  to  us  if  we  will  not  listen 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  309 

to  him  ?  How  shall  God  accept  us  if  we  will  not 
accept  his  Son  ?  If  we  set  ourselves  in  opposition 
to  his  gospel,  do  we  not  shut  the  door  of  mercy  in 
our  own  faces?  While  we  pretend  to  be  knocking 
at  heaven's  gate  we  are  turning  the  key  against 
ourselves.  Saul  had  been  more  than  an  opposer, 
he  had  become  a  persecutor;  can  persecutors  enjoy 
the  favor  of  God  ?  Can  we  hope  for  God's  bless 
ing  while  we  are  cursing  God's  people  ?  How  cau 
a  persecutor  pray  ?  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  evidently 
full  of  hate  and  cruelty;  how  could  he  pray? 
Love  is  the  element  of  the  children  of  God, 
"Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God;"  but  Saul 
had  conceived  such  an  intense  disgust  against 
the  followers  of  the  Crucified,  that  he  hauled  them 
to  prison  and  voted  for  their  death.  Brothers,  we 
have  no  right  to  persecute  any  man  for  his  religion 
or  his  irreligion  ;  whether  he  be  Catholic,  Jew,  Turk, 
or  Infidel,  we  must  do  nothing  wrong  towards  him, 
nor  rob  him  of  any  of  his  rights,  however  erroneoua 
his  views  may  be.  We  are  bound  to  be  just  and 
right  towards  all  men  as  men,  whatever  their 
religious  convictions,  or  irreligious  notions.  In 
justice  is  no  friend  to  truth.  We  must  not  fight 
God's  battles  with  the  weapons  of  ill-will.  For  us 
to  hate  those  who  are  in  error,  and  talk  of  them 
with  contempt  or  wish  them  ill,  or  do  them  wrong, 
is  not  according  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  You  can 
not  cast  out  Satan  by  Satan,  nor  correct  error  by 
violence,  nor  overcome  hate  by  hate.  The  conquer 
ing  weapon  of  the  Christian  is  love;  and  if  Paul  had 
sought  to  overthrow  what  he  thought  to  be  an  error, 
by  love,  although  he  had  been  mistaken,  he  would 
not  have  been  so  guilty.  Whoever  they  might  be, 


np.f)  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

whether  righteous  or  wicked,  men  or  women,  he 
would  compel  them  to  blaspheme  the  name  of 
Jesus,  whom  he  judged  to  be  an  impostor.  He 
seeks  to  domineer  over  their  consciences,  and  to 
oppress  *hern  for  their  belief;  how,  then,  can  God 
hear  his  prayer?  If  you  have  the  spirit  of  hate  in 
you,  it  nullifies  your  devotions,  and  makes  your 
prayer  to  be  no  prayer.  In  love  lies  the  essence  of 
prayer;  and  prayer  ought  to  be  the  flower  and 
crown  of  love.  If  I  go  through  the  world  hating 
my  fellow-men  because  they  differ  from  me,  and 
determining  to  force  my  own  doctrines  upon  others 
with  an  iron  hand,  I  cannot  lift  that  hand  in  prayer. 
A  malicious  heart  pollutes  the  sacrifice  which  it 
offers.  When  I  come  before  God  in  prayer,  I  may 
be  really  offending  him  when  I  dream  that  I  am 
pleasing  him.  Friend,  if  you  are  living  an  un 
godly  life,  I  do  notcare  howregularly  you  bend  your 
knee  in  seeming  devotion,  there  is  nothing  in  it. 
If  you  are  not  living  as  a  Christian  should  do,  your 
prayers  prove  nothing;  your  matins  and  your  ves 
pers,  your  family  prayers  and  your  prayer-meetings 
are  the  mimicry  of  prayer,  and  nothing  more.  You 
may  have  been  baptized,  and  you  may  have  fre 
quented  the  communion,  but  it  is  all  mockery,  the 
caricature  of  godliness,  and  nothing  more,  unless 
you  strive  alter  holiness,  and  labor  to  conform 
your  life  to  the  will  of  God.  God  will  hear  us 
\vhen  we  hear  him;  he  will  do  our  will  when  we  do 
his  will;  but  persistence  in  known  sin,  and  especi 
ally  indulgence  in  enmity  and  hatred,  are  so  de 
structive  to  prayer,  that  till  we  are  free  from  them, 
we  do  not  pray.  Be  at  peace  with  all  men,  or  talk 
not  of  prayer;  lay  aside  all  opposition  to  the  gospel 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH"  331 

of  the  Lord  Jesus  or  you  can  no  more  pray  than  a 
fiend  of  the  pit. 

Yet  again :  Saul  with  all  his  prayers  had  never 
truly  prayed,  because  humility  was  absent  from  his 
devotions.  What  a  test  this  is!  Saul  had  gone 
about  the  world  feeling  that  he  was  a  righteous 
man.  Did  he  not  wear  texts  of  Scripture  between 
his  eyes  ?  What  a  pious  man  he  was  !  Had  he 
not  broad  borders  to  his  garments — borders  of 
blue?  What  a  saint  he  was!  Did  he  not  fast 
thrice  in  the  week,  and  pay  tithes  of  mint  and 
anise  and  cummin  ?  There  was  not  a  better  man 
in  all  the  dominions  of  Csesar  than  this  Saul  in  his 
own  judgment.  When  he  prayed,  there  was  a  high 
flavor  of  self-righteousness  in  his  religious  exercises, 
and  this  made  them  disgusting  to  the  Most  High. 
The  Lord  delights  in  humble  and  contrite  spirits, 
but  the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  off.  There  was  no 
confession  of  sin,  no  crying  for  mercy  through  a 
propitiation ;  his  prayer  was  the  expression  of 
thankfulness  that  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  Hebrew  of 
the  Hebrews,  as  touching  the  law  blameless.  In 
the  courts  above,  where  outward  appearances  are 
nothing,  and  God  looketh  at  the  heart,  his  pious 
harangues  were  not  reckoned  to  be  prayers  at  all. 
If  you  feel  quite  content  with  your  own  prayers, 
permit  me  to  suggest  that  you  do  not  pray,  for 
few  who  pray  aright  are  ever  content  with  their 
own  petitions.  Those  who  dream  themselves  to 
belong  to  the  Good-enough  family  will  find  them 
selves  bad  enough,  and  the  Too-goods  will  find 
themselves  shut  out  of  heaven.  If  you  have  a 
righteousness  made  out  of  your  prayers,  throw  it 
to  the  dogs.  Self-righteoiisness  is  a  leaven  which 


332  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

the  Lord  commands  us  to  put  away,  for  he  abhors 
it,  und  considers  that  it  pollutes  his  passover.  If 
you  pray  as  a  deserving  person,  pleading  your  own 
good  deeds,  there  is  such  a  lie  at  the  bottom  of 
your  prayers  that  you  have  not  prayed  at  all. 

I  say  again,  this  makes  terrible  work  of  a  great 
many  persons  who  have  been  brought  up  in  out 
ward  religion.  Dear  friend,  be  not  vexed  or  angry 
if  this  should  seem  to  come  home  to  you.  If  before 
your  eyes  the  whole  heap  upon  your  threshing-floor 
should  be  blown  away  like  chaff,  thank  God  that  it 
has  been  blown  away  so  soon,  while  there  is  time 
to  gather  the  true  wheat.  It  is  better  for  you  to 
make  the  sad  discovery  now  than  to  make  it  when 
you  come  to  die,  or  to  wake  up  in  another  world 
where  there  will  be  no  hope  of  rectifying  the 
error.  Do  let  this  thought  come  to  every  professor 
of  religion  this  morning,  that  you  may  have 
been  a  praying  man  for  years,  you  may  have  come 
like  Saul  of  Tarsus  to  the  fullness  of  your  age, 
and  have  abounded  in  the  appearance  of  devotion, 
and  yet  you  may  have  to  pray  to  God  for  the  first 
time. 

II.  This  brings  me  to  my  second  reflection,  and 

t'uit  1S,  IT  IS  IMPLIED  IX  THE  TEXT  THAT  IT  WAS  A  REMARK 
ABLE  THING  FOR  SUCH  A  PKRSOX  NOW  TO  PRAT.  It  is  put 

with  an  eccc,  a  mark  of  admiration,  "  Behold,  he 
prayeth  !  "  It  is  a  very  difiicult  thing,  a  very 
marvelous  thing,  for  a  man  truly  to  pray  who  has 
been  all  his  lifetime  praying  in  a  false  way.  It  is 
a  miracle  of  grace  to  bring  a  proud  Pharisee  to 
plead  for  mercy  like  a  penitent  publican.  It  is  not 
half  so  wonderful  that  an  irreligious  man  should 
begin  to  pray  as  that  a  vain-glorious  professor 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  333 

(should  begin  to  pray.  The  most  remarkable  con 
version  that  could  take  place  here  to-day  would  not 
be  that  of  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  but  of  Saul  the 
Pharisee.  The  most  remarkable  conversion  in  the 
apostolic  age  was.  that  of  a  man  who  from  his 
youth  up  had  been  plunged  in  self-righteousness, 
and  in  the  self-content  which  comes  of  attention 
to  ritual,  and  ceremony,  and  the  form  of  godliness. 
"  Behold,  he  prayeth." 

It  is  hard  for  him  to  pray,  because  he  is  a  person 
who  has  been  a  formalist  for  a  long  time,  is  so  rooted 
in  the  habit  of  formal  devotion,  and  so  contented 
with  it,  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  bring  him 
to  attend  to  spiritual  things.  The  letter  kills  in 
more  senses  than  one;  and  the  man  so  killed  has 
no  life  for  the  tilings  of  the  spirit.  If  he  goes  up 
to  his  chamber  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  he  runs  along 
the  old  trams  without  the  least  feeling  and  heart. 
He  repeats  the  words,  but  he  might  as  well  be  read 
ing  an  unknown  language.  The  tendency  is  to 
say  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again  till  the  lips 
move  mechanically,  and  the  soul  is  in  a  deep  slum 
ber.  The  Bible  is  read,  but  the  mind  is  dozing: 
the  sermon  is  heard,  but  the  heart  is  wandering; 
where  is  the  good  of  this  ?  Yet  how  hard  it  is  to 
get  men  out  of  it!  It  is  easier  to  attend  a  thou 
sand  masses,  or  to  go  to  church  every  day  in  the 
week,  than  to  offer  one  true  prayer.  It  is  very 
difficult  for  you  who  are  rich  in  nominal  devotion 
to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  hard  to  get 
the  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness  upon  that  man's 
back  who  believes  that  his  own  coat  is  as  good  as 
it  needs  to  be:  he  has  worn  his  own  rags  so  long 
that  they  cling  to  him.  He  is  too  proud  to  beg,  for 


334  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

he  has  so  long  lived  like  a  gentleman  on  his  own 
income.  He  has  been  so  long  rich  and  increased 
in  goods,  and  in  need  of  nothing,  and  he  has  grown 
so  used  to  his  way  of  external  and  superficial  relig 
ion,  that  you  cannot  get  him,  without  a  miracle  of 
grace,  to  seek  after  that  which  is  deep  and  true. 
Again,  self -righteousness  is  a  very  great  hindi'ance 
to  coming  to  Christ  in  prayer.  In  Christ's  day  the 
publicans  and  harlots  entered  the  kingdom  before 
the  Pharisees,  who  were  self-righteous.  It  is  a 
great  thing  to  conquer  sinful  self,  but  it  is  a 
greater  thing  to  overcome  righteous  self.  The  man 
who  is  downright  bad  and  feels  it,  asks  for  mere}- ; 
but  these  people  are  bad  at  heart,  and  do  not  feel 
it:  therefore  they  will  not  seek  the  Lord.  They 
think  that  they  have  done  everything  they  ought 
to  have  done:  wrapping  themselves  about  in  their 
shoddy  righteousness,  they  imagine  themselves  to  be 
quite  fit  to  enter  into  the  royal  feast  without  putting 
on  the  wedding-garment  of  the  king's  providing.  It 
costs  a  self-righteous  man  a  great  effort  to  stoop  to 
prayer.  If  he  did  but  know  that  his  righteousness 
is  only  a  part  of  the  filthiness,  he  would  change 
his  note.  The  Scripture  saith,  "  All  our  righteous 
nesses  are  as  filthy  rags."  When  we  see  them  to 
be  such,  we  are  glad  to  be  rid  of  them,  for  they 
are  loathsome  in  themselves,  and  the  foul  disease 
of  pride  poisons  every  thread. 

The  man  that  has  been  accustomed  to  pray  with 
out  his  heart,  and  to  be  pious  without  being  con 
verted,  is  very  hard  to  be  made  to  pray,  because  he 
is  prejudiced  against  the  way  of  grace.  He  has 
made  up  his  mind  that  he  will  not  see  the  light  of 
God,  because  he  believes  in  his  own  light.  You 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  335 

talk  to  him  about  salvation  by  grace,  redemption 
by  the  precious  blood,  and  justification  by  faith 
alone,  but  he  cannot  endure  such  themes;  they  may 
suit  the  wicked,  but  he  is  of  another  breed.  He 
is  overshadowed  with  the  glory  of  his  own  self,  and 
therefore  he  cannot  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  habit  of  superficial  external 
religion  once  formed  is  as  hard  to  break  as  for  the 
Ethiopian  to  change  his  skin.  A  man  hugs  his  self- 
righteousness  as  he  hugs  his  life.  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath,  will  he  give  for  his  legal 
life,  the  life  of  self. 

Besides,  a  self-righteous  man  knows  that  every 
body  thinks  him  to  be  right,  and  therefore  he  cannot 
demean  himself  by  such  prayers  and  confessions  as 
might  suit  a  common  sinner.  If  you  talk  to  him 
about  being  converted,  why,  dear  sir,  he  needs  no 
conversion.  He  was  born  good.  He  has  always 
been  a  Christian;  he  needs  no  change;  you  don't 
know  what  a  fine  gentleman  he  is !  He  never 
cries,  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,  "  God,  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner."  Why  should  he?  His  mother 
and  father  were  extremely  good  people,  and  he 
was  born  again  at  the  font,  and  has  since  been  con« 
firmed.  What  do  you  want  more  ?  Washed  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus?  Well,  perhaps  he  needs  this 
as  others  do;  but  there  is  no  special  sin  in  him, 
nothing  certainly  for  which  he  could  be  condemned 

O  ^ 

Persons  who  are  of  this  order  are  seldom  brought 
to  pray.  They  may  be  called  reprobate  silver,  for 
the  Lord  has  rejected  them.  If  ever  such  as  these 
are  saved,  it  will  astonish  men  and  angels,  and  the 
Lord  himself  will  cry,  "Behold,  lieprayeth." 

Even  religious  intensity  and  fervor  may  become 


336  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

a  hindrance  to  a  man's  conversion  when  that  ardor 
is  for  a  false  faith.  The  earnest  formalist  is  cased 
in  steel,  and  the  arrows  of  the  gospel  glance  from 
him.  Some  worship  every  nail  of  the  church  door, 
and  every  tile  of  the  chancel:  if  such  a  thing  as  a 
priest  should  cross  the  road,  they  are  ready  to  kiss 
the  ground  he  treads  upon.  How  can  these  be 
brought  to  the  simplicity  of  the  faith?  Among 
Dissenters  are  there  not  persons  who  are  obstinate 
for  trifles,  conservative  for  old  methods,  hide-bound 
with  habit,  ferocious  for  externals,  and  yet  devoid 
of  spiritual  life?  Those  who  have  none  of  the  in 
ward  and  spiritual  grace  are  often  the  more  fierce 
for  the  outward  and  visible  sign.  The  man  who 
has  no  money  is  a  great  stickler  for  a  respectable 
appearance,  the  fact  being  that  if  he  does  not  keep 
that  up,  he  will  soon  be  in  the  Gazette,.  A  sincerely 
gracious  Christian  is  tempted  rather  to  think  too 
little  of  externals  than  too  much  of  them ;  he  sets 
the  highest  value  upon  the  inner  life,  and  faith  in 
the  Lord  Jesus.  I  say  again,  brethren,  it  is  such 
a  wonderful  thing  that  the  externally  religious  man 
ever  should  begin  to  pray  in  earnest  that  it  is  re 
corded  as  a  wonder.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 

See  what  was  needed  in  Saul's  case  to  make  him 
pray — the  Lord  Jesus  must  himself  appear  and 
bring  him  to  his  knees.  Nothing  less  than  a 
light  shining  from  heaven  could  show  him  his 
vileness.  Oh  that  such  a  light  would  break  upon 
all  self-righteous  souls!  The  proud  man  must  fall 
to  the  earth,  cast  down  from  his  high  places;  until 
he  lies  low  he  will  still  glory  in  his  flesh.  He 
must  be  struck  with  blindness,  that  he  may  be 
ready  to  accept  the  sight  of  faith.  Three  days  he 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  337 

must  neither  eat  nor  drink,  to  wean  him  from 
earth  and  make  him  teed  on  the  bread  of  heaven. 
Great,  must  be  the  agony  of  his  spirit,  for  he  that 
has  been  so  intensely  self-righteous  cannot  be 
brought  to  Christ  without  a  wrench.  He  that  has 
rested  in  him-self  so  completely  and  so  long,  needs 
to  be  torn  up  by  the  roots  ere  he  will  quit  his  car 
nal  confidences.  It  takes,  as  it  were,  a  special  in 
terposition  of  grace  to  bring  a  religious  professor 
to  pray  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

III.  And  now  I  want  you  to  notice,  in  the 
third  place,  that  albeit  it  was  a  great  wonder  that 
Sa-ul  prayed,  yet  IT  is  DIVINELY  DECLARED  IN  THE  TEXT 

THAT  HE  DID  PRAY. 

One  would  have  liked  to  have  heard  Sa-ul  of  Tarsus 
pray.  See  him  now  !  This  fine,  good  man  !  How 
humble,  how  lowly  he  is  !  His  prayer  began  with 
a  full  and  grievous  confession  of  sin.  He  offered 
neither  excuse  nor  extenuation.  He  looked  to  him 
whom  he  had  pierced,  and  mourned  for  him.  He 
owned  that  he  was  the  chief  of  sinners — "  beca-use 
I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God."  The  only  thing 
1«3  could  say  by  way  of  apology  was,  "  I  did  it 
ignorantly,  in  unbelief."  See  there,  alone  in  his 
chamber,  with  his  eyes  opened  and  yet  blinded,  he 
weeps,  and  cries,  and  groans,  and  humbles  himself 
before  the  Lord.  Indeed  he  prays.  The  other  day 
as  he  rode  along  to  Damascus  everj'body  looked 
upon  him  as  a  saint,  but  now  by  his  own  confession 
he  is  a  sinner  of  the  blackest  sort.  Hear  how  he 
defames  himself.  He  repents  in  dust  and  ashes. 
He  prays  for  mercy;  he  begs  to  be  forgiven  his 
scarlet  sins.  He  owns  that  if  he  were  sent  to  hell 
it  would  be  no  more  than  just;  but  he  begs  that  for 


338  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH." 

the  Saviour's  sake  he  may  be  spared  and  permitted 
to  see  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  1  think  I 
hear  him  making  this  sad  confession.  Behold,  he 
prayeth  now ! 

Now  you  will  find  him  acknowledging  his 
great  need.  Why,  he  says,  "Lord,  I  need  every 
thing.  It  is  not  one  thing  that  1  am  devoid  of, 
but  everything  is  gone  that  is  worth  having.  I 
need  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit:  I  need  truth 
in  the  hidden  parts,  and  that  in  the  inward  parts 
I  may  be  made  to  know  wisdom."  He  had  noth 
ing  to  boast  of:  he  had  turned  from  a  boastful 
millionaire  into  a  beggar.  He  would  cry,  "Lord, 
give  me  my  sight  again,  but  especially  grant 
me  my  spiritual  sight.  Take  away  the  scales 
from  my  heart  as  well  as  from  my  eyes.  Help 
me  to  see  Jesus  as  my  Saviour!  Help  me  to  live 
to  his  glory,  as  before  I  have  lived  to  perseciite 
him."  He  did  pray  this  time,  and  none  could 
doubt  it. 

I  think  I  can  see  mingled  with  that  prayer  the 
lowliest  adoration.  How  he  would  worship  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  as  his  God  now  that  he  was  conquered 
by  him  !  How  he  would  cry,  "  My  Lord,  my  Lord, 
have  I  been  persecuting  thee  ?  Art  thou.  the 
Messiah  whom  all  the  twelve  tribes  expected,  and 
have  I  rejected  thee  ?  Did  I  sit  to  see  thy  servant 
Stephen  stoned,  and  keep  the  garments  of  those 
that  stoned  him.  and  I  have  been  breathing  out 
threatening  against  thee,  my  Lord  ?  "  Surely  the 
deep  homage  of  his  chastened  spirit  must  have 
come  up  sweetly  before  the  exalted  Lord  as  Saul 
bowed  himself  in  the  dust  before  him,  and  said 
again  and  again,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory, 


"BEHOLD,    HE    FRAYETH."  330 

save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     "  Be 
hold,  he  prayeth  !  " 

Consider  what  pleas  he  had.  Did  it  ever  strike 
you  how  Saul  must  have  pleaded.  Pleading  is  the 
truest  and  strongest  part  of  prayer.  Now,  how  did 
Saul  of  Tarsus  plead  ?  Assuredly  he  urged  the 
promise,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts;  and  let  him  return 
unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  rnercy  upon  him, 
and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon." 
He  knew  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  better  than 
we  do,  and  he  would  be  sure  to  use  them  in  his 
prayer.  I  hear  him  crying,  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast 
said,  '  Come,  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith 
the  Lord;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 
be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.'  "  Surely,  he  also 
went  over  that  fifty-first  Psalm,  every  bit  of  it;  it 
suited  him  exactly.  "  Deliver  me  from  bloodguilti- 
ness,  0  God,  thou  God  of  my  salvation :  and  my 
tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  righteousness."  Do 
you  not  think  that  when  he  had  gone  over  those 
promises  he  would  then  plead  the  types  of  the 
ceremonial  law  concerning  Christ?  How  the  fifty- 
third  of  Isaiah  must  have  flashed  in  on  his  mind  ? 
He  was  blinded ;  but  what  a  light  must  have  flamed 
up  in  his  spirit  as  he  saw  the  Man  of  sorrows  the 
acquaintance  of  grief,  and  heard  the  prophets  say, 
"  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows.  .  .  .  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  him."  How  Saul  would  begin  to  cry  to 
Jesus,  "  Oh,  Son  of  God,  be  my  scapegoat,  be  my 
Bin-offering,  be  rny  morning  and  evening  sacrifice  ! 
Be  to  me  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the  paschal 


340  "BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH:' 

Lamb!  "  Knowing,  as  lie  did,  all  the  types  of  the 
Jewish  law,  he  must  have  found  them  rich  in  com 
fort  now  that,  in  beholding  Jesus,  he  had  found 
the  key  of  them  all. 

And,  beloved,  all  this  must  have  been  steeped  in  a 
wonderful  fervor.  If  we  could  have  stood  outside  the 
door  and  listened,  we  should  have  understood  why 
the  Lord  said,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  Before,  you 
might  have  heard  him  repeating  words,  but  now 
he  uttered  groans,  and  cries,  and  sobs,  and  tears. 
Before,  you  might  have  said  to  yourself,  "He  is 
saying  his  prayers,"  but  this  time  it  was  as  when  a 
man  wrestleth  for  his  life,  and  is  in  bitterness  for 
his  only  son.  All  previous  prayer  was  sham,  but 
this  was  real;  all  the  rest  was  but  a  performance, 
but  now  he  did  real  business  with  the  Most  High. 
"  Behold,  he  prayeth."  Now  he  is  a  real  Israel, 
and  lo,  he  comes  off  more  than  conqueror  through 
him  that  has  taught  him  to  pray. 

IV.   Lastly,  we  see  that  as  soon  as  he  did  pray, 

IT  WAS  EVIDENT  THAT  THE  LORD  ACCEPTED  HIS  PRAYER. 

How  do  I  know  this  from  the  text,  "  Behold,  he 
prayeth  "  ?  Well,  I  know  it  from  the  text  first, 
because  here  is  God  bearing  witness  that  he  did 
pray.  Might  not  the  Lord  stand  in  a  prayer-meeting 
and  hear  a  dozen  of  us  talk  our  piece,  and  never 
say,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  "  ?  But  if  a  voice  from 
heaven  were  to  say  concerning  some  one,  "  Behold, 
he  prayeth,"  we  should  know  that  the  man  was 
accepted  of  the  Lord.  So  was  it  with  Saul.  The 
first  time  he  praj'ed,  God  heard  him.  Try  it,  my 
friend,  try  it:  if  this  is  your  first  prayer  this 
morning,  breathe  it  to  God  with  humble  faith  and 
he  will  hear  YOU. 


"BEHOLD,    HE    PKAYETH."  341 

We  know  that  God  had  accepted  this  first  prayer 
for  he  was  about,  to  answer  it.  He  has  Ananias  in 
readiness  to  go  and  comfort  the  poor  blinded 
penitent.  God  is  about  to  answer  your  prayer,  ray 
dear  brother,  this  morning  if  you  have  cried  to 
him.  Perhaps  the  man  is  present  in  the  Tabernacle 
who  will  speak  to  you  before  you  leave  these  walls, 
or  somebody  will  soon  call  to  tell  you  the  way  of 
peace  more  perfectly.  If  now  you  quit  the  way  of 
self-righteousness  and  formal  devotion,  and  begin  to 
cry  out  for  the  living  God,  that  God  will  meet  you. 

Moreover,  we  are  sure  that  God  accepted  this 
first  prayer,  because  he  colled  attention  to  it  by  a 
"  Behold."  Jt  is  as  if  God  said  to  angels,  to  men, 
to  everybody,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  We  have 
heard  of  seven  wonders  of  the  world,  and  of  other 
marvels  concerning  which  men  cry,  "Behold";  but 
that  which  strikes  God  most  is  a  praying  man,  a 
sinner  praying.  God  does  not  say,  "  Behold  Herod 
on  his  throne,"  or  "  Behold  Caesar  in  his  palace"  ; 
but  he  does  say,  "  Behold  he  prayeth,"  as  if 
he  would  make  the  praying  man  the  center  of 
observation,  the  focus  of  regard.  "  Behold,  he 
prayeth."  The  heart  of  God  is  delighted  with  true 
prayer.  The  arch  enemy  notices  true  prayer,  and 
trembles  when  a  man  falls  on  his  knees.  And  God 
would  have  all  his  saints  on  earth,  and  his  saints 
in  heaven,  look  down  upon  a  man  in  prayer.  To 
the  great  Father's  heart  it  is  a  prodigal  returning. 
He  cries,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  "  ;  but  he  means, 
"Behold  he  is  coming  home!  Behold,  he  seeketh 
his  father's  face!  Behold,  I  have  found  my  son 
which  I  had  lost !  "  Prayer  is  God's  delight,  God's 
admiration. 


342  "BEHOLD,     HE    PRAYETH." 

Beloved,  has  this  ever  been  the  case  with  yon, 
that  you  could  draw  the  attention  of  the  great  God 
to  yourself?  I  am  afraid  there  are  many  of  whom 
it  would  have  to  be  said,  "Behold,  he  never 
prays!"  What  a  sight  upon  earth  ! — a  man  created 
by  his  Maker  who  never  worships  his  Creator,  a 
man  who  is  daily  fed  by  God's  bounty,  and  never 
worships  him  !  Sir,  you  are  a  monster,  yon  are  a 
creature  among  men  most  loathsome.  A  man  that 
lives  without  prayer  ought  not  to  live.  It  is  a 
wonder  that  the  earth  does  not  open  her  mouth 
and  swallow  up  such  a  wretch.  And  yet  when  he 
does  pray,  God  makes  a  wonder  of  it. 

It  is  his  first  prayer  this  morning.  I  see  him: 
the  sermon  is  over,  and  he  has  reached  home.  He 
has  gone  up  to  his  room;  lie  is  afraid  somebody 
will  come  in  and  disturb  him  ;  he  is  turning  the  key. 
He  is  kneeling  by  the  side  of  that  bed  on  which  he 
has  slept  so  often  without  prayer,  and  he  cries,  "  0 
God,  I  do  not  know  what  to  say,  but  be  merciful  to 
me  a  sinner,  and  forgive  my  sins."  I  hear  the  rust 
ling  wings  of  angels  as  they  gather  round  the  sacred 
spot.  Anon  they  fly  upward  crying,  "  Behold,  ho 
prayeth."  Years  shall  pass  on  with  you,  young 
man,  and  you  shall  come  to  middle  life  and  be 
exposed  to  sharp  temptation  ;  what  will  you  do  then  ? 
Good  spirits  watch  you,  fearing  lest  you  should  go 
astray,  and  devils  watch  for  your  halting.  You 
will  then  remember  that  clay  in  the  middle  of 
September,  when  you  first  prayed;  and  you  will 
say  to  yourself,  "  I  will  again  cry  unto  God,  as  I 
have  often  done."  You  go  upstairs,  and  say, 
"  Lord,  many  days  have  passed  since  I  first  cried  to 
thee,  and  I  have  not  ceased  to  cry;  but  now  I  am 


" BEHOLD,    HE    PRAYETH."  343 

in  special  trouble.  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  me  !  " 
God  will  help  you.  The  great  wheel  of  providence 
will  revolve  for  you.  Meanwhile,  both  angels  and 
the  devils  have  spied  you  out:  the  angels  sing  and 
the  devils  mutter,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 

A  few  years  have  passed;  the  young  man  has 
grown  old,  and  the  time  is  come  that  he  must  die. 
He  has  gone  up  to  the  same  room  for  the  last  time, 
and  there  are  those  about  him  who  weep  and  watch. 
Mark  the  sweet  serenity  of  the  departing  soul !  He 
is  looking  into  eternity  without  fear.  He  knows 
whom  he  has  believed,  and  he  is  ready  to  depart. 
What  is  he  doing  in  his  expiring  moments  ? 
"Behold  he  prayeth."  Prayer,  which  has  long  been 
his  vital  breath  and  native  air,  is  now 

"  His  writ  ch  word  at  the  gate  of  death; 
He  enters  heaven  with  prayer." 

Demons  that  gather  about  our  last  hour  shall  flee 
away  as  bats  fly  out  of  a  cavern  scared  by  a  torch: 
they  shall  flee  when  they  hear  the  voice,  "Behold, 
he  prayeth."  The  shining  ones  shall  gladly  meet 
the  soul  that  is  on  Jordan's  bank  when  they  hear 
the  voice,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  They  shall  meet 
the  praying  spirit  on  the  hither  side  of  the  river, 
and  shall  smile  while  the  prayer  of  earth  melts 
into  the  praise  of  heaven.  Soon  shall  we  be  for 
ever  with  the  Lord.  God  grant  it  may  be  so,  for 
his  name's  sake.  Amen. 


XV. 

DEPARTED  SAINTS  YET  LIVING. 
October  4,  1885. 

41  Now  that  the  dead  are  raised,  even  Moses  showed  at  the 
bush,  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the 
God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  For  he  is  not  a  God  of  the 
dead,  but  of  the  living:  for  all  live  unto  hint."—  Luke  xx.  37,  38. 

DURING  the  past  week  the  church  of  God,  and 
the  world  at  large,  have  sustained  a  very 
serious  loss.  In  the  taking  iiorne  to  himself  by  our 
gracious  Lord  of  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  we  have, 
in  my  judgment,  lost  the  best  man  of  the  age.  I  do 
not  know  whom  I  should  place  second,  but  I  cer 
tainly  should  put  him  first — far  beyond  all  other 
servants  of  God  within  my  knowledge — tor  useful 
ness  and  influence.  He  was  a  man  most  true  in 
his  personal  piety,  as  I  know  from  having  enjoyed 
his  private  friendship;  a  man  most  firm  in  his  faith 
in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  a  man  in 
tensely  active  in  the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  Take 
him  whichever  way  you  please,  he  was  admirable: 
he  was  faithful  to  God  in  all  his  house,  fulfilling 
both  first  and  second  commands  of  the  law  in  fer 
vent  love  to  God,  and  hearty  love  to  man.  He  oc 
cupied  his  high  position  with  singleness  of  purpose 
and  immovable  steadfastness:  where  shall  we  find 
his  equal  ?  If  it  is  not  possible  that  he  was  abso 
lutely  perfect,  it  is  equally  impossible  for  me  to 


DEPARTED    SAfXTS    YET   LIVING.  345 

mention  a  single  fault;  for  I  saw  none.  lie  exhib 
ited  Scriptural  perfection,  inasmuch  as  he  was  sin 
cere,  true,  and  consecrated.  Those  tilings  which 
have  been  regarded  as  faults  by  the  loose  thinkers 
of  this  age  are  prime  virtues  in  my  esteem.  They 
called  him  narrow;  and  iu  this  they  bear  uncon 
scious  testimony  to  his  loyalty  to  truth.  I  rejoice 
greatly  in  his  integrity,  his  fearlessness,  his  adherence 
to  principle,  in  a  day  when  revelation  is  questioned, 
the  gospel  explained  away,  and  human  thought  set 
up  as  the  idol  of  the  hour.  He  felt  that  there  was 
a  vital  and  eternal  difference  between  truth  and 
error;  consequently,  he  did  not  act  or  talk  as  if 
there  was  much  to  be  said  on  either  side,  and  there 
fore,  no  one  could  be  quite  sure.  We  shall  know 
for  many  a  year  how  much  we  miss  in  missing 
him ;  how  great  an  anchor  he  was  to  this  drifting 
generation,  and  how  great  a  stimulus  he  was  to 
every  movement  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor.  Both 
man  and  beast  may  unite  in  mourning  him:  he 
was  the  friend  of  every  living  thing.  He  lived  for 
the  oppressed;  he  lived  for  London;  he  lived  for 
the  nation;  he  lived  still  more  for  God.  He  has 
finished  his  course;  and  though  we  do  not  lay  him 
to  sleep  in  the  grave  with  the  sorrow  of  those  that 
have  no  hope,  yet  we  cannot  but  mourn  that  a 
great  man  and  a  prince  has  fallen  this  day  in  Israel. 
Surely,  the  righteous  are  taken  away  from  evil  to 
come,  and  we  are  left  to  struggle  on  under  increas 
ing  difficulties. 

It  must  always  be  so.  The  godly  must  die,  even 
as  others.  Though  our  life  be  perfectly  consecrated, 
yet  it  cannot  forever  be  continued  in  this  world, 
it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  and  that 


816  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET    LIVING. 

appointment  stands.  We  expect  the  present  rule  to 
last  till  lie  shall  come  who  8hall  destroy  the  last  en 
emy.  We  are  not  troubled  with  Sadducean  donbts; 
to  us,  seeing  that  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  it  is  a 
matter  of  certainty  that  all  his  followers  must  rise 
also;  and  seeing  that  .Jesus  ever  liveth,  it  is  equally  a 
matter  of  certainty  to  us  that  all  the  saints  are  still 
living,  for  he  hath  said,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live 
also."  Yet,  if  no  infidelity  is  permitted  to  creep 
into  our  brain  and  disturb  our  belief,  it  may  pene 
trate  into  our  heart,  and  cause  us  great  sadness. 
We  who  believe  in  Jesus  should  rise  into  an  atmos 
phere  more  clear  and  warm  than  that  of  the  sepul 
chre;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  "abolished  death, 
and  brought  life  and  iu  corruption,  to  light  through 
the  gospel."  We  are  not  now  sitting  in  the  shadow 
of  death,  for  eternal  life  has  sprung  np.  Children 
of  God,  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  proper  that  you 
should  think  of  things  as  your  Father  thinks  of 
them;  and  he  saith  that  "all  live  unto  God."  Let 
us  correct  our  phraseology  by  that  of  Scripture, 
and  speak  of  departed  saints  as  inspiration  speaks 
of  them.  Then  shall  we  come  back  to  the  simple 
child's  talk  which  Wordsworth  so  sweetly  turned 
into  rhyme — "Master,  we  are  seven";  and  in  our 
family  we  shall  number  brothers,  and  sisteis,  and 
friends,  whose  bodies  lie  in  the  churchyard,  and 
shall  speak  of  those  who  have  crossed  the  border, 
and  passed  within  the  veil,  as  still  our  own.  Like 
Jesus,  we  shall  say,  'k  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth"; 
like  Paul,  we  shall  speak  of  them  as  absent  from 
the  body  but  present  with  the  Lord,  and  regard 
them  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  one  family  in  heaven 
and  earth. 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET    LIVIh7G.  ;U7 

Our  text  was  fashioned  in  a  place  wliich  has  the 
air  of  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  about  it.  The 
voice  came  to  Moses  in  the  desert.  This  was  a 
strange  place  for  Moses:  the  living,  active,  well 
instructed  mind  of  Moses,  mighty  in  all  the  wisdom 
of  Egypt,  and  full  of  noble  thoughts  concerning 
the  living  God,  was  buried  in  a  desert.  It  is  sin 
gular  to  see  the  foremost  mind  of  the  age  in  the 
remotest  part  of  the  desert,  hidden  away  among 
the  sheep.  He  who  was  a  born  king  is  here  feed 
ing  a  flock.  It  is  death  to  Moses.  Rest  assured 
that  Moses  cannot  be  kept  in  this  living  tomb;  he 
must  rise  to  life  and  leadership.  While  there  is  a 
God  and  a  providence  Moses  cannot  continue  in 
obscurity.  There  are  certainties  wrapped  up  in 
him  which  cannot  fail.  A  man  need  not  be  a 
prophet  to  stand  at  Horeb  and  prognosticate  that 
Moses  will  emerge  from  the  desert,  and  shake  Egypt 
by  his  resurrection. 

While  Moses  is  in  the  desert  he  is  thinking 
about  another  case  of  death,  burial,  and  resurrec 
tion,  namely,  Israel  in  Egypt.  The  people  of  God, 
the  favored  nation  of  Jehovah,  with  whom  he  had 
entered  into  covenant,  saying.  "  I  will  be  their  God 
and  they  shall  be  my  people" — these  were  in  Egypt 
ground  down  by  relentless  oppression,  begrimed 
with  brick-earth,  and  black  and  blue  with  the  blows 
of  task-masters.  It  has  come  to  this,  that  they  are 
compelled  to  cast  their  male  children  into  the  river 
and  so  to  be  the  destroyers  of  their  own  race. 
The  children  of  Israel  have  become  a  herd  of 
slaves;  yet  they  are  God's  elect  people,  God's  favored 
family.  It  does  not  require  a  prophet  to  declare 
this  death  in  Egypt  cannot  last;  the  elect  nation 


348  DEPARTED    SAIXTS    YET 


must  live,  and  rise,  and  go  forth  free  to  serve 
the  Lord.  No,  Israel;  thou  shalt  never  perish! 
The  voice  must  yet  be  heard:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me." 

And  so,  while  Moses  in  the  desert  is  thinking  of 
Israel  in  Egypt,  he  sees  a  bush,  and  that  bush  is 
all  ablaze.  An  ordinary  bush  upon  the  heath 
needs  only  to  be  touched  with  a  match:  in  one 
moment  there  is  a  puff  of  flame,  and  then  all  is 
over;  nothing  is  left  but  a  trace  of  ashes.  Yet 
here  was  an  extraordinary  thing  —  a  bush  that  con 
tinued  to  burn,  and  was  not  consumed.  Here  was 
life  in  the  midst  of  death,  continuance  in  the  midst 
of  destruction.  This  was  an  emblem  of  God  abid 
ing  with  a  people,  and  yet  suffering  them  to  live; 
or  of  the  fires  of  affliction  being  rendered  harmless 
to  the  chosen  of  God.  He  who  then  spoke  to  Moses 
was  the  God  of  life,  the  God  who  could  sustain 
in  the  midst  of  destruction,  the  God  who  could 
preserve  even  a  bush  from  being  devoured  by  the 
intense  fury  of  flame.  Said  I  not  truly  that  the 
surroundings  of  Moses  and  the  bush  all  favor  a 
display  of  life  in  death,  and  resurrection  out  of 
death? 

Now  we  come  to  the  central  matter.  Out  of  the 
midst  of  the  bush  there  came  a  voice,  a  mysteri 
ous  and  divine  voice,  which  said,  "  I  am  the  God 
of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of 
Jacob.''  From  this  voice  our  divine  Lord  teaches 
us  to  gather  this  fact:  that  God's  people  live  when 
they  appear  to  hnve  been  long  dead  ;  for  he  who 
cannot  be  the  God  of  the  dead,  or  non-existent, 
still  avows  himself  to  be  the  God  of  the  long- 
buried  patriarchs.  Our  Lord  proved  from  that 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  349 

utterance  at  the  bush  the  continued  life  of  the 
Lord's  chosen  and  also  their  resurrection :  how  did 
he  do  this  ? 

I.  We  will  not  go  straight  to  the  answer,  but 
we  will  beat  around  the  bush  a  little,  that  the  rea 
soning  may  the  more  gently  enter  our  minds.  I 
would  say,  first,  that  in  these  words  we  have  A 
GLORIOUS  HELATIOSSHIP  DECLARED.  Moses  calleth  the 
Lord,  "The  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac, 
and  the  God  of  Jacob." 

The  glorious  Lord  did  at  the  bush  as  good  as 
say,  "  These  three  men  have  chosen  me  to  be  their 
God."  So  they  had;  through  the  grace  of  God 
they  had  deliberately  chosen  to  part  with  their 
natural  kindred  in  the  country  of  the  Chaldees, 
and  to  journey  to  a  land  of  which  they  knew  noth 
ing  except  that  God  had  promised  that  they  should 
afterwards  receive  it  for  an  inheritance.  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  were  three  very  different  charac 
ters;  yet  this  was  common  to  the  three — that  they 
believed  God,  and  took  him  to  their  God  alone. 
They  nestled  in  the  bosom  of  Jehovah  while  the 
rest  of  the  world  went  after  their  idols.  In  all 
their  troubles  they  flew  to  Jehovah;  for  the  supply 
of  all  their  needs  they  resorted  alone  to  him. 
They  were  men  who  had  through  divine  grace  de 
liberately  attached  themselves  unto  Jehovah  the 
Most  High  throughout  the  whole  of  their  lives. 
It  is  a  sublime  sight  to  see  a  man  trust  in  God  as 
Abraham  did,  and  obey  the  Lord  fully  as  he  did  in 
the  matter  of  Isaac,  when  he  accounted  God  to  be 
able  to  raise  him  up  even  from  the  dead.  Surely 
there  must  be  everlasting  life  in  a  being  who  could 
thus  confide  in  Jehovah.  1  call  you  to  admire  the 


350  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING. 

fact  that  God  called  the  patriarchs  into  the  noble 
position  of  following  the  Lord  fully,  of  fixed  and 
and  settled  choice.  Being  men  of  like  passions 
with  ourselves,  they  nevertheless  cast  in  their  lot 
with  the  Lord,  and  for  his  sake  preferred  the  life 
of  strangers  arid  pilgrims  on  the  earth  to  the  com 
forts  of  settled  residence  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees 
and  to  the  sinful  pleasures  of  Canaan.  We  also 
take  this  God  to  be  our  God,  even  the  God  of 
Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  There  is  a  no 
bility  about  the  choosers  of  the  true  God  which  will 
surely  secure  them  from  annihilation. 

Next-.,  these  three  men  had  learned  to  commune 
with  God.  How  wondrously  had  Abraham  spoken 
with  God!  Full  many  a  spot  was  consecrated 
as  "  the  place  where  he  stood  before  the  Lord." 
Isaac  also  walked  in  the  fields  at  eventide;  and 
there,  doubtless,  entered  into  secret  fellowship  with 
God.  The  Lord  also  appeared  unto  him  at  night, 
and  led  him  to  build  an  altar  and  call  upon  the 
name  of  Jehovah.  The  good  old  man  even  in  his 
blindness  found  solace  in  communion  with  the 
Lord  God  Almighty.  Jacob  also  was  favored  with 
heavenly  visitations.  We  can  never  forget  that 
mystic  dream  at  Bethel,  nor  the  wrestling  at  Jab- 
bok,  nor  the  many  times  when  he  turned  to  the 
God  of  his  father  Abraham,  and  his  father  Isaac, 
and  God  spake  with  him  as  a  man  speaketh  with 
his  friend.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  Lord 
should  thus  commune  with  men.  He  does  not 
thus  show  himself  to  the  beasts  which  perish;  he 
does  not  thus  reveal  himself  to  the  lifeless  stones 
of  the  field.  Those  are  strangely  honored  beings 
with  whom  God  enters  into  close  communion  as  he 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET    LIVING.  3,"1 

did  with  these  three  men.  I  argue  from  it,  that 
these  beings  cannot  dissolve  into  a  handful  of  dust 
and  cease  to  be.  Can  those  eyes  cease  to  be  which 
have  seen  the  Lord  ?  Can  those  souls  perish  which 
have  conversed  with  the  Eternal?  We  think  not 
so.  But  just  now  I  ask  you  only  to  meditate  upon 
the  glories  to  which  the  patriarchs  were  lifted  up, 
when  they  were  permitted  to  be  the  friends  of 
God. 

What  was  still  more  notable,  the  Lord  entered 
into  covenant  with  them.  He  made  a  covenant  with 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  which  he  remembered, 
saying,  "  Surely,  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  in 
multiplying  I  will  multiply  thee."  You  know  how 
the  Lord  swore  to  give  unto  the  seed  of  Abraham 
a  goodly  heritage,  a  land  that  flowed  with 
milk  and  honey.  Now,  it  is  a  wonderful  thing 
that  God  should  enter  into  compact  with  man. 
Doth  he  make  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in 
all  things  and  sure,  with  mere  insects  of  an  hour? 
Especially,  would  he  give  his  Son  Jesus  to  die  to 
seal  the  everlasting  covenant  by  his  heart's  blood 
with  mere  shadows  who  are  but  for  a  little  time 
and  then  cease  to  be?  I  am  sure  it  is  not  so.  If 
God  makes  men  capable  of  entering  into  everlast 
ing  covenant  with  himself,  there  lies  within  that 
fact  the  clear  suggestion  that  he  imparts  to  them 
an  existence  which  is  not  for  to-day  and  to-morrow, 
but  for  eternity.  Still,  I  wish  you  mainly  to  re 
gard  the  glory  into  which  manhood  is  lifted  up 
when  God  enters  into  gracious  covenant  with  it. 

Moreover,  to  go  further,  these  men  were  not 
only  in  covenant  with  God,  but  they  had  lived  in 
accordance  mtJt  that  anyenant,.  I  do  not  mean  that 


352  DEPARTED    SAINTS    VET  LIVING. 

they  had  lived  perfectly  in  accord  with  it,  but  that 
the  main  strain  of  their  lives  was  in  conformity 
with  their  covenant  relationship  to  God.  For  the 
sake  of  that  covenant  Abraham  quitted  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  and  dwelt  no  longer  in  the  land  of 
Haran,  but  became  a  sojourner  with  God  in  the  land 
of  Canaan.  For  the  sake  of  this  he  sent  away  bin 
firstborn  after  the  flesh,  seeing  it  was  said,  "  In 
Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called."  "  By  faith  he 
sojourned  in  the  land  of  promise,  as  a  strange 
country,  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and 
Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise." 
These  faithful  men  had  respect  to  the  recompense 
of  the  reward,  and,  therefore,  they  were  not  mindful 
of  the  country  from  whence  they  came  out,  neither 
sought  opportunity  to  return.  Jacob,  the  most  faulty 
of  the  three,  greatly  as  he  erred  in  his  conduct  to  his 
brother  Esau,  was  evidently  actuated  by  an  intense 
faith  in  the  covenant  birthright,  so  that  he  ventured 
all  things  to  obtain  it.  In  his  old  age  and  death 
he  was  anxious  not  to  be  confounded  with  the 
Eg3'ptians,  or  separated  from  the  chosen  house 
hold,  and,  therefore,  he  said  unto  Joseph,  '•  But  I 
will  lie  with  my  fathers,  and  them  shalt  carry  me 
out  of  Egpyt,  and  bury  me  in  their  buryingplace." 
This  he  made  Joseph  swear;  for  he  must  make  sure 
of  it.  He  was  aiming  at  the  promise,  despite  the 
errors  that  he  committed  in  so  doing.  Now,  doth 
God  enter  into  covenant  with  men  and  help  men 
to 'live  in  accordance  with  that  covenant,  and  after 
all  shall  they  miss  the  blessing  ?  Shall  it  end  in 
nothing  ?  Hiding  beneath  the  shadow  of  God's 
wing,  shall  they,  after  all,  perish?  It  cannot  be: 
they  must  live  to  whom  G<xl  is  God. 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  353 

For  this  was  the  covenant,  that  they  should  have 
God  to  be  their  God,  and  that  they  should  be  God's 
people.  0  brothers,  I  do  not  know  how  to  speak 
on  such  a  blessing  as  this,  though  I  live  in  the 
daily  enjoyment  of  it.  This  God  is  our  God.  All 
that  the  Lord  is,  and  all  that  he  can  do,  he  hath 
given  over  to  us,  to  be  used  on  our  behalf:  the  full 
ness  of  his  grace  and  truth,  the  infinity  of  his  love, 
the  omnipotence  of  his  power,  the  infallibility  of 
his  wisdom — all,  all  shall  be  used  on  our  behalf. 
The  Lord  has  given  himself  over  to  his  people  to 
be  their  inheritance;  and  on  the  other  hand,  we, 
poor  weak  feeble  creatures  as  we  are,  are  taken  to 
be  the  peculiar  treasure  of  the  living  God.  "They 
shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day 
when  I  make  up  my  jewels."  "The  Lord's  portion 
is  his  people:  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance." 
We  are  God's  heritage,  we  are  God's  jewels,  we  are 
God's  children,  we  are  dear  to  him  as  the  apple  of 
his  eye.  We  are  to  him  as  the  signet  upon  his 
hand  and  the  crown  upon  his  head.  He  cannot 
have  chosen  for  his  portion  a  mass  of  corruption, 
or  a  handful  of  brown  dust,  yet  that  is  what  the 
body  comes  to  in  death.  He  cannot  have  chosen 
for  his  heritage  that  which  will  melt  back  into 
mother  earth,  and  be  no  more  found;  this  cannot 
be.  The  covenant  hath  within  it  the  sure  guar 
antee  of  eternal  life.  0  what  an  honor  it  is  that 
God  should  even  say  to  you  and  to  me — "  I  will  be 
your  God,  and  you  shall  be  my  people.  Beyond 
the  angels,  beyond  heaven,  beyond  all  my  other 
creatures,  I  reserve  you  unto  myself.  I  have  loved 
you  with  an  everlasting  love.  I  will  rest  in  my 
love  to  you.  I  will  rejoice  over  you  with  singing." 


354  DEPARTED    SAIXTS    YET  LIVING. 

In  this  the  Lord  has  highly  exalted  his  covenanter! 
ones,  and  raised  them  to  great  nearness  to  himself 
and  thus  to  glory  and  honor.  What  hath  God 
wrought?  What  is  man  that  God  is  thus  mindful 
of  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that  he  thus  visits  him  ! 
Angels  are  nowhere  as  compared  with  men,  yea, 
cherubim  with  all  their  burning  bliss  and  conse 
crated  ardor  cannot  match  with  men  who  are  in 
covenant  with  God.  Blessed  above  all  other  beings 
are  those  who  have  Jehovah  to  be  their  God,  and 
who  are  themselves  the  Lord's  choice,  and  care, 
and  delight.  Each  one  of  these  points,  if  well 
thought  out,  will  go  to  strengthen  our  belief  that 
the  saints  must  live,  must  live  forever,  arid  are  at 
this  moment  living  unto  God. 

II.  We  now  come  to  that  matter  more  distinctly 
under  our  second  head:  here  is  ETERNAL  LIFE  IMPLIED; 
for  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living." 

It  is  implied  first  in  the  very  fact  of  tlie  covenant 
of  grace.  As  I  have  asked  before — Doth  the  eter 
nal  God  covenant  with  creatures  that  shall  live 
only  to  threescore  years  and  ten,  and  then  shall  go 
out  like  a  candle  snuff?  How  can  he  be  a  God  to 
them?  I  understand  how  he  can  be  a  helper  and 
a  friend  to  men  of  brief  existence,  but  I  see  not 
how  he  can  be  a  God.  Must  they  not  partake  in 
his  eternity  if  it  be  truly  said,  "  I  will  be  your 
God  "?  How  can  the  Lord  be  an  eternal  blessing 
to  an  ending  being?  He  has  power,  and  he  will 
give  me  strength  sufficient;  he  hath  wisdom,  and 
he  will  give  me  as  much  of  his  wisdom  as  I  am 
capable  of  receiving;  must  he  not  also  cause  me  to 
partake  of  his  immortality  ?  How  is  he  a  God  to 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET  LIVING.  355 

me  if  he  suffers  me  to  be  blotted  out  of  existence  ? 
When  David  said  in  dying,  "  Yet  bath  he  made 
me  an  everlasting  covenant,"  his  comfort  lay  in  his 
belief  that  he  should  live  in  the  everlasting  age  to 
enjoy  the  fruit  of  that  covenant.  How  could  there 
be  an  everlasting  covenant  with  a  creature  who 
would  cease  to  exist? 

But  next,  this  covenant  ivas  made  up  of  promises  of 
a  very  peculiar  order;  for  in  very  deed  the  cove 
nant  that  God  made  with  Abraham  was  not  alto 
gether,  or  even  mainly,  concerning  things  temporal. 
It  was  not  the  land  of  Canaan  alone  of  which  the 
Lord  spake  to  Abraham,  but  the  patriarchs  declared 
plainly  that  they  desired  a  better  country,  that 
is  an  heavenly"  (Heb.  xi.  1(>).  Even  when  they 
were  in  Canaan  they  were  still  looking  for  a  coun 
try;  and  the  city  promised  to  them  was  not  Jeru 
salem;  for  according  to  Paul  in  the  eleventh  of  the 
Hebrews,  they  still  were  looking  for  "  a  city  which 
hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is 
God."  They  did  not  find  in  their  earthly  lives  the 
complete  fulfillment  of  the  covenant;  for  they  re 
ceived  not  the  promises,  but  saw  them  afar  off,  and 
were  persuaded  of  them.  The  temporal  blessings 
which  God  gave  to  them  were  not  their  expected 
portion;  but  they  took  hold  upon  invisible  realities, 
and  lived  in  expectation  of  them.  They  were  evi 
dently  actuated  by  faith  in  something  spiritual, 
something  everlasting;  and  they  believed  that  the 
covenant  which  God  had  made  with  them  concerned 
such  things.  I  have  not  the  time  to  go  into  this 
subject;  you  get  it  more  fully  explained  to  you  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews;  but  so  it  was,  that  the 
covenant  blessings  were  of  an  order  and  a  class 


356  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET  LIVING. 

that  could  not  be  compassed  within  the  space  of 
Ihis  present  mortal  life:  the  outlook  of  covenant 
promises  was  toward  the  boundless  sea  of  eternity. 
Now,  if  the  Lord  made  with  them  a  covenant  con 
cerning  eternal  blessings,  these  saints  must  live  to 
enjoy  those  blessings.  God  did  not  promise  end 
less  blessings  to  the  creatures  of  a  day. 

More  especially,  beloved,  it  is  to  be  remembered 
that/or  the  sake  of  these  eternal  things  the  patriarchs 
had  given  up  transient  enjoyments.  Abraham  might 
have  been  quite  a  prince  in  his  own  country,  living 
in  comfort;  but  for  the  sake  of  the  spiritual  blessing 
he  left  Chaldea,  and  came  to  wander  in  the  pastures 
of  Canaan,  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  and  to  dwell 
in  tents  in  the  midst  of  discomforts.  Isaac  and 
Jacob  were  "  heirs  with  him  also  of  the  same 
promises  r';  "  but  they  entered  not  into  the  pursuits 
of  the  people;  they  dwelt  alone,  and  were  not 
numbered  among  the  nations.  Like  Moses  himself, 
to  whom  God  spake,  they  "  counted  the  reproach 
of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt." 
They  quitted  kith  and  kin,  and  all  the  advantages 
of  settled  civilized  life,  to  be  rangers  of  the  desert, 
exiles  from  their  fatherland.  They  were  the  very 
types  and  models  of  those  who  have  no  abiding 
city  here;  therefore,  for  certain,  though  they  died 
in  hope,  not  having  received  the  promise,  we  can 
not  believe  that  God  deceived  them.  Their  God 
was  no  mocker  of  them,  and  therefore  they  must 
live  after  death.  They  had  lived  in  this  poor  life 
for  something  not  seen  as  yet;  and  if  there  be 
no  such  thing,  and  no  future  life,  they  had 
been  duped  and  cozened  into  a  mistaken  self- 
denial.  If  there  be  no  life  to  come,  the  best 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  357 

philosophy  is  that  which  saith,  "  Let  us  eat 
and  drink;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  Since  these 
men  put  this  life  in  pawn  for  the  next,  they  were 
sadly  mistaken  if  there  be  no  such  life.  Do  you 
not  see  the  force  of  our  Saviour's  reasoning  ? — God, 
who  has  led  his  people  to  abandon  the  present  for 
the  future,  must  justifiy  their  choice. 

Besides,  t/ie  Lord  had  staked  his  honor  and  his 
repute  iipon  these  meris  lives.  "  Do  you  want,  to 
know,"  said  he,  "  who  I  am  ?  I  am  the  God  of 
Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  If  you  want  to 
know  how  I  deal  with  rny  servants,  go  and  look  at 
the  lives  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  My 
brethren,  as  far  as  the  earthly  lives  of  the  patri 
archs  can  be  written  in  human  records,  they  are 
certainly  full  of  God's  lovingkindness;  but  still 
there  is  nothing  so  remarkably  joyous  and  majestic 
about  them  from  a  natural  point  of  view  as  to 
make  the  Lord's  dealings  with  them  appear  to  be 
specially  wonderful.  Others  who  feared  not  God 
have  been  as  rich,  and  powerful,  and  honorable 
as  they.  Especially  is  the  life  of  Jacob  plowed 
and  cross-plowed  with  affliction  and  trial.  He 
spake  the  truth  when  he  summed  up  his  life  in  the 
words,  "  Few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the  years 
of  my  life  been."  Does  the  Lord  intend  us  to 
judge  of  this  goodness  to  his  servants  from  the 
written  life  of  Jacob?  or  from  the  career  of  any 
one  of  the  servants  ?  The  judgment  must  include 
the  ages  of  an  endless  blessedness.  This  life  is  but 
the  brief  preface  to  the  volume  of  our  history. 
It  is  but.  the  rough  border,  the  selvage  of  the  rich 
cloth  of  our  being.  These  rippling  streams  of  life 
come  not  to  an  end,  bat  flow  into  the  endless, 


358  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING. 

shoreless  ocean  of  bliss.  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob  have  long  been  enjoying  felicity,  and  shall 
enjoy  it  throughout  eternity.  God  is  not  ashamed 
to  be  called  their  God  if  you  judge  of  the  whole  of 
their  being;  he  would  not  have  spoken  thus  if  the 
visible  were  all,  and  there  were  no  future  to  coun 
terbalance  the  tribulations  of  this  mortal  life.  God 
is  not  the  God  of  the  shortlived,  who  are  so  speedily 
dead;  but  he  is  the  living  God  of  an  immortal  race 
whose  present  is  but  a  dark  passage  into  a  bright 
future  which  can  never  end. 

Yet  further,  to  bring  out  the  meaning  here,  God 
cannot  be  the  God  of  the  non-existent.  The  supposition 
is  too  absurd.  Our  Saviour  does  not  argue  about 
it,  but  he  says  so  most  peremptorily  !  God  is  not 
the  God  of  the  dead — that  cannot  be  !  If  Abraham, 
and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  are  reduced  to  a  handful  of 
ashes,  God  cannot  be  at  this  moment  their  God. 
We  cannot  take  a  dead  object  to  be  our  God, 
neither  can  Jehovah  be  a  God  to  lifeless  clay.  God 
is  not  the  God  of  putrefaction  and  annihilation. 
God  is  not  the  God  of  that  which  has  ceased  to  be. 
We  have  but  to  put  the  idea  into  words  to  make 
it  dissolve  before  the  glance  of  reason.  A  living 
God  is  the  God  of  living  men;  and  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  are  still  alive. 

This  even  goes  far  to  show  that  the  bodies  of 
these  saints  shall  yet  live.  God  reckons  his 
covenanted  ones  to  be  alive.  He  saith,  "  The  dead 
are  raised."  He  reckons  them  to  be  raised;  and  as 
he  reckons  nothing  falsely,  it  is  said  by  way  of 
anticipation.  "Thy  dead  men  shall  live."  Inas 
much  as  a  portion  of  these  chosen  ones  is  still  in 
the  earth,  God,  who  reckons  things  that  are  not,  as 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET  LIVING.  359 

though  they  were,  looks  upon  their  bodies  as 
possessing  life,  because  they  are  to  possess  life  so 
soon.  God  is  not  only  the  God  of  Abraham's  soul, 
but  of  Abraham  as  a  whole,  his  body,  soul,  and 
spirit.  God  is  the  God  of  Abraham's  body;  we  are 
sure  of  that,  because  the  covenant  seal  was  set 
upon  the  flesh  of  Abraham.  Where  the  double 
might  be,  there  is  the  confirming  seal,  namely,  in 
his  mortal  body.  There  was  no  seal  set  upon  his 
soul,  for  the  soul  has  life,  and  could  not  see  death; 
but  it  was  set  upon  his  body,  which  would  die,  to 
make  sure  that  even  it  would  live.  At  this  day 
we  have  baptism  and  the  holy  supper  to  be  seals 
as  to  the  body.  I  have  sometimes  thought  to 
myself  that  it  were  better  if  there  were  no  water 
baptism,  seeing  it  has  become  the  nest  of  so  much  su 
perstition  ;  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  with  all  its  blessed 
uses,  has  been  so  abused  that  one  is  apt  to  think 
that  without  outward  ordinances  there  might  be 
more  spiritual  religion;  but  the  Lord  intends  that 
the  materialism  of  man,  and  of  creation,  shall  be 
uplifted;  and  that  the  body  shall  be  raised  incor 
ruptible,  and  therefore  has  he  given  seals  which 
touch  the  outward  and  material.  The  water  where 
in  the  body  is  washed,  and  the  bread  and  wine 
whereby  the  body  is  nourished,  are  tokens  that 
there  cometh  to  us,  not  only  spiritual  and  in 
visible  blessings,  but  even  such  as  shall  redeem 
and  purify  our  mortal  body.  The  grave  cannot 
hold  any  portion  of  the  covenanted  ones:  eternal 
life  is  the  portion  of  the  whole  man.  God  is  the 
God  of  our  entire  manhood,  spirit,  soul,  and 
body;  and  all  live  unto  him  in  their  entirety. 
The  whole  of  the  covenant  shall  be  fulfilled  to  the 


3f,0  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING. 

whole  of  those  with  whom  that  covenant  was 
made. 

This  is  good  reasoning  to  those  who  have  gone 
beyond  mere  reason,  and  have  ascended  into  the 
realm  of  faith.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  grant  unto  us 
to  be  among  them  ! 

III.  Thirdly,  and  very  briefly,  beloved  friends: 
ray  text  not  only  declares  glorious  relationship,  and 
implies  eternal  lite,  but  it  also  unveils  somewhat 
scantily,  but  still  sufficiently,  what  the  glorious 
life  must  be.  Look  then  and  see  the  GLORIOUS  LIFE 
UNVEILED. 

1 1  is  clear  that  they  live  personally.  It  is  not  said 
"I  am  the  God  of  the  whole  body  of  the  saints  in 
one  mass."  But  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob."  God  will  make  his  people  to  live  individ 
ually.  My  mother,  my  father,  my  child,  each  will 
personally  exist.  God  is  the  God  of  saints,  as  liv 
ing  distinct  lives:  Abraham  is  Abraham,  Isaac  is 
Isaac,  Jacob  is  Jacob.  The  three  patriarchs  were 
not  all  melted  into  one  common  Abraham,  nor  Isaac 
into  one  imaginary  Isaac:  neither  was  any  one  BO 
altered  as  to  cease  to  be  himself.  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  are  all  literally  living  as  actual  men,  arid 
the  same  men  as  they  used  to  be.  Jacob  is  Jacob, 
and  not  an  echo  of  Abraham;  Isaac  is  Isaac,  and 
not  a  rehearsal  of  Jacob.  All  the  saints  are  ex 
istent  in  their  personality,  identity,  distinction, 
and  idiosyncrasy. 

What  is  more,  the  patriarchs  are  mentioned  by 
their  names;  and  so  it  is  clear  they  are  known:  they 
are  not  three  anonymous  bodies,  but  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Many  inquire,  "  Shall  we  know 
our  friends  in  heaven?"  Why  should  we  not? 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  361 

The  saints  in  heaven  are  never  spoken  of  in  Script 
ure  as  moving  about  anonymously;  but  their 
names  are  spoken  of  as  written  in  the  book  of  life. 
Why  is  this?  The  apostles  knew  Moses  and  lilias 
ou  the  Mount,  though  they  had  never  seen  them 
before.  I  cannot  forget  old  John  Kyland's  answei 
to  his  wife:  "John,"  she  said,  "  will  you  know  me 
in  heaven  ?  "  "  Betty,"  he  replied,  "  I  have  known 
you  well  here,  and  I  shall  not  be  a  bigger  fool  in 
heaven  than  I  am  now;  therefore  I  shall  certainly 
know  you  there."  That  seems  to  be  clear  enough. 
We  read  in  the  New  Testament,  "They  shall  sit 
down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacobin  the  king 
dom  of  heaven;"  not  sit  down  with  three  unknown 
individuals  in  iron  masks,  or  three  impersonalities 
who  make  a  part  of  the  great  pan,  nor  three  spirits 
who  are  as  exactly  alike  as  pins  made  in  a  factory; 
but  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  That  is  clear 
enough  in  the  text. 

That  glorious  life,  while  it  is  a  personal  and  a 
known  life,  is  also  free  from  all  sorrow,  and  misery, 
and  earthly  grossness.  They  are  neither  married 
nor  given  in  marriage,  neither  shall  they  die  any 
more;  but  they  are  as  the  angels  of  God.  It  is  a 
life  of  perfect  blessedness,  a  life  of  hallowed  wor 
ship,  a  life  of  undivided  glory.  Oh,  that  we  were  in 
it !  Oh,  that  we  may  soon  reach  it !  Let  us  think 
of  the  many  who  are  enjoying  it  now,  and  of  those 
who  have  attained  to  it  during  the  last  few  days. 
I  am  sure  they  are  at  home  in  every  golden  street, 
and  fully  engaged  in  the  adoration  and  worship  of 
their  Lord.  Those  saints  who  have  been  in  glory 
now  these  thousand  of  years  cannot  be  more  blest 
than  the  latest  arrivals.  Within  a  very  short  space 


362  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING. 

you  and  I  shall  be  among  the  shining-  onevS.  Some 
of  us  may  spend  our  next  Sabbath  with  the  angels. 
Let  us  rejoice  and  be  glad  at  the  bare  thought  of 
it.  Some  of  us  are  not  doomed  to  live  here  through 
another  winter:  we  shall  pass  beyond  these  autumn 
fogs  into  the  golden  light  of  the  eternal  summer 
before  another  Christmas-day  has  come.  Oh,  the 
joy  which  ought  to  thrill  through  our  souls  at  the 
thought  of  such  amazing  bliss! 

And  now,  taking  the  whole  subject  together,  I 
want  to  say  a  few  familiar  things  about  the  in 
fluence  which  all  this  ought  to  have  upon  us. 

Concerning  those  that  have  gone  before  us,  we 
gather  from  this  whole  text  that  they  are  not  lost. 
We  know  where  they  are.  Neither  have  they  lost 
anything,  for  they  are  what  they  were,  and  more. 
Abraham  has  about  him  still  everything  that  is 
Abrahamic;  he  is  Abraham  still.  And  Isaac  has 
everything  about  him  that  properly  belongs  to 
Isaac;  and  Jacob  has  all  about  him  that  makes 
him  God's  Israel.  These  good  men  have  lost  noth 
ing  that  really  appertained  to  their  individuality, 
nothing  that  made  them  precious  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord.  They  have  gained  infinitely;  they  have 
developed  gloriously.  They  are  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  now  at  their  best;  or  rather  they 
are  waiting  till  the  trumpet  of  the  resurrection 
shall  sound,  when  their  bodies  also  shall  be  united 
to  their  spirits,  and  then  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob  will  be  completely  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  world  without  end.  We  are  by  no  means 
deprived  of  our  dear  ones  by  their  death:  they  are; 
they  are  themselves;  and  they  are  ours  still.  As 
Abraham  is  not  lost  to  Isaac,  nor  to  Jacob,  nor  to 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  3G3 

God,  nor  to  himself;  so  are  our  beloved  ones  by  no 
means  lost  to  us.  Do  not  let  us  think  of  them  then 
as  if  they  were  lost.  I  know  your  sorrows  make 
an  excursion  to  the  grave,  to  look  there  for  the 
deceased  ones.  You  want  to  lift  that  coffin  lid 
and  to  unwrap  the  shroud.  Oh,  do  not  so,  do  not 
so!  He  is  not  here;  the  real  man  has  gone.  He 
may  be  dead  to  you  for  a  while,  but  he  lives  unto 
God.  Yes,  the  dead  one  liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God. 
Do  but  anticipate  the  passage  of  that  little  time, 
which  is  almost  gone  while  I  am  speaking  of  it, 
and  then  your  Saviour's  angels  shall  sound  their 
golden  trumpets,  and  at  the  welcome  noise  the 
grave  shall  open  its  portals,  and  resign  its  captives. 
"Thy  brother  shall  rise  again."  Wherefore,  com 
fort  one  another  with  these  words.  Shaftes- 
bury  is  as  much  Shaftesbury  as  ever,  and  even 
more  so.  We  have  parted  with  the  earl,  but 
the  saint  liveth:  he  has  gone  past  yonder  veil 
into  the  next  room,  and  there  he  is  before 
the  Lord  of  Hosts.  He  has  gone  out  of  this 
dim,  dusky,  cloudy  chamber,  into  the  bright,  pearly 
light  that  streamoth  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb.  We  have  nothing  to  sorrow  about  in 
reference  to  what  he  is  or  where  he  is.  So,  too, 
your  valued  parents,  and  beloved  children,  and 
choice  friends — they  are  yours  still.  Herein  is 
great  cause  for  thankfulness.  Put  aside  your 
sackcloth,  and  wear  the  garments  of  hope;  lay 
down  the  sackbut,  and  take  up  the  trumpet.  Draw 
not  the  beloved  bodies  to  the  cemetery  with  dreary 
pomp,  and  with  black  horses:  but  cover  the  coffin 
with  sweet  flowers,  and  drape  the  horses  with 
emblems  of  hope.  It  is  the  better  birthday  of  the 


364  DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING. 

saint,  yea,  his  truer  wedding-day.  Is  it  sad  to 
have  done  with  sadness?  Is  it  sorrowful  to  part 
with  sorrow?  Nay  rather,  when  joy  beginneth  to 
our  friends,  where  glory  dwelleth  in  ImrnanuePs 
land,  we  may  in  sympathy  sing,  as  it  were  a  new 
Bong,  and  tune  our  harps  to  the  melodies  of  the 
glorified. 

I  want  you  also  to  recollect  that  the  de 
parted  have  not  become  members  of  another  race; 
they  have  not  been  transferred  into  another 
family;  they  are  still  men,  still  women,  still 
of  our  kindred  dear;  their  names  are  in  the 
same  family  register  on  earth,  and  in  heaven. 
Oh,  no,  no !  do  not  dream  that  they  are  separated, 
and  exiled;  they  have  gone  to  the  home  country: 
we  are  the  exiles;  they  it  is  who  are  at  home.  We 
are  en  route  for  the  fatherland;  they  are  not  so  far 
from  us  as  we  think.  Sin  worked  to  divide  them 
from  us,  and  us  from  them,  while  we  were  here  to 
gether;  but  since  sin  is  now  taken  away  from  them, 
one  dividing  element  is  gone.  When  it  is  also  re 
moved  from  us,  we  shall  be  nearer  to  each  other 
than  we  could  have  been  while  we  were  both  sin 
ful.  Do  not  let  us  think  of  them  as  sundered  far, 
for  we  are  one  in  Christ. 

And  they  are  not  gone  over  to  the  other  side  in  the 
battle.  Oh,  do  not  speak  of  them  as  dead  and  lying 
on  the  battle-field:  they  live,  they  live  in  sympathy 
with  our  divine  conflict.  They  have  marched 
through  the  enemy's  country;  they  have  fought 
their  fight,  and  taken  possession  of  their  inheritance. 
They  are  still  on  our  side,  though  we  miss  them 
from  the  daily  service.  When  you  number  up  the 
hosts  of  God,  you  must  not  forget  the  god- 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  365 

like  hands  that  have  fought  the  good  fight,  and 
kept  the  faith,  and  finished  their  course.  They 
are  in  the  armies  ot  the  Lord,  though  not  at  this 
moment  resisting  unto  blood.  The  hundred  and 
forty-four  thousand  sealed  unto  the  Lord  include 
in  their  ranks  all  who  are  with  God,  whether  here 
or  in  heaven. 

"  One  family  we  dwell  in  him, 

One  church,  above,  beneath, 
Though  now  divided  by  the  stream, 
The  narrow  scream  of  death." 

Our  sacramental  host  inarches  onward  to  the  New 
Jerusalem.  Certain  of  the  legionaries  have  forded 
the  dividing  flood.  I  see  them  ascending  the  other 
side!  The  hither  bank  of  the  river  is  white  with 
their  rising  companies.  Lo  !  I  hear  the  splash  of 
the  ranks  before  us  as  they  steadily  pass  down  into 
the  chill  stream:  in  deep  silence  we  see  them  sol 
emnly  wading  through  the  billows.  The  host  is 
ever  marching  on,  marching  on.  The  much  dreaded 
stream  lies  a  little  before  us:  it  is  but  a-  silver 
streak.  We  are  to  the  margin  come.  We  shudder 
not  at  the  prospect.  We  follow  the  blessed  foot 
steps  of  our  Lord  and  his  redeemed.  Wo  are  all 
one  army  still :  we  are  not  losing  our  men ;  they  are 
pimply  ascending  from  the  long  campaign  to  take 
their  endless  rewards  at  the  Lord's  right  hand. 

What  then  ?  Why,  then,  we  will  take  up  their 
work.  If  they  have  gone  into  the  upper  cham 
ber  to  rest,  we  will  make  up  their  lack  of  service 
in  this  lower  room.  The  work  they  did  was  so 
human  that  we  will  not  allow  a  stitch  to  drop, 
but  take  it  up  where  they  left  it,  and  persevere  in 
earnest.  They  are  in  glory,  but  they  were  not 


3C6  DEPARTED  SAINTS  YET  LIVING. 

glorified  when  they  were  here.  The  work  they  did 
was  done  by  men  of  such  infirmities  as  ours;  so  let 
us  not  fear  to  go  on  where  they  left  off,  and  per 
petuate  the  work  which  they  rejoiced  in.  There  lies 
the  plow  in  the  furrow,  and  the  oxen  are  stand 
ing  still,  for  Shamgar,  the  champion,  is  gone. 
Will  no  one  lay  hold  of  the  plow  handles?  Will 
nobody  urge  the  oxen  with  the  goad  ?  Young  men, 
are  you  idling  ?  Here  is  work  for  you.  Are  you 
hiding  yourselves  ?  Come  forward,  I  pray  you  in 
the  name  of  the  great  Husbandman,  and  let  the 
fields  be  tilled,  and  sown  with  the  good  seed. 
Who  will  fill  the  gap  made  by  death  ?  Who  will 
be  baptized  for  the  dead  ?  Who  will  bear  the  ban 
ner  now  that  a  standard-bearer  has  fallen  ?  I  hope 
some  consecrated  voice  will  answer,  "Here  am  I; 
send  me." 

For,  last  of  all,  brethren,  we  may  expect  the  same 
succors  as  tlieij  received  who  have  gone  before.  .Jeho 
vah  saith  that  he  is  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God 
of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob;  but  he  also  saith 
"  I  am  the  God  of  your  father."  The  father  of 
Moses  had  the  Lord  to  be  his  God.  That  God  is 
the  God  of  my  father,  blessed  be  his  name.  As  I 
took  the  old  man  by  his  hand  yesterday,  at  the  age 
of  seventy-six,  I  could  not  but  rejoice  in  all  the 
faithfulness  of  the  Lord  to  him  and  to  his  house. 
He  was  the  God  of  my  father's  father  also;  I  can 
not  forget  how  the  venerable  man  laid  his  hands 
upon  his  grandchild,  and  blessed  him;  and  the 
blessing  is  with  him  still.  Yes,  and  he  is  the  God 
of  my  children,  and  he  shall  be  the  God  of  my 
children's  children;  for  he  keepeth  covenant  to 
thousands  of  them  that  love  him.  Wherefore  take 


DEPARTED    SAINTS    YET   LIVING.  3G7 

courage,  men  and  brethren  !  This  God  is  your 
God.  He  is  a  God  to  yon,  and  you  are  a  peo 
ple  to  him.  Act  as  his  true  servants.  Live  as 
those  that  are  elect.  If  you  are  his  choice,  be  choice 
characters.  The  chosen  should  be  the  best,  should 
they  not  ?  The  elect  should  be  especially  distin- 
quished  above  all  other  by  their  conversation  and 
their  fervent  zeal  for  him  that  chose  them.  As  you 
shall  rise  from  among  the  dead,  because  the  Lord 
Jesus  hath  redeemed  you  from  among  men,  so 
stand  up  from  among  the  dead  and  corrupt  mass 
of  this  world,  and  be  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ  your  Lord.  What  manner  of  people  ought 
ye  to  be  who  serve  the  living  God  ?  Since  the 
living  God  hath  manifested  himself  so  wonderfully 
to  you,  ought  you  not  to  live  unto  him  to.  the 
utmost?  God  bless  you  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


XVI. 

THE  NOBLEMAN'S  FAITH. 
October  11,  1885. 

"  There  was  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son  was  sick  at  Caper 
naum.  When  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  coine  out  of  Judasa  into 
Galilee,  he  went  unto  him,  and  besought  him  that  he  would 
come  down,  and  heal  his  son:  for  he  was  at  the  point  of 
death.  Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  Except  ye  see  signs  and 
wondsrs,  ye  will  not  believe.  The  nobleman  saith  unto  him,  Sir, 
come  down  ere  my  child  die.  Jesus  saith  \into  him,  Go  thy 
way;  thy  sonliveth.  And  the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus 
had  spoken  unto  him,  and  he  went  his  way.  And  as  he  was  going 
down,  his  servants  met  him,  and  toid  him,  saying,  Thy  son  liveth. 
Then  inquired  he  of  them  the  hour  when  he  began  to  amend. 
And  they  said  unto  him,  Yesterday  at  the  seventh  hour  the 
fever  left  him.  So  the  father  knew  that  it  was  at  the  same  hour 
in  the  which  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Thy  s:m  liveth:  and  himself 
believed,  and  his  whole  house." — JOIIN  iv.  46-53. 

r~P>HIS  narrative  illustrates  the  rise  and  progress 
•*•  of  faith  in  the  soul.  While  I  try  to  speak  of 
it,  I  pray  that  we  may  experimentally  follow  the 
the  track,  desiring  that  such  faith  may  have  a  rise 
in  our  hearts,  may  make  progress  in  our  spirits, 
and  may  become  even  stronger  in  us  than  it  was  in 
this  nobleman.  The  point,  my  brethren,  is  not  to 
hear  about  these  things  only,  but  to  have  them 
repeated  in  your  own  soul.  We  want  to  come  to 
real  business,  and  to  make  the  things  of  God  matter 
of  downright  fact  to  ourselves:  not  only  to  hear 
about  this  nobleman  from  Capernaum,  or  anybody 
else,  but  to  see  in  our  own  souls  the  same  work  of 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  369 

grace  as  wrought  in  them.  The  same  living  Christ 
is  here,  and  his  help  we  as  greatly  need  as  ever 
did  this  nobleman.  May  we  seek  it  as  he 
sought  it,  and  find  it  as  he  found  it!  Thus  will 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  inspired  the  narrative  before 
us,  be  found  writing  it  over  again,  not  upon  the 
pages  of  a  book,  but  upon  the  fleshy  tablets  of  our 
hearts. 

Observe  then,  at  the  commencement,  that  trouUe 
first  of  all  led  tJns  courtly  personage  to  Jesus.  Had  he 
been  without  trial,  he  might  have  lived  forgetful  of 
his  God  and  Saviour;  but  sorrow  came  to  his  house, 
and  it  was  God's  angel  in  disguise.  It  may  be, 
dear  friend,  that  you  are  in  trouble  this  morning; 
and,  if  so,  I  pray  that  affliction  may  be  the  black 
horse  upon  which  mercy  shall  ride  to  your  door. 
It  is  a  sad,  sad  thing  with  some  men  that  the  better 
the  Lord  deals  with  them  in  providence  the  worse 
return  they  make.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are 
hearts  that  turn  to  the  Lord  when  he  smites  them. 
When  they  drift  into  deep  waters,  when  they  can 
scarcely  find  bread  to  eat,  when  sickness  attacks 
their  bodies,  and  especially  when  their  children 
are  smitten,  then  they  begin  to  think  of  God,  and 
better  things.  Blessed  is  the  discipline  of  the 
great  Father  in  such  a  case.  It  is  well  for  the 
troubled  if  their  tribulation  bruises  their  heart 
to  repentance,  and  repentance  leads  them  to  seek 
and  find  pardon. 

The  particular  form  of  trial  which  visited  this  noble 
man  was  the  sickness  of  his  child.  A  little  son  he 
had,  whom  he  dearly  loved,  and  he  was  down  with 
a  deadly  fever.  The  father  appears  to  have  been  a 
naturally  kind  and  affectionate  person.  His  ser- 


370  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

vants  evidently  took  a  great  interest  in  him,  and  in 
the  domestic  affliction  which  grieved  him;  for  you 
observe  with  what  eagerness  they  came  to  meet 
him,  to  tell  him  of  the  recovery  of  his  child.  The 
fathers  heart  was  sadly  wounded  because  his  dear 
boy  was  at  the  point  of  death.  No  doubt  he  had 
tried  all  the  remedies  known  to  the  times,  had  sent 
for  every  physician  that  could  be  found  within 
miles  of  Capernaum ;  and  now,  having  heard  of  one 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  at  Can  a  had  turned  water 
into  wine,  and  at  Jerusalem  had  done  many  mighty 
works,  he  resorts  to  him  with  eager  petition  and 
desperate  hope.  He  might  never  have  thought  of 
seeking  Jesus  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  dear  dying 
boy.  How  often  does  it  happen  that  children,  though 
they  are  not  angels,  yet  are  used  to  do  better  work 
than  angels  could  accomplish ;  for  they  sweetly  lead 
their  parents  to  God  and  heaven  !  They  twine 
themselves  about  our  hearts,  and  then,  if  we  see 
them  sicken,  and  mark  their  pains,  our  sympathetic 
hearts  are  wrung  with  anguish,  and  we  cry,  "  0 
God,  spare  my  child  !  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  my 
little  one  !  "  The  first  prayers  that  come  from  many 
hearts  are  under  God,  fetched  forth  by  grief  for  lit 
tle  ones  most  dearly  loved.  Is  it  not  written,  "  And 
a  little  child  shall  lead  them  "  ?  It  was  so  with 
this  man;  he  was  brought  to  Jesus  by  trouble; 
brought  to  Jesus  by  anxiety  about  a  child.  I  have 
it  strongly  upon  me  at  this  moment  that  I  am 
speaking  to  certain  persons  who  are  not  converted, 
but  they  have  corne  hither  because  they  are  in  great 
sorrow:  possibly  a  dear  little  one  is  pining  away, 
and  their  hearts  are  crying  to  God  that,  if  possible, 
the  precious  life  may  be  spared.  In  the  house  of 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  371 

prayer  they  feel  somewhat  comforted;  but  their 
hearts  are  ready  to  break  because  of  the  loss  they 
so  much  dread.  How  much  1  pray  our  Lord  to 
make  this  trouble  a  means  of  grace  ! 

Trial  was  the  occasion,  the  preface  to  the  work 
of  divine  grace.  We  will  now  proceed  to  look 
upon  the  saving  part  of  it,  namely,  the  faith  which 
was  born  in  this  nobleman's  heart.  We  will  first 
spy  out  the  spark  of  faith;  then  the  smouldering  fire 
of  faith — much  heaped  over  and  damped,  so  as  to 
be  rather  smoke  than  fire.  Then,  thirdly,  we  will 
look  upon  the  /lame  of  faith,  or  faith  at  length 
showing  itself  decidedly;  and  fourthly,  the  confla 
gration  of  faith,  when  faith  at  last  blazed  up  in  the 
man,  fired  his  whole  nature,  and  spread  to  his 
whole  house — "  And  himself  believed,  and  his 
whole  house."  Again,  I  say,  let  us  try  to  follow 
in  fact  as  well  as  in  meditation. 

I.  I  want  you  carefully  to  mark  THE  SPARK  OF 
FAITH,  all  the  while  saying — I  am  going  to  look  and 
see  if  I  have  such  a  spark  of  faith ;  and  if  I  find  it,  I 
will  prize  it  much,  and  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
breathe  softly  upon  it,  that  it  may  rise  to  some 
thing  more  permanent  and  powerful. 

The  faith  of  this  nobleman  rested,  at  the  first,  en 
tirely  Ujjon  the  report  of  others.  He  lived  at  Caper 
naum,  down  there  by  the  sea;  and  amongst  the 
newsmongers  it  was  common  talk  that  there  had 
arisen  a  great  prophet  who  was  working  great 
wonders.  He  himself  had  never  seen  Jesus,  nor 
heard  him  speak;  but  he  believed  the  report  of 
others;  and  he  was  right  in  doing  so,  for  they  were 
credible  persons.  No  doubt  many  are  in  the  early 
stages  of  faith:  they  have  heard  friends  say  that 


372  THE    NOBLEMAN'' S    FAITH. 

the  Lord  Jesus  receiveth  sinners;  that  he  puts 
away  sin;  that  he  calms  the  conscience;  that  he 
changes  the  nature;  that  he  hears  prayer;  that  he 
sustains  his  people  under  trouble:  these  things  they 
have  heard  from  persons  of  good  repute,  whom 
they  esteem,  and  therefore  they  believe  them. 
Friend,  are  you  saying  to  yourself,  "  I  have  no 
doubt  it  is  all  true;  I  wonder  whether  it  ever 
would  be  true  to  me.  I  am  in  trouble  this  morn 
ing:  will  the  Lord  Jesus  help  me?  I  have  a  pres 
ent  pressure  upon  my  spirit:  will  prayer  to  him  re 
lieve  me"?  You  cannot  say  that  you  know,  from 
anything  you  have  ever  seen  of  him,  that  Jesus 
would  thus  bless  you;  but  you  infer  that  he  will  do 
so  from  what  friends  have  told  you.  Well,  faith 
often  begins  in  that  way.  Men  believe  the  report 
which  is  brought  to  them  by  well-known  persons 
who  have  experienced  the  power  of  divine  love, 
and  thus  at  first,  like  the  Samaritans,  they  believe 
because  of  the  woman's  report.  In  future  time, 
they  will  come  to  believe  because  of  having  heard, 
and  seen,  and  tasted,  and  handled,  for  themselves: 
but  the  beginning  is  good.  This  faith  which  comes 
of  a  report  by  others  is  a  spark  of  true  fire.  Take 
care  of  it.  May  God  grant  you  grace  so  to  pray 
about  it,  that  that  spark  may  increase  into  a  flame  ! 
Observe  that  this  faith  was  such  a  little  faith 
that  it  only  concerned  the  healing  of  the  sick  child. 
The  nobleman  did  not  know  that  he  needed  heal 
ing  in  his  own  heart;  he  did  not  perceive  his  own 
ignorance  of  Jesus,  and  his  own  blindness  to  the 
Messiah;  he  did  not  perhaps  know  that  he  needed 
to  be  born  again;  neither  did  he  understand  that 
the  Saviour  could  give  him  spiritual  life  and  light. 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  373 

He  had  little  knowledge  of  the  Saviour's  spiritual 
power,  and  thus  his  faith  had  a  very  narrow  range. 
What  he  did  believe  was  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  if  he 
would  come  to  his  house,  could  prevent  his  child 
from  dying  of  the  fever.  He  had  reached  as  far 
as  that;  and  such  faith  as  he  had,  he  turned  to 
practical  use  at  once.  Friend,  you  do  not  as  yet 
know  how  great  my  Lord  is,  and  what  wonderful 
things  he  doeth  for  those  who  put  their  trust  in 
him;  but  you  are  saying,  "Surely  he  could  help 
me  this  morning  in  my  present  trial,  and  deliver 
me  out  of  my  present  difficulty."  So  far,  so  good. 
Use  what  faith  you  have.  Bring  before  the  Lord 
the  trial  of  the  hour.  Let  me  encourage  you  to  do 
so.  If  you  cannot  come  to  him  for  heavenly  things 
you  may,  for  the  present,  begin  with  the  sorrows 
and  trials  of  earth:  if  you  cannot  come  to  him  for 
an  eternal  blessing,  you  may  come  to  him  for  a 
passing  favor,  and  he  is  ready  to  hear  you. 
Though  your  prayer  should  only  be  about  worldly 
things,  and  be  nothing  more  than  a  merely  nat 
ural  prayer,  yet  pray  it;  for  "  He  heareth  the  young 
ravens  when  they  cry,"  and  I  am  sure  they  do  not 
pray  spiritual  prayers.  All  that  ravens  can  ask 
for  will  be  worms  and  flies,  and  yet  he  hears  them, 
and  feeds  them;  and  you,  a  man,  though  you  may 
but  pray  at  this  time  for  a  very  commonplace 
mercy,  one  of  the  slighter  blessings,  yet  you  may 
pray  with  confidence  if  you  have  any  faith  in  the 
gracious  Lord.  Though  that  faith  will  be  only  a 
spark,  and  nothing  more,  I  would  not  blow  it  out; 
nor  will  the  Lord  Jesus  do  so,  for  he  hath  said  that 
a  smoking  flax  he  will  not  quench.  If  yon  have 
any  desire  towards  him,  and  any  degree  of  faith  in 


374  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

him,  let  it  live,  and  lead  you  to  the  dear  Master's 
feet. 

The  nobleman's  faith  was  so  feeble  that  he  lim 
ited  the  poiver  of  Jesus  to  his  local  presence.  Hence 
his  prayer  was,  "Sir,  come  down  ere  my  child  die." 
If  he  could  but  induce  the  Lord  Jesus  to  enter  the 
room  where  the  sick  child  lay,  he  believed  that  he 
would  speak  to  the  fever,  and  the  fever  would  be 
allayed;  but  he  had  no  idea  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  could  work  at  the  distance  of  twenty-five 
miles,  he  had  no  notion  that  the  word  of  the  Lord 
could  operate  apart  from  his  presence.  Still,  it  was 
better  to  have  that  limited  faith  than  to  have  none  at 
all.  You,  children  of  God,  when  you  get  limiting 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  are  guilty  of  gross  sin ;  but  if 
those  who  are  seeking  the  Lord,  through  ignorance 
and  weakness  of  faith,  are  found  limiting  him,  it 
is  far  more  excusable  in  them.  The  Lord  Jesus 
treats  it  graciously,  and  removes  it  by  a  gentle  re 
buke.  It  is  not  the  same  thing  for  a  beginner  to 
be  weak  of  faith  as  for  you,  who  have  enjoyed  long 
experience  of  God's  goodness,  to  fall  into  mistrust 
of  him.  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  in  whom  the  Lord 
is  beginning  to  work,  if  you  have  no  more  faith 
than  just  to  say,  "The  Lord  Jesus  could  heal  me  if 
he  were  here:  the  Lord  would  help  me,  and  answer 
my  cry,  if  he  were  here" — it  is  better  to  have  such 
a  faith  than  to  be  unbelieving.  Your  narrow  faith 
limits  him  exceedingly,  and  shuts  him  up  in  a  very 
close  place;  and  therefore  you  may  not  expect  him 
to  do  many  mighty  works  for  you:  and  yet  up  to 
the  measure  of  your  faith  he  will  go  with  you  and 
bless  you.  As  a  matter  of  un promised  sovereign 
grace,  he  may  even  do  exceeding  abundantly  above 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  375 

what  you  ask  or  even  think.  Therefore  I  would 
treat  your  f'aitli  like  a  little  babe:  I  would  nurse  it 
until  it  can  stand  alone,  and  hold  out  my  finger  to 
help  it  till  its  tottering  steps  become  firm.  We 
will  not  blame  the  babe  because  it  cannot  run  or 
leap,  but  we  will  cherish  it,  and  urge  it  to  greater 
strength;  to  which  strength  it  will  come  in  due 
time.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  deserves  the  largest 
faith  from  each  one  of  us.  Grieve  him  not  by  sus 
picions  of  his  ability.  Give  him  what  faith  you 
have,  and  ask  for  more. 

His  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  though  it  was 
only  a  spark,  yet  influenced  this  nobleman.  It  led 
him  to  take  a  considerable  journey  to  find  our  Lord. 
From  Capernaum  he  went  up  the  hills  to  Cana, 
that  he  might  plead  with  Jesus.  And  he  went 
personally.  Tin's  is  the  more  remarkable  because 
he  was  a  man  of  rank  arid  position.  I  do  not  know 
whether  he  was  Chuza,  Herod's  steward.  I  should 
not  wonder  if  he  was,  because  we  do  not  hear  of 
any  other  noble  family  being  on  the  side  of  Christ; 
but  we  do  hear  of  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  stew 
ard,  as  amongst  those  that  ministered  to  our  Lord 
of  their  substance.  We  hear  also  of  Manaen, 
foster-brother  to  Herod.  It  may  have  been  one  of 
these;  we  do  not  know:  but  noblemen  were  scarce 
birds  in  the  church  in  those  days;  as,  indeed,  they 
are  now.  We  naturally  expect,  therefore,  to  hear 
of  such  a  person  as  this  again ;  and  as  we  have 
honorable  mention  of  those  two,  we  are  not  very 
rash  in  conjecturing  that  this  nobleman  may  have 
been  one  of  them.  Now  noblemen  do  not,  as  a 
rule,  think  of  taking  journeys  themselves  while 
they  have  so  many  servants  at  their  disposal;  but 


376  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

this  nobleman  came  himself  to  Christ,  and  person- 
ally  besought  him  that  he  would  come  and  heal  his 
eon.  If  your  faith  is  weak  in  some  respects,  and 
yet  strong  enough  in  others  to  drive  you  personally 
to  Christ,  personally  to  pray  to  him,  it  is  faith  of 
an  acceptable  order.  If  it  leads  you  to  pray  to  our 
Lord  with  all  your  heart,  beseeching  him,  then 
your  faith  is  of  the  right  sort.  If  it  leads  you  to 
beseech  Christ  to  have  rnercy  upon  you,  it  is  the 
faith  which  saves  the  soul.  It  rnay  be  little  as  a 
grain  of  mustard-seed,  but  its  importunity  shows 
that  there  is  pungency  in  it — it  is  true  mustard. 
Dear  sir,  are  you  beginning  to  pray  at  this  time 
because  of  sorrow  ?  In  the  silence  of  your  soul 
are  you  crying,  "  0  God,  save  me  to-day  !  I  have 
come  up  to  London  to  see  other  things,  and  I  have 
dropped  in  here  this  morning:  oh,  that  this  may 
be  the  day  in  which  I  shall  be  helped  out  of  my 
trouble,  and  myself  be  saved  "  ?  If  your  faith  brings 
you  to  prayer,  it  is  the  acknowledged  child  of  grace, 
for  true-born  faith  always  cries.  If  your  faith  helps 
you  to  lay  hold  of  Jesus  with  a  resolute  grip,  say 
ing,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me," 
it  may  be  little  faith,  but  it  is  true  faith.  It  is 
wrought  in  your  soul  by  the  spirit  of  God,  and  it 
will  bring  a  blessing  with  it.  You  shall  be  saved 
by  this  faith,  to  our  Lord's  glory,  and  to  your  own 
comfort. 

I  notice  that  this  mans  faith  taught  him  how  to  pray 
in  the  right  style.  Notice  the  argument  he  used:  he 
besought  him  that  he  would  come  down  and  heal 
his  son,  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  death.  He  urged 
no  merit,  but  pleaded  the  misery  of  the  case.  He 
did  not  plead  that  the  boy  was  of  noble  birth — that 


THE    NOBLF.MAX'S    FAITH.  377 

would  have  been  very  bad  pleading  with  Jesus; 
nor  did  he  urge  that  lie  was  a  lovely  child — that 
would  have  been  a  sorry  argument;  but  he  pleaded 
that  he  was  at  the  point  of  death.  His  extremity 
was  his  reason  for  urgency:  the  child  was  at  death's 
door;  therefore  his  father  begs  that  mercj^'s  door 
may  open.  When  you,  rny  friend,  are  taught  by 
grace  to  pray  aright,  you  will  urge  those  facts 
which  reveal  your  own  danger  and  distress,  and 
not  those  which  would  make  you  appear  rich  and 
righteous.  Remember  how  David  prayed.  "  Lord," 
he  said,  "pardon  mine  iniquity;  for  it  is  great." 
That  is  evangelical  pleading.  Most  men  would 
have  said,  "  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  was 
excusable,  and  by  no  means  reached  to  the  hein- 
ousness  of  my  fellow-men."  David  knew  better. 
His  cry  is,  "  Pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great.'' 
Plead  with  God,  poor  sinner,  the  greatness  of 
your  necessity,  the  direness  of  your  need;  say  that 
you  are  at  the  point  of  death,  say  that  the  matter 
about  which  you  plead  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death: 
this  will  be  an  argument  calculated  to  move  the 
heart  of  infinite  compassion.  Any  tint  of  goodness 
that  your  pride  wool. I  tempt  you  to  throw  into 
the  picture  would  spoil  it:  lay  on  the  black  colors 
thick  and  three  fold.  Plead  with  God  for  his 
mercy's  sake,  for  mercy  is  the  only  attribute  which 
you  can  hopefully  address  while  you  are  a  sinner 
unforgiven.  You  cannot  a^k  the  Lord  to  bless  you 
because  of  any  desert  of  merit  you  have,  for  you 
have  no  trace  of  any  such  thing;  but  yon  will  be 
wise  to  plead  your  necessities.  Cry,  "  0  God,  have 
mercy  upon  me,  for  I  need  mercy  !  "  State  your 
child's  case,  and  say,  "  For  he  is  at  the  point  of 


378  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

death.'  This  is  the  key  which  opens  the  door  of 
mercy. 

Do  you  follow  me,  dear  hearers,  you  that  are  not 
yet  converted  ?  Is  there,  at  any  rate,  in  you  some 
desire  to  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  though  it 
be  only  because  a  temporal  trouble  is  pressing  you 
sorely  ?  A  horse  does  not  want  a  dozen  spurs  to 
make  it  run.  The  one  which  now  wounds  the 
flank  is  sharp  enough,  and  it  is  plunged  in  so  deep 
that  you  must  feel  it.  Yield  to  it,  lest  there  should 
be  need  of  whip  as  well  as  spur  to  make  you  stir. 
Jf  you  are  the  Lord's  chosen,  you  will  have  to  come, 
and  the  more  readily  you  do  so  the  better  will  it  be 
for  you.  Come  at  once.  Be  ye  not  as  the  horse 
or  as  the  mule,  which  have  no  understanding;  but 
come  to  Jesus  while  he  gently  draws.  Though  it  be 
Avith  such  a  feeble  faith  that  you  fear  it  is  rather 
unbelief  than  faith,  yet  draw  nigh  to  him.  Come 
just  as  you  are,  and  look  up  to  Jesus,  and  pray; 
for  in  that  prayer  shall  lie  the  hope,  nay,  the  cer 
tainty  of  relief.  The  great  heart  of  Jesus  will  feel 
your  prayer,  and  say,  "  Go  in  peace." 

II.  Thus  have  we  seen  faith  in  the  spark:  we 
will  now  look  at  THE  FIRE  OF  FAITH,  struggling  to 
maintain  itself,  and  gradually  increasing.  Let  us 
see  how  the  fire  smoulders,  and  the  heap  begins  to 
smoke,  and  thus  betrays  the  inner  fire. 

This  mansfaith  was  true  as  far  as  it  went.  That 
is  a  great  thing  to  say.  He  stood  before  the 
Saviour  resolved  not  to  go  away  from  him  ;  his 
only  hope  for  his  child's  life  was  in  this  great 
Prophet  of  Nazareth,  and  therefore  he  did  not  in 
tend  to  leave  him  till  his  request  was  granted. 
He  does  not  at  first  get  the  answer  that  he  wants, 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  379 

but  he  perseveres,  and  pleads  on.  This  showed 
that  his  faith  had  heart  and  vitality  in  it.  It  was 
no  whim,  nor  sudden  impulse,  but  a  real  persuasion 
of  the  power  of  Jesus  to  heal.  What  a  mercy  to 
be  delivered  from  all  sham  faith  !  Better  to  have 
little  faith,  and  that  faith  real,  than  to  possess 
a  great  creed,  and  give  the  Lord  Jesus  no  hearty 
credit.  Tell  me,  my  hearer,  have  you  any  real 
practical  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 

His  faith  was  true  as  far  as  it  went:  but  it  was 
hindered  by  a  desire  for  signs  and  wonders.  Our 
Lord  therefore  gently  eluded  him,  saying,  "Except 
ye  see. signs  and  wonders,  ye  will  not  believe." 
Now  I  know  that  many  of  you  believe  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  can  save,  but  you  have  fixed  in  your 
mind  the  way  in  which  he  must  do  it.  You  have 
been  reading  certain  religious  biographies,  and  you 
find  that  such  a  man  was  driven  to  despair,  had 
horrible  thoughts,  and  so  on:  therefore  you  settle 
it  in  your  minds  that  you  must  have  similar  horrors, 
or  you  will  be  lost.  You  lay  it  down  as  a  pro 
gramme  that  you  must  be  saved  in  that  way,  or 
not  at  all.  Is  this  right  ?  Is  this  wise  ?  Do  you 
mean  to  dictate  to  the  Lord  ? 

Perhaps  you  have  read  or  heard  that  certain 
eminent  persons  were  converted  through  singular 
dreams,  or  by  remarkable  movements  of  providence, 
and  you  say  to  yourself,  "Something  equally  sin 
gular  must  happen  to  me,  or  I  will  not  believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus."  In  this  you  err  like  the  noble 
man.  He  expected  the  Saviour  to  come  down  to 
the  house,  and  perform  some  act  peculiar  to  his 
prophetic  office.  In  fact,  this  nobleman  is  the  New 
Testament  reproduction  of  Naaman  in  the  Old 


380  TIIR    A'OBI.KMA.V'S    1-A1TIL 

Testament.  You  remember  how  Naaman  said, 
"  Behold,  I  thought,  lie  would  surely  come  out  to 
me,  and  stand,  and  call  on  the  Lord  his  God,  and 
strike  his  hand  over  the  place,  and  recover  the 
leper."  Naaman  had  planned  it  all  in  his  own 
mind,  and  had  no  doubt  arranged  a  very  pi'oper 
and  artistic  performance;  and,  therefore,  when  the 
prophet  simply  said,  "  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan 
seven  times,"  he  could  not  receive  so  simple  and 
bald  a  gospel:  it  was  too  common-place,  too  free 
from  ritual.  Many  persons,  by  their  mental  pre 
judices,  would  bind  down  the  Lord  of  mercy  to 
such  and  such  a  way  of  saving  them;  'but  our 
Lord  will  not  be  thus  laid  under  constraint;  why 
should  he  ?  He  will  save  whom  he  wills,  and 
he  will  save  as  he  wills.  His  gospel  is  not  "  Suffer 
so  much  horror  and  despair,  and  live";  but,  "Be 
lieve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  He  comes  to  many,  and  calls  them 
effectually  by  the  soft  whispers  of  his  love:  they 
do  but  trust  him,  and  they  enter  into  immedi 
ate  rest.  With  little  striking  feeling,  either  hor 
rible  or  ecstatic,  they  quietly  exercise  a  child 
like  confidence  in  their  crucified  Lord,  and  they 
find  eternal  life.  Why  should  it  not  be  so  with 
you  ?  Why  should  you  keep  yourself  out  of  com 
fort,  by  laying  down  a  programme,  and  demanding 
that  the  free  Spirit  should  pay  attention  to  it? 
Let  him  save  you  as  he  wills.  Away  with  foolish 
prejudices  ! 

Yet  this  is  to  be  said  of  the  nobleman's  faith:  it 
could  endure,  a  rebuff".  Think  of  the  Master  only  say 
ing  to  this  poor  anguished  father,  "  Except,  ye  see 
signs  and  wonders,  ye  will  not  believe."  It  was 


TV//:     A'OBLEMA.VS    FAITH.  381 

sadly  true,  but  it  sounded  honestly  sharp.  Oh,  the 
dear  lips  of  Jesus;  they  are  always  like  lilies,  drop 
ping  sweet-smelling  myrrh  !  Myrrh,  you  know,  is 
bitter  to  the  taste,  and  there  was  a  seeming  bitter 
ness  about  this  speech  to  the  nobleman;  yet  the 
father  did  not  give  up  his  suit,  and  turn  on  his 
heel,  and  say,  "  He  treats  me  hardly."  He  said 
within  himself,  "  To  whom  should  I  go  ?  "  and  there 
fore  he  went  not  away.  He  was  like  that  woman 
for  whom  the  Lord's  lips  dropped  a  far  more  pun 
gent  morsel  of  myrrh,  as  he  said,  "  It  is  not  meet 
to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  to 
dogs."  Yet  she  found  a  sweet  smell  in  that  myrrh, 
and  perfumed  her  prayer  with  it  as  she  said, 
"Truth,  Lord:  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs 
which  fall  from  their  masters1  table."  This  man 
answered  our  Lord  by  still  greater  importunity. 
He  would  not  go  away;  not  he.  Oh,  dear  heart, 
may  you  have  such  faith  in  Christ  that,  though  he 
should  rebuke  you,  you  will  not  leave  him  !  Jesus 
is  your  only  hope;  therefore  do  not  turn  away  from 
him.  Imitate  Bunyan  when  he  spake  words  to 
this  effect: — "  I  was  driven  to  such  straits  that  I 
must  of  necessity  go  to  Jesus;  and  if  he  had  met 
me  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  I  would  sooner 
have  thrown  myself  upon  the  edge  of  his  sword 
than  have  gone  away  from  him;  for  I  knew  him  to 
be  my  last  hope."  0  soul,  cling  to  thy  Lord,  come 
what  may! 

Then  see  hoio  passionately  this  man  pleaded.  He 
cried,  "  Sir,  comedown  ere  my  child  die;"  as  much 
as  if  he  had  said,  "  Lord,  do  not  question  me  just 
now  about  my  faith.  0  my  Lord,  I  pray  thee  do 
not  think  of  me  at  all,  but  heal  my  dear  child,  or 


382  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

he  will  be  dead!  He  was  at  the  point  of  death 
when  I  left  him:  do  hasten  down  and  save  him." 
Limited  was  that  faith,  for  he  still  asks  Christ  to 
come  down,  and  seems  to  think  it  essential  that 
our  Lord  should  make  a  journey  to  Capernaum  to 
work  the  cure;  but  note  how  intense,  how  eager, 
how  persevering  was  his  pleading.  If  his  faith 
failed  in  breadth,  it  excelled  in  force.  Dear  anxious 
friend,  keep  close  to  the  example  now  before  us. 
Pray,  ami  pray  again;  hold  on,  and  hold  out;  cry 
on,  and  cry  out;  never  cease  till  the  Lord  of  love 
grants  you  an  answer  of  peace. 

III.  \Ve  come  to  a  higher  stage,  and  watch  THE 
FLAME  OF  FAITH.  Tiie  s  park  increased  as  a  smoulder 
ing  fire,  and  now  the  fire  reveals  itself  in  flame.  Ob 
serve  that  Jesus  said  to  the  petitioner,  "  Go  thy  way; 
thy  son  liveth."  And  the  man  truly  believed,  and 
went  his  way. 

Here  note  that  he  Relieved  the  word  of  Jesii3  over  the 
head  of  all  his  former  prejudices.  He  had  thought 
only  that  Christ  could  heal  if  he  came  down  to 
Capernaum;  but  now  he  believes,  though  Jesus  re 
mains  where  he  is,  and  only  speaks  the  word. 
Friend,  wilt  thou,  at  this  moment,  believe  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  on  his  bare  word?  Without  laying 
down  any  rules  as  to  how  he  will  save  thee,  wilt 
thou  trust  him  ?  Thou  hast  prescribed  dark  con 
victions,  or  vivid  dreams,  or  strange  sensations; 
wilt  thou  cease  from  such  folly  ?  Wilt  thou  believe 
in  Jesus  Christ  as  he  is  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  ? 
Wilt  thou  believe  that  he  can  and  will  save  thee 
now  upon  thy  simple  trust  ?  Hast  thou  not  heard 
of  his  passion,  and  death  upon  the  cross  for  the 
guilty?  Hast  thou  not  heard  it  said  that  all  man- 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITIL  383 

ner  of  sin  and  of  iniquity  shall  be  forgiven  unto 
men  if  they  believe  in  him  ?  Dost  thon  not  know 
that  he  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life  ? 
Wilt  thou  have  done  with  thy  nonsense  about 
"Come  down,  and  save  me,"  or  "  Make  me  feel  this, 
and  I  will  believe  thee  "  ?  Wilt  thou  believe  in 
him  now,  despite  all  thy  former  thoughts  and  pre 
tensions  and  desires,  and  just  say,  "  I  will  trust  my 
soul  with  Christ,  believing  that  he  can  save  me  "  ? 
Thou  shalt  be  saved  as  surely  as  thou  dost  thus 
trust. 

The  next  thing  this  man  did  to  prove  the  sincer 
ity  of  his  faith  was  that  lie  had  at  once  obeyed  Christ. 
Jesus  said  to  him,  "Go  thy  way ;"  that  is,  "  Go 
home" — "Thy  son  liveth."  If  the  man  had  not  be 
lieved  the  word  he  would  have  lingered  there,  and 
kept  on  pleading,  and  looking  for  favorable  signs; 
but  as  he  has  believed,  he  is  satisfied  with  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  and  goes  his  way  without  another 
word.  "Tliy  son  liveth"  is  enough  for  him.  Many 
of  you  have  said,  when  you  have  heard  the  gospel 
preached,  "You  tell  us  to  believe  in  Christ;  but  we 
will  continue  in  prayer."  That  is  not  what  the  gos 
pel  commands  you.  Do  I  hear  yon  say,  "I  shall 
continue  to  read  my  Bible,  and  attend  the  means 
of  grace  "  ?  That  is  not  the  precept  of  the  Sariour. 
Are  you  not  satisfied  with  his  word  ?  Will  you 
not  take  that  word,  and  go  your  way?  If  you  be 
lieve  in  him,  you  will  go  your  way  in  peace:  you 
will  believe  that  he  has  saved  you,  and  act  as  if 
you  knew  it  to  be  true.  You  will  joy  and  rejoice 
in  the  fact  that  you  are  saved.  You  will  not  stop 
to  cavil,  and  to  question,  and  to  follow  after  all 
kinds  of  religions  experiences  and  feelings;  but 


384  TITE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

you  will  exclaim,  "  He  tells  me  to  believe  him,  and 
I  believe  him.  He  says,  '  He  that  belie veth  on  me 
hath  everlasting  life;'  and  I  do  believe  in  him,  and 
therefore  I  have  everlasting  life.  I  may  not  feel 
any  peculiar  emotion,  but  I  have  eternal  life. 
Whether  I  see  my  salvation  or  not,  I  am  saved.  It 
is  written,  '  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye 
ends  of  the  earth.'  Lord,  I  have  looked,  and  I  am 
saved.  My  reason  for  believing  it  is  that  thou 
hast  said  it.  I  have  done  as  thou  hast  bidden  me, 
and  thou  wilt  keep  thy  promise."  This  mode  of  rea 
soning  is  due  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  deserves  to 
be  taken  at  his  word,  and  trusted  in  real  earnest. 

Now,  the  nobleman's  faith  has  flamed  up  indeed. 
He  believes  not  upon  mere  report,  but  upon  the 
word  of  Jesus.  He  does  not  wait  for  a  sign,  but 
he  hears  the  word,  and  on  that  word  he  hangs  his 
confidence.  Jesus  said,  ''Thy  son  liveth;  go  thy 
way":  and  he  goes  his  way,  that  he  may  find  his 
son  alive.  0  seeking  soul,  may  God,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  bring  you  to  this  state  at  once,  that  you 
may  now  say,  ''  0  Lord,  I  will  wait  no  longer  for 
any  sort  of  feeling,  or  evidence,  or  sign,  but  on  the 
word  thy  blood  hath  sealed  I  will  trust  my  ever 
lasting  all,  for  I  do  now  accept  thy  promise, 
and  since  I  believe  it,  I  will  go  rny  way  in 
peace." 

Still,  I  am  bound  to  say  concerning  this  man's 
faiih  at  this  stage,  that  it  fell  still  somewhat  short  of 
what  it  might  have  faen.  It  was  a  great  thing  for 
him  to  have  come  so  far;  but  he  had  farther  yet  to 
go.  He  expected  less  than  he  might  have  ex 
pected,  and  therefore,  when  he  saw  his  servants, 
he  asked  them  when  the  dear  child  began  to 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH,  385 

amend.  He  was  overjoyed  when  they  virtually 
said,  "  He  never  did  begin  to  amend;  the  fever  left 
him  all  at  once;  at  the  seventh  hour  he  recovered." 
You  see  he  expected  a  gradual  restoration.  He 
looked  for  the  ordinary  course  of  nature;  but  here 
was  a  miraculous  work.  He  received  far  more 
than  he  reckoned  on.  Flow  little  we  know  of 
Christ,  and  how  little  we  believe  in  him  even  when 
we  do  trust  him !  We  measure  his  boundless 
treasure  by  our  scanty  purses.  Yet  the  faith  that 
saves  is  not  always  full-grown:  there  is  room  for  us 
to  believe  more,  and  to  expect  more,  of  our  blessed 
Lord.  Oh,  that  we  would  do  so ! 

But  one  thing  I  want  to  mention  here,  though  I 
do  not  quite  understand  it;  perhaps  you  can  make 
it  out.  The  father  traveled  with  the.  leisure  of  con 
fidence.  It  was  about  twenty-five  or  thirty  miles 
to  Capernaum,  and  I  have  no  doubt  the  good  man 
started  off  directly  the  Master  said,  "Go  thy  way." 
No  doubt  he  would  go  at  once  in  obedience  to  such 
a  command,  and  make  progress  on  the  road  home. 
But  we  read  that  the  servants  met  him.  Did  they 
start  as  soon  as  the  child  was  cured?  If  so,  they 
might  meet  him  half-way,  or  thereabouts.  It  was 
uphill:  say,  therefore,  that  they  came  ten  miles;  and 
that  fifteen,  or  even  twenty,  remained  for  the  noble 
man  to  travel.  The  servants  said,  "  Yesterday  at 
the  seventh  hour  the  fever  left  him."  The  seventh 
hour  was  about  one  o'clock  in  the  day,  and  that 
day  was  "  Yesterday."  I  know  that  the  day  closed 
at  set  of  sun,  yet  one  would  hardly  talk  of  "yes 
terday"  without  a  night  between.  Did  he  take 
fifteen  or  sixteen  hours  for  that  part  journey?  If 
so,  he  did  not  travel  with  any  excessive  speed.  It 


386  THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH. 

is  true  that  twenty-five  miles  was  a  good  day's 
journey  fora  camel,  for  in  the  East  the  roads  are 
execrable;  but  still  it  does  seem  to  me  that  the 
happy  father  moved  with  the  ease  of  a  believer 
rather  than  with  the  hurry  of  an  anxious  parent.  A 
nobleman's  usual  progress  through  the  villages  was 
slow,  and  he  did  not  alter  the  usual  pace,  because 
he  would  not  even  seem  to  hurry  now  that  his 
mind  was  believingly  at  rest.  He  felt  quite  sure 
that  his  son  was  all  right,  and  therefore  the  fever 
of  anxiety  left  the  father,  even  as  the  fever  had  left 
his  child.  Anxious  minds,  even  when  they  be 
lieve,  are  in  a  hurry  to  see;  but  this  good  man  was 
so  sure  that  he  would  not  allow  parental  love  to 
make  him  act  as  if  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  remained. 
It  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  muke 
haste";  and  in  him  it  was  literally  fulfilled.  He 
journeyed  on  in  such  style  as  a  member  of  the  royal 
household  would  be  expected  to  travel  in,  accom 
panied  by  a  fitting  retinue,  and  thus  all  saw  that 
his  mind  was  at  ease  about  his  son.  I  like  this 
consecrated  restfulness;  it  benefits  a  solid  faith.  I 
want  you  all,  when  you  believe  in  .Jesus  Christ,  to 
believe  right  up  to  the  hilt.  Give  him  not  a  half 
faith,  but  a  whole  faith;  whether  about  a  child,  or 
about  yourself,  believe  in  earnest.  Say,  "  '  Let  God 
be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar.'  On  his  bare  word 
my  soul  reposes.  I  will  '  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait 
patiently  for  him.'  What  though  no  amazing  joys" 
flash  through  my  spirit?  God  hath  said,  '  He  that 
believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life';  and  there 
fore  I  have  everlasting  life.  What  if  I  do  not  rise 
up,  and  dance  for  joy?  yet  will  I  sit  still,  and  sing 
within  my  soul,  because  God  has  visited  his  be- 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  S67 

lieving  servant.  I  will  wait  until  high  joys  shall 
come  to  me,  but  meanwhile  I  will  trust  and  not  be 
afraid." 

Dear  hearer,  are  you  accompanying  me  in  all 
this?  Are  you  ready  in  this  manner  to  exercise  a 
substantial,  restful  confidence  in  Jesus? 

IV.  So  far  the  nobleman's  faith  has  grown,  but 
now  we  shall  see  it  become  THE  CONFLAGRATION  OF 
FAITH.  As  he  went  home,  his  servants  met  him 
with  good  news.  In  the  quietude  of  his  faith  he 
was  exceedingly  delighted  when  they  said,  "Thy 
son  liveth."  The  message  came  upon  him  like  the 
echo  of  the  word  of  Jesus.  "  I  heard  that,"  said 
he,  "yesterday,  at  the  seventh  hour,  for  then  Jesus 
said,  'Thy  son  liveth.'  Another  day  has  come, 
and,  behold,  my  servants  salute  me  with  the  same 
word,  '  Thy  son  liveth.'  "  The  repetition  must  have 
astonished  him.  I  often  notice  about  the  preaching 
of  the  word,  how  the  sentences  strike  you  as  to 
their  very  words  when  God  blesses  them.  People 
say  to  me,  "You  said,  sir,  the  selfsame  thing  that 
we  were  talking  of  when  we  were  on  the  road  :  you 
described  our  cases  even  to  our  thoughts,  and  you 
mentioned  certain  expressions  which  had  been 
used  in  our  conversation;  surely  God  was  speaking 
through  you."  Yes,  it  is  often  so;  Christ's  own 
word  finds  many  echoes  from  the  mouths  of  his 
commissioned  servants.  Tlve  Lord's  providence 
rules  words  as  well  as  deeds,  and  makes  men  eay 
the  right  words  without  their  knowing  why  they 
say  them.  God  is  so  graciously  omnipresent 
that  all  things  reveal  him  when  they  are  bidden 
to  do  so. 

Now   the   nobleman's  faith   is  confirmed   by   the 


THE    NOPLEMAX'S    FAITH. 


answer  fo  his  prayers.  His  experience  has  come  in 
to  the  aid  of  his  faith.  He  believes  in  a  more  as 
sured  sense  than  he  did  before.  He  has  proved 
the  truth  of  the  Lord's  word,  and  therefore  he 
knows  and  is  persuaded  that  he  is  Lord  and 
God.  The  faith  of  a  sinner  coining  to  Christ  is 
one  thing;  the  faith  of  a  man  who  has  come  to 
Christ,  and  has  obtained  the  blessing,  is  another 
and  stronger  matter.  The  first  faith,  the  simpler 
faith,  is  that  which  saves;  but  the  further  faith  is 
that  which  brings  comfort,  and  joy,  and  strength 
into  the  spirit. 

"My  prayer  is  heard,"  said  he;  and  then 
he  spoke  to  the  servants,  and  after  inquiry 
his  faith  ivas  sustained  by  each  detail.  He  cried, 
"Tell  rne  all  about  it:  when  was  it?"  When 
they  replied,  "  At  the  seventh  hour  the  fever 
left  him,"  he  remembered  that  at  that  very 
moment,  when  over  there  above  the  hills  at 
Cana,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  said,  "  Go  thy 
way;  thy  son  liveth."  The  more  he  studied  the 
case  the  more  wonderful  it  became.  The  details 
were  singularly  confirmatory  of  his  confidence,  and 
by  their  means  he  rose  to  a  clearer  and  firmer  faith. 
Brethren,  how  many  such  confirmations  some  of  us 
have  had!  Doubters  attempt  to  argue  with  us 
about  the  simplicities  of  the  gospel;  and  they  want 
to  fight  with  us  upon  their  own  ground  of  mere 
speculative  reasoning.  Dear  sir,  this  is  hardly  fair 
to  us.  Our  own  ground  is  of  quite  another  kind. 
We  are  not  strangers  to  the  business  of  faith,  but 
adepts  in  it;  and  you  ought  to  allow  something  i'or 
our  personal  experience  of  the  faithfulness  of  the 
Lord  our  God.  We  have  a  thousand  treasured 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  389 

memories  of  happy  details  which  we  cannot  tell 
you.  We  do  not  call  you  swine,  but  at  the  same 
time  we  dare  not  throw  our  pearls  before  you. 
We  have  a  host  of  things  laid  by;  but  we  cannot 
repeat  them,  for  to  us  they  are  too  sacred:  thus  we 
are  not  able  to  use  those  reasons  which  to  our  own 
hearts  are  the  most  convincing.  We  have  other 
arguments  than  we  choose  to  bandy  in  open  court. 
Be  not  surprised  if  we  seem  obstinate;  you  do  not 
know  how  intensely  sure  we  are.  You  cannot 
argue  us  out  of  our  secret  consciousness;  you  might 
as  well  try  to  argue  our  eyes  out  of  their  sockets. 
We  know  and  are  sure ;  for  we  have  seen,  and  heard, 
and  tasted,  and  handled  of  the  good  Word  of  the 
Lord.  Certain  things  are  so  intertwisted  with  our 
lives  that  we  are  anchored  by  them.  "  Coinci 
dences,"  you  say.  Ah  well  !  say  what  you  please; 
to  us  they  are  other  than  to  you  !  Our  soul  has 
cried  out,  time  after  time,  "  This  is  the  finger  of 
God."  A  man  who  has  been  helped  out  of  a  very 
sevei'e  trouble  cannot  forget  his  deliverer.  Do 
you  reply,  "Yon  were  fortunate  to  get  out  of 
it  "  ?  O  sir;  this  seems  a  very  cold-blooded 
remark ! 

If  you  had  been  where  I  have  been,  and  expe 
rienced  what  I  have  experienced,  you  would  own 
that  the  Lord  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  saved  his 
servant:  you  would  have  the  same  solemn  convic 
tion  as  I  have  that  God  was  there,  working  out 
salvation.  I  know  that  I  cannot  create  those  con 
victions  in  you  by  telling  you  my  story.  If  you 
are  determined  not  to  believe,  you  will  not  accept 
my  testimony,  but  will  think  me  a  deluded  person. 
though  I  am  no  more  apt  to  be  deluded  than  you 


890  THE    NOBLE  MA  \T'S    FAITH. 

are.  However,  whether  you  are  inclined  to  believe 
or  to  disbelieve,  I  am  in  no  such  hesitation.  I  am 
forced  to  believe,  for  the  more  carefully  I  examine 
my  life,  the  more  1  am  convinced  that  God  must 
have  been  at  work  with  me  and  for  me. 

At  the  same  moment  that  Christ  said,  "Thy  son 
liveth,"  the  nobleman's  son  did  live;  the  same  word 
that  Jesus  used  to  the  father  was  used  also  by  the 
servants  who  had  been  thirty  miles  away;  and, 
therefore,  the  father  felt  that  something  more  than 
human  had  crossed  his  path.  Do  you  wonder  at 
it?  Besides,  that  dear  boy,  whom  he  found  sound 
arid  well,  was  a  potent  argument.  You  could  not 
argue  the  happy  father  out  of  a  faith  which  had 
brought  him  such  joy.  The  child  was  at  the  point 
of  death  till  faith  received  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  then  the  fever  fled.  The  father  must 
believe:  would  you  have  him  doubt? 

Strengthened  in  his  faith  by  his  experience,  after 
having  believed  the  bare  word  of  Jesus,  the  good 
man  now  sees  that  word  fulfilled,  and  he  Mieves  in 
Jesus  in  the  fullest  sense;  believes  for  everything;  for 
his  body,  and  for  his  soul;  for  all  that  he  is,  and  for 
all  that  he  has.  From  that  day  forth  he  becomes 
a  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  follows  him,  not 
as  a  Healer  only,  nor  as  a  Prophet  only,  nor  as  a 
Saviour  only,  but  as  his  Lord  and  his  God.  His 
hope,  his  trust,  and  his  confidence  are  fixed  upon 
Jesus  as  the  true  Messiah. 

What  follows  is  so  natural,  and  yet  so  joyous, 
that  I  pray  it  may  be  true  to  all  of  you:  his  family 
also  believe.  When  he  gets  home,  his  wife  meets 
him.  Oh.  the  delight  that  sparkles  in  that  woman's 
eyes!  "  The  dear  boy  is  well,"  she  said,  >:  he  is  as 


THE    NOBLEMAN'S    FAITH.  391 

well  as  ever  he  was  in  his  life.  He  did  not  need  to 
lie  in  bed  for  weeks  to  recover  his  strength  after 
the  weakening  influence  of  the  fever;  but  the  fever 
is  all  gone,  and  the  boy  is  well.  Oh,  my  dear 
husband,  what  a  wonderful  Being  this  must  be 
who  has  heard  your  prayers,  and  at  all  that  dis 
tance  has  spoken  our  child  into  health  !  I  believe 
in  him,  husband;  I  believe  in  him."  I  am  sure  she 
would  speak  in  that  fashion.  The  same  processes 
which  had  been  working  in  her  husband  had  been 
working  in  her.  Now,  think  of  the  little  boy. 
Here  he  comes,  so  happy  and  cheerful ;  and  his  father 
tells  him  all  about  his  fever,  and  his  going  to  see 
that  wonderful  Prophet  at  Cana,  and  how  he  said, 
"  Thy  Fon  liveth."  The  little  boy  cries,  "  Father,  I 
believe  in  Jesus.  He  is  the  Son  of  God."  Nobody 
doubts  the  dear  child's  faith:  he  was  not  too  young 
to  be  healed,  and  he  is  not  too  young  to  believe. 
He  bad  enjoyed  a  special  experience,  more  personal 
than  even  that  of  his  father  and  mother.  He  had 
felt  the  power  of  Jesus;  and  it  was  no  marvel  that 
he  believed.  Meanwhile,  the  father  is  rejoicing  to 
find  that  he  will  not  be  a  solitary  believer,  for  there 
are  his  wife  and  boy  also  confessing  their  faith. 
But  we  are  not  at  the  end  of  the  matter,  for  the 
servants  standing  around  exclaim,  "  Master,  we 
cannot  help  believing  in  Jesus,  also;  for  we 
watched  the  dear  child,  and  saw  him  recover,  and 
the  power  which  healed  him  must  have  been 
divine."  One  and  all,  they  emulate  their  master's 
faith  in  Jesus.  "  I  sat  up  with  the  dear  boy,"  says 
the  old  nurse;  "  I  would  not  go  to  sleep,  for  I  felt 
that  if  I  did  sleep  I  might  find  him  dead  when  I 
awoke.  I  watched  him,  and  just  at  the  seventh 


392  THE    NOBLEMAN'S   FAITH. 

hour  I  saw  a  delightful  change  come  over  him,  and 
the  fever  left  him."  "  Glory  be  to  Jesus  !"  shouted 
the  old  woman,  "  I  never  saw  or  heard  of  such  a 
thing;  it  is  the  finger  of  God."  All  the  other  ser 
vants  were  of  the  same  mind.  Happy  Household  ! 
There  was  a  grand  baptism  soon  after,  when  they 
all  went  to  confess  their  faith  in  Jesus.  Not  only 
was  the  child  cured,  but  the  whole  household  was 
cured.  The  father  did  not  know,  when  he  went 
pleading-  about  his  boy,  that  he  himself  needed  to 
be  saved;  the  mother,  also,  probably  thought  only 
of  her  son  ;  but  now  salvation  has  come  to  the  whole 
family,  and  the  fever  of  sin  and  unbelief  is  gone 
away  with  the  other  fever.  May  the  Lord  work 
such  a  wonder  as  that  in  all  our  houses  !  If  any  of 
you  are  groaning  under  a  burden  of  grief,  I  trust 
you  will  be  so  relieved  that,  when  you  tell  your 
wife  of  it,  she  will  believe  in  Jesus  too.  May  the 
dear  child  of  your  care  believe  in  Jesus  while  yet  a 
child;  and  may  all  who  belong  to  your  domestic 
circle  also  belong  to  the  divine  Lord  !  Grant,  at 
this  time,  thy  servant's  desire,  0  Lord  Jesus,  for 
thy  glory's  sake  !  Amen. 


XVI. 

JUBILATE. 

October  25,  1885. 

"Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel,  this  song  unto 
the  Lord,  and  spake  saying,  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he 
htvth  triumphed  gloriously;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he 
thrown  into  the  sea.  The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  song,  and 
he  is  become  my  salvation:  he  is  my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him 
an  habitation;  my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exait  him." — EXODUS 
rv.  1,  2. 

T  I  MI  IS  is  the  first  song  unto  the  Lord  which  is 
-•-  recorded  in  holy  scripture.  In  Jacob's  bless 
ing  of  his  children,  there  are  verses  which  may  be 
regarded  as  songs;  but  they  arc  mere  fragments, 
and  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  sung  unto  the  Lord. 
There  are  other  couplets  in  the  Book  of  Genesis, 
but  this  is  the  first  connected  song  upon  record.  I 
should  think  that  Abraham  often  sang  unto  the 
Lord;  but  we  have  no  record  of  it.  We  can  hardly 
doubt  but  that  Isaac  had  his  quiet  psalm,  as  Enoch 
had,  and  Noah,  and  others  who  called  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord;  but  none  of  these  hymns  are  left 
to  us.  This  is  the  very  first  of  those  sacred  songs 
preserved  in  Scripture,  and  in  some  respects  it  is 
first  in  merit  as  well  as  in  time.  At  any  rate,  its 
august  occasion  lifts  it  into  the  highest  place 
among  patriotic  hymns. 

The  song  of  Moses  appears  to  have  been  chanted 
by  an  exceeding  great  multitude.  Miriam,  the 


39-i 


prophetess  took  her  timbrel  and  led  the  strain,  all 
the  daughters  of  Israel  going  forth  with  her  with 
their  timbrels  and  dances,  and  the  whole  multitude 
of  the  people  taking  up  the  strain.  Never  had  the 
shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  or  any  other  sea,  heard  such 
a  song.  There  were  at  least  six  hundred  thousand 
men,  beside  women  and  children.  What  an  as 
sembly  !  Millions  made  up  that  choir!  Though 
their  voices  were  little  tuned  to  music,  yet  as  they 
lifted  them  up,  each  one  throwing  his  whole 
strength  into  the  strain,  it  must  have  sounded  like 
the  noise  of  many  waters,  especially  when  they 
repeated  the  refrain,  "Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  lie 
hath  triumphed  gloriously:  the  horse  and  his  rider 
hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea." 

We  saw  just  now,  in  our  reading  in  the  fifteenth 
chapter  of  Revelation,  that  the  Song  of  Moses,  the 
servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  will  be  sung  toward 
the  close  of  this  dispensation,  when  those  who  have 
gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast  and  his  image, 
shall  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the^  harps  of 
God.  Before  the  seven  last  plagues  shall  be  poured 
out  upon  the  earth,  and  God  shall  overthrow  the 
hosts  of  Antichrist  once  for  all,  then  shall  this  song 
be  heard,  sung,  not  by  the  Israelitish  nation,  but 
by  that  higher  Israel  who  have  escaped  by  the  grace 
of  God  from  the  power  of  the  spiritual  Pharaoh,  and 
have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Mow  sweetly  will  they  to 
gether  take  up  the  song,  u  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for 
he  hath  triumphed  gloriously!  Great  and  marvel 
ous  are  thy  works,  Lord  God  Almighty." 

It  is  obvious,  then,  from  the  plentiful  allusions  to 
this  song  in  holy  scripture,  that  it  is  full  of  deep 


JUBILA  TE.  396 

spiritual  significance.  It  teaches  us  not  only  to 
praise  God  concerning  the  literal  overthrow  of 
Egypt,  but  to  praise  him  concerning  the  overthrow 
of  all  the  powers  of  evil,  and  the  final  deliverance 
of  all  the  chosen.  It  is  God's  intent  that  from  the 
day  of  Moses  downward,  even  to  the  hour  when 
the  flames  of  fire  shall  lick  up  the  works  of  men, 
and  the  heavens  themselves  shall  be  dissolved  with 
fervent  heat,  that  this  shall  be  the  song  of  the 
chosen  people  everywhere,  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously." 

The  first  verse  of  this  song  was  quoted  by 
David.  I  think  you  will  find  it  in  almost  the 
same  words  three  times  in  the  Psalms;  but 
especially  in  the  hundred  and  eighteenth  Psalm 
you  have  the  exact  words,  "  The  Lord  is  rny 
strength  and  song;  and  is  become  my  salva 
tion.''  As  if  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  he  fur 
nished  Isaiah  with  his  noblest  minstrelsy,  could 
not  excel  the  earlier  strains  of  Moses.  Isaiah  him 
self,  in  chapter  twelve,  has  the  same  words:  "  Jeho 
vah  is  my  strength  and  my  song;  he  also  is  become 
my  salvation."  It  is  evident  that  this  patriotic 
song  was  interwoven  with  the  life  of  Israel,  and 
that  when  good  and  gracious  men  would  express 
themselves  in  praise  at  their  very  best,  they  fell 
back  upon  this  song  of  Moses,  and  they  sang  unto 
the  Lord  who  had  triumphed  gloriously.  So  full 
of  significance  then  as  this  song  is,  there  is  some 
thing  for  us  to  learn  from  it  this  moruing.  May 
God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dictated  this  song  to 
Moses,  now  write  it  afresh  upon  his  people's  hearts  ! 
Breathe  on  us,  Holy  spirit,  that  we  also  may  be 
filled  with  the  praises  of  Jehovah. 


396  JUBILA  TE. 

First,  I  shall  want  you  to  notice  the  time  for  singing 
this  song.  The  text  begins,  "  Then  sang  Moses  and 
the  children  of  Israel  this  song."  Secondly,  I  shall 
want  you  to  observe  the  tune  of  this  song;  it  is  worthy 
to  be  sung  in  heaven  itself.  High  and  lofty  in 
deed  it  is.  And  thirdly,  we  will  consider  tine,  first 
clauses  of  the  song  itself:  "  The  Lord  is  my  strength 
and  song,  and  he  is  become  my  salvation:  he  is 
my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him  an  habitation;  my 
father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him." 

I.  It  will  be  instructive  to  notice  THE  TIME  OF 
THE  SINGING  OP  THIS  SONG.  To  everything  there  is  a 
season,  and  a  time  for  every  purpose  under  heaven: 
there  is  a  time  of  the  singing  of  birds,  and  there  is 
a  time  for  the  singing  of  saints.  "  Then  sang 
Moses." 

It  was  first  of  all  at  the  moment  of  realized  salva 
tion.  The  Lord  saved  Israel  that  day  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  Egyptians;  and  Israel  saw  the  Egyp 
tians  dead  upon  the  sea  shore;  and  Israel  saw  that 
great  work  which  the  Lord  did  upon  the  Egyptians; 
and  the  people  feared  the  Lord,  and  believed  the 
Lord,  and  his  servant  Moses.  Then  sang  Moses 
and  the  children  of  Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord." 
There  was  no  singing  in  Egypt;  sighing,  and  cry 
ing,  and  groaning,  and  lamentation  abounded  there 
till  the  Lord  said,  "  I  have  surely  heard  the  cry  of 
my  people."  There  was  no  singing  that  I  know  of 
even  at  the  celebration  of  the  paschal  supper,  on 
that  dreadful  night  when  they  ate  the  lamb  in 
haste  with  their  loins  girded,  and  their  staves  in 
their  hands.  Its  first  observance  was  upon  a 
night  almost  too  solemn  for  song.  I  do  not  read 
that  they  sang  when  they  came  to  Succoth,  or 


JUBILA  TE.  897 

reached  their  first  encampment;  I  doubt  not 
that  they  sang  snatches  of  songs  when  they 
found  themselves  free  from  their  daily  tasks, 
and  from  the  Egyptian  rod.  No  doubt  there 
were  individual  songs,  but  the  masses  did  riot 
unite  in  concerted  music;  they  were  too  hurried 
and  too  much  in  fear  of  pursuit.  No  poet, 
as  yet,  had  arisen  to  write  a  lyric  in  which  all 
would  join.  The  hour  of  their  complete  deliverance 
had  not  yet  fully  come.  They  marched  on  steadily, 
but  they  had  hardly  reached  the  time  for  timbrels. 
When  they  had  crossed  the  sea,  and  the  waters 
thereof  rolled  between  them  and  the  house  of  their 
bondage,  "Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of 
Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord."  Their  previous 
lives  had  been  one  long-drawn  sigh,  or  one  discord 
of  anguish  and  fear  and  woe;  but  when  their  slav 
ery  was  altogether  a  thing  of  the  past,  then  sang 
Moses.  The  depths  have  covered  the  Egyptian 
host;  there  is  not  one  of  them  left;  "  Then  sang 
Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  this  song  unto  the 
Lord." 

You  will  have  noticed,  perhaps,  in  reading  the 
previous  chapter,  that  Moses  had  said  to  the  people 
(xiv.  14):  "The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye 
shall  hold  your  peace."  But  no\v  that  God  has 
fought  for  them,  they  are  not  commanded  to  hold 
their  peace  any  longer.  The  battle  is  fought,  and 
the  victory  is  won,  and  "  Then  sang  Moses  and  the 
children  of  Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord."  How 
could  they  help  it  ?  Surely,  "  if  these  should  hold 
their  peace,  the  stones  would  immediately  cry  out." 

What  does  that  teach  us,  brothers  and  sisters,  but 
that  we  cannot  sing  in  the  laud  of  bondage  while 


398  JUBILA  TE. 

under  the  dominion  of  sin  and  Satan  ?  How  shall 
we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  that  strange  land  ?  We 
do  not  even  sing  in  the  first  moments  of  our  spir 
itual  life,  when  our  question  is  how  to  escape  de 
struction  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  Nor 
do  we,  perhaps,  sing  in  those  first  hurried  steps 
when  we  fly  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan,  en 
deavoring  to  escape  out  of  bondage.  But,  oh,  when 
we  see  that  Christ  has  saved  us,  when  \ve  under 
stand  that  he  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlast 
ing  life,  then  we  sing!  When  we  learn  that  "  he 
that  believeth  is  justified  from  all  things  from  which 
he  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses,"  and 
hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  declaring,  "To  as  many 
as  received  him,  to  them  guve  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his 
name,"  then  we  sing  unto  the  Lord.  Who  could 
stop  us?  It  would  be  unnatural  for  us  to  be  silent 
after  sin  is  put  away.  When  we  are  reconciled  to 
God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  the  dumb  devil  is  cast 
out  of  us.  "  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of 
Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord."  Our  early  days, 
when  first  we  saw  how  complete  was  the  redemption 
of  Christ,  were  days  of  constant  praise;  and  I  think 
to-day  if  we  see  afresh  how  perfect  is  the  righteous 
ness  of  Christ,  how  fully  accepted  is  the  great  atone 
ment,  how  secure  is  our  standing  by  virtue  of  our 
union  with  the  Son  of  God,  we  shall  return  to  our 
music  and  make  this  house  resound  with  grateful 
psalms.  When  we  doubt  our  salvation  we  suspend 
our  singing;  but  when  we  realize  it.  when  we  get 
a  grip  of  it,  when  we  see  clearly  the  great  work 
that  God  has  done  for  us,  then  we  sing  unto  the 
Lord  who  hath  for  us  also  triumphed  gloriously. 


JUBILA  TE.  899 

I  say  again,  how  can  we  help  sinking  ?  How  can 
our  joy  of  heart  any  longer  be  pent  up?  It •must 
pour  itself  forth  in  floods  of  harmony,  in  tunes  of 
realized  salvation. 

So  is  it  also  in  times  of  distinct  consecration.  You 
may  not  see  this  at  first,  but  I  would  remind  you 
that  the  apostle  assures  us  that  all  Israel  were 
"  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea." 
When  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  had  been  destroyed, 
Israel  stood  for  the  first  time,  as  a  nation  separated 
from  Egypt.  The  Red  Sea  was  a  most  effectual 
division;  Israel  became  a  distinct  people,  a  race 
redeemed  from  among  men:  they  would  never 
again  feel  the  yoke  of  Mizraim,  they  would  not 
return  unto  Egypt,  nor  would  Pharaoh  again 
pursue  them.  They  were  now  a  distinct  people 
consecrated  unto  Jehovah;  to  them  God  would 
reveal  himself,  and  among  them  he  would  dwell. 
That  passage  through  the  Red  Sea  was  the  type  of 
their  death,  their  burial,  and  their  resurrection  to  a 
new  life;  it  was  their  national  baptism  unto  God: 
and  therefore  they  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song. 
Do  you  wonder  that  they  did  so?  It  is  the  happi 
est  thing  that  can  ever  happen  to  a  mortal  man, 
to  be  dedicated  to  God :  it  is  the  grandest  posture 
in  which  a  creature  can  stand,  to  be  fully  conse 
crated  to  his  Creator:  it  is  the  sweetest  and  happi 
est  condition  in  which  a  heart  can  be,  when  it  feels 
that  it  is  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  and  henceforth  is 
not  its  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  No  song 
among  sweet  pastorals  can  exceed  in  sweetness 
that  heavenly  Canticle,  "I  am  my  beloved's,  and 
my  beloved  is  mine."  There  is  no  greater  joy 
than  to  know  that  the  Lord  has  chosen  us  unto 


400  JUBILA  TE. 

himself  to  be  his  peculiar  heritage.  Conscious  of 
redemption  by  blood  and  separation  unto  Jehovah, 
their  God,  "  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of 
Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord."  Oh  you  that  hope 
that  you  are  Christians,  but  have  never  yet  taken 
the  distinct  step  to  avow  yourselves  to  be  wholly 
the  Lord's;  oh  you  that  have  never  come  clean 
away  from  Eygpt,  and  made  the  waters  to  roll  be 
tween  you  and  a  guilty  world, — you  have  delayed 
a  joy  which  I  trust  you  may  not  longer  miss,  lest 
that  dreadful  text  be  fulfilled  in  you,  "  Whosoever 
shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  words  in  this 
adulterous  and  sinful  generation ;  of  him  also  shall 
the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in 
the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy  angels." 
"  Then,"  in  the  day  of  realized  salvation,  "then," 
in  the  day  of  distinct  consecration,  they  sang  this 
song  unto  the  Lord. 

Brethren,  it  was  also  a  day  of  tie  manifest  display 
of  God's  power.  Our  hearts  are  heavy ;  at  least, 
mine  is  so,  when  God  seems  to  put  his  right  hand 
into  his  bosom  and  not  to  vindicate  his  own  cause. 
I  am  most  sad  because  I  see  error  prevalent  every 
where;  falsehood  reigns,  and  Jannes  and  Jambres 
withstand  Moses,  and  the  prince  of  this  world 
disdainfully  demands,  "Who  is  Jehovah?"  Plagues 
many  are  upon  us:  the  earth  swarms  with  errors  as 
if  the  dust  were  turned  into  lice  throughout  all  the 
land.  Heresies  like  frogs  are  croaking  everywhere ; 
they  have  come  up  into  the  King's  chambers.  The 
Lord  hath  sent  a  thick  darkness  over  all  the  land, 
even  darkness  that  may  be  felt.  The  people  loathe 
to  drink  of  the  waters  of  our  sanctuaries;  fora  curse 
is  upon  them  in  many  a  place.  Our  heart  fe*>Is 


JUBILA  TE.  401 

bowed  down,  and  we  go  mourning,  and  say,  "  Why 
hast  thou  made  us  to  drink  the  wine  of  astonish 
ment  ?"  But  when  we  hear  of  conversions,  when 
we  see  God  blessing  the  work  of  the  Sabbath-school, 
when  we  hear  of  sinners  turning  to  Christ  and  seek 
ing  mercy,  when  we  notice  the  children  of  God 
diligent  in  service,  when  we  see  the  work  of  the 
Lord  wrought  with  vigor,  then  is  our  heart  ex 
ceeding  glad,  and  then,  like  Moses  and  the  chil 
dren  of  Israel,  we  sing  unto  the  Lord.  How  can 
we  be  silent  when  God's  arm  is  made  bare?  A 
revival  is  our  joyous  holiday.  If  we  had  our  choice 
of  all  the  benedictions  that  God  can  give  us  on 
earth,  it  would  be  to  see  the  church  revive,  his 
truth  prevail,  and  his  kingdom  come.  It  is  not 
with  some  of  us  a  matter  of  indifference  whether 
the  truth  is  preached  or  error  is  proclaimed;  no,  it 
is  our  life  to  see  the  gospel  conquer.  Now  we  live 
if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  faith ;  but  our  spirit  distinctly 
sickens  in  proportion  as  the  church  of  God  decays; 
and  when  the  church  is  strong,  and  God  is  with 
her,  then  is  our  heart  revived,  and  our  song  bursts 
forth,  "The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  my  song;  he 
is  become  my  salvation." 

But  this  song  may  be  sung  at  all  times  through 
out  the  life  of  faith. 

I  want  to  put  it  to  the  people  of  God  here 
whether  it  is  good  to  save  up  our  songs  for  special 
occasions  of  great  joy,  or  for  times  when  we  have 
something  visible  to  sing  about.  Should  not  the 
believer  sing  by  faith  as  well  as  live  by  faith  ?  Do 
you  not  think  that  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  chil 
dren  of  Israel  at  the  Red  Sea  was,  after  all,  a  poor 
affair  as  far  as  faith  is  concerned?  The  bulk  of 


402  JUBILA  TE. 

the  Israelites  had  very  little  faith  indeed;  and  loud 
as  was  the  song,  there  was  more  'noise  than  faith 
in  it;  for  within  a  day  or  two  they  began  to  mur 
mur  against  God.  Sing  in  fine  weather!  Any 
bird  can  do  that.  Praising  God  when  al!  goes  well 
is  common-place  work.  Everybody  marks  the 
nightingale  above  all  other  birds  because  she 
singeth  when  the  other  minstrels  of  the  wood  are 
silent  and  asleep;  and  thus  doth  faith  praise  God 
under  the  cloud.  Songs  in  the  day  are  from  man, 
but  God  himself  giveth  songs  in  the  night.  0 
come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord  under  the  clouds; 
let  us  pour  forth  his  praises  in  the  fires  !  Let  us 
praise  him  under  depressions;  let  us  magnify  him 
when  our  heart  is  heavy.  Faith  believes  in  God 
when  there  is  nothing  to  support  her  but  the  bare 
promise.  That  man  was  highly  commended  who 
did  not  despair  of  the  Roman  Republic;  let  us 
never  despair  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom.  That 
is  the  true  Christian  who  can  say,  when  everything 
grieves  him,  "  Nevertheless,  with  joy  will  I  draw 
water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation;  for  I  will  sing 
unto  the  Lord  as  long  as  I  live."  "Therefore  will 
we  not  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and 
though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of 
the  sea."  I  ask  to-day  from  every  heavy  heart  and 
every  downcast  spirit,  from  every  man  that  con- 
tendeth  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to 
the  saints,  and  trernbleth  for  the  ark  of  the  Lord, 
that  in  the  midst  of  his  trembling  and  grief,  he 
should  burst  into  song.  Rob  not  God  of  his  glory, 
but  let  it  be  said  this  day,  "  Then  sang  Moses  and 
the  children  of  Israel  this  song  unto  the  Lord,  and 
Bpake,  saying,  I  will  sing  uuto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath 


JVBILA  TE.  403 

triumphed  gloriously:  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath 
he  thrown  into  the  sea." 

Thus  we  have  spoken  upon  the  time  for  singing. 
That  time  is  NOW,  I  think.  Let,  your  hearts  begin, 
to  ring  all  their  bells,  and  let  not  their  sweet  chimes 
cease  for  evermore. 

1 1.  Notice,  secondly,  THE  TOXK  OF  THIS  SO\G,  "  Then 
sang  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  this  song 
unto  the  Lord." 

Note,  first,  that  the  tone  is  enthusiastic.  There  is 
not  a  dull  line,  there  is  not  a  dreary  sentence,  all 
through;  it  is  full  of  force,  life,  power;  it  is  Luther's 
Old  Hundredth  psalm,  and  more;  it  rises  to  a  height 
of  intense  enthusiasm  which  cannot  be  excelled. 
The  words  are,  "  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he 
hath  triumphed  gloriously;"  and  the  singers  en 
deavor  to  sing  gloriously,  too. 

The  tone  is  also  congregational,  being  intended 
for  every  Israelite  to  join  in  it.  Though  Moses 
began  by  saying,  u  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,"  yet 
Miriam  concluded  with,  "  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord  for 
he  hath  triumphed  gloriously."  This  is  a  hymn 
for  every  child  of  God,  for  all  that  have  come  out 
of  Eg3Tpt.  Should  not  there  be  praise  from  every 
one  of  you?  You  in  the  back  settlements,  you 
that  bear  the  mark  of  Egypt's  lash,  and  smart  from 
wounds  still  nnhealed;  you  that  remember  well 
the  taskmaster,  and  the  iron  furnace;  yet  sing  ye 
unto  the  Lord.  From  Egypt  lately  corne,  sing  ye 
unto  the  Lord  !  There  should  be  sent  up  unto  God 
by  his  church  a  perfectly  unanimous  harmony  of 
praise.  "  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for 
his  goodness!  "  Let  all  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 
say  so.  "0  come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord:  let 


404  JUBILA  TE. 

us  make  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation." 
Let  the  song  be  enthusiastic  and  unanimous. 

Yet  please  to  notice  how  very  distinctly  personal 
it  is.  Jt  is  strikingly  so.  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord 
for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously.  The  Lord  is  my 
strength  and  song,  and  he  is  become  my  salvation; 
he  is  my  God,  and /will  prepare  him  an  habitation; 
my  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him."  Do  not 
lose  yourself  in  the  throng.  It  is  no  egotism  to 
resolve  that  if  nobody  else  will  sing,  you  will  say 
with  David,  "  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  as  long  as 
J  live."  The  fact  is,  that  unanimity  cannot  become 
fact  if  each  mind  is  not  active  in  praise.  We  can 
not  have  a  perfect  accord  unless  each  child  of  God 
feels  that  he  must  make  his  own  distinct  music 
melodious  in  the  ears  of  the  Most  High.  I  tell  you 
brethren,  if  you  will  not  praise  the  Lord  this  day, 
I  will.  Do  you  not  say  the  same?  Does  not  each 
brother  and  sister  here  say,  tl  If  no  others  feej 
bound  to  gratitude,  yet  I  have  such  reason  for 
thanksgiving  that  I  will  praise  the  Lord  while  I 
have  any  being  ? "  In  my  case  the  Lord  hath 
"  triumphed  gloriously ;"  and  if  others  will  not  take 
him  to  be  their  God,  yet  this  God  is  my  God  for 
ever  and  ever;  he  shall  be  my  guide  even  unto 
death.  I  like  the  personality  of  this  song,  and 
•would  urge  you  to  follow  it.  Some  of  you  cannot 
sing  unto  God  because  you  have  no  personal  enjoy 
ment  of  grace  from  him,  and  do  not  know  God  for 
yourselves.  Oh,  if  this  be  your  case,  do  not  let 
your  sun  go  down  until  you  do  know  this  God,  and 
so  can  offer  your  own  peculiar  song  to  him. 

Note,  again,  the  tone  of  this  song  is  exceeding 
confident.  There  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in  it:  it 


JUBILATE.  405 

is  all  the  way  through  most  positive  in  its  ascrip 
tions  of  praise.  The  lip  does  not  quiver,  the  mind 
does  not  waver.  It  begins,  'l  I  will  sing  unto  the 
Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously."  It  de 
clares  a  fact,  about  which  there  can  be  no  doubt : 
"the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the 
sea;"  and  it  goes  on  to  make  statements  which  are 
not  qualified  with  hopes,  and  desires,  and  "ifs, 
and  "  buts,"  but  are  bold  assertions  which  cannot 
be  challenged.  "The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  rny 
gong,  and  he  is  become  my  salvation."  That  is  the 
kind  of  singing.  I  do  not  mind  occasionally  sing 
ing  with  Cowper,  when  he  is  down  in  the  dumps; 
for  some  of  his  dreary  hymns  admirably  express 
the  experience  of  the  weaker  members  of  the 
family;  but  I  would  not  always  keep  to  the  minor 
key.  Oh  no!  let  us  sing  songs  of  joy  and  victory. 
Doubts  and  fears  ill  become  the  children  of  God. 
The  full  assurance  of  understanding  is  our  priv 
ilege  and  our  duty,  and  why  should  we  not  have 
it  ?  When  we  corne  before  God,  why  should  we 
bring  him  such  broken-legged  worship  ?  No,  let 
us  bring  him  perfect  praises,  the  firstlings  of  our 
bullocks,  even  as  David  says,  "  Then  shall  they 
offer  bullocks  upon  thine  altar."  God  should  be 
worshipped  with  the  best  we  have;  his  mercy  is 
so  sure,  so  true,  that  he  ought  to  have  our  fullest 
faith.  Where  is  room  for  doubt?  Let  us  sing 
with  confidence  unto  the  Lord. 

And  this  song  is  exceeding  comprehensive.  It 
sings  of  what  God  has  done,  and  then  of  what  God 
will  do  in  bringing  his  people  into  the  Promised 
Land;  nor  does  it  finish  till  it  rises  to  that  loftiest 
strain  of  all:  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and 


406  JUBILA  TE. 

ever."  I  think  I  hear  them  repeating  that  verse 
again  and  again:  "The  Lord  shall  reign  forever 
and  ever.  Hallelujah."  Sing  to  the  Lord,  not 
only  of  the  past,  but  of  the  present  and  the  future. 
Sing  of  the  second  coming;  sing  of  the  glory  to  be 
revealed;  sing  of  high  heaven  and  the  city  that 
needs  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun;  sing  of 
the  victories  of  Christ  when  the  armies  of  heaven 
shall  ride  forth  on  their  white  horses,  and  he  shall 
lead  them  whose  name  is  written  on  his  vesture 
and  on  his  thigh — King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. 
There  is  matter  enough  for  eternal  music  if  our 
hearts  are  right  with  God. 

Note,  too,  all  through,  that  this  song  is  immeas 
urably  joyous.  The  Israelites  were  slaves  enjoying 
new  liberty ;  children  let  out  to  play.  How  merrily 
did  they  disport  themselves  !  They  did  not  know 
how  to  be  glad  enough.  Let  us  give  to  God  our 
unlimited  joy.  David  said,  "  God  is  my  exceeding 
joy."  I  know  of  no  greater  word  than  that  word 
"exceeding;"  because,  however  far  you  go,  if  your 
joy  is  "  exceeding,"  it  is  above  the  highest;  and 
however  brave  the  description,  if  your  joy  be  "ex 
ceeding,"  it  surpasses  all  language.  Believers 
ought  to  be  unutterably  happy.  Men  redeemed 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  ought  habitually 
to  be  almost  too  happy  to  live;  men  that  are  chil 
dren  of  God,  and  heirs  of  the  covenant,  and  are  soon 
to  be  where  Jesus  is  in  the  ineffable  splendor  of 
Jehovah's  light,  ought  to  feel  their  soul  overflow 
ing  with  delight.  The  pulse  of  the  believer  should 
beat  hallelujahs;  every  heaving  of  the  lungs  should 
raise  a  Te  Dcum.  Oh,  if  our  minds  could  but  rise 
into  the  heavenlies,  where  we  ought  to  be,  we 


JUBILA  TE.  407 

should  not  only  be  happy  as  tho  days  are  long,  but 
we  should  enjoy  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth! 
Yet  I  must  say,  however  enthusiastic  that  song 
was,  and  however  full  of  joy  it  was,  it  ivas  only 
such  a  song  as  was  due  unto  the  Lord.  If  those 
people  on  that  day  had  sung  to  the  Lord  some  dull, 
heavy  tune,  I  think  if  I  had  been  there  I  should 
have  said,  '-Change  that  note.  Rouse  ye  to  ardor! 
Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength.  The  new  tunes 
of  the  present  age  are  constructed  upon  the  prin 
ciple  of  "  Let  us  sing  and  rattle  through  the  words 
as  hard  as  we  can  go."  I  like  weightier  music; 
moving  swiftly,  but  yet  grandly.  Such  was  the 
song  of  Moses,  full  of  solemnity,  but  full  of  heart; 
a  tune  into  which  every  one  could  throw  the  full 
volume  of  his  voice  without  fear  of  spoiling  the 
delicacy  of  tone.  But,  brethren,  the  tribes  of  Israel 
did  not  even  then  praise  the  Lord  half  as  he  should 
be  praised.  If  all  the  angels  in  heaven  had  left 
their  seats  and  descended  to  the  Red  Sea  shore,  and 
if  cherubim  and  seraphim  had  joined  the  lofty  song, 
it  had  not  been  more  than  meet  for  the  occasion. 
So  to-day,  if  we  could  arouse  all  on  earth,  arid  all 
in  heaven,  as  well  as  all  that  is  within  us,  to  blesa 
and  magnifiy  the  Lord,  the  song  would  not  be 
equal  to  the  majesty  of  the  divine  goodness;  it 
would  be  but  a  faint  expression  of  what  God  deserv- 
eth  from  each  one  of  us.  Therefore,  let  us  sing 
unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously. 

"  Sound  the  loud  timbrel  o'er  Egypt's  dark  sea  ! 
Jehovah  has  triuraph'd,  his  people  are  free. 
Sing— for  the  pride  of  the  tyrant  is  broken, 
His  chariots,  his  horsemen,  all  splendid  and  brave, 
How  vain  was  their  boasting  !  The  Lord  hath  but  spoken, 
And  chariots  and  horsemen  are  sunk  in  the  wave." 


408  yUBILA  TE. 

III.  We  are  to  dwell  for  a  few  minutes  upon  THE 
FIRST  CLAUSES  OF  THIS  SONG.  "  Tiie  Lord  is  my  strength 
and  song,  and  he  is  become  my  salvation;  he  is 
my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  him  an  habitation;  my 
father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him." 

Notice,  the  song  is  all  of  God;  there  is  not  a 
word  about  Moses.  Read  this  song  through,  arid 
neither  Moses,  nor  Aaron,  nor  Miriam  are  in  it: 
God  is  all  in  all:  "I  will  sing  unto  Jehovah." 
That  is  blessed  praise  when  self  lies  with  the 
Egyptians  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  when 
everything  that  is  in  us  that  is  commendable  is 
traced  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  Lord  is  magni 
fied  for  it.  Oh  for  the  glorification  of  Jesus,  and 
none  but  Jesus  !  Brothers,  we  spoil  our  music  by 
diverting  our  thoughts  to  man.  Let  us  forget  men, 
forget  earth,  forget  time,  forget  self,  forget  this 
mortal  life,  and  only  think  of  our  God.  The  song 
shall  be  all  for  thee,  0  Lord,  for  thou  art  all  in  all; 
and  if  we  have  one  note  that  is  determined  to  go 
astray  we  will  this  day  bind  it  with  cords,  even 
with  cords  to  the  horns  of  thine  altar,  0  Jehovah. 

Observe,  the  song  dwells  upon  what  God  has  done: 
"  The  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the 
sea."  There  is  nothing  concerning  the  deeds  of 
Moses  and  Aaron,  or  the  pride  of  Pharaoh,  or  the 
craft  of  Jannes  and  Jambres.  No,  the  whole  is 
consecrated  to  the  doings  of  the  Lord.  Let  us 
trace  all  the  mercies  we  get  to  our  God,  for  he  hath 
wrought  all  our  works  in  us;  he  hath  chosen  us, 
he  hath  redeemed  us,  he  hath  called  us,  he  hath 
quickened  us,  he  hath  preserved  us,  he  hath  sancti 
fied  us,  and  he  will  perfect  us  in  Christ  Jesus. 
The  glory  is  all  the  Lord's.  Let  us  sing  of  what 


JUBILATE.  409 

the  Lord  has  done.  When  you  read  human  his 
tory,  read  it  to  see  the  finger  of  God  in  it;  trace  all 
along  through  human  story  the  silver  line  of  cove 
nant  working;  observe  how  the  Lord  casts  the 
horse  and  his  rider  into  the  sea  when  they  come 
out  against  him  or  his  people. 

The  song  also  declares  what  the  Lord  will  yet 
do.  It  is  not  about  what  evil  men  are  doing,  or 
what  we  are  afraid  will  happen  through  their 
malice;  but  of  what  the  Lord  alone  will  do.  He 
says,  "  Thou  wilt  surely  bring  them  in ;"  he  pictures 
the  whole  affair  finished,  and  Israel  settled  in  the 
Promised  Land,  and  this  is  his  song.  Come, 
brethren,  let  us  sing  the  music  of  the  future,  the 
music  of  what  God  will  do.  Do  you  believe  that 
the  Lord  will  be  defeated  in  the  long  run  ?  Do 
you  fear  that  at  the  end  Jehovah's  everlasting  pur 
pose  will  fail — that  Christ  will  have  died  in  vain  ? 
Think  you  the  eternal  truth  promulgated  in  this 
book  will  be  driven  out  of  the  earth  by  modern 
thought  ?  or  that  our  old  Christianity,  for  which 
our  fathers  bled,  will  become  extinct?  By  no 
means.  We  shall  conquer  yet  in  the  great  name 
of  Jehovah.  Therefore  let  us  take  heart  of  hope 
to  ourselves,  and  sing  of  what  the  Lord  hath  done 
so  often ;  for  again  and  again,  "  The  horse  and  his 
rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea." 

Take  up  the  first  note:  "The  Lord  is  my  strength" 
What  a  noble  utterance !  Poor  Israel  had  no 
strength  !  She  had  cried  out  by  reason  of  her  sore 
bondage,  making  bricks  without  straw.  Poor 
Israel  was  weakness  itself!  but  Jehovah  drew 
near  in  power.  The  Lord  is  my  strength  when  I 
have  no  strength  of  my  own.  By  the  strength  of 


410  JUBILATE. 

the  Lord,  Israel  came  forth  with  a  high  hand  and 
an  outstretched  arm;  Egypt  was  glad  when  they 
departed,  and  the  Egyptians  gave  them  jewels  of 
silver  and  jewels  of  gold  that  they  might  wish 
them  well  in  departing;  for  God  had  given  them 
honor  in  the  sight  of  the  people.  Thus  the  Lord 
is  our  strength  when  we  are  at  the  extremity  of 
weakness. 

The  Lord  was  also  Israel's  strength  against 
strength.  Pharaoh  was  exceeding  mighty.  The 
kings  of  the  earth  trembled  at  the  neighing  of  his 
war-horse;  the  rattling  of  his  chariots  made  the 
very  heavens  to  resound;  but  God  was  more  than 
a  match  for  him.  When  strength  comes  out  against 
God's  ptople,  God  meets  it  with  his  omnipotence. 
What  is  Pharaoh's  strength  when  matched  against 
Jehovah's  might?  A  paper  pellet  thrown  against 
a  wall  of  brass.  The  enemy  said,  "I  will  pursue; 
I  will  overtake;  I  will  divide  the  spoil,"  and  so  on; 
but  Jehovah  had  only  to  blow  with  his  wind,  and 
the  sea  covered  them.  Thus  will  the  Lord  be  our 
strength  when  the  mighty  are  against  us. 

It  is  well  to  say,  "The  Lord  is  my  strength" 
when  we  are  weak  and  the  enemy  is  strong;  but 
we  must  mind  that  we  say  the  same  when  we  are 
strong,  and  our  enemies  are  routed.  Suppose 
Israel  had  stood  on  the  shore  and  cried,  "The 
Egyptian  power  is  broken  by  the  sons  of  Jacob. 
Israel  hath  cut  Rahab  and  wounded  the  dragon." 
Suppose  the  nation  had  boasted  itself,  it  would 
have  been  guilty  of  a  treasonable  attempt  upon 
God's  glory.  Lo  !  Israel  is  strong  enough  to  make 
the  dukes  of  Edom  tremble,  and  the  mighty  men 
of  Moab  to  be  afraid ;  but  she  must  not  sing  unto 


JUBILATE.  411 

her  own  honor.  "  Give  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye 
mighty,  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength. 
Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name." 
Let  this,  then,  be  our  song  when  we  are  weak,  and 
our  song  when  we  are  strong:  ''The  Lord  is  my 
strength." 

Note,  the  word  is  not  "The  Lord  gives  me 
strength,"  but  "The  Lord  is  my  strength!  "  How 
strong  is  a  believer  ?  I  say  it  with  reverence,  he 
is  as  strong  as  God — "The  Lord  is  my  strength." 
God,  the  infinite  Jehovah,  in  the  infinity  of  his 
nature,  is  our  strength. 

The  next  is,  "  The  Lord  is  my  song"  that  is  to 
say,  the  Lord  is  the  giver  of  our  songs;  he  breathes 
the  music  into  the  hearts  of  his  people;  he  is  the 
creator  of  their  joy.  The  Lord  is  also  the  subject 
of  their  songs:  they  sing  of  him  and  of  all  that  he 
does  on  their  behalf.  The  Lord  is,  moreover,  the 
object  of  their  song:  they  sing  unto  the  Lord. 
Their  praise  is  meant  for  him  alone.  They  do  not 
make  melody  for  human  ears,  but  unto  the  Lord. 
"The  Lord  is  my  song."  Then  I  ought  always  to 
sing:  and  if  I  sing  my  loudest,  I  can  never  reach 
the  height  of  this  great  argument,  nor  come  to  the 
end  of  it.  This  song  never  changes.  If  I  live  by 
faith  my  song  is  always  the  same,  for  "  The  Lord  is 
rny  song."  Our  song  unto  God  is  God  himself. 
He  alone  can  express  our  intensest  joy.  0  God, 
thou  art  my  -exceeding  joy.  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  thou  art  my  hymn  of  everlasting 
delight. 

"  The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  song,  and  he  is 
become  my  salvation."  The  Father  in  his  eternal 
purpose  is  my  salvation;  the  Son  in  his  complete 


412  JUBILA  TE. 

redemption  is  my  salvation ;  nay,  not  in  his  redemp 
tion  only,  but  in  his  life,  his  death,  his  resurrection, 
his  intercession,  his  second  coining,  he  has  become 
ray  salvation.  Arid  the  Holy  Ghost  indwelling  in 
me,  quickening  me,  instructing  me,  illuminating 
me,  perfecting  me,  keeping  me — he  is  become  my 
salvation.  Triune  God,  it  is  not  alone  that  thou 
dost  save  me,  but  thou  art  my  salvation.  I  look 
for  nothing  but  what  is  in  thee,  and  if  thou  givest 
thyself  to  me,  thou  hast  given  me  a  perfect  salva 
tion,  salvation  from  bondage,  salvation  from  world- 
liness,  salvation  from  death  and  hell,  salvation  into 
light,  and  liberty,  and  love,  and  joy,  salvation  that 
shall  culminate  in  eternal  glory.  A  full  salvation 
is  God  to  his  people. 

Next  "  He  is  my  God."  Perhaps  this  is  the  most 
joyous  note  of  all.  "  He  is  become  my  salvation" — 
this  is  very  sweet:  "He  is  my  God" — this  is  the 
sweetest  of  all.  "  He  is  my  God,"  I  choose  him  to 
be  my  God,  but  I  choose  him  of  necessity;  I  can  do 
no  other.  Who  else  can  be  my  God  ?  In  the 
Revised  Version  it  is,  "This  is  my  God,"  and  a 
very  proper  translation,  too;  as  if  Israel  saw  what 
God  did  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  exclaimed,  "This 
is  my  God."  This  God  of  justice,  this  God  of  ven 
geance  and  power,  is  my  God.  Beloved,  choose 
Jehovah  to  be  your  God ;  whom  else  can  you  choose  ? 
Let  your  hearts  cling  to  him. 

But  then  comes  the  added  word,  "He  is  my 
Fathers  God,"  that  is  to  say,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob;  a  God  by  covenant,  the  God 
who  has  given  himself  to  us  by  his  own  purpose 
and  promise,  and  therefore  is  our  God,  not  by  any 
right  of  merit  on  our  behalf,  but  solely  by  the  gift 


JUBILA  TE.  413 

of  his  free,  rich,  covenant  grace.  Let  us  praise  the 
triune  God  of  free  grace,  for  he  belongs  to  each 
one  of  us.  There  is  nothing  in  God  that  is  not 
mine;  there  is  no  high  and  lofty  attribute  that  is 
not  mine;  there  is  no  deep  and  dark  decree  that  is 
not  mine.  Thou  hast  neither  cross  nor  crown,  O 
Jesus,  which  is  not  mine.  He  hath  given  himself 
over  to  us  to  be  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Come, 
let  us  exult  in  his  name.  Have  you  lost  your  goods? 
You  have  not  lost  your  God.  Have  you  nothing 
on  earth?  Yet  can  you  say,  ''Whom  have  I  in 
heaven  but  thee?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that 
I  desire  beside  thee."  This  is  a  holy  portion,  a 
happy  portion,  a  heavenly  portion,  a  sure  portion, 
an  endless  portion,  a  portion  which  makes  us  feel 
rich  to  all  the  intents  of  bliss.  This  God  is  our 
God  for  ever  and  ever.  Let  us  praise  and  bless  his 
name. 

Note,  once  more,  that  as  Moses  said,  "  He  is  my 
strength,  my  song,  my  salvation,  my  God,"  now  he 
adds,  "  He  is  my  praise."  The  text  in  the  Old 
Version  is,  "  I  will  prepare  him  an  habitation." 
This  jars  a  little  on  my  ear;  it  rather  sinks  the 
majesty  of  the  infinite  for  Israel  to  think  so  soon 
of  Jehovah  as  One  for  whom  she  could  prepare  a 
habitation.  Building  a  habitation  was  rather  the 
idea  of  David  in  his  hour  of  decline,  than  of  Israel 
in  the  day  of  her  astonishment  and  victory.  The 
Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  is 
infinitely  superior  to  the  Revised  Version  of  the 
New  Testament,  renders  it:  "This  is  my  God:  I 
•will  praise  him."  The  fact  is,  there  are  two  words 
so  nearly  alike  that  it  is  hard  to  tell  which  is  cor 
rect — "  habitation"  or  "  praise."  Some  of  the  old- 


4H  JUBILATE. 

est  versions  of  all  have  it,  "  He  is  ray  praise."  I 
never  like  meddling  with  the  Old  Version,  how 
ever;  so  we  will  take  them  both,  and  make  sure 
that  we  do  not  miss  the  meaning.  Doth  not  the 
Lord  inhabit  the  praises  of  Israel?  We  will  pre 
pare  him  an  habitation  of  praise.  As  soon  as  Israel 
had  got  clear  of  the  Red  Sea,  clear  of  Egypt,  clear 
of  Pharaoh,  by  the  power  of  Jehovah,  then  she 
said,  "I  will  praise  him."  0  God,  it  shall  be  the 
business  of  thy  people  henceforth  to  praise  thee  ! 
We  have  no  bricks  to  make,  but  we  will  praise 
thee;  we  have  no  whips  to  fear,  but  we  will  praise 
thee  freely;  we  are  not  slaves  now,  but  we  are 
bound  to  thee  forever,  and  we  will  praise  thee. 
Then  the  people  seem  to  say,  "  We  will  praise  the 
Lord  by  regular  and  abiding  worship."  Inasmuch 
as  in  order  to  worship,  a  place  is  needed,  the 
thought  comes  up,  "  We  will  prepare  him  an 
habitation."  We  will  habitually  praise  our  God 
for  this  great  deliverance.  Let  us  build  our  God  a 
house  of  praise;  let  us  la}T  the  deep  foundations 
in  love,  set  up  the  pillars  with  gratitude,  and  roof 
in  the  whole  with  joyous  hallelujahs. 

The  thought  of  care  comes  before  me  in  the 
Authorized  Version:  "I  will  prepare  him  an  hab 
itation,"  as  if  Israel  said,  "  I  will  take  pains  to 
praise  God,  I  will  do  it  intelligently,  and  with  my 
best  powers;  he  shall  have  the  best  I  can  give  to 
him.  My  best  is  poor  compared  with  his  deserts, 
but  the  preparation  of  my  heart  shall  be  his;  I  will 
lay  myself  out  that  everything  shall  be  done 
decently  and  in  order  for  the  praise  of  this  most 
High  God;  I  will  prepare  him  an  habitation  of 
praise.  Does  it  not  look  as  if  Israel  said,  "  The 


JUBILATE.  415 

Lord  hath  come  hither  to  this  Red  Sea  to  fight  my 
enemies,  and  I  pray  that  he  may  abide  with  me, 
I  will  prepare  an  habitation  that  he  may  remain. 
Lord,  be  not  as  a  wayfaring  man  that  tarrieth  but 
for  a  night:  let  thy  presence  be  ever  with  me,  and 
I  will  praise  thee  always."  To  have  abiding  fellow 
ship  with  God  is  the  natural  desire  of  every  re 
deemed  soul.  O  brothers,  let  us  import  our  own 
desires  into  Israel's  words.  Let  us  say, 

««  Come,  dearest  Lord,  descend  and  dwell 

By  faith  and  love  in  every  breast; 
Then  shall  we  know,  and  taste,  and  feel 
The  joys  that  cannot  be  express'd." 

Never  leave  us,  nor  even  hide  thy  face  from  us,  0 
Lord,  our  God.  Dwell  in  us,  that  we  may  dwell  in 
thee.  Reside  in  these  bodies,  and  make  them  thy 
temples.  Abide  with  us.  Manifest  thyself  to  us 
as  thou  dost  not  to  the  world. 

The  verse  closes  with,  "  He  is  my  father's  God, 
and  I  will  exalt  him."  How  can  we  exalt  him  who 
is  already  high  above  all  thought?  We  cannot 
make  Gcd  really  greater,  but  we  can  make  him 
greater  in  the  estimation  of  our  fellow-men.  Let 
it  be  the  business  of  our  lives  to  magnify  him. 
Let  us  tell  to  our  friends  that  which  will  make  the 
Lord  appear  more  glorious  in  their  estimation. 
Let  us  lay  ourselves  out,  by  pen,  and  tongue,  and 
life,  to  make  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  more  honor 
able  among  those  who  surround  us.  Say,  "  1  must 
and  will  exalt  him.  Perhaps  I  have  groaned  too 
much  over  my  trials;  perhaps  I  have  been  too 
depressed  and  heavy  in  spirit;  but  from  this  day 
I  will  exalt  my  Lord,  and  sound  forth  his  praises. 


416  JUBILATE. 

If  he  will  permit  me,  I  will  make  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  the  one  object  of  my  being."  Come,  ye  young 
men  and  maidens,  ye  old  men  and  fathers,  let  us 
praise  the  Lord  on  the  high-sounding  cymbals,  and 
spend  the  rest  of  our  days  in  crying,  "  Sing  ye  unto 
the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously."  Amen. 


-—   - 


— • — -— 


