i 


z 


a 


FORG 


OTTE 


Me) 


Oe 


Ht 


BILL E, MACKIN ‘ie 
760 Clearview Drive hh es, a 


: Purchased from 
REGELS Book Store 

£ GRAND RAPIDS 6, MICHIGAN 

RELIGIOUS and THEOLOGICAL BOOKS - Bought and Sold 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


FORGOTTEN 
TROTHS 


BY 


SIR ROBERT ANDERSON, K.C.B., LL.D. 


London 
JAMES NISBET & CO., LIMITED 
22 BERNERS STREET, W. 
1913 


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co, 
At the Ballantyne Press, Edinburgh 


PREFACE 


To have written this book as a treatise, in hope 
of thus securing the attention of the sceptical 
pundits of a certain school, would have been mere 
waste of labour. For though the defence of the 
truth is, in these days, “a soldier’s battle,” these 
pundits resent the intrusion of “a mere layman” 
into a sphere which they claim as peculiarly 
their own. The book is intended, therefore, for 
Bible students and Christians in general. Hence 
its frequent repetitions ; for ordinary readers may 
open it here and there without any knowledge of 
its scheme and contents as a whole. 

Repetition of another kind demands an 
apology. No one who has written much on 
Scriptural subjects can avoid going over ground 
that he has already traversed ; and in the present 
work the author has freely used matter culled 
from his previous books. But upon its principal 
and most important theme he has not written 
hitherto, save in a merely incidental way. And 
his treatment of that theme in these pages is 
the outcome of earnest thought and study for 
more than half a century. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER I 
PAGE 


Introductory—A conversation with a Jewish Rabbi . i f 1 


CHAPTER II 


The seeming failure of God’s purposes for earth—A new Reve- 
lation—‘‘ Clear the decks ”—“ The times of the restitution of 
all things”—The Emmaus disciples—Prof. Tyndall quoted 
and answered—The kingdom deferred—Adolf Saphir on 
spiritualising the prophecies—Errors of the Patristic theo- 
logians—Dean Farrar quoted—The Feasts of the sacred 
Calendar—The nature and scope of the veneer inquiry— 
The meaning of “ mystery” . a s : 4 


CHAPTER III 


Lord Beaconsfield’s Life of Lord G. Bentinck—Why the Jews reject 
Christianity—The “‘ mystery” of Romans xi.—The olive tree 
parable—The destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans—The 
parallel between the Roman and Babylonian eras—The three 
judgments of the Servitude, the Captivity, and the Desolations 
—The murder of Stephen, and the call of the Apostle of the 
Gentiles—Paul’s mission to Israel—The Apostasy of the 
Jewish and Christian Church—‘* The and Catholic Church” 
of the Reformers . > ° i F : ; so 14 


CHAPTER IV 


“ The gospel of Rom. xvi. 25, 26, contrasted with that of Rom. i. 
1-3—The “ My Gospel” of Paul—Covenants and promises 
for Israel; grace for Gentiles—‘“ The Lord’s Day” in our 
criminal law—The Lord’s Nazareth sermon—The Indian 
Mutiny amnesty—The silence of God explained by the reign 
of grace—No public miracles in this age, save in the spiritual 
sphere : 


bo 
or 


vii 


Vili FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


CHAPTER V j 
PAGE 


The Bible and “old-fashioned orthodoxy ”—The Kingdom of 
Heaven preached as ‘‘at hand ”—Postponed on account of 
Judah’s sin—‘‘ The Higher Criticism” and miracles—‘‘ The 
mystery of God”—How and when it will end—The doom of 
the Professing Church—The ‘‘ mystery” of grace enthroned 
—‘‘The mystery of Christ”—The Body of Christ, and the 
Bride—Romish perversion of the truth of the Church . . 33 


CHAPTER VI 


The ground plan of the Old Testament: Dean Alford quoted— 
The scheme and purpose of the Bible—Abraham’s race as the 
Divine agents on earth—Their failure and ‘‘fall”—Their 
future restoration: a new dispensation—The crisis will be 
the Lord’s Coming (1 Thess. iv.; 1 Cor. xv.)—‘‘ The Second 
Advent”—The ‘‘Coming” of Zech. xiv. 4 and Acts i. 11— 
Is the hope of the Coming a delusion?—An opponent 
quoted—Hotchpotch exegesis . : : 3 5 - . 40 


CHAPTER VII 


The Lord’s Coming: importance of 1 Thess.—Paul’s ministry in 
Thessalonica—A Gentile Church—Paul’s ministry in Berea 
—When in Athens receives grave tidings from Thessalonica 
—Sends Timothy back—The nature of the trouble—The 
Epistle and the Lord’s message it conveyed—The teaching 
of 1 Cor, xv. 51-58; of 2 Cor. v. 1-8; of Phil. iii. 20, 21; of 

_ Titus ii. 11-13; and of 2 Peter ii. 14 z s ` 4 a: 


CHAPTER VIII 


The Lord’s Coming mentioned in the Epistles only incidentally 
—All were taught to expect it—The Coming is not ‘‘ the Day 
of the Lord” —The teaching of Matt. xxiv.—The Coming is 
before the Tribulation-—“ Times and Seasons ”—Matt. xxiv. 
and Dan, ix.—The Lord’s Coming as Saviour, and His Coming 
as Son of Man—Is the hope a delusion 7—‘‘ Until He come” 68 


CONTENTS ix 


CHAPTER IX 
PAGE 
“Surely I am coming quickly’’: why then the delay ?—The 
lesson from Israel's story—The delay explained, not by 2 Peter 
iii. 4-8 (passage explained), but by the Church’s evil history 
—In Apostolic times (Canon Bernard quoted)—In the days of 
the Fathers (Cyprian, Clement, Chrysostom, Jerome, Cyril of 
Alexandria, Salvian)—In the Middle Ages—The Reformation 
—Froude and Alford quoted—The sceptical Apostasy of to- 
day—tThe responsibility of Christians—“ Follow Me”—Indi- 
vidual faithfulness—Paul’s words to the Elders of Ephesus. 82 


CHAPTER X 


Why the Advent is delayed, further considered—Bengel’s 
dictum—* Till He come”—The ways divide—An appeal to 
Christians—Let us have an Hirenicon—Unscriptural phrases : 

“ Secret rapture,” “Coming for the Church,” &c.—Day- 
dreams—The lesson of the past—The true unity: Dr. Hatch 
quoted . 2 : à : r : : : i t0 


CHAPTER XI 


“The Hope” in 2 Timothy—Stories of two famous Rabbis— 
Will life on earth be forgotten?—The judgment-seat of 
Christ—Chrysostom’s homily on 2 Cor. v.—Verses 6-11 quoted 
and explained—The judgment, its character and purpose— 
God’s purpose in Redemption a . as 114 


CHAPTER XII 


« Old-fashioned orthodoxy” leaves the Bible a prey to the 
“ Higher Criticism”—The nature and purpose of the First 
Gospel—A Charles Simeon incident—A William Carey in- 
cident—The origin of the Church Missionary Society— 
Recapitulation: distinctively Christian truths—The setting 
aside of Israel, and its consequences—lIsrael’s restoration 
involves a change of dispensation—The crisis is the Coming 
of Christ—The judgment-seat of Christ—The truth of the 
Coming: difficulties and objections stated and answered . 124 


x FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


APPENDIX I 
PAGE 
The Eras of the Servitude, the Captivity, the Desolations, and 
the Seventy Weeks of Daniel . ` F 3 : r N Eri 
APPENDIX II 
Is the Church the Bride of Christ ? : : ; ‘ : . 141 
APPENDIX III 
Words used in the Greek Testament in relation to the Lord’s 
Coming . : é > : : ; : Í : . 144 
APPENDIX IV 
Erroneous and true exegesis of Philippians iii. 8-14 . x . 145 


APPENDIX V 


Is exclusion from the Millennial Kingdom the penalty for evil 
living on the part of Christians? . : : : 3 . 148 


SCRIPTURES EXPLAINED OR CITED . k s i : astal 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


CHAPTER I 


Tue lapse of time has not effaced from my 
memory the details of a conversation of many 
years ago with a liberal-minded and cultured 
Jewish Rabbi. He introduced himself by tell- 
ing me that he was a student of the New 
Testament, and that my friend, the then Chief 
Rabbi, had recommended one of my expository 
books to his attention. “ We regard Jesus as 
one of the greatest of our Rabbis,” was one of 
his opening remarks. And he added, “It was 
not he that founded Christianity, but your Paul.” 
I astonished him by replying that beneath his 
assertion there lay a truth which the theology 
of Christendom had let slip. For the words of 
the Lord Jesus’ were explicit: “Iam not sent 
but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel” ; 
* Salvation is of the Jews.” 

In this connection I cited also the Apostle’s 
words, that ‘Christ was a minister of the cir- 


1 Throughout our conversation he always spoke of Him as Jesus ; 
and I, as the Lord Jesus. 
A 


2 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


cumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the 
promises made unto the Fathers, and that the 
Gentiles might glorify God for His mercy.”’ 
And this I explained by reference to the Lord’s 
parable of the great supper. “ You were the 
invited guests,” I said, “for to you pertained 
the Fathers and the promises, whereas the Gen- 
tiles are beholden to uncovenanted mercy. But 
though by nature the waifs and strays of the 
highways and the streets, grace has given us a 
place of special favour and nearness to God.” 
The pleasant tenour of a prolonged conver- 
sation was interrupted at one point by an out- 
burst about “the persecutions and cruelties his 
nation had suffered from the Christian religion.” 
This evoked a no less indignant outburst on my 
part at his confounding the religion of Christen- 
dom with the Christianity of the New Testa- 
ment. I assured him that the best Christian 
theologians of our own time were free from the 
ignorance which in other days claimed for “the 
Christian Church” all the promises of the Heb- 
rew Scriptures, leaving nothing for Israel but 
the threatened judgments. And I exemplified 
my statement by quoting Dean Alford’s scathing 
words about the evil history and predicted doom 
of “the Christian Church.” °? I said that while in 


1 Rom. xv. 8. 
2 New Testament Commentary, Matt. xii. 48-45, See p. 97, post. 


I FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 3 


the past the Christians seem to have skipped the 
llth chapter of Romans, nowadays we studied 
it. We recognised, therefore, that the people 
of the Abrahamic covenant were “the natural 
branches” of the olive tree which symbolises the 
position of testimony and blessing upon earth, 
and that they would yet be restored to the place 
they had lost by unbelief; “for the gifts and 
calling of God are without repentance.” ? 

This is but an outline of a discussion which 
ended, as it had begun, in a most amicable tone 
and spirit, my companion repeatedly assuring 
me of the interest and surprise my words excited 
in his mind. 

But the questions raised and the truths in- 
volved are far too large and too important for 
treatment here in this incidental fashion; and I 
proceed to offer a more definite and systematic 
statement of them. 


1 Rom. xi. 13-29. 


CHAPTER II 


“ O THE depths of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are 
His judgments, and His ways past finding 
out!” ? Such was the burst of praise that rose 
from the heart of the inspired Apostle as he 
realised that the seeming failure of all that 
Hebrew prophets had foretold of blessing upon 
earth at the coming of Messiah had been made 
the occasion of a new revelation, which should 
lead up to the fulfilment of all their God-breathed 
words. 

“ The seeming failure,” I say advisedly. For 
though theologians have written “ The enlarge- 
ment of the Church” over such Scriptures as 
Isaiah liv., lx., lxvi., no sane and sensible person 
will pretend that there exists to-day, or has ever 
existed in the past, a condition of things on 
earth that could be accepted as the fulfilment 
of these prophecies. And to suppose that such 
a condition of things will result from the in- 
fluences at work in the present economy be- 
tokens sheer blindness and folly. The time has 


1 Rom, xi, 83, 
4 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 5 


come for plain speaking on this subject. “Clear 
the decks,” is the first order given when a war- 
ship prepares for action. And the vagaries of 
old-fashioned “orthodox” exegesis are top- 
hamper that grievously embarrasses the de- 
fence of Holy Scripture in these days when 
its Divine authority is so virulently attacked. 
As the inspired Apostle declared at Pentecost, 
“the times of the restitution of all things”— ` 
or, in other words, the times when all things 
will be put right—are the burden of Hebrew 
prophecy from Moses to Malachi,’ and the ful- 
filment of these prophecies awaits the return of 
Christ. 

The fact is plain to all who will use their 
brains that the condition of Christendom and 
of the world at large differs essentially from 
what is pourtrayed and promised in the visions 
of the Hebrew Seers. But these “holy men of 
God spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost,” 2? and no word of God can fail. No 
lapse of time affects it; for in His sight a 
thousand years are as a forgotten yesterday, 
or as a watch in the night.’ Thus it is that 
He would teach us that time is but a law 
of human thought, and that eternity is His 
domain. 

Therefore, while unbelief dismisses these 


1 Acts iii. 19 ff, 2 2 Pet. i. 21, 3 Ps, xc. 4, 


6 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


prophecies as old-world classics, the Christian 
accepts them as divine—the Word of God, 
“which liveth and abideth for ever.” And 
this being so, chronology has no bearing on 
the vital question here at issue. For we are 
“not ignorant of this one thing, that one day 
is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day.”! “To-day is the 
third day since these things were done,” was 
the despairing lament of the disciples on the 
road to Emmaus; but their unbelief brought 
upon them the Lord’s rebuke, “O fools, and 
slow of heart to believe all that the prophets 
have spoken.” And when the sceptical pundits 
would shake our faith by reminding us that 
the prophets’ words are still unfulfilled after 
the lapse of well-nigh three thousand years, 
we exclaim, “Three thousand years! then to- 
day is the third day since these things were 
spoken!” 

Spiritual discernment and ordinary intelli- 
gence are needed in the study of Holy 
Scripture. Spirituality is the prime essential, 
for spiritual truths are spiritually discerned ; 
but common sense, to use the popular phrase, 
will generally save us from the follies of false 
exegesis. And false exegesis, I repeat, affords 
a vantage-ground for sceptical attacks on Serip- 


1 2 Pet, iii. 8, 


II FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 7 


ture. To give an illustration of this, extremely 
apt in the circumstances of the day, I will 
quote a passage from Professor Tyndall’s famous 
address on “Science and Man.” Referring to 
the “ Angels’ Song,” he exclaimed, “Look to 
the East at the present moment, as a comment 
on the promise of peace on earth and good will 
toward men. The promise is a dream ruined 
by the experience of eighteen centuries.” The 
answer to this taunt is full and clear. The 
great birth in Bethlehem heralded the fulfil- 
ment of all that God had promised of blessing 
to the world. “The times of the restitution 
of all things,” to quote the Apostle Peter’s 
words again, were to come with the advent of 
Christ. And now, “the Coming One,” had 
come. Why then were not the promised 
blessings realised? Why, but because of His 
rejection. ‘His own received Him not,” and 
“the world knew Him not.” The Christ was 
crucified on Calvary. And when the Apostles 
were divinely commissioned to proclaim to His 
murderers that a national repentance would 
bring Him back to earth, with the fulfilment 
of every blessing of which their prophets spoke, 
the response made by that guilty people was 
to persecute the ministers of this great recon- 
ciliation and hound them to death. But it may 
be asked, Has the sin of man changed the pur- 


8 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


| poses of God? Most assuredly not. But, on 
| account of that sin, the fulfilment of the Divine 
purposes has been postponed. 

This then is the answer which Scripture gives 
to the sceptic’s taunt. But very different are 
the conflicting answers which “old-fashioned 
orthodoxy” offers. For some would have us 
believe that “the millennium” will result from 
the preaching of the Gospel in the present dis- 
pensation. And by others we are told that all 
we have to look for is “the end of the world,” 
when the Lord will come to take His people 
to Himself, and judgment fire will engulf this 
sin-cursed earth. ‘The former view was popular 
in the early days of the nineteenth-century 
revival; but in the present state of Christendom 
in general, and of the Churches of the Refor- 
mation in particular, anyone who clings to it 
to-day must be either a mystic ora fossil! And 
if the other view be accepted, the closing words 
of the 11th of Romans must be dismissed as the 

- wildest rhapsody; for the unsearchable judg- 
ments of Divine wisdom and knowledge are thus 
made to find their realisation in a pandemonium 
to be followed by a bonfire ! 

This ‘“spiritualising,” as it is called, of the 
Hebrew Scriptures has given the Jew a fair 
ground for rejecting the Christian’s appeal to 
the Messianic prophecies. And thus, as Adolf 


II FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 9 


Saphir says with sorrow, “It is out of the ` 
arsenal of the orthodox that the weapons have 
been taken with which the very fundamental 
truths of the Gospel have been assailed.” And 
he goes on to show how “this spiritualistic 
interpretation paved the way for Rationalism 
and Neology.” 

Let us then be done with it once for all; and 
rejecting absolutely the popular canon of exe- 
gesis, that Holy Scripture never says what it 
means, and never means what it says, let us 
learn with humility and reverence to accept all 
the Divine words at their face value. When the 
Lord declared that not a jot or tittle of the law 
shall fail of its fulfilment, He was speaking, not 
of the decalogue, but, as the context indicates, 
of the Hebrew Scriptures as a whole. Re- 
membering, then, that these Scriptures are the 
Word of Him with whom both the past and the 
future are a living present, let us read them with 
the settled conviction that every promise, and 
every prophecy, relating to earth and the earthly 
people must be fulfilled as definitely as were the 
seemingly unbelievable prophecies and promises 
about the birth and death of Christ. 

But on this subject our theology, so far from 
reflecting “the wisdom and knowledge of God,” 
partakes of the ignorance and the errors of the 
Patristic theologians. Plain words, I repeat, 


10 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


are needed here. For the writings of the Latin 
Fathers afford a vantage-ground both for Romish 
attacks upon the citadel of Divine truth, and 
for the insidious efforts of German scepticism 
to undermine its very foundations. It is note- 
worthy that though the writers of the New 
Testament, one and all, were men who, like 
Timothy, had known the Hebrew Scriptures 
from infancy,’ the Patristic theologians were 
converts from Paganism. And having regard 
to their comparative want of acquaintance with 
the Old Testament, it is not strange, perhaps, 
that in the then condition of the Jewish people, 
crushed apparently beyond hope of recovery by 
the judgments that had overwhelmed them, the 
belief prevailed that God had “cast away His 
people whom He foreknew.” But it is both 
strange and sad that such a belief should still 
survive in these enlightened days of ours. 

In proof that it does survive, appeal might be 
made to many a standard work; but for my 
present purpose it will suffice to quote the 
following sentence from the prolific pen of a 
writer of the highest repute as a popular theo- 
logian: “' The divine and steady light of his- 
tory first made clear to the Church that our 
Lord’s prophetic warnings as to His return 


1 Tt is a mere tradition that would exclude the Evangelist Luke 
from this category, and the facts outweigh the tradition, 


II FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 11 


applied primarily to the close of the Jewish dis- 
pensation, and the winding up of all the past, 
and the inauguration of the last great won of 
God's dealings with mankind.” } 

If we are to recover truth which the Church, 
in its incipient apostasy, lost through following 
the human light of history, we must seek it 
by “the Divine and steady light” of Holy 
Writ. And that light will make clear to us 
that, like many another Scripture, the promise 
to Abraham has a twofold aspect. It pointed 
to Christ and the redemption of Calvary ; but it 
still awaits its secondary fulfilment through the 
agency of the covenant people. “In thy seed 
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” ? 
The spiritually intelligent Bible student accepts 
that promise as the Word of the Lord, that 
endureth for ever, and he knows that it will be 
literally fulfilled. And he knows also, that this 
Christian dispensation is not “the last great 
zon of God’s dealings with mankind,” but 
rather a beginning of what, in His unsearchable 
counsels, He has in store for the blessing of this 
sin-blighted world. 

That glorious vista of future blessing, which 

1 Dean Farrar’s Life and Work of St. Paul, vol. i. p. 598, The 
italics are mine. I shall have occasion to refer to this passage again 
with reference to the truth of the Coming. 


2 Gen, xxii. 18. That it has a secondary meaning is clearly in- 
dicated by the 17th verse, 


12 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


filled so large a place in the visions of the 
Hebrew Seers, was but the unfolding of the 
prophecy of the sacred calendar. For the Pass- 
over is only the first of the great Festivals 
which typify the harvest of redemption. This 
present dispensation with its sheaf of the first- 
fruits,! the true, the heavenly Church, is to be 
followed by the Feast of Pentecost, when Israel 
reunited—the two wave loaves of the typical 
ritual—will be restored to Divine favour. And 
beyond these spring-time festivals there comes 
the harvest-home of redemption upon earth, in 
the fulfilment of the great Feast of Tabernacles, 
when unnumbered multitudes of the saved shall 
know and serve the Lord. 

This is no “ cunningly devised fable,” no mere 
dream of a visionary; it is a summary of what 
Scripture plainly teaches. And, rejecting the 
unworthy figment that earth is merely a re- 
cruiting-ground for heaven, to be given up to 
fire when the Church has been safely garnered, 
-faith looks out with joy upon this glorious vista 
of the future, when the Abrahamic promise 
shall receive complete fulfilment, and Christ 
“shall see of the travail of His soul, and shall 
be satisfied.” 

It is in this spirit and on these principles that 


1 In its highest fulfilment the sheaf of the first-fruits is Christ 
personally; but dispensationally it typifies the redeemed of this 
Christian age, “a kind of first-fruits of His creatures” (James i. 18). 


II FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 13 


the present inquiry shall proceed. And the 
nature and scope of the inquiry may be stated 
thus: What light does Scripture throw upon 
the abnormal condition of things on earth during 
this age, when “the people of the covenant” 
are in rejection? And what are the distinctive 
truths of Christianity, or, in other words, the 
special “‘mystery” truths of the New Testa- 
ment revelation ? 

As this word “ mystery ” will occur again and 
again in the following pages, it may be well to 
explain that it is here employed in its Scriptural 
acceptation, as signifying “not a thing unintel- 
ligible, but what lies hidden and secret till made 
known by the revelation of God.”* Oras Dr. 
Sanday gives it, “ something which up to the 
time of the Apostles had remained secret, but 
had then been made known by Divine interven- 
tion.” 


1 These words are quoted from Dr. Bloomfield’s Greek Testament. 
“ Mysteries of the faith” he again defines as ‘‘ certain verities hitherto 
quite unknown, and which could be derived from no other source but 
a Divine revelation.” 


CHAPTER III 


In Lord Beaconsfield’s Life of Lord George 
Bentinck there is a pathetically interesting 
chapter about the treatment meted out to the 
Jews by Christendom. He attributes their per- 
sistent rejection of Christianity to the fact that 
it was by a campaign of persecution and outrage 
that “the Christian religion” sought to force 
itself upon their acceptance. His own Jewish 
ancestors, as we know, were driven out of Spain 
by the Inquisition. 

“Ts it wonderful, therefore,” he might well 
ask, “that a great portion of the Jewish race 
should not believe in the most important por- 
tion of the Jewish religion?” For thus he 
correctly describes the atonement of Calvary. 
‘The “orthodox” figment that Christ came to 
found a new religion was in effect the gravamen 
of the charge on which the Apostle Paul was 
arraigned by his Jewish persecutors. For 
preaching a new religion was an offence against 
Roman law. And the Apostle’s defence was an 
emphatic repudiation of that charge. In his 
ministry among them, he declared, he taught 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 15 


“nothing but what the prophets and Moses did 
say should come.” ! 

Blessing for Gentiles is not a New Testa- 
ment truth. It was assured by the promise to 
Abraham, and explicitly foretold in Hebrew 
prophecy. But that “the people of the cove- 
nant” should lose nationally the privileged 
position of earthly testimony is a New Testa- 
ment “‘mystery,”* albeit Christians in general 
regard it as a matter of course. The 11th 
chapter of Romans teaches explicitly that the 
present economy is abnormal and temporary. 
For the olive tree is not the symbolism of a 
heavenly calling, but of the place of earthly 
testimony. And the “natural branches” of 
the olive tree are the covenant people. 

But were not the natural branches broken 
off? Such is the false belief of Christendom 
religion. The teaching of Scripture is that 
“ some of the branches” were broken off, and 
that, “contrary to nature,” wild olive branches 
(ie. Gentiles) have been “grafted in among 
them.” But the root of the olive remains, 
and the root is the people of the Abrahamic 
covenant.? For “to them pertaineth the cove- 
nants.” 4 

This cannot be evaded by the plea that, when 


1 Acts xxvi. 22; and see ver. 23. 
2 Rom. xi. 25. See p. 13, ante. 2 Rom. xi. 17-24. 
t Rom. ix. 4. Mark the present tense. 


16 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


the Epistle to the Romans was written, the 
“ Pentecostal Dispensation” was still current, 
and therefore a place of repentance was still 
open to the Jews. For the very same principle 
obtains with reference to the heavenly Church, 
the full revelation of which is found in “the 
Captivity Epistles.” Gentile Christians seem to 
regard the Church, the Body of Christ, as theirs 
in a peculiar sense, whereas in Eph. iii. 6 
the Apostle represents it as a signal proof of 
Divine grace “that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs 
(with Israelites) and fellow-members of the 
body.” 

Appealing to the Saviour’s intercessory prayer 
upon the Cross as securing Divine forgiveness 
for Israel for crucifying the Messiah, Lord 
Beaconsfield rightly challenges the received 
belief that the destruction of Jerusalem was a 
judgment for that greatest of all human sins. 
And yet that it was a Divine judgment is 
unquestionable. And if not for the crucifixion, 
how can it be accounted for? Here Lord 
Beaconsfield entirely misses the significance of 
the facts, and the nature of the question to 
which the facts give rise. It is a question, 
moreover, of exceptional interest, and of great 
importance in relation to the present inquiry. 
And a clew to the solution of it will be found in 
the events of the Babylonian era. 


II FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 17 


Because of national apostasy, the Divine 
judgment of the Servitude to Babylon fell upon 
Judah in the third year of the reign of King 
Jehoiakim. But owing to their continued 
impenitence, the severer judgment of the 
“Captivity” followed, nine years after the 
“ Servitude ” began. Even this, however, failed 
to move them; and in the seventeenth year of 
the “Servitude,” their persistent obduracy 
brought on them the third, and far more 
terrible, judgment of the seventy years’ “ Deso- 
lations.” That era began on the day when, 
for the third time, the Babylonian army invested 
Jerusalem; and the capture and burning of the 
city followed. 

A national repentance after the “ Servitude” 
began would not have cancelled that judgment. 
Nor would a repentance after the people were 
carried into captivity have brought them back 
to their land. But all further chastisement 
would have been averted ; and when the seventy 
years of the Servitude ended, and the decree of 
Cyrus permitted their return, they would have 
found their city intact and the holy temple still 
standing. 

Now mark the parallel between all this and 
the events of the Apostolic age. The proto- 
martyr Stephen was the messenger sent after 


the banished king to say, “We will not have 
B 


18 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


this man to reign over us.” His murder was 
the nation’s response to the Pentecostal promise 
that a national repentance would bring Christ 
back to them. But repentance even after that 
murder, though it would not have restored them 
to the privileged position which they had for- 
feited, would have saved them from further 
punishment. 

And the parallel may be carried further still. 
For forty years before the city was captured and 
burned by Nebuchadnezzar, the prophet’s warn- 
ing voice was never silent in their midst.* So 
for forty years before Jerusalem was taken and 
destroyed by Titus, the gospel was preached 
unceasingly in every place where Hebrews con- 
gregated. 

During all the forty years of Jeremiah’s 
ministry, as the chronicler records, God in mercy 
waited, “because He had compassion on His 
people and on His dwelling place. But they 
mocked the messengers of God and despised 
His words, and misused His prophets, until the 
wrath of the Lord arose against His people, till 
there was no remedy.”? ‘These words might 
have been repeated without the slightest varia- 
tion with reference to the forty years that 


1 Jeremiah prophesied from the thirteenth year of Josiah (627 B.c.) 
until the fall of Jerusalem in the eleventh year of Zedekiah (587 B.c.), 
See Jer. i, 2, 3. 

2 2 Chron, xxxvi, 15, 16, 


III FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 19 


elapsed between the ministry of Christ and the 
time of that awful judgment, when Jerusalem 
was sacked and burned by the Roman army. 

“ They misused His prophets.” The murder 
of Stephen was due to no sudden burst of 
passion; and their Roman governors had no 
share in it. It was the execution of a judicial 
sentence passed by the great Council of the 
nation. Not even the Crucifixion itself was 
more unequivocally the act of “the Common- 
wealth of Israel”; and the inspired narrative 
which records it marks its deep significance by 
recording as its sequel the call of the Apostle of 
the Gentiles. 

But God is “abundant in mercy,” and though 
Israel thus forfeited the national blessing which 
a national repentance would have brought them, 
the Apostle of the Gentiles was charged with a 
special mission to the Jews of the dispersion ;* 
and in every place his first appeal was to the 
synagogue. And can we doubt that if his testi- 
mony had been accepted, God, who would have 
spared Sodom for the sake of even ten righteous, 
would have certainly spared Jerusalem? But 
in all the wide circuit of the Apostle’s ministry, 
there was not a single provincial Sanhedrim or 


1 The Apostle Paul’s commission to the Jews is generally over- 
looked: “the people and the Gentiles, unto whom I send thee” 
(Acts xxvi. 17). ‘To both the people and the Gentiles; not the 
Gentiles only.” Alford in loco, 


20 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


local synagogue that accepted the proffered 
mercy. Divine forbearance met with no re- 
sponse. “There was no remedy.” So at last 
the judgment fell. Amid circumstances of un- 
paralleled horror Jerusalem was destroyed, and 
the Jews were driven out as homeless wanderers 
from the land of their inheritance. 

Now but for that judgment the Jews would 
have remained in a position akin to that assigned 
to them in the Servitude to Babylon—a nation 
in vassalage to Gentile sovereignty, but with 
their own land and their own city. And it is a 
fact of extreme importance that this was their 
actual condition when the Epistle to the Romans 
was written. But ignoring all this, the 11th 
chapter of that Epistle, which ought to be read 
in the clear light of Holy Scripture, came to be 
misread in the dim and discoloured light of 
human inferences from human history. The 
destruction of Jerusalem was supposed to be the 
end of Jewish hopes and Jewish story. And as 
Romans was written prior to the time of that 
disaster, the 11th chapter of the Epistle was 
taken as cancelled; and Old Testament pro- 
phecy relating to the future glory of Israel 
was “ spiritualised ” to mean the present glory 
of “the Church.” 

And this explains a fact which Protestantism 
struggles to evade, namely, that the writings of 


III FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 21 


the Fathers laid the foundations on which the 
fabric of the apostasy of Christendom was reared. 
For the figment that “God has cast away His 
people whom He foreknew,” t and therefore that 
the present economy is the fulfilment of Hebrew ; 
prophecy and the realisation of Divine purposes 
for earth, is in the warp and woof of the theology 
of Christendom. Hence the baneful supersti- 
tions about “the Christian Church” which are 
the secret of Rome’s aggressive influence. There 
is never a Protestant drawn into that fold who 
is not the dupe of these superstitions. And 
even evangelical and spiritual Christians are 
corrupted by them; for they are so congenial 
to human nature that the exposure of them, not 
only by the Reformers, but by eminent divines 
of our own day, is generally ignored. 

Blessing for Gentiles, I repeat, is not a New 
-Testament revelation. Witness the words of 
the promise to Abraham and, as a Divine com- 
mentary upon that promise, the inspired prayer 
at the dedication of the Temple: ‘ Moreover 
concerning the stranger, which is not of Thy 
people Israel, but is come from a far country for 

1 The A.V. makes the 15th verse of Rom. xi. contradict verse 2, where 
a different Greek word is used. Andthe R.V. is quite as unsatisfactory, 
for it uses a stronger phrase in ver. 15 than in ver. 2. (See The Oxford 
English Dictionary.) A garment befouled with filth is “ thrown away,” 


but a garment that impedes our movements is ‘‘ thrown off.” ‘The word 
used in ver. 15 occurs in its verbal form in this very sense in Mark 


x. 50. 


22 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


Thy great name’s sake, and Thy mighty hand, 
and Thy stretched out arm; if they come and 
pray in this house; then hear Thou from the 
heavens, even from Thy dwelling place, and do 
according to all that the stranger calleth to Thee 
for; that all the people of the earth may know 
Thy name, and fear Thee.” * 

But “the Jewish Church” was false to its 
trust, though not so grossly false as “ the Christian 
Church” has proved. For while the Jew treated 
the Gentile as a pariah, Christendom has regarded 
Jews as enemies to be shunned, if not as vermin 
to be exterminated. Hence the fact that so few 
Gentiles came within the blessing during the 
old economy, and that, during the new, so few 
Jews have accepted Christ. “ The name of God 
is blasphemed among the Gentiles through 
you”? was the scathing charge brought against 
“the Jewish Church” in its apostasy, and it is 
due to the deeper apostasy of “the Christian 
Church ” that the name of Christ is blasphemed 
among the Jews. 

But in modern times British Christianity has 
done not a little to clear itself from this reproach. 
And the question is germane to the present 
inquiry only in so far as it bears upon the 
character of the professing Church onearth. For 


1 2 Chron. vi. 32, 33. Of. Isa. lvi. 8-7. 
2 Rom, ii, 24. 


III FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 23 


Christian thought, even among Evangelicals, is 
leavened with the root error of the Roman 
Apostasy, namely, the confounding the true and 
heavenly Church, the Body of Christ, with “the 
Christian Church” on earth, or, to adopt Dean 
Alford’s synonym for it, “the outward frame of 
so-called Christendom.” * 

It isa sad proof that we have lapsed from the’ 
teaching of Scripture and the principles of the 
Reformation. With the Reformers “the Holy 
Catholic Church” was not an unholy alliance 
with all Christendom, but “the whole congrega- 
tion of Christian people dispersed throughout 
the whole world.” * Thus it was that they 
sought to break the entail of hideous guilt 
attaching to the historic Church. They had 
drunk deep of the spirit of the Apostle’s words 
to the Ephesian elders in days of incipient 
apostasy: “I commend you to God, and to the 
word of His grace, which is able to build you up, 
and to give you an inheritance among all them 
which are sanctified.” * Let us then seek to 
follow their noble example; and clearing our 
minds of the prevalent superstitions about the 
Church on earth, let us take our stand with 


1 See p. 97, post. 

2 55th Canon of the Convention of 1603. 

3 Acts xx. 32. It is noteworthy that the Epistles to the Thessalonians, 
Corinthians, and Galatians are addressed to churches, whereas his 
Epistles after this date—Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians—are ad- 
dressed to “‘ the saints” in those places. 


24 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


them upon Holy Scripture and the faithfulness 
of God. 

The next branch of our inquiry relates to other 
“mystery” ! truths of the New ‘Testament 
revelation, which, no less than that of the present 
phase of the olive tree, are well-nigh forgotten. 
And the mystery of grace enthroned in heaven 
claims priority of notice. 


1 See p. 13, ante. 


CHAPTER IV 


Ir is extraordinary that any student of Scrip- 
ture can miss the clearly-marked difference 
between the gospel of the opening clause of 
the Epistle to the Romans, and the gospel 
specified in the characteristically “ Pauline” 
postscript at its close. 

“ Sojourners from Rome, both Jews and prose- 
lytes,” were among the multitudes who heard 
the Divine amnesty proclaimed at Pentecost. 
And it was “to Jews only” that in those early 
days the word of that gospel was preached.! In 
Rome therefore, as elsewhere, Jews and prose- 
lytes constituted the nucleus and rallying centre 
of the Church. And we read the Epistle to 
the Romans amiss, if we fail to recognise what 
an important place its teaching accords to those 
Hebrew Christians. The word which had won 
them to Christ was that “ gospel of God which 
He had promised afore by His prophets in the 
Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son who was 
born of the seed of David.” Language could 
not more definitely indicate that it was the 


1 Acts xi, 19. 
25 


26 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


fulfilment of the hope of every true Israelite. 
Hence his words to the “Chief of the Jews” 
in Rome: “ For the hope of Israel I am bound 
with this chain.”1 And, as already noticed, his 
answer to the charge on which he was impri- 
soned was that his preaching to the Jews was 
based entirely on the Law and the Prophets.’ 

Such, then, was the burden of his ministry to 
his own people, a ministry he shared with all 
his brethren. But to Gentiles he preached a 
gospel which he had received by special reve- 
lation. And the specific purpose of his third 
visit to Jerusalem was to communicate that 
gospel to the other Apostles.* In writing to 
Timothy he speaks of it as “the gospel of the 
glory of the blessed God, which was committed 
to my trust.” It was the precious deposit which, 
on the eve of his martyrdom, he handed back, 
as it were, to the God who had entrusted it 
to him.* And this is the “ My gospel,” of the 
postscript to his Epistle to the Romans.° 

Here are his words: “Now to Him that 
is able to stablish you according to my gospel, 
even the preaching of Jesus Christ according 
to a revelation of a mystery kept in silence 


1 Acts xxviii. 20. 2 Acts xxvi. 22. See p. 14, ante. 

3 Gal. ii. 2. 4 2 Tim. i. 12 (R.V. marg.). 

5 Rom, xvi. 25, 26. The same phrase, ‘‘ My gospel,” occurs also in 
ch, ii. 16. How can anyone imagine that the Apostle would call the 
gospel his, save in the sense that it was the subject of a special revela- 
tion to himself ! 


IV FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 27 


through times eternal, but now manifested, and 
by prophetic writings according to the com- 
mandment of the Eternal God made known 
to all the nations unto obedience of faith” (or 
“ obedience to the faith ”).! 

It was in grace that God made promise to 
Abraham and granted him the covenant. But 
on the faithfulness of God it is that we rely to 
keep His promise and to fulfil His covenant. 
It is of his “kinsmen according to the flesh” 
that the Apostle speaks in the opening words 
of Romans ix. And of them, the Israelites, 
he says, “ Whose is the adoption and the glory, 
and the covenants and the giving of the law, 
and the service of God and the promises; whose 
are the fathers, and of whom, as concerning the 
flesh, Christ came.” And it was as “sons of 
the covenant” that the gospel was preached to 
them at Pentecost.2, “The promise is to you 

1 The first kai in this sentence is obviously epexegetic. If read, 
otherwise, as in our English versions, the Apostle is made to dis- 
tinguish between the gospel of Christ and a gospel of his own, And 
“ the Scriptures of the Prophets” is a mistranslation that reduces the 
Apostle’s words to an absurdity. For he is thus made to say that this 
“ mystery ” gospel was kept secret in all the past, and yet that it was 
plainly taught in the Old Testament Scriptures, The Greek is simple 
and clear. In ch.i. 2,the words are: “ His prophets in holy writings” 
(i.e. the Old Testament Scriptures). In ch. xvi. 25, 26, the words 
are: “prophetic writings” (the inspired Scriptures of the New 
Testament). A prophet is ‘‘one who, moved by the Spirit of God, 
declares to men what he has received by inspiration” (Grimm’s 
Lexicon), And therefore “ prophetic” is equivalent to inspired ; the 


element of foretelling the future is merely incidental. 
2 Acts iii. 25. 


28 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


and to your children,” the Apostle testified ;* 
for to them belonged the gospel of the cove- 
nant. But to the Gentiles, who were “ strangers 
from the covenants of promise,” ? was preached 
the gospel of grace—the gospel of the “ mystery ” 
truth, that grace was “reigning through right- 
eousness unto eternal life.” 

The covenants and promises to the Patriarchs 
neither exhausted nor limited the grace of God 
to men. And though “grace came by Jesus 
Christ,” it was restrained during all His ministry 
on earth. ‘I have a baptism to be baptized with 
(He exclaimed), and how am I straitened till 
it be accomplished.” Not till Divine righteous- 
ness was manifested in the death and resurrec- 
tion of Christ, could Divine grace be fully and 
openly revealed. ‘That there was forgiveness for 
the earnest seeker after God is not a distinc- 
tively Christian truth at all. It was always so. 
But the revelation of grace enthroned far tran- 
scends all that earlier ages knew. A parable 
may explain what that revelation means. ‘ The 
Lord’s day” è? is one of our national institutions 
(for England is still a Christian country). And 


1 Acts ii. 39. It is a gratifying proof of increasing light that so 
many modern expositors explain the words that follow (‘‘and to all 
that are afar off ”) as referring to the Jews of the dispersion. To say 
that the promise was to Gentiles is utterly opposed to Scripture. (See 
e.g. Rom, ix. 4; xv. 8; Eph. ii, 12; &c., &c.) It is certain, more- 
over, that not one of Peter’s audience would put such a meaning on 
his words. 

2 ph. ii. 12. 3 Sunday is thus designated in our older statutes, 


IV FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 29 


under English law that day is a day of grace, on 
which no court of justice can deal with criminals, 
Let their crimes be never so heinous, they 
cannot even be arraigned until the day of grace 
is over. And the present age is God’s great day 
of grace; “He knoweth how. . . to reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be 
punished.” 1 

We have a Divine commentary upon this 
from the lips of Christ Himself, when, on that 
Sabbath day in the synagogue of Nazareth, He 
stood up to read the 61st chapter of Isaiah, and 
stopped in the middle of its opening sentence. 
The record tells us that having uttered the 
words “ He sent me . . . to preach the accept- 
able year of the Lord,” He closed the book and 
sat down. And then, in reply to the wondering 
looks of all the hearers, “ He began to say unto 
them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in 
your ears.”? “ And the day of vengeance of our 
God” are the words that follow without break 
or pause, but He left those words unread. For 
till “the acceptable year of the Lord” has run 
its predestined course, the coming of “that 
great and terrible day of the Lord ” is, through 
Divine longsuffering, delayed. In view of the 
rejection and death of the Son of God, the 
only possible alternatives were the doom of 


1 2 Pet, ii. 9. 2 Luke iv, 16-21, 


30 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


Sodom or the mercy of the gospel; and mercy 
triumphed. 

The Indian Mutiny was followed by an 
amnesty. And so long as that amnesty re- 
mained in force, the honour of the Sovereign 
and Government of Britain was pledged to the 
rebels that on laying down their arms they would 
receive a pardon, instead of having their treason- 
able acts imputed to them. And during this 
day of grace, God is “not imputing unto men 
their trespasses.” Nay, more than this—for 
Divine grace surpasses every human parallel— 
He is pleading with them to accept the gospel 
amnesty. These amazing truths are well-nigh 
unbelievable. And yet behind them lies another 
truth that is still more wonderful: the Divine 
prerogative of judgment has been delegated 
without reserve or limit to the Lord Jesus 
Christ; and He is now “exalted to be a 
Saviour.” 

And this is the solution of the crowning 
wonder of a silent heaven. God is silent be- 
cause the gospel of His grace is His last word of 
mercy, and when again He breaks the silence it 
must be in wrath. The moral government of 
the world is not in abeyance, and men reap what 
they sow; but all direct punitive action against 
sin awaits the day of judgment. For in virtue 
of the Cross of Christ the throne of God has 


o FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 31 


become a throne of grace. And the silence of 
heaven will be unbroken until the Lord Jesus 
passes to the throne of judgment. 

In the ages before Christ came, men may well 
have craved for public proofs of the action of a 
personal God. But in the ministry and death 
and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, God 
has so plainly manifested, not only His power, 
but His goodness and love-toward-man, that to 
grant evidential miracles, now, would be an 
acknowledgment that questions which have 
been for ever settled are still open. Moreover, 
miracles of another kind abound. For in recent 
years the gospel has achieved triumphs in 
heathendom, which transcend anything recorded 
in the Acts of the Apostles. And infidelity is 
thus confronted by surer proofs of the presence 
and power of God than any miracle in the 
natural sphere could offer. For miracles in the 
natural sphere are not necessarily a proof of 
Divine action: they are the lure by which 
some of the demon cults of the present day 
ensnare their dupes; and the time may 
be near when such signs and wonders will 
abound. 

While therefore we dare not limit what God 
may do in response to individual faith—for 
there is a gift of faith—to claim a sign is to 
tempt God, and to leave ourselves open to be 


32 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


deceived by the seducing spirits of these last 
days. 

This truth of grace enthroned may be called 
the basal truth of the distinctively Christian 
revelation. And yet, in common with certain 
other truths of that revelation, it was lost in the 
post-apostolic age. The writings of the Patristic 
theologians will be searched in vain for a clear 
enunciation of it. And though it flashed out 
like April sunshine at the Reformation, it soon 
disappeared again. And, needless to say, the 
Romish system is a flagrant and open denial 
of it. 

1 These last clauses are taken from the Preface to the ninth edition 


of The Silence of God, a book in which I have sought to unfold the 
forgotten truth of ‘‘the mystery of God.” (See p. 35, post.) 


CHAPTER V 


Tue Bible has suffered more from Christian 
exponents than from infidel assailants. The 
prophets of Israel, “ moved by the Holy Spirit,” 
spoke with united voice of a time when right- 
eousness and peace would triumph and rule upon 
the earth; but “old-fashioned orthodoxy” in- 
terpreted their glowing periods much as an 
American crowd interprets the rhodomontade 
of political stump orators at election times! 
And thus the sublime words of the Hebrew 
Scriptures are supposed to find their fulfilment 
in the history of Christendom. They are read 
as referring to us and to our own age. And 
after us, the deluge! What wonder is it that 
sensible men of the world are sceptical both 
about the past predictions and the coming 
deluge! On this system of exegesis, for ex- 
ample, the sublime flights of Isaiah, when re- 
duced to sober prose, find their realisation— 
I repeat the phrase—in a pandemonium and a 
bonfire! This nightmare system of interpreting 
Holy Scripture makes the sacred pages seem to 


unbelief a hopeless maze of mysticism. 
33 c 


34 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


As we open the New Testament narrative we 
read that “ In those days came John the Baptist, 
preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and saying, 
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” 
And “ when John was cast into prison,” the Lord 
Himself took up this same testimony, ‘‘ Repent, 
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.”* Now 
the only meaning these words can bear, is that 
the time was at hand when heaven would rule 
upon earth,” a hope which, as the inspired 
Apostle declared at Pentecost, was the burden 
of Hebrew prophecy. But, as we have seen,’ the 
fulfilment of that hope has been postponed owing 
to the apostasy and sin of the Covenant people. 
And, because of its postponement, it has dropped 
out of the creed of Christendom; albeit Christ- 
endom, million-mouthed, daily recites the 
words the Lord Himself has given us with 
which to pray for its fulfilment—*“ Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven.” With the vast majority of Christians 
that prayer is merely a pious incantation; but 
the words are His own, and they shall be realised 
to the full. And yet, “in our covert atheism ” 
—to borrow a phrase from Charles Kingsley 


1 Matt. iii. 1, 2; iv. 17. 

2 For the only alternative would be that heaven was about to be 
brought under kingly rule. The word basileia means either kingly rule 
or the sphere in which that rule prevails, 

3 See p. 8, ante. 


v FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 35 


—those who cherish this belief are commonly 
regarded as fanatics. 

Indeed the sceptical crusade which masque- 
rades as “ Higher Criticism” began with the 
assumption that God must be a cipher in the 
world which He Himself created; and so every 
book of Scripture which records any immediate 
Divine intervention in human affairs had to be 
got rid of. But the atheist, who is more intel- 
ligent and logical than these “ Christian ” pundits, 
triumphantly points to the absence of all such 
intervention as proof that there is no God at all! 
And the majority even of real Christians are 
quite indifferent to the amazing mystery of a 
silent heaven. “The mystery of God” it is 
called in Scripture; and the time is foretold 
when “the mystery of God shall be finished.” + 
And, as the Seer declares, when that time comes, 
“great voices in heaven” will proclaim that 
“the sovereignty of this world is become the 
sovereignty of our Lord and of His Christ, and 
He shall reign.” And God will then do that 
which the thoughtful wonder He does not do 
now and always, “ He will give their reward to 
His servants and to His saints and to all that 
fear His name, and He will destroy them that 
destroy the earth.” ? 

The first act in that awful judgment drama 


1 Rev. x. 7. 2 Rev, xi. 15-18. 


36 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


will include the doom of the professing Church 
on earth... And when a mighty voice proclaims 
that “God hath avenged the blood of His 
servants at her hand ”—the unnumbered myriads 
of the martyrs—all heaven raises its hallelujah. 
And the Seer adds: “I heard as it were the 
voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of 
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thun- 
derings, saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth.” * 

But both the judgment of the Harlot and the 
restoration of the Covenant people await the close 
of the reign of grace. For, as we have seen, so 
long as grace is reigning, not only can there be 
no punitive action against human sin, but there 
can be no distinction made between one class of 
sinners and another. ‘There is no difference, 
for all have sinned” :* ‘There is no difference, 
for the same Lord is Lord of all, and is rich unto 
all that call upon Him.”* These are the prin- 
ciples of the reign of grace. 

But did not the Lord Himself declare that 
“salvation is of the Jews”? And did He not 
say, “I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of 
the house of Israel”? How, then, can we recon- 
cile statements so conflicting? This question 
has been already answered on a preceding pa ge. 


1 Rev. xix. 2. See p. 97, post. 2 Rev. xix. 6. 
3 Rom. iii. 22, 23, * Rom. x. 12, 13. 5 See p, 28, ante. 


v FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 87 


Grace in its fulness is a “ mystery ” truth that 
could not be revealed until the Covenant people 
had lost their vantage-ground of privilege. 
But the same Scripture which records their 
“fall” declares with explicit definiteness that 
the economy resulting from that fall is abnormal 
and temporary ; and that when the Divine pur- 
poses relating to this present age have been 
fulfilled, the covenant people shall be restored 
and “all Israel shall be saved.” 

It is as clear as light, therefore, that this 
Christian dispensation differs as essentially from 
the future as it does from the past. I have 
sought to pillory the belief that earth is merely 
a recruiting-ground for heaven ; but in a sense 
this characterises the present age, marked, as it 
is, by failure and apostasy, and ending, as it will, 
in judgment. But it was not a forecast of 
‘“ Christendom religion” that evoked the out- 
burst of praise with which the dispensational 
chapters of Romans end. As the Apostles 
spiritual vision became filled with the truth of 
a glorious heavenly purpose which God would 
accomplish in spite of sin and failure, he ex- 
claimed, “O the depth of the riches both of 
the wisdom and knowledge of God! How 

1 Rom. xi. Not “every Israelite,” but Israel as a nation. For 
Romans xi. does not deal with questions of individual salvation at all, 


but with national and dispensational distinctions. (See Alford’s Greek 
Testament Commentary.) 


38 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways 
past finding out!” 

And that purpose is revealed in “the mystery 
of Christ,” which finds its fullest unfolding in 
the “ Captivity Epistles ” :—* the mystery which 
from all ages hath been hid in God”—namely, 
that sinners of earth are called to the high- 
est glory of heaven in the closest possible 
relationship with Christ. The bridal relation- 
ship and glory of the heavenly election from the 
earthly people of the covenant might well seem 
the acme of everything to which redeemed 
humanity could ever rise; but this crowning 
“ mystery ” of the Christian revelation speaks of 
a bond more intimate and a glory more tran- 
scendent. The figure of the Bride betokens the 
closest union, but absolute oneness is implied in 
the figure of the Body. 

Some people regard the Old Testament as 
entirely superseded by the New, forgetting that 
all Scripture is God-breathed and profitable. 
And others again regard the New as merely an 
unfolding of the Old, forgetting that it reveals 
distinctively Christian truths of which no trace 
can be found in the Hebrew Scriptures, And 
in this category is “the mystery of Christ.” 
The Apostle’s words could not be more 


l Ephesians and Colossians, It is not specifically mentioned in 
Philippians. 


v FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 39 


explicit: “ By revelation He made known unto 
me the mystery which in other ages was not 
made known unto the sons of men.” 1 

This amazing climax of the New Testament 
revelation of grace is dragged into the mire by 
the Church of Rome, trading as it always does 

on the teaching of the Latin Fathers, who 
claimed for the professing Church all that 
pertains to the true and heavenly Church. The 
Body of Christ is a truth of practical import 
for the Christian, profoundly influencing his 
personal life on earth, and his relationships with 
his fellow Christians. But yet “the Church 
which is His body” is not on earth, nor can it 
have a corporate existence until all the members 
are brought in, and the Divine purpose respect- 
ing it is accomplished. 

The parallel of the bridal relationship of the 
heavenly election out of Israel may teach us a 
lesson here. For it is not until the future age 
of the Apocalyptic visions that the Bride is 
displayed, and her marriage takes place.2 In 
like manner the consummation and display of 
the Body relationship awaits the coming of the 
Lord. For in the Divine purpose it is entirely 
for the glory of our Lord and Saviour that 
these elect companies of the redeemed are given 
positions of special nearness; and therefore the 
element of display has prominence. 


1 Eph. iii. 3, 5. 2 See Appendix II. 


CHAPTER VI 


A FRUITFUL cause both of scepticism and of 
error is ignorance of what may be described as 
the ground plan and main purpose of the Old 
Testament Scriptures. “ The whole Scriptures 
are a testimony to Christ: the whole history of 
the chosen people, with its types and its law 
and its prophecies, is a shewing forth of Him.” * 
This, however, is the spiritual teaching of the 
Bible, which of course unspiritual men ignore, 
and I am here referring to what any intelligent 
reader ought to recognise. The book relates 
in the main to the Hebrew race. A brief pre- 
face of eleven chapters tells us all that we are 
concerned to know about “the earth and man,” 
prior to the call of Abraham. We are there 
told of the creation and fall of Adam: that the 
human family sprang from a first man, but not 
as he came from the hand of God; for our first 
progenitor was a sinner and an outcast. 

In that same preface are briefly recorded 
certain great crises in human history, the most 


1 These grand words are quoted from Dean Alford’s commentary 


upon Luke xxiv. 27. 
40 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 41 


notable being the judgment of the flood. A 
new era was then inaugurated with the family 
of Noah. In course of time, however, abounding 
iniquity brought about another crisis, and God 
once more made a new beginning with a single 
family ; though in fulfilment of His promise to 
Noah, He did not again destroy the guilty race. 

With the call of Abraham begins the main 
narrative of the Bible, which relates solely to 
Abraham’s descendants, other nations being 
mentioned only when, and so far as, Israel’s 
interests became in some way identified with 
theirs. And from that time the continually 
swelling stream of Messianic promise and pro- 
phecy runs in the channel of the national history 


of Abraham’s descendants. In our own days | 
the spade of the explorer has brought to light | 


abundant proofs that, at an earlier period, man 
had enjoyed a Divine revelation, and that he had 
utterly perverted and corrupted it. And now 
the revelation was entrusted to the Covenant 
people. They were chosen, so to speak, to be 
the Divine agents upon earth, and “unto them 
were committed the oracles of God.” 

Now in commerce an agent is appointed, 
not to restrict, but to facilitate, the supply of 
goods to the public; and also to ensure that 
they shall reach the public pure and un- 
adulterated. And the Divine purpose in giving 


42 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


that position to the Covenant people, and 
“committing to them the oracles of God,” 
was that the truth of God in its purity, and 
the blessings which accompany the knowledge 
of it, might be accessible to all mankind. 

We know what an employer would do if 
his agent acted as though the wares entrusted 
to him were his own, ignoring the interests 
of his principal, and treating the public with 
contempt. And this was precisely the case 
with Israel. The house of God, designed to 
be “a house of prayer for all nations,” they 
treated as their own, and ended by making it 
“a den of thieves.” And the Gentiles whom 
it was their duty to serve, they repelled with 
scorn. 

This agency parable explains the Lord’s 
words, “Salvation is of the Jews.” ‘‘For 
Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for 
the truth of God”;' and during His ministry 
on earth He recognised the divinely accorded 
position of the Covenant people. But to re- 
sume my parable, if the principal dismisses his 
agent, he begins to deal directly avith all who 
apply to him for supplies, and the dismissed 
agent must take his place as one of the public. 
And so was it with reference to Israel’s “fall,” 
“the setting-aside of them being the reconciling 


1 Rom, xy. 8. 


vI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 43 


of the world.” Thus deprived of their steward- 
ship, they are relegated to the position of other 
men. And the purpose and effect of their 
“fall” are stated in the words, “God hath 
concluded them all in unbelief that He might 
have mercy upon all.” ? 

Thus it was that the way was opened up 
for the revelation of the great “mystery” 
truth of grace enthroned. For, as we have 
seen, that truth is absolutely incompatible with 
the recognition of special privileges, or of any 
vantage-ground of favour. Language could not 
be more explicit: “ All the world is brought 
under the judgment of God”;’* “There is no 
difference between the Jew and the Greek.” * 
But the very same Scripture which teaches this 
declares with equal clearness and emphasis that 
“the gifts and calling of God are without re- 
pentance”; that “God has not cast away His 
people”; that “they are beloved for the fathers’ 
sakes,” and that they are yet to be restored to 
the favoured position which they have now lost 
through unbelief. 

But Israel’s restoration must involve as 
definite a change in God’s dealings with the 
world as did that which marked the inauguration 
of the Christian dispensation. In fact that 


1 Rom, xi. 15. 2 Rom, xi, 32. 
3 Rom. iii. 19. * Rom. x. 12. 


44 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


future dispensation must differ as essentially 

from the present, as the present differs from 

the past. For just as we aver that “God 

cannot lie,” we may assert that He cannot 

act at the same time upon two wholly different 

and incompatible principles. Most certain it is, 
therefore, that some great crisis must occur in. 
\ the spiritual sphere before the now pent-up 
stream of unfulfilled prophecy relating to Israel 
| can again begin to flow. Does Holy Scripture 
| foretell any crisis of the kind? 

Many students of prophecy believe that the 
Jews will regain possession of their land, and 
rebuild their temple, while still in unbelief.* 
And in view of recent events in the near East 
there is nothing improbable in such a forecast. 
The stage may be thus prepared for the great 
drama of the prophecies which await fulfilment. 
But the question here cannot be satisfied by 
proofs, however striking, of Jewish prosperity 
and influence on earth—events that might be 

- due to advancing civilisation and the exigencies 
of international politics. The solution of it 
must be sought for in Holy Scripture. 

The preceding pages have dealt with certain 
“ mysteries ” ? of the Christian revelation—truths 
which were kept secret until Apostolic times, 


1 This would be merely a return to the state of things existing when 
Romans xi. was written. See p. 20, ante. 
2 See p. 13, ante. 


vI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 45 


and of which therefore no trace can be found 
in the Hebrew Scriptures—the “mystery” of 
Israel’s present rejection, and of the resulting 
economy on earth; the “mystery ” of the Gospel ; 
the “mystery of God,” and the great “ mystery 
of Christ.” “But there are also other “ mys- 
teries,” and one of them seems to point to the 
very crisis about which we are seeking light. 
I refer to the neglected truth of the Coming of 
the Lord Jesus Christ to take His people home 
from earth to heaven. “For the Lord Himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with 
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump 
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first ; 
then we which are alive and remain, shall be 
caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever 
be with the Lord.” ? 

The Old Testament speaks plainly of His 
coming to bring deliverance to His earthly 
people upon the earth, after their restoration to 
Divine favour; and it contains many prophecies 
about His coming in judgment. ‘These events, 
therefore, though specifically mentioned in the 
New Testament, are not “mystery” truths. 
But the language of Scripture is explicit respect- 
ing the event which will bring the present 
dispensation to a close. Here are the Apostle’s 


1 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17. 


46 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


words: “Behold, I shew you a mystery; We 
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the 
last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and 
the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we 
shall be changed.” ? 

This “ Coming” is sometimes called “the first 
stage of the Second Advent.” But the phrase 
“ Second Advent” has no Biblical sanction,’ and 
it is the badge of the erroneous traditional 
belief that the Lord will never again appear 
until the last great judgment. Though the 
subject is one that calls for caution and reserve, 
we may assert with confidence that the numerous 
Scriptures which speak of the return of Christ 
cannot all refer to the same appearing. 

Compare, for example, the “ Coming” of the 
passages above cited from the Epistles, with that 
foretold by the heavenly messengers on the 
Mount of the Ascension. While the Lord was 


1 1 Cor, xy. 51, 52. 

2 Heb, ix. 28 is misread when cited as a warrant for the phrase. 
The subject there is the doctrine of the Sin-offering. When Aaron 
passed Within the veil, the people watched till he came out again to 
bless them. So also Christ, having been once offered to bear the sins 
of many, shall be seen a second time, apart from sin, by them that wait 
for Him unto salvation. The words of our A.V., “shall appear the 
second time,’ convey a wrong impression. The word translated 
“appear” in both A.V. and R.V. is not that employed respecting the 
Lord’s coming, but the ordinary word for being seen, I have therefore 
modified to this extent the R.V. reading given above, 

This will have a literal fulfilment for Israel; but it is a great 
doctrinal truth for the people of God in every age. It is the Hebrews 
aspect of the * of the Death and Resurrection of Christ in Romans. 


i voth 


VI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 47 


standing with His disciples on the Mount of 
Olives, “ He was taken up, and a cloud received 
Him out of their sight.” And as they were 
gazing heavenward “two men stood by them ” 
and said, “This same Jesus who is taken up 
from you into heaven shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven.” ! 
“ But surely,” some one may exclaim, “this 
cannot mean that the Lord will ever again 
stand upon His feet on Mount Olivet!” Yes, 
this is precisely what it means. The words are 
a confirmation of an Old Testament prophecy 
relating to times and events that are still future. 
In Zechariah xiv. 4 we read, “ His feet shall 
stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives 
which is before Jerusalem upon the East.” 
Now save that it is the same Christ in both 
cases, this “Coming” has nothing in common 
with that described in the Epistles. The one 
is strictly local, and it has to do with His 
earthly people in Jerusalem in the circumstances 
described by Zechariah ; whereas the purpose of 
the other is to take out of the earth His people 
of “the heavenly calling,” scattered the wide 
world over. And this will suffice to clear our 
minds of the error suggested by the phrase “ the 
Second Advent,” and thus to open the way for 
an unprejudiced inquiry as to the scope and 


1 Acts i. 11. 


48 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


meaning of the various Scriptures which speak 
of His coming again. 

On such a subject, I repeat, caution and 
reserve should mark our thoughts and words ; 
but on a few main points we may speak with 
definiteness and certainty. It is certain, for 
example, that before “the times of restitution of 
all things,” the Lord will be manifested to put 
down all open evil and rebellion against God 
upon earth. Then again, the reign of righteous- 
ness and peace will last not less than a thousand 
years, and not until after that period will be 
His appearing for the last great judgment. 
The question arises then, whether the “ Coming ” 
described in 1 Corinthians and 1 Thessalonians 
is connected with any of these ‘“ Appearings.” 
And here a brief pause for ‘“stock-taking ” 
may expedite the inquiry. 

We have seen that the Covenant people, 
though now set aside, are to be again restored 
to Divine favour, and that “the receiving of 
them” necessarily implies what is called “a 
change of dispensation.” And we have seen 
also that “ the times of restitution of all things” 
fall within that future dispensation. Now this 
obviously creates a presumption that there will 
be a “Coming” to bring this “ Christian dis- 


1 The ‘‘thousand years” of Rev, xx, 4 is taken by some to mean, 
not a definite chronological era, but a vast period of time, 


vI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 49 


pensation” of ours to an end. It remains to be 
seen then, whether such a presumption is con- 
firmed or vetoed by Scripture. And here, as 
in the preceding chapters, the appeal shall be 
neither to authority, nor to prejudice, but only 
to Holy Scripture itself, and to the intelligence 
of the reader. 

But let us not forget the momentous im- 
portance of the issue, for it must decide for us 
whether the Lord’s return is a present hope, or 
merely an event in the great drama of prophecy 
to be fulfilled at some future time, when most, 
if not all, of us shall have finished our course on 
earth. 

And this suggests another thought. If such 
a hope be a mere delusion, it is a delusion which 
is full of comfort, and has a sanctifying influence 
upon the life. Why, then, it may well be asked, 
should any Christian wish to rob us of it? And 
yet the belief is attacked with untiring zeal, and 
at times with acrimony, as though it ranked 
with heresies that dishonour Christ. It is spe- 
cially to the ephemeral literature on the subject 
that this reproach attaches; a literature that is 
generally marked by confusion of thought and 
neglect of the main landmarks that guide the 
intelligent interpretation of Scripture. The 
following, for example, is a typical sentence : 
«The Lord Jesus Himself warned His disciples 

D 


50 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS camar. 


against the thought of an immediate coming, 
and sketched a whole series of events which 
should happen before His personal return, add- 
ing, ‘For all these things must come to pass, 
but the end is not yet.—Matt. xxiv. 6.” Some 
of us have learned to distinguish between “the 
coming of the Son of Man” in judgment, “to 
gather out of His Kingdom all things that offend 
and them which do iniquity,” and the coming of 
the Lord, as Saviour, to call His people out of 
earth to heaven. 

In the very same discourse in which the Lord 
gave the warning above quoted, He gave 
another warning still more emphatic and ex- 
plicit. Here are His words: ‘“ Watch there- 
fore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth 
come”; and again, “ Watch therefore, for ye 
know neither the day nor the hour wherein the 
Son of Man cometh.”* But as the one warning 
seems to support the writer’s argument, whereas 
the other entirely refutes it, the one is quoted 
and the other is ignored. Indeed the system 
followed by writers of this school is to separate 
texts from their context, and throwing them into 
hotchpotch, to pick out any that suit their 
purpose. And it is not open to them to plead 

1 Matt. xiii, 41. The 40th and 41st verses of ch. xxiv. are explained 
by verse 31. It is not taking His elect out of the earth, but gathering 


them together upon earth for the earthly kingdom, 
2 Matt. xxiv. 42; xxv, 13. 


VI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 51 


that this particular advent is not the same as 
that described in the Epistles. For their argu- 
ment depends on the assumption, thus proved 
to be false, that there cannot be an unheralded 
advent of Christ ; and in view of this Scripture, 
that argument collapses like a child’s house 
of cards. 

This hotchpotch system of exegesis makes it 
easy to prove or disprove almost anything. And 
it leaves the Bible open to infidel attacks; for if 
it be discredited by contradictions, it cannot be 
Divine, or even true. But the intelligent Bible 
student has the clew to the seeming labyrinth. 
What is needed, as Lord Bacon quaintly puts 
it, is “that every prophecy of Scripture be 
sorted with the event fulfilling the same.” The 
task of attempting some “sorting” of this kind 
is reserved for another chapter. 


CHAPTER VII 


On the subject of the Coming of the Lord the 
First Epistle to the Thessalonians has an alto- 
gether exceptional importance. And the more 
closely we study the condition and circum- 
stances of those to whom it was addressed, our 
sense of its importance will increase. 

The opening clauses of the 17th chapter of 
the Acts contain all that the narrative records 
about the Apostle’s ministry in Thessalonica. 
And were it not for the incidental reference of 
verse 11, we might suppose that his preaching 
in the synagogue was crowned with unusual 
success; whereas that verse tells us that the 
Jews refused even to consider the Scriptures on 
which his appeals to them were based. We may 
therefore assume with confidence that, after his 
three Sabbath days’ “reasoning” with them, the 
Apostle “turned to the Gentiles,” and that the 
4th verse of the chapter gives the results, not of 
his synagogue ministry, but of all his evange- 
listic labours in Thessalonica. 

We thus learn that some of the Jews believed, 
“and of the devout Greeks a great multitude,” 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 58 


It is often assumed that these Greeks were pro- 
selytes, albeit it is most improbable that the 
whole company of the proselytes connected with 
the synagogue were numerous enough to justify 
the phrase “a great multitude.” But the ques- 
tion is absolutely settled by the Apostle’s ex- 
plicit statement that these converts had been 
pagan idolaters.* And as his Epistle makes no 
reference to Hebrew Christians, we may assume 
that the “some among the Jews” who believed 
must have been few in number. It is certain 
that the Church of the Thessalonians was essen- 
tially Gentile. And the bearing of this fact will 
appear in the sequel. 

How long the Apostle remained among them 
is a matter of conjecture; but the facts give 
proof that his sojourn cannot have been brief. 
For it is quite incredible that a congregation of 
recently converted pagans, if left to themselves, 
would have reached and maintained such a 
standard of saintship as to become a pattern 
church, exerting an influence “not only in 
Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place.”’ 
Results like these must have been the fruit of 
much doctrinal teaching and not a little pastoral 
care. And that they enjoyed such a ministry is 
definitely indicated by the many references to 
it scattered throughout both Epistles. 


1 1 Thess. i. 9. 2 1 Thess. i. 8. 


54 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS — cnap. 


But at last a storm of persecution robbed 
them of the Apostle’s presence. After a brief 
but happy ministry in Berea he was again 
obliged to flee, and he journeyed to Athens. 
During his stay in Athens some grave tidings 
reached him about the Thessalonian converts, 
tidings which raised fears whether all his labours 
among them had not been in vain! And much 
though he needed companionship and help at 
such a time, he commissioned Timothy to return 
at once to Macedonia. He himself passed on to 
Corinth, where in due course Timothy rejoined 
him, bringing him the particulars he longed for 
about the trouble in the Thessalonian Church. 
And the nature of that trouble is clearly in- 
dicated by the letter which he forthwith 
addressed to them. It was due to no lapse 
toward either immorality or heresy, but to 
the fact that certain of their leaders had been 
martyred.? 

We fail to appreciate the fears and difficulties 
of these Gentile converts of early days. The 
faith of the spiritual Christian who has the Bible 
in his hands, and to whom the story of the 
Church’s sufferings is an open page, may pierce 
the darkest clouds; but these Thessalonians had 
no such glorious records of a faith-tried past, and 


1 1 Thess, iii. 1-5. 
2 1 Thess. ii. 14, 15; iii. 4. That it was the leaders who had fallen 
is an obvious inference : it is so in every persecution. 


VII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 55 


it is doubtful to what extent they had access 
even to the Hebrew Scriptures. They had been 
told, moreover, that He in whom they believed 
had all power in heaven and earth; and yet they 
had been left a prey to the hate of their heathen 
enemies. But with exquisite tenderness the 
Apostle reminds them that they were not 
only the followers of the Hebrew Christians 
who had endured similar sufferings from their 
fellow-Jews, but also the disciples of the Lord 
Jesus, who had Himself been put to death 
by them. 

The groundwork of the Epistle was evidently 
supplied by the tidings which Timothy had 
brought him.* But the Epistle was (to change 
the figure) a casket to convey to them a special 
message which the Lord had entrusted to him, 
a message to comfort their hearts and confirm 
their faith. That this was its character is plainly 
indicated by the words: “This we are saying © 
unto you in the word of the Lord.” We cannot 
solve the mysteries of inspiration, but from 
certain passages in his Epistles it is clear that 
special revelations were occasionally received by 
the Apostle Paul with peculiar definiteness. By 
a revelation of this kind, and at this very time, 
he had “received” the very words in which to 
preach the Gospel in Corinth. After the utter 


1 This appears very plainly from the first part of both ch. iv. and ch. v. 


56 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS car. 


failure of his testimony at Athens, we can well 
believe that, with importunate supplication, he 
may have pleaded for special guidance in preach- 
ing to the Corinthians. And he reminds them of 
this in his First Epistle, in restating the Gospel he 
had proclaimed to them. For here the Revised 
Version of 1 Corinthians xv. 2 is explicit: “I 
make known, I say, in what words I preached it 
unto you; for I delivered unto you first of all 
that which I also received ”—the identical phrase 
he uses in the 11th chapter with reference to the 
revelation accorded him respecting the Lord’s 
Supper. 

Here, then, are the words in which he conveyed 
the Lord’s special message to the Thessa- 
lonians: ‘ (13) But we would not have you to 
be ignorant, brethren, concerning the sleeping 
ones, that ye may not sorrow, even as the rest 
do who have no hope. (14) For if we believe 
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also who fell asleep through Jesus will God 
_ bring together with Him. (15) For this we say 
unto you in the word of the Lord, that we who 
are living, who remain behind unto the coming 
of the Lord, shall in no wise gain an advantage 
over them who fell asleep, (16) because the 
Lord Himself shall come down from heaven 
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel 
and with the trumpet of God: and the dead 


vil FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 57 


in Christ shall rise first: * (17) then we who are 
living who remain behind, shall be caught up all 
together with them, in the clouds, to meet the 
the Lord, into the air: and so shall we be always 
with the Lord. (18) So then comfort one another 
with these words” (1 Thess. iv. 13-18). 

This is Dean Alford’s translation of the 
passage, save only that in verse 13 his version 
reads, “them that are sleeping.” The more 
literal rendering, “the sleeping ones,” makes it 
still clearer that, whereas the 16th verse speaks 
of all the dead in Christ, the reference in the 
preceding verses is to the particular individuals 
whose loss the Thessalonians were mourning. 
The popular rendering of the 14th verse, 
“them that sleep in Jesus,” is an obvious mis- 
translation. And a more literal rendering even 
than Alford’s would bring out more fully the 
exquisite pathos of the Lord’s message to them. 
For the primary meaning of the verb koimað 
is not to fall asleep but to put to sleep. What 
troubled these sorely-tried disciples was that 
they regarded the death of their friends as a 
sign that the Lord had failed them. And this 


1 ‘Alford’s note here is: “ This first has no reference whatever to the 
‘first resurrection’ (Rev. xx. 5, 6), but answers to then in verse 17.” 
This is of great importance if we are to understand Scripture aright. 
The first resurrection of Rev. xx. is so called in relation to the resurrec- 
tion after the 1000 years. It belongs tothe future dispensation of a 
restored Israel. The faithful martyrs of the Great Tribulation will 
then be raised from the dead, (New Testament Commentary, in loco.) 


58 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


is the Lord’s answer. As it was for His own 
name’s sake that they had suffered, He speaks 
of them as having been put to sleep by Him- 
self. It is as though He said, “Though I was 
the cause of their death, I have not failed them. 
Was not I Myself put to death? And as 
surely as I died and rose again, they too shall 
rise, and God will bring them with Me at My 
coming.” And our sense of the infinite grace 
of this is intensified by the fact that the message 
of hope and comfort is given in the name of 
His humiliation—the name under which He 
Himself was slain! It is His first recorded 
message to His saints on earth after His ascen- 
sion. And in that same name is His final 
message, given us upon the last page of Holy 
Scripture: “I, Jesus . . . am the bright and 
morning star. . . . Surely I am coming quickly.” 

But what voice has this message for ourselves 
to-day? This is the question which specially 
concerns us. And to enable us to answer it, 
we do well to consider what it meant, and what 
it was intended to mean, for those to whom 
it was primarily addressed: hence the import- 
ance of this inquiry respecting the condition 
and circumstances of the Thessalonian Chris- 
tians. Let us keep clearly in view that they 
were Gentile converts. They had no share, 
therefore, in Israel’s national hopes; nor do 


vil FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 59 


the Epistles give us any reason to believe that 
they had any doctrinal knowledge of those 
hopes. f 

The Pentecostal promise which, as a present 
hope, the Jews had already forfeited, was that, 
in fulfilment of Hebrew prophecy, Christ would 
come to His earthly people to put all things 
right upon the earth. And the literal definite- 
ness of that hope appears from the promise of 
the Ascension day, confirming Zechariah’s ex- 
plicit words. But these Thessalonians had 
“turned to God from idols . . . to wait for 
His Son from heaven.” And the Lord’s 
message to them plainly indicates the meaning 
of that special hope of theirs. Now if His 
coming to call away His heavenly people sig- 
nifies the same thing as His coming to deliver 
Jerusalem and the Jews from Gentile armies, 
we must conclude that in Scripture words may 
mean anything, and all discussion of them is 
idle. 

It may be said perhaps that although the 
earthly hope and the heavenly hope differ so 
essentially, they will be fulfilled at the same 
advent. But any presumption there may be 
in favour of this view rests entirely on popular 
misbeliefs about “the Second Advent.”? ‘There 
is no proof whatever of it, and it clashes with 


1 Acts i, 11; Zech, xiv. 4. 2 See p. 46, ante. 


60 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS car. 
the teaching of the Epistles. The Thessalonians 


were waiting for the Lord. But, for some 
reason unknown to us, they believed that at 
His coming it was only the living who would 
be called away. The martyred dead therefore 
had lost their part in this “blessed hope,” and 
as their “call” would thus be deferred till a 
resurrection in the distant future, their death 
was mourned with a hopeless sorrow. 

Now if our popular misbeliefs were true, the 
Apostle would surely have told them that their 
grief was due to the error of expecting the 
speedy return of Christ: they had mistaken a 
future for a present hope, and before the Advent 
could take place they would all have joined 
their martyred friends “ beyond the veil.” But 
in striking contrast with this, mark the God- 
given words of the Epistle, “that we who are 
living, who remain behind unto the coming of 
the Lord, shall in no wise gain an advantage 
over the sleeping ones.” ‘“ Wr who are living” : 
_ if they were wrong in believing that the Lord 
might come in their own lifetime, could even a 
trained lawyer have drafted words better fitted 
to confirm them in the error ! 

I repeat, therefore, with increased emphasis, 
that the knowledge which the Thessalonian 
Kpistle gives us of the circumstances of those 
to whom it was written, and of their special 


vir FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 61 


griefs and difficulties, lends to its teaching a 
peculiar definiteness and importance. Indeed 
if our expectation of the Lord’s return had no 
other Scriptural warrant, this Epistle might 
suffice us. But the references to the hope are 
many in other Epistles also. To deal with them 
in full detail, however, would be foreign to the 
scheme of these pages, and a few leading pass- 
ages will here suffice. 

The 15th chapter of 1 Corinthians claims very 
special notice. That wonderful exposition and 
defence of the great truth of the resurrection 
leads up to the following pregnant words :— 


“ Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall 
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last 
trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the 
dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed. For this corruptible must put on 
incorruption, and this mortal must put on im- 
mortality. So when this corruptible shall have 
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have 
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass 
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed 
up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? 
O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of 
death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. 
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. There- 
fore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, un- 


62 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP, 


moveable, always abounding in the work of the 
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is 
not in vain in the Lord.” ! 


“ We shall not all sleep”: Is this to be read 
as a mere recital of the obvious fact that when 
the Lord returns He will find some of His people 
living upon earth? What an empty platitude to 
introduce into one of the sublimest passages in 
all the New Testament Epistles! The purpose 
of the words is clear. The Corinthians were 
“waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus 
Christ” ;2 and he thus seeks to confirm them in 
that attitude, and (as the 58th verse so clearly 
indicates) to make it increasingly a present 
hope, fitted to influence heart and life. There- 
fore is it that, though he speaks of the dead in 
the third person, he always speaks of the living 
in the first— We shall not all sleep.” For 
while the Resurrection is the hope of those who 
fall asleep, the Coming is the hope of living 
saints. But if he had known that the advent was 
an event in a remote future, this would have been 
so misleading that in a merely human writing it 
would be regarded as almost a suggestio falsi / 

A like thought is suggested by his reference 
to this truth in his Second Epistle. The sym- 
bolism of the 5th chapter is as simple as it is 


1 1 Cor. xv, 51-58, 2 1 Cor. i. 7, 


VII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 63 


graphic. Our “natural body” is likened to a 
tent, the spiritual body to a house. Not a 
house like the Jerusalem temple, built on earth 
by human hands, and liable to perish; but a 
building of God, eternal, and in the heavens. 
Then the symbolism assumes another phase. 
Death is likened to our being unclothed; and 
in contrast with being thus stripped naked, our 
receiving the heavenly body without passing 
through death is symbolised by our being 
“ clothed upon.” ‘Three distinct conditions are 
thus indicated—clothed, clothed upon, and found 
naked. The first is our condition during our 
life on earth, and the last is that to which death 
reduces us. This is plain to all; but the “ being 
clothed upon” is apt to be misunderstood. It 
does not refer to the Resurrection, but to the 
change which the Coming of the Lord will bring 
to those “ who are alive and remain.” * 

Death is an outrage upon life, a hideous and 
hateful outrage. And yet (as the Apostle 
wrote to the Philippians) “to have died is 


gain” ;” for at death do we not pass from earth 


1 “ Being found naked” is the condition produced by death. ‘‘ Being 
clothed upon” refers, not to the Resurrection but to the coming of the 
Lord. ‘‘ The thought is that of one who. . . wishes, as he expects, to 
remain till that Coming (comp. 1 Cor. xv. 51; 1 Thess. iv. 15), to let 
the incorruptible body supervene on the corruptible, to be changed 
instead of dying.” (Bishop Ellicott’s New Testament Commentary for 
English Readers.) 

2 «To die is gain’ 
never said that! 


3 


is the evil creed of a suicide, The Apostle 


64 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


to be “ with Christ,” which is “far better”? So 
here he says, We are “willing rather” to be 
absent from the body and to be “at home with 
the Lord.” <“ Willing rather” denotes a bare 
preference; but when he speaks of the hope to 
be realised at the Coming, “ earnestly desiring” 
is the phrase he uses. And his purpose in all 
this, as the sequel plainly shows, is not to 
instruct them in eschatology, but to enforce the 
practical bearing of the hope upon life and 
conduct. How unreasonable this would be, if 
the Coming were not a present hope! 

The closing sentence of the 3rd chapter of 
Philippians is of special interest in this connec- 
tion: “Our citizenship is in heaven; from 
whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord 
Jesus Christ; who shall fashion anew the body 
of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to 
the body of His glory, according to the working 
whereby He is able even to subject all things 
unto Himself.”* Here again, mark the form of 
the sentence—the present tense, and the first 
person plural—“ We are expecting a Saviour.” 
But this is not all. When challenged by the 
question, “ How are the dead raised up and 
with what body do they come!” the Apostle’s 
answer was, “Thou fool!” But when in that 
same chapter he came to speak of the living, 


1 Phil. iii, 20, 21, R.V. 


VII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 65 


his words were explicit,“ We shall all be 
changed.” And here to the Philippians he uses 
a kindred, but still stronger word—the body of 
our humiliation shall be transformed. The holy 
dead, it need not be said, will be raised in bodies 
like the Lord’s. But it is not of the Resur- 
rection that he is speaking here, nor yet of the 
buried dust of them that are “fallen asleep,” 
but of the “flesh and blood” of the living men 
whom he is addressing; and to them he says, 
“We are waiting for the Saviour who will 
transform the body of our humiliation.” 

First Corinthians was one of the Apostle’s 
earlier Epistles: Philippians was written to- 
ward the close of his life, and after the close of 
his special ministry to Israel. But the doctrine 
of the Coming is unchanged—the hope is the 
same; the only difference being that, when 
writing from his Roman prison, he uses a 
stronger word than ever before—“ We are 
assiduously and patiently waiting for the 
Saviour.”' And still further to impress upon 
the Philippian saints the reality and definiteness 
of that hope, he adds, “The Lord is at hand.” ? 

The Apostles words to Titus may fittingly 


1 This is the meaning given to the word in Grimm’s Lexicon. It 
occurs also in Rom. viii. 19, 23, 25; 1 Cor. i.7; Gal. v.5; Heb. ix. 
28. Grimm remarks that it is scarcely found out of the New 
Testament. 

2 The 14th verse of Phil. iii. is sometimes taken as referring to the 
Coming. But verse 12 vetoes such an exegesis. See Appendix IV. 

E 


66 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


conclude this notice of his teaching about the 
Coming of the Lord. In this Epistle, believed 
to have been written in the very year of his 
martyrdom, we find the same glad note of 
comfort and hope. “For the grace of God 
hath appeared, salvation-bringing to all men, 
disciplining us in order that, denying ungodli- 
ness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
justly and godly in this present world, looking 
for that blessed hope, even the glorious 
appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus 
Christ.” 1 

Will any one dare to rob us of these words 
by referring them to “the great and terrible day 
of the Lord”? ‘True it is that the Lord Jesus 
shall be “revealed in flaming fire to take 
vengeance on them that know not God.” But 
to call that a “blessed hope” would savour of 
the spirit of the Spanish Inquisition, rather than 
of the Christian’s grace-taught heart ! 

One word more. In common with certain 
other distinctive truths of the Christian revela- 
tion, this of the Coming has peculiar pro- 
minence in the Epistles of the Apostle Paul. 

1 Titus ii, 11-13, “Bringing salvation to all men” suggests a 
serious error; and moreover the word here used is an adjective. And 
surely, having regard to English idiom, the A.V. hendiadys rendering, 
“the glorious appearing,” is right, for the R.V. rendering throws a 
wholly false emphasis upon “glory.” It is a strange exegesis which 


makes ‘‘the great God” a synonym for The Father: Scripture does 
not employ one term when another is intended. 


VII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 67 


But in proof that it was a hope shared by “all 
saints” in the Apostolic age, appeal may be 
made to the following words of the Apostle 
Peter: “ Knowing that I must shortly put off 
this tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ 
hath shewed me.”! Me emphatic. And the 
student of evidence will ask what need there 
could have been for such a special revelation to 
Peter, if death were the common lot of all; for 
when these words were written he must have 
been nearing his threescore years and ten. 


1 2 Peter i. 14. 


CHAPTER VIII 


Ir is a fact of great significance that the 
Coming of the Lord is never mentioned in the 
Epistles of the New Testament save in an 
incidental manner—never once as a doctrine 
that needed to be expounded, but only and 
always as a truth with which every Christian 
was supposed to be familiar. 

This is strikingly exemplified by the passages 
already cited. And it explains what to some may 
seem strange, that there is no notice of the 
Coming in Ephesians or Colossians. If these 
were the latest of the Apostle Paul’s Epistles, 
the omission might possibly suggest to some that 
the hope had been abandoned. But not only 
does it appear in Philippians, which was also 
written from his Roman prison; but, as we have 
seen, one of the fullest and clearest references to 
it is contained in Titus, which was written at a 
still later date than “the Captivity Epistles.” 
The Coming is not mentioned in Ephesians and 
Colossians; but neither is justification by faith. 
A “ Higher Critic” might find in this a proof of 
different authorship. And a lawyer might think 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 69 


that each book of the New Testament ought to 
begin with recitals, and with many a “ whereas,” 
referring to the contents of earlier writings; but 
happily the Scriptures are not written in that 
fashion ! 

The fact is clear then, that in Apostolic times 
the converts were taught to expect the Lord’s 
return. So certain is this indeed, that discussion 
would be useless with any who deny it. But 
what explanation can be found for the no less 
salient fact that, although we have reached the 
twentieth century of the Christian era, the hope 
appears to be no nearer its fulfilment? Re- 
jecting the infidel taunt that the teaching was 
erroneous, and the hope which it inspired a 
delusion, we are shut up to choose between the 
following alternatives: Either the promise has 
been cancelled or withdrawn; or else, owing to 
some cause which came fully into operation after 
the close of the sacred Canon, its fulfilment has 
been delayed. But all the promises of God are 
assured in Christ, and there is no variableness 
with Him. The one alternative, therefore, we 
reject: the other shall be considered in the 
sequel. 

Some indeed would seek to escape from this 
conclusion by a mistaken reading of First Thes- 


1 I say this because the fact is admitted by expositors of various 
schools, many of whom have no sympathy with the hope. 
2 2 Cor. i. 20. 


70 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


salonians. They take the day of the Lord in 
chapter v. to be a synonym for the Coming of 
the Lord in chapter iv.; and they appeal to the 
Second Epistle in proof that notable events must 
precede its happening. Even if this were ten- 
able, it would have no bearing upon the Epistles 
to the other Churches. And that it is quite un- 
tenable appears from the fact that the Coming 
of the Lord is a distinct event, whereas the day of 
the Lord is an era, the course and character of 
which are described both by the Hebrew pro- 
phets, and by the Lord Himself in the “ Second 
Sermon on the Mount.” * 

But it may be asked, Does not that sermon 
definitely declare that the Lord will come at the 
close of “the great tribulation”? Yes, truly; 
but the seeming relevance of this to the present 
question depends entirely on the prevalent error 
respecting “the Second Advent.” ? The promise 
of the Incarnation was so utterly incredible that it 
may well have staggered faith. But now that He 
has lived upon earth and gone back to heaven, 
His coming again seems a natural sequence to 
His ascension. Indeed if we were left to reason 
out the matter, we should expect Him to return 
again and again. And this is precisely what 
Scripture tells us to look for. Common sense 
might veto the suggestion that His coming as 


1 Matt. xxiv. See pp. 77, 78, post. 2 See p. 46, ante. 


\ 


VIN FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 71 


Avenger and Judge is the event described as 
“that blessed hope.” And it is no less clear that 
the message received by the disciples on the 
Mount of the Ascension does not relate to the 
same Coming as the Apostle’s words to the 
Thessalonians and the Corinthians.’ But the 
Coming of the Lord as Saviour is now con- 
founded with “the day of the Lord”—the day 
of wrath. In fact the error which the Second 
Epistle to the Thessalonians was designed to 
correct is now in the creed of Christendom! 
Are we to believe that the Gentile converts 
were taught to live in expectation of the 
Coming, although, ex hypothesi, before that hope 
could be realised the people of God were 
doomed to pass through a time of horror un- 
paralleled in all the ages? And yet no Epistle 
except that to the Thessalonians contained a 
warning word about that awful time. And 
the Apostle’s words to them, if intended as a 
warning, could scarcely have been more de- 
ceptive. For after speaking of the Coming as 
a present hope with which to comfort one 
another, he went on to speak of the day of 
the Lord as pertaining to the “times and 
seasons” of Israel’s national history. To the 
world that day would come as a day of wrath, 
for, “ when they shall say peace and safety, then 


1 See p. 46, ante. 


esnem eg 


72 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


sudden destruction cometh upon them.” But 
in contrast with this, the Apostle adds, “God 
has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain 
deliverance by our Lord Jesus Christ.” What 
meaning could the Thessalonians put upon these 
words, save that the appointed deliverance was 
by the Coming of the Lord? And to make 
this still more clear he again exhorts them to 
comfort one another with his words. 

«Times and seasons:” these well-known 
words come from the Book of Daniel. The 
Lord made use of them when, on the Mount 
of the Ascension, the disciples asked Him, 
“Wilt Thou at this time restore the kingdom 
to Israel?” “It is not for you (He said) to 
know times or seasons.” And this reply con- 
firmed the truth that underlay the question. 
The word which He had spoken by the mouth 
of Daniel shall be fulfilled, and the Kingdom 
shall yet be restored to Israel; but “the times 
and seasons” are with God. 

I will offer no conjectures as to what the 
= course of events would have been if the nation 
had accepted the Divine amnesty proclaimed at 
Pentecost. Certain it is, however, that none 
of the words of Christ will fail of their ultimate 
fulfilment on account of Israel’s rejection of 
the proffered mercy. But so long as Israel’s 
national position is in abeyance, the stream of 


VIII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 73 


fulfilment is tided back ; or to change the figure, 
the hands upon the dial of prophetic time are 
motionless. Without this clew to guide us 
in our study of them, the Scriptures appear to 
be full of confusion, if not of error. 

“The times and seasons” rest with Him to 
whom a thousand years are as one day. And 
when in Matthew xxiv., for example, the Lord 
addressed His hearers as though they themselves 
would pass through the Great Tribulation, we 
recognise that this would have proved literally 
true if the Jews had accepted Him as their 
Messiah. But with Romans xi. before us, we 
recognise also that, when Israel was cast aside 
the clock of prophetic time was stopped, to be 
set in motion once again at the close of this 
intercalary “ Christian dispensation.” And then 
the Lord’s prophetic words shall be fulfilled as 
though this age of ours had never intervened. 

And now, if we will but rise above the 
mists of controversy, and arguments based on 
isolated texts, and take note of the prominent 
landmarks of prophetic interpretation, and the 
distinctive truths of the Christian revelation, 
we shall find abundant proof that the fulfil- 
ment of Matthew xxiv. belongs to a future age, 
and to an economy essentially different from 
our own. 

The last verse of Daniel ix. might almost be 


| 


| 
\ 


74 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


paraphrased in the language of modern diplo- 
macy. The “prince” of that prophecy—the 
last great Kaiser of Christendom—will make a 
seven years’ treaty with the Jews, guaranteeing 
respect for the ordinances of their religion. But 
in the middle of that term he will violate the 
treaty, and defile the Temple by enthroning 
himself within it. This last particular we learn 
from 2 Thessalonians ii. 4. And the Lord’s own 
words, spoken with express reference to this 
very prophecy, for the guidance of His Jewish 
people who will witness its fulfilment, warn 
them that the defilement of the holy place is 
to be the signal for immediate flight; “for then 
shall be great tribulation such as never was 
since the beginning of the world.”! Daniel’s 
prophecy, to which the Lord explicitly refers, 
describes it as “a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation,’? and other 
references to it might be quoted from the 
Hebrew prophets, such for example as the 
words of Jeremiah, who calls it “the time of 
Jacob’s trouble.” ° 

Here is something to disturb the complacency 
of Christians who are in the habit of treating 
the Bible as though it were a lottery bag of 
texts, rejecting what they slightingly call “ dis- 
pensationalism.” The Apocalyptic visions in- 


1 Matt. xxiv. 21. 2 Dan. xii, 1. 3 Jer, xx. 7; 


VIII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 75 


dicate that Christendom will come within the 
awful persecution of the latter days, whereas 
these Old Testament prophecies relate only to 
Judah and Jerusalem, and in the Lord’s own 
teaching there is never a word to suggest that 
they will have any wider range. How is this to 
be explained? Not by saying, with the Higher 
Critics, that the Lord was ignorant, but by 
recognising that this “ Christian Dispensation ” 
is a New Testament “ mystery,” ? unknown to 
the people of God, and unnoticed in the Word 
of God, until after Israel had been set aside, 
and the Apostle to the Gentiles had received 
his call. Therefore was it that, from the stand- 
point of the Mount of Olives, the world con- 
sisted of Israel and heathendom, and the Lord 
spoke of the tribulation in relation only to His 
earthly people; whereas from the standpoint of 
Patmos, He took account of the new element 
of Christendom. 

But the words He spoke on Olivet were the 
words of God, and no dispensational change 
affects their eternal truth. And from them we 
learn that, when the time of their fulfilment 
comes, the Covenant people will have regained 
their normal status as the people of God, and 
that a believing community of Israelites will be 
living in their own land and their own “ city,” 


1 See p. 13, ante. 


76 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


with a restored sanctuary accredited as “the 
Temple of God.” Not “Jewish Christians” in 
the present-day sense,' but Jews whose faith will 
be akin to that of the Lord’s disciples during 
His earthly ministry. And the very words 
which these disciples heard from the Master’s 
lips will reach His disciples in that future age, 
just as they reach us to-day, by means of the 
printed page on which they are recorded. 

Once we shake free from the influence of 
traditional exegesis, we can see with noontide 
clearness that the entire scene, and all the cir- 
cumstances, pourtrayed by the Lord’s teaching 
in the 24th chapter of Matthew, pertain to the 
future age of a restored Israel. And therefore, 
prior to their fulfilment this “Christian dis- 
pensation” must have been brought to an end. 
And as it was in the past, so possibly it will be 
in the future, the change will be unheralded by 
any portents upon earth. But it will be ushered 
in by an event of vastly greater solemnity than 
any sights or sounds in the natural sphere. For 
then shall come the fulfilment of the word, “ the 
Master of the house is risen up and hath shut to 
the door.” ‘The Lord will have passed from the 
throne of grace to the throne of judgment; and 

1 For the Lord’s coming for His heavenly people having already 
taken place, “the Christian Church” will have reached the full develop- 


ment of its apostasy, and will then be awaiting its fearful doom, See 
Dean Alford’s words on p. 97, post. 


VIII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 77 


“the acceptable year of the Lord” will have run 
its course, and will soon be followed by “the day 
of vengeance of our God.” 

Great reserve is needed in attempting to map 
out the future as revealed in prophecy. But the 
Book of Daniel (ix. 27) tells us explicitly that 
the event predicted in Matthew xxiv. 15 will 
take place in the middle of the 70th “week” of 
the prophetic era. And the Lord’s words are 
perfectly explicit that the Tribulation will be 
followed immediately by the awful signs and 
portents which are to herald the coming of “ the 
great and terrible day of the Lord” (Joel ii. 32). 
But the 30th verse is commonly misread as 
though “the Coming of the Son of Man” were 
contemporaneous with the appearing of “the 
Sign of the Son of Man in heaven.” So far 
from this being the case, the Lord’s words which 
follow teach unmistakably that the “Coming” 
will be separated from the “ Sign” by an interval 
sufficiently prolonged to allow the worldling to 
forget the awful portents of the coming judg- 
ments, and to make His people need exhortations 
to continued watchfulness. When verse 15 is 
fulfilled, His people will know that a definite 
period of three years and a half (1260 days) will 
bring the fulfilment of verse 29; but none save 
the Father Himself can tell when the Son of 
Man will come. Hence the significance of the 


78 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


warning, ‘‘ The day of the Lord shall so come as 
a thief in the night.” For it is “the coming of 
the Son of Man” that will usher in that awful 
period of judgment.t 

But let us not forget that Matthew xxiv., xxv. 
relate to the Coming of the Son of Man. In 
our hymnology, and indeed in our Christian 
literature generally, the Lord’s names and titles 
are used just as the caprice of the writer, or the 
exigencies of rhythm or rhyme may suggest; 
but it is far otherwise in Scripture. And never 
once does the Lord’s title of Son of Man occur 
in the Epistles of the New Testament: never 
once is it used in Scripture in relation to the 
Church of God or the people of God of this 
dispensation. Surely this fact alone might save 
us from the error of confounding the Coming 
of the Son of Man for the deliverance of His 
earthly people and the judgment of living 
nations upon earth, with the Coming of the 
Lord to call His heavenly people home, and to 
_ bring this “ Christian dispensation ” to an end. 

And yet the question will be asked in unison 
by many otherwise discordant voices, ‘“ Will not 
the Church pass through the tribulation?” If 
the question refers to the professing Church on 
earth, it has been already answered.? But if 


1 As regards the 70 weeks, see Appendix I. 
2 See p. 36, ante. At the Coming of the Lord, His own people 
within the professing Church will be called up to heaven, and that 


—— ee 


VII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 79 


to the Church, the Body of Christ, it is un- 
intelligent; for it ignores the great truths of 
the Christian revelation, noticed in preceding 
chapters. The Body of Christ is not on earth, 
nor can it have a corporate existence until the 
Divine purpose respecting it has been ful- 
filled. And moreover, as we have seen, the 
Lord’s own teaching is most explicit, that a 
restored Israel will be, so to speak, the prime 
objective in that awful persecution; and a 
restored Israel implies the close of this Christian 
dispensation of grace. 

Most strange it is that any Christian who 
studies the 24th chapter of Matthew can tolerate 
the thought that the Lord would tell us to live 
looking for His Coming, if intervening events 
barred the fulfilment of His words. For here in 
His teaching about His Coming as Son of Man, 
He warns His earthly people to look, not for 
His Coming, but for “ things that must come to 
pass” before His Coming. And His words, 
** Watch, for ye know not what hour your Lord 
doth come,” relate to a time when every inter- 
vening event has actually come to pass, and not 


Church will be left to its doom. It may be asked again, “ Will there be 
no longer any salvation for sinners. within the apostate professing 
Church?” Surely the Divine principles of Rom. ii. 7 will hold good in 
that future age, as fully as in the past; and therefore, until “the 
great day of wrath” (which comes after the Tribulation—see p. 77, 
ante), there will be mercy for those who seek it aright. Very many 
waverers, perhaps, will be startled into repentance by the Coming of 
the Lord. 


80 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


a line of prophecy has to be fulfilled before His 
return. 

And in view of all this we may surely ask, 
Would the Lord be less gracious—less true, 
I might almost add—in dealing with His 
heavenly people in this dispensation? We are 
taught to look for Him, and that a crowning 
blessing will be theirs “ who are alive and remain 
unto the Coming of the Lord.” Are we then 
to believe that this involves our passing through 
such times and scenes of terror as would make 
us “praise the dead that are already dead more 
than the living that are yet alive!” In his 
Patmos vision of that awful time the Seer hears 
a voice from heaven proclaiming, “ Blessed are 
the dead.”! And if this Tribulation theory 
were true, should we not, in the spirit of those 
words, cry to God with earnest importunity to 
be allowed to die, rather than to await the 
Coming of the Lord ? 

And now we raise again the question, Are we 
who cling to the belief that the words of Holy 
Scripture mean what they seem to mean—are 
we the dupes of a blind delusion? Well, be it 
so. Some of us at least will cling to the 
delusion; and even if the “blessed hope” be 
no more than a happy dream, we shall refuse to 
change it for the hideous nightmare of “the 


1 Rev. xiv. 13. 


sab te ete Cae 


VIII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 81 


Tribulation.” But is it a delusion? The open- 
ing sentence of the present chapter may seem a 
startling statement. How was it then, some 
may ask, that all the early saints were led to 
expect the Lord’s return? The answer is not 
far to seek. Never a week went by, never a 
Lord’s day passed, without their hearing those 
charter words, “ Until He come.” And who 
among them could fail to ask their meaning! 
Whatever else of Christian truth they lacked, 
this at least they knew from the day they first 
took part in the sacred rite—the Lord who died 
for them would return again, and they were to 
live looking for His Coming. 


CHAPTER IX 


“ My people doth not consider.” Such was the 
reproach cast upon Israel in the days of Isaiah’s 
prophecy. And surely a like reproach rests 
upon the people of God to-day in regard to the 
promise of the Lord’s return. During all His 
ministry He spoke of His coming again; and 
He confirmed the promise after His resurrection 
from the dead. The teaching of His inspired 
Apostles gave prominence to the hope. And in 
His final message to His people, as recorded on 
the last page of Scripture, the words are three 
times repeated, “I am coming quickly.” 

“ Surely I am coming quickly.” No reference 
here to a thousand-year day of the eternal God, 
but to the time calendars of men. “The time 
was long,” was Daniel’s lament as he pondered 
the revelation made to him, that seven times 
seventy years would pass before the realisation 
of the promised blessings to his people. And 
more than four centuries elapsed between the 
promise of the land to Abraham, and the day 
when his descendants took possession of it. But 


nineteen centuries! And in view of such a 
82 


; 
— eo” ey 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 83 


promise, “Surely I am coming quickly”! 
Here it would be the pettiest quibble to raise 
the question of the Tribulation—a persecution 
definitely limited to a term that might be 
covered twenty times within a single lifetime. 
At this point, then, let us turn aside from con- 
troversy. Let us awake to realities and think. 
And if we do but think, the staggering fact 
of a nineteen centuries’ delay will lead us to 
* consider” with a solemnity and earnestness we 
have never known before. 

Under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, given 
to “lead them into all truth,” the Apostles taught 
the saints to look for the Coming as a present 
hope. ‘The suggestion of subterfuge or mistake 
would be profane. ‘The facts are not in dispute: 
how then can they be explained? Israel’s story 
may teach us something here. When the people 
were encamped at Sinai, Canaan lay but a few 
days’ march across the desert. And in the 
second year from the Exodus, they were led to 
the borders of the land, and bidden to enter and 
take possession of it. ‘ But they entered not in 
because of unbelief.” The Canaan rest, more- 
over, was only a type of the promised rest of the 
Messianic Kingdom. That rest was preached 
again “in David,”* but lost again through un- 
belief and the apostasy which unbelief begets. 


1 See p. 77, ante, 2 Heb. iv. 7. 


84 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


And in the exile it was revealed to Daniel that 
it would be further deferred for seven times 
seventy years. Lastly it was preached at Pente- 
cost, and lost once more by unbelief. And to 
continued unbelief is due the fact of these nine- 
teen centuries of Israel’s rejection. 

Does not this throw light on the seeming 
failure of “the hope of the Church”? Putting 
from us the profane thought that the Lord has 
been unmindful of His promise, are we not led 
to the conclusion that this long delay has been 
due to the unfaithfulness of His people upon 
earth ? 

The third chapter of 2 Peter has no bearing 
upon the question. In that passage the Apostle 
is not dealing with either the hopes or the 
heresies of Christians, but with the scoffing of 
the unbeliever who mocks at the Divine warning 
that the world shall at last be given up to 
judgment fire. The scientist may possibly be 
right in thinking that “for untold millions of 
years this earth has been the theatre of life and 
death.”* All that we know is that “in the 
beginning” (whenever that was) God created 
it, and that He did not create it “a waste,” 2 
albeit it had become a waste before the 
epoch of the Adamic creation. And 2 Peter 

1 The words are Professor Tyndall's. 


2 Isa. xlv, 14, R.V. Cf. Gen. i. 2, R.V., where the same Hebrew word 
is used, 


IX FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 85 


iii. 5, 6, points to the cataclysm referred to in 
Genesis i. 2, by which “the world that then 
was, being overflowed with water, perished.” 
“ Where is the promise of His coming !”’ is not 
the appeal of an inquirer as to the Coming of 
Christ, but the taunt of a scoffer about the 
coming of “the day of God.”? And the 
Apostle answers his appeal to the permanence of 
“ all things from the beginning of the creation ” 
by referring to the zons of Genesis i. 2, and to a 
God with Whom a thousand years are as one 
day.’ 

But what bearing can this passage in Peter’s 
Epistle have upon the question here at issue ? 
The long-suffering of God explains His tiding 
back the sea of fire by which the world is at last 
to be engulfed, but it cannot explain the Lord’s 
delaying to fulfil His promise to His believing 
people. “The coming of the day of God” 
means endless destruction for all the ungodly 
inhabitants of the earth; whereas beyond the 
coming of the Lord Jesus there lies the fulfilment 
of the hope of Israel, which is to be “ as life from 
the dead” to the nations of the earth; and 


1 It is an exclamation, like Gal. iv. 15. And announcement is the 
primary and common meaning of the word here translated ‘‘ promise.” 
It might be freely rendered, ‘‘What has become of His announce- 
ment?” 

2 “ The conflict between science and Scripture ” in regard to Genesis 
i. is mainly due to misreading Genesis. It does not describe the 
creation of the earth, but its refurnishing as a home for man, 


86 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


beyond that again there lies the deliverance of a 
groaning creation. 

No, no; the question here cannot be solved 
in that way. Nor can we tolerate the thought 
that the promise has failed. Sometimes in 
the past, God has not fulfilled His word, but 
only when His word threatened wrath. No 
Divine promise of blessing has ever failed. But 
if we reject that solution of the difficulty, what 
other can be found? No event or influence of 
a transient nature deserves a moment’s con- 
sideration ; nothing partial or merely local in its 
effects. We must find a cause of which the 
influence began to be felt before the Apostles 
left the earth, and which has been in operation 
during all the centuries until the present hour. 
And by a process of negative induction the 
suggestion forces itself upon us that the evil 
history of the Church on earth may afford a 
solution of the mystery. 

Christian thought, I again repeat it, is leavened 
with the error of failing to distinguish between 
the heavenly Church and the Church on earth. 
But here I would fain shirk the rôle of an 
iconoclast, and I will shelter myself behind the 
words of others in seeking to expose the prevalent 
superstitions to which that error has given rise, 
superstitions which are inconsistent with un- 


1 See, e.g., Exod. xxxii. 11-14; Jonah iii. 10. 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 87 


divided loyalty to our Lord Jesus Christ. The 
following sentences are quoted from Canon T. D. 
Bernard’s Bampton Lectures of 1864, a great 
book which ought to find a place in every 
Christian library : 


“ How fair was the morning of the Church! 
how swift its progress! what expectations it 
would have been natural to form of the future 
history which had begun so well! Doubtless 
they were formed in many a sanguine heart: 
but they were clouded soon. .. . 

“While the Apostles wrote, the actual state 
and the visible tendencies of things showed too 
plainly what Church history would be; and at 
the same time prophetic intimations made the 
prospect still more dark... . 

“I know not how any man in closing the 
Epistles could expect to find the subsequent 
history of the Church essentially different from 
what it is. In those writings we seem, as it 
were, not to witness some passing storms which 
clear the air, but to feel the whole atmosphere 
charged with the elements of future tempest 
and death... . 

“ The fact which I observe is not merely that 
these indications of the future are in the Epistles, 
but that they increase as we approach the close ; 
and after the doctrines of the Gospel have been 


1 The Progress of Doctrine in the New Testament (Macmillan & Co.). I 
had the satisfaction of appealing successfully for the reissue of this 
book a dozen years ago, 


88 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP 


fully wrought out, and the fulness of personal 
salvation and the ideal character of the Church 
have been placed in the clearest light, the shadows 
gather and deepen on the external history. The 
last words of St. Paul in the second Epistle to 
Timothy, and those of St. Peter in his second 
Kpistle, with the Epistles of St. John and St. 
Jude, breathe the language of a time in which 
the tendencies of that history had distinctly 
shown themselves; and in this respect these 
writings form a prelude and a passage to the 
Apocalypse.” 


The Church’s story from the close of the New 
Testament Canon to the era of the Patristic 
theologians must be gleaned from the revela- 
tions their writings afford of its condition in 
their own time. Who can doubt that then, 
as in the days of Israel’s apostasy, there were 
many who feared the Lord and thought upon 
His name? But here I am speaking of the 
Church as a whole. Protestantism delights in 
attributing to the Romish apostasy the vices 
- which disgraced the Church of Christendom 
during the Middle Ages; but in this regard the 
Church of Rome was merely the product and 
development of the much-vaunted “primitive 
Church” of the Fathers. Abundant proof of 
this will be found in the acts and words of some 
of the great and holy men who sought in vain 


we 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 89 


to stem the evil tide. The facts are disclosed 
in various standard works; here of course a few 
characteristic extracts must suffice. 

The birth of Cyprian occurred about a century 
after the death of the last of the Apostles. 
Born and bred in Paganism, he was converted in 
middle age, and three years afterwards he be- 
came Bishop of Carthage. Ten years later he 
suffered martyrdom in the Valerian persecution. 
The following words may indicate the condition 
of the Church in his time: “Serious scandals 
existed even among the clergy. Bishops were 
farmers, traders, and money-lenders, and by no 
means always honest. Some were too ignorant 
to teach the catechumens. Presbyters made 
money by helping in the manufacture of 
idols.” 1 

In Cyprian’s day “the virgins of the Church” 
(“nuns ” we call them now) were held in special 
honour on account of their reputed sanctity. 
What, then, passed for superior sanctity may 
be gleaned from the following words of that 
eminent and holy man: “ What have the virgins 
of the Church to do at promiscuous baths, there 
to violate the commonest dictates of feminine 
modesty! The places you frequent are more 
filthy than the theatre itself; all modesty is there 


1 Dr. Plummer’s Church of the Early Fathers, chapter vii. 


90 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


laid aside; and with your robes your personal 
honour and reserve are cast off.” 1 

Half a century before these words were 
written, Clement of Alexandria had bewailed 
the low morality which prevailed among Chris- 
tians, even at a time when, as he said, “the 
wells of martyrdom were flowing daily.” Re- 
ferring to their attendance at church he wrote: 
« After having waited upon God and heard of 
Him, they leave Him there, and find their 
pleasure without in ungodly fiddling, and love 
songs, and what-not—stage plays and gross 
revelries.” 

The “conversion of Constantine” set free the 
Church to put her house in order, and pursue 
her mission to the world without hindrance from 
without. But her condition in those haleyon 
days may be judged by the fact that at a single 
visitation the great Chrysostom deposed no 
fewer than thirteen bishops for simony and 
licentiousness. Nor was this strange, having 
regard to the means by which men secured 
election to the episcopal office. Here are Chry- 
sostom’s words: “That some have filled the 
churches with murders, and made cities desolate 
when contending for this position, Ñ now pass 
over, lest I should seem to say what is incred- 
ible to any.” 


1 De Habitu Virginum, 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 91 


He was equally unsparing in dealing with 
the vices of the lower orders of the clergy. 
The natural result followed. The “historic 
Church” convened a packed council, which 
deprived him of his archbishopric, and he was 
banished to Nicea. Moved, however, by the 
indignant fury of the laity, the Emperor re- 
called him, and his return to Constantinople was 
like a public triumph. But his fearless and 
scathing denunciations of the corruptions and 
immoralities of Church and Court led to the 
summoning of another council, more skilfully 
arranged; and his second banishment was in- 
tended to be, as in fact it proved, a death 
sentence. He practically died a martyr—one of 
the first of the great army whose blood cries to 
God for vengeance upon the “ historic Church.” 

Nor were licentiousness and simony evils of 
recent growth in the Church; nor were they 
peculiar to the see of Chrysostom. In A.D. 370 
an imperial edict was read in the churches of 
Rome, prohibiting clerics and monks from re- 
sorting to the houses of widows or female wards, 
and making them “incapable of receiving 
anything from the liberality or will of any 
woman to whom they may attach themselves 
under the plea of religion; and (the edict adds) 
any such donations or legacies as they shall have 
appropriated to themselves shall be confiscated.” 


92 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


This edict, sweeping though its terms were, 
had to be confirmed and strengthened by 
another twenty years later. And here is the 
comment of Jerome on the subject: “I blush 
to say it, heathen priests, players of pantomimes, 
drivers of chariots in the circuses, and harlots 
are allowed to receive legacies; clergy and 
monks are forbidden to do so by Christian 
princes. Nor do I complain of the law (he 
adds), but I am grieved that we deserve it.” 1 
According to Jerome, so great was the evil, that 
men actually sought ordination in order to gain 
easier access to the society of women, and to 
trade upon their credulity. He, at least, main- 
tained no reserve about the vices of the clergy 
of his day. And the picture he draws of the 
state of female society among the Christians is 
so repulsive that, as a recent writer remarks, 
we would gladly believe it to be exaggerated ; 
but (he adds) “if the priesthood, with its 
enormous influence, was so corrupt, it is only 
too probable that it debased the sex which is 
always most under clerical influence.” ? 

Of “ Saint ” Cyril of Alexandria, Dean Milman 
writes: “ While ambition, intrigue, arrogance, 
rapacity, and violence are proscribed as un- 
christian means, barbarity, persecution, blood- 


1 Wordsworth’s Church History, vol. iii. p. 92. 
* Dill’s Roman Society, p. 113. 


IX FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 93 


shed, as unholy and unevangelical wickednesses, 
posterity will condemn this orthodox Cyril as 
one of the worst of heretics against the spirit of 
the Gospel.” 

A kindly estimate this, of a man who was 
morally guilty of the murder of Hypatia, and 
who was a notorious mob leader, and the brutal 
persecutor of the Jews, whom he drove out of 
Alexandria in thousands, giving up their houses 
to pillage. This turbulent pagan claims notice 
here only because he was the ruling spirit in the 
Council of Ephesus (A.D. 481), which dealt with 
the heresies of Nestorius. Cyril had hurled 
anathemas against him for refusing to ac- 
knowledge the Virgin Mary as the “ Mother of 
God,” and he procured his condemnation by 
means that would discredit the lowest political 
contest, including the free use of a hired mob. 
So disgraceful was the disorder which prevailed 
that the Emperor dissolved the Council with the 
rebuke: “God is my witness that I am not the 
author of this confusion. His providence will 
discover and punish the guilty. Return to your 
provinces, and may your private virtues repair 
the mischief and scandal of your meeting.’’* 

1 And this was one of the “ Ecumenical Councils” which were recog- 
nised in England even after the Reformation. At the Ephesus Council 
of eighteen years later the ‘‘ orthodox” majority made free use of their 


hired bullies, and Flavian, Bishop of Byzantium, received such brutal 
treatment that he died of his injuries, As another illustration of what, in 


94 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


No one need suppose that a wider outlook 
would lead us to reverse the judgment to which 
these facts and testimonies point. A portly 
volume would not contain the evidence available 
to prove the utter apostasy of “the primitive 
Church of the Fathers.” One more testimony, 
however, is all I will here adduce. In his early 
life Salvian of Marseilles was the contemporary 
of Jerome and Augustine, the greatest of all 
the Latin Fathers. A century had elapsed 
since “the conversion of Constantine.” The 
“ persecution ” which the Christians had most to 
fear from the State was due to their vices and 
crimes, and to the operation of penal laws of 
drastic severity, designed to prevent their 
lapsing back to paganism. Why was it then 
that God seemed to have forsaken the Church ? 
Here is Salvian’s answer: “ See what Christians 
actually are everywhere, and then ask whether, 
under the administration of a righteous and 
holy God, such men can expect any favour ? 
What happens every day under our very eyes is 
rather an evidence of the doctrine of Provi- 
dence, as it displays the Divine displeasure pro- 
voked by the debauchery of the Church itself.” 


his Bampton Lectures, Canon Liddon calls ‘‘ the illuminated mind of 
primitive Christendom,” it may be mentioned that in the struggle for 
the Popedom between the rival factions of Damasus and Ursinus, 
131 corpses were left on the pavement of one of the Roman churches 
in a single day, 


IX FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 95 


The following are further extracts from the 
same treatise : 


“How can we wonder that God does not 
hearken to our prayers?... Alas! how grievous 
and doleful is what I have to say! The very 
Church of God, which ought to be the appeaser 
of God, is but the provoker of God. And a very 
few excepted who flee from evil, what is almost 
every assembly of Christians but a sink of 
vices? For you will find in the Church scarcely 
one who is not either a drunkard or a glutton, 
or an adulterer, or a fornicator or frequenter of 
brothels, or a robber or a murderer. I put it 
now to the consciences of all Christian people 
whether it be not so. ... 

The Churches are outraged by indecencies. 
. . . You may well imagine what men have been 
thinking about at church when you see them 
hurry off, some to plunder, some to get drunk, 
some to practise lewdness, some to rob on the 
highway... . 

“ How should we exult and leap for joy if we 
could believe that the good and bad were nearly 
balanced in the Church as to numbers! .. . 
How happy should we be in so thinking, but in 
fact we have to mourn over almost the whole 
mass as guilty.” 


In accounting for the growth of Christianity 
in early days, Gibbon the infidel gives promi- 
nence to the morality of the Christians. And 


96 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


Tertullian declared that no one who transgressed 
the rules of Christian discipline and propriety 
was recognised as a Christian at all. And yet 
two centuries later, ‘almost every assembly of 
Christians had become a sink of vices !’’* 

There is no need in this connection to speak of 
the Church of the Middle Ages—the fiendish 
enemy and persecutor of all who feared the Lord 
and followed righteousness and truth. The esti- 
mates formed of the number of the martyrs are 
unreliable; for though not one of those many 
millions is forgotten in heaven, the records on 
earth are altogether faulty. This at least is 
certain, that for long ages God was on the side 
of the martyrs, and that the Church of Chris- 
tendom was the most awful impersonation of 
the powers of hell that earth has ever known. 
“No means came amiss to it, sword or stake, 
torture chamber or assassin’s dagger. The 
effects of the Church’s working were seen in 
ruined nations and smoking cities, in human 
beings tearing one another to pieces, like 
raging maniacs, and the honour of the Creator 
of the world befouled by the hideous crimes 
committed in His name. All this is for- 


1 The body of Salvian’s treatise containing this terrible indictment 
of the Primitive Church is given in Taylor’s Ancient Christianity, to- 
gether with quotations from Augustine and others of the Fathers in 
support of his testimony. The preceding clauses are taken from The 
Buddha of Christendom, now republished as The Bible or the Church, 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 97 


gotten now, forgotten and even audaciously 
denied.” * 

And what of the Churches of the Reforma- 
tion? Here I will call another witness whose 
words should command attention. The following 
is a quotation from Dean Alford’s Commentary 
on the Lord’s Parable recorded in Matthew xii. 
43-44, After explaining the direct application 
of the parable to the Jewish people, he pro- 
ceeds : 


“ Strikingly parallel with this runs the history 
of the Christian Church. Not long after the 
apostolic times, the golden calves of idolatry 
were set up by the Church of Rome. What the 
effect of the captivity was to the Jews, that of 
the Reformation has been to Christendom. The 
first evil spirit has been cast out. But by the 
growth of hypocrisy, secularity, and rationalism, 
the house has become empty, swept, and gar- 
nished by the decencies of civilisation and dis- 
coveries of secular knowledge, but empty of living 
and earnest faith. And he must read prophecy 
but ill, who does not see under all these seeming 
improvements the preparation for the final de- 
velopment of the man of sin, the great repos- 
session when idolatry and the seven worse spirits 
shall bring the outward frame of so-called Chris- 
tendom to a fearful end.” 


With what increased emphasis might Dean 


1 Froude’s Council of Trent. 
} G 


98 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


Alford write these words to-day if he were still 
with us! Half a century ago the Church of 
England was giving a bold testimony to the 
principles of the Reformation, or, in other words, 
to the Divine authority of Scripture, and the 
great truths which Scripture teaches. And Non- 
conformity was a great spiritual power through- 
out the land. But to-day the Epistle to Laodicea 
is finding its fulfilment on every hand. For 
though “ empty of living and earnest faith,” the 
Churches were never so boastful of their con- 
dition. “The tree of knowledge, now, yields 
its last, ripest fruit,” for men sit in judgment } 
on the Word of God! | 

The Philadelphian Epistle promised an open 
door that none could shut; and at the Refor- 
mation the Bible was given to the people. The 
Devil has thus been baffled for centuries; for a 
return to his former methods is barred by the 
printing-press. But quite as effectually, and by 
far more subtle means, the Old Serpent is now 
filching the Bible from us. It is acclaimed as 
the best of books, but it is not the Word of God. 
And the agency by which he is seeking to 
achieve this fell design is the same as that which 
he used in pre-Reformation times—the Profess- 
ing Church on earth. 

And the Churches of the Reformation are his 
chief agents in this evil work. Within living 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 99 


memory they stood together in defence of the 
Bible, but there is not one of them that cor- 
porately maintains that testimony to-day. Stier’s 
epigram about the teaching of German Rational- 
ists applies to the teaching of most of our Theo- 
logical Colleges and numberless guwasi-Christian 
pulpits: “Heaven and earth will never pass 
away, but the words of Christ pass away in 
time!” 

Some one may object, perhaps, that all this 
refers only to the Professing Church, and not 
to the true Church. But there are not two 
Churches on earth in this dispensation, any 
more than in that which preceded it. “The 
Jewish Church” was Divine in its origin, but it 
was apostate; and so is it with the Church on 
earth to-day. The only true Church is that 
which the Lord is building, and it has no 
corporate existence upon earth. 

But it may be said that the real Christians, 
though within the Professing Church, are in no 
way responsible for its apostasy. In the age 
of the martyrs this plea might, perhaps, have 
been sustained, but never before or since. And 
certainly not to-day; for their apathy amounts 
in effect to positive connivance with evils which 
are undermining true Christianity. If they stood 
together in refusing to enter any church in 


1 See p. 79, ante, 


100 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


which an altar, with its pagan furniture, has 
supplanted the Communion Table, or where, 
in the ministry of the pulpit, the “ Higher 
Criticism” has dethroned the Word of God, the 
very apostasy itself might prove a blessing 
in disguise. But faithfulness to the Lord is 
subordinated to the maintenance of “ Church 
unity.” And so “the salt has lost its savour,” 
and all hope of recovery is gone. 

It seems to be forgotten that discipleship is a 
personal bond. ‘Follow Me” is not addressed 
to congregations, but to the individual Christian. 
To love father or mother more than Christ is 
to be unworthy of Him; but it is deemed allow- 
able to love one’s Church more than Him! In 
the Epistles to the Seven Churches, from 
Ephesus to Laodicea, the ruling note is indivi- 
dual faithfulness—“to him that overcometh.” 
A similar note vibrates in the Apostle Paul’s 
address to the Elders of Ephesus. The future 
of the Church was dark. Grievous wolves 
would enter in among them, and of their own 
selves there would arise fomenters of heresy and 
leaders of schism. And what was to be their 
resource? ‘I commend you to God and to the 
word of His grace.” 1 

It marks a crisis in the Apostle’s ministry. 
His earlier Epistles had been addressed to 


1 Acts xx. 29-32. 


Ix FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 101 


churches ; but Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, 
written during his Roman imprisonment, were 
addressed to “saints.” In sympathy with the 
Apostle’s words, Chrysostom, writing three 
centuries later, lamented that “all things which 
are Christ’s in the truth” were counterfeited 
in the prevailing heresies of that age, and he 
urged that Christians “ should betake themselves 
only to the Scriptures.” And in our own day 
all this found an echo in the exhortation of the 
late Bishop Ryle, that Christians should expect 
nothing from churches, but look only to the 
Lord. 

The student of human nature who has 
adequate means and opportunities of inquiry 
respecting the vices and crimes of men finds no 
need of a devil to account for everything in that 
sphere. But, without the Satan of Scripture, | 
the religion of men is an insoluble enigma. For | 
Satan is the god of this world, and therefore the | 
religion of the world is the normal sphere of his | 
activities. And, as Luther said, all his assaults i 
are aimed at Christ Himself. He blinds the / 
minds of men to the revelation of a Christ who | 
is “the image of God.” * The Deity of Christ 
is thus his main objective, for upon that depends 
everything that is vital in Christianity. 

Hence his campaign against the Bible. For 


1 2 Cor, iv. 4-6. 


102 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


no one whose mind is not warped or blinded 
by the superstitions of religion can fail to 
recognise that it is only through the written 
Word that we can reach “the living Word.” 
The man who denies the Divine authority and 
inspiration of Holy Scripture and yet clings to 
a belief in the atonement of Calvary and the 
Deity of Christ is a superstitious creature who 
would believe anything !? 


1 Since these pages were written, a sadder book even than New- 
man’s Apologia has been published, viz. Monsignor Benson’s Confessions 
of a Convert. The fact that such men as these are led by the prevalent 
superstitions about “the Church” to make shipwreck of their Chris- 
tian life proves the need of plain speaking on this subject. And 
surely all who are connected with either of the historic Churches of 
the Reformation have a peculiar right, if not a special responsibility, 
to undertake the unwelcome task. 


CHAPTER X 


Fut well I know that the preceding chapter 
will give offence and be resented. But having 
regard to the awfully solemn import of the 
question here at issue, considerations of that kind 
must be ignored. For what concerns us is 
whether the lapse of nineteen centuries gives 
proof that the Lord has been false to His promise, 
or whether the history of the Professing Church 
during all the centuries, down to the present 
hour, does not amply explain why the fulfil- 
ment of His promise is delayed. 

Coupled with the promise are the words in 
which He expects His people to respond—“ Even 
so, come, Lord Jesus.” But there is not one of 
the Churches of the Reformation that would 
corporately identify itself with that prayer. And 
the Church that claims to be the Divine oracle 
and interpreter of Scripture, displays its enlight- 
enment by an error that might disgrace a school- 

1 In these days to hold that the Lord of glory was duped by Jewish 
superstitions about the Divine authority of Holy Scripture is proof of 
enlightenment, but a man is “ past praying for” who exposes the 


pestilent superstitions about the Church, which are the stock-in-trade 


of the Apostasy ! 
a iena 103 


104 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


boy, for it interprets the Lord’s words about “ the 
consummation of the age” to mean the end of the 
world. The blunder is as crassly ignorant as that 
of finding in the parable of the tares a warrant 
for murdering the martyrs. But the Churches 
of the Reformation, while of course rejecting the 
heresy which found expression in the fires of 
Smithfield, have adopted the heresy which 
relegates the “ Second Advent” to the “end of 
the world”; and as the result (to quote Bengel’s 
words) “the Churches have forgotten the hope 
of the Church.” 

And. yet the Coming is inseparably linked 
with the Cross. Much there is in Scripture 
that the thoughtless can ignore; but not the 
words, ‘“ Ye do shew the Lord’s death till 
He come.” The many who dismiss the Coming 
to the end of all things, would presumably wish 
us to believe that, at the Lord’s Supper, the 
cup which points back to the blood of our 
redemption, points forward to the blood of 
Isaiah’s prophecy of “the day of vengeance” ; 
and some who are too enlightened for this would 
- find us a half-way house amid the horrors of the 
Great Tribulation. But all this betokens either 
ignorance of Scripture, or a mistaken exegesis. 
“Till He come”: the words are an implicit 
renewal of the promise, and an appeal to every 
heart that has learned by grace to look for “ that 


x FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 105 


blessed hope.” Doctrines are for the head, but 
the heart reaches out to a person ; and here it is 
Himself that the Lord brings before His people. 
* This do in remembrance of ME”’—not the Christ 
of the crucifix, not a dead Christ, but an absent 
Lord who has promised to come again. 

But here the ways divide, and we must choose 
between the teachings of theologians of repute 
and the words of Holy Scripture. In the 11th 
chapter of 1 Corinthians, the Apostle declares 
that the Church’s charter relative to the Lord’s 
Supper had been specially revealed to him, and 
he proceeds to deliver to them what he had thus 
“received of the Lord.” And yet here is what 
a great commentator has to say upon the 26th 
verse: “The words are addressed directly to the 
Corinthians, not to them and all succeeding 
Christians ; the Apostle regarding the coming of 
the Lord as near at hand, zz his own time.” 1 

Many a page might be filled with quotations 
from other eminent divines, all testifying to the 
fact that the Lord’s return was a present hope 
with the early saints, and offering a similar 
explanation of the seeming falseness of that 
hope. The momentous question here under con- 
sideration is thus disposed of by the assumption 
that, in regard to this vital truth, the Apostles 
were in error, and misled the Church entrusted 


1 Dean Alford in loco, The italics are his own. 


106 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


to their care. I repeat, therefore, that here we 
reach a parting of the ways; for we cannot 
consent to escape from a difficulty by under- 
mining faith in Holy Scripture. 

“« Gird up the loins of your mind” is a much- 
needed exhortation, and in no sphere more than 
in relation to this very truth. For let us face 
the facts once again. The inspired Apostles 
taught their converts to expect the Lord’s return. 
And “ I am coming quickly” was His own last 
message to His people, before the era of revela- 
tion ended, and the era of a silent heaven set in. 
But He did not come quickly, nor has He come 
at all. Were it not for the “slovenly-minded- 
ness ” that characterises thought in the religious 
sphere, this overwhelming fact would lead to 
searchings of heart on the part of all spiritual 
Christians. 

Scattered among the various Churches there 
must surely be very many who cherish the hope, 
and are troubled at the Lord’s continued absence. 
And is it idle to suggest that they should come 
together for earnest inquiry and prayer upon this 
subject? Even in the dark days of Elijah’s 
prophecy, there were 7000 true-hearted seekers 
after God in Israel; is it possible then that, in 
this seven-million-peopled London, there are not 
seven thousand Christians who would eagerly 
devote a day to such a purpose! And let them 


= FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 107 


be of one mind. Opinions may differ as to 
which phase of His Coming the Lord had in 
view in His parting message, and as to whether 
any events must precede the fulfilment of it. 
But in presence of the fact that we are in the 
twentieth century of the Christian era, to raise 
questions of this kind would betoken a spirit of 
controversy or of mere quibbling. 

In regard to what Bengel calls “the hope of 
the Church” let us have an eirenicon. It is 
sad that truth which ought to unite all spiritual 
Christians should lead to strife. And the fault 
is not all on one side. ‘The secret rapture,” 
“the Coming of the Lord for His Church,” 
“His coming back with His Church”—these 
and other kindred phrases are used as though 
they expressed revealed truth, whereas they 
express mere inferences from Scripture, which 
may be true or may be false. 

The Fourth Gospel closes with an incident 
which every Bible student ought to study. On 
receiving the command, “Follow Me,” Peter 
pointed to his companion and asked, “ What 
shall this man do?” And his inquiry brought 
the Lord’s rebuke, “If I will that he tarry till 
I come, what is that to thee?” How natural 
the inference the disciples drew, “that that dis- 
ciple should not die”! What other inference 
would anyone draw? But the Evangelist cites 


108 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


the Lord’s words a second time, in order to 
make it clear that He did not say what the 
disciples inferred to be His meaning. And the 
moral is that in all such matters we are not to 
draw inferences from Divine words, but to accept 
them with childlike simplicity. 

The language of Zech. xiv. 4 and Acts i. 11 
may seem to indicate that the Coming there 
foretold will be secret, in the sense in which 
the Ascension was secret—with no attendant 
angels, no manifestation to the world. But of 
another Coming it is said, “ Every eye shall see 
Him.” And if some sceptic demands how that 
is possible on this round earth, let him ask the 
first schoolboy he meets how it is that, day by 
day, every eye can see the sun! When “the 
King of Glory passes on his way,” then, “ From 
earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s furthest coast,” 
“every eye shall see Him.” But whether this 
will be true of the Coming of “that blessed 
hope” Scripture does not tell us; and we must 
not corrupt or add to Scripture with our own 
inferences and ‘ pious opinions.” 

Scripture teaches explicitly that, after this 
Christian dispensation ends, Israel will be re- 
stored to Divine favour; and the question is 
sometimes asked, how this will be brought about 
—‘ How can they hear without a preacher?” 
for, ev hypothesi, all Christians will previously 


x FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 109 


have been called away to heaven. And in our 
day-dreams the thought arises at times whether 
the devout among His earthly people may not 
see Him when He comes to call His heavenly 
people home. But this is a day-dream, nothing 
more. 

Then as regards the Lord’s coming for His 
Church, the phrase is incorrect, not merely on 
grounds already indicated,’ but also because it 
seems to imply that none of the holy dead of 
former ages will have part in that resurrection ; 
and for this we have no Scriptural warrant. 
Not that we would dare to assert the contrary. 
It behoves us to know whatever the Scripture 
teaches, and to be content not to know where 
Scripture is silent. And this applies no less to 
the theory of His coming back with His Church. 
Here again some of us have day-dreams. May 
it not be that ‘the holy ones” of His glorious 
escort, when He comes to execute vengeance 
upon earth, will be “the angels of His power,” 
and that the redeemed of this age of grace will 
have no part in that dread ministry ? 

Allied with this is that other phrase, “the 
personal reign of Christ on earth”; as though 
the Lord of glory is ever to live in a palace 
in Jerusalem! In our day-dreams here, the 
redeemed of the heavenly glory are not upon 


1 See p. 79, ante, 


110 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


the earth, but with the Lord as He reigns over 
the earth. Not in a heaven “ beyond the stars,” 
but in a heaven as near as it seemed to be in 
the Patmos visions, or when the martyr Stephen’s 
eyes were opened to behold it. But these again 
are only dreams; and men who dogmatise on 
these subjects are quite as silly, though neither 
as harmless nor as interesting, as a set of babies 
in the nursery, prattling about things that are 
beyond their ken. 

These criticisms and suggestions are designed 
merely to eliminate certain elements that tend 
either to prejudice, or to obscure, the considera- 
tion of the question here at issue. We often 
wonder that the Jews are not startled into 
repentance by the fact that, though we have 
reached the twentieth century of the Christian 
era, their national hope is still unfulfilled. And 
are we to remain indifferent to the fact that our 
Christian hope is also unrealised? “ Yet a very 
little while and the Coming One will come and 
will not tarry”:! such words as these cannot 
be explained away by the theory of a thousand- 
years’ day. What then should be our action 
and our attitude in this matter ? 

Has the past no lesson for us? ‘The Jewish 
Church” had a right creed, and the coming of 
Messiah was a vital part of it. But with the 


2 Heb; x. 87. 


—— 


x FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 111 


“Church” as a Church it was merely a doctrine. 
They did not want Him; and when He came 
they cast Him out. It was only with the few 
that it was a hope, and a heart-longing hope. 
They were really looking for Him—“ waiting 
for the consolation of Israel,” like the old saint 
who took the infant Saviour in his arms and 
said, “Now, Lord, lettest Thou Thy servant 
depart in peace . . . for mine eyes have seen 
Thy salvation.” They had a divinely appointed 
‘Church,’ with a ritual divinely ordered in 
every detail. And the Lord took His place 
within it, as did the disciples under His 
teaching. But though zm it, they were not 
of it. “The existing communities, the religious 
tendencies, the spirit of the age, assuredly 
offered no point of attachment, only absolute 
and essential contrariety, to the kingdom of 
heaven.” 1 

And this has its parallel to-day. Ministers 
and congregations that cling to “the faith once 
delivered,” reverencing the Scriptures as the 
Word of God, and cherishing the hope which 
the Scriptures inspire, find themselves daily 
more and more out of sympathy with the 
“organised Christianity” of which they are 
outwardly a part. In these “latter times,” 
strikingly characterised, as they are, by “de- 


1 These words are Dr. Alfred Edersheim’s. 


112 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


parting from the faith,” the unity of the Church 
can be promoted only by giving up the faith, 
and truckling to rationalism and ritualism. 
But “to keep the unity of the Spirit” ought 
to be the aspiration and the aim of all who 
are true to Christ. And this is the true “ Com- 
munion of Saints”—‘“ not the common per- 
formance of external acts, but a communion 
of soul with soul, and of the soul with Christ. 
It is a consequence of the nature which God 
has given us that an external organisation 
should help our communion with one another. 

But subtler, deeper, diviner, than any- 
thing of which external things can be either 
the symbol or the bond is that inner reality 
and essence of union—‘the unity of the 
Spirit.’” 

And no influence can be more fitted to pro- 
mote this unity than the confession of a common 
hope, and the longing which the hope inspires. 
No need here, moreover, for large assemblies or 
eloquent exhortations. Enthusiasm thus pro- 
duced is transient. And He Himself it was 
who spoke of the “two or three” gathered 
together in His name. Among Christians 
everywhere there must surely be some “who 
love His appearing.” And if to-day, for the 
first time in all the sad history of Christendom, 


1 Hatch’s Bampton Lectures, 1880 (vii.). 


xX * FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 113 


such would come together in every place the 
wide world over, wherever Christians can be 
found, we might look up in hope that He who 
is called “The Coming One”! would fulfil the 
promise of His name. 


1 'O épxduevos,—Heb. x. 37. 


CHAPTER XI 


In the Apostle Paul’s farewell words to Timothy 
there is nothing more pathetic than his reference 
to the hope. In the school of grace he had 
learned to live looking for the Lord’s appearing.’ 
But now he writes, “the time of my departure 
is at hand.” Perhaps it had been revealed to 
him, as it was revealed to Peter, that he was 
about to be “offered up’—to die a martyr’s 
death. But this gives rise to no suspicions of 
his having been misled respecting the hope, or 
of his having misled the converts. The only 
change in his language is the use of a new 
verb and a different tense. He had been looking 
for the appearing; now, he speaks of having 
loved it. And taking his place with all who, 
like himself, would have to enter the promised 
land through the waters of the Jordan, he 
says: “ Henceforth there is laid up for me 
the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: 
and not only to me, but also to all them that 
have loved His appearing.” ? 


1 Titus ii. 11-13. 4 2 Tim, iv, 8, R.V. 
114 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 115 


In connection with his epigram already quoted, 
Bengel notices that, in the New Testament, 
exhortations to faithfulness are based upon the 
hope of the Coming. And the failure of 
Christian life is largely due to the fact that 
the truth of grace is commonly separated from 
that hope. A certain great Jewish Rabbi asto- 
nished his disciples by teaching that every man 
should repent the day before his death. How, 
they asked him, could they know the day of 
their death? They could not know it, was 
his reply, and therefore every one should act 
as if each day was his last. If men could count 
on a few years’ warning of death, “deathbed 
repentances” would become the rule. And 
certain it is that if great events foretold in 
Hebrew prophecy must precede the Lord’s 
return, His coming will have less power to 
mould the character and influence the life than 
it had in Apostolic times. 

In these strange days of “stress and strain,” 
cases of “ loss of memory ”’ are becoming frequent. 
People are “found wandering.” Who they are, 
and where they came from, they cannot tell. 
Their past is all a blank; they remember 
nothing. And many Christians expect to reach 
heaven in that condition. The cloud on which 
they will be poised, as they sing the New Song 
of the redeemed, will shut out every memory of 


116 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


life on earth, with its unnumbered mercies and 
its unnumbered sins! Some there are, again, 
whose case is like that of another famous Rabbi, 
who, when he came to die, burst into tears 
through fear of Divine judgment ; and when his 
disciples who stood around his deathbed ex- 
pressed surprise that he, ‘the light of Israel,” 
should be a prey to such misgivings, he told 
them that he knew not by which of the two 
roads his journey lay, to Paradise or to Gehenna. 
Most Christians seem to oscillate between 
these two extremes of error. Many are 
strangers to settled peace, because they fear to 
trust “the word of the truth of the Gospel.” 
And those who know what it means to have “a 
heart established by grace” need to be reminded 
of the solemnities of the judgment-seat of Christ. 
For this subject of the judgment of the redeemed 
falls within the category of neglected truths. 
Chrysostom’s exposition of the 5th chapter 
of 2 Corinthians has been described as “ one of 
the grandest efforts of human eloquence.” But, 
intensely Christian though he was in heart and 
life, that great saint and teacher misread the 
Apostle’s words. And the mistranslation of the 
passage in our English version is a testimony to 
the far-reaching influence of his brilliant homily. 
To be “accepted of Him” is not the aim of the 
Christian life, nor is ‘‘the terror of the Lord” 


A 


XI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS LY? 


its constraining motive. For “the judgment- 
seat of Christ” is not the dread tribunal of “the 
great white throne” of the Patmos vision. The 
“we” of the tenth verse is the “we” of all the 
verses that precede and follow it. The whole 
passage breathes confidence and courage. God 
has “wrought” us for immortality, and He has 
given us the Holy Spirit as the earnest of that 
which is our assured destiny. And it is to us 
that the entire chapter refers. Here are the 
Apostle’s words : 


“ Being therefore always of good courage, and 
knowing that, whilst we are at home in the 
body, we are absent from the Lord (for we walk 
by faith, not by sight); we are of good courage, 
I say, and are willing rather to be absent from 
the body, and to be at home with the Lord. 
Wherefore also we make it our aim, whether at 
home or absent, to be well-pleasing unto Him. 
For we must all be made manifest before the 
judgment-seat of Christ; that each one may 
receive the things done in the body, according 
to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad. 
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we 
persuade men, but we are made manifest unto 
God; and I hope that we are made manifest 
also in your consciences. ”’* 


The salvation of the soul is not a prize to be 
won by saintship, but a blessing bestowed by 
12, Cor v. 6-11, R.V. 


118 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


Divine grace upon the sinner who believes in the 
Lord Jesus Christ. It is not the goal, but the 
starting-point, of the Christian’s life. '! Upon two 
main points the teaching of Scripture is explicit ; 
the consequences of accepting or rejecting Christ 
are eternal; and the destiny of all will be de- 
clared by the resurrection. For the resurrection 
will be either “unto life” 
and the saved will be raised in bodies “ fashioned 
like unto His glorious body.” And it is as thus 
“raised in glory ” that we shall be judged. 

This disposes of the Patristic interpretation 
of the passage, by which our translators were 
misled. Even the word “appear” lends itself 
to the error, for it suggests arraignment before a 
criminal tribunal on the issue of guilty or not 
guilty, whereas the “ resurrection unto life” will 
be a public proof that every question of guilt 
has been for ever settled. The judgment of 
2 Corinthians v. 10 will possibly be a public 
manifestation of the Fathers judgment of 
1 Peter i. 17, which is at present a secret matter 
between the child of God and His heavenly 
Father. Perhaps, indeed, the forensic tone given 
to the passage by the word “judgment-seat ” 
may be foreign to its intention.’ 


or unto judgment; 


1 The primary meaning of Sua is a space on which to put one’s foot, 
as in Acts vii. 5; then, a raised place, a platform or pulpit, as in Neh, 
viii. 4 (LXX). This is its usual meaning in classical Greek. Then, a 
throne (Acts xii, 21) and a judgment-seat. 


XI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 119 


This suggestion is greatly strengthened by the 
Revised Text, where “bad” is displaced by 
phaulos—one of those words, as Archbishdép 
Trench notices, “ which contemplate evil under 
another aspect, that, namely, of its good-for- 
nothingness.” And, he adds, “This notion of 
worthlessness is the central notion of phaulos,” 
though the word runs through other meanings 
until it reaches “bad”; “but still bad pre- 
dominantly in the sense of worthless.” * 

All this immensely deepens both the scope 
and the solemnity of the Apostle’s words. Many 
who could say with him, “I know nothing 
against myself,” miss the significance of what he 
adds—*“ yet am I not hereby justified, but He 
that judgeth me is the Lord.” And the Apostle 
Peters words about a “vain (or resultless) 
manner of life” come to mind in this connection.’ 
Writing to Hebrew Christians, his words refer 
to the strictly moral and religious life that 
characterised devout Judaism after the Ezra 
revival. And are there not very many pious 
people nowadays who, though leading ex- 
emplary lives, will have no garnered sheaves 
“ against that day ” ? 


1 N.T. Synonyms, Second Series. In his concluding sentence he says, 
“ The severer meaning is involved in the word in other places in the 
New Testament where it occurs.” The primary meaning of the word, 
according to Grimm, is ‘‘easy, slight, ordinary, mean, worthless, of 
no account.” 

2 l Pet. i. 18. 


120 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


I deprecate the thought that I wish to fritter 
away the solemn truth of the bema of Christ. 
My purpose is merely to explain the words in 
which it has been revealed. For the passage 
has been so perverted that even the word 
“ receive” is commonly read with a police-court 
flavour attaching to itt And this leads to 
efforts to get rid of the truth altogether. Such 
efforts are as discreditable as they are vain. 
Even in this life no one of generous feeling 
can fail to be distressed by the consciousness 
that he is unworthy of the estimate his fellows 
form of him ; and he is always glad to be ‘“ made 
manifest,” unless indeed where the result might 
do harm to others. And how could it be other- 
wise when we shall be freed from all the mean- 
ness, as well as from the grosser evil, of our 
Adam nature? And what meanness could be 
baser than to desire that everything which would 
bring us praise might be brought to light, but 
that all our faults and failings and sins might be 
concealed? Moreover, as Bengel beautifully 
puts it, “ The everlasting remembrance of a great 
debt which has been forgiven, will be the fuel of 
the strongest love.” 

And there is another element here involved, 
which our theology ignores. A Christian with 


! The following are the passages where it occurs: Matt. xxv. 27; 
Luke vii. 37 (brought); 2 Cor. v. 10; Eph. yi. 8; Col. iii, 25; Heb. 
x. 36; xi. 19, 39; 1 Pet. i, 9; v, 4; 2 Pet. ìi. 18. 


- 


p 


XI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 121 


the Bible in his hands does not need the well- 
accredited facts of Spiritualism to teach him 
that the denizens of the spirit world take notice 
of the acts of men. The declaration of God’s 
righteousness in remitting sins committed prior 
to the death of Christ! was certainly not to 
satisfy the sinners whom He pardoned. It had 
reference, doubtless, to the high intelligences of 
heaven. For the salvation of fallen men is no 
“ backstairs business.” It will be in open view 
of all the angelic host that God will raise the 
sinners of the earth to heavenly glory. And 
may not the judgment of the dema of Christ 
have some reference to them.? 

And there is yet another consideration which 
is of such transcendent importance that it ought 
to silence every cavil. God has a purpose in our 
redemption, and that purpose is “the praise of 
the glory of His grace.” Is it possible that 
anyone who knows anything of a true spiritual 
experience can believe, or even wish to believe, 
that aught will be concealed that tends to 
further that purpose? And there are two sides 
to this. Peter’s denial of his Lord, and Demas’ 
“turning back in the day of battle,’ will be 
remembered there. But so will the widow’s two 
mites, and Mary’s alabaster box of ointment. 


1 Rom. iii. 25. 
2 I find that Bishop Wordsworth makes a suggestion of this kind in 
his commentary on the passage. 


122 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS cmap. 


It was in circumstances of trial such as we have 
never known that Demas and Peter failed. But 
who is there who has not failed at times when 
faithfulness would have cost nothing more than 
reproach or ridicule? And let us not forget 
that the widow’s sacrifice would have been 
unrecorded had not the Lord been present to 
notice it; and that, but for Him, the reproach 
of « Why this waste?” would have rested upon 
Mary. And in that day surely we shall have 
the grace to rejoice when service which brings 
honour from men will be appraised at its true 
worth, and many a humble Christian will be 
rewarded for sacrifices that no eye but His has 
noticed, or that men have noticed only to 
condemn. 

A forgotten truth it is indeed, this of the 
bema of Christ. And the wish to get rid of it is 
a grave reflection upon the Christianity of our 
own times. If we are to “have confidence, and 
not to be ashamed before Him at His coming,” * 
it behoves us, instead of ignoring truth which 
makes us ashamed here and now, to judge both 
heart and conduct in the light of it. The 
Christian who has an expurgated version of 2 
Corinthians, from which the judgment-seat of 
Christ has been eliminated, would do well to 
turn his attention next to the following solemn 


1 1 John ii, 28. 


——s- ae 


XI FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 123 


words in Colossians: “Knowing that of the 
Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inherit- 
ance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. But he 
that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong 
which he hath done: and there is no respect 
of persons.” ' 


1 Çol. ii. 24, 25; ef. Eph. vi. 9. To cite a case of another kind, 
will nothing be heard in that day of the evil work of Christian 
advocates of the Higher Criticism apostasy, by whom many a Christian 
life is wrecked, and multitudes of young Christians are stumbled ? 
(Matt. xviii. 6.) 


CHAPTER XII 


THE exegetical system of “ old-fashioned ortho- 
doxy,” “received by tradition from the Fathers,” 
I once again repeat, leaves the Bible an easy 
prey to the sceptical attacks of the “ Higher 
Criticism.” In view of that movement, the 
defence of the Bible on the old lines is as hope- 
less as it would be to meet modern ordnance 
with the weapons which won the battle of 
Waterloo! If, for example, we persist in re- 
garding the present Christian dispensation as 
the last zon of God’s dealings with mankind, 
and in ignoring Israel’s place in the Divine 
counsels and purposes, the numerous eschato- 
logical passages in the Gospels and Epistles seem 
to be a tissue of wholly irreconcilable predic- 
tions. And an attempt to harmonise them 
serves only to bring their utter incongruity into 
stronger relief. And the clear and fearless 
thinker is thus tempted to jettison belief in the 
Divine inspiration of the Scriptures. 

One of the saddest effects of this sceptical 
crusade is that, under its evil influence, the 


writings of Christian expositors are often as 
124 


FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 125 


profane as those of avowed rationalists. Here, 
for example, is a sentence culled at random from 
the most recent Commentary of this school. 
Referring to the events predicted in Matt. xxiv. 
34, the writer says, “Jesus was quite certain 
that they would happen within the then living 
generation.” * 

To the Christian it is “quite certain” that 
the Lord Jesus was the Son of God, and that 
His words were the words of God—words that 
shall never pass away. Just as a spiritually 
devout Roman Catholic may be a true believer 
in Christ, though clinging to belief in the Virgin 
Mary and the saints, so these “critics” may 
unfeignedly believe in the deity of Christ; but 
in freely acknowledging this, we pay homage, 
not to their intelligence, but to their piety. 

A well-taught child could understand what 
seems to be hidden from the wise and prudent 
of this kenosis theology. For the study of 
God’s recorded dealings with His people, from 
Eden to Pentecost, will teach us that no Divine 
promise of blessing is ever marred by words to 
indicate the Divine foreknowledge that it will 
be rejected. At the beginning of His ministry, 
therefore, the Lord proclaimed that His king- 
dom was at hand, albeit, in this twentieth 


1 The Expositor’s Greek Testament. Dean Alford’s Commentary tells 
us that the word here rendered generation has the meaning of a race or 
family of people, 


126 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


century of the Christian era, His people are 
still praying that it may come. And so also 
when, at the close of His ministry, He warned 
His people of the events that “ must first come,” 
He still spoke of it as near at hand; for He had 
in view the Pentecostal amnesty so soon to be 
proclaimed. 

The First Gospel does not contain a single 
word that is inconsistent with its scope and 
purpose in the Divine scheme of revelation, as 
a record of the Lord’s mission and ministry 
as Israel’s Messiah; and it will be studied by 
believing Israelites in days to come as if the 
present Christian dispensation had never inter- 
vened. And on account of their ignoring this, 
some Christians suppose that the world must 
be evangelised before the return of Christ. It 
is “the gospel of the kingdom” that the Lord 
specified in His words in that connection, and 
“the end” to which He pointed is that of the 
age which will be brought to a close by His 
coming as Son of Man." 

At a missionary meeting long ago, when 
Charles Simeon sat down after speaking on 
behalf of missions to the Jews, Edward Bicker- 
steth, the Secretary of the Church Missionary 
Society, put a pencilled note into his hand, 
with the question, “ 8,000,000 Jews, 800,000,000 


1 See p. 50, ante, 


peper" Er 


XII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 127 


heathen—which is the more important?” To 
which Simeon promptly pencilled the reply: 
“ But what if the 8,000,000 Jews are to be ‘ life 
from the dead’ to the 800,000,000 heathen 2” 

Although so plainly stated in Scripture, it is 
a forgotten truth that the full and final evan- 
gelisation of the world awaits the restoration of 
Israel. And “the receiving” of Israel is neces- 
sarily deferred until after the coming of Christ 
to bring the present dispensation to a close. 
A forgotten truth, I call it, for in common 
with the “mystery ” truths’ of the distinctively 
Christian revelation, it was lost in the interval 
between the Apostolic age and the era of the 
Patristic theologians. And our standard theo- 
logy is so dominated by the writings of the 
Fathers that it is still unillumed by the light 
of the Evangelical Revival. 

It may be remarked in passing that if the 
leaders in that revival had waited for the 
“Christian Church” to promote missions to 
the heathen, the heathen would possibly be 
still in midnight darkness. When, a few years 
before he sailed for India, William Carey rose 
in an assembly of Ministers of his own com- 
munion, to plead the cause he held so dear, 
he was peremptorily silenced as a troublesome 
fanatic. And the Church Missionary Society 


1 See p. 13, ante. 


128 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


was the offspring of the despised and hated 
“Clapham Sect.” The meeting at which it 
was founded was not held in either West- 
minster Abbey or St. Paul’s, but in a small 
hired room in a poor sort of City inn. It was 
not till forty years afterwards that the eccle- 
siastical dignitaries accorded it their patronage. 


A brief recapitulation of the argument and 
contents of the preceding pages may fitly bring 
this final chapter to a close. If the sham 
‘Higher Criticism” gains acceptance with 
Christians, it is certainly not because of the 
infidel element which permeates its teaching. 
Its success is due to prevalent ignorance of the 
distinctive truths of the Christian revelation. 
Redemption and forgiveness of sins through the 
blood of Christ, justification by faith, the resur- 
rection of the dead and eternal judgment—these 
and other kindred truths are not Christian in any 
exclusive sense: they are in the warp and woof 
of the Divine religion of Judaism. And we need 
not doubt that they pertained to the primeval 
revelation which preceded the call of Abraham. 
For one of the great purposes of that “ call ” was 


1 The history of the C.M.S. might save us from the baneful super- 
stitions about ‘the Christian Church” which are so prevalent, and 
which are the great hindrance to a spiritual revival to-day. (See chap. 
ix., ante, especially pp, 97 ff.) These superstitions are opposed to the 
XXXIX Articles. See Canon Eden’s Ohwrchman’s Theological Dictionary 
on Art. XIX, p. 87, 


XII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 129 


that the oracles of God, which men had corrupted, 
might be entrusted to the Covenant people. 

And although that people were often made 
subject to Gentile rule, first in the Servitudes, 
and again during all the centuries which followed 
the Babylonian conquest, yet, from Genesis to 
Malachi, there is nothing in Scripture to suggest 
that they would ever lose their privileged 
position as the people of God. Their being 
“ cast off” was a crisis unparalleled since the call 
of Abraham—a crisis which, as we have seen, 
was a New Testament “mystery.” And yet, in 
spite of the Apostle’s warning, the exponents 
of Christendom religion are so “wise in their 
own conceits” that they not only regard the 
result as a matter of course, but in effect they 
accept the figment that God “ has cast away His 
people whom He foreknew.” But the intelligent 
Christian rejoices in the knowledge that “the 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance,” 
and that Israel is yet to be restored to Divine 
favour, and to regain their normal place of 
privilege and testimony. And the “mysteries” 
of the Christian revelation are truths relating 
to the present abnormal economy of Israel’s 
rejection. 

No error is more common than that of sup- 


1 The Babylonian cult, which the ‘‘ Higher Critics” regard as the 
source from which the cult of the Pentateuch was evolved, was the 
traditional and corrupt phase of that primeval revelation. 

I 


130 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


posing that the position from which the Jew 
has been dispossessed is now assigned to the 
Gentile. Gentiles, as such, whether professing 
Christians or pagan idolaters, share with Jews 
the common doom of sinful men. But “God 
has concluded them all under sin in order that 
He might have mercy upon all.” For He to 
whom all judgment has been committed is now 
exalted as Saviour, and the Divine throne has 
thus become a throne of grace; “grace is 
reigning through righteousness unto eternal 
life.” 

But it is not merely as lost sinners that Jew 
and Gentile stand upon the same level. As 
believers in the Lord Jesus Christ both are 
raised to the same heavenly glory, and the same 
relationship as members of His Body. As the 
reign of grace is the basal “ mystery,” so this is 
the crowning “mystery ” of the Christian reve- 
lation. 

We have seen, however, that these “ mys- 
teries ” are wholly incompatible with the special 
position and peculiar privileges Divinely ac- 
corded to Israel by the Abrahamic covenant. 
And this being so, the restoration of that people, 
so plainly foretold in Scripture, involves as 
definite a change of dispensation, as that which 
ushered in the present economy. And thus we 
are prepared for another “ mystery,” namely the 


XII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 131 


Coming of the Lord, which will bring this 
economy to a close; and which, by calling His 
heavenly people home to heaven, will clear the 
way for the restoration of His earthly people to 
their normal position under the covenant. 

The “mystery” of the Coming is indeed a 
forgotten truth. And yet, apart from its 
influence on Christian life and character, no 
truth is more important in our defence of Scrip- 
ture against the “learned ignorance” of the 
“Higher Criticism.” For it is the pivotal truth 
of New Testament eschatology; and in the light 
of it—to change the figure—we can find perfect 
harmony in the teaching of the Gospels and 
Kpistles on the subject of the Advent, where the 
sceptics see nothing but confusion. 

And lastly, the truth of the judgment-seat of 
Christ has received prominence in these pages. 
Even if Scripture were silent on this subject, a 
true spiritual instinct might teach a Christian 
to refuse the belief, which indeed the light of 
nature would lead us to reject, that when “we 
pass within the veil” all memories of earth will 
be effaced, and that as regards our future it is a 
matter of no practical importance whether we 
are faithful or unfaithful to the Lord. A revolt 
against such a false belief has betrayed very 
many into letting slip the truth that eternal life 
is a gift assured by Divine grace to all who come 


132 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


to Christ. Others fall back upon the old heresy 
of a purgatory of some kind; though with 
pharasaical blindness they assume that the 
better sort of Christian will escape the fiery 
discipline. Others again, ignoring the “mys- 
teries ” both of grace and of the Coming, would 
have us believe that, although 1 Corinthians xv. 
51 assures us that at the Coming of the Lord 
we shall ALL be changed and called to heaven, 
those who have failed to attain some undefined 
standard of saintship will be punished by being 
left behind to await a later resurrection. And 
the newest and strangest theory of this class is 
that erring Christians, though destined to enjoy 
an eternity of heavenly glory, are to be denied a 
share in the millennial kingdom upon the earth. 

But in marked contrast with all such vagaries 
of exegesis, the teaching of Scripture is clear. 
We are saved by grace through faith, and that 
(salvation) is not of ourselves, it is the gift of 
God, not of works lest any man should boast.? 
And for the elect of this dispensation, salvation 
includes the resurrection and the glory. In this 
respect, therefore, the least worthy stands upon 
the same level with the most worthy of His 
people. But the judgment-seat of Christ will 
deal with every question which these human 
expedients are designed to solve. 


1 See Appendix V. : Eph, ii. 8, 9. 


XII FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 133 


In words as profoundly true as they are 
simple, the Westminster Divines have taught 
us that “ Man’s chief end is to glorify God and 
to enjoy Him for ever.” And this end will be 
realised when the redeemed of earth shall stand 
in heavenly glory, the whole record of their past 
having been laid bare before Him who “ died for 
their sins according to the Scriptures.” And 
every attribute of God—not merely His grace 
and love, but His holiness and righteousness— 
will be so displayed and vindicated that the 
unfallen of heaven will unite with the redeemed 
of earth in ascriptions of eternal praise. 

But the chief burden of these pages is the 
truth of the Lord’s Coming. This subject is 
too often treated as a mere bypath of Christian 
doctrine. My aim has been to show that it is 
not merely the true hope of the Christian life, 
but that it is of such central importance in the 
New Testament revelation that ignorance or 
neglect of it leaves the Scriptures open to 
sceptical attack. And I have suggested that 
the seeming failure of the promise may be 
explained by the apostasy of Christendom, and 
the unfaithfulness of the people of God within 
the Professing Church. The great fact which 
claims our most earnest attention is that in 
Apostolic days the Christians were Divinely 
taught to look for the Lord’s return as a present 


134 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS CHAP. 


hope, and yet that it is still unfulfilled in this 
twentieth century of the Christian era. It is a 
fact which tries the faith of the believer, and 
supplies the sceptic with a plea for his unbelief. 
It may be said, perhaps, that the Lord’s 
promise that He would come “quickly” must 
be read in the light of the truth that with God 
“a thousand years are as one day.” ‘This I have 
already dealt with. And let us remember that 
these words are the complement of the other 
statement, “that one day is with the Lord as a 
thousand years.” ‘That is to say, time is not an 
element with Him in working out His purposes ; 
and therefore all that these many centuries of the 
Christian era will bring of glory to Christ, and of 
blessing to us, might have been attained without 
this long delay. And this consideration should 
quiet the fears and solve the difficulties of any 
who think that a shortening of the Christian age 
would have clashed with the truth of the Body 
of Christ, and of our election to that position of 
glory. The promise of the Coming is identified 
with that very truth. And to say that, were it 
not for this two thousand years’ delay, God 
could not have fulfilled all His purposes to 
usward, is a flagrant denial of the very truth 
upon which the above noticed objection is based. 
These well-intentioned efforts to defend Divine 
truth by searching into the “ unsearchable coun- 


xu FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 135 


sels” of God savour of Uzzah’s fault in putting 
forth his hand to protect the ark. And in these 
days of eager thought and earnest scepticism, it 
is perilous in the extreme to suggest that when 
the Lord declared He would come quickly, He 
meant that He would come in two thousand 
years! If this be so, then let us treat the pro- 
mise as a secret to be spoken of in whispers, 
and only when no unbelievers are within ear- 
shot. For it would lead the profane to rejoice ; 
and many a reverent and earnest seeker after 
truth would be stumbled and repelled. ‘“ What 
should we think of a fellow-man (they might ex- 
claim) who makes a plain statement in simple 
words which he knows will be accepted every- 
where in their ordinary acceptation, while he is 
using them in a mystical sense that entirely 
destroys their meaning!” ? 


1 It was a kindred misuse of the truth of the Divine counsels which 
led “the Christian Church” to oppose the pioneers of Gospel work 
in heathendom. We need a “‘Calvin Society” to clear that great 
teacher’s name from the reproach of ‘‘ Calvinism” ! 

2 There is no doubt as to the meaning of the words, viz. that He 
would come ‘‘ quickly, speedily, without delay” (Grimm’s Lexicon). 
The gloss, that when He does come He will come suddenly, is-a sorry 
quibble. I may add, it is a glaring misuse of 2 Peter iii. 8 to apply it 
here at all; and that not only because of the reason sstated on p. 84, 
ante, but also because the Lord here speaks in His human name, as 
when He taught by the Sea of Galilee, or at the Last Supper—“ I Jesus 
. .. I am coming quickly.” The mystery deepens when we realise 
that, if this strange hypothesis be true, the Lord’s inspired Apostles 
were misled by His words. And it becomes overwhelming when we 
mark the care with which He warned His Jewish disciples in relation 
to His returning as Son of Man, that He would not come quickly. (See 
pp. 79, 80, ante.) 


136 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


The only adequate answer to this taunt is 
a repudiation of the suggestion which gives 
rise to it. 

And if, rejecting that suggestion, we fall back 
upon the alternative offered in the preceding 
pages, we can plead the teaching of Scripture, 
from Eden to Patmos, that whenever Divine 
purposes or words have seemed to fail, the 
failure has been due to human sin, and almost 
always to the sin or unfaithfulness of the people 
of God. And we may plead also that, if this 
alternative solution of the difficulty be erroneous, 
the error is not one that can give occasion to the 
unbeliever to cavil at the faithfulness or truth of 
our Lord and Saviour. Every other word, with- 
out exception, that comes from His Divine lips 
is received by us with simple and unquestioning 
faith ; let us accord a like faith to the promise 
of His Coming. 


APPENDIX I 
Nore to Cuarrer III (p. 17) 


Tue Divine judgment of the 70 years’ Servitude to 
Babylon fell in 606 s.c., which was the third year of 
King Jehoiakim, and the year before the accession of 
Nebuchadnezzar. The Jews refused to bow to the Divine 
judgment thus inflicted upon them, and in the ninth year 


of the Servitude they revolted (597 3.c.). This brought 


upon them the judgment of the Captivity. The Baby- 
lonian army again captured Jerusalem, and all “save the 
poorest sort of the people of the land” were deported 
to Chaldea. Jeremiah in Jerusalem, and Ezekiel among 
the captives, gave repeated warnings that continued im- 
penitence would bring down a still fiercer judgment. 
But, misled by promises of help from Egypt, the Jews 
again revolted in the tenth year of the Captivity; and, 
in fulfilment of prophetic warnings, their city was de- 
stroyed and their land laid desolate. “'The Fast of 
Tebeth” is still observed by the Jews of every land in 
commemoration of the day from which the era of the 
70 years of “the Desolations” was reckoned, namely, 


` the tenth day of the tenth month in the ninth year of 


King Zedekiah (589 s.c.) See Ezek. xxiv. 1, 2, and 
2 Kings xxv. 11. 

Both the 70 years of the Servitude and the 62 
years of the Captivity ended in 536 s.c., when the 
decree of Cyrus permitted the Jews to return to their 
own land. That decree expressly authorised the re- 
building of the Temple. But though the words of a 
Persian king were regarded fe divine, that decree was 

13 


138 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


thwarted by the local authorities in Judea until the 
reign of Darius Hystaspes. The explanation of this 
strange fact is that God would not permit the re- 
building of the Temple until the era of the Desolations 
ended. 

The year in use both with the Jews and the Chaldeans 
was one of 360 days, the calendar being corrected by 
intercalation. And that this is the prophetic year is 
made plain both in Daniel and Revelation, 42 months 
being the equivalent of 1260 days. Now 70 years of 360 
days contain 25,200 days; and the period between the 
10th Tebeth 689 and the 24th Chisleu 520, when the 
foundation of the second Temple was laid (Haggai ii. 18), 
was exactly 25,200 days. 

It is very commonly assumed that Daniel’s prayer of 
chapter ix. of his prophecy had reference to the 70 years 
of the Captivity, and that the 70 weeks were to end 
with the coming of Messiah. These blunders discredit 
many a learned writer. For there was no 70 years’ cap- 
tivity, and the period “unto Messiah the Prince” was 
not 70 weeks but 7 and 62 weeks. Daniel ix. 2 states 
explicitly that it was the years of the Desolations that 
were the basis of the prayer and of the prophecy; and, 
as we have seen, these were prophetic years of 360 days. 
The era of the weeks was to date from the issue of a 
decree to rebuild Jerusalem. History records one such 
decree, and only one, viz. that of the month Nisan in 
the 20th year of Artaxerxes. And 69 sevens of prophetic 
years (173,800 days), measured from lst Nisan, 445 B.C., 
end upon that fateful day in Passion week when, for the 
first and only time in His ministry, the Lord was publicly 
acclaimed as the Messiah the Prince. (Neh. ii.; Luke 
xix. 37 ff. Mark the words of verse 42: “If thou hadst 
known, even thou in this day, the things that belong to 
thy peace !”) 


eo E | 


APPENDIX I 139 


But what then of the 70th week? Here it is that 
all this has an important bearing on the main subject 
of the preceding pages. As early as the days of Hippo- 
lytus, bishop and martyr, the belief prevailed that the 
fulfilment of Daniel’s last week belongs to the future. 
And such was the view of Julius Africanus, “the father 
of Christian Chronologists.” This, moreover, is entirely 
in keeping with the Lord’s words in the synagogue of 
Nazareth (see p. 29, ante); and it is definitely established 
by His words recorded in Matthew xxiv. 15, with reference 
to Daniel ix. 27. It is certain, moreover, that the 70th 
week has not been fulfilled in the past. For the 70th 
week begins with the covenant between the Jews and 
their last great patron, who becomes their last great per- 
secutor. In the middle of the week he violates his treaty 
with them; and the latter half of the week (the 42 
months, or 1260 days, of Daniel and Revelation) is the 
period of the Great Tribulation, which is to be followed 
immediately by the awful portents of the “ Coming of the 
Son of Man,” foretold in Isaiah xiii. 10 and Joel ii. 31. 
(Matt. xxiv. 29, and see verse 27.) 

As already noticed (p. 77, ante), there will be a pro- 
longed interval between those awful portents and the 
actual “Coming of the Son of Man.” This is evident 
from the Lord’s words in verses 36-44. And yet that 
Coming might have taken place within the lifetime of 
those to whom the words were addressed. But, as I have 
sought to show in preceding pages, all this has reference 
to Israel; and its fulfilment is in abeyance because of 
Israel’s rejection during this Christian dispensation. The 
“Second Sermon on the Mount” will be fulfilled in every 
jot and tittle of it. But to throw it into hotch-potch 
with the distinctively Christian revelation entrusted to 
His Apostles after “the change of dispensation,” modi- 
fying the language of both in the vain effort to make 


140 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


them harmonise—this displays neither spiritual intelli- 
gence nor reverence for Holy Scripture.? 


1 The incidental questions involved in the chronology of the judg- 
ments of the exilic era, and of the seventy weeks, are too numerous 
and far too important to be treated in an Appendix note. But they 
are fully dealt with in The Coming Prince ; or, The Seventy Weeks of 
Daniel, a book that has been before the public for thirty years, and 
is now in the ninth edition. 


APPENDIX II 
Nore to Cuarter V (p. 39) 


“ Is the Church the Bride of Christ?” Let us begin by 
correcting our terminology. In the Patmos visions we 
read of “the Bride, the Lamb’s wife”; but “ the Bride of 
Christ ” is unknown to Scripture. 

The first mention of the Bride is in John iii. 29. Ina 
Jewish marriage the “ friend of the bridegroom ” answered 
to our “ groomsman.” His most important duty was to 
present the bride to the bridegroom. And this was the 
place which the Baptist claimed. His mission was to 
prepare Israel to meet the Messiah, “to make ready a 
people prepared for the Lord” (Luke i. 17). 

With the close of the Baptist’s ministry, both the Bride 
and the Lamb disappear from the New Testament until 
we reach the Patmos visions. In Rev. xxi. the Angel 
summons the Seer to behold “the Bride, the Lamb’s 
wife”; and he showed him “the Holy Jerusalem de- 
scending out of heaven from God.” The twelve gates of 
the city bear the names of the twelve tribes of the children 
of Israel, and in its twelve foundations are “the names of 
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.” And the foundations 
are “ garnished with all manner of precious stones.” For 
“it is the city that hath the foundations, whose builder 
and maker is God,” + the city for which Abraham looked, 
when he turned his back upon the then metropolis of the 
world. 

These Apostles of the Bride are not the Apostles who 
were given after the Ascension for the building up of the 


1 Heb. xi. 10. 
141 


142 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


Body of Christ—the Apostles of this Christian dispensa- 
tion, chief among whom was Paul. They are the twelve 
Apostles of the Lord’s earthly ministry to Israel, who 
shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel (Matt. xix. 28). They are the Apostles of the 
Lamb. And “the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb” 
are the temple of this city; and the Lamb is the light 
thereof. Every part of the description and of the sym- 
bolism tends to make it clear that this city represents a 
relationship and a glory pertaining to the people of the 
covenant. And now we can understand why it is that it 
is called the Bride of the Lamb, and never the Bride of 
Christ. For, the mystery of the Body having now been 
revealed, Christ is identified with the Church which is His 
Body, whereas His relation to Israel is entirely personal. 

What relation, then, does ‘ Jerusalem which is above” 
bear to us? No need here for guessing, and no room for 
controversy, for on this point Scripture is explicit; “the 
Jerusalem that is above is free, which is our Mother” 
(Gal. iv. 26, R.V.). We know that most of the Fathers 
were obsessed by the false belief that the Jew had been 
cast away for ever; but even this seems inadequate to 
account for their claiming the bridal relationship and 
glory for the Church of this dispensation. 

There are two reasons for refusing to believe that the 
Church is the Bride. First, because Scripture nowhere 
states that it is the Bride, and secondly, because Scripture 
implicitly teaches that it is not the Bride. ‘The question, 
Is A the wife of B? may be answered in the negative, 
either by pointing to C as his wife, or by indicating a 
relationship between A and B which is incompatible with 
that of marriage. And in both these ways Scripture 
vetoes the Church-Bride theory. For it teaches that the 
Bride is “our Mother,” and that the Church is the Body 
of Christ. 


3 


APPENDIX II 143 


The 5th chapter of Ephesians, moreover, ought to be 
accepted as making an end of controversy on this subject. 
The marriage relationship is there readjusted by a heavenly 
standard. If, therefore, the Church were the Bride, we 
should find it asserted here with emphatic prominence. 
But it is the Body relationship that is emphasised. Christ 
loved the Church, and the Church is His Body; therefore 
a Christian is to love his wife as his own body. In the 
3lst verse the ordinance of Gen. ii. 24 is re-enacted for 
the Christian with a new sanction and a new meaning.’ 
The “great mystery ” of verse 32 is not that a man and 
his wife are one body, for such a use of the word “ mystery” 
is foreign to Scripture. And moreover, the Apostle says 
expressly, “ I am speaking about Christ and the Church.” 
And the last verse of the chapter disposes of the whole 
question: “Nevertheless (7rA7v, though man and wife are 
not one body, yet because Christ and the Church are one 
body) let every one of you love his wife even as himself.” 

By a strange vagary of exegesis the Apostle’s words in 
2 Cor. xi. 2 are sometimes appealed to in support of the 
Church-Bride theory. Dr. Edersheim cites this passage 
to illustrate the position of groomsmen (or “friends of 
the bridegroom”) at a Jewish marriage. Besides their 
_ other functions, they were, he says, “the guarantors of 
the bride’s virgin chastity.”? And the Apostle uses this 
figure to express his “jealousy ”—his solicitude, for the 
Corinthian Christians. 


1 To interpret Eph. v. 31 in a carnal sense is an outrage upon 
Scripture. 

2 Jewish Social Life, p. 153. It is noteworthy that in 2 Cor. xi. 2 the 
Apostle does not use the word “ bride,” but the ordinary word for an 
unmarried girl. 


APPENDIX III 
Nore to Cuaprer VI (p. 46) 


Tuer are three different words used in the Greek Testa- 
ment in relation to the Lord’s Coming. 

Parousia means primarily “ presence” (see 2 Cor. x. 
10; Phil. ii. 12), and it is used of any person’s arrival 
(see, e.g., 1 Cor. xvi. 17; 2 Cor. vii. 6,7; &c.). In secular 
use it applied specially to any state visit. In the follow- 
ing passages it is used of the return of Christ: Matt. 
xxiv. 3, 27, 37, 39; 1 Cor. xv. 23; 1 Thess. it, 192m 
18; iv. 15; v. 23; 2 Thess. i. 1, 8; James v. 7, 8; 
2 Pet. i. 16; 1 John ii. 28. 

Apokalupsis (“ revelation” or “ manifestation ”) is used 
of the Advent in 1 Cor. i.7; 2 Thess. i. 7; 1 Pet 
Indy bo: 

Epiphaneia (“appearing”) occurs in 2 Thess. ii. 8 
(brightness); 1 Tim. vi. 14; 2 Tim. i. 10; iv. 1, 8; 
Titus ii. 13. 

And the verb phanerod (“ to appear or be manifested ”) 
is used in Col. iii. 4; 1 Pet. v. 4; 1 John ii. 28; iii. 2. 

The attempt has been made to apportion these words 
to the several future manifestations of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. A reference to the passages where they occur 
will enable the Bible student to judge whether this dis- 
tinction can be sustained; or whether the words do not 
rather indicate different phases or aspects of the various 
“ Comings” foretold in Scripture. 


144 


piot patel 


APPENDIX IV 
Nore to Cuarrer VII (p. 65) 


Ir the commonly received exegesis of Philippians iii. 8-14 
be correct, we are faced by the astounding fact that 
the author of the Epistle to the Romans and of the 15th 
chapter of 1 Corinthians—the Apostle who was in a 
peculiar sense entrusted with the supreme revelation of 
grace—announced when nearing the close of his ministry 
that the resurrection was not, as he had been used to 
teach, a blessing which Divine grace assured to all 
believers in Christ, but a prize to be won by the sustained 
efforts of a life of wholly exceptional saintship. 

Nor is this all. In the same Epistle he has already 
said, “ To me to live is Christ, and to have died is gain”; 
whereas, ex hypothesi, it now appears that his chief aim 
in life was to earn a right to the resurrection; and that 
death, instead of bringing gain, would have cut him off 
before he had reached the standard of saintship needed to 
secure that prize! For his words are explicit, “not as 
though I had already attained.” 

Here was one who was “not a whit behind the chiefest 
Apostles”; who excelled them all in labours and sufferings 
for his Lord, and in the “visions and revelations” ac- 
corded to him; whose prolonged ministry, moreover, was 
accredited by “mighty signs and wonders by the power 
of the Spirit of God.” And yet, ‘ being now such an one 
as Paul the aged,” he was in doubt whether he should have 
part in that resurrection which he had taught all his 
pagan Corinthian converts to hope for: for to them it 
was he wrote the words, “we shall all be changed.” 

145 K 


146 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


Such is the exposition of the Apostle’s teaching in 
many a standard commentary. And yet the passage 
which is thus perverted reaches its climax in the words, 
“Our citizenship is in heaven, from whence we are looking 
for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall fashion 
anew the body of our humiliation that it may be con- 
formed to the body of His glory.” 

“ Our citizenship is in heaven”: here is the clew to the 
teaching of the whole passage. The truth to which his 
words refer is more clearly stated in Ephesians ii. 6: God 
has “ quickened us together with Christ, and raised us up 
with Him, and made us sit with Him in the heavenly 
places in Christ.” More clearly still is it given in Colos- 
sians iii. 1-3: “If then ye were raised together with 
Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is 
seated on the right hand of God. Set your mind on the 
things that are above, not on the things that are on 
earth. For ye died, and your life is hid with Christ 
in God.” 

Ephesians and Colossians, be it remembered, were 
written at the same period of his ministry as Philippians ; 
and in the light of these Scriptures we can read this chap- 
ter aright. To“ win Christ” (ver. 8), or to apprehend, or 
lay hold of, that for which he had been laid hold of, or 
apprehended (ver. 12); or in other words, to realise practi- 
cally in his life on earth what was true of him doctrinally 
as to his standing before God in heaven—this is what he 
was reaching toward, and what, he says, he had not 
“already attained.” 

The “high calling ” of ver. 14 is interpreted by some to 
mean Christ’s calling up His own to meet Him in the air 
(a blessing assured to all “who are alive and remain unto 
the Coming of the Lord”); but this is not in keeping with 
the plain words—God’s high calling in Christ Jesus, i.e. 
what God has called us (made us) to be in Christ, 


frig tig 


APPENDIX IV 147 


If this passage refers to the literal resurrection, then 
the words “not as though I had already attained” must 
mean that, while here on earth, and before the Lord’s 
Coming, the Apostle hoped either to undergo the change 
of ver. 21, or else to win some sort of saintship diploma, 
or certificate, to ensure his being raised at the Coming. 
These alternatives are inexorable; and they only need to 
be stated to ensure their rejection. 

One word more. Ifthe Apostle Paul, after such a life 
of saintship and service, was in doubt as to his part in the 
resurrection, no one of us, unless he be the proudest of 
Pharisees or the blindest of fools, will dream of attaining 
it. In fact we shall dismiss the subject from our minds. 


APPENDIX V 
Nore to Cuarrer XII (p. 132) 


Exciusion from the millennial kingdom, we are told by 
some, will be the penalty imposed on Christians who 
lapse into immoral practices. And in proof of this we 
are referred to such passages as 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10; Gal. v. 
21; Eph. v. 5; &c. This assumes, however, that “the 
Kingdom of God” is merely a synonym for the millennial 
kingdom, an error which is exposed by the very first 
passage in which the phrase occurs in the Epistles. In 
Rom. xiv. 17 we read, “The Kingdom of God is not 
meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in 
the Holy Ghost.” 'This reminds us of the Lord’s words 
to Nicodemus. ‘The world and its religion is the natural 
sphere, but the Kingdom of God is spiritual; and none 
can enter it, none can see it, without a new birth by the 
Spirit. This is a truth of present and universal applica- 
tion. 1 Cor. xv. 50, which refers to the future, is a still 
more decisive refutation of the error. There we read 
that “flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God”; that is, can have no place or part init. But, as 
we all know, “flesh and blood *—men in their natural 
bodies—will be in the millennial kingdom. 

Then again we recall the exhortation of 1 Thess. ii. 12, 
“that ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called 
you unto His kingdom and glory.” ‘This is explained 
by 2 Thess. i. 5, “that ye may be counted worthy of the 
Kingdom of God”—a reference not to the future state, 
but to the place and calling of the Christian here and now. 
It is akin to the exhortations of Eph. iv. 1 (R.V.), “I 

148 


pee Se opr ere 


APPENDIX V 149 


beseech you to walk worthily of the calling wherewith 
ye were called.” For it is a present truth, and a fact 
of practical import, that the Christian has been “ trans- 
lated into the kingdom of the Son of His love” (Col. 
i. 13) As a matter of fact, it is extremely doubtful 
whether the millennial kingdom is ever referred to in 
these Epistles of the Apostle Paul. 

This scheme of exegesis, moreover, would teach us to 
acknowledge an “evil liver” as a Christian. But as 
2 Tim. ii. 19 tells us, the Divine seal has two faces: 
“& The Lord knoweth them that are His” is the Godward 
side of it; the other, which is to govern our action, is 
“ Let everyone that nameth the name of Christ depart 
from iniquity.” But, we are told, the “incestuous 
person” in Corinth was a Christian. The inspired 
Apostle so decided; but to us it is not given to read the 
Godward face of the Divine seal, and we are bound to 
judge others by their profession and conduct. To 
acknowledge as a Christian any one who is living in open 
sin is to be false to the Lord. Our responsibility is 
to act on 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10 and similar Scriptures. 
But if every penitent has a claim upon Christian 
sympathy, surely one whom we have regarded as a fellow- 
believer ought to be treated with unbounded patience 
and pity and Christian love. And let us not forget that 
there are sins more heinous than immoral acts. Some of 
the “unfortunates” of the streets may be nearer the 
kingdom than are men of high repute in the Professing 
Church, who are patterns of all virtue, but who deny the 
Deity and atoning work of the Lord Jesus Christ (Matt. 
xxi. $1). The doom of Sodom will be more tolerable than 
that of devout Capernaum (Matt. xi. 23, 24). 

What do the writers I am criticising mean by “ reign- 
ing with Christ”? Are all the many millions of the elect 
to sit on separate thrones? The Lord’s words in Matt. 


150 FORGOTTEN TRUTHS 


xix. 28 are clear. And some commentators refer to 
those words as explaining the first clause of Rev. xx. 4. 
But is it not equally clear that in the latter clause, as 
in Rom. v. 17 and 2 Tim. ii. 12, the word is used 
in the secondary sense of “living royally ” with Christ, 
or (as Grimm gives it) “to denote the supreme dignity, 
liberty, blessedness, which will be enjoyed by the re- 
deemed”? And thus the word will be fulfilled for all; un- 
less indeed we are to jettison the truth of grace, and make 
our heavenly calling and its blessings depend on merit. 
Certain it is that some will have special honours and 
rewards; but this truth does not conflict with the other. 

In this closing section of the Apocalypse there is no 
element of historic fulfilment. The scheme I am criti- 
cising assumes that ‘‘ the first resurrection” is that of the 
“Coming” of Paul’s Epistles: to me it seems certain 
that it is called “ the first,” with reference to the general 
resurrection of the 5th verse. And (as noticed on page 
57, ante) the language of verse 4 clearly indicates that it 
is the victims of the Tribulation who will have part in 
the first resurrection; for the redeemed of the present 
dispensation will have already passed to heaven in 
fulfilment of 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52. And itis not a matter of 
opinion, but of faith based on the Divinely-given words, 
that at that Coming of Christ none of His people will 
be left behind—* we shall not all sleep, but we shall att 
be changed.” 

Instead of accepting any of these theories, albeit they 
are suggested by a true spiritual instinct, let us seek to 
realise the responsibilities of our life on earth in view of 
the supreme solemnities of the judgment-seat of Christ. 


ay. my 


SOME OF THE SCRIPTURES EXPLAINED 
OR CITED 


Gen. i. 2, p. 85 
Jirue, p. 11 
Psalm xe. 4, p. 5 
Dan. ix., pp. 73, 77, 138, 139 
Zech. xiv. 4, pp. 47, 59, 108 
Matt. xxiv., pp. 50, 70, 76, 79, 
125, 139 
Luke iv. 16-25, p. 29 
Acts i. 11, pp. 47, 59, 108 
pee fr p. 5 
» XxX. 32, pp. 23, 100 
kei LZ. p: 10 
Rom. i. 2, pp. 24-27 
» Xi. 13-33, pp. 3, 4, 15, 21, 
37, 43 
» xv. 8, pp. 2, 42 
» Xvi. 25, 26, pp. 26, 27 


1 Cor. xi. 26, p. 105 

» Xv. 51-58, pp. 46, 61, 62 
2 Cor. v., pp. 62-64, 117-122 
Eph. iii. 4-6, pp. 16, 39 
Phil. iii. 14, p. 145 

o ke 21, 22 pp. 64, 6b, 

146 
1 Thess. iv., pp. 45, 54-59 
2 Tim. ii, 4-8, p. 114 
Titus ii. 11-13, pp. 65, 66 
Heb. ix. 28, p. 46 
2 Peter i. 14, p. 67 
» iii. 3-10, pp. 6, 84, 85, 
135 

Rev. x. 7, p. 35 

» Xi. 15-18, p. 35 

» xix. 2, 6, p. 36 


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co, 
Edinburgh & London 


rie Wakes: OOM 
b T ELS De p Tra TENE 


n i Lis | T ee 


i i TEN } 
Wi WA 
— 
F ~~ f 
$ 
< ' i “y 
~ : 
En $ 
GAL 
"SS 
e 
z 
= I sa 
‘ ‘ 
x * 
~ 
è 
‘ o i 
~N 
À : 
hd 
b 
y 
: L 
' 
‘ 
i 
- 
r . 
` 
—~ 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


Published by JAMES NISBET & Co., Ltd., 22 Berners Street, W. 


THE LORD FROM HEAVEN: Chapters on the Deity 
of Christ. With a Preface by the BisHop or DURHAM. 
Second Edition. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


“We wish this book could be put into the hands of every divinity 
student in our land. It is a model of concise statement, careful 
ratiocination, and reverent but illuminative handling of the Word 
of God. . . . We have read all Sir Robert Anderson’s books, but, 
in our opinion, this is about the weightiest of them all.”— The Life 
of Faith. 

“We have read it with deep thankfulness, and commend it to 
the attention of those who hunger for an acquaintance with Holy 
Scripture.”— The Christian. 


“Among the many valuable literary productions of the author, 
this volume is one of the most valuable.” —Evangelical Christendom. 

“ Sound, strong, and to any open mind convincing.”— The Sword 
and Trowel. 


“Once we began to read it we could not put the book down 
until we had finished it. ‘The Lord from Heaven’ is the one 
book, and the last word, on this subject, and is of commanding 
importance. . . . We acknowledge with deepest thankfulness that 
our love for, and knowledge of, Him Who is ‘the Lord from 
Heaven’ has been greatly intensified ; and that we are able to say, 
with feelings never experienced before, ‘ My Lord and my God.’”— 
Rev. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D., in Things to Come. 


THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY : a Handbook 
of Evangelical Truth. Thirteenth Edition. Revised and 
Enlarged. Cloth, 2s. 6d. net. 

“The chapters on ‘Grace’ and ‘The Cross’ are worth their 
weight in gold.”—7he Christian. 
“In every way an uncommon work.”’—Rev. EvAN H. HOPKINS. 


DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN: a Reply to Pro- 
fessor Driver and the late Dean Farrar. Third Edition. 
Cloth, 3s. 6d. 

“His apparently cogent elucidation of the vexed question of the 

Seventy Weeks.”— The Times. 

“The refutation (of the critics) is crushing.” ——-7he Record. 


“Tt pulverises the latest attack on the Book of Daniel.”—7he 
English Churchman. 


I L 


Published by JAMES NISBET & Co., Ltd., 22 Berners Street, W. 


PSEUDO-CRITICISM ; or, The Higher Criticism and 
its Counterfeit. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


“Sir Robert Anderson again levels his lance at ‘rationalistic’ 
criticism” — The Times. 
“Tt is a masterpiece of apologetics.” — The English Churchman. 


“I read the book through with the keenest interest, and I laid 
it down with the earnest hope that God would use it very widely 
among precisely the men for whom it was written with such 
masterly force..-THE BISHOP OF DURHAM. 


THE WAY: Chapters on the Christian Life. Second 
Edition. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


“ The work is one of a masculine and outspoken character, and 
well repays attention.” — The Record. 


“The author deals with the problems of life in his own masterly 
manner.”—Lzfe of Faith. 


“Tt is a real literary treasure.”— Christian Commonwealth. 


THE HEBREWS EPISTLE in THE LIGHT OF THE 
Tyres. Cloth, 3s. 6d. net. 


“A real contribution to the literature of the subject with which 
he deals. . . . We can cordially recommend this admirable book.” 
— The Life of Faith. 


“The book is full of noble thoughts, and shows deep spiritual 
comprehension of Holy Scripture.” —Tke Record. 


CRIMINALS AND CRIME: some Facts and Sugges- 


tions. Cloth, ss. net. 


“A most interesting and enlightening book. . . . We earnestly 
hope that it may influence public opinion.”—Dai/ly News. 


“Sir Robert Anderson has much to tell that is worth hearing, 
and the more he draws on his own experience the more instructive 
he is."— The Spectator. 


“An excellent book, founded on wide experience ... and 


written in a lively and entertaining fashion.”—//anchester Courier. 


> 


7 
ph ae | are 


“b 


Published by HODDER & STOUGHTON, Warwick Square, E.C. 


THE LIGHTER SIDE OF MY OFFICIAL LIFE. 
Cloth, ros. 6d. net. 


“Full of good anecdotes, and may be read with enjoyment from 
cover to cover.” —Morning Post. 


“The author guides us behind the scenes of the drama of 
criminal investigation . . . and he also gives us his candid 
opinion of various important official personages.”— The Times. 


“The book’s material gives it an interest such as only few 
volumes of reminiscences can claim, but it owes not a little to the 
manner in which it is written.”— Scotsman. 


“None need take up the book without anticipating much enter- 
tainment ; none will put it down without regret that it is not 
longer.” — Sketch. 


THE SILENCE OF GOD. Ninth Edition. Cloth, 
2s. 6d. 


“We are profoundly grateful for this most striking endeavour to 
move a terrible stumbling-block out of the way of many.”—7%e 
Record. 


“ An ingenious and subtle attempt to meet scepticism on its own 
ground.” —New York Tribune. 


“A book which has astounded religious Europe.” —New York 
Herald. 


THE COMING PRINCE ; or, The Seventy Weeks of 
Daniel. Ninth Edition. Cloth, 5s. 


“It deserves to be well and carefully studied.” — The Record. 


“There are few books on prophecy written in so fair and im- 
partial a spirit.” — The Christian. 


“Written with great ability.” —Zondon Quarterly Review. 


HUMAN DESTINY: a Handbook of the Eschato- 
logical Controversy. Sixth Edition. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 


“The most valuable contribution on the subject I have ever 
seen.” —The late C. H. SPURGEON. 


“It is seldom that we take up a book of which we wish that it 
had been longer, but this is such a book.” — The Record. 


REDEMPTION TRUTHS: “FOR US MEN.” 


Is. net. 


“Intended to help those who are seeking peace with God, or 
who desire to lead others into the way of life.” — Preface. 


3 


Pry te SOR 


Published by HODDER & STOUGHTON, Warwick Square, E.C. 


THE BIBLE AND MODERN CRITICISM. With 
a Preface by the Bishop or DuruHAM. Sixth Edition. 
Cloth, 7s. 6d. 

“ A vigorous criticism of the methods of the ‘ Higher Critics? ”— 

The Times. 

“ A noble contribution to current literature.”— The Record. 


“There can be no doubt about the importance of the volume.”— 
The Church Times. 


“This is a work for the present age.”— The News. 


“Valuable as the author’s former works were, his latest volume 
excels them.”—T7he English Churchman. 


“A work of singular lucidity of style and of remarkable argu- 
mentative power.” —New York Tribune. 


IN DEFENCE: a Plea for the Faith. Second Edition. 
Cloth, 5s. p 
“In this addition to Sir Robert Anderson’s many books, he deals 
only at the end directly with the Higher Criticism, the earlier 
chapters being devoted to the origin of life, Darwin, Spencer, Sir 
Leslie Stephen, the proofs of Christianity, the evidence of miracles, 
&c. Some of these chapters appeared eighteen years ago in a 
book called ‘A Doubter’s Doubts about Science and Religion.’ ”— 
The Times. (“A Doubters Doubts” was specially commended 
by Mr. W. E. Gladstone.) 


THE BIBLE OR THE CHURCH? Cloth, 5S 
“We trust it will find multitudes of readers. There is nota dry 
page in the book.”—7%e Life of Faith. 


“ We find ourselves in hearty agreement with the authors main 
position.” — Churchman. 


“He has put those who would be faithful to the Gospel under a 
heavy debt.” — The Christian. 


THE BUDDHA OF CHRISTENDOM. (Out of 
print. The bulk of it is incorporated in “ The Bible or 
the Church?” ) 


Published by JOHN MURRAY, 50 Albemarle Street, W. 


A GREAT CONSPIRACY. Paper, 6d. net. (An 
abridged Edition of the Authors “Sidelights on the 
Home Rule Movement.” ) 

“Essentially one of the books for to-day.”—7he Times. 


“Once taken up it cannot be laid down... . A fascinating 
story, and a most valuable contribution to history.” — The Globe. 


All the above books may be ordered through any Bookseller. 
4 


are CN A 
N r E ral E TS i 

hast ‘i K EW 7 
i 


aro. „ys Mias 
FARAN ga sigi | 


ro. “a ‘ee a 


Se OS ene a ee ee ee 
ee ee a et ee 


se 
SSS 


