[Illustration: THE RIGHT REV. JOHN HORDEN, BISHOP OF MOOSONEE]




                             FORTY-TWO YEARS
                               AMONGST THE
                            INDIANS AND ESKIMO

                        PICTURES FROM THE LIFE OF
                      THE RIGHT REVEREND JOHN HORDEN
                         FIRST BISHOP OF MOOSONEE

                                    BY
                              BEATRICE BATTY

                                  LONDON
                       THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
              56 PATERNOSTER ROW AND 65 ST PAUL’S CHURCHYARD
                                   1893

                                PRINTED BY
                 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                                  LONDON




PREFACE


The contents of the present volume are in a large measure the outcome of
a long-continued personal correspondence with the late Bishop of Moosonee.

As Editor of the _Coral Magazine_ I received from him many appeals
for aid in the various departments of his work. I asked for graphic
descriptions of the surroundings; and I did not ask in vain. Questions
concerning the daily life of himself and those about him, the food and
habits of the people, modes of travel, dress, climate, products, seasons,
and special incidents were duly answered and fully entered into. The
bishop had the pen of a ready writer, and all that he wrote was graphic
in the extreme. He was, however, modestly unaware of his talent in this
respect, until his eyes were opened to the fact by the well-deserved
appreciation of the letters and papers which came more frequently and
more regularly increasing in interest as time wore on.

The bulk of this book is made up of extracts from this correspondence,
with just enough information supplied to give the reader a clear idea
of the bishop’s life and work. The journal of his first voyage to the
distant sphere of his future labours he sent to me in quite recent
years, with the expressed hope that it might be published. The various
papers and letters afford not only a vivid picture of life amongst the
Indians and Eskimo, but a valuable example of what may be accomplished,
even under the most untoward circumstances, by indomitable perseverance,
unwavering fortitude, and cheerful self-denial, accompanied always by
prayer and a firm reliance upon God. ‘I can do all things through Christ
who strengtheneth me’ was the bishop’s watchword. His motto—‘The happiest
man is he who is most diligently employed about his Master’s business.’

Should the pictures of life and work offered in the accompanying volume
lead others to follow in Bishop Horden’s footsteps, their purpose will
have been indeed fulfilled.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                             PAGE

        I. THE VOYAGE OUT                                 13

       II. ACQUIRING THE LANGUAGE                         18

      III. EARLY LIFE                                     23

       IV. WINTER AT MOOSE FORT                           28

        V. A VISIT TO THE ESKIMO AT WHALE RIVER           42

       VI. SCHOOL WORK                                    50

      VII. FIRST RETURN TO ENGLAND                        56

     VIII. AGAIN AT WORK                                  60

       IX. DAYS OF LABOUR                                 70

        X. THE BISHOPRIC OF MOOSONEE                      76

       XI. A PICNIC AND AN INDIAN DANCE                   83

      XII. ORGANISATION AND TRAVEL                        92

     XIII. YORK FACTORY                                  105

      XIV. THE RETURN TO MOOSE                           116

       XV. TRYING TIMES                                  132

      XVI. CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR’S DAY AT ALBANY        150

     XVII. THE PACKET MONTH                              160

    XVIII. CHURCHILL AND MATAWAKUMMA                     172

      XIX. A DAY AT BISHOP’S COURT                       183

       XX. CLOSING LABOURS                               193

      XXI. LAST DAYS                                     219




[Illustration: A LOG HUT]




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                 PAGE

    THE RIGHT REVEREND JOHN HORDEN, BISHOP OF MOOSONEE   _Frontispiece_

    A LOG HUT                                                        9

    MAP OF MOOSONEE                                                 12

    A TRADER’S STORE                                                36

    A GROUP OF ESKIMO                                               46

    SHOOTING A RAPID                                                99

    CANADIAN TIMBER                                                119

    MOOSE FACTORY                                                  124

    A PAGE OF THE CREE ‘PILGRIM’S PROGRESS’                        145

    A DOG SLEDGE                                                   151

    ALBANY, HUDSON’S BAY                                           156

    AN INDIAN TRAVELLING ON SNOW-SHOES                             161

    THE CHURCH AT FORT GEORGE                                      169

    CHURCHILL IN SUMMER                                            173

    ON THE CHURCHILL RIVER                                         177

    A LARGE CANOE SHOOTING A RAPID                                 189




[Illustration: MAP OF MOOSONEE (SCALE, 400 MILES TO THE INCH).

_Stanford’s Geogˡ. Estabᵗ. London_]




FORTY-TWO YEARS AMONGST THE INDIANS AND ESKIMO




CHAPTER I

THE VOYAGE OUT


In the year 1670, a few English gentlemen, ‘the Governor and Company of
Adventurers of England trading to Hudson’s Bay,’ obtained a charter from
King Charles II. The company consisted of but nine or ten merchants. They
made large profits by bartering English goods with the Indians of those
wild, and almost unknown, regions for furs of the fox, otter, beaver,
bear, lynx, musk, minx, and ermine.

The company established forts, and garrisoned them with Highlanders and
Norwegians. The climate was too cold and the food too coarse to attract
Englishmen to the service. The forts, or posts, were about a hundred
and fifty or two hundred miles apart, and to them the Indians resorted
in the spring of the year with the furs obtained by hunting, snaring,
and other modes of capture. In return for these they obtained guns,
powder and shot, traps, kettles, axes, cloth, and blankets. The standard
of value for everything was a beaver skin. Two white foxes were worth
one beaver skin, two silver foxes were worth eight beaver skins, one
pocket-handkerchief was worth one beaver skin, one yard of blue cloth
was worth one-and-a-half beaver skins, a frying-pan was worth two beaver
skins. As time went on, and the value of furs in the market rose or fell,
the prices of certain things altered. But this is a sample of what they
were when the hero of our tale first went out to Hudson’s Bay in 1851.

Let us accompany the young missionary on his voyage to Moose Fort, the
chief of the company’s trading posts. ‘We, that is, my dear wife and
myself,’ he writes, ‘went on board ship at Gravesend on June 6, 1851.
Our ship was strongly built, double throughout; it was armed with
thick blocks of timber, called ice chocks, at the bows, to enable it
to do battle with the ice it would have to encounter. At Stromness we
remained a fortnight, taking in a portion of our cargo and a number of
men who were going to Hudson’s Bay in the service of the company. It
was a solitary voyage. All the way we saw but one vessel. On a Saturday
afternoon we entered the Straits.

‘The weather had been very foggy; but the fog rose, the sun shone out,
and a most beautiful spectacle presented itself. The water was as
smooth as a fish-pond, and in it were lying blocks of ice of all sizes
and shapes, some of them resembling churches, others castles, and others
hulls of ships, while at a considerable distance, on either side, rose
the wild and dreary land—a land of desolation and death, without a tree
or a blade of grass, but high and mountainous, with masses of snow lying
in all the hollows. The captain and mates became very anxious. The
dangers of the voyage had commenced. An ice-stage, raised eight or nine
feet above the deck, was erected, and on this continually walked up and
down one or two of the ship’s officers. A man, too, was constantly at
the bow on the look out, and yet the blows we received were very heavy,
setting the bells a-ringing, and causing a sensation of fear.

‘When we had got about half-way through the Straits, we saw some of the
inhabitants of this dreary land. “The Eskimo are coming,” said a sailor.

‘By-and-by, I heard the word _Chimo_ frequently repeated, which means
“Welcome,” and presently we saw a number of beautiful little canoes
coming towards us, each containing a man. These were soon followed
by a large boat containing several women and children. They all came
alongside, bringing with them seal-skins, blubber, fox-skins, whalebone,
and ivory. These they freely parted with in exchange for pieces of iron,
needles, nails, saws, &c., they setting a very great value on anything
made of iron. Now these people, who were very, very dirty, were not
dressed like English people, but both men and women wore coats made of
seal-skins, breeches of dog-skins, and boots of well-dressed seal-skins,
the only difference between a man’s and a woman’s dress being that the
woman had a long tail to her coat, reaching almost to the ground, and
an immense hood, in which she carried her little naked baby, which was
perched on her shoulders.

‘Again hoisting our sails, in two or three days we cleared the Straits
and entered Hudson’s Bay. Danger was not over. Our difficulties had
scarcely commenced. Ahead, stretching as far as the eye could reach,
is ice—ice; now we are in it. More and more difficult becomes the
navigation. We are at a standstill. We go to the mast-head—ice! rugged
ice in every direction! One day passes by—two, three, four. The cold is
intense. Our hopes sink lower and lower; a week passes. The sailors are
allowed to get out and have a game at football; the days pass on; for
nearly three weeks we are imprisoned. Then there is a movement in the
ice. It is opening. The ship is clear! Every man is on deck. Up with the
sails in all speed! Crack, crack, go the blows from the ice through which
we are passing; but we shall now soon be free, and in the open sea. Ah!
no prisoner ever left his prison with greater joy than we left ours.

‘A few days afterwards, as evening was closing in, there was a great
commotion on board: heavy chains were got on deck; we were nearing the
place of our destination; in the midnight darkness the roar of our guns
announced the joyful intelligence that we were anchored at the Second
Buoy, only twenty-five miles from Moose Fort.’

Looking at the map of North America, a little inland from the coast of
Labrador, you will find Hudson’s Bay, and in the south-west corner, at
the mouth of the Moose River, Moose Fort. Here is the residence of the
deputy governor and his subordinate officers; a number of people are
anxiously looking out; they are expecting the one ship that comes to them
in the course of the year. A small vessel lying a little way out to sea
has raised the long-looked-for signal, and rejoicing is the order of the
day.




CHAPTER II

ACQUIRING THE LANGUAGE


Our travellers were delighted with the appearance of Moose Fort and its
immediate surroundings. The little church, the line of neat cottages with
their gardens in front, and the new factory buildings, lying irregularly
along the banks of the river, gave the place almost the air of an English
village. Towering picturesquely above all, was the old fort, strongly
built and loopholed, now serving the purpose of a salesroom, but once
needed as a place of defence from attacks of the Indians. Poplars, pines,
and juniper formed a green background, and the place bore a smiling and
pleasant aspect, altogether surprising to those who had expected to
arrive on a barren and desolate shore.

Mr. Horden was received with unmistakable joy by the people, who had long
been left without a teacher, his predecessor in the office having quitted
Moose Fort the year before. He was at once at home amongst the Indians,
and immediately set about learning their difficult language.

Greek and Latin he declared to be tame affairs ‘in comparison with
Sakehao and Ketemakalemāo, with their animate and inanimate forms, their
direct and inverse, their reciprocal and reflective, their absolute
and relative, their want of an infinitive mood, and their two first
persons plural. This I found very troublesome for a long time; to use
_kelananow_ for we, when I meant _I_ and _you_; and _nelanan_, when I
wished to express _I_ and _he_. If merely the extra pronoun had required
to be learnt, I should not have minded, but I did mind very much when I
found in the verb the pronoun inseparably mixed up with the verb, and
that in portions of it the whole of the personal pronouns were expressed
by different inflections of the verb. But I had the very strongest of
motives to urge me forward: the desire to speak to the Indian in his own
language the life-giving words of the Gospel.

‘I had been at my new home but a few days before I set to work in
earnest. The plan I adopted was this: every week, with the assistance
of an interpreter, I translated a small portion of the service of the
English Church. This I read over and over again, until I had nearly
committed it to memory, and was able to read it on Sunday. The Lord’s
Prayer and a few hymns I found already translated, and I soon added a
few hymns more. Chapters of the Bible and sermons were rendered by the
interpreter sentence by sentence. Rather tedious, but we improved fast,
and I shall not soon forget the expression of surprise and joy on the
countenances of my congregation, when, after a few months, I made my
first address to them without an interpreter—but I am anticipating.

‘My plan was threefold. I provided myself with two books and a living
instructor; the latter a young Indian with a smattering of English. The
first of the two books was a small one to carry in my pocket; in it I
wrote a few questions with the aid of the interpreter. Having learnt
them, I went into an Indian tent, sat down among its inmates, drew out
book and pencil, and put one of my questions. One of those present would
at once give me an answer, entering generally into a long explanation, of
which I did not understand a word. However, they, knowing my aim, talked
on, and I listened, wondering what it was all about. Getting gradually
bewildered, I returned home. I repeated the process again and again,
and after a few days light began to shine out of darkness, the jumble
divided itself into words, the book and pencil no longer lay idle, every
word that I could separate from the others was at once jotted down, all
were copied out, translated as far as possible, and committed to memory;
and presently I got not only to catch up the words, but likewise to
understand a good deal of what was said.

‘The second book was a much larger one, and ruled. Having this and
pen and ink by my side, I would call an Indian, and he would take his
seat opposite; I then made him understand that I wished him to talk
about something, and that I wished to write down what he said. He would
begin to speak, but too fast; I shook my head, and said, _Pākack,
pākack_—“slowly, slowly,” and at a more reasonable rate he would
recommence. As he spoke, so I wrote, writing on every other line. We sat
thus until I could bear no more. Then, with the interpreter’s assistance,
I wrote the translation of each word directly under it, thus making an
interline. The work was a little trying, but by it I gained words, I
gained words in combination, I gained the inflections of words, I gained
the idiom of the language, I gained a knowledge of the mind of the
Indian, the channel in which his ideas ran, I gained a knowledge of his
mode of life, the trials and privations to which he was subjected.

‘Now as to the Indian lad. I began by drilling him in the powers of
an English verb, and after a few days we said a lesson to each other,
he saying—First person singular, I love; second person singular, thou
lovest, &c. Then I going on with mine, thus:

    _Ne sakehou_          I love him.
    _Ke sakehou_          Thou lovest him.
    _Sakehao_             He loves him.
    _Ne sakehanam_        We love him.
    _Ke sakehanou_        We love him.
    _Ke sakehawou_        You love him.
    _Sakehawuh_           They love him.

Then the inverse form:

    _Ne sakehik_          Me loves he.
    _Ke sakehik_          Thee loves he.
    _Sakehiko_            He is loved by him.
    _Ne sakihikonau_      Us loves he.
    _Ke sakehikonau_      Us loves he.
    _Ke sakehikowou_      You loves he.
    _Sakehikowuk_         They are loved by him.

And so on and on. The subjunctive mood, with its _iks_ and _uks_ and
_aks_ and _chucks_, was terribly formidable, still the march was onward,
every week the drudgery became less and the pleasure greater, and every
week I was able to enter more and more into conversation with those who
formed my spiritual charge.

‘In my talk I made mistakes enough. Once I had a class of young men
sitting around me, and was telling them of the creation of Adam and Eve.
All went well until I came to speak of Eve’s creation; I got as far as
“God created Eve out of one of Adam’s ——,” when something more than a
smile broke forth from my companions. Instead of saying, “out of one of
Adam’s ribs,” I had said, “out of one of Adam’s pipes.” _Ospikakun_ is
“his rib,” and _ospwakun_, “his pipe.”

‘After eight months I never used an interpreter in my public
ministrations, and I had been in the country but a few days more than
a twelvemonth, when, standing by the side of good Bishop Anderson,
I interpreted his sermon to a congregation of Albany Indians. I say
this with deep thankfulness to God for assisting me in my formidable
undertaking.’




CHAPTER III

EARLY LIFE


Mr. Horden had not only a wonderful power of acquiring languages,
but a wonderful power of adapting himself to all things, people, and
circumstances. This stood him in good stead throughout his career. Born
in Exeter, January 20, 1828, in humble circumstances, simply educated,
apprenticed to a trade in early boyhood, he lived to attain a high
position. All difficulties were overcome by his dauntless energy of
purpose and unwavering perseverance.

He wished to study, but his father put him to a smithy. He desired to
become a missionary, but his relatives discouraged the idea. He did not
rebel, he did not kick against authority, but he neglected no opportunity
to further his purpose. He read and thought, he attended evening Bible
readings, he taught in the Sunday school, and when his indentures were
out he left the anvil for the desk. He obtained the post of usher in a
boys’ school. And now being independent, he offered himself to the Church
Missionary Society, with a view to going to India as a lay agent, and
he was accepted with the understanding that he would await a suitable
opening, which might perhaps not occur for two or three years.

He was willing to wait, but his patience was not to be tried. The society
learnt that the Wesleyans had withdrawn from Hudson’s Bay, and that there
was great need of a teacher at Moose Fort. Here was an opening for a
young man such as John Horden appeared to be. Hastily he was telegraphed
for—Hudson’s Bay was not India! But he was willing to go. It were better
he should take a wife with him. The lady was ready, like-minded with
himself. They must start in three weeks. They agreed to do it. He went
home, got married, and returned to London. The needful outfit was hastily
prepared, and they started, as we have seen. Such in short is the story
of our hero’s earlier life.

Large and varied were to be his experiences in his later years. The
society at home hearing of his success with the Indians, his great
progress in learning the language, and his ready adaptability to all
the requirements of the post, had determined to send him to the Bishop
of Rupert’s Land for ordination. ‘But,’ said the bishop, ‘this plan was
formed in ignorance of the distance and difficulties of travelling in
this part of the country, and I did not wish to expose Mr. Horden with
wife and baby to it.’ Bishop Anderson chose rather to traverse his huge
diocese and ordain the young missionary at Moose.

On the morning of June 28, in the year 1852, the start was made from St.
Andrews, Red River, in a canoe decorated by one of the bishop’s scholars
with a mitre and the Union flag at the stern, and at the bow a rose and
duck. For the latter ‘I might have substituted the dove with the olive
branch, had I known of it in time,’ says the bishop, ‘but it was done to
surprise me, and the more familiar object was naturally enough selected.’
The provisions consisted largely of flour and pemmican, the clothing, of
the bishop’s robes and a few necessaries, the bedding, of a pillow with
a buffalo robe and blankets. The journey lasted six weeks. Throughout it
the bishop confirmed, married, and baptized as he passed from post to
post, and on arriving at Moose Fort the work was repeated. He found the
Indians full of love and regard for their teacher. ‘He has their hearts
and affections,’ he wrote, ‘and their eyes turn to him at once. This is
his best testimonial for holy orders.’

Careful examination of the candidate still further convinced the bishop
of his suitability, and when the annual ship arrived bringing an English
clergyman, the Rev. E. A. Watkins, destined for Fort George, he no longer
delayed, but ordained Mr. Horden both deacon and priest, Mr. Watkins
presenting. The bishop and Mr. Watkins had then to hasten on their
several ways, lest early winter might overtake them ere they reached
their destinations. And so the ardent, earnest young catechist was left
at Moose, pastor as well as teacher of his flock, known to and esteemed
by every man, woman and child of the Indian families who resorted thither
during the summer season, and supremely happy in his work and position.

The home in which he and his wife dwelt was of the simplest, its walls
were of plain pine wood; but within it was enlivened by the baby prattle
of their first-born child, baptized by the bishop, Elizabeth Anderson.
Without, it was surrounded by a garden, in which some hardy flowers
grew side by side with potatoes, turnips, peas, and barley. Moose is
not by any means bare of wild flowers, and in mosses it is very rich,
whilst goodly clumps of trees waved their branches in the breeze on an
island only five minutes’ walk from the house. During the winter the
missionary and his family, together with the three or four gentlemen of
the Hudson’s Bay Company, with their servants, and a few sick and aged
Indians and children, were the sole inhabitants of the settlement. Then
Mr. Horden gave himself up to his little school, to his translation work,
and to such building operations as in course of time became necessary—a
school-house, a church, a new dwelling-house. After dinner he was
occupied with hammer, chisel, saw and plane until dark. In the evening he
gave instruction to a few young men.

One such, whom he employed for a time as a school assistant in later
years, he had the pleasure of sending in due course for ordination by
the Bishop of Rupert’s Land, who appointed him to the charge of Albany
station, one hundred miles north of Moose, an important outpost, at
which eighty families of Indians congregated during the summer. Hannah
Bay, another post, fifty miles east of Moose, was resorted to by fifty
families; Rupert’s House, one hundred miles east, was frequented by
sixty families; and Kevoogoonisse, 430 miles south, by thirty families.
All these places were to be visited by Mr. Horden, as well as Martin’s
Falls, three hundred miles from Albany, and Osnaburg, two hundred miles
further on; also Flying Post, one hundred from Kevoogoonisse, and New
Brunswick, one hundred from Flying Post.

This was sufficient to appal the mind and daunt the courage of one still
young and inexperienced. It did not daunt John Horden. He longed only to
teach all who were thus placed under his ministerial charge. The journeys
must be made at particular seasons, as throughout the greater part of the
year no Indians were at the trading-posts.




CHAPTER IV

WINTER AT MOOSE FORT


The four seasons are called in the Indian tongue, Sekwun, Nepin,
Tukwaukin, and Pepooa. Spring begins about the middle or end of May,
when the ice in the river breaks up. Vegetation proceeds rapidly. In a
few days the bushes look green, and within a fortnight the grass and
trees appear in summer garb. Sometimes the ‘breaking-up’ is attended with
danger, often with inconvenience.

In the spring of 1860 the little settlement was visited with a disastrous
flood. The ground all around is low, not a hill within seventy miles.
Mr. Horden was occupied in building his new church—the frame already
rested on the foundations. One Sunday morning it floated off and took
an excursion of nearly a quarter of a mile, and with the aid of ropes,
poles, and other implements it had to be dragged back to its former
position and strongly secured. ‘The ice,’ said Mr. Horden, ‘made much
more havoc than it did in ’57. A few days after the water had subsided I
found my garden thickly planted with ice blocks of a considerable size;
but our gardening operations were not impeded, we were able to raise a
large quantity of potatoes of very good quality. The effects of a flood
are not always evident at once; it is after the lapse of months that
they become apparent, when the poor Indian on arriving at his winter
hunting-grounds finds that the water has been there, and destroyed
nearly the whole of the rabbits. He is reduced to great straits, and the
energies of the whole family are required to keep them from starvation.’

Rabbits are the staple food of the Indians in the season. The skins,
being of little value for barter, are used by them as blankets, the women
sewing them very neatly together.

In 1861 Mr. Horden writes: ‘In May we were again threatened with a flood.
On returning from church one Sunday evening the river presented an awful
appearance. The strength of the current had broken up the ice, and formed
it into a conical shape, which rose as high as the tops of the trees on
the high bank of the river. We abandoned our house, having first taken
every precaution to guard against the fury of the waters, but, although
the threat was so formidable, we experienced no flood, and after spending
a few pleasant days at the establishment of the Hudson’s Bay Company
we returned, and at once began our gardening. The children look upon a
flood as a rare treat. To them it is something of a pleasant, exciting
nature, after the dull monotony of a seven or eight months’ winter. It
drives us from our house, but we take shelter in one equally good, where
we ourselves enjoy pleasant company, and where the children have a large
number of playmates. What we look upon as our greatest trial are the
privations and sufferings to which the Indians are subjected.’

Nepin is very changeable, sometimes excessively warm, with plenty of
mosquitoes and sand-flies, which are very troublesome; sometimes quite
cold, and the transition is very rapid. It may be hot in the morning, and
in the evening so cold that an overcoat may be worn with comfort.

‘This is the busy season,’ writes Mr. Horden, ‘when I take my journeys.
Brigades of canoes from the various posts arrive, bringing the furs
collected during the preceding winter; in fact, every person appears to
have plenty to do.’ Just as summer is ending, the ship arrives, and it
is very anxiously looked for, for on it almost everything depends—flour,
tea, clothing, books, everything.

‘Tukwaukin is generally very boisterous, with occasional hail and snow
storms. Then the Indians hunt geese, which are salted and put into
barrels for our use, although they are not quite so good as a corned
round of beef. Before the arrival of Pepooa, all of the Indians are gone
off to their winter grounds, from which most of them do not return until
the arrival of spring.’

Each point of Mr. Horden’s vast parish had to be reached by an arduous
journey. Arduous is indeed but a mild expression for the troubles,
trials, privations, and tremendous difficulties attendant on travel
through the immense, trackless wastes lying between many of the
posts—wastes intersected with rivers and rapids, varied only by tracts
of pathless forest, swept by severe storms. ‘Last autumn,’ he writes,
‘I took a journey to Kevoogoonisse; it is 430 miles distant, and during
the whole way I saw no tent or house, not even a human being, until I
arrived within a short distance of the post. I appeared to be passing
through a forgotten land; I saw trees by tens of thousands, living,
decaying, and dead; I saw majestic waterfalls, and passed through fearful
rapids; I walked over long and difficult places, and day after day struck
my little tent, and felt grieved at seeing no new faces, none to whom
I might impart some spiritual blessing. In the whole space of country
over which I travelled, perhaps a dozen Indian families hunt during the
winter. Sometimes even this tract is insufficient to supply their wants;
animals become scarce, the lands are burnt by the forest fires, and they
are reduced to the greatest distress. I have seen terrible cases of this
kind. I have seen a man with an emaciated countenance, who in one winter
lost six children, all he had; and, horrible to relate, nearly every one
of them was killed for the purpose of satisfying the cravings of hunger.
At the post to which he was attached, Kevoogoonisse, out of about 120
Indians, twenty died through starvation in one winter.’

The country may be said to be one vast forest, with very extensive
plains, watered by large rivers and numerous lakes, inhabited by a few
roving Indians, who are engaged in hunting wild animals to procure furs
for the use of civilized man.

Sometimes sad things took place during the absence of the missionary on
his journeyings to visit outlying stations. During the short summer of
1858, he set out with his wife and their little children to visit Whale
River, in the country of the Eskimo. It was not his first journey to that
post. ‘You will have need of all your courage,’ said he to his wife.
Tempestuous seas, shelterless nights, and stormy days were vivid to his
own memory, but wife and children were glad to see anything new, after
the monotonous days and nights of the long Moose winter.

The family had not long been gone, when whooping-cough broke out at
Moose. Young, old, and middle-aged were attacked alike, and numbers died.
So terrible was the sickness that at one time there was but one man able
to work, and his work was to make two coffins. The missionary returned
to a sorrowing people. Out of five European families four had lost each
a child, and ‘the sight of the grave-yard and the mothers weeping there
is one I never shall forget. In ordinary years the average mortality was
two. This year it was thirty-two.’ Amongst the children taken was dear
little Susan, the orphan child of a heathen Indian, whom they had cared
for from infancy, and whose little fingers had just before her illness
traced upon a sampler the text: ‘Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, while the evil days’——Here the words had ceased—she was taken
from all evil, and the evil days would not draw nigh her, the needle
remained in the sampler at that spot. Amongst the aged taken were blind
Koote, old blind Adam, and old blind Hannah, all of whom are specially
mentioned in Mr. Horden’s account of the previous Christmas Day services.

‘Yesterday,’ he writes, speaking of Christmas 1857, ‘was a deeply
interesting one to me. As usual, I met the Indians at seven, the
English-speaking congregation at eleven, and Indians again at three.
Among the communicants present were no less than three blind persons. Old
Adam, over whose head have, I should think, passed a hundred winters.
Old Koote, always at church, led with a string by a little boy, and poor
old lame Hannah, whose seat is seldom empty, be the weather what it may.
The day previous to our communion we had a meeting of the communicants.
Old blind Koote said, “I thank God for having preserved me to this day.
God is good! I pray to Him every night and morning. That does good to my
soul. I think a great deal about heaven, I ask Jesus to wash away all my
sins, and to take me there.”’

Any of the Indians who can come in to celebrate the Christmas and New
Year’s festivals eagerly seize the opportunity. But this is not possible
for the greater number, whose hunting-grounds lie at considerable
distances from the fort. In their far-away tents they have no means
of Christian communion or instruction, except by intercourse with one
another, and by the study of the portions of Scripture, prayers, and
hymns which they gladly and thankfully carry away with them to their
lonely homes in the wilderness.

The society had sent out a printing-press to Moose Fort, to facilitate
the supply of books to the Indians. Mr. Horden had hoped to receive by
the ship copies of his translations ready printed, instead of which,
to his dismay, blank sheets arrived with the press. He was no printer,
although his father had been, and now his energy, courage, and power to
overcome difficulties pre-eminently showed themselves. He shut himself up
in his room for several days, resolved to master the putting together of
the press; a very complicated business. But he accomplished it, and great
was his joy and triumph when he found that the machinery would work. From
this press issued, in one winter, no less than sixteen hundred books in
three Indian dialects.

The winter over and gone, the snow nearly disappeared, day after day the
geese and wavies are seen flying overhead. The mighty river, which has
been for many months locked up, with a giant’s strength has burst its
bonds asunder, and rushes impetuously towards the sea; a few birds appear
in the trees, the frogs have commenced their croaking, fish find their
way to the well-laid nets; and the busy mosquito has begun its unwelcome
buzz. The Indians collect their furs, tie them in bundles, and place them
in the canoes, and with their dogs and household stuff they make their
way down stream to the trader’s residence. They run a few rapids, carry
their canoe and baggage over many portages, sail the frail bark over
one or two lakes, and are at the end of their journey. Down come the
trader’s servants to help to carry the packs to the store.

[Illustration: A TRADER’S STORE]

Let us look around. The store contains everything that an Indian needs,
whether for business or comfort. Here a rack full of guns, there a pile
of thick blankets, a bale of blanket coats, and an almost unlimited
supply of blue and red cloth; axes and knives, matches and kettles, beads
and braid, deer-skin and moose-skin, powder and shot, twine for nets and
snares, tea and sugar, flour and oatmeal, pork and pease; and some good
books too, which tell the Indian of God and heaven, and which he can read.

The trader approaches, his face beaming with delight as he eyes the
packs, for they are large and valuable. He soon begins work. The first
bale contains nothing but beaver skins. Eighty-five examined are said to
be worth a hundred and twenty beaver according to the standard value. The
next contains forty marten, ten otter, a hundred and fifty rat. These
are adjudged worth a hundred beaver; the third bale is composed of five
hundred rabbit skins, worth twenty-five beaver. Consider a beaver equal
to two shillings and sixpence, and you will see the value of the hunt in
sterling money. We have now—bale one value one hundred and twenty beaver;
bale two value one hundred beaver; and bale three value twenty-five
beaver; altogether two-hundred-and-forty-five beaver. Last summer
yonder Indian took out a debt in goods of one hundred and fifty beaver,
this he pays, and then he has ninety-five beaver with which to trade.
Ninety-five quills are given to him, and his trading begins. The trader,
like an English shopman, stands behind a counter, and the Indian outside.
Native-like, he consults long before the purchase of each article. Having
decided, he calls out, ‘A gun;’ a gun is delivered, and he pays over ten
of his quills; then three yards of cloth, for which he pays two quills;
two books, and for them he pays one quill; and so on he goes, the heap
of goods increasing and the supply of quills decreasing gradually. As he
approaches the end, the consultation becomes very anxious; he is making
quite sure that he is laying out his money to the best advantage. But
the end comes at last, and, satisfied with his bargains, he gathers all
up into one of the purchased blankets, and retires to his tent, where he
examines and admires, and admires again, article after article.

Shall we take a peep into an Indian’s tent when encamped in the forest
on a trapping expedition? A fire burns in the centre, but through the
large opening overhead we see the snow lying thick on the branches
of the trees. The day has just broken, but the Christian Indian has
already engaged in worship and taken his morning meal. Then on with his
snow-shoes, for there is no moving without them. The blanket which forms
the tent door is raised, and he steps outside. How cold! and how drear
the scene! how still and death-like! no birds, no sound, save the wind
whistling through the forest. Now he is at a marten trap, a very simple
contrivance, composed of a framework of sticks, in the middle of which
a bait is placed, which being meddled with, causes the descent of a log,
which crushes the intruder. Here is a beautiful dark marten, quite a
prize. He takes it out and fastens it to a sledge, re-baits the trap, and
on he goes to another. Ah! he sees tracks, but the marten has not entered
the trap; on to another. What is this? He looks dismayed; a wolverine has
been here, and has robbed the trap. He resets it and goes on to the next;
the wolverine has been there too; to another and another, with the same
result. He is disheartened, but it cannot be helped. So he trudges on
over a round of thirty traps, taking altogether six fine martens; not a
bad day’s hunt, all things considered. Evening is drawing on. He returns
to the tent, and there awaits him a glorious repast, perhaps of beaver
meat. He feels quite refreshed, and recounts all the vicissitudes of the
day, the gains and disappointments.

On the morrow he takes the martens and skins them; and what is he to do
with the bodies? Our Indian friends are not fastidious. He eats them. The
skins he turns inside out, and stitches them up. In the spring he brings
them to the fur-trading post, and there exchanges them, as we have seen,
for all the requisites of Indian life. An Indian cannot afford to cast
away anything; all he kills is to him ‘beef,’ sometimes good, sometimes
not a little bad. ‘In my own experience,’ Mr. Horden says, ‘I have eaten
white bear, black bear, wild cat, while for a week or ten days together
I have had nothing but beaver, and glad indeed I have been to get it.’

When the Indians have come into the post the work of instruction at
once commences. Amid school-work, services, visiting and talking with
individuals, the missionary found his time fully occupied. Little leisure
remained for his dearly-loved translation work—yet this progressed. In
1859 Mr. Horden had already the prayer and hymn book and the four Gospels
printed in the syllabic character. The prayer and hymn book were printed
in England. The Gospels he had himself printed at Moose. ‘The performance
of this labour,’ he writes, ‘was almost too much for me, as, since last
winter, although not incapacitated for work, I have felt that even a very
strong constitution has limits, which it may not pass with impunity; I
have occasionally suffered from weakness of the chest. I need not say
with what delight the Indians received the books prepared for them. I did
not think it right to provide them all gratis, I therefore charged two
shillings each, a little less than one beaver skin, and with the money
thus raised I am able to purchase a year’s consumption of paper. Our
services are now conducted in a manner very similar to what they are at
home. Our meetings for prayer are extremely refreshing, and my spirit is
often revived by joining with my brethren around the throne of grace.’

It must be remembered that Mr. Horden had not only the Indians under
his ministry, but the Europeans of the Hudson’s Bay Company; thus he
had English as well as Indian services to hold, and as there were some
Norwegians amongst the company’s servants who did not readily follow
either the English or the Indian, he set himself to learn for their sake
sufficient Norwegian to read the service and to preach to them in their
own tongue.

To these languages he added Eskimo and Ojibbeway—the latter being the
speech of the people of the Kevoogoonisse district, the former that of
the natives of Whale River.

How could all this be crowded into the busy day of this father of his
flock? How but by rising in the small hours of the morning, when by the
light of a lamp in his little study he read, and wrote, and translated,
and in addition to all else taught himself Hebrew.




CHAPTER V

A VISIT TO THE ESKIMO AT WHALE RIVER


In February 1861, Mr. Horden writes, ‘My hands are quite full; I find it
impossible to do all that I should wish to do. On Sundays I hold three
full services, and attend school twice, and every morning except Saturday
I conduct school. On Tuesday afternoon and Wednesday evening I hold a
service. These matters, with my house and sick visiting, leave me very
little leisure. But as myself and my family enjoy good health, I can
say that happiness is to be found as well among the primeval forests of
Moosonee as in the more sunny land of our birth.’

For his Eskimo children the bishop always had a very special affection.
Very early in his missionary career he managed, as we have seen, to pay
them a visit. He then could not converse with them, nor could he do so
without the aid of an interpreter when he paid a summer visit to Whale
River about the year 1862. We give his own graphic account of this.

‘Let our thoughts for a while be transferred to a land more bleak and
desolate than Moose, to the land where snow never entirely disappears,
to the land of barren rock and howling storm, to the country of the
white bear and the hardy Eskimo, where I spent some time last summer.
I remained with the Eskimo only eight days, yet those eight days were
indeed blessed ones, and will not soon be forgotten by me, for they were
amongst the most successful missionary days I have had since I have been
in the country.

‘The Eskimo appeared to me to be kind, cheerful, docile, persevering, and
honest. Nothing could exceed the desire they professed for instruction,
nothing the exertions they made to learn to read, nothing the attention
with which they listened to the Word of God. I was most fortunate (but
should I not use another word?) in obtaining the services of a young
Eskimo as my interpreter, who had received instruction from missionaries
(Moravians) while living on the coast of Labrador. He spoke English but
imperfectly; but knew some hymns and texts exceedingly well, and showed
himself most willing to assist me to the fullest extent of his power.
I could not have done half the work I did, had I not had him as my
assistant. Accompany me for a day, commencing with the early morning.

‘Soon after six we had a service with the Eskimo; about twenty-five were
present. Some of the men were dressed very much like working men in
England. They purchase their clothing from the store of the Hudson’s Bay
Company. Others were dressed in the comfortable native style, composed
of a loose seal-skin jacket coming to the waist, seal-skin breeches, and
seal-skin boots. One of the women had on an English gown, of which she
seemed not a little proud; the others were attired in a dress somewhat
similar to the men, with the addition of an immense hood to their
jackets, in which they deposit their little babies.

‘The service was commenced by singing a hymn; reading followed, then
prayer, the Lord’s Prayer being repeated aloud by all; singing again;
then a long lesson on the “Syllabariam,” _i.e._ the system of reading
by syllables, without the labour of spelling. They were then instructed
in Watt’s First Catechism, and another hymn completed the service.
After having taken my breakfast, I assembled the Indians, who were
nearly twice the number of the Eskimo, but not half as painstaking. My
service with them was somewhat less simple than that with the Eskimo,
as they had received more instruction, and a few could use their prayer
books intelligently; but I noticed an apathy among them which rather
disheartened me.

‘I then took a lesson from my Eskimo interpreter, writing questions and
obtaining his assistance in translating a portion of the baptismal and
marriage services; I then went to the Eskimo tents until dinner-time.
They are made of seal-skins in the shape of a common marquee. Some of
them are spacious and not very dirty. In the centre is a fire, over
which is suspended a large kettle full of cray-fish. An old woman was
sewing very industriously at a pair of seal-skin short boots, which she
presented to me. Her husband was equally industrious, making models of
Eskimo implements. I instantly transferred to paper the few words of
conversation they had with me. My next visit was to a tent where younger
people were assembled. I asked a few questions, which they readily
answered. I was pleased at this, as showing that they could understand
me. I then dined, and took a short stroll along the river towards the
sea, to see what prospect there was for the whale fishermen. The fishers
were there, waiting patiently, but with the look of disappointment on
their countenances. They could see hundreds of whales outside the bar of
the river, but while they remained there not one could be caught, and
there seemed no chance of any coming inside the bar. Leaving them, I went
to hold a second service with my Eskimo, then another with my Indians.
It was then tea-time. I spent an hour with my Eskimo interpreter, after
which I held an English service with the master and mistress, the only
English-speaking woman for hundreds of miles, and the European servants
of the company. Half an hour’s social chat at length closed the day, and
with feelings of thankfulness at having been placed as a labourer in the
vineyard of the Lord, I retired to rest.

[Illustration: A GROUP OF ESKIMO]

‘I was so deeply impressed with the conduct of the Eskimo, their anxiety
to learn, and their love for the truths of Christianity, that I could not
forbid water that some of them should be baptized. Three of them could
read well; these received the rite of baptism at an evening service, all
the Europeans being present, for all appeared to take a deep interest
in the proceedings. All three were young, neat, tidy, and dressed
in European costume. They answered my inquiries very intelligently,
receiving severally the names of John Horden, Thomas Henry, and Elizabeth
Oke. John and Elizabeth were afterwards married. Malikto, the father of
the bridegroom, stood up at the conclusion of the service, and said that
he hoped they would not forget the instruction they had received, after I
left them. It was a delightful but solemn service.’

The Eskimo formed a large part of Mr. Horden’s charge, and he was much
attracted by their gentle contentment amidst their dreary surroundings,
and by their teachableness. ‘What should we have been, had we, like
them,’ he said, ‘had no Bible to direct us to God?’

Thus speaks the Eskimo, the man who considers himself pre-eminently the
‘man,’ and who has _not_ been taught that God made him, the sun, and the
moon, and the stars also:

‘Long, long ago, not long after the creation of the world, there lived a
mighty Eskimo, who was a great conjurer; nothing was impossible to him;
no other of his profession could stand before him. He found the world too
small and insignificant for his powers, so, taking with him his sister
and a small fire, he raised himself up into the heavens. Heaping immense
quantities of fuel on the fire, he formed the sun, which has continued
burning ever since. For a while he and his sister lived together in
perfect harmony, but after a time he began to ill-treat her, and his
conduct towards her became worse and worse until one day he scorched
her face, which was exquisitely beautiful. This was not to be borne,
she therefore fled from him, and formed the moon. Her brother is still
in chase of her, but although he sometimes gets near her, he will never
overtake her. When it is new moon the burnt side of her face is towards
us; when full moon the reverse is the case. The stars are the spirits of
the dead Eskimo that have fixed themselves in the heavens, and meteors
and the aurora are these spirits moving from one place to another whilst
visiting their friends.’




CHAPTER VI

SCHOOL WORK


In school work and teaching Mr. Horden took from first to last the
keenest interest. After he became bishop he still visited the Moose
School daily, whenever he was in residence. In earlier years he had for
a time the able assistance of a native master, Mr. Vincent. A small
boarding-school had been commenced in 1855 with two children, who were
supported through the Coral Missionary Fund.[1] The following year, two
more children were taken, and in 1857 the number on the list amounted to
eight; to these others were yearly added, supported by friends of the
Coral Fund.

Little Susan was one of these. Her unfinished sampler with the needle in
it was sent to England. The children’s histories were many of them very
sad and pathetic. Some were orphans. The parents of others were disabled,
or too sick and suffering to work. One little girl was described as
having so wild a look that a portrait of her scarcely resembled that of
a human being. Another, after remaining for a time in the school, fell
ill with the strange Indian sickness called ‘long thinking,’ a gypsy-like
yearning for the wild life of the forest, and she had to be sent back to
her widowed father. One boy died early of decline, a complaint to which
the Indian is very subject. Another was the child of a father who lay
sick and bed-ridden in a most deplorable condition—parts of his body
actually rotten. ‘He might’ have been the Lazarus of the parable,’ wrote
Mr. Horden. ‘He gets little rest night or day, but, like Lazarus, his
mind is stayed on God.’

A few children having thus been gathered together with the certainty of
support, Mr. Horden commenced building a school-house. He had from the
first assembled the children for daily instruction, but to board and
clothe them was impossible without some friendly help, all necessaries
at Moose being nearly double the price of the same articles at home.
At one time it was quite double. From this we may gather with what
delight was hailed, as the season came round, the arrival of the annual
ship, bringing to the missionary and his family the stores needed for
themselves and their charges for the year to come.

In 1864 very especially, Mr. and Mrs. Horden awaited in eager expectation
the ship’s appearance, for not only did they long to know that the wants
of the school children and the poor who depended upon them would be
supplied, but they were hoping themselves to return in her with their
little family for a well-earned rest and change in England, from which
country they had then been absent thirteen long years. The three elder
children were of an age to need an English education. The little son,
a boy of nine or ten, whose principal amusement was to go to the woods
with an axe over his shoulder to cut firewood, must, ere it was too late,
be weaned from the free life in the forest, and begin to measure his
powers of mind and body with other lads of his age and class at home. The
wife and mother yearned to see the relatives parted from long ago; the
hard-worked man hoped for stimulus and help in the society and sympathy
of his brethren and fellow-labourers.

These hopes and yearnings were doomed to disappointment. ‘You know,’
wrote Mr. Horden on January 25, 1865, ‘that it was my intention to be at
home this year, and I had expected to have reached England in October or
the beginning of November. But August passed and the ship did not arrive,
and anxiety increased daily. The 23rd came, the latest day on which the
ship had ever been known to appear, and then we began to despond and to
say, “No ship this year!” The schooner still remained outside, hoping
against hope, until October 7. That same night, in the midst of a most
fearful storm, we heard the report of large guns at sea; our excitement
was extreme, our hopes revived, and from mouth to mouth passed the joyful
exclamation, “The ship’s come! the ship’s come!” We lay down to rest,
lightened of a great weight of anxiety, dreaming of absent friends, with
a strange pleasant confusion of boxes, storms, ice, guns, and the many
other etceteras of the sailing, arrival, and unloading of our ship.

‘Morning dawned, the storm had subsided, a boat was despatched for
letters, the schooner was again ordered to sea, all hearts beat high,
and by ten o’clock our illusions were dispelled. The guns had been fired
by the York schooner, which had been despatched to Moose to acquaint us
with our misfortune, and to bring the little that had been saved from the
wreck. It was very little, yet sufficient to remove anxiety as to our
living for this winter, as we thus became possessed of flour and tea,
which we can only obtain by the ship, for in our wintry land no fields
of wheat wave their golden heads, and no sound of the reapers ever falls
upon the ear. Of the many packages sent me, the Coral Fund box was the
only one which came to hand, all the rest are at the bottom of the sea:
and of the contents of your box, everything was much damaged, except the
service book, now lying on the communion table at Moose. The packet-box
was saved, which accounts for my receiving your letter.

‘The Moose ship left England in company with the Hudson’s Bay Company’s
ship, bound for York Factory, which is a post about seven hundred miles
north of Moose, and came across the Atlantic and nearly through Hudson’s
Straits without any mishaps. On August 13 the two ships were together,
a few miles to the east of Mansfield Island; the captains visited and
congratulated each other upon having passed the most dangerous portion
of the voyage, and expected that within a week the one would be at York
and the other at Moose. But how blind is man! Within a few hours both of
them were ashore on Mansfield Island, about twelve miles distant from
each other. The York ship had a very large number of men on board, and
by almost incredible exertions she was got off, but not until she had
sustained such damages as necessitated the constant use of the pumps.
The Moose ship could not be got off, and still lies with nearly all her
valuable cargo on the rocks. The York ship came to her and took all the
crew on board, together with what had been saved, and proceeded to York
Factory. There she was examined, and then it appeared how near all had
been to death; the wonder was how she could possibly have kept afloat. To
return to England in her would have been madness, so she still lies at
York. Happily a second vessel had gone to York, which took home nearly
the whole of the crews of the two disabled ships.

‘When I last wrote I asked for the service book for my new church;
that edifice has now, I am happy to say, been opened; the interesting
ceremony took place on Whit-Sunday, May 15, 1864. The ice had entirely
disappeared from the river; the sun shone forth brilliantly, all Nature
smiled. A large congregation assembled at our usual hour for service,
and all seemed impressed with the solemnity of the occasion. The subject
of the sermon was the dedication of Solomon’s temple. At its close the
collection amounted to upwards of 4_l._, and after that a number of
Europeans, natives, and Indians, assembled round the table of the Lord.
It was the first time I ever administered a general communion, many of
the Indians not understanding English; but on this occasion I wished them
to see that, in spite of diversity of language, God is alike the God of
the white man and the red. Altogether it was a most interesting and happy
day. It is literally a church in the wilderness. I hope it will not be
long before others rise in this part of the country.

‘I have lately heard of my poor Eskimo brethren in the far-off desert;
that infant church has been much tried. Just one half of its members have
been carried off by death; there were but four, two of whom are gone, and
both somewhat suddenly. One of them was the young Eskimo interpreter,
who when I was last with them was of such very great service to me. Late
in the fall he went off in his kayak to set a fox trap. He did so, but
as he was getting into the canoe to return home it upset with him, and
the coldness of the water prevented him from swimming. His body was not
discovered until the evening of the following day. The other was the
only baptized woman, her name was Elizabeth Horden. These trials must be
necessary, or they would not be sent.’




CHAPTER VII

FIRST RETURN TO ENGLAND


In 1865 Mr. Horden and his family came home; the journey was a long
and very anxious one. ‘Among the many dangerous voyages which our bold
sailors undertake,’ he writes, ‘there is none more dangerous, or attended
with more anxiety, than the one to or from Moose Factory. Hudson’s
Straits are dangerous, Hudson’s Bay fearfully so, James’s Bay worst of
all. It is full of sunken rocks and shoals; it is noted for its fogs.

‘When the ship came, it was in a somewhat disabled condition, so severely
had she been handled by the ice. However, we repaired her at Moose, and
although it was very late in the season we determined, putting ourselves
in God’s hands, to trust ourselves in her. We left Moose with a fair
wind, which took us in safety over our long, crooked, and dangerous
bar; but we had not proceeded above half a day’s sail before a heavy
storm came upon us. Dangers were around us, the dread of all coming to
Moose Factory, the Gasket Shoal, was ahead; the charts were frequently
consulted; the captain was anxious, sleep departed from his eyes. We are
at the commencement of the straits; we see land, high, rugged, barren
hills; snow is lying in the valleys, stern winter is already come; it
seems a home scarcely fit for the white bear and the walrus. What are
these solitary giants, raising their heads so high, and appearing so
formidable? They are immense icebergs which have come from regions still
farther north, and are now being carried by the current through Hudson’s
Straits into the Atlantic Ocean. The glass speaks of coming bad weather,
the top-sails are reefed, reefs are put to the main-sail; and now it is
on us, the wind roars through the rigging, the ship plunges and creaks.
Night comes over the scene, there is no cessation of the tempest; it
howls and roars, it is a fearful night! One of the boats is nearly swept
away, and is saved with difficulty; we have lost some of our rigging; one
man is washed overboard, and washed back again. The sea breaks over the
vessel, and dashes into the cabin; but One mightier has said, “Hitherto
shalt thou come, and no farther.” By the morning, the morning of the
Sabbath, the wind had abated.’

Dreary weeks followed; the time for arrival in England had long since
passed, and our travellers were still beating about in the Atlantic.
Luxuries had vanished, comforts had departed, necessaries were becoming
very scarce, and they began to ask each other, ‘Is England ever to be
reached?’ Then the children saw a steamer for the first time in their
lives, and their surprise was great; and now they pass vessel after
vessel. They are running up the English Channel, a pilot comes on board,
and on they go, till they are safely moored in the West India Docks. Now
to a railway station and into a railway carriage, out of that and into a
cab through the busiest part of London; the shops are brilliantly lighted
up; the children are at the windows, their exclamations of surprise are
incessant, a new world is opened to their view—a world of bustle, a world
of life.

Mr. Horden spent a busy year in England, travelling, as he expressed it,
‘from Dan to Beersheba,’ speaking on behalf of ‘his beloved people’ and
his work; everywhere eliciting sympathy and interest. In his absence from
the station Mr. Vincent of Albany had gone to Moose, to provide for the
spiritual wants of the flock and to keep the school going. The children
were examined before the Christmas holidays in Scripture and Catechism
and arithmetic, after which they were rewarded with little presents
sent in the bales from England. He reported the mission as presenting a
cheering aspect. ‘From every quarter,’ he writes, ‘the heathen are being
gradually brought under the influence of the Gospel; we have much cause
for encouragement, but we also meet with opposition. I visited an outpost
in the Rupert’s River district last summer, about five hundred and fifty
miles distant from this station, called Mistasinnee. Both there and on
the way I had frequent opportunities of preaching the Gospel to anxious
inquirers, and before leaving that post I had forty-eight baptisms,
half the number being adults; the trip occupied about two months. We
are having a very mild winter, but not a favourable one for living, as
rabbits and partridges are very scarce. Sometimes we have a difficulty
in making up something for dinner. I hope, however, as the season
advances, we shall do better, for partridges then will be returning to
the northward, and we may get a few in passing.’




CHAPTER VIII

AGAIN AT WORK


At the end of the year Mr. Horden returned to Moose with his wife and two
youngest children, and that same year the homeward-bound ship was once
more in imminent peril. And now our hero began a series of long journeys,
the longest he had made—one occupying three months and covering nearly
two thousand miles—amongst people of various languages. He thus vividly
describes it:

‘I left Moose Factory for Brunswick House in the afternoon of May 20,
1868. The weather was very cold, and on the following morning we left
our encampment amidst a fall of snow. All along the river banks the
ice lay piled up in heaps, occasionally forming a wall twenty feet
high. This ice was very detrimental to our progress; it prevented the
Indians from tracking the canoe, so that they were forced to use the
paddle or pole, which is harder work and does not permit of such rapid
progress. We got on pretty well until we came to where the river rushes
with awful rapidity between high and almost perpendicular rocks: it
certainly appeared like travelling to destruction. We had to cross the
river several times, so as to get where the current was weakest. We had
crossed twice, and bad enough it was each time; we were to cross the
third time; our guide demurred. It could not be done with safety; we
should be driven down a foaming rapid and destroyed.

‘But it was now just as dangerous to go backward as forward, so, after
a little persuading, the old man was induced to try. I took a paddle,
and we got out into the middle of the stream, paddling for our lives; we
were carried a considerable way down, but the other side was reached in
safety. Then we poled, or tracked, on, as we best could, very slowly,
until we had to cross again, and so on until the first portage was
reached. Over this we plod, and again our canoe floats into the river;
then pole, paddle, or track until a majestic fall or a roaring rapid
warned us to make another portage; and so on, again and again, day after
day.

‘As we went towards the south we actually saw some trees beginning to
bud. On the very last day of May, in the afternoon, I reached Brunswick
House. It is situated on a beautiful lake, the whole establishment
consisting of about five or six houses; it is a fur-trading post. The
Indians speak the Saulteaux language; there are about a hundred and fifty
of them here; they are quiet and teachable, but given to pilfering and
very superstitious. To comfort they seem to be strangers, lying about
anywhere at night, their principal resort being the platforms near the
trading-house. I believe that God’s blessing rested on my labours among
these Indians. This was their first introduction to the Christian
religion, and I trust that ere long many will be numbered among Christ’s
disciples.

‘After remaining with them nine days, I was obliged to hurry northward.
Our progress was rapid, the water was in good order. A few days at
Moose, and I went to the sea-coast to Rupert’s House. I found between
three and four hundred Indians assembled there, under the guidance of
their teacher, Matamashkum. Our joy was great and mutual; they have been
heathens, many of them have committed horrible crimes, but those days
have passed away, and now they rejoice in the merits of a Crucified
Saviour. Twice every day we had service, almost out of doors, for there
was no available room at the place capable of containing all. During the
day I had examinations, and baptisms, and weddings, and consultations;
and one afternoon we had a grand feast, for the Indians had made a good
hunt, and the fur-traders, delighted with what they had done, provided
the feast for them. There was nothing of dissipation. Eating and drinking
was quite a serious matter with them, and it was astonishing to see the
quantities of pea-soup, pork, geese, bread, biscuit, tobacco, tea and
sugar, they consumed; the providing a body of Indians with a good feast
is no light matter.

‘Having spent two Sundays at Rupert’s House, I took canoe and went to
Fort George, northwards along the sea-coast. For a portion of the way I
had company, as many Indians were also going north. This was the most
pleasant of all the journeys; the weather fine, the scenery often grand,
the wind fair. Two hundred miles were made in four days and a half. At
Fort George I met a good body of Christian Indians with their teacher,
William Keshkumash.

‘A few days here, and I embarked on board a schooner, to go yet further
north, to Great Whale River. Soon after getting out to sea we were among
the ice; however, on we go. It is the sea, but there is no water! We are
in an Arctic scene; we cannot go through, so we turn our head for Fort
George again, and wait there for nearly another week, and then try once
more. We get half way, then, as the vessel cannot move forward, I leave
it, and accompanied by two native sailors proceed in a small boat. Two
days bring us to an encampment of Indians. I now leave my boat and enter
a canoe, having with me Keshkumash, his wife, and their young son; two
other canoes, each containing a man and his wife, keep us company. We
have to work in earnest. Sometimes we got along fast, then we were in the
midst of ice and could not move at all, again we were chopping a passage
for the canoe with our axes; and then, when we could do nothing else,
we carried it over the rocks and set it down where the ice was not so
closely packed.

‘After two days and a half of this we came to a standstill, and I
determined to go on foot. I took one Indian with me, and we set off. Our
walk was over high bare hills; rivers ran through several of the valleys,
these we waded. About ten o’clock that night I sat down once more in a
house, very, very tired, and very, very thankful. I spent several days
with the Indians of this place; they are a large tribe of Crees, but
speak somewhat differently from those of Moose. Most of them believed the
words that were spoken, but some cared for none of those things, being
filled with their own superstitions.

‘By-and-by the schooner Fox made her appearance, and I embarked once
more, to endeavour to get to the last inhabited spot, Little Whale River.
We went half way, and then the ice sent a hole through the Fox’s side;
this we covered with a sheet of lead. I now again deserted the Fox, and
took to the canoe, in which, in somewhat less than two days, I got at
last to my journey’s end. And that journey’s end is a dreary, dreary
place, with scarcely any summer. It was August, and the ice was lying
thick at the mouth of the river. But my work was not dreary. I here met
Eskimo, the most teachable of people. They were very ready for school
or service, and although their attainments were not high, so much was I
impressed with their sincerity and perseverance, that I admitted four
families into the Christian Church. This rewarded me for all my toil. I
can address them now as brothers and sisters; and I am sure that all my
friends will rejoice with me for the blessing with which God crowned my
labour.

‘I had my difficulties in getting back again; ice still disputed our
progress, but on August 30, late in the evening, the trusty Fox, battered
and bruised, came to anchor at Moose Factory, and I had the happiness of
once more meeting my family, and of finding that all had been quite well
during the whole of my absence.’

About this time Mr. Horden began to plead for help to train up one of the
most promising of his school-boys as a catechist. Friends of the Coral
Fund took up the lad, and the money expended upon his education was not
in vain, for that boy is now a native pastor in charge of Rupert’s House.
Of him and of his ordination we shall have more to relate by-and-by.
The school children in whom Mr. Horden had first taken an interest were
growing up. Some were already earning their living, some were married;
one girl had gone with her husband to the Red River settlement, and
was, wrote Mr. Horden, in 1869, in as respectable a sphere of life as
any Christian farmer’s wife in England could be. Another had married a
fine young Moose Fort hunter, an excellent voyager. After an absence of
several months, they with their little child came back to the place,
stayed a few days, and again departed. In May, at the breaking-up of the
river, the Indians came in. One canoe Mr. Horden felt sure was that of
Amelia and her husband, and he at once went to see them.

‘I saw,’ he says, ‘first a fair little boy, plump and hearty, showing
that great care had been taken of him. I then cast my eye on a woman
sitting near, whom I took to be a stranger; but another look showed me
that the poor emaciated creature was indeed none other than Amelia, who
had been brought to the brink of the grave by starvation. She had lost
her husband, but in all her privations she had taken care that her baby
son should not want. The tale of her suffering was very distressing.
After leaving Moose in the end of March, they by themselves had gone to
their hunting-grounds, hoping to get a few furs to pay off the debt they
had contracted with the fur-trader; for in the early part of the winter
they had been very unfortunate, a wolverine having destroyed nearly
all the martens they had trapped. Amelia’s husband was soon attacked
by sickness, which entirely laid him by; food was very scarce, and the
little the forest might yield he could not seek. He gradually became
worse and worse, his sufferings aggravated by want, his only source of
consolation was his religion; both expected to lay their bones, as well
as those of the child, where they were. He wrote a letter, and got Amelia
to go and hang it up where some Indians might pass in the summer, stating
their joint deaths and the cause, and requesting burial. The end came,
the once strong young man lay a corpse; but Amelia had something to live
for—for her little son she would struggle on. Unable to dig a grave, for
she had no strength and the ground was frozen as hard as a stone, she
covered the body with moss, and set off to the Main Moose River, hoping
there to fall in with Indians. She was not disappointed. After a while
she fell in with Isaac Mekawatch, a Moose Indian, who took care of her
and her child, and brought them in safety to the fort. Such incidents as
this are amongst the sad experiences of life in Moosonee.’

In 1870 Mr. Horden wrote: ‘I have this summer travelled about thirteen
hundred miles, and during a part of this time I experienced a
considerable degree of hardship, which brought me down greatly. I am now,
however, well as ever I have been in my life. It was a very long journey,
and occupied many weeks, yet I did not travel out of my parish all the
time. When I was at Matawakumma, five hundred miles south of Moose, I was
upwards of eleven hundred miles from Little Whale River.

‘I left Moose on June 13, and overtook a boat going to the Long Portage,
with goods for the supply of New Brunswick, and I went forward in it.
Travelling by boat is very monotonous work indeed. At breakfast-time,
dinner-time, and when the day’s work was done, we endeavoured to catch
a few fish, our rod a long rough stick cut from the woods, a piece of
strong cord for a line, to which we attached a large hook baited with
salt pork; with this we would occasionally draw out a perch, a trout, a
pike from six to twelve pounds in weight. At the Long Portage I changed
my mode of travelling, my companions now using the canoe. With my new
friends I got on extremely well, taking advantage of every opportunity
to instruct them in divine things. Most of them received the instruction
gladly, but a few held back; they love their old superstitions, their
conjurations, dreams, spirits, and all the other things which so sadly
debase the Indian mind. In due time New Brunswick was reached, and I at
once began my work.

‘The Indians here, before they had ever seen a missionary, used to meet
for prayer and exhortation, having learnt a little from an Indian who had
seen one. Desirous of knowing how they conducted their service, about
which I had heard a great deal, I arranged one evening to be present as a
spectator. They showed no shyness, but consented at once.

‘At the time appointed, all being assembled, one gave out the verse of a
hymn, which was sung by all; another then repeated a text of Scripture,
then a second verse of the hymn was sung, followed by a second text; all
then knelt down, I by the side of the old chief, and about six began to
pray aloud at the same time, each in his own words. Ojibway’s prayer was
very simple, of course, but it was a cry to Jesus for mercy; and can we
doubt that his prayer was heard? Kneeling by his side was one sent by God
to show him the way of salvation.

‘One of those who opposed the Gospel said: “I would not give up my
children to you for baptism on any account. My eldest child has been
twice so ill that I thought she would die, but an Indian, by his charms,
saved her; and recently a spirit appeared to me, telling me to take heed
and never give up my children, for if I did, he would no longer take care
of them, and they would die.”

‘I remained at Brunswick until the Indians departed to Michipicoton
for supplies of flour. I went with them a little way, and then on to
Flying Post by a road untrodden by any save the Indian on his hunting
expeditions. I found it a terrible route—the worst I have ever
travelled—but having no one to think of but myself, I did not mind it—I
was about my Master’s business. In due time we reached Flying Post. Our
last portage was eight miles of truly horrible walking; it cost us many
weary hours.

‘The Indians of Flying Post evinced a great desire for instruction. This
was my first visit; I baptized seventeen persons. From Flying Post I
went on to Matawakumma. At Matawakumma the Indians are decreasing, as
at Flying Post. The decay of a people brings sad reflections, and the
Indians seem doomed to extinction. I found a church partly built under
the guidance of their trader, Mr. Richards, who takes a deep interest
in his Indians’ welfare. A bell and a set of communion plate I hope to
get out next ship time; the little church in the wilderness will then be
tolerably well furnished.

‘I here made the largest comparative collection I have ever made in my
life, no less than 8_l._ 2_s._ 8_d._ The poor people were truly liberal
in their poverty, and some of these poor sheep for the first time
approached the table of the Lord. Some of them are very intelligent, can
read well, and thoroughly understand their Christian responsibilities and
appreciate their privileges. And now, my work done, I turn my canoe-head
Mooseward, and pass over grand lakes, down a large river, run the rapids,
admire the falls, carry over the portages, hurrying towards the sea, and
after an absence of between eight and nine weeks I found myself once more
in the bosom of my family.’




CHAPTER IX

DAYS OF LABOUR


Nothing perhaps could give a better idea of Mr. Horden’s gigantic labours
than an account of a day’s work at different times. A Sunday in the
winter of 1871 is thus spent by him.

‘While it was yet dark,’ he says, ‘at half-past six o’clock the church
bells summoned us to the house of prayer; the cold was severe, but I
found a tolerable congregation awaiting me, and the service was very
enjoyable. The congregation dismissed, I returned home to breakfast,
and soon afterwards went to the church again for our English service.
This is conducted precisely as in a church at home; the full service is
read, and we use one prayer which you do not, for the Governor-General of
Canada and the Lieutenant-Governor of the Hudson’s Bay Territories. The
congregation is composed of the deputy-governor, his family and his staff
of clerks, and the doctor—not one of whom is ever absent, and all but one
are communicants—my own family, and the servants European and native of
the Hudson’s Bay Company. After the sermon a general offertory was made,
and then the communicants met around the Lord’s table, there to renew
their vows, and to partake of that spiritual food which was ordained to
strengthen them in their heavenly course.

‘At a quarter to two the bell was rung for school, and a few minutes
after I was with the scholars, on my knees seeking a blessing on our
meeting together. School over, our second Indian service commenced with
a larger congregation than in the early morning, for young children can
be brought out now. There is again a departure from the church, yet
some remain, and those, as their English-speaking brethren had done in
the morning, commemorate their dying Saviour’s love. In all thirty have
communicated. The shades of evening are falling as I leave the church,
after a fatiguing, but blessed day’s work.’

The necessity was laid upon Mr. Horden of being like St. Paul, ‘in
journeyings oft,’ and the day’s work we have now to speak of was one of
journeying.

‘Last summer,’ he says, ‘I was on my way to Rupert’s House. A large boat
just built was going there, and I took a passage in it. It was loaded
with a miscellaneous cargo of bricks, potatoes, a stove, bags of flour,
and bales of goods. The crew was composed of Rupert’s House Indians, fine
manly fellows, and all Christians. Leaving Moose somewhat late in the
day, we went but a short distance and encamped on an island, eight miles
off, called Ship-sands. Here we set up our tent and cooked our supper;
then we gathered together, and joined our voices in a hymn of praise. I
read a portion of Scripture, and we all knelt in prayer to the God of
heaven and earth, and not long after lay down to rest. At midnight there
was an arrival, and I was aroused from sleep by my guide, with the cry of
“Musenahekun! Musenahekun!” A packet! a packet! These are magic words.
I started to my feet in an instant, for not since February had I seen a
letter from home, and it was now June 17. It was, however, but a poor
affair, containing no private letters from England, and but little public
news. The real packet I welcomed at Rupert’s House nearly a month later.

‘In the early morn we spread our sails to the wind and went joyously
forward. The east point of Hannah Bay is reached, and it now seems that
further progress is impossible; there is ice, ice; block after block is
pushed aside; hoisting sail, back we go, to round a projecting point.
We are in a narrow, crooked lane of water, through which we move very
carefully, with poles in hand, ready to do battle with any piece of ice
which lies in our way, and so hour after hour slips by, and all hopes of
reaching Rupert’s House are at an end; but towards evening our labours
are crowned with success, and the clear sea stretches before us. There is
no place to land. We set our best man at the helm, and taking reefs in
our sails, trust to the protection of the Almighty. I think it was the
most uncomfortable night I have ever spent.

‘In the early morning the wind abated. We once more set sail, and
traversed beautiful Rupert’s Bay, with its varied scenery of hill and
valley, wooded headlands and bare rocks, Gheiles Mount, the highest
eminence in this part of the country, rising majestically above all. By
and by, the North Point is reached, and we enter Rupert’s River. We have
been seen at Rupert’s House, the flag is waving in the breeze; the few
houses form a pretty picture in the morning light; and just before seven
o’clock I am heartily welcomed by a crowd of Europeans and natives, who
come down to the river’s bank to meet me, as I get out of the boat.’

Rupert’s House is an important post of the Hudson’s Bay Company, and the
centre of their fur trade in a very extensive district. The business
is managed by a trader high in the Hudson’s Bay service, assisted by
a clerk, a storekeeper, and a staff of tradesmen and servants; the
buildings consist of the master’s residence, houses for the servants,
large and substantially built stores, and last, though not least, a
capacious church. ‘That church,’ says Mr. Horden, ‘how long I had sighed
for it; how hard I had laboured one summer getting logs brought to the
place from distant woods, and sawn into boards for the commencement of
the building! And now I see a stream of worshippers flowing from tents
and marquees, gradually filling it, until there is scarcely room for
another human being. What joy and gratitude did I feel! This is the
fifth church in my district since Moose became my home; my next must be
four hundred miles from Rupert’s House, for the Saulteaux Indians of New
Brunswick.

‘There goes the bell! it is just six o’clock. I had service every
morning at Rupert’s House, but this morning there is an innovation, I
am one of the assembly, not the leader; I have deputed an Indian to
conduct the service, and right well he performs his duty. The Litany is
very impressively rendered, and a chapter of St. Matthew well read. The
numerous voices mingle in their translation of “He dies, the friend of
sinners dies”—_Nepeu, umra ka sakehat_—to Luther’s hymn; then I take the
Testament and once more read the chapter and explain it, enforcing its
lessons on my hearers; the hymn, “Lord, dismiss us with Thy blessing,” is
sung, and the congregation separates.

‘It is time for breakfast. I take mine with my kind host, the trader, who
is not only an English gentleman, but a Churchman and communicant. At
nine o’clock I am in my vestry, and around me are the servants’ children.
I am in a small English school, reading the English Testament, teaching
English hymns, till eleven, when my Indians come to me family by family.

‘Here is Jacob Matamashkum.

‘“Well, Jacob, how did you get on last winter?”

‘“Part of it very badly, part tolerably well. It was a poor season for
furs, martens entirely failed, and none of the other animals made up
for the deficiency; many of the Indians will be quite unable to pay
their debts to the trader. We had our prayers every day, and we kept the
Sabbath, but once now and then we were obliged to look for some food on
Sunday when we had nothing. We love our religion more and more, and are
very glad indeed we have the church to assemble in.”

‘Then I gave my instructions, assured that, as far as possible, they
would be attended to. And so the hours passed by. At four o’clock I
had a very solemn service; two gentlemen, one more than seventy years
of age, and the other in middle life, both from far in the interior
of the country, knelt together for the first time in their lives at
the Lord’s table; the elder had not seen a clergyman for upwards of a
quarter of a century. At six o’clock it is ding-dong, ding-dong, again,
and again the voice of praise is raised, prayer offered, the Bible read
and explained, and the congregation then separated to their fragile and
temporary dwellings. Yet once more the bell calls to prayer; the master,
the gentlemen from the interior, the servants, their wives and children
obey the summons, and I hold an English service, enjoyable and enjoyed.
At its termination I take a short walk, reflecting on the day’s events,
offering up a silent prayer that God would vouchsafe His blessing thereon
abundantly.’




CHAPTER X

THE BISHOPRIC OF MOOSONEE


The summer of 1872 passed. On September 13 of that year Mr. Horden wrote
to the present writer: ‘Your much prized letter reached me a day or two
before I set out on one of my longest and most trying journeys, from
which I have but just returned. I took your letter with me, and indulged
myself with an occasional perusal of it; it has been to many of the posts
of the country, has journeyed over some of our terrible portages, and has
sailed over many a lake through the “forgotten land,” as it may well be
called, for it is waiting, and will long wait, to be taken possession of.
The Indians cannot be said to hold possession, they are so few in number,
and the country is so vast, that one unacquainted with it can have no
conception of its extent. Fancy travelling a whole fortnight, and during
that time not seeing one hundred persons. A feeling of great sadness
sometimes crept over me as my solitary canoe glided over the bosom of
some beautiful sea-like lake; myself and canoe-men were alone in the
wilderness. I shall (D.V.) write you again in February, when I hope to
send you as usual a “little budget.”’

Little did the hero of our history imagine when he wrote those last
lines that a new era was even then about to open in his eventful life.
Our readers, who have thus far followed his steps with interest, will
learn, we feel assured, with heartfelt sympathy, that the well-tried and
devoted missionary, the faithful friend and pastor of his flock during so
many years, was now to become the missionary bishop of the newly-formed
diocese of Moosonee, formerly a portion of the enormous diocese of
Rupertsland. At short notice he started for England, leaving wife and
children at Moose, for he was not to be long absent. He was consecrated
at Westminster Abbey on December 15, 1872.

In the few short months which he spent at home the new bishop pleaded
hard, and not without response, for assistance to carry out his plans
for advancing and consolidating his former work in what was henceforth
to be his diocese, stretching 1,500 miles from east to west and north
to south, inhabited by Crees, Ojibbeways and Eskimo, together with some
Europeans and half-castes. As a missionary he had the joy of witnessing
the conversion of the greater part of those children of the wilderness,
and now, as a missionary bishop, his heart was set on the raising up of a
native ministry, supported as far as possible by native resources.

In this some progress had already been made. His plan was to divide
the diocese into five districts, each of them superintended by a fully
qualified pastor, who would be assisted by two or three other Indian
clergymen, whose training would be confined to a thorough knowledge of
their Bibles and Prayer-books in their own language. These men would
accompany the members of their own tribes to their hunting-grounds, and
as they would be able in a great measure to support themselves, they
would require but a comparatively small allowance for their maintenance.
This was his purpose, and what he purposed he had with the Divine
assistance, which he ever sought, never yet failed to carry out.

    All praise to Thee, my Father and my God.
    Thus far Thy love has brought me on life’s road;
    Day after day Thy mercy was renewed,
    Night after night my safety been secured.
    ...
    More like to Jesus I would daily grow,
    Through whom redemption, love, and mercy flow;
    More loving, holy, generous, resigned,
    Thoughtless of self, the friend of all mankind.

Thus was the newly consecrated bishop moved to sing.

At home in Moose again, with his dear wife and children, Bishop Horden
hastened to buckle to his beloved work; but he found time to write a
graphic account of his homeward journey, in which he had as his companion
his second daughter, who had just left school; the eldest was already
at Moose. They travelled _viâ_ New York to Michipicoton, and thence
the remainder of the long, long journey by canoe, ‘encamping,’ wrote
the bishop, ‘in woods under a canvas marquee, waited on by Indians,
travelling through perfect solitudes for days without seeing any human
being other than our crew. It was on the morning of Tuesday, July 8,
that we stepped into our canoe, having four Indian companions. We went
up the river slowly against the stream. Then came a long portage, where
we carried everything, and this detained us many hours; then on and on
till night. Then we put ashore, lit our fire, erected our tent, fried our
pancakes, boiled our kettles, made our beds, and having partaken of a
good supper, we assembled our men around us, and they knelt in prayer to
the Father in heaven; then, shutting the tent’s frail door, we lay down
to rest.

‘The feeling was strange: so many months had elapsed since the ground
had been my bed. Sleep did not come at once, and thoughts were busy on
the past and the future. Presently I slept soundly until the early morn,
when we were awakened to pursue our way. We were off by five o’clock,
and during the day travelled mostly among large lakes. There were no
birds, no creatures of any kind visible, except when we were crossing the
portages, and here we saw quite enough of the dreaded mosquito. On the
third day we came upon two men engaged in erecting a house, which was
to be a trading post in opposition to the great traders of the country,
the Hudson’s Bay Company. On our fifth night, when we were not very far
from New Brunswick, we were so troubled by mosquitoes that we could get
no sleep, and we were not at all sorry when the light of the early morn
allowed us to pursue our way over a bare and swampy portage.

‘This ended, we once more got into our canoe, and in a few hours found
ourselves at the little post of New Brunswick. Here were some Indians,
but not very many, and with them I spent the day, praying with and
teaching them. They are as yet mere infants in the faith, knowing but
little; but I would fain hope that much good has been already effected
by the preaching of the Gospel. They were very low, but some among them
have already been baptized, and are walking consistently. The new trader
they have among them is an old friend, who takes deep interest in the
spiritual welfare of those who come to him for the purposes of trade.

‘Work done, we once more entered our canoe, passed through Brunswick Lake
out into the broad Brunswick branch of the Moose River, and here our real
troubles began. It rained heavily for several days. It was bad enough in
the canoe, but it was much worse on the portages. Fancy a narrow rough
path through the woods, with thick bushes on either side, and the path
deep in mud and water. I was much afraid my dear daughter Chrissie would
suffer from such exposure, but she bore up cheerfully, and proved herself
an expert traveller.

‘When the portages were passed we had 150 miles further to go; but the
wind became fair, and we almost flew over the water. On Tuesday morning,
July 22, we rounded the head of Moose Island, and our home stood before
us. There was a great running and calling, and a hoisting of flags. The
guns gave their loud welcome, and the dear ones who had been left behind
came out to greet us; and there was joy—deep, oh, how deep and grateful!
for God had indeed dealt very graciously with us. Our first evening
passed. It has left the impression of a pleasant dream. I cannot record
our sayings and doings—our exclamations, our tones of joy and sorrow as
we spoke of this friend’s success, or that one’s distress: of this one
being born, and that one dying; it was an evening unique in our history.
We had no “pemmican,” for we are not in the land of the buffalo; it is an
article of food unknown here. Neither had we “salt goose,” a viand which
takes the place of the pemmican; we had something better for that evening!

‘I at once set to work; life is too short and precious to waste much of
it; and since then every day has been crowded. I sometimes scarcely know
what to do first, and yet I find time to sit down and write a line or two
to a friend. The way I manage it is this. I get my work of translation
forward by devoting to it a few extra hours daily, knowing that a packet
time will come, and that it is necessary that every hour of packet week
must be given up to writing; the bonds of Christian friendship must not
be lightly broken. The translation work is very heavy and trying. This
is what I have accomplished since I returned in July: I have revised
our Indian hymn-book, adding to it a large number of new hymns. I have
translated all the first lessons between the tenth Sunday after Trinity
and the first Sunday in Lent, as well as some for many of the holy days.
What I wish to accomplish is the Psalter, the first lessons, and the New
Testament, to be bound up in one volume. If I go on as I have done, I may
get the whole ready in twelve months from this time. I shall give myself
no rest until my people have the whole of the Word of God in their hands.’

Thus the good bishop worked on, happy in the conviction that if things
were not hurrying onward to perfection, they were at least moving slowly
in the right direction—his exertions being helped by his Heavenly Father,
to whom he attributed all progress.




CHAPTER XI

A PICNIC AND AN INDIAN DANCE


The year 1874 was an eventful one at Moose; the breaking-up of the ice
brought with it a flood, and the bishop and his family had to be fetched
in a canoe to the house of the deputy-governor for safety. The moving
ice masses tore up the river bank, broke down the fences, snapped trees
as if they had been reeds; whilst an incessant roar was kept up as the
mile-wide river rushed madly on towards the sea. Crops were backward and
sparse that season.

In July the bishop started on his summer visitation tour to Rupert’s
House, East Main, and Fort George. Everywhere he was received with open
arms; everywhere the services were well attended; at each of the posts
visited many were baptized and confirmed.

By September the bishop was back again, busy amongst his Indians and
with the European sailors who had spent perforce a whole year in the
vicinity, the ship of 1873 having been ice-bound off Charlton Island;
there was no place nearer at hand at which she could winter in safety.
But the captain, mate, and some of the men had visited Moose during the
summer, and every opportunity of communication had been taken advantage
of. Now they were occupied in cleaning the ship and making ready for a
fresh start homewards. Late one night, just before she set sail, the
bishop and his wife accompanied their newly-married daughter on board,
their eldest—the child whom Bishop Anderson had baptized. All hands were
invited aft; a last solemn and affecting farewell service was held.

The annual ship came and went, and the good folks at Moose began to feel
at once that winter was at the door. The weather, though still warm,
could not be long depended upon. ‘We begin,’ wrote the bishop, ‘to take
up our potatoes; that done, we look well to our buildings, to prevent
as far as possible the entrance of frost; then we endeavour to lay in a
stock of fish for the winter, some of which are salted while others are
frozen—in which state they keep good almost all the winter; after that,
pigs and cattle are killed, and cut up, and allowed to freeze. Then the
great labour of the season begins—the cutting and hauling of firewood,
for we have no coals here. We send men armed with large axes into the
thick woods, and there they chop down tree after tree, strip off the
branches, cut them into billets about three feet long, split them and
pile them into a “cord.” A cord is a pile of billets eight feet long and
four feet high, one and a half of such being considered a fair day’s
work for a man. Then other men come with horses and oxen, harnessed to
sledges, and haul the wood to our respective houses, near which it is
replied. Then the men are sent further off to get logs for building
purposes, which are rafted down the river on the breaking-up of the ice.

‘My young son Bertie delights in chopping, and in winter both Bertie
and Beatrice delight in tobogganing, which gives them capital exercise.
A piece of wood about six feet long, ten inches broad, and a quarter
of an inch thick, is turned up a little in front, and is then called a
sled; this is brought to the edge of the river’s bank, which is in some
places very steep. Bertie sits down in front, armed with a short stick
to guide the sled; his sister sits down behind him, and down they rush
with amazing speed, the impetus carrying them far out on the frozen
river; then they trudge up the bank, bringing the sled with them, and
the process is repeated again and again. As this sort of exercise is a
little too violent for a person of middle age, I don’t engage in it now.
Then there is the fishing. Walking out two or three miles in snow-shoes,
a gipsy tent is made in the woods; holes are cut in the thick ice, a pile
of pine brush is brought from the woods; and then comes the sitting and
shivering at the hole, bobbing a baited hook up and down, perhaps the
pleasure of catching a fish, then the pleasure of cooking it, and then
the pleasure of eating it.’

During the cold of this year’s winter the bishop allowed himself a rare
holiday—the only one, indeed, with the exception of those connected with
Christmas-tree doings, ever recorded by him in his many letters to us.
Availing himself of an unusually fine warm day in February, he held a
grand picnic with his family and friends, driving out four or five miles
in dog and horse sleighs, taking dinner in a large comfortable tent, with
a fine fire in the centre, and then going down to the river and fishing
through holes cut in the ice. ‘Bobbing our hooks, baited with either a
piece of fat pork or rabbit, until a hungry trout made a dart at it, we
generally succeeded,’ he says, ‘in drawing it through the thick ice on
to the snow, where in a short time he became frozen hard; for when I say
that we had a warm day, I mean the thermometer stood but a little below
zero.’ Yes, there sat the bishop and his children and friends on pine
brush on the ice, quite enjoying themselves!

‘We got home very nicely in the evening, but the cold was then becoming
severe, and as the wind was high we should have been very uncomfortable
indeed had we been out much later. With all the drawbacks, I am very
happy here at Moose. I have no time for _kushkaletumowin_, or “thinking
long.” Were the day thirty hours instead of twenty-four, I should still
find it too short. Each year finds me busier than its predecessor, and
so I suppose it will continue to the end. The happiest man is he who is
most diligently employed about his Master’s business. I have before me
for next summer a most extensive journey; I go to Red River to attend
the first meeting of our provincial synod, and then to York Factory,
travelling over four thousand miles.’

The school, under the bishop’s own immediate superintendence, was going
on well, the scholars making good progress. One boy, out of school
hours, was employed in chopping wood for the school fire. Another had
accompanied the bishop in all his last summer journeyings, behaving in
an exemplary manner. A third, Edward Richards, was already very useful,
assisting as a master in the school. The Indians are very fond of their
children, and perhaps a little over-indulgent. The spoilt children
are sometimes disobedient. The bishop gives an amusing description of
parental admonition on one occasion at a distant camp. ‘I had been,’ he
says, ‘away from home for some time, and hoped before night to arrive at
East Main. I had reached a part of the coast opposite the large island
Wepechenite, “the Walrus,” when I observed a body of Indians standing
on a rock, watching us. Here was an opportunity not to be missed; those
Indians might not hear the Gospel again for years. I at once directed
my men to look out for a good landing-place, and I got ashore. My men
also came ashore, and began collecting wood for the purpose of cooking
breakfast. In the meantime the Indians, seeing our movements, got their
canoes into the water; they did not come empty-handed, but brought a
large number of fine white fish, called by them Atikamakwuk—“deer of the
sea,” some dried, others fresh, just taken from the nets. I collected all
our visitors to a service, at which many children were to be baptized.
The deepest attention was paid. The morning hymn was heartily sung, for
these Indians are all Christians. The discourse is being delivered when
there is a great stir among the congregation; faces look excited, voices
are raised, apparently in anger. For a moment I was at a loss to account
for this; then I saw that it was my address that was taking effect,
although not quite in the way I had intended. I was speaking to the young
people, telling them their duty to their parents. The mothers thought
this an opportunity not to be passed over, so, raising their voices, they
cried out to their daughters, “Do you hear? Isn’t this what we are always
telling you?” Then, rushing at them, they brought them to the front,
saying, “Come here, that he may see you; let him see how ashamed you
look, you disobedient children!” Turning to me they said, “Yes, they are
disobedient, they will not listen; perhaps now they have heard you they
will behave better.” The young people promised better conduct for the
future. The service over, we once more took to our canoe, and paddled on
under the hottest sun, I think, I have ever experienced.’

It was during this summer trip that the bishop witnessed an Indian dance.

‘I had travelled far,’ he says. ‘I had visited the stations on the
East Main coast, and had been some time at Little Whale River. It is a
dreary place, and the mighty, frowning, rocky portals of the river seem
fitted for the entrance to other regions, to another world. I had spent
much time preaching the Gospel to Europeans, half-castes, Indians, and
Eskimo, and I was intending almost immediately to turn the bow of my
canoe southwards, and speed back as fast as possible to my home at Moose
Factory.

‘Walking out one evening with the gentleman in charge of the post, we
were somewhat startled by a great noise proceeding from an encampment
of Indians a quarter of a mile distant, on the top of a high hill. “A
conjuring, a conjuring extraordinary!” said we. We ascended the hill
quietly, and quite unobserved. Having attained the summit, we walked
rapidly towards a large tent from which the noise was proceeding, and
looked in, but at first could make out nothing distinctly. We entered,
and found six or seven men standing as closely together as possible
around a very small fire, dancing, or rather shuffling up and down,
without in the least changing their position; the women and children were
sitting around, admiring and applauding spectators of the doings of their
lords and masters. There was music, too, both vocal and instrumental.
The player was likewise the vocalist; he was an old man, who sat among
the women and children; his instrument an old kettle, over which a
piece of deer-skin had been tightly drawn, and this he beat with a
stick, accompanying with his cracked voice, raised to its highest pitch.
The dancing and music continued for some hours, but about every five
minutes there was a momentary cessation, when all in the tent joined in
a prolonged howl. All seemed to thoroughly enjoy the sport, and I was
myself glad to see it, for it was no conjuring after all, only a little
simple amusement, and it was the first sign of animation I had witnessed
among those Indians, who are not of a very high type of humanity. They
are now all Christians, but the standard of Christianity is low—how can
it be otherwise? I am the nearest clergyman to them, and I am six hundred
miles distant. The difficulty of reaching them is very great, for the
sea in their vicinity is open but for a short time in the whole year.
This summer I had hoped to see a labourer stationed among them and the
teachable Eskimo, but for the present I have been disappointed.’

The bishop’s thoughts were much occupied with the need for more churches
and schools, more pastors and teachers, in his extensive diocese. In 1875
he writes: ‘At present there are three clergymen in the diocese besides
myself, and the work we have to do is very great and onerous. I have
given, God’s grace enabling me to do so, more than twenty years of my
life to the cause which is so close to my heart, and I long to see the
whole of the country under my charge not only free from superstition, but
likewise entirely under the sway of Christ, that there shall not be a
tribe, either among the Crees, Ojibbeways, or Eskimo, which has not its
well-instructed and fully-accredited teacher. Many of the tribes do not
see a minister’s face for years.’

Bishop Horden had now been actively engaged in the mission field nearly
a quarter of a century. On January 6, 1876, he writes: ‘During the whole
of that time I have not been laid up with any serious illness whatever,
and I am thankful to add that I still feel as strong in body and as
capable of work as when I first landed here; truly God has surrounded me
with loving-kindness and tender mercy; but in the course of last year He
taught me, in a manner not to be misunderstood, that the threads of my
life are held in His hand, for He plucked me from the very jaws of death.

‘With a large number of fellow-passengers I was on board the steamship
Manitoba, on Lake Superior, on my way to Michipicoton, when late in the
evening we came into collision with the American steamship the Comet, a
vessel more than twice the size of our own, laden with a heavy cargo of
silver ore and pig-iron. That we escaped without material injury seemed
quite miraculous, for the Comet sank immediately, and with her, I am
grieved to add, eleven of her crew of twenty-one men. I trust that this
nearness to death, showing me how uncertain is life, is causing me to
value it more highly, and to labour more earnestly in the vineyard before
the night cometh in which no man can work.’




CHAPTER XII

ORGANISATION AND TRAVEL


The marked feature of the year 1875 was the organisation of the four
dioceses, into which the old diocese of Rupertsland was divided, into
an ecclesiastical province, the first synod of which was held in the
beginning of August. This necessitated the bishop’s going to Winnipeg,
Red River, a journey of fifteen hundred miles. ‘In going I visited the
stations of New Brunswick, Misenabe, and Michipicoton. At New Brunswick
much progress is being made; most of the Indians are now baptized, and as
the present agent of the Hudson’s Bay Company there is a great friend of
missions, and one who will do all in his power for the spiritual benefit
of those attached to his trading post, I hope it will not be long before
heathenism will have taken its entire departure, and Christianity be the
professed religion of that important portion of my charge. From all the
stations I receive good reports, but before that advance can be made for
which we so deeply long, we must have more labourers. We are so few, and
the field is so large. In the autumn the mission was strengthened by the
arrival of the Rev. J. H. Keen from England, and a valuable gift he is
proving himself to be. I trust another man equally good will be sent next
autumn.

‘In May I hope to set apart Mr. Saunders, a native of the country, for
the work of the ministry among his countrymen (the Ojibbeways). Thus I
shall be enabled to occupy three most important posts, so that, should
I further carry out my plans, I shall consider that I have the diocese
tolerably well in hand. The places I hope to occupy are Rupert’s House,
to which an immense extent of country looks as its head; Matawakumma,
which will guard the frontier from Roman Catholic encroachment; and Whale
River, opening up communication with the interesting but much neglected
Eskimo of the north-eastern coast of Hudson’s Bay. Another place, Flying
Post, I had likewise hoped to supply with a permanent competent teacher,
but the man intended for it, a pure Indian, will not be ready this year.’

The Rev. J. H. Keen had been assisting the bishop at Moose, but the
people at Rupert’s House were still without a missionary, so at Christmas
he was given up to them, and the bishop took the work at Moose Fort
alone. The Christmas Day services began ere the stars had disappeared
from the firmament, and continued till late in the afternoon. ‘After
this,’ he writes, ‘I felt considerably fatigued, but a cup of tea revived
me, and I spent a quietly happy evening with my wife and youngest
children.’

In the following summer the bishop joined Mr. Keen at Rupert’s House.
‘Among those who came down to meet me,’ he says, ‘were our old friends
Matamashkum, Wapunaweshkum, Snuffers, and many others. Our joy was mutual.

‘Soon arrived the brigades from Mistasinnee, Waswanepe, and Nitchekwun,
hundreds of miles up the Rupert’s River. We were busy morning, noon,
and night. Every moment was employed, for these children of ours would
have but a few days’ intercourse with their father, and then would again
return to their distant homes. We had marriages to perform, many children
to baptize, candidates for confirmation to prepare, communicants to
instruct, the disobedient to rebuke. There was not much of this, however,
and the days ran rapidly and happily on. The Psalter, beautifully printed
from my translation, had come to us the previous ship time, and the
Indians were delighted. After a little while it was most cheering to hear
how well they read together their appointed portions. They gave me a
very good collection, a good number of beaver; that is to say, they did
not give me a large pile of beaver skins, but our native teacher, Jacob
Matamashkum, had made a list of all the Indians, and after each name he
had written down the man’s contribution in beaver. When the list was
completed it was given to the resident trader, who credited me with three
shillings for each beaver. Altogether it amounted to a considerable sum.’

Some time after this the bishop made a voyage in the Mink to Big River
and Great Whale River, both on the eastern coast of Hudson’s Bay. At
Great Whale River the work was of a varied character, amongst Indians,
Eskimo, and English. The Eskimo were assembled in some numbers for the
whale fishery. But it was not a success that season. The whales, or
rather porpoises, remained outside the river, and would not come in. ‘A
whale fishery when the whales are numerous is a very exciting sight. I
myself,’ says the bishop, ‘have engaged in a fishery in which a thousand
were killed, but that was many years ago. The Eskimo gave much cause for
encouragement; no matter what they were about, when summoned to school or
service the work was dropped instantly, their little books were taken up,
and off they trotted, singing, listening, praying; they showed that they
were thoroughly in earnest.’

‘How grieved was my heart that I had no one to leave behind who might
take the Eskimo as his special charge!’ says the bishop. But the man
desired was even then approaching Moose Fort in the annual ship. It was
Mr. Peck, a layman, who had spent some of the earlier years of his life
as a sailor. ‘It was by searching the Scriptures in my mess on board one
of H.M.’s vessels that the light shone into my darkened soul; it was
then I knew its truth,’ he says. The bishop was much pleased with the
earnestness and evident fitness for the work of the young missionary.
After remaining at Moose only a week, the latter set out in a boat with
three or four Indians for his distant and lonely home. After a few months
he returned to Moose to be ordained.

‘The two events of the winter,’ writes the bishop, February 1878, ‘have
been the children’s school-treat and the ordination of Mr. Peck.
The treat was a great success. Fifty-six partook of our hospitality.
We divided them into two parties on two successive evenings; I never
saw children enjoy themselves more. We had many games to amuse them,
finishing each evening with a religious service. Edward Richards, one
of the Coral Fund _protégés_, is with us, assisting generally in the
mission. He has done good work this winter in giving instruction to Mr.
Peck in the Indian language. My son is spending the winter with us,
cheering us much, and assisting in the work. In the summer he takes his
mother, Beatrice, and Bertie to England, the two latter to go to school.
I am afraid I shall find a bachelor’s life here rather hard.’

On May 10, 1878, the bishop, with heartfelt thanksgiving, ordained Mr.
Peck deacon and priest. ‘He left us,’ writes Mr. Horden on June 18,
‘with our deepest sympathy and our most earnest prayers. He left us well
prepared for his work, and with a good insight into the two difficult
native languages he will be in constant contact with, the Cree and the
Eskimo. He is full of zeal—zeal tempered with prudence, and I think that,
should his life be spared, a noble career is before him. The surroundings
of his home are very desolate, and he needs all the help and sympathy we
can give him.’

This summer was spent as usual in almost constant travel by the bishop,
who still had not been from end to end of his vast diocese. The station
next in importance to Moose at that time was York Factory, but he had
never yet seen it, owing to the great distance. This summer he visited
Albany. Although it was the end of June, ice was still lying on the coast
when he set out in a large canoe, accompanied by six Indians. The way lay
along the western shore of James’ Bay. The scenery is very dreary, the
coast low and flat, not a hill to be seen. At the end of three days he
found himself ‘at a very small village, consisting of the residence of
the fur trader, a nice church, a good parsonage, a few well-built houses,
and a number of Indian tents.’

‘I was most heartily welcomed,’ he writes. ‘It was late in the evening
when I got out of the canoe, and the next morning early I entered the
church for service. The Rev. Thomas Vincent, who has built both his
house and church, principally with his own hands, is most indefatigable.
I saw no heathen Indians here, I heard no Indian drums, I beheld no
superstitious rites, but I heard hymns of praise rising to heaven. A
large number had been prepared for confirmation, and many knelt at the
Lord’s table.’

After a stay of a fortnight’s duration the bishop returned to Moose,
and started for Matawakumma, 500 miles distant, where the Rev. John
Saunders, a native, like Mr. Vincent, of Albany, was now located.
Matawakumma means, ‘the lake of the meeting of the waters.’ It is a large
lake, irregular in outline, surrounded by woods. The first thing which
strikes the visitor on approaching the station is the neat little church
perched on a rising ground, like a beacon set on a hill, the rallying
point for the little band of Ojibbeway Indians of the neighbourhood.
Then the residence of the fur-trader comes in sight, the store and
other buildings, and the modest parsonage-house, with its garden and
accessories. The whole way from Moose the bishop saw not more than a
dozen people. The journey took rather more than a fortnight. The road was
a broad river, impeded in its course by many rapids and shoals, and by
numerous waterfalls, some of which are very beautiful.

‘Various portages had been made, and we were going on, as we thought,
safely,’ writes the bishop, ‘when suddenly there is a heavy crash, and
the water comes rushing into the canoe. We had come with force upon a
rock, which had made a great hole in the bark. We paddle to the shore as
fast as possible, take everything out of the canoe and begin repairing
it. One goes to a birch tree and cuts off a large piece of bark, another
digs up some roots and splits them, a third prepares some pitch, and in
the course of an hour or two the bark is sewn into the bottom of the
canoe, the seams are covered with pitch, and we are once more loading our
little vessel.

‘At the end of our second week we come to an encampment of Indians. It is
Sunday, and we stay and spend the day with them. They are old friends,
Henry Martyn and his wife and others. Indians who are Christians,
baptized and communicants. Indians who can give a reason for the hope
which is in them. Indians who can read their books and write their
letters, and who may be depended upon quite as much as any Europeans.

[Illustration: SHOOTING A RAPID]

‘Early on Monday morning we are once more in our canoe, and soon get into
Matawakumma Lake, in which we paddle for five hours in very heavy rain.
Soaked quite through, we feel not a little glad to step ashore on the
friendly beach, and find ourselves once more with civilised man.’

And ere long the time came for the bishop’s sore trial of parting with
wife and children. The two youngest must go to an English school.
But ‘who was to take them?’ he writes. ‘There was no one but their
dear mother, and although it was hard to part with her in this dreary
and solitary land, it was absolutely necessary; and they were to be
accompanied by my eldest son, Dr. Horden, who had spent the winter with
us. Our annual ship came early, and the party was to start in her on her
return voyage. I spent one night on board. Next morning, at an early
hour, the ship’s guns told us that the voyage had commenced. I remained
until after breakfast, and then, after a sorrowful farewell, I left in a
boat, and in a few minutes found myself on the deck of the schooner bound
for Fort George.

‘Now the way to Fort George is, in part, the way to England, and so the
two vessels started in company. The day was beautiful, the wind was fair,
and we made good progress; but the great ship, spreading more canvas,
gradually got ahead—late in the evening she was about twelve miles
distant, and I thought we had seen the last of her. That night and the
next day the weather was very wild and disagreeable, but the day, after
all, was once more prosperous, and soon after breakfast we espied our
huge companion a few miles to the west of us. She drew towards us, and
when we saw the last of her, as night came on, she was about ten miles
ahead.

‘The following day we should easily have reached our destination had the
weather been clear; as it was, we could not venture near the dangerous
coast. On Sunday the weather cleared up, the high land of Wastekan Island
came in sight, and by-and-by the low and dangerous lead islands. Then the
wild and uninviting land all around showed we were at the mouth of Big
River, the tortuous channel of which we carefully threaded, and at four
o’clock we dropped anchor in front of the little village, consisting only
of six or eight houses.

‘I was agreeably surprised to find a large number of my red friends
assembled on the beach to greet me. I at once collected them together,
and we had a most interesting service. Later in the evening we had the
English-speaking people and the crew of our vessel, making altogether
quite a respectable congregation. On Friday morning we had to say
good-bye, and once more go on board. The next day was dark and dismal,
the wind blowing a hurricane, while the sea ran mountains high. At noon
we caught a momentary sight of land, but we were obliged to stand out,
as we could not see our way through the tortuous course to Moose. No one
on board slept a moment that night. The storm abated in the morning,
and at daybreak we were once more sailing in the right direction; in
the afternoon the wind was very light, and a little after six o’clock
we landed at Moose. I made my way to my own house; the loved ones, who
were accustomed to greet me with such joy on my return, were far away,
battling with the great Atlantic waves.... They were gone, and it ill
became me to sit down and mope; so I set to work to drive melancholy
away. More work came upon me than I had calculated upon.

‘This was the only winter that Mr. Saunders, the Ojibbeway clergyman,
could be at Moose for a long time, and I could not translate into the
Ojibbeway tongue without his assistance. We first attacked the Moosonee
hymn-book. This finished, we commenced the Prayer-book, and having
finished the morning prayers we put it aside to get one of the Gospels
done. The great diversity of languages in the diocese vastly increases
our labour—Cree, Ojibbeway, Chipwyan, and Eskimo—and there must be
separate translations for each. The English school, too, I manage myself,
with over thirty scholars. They are a happy lot, very well behaved,
with a great love for their school—as a proof of which I need only say
that there has been scarcely an absentee for the winter. All this,
with sermons, visiting my people, correspondence, which grows instead
of diminishing, keeps me thoroughly employed every day from morning to
night. The winter hitherto has been a very mild one. When it stands at or
a little above zero, we consider it decidedly warm.

‘Of all I received last ship time nothing gladdened my eyes more than the
sight of a box of Eskimo books in the syllabic character, printed from
manuscript sent home the previous year. I can fancy with what delight
Mr. Peck pounced on them, and with what gratification the Eskimo beheld
the raising of the lid which exposed to view so much spiritual food. Our
native library is becoming extensive, new books being added every year.
There is no language without literature. It is blessed work supplying the
aborigines of any country with the Word of Life; that Word which reveals
to them Jesus, and raises them in spiritual things to a level with the
most polished and civilised nations on earth.’




CHAPTER XIII

YORK FACTORY


Leaving the station in charge of the Rev. J. Keen, the bishop started,
in June 1879, on the long contemplated visit to York Factory, in the
northern part of his diocese. ‘I left Moose,’ he says, ‘on June 30,
having made every necessary arrangement for the management of the mission
during my absence. At Michipicoton, close to the mighty Lake Superior,
kind friends were my hosts for four days, days full of work, and then a
steamer carried me to Sault St. Marie, a long way out of my course, where
I was obliged to remain a week, during which I was the guest of another
missionary bishop, the Bishop of Algoma, whose diocese is rapidly filling
up from England and the well-peopled parts of Canada.

‘I went through Lake Superior. Four-and-twenty hours of railroad
followed, and fourteen hours more of steamer, and the second stage
was completed. A month was spent with my kind friend the Bishop of
Rupertsland. I was in the centre of the civilisation of the country,
in the neighbourhood of Winnipeg, only a few years ago a waste, now a
populous town, with splendid schools, churches, banks, colleges, town
hall, &c. I was constantly at work, preaching in the various churches,
sometimes in Cree, sometimes in English, added to which to my lot fell
the duty of preaching the sermon at the opening of the synod, at which
the clergy were collected from various parts of the country. I need not
say how thoroughly this month was enjoyed; it gave me the largest amount
of Christian intercourse I have had for several years.

‘When the steamer which was to convey me through Lake Winnipeg was ready
to start I went on board, and in her had a journey of three hundred miles
to Old Fort, from which I was conveyed to Norfolk House by boat. I was
far enough away from civilisation now, and had before me five hundred
miles of dreary and desolate country. There were some immense lakes to
cross, and some rough rapids to descend; but we saw no bold falls, such
as I have been accustomed to find in other parts of the country.

‘On September 19 I found myself at my journey’s end, at York Factory, a
spot I had longed to visit for many, many years, a spot at which several
devoted missionaries have laboured, where Christ has been faithfully
preached, and where many precious souls have been gathered into His
garner.’

The Rev. J. Winter had arrived at the station to take the place of
Archdeacon Kirkby, who had quitted York by the annual ship just a week
before. Mr. Winter had heard the archdeacon’s farewell sermon. The
latter had faithfully toiled there for twenty-seven years, and there
was scarcely a dry eye. The interpreter was the first to break down,
then followed the archdeacon himself, together with the congregation.
For a few moments there was a pause; it was with difficulty that he
finished his discourse. ‘I had wished,’ wrote the bishop, ‘to express
to him personally my sense of the praiseworthy manner in which he had,
single-handed, managed this large district. It needs more labourers—one
at Churchill, and another at Trout Lake. One great difficulty is the
number of languages spoken. At York and Severn, Cree; at Trout Lake, a
mixture of Cree and Saulteaux; and at Churchill, Chipwyan and Eskimo,
which have no resemblance either to each other or to the Cree or
Saulteaux. I have been busy ever since coming here, for besides the
Indian there is a somewhat large English congregation, York having ever
been a place of great importance in the country, although it is now much
less so than formerly. I conduct an English school daily, give lessons
in Cree to Mr. Winter, and twice a week I give lessons to the European
and native servants of the Hudson’s Bay Company. Altogether I am as fully
employed as I have ever been at Moose; but I cannot but know that with me
the sun has passed the meridian, and that it behoves one to work while it
is called to-day.

‘In January I go northward two hundred miles to Churchill, the most
northerly inhabited spot in the diocese of Moosonee. It is a very dreary
place. The wife of the gentleman in charge there, the sister of one of
our missionaries, is often years without seeing the face of a civilised
woman, while the intensity of the cold there is as great almost as
in any spot on the earth’s surface. You may conceive with what joy a
visitor is received. What a welcome I may expect on my arrival! The
Indians there will be quite strange to me; with their language I am not
at all acquainted. I had never seen one until I came here, and here only
one—a poor girl, now a happy, comfortable, Christian lassie, with an
English tongue, but who was cast out as an encumbrance by her unnatural
relatives. In June I go on a tour to Trout Lake and Severn; this will
occupy me nearly two months, and in August I once more set off for
England.’

The voyage from York Factory in the autumn of 1880 was the most tedious
and stormy on record, occupying ten weeks instead of five. It was the
middle of November ere Bishop Horden reached England, when once more
he had the joy of greeting his wife and children. And now followed a
continual round of preaching, speaking, and travelling, with very heavy
daily correspondence. At many a meeting the bishop held his audience
in rapt attention with the story of the rise and progress of the Moose
mission, with graphic descriptions of parts of the Moose diocese, with
accounts of the work in the six several districts into which it was now
divided, each under the care of an ordained clergyman. Charters had
been granted to two companies for the construction of railways from
the corn-growing provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan to the shores
of Hudson’s Bay, one or both of which would run for the greater part
through the Moosonee diocese. The bishop pleaded for help, therefore,
for a church extension fund. He would often close his address with an
Indian’s account of the condition of his people when in a state of
heathenism, giving it in the native Cree, with a literal translation.

  Naspich ne ke muchepimatisin  wāskuch  numa kākwan
   Very   I  was     bad       formerly  not  anything

  ne kiskāletān piko Muchemuneto  ishpish    ka  primatiseyan;
  I   know it   only  the devil  as long as  I     lived

  misew ā ililewuk ne ke wapumowuk  moshuk ā muchepima.
   all the Indians I     saw them   always   they being

  tisitchik,          ā notenittochik,          ā keshkwāpāchik,
   wicked    when they fight with each other  when they get drunk

   ā mukoshāchik,    ā mitāwitchik,          ā kosapatutik,
  when they feast  when they conjure  when they pretend to prophesy

  ā kelaskitchik;             muskumāö wewa,                nutopowuk,
  when they lie   he takes from him by force his wife  they ask for liquor

  naspich,  saketowuk,    utawāwuk,           kimotaskāwuk
   much    they like it  they buy it  they rob (other) people’s lands

    kisewahaö       weche ililewa,     naspich  tapwā
  he angers them  his fellow Indians,   very    truly

  ke muhepimatisewuk.
   they were wicked.

These sentences will illustrate the peculiar structure of the Indian
tongue, which, with its ‘sesquipedalian compounds,’ as Professor Max
Müller calls them, might deter almost any student from the attempt
to master it. Bishop Horden, with great patience, perseverance, and
thoroughness, compiled a grammar of the Cree language, which appeared
about this time, and in which we are, step by step, introduced to a
system complete in the mechanism of all its parts. Words that seem all
confusion gradually assume their proper forms. Around the verb, which is
the most important factor in the formation of those polysyllabic words,
cluster all the other ideas. They are glued on to it, so to speak. That
which with us would be a whole sentence is accumulated in the Cree into a
long compound word; agent, action, object, with adverbial expletives, are
all combined.

The bishop, in the midst of all his hard work when in England, now
speaking for the Church Missionary Society, now pleading for his own
diocese, in the midst of engagements and travel, in the midst even of
his very journeyings to and fro, found time to write some of his graphic
descriptive papers. We give the following true story of one of the former
Coral School children, written by him in the waiting-room of a railway
station, whilst expecting a train.

‘Amelia Davey was originally named Amelia Ward, and was one of the
children of the Coral Fund. She got on with her learning very well, could
read and write English creditably, and spoke English as well as if she
had been an English girl, instead of a Cree. At the age of about nineteen
she married a young Indian named James Okune Shesh; and, after about
three years of married life, lost him through disease and starvation, she
herself narrowly escaping death.

‘Some time afterwards she married another Indian, named Solomon Davey,
a good steady man, who was to her an excellent husband. Last autumn
they left Moose Factory with their children, accompanied by Davey’s old
father and mother, for their winter hunting-grounds. For a time all went
well, fish and rabbits supplying the daily needs of the family; the food
gradually, however, failed, until scarcely any was obtainable. Day after
day Solomon went off to seek supplies; evening after evening he returned
bringing little or nothing. The party now determined to make their way
to Moose; there they knew their wants would be relieved, but Solomon’s
strength entirely broke down, and they were obliged to place him on
a sledge, which was hauled by his mother; thus they moved painfully
forward. The poor fellow was covered up as well as possible. He seemed
very quiet; his mother went to him to assure herself that all was right;
but the spirit had fled. The brave good Indian, who had done his best to
supply the wants of those dependent on him, had perished in the attempt.
Fresh trouble came; Amelia’s time had come for the arrival of another
baby; camp was made, and a little unsuspecting mortal was ushered into
the world.

‘How they lived I know not; but two days after the child’s birth, Amelia,
tying up her little one, and placing it on her back, and putting her
snow-shoes on her feet, essayed to walk to Moose, still eighteen miles
distant. Bravely she stepped out; her own life as well as the lives
of those she left behind depended on her reaching it. She slept once;
the bitter cold seemed anxious to make her its victim, but the morning
still beheld the thin spare form alive, and, asking God to give her the
strength she so sorely needed, she struggled on again.

‘Presently the houses of Moose make their appearance, but they are far,
far off. Can they be reached? It seems scarcely possible, but the effort
is made, the necessary strength is supplied, and she finds herself in
a house, with Christian hands and Christian hearts to minister to her
necessities.

‘But can this poor wrinkled old woman, apparently sixty years of age, be
the bright, well-favoured, cheerful Amelia of thirty? The very same. What
you see has been produced by the cold and want; and how about the babe?
Well, the dear little baby was well and strong; the Christian mother
had preserved it with the greatest imaginable care, and it was to her,
doubtless, all the more dear from the terrible circumstances under which
it was born.

‘Parties were at once sent off to those left behind, with food and other
necessaries, and all were brought to Moose, where they were kindly and
abundantly cared for. The last thing Solomon did last autumn was to go
to the Rev. J. H. Keen, and purchase for himself a Cree New Testament to
take with him to his hunting-grounds.’

Other stories the bishop told or wrote, too many for the size of the
present volume. There was David Anderson, one of the many lambs of the
Bishop of Rupertsland’s flock, whose arm was shattered by an accidental
gunshot, and for whom a false arm was sent out from England. This arm for
a time he would not use, because he thought it wrong thus to supplement
a limb of which ‘God had seen fit to deprive him!’ There was the devoted
wife of the dying hunter (Jacob Matamashkum), who saved him in the last
pangs of starvation by applying his lips to her own breast. There was the
aged grandmother (good old Widow Charlotte), who took the dead daughter’s
babe and nourished it at her bosom thirty years after her own last child
had been born. There was Richard, son of the Widow Charlotte, who was
‘a famous fisherwoman’ even after she had become a great grandmother.
The son was a delicate young man, who had largely depended on her for
subsistence. He married and fell ill. The poor wife on the morning before
he died ruptured a blood-vessel in driving in a tent-peg, and was carried
to the grave just a month after him. There were the starving parents,
who, having lost their two youngest children from hunger, set off with
the remaining two for the nearest station, a hundred miles away, to get
food. The wife drew the sledge on which the children lay, while the
husband walked in front to break a road in the snow for her, till at last
his strength failed, and he could go no further. She, however, set up a
little tent for him, and hastened on. She might yet get help in time to
save him. She reached Albany, and sank unconscious. But friends were at
hand—the children, scarcely alive, were taken from the sledge. The mother
recovered to say where her husband lay. A party went in search of him; he
was dead, and the body was hard frozen.

Many of the school-children wrote to the bishop whilst he was in England
letters, that might favourably compare with those of children possessing
far greater advantages than they. All spoke of deepest attachment to him,
all longed for his return amongst them. ‘We shall be so happy to see
you again,’ was the refrain of every letter. The elder sister of one of
the girls had become the wife of the Rev. J. Saunders, native pastor of
Matawakumma. Her letter addressed to Mrs. Horden is full of interest. It
is dated August 13, 1881. She says:

    ‘We are pretty dull up here, but we enjoy good health, and we
    must feel thankful to Him who gives us health and life. Of
    course you know that we spent the first winter you were away
    at Moose, and I must say your absence was very much felt, and
    when, the bishop went away the following summer, Moose was
    quite deserted.

    ‘I think the people at Moose will be very glad to see you back
    again. Sometimes I wish to see Moose and my friends living
    there, but, knowing the difficulty and expense of travelling,
    I put the subject out of my mind, and try to feel contented.
    If this place was not such a poor one for living I should
    certainly feel more settled. In the winter we do very well
    in the way of food, but my husband is obliged to occupy a
    good deal of his time in hunting; but in the summer we depend
    altogether on our nets, and if fish fails, then there is
    nothing at all; but I am glad to say that it is only sometimes
    that we get only enough for breakfast. I feel happy to say
    that our Heavenly Father never allows us to be without food
    altogether, and we bless the Bounteous Hand which can give
    us food even in this bleak and lonely wilderness. Many times
    while I was at Moose I thought it would be impossible to exist
    on fish alone, but experience teaches me that we can exist on
    fish, and fish alone. Many times I think how nice and helpful
    it would be if we had a cow.

    ‘I feel rather surprised that my husband did not arrange with
    the bishop before this to have a cow; to my mind that should
    have been considered before now. The other missionaries have
    cattle, and I think we could keep a cow very nicely here. I am
    afraid I shall be tiring you, so I must conclude my letter,
    wishing you and yours every blessing.

                 ‘I remain yours very gratefully,

                                                 ‘FRANCES SAUNDERS.’

The bishop did not return to Moose in the summer of 1881. He found much
to do in England, and so the annual ship by which he was expected arrived
without him. The Rev. Thomas Vincent visited Moose, taking the place of
the Rev. J. Keen, in the course of the winter, which was a mild one. The
summer had been dry, and there had been many forest fires—hundreds of
young rabbits and partridges must have been roasted alive. A sad loss for
the Indians, who largely depend on these for food.




CHAPTER XIV

THE RETURN TO MOOSE


In the spring of 1882, the good folk at Moose became more and more
pressing for their beloved bishop’s return. They were looking eagerly
forward to his presence amongst them again; and he went, but he went
alone, Mrs. Horden remaining in England with their children. A fortnight
after his arrival in Moose he wrote:

‘My canoe journey occupied eighteen days, and was rather arduous. The
heat, against which there could never be the slightest protection, was
terrible, sometimes rising as high as 110° in the shade, which was
aggravated by the rocky and difficult character of many of our portages.
These things were nothing to me some years ago, but it is different now.
I cannot bear fatigue as I could when I came by the same route fifteen
years ago; then it was physically a pleasure, now it is a labour.’

The bishop had travelled _viâ_ New York, Montreal and Matawa. ‘We
alighted at the station,’ he writes, ‘and a mile ride on a very rough
road brought us to the thriving young town. Fifteen years ago, with wife
and two young children, I had found the reaching Matawa a difficult
journey by canoe, and when I had reached it, it consisted of three
houses; now its population is about five hundred, while the number of
people passing through is very large. It has fine shops, many hotels, a
broad street, and an English church and parsonage are being built for a
very energetic resident clergyman. It is the seat of the lumber trade
in the Upper Ottawa; hence its importance. But where are the Indians,
who not long since were numerous here? This place knows them no more!
I saw scarcely any; as a race they have passed away; many have died,
for they cannot stand the diseases Europeans bring with them—measles,
whooping-cough, diphtheria, make short work of them. Many, too, have gone
to work on the railways, while the women have married French Canadians,
and so the Indian becomes swallowed up by the advancing whites.

‘I travelled on by rail as far as the railroad went—forty miles from
Matawa. The country is rocky and uninteresting, with a good spot for
farming here and there. This railroad forms part of the Great Canadian
Pacific, which is being carried forward with extraordinary rapidity, and
will be accomplished years before it was expected to be, the part causing
most difficulty being that north of Lake Superior. At Matawa I remained
four days, the guest of Mr. and Mrs. Bliss, spending a Sunday there,
which I much enjoyed. I preached both morning and evening, and in the
afternoon gave an address to the children. I never spend an idle Sunday.
I should hope no one ever does; but a Sunday never passes without my
saying something for the Master in a public manner. I feel that I must
work; the truth comes home to me more and more forcibly every day that
“the time is short,” that it behoves us to work while it is called to-day.

‘On Tuesday, August 1, I had done with railways and telegrams, almost
with letters, and was once more in my birch-bark canoe up the Ottawa.
There lies the bedding, tied up in an oil-cloth to prevent its getting
wet; there the provisions, and the kettles and frying-pan, and tent and
paddles; and here are my companions—four Temiscamingue Indians, fine
strong fellows, who with alacrity place the canoe in the water, and
then everything in it in a very orderly manner; then one of them with
a respectful touch of his cap says, “_Ashi nen he posetonau kekinow_”
(“Already we have embarked everything”). I step into the canoe; a nice
seat has been prepared for me, and we are off. The sound of the paddles
is familiar; I could almost forget that I had not heard it for two years.
Through the whole course of our journey I did not see a dozen farms. But
what is this I see? Logs, logs, logs; tens, hundreds, thousands, all
formed into a raft, on their way to build houses, churches, palaces,
cottages, in the civilised world. And here we are at the foot of a
great rapid; we are obliged to get out of our canoe, which, with all
the baggage, has to be carried over a long portage. But there comes a
curious-looking structure, square in shape, and on it a couple of small
houses and four men. It is composed of a large number of squared logs
formed into a small raft called a “crib”; the men look resolute and
determined, and handle immense oars called sweeps. They come on towards
the rapid, slowly at first, then the speed increases, and down they go,
covered with water, down, down, down, until quieter waters are reached.
A few more strokes of the oar send it out into mid-stream, where it will
wait until all the other cribs have descended, when they will be again
joined together, and so go on until the next rapid is reached. As we sit,
crib after crib descends without accident; but it is dangerous work, and
the Ottawa frequently secures its victims.

[Illustration: CANADIAN TIMBER]

‘We have a good deal of portaging, and very hot it is. On this portage
there is an abundance of blueberries; we gather and eat them, and
capitally they quench our thirst, almost making us forget the fiery sun
above us. At the head of the Long Sault our difficulties are over, we are
on the placid waters of the great Lake Temiscamingue. Some time after it
has become quite dark, one of my companions exclaims, “_Ma!_” (“Listen”)
“_kagat iskota chemau_” (“truly the fire-boat”—the steamer); and in the
distance I hear the puffing of the giant, who has now invaded these
hitherto quiet waters. At midnight we put up our tent and seek repose; we
set off again early, and about four P.M. reach Temiscamingue.

‘Five days beyond Temiscamingue we found ourselves on the broad waters of
the Abbitibbe Lake, a grand expanse, dotted with islands, which make it
in places very picturesque. And there stands the Hudson’s Bay Company
establishment, where I am sure of a welcome.’

A few days later the bishop landed at Long Portage House, a small and
lonely establishment. All are friends here, and preparations are at once
made for a service, which all greatly enjoy. ‘And there is a beautiful
little baby to baptize,’ continues the child-loving bishop, and there are
several who are anxious to receive the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper.

‘I wished to get to Moose before the ship, so before six o’clock we
are in our canoe and hurrying forwards; down we plunge over our last
great rapid, and are in the Moose River. We are soon nearing Moose, and
already come upon some of its people. Here is Widow Charlotte in her
canoe, fishing; her face brightens as she grasps my hand and tells me how
thankful she is to see me once more; she looks well, but the last three
years have told greatly upon her. A little further on we meet stirring
Widow Harriet, engaged in the same occupation. At breakfast-time we meet
a large canoe on its way to Abbitibbe, containing a family returning to
Canada; we breakfast and have prayers together, and I learn that the
ship arrived safely from England two days ago, and that all were well.
We paddle on, pass the Bill of Portland, and the Mill, and the winter
fishing-place at the mouth of Maidman’s Creek, and we cross the broad
river, and sweep round the head of Charles Island. Here is Sawpit Island,
and there, directly in front of us, is Moose Island, but showing no
signs of being inhabited. We travel along it, we round its head, and
a new world lies before us—for it seems indeed nothing less, coming as
one does on the large thriving establishment after days of travel in the
wilderness.’

[Illustration: MOOSE FACTORY, CAPITAL OF THE DIOCESE OF MOOSONEE

1, Bishop’s Court; 2, school-house; 3, cottage (residence of a good
helper); 4, cottage (residence of catechist); 5, stores; 6, church; 7,
residence of chief factor; 8, residence of officers; 9, large store and
sale shop; 10, cattle byres; 11, Pontypool, a mile below the church]

Moose at this time and at this season presented an even still more
pleasant aspect than when, some thirty years before, the Bishop of
Rupertsland had described it as the prettiest spot in the country. Since
then it has somewhat increased in importance, and the condition of the
buildings and their surroundings give it a charming appearance.

The grazing cattle first attract attention, then the neat residence of
the bishop and the other mission buildings, the adjoining cottages with
their well-kept gardens, and a number of Indian tents and marquees in the
foreground, the church with its metal covered spire glistening in the
sun’s rays a little distance off. Near the landing-place are the Hudson’s
Bay Company buildings, the substantial residence of the company’s
representative and that of his subordinate officers. The large handsome
store, and a good garden, with the steward’s house adjoining, with a
group of workshops—carpenter’s, joiner’s, cooper’s, and the blacksmith’s
forge behind, cow-houses and stables for cattle, horses, pigs, and sheep.
In the foreground is the grave-yard neatly fenced round; then a field of
waving barley, another of potatoes, and a large hay-meadow, with again a
group of cottages, gardens, and tents.

The ship had come in, and people were hurrying about everywhere. The
Mink was receiving cargo, the Marten too, as well as a barge with
sails set. These transferred their contents to large flat-bottomed
boats, which conveyed them to a store by the riverside. Along the banks
were moored many smaller craft, full of grass, brought from the salt
marshes, to be turned into hay for the cattle during the long winter.
In the midst of all the bustle the advent of the bishop in his canoe
is observed. The white mission flag is hastily run up. The red flag of
the Hudson’s Bay Company is hoisted. The mission party, which includes
Archdeacon Vincent from Albany and Mr. Peck from Fort George, as well
as two young missionaries, the Rev. H. Nevitt and Rev. J. Lofthouse,
who had come by the ship, and Mrs. Saunders from Matawakumma, hasten to
the landing-stage. The bishop’s daughter Chrissie, with her husband,
Mr. Broughton, and their three boys, Kelk, Fred and Arthur, are there
already, and the first greetings are not given before the chief members
of the station are all collected about the bishop. All are anxious to
welcome him and to give him the news he longs to hear, of the welfare of
themselves and the various members of his flock in the different parts of
his diocese. Then the bell from the church tower sends forth its summons,
and the Indians hurry to respond to it, and soon the church is filled
from end to end by an eager and interested congregation. He to whom they
all look as a father has come back, and having given their greeting and
received his blessing, they depart again to their several occupations.

The bishop was speedily immersed in work. Only a few days after his
return he confirmed forty-five young Indians, men and women who had
been carefully prepared by Mr. Vincent. Later on he confirmed all the
English-speaking young people, both half-caste and Indian. His heart
was cheered by the progress made in the mission during his absence. The
church was not large enough to contain the congregation. The winter came
and passed.

The spring-tide of 1883 was not a cheerful one, and the bishop felt
the contrast between the scene in his out-of-the-world home and the
surroundings in which he had passed the preceding year. ‘_Mispoor,
mispoor, mispoor_’—‘Snow, snow, snow,’ he wrote on May 2, ‘everything
white, the ground all covered, the river all dead and still—the
ice-covering four feet thick.... I turned to my table and found comfort
from reading a portion of the Book of books, God’s great gift to
mankind, until I was called to prayers. Family prayers they were, and
yet no member of my family knelt with me; the nearest is a hundred miles
distant, the rest thousands.’

Not until May 21 did the ice begin to break. ‘On Trinity Sunday I looked
out at three o’clock—all was still, and I lay down again. At five I
once more looked out—the operation of breaking-up had commenced. In the
evening the river, which for so many months had shown no signs of life,
was rolling on in a vast flood.’

In the summer of this year whooping-cough once more broke out at Moose
and Albany. At the latter place forty-four died of it; amongst the number
the bishop’s infant grandson. At Moose, the illness raged almost as
fiercely. Day after day funerals are recorded by the bishop, who was much
depressed by the mourning and sadness around him. ‘Could I,’ he says,
‘when the service is over, come back to a cheerful home, it would be
different, but I come back to the once joyous, but now solitary house, to
hear my own footsteps, and to feed upon my own thoughts.’

On August 22 a terrible storm broke over Moose. The morning dawned
brightly, and everything betokened a beautiful summer day. The sun shone
out, the air was warm, and the wind blew from the south-east. After
breakfast the wind grew stronger and yet stronger, until it became a
perfect hurricane. Forest trees bent like wands, some were torn up by the
roots, others snapped in two. The river was like a tempest-tossed sea.
The great flagstaff of the Hudson’s Bay Company came down with a mighty
crash. The mission flagstaff swayed to and fro, threatening every instant
to fall. The houses suffered little, being built of solid logs, strongly
bolted together with iron bolts. That Wednesday night was a fearful one,
the next day not quite so bad. The weather continued dull and raining.
The ship was expected, and a load of anxiety would be removed by its
arrival. But September dawned, and there was no ship!

‘It is now September 5, and one of the gloomiest days I have known for
a very long time. The haycocks are lying in the fields, thoroughly
drenched, and turning black from their long exposure to the daily
downpour. The potatoes are cut down by the heavy frost of last Saturday,
and the barley lies prostrate. All this we could bear, but this year
there is a fear that we may have to depend more on what our fields may
give than is generally the case, for as yet there is no ship. We have had
a vessel lying at the river’s mouth for nearly a month waiting for her,
and every face begins to look serious. There is good cause, for there are
not sufficient supplies here for another year. Of wine there is none. Of
medicine, scarcely any. A restriction has been put on the sale of food
and clothing; the supply is scanty, and the look-out is really very dark
indeed. What adds so much to our gloom is the saddening fact that death
is still amongst us, carrying off our little ones amid great suffering.’

The 7th of September passed, but the joyful cry of ‘The ship is come!’
had not been raised. The hearts of the watchers began to grow sick with
hope deferred, and all sorts of conjectures were formed as to the cause
of the delay. On September 10 the bishop wrote, ‘Our gloom deepens as
day succeeds day, and we get no tidings of our ship. There are parties
here from distant stations all waiting, but in a couple of days all must
leave, so as to burden us no longer for the provisions they require.
September 15. Our ship has not come, and I am afraid now it will not
come. You can have no idea of our state of anxiety. She may come yet, and
I trust she may; but it is now so late that we are beginning to give up
hope. And here we are, with no medicine or wine for the sick, scarcely
any candles, a very limited supply of tea and sugar, a very scanty supply
of clothing, only half a crop of potatoes, and no hope of improvement
for nearly twelve months. I feel that we must not run these risks in
future. It is absolutely necessary that we should have at Moose a full
year’s supply for all our missions in this quarter. It _must be done_,[2]
and I shall require 500_l._, which will be expended in the purchase of
flour, tea, sugar, salt pork, bacon, preserved Australian beef, &c. We
shall then always have a year’s stock of necessaries on hand, and so be
independent for one year of the ship’s arrival.’

At last, when all hope had fled from the breasts of those who so long
had watched, and watched in vain, on the morning of September 21 the cry
was raised, ‘The ship’s come!’ ‘Magic words,’ the bishop wrote, ‘which
entirely changed the current of our thoughts.’

The flag was hoisted to announce the event, and everyone was full of
grateful joy, everyone busy with a helping hand, for the weather was
already winterly, with snow falling every day, and the ship must start
quickly on her return voyage. The danger was that she might not reach
home again in safety so late in the season. She had been delayed for
weeks in the ice in coming out, and the return voyage was indeed a
terrible one. The water in the ship’s tanks froze some inches thick, and
heavy gales and blinding snow-storms accompanied her until she reached
England late in November.

Moosonee has two ports, Moose Factory and York Factory, and the York
ship that year could not return to England at all. She had arrived at
York when the people were almost in despair, and had then set out for
Churchill, where she was weather-bound. This place is so small and out
of the world, that as soon as possible the crew was transferred to York
Factory, where there was better accommodation for them, the men having to
walk thither two hundred miles on snow-shoes.




CHAPTER XV

TRYING TIMES


The summer of 1884 was again a sickly one; a severe influenza cold
attacked almost everyone. The bishop had accomplished two visitation
tours, when a cry of distress came from Albany. The sickness was there;
many in the prime of life were dying. Archdeacon Vincent was himself ill.
The bishop went. Morning, noon and night he was by the bedside of the
sufferers, or making up medicines for them, till at length a change took
place; and after a stay of four or five weeks he was able to return to
Moose, taking with him Mr. Vincent and his eldest daughter.

It was September, and he was at once plunged in a whirl of business, for
the battered old ship had come again, and it had brought so many fine
packages of eatables and necessaries that every spare foot of the mission
premises was filled with them.

The ship was again nearly a month behind her time. For a thousand miles
she had contended with ice, and had been very severely handled. After she
had sailed on her return voyage the various autumn works were rapidly
proceeded with: garden produce was taken up; the cattle and byres were
made snug and taut; and for house and school 120 cords of wood were cut.
Then the Indians, who had spent three or four months at the station,
began to disperse, to shoot the geese and ducks so plentiful at that
season, and to hunt the fur-bearing animals, which had by this time
donned their valuable winter coats.

All are anxious to get to their winter quarters whilst the river is
available for the canoes. They assemble for a last Sunday service at the
station; family after family come to receive the bishop’s parting words
of counsel and advice; then the farewell is spoken. ‘Farewell,’ they say;
‘we will not forget.’ The last shake of the hand is given, and they go
to their homes in the wilderness, not to return until the spring, unless
some adverse or untoward circumstance compels them to come in.

Winter came. It set in severely, and much earlier than usual, preventing
the fall fishery, much depended upon for the supply of winter food. All
the more thankful was the bishop for the founding of the Moose store.

In January he wrote: ‘It is a very great relief to know that the food
is here. As to the store being put up, that must bide its time. Every
person has as much as he can do, myself included. Just now wood and fire
take precedence of everything else. Day after day chopping and hauling
are going on, while the disappearance of our immense piles of wood tells
pretty plainly of the difficulty we have in keeping up the necessary
warmth in our houses.’

The past year had been a very chequered one, outwardly full of trouble,
bad seasons, unprecedented storms, fatal epidemics, cases of starvation,
much to discourage and depress. Yet the bishop could write thankfully
that he had been enabled to labour so continuously in this inclement and
isolated land, he and his faithful band of assistants having visited
nearly the whole of the great diocese in the course of the year.
Everywhere the Gospel was received with readiness. ‘We have now no active
opposition,’ he says; ‘indeed, there are very few persons in the diocese,
except those in the far north, who have not been baptized, by far the
greater part into our own beloved Church. For those on the north-western
part of the bay a man admirably adapted for the work has been appointed
in the person of the Rev. J. Lofthouse, who longs, with God’s blessing,
to gather into Christ’s fold the Eskimo of that region, as the Rev. E. J.
Peck has done on the eastern side of the bay.

‘For the present winter Mr. Lofthouse is at York Factory, in the place
of Mr. Winter, who is in England on account of his wife’s health; but I
expect them back in the summer, when Mr. Lofthouse will go to his more
northern home.’

The Rev. E. J. Peck visited Fort George and Great Whale River, and
started from Little Whale River for the distant station of Ungava, at
the entrance of the Hudson’s Straits, to see the Indians and Eskimo of
that quarter. He was then to embark on board the Hudson’s Bay Company’s
steamer for Quebec, whence he was to proceed to England.

‘The Rev. H. Nevitt remained at Moose all the summer, conducting services
and school, and attending to the numerous needs of our large summer
population.

‘As soon as the river broke up, I set off for Long Portage House, a
station one hundred and twenty miles distant, on the way to Canada. The
Indians there are Ojibbeways, and as yet have not made much progress in
the religious life; but they received my message with attention, and I
trust will yet become emancipated from the superstitions which oppress
them. Returning from Long Portage House, I remained a short time at
Moose, and, making all necessary arrangements, went in my mission boat to
Rupert’s House, which I formerly visited yearly, and where I have long
wished to see a missionary permanently settled, and for which I had too
fondly hoped to see one arrive from England last autumn.

‘Sad troubles have come upon my much loved people there during the last
few years, numbers of them having died of starvation from the failure of
deer, which were formerly very numerous in their hunting-grounds. I trust
that such stories of misery and death as I was constrained to listen to
will never fall on my ears again. My mission was very successful, for I
was enabled not only to minister to all the Rupert’s House Indians and
residents, but likewise to the Indians of the far interior, who came in
the different trading brigades from Mistasinnee, Waswanepe, Machiskun,
and Nitchekwun. These are all Christians, many of them communicants,
and the greater part of them read and write the syllabic characters
very well. Rupert’s House is a great centre of trade, hence the vital
necessity of the establishment of a strong mission there.’

In returning from Rupert’s House on a former occasion, somewhat late
in the cold season, the bishop very nearly lost his life. He set off
in a cariole, with a train of dogs, accompanied by two young Indians,
travelling by night, to escape the danger of snow blindness from
the glare of the sun on the snow. They crossed Rupert’s Bay, and at
Cabbages Willows took breakfast with an Indian woman whose husband was
goose-hunting. After resting some hours they went on to the east point of
Hannah Bay, intending to cross that night, but the air had become warm,
and rain indicated a possible breaking up of the ice, so they reluctantly
turned into the woods and encamped. In the morning the weather was
again cold with a strong wind, so on they went. When they had reached
the middle of the bay, about ten miles from the nearest land, the guide
suddenly exclaimed:

‘What is this! the tide is coming in, and the ice is breaking up.’

They looked seaward, and saw mass after mass rise up on end and fall
again. The guide had a small stick in his hand; he struck the ice on
which they were standing, and it went through; clearly there was but a
step between them and death.

‘Get into the cariole at once!’ cried he, ‘and let us hurry back. We may
be saved yet!’

The bishop did so, and almost instantly the hinder part of the cariole
went through the ice into the sea. Faces blanched a little, but happily
the dogs seemed aware of the danger and made no halt, but hurried onward
as fast as they could go; there was no stoppage for a moment.

Running by the side of the cariole, one of his companions said to the
bishop:

‘Perhaps God is not pleased at your leaving the Indians so soon. Should
we get back safely, the Indians will be very glad to see you again, for
they are not tired of the teaching you gave them.’

In the afternoon they came to the Indian hut before alluded to. It was
full now; several hunters were there, and geese were abundant. They were
made very welcome, and sitting round the fire, all listened with wrapt
attention to the guide as he narrated the incidents of the day. When he
had finished they expressed their wonder and joy at the escape.

‘Not long afterwards,’ says the bishop, ‘I went out to have a look at
our surroundings. I soon came upon a curious sight: a high cross-like
erection with lines attached to it covered with bones of animals and
birds, and pieces of red and blue cloth and other things. I had never
seen anything of the kind before, and had no idea what it was intended
for. I called Wiskechan, the proprietor of the tent, and said, “What is
this?”

‘“Oh,” said he, “this is my _mistikokan_ (conjuring pole), which I shake
in this way when I do my conjuring.”

‘Looking solemnly at him, I replied, “I have come to tell you of better
things, of God’s willingness to give you all things through Jesus Christ,
His Son. If you wish to accept the message I have brought, you must give
up this.”

‘Without a moment’s hesitation he called for his axe, and instantly
chopped the pole down. What a glorious end to a day of danger! My
thanksgivings that night were very hearty. I slept in peace, surrounded
by my red-skin brethren, and a little after the next noontide was again
at Rupert’s House.’

Rupert’s House, which is called after Prince Rupert, cousin of King
Charles II., to whom and a band of associates the king granted a charter,
giving them exclusive rights to trade with the inhabitants of Hudson’s
Bay, is situated near the mouth of Rupert’s River, which empties itself
into the beautiful Hudson’s Bay, studded with picturesque islands. It
lies one hundred miles east of Moose, from which it is reached by a sea
voyage in summer along the southern shore of Hudson’s Bay, and by a
snow-shoe or cariole journey in winter.

As a fur-trading post it is of considerable importance, being the
head-quarters of a large district.

The posts dependent on it are East Main, Mistasinnee, Waswanepe,
Nitchekwun, and Machiskun; and every summer large canoes come from each
of those places, bringing all the furs collected during the previous
twelve months, and taking back with them full loads of bags of flour,
chests of tea, casks of sugar, bales of cloth, kegs of gunpowder,
shot, cases of guns, and all the other etceteras which comprise an
Indian’s wants. The furs are examined, counted and sorted, made up into
large bales, shipped on board the Moose schooner, and taken to Moose,
where they remain until they are put on board the yearly ship, to be
transported to England.

At Rupert’s House the number of residents in the service of the Hudson’s
Bay Company was about fifty; these were all half-castes, but speaking
English as well as if born in England. They were very well conducted,
several of them were communicants; ‘and although there is not yet, I am
sorry to say,’ wrote the bishop at that time, ‘a resident clergyman among
them, all are punctual in their attendance at an English service held for
them by their trader every Sunday.

‘The Indians did number somewhat over three hundred, but for the last
few years they have suffered greatly from a failure of food. And many
of them have been starved to death. All are now Christians, but when I
first went to them they were in a sad state of heathenism; their minds
were very dark, and their deeds corresponded thereto. They were devoted
to conjuring, having the most superstitious dread of the conjurer’s
power. Their sick they never burdened themselves with for any length of
time; there was the unfailing remedy of relief, the bowstring; for death
required no attention save the burying of the body. Parents, as soon
as they became dependent on their children, were subjected to the same
operation. Murder for gain was rife; indeed, I could hardly point to
any place better adapted to illustrate the text, “The dark places of the
earth are full of the habitations of cruelty,” than Rupert’s House. But
of many of the Indians it might now be said, “But ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified.” All are baptized.

‘In consequence of the immensity of my charge, I am not able to visit
Rupert’s House as I did formerly every summer. When my canoe was seen
approaching, every man, woman, and child would leave their tents, and
come and stand on the river’s bank to see their “father,” as they called
me, and, if possible, to get a shake of his hand. For some years we had
no church, but assembled in a large upper room kindly placed at our
disposal. Within a short time of my arrival, it was always packed as full
as it could hold, and so it would be two or three times every day of my
stay. And then every family came to me privately, and we talked over the
events of the previous winter: how they had been off for food; whether
furs had been plentiful or not; who had been sick, and who had died; how
they had followed their religious duties; what instruction they had given
their children. The whole family history of the year was gone through,
and reproof, commendation, or encouragement given, as the case required.

‘How full of work was every day, and every minute of every day! From six
o’clock in the morning until nearly nine at night, except at meal times,
it was work, work, work; but what blessed work! How the people responded
to every call! It was work which made me bless God for calling me to
enjoy so high a privilege. And many see things now with a much clearer
eye than when they were ministered to by His servant. He directed them to
the Master, and into the Master’s presence they have entered.’

The bishop was more and more desirous to be able to place a missionary
permanently at Rupert’s House. The Rev. H. Nevitt, who had already made
acquaintance with the station, would have liked to be located there, but
he could not be spared from Moose until someone came to take his place.
The ‘someone’ expected had not come out in the last year’s ship, and was
still anxiously looked for.

In July the bishop visited Martin’s Falls, a canoe voyage of three
hundred miles from Albany. The Indians here he found not very
satisfactory, being steeped much more deeply in heathenism than any
others in the diocese, not very accessible, remaining at the station no
longer than was necessary for their trading purposes. He determined to
place a resident catechist there. He then went on two hundred and fifty
miles further, by a most difficult route, to Osnaburgh, situated on a
large and beautiful lake. Here, morning, noon, and night, the teaching
went on. The bishop’s heart was gladdened to see that God was blessing
the work, and he made up his mind to appoint one of his divinity students
as pastor at the post; in the meantime he left a trusty native agent,
himself an Osnaburgh Indian, in charge.

In 1886 this man writes as follows:

    ‘I wish to tell you I am doing the work you wanted me to do.
    Only some of the Osnaburgh Indians listen to me. I am always
    going about. Last fall I went very far to see the Cranes; they
    are good people, and say prayers morning and evening. I wish
    you would let Queen Victoria know that I am teaching her people
    to serve and fear God and to love Jesus.

                                                     ‘JAMES UMBASI.’

In July the Rev. J. Peck returned from his visit to England, bringing
with him a wife. They remained for the time with the bishop. The Moose
Church, or Cathedral, had been enlarged by means of a new chancel; the
hundred seats thereby gained were a great comfort to the congregation.
‘It is a long time,’ says the bishop, ‘since I felt happier than on the
dedication day.’

Ship time was again approaching, not quite so anxious a time, now that a
year’s provision in advance was safely stored on the mission premises.
The poor would not want, and the missionary would be fed. But how little
did any think how greatly those stores would be needed this year!

The ship, the Princess Royal, came; she discharged her precious cargo,
consisting of all the necessaries for all the inhabitants of South
Moosonee; and then she reloaded with bales of furs, huge bags of
feathers, and hogsheads of oil. She left her anchorage, and got out
over the long and crooked bar at the mouth of the river. She was then
assailed by a terrible storm of three days’ duration, which drove her
back over the bar again, and ashore on an extensive sand-bank. Here she
was fiercely buffeted by the sea, and threatened to part asunder. The
life-boat was lowered, and into it got the pilot, the second mate, and
ten of the crew, who succeeded in reaching the schooner Martin, which lay
at anchor in the river.

The captain and remainder of the crew were to follow in the pinnace,
but the risk for the pinnace was greater than that for the life-boat,
therefore they decided on remaining by the ship. The vessel was half full
of water, and after a night of anxious watching they were taken ashore by
the Martin. The vessel lay a total wreck about fourteen miles from Moose.

All was done that could be done for the shipwrecked mariners. The men
were taken into the employ of the Hudson’s Bay Company, one of the
carpenter’s shops being fitted up for their accommodation. Their own
cook prepared their meals. Mr. Peck was appointed chaplain to them, his
sailor experiences especially fitting him for the service. The bishop and
his divinity students held night-school for them twice a week, teaching
navigation, reading, writing, and arithmetic, closing always with singing
and study of the Scriptures and prayer.

All behaved well; the captain set his men an excellent example; never
being absent from his place in church as long as he remained at the
station.

In the midst of all this, the bishop was still occupied in his important
translation work. He had in the summer examined and revised an edition of
the _Pilgrim’s Progress_ into Cree, by the Rev. J. Vincent.

He hoped to be able to send the work home by the next ship, to be
printed. The names of some of the characters in this work are remarkable
for their length in the Cree dress. Christian is the same as in English,
but Hopeful is Opuhosalems; Faithful is Atapwawinewen; Little Faith,
Tapwayaletumowineshish; Evangelist is Miloachemowililew; Save-all is
Misewamunachetow; Money-love is Sakeskooleanas; Worldly Wisdom is
Uskewekutatawaletumowilileu! ‘I think,’ says the bishop, commenting on
the translation, ‘that the Indians of Moosonee will be as well able
to appreciate and enjoy this wondrous book as the generality of their
English brethren.’ The work was printed with the help and through the
agency of the Religious Tract Society (the friend and helper of all
evangelical workers); and we give a specimen of it, that our readers may
see what the printed page is like.

In March 1885, the bishop had at last been able to commence the erection
of a new and large building in which to place the winter stores.

[Illustration: A PAGE OF THE CREE ‘PILGRIM’S PROGRESS’]

‘We have been logging,’ he wrote; ‘I have two men and a boy cutting logs,
and sawing them with large pit saws. They are working at Maidman Island,
three miles distant. We shall not be able to get our boards home until
open water, but when the sawing is completed we shall get on with the
frame.’

April brought with it a second epidemic of influenza; the packeters
returning from Abbitibbe with the letters conveyed it to Moose. Everyone,
except a few Europeans, was attacked, and work was at a standstill. Many
deaths resulted, and the bishop’s heart was sad. The poor folks at Moose
had been disappointed too by the failure of grey geese and wavies, as
well as the beautiful snow-buntings, which generally come in clouds, just
before the geese. The bishop greatly feared that when the Indians came in
from their hunting-grounds they would all take the dreaded influenza, and
that their tents would become the scene of disease and misery.

On May 8 the great guns, the break-up signal, were fired. The Indians
follow the ice down, and so as soon as the passage was practicable canoe
after canoe appeared opposite Bishop’s Court, and the bank was alive with
men, women, children, and dogs. ‘There they were,’ says the bishop, ‘just
as well as when they went in the autumn. We soon entered the house of
prayer to thank our Heavenly Father for the loving care He had exercised
towards those who for so many months had had their home amongst the
gloomy forests of Moosonee. Each family was then seen apart, and I was
made acquainted with the whole history of the winter.

‘In June a dispersion took place, when most of the men manned the boats
which take the supplies to the stations in the interior, and most of
their wives and families going off to the fishing-stations, only to
come in on Saturday to take part in the Sunday services. The morning of
departure presented a busy scene—from the store issued the men, carrying
bags of flour, kegs of pork and gunpowder, bales of cloth, calico, and
leather, cases of guns, chests of tea, and all the things mentioned in a
trader’s inventory. All is snugly packed in the boats, the signal given,
and they push off from the launch. It is a pretty sight, the men are
all standing up, and their long ironclad poles for a time rise together
as they force their respective boats forward, bending to the work, and
putting forth their strength.

‘Two of the boats were under the guidance of Jacob Mekwatch, “our prince
of hunters.” The other three boats were under the charge of James Gideon,
another excellent Indian and good hunter, who had several men among his
crews who could conduct a service and deliver a very good address—for
all of the most intelligent Indians are trained to do this, so that
when there is no clergyman at the place one of them may be able to lead
his fellow Indians in worship. All looked well, no one complained. But
many days had not elapsed before influenza attacked the boats’ crews;
one after the other of the poor men succumbed, and was brought back to
be under medical care. James Gideon became so ill that it was feared he
would die, and many of his crew were but little better. It was a sad
time, for many were taken ill so far up the river that it was judged best
for them to remain with the boats. Happily, though there was so much
sickness, there were no deaths. It was a sad, sad time.’

But brighter days dawned at last. Entrusting the station to Mr. Nevitt’s
care, the bishop started on a long visitation tour, from which he did not
return till late in the autumn.




CHAPTER XVI

CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR’S DAY AT ALBANY


The bishop was very busy during the early part of the winter of 1885,
fulfilling the duties of the doctor (who was absent at Albany) in
addition to his own. But he felt well and strong, and happy in the
progress of all his work. He was revising and correcting his translation,
with a view to a new edition being printed, of the Book of Common
Prayer, and the hymn-book, which he had compiled many years before.
The first editions of both he had himself printed at Moose, and bound
too. In earlier days the Indians had carried their few pages of neatly
written-out texts, and hymns, and Gospel portions between strips of bark
fastened together with thongs of deer-skin. The first bound books were a
strange novelty to them.

December found him once more setting out for Albany. The archdeacon
having gone to England to see his _Pilgrim’s Progress_ through the press,
the bishop had arranged to spend Christmas at that station. On December
18 he walked down to the starting-point. The sledge was already on the
ice, and presently the dogs, each held by its own trace, were brought
down and fastened to it—it being strongly moored the while, lest they
should run off with it, so eager were they to go.

[Illustration: A DOG SLEDGE]

‘All being ready, I got into my sledge and looked at my team. It was
composed of twelve splendid creatures, perfectly clean, and in the best
of order, with ears erect and their fine tails gracefully turned up
over their backs; they were jumping and howling, endeavouring to move
the sledge. I said good-bye to the numerous friends around me; I waved
adieu to many others standing on the river’s bank; the binding rope was
cast off, and then not a sound was heard, save the soft movement of the
sledge over the snow, and the tinkling of the musical bells attached to
the dogs’ necks. We sped down the river at a great rate; the houses were
soon left behind, and we were in the wilderness. At the river’s mouth
the ice became quite smooth, with the smallest sprinkling of snow on
its surface—its best possible condition. There was no cold in the air,
I needed no wrapping up; it was the perfection of travelling. At about
fourteen miles from Moose we saw the ill-fated Princess Royal, standing
with her masts erect; a few miles further on, at the North Bluff Beacon,
we remained for half an hour to give the dogs a rest, and to take a
little refreshment. Then on and on; the dogs, requiring no whip to urge
them, either galloped or went at a fast trot the whole way to Piskwamisk,
“The place of the stone heaps,” where we encamped. We had gone nearly
forty miles in six hours. We soon made ourselves comfortable; a fire was
lit in the tent, the robes spread, and in a little while a good cup of
coffee was ready, which, with a biscuit, was enough until the evening’s
substantial meal.

‘The good dogs were then attended to, the harness taken off, a collar
with a chain attached was placed around each dog’s neck, and, to prevent
their indulging in the much-desired fight, each was fastened to a
separate tree stump, close to which was strewn some fine brush for a bed.
All were then served with a good supper of fish, and after looking round
to see that no more was forthcoming, they coiled themselves up, with
their tails over their heads, and nothing was heard of them until next
morning. The whole of the next day we were obliged to remain in camp,
the weather being very rough, and the atmosphere so thick that we could
scarcely see fifty yards out to sea. It was still somewhat thick on the
morning of the third day, but as meat for the dogs failed we were obliged
to proceed. It cleared soon after starting, and four hours brought us to
our next encampment, Cock Point. We were now forty miles from Albany, and
this we accomplished in little more than six hours on the day following.

‘I found all well: young Kelk and his brothers quite as ready for a
romp as ever, and as ready as ever to run a snow-shoe race, or join in
the glorious game of “tobogganing.” But work was to occupy most of my
attention. I visited all the people, by whom I was most warmly received,
and I invited them to our Christmas services—not that services had
been neglected, for Sunday after Sunday, Mr. Broughton, Chrissie’s
husband, had conducted an English service; while young Mr. Vincent, the
archdeacon’s son, conducted an Indian one.

[Illustration: ALBANY, HUDSON’S BAY]

‘Christmas Day dawned bright and clear. Before it was light the church
was nearly filled with Indians, many having come in from their distant
hunting-grounds to join in the festival. The singing was hearty, and
the attention throughout very deep. As I read and spoke of the love of
Christ, the manger of Bethlehem, the joy of the angels, the adoration of
the shepherds, and the blessings Christ is willing to dispense to all who
believe on Him, we all, I think, felt that Christ was with us of a truth.
At four o’clock another congregation assembled. There were only two or
three persons present who had ever seen England, yet the English language
is well spoken by nearly everyone, and this service was as enjoyable as
its predecessor had been. In the afternoon we had our third service, in
Indian, and after the sermon twenty-eight of us knelt around the Lord’s
table.

‘On New Year’s Day, at five o’clock, I was serenaded by the “Albany
Band.” It consists of a drum, a violin, and a triangle, and on these
three instruments our New Year’s morning music was discoursed. Two hours
and a half later there was a good congregation in the church, in which
we met to return thanks for the mercies of the past year, and to ask a
continuance of them during that so lately begun. I preached on Psalm xc.
12, “So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.” Directly after breakfast we began to prepare for visitors, the
entire population of Albany. For their consumption a large quantity of
currant wine, cakes, and tea was provided, together with an abundance
of sweets, intended mostly for the little ones. About ten o’clock all
the men-servants of the establishment came in, dressed in their best,
and, after wishing us a “Happy New Year,” all sat around the room, and a
lively conversation began. But what a difference now from the old days!
Then, nearly all were Europeans, for very few natives were fit for the
service in any capacity; now, all are natives. Shop-master, blacksmith,
cooper, carpenters, storekeeper—not one of them has ever seen more than
five hundred people at one time, and now all would be able to take their
places in the workshops of England, speaking and reading English as if
born in England. The oldest present I married four-and-thirty years ago,
and he and his wife have now a goodly number of grandchildren. All are
very well conducted, nearly all are communicants. What would the state of
things have been had there been no mission in the country!

‘The men and lads having departed, after an interval the wives,
daughters, and young children came in, and a goodly number they were,
healthy and strong; while in colour they were of all shades, from pure
white to dark brown. All spoke English well—quite as good, nay, very much
better English than is spoken by many of the working-classes in England;
while all above the age of seven years can read fairly. This was a very
enjoyable party, the enjoyment culminating in a grand scramble for
sweets.

‘After our dinner the Indians all came in again. There was a little
speech-making, and a great deal of cake-eating and tea-drinking; after
which grandfather, and daughter, and son-in-law, and the four young
grandsons, had the evening to themselves, and a very pleasant one they
had.

‘New Year’s Day was over. A few days more passed, and then on the morning
of January 5 the sledge and dogs—now thirteen—were once more on the ice.
We started. The cold was terrible, thirty-five degrees below zero, and
a strong wind blowing. Six hours afterwards we were in our tent, making
a fire, over which a kettle of good coffee was soon boiling. The next
day, and still the next day, the wind was equally strong, the temperature
nearly as low, and the atmosphere filled with fine particles of snow. The
third day was our last out, and at three o’clock in the afternoon I was
once more in my old quarters. I found all well, and at once fell into the
old routine of work.’




CHAPTER XVII

THE PACKET MONTH


‘February is the most interesting month of the year to us; it is the
“Packet Month,” the month in which we have our one communication with the
outer world during the dreary months of our long winter. On the third day
of the month, 1886, we had two arrivals—Mr. Broughton and Mr. Vincent,
the agents from Rupert’s House and Albany—each bringing the “packet”
of his respective district. The news was generally good, but from the
smallest post of all—English River—came the saddest possible. Three
children of the only resident there, the whole of whom were in robust
health in the autumn, were cut off by diphtheria in the course of eleven
days, in the beginning of winter.

[Illustration: AN INDIAN TRAVELLING ON SNOW-SHOES]

‘On the 5th, a little after breakfast, the “packeters” were espied
crossing the river, in snow-shoes. Directly they arrived their precious
load was transferred to the Hudson’s Bay Company offices; there hammers
and chisels, seized by willing hands, soon knocked the covers from
the boxes, and the work of distribution commenced. All my letters are
thrown upon the table; the eye travels along them somewhat nervously,
brightening as this and that well-known hand is seen, looking with sad
inquiry at such as are black-edged, and disappointedly anxious if those
expected most are not forthcoming. The receiving of letters is good;
the answering of them, when they are many in number, is great drudgery.
Telephones have not come our way yet, and the nearest telegraph office is
about four hundred miles distant.

‘On the 7th the break-up of our party commenced. Mr. Broughton started
for Albany. In the evening the packet was closed, and the next morning
the “packeters” once more turned their faces southwards, and set out on
their three hundred miles’ tramp to Abbitibbe; thence the packet will be
forwarded to Temiscamingue and Matawa, and twelve days more will take it
to England.’

In March Mr. Nevitt left Moose Fort for Rupert’s House, with the purpose
of at length establishing a permanent mission at that station. ‘For many
years I had longed, with a most earnest longing, to see a missionary
established there, until the heart was beginning to grow sick, and at
last I determined to give up all help here at Moose, rather than allow
my dear hungering people to remain longer without a shepherd to watch
over them. I therefore told Mr. Nevitt to prepare for departure. This was
neither unexpected nor disagreeable to him. A train of dogs and a sledge
arrived from Rupert’s House, which, after a few days’ stay here, were to
return thither with supplies of various kinds. Here was an opportunity
not to be neglected. A few necessaries were collected and placed in the
sledge, and, after having been commended to God’s providential care, he
set out for his new home, accompanied by two members of his future flock.
One of them, Richard Swanson, was educated at our mission school at
Moose; the other, Samuel Wesley, at the school at Albany.’

This spring there was a flood of a somewhat serious character at Moose.
At three o’clock one morning in April, a heavy crash awoke all the
inhabitants of the fort. An immense field of ice was borne in on the
land, the water rose several feet at once, and everyone was on the alert.
Nothing serious happened during the day, and Mrs. Peck, who was staying
at Moose on account of her health, and the servant retired to bed about
half-past nine.

At eleven the alarm bell was rung; almost everyone fled to the factory;
the bishop took Mrs. Peck to one of the mission buildings further from
the river, he himself remaining up to watch. Early the next morning they
went to the company’s establishment, where the bishop spent the day in
bed, for he had passed the greater part of two nights without removing
his clothes. Had the water risen only a little higher, the results would
have been very disastrous. As it was, the scene all around was desolate
in the extreme. However, Easter Sunday dawned bright and fair, the ice
yielded to the current, and the water found again its proper channel.

When May came that year the snow had disappeared, the grass was becoming
green, the air was mild and genial, and the birds were singing in the
woods, despite the huge ice blocks which still were lying there. June,
1886, was the finest month the bishop had ever known in Hudson’s Bay.
Generally at that time winter has scarcely departed, and the trees show
no appearance of life; but now the poplars were bursting into leaf,
the willows were already clothed with the first fresh flush of green,
birds hopped among the branches, the cattle bells told that the cows
were grazing near at hand, and the meadows formed one superb carpet. The
hearts of all in that sterile land rejoiced, but Moose was comparatively
empty, for the season being so advanced the Indian brigades had left
early.

‘Before starting they came to me, mostly one by one, each to give me his
little confidence. One said: “I have not yet given my subscription to
the church, and will give it now, but I am not able to do as much as I
did last year; then I made a good fur hunt, this year but a very poor
one; but I know we must not appear before God empty, so I will do what
I can.” Another said: “Pray for me while I am away. I know I have given
you a great deal of trouble, and I am very sad at heart at thinking how
wickedly and foolishly I have acted, but I hope I shall be very different
in future.” Another: “My wife has been taken ill; I shall be glad if
you will go to her, and read and pray by her.” Another and another and
yet another required a book, some two, a Prayer and hymn-book; then
all descend to their boats, which speedily make from the shore, and,
impelled by heavy oars, they commence their journey.’

On July 1, 1886, the bishop wrote: ‘It is hot; we are being literally
baked, and from the heat there is scarcely any shelter, for the houses,
all made of wood, retain the heat in such a manner that they are like
ovens. But we are getting exactly the weather we need, with a prospect of
very fair crops of potatoes and turnips, and, what is better, of being
free from the terrible epidemics which have caused so much sorrow during
the last few years. The packet, or rather the first instalment of it,
reached us late in the evening of Sunday, June 20—the first news from
the outer world since the beginning of February; and then for a day or
two we were deep in letters and newspapers. But the 23rd was the great
day of arrivals, for we had no less than three. In the early morning,
soon after getting up, we saw a large boat coming up the river; the boat
from Rupert’s House, coming for supplies for the mission. Presently we
saw a large canoe, and from the shape of it we knew it must be from Fort
George, and that our dear friend and earnest worker, Mr. Peck, must be in
it; and very soon I had the pleasure of grasping by the hand a sunburnt,
weather-beaten son of toil, who, after more than four months of hard and
continuous work—of travel by snow-shoe, dog-sledge, and canoe—returned
to his wife, to find her as well as she had ever been in her life, and
hoping to see a steam-launch, which had been sent out for his use, ready
for sea, that he might at once leave again for his northern home. But
in this he was disappointed, for the job of putting the various parts
together was more difficult than we had anticipated. During the whole
month the hammers were giving forth their noise from four o’clock in
the morning until night. All the mission staff, setting aside their
work, spent day after day in steaming planks, nailing them on, in sawing
wood, in caulking, and painting, and puttying. On the same day came the
remainder of the packet.

‘Throughout the first days of July all were still occupied with Mr.
Peck’s boat. The hammering went on; nail after nail was driven, and
the caulking went on incessantly; the air was filled with the odour
of burning tar. On the 9th the craft was ready to be launched. In the
evening almost everyone in the place was at the mission, either as a
spectator or a helper. We had a long way to drag the boat, and this
occupied nearly two hours. Then we had the pleasure of seeing it descend
quietly into the water, in which, I trust, it will make many voyages for
the extension of the kingdom of our Lord among the Indians and Eskimo of
the wide district of East Main.

‘All now were busy in preparation for departure, for the sooner our
friends arrived at their place of destination the better. Saturday was
so employed, and so was Monday; while on Sunday we held three delightful
services, at two of which Mr. Peck preached.

‘On Tuesday the boat was loaded with casks of flour, cans of beef
and salt pork, chests of tea, and all the other etceteras needful to
housekeeping, for at Fort George the nearest shop is three hundred miles
away. About two o’clock in the afternoon it went down the river. An hour
afterwards, Mr. and Mrs. Peck and our kind doctor entered a canoe and,
amid the blessing and prayers of a large number of people assembled on
the bank of the river, they set off. Canoe and boat went on to Ship’s
Sands, an island eight miles down the river. Here they passed the night.
The next day Mr. Peck went on board his boat, while Mrs. Peck continued
her voyage in the canoe. In a few days East Main was reached; here Mrs.
Peck rested for a night. East Main was formerly the principal Hudson’s
Bay Company’s station in James’ Bay, but the river silting up and
preventing the annual ship from getting near enough for protection from
the open sea, Moose became the head-quarters of the fur trade. A hundred
and fifty miles had yet to be travelled, which would occupy five or six
days. At last Fort George, a few miles up the Fort George River, was
reached, the home of the faithful missionary and his brave and faithful
wife.

[Illustration: THE CHURCH AT FORT GEORGE]

‘When the Pecks had left, an influenza cold attacked almost everyone
at Moose, persistently clinging to the sufferers; but is it any wonder
that we have colds here, when sometimes there is a difference of over
fifty degrees between the temperature of the morning and evening? In
the morning we may be almost roasting: before evening the wind may have
suddenly chopped round to the north, and, sweeping over the frozen bay,
may render fires and warm coats desirable, if not necessary.’




CHAPTER XVIII

CHURCHILL AND MATAWAKUMMA


In 1886 the bishop wrote with much thankfulness of the location of the
Rev. J. Lofthouse at Churchill—‘the last house in the world,’ as he
called it, for there is no other between it and the North Pole. Churchill
boasts, however, of quite a little colony of English and half-caste
Chipwyans, Eskimo, and Crees. The Chipwyans are difficult to trade with,
and apt to avoid a station for years if their demands are not complied
with. They are cruel to their wives and their dogs, and are terrible
thieves, but they stand in great fear of the Eskimo. The Eskimo of
Churchill are not so bloodthirsty as their brethren in the west, who come
in with their faces marked with red ochre, to indicate that they have
committed a murder during the winter, a mark in which they glory, for
in their opinion there is more honour in killing a human being than in
killing a walrus or white bear.

[Illustration: CHURCHILL IN SUMMER]

Out of the world as it seems, Churchill is a busy place with the coming
and going of Crees, Eskimo, and Chipwyans. The annual ship goes thither
from York Factory, and boats have to be built for the loading and
unloading of the cargo, as well as or carrying on the trade further
north with Mable Island. Food is very dear, and is obtained with toil and
difficulty. In summer, porpoises are hunted; in winter, bears, wolves,
and foxes are shot. The cold is intense, and quantities of wood must
be hewn, and hauled home on sledges drawn by the Eskimo dog. The short
summer will scarcely allow any garden produce to come to perfection. A
few very poor and puny potatoes are grown, which are highly prized by
the Europeans, and carefully eked out. A very little hay is made for the
winter fodder of the cows; which, however, gladly eat the nourishing
white moss, which is the food of the reindeer.

‘I must tell you,’ says the bishop, with a spice of humour,’ about the
Churchill cows, for they are—or were—a curious lot. There were three of
them. About one there was nothing very particular, except that it was
somewhat of a dwarf. The second went about harnessed, for, Churchill
pasture not making her particularly fat, she was so supple that she
required no milkmaid to milk her; she did it herself, and seemed to enjoy
the exercise. The harness supported a bag, which enclosed the udder, and
which prevented her from indulging in a draught of new milk. The third
had an artificial tail. The poor brute had been off at a little distance
from the place, when she was set upon by some wolves; she bellowed, and
at once made for home, where she arrived almost frightened to death, and
without a tail. What was to be done now? The flies were in myriads, and,
if she had no protection against them, they would put her to a much more
cruel death than that threatened by the wolves. A happy thought struck
one of the colony of fifty. They had a dead cow’s tail lying in the
store! Why not use that? The suggestion was at once acted upon; the tail
was attached to the stump by means of some twine, and over it was tied
some canvas, well saturated with Stockholm tar. It was a great success,
and the creature was again able to do battle with her diminutive but
persevering foes.’

In undertaking the distant station of Churchill, in the midst of a dreary
waste, Mr. Lofthouse had a life of self-denial before him, as well as
very serious work, not the least of which was the necessity for learning
three languages, neither of them bearing any resemblance to the other.
For example, the phrase ‘It is good’ is in Chipwyan _nazo_, in Cree
_milwashiu_, and in Eskimo _peyokumme_.

Far away from Moose, five hundred miles distant, very difficult to
reach—the journey to it occupying about twenty days—is the station
of Matawakumma. Long and dangerous rapids have to be ascended, long
and disagreeable portages to be crossed, one of which is four miles
in length. One long lake—Kinokummisse, meaning ‘long lake’—must be
traversed, and another—Matawakumma, ‘The meeting of the waters’—must be
gone over.

[Illustration: ON THE CHURCHILL RIVER]

The station is very prettily situated on a long point of land which
runs almost across the lake. There are a few houses representing
the fur-trading establishment. At a short distance is the modest
parsonage-house and neat church, both of which have been almost entirely
erected by the Rev. J. Saunders’ own hands. It was the most isolated
station in Moosonee, but it is so no longer, as at only two days’ journey
distant runs the great Canadian Pacific railroad, by which all supplies
are now introduced into that part of the country.

There is at present no danger of starvation here, but formerly, when
all supplies were got up from Moose, and were consequently limited,
great privation was frequently experienced. If the rabbits failed,
famine stared the inhabitants in the face. The worst year ever known
was the one the bishop first spent in the country, when a fourth of the
entire population died, some from actual starvation, the rest being
killed and eaten by their friends! The tales of that terrible winter are
heartrending in the extreme. The most painful case was that of a man and
his wife who lost their whole family of six children.

Among the Indians of Matawakumma was one named Arthur Martin.

‘I forget his Indian name,’ says the bishop. ‘I give the name he received
at his baptism. At the time referred to he was a young man, and was not
subjected to as great privations as some of his countrymen. I received
him into the Church in 1852, and in 1854 I received his wife, on my first
visit to Matawakumma, where I married them. Many of the Indians there
clung very closely to their old superstitions, and the drum and the
conjuring tents were in constant requisition. Some of them still hold
back, not having yet taken the Saviour to their hearts.

‘But this was not the case with Arthur and his wife; when once they had
put their hand to the plough, they looked not back again. Their Saviour
was their all in all. They both learnt to read, and made themselves well
acquainted with the books as they came out in the Ojibbeway language,
the only one they knew, and they did their best to train their children
in the ways of the Lord. Their eldest son, Louis, one of the most
intelligent Indians I have ever known, followed in his father’s steps,
and eventually became a valuable catechist in the mission. His letters
were excellent, while to Mr. Saunders he was invaluable, assisting him in
everything; for he handled hammer, axe, and paddle with equal facility,
and he was his constant companion in his journeys through the country. I
had hopes that eventually I might ordain him, and thus increase both his
influence and usefulness among his countrymen; but this was not to be. He
went with Mr. Saunders to their railway station, Biscotasing; in getting
into a carriage while in motion, he fell and injured his leg. It required
amputation; the operation was performed, and it was hoped that all would
go well; but a few days after mortification set in, and the end soon
came. He seemed necessary for our work; it never occurred to us that we
might be obliged to do without him. Truly

                      God moves in a mysterious way.

‘The death of this son was a heavy blow to his father, now growing old;
but he was soon resigned to the will of God, and went on his Christian
course. Like Job of old, he was tried by personal suffering; in that,
too, his faith remained firm and steadfast. A mist and darkness came over
him—blindness took possession of both his eyes. It was thought that his
sight might be restored by an operation, and he was sent down to Moose
for that purpose. He was quite alone, having no relative with him, but he
was taken good care of by a Christian woman, who tended him with sisterly
devotion.

‘For awhile he kept well, was never absent from the house of God; then
weakness attacked him in the legs, and he could no longer attend the
services, yet not a word of complaint fell from him. He longed for news
from home, and this he received; his wife was very unwell, but hoped soon
to see him back with her again. Inflammation of the lungs set in, and in
three or four days he had passed away. God was with him in his trial, and
supported him. He made all his bed in his sickness. I saw him on the day
of his death, September 12, between the morning and afternoon services.
Blind and speechless, he lay in his tent surrounded by a few Christian
friends, who said that he was quite insensible. He regained consciousness
as I spoke to him of Jesus and His love. When I asked him whether he felt
Jesus near, a joyous, assuring smile came over his countenance, more
expressive than the most eloquent of speeches.

‘He was waiting in peace the Master’s call, and it was not long in
coming. I commended him to God in prayer, and, shaking him warmly by
the hand, hurried off to church to conduct service. Soon afterwards the
messenger arrived to summon him to the Master’s presence. With the Lord
he went through the dark valley; with Him he crossed the dividing river,
and then entered the joy of his Lord.’




CHAPTER XIX

A DAY AT BISHOP’S COURT


The bishop was now contemplating a visit to England. He had not seen his
wife or children for six years, and looked forward to meeting them in
the fatherland once more. He hoped to leave Moose in June 1888, to be in
time for the Lambeth Conference in July. He intended the summer following
to visit York and Churchill, in North Moosonee, which could be more
conveniently done in starting from England. ‘To visit them from Moose,’
he said, ‘would involve a very, very long and expensive journey, and a
winter’s stay, which is now quite unnecessary, seeing that both stations
are well occupied, and I can do much more for the missions in England
than I could there.’

In February ‘the packet’ came, and friends from all the surrounding
stations gathered together to bring and receive letters, and to wish him
God speed on his proposed journey.

May-day came, and a depth of snow lay upon the ground. The river was
still ice-bound. All Nature was hushed, not even the ‘goose call’ was
heard, for the weather was so severe that the geese kept close. One
of the mission party went off early, and sat for many hours in his
goose-stand with his decoy geese professionally arranged, but he returned
unsuccessful.

The bishop too was up early. ‘I always am,’ he wrote, ‘wishing to have
an hour of perfect quiet before the duties of the day begin. I generally
read a chapter of the Hebrew Bible every morning. I was never taught to
read it. I never heard a word of it read, except what is contained in the
English Bible; yet I have read the Hebrew Bible right through, carefully
and grammatically. Hebrew is a very difficult language, but it is not
insurmountable, and the word impossible must never find its way into
the vocabulary of one who intends to devote himself to mission work. A
man who is daunted by difficulties, who thinks there is a possibility
of his not acquiring the language of the people to whom he may be sent,
had far better never put his foot on ship-board for foreign work. He
will in the end prove a bitter disappointment, both to himself and
those who are associated with him. “I can do all things through Christ,
who strengtheneth me,” must be the watchword of every one who enters
the diocese of Moosonee. And now look at the 84th Psalm in the Revised
Version; observe the beauty of the sixth verse. It is superlatively sweet
and consolatory: “Passing through the valley of weeping, they make it a
place of springs; yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings.” Then I
read the third chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Ephesians, in Greek;
what beauty, too, there is in this chapter, especially in verses fourteen
to nineteen.

‘Before I had completed the second chapter my three young grandsons,
Fred, Arthur, and Sydney Broughton, had come into my sitting-room to wish
me good-morning, when the two elder ones remained to receive a lesson
from me, which they do every day. Family prayers were held at eight
o’clock punctually, for I am a very punctual man, never keeping anyone
waiting, and we then discussed our frugal breakfast. There was myself
and my daughter Chrissie—her husband having some time before gone to the
Hudson’s Bay Company’s establishment to preside at breakfast there; my
two grandsons, and the Rev. E. Richards, my much beloved native helper;
Arthur and his beautiful little mischievous sister, Gertrude, taking
their breakfast with their nurse in another room. We had one rabbit, the
last, I am afraid, for the season, a little imported bacon, and some good
bread to eat, while to drink we had excellent coffee.

‘A little after ten o’clock I should have had the first class of our
school in my room, but thinking the shooting of a goose or duck as
necessary an accomplishment in Moosonee as writing a letter, I had given
the bigger boys a week’s holiday to go goose-hunting, and had moreover
promised a prize to the most successful hunter. Then our doctor came in,
and we discussed the various cases under his care. I take a deep interest
in his work, and always assist him when he requires help. I am extremely
sorry to find that the condition of a good young man, married, with one
child, is very critical. Consumption will, I fear, at no distant day make
him its victim. For dinner we had a little cold beef, a part of the
store laid by last autumn, when the whole beef of the year was killed;
it was still quite fresh and good; some mashed potatoes, and afterwards
a nice raspberry tart. We drink spruce beer at dinner, a most wholesome
non-intoxicating drink, refreshing and an excellent digestive. After
dinner much of my time was spent with two of my sick folk, who delight in
hearing the Word of God read to them.’

The rest of the bishop’s day was filled up with study with his divinity
students, the ever continuing work of translation, and lessons to
an evening class of young men of the Hudson’s Bay Company. He never
permitted himself an idle moment. ‘He had,’ he said, ‘no desire to rust
out.’ And there seemed little danger of it.

On May 31, 1888, the bishop left Moose Fort for England. It was his
fourth visit in the course of thirty-seven years of missionary life in
the Great Lone Land.

‘What a day,’ he writes, ‘was my last Sunday at Moose! How fully were
all the services attended! What a large number of communicants, and how
solemn was our ordination service, when the Rev. E. Richards was made
priest! How painful were the partings of the succeeding week, for every
one at Moose is to me as a son or a daughter. As the hour of departure
approached a crowd assembled at the head of the island, where I was to
embark. At four o’clock I stepped into my canoe, and standing up, the
people being on the high bank, I gave them my fatherly blessing. I had
two companions to go with me to Canada—a young grandson, eight years
of age, and a most loved young friend, who was to stay with her uncle
in Montreal. My daughter and her children accompanied me, to remain for
the night, and the evening was one of cheerful sadness. Our encampment
seemed like a small canvas village, so many had come off in their canoes.
After the tents were all erected, we soon had a good fire roaring in the
forest, by which we cooked our meal; then we had a very solemn service,
and by half-past nine the fires were out, the tents were closed, and all
was quiet.

‘We were astir in the early morning, when we again bent the knee together
in prayer, after which the last farewells were uttered, the last kiss
given—my last to my sweet little granddaughter, Gertrude, who was too
young to understand the nature of “Good-bye,” and who would for many
a day wonder why grandpapa did not come and have a romp with her, and
take his accustomed place at table. Then we descended to our respective
canoes; they to return to Moose, we to pursue our solitary way up the
mighty river, until we came to the great sign of modern civilisation,
the iron road of the steam-engine at Missenabie, a station of the
Canadian Pacific Railway. I had five Indians with me, all good fellows,
Christians, in whom I had the fullest confidence, and who, I knew, would
do their very best to bring us in safety to the place of our destination.
They divided themselves into two bodies, and took turn and turn about
at the tracking. A long line was attached to the canoe; to this one
party harnessed itself, for in going against the stream the paddle is
but little used, the principal work being done by the tracking line and
pole—the latter a powerful instrument of propulsion about nine feet long,
and shod with iron, wonderfully useful among the rapids.

‘At breakfast time we all went ashore; a fire was kindled, the kettle
boiled, a little meat cooked, and, sitting on boxes or stones, the meal
was consumed; after which we continued our way until dinner-time, when
there was another halt. Then we went on again until eight o’clock, when
we put up for the night. This was quite a business, for we could not
encamp everywhere. We went up into the woods; axes were brought into
requisition, and a large space was cleared; the marquees were put up, and
everything was made as comfortable as possible, so that presently we were
quite at home; supper, conversation, and service finished the day, when
we lay down, grateful for continued mercies.

‘In the morning, during the breakfast hour, all met near the fire;
we first had a hymn, after which I read a portion of Scripture, and
prayers from the Prayer Book. Prayer-time was to us a season of great
refreshment. We had sometimes heavy rains; this caused us much trouble,
greatly increasing the difficulty and danger of the rapids. Frequently we
were all obliged to get ashore, and make our way as best we could through
the pathless woods, where the fallen trees were lying about in every
direction. This was intensely hard work.

[Illustration: A LARGE CANOE SHOOTING A RAPID]

‘On one occasion we had ascended a terrible and long rapid, and had got
by the easiest side of the stream just opposite the foot of our longest
portage, but between us and it ran the swollen and fiercely flowing
river. We all grasped a paddle firmly, and bending with our full strength
dashed out into the stream; we could get no further, and were swept down
like lightning into the boiling rapid. The sight was the most dangerous
I had ever witnessed, but the men were equal to the emergency. Turning
round in the canoe, the bow became the stern, and we were kept clear of
the rocks which threatened our destruction.

‘Then on we went again to face fresh dangers, to meet with new
difficulties; still ever onwards, till on Saturday morning we came into
the smooth waters of the Missenabie Lake. Missenabie was a small and
inconsiderable post which up to this time had been buried deep in the
wilderness, but which by the carrying of the Canadian Pacific Railway
through the country, had been brought to the very confines of the
civilised world, being only fifty miles from a railway station.’

After spending Sunday at Missenabie, a day’s journey brought the
travellers to Missenabie station. The Indians heard for the first time
the voice of the ‘steam giant.’ Paddling with some difficulty under
the wooden bridge which is the path of the ‘fire-sledge,’ the station
was presently reached. It was a dreary spot—a tent or two, a couple
of tumbledown stores, a house or two for the railway officials, and
multitudes of mosquitoes. A railway truck was the bishop’s parlour; in
the booking-office he held services in three languages, Cree, Ojibbeway,
and English. Very early in the morning the train came in from the West,
and carried the party away. To the little grandson, aged eight, all
things were new and strange. A lad passed through the cars with oranges
and apples for sale; the child had never seen either an apple or an
orange in his life, and when one of each was handed to him, he asked,
‘Grandpapa, which is which?’

At Ottawa, Montreal, and the grand old town of Quebec, our travellers had
some few days’ rest. At the latter place, Master Fred saw a Punch and
Judy show for the first time, and enjoyed it; and the bishop enjoyed it
‘almost as much as he.’ Grandfather and grandson visited the site of the
battle which gave Quebec to England, and the monuments erected to the
memory of the brave Generals Montcalm and Wolfe. Twelve days later they
were in England. ‘But,’ says the bishop, ‘the heart was still far away
across the water, amid the secluded forests of Moosonee.’




CHAPTER XX

CLOSING LABOURS


Bishop Horden did not spend a very great many months in England. He left
again on May 22, 1889, the parting from wife and family being softened by
the hope of shortly returning to them. Taking steamer direct for Quebec,
he went on from thence to Montreal—‘one of the most beautifully situated
cities in the world, containing fine shops, a noble quay, many grand
houses, and a large number of very fine churches.’

The following evening he took his place in the train going west, to
spend three days and two nights in it. The car was crowded, and each
day he—indefatigable man that he was—gave a much appreciated lecture
to the occupants packed closely together around him. After passing
through hundreds of miles of wilderness he at last landed at Winnipeg,
the capital of the West. Two or three hours later he was sitting in the
Parliament House, witnessing the conferring of university degrees by the
Metropolitan, amongst the students being Miss Holmes, the first lady who
had taken a degree in Manitoba. On Sunday there was an ordination and
confirmation, and in the evening Bishop Horden preached in the cathedral,
although he was suffering from a severe cold contracted during his long
railway journey. The following day he started by rail and steamer for
Norway House, which he reached on June 14.

There used to be stirring times at Norway House. Here the great council
was held. Here in olden time the Governor of the Hudson’s Bay Company,
who possessed more real power than the most arbitrary of sovereigns,
held his court annually, and to it flocked the principal officers of the
company. The affairs of the country were discussed, and everything was
arranged for another year. During the whole summer the greatest activity
prevailed. Boats were continually arriving and departing; now an immense
brigade from York Factory, then another from the Saskatchewan or the
Mackenzie River district. The dwelling-houses were crowded, and the great
stores were constantly receiving or giving out supplies.

But the railway and steamers have changed all this, and among other
results have brought about the downfall of Norway House. Goods for the
interior are no longer sent to York Factory, and thence by boat to the
various stations. They are forwarded to the Saskatchewan by rail and
steamer, and thence onward to the interior. Now Norway House supplies
only two or three trading posts in its immediate district. Very few
officers and few men are required for the business. The stores lie empty,
and the great square is almost deserted.

Bishop Horden spent two Sundays here, waiting for the boats to Oxford
House, whence he journeyed on to York Factory. Then he set off for
Churchill, another journey of two hundred miles.

A peaceful voyage of nine days in a schooner, the first that for twenty
years had visited York Factory, brought the bishop to Moose Fort. It was
quite dark when he landed, but a great crowd had gathered on the beach
to welcome him, chief amongst them his daughter, Mrs. Broughton, and her
husband, and their three youngest children, and Archdeacon Vincent, who
had been in charge at Bishop’s Court.

‘I was really at home, and felt so overjoyed and so thankful; I was
happy, and so seemed all around me. Monday was devoted to the affairs of
the mission, and it gratified me to find that things had gone on so well
during my absence. I visited all the people in their houses, for they are
very dear to me, and found all well.’

But his own house was lonely, and would be lonelier still in the winter,
for the Broughtons were to be now stationed at Rupert’s House. He had
not been expected to return so soon to Moose; the archdeacon had the
work there well in hand, whilst at Albany Mr. and Mrs. Nevitt were fully
installed. He himself needed some little quiet and rest. He decided,
therefore, to go with his daughter and grandchildren to Rupert’s House
for the next months.

The Moose ship, Lady Head, had already arrived. The season was advanced,
a parting service was held, and once more the bishop went on board the
Mink, and sailed with his dear ones for Rupert’s House. Here he came
in contact with Indians from various stations, bringing in furs for
barter at the factory. The Rev. E. Richards assisted him in all his
ministrations. A cheerful Christmas was followed by quiet work, and
then a busy and a happy Eastertide, notwithstanding the ‘snow which
lay several feet deep on the ground, biting winds, and the death-like
appearance of all Nature.’

The spring was very dreary. There was nothing for the geese to feed upon,
and the hunters came home evening after evening having shot nothing. When
the Indians from the surrounding districts came in, there was amongst
them one very sad and reduced party. Where were the rest? All, to the
number of eighteen, had perished from starvation.

As the summer approached, the bishop went northward to East Main
River—now a small outpost, but once the most important place in the bay.
About one hundred Indians had met together there, and every moment was
made the most of, for they seldom saw a clergyman.

The bishop thence went in a boat to Fort George. This is almost the most
interesting bit of travel in the country. High and rocky islands, some of
them well wooded, others majestically rugged, rise in constant succession.

A week was spent at the Fort, and then, with Mr. Peck as his companion,
the bishop pushed on to the dreary storm-beaten land of Great Whale
River—a hard and difficult journey along an inhospitable and dangerous
coast. Sometimes they met a few Indians on the way, and the desert was
made to rejoice with ‘some of the songs of Zion.’

One morning they put ashore among a body of Eskimo, who had their books
with them. The bishop heard them all read; for one woman, who could
not read as well as the rest, they made the apology that she had but
just recently joined them from the north, and could not be expected to
do very well yet; but she was getting on, for they taught her every
day. The next day, and half of the following, was spent here, then the
travellers proceeded, the canoe flying before a threatened storm. Just
before midnight they reached the mouth of the river, and two or three
hours afterwards the storm broke with terrible violence, lasting without
intermission for a couple of days.

‘Three days of intense work (I wish it could have been three weeks), and
the schooner was ready for sea; so, leaving Mr. Peck to continue his
labours, I took a passage kindly granted me, and bidding farewell to all,
I set off on my way south.’

The bishop was much gratified with the progress made by the Eskimo,
their earnestness was so evident, their attention so fixed; his heart
was lifted in gratitude to God. After another week spent at Fort George,
his mission completed, his face was once more turned homewards, and he
reached Moose just about ship time. ‘In all this journey God’s hand has
been on me for good.’

Soon after the bishop had returned to Moose, Mr. and Mrs. Nevitt went
to take charge of Rupert’s House, the Rev. E. Richards and his wife
coming to assist the bishop at Moose. Great preparations were made for
the Christmas of 1890. The old mission ox brought home several loads
of pine and cedar-brush from the woods for the church decorations. On
Christmas Eve a high tea was provided at Bishop’s Court for the joyous
band of workers, a dish of splendid trout gracing the hospitable board.
Christmas morning dawned not too cold for enjoyment, and hearty, cheery
services followed throughout the day. A feast had been planned for the
school-children. Cakes were made by ‘the Rev. E. Richards and his wife;’
a large heap of biscuits were provided from the bishop’s own store; huge
kettles were suspended in the school-yard; tea, sugar, and milk were
there in abundance, and one afternoon in the Christmas week the scholars
all assembled and enjoyed a substantial meal.

A Christmas-tree followed, which Mr. and Mrs. Richards had decorated
with artificial flowers and ornaments, lights and gifts. The children’s
parents were there, and the European residents and all stood round the
tree, and sang ‘God save the Queen.’

    Muncto pinache Kicheake-maskwas,
    O Pimache; Melche puskilakat,
    Kitche mihwaletuk Kinwaish
    Pimatesit, O Pimache.

Other gatherings there were that joyous Christmastide spent by the bishop
amongst his own especial flock; and doubtless, as he said, for many days
to come the pleasures and wonders of those happy evenings were subjects
of comment in every house.

The bishop had brought with him from York Factory a very promising youth,
Isaiah Squirrel by name, whom he hoped to train under his own eye for the
Christian ministry. He was now at Moose, ‘learning all sorts of things,
and showing himself very teachable.’

At the beginning of the year 1891 the bishop announced with thankful joy,
‘I have now ready for the press the Pentateuch, Isaiah, Jeremiah, the
Lamentations, Ezekiel, and Daniel; the Psalms and New Testament have been
in print some years. The whole Bible will, I trust, form the crown of my
missionary life. I take the deepest delight in this translation work,
which has always engaged very much of my time and attention.’

May was cold and damp this year; snow and ice abounded, and the ground
was still almost bare of pasture. Flocks of snowbirds were about, which
were pursued by the boys with bows and arrows, and a few American robins
sang among the leafless trees; but the geese, like everything else,
failed. Day after day the Indian went forth to his goose-stand in the
marsh, arranged his decoys, loaded his guns, and sat and called, hoping
that a flight of geese would be enticed by the friendly voice to come and
visit his flock of dummies. But no geese came, and the hunter returned
each evening disconsolate and supperless to his tent. When the kettle on
the fire is well filled with _mechim_ (food), there is joy in the camp,
and the Indian does not heed the weather—storm rain, and snow are to him
of no account; but with wife and children hungering around him things are
sad indeed; and thus they were in the month of May.

The summer proved a sickly one in all the district. In June the bishop
went to Rupert’s House, and whilst working there from morning till
night amongst the great body of Indians congregated for the season, the
influenza broke out, and he became at once doctor and nurse, until he was
himself attacked. He was for some time very unwell, and his voice went.
Mr. and Mrs. Nevitt had left to go home by the annual ship, Mr. Nevitt’s
health having failed, and Mr. Richards was at Moose, so he could not, and
would not, give in, except for a day or two. Happily, he was in the house
of his dear daughter Chrissie, where every possible attention was given
him. ‘The voice returned, but strength was slow in coming.’ Then his much
loved little granddaughter was attacked very severely, and it was a sore
trial to have to leave her, still hovering between life and death, when
he was obliged to return to Moose. A long time elapsed before he could
hear from Rupert’s House. Then at last came a little letter from the
child herself to tell of her recovery.

In August, 1891, an event happened which was destined to be of very great
importance to the diocese of Moosonee. This was the arrival at Fort Moose
of the Rev. J. A. Newnham. The bishop had met and conversed with Mr.
Newnham on his visit to Montreal in the previous year, and finding how
his heart was yearning for the mission cause in Moosonee, he had invited
him to join him there.

‘I was charmed,’ wrote Mr. Newnham, ‘with my first acquaintance with
Moose. My room in the bishop’s house looks over a small encampment of
about forty tents and sixty dogs. Just now is the busy season; the hay is
being carried, and the ship unloaded, but quite a congregation gathers
every evening at 6·30 for a short service. I attended it my first evening
on shore, and was much struck with the hearty responses, and the clear
and true singing of our well-known hymn tunes.’

After the service Mr. Newnham was introduced to the Indians, who greeted
him with ‘What cheer?’ their form of ‘How do you do?’ As he sat in his
study later, he could see them constantly coming to the house. The bishop
never locked his door; even in the night it was left unfastened, and
anyone might come to him at any hour for assistance or advice.

The bishop spent nearly the whole of this year at Moose, devoting all his
leisure to the translation of the Cree Bible. He hoped to have the whole
of the Old Testament ready for the press by midsummer 1892. The revision
of the New Testament, which had been printed many years before, would
occupy him, he said, during the following winter. Again he wrote, ‘and
this will be the crowning work of my life, which will give spiritual
food to my people for generations after my decease.’ In less than a year
after these words were penned, the earnest worker and writer lay in his
grave, his work on earth done.

Towards the close of the year 1891, Archdeacon Vincent lost his wife,
who had long been in a declining state. He brought her to Moose for
burial. On December 20 the bishop preached the funeral sermon from the
words, ‘It is well.’ These had been almost her last words before her
death. Returning with the archdeacon to Albany, Bishop Horden there spent
Christmas and New Year’s Day. It was his last winter trip to Albany.
‘The last,’ he wrote, ‘that I shall in all probability ever undertake.
My first winter trip to Albany took place long, long ago, forty years
ago this very month! I was then young and active, and thought nothing a
hardship; I could sleep in the open, bivouac with the cold bright sky
overhead, with the thermometer 40° below zero. I had no back, nor legs,
nor shoulders; at least I had them as well as now, and much better; I
merely did not know of their existence from any pain or inconvenience
they caused me. But forty years make a difference. I know now that I have
several members of my body, and these tell me in the most unmistakable
manner that there must be no more getting over the rough snow and ice,
and that the discomforts of a cold smoky tent must be no longer endured,
unless there be absolute necessity. They tell me that, for the future,
winter travelling must not be indulged in. And we must bow to the
inevitable; we cannot be always young; the halting step and the grey head
will come, and why should we dread their approach, when we know that “if
the earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens”?

‘I am not, however, writing a sermon. I was about to speak of my last
winter journey to Albany. I wished to go there, because there was very
little hope of my going next summer. At seven o’clock on the morning
of December 21, I was sitting in my sledge, and ten beautiful dogs in
excellent condition were being harnessed thereto, each having its own
single trace, by which it was attached to the sledge. The archdeacon
occupied a second sledge. When all were harnessed, there was a great
howling, and jumping, and tugging, for the dogs were anxious to be off,
but the sledge was too firmly moored for their united strength until
all was ready; then the binding rope was cast off, howling ceased in
a moment, each dog hauled with all his might, and we were away at the
rate of ten miles an hour. The fine tails of the dogs were curled up
over their backs, they were overjoyed to be once more on the road. The
great pace was not long kept up, but settled into between five and six
miles an hour, and so it continued throughout the day. To the music of
our dog-bells we rushed down the river, soon losing sight of Moose, on
past Middleborough Island, through Hay Creek, and then over a rough
uncomfortable sort of plain at North Bluff, where stands the great beacon
erected to attract the attention of our annual ship, and to tell her
that she is nearing the place of her destination.

‘Near the beacon we brought up for awhile, to give the dogs a rest. We
had accomplished half of our day’s work, and had come about eighteen
miles. We are soon off again; the air is very comfortable, and all our
sensations are pleasurable as we run across North Bay, past Jarvis Bluff
and Little Piskwamisk on to Piskwamisk, where our first “hotel” is
situated—a small circular erection, gradually getting smaller towards
the top, where a number of poles meet together; the whole is covered
with snow, the doorway is blocked up with snow—as comfortless looking
a place as can well be imagined. This is our hotel, and we at once set
about making it as habitable as we can. The snow is dug away from the
entrance with our snow-shoes, as well as from the sides, that there may
be no dripping from its melting as the evening advances. Wood is carried
in and a fire lit, and when a good beef-steak has been fried and a strong
cup of tea made and partaken of, we almost fall in love with our smoky
hotel, and at any rate think it far preferable to the open bivouac in the
heaven-covered forest.

‘On the second day the weather was very warm, and much rain fell in the
early part, but we continued on our way, having but twenty-five miles to
travel, which brought us to our second hotel at Keshepinakok.

‘On the third day we had forty miles of travel. The weather was colder
and our dogs trotted on without much fatigue. About four o’clock in
the afternoon we saw the settlement in the distance, and then the dogs,
knowing that they were nearly home, put on extra speed, and we were soon
in front of the factory. A steep bank had to be ascended, but there was
no difficulty, for a number of men and boys ran down and gave their ready
help, and I was soon in the middle of a large yard, receiving the warm
welcome of all who had congregated there. One day at Albany, and then
came Christmas Day, when I preached two sermons, one in English, the
other in Indian; afterwards I had the examination of the candidates for
confirmation belonging to the two congregations, Indian and English, with
whom I was very well pleased; and the examination of the scholars in the
school, who quite satisfied me, and I visited all the families in their
respective houses. I also gave a feast to the Indians and another to the
school children, and inspected some beautiful fox-skins. Quite a number
of the silver fox came in during my visit. They are black, but the tips
are white. They are too heavy for English wear, but are exported mostly
to China. The late King George the Fourth had new coronation robes made
for him, which were lined with the choicest parts of the silver fox
skins, and for each skin forty guineas were paid; rather expensive robes,
I should think.

‘I found time to correct the proofs of two of my Indian books, which are
printing in England. The days were well filled up and fled swiftly, and
it seemed but a short time before I was compelled to say good-bye to
Albany, and on the third day after we once more ran up Moose River, and
received the congratulations of all my people, who had lined the banks to
see me as I passed.’

The end of February, 1892, came before the ‘packet’ of that year arrived.
All hope of its coming had died away, and many who had travelled hundreds
of miles to meet it had been forced to travel back again without getting
a letter to tell of those far away, or even a paper. ‘Cruel, cruel!’
said the sympathising bishop, and yet he was sometimes inclined to
feel grateful for the very absence of news himself. ‘Our outer door is
opened,’ he wrote, ‘but twice or three times a year, and then we have a
deluge of papers and a great number of letters, and we find the deluge
almost as bad as the previous dearth.’

Moose was enjoying a mild winter, and food was plentiful, rabbits never
more abundant, of pheasants there was no scarcity, and there was no
sickness; the Moose doctor was enjoying quite a sinecure. Far otherwise
was it with Rupert’s House. The weather there also had been very mild,
but rain had fallen in torrents, and the swamps around were giving
forth miasma, which brought disease and death to the little settlement.
Influenza and dysentery attacked almost every individual.

When the Rupert’s House dogs brought the budget for the ‘packet,’ the
bishop’s share of news was a sad and gloomy one. Mr. Broughton wrote that
the Indians were dying out from disease, and his own little daughter had
again been attacked with influenza. Saddest tidings of all, four children
had been frozen to death, almost close to the station. The father of
those children was Weyawastum; he had died, as did also his wife, some
years ago. The grandmother and her husband took the children under their
care, she being a kind old body, and speaking very good English. They
were spending the winter at Pontax Creek, about seven miles distant from
the station, coming in occasionally for provisions, which were never
denied them. At New Year the husband, named Huskey, came in to spend a
few days at the place, and was there attacked by the prevailing disease,
so severely as to be unable to return home. His wife and the children
remained at Pontax Creek, no one feeling the least anxiety about them.
They had a good tent and a sufficiency of provisions, and should those be
consumed more would be given them. But one morning, someone walking down
the river during a terribly cold spell of weather came upon a child lying
dead, and hard frozen, only a mile from the establishment. And still
farther on lay another, and yet another, and still another was found in
the same condition. The tent was entered, but it was cold and silent, and
there lay the dead body of kind old Betsy, the faithful grandmother. All
were taken to Rupert’s House, and buried in one grave. It must have been
a terribly solemn event in that little settlement—five coffins entering
the church in procession, four young lives passing away in such a manner.
The full particulars will never be known, but it is supposed that while
the grandmother was with the children in the tent she was suddenly taken
ill, or being ill had become delirious, and the children being afraid,
or wishing to obtain help for the old woman, had set off to get to the
settlement, but the cold was too severe for them, and so all had perished.

If the winter at Moose had been late in coming, and mild when it came, it
lasted long into the year 1892. On May 6 the bishop wrote:—

‘Day succeeds day, and there is the same cold biting air, the same dark
leaden sky and heavy snowflakes, which have lately again and again
thrown us back into apparent midwinter. I should be glad to write more
cheerfully, but I must write what I see and know, and not give a picture
from the imagination; what I write must be truth, and not romance. You
can’t conceive how anxiously we are longing for spring; to see our noble
river rushing by, carrying on its bosom the laden boat, the beautiful
canoe, the majestic vessel. But it is still blocked up, heavily fettered
with its icy chains. The surface is still white, and an oppressive
silence hangs over it; the fluttering haze has not yet appeared into
which the mighty magician of long ago changed himself, appearing yearly
in the spring, just before the breaking-up of the river, that he may meet
his beautiful sister, the lovely American robin. She has already come,
and it was with joy which can be felt, but not described, that I heard
her singing her sweet song this morning, as if she would thus hasten
the steps of her loitering brother, and bring him to cheer both her
own heart and the hearts of all others who are anxiously awaiting his
arrival. Whilst you enjoy sweet May weather, feel deeply thankful for
it, and think of those in this wild lone land who are fighting the great
Christian battle as your substitutes; pray for them, that their spirits
droop not on account of the hardness of their surroundings, and show
your sympathy practically by making greater and yet greater exertions in
supporting the missionary cause.

‘Now, looking out of my window, what can I see? Besides the cathedral
and adjacent houses, I see the frozen surface of the river, dotted here
and there with goose-stands, for this is the time for geese, and each
goose-stand should be supplied with one or two smart hunters, whose
decoy geese and their perfect imitation of the goose’s call generally
succeed in alluring the silly birds to their destruction. But the stands
are unoccupied, the decoy geese are lying in heaps, the weather is so
unpropitious that no birds are flying. They are delaying their journey to
the sea coast, and are feeding in the plains in the interior; and when
they come they will make but a short stay, and hurry forward to where
they lay their eggs and bring up their families.

‘But something exquisitely beautiful seems to enjoy the dreary
waste—flocks of the snow bunting are constantly flitting by, alighting on
the garden, the plain, and the dust heaps. When they first came they were
white, but now they have begun to assume their summer garb, and clothe
themselves in russet brown. They are not allowed to feed in peace.
The fierce hawk hovers about, and occasionally swoops down and makes a
capture; big boys and men are out with their guns, small boys are out
with their bows and arrows, girls are out with their bird nets—all intent
on business, for food is scarce, and those pretty birds are plump and
fat, and said to be very good eating. And this is really all I can see
from my window, except the dark distant pines, which fill up but do not
enliven the landscape.

‘You must not think that because I have such surroundings I am therefore
dull and melancholy; such is by no means the case. God has blessed me
with a sanguine temperament, and a great capacity for love of work, and
this being the case, hope for better days and their speedy appearance
causes me to look, in dark days, more to the future than the present; it
gives no time for repining, or, as the people here say, thinking long.

‘Well, thank God! I have written the last word of my Cree translation of
the Bible. I had hoped to get it done by the time the river broke up,
that I might then put my work aside for another winter, and devote myself
to the Indians who will be coming in from the far interior; that I might
take my long journeys to those distant centres of the mission whence
the Indians cannot come; that Cree and Ojibbeway and Eskimo might again
hear from my lips of the wondrous love of God in the gift to the world
of His well-beloved Son; and my hope has been realised. The last word of
the New Testament was written many years ago, but all will probably be
re-written; all will at any rate be revised, if God permit, next winter,
so as to bring it into accord with the Revised Version. It is, I think,
a very good translation of the Authorised Version, and I could make but
little improvement in it. My first work next winter will be to go through
very carefully, with my most valued assistant from Rupert’s House, all I
have written this winter. Every word will be examined, and wherever an
improvement can be made it will be made; and then the New Testament will
come under review, and then I trust one of the principal works of my life
will be accomplished, my most cherished hope realised—my people will have
the Word of God in a form they can thoroughly understand.’

In June, 1892, the bishop visited Rupert’s House, and, still full of
energy and indefatigable in his work, had scarcely returned when he
prepared to start off on a much longer trip to Whale River and Fort
George.

On the eve of setting off he wrote, alluding to the arrival of a ‘packet’
with letters and papers:

‘Just think of seven months of reviews and missionary publications, as
well as other periodicals, coming at one time, and that the busiest time
of the year, when every minute must be utilised for work. The consequence
is that many papers are never opened at all. It is sometimes a question
with me as to whether this is a gain or a loss; it certainly keeps my
mind fixed on my work, of which there is always a great deal more to
be done than can be well got through. You good people at home cannot at
all realise our position; we are in another world, and you have the same
difficulty in endeavouring to realise it as you would have in realising
the condition of life in the planet Mars.

‘On Saturday last I returned from Rupert’s House, having with me my
daughter, Mrs. Broughton, her husband, and family. They will now live at
Moose, Mr. Broughton having been appointed to the charge of the whole
southern department. At present they are staying with me, but next week
they go to the Factory, five minutes’ walk from my house, which will
then be vacated by its present occupants, who are returning to Canada.
To-morrow I set off for Fort George and Whale River, Mr. Peck’s district.
I shall be absent about a month, and trust that in that time I may be
able to do much for the Master. We are passing through the hottest summer
known here for many years; the heat is sometimes almost unbearable, while
the mosquitoes are most venomous and annoying. Our gardens look well so
far, and we hope to have good crops by-and-by.’

In August the bishop was back at Moose Fort. ‘I am once more in the old
house,’ he writes, ‘home from my long summer journeyings, and I don’t
think I shall leave it again this year, but employ myself in my usual
educational and translation duties. I first went to Whale River, which
receives its name from the large number of porpoises found there: there
was formerly a great trade in the oil produced from them as well as in
their skins. I started from Moose in the Mink schooner on July 15. We had
foul winds, and the cold became severe, and many icebergs were about,
which occasionally gave our vessel some heavy blows. Then we passed the
Twins, two large islands of equal size, on which grows neither tree nor
shrub; then we caught sight of Cape Jones, which divides James’ Bay from
Hudson’s Bay, and Bear Island, a large, high rock of most forbidding
aspect; and then we ran along Long Island, which has a very bad repute
as the centre of the abode of storms, and as we pass it the great tors
on the mainland rise one after the other in their majesty of desolation;
and there is more ice, and more islands, and an abundance of fog, hiding
everything from view. And here, at last, is the south point of the
river, and presently we come to anchor, for the wind will not allow us
to proceed up to the Hudson’s Bay Company’s establishment; but a canoe
is soon alongside, and in that I am taken ashore, and am presently among
those who have been eagerly looking for me, and who receive me with a
warm welcome. There is much work to do, and I am alone.

‘Our first service on Sunday commences at half-past six in the morning:
all the Indians at the place are present, and all seem to enjoy it; some
among the congregation I have not seen for years. They had wandered
off to Ungava, many hundreds of miles distant, and had long remained
there; they now say that they intend to make Whale River their permanent
trading post. We take breakfast, and then for our Eskimo service. You
see before you a goodly number of clean, intelligent-looking people,
short and stout; you see that they have books in their hands, and notice
that they readily find out the places required; they sing very nicely,
having greatly improved since my last visit to them. Thank God for the
blessing He has vouchsafed to the missionaries’ labour. And now we attend
the English service. One young person is confirmed, and three partake
of the Lord’s Supper. After this we have dinner; this finished, it will
soon be time for our second Indian service, so let us walk quietly to
the house we use as a church. It is already crowded with young and old;
all sing the sweet Indian hymns, and use the Church prayers in their
Indian dress. I baptize twelve children and perform four marriages. The
Indians retire, and soon the interesting Eskimo flock in and take their
places; two people are confirmed, and four partake of the sacrament. We
are all a little tired now, the more so from the atmosphere being very
close in the church; so we go up to the top of the extensive plain on
which are pitched the Indian and Eskimo tents, and take a brisk walk
among the heather, which gives us an appetite for tea. On the table is
tea, preserved milk, sugar, bread, and marrow fat. Our last service is
afterwards held; the old familiar English one. We have had a busy day,
and yet not quite so busy as it would have been at Churchill, on the
western side of the bay, where, in addition to the three languages spoken
here, we should have had the Chipwyan. We have a little conversation and
then go to bed, for we must be early astir tomorrow morning.

‘Yes, in the morning there was a great stir: all hands were up at four
o’clock, loading the schooner, which had taken everything in by six
o’clock, when I held my last service, the last in all probability I shall
ever hold at Whale River. I then had breakfast, after which, having said
good-bye to and shaken hands with every one—English, half-caste, Indian
and Eskimo—I hastened on board. The anchor was at once raised, and we
began to descend the river amidst volley after volley of musketry, the
Indians wishing to testify their appreciation of what had been attempted
for their good.

‘After we had left the river we bent our way southward, and went as fast
as the baffling winds would allow us. We had the high rocky coast on our
left, on which side lay Long Island; then we passed Bear Island and Cape
Jones, and Lucker Creek and Wastekan Island, the highest land between
Cape Jones and Fort George, and Governor’s Island, and Horse Island, and
others, and so came to the mouth of Fort George River. We were seen at
the fort, when instantly the flag was run up. On and on we went until we
arrived opposite the landing-place, when the anchor was dropped and a
boat took me ashore. I was directly in the midst of old and warm friends,
who gave me the heartiest of welcomes.

‘I was eight days at Fort George, and they were all busy ones. I kept
school twice a day, devoting the mornings to the Indian children and the
afternoons to those speaking English. I held likewise two services each
day, one in each language, and for the few days that some Eskimo were
at the place, one for them as well. The principal Eskimo here is called
Nero, and he is really a fine fellow, about the size of a big English
boy, although I think the English boy would have but little chance with
him in a wrestling match. I got him to assist me in one of the services,
and what he did he did well.

‘The Indians are all busy haymaking. They go up the river some distance,
and there find abundance of grass, and bring it down in boats, spreading
it on a large field, where they make it into hay. There are stables
for the cattle, but there are no horses. There are four or five houses
for the workpeople, and on a large plain are some Indian tents—and the
gardens are looking well—the potatoes and turnips look as if good crops
would be secured, a matter for congratulation, as this is by no means
always the case. Day follows day, and the last arrived, when I gave a
treat to all the children.

‘Our farewell service is held, and it is a very solemn one, for every
one at Fort George is very dear to me. I wish all and everyone good-bye,
for I start early on the morrow; but early as it is, everyone is on the
river’s bank to see me as I step into a large canoe, which is to take me
seven miles to the Mink, lying in Stromness harbour. Several farewell
volleys are fired, and I am speedily out of sight of my hospitable
friends and on my way to the old house at Moose.’

To the bishop’s great joy and thankfulness a young missionary, Mr.
Walton, arrived by the ship in the autumn of 1892. He was destined for
the distant post of Ungava. The bishop was much pleased with him, and,
after due examination, ordained him, and sent him on to Fort George to
fill meanwhile the place of Mr. Peck, who was by doctor’s advice to take
his wife and children to England by the ship homeward bound.

Mr. Peck would, the bishop hoped, return in the following May, to proceed
to Ungava with the Rev. W. Walton.

The journey to Ungava is toilsome and very difficult. Mr. Peck had
visited the post in 1885, having been driven back three times before he
succeeded in crossing the Labrador peninsula, eight hundred miles. He
was repaid at length by meeting with many Eskimo anxious for the message
of salvation. The thought of the pressing need for a missionary to this
far-off spot had ever since lain ‘heavy on the heart of the bishop.’ He
said, ‘If we go to the North Pole, we shall be still in the diocese of
Moosonee.’ The ice-bound regions visited by Sir John Franklin, Admiral
McClintock, Captain Parry, and other Arctic explorers, are nearly all in
this diocese.

The bishop worked on, assisted by the Rev. J. A. Newnham, who had
returned from a visit to Montreal, bringing with him a wife, who took
the deepest interest in the women and girls, and proved a great addition
to the mission party. The native pastor, the Rev. E. Richards, was also
staying at Moose at this time, especially to help in the revision of the
Bible translations.




CHAPTER XXI

LAST DAYS


Towards the end of November the bishop was taken suddenly ill. We have
the account of his attack in his own words, written on January 2, 1893,
by his daughter Chrissie from his dictation. ‘Three-and-fifty years ago
Christmas was spent by me in bed; my life was almost given up. I was
suffering from typhus fever, and my doctor said that, had I not had a
constitution of lead, I must have succumbed to the virulence of the
disease. God raised me up again, and eventually sent me to the land of
snow, and I am now spending my forty-second Christmas in connection
with it. And how very joyous every Christmas has been up to the present
one! How wonderfully good my health has always been, how I could always
join the frolic and fun of the youngsters! I felt as one of them; the
difference in our age was as nothing. We were all children. This year,
too, the church has been beautifully decorated; the splendid trees have
been laden with their precious fruits, faces have brightened with joy as
of yore: but I have seen nothing of them; the mingled voices of childhood
have been unheard.

‘It has been God’s will that I should spend this Christmas in a sick
room, and amid much and severe suffering. He has brought down my strength
in my journey; but amidst it all He has kept me in perfect peace. On
November 20 I was very well. I preached at both English and Indian
services, and took my class in the Indian school, spending the evening
with my dear daughter and her family. I was in bed by ten, and arose
on Monday, November 21, before it was daylight, according to custom,
for I had a great work on hand, and about a quarter after seven, when
the light had become sufficiently strong, I went on with my revision of
the New Testament in the Cree language. I commenced the twelfth chapter
of St. Luke, and worked on steadily for a quarter of an hour, when I
suddenly felt as if I had received a very heavy blow in the lower portion
of my back. I knew it was a stroke of rheumatism, but rheumatism was a
companion of many years’ standing—not a pleasant one by any means, but it
had never materially interfered with my work. So, thinking that this was
merely a twinge of a rather more severe character than usual, I continued
my labour; but soon stroke after stroke succeeded of a more and more
violent nature. I sat up until after prayers and breakfast, and then was
conducted to bed, which I reached with great difficulty; severe torturing
pains, the nature of which I had hitherto no conception of, came on with
every movement.

‘For a week I could do nothing, although my general health had not much
suffered. I then, however, resumed the revision of my last winter’s work
on the Cree Old Testament, devoting some hours to it every day, assisted
by my most valuable helper, the Rev. E. Richards. In a few days more I
trust that the whole of the Old Testament will be fit for the printer’s
hands; I shall then go on with the New Testament, and, God helping me, I
hope to see it completed in the summer. Picture me in my work. I am lying
on my back in my bed; Mr. Richards is sitting at a table by my side; I
have my English Bible, the Revised Version, in my hand; Mr. Richards
has my translation before him, which he is reading to me slowly and
distinctly. Every sentence is very carefully weighed, and all errors are
corrected. This is a glorious occupation, and I cannot feel too thankful
that I am able to follow it in these days of my weakness.

‘I am much better than I was, and I trust it will not be long before I
shall be able to be about as usual. But it was almost worth while to be
visited with this affliction, to experience the loving and anxious care
of every one by whom I am surrounded. Everyone does his and her best to
alleviate my sufferings. Our medical man has done his very utmost; a
kind and loving daughter, and her equally kind husband and children, Mr.
and Mrs. Newnham, Mr. and Mrs. Richards, and all my Indian and native
friends, have vied with each other in administering to my comfort.’

The end of February, the date at which the bishop expected his budget of
news from the outer world, brought to his friends in England the sad
tidings that he had died suddenly on January 12. The telegram had been
carried four hundred miles to Matawa, the nearest post-office. In due
course letters followed. The end had come very unexpectedly to those
about him.

The Rev. J. A. Newnham wrote: ‘Our dear bishop has entered into rest—a
more perfect rest than that which he expected to enjoy later in the year.
It seems to have been failure of the heart which caused his death....
The people of Moosonee, and of Moose Factory especially, have lost a
father, a loving friend, and are plunged in grief.... The remains, clad
in episcopal robes, and laid in the coffin, were placed in the church
awaiting the funeral, and the people, young and old, all came to take a
last farewell of the face so dear to them, and of one who had been in and
out of their houses, cottages, and wigwams for over forty years, as a
missionary, pastor, friend, and bishop.... Archdeacon Vincent arrived on
the evening of the 20th. On the 21st, Saturday, the coffin was closed in
the presence of four clergymen—the Rev. W. G. Walton having arrived with
the dogs from Fort George—and of the gentlemen of the Honourable Hudson’s
Bay Company from Fort George, Rupert’s House, and Albany, as well as
Moose Fort.

‘At three P.M. the burial service was read, and the body of the first
Bishop of Moosonee was reverently committed to the grave. It was a
beautiful afternoon, almost spring-like, and the whole adult population
was present in the church and at the grave. Thus our bishop, amid the
tears of his bereaved people, was laid to rest, as he had said he would
have wished, in the midst of his flock.’

At the time of his death Bishop Horden had just attained the age of
sixty-five. He had been forty-two years in the field. He had laboured
in the apostolic spirit with a large measure of apostolic success. He
had laid well and deeply, building upon the Rock which is Christ, the
foundation of the work in that vast district. This is being continued
by men trained under his influence, and fired by his example. Denied
the brief season of earthly rest to which he had looked forward, he has
entered the sooner into the perfect rest above. He has ceased from his
labours, and for us it is to strive and pray that the flock which he so
long and faithfully shepherded in Moosonee shall at length be brought to
join him in the heavenly fold above.




FOOTNOTES


[1] At the instance of the then editors of the _Coral Missionary
Magazine_.

[2] It was done by the Coral Fund.

                                PRINTED BY
                 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                                  LONDON
