UC-NRLF 


$B    EbM    flbl 


Truths  of 


Salvation, 


LIBRARY 

OF  -i'hp: 

University  of  California. 

Received        i/yt.'iZ't^        •  i8g^. 
Accession  Ko.^ 3 Ol^io.  ^ Class  No. 


FUNDAMENTAL 

TRUTHS  or  SALVATION: 

BEING 

|)elj3s  for  tbc  |lnmu^ 

AND    FOR     YOUNG     BELIEVERS, 


EDWAKD   DENNETT. 


LONDON : 

AY.    H.    BROOM,   25,   PATERNOSTER   SQUARE. 

1876. 


15T7SI 

1)1 


&3^^^ 


The  following  pages  are  designed  to  meet  the  need 
of  those  who  have  been  awakened  and  quickened 
by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  therefore  the  writer 
has  sought  to  explain  ''the  way  of  salvation"  as 
simply  and  as  clearly  as  possible.  On  this  account 
he  has  not  been  anxious  to  avoid  repetition,'  if 
in  this  way  he  could  succeed  in  simplifying 
his  subject.  But  he  has  not  been  satisfied  alone 
with  directing  the  soul  to  "the  Lamb  of  God 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world;"  but, 
as  the  table  of  contents  will  show,  has  added 
instruction  upon  some  of  the  fundamental  teach- 
ings of  the  Scriptures — such  elementary  instruction 
as  is  needful  for  hales  in  Christ.  It  may  occur  to 
some  that  other  subjects  might  have  been  in- 
cluded. The  writer  also  thought  so ;  but  upon 
further  consideration  was  led  to  judge  otherwise, 
especially  as  there  are  numbers  of  books  already 
in  existence  which  deal  with  more  advanced 
truth. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2007  with  funding  from 
IVIicrosoft  Corporation   - 


http://www.archive.6rg/details/fundamentaltruth00dennrich 


fuHlVBRSITT] 

FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS  OF  SALVATION. 


CHAPTEE  1. 

SOUZ-AKXIETY* 

We  desire  in  these  pages  to  meet  the  need  of 
those  who  have  been  awakened  out  of  the  torpor 
of  spiritual  death,  and  whose  chief  concern  is  to 
know  how  to  obtain  peace  with  God.  Their  state 
may  be  best  described  as  one  of  soul-anxiety. 
There  are  always  numbers  in  this  condition,  and 
especially  now,  when  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God  is  so  widely  preached  on  every  hand.  It  is 
not  only  those  who  are  so  w^rought  upon  as  to  be 
compelled  to  cry,  ''What  must  we  do  to  be  saved?" 
but  there  are  many  others  also  who,  under  an  out- 
wardly calm  and  placid  demeanour,  hide  severe 
distress  of  soul.  The  depth  and  intensity  of 
feeling  will  vary  in  different  people  and  under 
different  circumstances.  With  some  it  will  be 
anxiety,  and  nothing  more;    with   others   there 

*  The  substance  of  this  chapter  has  appeared  elsewhere. 


8  FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

will  be  a  real  distress  of  mind  and  heart ;  while 
in  other  cases  there  will  be  positive  anguish  of 
soul.  But  whatever  the  depth  of  the  feeling — be 
it  more  or  less — if  there  be  any  conviction  of 
alienation  from  or  guilt  before  God ;  if  there  be 
any  sorrow  for  sin,  together  with  even  but  the 
faintest  desire  for  pardon  and  reconciliation  with 
God;  if,  in  other  words,  there  be  any  bowing 
before  God  in  the  place  of  self-judgment,  there  is 
that  real  spiritual  anxiety  of  which  we  speak  ;  for 
such  a  state  of  mind  can  only  be  produced  by  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

The  instrumentality  employed  to  bring  about 
this  state  of  soul  is,  in  one  form  or  another,  the 
word  of  God.  This  may  not  be  always  apparent ; 
for  sometimes  a  hymn,  sometimes  a  simple  ques- 
tion from  another,  sometimes  the  recollection  of  a 
prayer,  sometimes  the  appeal  of  a  preacher  of  the 
gospel,  may  be  used  as  the  arrow  of  conviction  ; 
but  in  all  these  cases  it  is  really  the  word  of 
God,  embodied  in  these  several  forms,  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  wields  to  awaken  the  careless  soul. 
His  own  word  is,  as  far  as  we  know,  tlie  only 
weapon  which  God  uses  for  this  end;  for  He  is 
pleased  "by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save 
them  that  believe"  (1  Cor.  i.  21) ;  and  hence  the 
apostle  says,  "We  preach  Christ  crucified,  unto 
the  Jews  a  stumblingblock,  and  unto  the  Greeks 
foolishness ;  but  unto  them  which  are  called,  botli 


SOUL-ANXIETY.  9 

Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and 
the  wisdom  of  God."  (1  Cor.  i.  23,  24) 

Several  illustrations  of  this  may  be  collected 
from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  On  the  day  of 
Pentecost  we  find  Peter  presenting,  in  preaching, 
Christ  crucified,  risen,  and  exalted,  and  charging 
his  hearers  with  the  sin  of  rejecting  and  cruci- 
fying Him  whom  God  had  raised  from  the  dead. 
"  Therefore  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assur- 
edly, that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom 
ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ.  Noio 
vjhen  they  heard,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart, 
and  said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles, 
Men  [and]  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?"  (Acts  ii. 
36,  37.)  The  apostle  Paul  was  humbled  at  the 
feet  of  the  Saviour  in  a  special  and  extraordinary 
way;  but  it  was  also  by  the  presentation  of 
Christ,  though  in  revelation,  and  not  in  the 
preaching  of  the  word.  Take  the  case  also 
of  Felix.  We  are  told  that  when  the  apostle 
reasoned  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judg- 
ment to  come,  Felix  trembled;  and  though  the 
effect  in  this  instance  seems  to  have  been  but 
transient,  it  yet  shows  us  the  power  of  the  word 
of  God  over  the  soul.  The  Philippian  jailer  might 
seem  at  first  sight  to  be  an  exception  to  the  rule ; 
but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  super- 
natural occurrences  of  that  eventful  night,  when 
Paul  and  Silas  were  in  his  charge  and  custody,  were 


10  FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

but  the  occasion  of  his  soul-distress— the  means  of 
fastening  upon  his  heart  and  conscience  the  gospel 
message  which  he  must  have  previously  heard. 
It  is  often  so  now.  Sudden  sickness  or  danger, 
bringing  an  immediate  prospect  of  death,  will 
frequently  give  effect,  under  the  power  of  the 
Spirit,  to  the  previously  unheeded  and  neglected 
messages  and  warnings  of  the  gospel ;  and,  filling 
the  souls  of  men  with  guilty  fears,  with  apprehen- 
sions of  God's  wrath  against  them,  will  constrain 
them  to  cry  aloud  for  mercy. 

Wherever  therefore  we  see  soul-anxiety — that 
soul-anxiety  of  which  we  have  spoken — we  may 
be  sure  that  it  has  been  wrought  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  through  the  word  of  God.  And  it  is  to 
those  that  are  the  subjects  of  this  anxiety  that 
we  desire  to  speak.  Beloved  reader,  are  you  in 
this  condition  of  concern  for  salvation?  Have 
you  been  convicted  of  sin,  and  is  it  the  desire  of 
your  soul  to  know  the  way  of  peace  with  God  ? 
If  such  is  your  state,  beware  of  turning  a  deaf 
ear  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  of  trifling 
with,  or  seeking  to  hush  or  to  drown  the  convic- 
tions which  He  has  wrought.  Beware  also,  we 
entreat  you,  of  delay.  God  is  striving  in  grace 
with  you.  For  you,  therefore,  it  is  especially  true, 
that  *'now  is  the  accepted  time,  and  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation."  (2  Cor.  vi.  2.)  Beware,  too,  of 
healing  the  wounds  of  your  soul  with  other  reme- 


SOUL-ANXIETY.  11 

dies  than  those  of  the  gospel,  lest  you  be  led  to 
cry  "  Peace  "  when  there  is  no  peace.  Your  case 
is  full  of  hope.  For  He  who  has  awakened  your 
desires  after  salvation  sends  this  message  to  you, 
"  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God "  (2  Cor.  v.  20) ;  and 
His  own  word  says,  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world, 
that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whoso- 
ever believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  16.)  Let  me  then 
beseech  you,  as  before  God,  to  read,  both  carefully 
and  prayerfully,  the  ensuing  pages,  that  you  may 
learn  the  way  of  salvation  as  revealed  in  the 
Scriptures.  And  may  God  Himself  teach  you,  and 
guide  you  into  peace,  through  believing  in  Christ ! 

"  Eest,  weary  soul  1 
The  penalty  is  borne,  the  ransom  paid  ; 
For  all  thy  sins  full  satisfaction  made. 
Strive  not  thyself  to  do  what  Christ  has  done  ; 
Claim  the  free  gift,  and  make  the  joy  thine  own  ; 
No  more  by  pangs  of  guilt  and  fear  clistrest. 
Rest,  sweetly  rest !" 


'  Jesus,  we  rest  in  Thee, 

In  Thee  ourselves  we  hide  ; 
Laden  with  guilt  and  misery. 

Where  could  we  rest  beside  I 
"Tis  on  Thy  meek  and  lowly  breast 
Our  weary  souls  alone  can  rest." 


12         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 


CHAPTEE  11. 

MAN'S  STATE  BEFORE  GOD, 

The  very  first  thing  that  anxious  souls  need  to 
learn  is  their  place  and  condition  before  God ;  i.e, 
to  understand  in  what  light  they  are  regarded  by 
God  Himself.  For  as  long  as  they  continue  deceived 
and  ignorant  of  their  own  condition,  so  long  will 
they  be  unwilling  to  be  saved  by  God's  grace. 
Hence,  until  they  apprehend  and  receive  His 
testimony  about  themselves,  they  will  not  receive 
His  testimony  about  His  Son.  "For  the  gospel  is 
for  sinners,  and  therefore  can  only  be  proclaimed 
to  sinners.  I  would  press  this  point  very 
earnestly  upon  all  who  are  the  subjects  of  soul 
anxiety ;  for  many  are  kept  for  months,  and  even 
years,  in  doubt  and  distress,  because  they  search 
their  own  hearts,  instead  of  God's  word,  to  ascer- 
tain their  real  condition,  and  because  therefore 
they  never  take  the  place  before  God  which  He 
assigns  to  them.  ''The  heart  is  deceitful  above 
all  things "  (Jer.  xvii.  9) ;  but  God's  word  is 
truth  (John  xvii.  17) ;  and  hence  it  is  to  it  alone 
that  we  must  appeal. 

What  then  is  God^s  testimoiy  concermny  you — 


man's  state  before  god.  13 

concerning  all  men  ?  Be  prepared  for  the  worst. 
It  is,  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world, 
and  death  by  sin;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all 
men,  for  that  all  have  sinned/'  (Eom.  v.  12.) 
Again,  "There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one: 
there  is  none  that  understandeth,  there  is  none 
that  seeketh  after  God.  They  are  all  gone  out  of 
the  way,  they  are  together  become  unprofitable ; 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one,"  etc. 
(Eom.  iii.  10-19.)  Once  more,  ''There  is  no 
difference :  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  God."  (?;r.  22,  23.)  "The  Scripture 
hath  concluded  all  under  bint"  (Gal.  iii.  22.) 
Such  is  the  testimony  of  tlie  Scriptures,  accord- 
ing to  which  all  men  are  sinners  before  (lod.  Do 
you  accept  it  as  true  of  yovrselfl 

I  do  not  ask  if  you  assent  to  it  in  a  general  way; 
for  many  will  do  this  who  will  yet  seek,  by  com- 
parison with  others,  either  to  excuse  themselves 
or  to  draw  conclusions  to  their  own  advantage. 
The  point  is  this,  God  places  all  men  on  the  same 
footing  before  Him ;  He  declares  that  all  are 
sinners;  that  there  is  no  question  with  Him  of 
degrees  of  sinfulness  or  of  guilt,  but  that  there 
is  no  difference;  that  all,  whatever  their  station, 
character,  or  repute,  are  sinners,  sinners  without 
excuse,  without  a  single  ground  of  hope  in  them- 
selves, inasmuch  as  all  lie  under  the  same  con- 
demnation ;  for  death  has  passed  upon  all  men, 


14         FUNDAMENTAL    TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

for  that  all  have  sinned ;  for  the  wages  of  sin  is 
dea^h.  (Eom.  vi.  23.)  Again  I  ask  you,  Do  you 
accept  this  testimony  of  God  as  true  of  yourself  ? 
Do  you  bow  in  self-judgment  before  God,  acknow- 
ledging that  you  are  a  sinner  under  His  just 
judgment  against  sin  ? 

If  you  do  not,  then  I  entreat  you  to  pause 
and  consider  the  hopelessness  of  your  case;  for 
the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  said,  ''  I  am  not  come  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance." 
(Matt.  ix.  13.)  There  is  therefore  no  Christ,  no 
Saviour,  except  for  sinners ;  and  hence,  as  long  as 
you  hesitate  or  refuse  to  take  the  lost  sinner's 
place,  you  are  outside  the  pale  of  God's  grace  and 
mercy  in  the  gospel.  But  if  you  do  accept  the 
testimony  of  the  Scriptures  as  to  your  state,  we 
can  then  tell  of  One  who  '■'  bare  our  sins  in  His 
own  body  on  the  tree  "  (1  Peter  ii.  24) ;  "  who  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  bruised  for  our 
iniquities"  (Isa.  liii.  5) ;  of  One  "whom  God  hath 
set  forth  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood" 
(Rom.  iii.  25) ;  of  Him,  indeed,  who  has  taken  the 
sinner's  place,  borne  the  sinner's  judgment,  that 
Avhosoever  belie veth  on  Him  might  not  perish,  but 
have  everlasting  life.  (2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  John  iii.  16.) 

But  the  whole  truth  has  not  yet  been  told.  It 
is  not  only  that  you  are  sinners,  but  the  Scriptures 
teach  also  that  all  who  are  unsaved  are  "  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins."  (Eph.  ii.  1.)    The  Lord  Jesus 


fTTllTBB.SIT3n 

man's  state  before  aoD.^^aV^^lS 

thus  says  that  the  believer  ''  is  passed  Trom  death 
unto  life  "  (John  v.  24),  showing  plainly  that  the 
previous  condition  of  the  believer  was  death, 
spiritual  death.  The  sinner  therefore  is  both 
under  the  condemnation  of  sin,  and  is  dead  in 
sins.  It  is  not  meant  of  course  that  he  has  no  life 
at  all ;  for  it  is  very  palpable  that  he  has  physical 
life.  But  what  is  asserted  is,  that  through  sin 
the  sinner  is  separated  from  God,  cut  off  from  the 
source  of  life  (for  God  is  the  Fountain  of  life), 
and  consequently  that  the  sinner  is  in  a  state  of 
spiritual  death,  having  no  life,  and  no  power  of 
life  towards  God.  The  whole  dealings  of  God 
with  men,  from  Israel  downwards,  do  but  prove 
the  truth  of  His  word ;  and  hence  I  have  to  ask 
you  again.  Do  you  accejpl  this  fvrther  testimony 
concenmig  yourself? 

Beloved  reader,  you  will  never  know  the  hope- 
lessness of  your  condition  until  you  subscribe  also 
to  this  verdict.  Men  say, ''  While  there  is  life  there 
is  hope."  How  often  have  such  words  sustained  the 
liearts  of  those  who  have  been  watching  by  the  bed- 
side of  a  sick  relative.  Hoping  against  hope,  they 
refused  to  believe  that  the  end  was  near,  and  not 
until  the  last  beat  of  tlie  pulse,  together  with  the 
last  breath,  would  tliey  believe  that  they  stood  in 
the  presence  of  death.  So  also  is  it  oftentimes 
with  sinners ;  yea,  even  with  awakened  and 
unxious  souls.     They  may  not  doubt  that  they 


16  FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

are  sinners,  and  sinners  under  judgment ;  Lut 
they  cannot  believe  that  their  case  is  hopeless, 
that  they  have  no  power  of  life  within  themselves, 
no  power  of  recovery,  restoration,  and  hence  tliey 
will  not  take  the  place  of  being  utterly  undone, 
lost,  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Ah  !  thereby 
they  effectually  shut  themselves  out  from  blessing, 
and  turn  back,  it  may  be,  to  years  of  weary 
wanderings  and  conflicts  because  they  believed 
their  own  hearts  (and  he  that  trusteth  his  own 
lieart  is  a  fool — Prov.  xxviii.  26)  rather  than  God. 
But  we  should  resolutely  close  our  eyes  against 
everything  but  the  testimony  of  the  Scriptures ; 
for  it  is  not  what  1  think,  feel,  or  believe,  but 
what  God  declares,  that  determines  my  condition 
in  His  sight.  He  is  the  sole  Judge ;  and  hence, 
if  He  tells  the  sinner  that  he  is  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  sinner  to 
acknowledge  that  God  is  true  though  every  man 
be  a  liar.  (Eom.  iii.  4.) 

Do  you  then  now  believe  that  having  no  life 
you  have  no  hope  ?  If  not,  accept  God's  verdict 
at  once ;  for  as  soon  as  you  take  the  sinner's  place, 
owning  the  truth  of  God's  word  about  you,  con- 
fessing that  you  are  under  the  just  judgment  of 
sin,  so  soon  are  you  in  the  place  of  blessing ; 
the  place  in  which  God,  in  all  His  infinite  grace, 
can  meet  you  ;  the  place  in  which  you  can  claim 
the  sinner's  Saviour.    Bow  therefore  before  God  at 


man's  state  before  god.  17 

once,  and  receive  the  unspeakable  gift  of  His  love 
— His  own  Son,  as  your  Saviour,  Redeemer,  and 
Lord. 

''  0  God  of  mercy — Father  ; 

The  one  unchanging  claim, 
The  brightest  hopes,  we  gather 

From  Christ's  most  precious  name  ; 
Wliat  always  sounds  so  sweetly 

In  Thine  unwearied  ear, 
Has  freed  our  souls  completely 

From  all  our  sinful  fear. 

"  The  trembling  sinner  feareth 

That  God  can  ne'er  forget ; 
But  one  full  payment  cleareth 

His  memory  of  all  debt. 
When  nought  beside  could  ease  us, 

Or  set  our  souls  at  large. 
Thy  holy  work,  Lord  Jesus, 

Secured  a  full  discharge. 

*'  No  wrath  God's  heart  retaineth 

To  US-ward  who  believe  ; 
No  dread  in  ours  remaineth 

As  we  His  love  receive. 
Returning  sons  He  kisses. 

And  with  His  robe  invests  ; 
His  perhct  love  dismisses 

All  terror  from  our  breasts.'' 


18         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 


CHAPTEl^  ITT. 

THE  BLOOD   OF  CHRIST. 

Supposing  now  that  those  of  whom  we  speak — 
'anxious  ones' — have  bowed  to  the  judgment  of 
God  upon  their  condition,  their  immediate  concern 
will  be  to  know  by  w^hat  means  they  can  obtain 
the  pardon  of  their  sins.  The  blood  of  Christ  is 
the  only  way  by  which  the  guilt  of  sin  can  be  re- 
moved. ''  Without  shedding  of  Mood  is  no  remis- 
sion." (Heb.  ix.  22.)  Herein  lies  the  necessity 
for  the  death  of  Christ ;  the  need,  in  fact,  for  the 
whole  work  of  redemption.  And  hence  it  is  of 
the  first  importance  that  this  truth  should  be 
rightly  understood. 

We  have  already  pointed  out  that  death  has 
"  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned." 
(Eom.  V.  12.)  Adam  first  incurred  the  penalty 
through  his  disobedience  to  God.  He  had  been 
warned  not  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil;  "for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest 
thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  (Gen.  ii.  16,  17.) 
Adam  disregarded  the  divine  command,  and  fell 
under  the  awful  sentence  of  death — the  penalty 
which  God  had  annexed  to  disobedience.     Thus 


I'HK    BLOOD    OF    CHRIST.  19 

''  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for 
that  all  have  sinned."     (Eom.  v.  12.)     There  is 
therefore  no  difference ;  all  alike  are  sinners ;  and 
hence  every  child  of  Adam's  race  is  subject  to  the 
penalty  of  sin,  which  is  death.    Yea,  death  already 
reigns  (see  Kom.  v.  13-21)  over  the  whole  human 
family :  every  individual  member  of  it  (saving 
those  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ)  being 
under  the  righteous  judgment  of  death,  because  of 
sin.     "  But  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  \is, 
in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for 
us."  (Eom.  V.  8.)     He  "so  loved  the  world,  that 
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life."  (John  iii.  16.)     Being  rich  in  mercy, 
He  sent  His  own  Son  to  die,  ''the  just  for  the 
unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  (1  Peter 
iii.   18.)     Just  as  when  Abraham  was  about  to 
sacrifice  his  son,  God  provided  a  lamb  to  be  offered 
up  in  his  stead,  that  Isaac  might  be  rescued  and 
live  (Gen.  xxii.),  so  God  has  provided  a  Lamb  to 
be  offered  up  in  the  sinner's  room  and  stead — 
*'  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketli  away  the  sin  of 
the  world."  (John  i.  29.)     This  is  the  secret  and 
meaning,  in  this  aspect,  of  the  death  of  Christ. 
He  died  as  the  sinner's  substitute,  bore  the  sinner's 
judgment,  expiated  the  sinner's  guilt. 
.    The  marvellous  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ, 


20         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

as  meeting  the  sinner's  need,  flows  from  the  cha- 
racter of  His  person  and  the  nature  of  His  death. 
His  blood  is  the  symbol  of  His  death,  of  His  life 
poured  out ;  for  the  life  is  in  the  blood  (see  Lev. 
xvii.  10-14),  and  hence  His  blood  cleanses  from 
sin,  because  of  the  value  of  His  death  before  God 
in  the  sinner's  place  and  behalf  God  has  con- 
descended to  teach  us  this  by  type  and  illustra- 
tion, as  well  as  by  direct  statement.  Look  at  the 
Israelites  in  the  land  of  Egypt  on  the  passover 
night.  God  was  about  to  execute  judgment  upon 
the  land  of  Egypt;  and  when  once  He  began  to 
deal  in  righteousness,  Israel  was  as  much  amenable 
to  the  penalty  of  sin  as  the  Egyptians.  How  then 
spare  the  former  when  the  latter  were  to  be  judged  ? 
"  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt  this  night, 
and  will  smite  all  the  firstborn  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  both  man  and  beast ;  and  against  all  the 
gods  of  Egypt  I  will  execute  judgment:  I  am  the 
Lord.  And  the  blood  shall  be  to  you  for  a  token 
upon  the  houses  where  ye  are :  and  when  I  see  the 
bloody  I  will  pass  over  you,  and  the  plague  shall 
not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you,  when  I  smite  the 
land  of  Egypt."  (Ex.  xii.  12,  13;  also  vv.  21-23.) 
The  only  ground  (mark  it  well)  of  difference  on 
this  night  between  Israel  and  Egypt  was  the 
BLOOD.  It  was  not  what  Israel  vjas  in  comparison 
with  the  Egyptians,  but  it  was  the  blood  that 
stayed   the   destroyers   hand — the  blood  on  the 


THE   BLOOD   OF    CHRIST.  21 

outside  of  their  houses ;  for  the  Lord  had  said, 
When  /  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you.  The 
blood  of  the  lamb — for  the  lainb  had  been  slain — 
cleansed  them  typically  from  guilt,  so  that  God 
could  righteously  spare  Israel  while  He  righteously 
destroyed  Egypt.  The  same  lesson  is  taught  by 
the  great  day  of  atonement,  of  which  we  have  the 
record  in  Leviticus  xvi.  For  Aaron  was  directed 
to  sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  bullock,  and  of  the 
goat  of  the  sin-offerings,  both  upon  the  mercy- 
seat  and  before  the  mercy-seat,  where  God  dwelt 
between  the  cherubim ;  "  for  on  that  day  shall 
the  priest  make  an  atonement  for  you,  to  cleanse 
you,  th^t  ye  may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins 
before  the  Lord."  (Lev.  xvi.  30.)  All  these  things 
were  but  shadows  of  the  efficacy  of  the  blood 
of  Christ.  Thus  we  read :  "  Christ  our  Passover 
is  sacrificed  for  us "  (1  Cor.  v.  7) ;  and  again, 
"Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but 
by  His  own  blood  He  entered  in  once  into  the 
holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption. 
For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,  and  the  ashes 
of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to 
the  purifying  of  the  flesh :  hoiv  much  more  shall 
the  hlood  of  Christy  who  through  the  eternal 
Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge 
your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the 
living  God?"  (Heb.  ix.  12-14.)  Accordingly  we 
are  taught,  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His 


22         FUNDAMENTAL   TEUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

(God's)  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  (1  John 
i.7.) 

We  may,  then,  now  point  out  distinctly  the 
teaching  of  Scripture  as  to  the  blood  of  Christ 
in  relation  to  sin.     (1.)  It  is  the  only  means  of 
cleansing  from  guilt.     This  is  the  divinely  ap- 
pointed and  the  divinely  given  way.     It  is  tliere- 
fore  exclusive  of  all  other  metliods.     "Though  thou 
wash  thee  with  nitre,  and  take  thee  much  sope, 
thine   iniquity   is   marked   before  me,  saith   the 
Lord  God."  (Jer.  ii.  22.)     '^If  I  wash  myself  with 
snow-water,  and  make  my  hands  never  so  clean ; 
yet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch,  and  mine 
own  clothes  shall  abhor  me."  (Job  ix.  30,  31.)     It 
is  only  the  blood  of  Christ  which  can  make  the 
sinner  whiter  than  snow.     (2.)  It  is  the  blood  in 
and  by  itself  alone  which  possesses  this  efficacy. 
There  cannot  be  any  addition  to  it.     It  is  not  the 
blood  and  something  else.     Add  to  it  in  any  way, 
whether  by  feelings,  prayers,  penitence  (all  of  which 
have  their  proper  place),  and  you  mar  its  cleansing 
power.     fS.)  God  has  provided  the  blood.     It  is 
He  who  has  delivered  up  His  Son  to  death.     This 
provision  for  the  sinner's  need  is  one  therefore 
entirely  of  God's  grace,  and  consequently  a  pro- 
vision outside  of  the  sinner  altogether.     God  in 
His  infinite  mercy,  and  because  He  so  loved  the 
world,  provided  the  Lamb  for  the  sacrifice;  and 
now  the  precious  blood  of  that  Lamb  avails  for 


THE   BLOOD    OF    CHRIST.  23 

every  one  who  believes.  (John  iii.  16.)  There  is 
no  limit  whatever  in  its  application,  excepting  in 
the  sinner's  unbelief.  It  is  provided  for  all,  and 
everyone  may  be  the  subject  of  its  blessed  cleans- 
ing power  through  faith. 

Beloved  reader,  you  have  confessed  your  need 
of  cleansing,  and  God  has  provided  that  which 
alone  can  meet  your  need.  Do  you  ask,  But  how 
am  I  to  obtain  the  application  of  the  blood  to 
myself?  Solely  and  entirely  hy  the  ohedienee  of 
faith.  Let  us  go  back  to  the  passover  night. 
(Ex.  xii.)  It  was  not  enough  that  the  lamb  was 
slain,  and  that  the  blood  was  in  the  basin ;  but 
the  Israelite  was  directed  to  sprinkle  the  blood  for 
himself  upon  the  lintel  and  the  two  side-posts  of 
his  door.  With  the  bunch  of  hyssop  in  his  hand, 
the  sign  of  his  humiliation  before  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God,  he  sprinkled  the  blood,  thereby 
confessing  his  own  desert  of  death,  and  his  faith 
in  the  blood  as  the  means  to  avert  the  stroke  of 
the  destroyer,  of  sheltering  him  from  the  wrath  of 
the  Kighteous  Judge.  So  now.  The  Lamb  has 
been  provided,  and  slain;  His  blood  has  been 
shed.  But  the  fact  of  His  blood-shedding  does 
not  secure  your  safety.  The  question  is.  Are  you 
under  the  shelter  of  the  blood  ?  Do  you  again  ask, 
How  can  this  be?  By  bowing  in  humiliation, 
like  the  Israelite,  before  the  judgment  which  God 
has  pronounced  against  sin ;  that  is,  by  taking  the 


24  FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

place  of  a  sinner,  arid  by  looking  to  the  blood  of 
Christ  to  secure  you  from  the  righteous  doom  and 
meed  of  sin.  The  moment  you  do  this,  the  blood 
of  Christ  is  upon  you  in  all  its  value,  between  you 
and  judgment,  sheltering  you  completely  and  for 
ever  from  the  consequences  of  sin;  for  the  blood 
has  met  and  satisfied  all  the  claims  that  a  holy 
God  had  against  you.  For  God  hath  set  forth 
Christ  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood. 
(Rom.  iii.  25.)  There  is  therefore  absolutely  nothing 
for  you  to  do ;  not  even  have  you  to  gather  the 
hyssop  and  sprinkle  the  blood.  You  have  simply 
to  believe  the  word  of  God,  to  look  in  faith 
to  the  blood  already  shed,  as  the  only  means 
of  protection  from  death  and  judgment,  and  God 
instantly  sees  you  as  covered  with  all  its  efficacy 
and  value — cleansed  from  guilt,  and  whiter  than 
snow.  Delay  not,  then,  to  seek  the  protection  of 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  At  midnight  the 
Lord  smote  all  the  first-born  in  the  land  of  Egypt ; 
and  as  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  will  judgment 
overtake  the  rejecter  of  Christ,  for  when  they  shall 
say.  Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction 
cometh  upon  them,  and  they  shall  not  escape. 
(1  Thess.  v.  3.)  To-day,  then,  hear  the  entreating 
voice  of  the  love  of  God,  which  bids  you  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  to  "  behold  the  Lamb 
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.*' 
(John  i.  29.) 


THE   BLOOD    OF    CHRIST.  25 

"  When  first  o'erwhelmed  witii^sin  and  shame, 
To  Jesus'  cross  I  trembling  came, 
Bmxiened  with  guilt,  and  full  of  fear, 
Yet  drawn  by  love,  T  ventured  near, 
And  pardon  found,  and  peace  with  God, 
In  Jesus'  rich  atoning  blood. 

"  My  sin  is  gone,  my  fear  is  o'er, 
I  shun  His  presence  now  no  more  ; 
He  sits  upon  the  throne  of  grace, 
He  bids  me  boldly  seek  His  face  ; 
Sprinkled  upon  the  throne  of  God, 
I  see  that  rich  atoning  blood. 

"  Before  His  face  my  Priest  appears  ; 
My  Advocate  the  Father  hears  ; 
That  precious  blood,  before  His  eyes, 
Both  day  and  night  for  pardon  cries  ; 
It  speaks,  it  ever  speaks  to  God — 
The  voice  of  that  atoning  blood. 

"  By  faith  that  voice  I  also  hear ; 
It  answers  doubt,  it  stills  each  fear  : 
Th'  accuser  seeks  in  vain  to  move 
The  wrath  of  Him  whose  name  is  Love  ; 
Each  charge  against  the  sons  of  God 
Is  silenced  by  th'  atoning  blood. 

"  Here  I  can  rest  without  a  fear ; 
By  this  to  God  I  now  di*aw  near  ; 
By  this  I  triumph  over  sin, 
For  this  has  made  and  keeps  me  clean  ; 
And  when  I  reach  the  throne  of  God, 
I  '11  praise  that  rich  atoning  blood." 


26  FUNDAMENTAL    TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

YU  MUST  BE  BORX  AGAIN. 

When  Nicodemus  went  to  our  Lord  for  instruc- 
tion, he  was  met  instantly  by  the  solemn  word, 
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he,  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 
(John  iii.  3.)  It  behoves  therefore  every  anxious 
soul  to  consider  this  searching  divine  word;  be- 
cause we  at  once  learn,  that  whatever  the  anxiety 
of  soul — earnest  desires,  profession  of  faith — if 
there  has  not  been  wrought  this  great  change,  the 
"new  birth,"  there  is  no  life  in  the  soul,  and 
consequently  no  salvation. 

Who  was  it  then  to  whom  the  Lord  addressed 
these  words  ?  We  only  learn  half  the  truth  when 
we  answer,  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews ;  for, 
in  fact,  this  tells  us  nothing  beyond  his  name  and 
official  rank,  and  these  things  have  no  weight 
before  God,  and  no  significance  for  the  seeking 
soul.  It  is  in  the  connection  of  the  third  chapter 
with  the  second  that  we  shall  find  the  real  answer 
to  ou]-  question.  We  read,  *'  Now  when  He  [Jesus] 
was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  passover,  in  the  feast-day, 
vimiy  believed  in  His  7iame,  when  they  saiv  tlie 


YE    MUST   BE   BOEN   AGAIN.  27 

miracles  which  He  did.  But  Jesus  did  not  commit 
Himself  unto  them,  because  He  knew  all  men, 
and  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man ; 
for  He  knew  what  was  in  man.  But''  (as  it  should 
be  read)  "there  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees  named 
Mcodemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,"  etc.  (John  ii. 
23-25 ;  iii.  1,  etc.)  There  was  thus  a  number  of 
Jews  who  believed  on  Jesus  when  they  saw  His 
miracles,  and  Nicodemus  was  one  of  that  number. 
But  Jesus  did  not  commit  Himself  to  them  be- 
cause He  knew  what  was  in  man ;  because,  in  fact, 
their  faith  was  nothing  more  than  a  natural  con- 
viction, wrought  by  the  evidence  of  the  miracles, 
of  the  truth  of  the  claims  of  Jesus.  There  was 
no  bowing  of  heart  before  God  in  all  this ;  there 
was  nothing  more  than  a  natural  or  intellectual 
belief  in  the  name  of  Christ.  When  therefore 
Mcodemus  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  no  doubt  in 
quest  of  something  more,  and  expressed  this  belief, 
''Eabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come 
from  God  :  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles 
that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him,"  Jesus 
answered  him  at  once  by  stating  the  necessity  of 
being  born  again.  It  was  as  if  He  had  said,  "  You 
may  believe  in  me  as  a  divine  teacher,  and  yet 
be  lost.  You  must  be  born  again  before  you  can 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 

We  thus  get  a  most  solemn  warning,  as  well  as 
a  needed  caution.     The  warning  is,  ''  Beware  of 


28         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION.. 

being  satisfied  with  a  profession  of  belief  in  Christ." 
The  caution  is,  "Never  forget  that  everything  is 
useless  if  you  have  not  been  born  again.  You 
may  be  most  earnest,  most  religious,  a  model  of 
activity,  in  high  repute  for  sanctity  of  life,  or  for 
works  of  usefulness,  and  yet  be  a  lost  soul;  for 
unless  you  are  born  again,  you  cannot  even  see 
the  kingdom  of  God." 

Why  then  must  a  man  he  born  again  ?  The 
answer  to  this  question  brings  us  to  a  most 
important  part  of  our  subject.  We  have  already 
shown  that  all  men  are  sinners ;  but  it  is  not 
only  that  they  are  sinners,  but  they  have  an 
evil,  corrupt,  depraved  nature  ;  and  this  incurably 
corrupt  nature  is  the  tree  which  produces  all  the 
evil  fruits  of  sin.  The  acts  of  sin  reveal  the 
character  of  the  nature  ;  and  this  nature  is  totally 
unfit  for  God's  presence.  This  is  the  purport  of 
our  Lord's  words  in  this  chapter,  ''  That  which  is 
born  of  flesh  is  flesh."  {v.  6.)  All  therefore  that 
we  are  as  natural  men,  as  children  of  Adam,  is 
flesh ;  and  in  this  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good 
thing.  (Eom.  vii.  18.) 

"Are  we  to  understand  that  all  men,  without  ex- 
ception, are  thus  totally  corrupt,  hopelessly  evil  ?" 

"  Yes.  Such  is  the  verdict  of  God  upon  human 
nature.     *  That  which  is  born  of  flesh  is  flesh.* " 

"But  is  it  possible,  for  example,  that  all  the 
noble  deeds  recorded  in  history,  or  all  the  kind, 


YE   MUST   BE   BORN   AGAIN.  29 

generous,  and  beneficent  actions  which  we  meet 
with  in  daily  life,  are  all  these  done  by  those 
wdio  have  a  totally  depraved  nature?  Surely 
there  must  be  a  difference — degrees  in  our  natural 
condition ;  for  how  is  it  possible  to  class  such 
actions  with  open  and  flagrant  sins  ? " 

It  matters  not  what  may  be  the  outward  cha- 
racter of  the  actions  of  men,  whether  such  as  will 
elicit  the  applause  or  draw  down  the  condemna- 
tion of  their  fellows ;  for  as  long  as  they  proceed 
from  men  who  have  not  been  born  again,  they  are 
nothing  but  evil  in  the  sight  of  God,  ''for  a  cor- 
rupt tree  cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.  For  of 
thorns  men  do  not  gather  figs,  nor  of  a  bramble 
bush  gather  they  grapes."  (Luke  vi.  43,  44.)  The 
word  of  God  is  most  explicit  on  this  question. 
"The  carnal  mind"  (the  mind  of  the  flesh)  "is 
enmity  against  God :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the 
law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  So  then  they 
that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  (Romans 
viii.  7,  8.)  It  is  thus,  as  Luther  said,  not  a  ques- 
tion of  doing,  but  of  being ;  not  a  question  of  the 
character  of  actions,  but  a  question  of  nature,  and 
this  nature  God  declares  to  be  flesh,  and  the  flesh 
is  nothing  but  evil  in  His  sight,  and  consequently 
"flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God;  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup- 
tion."  (1  Cor.  xv.  50.) 

Herein  therefore  lies  the  necessity  of  being  born 


30  FUNDAMENTAL   TPvUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

again.  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh. 
....  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must 
be  born  again."  (John  iii.  6,  7.)  This  necessity  is 
universal  in  its  application.  It  concerns  every  one 
born  into  tliis  world,  the  dutiful,  obedient  child  as 
mucli  as  the  ^Drodigal  son ;  the  active,  zealous 
philanthropist  as  much  as  the  convict  in  his  cell. 
For  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  cannot  enter  the  king- 
dom of  God.  There  must  therefore  be  a  7iew  nahtre 
and  a  new  life ;  for  if  there  be  not  these,  whatever 
a  man's  moral  repute,  he  will  be  for  ever  outside 
of  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Hair  then  must  a  man  he  horn  again  1  This,  in 
substance,  was  the  question  of  Mcodemus.  ''  How 
can  a  man  be  born  when  lie  is  old  ?  Can  he  enter 
the  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb,  and  be 
born  ?  "  (John  iii.  4)  This  question  rigidly  con- 
strued means  undoubtedly,  How  is  it  possihle  for 
a  man  to  be  born  again  ?  But  our  Lord,  in  His 
answer,  does  not  notice  it  in  this  foriu,  but  points 
out  the  way  in  which  a  man  is  born  again. 
"Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God."  {v,  5.) 

(1)  Water.  Much  difficulty  has  been  occasioned 
by  special  attempts  to  wrest  the  meaning  of  this 
symbol.  Ritualists  of  many  shades  have  persis- 
tently endeavoured  to  suj^port  their  false  teaching 
of  baptismal  regeneration  from  this  passage.     But 


YE   MUST   BE   BORN   AGAIN.  31 

if  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  Scriptures,  we  shall 
find  that  the  difficulty  will  disappear.  N"o  w  it  is  very 
evident  that  Xicodemus  should  have  understood 
what  our  Lord  meant;  and  if  he  did  not,  that  he  was 
expected  to  understand.  For  when  he  replied,  "  How^ 
can  these  things  be  ?  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Art 
thou  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not  these 
things  ? "  (John  iii.  9,  10.)  And  if  we  turn  to  one 
of  the  prophets  (with  whose  writings  Kicodemus, 
as  one  of  Israel's  teachers,  should  have  been  well 
acquainted),  we  shall  find  a  distinct  foreshadowing 
of  this  teaching  of  our  Lord.  Speaking  of  the 
future  restoration  of  Israel,  the  prophet  says, 
"  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and 
ye  shall  be  clean:  from  all  your  filthiness,  and 
from  all  your  idols,  will  I  cleanse  you.  A  new 
heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I 
put  within  you :  and  I  will  take  aw^ay  the  stony 
heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  an  heart 
of  flesh.  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you, 
and  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall 
keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them."  (Ezek.  xxxvi. 
25-27.)  Here  we  have  the  same  conjunction  of 
the  water  and  the  Spirit,  and  a  radical  change 
following  upon  its  application;  for  nothing  less 
than  this  can  be  implied  by  "  a  new  heart."  JSTot 
only  so,  but  the  water  in  this  passage  is  used  in 
the  most  familiar  of  all  senses  to  the  Israelites, 
in  connection  with  cleansing.    .,,-«j^«sr5z?":r==:^ 

Z(^  Of  THa 

tTHIVBESITT] 


32         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

With  this  passage  then  before  us,  what,  we  ask, 
is  the  import  of  the  water?  Turn  to  Psalm 
cxix.,  and  we  get  this  question :  "  Wherewithal 
shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  way  ?  by  taking 
heed  thereto  according  to  thy  word!'  We  read  also 
in  the  New  Testament  of  ''  the  washing  of  water 
by  the  word"  (Eph.  v.  26) ;  again,  ''Now  ye  are 
clean  through "  (or  because  of)  *'  the  word  which 
I  have  spoken  unto  you."  (John  xv.  3 ;  read  also 
John  xiii.  5-11.)  The  water  therefore  is  a  well- 
known  symbol  for  the  word  of  God.  Hence  we 
find  the  Word  constantly  associated  in  other 
passages  with  the  new  birth.  "  Of  His  own  will 
begat  He  us  with  the  word  of  truths  (James  i.  18.) 
'*  Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of 
incorruptible,  hy  the  ivord  of  God,  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever.  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and 
all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The 
grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth 
away ;  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for 
ever.  And  this  is  the  Word  which  hy  the  gosjpel  is 
pleached  unto  you!'  (1  Peter  i.  23-25.)  The  apostle 
Paul  makes  an  allusion  to  the  same  thing  when 
he  says  to  the  Corinthians,  "  In  Christ  Jesus  I 
have  begotten  you  through  the  gosyd!'  (1  Cor.iv.  15.) 
The  Word  of  God,  preached  in  the  gospel,  is  the 
first  means  of  the  new  birth  which  our  Lord  here 
sets  forth  under  the  type  of  water. 

(2)  And  [o/]  the  Sjpirit.     "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 


YE   MUST   BE   BORN    AGAIN.  33 

quickeneth."  (John  vi.  63.)  "The  letter  killeth, 
but  the  Spirit  giveth  life."  (2  Cor.  iii.  6.)  The 
Spirit  acting  in  and  through  the  word  of  God 
quickens  dead  souls,  and  they  are  born  again.  The 
Word  cannot  do  this  in  and  by  itself;  nor  does  the 
Spirit  of  God  act  alone,  but  He  wields  the  Word 
as  the  instrument,  so  tliat  by  it  He  may  bring  souls 
out  of  death  into  life,  producing  in  them  both  a 
new  nature  and  a  new  life.  Many  illustrations  of 
this  might  be  collected  from  the  Scriptures.  Take 
the  most  prominent  of  all — that  afforded  by  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  The  crucifiers  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  were  gathered  round  about  Peter  and  the 
other  apostles.  Peter  proclaimed  the  word  of 
God  to  them,  and  said,  "Let  all  the  house  of 
Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that 
same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord 
and  Christ."  (Acts  ii.  36.)  At  the  beginning  of 
the  chapter  we  read  of  the  descent  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  and  it  is  said  of  the  apostles  that  ''  they 
were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to 
speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave 
them  utterance."  Peter  was  therefore  speaking 
in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  same  Spirit 
clothed  the  word  of  God  with  mighty  power,  and 
the  effect  was  that  a  multitude  were  born  again, 
the  change  wrought  upon  them  being  indicated  by 
the  fact  that  ''  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart, 
and  said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles, 

0 


34         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Men  [and]  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  '*  (?\  37.) 
So  it  is  now  when  men  are  born  again.  It  is 
always  through  the  Word,  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
There  is  no  other  way. 

(3)  We  may,  however,  with  our  Lord\s  own 
teaching  before  ns,  define  more  exactly.  In  the 
ninth  verse  Nicodemus  asks,  "  How  can  these 
things  be  ? "  Our  Lord  first  of  all  rebukes, 
though  with  all  tenderness,  both  his  ignorance 
(v.  10)  and  his  unbelief  {vv.  11,  12),  and  then 
proceeds  to  vouchsafe  a  full  reply  to  the  question 
he  had  put.  It  falls  into  three  parts,  and  together 
they  reveal  the  whole  mystery  which  was  perplex- 
ing the  mind  of  Nicodemus.  (a)  The  Person  of  the 
Son  of  man.  This  is  the  foundation  of  all  in  that 
word  of  God — the  gospel — by  which,  through  the 
Spirit  of  God,  souls  are  born  again.  "Xo  man 
hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  but  He  that  came 
down  from  heaven,  [even]  the  Son  of  man  which 
is  in  heaven."  (v.  13.)  We  have  here  the  great 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God. 
He  was  in  heaven,  but  He  ''  came  down  from 
heaven,"  was  born  of  a  woman,  and  1)ecame  the 
Son  of  man  on  earth,  who  yet  while  He  spake 
to  Nicodemus  could  say  of  Himself,  ''  AVho  is  in 
heaven."  It  is  the  God-man — true  man,  and  true 
God,  who  is  here  revealed  in  the  Person  of  the  Son 
of  man.  And  it  is  this  wondrous  dignity  of  the 
Person  of  Christ  which  gives  such  infinite  efficacy 


YE    MUST   BE    BORN   AGAIN.  35 

to  His  work ;  and  hence  the  necessity  of  guarding 
with  such  jealous  care  the  true  doctrine  of  the 
Person  of  our  Lord,  of  repudiating,  refusing 
all  teachings  which  seek  to  degrade  either 
His  human  or  divine  natures.  For  whatever 
militates  against  the  Person  of  Christ,  militates 
against  the  cross,  against  His  atoning  sacrifice. 
The  Person  of  Christ  lies  at  the  foundation  of, 
gives  its  blessed  character  to,  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God.  "For  God,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shinecl  in  our 
hearts,  to  [give]  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ!'  (2  Cor. 
iv.  6.)  {p)  The  Work  of  Christ.  In  this  we  have 
the  second  of  the  divine  "  musts."  "  Ye,"  said  our 
Lord,  ''must  be  born  again;"  and  now  He  says, 
"As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness, 
even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up  :  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  14,  15.)  But 
why  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up — crucified  ? 
It  was  a  moral  necessity ;  for  without  the  shed- 
ding of  blood  there  is  no  remission  (Heb.  ix.  22) ; 
because,  as  taking  the  sinner's  place.  He  must 
be  "  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  bruised  for 
our  iniquities "  (Isa.  liii.  5) ;  because,  inasmuch 
as  we  were  under  the  judgment  and  condemna- 
tion of  sin,  He  must  die  in  our  stead  ;  for  He 
''bare  our  sins  in   His  own  body  on  the  tree." 


36         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

(1  Peter  ii.  24.)  It  was,  in  a  word,  as  the  sinner's 
substitute  that  He  must  be  ''lifted  up."  The 
object  of  His  being  lifted  up  is,  "  that  who- 
soever believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  eternal  life."  (v.  15.)  He  thus  becomes  the 
source  of  life,  yea,  in  resurrection  He  is  the  life  of 
every  believer  (Col.  iii.  3,  4) ;  for  it  is  in  being 
born  again  that  this  life  is  communicMed  through 
the  power  of  tlie  quickening  Spirit.  But  He  is 
the  life  of  those  who  believe,  because  of  the  cha- 
racter of  His  death,  because  He  was  the  sinner's 
substitute  on  the  cross ;  for  it  was  in  death  that 
He  expiated,  made  atonement  for  our  sins,  and 
thereby  removed  every  barrier  out  of  the  way  be- 
tween a  God  of  grace  and  lost  sinners.  Hence  He 
could  say,  "He  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live."  (John  xi.  25.)  It  is 
thus  life  out  of  death,  life  in  a  crucified  and  risen 
Saviour,  because  "through  death  He  destroyed 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death  "  (Heb.  ii.  14) ; 
for  if  the  corn  of  wheat  had  not  fallen  into  the 
ground  and  died,  it  must  have  remained  alone ; 
but  having  died,  it  brings  forth  much  fruit. 
(John  xii.  24.)  (y)  Faith  is  the  connecting-link 
between  the  sinner  and  Christ,  just  as  the  toucli 
was  the  connecting-link  between  those  who  were 
healed  and  Christ  in  the  days  of  His  sojourn  here. 
Hence  it  is,  "Whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."   (vv.  15,   16.) 


YE   MUST   BE   BORN   AGAIN.  37 

This  will  be  at  once  understood  by  looking  at  the 
comparison  which  the  Lord  Himself  has  made. 
He  compares  His  own  "lifting  up"  to  the  serpent 
lifted  up  by  Moses  in  the  wilderness.  (Num.  xxi. 
6-9.)  They  were  serpents  that  bit  the  people  of 
Israel  and  caused  their  death ;  it  was  a  serpent  to 
which  they  were  directed  to  look  and  live.  It  is 
sin  that  has  caused  our  death.  "  By  one  man  sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  hy  sin''  etc. 
(Eom.  V.  12.)  It  is  to  One  w^ho  was  made  sin  for 
us  (2  Cor.  V.  21)  on  whom  w^e  are  commanded  to 
believe  in  order  to  live. 

This,  then,  is  the  present  point  of  importance — 
the  comparison  between  the  looking  and  believing. 
We  read — "And  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass, 
and  put  it  upon  a  pole,  and  it  came  to  pass,  thai 
if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  mail,  when  he  heheld 
the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived.''  (Num.  xxi.  9.) 
Notice,  first  of  all,  that  it  was  the  bitten  Israelite 
who  looked;  and  secondly,  that  he  looked  in  the 
obedience  of  faith — believing  the  word  of  God. 
Just  so  is  it  with  Christ  lifted  up.  Whosoever 
takes  the  place  of  a  sinner,  acknowledging  that  he 
is  "  bitten,"  hopelessly  lost  by  sin,  if  he  look  away 
in  the  obedience  of  faith  to  Christ,  will  not  perish, 
but  have  eternal  life.  We  thus,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  passover  night,  see  that  there  is  absolutely 
nothing  w^hatever  for  the  sinner  to  do  ;  he  has 
simply  to  believe  the  record  that  God  has  given 


38         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

of  His  Son,  that  God  has  dealt  with  sin  in  the 
death  of  Christ,  and  that  therefore  He  proclaims 
life  to  every  one  that  believeth.  So  soon  then  as 
the  sinner  has  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  he  is 
born  again,  he  has  everlasting  life.  (Gal.  iii.  26.) 

This  is  the  method  of  the  new  birth.  The  gos- 
pel is  preached — the  word  of  God — which  tells  to 
a  guilty  race  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that 
He  gave  (delivered  up  to  death)  His  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  16.) 
The  Spirit  xlothes  this  message  of  God's  grace 
with  power.  It  enters  the  hearts  of  sinners ;  they 
believe,  they  are  quickened,  tliey  are  born  again, 
they  have  everlasting  life.  (John  iii.  16.) 

Dear  reader.  Have  you  been  born  again  ?  You 
surely,  with  this  testing  word  before  you,  can  have 
no  difficulty  in  answering  the  question.  If  you 
are,  your  whole  soul  will  go  out  in  thanksgivings 
to  God  for  the  gift  of  His  only  begotten  Son.  If 
you  are  not,  let  me  again  warn  you  that  it  matters 
not  what  you  are  besides — you  may  be  a  good 
son  or  daughter,  a  loving  husband  or  wife,  a  kind 
father  or  mother,  and  yet,  not  being  born  again, 
you  are  outside  the  kingdom  of  God,  hopelessly 
undone  and  lost.  Will  you  be  satisfied  in  this 
condition  ?  What  had  been  the  consequence  if 
the  bitten  Israelites  had  refused  to  look  at  the 
serpent  of  brass,  saying,  "We  may  perhaps  re- 


YE   MUST   BE   BORN   AGAIN.  39 

cover"?  They  would  have  died  in  their  anguish 
and  their  sin.  And  so  if  you  refuse  to  look  to 
Christ,  to  believe  in  Him,  there  is  no  other  remedy ; 
and,  instead  of  having  eternal  life,  you  will  for  ever 
perish.  But  if  you  bow  to  this  divine  necessity 
of  being  born  again,  acknowledging  your  true  con- 
dition before  God,  and  look  to  Christ  in  simple 
faith,  you  will  immediately  pass  from  death  unto 
life. 

"  Let  earth  and  heaven  agree, 

Let  men  with  angels  join, 
To  sing  salvation  free, 

The  work  of  grace  divine  ; 
To  praise  the  great  atoning  Lamb, 
And  all  His  wondrous  love  proclaim. 

"  Jesus  !  life-giving  sound, 

The  joy  of  earth  and  heaven  ; 
No  other  help  is  found, 
No  other  name  is  given, 
In  which  the  sons  of  men  can  boast, 
But  His  who  seeks  and  saves  tlie  lost. 

"  His  name  the  sinner  hears, 
And  is  from  guilt  set  free  ; 
^Tis  music  in  his  ears, 
'Tis  life  and  victory  : 
His  heart  overflows  with  sacred  joy, 
And  songs  of  praise  his  li^  s  employ/' 


40        FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF  SALTATION. 


CHAPTER  V. 

PEACE    WITH    GOD. 

"  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Rom.  v.  1.)  This 
is  the  conclusion  at  which  the  apostle  arrives, 
after  stating  the  gi'ounds  on  which  God  is  able  to 
meet  the  sinner  in  grace,  and  to  justify  every  one 
that  believeth  in  Jesus.  The  principle  involved 
is  so  important,  and  so  necessary  to  be  under- 
stood, that  we  propose  to  state  it  at  length,  so  that 
anxious  ones  may  see  how  carefully  God  has  laid 
the  foundation  of  peace  outside  of  themselves  alto- 
gether; that,  in  a  word,  they  may  perceive  that 
the  Rock  on  which  it  is  gTOunded  is  Christ  alone, 
and  what  He  has  done. 

1.  Justification  is  by  faith;  i.e.  on  the  prin- 
ciple of  faith  in  contrast  with  the  principle  of 
works.  Much  confusion  of  mind  would  be  spared 
if  this  were  remembered;  and  it  is  on  this  con- 
trast that  the  apostle's  whole  argument  is  based. 
Thus,  after  depicting  the  state  both  of  Gentiles 
and  Jews,  after  proving  that  both  are  convicted  as 
sinners,  he  says,  "By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall 
no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  [God*s]  sight."  (Rom. 


PEACE   WITH   GOD.  41 

iii.  20.)  Again,  ''  Therefore  we  conclude  that  a 
man  is  justified  by  faith  ivithmU  the  deeds  of  the 
laiv''  (v.  28) ;  and  then,  after  citing  the  example 
of  Abraham's  justification — "Abraham  believed 
God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteous- 
ness"— he  tells  us,  ''To  him  that  tvorketh  not,  hut 
helieveth  on  Him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his 
faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  (Eom.  iv.  3-5.) 
We  have  therefore  the  most  complete  contrast 
between  the  law  and  the  gospel.  The  law  had 
said,  "The  man  that  doeth  them  shall  live  in 
them"  (Gal.  iii.  12) ;  but  the  gospel  proclaims  that 
God  is  the  "  justifier  of  every  one  that  helieveth  in 
Jesus."  (Eom.  iii.  26.)  It  is  no  more  therefore  a 
question  of  works — of  doing  on  man's  part;  for 
God  has  shown  man's  complete  and  utter  failure 
in  every  position  in  which  he  has  been  placed. 
The  Gentile  without  law,  and  the  Jew  under  law, 
are  brought  in  as  sinners ;  and  thus  every  mouth 
is  stopped,  and  the  whole  world  is  become  guilty 
before  God.  (Eom.  iii.  19.)  From  this  very  fact, 
man  is  entirely  precluded  from  doing  anything 
either  to  recover  himself,  or  to  save  himself.  Ho 
is  already  under  condemnation,  lost,  and  hence 
works  or  doings  of  any  kind  are  utterly  without 
avail.  If  therefore  he  is  now  to  be  saved,  it  must 
be  on  the  principle  of  faith ;  "  For  by  grace  are  ye 
saved  through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves : 
it  is  the  gift  of  God."  (Eph.  ii.  8.)     He  neither 


42         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

has,  nor  can  he  obtain  by  his  utmost  efforts,  any 
righteousness  before  God;  and  accordingly  he  is 
shut  up  to  God's  righteousness,  which  is  revealed 
in  the  gospel  from  faith  to  faith.  (Rom.  i.  17.) 

It  is  of  the  first  importance  to  apprehend  this 
point ;  for  it  is  just  here  that  so  many  souls,  like 
the  Jews  of  old,  fail.  Thus,  in  the  tenth  chapter, 
we  read  that  "  they  being  ignorant  of  God's  right- 
eousness, and  going  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness,  have  not  submitted  themselves  unto 
the  righteousness  of  God.  For  Christ  is  the  end 
of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  (Eomans  x.  3,  4.)  Until  therefore  souls 
understand  that  they  cannot  "  establish  their  own 
righteousness,"  that  "  their  righteousnesses  are  as 
filthy  rags  "  before  God  flsaiah  Ixiv.  6),  they  will 
never  accept  the  truth,  that  they  can  only  be 
justified  on  the  principle  of  faith,  that  if  they  are 
saved,  it  must  be  by  God  in  His  grace  towards 
them  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  once  understood,  the 
gain  is  immense ;  for  the  eye  will  be  immediately 
taken  from  self,  and  directed  to  Him  who  is  the 
only  Saviour :  they  will  cease  from  their  own 
doings,  and  be  made  willing  to  submit,  on  the 
principle  of  faith,  to  the  righteousness  of  God. 

2.  We  may  inquire  now.  What  is  the  object 
proposed  to  faith  in  order  to  justification  ?  This 
is  very  clearly  defined  in  Romans  iv.  The  apostle, 
as  we  have  seen,  descril}es  that  Abraham  believed 


PEACE   WITH    GOD.  43 

God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness ; 
and,  furthermore,  he  details  the  circumstances  and 
character  of  his  faith,  carefully  pointing  out  that 
it  was  prior  to  circumcision,  and  that  the  law  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  promise  which  he  received 
(vv.  9-16);  and  then  he  says,  "Now  it  was  not 
written  for  his  sake  alone,  that  it  was  imputed 
to  him ;  but  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be  im- 
puted, if  ive  believe  on  Sim  that  raised  up  Jesus 
our  Lord  from  the  dead ;  who  was  delivered  for 
our  offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justifica- 
tion." (vv.  23-25.)  The  object  proposed  to  Abraham's 
faith  was  God  Himself,  in  His  promise  that  "  he 
should  be  the  heir  of  the  world"  (y.  13) ;  and  he, 
''  against  hope,  believed  in  hope,  that  he  might  be- 
come the  father  of  many  nations,  according  to  that 
which  was  spoken.  So  shall  thy  seed  be.  And 
being  not  weak  in  faith,  he  considered  not  his  own 
body  now  dead,  when  he  was  about  an  hundred 
years  old,  neither  yet  the  deadness  of  Sarah's 
womb :  he  staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God 
through  unbelief;  but  was  strong  in  faith,  giving 
glory  to  God;  and  being  fully  persuaded  that, 
what  He  had  promised.  He  was  able  also  to  per- 
form. And  therefore  it  was  imputed  to  him  for 
righteousness."  (vv.  18-22.) 

The  object  of  his  faith  was  thus  a  God  of 
promise;  but  the  object  proposed  to  our  faith  is 
a  God  of  accomplishment ;  for  righteousness  will 


44         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF    SALVATION.  ] 

be  imputed  to  us  "if  we  believe  on  Him  that  \ 
raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the  dead."  (v.  24.)  1 
God  therefore  is  presented  to  the  sinner  in  the  | 
gospel  as  One  who  has  intervened  in  grace,  J 
provided  redemption  in  Christ,  and  as  testifying  | 
that  Christ  has  been  delivered  for  our  offences, 
and  raised  again  for  our  justification ;  as  there-  i 
fore  a  God  of  salvation,  One  who  requires  now  ' 
nothing  from  the  sinner  but  faith  in  Himself —  , 
requiring  nothing  because  He  has  sent  His  only  I 
begotten  Son,  who  took  the  whole  of  our  respon-  j 
sibilities  upon  Himself,  met  in  His  death  every  ; 
claim  which  a  holy  God  had  against  us,  settled  for  ' 
ever  the  question  of  sin,  and  so  glorified  God  that .; 
He  is  now  able,  on  the  foundation  of  that  finished  ^ 
ANork  of  redemption,  righteously  to  receive  and  , 
justify  every  one  that  believeth.  God  has  thus  ■ 
in  grace,  and  out  of  the  love  of  His  own  heart,  ] 
provided  everything  for  the  sinner — the  precious  j 
blood  of  Christ  for  his  cleansing  from  guilt,  a  ; 
divine  righteousness  in  which  he  can  stand  in  \ 
His  ow^n  presence — in  fact,  everything  needed  tu  : 
bring  the  sinner  out  of  his  place  of  distance,  guilt,  ^ 
and  death,  home  unto  Himself  In  the  gospel  of  ; 
His  grace.  He  is  therefore  presented  as  a  Giver,  ! 
and  not  as  a  Eeceiver,  and  as  the  object  of  faith  ! 
in  His  testimony  concerning  what  He  has  wrought 
for  us  in  and  by  His  Son.  ! 

In  the  third  chapter  the  blood  of  Christ  is  pre-  ' 


PEACE   WITH    GOD.  45 

sented  as  the  object  of  faith :  "  Being  justified 
freely  by  His  grace  through  the  redemption  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus :  whom  God  hath  set  forth  [to 
be]  a  propitiation  through  faith  m  His  hloodr  (Eom. 
iii.  24,  25.)  The  connection  here  is  different.  Man 
— all  the  world — has  been  proved  to  be  guilty  be- 
fore God.  (v.  19.)  The  question  therefore  is  how 
to  meet  the  claims  of  God  as  a  Judge;  and  the 
answer  is  found  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  provided 
by  the  gTace  of  God,  so  that  the  most  guilty  can 
come  and  be  justified  before  Him  through  faith  in 
the  blood  of  Christ,  {vv.  24-26.)  But  in  the 
passage  just  considered  God  comes  forth,  as 
already  said,  as  a  God  of  salvation,  satisfied  ^\'ith 
the  work  of  Christ,  He  having  made  atonement 
for  sin  by  His  death,  and  thus  presents  Himself 
as  the  God  of  grace  in  redemption,  and  therefore 
as  the  object  of  the  sinner's  faith.  And  how 
blessedly  simple  it  is !  for  what  does  God  require 
from  sinners  ?  Only  that  they  should  believe  in 
Him,  that  they  should  believe  His  testimony  con- 
cerning what  has  been  accomplished  on  their  be- 
half by  the  death  of  His  Son ;  at  the  same  time 
offering  to  them,  in  confirmation  of  His  testimony, 
the  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  our  Lord 
from  the  dead.  It  is  as  if  He  said  to  us,  "  If  you 
want  a  proof  that  Christ  was  delivered  for  your 
offences,  that  He  has  expiated  them  by  His  death, 
and  that  all  my  claims  against  you  have  been 


46  FUNDAMENTAL    TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

completely  satisfied,  behold  it  in  His  resurrection. 
I  have  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  set  Him  down 
at  my  right  hand  in  the  glory,  to  convince  all  that 
He  has  finished  the  work  of  atonement,  and  that 
I  have  accepted  it/' 

3.  Eveiy  one  who  believes  in  Him  is  justified. 
"  Being  Justified  by  faith  ;"  i.e.  we  are  by  faith  ac- 
counted righteous  before  God,  righteous  in  Christ ; 
for  God  ''  made  Him  [to  be]  sin  for  us,  who  knew 
no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  Him."  (2  Cor.  v.  21.)  This  is  much 
more  than  cleansing  from  guilt,  or  pardon  of  sins, 
because  we  have  in  justification  a  positive  right- 
eousness which  fits  us  for  the  presence  of  God. 
The  blood  of  Christ,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  meri- 
torious cause  of  this,  it  being  on  our  behalf  of 
such  infinite  value,  having  so  glorified  God  in 
expiating  our  sins,  that  He  righteously — in  right- 
eousness to  His  Son — receives,  pardons,  justifies, 
and  brings  us  into  the  very  place  where  Christ 
Himself  is.  Hence,  as  the  apostle  says  elsewhere, 
*'  But  of  Him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God 
is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness''  etc. 
(1  Cor.  i.  30.)  For  so  completely  are  we  identified 
with  Christ  before  God,  that  His  place  is  our  place. 
His  acceptance  our  acceptance;  for  we  are  in  Him; 
and  accordingly  the  apostle  John  can  write,  "  As 
He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world."  (1  John  iv.  17.) 

This  will  suffice  to  show  the  complete  character 


PEACE   A^^^^.f^rt-  47 

of  our  justification;  and  it  may'aid  aoulDting  souls 
to  remember  that  it  is  God  Himself  who  justifies 
the  believer.  For  if  He  justifies  us,  if  He  is  so 
completely  satisfied  with  what  has  been  done  for 
us  as  to  clear  us  from  every  charge,  and  set  us 
down  in  Christ  before  Himself,  who  can  condemn 
us  ?  (Eom.  viii.  33,  34.)  Who  can  incriminate  us  ? 
nay,  who  can  lower  by  one  jot  or  tittle  the  perfect- 
ness  of  our  acceptance  ?  God  has  spoken ;  He  has 
declared  that  we  are  "justified  by  faith,''  and  His 
word  abideth  for  ever. 

4.  Peace  is  the  portion  of  the  justified.  "  Being 
justified  by  faith,  loe  have  ijeace  with  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  words,  "we  have 
peace,"  do  not  of  necessity  mean  that  we  enjoy  it ; 
for  there  are  doubtless  many  justified  ones  before 
God  who  know  but  little  of  this  peace.  The 
meaning  is  that  peace  belongs  to  us,  that  it  is 
made  between  our  souls  and  God,  that  every 
question  between  Him  and  us  is  so  perfectly 
settled,  that  He  has  nothing  against  us,  that  peace 
therefore  is  our  portion. 

But  if  it  is  made,  and  it  belongs  to  us,  what 
hinders  so  many  souls  from  entering  into  its  pos- 
session? Simply  unbelief;  they  look  within  to 
their  own  state,  instead  of  without  to  what  God 
has  done  for  them.  We  can  only  enjoy  this  peace 
as  knowing  it  to  be  ours ;  and  we  can  only  know 
it  to  be  ours  by  believing  God's  word.     But  if  wq 


48         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

believe,  and  are  justified,  we  have  peace,  whatever 
our  feelings  or  experience ;  and  hence  we  should 
rest  in  the  enjoyment  of  it  in  simple  confidence 
in  the  word  of  God.  It  is  of  the  first  importance 
to  know  that  it  is  ours ;  for  souls  are  tossed  hither 
and  thither  by  doubts  and  fears,  because  they 
hesitate  to  believe  in  the  fulness  of  the  grace  of 
God.  They  are  therefore  weak  and  helpless,  the 
easy  prey  of  the  tempter;  whereas  if  they  but 
quietly  rested  on  this  sure  word  of  God  that  they 
''have  peace,"  that  He  has  made  it  through  tlie 
work  of  Christ,  and  made  it  for  them,  they  would 
be  able  to  sing  amid  the  storm,  to  present  a 
fearless  front  in  the  face  of  all  difficulties,  to  be 
undisturbed  by  the  most  insidious  suggestions  of 
Satan,  knowing  that  as  the  peace  rests  upon  the 
cross  of  Christ,  it  is  both  sure  and  steadfast,  in- 
alienable and  immutable,  a  foundation  on  which 
they  might  "  build  and  rest  secure  "  for  ever.  For 
the  peace  of  the  justified  is  the  result  of  accom- 
plished  redemption,  founded  on  the  cross,  and 
proved  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 

Tt  may  encourage  some  to  a  stronger  confidence 
if  we  remind  them  that  God  is  just,  as  well  as  the 
justifier  of  every  one  that  believes  in  Jesus  (Rom. 
iii.  26) ;  i.  e,  that  He  is  just  to  the  claims  which 
the  work  of  Christ,  or  rather  Christ  in  His  work, 
has  established  upon  Him.  It  is  therefore  what 
Christ  has  gained  for  us;  and  hence  He  is  our 


PEACE  WITH   GOD.  49 

peace.  (Eph.  ii.  14.)  It  should  indeed  be  never 
forgotten  that  this  peace  is  not  apart  from,  but  in 
and  through  Christ ;  or,  consequently,  that  it  is  a 
righteous  peace,  a  peace  which  God  righteously 
bestows  upon  and  secures  to  us  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

"  Blessed  be  God,  our  God  ! 
Who  gave  for  us  His  well-beloved  Son, 
The  gift  of  gifts,  all  other  gifts  in  one. 

Blessed  be  God,  our  God  ! 

"  He  spared  not  His  Son  ! 
Tis  this  that  silences  each  rising  fear, 
'Tis  this  that  bids  the  hard  thought  disa]>i)oar — 

He  spared  not  His  Son  ! 

*'  "Who  shall  condemn  us  now  ? 
Since  Christ  has  died,  and  risen,  and  gone  above, 
For  us  to  plead  at  the  right  hand  of  Love, 

Who  shall  condemn  us  now  ? 

"  'Tis  God  that  justifies  I 
AVho  shall  recall  the  pardon  or  tlie  grace, 
Or  who  the  broken  chain  of  guilt  re]^hK'e  ? 

Tis  God  that  justifies  ! 

"  The  victory  is  ours  ! 
For  us  in  miglit  came  forth  the  Mighty  One, 
For  us  He  fought  the  fight,  the  triumph  wrai  : 

The  victorv  is  ours  ! '' 


50         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

*'WHAT  MUST  I  BO   TO  BE  SAVEB?'' 

Having  pointed  out  God's  provision  for  the  need 
of  souls,  we  may  now  consider  the  subject  from 
man's  point  of  view.  No  sooner  indeed  is  he  con- 
victed of  sin  than  the  question  springs  up  within 
his  heart  in  one  form  or  another,  "  What  must  T 
doV  It  was  so  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when 
the  Jews  were  pricked  in  their  heart  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  under  the  preaching  of  Peter. 
**Men  and  brethren,"  they  said,  ''what  shall  we 
do  ? "  The  jailor  asked  Paul  and  Silas,  "  What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  (Acts  xvi.  30.)  Twice 
our  Lord  Himself  was  asked,  "What  shall  I  do 
that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life?"  (Mark  x.  17; 
and  Luke  x.  25.)  The  question  addressed  to  our 
Lord  by  Paul,  or  rather  Saul — "  Lord,  what  wilt 
thou  have  me  to  do  ? "  (Acts.  ix.  6) — is  different, 
and  need  not  therefore  be  considered. 

The  peculiarity  of  these  questions  is  that  the 
"  I  "  occupies  a  prominent  place,  or  rather  perhaps 
the  thought  of  doing.  It  is,  What  must  I  do'^ 
a  sure  sign  that  the  questioners  have  not  yet 
learnt  what  God  is,  or  their  true  place  before  Him. 


"WHAT   MUST   T    DO    TO    BE   SAVED?"  51 

It  is  on  this  very  account  the  more  important  to 
answer  the  question,  because  it  marks  in  many 
souls  a  distinct  stage  of  their  history.  There  are 
very  few  indeed  who  have  not  asked  the  same 
question  at  some  period  of  their  soul -anxiety. 
We  propose  therefore  to  examine  some  of  the 
examples  which  we  have  cited,  that  we  may 
ascertain  the  answer  given  to  it  in  the  word  of 
God. 

1.  We  take  first  the  case  of  the  young  man. 
(Mark  x.  17 ;  Matt.  xix.  16  ;  Luke  xviii.  18.)  We 
read  that  when  Jesus  "was  gone  forth  into  the 
way,  there  came  one  running,  and  kneeled  to  Him, 
and  asked  Him,  Good  Master,  what  shall  I  do  that 
I  may  inherit  eternal  life  ?  And  Jesus  said  unto 
him,  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  [there  is]  none 
good  but  one,  [that  is,]  God.  Thou  knowest  the 
commandments.  Do  not  commit  adultery,  Do  not 
kill,  Do  not  steal,  Do  not  bear  false  witness, 
Defraud  not,  Honour  thy  father  and  mother.  And 
he  answered  and  said  unto  Him,  Master,  all  these 
things  have  I  observed  from  my  youth."  (Matthew 
tells  us  that  the  young  man  added,  "  What  lack  I 
yet?")  "Then  Jesus  beholding  him  loved  him, 
and  said  unto  him,  One  thing  thou  lackest:  go 
thy  way,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and  give  to 
the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven : 
and  come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me.  And 
he  ivas  sad  at  that  saying,  and  ivent  away  giHeved : 


52         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

for  he  had  gre-at  j^osscssions''  (Mark  x.  17-22.) 
This  case  is  the  more  remarkable  and  instructive 
from  the  fact  that  this  young  man  was  so  blame- 
less and  unexceptionable  in  conduct  and  character. 
He  was  both  sincere  and  upright,  one  who  could 
say,  what  Paul  said  of  himself,  that  touching  the 
righteousness  which  was  in  the  law,  he  was 
blameless  (Phil.  iii.  6) ;  for  he  replied  to  our 
Lord's  enumeration  of  the  commandments,  "  All 
these  have  I  observed  from  my  youth,"  and  added, 
^^  What  lack  I  yet  ?"  (See  Matt.  xix.  20.) 

Is  not  this  a  picture  of  many  in  our  own  day, 
young  people  and  others,  whose  whole  lives, 
morally,  as  we  speak,  in  their  outward  expression 
leave  nothing  to  be  desired  ?  Gentle,  amiable,  and 
losing;  observant,  and  tenderly  observant  of  their 
duties  as  sons  or  daughters,  upright  and  honour- 
able in  all  the  relationships  of  life,  and  diligent 
also  in  attendance  upon  what  are  termed  religious 
duties,  they  win  the  approbation  of  their  whole 
circle,  both  of  relatives  and  friends.  And  what- 
lack  they  yet  ?  The  Lord's  answer  to  this  young 
man  is  the  answer  to  our  question.  What  then 
is  its  import  ?  First,  that  man  can  bring  nothmg 
to  God,  and  therefore  can  DO  nothing  to  inherit 
sternal  life.  Like  Paul,  he  must  learn  that  his 
righteousness  is  as  filthy  rags,  to  count  the  things 
which  were  a  gain  to  him  as  a  natural  man  loss 
for  Christ,  that  nothing  that  he  is,  or  has  done, 


''WHAT    MUST    I    DO    TO    BE    SAVED?"  53 

is  of  any  merit  before  God;  nay,  that  his  best 
things  must  be  regarded  as  worthless  and  unclean. 
Secondly,  that  he  must  he  willing  to  suffer  the  loss  of 
all  thi7igs — self]  his  0W7i  right eoiisness,  and  the  ivorld 
— for  the  excelleneg  of  the  knovjledge  of  Christ  Jesus. 
Hence  our  Lord  told  the  young  man  to  sell  all 
that  he  had,  and  give  to  the  poor;  and  then  to 
*'  come,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me." 

Such  is  the  first  answer  to  the  question,  "  What 
must  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  ? "  You  must 
take  the  place  of  having  nothing,  and  being 
nothing — self,  the  world,  yea,  and  every  thing 
being  nothing — at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  And  let 
not  the  solemn  warning  of  this  whole  incident 
be  forgotten,  that  moral  attainments,  and  the 
advantages  of  position,  etc.,  are  to  be  classed 
among  the  gi'eatest  hindrances  to  coming  to 
Christ,  because  they  so  often  cover  up  and 
conceal  the  soul's  real  condition  before  God. 

2.  The  case  of  the  lawyer.  (Luke  x.)  This  is 
in  many  respects  totally  different  from  that  just 
considered ;  for  the  lawyer  comes  tempting  Christ, 
and  thus  occupying  a  much  lower  moral  place. 
Accordingly  our  Lord  connects  with  it  much 
deeper  lessons  of  man's  true  condition.  "A 
certain  lawyer  stood  up,  and  tempted  him,  saying, 
Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life? 
He  said  unto  him,  What  is  written  in  the  law  ? 
How  readest  thou  ?    And  he  answering  said.  Thou 


54         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength, 
and  with  all  thy  mind  ;  and  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself.  And  He  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast 
answered  right :  this  do,  and  thou  shalt  live. 
But  he,  willing  to  justify  himself,  said  unto 
Jesus,  And  who  is  my  neighbour?"  etc.  Then 
follows  the  parable  of  the  "good  Samaritan." 
(Luke  X.  25-37.)  Here  the  Lord  takes  the 
lawyer,  w^ho  was  tempting  Him,  on  his  own 
ground ;  viz  that  of  the  law ;  and  He  thus 
accepts  his  statement  of  the  requirements  of 
the  law,  adding  the  words  connected  with  its 
promulgation,  "This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live" 
("  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them."  Lev. 
xviii  5).  But  he  used  the  law,  according  to  its 
divine  intention,  as  a  standard  of  God's  require- 
ments from  men  in  the  flesh,  and  so  brought  in 
the  knowledge  of  sin.  (Eom.  iii.  20.)  For  His 
words,  "  Thou  hast  answered  right :  this  do,  and 
thou  shalt  live"  (v.  28),  convicted  the  tempting 
lawyer  of  sin ;  for  we  read,  "  He,  willing  to  justify 
himself,  said  unto  Jesus,  And  who  is  my  neigh- 
bour?" The  Lord  had  searched  him  with  that 
word  which  "  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper 
than  any  two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the 
dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the 
joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart "  (Heb.  iv.  12) ; 


"WHAT   MUST   I   DO   TO   BE   SAVED?"  55 

but  instead  of  bowing  to  it  lie  desired  to  escape 
from  its  application,  if  not  to  insinuate  the 
impossible  character  of  the  divine  requirements. 
He  sought  to  justify  himself,  as  if  a  man  could  be 
just  with  God,  by  alleging  that,  since  he  could  not 
carry  out  the  divine  command,  he  could  not  be 
expected  to  do  any  thing.  But  the  Lord  had 
brought  into  his  mind  the  knowledge  of  sin,  and 
then,  to  teach  also  the  lesson  as  to  who  was  his 
neighbour,  described  the  man  who  fell  among 
thieves,  and  how  he  was  succoured  by  a  Samaritan. 
What  then  are  the  special  lessons  taught  by 
this  answer  to  the  question,  What  must  I  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life  ?  It  is  not  only  that  man  can 
do  nothing,  hut  that  he  is  also  convicted  as  a  sinner 
before  God ;  and  hence  we  have  man's  condition 
as  a  sinner  pictured  out  in  the  parable.  It  is  thus 
described :  "  A  certain  man  went  down  from  Jeru- 
salem to  Jericho,  and  fell  among  thieves,  which 
stripped  him  of  his  raiment,  and  wounded  [him], 
and  departed,  leaving  [him]  half  dead."  {v.  30.) 
The  very  place  in  which  the  traveller  is  assailed  is 
significant.  He  was  on  his  way  from  Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  God,  to  Jericho,  the  city  of  curse 
(Joshua  vi.  26) — a  striking  picture  of  the  sinner's 
journey  to  destruction.  He  falls  among  thieves, 
who  strip,  wound,  and  depart,  leaving  him  half 
dead ;  and  so  he  lies  helpless  and  hopeless,  at  the 
point  of  death. 


56         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Who  does  not  see  in  this  sketch  man's  con- 
dition as  a  sinner  ?  And  what  folly  it  were  for 
one  in  that  condition  to  ask,  What  shall  /  do 
to  inherit  eternal  life  ?  The  question  rather  is, 
What  can  he  done  to  save  him  ?  And  this  is 
what  our  Lord  would  teach  the  lawyer — the  folly 
of  a  sinner  asking  what  he  can  do,  and  that  if  he 
is  saved,  it  must  be  by  the  grace  and  by  the  doing 
of  another.  This  latter  truth  is  brought  out  in  the 
Samaritan.  But  first  a  priest  and  a  Levite  pass 
by,  and  leave  the  wretched  man  to  his  fate,  show- 
ing the  helplessness  of  law  to  save  the  soul.  Then 
the  Samaritan  comes  upon  the  scene,  "  And  when 
he  saw  him,  he  had  compassion  [on  him],  and 
went  to  [him],  and  bound  up  his  wounds,  pouring 
in  oil  and  wine,  and  set  him  on  his  own  beast, 
and  brought  him  to  an  inn,  and  took  care  of  him. 
And  on  the  morrow  when  he  departed,  he  took 
out  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  the  host,  and  said 
unto  him,  Take  care  of  him ;  and  whatsoever  thou 
spendest  more,  when  I  come  again,  I  will  repay 
thee."  (w.  33-35.)  Who  then  is  the  Samaritan  ? 
Surely  none  but  Christ — Christ,  in  the  compassion 
of  His  love,  seeking  and  saving  the  lost.  For  He 
is  moved  with  pity  by  the  wretchedness  of  the 
poor,  helpless  man,  binds  up  his  wounds,  carries 
him  to  a  place  of  safety,  cares,  undertakes,  and 
provides  for  him  until  He  returns.  We  learn 
therefore  from  the  whole  scene  (1)  that  man  is  a 


"WHAT    MUST    I    DO    TO    BE    SAVED?'*  57 

sinner;  (2)  that  as  a  sinner  he  is  both  helpless 
and  lost ;  (3)  that  therefore  he  can  do  nothing ; 
and  (4)  that  if  he  is  to  be  saved,  it  can  only  be 
through  Christ,  and  what  He  has  done. 

3.  This  will  prepare  us  for  the  case  of  the 
jailor.  (Acts  xvi.)  We  take  this  rather  than  that 
of  the  Jews  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  because  the 
question  is  put  by  him  in  its  most  distinct  form. 
Paul  and  Silas,  at  the  instigation  of  an  excited 
crowd,  had  been  put  into  prison  at  Philippi ;  and 
at  midnight,  we  read,  the  apostles  prayed,  and 
sang  praises  to  God :  and  "  suddenly  there  was  a 
great  earthquake,  so  that  the  foundations  of  the 
prison  were  shaken :  and  immediately  all  the  doors 
were  opened,  and  every  one's  bands  were  loosed." 
(Acts  xvi.  25-26.)  The  keeper  of  the  prison  was 
terrified,  and  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment, 
thinking  that  the  prisoners  had  escaped,  would 
have  killed  himself,  but  for  the  interposition  of 
Paul.  "  Then  he  called  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in, 
and  came  trembling,  and  fell  down  before  Paul 
and  Silas,  and  brought  them  out,  and  said.  Sirs, 
what  must  I  do  to  he  saved  ?  And  they  said.  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved, 
and  thy  house."  (vv.  27-31.) 

Why  do  Paul  and  Silas  treat  him  otherwise 
than  our  Lord  dealt  with  the  two  cases  already 
considered?  The  answer  in  each  case  meets  the 
moral  condition  of  the  questioner.     But  Paul  and 


58         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Silas  are  able  to  direct  the  jailcrr  instantly  to  Christy 
becaicse  he  came  m  the  moral  condition  set  forth  by 
the  dying  man  in  the  imrable.  And  hence  if  any 
of  my  readers  are  putting  this  same  question,  they 
cannot  be  answered  until  they  take  the  same 
place.  This  truth  has  already  been  insisted  on  in 
the  second  chapter;  but  we  again  emphasize  it 
here.  For  until  the  lesson  is  learnt  the  way  of 
salvation  cannot  be  known.  Are  you  then,  beloved 
readers,  recognizing,  not  only  that  you  can  bring 
nothing  to  God,  that  even  the  things  that  might 
be  a  gain  to  you  amongst  men  are  worthless 
before  Him,  but  also  that  you  are  sinners,  and  as 
such  lost  and  undone ;  that  therefore  you  can  do 
nothing  towards  yoiu^  salvation,  and  that  if  you 
are  saved,  it  must  be  by  the  work  and  grace  of 
another  ?  If  you  are,  we  can  then  unfold  to  you 
the  blessed  truth,  contained  in  the  words,  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 
(v.  31.) 

To  be  saved  therefore,  to  have  eternal  life,  you 
must  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  thus 
a  question  not  of  doing,  but  of  believing.  For  it  is 
now,  not  what  the  sinner  can  do,  but  what  Christ 
has  done,  for  "He  took  what  I  had  earned;  I  get 
the  fruit  of  what  He  has  done."  Therefore  it 
is,  and  ever  must  be,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  There  is  no 
other  way;   and  hence  salvation  is  always  con- 


"WHAT    MUST    I    DO    TO    BE    SAVED?"  59 

iiected  with  faith.  Take  a  few  instances :  "  Thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee;  go  in  peace"  (Luke  vii. 
50) ;  "  Arise,  go  thy  way :  thy  faith  hath  made 
thee  whole"  (Luke  xvii.  19);  "He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life"  (John  iii.  36) ; 
*'  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  Him 
that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not 
come  into  condemnation  (judgment) ;  but  is 
passed  from  death  unto  life"  (John  v.  24) ;  "Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you.  He  that  believeth  on  me 
hath  everlasting  life"  (John  vi.  47);  "To  Him 
give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  His 
name  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sins"  (Acts  x.  43);  "  Being  justified 
by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Eom.  v.  1,  etc.  etc.) 

Do  you  then,  beloved  reader,  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  We  have  pointed  out  the  place  the 
sinner  must  first  take ;  that  he  must  accept  God's 
testimony  concerning  himself — that  he  is  both 
helpless,  guilty,  and  lost.  If  you  accept  God's 
word  as  to  yourself  and  your  condition,  we  then 
point  you  to  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  w^orld ;  for  He  who  declares  to  us 
what  we  are  by  nature  and  practice  in  His  sight, 
has  provided  redemption  for  us  in  Christ :  He  "  so 
loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  16.) 


60  FUJSDAMENTAL    TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

Look  away  therefore  from  yourself  to  Christ, 
accept  God's  testimony  also  conceriiiug  Him, 
and  even  while  you  look  you  shall  pass  from 
death  unto  life.  "The  word  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy 
mouth,  and  in  thy  heart :  that  is,  the  word  of  faith, 
which  we  preach ;  that  if  tliou  shalt  confess  with 
thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in 
thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  Him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  For  with  the  heart 
man  believeth  unto  righteousness;  and  with  the 
mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  (Eom. 
X.  8-10.) 

"  Tis  finished  !  the  creature  owed 
A  debt  he  ne'er  could  pay  to  God  ; 

Our  sins  had  moved  the  wrath  of  heaven  : 
That  debt  is  paid,  those  sins  forgiven. 
The  Son  of  God  hath  sufter^l  in  our  stead, 
And  we  are  free  ;  'tis  finished. 

'*  'Tis  finishkl !  the  mighty  Son 
O'er  death  and  hell  the  victory  won  : 
He  died.  He  lives  for  our  salvation, 
And  we  may  say  with  exultation, — 
'  For  me  my  Saviour's  precious  blood  was  shed, 
And  come  what  will,  'tis  finished.' " 


DIFFICULTIES.  61 


CHAPTER    VTI. 

DIFFICULTIES* 

No  sooner  is  the  soul  awakened,  convinced  of  sin, 
and  directed  to  Christ,  than  difficulties  will  often 
appear  on  every  side,  threatening  deprivation  for 
ever  of  the  blessing  now  so  earnestly  desired. 
Magnified  by  the  unbelief  which  is  native  to  our 
hearts,  and  pressed  continually  upon  the  soul  by 
the  activity  of  Satan,  they  seem  insuperable ;  and 
it  may  therefore  be  helpful,  if  the  most  prevalent 
forms  which  they  assume  are  indicated  and  ex- 
plained. At  the  same  time  it  should  never  be 
forgotten  that  the  only  effectual  solver  of  difficul- 
ties is  the  Lord  Himself;  and  that  they  will  soon 
cease  to  harass  the  mind,  if  carried  and  spread 
out  in  simple  faith  before  the  throne  of  grace. 

1.  "  My  sins  have  teen  too  many  and  too  grievous!' 
How  often  are  words  like  these  uttered  by  the  self- 
judged  penitent  when  he  is  told  of  the  freeness  of 
God's  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Yes,"  he  will  say, 
"  Christ  is  able  to  save,  and  God  no  doubt  waits  to 
be  gracious.  But  I  am  very  guilty.  I  have  sinned 
against  light  and  knowledge;   others  may  come 

*  A  small  portion  of  this  chapter  has  appeared  elsewhere. 


62  FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

and  be  saved ;  but  for  me  there  is  no  hope."  Two 
or  three  remarks  will  show  the  real  nature  of  this 
feeling.  In  the  first  place,  it  really  expresses  a 
doubt  concerning  the  efficacy  of  the  precious  blood 
of  Clirist;  for  if  it  cannot  cleanse  you,  it  cannot 
cleanse  from  all  sin.  Moreover,  it  distrusts  the 
sincerity  of  God  in  the  invitations  which  He  sends 
to  sinners  tln^ough  the  gospel  of  His  grace.  For 
He  says,  "Whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  shall 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  "  (John  iii.  16) ; 
"Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  w^ater  of  life 
freely  "  (Eev.  xxii.  17) ;  and  if  you  say  that  you 
are  not  included  in  these  "  whosoevers,"  what  is  it 
but  to  doubt  the  truth  of  God  ?  Again,  our  Lord 
Himself  says,  "  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance."  (Matt.  ix.  13.)  This 
is  not  some,  but  all  sinners.  Hence,  to  be  a  sinner, 
is  to  have  a  title  to  come  to  Christ ;  and  thus  the 
more  sure  you  are  of  your  sinfulness,  the  more 
certain  you  ought  to  be  that  there  is  nothing  in 
your  case  to  shut  you  out  from  the  mercy  of  God. 
It  is  w^orthy  of  question  whether  the  root  of 
such  a  feeling  is  not  self-righteousness,  for  it  really 
means  that  you  are  too  unworthy.  As  another  has 
said,  "  If  when  God  speaks  I  refuse  to  believe  on 
the  ground  of  something  in  myself,  I  make  Him 
a  liar.  (1  John  v.  10.)  When  God  declares  His 
love,  and  I  refuse  to  believe  because  I  do  not 
deem  myself  a  sufficiently  worthy  object,  I  .  .  .  . 


DIFFICULTIES.  63 

exhibit  the  inherent  pride  of  my  heart.  .  .  .  God's 
love  flows  forth  spontaneously.  It  is  not  drawn 
forth  by  my  deserts,  but  by  my  misery.  Nor  is  it 
a  question  as  to  the  place  which  I  deserve,  but 
which  Christ  deserves.  Christ  took  the  sinner's 
place  on  the  cross,  that  the  sinner  might  take  His 
place  in  the  glory.  Christ  got  what  the  sinner 
deserved,  that  the  sinner  might  get  what  Christ 
deserves.    Thus  self  is  totally  set  aside." 

Besides,  it  may  be  added,  our  Lord  has  met  by 
anticipation  your  objection,  by  receiving  while  on 
earth  some  of  the  vilest  and  most  degraded.  The 
woman  who  was  "a  sinner"  (Luke  vii.  37-39), 
and  the  thief  on  the  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  40-43) 
are  everlasting  monuments  of  His  willingness  to 
receive  the  guiltiest.  Meet  therefore  all  such 
thoughts  by  the  plain  examples  and  statements 
of  God's  word;  and  never  harbour,  even  for  a 
moment,  any  suggestion  which  tends  to  obscure 
the  Saviour's  willingness  to  receive,  or  His  ability 
to  save,  any  and  all  who  come  in  penitence  to  His 
feet. 

2.  "/  do  not  feel  my  sins  enough''  This  is 
quite  true;  for  it  is  a  complaint  that  even  be- 
lievers have  to  make,  and  will  make  to  the  end  of 
their  days  upon  earth.  It  is  sure  therefore  to  be 
the  case  with  every  anxious  one;  and  it  is  on 
account  of  his  sinfulness  that  he  does  not  feel 
more  deeply.     But  this  only  argues  his  greater 


K^^  ow  raa 


64         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

and  more  urgent  need  of  Christ.  For  his  want  of 
feeling  is  but  the  evidence  of  his  alienation  from 
God,  and  consequently  of  his  need  of  reconcilia- 
tion through  the  blood  of  Christ.  It  cannot  then 
be,  that  to  feel  deeply  is  a  qualification  for  coming 
to  Christ,  for  that  would  mean  that  we  must  first 
cleanse  ourselves  from  some  part  of  our  sinfulness. 
No;  the  gospel  makes  no  conditions  with  men 
about  feelings;  it  demands  no  preparation  of 
heart,  but  proclaims  a  present  salvation  to  every 
one  that  belie veth. 

"  But  must  I  not  first  repent  ?  "  Let  me  then 
ask,  What  is  meant  by  repentance  ?  It  is  simply 
taking  the  place  of  seK-judgment,  the  place  of  a 
sinner  before  God,  taking  God's  view  about  my 
sins.  The  confusion  arises  from  the  misconception 
that  it  signifies  "the  feeling  sorry  for,  and  the 
determination  to  forsake,  sin;"  and  hence  many 
probe  themselves  to  discover  whether  they  are  in 
this  state  of  mind.  But  the  only  thing  you  have 
to  consider  is,  Do  I  know  that  I  am  a  sinner? 
and,  Do  I  accept  God's  judgment  of  myself  as  a 
sinner?  If  you  do,  there  is  nothing  on  God's 
part  between  you  and  the  sinner's  Saviour.  For 
the  only  message  of  the  gospel  is,  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  tliou  shalt  be  saved,  and 
thy  house.  (Acts  xvi.  31.) 

3.  "7  cannot  he  sicre  that  Christ  died  for  me; 
that  I  am  personally  included  An  the  invitations  of. 


DIFFICULTIES.  65 

the  gospeiy  And  why  not  ?  For  when  God  speaks 
in  His  word  so  repeatedly,  and  says,  "  Whosoever 
belie veth"  shall  be  saved  (John  iii.  15,  16,  36; 
Acts  X.  43,  etc.),  is  it  not  as  evident  that  you  are 
included  as  if  your  name  w^ere  written  there  ?  As 
an  evangelist  recently  put  it,  if  you  saw  written 
over  a  gate,  Whosoever  ivill  may  enter,  you  would 
understand  at  once  that  you  had  a  title  to  entrance  ; 
and  you  would  regard  it  as  downright  folly  if  a 
companion  were  to  argue  wdth  you  on  the  sub- 
ject, contending  that  the  notice  was  not  distinct. 
When  then  we  read  in  the  Scriptures,  "  Whoso- 
ever will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely" 
(Eev.  xxii.  17),  it  is  nothing  but  rank  unbelief  to 
express  the  doubt  whether  we  are  included  in  the 
invitation.  In  a  recently  published  memoir  there 
is  an  example  of  the  kind.  The  subject  of  it, 
when  first  awakened,  }i?A  this  difficulty ;  and, 
though  Scripture  after  Scripture  was  pressed  upon 
him,  remained  immovable.  But  going  home,  he 
spent  a  great  part  of  the  night  alone  with  God. 
At  last  he  took  a  piece  of  paper,  and  wrote,  "  As  I 
live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked"  (Ezekiel  xxxiii.  11);  then 
he  added,  "I  am  one  of  the  wicked;"  and  further, 
"Therefore  the  Lord  God  has  no  pleasure  in  my 
death,"  and  was  thus  led  to  believe  that  he  was 
within  the  range  of  the  divine  mercy. 

Every  sinner  is  entitled  to  adopt  the  same  plan. 

E 


66  FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

Let  any  one  therefore  who  is  troubled  with  the 
doubt  named  take,  for  example,  John  iii.  16,  and 
write  it  out  with  self-application,  and  he  will  find 
that  it  is  as  clear  as  noonday  that  God  includes 
him  in  the  term  "  whosoever."  There  is  no  limit 
indeed  to  God's  grace  in  the  gospel,  except  in  the 
unbelief  of  sinful  hearts. 

4.  "It  may  he  that  I  am  not  one  of  the  electa 
Now  this  is  the  most  useless  of  all  doubts,  except 
indeed  for  the  purposes  of  Satan.  For  secret 
things  belong  unto  God,  and  no  amount  of  specu- 
lation or  reasoning  can  discover  them.  And  let 
it  be  remembered  that  the  sinner  has  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  God's  purposes.  Election 
has  to  do  with  saints,  and  saints  alone.  The 
difficulty,  if  sincerely  felt,  should  therefore  be 
met  by  the  simple  question.  Am  I  a  sinner? 
For  if  that  can  be  plainly  answered,  it  has 
already  been  abundantly  shown  that  the  invi- 
tations of  the  gospel  are  addressed  to  you,  and 
that  to  be  a  sinner  is  the  only  qualification  for 
coming  to  Christ. 

5.  "/  cannot  believer  Let  us  examine  this 
difficulty.  What  then  is  it  that  you  cannot 
believe  ?  Cannot  you  believe  that  you  are  a 
sinner?  God  testifies  this  to  you  in  His  word; 
and  if  you  want  any  confirmation  of  His  truth, 
the  experience  of  a  single  day  will  surely  be 
sufficient.     No ;  you  do  not  doubt  that  you  are  a 


DIFFICULTIES.  67 

sinner.  Can  you  not  then  believe  God's  testi- 
mony concerning  His  Son  ?  What  is  that  testi- 
mony ?  It  is  that  "  He  was  delivered  for  onr 
offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justifi- 
cation (Rom.  iv.  25) ;  that  "He  hath  once  suffered 
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might 
bring  us  to  God"  (1  Peter  iii.  18);  that  God 
"  made  Him  [to  be]  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin, 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  Him."  Do  you  believe  this  ?  You  will  say, 
"  Of  course  I  do."  Then  see  what  this  involves. 
You  believe  on  the  one  hand  that  you  are  a 
sinner,  and  on  the  other  that  Christ  has  died  for 
sinners;  and  yet  you  say  "you  cannot  believe." 
Let  me  then  put  another  question.  Do  you 
believe  that  God  is  satisfied  with  and  has 
accepted  that  which  Christ  has  done  for  sinners 
by  His  death?  Before  you  attempt  to  answer 
this  question,  remember  two  things ;  first,  that 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  His  glorification 
at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  is  the 
proof  that  God  is  satisfied— that  He  has  abun- 
dantly accepted  the  atonement  made  on  the 
cross ;  and  secondly,  that  the  proclamation  of 
the  gospel  is  a  proof  also  of  it,  for  the  gospel  is 
a  consequence  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  and 
its  acceptance  by  God.  It  is  on  the  foundation 
of  the  cross  that  the  message  is  sent  forth,  "  Be  ye 
reconciled  to  God."  (2  Cor.  v.  20.)     Do  you  then 


68         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

believe  that  God  is  satisfied  ?  You  cannot  doubt 
it.  What  remains?  That  you  also  should  he 
satisfied.     This  and  nothing  more. 

"  Cannot  believe,"  therefore,  often  means  unwill- 
ingness to  believe,  the  refusal  to  bow  before  God's 
judgment  upon  yourself  as  a  sinner ;  for  when 
you  have  truly  taken  the  place  of  a  sinner,  you 
must  of  necessity  welcome  the  offers  of  salvation 
as  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  Suppose  now  a  family 
in  a  state  of  starvation  at  the  point  of  death,  and 
provision  is  carried  to  their  doors,  and  freely  offered 
to  them,  what  would  you  think  if  they  were  to 
reply,  "We  cannot  believe  it  is  for  us"  ?  Of  a 
like  character  is  the  objection  of  the  sinner  under 
condemnation  to  the  invitations  of  the  gospel,  "  I 
cannot  believe."  For  remember  it  is  God  who 
speaks,  and  is  it  possible  for  unbelief  to  go  so  far 
as  to  doubt  whether  He  is  worthy  of  credit  ?  If  a 
friend  were  to  come  to  you  with  some  annoifhce- 
ment,  and  you  were  to  reply,  "  I  cannot  believe 
you,"  he  would  regard  it,  if  spoken  in  seriousness, 
as  an  insult.  Much  more,  then,  should  you  hesitate 
to  doubt  the  truth  and  veracity  of  God. 

6.  "/  cannot  feel  that  I  am  saved!'  This  is 
often  said  by  those  who  think  and  avow^  that  they 
believe  in  Christ,  but  who  yet  have  no  peace. 
How  then  is  the  knowledge  of  salvation  to  be 
obtained  ?  Many  expect  some  sudden  accession  of 
joy,  or  some  inward  experience  to  certify  them  of 


DIFFICULTIES.  69 

it.  A  young  believer  once  came  to  the  writer,  and 
said,  "  I  know  I  am  saved  now,  because  I  feel  so 
happy."  But  when  he  replied,  ''  Suppose  you  feel 
unhappy  to-morrow,  will  you  come  and  say,  M 
know  I  am  not  saved  now,  because  I  feel  so  miser- 
able*?" she  at  once  saw  that  she  was  building 
on  a  wrong  foundation.  How  then  can  it  be 
known  ?  By  faith — faith  in  the  word  of  God. 
For  when  God  testifies  that  "  whosoever  believeth 
in  Christ  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life  "  (John  iii.  16),  I  am  entitled,  if  I  believe,  to 
say  that  I  am  saved,  resting  my  confidence  on  this 
word ;  and  peace  comes  as  the  result  of  my  belief 
of  God's  testimony. 

Such  is  the  divine  order.  First,  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  secondly,  knowledge  of  salva- 
tion, or  assurance,  as  it  is  sometimes  termed,  from 
belief  in  the  word  of  God;  and  lastly,  peace  as 
the  consequence  of  knowing  that  I  am  saved. 
Take  a  simple  illustration.  If  I  owe  a  debt  of 
one  hundred  pounds,  and  have  not  wherewith  to 
meet  it,  I  shall  be  under  constant  concern  and 
anxiety.  If  however  a  friend  comes  and  says, 
"  Be  under  no  concern  for  the  debt.  I  have  dis- 
charged it,"  my  anxiety  will  instantly  cease,  if  I 
believe  his  word,  not  otherwise.  So  is  it  with  our 
knowledge  of  salvation.  If  I  believe  in  Christ 
Jesus,  I  shall  know  that  all  God's  claims  against 
me  have  been  satisfied,  and  consequently  I  shall. 


70         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

have  peace,  if  I  believe  His  word,  and  in  no  other 
way.  It  is  most  important  to  apprehend  this 
point ;  for  many,  making  "  assurance  "  to  depend 
on  feeling,  are  continually  in  a  state  of  disquiet 
and  unrest.  But  when  we  see  that  the  foundation 
of  our  confidence  lies  in  the  immutable  truth  of 
God,  we  shall  never  doubt  our  salvation,  whatever 
the  chequered  character  of  our  inward  experi- 
ences. The  fact  indeed  is  too  often  lost  sight  of 
(as  pointed  out  in  another  chapter),  that  the 
ground  of  our  peace  is  entirely  outside  of  our- 
selves, in  the  work  of  Christ  for  us ;  and  hence 
the  eye  is  turned  inward,  instead  of  outward  to 
His  cross.  His  precious  blood.  ''Being  justified 
by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Eom.  v.  1.) 

It  will  be  observed  that  we  have  spoken  only 
of  the  ground  of  assurance.  Having  peace,  there 
will  be,  indeed  should  be,  happy  experiences ;  for 
God  sends  His  Spirit  to  dwell  in  the  hearts  of 
saved  ones,  and  He  bears  witness  with  their  spirits 
that  they  are  the  children  of  God.  But  happy 
experiences  must  follow  upon,  and  cannot  precede, 
the  knowledge  that  we  are  saved. 

7.  "  BlaqjheniTj  against  the  Holy  Ghost!'  As  very 
many  anxious  souls  are  perplexed  with  the  fear 
that  they  have  been  guilty  of  this  sin,  and  that 
they  are  consequently  shut  out  from  the  offers  of 
mercy  in  the  gospel,  it  may  be  well  to  explain 


DIFFICULTIES.  71 

its  true  character.  The  words  in  which  our  Lord 
describes  it  are  these :  "  All  manner  of  sin  and 
blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men :  but  the 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be 
forgiven  unto  men.  And  whosoever  speaketh  a 
word  against  the  Son  of  man,  it  shall  be  forgiven 
him:  but  whosoever  speaketh  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this 
world,  neither  in  the  world  to  come."  (Matt.  xii. 
31,  32 ;  see  also  Mark  iii.  28-30.) 

The  sin  then  spoken  of  is  "blasphemy,"  or 
"  speaking  against "  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
precise  force  of  these  terms  may  be  gathered  from 
an  examination  of  the  context.  The  Saviour  liad 
just  performed  a  miracle.  We  read,  "'  Then  was 
brought  unto  Him  one  possessed  with  a  devil, 
blind,  and  dumb :  and  He  healed  him,  insomuch 
that  the  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  saw." 
(Matt.  xii.  22.)  The  people  were  deeply  impressed 
with  this  display  of  divine  power  and  mercy,  and 
saw  in  it  an  evidence  of  His  Messiahship ;  for  they 
said,  "  Is  not  this  the  Son  of  David  ? "  But  the 
enemies  of  Christ — the  Pharisees — made  it  an  oc- 
casion for  the  exhibition  of  their  enmity,  and  with 
the  miracle  before  their  eyes— indeed,  confessing 
it — ascribed  the  power  which  they  had  seen  exerted 
to  the  devil.  They  said,  "This  fellow  doth  not 
cast  out  devils,  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the 
devils."     Hence  it  is  that  we  find  in  the  gospel  of 


72         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

Mark  the  reason  given  for  the  Savioiir*s  warning 
concerning  "blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost:" 
"  Because  they  said,  He  hath  an  unclean  spirit." 
The  sin  therefore  spoken  of  is  the  vnlful  ascription 
to  Satan  of  tlwpower  wrought  ly  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
therefore  blaspheming  the  Holy  Ghost  hy  maligning 
His  operations  as  devilish.  To  prevent  all  possibility 
of  mistake,  the  argument  maybe  displayed  at  length. 

1.  The  power  in  which  Jesus  laboured,  wrought 
miracles,  performed  His  mission,  was  that  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  (Luke  iv.  1-18  ;  Isaiah  Ixi.  1,  2 ;  John 
iii.  34;  xiv.  10,  &c.) 

2.  It  was,  therefore,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  that  He  expelled  the  devil  from  the  blind 
and  dumb  man. 

3.  The  Pharisees  acknowledged  the  miracle; 
they  had  seen  it  done,  and  could  not  deny  it. 

4.  They  had  therefore  before  them  a  clear  proof 
of  the  Saviour's  mission ;  for,  if  done,  it  substan- 
tiated His  claim  to  be  the  Messiah. 

5.  They  ignored  the  evidence,  and  sought  to 
discredit  Jesus  by  charging  Him  with  being  the 
agent  of  the  devil. 

6.  They  thus  wilfully  not  only  sinned  against, 
but  "  blasphemed,"  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Thus,  as  another  has  said,  "  What  the  Lord 
denounces  is  Uasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Keeping  that  distinctly  in  view  would  save  many 
souls  a  great  deal  of  needless  trouble.    How  many 


DIFFICULTIES.  7S' 

have  groaned  in  terror  through  fear  of  being  guilty 
of  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost !  That  phrase  ad- 
mits of  vague  notions  and  general  reasonings  about 
its  nature.  But  our  Lord  spoke  definitely  of  blas- 
phemous, unforgivable  sin  against  Him.  All  sin, 
I  presume,  is  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  has 
taken  His  place  in  Christendom,  and  consequently 
gives  all  sin  this  character.  Thus,  lying  in  the 
church  is  not  mere  falsehood  toward  man,  but 
unto  God,  because  of  the  great  truth  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  there.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  the 
Lord  speaks  of  unforgivable  sin  (not  that  vague 
sense  of  evil  which  troubled  souls  dread  as  "  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  but  blasphemy  against 
Him).  What,  is  this  evil  never  to  be  forgiven  ? 
It  is  attributing  the  power  that  wrought  in  Jesus 
to  the  devil.  How  many  troubled  souls  would  be 
instantly  relieved  if  they  laid  hold  of  that  simple 
truth  !  It  would  dissipate  what  really  is  a  delusion 
of  the  devil,  who  strives  hard  to  plunge  them  into 
anxiety,  and  drive  them  into  despair,  if  possible. 
The  truth  is,  that  as  any  sin  of  a  Christian  may 
be  said  to  be  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  what  is 
especially  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  there 
be  anything  which  is  so,  is  that  which  directly 
hinders  the  free  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
work  of  God,  or  in  His  church.  Such  might  be 
said  to  be  the  sin,  if  you  speak  of  it  with  precision. 
But  what  our  Lord  referred  to  was  neither  a  sin 


74         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

uor  the  sin,  but  Uasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  was  that  which  the  Jewish  nation  was  then 
rapidly  falling  into,  and  for  which  they  were 
neither  forgiven  then,  nor  will  ever  be  forgiven. 
There  will  be  a  new  stock,  so  to  speak ;  another 
generation  will  be  raised  up,  who  will  receive  the 
Christ  whom  their  fathers  blasphemed ;  but  as  far 
as  that  generation  was  concerned,  they  were  guilty 
of  this  sin,  and  could  not  be  forgiven.  They  began 
it  in  the  lifetime  of  Jesus ;  they  consummated  it 
when  the  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  down  and  despised. 
They  still  carried  it  on  persistently;  and  it  is  always 
the  case  when  men  enter  upon  a  bad  course,  unless 
sovereign  grace  deliver.  The  more  God  brings  out 
of  love,  grace,  truth,  wisdom,  the  more  determinedly 
and  blindly  they  rush  on  to  their  own  perdition. 
So  it  was  with  Israel.  So  it  ever  is  with  man  left 
to  himself,  and  despising  the  grace  of  God.  "  He 
that  shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
never  forgiveness."  It  is  the  final  stage  of  rebellion 
against  God." 

It  may  then  be  confidently  af&rmed,  that  no 
one  under  convictions  of  sin,  no  one  who  desires 
reconciliation  to  God  through  the  blood  of  Christ, 
can  have  committed  "blasphemy  against  the  Holy 
Ghost."  Nay,  these  very  convictions  of  sin,  and 
desires  after  peace  with  God,  are  the  effects  of  His 
own  work  in  the  soul;  the  sure  proof  that  this 
"  blasphemy  "  has  not  been  committed. 


DIFFICULTIES.  75 

The  "  sin  unto  death.''  This  is  popularly 
confounded  with  that  just  considered.  But  an 
examination  of  the  Scripture  in  which  it  is  men- 
tioned will  show  that  it  is  a  totally  distinct  thing. 
It  is  thus  described  :  "  If  any  man  see  his  brother 
sin  a  sin  [which  is]  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask, 
and  He  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not 
unto  death.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death :  I  do  not 
say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it."  (1  John  v.  16.) 
Here  the  question  is  concerning  the  sin  of  a 
believer.  If  any  man  see  his  brother ^  etc. ;  and 
since  it  is  a  believer  who  is  spoken  of,  there  can 
be  no  reference  to  eternal  death.  In  fact,  the 
death  spoken  of  is  bodily.  Thus  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  committed  a  sin  *'  unto  death.''  (Acts  v.) 
Their  sin  was  of  such  a  character  that  God  inter- 
posed and  removed  them  from  off  the  scene,  in 
merciful  chastisement  upon  themselves,  and  in 
solemn  warning  to  others.  But  though  they 
sinned  "unto  death,"  this  did  not  affect  their 
standing,  if  they  were  real  believers.  Their  death 
was  the  result  of  the  interposition  of  God  in 
governmental  discipline  in  the  church  on  earth. 
Allusion  is  made  to  other  cases  of  a  similar 
character  in  1  Corinthians.  The  apostle,  writing 
concerning  the  abuses  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  says, 
"  He  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth 
and  drinketh  damnation  "  {judgment,  as  in  margin) 
'*  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body.     For 


76         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

this  cause  many  are  weak  and  sickly  among  you, 
and  many  slcepr  (1  Cor.  xi.  29,  30.)  That  is,  as 
the  result  of  God's  intervention  in  discipline, 
many  had  died. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  explanation 
that  no  one  can  tell  beforehand  what  constitutes 
the  "  sin  unto  death,"  because  it  is  judged  only  by 
the  Lord.  Indeed,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  same 
act  would  constitute  the  same  sin  in  different 
circumstances  ;  for  there  is  little  doubt  that  there 
have  been  many  Ananiases  and  Sapphiras  since 
their  day.  But  we  need  not  pursue  the  subject, 
as  we  have  shown  that  the  sin  is  that  of  a 
believer,  and  that  it  is  connected  with  bodily, 
and  not  eternal,  death,  and  hence  that  anxious 
ones  cannot  have  been  guilty  of  it  before  God. 

8.  The  case  supposed  in  Heb.  vi.  3-6  is  often  a 
real  difi&culty.  But  a  careful  examination  of  the 
passage,  though  we  cannot  here  go  into  it  minutely, 
will  show  that  it  can  have  no  application  to  those 
who  are  anxious  and  who  desire  peace  with  God. 
For  the  case  is  that  of  "those  who  were  once 
enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift, 
and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come,  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to 
renew  them  again  unto  repentance;  seeing  they 
crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and 
put  Him  to  an  open  shame."  Let  it  be  first  of  all 
distinctly  noted,  that  this  cannot  refer  to  the  falling 


DIFFICULTIES.  -•  77 

away  of  any  who  have  teen  really  converted.  For 
nothing  is  more  plainly  taught  in  the  Scriptures 
than  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  child  of  God  to 
perish.  (See  John  x.  27-29;  Eom.  viii.  28-39; 
1  Cor.  i.  8,  9  ;  Eph.  i.  13, 14 ;  Phil.  i.  6,  7,  etc.,  etc.) 
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  indeed  that  the  epistle 
was  addressed  to  Hebrew  Christians ;  and  the 
case  put  is  that  of  those  who  had  been  brought 
out  of  Judaism,  and  convinced  of  the  truth  of 
Christianity,  thus  far  enlightened  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  but  not  converted,  born  again. 
They  were  brought  into  the  blessings  indicated, 
but  were  still  without  life;  and  it  is  concerning 
these  we  are  told,  that  if  they  should  fall  away 
it  would  be  impossible  to  renew  them  again  unto 
repentance,  etc.  And  why  ?  Because  they  would 
be  deliberately  and  wilfully  going  back  to  what 
they  knew  to  be  no  longer  according  to  God; 
reassociating  themselves  with  the  nation  that 
crucified  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus,  by  endorsing 
NN  ith  their  eyes  open  the  act  of  the  nation,  crucify- 
ing for  themselves  the  Son  of  God,  and  putting 
Him  to  an  open  shame,  (v.  6.) 

The  case  supposed  therefore  is  that  of  wilful 
apostates.  But  no  doubt  it  is  intended  as  a  solemn 
warning,  though  not  for  anxious  souls.  The  warn- 
ing will  have  its  application  to  many  who  are 
associated  with  believers  in  various  ways,  to  pro- 
fessors, and  such  professors  as  have  been  the  sub- 
jects of  much  enlightenment  without  being  born 


78  FUNDAMENTAL    TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

again,  so  that  they,  knowing  the  divine  character  of 
redemption,  are  persuaded  that  the  only  way  of 
salvation  is  through  a  crucified  and  risen  Saviour, 
and  may  even  be  outwardly  zealous  for  Christ.  It  is 
for  such  that  this  warning  is  intended ;  for  if  they 
turn  their  backs  upon  what  they  know  to  be  true, 
deny  Him  whom  they  know  to  be  the  Christ  of 
God,  become  wilful  apostates,  their  case  is  hopeless. 
It  is  to  this  class  alone  that  this  passage  applies ; 
and  it  therefore  cannot  include  those  who,  con- 
victed of  sin  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  desire  above 
all  things  to  know  that  Christ  is  their  Saviour 
and  Lord.  In  a  word,  no  one  who  desires  to  be 
saved,  through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  can 
be  of  that  class  and  character. 

There  are  doubtless  many  other  difficulties  in 
special  cases,  but  those  dealt  with  are  the  most 
common.  Our  aim  should  be  to  bring  everything 
to  the  word  of  God  in  a  prayerful  spirit;  for 
"  unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  dark- 
ness" (Ps.  cxii.  4),  and  "the  entrance  of  thy 
words  giveth  light."  (Ps.  cxix.  130.) 

*'  Thine  arm  hath  safely  brought  us 

A  way  no  more  expected, 
Than  when  thy  sheep  passed  thro'  the  deep, 

By  crystal  walls  protected. 
We  sing  thine  arm  unshorten'd, 

Brought  thro'  each  sore  temptation  ; 
With  heart  and  voice  in  thee  rejoice. 

Thou  God  of  our  salvation." 


DELIVERANCE. 


rj(^  Of  TBM 

[TJiriVBilSITTl 


CHAPTER 

DELIVERANCE. 


^ixfh^ 


Many  who  have  been  awakened,  quickened,  and 
who  may  even  be  under  the  sure  protection  of  the 
blood  of  Christ,  are  yet  without  a  clear  knowledge 
of  salvation.  They  have  sometimes  a  "  good  hope" 
that  they  are  saved,  but  then  sin  breaks  out  wdthin 
them  in  such  overwhelming  power,  that,  thereby 
made  to  know  the  utter  corruption  of  their  sinful 
hearts,  they  are  plunged  back  into  uncertaint}'  and 
distress.  They  are  thus  deprived  of  the  fulness  of 
the  blessing  which  belongs  to  all  who  believe  in 
Christ,  owing  to  ignorance  (oftentimes  through  bad 
teaching)  of  the  two  natures,  and  of  the  provision 
which  God  has  made  in  Christ  for  indw^elling  sin, 
as  well  as  for  sins.  In  other  words,  they  have 
never  learned  that  complete  deliverance  is  to  be 
found  in  Christ,  both  from  the  guilt  of  sin  and 
from  our  sinful  nature,  so  that  the  believer  can 
say,  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to 
them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  .  .  .  For  the  law 
of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made 
me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  (Eom. 
viii.  1-2.) 


80         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF    SALVATION. 

The  truth  on  this  subject  is  specially  unfolded 
in  the  epistle  to  the  Eomans,  from  chapter  v.  to 
the  end  of  chapter  viii.  This  section  has  been 
described  by  another  as  follows:  "Hitherto  the 
great  truth  of  the  remission  of  the  believer's  sins 
has  been  fully  set  forth,  closing  with  the  blessed 
privileges  which  belong  to  the  justified  man,  but 
still  in  that  connection,  the  expiatory  efficacy  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  this  displayed  in  His 
resurrection.  Precious  as  it  all  is,  it  is  not  every- 
thing the  believer  wants.  He  may  he  miserable  in  . 
the  discovery  of  ivkat  he  finds  within  himself ;  and 
if  he  know  not  the  truth  that  applies  to  his 
difficulties  on  this  score,  he  is  in  dangler  of 
yielding  to  hardness  on  one  side,  or  of  bearing 
a  burdened  spirit  of  bondage  on  the  other.  Row 
many  saints  ha.ve  never  learnt  the  extent  of  their 
deliverance y  and  go  mourning  from  day  to  day 
under  efforts  lohich  they  ivould  he  the  first  to  confess 
unavailing  against  their  inward  corruption  !  How 
many  settle  down  callously  balancing  their  faith 
in  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  by  the  blood  of 
Christ  as  a  set-off  against  a  plague  which  they  sup- 
pose must  needs  be,  and,  of  course,  with  no  more 
power  over  it  than  those  who  are  honestly,  but  in 
vain,  struggling  to  get  better.  Xeither  the  one 
nor  the  other  understands  the  value  to  them  of 
the  sentence  already  executed  on  the  old  man  in 
the  cross,  nor  their  own  new  place  before  God  in 


DELIVERAXCE.  81 

Christ  risen  from  the  dead.  This  it  is  the  Spirit's 
object  to  unfold  in  what  follows." 

The  sentences  italicised  in  the  above  extract 
find  a  striking  confirmation  in  chapter  vii., 
where  we  have  a  quickened  man,  one  who  has 
been  born  again,  not  knowing  his  deliverance 
from  law,  struggling  and  groaning  under  the 
burden  of  his  indwelling  sin,  so  much  so  that 
he  cries,  "  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin "  {v.  14) ; 
and  again,  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the 
inward  man :  but  I  see  another  law  in  my  mem- 
bers, warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and 
bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which 
is  in  my  members.  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  ! 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death? " 
(vv.  22-24.)  This  is  precisely  the  condition  of 
many  who  are  termed  anxious  souls.  It  is  the 
felt  contrariety  of  their  state  to  all  that  they  had 
longed  for  and  hoped  which  leads  them  to  doubt 
whether  they  are  saved. 

How  then  has  God  met  this  need  of  the  soul? 
There  can  be  only  one  answer  to  this  question : 
it  is  in  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  not  only 
did  He,  as  we  have  seen,  bear  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree,  but  He  was  also  7nade  sin  for  us 
(2  Cor.  V.  21);  yea,  "God  sending  His  own  Son 
in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh!'  (Romans  viii.  3.) 

The  application  of  this  truth  is  expounded  in 

F 


82         FUNDAMENTJlJL^TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

I 
Eomaiis  vi.  Having  shown  in  the  previous  chapter 

that  "  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more 
abound :  that  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even 
so  might  grace  reign  tlirough  righteousness  unto 
eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  (yv,  20-21), 
the  apostle  proceeds,  "  What  shall  we  say  then  ? 
Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ? 
God  forbid.  How  shall  iue,  that  are  dead  to  sin, 
live  any  longer  therein  ?  Know  ye  not,  that  so 
many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ 
ivere  baptized  into  His  death?  Therefore  we  are 
buried  with  Him  by  baptism  into  death :  that  like 
as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory 
of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have  been  planted 
together  in  the  likeness  of  His  death,  we  shall 
be  also  [in  the  likeness]  of  [His]  resurrection : 
knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with 
\Him\  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed 
(annulled),  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve 
sin.  For  he  that  is  dead  is  freed "  {justified,  in 
margin)  ''from  sin.''  (Eom.  vi.  1-7.) 

If  now  we  give  attention  to  the  w^ords  which 
we  have  emphasized  by  italics,  we  shall  under- 
stand the  whole  subject.  (1.)  We  are  here  taught 
that  we  have  part  in  Christ's  death :  we  "  were 
baptized  into  (or  unto)  His  death;"  "our  old  man 
is  crucified  with  Him."  (yv.  3-6.)  This  is  on  the 
principle  of  substitution,  a  principle  which  finds 


a  striking  illustration  in  the  following  familiar 
incident.  During  the  days  of  Kapoleon  I.,  a 
young  man  was  drawn  as  a  soldier,  but  having 
some  means,  he  purchased  a  substitute,  who  went 
in  his  stead  to  fight  the  battles  of  his  country. 
The  substitute  was  soon  killed,  and  not  long  after 
a  decree  for  another  conscription  was  issued.  It 
so  happened  that  the  same  young  man  was  drawn 
for  the  second  time,  but  he  pleaded  that  he  was  a 
dead  man.  When  asked  what  he  meant  by  such 
a  plea,  he  answered  that,  since  his  substitute  had 
been  killed,  he  himself  ought  to  be  regarded  as 
dead.  The  case,  from  its  singularity,  was  carried 
before  the  courts  of  law,  and,  after  examination 
and  trial,  it  was  ruled  that  the  young  man  was 
dead  before  the  law  of  conscription,  on  the  ground 
of  the  death  of  his  substitute.  So  with  us,  if 
we  are  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
can  plead  that  we  have  died  in  the  person  of  our 
Substitute,  that  in  Him  the  whole  judgment  and 
condemnation  due  to  our  sin  and  sins  have  been 
borne  and  exhausted.  (2.)  We  are  consequently 
"  dead  to  sin "  (v.  2) ;  and  being  dead,  we  are 
"freed  (justified)  from  sin."  (v.  7.)  That  is,  our 
Adam  nature — the  seat  of  indwelling  sin — our  old 
man,  has  been  judicially  judged  by  God  in  the 
death  of  Christ;  so  that  the  penalty  has  already 
been  paid,  our  doom  so  completely  met,  that  before 
God  we  are  regarded  as  judicially  dead,  and  being 


84         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

dead  we  are  justified  from  sin — cleared  from  all 
charge  on  account  of  it,  completely  delivered  from 
it,  through  our  death  in  the  death  of  Christ. 

The  practical  consequences  of  this  truth  are 
given  in  the  succeeding  verses.  "  Now  if  we  be 
dead  with  Christ,  we  believe  that  we  shall  also 
live  with  Him :  knowing  that  Christ  being  raised 
from  the  dead  dieth  no  more ;  death  hath  no  more 
dominion  over  Him.  For  in  that  He  died,  He 
died  unto  sin  once:  but  in  that  He  liveth.  He 
liveth  unto  God.  Likewise  rechon  ye  yourselves  to 
he  dead  indeed  unto  sin^  hut  alive  unto  God  in^^  (not 
through)  "  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Let  not  sin  there- 
fore reign  in  your  mortal  body,  that  ye  should 
obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof,"  etc.  (yv.  8-12.)  We 
are  thus  reminded,  by  implication  at  least,  that  we 
have  part  not  only  in  the  death  of  Christ,  but  also 
in  Him  as  risen.  "  For  if  we  be  dead  with  Him, 
we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  Him " 
{v.  8) ;  and  this  is  confirmed  and  enforced  by  the 
fact,  that  "in  that  He  died.  He  died  unto  sin 
once  :  but  in  that  He  liveth.  He  liveth  unto  God." 
{v.  10.) 

Then  follow  the  practical  exhortations. 

1.  We  are  to  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin.  The 
very  terms  of  the  exhortation  indicate  the  truth ; 
for  if  we  were  actually  dead,  we  could  not  be  told 
to  reckon  ourselves  so.  What  we  are  then  to  do  is 
to  take  God's  estimate  of  ourselves.     Having  judged 


DELIVERANCE.  85 

US,  as  to  our  Adam  nature,  in  the  cross  of  Christ, 
He  holds  us  as  having  met  our  judgment,  and 
consequently  to  be  dead  in  His  sight.  This  is 
His  judicial  estimate'  of  every  believer  as  to  the 
old  man ;  and  this  judicial  estimate  is  to  be  the 
estimate  of  our  faith.  What  God  declares  we  are 
to  believe,  and  to  believe  spite  of  all  appearances 
or  experiences  to  the  contrary ;  and  since  He  holds 
us  to  have  been  cruciiBed  with  Christ,  we  are  to 
reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin.  This  will  explain 
many  otherwise  difficult  expressions  in  the  Scrip- 
tures. "  I  am ''  (or  have  been)  "  crucified  with 
Christ."  (Gal.  ii.  20.)  ''  If  ye  be  dead  "  (or  have 
died)  "with  Christ,"  etc.  (Col.  ii.  20);  these,  and 
all  such,  setting  forth  the  truth  here  considered, 
that  God  regards  all  believers  as  having  died  with 
Christ,  and  therefore  as  having  in  Him  borne  the 
condemnation  of  sin.  And  this  truth  is  to  be  our 
vantage-ground  in  the  presence  of  temptation. 
We  should  remember  in  the  presence  of  all  solici- 
tations to  sin,  that  our  old  man  has  been  crucified 
with  Christ,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  de- 
stroyed, that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin. 
(Eom.  vi.  6.) 

Thus  our  place  before  God  determines  our  re- 
sponsibility ;  and  hence  if  I  yield  to  sin,  I  contradict 
in  fact  that  I  have  died  with  Christ ;  for  sin  argues, 
evidences  one  alive  in  the  flesh  and  acting  in  the 
flesh.     On  the  other  hand,  taking  God's  estimate 


86         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

of  myself  to  be  true  for  faith,  I  cannot  let  sin 
reign  in  my  mortal  body,  that  I  should  obey  it  in 
the  lust  thereof.  I  reckon  myself  to  be  dead  to 
sin,  and  therefore  delivered  from  it  by  the  death  of 
Christ ;  and  thus  my  peace  is  undisturbed  because 
I  know  that  the  flesh  which  I  still  have  in  me, 
and  which,  if  not  kept  in  the  place  of  death, 
would  break  out  at  any  moment  in  unbridled 
lusts,  has  already  been  judged,  and  condemned 
on  the  cross. 

2.  But  we  are  also  to  reckon  ourselves  as  alive 
unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  This,  as  be- 
fore said,  implies  our  resurrection  with  Christ — 
although  this  truth  is  not  here  formally  stated 
— because  it  is  only  as  being  in  the  risen  Christ 
that  we  can  be  alive  unto  God.  In  the  Colossians 
we  find  this  aspect  fully  developed,  the  apostle 
making  the  fact  of  our  being  risen  with  Christ 
the  ground  of  a  practical  appeal :  "  If  ye  then  be 
risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.  Set  your  affection  on  things  above,  not  on 
things  on  the  earth.  For  ye  are  dead  "  (or  have 
died),  "  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God." 
(Col.  iii.  1-3.)  It  is  not  only  therefore  that  we 
have  been  crucified  with  Christ,  but  in  Christ  we 
passed  through  death;  for  "God  hath  raised  us 
up  together"  with  Christ.  (Eph.  ii.  6.)  This  was 
typified  by  the  passage  of  the  Israelites  through 


DELIVERANCE.  87 

the  Eed  Sea.  In  type  "  the  Eed  Sea  is  evidently 
the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  and  of  His 
people  in  Him;  God  acting  in  it,  in  order  to  bring 
them  into  death  to  sin,  and  to  deliverance  from  it, 
by  death,  where  He  had  brought  them  in  Christ, 
and  consequently  beyond  the  possibility  of  being 
reached  by  the  enemy.  We  are  made  partakers 
of  it  already  through  faith.  Sheltered  from  the 
judgment  of  God  by  the  blood,  we  are  delivered, 
by  His  power  which  acts  for  us,  from  the  power 
of  Satan,  the  prince  of  this  world.  The  blood 
keeping  us  from  the  judgment  of  God  was  the 
beginning.  The  power  which  has  made  us  alive, 
through  Christ,  has  made  us  free  from  the  whole 
power  of  Satan,  who  followed  us,  and  from  all 
his  attacks  and  accusations.  We  have  done  with 
Egypt  and  the  world." 

God  who  gave  the  blood  to  screen  us, 

God  looks  down  in  perfect  love  ; 
Clouds  may  seem  to  pass  between  us, 

There 's  no  change  in  Him  above. 

Though  the  restless  foe  accuses, 

Sins  recounting  like  a  flood  ; 
Every  charge  our  God  refuses  : 

Christ  hath  answer'd  with  His  blood. 

Itt  the  refuge  God  provided — 

Though  the  world's  destruction  lowers — 

We  are  safe — to  Christ  confided, 
Everlastinoj  life  is  ours. 


88         FUNDAMENTA.L   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

And,  ere  long,  when  come  to  glory, 
We  shall  sing  a  well-known  strain, 

This — the  never-tiring  story, 

"  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  once  slain  ! " 

Two  things  have  to  be  carefully  noted.  It  is  in 
Christ  that  we  are  alive  unto  God ;  and  secondly, 
our  being  so  is  to  be  a  matter  of  faith :  we  are 
to  reckon  ourselves  so.  We  are  alive  in  Christ 
really  and  actually;  but  this  is  not  the  thought 
here  presented.  We  are  also  in  this  respect  to 
take  God's  estimate,  spite  of  all  the  contradictions 
to  it  within  and  without.  Since  God  regards  me 
as  dead  to  sin,  and  alive  unto  Him  in  Christ  Jesus, 
I  am  to  reckon  myself  so ;  His  estimate  being  the 
foundation  of  my  faith  and  confidence,  as  well  as 
the  measure  of  my  responsibility. 

We  are  thus  before  God  brought  through  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  out  of  our  old 
state  and  standing  altogether,  into  a  place  and 
sphere  where  the  flesh  has  no  entrance — a  deliver- 
ance so  complete  that  not  only  is  it  said,  "  There 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which 
are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  but  also,  "  Ye  are  not  in  the 
flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  the  Spirit  of  God 
dwell  in  you."  (Eom.  viii.  1,  9.)  Such  is  our  per- 
fect standing  before  God  in  Christ  as  risen  from 
the  dead. 

3.  We  shall  now  be  in  a  position  to  understand 
the  concluding  exhortation  of  the  passage  cited; 


DELIVERANCE.  89 

viz.,  "Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal 
body,  that  ye  should  obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof." 
(Rom.  vi.  12,  etc.)  We  have  here  the  contrast 
between  our  standing  before  God  in  Christ  Jesus 
and  our  practical  condition.  He  holds  us,  as  we 
have  seen,  as  dead  to  sin;  but  this  exhortation 
supposes  the  presence  of  sin  in  the  believer.  N'ow 
it  is  in  the  understanding  of  this  contrast,  and  its 
practical  consequences  and  responsibilities,  that 
the  solution  is  found  of  the  difficulties  which  are 
so  often  encountered  at  the  outset  of  the  Christian 
life,  and  which  indeed  in  many  cases  keep  be- 
lievers in  bondage  for  years,  if  not  throughout  the 
whole  of  their  lives.  It  behoves  us  to  be  the 
more  careful  that  our  statements,  in  summing  up 
the  teachings  upon  this  subject,  are  according  to 
the  word  of  God. 

(a)  Indwelling  sin  will  always  be  present  in 
the  believer.  Though  he  has  a  complete  deliver- 
ance before  God,  the  flesh  in  him  remains  un- 
changed; so  that  he  will  ever  have  to  say,  "In 
my  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing.''  He  must 
therefore  never  expect  any  amendment  in  the 
character  of  the  flesh.  What  it  was  before  his 
conversion  it  will  be  after,  until  he  departs  to  be 
with  Christ,  either  at  His  coming  or  through 
death.  (Rom.  vii.  18;  viii.  1-13;  Gal.  iii.  16-26.) 
(^)  The  presence  of  indwelling  sin  does  not  affect 
our  perfect  standing,  our  complete  acceptance,  be- 


90         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

fore  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  for  God  regards  us  as 
dead  to  sin.  This  is  His  judicial  estimate  of  us, 
and  consequently  He  looks  upon  the  sin  in  us  as 
already  judged  in  the  death  of  Christ.  Thus  sin 
in  the  flesh  has  been  condemned.  (Kom.  viii.  3.) 
Its  motions  therefore  within  me,  if  I  do  not  yield 
to  tlurtiy  cannot  for  one  minute  obscure  even  my 
enjoyment  of  the  love  of  God;  for  I  reckon  the 
flesh  in  me  as  judged,  according  to  His  own  esti- 
mate. It  is  thus  not  only  that  my  standing  is 
unalterable,  but  also  my  peace,  my  communion,  is 
undisturbed,  (y)  My  responsibility  is  measured 
by  God's  estimate.  If  He  regards  me  as  dead  to 
sin,  I. have  to  do  the  same ;  and  therefore  I  must 
not  allow  sin  to  reign  in  my  mortal  lody,  that  I 
should  obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof  For  if  I  were 
to  allow  sin  to  reign,  I  should  practically  contra- 
dict God's  estimate  of  me  as  dead  to  it.  I  have 
thus  to  keep  myself  in  the  place  of  death,  to 
mortify  my  members  which  are  upon  the  earth 
(Col.  iii.  5),  because  I  am  dead  with  Christ.  Here 
then  is  the  whole  secret.  I  cannot  rid  myself  of 
the  foe.  But  God  has  judged  it,  and  I  have 
simply  to  act  according  to  that  judgment ;  to  keep 
it  in  that  place  of  death  where  He  has  already  put 
it.  Hence  we  are  not  told  to  expel  sin,  to  root  it 
out,  to  cast  it  away  from  us,  as  moralists,  and 
even  divines,  ignorant  of  the  Scriptures,  some- 
times exhort  us  to  do ;  but  we  are  told  not  to  let 


DELIVERANCE.  91 

it  reign ;  i.e.  it  must  be  kept  under,  in  the  place 
and  under  the  sentence  of  death  which  has  been 
passed  upon  it. 

''Ah  1"  you  exclaim,  "here  is  my  difficulty.  How 
am  I,  a  poor  feeble  creature,  to  do  this  thing  ? "  It 
is  thus  that  unbelief  ever  speaks.  Look  at  David 
in  the  presence  of  Goliath.  Does  he  feel  the  im- 
possibility of  coping  with  such  a  powerful  adver- 
sary ?  Nothing  of  the  kind.  His  one  conviction 
was  that  "  the  battle  was  the  Lord's ; "  that  Goliath 
was  the  Lord's  enemy,  and  hence  that  the  Lord 
would  that  day  deliver  him  into  his  hand.  (1  Sam. 
xvii.  45-47.)  He  thus  measured  his  foe  by  the 
strength  of  the  Lord;  and  by  that  measurement 
Goliath  dwindled  down  before  him  into  a  puny 
dwarf,  yea,  into  utter  impotence  and  nothingness. 
So  should  it  be  with  us.  Granted  that  indwelling 
sin  is  strong  and  active,  yet  He  who  tells  us  to 
reckon  ourselves  to  be  dead  to  it,  has  supplied  the 
power  to  enable  us  to  comply  with  the  exhorta- 
tion. He  has  given  us  the  indwelling  Spirit,  and 
if  we  "  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of 
the  body,  we  shall  live"  (Kom.  viii.  13);  if  "we 
walk  in  the  Spirit,  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of 
the  flesh."  (Gal.  v.  16.)  The  Spirit  of  God  is 
therefore  our  strength  in  this  warfare,  the  all- 
sufficient  power  given  to  enable  us  to  keep  sin 
from  reigning  in  our  mortal  body. 

The  completeness  of  our  deliverance  is  thus  not 


92         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

even  touched  by  the  presence  of  indwelling  sin. 
God  has  judged  it  in  the  death  of  Christ ;  we  are 
brought  clean  out  from  under  its  power  through 
the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  and  we  have  the  power, 
in  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  our  hearts,  to  keep 
it  where  God  has  put  it,  under  judgment  and 
death.  Blessed  be  His  name  !  We  can  therefore, 
like  Israel,  stand  upon  the  resurrection  side  of  our 
Eed  Sea,  and  sing,  "  The  Lord  is  my  strength  and 
song,  and  He  is  become  my  salvation."  (Exodus 
XV.  2.) 

"  0  Lord  !  Thou  now  art  risen, 

Thy  travail  all  is  o  'er  ; 
For  sin  Thou  once  hast  suffered — 

Thou  liVst  to  die  no  more. 
Sin,  death,  and  hell  are  vanquished 

By  Thee,  the  Church's  Head ; 
And,  lo !  we  share  Thy  triumphs, 

Thou  First-bom  from  the  dead. 

"  Into  Thy  death  baptized, 

"We  own  with  Thee  we  died ; 
With  Thee,  our  Life,  we're  risen, 

And  shall  be  glorified. 
From  sin,  the  world,  and  Satan, 

We  're  ransom'd  by  Thy  blood ; 
And  here  would  walk  as  strangers, 

AUve  with  Thee  to  God.'* 


THE   INDWELLING   SPIRIT.  93 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

TEE  INDWELLING  SFIRIT. 

''Ye  are  all  the  sons  (yloX)  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."  (Gal.  iii.  26.)  "  And  because  ye 
are  sons,  God  has  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son 
into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father."  (iv.  6.) 
This  is  the  divine  order.  We  are  born  of  the 
Spirit  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  thus  are 
made  sons;  then  God  sends  forth  the  Spirit  as 
the  Spirit  of  sonship  to  dwell  in  our  hearts.  The 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  is  therefore,  it  will  be 
observed,  not  coincident  with,  but  consequent  upon, 
becoming  sons. 

This  divine  order  is  shadowed  forth  in  God's 
dealings  with  Israel.  On  the  passover  night, 
while  still  in  Egypt,  Israel  was  completely  shel- 
tered by  the  blood ;  but  it  is  not  until  they  had 
crossed  the  Eed  Sea  that  we  read  either  of  salva- 
tion, or  of  God's  "  holy  habitation ; "  and  we  know 
that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  God  did  not  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  His  people  until  they  were  brought  out 
from  Egypt,  through  the  Eed  Sea,  into  the  wilder- 
ness. So  now.  A  soul  may  be  quickened,  born 
again,  be  under  the  protection  of  the  blood  of 


94         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Christ,  but  he  must  be  indwelt  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  before  he  can  cry,  "Abba,  Father."  (Gal. 
iv.  6.)  Accordingly,  we  do  not  find  in  the 
epistle  to  the  Eomans  any  distinct  mention  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  dwelling  in  the  believer,  until 
we  come  to  the  eighth  chapter.  As  long  as  the 
believer  does  not  know  his  deliverance  from  sin 
and  from  the  law,  we  search  in  vain  for  any 
teaching  on  this  subject;  but  no  sooner  do  we 
get  the  complete  answer  to  the  question  raised, 
*'0  wretched  man  that  I  am!  who  shall  deliver 
me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? "  than  we  are 
told,  "  Ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if 
so  he  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you.''  (Eomans 
viii.  9.) 

The  truth  then  is  that  every  saved  soul  has  the 
indwelling  Spirit ;  and  doubtless  when  the  gospel 
was  first  proclaimed — proclaimed  as  it  was  in  all 
its  fulness,  simplicity,  and  power — those  who 
received  it  by  the  grace  of  God  were  brought  at 
once  out  of  darkness  into  light,  and  immediately 
received  the  seal  of  their  redemption  in  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  But  now  in  the  confusion  that 
reigns  around,  when  the  gospel  has  been  so  largely 
corrupted  by  human  admixtures,  that  the  fulness 
of  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  is  seldom 
preached,  there  are  numbers  who,  though  quick- 
ened, are  still  groping  in  the  twilight,  groaning  in 
the  house  of  their  bondage,  and  consequently  have 


THE  INDWELLING   SPIRIT.  95 

not  yet  received  that  Spirit  of  adoption  whereby- 
alone  believers  can  cry,  Abba,  Father.  For  "  the 
Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God"  (Eom.  viii.  16) ;  and 
hence  if  we  do  not  know  that  we  are  children  of 
God,  and  cannot  cry  in  filial  confidence,  Abba, 
Father,  it  is  because  we  have  not  the  Holy  Ghost 
dwelling  in  us. 

Our  object  now  is  to  unfold  what  the  Scriptures 
teach  concerning  this  subject.  As  we  have  seen, 
the  Spirit  of  God  takes  up  His  abode  in  us, 
consequent  upon  our  becoming  sons.  And  this 
it  is  which  distinguishes  a  Christian  from  the 
saints  under  the  old  dispensation.  Jewish  be- 
lievers were  quickened,  born  again,  but  they 
knew  nothing  of  God's  Spirit  as  dwelling  in 
them ;  "  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet,  because 
that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  (John  vii.  39.) 
He  wrought  by  His  power;  for  it  was  He  who 
quickened  the  Jewish  saints,  as  well  as  Christians; 
He  also  strengthened  them  for  walk  and  service ; 
but  His  coming  down  from  heaven  as  a  person 
to  dwell  in  believers,  and  in  the  Church,  was 
consequent  upon  the  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  of  Christ.  This  difference  is  marked 
in  one  aspect  very  plainly  by  a  prayer  of  the 
psalmist :  "  Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence ; 
and  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me''  (Ps.  li.  11); 
but  the  apostle  Paul,  writing  to  the  Ephesiana, 


96         FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

says, ."And  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption'' 
(Eph.  iv.  30.)  Working  by  His  influences  in  the 
heart  of  the  psalmist,  it  was  possible  for  him  to 
lose  that  blessed  power;  but  believers  now,  though 
they  may  grieve,  are  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
until  the  day  of  redemption.  Just  as  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  earth,  in  the  house  of 
God,  characterises  Christianity,  so  His  dwelling 
in  God's  children  distinguishes  them  from  the 
believers  of  all  past  dispensations.  For  it  is  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  unites  us  to  Christ,  makes  us 
members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His 
bones  (1  Cor.  xii.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  30) ;  and  this  union, 
this  place  as  members  of  His  body,  was  not 
possible  until  Christ  had  been  glorified,  and  had 
taken  the  place  of  Head  in  heaven. 

There  are  several  prominent  aspects  of  the  in- 
dwelling Spirit  which  we  desire  briefly  to  notice. 

\,  As  a  ivitness.  The  presence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  on  earth  is  the  witness  of  accomplished 
redemption.  For  before  our  Lord  departed,  He 
promised  to  send  "another  Comforter"  (John 
xiv.  16,  17,  25,  26;  xv.  26,  27;  xvi.  7-14);  and 
He  distinctly  told  His  disciples  that  "  He  would 
send  the  promise  of  His  Father  upon  them," 
and  that  they  were  to  "  tarry  in  Jerusalem  until 
they  were  endued  with  power  from  on  high." 
(Luke   xxiv.  49.)     The  descent  therefore  of  the 


THE   INDWELLING   SPIRIT.  97 

Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  the 
infallible  sign  of  the  completion  of  redemption, 
or  rather  the  proof  that  God  had  accepted  and 
was  resting  satisfied  in  the  finished  work  of  Christ. 
For  "  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  becanse 
the  Spirit  is  truth."  (1  John  v.  6.) 

But  here  we  speak  rather  of  the  Spirit  as  dwell- 
ing in  God's  children,  and  as  such,  as  we  have 
seen,  He  "  bears  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we 
are  the  children  of  God."  (Eom.  viii.  15,  16; 
Gal.  iv.  6,  7.)  In  this  aspect,  He  is  the  witness  of 
accomplished  redemption  to  the  individual  soul — 
as  will  be  seen  when  treating  the  next  point — and 
hence  every  child  of  God  ought  to  know  by  this 
sure  testimony  that  he  is  saved.  But  it  may  be 
asked,  How  is  this  witness  borne  to  our  sonship  ? 
The  very  fact  of  His  presence  within  us  testifies 
to  it ;  but  by  His  presence  He  forms  within  us 
affections  suited  to  our  relationship,  begets  in  us 
desires  after  the  enjoyment  of  the  Fatlier's  love, 
enables  us  in  the  holy  intimacies  of  our  filial  place 
and  position  to  cry,  Abba,  Father,  verifies  to  our 
souls  the  word  on  which  we  have  trusted  as 
revealing  to  us  the  relationship  and  the  blessings 
which  belong  to  us  as  God's  children,  and  thus 
bears  very  distinct  witness  with  our  spirit.  No ! 
it  is  not  an  audible  testimony,  and  it  is  discerned 
and  apprehended  by  our  spirit  alone;  but  it  is 
none  the  less,  nay,  it  is  all  the  more,  real  on  this 
G 


98         FUNl)AMEx\TAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

account,  because  indeed  it  is  a  living  secret  between  ; 
ourselves  and  God.  The  strength  and  distinctness  ; 
of  His  testimony,  it  ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  will  i 
depend  upon  conditions.  "  As  many  as  are  led  by ' 
the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God."  In  | 
other  words,  just  as  being  led  by  the  Spirit  of  j 
God  is  an  evidence  of  our  being  the  sons  of  God,  j 
so  it  is,  when  we  are  led  walking  in  simple,  loving  \ 
obedience  and  dependence,  that  our  spirit  will; 
discern  most  clearly  His  testimony  to  our  sonship.  | 
But  if  we  are  so  walking  as  to  grieve  Him,  wej 
shall  listen  in  vain  for  His  testimony,  for  we  J 
shall  have  grieved  Him  into  silence.  God  will  I 
not  therefore  permit  any  of  His  children  to  walk  j 
carelessly,  resting  the  certainty  of  their  salvation ; 
on  the  ground  of  their  being  children ;  but  He  i 
reminds  us  that  if  we  are  His  we  shall  be  led  of' 
the  Spirit,  and  that  He  will  bear  witness  with  our  : 
spirit,  and  teach  us  to  cry,  Abba,  Father. 

2.  As  a  Seal    This  truth  is  set  before  us  in 
several  passages.     "  K^ow  He  which  stablisheth  us 
with  you  in  Christ,  and  hath  anointed  us,  is  God ;  \ 
who  hath  also  sealed  us."  (2  Cor.  i.  21,  22.)  Again,  j 
•'  In   wliom  also  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  ; 
sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise."  (Eph.  i. 
18) ;  and  in  the  same  epistle  we  are  exhorted  to 
*' grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  j 
are  sealed  unto  tlie  day  of  redemption."  (iv.  30.)  ; 
The  Holy  Spirit  given  to  dwell  in  believers  is  i 


THE    INDWELLING    SPIRIT.  99 

Himself  the  seal;  i.e.  God  thereby  marks  them 
out,  takes  possession  of  them  as  His  own,  and 
declares  them  by  the  Spirit  being  within  them  to 
be  His  property.  If  one  may  use  the  illustration, 
just  as  the  broad -arrow  declares  the  thing  on 
which  it  is  marked  to  belong  to  the  Queen,  so  the 
Spirit  of  God  sets  us  apart,  marks  us  out  as  be- 
longing to  God.  But  the  figure  is  that  of  a  seal. 
Now  the  seal  not  only  indicated  ownership  by  the 
impress  upon  it,  but  it  was  put  also  for  protection. 
Hence  believers  are  said  to  be  sealed  until  the  day 
of  redemption.  They  are  secured  by  the  seal  until 
the  Lord  shall  return  to  receive  them  unto  Himself. 
And  hence  only  believers  are  sealed ;  and  they  are 
not  sealed  until  they  are  the  Lord's,  until  they  are 
brought  out  of  the  house  of  their  bondage  (as 
before  seen),  through  the  death  and  resurrection 
of  Christ,  until  they  not  only  are  safe,  but  are  also 
saved. 

3.  As  an  Earnest.  Two  of  the  passages  already 
cited  speak  of  the  Spirit  as  the  earnest.  ''  Who 
hath  also  sealed  us,  and  given  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit  in  our  hearts "  (2  Cor.  i.  22) ;  "  In  whom 
after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with  that 
Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased 
possession,  unto  the  praise  of  His  glory."  (Eph.  i. 
13^  14.)  It  is  the  latter  passage  which  defines  most 
exactly  the  character  of  the  earnest.     The  Holy 


,'  T 


100       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF    SALVATION. 

Spirit  as  now  given  is  regarded  as  "  the  earnest  of 
our  inheritance;"  that  is,  He  is  the  first-fruits  of 
that  which  we  shall  inherit  in  and  through  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  As  indeed  when  a  sale  is  effected  of  a 
property,  a  portion  of  the  purchase-money  is  paid 
down  as  earnest-money  for  the  completion  of  the 
bargain,  so  God  graciously  gives  us  the  indwelling 
Spirit  as  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance,  thereby 
assuring  us  that  we  shall  possess  all  that  He  has 
promised,  and  binding  Himself  (if  we  may  so 
speak)  to  accomplish  His  own  faithful  word ;  for 
the  earnest-money  is  both  a  promise  and  a  pledge. 
But  the  Holy  Spirit  is  even  more,  because^  as  we 
have  seen.  He  is  also  the  seal,  thereby  securing  us 
for  the  inheritance,  as  well  as  certifying  us  that 
God  will  put  us  into  possession  of  it  to  the  praise 
of  His  glory. 

4.  It  would  lead  us  far  beyond  the  scope  of 
these  pages  to  enter  fully  upon  the  offices  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit.  We  can  therefore  only  briefly 
indicate  that  He  alone  is  our  power  for  worship 
(John  iv.  23,  24 ;  Phil.  iii.  3) ;  for  prayer  (Eom. 
viii.  26,  27;  Eph.  vi.  18;  Jude  20);  for  walk 
(Rom.  viii.  14;  Gal.  v.  16-26);  for  service  (1  Cor. 
ii.  4 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5,  etc.) ;  for  the  ap^jrehension  of 
truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  9-16;  John  xvi.  13;  1  John  ii. 
20-27) ;  for  growth  (Eph.  iii.  16-19),  etc.  Indeed, 
as  the  Spirit  characterizes  our  existence  before 
God — for  we  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit, 


THE  INDWELLING  SPIRIT.  101 

if  SO  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  us  (Eom. 
viii.  2) — He  only  is  the  source  of  power  for  all  the 
activities  of  our  sphitual  life,  whether  those  acti- 
vities have  God  or  man  for  their  object.  Blessed 
fact !  for  it  is  only  when  we  know  our  own  weak- 
ness and  nothingness  that  we  can  learn  the  lesson 
of  dependence ;  and  when  Ave  are  dependent,  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  free  to  act  within  us  according  to 
His  will. 

A  caution  is  often  given,  and  much  needed  both 
by  anxious  souls  and  young  believers,  not  to  con- 
found the  Spirit's  work  in  us  with  Christ's  work 
for  us.  Thus  another  has  said,  ''We  are  con- 
stantly prone  to  look  at  something  in  ourselves 
as  necessary  to  form  the  ground  of  peace.  We 
are  apt  to  regard  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  us, 
rather  than  the  work  of  Christ  for  us,  as  the 
foundation  of  our  peace.  This  is  a  mistake.  .  .  . 
The  Holy  Ghost  did  not  make  peace ;  but  Christ 
did.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  not  said  to  be  our  peace ; 
but  Christ  is.  God  did  not  send  '  preaching  peace/ 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  'by  Jesus  Christ.'  (Com- 
pare Acts  X.  36 ;  Eph.  xi.  14,  17  ;  Col.  i.  20.) 
The  Holy  Ghost  reveals  Christ;  He  makes  us 
know,  enjoy,  and  feed  upon  Christ.  He  bears 
witness  to  Christ,  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ, 
and  shows  them  unto  us.  He  is  the  power  of 
communion,  the  seal,  the  witness,  the  earnest,  the 
unction.     In  short,  His  operations  are  essential. 


102       FUNDAMENTAL   TKUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Without  Him  we  can  neither  see,  hear,  know,  feel, 
experience,  enjoy,  nor  exhibit  aught  of  Christ. 
This  is  plain,  and  is  understood  and  admitted  by 
every  true  and  rightly-instructed  Christian.  Yet, 
notwithstanding  all  this,  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
is  not  the  ground  of  peace,  though  He  enables  us 
to  enjoy  the  peace.  He  is  not  our  title,  though 
He  reveals  our  title,  and  enables  us  to  enjoy  it." 
No ;  the  foundation  or  ground  of  peace  is  Christ 
— Christ  in  His  finished  work  which  He  accom- 
plished on  the  cross.  For  whoever  believes  "  on 
Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the 
dead,  who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  w^as 
raised  again  for  our  justification,"  is  justified ;  and 
"  being  justified  by  faith,  ive  have  'peace  ivith  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ !'  (Eom.  iv.  24,  25  ; 
V.  1.)  The  foundation  of  peace  then,  it  should  ever 
be  remembered,  is  outside  of  ourselves;  and  the 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  pointed  out,  is 
consequent  upon  our  becoming  the  sons  of  God. 

But  we  cannot  be  too  sensible  to  the  fact  tliat, 
if  believers,  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling 
in  us  ;  nor  too  solicitous  not  to  grieve  Him  by 
unholy  actings  in  the  flesli.  (See  Ephes.  iv.  29-32.) 
Hence  too  the  solemn  interrogation  of  the  apostle, 
"What?  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  [which  is]  in  you,  which  ye 
have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own  ?  For  ye 
are  bought  with  a  price :  therefore  glorify  God  in 


THE   INDWELLING   SPIRIT.  103 

your  body"  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20) ;  and  the  exhorta- 
tions, ''  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil 
the  lust  of  the  liesh ; "  "  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit, 
let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit."  (Gal.  v.  16-25.) 

"  What  moved  Thee  to  impart 

Thy  Spirit  from  above, 
Therewith  to  fill  our  heart 

With  heavenly  peace  and  love  ? 
'Twas  love,  unbounded  love  to  us, 
Moved  Thee  to  give  Thy  Spirit  thus." 


"  The  Comforter,  now  present, 

Assures  us  of  Thy  love  ; 
He  is  the  blessM  earnest 

Of  glory  there  above  : 
The  river  of  Thy  pleasure 

Is  what  sustains  us  now  ; 
Till  Thy  new  name 's  imprinted 

On  every  sinless  brow." 


'^  Thou  hast  bestow'd  the  earnest 

Of  that  we  shall  inherit ; 
Till  Thou  shalt  come  to  take  us  home, 

We  ^re  sealed  by  God  the  Spirit. 

We  wait  for  Thine  appearing. 

When  we  shall  know  more  fully 
The  grace  divine  that  made  us  Thine, 

Thou  Lamb  of  God  most  holy  ! " 


104      FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 


CHAPTER  X. 

STANDING  AND  RESPONSIBILITY. 

No  exposition  of  the  salvation  which  is  connected 
with  faitli  in  Christ  would  be  complete,  without 
some  explanation  of  the  perfect  place  of  blessing 
into  which  we  are  thereby  brought.  There  is 
little  doubt  indeed  that  many  quickened  souls 
are  also  kept  in  the  bondage  of  doubt  and  anxiety 
through  their  ignorance  of  what  Christ  has  really 
accomplished  on  their  behalf;  and  it  is  perfectly 
certain  that  they  can  have  no  adequate  apprehen- 
sion of  their  responsibility  without  a  knowledge  of 
their  position  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Every  one  understands  that  forgiveness  of  sins 
is  the  immediate  portion  of  the  believer  in  Christ. 
But  great  as  is  this  blessing,  it  is  but  a  small  part 
of  the  provisions  of  grace.  "Being  justified  by 
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  (Rom.  v.  1.)  The  very  next  verse 
speaks  of  two  additional  blessings  :  "  access  by 
faith  into  this  grace  in  which  we  stand,"  i.e.  into 
the  full  favour  of  God  in  Christ ;  and  "  rejoicing 
in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,"  i.e.  the  full  fruition 
and  consummation  of  our  present  blessings.     But 


STANDING   AND   RESPONSIBILITY.  105 

these  gifts  of  God's  grace  through  Christ  helong  to 
us  here,  as  justified  men;  and  in  the  same  way  we 
can  turn  to  other  passages  which  speak  of  perfect 
and  everlasting  reconciliation.  (See  Col.  i.  21,  22.) 
But  there  is  something  beyond  all  this ;  as  indeed 
we  partly  saw  when  treating  of  "  deliverance." 

What  then  is  our  standing,  position,  or  'place 
lefore  Godl  It  is  in  Christ  where  He  is.  Let 
us  explain.  We  have  seen  (chap,  viii.)  that  every 
believer  is  regarded  by  God  as  having  died  with 
Christ ;  that  the  apostle  could  write  to  the  Colos- 
sians,  "Ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God"  (Col.  iii.  3) ;  and  the  context  {p,  1) 
of  the  same  passage  speaks  further  of  our  "  being 
risen  with  Christ."  Turning  to  another  epistle  we 
get  even  more.  "  But  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy, 
for  His  gTcat  love  wherewith  He  loved  us,  even 
when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us 
together  with  Christ,  (by  grace  ye  are  saved ;)  and 
hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus''  (Eph.  ii.  4-6.) 
These  expressions  refer  to  something  already 
accomplished,  and  we  learn  from  them  that, 
though  we  are  still  actually  in  the  body  on  the 
earth,  we  are  before  God  seated  in  heavenly 
places  in  Christ  Jesus;  that  the  work  of  Christ 
on  our  behalf  is  so  efficacious  and  wonderful,  so 
God-glorifying,  that  God  even  now  can  righteously 
accord  us  a  position  in  Christ  in  the  heavenly 


lOff      FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

places.  For  Christ  "  has  not  only  borne  our  sins, 
and  died  to  sin,  and  closed  the  whole  history  of 
the  old  man  in  death,  for  those  who  believe,  they 
having  been  crucified  with  Him;  but  He  has 
glorified  God  in  this  work  (John  xiii.  31,  32 ;  xvii. 
4,  5),  and  so  obtained  a  place  for  man  in  the  glory 
of  God,  and  a  place  of  present  positive  acceptance, 
according  to  the  nature  and  favour  of  God  whom 
He  has  glorified;  and  that  is  our  place  before  God. 
It  is  not  only  that  the  old  man  and  his  sins  are 
all  put  out  of  God's  sight,  hut  ive  are  in  Christ 
hefore  God"  Every  believer  therefore  has  been 
crucified  with  Christ,  raised  up  with  Him,  and  is 
now  seated  in  Him  in  the  heavenlies.  He  is  thus 
taken  altogether  out  of  his  old  standing — his 
Adam  standing ;  for  "  he  is  not  in  the  flesh  but 
in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in 
him  (Rom.  viii.  9) ;  and  his  new  standing  is  in 
Christ,  and  thus  of  necessity  in  Christ  where  He 
is.  Hence  too  the  measure  of  His  acceptance  is 
the  acceptance  of  Christ ;  "  for  as  He  is  so  are  we 
in  this  world."  (1  John  iv.  17.) 

This  is  often  very  difficult  for  the  young  believer 
to  understand.  Be  it  therefore  very  distinctly 
noted  that  it  is  no  question  whatever  of  attain- 
ment or  experience,  that  it  belongs  to  every 
believer;  and  the  difficulty  wdll  vanish  if  the 
eye  be  taken  off  from  self  and  directed  to  Christ. 
If    we    look   within,    consider    our    weaknesses, 


STANDING   AND   RESPONSIBILITY.  107 

failures,  imperfections,  sins,  well  might  we  he 
perplexed  to  understand  how  such  imperfect  ones, 
as  we  are  practically,  could  have  such  a  perfect 
and  inalienable  place  before  God.  But  when  we 
look  at  Christ,  at  His  precious  blood,  at  what  He 
M^as  to  God  on  the  cross,  and  what  He  accom- 
plished there,  we  instantly  confess  that  He  is 
worthy  of  the  place  He  fills.  Here  is  the  whole 
secret.  It  is  in  His  worthiness  we  stand.  All 
that  we  were,  as  to  the  old  nature,  is  gone  from 
before  God  :  Christ  only  remains,  and  we  in  Him. 
Our  place,  standing,  is  thus  God's  response  to  the 
worthiness,  the  merits,  of  His  own  Son.  He  can 
therefore  righteously  shelter  us  by  the  blood,  bring 
us  out  of  Egypt,  through  the  Eed  Sea,  across 
the  Jordan,  and  set  us  down  in  Christ  in  the 
heavenlies. 

And  just  because  our  standing  is  in  Christ,  it  is 
unalterable  and  immutable.  Knowing  this,  the 
completeness  of  our  redemption,  because  of  our 
union  with  that  blessed  One  who  is  risen  from 
among  the  dead,  we  have  abiding  confidence  and 
peace.  We  may  change,  fluctuate  in  feeling  and 
attainment,  but  Christ  can  never  change;  He  is 
"the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
(Heb.  xiii.  8.)  And  hence,  since  our  standing  is  in 
Him,  we  dwell  for  ever  in  the  light  and  presence 
of  God ;  for  our  home  is  before  Him,  though  we 
may  sonietimes  forget  it ;  and  where  should  we 


108      FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION.  ! 

dwell  but  in  our  home  ?     The  more  fully  there-  ; 
fore  we  understand  our  true  place  and  standing  in 
Christ,  the  more  familiar  shall  we  be  with  the  j 
presence  and  glory  of  God.  : 

But  such  a  wondrous  place  or  standing  has  its  ; 
responsibilities ;  and  it  is  to  these  we  would  now 
turn.     As  we  have  seen,  we  are  in  Christ  before  I 
God;  and,  marvellous  fact,  Christ  is  in  us  down  ' 
here  (see  John  xv.  4;  Gal.  ii.  20;  Eph.  iii.  17; 
Col.  i.  27,  etc.),  and  this  defines  and  measures  our  . 
responsibilities;  for  if  God  has  given  us  a  place 
in  Christ  where  He  is,  it  is  that  we  may  exhibit  ' 
Christ  where  we  are.     A  few  illustrations  of  this  : 
may  be  collected  from  the  Scriptures.     '*  He  that  ; 
saith  he  abideth  in  Him  ought  himself  also  so  to  \ 
walk,  even  as  He  walked^  (1  John  ii.  6.)     Taking  \ 
this  in  its  most  general  form,  we  may  ask.  And  ' 
how  did   the   Lord   Jesus  walk  ?      Ever  as  the  , 
heavenly  One  upon  the  earth.     As  when  speak-  j 
ing  to  Nicodemus,  He  could  say,  "  The  Son  of  | 
man  which  is  in  heaven"  (John  iii.  13),  so  was  it  ^ 
during  the  whole  of  His  earthly  sojourn ;  for  the  j 
life  He  lived  was  a  heavenly  life — as  One  who  ■ 
had  come  forth  from  the  Father,  revealing  Him,  \ 
and   unfolding   the   perfectness  of  heaven  upon  \ 
earth.     He  could  thus  say,  "He  that  hath  seen  ' 
me  hath  seen   the  Father "   (John   xiv.   9)  ;   for 
morally  He  was  the  perfect  presentation  of  the 
Father.  So  ought  we  to  walk — as  belonging  not  I 


STANDING   AND   RESPONSIBILITY.  109 

to  earth,  but  to  heaven,  and  unfolding  the  ways 
of  heaven  upon  earth — as  samples  of  the  heavenly 
character ;  for  we  are  dead  with  Christ.  We  have 
not  only  died  in  Him  to  sin,  but  we  have  also 
died  with  Him  from  out  of  this  scene  in  which 
we  move,  and  have  been  raised  together  with  Him. 
Our  citizenship,  or  commonwealth,  is  in  heaven 
(Phil.  iii.  20),  and  in  accordance  with  this  character 
must  be  our  lives.  This  responsibility  is  summed 
up,  in  its  double  aspect,  by  the  apostle  Paul  when 
he  says,  "Always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the 
dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of 
Jesus  might  be  made  manifest  in  our  body.  For 
we  which  live  are  alway  delivered  unto  death  for 
Jesus'  sake,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  might  be 
made  manifest  in  our  mortal  flesh."  (2  Cor.  iv. 
10,  11.)  Thus  it  is  death  on  the  one  side,  and  life 
on  the  other :  death  as  to  all  that  we  were  in  the 
flesh ;  life  as  to  all  that  we  are  in  Christ,  or  rather, 
Christ  Himself  as  our  life — manifested  even  in  our 
mortal  flesh.  Hence  the  obligation  to  mortify  our 
members  which  are  upon  the  earth  (Col.  iii.  5) — an 
ol)ligation  which  distinctly  flows  from  the  fact  that 
our  standing  is  in  Christ  risen.  The  apostle  shows 
that  he  had  apprehended  tlie  responsibility  when 
he  says,  "  To  me  to  liv^e  is  Christ"  (Phil.  i.  21) ;  and 
just  in  proportion  as  we  approximate  to  the  ability 
to  say  the  same  thing  will  be  our  understanding 
of  our  true  place  in  Christ. 


110       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Another  form  of  our  responsibility  is  found  in 
the  passage,  "  Be  ye  therefore  followers  (imita- 
tors) of  God,  as  dear  children ;  and  walk  in  love, 
as  Christ  also  hath  loved  its,  and  hath  given  Him- 
self for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacritice  to  God  for  a 
sweet-smelling  savour."  (Eph.  v.  1,  2.)  The  same 
thing  is  enforced  by  the  apostle  John.  Herein 
we  have  known  love,  because  He  has  laid  down 
His  life  for  us :  and  ive  ought  to  lay  down  our 
lives  for  the  brethren.  (1  John  iii.  16.)  We  have 
also  an  example,  in  one  particular  direction,  given 
in  John  xiii.  After  the  Lord  Jesus  had  washed  the 
feet  of  His  disciples,  "  and  had  taken  His  garments, 
and  was  set  down  again.  He  said  unto  them.  Know 
ye  what  I  have  done  to  you  ?  Ye  call  me  Master 
and  Lord:  and  ye  say  well;  for  so  I  am.  If  I 
then,  [your]  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your 
feet;  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet. 
For  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should 
do  as  I  have  done  to  you."  (John  xiii.  12-15.)  The 
love  of  Christ  therefore  to  us,  even  in  yielding 
Himself  up  to  death  on  our  behalf,  is  proposed 
to  us  as  our  example.  If  He  laid  down  His  life  for 
us,  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren, 
love's  uttermost  expression,  and  this — no  degree 
short  of  this — is  our  responsibility. 

But  mark  the  language  of  the  first  of  the  passages 
which  we  have  cited;  and  see  how  carefully  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  defined  the  character  of  the  love 


STANDING    AND   RESPONSIBILITY.  Ill 

which  should  also  flow  out  from  us,  and  thereby- 
guarded  it  from  degenerating  into  human  kindness 
and  amiability.  It  is,  ''As  Christ  also  hath  loved 
us,  and  hath  given  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a 
sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour.''  While 
therefore  we  are  under  responsibility  to  love  our 
brethren  to  the  uttermost,  God,  and  not  they,  is 
to  be  the  object  before  our  souls.  It  must  be 
expressed  as  to  Him;  and  can  therefore  only  be 
expressed  in  the  pathways  of  obedience.  "By 
this  we  know  that  we  love  the  children  of  God, 
when  we  love  God,  and  keep  His  commandments." 
(1  John  V.  2.)  Accordingly,  our  Lord's  sacrifice 
of  Himself  is  characterised  as  "obedience  untu 
death  "  (Phil.  ii.  8) ;  and  He  Himself  thus  speaks 
of  it :  "I  have  power  to  lay  it "  (His  life)  " down, 
and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again.  This  command- 
ment have  I  received  of  my  Father."  (John  x.  18.) 
Thus  Christ  must  be  before  our  souls — Christ  in 
motive  as  well  as  act,  in  treading  in  His  path  of 
love,  in  seeking  to  love  one  another,  even  as  He 
hath  loved  us.  (John  xv.  12.) 

The  apostle  Peter  gives  us  another  aspect  of 
our  responsibility  in  the  presentation  of  Christ  in 
walk,  an  aspect  towards  enemies  or  persecutoris. 
"  If,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  [for  it],  ye  take  it 
patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For  even 
hereunto  were  ye  called:  because  Christ  also 
suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye 


112       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF    SALVATION. 

should  follow  His  steps :  who  did  no  sin,  neither 
was  guile  found  in  His  mouth:  who,  when  He 
was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  when  He  suffered, 
He  threatened  not;  but  committed  Himself  to 
Him  that  judgeth  righteously :  who  His  own  self 
bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  that 
we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteous- 
ness :  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed."  (1  Peter 
ii.  20-24.)  It  is  thus  Christ,  in  whatever  way  we 
look ;  for  since  He  is  our  life,  our  responsibility  is 
to  live  Christ.  "  I  am  crucified  \\ith  Christ :  never- 
theless I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  : 
and  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live 
by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me, 
and  gave  Himself  for  me."  (Gal.  ii.  20.) 

It  may  tend  to  simplify  the  whole  subject,  and 
aid  in  its  apprehension,  if  we  refer  briefly  to  two 
other  passages  which  treat  of  it  in  another  form. 
Ephesians  iv.  20-32,  and  Colossians  iii.  contain  a 
number  of  practical  exhortations  which  are  all 
based  upon  our  standing  in  Christ.  We  take  the 
latter  to  indicate  their  general  character.  The  first 
part  of  the  chapter  (Col.  iii.)  deals  with  our  death 
and  resurrection  with  Christ,  on  which  we  have 
already  touched.  Following  upon  this  we  have 
practical  directions.  Then  the  apostle  lays  the 
foundation  of  all.  "  Lie  not  one  to  another,  seeing 
that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds ; 
i^nd  have  put  on^  iJi^  new  \man\ -whioh  is  renewed 


STANDING  AND   RESPONSIBILITY.  113 

in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  that  created 
him :  where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  cir- 
cumcision nor  uncircumcision,  Barbarian,  Scythian, 
bond  [nor]  free :  lut  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all.  Put 
on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved, 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  9-12.) 
Without  entering  upon  a  detailed  exposition  of  the 
passage,  it  will  be  observed  that  the  ground  of  the 
exhortations  lies  in  the  Colossian  believers  having 
"  put  off  the  old  man,"  and  having  "  put  on  the 
new."  But  when  did  they  put  off  the  old  man  ? 
It  was  in  the  death  of  Christ  that  our  old  man 
(Adam)  was  crucified.  (Eom.  vi.  6.)  And  when  did 
they  put  on  the  new  man  ?  In  the  resurrection 
of  Christ.  (Col.  ii.  11-13;  iii.  1-5.)  And  herein 
lies  the  whole  of  our  responsibility.  For  if  I,  through 
grace,  have  put  off  the  old  man,  my  responsibility 
is,  to  live  no  longer  according  to  the  old  man, 
but  to  mortify  my  members  which  are  upon 
the  earth;  and  if  I  have  put  on  the  new  man, 
I  am  under  the  obligation  to  walk  accordingly, 
For  we  have  been  brought,  through  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Christ,  out  of  the  old  state  and 
standing  in  which  Adam  was  all  and  in  all,  into 
the  new,  where  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  If  there- 
fore Christ  in  glory  is  the  measure  of  my  standing, 
He  also  is  the  measure  of  my  responsibility,  and 
these  two  things  are  ahvays  connected  in  the  word 
of  God,  as  they  should  also  ever  be  connected  in 
II 


114      FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

our  own  souls.  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  a  new 
creature"  (2  Cor.  v.  17),  i.c,  he  is  brought  into 
that  new  creation  of  which  Christ  is  the  beginning 
and  the  Head ;  and  hence  every  believer  is  respon- 
sible to  walk  in  accordance  with  the  character  of 
the  place  into  which  he  is  brought. 

"  0  Lord  !  when  we  the  path  retrace 
Which  Thou  on  earth  hast  trod, 
To  man  Thy  wondrous  love  and  grace, 
Thy  faithfulness  to  God  ; 

"'  Thy  love,  by  man  so  sorely  tried, 
Proved  stronger  tlian  the  gi^ave ; 
The  very  spear  that  pierced  Thy  side 
Drew  forth  the  blood  to  save  ; 

Faithful  amidst  unfaithfulness, 

'Mid  darkness  only  light. 
Thou  didst  Thy  Father's  name  confess. 

And  in  His  will  delight ; 

Unmoved  by  Satan's  subtle  wiles, 

Or  suffering,  shame,  and  loss. 
Thy  path,  uncheered  by  earthly  smilea, 

Led  only  to  the  cross  : — 

We  wonder  at  Thy  lowly  mind. 

And  fain  would  like  Thee  be. 
And  all  our  rest  and  pleasure  find 

In  learning,  Lord,  of  Thee." 


THE  COMING  OF  THE  LORD.        115 


CHAPTEE   XL 

THE   COMING    OF  THE  LORD. 

One  object  of  hope  is  placed  before  the  believer 
in  the  Scriptures  as  soon  as  he  has  been  brought 
out  of  darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light,  and 
that  is  the  coming  or  return  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
This  is  the  case  in  almost  every  book  of  the  New 
Testament ;  and  this  fact  makes  it  the  more  sur- 
prising that  the  hope  of  the  Lord's  return  has 
been  lost  sight  of  by  almost  the  whole  professing 
Church.  Let  us  examine  the  Scriptures  on  this 
point. 

In  the  first  place,  we  shall  find  that  our  Lord 
Himself  was  continually  pressing  this  truth  upon 
the  attention  of  His  disciples.  In  the  gospel  of 
Matthew  it  is  found  again  and  again,  and  the 
"parable  of  the  virgins"  embodies  it  in  its  most 
striking  form.  (Matt,  xxv.)  In  Mark  we  get  the 
exhortation,  "Watch  ye  therefore:  for  ye  know 
not  when  the  Master  of  the  house  cometh,  at 
even,  or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in 
the  morning,"  etc.  (xiii.  35-37.)  In  Luke  we  read, 
"  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights 
burning;  and  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that 


116       FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

wait  for  their  lord,  when  he  will  return  from  the 
wedding ;  that  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they 
may  open  unto  him  immediately."  (xii.  35,  36.) 
In  John  we  have  those  blessed  and  familiar  words  : 
"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled :  ye  believe  in 
God,  believe  also  in  me.  In  my  Father's  house 
are  many  mansions :  if  [it  were]  not  [so],  I  would 
have 'told  you.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you. 
And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  /  ^vill 
come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself;  that  toiler  e 
I  am,  [there']  ye  may  he  also''  (xiv.  1-3.) 

These  are  only  samples  of  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  presented  His  return  to  His  disciples ;  and 
we  now  pass  on  to  the  subsequent  books  of  the 
New  Testament,  because  it  is  after  the  resurrection 
and  ascension  of  Christ  that  the  Holy  Spirit  re- 
veals this  truth  as  the  distinctive  hope  of  the 
believer.  Indeed,  no  sooner  had  the  Lord  been 
taken  from  His  disciples  up  into  heaven  than  this 
message  was  sent  to  them :  "Ye  men  of  Galilee, 
why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?  this  same 
Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  yoxL  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  7nanner  as  ye  have  seen  Him 
go  into  heaven."  (Acts  i.  10,  11.)  Passing  still 
onward  to  the  epistles  which  were  addressed  to 
churches  or  to  saints,  we  shall  find  the  same 
thing.  The  first  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  was 
the  earliest  in  point  of  time  of  these;  and  in 
this,  describing  their  conversion,  the  apostle  says : 


THE  COMING  OF  THE  LOED.       117 

"They  themselves  show  of  us  what  manner  of 
entering  in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how  ye  turned 
to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God; 
and  to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven'^  (1  Thess. 
i.  9, 10 ;  see  also  ii.  19,  20 ;  iii.  13 ;  iv.  13-18,  etc.) 
The  second  epistle  to  the  same  church  treats  of 
the  same  subject,  correcting  some  mistakes  into 
which  the  saints  were  in  danger  of  falling  through 
false  teaching.  (See  2  Thess.  ii.  1-6.)  In  Colossians 
we  have  the  same  distinct  note— "When  Christ, 
[who  is]  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
appear  with  Him  in  gloiy"  (iii.  4),  showing  here 
indeed  that  the  saints  will  have  been  caught 
up  to  meet  the  Lord  before  His  appearing.  In 
Philippians  also  we  have,  "  Our  conversation  is  in 
heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (iii.  20.)  So  in  Titus, 
"  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  (ii.  13.) 

Taking  now  the  last  book  of  the  Bible,  what  do 
we  find  ?  The  same  thing  both  at  the  commence- 
ment and  at  the  close.  Of  all  the  seven  churches 
Philadelphia  seems  most  in  accord  with  the  Lord's 
mind;  and  it  is  to  it  that  He  says,  "Behold,  I 
come  quickly :  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that 
no  man  take  thy  crown."  (Eev.  iii.  11.)  And  our 
Lord  thus  closes  His  communications  to  His  people, 
and  the  whole  canon  of  inspired  truth :  "  He  which 


118       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

testifietli]these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly" 
(Eev.  xxii.  20),  sufficient  evidence  surely  of  the 
place  He  would  have  His  coming  to  occupy  in 
our  minds. 

And  not  only  is  it  the  fact  that  our  attitude 
should  ever  be  that  of  waiting  for  the  Lord  Jesus, 
but  we  are  also  taught  that  there  is  nothing  of 
necessity,  as  far  as  is  revealed,  between  the  pre- 
sent and  that  coming,  no  intervening  events  to 
occupy  us  or  to  turn  aside  our  gaze ;  but  that  at 
any  moment,  even  while  this  page  is  being  written 
or  read,  the  Lord  may  '*  descend  from  lieaven  with 
a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with 
the  trump  of  God,"  to  raise  His  sleeping  saints, 
and  to  change  the  living  ones,  that  both  alike  may 
be  caught  up  "  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air."  (1  Thess.  iv.  15-18.)  Thus  the  apostle, 
in  the  constant  expectation  of  this  event,  says, 
'*  We  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught 
up,"  etc.  {v.  17) ;  and  again,  "  We  shall  not  all 
sleep,  but  ive  shall  be  changed."  (1  Cor.  xv.  51.) 
Accordingly,  it  is  the  evil  servant  who  is  spoken 
of  as  saying  in  his  heart,  "My  lord  delayeth  his 
coming  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  48) ;  and  Peter  also  tells  us 
that  there  will  be  scoffers  in  the  last  days,  "  walk- 
ing after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying.  Where  is 
the  promise  of  His  coming  ? "  (2  Peter  iii.  3,  4) 

Waiting,  looking  for,  expecting  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  should  thus  characterize  eveiy  believer. 


THE  COMING  OF  THE  LOED.        119 

For,  as  we  have  continually  seen  in  these  pages, 
we  are  a  heavenly  people,  and  hence  our  hope  is 
also  heavenly;  and  we  wait  for  the  Lord  Jesus, 
because  He  Himself  has  told  us  to  do  so.  And, 
moreover,  He  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  to  us 
that  then  will  be  the  consummation  of  our  re- 
demption. It  is  then  that  we  shall  be  like  Him 
(1  John  iii.  2) ;  that  we  shall  be  like  Him  bodily 
as  well  as  morally.  (Phil.  iii.  21.)  For  if  we  shall 
have  died  as  to  the  body  ere  He  returns,  He  will 
raise  us  from  among  the  dead,  in  resurrection 
bodies  like  His  own ;  if  we  are  still  on  the  earth, 
we  shall  "  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twink- 
ling of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump  :  for  the  trumpet 
shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incor- 
ruptible, and  we"  (i.e.  the  living)  "shall  be 
changed."  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52.)  Then,  too,  not  only 
shall  we  enter  upon  our  association  with  Him 
in  the  glory,  but  we  shall  also  "  ever  be  with  the 
Lord."  (1  Thess.  iv.  17.) 

The  effect  of  this  hope  upon  the  soul  should  be 
most  blessed.  We  may  adduce  a  few  instances 
of  the  practical  power  which  it  is  intended  to 
exercise.  Beyond  all,  the  constant  expectation  of 
Christ  constitutes  a  searching  test  of  our  spiritual 
condition.  This  is  one  of  the  main  points  in  the 
parable  of  the  virgins.  (Matt.  xxv.  1-13.)  All  the 
virgins  are  professors ;  but  the  fatal  distinction  is 
that  while  five  are  wise,  five  are  foolish.    All  alike 


120      FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

had  lamps,  and  all  alike  professed  to  go  forth  to 
meet  the  Bridegroom.  Outwardly  therefore  there 
was  no  difference ;  and  as  far  as  can  be  discovered 
from  the  parable  the  essential  difference  between 
them  was  not  detected  until  the  cry  was  raised, 
''  Behold  the  Bridegroom ! "  Then  it  is,  in  the 
prospect  of  His  approach,  and  in  order  to  be 
ready  to  meet  Him,  that  they  are  aroused  from 
their  slumbers,  and  that  they  begin  to  trim  their 
lamps;  but  no  sooner  was  the  light  applied  to 
the  wicks  of  their  lamps  than  five  discover  their 
lack  of  oil.  Until  now  they  had  thought  that  all 
was  well.  They  were  professors,  and  walked,  out- 
wardly at  least,  as  the  Lord's  people ;  but  now,  in 
the  near  prospect  of  meeting  the  Lord,  they  are 
made  to  know  that  they  had  no  oil,  that  they  had 
not  been  born  again,  that  they  had  no  indwelling 
Spirit  to  bear  witness  with  their  spirits  that  they 
were  God's  children,  that  they  were  professors  and 
nothing  else,  and  therefore  that  as  such  they  could 
not  meet  the  Bridegroom.  Hence  their  endeavours 
to  get  the  oil :  but  no,  their  efforts  are  vain ;  it  is 
too  late,  for  the  Bridegroom  and  those  that  were 
ready  have  gone  in  to  the  marriage:  ''and  the  door 
was  shut."  (v.  10.)  Undaunted  still,  they  press 
onwards  and  reach  the  door,  and  standing  there, 
they  raise  the  pleading  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to 
us.  But  He  answered  and  said.  Verily  I  say  unto 
you,  I  know  you  not."    (vv.  11,   12.)     And  the 


THE  COMING  OF  THE  LOKD.       121 

solemn  lesson  which  the  Lord  Himself  draws  is 
this,  "Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the 
day  nor  the  hour"  (v.  13) ;  for  what  happened  to 
the  foolish  virgins  in  the  parable  may  happen  to 
any  of  us,  if  we  take  only  the  lamp  of  profession, 
and  have  no  oil;  i.e.  if  we  are  Christians  only  in 
name,  never  having  been  born  again,  and  received 
the  Spirit  of  adoption. 

But  not  only  does  the  expectation  of  Christ 
reveal  the  true  state  of  professors,  but  it  also  dis- 
covers the  condition  of  the  wise  virgins.  These 
equally  with  the  foolish  had  slumbered  and  slept, 
and  it  is  the  cry,  "  Behold  the  Bridegroom  "  which 
also  awakens  them,  and  constrains  them  to  trim 
their  lamps  that  they  might  go  forth  and  meet 
Him;  and  it  is  only  thus  that  being  ready  they 
went  in  with  Him  to  the  marriage,  (v.  10.)  Indeed, 
when  believers  are  constantly  expecting  their  Lord, 
it  is  impossible  for  them  to  sleep.  In  spirit  they 
are  already  in  His  presence,  and  their  own  state 
and  associations  are  instantly  revealed.  And  it 
would  seem  from  the  parable  that  there  are  four 
things  which  constitute  readiness  to  meet  the  Lord: 
First,  the  one  essential  thing,  oil;  secondly,  the 
lamp  trimmed  and  burning;  thirdly,  separation, 
for  they  were  to  go  out  to  meet  the  Bridegroom ; 
and  lastly,  watchfulness,  for  their  failure  was  in 
having  slumbered  and  slept.  And  it  is  when  the 
Lord  is  momentarily  expected  that  believers  will 


122       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS    OF   SALVATION. 

seek  to  have  these  characteristics  of  preparedness 
for  His  presence. 

It  should  be  also  an  incentive  to  fidelity  in 
service.  Thus  in  the  parable  of  the  ten  pounds, 
the  charge  which  accompanied  their  delivery  to 
the  ten  servants  was,  "  Occupy  till  I  come."  (Luke 
xix.  12-27.)  Concerning  the  evil  servant,  already 
mentioned,  it  is  said,  "The  lord  of  that  servant 
shall  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him, 
and  in  an  hour  that  he  is  not  aware  of,  and  shall 
cut  him  asunder,  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with 
the  hypocrites,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxiv.  50,  51.)  Thus  the 
coming  of  Christ  is  a  double  motive  to  fidelity; 
it  holds  out  encouragement  to  the  faithful,  and  it 
affords  a  warning  to  the  careless  servant.  The 
former  will  say  with  joyful  anticipation,  "My 
Lord  is  at  hand,  and  therefore  I  must  seek  to  be 
diligent  ere  He  comes;"  while  the  latter,  if  he 
reflect  at  all,  will  surely  think,  "What  will  my 
Lord  say  if  He  find  me,  at  His  coming,  both  care- 
less and  unfaithful?"  The  more  fully  therefore 
we  live  in  the  power  of  the  expectation  of  Christ, 
the  more  shall  we  feel  the  need  of  serving  as  in 
His  sight,  knowing  that  He  will  reckon  with  us 
on  His  return. 

Tlie  prospect  of  the  coming  of  Christ  exerts  also 
a  separating  power  upon  heart  and  life.  The 
apostle  John  says,  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the 
sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 


THE   COMING   OF  fflE  "XORD.  123/^ 

shall  be :  but  we  know  that  when  He  shall  appear 
we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He 
is.  And  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him 
{i.e.  in  Christ)  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is 
pure."  (1  John  ii.  2,  3.)  Nothing  indeed  will 
detach  us  from  all  that  is  unsuited  to  His  pre- 
sence like  the  constant  expectation  of  Christ 
Knowing  that  He  may  return  at  any  moment, 
and  living  with  this  expectation,  it  will  be  our 
desire  to  be  separated  from  all,  whether  in  heart, 
manner,  habit,  life,  and  walk,  on  which  He  could 
not  smile.  Yea,  it  will  lead  us  to  judge  every- 
thing within  and  without  ourselves  by  the  light 
of  His  presence  as  being  in  spirit  already  with 
Him,  and  thus  having  Him  in  glory  continually 
before  our  souls,  to  "  purify  ourselves  even  as  He 
is  pure." 

These  are  only  some  of  the  practical  effects  of 
the  living  expectation  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  If 
the  Scriptures  are  examined  further  on  the  subject, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  coming  of  Christ  is 
always  associated  with  the  heart  and  life  of  the 
believer.  But  enough  has  been  said  to  indicate 
the  practical  character  of  the  doctrine.  A  grievous 
wrong  is  therefore  done  to  the  young  believer 
when  he  is  kept  in  ignorance  of  this  most  blessed 
truth.  For  if  the  cross  of  Christ  is  the  founda- 
tion, the  coming  of  Christ  is  the  completion  of 
his  salvation,  for  it  is  then,  as  we  have  seen,  that 


124      FUNDAMENTAL  TEUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

ill  body  also  he  will  be  like  his  Lord.  And  not 
only  so,  but  he  is  also  deprived  of  that  hope 
which,  applied  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  only  sus- 
tains him  in  discouragement,  comforts  him  in 
trouble,  consoles  him  in  bereavement,  nerves  him 
for  conflict,  stimulates  his  zeal,  and  calls  forth  his 
affections,  but  also  works  mightily  for  his  practical 
sanctification.  It  is  no  wonder  therefore  that 
Satan  should  seek  to  obscure  it  from  the  minds 
of  believers;  but  it  is  a  wonder  that  so  many 
should  fall  into  his  snare,  inasmuch  as  our  blessed 
Lord  has  for  ever  associated  it  with  the  touching 
memorials  of  His  own  death.  For  every  time 
"  we  eat  the  bread,  and  drink  the  cup,  we  do  show 
the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."  (1  Cor.  xi.  26.) 

"  *  A  little  while  V  the  Lord  shall  come, 
And  we  shall  wander  here  no  more  ; 

He  11  take  us  to  His  Father's  home, 
Where  He  for  us  is  gone  before  : 

To  dwell  with  Him,  to  see  His  face, 

And  sing  the  glories  of  His  grace. 

"  *  A  little  while  ! "  He  11  come  again  : 
Let  us  the  precious  hours  redeem  ; 
Our  only  grief  to  give  Him  pain, 

Our  joy  to  serve  and  follow  Him  : 
Watching  and  ready  may  we  be, 
As  those  that  wait  their  Lord  to  see/' 


THE   JUDGMENT.  125. 


CHAPTEE   XII. 

TEE  JUDGMENT. 

Much  confusion  exists  in  the  minds  both  of  be- 
lievers and  unbelievers  as  to  the  judgment.  The 
general  idea  is  that  at  the  end  of  the  world  there 
will  be  a  judgment-day,  when  all  alike,  whether 
saved  or  unsaved,  will  stand  before  God,  and  re- 
ceive according  to  their  works.  Hence  it  is  often 
contended  that  we  cannot  know  whether  we  are 
saved  before  that  time.  We  therefore  propose  to 
examine  this  subject  by  the  light  of  the  Scrip- 
tures. 

1.  It  is  very  certain  that  believers  will  never 
be  judged — will  never  stand  before  the  judgment- 
seat  on  account  of  sin.  Our  Lord  teaches  this 
doctrine  most  distinctly.  He  says,  "  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
believeth  on  Him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting 
life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation ;  but  is 
passed  from  death  unto  life."  (John  v.  24.)  Now 
this  word  "condemnation"  should  be  translated 
judgment,  and  is  so  translated  in  verses  22,  27,  and 
29 ;  and  we  have  therefore  a  distinct  assertion  that 


126       FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

believers  will  not  come  into  judgment.  Indeed, 
this  is  only  a  simple  consequence  of  having  eternal 
life ;  for  if  the  question  of  our  state  before  God 
were  left  unsettled,  how  could  we  be  possessors  of 
everlasting  life  ?  And  yet  we  are  taught  that  we 
have  this  now :  "  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
belie veth  on  Him  that  sent  me,  liaW  (not  shall 
have)  "  everlasting  life."  (See  also  John  iii.  36;  vi. 
47 ;  1  John  v.  13,  etc.) 

This  truth  was  shadowed  forth  in  the  distinction 
which  God  made  between  Israel  and  Egypt  on  the 
Passover  night,  when  He  smote  the  first-born. 
Israel,  as  we  have  seen,  was  completely  sheltered 
from  the  power  of  the  destroying  angel,  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  In  like  manner  every  believer 
is  secured  from  judgment  as  to  guilt,  by  the  blood 
of  Christ;  for  Christ  has  borne  the  judgment  for 
him  in  His  death  on  the  cross,  so  that  he  can  say, 
''  He  bare  my  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree." 
(1  Peter  ii.  24) 

"  Yes,"  you  may  perhaps  reply,  ''  my  past  sins." 
"  No,"  we  answer,  "  your  sins ;  all  your  sins  if  you 
are  a  believer.  For  not  one  of  them  had  been 
committed  when  the  Saviour  died ;  and  so  He 
took  the  burden  of  all  of  them,  entered  into  and 
exhausted  the  judgment  due  to  all  of  them,  so 
that  the  whole  of  your  guilt  might  for  ever  be 
swept  away.     Blessed  truth  ! " 


THE  JUDGMENT.  127 

"  If  thou  hast  my  discharge  procured, 
And  freely  in  my  place  endured 

The  whole  of  wrath  divine, 
Payment  He  will  not  twice  demand, 
First  at  my  bleeding  surety's  hand, 

And  then  again  at  mine." 

Thus  it  is  that  we  have  not  only  died,  but  have 
also  been  raised  together  with  Christ  (Eph.  ii. ; 
Col.  iii.),  and  therefore  have  been  brought  through 
the  judgment,  in  the  death  of  Christ,  so  that  we 
stand  on  the  other,  the  resurrection  side,  where 
in  perfect  confidence  we  can  cry,  "  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God 
that  justifieth.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? " 
(Eom.  viii.  33,  34.) 

2.  Though  believers  will  never  be  judged  on 
account  of  sin,  all  must  appear  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ.  Thus  the  apostle  writes  : 
"  We  are  confident  [I  say]  and  willing  rather  to 
be  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be  present  with 
the  Lord.  Wherefore  we  labour  (or,  it  is  our 
earnest  desire),  that,  whether  present  or  absent, 
we  may  be  accepted  of  Him  (or,  acceptable  to 
Him).  For  we  must  all  ap;pear  lefore  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the 
things  [done]  in  [his]  body,  according  to  that  he 
hath  done,  whether  [it  be]  good  or  bad."  (2  Cor. 
V.  8-10.)  No  statement  could  be  plainer  to  the 
effect  that  all,  ''we  all,"  and  therefore  believers, 
must  also   appear  before   the  judgment-seat   of 


128       FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

Christ.  We  ask  them  these  two  questions:  first, 
When  will  this  be  for  believers  ?  and  secondly,  For 
what  purpose  will  they  be  there  ? 

(a)  When  will  believers  appear  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ  ?  It  has  been  seen  in  the 
previous  chapter  that  the  hope  of  the  believer  is 
the  coming  of  Christ ;  and  that  at  His  coming  the 
dead  in  Christ  will  be  raised,  that  those  who  are 
living  will  be  changed,  and  that  both  will  be 
caught  up  together  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air.  (1  Thess.  iv.  16-18.)  This  applies 
to  believers  alone,  and  is  "the  resurrection  of  life" 
of  which  our  Lord  speaks  in  the  gospel  of  John. 
If  we  cite  the  whole  passage  the  reference  will  be 
better  understood.  He  says,  "  The  hour  is  coming 
in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear 
His  voice,  and  shall  come  forth;  they  that  have 
done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life ;  and  they 
have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of  damna- 
tion" (judgment,  Kpia-ews).  (John  v.  28,  29.)  In 
verse  24,  He  proclaims  everlasting  life  to  every 
one  that  heareth  His  word,  and  believeth  on  Him 
that  sent  Him;  and  declares  that  all  such  shall 
not  come  into  judgment,  but  are  passed  from  death 
unto  life.  He  then  proceeds,  "Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you.  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is, 
when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God  :  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."  He  grounds 
this  assurance  upon  the  fact  that  "  as  the  Father 


THE  JUDGMENT.  129 

hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  to  the 
Son  to  have  life  in  Himself;  and  hath  given 
Him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because 
He  is  the  Son  of  man."  (vv.  25-27.)  Then  comes 
our  passage,  "  Marvel  not  at  this  :  for  the  hour  is 
coming,"  etc.  (v.  28.) 

The  two  things  here  contrasted  are  life  and 
judgment,  in  connection  with  Christ  as  the  source 
of  one,  and  the  depositary  of  the  other.  As  the 
Son  of  God  He  communicates  life ;  as  the  Son  of 
man  He  is  invested  with  the  authority  to  execute 
judgment.  Accordingly  He  offers  life  in  the  hour 
that  now  is;  and  will  execute  judgment  in  the 
hour  that  is  coming.  The  hour  that  "  now  is  "  has 
lasted  therefore  from  the  time  when  these  words 
were  spoken,  and  will  last  until  the  close  of  the 
present  dispensation.  Thus  the  dead  in  verse  25 
are  the  spiritually  dead;  and  hence  we  have  the 
words  ''they  that  hear  shall  live;"  for  it  is  only 
they  that  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
gospel  who  pass  from  death  unto  life.  But  in  the 
coming  hour  (v.  28)  we  are  told  that  all  that  are 
in  the  graves  shall  come  forth ;  "  the  hour  "  in  this 
case,  as  in  verse  25,  marking  a  period  or  dispensa- 
tion, and  therefore  in  no  way  indicating  a  simul- 
taneous resurrection.  On  the  other  hand,  as  we 
know  from  other  Scriptures  (1  Cor.  xv.  23 ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  15-18  ;  Kev.  xx.  4-6,  etc.),  the  resurrection  of 
life  will  take  place  at  the  Lord's  return,  while  the 
I 


130      FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

resurrection  of  judgment  will  not  be  until  the 
close  of  the  millennium,  being  the  closing  event 
of  earthly  dispensations  preparatory  to  the  eternal 
state.  What  we  get  then  from  this  passage  is, 
that  the  resurrection  of  life  of  those  who  have 
heard  the  word  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  believed 
on  Him  that  sent  Him,  and  have  received  ever- 
lasting life,  is  an  entirely  distinct  thing  from  the 
resurrection  of  judgment;  that  believers  have  no 
part  in  the  resurrection  of  judgment,  and  hence 
that  they  will  not  appear  before  the  judgment- 
seat  together  with  the  wicked.  There  is  also  the 
other  solemn  instruction  which  we  note  and  leave, 
as  outside  our  present  purpose,  that  all  men  must 
honour  the  Son  of  God,  if  not  now  by  bowing 
before  Him  in  self-judgment  to  receive  everlasting 
life,  then  by-and-by  when  He  executes  judgment 
as  the  Son  of  man  upon  every  one  according  to 
their  works.  Now  He  acts  in  grace;  then  in 
righteous  judgment. 

Having  then  seen  that  believers  have  no  part 
in  the  resurrection  of  judgment,  we  have  still  to 
enquire.  When  will  they  appear  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ  ?  The  answer  is  clear  from 
many  passages  that  it  is  on  His  return,  and  there- 
fore consequent  upon  the  first  resurrection.  This  is 
the  distinct  teaching  of  the  parables  in  Matthew 
XXV.  14,  etc.;  Luke  xix.  11,  etc.  In  the  former, 
we  have  the  words,  "  After  a  long  time  the  lord  of 


THE  JUDGMENT.  131 

those  servants  cometh,  and  reckoneth  with  them  '* 
(Matt.  XXV.  19) ;  in  the  latter,  the  charge  on  de- 
parture is,  "  Occupy  till  I  come."  (Luke  xix.  13.) 
In  all  the  exhortations,  too,  addressed  to  the  dis- 
ciples, under  responsibilty  as  servants,  the  coming 
of  Christ  is  the  goal  to  which  they  are  directed 
to  look ;  so  also  in  the  epistles  (as,  for  example, 
1  Cor.  i.  7,  8;  1  Thess.  i.  9, 10;  iii.  12, 13;  2  Thess. 
L  ;  1  Timothy  vi.  13-16 ;  Titus  ii.  11-14,  etc.) 

(J3)  We  may,  then,  now  answer  our  second  ques- 
tion— For  what  purpose  will  believers  appear  before 
the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  ?  We  have  seen  that 
it  is  not  to  be  judged  for  sin ;  for  the  possession  of 
everlasting  life  exempts  them  from  this,  and  the 
judgment,  due  both  to  their  sins  and  sinful  con- 
dition, has  already  been  borne  by  their  Surety  in 
His  death.  It  is  "  that  every  one  may  receive  the 
things  [done]  in  [his]  body;''  and  thus  for  the 
believer  it  is  a  judgment  of  his  works  or  service. 
This  truth  cannot  be  too  earnestly  pressed  upon 
our  hearts  and  consciences ;  for  it  will  stimulate 
us  both  to  fidelity  and  zeal  to  remember  that  we 
must  "be  manifested"  (as  the  word  is)  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Let  it  be  remembered, 
however,  that  before  we  are  thus  judged  we  are 
already  raised,  and  made  like  unto  our  Lord  (Phil, 
iii.  20,  21 ;  1  John  iii.  2),  bodily  as  well  as  spirit- 
ually ;  and  hence  that  we  shall  have  full  fellowship 
with  Him  in  His  judgment  upon  our  works.    Still 


132      FUNDAMENTAL   TRUTHS   OF   SALVATION. 

it  is  a  very  solemn  consideration,  that  in  regard  to 
those  things  which  we  now  excuse  or  allow  to  pass 
unjudged,  we  shall  then  take  part  with  Christ  in 
condemning  as  unworthy  of  Him  whom  we  pro- 
fessed to  serve ;  as  traces  of  Egypt  which  ought  to 
have  been  judged  and  rolled  away ;  as  actings  of 
the  flesh  which  God  in  His  infinite  mercy  and 
grace  had  put  into  the  place  of  death,  and  which 
He  has  given  us  power  to  keep  there  through  the 
indwelling  Spirit.  Hence  the  blessing  of  con- 
stant and  faithful  self-judgment,  as  even  now  in 
spirit  manifested  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ.  May  we  be  enabled  to  do  this,  and  may 
"  the  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly ;  and 
your  whole  spirit,  soul,  and  body  be  preserved 
blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  (1  Thess.  v.  23.) 

3.  The  final  judgment  of  the  wicked  will  take 
place  at  the  end  of  the  millennium.  Earth  has 
been,  and  will  yet  be,  the  scene  of  many  a  judg- 
ment of  the  living ;  and  so  also  "  when  the  Son  of 
man  comes  in  His  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels 
with  Him,  then  shall  He  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
His  glory :  and  before  Him  shall  be  gathered  all 
nations,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  etc.)  This  judgment 
scene  is  often  confounded  with  that  which  takes 
place  before  the  great  white  throne ;  but  it  is 
entirely  distinct.  It  is,  as  the  word  declares, 
the  judgment  of  the  nations,  living  nations  at 


THE  JUDGMENT.  133 

the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  glory ;  a  judg- 
ment therefore  preparatory  to  His  sway  from  the 
river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  final  judg- 
ment, that  of  the  dead,  is  found  in  the  Eevelation, 
and  is  thus  described  :  "And  I  saw  the  dead,  small 
and  great,  stand  before  God  "  (it  should  be,  before 
the  throne) ;  "  and  the  books  were  opened :  and 
another  book  was  opened,  which  is  [the  book]  of 
life :  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those 
things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according 
to  their  w^orks.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead 
which  were  in  it;  and  death  and  hell  (rather, 
hades)  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them : 
and  they  were  judged  every  man  according  to 
their  works.  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into 
the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death.  And 
whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of 
life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  (Eev.  xx.  11-15.) 
This  is  the  "resurrection  of  judgment"  of  which 
our  Lord  speaks  in  the  gospel  of  John ;  and  will 
include  therefore  all  the  unsaved,  and  the  unsaved 
alone.  True  that  the  book  of  life  is  there;  but 
there  is  no  indication  of  any  saints  to  be  judged. 
The  book  of  life  is  opened  to  show  that  the  names 
of  those  to  be  judged  were  not  there;  and  thus 
they  are  condemned  on  both  negative  and  positive 
grounds.  Their  names  were  not  written  in  the 
book  of  life,  and  their  works  declared  them 
amenable  to  righteous  judgment,  and  they  thus 


134      FUNDAMENTAL  TRUTHS   OF  SALVATION. 

fall  hopelessly  under  the  everlasting  sentence  of 
the  lake  of  fire,  which  is  the  second  death,  a 
sentence  from  which  there  is  no  appeal  and  no 
escape. 

Are  any  of  my  readers  still  unsaved  ?  Let  me 
beseech  you  to  ponder  upon  this  solemn  scene.  He 
who  sits  upon  that  great  white  throne  as  the 
Judge  is  the  Blessed  One  who,  now  seated  in  the 
glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  is  proclaimed  to 
you  as  a  Saviour.  Concerning  Him  the  divine 
decree  has  gone  forth,  "  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  [things]  in  heaven,  and 
[things]  in  earth,  and  [things]  under  the  earth" 
(i.e.  celestial,  terrestrial,  and  infernal  beings) ;  "  and 
[that]  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father." 
(Phil.  ii.  10,  11.)  None  therefore  can  escape;  but 
the  question  which  affects  you,  and  will  affect  you 
eternally,  is  whether  you  will  bow  the  knee  to 
Him  now  while  it  is  the  accepted  time,  and  the 
day  of  salvation,  or  whether  you  will  be  constrained 
to  bow  before  Him  as  your  Judge  on  the  throne. 
Bow  before  Him  now,  in  self-judgment,  taking  tlie 
place  of  a  sinner,  and  looking  to  Him  as  the  Savioui*, 
the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world,  and  you  will  not  come  into  judgmeii!* 
but  will,  while  you  look,  pass  from  death  unto 
life.  Eefusing  Him  as  a  Saviour,  despising  the 
grace  of  God  which  promises  everlasting  life  tu 


THE  JUDGMENT.  135 

every  one  that  believeth  on  Him,  you  will  have  to 
bow  before  and  under  the  rod  of  His  judgment, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  confess  that  He  is  Lord 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  Awful  alternative  ! 
Oh  that  even  the  contemplation  of  it  may  be  used 
of  the  Lord  to  bring  you,  even  as  you  read,  as  a  lost 
sinner  to  His  feet,  so  that  finding  Him  as  your 
Saviour,  you  may  be  amongst  that  happy  number 
who  are  waiting  for  His  return,  and  who  will 
never  stand  before  the  great  white  throne. 

"  Lamb  of  God,  Thou  now  art  seated 

High  upon  Thy  Father^s  throne  ; 
All  Thy  gracious  work  completed, 

All  Thy  mighty  vict'ry  won  : 
Every  knee  in  heaven  is  bending 

To  the  Lamb  for  sinners  slain  ; 
Every  voice  and  harp  is  swelling, — 

Worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  reign." 


"  Unto  Him  who  loved  us — gave  us 
Every  pledge  that  love  could  give  ; 
Freely  shed  His  blood  to  save  us  ; 
Gave  His  life  that  we  might  live  ; 
Be  the  kingdom, 
And  dominion, 
And  the  glory  evermore  ! " 

'Ol  TBGR 


LONDON  : 
W.    H.    BROOM,    25,   PATKIlNOSTEfi   SQUARE, 


iririVBESITTl 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CAUFORNIA  UBRARY 


