— ■ — no 

:GEiNEsis: 

I -XXV. 

:       REV.  w.  ft.      : 

GRM*rf;\  moMAs.D.n 


a  devotional 
:  commentary: 


One-' 

Clieolo^tcal  Collection, 

of  the' 


Govovxto 


GKNESIS  I.— XXV.  10 


UNIFORM  WITH  THI8  VOLUME. 

GENESIS. 

By  the  REV.  W.  H.  GRIFFITH  THOMAS,  D.D. 

In  Three  Volumes. 
Volume  II.— Genesis  XXV.  n-XXXVI.  8. 
Volume  III.— Genesis  XXXVII.-L. 

ESTHER. 

By  the  REV.  J.  ELDER  CUMMING,  D.D. 

THE  PSALMS. 

By  the  REV.  J.  ELDER  CUMMING,  D.D. 

In  Three  Volumes. 
Volume  I.— Psalms  I.-XLI. 
Volume  II.— Psalms  XLII.-LXXXIX. 
Volume  III.— Psalms  XC.-CL. 

PHILIPPIANS. 

By  the  REV.  F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A. 

I.  THESSALONIANS. 

By  the  REV.  A.  R.  BUCKLAND,  M.A. 

II.  THESSALONIANS. 

By  the  REV.  A.  R.  BUCKLAND,  M.A. 

I.  TIMOTHY. 

By  the  REV.  T.  A.  GURNEY,  M.A. 

II.  TIMOTHY. 

By  the  LORD  BISHOP  of  DURHAM. 

PHILEMON. 

By  the  REV.  A.  H.  DRYSDALE,  D.D. 

HEBREWS. 

By  the  LORD  BISHOP  of  DERRY. 

JAMES. 

By  the  REV.  CHARLES  BROWN. 


A  DEVOTIONAL  COMMENTARY 

Edited  by  the  Roy.  A.  R.  BUCKLAND,  M.A. 


GENESIS 

I.-XXV.  JO 
A  DEVOTIONAL  COMMENTARY 

By  the 
Rev.  W.  H.  GRIFFITH  THOMAS,  D.D. 

Principal  of  Wydiffe  Hall,  Oxford 
THIRD  EDITION 


* 


LONDON 
THE  RELIGIOUS  TRACT  SOCIETY 

4  BOUVERIE  STREET  and  6s  ST  PAULS  CHURCHYARD,  B.C. 

1909 


NOV     9  2001 


CONTENTS 

i. 

PAGE 

Introduction 

ii. 

1 

The  Creation  , 

>        •                •        • 

Chapter  i. 
III. 

12 

The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

31 

Chapter  ii. 

IV. 

The  Fall          , 

Chapter  iii. 
V. 

44 

Cain  and  Abel 

Chapter  iv.  1-15. 
VI. 

66 

Human  Progress       . 

66 

Chapters  iv.  16-vi.  8. 

VII. 

Before  the  Flood    . 

.        80 

Chapter  vi.  0-22 

VIII. 

At  the  Flood 

•                      •           • 
Chapter  vi j. 
V 

.       88 

Contents 


PAOE 


IX. 

After  the  Flood      .....       98 
Chapter  viii. 

X. 

The  New  Era  ......      105 

Chapter  ix.  1-17. 

XI. 

A  Believer's  Fall    .  .  .  .  .115 

Chapter  ix.  18-29. 

XII. 

A  Wide  Outlook       .  .  .  .  .124 

Chapter  x. 

XIII. 

The  Tower  op  Babel  .  .  .  .134 

Chapter  xi.  1-9. 

XIV. 

The  Call  of  Abraham       .  .  .  .142 

Chapters  xi.  10 — xii.  9. 

XV. 

The  Testing 151 

Chapters  xii.  10— xiii.  4. 

XVI. 

The  Separation         .  .  .  .  .157 

Chapter  xiii.  5-18. 

XVII. 

A  New  Emergency    .  .  .  .  .165 

Chapter  xiv.  1-16. 

vi 


Contents 


PAGE 


XVIII. 

The  Test  of  Victory  .  .  ,  .171 

Chapter  xiv.  17-24. 

XIX. 

Thb  Great  Encouragement         .  .  .178 

Chapter  xv.  1-6. 

XX. 

The  Confirmation  of  Faith        .  .  .185 

Chapter  xv.  7-21. 

XXI. 

A  False  Step  ......      102 

Chapter  xvi. 

XXII. 

The  Covenant  Renewed    .  .  200 

Chapter  xvii. 

XXIII. 

Fellowship  with  God        .  .  200 

Chapter  xviii.  1-21. 

XXIV. 

The  Ministry  of  Intercession    .  .  .216 

Chapters  xviii.  22-23— xix.  27-20. 

XXV. 

The  Story  of  Lot     .  .  .  .224 

Chapter  xix. 

XXVI. 

An  Old  Sin  Repeated  .  .234 

Chapter  xx. 

vii 


Contents 


PAGK 


XXVII. 
Joy  and  Sorrow        .  .  .  .  .242 

Chapter  xxi.  1-21. 

XXVIII. 

The  Daily  Round 250 

Chapter  xxi.  22-34. 

XXIX. 

The  Supreme  Crisis  .  .  .258 

Chapter  xxii.  1-19. 

XXX. 

Death  in  the  Home  .  .  .  •  .267 

Chapter  xxiii. 

XXXI. 

The  Evening  op  Lipe  .  .  .  .274 

Chapters  xxi  v.  1-9— xx  v.  1-10 

XXXII. 

The  Model  Servant  .  .  .  .282 

Chapter  xxiv.  10-67. 

XXXIII. 
The  Father  op  the  Faithful     .  ,  .292 


I 

INTRODUCTION 

THE  first    book  of   the   Bible   is   for    several  Intro- 
reasons   one    of   the    most   interesting   and  duction. 
fascinating  portions  of  Scripture.     Its  place  in  the  ^interest. 
Canon,  its  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  Bible,  and 
the  varied  and  striking  character  of  its  contents 
combine  to  make  it  one  of  the  most  prominent  in 
Holy  Writ.     It  is   with   a   real   spiritual   insight, 
therefore,  that  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages  have 
fastened  upon  this  book,  and  given  it  their  earnest 
attention.     It  is  also  a  testimony  to  its  value  and 
importance   that  criticism   of    various    kinds   and 
degrees  has  also  concentrated  itself  upon  this  first 
book  of  the  Bible.     Its  substance  and  claim  are  far 
too  important  to  be  overlooked. 

In  the  Hebrew  the  title  of  the  book  is  taken  its  Title, 
from  its  first  words,  Bereshith  ('  In  the  beginning '). 
The  title  of  the  Authorised  Version,  following  the 
Septuagint,  refers  to  the  contents  of  the  book. 
It  is  a  book  of '  beginnings,'  and  is  true  to  this  idea 
throughout 

I.  Its  Purpose. — As  the  purpose  is  not  definitely  Its  Purpose. 

stated  in   any  part  of  the  book,  it  is,  of  course, 

necessary  to  read  it  through  in  order  to  gain  an  idea 

of  the  author's  meaning  and  object    It  should  there- 

1 


Introduction 


Character- 
istics of 
i.— xi.,  and 
of  xii.  i 


Intro-  fore  be  read  through  at  one  time,  so  as  to  gain  an 
duction.  adequate  idea  both  of  its  contents  and  proportion. 
Indeed,  the  oftener  it  can  be  read  right  through  at 
once  with  this  aim  the  better,  more  particularly  as 
we  are  accustomed  to  read  it  merely  in  chapters  or 
sections.  It  is  only  as  the  book  is  carefully  read 
and  pondered  that  its  purpose  becomes  manifest. 

The  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  the  summary  and 
fragmentary  character  of  the  first  eleven  chapters, 
and  the  fulness  of  detail  in  the  remainder  of  the 
book,  the  latter  chapters  (xii.  to  1.)  dealing  practi- 
cally with  only  four  men.  Eleven  chapters  are  thus 
concerned  with  the  affairs  of  the  human  race,  and 
thirty-nine  chapters  with  one  family.  This,  ordi- 
narily, would  seem  very  disproportionate,  but  in  fact 
it  is  really  an  indication  of  the  specific  purpose  of  the 
book.  The  first  eleven  chapters  are  evidently  intro- 
ductory to  the  rest.  Abraham  is  clearly  the  central 
figure  of  the  book,  chapters  xii  1  to  xxv.  10  being 
devoted  to  him;  and  all  that  follows  is  seen  to 
be  closely  connected  with,  and  to  arise  out  of, 
the  record  of  his  life.  If,  then,  we  take  our  stand, 
as  it  were,  at  the  beginning  of  chapter  xii.  and  look 
backwards  and  forwards  we  can  see  (1)  the  descent 
of  Abraham  from  Adam,  and  (2)  the  descendants 
of  Abraham. 
History  with  It  must  be  evident  from  these  simple  facts  that 
a  urpose.  ^ere  was  no  intention  of  writing  an  universal 
history  of  man,  but  only  of  recording  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Divine  will  and  purpose  for  and  through 
Abraham.  It  is  history  written  with  a  special 
purpose.     The  book  might  easily  have  begun  with 


Introduction 

Abraham  if  the  purpose  had  been  to  record  the  Intro- 
ordinary  history  of  an  ordinary  people ;  yet  inas-  duction. 
much  as  Israel  was  not  an  ordinary  people,  but 
charged  with  God's  purposes  for  the  whole  of  man- 
kind, it  was  necessary  to  show — at  least  in  brief 
form — the  connection  between  the  progenitor  of 
the  human  race  and  Abraham,  in  whom  and  in 
whose  descendants  the  Divine  purpose  was  to  be 
realised. 

The  two  main  divisions,  therefore,  are  chapters  i.  to 
xi.  and  chapters  xii.  to  1.  The  former  section  can  be 
divided  by  the  Flood,  and  the  two  parts  referred 
respectively  to  Adam  as  the  head  of  the  original 
race,  and  to  Noah  as  the  head  of  the  new  race. 
Then  follows  the  record  of  Abraham,  the  head  of 
the  family  through  which  God's  purposes  for  the 
race  were  to  be  fulfilled,  and  the  story  of  his 
three  great  descendants — Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Joseph. 
Before  proceeding  to  a  more  detailed  consideration 
of  the  book  it  is  essential  that  these  main  outlines 
should  be  clearly  in  view. 

II.  Its  Plan. — Taking  up  the  book  again  for  the  Plan  of  the 
purpose  of  fuller  study,  as  we  look  at  it  more Work* 
closely  we  become  conscious  of  the  recurrence  of  a 
phrase, '  These  are  the  generations,'  or  '  The  book  of 
the  generations,'  and  we  observe  that  it  occurs  no 
fewer  than  ten  times.  Inasmuch  as  nine  of  these 
are  without  doubt  superscriptions,  and  are  therefore 
closely  connected  with  what  follows,  it  is  a  strong 
argument  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  first  of 
these  occurrences  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the  same 
way :  '  These  are  the  generations  of  the  heaven  and 
8 


Introduction 

Intro-  the  earth '  (chap.  ii.  4).  It  refers,  not  to  what  pro- 
duction, cedes,  but  to  what  follows.  This  view  is  clearly 
borne  out  by  the  meaning  of  the  word  translated 
'generations'  (Toledoth),  which  comes  from  the 
Hebrew  Yalad  (Ho  beget'),  and  invariably  refers 
to  results,  not  causes;  not  to  ancestry,  but  to 
descendants ;  not  to  origin,  but  to  effects. 
Its  Analysis.  The  book  should  therefore  be  analysed  as 
follows :  — 

1.  Introduction. — The  Creation.     (Chap.  i.  1  to 
ii.  3.) 

2.  The  Generations  of  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth. 
(Chap.  ii.  4  to  iv.  26.) 

3.  The   Generations    of   Adam.     (Chap.  v.  1   to 
vi.  8.) 

4.  The   Generations   of  Noah.     (Chap.  vi.  9  to 
ix.  29.) 

5.  The  Generations  of  the  Sons  of  Noah.  (Chap, 
x.  1  to  xi.  9.) 

6.  The  Generations  of  Shem.     (Chap.  xi.  10-26.) 

7.  The  Generations  of  Terah.     (Chap.  xi.  27  to 
xxv.  11.) 

8.  The   Generations  of  Ishmael.      (Chap.   xxv. 
12-18.) 

9.  The  Generations  of  Isaac.     (Chap.  xxv.  19  to 
xxxv.  29.) 

10.  The  Generations  of  Esau.     (Chap,  xxxvi.  1  to 
xxx  vii.  1.) 

11.  The  Generations  of  Jacob.     (Chap,  xxxvii.  2 
to  1.  26.) 

All  thorough  study  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  in  the 
Ught  of  its  structure,  purpose,  and  plan  should  pro- 
4 


Introduction 

ceed  along  these  lines.    The  book  is  thus  seen  to  be  Intro- 
in  great  measure  a  compilation  of  family  documents  ;  auction, 
the  author,  whoever  he  was  and  whenever  he  wrote,  ^amily 

7  .     .  Documents, 

made  use  of  pre-existing  materials,  as  was  the  case 

in  the  composition  of  the  Gospels  (Luke  i.  1-4), 
and  welded  together  the  whole  into  a  striking  and 
beautiful  unity.  The  record  is  thereby  shown  to 
partake  of  a  genealogical  character,  and  this  is 
due  to  the  author's  purpose  of  tracing  the  fulfilments 
of  God's  purposes  of  redemption  through  the  line  of 
the  chosen  people.  These  genealogies  are  con- 
sequently an  essential  part  of  the  book,  and  form  a 
consecutive  series  from  Adam  to  Jacob.  Although, 
as  it  has  been  often  pointed  out,  they  are 
occasionally  interrupted  for  the  purpose  of  intro- 
ducing collateral  and  connected  facts,  the  thread 
is  soon  resumed  and  the  main  purpose  never 
allowed  to  go  out  of  sight 

We  may  therefore  describe  the  present  Book  of 
Genesis  as  consisting  of  an  introduction,  and  ten 
books  representing  ten  sections  or  stages  of  history, 
each  complete  in  itself.  It  is  worth  while  noticing 
once  again,  that  in  the  course  of  bringing  forward 
these  successive  genealogies  the  plan  is  to  deal 
with  collateral  branches  first,  before  dwelling  upon 
the  main  line  of  descent  in  regard  to  the  purpose 
of  redemption.  Thus  the  genealogy  of  Cain  comes 
before  that  of  Seth,  those  of  Ham  and  Canaan 
before  Shem,  that  of  Terah  before  Abraham, 
those  of  Ishmael  and  Esau  before  Isaac  and 
Jacob.  All  the  apparent  deviations  are  strictly 
according  to  the  idea  of  the  book  as  a  book  of 
6 


Introduction 

Intro-         beginnings.     As  it  has  been  well  said,  '  Genesis  is 

duction.      fullofgeneses.'1 

Its  Unity.  III.  Its  Unity. — It  is  generally  admitted,  even  by 

men  of  very  different  schools,  that  our  present  Book 
of  Genesis  is  a  unity,  however  that  unity  has  been 
brought  about.  For  this  reason  it  should  be  studied 
as  a  whole,  and  allowed  to  make  its  own  definite 
and  deep  impression  upon  the  reader.  As  Dr 
Whitelaw  (Pulpit  Commentary,  p.  viii.)  truly  says, 
there  is  a  chronological  thread  running  through  the 
entire  book,  and  all  its  parts  are  so  interdependent 
that  if  one  were  omitted  it  would  create  a  gap,  and 
entirely  rob  the  book  of  its  unity.  There  are  few 
facts  more  certain  than  that  of  the  literary  unity  of 
Genesis  as  it  has  come  down  to  us,  and  no  study  of 
the  book  will  arrive  at  right  conclusions  unless  this 
fact  is  kept  well  in  view. 

Value  of  the  IV.  Its  Value. — As  the  title  clearly  indicates,  it 
is  essentially  and  pre-eminently  a  book  of  origins  ; 
it  deals  with  a  number  of  characteristic  *  beginnings.' 
It  records  the  beginning  of  creation,  of  man,  of 
woman,  of  the  Sabbath,  of  marriage,  of  home,  of 
childhood,  of  sin,  of  murder,  of  sacrifice,  of  grace, 
of  trade,  of  agriculture,  of  city  life,  of  races,  of 
languages,  and  of  the  chosen  people. 

In  the  light  of  its  title  and  evident  purpose  it  is 
worthy  of  notice  that  there  are  in  particular  seven 
important  '  beginnings '  recorded  and  dealt  with  in 
this  book : — 

1.  The  beginning  of  the  material  universe,  or  the 
Sphere  of  the  Divine  revelation  of  grace. 

1  Of.  Green's  Unity  of  the  Book  of  Genesis. 


Book. 


Introduction 

2.  The  beginning  of  the  human  race,  or  the  Subject  Intro- 
of  the  Divine  revelation  of  grace.  duction. 

3.  The  beginning  of  human  sin,  or  the  Cause  of 
the  Divine  revelation  of  grace. 

4.  The  beginning  of  divine  redemption,  or  the 
Character  of  the  Divine  revelation  of  grace. 

5.  The  beginning  of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  or 
the  Scope  of  the  Divine  revelation  of  grace. 

6.  The  beginning  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  or  the 
Channel  of  the  Divine  revelation  of  grace. 

7.  The  beginning  of  the  life  of  faith  and  con- 
secration, or  the  Outcome  of  the  Divine  revelation 
of  grace. 

The  first  four  words  form  the  keynote  of  the 
book,  which  is  struck  again  and  again  through- 
out the  record — 'In  the  beginning  God.'  It  is 
essentially  a  book  where  God  is  prominent  and 
predominant,  notwithstanding  human  wilfulness, 
wandering,  and  wretchedness  through  sin. 

God  in  Creation. — The  outstanding  impression  God  in 
derived  from  the  story  in  chapter  i.  is  that  the  Creation- 
universe  is  not  self-originated,  but   is   the  result 
of  the   Creator's   handiwork.      '  God  saw,'   '  God 
said,'  'God  made,'  are  the  prominent  teachings. 

God  in  History, — In  this  book  we  have  the  God  in 
dawn  of  history  and  the  earliest  years  of  the  life  Hlstory* 
and  progress  of  the  human  race;  and  although 
the  narrative  of  the  first  eleven  chapters  takes 
various  literary  forms,  and  is  only  brought  before 
us  in  very  summary  fashion,  there  is  no  doubt  of 
the  essential  historical  character  of  the  events 
underlying  the   record.     And  when  we  come  to 


Introduction 


Intro- 
duction. 


God  in 

Providence. 


God  in 
Redemption. 


the  fuller  details  of  the  patriarchal  narratives  we 
can  readily  appreciate  the  truth  of  Dr  Driver's 
dictum  with  reference  to  the  parts  of  2  Samuel : 
*  The  abundance  and  particularity  of  detail  show 
that  the  narratives  must  date  from  a  period  very 
little  later  than  that  of  the  events  related '  (Intro. 
O.T.j  p.  173).  No  student  of  history  can  afford 
to  overlook  the  instructive  and  fascinating  record 
contained  in  the  first  book  of  the  Bible. 

God  in  Providence. — No  book  in  the  world 
shows  so  clearly  the  truth  that  '  There's  a  Divinity 
that  shapes  our  ends,  rough  hew  them  how  we 
will.'  From  the  time  that  man  was  created,  God's 
providence  is  seen  watching  over  him,  warning 
him,  checking  him,  overruling  his  mistakes,  and, 
in  spite  of  his  wilfulness,  carrying  out  the  Divine 
purpose.  In  the  record  of  the  ages  before  the 
Flood  and  of  the  time  of  the  Deluge,  in  the 
stories  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Joseph,  we 
see  step  by  step  the  working  of  that  *  never-failing 
providence  that  ordereth  all  things  in  heaven 
and  earth.' 

God  in  Redemption. — This  is  the  most  important, 
even  though  it  is  not  the  most  prominent,  feature 
on  the  surface  of  the  book.  Genesis  has  been  well 
summed  up  in  three  words — generation,  degenera- 
tion, regeneration.  The  great  promise  of  redemption 
recorded  in  chapter  iii.  is  taken  up  and  gradually 
prepared  for  through  a  long  line  from  Seth  through 
Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  In  this  connec- 
tion, too,  we  must  not  overlook  the  typological 
value  of  Genesis,  for  it  is  a  book  of  type  as  well  as 
8 


Introduction 

of  prophecy,  of  picture  as  well  as  of  promise.  From  Intro- 
the  sacrifice  of  Abel  straight  onward  to  the  sacrifice  Auction, 
of  Isaac,  the  vision  of  Jacob  at  Bethel,  and  the 
story  of  Joseph,  we  have  picture  after  picture  of 
redemption,  which  find  their  full  meaning,  vividness, 
and  glory,  in  the  New  Testament  revelation,  until 
at  length  in  Jacob's  benediction  we  have  a  striking 
reference  to  the  primeval  fact  of  sin  and  the  primeval 
promise  of  salvation  (chap.  xlix.  17,  18).  The  red 
thread  of  redemption  binds  every  chapter  together, 
and  gives  the  book  one  of  its  essential  marks  of  unity. 

God  in  Human  Life. — Not  the  least  interesting  God  in 
and  valuable  feature  of  this  most  remarkable  book  Human  Uit' 
is  its  record  of  human  life  in  relation  to  God.  As 
we  read  the  stories  from  Adam  to  Joseph,  we  see 
various  aspects  of  the  Divine  revelation  in  regard  to 
personal  life,  and  the  various  attitudes  of  human 
response  to  that  revelation.  The  book  is  of  pre- 
eminent value,  because  it  has  to  do  with  the 
essential  and  abiding  elements  of  God's  relation  to 
man,  and  man's  relation  to  God.  As  we  study  point 
after  point  in  individual  history  and  character,  we 
see  abundant  proofs  of  spiritual  guidance,  warning, 
encouragement,  and  cheer,  and  we  become  more 
and  more  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  Apostolic 
word,  that  'Whatsoever  things  were  written 
aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning.' 


In  the  foregoing  remarks  critical  questions  have  The 
jen  deliberately  avoided,  in  order  to  concentrate  Tajfc 
.tention  on  the  importance  of  a  study  of  the  book  witi 
itself.     It  is  to  be  feared  that  there  is  often  a  good 


Introduction 

Intro-  deal  of  knowledge  about  Genesis  without  too  much 
auction,  knowledge  of  the  book  itself.  If  only  we  would 
allow  it  to  make  its  own  impression  by  direct  and 
prolonged  study,  apart  from  all  authorities,  it  would 
go  far  to  instruct  us  as  to  its  own  real  character. 
Even  so  extreme  a  critic  as  Kuenen  bears  witness 
to  the  value  of  direct  Bible  study  when  he  says : — 

*The  Bible  is  in  every  one's  hand.  The  critic  has  no 
other  Bible  than  the  public.  He  does  not  profess  to  have 
any  other  documents  inaccessible  to  the  laity,  nor  does  he 
profess  to  see  anything  in  the  Bible  that  the  ordinary  reader 
cannot  see.  It  is  true  that  here  and  there  he  improves  the 
common  translation,  but  this  is  the  exception,  and  not  the 
rule.' 

And  that  great  scholar,  Dr  M'Caul,  gives  a  very 
valuable  reminder  to  all  Bible  readers  in  the 
following  words: — 

'No  reader  of  the  Authorised  Version  ought  to  allow 
himself  to  be  mystified  or  silenced  by  an  appeal  to  foreign 
critics,  much  less  to  be  disturbed  in  his  faith,  as  if  he  could 
not  apprehend  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible  without 
profound  knowledge  of  the  Semitic  dialects  and  the  latest 
results  of  German  criticism.' 

We  cannot  do  better  than  close  with  a  striking 
testimony  to  the  value  of  Genesis  from  a  scholar 
whose  books  on  the  Old  Testament  have  proved 
so  valuable  and  convincing  during  recent  years, 
Professor  James  Robertson,  of  Glasgow : — 

4  It  may  be  a  matter  of  criticism  to  discover  the  joinings 
of  the  narratives,  and  to  trace  the  literary  process  by  which 
the  book  took  its  present  shape ;  but  it  is  of  far  deeper 
interest  to  note  the  existence  of  a  pure  light  in  the  midst  of 
the  world's  darkness.    It  is  our  familiarity  with  it  that 

10 


Introduction 

makes  us  overlook  the  significance  of  the  early  testimony  of  Intro- 
the  Hebrew  people  to  the  truth  of  the  one  God.  But  when  duction. 
we  reflect  that,  at  a  time  when  the  great  nations  of  antiquity 
were  stumbling  in  the  dark  on  this  subject,  or  groping  their 
way  towards  it,  the  Hebrew  race  had  it  as  their  oldest 
tradition,  we  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  they  received  it 
from  Qod  Himself.  And  of  far  higher  importance  is  it  to 
our  faith  than  the  anticipation  of  the  results  of  modern 
science  would  have  been,  to  be  assured  that  from  hoary 
antiquity  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
been  guiding  our  race  and  preparing  it  for  the  fulness  of 
the  times.' 

For  the  purpose  of  general  study  as  distinct  from 
critical  questions  two  works  may  be  mentioned: 
How  to  Read  the  Bible,  vols.  L  and  ii.,  by  the  Rev. 
J.  Urquhart,  and  Genesis,  in  the  Pulpit  Com- 
mentary, by  Dr  Whitelaw.  Critical  questions  can 
be  most  conveniently  studied  in  the  following 
works:  (1)  From  the  standpoint  of  modern  criti- 
cism, in  Dr  Driver's  Commentary.  (2)  From  the 
conservative  side,  in  Green's  Unity  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis,  Dr  Redpath's  Modern  Criticism  and 
Genesis  (a  criticism  of  Dr  Driver),  and  Dr  Orr's 
Problem  of  the  Old  Testament  (see  Index  s.v. 
Genesis). 


11 


n 

THE  CREATION 
Gen.  i 


In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth. 

And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void  ;  and  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep  :  and  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon 
the  face  of  the  waters. 

And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light. 

And  God  saw  the  light,  that  it  was  good  ;  and  God  divided  the 
light  from  the  darkness. 

And  God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness  he  called 
Night.     And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the  waters. 

And  God  made  the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters  which 
were  under  the  firmament,  from  the  waters  which  were  above  the 
firmament :  and  it  was  so. 

And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven.  And  the  evening  and 
the  morning  were  the  second  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered 
together  unto  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land  appear :  and  it 
was  so. 

And  God  called  the  dry  land  Earth ;  and  the  gathering 
together  of  the  waters  called  He  Seas  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was 
good. 

And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  the  herb 
yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit-tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind, 
whose  seed  is  in  itself,  upon  the  earth  :  and  it  was  so. 

And  the  earth  brought  forth  grass,  and  herb  yielding  seed  after 
his  kind,  and  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  whose  seed  was  in  itself, 
after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good. 

And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  third  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the 
heaven,  to  divide  the  day  from  the  night ;  and  let  them  be  for 
signs,  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  years. 

12 


The  Creation 

And  let  them  be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to 
give  light  upon  the  earth  :  and  it  was  so. 

And  God  made  two  great  lights  ;  the  greater  light  to  rule  the 
day,  and  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  night :  He  made  the  stars 
also. 

And  God  set  them  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven,  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth. 

And  to  rule  over  the  day  and  over  the  night,  and  to  divide 
the  light  from  the  darkness :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good. 

And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  fourth  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly  the 
moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and  fowl  that  may  fly  above  the 
earth  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven. 

And  God  created  great  whales,  and  every  living  creature  that 
moveth,  which  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly,  after  their 
kind,  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that 
it  teas  good. 

And  God  blessed  them,  saying,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and 
fill  the  waters  in  the  seas,  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the  earth. 

And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  fifth  day. 

And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature 
after  his  kind,  cattle,  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of  the  earth 
after  his  kind  :  and  it  was  so. 

And  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  cattle 
after  their  kind,  and  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 
after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good. 

And  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  like- 
ness ;  and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and 
over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the 
earth,  and  over  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the 
earth. 

So  God  created  man  in  His  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God 
created  He  him  :  male  and  female  created  He  them. 

And  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful, 
and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it ;  and  have 
dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  over  every  living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth. 

And  God  said,  Behold,!  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing 
seal,  which  is  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and  every  tree,  in 
the  which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding  seed  ;  to  you  it  shall  be 
for  meat 

And  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to  every  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  to  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  wherein  there 
is  life,  /  have  given  every  green  herb  for  meat :  and  it  was  so. 

And  God  saw  every  thing  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it 
was  very  good.  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the 
sixth  day. 


IS 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i  (~X^  a^  *he  chapters  of  this  remarkable  book  the 
V^  first  has  probably  given  rise  to  more  thought, 
discussion,  and  controversy  than  any  other.  Nor  is 
this  surprising,  remembering  its  contents  and  the 
place  it  occupies  at  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of 
God.  And  assuredly  it  will  repay  the  fullest  and 
minutest  attention,  study,  and  meditation.  In 
order  to  arrive  at  a  right  conclusion  as  to  its  mean- 
ing and  object,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  into 
view  several  considerations. 
Character  !•   What  is  its  Character  ? — The  first  essential  is 

jf  the  that  we  try  to  discover  what  the  chapter  really  is. 

Is  it  history?  This  were  obviously  impossible, 
since  no  one  was  present  to  observe  and  record 
for  posterity  the  events  here  stated.  The 
contents  clearly  refer  to  prehistoric  events  and 
times. 

Is  it  science  ?  This  at  any  rate  can  hardly  be  the 
primary  purpose  of  the  writer,  for  the  Bible  is  a 
book  of  religion,  and  this  is  its  introductory  chapter. 
Besides,  science  is  continuous  and  incomplete,  and 
we  are  learning  more  and  more  of  its  secrets  every 
day.  In  any  case  this  chapter  could  only  be 
scientific  in  the  broadest  and  most  summary  mean- 
ing of  the  term. 

Is  it  myth  ?  If  by  this  is  meant  that  which  is 
inaccurate,  untrustworthy,  legendary,  and,  in  modern 
phraseology,  'mythical/  we  naturally  ask  whether 
such  inaccuracy  and  untrustworthiness  are  likely  to 
be  found  in  a  book  of  religion.  But  if  by  myth  is 
meant  a  form  of  picturesque  teaching  suited  to  the 
childhood  of  the  world,  it  may  be  said  that  even 
14 


The  Creation 

if  it  be  a  myth  in  form,  its  underlying    teaching  Gen.  i. 
and  details  must  be  true  to  fact.     Even  parabolic 
teaching  presupposes  facts  which    correspond  to 
the  symbol  used. 

When  we  compare  other  cosmogonies,  such  as 
the  Babylonian,  we  notice  at  once  some  remarkable 
agreements  and  some  equally  remarkable  contrasts. 
All  cosmogonies,  for  instance,  have  traces  of  a  prim- 
eval chaos,  yet  their  moral  atmosphere  is  entirely 
different  from  that  of  Genesis,  and  they  have  noth- 
ing corresponding  to  the  great  statement  of  verse  1 : 
*  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth.'  Moreover,  the  Babylonian  cosmogony  is,  as 
is  well  known,  religiously  impure,  with  materialistic 
and  polytheistic  elements. 

Is  it  invention?  By  this  is  meant,  Is  it  the 
work  of  man's  imagination,  the  record  of  what 
some  early  writer  thought  must  have  happened 
or  did  happen?  If  so,  we  naturally  ask  why  it 
appears  in  a  book  purporting  to  be  the  Word 
of  God? 

Is  it  revelation  ?  That  is,  is  it  to  be  regarded  as 
an  integral  part  of  the  Book  which  has  come  down 
to  us  as  (in  whatever  sense)  the  inspired  Scriptures 
of  God?  The  precise  method  of  revelation  we 
know  not,  and  it  does  not  concern  us  to  know ;  but 
the  fact  of  revelation,  and  the  place  of  this  chapter 
in  the  book  and  in  the  Bible  generally,  seems  to 
compel  the  inquiry,  Is  it  invention  or  revelation? 
Is  it  in  any  sense  trustworthy  in  what  it  says? 
Can  we  use  it  in  confidence  in  reading  and  teach- 
ing? Its  place  in  Scripture  must  be  accounted  for 
15 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  as  also  its  position  in  a  book  whose  characteristic  is 
truth,  and  whose  purpose  is  to  reveal  the  God  of 
truth. 
Hebrew  and  There  are  two  usual  explanations  of  the  points 
Cosmo.man  °f  contact  between  the  Hebrew  and  Babylonian 
gonies.  cosmogonies.    (1)  Some  urge  that  Genesis  is  to  be 

traced  from  Babylonia,  but  was  afterwards  purified, 
the  Hebrew  writer  using  the  best  of  sources  avail- 
able, and  making  them  the  vehicle  of  religious 
teaching.  Apart  from  the  likelihood  or  unlikeli- 
hood of  any  direct  borrowing  from  so  impure 
a  source,  we  may  fairly  inquire  whether  this 
view  is  adequate  in  the  light  of  any  true 
theory  of  Divine  inspiration.  And  even  though 
we  limit  the  idea  of  inspiration  to  the  arrange- 
ment and  use  of  materials,  to  what  has  been 
called  the  '  inspiration  of  selection,'  the  prior 
question  still  remains  as  to  the  source  of  those 
materials,  and  also  their  reliableness  and  accuracy. 
Surely  we  need  some  guarantee  at  this  initial  point. 
(2)  Others  say  that  the  Babylonian  cosmogony  is 
the  corrupt  version  of  which  Genesis  is  the  pure 
record  received  from  primal  revelation.  Is  not 
this  view  much  more  likely  to  be  true,  and  also 
much  more  in  keeping  with  the  idea  of  a  Divine 
inspiration  ?  When  we  remember  the  longevity  of 
the  human  race  up  to  the  time  of  Abraham,  there 
is  nothing  insuperably  difficult  in  the  view  that  this 
pure  cosmogony  may  have  been  preserved  among 
the  antediluvians,  and  brought  from  Mesopotamia 
by  Abraham  without  any  corruption.  At  any  rate, 
we  have  to  account  for  the  fact  that  this  pure 
16 


The  Creation 

cosmogony  is  found  among  the  Hebrews,  while  Gen.  i. 
an  impure  cosmogony  is  found  in  Babylonia. 
Surely  Divine  inspiration  is  the  only  adequate 
solution  of  the  problem.  If  the  substance  of 
this  chapter  is  not  revelation  it  must  be,  in 
whatever  sense,  invention  or  fiction  ;  and  in 
the  latter  case  it  really  matters  not  whence  it 
came  or  by  what  process  it  has  arrived  at  its 
present  state.  In  view,  therefore,  of  the  unique- 
ness of  the  Hebrew  race,  the  place  of  this 
chapter  in  the  Bible,  and  the  general  idea  of 
Divine  inspiration  associated  with  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, it  seems  much  easier  and  truer  to  believe 
that  we  have  in  this  chapter  the  record  of  a 
primeval  revelation. 

The  following  remarks  from  Lange's  Commentary  Lange's 
on  Genesis  (p.  147)  seem  to  sum  up  the  truth  on  Testimony, 
this  subject  :— 

*  Holiness,  sublimity,  truthfulness— these  are  the  im- 
pressions left  upon  the  mind  of  the  thoughtful  reader 
of  the  First  of  Genesis.  There  is  meant  by  this  its 
subjective  truthfulness.  It  is  no  invention.  The  one 
who  first  wrote  it  down,  or  first  spoke  it  to  human 
ears,  had  a  perfect  conscious  conviction  of  the  presence 
to  his  mind  of  the  scenes  so  vividly  described — whether 
given  to  him  in  vision  or  otherwise— and  a  firm  belief  in 
a  great  objective  reality  represented  by  them.  It  is 
equally  evident,  too,  that  it  is  the  offspring  of  one  con- 
ceiving mind.  It  never  grew  like  a  myth  or  legend.  It 
is  one  total  conception,  perfect  and  consistent  in  all  its 
parts.  It  bears  no  evidence  of  being  a  story  artificially 
made  to  represent  an  idea,  or  a  system  of  ideas.  There  is, 
in  truth,  nothing  ideal  about  it.  It  presents  on  its  very 
face  the  serious  impression  of /act  believed,  and  given  forth 

17 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  as  thus  believed,  however  the  original  representation  may 
have  been  made  to  the  first  human  soul  that  received  it. 
Myths  and  legends  are  the  products  of  time  ;  they  have  a 
growth  ;  we  can,  in  general,  tell  how  and  whence  they 
came,  and  after  what  manner  they  have  received  their 
mythical  form.  Thus  other  ancient  cosmogonies,  though 
bearing  evidence  of  derivation  from  the  one  in  Genesis, 
have  had  their  successive  accretions  and  deposits  of  physical, 
legendary,  and  mythological  strata.  This  stands  alone  in 
the  world,  like  the  primeval  granite  of  the  Himalaya 
among  the  later  geological  formations.  It  has  nothing 
national  about  it.  It  is  no  more  Jewish  than  it  is  Assyrian, 
Chaldaean,  Indian,  Persian,  or  Egyptian.  It  is  found  among 
the  preserved  Jewish  writings,  but  there  is  nothing,  except 
its  pure  monotheistic  aspect,  which  would  assign  it  to  that 
people  rather  than  to  any  other.  If  the  Jews  derived  it 
from  others,  as  is  often  affirmed,  then  is  it  something  very 
wonderful,  something  utterly  the  reverse  of  the  usual 
process,  that  they  should  have  so  stripped  it  of  all  national 
or  sect  features,  and  given  it  such  a  sublime  aspect  of 
universalism,  so  transcending,  apparently,  all  local  or  partial 
history.' 

Purpose  U*   W^  iS  it8  Purpose  ? — We  must  never  forget 

of  the  that  a  chapter  like  this,  as  indeed  every  chapter 

of  the  Bible,  must  be  judged  primarily  from  the 
standpoint  of  those  for  whom  it  was  originally 
intended.  What  did  the  first  readers  understand 
by  it?  Still  more,  what  were  they  intended  to 
understand  by  it  ?  It  must  have  had  an  intelligible 
message  for  them,  however  imperfectly  and  incom- 
pletely they  grasped  it.  If,  therefore,  this  chapter 
had  been  written  in  scientific  language  it  would 
have  been  almost  entirely  unintelligible  until  the 
nineteenth  century  of  our  present  era.  Indeed,  we 
may  go  very  much  further  and  say  that  many  of 
18 


Narrative. 


The  Creation 

the  scientific  books  in  our  own  language  written  Gen.  i. 
a  century  ago  are  not  only  superseded,  but  practi- 
cally uninteltigible  in  the  light  of  modern  research. 
We  are,  therefore,  justified  in  regarding  this  chapter 
as  giving  a  simple,  popular  account  of  creation 
from  the  religious  standpoint,  and  intended  to  be 
understood  by  people  who  lived  in  the  time  of  the 
world's  childhood.  Its  elementary  character  and 
religious  purpose  are  the  twofold  key  to  its  true 
meaning,  and  if  this  is  continually  borne  in  mind 
it  will  not  be  difficult  to  see  its  continued  value 
up  to  the  present  day.  The  great  fundamental  yet 
elementary  principles  connected  with  the  creation 
need  to  be  taught  to  succeeding  generations  of 
people  of  various  ages  and  capacities,  and  it  is 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  the  ex- 
perience of  Christian  teaching  that  this  chapter 
is  found  to  be  adapted  to  intellectual  and  moral 
childhood  in  all  ages  and  countries,  and  at  the 
same  time  not  inappropriate  to  mature  minds  and 
fuller  knowledge. 

III.  What  is  its  Plan!— There  are  those  who  think  pun  of  the 
that  verse  1  refers  to  the  original  creation,  and  that  NarratiTe. 
then  between  verses  1  and  2  room  is  left  for  the 
vast  geological  ages  with  their  catastrophes  which 
are  thought  to  be  described  by  the  phrase  'the 
earth  was  without  form  and  void.'  This  is  urged 
more  particularly  because  we  read  in  Is.  xlv.  18 
that  God  did  not  create  '  without  form '  (same  word 
in  Hebrew).  According  to  this  view,  verse  2  to 
the  end  of  the  chapter  gives  the  story  of  the  earth 
being  fashioned  for  man's  life  and  habitation  just 
19 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  prior  to  the  historic  period.  This  view,  though  not 
generally  accepted,  is  interesting  and  suggestive, 
and  has  not  a  little  to  recommend  it,  even  though 
it  does  not  solve  every  problem. 

Taking  the  chapter,  however,  just  as  it  stands, 
without  any  such  break,  we  read  it  through,  and 
are  at  once  impressed  with  two  things:  (1)  There 
is  only  one  species  mentioned  in  the  entire 
chapter,  'And  God  created  great  whales'  (ver.  21). 
Everything  else  is  generic.  Why  this  exceptional 
reference  ?  Why  are  these  *  water  monsters '  singled 
out  in  this  way  ?  Is  it  possible  that  we  have  here 
a  hint  of  the  writer's  purpose  ?  Was  he  striking  at 
the  root  of  some  ancient  worship  of  sacred  animals  ? 
Is  it  impossible  that  if  the  materials  for  the  com- 
position of  Genesis  were  associated  with  Egypt  this 
has  reference  to  the  worship  of  some  sacred  animal 
like  the  crocodile?  (See  Miracles,  by  Dr  S.  Cox.) 
(2)  Then  in  verse  16  special  reference  is  made  to  the 
creation  of  the  sun  and  moon.  Is  it  possible  that 
we  have  here  another  blow  to  a  prevalent  form  of 
Eastern  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies?  These 
two  hints  at  any  rate  possibly  suggest  the  religious 
purpose  of  the  writer. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  Hebrew  of  verse  2 
the  adjectives  'formless'  and  'empty'  seem  to  be 
the  key  to  the  literary  structure  of  the  chapter. 
The  record  of  the  first  three  days  refers  to  the 
heaven  and  earth  receiving  their  '  form,'  and  the 
record  of  the  last  three  days  to  the  filling-up  of 
their  'emptiness.'  An  outline  will  show  this 
clearly : — 

20 


The  Creation 

1  Formless  '  '  Empty  '  Gen.  i. 

First  Day.       Light         Fourth  Day.    Lights. 

Second  Day.  {^        Fifth  Day.    {J^j* 

_  .  ,  _.  (Land.  „.  ±.  ^         (Animals. 

Th.rdDay.    {plante        Suth  Day.    {Man 

Thus,  the  first  and  fourth  days  correspond,  the 
second  and  fifth,  and  the  third  aud  sixth.  First 
comes  'form,'  and  then  ' fulness.'  The  literary 
structure  of  the  chapter  is  clear,  and  is  one  of  many 
proofs  of  Hebrew  parallelism  and  love  of  parallel- 
istic  structure. 

Above  all,  the  keynote  of  the  chapter  is 
'In  the  beginning  God.'  The  word  'God'  occurs 
no  fewer  than  thirty-two  times;  'God  created' 
four  times ;  '  God  said '  eight  times ;  '  God  saw ' 
seven  times;  'God  made'  three  times;  'It  was 
so'  (God's  purpose)  six  times.  So  also  we  find 
'God  called,'  'God  set,'  'God  blessed,'  'God 
divided.' 

Are  we  not  right,  then,  in  thinking  that  this 
chapter  was  intended  as  an  account  of  creation  from 
the  religious  point  of  view,  and  written  for  the 
instruction  of  mankind  in  all  ages  ? 

IV.  What  is  its  Relation  to  Science  ?— It  is  Relation  to 
inevitable  that  this  question  should  be  asked, Sdcnce' 
since  on  the  assumption  that  religion  and  science 
both  come  from  God  there  should  be  at  least  some 
general  agreement  or  points  of  contact  between 
them.  At  the  same  time  the  truest  method  of 
31 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  comparison  is  not  between  this  chapter  and  the 
results  of  modern  science,  but  rather  between 
this  chapter  and  all  other  ancient  cosmogonies. 
It  is  when  Genesis  is  compared  with  such  other 
ancient  accounts  of  creation  that  its  immeasurable 
superiority  is  seen  (Waggett,  The  Scientific  Temper 
in  Religion,  pp.  160j^).  Nevertheless,  in  view  of 
natural  questionings,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  evident 
purpose  of  the  chapter  as  an  account  of  creation 
from  the  religious  standpoint,  the  following  inquiries 
with  reference  to  its  relation  to  science  may  rightly 
be  made. 

Absence  of  Does  the  chapter  contain  any  scientific  error  ?  On 
the  authority  of  the  greatest  masters  of  geological 
and  biological  science  we  may  say  that  this  has  not 
yet  been  proved.  There  was  a  time  when  the 
statement  of  the  creation  of  light  before  the  sun 
was  regarded  as  a  scientific  inaccuracy,  but  this 
charge  has  long  been  dropped,  for  modern  science 
has  shown  that  light  existed  before  and  inde- 
pendent of  our  present  sun.  In  entire  keeping 
with  this  the  Hebrew  distinguishes  between 
light  (ver.  3)  and  luminaries,  or  light-bearers 
(ver.   15). 

Elasticity  of      Is    the   chapter   written    in   sufficiently   elastic 

Language.  an(j  pjiant  language  to  admit  of  the  inclusion  of 
continuous  scientific  discoveries?  It  must  be 
obvious  to  every  thoughtful  reader  that  this  early 
chapter  could  not  be  expected  to  be  in  exact 
agreement  with  the  latest  details  of  scientific 
research,  since  science  is  continually  changing  and 
is  ever  incomplete.  If  it  had  been  written  in  strict 
22 


The  Creation 

scientific  language  it  would,  of  course,  have  been  Gen.  i. 
unintelligible    for    centuries.      As    the    Speaker's 
Commentary  rightly  says: — 

'  If  the  wisest  geologist  of  our  days  could  show  that  there 
was  an  exact  agreement  between  geology  and  the  Bible,  it 
would  rather  disprove  than  prove  its  truth.  For,  as  geology 
is  a  growing  science,  it  would  prove  the  agreement  of  the 
Bible  with  that  which  is  receiving  daily  additions,  and  is 
constantly  undergoing  modification  ;  and  ten  years  hence  the 
two  would  be  at  hopeless  variance.' 

Yet  there  are  indications  that  the  very  language 
of  Genesis  is  pliant  enough  to  allow  of  not  a  little 
scientific  discovery  being  inserted.  Thus  there  are 
two  words  used  for  creation.  One,  Bara,  is  used 
three  times  only  in  the  chapter — (1)  at  the  beginning 
(ver.  1);  (2)  at  the  commencement  of  life  (ver. 
21);  (3)  at  the  creation  of  man  (ver.  27).  'Bara 
is  thus  reserved  for  marking  the  first  introduction 
of  each  of  the  three  great  spheres  of  creation — the 
world  of  matter,  the  world  of  life,  and  the  spiritual 
world  represented  by  man'  (Green).  The  other 
word,  Asahy  is  found  throughout  the  rest  of  the 
chapter,  and  is  used  of  God  making  or  moulding 
from  already  created  materials.  Surely  in  this  we 
have  at  least  a  hint  of  the  modern  scientific  ideas  of 
primal  creation  and  mediate  creation. 

In  a  fascinating  book,  The  Conflict  of  Truth 
(by  Mr  F.  H.  Capron),  the  author  refers  to  the  five 
factors  which  Mr  Herbert  Spencer  regards  as  *  the 
most  general  forms  into  which  the  manifestations  of 
the  Unknowable  are  re-divisible.'  These  forms  are 
said  to  be:  Space,  time,  matter,  motion,  force. 
23 


Discovery. 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  Mr  Capron  calls  attention  to  the  suggestive  and 
even  remarkable  analogy  between  these  forms  and 
the  early  verses  of  Genesis  i. 

(a)  Time  = '  In  the  beginning/ 

(b)  Space  = '  The  heavens.' 

(c)  Matter ='  The  earth.' 

(d)  Force  = '  The  Spirit  of  God.' 

(e)  Motion  =  '  Moved.' 

Even  though  we  may  think  it  too  ingenious  to  be 
true,  there  is  ample  proof,  apart  from  this,  to  lead 
to  the  conclusion  that  there  is — at  any  rate,  up  to 
the  present — nothing  in  the  chapter  which  conflicts 
with  any  assured  results  of  science. 
Anticipa-  Has  the  chapter  any  anticipations  of  science  as 

rwl^L.  revealed  by  modern  research?  We  may  reply  by 
calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  is  the  same 
general  order  of  events.  The  steps  of  the  creation 
of  vegetation,  reptiles,  mammals,  and  man  are 
essentially  true  to  modern  science.  Professor 
Romanes  admitted  that — 

*  The  order  in  which  the  flora  and  fauna  are  said  by  the 
Mosaic  account  to  have  appeared  upon  the  earth  corresponds 
with  that  which  the  theory  of  evolution  requires  and  the 
evidence  of  geology  proves '  (quoted  in  M'Cosh,  The  Religious 
Aspect  of  Evolution,  p.  99). 

And  Sir  William  Dawson,  whose  scientific 
eminence  and  authority  no  one  can  question,  states 
still  more  definitely  that — 

'  The  order  of  that  vision  of  the  creative  work  with  which 
the  Bible  begins  its  history  is  so  closely  in  harmony  with  the 
results  worked  out  by  geological  investigations  that  the 

24 


The  Creation 

correspondences  have  excited  marked  attention,  and  have  rien   ; 
been  justly  regarded  as  establishing  the  common  authorship 
of  nature  and  revelation.' 

Has  the  chapter  any  indications  of  development  Qcncsis  ^j 
and  progress  answering  to  the  great  modern  theory  Evolution, 
of  evolution?  A  very  superficial  reading  of  the 
chapter  shows  that  development,  progress,  and 
change  are  among  its  leading  ideas.  The  term 
'day'  is  regarded  by  some  high  authorities  as 
expressive  of  the  ages  or  epochs  of  science.  They 
urge  that  the  term  '  day '  does  not,  and  was  not 
intended  to  mean  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours, 
since  it  is  applied  to  the  first  three  days  before  the 
sun  and  moon — our  present  means  of  measure- 
ment— are  introduced  into  the  narrative.  And, 
further,  that  in  chapter  ii.  4  the  term  '  day '  is  used 
for  the  whole  period  of  creation.  There  are  certainly 
many  places  in  Scripture  where  the  word  'day' 
refers  to  other  periods  than  that  of  the  rotation 
of  the  earth.1 

Has    the  chapter   any   points   of  contact   with  Contact  with 
modern    biological    and   anthropological   teaching  Modern 

1  Another  view  which  has  much  to  recommend  it  is  that  '  in 
the  six  days  God  pronounced  all  the  laws  upon  which  the  produc- 
tion of  phenomena  depends,'  that  those  laws  thus  pronounced  were 
'the  only  operative  agencies  of  production,'  and  that  nothing 
remained  to  be  done  but  to  '  allow  the  laws  to  take  effect  and 
bring  into  existence  the  various  phenomena  which  they  have 
produced  and  are  still  produoing  to-day.'  On  this  interpretation 
an  interval  is  to  be  understood  between  *  God  said '  and  '  it  was 
so,'  an  interval  as  to  whioh  the  Bible  is  silent,  but  which  may 
have  extended  for  ages.  (For  a  full  statement  of  this  view 
see  Capron,  Conflict  of  Truth,  chap.  xi.  and  xii.,  especially 
p.  193.) 

C  25 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  about  man's  nature  ?  The  answer  is  plain.  On 
the  one  hand  the  chapter  teaches  clearly  an  essential 
unity  of  man  with  animate  and  inanimate  nature, 
and  at  the  same  time  it  teaches  with  equal  clear- 
ness man's  separateness  from  nature  and  his 
transcendence  in  view  of  his  creation  in  the  image 
of  God.  Thus  modern  science  and  ancient  Genesis 
are  at  one  as  to  the  complexity  of  man's  nature,  and 
also  as  to  its  unity  at  once  with  earth  and  heaven. 
Reviewing  the  relations  of  this  chapter  to  modern 
science,  we  again  call  attention  to  the  definitely 
religious  aim  and  object  of  Genesis,  and  may  say 
that  while  the  chapter  is  scientifically  incomplete  it 
is  not  scientifically  inaccurate.  On  the  other  hand, 
religiously,  it  is  both  accurate  and  complete. 

Nor  can  we  fail  to  ask  how  this  correspondence 
between  Genesis  and  science  is  to  be  explained. 
How  are  we  to  account  for  such  anticipations  of 
modern  science  in  this  early  book  ?  Even  Haeckel 
admits  that 

'two  great  and  fundamental  ideas,  common  also  to  the 
non-miraculous,  meet  us  in  the  Mosaic  hypothesis  of  creation 
with  surprising  clearness  and  simplicity — the  idea  of  separa- 
tion or  differentiation  and  the  idea  of  progressive  develop- 
ment or  perfecting.  ...  In  this  theory  there  lies  hidden  the 
ruling  idea  of  a  progressive  development  and  differentiation 
of  the  originally  simple  matter.  We  can  therefore  bestow 
our  just  and  sincere  admiration  of  the  Jewish  law-giver's 
grand  insight  into  nature '  (quoted  by  M'Cosh,  The  Religious 
Aspect  of  Evolution,  pp.  99,  100). 

May  we  not  rightly  see  in  this  record  a  clear 
proof  of  Divine  inspiration  ?    There  is  surely  noth- 


The  Creation 

ing  in  all  these  correspondences  which  could  have  Gen.  u 
come  into  the   ken  of  Moses  by  purely  natural 
means. 
To  quote  Sir  William  Dawson  again  : — 

1  All  these  coincidences  cannot  be  accidental.  They  are 
the  more  remarkable  when  we  consider  the  primitive  and 
child-like  character  of  the  notices  in  Genesis,  making  no 
scientific  pretensions,  and  introducing  what  they  tell  us  of 
primitive  man  merely  to  explain  and  illustrate  the  highest 
moral  and  religious  teachings.  Truth  and  divinity  are 
stamped  on  every  line  of  the  early  chapters  of  Genesis,  alike 
in  their  archaic  simplicity,  and  in  that  accuracy  as  to  facts 
which  enables  them  not  only  to  stand  unharmed  amid  the 
discoveries  of  modern  science,  but  to  display  new  beauties 
as  we  are  able  more  and  more  fully  to  compare  them  with 
the  records  stored  up  from  old  in  the  recesses  of  the  earth. 
Those  who  base  their  hopes  for  the  future  on  the  glorious 
revelations  of  the  Bible  need  not  be  ashamed  of  its  story  of 
the  past.' 

V.  What  is  its  Religious  Teaching  ?    The  primary  its  Religious 
and  fundamental  truth  of  this  chapter  is,  *  In  the  Teaching- 
beginning  God  created.'     It  teaches  that  the  world 
is  not  self-originated,  and  thereby  declares,  what 
science  compels  us  to  demand,  the  fact  of  a  First 
Cause.     The  nebular  hypothesis  of  Laplace  is  the 
best  scientific  account  of  the  solar  system,  and  yet 
it  is  obvious  that  this  hypothesis   only  accounts 
for  the  second  verse   of  Genesis  i.,  not  the  first 
Laplace's  theory   presupposes  a  central  sun  and 
an  atmospheric  envelope,  but  Genesis  i.   1    goes 
behind    this    nebular    hypothesis    and    gives    the 
explanation  of  its  revolution  in  the  creative  fiat  _a8  to  the 
of  God.     This  simple  thought  of  creation  is  very  Creator. 
27 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  L  familiar  to  us  to-day,  but,  as  is  well  known,  it  was 
not  so  evident  to  all  the  thinkers  and  all  the  nations 
of  the  old  world.  Some  of  the  earliest  peoples  had 
no  idea  of  absolute  creation,  and  moBt  assuredly  it 
never  was  so  clear  and  unmistakable  in  any  part  of 
the  world  as  it  was  among  the  Hebrews.  In  view 
of  the  fact  that  '  the  notion  of  creation  is  one  which 
had  not  dawned  on  the  ancient  Greek  mind,'  and 
was  'never  securely  attained  in  the  thought  of 
Greece,'  we  can  perhaps  realise  a  little  of  the 
immense  benefit  the  world  has  derived  from  this 
chapter  (Waggett,  The  Scientific  Temper  in 
Religion,  pp.  165  /.). 
—As  to  The  chapter  also  teaches  us  that  man  is  the 

Man*  crown  and  culmination  of  creation,  that  he  is  the 

earthly  end  for  which  creation  has  been  made  and 
developed,  and  that  in  his  life  there  is  the  promise 
and  potency  of  God-likeness.  Nothing  could  be 
clearer  than  the  teaching  of  this  chapter  as  to  the 
spiritual  nature  of  man  and  the  spiritual  purpose 
for  which  he  was  made.  Again  to  quote  Sir 
William  Dawson: — 

1  In  man  there  are  other  and  higher  powers,  determining 
his  conscious  personality,  his  formation  of  general  principles, 
his  rational  and  moral  volitions  and  self-restraints.  These 
are  manifestations  of  a  higher  spiritual  nature,  which 
constitute  in  man  the  image  and  shadow  of  God.' 

—As  to  The   chapter  also   declares   that   matter  is  not 

Matter.         eternal;  it  teaches  clearly  that  absolute  dualism, 

that  refuge  of  many  ancient  Eastern  thinkers,  is 

entirely  impossible  and  foreign  to  the  whole  idea 

of  true  religion. 

28 


The  Creation 

Not  least  significant  is  the  simple  but  conclusive  Gen.  i. 
way  in  which  this  chapter  deals  with  some  of  the 
most  characteristic  errors  of  ancient  and  modern 
thought  In  opposition  to  Atheism  it  proclaims 
God;  in  opposition  to  Polytheism  it  emphasises 
one  God;  in  opposition  to  Pantheism  it  declares 
the  separateness  of  God  and  the  world ;  in  oppo- 
sition to  Materialism  it  reveals  the  spirituality  of 
God  and  man. 

And  thus  we  find  ourselves  coming  back  again  The  Office  of 
and  again  to  the  first  verse,  •  In  the  beginning Faith- 
God,'  and  we  rest  both  mind  and  heart  on  the 
familiar  words.  'Through  faith  we  understand 
that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  Word  of 
God.'  Let  us  mark  this  expression  with  great 
care.  'Through  faith  we  understand.'  Faith  is 
the  great  secret  of  true  perception.  Never  do  we 
find  any  opposition  in  Holy  Scripture  between 
faith  and  understanding,  between  faith  and  reason, 
but  only  between  faith  and  sight.  Faith  is  the 
greatest  perceptive  power  in  the  world.  Through 
faith  we  see.  And  as  we  contemplate  God's 
creation  in  the  light  of  this  early  chapter  as 
well  as  in  the  later  chapters  of  modern  science, 
we  come  back  to  the  old  word  which  declares 
that  'Thou  hast  created  all  things,  and  for 
Thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were  created'  (Rev. 
iv.  11). 

In  the  study  of  this  chapter  with  special  reference 
to  modern  science  the  following  authorities  will  be 
found  of  service:   M'Cosh,  The  Religious  Aspect 
29 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  i.  of  Evolution ;  The  Scientific  Temper  in  Religion 
(chapter  vil),  by  Waggett;  The  Conflict  of  Truth, 
by  F.  H.  Capron ;  The  Impregnable  Rock  of  Holy 
Scripture,  by  W.  E.  Gladstone;  article  by  Sir  J. 
William  Dawson,  Expositor,  third  series,  vol.  iii. 
p.  284. 


30 


Ill 


THE   FOUNDATIONS  OF 
HUMAN   LIFE 

Gen.  ii. 


Thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were  finished,  and  all  the  host 
of  them. 

And  on  the  seventh  day  God  ended  His  work  whioh  He  had 
made  ;  and  He  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  His  work  whioh 
He  had  made. 

And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it ;  because 
that  in  it  He  had  rested  from  all  His  work  which  God  created  and 
made. 

These  are  the  generations  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  when 
they  were  created,  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  God  made  the  earth 
and  the  heavens, 

And  every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the  earth,  and 
every  herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew  :  for  the  Lord  God  had  not 
caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  there  was  not  a  man  to  till 
the  ground. 

But  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth,  and  watered  the 
whole  face  of  the  ground. 

And  tho  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life  ;  and  man  became  a 
living  soul. 

And  the  Lord  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden ;  and 
there  He  put  the  man  whom  He  had  formed. 

And  out  of  the  ground  made  the  Lord  God  to  grow  every  tree 
that  is  pleasant  to  the  sight,  and  good  for  food  ;  the  tree  of  life 
also  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil. 

And  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  garden  :  and  from 
thence  it  was  parted,  and  became  into  four  heads. 

The  name  or  the  first  is  Pison  ;  that  is  it  which  compasseth  the 
whole  land  of  Havilah,  where  there  is  gold. 

31 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  the  gold  of  that  land  is  good  :  there  is  bdellium  and  the 
onyx  stone. 

And  the  name  of  the  second  river  is  Gihon  :  the  same  is  it  that 
compasseth  the  whole  land  of  Ethiopia. 

And  the  name  of  the  third-river  is  Hiddekel :  that  is  it  which 
goeth  toward  the  east  of  Assyria.  And  the  fourth  river  is 
Euphrates. 

And  the  Lord  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into  the  garden 
of  Eden  to  dress  it,  and  to  keep  it. 

And  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  saying,  Of  every  tree 
of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat ; 

But  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt 
not  eat  of  it :  for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt 
surely  die. 

And  the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  should  be 
alone  ;  I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him. 

And  out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the 
field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  brought  them  unto  Adam,  to 
see  what  he  would  call  them  :  and  whatsoever  Adam  called  every 
living  creature,  that  was  the  name  thereof. 

And  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,  and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  to  every  beast  of  the  field :  but  for  Adam  there  was  not 
found  an  help  meet  for  him. 

And  the  Lord  God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam,  and 
he  slept :  and  He  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh 
instead  thereof. 

And  the  rib,  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken  from  man,  made 
He  a  woman,  and  brought  her  unto  the  man. 

And  Adam  said,  This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of 
my  flesh  :  she  shall  be  called  Woman,  because  she  was  taken  out 
of  Man. 

Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and 
shall  cleave  unto  his  wife  ;  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh. 

And  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his  wife,  and  were 
not  ashamed. 

Gen.  ii.  FT1HE  second  chapter  of  Genesis  is  the  natural 
Human  Life.  -L  sequel  of  the  first,  and  nowhere  is  the  purpose 
of  the  book  more  clearly  seen.  After  the  con- 
sideration of  creation  as  a  whole  our  attention  is 
concentrated  on  man — his  formation,  his  relation 
to  God,  and  his  earthly  life. 

The  introductory  purpose  of  chapter  i.  is  thus 
evident,    and   we    now    proceed    to    that   which 
32 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

is  the  predominant  purpose  of  the  book  —  the  Gen.  ii. 
record  of  human  life  in  relation  to  God  and 
religion.  The  thought  of  creation  is  now  no 
longer  dominant  In  the  first  chapter  man 
comes  at  the  end  as  the  crown  of  creation ;  here 
he  comes  at  the  commencement  as  the  starting- 
point  of  human  history. 

At  the  same  time  this  chapter  is  preparatory  to 
the  next,  for  it  deals  with  some  of  the  fundamental 
facts  and  experiences  of  human  life  which  find 
their  expression  and  development  along  the  lines 
recorded  in  later  chapters.  We  are  again  reminded 
that  Genesis  is  a  book  of  beginnings,  for  this 
chapter  is  essentially  a  chapter  of  'geneses,'  and 
is  best  looked  at  from  this  point  of  view,  since 
it  deals  with  some  of  the  primary  essentials  of 
human  life  on  earth.  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say 
that  there  is  a  great  law  connected  with  the  first 
mention  of  anything  in  Scripture  which  is  after- 
wards treated  or  recorded  in  other  parts.  It  will 
frequently,  if  not  always,  be  found  that  '  the  very 
first  words  on  any  subject  on  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  going  to  treat  are  the  keystone  of  the 
whole  matter'  (B.  W.  Newton.  Quoted  in  The 
Bible  and  Spiritual  Criticism,  by  Dr  Pierson, 
p.  41).  There  are  several  things  mentioned  for 
the  first  time  in  this  chapter,  and  they  deserve 
the  closest  possible  attention. 

I.  The  Sabbath  for  Man  (vers.  1-3).— Strictly,  The 
this  section  should  be  placed  in  close  connection  S^^th. 
with  chapter  i.  as  the  crowning  point  of  the  record 
of  the  days  of  creation.     As  the  Sabbath  is  men- 
33 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ii.  tioned  here  for  the  first  time  we  are  justified 
in  inquiring  as  to  its  fundamental  purpose  and 
principles. 

The  Sabbath  should  first  be  considered  in  its 
primary  meaning.  In  the  light  of  God's  creative 
work  the  fundamental  and  primary  idea  of  the 
Sabbath  is  twofold :  cessation  from  work,  and 
satisfaction  after  work. 

The  Sabbath  should  then  be  noticed  as  a  divine 
institution.  The  very  familiar  term  *  sanctify ' 
occurs  first  here,  and  we  are  enabled  to  see  that 
its  root  idea  is  *  separation'  or  'consecration.' 
God  separated — i.e.  set  apart — the  Sabbath  to  be 
consecrated  to  a  special  purpose. 

The  Sabbath  should  be  emphasised  as  of  per- 
manent obligation.  The  institution  of  the  Sabbath 
is  evidently  grounded  in  creation,  and  is  therefore 
pre- Mosaic,  and  not  at  all  to  be  limited  to  the 
Jews.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  fourth  Command- 
ment calls  attention  to  the  Sabbath  as  an  already 
existing  fact  ('  Remember  the  Sabbath  day,' 
Exod.  xx.  8).  There  are  many  indications,  both 
in  Genesis  and  in  Babylonian  records,  that  the 
Sabbath  was  part  of  the  primeval  revelation  which 
received  fresh  sanction  under  Moses.  Only  in  this 
way  can  the  universality  of  the  tradition  and  the 
precise  wording  of  the  fourth  Commandment  be 
explained. 

The  Sabbath  should  be  carefully  understood  as 

to  its  essential  elements.     God's  rest  after  creation 

is  put  forth  as  the  reason  and   model   of  man's 

weekly  rest     It  involves  the  special  consecration 

34 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

to  God  of  a  portion  of  our  time.  While  it  affords  Gen.  ii. 
physical  rest  and  recreation  of  energies,  it  also 
calls  for  the  worship  of  God.  Nor  are  we  to  lay 
any  stress  on  the  day,  since  no  one  can  now  say  for 
certain  that  any  particular  day  of  the  week  is, 
literally,  the  seventh  day  from  the  close  of  creation. 
It  is  the  institution,  not  the  day,  that  must  be 
emphasised.  Whether  we  think  of  the  physical, 
or  the  mental,  or  the  spiritual  results  of  the 
observance  of  the  Sabbath  Day,  we  are  face  to 
face  with  one  of  the  fundamental  facts  of  human 
life.  The  law  of  God  and  the  needs  of  man 
combine  to  make  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath 
an  absolute  necessity. 

II.  The  Formation  of  Man  (vers.  4-7). — At  Man 
this  point  a  new  section  of  Genesis  commences  Formed* 
extending  to  chapter  iv.  26,  and  described  as  '  these 
are  the  generations  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth.' 
This  phrase,  as  we  have  already  noticed,  is  always 
at  the  beginning  of  a  section,  and  has  a  prospective 
view,  not  a  retrospective.  It  is  a  superscrip- 
tion, not  a  subscription,  and  deals  with  some  new 
unfolding  of  the  record.  It  suitably  describes  the 
section  that  follows,  for  it  describes  the  offspring 
or  '  generations '  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth  in 
the  person  of  man.  Man  is  at  once  the  offspring  of 
earth  and  heaven.  It  would  be  impossible  to  regard 
this  phrase  as  suited  either  to  the  end  of  chapter  i. 
or  as  introductory  to  it,  since  that  chapter  deals 
witli  the  heavens  and  the  earth  themselves,  not  with 
their  '  generations '  or  offspring. 

It  is  sometimes  urged  that  this  section  introduces 
35 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ii.  a  new  and  second  account  of  creation,  but  this  is 
only  true  in  the  sense  that  we  have  here  a  more 
circumstantial  account  of  what  is  given  in  summary 
form  in  chapter  i.  The  differences  are  not  contra- 
dictory, but  complementary,  and  are  explained  by 
the  different  standpoint  The  second  account  pre- 
supposes the  first  in  several  particulars.  Thus  in 
chapter  i.  27,  we  have  both  male  and  female  referred 
to  as  created  (c/.  chap.  v.  1,  2),  which  prepares 
the  way  for  the  detailed  statement  of  chapter  ii. 
So  also  the  'herb'  of  chapter  iii.  18  implies 
chapter  i.  29.  Chapter  ii.  says  nothing  as  to  the 
relative  priority  of  man  or  plants,  and  only  refers  to 
the  trees  of  Eden  (vers.  8,  9).  Plants  and  man 
are  necessarily  associated  here  in  connection  with 
husbandry  and  tillage,  and  the  association  is  one  of 
thought,  not  of  chronology.  Man  could  hardly 
have  been  created  before  there  was  a  home  and 
provision  for  him  (Green,  Unity  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis,  i/n  loc). 

The  Divine  The  change  in  the  Divine  Name  ('Lord  God' 
instead  of  '  God ')  is  also  very  noteworthy.  *  Elo- 
him '  is  the  God  of  Creation,  with  special  reference 
to  His  power  and  might.  '  Jehovah  '  is  the  God 
of  Revelation  and  Redemption,  with  special  refer- 
ence to  human  life  and  the  Divine  covenant.  The 
combination  of  the  two  names  ('Lord  God/ 
*  Jehovah  Elohim ')  shows  the  association  of  the 
God  of  Revelation  with  the  God  of  Creation,  and 
the  discrimination  of  the  usage  of  these  two  Divine 
Names  in  the  whole  section  (chaps,  ii.  4,  iv.  26) 
is  very  striking  and  suggestive.  So  far  from  this 
36 


Names. 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

usage  being  a  proof  of  different  documents,  there  Gen.  ii. 
are,  on  the  contrary,  clear  indications  that  they  are 
used  with  precision  and  spiritual  meaning. 

These  verses  (4-7)  tell  us  of  the  special  prepara- 
tion made  for  man's  life,  and  they  describe  the 
appearance  of  the  earth  at  the  time  of  man's 
formation. 

The  terms  descriptive  of  man's  physical  creation  Man's 
need  careful  attention.  The  word  '  formed  '  is  the  creation. 
Hebrew  Asah,  not  Bara,  and  refers  to  moulding 
or  fashioning  out  of  already  existing  materials.  As 
these  existing  materials  are  described  as  '  the  dust 
of  the  ground,'  we  see  at  once  how  true  to  scientific 
fact  the  statement  is  in  man's  point  of  contact  with 
material  creation.  If,  therefore,  we  are  inclined  to 
hold  that  so  far  as  man's  bodily  structure  is  con- 
cerned he  is  a  product  of  evolution,  having  come 
upwards  from  below,  we  may  find  in  the  story  in 
Genesis  a  possible  suggestion  of  this  point 

Equally  clear  and  definite  is  the  statement  as  to  Man's 
man's  spiritual  nature — '  breathed  into  his  nostrils  Nature* 
the  breath  of  life ;  and  man  became  a  living  soul' 
Thus,  whatever  may  be  true  of  man's  bodily  frame, 
there  was  a  point  of  departure  from  material 
creation  in  regard  to  man's  moral  being  which  is 
characterised  in  this  verse  as  a  Divine  act  differen- 
tiating man  from  nature.  Once  again  we  are 
in  the  region  of  scientific  fact,  for,  in  spite  of 
arguments  to  the  contrary,  there  is — at  any  rate  up 
to  the  present — no  real  proof  of  the  evolution  of  man's 
moral  and  spiritual  nature.  Personality  has  never 
yet  been  expressed  in  terms  of  evolution,  and 
37 


Home. 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ii.  requires  a  Divine  creation  to  account  for  it.  Three 
great  facts  stand  outside  the  realm  of  evolution  as 
it  is  now  understood — human  speech,  human  con- 
science, and  human  individuality. 

Man's  III.  The  Home  of  Man  (vers.  8-14). — Human 

life  requires  a  locality,  a  home  for  its  proper  ex- 
pression and  development,  and  consequently  we 
read  of  God's  provision  for  this  great  necessity.  As 
is  well  known,  the  exact  locality  of  man's  first  home 
has  been  a  subject  of  great  discussion,  and  the 
result  is  as  uncertain  to-day  as  ever.  Three  solu- 
tions of  the  problem  practically  sum  up  the  known 
conditions — (1)  At  the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf; 
(2)  Armenia;  (3)  Babylonia.  The  weightiest 
authorities  seem  to  favour  the  last-named  locality. 

The  two  elements  of  man's  home  call  for  our 
attention — the  characteristics  of  beauty  ('  pleasant 
to  the  sight'),  and  utility  ('good  for  food').  As 
it  was  with  the  first  home,  so  should  it  ever  be, 
in  the  possession  and  proportion  of  these  two 
requirements.  The  beautiful  without  the  useful,  or 
the  useful  without  the  beautiful,  will  fail  in  that 
which  is  essential  to  a  true  home. 

The  tree  of  life  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil  seem  to  be  symbols  of  spiritual 
realities.  We  may  set  aside  the  unworthy  and 
unnecessary  literalism  which  thinks  of  the  fruit  of 
these  trees  as  capable  of  conveying  life  and  know- 
ledge. They  are  in  keeping  with  the  pictorial  and 
symbolical  character  of  the  narrative  as  expressive 
of  great  spiritual  realities. 

IV.  The  Service  of  Man  (ver.   15). — From  the 
38 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

very  first  man  was  intended  for  work,  and  the  Gen.  ii. 
necessity  of  service  is  one  of  the  fundamental  Man;s 
principles  of  man's  existeuce.  Moreover,  this  emcc* 
necessity  will  be  realised  in  enjoyment  under  normal 
conditions,  for  there  is  nothing  which  is  so  full  of 
genuine  satisfaction  as  the  performance  of  the  work 
which  God  has  given  us  to  do.  Work  which  is  not 
toil  and  trouble  always  gives  pleasure.  In  the 
Garden  of  Eden  man  was  to  *  dress  it  and  to  keep 
it'  May  not  this  latter  phrase  give  us  some  hint 
of  already-existing  danger  ?  May  not  defence  as 
well  as  preservation  be  included  ?  If  so,  man  was 
not  only  to  do  the  work  of  the  gardener  in  dressing 
it,  he  had  also  to  safeguard  it,  presumably  from 
foes.  Again  we  seem  to  be  in  the  realm  of  spiritual 
realities  in  this  hint  of  the  existence  of  evil  on  the 
earth. 

V.  The  Probation  of  Man  (vers.  16,  17).— For  Man's 
the  first  time  we  are  reminded  of  the  possibility  of  Probatlon- 
human  understanding,  human  speech,  and  human 
language  in  this  communication  from  God  to  man. 
Man  had  this  primeval  revelation  from  God,  giving 
full  permission  of  freedom  in  the  garden  with  one 
simple,  but  significant,  limitation.  There  was  one 
thing,  and  one  only,  that  he  was  not  to  do.  Again 
we  notice  the  underlying  spiritual  reality  involved. 
The  narrative  gives  in  a  pictorial  form  the  concrete 
fact  of  human  responsibility  and  probation.  Man's 
life  was  to  be  limited  by  obedience,  God's  law  being 
the  standard  of  his  life.  There  is  nothing  unworthy 
in  the  form  of  the  probation.  The  principle  of 
obedience  can  be  emphasised  as  easily  one  way  as 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Gen.  ii. 


Man's 
Authority. 


Man's 
Companion. 


another.  The  result  of  disobedience  is  stated  to 
be  death,  and  the  precise  meaning  of  this  term  will 
come  before  us  later.  Suffice  it  to  say,  as  we  have 
it  here  for  the  first  time  in  Scripture,  the  root 
idea  of  death  seems  to  be  that  of  separation,  not 
annihilation. 

VI.  The  Authority  of  Man  (vers.  18-20).— We 
are  here  taught  in  detail  what  is  mentioned  briefly 
in  chapter  i.  26 — man's  original  dominion  and  lord- 
ship over  nature.  In  a  very  true  sense  God  in- 
tended man  to  be  the  crown  of  creation,  and  this 
naming  of  the  creatures  of  the  earth  and  sky  is  the 
Scripture  method  of  emphasising  a  fact  which  all 
scientific  research  during  the  centuries  has  gone  to 
confirm  more  and  more.  Man  was  intended  to  be 
supreme,  the  culminating  point  of  God's  creation. 
Hints  of  this  are  found  in  various  parts  of  Holy 
Scripture  (cf  Ps.  viii.),  and  it  is  not  altogether 
speculative  to  attempt  to  imagine  the  precise  forms 
that  this  dominion  would  have  taken  had  sin  not 
come  into  the  world.  In  any  case  that  lordship 
will  one  day  be  resumed  (Isa.  xi.  6;  Heb.  ii. 
6-10). 

VII.  The  Companion  for  Man  (vers.  21-25). — 
We  are  now  to  read  the  detail  of  that  creation  of 
the  female  already  barely  mentioned  in  chapter  i. 
27.  The  words  of  verse  18  express  a  profound 
truth  which  can  be  proved  from  various  points  of 
view.  '  It  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  alone ; 
I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him.'  '  It  is  not 
good'  whether  we  consider  man's  character  and 
its  development,  or  his  need  of  fellowship,  or  his 

40 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

position  as  head  of  the  race.  It  is  curious  that  Gen.  ii. 
from  this  verse,  by  an  error  of  reading,  the  English 
language  has  been  supplied  with  the  term  *  help- 
meet* The  Hebrew  phrase  is  *  a  helper  suited  for 
him,'  or,  quite  literally, '  a  helper  as  his  counterpart.' 
This  is  the  true  idea  of  woman's  relation  to  man, 
his  counterpart,  his  complement,  and  whenever 
this  is  realised  in  marriage,  God's  purpose  is  being 
fulfilled. 

'For  woman  is  not  undevelopt  man, 
But  diverse  : 

Not  like  to  like,  but  like  in  difference. 

Yet  in  the  long  years  liker  must  they  grow  ; 

Till  at  the  last  she  set  herself  to  man, 
Like  perfect  music  unto  noble  words ; 

Distinct  in  individualities, 

But  like  each  other  ev'n  as  those  who  love.' 

The  narrative  continues  to  be  pictorial  and  A  Narrative 
picturesque,  though  we  must  ever  take  care  to  Facts- 
avoid  the  idea  that  it  is  purely  allegorical.  The 
pictures  have  distinct  realities  corresponding  to 
them,  and  are  expressive  of  actual  facts.  The 
question  of  sex  is  one  of  the  problems  still 
unsolved  (and  perhaps  insoluble)  by  the  science  of 
to-day,  and  it  may  perhaps  be  asked  whether 
science  could  ever  have  given  a  more  religiously 
fitting  and  helpful  account  of  the  physiological 
facts  as  they  are  now  known  to  us. 

Matthew  Henry  quaintly  says  that  woman  was 
taken  out  of  man's  side  to  suggest  her  equality 
with  him ;  not  out  of  his  feet  to  imply  inferiority, 
D  41 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ii.  or  out  of  his  head  to  suggest  superiority,  but  out 
of  his  side,  implying  companionship  and  equality. 

Not  only  the  formation  of  woman,  but  the  great 
primary  ordinance  of  marriage,  is  brought  before 
us  in  this  section,  and  so  the  chapter  ends  with 
this  account  of  one  of  the  essential  facts  and 
factors  in  human  life  and  history. 

Once  more  let  us  call  attention  to  the  real  value 
of  this  record  both  as  to  its  pictorial  form  and  the 
underlying  facts  suggested  and  implied.  As  the 
Editor  of  Lange's  Commentary,  referring  to  these 
early  chapters,  says  : — 

'  Great  truths,  great  facts,  ineffable  truths,  ineffable  facts, 
are  doubtless  set  forth.  We  do  not  abate  one  iota  of  their 
greatness,  their  wonderfulness,  by  supposing  such  a  mode 
of  representation.  It  is  not  an  accommodation  to  a  rude 
and  early  age,  but  the  best  language  for  every  age.  How 
trifling  the  conceit  that  our  science  could  have  furnished 
any  better  !  .  .  .  Her  language  will  ever  be  more  or  less 
incorrect ;  and  therefore,  a  Divine  revelation  cannot  use 
it,  since  such  use  would  be  an  endorsement  of  its  absolute 
verity.  The  simpler  and  more  universal  language  of  the 
Scripture  may  be  inadequate,  as  all  language  must  be  ;  it 
may  fall  short ;  but  it  points  in  the  right  direction.  Though 
giving  us  only  the  great  steps  in  the  process,  it  secures  that 
essential  faith  in  the  transcendent  Divine  working,  which 
science — our  science,  or  the  science  of  ages  hence — might 
only  be  in  danger,  to  say  the  least,  of  darkening.  It  saves 
us  from  those  trifling  things  commonly  called  reconciliations 
of  revelation  with  science,  and  which  the  next  science  is 
almost  sure  to  unreconcile.  It  does  so  by  placing  the  mind 
on  a  wholly  different  plane,  giving  us  simple,  though  grand, 
conceptions  as  the  vehicle  of  great  ideas  and  great  facts  of 
origin  in  themselves  no  more  accessible  to  the  most  culti- 
vated  than   to  the  lowliest  minds.      There   is  an  awful 

42 


The  Foundations  of  Human  Life 

sublimity  in  this  Mosaic  account  of  the  origin  of  the  world  Gen.  ii. 
and  man,  and  that,  too,  whether  we  regard  it  as  inspired 
Scripture  or  the  grandest  picture  ever  conceived  by  human 
genius.  To  those  who  cannot,  or  who  do  not,  thus  appreciate 
it,  it  matters  little  what  mode  of  interpretation  is  adopted 
— whether  it  be  one  of  the  so-called  reconciliations,  or  the 
crude  dogmatism  that  calls  itself  literal  because  it  chooses 
to  take  on  the  narrowest  scale  a  language  so  suggestive  of 
vast  times  and  ineffable  causalities'  (p.  211). 

We  see  in  this  chapter   some  of  the  essential  Suggestions 
elements   of  human   life.      They   call   for   earnest  Meditation, 
thought  and  definite  personal  application.     They 
cover  almost  everything  of  importance  in  life  and 
experience,  and  are  a  constant  reminder  of  God's 
purpose  for  humanity  and  for  each  individual. 

(1)  Man's  kinship  with  God  (ver.  7). 

(2)  Man's  worship  of  God  (ver.  3). 

(3)  Man's  fellowship  with  God  (ver.  16). 

(4)  Man's  service  for  God  (ver.  18). 

(5)  Man's  loyalty  to  God  (ver.  17). 

(6)  Man's  authority  from  God  (ver.  19). 

(7)  Man's  social  life  from  and  for  God  (ver.  24). 

When  these  ideas  are  realised  in  personal  experi- 
ence, God's  purpose  in  creating  man  and  man's 
perfect  life  are  being  fulfilled. 


43 


IV 
THE  FALL 

Gen.  iii. 


Now  the  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  beast  of  the  field 
which  the  Lord  God  had  made.  And  he  said  unto  the  woman, 
Yea,  hath  God  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden  ? 

And  the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  We  may  eat  of  the  fruit 
of  the  trees  of  the  garden  : 

But  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden, 
God  hath  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it, 
lest  ye  die. 

And  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye  shall  not  surely 
die: 

For  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your 
eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and 
evil. 

And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and 
that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make 
one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat,  and  gave  also 
unto  her  husband  with  her ;  and  he  did  eat. 

And  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and  they  knew  that 
they  were  naked  ;  and  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made 
themselves  aprons. 

And  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  walking  in  the 
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day  :  and  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  them- 
selves from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God  amongst  the  trees  of 
the  garden. 

And  the  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said  unto  him, 
Where  art  thou  ? 

And  he  said,  I  heard  Thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid, 
because  I  was  naked  ;  and  I  hid  myself. 

And  He  said,  Who  told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  ?  Hast  thou 
eaten  of  the  tree,  whereof  I  commanded  thee  that  thou  shouldest 
not  eat  ? 

And  the  man  said,  The  woman  whom  Thou  gavest  to  be  with 
me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat. 

44 


The  Fall 

And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  woman,  What  is  this  that 
thou  hast  done  ?  And  the  woman  said,  The  serpent  beguiled  me, 
and  I  did  eat. 

And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent,  Because  thou  hast 
done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 
of  the  field,  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  shaft  thou 
eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life  : 

And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and 
between  thy  seed  and  her  seed ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and 
thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel. 

Unto  the  woman  he  said,  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow 
and  thy  conception  ;  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children  ; 
and  thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over 
thee. 

And  unto  Adam  he  said,  Because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto 
the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast  eaten  of  the  tree,  of  which  I 
commanded  thee,  saying,  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it :  cursed  is  the 
ground  for  thy  sake  ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days 
of  thy  life ; 

Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee  ;  and  thou 
shalt  eat  of  the  herb  of  the  field  ; 

In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return 
unto  the  ground  ;  for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken  :  for  dust  thou 
art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return. 

And  Adam  called  his  wife's  name  Eve ;  because  she  was  the 
mother  of  all  living. 

Unto  Adam  also  and  to  his  wife  did  the  Lord  God  make  coats 
of  skins,  and  clothed  them. 

And  the  Lord  God  said,  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of 
us,  to  know  good  and  evil :  and  now,  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand, 
and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat,  and  live  for  ever : 

Therefore  the  Lord  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of 
Eden,  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was  taken. 

So  He  drove  out  the  man  ;  and  He  placed  at  the  east  of  the 
garden  of  Eden  cherubim,  aud  a  flaming  sword  which  turned 
every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life. 

IT  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  this  chapter  is  Gen.  Hi. 
the  pivot  of  the  Bible,  for  if  we  take  it  away 
the  rest  of  Scripture  becomes  meaningless.  With 
the  exception  of  the  fact  of  Creation,  we  have  here 
the  record  of  the  most  important  and  far-reaching 
event  in  the  world's  history — the  entrance  of  sin. 
The  record  in  this  chapter,  like  that  of  the 
45 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iii.  Creation,  is  variously  interpreted.  Many  speak  of 
it  as  '  mythical,'  by  which  is  often  meant  that  whicli 
is  unreal,  untrue,  and  impossible.  Others  use  the 
term  l  myth '  as  indicating  an  elementary  method  of 
conveying  moral  and  spiritual  truth,  even  though 
the  narrative  itself  is  not  historical  in  form.  The 
former  view  is  naturally  to  be  set  aside  by  all  who 
believe  in  the  fact  and  veracity  of  a  Divine  revela- 
tion. The  latter  interpretation  of  '  myth '  does  not 
seem  to  be  quite  satisfactory  on  any  intelligible 
principle  of  Divine  inspiration.  The  truest  method 
of  interpretation  is  that  which  regards  these  narra- 
tives as  pictorial  records  of  actual  fact ;  solid  history 
in  pictorial  form.  It  is  inadequate  to  speak  of  the 
narrative  as  poetic  or  merely  symbolical,  lest  we 
should  give  the  impression  that  the  story  is  not 
concerned  with  actual  fact.  Allegory,  too,  is 
identical  with  the  truth  illustrated,  and  does  not 
necessarily  presuppose  any  historical  basis.  What 
we  must  insist  upon  and  ever  keep  in  view  is  that, 
whether  allegorical  or  pictorial,  the  narrative  is 
expressive  of  actual  fact. 

The  chapter  is  so  full  of  spiritual  truths  that  it  is 
impossible  to  deal  with  everything  in  detail.  It 
must  suffice  to  call  attention  to  four  great  realities 
of  the  spiritual  life  which  are  here  brought  before 
us  for  the  first  time  in  the  Word  of  God. 

Temptation.  I.  Temptation.  —  Consider  its  source.  The 
practical  character  of  the  narrative  is  clearly  seen 
in  the  reference  to  the  serpent  as  the  immediate 
cause  of  human  sin.  Inasmuch  as  Satan  is  not 
actually  mentioned  in  the  chapter,  we  are  surely 
46 


—Its 
Source 


The  Fall 

right  in  regarding  this  reference  to  the  serpent  as  a  Gen.  iii. 
pictorial  and  symbolical  reference  to  Satan  himself, 
a  view  which  is  confirmed  by  later  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture, such  as  2  Cor.  \i.  1  1  ;  Rev.  xii.  9.  and  xx.  2. 
There  is  no  reference  to  the  problem  of  how  and 
when  Satan  sinned.  The  one  point  of  stress  is  laid 
upon  sin  in  relation  to  man,  and  we  are  taught  very 
unmistakably  two  great  truths :  (1)  That  God  is 
not  the  author  of  sin,  and  (2)  that  sin  came  to  man 
from  without,  and  was  due  to  a  power  of  evil 
suggestion  and  influence  other  than  that  which 
came  from  man's  own  nature.  Even  though  we 
fall  short  of  identifying  the  serpent  of  this  chapter 
with  the  personal  Satan  of  later  Scripture,  we  may 
still  regard  the  teaching  of  the  Fall  story  as  sug- 
gesting the  personification  of  an  evil  principle  from 
without,  which  in  later  times  is  seen  to  be  more 
than  a  personification,  and  nothing  less  than  an 
actual  being  (Orr,  Image  of  God  in  Man,  pp. 
219  ff.). 

Mark  its  subtilty.  The  stages  of  the  temptation  —its 
should  be  carefully  noticed :  (a)  The  serpent  first  Subtilt7- 
of  all  excites  the  woman's  curiosity  by  speaking  to 
her ;  (b)  then  he  raises  a  suspicion  of  God  by  the 
question  that  he  puts  to  her  (ver.  1) ;  (c)  then  he 
proceeds  to  inject  a  threefold  doubt  of  God — of  His 
goodness,  by  reason  of  the  restriction  (ver.  1) ;  of 
His  righteousness,  in  the  assurance  that  they  shall 
not  die  (ver.  4) ;  and  of  His  holiness,  in  the  assur- 
ance that,  so  far  from  dying,  they  '  shall  be  as  gods ' 
(ver.  5).  (See  Candlish's  Lectures  on  Genesis,  in 
loc)  (d)  Thus  he  incites  the  woman  to  unbelief, 
47 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iii.  and  (e)  leads  her  eventually  to  disobedience.  It  is 
very  noteworthy  that  the  temptation  is  associated 
entirely  with  doubt  of  God's  Word :  *  Hath  God 
said  ? '  This  is  characteristic  of  sin  at  all  times ;  the 
doubt,  the  denial,  and  the  disbelief  of  God's  Word. 
First  Satan  distorts  the  Word,  then  he  leads  the 
woman  to  doubt  it,  and  last  of  all  he  denies  it.  It 
is  also  significant  that  Satan  and  the  woman  in 
their  conversation  use  the  term  'God,'  and  not 
'  Lord  God.'  This  inadequate  and  defective  refer- 
ence to  God  was  doubtless  part  of  the  explanation 
of  the  temptation  and  the  Fall.  It  would  not  have 
served  Satan's  purposes  to  have  introduced  the 
specific  covenant  term  ' Jehovah'  when  raising 
questions  about  the  veracity  and  faithfulness  of  God's 
Word. 

—Its  Observe  its  success.     The  stages  of  the  woman's 

attitude  have  often  been  pointed  out:  (a)  She 
heeded  the  temptation,  and  listened  to  Satan's 
questioning  of  God's  Word  and  his  new  interpre- 
tation of  that  Divine  utterance.  In  her  reply  to  his 
question,  she  perverted  and  misquoted  three  times 
the  divine  law  to  which  she  and  Adam  were  subject  : 
(1)  She  disparaged  her  privileges  by  misquoting 
the  terms  of  the  Divine  permission  as  to  the  other 
trees.  (2)  She  overstated  the  restrictions  by  mis- 
quoting the  Divine  prohibition.  (3)  She  under- 
rated her  obligations  by  misquoting  the  Divine 
penalty.  And  thus  she  was  easily  exposed  to  the 
temptation  to  question,  doubt,  and  deny  God.  (b) 
Her  curiosity  was  roused,  perhaps,  by  Satan  demon- 
strating before  her  the  apparent  futility  of  heeding 
48 


Success. 


The  Fall 

God,  for  we  are  told  that  she  saw  that  the  tree  was  Gen.  iii. 
good  for  food  as  well  as  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  (c) 
Then  sprang  up  physical  craving,  and  she  desired  to 
disobey,  with  the  result  that  (d)  she  took  and  ate, 
and  'gave  also  unto  her  husband  and  he  did  eat.' 
Her  fall  was  consequently  due  to  dalliance  with 
temptation.  She  did  not  repel,  but  yielded  to  it 
Had  she  resisted  at  the  very  outset  she  would  not 
have  fallen ;  for  it  is  a  universal  law  that  if  we 
resist  the  devil,  he  will  flee  from  us.  Nothing  is 
more  remarkable  in  the  whole  history  of  man's  moral 
life  than  the  powerlessness  of  the  devil  to  overcome 
us  apart  from  our  own  assent  and  consent  If  we 
resist,  he  flees;  if  we  yield,  he  wins.  It  is  this 
simple  fact  that  constitutes  man's  ultimate  respon- 
sibility for  his  actions.  He  never  can  say,  '  I  was 
overpowered  in  spite  of  myself.'  All  that  he  can 
say  is,  '  I  was  overpowered  because  of  myself.' 

//.  Sin. — The  reality  of  sin  is  undoubted.  The  Sin— Its 
chapter  is  clear  as  to  the  fact  of  a  Fall.  There  is  ReaUty- 
such  a  thing  as  moral  evil  in  the  world.  Human 
nature,  with  its  constant  tendency  to  retrogression 
and  degeneration,  clearly  proves  this.  However 
and  whenever  it  has  come  about,  we  know  the 
universality  and  persistence  of  evil  to-day,  and  the 
world  has  never  had  any  other  adequate  explanation 
than  that  which  is  afforded  by  this  chapter.  Tradi- 
tions of  the  Fall  are  almost  as  numerous  as  those 
of  creation  (Pulpit  Commentary,  p.  59).  There  is 
scarcely  any  part  of  God's  Word  which  is  more  in 
accord  with  the  known  facts  of  history  and  science 
than  the  story  of  this  chapter.  We  have  recently 
49 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iii.  been  told  that  the  doctrine  of  a  Fall  from  original 
righteousness  is  only  found  in  this  chapter  and  in 
the  theology  of  St  Paul,  and  yet  it  is  surely  obvious 
that  the  facts  of  sin  and  its  universality  are  pre- 
supposed in  every  part  of  the  Old  Testament. 

'If  a  Fall  were  not  narrated  in  the  opening 
chapters  of  Genesis,  we  should  still  have  to  postulate 
something  of  the  kind  for  the  Bible's  own  represent- 
ations of  the  state  of  man'  (Orr,  ut  supra,  p.  201). 
We  may  also  add  that  the  same  postulate  is 
necessary  to  account  for  the  tendencies  to  evil  seen 
in  the  natures  of  little  children  throughout  the 
whole  world. 

—Its  Root.  The  root  of  sin  should  be  understood.  The 
foundation  of  all  sin  lies  in  man's  desire  for  self- 
assertion  and  his  determination  to  be  independent 
of  God.  Adam  and  Eve  chafed  under  the 
restriction  laid  upon  them  by  the  command  of 
God,  and  it  was  in  opposition  to  this  that  they 
asserted  themselves,  and  thereby  fell.  Man  does 
not  like  to  be  dependent  upon  another,  and 
subject  to  commands  from  without.  He  desires 
to  go  his  own  way,  to  be  his  own  master; 
and  as  a  consequence  he  sins,  and  becomes  i  lord 
of  himself,  that  heritage  of  woe.' 

—Its  Re-  The     responsibility     of     sin     needs    constant 

sponsibility.  emphasis.  The  possibility  of  sin  is  involved 
in  the  fact  of  personality.  Unless  man  was 
to  be  an  automaton,  with  no  opportunity  for 
character,  there  must  be  granted  the  possibility 
of  sin.  It  is  at  this  point  we  realise  the  solemn 
fact  of  personal  accountability.  Whatever  may 
50 


The  Fall 

be  true  of  environment  and  heredity,  they  never  Gen.  iii. 
can  blot  out  the  distinction  between  right  and 
wrong,  or  rob  man  of  his  responsibility.  Nor 
must  we  for  a  moment  suppose  that  sin  was  any 
inherent  tendency  or  primal  necessity  of  human 
life.  Adam  had  liability,  but  not  a  tendency,  to 
sin.  Our  Lord  had  neither  liability  nor  tendency, 
though  of  course  His  temptation  was  real,  all  the 
more  so  because  of  His  sinless  nature  (Heb.  iv. 
16  R.V.,  not  A. V.).  We  to-day,  as  fallen,  have 
both  liability  and  tendency.  Any  modern  theories 
of  evolution  which  make  sin  a  necessity  of  human 
development  tend  thereby  to  blot  out  the  eternal 
distinction  between  good  and  evil.  In  view  of 
certain  aspects  of  modern  evolutionary  thought, 
man  had  no  alternative  but  to  fall ;  and  to  add  to 
the  confusion  of  thought  and  morals,  we  are  also 
told  that  this  failure  was  not  a  fall,  but  a  rise — a 
fall  upwards — so  that  we  must  now,  it  is  said, 
speak  of  the  ascent,  not  of  the  fall,  of  man.  In 
opposition  to  all  this  the  Bible  teaches  us  that  sin 
was  not  a  necessity,  and  there  never  will  be  any 
clear  Christian  thinking  until  this  necessitarian 
theory  is  entirely  banished  from  our  minds  (Orr,  ut 
supra,  pp.  1 58  and  298). 

III.  Punishment. — '  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  Punishment 
you  out '  is  the  great  principle  written  clearly  and 
deeply  on  this  record  of  the  first  sin,  as,  indeed,  of 
every  other  since  that  time.  What  was  the  punish- 
ment associated  with  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve? 
The  narrative  shows  this  plainly. 

They  soon  had  a  sense  of  guilt     At  once  their 
61 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Condemna- 
tion. 


Gen.  iii.      eyes  were  opened,  and  they  became  conscious  of 
Guilt.  the  shame  associated  with  their  wrong-doing.     The 

reference  to  nakedness  and  clothing  indicates  the 
profound  shame  that  actuated  them,  and  at  once 
they  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
Fear  was  the  result  of  their  guilt ;  the  old  ex- 
periences of  innocence  and  fellowship  were  at  an 
end,  and  now  they  were  guilty  before  God.  Con- 
science, that  element  of  the  Divine  image  and  like- 
ness, was  already  at  work,  and  their  sin  was  indeed 
finding  them  out. 

Then  followed  a  sentence  of  condemnation. 
God  soon  dealt  with  this  wrong-doing,  and  there 
was  a  threefold  condemnation.  All  subterfuges 
(ver.  10)  and  all  cowardly  attempts  to  blame 
others  (vers.  12,  13)  were  unavailing,  and  man  stood 
face  to  face  with  the  holy  God,  conscious  of  guilt 
and  unspeakable  shame,  (a)  The  serpent  was 
first  dealt  with,  and  judgment  passed  upon  him 
(vers.  14,  15);  (b)  the  woman  was  next  judged, 
and  condemned  to  sorrow  and  subjection  (ver. 
16);  (c)  the  man  last  of  all  was  dealt  with,  and 
sorrow,  hardship,  toil,  and  death  were  made  his 
portion  (vers.  17-19). 
Separation.  Last  of  all  came  an  act  of  separation.  It  was 
impossible  for  man  to  remain  in  the  garden,  and  in 
a  state  of  fellowship  with  God.  Sin  and  Paradise 
were  incompatible,  and  so  the  Lord  sent  them 
forth,  driving  them  out,  and  placing  the  guard  with 
the  sword  that  turned  every  way.  Mark  the  sig- 
nificance of  this  phrase.  There  was  no  possibility 
of  a  return  to  the  old  life.  Paradise  was  lost,  and 
62 


The  Fall 

by  no  human  effort  could  it  ever  be  regained.  Gen.  iii. 
Separation  is  always  the  result  of  sin.  'Your 
iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your 
God '  (Isa.  lix.  2).  And  thus  the  threefold  punish- 
ment of  guilt,  condemnation,  and  separation  accrued 
to  man  because  of  his  sin. 

The  chapter,  however,  does  not  end  with  sin  and 
its  punishment,  and  we  pass  on  to  consider  the 
fourth  great  reality. 

IV.  Redemption. — The  announcement  of  enmity  Redemption, 
between  the  serpent  and  the  woman,  and  between 
her  seed  and  his  seed,  is  the  first  message  of  Divine 
redemption  in  its  antagonism  to,  and  victory  over,  —Promised, 
sin.  This  is  indeed  the  Protevangelium,  and  is  the 
primeval  promise  which  is  taken  up  again  and 
again  henceforward  in  Scripture,  until  He  comes 
Who  destroys  him  that  has  the  power  of  death, 
and  casts  him  into  the  lake  of  fire. 

Redemption  is  not  only  promised  in  word,  it  is  —Pictured, 
also  pictured  in  deed.  Man  attempted  to  cover 
his  shame  by  the  leaves  of  the  fig-tree,  but  this 
was  far  too  slight  a  covering  for  so  deep  a  shame. 
No  human  covering  could  suffice,  and  so  we  are 
told  with  profound  significance  that  the  'Lord 
God  made  coats  of  skins  and  clothed  them.'  This 
Divine  clothing  took  the  place  of  their  own  self- 
made  clothing,  and  now  they  are  clothed  indeed. 
The  mention  of  skins  suggests  the  fact  and 
necessity  of  death  of  the  animal  before  they 
could  be  used  as  clothing,  and  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  in  this  fact  we  have  the  primal 
revelation  of  sacrifice,  and  of  the  way  in  which 
53 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iii.  the  robe  of  righteousness  was  to  be  provided 
for  them. 

'  Jesu,  Thy  blood  and  righteousness 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress.' 

—Provided.  Looking  on  to  the  New  Testament,  we  cannot 
but  associate  with  this  chapter  the  great  Pauline 
chapter,  Romans  viii.,  which  ends  very  significantly 
with  three  questions  triumphantly  asked  by  the 
Apostle,  and  it  should  be  carefully  noticed  that 
these  questions  exactly  correspond  to  the  three 
aspects  of  punishment  mentioned  above. 

(a)  'Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of 
God's  elect?'  (ver.  33).  That  is,  'There  is  no 
guilt' 

(b)  'Who  is  he  that  condemneth?'  (ver.  34). 
That  is,  'There  is  no  condemnation.' 

(c)  'Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ?'  (ver.  35).  That  is,  'There  is  no 
separation.' 

Thus,  where  sin  abounded  grace  did  super- 
abound,  and  'as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the 
world  and  death  by  sin,  so  now  grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.' 

Suggestions  God's  question  to  Adam  still  sounds  in  the  ear 
M  ditati  °^  evei7  8mner>  '  Where  art  thou  ? '  It  is  the  call 
of  Divine  justice,  which  cannot  overlook  sin.  It 
is  the  call  of  Divine  sorrow,  which  grieves  over  the 
sinner.  It  is  the  call  of  Divine  love,  which  offers 
redemption  for  sin.  To  each  and  to  every  one  of 
us  the  call  is  reiterated,  '  Where  art  thou  ? ' 
54 


The  Fall 

The  answer  to  the  question  must  be  either :  ■  in  Gen. 
Adam'  or  'in  Christ'  These  are  the  only  two 
places  where  we  can  be.  If  we  are  still  'in 
Adam,'  we  are  still  in  sin,  and  therefore  in  guilt, 
condemnation,  and  in  danger  of  eternal  separation. 
If  we  are  'in  Christ,'  we  are  already  pardoned, 
accounted  righteous,  subjects  of  His  grace,  and 
heirs  of  eternal  glory. 

Note. — For  all  modern  evolutionary  and  philo- 
sophical questions  connected  with  this  chapter 
attention  is  earnestly  called  to  the  very  able  and 
scholarly  book  by  Dr  Orr,  already  quoted  and 
referred  to. 


BG 


CAIN  AND  ABEL 

Gen.  iv.  1-15 


And  Adam  knew  Eve  his  wife ;  and  she  conceived,  and  bare 
Cain,  and  said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord. 

And  she  again  bare  his  brother  Abel.  And  Abel  was  a  keeper 
of  sheep,  but  Cain  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground. 

And  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  pass,  that  Cain  brought  of 
the  fruit  of  the  ground  an  offering  unto  the  Lord. 

And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  and  of 
the  fat  thereof.  And  the  Lord  had  respect  unto  Abel,  and  to  his 
offering : 

But  unto  Cain,  and  to  his  offering,  He  had  not  respect.  And 
Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  countenance  fell. 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth  ?  and  why 
is  thy  countenance  fallen  ? 

If  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ?  and  if  thou 
doest  not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  door.  And  unto  thee  shall  be 
his  desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule  over  him. 

And  Cain  talked  with  Abel  his  brother :  and  it  came  to  pass, 
when  they  were  in  the  field,  that  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel 
his  brother,  and  slew  him. 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Where  is  Abel  thy  brother  ?  And 
he  said,  I  know  not :  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? 

And  He  said,  What  hast  thou  done  ?  the  voice  of  thy  brother's 
blood  crieth  unto  Me  from  the  ground. 

And  now  art  thou  cursed  from  the  earth,  which  hath  opened 
her  mouth  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy  hand. 

When  thou  tillest  the  ground,  it  shall  not  henceforth  yield  unto 
thee  her  strength  :  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  be  in 
the  earth. 

And  Cain  said  unto  the  Lord,  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I 
can  bear. 

Behold,  Thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  day  from  the  face  of 
the  earth  ;  and  from  Thy  face  shall  I  be  hid  ;  and  I  shall  be  a 

56 


Cain  and  Abel 

fugitive  and  a   vagabond  in  the  earth ;    and   it  shall  come  to 
pass,  that  every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me. 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Therefore  whosoever  slayeth 
Cain,  vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  him  sevenfold.  And  the 
Lord  set  a  mark  upon  Cain,  lest  any  finding  him  should  kill 
him. 

FROM  the  origin  of  sin  (chap,  Hi.)  we  pass  to  Gen.  iv. 
the  consideration  of  its  progress.     Sin  in  the  x~x5« 
individual   is   now   seen   to   develop   and   express The  Pr?*s- 
itself  in  the  family.     This  chapter,  like  the  three 
preceding  it,   is   full   of    'geneses,'   for   we    have 
brought  before  us  the  first  motherhood,  the  first 
birth,  the  first  family,  the  first  murder,  the  first 
martyrdom,  the  first  indications  of  human  develop- 
ment    Not  least  of  all  we  have  in  it  the  record 
of  the  first  conflict  between  the  two  seeds  (chap. 
iil    15),   and    this    in    connection   with   religious 
worship. 

It  is  a  necessary  and  useful  reminder  that  only  Selection  of 
a  few  things  are  touched  upon  in  this  chapter,  and  Facts- 
that  many  things  are  left  unexplained.  The  writer 
calls  attention  to  the  mountain  peaks  only  of 
human  history  and  experience  as  he  passes  from 
one  fact  to  another.  Thus  there  is  no  statement 
of  the  time  that  elapsed  between  chapter  iii.  24 
and  chapter  iv.  3 ;  no  explanation  of  the  origin  of 
sacrifice,  of  blood  revenge  (ver.  14),  of  the  method 
of  Divine  acceptance  of  sacrifice,  of  the  sign 
appointed  for  Cain,  and  of  the  growth  of  the 
population  implied  (vers.  15-19).  Whatever 
views  we  may  hold  upon  these  subjects  must 
necessarily  be  problematical  in  the  absence  of  clear 
teaching.  Turning  now  to  the  record  of  the  two 
B  67 


Genesis  L-xxv.  10 


Gen.  iv. 

The  Home. 


The 
Brothers. 


brothers    and    all    that    the    story    implies,    we 
notice : — 

I.  The  First  Home.  —  We  have  here  brought 
before  us  those  home  relationships,  conjugal, 
parental,  brotherly,  that  constitute  the  founda- 
tion of  all  social  life.  The  parents,  although  expelled 
from  Eden,  are  evidently  still  influenced  by  the 
consciousness  of  their  relation  to  God,  and  by 
the  thought  of  a  Divine  promise  of  a  seed  (chap, 
iii.  15).  The  words  of  Eve  at  the  birth  of  her 
first-born  son  are  to  be  noted.  She  called  the 
child  'Cain' — i.e.  'possession' — evidently  thinking 
that  in  him  would  be  fulfilled  the  promise  to  her 
seed.  It  is  possible  that  the  literal  rendering  of 
her  words,  'I  have  gotten  a  man,  even  Jehovah/ 
suggests  a  more  definite  belief  and  knowledge  than 
are  warranted.  At  the  same  time,  to  render  the 
words,  'I  have  gotten  a  man  with  the  help  of 
the  Lord,'  seems  unduly  to  weaken  the  Hebrew 
phrase.  Probably  we  are  to  understand  some  such 
rendering  as  '  I  have  gotten  a  man  in  relation  to 
Jehovah,'  pointing  definitely  to  a  conviction  that 
somehow  or  other  this  new-born  son  was  related 
to  the  Divine  promise  and  purpose.  Eve  must 
have  been  quickly  undeceived  in  this  respect,  for 
when  her  second  child  was  born  there  was  no 
reference  whatever  to  any  relation  to  the  Lord,  and 
the  fact  of  his  name  meaning  ' vanity'  seems  to 
show  clearly  that  the  mother  had  already  become 
disappointed  in  her  hopes  of  her  first-born  son. 

II.  The  Two  Brothers. — Their  work  is  first  of  all 
brought  before  us — the  one  being  a  shepherd,  the 

58 


Cain  and  Abel 

other  an  agriculturist.     Thus  early  in  the  history  of  Gen.  iv. 
the  world  are  we  reminded  of  the  necessity  and  1"15- 
dignity  of  work  as  one  of  the  essentials  of  human 
life  and  progress. 

They  not  only  worked,  however,  but  they  also  The 
worshipped.  '  To  labour '  is  not  '  to  pray '  in  the  0fferin£- 
literal  meaning  of  the  phrase.  Man  must  pray  as 
well  as  labour.  Their  worship  took  the  form  of 
offerings,  and  this  must  always  be  the  case.  Worship 
is  giving,  not  getting  ;  ascribing,  not  appropriating. 
It  is  evident  from  the  phrase,  '  in  process  of  time,' 
that  this  worship  was  regularly  rendered  as  some- 
thing habitual  in  their  life.  Man  is  never  more 
truly  man  than  when  he  is  worshipping  God  ;  for 
it  is  only  then  that  he  finds,  realises,  and  expresses 
his  true  relationship  of  dependence. 

III.  The  Divine  Response. — One  offering  was  The  Dmne 
accepted,  the  other  was  not.  It  is  noteworthy  Response' 
that  the  Divine  ' respect'  is  stated  in  both  cases, 
not  merely  with  reference  to  the  offerings,  but 
primarily  with  reference  to  the  offerer.  '  Unto 
Abel  and  to  his  offering ;  unto  Cain  and  to  his 
offering.'  The  value  of  the  offering  is  seen  to 
depend  upon  the  character  of  the  offerer.  Not 
costliness,  but  character,  constitutes  true  worship. 
We  naturally  ask  why  it  was  that  God  had  respect 
to  Abel  and  to  his  offering,  and  not  to  Cain  and 
his?  According  to  Heb.  xi.  4,  the  explanation 
is  to  be  found  in  the  words,  '  By  faith  Abel  offered 
a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain.'  Faith  always 
presupposes  a  Divine  revelation  to  which  it  is  the 
response,  and  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament 
69 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.      interpretation  it  would  seem  clear  that  one  was  an 
I-I5'  offering  of  faith,  and  the  other  an  offering  without 

faith.  Why  should  faith  be  emphasised  by  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  more  than  gratitude  or 
prayer  ?  May  it  not  be  because  of  a  prior  revelation 
from  God  as  to  how  He  was  to  be  approached? 
We  must  never  forget  that  while  death  is  very 
familiar  to  us  now,  it  was  not  so  in  those  early 
days,  and  it  might  well  have  been  asked  why  it 
was  necessary  to  destroy  the  life  of  a  lamb  when 
it  was  not  needed  for  food.  In  what  respects 
are  we  to  think  of  death  as  making  a  sacrifice 
acceptable  to  the  Creator  ?  Is  it  not  possible,  and 
even  probable,  that  Abel's  sacrifice,  involving  death, 
was  his  response  to  an  already  existing  revelation  of 
God  as  to  this  method  of  sacrifice  ?  May  we  not 
see  in  the  coats  of  skins  (chap.  iii.  21)  a  hint  of 
the  revelation  of  sacrifice  through  death  as  the  way 
of  approach  to  God  ?  This  view  at  any  rate  makes 
it  intelligible  why  Abel  can  be  said  to  have  offered 
'  by  faith,'  while  Cain  offered  a  sacrifice  which  did 
not  involve  death,  and  which  was  therefore,  on 
this  interpretation,  not  in  accordance  with  the 
Divine  revelation.  At  any  rate  we  may  fairly  say 
that  these  two  aspects  represent  two  attitudes  to- 
day— the  attitude  of  the  man  who  responds  to 
God's  revelation  and  submits  to  His  will,  and  the 
attitude  of  the  man  who  will  only  come  to  God  on 
his  own  terms,  refusing  to  do  what  does  not  suit 
him  or  commend  itself  to  his  judgment.  It  does 
not  seem  unjust  to  Cain  to  say  that  his  was  a 
sacrifice  which,  however  good  in  itself,  was  not 
60 


Cain  and  Abel 

prompted  by  a  faith  that  rested  in  and  responded  Gen.  iv. 
to  God's  revelation  of  His  will.  In  this  connection  1-IS 
the  works  of  Professor  Curtiss  (Primitive  Semitic 
Sacrifices,  and  Expositor,  1904,  1905)  on  the 
primitive  Semitic  ideas  of  sacrifice  should  be  care- 
fully studied,  since  they  indicate  very  clearly  that 
the  root  idea  of  sacrifice  among  the  Bedouin  tribes 
is  propitiation  rather  than  communion. 

IV.  The  Divine  Expostulation. — Cain's    anger  Divine 
clearly  shows  that  his  worship  was  only  a  form  of  J^£os      " 
godliness  without  the  power.     If  his  offering  had 

been  made  in  the  right  spirit,  there  would  have 
been  no  anger  and  no  lowering  of  the  countenance. 
The  Lord  meets  this  wrath  with  a  very  definite 
inquiry  and  an  equally  definite  reminder.  Verse  7 
has  long  been  a  crux  interpretum.  The  following 
rendering  seems  worthy  of  attention :  'If  thou 
doest  well,  will  there  not  be  acceptance  for  thee? 
And  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  is  lying  at  the  door 
like  a  crouching  beast,  ready  to  spring  upon  thee, 
and  unto  thee  is  Bin's  desire,  but  thou  shouldest 
rule  over  it.'  (See  RV.  margin.)  It  is  very  evident 
from  these  words  that  Cain  had  not  been  '  doing 
well '  previously  to  this,  and  hence  the  necessity  of 
this  solemn  warning  of  the  bitter  consequences  of 
continued  sin.  Sin  is  personified  as  a  lurking  beast 
of  prey  ready  to  spring  upon  its  victim,  and  against 
this  enemy  Cain  is  warned,  and  commanded  to  rule 
over  it.  (See  Murphy,  Conant,  and  Lange  in  loc.) 
For  another  view  see  Note,  p.  64. 

V.  The   First    Murder.  —  The   warning  went  The  First 
unheeded,  and    the   jealousy  and    hatred    found  Murder. 

61 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Gen.  iv.      expression  in  anger  and  murder.     Thus,   in  con- 

I"I5«  nection  with  religious  worship,  the   first   murder 

was  committed.     Could  anything  be  more  tragic? 

*  If  you  want  to  find  out  Cain's  condition  of  heart  you 
will  find  it  after  the  service  which  he  pretended  to  render  ; 
you  know  a  man  best  out  of  church  ;  the  minister  sees  the 
best  side  of  a  man,  the  lawyer  the  worst,  and  the  physician 
the  real.  If  you  want  to  know  what  a  man's  religious 
worship  is  worth,  see  him  out  of  church.  Cain  killed  his 
brother  when  church  was  over,  and  that  is  the  exact 
measure  of  Cain's  piety.  And  so,  when  you  went  home  the 
other  day,  you  charged  five  shillings  for  a  three-shilling 
article,  and  told  the  buyer  it  was  too  cheap  :  and  that  is 
exactly  the  value  of  your  psalm-singing  and  sermon- 
hearing.  You  said  you  enjoyed  the  discourse  exceedingly 
last  Thursday  ;  then  you  filled  up  the  income-tax  paper 
falsely  ;  and  you  will  be  judged  by  the  schedule,  not  by  the 
sentiment'  (Parker's  Peoples  Bible,  Genesis,  p.  147). 


Condemna- 
tion. 


Judgment. 


VI.  The  Divine  Condemnation.  —  Very  soon 
comes  God's  inquiry,  '  Where  is  Abel  thy  brother  ? ' 
for  sin  cannot  possibly  be  hid.  There  is  a  solemn 
significance  in  the  repetition  of  'his  brother'  and 
*  thy  brother '  in  these  verses.  The  Divine  rebuke 
immediately  follows  (ver.  10),  which  in  turn  is 
succeeded  by  the  Divine  sentence  of  unrequited  toil 
and  wandering.  Thus  once  again  we  are  taught 
in  most  unmistakable  terms  of  the  Divine  holiness 
and  righteousness,  which  will  not  for  an  instant 
tolerate  human  sin. 

VII.  The  Divine  Judgment. — Cain  now  realises 
something  of  what  he  has  done,  though  it  would 
seem  that  his  thought  is  more  of  his  punishment 
than  of  the  sin  that  led  to  it     In  mitigation  of  the 

62 


Cain  and  Abel 

results  of  his  sin  the  Lord  gives  him  a  pledge  of  Gen.  iv. 
protection  from  vengeance.  The  phrase  '  set  a  I"I5« 
mark  upon  Cain '  should  be  rendered  '  appointed  a 
sign  for  Cain,'  the  same  word  being  used  as  in 
chapter  L  14,  ix.  12,  and  elsewhere.  There  seems 
no  reason  to  think  of  a  mark  or  brand  upon  his 
body,  but  some  pledge  or  sign  in  regard  to  the 
question  of  vengeance.  Then  the  judgment  was 
executed,  and  Cain  'went  out  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,'  realising  now  to  the  full  the  separating 
character  of  sin,  and  the  fact  that  when  a  man 
does  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace  in  rejecting 
God's  will  there  can  be  only  spiritual  solitariness 
and  misery. 

The  two  men,  Cain  and  Abel,  are  brought  before  Suggestions 
us  in  several  passages  in  the  New  Testament.  Meditation 
They  were  both  worshippers,  for  Cain  was  not  a 
profane  man;  and  yet  how  different  was  their 
worship,  by  reason  of  the  difference  of  their  lives ! 
Two  New  Testament  phrases  sum  up  the  practical 
lessons : — 

1.  'Righteous    Abel.'       Abel    teaches    us   very 
clearly  that — 

(1)  God  is  to  be  worshipped. 

(2)  God  is  to  be  worshipped  through  sacrifice. 

(3)  God  is  to  be  worshipped  through  atoning 
sacrifice. 

(4)  God  is  to  be  worshipped  through  an  atoning 
sacrifice  responded  to  by  faith. 

(5)  God  is  to  be  glorified  by  a  life  of  faith. 

(6)  God  is  to  be  glorified  by  a  life  of  faith  which 

C3 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.      expresses  itself  in  righteousness.     (Cf.  1  John  iii. 
I"I5-  12;  Heb.  xi.  4,  xii.  24.) 

2.  'The  way  of  Cain.'  In  the  life  of  Cain  we 
see 

(1)  Human  thought  as  opposed  to  Divine 
revelation. 

(2)  Human  wilfulness  as  opposed  to  the  Divine 
will. 

(3)  Human  pride  as  opposed  to  Divine  humility. 

(4)  Human  hatred  as  opposed  to  Divine  love. 

(5)  Human  hostility  as  opposed  to  Divine 
favour. 

(6)  Human  loneliness  as  opposed  to  Divine 
fellowship. 

Note  on  Verse  7. 

Another  interpretation  which  has  much  to  recommend  it 
is  :  '  But  if  thou  doest  (or  offerest)  not  well,  even  then  there 
is  a  sin-offering  ready  at  hand  for  use  as  a  propitiation. 
And  not  only  so,  but  Abel,  thy  brother,  will  submit  himself 
to  thee  as  the  first-born,  and  thou  shalt  exercise  thy  right 
of  authority  over  him'  (cf.  iii.  16).  The  word  rendered 
1  sin '  is  translated  '  sin-offering '  a  large  number  of  times  in 
the  Old  Testament.  This  view  regards  the  verse  as  at 
once  a  divine  expostulation  and  an  offer  of  grace.  It  is 
further  argued  that  as  the  word  for  '  sin '  in  the  Hebrew  is 
feminine,  and  the  verb  and  pronouns  in  the  last  clause  are 
masculine,  the  '  desire '  must  refer  to  Abel  and  not  to  sin. 


64 


VI 

HUMAN   PROGRESS 

Gen.  iv.  16—  vi.  8 

And  Cain  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  dwelt 
in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  east  of  Eden. 

And  Cain  knew  his  wife  ;  and  she  conceivod,  and  bare  Enoch  : 
and  he  builded  a  city,  and  called  the  name  of  the  city,  after  the 
name  of  his  son,  Enoch. 

And  unto  Enoch  was  born  Irad :  and  Irad  begat  Muhujael : 
and  Mehujael  begat  Methusael :  and  Methusael  begat  Lamech. 

And  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives :  the  name  of  the  one 
was  Adah,  and  the  name  of  the  other  Zillah. 

And  Adah  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in 
tents,  and  of  such  as  have  cattle. 

And  his  brother's  name  was  Jubal :  he  was  the  father  of  all 
such  as  handle  the  harp  and  organ. 

And  Zillah,  she  also  bare  Tubal-cain,  an  instructor  of  every 
artificer  in  brass  and  iron  ;  and  the  sister  of  Tubal-cain  was 
Naamah. 

And  Lamech  said  unto  his  wives,  Adah  and  Zillah,  hear  my 
voice  ;  ye  wives  of  Lamech,  hearken  unto  my  speech  :  for  I  have 
slain  a  man  to  my  wounding,  and  a  young  man  to  my  hurt : 

If  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  Lamech  seventy  and 
sevenfold. 

And  Adam  knew  his  wife  again  ;  and  she  bare  a  son,  and 
called  his  name  Seth  :  For  God,  said  she,  hath  appointed  mo 
another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  whom  Cain  slew. 

And  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son  ;  and  ho  called 
his  name  Enos :  then  began  men  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord. 

This  is  the  book  of  the  generations  of  Adam.  In  the  day  that 
God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  He  him  ; 

Male  and  female  created  He  them  ;  and  blessed  them,  and 
called  their  name  Adam,  in  the  day  when  they  were  created. 

And  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  a  son 
in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image  ;  and  called  his  name  Seth  : 

65 


*  Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  the  days  of  Adam  after  he  had  begotten  Seth  were  eight 
hundred  years  :  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  that  Adam  lived  were  nine  hundred  and 
thirty  years  :  and  he  died. 

And  Seth  lived  an  hundred  and  five  years,  and  begat  Enos : 

And  Seth  lived  after  he  begat  Enos  eight  hundred  and  seven 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters : 

And  all  the  days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years  : 
and  he  died. 

And  Enos  lived  ninety  years,  and  begat  Cainan  : 

And  Enos  lived  after  he  begat  Cainan  eight  hundred  and 
fifteen  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  of  Enos  were  nine  hundred  and  five  years : 
and  he  died. 

And  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Mahalaleel : 

And  Cainan  lived  after  he  begat  Mahalaleel  eight  hundred  and 
forty  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  of  Cainan  were  nine  hundred  and  ten  years : 
and  he  died. 

And  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  Jared  : 

And  Mahalaleel  lived  after  he  begat  Jared  eight  hundred  and 
thirty  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  of  Mahalaleel  were  eight  hundred  ninety  and 
five  years  :  and  he  died. 

And  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two  years,  and  he  begat 
Enoch : 

And  Jared  lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  eight  hundred  years, 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  of  Jared  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and  two 
years  :  and  he  died. 

And  Enoch  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  Methuselah  : 

And  Enoch  walked  with  God  alter  he  begat  Methuselah  three 
hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters : 

And  all  the  days  of  Enoch  were  three  hundred  sixty  and  five 
years : 

And  Enoch  walked  with  God  :  and  he  was  not ;  for  God  took 
him. 

And  Methuselah  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  seven  years,  and 
begat  Lamech : 

And  Methuselah  liv«d  after  he  begat  Lamech  seven  hundred 
eighty  and  two  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

And  all  the  days  of  Methuselah  were  nine  hundred  sixty  and 
nine  years  :  and  he  died. 

And  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two  years,  and 
begat  a  son : 

And  he  called  his  name  Noah,  saying,  This  same  shall  comfort 
us  concerning  our  work  and  toil  of  our  hands,  because  of  the 
ground  which  the  Lord  hath  cursed. 

66 


Human  Progress 

And  Lantech  lived  after  he  begat  Noah  five  hundred  ninety 
and  five  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters : 

And  all  the  days  of  Lamech  were  seven  hundred  seventy  and 
seven  years :  and  he  died. 

And  Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old  :  and  Noah  begat  Shera, 
Ham,  and  Japheth. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face 
of  the  earth,  and  (laughters  were  born  unto  them, 

That  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men  that  they  were 
fair  ;  and  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which  they  ohose. 

And  the  Lord  said,  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
man,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh  :  yet  his  days  shall  be  an  hundred 
and  twenty  years. 

There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days  ;  and  also  after 
that,  when  the  Rons  of  God  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  men, 
and  they  bare  children  to  them,  the  same  became  mighty  men 
which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown. 

And  God  saw  that  tho  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the 
earth,  and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 
was  only  evil  continually. 

And  it  repented  the  Lord  that  He  had  made  man  on  the 
earth,  and  it  grieved  Him  at  His  heart. 

And  the  Lord  said,  I  will  destroy  man  whom  I  have  created 
from  the  face  of  the  earth ;  both  man,  and  beast,  and  the 
creeping  thing,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air ;  for  it  repenteth  mo 
that  I  have  made  them. 

But  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord. 

WE  have  now  to  follow  the  development  of  Gen.  iv.  16 
humanity  along  two  lines — that  of  Cain  — vi.  8. 
and  that  of  Seth.  This  progress  is  first  seen  in  the 
family,  and  then  it  extends  to  society  in  general. 
The  entire  section  now  before  us  has  a  completeness 
all  its  own,  even  though  it  forms  parts  of  two  of 
the  original  sections  of  Genesis.  Thus  (a)  iv.  16-24 
gives  the  line  of  Cain ;  (b)  iv.  25  to  v.  32  the  line 
of  Seth  ;  and  then  (c)  vi  1-8  the  blending  of  these 
two  lines,  culminating  in  the  Flood  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  preservation  of  Noah  on  the  other. 
The  entire  section  thus  calls  for  careful  study,  both 
in  connection  with  what  precedes  and  with  what 
67 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.  16  follows.  *  The  section  chapter  ii.  4  to  chapter  iv. 
vi.  8.  had  recorded  a  constant  descent  from  bad  to  worse 
— the  sin  of  our  first  parents,  their  expulsion  from 
Paradise,  the  murder  of  Abel,  Cain's  descendants 
reaching  in  Lamech  the  climax  of  boastful  and 
unrestrained  violence.  That  the  section  might  not 
be  suffered  to  end  in  unrelieved  gloom  a  brighter 
outlook  is  added  at  the  close,  precisely  as  is  done 
at  the  end  of  the  next  section  in  vi.  8.  Seth  is 
substituted  for  Abel,  whom  Cain  slew ;  and  instead 
of  piety  perishing  with  murdered  Abel,  it  reaches  a 
new  development  in  the  days  of  Enos.  The  whole 
arrangement  bears  evidence  of  adaptation  and 
careful  thought,  and  is  suggestive  of  one  author, 
not  the  combination  of  separate  compositions 
prepared  with  no  reference  to  each  other '  (Green, 
The  Unity  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  p.  48). 

I.  The  First       The  characteristics  of  Cain  and  his  line  must  be 

Sol,       ^refully  followed. 

(iv.  16-24).  I.  The  First  Stream — Irreligion  (iv.   16-24). — 

Cain  went  forth  from  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  Eden  and  dwelt  'in  the  land  of  Nod.'  The 
precise  locality  is,  of  course,  unknown,  though  it  is 
probable  that  it  was  the  country  of  Elam.  As  to 
the  perennial  question  of  Cain's  wife,  it  is  sufficient 
to  say  that  she  was  either  his  sister  or  some  other 
relative.  In  the  absence  of  any  law  there  would, 
of  course,  have  been  no  sin  in  the  marriage  of  a 
sister,  and  it  is  worthy  of  mention  that  within 
historic  times  the  marriage  of  brother  and  sister 
was  in  practice  in  the  royal  family  of  Egypt,  in 
order  to  secure  unquestioned  royalty  of  blood  in 
68 


— In  Cain 
Himself. 


Human  Progress 

the  descent ;  and  this  was  the  case  when  the  Gen.  iv.  16 
civilisation  of  Egypt  was  at  its  highest.  The  ~~ ▼*•  x& 
suggestions  of  the  narrative  with  regard  to  Cain 
show  no  trace  of  the  influence  of  God's  mercy  upon 
him,  and  no  indication  of  penitence  on  his  part. 
He  is  still  godless  and  reckless.  His  sacrifice 
showed  that  while  he  was  prepared  to  recognise 
God  as  the  God  of  providence,  he  had  no  con- 
ception of  Him  as  the  God  of  grace.  There  was 
no  trace  of  real  homage  of  heart ;  and  as  there  had 
been  no  thought  of  sin  and  salvation  in  his  offering, 
so  now  there  is  no  indication  of  real  devotion  to 
God. 

One  characteristic  of  the  line  of  Cain  was  the 
settled  life  they  lived.  The  birth  of  a  son  was 
followed  by  the  building  of  a  city,  to  which  Cain 
gave  the  name  of  his  son,  Enoch.  This  indication 
of  a  settled  abode  and  a  new  line  of  descent  seems 
to  show  that  Cain  was  now  going  his  own  way, 
regardless  of  everything  else.  Nothing  more  is 
said  of  his  line  until  the  fifth  generation. 

It  was  in  the  line  of  Cain  that  the  terrible  evil  —in  the  Line 
of  polygamy  was  first  experienced,  and  the  way  of  Cain- 
that  it  is  mentioned  in  the  narrative  by  contrast 
with  chapter  ii.  24  shows  the  impression  that  it 
was  intended  to  convey. 

From  the  sons  of  Lamech  come  the  founders  of 
agriculture  (ver.  20),  music  (ver.  21),  and  manu- 
facture (ver.  22).  This  development  of  earthly 
civilisation  in  connection  with  Cain's  line  is  very 
suggestive  and  significant. 

In  Lamech  we  have  the  culmination  of  Cainite 
69 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.  16  irreligion.  Whatever  his  song  may  mean,  it  seems 
vi.  8.  on  the  face  of  it  to  suggest  the  glorification  of  two 
great  evils — polygamy  and  murder.  If  heredity 
accounts  for  anything,  we  may  see  in  Lamech  the 
intensified  form  of  those  evil  tendencies  which  were 
evident  in  Cain. 

Thus  we  have  the  Cainite  race  in  six  generations, 
and  with  an  entire  absence  of  all  indications  of 
religion,  unless  we  interpret  the  name  of  Cain's 
son  to  mean  '  Consecrated.'  This  line  was  devoted 
to  things  earthly  and  lived  absolutely  apart  from 
God.  Natural  ingenuity  characterised  the  race. 
There  was  art  and  civilisation,  but  no  religion. 
Not  that  they  were  all  necessarily  flagrantly  sinful, 
but  just  living  without  God  (Eph.  ii.  12).  Is  it 
not  suggestive  that  the  first  time  art,  trade,  and 
manufactures  are  mentioned  they  are  associated 
with  godlessness?  Is  it,  or  is  it  not,  an  accident 
that  art  has  often  flourished  most  when  religion 
has  been  at  its  lowest  ?  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  there 
is  that  in  music,  art,  and  civilisation  which  easily 
panders  to  the  very  lowest  in  man?  And  while 
these  things  should  be,  and  can  be,  devoted  to 
the  highest  interests  of  human  life  and  the  glory 
of  God,  the  possibilities  of  evil  which  they  contain 
must  never  be  overlooked.  As  for  regarding  them 
as  substitutes  for  God,  this  is  utterly  impossible. 
This  vivid  picture  of  human  society  without 
God  should  be  carefully  pondered,  and  the 
message  for  society  to-day  clearly  understood  and 
proclaimed. 

II.  The  Second  Stream — Godliness  (iv.  25-v.  32). 
70 


Human  Progress 

— By  contrast  with  the  line  of  Cain  we  are  now  Gen.  iv.  16 
introduced  to  the  new  line  of  Seth,  his  brother.     ▼*•  *• 
The  points  of  contrast  are  many  and  significant        "•  T^e 

The  first  is  the  birth  of  Seth.     The  death  of  stream- 
Abel  had  left  an  indelible  mark  on  the  soul  of  §^^)# 
Eve,  and  now  with  the  birth  of  her  third  son  her  3^ 
hopes  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  primeval  promise 
again   spring   up,   and   she  calls   him   Seth,   and 
recognises  in  his  birth  a  Divine  appointment  and 
providence.     It  is  noteworthy  that  when  Cain  was 
born  she  associated  his  birth  with  the  Covenant 
God  of  Grace  (Jehovah).     With  Seth's  birth  she 
associates  the  God  of  Creation  and  Power  (Elohim). 
This  distinctness   of  usage   of  the  Divine  names 
should  be  carefully  noted   at  each   stage   of  the 
narrative,   for  it   is   full    of  spiritual   significance 
and  cannot  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in  any 
other  way. 

Another  point  of  emphasis  is  associated  with  the  The  Son  of 
son  of  Seth.  It  is  interesting  that  in  the  same  Seth* 
chapter  we  have  the  record  of  the  birth  of  Cain's 
son  and  also  the  son  of  Seth.  Still  more  interesting 
is  the  fact  that  with  the  birth  of  Seth's  son  there 
came  what  may  very  fairly  be  called  a  revival  of 
true  religion,  for  '  then  began  men  to  call  upon 
the  Name  of  Jehovah.'  This  may  mean,  as  in  our 
A. V.,  a  revival  of  prayer;  or  it  may  mean  still 
more  than  this  (sec  margin),  and  indicate  conse- 
cration to  Jehovah,  '  calling  themselves  by  His 
Name,'  and  thereby  separating  themselves  from  all 
those  who  were  not  prepared  to  take  the  same 
action.  They  realised  that  they  were  in  covenant 
71 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.  16  with  the  God  of  their  father,  Who  had  promised 
vi.  8.        victory  over  sin. 

The  Line  of  Then  follows  the  record  of  the  line  of  Seth. 
Once  again  we  have  a  reference  to  Adam  which 
comes  in  naturally  at  the  head  of  the  line  of  Seth. 
Ten  generations  are  given,  and  the  monotony  of 
the  chapter  has  often  been  remarked.  It  is  a 
simple  record  of  living  and  dying,  only  broken  by 
the  references  to  Enoch  and  Noah.  We  know 
nothing  more  of  the  names  here  mentioned — a 
reminder,  however,  that  human  history  is  not 
necessarily  to  be  judged  by  the  outstanding  names 
that  every  one  knows : 

'  The  best  part  of  human  history  is  never  written  at  all. 
Family  life,  patient  service,  quiet  endurance,  the  training  of 
children,  the  resistance  of  temptation  ;  these  things  are 
never  mentioned  by  the  historian'  (Parker,  Peoples  Bible, 
Genesis,  p.  155). 

The  three  breaks  in  the  whole  narrative  from 

Seth  are  associated  with  Enos,  Enoch,  and  Noah, 

and  they  seem  to  represent  three  typical  aspects 

of  religious  life.     (1)  Separation  (iv.  26,  margin); 

(2)  fellowship  (v.   22);   (3)  service  (v.   29).     No 

inventions,  art,  or  civilisation  are  connected  with 

the  line  of  Seth.     There  is  a  simplicity  about  the 

record,   perhaps   indicative   of   the   quiet,   simple 

religion   that   characterised   most,   if   not    all,   of 

them. 

The  Witness      The  witness  of  Enoch  is  given  to  us  as  an  oasis 

of  Enoch.       m  tne  c}iapter,  and  he  is  one  of  only  two  men  of 

whom  it  is  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  that 

they  '  walked  with  God '  (vi.  9). 

72 


Human  Progress 

(o)  The  feet  of  fellowship  with  God  is  suggested  Gen.  iv.  16 
by  this  phrase.  Several  aspects  of  our  l  walk  '  are  **•  "* 
emphasised  in  Scripture.  *  Walk  before  Me '  (Gen. 
xvii.  1),  implying  sincerity;  'Walk  after  the  Lord 
your  God'  (Deut  xiii.  4),  suggesting  obedience; 
1  Walk  in  Him '  (Col.  ii.  6),  telling  of  union  ; 
'Walking  with  God,'  meaning  fellowship.  This 
is  life's  ideal  and  the  culmination  of  God's  purpose 
for  man. 

(b)  The  commencement  of  this  fellowship  is 
suggested  (ver.  22).  Enoch  is  not  said  to  have 
walked  with  God  until  the  birth  of  his  son.  May 
it  not  have  been  the  coming  into  his  life  of  that 
little  life,  God's  gift  to  him,  that  led  to  this  close 
fellowship  ? 

(c)  The  continuance  of  fellowship.  It  lasted 
three  hundred  years.  This  was  not  easy.  Enoch 
was  no  dreamy  sentimental  idealist.  His  life  had 
in  it  the  real  difficulty  of  testimony  against  evil 
(Jude  14,  15).  The  judgment  on  the  line  of  the 
Cainites  had  to  be  proclaimed,  and  this  is  never 
anything  but  an  irksome  and  trying  task.  Like  the 
rest  of  mankind  in  later  days,  Enoch  did  not  find 
it  easy  to  walk  with  God. 

(d)  The  culmination  of  fellowship.  '  He  was  not, 
for  God  took  him.'  The  life  of  faith  was  thus 
crowned  by  entrance  upon  the  life  of  perfect 
fellowship  above.  'They  shall  walk  with  Me  in 
white.' 

The  chapter  suitably  closes  with  a  reference  to 
Noah.      Lamcch  showed  his  faith  in  connection 
with  the  naming  of  his  son,  and  all  through  the 
p  73 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


in. 

The 

Streams 

Blended 

(vi.  1-8). 

Man's 

Apostasy. 


Gen.  iv.  16  story  of  Noah  we  see  the  secret  of  a  living  faith  in 

~vi-  8-        God  (Heb.  xi.  7). 

III.  The  Streams  Blended  (vi.  1-8). — This  section 
is  closely  connected  with  the  preceding  and  following 
sections  as  their  necessary  and  adequate  explanation. 
We  observe  the  sad  marks  of  human  apostasy. 
Verse  1  takes  up  the  story  laid  down  in  chapter  iv. 
24,  and  deals  with  the  growth  of  the  Cainites. 
Verse  2  speaks  of  the  union  of  the  two  lines  by 
inter-marriage.  Some  writers  regard  the  phrase 
'sons  of  God'  as  referring  to  the  angels,  and  it  is 
urged  that  in  other  passages — e.g.  Job  i.  6 ;  Ps. 
xxix.  1 ;  Dan.  iii.  25 — and,  indeed,  always  else- 
where in  Scripture,  the  phrase  invariably  means 
angels.  According  to  this  view,  we  have  here 
what  has  recently  been  called  an  '  ^etiological 
myth,'  though  the  same  view  is  held  by  those  who 
regard  the  story  not  as  mythical,  but  as  absolutely 
historical,  seeing  in  it  a  reference  to  the  sin  of  the 
angels  mentioned  in  Jude  6,  7  and  2  Pet.  ii.  4-6. 
The  former  view,  which  makes  it  mythological,  is 
clearly  to  be  set  aside,  since  on  this  interpretation 
it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  understand  the 
value  of  the  story  as  part  of  the  Word  of  God. 
The  latter  interpretation  is  also  unnecessary  on 
other  grounds ;  and  the  view  that  regards  the 
passage  as  the  union  of  the  Cainites  and  the 
Sethites  is  at  once  the  most  natural  and  the  most 
Scriptural.  The  idea  of  the  phrase  '  sons  of  God ' 
was  used  in  connection  with  Israel  (Deut.  xiv.  1 ; 
Hos.  i.  10 ;  xi.  1),  and  the  teaching  of  subsequent 
Scripture  is  perfectly  clear  against  the  inter-marriage 
74 


Human  Progress 

of  Israel  with  the  Canaanites.     Besides,  this  verse  Gen.  iv.  16 

accounts  for  the  universality  of  the  sin  which  led  — ▼*•  8. 

to  the  catastrophe  of  the  Flood,  and  verse  3  declares 

God's  sentence  upon  man  only  for  the  sin  recorded 

in  verse  2.     Surely  angels  would  have  been  included 

in  the  judgment  and  in  the  record  if  they  had  been 

involved  in  this  sin.     Further,  the  'Nephilim'  of 

verse  4  are  not  said  to  be  due  to  what  is  recorded 

in  verse  2,  but  are  spoken  of  as  existing  previously 

and  subsequently.      It  is  therefore  in  every  way 

better   and   truer   to   the   context   to  explain  the 

passage  of  the  two  lines  of  Seth  and  of  Cain,  and 

as  giving  the  explanation  of  the  judgment  and  the 

Flood  (Green  and  Lange  in  loc.) 

As  a  natural  result  comes  the  Divine  warning  God's 
(ver.  3).  The  interpretation  of  this  verse  is  Warning 
difficult  Probably  the  Hebrew  word  rendered 
'strive'  would  be  better  expressed  by  'dwell.' 
In  either  case  it  is  a  warning  of  the  limitation 
of  mercy,  and  it  is  generally  thought  that  the  term 
of  120  years  refers  to  the  time  yet  to  be  given  to 
mankind  before  the  Flood  should  come  upon  the 
earth.  Thus  God  in  mercy  warns  while  declaring 
His  certain  judgment  upon  evil. 

Nothing  could  well  be  more  pitiable  than  this  Man's  Sin 
delineation  of  human  sin  (ver.  5).  What  a 
contrast  we  have  here  to  the  '  God  saw '  of  chapter 
i  31 !  Instead  of  everything  being  very  good,  all 
things  were  now  evil  Mark  carefully  the  phrases 
'every  imagination,'  'only  evil  continually.'  Could 
anything  be  more  solemn  in  its  unrelieved  gloom  ? 
No  redeeming  feature  appears.  Everything  is  evil 
75 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.  16  in  human  life.     It  is  also  a  solemn  fact  that  most 
vi.  8.        0f  the  unholiness  in  human  history  has  been  due  to 
the  same  cause  as  is  mentioned  here,  the  relations 
of  men  and  women  (vers.  2,  4). 
God's  We  are  now  bidden  to  note  the  Divine  Sorrow 

Sorrow.  (vers.  6,  7).  The  statements  here  are  startling  in 
their  directness  and  definiteness.  We  are  accus- 
tomed to  speak  of  them  as  anthropomorphic ;  but 
so  far  from  this  being  an  objection,  anthropomorphic 
language  is  our  highest  and  best  method  of  expres- 
sion concerning  God.  It  is  no  disrespect  or 
derogation  from  infinite  holiness  to  speak  of  God 
in  this  way.  A  very  great  deal  of  the  objection  to 
anthropomorphism  really  involves  utter  agnosticism 
and  the  impossibility  of  finding  any  expression  for 
God  at  all  (Dods,  Genesis,  pp.  60-62). 

There  was  one  exception  to  the  universal  pre- 
valence of  sin.  'Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord '  (ver.  8).  He  and  his  alone  were  to 
be  preserved  amidst  surrounding  destruction. 

Special  Three  subjects  seem  to  call  for  particular  attention 

Notes.  from  students. 

1.  The  Longevity  of  the  Antediluvians. — 'The 
longevity  attributed  to  the  antediluvians  has  been 
declared  to  be  inconsistent  with  physiological 
laws ;  but  in  our  ignorance  of  the  extent  to 
which  the  conditions  affecting  human  life  may 
have  been  modified,  such  an  assertion  is  un- 
warranted '  (Green,  Unity  of  the  Book  of  Genesis, 
p.  43). 

2.  The   Authenticity    of   the    Chronology. — 'It 

76 


Human  Progress 

should  be  remarked  that  no  computation  of  time  Gen.  iv.  16 

is  ever  built  in  the  Bible  upon  this  or  any  other  — ▼*•  & 

genealogy.  .  .  .  This  genealogy  could  only  afford 

a  safe  estimate  of  time  on  the   assumption  that 

no  links  are  missing,  and  that  every  name  in  the 

line  of  descent  has  been  recorded.     But  this  we 

have  no  right  to  take  for  granted.     The  analogy 

of  other  Biblical  genealogies  is  decidedly  against 

it      Very    commonly     unimportant     names     are 

omitted;    sometimes    several    consecutive     names 

are    dropped    together.       No    one    has    a    right, 

therefore,  to  denominate   a   primaeval   chronology 

and  set  it  in  opposition  to  the  deductions  of  science, 

and    thence    conclude    that    there    is    a    conflict 

between   the  Bible  and   science'  (Green,    Unity, 

pp.  49/.). 

3.  The  Two  Genealogies. — It  is  sometimes  urged 
that  there  has  been  a  confusion  between  the 
genealogy  of  the  Cainites  and  that  of  the  Sethites, 
owing  to  a  certain  similarity  of  names,  six  of 
them  being  nearly  identical ;  yet  the  distinctness 
of  the  two  genealogies  is  clearly  stated,  and  in 
reality  only  two  names  are  exactly  the  same  in 
both.  If  it  be  said  that  the  editor  of  Genesis 
evidently  intended  the  Lamech  of  chapter  iv.  to 
be  regarded  as  the  Lamech  of  chapter  v.,  it  may 
perhaps  be  replied  that  centuries  of  readers  have 
clearly  recognised  the  distinction  between  them 
(Green,  p.  45  ;  Red  path  in  loc.). 


In  this  section  we  have  in  sharp  contrast  two  Suggestions 

for 
Meditation. 


classes  of  men   who  are  still  to  be  found  upon  fo 


77 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  iv.  16  earth,  and  whose  characteristics  take  pretty  much 
— v1,  °*        the  same  form  as  in  those  early  days. 

Man  living  without  God. — In  the  line  of  Cain 
we  have  cleverness,  culture,  and  civilisation ;  and 
yet  with  all  these  manifest  advantages  everything 
was  purely  earthly,  selfish,  and  sensual.  God 
was  ignored,  and  they  lived  their  life  entirely 
apart  from  Him.  Self-contained,  occupied  with 
their  own  intellectual  and  social  pursuits,  they 
simply  ignored  the  claims  of  God,  and  lived 
and  died  without  Him.  To  day  the  same  spirit 
is  abroad  in  many  quarters.  Men  have  everything 
that  this  world  can  give  of  education,  refinement, 
culture,  pleasure,  art,  civilisation,  and  yet  there 
is  nothing  of  God  or  His  Christ  in  their  lives. 

Man  walking  with  God. — The  elements  of  true 
living  in  relation  to  God  are  evident  in  the  line 
of  Seth. 

(1)  Devotion  to  God  (iv.  25). 

(2)  Consecration  to  God  (iv.  26). 

(3)  Fellowship  with  God  (v.  22). 

(4)  Testimony  for  God  (Heb.  xi.  5). 

(5)  Service  for  God  (v.  29). 

(6)  Grace  from  God  (vi.  8). 

Let  us  therefore  keep  the  avenues  open  towards 
God  and  a  constant  communication  between  us 
and  the  sky.  The  house  of  life  assuredly  needs 
its  kitchen  (physical),  its  library  (intellectual),  its 
parlour  (social) ;  but  it  also  needs,  above  all,  its 
drawing-room — that  is,  its  withdrawing  room — 
where  the  soul  retires  from  all  else  to  seek  and 
meet  with  God.  Only  then  do  we  come  to  our 
78 


Human  Progress 

true  life  and  realise  the  Divine  end  of  existence.  Gen.  iv.  16 
Our  cleverness   becomes    devoted   to   the   highest     v*-  &• 
objects,   our   culture   becomes  transformed  into  a 
true  cultus  or  worship,  our  civilisation  is  fraught 
with  blessing  to  those  around,  and  God  is  in  all 
things  glorified. 


79 


VII 
BEFORE  THE   FLOOD 

Gen.  vi.  9-22 


These  are  the  generations  of  Noah  :  Noah  was  a  just  man  and 
perfect  in  his  generations,  and  Noah  walked  with  God. 

And  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth. 

The  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God,  and  the  earth  was  filled 
with  violence. 

And  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold,  it  was  corrupt : 
for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth. 

And  God  said  unto  Noah,  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before 
Me  ;  for  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  them  ;  and, 
behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth. 

Make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher  wood  ;  rooms  shalt  thou  make  in 
the  ark,  and  shalt  pitch  it  within  and  without  with  pitch. 

And  this  is  the  fashion  which  thou  shalt  make  it  of:  The 
length  of  the  ark  shall  be  three  hundred  cubits,  the  breadth  of  it 
fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits. 

A  window  shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark,  and  in  a  cubit  shalt 
thou  finish  it  above  ;  and  the  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in 
the  side  thereof ;  with  lower,  second,  and  third  stories  shalt  thou 
make  it 

And,  behold,  I,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  upon  the 
earth,  to  destroy  all  flesh,  wherein  is  the  breath  of  life,  from 
under  heaven  ;  and  every  thing  that  is  in  the  earth  shall  die. 

But  with  thee  will  I  establish  My  covenant ;  and  thou  shalt 
come  into  the  ark,  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and  thy 
sons'  wives  with  thee. 

And  of  every  living  thing  of  all  flesh,  two  of  every  sort  shalt 
thou  bring  into  the  ark,  to  keep  them  alive  with  thee  ;  they  shall 
be  male  and  female. 

Of  fowls  after  their  kind,  and  of  cattle  after  their  kind,  of 
every  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  two  of  every 
sort  shall  come  unto  thee,  to  keep  them  alive. 

80 


Before  the  Flood 

And  take  thou  unto  thee  of  all  food  that  is  eaten,  and  thou 
shalt  gather  it  to  thee  ;  and  it  shall  be  for  food  for  thee,  and  for 
them. 

Thus  did  Noah  ;  according  to  all  that  God  commanded  him, 
so  did  he. 

ANEW  section  of  Genesis  commences  here.  The  Gen.  vi. 
period  from  Adam  to  Noah  is  almost  entirely  9~22' 
passed  over,  probably  because  there  was  nothing 
to  record  as  to  the  progress  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God.  Instead  of  such  a  record  we  have,  by  con- 
trast, only  the  solemn  and  significant  summary  of 
the  awful  progress  of  sin.  We  have  already  seen 
the  development  of  wickedness  which  culminated 
in  the  awful  sins  referred  to  in  the  previous  verses. 
There  is  no  indication  in  the  Bible  of  man's  steady 
rise  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  level,  developing  out 
of  barbarism  into  holiness.  On  the  contrary,  the 
race  is  seen  to  tend  downward  in  proportion  as  it 
is  left  to  follow  its  own  way.  This  view  of  mans 
proneness  to  evil,  with  the  consequent  results,  is 
in  exact  keeping  with  the  facts  of  history,  and  with 
all  the  best  and  most  accurate  anthropological 
knowledge  of  the  present  day  (Orr,  Image  of  God, 
passim). 

The  entire  section  dealing  with  '  the  generations  The 
of  Noah'  (chap.  vi.  9  to  ix.  29)  should  be  looked  ofT£h0aS 
at  as  a  whole,  and  its  completeness  noted  : — 

1.  Noah  and  his  Sons  (chap.  vi.  9,  10). 

2.  The  Sinfulness  and  Condemnation  of  the 
World  (chap,  vi  11-13). 

3.  The  Divine  Command  (chap.  vi.  14-21). 

4.  The  Obedience  of  Noah  (chap.  vi.  22  to 
vii  9). 

81 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vi.  5.  The  Flood  (chap.  vii.  10-24). 

9-22.  g#  The  Divine  Preservation  of  the  Ark  (chap, 

viii.  1-22). 

7.  The  New  Covenant  (chap.  ix.  1-17). 

8.  The  New  Start  (chap.  ix.  18-29). 

In  studying  this  material  in  detail  it  is  important 
to  notice  the  combination  of  formal  phraseology 
with  the  vividness  and  detail — e.g.,  chapter  vL 
17-20  and  chapter  viii.  20-22.  The  dignity  of  the 
narrative  is  also  noteworthy.  There  is  nothing 
grotesque  or  unworthy,  everything  is  sober  and 
in  keeping  with  the  solemn  realities  involved. 
The  simplicity  and  genuineness  of  Noah's  character, 
the  simple  and  righteous  motives  ascribed  to  God, 
the  sobriety  and  purity  of  the  promise  made  to 
Noah,  should  all  be  observed.  Not  least  of  all 
it  will  be  noticed  that  the  story  of  the  Flood, 
as  such,  is  quite  incidental  to  the  spiritual  realities 
that  arise  out  of  the  events.  The  narrative  leads 
up  to  the  covenant  in  chapter  ix.,  which  carries 
with  it  the  new  start  of  the  human  race  after  the 
failure  between  Adam  and  Noah. 
The  Flood.  It  is  impossible  to  dwell  in  detail  on  the  entire 
narrative  of  the  Flood :  it  must  suffice  to  follow 
mainly  the  pages  of  our  English  Bible,  and  look 
at  the  spiritual  truths  associated  with  (1)  the 
period  immediately  preceding  the  Flood,  (2)  the 
time  of  the  Flood  itself,  and  (3)  the  early  days 
of  the  new  era  after  the  Flood.  We  now  dwell 
first  of  all  upon  the  verses  at  the  head  of  this 
section. 

The  contrast  between  the  sin  recorded  in  verse 
82 


Before  the  Flood 

7  and   the  character  of  Noah  in   verses  8-10   is  Gen.  vi. 
very    striking,    especially    as    it    is    followed    by  9*22- 
another  contrast  in  the  verses  now  before  us.        h  The 

I.  The  Divine  Purpose  (vers.  9-13)  is  now  clearly  Purpose 
stated  to  be  a  judgment  upon  sin.    Its  cause  is  due  to  ^vcr3,  9'13^ 
the  awful  character  of  mankind  (ver.  11).     The  two 

words,  '  corrupt '  and  '  violence,'  give  us  respectively 
the  character  and  expression  of  the  sin,  the  cause 
and  the  effect.  The  corruption  has  led  to  violence, 
for  badness  always  leads  to  cruelty  in  one  form  or 
another.  A  life  that  is  wrong  with  God  necessarily 
becomes  wrong  with  its  fellows. 

The  Divine  Scrutiny  is  also  stated  in  simple  but 
solemn  terms  (ver.  12).  'God  looked  upon  the 
earth,  and,  behold,  it  was  corrupt.'  How  great 
is  the  contrast  here  with  a  former  occasion :  '  God 
saw  everything  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold, 
it  was  very  good'  (chap.  i.  31).  God  is  not 
indifferent  to  human  life,  and  the  fact  of  sin 
necessarily  compelled  Him  to  take  action.  His 
decision  to  destroy  the  earth  was  at  once  an 
expression  of  His  justice  and  His  mercy ;  the  end 
had  come,  and  there  was  no  alternative.  Moral 
putridity  can  only  be  destroyed  by  a  Divine 
judgment. 

II.  The  Divine  Plan  (vers.  14-17).— The  method  II.  The 

of  deliverance  was  the  Ark  of  Safety  about  which  JJJ!™,^. 
God  now  proceeds  to  speak.  The  instructions  are 
given  in  full  detail.  The  ark  is  to  be  made  of 
gopher  wood,  by  which  is  probably  to  be  under- 
stood some  resinous  wood  like  that  of  the  fir  or 
cypress  tree.  The  vessel  was  in  no  sense  a  ship 
83 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vi.      intended   for   a    voyage,    but   a   kind   of  covered 
9-22.  raft  or  floating  house,  sufficient  for  buoyancy  and 

protection  during  the  flood.  Into  the  details  of 
shape  and  space  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter,  except 
to  notice  the  minute  care  shown  by  these  details 
and  the  indications  they  afford  of  the  Divine  thought 
for  the  inmates  of  the  ark. 

With  great  solemnity  God  announces  his  intention 
of  bringing  a  flood  upon  the  earth  to  destroy  all 
life.  '  Behold,  I,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood 
of  waters  upon  the  earth.'  Thus  solemnly  does 
God  call  His  servant's  attention  to  what  is  to 
happen  and  also  to  the  fact  that  the  flood  is  His 
own  divine  act. 
III.  The  III.  The  Divine  Provision  (vers.  18-22). — In  con- 

Provision  *ras*  w^n  tne  announcement  of  the  flood  comes  this 
(vers.  18-22).  declaration  of  the  divine  covenant.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  we  have  the  word  '  establish '  in  connection 
with  the  covenant.  Noah  was  already  in  covenant 
with  God  (ver.  8),  but  in  view  of  the  special  need 
of  assurance  of  divine  protection  God  now  declares 
that  He  will  establish  His  covenant.  This  is  the 
first  occasion  on  which  we  have  this  word  '  covenant,' 
one  of  the  great  outstanding  expressions  of  Holy 
Scripture  as  indicative  of  God's  relations  with  man. 
It  is  particularly  interesting  to  notice  that  the 
covenant  was  with  Noah  only,  his  family  being 
included  because  of  their  connection  with  him.  It 
is  worth  while  observing  that  in  Holy  Scripture  the 
family  rather  than  the  individual  constitutes  the 
true  unity.  The  race,  as  we  well  know,  fell  in  Adam, 
and  here  in  like  manner  Noah's  family  was  saved 
84 


Before  the  Flood 

for  his  sake.  Other  instances  like  those  of  Abraham  Gen.  vi. 
and  Cain  confirm  this  view  of  what  is  now  usually  9"22- 
described  as  the  solidarity  of  mankind.  The 
Apostle  Peter,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  seems  to 
recognise  the  same  principle  when  he  says,  'The 
promise  is  to  you,  and  to  your  children.' 
What  a  responsibility  this  places  upon  parentage 
and  guardianship  and  every  other  position  involving 
the  lives  of  others. 

God's  care  of  the  animals  is  not  to  be  overlooked 
in  the  study  of  these  verses.  '  Two  of  every  sort 
shall  come  unto  thee,  to  keep  them  alive '  (ver.  20). 

To  all  this  Noah  made  a  fitting  response  (ver.  22). 
Twice  over  we  are  told  simply  and  suggestively 
that  he  did  '  according  to  all  that  God  commanded 
him.' 

In  these  verses  we  have  some   of  the  essential  Suggestions 
elements  in  the  life  of  a  true  believer  as  illustrated  Sj^^ 
by  Noah. 

1.  His  Position  (ver.  8).  'Noah  found  grace 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.'  This  was  the  founda- 
tion of  his  life  as  it  is  the  foundation 
of  every  true  life  to-day.  'By  grace  are  ye 
saved.'  Grace,  in  the  Bible  sense  of  the  word, 
means  God's  unmerited  favour,  and  it  was  this 
alone  that  gave  Noah  his  spiritual  position  before 
God.     He  was  'saved  by  grace  alone.' 

2.  His  Attitude  (ver.  9).  'Noah  was  a  righteous 
man.'  From  grace  comes  righteousness,  and  whether 
we  think  of  its  Old  Testament  meaning  of  genuine- 
ness and  sincerity,  or  of  its  New  Testament  fuller 

85 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vi.      meaning  of  being   right   with   God,  we   can   see 
9-22*  its     necessity     and     importance     for    every    one 

of  us.' 

3.  His  Character  (ver.  9).  'Noah  was  .  .  . 
perfect.'  The  original  word  means  upright, 
genuine,  and  has  no  reference  to  the  absence  of 
sin.  Uprightness  in  turn  is  the  result  of  being 
righteous  before  God  through  grace.  Our  personal 
character  must  necessarily  be  the  proof  of  our  true 
position  in  the  sight  of  God. 

4.  His  Testimony  (ver.  9).  '  In  his  generations.' 
Here  we  have  brought  before  us  the  thought  of 
Noah's  life  in  relation  to  his  contemporaries.  He 
lived  a  life  of  witness  to  God  among  those  with 
whom  he  was  associated.  As  the  Apostle  Peter 
tells  us,  he  was  '  a  preacher  of  righteousness '  (2 
Pet.  ii.  5).  His  life  as  well  as  his  words  bore 
testimony  to  God  and  thus  '  condemned  the  world ' 
of  his  day  (Heb.  xi.  7). 

5.  His  Fellowship  (ver.  9).  *  Noah  walked 
with  God.'  He  is  one  of  two  men  of  whom  this 
is  recorded  (chap.  v.  22).  The  idea  is  that  of 
friendship  and  fellowship  with  God,  and  it  is  note- 
worthy that  such  a  position  was  possible  amidst 
the  very  difficult,  practical,  every-day  life  that 
Noah  had  to  lead.  It  meant  courage  and  inde- 
pendence, for  no  one  else  was  walking  in  that  way. 
When  a  man  walks  with  God  it  necessarily  means 
that  he  cannot  walk  with  any  of  his  fellows  who 
are  going  in  the  opposite  direction. 

6.  His  Conduct  (ver.  22).  'Thus  did  Noah.' 
His    spiritual    position,    attitude,   character     and 


Before  the  Flood 

fellowship  were  expressed  and  proved  in  practical  Gen.  vL 
obedience.     Nothing  can  make   up  for  this.     All  9"22- 
our    privileges    and    opportunities  of   grace    are 
intended    to    be    manifested    in   daily   obedience. 
1  Conduct  is  three-fourths  of  life.' 

7.  His  Thoroughness  (ver.  22).  *  According 
to  all  that  God  commanded  him.'  This  was  the 
standard  by  which  Noah  lived,  the  Word  of  God 
and  everything  that  that  Word  had  declared.  He 
did  not  pick  and  choose  among  God's  commands 
but  did  '  according  to  all '  that  God  had  said.  It 
was  this  Word  of  God  that  led  him  to  prepare  the 
ark,  '  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not  seen  as 
yet'(Heb.  xi.  7). 

What  a  splendid  figure  this  man  makes,  a 
picture  of  solitary  goodness!  He  was  the  one 
saint  of  that  day.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  be 
good  even  though  we  have  to  stand  alone.  It  is 
possible  to  be  right  with  God  even  amidst  surround- 
ing iniquity.  God  is  the  same  to-day  as  He  was  to 
Noah,  and  if  only  we  are  willing  to  fulfil  the 
conditions  we  too  shall  walk  with  God  and  please 
Him. 


f;" 


VIII 
AT  THE  FLOOD 

Gen.  vii. 


And  the  Lord  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house 
into  the  ark ;  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  Me  in  this 
generation. 

Of  every  clean  beast  thou  shalt  take  to  thee  by  sevens,  the 
male  and  his  female  :  and  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean  by  two, 
the  male  and  his  female. 

Of  fowls  also  of  the  air  by  sevens,  tbe  male  and  the  female ; 
to  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth. 

For  yet  seven  days,  and  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth 
forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  and  every  living  substance  that 
I  have  made  will  I  destroy  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth. 

And  Noah  did  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  him. 

And  Noah  was  six  hundred  years  old  when  the  flood  of  waters 
was  upon  the  earth. 

And  Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons' 
wives  with  him,  into  the  ark,  because  of  the  waters  of  the  flood. 

Of  clean  beasts,  and  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean,  and  of  fowls, 
and  of  every  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth, 

There  went  in  two  and  two  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  the  male 
and  the  female,  as  God  had  commanded  Noah. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  after  seven  days,  that  the  waters  of  the 
flood  were  upon  the  earth. 

In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life,  in  the  second  month, 
the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  the  same  day  were  all  the 
fountains  of  the  great  deep  broken  up,  and  the  windows  of 
heaven  were  opened. 

And  the  rain  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights. 

In  the  self-same  day  entered  Noah,  and  Shem,  and  Ham,  and 
Japheth,  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  Noah's  wife,  and  the  three  wives 
of  his  sons  with  them,  into  the  ark  ; 

They,  and  every  beast  after  his  kind,  and  all  the  cattle  after 
their  kind,  and  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth 

88 


At  the  Flood 

after  his  kind,  and  every  fowl  after  hie  kind,  every  bird  of  every 
sort. 

And  they  went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  two  and  two  of  all 
flesh,  wherein  is  the  breath  of  life. 

And  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  female  of  all  flesh, 
aa  God  had  commanded  him  :  and   the  Lord  shut  him  in. 

And  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth  ;  and  the  waters 
increased,  and  bare  up  the  ark,  and  it  was  lift  up  above  the 
earth. 

And  the  waters  prevailed,  and  were  increased  greatly  upon 
the  earth  ;  and  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 

And  the  waters  prevailed  exceedingly  upon  the  earth  ;  and  all 
the  high  hills  that  were  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered. 

Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  prevail ;  and  the 
mountains  were  covered. 

And  all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of  fowl, 
and  of  cattle,  and  of  beast,  and  of  every  creeping  thing  that 
ereepeth  upon  the  earth,  and  every  man  : 

All  in  whose  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  life,  of  all  that  was  in 
the  dry  land,  died. 

And  every  living  substance  was  destroyed  which  was  upon  the 
face  of  the  ground,  both  man,  and  cattle,  and  the  creeping 
things,  and  the  fowl  of  the  heaven  ;  and  they  were  destroyed 
from  the  earth :  and  Noah  only  remained  alive,  and  they  that 
were  with  him  in  the  ark. 

And  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  an  hundred  and 
fifty  days. 

IN  view  of  the  brief  and  summary  character  of  Gen.  vii. 
the  first  five  chapters  of  Genesis  it  cannot  but 
be  noticed  how  full  of  detail  these  chapters  are  in 
their  record  of  the  Flood.  Bearing  in  mind  the 
constant  spiritual  purpose  of  the  book  it  would 
seem  as  though  we  are  intended  to  study  as 
carefully  as  possible  every  detail  in  order  to  learn 
the  lessons  God  would  teach  us. 

I.  The  Record  of  the  Events.—  This  chapter  is  I.  The 
noteworthy  for  the  points  of  time  mentioned.     The  S^g^L 
details  can  best  be  studied  along  these  lines. 

First,  we  have  the  last  week  preceding  the  flood 
(vers.    1-6).     During  this  time  God  gave  the  final 
G  89 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vii.     invitation    to  Noah,  and   announced   to  him   the 
coming  of  the  flood  within  seven  days. 

Then  we  have  the  day  on  which  Noah  entered 
into  the  ark  (vers.  7-10).  It  requires  very  little 
imagination  to  realise  the  solemnity  of  the 
occasion,  and  the  procession  and  the  entrance 
of  all  those  who  were  to  be  preserved  from  the 
Flood. 

Next  comes  a  record  of  the  forty  days  of 
rain  (vers.  11-17).  Together  with  the  rain 
we  are  told  of  the  movements  of  the  great 
deep,  both  combining  to  bring  about  the  Divine 
judgment. 

The  chapter  closes  with  the  statement  of  the 
one  hundred  and  fifty  days  during  which  'the 
waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth'  (vers.  18-24). 
The  word  'prevailed'  is  the  keynote  of  this 
section,  and  may  suggest  not  merely  a  physical 
prevalence  of  the  Flood,  but  a  spiritual  preval- 
ence of  Divine  judgment,  irresistible,  irretrievable, 
irrevocable. 
II.  The  H«  The  Facts  of  the  Flood. — The  evidence  for 

Facts  of  the  the  destruction  of  the  human  race  except  one 
family  is  very  strong  apart  from  Genesis.  It  seems 
impossible  that  so  widespread  and  persistent  a 
tradition  can  be  regarded  as  an  invention  or  myth. 
There  is  nothing  mythical  or  unworthy  about  the 
Bible  account,  and  it  is  perhaps  worth  while 
observing  that  the  proportions  of  the  ark  are  not 
essentially  different  from  those  of  ships  of  corres- 
ponding size  now  sailing  between  here  and 
America.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  the  pro- 
90 


At  the  Flood 

portions  given  in  Genesis  could  be  mere  guess  Gen.  vii. 
work. 

Further,  the  tendency  of  recent  geological  dis- 
coveries is  to  render  the  account  in  Genesis  more 
credible  than  it  was  even  twenty-five  years  ago. 
There  are  clear  proofs  of  a  widespread  catastrophe 
to  animals  and  plants  immediately  preceding  the 
period  of  man's  appearance  on  the  earth,  and  it 
is  urged  by  some  geologists  that  these  changes 
suggest  that  man  was  introduced  into  the  world 
before  the  instability  of  the  glacial  period  had 
given  way  to  the  apparent  stability  of  the  present 
order  of  affairs.  All  this,  while  it  is,  of 
course,  no  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  Genesis, 
is  distinctly  in  keeping  with  the  narrative  there 
given  (Geology's  Witness  to  the  Flood,  by  Dr  G. 
F.  Wright,  American  Sunday  School  Times,  July 
6,  1901). 

III.  Was  the  Flood  Universal  ?— It  is  essential,  in  III.  Was 
considering  this  question,  to  view  it  from  the  stand-  universal? 
point  of  the  writer  of  Genesis.  Then  we  at  once 
realise  that  to  an  eye-witness,  or  to  one  dealing 
with  the  subject  from  the  standpoint  of  human 
sin  and  Divine  judgment,  the  universality  of 
the  Flood  would  be  certain,  even  though 
the  area  was  quite  local.  The  description  of 
the  Flood,  so  far  as  the  destruction  of  human 
life  is  concerned,  would  be  much  the  same,  whether 
local  or  literally  universal.  The  one  and  only 
purpose  of  the  writer  seems  to  be  the  record  of 
the  destruction  of  man. 

The    universal    tradition   of   the    Flood   is  no 
91 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vii.  necessary  proof  of  its  universality,  since  the 
tradition,  as  handed  down,  would  be  necessarily 
carried  wherever  men  went  At  the  same  time 
there  are  geological  facts  in  different  parts  of 
the  world  which  seem  to  suggest  something  more 
than  a  local  flood  in  Western  Asia.  The  narrative 
in  Genesis  has  been  aptly  likened  to  a  sea  captain's 
log-book  (Wright,  ut  supra),  and  certainly  all  the 
universality  demanded  is  that  which  was  necessary 
for  the  destruction  of  the  human  race.  The 
spiritual  purpose  of  the  narrative,  which  is,  of 
course,  the  predominant  factor,  would  be  perfectly 
realised  by  supposing  that  the  Flood  was  con- 
fined to  the  locality  then  inhabited  by  the  human 
race  (Pulpit  Commentary,  Genesis,  pp.  119  /.; 
Urquhart,  New  Biblical  Guide,  vol  i.,  chapters 
xi.,  xii.,  xiii. ;  Howorth's  Mammoth  and  the 
Flood). 
IV.  The  IV.   The   Flood   in    Tradition. — According   to 

Tradition.  Lenormant  the  story  of  the  Flood  is  a  '  uni- 
versal tradition  in  all  branches  of  the  human 
family,  with  the  sole  exception  of  the  black 
race.'  The  Babylonian  tradition  is  remarkably 
like  the  Hebrew  account,  and  at  the  same  time 
remarkably  unlike.  The  coincidences  suggest  a 
community  of  origin,  while  the  divergences  show 
that  there  cannot  have  been  any  direct  influence 
of  Babylonia  on  the  Hebrew  account. 

It  is  hardly  likely  that  the  Jews  would  have 
copied  it  from   any   Exilic   records   possessed  by 
their  inveterate  foe.     As  is  well  known,  the  Baby- 
lonian account  is  grossly   polytheistic,  while  the 
92 


At  the  Flood 

Hebrew  is  as  purely  monotheistic,  and  no  theory  Gen.  vii. 
of  their  relationship  will  ever  be  satisfactory  unless 
the  divergences  as  well  as  the  coincidences  are 
accounted  for.  It  is  much  more  natural  to  believe 
that  the  Hebrew  preserves  for  us  the  pure  spiritual 
version  of  the  tradition,  and  that  the  Babylonian 
account  is  a  corrupt  version. 

The  antecedents  of  Abraham  are  ample  to 
account  for  the  Hebrew  tradition,  and  if  we  may 
assume  that  he  brought  it  with  him  to  Canaan 
we  can  quite  understand  how  the  purer  account 
was  preserved.  Civilisation  in  the  days  prior  to 
Abraham  shows  that  this  view  is  perfectly 
reasonable  and  even  likely. 

V.  The  Flood  in  Genesis.  —  It  is  urged  that  V.  The 
two,  if  not  three,  accounts  are  united,  not  by  SSJjjf 
the  blending  of  excerpts,  as  in  previous  sections, 
but  by  close  interweaving.  This  is  argued 
on  the  grounds  that  each  account  is  complete  in 
itself,  and  that  only  thus  can  the  repetitions  and 
alternations  of  the  Divine  names  be  accounted 
for.  It  may,  however,  be  pointed  out  that  each 
account  is  not  complete,  for  if  the  sections 
attributed  to  each  source  respectively  are  read 
continuously,  it  will  be  found  that  there  arc  gaps 
of  great  importance,  and  no  real  continuity  of  the 
narrative. 

The  story  as  it  stands  has  a  unity,  and  certainly 
was  intended  by  the  compiler  to  be  regarded  as  a 
whole.  If  we  allow  the  recognised  thirty  days 
to  the  month,  and  commence  with  Noah's  six 
hundredth  birthday  as  in  chapter  vii.  11,  we  shall 
93 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vii.     find    that    there    is    no    inconsistency    in    the 
chronology. 

The  use  of  the  Divine  names  gives  us  the  two 
aspects  of  the  Flood  in  relation  to  the  God  of 
Judgment  (Elohim)  and  the  God  of  Grace 
(Jehovah).  Both  titles  are  used,  and  that  with 
remarkable  discrimination,  while  on  the  partition 
theory  the  differences  of  use  are  inexplicable.  It 
is  admitted  by  one  leading  critic  that  other 
phraseological  criteria,  apart  from  the  use  of  the 
Divine  names,  are  slight ;  while  another  critic 
holds  that  the  theory  of  a  division  of  the  nar- 
rative based  upon  this  distinction  of  usage  of 
Divine  names  is  now  '  manifestly  exploded,  and 
the  disproof  is  absolute  and  irrefragable.' 

Above  all,  the  theory  of  two  documents  entirely 
fails  to  account  for  the  Chaldaean  narrative  of  the 
Flood,  which  contains  the  characteristics  both  of 
the  alleged  author  who  uses  Elohim  and  of  the 
one  who  uses  Jehovah.  There  are  at  least  twenty- 
five  items  of  the  story  of  the  Flood  common  to 
Genesis  and  the  Assyrian  tablet;  and  as  these 
items  cover  nearly  the  entire  story  they  necessarily 
include  nearly  all  the  literary  characteristics  upon 
which  criticism  bases  its  claim  of  two  documents. 
As  this  tablet  is  said  to  be  as  old  as  3000  B.C. 
(Hastings'  Bible  Dictionary),  it  is  difficult  to 
understand  how  we  are  to  account  for  the 
separate  narratives  of  the  two  authors,  who  are 
said  to  have  lived  more  than  a  thousand  years 
later. 

The  story  in  Genesis  undoubtedly  appears  before 
94 


At  the  Flood 

us  as  a  unity ;  and  even  if  there  were  originally  two  Gen.  vii. 
stories  they  have  been  remarkably  well  blended  into 
one.  Certainly  contradictions  only  arise  when  the 
attempt  is  made  to  dissect  the  narrative  as  it  now 
stands  (Green,  Unity  of  Genesis,  in  foe. ;  Everts, 
Homiletic  Review,  vol.  xL  p.  124  ;  Sayce,  Monument 
Facts  and  Higher  Critical  Fancies). 

If  in  chapter  vi.  we  find  we  have  a  portrait  of  Suggestions 
the  servant  in  relation  to  God,  in  chapter  vii.  we  Meditation. 
have  a  number  of  statements  concerning  God  in 
relation  to  His  servant 

1.  The  Divine  Invitation  (ver.  1). —  'Come 
thou.'  This  is  the  first  time  that  the  familiar 
word  'Come'  occurs.  It  is  found  some  six 
hundred  times  in  the  rest  of  the  Bible.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  God  said  'Come'  into  the  ark, 
not  'Go.'  Surely  we  have  here  the  suggestion 
that  in  some  sense  God  would  be  with  him 
there.  'His  presence  is  salvation.'  The  personal 
character  of  the  invitation  is  also  noteworthy, 
'Come  thou.'  Yet  again,  the  inclusion  of  his 
family  in  the  invitation  should  be  observed, 
'Come  thou  and  all  thy  house.' 

2.  The  Divine  Observation  (ver.  1).  — 'Thee 
have  I  seen.'  The  thought  of  God  watching  His 
servants  is  at  once  a  joy  and  a  responsibility,  an 
inspiration  and  a  warning.  When  the  life  is 
wholly  surrendered  to  God  and  lived  in  genuine 
•incerity  the  thought  of  'Thou  God  seest  me' 
is  a  delight  Not  seldom  in  Holy  Scripture  have 
we  expressions  telling  us  that  God  is  '  well  pleased ' 

95 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  vii.  with  His  faithful  servants.  The  thought  that  our 
life  can  give  pleasure  to  God  is  one  of  the  greatest 
incentives  to  holy  living. 

3.  The  Divine  Requirement  (ver.  1). — 'Righteous 
before  Me.'  This  practically  sums  up  everything  that 
God  demands  from  man.  Article  XI.  of  the  Church 
of  England  defines  justification  as  *  accounted  right- 
eous before  God.'  Somewhat  similar  in  idea  is 
the  description  of  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth.  '  They 
were  both  righteous  before  God '  (see  Gen.  xvii.  1 ; 
1  Kings  ix.  4 ;  2  Kings  xx.  3 ;  Job  i.  1 ;  Acts 
xxiii.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  6).  The  Old  Testament  is  neces- 
sarily concerned  only  with  the  divine  requirement 
of  righteousness.  It  remained  for  New  Testament 
times  to  reveal  the  provision  of  a  perfect  righteousness 
in  Christ  Jesus  (Rom.  iii.  20-26). 

4.  The  Divine  Testimony  (ver.  1). — 'Righteous 
before  Me  in  this  generation.'  Once  again  we  have 
the  thought  of  Noah's  contemporaries  brought  before 
us,  but  this  time  from  the  divine  side.  God  here 
proclaims  His  servant's  righteousness,  and  bears 
witness  thereto.  Like  Abel  and  Enoch  before  him, 
'he  obtained  witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God 
testifying  of  his  life  (Heb.  xi.  4-7).  'When  a 
man's  ways  please  the  Lord '  God  always  lets  other 
people  know  it. 

5.  The  Divine  Commandment  (ver.  5). — 'The 
Lord  commanded  him.'  The  Word  of  God  is 
brought  constantly  before  us  in  connection  with 
Noah  (chaps,  vi.  13,  22 ;  vii.  5,  9,  16 ;  viii.  15,  21 ; 
ix.  1,  8,  12,  17),  as  indeed  it  is  all  through  the 
Bible.     God  speaks,  man  listens  ;  God  commands, 

96 


At  the  Flood 

man  obeys.      The  Word  of  God  is  at  once  the  Gen.  vii. 
standard  and  the  guide  of  life,  and  no  life  or  service 
is  possible  unless  it  is  ever  subject  thereto. 

6.  The,  Divine  Protection  (ver.  16).  — 'The 
Lord  shut  him  in.'  This  suggests  that  he  was 
not  dependent  upon  himself  for  safety,  but  upon 
the  Lord.  It  was  a  divine,  not  a  human  fasten- 
ing, that  guaranteed  his  perfect  shelter.  Those 
whom  God  protects  never  need  have  any  fear. 

7.  The  Divine  Preservation  (chap.  viii.  1). — 
'God  remembered  Noah.'  The  servant  was  not 
forgotten  by  his  Lord,  and  this  point,  which  is 
the  culminating  thought  of  the  section,  shows 
the  constant  divine  care  of  Noah  and  his  family. 
There  is  only  one  thing  that  God  forgets  with 
reference  to  His  children,  that  is,  their  sins. 
'Their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no 
more.'  As  for  God's  people  themselves,  the  words 
are  blessedly  and  eternally  true,  'They  shall  not 
be  forgotten  of  Me.' 


97 


IX 

AFTER  THE  FLOOD 

Gen.  viii. 


And  God  remembered  Noah,  and  every  living  thing,  and  all 
the  cattle  that  was  with  him  in  the  ark :  and  God  made  a  wind 
to  pass  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  asswaged  : 

The  fountains  also  of  the  deep  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were 
stopped,  and  the  rain  from  heaven  was  restrained  ; 

And  the  waters  returned  from  off  the  earth  continually :  and 
after  the  end  of  the  hundred  and  fifty  days  the  waters  were 
abated. 

And  the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  seventeenth 
day  of  the  month,  upon  the  mountains  of  Ararat. 

And  the  waters  decreased  continually  until  the  tenth  month  : 
in  the  tenth  month,  on  the  first  day  of  the  month,  were  the  tops 
of  the  mountains  seen. 

And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  forty  days,  that  Noah  opened 
the  window  of  the  ark  which  he  had  made  : 

And  he  sent  forth  a  raven,  which  went  forth  to  and  fro,  until 
the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth. 

And  he  sent  forth  a  dove  from  him,  to  see  if  the  waters  were 
abated  from  off  the  face  of  the  ground  : 

But  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  and  she 
returned  unto  him  into  the  ark,  for  the  waters  were  on  the  face 
of  the  whole  earth  :  then  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  her, 
and  pulled  her  in  unto  him  into  the  ark. 

And  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days,  and  again  h«  sent  forth 
the  dove  out  of  the  ark  ; 

And  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening;  and,  lo,  in  her 
mouth  was  an  olive  leaf  pluckt  off :  so  Noah  knew  that  the  waters 
were  abated  from  off  the  earth. 

And  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days  ;  and  sent  forth  the  dove  ; 
which  returned  not  again  unto  him  any  more. 

And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year,  in  the 
first  month,  the  first  day  of  the  month,  the  waters  were  dried  up 

98 


After  the  Flood 

from  off  the  earth  :  and  Noah  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark, 
and  looked,  and,  behold,  the  face  of  the  ground  was  dry. 

And  in  the  second  month,  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of 
the  month,  was  the  earth  dried. 

And  God  spake  unto  Noah,  saying, 

Go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou,  aud  thy  wife,  and  thy  sons,  and 
thy  sons'  wives  with  thee. 

Bring  forth  with  thee  every  living  thing  that  w  with  thee,  of 
all  flesh,  both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  every  creeping  thing 
that  creepeth  upon  the  earth  ;  that  they  may  breed  abundantly 
in  the  earth,  and  be  fruitful,  and  multiply  upon  the  earth. 

And  Noah  went  forth,  and  his  sons,  and  kis  wife,  and  his  sons' 
wives  with  him : 

Every  beast,  every  creeping  thing,  and  every  fowl,  and  what- 
soever creepeth  upon  the  earth,  after  their  kinds,  went  forth  out 
of  the  ark. 

And  Noah  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  took  of  every 
clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean  fowl,  and  offered  burnt  offerings 
on  the  altar. 

And  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour ;  and  the  Lord  said  in 
His  heart,  I  will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any  more  for  man's 
sake  ;  for  the  imagination  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth  ; 
neither  will  I  again  smite  any  more  every  thing  living,  as  I  have 
done. 

While  the  earth  remaineth,  seedtime  and  harvest,  and  cold 
and  heat,  and  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night  shall  not 
MM*. 

AGAIN  we  are  impressed  with  the  remarkable  Gen.  viii. 
detail  of  the  history.  Yet  human  history,  as 
such  and  in  itself,  has  no  real  place  in  the  Old 
Testament.  It  is  only  human  life,  as  seen  in  the 
light  of  the  divine  purpose,  that  is  recorded  in  the 
Word  of  God  The  divine  and  the  human  elements 
are  here  blended  and  contrasted,  and  along  these 
lines  the  chapter  will  best  be  studied. 

I.   The   Lord's  Action  (vers.   1-5).— The   divine  I.  The  Lord's 
judgment  is  now  drawing  to  its  close.    The  servant  /v^nx.S)# 
is  remembered  by  God  and  the  covenant  established 
is  now  to  be  carried  out  in  full.     The  waters  from 
above  and  below  were  restrained,  and  the  ark  now 
99 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  viii.  rests  in  safety  upon  the  mountains  of  Ararat.  The 
place  of  reat  seems  to  have  been  the  territory  known 
by  the  name  of  one  of  the  peaks  (c/.  2  Kings 
xix.  37,  R.V.). 

II.  The  II.  The  Servant's  Attitude  (vers.  6-14).— It  was 
Slant's  an  attitude  of  Faith.  Noah  was  on  the  alert 
(vers.  6-14).    and  responsive  to  the  divine  movements.     Having 

opened  the  window,  he  sent  forth  a  raven,  which 
wandered  hither  and  thither  and  did  not  return. 
Then  he  sent  forth  a  dove,  but  the  dove  found 
no  resting-place  and  returned  to  him  in  the  ark. 

It  was  also  an  attitude  of  Hope.  Having  waited 
seven  days  more,  again  he  sent  forth  a  dove,  and 
the  dove  came  back  with  an  olive  leaf,  so  that  Noah 
now  knew  that  the  waters  were  abating. 

It  was  also  an  attitude  of  Patience.  He  waited 
seven  days  longer  before  sending  out  the  dove  a 
third  time,  and  when  the  dove  did  not  return,  Noah 
must  have  known  that  the  day  of  deliverance  was 
at  hand. 

When  God  pledges  His  word  and  establishes  His 
covenant,  His  servants  have  a  strong  foundation  for 
their  faith,  hope,  and  patience. 

'  How  firm  a  foundation,  ye  saints  of  the  Lord, 
Is  laid  for  your  faith  in  His  excellent  Word  ! 
What  more  can  He  say,  than  to  you  He  hath  said — 
To  you,  who  for  refuge  to  Jesus  have  fled.' 

III.  The  III.    The  Lord's  Command  (vers.   15-17). — At 

Command      ^as* tne  **me  na(*  come  f°r  Noah  to  leave  the  ark, 
(vers.  15-17).  and  the  Word  which  had  so  clearly  told  him  to 
enter,  now  with  equal  clearness  tells  him  to  come 
100 


After  the  Flood 

forth  with  his  family,  and  to  bring  forth  with  him  Gen.  viii. 
everything  that  he  had  taken  in.     God  never  com- 
mands  before   the   time    required   for   obedience. 
Step  by  step  He   makes  known   His   will.      He 
is  never  too  soon  and  never  too  late. 

IV.  The  Servant's  Obedience  (vers.  18,  19).— As  IV.  The 
the  servant  had  obeyed  implicitly,  accurately,  and  obedience 
immediately  before   the  Flood,  so  he  does   now.  {vtn.  18, 19). 
He  went  forth  at  once  at  the  command  of  God. 
Obedience   to  be  real   must   be  prompt  and  full. 

This  is  one  of  the  supreme  tests  of  genuine  living. 

V.  The    Servant's    Consecration    (ver.    20).  —  V.  The 
Noah's    first    act    on    landing    upon    the    earth  consecration 
was    to    build    an    altar    and   to   offer   sacrifices,  (ver.  20). 
Thereby  he   testified  at  once  (a)  to  his  gratitude 

to  God  for  deliverance,  (b)  to  his  need  of  sacrifice 
in  approaching  his  God,  and  (c)  to  the  consecration 
of  his  life  to  the  service  of  God  as  symbolised  by 
the  burnt  offering. 

VI.  The  Lord's  Revelation  (vers.  21,   22).— In  VI.  The 
response  there   is   a   twofold   movement   of  God.  R^vSition 
First  there  is  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice,  *  The  (vers.  21, 22). 
Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour.'     Quite  literally  the 

phrase  is,  'a  savour  of  rest,'  the  word  apparently 
being  a  play  upon  the  meaning  of  Noah  (chap.  v.  29). 
God  thus  signified  His  acceptance  of  what  His 
servant  had  done  in  offering  '  a  sacrifice  to  God  for 
a  sweet  smelling  savour '  (Eph.  v.  2). 

Following  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice  was  the 

divine  assurance  with  special  reference  to  the  future 

of  the  earth.     There  was  to  be  no  more  curse  in 

the  form  of  a  flood,  and  there  was  to  be  an  absolute 

101 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  viii.    guarantee  of  the  permanence  of  the  seasons,  year 
by  year,  as  long  as  the  earth  remained. 

Thus  the  Lord  and  His  servant  revealed  their 
attitudes  towards  each  other  all  through  this 
chapter,  and  we  have  in  it  one  of  the  most  sug- 
gestive pictures  of  God  in  relation  to  man,  and 
of  man  in  relation  to  God. 

Suggestions  Let  us  now  review  these  three  chapters 
J0/..  ti  (vi.-viii.),  and  read  them  afresh  in  the  light 
of  New  Testament  teaching.  In  view  of  the 
words  of  the  Apostle  Peter  (1  Pet.  iii.  20),  it  is 
not  wrong  to  regard  the  story  of  the  flood  as 
a  great  pictorial  and  symbolical  lesson  full  of 
spiritual  truths.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  history 
never  repeats  itself,  but  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
it  does  in  relation  to  spiritual  and  moral  realities. 
Our  Lord  distinctly  tells  us  that  the  history  of 
Noah  will  repeat  itself  in  the  day  of  His  coming 
(Matt.  xxiv.  37-42).  What  were  the  days  of 
Noah,  and  what  will  be  the  days  of  the  Son  of 
Man  ? 

1.  Days  of  sin. 

(a)  God's  Way  was  abandoned.  The  earth  had 
become  corrupt  through  sin,  and  man's  heart  was 
only  evil  continually. 

(b)  God's  Word  was  speaking.  The  Ark  was 
the  Divine  protest  against  sin ;  while  Noah,  a 
preacher  of  righteousness,  ever  witnessed  to  the 
certainty  of  retribution  and  the  limited  time  of 
God's  Spirit  among  men  (chap.  vi.  3). 

(c)  God's  Will  was   unheeded.      For  120  years 

102 


After  the  Flood 

Noah  preached  without  obtaining  a  single  convert.  Gen.  viii. 

This  shows  the  awful  extent  of  man's  depravity, 

and  the  certainty  of  that  wrath  of  God  which  is 

the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  holiness  against 

sin.     'It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands 

of  a  living  God.' 

2.  Days  of  sorrow. 

We  think  of  the  people  at  the  time  of  the  Flood, 
and  our  thought  goes  on  to  those  who  will  be 
living  similarly  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man. 

(a)  God's  Message  was  neglected.  Every  nail 
driven  into  the  ark  was  like  an  appeal  from  God, 
and  yet  all  the  testimony  was  fruitless  year  after 
year. 

(b)  God's  Refuge  was  rejected.  There  was  no 
other  way  of  salvation  except  the  Ark ;  no  human 
device  was  sufficient.  They  might  get  up  to  the 
highest  peak  of  the  highest  hill,  and  yet  there 
would  be  no  salvation. 

(c)  God's  Gift  was  lost  They  had  the  offer 
of  salvation  and  life.  They  neglected  and  then 
rejected  it,  and  as  a  consequence  they  lost  it. 

3.  Days  of  salvation. 

(a)  God's  Grace  was  working.  Noah  was  the 
solitary  saint  of  those  days,  and  this  shows  that 
goodness  is  possible,  even  amidst  the  most  adverse 
circumstances.  He  lived  as  well  as  preached ;  his 
life  testified  as  well  as  his  words  to  the  reality  and 
opportunity  of  the  grace  of  God. 

(b)  God's  Love  was  planning.  The  instructions 
about  the  Ark,  the  invitation  to  enter,  the  pro- 
tection within  the  Ark,  the  cessation  of  the  Flood, 

103 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  viii.  and  the  deliverance  of  Noah  and  his  house,  all 
testify  to  the  reality  of  God's  love  in  providing  this 
way  of  salvation. 

(c)  God's  Power  was  keeping.  How  significant 
it  is  to  read,  *  The  Lord  shut  him  in ' !  There  was 
ample  room  and  perfect  provision  in  the  Ark.  No 
anxiety,  no  possibility  of  leakage  or  wreck  ;  one 
door  of  entrance,  and  that  protected  by  Divine 
power.  The  Ark  was  a  home  for  saved  people. 
So  far  as  we  know,  there  was  no  sail,  no  mast, 
no  rudder ;  only  God !     And  that  was  enough ! 

Thus,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  will  it 
be  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Days  of  evil 
and  yet  of  good.  Amid  the  evil  days  an  oppor- 
tunity for  salvation  and  an  invitation  to  partake 
of  the  Divine  mercy.  Days  of  peril  and  of  loss; 
and  yet  the  opportunity  of  pardon,  peace,  pro- 
tection, preservation.  '  Now  is  the  accepted  time ; 
now  is  the  day  of  salvation.' 


104 


X 

THE  NEW  ERA 
Gen.  ix.  1-17 


And  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said  unto  them,  Be 
fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth. 

And  the  fear  of  you,  and  the  dread  of  you,  shall  be  upon  every 
beast  of  the  earth,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air,  upon  all  that 
moveth  upon  the  earth,  and  upon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea  ;  into 
your  hand  are  they  delivered. 

Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  meat  for  you  ;  even 
as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you  all  things. 

But  flesh  with  the  life  thereof,  which  is  the  blood  thereof,  shall 
ye  not  eat. 

And  surely  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  require  :  at  the  hand 
of  every  beast  will  I  require  it,  and  at  the  hand  of  man  ;  at  the 
hand  of  every  man's  brother  will  I  require  the  life  of  man. 

Whoso  shcddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed : 
for  in  tho  image  of  God  made  He  man. 

And  you,  be  ye  fruitful,  and  multiply  ;  bring  forth  abundantly 
in  the  earth,  and  multiply  therein. 

And  God  spake  unto  Noah,  and  to  his  sons  with  him,  saying, 

And  I,  behold,  I  establish  my  covenant  with  you,  and  with 
your  seed  after  you  ; 

And  with  every  living  creature  that  is  with  you,  of  the  fowl, 
of  the  cattle,  and  of  every  beast  of  the  earth  with  you  ;  from  all 
that  go  out  of  the  ark,  to  every  beast  of  the  earth. 

And  I  will  establish  My  covenant  with  you  ;  neither  shall  all 
flesh  be  cut  off  any  more  by  the  waters  of  a  flood  ;  neither  shall 
there  any  more  be  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth. 

And  God  said,  This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  make 
between  Me  and  you  and  every  living  creature  that  is  with  you, 
for  perpetual  generations : 

I  do  set  My  bow  in  the  cloud,  and  it  shall  be  for  a  token  of  a 
covenant  between  Me  and  the  earth. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth, 
that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud  : 

H  105 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  I  will  remember  My  covenant,  which  is  between  Me  and 
you  and  every  living  creature  of  all  flesh  ;  and  the  waters  shall 
no  more  become  a  flood  to  destroy  all  flesh. 

And  the  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud  ;  and  I  will  look  upon  it, 
that  I  may  remember  the  everlasting  covenant  between  God  and 
every  living  creature  of  all  flesh  that  is  upon  the  earth. 

And  God  said  unto  Noah,  This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant, 
which  I  have  established  between  Me  and  all  flesh  that  is  upon 
the  earth. 

Gen.  ix.      IVT^^  now  takes  his  place  as  the  second  head 

i -17.  iy      of  the  human  race.    There  was  to  be  a  new 

beginning,  a  fresh   start,  full   of  hope   and  with 

every  Divine  guarantee  of  blessing.     Sin  had  been 

punished,  grace  was  working,  and  God  was  ready 

to  guide  and  bless  those  through  whom  the  earth 

was  to  be  peopled  and  ruled. 

I.  The  I.  The  Elements  of  a  New  Commencement  (vers. 

a  neTSrn*   1-7).— The  new  start  is  made  at  the  only  possible 

mencement     point,  that  of  the  Divine  blessing  (ver.  1).      '  God 

(vers.  1-7).     jigged  Noah  and  his  sons.'    Just  as  God  blessed 

Adam  and  Eve  (chap.  i.  28),  so  it  was  necessary 

that  the  same  Divine  blessing  should  rest  upon  the 

new  progenitors  of  the  human  race. 

Divine    exhortation     naturally    follows    Divine 

blessing    (ver.    1).      '  Be   fruitful,    and   multiply, 

and  replenish  the  earth.'    Again  we  are  reminded 

of  the  primeval  command  (chap.  i.  28).    God  thereby 

took  the  necessary  steps  for  the  propagation  of  life. 

The  Divine  promise  appropriately  follows  (ver. 

2).     Noah  is  assured  that  fear  and  dread  should  be 

upon  everything  on  the  earth  for  his  sake.     Into 

his  hands  they  were  all  to  be  delivered,  thereby 

assuring  him  of  protection  and  power. 

Divine  provision  was  also  assured  to  him  (ver. 

106 


The  New  Era 

3).     Food  and  sustenance  were  thus  assured.     It  Gen.  ix. 
would  seem  from  a  comparison  of  this  verse  with  I-I7' 
chapter  i.  29,  that  it  was  only  after  the  Flood  that 
animal  food  was  permitted  to  man. 

Divine  prohibition  is  included  in  this  new 
commencement  (ver.  4).  The  sacredness  of  life 
is  taught  by  this  prohibition  about  the  eating  of 
blood,  and  still  more  the  thought  of  what  that 
blood  was  to  symbolise  in  atonement  is  probably 
here  first  brought  before  us  (Lev.  iii.  17). 

Divine  warnings  are  another  element  in  this 
passage  (ver.  6).  Noah  and  his  sons  are  told 
still  more  about  the  sanctity  of  life.  Blood  shed 
will  be  required,  and  this  great  principle  is  based 
upon  the  highest  sanction,  for  '  in  the  image  of 
God  made  He  man.' 

Divine  expectations  fitly  close  the  section  (ver.  7). 
God  again  exhorts  and  encourages  Noah  and  his 
sons  to  fruitfulness,  thus  indicating  that  He  expected 
them  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  life  and  blessing, 
and  to  realise  thereby  the  Divine  purpose. 

II.  The  Establishment  of  a  New  Covenant  (vers.  n.  The 
8-17).— It  is  often  said  that  God  never  gives  a  ^^Unew 
command   without    providing    the    grace    needed  CoTcaant 
to    obey,    and    we    have    a    striking    illustration (vcrs-  8l7)- 
of  this  great  principle  in  the  passage  before  us. 
Following  naturally  and   appropriately  after  the 
Divine  counsels  given  in  the  preceding  section  we 
have  the  assurance  of  needed  grace  in  connection 
with  the  Divine  covenant. 

The   Source   of  the   covenant    naturally  comes  _iu  Source, 
first   (ver.   9).      Its  author  was    God.       Human 
107 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      covenants  were    entered    into    mutually  between 
I"I7-  two    parties,   but  here  the   entire  initiation  was 

taken  by  God.  'I,  behold,  I'  (ver.  9);  '  I  will' 
(ver.  11);  'I  make'  (ver.  12);  'I  have  estab- 
lished' (ver.  17).  The  significance  of  this  is 
due  to  the  fact  that  it  was  of  God's  free  grace 
alone  that  the  covenant  was  made.  His  blessings 
were  to  be  bestowed  even  though  nothing  had 
been  done  by  man  to  deserve  them.  Everything 
is  of  grace  from  first  to  last. 
—Its  Scope.  The  Scope  of  the  covenant  is  also  noteworthy 
(vers.  9,  10).  It  comprehended  Noah  and  his 
seed,  and  not  only  these,  but  '  every  living 
creature.'  Thus  the  blessings  of  God  were  to  be 
extended  as  widely  over  the  earth  as  they  could 
possibly  be.  This  is  not  the  only  place  in  Scripture 
where  the  destiny  of  the  lower  creation  is  intimately 
connected  with  that  of  man  (Isa.  xi.  6-8;  Rom. 
viii.  19-22). 
—Its  The  Purpose  of  the  covenant  should  be  carefully 

Purpose.  noted  (ver.  11).  It  was  associated  with  the 
assurance  that  human  life  should  not  be  cut  off  or 
the  world  destroyed  any  more  by  a  flood.  The 
appropriateness  of  this  revelation  is  apparent,  for 
at  that  time  it  must  have  been  a  real  perplexity  to 
know  whether  there  would  be  any  repetition  in  the 
future  of  what  they  had  experienced  in  the  Flood. 
Everything  connected  with  their  relations  to  God 
had  been  altered  by  that  catastrophe,  and  now 
God  does  not  leave  man  ignorant,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  pledges  Himself  not  to  bring  another 
similar  judgment  upon  the  earth. 
108 


The  New  Era 

The  Sign  of  the  covenant  is  specially  emphasised  Gen.  ix. 
(vera.  12,  13).  The  rainbow  is  now  given  a  I*I7» 
specific  spiritual  meaning,  and  nature  for  the  first  ~ It3  Si*n- 
time  becomes  a  symbol  of  spiritual  truth.  We 
know  from  subsequent  passages  what  a  great 
principle  is  brought  before  us  in  this  way.  It  is 
what  is  known  as  the  *  sacramental  principle.'  In 
one  of  the  Homilies  of  the  Church  of  England, 
Sacraments  are  defined  as  *  visible  signs  to  which 
are  annexed  promises,'  and  the  rainbow  was  the 
first  of  such  visible  signs  illustrative  of  spiritual 
truths.  We  think  of  the  Passover  Lamb,  the 
Brazen  Serpent,  Gideon's  Fleece,  and  especially  of 
Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  as  illustrations  of 
this  Divine  method  of  revealing  and  assuring  us 
of  spiritual  truth.  As  Lange  beautifully  says, 
'God's  eye  of  grace  and  our  eye  of  faith  meet 
in  the  Sacraments.'  Our  faith  lays  hold  of  the 
promise  annexed  to  the  sign,  and  the  sign 
strengthens  and  confirms  our  faith  that  God  will 
fulfil  His  word.  At  the  same  time  it  must  never 
be  forgotten  that  if  there  is  no  faith  in  the  promise 
there  can  be  no  assurance  in  the  sign.  The  word 
and  the  sign  necessarily  go  together,  and  can  never 
be  separated.  This  revelation  of  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  the  rainbow  was  God's  response  to 
Noah's  altar.  Divine  faithfulness  thus  answered 
to  human  faith,  and  it  is  of  real  interest  that  in  the 
Bymbol  of  the  prophet  Ezekiel  (chap.  i.  28),  and 
of  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  iv.  3  ;  x.  1),  the  rainbow 
is  again  brought  before  us. 

The  Message  of  the  covenant  should   be  care- 
109 


Genesis  i -xxv.  10 


Gen.  ix. 

1-17. 

-Its 
Message. 


—Its 
Duration. 


-Its 
Guarantee. 


fully  pondered  (vers.  14,  15).  It  was  an  assur- 
ance of  God's  faithfulness.  He  was  prepared  to 
carry  out  all  His  promises,  notwithstanding  all  the 
previous  failures  of  mankind.  The  emphasis  upon 
My  covenant  and  My  bow  should  be  noted  (c/. 
vi.  18),  and  it  is  specially  to  be  observed  that 
the  sign  of  the  covenant  is  associated  with  God's 
remembrance  rather  than  man's.  'I  will  re- 
member' (ver.  15).  'I  will  look  upon  it,  that 
I  may  remember'  (ver.  16). 

The  Duration  of  the  covenant  is  also  revealed 
(vers.  12,  16).  'For  perpetual  generations.' 
1  The  everlasting  covenant.'  The  unconditional 
and  permanent  character  of  the  covenant  is  thus 
emphasised.  God  did  not  demand  any  pledge 
of  obedience  in  response  to  the  covenant,  but 
assured  Noah  of  the  unconditional  Divine  faith- 
fulness to  His  word  throughout  all  generations. 

The  Guarantee  of  the  covenant  is  not  to  be 
overlooked  (ver.  17).  'God  said  unto  Noah, 
This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant.'  The  covenant 
is  thus  based  upon  the  Divine  word.  It  is  God's 
character  and  word  that  guarantee  the  fulfilling 
of  His  promises.  'Two  immutable  things,  in 
which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie'  (Heb. 
vi.  18).  Here  is  our  strong  and  invincible  assur- 
ance, the  unchanging  faithfulness  of  the  word  of 
the  living  God. 


Suggestions      The  word  'covenant'  is  one  of  the  great  Bible 

C0/  *•*  .•        words.     It  means  '  a  coming  together '  (co-venant, 
Meditation.  •    \        a  j      *       v 

con-venire).     As  used  of  a  human  transaction,  it 

110 


The  New  Era 

implies  a  bargain,  one  party  giving  and  tlie  other  Gen.  ix. 
receiving.  It  also  sometimes  partakes  of  the  I-I7» 
nature  of  a  voluntary  undertaking  or  pledge,  with- 
out any  expectation  of  a  return.  This  latter  view 
is  its  characteristic  in  the  passage  before  us,  for 
we  read  only  of  God's  covenant  with  Noah,  not 
Noah's  covenant  with  God.  God  binds  Himself, 
and  lays  down  the  line  of  His  relationship  to 
man.  It  was  for  Noah  simply  to  receive  this, 
to  reckon  upon  it,  and  to  rely  upon  its  blessings. 
It  was  essentially  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  like 
the  New  Covenant  of  the  Gospel,  the  essence  of 
it  is  a  gift. 

1.  The  Contents  of  the  Covenant. — It  declared 
God's  mercy  in  relation  to  the  past.  It  told 
Noah  that  there  would  not  be  another  flood  of 
judgment 

It  declared  God's  power  in  relation  to  the 
present.  It  reminded  the  patriarch  and  his  sons 
that  they  could  depend  upon  the  regular  order 
of  nature  not  being  disturbed,  and  not  being 
subject  to  chance  and  mere  caprice. 

It  declared  God's  faithfulness  in  relation  to  the 
future.  It  bid  them  look  forward,  and  rest  quietly 
in  the  assurance,  that  as  each  day  came,  all  would 
be  well  with  their  life. 

It  declared  God's  grace  in  relation  to  man. 
There  is  a  clear  distinction  between  mercy  and 
grace.  Mercy  partakes  largely  of  the  element  of 
pity  and  compassion  for  those  who  are  in  need. 
Grace  is  much  more  than  this,  and  is  God's 
attitude  of  unmerited,  undeserved  favour  towards 
111 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      those  who  are  not  merely  negatively  non-deserving, 
I-I7»  but  also  to  those  who  are  positively  undeserving. 

The  covenant  of  grace  is  at  the  foundation  of  every- 
thing which  God  bestows  upon  us. 

It  was  intended  to  elicit  faith.  This  was  to 
be  the  human  response  to  the  Divine  faithfulness. 
Man's  trust  was  to  answer  to  God's  truth,  and 
in  this  confidence  man  would  find  peace  and 
strength. 

It  was  intended  to  elicit  hope.  Hope  differs 
from  faith  in  this  respect,  that  it  looks  onward  to 
the  future  rather  than  being  limited  to  the  present. 
Faith  accepts  a  present  gift,  hope  expects  a  future 
gift.  Faith  looks  upward  to  the  Promiser,  hope 
looks  forward  to  the  thing  promised.  Faith  appro- 
priates here  and  now,  hope  anticipates  the  coming 
blessing.  Day  by  day  Noah  and  his  sons  were 
intended  to  exercise  hope  as  they  rested  upon  the 
covenant  of  God. 

It  was  intended  to  elicit  love.  Just  as  the  altar 
expressed  Noah's  gratitude,  so  we  may  be  perfectly 
sure  that  this  renewal  and  establishment  of  the 
covenant  would  stir  him  to  grateful  and  adoring 
love.     '  We  love,  because  He  first  loved  us.' 

2.  The  Characteristics  of  the  Covenant. — Let 
us  dwell  on  the  rainbow  as  illustrating  the  Divine 
Covenant 

Consider  its  naturalness.  A  temporal  feature 
was  used  to  express  and  symbolise  spiritual  truths. 
God  definitely  associated  nature  with  grace.  This 
is  but  one  out  of  many  instances  in  which  nature 
is  a  symbol  of  the  supernatural. 
112 


The  New  Era 

Consider  ite  conspicuousness.     All  could  see  the  Gen.  ix. 
rainbow,  and  the  covenant  of  God  in  like  manner  I"I7» 
was  intended  to  be  seen  by  all  without  difficulty  or 
hindrance. 

Consider  its  universality.  As  the  rainbow  in  the 
heavens  so  was  the  universal  scope  of  the  covenant 
All  the  earth  was  included  in  it,  not  one  of  God's 
creatures  was  exempted. 

Consider  its  uniqueness.  The  rainbow  has  been 
rightly  described  as  the  joint  product  of  storm  and 
sunshine.  It  comes  from  the  effects  of  the  sun  on 
the  drops  of  rain  in  a  rain-cloud.  So  is  it  with  the 
covenant  of  God.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  due  to  the 
cloud  of  human  sin,  on  the  other  to  the  sunshine 
of  Divine  grace. 

Consider  its  beauty.  There  is  scarcely  anything 
more  exquisitely  beautiful  than  the  rainbow,  and 
assuredly  there  is  nothing  in  this  universe  more 
beautiful  than  the  grace  of  God.  The  term  '  grace ' 
has  for  one  of  its  meanings  that  of  '  beauty,'  and 
the  Apostle  Peter  speaks  of  *  the  variegated  grace 
of  God'  (1  Pet.  iv.  10).  John  Wesley  aptly  writes 
of  the  *  Victorious  sweetness  of  the  grace  of  God.' 

*  Grace,  'tis  a  charming  sound, 
Harmonious  to  the  ear.' 

Consider  its  union  of  earth  and  heaven.  As  the 
rainbow  spans  the  sky  and  reaches  the  earth,  so  is 
it  with  the  covenant  of  grace.  Like  Jacob's  ladder, 
it  is  set  up  on  the  earth  and  the  top  reaches  to 
heaven. 

Consider  its  permanence.      Mr    Eugene  Stock 

113 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      (Lesson  Studies  in  Genesis)  calls  attention  to  the 
I_I7«  fact  that  while  we  do  not  always  see  a  rainbow 

owing  to  the  clouds  hiding  the  sun,  yet  if  we  could 
get  above  the  clouds  we  should  see  the  rainbow  on 
them.  Thus  '  there  is  never  rain  without  a  rainbow 
being  visible  if  we  could  only  get  to  the  right  spot 
to  see  it,  but  God  is  always  above  the  clouds  and 
He  always  sees  it.'  This  is  exactly  what  is  taught 
us.  'The  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud,  and  I  will 
look  upon  it.'  It  is  not  our  sight  of  the  rainbow, 
but  God's,  that  constitutes  the  power  and  peace 
of  this  covenant. 

The  clouds  may  go  and  come, 
And  storms  may  sweep  my  sky — 
This  blood-sealed  friendship  changes  not : 
The  cross  is  ever  nigh. 

My  love  is  oft-times  low, 
My  joy  still  ebbs  and  flows  ; 
But  peace  with  Him  remains  the  same — 
No  change  Jehovah  knows. 

I  change,  He  changes  not, 
The  Christ  can  never  die  ; 
His  love,  not  mine,  the  resting-place, 
His  truth,  not  mine,  the  tie. 


114 


XI 

A   BELIEVER'S  FALL 

Gen.  ix.  18-29. 

And  the  sons  of  Noah,  that  went  forth  of  the  ark,  were  Shem, 
and  Ham,  and  Japheth  :  and  Ham  is  the  father  of  Canaan. 

These  are  the  three  sons  of  Noah  :  and  of  them  was  the  whole 
earth  overspread. 

And  Noah  began  to  be  an  husbandman,  and  he  planted  a 
vineyard : 

And  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunken  ;  and  he  was  un- 
covered within  his  tent. 

And  Ham,  the  father  of  Canaan,  saw  the  nakedness  of  his 
father,  and  told  his  two  brethren  without. 

And  Shem  and  Japheth  took  a  garment,  and  laid  *'/.  upon  both 
their  shoulders,  and  went  backward,  and  covered  the  nakedness 
of  their  father ;  and  their  faces  were  backward,  and  they  saw 
not  their  father's  nakedness. 

And  Noah  awoke  from  his  wine,  and  knew  what  his  younger 
son  had  done  unto  him. 

And  he  said,  Cursed  be  Canaan  ;  a  servant  of  servants  shall  he 
be  unto  his  brethren. 

And  he  said,  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Shem  ;  and  Canaan 
■hall  be  his  servant. 

God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tenia  of 
Shem  ;  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant. 

And  Noah  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred  and  fifty  years. 

And  all  the  days  of  Noah  were  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years  : 
and  he  died. 

rilHE  events  recorded  in  the  preceding  section  Gen.  ix. 
-I-     might  well  suggest  that  henceforth  everything  18-29. 
would  be  well  with  Noah  aud  his  sons.     A  new 
115 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      start    had    been    made    amid    great    hopes,   with 
18-29.  perfect  provision   and   a   Divine    assurance.     Yet 

here  comes  the  record  of  failure.  As  we  read 
it  our  hearts  are  full  of  disappointment,  and  yet, 
if  we  may  use  human  language,  what  must  the 
Divine  disappointment  have  been.  As  God  after- 
wards said  about  Israel,  'What  could  have  been 
done  more  to  My  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done 
in  it'  (Isa.  v.  4)?  It  is  evident  that  the  Divine 
judgment  at  the  Flood  had  not  extirpated  the 
evil  in  human  nature,  and  as  we  ponder  this 
solemn  lesson,  we  should  take  care  to  apply  it 
to  ourselves.  It  is  much  easier  to  feel  sad 
about  Noah  than  to  be  on  the  watch  about  our 
own  life. 

I.  The  Sons      I.  The  Sons  (vers.  18, 19). — The  names  of  Noah's 
(vers.  18, 19).  gong  nave  keen  given  before  (v.  32 ;  vi.  10 ;  vii.  13) ; 

they  are  given  again  here  because  the  narrative 
specially  concerns  them.  In  the  reference  to  Canaan 
we  have  an  anticipation  of  chapter  x.  6,  in  order  to 
prepare  for  what  is  recorded  of  him  in  verse  25 
of  the  present  section.  The  three  sons  of  Noah 
are  described  as  the  heads  of  the  three  divisions 
of  the  human  race  (ver.  19),  and  it  is  by  reason 
of  their  importance  in  this  connection  that  the 
incident  now  recorded  finds  its  full  significance. 
Their  action  is  soon  seen  to  affect  others. 

II.  The  Sins      II.   The  Sins  (vers.  20,  21). — The  occasion  of  the 
(vers.  20,21).  sm8  0f  N-oan>  it  ghouid  be  observed,  was  his  daily 

occupation.    They  were  committed  in  the  course  of 

his  ordinary  work.     It  was  a  perfectly  legitimate 

calling  as  a  husbandman  to  plant  a  vineyard,  and 

116 


A  Believer's  Fall 

no  blame  is  attached  to  him  in  this  respect     It  is  Gen.  ix. 
a  point  worthy  of  careful  notice,  that  legitimate  18-29. 
occupations  may  easily  become  the  occasions  of 
wrong  doing. 

The  first  of  Noah's  sins  was  that  of  drunken- 
ness. Now  whatever  views  Christian  men  may 
hold  as  to  the  lawfulness  or  wisdom  of  moderate 
drinking,  there  is  no  question  whatever  about 
the  fact  and  heinousness  of  the  sin  of  drunken- 
ness as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  writ 
large  on  all  parts  of  the  Word  of  God.  Warnings 
and  denunciations  abound  in  the  Old  Testament, 
while  in  the  New,  drunkenness  is  included  in 
St  Paul's  catalogue  of  the  works  of  the  flesh 
with  all  the  nameless  and  most  shameful  of  evils 
(see  Prov.  xxiii.  20;  Isa.  v.  11,  22;  xxviii.  1-7; 
Luke  xxi.  34;  Rom.  xiii.  13;  1  Cor.  v.  11,  and 
vi  10;  Gal.  v.  21;  Eph.  v.  18;  1  Thes.  v.  8). 
The  story  of  Noah  is  the  first  recorded  instance 
of  a  sin  that  has  since  become  well  known  and  even 
prevalent  almost  all  over  the  world. 

Associated  with  drunkenness  was  the  sin  of 
immodesty.  The  Hebrew  clearly  indicates  a  de- 
liberate act,  and  not  a  mere  unconscious  effect 
of  drunkenness.  The  two  sins  of  intemperance 
and  impurity  have  often  been  associated,  and 
indeed  the  association  has  become  proverbial. 
Of  the  unutterable  sadness  of  this  sin  of  a  servant 
of  God  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  speak. 

III.  The  Shame  (ver.  22).— Although  the  narra-  ill.  The 
tive  does  not  mention  the  shame  that  accrued  to  ^m^)# 
Noah,  it  is  not  difficult  to  realise  what  it  must 
117 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      have  been.      To  think  that  one  who  had  passed 
18-29.  through   the   thrilling  and   unique  experiences  of 

the  Flood  and  the  associated  events  should  have 
been  guilty  of  such  conduct  was  a  fact  full  of 
unspeakable  shame.  The  corruption  of  the  best 
is  always  the  worst  thing  possible. 

Still  more  shameful  was  the  conduct  of  his  son, 
Ham.  He  had  no  sense  of  filial  love  or  even  of 
common  decency.  We  seem  to  see  depravity  here, 
of  no  ordinary  degree.  Not  only  was  he  guilty  of 
the  plain  sin  of  omission  in  failing  to  shield  and 
hide  his  father's  shame ;  he  was  guilty  also  of  a  sin 
of  commission  in  calling  attention  to  the  circum- 
stances, and  endeavouring  to  get  his  brothers  to 
share  in  his  sin.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that 
Noah's  sin  must  surely  have  been  a  solitary  act,  for 
Ham  would  not  have  done  this  to  his  father  if 
the  circumstances  had  been  familiar.  Candlish 
suggests  that  in  the  light  of  Canaan's  probable 
association  with  his  father,  the  act  was  a  token 
of  a  deliberate  opposition  to  Noah  on  religious 
grounds.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  sin  against  filial 
respect  and  honour  is  sufficiently  heinous. 
IV.  The  IV.  The  Sorrow  (vers.  23,  24).— The  two  brothers 

(vers!  23, 24).  remse(* to  snare  in  Ham's  sin.  With  filial  love,  true 
purity,  and,  as  we  can  believe,  profound  sorrow, 
they  took  immediate  steps  to  cover  their  father's 
shame.  After  all,  he  was  their  father,  they  owed 
everything  to  him,  and  however  deeply  he  had 
fallen,  it  was  not  for  them  to  do  anything  but  hide 
his  and  their  unspeakable  sorrow  and  shame.  They 
restored  him  in  the  spirit  of  love  and  meekness  (Gal. 
118 


A  Believer's  Fall 

vi.  1),  perhaps  not  unmindful  of  the  possibilities  of  Gen.  ix. 
sin  in  themselves.  18-29. 

And  what  must  Noah's  sorrow  have  been  when 
he  awoke  and  knew  alL  When  he  realised  what 
he  himself  had  done,  and  when  he  discovered  what 
his  son  had  done  to  him,  we  can  well  imagine  the 
profound  sorrow  and  sense  of  shame  that  filled  his 
heart.  He  who  had  *  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord '  (vi.  8),  he  who  had  been  testified  of 
by  God  as  the  only  upright  one  in  that  age  (vii.  1), 
he  who  had  been  the  honoured  instrument  of 
declaring  and  doing  God's  will  in  circumstances 
such  as  would  never  happen  again — he  it  is  who 
had  now  awoke  to  a  consciousness  of  awful  sin  in 
himself  and  his  home. 

V.  The  Retribution  (ver.  23). — The  curse  pro-  V.  The 
nounoed  on  Canaan  was  not  the  result  of  any  S^",!??011 
personal  feeling  on  the  part  of  Noah,  for  Ham  the 
father  is  not  mentioned  as  included  in  the  curse. 
Noah  is  here,  as  it  were,  among  the  prophets,  and 
foresees  the  future  in  which  the  curse  of  Canaan 
shall  be  realised.  It  is  a  real  difficulty  how  to  explain 
the  connection  of  Canaan  with  the  sin  that  is  attri- 
buted to  his  father  Ham.  It  is  perhaps  best  to 
understand  the  matter  according  to  the  old  Jewish 
tradition,  that  Canaan  was  somehow  involved 
in  the  sin  and  was  associated  with  his  father  in 
the  mockery  of  Noah.  It  has  been  well  said 
that  Ham  sinned  as  a  son  and  was  punished  in 
his  son.  This  is  the  third  curse  mentioned  in 
Genesis  (chaps,  iii.  14-17;  iv.  11). 

The  servitude    of   Canaan    here    foretold    waa 
119 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      subsequently    seen     in     the     course     of  history. 

18-29.  <  Servant  of  servants '  is  the  Hebrew  superlative 

for  '  greatest  possible  servitude,'  and  we  know  how 
true  this  has  worked  out.  Canaan  was  to  be 
a  slave  both  to  Shem  and  Japheth.  The  land 
of  Canaan  was  subjugated  by  Israel,  and  the 
Canaanites  became  the  servants  of  the  Semitic 
race.  In  a  still  wider  sense  the  descendants  of 
Ham  in  Africa  have  for  centuries  been  the  slaves 
of  the  Japhethic  races. 

VI.  The  Re-      VI.  The  Reward  (vers.  26,  27).— The  supremacy 

^ar^)Vers'  °f  Shem  is  foretold  with  reference  to  their  religious 
privileges.  Jehovah  is  to  be  their  God,  and,  if  the 
Hebrew  may  thus  be  rendered,  it  is  Jehovah  Who  is 
to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem.  The  truth  of  this  is 
readily  seen  when  we  think  of  the  preservation  of 
Monotheism  amongst  the  Jews  amidst  all  the  false 
religions  that  surrounded  them.  Above  all,  Christ 
belonged  to  the  race  of  Shem,  and  Christianity  was 
first  proclaimed  and  spread  abroad  by  Semites. 

The  prophecy  about  Japheth  indicates  great 
prosperity  and  the  multiplication  of  descendants. 
'  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth.'  If  the  rendering  of 
the  English  versions  is  correct  that  Japheth  is  to 
'  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,'  we  know  that  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  Christian  Gentile  nations  have 
indeed  superseded  the  family  of  Shem  in  religious 
privileges,  and  have  entered  upon  their  inheritance 
of  spiritual  blessing  and  earthly  power.  It  is  at 
least  striking  that  the  political  control  of  human 
affairs  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Japhethic 
line. 

120 


A  Believer's  Fall 

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  long  after  the  Flood  Gen.  ix. 
this  sad  event  took  place,  but  inasmuch  as  Noah  18-29. 
lived  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  Flood  VII.  The 
we  may  rightly  assume  that  he  lived  long  after  this 28*29). 
fall,  and  did  not  repeat'  his  terrible  sin.  His  fall 
is  never  mentioned  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  and  we 
may  fairly  believe  in  his  complete  restoration. 
Still,  the  memory  must  necessarily  have  remained 
to  cloud  the  glory  of  his  former  days. 

1.  A  Believer  is  never  immune  from  sin. — How-  Suggestions 
ever  far  we  may   advance   in   the   Christian   life,  ^r  ...  .. 
however  rich  and  deep  our  experiences,  the  evil 
principle  still  remains,  and  may  at  any  time  gain 

the  upper  hand.  The  infection  of  sin  remains  in 
the  regenerate,  and  this  is  a  fact  that  needs  to  be 
faced  day  by  day. 

2.  A  Believer  often  finds  small  temptations  the 
most  dangerous. — It  was  in  his  ordinary  duty  that 
Noah  found  the  occasion  of  his  fall.  Many  a  man 
can  meet  a  great  crisis  who  fails  before  a  simple 
duty.  The  little  things  of  life  frequently  constitute 
the  most  searching  test. 

3.  A  Believer  is  always  liable  to  experience 
entirely  new  temptations. —  As  the  days  go  on 
•vil  often  takes  entirely  novel  forms.  A  man 
may  have  had  a  special  weakness  in  youth  and 
fought  against  it  for  years,  only  to  find  other 
weaknesses  breaking  out  and  new  sins  coming 
upon  him  in  mature  and  old  age. 

4.  A  Believer  may  be  the  occasion  of  sin  in 
others. —  How   sad   to   think   of  the   influence   of 

I  121 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  ix.      Noah  on  his  sons.     It  is  only  one  solitary  instance 
18-29.  of  the  great  law  that  no  one  ever  sins  alone.     The 

solidarity  of  human  life  is  such   that  others  are 
inevitably  affected  by  the  evil  that  we  do. 

6.  A  Believer  will  suffer  most  bitterly  for  his 
backsliding. —  We  may  be  perfectly  certain  that 
Noah  was  never  without  the  shadow  of  his  sin, 
although  his  life  might  have  been  wholly  bright. 
The  Spirit  of  God  makes  the  repentant  believer 
more  and  more  sensitive,  and  he  does  not  cease 
to  grieve  over  aberrations  from  the  pathway  of 
right. 

6.  A  Believer  is  always  conscious  of  the  utter 
impartiality  of  God. —  No  vice  or  sin  is  ever 
hidden  or  extenuated.  The  sins  and  faults  of 
the  men  of  God  are  dealt  with  with  perfect 
frankness  and  impartiality  in  the  Word  of 
God,  and  so  it  is  in  daily  experience.  God  has 
no  favourites. 

7.  A  Believer  need  never  fall  into  sin. — Although 
the  evil  principle  remains  with  us  to  the  end  of 
this  life,  the  provision  of  grace  is  such  that  sinning 
is  absolutely  unnecessary.  The  promise  stands 
absolute  and  universal  in  its  application.  *  Sin 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  you'  (Rom.  vi.  14), 
and  the  explanation  is  accordingly  given,  l  Ye  are 
under  grace.'  The  grace  of  God  is  more  than 
sufficient  to  meet  every  need.  The  Spirit  of  God 
dwelling  in  the  heart  and  possessing  it  is  able  to 
counteract  the  strongest  force  of  the  evil  nature ; 
and  while,  according  to  Romans  vii.,  the  evil  nature, 
in  and  by  itself,  will  always  assert  itself,  the  true 

122 


A  Believer's  Fall 

full    Christ  inn   life  is  that   which   is  depicted  in  Gen.  ix. 
Romans  viiL,  which  commences  with   '  No   con-  18-29. 
dem  nation,'  and  ends  with  'No  separation/  since 
'we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that 
loved  us.' 


123 


XII 

A  WIDE  OUTLOOK 

Gen.  x. 


Now  these  are  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah  ;  Shem, 
Ham,  and  Japheth  :  and  unto  them  were  sons  born  after  the 
flood. 

The  sons  of  Japheth  ;  Gomer,  and  Magog,  and  Madai,  and 
Javan,  and  Tubal,  and  Meshech,  and  Tiras. 

And  the  sons  of  Gomer ;  Ashkenaz,  and  Riphath,  andTogarmah. 

And  the  sons  of  Javan  ;  Elishah,  and  Tarshish,  Eittim,  and 
Dodanim. 

By  these  were  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles  divided  in  their  lands  ; 
every  one  after  his  tongue,  after  their  families,  in  their  nations. 

And  the  sons  of  Ham ;  Cush,  and  Mizraim,  and  Phut,  and 
Canaan. 

And  the  sons  of  Cush ;  Seba,  and  Havilah,  and  Sabtah,  and 
Raainah,  and  Sabtechah  :  and  the  sons  of  Raamah  ;  Sheba,  and 
Dedan. 

And  Cush  begat  Nimrod  :  he  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the 
earth. 

He  was  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord  :  wherefore  it  is  said, 
Even  as  Nimrod  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord. 

And  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel,  and  Erech,  and 
Aocad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar. 

Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Asshur,  and  builded  Nineveh,  and 
the  city  Rehoboth,  and  Calah, 

And  Resen  between  Nineveh  and  Calah  :  the  same  is  a  great 
city. 

And  Mizraim  begat  Ludim,  and  Anamim,  and  Lehabim,  and 
Naphtuhim, 

And  Pathrusim,  and  Casluhim  (out  of  whom  came  Philistim), 
and  Caphtorim. 

And  Canaan  begat  Sidon  his  first-born,  and  Heth, 

And  the  Jebusite  and  the  Amorite,  and  the  Girgasite, 

And  the  Hivite,  and  the  Arkite,  and  the  Sinite, 

124 


A  Wide  Outlook 

And  the  Arvadite,  and  the  Zemarite,  and  the  Hamathite :  and 
afterward  were  the  families  of  the  Canaanitea  spread  abroad. 

And  the  border  of  the  Canaanitea  was  from  Sidon,  as  thou 
comest  to  Gerar,  unto  Gaza  ;  as  thou  goest  unto  Sodom,  and 
Gomorrah,  and  Admah,  and  Zeboim,  even  unto  Lasha. 

These  are  the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their  families,  after  their 
tongues,  in  their  countries,  and  in  their  nations. 

Unto  Shem  also,  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  Eber,  the 
brother  of  Japheth  the  elder,  even  to  him  were  children  born. 

The  children  of  Shem  ;  Elam,  and  Asshur,  and  Arphazad, 
and  Lud,  and  Aram. 

And  the  children  of  Aram ;  Uz,  and  Hul,  and  Gether,  and 
Hash. 

And  Arphazad  begat  Salah  ;  and  Salah  begat  Eber. 

And  unto  Eber  were  born  two  sous :  the  name  of  one  teas 
Peleg  ;  for  in  his  days  was  the  earth  divided  ;  and  his  brother's 
name  was  J  ok  tan. 

And  Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  Sheleph,  and  Hazarmaveth, 
and  Jerah, 

And  Hadoram,  and  Uzal,  and  Diklah, 

And  Obal,  and  Abimael,  and  Sheba, 

And  Ophir,  and  Havilah,  and  Jobab  :  all  these  were  the  sons 
of  Joktan. 

And  their  dwelling  was  from  Mesha,  as  thou  goest  unto 
Sephar,  a  mount  of  the  east. 

These  are  the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their  families,  after  their 
tongues,  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations. 

These  are  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their  genera- 
tions, in  their  nations :  and  by  these  were  the  nations  divided 
in  the  earth  after  the  flood. 


AT  first  sight  this  chapter  seems  quite  remote  Gen.  x. 
from  the  spiritual  character  of  the  preceding 
and  following  sections,  but  further  consideration 
shows  that  it  is  in  direct  line  with  the  religious  pur- 
pose of  Genesis.  In  chapter  v.  we  have  a  list  of 
the  descendants  of  Adam  ending  with  Noah,  and  in 
this  chapter  there  naturally  follows  a  list  of  Noah's 
descendants,  until  we  reach  Terab,  the  father  of 
Abraham.  In  chapter  x.  1  the  sons  of  Noah  are 
mentioned  in  the  familiar  order,  Shem,  Ham,  and 
Japheth,  but  in  the  remainder  of  the  chapter 
125 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  x.  their  descendants  are  taken  in  the  opposite  order, 
Japheth,  Ham,  Shem.  This  is  an  example  of  the 
characteristic,  already  mentioned,  of  dealing  with 
collateral  branches  first,  and  only  after  that  con- 
sidering the  main  stream  in  the  descendants  of 
Shem.  The  religious  purpose  of  the  chapter  must 
A  Survey  of  therefore  be  continually  kept  in  view.  This  table 
the  Nations.  0f  natjons  shows  their  kinship  with  the  chosen 
race,  out  of  which  all  spiritual  blessing  is  to  come. 
Then  the  nations  are  dismissed  from  the  Scripture 
record,  and  attention  concentrated  on  the  Semitic 
line.  Saphir  {The  Divine  Unity  of  Scripture) 
truly  says,  '  The  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis  is  a  very 
remarkable  chapter.  Before  God  leaves,  as  it 
were,  the  nations  to  themselves  and  begins  to  deal 
with  Israel,  His  chosen  people  from  Abraham 
downward,  He  takes  a  loving  farewell  of  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  as  much  as  to  say,  "I  am 
going  to  leave  you  for  a  while,  but  I  love  you. 
I  have  created  you  :  I  have  ordered  all  your 
future " ;  and  their  different  genealogies  are 
traced.' 

It  is  impossible  to  enter  in  detail  upon  the 
classification  of  this  chapter.  It  must  suffice  to 
call  attention  to  its  ethnological,  genealogical, 
geographical,  and  biographical  aspects.  The  four 
words  (ver.  31),  '  families,'  l  tongues,'  '  lands,' 
*  nations,'  show  the  varied  character  of  the  classi- 
fication. The  precise  principle  of  classification 
must  thus  include  all  these  elements  ;  the  personal 
aspect  is  sometimes  individual  and  sometimes 
tribal. 

196 


A  Wide  Outlook 

It  is  also  to  be  carefully  observed  that  there  is  Gen.  x. 
no  attempt  at  completeness  in  the  list.  Several  of 
the  more  modern  nations  which  came  later  into 
close  contact  with  Israel,  as  Moab,  Ammon,  Edom, 
Amalck,  find  no  mention  here,  while  on  the  other 
hand  not  all  the  most  ancient  of  the  nations  are 
included.  The  names  of  seventy  nations  are  found 
here,  fourteen  associated  with  Japheth,  thirty  with 
Ham,  and  twenty-six  with  Shein.  This  number 
seventy  is  familiar  from  other  parts  of  Scripture 
(chaps,  xlvi.  27  ;  Exod.  xxiv.  1-9),  and  is  evidently 
symbolical.  Lange  rightly  speaks  of  the  '  high 
antiquity  '  of  the  chapter,  and  this  is  confirmed 
by  Professor  Sayce  in  his  Archaeological  Com- 
mentary on  Genesis.  There  is  no  reference  in 
the  chapter  to  the  time  posterior  to  Abraham. 
For  the  purpose  of  detailed  study  of  the  many 
interesting  and  important  points  which  arise  out 
of  it,  reference  may  be  made  to  Sayce 's  Archaeo- 
logical Commentary  on  Genesis  (Expository  Times, 
voL  viii.  p.  82  ff.) ;  Cave  (Inspiration  of  the  Old 
Testament,  Lecture  iii.) ;  Lange  (Commentary  on 
Genesis,  p.  346^".) ;  Urquhart  (The  Bible  and  How 
to  Bead  It,  vol.  ii.  p.  2ff.).  It  is  only  possible  to 
call  attention  to  a  few  of  the  outstanding  features 
with  special  reference  to  the  spiritual  meaning  of 
the  chapter. 

I.  The  Family  of  Japheth  (vers.  2-5).— Here  it  is  i.  The 
unnecessary  and  perhaps  impossible  to  identify  the  faiJJll7hof 
names  with  those  of  subsequent  races  and  countries,  (vers.  25). 
but  attention  should  certainly  be  concentrated  on 
verse  5  with  its   reference  to  Gentiles.      Viewed 
127 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  x.  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Jews  it  is  clear  that 
the  Gentile  nations  arose  from  Japheth.  This 
early  reference  to  '  the  nations,'  to  use  the  Hebrew 
phrase  of  later  books,  is  very  significant,  and  shows 
that  amid  all  the  Jewish  exclusiveness  the  Old 
Testament  never  loses  sight  of  the  great  fact  of 
universality  and  God's  purposes  for  all  the  world. 
It  was  the  crowning  sin  of  the  Jews  in  later  ages 
that  they  forgot  this  and  concentrated  attention 
upon  themselves  as  the  chosen  people  of  God, 
stopping  short  of  the  great  truth  of  their  revealed 
religion  that  they  were  chosen  only  for  the  purpose 
of  being  the  instrument  and  channel  of  God's 
mercy  and  grace  to  'the  nations'  of  the  whole 
earth.  Even  to-day  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
ignorance  among  Christian  people  as  to  the  note 
of  universality  that  is  struck  so  often  in  the 
Old  Testament.  A  study  of  the  Psalms  and 
the  Prophets  in  the  Revised  Version,  with 
special  reference  to  the  phrase  in  the  plural, 
'the  nations,'  would  do  much  to  correct  this. 
II.  The  II.  The  Family  of  Ham  (vers.  6-20).— The  first 

Ham  (vers.     Pomt  tnat  stands  out  with  prominence  in  regard  to 
6-20).  the  family  of  Ham  is  the  reference  to  Nimrod  (vers. 

8,  9),  and  the  word  'mighty'  in  these  verses  is 
the  same  in  the  Hebrew  as  that  used  in  chapter 
vL  4.  It  would  seem  as  though  Nimrod  repre- 
sented a  revival  of  the  antediluvian  spirit  of 
independence  and  rebellion  with  its  disregard  of 
God  and  His  authority.  Nimrod,  however,  is 
specially  associated  with  the  founding  of  Babel, 
or  Babylon,  and  this  first  mention  of  a  word 
128 


A  Wide  Outlook 

which  is  bo  familiar  elsewhere  should  be  specially  Gen.  x. 
noted.  Babylon  henceforward  stands  for  every- 
thing that  is  godless,  and  for  the  great  opponent 
of  the  people  of  God.  It  was  a  'Babylonish 
garment'  (Josh.  vii.  21)  that  led  to  the  first  siu 
in  the  promised  land,  and  it  was  Babylon  in  one 
form  or  another  that  caused  most  of  the  trouble 
to  the  nation  of  Israel.  In  the  Old  Testament 
Babylon  is  a  godless  city  and  empire,  in  the  New 
Testament  it  is  a  godless  system,  and  it  would 
form  a  study  of  the  greatest  possible  significance 
and  value  to  look  at  all  the  passages  where 
Babylon  is  mentioned,  until  at  length  we  come 
to  its  destruction  as  recorded  in  the  Apocalypse 
(chap,  xviii.).  The  other  point  in  this  section  is 
the  prominence  given  to  Canaan  and  his  des- 
cendants (vers.  15-19).  This  is  doubtless  because 
of  the  connection  of  Canaan  with  Israel  in  the 
light  of  subsequent  history.  Sayce  (ut  supra) 
sayB,  *  The  age  to  which  the  chapter  takes  us  back 
is  indicated  by  the  position  given  to  Canaan.  It 
is  a  position  that  was  true  of  it  only  during  the 
age  of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  Egyptian 
dynasties.  .  .  .  After  that  age  no  one  would 
have  dreamed  of  coupling  Canaan  and  Egypt 
together.' 

III.  The  Family  of  Shem  (vers.  21-31).— Shem  is  III,  The 

described  as  '  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  Eber,'  ^J"1"1?  of 

*  t-ii  i  t>nem  (vers. 

and  this  prominence  given  to  Eber  seems  to  bear  21-31). 

out  the  suggestion  that  '  Hebrew '  comes  from  Eber. 

Eber  is  also  mentioned   (ver.  25)  as    having  two 

sons,  Peleg  and  Joktan.     It  was  in  the  time  of 

129 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  x.  the  former  that  the  earth  was  divided,  the 
reference  probably  being  an  anticipation  of  the 
confusion  of  Babel  recorded  in  detail  in  the  next 
chapter. 

Thus  we  have  this  brief  and  suggestive  account 
of  the  families  of  Noah,  and  the  division  of  the 
earth  by  means  of  them.  The  authenticity  and 
genuineness  of  the  chapter  may  be  seen  from  the 
simple  fact  that  as  late  as  the  date  of  1  Chronicles 
nothing  more  was  known  of  the  origin  of  the 
nations,  and  consequently  the  writer  of  Chronicles 
followed  this  list,  for  with  only  slight  variations 
it  is  repeated  there  (1  Chron.  i.).  Canon  Rawlin- 
son  remarks  that  these  lists  have  *  extorted  the 
admiration  of  modern  ethnologists,  who  continually 
find  in  them  anticipations  of  their  greatest  dis- 
coveries.' Up  to  the  present  moment  ethnology 
cannot  get  behind  the  division  of  mankind  into 
three  primary  groups.  It  remains  to  be  added 
that  archaeological  studies  have  gone  to  confirm 
the  facts  recorded  here. 

Suggestions       Keeping    in   view   the    religious    and    spiritual 
Meditation     PurPose  °^  tne  cnapter  when  read  in  the  light  of 
the    entire    book   of   Genesis,   we  notice   several 
spiritual  lessons. 

1.  All  Nations  are  of  one  blood. — Or  as  the  R.V. 
reads,  '  He  made  of  one  every  nation  of  men.'  This 
is  surely  one  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  arising 
out  of  this  chapter.  Such  representative  critics  as 
Dillmann,  and  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  call  atten- 
tion to  the  spiritual  significance  of  this  chapter  in 
130 


A  Wide  Outlook 

the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  '  It  reminded  the  Israelite  Gen.  x. 
that  God  had  made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  and  that  the  heathen  who  knew  not 
Jehovah  were  nevertheless  brethren  of  Israel.  It 
reminded  him  that  his  own  nation  was  only  one 
among  the  nations  of  tite  earth  by  origin,  and  in 
no  way  separated  from  them,  but  only  by  the 
grace  of  God  selected  and  chosen  to  be  the  bearer 
of  His  revelation  to  the  world '  (Kyle,  Early 
Narratives  of  Genesis).  Dillmann  is  equally  clear 
aB  to  the  uniqueness  of  this  feature.  *  The  funda- 
mental idea  of  the  survey  is  to  point  out  the 
ultimate  relationship  of  all  these  peoples.  This 
idea  is  important  .  .  .  not  mnch  attention  was 
paid  as  a  rule  to  foreigners,  unless  national  or 
trade  interests  were  at  stake.  Often  enough  they 
were  despised  as  mere  barbarians,  and  in  no  case 
were  they  included  with  the  more  cultured  nations 
in  a  higher  community.  It  is  otherwise  in  our 
text  Here,  many  with  whom  the  Israelites  had 
no  sort  of  actual  relationship  are  taken  into  con- 
sideration. ...  All  men  and  peoples  are  of  the 
same  race,  of  the  same  rank,  and  with  the  same 
destiny,  brothers  and  relatives  of  one  another' 
(Dillmann,  Genesis,  vol.  i.  p.  314).  When  it  is 
remembered  that  no  other  nation  ever  taught  the 
brotherhood  of  man,  but  on  the  eontrary  despised 
and  opposed  it,  we  can  surely  see  marks  of  divine 
inspiration  in  the  way  in  which  all  nations  are 
mentioned  in  this  chapter.  lianke  says  of  this 
chapter,  '  It  is  impossible  to  read  it  without  seeing 
that  there  is  something  here  different  from  all  other 
131 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  x.  history,  and  that  the  national  pride  and  separation 
which  we  see  everywhere  else  has  been  entirely 
subjugated  by  the  religious  idea,  that  all  the 
different  tribes  of  the  earth  are  related  to  one 
another  by  their  common  descent  from  Shem,  Ham, 
and  Japheth.'  There  is  also  a  practical  lesson  for 
ourselves.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  'foreign' 
missionary  work.  'All  souls  are  Mine,'  and  no 
one  can  say  where  home  missions  end  and  foreign 
missions  begin.  Here,  then,  is  our  great  charter 
of  world-wide  evangelisation.  'Go  ye,  and  teach 
all  nations  '  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  i  Before  Him  shall 
be  gathered  all  nations'  (Matt.  xxv.  32).  'All 
nations'  (Rev.  vii.  9). 

2.  All  Nations  have  one  need. — The  thought  of 
sin  is  clearly  implied  throughout  this  chapter,  as 
indeed  throughout  the  book.  Common  trouble 
and  disease  rest  upon  all.  '  There  is  no  difference, 
for  all  have  sinned.'  Amid  every  variety  of  race, 
circumstance,  place,  and  temperament,  this  one 
great  fact  of  sin,  deep-seated,  ineradicable  by 
human  means,  is  experienced  by  all.  It  is  this 
thought  that  gives  point  to  the  proclamation  of 
the  Gospel  everywhere,  that  it  meets  one  and  the 
same  great  need. 

3.  All  Nations  have  one  way  of  salvation. — 
God's  method  of  redemption,  while  working 
through  Shem,  is  intended  to  include  in  its 
beneficent  scope  the  descendants  of  Ham  and 
Japheth  as  well.  The  Jewish  Messiah  is  the 
world's  Saviour,  and  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
is    intended    to    come    on    the    Gentiles    through 

132 


A  Wide  Outlook 

Jesus  Christ  (Gal.   iii.    7-14).      All  workers  for  Gen. 
missions  will  find  not  a  little  of  their  warrant 
and  inspiration  as  they  ponder  this  chapter   in 
the  light  of  the  subsequent  teaching  of  the  Word 
of  God. 


133 


XIII 
THE  TOWER  OF  BABEL 

Gen.  xi.  1-9 


And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language,  and  of  one  speech. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  journeyed  from  the  east,  that  they 
found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar  ;  and  they  dwelt  there. 

And  they  said  one  to  another,  Go  to,  let  us  make  brick,  and 
burn  them  throughly.  And  they  had  brick  for  stone,  and  slime 
had  they  for  mortar. 

And  they  said,  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city,  and  a  tower  whose 
top  may  reach  unto  heaven  ;  and  let  us  make  us  a  name,  lest  we 
be  scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth. 

And  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower,  which 
the  children  of  men  builded. 

And  the  Lord  said,  Behold,  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have 
all  one  language  ;  and  this  they  begin  to  do  :  and  now  nothing 
will  be  restrained  from  them,  which  they  have  imagined  to  do. 

Go  to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language,  that 
they  may  not  understand  one  another's  speech. 

So  the  Lord  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upon  the  face  of 
all  the  earth  :  and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city. 

Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel ;  because  the  Lord  did 
there  confound  the  language  of  all  the  earth  :  and  from  thence 
did  the  Lord  scatter  them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth. 

Gen.  xi.      FT^HE  events  of  this  section  apparently  happened 
1-9.  -■-    earlier  than  some  of  those  recorded  in  chapter 

x.,  for  it  is  probable  that  this  gives  us  the 
detailed  account  of  that  division  of  the  earth 
which  happened  in  the  days  of  Peleg  (chap.  x. 
25).  Dispersion  may  have  been  divinely  intended, 
134 


The  Tower  of  Babel 

and  notified  to  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  this  episode  Gen.  xi. 
of  Babel  may  have  been  the  human  response  of  I-9» 
unwillingness  to  follow  the  divine  command.  It 
should  be  observed  that  there  is  no  trace  of 
Babylonian  origin  in  this  story,  and  no  indica- 
tions of  its  being  based  upon  Babylonian  myth, 
the  mythical  element  being  entirely  absent 

I.  Human  Life  (vers.  1-3). — Mankind  is  de- 1.  Human 
scribed  as  possessing  at  the  time  oneness  of  *-*** (Ter*- 
language,  whatever  that  language  was.  There 
was  also  a  natural  nomadic  element,  for  they 
were  journeying  from  place  to  place.  The  con- 
ditions of  agricultural  life  would  doubtless  neces- 
sitate a  great  deal  of  movement  In  their 
journeyings  they  at  last  arrived  at  the  land  of 
Shinar,  the  plain  in  which  Babylon  was  after- 
wards situated  (chap.  x.  10).  The  fertility  of 
this  plain  would  be  of  special  value,  and  we  are 
not  surprised  to  read  that  '  they  dwelt  there.' 

They  soon  conceived  the  plan  of  a  prolonged 
stay  and  definite  association,  for  they  proposed 
to  one  another  to  make  brick  and  build  a  city 
and  a  tower.  The  alluvial  soil  of  the  plain  would 
give  them  facilities  for  clay  and  brickmaking, 
thereby  providing  materials  for  building.  This 
was  quite  natural,  because  of  the  absence  of  stone 
in  that  region. 

The  primary  motive  in  building  the  city,  apart 
from  the  story  of  the  tower,  may  well  have  been 
the  innocent  desire  to  remain  associated,  and  to 
be  protected  by  means  of  the  city.  At  any  rate, 
unit—  there  had  been  a  Divine  revelation,  it  is 
136 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xL      difficult  at  this  stage  to  charge  them   with  any 

1~9'  breach  of  a  known  law  of  God. 

II.  Human        II.   Human   Sin  (ver.   4). — Before    long    their 

Sin  (ver.  4).  0Djectg  (if  innocent)  degenerated  into  evil.  To  have 
a  rendezvous  might  not  in  itself  have  been  wrong, 
though  there  may  have  been  associated  with  this 
desire  a  wish  to  remain  together  which  possibly 
conflicted  with  the  purposes  of  God  for  mankind 
at  that  stage.  Whether  this  was  so  or  not,  the 
desire  for  a  tower  '  whose  top  might  reach  to 
heaven'  seems  to  have  been  prompted  by  some- 
thing like  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  It  is  thought 
by  some  authorities  that  a  religious  question  was 
involved  in  this  tower,  and  that  it  was  intended 
for  an  idolatrous  temple.  At  any  rate  it  is  cer- 
tainly true  that  Babylon  afterwards  became  one 
of  the  worst  and  most  terrible  strongholds  of 
idolatry  and  false  religion. 

One  thing,  however,  is  perfectly  clear — they 
were  filled  with  a  godless  ambition.  'Let  us 
make  us  a  name,  lest  we  be  scattered  abroad.' 
In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  Hebrew  word  for 
'name'  is  ' shem/  it  is  not  altogether  impossible 
that  the  suggestion  'to  make  a  shem'  had  in  it 
some  covert  sneer  against  the  family  of  Shem, 
which  had  been  assured  of  the  Divine  presence 
and  blessing  (chap.  ix.  26) ;  and  the  fear  lest  they 
should  be  scattered  abroad  is  fairly  chargeable 
with  distrust  in  God,  Whose  purpose  it  was  that 
they  should  be  dispersed  and  people  the  whole 
earth.  He  Who  commanded  them  to  scatter 
abroad  would  not  leave  them  unsafe  and  un- 
136 


The  Tower  of  Babel 

protected.      Altogether,    this   is   a    revelation    of  Gen.  xi. 
human  sin  in  the  form  of  rebellion  against  God,  I-9« 
and  it  has  not  been  wrongly  described  as  the  first 
organisation    of    the   scheme   of   godlessness   and 
irreligion. 

III.  Divine  Consideration  (vers.  5,  6). — The  de-  III.  Divine 
scription  of  God's  attitude  here  recorded  is  striking  in  Considera- 
te simplicity.  *  The  Lord  came  down  to  see.'  Man  (vers.  5,  6). 
had  just  attempted  to  go  up  in  his  sin.     God  now 

comes  down  in  judgment.  Again  we  have  what  has 
been  already  seen  several  times  in  these  early  chapters, 
the  revelation  of  the  Divine  scrutiny  and  examina- 
tion, showing  that  God  is  intent  upon  His  people's 
ways  and  cannot  be  indifferent  to  their  attitude 
to  Him.  The  result  of  this  scrutiny  is  that  God 
anticipates  what  the  people  will  do,  and  He 
decides  that  nothing  will  restrain  them  from  that 
which  they  have  purposed  to  effect.  The  faet  of 
their  oneness  of  language  would  give  them  this 
remarkable  power  of  united  effort  on  a  large 
scale.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  face  the 
problem  and  deal  with  it  in  the  best  possible 
way. 

IV.  Divine  Action  (vers.  7,  9). — The  method  em-  IV.  Divine 
ployed  was  that  of  the  confusion  of  their  language,  f^£°a7  Q) 
and  their  subsequent  dispersion.     We  are  told  that 

they  left  off  to  build  the  city,  and  it  is  not  known 
whether  or  not  they  finished  the  tower.  Into  the 
question  of  the  identity  of  the  tower  ruins  found 
on  the  site  of  Babylon  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter 
here. 

Dr  Dale  thinks  that  dissension  among  the  work- 
K  137 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.      men  was  the  first  step  leading  to  dispersion,  and 
lm9-  that  the  confusion  of  language  came  as  the  necessary 

consequence  of  this  dispersion,  the  language  being 
modified  by  separation  from  one  another.  It  is  worth 
noticing  that  history  and  archaeology  bear  clear  testi- 
mony to  the  fact  of  confusion  of  languages.  Bunsen 
(quoted  in  Lange's  Commentary)  says : — '  Com- 
parative philology  would  have  been  compelled  to 
set  forth  as  a  postulate  the  supposition  of  some 
such  division  of  languages  in  Asia,  especially 
on  the  ground  of  the  relation  of  the  Egyptian 
language  to  the  Shemitic,  even  if  the  Bible 
had  not  assured  us  of  the  truth  of  this  great 
historical  event.  It  is  truly  wonderful,  it  is  a 
matter  of  astonishment,  that  something  so  purely 
historical,  something  so  conformable  to  reason,  is 
here  related  to  us  out  of  the  oldest  primeval 
period,  and  which  now,  for  the  first  time, 
through  the  new  science  of  philology,  has  become 
capable  of  being  historically  and  philosophically 
explained.' 

The  memorial  of  their  confusion  remained  in 
the  city  that  they  had  built,  and  Babel  from  this 
time  forward  occupies  a  definite,  not  to  say  promi- 
nent part,  in  the  record  contained  in  the  Scriptures. 
Babylon  is  never  long  out  of  sight,  until  at  length 
it  finds  its  complete  and  final  overthrow  in  the 
Apocalypse. 

Suggestions       1.    The  danger   and    disaster    of   life   without 
Meditation.    ®°d- — ^  l9>  vei7  striking,  that  in  connection  with 
Cain  we  have  the  first  elements  of  human  civilisa- 
138 


The  Tower  of  Babel 

tion,  and  here  again  we  have  the  building  of  a  Gen.  xL 
city  connected  with  those  who  were  evidently  *"9* 
indifferent  to  God.  At  first  it  was  not  so  much 
iniquity  as  simple  indifference.  God  was  not  in 
their  life,  but  from  indifference  soon  came  rebellion, 
as  is  always  the  case.  Whenever  a  religious  sys- 
tem glorifies  humanity  and  makes  man  everything, 
it  is  not  long  before  it  minimises  God  and  makes 
Him  nothing.  Culture,  civilisation,  intellect,  clever- 
ness, progress,  are  all  among  the  natural  gifts  of 
God  to  human  life,  and  there  is  no  reason  what- 
ever why  they  should  not  all  be  consecrated  to 
the  Divine  service.  When  they  are  thus  yielded 
to  Him  they  become  doubly  powerful,  and  are 
the  means  of  blessing  on  every  hand.  When, 
however,  they  are  not  handed  over  to  God  Who 
gives  them,  but  are  kept  in  man's  own  power 
and  authority,  they  lead  men  farther  and  farther 
from  God,  and  are  the  means  of  nothing  but  trouble 
on  every  hand. 

2.  The  danger  and  disaster  of  all  false  unity. 
—  These  people  attempted  to  keep  themselves 
together  by  means  of  the  outward  and  visible  tie 
of  a  common  dwelling-place  and  rallying-point 
They  had  nothing  in  common  except  the  city  which 
they  built  This,  however,  proved  fatal,  and 
always  will  prove  fatal  to  real  unity.  Unity 
must  come  from  within.  When  outward  unity  is 
attempted  the  result  will  be,  as  in  this  case, 
separation,  dispersion,  confusion.  What  a  lesson 
we  have  here  in  connection  with  all  attempts 
at  church  unity.  How  often  churches  have 
139 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.      attempted  to  keep  Christians  together  by  means 
l"9'  of  outward  elements  only  or  mainly.     Sometimes 

it  has  been  unanimity  of  opinion,  and  this  has 
proved  impossible.  Sometimes  it  has  been  uni- 
formity of  observance  and  ceremonial,  but  this 
has  proved  equally  futile.  Sometimes  it  has  been 
a  unity  of  organisation,  but  this  has  never  once 
succeeded.  Unity  must  be  a  unity  of  life,  of  love, 
of  interest,  of  intention,  of  spirit,  of  service,  and 
this  unity  can  be  obtained  and  maintained  amidst 
a  great  variety  of  organisation,  of  opinion,  of  cere- 
monial. Our  Lord  speaks  of  the  Jewish  fold,  and 
then  of  the  unity  of  a  flock  including  other  than 
Jews  (John  x.  16,  R.V.),  the  latter  being  far  the 
more  important,  for  it  is  possible  to  have  one 
flock  consisting  of  very  different  kinds  of  sheep 
and  in  many  folds,  yet  all  belonging  to  the  one 
Master. 

3.  The  blessedness  of  true  unity.  —  There  are 
three  pictures  in  God's  Word  which  ought  always 
to  be  considered  together.  The  confusion  of 
tongues  in  Genesis  xi. ;  the  real  unity  amid  diver- 
sities of  tongues  as  the  result  of  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  in  Acts  ii.  ; 
and  the  magnificent  picture  of  'all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  tongues '  in  Revelation  vii.  as  they 
stand  before  the  throne.  With  the  Babel  of  earth 
we  set  in  contrast  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above.  To 
the  city  of  man  we  oppose  the  city  of  God.  True 
unity  is  always  primarily  the  result  of  an  organism, 
and  only  secondarily  of  an  organisation.  It  is 
based  upon  God  and  upon  spiritual  life  in  Him. 
140 


The  Tower  of  Babel 

1  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye  Gen.  xi. 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling,  one  Lord,  I"9* 
one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of 
all,  Who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  you 
all '  (Eph.  iv.  4-6). 


141 


XIV 
THE  CALL  OF  ABRAHAM 

Gen.  xi.  10 — xii.  9. 


These  are  the  generations  of  Shem :  Shem  was  an  hundred 
years  old,  and  begat  Arphaxad  two  years  after  the  flood. 

And  Shem  lived,  after  he  begat  Arphaxad,  five  hundred  years, 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Arphaxad  lived  live  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Salah. 

And  Arphaxad  lived,  after  he  begat  Salah,  four  hundred  and 
three  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Eber. 

And  Salah  lived,  after  he  begat  Eber,  four  hundred  and  three 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Peleg. 

And  Eber  lived,  after  he  begat  Peleg,  four  hundred  and  thirty 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Peleg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Reu. 

And  Peleg  lived  after  he  begat  Reu,  two  hundred  and  nine 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Serug. 

And  Reu  lived,  after  he  begat  Serug  two  hundred  and  seven 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Nahor. 

And  Serug  lived,  after  he  begat  Nahor,  two  hundred  years, 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and  begat  Terah. 

And  Nahor  lived,  after  he  begat  Terah,  an  hundred  and 
nineteen  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 

And  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Abram,  Nahor,  and 
Haran. 

Now  these  are  the  generations  of  Terah  :  Terah  begat  Abram, 
Nahor,  and  Haran  ;  and  Haran  begat  Lot, 

And  Haran  died  before  his  father  Terah  in  the  land  of  his 
nativity,  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees. 

And  Abram  and  Nahor  took  them  wives  :  the  name  of  Abram's 
wife  was  Sarai ;  and  the  name  of  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah,  the 
daughter  of  Haran,  the  father  of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of  Iscah. 

142 


The  Call  of  Abraham 

But  Sarai  was  barren  ;  she  had  no  child. 

And  Terah  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Haran,  his 
son's  son,  and  Sarai  his  daughter-in-law,  his  son  Abram 's  wife  ; 
and  went  forth  with  them  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  go  into 
the  land  of  Canaan  ;  and  they  came  unto  Haran,  and  dwelt  there. 

And  the  days  of  Terah  were  two  hundred  and  five  years  :  and 
Terah  died  in  Haran. 

Now  the  Lord  had  said  unto  Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy 
country,  and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  house, 
unto  a  land  that  I  will  show  thee. 

And  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  I  will  bless  thee, 
and  make  thy  name  great ;  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing : 

And  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that 
curseth  thee :  and  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. 

So  Abram  departed,  as  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  him  ;  and 
Lot  went  with  nira  :  and  Abram  was  seventy  and  five  years  old 
when  he  departed  out  of  Haran. 

And  Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot  his  brother's  son, 
and  all  their  substance  that  they  had  gathered,  and  the  souls 
that  they  had  gotten  in  Haran  ;  and  they  went  forth  to  go  into 
the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they 
came. 

And  Abram  passed  through  the  land  unto  the  place  of  Sichem, 
unto  the  plain  of  Moreh.  And  the  Canaanite  was  then  in  the 
land. 

And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Abram,  and  said,  Unto  thy  seed 
will  I  give  this  land :  and  there  builded  he  an  altar  unto  the 
Lord,  who  appeared  unto  him. 

And  he  removed  from  thence  unto  a  mountain  on  the  east 
of  Beth-el,  and  pitched  his  tent,  having  Beth-el  on  the  west, 
and  Hai  on  the  cast:  and  there  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the 
Lord,*  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

And  Abram  journeyed,  going  on  still  towards  the  south. 

WITH  this  section  the  Book  of  Genesis  takes  Gen.  xi.  10 
a  new  and  very  distinct  departure.     From  — xii.  9. 
the  consideration  of  the  entire  human  race  (chaps.  ^New 
x.    and   xi.)    our    attention    is    directed    to    one      P*™""*- 
family    and    one    man    as    the    chosen    channel 
of   the  Divine    purpose    of    redemption    for    the 
race.      The    earlier    chapters    are   but  a    preface, 
though   a  necessary   explanatory  preface,   to    the 
remainder      They  cover  at    least    two  thousand 
143 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.  10  years,  and  yet  we  seem  to  be,  as  it  were,  hurried 
— xii.  9.  along,  until  we  reach  the  fulness  of  the  narrative 
about  Abraham  and  his  seed.  The  first  eleven 
chapters  are  the  foundation  of  which  the  other 
thirty-nine  are  the  superstructure.  They  trace  back 
the  Divine  redemption  until  its  cause  is  found  in 
the  sin  of  the  human  race,  and  its  scope  is  shown 
to  embrace  all  mankind.  This  done,  we  are  now 
free  to  consider  the  precise  method  whereby  God 
accomplished  His  purpose,  and  redeemed  mankind 
through  the  instrumentality  of  one  man,  his  family, 
and  his  nation.  It  is  the  importance  of  Abraham 
in  this  connection  that  gives  its  meaning  and 
importance  to  chapter  xii.  of  this  book.  As  the 
root  to  the  stem  so  are  chapters  i.-xl  to  xii.-l.,  and 
as  the  stem  to  the  tree  so  is  Genesis  to  the  rest 
of  the  Bible.  It  is  the  foundation,  the  explana- 
tion, the  preface,  the  key  to  the  rest  of  the  Word 
of  God. 
Abraham:  There  is  only  one  man  of  those  whose  lives  are 
JfGodriend  recorded  in  the  01d  Testament  who  has  the  high 
privilege  of  being  called  the  '  friend  of  God.' 
Isa.  xii.  8,  'Abraham,  My  friend';  2  Chron.  xx. 
7, 'Abraham,  Thy  friend';  (c/.  Jas.  ii.  23).  To 
this  day  Abraham  is  known  among  the  Arabs  as 
El  Khalil  (Friend  of  God).  The  study  of  his  life 
is  one  of  the  deepest  interest  on  two  grounds: 
(1)  Personal :  he  is  one  of  the  noblest  and  most 
heroic  figures  in  ancient  history ;  (2)  Spiritual :  he 
was  God's  chosen  instrument  for  the  realisation  of 
the  divine  purposes  of  redemption. 

The  importance  of  Abraham  can  readily  be  seen 
144 


The  Call  of  Abraham 

by  the  space  given  to  him  in  the  record,  nearly  Gen.  xi.  10 
fourteen  chapters  out  of  fifty  being  devoted  to  him.  — xu»  9* 
It  may  be  well  to  summarise  the  record  of  his  life 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  general  view  of  its 
history. 

(a)  Chapters   xii.-xiv.,  the   Call   given  and  ac- 
cepted. 

(b)  Chapters  xv.,  xvi.,  the  Covenant  made  and 
received. 

(c)  Chapters  xvil-xxi.,  the  Confirmation  of  the 
Covenant. 

(d)  Chapter  xxii.,  the  Crowning  Event 

(e)  Chapters  xxiii.-xxv.  10,  the  Closing  Years. 
We  now  commence  by  studying  the  circumstances 

of  his  early  days  and  the  Divine  call  as  recorded  at 
the  head  of  this  chapter. 

I.  Abraham  s  Early  Life. — Abraham  lived  atUr  of  I.  Abraham*! 
the  Chaldees,  usually  identified  with  Mugheir,  near  Ear*y  Lafe- 
the  Persian  Gulf.  The  coast-line,  however,  was  at 
that  time  about  one  hundred  and  forty  miles  north 
of  the  present  line.  He  comes  of  the  line  of  Sheni. 
His  father  was  Terah  (chap.  xi.  24),  and  he  had 
two  brothers  (chap.  xi.  26).  His  wife  was  Sarai 
(chap.  xL  29),  and  she  was  childless  (chap.  xi.  30). 
Most  probably  Abraham  was  the  youngest,  not  the 
eldest  son,  the  names  not  being  given  in  the  order 
of  their  birth,  but  in  the  order  of  importance,  since 
Abraham  was  God's  chosen  instrument  Similar 
circumstances  are  found  in  Gen.  v.  32  with  reference 
to  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  and  in  Gen.  x.  2, 
where  Japheth  comes  first  in  the  order  of  genealogy 
(c/  1  Chron.  L  5,  8,  17).  The  aualogy  of  God's 
145 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.  10  choice  of  the  younger  of  the  sons  of  Adam,  Isaac, 
— xn.  9.       Joseph,  Jesse,  suggests  the  probability  that  Abraham 
was  Terah's  youngest  son. 

Abraham  evidently  belonged  to  a  family  of 
shepherds  accustomed  to  move  about  as  pasture 
was  needed. 

Either  Terah  or  his  ancestors  were  idolaters 
(Joshua  xxiv.  2,  15).  Four  hundred  years  had 
elapsed  since  the  Flood,  and  there  had  thus  been 
time  for  the  degeneration  of  the  sons  of  Shem. 
Possibly  Abraham  himself  may  have  been  an 
idolater  (cf.  Isa.  li.  1,  2). 
II.  The  H.  The  Divine  Call. — A  third  start  is  made  with 

Divine  Call,  humanity.  Adam  had  failed,  Noah's  descendants 
had  failed,  and  now  another  attempt  was  to  be 
made.  The  former  attempts  were  made  with  the 
race,  but  this  one  was  made  by  means  of  an 
individual  as  the  founder  of  a  nation  which  should 
in  turn  bless  the  race.  Abraham,  as  the  founder 
of  the  Jewish  nation,  was  intended  by  God  as  (a) 
a  witness  to  him  to  the  rest  of  mankind  (Isa.  xliv. 
8),  (b)  a  depository  of  God's  revelation  (Rom.  iii.  2), 
(c)  a  preparation  for  the  Messiah  and  Saviour  (Isa. 
liii.),  (d)  a  channel  of  blessing  to  the  world  (Rom. 
xv.  8-12). 

The  first  call  came  at  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  (Acts 
vii.  2-4).  'The  God  of  Glory'  called  him.  This 
unique  title  of  God  is  very  noteworthy.  It  was 
doubtless  due  to  this  call  that  Terah  left  Ur  (Gen. 
xi.  31).  Then  came  a  second  call  to  Haran  after 
Terah's  death  (Gen.  xii.  1).  Some  authorities 
consider  Gen.  xii.  1  to  refer  to  the  first  call  at  Ur, 
146 


The  Call  of  Abraham 

and  this  is  why  the  Authorised  Version  and  the  Gen.  xi.  io 
Revised  Version  render  the  Hebrew  words  '  the     X1L  9> 
Lord  had  said.'    As,  however,  there  is  no  pluperfect 
tense  in  the  original,  it  seems  better  to  regard  Gen. 
xii.  1  as  referring  to  the  second  call,  especially  in 
the  light  of  Acts  vii.  2-4. 

The  Lord  said,  *  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and 
from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  house.' 
These  were  very  searching  and  pressing  demands 
upon  one  who  was  the  youngest  son.  Yet  God's 
call  to  separation  was  a  necessary  condition  of 
blessing.  Separation  was  the  keynote  of  Abraham's 
life  from  first  to  last,  and  in  that  separation  to  the 
will  of  God  he  found  all  his  peace  and  blessing. 

God  never  places  burdens  on  His  people's 
shoulders  without  giving  them  power  to  respond. 
1  God's  biddings  are  His  enablings.'  He  encouraged 
Abraham  with  a  threefold  promise  :  (a)  A  land 
(xii.  1),  (b)  a  seed  (xii.  2),  (c)  a  world-wide  blessing 
(xii.  3). 

III.    The  Human  Response. — Nothing  is  more  III.  The 
striking  than   the   immediate    response   made    by  R^Sonae 
Abraham.     At  the  outset  he  manifests  that  faith 
which  characterised  him  almost  the  whole  of  his 
life.     The  following  aspects  of  his  faith  are  worthy 
of  consideration : — 

The  Confidence  of  Faith  (ver.  4). — ■  So  Abraham 
went,  as  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  him.'  He  took 
God  at  His  word  without  hesitation  and  without 
questioning. 

The  Obedience  of  Faith  (vers.  4-6).— In  leaving 
Ur  and  staying  at  Haran  his  obedience  was  only 
147 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.  10  partial,  whatever  may  have  been  the  precise  cause 
xn.  9.  an(j  explanation.  Perhaps  Terah  lacked  spiritual 
sympathy  with  Abraham,  or  else  age  and  infirmity 
may  have  prevented  him  going  further  than  Haran. 
In  any  case,  Abraham  did  not  obey  fully  until  after 
his  father's  death.  Then  came  entire  and  prompt 
obedience  in  his  departure  from  Haran  with  all 
that  he  possessed.  It  is  evident  that  the  stay  in 
Haran  was  a  protracted  one  (ver.  5).  The  '  souls ' 
refer  to  the  persons  of  the  slaves  and  other 
dependents. 

The  Influence  of  Faith  (ver.  5). — Abraham's  re- 
sponse to  the  Divine  call  evidently  led  Lot  to  join 
his  uncle  and  journey  to  Canaan.  There  was  no 
compulsion  on  Lot ;  he  might  have  stayed  where  he 
was.  The  influence  of  Abraham's  faith  constrained 
him  to  go.  True  faith  in  God  often  inspires  others 
and  leads  them  to  blessing. 

The  Confession  of  Faith  (vers.  6,  7). — Abraham 
came  to  Sicheni  (Sychar,  John  iv.),  the  later 
Shechem.  The  'oak'  may  be  the  'terebinth,'  or 
turpentine  tree,  whose  leaf  is  very  similar  to  that  of 
the  oak.  '  Moreh '  may  be  the  name  of  the  owner 
of  the  terebinth,  or,  according  to  some,  it  means  a 
soothsayer,  implying  that  under  this  tree  the  art  of 
divination  was  practised  among  the  Canaanites. 
In  verse  7  we  have  the  first  visible  appearance  of 
God  to  man.  Hitherto  only  the  Divine  voice  had 
been  heard.  Now  there  was  a  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  presence,  probably  in  the  form  of  the 
Angel  of  the  Covenant  (chap,  xviii.  22;  Josh.  v.  13; 
Judges  xiii.  3).  To  this  revelation  of  God  Abraham 
148 


The  Call  of  Abraham 

at  once  responded  by  building  an  altar.     This  was  Gen.  xi.  10 
his  acceptance  and  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  — *&  9« 
revelation,  the  revelation  being  thus  followed  by 
his  personal  response.     At  the  same  time  the  altar 
was  a  testimony  to  the  Canaanites  who  were  then 
in  the  land. 

The  Endurance  of  Faith  (vers.  8,  9).— Notwith- 
standing the  promises  of  God,  Abraham  had  to 
wait  He  had  no  seed,  though  one  had  been 
promised ;  he  had  no  abiding  place,  pitching  his 
tent,  not  building  a  home ;  and  the  Canaanites  in 
the  land  prevented  him  from  possessing  an  inch  of 
the  country'.  All  this  was  a  renewed  call  to 
continued  faith. 


In  this  opening  episode  of  Abraham's  life  we  Suggestions 

for 
Meditation. 


have  clearly  brought  before  us  some  of  the  most 


frequent  experiences  of  the  believer's  early  days. 

1.  The  Divine  Call. — To  us  also  comes  the  call 
for  absolute  trust,  the  faith  that  takes  God  simply 
at  His  word,  feeling  assured  that  it  cannot 
fail.  Like  Abraham,  we  are  to  trust  in  the  dark 
(Heb.  xi.  8). 

2.  The  Divine  Claim. — Separation  is  still  the 
believer's  duty.  Sometimes  it  involves  separation 
from  dearest  kindred,  sometimes  from  congenial 
surroundings,  and  always  from  sin  and  self-will 
Separation  thus  tests  the  reality  of  our  life,  and  at 
the  same  time  strengthens  our  spiritual  fibres.  'The 
nearer  to  heaven  the  steeper  the  mountains.' 

3.  The  Divine  Consecration.  —  Abraham  re- 
sponded  by  building  an  altar  and   pitching   his 

149 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xi.  io  tent  in  place  after  place.      By  the  altar  he  con- 

— xii.  9.       fessed   himself  a  worshipper   and  by   the  tent   a 

stranger  and  a  pilgrim.     Thus  was  his  life  wholly 

surrendered  to  his  God.     The  altar  and  the  tent 

together  sum  up  the  believer's  life. 

4.  The  Divine  Cheer.  —  How  beautifully  God 
meets  those  who  respond  wholly  to  Him.  They 
are  assured  of  His  presence  (xii.  7),  of  His  promises 
(xii.  2,  3),  of  His  power,  and  of  His  peace.  No  life 
has  ever  had  any  demand  made  upon  it  without 
receiving  the  Divine  cheer  and  encouragement 
which  enables  the  soul  to  abide  in  the  Lord  and 
go  forward  with  joy  and  courage. 


150 


XV 
THE  TESTING 

Gen.  xii.  10 — xiii.  4. 


And  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land  :  and  Abram  went  down 
into  Egypt  to  .sojourn  there  ;  for  the  famine  was  grievous  in  the 
land. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  waa  come  near  to  enter  into 
Egypt,  that  he  said  unto  Sarai  hia  wife,  Behold  now,  I  know  that 
thou  art  a  fair  woman  to  look  upon  : 

Therefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  the  Egyptians  shall  see 
thee,  that  they  shall  say,  This  is  hia  wife:  and  they  will  kill 
me,  but  they  will  save  thee  alive. 

8ay,  I  pray  thee,  thou  art  my  sister :  that  it  may  be  well  with 
me  for  thy  sake  ;  and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of  thee. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  Abram  was  come  into  Egypt, 
the  Egyptians  beheld  the  woman,  that  she  was  very  fair. 

The  princes  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  her,  and  commended  her 
before  Pharaoh :  and  the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's 
house. 

And  he  entreated  Abram  well  for  her  sake  :  and  he  had  sheep, 
and  oxen,  and  he-asses,  and  men-servants,  and  maid-servants, 
and  she-asses,  and  camels. 

And  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  house  with  great 
plagues  because  of  Sarai,  Abram's  wife. 

And  Pharaoh  called  Abram,  and  said,  What  is  this  that  thou 
hast  done  unto  me  T  why  didst  thou  not  tell  me  that  she  was  thy 
wife? 

Why  saidst  thou,  She  is  my  sister  f  so  I  might  have  taken  her 
to  me  to  wife :  now  therefore  behold  thy  wife,  take  her,  and  go 
thy  way. 

And  Pharaoh  commanded  his  men  concerning  him :  and  they 
sent  him  away,  and  his  wife,  and  all  that  he  had. 

And  Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  he,  and  hia  wife,  and  all 
that  he  had,  and  Lot  with  him,  into  the  south. 

And  Abram  was  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver,  and  in  gold. 

And  he  went  on  hia  journeys  from  the  south  even  to  Beth-el, 

161 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

unto  the  place  where  his  tent  had  been  at  the  beginning,  between 
Beth-el  and  Hai ; 

Unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  which  he  had  made  there  at  the 
first :  and  there  Abram  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord. 


Gen.  xii.  rTIHE  young  believer's  life  is  soon  tested,  especi- 
10— xiii.  4.  J-  ally  after  seasons  of  communion  (see  2  Chron. 
xxxii.  1,  and  xxxi.  20,  21,  R.V.).  It  was  so 
with  the  Apostle  Peter  (Matt.  xvi.  17-23),  and 
even  with  our  Lord  (Luke  iii.  22,  and  iv.  1).  We 
now  see  this  great  principle  in  the  life  of  Abraham. 

I.  The  I.  The  Special  Circumstances  (ver.  10). — One  of 
Special  Cir-  tne  freqUent  famines  arose.  As  there  was  no  arti- 
(ver.  10).        ficial  irrigation,  Palestine  necessarily  depended  on 

the  annual  rainfall  and  the  heavy  sea  mist  that  came 
up  from  the  Mediterranean  at  certain  times  of  the 
year  (the  "dew"  of  the  Old  Testament). 

This  was  a  very  real  test  to  Abraham.  Not- 
withstanding the  recent  revelation  of  God  with  all 
its  promises  (xii.  7),  there  was  actually  a  famine  in 
the  land  of  promise.  Doubtless  Abraham  remem- 
bered the  rich  alluvial  plains  of  Mesopotamia  and 
Syria.  Thus  he  was  soon  tested,  and  his  faithful- 
ness put  to  the  proof.  We  are  sometimes  apt  to 
identify  the  peace  and  calm  of  outward  circum- 
stances with  the  peace  arising  from  a  consciousness 
of  the  Divine  presence.  It  was  to  make  this 
distinction  clear  that  Abraham  was  tested. 

II.  The  II.  The  Long  Journey  (ver.  10). — This  journey 
Long  jour-    j8  tne    fjrat  point  of  contact  between   Israel   as 

ney  (ver.  10).  _    . r      .  ,      ,  .    _,  TTr  „ 

represented   in   Abraham   and   Lgypt.      We   well 

know  the  baneful  influence  exercised  in  later  ages. 

The   famine   was,   of  course,   the    sole    cause   of 

152 


The  Testing 

Abraham's  journey,  and  in  itself  the  most  obvious  Gen.  xiL 
and  natural  thing  for  him  to  do.  10— xiii.  4. 

It  was  the  ' natural'  thing  for  him  to  do;  but 
then  Abraham's  position  was  not  merely  natural, 
for  he  had  supernatural  relationships.  The  right 
way  is  not  always  the  easiest,  and  the  easiest  is  not 
always  the  right  way.  Difficulties  do  not  neces- 
sarily indicate  that  we  are  out  of  the  pathway  of 
God's  will.  It  would  certainly  seem  that  Abraham 
was  now  thinking  solely  of  the  land  and  its  famine, 
and  forgetting  God  and  His  promises. 

III.  The   Proposal    (vers.    11-13).  —  Abraham  III.  The 
suggested  that  Sarai  should  say  that  she  was  his  (ycrjj0^.^) 
sister  instead  of  his  wife.     This  was  a  '  half-truth ' 

(c/.  xx.  12).     Verbally  it  was  correct;  but  really  it 
was  a  lie. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  too,  that  the  proposal  was 
clearly  actuated  by  selfishness ;  there  was  no  regard 
for  Sarai,  but  only  for  his  own  safety.  How  strange 
this  is  !  He  had  journeyed  all  the  way  from  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  and  yet  could  not  trust  God  with  his 
wife  or  with  his  own  life.  How  small  great  people 
can  be !  How  weak  strong  men  can  be  !  How 
bad  good  people  can  be  I 

IV.  The  Result  (vers.  14-16).— What  Abraham  iv.  The 
anticipated  came  to  pass  ;  Sarai  was  taken  into  the  ^J1*,.  ,$» 
King's  harem.     Abraham's  very  precaution  led  to 
Pharaoh's  action. 

The  patriarch's  life  is  thus  saved,  and  gifts  are 

showered  upon  him,  doubtless  as  the  recognised 

dowry  on  the  marriage  of  his  sister  with  Pharaoh. 

Yet  what  must  have  been  his  thoughts  as  he  was 

L  153 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xii.     alone  in  his  tent !      He  had  gained  his  end,  but 

10— xiii.  4.  at  a  very  great  cost  to  Sarai  and  himself.     Thus 

Abraham  fell  at  the  point  where  he  was  supposed 

to  be  strongest — his  faith.     So  it  was  with  Moses, 

the  meek  man  (Num.  xx.  10). 

V.  The  V.  The  Divine  Displeasure  (ver.   17). — Serious 
Divine          illness  came  upon  Pharaoh  and  his  house,  showing 

Displeasure      ,,,,,,  ,.  .  to 

(ver.  17).        them  clearly  that  some  extraordinary  meaning  was 

in    it      God    could    not    allow    His   promises   to 

Abraham  to  be  frustrated  or  His  will  unfulfilled. 

It  was  therefore  necessary  to  save  Abraham  from 

himself  and  rescue  Sarai. 

VI.  The  VI.  The  Rebuke  (vers.  18-20). — We  can  picture 
Rebuke         Abraham's  surprise  at  Pharaoh's  expostulation.   The 

Egyptians,  with  all  their  sins,  seem  to  have  laid 
great  store  by  truth  and  abhorred  all  kinds  of  lying. 
The  King  thereupon  ordered  Abraham  to  take  her 
and  go  out  of  the  land,  Pharaoh's  servants  being 
charged  to  see  them  both  safely  out  of  Egypt 

VII.  The  VII.    The   Restoration   (vers.    1-4).  —  We    can 
Restoration    jmagine  Abraham's  feelings  as  the  caravan  slowly 

wended  its  way  out  of  Egypt,  and  as  he  came  back 
to  the  land  of  Canaan.  Note  the  phrase  '  at  the 
beginning '  (ver.  3),  and  '  unto  the  place  of  the  altar, 
which  he  had  made  there  at  the  first '  (ver.  4),  and 
*  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord'  (ver.  4).  We 
read  of  no  such  altar  or  prayer  in  Egypt.  Abraham 
seems  to  have  been  out  of  communion  there.  Now, 
however,  he  does  the  only  possible  thing  —  he 
returns  to  where  he  had  been  at  the  commence- 
ment ;  he  came  back  to  the  true  surrender  and 
simple  worship  of  his  earliest  days  in  Canaan. 
154 


The  Testing 

Whenever  we  backslide  there  is  nothing  else  to  Gen.  xii. 
do    but    to   come   back   by  the  old  gateway  of  xo—xiii.  4. 
genuine  repentance  and  simple  faith  (Ps.  xxiii.  3; 
1  John  i.  9). 

A  Believer  8  false  step. — Abraham  went  aside  Suggestions 
out  of  the  path  of  God's  will ;  he  was  occupied  Meditation, 
with  circumstances  instead  of  with  God.  He  only 
saw  the  famine,  not  the  Divine  faithfulness.  *  He 
that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool'  (Prov. 
xxviii.  26).  'A  crust  with  God  is  better  than  a 
feast  without  Him.' 

2.  A  Believers  definite  backsliding.  —  The 
possibilities  of  a  true  child  of  God  wandering 
into  sin  and  unfaithfulness  are  very  clear  from 
Scripture.  This  is  one  of  the  saddest  and  most 
mysterious  facts  of  spiritual  experience.  In 
Abraham's  case  it  manifested  itself  first  in  fear 
due  to  forgetfulne8s  of  God,  then  in  selfishness, 
and  lastly  in  hypocrisy  and  deceit.  There  is 
nothing  more  solemn  than  the  well-known  fact 
that  through  sin  a  believer  can  be  out  of  touch 
with  God  for  a  long  time. 

3.  A  Believers  sad  experience.  —  One  part  of 
this  was  the  knowledge  that  his  wrongdoing  had 
brought  ill  effects  on  others.  Both  Sarai  and 
Pharaoh's  house  suffered  through  Abraham's  sin. 
Another  element  in  his  bitter  cup  was  the  plain 
rebuke  from  the  heathen  Pharaoh.  We  have  truly 
touched  the  depths  of  spiritual  unfaithfulness  when 
a  believer  has  to  be  openly  rebuked  by  the 
ungodly. 

165 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xii.  4.  A  Belietw's  only  safeguard. — This  preser- 
10 — xiii.  4.  vative  is  twofold — trust  and  truth  every  moment. 
Abraham  was  taught  three  lessons  about  God 
in  relation  to  trust:  (1)  That  God  was  essential 
to  his  every  step,  and  that  nothing  can  be  done 
apart  from  Him  (John  xv.  5);  (2)  that  God  was 
able — notwithstanding  the  famine  God  could  have 
provided  for  Abraham  ;  (3)  that  God  was  faithful : 
He  had  not  forgotten  His  promises  to  His  servant 
(xii.  1-3).  Thus  Abraham  came  back  with  a 
deepened  idea  of  God  and  a  louder  call  for  simple, 
absolute,  continual  trust. 

He  was  also  taught  the  lesson  of  truth.  The 
child  of  God  is  to  be  straightforward  in  all  his 
attitude,  and  to  go  straight  forward  in  all  his 
actions.  The  end  does  not  justify  the  means, 
whatever  men  may  say.  Even  though  our  objects 
may  be  perfectly  right,  our  means  to  attain  those 
objects  must  be  without  blemish.  This  has  special 
application  to  methods  of  Church  work,  ideas  of 
social  status,  aspects  of  family  life,  and  objects  of 
personal  ambition.  Not  only  must  the  end  we 
seek  be  true,  the  means  we  use  must  also  be 
true. 


156 


XVI 
THE  SEPARATION 

Gen.  xiii.  5-18 


And  Lot  also,  which  went  with  Abram,  had  flocks,  and  herds, 
and  tents. 

And  the  land  was  not  able  to  bear  them,  that  they  might  dwell 
together :  for  their  substance  was  great,  so  that  they  could  not 
dwell  together. 

And  there  was  a  strife  between  the  herdmen  of  Abram 's  cattle, 
and  the  herdmen  of  Lot's  cattle.  And  the  Canaanite  and  the 
Perizzite  dwelt  then  in  the  land. 

And  Abram  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no  strife,  I  pray  thee, 
between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and  thy  herdmen  ; 
for  we  be  brethren. 

Is  not  the  whole  land  before  thee  ?  Separate  thyself,  I  pray 
thee,  from  me :  if  thou  wilt  take  the  left  hand,  then  I  will  go  to 
the  right;  or  if  thou  depart  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to 
the  left 

And  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the  plain  of  Jordan, 
that  it  toas  well  watered  every  where,  before  the  Lord  destroyed 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  even  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  like  the 
land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  comest  unto  Zoar. 

Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan  ;  and  Lot  journeyed 
east:  and  they  separated  themselves  the  one  from  the  other. 

Abram  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  Lot  dwelt  in  the  cities 
of  the  plain,  and  pitched  his  tent  toward  Sodom. 

But  the  men  of  Sodom  were  wicked,  and  sinners  before  the 
Lord  exceedingly. 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abram,  after  that  Lot  separated 
from  him,  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the  place 
where  thou  art  northward,  and  southward,  and  eastward,  and 
westward : 

For  all  the  land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to 
thy  seed  for  ever. 

And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth  :  so  that  if 

157 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

a  man  can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth,  thtn  shall  thy  seed  also 
be  numbered. 

Arise,  walk  through  the  land,  in  the  length  of  it,  and  in  the 
breadth  of  it :  for  I  will  give  it  unto  thee. 

Then  Abram  removed  his  tent,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain 
of  Mamre,  which  is  in  Hebron,  and  built  there  an  altar  unto  the 
Lord. 

Gen.  xiii.    f^  OD  teaches  His  children  new  lessons  at  every 
5-18.  ^-^~    step  of  life's  pathway.     We  are  now  to  gain 

a  deeper  insight  into  the  reality  of  Abraham's 
life,  as  well  as  a  fuller  revelation  of  God's  will 
concerning  him. 
I.  A  Serious  I.  A  Serious  Problem  (vers.  5,  6). — Abraham  and 
fvers16^)  ^ot  were  r*cn-  -^e  accessions  which  came  to  them 
in  Egypt  had  increased  their  flocks  and  herds.  This 
is  the  first  instance  of  riches  in  the  Bible  (ver.  2), 
and  we  also  have  here  the  interesting  problem  of 
wealth  connected  with  the  believer's  life.  What 
is  the  teaching  of  Scripture  about  wealth  as 
possessed  by  a  child  of  God  ?  A  careful  study  of 
the  entire  Bible  seems  to  show  that  there  is  no  sin 
in  being  wealthy  provided  the  riches  have  been 
honourably  obtained,  are  regarded  as  belonging  to 
God,  and  are  being  constantly  used  as  in  the  sight 
of  God.  At  the  same  time,  wealth  very  seriously 
increases  the  responsibility  of  a  believer,  and  his 
riches  will  soon  become  a  sin  if  they  are  not  used 
properly  and  with  a  sense  of  stewardship,  not  of 
ownership.  Another  experience  of  human  life  is 
seen  in  this  story — the  danger  of  quarrels  between 
relatives  on  account  of  wealth.  How  often  this 
deplorable  fact  has  been  experienced  since 
Abraham's  day ! 
The  possession  of  such  flocks  and  herds  prevented 
168 


The  Separation 

the  uncle  and  nephew  from  continuing  to  dwell  Gen*  xiii. 
together.      The     need    of    increasing    pasturage,  S"1^. 
together  with  the  need  of  water,  must  have  been 
very  acute,  and  the  problem  was  intensified  by  the 
presence   of  the   Canaanites  with   their   pastoral 
requirements. 

II.  A  Deplorable  Strife  (ver.  7). — The  quarrel  II.  A  Depior- 
originated  with  the  servants,  and  was  limited  tojjj  |F"e 
them.      Doubtless  each  herd  man  endeavoured  to 

gain  the  best  locality  for  his  own  flocks. 

Very  significantly  we  read  that  '  The  Canaanite 
and  Perizzite  dwelled  then  in  the  land.'  This 
statement  suggests  not  only  the  circumstance  that 
accentuated  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  pasturage, 
but  also  the  fact  that  the  heathen  around  must 
have  seen  and  overheard  this  quarrel  between 
the  servants  of  God's  children.  Herein  lay  one 
of  the  saddest  elements  of  the  matter. 

III.  A  Generous  Proposal  (vers.  8,  9). — Abraham  III.  A 
takes  the  initiative,  and  begs  that  there  shall  be  no  pJJJJJ? 
strife.     The  quarrel  might  easily  rise  above  the  (ver*  8,  9). 
servants  to  the  masters,  and  Abraham  speaks  in  time 

to  prevent  this,  urging  as  the  great  reason,  'We 
are  brethren.'  Notice  his  large-hearted  suggestion. 
Although  he  is  older  than  Lot  and  chief  of  the 
tribe  or  clan,  and  although  the  land  had  been 
promised  by  God  to  him,  he  allows  his  nephew 
the  first  choice.  'The  servant  of  God  must  not 
strive '  (2  Tim.  ii.  24).  How  beautifully  Abraham 
had  recovered  from  his  fall  in  Egypt!  While 
there  he  had  learned  the  great  lesson  that  no  one 
needs  to  descend  to  deceit  in  order  to  obtain  his 
169 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiii.    desires.     The   true   child   of  God  can  afford   to 
5-18.  be  magnanimous,   simply   because  he  is   a  child 

of  God. 

IV.  A  Selfish      IV.  A  Selfish  Choice  (vers.  10-13). — Lot  there- 
Choice  Up0n  ^ok  the  generous  Abraham  at  his  word,  and, 

seeing  that  the  plain  of  Jordan  was  '  well  watered 
everywhere,'  he  chose  that  region,  and  departed 
thither.  This  was  the  sole  reason  that  prompted 
his  choice.  He  saw  the  great  advantage  to  him 
and  his  possessions  in  that  most  fertile  of  regions. 

The  land  was  indeed  fertile,  but  as  he  *  moved 
his  tent  as  far  as  Sodom'  (ver.  12,  R.V.)  it 
soon  became  evident  what  danger  he  was  in. 
The  material  blessing  was  accompanied  by  moral 
blight.  There  are  many  modern  counterparts  to 
Lot's  action;  even  professedly  Christian  people 
often  choose  their  home  in  a  locality  simply  for 
its  scenery,  or  its  society,  or  its  other  material 
advantages  without  once  inquiring  what  Church 
privileges  are  there.  The  souls  of  their  children 
may  starve  amid  worldliness  and  polite  indifference. 
The  same  disastrous  choice  is  often  made  in  con- 
nection with  public  schools,  to  which  boys  are 
sent  simply  for  the  position  and  reputation  of 
the  school,  regardless  of  the  moral  and  spiritual 
atmosphere  of  the  institution.  This  was  the  great 
mistake  of  Lot's  life,  from  which  he  ever  afterwards 
suffered. 

V.  A  Divine      V.  A  Divine  Revelation  (vers.  14-17). — 'After  that 

Crerslai4°i7)    ^J°t  was  8eParated  fr°m  him.'     Abraham  was  now 
alone,   and  perhaps   in   his   solitude  he  began   to 
wonder  whether  he  had  done  right,  or  whether  his 
160 


The  Separation 

offer  to  Lot  was  due  to  weakness  and  the  lack  of  Gen.  xiii. 
true  assertion  of  rights.     There  is  often  a  tempta-  5-I8. 
tion  to  reaction  after  a  great  moral  decision  has 
been  made.     Just  at  this  time,  then,  and  when 
he  was  alone,   God    came   to   him   with    Divine 
assurances  and  blessed  compensation. 

The  revelation  of  the  Divine  purposes  was  fuller 
than  any  that  preceded  it  (c/.  xii.  1  and  7).  Notice 
its  three  aspects : — 

(a)  The  prospect  afforded  (ver.  14).  Lot  had 
*  lifted  up  his  eyes'  (ver.  10),  and  with  remarkable 
force  and  significant  emphasis  God  says  to  Abraham, 
1  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes.'  How  different  the  action 
is  in  each  case !  Abraham's  prospect  was  not  only 
wider,  but  infinitely  more  glorious,  because  of  the 
Word  of  God  behind  it 

(6)  The  promise  given  (vers.  16,  16).  For  the 
first  time  God  promises  the  land  to  Abraham  him- 
self. *  To  thee  will  I  give  it ' ;  hitherto  the  land 
had  only  been  promised  to  his  seed  (xii.  7).  Let 
us  ponder  these  wonderful  promises.  They  are 
to  be  interpreted  literally  and  spiritually.  They 
are  already  having  their  primary  fulfilment  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  as  Abraham's  spiritual  seed  (Gal. 
iil  7-9,  16),  but  there  will  surely  be  a  literal  fulfil- 
ment in  the  future  to  the  Jewish  nation  (Rom.  xi. 
26-29). 

(c)  The  possession  enjoined  (ver.  17>  Abraham 
is  to  '  walk  up  and  down,'  and,  as  it  were,  appro- 
priate and  claim  for  himself  in  detail  that  which 
God  gives  (c/.  Josh.  i.  3).  The  promises  of  God 
are  to  be  appropriated  by  faith,  and  it  is  thus 
161 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiii.    the  purpose  of  God  becomes  realised  in  individual 
S-1^.  experience. 

VI.  A  'Then  Abraham  moved  his  tent.'     Immediately 

Response       ne  re8Ponded  to  God   and  pitched   his  tent   'at 

(ver.  18).        Mamre,   which    is    in    Hebron.'      Hebron   means 

'fellowship,'  and  we  may  spiritualise  the  thought 

by  saying  that  prompt  whole-hearted   obedience 

always  leads  to  fellowship  with  God. 

'Built  there  an  altar.'  Again  we  see  the  real 
man  in  this  simple,  whole-hearted  testimony  to 
the  Divine  presence  and  promises.  His  tent  and 
his  altar  indicate  the  pilgrim  and  devout  life  of  the 
true  child  of  God. 

Suggestions  1«  Differences  in  Believers. — What  a  contrast 
Meditati  n  between  Lot  an(*  Abraham !  Except  for  2  Peter 
ii.  7,  8,  we  should  have  hardly  credited  Lot  with 
any  vital  religion.  Although  '  righteous,'  he  is  yet 
living  by  sight,  seeking  only  his  own  advantages 
and  pleasure ;  worldliness  is  his  dominant  charac- 
teristic, his  one  thought  is  the  well-watered  plains. 
He  is  a  type  and  illustration  of  the  Christian  who 
is  not  fully  consecrated — one  who  is  trying  to  make 
the  best  of  both  worlds,  endeavouring  to  stand 
well  with  God,  while  pushing  to  the  full  his  own 
earthly  interests.  Yet  one  part  of  his  life  must 
necessarily  suffer;  so  it  was  with  Lot,  so  it  is 
always.  Contrast  Abraham  with  his  large-hearted- 
ness  of  spirit,  his  simple  acceptance  of  God's 
promises,  his  whole-hearted  obedience  to  God's 
will,  and  his  courageous  testimony  in  the  altar  of 
worship.  He  is  a  type  and  illustration  of  the 
162 


The  Separation 

consecrated  believer,  the  one  who  puts  God  firet,  Gen.  xiii. 
and  to  whom  God's  presence,  God's  will,  God's  5-*8. 
way  are  everytlung.     These  differences  in  believers 
are  as  striking  and  as  puzzling  to-day  as  ever, 
yet  they  ought  not  to  exist  in   the  Church   of 
Christ 

2.  Differences  between  Believers.  —  Even  the 
children  of  God  from  time  to  time  have  their 
differences  of  opinion,  which  often  lead  to  trouble 
and  strife.  If  only  they  are  met  with  magnanimity 
like  Abraham's,  they  will  soon  be  resolved.  Note 
the  New  Testament  emphasis  on  mutual  submis- 
sion (Eph.  v.  21 ;  1  Peter  v.  5).  The  Christian 
paradox  of  everybody  submitting  to  everybody  else 
would  soon  heal  all  dissensions  between  believers. 
Magnanimity  in  Abraham  was  the  result  of  his 
faith  in  God.  He  could  afford  to  be  large-hearted 
because  God  was  so  real  to  him.  Those  who 
put  God  first  will  never  be  bereft  of  their  just 
rights.  God  is  pledged  on  their  behalf  (Prov. 
iii.  5,  6). 

3.  Differences  for  Believers. — The  results  in  the 
lives  of  Lot  and  Abraham  were  vastly  different 
Lot  obtained  what  he  wanted,  earthly  prosperity, 
but  spiritually  it  may  be  questioned  whether  he 
was  ever  happy  after  making  that  choice.  There 
was  no  witness  for  God,  no  real  blessing  on  his 
home,  and  in  the  end  came  spiritual  and  social 
disaster.  Abraham's  experience  was  very  different ; 
God  became  an  increasing  reality  to  him,  there  was 
a  glory  and  power  in  his  life,  and  we  are  sure 
that  he  never  regretted  his  action  in  putting  God 

163 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiii.    first.     God's  children  always  experience  His  Divine 
5-18.  favour  and  blessing  in  proportion  to  their  faithful- 

ness, and  if  we  are  inclined  to  question  and  seek 
for  the  reason  of  differences  in  the  spiritual  experi- 
ences of  the  children  of  God  we  may  find  them  in 
the  difference  of  response  to  God  on  the  part  of 
His  followers. 


164 


XVII 

A  NEW  EMERGENCY 

Gen.  xiv.  1-16 

And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  days  of  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar, 
Arioch  king  of  Ellasar,  Chedorlaomer  king  of  Elaru,  and  Tidal 
king  of  nations ; 

That  these  made  war  with  Bera  king  of  Sodom,  and  with 
Birsha  king  of  Gomorrah,  8hinab  king  of  Admah,  and  Shemeber 
king  of  Zeboiim,  and  the  king  of  Bela,  which  is  Zoar. 

All  these  were  joined  together  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,  which  is 
the  salt  sea. 

Twelve  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer,  and  in  the  thirteenth 
year  they  rebelled. 

And  in  the  fourteenth  year  came  Chedorlaomer,  and  the  kings 
that  were  with  him,  ana  smote  the  Kephaims  in  Ashteroth- 
Karnaim,  and  the  Zuzims  in  Ham,  and  tho  Emims  in  Shaveh 
Kiriathaim. 

And  the  Horites  in  their  mount  Seir,  unto  El-paran,  which  is 
by  the  wilderness. 

And  they  returned,  and  came  to  Enmishpat,  which  is  Kadcsh, 
and  smote  all  the  country  of  the  Amalekites,  and  also  the 
Amorites,  that  dwelt  in  Hazezon-tamar. 

And  there  went  out  the  king  of  Sodom,  and  the  king  of 
Gomorrah,  and  the  king  of  Admah,  and  the  king  of  Zeboiim, 
and  the  king  of  Bela  (the  same  is  Zoar) ;  and  they  joined  battle 
with  them  in  the  vale  of  Siddim  ; 

With  Chedorlaomer  the  king  of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal  king  of 
nations,  and  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar,  and  Arioch  king  of 
Ellasar  ;  four  kings  with  five. 

And  the  vale  of  Siddim  vxts  full  of  slime-pits  :  and  the  kings 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  fled,  and  fell  there  s  and  they  that 
remained  fled  to  the  mountain. 

And  they  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  all 
their  victuals,  and  went  their  way. 

And  they  took  Lot,  Abram's  brother's  son,  who  dwelt  in  Sodom, 
and  his  goods,  and  departed. 

165 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  there  came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told  Abram  the 
Hebrew:  for  he  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre  the  Amorite, 
brother  of  Eshcol,  and  brother  of  Aner :  and  these  were  con- 
federate with  Abram. 

And  when  Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was  taken  captive,  he 
armed  his  trained  servants,  born  in  his  own  house,  three  hundred 
and  eighteen,  and  pursued  them  unto  Dan. 

And  he  divided  himself  against  them,  he  and  his  servants,  by 
night,  and  smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  Hobah,  which  is 
on  the  left  hand  of  Damascus. 

And  he  brought  back  all  the  goods,  and  also  brought  again  his 
brother  Lot,  and  his  goods,  and  the  women  also,  and  the  people. 

Gen.  xiv.    rpHE  life  of  restful  fellowship  with  God  (xiii.  18) 
1-16.  J-      is  now  to  be  disturbed  by  a  new  emergency 

issuing  in  new  experiences.  Communion  with  God 
is  constantly  found  to  be  the  preparation  for  new 
crises  in  the  believer's  daily  life. 
I.  The  Great  I.  The  Great  Battle  (vers.  1-11). — Clearly  we  have 
(vers6i-ii)  nere  a  con temporary  record  of  the  events  described. 
Elam  is  seen  to  be  supreme  over  Assyria  and  Babylon, 
and  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  Elam  to  keep 
the  Jordan  valley  free  and  open  on  account  of  the 
trade  route  to  Egypt,  with  all  that  intercourse  in 
commerce  meant  to  those  Eastern  lands.  Five 
kings  of  Eastern  Palestine  (ver.  2)  had  been  sub- 
ject to  Chedorlaomer,  the  leader  of  the  four  kings 
of  the  East.  Then  came  a  rebellion  on  the  part  of 
the  Palestine  tributaries,  followed  by  the  expedition 
of  Chedorlaomer  and  the  kings  that  were  with  him 
(vers.  5-7).  The  vale  of  Siddim  was  the  scene  of 
the  battle,  with  the  result  that  the  kings  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  were  entirely  vanquished. 

It  is  well  known  that  up  to  quite  recent  years 
certain  schools  of  modern   criticism  rejected  this 
chapter  as  wholly  unhistorical.     The  discovery  of 
166 


A  New  Emergency 

tablets,  however,  has  altered  this  view,  and  goes  Gen.  xiv. 
far  towards  demonstrating  the  essential  historicity  lml& 
of  the  entire  chapter.  Chedorlaomer  appears  on 
the  tablets  as  Kudur  Lagamar  and  Amraphel  aa 
Hammurabi.  The  discovery  of  the  code  of  Ham- 
murabi during  the  last  few  years  has  given  a  further 
confirmation  to  the  historical  character  of  this 
chapter.  (For  a  popular  discussion  on  this  subject, 
see  Sayce's  Monument  Facts  and  Higher  Critical 
Fancies,  chapter  iv.) 

II.  The  Significant  Capt  ure  (ver.  12). — Among  then.  The 
captures  from  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  Significant 
was  Lot,  who  was  taken  prisoner,  and  carried  off  to  (ver.  12). 
the  East    It  is  evident  that  Lot  had  overlooked  the 
fact  that  others  besides  himself  were  thoroughly 
aware  of  the  fertility  of  that  neighbourhood.     It 
was  not  likely  that  he  could  expect  to  enjoy  sole 
and  unmolested  possession  of  so  advantageous  a 
position.      As   he  journeyed   in   the   train   of  his 
captors  we  wonder  what  were  his  feelings,  and 
whether  he  thought  of  his  uncle  Abraham  in  per- 
fect safety,  although  only  a  few  miles  off. 

How  was  it  that  Lot  was  taken  captive,  for  we 
read  only  that  he  pitched  his  tent  towards  Sodom 
(xiii.  12)?  It  is  evident  that  this  did  not  satisfy 
him,  for  now  we  read  that  he  dwelt  in  Sodom  (xiv. 
12).  The  consequences  of  this  false  step  were  as 
disastrous  as  they  were  thoroughly  deserved.  No 
godly  man  can  ever  deliberately  dwell  in  Sodom 
with  impunity. 

An  escaped  prisoner  came  and  told  Abraham  of 
what  had  happened,  and  for  Abraham  to  hear  that 
167 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiv.  '  his  brother  was  taken  captive '  was  to  decide  at 
1-16.  once  on  his  rescue.     How  very  touching  are  the 

words  '  when  Abraham  heard  that  his  brother  was 
taken'  (ver.  14).  There  is  no  root  of  bitterness 
here.  He  does  not  say  *  It  serves  him  right '  or  '  Let 
him  alone.' 

III.  The  III.  The  Bold  Undertaking  (vers.  13,  14). — 
tJ0ld  rtakin*  Abraham  now  appears  before  us  in  a  new  aspect, 
(vers.  13, 14).  showing  himself  to  be  a  man  of  thought  and  skill,  and 

of  bravery.  There  may  also  be  a  touch  of  patriotism 
in  it  in  relation  to  Canaan,  his  adopted  country. 
New  emergencies  call  out  new  powers.  Apart  from 
these  circumstances  no  one  would  have  credited 
Abraham  with  these  remarkable  qualities.  He  arms 
his  trained  servants  and  sets  off  in  pursuit,  arriving 
quickly  at  the  northern  end  of  Palestine  at  Dan. 

IV.  The  The  pursuit  extended  to  120  miles,  and  by  a 
Success*  kold  stroke  of  strategy,  dividing  his  servants  into 
(vers.  15, 16).  separate    companies,   he    smote    the    enemy  from 

different  directions,  and  pursued  them  far  beyond 
the  limits  of  Palestine,  and  nearly  as  far  north  as 
Damascus.  The  prompt  action,  the  skilful  leader- 
ship, and  the  brave,  determined  attack  are  interest- 
ing revelations  of  this  new  side  of  Abraham's 
nature. 

Abraham  was  entirely  successful,  for  he  rescued 
Lot  and  all  his  household,  besides  the  recovery  of 
the  goods  belonging  to  the  kings  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah.  As  they  journeyed  back,  uncle  and 
nephew,  we  again  wonder  what  were  Lot's  thoughts. 
There  is  no  record  of  any  expression  or  even  feeling 
of  gratitude,  and  the  fact  that  he  deliberately  went 
168 


A  New  Emergency 

back  to  Sodom  is  another  illustration  of  the  essential  Gen.  xiv. 
shallowness  and  worldliness  of  his  mind  in  contrast I"1^. 
to  the  magnanimity   and  genuine   spirituality  of 
Abraham. 

1.  Some   elements    of   a   godly    life. — Looking  Suggestions 
closely  at  the  narrative  we  cannot  fail  to  see  in  it  Meditation 
some  essential  features  and  most  beautiful  aspects 

of  the  life  of  a  child  of  God. 

(a)  His  Sympathy.  Abraham  showed  no  resent- 
ment, but  with  utter  unselfishness  he  at  once  desires 
and  determines  to  set  out  to  the  rescue  of  Lot. 

(b)  His  Decision.  We  generally  associate  godli- 
ness with  the  passive  rather  than  the  active  virtues, 
but  in  view  of  Hebrews  xi.  we  must  not  forget  the 
two  sides  of  the  Christian  life.  In  Gen.  xiii. 
Abraham  is  seen  manifesting  the  passive  virtues 
of  unselfishness,  humility,  and  willingness  to  yield 
his  rights.  In  chapter  xiv.,  however,  there  is  all 
the  decision  and  initiative  of  the  brave  and  fearless 
man.  Courage  is  as  real  a  Christian  virtue  as 
humility. 

(c)  His  Capability.  Abraham's  strategy  and  skill 
show  that  he  was  "  a  man  of  parts."  There  is  no 
necessary  connection  between  godliness  and  in- 
capacity. The  Christian  man  should  neither  be 
a  coward  nor  an  incapable.  The  Spirit  of  God 
Who  equipped  Bezaleel  (Exod.  xxxi.  3)  is  able  to 
give  inventiveness,  and  intellectual  and  executive 
ability. 

2.  The  explanation  of  these  elements.  —  It  is 
all  summed    up    by   'faith   in  God.'      'By   faith 

M  169 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiv.    Abraham '   was   enabled    to    feel   and   show  this 
1-16.  sympathy,  for  the  simple  reason  that  God  was  all 

in  all  to  him,  and  he  could  in  the  true  sense  afford 
to  be  tender-hearted  and  unselfish.  'By  faith 
Abraham'  possessed  and  manifested  decision,  be- 
cause he  was  in  constant  touch  with  the  Source  of 
all  power,  and  was  strong  in  his  God  to  attempt 
and  do  great  things.  'By  faith  Abraham'  was 
enabled  to  cultivate  and  reveal  his  capacity  as  a 
man  of  affairs  because  God  is  the  God  of  all  grace, 
and  provides  grace  sufficient  for  all  His  servants  in 
every  emergency,  and  even  when  the  believer's  life 
commences  with  only  a  partial  capability  in  certain 
directions,  it  is  wonderful  how  grace  can  cultivate 
this  faculty  and  enable  the  man  to  do  wonders  for 
God.  Faith  thus  purifies  and  instructs  the  mind, 
softens  and  stirs  the  heart,  and  strengthens  and 
controls  the  will.  'This  is  the  victory  .  .  .  our 
faith.' 


170 


XVIII 

THE  TEST  OF  VICTORY 
Gen.  xiv.  17-24. 

And  the  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him  after  his  return 
from  the  slaughter  of  Chedorlaomer,  and  of  the  kings  that 
toere  with  him,  at  the  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  w  the  king's 
dale. 

And  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  bread  and  wine  ; 
and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  most  high  God. 

And  he  blessed  him,  and  said,  Blessed  be  Abram  of  the  most 
high  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth  : 

And  blessed  be  the  most  high  God,  which  hath  delivered  thine 
enemies  into  thy  hand.     And  he  gave  him  tithes  of  all. 

And  the  king  of  Sodom  said  unto  Abram,  Give  me  the  persons, 
and  take  the  goods  to  thyself. 

And  Abram  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  have  lift  up  mine 
hand  unto  the  Lord,  the  most  high  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven 
and  earth, 

That  I  will  not  take  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoelatchet,  and 
that  I  will  not  take  any  thing  that  it  thine,  lest  thou  shouldest 
say,  I  have  made  Abram  rich  ; 

Save  only  that  which  the  young  men  have  eaten,  and  the 
portion  of  the  men  which  went  with  me,  Aner,  Eshool,  and 
Mamre  ;  let  them  take  their  portion. 

THE  crowning  hour  of  success  is  a  good  test  of  Gen.  xiv. 
character.  If  'sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity,'  17-24- 
equally  valuable  in  other  directions  are  the  uses  of 
prosperity.  How  a  man  behaves  at  the  moment 
of  victory  often  affords  a  supreme  revelation 
of  character  and  spiritual  power.  We  shall 
171 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiv.  see  this  in  the  case  of  Abraham  as  we  study 
I7"24«  his  interview  with  the  two  kings. 

I.  The  Royal  I.  The  Royal  Recognition  (vers.  17,  18). — Grati- 
Recogmtion  ^U(je  aione  WOuld  suffice  to  prompt  the  king  of 

Sodom  to  go  out  to  meet  Abraham  after  his  return 
from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings  who  had  caused 
such  havoc  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  The  meeting 
was  the  natural  and  fitting  recognition  of  the  great 
services  rendered. 

The  other  king  (of  Salem)  who  met  the 
victorious  patriarch  was  a  very  different  per- 
sonage, and  in  his  capacity  as  priest  of  the  Most 
High  God  brought  forth  bread  and  wine  to  greet 
the  conqueror  of  the  enemies  of  his  country. 
It  was  another  new  experience  to  Abraham  to 
be  met  by  two  kings  and  to  be  acknowledged 
by  them  before  all  their  retinue  as  the  saviour 
of  their  country. 

II.  The  II.  The  Priestly  Benediction  (vers.  18-20). — 
Benediction  ^no  *8  *n*s  Personage  suddenly  entering  patriarchal 
(vers.  18-20).  history  ?    He  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  faithful 

few ;  one  of  those  who  still  retained  the  purity  of 
their  allegiance  to  the  one  true  God.  He  was  a  link 
with  the  past  age  of  Shem,  and  amidst  the  surround- 
ing departure  from  God  still  witnessed  to  the  reality 
of  the  Divine  presence  and  its  claim  upon  men.  The 
title  of  God  is  very  noteworthy,  '  God  Most  High ' 
(Hebrew,  El  Elyon).  This  title  is  very  rare  in 
the  Old  Testament,  though  it  is  found  no  less  than 
four  times  in  the  verses  now  before  us.  The  idea 
underlying  it  is  that  of  God  as  the  Supreme  Being 
who  is  above  all  local  deities.  We  have  its  New 
172 


The  Test  of  Victory 

Testament  equivalent  in  '  the  Highest '  (Luke  i.  Gen.  xiv. 
32,  35),  and  '  the  Most  High  God'  (Acts  xvi  17).  l>2^ 
Melchizedek  was  '  a  priest  of  God  Most  High,'  and 
the  root  idea  of  priesthood  is  access  into  God's 
presence  and  the  representation  of  man  to  God 
(Heb.  v.  1).  His  typical  character  will  come  before 
us  at  a  later  stage. 

We  are  told  very  distinctly  that  Melchizedek 
blessed  Abraham  and  prayed  the  blessing  of  God 
Most  High  upon  him,  at  the  same  time  blessing 
God  for  the  deliverance  of  Abraham.  This  solitary 
figure  of  the  king  thus  standing  between  God  and 
Abraham  is  very  striking,  and  shows  that  true 
religion  was  still  possible  and  actual  outside 
the  Abrahamic  relation  to  God.  The  twofold 
blessing  of  Abraham  and  of  God  is  also  to  be  noted. 
When  God  blesses  us  it  is  a  blessing  in  deed,  a 
benefaction.  When  man  blesses  God  it  can  of 
necessity  only  be  a  blessing  in  word,  a  benediction. 
Here  we  have  both. 

III.  The  Loyal  Acknowledgment  (\cr.  20). — Abra-  m.  The 

ham's  attitude  of  immediate  willingness  to  receive  *r°7al 

.  Acknow- 

blessing  is  a  striking  testimony  to  his  consciousness  ledgment 

of  the  spiritual  position  and  power  of  Melchizedek.  (ver  ao)- 

This  Divine  blessi.:  ~  was  received  before  his  spiritual 

testing  in  the  interview  with  the  king  of  Sodom, 

and  doubtless  played  its  part  in  preparing  him. 

Abraham  further  acknowledged  the  position  of 

the  king  of  Salem  by  giving  him  tithes  of  all  that  he 

possessed     This  reference  to  tithing  is  exceedingly 

interesting  as  suggesting  the  pre-Mosaic  observance 

of  this  acknowledgment  of  God's  claim  on  our  gifts. 

173 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Gen.  xiv. 
17-24. 


IV.  The 
Natural 
Proposal 
(ver.  21). 


V.  The 

Noble 
Refusal 

(vers.  22-24). 


If  the  principle  of  tithing  was  thus  previous  to  the 
Mosaic  economy  there  seems  no  reason  to  deny  its 
essential  fitness  to-day  in  the  economy  of  grace ; 
the  tenth  being  regarded  as  God's  absolute  right 
before  any  question  arises  about  free-will  offerings 
and  other  spontaneous  gifts  of  the  redeemed  and 
grateful  life. 

IV.  The  Natural  Proposal  (ver.  21). — It  was 
natural  and  inevitable  that  the  king  of  Sodom 
should  forthwith  acknowledge  his  indebtedness  to 
Abraham.  The  patriarch  was  now  a  great  man  in 
the  eyes  of  the  king,  and  it  was  the  monarch's 
obvious  duty  to  show  his  gratitude  and  apprecia- 
tion of  Abraham's  great  services.  He  proposed 
to  Abraham  the  retention  of  the  goods  rescued 
from  the  Eastern  kings,  and  that  the  men  and 
women  of  Sodom  should  be  handed  over  to  their 
rightful  sovereign.  This  was  a  natural  and 
customary  method  of  dividing  the  spoil  after  a 
victory,  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  existing 
usage  it  was  as  natural  for  the  king  to  make  the 
proposal  as  it  would  have  been  simply  natural  for 
Abraham  to  accept  it.  But  Abraham  had  other 
than  '  natural '  principles  to  guide  him. 

V.  The  Noble  Refusal  (vers.  22-24).— He  would 
not  take  anything,  even  the  smallest  gift.  He  had 
not  entered  upon  the  expedition  for  his  own  advan- 
tage, and  consequently  there  was  now  no  question 
about  the  spoil. 

It  would  seem  from  the  words,  '  I  have  lift  up 
mine   hand  unto   the   Lord,'  that  Abraham    had 
anticipated  the  possibility  of  this  or  some  similar 
174 


The  Test  of  Victory 

proposal  and  had  provided  beforehand  for  it  Gen.  xiv. 
Having  thus  faced  the  matter  quietly  before  God,  l7"M* 
he  was  able  to  decide  at  once  as  to  his  course 
of  action.  It  is  always  of  great  spiritual  value, 
whenever  the  opportunity  is  afforded  us,  to  face 
probable  contingencies  beforehand,  and  decide  in 
the  sight  of  God  what  we  shall  do  if  and  when 
the  event  takes  place. 

*  Lest  thou  shouldest  say,  I  have  made  Abraham 
rich.'  His  position  in  the  sight  of  God  was  such 
that  he  could  not  endure  the  thought  of  being  in 
any  way  dependent  upon  the  king  of  Sodom.  It 
is  often  found  that  when  men  rise  in  the  world 
there  are  others  who  are  only  too  ready  to  boast 
of  the  way  in  which  they  have  helped  these  men 
in  their  upward  progress.  Very  often  this  boasting 
is  as  natural  as  it  is  allowable,  but  it  has  its  limits 
in  any  case,  and  sometimes  it  is  very  easily  ex- 
aggerated. In  Abraham's  case  help  from  the  king 
of  Sodom  would  have  been  help  from  a  quarter 
to  which  he  did  not  desire  to  be  indebted.  The 
worldliness  of  his  nephew  Lot  had  already  shown 
the  spiritual  dangers  of  intimacy  with  Sodom. 

The  only  qualification  that  Abraham  makes  is 
with  reference  to  the  Canaanitish  young  men  who 
had  assisted  him  in  the  victory,  and  who  naturally 
would  not  be  guided  by  the  principles  that  actuated 
him.  On  their  behalf  he  is  willing  to  receive  some 
of  the  spoil  Spirituality  is  thus  able  to  discern 
and  distinguish  between  circumstances  when  we 
are  called  upon  to  act  for  self  and  on  behalf  of 
others. 

176 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xiv.        1.  The  contrast  of  Abraham's  attitude  to  the  two 
I7-24«  kings. — How  very  remarkable  is  this  difference! 

Suggestions  To  the  king  of   Salem   the   acknowledgment  of 

Meditation,  dependence  ;  to  the  king  of  Sodom  the  assertion 
of  independence.  To  the  king  of  Salem  the 
admission  of  inferiority;  to  the  king  of  Sodom 
the  attitude  of  equality.  To  the  king  of  Salem 
the  spirit  of  humility ;  to  the  king  of  Sodom  the 
attitude  of  dignity.  How  striking  and  really 
wonderful  is  this  perfect  balance  of  qualities ! 

2.  The  explanation  of  this  striking  attitude. — 
Again  we  have  to  penetrate  below  the  surface  to 
discover  the  secret  of  Abraham's  wonderful  bearing. 
The  explanation,  of  course,  is  'faith,'  and  as  we 
study  the  subject  somewhat  more  closely  we  find 
a  fourfold  action  and  activity  of  Abraham's  trust 
in  God. 

(a)  Faith  is  able  to  recognise  spiritual  position. 
Melchizedek  was  God's  representative,  and 
Abraham's  faith  was  quick  to  see  this  and 
to   act   accordingly. 

(b)  Faith  is  able  to  realise  serious  peril.  Not 
always  has  a  believer  been  able  to  see  that  success 
often  means  temptation,  and  victory  the  possibility 
of  danger.  Abraham  saw  this,  and  hence  his 
unflinching  attitude. 

(c)  Faith  is  able  to  resist  strong  pressure.  It 
takes  a  real  man  to  withstand  honour  paid  by  a 
king.  '  By  faith '  Abraham  endured  as  seeing  the 
King  of  kings. 

(d)  Faith  is  able  to  rest  on  special  provision. 
The  offer  of  the  spoil  was  as  nothing  to  Abraham 

176 


The  Test  of  Victory 

compared  with  God's  promise  of  the  land  and  the  Gen.  xiv. 
attendant  blessings.      Thus  Abraham  could  wait,  x7-24- 
and  his  faith  expressed  itself  in  patience,  as  he  put 
God  first    '  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and 
He  shall  direct  thy  paths.' 


177 


XIX 
THE  GREAT  ENCOURAGEMENT 

Gen.  xv.  1-6 

After  these  things  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Abrara  in 
a  vision,  saying,  Fear  not,  Abram :  I  am  thy  shield  and  thy 
exceeding  great  reward. 

And  Abram  said,  Lord  God,  what  wilt  Thou  give  me,  seeing  I 
go  childless,  and  the  steward  of  my  house  is  this  Eliezer  of 
Damascus  ? 

And  Abram  said,  Behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed  :  and, 
lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  heir. 

And,  behold,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  saying, 
This  shall  not  be  thine  heir  ;  but  he  that  shall  come  forth  out  of 
thine  own  bowels  shall  be  thine  heir. 

And  He  brought  him  forth  abroad,  and  said,  Look  now  toward 
heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them  :  and 
He  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  seed  be. 

And  he  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  He  counted  it  to  him  for 
righteousness. 

Gen.  xv.     rTUMES  of  spiritual  reaction  are  not  uncommon 
1-6.  -L     among  the  people  of  God.    Elijah  experienced 

a  great  reaction  (1  Kings  xix.)  after  the  eventful 
and  critical  day  on  Carmel  (1  Kings  xviii.)  So  it 
evidently  was  with  Abraham.  The  new,  remark- 
able, and  in  some  respects  exciting  events  con- 
nected with  the  rescue  of  Lot  brought  about  the 
inevitable  swing  of  the  pendulum,  as  we  can  easily 
see  in  studying  this  chapter,  which  is  closely  con- 
nected with  the  preceding  one. 
178 


The  Great  Encouragement 

I.    The    Divine    Revelation    (ver.    1). — There  Gen.  xv. 
were  nine  successive   manifestations  of   God    to  x"& 
Abraham,  of  which  this  is  the  fifth.     The  phrase  \^££ 
1  the  word  of  the  Lord  came '  is  very  noteworthy  Revelation 
as  occurring   first   in   this   passage.     It  is   found (Ter  I)- 
frequently  afterwards  throughout  the  Old  Testa- 
ment    (Cf.  Exod.  ix.   20;   1  Sam.  iil   1.)    The 
revelation  seems  to  have  been  in  the  form  of  a 
vision,  not  a  dream  (ver.  5). 

When  did  it  come ?  'After  these  things.'  The 
reference  is,  of  course,  to  the  events  of  chapter 
xiv.,  and  shows  the  direct  and  essential  connection 
between  the  two  chapters.  God's  revelations  to 
His  people  are  always  intimately  connected 
with  their  needs,   as  we  see  in   this  case. 

Why  did  it  come  ?  '  Fear  not,  Abraham.'  Then 
Abraham  must  have  had  some  fear.  What  was 
this?  Was  it  not  a  natural  dejection  after 
victory  ?  May  it  not  have  been  caused  by 
inevitable  physical,  mental,  and  moral  reaction 
after  the  strain  involved  in  the  recent  events? 
Fear  before  battle  is  the  characteristic  of  cowards  ; 
fear  after  battle  is  the  mark  of  a  hero.  This  is 
the  first  occurrence  of  the  Divine  'Fear  not' 
which  is  afterwards  found  so  often  as  God's 
message  to  His  weary  and  tried  servants.  Either 
'Fear  not,'  or  its  equivalent  'Be  not  afraid,' 
occurs  some  eighty-four  times  in  Holy  Scripture. 
The  silence  of  six  centuries  after  Malachi  was 
broken  by  the  Divine  'Fear  not'  (Luke  L  13),  and 
the  announcement  of  the  Incarnation  was  made  in 
the  same  way  (Luke  i.  30). 
179 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Gen.  xv. 
1-6. 


II.  The 

Human 
Response 
(vers.  2.3). 


III.  The 
Divine 
Assurance 
(vers.  4-5). 


What  was  it?  'I  am  thy  shield  and  thy 
exceeding  great  reward.'  How  appropriate  to 
the  need  of  the  moment  was  this  twofold 
revelation  of  God  to  His  servant!  (a)  God  as  a 
shield  against  all  foes.  (Cf.  Psalm  iii.  3;  xviii. 
2 ;  xviii.  30 ;  lxxxiv.  9 ;  xci.  4.)  (b)  God  as  a 
reward  after  victory.  Abraham  had  refused  the 
spoil  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah ;  but  God  would 
not  allow  Abraham  to  be  a  loser.  He  Himself 
would  be  His  servant's  '  exceeding  great  reward.' 

II.  The  Human  Response  (vers.  2-3). — Notice 
his  despondent  inquiry.  '  What  wilt  Thou  give 
me?'  It  is  evident  from  this  inquiry  how  over- 
strained Abraham  wa*.  The  long  waiting  and 
the  spiritual  loneliness  had  been  making  their 
mark,  and  now  he  almost  complains  as  he  asks 
what  reward  there  can  be  for  him. 

Mark  his  disappointed  hope.  'Seeing  I  go 
childless.'  Ten  years  had  elapsed  since  his 
entrance  into  Canaan,  and,  in  spite  of  the  promise 
of  a  seed,  there  was  no  sign  of  fulfilment.  Sarah 
and  he  were  so  much  older,  and  everything  seemed 
against  even  the  possibility  of  the  realisation  of 
God's  promises. 

Observe  his  discouraging  prospect.  'One  born 
in  my  house  is  mine  heir.'  Abraham  seems  to 
have  almost  lost  hope,  and  was  settling  down 
to  the  conviction  that,  after  all,  his  steward  would 
be  his  heir. 

III.  The  Divine  Assurance  (vers.  4,  5). — Now  we 
shall  see  how  God  dealt  lovingly  and  faithfully 
with  His  tried  and  troubled  servant. 

180 


The  Great  Encouragement 

His  faithlessness  was  corrected.     '  This  shall  not  Gen.  x v. 
be  thine  heir.'     God    had   not    forgotten    to   be x"^ 
gracious.     He  was  still  mindful  of  His  promises 
(Gen.  xii.  7,  and  \iii.   16). 

His  faith  was  instructed.  '  He  that  shall  come 
.  .  .  shall  be  thine  heir.'  Thus  God  particularised 
in  a  way  that  had  not  been  done  previously  in 
connection  with  the  promise,  and  taught  His 
servant,  by  giving  him  new  ground  for  trust 

His  faith  was  encouraged.  '  Tell  the  stars  .  .  . 
so  shall  thy  seed  be.'  Abraham  was  bidden  to  look 
toward  heaven,  and  in  so  doing  he  would  doubtless 
realise  something  of  the  wide  sweep  of  God's 
purposes  for  him  and  his  seed.  Notice  the  three 
metaphors  connected  with  Abraham's  seed :  '  The 
dust  of  the  earth'  (Gen.  xiii.  16);  'the  stars  of 
heaven '  (Gen.  xv.  5) ;  '  the  sand  of  the  seashore ' 
(Gen.  xxii.  17). 

IV.    The  Human  Acceptance  (ver.   6).  —  Now  IV.  The 
comes  a  wonderful  change  and  a  definite  progress  Acceptance 
upwards  in  Abraham's  spiritual  experience.  (ver.  6). 

There  was  a  prompt  response  to  the  Divine 
revelation.  'Abraham  believed.'  He  had  faith 
before,  but  now  it  was  prominent  and  emphatic, 
a  clearer,  stronger,  fuller  trust  in  God.  The  original 
Hebrew  for  '  believed '  comes  from  a  root  whence 
we  derive  our  'Amen,'  and  we  might  paraphrase 
it  by  saying  that  'Abraham  said  Amen  to  the 
Lord.'  '  Amen '  in  Scripture  never  means  a  petition 
('  May  it  be  so '),  but  is  always  a  strong  assertion 
of  faith  ('  It  shall  be  so,'  or  'It  is  so').  Faith  is 
thus  the  only,  as  it  is  the  adequate,  response  to 
181 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xv,  God's  revelation.  The  word  of  the  Lord  comes, 
I""*  and  we  believe.     Faith  takes  God  at  His  word. 

Then  came  an  equally  prompt  rejoinder  from 
God  in  answer  to  His  servant's  trust.  'And  He 
counted  it  to  him.'  That  is,  God  accounted 
Abraham's  faith  as  the  channel  for  the  reception 
of  the  gift  of  righteousness.  Notice  the  Old 
Testament  allusions  to  the  doctrine  of  imputation, 
or  reckoning  (Lev.  vii.  18 ;  xvii.  4 ;  Num.  xviii.  27; 
2  Sam.  xix.  19;  Psalm  xxxii.  2;  cvi  31.  (See 
also  Rom.  iv.  passim.) 

The  spiritual  result  is  described  in  one  significant 
word,  '  righteousness.'  This  means  the  state  or 
condition  of  being  'right'  with  God,  and  we 
have  here  the  first  reference  to  this  great  word 
1  righteousness '  which  is  subsequently  so  charac- 
teristic of  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the  New 
Testament  revelation.  Abraham  was  originally 
destitute  of  righteousness,  and  is  now  reckoned 
as  righteous  through  faith  in  God.  God  Himself 
is  the  Object  of  his  faith,  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
ground  of  his  faith,  and  righteousness  is  the  result 
of  his  faith.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  phrase 
1  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness '  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  '  counted  it  to  him  instead  of  right- 
eousness.' It  means  counted  or  reckoned  with  a 
view  to  his  receiving  righteousness.  In  Rom.  iv. 
the  preposition  eij  (for,  unto)  with  '  righteousness ' 
cannot  be  equivalent  to  o>?  (as  if)  or  avrl  (instead 
of).     (See  Haldane  in  loc.) 

This  passage  is  noteworthy  for  its  first  occur- 
rences of  remarkable  and  subsequently  well-known 
182 


The  Great  Encouragement 

words  and  phrases :  ( 1 )  'The  word  of  the  Lord  came ';  Gen.  xv. 
(2)  'Fear  not';    (3)  'Believed';    (4)  ' Counted '; I"6- 
(6)  'Righteousness.'      It   is   hardly   too   much   to 
say    that    all    subsequent    occurrences    of    these 
words  and  phrases  find  the  key  to  their  meaning 
here. 

1.  The  Possibility  of  spiritual  despondency. —  Su^^cstiont 
This  is  a  well-known  fact  in  the  life  of  the  believer.  Meditation. 
It  is  often  due  to  a  threefold  strain  which  is  partly 
physical,    partly   emotional,   and    partly   spiritual. 

Great  experiences  make  their  mark  upon  us,  and 
'by  reason  of  the  frailty  of  our  nature  we  cannot 
always  stand  upright.'     At  any  rate  we  do  not 

2.  The  Peril  of  spiritual  disheartenment. — We 
may  explain,  but  we  can  hardly  excuse,  spiritual 
depression,  and  it  is  often  used  of  Satan  to  lead  us 
away  from  God  into  the  paths  of  spiritual  despair. 
And  even  though  we  never  reach  despair,  our 
depression  may  easily  bring  discredit  upon  the 
name  of  God.  Herein  lies  one  of  the  most 
serious  elements  of  the  peril. 

3.  The  Protection  against  .spiritual  discourage- 
ment.— This  is  found  first  in  God's  continuous 
revelation  of  Himself  to  our  hearts,  and  then  our 
continued  response  in  whole-hearted  trust  and 
confidence  maintained  through  prayer  and  fellow- 
ship with  the  Word  of  God.  God's  truth  and 
our  trust  His  grace  and  our  faith.  These  are 
correlative  facts  and  will  ever  protect  the  soul. 

4.  The  Preciousness  of  spiritual  discipline. — 
God's  delays  to  Abraham  were  not  denials.     They 

183 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xv.     were  intended  to  bring  him  nearer  to  God  and  to 

I-6.  lead  him  to  depend  more  upon  the  Giver  than  on 

His  gifts.     Not  what  God  gives  so  much  as  what 

He  is,  is  the  foundation  and  source  of  spiritual  life, 

power  and  progress. 


184 


XX 

THE  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH 

Gen.  xv.  7-21 

And  He  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  Lord  that  brought  thee  out 
of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  give  thee  this  land  to  inherit  it. 

And  he  said,  Lord  God,  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall 
inherit  it? 

And  He  said  unto  him,  Take  Me  an  heifer  of  three  yean 
old,  and  a  she-goat  of  three  years  old,  and  a  ram  of  three 
years  old,  and  a  turtledove,  and  a  young  pigeon. 

And  he  took  unto  Him  all  these,  and  divided  them  in  the 
midst,  and  laid  each  piece  one  against  another  :  but  the  birds 
divided  he  not 

And  when  the  fowls  came  down  upon  the  carcases,  Abram  drove 
them  away. 

And  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon 
Abram  ;  and,  lo,  an  horror  of  great  darkness  fell  upon  him. 

And  He  said  unto  Abram,  Know  of  a  surety,  that  thy  seed 
•hall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  theirs,  and  shall  serve 
them  ;  and  they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years  : 

And  also  that  nation,  whom  they  shall  serve,  will  I  judge ; 
and  afterward  shall  they  come  out  with  great  substance. 

And  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace  ;  thou  shalt  bo 
buried  in  a  good  old  age. 

But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall  come  hither  again : 
for  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  the  sun  went  down,  and 
it  was  dark,  behold  a  smoking  furnace,  and  a  burning  lamp 
that  passed  between  those  pieces. 

In  that  same  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  Abram, 
saying,  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from  the  river 
of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river,   the  river  Euphrates : 

The  Kenites,  and  the  Kenizzites,  and  the  Kadm«»intes, 

And  the  Hittites,  and  the  l'erizzites,  and  the  Kcphaimt, 

And  the  Amorites,  and  the  Canaanites,  aud  the  Oirgashitw, 
and  the  Jebusites. 

N  185 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xv.  TN  response  to  Abraham's  faith  (ver.  6)  God  entered 
7"21'  -L   into  solemn  covenant  with  him,  assuring  him  of 

the  certainty,  while  revealing  still  more  of  the  mean- 
ing, of  the  Divine  promises  concerning  him  and  his 
seed.     In  this  section  '  covenant '  is  the  key- word. 

I.  The  I.  The  Foundation  of  the  Covenant  (ver.  7). — 
ofthe  atl°n  ^  *ne  Das*8  °f  *ne  covenant  was  God's  character 
Covenant  and  revelation  to  Abraham,  and  on  this  foundation 
(ver.  7).         everything  else  rested. 

The  covenant  was  introduced  by  the  solemn  an- 
nouncement of  the  Divine  Name,  'I  am  Jehovah.' 
This  was  the  bed-rock  of  all;  God's  unchanging 
and  unchangeable  presence  and  character. 

Then  came  the  significant  reminder  of  what  God 
had  already  done  for  him.  'That  brought  thee  out 
of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.'  Abraham  had  already  been 
redeemed,  and  this  fact  was  the  foundation  of,  and 
was  intended  to  be  a  factor  in,  the  rest  of  God's 
dealings  with  him. 

Following  this  came  the  renewed  declaration  of 
the  Divine  purpose.  'To  give  thee  this  land  to 
inherit  it.'  God  again  reminds  and  assures  Abraham 
of  His  object  in  bringing  him  out  of  his  own  land. 
The  purpose  is  once  more  stated  clearly  and  plainly. 

II.  The  II.  The  Desire  for  the  Covenant  (ver.  8). — 
Covenant fc  *  Abraham  met  this  new  assurance  of  God  with 
Cver.  8).          an  earnest  desire  for  a  proof. 

He  makes  his  appeal  for  knowledge.  This  was 
what  he  needed  ;  knowledge,  certitude. 

He    also    sought    from    God    some    assurance. 
'Whereby  shall  I  know.'      He  desired  some  out- 
ward and  visible  guarantee  and  pledge. 
186 


The  Confirmation  of  Faith 

And  yet  it  must  be  observed  that  he  did  not  Gen.  xw. 
require  a  sign  in  order  to  believe,  but  after  and  7~2I. 
on  account  of  believing.  It  was  not  faithlessness, 
but  a  desire  for  confirmation.  He  fully  believed 
God's  Word,  and  yet  wondered  how  and  when 
it  would  be  fulfilled.  Contrast  Mary's  attitude 
(Luke  i.  34)  with  that  of  Zacharias  (Luke  i.  18), 
though  her  words  were  practically  the  same. 
Abraham's  attitude  might  well  be  summed  up 
and  illustrated  by  the  wordH,  '  Lord,  I  believe ; 
help  Thou  mine  unbelief  (Mark  ix.  24). 

III.  The  Preparation/or  the  Covenant  (vers.  9-10).  HI.  The 
— The  Divine  instructions  are  now  given.    '  Take  for  for'the***00 
Me  an  heifer,'  etc.    The  heifer,  goat,  and  ram  were  to  Covenant 
be  three  years  old,  signifying  maturity  in  the  offering.  (vcr8'  9  I0)" 
These,  with  the  dove  and  pigeon,  were  afterwards 
found  associated  with  the  Mosaic  law  (Exod.  xxix. 
16;  Num.  xv.  27,  xix.  2;  Deut  xxi.  3). 

Then  Abraham  proceeded  to  fulfil  the  require- 
ments connected  with  the  solemnities  of  a 
covenant  'Took  .  .  .  divided.'  See  Leviticus 
L  6.  Having  divided  the  animals,  he  places  the 
corresponding  pieces  opposite  to  each  other,  and 
the  one  bird  opposite  to  the  other,  leaving  a 
passage  between.  This  was  the  usual  form  of 
agreement  and  contract,  the  two  parties  walk- 
ing in  procession  along  the  pathway  just  made, 
and  thereby  signifying  their  agreement  (Jer. 
xxxiv.  18  /.>  The  idea  underlying  this  was  that 
of  a  covenant  by  means  of  sacrifice  (Ps.  1.  5). 
The  blood-covenant  was  a  well-known  primitive 
method  of  ratifying  solemn  agreements. 
187 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xv.  We  are  now  able  to  notice  how  Abraham 
7-21.  prepared   to   receive  God's  assurance  and  farther 

revelation. 

IV.  The  IV.  The  Readiness  for  the  Covenant  (vers.  11,  12). 
f^^s  —Faithfulness  was  the  first  and  leading  proof  of 
Covenant  Abraham's  readiness.  He  had  obeyed  exactly  ac- 
(vers.  11, 12).  cor(jjDg  t0  the  command  of  God,  observing  to  the 

letter  what  God  required.  This  is  ever  the  true 
attitude  for  fuller  teaching  and  deeper  blessing. 

Watchfulness  was  another  feature  of  his  attitude 
at  this  time.  While  waiting  God's  time  he  kept  guard 
over  the  carcases,  and  kept  away  the  birds  of  prey. 
We  see  how  spiritual  attitude  underlies  this  act. 

Nor  are  we  wrong  in  thinking  that  receptiveness 
characterised  him.  The  supernatural  slumber  (cf. 
Gen.  ii.  21)  prepared  Abraham  for  the  reception  of 
God's  revelation  by  detaching  him  from  all  things 
earthly  which  might  divert  his  attention,  and  prevent 
the  full  teaching  having  its  effect  upon  his  life. 
The  dread  that  fell  upon  him  was  doubtless 
due  to  the  consciousness  of  a  Divine  presence 
overshadowing  him. 

V.  The  V.  The  Message  of  the  Covenant  (vers.  13-16). — 
the  Covenant  — ^  f°urf°ld  revelation  now  comes  from  God, 
(vers.  13-16).  and  Abraham  is  told   of  remarkable   experiences 

which  should  accrue  to  his  seed. 

His  seed  is  to  endure  great  privation  (ver.  13). 
Exile,  bondage,  and  affliction  are  the  three  elements 
of  this  privation.  He  was  to  learn  the  meaning  of 
heirship  through  suffering.     (Cf  Rom.  viii.  17.) 

N.B. — The  term  of  400  years  seems  to  be  a 
round  number  for  430  (Exod.  xii.  40 ;  Acts  vii.  6 ; 
188 


The  Confirmation  of  Faith 

GaL  iiL  17).    The  430  years  may  date  from  the  birth  Gen.  xv. 
of  Isaac  or  from  the  death  of  Jacob,  according  to  7"2I« 
the  computation  chosen. 

His  seed  is  to  witness  the  display  of  great  power 
(ver.  14).  The  nation  that  would  cause  trouble  to 
his  seed  would  be  punished,  and  his  seed  should 
come  forth  with  abundant  provision  by  God's  help. 

He  himself  is  to  experience  great  peace  (ver.  1 5). 
This  is  the  first  hint  that  Abraham  himself  was 
not  to  realise  personally  the  fulness  of  God's 
purpose.  God  leads  us  step  by  step  without 
revealing  everything  at  once ;  and  as  revelation 
after  revelation  came  to  Abraham  the  horizon 
of  God's  purpose  extended  wider  and  wider. 
Abraham  is  to  die  in  peace  and  be  buried  in  a 
good  old  age.  He  is  to  be  gathered  'to  his 
fathers' — which  means,  as  they  were  not  buried 
in  Canaan,  that  he  would  be  with  them  in  Sheol. 

And  he  is  called  to  exercise  great  patience 
(ver.  16).  Another  hint  of  the  wide  sweep  of 
the  Divine  purposes.  Other  factors  were  at  work, 
and  many  conditions  had  to  be  fulfilled  before 
God's  purpose  could  be  completely  realised. 

VI.   The  Making  of  the  Covenant  (vers.  17-21).  vi.  The 
— After  the   revelation   of  God's  will   comes  the  i?*]£Jn8:J?Lt 
Divine  assurance  in  the  form  of  a  covenant  (TCr».  17  ax). 

The  symbolical  action  is  noteworthy  (ver.  17). 
A  cylindrical  fire-pot  and  a  fiery  torch  combined 
to  symbolise  and  express  the  Divine  presence 
(Exod.  xix.),  and  in  condescension  to  Abraham 
and  his  experience  this  symbol  of  the  Divine 
presence  passed  along  the  pathway  made  between 
189 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xv.     the    birds    and    the    animals,   thus  ratifying    the 
7-21.  covenant   and    giving     God's    servant    a    Divine 

guarantee. 

Then  comes  a  special  assurance  (vers.  18-21). 
God  now  reveals  to  His  servant  the  precise  limits 
of  the  land  promised  to  him.  It  seems  pretty  clear 
that  the  two  rivers  referred  to  must  be  the  Nile 
and  the  Euphrates,  thus  giving  those  complete 
boundaries  of  the  Holy  Land  which  have  never 
yet  been  fully  realised.  (Cf.  1  Kings  iv.  21 ; 
2  Chron.  ix.  26.)  God's  promises  still  await  their 
perfect  fulfilment,  for  His  covenant  with  Abraham 
is  absolutely  unconditional,  and  will  be  realised  in 
His  own  time. 

Suggestions  The  study  of  the  Divine  covenants  of  the 
{°rd.  H  Bible  is  full  of  the  profoundest  interest:  (1)  With 
Noah,  (2)  with  Abraham,  (3)  with  Moses  and 
Israel,  (4)  the  New  Covenant.  Each  has  its  own 
characteristic  features  and  elements ;  and  only  one, 
the  Mosaic,  is  conditional,  a  covenant  of  works. 
The  other  three  are  covenants  'all  of  grace.' 
Consider  now  the  meaning  and  message  of  this 
Covenant. 

1.  The  Divine  Action. — It  is  noteworthy  that 
God  only  passed  through  the  pieces,  and  not 
Abraham  as  well  This  clearly  shows  that  a 
Divine  covenant  is  not  a  mutual  agreement 
on  equal  terms  between  two  parties,  but  a  Divine 
promise  assured  and  ratified  by  means  of  a  visible 
pledge  of  its  fulfilment  This  at  once  takes  the 
Divine  covenant  out  of  the  category  of  all  similar 
190 


The  Confirmation  of  Faith 

human  agreements.     It  is  divinely  one-sided     God  Gen.  xy. 
promises,  God  gives,  God  assures  (Heb.  vi  17).         7"2I» 

2.  The  Human  Attitude. — What,  then,  is  man's 
part  in  this  covenant?  Simply  that  of  a  recipient 
God  gives ;  Abraham  takes.  *  What  shall  I  render 
unto  the  Lord?  ...  I  will  take'  (Ps.  cxvi.  12,  13). 
The  attitude  of  the  believer  in  response  to  this 
covenant  of  grace  is  fourfold :  (1)  A  feeling  of 
deep  gratitude,  (2)  a  response  of  whole-hearted 
trust,  (3)  an  expression  of  hearty  thanksgiving, 
(4)  a  life  of  loyal  obedience. 


101 


XXI 
A  FALSE  STEP 

Gen.  xvi 


Now  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  bare  him  no  children  :  and  she  had 
an  handmaid,  an  Egyptian,  whose  name  was  Hagar. 

And  Sarai  said  unto  Abram,  Behold  now,  the  Lord  hath 
restrained  me  from  bearing  :  I  pray  thee,  go  in  unto  my  maid  ; 
it  may  be  that  I  may  obtain  children  by  her.  And  Abram 
hearkened  to  the  voice  of  Sarai. 

And  Sarai,  Abram's  wife,  took  Hagar  her  maid,  the  Egyptian, 
after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  gave 
her  to  her  husband  Abram  to  be  his  wife. 

And  he  went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she  conceived  :  and  when 
she  saw  that  she  had  conceired,  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her 
eyes. 

And  Sarai  said  unto  Abram,  My  wrong  be  upon  thee :  I  have 
given  my  maid  into  thy  bosom  ;  and  when  she  saw  that  she  had 
conceived,  I  was  despised  in  her  eyes :  the  Lord  judge  between 
me  and  thee. 

But  Abram  said  unto  Sarai,  Behold,  thy  maid  is  in  thy  hand  : 
do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth  thee.  And  when  Sarai  dealt  hardly  with 
her,  she  fled  from  her  face. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  found  her  by  a  fountain  of  water  in 
the  wilderness,  by  the  fountain  in  the  way  to  Shur. 

And  he  said,  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence  earnest  thou?  and 
whither  wilt  thou  go  ?  And  she  said,  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my 
mistress  Sarai. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  her,  Return  to  thy  mistress, 
and  submit  thyself  under  her  hands. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  her,  I  will  multiply  thy 
seed  exceedingly,  that  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multitude. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  her,  Behold,  thou  art  with 
ohild,  and  shalt  bear  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Ishmael ; 
because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  affliction. 

And  he  will  be  a  wild  man  ;  his  hand  will  be  against  every 

192 


A  False  Step 

man,  and  every  man's  hand  against  him  :  and  he  shall  dwell  in 
the  presence  of  all  his  brethren. 

And  she  called  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  spake  unto  her.  Thou 
God  seest  me  :  for  she  said,  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him  that 
seeth  me? 

Wherefore  the  well  was  called  Beer-lahai-roi ;  behold,  it  i$ 
between  Kadesh  and  Bered. 

And  Hagar  bare  Abram  a  son  :  and  Abrara  called  his  son's 
name,  which  Hagar  bare,  Ishmael. 

And  Abram  was  fourscore  and  six  years  old  when  Hagar  bare 
Ishmael  to  Abram. 

IT  might  have  been  thought  that  after  the  experi-  Gen.  xvi 
ence  recorded  in  chapter  xv.  Abraham  would  have 
been  enabled  to  continue  along  the  pathway  of  God's 
will  without  hesitation,  mistake,  or  trouble.  But 
we  know  by  our  own  experience  the  proneness  of  the 
believer  to  blunder  and  fall  into  error  and  sin  all 
through  his  earthly  pilgrimage,  no  matter  how  far 
advanced  his  course  or  mature  his  experience.  In 
the  story  of  Hagar  we  come  upon  the  record  of 
another  shadow  which  fell  on  Abraham's  life.  He 
k  brought  face  to  face  with  a  specious  temptation, 
and  for  lack  of  spiritual  perception  he  falls  into  the 
snare,  which  leads  to  serious  and  very  far-reaching 
consequences. 

I.   The  Sad  Mistake  (vers.  1-3).— The  temptation  i.  The  Sad 
came  originally  from  Sarah.    Waiting  had  evidently  JJjJJ^Li 
told  upon  her,  and  this  action  was  the  result.     Yet 
we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  Abraham  yielded 
even  though  the  first  suggestion  came  from  his  wife. 

It  had  not  yet  been  clearly  revealed  that  Sarah 
was  to  be  the  mother  of  the  promised  seed,  and 
probably  this  led  to  her  impatience.  Hagar,  as 
bond-slave,  was  her  mistress's  personal  property, 
'  a  living  chattel,'  and  any  child  of  the  bond-slave 
193 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvi.    would  necessarily  belong  to  the  mistress,  not  the 
mother. 

There  was  evident  faith  in  God's  promise  in  this 
proposal  of  Sarah's.  She  fully  believed  that 
Abraham  was  to  have  the  seed  promised  by  God. 
We  can  therefore  understand  that  her  suggestion 
meant  a  very  genuine  piece  of  self-denial.  The 
practice  was  a  common  one,  and  Sarah  was  but 
the  creature  of  her  age  in  urging  it  on  Abraham. 
Nevertheless,  though  Sarah's  motive  was  good, 
genuine,  and  involved  self-sacrifice,  the  proposal 
was  wrong  in  itself,  and,  at  the  same  time,  wrong 
in  its  method  of  obtaining  the  end  sought,  it  was 
wrong  against  God,  Whose  word  had  been  given 
and  Whose  time  should  have  been  waited.  It  was 
wrong  against  Abraham,  leading  him  out  of  the 
pathway  of  patient  waiting  for  God's  will.  It  was 
wrong  against  Hagar,  and  did  not  recognise  her 
individuality  and  rights  in  the  matter.  It  was 
wrong  against  Sarah  herself,  robbing  her  of  a  high 
privilege  as  well  as  leading  to  disobedience. 
II.  The  II.  The  Sorrowful  Results  (vers.  4-6). — The  out- 

Results^1      come  °^  Abraham's  yielding  was  soon  seen  in  the 
(vers.  4-6).      effects  which  came  upon  all. 

The  first  effect  was  pride  (ver.  4).  Hagar's 
insolence  was  perfectly  natural,  and  her  reproach 
of  her  mistress,  even  though  insolent,  quite 
inevitable.  Human  nature  is  always  human 
nature,  and  this  reproach  stung  Sarah's  pride  to 
the  quick,  with  the  results  that  are  well  known. 
The  next  result  was  jealousy  (ver.  5).  Now 
Sarah  blames  Abraham,  a  somewhat  curious  and 
194 


A  False  Step 

very  unfair  attitude.     '  My  wrong  be  upon  thee.'  Gen.  xvi 

This  may  be  interpreted,   'My  injury  belongs  to 

thee  as  well,'  or,  '  May  the  injury  to  me  return 

to  thee  I '     It  is  a  little  surprising  that  Sarahs 

quick  womanly  perception  did  not  forewarn  her 

of  these  results  of  pride  and  jealousy. 

Then  followed  misery  (ver.  6).  This  came  upon 
Abraham  with  real  force.  He  was,  of  course,  power- 
less in  the  matter,  as  Hagar  was  her  mistress's 
absolute  property.  He  could  not  interfere,  and  was 
compelled  to  accept  the  inevitable,  and  say  that 
Sarah  must  do  *  as  it  pleased '  her. 

And  not  least  was  the  injustice  (ver.  6).  This 
came  upon  Hagar,  with  whom  Sarah  'dealt  hardly.' 
Hagar  found  herself  once  more  a  slave,  and  this 
time  with  personal  maltreatment  such  as  she  had 
never  experienced  before. 

It  is  easy  for  us  to  see  as  we  read  the  story  how 
inevitable  these  results  were.  Would  that  we  our- 
selves realised  beforehand  all  such  iuevitableness  ! 

III.    The  Special    Interposition   (vera.    7-12). — 
What  a  picture  of   real    life    is    found    in    this  III.  The 
chapter!      Man  is  seen  blundering,  sinning,   and  pPJ^jJ^^ 
suffering,    and    then    God    intervenes    with     His  (vera.  7-12). 
overruling  providence,  wisdom,  and  grace. 

We  see  the  blessed  truth  of  Divine  interest  in 
human  troubles  (ver.  7).  'The  angel  found  her.' 
God  had  not  overlooked  what  had  taken  place, 
and  now  He  interposes  in  order  to  bring  about  the 
best  possible  results  after  the  error  and  sin  of  His 
children.  How  often  God  has  had  to  do  this  for 
His  children  since  that  day! 
195 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvi.  We  observe,  too,  the  Divine  call  for  perfect 
submission  (vers.  8,  9).  The  questions  '  whence' 
and  ' whither'  recall  Hagar  to  her  position,  and 
the  slave  woman  tells  the  simple  truth  about  her 
flight.  The  Divine  command  is  that  she  should 
return  and  submit  herself.  It  will  be  noticed 
that  the  quasi-marriage  is  not  for  an  instant 
acknowledged.  Sarah  is  still  Hagar's  mistress. 
This  call  for  submission  was  the  first  step  towards 
blessing  in  Hagar's  life.  The  same  is  true  to-day. 
If  we  have  made  mistakes  which  have  led  us  into 
sin,  the  primary  condition  of  restoration  is  complete 
submission  to  the  will  of  God,  whatever  that  may 
involve. 

We  have  also  the  Divine  assurance  of  definite 
blessing  (ver.  10).  God  accompanies  His  call 
for  submission  by  the  promise  of  blessing  to  her 
child.  He  never  makes  a  demand  without  giving 
us  a  promise.  Thus  He  encouraged  and  incited 
her  to  the  very  submission  from  which  she  doubt- 
less shrank. 

And  above  all  there  is  the  Divine  revelation  of 
overruling  providence  (vers.  11,  12).  God  told 
her  that  she  should  have  a  son  and  also  of  his 
name  and  its  meaning  (Ishmael ;  '  God  shall  hear '). 
Thus  every  time  she  mentioned  his  name  she 
might  be  reminded  of  God's  promises.  Her  son's 
character  and  relation  to  others  were  also  revealed 
(ver.  12),  an  additional  encouragement  to  the  poor 
creature  in  her  misery  and  trouble. 

This  interposition  had  its  immediate  and  blessed 
effect  on  Hagar. 

196 


A  False  Step 

It  led  to  a  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence  Gen.  xvL 
(ver.  13.)     'She  called  the  name.  .  .  .  Thou  God 
seest  me,'  or  '  The  God  of  my  vision.'    The  Divine 
Presence  thus  came  into  her  life  with  its  blessing 
and  cheer. 

It  prompted  a  memorial  of  the  Divine  promise 
(ver.  14).  'The  well  was  called  Beer-lahai-roi.' 
See  margin,  '  The  well  of  Him  that  liveth  and 
seeth  me ' ;  that  is,  the  well  where  life  is  preserved 
after  seeing  God. 

It  elicited  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  She 
returned  to  her  mistress,  accepted  the  position, 
and  all  things  were  fulfilled  according  to  the 
Divine  revelation. 

1.  The  continuance   of  the  old   nature. — How  Snpgcstioni 
truly   this  fact  of  the  spiritual  life  is  proved  by  Sfediuti 
this  chapter!     Is   it   not   also   manifest   in    daily 
experience?     The  most  deeply-taught  believer  is 

not  exempt    from   the    temptations,    weaknesses, 
and  tendencies  of  the  old  sinful  nature. 

2.  The  occurrence  of  special  dangers. — Here 
again  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  well-known  fact 
of  the  spiritual  life.  Our  life  may  be  lived  for 
days,  and  weeks,  and  months  without  anything 
exceptional  occurring,  and  then  suddenly  a  special 
temptation  may  arise  which  leads  us  into  sin. 

3.  The  unexpected  sources  of  temptation, — 
Abraham's  temptation  came  from  the  nearest  and 
dearest  in  his  life,  the  very  source  whence  trouble 
might  have  been  least  expected.  So  it  often  is 
to-day.     Satan  uses  even   the  holiest  of  relatiou- 

197 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvi.    ships  and  the  closest  of  ties  to  bring  about  sin, 
and  we  ought  not  to  be  '  ignorant  of  his  devices.' 

4.  The  combination  of  high  motives  and  wrong 
actions. — Sarah's  motives  were  undoubtedly  good, 
and  we  may  fully  believe  that  Abraham  was 
actuated  in  the  same  way,  and  yet  their  actions 
were  manifestly  wrong.  How  frequently  this 
remarkable  combination  of  good  motive  and  bad 
conduct  occurs  in  history  and  daily  life!  The 
end  does  not  justify  the  means,  whatever  people 
may  say. 

5.  The  far-reaching  effects  of  a  believers  sin. — 
Evil-doing  on  the  part  of  a  child  of  God  is  perhaps 
the  very  worst  thing  that  can  happen,  and  often 
has  very  widespread  effects.  It  has  been  well 
pointed  out  by  a  modern  writer  that  the  existence 
of  Mohammedanism  to-day  is  really  to  be  traced 
to  Abraham's  false  step  ;  Mohammedanism  which 
is  in  some  respects  the  deadliest  opponent  of 
Christianity.  Isaac  and  Ishmael  still  struggle  in 
fierce  opposition. 

6.  The  necessity  of  prolonged  waiting  on  God. 
— God's  will  must  be  realised  in  God's  way,  and 
God's  way  often  involves  waiting  God's  time.  The 
union  of  faith  and  patience  (Heb.  vi  12)  is  one 
of  the  prime  necessities  of  true  spiritual  life. 

7.  The  supreme  secret  of  all  true  living. — 
Abraham  could  hardly  have  been  living  in  close 
touch  with  God,  or  his  spiritual  perception  would 
have  been  keen  enough  to  detect  the  danger  lurking 
in  Sarah's  temptation.  The  only  protection  against 
error  in  thought  and  action  is  found  in  abiding  with 

198 


A  False  Step 

God,  living  in  fellowship  with  Him,  listening  to  Gen.  xvi 
His  voice  in  His  word,  and  keeping  the  pathway 
to  His  presence  clear  by  prayer  and  alertness  of 
attitude  before  Him.     'They  that  know  their  God 
shall  be  strong  and  do '  (Dan.  xi.  32,  Heb.). 


19f 


XXII 
THE   COVENANT   RENEWED 

Gen.  xvii. 


And  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine,  the  Lord 
appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  Almighty 
God  ;  walk  before  Me,  and  be  thou  perfect. 

And  I  will  make  My  covenant  between  Me  and  thee,  and  will 
multiply  thee  exceedingly. 

And  Abram  fell  on  his  face  :  and  God  talked  with  him,  saying, 

As  for  Me,  behold,  My  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
be  a  father  of  many  nations. 

Neither  shall  thy  name  any  more  be  called  Abram,  but  thy 
name  shall  be  Abraham  ;  for  a  father  of  many  nations  have  I 
made  thee. 

And  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  and  I  will  make 
nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thee. 

And  I  will  establish  My  covenant  between  Me  and  thee,  and 
thy  seed  after  thee,  in  their  generations,  for  an  everlasting 
covenant,  to  be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee. 

And  I  will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land 
wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  ever- 
lasting possession  ;  and  I  will  be  their  God. 

And  God  said  unto  Abraham,  Thou  shalt  keep  My  covenant 
therefore,  thou,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations. 

This  is  My  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep,  between  Me  and 
you,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  ;  Every  man-child  among  you  shall 
be  circumcised. 

And  ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin  ;  and  it  shall 
be  a  token  of  the  covenant  betwixt  Me  and  you. 

And  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you, 
every  man-child  in  your  generations,  he  that  is  born  in  the 
house,  or  bought  with  money  of  any  stranger,  which  is  not  of 
thy  seed. 

He  that  is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he  that  is  bought  with  thy 
money,  must  needs  be  circumcised  :  and  My  covenant  shall  be  in 
your  fleah  for  an  everlasting  covenant. 

200 


The  Covenant  Renewed 

And  the  uncircumcised  man-child,  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin 
is  not  circumcised,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people  ;  he 
hath  broken  My  covenant. 

And  God  said  unto  Abraham,  As  for  Sarai  thy  wife,  thou  shalt 
not  call  her  name  Sarai,  but  Sarah  shall  her  name  be. 

And  I  will  bless  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  also  of  her :  yea,  I 
will  bless  her,  and  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations ;  kings  of 
people  shall  be  of  her. 

Then  Abraham  fell  upon  his  face,  and  laughed,  and  said  in  his 
heart,  Shall  a  child  be  born  unto  him  that  is  an  hundred  years 
oldt  and  shall  Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear? 

And  Abraham  said  unto  God,  O  that  Ishmael  might  live  before 
Thee  I 

And  God  said,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed  ; 
and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac  :  and  I  will  establish  My 
covenant  with  him  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  with  his 
seed  after  him. 

And  as  for  Ishmael,  I  have  heard  thee  :  Behold,  I  have  blessed 
him,  and  will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  multiply  him  exceed- 
ingly ;  twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will  make  him  a  great 
nation. 

But  My  covenant  will  I  establish  with  Isaac,  which  Sarah  shall 
bear  unto  thee  at  this  set  time  in  the  next  year. 

And  He  left  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  went  up  from 
Abraham. 

And  Abraham  took  Ishmael  his  son,  snd  all  that  were  born  in 
his  house,  and  all  that  were  bought  with  his  money,  every  male 
among  the  men  of  Abraham's  house,  and  circumcised  the  flesh 
of  their  foreskin  in  the  selfsame  day,  as  God  had  said  unto 
him. 

And  Abraham  was  ninety  years  old  and  nine  when  he  was 
circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin. 

And  Ishmael  his  son  was  thirteen  years  old  when  he  was 
circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin. 

In  the  selfsame  day  was  Abraham  circumcised,  and  Ishmael 
his  son. 

And  all  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in  the  house,  and  bought 
with  money  of  the  stranger,  were  circumcised  with  him. 

GOD  has  always  some  fresh  surprise  of  knowledge,  Gen.  xvii 
grace,  and  blessing  with  which  to  delight  His 
children.  We  see  this  again  and  again  in  the 
life  of  Abraham,  and  not  least  of  all  in  the  story 
recorded  in  the  present  chapter.  This  episode 
was  a  great  step  forward  in  Abraham's  spiritual 
o  201 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvii.  relationship  to  God,  as  well  as  in  his  personal 

experience. 
I.  The  Fresh  I.  The  Fresh  Revelation  (vers.  1-8). — Abraham 
(^ers.ai^8)n  was  at  th*s  Period  ninety-nine  years  old.  Thir- 
teen years  had  elapsed  since  the  trouble  about 
Hagar  (chap.  xvi.  16).  Nothing  is  recorded  of 
these  years,  and  we  may  assume  that  there  was 
no  special  or  new  revelation  of  God's  will  during 
the  time.  It  was  an  opportunity  of  quiet  waiting 
for,  and  waiting  on  God.  Now  once  again  the 
Lord  appears  to  His  servant. 

This  fresh  appearance  of  God  brought  with  it 
a  new  message  (ver.  1).  'I  am  the  Almighty 
God.'  This  was  a  new  title  of  God  (Hebrew: 
El  Shaddai).  The  root  idea  seems  to  be  that  of 
power  and  ability,  and  is  best  rendered  by  the 
phrase  'the  Mighty  God,'  the  addition  of  'All' 
being  no  necessary  part  of  the  word.  This  special 
emphasis  upon  God's  power  was  very  appropriate 
to  the  new  message  about  to  be  given. 

New  knowledge  always  carries  new  responsibili- 
ties and  we  are  not  surprised  to  note  the  definite 
claim  (ver.  1).  'Walk  before  Me,  and  be  thou 
perfect'  (upright).  God  called  upon  His  servant 
to  live  and  move  in  the  Divine  presence,  and  to 
be  sincere,  genuine,  and  true-hearted.  Is  this  a 
hint  that  Abraham  was  settling  down,  satisfied 
with  Ishmael,  and  no  longer  anxious  about  the 
special  seed  promised  by  God  ?  Something  of  this 
seems  to  have  been  the  case,  or  we  should  have 
hardly  had  this  very  definite  call. 

The    personal    result   was    soon   seen   (ver.    3). 
202 


The  Covenant  Renewed 

*  Abraham    fell    on    his    face.'     This  attitude  of  Gen.  xvii. 
reverence  and  of  readiness  shows  that  Abraham 
realised  at  once  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion. 

And  now  for  the  first  time  we  seem  to  become 
fully  conscious  of  Abraham's  high  privilege  (ver.  3). 
1  God  talked  with  him.'  Few  of  those  whose  lives 
are  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  were  on  the 
same  spiritual  footing  as  Abraham.  God  once 
again  shows  His  trust  in  His  servant,  and  that 
He  will  not  hide  from  him  what  He  is  about  to 
do.  How  beautiful  is  the  picture  of  this  holy 
familiarity  between  the  Mighty  God  and  His 
servant ! 

Nor  are  we  surprised  to  find  that  God  gives  to 
His  servant  a  specially  strong  assurance  (ver.  4). 
'As  for  Me,  behold,  My  covenant  is  with  thee.' 
These  words  are  evidently  intended,  by  their 
emphatic  reference  to  God  Himself  ('  as  for  Me '), 
as  a  reminder  to  Abraham  that,  whatever  he  had 
forgotten,  God  had  not  been  unmindful  of  His 
solemn  promises.  It  is  noteworthy  that  God 
reminds  Abraham  of  an  already  existing  covenant 
('My  covenant  is  with  thee'),  and  then  proceeds 
to  tell  him  some  of  the  forthcoming  results  of  this 
existing  fact.  Not  even  the  silence  of  thirteen 
years,  still  less  the  birth  of  Ishmael,  can  alter 
God's  purposes  or  change  His  mind  concerning 
Abraham. 

The  detailed  promises  of  this  new   revelation 

deserve  the  most  careful  study  (vers.  4-8).     They 

deal  with  three  great  facts :  (a)  Abraham  himself, 

(6)  the  land,  (c)  his  seed.     At  this  point  a  com- 

203 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvii.  parison  should  be  made  of  the  growth  in  the  details 

of  the  revelation  of  God's  purpose :  chapter  xii.,  '  a 

great  nation';  chapter  xiii.,   'as  the  dust  of  the 

earth';    chapter   xv.,    'as   the   stars  of  heaven'; 

chapter  xvii.,  'many  nations.' 

II.  The  II.  The  Necessary  Requirements  (vers.  9-14). — 

Requ?^-17      Abraham  is  now  told  his  part  in  the  matter,  and 

ments  it  is  very  striking  and  suggestive  to  notice  that  all 

(vers.  9-14).    ^^  ^  kag  to  ^Q  jg  to  ^y  q0(j's  wor(j  m  ^e 

one  respect  mentioned  in  these  verses.  This  is 
another  illustration  of  the  fact  that  God's  cove- 
nant of  grace  is  divinely  one-sided.  God  is  the 
Giver ;  man  the  receiver,  not  the  equal.  The 
conditions  to  be  fulfilled  (vers.  10-14)  are  now 
stated.  The  ordinance  of  circumcision,  already 
known  widely  in  the  East,  is  given  a  special 
meaning  and  deep  sacredness.  The  truths  con- 
nected with  it  seem  to  include  at  least  four  ideas : 
(a)  designation,  as  belonging  to  God ;  (b)  separation 
unto  Him ;  (c)  purity  in  Him ;  (d)  possession  by 
Him.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  we  are  here 
brought  face  to  face  for  the  first  time  in  Holy 
Scripture  with  young  life  in  relation  to  God.  God 
entered  into  covenant  with  little  children,  and  as 
the  covenant  with  Abraham  was  one  of  grace  we 
see  the  true  place  of  little  children  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Circumcision  was  not  merely  a  mark  of 
the  Mosaic  dispensation  and  Jewish  covenant  of 
works  ;  it  was,  as  here,  pre-Mosaic,  associated  with 
the  covenant  of  grace,  and  therefore  independent 
of,  and  wider  than,  the  Jewish  national  life  (John 
vii.  22).  God  is  here  seen  in  the  attitude  of  Father 
204 


The  Covenant  Renewed 

to  little  children,  and  He  has  never  altered  that  Gen.  xvii. 
attitude. 

III.  The   Further  Revelation  (vers.    15,  16).— III.  The 
Not  only  Abraham's,  but  also  his  wife's  name  is  J^S^on 
now  changed.     This  is  another  indication  of  God's  (▼«•«.  15,  16). 
purpose  and  a  special  assurance  of  blessing.     And 

now  for  the  first  time  Sarah  is  announced  as  the 
mother  of  the  promised  seed.  Up  to  this  moment 
everything  had  been  couched  in  general  terms  as 
to  'seed,'  but  without  special  reference  to  Sarah. 
God's  promises  become  more  definite  and  detailed 
as  time  goes  on  and  need  arises. 

IV.  The  Immediate  Response  (vers.   17,   18). —  iv.  The 

Abraham  receives  the  new  revelation  of  God  with  Jmmedi*** 

Response 
reverence,  and  yet  with  a  certain  trustful  astonish-  (vers.  17, 18). 

ment.  The  laugh  is  evidently  not  the  laugh  of  un- 
belief, but  of  a  faith  which,  while  taking  God  at  His 
word,  considers  the  news  almost  too  good  to  be 
true.  God's  revelations  to  His  people  often  seem 
to  be  too  good  to  be  true,  and  yet  they  are  true ! 

But  there  is  one  shadow  over  the  scene.  He  is 
thinking  of  his  growing  son.  How  natural  was 
this  appeal  on  behalf  of  Ishmacl !  The  boy  had 
won  his  way  to  his  father's  heart,  and  it  would 
have  been  surprising  from  the  natural  and  human 
standpoint  if  Abraham  had  not  desired  Ishmael 
to  be  his  heir.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  the 
naturalness  of  the  appeal,  there  lies  at  the  root 
of  it  a  desire  to  have  'some  substitute  for  God's 
promises.'  It  is  as  though  anything  else  would 
really  do  as  well.  God  knows  better  than  His 
servant,  and  we  have  His  answer  at  once. 
205 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvii.       V.    The  Full  Revelation  (vers.    19-22). —Not 

V.  The  even  the  intense  appeal  can  stand  before  God's 
Revelation  purposes.  God  will  maintain  His  own  way,  and  so 
(vers.  19-22).  He  assures  Abraham  that  Sarah  is  indeed  to  be  the 

mother  of  the  seed,  that  the  son's  name  shall  be 
Isaac  ('Laughter'),  and  that  the  covenant  which 
is  to  be  everlasting  is  to  be  realised  through  Isaac, 
and  not  through  Ishmael. 

Nevertheless  Ishmael  shall  not  be  forgotten. 
He  is  Abraham's  seed,  and  as  the  son  of  God's 
servant  he  will  be  blessed  and  made  a  great 
nation.  Thus  God  overrules  His  children's  mis- 
takes, and  in  loving  condescension  and  tender 
mercy  brings  blessing  out  of  trouble. 

VI.  The  VI.  The  Loyal  Reception  (vers.  23-27).— Now 
Reception  *ne  *mie  °f  communion  has  come  to  an  end,  and 
(vers.  23-27).  God  leaves  His  servant  to  ponder  what  has  been 

said  and  to  respond  to  the  revelation. 

How  prompt  was  his  obedience  (ver.  23).  'In 
the  selfsame  day,  as  God  had  said.'  How  striking 
in  their  simplicity  are  these  words,  indicating  the 
immediateness  of  Abraham's  trustful  obedience! 
This  is  ever  the  pathway  of  blessing.  'What- 
soever He  saith  unto  you,  do  it,'  and  do  it  at 
once! 

How  complete  was  his  acceptance  (ver.  27). 
Not  only  as  to  himself  and  Ishmael,  but  also  as 
to  all  his  house,  Abraham  fulfilled  the  Divine 
requirement  and  bestowed  the  sign  of  the  covenant. 
They  were  all  included  in  the  Divine  blessings, 
for  God  knew  that  Abraham  would  influence  his 
whole  household  aright. 

206 


The  Covenant  Renewed 

In  this  fresh  revelation  Abraham  learned  much  Gen.  xvii. 
about  God,  and  the  same  lessons  are  needed  by  Suggestions 
us  to-day.      The    more   we    know    of   God,   the  Meditation, 
stronger  and  richer  will  be  our  lives. 

1.  A  new  view  of  God's  Character. — God  re- 
vealed Himself  to  Abraham  as  a  God  of  might 
and  power  (ver.  1),  and,  as  such,  able  to  fulfil 
all  his  hopes.  God  does  not  wish  His  children 
to  be  content  with  anything  else  than  His  fullest 
blessings,  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  this 
1  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above 
all  that  we  ask  or  think.'  The  various  passages 
in  the  New  Testament  where  we  read  that  'God 
is  able '  call  for  earnest  meditation. 

2.  A  wider  view  of  God's  Purposes. — Abraham 
little  realised  the  far-reaching  extent  and  universal 
scope  of  God's  purpose  concerning  him.  He  was 
now  taught  this  as  he  had  never  been  taught  before, 
in  great  wealth  of  detail  and  defiuiteness  of 
meaning.  It  is  always  well  to  have  our  view 
of  God's  mind  for  the  world  extended  and 
deepened,  and  so  'think  His  thoughts  after 
Him.' 

3.  A  clearer  view  of  GooVs  Will— God's  will 
for  us,  as  it  was  for  Abraham,  is  loyal  obedience. 
As  the  little  child  said  of  the  angels  in  heaven 
who  do  God's  will  there,  'they  obey  without 
asking  any  questions.'  This,  and  this  alone,  is 
the  secret  of  power  in  daily  living. 

4.  A  fuller  view  of  God's  Grace.— The  whole 
chapter  is  full  of  grace.  It  was  grace  that 
prompted,  planned,  and  provided  these  blessings 

207 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xvii.  for  Abraham.  It  was  grace  that  condescended 
to  Abraham's  weaknesses,  limitations,  and  faults. 
It  was  grace  that  persisted  with  Abraham  in 
spite  of  every  check  and  drawback,  and  it  was 
grace  that  perfected  everything  concerning  him. 
God  is  still  'the  God  of  all  grace,'  and  it  is  the 
believer's  joy  to  experience  the  'unsearchable 
riches  of  His  grace  in  His  kindness  toward  us 
in  Christ  Jesus.' 


208 


XXIII 
FELLOWSHIP  WITH  GOD 

Gen.  xviii.  1-21 


And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of  Mature  :  and 
he  aat  in  the  teiit  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day  : 

And  he  lift  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood 
by  him  :  and  when  he  saw  them,  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the 
tent  door,  and  bowed  himself  toward  the  ground, 

And  said,  My  Lord  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight, 
pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee,  from  thy  servant : 

Let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched,  and  wash  your  feet, 
and  rest  yourselves  under  the  tree  : 

And  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comfort  ye  your 
hearts  ;  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on  :  lor  therefore  are  ye  come  to 
your  servant.     And  they  said,  So  do,  as  thou  hast  said. 

And  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah,  and  said, 
Make  ready  quickly  three  measures  of  lino  meal,  knead  it,  and 
make  cakes  upon  the  hearth. 

And  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetcht  a  calf  tender  and 
good,  and  gave  it  unto  a  young  man  ;  and  he  hasted  to  drew  it 

And  he  took  butter,  and  milk,  and  the  calf  which  he  had 
dressed,  and  set  it  bofore  them  ;  and  he  stood  by  them  under  the 
tree,  and  they  did  eat. 

And  they  said  unto  him,  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ?  And  he 
said,  Behold,  in  the  tent. 

And  he  said,  I  will  certainly  return  unto  thee  according  to  the 
time  of  life  ;  and,  lo,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son.  And 
Sarah  heard  it  in  the  tent  door,  which  teas  behind  him. 

Now  Abraham  and  Sarah  xoere  old  and  well  stricken  in  age : 
and  it  ceased  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the  manner  of  women. 

Therefore  Sarah  laughed  within  herself,  saying,  After  I  am 
waxed  old  shall  I  have  pleasure,  my  lord  Wing  old  also? 

And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abraham,  Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh, 
saying,  Shall  I  of  a  surety  bear  a  child,  which  am  old  ? 

Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?    At  the  time  appointed  I 

209 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

will  return  unto  thee,  according  to  the  time  of  life,  and  Sarah 
shall  have  a  son. 

Then  Sarah  denied ,  saying,  I  laughed  not ;  for  she  was  afraid. 
And  he  said,  Nay  :  but  thou  didst  laugh. 

And  the  men  rose  up  from  thence,  and  looked  toward  Sodom : 
and  Abraham  went  with  them  to  bring  them  on  the  way. 

And  the  Lord  said,  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing 
which  I  do  ; 

Seeing  that  Abraham  shall  surely  become  a  great  and  mighty 
nation,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  in 
him? 

For  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children  and  his 
household  after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord, 
to  do  justice  and  judgment ;  that  the  Lord  may  bring  upon 
Abraham  that  which  he  hath  spoken  of  him. 

And  the  Lord  said,  Because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
is  great,  and  because  their  sin  is  very  grievous  ; 

I  will  go  down  now,  and  see  whether  they  have  done  altogether 
according  to  the  cry  of  it,which  is  come  unto  me  :  and  if  not,  I 
will  know. 

Gen.  xviii.  /^VUR  life  in  relation  to  God  can  be  summed  up 
I-2I.  V-S     in  four  words — sonship,  worship,  stewardship, 

fellowship.  The  believer  is  at  once  a  son,  a 
subject,  a  servant,  and  a  friend  of  God.  The 
last-named  relationship  marks  the  later  period  of 
Abraham's  life,  and  seems  to  be  (as  always) 
associated  with  growth  and  maturity  of  spiritual 
experience.  In  this  chapter  there  are  several 
aspects  of  the  believer's  fellowship  with  God, 
and  it  is  probable  that  from  this  period  com- 
mence those  experiences  which  led  to  Abraham 
being  called  the  ' friend  of  God'  (2  Chron.  xx. 
7 ;  Isa.  xli.  8 ;  Jas.  ii.  23).  He  is  the  only  one 
to  whom  this  designation  is  given  in  the  Old 
Testament 
I.  The  I.  The  Divine  Appearance  (vers.  1-8). — The  char- 

?lvine  acter  of  the  appearance  is  noteworthy.     It  was  not 

(rers.  i-8).     in  the  form  of  a  vision  (chap,  xv.),  nor  was  it  merely 

210 


Fellowship  with  God 

a  word  or  message  (chap.  xvii.).     It  was  a  Divine  Gen.  xviii. 
appearance  as  a  Guest,   thus  marking   Abraham's  I~21- 
position  of  friendship  and  fellowship  with  God. 

It  is  evident  that  the  '  three  men '  represent  a 
personal  manifestation  of  God  in  visible  form, 
accompanied  by  two  created  angels  (ver.  22  and 
xix.  1).  The  fact  that  the  Church  of  England  uses 
this  chapter  as  a  Lesson  for  Trinity  Sunday  indi- 
cates that  this  chapter  has  been  regarded  as  in 
some  sense  a  foreshadowing  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity.  We  must,  of  course,  be  careful  not  to 
read  too  much  of  such  a  New  Testament  idea  into 
it,  though  we  are  perfectly  safe,  and  entirely 
warranted,  in  seeing  in  this  unique  manifestation 
an  indication  of  certain  essential  distinctions  in  the 
Godhead  which  subsequently  were  fully  revealed  as 
the  Trinity  of  the  New  Testament. 

The  response  made  by  Abraham  (vers.  2-8)  is  a 
characteristic  picture  of  Eastern  politeness  ami 
hospitality.  The  elements  of  courtesy  (ver.  2), 
activity  (vers.  6-7),  hospitality  (vers.  7-8),  and 
respect  (ver.  8)  are  very  interesting  and  noteworthy, 
and  strictly  true  to  Eastern  life  to-day.  The  promin- 
ence given  to  hospitality  in  the  New  Testament  is 
also  to  be  pondered  (Rom.  xii.  13;  1  Tim.  iii.  2; 
3  John  5-7).  Abraham  indeed  '  entertained  angels 
unawares '  (Heb.  xiii.  2). 

II.   The  Divine  Assurance  (vers.  9-15). — Theques  II.  The 
tion  '  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ? '  showed  that  the  ^ilUlnce 
strangers  knew  her  name,  and  the  words  which  im-  [wtn.  9-15). 
mediately  followed  quickly  told  him  Who  the  speaker 
was.     The  promise  of  a  son  was  then  repeated, 
211 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xviii.  with  the   assurance  of  the  near  approach  of  its 

I-2I.  fulfilment. 

Sarah  received  this  message  with  the  utter 
astonishment  of  unbelief.  She  could  not  credit 
the  possibility  of  it.  This  is  only  one  out  of  several 
indications  in  the  course  of  the  story  that  Sarah's 
spiritual  kinship  with  Abraham  was  not  very  close, 
and  that  she  had  never  really  risen  with  him  to  his 
clear  faith  in  God. 

Sarah  was  now  taught  a  solemn  and  severe 
lesson.  She  was  first  of  all  reminded  of  God's 
power.  '  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? ' 
And  when  she  denied  her  laughter,  she  was  reminded 
of  God's  knowledge  (ver.  15).  Sarah  now  became 
aware  of  the  real  character  of  her  visitors,  and  we 
see  the  result  in  her  fear  even  while  she  denied  the 
laughter. 

III.  The  III.   The   Divine    Announcement    (vers.    16-21). 

Announce-     — "^   v^8^ors   tnen    k^   *ne   hospitable  tent  of 
ment  Abraham,  and  with  characteristic  courtesy  Abraham 

(vers.  16-21).  accompanie(l  them  on  their  journey.     The  time  had 
come  for  a  further  revelation  to  Abraham. 

How  beautiful  is  the  suggestion  made  by  the 
Divine  soliloquy !  '  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham 
that  thing  which  I  do?'  God's  friends  are  per- 
mitted to  know  His  secrets  because  they  are  His 
friends.  Abraham  is  regarded  by  God  as  having 
a  right  to  know  what  was  about  to  be  done  (Ps. 
xxv.  4 ;  Amos  iii.  7). 

God  reveals  His  purpose  to  Abraham  for  very 
weighty  reasons.    He  is  to  be  the  means  of  blessing 
to  all  nations  (ver.  18),  and  it  is  therefore  necessary 
212 


Fellowship  with  God 

for  him  to  know  the  reason   of  this  destruction  Gen.  xviii. 

of  two  of  the  cities   of  the  earth— Sodom   and  1"21> 

Gomorrah.      Further,    Abraham's    influence    over 

posterity  (ver.  19,  R.V.)  required  that  he  should 

know  of  this  judgment   in   order   that   it   might 

be    used    as    a    solemn    lesson    in    the    days    to 

come  (Ps.  lxxviii.  1-8).     Again,  it  was  his  influence 

with  those  under  his  charge,  and  their  obedience, 

that  would  in  some  way  bring  about  the  fulfilment 

of  God's  word  to  Abraham  himself  (ver.  19,  last 

clause). 

God  now  tells  His  servant  of  the  terrible  sin  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  of  His  Divine  deter- 
mination to  examine  into  it  and  to  deal  with  it 
accordingly.  Thus  the  servant  of  God  learns  the 
Divine  will  and  enters  more  fully  into  the  Divine 
purposes. 

In  this  section  we  have  an  illustration  of  fellow-  Suggestions 
ship  with  God  and  some  of  its  essential  features.  wrj:uti 
Fellowship  is  the  crowning  purpose  of  God's 
revelation  (1  John  i.  3).  There  is  nothing  higher 
than  this,  for  man's  life  finds  its  complete  realisation 
in  union  and  communion  with  God.  Notice  the 
following  elements : — 

1.  Sacred  Intimacy. — The  picture  of  God  as  the 
guest  of  Abraham  is  a  symbol  of  that  spiritual 
relationship  which  is  brought  very  clearly  and 
beautifully  before  us  in  the  New  Testament 
What  an  unspeakable  privilege  it  is  to  have  God 
as  our  Guest,  and  for  us  to  be  His  guests  (John  xiv. 
23 ;  Rev.  iil  20.) 

213 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xviii.      2.  Genuine  Humility. — Abraham's   attitude   on 
I-2I.  this  occasion  is  noteworthy.     He  quickly  realised 

Who  had  come,  and  although  he  had  all  the 
privileges  of  fellowship,  he  never  forgot  his  own 
true  place  and  position.  So  is  it  always  with 
the  true  believer.  He  never  forgets  that,  not- 
withstanding all  the  privileges  of  fellowship,  God 
is  God,  and  he  himself  is  nothing.  Reverence  is 
never  separated  from  the  fullest,  freest  realisation 
of  the  Gospel  of  Grace.  While  we  have  '  access,' 
it  is  l access  into  the  Holiest'  (Heb.  x.  19).  There 
is  no  incompatibility,  but  the  most  beautiful  fitness 
in  the  freedom,  freeness,  and  fulness  of  Divine 
grace,  combined  with  the  attitude  of  reverential 
awe  in  those  who  are  partakers  of  grace.  'Holy 
and  reverend  is  His  Name '  (Ps.  cxi.  9). 

3.  Special  Revelation. — Fellowship  with  God  is 
always  associated  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will. 
Servants  do  not  know  their  master's  purposes, 
but  friends  and  intimates  do.  Our  Lord  taught 
this  plainly  to  His  disciples  (John  xv.  15).  There 
is  no  position  like  that  of  fellowship  with  God 
for  knowing  fully  our  Master's  will.  (Cf.  John 
xiii.  25,  R.V.). 

4.  Unique  Association. — The  man  who  is  in 
fellowship  with  God  does  not  merely  know  the 
Divine  will,  but  becomes  associated  with  God  in 
the  carrying  out  of  that  will.  God  deliberately 
and  definitely  associated  Abraham  with  the  realisa- 
tion of  His  purposes  (vers.  17-19),  and  this  has 
ever  been  the  case.  The  friends  of  God  become 
His   fellow-workers,   and   are   used    to   carry   out 

214 


Fellowship  with  God 

the  wide-reaching  purposes  of  His  will  to  man-  Gen.  xviii. 
kind.     In  view  of  all  these  glorious  privileges  and  X~2I« 
solemn    responsibilities   of   fellowship   with   God, 
'what  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all 
holy  conversation  and  godliness?' 


215 


XXIV 

THE   MINISTRY  OF 
INTERCESSION 

Gen.  xviii.  22-33  — xix.  27-29 

And  the  men  turned  their  faces  from  thence,  and  went  toward 
Sodom  :  but  Abraham  stood  yet  before  the  Lord. 

And  Abraham  drew  near,  and  said,  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the 
righteous  with  the  wicked  ? 

Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  the  city  :  wilt 
thou  also  destroy  and  not  spare  the  place  for  the  fifty  righteous 
that  are  therein  ? 

That  be  far  from  Thee  to  do  after  this  manner,  to  slay  the 
righteous  with  the  wicked  :  and  that  the  righteous  should  be  as 
the  wicked,  that  be  far  from  Thee :  Shall  not  the  judge  of  all 
the  earth  do  right  ? 

And  the  Lord  said,  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  within 
the  city,  then  I  will  spare  all  the  place  for  their  sakes. 

And  Abraham  answered  and  said,  Behold,  now,  I  have  taken 
upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord  which  am  but  dust  and  ashes : 

Peradventure  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous  :  wilt 
thou  destroy  all  the  city  for  lack  of  five  ?  And  He  said,  If  I  find 
there  forty  and  five,  I  will  not  destroy  it. 

And  he  spake  unto  Him  yet  again,  and  said,  Peradventure 
there  shall  be  forty  found  there.  And  He  said,  I  will  not  do  it 
for  forty's  sake. 

And  he  said  unto  Him,  0  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will 
speak  :  Peradventure  there  shall  thirty  be  found  there.  And 
He  said,  I  will  not  do  it  if  I  find  thirty  there. 

And  he  said,  Behold  now,  I  have  taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto 
the  Lord :  Peradventure  there  shall  be  twenty  found  there. 
And  He  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  twenty's  sake. 

And  he  said,  0  let  not  the  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will  speak 
yet  but  this  once  :  Peradventure  ten  shall  be  found  there.  And 
He  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  ten's  sake. 

And  the  Lord  went  His  way,  as  soon  as  He  had  left  communing 
with  Abraham  :  and  Abraham  returned  unto  his  place. 

216 


The  Ministry  of  Intercession 

And  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to  the  place  where 
he  stood  before  the  Lord  : 

And  he  looked  toward  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward  all 
the  land  of  the  plain,  and  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the 
country  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the 
plain,  that  God  remembered  Abraham,  and  sent  Lot  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  overthrow,  when  He  overthrew  the  cities  in  the 
which  Lot  dwelt. 

ONE  of  the  essential  and  most  blessed  features  Gen.  xviii. 
of  the  believer's  fellowship  with  God  is  the  22-33 — 
privilege  and   responsibility,    the  joy  and  duty  of  X1X*  27"29* 
intercession.     The  Divine  announcement  concerning 
Sodom  led  Abraham  to  intercede  for  the  doomed 
city.     God's  revelation  thus  finds  its  response   in 
His  servant's  intercession.     Some  of  the  elements 
of  intercession    are    clearly   shown   in   the   above 


I.  The  Privileged  Position  (vers.  22-23).— Inter-  I.  The 
cession  with  God  presupposes  a  spiritual  relationship  portion* 
and  position  from  which  all  else  follows.  (vers.  22-23). 

He  was  in  God's  presence.  'Abraham  stood 
yet  before  the  Lord.'  The  two  angels  had  gone 
on  to  Sodom  to  fulfil  the  Divine  will,  leaving  the 
Angel  of  the  Covenant  with  Abraham. 

He  also  realised  God's  nearness.  'Abraham 
drew  near.'  How  like  this  language  is  to  the 
teaching  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (Heb. 
x.  22).  Abraham  was  on  a  true  footing  of  fellow- 
ship as  he  poured  out  his  heart  to  God. 

He  also  knew  God's  will.  He  had  already  been 
told  what  God  was  about  to  do,  and  this  led  him 
to  prayer. 

We  have  here  a  striking  illustration  of  the  true 

P  217 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xviii.  spirituality  and  power  of  Abraham's  life.     Several 
22-33 —       elements  of  real  prayer  are  clearly  seen. 
xix.  27-29.      jj    rjifa  jEarnest  Spirit  (vers.  23,  24).— His  corn- 
Earnest         passion  is  manifest.     Abraham's  prayer  is  evidently 
Spirit  for  the  whole  city  and  not  merely  for  his  nephew  Lot. 

(vers.  23, 24).  j^  .g  gjjpjkjjjg  flja|.  jje  joes  not  mention  Lot  from 

beginning  to  end,  but  only  prays  for  the  city. 

His  definiteness  is  noteworthy.  He  asked  for 
what  he  wanted,  and  this  is  always  the  true  atti- 
tude in  prayer.  God  will  tell  us  whether  what  we 
want  is  also  what  He  thinks  we  need,  but  mean- 
while our  prayers  should  be  definite. 

His  boldness  is  striking.  There  is  no  hesitation 
in  his  utterance,  no  fear  in  his  attitude.  Every- 
thing is  frank,  fearless,  courageous,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  he  knows  Whom  he  believes.  Our 
Lord  frequently  inculcated  boldness  in  prayer 
(Luke  xi.  5-10 ;  xviii.  1-8). 
III.  The  III.   The     Urgent    Plea     (vers.     23-25).— But 

Piefent  Abraham  was  perplexed  by  the  fact  that  the  destruc- 
(vers.  23-25).  tion  of  Sodom  would  involve  the  destruction  of 
righteous  men  with  wicked  ones.  With  this  difficulty 
in  his  mind  he  did  the  very  best  thing ;  he  told  God 
about  it.  Problems  thus  brought  to  God  will  either 
be  resolved,  or  else  sufficient  grace  will  be  given  to 
wait  for  the  perfect  solution.  Abraham  had  some- 
how got  hold  of  the  great  principle  that  good 
people  are  as  salt  preventing  surrounding  corrup- 
tion. How  often  one  Christian  in  a  family  keeps 
back  Divine  judgment  on  sin!  How  often 
wandering  boys  are  withheld  from  ruin  through 
their  mother's  prayers ! 

218 


The  Ministry  of  Intercession 

Yet  he  cannot  help  entertaining  a  strong  con-  Gen.  xviii. 
viction.     He  felt  that  it  was  impossible  that  the  22-33— 
righteous  could  be  destroyed  with  the  wicked.     In  aux*  2^'2^% 
the  absence  of  any  revelation  of  a  future  judgment 
redressing  present  inequalities,  we  are  not  surprised 
at  Abraham's  strong  assertion  of  his  sense  of  the 
injustice   of  indiscriminate  destruction.      He  was 
evidently  concerned  for  God  also,  and  was  particu- 
larly anxious  that  the  heathen  around  should  not 
get  a  wrong  impression  of  the  God  of  Abraham. 

And  all  the  while  he  rests  in  a  sure  confidence  in 
God.  'Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
right?'  He  makes  his  appeal  to  God's  righteous- 
ness rather  than  to  His  mercy,  and  in  so  doing  he 
touches  the  very  foundation  of  things.  With  a 
perfect  trust  in  the  absolute  justice  of  God  he  pours 
out  his  heart  and  tells  God  his  difficulties.  This  is 
the  true  spirit  of  the  believer  who  is  face  to  face 
with  the  great  mysteries  of  life.  He  takes  them  all 
to  God  in  prayer,  and  in  the  presence  of  Divine 
righteousness  he  finds  that  rest  of  heart  which  en- 
ables him  to  wait  patiently  for  God  (Psalms  xxxvii. 
6,  7;  lxxhi.  16,  17). 

IV.   The  Divine  Encouragement  (ver.  20). — Let  iv.  The 
us  observe,  moreover,  how  point  by  point  the  prayer  Divine 
was  met  by  a  Divine  response :  '  And  the  Lord  said.'  ment 
Thus  God  spoke  to  His  servant  in  answer  to  prayer. 
So  it  ever  is  with  the  believer.      God's  Word  is  the 
complement  of  and  response  to  our  petitions. 

*  If  I  find  ...  I  will  spare.'    God  met  his  ser- 
vant's request  by  a  definite  promise  that  if  He 
found  fifty  righteous  He  would  spare  the  place. 
219 


(vex.  a6). 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xviii.  'For  their  sakes.'  Thus  God  responded  to  His 
22-33 —  servant's  conviction  that  there  was  indeed  a  power 
xix.  27-29.  an(j  jnfluence  jn  g00ci  people.  The  whole  city  is 
to  be  spared,  notwithstanding  its  sin,  simply  and 
solely  on  account  of  fifty  people  therein.  Nothing 
can  be  clearer  than  this  testimony  to  the  salutary 
power  and  influence  of  godliness  (Matt.  v.  13). 

V.  The  Deep  V.  The  Deep  Humility  (ver.  27). — Abraham  had 
(ver\27).        a  Prof°un(l  consciousness  of  God.     'I  have  taken 

upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord.'  Again  we 
notice  how  his  friendship  with  God  is  never 
allowed  to  make  him  forget  his  true  position  of 
dependence. 

He  also  had  an  equally  real  and  deep  knowledge 
of  himself.  '  Which  am  but  dust  and  ashes.'  This 
is  always  the  consciousness  of  the  true  child  of  God 
as  he  abides  in  the  Divine  presence.  God's  holi- 
ness and  our  sinfulness,  God's  greatness  and  our 
nothingness,  are  the  overwhelming  experiences. 

VI.  The  VI.  The  Earnest  Persistence  (vers.  29-32). — 
Persistence  ^*x  time8  Abraham  intercedes  for  the  wicked  cities, 
(vers.  29-32).  His  heart   is  drawn  out  in  pity  and  compassion, 

and  he  pleads  again  and  again.  Persistence  in 
prayer  is  one  of  the  prominent  features  of  New 
Testament  teaching.  *  Continuing  instant'  (Rom. 
xii.  12).  Steadfastness  in  intercession  is  one  of 
the  sure  marks  of  reality  and  earnestness. 

Six  times  God  responded  to  His  servant's  prayer. 
After  each  petition  came  the  definite  answer.  So 
is  it  always ;  as  long  as  we  ask,  God  will  answer. 
Notice  the  threefold  promise  with  its  element  of 
increasing  persistency  in  Matt  vii.  7. 
220 


The  Ministry  of  Intercession 

VII.  The  Natural  Limitation  (ver.  33). — Why,  Gen.  xviii. 
then,  did  Abraham  stop  praying  when  he  reached  22-33 — 
the  number  ten  ?     Probably  because  of  his  ignor-  xlx*  S/"2^ 
ance  of  the  extent  and  effect  of  Sodom's  sin,  and,  Natural  * 
from  another  point   of  view,  probably  because  of  Limitation 
his  ignorance  of  the  extent  of  the  Divine  mercy       '  ^ 
and  longsuffering. 

As  it  has  often  been  said,  Abraham  ceased  ask- 
ing before  God  ceased  giving.  The  reason  why 
Abraham  did  not  go  lower  than  ten  was  possibly 
due  to  the  fact  that  now  he  did  not  think  there 
were  anything  like  that  number  in  the  city. 

We  naturally  compare  and  contrast  Abraham's 
words,  '  I  will  speak  yet  but  this  once,'  with  the 
intercession  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Whose  plead- 
ing on  our  behalf  knows  no  limitation  whatever. 
1  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  .  .  .  seeing  that 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession '  (Heb.  vii.  25). 

VIII.  The    Gracious    Answer    (xix.    27-29). —  VIII.  The 
1  Abraham    rose    up    early   in    the    morning    and  Gracious 
looked  towards  Sodom.'     Somehow   or  other  he  (chap.  xix. 
must  have  expected  that  God  would  at  least  de-  27"a°)' 
liver  the  one  righteous  man  that  was  in  Sodom,  and 

not  destroy  him  with  the  rest. 

Is  it  not  very  significant  that  Lot's  preservation 
is  here  directly  connected  with  Abraham's  interces- 
sion? Thus  Abraham  saved  his  nephew  for  the 
second  time.  The  first  time  by  the  sword  (chap,  xiv.), 
the  second  time  by  supplication  (chap,  xviii.). 

1.   The  solemn  responsibilities  of  Intercession. —  Suggestions 
How  striking  arc  the  words  of  Samuel  teaching  Meditation. 
221 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xviii.  us  that  we  are  actually  sinning  against  God  if 
22-33 —  we  (j0  not  pray  for  others !  (1  Sam.  xii.  }3.)  Do 
xix.  27-29.  we  cjeariy  realise  this  ?  Does  it  not  make  us 
ashamed  and  even  afraid  when  we  remember  how 
little  we  pray  for  others  as  compared  with  our 
prayers  for  ourselves  ?  And  yet  there  is  scarcely  any 
part  of  prayer  more  prominent  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment than  prayer  for  others  (Jas.  v.  16 ;  2  Thess. 
iii.  1 ;  Eph.  vi.  17,  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1).  The  reason 
why  intercessory  prayer  is  thus  so  plainly  taught 
is  that  it  is  the  best  opportunity  we  possess  of 
showing  spiritual  interest  in  others.  Our  Christian 
life  will  never  be  really  healthy  and  strong  until 
we  make  intercession  a  very  prominent  and  even 
predominant  feature  of  our  private  devotions.  The 
Lord's  Prayer  gives  us  the  model  in  this  as  in  other 
respects. 

2.  The  marvellous  possibilities  of  Intercession. 
'The  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Job,  when  he 
prayed  for  his  friends'  (Job  xlii.  10).  This  shows 
the  reflex  blessing  of  intercessory  prayer,  but  far 
beyond  this  is  the  social  value  of  intercession. 
God  has  included  in  His  great  purpose  of  redemp- 
tive love  the  power  and  blessing  of  prayer  for 
others,  and  if  only  God's  people  would  realise  what 
their  prayers  could  do  for  the  world,  they  would 
take  up  this  work  of  priestly  intercession  in  a  way 
that  they  have  never  realised  before.  Only  the 
great  day  will  reveal  what  has  been  done  by  inter- 
cessory prayer.  The  Apostle  Paul  depended  greatly 
on  it  in  his  ministry,  and  was  frequently  asking  his 
friends  to  remember  him  and  his  work  in  prayer. 
222 


The  Ministry  of  Intercession 

3.  The  essential  conditions  of  Intercession, — We  Gen.  xviii. 
can  only  intercede  in  proportion  as  we  abide  in  22*33 
close  fellowship  with  God.     '  If  ye  abide  in  Me,  X1X*  27"29# 
and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye 
will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you '  (John  xv.  7). 
Asking  in  our  Lord's  Name  (John  xiv.  13  ;  xvi.  23) 
is  another  way  of  stuting  the  need  of  union  and 
communion  with  God.     '  In  My  Name  '  means,  not 
simply  using  His  Name  as  a  plea,  but  praying  in 
union  with  Him  and  with  all  that  we  know  of  His 
will.     When  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  the  Ix>rd's 
wordH  become  blessedly  true.     '  Ye  shall  ask  what 
ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you.'     '  Ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.'     (Cf. 
1  Johniii  22;  v.  14,  15.) 


223 


XXV 
THE  STORY  OF  LOT 

Gen.  xix. 


And  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  even  ;  and  Lot  sat  in 
the  gate  of  Sodom  :  and  Lot  seeing  them,  rose  up  to  meet  them  ; 
and  he  bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  the  ground  : 

And  he  said,  Behold  now,  my  lords,  turn  in,  I  pray  you,  into 
your  servant's  house,  and  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet, 
and  ye  shall  rise  up  early,  and  go  on  your  ways.  And  they  said, 
Nay  ;  but  we  will  abide  in  the  street  all  night. 

And  he  pressed  upon  them  greatly  ;  and  they  turned  in  unto 
him,  and  entered  into  his  house  :  and  he  made  them  a  feast,  and 
did  bake  unleavened  bread,  and  they  did  eat. 

But,  before  they  lay  down,  the  men  of  the  city,  even  the  men 
of  Sodom,  compassed  the  house  round,  both  old  and  young,  all 
the  people  from  every  quarter. 

And  they  called  unto  Lot,  and  said  unto  him,  Where  are  the 
men  which  came  in  to  thee  this  night  ?  bring  them  out  unto  us, 
that  we  may  know  them. 

And  Lot  went  out  at  the  door  unto  them,  and  shut  the  door 
after  him, 

And  said,  I  pray  you,  brethren,  do  not  so  wickedly. 

Behold  now,  I  have  two  daughters  which  have  not  known 
man  ;  let  me,  I  pray  you,  bring  them  out  unto  you,  and  do  ye 
to  them  as  is  good  in  your  eyes  :  only  unto  these  men  do  nothing  : 
for  therefore  came  they  under  the  shadow  of  my  roof. 

And  they  said,  Stand  back.  And  they  said  again,  This  one 
fellow  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a  judge  :  now  we 
will  deal  worse  with  thee  than  with  them.  And  they  pressed 
sore  upon  the  man,  even  Lot,  and  came  near  to  break  the  door. 

But  the  men  put  forth  their  hand,  and  pulled  Lot  into  the 
house  to  them,  and  shut  to  the  door. 

And  they  smote  the  men  that  were  at  the  door  of  the  house 
with  blindness,  both  small  and  great :  so  that  they  wearied 
themselves  to  find  the  door. 

And  the  men  said  unto  Lot,  Hast  thou  here  any  besides? 

224 


The  Story  of  Lot 


son-in-law,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  daughters,  and  whatsoever 
thon  hast  in  the  city,  bring  them  out  of  this  place  : 

For  we  will  destroy  this  place,  because  the  cry  of  them  is 
waxen  great  before  the  face  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  hath 
sent  us  to  destroy  it. 

And  Lot  went  out,  and  spake  unto  his  sons-in-law,  which 
married  his  daughters,  and  said,  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place  ; 
for  the  Lord  will  destroy  this  city.  But  he  seemed  as  one  that 
mocked  unto  his  sons-in-law. 

And  when  the  morning  arose,  then  the  angels  hastened  Lot, 
saying,  Arise,  take  thy  wife,  and  thy  two  daughters,  which  are 
here  ;  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of  the  city. 

And  while  he  lingered,  the  men  laid  hold  upon  his  hand, 
and  upon  the  hand  of  his  wife,  and  upon  the  hand  of  his  two 
daughters ;  the  Lord  being  merciful  unto  him  :  and  they  brought 
him  forth,  and  set  him  without  the  city. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they  had  brought  them  forth 
abroad,  that  he  said,  Escape  for  thy  life ;  look  not  behind  thee, 
neither  stay  thou  in  all  the  plain  :  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest 
thou  be  consumed. 

And  Lot  said  unto  them,  Oh  !  not  so,  my  lord. 

Behold  now,  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  and 
thou  hast  magnified  thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast  shewed  unto 
me  in  saving  my  life ;  and  I  cannot  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest 
some  evil  take  me,  and  I  die. 

Behold  now,  this  city  is  near  to  flee  unto,  and  it  is  a  little  one  : 
Oh  !  let  me  escape  thither  (is  it  not  a  little  one  ?)  and  my  soul 
shall  live. 

And  he  said  unto  him,  See,  I  have  accepted  thee  concerning 
this  thing  also,  that  I  will  not  overthrow  this  oity,  for  the 
which  thou  hast  spoken. 

Haste  thee  escape  thither ;  for  I  cannot  do  any  thing  till 
thou  be  come  thither.  Therefore  the  name  of  the  city  was  called 
Boat. 

The  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot  entered  into  Zoar. 

Then  the  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorrah  brim- 
stone and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven. 

And  He  overthrew  those  cities,  and  all  the  plain,  and  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  cities,  and  that  which  grew  upon  the  ground. 

But  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him,  and  she  became  a 
pillar  of  salt 

And  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to  the  place  where 
he  stood  before  the  Lord. 

And  he  looked  toward  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward  all 
the  land  of  the  plain,  and  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the 
country  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  God  destroyed  the  cities  of  the 
plain,  that  God  remembered  Abraham,  and  sent  Lot  out  of  the 

225 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

midst  of  the  overthrow,  when  He  overthrew  the  cities  in  which 
Lot  dwelt. 

And  Lot  went  up  out  of  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and 
his  two  daughters  with  him  ;  for  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar : 
and  he  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  daughters. 

And  the  first-born  said  unto  the  younger,  Our  father  is  old, 
and  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  earth  to  come  in  unto  us  after  the 
manner  of  all  the  earth  : 

Come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine,  and  we  will  lie  with 
him,  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  father. 

And  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that  night :  and  the 
first-born  went  in,  and  lay  with  her  father ;  and  he  perceived 
not  when  she  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose. 

And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  the  first-born  said 
unto  the  younger,  Behold,  I  lay  yesternight  with  my  father: 
let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night  also  ;  and  go  thou  in,  and 
lie  with  him,  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  father. 

And  they  made  their  father  drink  wine  that  night  also  :  and 
the  younger  arose,  and  lay  with  him ;  and  he  perceived  not 
when  she  lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose. 

Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  Lot  with  child  by  their 
father. 

And  the  first-born  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab  :  the 
same  is  the  father  of  the  Moabitcs  unto  this  day. 

And  the  younger,  she  also  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name 
Ben-ammi :  the  same  is  the  father  of  the  children  of  Ammon 
unto  this  day. 

Gen.  xix.  rflHERE  are  lives  recorded  in  the  Bible  which  have 
J-  well  been  called  beacons.  There  are  men  like 
Balaam,  Saul,  and  Solomon,  who  started  well,  with 
every  possible  advantage,  and  then  closed  their 
careers  in  failure  and  disaster.  Such  a  life  was 
that  of  Lot  the  nephew  of  Abraham.  He  came 
out  of  Mesopotamia  with  his  uncle,  and  continued 
with  him  in  Canaan  until  their  possessions  neces- 
sitated a  separation  (chapters  xii.,  xiii.).  He 
thereupon  pitched  his  tent  towards  Sodom,  but 
soon  entered  and  abode  in  the  city.  As  a 
consequence  he  was  involved  in  its  captivity  by 
the  kings  of  the  East  (chapter  xiv.).  Even  his  rescue 
220 


The  Story  of  Lot 

by  Abraham  did  not  suffice  to  warn  him  from  the  Gen.  xlx. 
place,  for  he  returned  and  lived  there  as  before. 

There  is  scarcely  a  life  recorded  in  Scripture 
which  is  fuller  of  serious  and  solemn  instruction 
for  every  believer. 

I.  The    Angelic     Visit    (vers.     1-3).  —  While  I.  The 
the  Divine  personage  remained  in   company  with  vJft 
Abraham,   the    two    attendant    angels    journeyed  (vers.  x-3). 
on  to  Sodom,  where  Lot  was  sitting  in  the  gate, 

the  place  of  concourse,  the  place  of  importance. 
It  is  not  improbable  that  he  sat  there  in  an 
official  capacity  as  judge.  With  the  true  spirit 
of  Eastern  courtesy  he  rose  to  meet  them,  and 
greeted  them  with  profound  obeisance,  also  offer- 
ing to  them  hospitality.  At  first  they  declined 
his  invitation,  alleging  a  somewhat  remarkable 
reason,  'We  will  abide  in  the  street  all  night.' 
They  were  there  for  the  purpose  of  exploration 
with  a  view  to  judgment,  and  perhaps  this  was 
why  they  suggested  remaining  all  night  in  the 
open  street  But  Lot  urged  them,  and  at  last 
they  yielded,  and  accepted  his  hospitality. 

II.  The  Awful  Depravity  (vers.   4-11).  —  Into  II.  The 
the  fearful  story  recorded   in   these  verses  it   is  ueprmvity 
impossible    to    enter    for    more    than   the    barest  (vers.  4-11). 
comment     Every  one  knows  that  the  sin  hinted 

at  here  is  perpetuated  for  ever  by  a  word  in  our 
language  to  which  this  chapter  has  given  rise. 
Perhaps  two  other  cities  have  equalled  Sodom  in 
this  respect,  the  cities  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum, 
both  of  which  have  suffered  in  a  similar  way  from 
devastation,  and  one  of  them  to  this  very  day 
227 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xix.  reveals  the  unspeakable  depravity  of  its  inhabitants. 
One  other  point  dare  not  be  overlooked  in  this 
hideous  recital  of  sin,  and  that  is,  the  selfish 
readiness  of  Lot  to  sacrifice  his  daughters  in  order 
to  save  his  own  life  and  peace. 

III.  The  III.  The  Solemn  Warning  (vers.  12-14).— The 
Warning  angels  now  enquire  of  Lot  as  to  his  kinsfolk,  and 
(vers.  12-14).  command   him  to  bring  them  out  of  the  wicked 

city.  They  also  announce  in  the  plainest  terms 
the  purpose  of  their  errand.  'The  Lord  hath  sent 
us  to  destroy  it.'  Lot  does  not  hesitate  to  believe 
their  testimony,  and  at  once  goes  forth  to  urge 
upon  his  sons-in-law  the  absolute  necessity  of 
getting  quickly  out  of  the  city.  'But  he  seemed 
as  one  that  mocked.'  His  testimony  had  no 
power.  He  had  lived  too  long  as  one  of  them- 
selves, without  any  very  real  difference,  to  allow 
of  his  message  being  of  any  avail.  When  the 
testimony  of  the  life  does  not  agree  with  the 
testimony  of  the  lips  the  latter  always  goes 
unheeded.  It  is  the  life  that  is  the  true 
light. 

IV.  The  IV.  Tlie  Urgent  Deliverance  (vers.  15-22).— At 
Deliverance  daybreak  the  angels  had  to  urge  Lot  to  take  his  wife 
(vers.  15-22).  and  two  daughters  out  of  the  city,  '  lest  they  be  con- 
sumed.' Even  then  Lot  lingered,  until  at  last  the  men 
laid  hold  upon  him,  his  wife,  and  his  daughters,  and 
compelled  them  to  go  outside  the  city,  'the  Lord 
being  merciful.'  On  reaching  the  confines  of  the 
city  another  urgent  appeal  was  made.  'Escape 
for  thy  life;  look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay 
thou  in  all   the  plain;   escape  to  the  mountain.' 

228 


The  Story  of  Lot 

Even  now,  with  almost  incredible  weakness,  Lot  Gen.  xix. 

pleads   that   the  mountain   is   too   far  away,  and 

begs  to  be  permitted  to  go  to  the  neighbouring 

city  of  Zoar.     The  Divine  messengers  concede  this 

point,  urging  him  once  more  to  escape,  since  God 

was  unable  to  do  anything  till   His  servant  was 

in   safety.      What    a   marvellous    picture    of    the 

Divine   condescension  and   patience   with   one  of 

the  frailest  of  His  creatures. 

V.  The  Divine  Judgment  (vers.   23-26). — Lot,  v.  The 
together  with  his  wife  and  his  daughters,  had  only  Dlvme 
reached    Zoar  when   the   Lord    poured    out    His  (vers.  23  26). 
judgment    on   the  wicked    cities    and    overthrew 

them  and  all  their  people.  Lot's  wife  seems  to 
have  been  equally  attracted  to  Sodom,  for  we 
are  told  that  she  looked  back,  and  was  soon 
engulfed  in  the  lava  by  which  the  cities  were 
destroyed.  With  husband  and  wife  both  weak, 
hesitating,  and  yielding,  there  can  be  no  surprise 
at  what  we  know  of  their  family  life. 

VI.  The  Powerful  Intercession  (vers.   27-29). —  VI.  The 

Abraham  rose  early  that  morning  on  his  way  to  Powerfid 

Intercession 
a  place  from  which  he  could  see  the  plain  of  the  (vers.  27-29). 

Jordan  valley.  As  he  looked  towards  the  cities  he 
saw  a  smoke  like  that  of  a  furnace,  and  yet  with  ex- 
quisite suggestiveness  we  have  inserted  at  this  point 
the  indication  that  Abraham's  prayer  was  answered 
so  far  as  concerned  his  nephew.  'God  remem- 
bered Abraham,  and  sent  Lot  out'  Abraham  had 
ceased  praying  at  the  mention  of  ten  righteous, 
but  God  was  better  than  his  prayers,  and  heard 
him  for  four  only. 

229 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xix.       VII.  The    Unutterable   Shame  (vers.   30-38).— 

VII.  The      Again  it  is   impossible   to   comment  on  this  un- 

Shame"1  *   speakably    sorrowful     scene.       Drunkenness    and 

(vers.  30-38).  impurity   are   once  more   seen   in   association.     It 

perhaps  says  one  thing  for  Lot  that  it  was  only  by 

means  of  the  sin  of  drunkenness  that  his  daughters 

could  accomplish  their  ends.     Yet  this  is  but  an 

infinitesimal  point  by  comparison,   for  we  cannot 

forget  that  Moab  and  Ammon  (though  they  were 

kinsmen  to  Abraham)  were  in  after  years   among 

the  most  implacable  foes  of  Abraham's  descendants. 

As  for  Lot  he  had  sounded  the  lowest  depths  of 

shame,  and  passes   away   into   the  darkness   and 

oblivion  that  were  his  due. 

Suggestions  1 .  Lessons  from  Sodom. — (a)  We  observe  the  awful 
Meditation  extent  of  human  depravity.  This  is  one  of  the 
most  terrible  chapters  in  the  Bible,  and  is  a 
reminder  of  the  hideous  possibilities  of  sin,  and 
the  extent  to  which  evil  can  take  hold  of  human 
nature.  When  the  restraints  of  the  Divine  law 
are  removed  or  set  at  naught  there  are  scarcely 
any  limits  to  human  degeneracy  and  depravity 
(Rom.  i.  21-31;  2  Pet.  ii.  8;  Jude  7,  8). 

(b)  We  mark  the  certainty  of  Divine  judgment. 
The  iniquity  of  Sodom  was  indeed  full.  i  The  cry 
of  them  is  waxen  great  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,' 
and  when  human  sin  reaches  its  awful  fruit  the 
judgment  is  as  certain  as  it  is  unerring.  There  is 
no  fact  in  God's  universe  more  certain  and  assured 
than  this,  that  He  is  not,  and  cannot,  and  will 
not  be  indifferent  to  human  sin. 
230 


The  Story  of  Lot 

(c)  We  note  the  marvel  of  Divine  mercy.  From  Gen.  xix. 
the  narrative  it  might  seem  that  Lot  was  not  worth 
saving.  His  weakness  amounted  to  wickedness,  and 
jet  again  and  again  God  bore  with  him,  waited  for 
hi  in,  pleaded  with  him.  urged  him.  and  at  length 
did  not  bring  down  the  Divine  judgment  until  he 
was  safe  out  of  Sodom.  Is  there  anything  in  this 
world  so  wonderful  as  the  mercy  that  waits  for  us, 
follows  us,  hedges  our  path,  and  short  of  com- 
pulsion does  everything  to  keep  us  from  ruin  ? 

2.  Lessons  from  Lot. — (a)  His  dangers  may 
easily  be  ours  also.  His  first  danger  was  from 
things  lawful.  It  was  not  wrong  to  desire  a  good 
place  for  his  flocks  and  herds.  The  sin  was  in 
putting  earthly  ease  and  prosperity  first.  'More 
men  are  killed  by  meat  than  poison.'  More  souls 
are  lost  by  abuse  of  things  lawful  than  by  the  use 
of  things  unlawful.  It  is  not  wrong  to  have 
possessions,  it  is  only  wrong  to  let  possessions  have 
us.  A  ship  in  the  water  is  perfectly  right,  but 
the  water  in  the  ship  would  be  perfectly  wrong. 
The  Christian  in  the  world  is  right  and  necessary, 
but  the  world  in  the  Christian  is  wrong  and 
disastrous.  Another  danger  of  Lot's  was  that  of 
compromise.  At  first  he  pitched  his  tent  towards 
Sodom,  but  soon  entered  the  city  and  stayed  there. 
He  doubtless  thought  he  could  testify  to  the 
wicked  people,  but  his  words  were  nothing  without 
deeds.  They  were  quick  enough  to  see  that  he 
was  as  sharp  about  money-making  as  the  rest  of 
them.  A  Christian  must  be  outside  Sodom  in 
order  to  testify  against  it  To  go  into  the  world 
231 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xix.  to  influence  it  is  futile  and  fatal.  The  world  does 
not  need  influencing  but  saving,  and  for  this  the 
Christian  must  live  a  life  of  separation, '  in  the 
world,  but  not  of  the  world.'  This  suggests  yet  a 
third  danger  that  Lot  incurred,  that  of  worldliness. 
He  did  testify  and  showed  genuine  hospitality, 
but  his  character  was  weakened,  and  his  life  was 
essentially  selfish  from  the  moment  that  he  chose 
the  best  part  of  the  land  to  the  moment  when  he 
was  prepared  to  sacrifice  his  daughters  for  his  own 
safety.  Some  men  are  utterly  unable  to  bear 
worldly  success.  It  affects  their  character  and 
their  home  life.  Not  least  of  all  this  worldliness 
endangered  his  happiness.  He  '  got  on '  in  the 
world,  he  sat  in  the  gate  as  a  leading  citizen,  but 
he  was  miserable.  He  '  vexed  his  soul '  day  by 
day  in  seeing  and  hearing  their  wickedness  (2  Pet. 
ii.  8).  It  is  always  so  with  those  who  do  not  put 
God  first  Those  who  put  Him  second  are  the 
most  miserable  of  men. 

(b)  His  weakness  may  be  ours  also.  He  lacked 
the  spirit  of  true  independence.  He  was  all  right 
as  long  as  he  was  with  the  stronger  nature  of 
Abraham,  but  he  never  seems  to  have  been  right 
afterwards.  When  the  prop  was  removed  he  fell 
It  is  often  the  case  with  Christian  people  to-day. 
Their  religion  is  one  of  association.  As  long  as 
they  are  surrounded  with  Christian  friends,  and 
connected  with  a  Christian  Church,  their  life  seems 
to  be  perfectly  right;  but  let  these  supports  be 
removed,  and  they  themselves  placed  alone  in 
difficult  surroundings,  and  their  weakness  is  at  once 
232 


The  Story  of  Lot 

seen.  Lot  also  lacked  decision.  At  every  point  Gen.  xix. 
of  the  story  from  his  separation  from  Abraham 
indecision  is  stamped  on  his  career.  Mark  in  this 
chapter  the  urgency  of  the  angels,  and  the  refer- 
ences to  his  lingering,  and  to  their  hastening  him. 
Even  Zoar  had  to  be  left  and  the  mountain  reached 
after  all.  Every  true  life  needs  decision  and  firm- 
ness of  character.  Otherwise  when  emergencies 
come  circumstances  are  too  strong  and  we  fall. 
'The  flighty  purpose  never  is  o'ertook,  unless  the 
deed  go  with  it' 

(c)  Lot's  needs  may  be  ours  also.  The  one 
supreme  and  all-embracing  requirement  was  whole- 
hearted trust  in  and  consecration  to  God.  But  for 
the  phrase  'righteous  Lot'  (2  Pet.  ii.  7)  we 
should  have  scarcely  believed  him  to  be  in  any 
sense  a  believer.  From  the  Old  Testament  nar- 
rative he  seems  to  be  apparently  godly,  but  really 
worldly,  and  the  explanation  is  that  there  was 
nothing  whole-hearted  about  his  relation  to  God. 
His  religion,  though  real  as  far  as  it  went,  was  so 
entirely  superficial  that  it  did  not  cover  more  than 
a  small  part  of  his  life.  And  so  he  was  a  back- 
slider, an  awful  failure,  his  soul  saved,  but  his  life 
lost  '  Saved,  so  as  by  fire.'  What  a  call  it  is  to 
keep  close  to  God  and  to  His  people,  to  witness  for 
God  to  the  world  around,  never  to  indulge  in  any 
half-way  house  between  godliness  and  worldliness, 
but  to  let  our  light  shine,  and  live  by  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God  Who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us. 


233 


XXVI 

AN  OLD  SIN  REPEATED 

Gen.  xx. 


And  Abraham  journeyed  from  thence  toward  the  south  country, 
and  dwelled  between  Kadesh  and  Shur,  and  sojourned  in  Gerar. 

And  Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  She  is  my  sister :  and 
Abimelech  king  of  Gerar  sent  and  took  Sarah. 

But  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  night,  and  said  to 
him,  Behold,  thou  art  but  a  dead  man,  for  the  woman  which 
thou  hast  taken  ;  for  she  is  a  man's  wife. 

But  Abimelech  had  not  come  near  her :  and  he  said,  Lord,  wilt 
thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nation  ? 

Said  he  not  unto  me,  She  is  my  sister  ?  and  she,  even  she  her- 
self said,  He  is  my  brother.  In  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  and 
innocency  of  my  hands,  haye  I  done  this. 

And  God  said  uuto  him  in  a  dream,  Yea,  I  know  that  thou 
didst  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart ;  for  I  also  withheld  thee 
from  sinning  against  me  :  therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  touch 
her. 

Now  therefore  restore  the  man  his  wife ;  for  he  is  &  prophet, 
and  he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live :  and  if  thou 
restore  licr  not,  know  thou  that  thou  shalt  surely  die,  thou,  and 
all  that  are  thine. 

Therefore  Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  called  all 
his  servants,  and  told  all  these  things  in  their  ears  :  and  the 
men  were  sore  afraid. 

Then  Abimelech  called  Abraham,  and  said  unto  him,  What 
hast  thou  done  unto  us  ?  and  what  have  I  offended  thee,  that 
thou  hast  brought  on  me  and  on  my  kingdom  a  great  sin  ?  thou 
hast  done  deeds  unto  me  that  ought  not  to  be  done. 

And  Abimelech  said  unto  Abraham,  What  sawest  thou,  that 
thou  hast  done  this  thing  ? 

And  Abraham  said,  Because  I  thought,  Surely  the  fear  of  God 
is  not  in  this  place ;  and  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's 
sake. 

234 


An  Old  Sin  Repeated 

And  yet  indeed  she  is  my  sister  :  she  is  the  daughter  of  my 
father,  but  not  the  daughter  of  my  mother ;  and  she  became  my 
wife. 

And  it  oame  to  pass,  when  God  caused  me  to  wander  from  my 
father's  house,  that  I  said  unto  her,  This  is  thy  kindness  which 
thou  shalt  shew  unto  me  ;  at  every  place  whither  we  shall  come, 
say  of  me,  He  is  my  brother. 

And  Abimelech  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men-servants,  and 
women-servants,  and  gave  them  unto  Abraham,  and  restored  him 
Sarah  his  wife. 

And  Abimelech  said,  Behold,  my  land  is  before  thee  :  dwell 
where  it  pleaseth  thee. 

And  unto  Sarah  he  said,  Behold,  I  have  given  thy  brother  a 
thousand  pieces  of  silver  :  behold,  ho  is  to  thee  a  covering  of  the 
eyes,  unto  all  that  are  with  thee,  and  with  all  other.  Thus 
she  was  reproved. 

So  Abraham  prayed  unto  God ;  and  God  healed  Abimelech, 
and  his  wife,  and  his  maid-servants  ;  and  they  bare  children. 

For  the  Lord  had  fast  closed  up  all  the  wombs  of  the  house  of 
Abimelech  because  of  Sarah,  Abraham's  wifo. 

THE  continuance  and  power  of  the  evil  nature  Gen.  xx. 
in  believers  are  among  the  most  patent  and 
potent  facts  of  universal  spiritual  experience.  That 
the  *  infection  doth  remain  in  the  regenerate '  is  as 
certain  as  it  is  sad  and  serious.  We  have  here  a 
solemn  example  and  warning  of  this  in  Abraham. 

I.   The  Deplorable  Sin  (vers.   1,  2). — Abraham  I.  The 
journeyed  onward  from  Mamre  (xviii.  1)  towards  g-J ora  e 
the  south,  that  southern  district  of  Palestine  known  (vers,  i,  a). 
as  the  Negeb.    This  may  have  been  due  to  the  need 
of  new  pasturage  for  his  increasing  flocks,  or  it  may 
have  been  caused  by  his  call  to  a  continued  pilgrim- 
age with  no  settled  habitation  in  the  Land  of  Promise. 
Some  think  that  it  was  prompted  by  a  desire  to 
remove  from  the  surroundings  made  bo  painful  to 
him  from  the  events  recorded  in  chapter  xix.     His 
place  of  sojourning  was  Gerar,  in  the  land  of  the 
Philistines. 

235 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xx.  As  before  (cf.  chap.  xii.  13)  Abraham  said  that 
Sarah  was  his  sister.  Thus  Abraham  attempted  to 
protect  himself  at  the  expense  of  his  wife.  This 
repetition  of  an  old  sin  would  be  astonishing  were 
it  not  for  the  close  consistency  it  bears  to  human 
nature,  even  among  the  people  of  God.  Believers 
are  often  found  to  slip  and  fall  where  they  have 
fallen  previously. 

Abimelech,  the  King  of  Gerar,  at  once  acted 
upon  the  information  received  about  Sarah,  and 
took  her  with  the  intention  of  making  her  his  wife. 
He  doubtless  realised  the  value  of  an  alliance  with 
a  powerful  man  like  Abraham.  It  is  sometimes 
said  that  this  story  is  only  a  variation  of  that  which 
is  recorded  in  chapter  xiii.,  and  is  not  a  separate 
incident,  but  the  numerous  variations  in  the 
narrative,  as  well  as  its  place  in  the  history  of 
Abraham,  disprove  this  theory.  Besides,  it  is  too 
true  to  human  nature  that  a  sin  of  this  kind  should 
be  repeated  to  make  it  incredible  that  Abraham 
should  again  transgress. 
II.  The  II.  The  Divine  Intervention  (vers.  3-8). — Very 

Divine  appropriately  we  have  the  title  'God'  employed 

(vers.  3-8).  (ver.  3)  when  the  relation  of  God  with  the  heathen 
is  in  question.  *  Jehovah '  is  the  Covenant  Name. 
The  Lord's  intervention  was  for  the  purpose  of 
preserving  Sarah,  and  at  the  same  time  of  fulfilling 
the  Divine  purposes  concerning  the  seed.  Thus 
God's  children  are  saved  from  themselves. 

It  was  necessary  that  Abimelech  should  be  re- 
strained from  doing  that  which  in  all  ignorance 
and  innocence  he  was  about  to  do.      There  was 
236 


An  Old  Sin  Repeated 

also    the    thought    of    instruction    and   testimony  Gen.  xx. 
concerning    Abraham    and    his    relation   to   God. 
Notwithstanding  Abraham's   sin,  God  would  not 
allow  him  to  be  dishonoured  in  the  face  of  the 
ungodly. 

The  character  of  Abimelech  shines  out  beauti- 
fully, and  is  in  marked  contrast  with  Abraham's  at 
this  point.  Men  of  the  world  stand  out  superior 
at  times  to  the  people  of  God,  and  this  is  one  of 
the  great  perplexities  and  problems  of  the  spiritual 
realm.  Abimelech 's  words  bear  witness  to  a  true 
knowledge  of  God,  and  a  genuine  fear  of  God 
outside  the  covenant  with  Abraham  (ver.  8). 
Abimelech  had  no  intention  of  sinning,  only  of 
doing  that  which  was  perfectly  natural  to  that  age 
and  state  of  life. 

III.   The  Deserved  Rebuke  (vers.  9-16).— Again  in.  The 
Abimelech's   character   and    attitude   shine   as   he  Rej^g4 
reproaches  Abraham  with  what  he  had  done.     It  (vers.  9 -16). 
is  very  sad  when  a  man  of  God  has  to  be  rebuked 
by  a  man  of  the  world. 

There  are  three  points  in  Abraham's  statement 
by  which  he  attempted  to  justify  his  conduct 
(a)  He  thought  there  was  no  fear  of  God  (ver.  11) 
in  Abimelech  and  his  people.  We  can  see  how 
distinctly  he  was  mistaken  on  this  point  (b)  Sarah 
was  really  his  sister ;  that  is,  a  half-sister.  Abra- 
ham here  clearly  crossed  over  the  boundary  between 
concealment  and  lying,  and  by  suppressing  the  truth 
he  suggested  only  too  plainly  what  was  false,  (c) 
It  was  an  old  compact  made  thirty  years  ago  (ver. 
13).  This,  spoken  in  extenuation,  really  intensifies 
237 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xx.  his  sin,  for  it  means  that  all  through  the  thirty 
years  of  fellowship  with  God  in  Canaan  this  old 
compact  had  been  in  existence  and  never  broken. 
How  true,  again,  this  is  to  experience !  A  believer 
often  finds  some  old  habit  or  sin  cropping  up,  and 
if  it  is  not  at  once  dealt  with  it  will  assuredly 
bring  trouble  and  sorrow. 

Abimelech  gave  gifts  to  Abraham,  doubtless  as 
an  acknowledgment  and  as  a  kind  of  propitiation 
of  the  wrong  that  would  have  been  done.  To 
Sarah  also  Abimelech  addressed  himself,  telling  her 
that  the  gifts  which  he  had  given  to  her  husband 
were  of  a  propitiatory  kind,  so  that  the  recent 
events  might  be  covered  and  forgotten.  This  must 
have  been  a  very  definite  rebuke  to  Sarah,  who, 
whatever  the  old  compact  may  have  meant,  should 
have  at  once  told  Abimelech  the  true  state  of 
affairs.  N.B. — Perhaps  the  words  'he  is  to  thee' 
(ver.  16)  should  be  rendered  'it  is  to  thee,'  referring 
to  the  gift  rather  than  to  Abraham. 

All  through  we  see  the  manifest  moral  superiority 
of  a  heathen  man  over  children  of  God.  When 
believers  are  out  of  the  line  of  God's  will  they  will 
sometimes  go  lower  than  other  people.  Abimelech 
is  at  his  best.  Abraham  is  at  his  worst  We  must, 
of  course,  take  care  not  to  judge  the  entire  life  of 
either  by  this  one  incident,  but  the  facts  of  the 
incident  itself  convey  their  own  special  lesson. 
How  sad  and  deplorable  it  is  when  a  believer  does 
not  keep  in  touch  with  God !  '  The  corruption  of 
the  best  is  the  worst.'  '  'Tis  true,  'tis  pity ;  and 
pity  'tis  'tis  true.' 

238 


An  Old  Sin  Repeated 

IV.  The    Definite    Results  (vers.    17,    18).— In  Gen.  xx. 
answer  to  prayer,  God's  blessing  came  down  upon  IV.  The 
Abimelech  and  his  household.    Thus  God  overruled  Results 
these  sad  mistakes  and  brought  blessing.  (vers.  17, 18). 

Sarah's  position  as  Abrahams  wife  was  pre- 
served, and  she  would  still  be  the  instrument  of 
fulfilling  God's  purposes  by  means  of  the  promised 
seed. 

Divine  protection  was  vouchsafed  to  Abraham, 
and  his  sin  overruled  by  the  mercy  and  love  of  God. 
If  God  had  not  interposed  on  His  servant's  behalf 
what  an  unspeakable  catastrophe  would  have  been 
the  result! 

1.  The  possibilities  of  sin   in   believers. — It   is  Suggestions 
almost   incredible,  after   the   experiences   recorded  Meditation. 
in  chapters  xv.   and  xviii.,  that  Abraham  should 

have  sinned  in  this  way  against  God.  Notice 
the  elements  included  in  this  sin :  (a)  The  fear 
of  man ;  (b)  innate  selfishness ;  (c)  deliberate 
untruth ;  (d)  distrust  of  God  through  fear  of 
circumstances.  And  what  a  degradation  it  was 
to  be  rebuked  by  a  man  of  the  world!  It  is 
truly  a  picture  full  of  sadness  and  shame. 

2.  The  perils  of  sin  in  believers. — There  was 
peril  to  Abraham  himself.  Old  habits  broke  out 
afresh  which  had  been  restrained  and  kept  in  the 
background  for  years.  This  is  often  a  believer's 
experience.  Former  weaknesses  and  inveterate 
tendencies  which  we  think  no  longer  powerful 
suddenly  arise  and  bring  about  our  downfall 
There  is  also  a  peril  to  our  fellow-believers  through 

239 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xx.  our  example.  What  a  bad  influence  on  Sarah ! 
Younger  Christians  are  shocked,  and  even  led 
into  sin,  when  they  see  an  old  believer  falL 
There  is  also  a  peril  to  the  world,  for  the  sin 
of  a  child  of  God  dishonours  God,  and  so  far 
prevents  the  world  from  being  impressed  with  the 
Divine  character. 

3.  The  persistence  of  sin  in  believers. — Abraham's 
experience  proves  New  Testament  truth  that  the 
old  nature  abides  in  the  believer  to  the  very  end. 
Nowhere  in  Scripture  is  there  any  warrant  for  the 
idea  that  the  root  of  sin  is  taken  out  in  this  life. 
The  teaching  of  Article  IX.  of  the  Church  of 
England  is  in  exact  correspondence  with  the  Word 
of  God.  Neither  in  the  regenerate  nor  in  the 
sanctified  (a  distinction  often  made,  but  without 
warrant)  is  'the  infection  of  nature'  taken  away. 
The  realisation  of  this  solemn  and  patent  fact  would 
save  many  a  believer  from  spiritual  trouble. 

4.  T/ie  protection  against  sin  in  believers. — God 
took  Abraham's  part  before  Abimelech,  but  assuredly 
must  have  dealt  very  differeutly  with  him  in  private. 
The  believer's  standing  before  God  is  one  thing ;  his 
state  is  quite  another.  While  God's  people  are  all 
'  accepted  in  the  Beloved,'  they  are  not  all  equally 
acceptable  to  the  Beloved,  and  the  question  of 
protection  against  indwelling  sin  is  vital  for  Christian 
living.  This  protection  God  has  provided  in  abundant 
sufficiency  for  every  need.  The  promise  is  clear: 
'Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you.'  God's 
provision  of  power  is  in  union  with  the  death  of 
Christ,  and  this,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  affords 

240 


An  Old  Sin  Repeated 

the  guarantee  of  perpetual  protection  and  victory.  Gen.  xx. 

This  provision  must,  however,  be  used.     We  are 

to  'live  in  the  Spirit  and  walk  in  the  Spirit'  (Gal. 

v.  25).    '  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus ' 

is  the  law,  not  of  eradication,  but  of  counteraction. 

If  we  will  live  and  walk  in  the  Spirit  we  shall  not 

yield  to  and  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  16). 

Full  surrender  to  the  Holy  Spirit  will  keep  the  inner 

being  sensitive  to  the  approaches  of  sin.     We  shall 

become  conscious  of  the  Satanic  devices  to  lead  us 

astray  ;  and  as  we  continue  to  yield  ourselves  to  the 

incoming,  full  possession,  and  entire  control  of  the 

Spirit  of  God  the  old  nature  will  be  kept  under,  the 

new  life  will  have  complete  power,  and  we  shall  be 

'  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loves  us.' 


241 


XXVII 
JOY  AND  SORROW 

Gen.  xxi.  1-21 


And  the  Lord  visited  Sarah  as  He  had  said,  and  the  Lord  did 
unto  Sarah  as  He  had  spoken. 

For  Sarah  conceived,  and  bare  Abraham  a  son  in  his  old  age, 
at  the  set  time  of  which  God  had  spoken  to  him. 

And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son  that  was  born  unto 
him,  whom  Sarah  bare  to  him,  Isaac. 

And  Abraham  circumcised  his  son  Isaac,  being  eight  days  old, 
as  God  had  commanded  him. 

And  Abraham  was  an  hundred  years  old,  when  his  son  Isaac 
was  born  unto  him. 

And  Sarah  said,  God  hath  made  me  to  laugh,  so  thai  all  that 
hear  will  laugh  with  me. 

And  she  said,  Who  would  have  said  unto  Abraham,  that 
Sarah  should  have  given  children  suck  ?  for  I  have  born  him 
a  son  in  his  old  age. 

And  the  child  grew,  and  was  weaned  :  and  Abraham  made  a 
great  feast  the  same  day  that  Isaac  was  weaned. 

And  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  which  she  had 
born  unto  Abraham,  mocking. 

Wherefore  she  said  unto  Abraham,  Cast  out  this  bondwoman 
and  her  son  :  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir 
with  my  son,  even  with  Isaac. 

And  the  thing  was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's  sight  because 
of  his  son. 

And  God  said  unto  Abraham,  Let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy 
sight  because  of  the  lad,  and  because  of  thy  bondwoman  ;  in  all 
that  Sarah  hath  said  unto  thee,  hearken  unto  her  voice ;  for  in 
Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called. 

And  also  of  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  will  I  make  a  nation, 
because  he  is  thy  seed. 

And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  bread, 

242 


Joy  and  Sorrow 


and  a  bottle  of  water,  and  gave  it  unto  Hagar  ((tutting  it  on  her 
shoulder),  and  the  child,  and  sent  her  away  :  and  she  dej>arted, 
and  wandered  in  tho  wilderness  of  Beer-sheba. 

And  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and  she  cast  the  child 
under  one  of  the  shrubs. 

And  she  went,  and  sat  her  down  over  against  him  a  good  way 
off,  as  it  were  a  bow-shot :  for  she  said,  Let  me  not  see  the  death 
of  the  child.  And  she  sat  over  against  him,  and  lift  up  her 
voice,  and  wept. 

And  God  heard  the  voice  of  tlto  lad :  and  the  angel  of  God 
called  to  Hagar  out  of  heaven,  and  said  unto  her,  What  aileth 
thee,  Hagar  f  fear  not ;  for  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad 
where  he  is. 

Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in  thine  hand  ;  for  I  will 
make  him  a  great  nation. 

And  God  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well  of  water  ;  and 
she  went,  ana  filled  tho  bottle  with  water,  and  gave  the  lad 
drink. 

And  God  was  with  the  lad  ;  and  he  grew,  and  dwelt  in  the 
wilderness,  and  became  an  archer. 

And  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  Taran  :  and  his  mother 
took  him  a  wife  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt. 


THE  believer  never  conies,  never  can  come,  to  Gen.  xxi. 
a  point  in  his  experience  when  God  has  I"2I» 
nothing  new  to  teach  him  or  to  give  to  him. 
Further  and  deeper  lessons  come  constantly, 
lessons  about  God  and  about  life  in  relation  to 
Him.  This  is  now  very  clearly  and  strikingly 
brought  before  us  in  connection  with  Abraham. 

I.   The  Promised  Seed  (vera.   1-8).— At  last  the  I.  The 
word  of  God  was  fulfilled,  and  Sarah  received  the  geeT^ 
long-promised  son.     Her  joy  can  readily  be  under-  (vers.  1-8). 
stood,  and  it  is  suggestive  to  see  the  emphasis  upon 
the  Lord's  action  being  in  strict  accordance  with 
His  word.    '  The  Lord  did  ...  as  He  had  spoken ' 
(ver.   1).      'At  the  set  time  of  which   God   had 
spoken '  (ver.  2).     The  comment  of  the  Apostle  is 
very  significant  in  this  connection.    According  to  the 
243 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxi.    Authorised  Version  (Rom.  iv.  19)  Abraham  'con- 
1"21'  sidered  not  his  own  body  now  dead,'  implying  that 

his  faith  disregarded  the  physical  circumstances 
which,  humanly  speaking,  might  make  it  im- 
possible for  God  to  do  as  He  had  promised. 
According  to  the  Revised  Version,  which  omits 
the  negative,  and  reads,  'He  considered  his  own 
body  now  dead,'  we  have  a  still  more  striking 
suggestion  as  to  his  faith,  for  it  implies  that 
he  deliberately  thought  on  the  subject  of  his 
own  age  and  circumstances,  and,  notwithstanding 
this  careful  consideration,  he  exercised  faith  in 
God  and  His  Word.  And  now  at  length  this 
faith  was  justified,  and  God  was  true  to  His 
promise. 

The  naming  of  the  child  '  Isaac '  and  his  circum- 
cision were  two  prompt  and  definite  proofs  of 
Abraham's  thorough  trust  in  God.  As  already 
seen  (chap,  xvii.),  the  root  idea  of  circumcision  is 
designation,  God  marking  off  the  life  as  belonging 
to  Him. 

Sarah  now  laughs  the  laugh  of  joy  and  satis- 
faction. The  fulfilment  of  the  promise  was  almost 
too  good  to  be  true ;  and  yet  it  was  true,  as  she 
shows  by  her  joyous  surprise.  She  doubtless 
remembers  her  former  laugh  of  incredulity  (chap, 
xviii.  13)  as  well  as  Abraham's  laugh  of  faith  and 
hope  (chap.  xvii.  17). 

In  due  course  the  child  was  weaned ;  according 
to  Eastern  custom,  at  a  much  later  date  than  in 
Western  lands.  Isaac  must  have  been  at  least 
three,  if  not  five,  years  old  when  this  event  took 

244 


Joy  and  Sorrow 

place.     Abraham  made  a  great  feast  to  celebrate  Gen.  xxl 
this  occasion.      The  difference  between  East  and  x*21- 
West    in    this    matter,    and    the    spiritual    ideas 
associated   with   it,  can   be   seen   from   a   careful 
comparison  of  Psalm  cxxxi.  2 ;    Isaiah  xxviii.  9 ; 
Matt  xxi.  16. 

II.   The  Profound    Sadness  (vers.    9-11).— The  II.  The 
results  of  Abraham's  sin  as  to   Hagar  now  show  sadness* 
themselves   acutely.      Up  to   the  time  of  Isaac's  (▼ers.  9  11). 
birth    Ishmael    occupied    the    foremost    place    in 
Abraham's    life,   but    now   he   has   to   give   place 
to    Isaac.       The    disappointment    to    a    growing 
and    wild    lad    of    seventeen    must    have    been 
keen,  and  we  are  not  surprised   to   read  of   his 
mockery  of  the  little  child.     St  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  29) 
speaks  of  the  action  of  Ishmael  as  '  persecuting/ 
and  no  wonder,  from  Ishmael's  point  of  view,  since 
Isaac's  arrival  meant  that  he  was  robbed  of  his 
former  position. 

Sarah  was  quick  to  see  this  action  of  Ishmael, 
and  resented  it  It  was  now  her  turn  to  do 
what  Hagar  had  done  under  similar  circumstances. 
Thus  the  tangled  web  becomes  still  more  tangled 
as  jealousy,  anger,  and  malice  bear  their  sad 
fruit 

Sarah  at  once  demands  that  Hagar  and  Ishmael 
shall  be  cast  out  The  terms  in  which  she  speaks 
of  '  this  bondwoman  and  her  son '  show  the  pitiable 
spirit  of  jealousy  and  anger.  She  insists  that 
Ishmael  shall  not  be  heir  with  her  son,  as  though 
Abraham  had  any  idea  of  the  two  boys  being 
co-heirs.  Sarah  had  either  forgotten,  or  else 
246 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxi.   distrusted    God's   definite   promise   about    Isaac's 

i-2i.  sole  heirship  (chap.  xvii.  21). 

It  is  no  surprise  that  this  was  a  poignant  grief  to 
Abraham.  After  all,  Ishmael  was  his  own  child, 
and  for  seventeen  years  had  been  the  joy  and  light 
of  his  life. 

III.  The  III.  The  Perfect  Strength  (vers.  12-14).— We  are 

Strength  now  to  see  now  ^°^  m*erP08ed  amidst  this  strife  and 
(vers.  12-14).  sorrow,  overruling  His  children's  mistakes  and  sin, 
and  doing  the  very  best  that  was  possible  for  them. 

We  can  hear  the  voice  of  God  comforting  him 
(ver.  12).  God  urged  Abraham  not  to  grieve.  In 
all  ages  God's  cheering  message  to  His  people  has 
been  '  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled.' 

We  can  observe  the  wisdom  of  God  guiding  him 
(ver.  12).  God  tells  Abraham  to  listen  to  what 
Sarah  had  said.  Her  counsel  is  to  be  followed, 
even  though  her  conduct  could  not  be  approved. 
Ishmael's  presence  in  the  home  would  doubtless 
have  been  an  ever-increasing  difficulty,  and  a  very 
genuine  hindrance  to  the  complete  realisation  of 
God's  will  and  purposes  for  Isaac.  Thus  in  sending 
Ishmael  away  Abraham  was  really  removing  the 
cause  of  possible  failure  in  regard  to  Isaac. 
Moreover,  Ishmael  had  arrived,  or  would  soon 
arrive,  at  a  point  in  his  life  where  he  would 
need  room  to  grow,  and  a  change  would  therefore 
be  good  for  him  as  well. 

We  can  mark  the  promise  of  God  encouraging  him 

(ver.  13).     God  would  not  forget  Ishmael,  and  he 

also  was  to  become  a  great  nation  because  of  his 

relationship  to    Abraham.      It   is    interesting    to 

246 


Joy  and  Sorrow 

notice  this  reason  assigned  by  God  for  His  care  Gen.  xxi. 
of  Ishmael.  It  is  '  because '  he  is  the  child  of  one  I"21* 
of  God's  children.  Thus  Abraham  was  encouraged 
to  do  what  must  have  been  one  of  the  hardest, 
things  in  his  experience,  to  put  away  from  him 
his  own  child,  and  to  realise  that  that  child  was 
no  longer  to  be  in  any  close  and  definite  sense  part 
of  his  life. 

We  can  see  the  servant  of  God  responding 
(ver.  14).  Abraham  at  once  obeys  the  Divine 
word.  We  see  him  rising  up  early  in  the  morning, 
and  with  thoughtrulness  and  tenderness  he  bids 
Hagar  and  Ishmael  farewell.  It  requires  very 
little  imagination  to  enter  into  his  feelings  as  he 
saw  them  depart,  realising  that  a  break  had  come 
into  his  life  which  could  never  be  altered  or  set 
aside.  It  is  striking  to  notice  the  entire  absence 
of  any  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  Hagar.  She 
seems  to  have  taken  everything  quietly.  Ishmael, 
too,  although  seventeen  years  old,  showed  no  signs 
of  rebellion.  Perhaps  there  was  something  behind 
which  would  explain  all,  as,  indeed,  seems  to  be 
hinted  at  in  the  Apostolic  treatment  of  this  incident 
(Gal.  iv.> 

1.  The  unchanging  faithfulness  of  God. — The  Suggestions 
birth  of  Isaac  was  a  beautiful  and  striking  reminder  Meditation 
that  God  is  ever  true  to  His  word.  '  As  He  had 
spoken'  is  the  keynote  of  the  narrative.  This  is 
the  experience  of  God's  people  in  all  ages.  Joshua 
said  that  not  one  thing  had  (ailed  of  all  that  God 
had  spoken ;  all  had  come  to  pass  (Josh.  xxi.  46 ; 
247 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxi.   xxiii.  14).     This  is  the  bedrock  of  the  believer's 
I-2I.  life.     '  God  is  faithful/     A  careful  study  of  all  the 

passages  of  the  New  Testament  (and  they  are  not 
few)  which  bring  before  us  the  faithfulness  of 
God  will  show  the  prominence  of  this  great 
truth  in  the  Bible.  '  He  abideth  faithful ' ; 
and  the  more  closely  we  enter  into  fellowship 
with  Him  through  His  Word,  the  more  definitely 
we  shall  realise  the  preciousness  of  this  great 
fact.  'The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for 
ever,  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  to  all  generations ' 
(Ps.  xxxiii.  11). 

2.  The  perfect  wisdom  of  God. — We  can  easily 
realise  the  aching  heart  and  troubled  spirit  of 
Abraham  as  he  prepared  to  bid  farewell  to  Ishmael, 
and  yet,  the  initial  mistake  having  been  made 
(chap,  xvi.),  this  severance  was  really  the  very 
best  thing  that  could  have  happened  for  all 
concerned.  Discipleship  always  involves  discipline, 
and  discipline  is  always  necessary  to  spiritual 
blessing.  God  was  taking  up  the  tangled  threads 
of  His  servant's  life,  weaving  them  into  His  own 
Divine  pattern,  and  overruling  everything  for  good. 
Happy  for  us  if,  like  the  Apostle  Paul,  we  can  rest 
our  hearts  day  by  day  on  '  the  depth  of  the  riches 
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God '  (Rom. 
xi.  33). 

3.  The  absolute  sufficiency  of  God.  —  God's 
call  to  Abraham  was  met  by  Divine  grace 
sufficient  for  his  need.  The  Lord  never  puts 
upon  His  people  more  than  they  are  able  to 
bear.      He    encourages    them    by   His    promises, 

248 


Joy  and  Sorrow 

He  assures   them    of  His    presence    and    power,  Gen.  xxl 
and  in  response  to  all  these  encouragements  His  X"2I» 
people  yield  trustful  obedience,  and  find  that  His 
grace  is  sufficient  for  them.     '  As  thy  days,  so  shall 
thy  strength  be.' 


249 


XXVIII 

THE   DAILY   ROUND 

Gen.  xxi.  22-34 

And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Abimelech  and  Phichol 
the  chief  captain  of  his  host  spake  unto  Abraham,  saying,  God 
is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  doest : 

Now  therefore  swear  unto  me  here  by  God  that  thou  wilt  not 
deal  falsely  with  me,  nor  with  my  son,  nor  with  my  son's  son  : 
but  according  to  the  kindness  that  I  have  done  unto  thee,  thou 
shalt  do  unto  me,  and  to  the  land  wherein  thou  hast  sojourned. 

And  Abraham  said,  I  will  swear. 

And  Abraham  reproved  Abimelech  because  of  a  well  of  water, 
which  Abimeleoh's  servants  had  violently  taken  away. 

And  Abimelech  said,  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this  thing : 
neither  didst  thou  tell  me,  neither  yet  heard  I  of  it,  but  to-day. 

And  Abraham  took  sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto 
Abimelech  ;  and  both  of  them  made  a  covenant. 

And  Abraham  set  seven  ewe  lambs  of  the  flock  by  themselves. 

And  Abimelech  said  unto  Abraham,  What  mean  these  seven 
ewe  lambs  which  thou  hast  set  by  themselves  T 

And  he  said,  For  these  seven  ewe  lambs  shalt  thou  take  of  my 
hand,  that  they  may  be  a  witness  unto  me,  that  I  have  digged 
this  well. 

Wherefore  he  called  that  place  Beer-sheba ;  because  there 
they  sware  both  of  them. 

Thus  they  made  a  covenant  at  Beer-sheba :  then  Abimelech 
rose  up,  and  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  host,  and  they 
returned  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines. 

And  Abraham  planted  a  grove  in  Beer-sheba,  and  called  there 
on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  everlasting  God. 

And  Abraham  sojourned  in  the  Philistines'  land  many  days. 

Gen.  xxi.    rjlHE  ordinary  uneventful  days  of  a  believer's  life 
22-34.  -L      are  usually  a  better  test  of  his  true  character 

than  an  emergency  or  crisis.    It  is  sometimes  possible 
250 


The  Daily  Round 

to  face  a  great  occasion  with  wisdom  and  courage,  Gen.  xxi. 
and  yet  to  fail  in  some  simple,  average  experiences  22"Z^ 
of  daily  living.  We  have  already  had  illustrations 
of  what  Abraham  could  do  in  great  crises  and 
striking  situations.  We  shall  now  see  him  in  an 
ordinary  episode,  and  be  able  to  consider  some  of 
the  elements  of  his  inner  life  and  character. 

I.  A  Striking  Testimony  (ver.  22). — Abimelech,  I.  A  Striking 
King  of  Gerar,  together  with  Phichol,  the  chief  cap-  ^ti^ny 
tain  of  his  host,  came   to   Abraham  on  a  special 

errand,  using  the  striking  words,  *  God  is  with  thee 
in  all  that  thou  doest'  '  Abimelech  '  is  probably  a 
title  of  a  dynasty,  like  '  Pharaoh '  (c/.  xx.  2  ;  xxvi 
1,  16).  '  Phichol '  also  seems  to  be  an  official  title 
answering  to  '  Vizier '  (cf.  xxvi.  26). 

This  testimony  to  God's  presence  with  Abraham 
seems  to  have  been  based  on  the  occurrences  of 
chapter  xx.  and  on  Abimelech's  subsequent 
experiences  of  Abraham's  life  and  prosperity. 
It  showed  that  the  patriarch's  daily  life  was  a 
genuine  witness  for  God.  The  fact  that  a 
heathen  king  should  be  able  to  draw  this 
conclusion  clearly  indicates  the  genuineness  and 
reality  of  Abraham's  life. 

II.  A  Significant  Request  (ver.  23). — Abimelech,  II.  A 
realising  the  presence  of  God  with  Abraham,  is  l^j^01 
specially  desirous  of  peace  for  himself,  his  kindred,  (▼«-.  23). 
and  his  land.     He  therefore  appeals  to  Abraham  to 

take  a  solemn  oath  to  insure  this  result     Abimelech 
also  reminds  him  of  their  past  intercourse,  and  the 
kindness  shown  on  a  former  occasion  (xx.  15). 
Abimelech    is    evidently    afraid    of   Abraham's 
261 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 


Gen.  xxi. 
23-24. 


III.  A 
Sincere 
Response 

(ver.  24). 


IV.  A 

Serious 
Remon- 
strance 
(ver.  25). 


power,  and  this,  with  his  growing  prosperity  and 
influence,  might  easily  lead  to  difficulty,  and  even 
differences,  in  the  immediate  future.  Perhaps,  too, 
Abimelech  might  not  have  felt  quite  satisfied  about 
Abraham's  future  attitude  in  the  light  of  his  former 
experiences.  Yet  it  is  very  probable  that  religious 
influence  was  not  wanting  as  a  reason  for  making 
this  request.  Abimelech  was  finding  out  what 
many  others  have  found  out  since  his  day,  that 
the  friendship  of  good  men  is  often  an  advantage, 
even  in  things  temporal. 

III.  A  Sincere  Response  (ver.  24). — At  once 
Abraham  responds  to  the  invitation  of  Abimelech, 
and  shows  his  readiness  to  do  as  the  heathen  king 
desires.  He  expresses  his  readiness  and  deter- 
mination to  take  the  oath  required,  and  to  give 
the  solemn  undertaking  that  there  shall  be  peace 
between  him  and  Abimelech.  Abraham  stands 
out  at  this  point  to  distinct  advantage.  He  is 
truly  a  man  of  God,  and  shows  this  by  his 
heartiness  and  willingness  in  meeting  the  desires 
and  fears  of  Abimelech.  His  readiness  would 
at  once  go  far  to  show  that  he  was  not  bent 
on  any  conquest  or  purely  selfish  ends. 

IV.  A  Serious  Remonstrance  (ver.  25). — Abraham 
now  points  out  one  difficulty  in  the  way  and 
clearly  implies  that  any  compact  of  peace  is 
really  impossible  until  the  difficulty  is  settled. 
Abimelech's  servants  had  violently  taken  away  a 
well  of  water  which  belonged  to  Abraham,  and 
it  was  with  reference  to  this  that  Abraham 
complained.      Water  was  everything  to  nomadic 

252 


The  Daily  Round 

tribes,   and  its  absence  necessarily   involved   the  Gen.  xxi. 
greatest  possible  inconvenience,  injury,  and  loss.    23-24« 

The  fact  that  Abimelech's  servants  had  dealt  un- 
justly with  the  well  has  suggested  to  some  writers 
that  the  well  may  have  been  made  by  Abraham  for 
the  convenience  of  Ishmael  when  he  was  sent  out 
from  his  father's  home,  and  that  Abimelech's 
servants  were  not  aware  of  the  connection  of 
Ishmael  with  Abraham.  This  is  a  very  probable 
explanation,  though  at  the  same  time  it  is  equally 
likely  that  in  the  movement  of  their  flocks  and 
herds  the  servants  of  Abimelech  might  easily  have 
trespassed  in  Abraham's  neighbourhood.  Such 
disputes  have  always  been  very  common. 

V.  A  Satisfactory  Explanation  (ver.  26).— Abi-  v.  A 
melech,  however,  disclaims  all  knowledge  of  what  |*^^on 
had  been  done.     He  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  (▼«•.  26). 
action  of  his  servants.     Thus,  so  far  as  Abimelech  is 
concerned,  a  simple  misunderstanding  is  at  the  root 

of  Abraham's  remonstrance.  How  often  this  is  the 
case  between  friends  and  neighbours !  Happy  are 
they  who  are  enabled  to  clear  away  misunder- 
standings as  quickly  and  as  easily  as  these  two. 
Abimelech  not  only  disclaims  knowledge  and 
responsibility,  but  complains  of  Abraham  for  not 
telling  him  of  this.  The  man  is  evidently  sincere, 
upright,  and  genuine,  a  fine  specimen  of  natural 
goodness,  apart  from  the  special  spiritual  revelation 
involved  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant 

VI.  A  Solemn  Covenant  (ver.  27-32).— Abraham  VI.  A 
thereupon  sets  before  Abimelech  the  usual  coven-  cjjjii 
ant  presents   (verse   27.      Cf.    1    Kings   xv.    19 ;  (ven.  tj  yt). 

253 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxi.   Hosea  xii.  1).     Then  he  sets  seven  lambs  of  the 

23"24«  flock  by  themselves,  and,  on  being  asked  why  this 

difference  was  made,  he  replies  that  they  are  a 

special  gift,  an  additional  security  for  the  future 

with  reference  to  the  well  (verse  30). 

Abraham  then  calls  the  name  of  the  place 
'  Beer-sheba,'  which  may  mean  'the  well  of  the 
oath'  or  'the  well  of  the  seven.'  There  is  an 
etymological  connection  between  the  Hebrew  words 
for  'swear'  and  'seven,'  probably  because  of  the 
seven  sacrifices  (ver.  28).  It  is,  however,  very 
interesting  to  know  that  seven  wells  have  actually 
been  found  at  the  place  which  has  been  identified 
with  Beersheba,  twelve  hours  south-west  of  Hebron. 
Thus  the  covenant  is  made,  and  the  two  men 
become  united  in  a  solemn  compact  of  brotherhood 
and  peace.  Abimelech  and  Phichol  return  to  their 
country.  Abraham  remains  at  Beer-sheba. 
VILA  VII.   A   Special  Revelation    (vers.    33,   34). — 

Relation  ADranam  now  a(lds  on  his  own  account  another 
(vers.  33, 34).  testimony  to  his  recent  experiences.  He  plants  a 
grove,  probably  a  tamarisk  tree,  one  of  the  ever- 
greens of  the  East,  and  a  fit  memorial  of  the  perfect 
peace  which  he  desired  between  himself,  his  God, 
and  his  fellow-men.  But  now  there  came  a  new 
revelation  of  the  meaning  of  his  relation  to  God. 
In  the  course  of  his  prayer  and  communion  he 
learnt  a  new  Name  of  God,  and  the  new  Name  was 
no  mere  additional  title,  but  contained  a  new  truth 
about  God;  'the  Everlasting  God'  {El  Olam). 
He  was  thus  reminded  of  God's  unchangeableness 
and  his  dependableness.  This  was  a  distinct  ad- 
254 


The  Daily  Round 

vance  on  his  previous  knowledge  of  God  as  '  Most  Gen.  xxi 
High'(xiv.  22),  and  'Almighty'  (xvii.  1).     Thus,  2a"34- 
in  the  course  of  Abraham's  daily  life  and  his  faithful 
attitude  to  those  around  him,  came  fresh  mercies 
and  blessings  and  new  experiences  of  his  God 

1.  The  spiritual  value    of   ordinary  everyday  Suggestions 

life. — It  is  impossible   for  Christians  to  be  ever  *°/  J.  _ 
,.   .       .  *,  -  ,  Meditation. 

living  in  a  constant  succession  of  crises  and  great 

occasions.  These  exceptional  experiences  must  of 
necessity  be  very  rare.  Ordinary  life  is  the  normal 
experience  of  the  overwhelming  majority  of  God's 
people ;  and  '  the  trivial  round,  the  common  task, 
will  furnish  all  we  need  to  ask '  of  opportunities  for 
faithfulness,  as  well  as  of  experience  of  God.  The 
prophet  Isaiah  seems  to  suggest  the  three  general 
experiences  of  life  (xl.  31)— (a)  There  is  the  excep- 
tional moment  of  exalted  communion  with  God ; 
'mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles.'  (6)  There  is  the 
special  emergency;  'they  shall  run.'  (c)  There  is 
the  ordinary,  normal,  average,  daily  life;  'they 
shall  walk.'  The  last-named  is  at  once  the  hardest 
and  really  the  most  blessed.  Ordinary  is,  after  all, 
the  'ordered,'  and  therefore  the  truly  'ordained' 
life.  If  we  wait  for  great  occasions  in  order  to 
show  our  character  we  shall  utterly  fail  to  do  God's 
will.  It  is  for  us  to  make  every  occasion  great  by 
faithful  loyalty  to  His  grace. 

2.  The  true  attitude  of  believers  to  '  them  thai 
are  without.' — This  episode  is  a  helpful  illustration 
of  the  relation  of  God's  people  to  those  who  are  not 
yet  within  the  fold.     The  Apostle  urges  us  more 

255 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxi.   than  once  to  live  in  view  of  the  non-Christiana 
22-34.  around  us.     'Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that 

are  without'  (Col.  iv.  5).  'Walk  becomingly  to- 
ward them  that  are  without'  (1  Thess.  iv.  12).  'A 
good  report  of  them  which  are  without'  (1  Tim.  Hi. 
7).  The  very  phrase  '  them  that  are  without '  tells 
of  the  unutterable  sadness  and  loss  of  being  outside 
the  fold  and  separated  from  all  the  great  privileges 
of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  fact  alone  should 
make  us  the  more  careful  to  live  aright  in  order 
that  those  who  are  now  without  may  be  attracted 
to  come  within.  And,  further,  as  a  witness  for 
God  and  His  grace  it  is  of  the  utmost  necessity 
that  we  should  '  walk  circumspectly,'  or,  as  St  Paul 
more  literally  wrote,  'walk  accurately'  (Eph.  v. 
15),  'providing  things  beautiful  [or  attractive]  in 
the  sight  of  all  men '  (Rom.  xii.  17,  Greek). 

3.  The  unspeakable  blessedness  of  new  experi- 
ences of  God. — A  profound  satisfaction  is  realised 
by  the  believer  as  he  discovers  more  and  more  of 
the  glories  of  God  and  His  grace.  The  believer  is 
'  ever  learning,'  and  from  the  moment  of  his  conver- 
sion, in  proportion  to  his  faithful  obedience  day  by 
day,  God  becomes  better  known  in  all  the  fulness 
and  manifold  variety  of  His  revelation.  These  new 
experiences  as  they  come  are,  however,  not  merely 
a  matter  of  personal  satisfaction,  blessed  though 
that  is ;  they  tend  to  prepare  the  soul  for  still 
greater  accomplishments.  God's  revelations  are 
not  mere  luxuries  for  personal  enjoyment,  but  are 
given  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  the  soul  for 
fuller  service  and  still  clearer  testimony  for  God. 
256 


The  Daily  Round 

We  shall  see  how  this  new  revelation  of  God  to  Gen.  xxi. 

Abraham  was  a  distinct  preparation  for  a  crisis  that  22"34* 

was  to  come  in  his  life.     It  is  the  same  to-day. 

God  reveals  Himself  more  and  more  fully  in  order 

that    we    may    be    more    and    more    thoroughly 

equipped  for  greater   efforts   in   the   kingdom   of 

God. 


257 


XXIX 
THE  SUPREME  CRISIS 

Gen.  xxii.  1-19 


And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things  that  God  did  tempt 
Abraham,  and  said  unto  him,  Abraham :  and  he  said,  Behold, 
here  I  am. 

And  he  said,  Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac,  whom 
thou  lovest,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah  ;  and  offer  him 
there  for  a  burnt  offering  upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  will 
tell  thee  of. 

And  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  saddled  his 
ass,  and  took  two  of  his  young  men  with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son, 
and  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering,  and  rose  up,  and  went 
unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him. 

Then  on  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw 
the  place  afar  off. 

And  Abraham  said  unto  his  young  men,  Abide  ye  here  with 
the  ass  ;  and  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship,  and 
come  again  to  you. 

And  Abraham  took  the  wood  of  the  burnt  offering,  and  laid  it 
upon  Isaac  his  son  :  and  he  took  the  fire  in  his  hand,  and  a 
knife ;  and  they  went  both  of  them  together. 

And  Isaac  spake  unto  Abraham  his  father,  and  said,  My 
father  :  and  he  said,  Here  am  I,  my  son.  And  he  said,  Behold 
the  fire  and  the  wood  :  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt 
offering  ? 

And  Abraham  said,  My  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb 
for  a  burnt  offering  ;  so  they  went  both  of  them  together. 

And  they  came  to  the  place  which  God  had  told  him  of  ;  and 
Abraham  built  an  altar  there,  and  laid  the  wood  in  order,  and 
bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the  wood. 

And  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  took  the  knife  to 
slay  his  son. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  him  out  of  heaven,  and 
said,  Abraham,  Abraham  :  and  he  said,  Here  am  I. 

And  he  said,  Lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither  do  thou 

258 


The  Supreme  Crisis 

anything  nnto  him:  for  now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God, 
seeing  that  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  *m, 
from  me. 

And  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold 
behind  him  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  horns  :  and 
Abraham  went  and  took  the  ram,  and  offered  him  up  for  a  burnt 
offering  in  the  stead  of  his  son. 

And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  Jehovah -jireh  : 
as  it  is  said  to  this  day,  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen. 

And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  Abraham  out  of  heaven 
the  second  time, 

And  said,  By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  the  Lord,  for 
because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy 
son,  thine  only  son : 

That  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  in  multiplying  I  will 
multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which 
is  upon  the  sea  shore  ;  and  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his 
enemies ; 

And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  ; 
because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice. 

So  Abraham  returned  unto  his  young  men,  and  they  rose  up 
and  went  together  to  Beer-sheba :  and  Abraham  dwelt  at  Beer- 
sheba. 

LIFE  is  a  succession  of  tests,  for  character  is  Gen.  xxii. 
only  possible  through  discipline.  In  many  lives  1-19. 
there  is  some  supreme  test  to  which  all  others  are 
secondary  and  preparatory.  It  was  so  with  Abra- 
ham, and  we  are  now  to  consider  the  record  of  the 
crowning  event  of  his  life.  For  him  it  was  the 
avenue  leading  to  his  closest  fellowship  with  God 
and  his  greatest  spiritual  blessing.  For  us  to-day 
it  still  reveals  the  secret  of  spiritual  power  and 
victory. 

I.  The  Test  (vers.  1,  2).— The  time  is  noteworthy.  1.  The  Teat 
1  After  these  things.'  It  was  immediately  after  the  (Tert- ,(  a)- 
new  experiences  of  God  recorded  in  the  former 
chapter  (xxi.  33,  34).  It  is  frequently  the  case 
that  severe  tests  follow  special  times  of  blessing. 
Our  Lord's  temptation  followed  immediately  upon 
369 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxii.  the  spiritual  experiment  of  His  baptism,  and  the 
I-I9'  two  events  are  closely  associated  by  the  Evangelists 

(Matt.  iv.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  1).  Discipline  thus  proves 
whether  our  spiritual  experiences  have  really  be- 
come part  of  our  life  and  character,  instead  of 
being  mere  temporary  enjoyments  and  luxuries. 

What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  words, 
'God  did  tempt  Abraham'?  The  word  'test' 
better  expresses  the  Divine  intention  and  action. 
God  tests  us  to  bring  out  the  good.  Satan  tempts 
us  to  bring  out  the  evil  (James  i.  12-15). 

The  description  (ver.  2)  is  worthy  of  careful 
notice :  '  Thy  son,  thine  only  son,  whom  thou 
lovest,  even  Isaac.'  (R.V.).  Thus  by  point  after 
point  Abraham  is  reminded  of  the  dearest  posses- 
sion of  his  life,  and  is  asked  to  give  to  God  his 
best.  Trials  that  are  put  upon  us  with  no  reason 
given  at  the  time  are  the  severest  tests  of  all. 
They  call  for  absolute  unquestioning  faith,  and 
when  responded  to  in  this  spirit  invariably  lead 
the  soul  higher  and  nearer  to  God.  Moriah  is 
mentioned  again  only  once  (2  Chron.  iii.  1),  where 
the  reference  is  to  one  of  the  mountains  on  which 
Jerusalem  is  situated.  Some  writers  think  that, 
as  the  journey  from  Beer-sheba  to  Jerusalem  would 
only  take  about  seventeen  hours,  it  is  impossible 
to  believe  that  Mount  Moriah  is  intended  in  this 
chapter.  At  the  same  time  the  tradition  that  this 
was  the  spot  is  at  least  as  old  as  Josephus,  and, 
to  say  nothing  of  its  spiritual  appropriateness  in 
view  of  Calvary,  there  does  not  seem  any  valid 
reason  for  rejecting  it. 

260 


The  Supreme  Crisis 

II.    The    Trial  (vera.   3-10).  — The  alacrity  ofGcn.xxii. 
Abraham 's  reply  to  God's  call  is  very  Htriking,  and  is  I"I9- 
evidently  intended  to  be  regarded  as  a  prominent ' l -The Trial 
feature  of  the  narrative.    Some  writers  are  fond  of  de-  ****  3  X° ' 
picting  his  silent  agony,  and  emphasising  that  he  did 
not  tell  Sarah  a  word  of  what  God  had  ordered. 
There  is,  however,  nothing  of  this  in  the  narrative. 
No  reluctance,  no  hesitation,  no  doubt  mark  Abraham 
at  this  point.     He  '  made  haste,  and  delayed  not ' 
to  keep  God's  commandment  (Ps.  cxix.  60).     He 
'conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood'  (Gal.  i.  16). 
This  alacrity  should  be  borne  in  mind  as  one  of  the 
leading  and  most  significant  points  of  the  story. 

On  the  third  day  Abraham  came  to  the  end  of 
his  journey.  His  words  to  the  young  men  need 
special  attention  (verse  5).  'Abide  ye  here  .  .  . 
I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship,  and 
come  again  to  you.'  It  is  therefore  evident  that 
Abraham  fully  expected  Isaac  would  come  back 
with  him.  The  conversation  between  the  father 
and  the  son  is  noteworthy  and  beautiful.  The 
son's  natural  question  about  the  lamb  is  followed 
by  the  father's  whole-hearted  and  confident  reply 
that  God  will  provide  it  Notice  the  rci>ctition 
of  the  phrase  in  verses  6  and  8,  '  they  went  both 
of  them  together.' 

The  part  of  Isaac  in  this  matter  is  always  a 
subject  of  great  interest  Was  there  any  concurrence 
on  his  part  ?  It  must  be  remembered  that  he  had 
already  arrived  at  man's  estate.  Probably  as  they 
neared  the  place  Abraham  revealed  to  his  son  what 
God  had  commanded,  and  also  told  him  what  he 
261 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxii.  himself  expected  as  the  result  of  that  command. 

I-I9'  There  is  no  idea  in   Abraham's  mind  that  he  is 

doing  wrong  in  sacrificing  his  son.  He  was  familiar 
with  the  practice  of  human  sacrifices  from  the 
Canaanites  around  him,  and  there  was  consequently 
no  shock  to  his  conscience  in  this  command.  As 
to  the  Divine  aspect  of  it,  it  must  be  ever  remem- 
bered that  God  accommodates  His  instructions  to 
the  moral  and  spiritual  standards  of  the  people  at 
any  given  time.  He  knew  the  end  from  the 
beginning,  and  that  He  never  meant  Isaac  to  be 
sacrificed.  What  God  desired  was  not  Isaac's  life 
but  Abraham's  loyalty,  thus  separating  between 
the  false  and  the  true  in  relation  to  human 
sacrifice. 

III.  The  HI.  The  Triumph  (vers.   11-14).— At  the  right 

(Tersm?ihi4).  moment  and  not  before  (Ps.  cvii.  27,  28),  God 
interposed  and  stayed  Abraham's  hand.  By  this 
action  God  bore  unmistakable  testimony  to  the 
error  of  the  heathen  as  to  human  sacrifices,  and  it 
is  a  striking  fact  that  from  this  time  forward  the 
Jews  never  adopted  the  practice  of  human  sacri- 
fices until  they  had  sunk  to  the  level  of  the  heathen 
around  them.  In  this  respect  the  superiority  of 
the  Old  Testament  to  the  worship  and  practices  of 
the  heathen  around  is  evident  to  all.  God  could 
not  have  given  a  better  object  lesson  as  to  the  sin 
of  sacrificing  our  offspring  with  the  thought  that  it 
would  be  pleasing  to  Him.  God  sets  His  seal 
upon  His  servant's  faith,  and  says,  *  Now  I  know 
that  thou  fearest  God.'  Abraham  was  prepared 
to  give  God  his  very  best.  Faith  can  do  no  more. 
262 


The  Supreme  Crisis 

Abraham  not  only  finds  that  God  interposes  to  Gen.  xxii. 
prevent  him  from  killing  his  son,  but  that  his  word  I*I9» 
to  his  son,   '  God   will   provide,'   is  also   literally 
fulfilled.     The   ram   was   offered   up    as    a   burnt 
offering  in  the  stead  of  Isaac. 

*  Abraham  called  the  name  of  the  place  Jehovah- 
iireh,'  thus  bearing  his  testimony  to  the  reality  of 
God's  presence  and  provision.  'The  Lord  will 
see  to  it'  This  was  the  secret  and  assurance  of 
Abraham's  faith,  and  the  same  is  true  to-day.  As 
God  has  saved  our  souls  and  made  us  His  own 
children  and  servants,  so  assuredly  with  reference  to 
the  whole  of  our  life  '  The  Lord  will  see  to  it ' 
(c/.  Rom  v.  10).  The  place  became  sanctified  to 
Abraham  by  a  very  holy  and  blessed  memory.  It 
is  well  when  we  can  look  back  over  life's  pathway 
and  point  to  a  particular  place  or  time  when 
God  revealed  Himself  to  us  in  blessing. 

IV.  The    Testimony  (vers.    15-19). — Again    the  iv.  The 
Voice  from  heaven  was  heard.    It  called  to  Abraham  Testimony 
and  acknowledged  what  had  been  done  :  '  Because 
thou   hast   done   this.'     God    clearly    teaches    the 
patriarch  that  He  regarded  the  sacrifice  as  actually 
offered.     The  will  was  taken  for  the  deed. 

God  now  introduces  a  renewal  of  the  promises 
by  a  specially  solemn  oath :  '  By  Myself  have  I 
sworn.'  This  expression  is  only  found  very  rarely  in 
Scripture,  and  indicates  the  most  solemn  oath 
possible  (Isaiah  xlv.  23;  Jer.  xxii.  5;  xlix.  13; 
Heb.  vi.  13,  14).  These  promises  should  be  com- 
pared with  those  given  on  the  former  occasions 
(chaps,  xii.  2,  3 ;  xiii.  16 ;  xv.  5;  xvii.  4-8> 
263 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxii.       We  can  easily  picture  the  glad  satisfaction  with 
I"I9-  which  Abraham  returned  to  the  young  men  with 

Isaac  his  son.  He  had  said  they  would  come 
back,  and  they  had.  He  had  proved  that  God  was 
true,  and,  having  loyally  accepted  and  fulfilled 
God's  will,  he  was  filled  with  joy  and  peace. 

Suggestions  i.  The  simplicity  of  faith. — Faith  in  the  case 
Meditation.  °f  Abraham,  as  indeed  in  every  other  instance,  is 
taking  God  at  His  word.  True  faith  is  nothing 
more,  as  it  is  nothing  less,  than  this.  God  speaks : 
man  believes.  This  is  the  true  idea  involved  in  the 
phrase  '  implicit  trust,'  a  trust  that  relies  upon  God 
without  having  his  reasons  '  unfolded '  to  us.  This 
simple  faith,  taking  God  at  His  word,  is  always  at 
the  foundation  of  the  believer's  peace  and  restful- 
ness,  strength  and  progress. 

2.  The  strength  of  faith. — The  entire  absence 
from  the  narrative  of  any  suggestions  about  Abra- 
ham's emotions  or  self-sacrifice  is  surely  very 
significant.  He  had  received  certain  promises 
from  God  about  his  son,  and  he  was  perfectly 
certain  that  those  promises  would  be  fulfilled. 
In  the  strength  of  this  assurance  he  went  forward, 
his  attitude  being  that  of  Job  :  '  Though  He  slay 
me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him'  (Job  xiii.  15). 
Abraham's  faith  showed  its  strength  in  the  way 
in  which  he  fully  expected  his  son  Isaac  to  return 
with  him  to  the  young  men  (ver.  6).  'We  will 
come  again  to  you.'  Nothing  can  affect  the  force 
of  this  splendid  expectation  of  Abraham.  What, 
then,  did  the  words  imply  ?  Simply  this :  that 
264 


The  Supreme  Crisis 

whilst  he  believed  at  that  moment  that  God  in-  Gen.  xxiL 
tended  him  to  slay  his  son,  he  nevertheless  felt  I -19. 
perfectly  certain  that  God  would  there  and  then 
raise  Isaac  from  the  dead  and  send  him  back  alive. 
Only  thus  could  Abraham  then  see  that  the 
promises  concerning  his  seed  were  to  be  fulfilled. 
What  a  magnificent  exercise  of  faith  this  was! 
There  had  never  been  such  an  event  as  a  resur- 
rection, and  so  Abraham  had  no  previous  example 
to  suggest  this  result  or  to  encourage  his  faith 
thereby.  But  with  a  splendid  sweep  of  God-given 
imagination,  based  upon  God's  personal  relation  to 
him,  he  said  to  himself,  'God  will  raise  my  son 
from  the  dead.' 

3.  The  source  of  faith, — The  foundation  of  this 
remarkable  confidence  was  Abraham's  conviction 
of  the  power  of  God :  '  Accounting  that  God  was 
able'  (Heb.  xi.  17-19).  The  whole  passage  from 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  shows  that  this  is  the 
true  explanation  of  this  incident,  and  so  far  from 
this  view  being,  as  is  sometimes  alleged,  a  mere 
coup  de  theatre,  it  was  in  reality  a  marvellous 
exercise  of  faith  when  it  is  remembered  that  no 
instance  had  then  been  known  of  God's  power 
being  exercised  in  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
God  was  such  a  reality  to  Abraham,  and  His 
promises  were  so  certain,  that  the  patriarch  at 
once  drew  the  inevitable  and  natural  conclusion 
that  God's  power  could  and  would  effect  this. 

4.  The  secret  of  faith.  —  How  was  it  that 
Abraham  was  able  to  exercise  this  unquestioning 
and  even  astonishing  trust  in  God  ?    The  explana- 

8  965 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiL  tion  is  found  in  the  phrase,  which  occurs  twice  in 
I_I9«  this  chapter,  '  Here  am  I.'    Abraham  lived  in  close 

fellowship  with  God,  ready  for  His  new  revelations 
and  responsive  to  His  continual  calls.  Abiding 
close  to  God,  he  learnt  more  and  more  of  the 
character  of  the  One  with  Whom  he  was  in 
covenant.  'The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  Him,'  and  when  we  thus  abide  in  Him 
He  abides  in  us,  and  our  faith  grows  strong,  our 
love  grows  deep,  our  hope  grows  high.  Then  it  is 
we  'stagger  not  through  unbelief  (Rom.  iv.  20), 
and  we  are  able  to  say :  '  The  Lord  God  will  help 
me ;  therefore  shall  I  not  be  confounded ;  therefore 
have  I  set  my  face  like  a  flint,  and  I  know  that  I 
shall  not  be  ashamed '  (Isaiah  L  7). 


XXX 

DEATH  IN  THE  HOME 

Gen.  xxiii. 


And  Sarah  was  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  years  old  : 
these  were  the  years  of  the  life  of  Sarah. 

And  Sarah  died  in  Kirjatharha  ;  the  same  u  Hebron  in  the 
land  of  Canaan  :  and  Abraham  came  to  mourn  for  Sarah,  aud  to 
weep  for  her. 

And  Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead,  and  spake  unto 
the  sons  of  Heth,  saying, 

I  am  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  with  you  :  give  me  a  possession 
of  a  buryingplace  with  you,  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my 
sight. 

And  the  children  of  Heth  answered  Abraham,  saying  unto 
him. 

Hear  us,  my  lord  :  thou  art  a  mighty  prince  among  us  :  in  the 
choice  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy  dead  ;  none  of  us  shall  with- 
hold from  thee  his  sepulchre,  but  that  thou  mayest  bury  thy 
dead. 

And  Abraham  stood  up,  and  bowed  himself  to  the  people  of 
the  land,  even  to  the  children  of  Heth. 

And  he  communed  with  them,  saying,  If  it  be  your  mind  that 
I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight ;  hear  ma  and  intreat  for 
me  to  Ephron,  the  son  of  Zohar. 

That  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  which  he  hath, 
which  is  in  the  end  of  his  field  ;  for  as  much  money  as  it  is  worth 
he  shall  give  it  me  for  a  possession  of  a  buryingplace  amongst 
you. 

And  Ephron  dwelt  amongst  the  children  of  Heth  :  and  Ephron 
the  Hittite  answered  Abraham  in  the  audience  of  the  children 
of  Heth,  even  of  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city,  saying, 

Nay,  my  lord,  hear  me :  the  field  give  I  thee,  and  the  cave 
that  w  therein,  I  give  it  thee  ;  and  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of 
my  people  give  I  it  thee :  bury  thy  dead. 

267 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  Abraham  bowed  down  himself  before  the  people  of  the 
land. 

And  he  spake  unto  Ephron  in  the  audience  of  the  people  of 
the  land,  saying,  But  if  thou  wilt  give  it,  I  pray  thee,  hear  me :  I 
will  give  thee  money  for  the  field  ;  take  it  of  me,  and  I  will  bury 
my  dead  there. 

And  Ephron  answered  Abraham,  saying  unto  him, 

My  lord,  hearken  unto  me :  the  land  is  worth  four  hundred 
shekels  of  silver ;  what  is  that  betwixt  me  and  thee  ?  bury  there- 
fore thy  dead. 

And  Abraham  hearkened  unto  Ephron  ;  and  Abraham  weighed 
to  Ephron  the  silver,  which  he  had  named  in  the  audience  of  the 
sons  of  Heth,  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  current  money  with 
the  merchant. 

And  the  field  of  Ephron,  which  was  in  Machpelah,  which  was 
before  Mamre,  the  field,  and  the  cave  which  was  therein,  and  all 
the  trees  that  were  in  the  field,  that  were  in  all  the  borders 
round  about,  were  made  sure 

Unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  in  the  presence  of  the  children 
of  Heth,  before  all  that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city. 

And  after  this,  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of 
the  field  of  Machpelah  before  Mamre  :  the  same  is  Hebron  in  the 
land  of  Canaan. 

And  the  field,  and  the  cave  that  is  therein,  were  made  sure 
unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  of  a  buryingplace  by  the  sons  of 
Heth. 

Gen.  xxiii.  A  FTER  the  great  crisis  (Gen.  xxii.)  Abraham  had 
-^-  twenty-five  years  of  apparent  uneventful  life. 
Three  scenes  illustrative  of  home  and  personal  ex- 
periences are  successively  brought  before  us :  (a)  the 
news  of  relatives  from  afar  (chap.  xxii.  20-24) ;  {b) 
the  death  of  the  wife  and  mother  (chap,  xxiii.) ;  (c) 
the  marriage  of  the  son  (chap,  xxiv.)  We  are  now 
to  consider  the  second  of  these,  the  death  of  Sarah. 
I.  Death  I.  Death  (vers.  1,  2). — At  the  age  of  one  hundred 

(vers,  i,  2).  an(j  twenty-seven,  forty  years  after  the  birth  of 
Isaac  (Gen.  xviii.  12),  Sarah  died.  She  is  the  only 
woman  whose  age  is  recorded  in  the  Bible.  The 
following  points  with  reference  to  her  death  are 
worthy  of  consideration  and  meditation. 


Death  in  the  Home 

It  was  the  death  of  a  believer.  Certain  hints  Gen.  xxiii 
in  the  story  suggest  that  Sarah's  spiritual  life  and 
experience  were  not  quite  on  the  high  level  of 
her  husband's,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  equally 
evident  that  her  spiritual  life  was  real,  and  her 
faith  in  the  promises  of  God  strong.  The  New 
Testament  also  adds  its  witness  to  the  fact  of 
Sarah's  spiritual  oneness  with  Abraham  (Heb.  xi. 
11-13;  1  Pet.  iii.  5,  6). 

It  was  the  death  of  a  life-long  companion.  For 
sixty  years  Sarah  had  lived  in  Canaan  with  Abra- 
ham, and  with  the  exception  of  the  incident  about 
Hagar,  which  was  itself  prompted  by  Sarah,  nothing 
marred  the  fellowship  of  these  two  as  husband 
and  wife.  They  afford  to  us  a  picture  of  true 
married  life,  a  husband  and  wife  united  in  the  Lord 
and  in  each  other  in  Him. 

It  was  the  death  of  a  mother.  To  Isaac  the 
death  of  Sarah  was  a  very  great  loss.  Although 
he  was  now  nearly  forty  years  of  age,  he  had 
always  lived  at  home  aud  was  the  recipient  of 
his  mother's  love  and  devotion  and  the  subject  of 
her  constant  hope  and  prayer.  We  are  distinctly 
told  of  his  sorrow  on  her  death  (chap.  xxiv.  Q7\ 

It  was  a  death  in  the  home.  The  removal  of 
one  member  of  a  household,  especially  if  that 
member  is  a  beloved  wife  and  mother,  causes  a 
blank  which  nothing  else  can  611.  The  quiet  influ- 
ence of  such  a  life  in  the  home  is  of  untold  value, 
and  the  loss  at  death  is  proportionately  great 

II.   Sorrow  (ver.   2). — Sarah's  life  came  to  its  II.  Sorrow 
end  at  Hebron,  and  it  would  almost  seem  from  (fer  2h 
2(59 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.xxiii.  the  words  'Abraham  came  to  mourn'  that  he  was 
away  at  the  time  of  her  death.  It  is  possible, 
if  not  probable,  that  Abraham  had  two  establish- 
ments with  separate  flocks  and  herds,  one  at  Beer- 
sheba  (chap.  xxii.  19),  and  the  other  at  Hebron, 
where  Sarah  then  was. 

This  is  the  first  occasion  in  Scripture  of  the 
record  of  a  man's  tears,  and  they  were  neither 
idle,  nor  unmanly,  nor  morbid,  but  the  genuine 
and  rightful  expression  of  Abraham's  deep  sorrow 
on  the  death  of  his  wife. 

III.  Duty  III.  Duty  (ver.  3). — There  is  danger  lest  sorrow 
(ver.  3).         overwhelm  us   and  we   should  give   way  beyond 

measure.  The  great  safeguard  against  this  danger 
is  work.  So  Abraham  rose  up  and  applied  to  the 
children  of  Heth  with  reference  to  a  burial- 
place. 

Abraham's  desire  for  a  resting-place  for  the  body 
of  his  wife  is  a  simple  but  striking  testimony  to 
the  innate  feelings  about  the  care  of  the  body. 
The  possessive  pronouns,  '  his  dead '  (ver.  3),  '  my 
dead '  (ver.  4),  '  thy  dead '  (ver.  6),  are  very  note- 
worthy in  this  connection.  The  body  of  his  beloved 
wife  was  precious  to  him  and  was  regarded  by  him 
and  by  others  as  his  own  property,  of  which  he  was 
about  to  take  special  and  loving  care. 

IV.  Faith         IV.  Faith  (vers.  4-18).— The  dialogue  between 
(vers.  4-18).    Abraham  an(j  tne  sons  of  Heth  is  full  of  touching 

and  deep  interest,  and  is  especially  noteworthy  as 
a  revelation  of  Abraham's  inner  life. 

Abraham  confesses  that  he  is  a  'stranger  and 
sojourner,'  and  yet  by  his  request  for  a  burial-place 
270 


Death  in  the  Home 

he  clearly  indicates  that  he  intends  to  stay  in  the  Gen.  xxiii. 
land  of  Canaan,  and  not  to  return  to  Mesopotamia. 
When  Eastern  sentiment  as  to  burial  with  ancestors 
is  remembered,  this  request  for  a  piece  of  ground 
in  Canaan  is  a  striking  testimony  to  Abraham's 
faith.  He  was  fully  assured  that  Canaan  was  the 
place  for  him  and  his  descendants,  and  on  this 
account  Sarah  is  to  be  buried  there. 

We  notice  the  perfect  courtesy  of  Abraham  in 
reply  to  the  offers  of  the  people  of  the  land. 
Whether,  as  some  writers  think,  all  this  was  mere 
parleying  with  a  view  to  a  bargain,  or  whether, 
as  others  urge,  it  was  a  genuine  and  sincere  offer 
on  the  part  of  the  children  of  Heth,  Abraham's 
attitude  stands  out  in  a  very  beautiful  way. 
Religion  is  not  intended  to  decrease,  but  to 
increase  natural  politeness,  gentlemanliness,  and 
courtesy.  Indeed,  courtesy  is  one  of  the  truest 
marks  of  a  genuine  believer. 

Abraham  persisted  in  declining  the  offer  (if  it 
was  really  intended  as  an  offer)  of  a  burying-place. 
He  was  determined  that  Sarah  should  not  be 
buried  in  any  land  but  his  own.  It  must  not  be 
hired  ;  it  must  not  be  given.  Till  God's  time  came 
Abraham  would  not  be  a  debtor  to  those  who  were 
to  be  dispossessed.     '  By  faith '  he  refused. 

Payment  was  consequently  made,  and  every- 
thing was  done  in  due  form  in  the  presence  of 
witnesses.  Thus,  the  first  foothold  in  the  land 
of  Canaan  that  Abraham  ever  had  was  bought 
Notwithstanding  all  God's  promises  of  that  land 
to  him  and  to  his  seed,  Abraham  would  not  deal 
271 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiii.  unjustly,  even  in  appearance,  with  those  then  in 

possession  of  Canaan. 
V.  Love  V.  Love  (vers.  19,  20). — The  funeral  brings  us  to 

(vers.  19, 20).  ^e  fi^  g,.aTe  0f  which  we  have  any  record  in 
Holy  Writ.  The  last  offices  of  respect  were  paid, 
and  the  lonely  old  man  went  back  to  his  home. 

The  possession  of  the  property  was  guaranteed 
to  Abraham  and  'made  sure'  for  a  perpetual 
possession.  Visitors  to  Hebron  to-day  are  still 
shown  what  is  called  Abraham's  Tomb,  and, 
although  no  Christian  is  allowed  to  enter  and 
explore  for  himself,  there  does  not  seem  much 
doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  tradition  which 
associates  the  present  place  with  the  cave  of 
Machpelah.  What  an  inspiring  thought  to  realise 
that  very  likely  the  bodies  of  the  patriarchs  are 
still  there,  and  that  some  day  they  will  be  exposed 
to  view ! 

Suggestions       From  this  simple  and  touching  story  of  death  in 

ya  A' tat'  ^e  nome  we  mav  learn  now  we  should  behave  in 
times  of  bereavement.  The  true  attitude  at  such 
times  is  threefold : — 

1.  Sorrowing  Love. — The  expression  of  love  in 
sorrow  is  as  natural  as  it  is  inevitable  and 
beautiful.  A  consciousness  of  loss  cannot  fail 
to  produce  sorrow,  and  no  one  is  to  be  blamed 
for  feeling  and  expressing  a  sense  of  bereave- 
ment. It  would  be  utterly  unnatural  if  death 
were  to  come  without  eliciting  sorrow. 

2.  Faithful  Service. — At  the  same  time,  in  order 
that  the  soul  may  not  be  swallowed  up  with  over- 

272 


Death  in  the  Home 

much  sorrow,  there  comes  to  us  all  at  such  Gen.  xxiiL 
occasions  the  call  to  and  opportunity  for  definite 
service.  The  memory  of  a  loved  one  is  best 
treasured  by  doing  what  that  loved  one  would 
wish  were  she  here.  Service  always  prevents 
sorrow  from  becoming  dissipated  in  idle  regreta 
and  mere  remembrance. 

3.  Blessed  Hope. — Abraham  laid  Sarah's  body 
to  rest  'in  sure  and  certain  hope'  of  a  joyful 
resurrection  (Heb.  xi.  14).  It  was  this  above  all 
things  that  upheld  and  strengthened  him  as  he 
bade  farewell  to  the  wife  who  had  shared  his 
joys  and  sorrows  for  so  many  years.  The  ex- 
pectation and  anticipation  of  reunion  in  Christ 
on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  is  still  the  real  hope, 
the  blessed  comfort,  and  the  strong  inspiration  of 
the  people  of  God.  It  enables  us  to  look  upon 
death  without  fear,  and  to  look  forward  without 
dread.  'In  the  midst  of  death  we  are  in  life' 
through  Him  who  is  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life. 


273 


XXXI 
THE   EVENING  OF   LIFE 

Gen.  xxiv.  1-9 — xxv.  1-10. 


And  Abraham  was  old,  and  well  stricken  in  age  :  and  the  Lord 
had  blessed  Abraham  in  all  things. 

And  Abraham  said  unto  his  eldest  servant  of  his  house,  that 
ruled  over  all  that  he  had,  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my 
thigh : 

And  I  will  make  thee  swear  by  the  Lord,  the  God  of  heaven, 
and  the  God  of  the  earth,  that  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  unto 
my  son  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanites,  among  whom  I 
dwell : 

But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  country,  and  to  my  kindred,  and 
take  a  wife  unto  my  son  Isaac. 

And  the  servant  said  unto  him,  Peradventure  the  woman  will 
not  be  willing  to  follow  me  unto  this  land  :  must  I  needs  bring 
thy  son  again  unto  the  land  from  whence  thou  earnest  ? 

And  Abraham  said  unto  him,  Beware  thou  that  thou  bring 
not  my  son  thither  again. 

The  Lord  God  of  heaven,  which  took  me  from  my  father's 
house,  and  from  the  land  of  my  kindred,  and  which  spake  unto 
me,  and  that  sware  unto  me,  saying,  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give 
this  land ;  he  shall  send  his  angel  before  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
take  a  wife  unto  my  son  from  thence. 

And  if  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow  thee,  then  thou 
shalt  be  clear  from  this  my  oath  :  only  bring  not  my  son  thither 
again. 

And  the  servant  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  Abraham  his 
master,  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  matter. 

Then  again  Abraham  took  a  wife,  and  her  name  was 
Keturah. 

And  she  bare  him  Zimran,  and  Jokshan,  and  Medan,  and 
Midian,  and  Ishbak,  and  Shuah. 

And  Jokshan  begat  Sheba,  and  Dedan.  And  the  sons  of  Dedan 
were  Asshurim,  and  Letushim,  and  Leummim. 

274 


The  Evening  of  Life 

And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;    Ephah,  and  Epher,  and  Hanoch 
and    Abidab,   and    Eldaah.      All  these   were    the  children   of 
Keturah. 

And  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac. 

But  unto  the  sous  of  the  concubines,  which  Abraham  had 
Abraham  gave  gifts,  and  sent  them  away  from  Isaac  his  son, 
while  he  yet  lived,  eastward,  unto  tho  east  country. 

And  these  are  the  days  of  the  years  of  Abraham  a  life  which  he 
lived,  an  hundred  threescore  and  fifteen  years. 

Then  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died  in  a  good  old 
age,  an  old  man,  and  full  of  years ;  and  was  gathered  to  his 
people. 

And  his  sons  Isaac  and  Ishmael  buried  him  in  the  cave  of 
Machpelah,  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar  the  Hittite, 
which  w  before  Mam  re  ; 

The  field  which  Abraham  purchased  of  the  sons  of  Heth  :  there 
was  Abraham  buried,  and  Sarah  his  wife. 


THERE  is  scarcely  anything  more  beautiful  and  Gen.  xxiv. 
inspiring  than  the  calm,  bright,  peaceful  close  1-9— xx  v. 
of  a   long   and    honoured   life.     Like   a   summer  x"ia 
sunset,   it   floods    the    whole    scene    with    bright- 
ness  and   glory.      'The   hoary   head   is   a   crown 
of  glory'   as   it   sinks   to   rest  after  a  life's   long 
day    spent    'in    the    way    of   righteousness.'      So 
it  was  with   Abraham,  as  we  can   see   from    the 
passages  which  record  his  closing  years. 

I.  Crown i a g  Experiences  (xxiv.  1-U). — Abraham's  I.  Crowning 
was  an   old  age  happily   spent  in  continued  en-  ^$£n™"? 
joyment  of  the  Divine  blessing  (ver.    1).      'The  19). 
Lord  had  blessed  Abraham  in  all  things.'    These 
words  sum  up  the  whole  of  Abraham's  life  and 
experiences,  and  now  in  old  age  he  is  still  rejoicing 
in  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence  and  favour. 
*  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  it  maketh  rich,  and  He 
addeth  no  sorrow  with  it'  (Prov.  x,  22;  c/.  Pa, 
xxxvii.  22). 

275 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  His  was  an  old  age  marked  by  persistent  faith- 
1-9 — xxv-  fulness  to  the  Divine  will  (vers.  2-4).  Abraham 
I"10,  still  clings  with  undiminished  faith  and  persistence 

to  the  revelation  of  God  concerning  him  and  his 
seed.  He  is  therefore  urgent  that  his  son  should 
not  take  a  wife  from  the  daughters  of  the  Canaan- 
ites.  The  commission  which  he  now  gives  to  his 
trusted  servant  (perhaps  Eliezer,  chap.  xv.  2)  shows 
clearly  that  he  desires  and  determines  to  follow 
closely  the  Divine  will.  The  oath  mentioned 
here  and  in  chapter  xlvii.  29  only  occurs  in 
these  two  passages  in  the  Old  Testament.  It 
betokens  a  specially  solemn  engagement,  though 
the  reason  of  the  precise  form  and  method  is 
practically  unknown,  and  is  therefore  variously 
interpreted.  A  somewhat  similar  form  of  oath 
has  been  found  in  Australia  (Driver,  Genesis, 
p.  231). 

His  was  an  old  age  characterised  by  deep 
insight  into  the  Divine  purpose  (vers.  6,  7). 
The  servant  naturally  asks  what  is  to  be 
done  if  the  woman  of  his  kindred  is  unwilling 
to  take  the  long  journey  into  Canaan.  Abraham 
promptly  and  briefly  replies  that  in  any  case 
his  son  is  not  to  be  taken  out  of  Canaan. 
Whatever  happens,  Abraham  is  perfectly  clear 
that  God's  will  must  be  done  and  His  purpose 
maintained. 

His    was   an    old    age    possessed    of   absolute 

assurance  of  the  Divine  favour  (vers.    7-9).     He 

tells  the  servant  that  God,  who  had   been  with 

him    all    through    his    long   life,    would    prosper 

276 


The  Evening  of  Life 

the  errand,  and  bring  about  that  which  was  Gen.  xxiy. 
desired.  At  the  same  time  the  servant  is  once  1-9— xxv. 
more  enjoined  not  to  take  his  son  out  of  the I"10* 
land,  and  in  the  event  of  the  unwillingness  of 
the  woman  to  come  the  servant  will  be  clear 
of  his  oath.  Thereupon  the  solemn  promise  was 
made,  and  the  servant  at  once  set  out  on  that 
errand  which,  as  we  shall  see,  was  crowned 
with  Divine  favour  and  success.  The  details 
of  the  story  of  his  meeting  with  Rebekah,  and 
the  subsequent  marriage,  will  come  before  us  in 
the  next  chapter.  We  would  now  merely  call 
renewed  attention  to  this  beautiful  picture  of  an 
honoured  old  age,  loyal  to  God  at  all  costs,  '  satis- 
fied with  favour,  full  with  the  blessing  of  the 
Lord.' 

II.  Closing   Events  (xxv.   1-10). — It  is  evident  u.  Closing 
that  Abraham '8  closing  years  were  marked  by   a,^01* 
fresh  accession  of  bodily  and  mental  vigour,  as  can  mo). 
be  seen  from  the  statements  included  in  this  section. 

After  the  events  recorded  in  the  last  chapter, 
culminating  in  the  marriage  of  Isaac,  Abraham 
in  his  solitude  took  to  himself  another  wife, 
Keturah.  At  the  same  time  the  narrative 
makes  it  quite  evident  that  she  did  not 
occupy  the  same  rank  of  equality  as  Sarah 
did  (ver.  6;  1  Chron.  L  32).  It  is  inter- 
esting and  significant  to  notice  that  one 
of  the  sons  of  Abraham's  second  marriage 
was  Midian,  whose  descendants  became  the 
intensely  bitter  foes  of  the  descendants  of 
Isaac 

277 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  Abraham  was  careful  to  make  Isaac's  position 
1"9  xxv.  perfectly  clear,  and,  by  providing  for  his  other 
sons  and  sending  them  away  'eastward,  unto 
the  east  country,'  he  took  the  necessary  steps 
to  maintain  Isaac's  position  free  from  possible 
difficulties.  Abraham  thus  sets  possessors  of 
wealth  a  good  example  in  the  careful  and 
complete  provision  which  he  made  during  his  life- 
time for  his  family. 

At  length,  at  the  age  of  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  years  he  passed  away,  seventy-five 
years  after  the  birth  of  Isaac  and  thirty-five  years 
after  the  marriage  of  the  latter  with  Rebekah 
(chap.  xxi.  5 ;  xxv.  20).  The  description  of  his 
death  (ver.  8)  is  very  beautiful,  and  it  is  in- 
teresting to  note  that  he  was  '  gathered  to  his 
people,'  referring  to  their  reunion  in  the  unseen 
world.  It  is  obvious  that  this  phrase  cannot 
possibly  refer  to  his  burial,  since  only  Sarah's 
body  was  in  that  tomb.  (Cf.  chap.  xxxv.  29; 
xlix.  33.) 

The  two  sons,  Isaac  and  Ishmael,  met  over  their 
father's  dead  body  to  pay  the  last  tokens  of  respect. 
Death  is  the  great  healer  of  family  differences  and 
personal  feuds. 
III.  Charac-      III.    Characteristic   Elements.  —  Looking    over 
Elements.      *ne   wn°le  °f  Abraham's  life,  we   cannot  but  be 
struck   with    certain    outstanding    points    in    his 
character.     Dr    Candlish,   in   his   suggestive    lec- 
tures on  Genesis,  divides  the  patriarch's  life  into 
two    main    sections;    the    first    of   these   (chaps, 
xii.-xv.)  he  characterises   as  the  time  of   faith, 
278 


The  Evening  of  Life 

when   Abraham   was  accepting  the  present  gifts  Gen.  xxiv. 
of  God;   the   second   (chaps,    xvi.-xxiv.)  he  char- 1~9~ xxw, 
acterises     as     the     period     of    patience,     when  I'10, 
Abraham    was    expecting    the    future    inheritance 
promised   to   him.     The  following  elements  may, 
however,   be   seen   throughout   the   whole  of  his 
life. 

His  Faith. — He  took  God  at  His  word  at  each 
step  of  his  career,  and  his  simple  trust  in  the 
Divine  promise  is  the  predominant  feature  of  his 
life. 

His  Faithfulness. —  He  is  rightly  described  as 
*  faithful  Abraham '  (Gal.  iii.  9),  for  he  not  only 
believed,  but  expressed  his  belief  in  life.  God's 
promise  had  its  outcome  in  Abraham's  practice ; 
his  faith  was  proved  by  faithfulness. 

His  Fear. — By  this  is  meant  his  attitude  of 
reverence.  Notwithstanding  the  familiar  terms  on 
which  he  lived  with  God,  he  never  forgot  the 
relative  position  of  the  Divine  Majesty  and  his 
own  nothingness. 

His  Fellowship. — As  we  have  already  seen,  the 
latter  portion  of  his  life  was  marked  by  a  great 
access  of  spiritual  experience  and  blessing,  which 
led  him  into  full  friendship  and  fellowship  with 
God.  This  was  with  Abraham,  as  it  is  now 
with  the  believer,  the  culminating  point  of  all 
spiritual  life. 

As  we  review  the  entire  life  of  Abraham,  and  Snftettioos 
consider  it   specially   from   God's  standpoint,   we  ° 
cannot    help    being    struck    with    the    threefold 
279 


I-IO. 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  exemplification  which  is  so  evident  all  through 
1-9— xxv.   the  story. 

1.  The  Divine  Purpose. — One  thing  above  all 
others  marked  the  attitude  of  God  in  relation  to 
Abraham:  His  will  was  to  be  done.  From  first 
to  last  this  was  God's  purpose.  He  had  in  view 
not  merely  the  manifestation  of  what  a  life  could 
be,  but  also,  and  perhaps  chiefly,  the  choice  of 
Abraham  as  the  instrument  of  furthering  His  great 
purposes  of  redemption  through  the  promised 
Messiah.  Whether  we  think  of  Abraham  person- 
ally or  as  the  ancestor  of  the  Messiah,  we  cannot 
help  learning  this  one  lesson,  that  believers  are 
placed  upon  this  earth  for  the  one  purpose  above 
all  others  of  fulfilling  the  Divine  will.  l  Thy  will 
be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.' 

2.  The  Divine  Power. — God  never  commands 
without  enabling,  and  in  order  that  His  purpose 
might  be  fulfilled  He  provided  needful  strength 
for  Abraham.  God's  grace  was  to  be  accepted.  It 
is  as  true  to-day  as  ever  that  '  As  thy  days  so  shall 
thy  strength  be,'  and  the  grace  of  God  will  always 
be  found  sufficient  for  carrying  out  His  will  and 
purpose. 

3.  The  Divine  Plan. — The  practical  question 
remains  as  to  how,  and  by  what  means,  the 
Divine  purpose  can  be  accomplished  and  the 
Divine  power  utilised  by  man.  The  answer  is 
found  in  the  life  of  Abraham.  God's  word  was 
to  be  believed.  When  faith  responds  to  the  Divine 
promise  the  Divine  power  is  at  once  given,  and 
through  that  power  the  Divine  purpose  is  per- 

280 


The  Evening  of  Life 

fectly    accomplished.      On    the    one    hand    God  Gen.  xxiv. 
assures  the   believer,    *  My  grace   is  sufficient  for  I-9 — xxw. 
thee ' ;  and  on   the   other  the   believer  responds,  I"10, 
'I    can    do    all    things    through    Him    Who    is 
empowering  me.' 


281 


XXXII 

THE   MODEL  SERVANT 

Gen.  xxiv.  10-67 

And  the  servant  took  ten  camels  of  the  camels  of  his  master, 
and  departed  ;  for  all  the  goods  of  his  master  were  in  his  hand  : 
and  he  arose,  and  went  to  Mesopotamia,  unto  the  city  of  Nahor. 

And  he  made  his  camels  to  kneel  down  without  the  city  by  a 
well  of  water  at  the  time  of  the  evening,  even  the  time  that 
women  go  out  to  draw  water. 

And  he  said,  0  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  I  pray  Thee, 
send  me  good  speed  this  day,  and  shew  kindness  unto  my  master 
Abraham. 

Behold,  I  stand  here  by  the  well  of  water  ;  and  the  daughters 
of  the  men  of  the  city  come  out  to  draw  water : 

And  let  it  come  to  pass,  that  the  damsel  to  whom  I  shall 
say,  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  that  I  may  drink ;  and 
she  shall  say,  Drink,  and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink  also : 
let  the  same  be  she  that  Thou  hast  appointed  for  Thy  servant 
Isaac  ;  and  thereby  shall  I  know  that  Thou  hast  shewed  kindness 
unto  my  master. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  before  he  had  done  speaking,  that,  behold, 
Rebekah  came  out,  who  was  born  to  Bethuel,  son  of  Milcah,  the 
wife  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother,  with  her  pitcher  upon  her 
shoulder. 

And  the  damsel  was  very  fair  to  look  upon,  a  virgin,  neither 
had  any  man  known  her :  and  she  went  down  to  the  well,  and 
filled  her  pitcher,  and  came  up. 

And  the  servant  ran  to  meet  her,  and  said,  Let  me,  I  pray 
thee,  drink  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher. 

And  she  said,  Drink,  my  lord :  and  she  hasted,  and  let  down 
her  pitcher  upon  her  hand,  and  gave  him  drink. 

And  when  she  had  done  giving  him  drink,  she  said,  I  will 
draw  water  for  thy  camels  also,  until  they  have  done  drinking. 

And  she  hasted,  and  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough,  and 
ran  again  unto  the  well  to  draw  water,  and  drew  for  all  his 
camels. 

282 


The  Model  Servant 

And  the  man  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace,  to  wit  whether 
the  Lord  had  made  his  journey  prosperous  or  not. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  camels  had  done  drinking,  that 
the  man  took  a  golden  earring  of  half  a  shekel  weight,  and  two 
bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten  sfwkels  weight  of  gold  • 

And  said,  Whose  daughter  art  thou  ?  tell  me,  I  pray  thee :  is 
there  room  in  thy  father's  house  for  us  to  lodge  in  T 

And  she  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  daughter  of  Ik-thuel  the  son 
of  Mil-all,  which  she  bare  unto  Nahor. 

She  said  moreover  unto  him,  We  have  both  straw  and  pro* 
vender  enough,  and  room  to  lodge  in. 

And  the  man  bowed  down  his  head,  and  worshipped  the 
Lord. 

And  he  said,  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham, 
Who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master  of  His  mercy  and  His 
truth :  I  being  in  the  way,  the  Lord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my 
master's  brethren. 

And  the  damsel  ran,  and  told  them  of  her  mother's  house 
these  things. 

And  Rebekah  had  a  brother,  and  his  name  was  Laban  :  and 
Laban  ran  out  unto  the  man,  unto  the  well. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  saw  the  earring  and  brar*lpta 
upon  his  sister's  hands,  and  when  he  heard  the  words  of  Rebekah 
his  sister,  saying,  Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me  ;  that  he  came 
unto  the  man  ;  and,  behold,  he  stood  by  the  camels  at  the 
well. 

And  he  said,  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord  ;  wherefore 
standest  thou  without  f  for  I  have  preparer!  the  house,  and  room 
for  the  camels. 

And  the  man  came  into  the  house  :  and  he  ungirded  his  camels, 
and  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels,  and  water  to  wash 
his  feet,  and  the  men's  feet  that  tcere  with  him. 

And  there  was  set  meat  before  him  to  eat :  but  he  said,  I  will 
not  eat,  until  I  have  told  mine  errand.     And  he  said,  8peak  on. 

And  he  said,  I  am  Abraham's  servant 

And  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master  greatly ;  and  he  is 
become  great :  and  He  hath  given  him  Boom,  and  herds,  and 
silver,  and  gold,  and  menservanta,  and  maidservants,  and  camels, 
and  asses. 

And  8arah  ray  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my  master  when  she 
was  old  :  and  unto  him  hath  he  given  all  that  he  hath. 

And  my  master  made  me  swear,  saying,  Thou  shalt  not  take 
a  wife  to  my  son  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanitee,  in  whose 
land  I  dwell : 

But  thou  shalt  go  unto  my  father's  house,  and  to  my  kindred, 
and  take  a  wife  unto  my  son. 

And  I  said  unto  my  master,  Peradventure  the  woman  will  not 
follow  me. 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

And  he  said  unto  me,  The  Lord,  before  whom  I  walk,  will 
send  His  angel  with  thee,  and  prosper  thy  way  ;  and  thou  shalt 
take  a  wife  for  my  son  of  my  kindred,  and  of  my  father's 
house : 

Then  shalt  thou  be  clear  from  this  my  oath,  when  thou  comest 
to  my  kindred  ;  and  if  they  give  not  thee  one,  thou  shalt  be  clear 
from  my  oath. 

And  I  came  this  day  unto  the  well,  and  said,  0  Lord  God  of 
my  master  Abraham,  if  now  Thou  do  prosper  my  way  which 
I  go: 

Behold,  I  stand  by  the  well  of  water :  and  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  when  the  virgin  cometh  forth  to  draw  water,  and  I  say  to 
her,  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  to  drink  ; 

And  she  say  to  me,  Both  drink  thou,  and  I  will  also  draw  for 
thy  camels :  let  the  same  be  the  woman  whom  the  Lord  hath 
appointed  out  for  my  master's  son. 

And  before  I  had  done  speaking  in  mine  heart,  behold, 
Rebekah  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on  her  shoulder;  and 
she  went  down  unto  the  well,  and  drew  water :  and  I  said  unto 
her,  Let  me  drink,  I  pray  thee. 

And  she  made  haste,  and  let  down  her  pitcher  from  her 
shoulder,  and  said,  Drink,  and  I  will  give  thy  camels  drink 
also  :  so  I  drank,  and  she  made  the  camels  drink  also. 

And  I  asked  her,  and  said,  Whose  daughter  art  thou  ?  And 
she  said,  The  daughter  of  Bethuel,  Nahor's  son,  whom  Milcah 
bare  unto  him :  and  I  put  the  earring  upon  her  face,  and  the 
bracelets  upon  her  hands. 

And  I  bowed  down  my  head,  and  worshipped  the  Lord,  and 
blessed  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  which  had  led  me 
in  the  right  way  to  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter  unto  his 
son. 

And  now  if  ye  will  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  my  master,  tell 
me  :  and  if  not,  tell  me  ;  that  I  may  turn  to  the  right  hand,  or 
to  the  left. 

Then  Laban  and  Bethuel  answered  and  said,  The  thing 
proceedeth  from  the  Lord :  we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or 
good. 

Behold,  Rebekah  is  before  thee,  take  her,  and  go,  and  let  her 
be  thy  master's  son's  wife,  as  the  Lord  hath  spoken. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  when  Abraham's  servant  heard 
their  words,  he  worshipped  the  Lord,  lowing  himself  to  the 
earth. 

And  the  servant  brought  forth  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of 
gold,  and  raiment,  and  gave  them  to  Rebekah :  he  gave  also  to 
her  brother  and  to  her  mother  precious  things. 

And  they  did  eat  and  drink,  he  and  the  men  that  were  with 
him,  and  tarried  all  night ;  and  they  rose  up  in  the  morning, 
and  he  said,  Send  me  away  unto  my  master. 

284 


The  Model  Servant 

And  her  brother  and  her  mother  said,  Let  the  damsel  abide 
with  us  a  few  days,  at  the  lout  ten  ;  alter  that  ahe  shall  go. 

And  he  said  unto  them,  Hinder  me  not,  seeing  the  Lord  hath 
prospered  my  way  ;  send  me  away  that  I  may  go  to  my  mauler. 

And  they  said,  We  will  call  the  damsel,  and  enquire  at  her 
mouth. 

And  they  called  Rebekah,  and  said  unto  her,  Wilt  thou  go 
with  this  man  ?     And  she  said,  I  will  go. 

And  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  sister,  and  her  nurse,  and 
Abraham's  servant,  and  his  nun. 

And  they  blessed  Reliekah,  and  said  uuto  her,  Thou  art  our 
sister,  be  thou  the  mother  of  thousands  of  millions,  and  let  thy 
seed  possess  the  gate  of  those  which  hate  them. 

And  Rebekah  arose,  and  her  damsels,  and  they  rode  upon  the 
camels,  and  followed  the  man:  and  the  servant  took  Krhrkah, 
and  went  his  way. 

And  Isaac  oame  from  the  way  of  the  well  Lahai-roi  ;  for  he 
dwelt  in  the  south  country. 

And  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field  at  the  eventide: 
and  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  Uhuld,  the  camels  were 
coming. 

Ana  Rebekah  lifted  up  her  eyes,  and  when  she  saw  Isaac,  ahe 
lighted  off  the  camel. 

For  she  had  said  unto  the  servant,  What  man  is  this  that 
walketh  in  the  field  to  meet  us?  And  the  servant  had  said,  It 
is  my  master :  therefore  she  took  a  vail,  and  covered  herself. 
And  the  servant  told  Isaac  all  things  that  he  had  done. 
And  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah's  tent,  and  took 
Rebekah,  and  she  became  his  wife  ;  and  he  loved  her :  and  Isaac 
was  comforted  after  his  mother's  death. 


'f  XTE  have  already  considered  Abraham's  part  in  G«n.  xxiv. 

▼  ▼  this  search  of  a  bride  for  his  son  Isaac,  but  IO-67. 
the  chapter  is  so  full  of  interesting  and  vivid  detail 
that  it  needs  careful  attention  from  the  standpoint 
of  Abraham's  servant,  whose  attitude  and  action 
illustrate  in  the  highest  degree  the  qualities  of 
true  service.  We  may,  therefore,  fitly  regard  him 
as  a  model  for  all  who  arc  called  upon  to  work 
for  God.  Several  characteristics  of  his  service 
call  for  attention. 
L  Intelligent  Obedience  (vers.  l-9>— He  was  at 
286 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  hand  ready  for  work,  and  upon  being  told  what 
10-07.  wag  reqUire{i  0f  him  met  his  master's  commands  by 

Obedience60* an  eyident  desire  for  information  (ver.  5).  His 
(vers.  1-9).  service  was  an  intelligent  service,  and  he  wished 
to  know  what  was  to  be  done  under  certain 
contingencies  that  might  present  themselves. 
God  always  welcomes  inquiries  from  His 
servants  concerning  His  will  (John  xvi.  19). 
On  being  assured  by  his  master  of  the  Divine 
guidance  he  at  once  pledged  himself  to  Abraham, 
and  took  a  solemn  oath  of  faithfulness  to  duty. 
II.  Zealous  II.  Zealous  Interest  (vers.  10-14). — With  promp- 
ters61*0- 14).  ^itude  *ne  servant  set  out  on  his  important 
errand,  and  we  can  see  from  the  entire  narrative 
that  he  was  fully  identified  with  the  object 
of  his  quest.  His  was  no  mere  slavery,  for  it 
was  an  evident  delight  to  him  to  do  his 
master's  bidding,  and  to  seek  for  a  bride  for 
his  son. 

The  true  spirit  of  the  man  is  seen  in  his 
earnest  prayer  for  guidance  (ver.  12);  his  task 
was  a  difficult  one.  He  was  on  a  very  unlikely 
and  unusual  errand,  and  so  he  prays  that  the 
God  of  his  master  would  give  him  good  success. 
Not  only  does  he  pray  for  guidance,  but  for 
grace  (vers.  13,  14).  He  seeks  to  know  the 
road,  and  then  asks  for  power  to  walk  along 
it.  He  requests  opportunities,  and  then  grace 
to  use  them.  There  is  scarcely  anything  more 
touching  and  beautiful  than  this  prayer,  especi- 
ally in  its  emphasis  upon  his  master,  and  his  desire 
that  God  would  show  kindness  to  Abraham. 
286 


The  Model  Servant 

Happy    are    those    masters    who    have    such    a  Gen.  xxiv. 
servant   as    this,    and    happy   are    those  servants  10-67. 
able  to  pray  in  this  way  for  their  masters. 

IIL  The  Holy  Tact  (vers.  15-33).— It  is  im-  III.  Holy 
possible  for  us  to  dwell  in  exhaustive  detail  on  all  |^Jj£  . 
the  interesting  and  beautiful  touches  of  this  full 
narrative.  We  cannot,  however,  fail  to  notice 
his  perfect  courtesy  (ver.  17).  Manner  counts 
for  a  very  great  deal  in  all  Christian  work. 
We  may  spoil  a  good  cause  by  our  lack  of 
considerateness  and  courtesy.  We  observe,  too, 
his  patience  (ver.  21).  He  will  not  force  matters, 
for  there  must  be  no  hurry.  The  man  is  filled 
with  a  holy  watchfulness  for  every  indication  of 
the  will  of  God.  'The  man  looked  steadfastly 
on  her,  holding  his  peace,  to  know  whether  the 
Lord  had  made  his  journey  prosperous  or  not' 

The  wisdom  of  the  man  is  equally  evident 
(ver.  22).  He  brings  out  what  would  be  perfectly 
known  to  the  young  girl  as  bridal  gifts,  and 
offers  them  first  before  approaching  the  subject 
of  his  errand,  or  mentioning  the  person  of  his 
master  or  his  master's  son.  We  cannot  fail  to 
observe  his  reverence  and  thankfulness  as  he 
realises  that  his  prayer  lias  beeu  answered,  and 
that  God  has  indeed  guided  him  in  the  way. 
Not  least  of  all  is  the  man's  intense  earnestness 
(ver.  33).  He  would  not  eat  or  rest  until  he 
had  told  his  errand  ;  his  master's  cause  must  come 
first 

IV.  Loving  Faithfulness  (vers.  34-49).—  Again 
we  are  impressed  with  the  combination  of  wisdom 
287 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  and  faithfulness  in  all  that  the  servant  says  and 

IO-67.  does.     He  states  his  position  at  once  with  dignity 

FVthf°rn8:   anc*  numihty  (ver-  34).     He  is  loud  in  the  praises 

(vers.  34-49).  °f  his  master,  and  tells  them  in  brief  his  history 

(vers.  35,   36).      He  then   declares   definitely  the 

object  of  his  errand  (vers.  37-48),  and  makes  the 

proposal,  offering  a  definite  choice  to  the  relatives 

of  the  young  woman  whom  he  had  met  at  the  well 

(ver.  49). 

V.  Blessed         V.  Blessed    Success    (vers.   50-67). — There    are 

Success         difficulties  in  the  way,  as  they  point  out,  but  they 

are  willing  that  Rebekah  should  go,  only  they  ask 

him  to  allow  her  to  remain  a  few  days  before 

the  departure.      The  man,  however,   is  decided; 

his  master's  business  requires  haste,  and  he  urges 

upon    them    the    necessity    of    instant    decision. 

Rebekah    at    once,   and  with    definiteness,    says, 

'I   will    go,'  and    thus    the   journey  home    was 

commenced. 

Soon  the  purpose  of  the  servant  is  accomplished. 
He  introduces  Rebekah  to  Isaac,  and  the  servant 
retires  to  tell  his  aged  master  what  he  has  done. 
The  servant  disappears  from  view  at  this  point 
with  fitness  and  appropriateness,  but  we  are 
sure  that  he  received  his  '  well  done '  from 
Abraham,  and  entered  into  the  joy  of  his  master  in 
the  accomplishment  of  the  task  appointed  to  him. 

Suggestions       In   addition  to  the  lessons  of  Christian  service 

M  d'tati        already  observed  in  our  study  of  the  chapter  it  is 

possible,  and  we  believe  legitimate,  to  regard  this 

story  as  an  illustration  of  still  higher  truths.     The 

288 


The  Model  Servant 

length  of  the  chapter  in  a  hook  whose  spiritual  Gen.  xxiv. 
purpose  is  evident  at  every  stage  seems  to  compel  IO-67. 
the  thought  that  the  full  detail  in  these  sixty- 
seven  verses  must  have  some  deeper  meaning  than 
appears  on  the  surface.  Spiritual  commentators 
have  consequently  not  been  slow  to  find  herein  the 
seeds  of  profound  spiritual  truths.  Doubtless  our 
forefathers  went  too  far  in  the  direction  of  spirit- 
ualising the  Old  Testament  narratives,  but  it  is 
equally  possible  for  us  to  go  to  the  other  extreme, 
and  to  see  nothing  of  the  kind  in  them.  If  it  be 
ever  borne  in  mind  that  such  a  spiritual  use  of  the 
narrative  is  secondary  and  not  primary,  that  it 
is  application  not  interpretation,  and  if  moreover 
we  avoid  fanciful  details  and  confine  ourselves  to 
leading  lines  of  spiritual  suggestion,  the  method  is 
not  only  legitimate  but  essentially  helpful  Let 
us  therefore  look  at  some  of  these  suggestions 
that  are  often  brought  out  of  this  chapter. 

1.  The  purpose  of  the  father. — The  father  has 
but  one  purpose  in  this  chapter,  to  seek  a  bride 
for  his  son.  'A  certain  king  made  a  marriage 
feast  for  his  son '  (Matt  xxii.  2). 

2.  The  position  of  the  son, — The  son  is  the 
father's  one  thought,  and  iu  him  all  his  purposes 
are  to  be  fulfilled  (rer.  36).  So  also  is  it  in 
regard  to  the  Son  of  God  (Eph.  i.  20-22). 

3.  The  prospects  of  the  bride.—  The  bride  was 
thought  of  before  she  herself  knew  it  (ver.  4),  and 
arrangements  were  made  for  her  to  be  offered  tli. 
position  of  wife  to  Isaac.  'He  chose  us  in  Him 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  should 

289 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Gen.  xxiv.  be  holy  and  without  blemish  before  Him  in  love' 
IO"67-  (Epb.  i.  4). 

4.  The  proclamation  of  the  servant. — The  one 
object  of  the  servant  was  the  announcement  of 
Abraham's  purpose,  which  carried  with  it  the 
revelation  concerning  the  son,  and  the  offer  to 
Rebekah.  How  wonderfully  he  proclaimed  the 
vast  resources  of  the  father  (ver.  35),  and  the  glory 
of  the  son  (ver.  36).  In  like  manner  the  Holy 
Spirit  through  the  mouths  of  Christian  preachers 
is  continually  proclaiming  the  glory  of  Christ.  Is 
it  not  something  more  than  a  coincidence  that  we 
have  such  striking  words  in  St  John  xvi.  14,  15  ? 

5.  The  power  of  the  message. — The  success  of 
the  servant  in  attracting  Rebekah  to  go  with  him 
is  very  noteworthy.  In  like  manner,  Christ,  if  He 
be  lifted  up,  will  draw  men  to  Himself.  There  is 
nothing  so  attractive  as  the  preaching  of  a  free 
and  full  Gospel  (John  xii.  32). 

6.  The  progress  of  the  soul. — The  decision  of 
Rebekah  and  her  determination  to  go  is  another 
striking  point  of  the  narrative.  She  believed  the 
servant's  word  based  upon  the  evidences  of 
Abraham's  good  faith.  She  ventured  everything 
and  went.  So  is  it  with  the  soul  that  rests  upon 
the  Word  of  God  based  upon  the  certainty  of 
those  things  wherein  we  have  been  instructed. 
Faith  ventures  and  finds  itself  justified.  Faith 
steps  on  the  seeming  void  and  finds  the  rock 
beneath. 

7.  The  prospect  of  the  home. — Rebekah  in  coming 
to  Canaan  finds  a  husband,  her  true  life,  and  her 

290 


The  Model  Servant 

permanent    home.     The    soul    coming    to    Christ  Gen.  xxiv. 
enters  into  true  fellowship,  rejoices  even  now  in  io^7- 
eternal  life,  and   knows  that  in  God's  good  time 
there  will  be  the  Canaan  above,  the  rest  for  the 
people  of  God. 


201 


XXXIII 

THE  FATHER  OF  THE 
FAITHFUL 

BEFORE  passing  on  to  the  story  of  Isaac,  and 
the  record  of  the  development  of  the  Divine 
purpose  with  Abraham  and  his  descendants,  it  will 
be  useful  to  dwell  once  more  on  the  life  and 
character  of  Abraham  as  a  whole. 

None  of  the  lives  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament 
made  a  deeper  impression  or  became  more  prominent 
in  after  ages  than  that  of  Abraham.  His  position 
as  the  founder  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  his 
character  as  the  pattern  and  type  of  believers  in 
all  ages,  have  given  him  a  very  important  place 
in  Holy  Scripture.  The  following  summary  of 
passages  may  serve  as  a  guide  to  fuller  and  detailed 
study. 

I.  In  the  Old  Testament — 

Abraham  in  The  Scripture  Record. — It  is  evident  to  the  most 
Testament.  casual  reader  that  wherever  Abraham  is  mentioned 
he  is  always  assumed  to  have  been  a  veritable  historic 
personage.  There  is  no  possibility  of  his  being 
regarded  as  an  '  eponymous  hero.'  That  he  existed, 
that  he  had  the  experiences  recorded  in  the  Book 
292 


The  Father  of  the  Faithful 

of  Genesis,  and  that  he  was  the  personal,  definite, 
historic  founder  of  the  Jewish  nation  are  always 
regarded  as  simple  matters  of  fact 

The  Gracious  Covenant  (Exod.  ii.  24).— 'God 
remembered  His  covenant  with  Abraham.'  This 
Abrahamic  covenant  is  often  referred  to  in  times 
subsequent  to  the  patriarch,  and  is  regarded  as  the 
foundation  of  everything  in  connection  with  God's 
dealings  with  Israel. 

The  Divine  Title  (Exod.  iii.  6).—' I  am  .  .  .  the 
God  of  Abraham.'  This  title  of  God  in  relation  to 
the  patriarch  is  full  of  spiritual  reality  and  blessed- 
ness, and  is  dwelt  on  in  later  books  with  evident 
satisfaction.  It  is  especially  precious  as  a  spiritual 
fact  in  the  light  of  Heb.  xi.  16:  'God  is  not 
ashamed  to  be  called  their  God.' 

The  Special  Appeal  (Isa.  Ii.  2). — '  Look  unto 
Abraham  your  father  .  .  .  for  I  .  .  .  blessed  him.' 
God  here  uses  Abraham  and  His  own  dealings 
with  the  patriarch  as  a  reminder  to  Israel  and  an 
assurance  to  His  people  in  captivity  that  He  will 
bless  them  also,  as  He  had  blessed  their  ancestor. 
The  unchanging  faithfulness  of  God  is  one  of  the 
foundation  truths  of  Holy  Scripture. 

The  Definite  Plea  (1  Kings  xviii.  36).— '  Lord 
God  of  Abraham.'  Elijah  bases  his  prayer  on  God's 
relation  to  Abraham.  He  uses  it  as  a  reason  for 
God's  answer  to  His  prayer,  and  His  manifestation 
in  the  face  of  idolatry.  In  like  manner  Moses  put 
forth  the  same  plea  :  '  Remember  Abraham  ...  to 
whom  Thou  swarcst  .  .  .  and  saidst '  (Exod.  xxxiL 
13 ;  Deut  ix.  27).     Believers  have  a  blessed  and  holy 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

right  to  plead  God's  faithfulness  to  their  forefathers 
as  a  reason  for  continued  help. 

The  Unique  Relationship  (2  Chron.  xx.  7). — 
'Abraham,  Thy  friend.'  (Cf  Isa.  xli.  8.)  He  is 
the  only  personage  in  the  Old  Testament  who  has 
this  high  and  privileged  title.  To  this  day  in 
Arabia  El  Khalil  (' God's  friend')  is  used  of 
Abraham. 

A  careful  study  of  these  and  other  passages, 
especially  in  the  Psalms,  will  reveal  a  wealth  of 
spiritual  teaching  associated  with  Abraham  and  the 
Divine  Covenant  made  with  him. 

II.  In  the  New  Testament — 
Abraham  in        The  Record  of  his  Life. — Here   again  we   are 

TlstamTnt      faCe    to    face    ^^    the    simPle    fact    that    aU    tne 
New  Testament  writers    regard    Abraham    as    a 

genuine  personage,  and  no  mere  mythical  hero. 
Whether  we  study  passages  like  Acts  vii.  or 
Romans  iv.  or  Hebrews  xi.,  or  dwell  upon  parti- 
cular verses  in  the  Gospels  and  elsewhere,  there  is 
only  one  interpretation  possible;  the  New  Testa- 
ment accepts,  endorses,  and  uses  the  Old  Testa- 
ment testimony  to  Abraham,  and  it  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  no  one  with  his  New  Testament 
in  his  hand  can  hesitate  for  an  instant  as  to  the 
true  meaning  and  genuine  implications  of  the 
references  to  the  patriarch. 

His  Relation  to  the  Messiah. — The  genealogy 

given  by  St  Matthew   (i.    1)    traces  our  Lord's 

connection    with    Abraham    and    clearly    teaches 

that    the    Messiah    '  took    on    Him    the    seed 

294 


The  Father  of  the  Faithful 

of  Abraham'  (Heb.  ii.  16).  This  fact  in  the 
first  Gospel,  which  is  essentially  the  Gospel 
for  the  Jews,  shows  the  historic  root  of  the 
Messianic  expectation.  Looking  at  Abraham's 
relation  to  the  Messiah  from  another  standpoint, 
we  notice  what  may  be  called  his  spiritual  antici- 
pation of  the  Messiah :  *  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see 
My  day '  (John  viii.  56).  What  this  sight  of  the 
Messianic  day  really  meant  and  included  it  is 
now  impossible  to  say.  We  must  be  on  our 
guard  against  assuming  too  much  spiritual  know- 
ledge or  against  almost  entirely  denying  it 
Probably  on  the  occasion  of  the  great  events 
recorded  in  Gen.  xv.,  and  especially  in  Gen.  xxii., 
Abraham  had  a  spiritual  vision  given  of  Him  in 
Whom  all  the  promises  were  to  be  completely 
fulfilled. 

His  Relation  to  the  Jews. — We  can  nee  from 
several  passages  the  national  and  individual 
pride  felt  in  Abraham  (Matt.  iii.  9;  John  viii.  39). 
A  poor  woman  is  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  as  'a 
daughter  of  Abraham'  (Luke  xiii.  16),  and  the 
highest  and  most  precious  view  of  the  future 
life  to  the  Jews  seems  to  have  been  'Abraham's 
bosom '  (Luke  xvi  22).  We  can  see  from  all  this 
how  profound  was  the  Jewish  reverence  for  their 
great  ancestor.  The  pride  was  in  some  respects 
perfectly  natural  and  legitimate,  though  in  the 
result  it  became  a  stumbling-block  nnd  a  danger 
to  them,  since  they  rested  in  their  lineal  descent 
and  forgot  the  need  of  spiritual  affinity  and 
kinship. 

295 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Aspects  of  The  above  passages  are  concerned  with  general 
Ufe?plntUal  references  to  Abraham.  In  the  four  passages 
that  follow  he  is  used  by  the  writers  for  the 
purpose  of  conveying  special  spiritual  teaching, 
and  it  is  to  be  noted  carefully  that  each  passage 
by  itself  has  one  main  thought  about  Abraham. 
There  is  no  repetition,  but  four  different  aspects 
of  his  spiritual  life  are  dwelt  upon. 

His  Righteousness  by  Faith  (Rom.  iv.). — This 
is  the  main  thought  of  the  entire  chapter,  in 
which  the  Apostle  sets  out  to  prove  that  Abra- 
ham became  righteous  not  by  works  but  by  faith. 
Righteousness  in  Romans,  as  also  in  Genesis  xv., 
is  much  more  than  justification,  and  from  first  to 
last  we  are  to  understand  that  Abraham  became 
righteous  by  faith  in  God  (vers.  3,  13,  21,  22). 

His  Spiritual  Seeq\  (Gal.  iii. ;  iv.  22-31). — 
Another  aspect  of  Abraham's  life  is  here  con- 
sidered. The  key-thought  of  the  whole  passage 
is  the  relation  of  Abraham  to  the  great  spiritual 
seed  of  believers  of  whom  he  is  the  father  (iii.  9, 
16,  26,  29;  iv.  31).  The  Apostle  is  emphasising 
the  great  outstanding  reality  of  spiritual  kinship 
with  Abraham  through  faith,  and  all  that  faith 
brings  of  sonship  to  God  and  liberty. 

His  Life  of  Faith  (Heb.  xi.  8-19).— It  is  inter- 
esting to  notice  that  three  times  in  the  New 
Testament  the  words  of  the  prophet,  'The  just 
shall  live  by  faith'  (Hab.  ii.  4),  are  quoted,  but 
each  time  with  a  special  emphasis.  Taking  the 
words  as  they  stand  in  the  Greek,  'The  just  by 
faith  shall  live/  we  notice  that  in  Romans  i.  17 
296 


The  Father  of  the  Faithful 

the  emphasis  is  on  'the  just' ;  in  Galatians  UL  11  it 
is  on  'by  faith' ;  in  Hebrews  x.  38  it  is  on  'shall 
live ' ;  and  the  result  is  that  the  great  chapter, 
Hebrews  xl,  is  concerned  with  illustrations  of  the 
life  of  faith — that  is,  with  faith  as  the  spiritual 
principle  and  power  of  the  entire  life  of  the  believer 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  Consequently 
Abraham  is  there  described  as  manifesting  various 
characteristics  of  the  attitude  of  faith — e.g.  his 
obedience  of  faith  (ver.  8);  his  patience  of  faith 
(ver.  9) ;  his  expectation  of  faith  (ver.  10) ;  his 
consecration  of  faith  (ver.  17).  The  entire  passage 
shows  the  various  ways  in  which  faith  manifests 
itself  as  the  fundamental  power  of  daily  living. 

His  Faith  and  Works  (Jas.  ii.  21-24).— This 
passage,  as  is  well  known,  has  given  rise  to  great 
controversy,  but  there  surely  was  no  need  of  much 
difference  of  opinion.  St  Paul  uses  the  story 
recorded  in  Genesis  xv.  as  a  proof  that  Abraham 
was  justified  by  faith.  St  James  uses  the  event 
recorded  in  Genesis  xxiL,  which  occurred  twenty- 
five  years  after,  as  a  proof  that  Abraham  was 
justified  by  works.  Seeing,  then,  that  for  twenty- 
five  years  Abraham's  relationship  with  God  was  of 
faith,  it  is  evident  that  Genesis  xxii.  is  the  crown 
and  culmination  of  that  faith,  and  is  proved  by 
Abraham's  act  of  offering  Isaac  '  Faith  wrought 
with  his  works,  and  by  works  was  faith  made 
perfect'  (Jas.  il  22).  Works  are  the  evidential 
proof  of  faith.  As  Calvin  has  aptly  said,  while 
it  is  faith  alone  that  justifies,  the  faith  that  justifies 
is  never  alone. 

U  297 


Genesis  i.-xxv.  10 

Suggestions      Let  us  now  sum  up  the  entire  record  of  Abra- 
Sfditati        ham's  life  as  found  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  dwell 

upon  it  from  God's  standpoint  and  from  his  own. 

We  may  see  in  it  a  revelation  of  true  life. 

1.  Life's  choicest  privilege. — What  is  this?  It 
is  to  be  associated  with  God,  as  was  Abraham; 
to  be  lifted  up  into  union  with  God  and  into 
fellowship  with  His  Divine  purposes  of  blessing 
for  the  world.  We  can  easily  imagine  what 
Abraham  would  have  been  without  this  privilege. 
Now,  however,  he  is  for  ever  associated  with 
God,  and  God  is  called  'the  God  of  Abraham' 
(Luke  xx.  37).  Such  is  the  case  with  every 
believer.  God  lifts  him  out  of  the  mire  of  sin 
and  raises  him  to  a  position  of  high  privilege, 
transforming  his  life  and  enabling  him  to  realise 
the  Divine  will. 

2.  Life's  strong  foundation.  —  What  is  this? 
It  is  God's  covenant  with  man.  This  was  at  the 
basis  of  everything  with  Abraham.  This,  too,  was 
what  David  rested  on  and  rejoiced  in ;  '  the  ever- 
lasting covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure' 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  This  is  still  the  foundation  of 
the  believer's  life  and  tower  of  hope,  the  new 
covenant  in  Christ  (Heb.  viii.  10-12).  A  life  lived 
in  the  consciousness  of  an  everlasting  covenant 
made  between  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son 
on  behalf  of  the  believer  and  sealed  to  him  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  makes  life  strong,  peaceful,  and 
satisfied. 

3.  Life's  greatest  glory. — What  is  this?  It  is 
faithfulness  to  God.     The  one  thing  needful  is  not 

298 


The  Father  of  the  Faithful 

success,  but  sincerity ;  not  glory,  but  goodness ; 
not  honour,  but  holiness.  A  humble,  consistent, 
earnest  life,  lived  to  the  praise  of  God,  is  the 
greatest  life  that  can  be  lived ;  and  this,  on  the 
whole,  was  the  characteristic  of  Abraham's  life. 
He  witnessed  to  the  reality  of  God  and  His 
grace. 

4.  Life's  simple  secret. — What  is  this?  It  is 
faith — faith  believing  God's  word  and  trusting  God 
Himself.  Faith  rests  on  God,  receives  from  God, 
responds  to  God,  relies  on  God,  realises  God, 
rejoices  in  God,  and  reproduces  His  life  and  char- 
acter. In  proportion  to  our  faith  will  everything 
else  be.  '  By  faith '  is  the  simple  but  all-embracing 
secret  of  daily  living.  80  it  was  with  Abraham, 
so  it  has  ever  been,  so  it  ever  will  be  until  *  Faith 
is  changed  to  sight  and  hope  with  glory  crowned.' 


TCKXBCLl.   AMI*   •l-KAR*.    MUSTEK*.    kl'l*»t  ROM 


A   DEVOTIONAL  COMMENTARY. 

Bible  students  and  Bible  readers  have  long  felt  the  necessity 
for  some  Commentary  which  should  aim  simply  and  solely  at 
helping  the  spiritual  life  of  those  who  us*  it.  The  Religious 
Tract  Society  is  now  producing  a  series  of  volumes  designed 
to  fill  this  gap.  In  every  case  the  aim  has  been  so  to  comment 
upon  the  words  of  Holy  Scripture  as  to  h<?lp  the  spiritual  life 
of  the  reader.  There  has,  of  course,  bren  some  treatment  of 
perplexing  passages  and  a  steady  attempt  to  draw  out  the  general 
character  as  well  as  the  particular  lessons  of  each  book.  Each 
volume  is  primarily  and  distinctively  a  devotional  volume — 
a  book  which  the  Bible  reader  can  take  up  day  by  day  and 
find  it  aid  him  in  applying  the  words  of  Holy  Scripture  to  the 
needs  of  his  own  personal  character  and   life. 


The  Second   Epistle  to  Timothy. 

Short   Devotional  Studies  on  the  Dying  Letter 
of  St.   Paul. 

By  the  Right  Rev.   HANDLEY  C  G.  MOULE.  D.D., 
Bishop  of  Durham. 

Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  as. 

"The  Bishop  has  sought  to  help  the  exercise  of  the  study 
by  treating  a  pre-eminently  heart-moving  Epistle  in  simple 
expository  style  after  the  manner  of  a  Bible  reading.  His  aim, 
he  tells  us,  is  not  'for  literary  criticism  or  inquiry,  but  in 
quest  of  Divine  messages  for  heart  and  life.'  Yet  it  need  not 
be  said  that,  while  the  book  is  not  encumbered  with  a  mass 
of  learned  details — valuable  in  their  place,  but  unneeded  here 
— the  most  exact  and  delicate  scholarship  underlies  each  attempt 

to   bring   out   the   full   meaning   of  the    Apostle's  words 

The  Bishop  of  Durham  has  published  several  volumes  of 
studies  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  but  never,  we  think,  one 
which  came  so  near  his  heart,  or  which  his  readers  will  find 
so   moving   and    absorbing   as   this." — The   Record. 

"We  may  say  it  is  a  work  of  no  ordinary  value,  and  Chris- 
tians will  find  in  it  a  rich  feast.  It  is  needless,  of  course, 
to  say  that  it  is  the  work  of  a  scholar;  it  is  also  the  work 
of  a  whole-hearted  believer."— The  English  Churchman. 

"  It  is  well  conceived,  and  written  with  Dr.  Moule's  usual 
care  and  finish." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"  No  man  writes  with  more  insight,  with  a  more  thorough 
appreciation  of  the  conditions  of  his  task,  than  Dr.  Motile, 
when  he  deals  with  devotional   subjects."— Westminster  Gazette. 


LONDON:  THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


A    DEVOTIONAL    COMMENTARY. 


The  Epistle  to  the  Phillpplans. 

By    the    Rev.    F.    B.  MEYER,    B.A. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s. 

"  This  devotional  commentary,  by  so  well-known  a  writer, 
needs  little  notice  to  commend  it.  It  is  replete  with  th« 
earnestness,  extensive  Christian  experience,  and  spiritual  in» 
sight  that  characterise  Mr.  Meyer's  numerous  writings." 
— The  Rock. 

"  The  text  of  the  Epistle  is  broken  up  by  Mr.  Meyer  into 
paragraphs,  upon  each  of  which  he  comments  at  length.  It 
is  not  too  much  to  say  that  Mr.  Meyer  has  never  in  the  course 
of  his  fruitful  labours  done  better  work  of  its  kind  than  appears 
in  this  volume.  His  comments  are  marked  by  spiritual  in- 
sight as  well  as  by  great  aptitude  of  practical  application.  The 
whole  exposition  is  full  of  thought  and  instinct  with  warm 
Christian  feeling." — The  Record. 

THE    PSALMS. 
THEIR  SPIRITUAL  TEACHING. 

By  the  Rev.  J.  ELDER  CUMMING,  D.D. 

In  three  Volumes. 

Vol.  I.— Psalms  I.-XLI.         Vol.  II.— Psalms  XLII.-LXXXIX. 

Vol.  III.— Psalms  XC-CL. 

Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  each  volume. 

"  Dr.  Elder  Cumming's  expositions  are  models  of  what  such 
expositions  should  be.  Brief,  lucid,  and  pervaded  by  fine 
spiritual  feeling,  they  will  do  more  to  bring  the  Psalms  into 
heart  and  life  than  many  of  the  larger  standard  works." — 
The    Scotsman. 

"It  stands  out  among  the  many  books  on  the  Psalms  as  the 
commentary  most  adapted  for  busy  men  and  women  who  wish 
to  grip,  one  by  one  in  their  daily  devotions,  the  innermost 
teaching  of  the  Divine  Songs." — The  Presbyterian. 

"  The  reader  is  helped  to  feel  the  Psalms,  and  nowhere  is 
that  more  conspicuous  than  in  the  Psalms  which  have  a  per- 
sonal origin  and  application.  Certainly  the  work  will  make 
the  Psalms  live  again  to  many  readers." — The  Record. 

"  The   tone    and    spirit   is    frankly   evangelical There 

is  ample  scope  for  a  book  of  this  kind." — The  Daily  News. 

"Dr.  Cumming's  brief  expositions  of  the  Psalms  are  the 
sincere  utterances  of  a  deeply  religious  mind,  and  are  leavened 
by  good  sense  as  well  as  by  pious  sentiment." — The  Glasgow 
Herald. 


LONDON:  THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


A    DEVOTIONAL    COMMENTARY, 

St.   Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the 
Thessalonians. 

By  Rev.  A.  R.  BUCKLAND,  M.A, 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  as. 

"  The  volume  is  one  of  a  series  which  aims  simply  and  solely 
at  helping  the  reader's  spiritual  life.  To  this  end  Mr.  Buck- 
land's    work   is   excellently   adapted." — Scotsman. 

"Mr.    Buckland's  Commentary   has   uniformly   interested   and 

delighted    me The   topics,    specified    for   thought   and 

prayer  at  the  close  of  each  section,  are  a  very  happy  feature 
of  the  book."— Bishop  of  Durham  in   The  Record. 

"  To  those  who  wish  a  clear,  terse,  sympathetic  treatment 
of  Paul's  first  message,  the  book  will  prove  most  helpful."— 
Scottish   Review. 

"Where  Mr.  Buckland  is  concerned  a  'devotional*  Com- 
mentary stands  for  a  strength  and  thoughtfulness  not  always 
associated  with  that  term ;  and  his  treatment  of  the  earliest 
of  the  New  Testament  books  makes  a  welcome  addition  to  the 
series  of  which  he  is  the  general  editor." — Christian  World. 

The  General   Epistle  of  James. 

By  Rev.  CHARLES  BROWN  (of  Ferme  Park). 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  as. 

"This  little  book  is  well  arranged  upon  a  plan  calculated  to 
enhance  its  utility  to  ministers  and  teachers.  We  cordially 
recommend  it." — Baptist. 

"Will  be  found  specially  attractive  by  lovers  of  simplicity 
who  care  less  for  criticism  than  for  Bible  teaching." — Sheffield 
Daily  Telegraph. 

The  Epistle  of  St.   Paul  to   Philemon, 

By  Rev.  A.  H.  DRYSDALB,  D.D. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  as. 

"Dr.  Drysdale's  exposition  is  thorough  and  lucid,  and  it 
eminently  adapted  for  the  instruction  of  the  general  reader  as 
well  as  for  the  thoughtful  student  of  the  Apostle's  writings." 
—Christian. 


LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT   SOCIETY. 


A  DEVOTIONAL  COMMENTARY. 


THE   BOOK    OF   ESTHER]   Its  Spiritual 
Teaching. 

By  Rev.  J.  ELDER  CUMMING,  D.D. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s. 

"  Dr.  Cumming's  name  is  sufficiently  well  known  to  command 
attention  to  the  volume  ....  this  latest  edition  to  this  useful 
Commentary  only  goes  to  enhance  the  value  of  the  whole." 
—Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  Alike  for  scholarship  and  reverence  the  author's  treatment 
of  this  difficult  book  is  all  that  could  be  desired  by  the  devout 
student  of  the  inspired  Word." — English  Churchman. 

"  Critics  have  frequently  examined  this  book,  and  questioned 
its  right  to  a  place  in  the  inspired  canon.  With  much  cogency 
of  argument  and  deep  insight,  Dr.  Cumming  shows  conclu- 
sively that  the  alleged  difficulties  are  either  captious  or  of 
little  weight.  From  the  historical  position  and  date  of  persons 
and  events  described  he  proves  that  the  objections  to  the  book 
will  not  hold  good,  and  makes  out  his  case  with  the  lucidity 
of  a  self-taught  expositor." — Christian. 

"The  subject  is  undoubtedly  difficult,  but  Dr.  Cumming  has 
treated  it  wisely  and  well.  The  problems  of  the  book  are 
fairly  faced  and  often  disposed  of,  while  the  meditations, 
though  sometimes  taxing  the  strength  of  the  text,  are  helpful 
and  suggestive." — Methodist  Times. 

GENESIS.    Vol.  I.— Gen.  I-XXV. 

By  Rev.  W.  H.  GRIFFITH  THOMAS,  D.D. 
Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  2s. 

This  addition  to  the  "Devotional  Commentary"  is  from  the 
pen  of  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Griffith  Thomas,  D.D.,  Principal  of 
Wycliffe  Hall,  Oxford.  The  author  combines  in  a  marked  de- 
gree scholarship  and  expository  skill.  He  evades  no  difficulties 
suggested  by  the  narrative  or  by  comments  upon  it ;  and  his 
treatment  of  these  will  be  found  particularly  helpful.  But  the 
devotional  element  in  the  Commentary  is  prominent  throughout. 
The  lesson  derivable  from  the  earlier  chapters  of  Genesis 
have  never,  perhaps,  been  set  out  with  more  detail  or  con- 
veyed more  forcibly.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  preacher 
or  Bible  class  leader,  the  careful  sub-divisions  of  the  matter — 
whether  expository  or  devotional — will  be  found  of  the  greatest 
value.  

LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT   SOCIETY. 


By  Rev.  CHARLES  BROWN. 

LIGHT  AND   LIFE. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Autho.\     Crown  8vo, 
cloth  gilt,  35.  6d. 

"Valuable  and  suggestive  sermons,  simply  written." — TJU 
British   Weekly. 

"  The  sermons  contain  keen,  searching  analyses  of  human 
motives ;  they  vibrate  with  feeling ;  they  are  intensely  prac- 
tical."— The    Daily    News. 

"Those  who  here  make  Mr.  Brown's  acquaintance  for  the 
first  time  will  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  the  spiritual  direct- 
""'  ^nd  practical  helpfulness  of  his  ministry."—  The  Christian 
World.  

By  Rev.  W.  H.  GRIFFITH    THOMAS,  B.D. 

THE  APOSTLE    PETER. 

Outline  Studies  In  hie  Life,  Character, 
and  Writings. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo, 
cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d. 

"It  is  a  helpful  book  for  Bible  classes  and  private  students." 
— Scotsman. 

"  sir.  Thomas's  brief  expositions  are  full  of  luminous  inter- 
pretations of  St.  Peter's  life  and  character."— The  British 
Weekly. 

"  It  is  a  volume  of  scholarship,  of  original  work  and  insight." 
—Expository   Times. 

By  Rev.  W.  L.  WATKTNSON. 

THE  ASHES  OF  ROSES,  AND  OTHER 
BIBLE  8TUDIES. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo. 
cloth  gilt.  3s.  6d. 

"  Nonconformity  has  few  more  brilliant  or  interesting  preachers 

than   the   Rev.   W.    L.   Wafkinson His    comments    are 

never  commonplace,  whilst  their  expression  is  oft<*n  marked 
by  an  aptness  and  brilliancy  not  often  found  in  literature  of 
this   order." — The   Record. 

"  For  originality,  brevity,  and  felicity  of  illustration,  Mr. 
Watkinson's  sermons  stand  without  a  rival."-—  The  British 
Weekly. 

"  We  have  what  might  be  called  the  concentrated  essence  of  one 
of  the  most  ingeniously  original  preachers  our  sge  has 
— Tht  Christian   World. 


LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


By  the  BISHOP  OP  DURHAM. 

Thoughts  for  the  Sundays  of  the  Year. 

By  the  Right  Rev.  HANDLEY  C.  G.  MOULE,  D.D., 
Bishop  of  Durham. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Author.      Crown  8vo.     Cloth 
gilt,  3s.  6d.     Presentation  Edition,  padded  paste  grain,  6s.  net 

"  There  is  not  a  chapter  in  the  book  which  does  not  yield  some 
wise  direction,  some  searching  or  some  bracing  thought." — Record. 

"  There  is  no  living  theologian  who  is  better  qualified  to  write 
such  a  work  than  Dr.  Moule." — Spectator. 

"Most  helpful  meditations,  characterised  by  fine  exposition, 
wedded  to  an  admirable  style,  and  saturated  with  a  beautiful  spirit 
of  devotion  "—Examiner. 


By  BISHOP  WELLDON. 

Youth    and   Duty. 

Sermons  to  Harrow  Schoolboys. 

By  the  Right  Rev.  J.  E.  C.  WELLDON,   D.D.,  Dean  of  Man- 
chester, sometime  Bishop  of  Calcutta.     Author  of  "  I  Believe," 
etc.     With  a  Photogravure  Portrait.     Crown  8vo.    Cloth  gilt, 
3s.  6d 
Many  old  Harrow  boys  will  be  glad  to  see,  in  a  permanent  form, 

a  careful    selection  of   the  sermons  preached  there  by  Bishop 

Welldon  while  Headmaster  of  the  great  school. 


By  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

Grace  Triumphant. 

A  Series  of  Sermons,  hitherto  unpublished. 

By  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON. 
With  a  Photogravure  Frontispiece.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

••  Here  we  have  fifteen  sermons  by  this  noted  preacher  which 
have  never  before  appeared  in  print.  They  have  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  man  and  his  methods  which  have  made  them  so 
widely  read,  and  so  great  an  influence  for  good.  There  is  an  apt- 
ness, a  directness,  a  confident  appeal  to  Scripture,  a  taking  hold  of 
Scripture  promises,  and  an  application  of  Scripture  lessons  to  the 
daily  life  and  habits  of  the  people  which  have  made  them  a  power- 
ful influence  for  good." — Church  Family  News. 

"They  are  excellent  specimens  of  the  sainted  preacher's  pulpit 
utterances,  revealing  that  intensity  of  feeling  and  strength  of  con- 
viction which  characterised  all  his  expositions  of  Scripture." — The 
Christian.  

LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT   SOCIETY. 


By  the  Right  Rev.  O.  A.  CHADWICK,  D.D., 

Bishop  of  Derry 

PILATE'S      GIFT. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d. 

"These  are  sermons  of  sterling  worth.  It  was  fit  that  such 
admirable  examples  of  skilful  Biblical  exposition  should  be 
gathered  into  a  volume." — The  Christian  World. 

"The  student  will  find  the  volume  full  of  rich  and  suggestive 
thought.  Vet  there  is  a  simplicity  about  the  teaching  which 
will  make  it  of  very  real  service  to  the  devout  reader  of 
sermons." — The  Record. 


By  Rev.  J.  D    JONES,  MA.,  B  D 
(Of  Bournemouth). 

ELIMS  OF  LIFE,  and  OTHER  SERMONS. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo, 
cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d. 

"The  sermons  are  fresh,  living,  and  contain  very  direct 
appeals  to  conscience.  The  interest  is  never  allowed  to  flag." 
— The  British    Weekly. 

"Undoubtedly    this    volume   cannot    but    meet    with    general 

acceptance It  is  replete  with  teaching  of  a  high  order 

and  intense  spiritual  conviction."—  Dundee  Courier . 

"  Mr.  Jones  never  fails  to  arrest  the  attention  of  his  hearers. 
....  The  outstanding  quality  of  these  sermons  is  their  prac- 
tical  import." — The  Daily  News. 


By  HESBA   STRETTON 

THE   PARABLES  OF  OUR    LORD. 

With  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo. 
cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d. 

"This   book    should    be    widely    read It    is    simply 

written  and  full  of  helpful  thoughts."— The  British  Weekly. 

»  Miss  Hesba  Stretton  writes  simply,  sincerely,  tonchingly, 
and  her  way  of  putting  old  and  familiar  truths  may  reach 
her  hearers  as  the  words  of  others  have  not  done."— T he  Chris- 
tian   World. 

"  This  should  be  a  very  useful  book  for  anv  who  wish  to  get 
an  explanation  and  exposition  of  the  Tarables  in  clear  and 
simple  language."— Manchester  Courier. 

LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


The  Bible    Handbook. 

An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Holy  Scripture. 

By  the  late  JOSEPH  ANGUS,  D.D. 

New  Edition  thoroughly  Revised  and  in  part  Re- written  by 

SAMUEL  G.  GREEN,  D.D. 

Author  of  'A  Handbook  of  Church  History,*  etc. 

Demy  8vo.     848  pages.     Cloth  gilt.     3s.  6d. 

'  "  The  Bible  Handbook "  has  been  entirely  re-cast  and  partly 
re-written.  In  its  new  form  it  will  be  a  valuable  aid  to  the  Biblical 
student  and  to  the  intelligent  layman  who  wishes  to  keep  abreast  of 
the  latest  scholarship  in  the  realm  of  Biblical  interpretation.' — The 
Daily  News. 

'  Dr.  Angus'  "  Bible  Handbook  "  has  for  half  a  century  held  its 
ground  as  a  popular  and  sensible  introduction  to  the  study  of 
Scripture.  But  the  last  half  century  has  been  marked  by  very  dis- 
tinct advance  in  Biblical  knowledge,  and  public  confidence  could 
not  be  retained  save  by  issuing  this  valuable  manual  in  a  revised 
form.  Large  parts  have  necessarily  been  re-written,  and  a  vast 
amount  of  valuable  information  has  been  incorporated,  so  that  the 
value  of  the  original  work  is  greatly  enhanced.'— B ritis h  Weekly, 

A   Handbook  of  Church   History. 

From  the  Apostolic  Era  to  the  Dawn  of  the 

Reformation. 

By  SAMUEL  G.  GREEN,  D.D. 

Author  of  *  A  Handbook  of  Old  Testament  Hebrew,'  etc. 

With  Full  Dates,  Chronological  Tables,  and  Index. 

Demy  8vo.     640  pages.     6s.  net. 

For  the  purposes  of  the  student  it  will  be  found  simple  in  arrange- 
ment, lucid  in  style,  and  entirely  without  bias;  while  careful 
chronological  and  other  tables  will  facilitate  its  use  as  a  text-book. 
At  the  same  time  the  history  is  eminently  adapted  for  the  general 
reader,  who  will  find  a  subject,  which  is  often  rendered  for  him 
unapproachable  by  the  dry  and  technical  method  of  its  treatment, 
dealt  with  in  a  style  at  once  popular  and  exact. 

*  It  is  a  capable  and  lucid  narrative,  which  seems  to  succeed  in 
treating  a  history  which  covers  14^  centuries  in  not  too  sketchy  a 
manner,  and  which  is  not  intent  on  establishing  any  particular 
doctrine.' — The  Times. 

'  It  is  an  interesting  synoptic  view  of  the  history  of  the  Western 
Church.' — The  Daily  News. 

'  It  gives  an  able  and  interesting  presentation  of  a  subject  which 
has  often  been  made  repellant  by  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
treated.' — The  Scotsman. 

'  It  is  a  marvel  of  cheapness.' — The  Glasgow  Herald. 


LONDON:  THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


A  Handbook  to  Old  Testament  Hebrew. 

Containing  an  Elementary  Grammar  of  the  language,  with  Reading 
Lessons,  Notes  on  many  Scripture  Passages,  and  Copious 
Exercises. 

Edited  by  SAMUEL  G.  GREEN,  D.D. 

Author  of  "  A  Handbook  to  the  Grammar  of  the  Greek  Testament.' 

Demy  8vo,  332  pages.     Cloth  gilt,  bevelled  boards,  10s.  6d. 

THE  CHIEF  RABBI  (Dr.  Hermann  Adler).— "The  grammar 
has  been  carefully  prepared,  and  it  will  prove  a  useful  aid  to 
students  of  the  Sacred  Language." 

Dr.  DRIVER  (Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  at  Oxford)  says:— 
"  It  appears  to  me  to  be  well  planned  and  very  practical." 

THE  PROFESSOR  OF  HEBREW  at  Edinburgh  University 
says:—"  It  will  prove  a  real  boon  to  beginners." 

A   Handbook  to  the  Grammar  of  the 
Greek  Testament. 

Together  with  a  Complete  Vocabulary,  and  an  Examination  of  the 
Chief  New  Testament  Synonyms.  Illustrated  by  nMmerous 
Examples  and  Comments. 

By  SAMUEL  G.  GREEN,  D.D. 
Revised  and  Improved  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     604  pages. 
Cloth  boards,  7s.  6d. 
This  well  known  handbook,  which  has  passed  through  several 
editions,  has  now  been  completely  revised,  additions  and  modifica- 
tions appearing  on  almost  every  page.     Constant  reference  is  made 
to  the  revised  New  Testament  ot   1881,  and  more  especially  to  the 
Greek  text  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort. 

Analytical  Concordance  to  the  Bible. 

Arranged  on  an  entirely  new  plan.  Containing  about  311,000 
references,  subdivided  under  the  Greek  and  Hebrew  originals, 
with  the  literal  meaning  and  pronounciation  of  each.  Designed 
for  the  simplest  reader  of  the  English  Bible.  By  Robert 
Young,  LL.D .,  author  of  "A  New  Translation  of  the  Bible  " 
and  "A  New  Concordance  to  the  Greek  New  Testament." 
etc.  Seventh  Edition.  Revised  throughout  by  William  B. 
Stephenson,  B.D.  (Edin.).  With  Index  Lexicons  to  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments,  being  a  guide  to  parallel  passages,  and  a 
complete  list  of  Scripture  Proper  Names,  showing  their  proper 
pronunciation.  Demy  4to.  Substantially  bound  in  cloth, 
218. ;  half- morocco,  25s 

This  work  is  in  no  sense  an  edition  of  Cruden  or  of  any  similar 
work  in  existence. 


LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT   SOCIETY. 


MONUMENT  FACTS 

AND 

HIGHER  CRITICAL  FANCIES. 

By  A.  H.  SAYCE,  D.D.,  LL.D., 

Professor  of  Assyriology  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Author  of 
"  Fresh  Light  from  the  Ancient  Monuments,"  etc.  With  a 
Portrait  of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,   is.  net. 

"  It  gives  in  a  compressed  form  the  arguments  for  the  con- 
servative   case    in   the    Bible    question." — The   Spectator. 

"  It  puts  a  sacerdotal  poser  to  the  Higher  Critics." — The 
Scotsman. 

"  Perhaps  one  of  the  strongest  points  on  which  the  author  re- 
lies is  the  necessity  of  trying  to  'think  Orientally'  when 
working  with   Oriental   books." — The  Glasgow   Herald. 

"  We  heartily  recommend  this  book." — The  Church  Family 
Newspaper. 

"  No  honest  student  of  the  Bible  should  fail  to  read  every 
line  of  Dr.  Sayce's  learned  and  up-to-date  treatise." — The 
English  Churchman. 

THE   NEW  TESTAMENT  AND  THE 
PENTATEUCH. 

By  Professor  C.  F.  NOSGEN,  D.D. 

Translated  from  the  German  by  Rev.  C.  H.  IRWIN,  M.A. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  is.  net. 

Professor  C.  F.  Nosgen's  argument  in  regard  to  the  witness 
of  the  New  Testament  to  the  Pentateuch  is  interesting.  He 
considers  the  testimony  which  our  Lord  and  His  Apostles  bore 
to  the  Law  and  the  Pentateuch,  without  demanding  a  super- 
natural acquaintance  of  either.  He  seeks  to  pursue  the  argu- 
ment upon  the  lower  plane  of  considering  their  testimony  just 
as  it  stands,  and  shows  how,  even  from  this  point  of  view, 
evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the  Old  Testament  records  can- 
not be  set  aside.  Thus  the  work  has  its  limitations  which  have 
to  be  kept  in  mind,  but  is,  within  its  own  lines,  a  very  striking 
and  forcible  presentation  of  a  powerful  argument. 

THE   MEETING   PLACE  OF  GEOLOGY 
AND    HISTORY. 

By  Sir  J.  W.  DAWSON,  C.M.G.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 
With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.  5s. 
The  object  of  this  book  is  to  give  a  clear  and  accurate  state- 
ment of  facts  bearing  on  the  character  of  the  debatable  ground 
intervening  between  the  latter  part  of  the  geological  record  aDd 
the  beginning  of  sacred  and  secular  history. 


LONDON:    THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


ARE    THE    CRITICS    RIGHT  P 

Historical  and  Critical  Considerations  against 
the  Graf-Wellhausen  Hypothesis. 

By  W.  MOLLER. 

Translated  from  the  German  by  C.  H.  IRWIN,  M.  A.    With  Preface 

by  Professor  VON  ORELLI,  of  Basel. 

Crown  Svo,  cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d. 

M  His  position  is  a  strong  one.  It  is  not  new,  of  course,  but  we 
know  of  no  book  in  English  which  sets  it  out  so  well." — The 
Guardian. 

"It  is  a  wise,  sane,  and  discriminating  plea  for  suspension  of 
judgment  on  many  points,  and  for  readjustment  of  view  on  many 
others." — The  Preacher's  Magazine. 

"  It  is  undoubtedly  an  able  contribution  to  the  further  elucidation 
of  the  Pentateuch  problem." — The  Christian  World. 

"The  book  is  temperate.  It  is  also  a  scholar's  book." — The 
Expository  Times. 

THE    BIBLE    AND    BABYLON. 

Their  Relationship  In  the  History  of  Culture. 

By  EDUARD  KONIG,  D.D.    Translated  from  the  Tenth  German 
Edition,  with  additional  Notes,  by  Rev.  W.  T.  PILTER. 

With  a  Preface  by  the  Very  Rev.  HENRY  WACE,  D.D.,  Dean  of 

Canterbury. 

Crown  8\o,  cloth  gilt,  is.  net. 

"  It  should  find  a  place  on  the  shelves  of  every  minister  and  lay 

preacher,  and  of  all  those  whose  difficult   task  it  is  to  uphold  the 

integrity  of  the  Old  Testament  in  places  where  its  historicity  is 

scorned." — The  Baptist. 

OLD    TESTAMENT  CRITICISM    IN 
NEW    TESTAMENT   LIGHT. 

By  G.  H.  ROUSE,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  D.D. 
Crown  Svo,  334  pages.     3s.  6d. 

"  In  my  opinion  it  is  the  ablest  and  fairest  defence  of  the  '  tra- 
ditional' view  of  Old  Testament  criticism  that  has  appeared  in 
German  or  English."— Professor  T.  WITTON  DAVIES,  B.A., 
Ph.D.,  of  Bangor  College. 

"  We  rejoice  to  see  the  thoughtful  and  extremely  capable  essay 
which  Dr.  Rouse  has  given  us,  where  careful,  well-digested  learning, 
strong  common  sense,  and  profound  reverence  for  the  Word  of 
God  are  alike  manifest."— Tks  Record. 


LONDON:  THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


THE   RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY^ 
EDITIONS   OF 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

WITH   ILLUSTRATIONS  BY  HAROLD  COPPING. 

The  text  of  these  editions  (One  Shilling  and  upwards)  has  been 
thoroughly  revised  in  the  light  of  those  editions — especially  the 
Eleventh,  which  was  issued  just  prior  to  his  death — which  had  the 
advantage  of  careful  revision  by  Bunyan  himself.  It  claims,  there- 
fore, to  be  one  of  the  most  accurate  yet  printed. 

Mr.  Harold  Copping's  Illustrations  are  marked  at  once  by  insight, 
realism,  and  deep  religious  feeling.  He  has  succeeded  in  catching 
the  lofty  quality  of  Bunyan's  character  drawing,  and  his  pictures 
give  new  and  vivid  realizations  of  Bunyan's  meaning. 

THE   PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS. 

With  31  full  page  illustrations,  beautifully  printed  in  duple 
6/-  tone  ink.     Demy  8vo,  full  gilt,  with  leather  medallion 

centre,  bevelled  boards,  gilt  top,  headbands,  and  silk 
register,  5s. 

THE    PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

With  31  full  page  illustrations,  beautifully  printed  in  dupU 
8/6  tone  ink.     Demy  8vo,  full  gilt,  gilt  top,  3s.  6d. 

This  edition  is  also  bound  in  three-quarter  morocco. 
6s.  6d.  net. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

,_  With  eight  coloured  and  numerous  other  full-page  illustra- 
a  °  tions.     Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  gilt  edges,  as.  6d. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

_,       With  eight  coloured  and  numerous  other  full-page  illustra- 
*'"  tions.     Large  crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  as. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

.._      With  eight  coloured  illustrations.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  gilt 

■'0  top,  is.  6d. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

With  eight  coloured  illustrations.     Crown  tvo,  cloth,  i». 
|/.  This  edition  is  also  bound  in  lambskin,  gilt  top  ;  and  in 

padded  paste  grain,  red  under  gilt  edges. 

THE   PILGRIM'S   PROGRESS. 

_  .      With   eleven   illustrations    printed   in   text.     Imperial   8v« 

•*■■  Illustrated  paper  covers.     3d. 


LONDON :  THE    RELIGIOUS    TRACT    SOCIETY. 


DATE  DUE 

GRAHA 

\A   L!BR.A 

*o|Nt 

r^^  '  f  ' 

416-97. 

3-5851 

